 
 
1 
 
 
COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE 
(2012-2013) 
                 
         
FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA 
                                                 
MINISTRY OF AGRICULTURE  
(DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURAL RESEARCH AND EDUCATION) 
              
         
“DEVELOPMENT OF ABIOTIC STRESS RESISTANT CROP VARIETIES AND 
DISSEMINATION OF PRODUCTION ENHANCING TECHNOLOGIES – REVIEW OF 
R&D AND EXTENSION EFFORTS IN THE COUNTRY” 
 
 
{Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/ 
Recommendations contained in the Twenty-sixth Report  
of the Committee on Agriculture (2010-2011)} 
 
                
FIFTIETH REPORT 
  
 
                    
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
August, 2013/Bhadrapada,1935 (Saka) 
50 

 
 
2 
 
FIFTIETH REPORT 
 
COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE 
(2012-2013) 
 
(FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
         
         
         
MINISTRY OF AGRICULTURE  
(DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURAL RESEARCH AND EDUCATION) 
                         
“DEVELOPMENT OF ABIOTIC STRESS RESISTANT CROP VARIETIES AND 
DISSEMINATION OF PRODUCTION ENHANCING TECHNOLOGIES – REVIEW OF 
R&D AND EXTENSION EFFORTS IN THE COUNTRY” 
  
         
[Action Taken by the Government on the  
Observations/Recommendations contained in the Twenty-sixth Report 
of the Committee on Agriculture (2010-2011)] 
 
  Presented to Lok Sabha on      30.08.2013      
  Laid on the Table of Rajya Sabha on     30.08.2013     
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
August, 2013/Bhadrapada,1935 (Saka) 

 
 
3 
 
 
COA No. 273 
 
 
         
         
         
         
         
         
 
         
         
        
Price:  Rs.  
         
         
         
         
         
 
 
© 2011 By Lok Sabha Secretariat 
 
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of Business in Lok 
Sabha (Fourteenth Edition) and Printed by  
 

 
 
4 
 
<CONTENTS> 
                   PAGE 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE………………………………….  (iii) 
         
INTRODUCTION……………………………………………………………  (v) 
 
CHAPTER I   Report …………………………………………     1  
 
CHAPTER II  Observations/Recommendations which have      
   been accepted by the Government ……………   23     
 
CHAPTER III  Observations/Recommendations which the   
   Committee do not desire to pursue in view 
   of the Government’s replies …………………..  46       
 
CHAPTER IV Observations/Recommendations in respect    
   of  which replies of the Government have  
   not been accepted by the Committee ………….   47       
 
CHAPTER V  Observations/Recommendations in respect of     
   which final replies of the Government are  
   still awaited …………………………………….   55        
 
 
APPENDIX 
 
 Minutes of the Thirty-ninth Sitting of the Committee   59 
held on 29 August, 2013.           
                                                  
                   ANNEXURE  
         
  Analysis of Action Taken by the Government on the                
Recommendations contained in the Twenty-sixth Report  
(Fifteenth Lok Sabha) of the Committee on Agriculture 
  (2011-2012)……………………………………………………      61 
 
(i)

 
 
5 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE  COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE (2012-13) 
 
Shri Basudeb Acharia   -   Chairman 
 
MEMBERS 
 
LOK SABHA 
 
2.  Shri Narayansingh Amlabe 
3.  Shri Sanjay Singh Chauhan 
4.  Shri H.D. Devegowda 
5.  Smt. Ashwamedh Devi 
6.  Shri L. Raja Gopal 
7.  Smt. Paramjit Kaur Gulshan 
8.  Shri Anant Kumar Hegde 
9.  Shri Premdas Katheria 
10.  Shri P. Kumar 
11.  Dr. (Smt.) Botcha Jhansi Lakshmi 
12.  Sardar Sukhdev Singh Libra 
13.  Dr. Jyoti Mirdha 
14.  Shri Naranbhai Kachhadia 
15.  Shri Devji M. Patel 
16.  Smt. Bhavana Gawali (Patil) 
17.  Shri Jagdish Singh Rana 
18.  Shri Rajaiah Siricilla 
19.  Shri Patel Kishanbhai V.  
20.  Dr. Vinay Kumar Pandey ‘Vinnu’ 
21.  Shri Hukamdeo Narayan Yadav 
  
 RAJYA SABHA 
 
22.  Shri Satyavrat Chaturvedi 
*23.  Vacant 
24.  Smt. Mohsina Kidwai 
25.  Shri Dharmendra Pradhan 
26.  Dr. K.V.P. Ramachandra Rao 
27.  Shri Parshottam Khodabhai Rupala 
28.  Shri Rajpal Singh Saini 
29.  Shri Shivanand Tiwari 
30.  Shri S. Thangavelu 
31.  Shri Darshan Singh Yadav 
________________________________________________________________________  
*Vice Shri A. Elavarasan who ceased to be the Member of the Committee on his  
retirement from Rajya Sabha on 24 July, 2013. 
 (iii) 

 
 
6 
 
SECRETARIAT  
 
1. Shri R.S. Kambo   - Joint  Secretary 
2. Shri P. C. Koul   - Director 
3. Shri R.S. Negi   - Committee Officer 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(iv) 

 
 
7 
 
INTRODUCTION 
         
I, the Chairman, Committee on Agriculture having been authorized by the 
Committee to submit th e Report on their behalf, present this Fiftieth Report on action 
taken by the Government on the Observations/ Recommendations contained in the 
Twenty-sixth Report of the Committee on Agriculture (2010 -11) on “Development of 
Abiotic Stress Resistant Crop Va rieties and Dissemination of Production Enhancing 
Technologies Review of R&D and Extension Efforts in the Country”. 
 
2. The Twenty-sixth Report was presented to Lok Sabha and laid on the Table of 
Rajya Sabha on 30 August 2011.  The Action Taken Replies on t he Report were 
received on 29 November, 2011. 
 
3. The Report was considered and adopted by the Committee at their Sitting held 
on 29 August, 2013. 
4. An analysis of the action taken by the Government on the Observations/ 
Recommendations contained in the Tw enty-sixth Report of the Committee is at 
Annexure. 
 
                     
             
                                                                                     
                                                                                        
NEW DELHI;               BASUDEB ACHARIA 
 29  August, 2013                                                         Chairman, 
 07 Bhadrapada, 1935 (Saka)                                 Committee on Agriculture.   
 
 
 
 
(v) 

 
 
8 
 
 
CHAPTER-I 
 
R E P O R T 
 
 
This Report of the Committee on Agriculture deals with the action taken by the 
Government on the Recommendations contained in the Twenty-sixth Report (Fifteenth 
Lok Sabha) of the Committee on Agriculture (20 10-2011) on “ Development of Abiotic 
Stress Resistant C rop Varieties and Dissemination of Production Enhancing 
Technologies Review of R&D and Extension Efforts in the Country”  pertaining to 
Ministry of Agriculture (Department of Agric ultural Research and Education)  which was 
presented to Lok Sabha and laid on the Table of Rajya Sabha on 30 August 2011.  
 
1.2  The Department of Agricultural Research & Education have furnished Action 
Taken Replies in respect of all the 21 Observations/Recommendations contained in the 
Report. These have been categorized as under:  
 
 Observations/Recommendations that have been accepted by the Government:  
 
Recommendation Para Nos. 1.9, 1.11, 1.12, 2.18 & 2.19, 3.32, 3.33, 3.35, 3.36,  
       4.14, 4.15, 4.16, 4.18 and 4.19 
 
 Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to pursue in 
view of the Government’s reply:  
 
Recommendation Para No. NIL  
 
 Observations/Recommendations in respect of which action taken replies of the 
Government have not been accepted by the Committee: 
 
Recommendation Para Nos. 1.10, 2.20, 3.37, 3.38 and 4.17 
 
 Observations/Recommendations in respect of which final replies of the 
Government are still awaited :  
 
Recommendation Para Nos. 2.17 and 3.34  

 
 
9 
 
 
1.3 The Committee trust that utmost importance would be given to 
implementation of the observations/ recommendations accepted by the 
Government. In cases, where it is not possible for the Department to implement 
the recommendations in letter and spirit for any reason, the matter should be 
reported to the Committee with reasons for non -implementation. The Committee 
desire that further Action Taken Notes on the Observations / Recommendations 
contained in Chapter -I and Final Action Taken Replies to the Recommendations 
contained in Chapter-V of this Report be furnished to them at an early date.  
 
1.4  The Committee will now deal with the action taken by the Government on some 
of the Recommendations in the succeeding paragraphs.  
 
Funds for Research on Agriculture and Allied Sectors 
(Recommendation Para No. 1.10) 
 
1.5 The Committee had noted that v ariability in weather particularly when almost 80 
million hectares of land in India is rainfed pose d serious challenges on the agri -sector, 
moreso, when inspite of the declining contribution of this sector to GDP drastically over 
the years, agriculture continue d to provide livelihood to almost 60% of our workforce. 
They had further noted with disappointment that the Government, despite of being 
forewarned of the impending threats and their likely ramifications on the agriculture 
sector and livelihoods of million of peopl e in the Forty -seventh Report (Fourteenth Lok 
Sabha) on ‘Impact of Global Climate Change on Agriculture and Allied Sectors in India’  
had chosen to remain impervious to the gravity of the situation.  Highly perturbed to 
note that the Government had singularly failed to adequately fund the research efforts of 
our research scientists, as had been time and again brought out in previous Reports of 

 
 
10 
 
the Committee, the Committee hoping against hope had expected that the situation on 
this front would witness a significant improvement at least during the Twelfth Plan. 
1.6 The Government in their Action Taken Reply have stated that ICAR is proposing 
to address the issues such as Natural Resources degradation, Increasing Biotic and 
Abiotic Pressures, Input use Efficienc y, Farm Mechanization , Harvest & Post Harvest 
Losses, Profitability in farming, Quality Human Resource and Farm Extension through 
establishment of Consortia Platforms in a mission mode approach  in the Twelfth Five 
Year Plan . Some of the Consortia Platforms  are Agri -Biodiversity Management, 
Genomics, Seed, Hybrids, Climate Change, Conservation Agriculture, Water and Waste 
Management, Health Foods, Feed & Fodder, Biofortification, Diagnostics and Vaccines, 
Nanotechnology, etc. Further approach will be on Prod uctivity enhancement and Yield 
Gap Reduction, Extra Mural Funding, Establishment of Agri Innovation Fund, Regional 
Phytotron facilities, etc.  
1.7 The ICAR through  the National Agricultural Innovation Project  (NAIP) is 
addressing the issues of climate chan ge through mitigation measures to meet 
productivity under rainfed agriculture.  Some of the good results emerging from the 
projects on ground are: 1)  Networking water yielding borewells in dryland areas 
coupled with micro -irrigation systems to ensure atle ast one crop i.e., Kharif, besides 
providing life saving irrigation to the second crop req uiring less water during rabi. The 
results have been successfully demonstrated in Rangareddy district of  
Andhra Pradesh; 2) The nano -particles of phosphorus applied through soil application 
enhanced yield of crops like pearl millet by 15 to 30% in the semi -arid areas like 
Jodhpur in Rajasthan.  The results of 2 years crop have shown promise for making 

 
 
11 
 
further effort in this direction; 3) A model of benefitting small h older through carbon 
finance has been demonstrated over a grid of more than 1500 ha  involving 1450 
farmers in the district of Warangal, Andhra Pradesh.  By making a consortium of these 
farmers in a grid and planting timber and fruit trees, every farmer ha s started earning 
Rs. 7 to 8 thousand per year;  4) The proposals are being formed during XII Plan for 
ensuring timely availability of critical inputs for land preparation, seed and fertilizers. 
This is one such intervention besides technology which facili tates utilizing available soil 
moisture during the short periods of monsoon rains. 
1.8 As part of  National Initiative on Climate Resilient Agriculture (NICRA) project, 
KVKs have taken up activities relating to the major farming systems in 100 vulnerable 
districts for mitigation and adaptation to climate change. The focus of work include 
drought  tolerant and early maturing varieties in rainfed  crops, sub -mergence tolerant  
rice varieties in frequently flood or cyclone prone districts, varieties which escap e 
terminal heat stress in the rabi crops, moisture conservation, zero tillage practices and 
agro forestry interventions for rehabilitation for degraded lands etc.          
1.9 This could be possible only through enhanced allocation for XII Five Year Plan 
out of which a major share would be identified for research for improving crop 
productivity in rainfed agriculture. Revamping of higher agricultural education for 
improving and sustaining the quality, need priority attention by extending financial 
support to State Agricultural University for their research and education programmes.  
 
1.10 The Working Group on Agriculture constituted by the Planning Commission also 
endorses the matter.  The ICAR has proposed to address this issue through enhanced 

 
 
12 
 
allocation f or 12th Five Year Pl an out of which a major share would be identified for 
research for improving crop productivity in rainfed agriculture. 
 
1.11 The Committee note that ICAR propose to address a host of issues such as 
natural resource degradation, increasi ng abiotic and biotic pressures, input use 
efficiency, farm mechanisation, harvest and post harvest crop losses, profitability 
in farming, quality human resources and farm extension through establishment of 
consortia platforms in a mission m ode approach in  the Twelfth Plan. The 
Committee also note with satisfaction that ICAR through the National Agricultural 
Innovation P roject (NAIP) has been addressing the issues of climate change 
through mitigation measures to meet productivity under rainfed agriculture. KVKs 
have taken up activities for mitigation and adoption to climate change under 
National Initiative on Climate Resilient Agriculture Project. Accordingly, the 
Department have proposed enhanced allocation for Twelfth Five Year Plan to 
strengthen research for improving crop productivity in rainfed  agriculture, 
revamping of higher agricultural education for improving and sustaining the 
quality and financial support to State Agricultural Universit ies for Research and 
Education Programme s. The working group o n Agriculture ,  constituted by the 
Planning Commission, has also endorsed this proposal of the Department of 
Agricultural Research and Education. The moot point, however, remains where is 
the money.  The Government in their wisdom, and quite like in the pa st is yet to 
finalise the Twelfth Plan though the first Fiscal of the Plan is soon going to be 
over.  Notwithstanding, the sincere efforts of our Agricultural Scientists, their 
plans and endeavours will only bear fruit when the research being conducted in 

 
 
13 
 
NARS is funded as per the requirements.  The Committee, however, note with 
indignation that in the ongoing Fiscal, which is the first year of Twelfth Plan, the 
Government has merely gone through the motion of allocations without any 
concern for the mammoth  challenge that NARS  has to tackle in the form of 
climate change and global warming and innumerable problems flowing in their 
wake.  This failure of the Government, becomes all the more glaring in view of the 
fact that the Committee in most of their previo us Reports  had forewarned 
Government to diligently and professionally approach the Planning Commission 
and ensure timely  finalisation of Twelfth Plan so that it is conveyed to all by 
December, 2011 and, all Ministries/Departments would start implementation  of 
Twelfth Plan Schemes from day one of the Plan i.e. 1 April, 2012.   
1.12 The Committee strongly feel that incalculable harm has been done to 
various new Schemes as well as ongoing Schemes of DARE due to dithering of 
the Government in finalising the Twe lfth Plan.  They, therefore, recommend with 
all force at their command that Twelfth Plan finalisation be attended to by the 
Government on war footing basis so that it does not meet the fate of Eleventh 
Plan and the implementation of several crucial schemes  of DARE commences in 
right earnest without any further delay.    
 
Impact of Abiotic Stresses on Agriculture Produce 
(Recommendation Para No. 2.17) 
 
1.13 Having noted with a sense of trepidation , the continued havoc caused by abiotic 
stresses to the agricu lture and allied sector produce of the Country , since till date 
effective solutions for tackling abiotic stresses and other factors were not readily 

 
 
14 
 
available, the Committee had further noted that as compared to the staggering losses 
during 1987, 2002 and 2004 loss of food grain production was prevented to a  certain 
extent during the 2009 drought . This happened because ICAR took several pro -active 
measures including compiling all the available research information including varietal 
and emergent strategies on contingency plans for facing anticipated eventualities.  The 
efforts of ICAR were also ably supplemented by weather forecasting of agro -advisories 
in local languages by the State Agriculture Universities.  While acknowledging the 
exemplary drought mitigation efforts of 2009 as  trend setter for the future strategies for 
tackling calamities caused by abiotic stresses , the Committee had  felt that apart from 
the need of institutionalizing a coordinated multi -agency and multi-disciplinary strategy, 
a lot needed to be done on the research and development front by the ICAR.   
1.14 The Department of Agricultural Research and Education in their Action Taken 
Note have stated that in order to mitigate the anticipated abiotic and biotic stress in crop 
production, fr ontier science -based research to exploit explored genetic systems for 
being introgressed into crops is proposed in the next Plan period.  Efforts are being 
made to develop second generation technologies with the help of biotechnological tools 
to cope up wi th the climate change induced abiotic stresses and drought -proofing. A 
National Institute on Abiotic Stress Management has been established in Baramati, 
Pune to conduct upstream multi-disciplinary research with state-of the art infrastructure. 
CRIDA, CAZRI, CSSRI and CSWCRTI are also strengthening their research on drought 
proofing and water harvesting.  Efforts are being made to strengthen the agroforestry 
component research in watershed management based agricultural production 
mechanism. 

 
 
15 
 
1.15 The ICAR is developing designer varieties to combat heat tolerance, drought 
tolerance and other abiotic stresses in different crops in near future. Root -stock 
research using dogridge in grapes has given varieties resistant to heat tolerance. Apart 
from this efforts ar e being made to develop heat tolerance varieties in chillies, tomato, 
French beans and pea varieties. 
1.16 The efforts of ICAR for improvisation in forewarning of weather conditions as well 
as release of necessary agro-advisories to farmers in local languages is being relooked.  
Enhanced efficiency for prompt advisories through Information and Communication 
Technology (ICT) to reach each Panchayat could sensitize the access to the relevant 
knowledge for farmers.  
1.17 The Committee note that the Department of Agricultural Research and 
Education have with a view to  mitigate the anticipated abiotic and biotic stress in 
crop production, propose frontier science based research to exploit explored 
genetic system for introgressed into crops in the Twelfth Five Yea r Plan period. 
They appreciate that the Department ha ve initiated  efforts to develop second 
generation technologies with the help of biotechnological tools to cope with the 
climate change induced abiotic stresses and drought proofing. The Committee 
also no te with satisfaction that apart from strengthening focussed research on 
drought proofing and water harvesting at existing institutions viz. CRIDA, CAZRI, 
CSSRI and CSWCRTI , a National Institute for Abiotic Stress Management at 
Baramati.  The Council is als o developing designer varieties to combat heat 
tolerance, drought tolerance and other abiotic stresses in different crops.  The 
Committee would like the Council to work with renewed vigour on all these 

 
 
16 
 
schemes and programmes as the harmful efforts of globa l warming and climate 
are already at our door and there is no further scope for procrastination.    
1.18 The Committee find that the ICAR proposes to relook into improvisation of 
forewarning of weather conditions and also release of agro -advisories in loca l 
languages.  The Committee would like to be apprised of the present status of this 
proposal.  At the same time, the Committee exhort the Government to make use 
of the Information and Communication Technology (ICT) so as t o ensure efficient 
and prompt deli very of advisories to the farmers.  The Committee are of the 
opinion that the use of ICT will certainly go a long way in minimizing the stress, 
both biotic and abiotic crops to a great extent. 
Technologies to Mitigate Abiotic and Biotic Stresses 
(Recommendation Para Nos. 2.18 and 2.19) 
 
1.19 Noting the grim projection s made by the Inter -Governmental Panel on Climate 
Control (IPCC), a UN body about the increase in global temperature and its 
consequences in the form of decrease in production of grain, rice, m aize and a variety 
of other crops, the Committee while appreciating the fact that the Government was 
aware of all these implications had felt that various Ministries/Departments of the 
Government need to put their heads together  so as to devise strategies to meet these 
challenges and DARE/ICAR being the nodal body of the National Agricultural Research 
System, ought to play a proactive role in facilitating the creation of such an inter -
ministerial body for devising the strategies, working out interfaces, put ting a suitable 
mechanism in place and finally for implementation of those strategies. 

 
 
17 
 
1.20 The Government in their Action Taken Note  have stated that several crop 
varieties, that are terminal heat tolerant as in wheat, or sustain inundation due to 
unseasonal rainfall as in rice have been developed and are popularized in relevant 
agro-ecologies.  
List of some important varieties  resistant to abiotic stresses in different crops 
Drought 
Wheat : PBW 527, HD 2888, HI 153, HI 1500, HD 8627, HS 507, VL829, VL 89 2, 
WH 1080, HD 2781, HW 1085  
Barley : HBL 276, RD 2660, K 603  
Rice: Sahabhagi Dhan, Vandana,  Annada, Annapurna, Anjali, Dateswari,                  
PNR – 519, VL Dhan 208, Abhisek, Virendra , Sadabahar, Hazaridhan   Govind, 
Heera, Tulasi, Shusk, Samrat. 
Maize : Pusa Hybrid Makka- 1,2 and 5, Vivke-21, Vevek-23, HM-4 
Sorghum :  Maldandi 35-1, Phule-Maulee 
Pearl Millet : HHB 67 improved, GHB -757, GHB -538, RHB 177, HHB 226, HHB 
216, RHB 154, GHB 719, HHB 68 
Chickpea :  RSG 44, RSG 888, S26, BGD 72,Vijay, Pus a 362, Pusa 362, Pusa 
1103 
Mothbean  : CZM 1, CZM 2, CZM 3 
Cotton : HD 324, CICR -1, Raj DH7, CSHH 198, PKV Hy 5, Jawahar Tapti, Pratap 
Kapi, PA 225, G.Cot.15, G.Cot.18, NH 545, LRA 5166, AK 235,  Suraj, Surabhi, 
Sumangala, Veena . 
Sugarcane: Co 94008 (Shya ma), Co 99004 (Damodar),  Co 2001 -3 (Sulabh), Co 
2001-15 (Mangal), Karan-1, Karan-4. 

 
 
18 
 
Salinity 
Rice : CR Dhan 402, CR Dhan 403, CSR 30, CSR 27, CSR -36, Narendar Ushar 
Sankar Dhan 3, Lunishri, Bhutnath, DRR Dahn 39, Jarava, Sumati, Vikas 
Wheat :  KRL-14, KRL-19, KRL-210, KRL-213. 
Chickpea : ICCV6, Karnal Chana 1  
Cotton :AAH1, CICR-2, Raj DH 9, G27, Pusa Ageti 
Sugarcane: Co 94008 (Shyama), Co 99004 (Damodar), Co 2001 -3 (Sulabh), Co 
2001-15 (Mangal). 
Guinea Grass:  For acid soil  : Hamil, PGG -1;  For Degraded f orests and 
ravines; Hamil, PGG 14 & PGG 19; for  Coastal saline : Hamil, PGG-14 
                                                      Submergence 
Rice : Swarna Sub-1,  IR 64 Sub-1  
Deep Water 
Rice : Jitendra, Dinesh, Jaladhi, Neeraja 
                   High temperature 
Wheat- WH 730, NIAW 34, Raj 3765 and DBW 14, HD 2808 and Raj 4037  
Mungbean: HUM 1,16, Samrat, Meha, IPM 02-3, IPM 02-14, Pant Mung 5 and SML 
668, Pusa Vishal 
Urdbean: WBU 109, KU 96-3 and Pant U 35. 
Fieldpea   Adarsh, Prakash, Vikash and Pant Pea 42   
Maize Hybrids :  Prakash, Buland, PMH-1, PMH-3, HM-9 and HQPM-1  
It has been further stated that b iotechnological research in the direction of crop 
improvement to integrate and fortify crop genomes with beneficial genes for various 
abiotic and biotic stresses would be intensified.  

 
 
19 
 
1.21 The ICAR is in the process of strengthening simulation and modeling for 
developing forewarning and forecasting of major impacts of climate change to help 
undertake mitigation measures. With this view, the NPCC is being merged with NICRA 
in the 12 th Plan to have holistic solutions. The newly established NIASM is also 
mandated with this activity.   
1.22 The simulation model to predict the likely change has indicated that there could 
be a decline in production, which is largely based on data of the change in temperature 
and humidity. The simulation model has not taken into account the changes in 
technologies and cultivars. The expected decline in production of many horticultural 
crops will be a reality if new technologies to mitigate the problems arising due to climate 
change is not developed. Therefore, the ICAR has given major focus on developing 
cultivars and technologies which will mitigate the problems arising due to temperature, 
salinity and biotc/abiotic stresses . Research on these aspects for adoption to climate 
change has been intensified through conventional breeding. Many lines have been 
developed in chillies, tomato, potato, capsicum which will have some kind of resistance 
to arising temperature. Cultivars 7 -6XKTP4 in pea, F6CHT1 in capsicum are less 
sensitive to high temperature. In case of potato, variety Kufri Suriya has been 
developed which can be grown in the higher temperature regime. Genetic prospection, 
genomics and allele mining are being attempted to  develop varieties which can resist 
the higher temperature as well as abiotic stresses. In case of potato, complete 
sequencing of genome has been done which is a major breakthrough for understanding 
potato genes and the information will be utilized for dev eloping designer cultivar of 
potato. Similarly, rootstock research has been identified to mitigate problems of abiotic 

 
 
20 
 
stresses arising in the soil and also tolerant rootstock dogridge, which is commercially 
used. 
1.23 Allele mining and bioprospecting in l ivestock has been taken up to understand 
the possible impact of climate change. Appropriate shelters are being designed for 
cattle, sheep, goats and pigs under NICRA Project to minimize the extreme effects of 
climate change. In XII Plan, mission on pig, ru ral poultry, goat production, and feed and 
fodder development is being proposed. 
1.24 The Committee note that the simulation model used  for making the IPCC 
forecast about the likely change has indicated that there could be a decline in 
production, which is  largely based on data  of the change in temperature and 
humidity.  The simulation model has not taken into account the changes in 
technologies and cultivars.  The expected decline in production of many 
horticultural crops will be  reality only if new techno logies to mitigate the 
problems arising due to climate change are not developed.   The Committee are, 
therefore, confident that the scenario is not that bleak and if technological 
innovations keep step with the negative impact of climate change , then the 
harmful effects on crop production, etc. can be mitigated substantially.    
1.25 The Committee further note with satisfaction that DARE/ICAR are already in 
the midst of countering the threat posed by climate change and related aspects.  
Several varieties in different crops like Wheat, Barley, Rice, Maize, Sorghum, 
Cotton, Sugarcane, Pearl  Millet, etc . which are resistant to specific abiotic 
stresses have been developed are popularised in relevant agro-ecologies.   

 
 
21 
 
1.26 With a view to help undertake mitigation  measures, ICAR is in the process 
of strengthening simulation and modelling for developing forewarning and 
forecasting of major impacts of climate change. 
1.27 The Committee while appreciating the slew of measures taken by 
DARE/ICAR in the direction of tac kling the negative impact of climate change , on 
both crops and livestock,  feel that this is a very prolonged and continuous war 
which, as the things worse n, will be required to be fought on a  multi-dimensional 
plane.  Thus, DARE/ICAR should never let down their guard and keep on evolving 
strategies to mitigate the newer and newer threat emerging due to climate 
change. 
1.28 The Committee also note that the National Action Plan on climate change 
under the Chairmanship  of Prime Minister has been set -up.  E ight missions 
including different sectors have been formulated under the Action Plan.  While, 
the Committee hope that the Government will work on the implementation of the 
Action Plan in right earnest and ensure its success expeditiously , they would 
also like to be apprised of progress made so far on the Action Plan. 
 
Mapping of Soil Fertility 
(Recommendation Para No. 2.20) 
 
1.29 Having noted the de pletion of natural resources such as water and nutrients 
caused by intensive agricultural practices in various par ts of the Country and further 
noting with dismay that the Government had till then prepared soil maps of 
micronutrients (NPK) for only 20 States and micronutrients map for only 10 States, the 
Committee had asked the Government to complete the mapping of soil fertility of all the 

 
 
22 
 
remaining States in a time bound manner as this step would also contribute significantly 
in the strategies being evolved for tackling abiotic stresses.  
 
1.30 In their Action Taken Notes the Government have stated that k eeping in view the 
immense importance of soil fertility mapping, the ICAR has taken initiative to prepare 
GIS based soil fertility mapping for macro, secondary and micronutrients at district or 
even block level in 21 States. The programme is being funded by Department  of 
Agriculture & Cooperation, Ministry of Agriculture. So far mapping of 65 districts of the 
country has been completed by various AICRP on Soil Test Crop Response centres. 
These maps will be useful for monitoring of soil fertility at district/block level  fertilizer 
recommendations and distribution of fertilizers etc. to ensure balance fertilization and 
thereby improving soil health and crop productivity in the country.  It is projected that 
mapping of all the 171 districts would be completed by September, 2012 and soil fertility 
mapping of rest of about 430 districts would be completed in second phase of the 
project.  
 
1.31 The Committee find the progress made in this project unsatisfactory .  T he 
preparation of GIS based soil fertility mapping for macro, s econdary and 
micronutrients is the minimum pre -requisite for the mitigation planning to 
commence.  U nless this is done the mitigation strategies cannot be put in place 
what to speak of implementing the mitigation measures.  The Committee, 
therefore, reiterate their earlier recommendation and  desire the Department to 
complete the mapping in a time bound manner and on a war footing.  
 
 

 
 
23 
 
Bio-Prospecting of Genes and Allele Mining  
(Recommendation Para No. 3.34) 
 
1.32 Finding that out of the approved allocation of Rs. 57.13 crore during 2009 -10 for 
bio-prospecting of genes and allele mining for abiotic stress tolerance project, only            
Rs. 32.10 crore was sanctioned in 2009 -10 of which Rs. 16.03 crore only ha d been 
released for the project, the Committee opined that starving this Scheme of funds in the 
initial stages w ould hamper the research activities in this vital field  and, therefore, 
recommended that funds once sanctioned for such pivotal projects should be released 
in time in the future so as to ensu re that research was carried on uninterruptedly and 
unaffected in any manner by paucity of funds. 
1.33 The Government in their Action Taken Note  have informed the Committee  that 
the NAIP funded project on “Bioprospecting of genes and allele mining for abio tic stress 
tolerance” is in operation at 36 different centres with NRC on Plant Biotechnology as the 
lead centre.  By June 2011 a total of Rs.4258.874 lakhs have been released of which 
Rs.35.92 crore have been spent so far (84.35% utilization).  The rest a mount out of the 
total sanctioned budget of Rs. 57.13 crore is released in the year 2011-12 so that all the 
activities are carried out and all the projected objectives are met.   
1.34 The project has already made significant progress with regard to generat ion of 
resource base for gene prospecting in all the target species including moth bean, 
lathyrus, goat, camel, fish species in which very little information was available.  Many 
stress responsive genes have been cloned and some of them are being functiona lly 
validated.  While most of the objectives will be met during the project period of three 
months by March 2012, some aspects would require extension of the project period by 
another one and a half year in view of the fact that the traits being handled ar e of 

 
 
24 
 
complex nature and many of the species from which genes are being prospected have 
not been worked out earlier, which demand more time and efforts. 
1.35 Further studies are aimed on chilli, tomato, capsicum, onion and peas and on 
several cucumis specie s at IIHR, B engaluru and IIVR, Varanasi, and also to initiate 
same studies on potato at CPRI, Shimla and at IISR, Calicut on spices. Forty two 
genotypes of cucumber and 48 genotypes of musk melon at IIHR and 16 genotypes of 
cucumber and 19 genotypes of mus k melon were screened at IIVR against water 
stress. In due course of time, ICAR may be able to solve the problem of abiotic stress 
tolerance in various horticultural crops.  
1.36 The Committee are disappointed to note that the Department have been 
able to spend only 84.35% funds under bio -prospecting of genes and allele  
mining for abiotic stress tolerance project  till June, 2011  i.e. well after even the 
Fiscal next to 2009 -10 has been over.  This is not a happy state of affairs.  They 
desire the Department to inform the details of the objectives of the project could 
not obtained due to underutilisation funds under the project  alongwith the status 
of the project as on date.   
 
 
Impact, Adoption and Vulnerability of Agriculture to Climate Change 
(Recommendation Para No. 3.37) 
 
1.37 Having found that under  the project entitled ‘Impacts, adaption and vulnerability 
of Indian Agriculture to climate change’ with the objective of quantifying the sensitivity of 
crops including horticultural crops and plantations, soi l, water, fish and livestock to 
climate changes which was launched in 2004. ICAR had not undertaken any projects on 
soil during the year 2007 -08 and 2008 -09 and the funds allocated under the projects 

 
 
25 
 
were not fully utilized during the ye ar 2007 -08, 2008 -09 and 2009-10, the Committee 
had desired the Department to improve their management of finances so that not only 
precious resources were fully utilized but also the timelines for various components of 
the Project achieved without any cost over runs.   
1.38 The Government in their Action T aken Note have stated that the research on 
assessing sensitivity of crop to climate change in food crops has resulted in identifying 
breeding materials that are less affected and are being put to use in breeding for new 
crop varieties. 
1.39 The adaptation and mitigation through enhanced water productivity, nutrient use 
efficiency, and conservation agriculture and agro -forestry systems is already included 
under NICRA which aims at designing and development of suitable soil -water 
management practices for enhancing climate resilience.  
 
1.40 The horticulture component of this project is taken up at IIHR, Bangalore and 
IIVR, Varanasi to identify and develop tomato, french bean, chillies etc. varieties tolerant 
to climatic stress ( heat and water deficit) for different agro climatic regions and varying 
seasons in the country. In tomato, 225 lines have already been screened against heat 
stress and promising lines have been sorted out. The source of resistance to high 
temperature in frenchbean was also identified. Thirty chilli lines were screened for water 
stress tolerance and four onion lines were identified to soil moisture stress. 
1.41 The Committee take due note of the details of activities undertaken by the 
ICAR under impacts, ada ption and vulnerability of Indian Agriculture to Climate 
Change Project. They , however, find it inexplicable as to why  the Department 
have chosen to remain silent in regard to under/non-utilization of funds under the 

 
 
26 
 
project during 2007-08, 2008-09 and 2009-10. They, therefore, reiterate their earlier 
recommendation and desire a specific response from the Department at the 
earliest.  
 
Contingency Planning 
(Recommendation Para No. 3.38) 
 
1.42 The Committee having observed that out of 575 Districts targeted f or the 
Contingency Plans , 102 Plans had been completed and 257 Plans were under 
preparation but a large number of districts in States like Madhya Pradesh, Himachal 
Pradesh, Jammu and Kashmir, Uttar Pradesh, Bihar, Chhattisgarh, Jharkhand and 
Assam were yet to be taken up by the Government for District Contingency Planning , 
they had recommended the Government to take up these activities in a uniform manner 
so that all the States could avail the benefit of Contingency Plan simultaneously. The 
Committee had also recommended that the preparations of Plans in the remaining 216 
Districts be completed by the Government at the earliest.  
1.43 The Government in their Action Taken Note have stated that t he C ontingency 
Plans for 209 districts have been completed so far . These include 22 in Andhra 
Pradesh, 23 in Gujarat, 19 in Haryana, 24 in Karnataka, 14 in Kerala, 21 in 
Maharashtra, 27 in Orissa, 19 in Punjab, 9 in Rajasthan and 31 in Tamil Nadu. By 
March 2012, district plans will be completed for a total of 350 distri cts and remaining 
districts in the other States will be completed on priority. 
1.44 The Committee are dismayed with the slow progress of execution of the 
Scheme.  They are further dismayed to note that despite their recommendation to 
cover all States in a uniform manner the States like Assam, Madhya Pradesh, 

 
 
27 
 
Himachal Pradesh, Jammu & Kashmir, Uttar Pradesh, Uttarakhand, Bihar, 
Chhattisgarh, Jharkhand and West Bengal have not yet found place even in the 
list of 209 districts. The Committee , therefore,  reiterate their earlier 
recommendation and desire the Department to get the needful done without any 
further delay. 
 
Norms for Krishi Vigyan Kendras (KVKs) 
(Recommendation Para No. 4.14) 
 
 
1.45 The Committee had noted as many as 589 Krishi Vigyan Kendras (KVKs) were 
operational and the Department plan to establish a total of 667 KVKs by the end of the 
Eleventh Plan.  As a part of the perspective planning, the Department intend to 
establish one additional KVK in each of the 50 larger districts keeping in view the 
potential of the district for agricultural growth and scope of diversification in addition to 
the geographical area, rural population and net sown area.  While appreciating this 
initiative of the DARE/ICAR to increase the number of KVKs in the country, the  
Committee had desired that the norms of establishing a KVK be reviewed so as to 
improve the accessibility of the farmers to them. 
 
1.46 The Government in their Action Taken Note have stated that as a standard 
practice, as site selection committee headed b y an eminent agricultural scientist 
assesses the logistics available in a district for establishing a KVK keeping in view the 
availability of land and its location accessible to farmers.  In order to select most 
appropriate site for setting up a KVK, need based changes in the site selection criteria 
have been made from time to time.  The KVKs of 100 districts of the country which are 

 
 
28 
 
vulnerable to climate change have been given responsibility to conduct demonstrations 
of available climate resilient technologies at farmers’ field under NICRA. 
 
1.47 The Committee are not convinced with the contention of DARE/ICAR that 
need-based changes in the site selection criteria for establishing Krishi Vigyan 
Kendra (KVK) have been made from time to time.  Taking into con sideration, the 
pace at which the KVKs have been set up in the past, as against a target of 667 
KVKs and more than one in larger districts by the end of Eleventh Five Year Plan, 
600 odd KVKs have been set up throughout the country – there is a dire need to  
review and upgrade the existing norms.  Re -iterating their earlier 
recommendation, the Committee desire that the norms for establishing a KVK be 
reviewed urgently, so as to ensure improved farm extension services to the 
farmers.  This may also hasten the speed of setting up of KVKs in the remaining 
uncovered districts of the country. 
 
Setting up of Weather Station/Automatic Weather Stations in KVKs. 
(Recommendation Para No. 4.17) 
 
1.48 Having noted that inspite of the fact that k eeping the farmers constant ly updated 
on weather information could play a major role in improving the agriculture production in 
the Country, there were very few Krishi Vigyan Kendras in which weather stations have 
so far been established by the Indian Meteorological Department , the Committee had 
recommended the Department to take up the issue of setting up of weather 
stations/automatic weather stations with the Indian Meteorological Department so that 
all the KVKs were provided with agro-met observatory and were in a position to prov ide 
farmers weather updates timely and in the event of any natural calamities enable them 

 
 
29 
 
to take a pre-emptive course of action to save their precious produce from falling prey to 
the fury of nature. 
1.49 The Government in their Action Taken Note stated t hat appreciating the need for 
Agro Advisories for the farming community, the ICAR has so far set up t he weather 
stations/automatic weather stations at 270 centres at SAUs and plans to set up another 
100 such stations in KVKs in 100 vulnerable districts under National Initiative on Climate 
Resilient Agriculture (NICRA). 
1.50 Noting the absence of weather stations in Krishi Vigyan Kendras (KVKs) 
and appreciating t he importance of timely dissemination of Agro Advisories for 
the farming community the Committee had recommended setting up of weather 
stations/automatic weather stations in all the KVKs. They , therefore, find it highly 
perplexing as to why the Department are still proposing only  100 such stations in 
KVKs in vulnerable districts under National Initiat ive on Climate Resilient 
Agriculture.  The Committee understand that several of the KVKs are attached to 
SAUs.  Still the farmers access to KVKs is far more easy as compared to the 
SAUs.  They, therefor e, re iterate their earlier recommendation and desire t he 
Department to expeditiously take up the matter with Indian Meteorological 
Department so that weather stations/automatic weather stations are set up in all 
KVKs. 

 
 
30 
 
 
CHAPTER - II 
Observations/Recommendations that have been accepted by the Government 
 
RECOMMENDATION SERIAL NO. 1.9 
 In the considered opinion of the Committee, apart from the Indian farmer, it is the 
National Agricultural Research System with ICAR as its guiding spirit which has ensured 
the food security and safety of the Country.  With 45 Rese arch Institutes, 4 Deemed 
Universities, 6 National Bureaux, 17 National Research Centers, 25 Directorates/Project 
Directorates, 61 All India Coordinated Research Projects and 17 Network Projects 
forming the Research and Development core and 45 State Agricu ltural Universities, one 
Central Agricultural University and 584 KVK forming the bulwark of the Extension 
Services, the DARE/ICAR network has contributed significantly towards   self -reliance 
and development of agriculture and allied sectors in India.  Hav ing successfully met the 
challenge of ensuring food security during the last five odd decades, ICAR need to now 
gear up to face many different types of challenges. The increased economic and 
industrial activities have led to a paradigm shift in the climate  and environment of the 
world. Apart from the diseases and pestilence, new threats are emerging to agriculture 
sector due to global warming and climate change etc.  In such a scenario, agriculture 
which is inherently sensitive to climatic conditions had ac quired additional vulnerability, 
which at the present juncture is highly unpredictable.  
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 ICAR has already established the National Institute for Abiotic Stress 
Management in Baramati, Maharashtra to cater to different abiotic str esses including 
heat, cold, drought, flood, etc. on soil, crop, microbes, fisheries, and livestock. Further,  
intensification of these efforts are in process of establishment of Indian Institute for 

 
 
31 
 
Agricultural Biotechnology at Ranchi, Jharkhand and Natio nal Institute of Biotic Stress 
Management at Raipur, Chhatisgargh. These institutions are to take up multidisciplinary 
science to address the new and emerging threats that challenge crop productivity in 
agricultural sector. 
 The Council had also initiated a Network Project on Impacts, Adaptation and 
Vulnerability of Indian Agriculture to Climate Change at 15 locations which was 
extended to 23 locations during XI Plan. To augment the efforts, ICAR launched 
National Initiative on Climate Resilient Agriculture  (NICRA) with a total budget of Rs. 
350 crores for the period 2010 -2012. The NICRA aims to assess the impact of climate 
change on agriculture and allied sectors in the country and evolve cost effective 
adaptation and mitigation strategies.  
 
[Vide Ministry of Agriculture O.M. No. 7(10)/2011, dated 29th November, 2011, 
Department of Agricultural Research and Education] 
 
RECOMMENDATION SERIAL NO. 1.11  
 The Committee would like to caution the Government that climate change 
presents an unprecedented situation before a developing Country like India. The most 
worrisome aspect being the unpredictability of the dimensions of the problem;  the overt 
dependence of Indian agriculture on monsoon; the pre -dominance of small and 
marginal farmers and several landless who do not have secure livelihoods; the more or 
less plateauing of the agricultural production;  the continuing socio -economic 
downgrading of agriculture as a profession to cite a few. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 Recognizing the problems of small and marginal fa rmers with declining 
profitability of land, the ICAR has provided major focus for the technological 
development to increase their livelihood. Efforts of ICAR in terms of technology 

 
 
32 
 
generation have provided development of many varieties and technologies whi ch can 
enhance profitability of the land and can attract the youths. 
 Presently available crop production technologies such as intercropping, relay 
cropping, cultivation of rice fallows with short duration remunerative crops such as 
pulses could help the c ategory of landless, small or marginal farmers. Integrated 
Farming System (IFS) models for different agro -ecological zones have been developed 
through AICRP on Integrated Farming Systems nation -wide to enhance productivity, 
profitability and livelihoods, particularly for small and marginal farm-holders. The IFS will 
also help in generating rural employment. 
 
 The technologies like use of hybrid seeds, protected cultivation, micro -irrigation, 
use of tissue culture plants, disease free quality seed and planti ng materials and 
efficient nutrient and plant health management have been largely adopted by marginal 
farmers. The mushroom cultivation and also the honey bee as pollinizers have also 
provided opportunities for landless labourers to enhance their income. T he vegetable 
cultivation including potato, growing of flowers, seed spices, medicinal and aromatic 
plants have resultantly increased the income per unit area.  
 
 Research has been carried out in developing pig villages in NEH Region for 
rearing pigs with o ptimal performing breeds for reducing shortage of animal proteins 
and providing livelihood to landless labourers and to unemployed youth. Poultry strains 
of Vanaraja and Grampriya have been developed for optimal performance under rural 
and backyard poultry  production systems for improving livelihood security of small & 
marginal farmers and landless labourers.  Appropriate shelters are being designed for 
cattle, sheep, goats and pigs under NICRA Project to minimize the extreme effects of 
climate change.  
 
 ICAR institutes have developed improved tools and implements for small and 
marginal farmers to facilitate timeliness of operations which, otherwise, is critical to 
mitigate abiotic stresses. Use of such tools and equipment enhance the application 

 
 
33 
 
efficiency of inputs and reduce the drudgery of workers.  Emphasis has been given to 
design gender -friendly tools as a large number of women workers are engaged in 
farming activities. Besides, custom hiring of location -specific farm equipment is now a 
fast-evolving rural enterprise which is beneficial to small farmers as well as landless 
workers. In addition, energy gadgets such as solar cooker, improved cook stove, solar 
dryer and biogas plants have proved helpful to improve livelihood of small farmers.  
 
 Fisheries in India has contributed to a large extent to the small scale sector. The 
culture based capture in water bodies like flood -plains, in eastern part of the country 
and filling of reservoirs upto optimum capacity and water availability to enable 
freshwater aquaculture  systems depend on success of monsoon every year. To enable 
the poor and vulnerable fishermen for their economic empowerment, ICAR has 
developed easily adaptable technologies  like small scale aqua farming in ponds, seed 
production, coastal aqua culture technologies, marine and inland  aquaculture 
technologies, mussel farming, oyster farming, poly -lined pond culture systems for hill 
areas and technology for ornamental fish  culture. The aqua farming will improve the 
economic status of the landless  rural poor. Hygenic fish drying/ smoking technologies 
and value addition to low value fishes developed by CIFT will also help poor farmers 
fetch more price for their commodity.  
 
 Need based training programmes are also conducted by KVKs for farmers 
including those having small and marginal land holdings, besides landless farmers with 
focus on livelihood security interventions. 
 
 
[Vide Ministry of Agriculture O.M. No. 7(10)/2011, dated 29th November, 2011, 
Department of Agricultural Research and Education] 
 

 
 
34 
 
RECOMMENDATION SERIAL NO. 1.12  
 
 As would be clear from the succeeding Chapters, the National Agricultural 
Research System is fully seized of the gravity of the problem and is also working on 
several solutions both long and short term, to mitigate the p roblems that are arising/may 
arise from climate change. Unfortunately, however, the requisite support of the political 
leadership and the policy makers is not forthcoming at the requisite levels and with due 
alacrity. The food security of the Country has b een earned through the relentless toil of 
our farmers and the selfless services of our scientists in the public sector and it should 
not be frittered away due to unimaginative planning and wrong priorities.  If we have to 
ensure food security for our popul ation in the coming years, the Research and 
Development efforts of National Agricultural Research System in agriculture sector are 
to be catered to the fullest and with all promptitude. The Committee expect the 
Government to wake from its slumber and do th e needful at least in the Twelfth Plan.  
The Committee also expect the Department to put their proposals before the planners 
and the Government more forcefully and purposefully so that their voice is heard and 
their financial requirements are met on priority.      
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 Keeping in view the priorities for improving crop productivity in rain -fed 
agriculture, ICAR is proposing to address the concerns such as Natural Resources 
Degradation, Increasing Biotic and Abiotic Pressures, Input use Efficiency, Farm 
Mechanization Harvest & Post Harvest Losses, Profitability in farming, Quality Human 
Resource and Farm Extension through establishment of Consortia Platforms on Agri -
Biodiversity Management, Genomics, Seed, Hybrids, Climate Change, Conserv ation 
Agriculture, Water and Waste Management, Health Foods, Feed & Fodder, 
Biofortification, Diagnostics and Vaccines, Nanotechnology, etc.  in a mission mode 
approach during the XII Five Year Plan. Further approach will be on productivity 

 
 
35 
 
enhancement and  yield gap reduction, extra mural funding, Establishment of Agri 
Innovation Fund, Regional Phytotron facilities etc.  
 Establishment of National Institute of Biotic Stress Management, Indian Institute 
of Agricultural Biotechnology besides Central Agricultu ral Universities in Bundelkhand, 
Barapani and Bihar is in the final stage and need adequate funding for development of 
infrastructure & technology development. Consortia/Platform approaches, Inter -
Departmental Platforms, National Agricultural Education Pro ject and National 
Agricultural Science Foundation, etc. have been proposed with enhanced fund 
allocation during XII Five Year Plan.  
 The ICAR is operating few projects under NAIP in order to mitigate the effects of 
climate change.  Some of the major effor ts are towards developing heat tolerant, salt 
tolerant and submergence tolerant varieties of food crops. Besides, some tree species 
of economic value like tree fodder, oil bearing trees, resin yielding trees, etc. have also 
been introduced and demonstrated through agro-forestry.   
 
[Vide Ministry of Agriculture O.M. No. 7(10)/2011, dated 29th November, 2011, 
Department of Agricultural Research and Education] 
 
 
RECOMMENDATION SERIAL NO. 2.18  
 The abiotic and biotic stresses have as old a history as agricult ure itself.   
The only difference now being that the climate change and global warming have 
fastened the pace of natural vagaries.  This can be gauged from the fact that the twelve 
of the years between 1995 and 2008 have been the warmest in the instrumenta l record 
of global surface temperature since 1850. The Inter -Governmental Panel on Climate 
Control a UN body has projected that global annual temperature is likely to increase in 
the range of 1.4 to 4.5ºC by the end of this century,  leading to increased  
precipitation, more intense tropical cyclones, higher peak wind speeds  
causing hot extremes, heat waves and heavy precipitation events more  

 
 
36 
 
frequently.  The Committee have also been informed by the Department that in the 
aftermath of IPCC report and othe r studies, simulation studies have been carried out 
under Network Project on Climate Change.  To them, the outcome of these simulations 
presents a very bleak scenario in the Indian context.  The irrigated wheat production 
may reduce by 5% in 2030 and by al most one fourth in 2080; reduction in irrigated rice 
production likely to be about 2% in 2030 and upto 10% upto 2080; refined rice 
production to increase by 2% upto 2030 but dip by 8% by 2080; irrigated Kharif maize to 
decrease by almost 9% by 2030; varyin g effects on production of potato, soybean, 
groundnut, etc; decreased milk production in livestock.   
Reply of the Government 
 Several crop varieties, that are terminal heat tolerant as in wheat crop, or sustain 
inundation due to unseasonal rainfall as in rice have been developed and are 
popularized in relevant agro-ecologies.  
List of some important varieties  resistant to abiotic stresses in different crops 
Drought 
 
Wheat : PBW 527, HD 2888, HI 153, HI 1500, HD 8627, HS 507, VL829, VL 892, 
WH 1080, HD 2781, HW 1085  
Barley : HBL 276, RD 2660, K 603  
Rice: Sahabhagi Dhan, Vandana,  Annada, Annapurna, Anjali, Dateswari, PNR – 
519, VL Dhan 208, Abhisek, Virendra , Sadabahar, Hazaridhan   Govind, Heera, 
Tulasi, Shusk, Samrat. 
Maize : Pusa Hybrid Makka- 1,2 and 5, Vivke-21, Vevek-23, HM-4 
Sorghum :  Maldandi 35-1, Phule-Maulee 
Pearl Millet : HHB 67 improved, GHB -757, GHB -538, RHB 177, HHB 226, HHB 
216, RHB 154, GHB 719, HHB 68 
Chickpea :  RSG 44, RSG 888, S26, BGD 72,Vijay, Pusa 362, Pusa 362, Pusa 
1103 
Mothbean  : CZM 1, CZM 2, CZM 3 

 
 
37 
 
Cotton : HD 324, CICR -1, Raj DH7, CSHH 198, PKV Hy 5, Jawahar Tapti, Pratap 
Kapi, PA 225, G.Cot.15, G.Cot.18, NH 545, LRA 5166, AK 235,  Suraj, Surabhi, 
Sumangala, Veena . 
Sugarcane: Co 94008 (Shyama), Co 99004 (Damodar),  Co 2001 -3 (Sulabh), Co 
2001-15 (Mangal), Karan-1, Karan-4. 
Salinity 
Rice : CR Dhan 402, CR Dhan 403, CSR 30, CSR 27, CSR -36, Narendar Ushar 
Sankar Dhan 3, Lunishri, Bhutnath, DRR Dahn 39, Jarava, Sumati, Vikas 
Wheat :  KRL-14, KRL-19, KRL-210, KRL-213. 
Chickpea : ICCV6, Karnal Chana 1  
Cotton :AAH1, CICR-2, Raj DH 9, G27, Pusa Ageti 
Sugarcane: Co 94008 (Shyama), Co 99004 (Damodar), Co 2001 -3 (Sulabh), Co 
2001-15 (Mangal). 
Guinea Grass:  For acid soil  : Hamil, PGG -1;  For Degraded forests and 
ravines; Hamil, PGG 14 & PGG 19; for  Coastal saline : Hamil, PGG-14 
                                                      Submergence 
Rice : Swarna Sub-1,  IR 64 Sub-1  
Deep Water 
Rice : Jitendra, Dinesh, Jaladhi, Neeraja 
                   High temperature 
Wheat- WH 730, NIAW 34, Raj 3765 and DBW 14, HD 2808 and Raj 4037  
Mungbean: HUM 1,16, Samrat, Meha, IPM 02-3, IPM 02-14, Pant Mung 5 and SML 
668, Pusa Vishal 
Urdbean: WBU 109, KU 96-3 and Pant U 35. 
Fieldpea   Adarsh, Prakash, Vikash and Pant Pea 42   
Maize Hybrids :  Prakash, Buland, PMH-1, PMH-3, HM-9 and HQPM-1  
 
Biotechnological research in the direction of crop improvement to integrate and fortify 
crop genomes with beneficial genes for various abiotic and biotic stresses would be 
intensified.  

 
 
38 
 
 The ICAR is in the process of strengthening simulation and modeling for 
developing forewarning and forecasting of major impacts of climate change to help 
undertake mitigation measures. With this view, the NPCC is being merged with NICRA 
in the 12 th Plan to have holistic solutions. T he newly established NIASM is also 
mandated with this activity.   
 
 The simulation model to predict the likely change has indicated that there could 
be a decline in production, which is largely based on data of the change in temperature 
and humidity. The s imulation model has not taken into account the changes in 
technologies and cultivars. The expected decline in production of many horticultural 
crops will be a reality if new technologies to mitigate the problems arising due to climate 
change is not develop ed. Therefore, the ICAR has given major focus on developing 
cultivars and technologies which will mitigate the problems arising due to temperature, 
salinity and biotc/abiotic  stresses. Research on these aspects for adoption to climate 
change has been inte nsified through conventional breeding. Many lines have been 
developed in chillies, tomato, potato, capsicum which will have some kind of resistance 
to arising temperature. Cultivars 7 -6XKTP4 in pea, F6CHT1 in capsicum are less 
sensitive to high temperature . In case of potato, variety Kufri Suriya has been 
developed which can be grown in the higher temperature regime. Genetic prospection, 
genomics and allele mining are being attempted to develop varieties which can resist 
the higher temperature as well as ab iotic stresses. In case of potato, complete 
sequencing of genome has been done which is a major breakthrough for understanding 
potato genes and the information will be utilized for developing designer cultivar of 
potato. Similarly, rootstock research has b een identified to mitigate problems of abiotic 
stresses arising in the soil and also tolerant rootstock dogridge, which is commercially 
used. 
 
 Allele mining and bioprospecting in livestock has been taken up to understand 
the possible impact of climate cha nge. Appropriate shelters are being designed for 
cattle, sheep, goats and pigs under NICRA Project to minimize the extreme effects of 

 
 
39 
 
climate change. In XII Plan, mission on pig, rural poultry, goat production, and feed and 
fodder development is being proposed. 
[Vide Ministry of Agriculture O.M. No. 7(10)/2011, dated 29th November, 2011, 
Department of Agricultural Research and Education] 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 For comments of the Committee please refer to Para Nos. 1.23, 1.24 and 1.25 of 
Chapter – I of this Report. 
 
RECOMMENDATION SERIAL NO. 2.19  
 Even in such a scenario, the Committee draw consolation from the fact that 
atleast the Government are fully aware of what all problems the Country might face in 
future due to abiotic stress factors.  What is now required is that the various 
Ministries/Departments of the Government have to put their heads together and devise 
strategies, both short term and long term, to take care of the problems arising out of or 
incidental to various abiotic stresses.  Merely,  passing around pressing issues or issues 
which may acquire pressing dimensions later on, just because of jurisdictional 
considerations or constraints is not going to pay any dividends on an all encompassing 
matter like abiotic stress resulting from climat e change.  The Government need to take 
a cue from the UN initiative of the Inter -Governmental Panel on Climate Change and 
form an inter -ministerial body consisting of all Ministries/Departments, who have some 
or the other mandate relevant to working out a holistic response and putting in place a 
suitable mechanism for tackling climate change, abiotic stress not excluded.    
DARE/ICAR being the nodal body of the National Agricultural Research System, the 
Committee expect them to play a more proactive role in  facilitating the creation of such 
an inter -ministerial body for devising the strategies, working out interfaces, putting a 
suitable mechanism in place and finally for implementation of those strategies for 
consoling and or mitigating the effects of abioti c stress on the agriculture and allied 
sectors.  The Committee would like to have a detailed Action Plan in this regard from 

 
 
40 
 
DARE detailing all the action that has already been taken and what all still needs to be 
done for fructification of the strategies,  wherewithal and infrastructure for combating 
climate change and mitigating the resultant aggravation in abiotic stresses.      
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 The National Action Plan on Climate Change (NAPCC) under the Chairmanship 
of Prime Minister is alread y in place wherein eight missions including different sectors 
have been formulated. These missions have been formulated with the Inter -ministerial 
consultations. 
 
 The Department has identified various platforms which directly or indirectly 
address most of  the concerns in XII Plan. This will constitute the major efforts towards 
adaptation to climate change including technology development for coping with climatic 
stresses in crops, livestock and fisheries and also demonstration of existing 
technologies in more than 200 vulnerable districts. 
 The Indian Council of Agricultural Research (ICAR)  initiated a Network Project 
‘Impacts, Adaptation and Vulnerability of Indian Agriculture to Climate Change’ in 2004 
to study the impact of climate change and global warm ing on agricultural crops, 
horticulture, forests, livestock, fisheries, etc., at 15 locations which was extended to 23 
locations during XI Plan. A dedicated institute National Institute on Abiotic Stress 
Management was established in 2009 to conduct upstre am research on atmospheric, 
edaphic and drought stresses besides policy support research.  Several other projects 
were also initiated by ICAR in the XI Plan under NAIP. Some of the notable projects are 
related to development of a single cell C 4 photosynthetic system in rice, shelter 
management for livestock, etc.  Under Global Environment Facility (GEF) two projects 
viz, ‘strategies for sustainable management of degraded coastal land and water for 
enhanced livelihood security of the farming communities’ and  ‘strategies to enhance 
adaptive capacity to climate change in vulnerable regions’ were also initiated at Central 

 
 
41 
 
Soil Salinity Research Institute (CSSRI), Karnal and IARI, New  Delhi, respectively 
during September, 2009. 
 Under NICRA, the demonstration of  available climate resilient technologies at 
farmers’ field in 100 vulnerable districts across the country has been planned from 
2011-12 onwards targeting one lakh farmers. The district level contingency plan for 209 
districts was also prepared for the imp lementation by the States in the event of aberrant 
weather situations such as droughts, floods, heat and cold waves, frost, hailstorms, etc.  
 Under NAIP Project, allele mining is being done in camel and goats for abiotic 
stress. In XII Plan, mission on pi g, rural poultry, goat production and feed -fodder and 
climate resilient livestock production is being proposed. 
[Vide Ministry of Agriculture O.M. No. 7(10)/2011, dated 29th November, 2011, 
Department of Agricultural Research and Education] 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 For comments of the Committee please refer to Para Nos. 1.26 and 1.27 of 
Chapter – I of this Report. 
 
ONGOING ENDEVOURS 
RECOMMENDATION SERIAL NO. 3.32  
 The Committee note with satisfaction that ICAR have taken up various crop 
breeding activities with a view to develop varieties that have the capability to minimize 
the impact of abiotic stresses.  They are, however, constrained to observe that the 
efforts of ICAR  face  the twin roadblocks of lack of requisite infrastructure and facilities 
for these activities and availability of suitably trained human resource.  In their 
considered opinion   no research system can make any headway in the absence of 
state-of-the-art facilities and trained manpower to operate the systems.  It is, therefore, 
but imperative that both these constraints are attended to with utmost urgency to enable 
the research and development activities continue unhindered in this frontier area of 
science.  The Committee understand that all this can not be achieved till sufficient fu nds 
are placed  at the disposal of the Department on priority basis exclusively to attend to 

 
 
42 
 
the requirements of men and material for the activities and endeavours being 
undertaken to mitigate the effect of abiotic stresses on agriculture and allied activi ties.  
From the requirements of infrastructure and facilities communicated, it is abundantly 
clear to them that even the Department are yet to work out a holistic and 
comprehensive proposal with a long term perspective.  They, therefore, desire that an 
exercise be carried out by the Department detailing  all of their specific and precise 
requirements in the first instance.  The financial proposals incidental to these 
requirements be then accordingly worked out and presented to the Planning 
Commission and th e Ministry of Finance. The Committee would like to advise the 
Department to complete these two activities with utmost speed not only due to the 
gravity of the problem to be tackled but also in view of the fact that the Twelfth Plan is 
being finalized and t here is a greater chance of their proposals being given 
consideration at this stage rather than in the middle of the Plan. The Committee also 
recommend the Government to give a serious consideration to these proposals of 
DARE/ICAR for allocation of funds a s these investments are of utmost relevance to 
ensure food safety and security in the years to come.  
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 During XI Plan the ICAR through NAIP has trained a large number of scientists 
from all stake -holders of NARS in the frontier ar eas of agricultural sciences.  These 
scientists have been trained in the state of the art laboratories in a particular area.  
These scientists are being utilized as resource persons to train other scientists in the 
country through national trainings.  The total number of scientists trained abroad are 
580 and also organized 20 national trainings using many of these scientists as resource 
persons in these national trainings.  The effort would continue during XII Plan and ICAR 
would like to strive that India d oes not lag behind in technical skills and competence in 
the frontier areas of agricultural sciences like nano -technology, allele mining, carbon 
trading, stem cell research, nutraceuticals, smart packaging, water use efficiency, etc. 

 
 
43 
 
Further to address sho rtage of suitably trained Human Resources in the area of 
abiotic stress mitigation in agriculture, ICAR is also sponsoring Summer Winter 
Schools/ short courses and Training Programmes under Centre of Advanced Faculty 
Training Scheme for capacity building of Scientists/ Teachers of National Agricultural 
Research System in emerging areas like Biotic and Abiotic Stress Management   in 
Fruits Crops, Breeding for Biotic and Abiotic Stresses, Biotic and Abiotic Resources 
Management for Eco Friendly and Sustainable  Agriculture, Advances in Rootstocks 
for overcoming Biotic and Abiotic Stresses, Nutrio -hormonal Dynamics and 
Photosynthetic Efficiency in Crop Plants under Abiotic Stress.  
 Niche Area of Excellence in the areas of Genetic Engineering for Drought 
Resistance and Management, Microbial Biotechnology for imparting resistance in 
plants against insects and pest, enhancing water and fertilizer use efficiency in arid 
crops have been established for research and capacity building in addressing 
problems associated w ith abiotic and biotic stresses. These programmes provide 
support for sustaining and augmenting the regional national and global advantage in 
this important area for improving quality of human resources, adequate 
infrastructure, access to information and i nteraction with best of peer groups in India 
and aboard. 
  The efforts to improve availability of training facilities in this area will be further 
intensified in the XII Plan by more allocations of funds and support for the desired 
facilities. 
 [Vide Ministry of Agriculture O.M. No. 7(10)/2011, dated 29th November, 2011, 
Department of Agricultural Research and Education] 
 
RECOMMENDATION SERIAL NO.3.33  
 The Committee note that the ICAR as an interim measure have made some 
reallocation of finances, etc. to s trengthen the research on climate change and abiotic 
stresses. The National Network to Study on Climate Change Impacts, Adaption and 
Mitigation has been expanded to 23 centres during Eleventh Plan period.  The 

 
 
44 
 
Committee while appreciating the constraints of ICAR in limiting this Programme to only 
23 centres due to the obvious resource constraints desire that as this study would be 
the backbone of the strategies to counter the various consequences of climate change 
and abiotic stresses, the Department should  approach the Planning Commission and 
the Ministry of Finance at the highest level to get additional funds released for these 
studies without any further delay.   Thereafter, the Department should expand such 
studies to all of their centres and take initia tives to enhance the strength of scientists in 
these centres and impart them the best of training to enable them to concentrate their 
research on tangible, effective and economical solutions to tackle the effects of climate 
change and abiotic stresses with  a view to work out long term strategies to ensure food 
safety and security of the Nation.  
 
Reply of the Government 
 The Network Project ‘Impact, Adaptation and Vulnerability of Indian Agriculture to 
Climate Change’ will be merged with National Initiative  on Climate Resilient Agriculture 
(NICRA) in the 12 th Plan. NICRA as such has  four components viz., (i) strategic 
research on adaptation and mitigation, (ii) technology demonstration to cope with 
current climate variability in 100 vulnerable districts, (ii i) capacity building and (iv) 
sponsored competitive research to fill critical gaps in the strategic research.   This 
scheme is being implemented in 21 ICAR Institutes covering all aspects of agriculture 
i.e., food crops, horticultural crops, livestock and f isheries. The capacity building is an 
important component of NICRA which will involve training of young scientists in climate 
change research for scenario building, simulation models and quantifying GHGs 
emissions. Training programmes and awareness camps o n climate change/climate 
variability and coping strategies are also planned for farmers, NGOs, SHGs, line 
department officials, policy makers and lead institutions (banks, insurance companies, 
cooperative credit societies).  
 
[Vide Ministry of Agriculture O.M. No. 7(10)/2011, dated 29th November, 2011, 
Department of Agricultural Research and Education] 

 
 
45 
 
RECOMMENDATION SERIAL NO. 3.35  
 The Committee find that the National Agriculture Innovation Project to increase 
the productivity under abiotic stress condit ions has been allocated a sum of Rs. 2.61 
crore for the period 2008 -09 to 2010 -11.   Out of this an expenditure of Rs. 2.36 crore 
has been incurred on the said project till date.   The Committee view  agriculture 
innovation to be a constant bedrock of the future R&D in agriculture.  This area, 
therefore, needs to be funded adequately for well defined and cogent proposals.  
Accordingly, they feel that DARE need to rework on the future funds requirement for this 
Project and get the same released from Planning Commission with due promptitude.  
 
Reply of the Government 
 A project on Bio -prospecting of genes and allele mining for abiotic stress 
tolerance is operating at 36 centres besides the National Research Centre on Plant 
Biotechnology as the Lead Centre.  NA IP has sanctioned Rs. 57.13 crores for this 
project. The funds released to the project are Rs. 42.58 crores and utilization is to the 
tune of Rs. 35.92 crores as on June 30, 2011.  Therefore, The ICAR has addressed the 
concerns raised by the Committee and the project is not facing any paucity of funds.   
 
[Vide Ministry of Agriculture O.M. No. 7(10)/2011, dated 29th November, 2011, 
Department of Agricultural Research and Education] 
 
RECOMMENDATION SERIAL NO. 3.36  
 
 The Committee note that as of now Departm ent of Agricultural Research and 
Education have some projects on transgenics in crops which includes abiotic stress 
tolerant varieties under the Network Project of Transgenic Crops (NPTC).  Due to the 
very specialized nature of such research, there are ver y few ICAR Institutes who have 
been assigned the task of development of gene constructs and development of 
transgenic crop varieties for resistance to abiotic stresses. Rice, Wheat, Mustard, 

 
 
46 
 
Tomato, Chickpea, Groundnut and Cotton have been included for dev elopment of gene 
constructs and development of transgenic crop varieties for resistance of abiotic 
stresses.  During the Tenth and Eleventh Plans, out of Rs. 95.33 crore, a sum of 
Rs.70.32 crore was incurred under the NPTC project.  The Committee would lik e to 
caution the Department for such under utilisation of funds when avowedly there is 
paucity of money.  They, therefore, recommend that funds allocated for the Project 
should be utilized in a planned manner.   The Committee deliberately refrain from 
commenting on other aspects of transgenic crop varieties as they are separately 
examining the Subject ‘Cultivation of Genetically Modified Food Crops – Prospects and 
Effects’ on which they intend to Report to the Parliament shortly.  
 
Reply of the Government 
The Network Project on Transgenic Crops (NPTC) has substantially progressed in the 
assigned tasks. The present position in regard to financial expenditure is that, out of the 
grants received during the current plan period of Rs. 6250 lakhs, an amount of Rs.  5921 
lakhs (about 94%) has been utilized for enabling the progress of this project. 
 
[Vide Ministry of Agriculture O.M. No. 7(10)/2011, dated 29th November, 2011, 
Department of Agricultural Research and Education] 
 
RECOMMENDATION SERIAL NO. 4.14  
 Inspite of the fact that  agriculture is a State Subject and thereby the extension 
efforts are being primarily undertaken by the State Governments, the fact still remains 
that ICAR at the apex of the National Agriculture Research System (NARS) have a 
pivotal role  in the assessment, refinement and demonstration of technology/products.  
For this purpose, the ICAR has a network of 61 All India Coordinated Research Projects 
and 17 Network Projects in the Country to take care of technology identification and 
dissemination/extension requirements. The State Agriculture Universities are also an 
integral component of the extension system and the field level dissemination of the 
extension services is the responsibility of Krishi Vigyan Kendras (KVKs).  The first KVK 

 
 
47 
 
was establish in Puducherry in 1974.  The Committee find that their numbers, over the 
years, increased to 589, as on date.  The Department plan to establish a total of 667 
KVKs by end of the Eleventh Plan.  The Committee also note that out of 589 KVKs 
operational now, some are under the ICAR, some under SAUs, some with the State 
Governments.  The remaining KVKs are under PSUs, Central Universities and NGOs.  
As a part of the perspective planning, the Department intend to establish one additional 
KVK in each of the 50 larger districts keeping in view the potentional of the district for 
agricultural growth and scope of diversification in addition to the geographical area, rural 
population and net sown area.  The Committee appreciate this long overdue initiative of 
DARE/ICAR to increase the number of KVKs in the Country.  Knowing fully well the 
state of connectivity and access of rural areas with a KVK, at district level, the 
Committee strongly feel that the norms of establishing a KVK need an urgent review 
with the int ention of improving the accessibility of the farmers to them.  This is their 
considered opinion would enhance the reach and spread of the extension services run 
by the KVKs.  They, therefore, desire the Department to immediately get down to the 
task of preparing an action plan for this purpose and getting it fructified on priority as the 
Twelfth Plan is already on the anvil.   
Reply of the Government 
 As a standard practice, a site selection committee headed by an eminent 
agricultural scientist assesses the  logistics available in a district for establishing a KVK 
keeping in view the availability of land and its location accessible to farmers.  In order to 
select most appropriate site for setting up a KVK, need based changes in the site 
selection criteria have been made from time to time. 
 The KVKs of 100 districts of the country which are vulnerable to climate change 
have been given responsibility to conduct demonstrations of available climate resilient 
technologies at farmers’ field under NICRA. 
 
[Vide Ministry of Agriculture O.M. No. 7(10)/2011, dated 29th November, 2011, 
Department of Agricultural Research and Education] 
 

 
 
48 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 For comments of the Committee please refer to Para Nos. 1.47 of Chapter – I of 
this Report. 
 
RECOMMENDATION SERIAL NO. 4.15   
 The Committee note with satisfaction that the extension services system of 
NARS has been able to transfer several technologies/equipment for demonstration as 
well as for actual use to suit the requirements of various categories of farmers in 
different agro-climatic regions for different crops.  These have led to value addition of 
the agriculture produce and consequently the income of the farmers alongwith 
improving this.  They have also been able to availability of breeder seeds in sufficie nt 
quantities.  They further note with satisfaction that the KVKs system as a part of its goal 
of rendering agriculture technologies and training farmers through development and 
demonstration is providing e -connectivity amongst the KVKs to facilitate acces s to the 
e-enabled agricultural technologies to the KVKs and ZPDs.  This also enables them to 
access the e -enabled agricultural technologies available on internet/websites of 
Agriculture Institutes and Universities, e -mailing and voice communication with o ther 
remote sites connected.  The Committee desire that all KVKs should be provided e -
connectivity as early as possible enabling the farmers to avail the benefits of various 
latest technologies related to agriculture sector.  
 
Reply of the Government 
 As suggested by the committee, proposal for providing e -connectivity to rest of 
the KVKs will be made during the XII Five Year Plan. 
 
[Vide Ministry of Agriculture O.M. No. 7(10)/2011, dated 29th November, 2011, 
Department of Agricultural Research and Education] 
 

 
 
49 
 
RECOMMENDATION SERIAL NO. 4.16  
 The Nutrient Based Subsidy Scheme for fertilizers was introduced by the 
Government with effect from 1 April, 2010.  The Committee find that DARE/ICAR as of 
now lack exact feedback on this Scheme as it has been implement ed only recently.  
The Committee are, however, of the view that to effectively implement the Nutrient 
Based Subsidy Scheme for fertilizers,  the Government would require substantial inputs 
from NARS on the soil health and related matters, nutrient status o f soil, the agricultural 
practices, etc.  DARE/ICAR have to, therefore, do a lot of spade work in this direction.  
The Committee note that DARE/ICAR have been assigned the job of having geo -
reference database on major and micro nutrients created. They have  already 
commenced work on the Project from April this year and intend to cover 170 districts by 
March, 2012.  The geo -reference databasing will help in working out the exact fertiliser 
requirement of a crop in a district.  The Committee, therefore, desire  that this task be 
completed by DARE/ICAR on top priority basis in a highly time bound manner to not 
only attain the target of 170 districts this year is fully met within the stipulated timeline 
but also accomplish the geo -reference databasing of major and  micro nutrients for the 
remaining districts at the earliest.  
 
Reply of the Government 
 In order to provide adequate support to the nutrient based subsidy scheme, ICAR 
is undertaking soil fertility mapping based on geo -referenced soil sampling for site 
specific and precise fertilizer recommendations. So far mapping has been completed 
with respect to organic carbon, major and micronutrients in 65 districts and soil 
sampling and laboratory analysis is in progress for another 38 districts. It is projected 
that mapping of 171 districts would be completed by September, 2012 and soil fertility 
mapping of the rest of about 430 districts would be completed in second phase of the 
project.  
[Vide Ministry of Agriculture O.M. No. 7(10)/2011, dated 29th November, 2011, 
Department of Agricultural Research and Education] 
 

 
 
50 
 
RECOMMENDATION SERIAL NO. 4.18  
 
 Having assessed the performance of the present extension system on the basis 
of various inputs received by them, the Committee, have a distinct feeling that the 
Extension Services in the Country are at present not in an optimal state of readiness to 
cope with the responsibilities that will enjoin upon them in view of the fast paced 
developments, due to climate change and global warming.  The Department have also 
admitted as much about the deficiencies in NARS and consequently in extension 
services due to paucity of funds, lack of infrastructure and shortage of human resource 
etc.  In such a scenario, it is but apparent that the challenges posed to agriculture and 
allied se ctors, climate change and resultant abiotic stresses cannot be met upto the 
desired level causing avoidable distress to the farming community.  Furthermore, such 
an eventuality also has serious implications for the food security and safety of the 
Country.  
Reply of the Government 
 In order to reach more number of farmers in the district, the KVKs need 
strengthening in terms of infrastructure and manpower. In order to tackle the challenges 
posed to agriculture due to climate change and resultant abiotic stre sses as many 
as100 KVKs, as part of NICRA project, have been given the responsibility of taking up 
climate issues through demonstration of climate resilient technologies in the farmers 
field. The thrust areas of work include p romotion of drought tolerant early maturing crop 
varieties in rainfed crops;  harvesting rainwater and supplemental irrigation during dry 
periods; in- situ moisture conservation in red and black soils ; custom hiring centres for 
timely planting of dryland crops; promotion of small rumina nts as livelihood enterprise in 
highly drought -prone areas;  organization of community seed and fodder banks in 
remote villages, etc.    
 
[Vide Ministry of Agriculture O.M. No. 7(10)/2011, dated 29th November, 2011, 
Department of Agricultural Research and Education] 

 
 
51 
 
RECOMMENDATION SERIAL NO. 4.19  
 
 The NARS has now to be oriented on a two way system where technologies and 
products are disseminated downwards and data base and feedbacks are generated 
upwards from the lowest tier.  In this endeavour, the KVKs because of their district level 
positioning and, therefore, their limitation of reach and spread cannot be the ultimate 
panacea.  The Committee, therefore, feel that another tier below the KVKs needs to be 
developed under them especially under those KVKs h aving a wider area to cover.  In 
their considered view, an entity at the block level called Krishi Vigyan Up -kendra, etc. 
can act as the terminal point for dissemination of technologies and other outputs of 
extension services in a more effective and time b ound manner than the district level 
KVKs.  They can also act as the generation/collection points for database and feedback 
not only for DARE/ICAR but for the other Ministries/Departments of the Government 
who have some or the other stake in agriculture, in  a far comprehensive manner at the 
block levels.  As far as funding of such block level entities is concerned, DARE can think 
of working out the modalities for the purpose in coordination with Department of 
Agriculture and Cooperation for including it as a  component under Rashtriya Krishi 
Vikas Yojana.  They desire to be apprised of the progress made in this regard. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 KVK is an institution mandated to assess, refine and demonstrate the 
technologies developed by ICAR institutes and a gricultural universities in the major 
farming systems of a district.  The results of performance of technologies and 
associated constraints are shared with research as feedback and with extension system 
to disseminate among farmers. Each KVK is provided mo dest infrastructure and a team 
of six Subject Matter Specialists only.  The creation of its sub unit at block level will 
dilute its composite and integrated science focused structure as well as the mandated 
activities.  However, in case of 50 larger districts one additional KVK is being set up.  As 
far as data base development is concerned the KVKs provide technological 

 
 
52 
 
backstopping to district line departments for generating data and feed -back. The 
Department of Agriculture and Cooperation has already made  provision of a Block 
Technology Team under ATMA scheme and KVKs provide necessary technical support 
to re-orient them with the advancement of technologies. 
 
[Vide Ministry of Agriculture O.M. No. 7(10)/2011, dated 29th November, 2011, 
Department of Agricultural Research and Education] 

 
 
53 
 
 
CHAPTER – III 
 
Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to pursue in 
view of the Government’s reply 
 
 
 
- NIL - 

 
 
54 
 
CHAPTER – IV 
 
Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies of the Government 
have not been accepted by the Committee 
 
RECOMMENDATION SERIAL NO. 1.10 
 Variability in weather particularly when almost 80 million hectares of land in India 
is rainfed poses serious ramifications on the agri -sector.  The Committee observe that 
inspite of the declining contribution of this sector to GDP drastically over the years, 
agriculture continues to provide livelihood to almost 60% of our workforce. The 
Committee note that though abiotic stresses are as old as agriculture itself, the 
changing dimensio n due to climate change are a worrisome aspect.  The growing 
vagaries of weather apart, abiotic stresses are also a result of depletion of water table 
and nutrient  imbalances in soil like zinc, boron, sulphur and iron, increased salinity and 
alkalinity, d eficiencies of nitrogen, phosphorous and sulphur, imbalanced use of 
fertilizers, increasing toxicities of selenium and other heavy metals, etc. The Committee 
realizing the emerging threats, had in their Forty Seventh Report (Fourteenth Lok 
Sabha) on the ‘I mpact of Global Climate Change on Agriculture and Allied Sectors in 
India’ suggested several remedial measures and strategies to cope up with the 
situation. What has, however, dis -appointed them was that the Government, despite 
being forwarned of the impending threats and their likely ramifications on the agriculture 
sector and livelihoods of million of people has chosen to remain impervious to the 
gravity of the situation.  The Committee had in view of the capital intensive solutions to 
these vexed problem s recommended in their said Report that National Agriculture 
Research System ought to be provided sufficient funds to ensure that the Research and 
Development efforts are not hindered.  The Committee are, however, highly perturbed 
to note that the Government has singularly failed to adequately fund the research efforts 
of our research scientists.  As has been time and again brought out in previous Reports 
of the Committee, the allocation of Rs.12023 crore against Rs.31000 crore 
recommended by the Working Group  for DARE for  the Eleventh Plan, shows complete 
lack of concern of the Government towards this important aspect. They hope against 

 
 
55 
 
hope that the situation on this front would witness a significant improvement at least 
during Twelfth Plan. They would l ike to be apprised of the action taken and results 
obtain in this regard at the earliest. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 During the XII Five Year Plan, the ICAR is proposing to address the issues such 
as Natural Resources degradation, Increasing Biotic and Abio tic Pressures, Input use 
Efficiency, Farm Mechanization Harvest & Post Harvest Losses, Profitability in farming, 
Quality Human Resource and Farm Extension through establishment of Consortia 
Platforms in a mission mode approach. Some of the Consortia Platfo rms are Agri -
Biodiversity Management, Genomics, Seed, Hybrids, Climate Change, Conservation 
Agriculture, Water and Waste Management, Health Foods, Feed & Fodder, 
Biofortification, Diagnostics and Vaccines, Nanotechnology, etc. Further approach will 
be on P roductivity enhancement and Yield Gap Reduction, Extra Mural Funding, 
Establishment of Agri Innovation Fund, Regional Phytotron facilities, etc.  
 
 The ICAR through NAIP is addressing the issues of climate change through 
mitigation measures to meet product ivity under rainfed agriculture.  Some of the good 
results emerging from the projects on ground are: 1)  Networking water yielding 
borewells in dryland areas coupled with micro -irrigation systems to ensure atleast one 
crop i.e., Kharif, besides providing l ife saving irrigation to the second crop requiring less 
water during rabi.  The results have been successfully demonstrated in Rangareddy 
district of Andhra Pradesh;  2) The nano -particles of phosphorus applied through soil 
application enhanced yield of crops like pearl millet by 15 to 30% in the semi -arid areas 
like Jodhpur in Rajasthan.  The results of 2 years crop have shown promise for making 
further effort in this direction;  3) A model of benefitting small holder through carbon 
finance has been demons trated over a grid of more than 1500 ha  involving 1450 
farmers in the district of Warangal, Andhra Pradesh.  By making a consortium of these 
farmers in a grid and planting timber and fruit trees, every farmer has started earning 
Rs. 7 to 8 thousand per ye ar;  4) The proposals are being formed during XII Plan for 

 
 
56 
 
ensuring timely availability of critical inputs for land preparation, seed and fertilizers. 
This is one such intervention besides technology which facilitates utilizing available soil 
moisture during the short periods of monsoon rains. 
 As part of  National Initiative on Climate Resilient Agriculture (NICRA) project, 
KVKs have taken up activities relating to the major farming systems in 100 vulnerable 
districts for mitigation and adaptation to climat e change. The focus of work include 
drought  tolerant and early maturing varieties in rainfed  crops, sub -mergence tolerant  
rice varieties in frequently flood or cyclone prone districts, varieties which escape 
terminal heat stress in the rabi crops, moist ure conservation, zero tillage practices and 
agro forestry interventions for rehabilitation for degraded lands etc.          
 This could be possible only through enhanced allocation for XII Five Year Plan 
out of which a major share would be identified for research for improving crop 
productivity in rainfed agriculture. Revamping of higher agricultural education for 
improving and sustaining the quality, need priority attention by extending financial 
support to State Agricultural University for their research and education programmes.  
 The Working Group on Agriculture constituted by the Planning Commission also 
endorses the matter.  The ICAR has proposed to address this issue through enhanced 
allocation for 12th five year plan out of which a major share would  be identified for 
research for improving crop productivity in rainfed agriculture. 
[Vide Ministry of Agriculture O.M. No. 7(10)/2011, dated 29th November, 2011, 
Department of Agricultural Research and Education] 
Comments of the Committee 
 For comments of the Committee please refer to Para Nos. 1.11 and 1.12 of 
Chapter – I of this Report. 
 
 
RECOMMENDATION SERIAL NO. 2.20  
 Coming to the immediate task ahead for DARE/ICAR, the Committee note that 
the intensive agriculture in various parts of the Country has caused depletion of natural 

 
 
57 
 
resources such as water and nutrients, leading to lowered water table and nutrient 
imbalances in the production systems. The Government have so far prepared soil 
fertility maps of micronutrients (NPK) for only 20 States and micr onutrient maps for 10 
States. The Committee express their unhappiness over the tardy progress of mapping 
of soil fertility. Due to this, a large number of marginal and small farmers do not invest in 
application of micronutrients which has lead to increase in deficiencies of nutrients such 
as zinc, boron, sulphur and iron and also degrading environment or pollution. The 
Committee, therefore, urge the Department of Agricultural Research and Education  to 
complete the mapping of soil fertility of all the remai ning States in a time bound manner 
as this step would also contribute significantly in the strategies being evolved for 
tackling abiotic stresses.  
Reply of the Government 
 Keeping in view the immense importance of soil fertility mapping, the ICAR has 
taken initiative to prepare GIS based soil fertility mapping for macro, secondary and 
micronutrients at district or even block level in 21 States. The programme is being 
funded by Department of Agriculture & Cooperation, Ministry of Agriculture. So far 
mapping of 65 districts of the country has been completed by various AICRP on Soil 
Test Crop Response centres. These maps will be useful for monitoring of soil fertility at 
district/block level fertilizer recommendations and distribution of fertilizers etc. to en sure 
balance fertilization and thereby improving soil health and crop productivity in the 
country.  It is projected that mapping of all the 171 districts would be completed by 
September, 2012 and soil fertility mapping of rest of about 430 districts would be 
completed in second phase of the project.  
 
[Vide Ministry of Agriculture O.M. No. 7(10)/2011, dated 29th November, 2011, 
Department of Agricultural Research and Education] 
Comments of the Committee 
 For comments of the Committee please refer to Para No . 1.30 of Chapter – I of 
this Report. 

 
 
58 
 
RECOMMENDATION SERIAL NO. 3.37  
 The Committee note that the project entitled ‘Impacts, adaption and vulnerability 
of Indian Agriculture to climate change’ with the objective of quantifying the sensitivity of 
crops inc luding horticultural crops and plantations, soil, water, fish and livestock to 
climate changes was launched in 2004. A very important component of agriculture is 
soil. They, however, find that the ICAR have not undertaken any projects on soil under 
this pr oject during the year 2007 -08 and 2008 -09. They also find that the funds 
allocated under the projects were not fully utilized during the year 2007-08, 2008-09 and 
2009-10. They, therefore, desire   the Department to improve their management of 
finances so that not only precious resources are fully utilized but also the timelines for 
various components of the Project are achieved without any cost over runs.   
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 The research on assessing sensitivity of crop to climate change in food crops has 
resulted in identifying breeding materials that are less affected and are being put to use 
in breeding for new crop varieties. 
 
 The adaptation and mitigation through enhanced water productivity, nutrient use 
efficiency, and conservation agricultu re and agro -forestry systems is already included 
under NICRA which aims at designing and development of suitable soil -water 
management practices for enhancing climate resilience.  
 
 The horticulture component of this project is taken up at IIHR, Bangalore and 
IIVR, Varanasi to identify and develop tomato, french bean, chillies etc. varieties tolerant 
to climatic stress (heat and water deficit) for different agro climatic regions and varying 
seasons in the country. In tomato, 225 lines have already been scre ened against heat 
stress and promising lines have been sorted out. The source of resistance to high 

 
 
59 
 
temperature in frenchbean was also identified. Thirty chilli lines were screened for water 
stress tolerance and four onion lines were identified to soil moisture stress. 
 
 [Vide Ministry of Agriculture O.M. No. 7(10)/2011, dated 29 th November, 2011, 
Department of Agricultural Research and Education] 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 For comments of the Committee please refer to Para No. 1.40 of Chapter – I of 
this Report. 
RECOMMENDATION SERIAL NO. 3.38  
 The Committee appreciate that different crop management practices including 
Contingency Planning are being worked out by the Department by monitoring of the 
status of crops situations. 575 Districts have been target ed for the Contingency Plans 
and out of this 102 Plans have been completed and 257 Plans are under preparation. 
The Committee, however, note that 102 districts in which the Contingency Plan have 
been completed present a very lop -sided picture and a large n umber of States are not 
being attended to at the requisite pace.  Thus, a large number of districts in States like 
Madhya Pradesh, Himachal Pradesh, Jammu and Kashmir, Uttar Pradesh, Bihar, 
Chhattisgarh, Jharkhand and Assam are yet to be taken up by the Go vernment for 
District Contingency Planning. The Committee, therefore, recommend that the 
Government to take up these activities in a uniform manner so that all the States can 
avail the benefit of Contingency Plan simultaneously. The Committee also recommen d 
that the preparations of Plans in the remaining 216 Districts be completed by the 
Government at the earliest. They would like to be apprised of the progress made in this 
regard at the earliest. 
Reply of the Government 
 
 The contingency plans for 209 dist ricts have been completed so far. These 
include 22 in Andhra Pradesh, 23 in Gujarat, 19 in Haryana, 24 in Karnataka, 14 in 

 
 
60 
 
Kerala, 21 in Maharashtra, 27 in Orissa, 19 in Punjab, 9 in Rajasthan and 31 in Tamil 
Nadu. By March 2012, district plans will be com pleted for a total of 350 districts and 
remaining districts in the other states will be completed on priority. 
 
[Vide Ministry of Agriculture O.M. No. 7(10)/2011, dated 29th November, 2011, 
Department of Agricultural Research and Education] 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 For comments of the Committee please refer to Para No. 1.43 of Chapter – I of 
this Report. 
 
RECOMMENDATION SERIAL NO. 4.17  
 Keeping the farmers constantly updated on weather information can play a major 
role in improving the agriculture produ ction in the Country.  The matter has already 
been touched upon by the Committee in the previous Chapter of this Report.  The 
Committee find that there are very few Kisan Vikas Kendras in which weather stations 
have so far been established by the Indian Me teorological Department. The Committee, 
therefore, recommend the Department of Agricultural Research and Education to take 
up the issue of setting up of weather stations/automatic weather stations with the Indian 
Meteorological Department so that all the K VKs are provided with agromet observatory 
and are in a position to provide farmers weather updates timely and in the event of any 
natural calamities enable them to take a pre -emptive course of action to save their 
precious produce from falling prey to the fury of nature. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 Appreciating the need for Agro Advisories for the farming community, the ICAR 
has so far set up t he weather stations/automatic weather stations at 270 centres at 
SAUs and plans to set up another 100 such stations i n KVKs in 100 vulnerable districts 
under National Initiative on Climate Resilient Agriculture (NICRA). 

 
 
61 
 
 
[Vide Ministry of Agriculture O.M. No. 7(10)/2011, dated 29th November, 2011, 
Department of Agricultural Research and Education] 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 For comments of the Committee please refer to Para No. 1.46 of Chapter – I of 
this Report. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
62 
 
CHAPTER – V 
 
Observations/Recommendations in respect of which final replies of the 
Government are still awaited 
 
RECOMMENDATION SERIAL NO. 2.17  
 
 The Committee note with a sense of trepidation the continued havoc caused by 
abiotic stresses to the agriculture and allied sector produce of the Country.  The abiotic 
stresses alone as also in tandem with other factors like input supply deficiencies,  agro-
climatic conditions, biotic stresses, etc. continue to be a major worry for the farming 
community and the agriculture scientists alike since till date effective solutions for 
tackling them are not readily available.  The extensive loss caused to food  grain 
production by the droughts, which are abiotic stresses, during 1987 and 2002 are well 
documented.  As admitted by the Department the cold waves, which are also a form of 
abiotic stress caused substantial damage to mustard, mango, guava, papaya, brin jal, 
tomato and potato corps during 2002.  In like manner the heat stress in 2004 in the 
Indo-Gangetic Plains led to the wheat crop maturing earlier by 10 -20 days.  The 
Committee further note that as compared to these staggering losses during the 2009 
drought, loss of food grain production was prevented to a certain extent.  This happened 
because ICAR took several pro -active measures.  These include compiling all the 
available research information including varietal and emergent strategies on 
contingency pl ans for facing anticipated eventualities.  The efforts of ICAR were also 
ably supplemented by weather forecasting of agro -advisories in local languages by the 
State Agriculture Universities.  According to the Committee, the example drought 
mitigation effor ts of 2009 can be a trend setter for the future strategies for tackling 
calamities caused by abiotic stresses.  The Committee, however, feel that apart from 
the need of institutionalizing a coordinated multi -agency, multi-disciplinary strategy a lot 
needs to be done on the research and development front by the ICAR.   
 

 
 
63 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 In order to mitigate the anticipated abiotic and biotic stress in crop production, 
frontier science -based research to exploit explored genetic systems for being 
introgressed into crops is proposed in the next plan period.  
 
 Efforts are being made to develop second generation technologies with the help 
of biotechnological tools to cope up with the climate change induced abiotic stresses 
and drought -proofing. A Nationa l Institute on Abiotic Stress Management has been 
established in Baramati, Pune to conduct upstream multi -disciplinary research with 
state-of the art infrastructure. CRIDA, CAZRI, CSSRI and CSWCRTI are also 
strengthening their research on drought proofing and water harvesting.  Efforts are 
being made to strengthen the agroforestry component research in watershed 
management based agricultural production mechanism. 
 
 The ICAR is developing designer varieties to combat heat tolerance, drought 
tolerance and oth er abiotic stresses in different crops in near future. Root -stock 
research using dogridge in grapes has given varieties resistant to heat tolerance. Apart 
from this efforts are being made to develop heat tolerance varieties in chillies, tomato, 
French beans and pea varieties. 
 The efforts of ICAR for improvisation in forewarning of weather conditions as well 
as release of necessary agro-advisories to farmers in local languages is being relooked.  
Enhanced efficiency for prompt advisories through Information  and Communication 
Technology (ICT) to reach each Panchayat could sensitize the access to the relevant 
knowledge for farmers.  
 
[Vide Ministry of Agriculture O.M. No. 7(10)/2011, dated 29th November, 2011, 
Department of Agricultural Research and Education] 

 
 
64 
 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 For comments of the Committee please refer to Para No. 1.17 of Chapter – I of 
this Report. 
 
RECOMMENDATION SERIAL NO. 3.34  
 With regard to bio -prospecting of genes and allele mining for abiotic stress 
tolerance it transpires t hat a project with an approved allocation of Rs. 57.13 crore was 
started in 2009 -10. However only Rs. 32.10 crore was sanctioned in 2009 -10of which 
Rs. 16.03 crore only has been released for the project. The Committee are of the firm 
opinion that starving this Scheme of funds in the initial stages will hamper the research 
activities in this vital field. They, therefore, recommend that funds once sanctioned for 
such pivotal projects should be released in time in the future so as to ensure that 
research is ca rried on uninterruptedly and is unaffected in any manner by paucity of 
funds. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 The NAIP funded project on “Bioprospecting of genes and allele mining for 
abiotic stress tolerance” is in operation at 36 different centres with NRC on Plant 
Biotechnology as the lead centre.  By June 2011 a total of Rs.4258.874 lakhs have 
been released of which Rs.3592.427 lakhs have been spent so far (84.35% utilization).  
The rest amount out of the total sanctioned budget of Rs. 5713.243 lakhs is relea sed in 
the year 2011-12 so that all the activities are carried out and all the projected objectives 
are met.   
 The project has already made significant progress with regard to generation of 
resource base for gene prospecting in all the target species incl uding moth bean, 
lathyrus, goat, camel, fish species in which very little information was available.  Many 
stress responsive genes have been cloned and some of them are being functionally 

 
 
65 
 
validated.  While most of the objectives will be met during the proj ect period of three 
months by March 2012, some aspects would require extension of the project period by 
another one and a half year in view of the fact that the traits being handled are of 
complex nature and many of the species from which genes are being p rospected have 
not been worked out earlier, which demand more time and efforts. 
 
 Further studies are aimed on chilli, tomato, capsicum, onion and peas and on 
several cucumis species at IIHR, Bangalore and IIVR, Varanasi, and also to initiate 
same studies  on potato at CPRI, Shimla and at IISR, Calicut on spices. Forty two 
genotypes of cucumber and 48 genotypes of musk melon at IIHR and 16 genotypes of 
cucumber and 19 genotypes of musk melon were screened at IIVR against water 
stress. In due course of time,  ICAR may be able to solve the problem of abiotic stress 
tolerance in various horticultural crops.  
  
[Vide Ministry of Agriculture O.M. No. 7(10)/2011, dated 29th November, 2011, 
Department of Agricultural Research and Education] 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 For comments of the Committee please refer to Para No. 1.35 of Chapter – I of 
this Report. 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI;               BASUDEB ACHARIA 
 29  August, 2013                                                         Chairman, 
 07 Bhadrapada, 1935 (Saka)                                 Committee on Agriculture.   
 
 

 
 
66 
 
Appendix 
 
COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE 
(2012-13) 
 
MINUTES OF THE THIRTY NINTH SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE 
 
 The Committee sat on Thursday, the 29 th August, 2013 from 1000 hours to 1040 
hours in Committee Room ‘E’, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.  
 
         PRESENT 
Shri Basudeb Acharia   -   Chairman 
 
MEMBERS 
 
                                          LOK SABHA 
 
2.  Shri Narayansingh Amlabe 
3.  Smt. Ashwamedh Devi 
4.  Shri P. Kumar 
5.  Dr. Jyoti Mirdha 
6.  Shri Devji M. Patel 
7.  Shri Rajaiah Siricilla 
8.  Shri Hukamdeo Narayan Yadav 
  
                          RAJYA SABHA 
09.  Shri Parshottam Khodabhai Rupala 
10.  Shri S. Thangavelu 

 
 
67 
 
     
SECRETARIAT 
 
 1. Shri R.S. Kambo  - Joint Secretary 
 2. Shri P.C. Koul  - Director 
 3. Shri C. Vanlalruata  - Deputy Secretary 
2. At the outset the Chairman welcomed the members to the Sitting of the Committee.  
The Committee, thereafter, took up the following draft Reports for consideration:  
 
(i)  Fiftieth R eport on action taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in the Twenty -sixth Report of 
the Committee on Agriculture (2010-11) on “Development of Abiotic Stress 
Resistant Crop Varieties and Dissemination of Production Enhancing 
Technologies Review of R&D and Extension Efforts in the Country” ; and  
 
*(ii) xxxx  xxxx  xxxx  xxxx  xxxx   
 xxxx  xxxx  xxxx  xxxx  xxxx  
 
3. After some deliberations, the Committee adopted the draft Fiftieth Report without 
any modifications and    *xxxx     xxxx xxxx xxxx.  They also authorized the Chairman 
to finalise the above Draft Report(s) in the light of the factual verifications got done by the 
concerned Departments of the Ministry of Agriculture and present them to the Parliament.   
 
The Committee then adjourned. 
***** 
____________________________________________________________ 
* Matters not related to this Report. 

 
 
68 
 
ANNEXURE 
(Vide Para 4 of Introduction of the Report) 
ANALYSIS OF ACTION TAKEN BY GOVERNMENT ON 
THE TWENTY-SIXTH REPORT OF COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE ON 
DEVELOPMENT OF ABIOTIC STRESS RESISTANT CROP VARIETIES AND 
DISSEMINATION OF PRODUCTION ENHANCING TECHNOLOGIES REVIEW OF 
R&D AND EXTENSION EFFORTS IN THE COUNTRY 
  
(i)  Total number of Recommendations              21 
(ii) Recommendations/Observations which have been 
Accepted by the Government  
Para Nos. 1.9, 1.11, 1.12, 2.18, 2.19, 3.32, 3.33, 3.35, 3.36, 4.14,  
 4.15, 4.16, 4.18 and 4.19 
Total           14 
Percentage                          66.66%  
(iii) Recommendations/Observations which the Committee 
Do not desire to pursue in view of the Government’s replies  
 
Total                   NIL 
Percentage                               0% 
(iv) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies 
 of the Government have not been accepted by the Committee 
Para Nos.  1.10, 2.20, 3.37, 3.38 and 4.17  
Total             05  
Percentage                        23.80% 
(v) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which  
 Final replies of the Government are still awaited 
Para Nos.   2.17 and 3.34         02 
Total            NIL   
Percentage                 09.52% 