FIFTY-SIXTH REPORT
COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE
(2013-2014)
(FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA)
MINISTRY OF AGRICULTURE
(DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE AND
CO-OPERATION)
‘THE AGRICULTURAL BIOSECURITY BILL, 2013’
Presented to Hon’ble Speaker, Lok Sabha on 04.01.2014
Presented to Lok Sabha on ...................................
Laid on the Table of Rajya Sabha on ..............
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
December, 2013/Agrahayana, 1935 (Saka)


C.O.A. No. 279
Price : Rs. 153.00
© 2013 BY LOK SABHA S ECRETARIAT
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct
of Business in Lok Sabha (Fourteenth Edition) and printed by
Jainco Art India, New Delhi-110 005.

(i)
CONTENTS
PAGE
COMPOSITION OF THE C OMMITTEE (2013-14) .......................................... (iii)
COMPOSITION OF THE C OMMITTEE (2012-13) .......................................... (v)
INTRODUCTION ............................................................................................ (vii)
REPORT
PART I
Background analysis of ‘The Agricultural Biosecurity
Bill, 2013’ .......................................................................................... 1
PART II
Recommendations and Observations of the Committee ...... 25
ANNEXURES
I. ‘The Agricultural Biosecurity Bill, 2013’ ................................ 28
II. List of State Governments/Union Territories which
submitted Written Memoranda to the Committee ............. 118
III. List of Individuals/Experts/Organisations who submitted
Written Memoranda to the Committee ................................. 119
IV . List of State Governments who tendered Oral Evidence
before the Committee ................................................................. 120
V. List of Individuals/Experts/Organisations who appeared
for Personal Hearing before the Committee ........................ 121
APPENDICES
I. Minutes of the 28th Sitting of the Committee held on
21 May, 2013 (2012-13) ............................................................... 122
II. Minutes of the 34th Sitting of the Committee held on
15 July, 2013 (2012-13)................................................................ 124
III. Minutes of the 36th Sitting of the Committee held on
01 August, 2013 (2012-13) ......................................................... 126

PAGE
(ii)
IV . Minutes of the 37th Sitting of the Committee held on
07 August, 2013 (2012-13) ......................................................... 129
V. Minutes of the 38th Sitting of the Committee held on
26 August, 2013 (2012-13) ......................................................... 131
VI. Minutes of the 4th Sitting of the Committee held on
08 October, 2013 (2013-14) ........................................................ 133
VII. Minutes of the 6th Sitting of the Committee held on
11 November, 2013 (2013-14) .................................................... 136
VIII. Minutes of the 12th Sitting of the Committee held on
09 December, 2013 (2013-14) ..................................................... 139
IX. Minutes of the 13th Sitting of the Committee held on
19 December, 2013 (2013-14) ..................................................... 141

COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE
ON AGRICULTURE (2013-2014)
Shri Basudeb Acharia —  Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Narayansingh Amlabe
3. Shri Sanjay Singh Chauhan
4. Shri H.D. Devegowda
5. Smt. Ashwamedh Devi
6. Shri L. Raja Gopal
7. Smt. Paramjit Kaur Gulshan
8. Shri Anant Kumar Hegde
9. Shri Premdas Katheria
10. Shri P . Kumar
11. Smt. Botcha Jhansi Lakshmi
12. Sardar Sukhdev Singh Libra
13. Dr. Jyoti Mirdha
14. Shri Naranbhai Kachhadia
15. Shri Devji M. Patel
16. Smt. Bhavana Gawali (Patil)
17. Shri Jagdish Singh Rana
18. Shri Rajaiah Siricilla
19. Shri Patel Kishanbhai V .
20. Dr. Vinay Kumar Pandey ‘Vinnu’
21. Shri Hukumdeo Narayan Yadav
Rajya Sabha
22. Shri N. Balaganga
23. Shri Satyavrat Chaturvedi
24. Smt. Mohsina Kidwai
(iii)

25. Shri Dharmendra Pradhan
26. Dr. K.V .P . Ramachandra Rao
27. Shri Parshottam Khodabhai Rupala
28. Shri Rajpal Singh Saini
29. Shri S. Thangavelu
30. Shri Shivanand Tiwari
31. Shri Darshan Singh Yadav
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Shri A. Louis Martin — Joint Secretary
2. Smt. Abha Singh Yaduvanshi — Director
3. Shri C. Vanlalruata — Deputy Secretary
(iv)

COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE
ON AGRICULTURE (2012-2013)
Shri Basudeb Acharia —  Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Narayansingh Amlabe
3. Shri Sanjay Singh Chauhan
4. Shri H.D. Devegowda
5. Smt. Ashwamedh Devi
6. Shri L. Raja Gopal
7. Smt. Paramjit Kaur Gulshan
8. Shri Anant Kumar Hegde
9. Shri Premdas Katheria
10. Shri P . Kumar
11.D r. (Smt.) Botcha Jhansi Lakshmi
12. Sardar Sukhdev Singh Libra
13. Dr. Jyoti Mirdha
14. Shri Naranbhai Kachhadia
15. Shri Devji M. Patel
16. Smt. Bhavana Gawali (Patil)
17. Shri Jagdish Singh Rana
18. Shri Rajaiah Siricilla
19. Shri Patel Kishanbhai V .
20. Dr. Vinay Kumar Pandey ‘Vinnu’
21. Shri Hukamdeo Narayan Yadav
Rajya Sabha
22. Shri Satyavrat Chaturvedi
*23. Vacant
(v)
* Vice Shri A. Elavarasan who ceased to be the Member of the Committee on his
retirement from Rajya Sabha on 24 July, 2013.

24. Smt. Mohsina Kidwai
25. Shri Dharmendra Pradhan
26. Dr. K.V .P . Ramachandra Rao
27. Shri Parshottam Khodabhai Rupala
28. Shri Rajpal Singh Saini
29. Shri Shivanand Tiwari
30. Shri S. Thangavelu
31. Shri Darshan Singh Yadav
(vi)

(vii)
INTRODUCTION
I, the Chairman, Committee on Agriculture having been authorized
by the Committee to present the report on their behalf, present this
Fifty-Sixth Report on ‘The Agricultural Biosecurity Bill 2013‘.
2. The Agricultural Biosecurity Bill, 2013 was introduced in
Lok Sabha on 11 March, 2013. The Speaker referred the Bill to the
Committee under Rule 331E(1)(b) of the Rules of Procedure and
Conduct of Business in Lok Sabha.
3. The Committee were briefed by the representatives of the
Ministry of Agriculture (Department of Agriculture and Co-operation)
on the Bill on 21 May, 2013.
4. The Committee invited suggestions/views of various
stakeholders on the Bill through an advertisement in the media. In
response, written suggestions/memoranda were received from
16 individuals/Organisations.
5. The Committee also sought the views of State Governments/
Union Territory Administrations on various clauses of the Bill. Fourteen
State Governments viz. Andhra Pradesh, Arunachal Pradesh,
Chhattisgarh, Goa, Haryana, Himachal Pradesh, Karnataka, Kerala,
Madhya Pradesh, Punjab, Rajasthan, Tamil Nadu, Uttarakhand and
Uttar Pradesh and six Union Territory Administrations viz. Andaman
and Nicobar, Chandigarh, Dadra and Nagar Haveli, Daman and Diu,
Delhi and Puducherry forwarded their views to the Committee.
6. The Committee took oral evidence of the representatives of the
State Governments of Andhra Pradesh and Haryana; Karnataka; Punjab
and Tamil Nadu respectively and also heard the views of an expert
on 01 August, 2013, 26 August, 2013 and 08 October, 2013.
7. The Committee took oral evidence of the representatives of
Ministry of Agriculture (Department of Agriculture and Co-operation)
on 11 November, 2013.
8. The Committee at their sitting held on 19 December, 2013
considered and adopted the Report.
9. The Committee express their thanks to the Individuals/Experts/
Organisations who furnished Memoranda giving their views/
suggestions on the Bill.

10. The Committee also wish to express their thanks to the
representatives of the Ministry of Agriculture (Department of
Agriculture and Co-operation) for tendering of evidence before the
Committee and furnishing the requisite information in connection with
examination of the Bill. They also express their thanks to the State
Governments/Union Territory Administrations which furnished their
suggestions/views in writing on various clauses of the Bill and also
to the representatives of the State Governments who tendered evidence
before the Committee.
   N
EW D ELHI; BASUDEB ACHARIA,
19 December, 2013 Chairman,
28 Agrahayana, 1935 (Saka) Committee on Agriculture.
(viii)

REPORT
PART I
BACKGROUND ANALYSIS OF ‘THE AGRICULTURAL
BIOSECUIRTY BILL, 2013’
‘The Agricultural Biosecurity Bill, 2013’ (Annexure-I) was
introduced in the Lok Sabha on 11 March, 2013. The Bill was referred
to the Committee on Agriculture by the Speaker, Lok Sabha on
9 May, 2013 for examination and Report.
1.2 Over the years, systems have been developed and put in place
for protection of plant, animal and marine health. The Directorate of
Plant Protection, Quarantine and Storage (DPPQ&S) in the Department
of Agriculture and Co-operation (DAC), through its 35 plant quarantine
stations, enforces plant quarantine regulations stipulated in the Plant
Quarantine (Regulation of Import into India) Order, 2003 issued under
the Destructive Insects and Pests Act, 1914. The Directorate has also
been implementing Integrated Pest Management (IPM) as the main
strategy for plant protection since 1985 through 31 Central Integrated
Pest Management Centres (CIPMCs). Under the Livestock Importation
Act, 1898, the import of livestock and livestock products is regulated
through international ports at Delhi, Mumbai, Kolkata and Chennai.
Land-border check-post at Petrapole (West Bengal) and sea-ports at
Kochi and Vishakhapattinam under the Department of Animal
Husbandry, Dairying and Fisheries (DAHD&F) regulate the import of
aquatic animals.
1.3 The Core Group constituted by Department of Agriculture
and Co-operation in 2008 pointed out that the Destructive Insects and
Pests Act, 1914 and the Livestock Importation Act, 1898 are age old
legislations and are subsidiary to the Customs Act, 1962 which does
not give direct powers to the quarantine officers to deport or destroy
or confiscate the consignment or lodge complaints under the Indian
Penal Code. Inadequate or obsolete definitions in these Acts need to
be updated. Adequate provisions for regulating plants, livestock and
aquatics and powers for inspecting transport vehicles and seizure and
destruction of infested or infected plants and livestock or their products
have to be incorporated. Punishment or penalty on the importers or
custom house clearing agents or other defaulters for violation of
provisions of the legislation has to be provided. Provisions for effective
domestic quarantine have to be incorporated. The enabling legislation
for the proposed biosecurity authority would have to be enacted.

2
1.4 The existing systems of the country need major changes to
meet the emerging challenges of agricultural biosecurity through
policies and technological capabilities to prevent, detect, and respond
to threats of pests & diseases. An integrated approach towards
agricultural biosecurity would not only increase the national capacity
to protect human health, agricultural production and livelihoods and
safeguard the environment, but also equip the country to meet
obligations under international trade and sanitary and phytosanitary
agreements in food and agricultural products. Agricultural biosecurity
is an essential element of sustainable agricultural development. The
National Commission on Farmers (NCF) has recommended developing
a National Agricultural Biosecurity System characterized by high
professional, public, and political credibility through integration of
plant, animal and fish management systems on biosecurity based on
risk analysis and management. It has also recommended establishment
of synergies in requirements of international agreements and national
regulations across these sectors to avoid duplication of resources. The
National Policy for Farmers (2007) has identified strengthening the
biosecurity of crops, farm animals, fish, and forest trees for
safeguarding the livelihood and income security of farmer families
and the health and trade security of the nation as a major policy
goal.
1.5 In the 3rd meeting of the Agriculture Co-ordination Committee
held on 15 February, 2008, it was recognized that it is essential to
establish an integrated national biosecurity system covering plant,
animal and marine issues. A Core Committee, constituted by the DAC
in April, 2008, submitted a report recommending establishment of the
National Agriculture Biosecurity System (NABS) requiring a new
legislation which is more relevant in the context of the present scenario.
It suggested that the traditional approach of managing agricultural
biosecurity on a sectoral basis through the development and
implementation of separate policy and legislative frameworks ( e.g. for
animal and plant life and health) would have to be converted to a
cohesive and convergent approach recognizing the interdisciplinary
nature of biosecurity. In a harmonized and integrated system, various
authorities would work together towards the common goal of
agricultural biosecurity utilizing expertise from various organizations
under the Ministries of Agriculture, Commerce and Industry, Defence,
Environment and Forests, Health and Family Welfare, Home Affairs,
Rural Development and Science and Technology. Accordingly, the
Agricultural Biosecurity Bill, 2012 (now 2013) was mooted and the
proposal was considered and approved by the Union Cabinet in its
meeting held on 17.05.2012. The direction of the Union Cabinet

3
regarding inclusion of representatives of various State Governments/
Union Territories in the proposed National Agricultural Biosecurity
Authority on rotation basis was incorporated in the Bill. The
Agricultural Biosecurity Bill, 2013 has been introduced in Lok Sabha
on 11th March, 2013.
1.6 During the course of a briefing meeting on the Bill, when
asked about the extant system for protection of plant and animal
species, the Secretary, Department of Agriculture and Cooperation
informed as under:—
“As of now when we undertake any kind of import, the statutory
backing for the prevention of import of either plant or animal
species or products which may cause injury to either human or
animal or environmental health, is dealt through three separate
legislations. The first one is on the sanitary side, which is the
human health side. That is dealt with by the Ministry of Health
and now through the Food Safety and Standards Authority of
India. That is legislated to look at all matters relating to impact
on human health. There is no particular procedure prescribed as
such for import except to the extent that any commodity that is
imported into the country must meet the stipulations and the
criteria laid down in the Prevention of Food Adulteration Act and
the standards prescribed thereunder. That is on the human health
side. On the plant health issue, we have the Destructive Insects
and Pests Act which dates back to 1914, nearly a hundred years
ago, under which we have issued the plant quarantine order in
2003. Before that, any plant material—by plant material I mean
any living organism on the plant side; it could be micro-organism,
it could be weeds, it could even be food commodities which are
unprocessed—was allowed access into our country as long as it
was accompanied by a phytosanitary certificate issued by the
notified authority of the exporting country. The phytosanitary
certificate certified that the exported commodity was free from
pests and diseases. That is what it took for being allowed to be
imported into the country. In 2003 under the Destructive Insects
and Pests Act, we promulgated the plant quarantine order in which
on the basis of pest risk appraisal conducted within the country,
we identified certain conditions for import of each crop. Earlier
there was a free list for imports. Now we have a positive list of
imports. For each crop we have prescribed the conditions that
must be sought in respect of import from each region. For instance,
if we allow wheat to be imported, there are general conditions
which are to be met by all the countries; the others are specific

4
conditions related to each specific country. What we try to do
through the plant quarantine order is to prescribe that the notified
authority in the exporting country must certify that the
consignments are free from any pests or diseases which are alien
to the importing country, so that along with the imported
consignment, some dangerous pests or weeds or diseases do not
come into our country.
In the plant quarantine order we have also prescribed some plant
commodities which are not allowed to be imported. There are
some commodities which we prescribed that can only be imported
subject to the recommendations, supervision and inspection by
the designated national research centre of the ICAR in respect of
that particular crop. For each commodity we have prescribed
different conditions for import. When the commodity is to be
imported, it has to be imported on the basis of an import permit
issued by the officers in our plant quarantine stations and when
it comes into the country it has to be accompanied by a
phytosanitary certificate from the point of origin. After it meets
those conditions, it is allowed entry into the country. We have I
think 35 plant quarantine stations across the country from where
plants can be imported.”
1.7 He further submitted that:—
“On the animal husbandry side, they allow the import of animals,
etc. under the Livestock Importation Act which dates back to 1898.
On that basis they have only five or six designated ports of entry
into the country where they have their own quarantine stations.
Likewise, the animal that is allowed into the country has to meet
the conditions prescribed by the quarantine authorities in the
Animal Husbandry Department. What we found over the course
of several years is that due to increase in trade when India was
seeking an increasing role for its exports, we came across a
stumbling block in the shape of SPS measures.
These were imposed mainly by developed countries in the West.
We found that most of the developed countries take shelter behind
autonomous organizations that they have created which set the
standards in respect of imports of commodities. Even when we
say we have a strong case on the basis of science for exporting
to their countries, they sometimes take shelter behind the fact
that because this is an autonomous body, so we have to follow
the procedures and protocols for revision of the standards, and
that used to take a long time. We found that this was a delaying
tactics adopted by a lot of developed countries.”

5
1.8 There are models of integrated biosecurity systems/
organizations in countries like Australia, New Zealand and USA.
During the evidence before the Committee, the Secretary, Department
of Agriculture and Cooperation stated:—
“….three or four countries had very stringent requirements, very
well-structured organisational set-ups for protecting their bio-
security. ….in certain countries the set up for looking after all the
SPS aspects of the agreement on agriculture is vested with a single
umbrella body ……… Australia, New Zealand, China and the
USA specifically. These countries use these bodies to ensure that
there was no loophole under which imports could take place in
products which are sometimes difficult to distinguish whether they
are agricultural products, or animal husbandry products or fishery
products.”
1.9 On being queried by the Committee about the existence of
autonomous bodies, the Secretary clarified as under:—
“For instance, USA has got APHIS, Australia and New Zealand
have got AQIS, China has got AQIIS. These are the countries
which have the most stringent plant quarantine regimes. They
have got very tough quarantine regimes. Whenever we try to
make a breakthrough in exporting to these countries, we come
across this roadblock when they refer each matter to this regulatory
and autonomous body which takes a lot of time.
As you are aware, when we first managed to export or get entry
in the US for export of our mangoes, that took place after
22 years of negotiations,…… in Japan after 18 years of negotiation.”
1.10 He further added:—
“….during the negotiations, an argument that the regulatory
systems in those countries is governed by autonomous bodies on
which Government does not have control and the Government
cannot give directions. This is being used by these countries as
an argument for delaying market access to us.
There was a working group set up in the Ministry of Agriculture
under the Chairmanship of the then Additional Secretary,
Department of Agriculture and Cooperation which had
representation from the Department of Animal Husbandry, as well
as from the Department of Agriculture and Cooperation, which
studied the systems in major developed countries and then came
up with this idea of having a bio-security authority.”

6
1.11 During the course of his oral deposition before the Committee,
the representative of Department of Agriculture and Cooperation on
being asked as to whether the Government felt that the present
mechanism for plant and animal quarantine was inadequate to meet
the challenges posed by globalization and liberalization stated as
under:—
“……..Post-liberalisation, with the increase in trade in agricultural
commodities, first of all, the main issue that we had to address
was that in India importation used to take place from any country
in the world merely on the basis of Phyto-sanitary certificate issued
by the designated authority in the exporting country certifying
that the product they are exporting are free from any pest or
disease. That was the only criterion that was applicable in India
for importation. We noticed that several of the developed countries
had extremely stringent regulatory measures specifying crop-wise
the kind of freedom from pests and diseases that were required
for their imports from any of the countries. So, these developed
countries used to specify specific freedoms to be certified in the
Phyto-sanitary certificate and these obligations on the exporting
country were different for different countries depending on the
pest profile.
Post liberalisation, we found, with increase in trade in agricultural
commodities, it was becoming more and more difficult for India
to gain access to these developed countries for the export of our
produce. Lots of times our applications for export to these
countries were rejected on the basis that we did not fulfil the
criterion that they mentioned in their pest appraisal and in their
requirements of Phytosanitary certificates from us.
………. in international trade, all issues related to issue of
certificates, whether they are Phytosanitary certificates or zoo
sanitary certificates or sanitary certificates, are supposed to be
science based but to a large extent these also depend on quid-pro-
quo.”
1.12 Elaborating on the success of the Plant Quarantine Order,
2003, he further submitted that:—
“……the first act that we did was to promulgate a Plant
Quarantine Order. That listed out crop-wise the category of plants
that would not be allowed entry into the country under any
circumstances because we felt that the pests and diseases associated
with those plants are such that our country cannot risk to import

7
them. We listed other categories of plants which could be imported
from countries under specific recommendations of the designated
ICAR institute. For these crops, there were specific pest and disease
profiles which were of concern to us and we thought that the
best people to guide us in this matter are the designated institutes
of the ICAR. Also, we had another schedule in which we had a
positive list of each commodity specifying the kind of conditions
that we prescribe for the import of these commodities from each
country. …….This step that we took in 2003 led to a great
improvement in our getting market access to other countries
abroad, ……once we put up a system which we say is regulated
by science, then it puts pressure on the other countries to also
allow imports of our commodities. Then it becomes a quid-pro-
quo. We allow market access to certain products of theirs and
they also allow market access to certain product of ours. That
helps the interest of India. …. that was the first step that we had
taken. So, when we were implementing the provisions of the Plant
Quarantine Order and when we were negotiating with various
countries bilaterally for improvement of market access, we noticed
that three or four countries had very stringent requirements, and
very well-structured organisational set up for protecting their bio-
security.”
1.13 In response to a specific query of the Committee regarding
delay in issuing of the Plant Quarantine Order in 2003, the Committee
were informed that:—
“In fact, when we signed the WTO agreement that is exactly what
I am saying, I would not call it a delay because at that time our
trade in agricultural products was mainly confined to the Middle
East and Europe. Those were the main areas of our focus. Even
today a lot of our agricultural trade are in these two areas and
in those areas because of historic reasons, of historic trade ties,
the pest profile of those areas were also, to a large extent, co-
terminus with our pest profile and so it did not make much of
a difference. When we found through negotiations, and
negotiations typically take a very long time, found that we are
facing difficulties in getting market access to other countries, we
tried to understand what the reasons for this were, and it was
only then to put pressure and have a science based regulatory
system to regulate imports in our country, rather than allow, in a
sense, free import, that the Plant Quarantine Order was
promulgated.”

8
1.14 On being asked to state the reasons leading to the protracted
delay on the part of the Government in formulating this vital
legislation to protect our agricultural biosecurity, based on the
recommendations of the Farmers Commission in their Report submitted
to the Government in the year 2005, Secretary, Department of
Agriculture and Cooperation during the course of a briefing meeting
submitted as under:—
“After the Farmers Commission submitted the Report in 2006 in
which they had made a recommendation on the establishment of
such an authority and that was the year when the bird flu
epidemic also had hit India and it was realized that this could
not be controlled by imports alone because the bird flu menace
did not arise out of regulated imports; it arrived out of migration
of birds because plants, diseases, wildlife and animals do not
recognize boundaries. They spread and cross boundaries with
impunity. At that time, the Agriculture Coordination Committee
discussed this issue under the Chairmanship of the Prime Minister
in which it was decided that such an authority needs to be set
up; and then a Core Group was set up in the Department of
Agriculture and Co-operation under the Chairmanship of the then
Additional Secretary which looked into this. This Core Group
examined the set up in the countries that I had mentioned—the
US, Australia, New Zealand, and China—and tried to put together
a structure for housing this bio-security authority. Thereafter this
was discussed with various Departments and Ministries concerned.
Originally, the idea in the Department of Agriculture and
Cooperation was to establish a body which also has authority
over human health aspects because the commodity to be imported
is the same. But then, after a lot of discussion with the Ministry
of Health and Family Welfare and because of the fact that the
Food Safety and Standards Authority of India Act had just come
in, which, itself, was an umbrella legislation which governed
various other pieces of legislation, it was thought best to confine
ourselves to the phytosanitary, which is the plant health side, and
zoo sanitary which is the animal health side. Thereafter, there
were lots of discussions at various stages with the Department of
Animal Husbandry and that is why it has taken us so long to
come up with this Bill.”
1.15 Pleading his case further during the course of oral evidence
before the Committee, he stated as under:—
“…..In fact, this idea was being mooted from 2005 or so. At that
time the National Commission on Farmers also had addressed

9
this issue and they had included it in their recommendations as
well. The National Farmers Policy that was announced by the
Government in 2007 also contained a statement to the effect that
a biosecurity arrangement would be organised and set up for the
country. What we originally tried to do was to get all three aspects
of SPS under the umbrella of one authority. That would involve
participation from the Ministry of Health to look into sanitary
aspects, basically relating to food laws and pesticide residues, to
the Department of Agriculture on the phytosanitary aspects,
relating to plant health, and to the Department of Animal
Husbandry, Dairying and Fisheries on the zoo sanitary aspects
relating to animal health. However, we could not make much
headway with the Department of Health because at that time
they had already started formulating the FSSAI which has been
set up, which lays down all the standards for import of food
stuffs. So, we had to then think of keeping it outside the ambit
of this authority. After wide ranging consultations with the
Department of Animal Husbandry, finally we came out with this
Bill. There was a working group set up in the Ministry of
Agriculture under the Chairmanship of my predecessor which had
representation from the Department of Animal Husbandry, as well
as from the Department of Agriculture and Co-operation, which
studied the systems in major developed countries and then came
up with this idea of having a biosecurity authority. After the
formulation of the Bill, its circulation and getting comments, it
was accepted in 2012 and then submitted to the Parliament.”
1.16 In response to a query regarding details of plant, animal and
marine diseases introduced in the country during the last three years,
the representative of Indian Council for Agricultural Research (ICAR)
categorically stated that in the past three years there has not been
any example of import of any such kind of pests or plants.
1.17 However, in their Post Evidence Written Replies, Department
of Agriculture and Cooperation submitted that one new disease Porcine
Respiratory and Reproductive Syndrome may have ingressed through
clandestine movements of pigs across the land border in Mizoram in
2013. However, Government has taken effective control measures in
all North Eastern States, and as such there are no estimates of
economic losses. Ministry of Agriculture has established Plant and
Animal Quarantine Stations at various ports of entry to ensure that
pests of concern do not enter the country.

10
1.18 The Department of Agriculture and Cooperation also informed
the Committee that the agricultural biosecurity has been breached in
the past leading to introduction of exotic pests in our country like
coffee berry borer in coffee beans, coconut eriophid mite in coconut
and bunchy top in banana from Sri Lanka, wart in potato from the
Netherlands, Parthenium weed with wheat from USA and Argemone
mexicana weed with mustard seed from USA/Mexico. A number of
plant, animal and marine diseases and pests have been introduced
into India through imports of seeds, planting material, livestock and
livestock products. Many weeds such as parthenium, phalaris minor
and lanatana camara, have got established in the country and continue
to cause enormous economic losses every year.
1.19 The Department further informed that The Agricultural
Biosecurity Bill would sufficiently bolster our agricultural biosecurity
by incorporating the following features:—
(a) Integration of Plant and Animal Quarantine services.
(b) Regulation for export of plants, animals and their products,
aquatic organisms and agriculturally important
microorganisms.
(c) Provision to declare ‘controlled area’ to enable control
measures for eradication of such infestation/infection.
(d) Joint action by Agricultural Biosecurity Authority of India
and State Governments to meet the challenges of pest
outbreaks and conduct pest eradication campaigns.
(e) Declaration of Biosecurity emergency and actions and
procedures to deal with it.
(f) Searching premises, checking of conveyances to ensure
compliance of phytosanitary and sanitary measures and
authority to seize to treat and dispose of plants, animals
and their products by Designated Officers of ABAI to
prevent spread of pests.
(g) Imprisonment or imposition of fine in case of false
declaration and for contravention of provisions with stiffer
punishment for import/export violations.
(h) Bar on jurisdiction of Civil Courts in quarantine matters/
decisions.

11
(i) Provision for appeal before Central Government against any
order of the Designated Officer.
(j) Three members of the Authority to be appointed by rotation
in alphabetical order to represent the States and UTs.
(k) Assistance from Customs, Shipping, Airports, Ports etc. to
ABAI in implementation of the provisions in the Bill for
better coordination and effective action.
(l) Power of the Authority to give directions to importers/
exporters.
(m) Confiscation of plant, animals, their products and other
objects imported in violation of the provisions of the Bill.
1.20 Idea of setting up biosecurity arrangement for the country
was mooted in 2005 and the National Commission on Farmers also
addressed this issue. According to the Department of Agriculture and
Cooperation the Farmer’s Commission Report in 2006 had made a
recommendation on the establishment of authority. Due to this
recommendation and bird flu menace, the Agriculture Co-ordination
Committee discussed the matter under the Chairmanship of the Prime
Minister, wherein it decided that such an Authority needs to be set
up. A Core Group was set up in the Department of Agriculture and
Cooperation under the Chairmanship of the then Additional Secretary,
which examined the set up in different countries. Thereafter, this was
discussed with various Ministries/Departments concerned such as
Ministry of Health and Family Welfare and Department of Animal
Husbandry and came out with the idea of having biosecurity authority.
Department of Agriculture and Cooperation also informed that after
the formulation of the Bill, its circulation and getting comments, it
was accepted in 2012 and then submitted it to Parliament.
1.21 When Committee desired to know whether the State
Governments were consulted in this regard, the Secretary, Department
of Agriculture and Cooperation replied in the negative. However, he
clarified his stand and stated:—
“…. it is correct that we have not consulted with the State
Governments before the drafting of this legislation. …..what this
legislation is trying to do is to basically replace the Central
Government, as it exists today, with an autonomous organization.

12
That is the first and foremost thing that we are trying to do.
Then, we are trying to build up the capacity of this autonomous
organization to respond to the needs as they arise dynamically.”
1.22 He also informed that the proposed Authority would replace
the existing directorate of the Central Government.
1.23 On being queried by the Committee whether any Central Act
be formulated without prior consultation with the States on a subject
which is exclusively a State subject, the Secretary responded as under:—
“There should be consultation. But this subject is not exclusively
a State subject. This is not agriculture. This is agricultural
biosecurity which is not exclusively a State subject. But, none-the-
less I concede your point that we should consult with the States.”
1.24 The Committee invited views/memoranda/deliberations of
the State Governments and experts. The memoranda of the State
Governments so received were sent to the Department of Agriculture
and Cooperation for examination and their comments. Department of
Agriculture and Cooperation forwarded their response point-wise to
the suggestions of the State Governments/State Agricultural
Universities. In some cases, Department of Agriculture and Cooperation
have given reasons for not agreeing with the proposals of State
Governments while in some other cases they have stated we may not
have any objection’.
1.25 Apart from the written information and oral evidence by the
Department of Agriculture and Cooperation, the Committee, as already
stated, received memoranda from State Governments/Experts/State
Agricultural Universities and heard their views on the Bill under
consideration. The major issues which came up before the Committee
are discussed in the succeeding paragraphs.
1.26 The Government of Haryana in their memorandum suggested
that the term “Office of International des Epizooties”  used in the Bill
may be replaced by the term “World Organization for Animal Health.”
1.27 Department of Agriculture and Cooperation in their response
have conveyed that they do not have any objection as the name of
Office of International des Epizooties has been changed to World
Organization for Animal Health for official use.

13
Clause 2—Definitions
Clause 2 of the Bill relates to definitions:—
1.28 The Government of Haryana suggested amplification of the
definitions in some sub-clauses of clause 2 of the Bill. The relevant
sub-clauses as available in the Bill and suggested modification made
by the Government of Haryana are brought out below:—
Modifications suggested in the
sub-clause
“all kinds of meat and meat
products including fresh, chilled
and frozen meat, tissue or organs
of all livestock species, poultry
and marine organisms. ”
“embryos, ova and semen of all
livestock species, poultry and
marine organisms.”
“Beneficial organism” means any
organism, including fungi,
bacteria, viruses, virus-like
organisms or invertebrate animals,
utilised specifically for—
(i) the control of a pest;
(ii) pollination;
(iii ) the production of
commercially valuable agricultural
products; or
(iv) ‘any other purposes beneficial
to agricultural production, and
ensuring agricultural and
livestock biosecurity’.
“live-stock” includes bovine,
equines cattle, horses, canine,
camels, sheep, pigs, goat and
poultry and any other animal as
may be specified by the Central
Government by notification;
Sub-clauses as existing in the
Bill
2(c )( i) “all kinds of meat and
meat products including fresh,
chilled and frozen meat, tissue or
organs of poultry, pig, sheep and
goat;”
2(c)(iii) “embryos, ova and semen
of bovine, ovine and caprine;”
2(e) “Beneficial organism” means
any organism, including fungi,
bacteria, viruses, virus-like
organisms or invertebrate animals,
utilised specifically for—
(i) the control of a pest;
(ii) pollination;
(iii ) the production of
commercially valuable agricultural
products; or
(iv) any other purposes beneficial
to agricultural production and
ensuring agricultural biosecurity;
2(u) “live-stock” includes cattle,
horses, canine, camels, sheep,
pigs, goat and poultry and any
other animal as may be specified
by the Central Government by
notification;

14
1.29 Asked to clarify the reasons for suggesting rephrasing of
sub-clause 2(c) (i) as all kinds of meat and meat products including
fresh, chilled and frozen meat, tissue or organs of all livestock species,
poultry and marine organisms a representative of the Government of
Haryana submitted before the Committee that from bio-security point
of view, whatever comes should be checked for pests and diseases
and should go through quarantine. Poultry, pig and goat are already
there. Insertion of the term ‘livestock‘ would cover all other livestock.
1.30 The representative of Haryana Government further added
that similarly, in 2(c)(iii), the words ‘bovine, ovine and caprine’ should
be substituted with the words ‘livestock species, poultry and marine
organisms’, as it will become a wider term because it will cover wider
items in case they are imported or exported.
1.31 In regard to sub-clause 2(e)(iv), the representative of the
Government of Haryana stated as under:—
“I come to 2 (e) which says “other agricultural products”, we
want here that the word ‘livestock‘ be inserted, like they say
beneficial organisms include any organisms like fungi, bacteria,
viruses, virus like organisms etc. Similarly, in 2 (e) (iv), it is
mentioned “any other purposes beneficial to agricultural
production”, if the word ‘livestock’ is added, then it will include
livestock also.”
1.32 Clarifying the position of the Government of Haryana on
sub-clause 2(u), the representative of the Government of Haryana
during the course of oral deposition stated as under:—
“……the word livestock includes bovines and equines. We want
to broaden the term. It can be inserted here. Livestock includes
both cattle and horses. The word equine includes horses and the
word bovine includes cattle, can be added. When in place of horses
if equine is used it will not just be horses but would also include
ponies and all and in place of cattle if bovine is used, then it will
include buffaloes and others. The rest is fine except this cattle
and horses. Here the words bovine and equine can be added.”
Clause 2(s)
1.33 An expert who appeared before the Committee suggested
amplification of the definition in sub-clause (s) of clause 2 of the Bill.
The relevant sub-clause as available in the Bill and suggested

15
modification made by the Non-official witness/expert is brought out
below:—
Sub-clause as existing in the
Bill
2(s) “infectious or contagious
disorders” includes tick-pest,
glanders, farcy, scabies and any
other parasite, disease or disorder
which may be specified by the
Central Government by
notification;
Modification suggested in the
sub-clause
‘infectious or contagious
disorders’ should be re-written as
‘infectious or contagious diseases/
disorders’.
The Department of Agriculture and Cooperation agreed to the
aforesaid suggested change in the clause 2(s) of the Bill.
Clause 2(zo)
1.34 The Government of Haryana suggested amplification of the
definition in sub-clause (zo) of clause 2 of the Bill by insertion of the
words “synthetic biology”. The relevant sub-clause as available in the
Bill and suggested modification made by the Government of Haryana
is brought out below:—
Sub-clause as existing in the
Bill
2(zo) “transgenic material” means
any plant or animal origin
material transformed by genetic
engineering and in particular by
adding a foreign gene using
modern biotechnology.
Modification suggested in the
sub-clause
“transgenic material” means any
plant or animal origin material
transformed by genetic
engineering or by synthetic
biology and in particular by
adding a foreign gene using
modern biotechnology.
1.35 On being asked to clarify the reasons for State Government‘s
suggestion for inclusion of the term synthetic biology‘ to transgenic
material, the representative of Haryana Government stated as under:—
“Nowadays, besides genetic engineering living material is being
produced, living organisms are being produced by synthetic
biology methods by new technology. So, we suggest that if that
word is put here ……..synthetic biology is creating a new organism
itself and this has already been created.”

16
1.36 Department of Agriculture and Cooperation in their written
submission stated that synthetic biology is insertion of in vitro synthetic
DNA into a living cell to develop a cell with modified genetic character
to help design and construct biological devices and systems. According
to the Department of Agriculture Cooperation, Clause 2 (zo) provides
definition for the term transgenic material to describe any plant or
animal origin material transformed using modern biotechnology and
subsumes the term synthetic biology. Hence, there is no need to ‘insert‘
the term synthetic biology in the section dealing with definitions.
Clauses 5 & 6—Domestic Quarantine and Duty to Inform
1.37 Clauses 5 & 6 of the Bill read as under:—
“5. Except as provided under this Act, or rules and regulations
made thereunder, no person shall possess, move, grow, raise,
culture, breed or produce any plant, animal and plant product or
animal product or any other object, as the case may be, if he has
reasons to believe that it is carrying or harbouring, or may carry
or harbor, a quarantine pest, or that it is or could be infested or
infected with a quarantine pest.”
“6. Where a person becomes aware of the existence of a pest or
disease of plant or animal which the person suspects to be a
quarantine pest or disease in an area where such pest or disease
has not previously been known to exist, it shall be duty of that
person to inform immediately the existence of such pest or
disease.”
1.38 When the Committee pointed out that Clauses 5 and 6 can
be misused to harass persons with imposition of penalty and how
could the people be safeguarded from misuse of the clauses, the
Department of Agriculture and Cooperation stated in a written reply
that Clause 5 relates to domestic quarantine wherein strong
disincentives have been sought to be created against possession,
manufacture, growth, raising, culture, breeding or production any
plant, animal and plant product or animal product or any other object
with the knowledge that it is carrying or harboring a quarantine pest.
Domestic quarantine shall be notified by the Authority from time to
time and implementation of measures will involve State Governments.
The implementation of measures and required enforcements shall be
as in line with the Notification which would preclude any likelihood
of misuse of clause 5. A person aware of the existence of a quarantine
pest or suspected quarantine pest in an area is required to inform the
Authority and by the same token any person not privy to the
knowledge and information cannot be harassed under provisions of
Clause 6.

17
1.39 When the Committee pointed out that Clause 6 does not
indicate who should be informed of the fact when a person becomes
aware of the existence of a quarantine pest or disease in an area, the
Department of Agriculture and Cooperation stated that the person
would inform the Agricultural Biosecurity Authority of an existence
of quarantine pest or disease and that rules will be notified in due
course to elucidate the procedure for such transmission of information
to the Authority.
1.40 During the course of oral evidence when the Committee
pointed out that the wording of Clause 6 was not specific and, the
Secretary, Agriculture stated that if required they would clarify .
Clause 8(d)—Composition of Agricultural Biosecurity Authority of
India
1.41 Sub-clause (d) of clause 8 provides for appointment of three
members to the Agricultural Biosecurity Authority of India by the
Central Government by rotation in the alphabetical order to represent
the States and the Union Territories.
1.42 The Government of Karnataka suggested in this connection
that the Authority should have a representative of all the States and
if the number is huge, a consortia of States from each region like one
out of there or four States representing the group on a yearly term
may be considered.
1.43 Echoing the views of the Government of Karnataka, the
Government of Tamil Nadu submitted that instead of appointing three
members on rotational basis, the Central Government may consider
appointing at least one member from each State/Union Territory
permanently or at least one member from the concerned State may
be appointed whenever the Bio-security issue arises, pertinent to the
State. This will ensure more realistic area specific approach in handling
bio-security issues.
1.44 Buttressing his point further, the representative of Government
of Karnataka while deposing before the Committee stated as under:—
“The main idea behind suggesting this is that, it states that the
representative States will be selected on a rotation basis in
alphabetical order. So, if that is followed, in fact, the southern
region may not be able to get representation. Instead of selecting
in alphabetical order, if it is selected on the basis of groups like
and if a State is selected from southern group, then by and large

18
the interest of that state can be highlighted before the Committee
or an august body.”
1.45 The representative of the Government of Tamil Nadu while
deposing before the Committee stated as under:—
“We suggest that each State has to be included in the list. For
example, if the alphabetical list is going to be followed, then Tamil
Nadu or U.P . will come in the last. So, we may be getting a
chance after 5 or 10 years and if any issue comes up in between,
then we will not be able to express our views.”
1.46 Reacting to the views of the State Governments of Karnataka
and Tamil Nadu, the Department of Agriculture and Cooperation in
their written submission stated that it will not be advisable to appoint
one Member from each State/Union Territory as a Member of Bio-
security Authority since this would render the size of the authority
unmanageable and militate against prompt decision making with
regard to a bio-security threat. The Authority is proposed to be a
representative body, including domain experts and State Government
representatives to enable informed and objective decision making on
all issues. However, the suggestion for appointment of representatives
of States as member on the basis of geographical regions could be
considered.
1.47 On being queried as to how the representation of States can
be made in a better manner and not just by deciding alphabetically,
the Secretary , Department of Agriculture and Cooperation during the
course of his oral deposition submitted as under:—
“It would be difficult to satisfy all the States together at one time
because it would not be possible for the Board to comprise, to
include representation from all the States, since this would render
the size of the authority unmanageable and mitigate against
prompt decision making with regard to biosecurity threat.
However, there are certain permutations and combinations that
can be resorted to. We can have representations based upon
regions. For instance, if you can recall in the seeds Bill also,
geographical representation has been recommended by this
Committee. All four or five different regions can have
representation from each region.”
He further stated that this can certainly be looked at, so as to
allow an opportunity to all States and to satisfy their aspirations.

19
Clause 22 (5)—Jurisdiction of Court
1.48 Sub-clause (5) of the Clause 22 of the Bill reads as under:—
“If a question arises whether the terms and conditions of service
specified in the regulations framed by the Authority in respect of
any matter, including remuneration, pension, leave, provident fund
and medical benefits, are less favourable than those attached to
the post held by an officer or other employee immediately before
his transfer to the Authority, the decision of the Central
Government in the matter shall be final.”
1.49 When the attention of the Department of Agriculture and
Cooperation was drawn to the fact that this sub-clause would have
the effect of debarring the jurisdiction of courts, the Committee were
informed that clause 22(5) makes a special provision for the transfer
of employees to the Authority after following the detailed procedure
laid down in the said section and in case any question arises about
the terms and conditions of the service specified in the regulations to
be framed by the Authority, the decision of the Central Government
shall be final. However, if any person is aggrieved by the decision of
the Central Government, there is no bar for him to approach
appropriate court against the final decision of the Central Government.
1.50 During the course of his oral deposition in response to a
specific query whether an aggrieved employee can go to the court
against the decision of the Central Government, the Secretary stated
as under:—
“Certainly, That option is always open. There has to be a final
authority in administrative decision making. In that case, the final
authority should be the Central Government. That is all that this
is saying. The jurisdiction of the court is always open and will
always remain open. On that, we don‘t think we are competent
to suggest anything.”
Clause 23(b)—Functions of Authority
1.51 Clause 23 relates to the functions of Authority and sub-clause
(b) states as under:—
“Regulate the export of plants, animals, plant products or animal
products and other objects, to meet the importing country’s
requirements in accordance with international agreements, and to
discharge such obligations under those international agreements.”

20
1.52 The Government of Punjab suggested addition of word
“facilitate” after the word “regulate” in clause 23(b).
1.53 While deposing before the Committee, a representative of the
Government of Punjab submitted the following:—
“The issue is related to Clause 23 which is about the functions of
the Authority. There are regulatory functions and there are
developmental functions mentioned in this Clause. So, in Clause
23 (b), it is mentioned “regulate the export of”. We would request
that it should be “regulate and facilitate” because at the State
level when it comes to the export of material the basic call is
taken at the Government of India level. So, therefore, we would
request that in addition to regulation, the development and the
facilitation is more important. We have faced a little issue in this
regard. In the past few years the potato from Punjab is required
to be exported to European countries. But somewhere in early
fifties the European countries imposed embargo for potatoes from
India because it was suffering from some disease. So, we had
requested the European Union that potatoes from Punjab are not
suffering from that particular disease. So, therefore, that embargo
vis-à-vis Punjab should be removed. But then they asked us to
conduct a study. It was conducted by the Agricultural University
and everything was done at the Government of India level. Now,
that case is lying before the European Union in their Headquarters,
Brussels for the last three or four years. We do not know at the
State level as to what is required to be done. So, this Authority
should also take into consideration those aspects. That is our
request.”
1.54 Responding to the suggestion of the Government of Punjab,
the Department of Agriculture and Cooperation in their written
submission stated that it would not be appropriate to add the word
‘facilitate’ in Clause 23(b) after the word ‘regulate’ because the
functions of the Authority are regulatory in nature which may or
may not facilitate import or export of a particular plant, animal, plant
product or animal product and other objects with a potential to
jeopardize the Biosecurity of India or its foreign trading partners.
There are several plants, the entry or import of which into India is
prohibited and is likely to remain so because of the phytosanitary
risks associated with them. Similarly, several countries also have a
negative list of plants and animals and their products. Therefore, it
will not be advisable to insert the word facilitate in Clause 23(b).

21
1.55 On being asked to comment upon the suggestion of the
Government of Punjab, the Secretary, Agriculture during his oral
deposition stated as under:—
“There is a huge difference between ‘regulation’ and ‘facilitation’.
There will be instances where we will not facilitate. In fact, there
would be instances where we would disallow exports or regulate
under very strict conditions. Facilitate would not probably be the
right word here. This regulation means whatever export is done,
is done as per the prescribed procedures and protocols keeping in
view the extant policy of the Government. That would cater to all
kinds of dispensation. But facilitation would carry a different
connotation which can later cause a problem to us.”
Clause 23(v)—Diagnostic Laboratories
1.56 According to Sub-clause(v) of Clause 23, the function of the
Authority shall be to establish and maintain diagnostic laboratories
related to pests and diseases of plants and animals.
1.57 The Government of Haryana suggested insertion of the words
“internationally accredited” before the words “diagnostic laboratories”
in the above sub-clause.
1.58 The Department of Agriculture and Cooperation was not
agreeable to the said suggestion.
1.59 When enquired as to how the standard and quality of
laboratories would be ensured if there is no accreditation of diagnostic
laboratories, the Department of Agriculture and Cooperation in their
written reply stated that the provision in Clause 23(v) is an enabling
provision to establish and maintain diagnostic laboratories. Reliance
should be placed more on national rather than international
accreditation in the interests of national Biosecurity. Details pertaining
to accreditation will be provided in the rules. It may be mentioned
that at present major Plant Quarantine Laboratories are accredited
under the National System of NABL or ISO Certification system and
the standard and quality of laboratories in the animal health sector
are ensured by following the testing procedures of the OIE (World
Animal Health Organization). Therefore, Clause in the draft Bill is
appropriate.
1.60 The Secretary, Department of Agriculture and Cooperation
stated in this connection during the course of oral evidence stated as
under:—
“If I may submit, does it mean that if we establish a diagnostic
laboratory and it does not get international accreditation, it will

22
be invalid in the eyes of law. This is something that actually
people to whom we export or people from whom we import
might be suggesting. It is not for us. I don’t think it is in our
interest to be prescribing what kind of certification or what kind
of protocols our labs should have.”
Clause 29—Recovery of expenses from State Government
1.61 Clause 29 states:—
“Where the State Government fails to repay the costs of any
measure taken under this Chapter, such costs shall be recoverable
from the State Government in the manner provided by the Code
of Criminal Procedure, 1973, for the recovery of fines imposed by
a Court, as if such costs were a fine imposed by a Court.”
1.62 A representative of the Government of Punjab during the
course of oral evidence before the Committee, while opposing the
provisions of the said clause submitted as under:—
“Here it is mentioned that when the Authority from the
Government of India takes direct action then the recovery of that
expenditure shall be made from the State Government. This
recovery will be made in such a harsher manner as is given in
the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973. So, this is too much. What
is Code of Criminal Procedure? They say, either he has to be
arrested or his property has to be sold. So, these are the things
where they are going beyond the scheme of things in the
Constitution which have been prescribed.”
1.63 Echoing the sentiments of the Government of Punjab, a
representative of the Government of Tamil Nadu during the course of
his oral deposition submitted:—
“We feel that the Controlled Area’s expenditure can be maintained
by the Central Government and not by the State Government. I
am saying this because no State can be held responsible for it.
For example, if I want to bring seeds of Brinjal from Tamil Nadu
to Delhi, it is possible, but in foreign countries each State is
controlled by a quarantine border, which we do not have here.
So, in the absence of such a facility, I think that the Central
Government can finance the entire expenditure and the
punishment/fine aspect can be removed.”

23
1.64 On being asked to clarify why such stringent provision has
been made for recovery of costs from State Government, the
Department of Agriculture and Cooperation submitted that the State
Government is to take measures to contain and eradicate the
quarantine pests from an area where such pest gets established in the
country. Where the State fails to take immediate action as advised by
the Authority, the Authority themselves have to take the measures to
deal with the situation. Therefore, the cost involved in such an
operation would have to be recovered by the Authority from the
State concerned. If the State is not willing to reimburse the cost to
the Authority, the Authority needs an enabling provision to recover
such costs as per the laws of the country. While drafting the Bill, the
Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 was found appropriate by the
Ministry of Law for the purpose. Further, it is relevant to mention
that the State Government may seek exemption from whole or part
of the reimbursement of the cost from the Central Government giving
reasons to the satisfaction of the Central Government for such
exemption as per Clause 26(2) of the Bill and in such a case the
Central Government shall reimburse the cost to the Authority.
1.65 During the course of oral evidence, on being enquired as to
why such a stringent provision has been made for recovery of costs
from the State Government, the Secretary submitted as under:—
“I would like to cite a small example here. If there is an outbreak
of a pest in any State, it is the responsibility of the State
Government to undertake such control measures as are necessary
to confine and then wipe out that infestation. If the State
Government does not do it and the disease assumes such
proportions that it spreads across the boundaries of the State,
then this Authority is required to step in and incur huge
expenditure for control arrangements and it is under those
circumstances that it is proposed that the expenditure incurred by
this Authority on these measures, due to negligence or lack of
effectiveness of the State machinery, that the costs will be recovered
from the States. Otherwise, the State Government will sit back
and wait for the Authority to take any pest control measures
anywhere and they will wash their hands off the entire process.”
1.66 When the Committee further enquired about the procedure
of recovery of fines imposed by a court as laid down in the Code of
Criminal Procedure, 1973, the Secretary submitted that he would get
back to the Committee on this specific point.

24
Clause 75—Bar of Jurisdiction of Civil Courts
1.67 The clause 75 of the Bill states:—
“No civil court shall have jurisdiction in respect of any matter
which the Authority or Central Government is empowered by or
under this Act to determine and no injunction shall be granted
by any court in respect of any action taken or to be taken by the
Authority and the Central Government in pursuance of any power
conferred by or under this Act.”
1.68 When the Committee drew the attention of the Secretary,
Agriculture to the above clause which debars the jurisdiction of the
court, the witness submitted:—
“I take your point. I accept that. The intention here is to disallow
or to ensure that court does not interfere when we take immediate
action where there is emergency of any kind, where the jurisdiction
of the courts and to allow the intervention of the court which
may prove to be of long term damage to the plant or animal
health or biosecurity of the country. It is in respect of those areas
that this bar has been provided.”
He also accepted that in this matter codification is required.
1.69 When asked to justify the incorporation of this clause in the
Bill, the Department of Agriculture and Cooperation in their post-
evidence reply submitted that the intent of the Clause 75 is to avoid
litigation in respect of technical and scientific decisions taken by the
Authority and the Central Government to protect agricultural bio-
security of the country from the risks that may arise from import of
plants, animals, plant products, animal products and other objects as
well as technical matters arising as a result of export of plants, animals,
plant products, animal products and other objects. Hence, the Clause
75 of the bill is proposed to be amended as under:—
“No civil court shall have jurisdiction in respect of any matter
related to decision taken by the Authority or the Central
Government to protect agricultural bio-security of the country
while regulating import or export of plants, animals, plant
products, animal products and other objects which the Authority
or Central government is empowered by or under this act to
determine and no injunction shall be granted by any Court in
respect of any action taken or to be taken by the authority and
the Central Government in pursuance of any power conferred by
or under this act.”

25
PART II
RECOMMENDATIONS AND OBSERVATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
1. The Committee note that setting up of ‘The Agricultural
Biosecurity Authority’ was first mooted by the National Commission
of Farmers in their Report of 2005. However, it has taken more than
seven years for the Government to come up with the legislation for
the purpose. The Committee recommend that once the Committee’s
Report on the Bill is presented to Parliament, no time should be
lost in getting this Bill enacted into an Act, and thereafter immediate
follow-up action be taken for establishment and functioning of the
National Agricultural Biosecurity Authority.
2. The Committee have been informed that there was no prior
consultation with State Governments before introduction of the Bill
in Parliament, inspite of the fact that agriculture is a State subject
and States are the implementing agencies. The Committee have
invited views of State Governments, experts and stakeholders and
most of the suggestions received from them have been agreed to by
the Government. The Committee feel that there should be wider
consultations with all relevant stakeholders by the Government
before introduction of Bills in Parliament, particularly, when the
subject-matter of the Bill falls under the jurisdiction of “States”.
3. The Committee recommend that the term ‘ Office of
International de Epizooties’ be replaced with ‘World Organization
for Animal Health’ wherever it appears in the Bill.
4. The Committee find that modifications suggested by the
Government of Haryana in various sub-clauses of clause 2 of the
Bill are meant to broaden the coverage of species under the
definitions. The Department of Agriculture and Cooperation have
also agreed to those changes. The Committee, accordingly
recommend that the following sub-clauses of clause 2 of the Bill be
amended as shown below:—
— Sub-clause 2 (c) (i) be reworded as “all kinds of meat and
meat products including fresh, chilled and frozen meat,
tissue or organs of all livestock species, poultry and marine
organisms”.

26
— Sub-clause 2 (c) (iii) be reworded as “embryos, ova and
semen of all livestock species, poultry and marine
organisms”.
— Sub-clause 2 (e) (iv) be reworded as ‘any other purposes
beneficial to agricultural production, and ensuring
agricultural and livestock bio-security’.
— Sub-clause 2 (u) be reworded as “livestock” includes
bovine equine, cattle, horses, canine, camels, sheep, pigs,
goat and poultry and any other animal as may be
specified by the Central Government by notification.
5. Insertion of the word ‘disease’ in the term “infectious or
contagious disorders” will make the term broad-based and inclusive.
The Committee, therefore, recommend that the term “infectious or
contagious disorders” in sub-clause (s) of clause 2 of the Bill be
amplified as—‘infectious or contagious diseases/disorders”.
6. The Committee observe that the clause 6 of the Bill firmly
puts the onus on any individual to inform immediately on being
aware of the existence of a pest or disease of plant or animal but
does not indicate as to whom the information should be given. The
Committee desire that the lacuna in the clause be addressed.
7. Clause 8 (d) of the Bill envisages, appointment of 3 members
by rotation in the alphabetical order to represent the States/Union
Territories in the proposed Agricultural Biosecurity Authority of
India. The Committee agree with the Government’s view that
inclusion of one member from each State/Union Territory may render
the size of the Authority unmanageable. They, however, feel that
there should be proper and balanced representation of States in the
Authority. The Committee, therefore, recommend that there should
be at least one representative from each group of States from
different regions of the country and clause 8 (d) accordingly be
amended. The Committee further recommend that there should be
an enabling provision in the sub-clause to co-opt a member from
the concerned State(s), if and when there is an outbreak of pest or
disease of plant or animal in the State(s).
8. The Committee feel that the language used in a statute should
not give an impression that the jurisdiction of court is being ousted.
The Committee, therefore, desire that the words “the decision of
the Central Government in the matter shall be final” in clause 22(5)
be substituted with words “the matter shall be decided by the
Central Government”.

27
9. The Committee feel that a very stringent provision has been
made in clause 29 of the Bill regarding recovery of expenses from
the State Government. The Committee are of the view that if the
provision of recovery costs is kept in the legislation, the State
Government(s) may not bring out the cases of any outbreak of
pest(s)/diseases of plants and animals before the authority proactively
and may also not take necessary quarantine measures. The
Committee, therefore, desire that clause 29 of the Bill be deleted.
10. The Department of Agriculture and Cooperation have agreed
to amend clause 75 of the Bill to restrict the scope of the clause
only to matters relating to protection of agricultural bio-security of
the country while regulating import or export of plants, animals,
plant products, animal products, and other objects. The Committee
are of the view that debarring the jurisdiction of the entire judiciary
in the matter will be in violation of Constitutional provisions and
desire that the clause 75 of the Bill be so amended that the
jurisdiction of the High Courts and Supreme Court is not debarred
in any respect.
   N
EW D ELHI; BASUDEB ACHARIA,
19 December, 2013 Chairman,
28 Agrahayana, 1935 (Saka) Committee on Agriculture.

28
ANNEXURE I
TO BE INTRODUCED IN L OK S ABHA
Bill No. 31 of 2013
THE AGRICULTURAL BIOSECURITY BILL, 2013
—————
ARRANGEMENT OF CLAUSES
—————
CHAPTER I
PRELIMINARY
CLAUSES
1. Short title, extent and commencement.
2. Definitions.
3. Prohibition of import.
4. Prohibition of export.
5. Domestic quarantine.
6. Duty to inform.
CHAPTER II
AGRICULTURAL BIOSECURITY AUTHORITY OF INDIA
7. Constitution and incorporation of Authority.
8. Composition of Authority.
9. Qualification for appointment of Director General.
10. Powers of Director General.
11. Conditions of Service of the Director General and members.
12. Meetings of Authority.
13. Vacancies, etc., not to invalidate proceedings of Authority.
14. Removal of Director General, Deputy Director General and
members.
15. Secretary of Authority and his powers.

29
CLAUSES
16. Officers and employees of Authority.
17. Director, etc., not to undertake any other work.
18. Appointment of experts.
19. Committees of Authority.
CHAPTER III
TRANSFER OF ASSETS, LIABILITIES, ETC., OF AUTHORITY
20. Transfer and vesting in Authority undertakings of Plant Animal
Quarantine Stations, etc.
21. General effect of vesting of undertaking in Authority.
22. Special Provision for transfer of employees to Authority.
CHAPTER IV
POWERS AND FUNCTIONS OF AUTHORITY
23. Functions of Authority.
24. Declaration of quarantine pests.
25. Controlled areas.
26. Action by Authority on report of State Government.
27. Control measures and their implementation.
28. Prohibition on removal of plants, animals, plant products or
animal products or other objects, or pests under quarantine.
29. Recovery of expenses from State Government.
30. Accredited laboratories and accredited quarantine facilities.
31. Delegation of powers.
32. Authentication of orders and other instruments of Authority.
33. Contracts by Authority.
34. Mode of Executing Contracts on behalf of Authority.
35. Borrowing powers of Authority.
36. Power of Authority to issue directions.
CHAPTER V
O
BLIGATIONS UNDER INTERNATIONAL AGREEMENTS
37. Discharge of obligations under International Agreements.

30
CHAPTER VI
EMERGENCY ACTION
CLAUSES
38. Declaration of biosecurity emergency.
39. Effect of declaration of biosecurity emergency.
40. Biosecurity emergency scheme.
CHAPTER VII
A
PPEAL AND REVISION
41. Appeal.
42. Power of revision.
43. Re-analysis.
44. Procedure for sale of goods and application of sale proceeds.
CHAPTER VIII
F
INANCE, ACCOUNTS AND AUDIT
45. Grants by Central Government.
46. Constitution of Agricultural Biosecurity Fund.
47. Accounts and audit.
48. Annual report and its laying before Parliament.
CHAPTER IX
I
MPORT OF PLANTS AND ANIMALS, ETC.
49. Application of law relating to customs and powers of Customs
officers.
50. Release of imported products.
51. Revocation or suspension of permit or certificate.
52. Removal of imports.
CHAPTER X
ENFORCEMENT
53. Appointment of Designated Officers.
54. Powers of Designated Officers.
55. Duties of Designated Officers.
56. Procedures for sampling and analysis.
57. All agencies to assist.
58. Compensation not to be paid in certain cases.

31
CHAPTER XI
OFFENCES AND PUNISHMENT
CLAUSES
59. Penalty for contraventions for which no specific penalty is
provided.
60. Punishment for interfering with seized items.
61. Punishment for false information.
62. Punishment for obstructing or impersonating a Designated
Officer.
63. Penalty for contravention in relation to imports and exports.
64. Punishment for subsequent offences.
65. Offences by companies.
66. Cognizance and trial of offences.
67. Recovery of penalty, etc.
CHAPTER XII
C
ONTROL BY CENTRAL GOVERNMENT
68. Directions by Central Government.
69. Power of Central Government to prohibit import of pests or
plants or animals and its products in public interest.
70. Power to supersede Authority.
CHAPTER XIII
MISCELLANEOUS
71. Act to have effect in addition to other laws.
72. Power of Central Government to obtain reports and returns.
73. Officers and employees of the Authority to be public servants.
74. Protection of action taken in good faith.
75. Bar of jurisdiction of civil courts.
76. Power of Central Government to make rules.
77. Power to make regulations.
78. Laying of rules and regulations before Parliament.
79. Power to remove difficulties.
80. Repeal and savings.

32
TO BE INTRODUCED IN L OK S ABHA
Bill No. 31 of 2013
THE AGRICULTURAL BIOSECURITY BILL, 2013
A
BILL
to provide for establishment of an Authority for prevention, control,
eradication and management of pests and diseases of plants and animals
and unwanted organisms for ensuring agricultural biosecurity and to
meet international obligations of India for facilitating imports and exports
of plants, plant products, animals, animal products, aquatic organisms
and regulation of agriculturally important micro organisms and for
matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.
WHEREAS the International Plants
Protection Convention came into force on the
3rd April, 1952 which provides for the purpose
of securing common and effective action to
prevent the spread and introduction of pests
of plants and plants products and to promote
appropriate measure for their control and India
signed the said Convention on the 30th April,
1952 and ratified the same on the 9th June,
1952.
AND WHEREAS an Office of International des
Epizooties has been created under International
Agreement for the creation of An Office of
International des Epizooties in Paris and the
main object of the said office is to promote
and co-ordinate in experimental and other
research work concerning the pathology or
prophylaxis of contagious diseases of live-stock
for which international collaboration is deemed
desirable and India, as a member thereof, is
required to take the measures to fulfil the said
objects.

33
AND WHEREAS, India, having ratified the said
conventions, being the member of the said
office has to make provision for giving effect
thereto and matters connected therewith and
incidental thereto.
B
E it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-
fourth Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
CHAPTER I
PRELIMINARY
1. (1) This Act may be called the
Agricultural Biosecurity Act, 2013.
(2) It extends to the whole of India.
(3) It shall come into force on such date
as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint:
Provided that different dates may be
appointed for different provisions of this Act
and any reference in any such provision to
the commencement of this Act shall be
construed as a reference to the coming into
force of that provision.
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise
requires,—
(a) “appointed day” means the date
with effect from which the Authority is
established by notification under sub-section
(1) of section 7;
(b) “animal” shall have the meaning
assigned to it in clause ( a) of section 2 of
the Prevention and Control of Infectious
and Contagious Diseases in Animals Act,
2009;
(c) “animal product” means,—
(i) all kinds of meat and meat
products including fresh, chilled and
frozen meat, tissue or organs of poultry,
pig, sheep and goat;
Short title,
extent and
commen-
cement.
Definitions.
27 of 2009.

34
(ii) egg and egg powder, milk and
milk products of all kinds;
(iii) embryos, ova and semen of
bovine, ovine and caprine;
(iv) pet food products of animal
origin; and
(v) any other animal product which
may be specified by Central
Government, by notification, in the
Official Gazette;
(d) “Authority” means the Agricultural
Biosecurity Authority of India constituted
under sub-section ( 1) of section 7;
(e) “Beneficial organism” means any
organism, including fungi, bacteria, viruses,
virus-like organisms or invertebrate animals,
utilised specifically for—
(i) the control of a pest;
(ii) pollination;
(iii) the production of commercially
valuable agricultural products; or
(iv) any other purposes beneficial
to agricultural production and ensuring
agricultural biosecurity;
(f) “Biosecurity” means protection from
the adverse effect which any organism has
or may have on—
(i) an organism excluding human
organism; or
(ii) other organisms such as plants,
animals, terrestrial or aquatic; or
(iii) the environment or part of
environment; or
(iv) agricultural activities, fishing or
pearling activities, or commercial
activities relating to them which are
being carried on, or intended to be
carried on in the whole of the country
or any part thereof;

35
(g) “Biosecurity emergency” means any
outbreak or occurrence in the country of
an organism (being an organism not
previously known to be established) that
has the potential to cause significant loss
to the biosecurity of the country;
(h) “Certificate” means an official
document issued under this Act for
quarantine purpose which attests to the
sanitary and phytosanitary status of any
consignment affected by this Act, or rules
and regulations made thereunder;
(i) “Containment” means the application
of sanitary or phytosanitary measures in
and around an infested area to prevent the
spread of a pest or disease of plants and
animals;
(j) “Controlled area” means any area
declared as such by the Authority under
section 25;
(k) “Conveyance” means any vessel,
hovercraft, aircraft, train, truck, car, cart,
cargo container, animal or any other device
or mode of transport whereby plants,
animals, plant products or animal products
or other objects may be moved;
(l) “Designated Officer” means an
officer of the Authority designated as such
under sub-section ( 1) of section 53 and
includes the person appointed to act as
Designated Officer under sub-section ( 2) of
that section;
(m) “Director General” means Director
General of the Authority;
(n) “environment” includes—
(i) ecosystems and their constituent
parts, including people and their
communities;
(ii ) all natural and physical
resources;

36
(iii) amenity values (environmental
or landscape benefit of trees irrespective
of their commercial value as a timber
crop); and
(iv) the aesthetic, cultural, economic,
and social conditions that affect or are
affected by any matter referred to in
sub-clauses ( i) to ( iii);
(o) “eradication” means application of
sanitary or phytosanitary measures to
eliminate pests and diseases from an area;
(p) “export” with its grammatical
variation and cognate expressions, means
taking out of India to a place outside India;
(q) “import” with its grammatical
variations and cognate expressions means
bringing into India from a place outside
India;
(r) “import permit” means an import
permit referred to in clause ( i) of section 3;
(s) “infectious or contagious disorders”
includes tick-pest, glanders, farcy , scabies
and any other parasite, disease or disorder
which may be specified by the Central
Government by notification;
(t) “integrated pest management”
means management of pests by using eco-
friendly methods;
(u) “live-stock” includes cattle, horses,
canine, camels, sheep, pigs, goat and
poultry and any other animal as may be
specified by the Central Government by
notification;
(v) “member” means a member of the
Authority and includes the Director
General;
(w) “notification” means notification
published in the Official Gazette;
(x) “object” means any new organism,
or micro-organism and genetic structure

37
capable of replicating, and includes any
other object other than plants, plant
products, animals and animal products
which is capable of carrying or harbouring
a pest, including soil and packaging;
(y) “organism” means a living thing
that can cause a disease and includes,—
(i) micro-organism;
(ii) an entity notified by the Central
Government in the Official Gazette, to
be an organism for the purpose of this
Act;
(iii ) a reproductive cell or
developmental stage of an organism,
but does not include a human being or a
part of human being or a genetic structure
derived from a human being;
(z) “pest” means any species, strain or
biotype of plant, animal, or pathogenic
agent injurious to plants or animals or plant
products or animal products;
(za) “pest risk analysis” means the
process of evaluating biological or other
scientific and economic evidence to
determine requirement of the regulation of
a pest and the strength of any sanitary or
phytosanitary measure to be taken against
it;
(zb) “phytosanitary or sanitary
certificate” means the phytosanitary or
sanitary certificate referred to in clause ( ii)
of section 3;
(zc) “phytosanitary or sanitary measure”
means any measure taken under this Act,
or rules or regulations made thereunder, or
other administrative orders, instructions or
guidelines, for the purpose of preventing
the introduction or the spread of a
quarantine pest;
(zd) “plant” means living plants and
parts thereof, including seeds and
propagules;

38
(ze ) “plant products” means any
unmanufactured material of plant origin
including grain, and those manufactured
products which, by their nature or that of
their processing, may create a risk for the
introduction and spread of pests;
(zf) “post-entry quarantine” means
quarantine measures applied to a
consignment after import;
(zg) ”prescribed” means prescribed by
rules made under this Act;
(zh) “prohibition” means any sanitary
and phytosanitary measure forbidding the
import, or the export, or the movement of
such pests, plants, animals, plant products
or animal products or other objects as the
Authority may specify by regulation;
(zi) “quarantine pest” means a pest of
potential economic importance to the area
endangered thereby and not yet present
there, or present but not widely distributed
and being officially controlled by the
Authority;
(zj) “regulation” means a regulation
made by the Authority under this Act;
(zk) “research institute” means any
institution conducting research on plants,
plant products, animals, animal products,
pests or diseases and includes, agricultural
universities and research laboratories under
the Indian Council of Agricultural Research,
Indian Council of Forestry Research and
Education, Indian Council of Medical
Research, Council of Scientific and
Industrial Research and private sector and
academic institutions;
(zl) “restricted place” means any place
that has been declared by a Designated
Officer to be a restricted place under this
Act;
(zm) “safer and effective pesticide”
means pesticide safe to the human beings
and animals and found effective against the

39
pests for which it is recommended for
control under any law for the time being
in force;
(zn ) “soil” means any medium,
including earth, water, compost or clay,
which is capable of supporting plant life,
or of harbouring or transmitting pests;
(zo) “transgenic material” means any
plant or animal origin material transformed
by genetic engineering and in particular by
adding a foreign gene using modern
biotechnology;
(zp) “treatment” means an officially
authorised procedure for removing or
rendering infertile the pests.
3. No person shall import into India any
plant, animal or plant product or animal
product or any other object in contravention
of any notification issued by the Authority
specifying the plant, animal, plant product or
animal product or other object, or in
contravention of the guidelines issued by the
Authority, the import of which shall be
prohibited except in accordance with,—
(i) an import permit issued by the
Designated Officer in such form, manner
and on payment of such fee and subject to
such conditions and exemptions as may be
specified by regulations; and
(ii ) the sanitary or phytosanitary
certificate issued by such authority of the
country of origin and the country of re-
export of such imports as may be specified
by regulations.
4. No person shall export any plant,
animal, plant product or animal product or
other object except in accordance with the
sanitary or phytosanitary certificate issued by
the Designated Officer in such manner and on
payment of such fee as may be specified by
regulations:
Prohibition
of import.
Prohibition
of export.

40
Provided that no such certificate shall be
necessary where the country of destination
does not require it.
5. Except as provided under this Act, or
rules and regulations made thereunder, no
person shall possess, move, grow, raise, culture,
breed or produce any plant, animal and plant
product or animal product or any other object,
as the case may be, if he has reasons to believe
that it is carrying or harbouring, or may carry
or harbour, a quarantine pest, or that it is or
could be infested or infected with a quarantine
pest.
6. Where a person becomes aware of the
existence of a pest or disease of plant or animal
which the person suspects to be a quarantine
pest or disease in an area where such pest or
disease has not previously been known to exist,
it shall be duty of that person to inform
immediately the existence of such pest or
disease.
CHAPTER II
A
GRICULTURAL BIOSECURITY AUTHORITY OF INDIA
7. (1) With effect from the appointed day,
the Central Government shall, by notification,
constitute an authority to be called the
Agricultural Biosecurity Authority of India.
(2) The Authority shall be a body
corporate by the name aforesaid, having
perpetual succession and a common seal, with
power, subject to the provisions of this Act,
to acquire, hold and dispose of property, both
movable and immovable, and to contract, and
shall by the said name sue or be sued.
(3) The head office of the Authority shall
be at Faridabad.
Domestic
quarantine.
Duty to
inform.
Constitution
and
incorporation
of
Authority.

41
8. The Authority shall consist of—
(a) a Director General to be appointed
by the Central Government;
(b) two Deputy Director Generals to
be appointed by the Central Government
from amongst the persons having special
knowledge and experience of not less than
ten years in plant and animal sciences—
Members;
(c) two members to be appointed by
the Central Government, from amongst
persons having special knowledge and
experience of not less than ten years in
plant and animal quarantine, or in plant
and animal protection, or in any other
discipline pertaining to plant and animal
protection, which, in the opinion of the
Central Government, is related to the
functions of the Authority—Members;
(d) three members to be appointed by
the Central Government by rotation in the
alphabetical order to represent the States
and the Union territories:
Provided that an appointment under
this clause shall be made on the
recommendation of the Government of the
State, or as the case may be, the Union
territory concerned.
(e) one representative of the Ministry
or Department dealing with the Agriculture
and Co-operation, not below the rank of
Joint Secretary - Member;
(f) one representative of the Ministry
or Department dealing with the Animal
Husbandary, Dairying and Fisheries, not
below the rank of Joint Secretary—Member;
(g) one representative of the Ministry
or Department dealing with the Commerce,
not below the rank of Joint Secretary—
Member;
Composition
of
Authority.

42
(h) one representative of the Ministry
or Department dealing with the
Environment and Forest, not below the rank
of Joint Secretary—Member;
(i) one representative from the Indian
Council of Agricultural Research, to be
nominated by the Director General, Indian
Council of Agricultural Research, not below
the rank of Joint Secretary—Member;
(j) one representative from the Indian
Council of Forestry Research and Education,
to be nominated by the Director General,
Indian Council of Forestry Research and
Education, not below the rank of Joint
Secretary—Member;
(k) one representative of the Ministry
or Department dealing with health or from
Food Safety and Standards Authority of
India, not below the rank of Joint
Secretary—Member;
(l) the Member (Customs) of Central
Board of Excise and Customs, Department
of Revenue, Ministry of Finance—Member;
(m) one representative from the
Ministry or Department dealing with
Biotechnology, not below the rank of Joint
Secretary—Member;
(n) one representative to be nominated
by the Director General, Council of
Scientific and Industrial Research not below
the rank of Joint Secretary—Member;
(o) one representative from the National
Disaster Management Authority , not below
the rank of Joint Secretary—Member;
(p) one representative from the Defence
Research and Development Organisation,
not below the rank of Joint Secretary—
Member;
(q) one representative of the Ministry
or Department dealing with legal or
legislative affairs, not below the rank of
Joint Secretary—Member.

43
9. The Director General of the Authority
shall be appointed by the Central Government
from amongst persons who have special
knowledge and professional experience of such
years as may be prescribed in plant and animal
quarantine or in plant and animal protection
or any other discipline pertaining to plant and
animal protection or from amongst the persons
from the administration who have been
associated with the subject:
Provided that a person who is in the
service of Government shall not be appointed
as Director General unless he is holding or
has held the post not below the rank of
Additional Secretary to the Government of
India.
10. The Director General shall be the Chief
Executive Officer of the Authority and shall
have the general superintendence and
directions in the conduct of the affairs of the
Authority and shall, in addition to presiding
over the meetings of the Authority, exercise
and discharge such powers and functions of
the Authority as may be prescribed.
11. ( 1) The term of office and conditions
of service of, and fee and allowances payable
to, the Director General, Deputy Director
General and the other members (other than
ex officio members) shall be such as may be
prescribed.
(2) The Director General, Deputy Director
General or any other member ceasing to hold
office as such, shall not accept any commercial
employment, for a period of two years from
the date he ceases to hold such office without
the approval of the Central Government.
Explanation .— For the purposes of this
section, “commercial employment” means
employment in any capacity under, or agency
of, a person engaged in trading, commercial,
industrial or financial business in plants,
animals, plant products or animal products,
Qualification
for
appointment
of Director
General.
Powers of
Director
General.
Conditions
of Service
of the
Director
General
and
members.

44
aquatic organisms and micro-organisms or
other object and includes also a Director of a
company or partner of a firm and it also
includes setting up practice either
independently or as partner of a firm or as an
adviser or a consultant.
12. (1) The Authority shall meet at such
times and places, and shall observe such
procedures in regard to the transaction of
business at its meetings, including the quorum,
as may be provided by regulations.
(2) The Director General or, if for any
reason he is unable to attend any meeting of
the Authority, any other member chosen by
the members present from amongst themselves
at the meeting shall preside at the meeting.
(3) All questions which come up before the
Authority in the meeting shall be decided by
a majority of votes of the members present
and voting, and, in the event of an equality of
votes, the Director General, or in his absence,
the person presiding the meeting, shall have a
second or casting vote.
(4) The Authority may make regulations
for the transaction of business at its meetings.
13. No act or proceeding of the Authority
shall be invalid merely for reason of—
(a) any vacancy in, or any defect in the
constitution of, the Authority; or
(b) any defect in the appointment of a
person acting as a member of the Authority;
(c) any irregularity in the procedure of
the Authority not affecting the merits of
the case.
14. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained
in section 11, the Central Government may, by
order, remove from office the Director General,
Deputy Director General or any member
Meetings
of
Authority.
Vacancies,
etc., not to
invalidate
proceedings
of
Authority.
Removal of
Director
General,
Deputy
Director
General
and
members.

45
referred to in clause ( c) of section 8, if the
Director General or such other member—
(a) has been adjudged an insolvent; or
(b) has been convicted of an offence,
which in the opinion of the Central
Government, involves moral turpitude; or
(c) has become physically and mentally
incapable of acting as a member; or
(d) has acquired such financial or other
interests as are likely to affect prejudicially
his functions as a member; or
(e) has so abused his position as to
render his continuance in office prejudicial
to the public interest.
(2) No member shall be removed under
clauses ( d) and ( e) of sub-section ( 1) unless he
has been given a reasonable opportunity of
being heard in the matter.
15. (1) The Central Government shall
appoint a Secretary to the Authority who shall
exercise such powers and perform such duties
as may be prescribed or as may be delegated
to him by the Director General.
(2) The Secretary shall be entitled to such
salary and allowances and shall be subject to
such conditions of service in respect of leave,
pension, provident fund and such other matters
as may, from time to time, be fixed by the
Central Government.
16. Subject to such control and restrictions
as may be prescribed, the Authority may
appoint such other officers and employees,
as may be necessary, for the efficient
performance of its functions and the method
of appointment, the scale of pay and
allowances and other conditions of service of
such other officers and employees of the
Authority shall be such as may be provided
by the Authority by regulations.
Secretary
of
Authority
and his
powers.
Officers
and
employees
of
Authority.

46
17. The Director General, Deputy Director
General, other members, the Secretary and
other employees of the Authority shall not
undertake any work unconnected with their
duties under this Act except with the
permission of the Central Government.
18. The Authority may engage, in such
manner and on such remuneration or fee as
may be specified by regulations such number
of experts and professionals of integrity and
outstanding ability, having special knowledge
of, and experience in, plant pests and diseases
and animal diseases or such other disciplines
related to agricultural biosecurity as it deems
necessary to assist the Authority in the
discharge of its functions under this Act.
19. (1) The Authority may appoint such
committees as may be necessary for the
efficient discharge of its duties and
performance of its functions under this Act.
(2) The Authority shall have the power to
co-opt as members of any committee appointed
under sub-section ( 1) such number of persons,
who are not members of the Authority, as it
may think fit and the persons so co-opted shall
have the right to attend the meetings of the
committee and take part in its proceedings but
shall not have the right to vote.
(3) The persons co-opted as members of a
committee under sub-section ( 2) shall be
entitled to receive such allowances for
attending meetings of the committee as may
be fixed by the Authority.
CHAPTER III
T
RANSFER OF ASSETS, LIABILITIES, ETC. OF
AUTHORITY
20. (1) On and from the appointed day,
there shall be transferred to, and vest in, the
Authority constituted under sub-section ( 1) of
section 7, the undertakings of the existing Plant
Quarantine Stations, Central Integrated Pest
Management Centres, Locust Warning
Director,
etc., not to
undertake
any other
work.
Appointment
of experts.
Committees
of
Authority.
Transfer
and
vesting in
Authority
undertakings
of Plant
Animal
Quarantine
Stations,
etc.

47
Organisation, Secretariat of Central Insecticide
Board and Registration Committee, any other
laboratories under the Directorate of Plant
Protection, Quarantine and Storage,
Government of India and Animal Quarantine
Stations and connected laboratories hereinafter
referred to as “the undertakings”.
(2) The undertakings which are transferred
to, and which vest in the Authority under sub-
section ( 1) shall be deemed to include all
assets, rights, powers, authorities and privileges
and all property movable and immovable, real
or personal, corporeal or incorporeal, present
or contingent, of whatever nature and
wheresoever situate, including lands, buildings,
machinery, equipments, works, workshops, cash
balances, capital, reserves, reserve funds,
investments, tenancies, leases and book debts
and all other rights and interests arising out
of such property as were immediately before
the appointed day in the ownership, possession
or power of the undertakings, in relation to
their undertakings, whether within or outside
India, all books of account and documents
relating thereto and shall also be deemed to
include all borrowings, liabilities and
obligations of whatever kind then subsisting
of the undertakings in relation to their
undertakings.
21. (1) All contracts, agreements and
working arrangements subsisting immediately
before the appointed day and affecting the
undertakings, shall, in so far as they relate to
the undertakings cease to have effect or be
enforceable against the undertakings and shall
be of as full force and effect against or in
favour of the Authority in which the
undertakings have vested by virtue of this Act
and enforceable as fully and effectually as if,
instead of the undertakings the Authority had
been named therein or had been a party
thereto.
General
effect of
vesting of
undertaking
in
Authority.

48
(2) Any proceeding, suit or cause of action
pending or existing immediately before the
appointed day by or against the undertakings
in relation to their undertakings may, as from
that day, be continued and enforced by or
against the Authority in which they have
vested by virtue of this Act, as it might have
been enforced by or against the undertakings
if this Act had not been passed, and shall cease
to be enforceable by or against the
undertakings.
22. (1) On the establishment of the
Authority, it shall be lawful for the Central
Government to transfer to the Authority, by
order and with effect from such date or dates
as may be specified in the order, any officer
or other employee holding office as such in
the Directorate of Plant Protection Quarantine
and Storage and Animal Quarantine Stations
under the Central Government immediately
before the date on which the Authority is
established:
Provided that the scale of pay of the post
in the Authority to which such officer or other
employee is transferred shall not be lower than
the scale of pay of the post he was holding
immediately before such transfer and the other
terms and conditions of service (including
pension, leave, provident fund and medical
benefits) of the post to which he is transferred
shall not be less favourable than the terms and
conditions of service in relation to the post
held by him immediately before such transfer.
(2) An order under sub-section ( 1) may be
made so as to have retrospective effect from a
date not earlier than the date of the
commencement of this Act.
(3) Before any order is issued under sub-
section ( 1), all officers and employees of the
aforesaid Directorate of Plant Protection
Quarantine and Storage and Animal
Special
Provision
for transfer
of
employees
to
Authority.

49
Quarantine Stations shall be given an option
to express, in such form as may be prescribed,
and within such time as may be specified in
that behalf by the Central Government, their
willingness or otherwise to become employees
of the Authority and such option once
exercised shall be final:
Provided that no order under sub-section
(1) shall be made in relation to any officer or
other employee of the Directorate of Plant
Protection Quarantine and Storage and
Animal Quarantine Stations who has
intimated his intention of not becoming an
employee of the Authority within the time
specified in that behalf:
Provided further that such of the officers
and employees of the Directorate of Plant
Protection Quarantine and Storage and
Animal Quarantine Stations who do not
express, within the time specified in that
behalf, their intention of becoming the
employees of the Authority, shall be dealt
with in the same manner and in accordance
with the same laws and standing orders as
would have applied immediately before the
commencement of this Act to the employees
of the Directorate of Plant Protection
Quarantine and Storage and Animal
Quarantine Stations in the event of the
reduction of the strength of the officers and
employees of the Directorate of Plant
Protection Quarantine and Storage and
Animal Quarantine Stations.
(4) An officer or other employee transferred
by an order made under sub-section ( 1) shall,
on and from the date of transfer, cease to be
an employee of the Directorate of Plant
Protection Quarantine and Storage and Animal
Quarantine Stations and become an officer or
other employee of the Authority with such
designation as the Authority may determine
and shall, subject to the provisions of the
proviso to sub-section ( 1), be governed by the
regulations made by the Authority under this

50
Act in respect of remuneration and other
conditions of service (including pension, leave,
provident fund and medical benefits) and shall
continue to be an officer or other employee of
the Authority unless and until his employment
is duly terminated by the Authority:
Provided that till such time as the
regulations referred to above governing the
conditions of service of its officers or other
employees are framed by the Authority, the
relevant laws and standing orders applicable
to the officers and employees of the Directorate
of Plant Protection Quarantine and Storage and
Animal Quarantine Stations shall continue to
be applicable to them.
(5) If a question arises whether the terms
and conditions of service specified in the
regulations framed by the Authority in respect
of any matter, including remuneration, pension,
leave, provident fund and medical benefits, are
less favourable than those attached to the post
held by an officer or other employee
immediately before his transfer to the
Authority, the decision of the Central
Government in the matter shall be final.
CHAPTER IV
P
OWERS AND FUNCTIONS OF AUTHORITY
23. The functions of the Authority shall be
to—
(a) prevent the introduction of
quarantine pests in India from outside the
country by regulating the import of plants,
animals and plant products or animal
products and other objects;
(b) regulate the export of plants,
animals, plant products or animal products
and other objects, to meet the importing
country’s requirements in accordance with
international agreements, and to discharge
such obligations under those international
agreements;
Functions
of
Authority.

51
(c) declare, by notification, any place to
be a controlled area under section 25;
(d) regulate the spread of pests and
diseases of plants and animals from one
State to another;
(e) regulate the introduction of new or
beneficial organisms into the country;
(f) implement such post-entry
quarantine measures wherever necessary,
either by itself or through research
institutes, or jointly with such research
institutes, as may be provided by
regulations;
(g) undertake pest risk analysis;
(h) undertake regular review and
revision with a view to update and
harmonise sanitary or phytosanitary
measures;
(i) undertake surveys and surveillance
of pests and diseases of plants and animals
in India;
(j) interact with international, regional
or national plant protection organisations;
(k) interact with research institutes and
State Governments on matters relating to
plant and animal protection and quarantine;
(l) provide such technical guidance and
assistance as it considers necessary to
agriculture, horticulture, animal husbandry
and fisheries departments of State
Governments and other statutory bodies;
(m) arrange training programmes and
hold workshops, seminars and conferences
periodically to review status of pests and
pathogens, and to spread awareness on
plant and animal quarantine through mass
media;
(n) frame guidelines for the import and
export of plants, animals, plant products or
animal products and other objects, whether
for trade or research;

52
(o) regulate the import of transgenic
materials with respect to sanitary and
phytosanitary matters;
(p) establish plant and animal
quarantine stations, pest management
centres or other units at such places as may
be deemed necessary;
(q) promote integrated pest
management;
(r) watch and control locusts in such
areas as the Central Government may, by
notification, specify;
(s) take steps to ensure availability of
safer and effective pesticides and their
quality control;
(t) contribute towards development of
human resource in plant and animal
protection technology;
(u) advise and assist the Central
Government on all matters including
international obligations related to plant
and animal protection;
(v) establish and maintain diagnostic
laboratories related to pests and diseases
of plants and animals;
(w) charge such fees for the services
provided under this Act, as may be
specified by regulations;
(x) recommend to the Central
Government to issue directions to the State
Governments for the purpose of enforcing
obligations under international agreements;
(y) undertake such other activities as
may be prescribed.
24. The Authority may declare, by
notification, any pest to be a quarantine pest.
25. Where the Authority, on information
received from the State Government or any
Declaration
of
quarantine
pests.
Controlled
areas.

53
other information obtained suo-motu, suspects
or determines that an area is infested or
infected with a quarantine pest, and is of the
opinion that the quarantine pest could spread,
the Authority may by notification declare that
area to be a controlled area.
26. (1) Where the information has been
received by the Authority from any source
other than the State Government, and the
Authority has reason to believe that an area is
infested or infected with a quarantine pest, and
is of the opinion that the quarantine pest could
spread, the Authority shall forward such
information to the State Government requesting
the State Government to send to the Authority
a detailed report on the said information within
a period stipulated by the Authority, or within
such extended time as the Authority may deem
fit in consultation with the State Government,
before issuance of the declaration under
section 25.
(2) Where the concerned State Government
fails to take measures in a controlled area
declared under section 25, then, it shall be
lawful for the Authority to take necessary steps
for eradication, containment or prevention of
spread of the quarantine pest in such controlled
area and such State Government shall
reimburse the Authority the costs incurred by
it for such purpose:
Provided that the Central Government may
exempt the concerned State Government from
whole or part of the reimbursement of the
costs, if the concerned State Government gives
reasons to the satisfaction of the Central
Government for such exemption and exempted
costs shall be reimbursed by the Central
Government to the Authority.
(3) Where an area has been declared as
controlled area under section 25 that area shall
continue to be the controlled area until the
Authority, by notification, declares that the
controlled area is no longer infested or infected
with quarantine pest.
Action by
Authority
on report
of State
Government.

54
27. (1) Where an area is notified to be a
controlled area under section 25, the Authority
shall communicate to the concerned State
Government the quarantine measures which
the State Government may implement.
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to
the generality of the foregoing, such quarantine
measures include the following matters,
namely:—
(a) treatment or disposal of plants, plant
products, animals, animal products or other
objects, whether infested or infected or not,
as well as treatment of conveyances in
order to limit the spread of the quarantine
pest and infected plants, plant products,
animals and animal products;
(b) prohibition, restriction or control on
removal of any plant, plant product, animal,
animal product or other object from a
controlled area to any other part of India;
(c) stipulation of the period within
which it shall not be lawful to plant or
replant with any particular plant, the whole
or any portion of such controlled area;
(d) any other measure which the
Authority may communicate.
(3) The Designated Officer and the State
Government through its agencies shall jointly
implement the quarantine measures referred to
in sub-sections ( 1) and ( 2) and they shall also
co-ordinate surveys, reports and actions in case
of new outbreak of pests or during eradication
campaign.
28. No plant, animal, plant product or
animal product or other object or pest in the
area where quarantine measure has been
implemented under this Act, shall be removed
from that area or from a quarantine station
situated in that area, except with the approval
in writing of the Designated Officer.
Control
measures
and their
implemen-
tation.
Prohibition
on removal
of plants,
animals,
plant
products or
animal
products or
other
objects, or
pests
under
quarantine.

55
29. Where the State Government fails to
repay the costs of any measure taken under
this Chapter, such costs shall be recoverable
from the State Government in the manner
provided by the Code of Criminal Procedure,
1973, for the recovery of fines imposed by a
Court, as if such costs were a fine imposed by
a Court.
30. The Authority may accredit any
laboratory, or any quarantine facility, subject
to such conditions and to carry out such
activities as may be specified by regulation.
31. The Authority may, by general or
special order in writing, delegate to the
Director General or any other member, or to
any officer of the Authority, subject to such
conditions and limitations, if any, as may be
specified in the order, such of its powers and
functions under this Act (except the powers
under section 76) as it may deem necessary.
32. All orders and decisions of the
Authority shall be authenticated by the
signature of the Director General, or any other
member authorised by the Authority in this
behalf, and all other instruments executed by
the Authority shall be authenticated by the
signature of an officer of the Authority
authorised by it in this behalf.
33. Subject to the provisions of section 34,
the Authority shall be competent to enter into
and perform any contract necessary for the
discharge of its functions under this Act.
34. (1) Every contract shall, on behalf of
the Authority, be made by the Director General
or such other member, or such officer of the
Authority as may be generally or specially
empowered in this behalf by the Authority, and
such contracts or class of contracts shall be
sealed with the common seal of the Authority:
Recovery
of expenses
from State
Government.
Accredited
laboratories
and
accredited
quarantine
facilities.
Delegation
of powers.
Authenti-
cation of
orders and
other
instruments
of
Authority.
Contracts
by
Authority.
Mode of
Executing
Contracts
on behalf
of
Authority.
2 of 1974.

56
Provided that no contract exceeding such
value or amount, as the Central Government
may, from time to time, by order, fix in this
behalf, shall be made unless it has been
previously approved by the Authority:
Provided further that no contract for the
acquisition or sale of immovable property or
for the lease of any such property for a term
exceeding thirty years, and no other contract
exceeding such value or amount as the Central
Government may, from time to time, by order
fix in this behalf, shall be made unless it has
been previously approved by the Central
Government.
(2) Subject to the provisions of sub-section (1),
the form and manner in which any contract
shall be made under this Act, shall be such as
may be specified by regulations.
(3) No contract, which is not in accordance
with the provisions of this Act and the
regulations made thereunder, shall be binding
on the Authority.
35. (1) The Authority may, with the prior
consent of the Central Government or in
accordance with the terms of any general or
special authority given to it by the Central
Government, borrow money from any source
by the issue of bonds, debentures or such other
instruments as it may deem fit for discharging
all or any of its functions under this Act.
(2) The Central Government may
guarantee, in such manner as it thinks fit, the
repayment of the principal and the payment
of interest thereon with respect to the
loans borrowed by the Authority under
sub-section ( 1).
(3) Subject to such limits as the Central
Government may, from time to time lay down,
the Authority may borrow temporarily by way
of overdraft or otherwise such amount as it
may require for discharging its functions under
this Act.
Borrowing
powers of
Authority.

57
36. The Authority may, for the discharge
of its functions under section 23 issue such
directions from time to time to importers and
exporters of plant, animal, plant product or
animal product or other object, as it may
consider necessary.
CHAPTER V
O
BLIGATIONS UNDER INTERNATIONAL AGREEMENTS
37. The Authority shall—
(a) act as the National Plant Protection
Organisation to discharge obligations under
the International Plant Protection
Convention, and on request by any
international, regional or other National
Plant Protection Organisation, provide it
free of charge or on reciprocal basis, such
information as the Authority may have in
regard to import and export of, and
technical requirements for, plants, plant
products and other objects;
(b) act as the National Organisation to
discharge obligations under the Office
International des Epizooties, and on request
by any regional or national organisation,
provide it free of charge or on reciprocal
basis, such information as it may have in
regard to import and export of, and
technical requirement for, animals, animal
products, marine products and other
objects:
Provided that before providing any
information under this section, approval of
the Central Government shall be obtained.
Explanation.— For the purposes of this
section the expression—
(i) “International Plant Protection
Convention” means the International
Plant Protection Convention, 1951 of
which India is a member; and
Power of
Authority
to issue
directions.
Discharge
of
obligations
under
International
Agreements.

58
(ii ) “Office International des
Epizooties (OIE)” means the Office
International des Epizooties created
through an international agreement of
which India is a member.
CHAPTER VI
EMERGENCY ACTION
38. (1) If the Authority is satisfied, on the
information received by it that—
(a) there is likelihood of—
(i) an outbreak or occurrence in
India of an organism, which is not
previously known to be established in
India and if it becomes established in
India, it has the potential to cause
significant loss to the biosecurity of the
country; or
(ii) an organism, previously thought
to be of restricted distribution or
abundance in India, which has become
so distributed and abundant in India
or any part thereof that it has the
potential to cause significant loss to the
biosecurity; or
(iii) spreading of a pest beyond
control by the application of the
national pest management strategy for
that pest; and
(b) it is in the public interest that action
be taken immediately to manage, or
eradicate the organism and such
management or eradication is not effectively
possible in normal course;
it may recommend the Central Government to
declare a biosecurity emergency in respect of
the whole of India or of such part of the
territory thereof as may be specified in the
recommendation.
(2) The Central Government, if it is
satisfied, on the recommendation made under
sub-section (1) and after consultation with such
Declaration
of
biosecurity
emergency.

59
persons as it may deem reasonable, that such
biosecurity emergency exists, may make
declaration to that effect in respect of the whole
of India or of such part of the territory thereof
as may be specified in the declaration.
(3) A declaration made under sub-section (2)
may be varied or revoked by subsequent
declaration.
(4) The Central Government shall not issue
a notification varying such proclamation unless
the recommendations of the Authority are
communicated to it.
(5) A declaration under sub-section ( 2) shall
cease to have effect on the expiration of six
months unless revoked earlier.
39. While the declaration of biosecurity
emergency is in operation, then,—
(a) the Central Government may give
all such directions to the Authority and
require all such acts to be done or not to
be done by the Authority as the Central
Government may deem necessary for the
purpose of managing or eradicating the
organism in respect of which such
biosecurity emergency is declared;
(b) the Authority may take such
measures and do all such acts and things
which the Authority deems necessary for
the purpose of managing or eradicating the
organism in respect of which such
biosecurity emergency is declared.
40. (1) The Authority may with the prior
approval of the Central Government, at any
time while a declaration of biosecurity
emergency under sub-section ( 2) of section 38
is in force, by notification, make a scheme for
the management or eradication of the organism
in respect of which such emergency has been
declared.
Effect of
declaration
of
biosecurity
emergency.
Biosecurity
emergency
scheme.

60
(2) The Central Government may, before
giving approval under sub-section ( 1), consult
such experts as it may deem fit as to the
desirability of such scheme.
CHAPTER VII
APPEAL AND REVISION
41. Any person aggrieved by any order of
the Designated Officer under this Act may
within a period of thirty days from the date
on which the said order is communicated to
him appeal, in the such manner and on such
payment of fees as may be prescribed, to the
Central Government whose decision thereon
shall be final:
Provided that the Central Government may
entertain an appeal after the expiry of thirty
days if it is satisfied that such person was
prevented by sufficient cause from filing the
appeal in time.
42. The Central Government may, at any
time, call for and examine the record relating
to any case on which the Designated Officer
has made an order for the purpose of satisfying
itself as to the legality or propriety of such
order and make such order as it may deem
fit:
Provided that no order under this section
shall be made after the expiry of one year from
the date of such decision:
Provided further that the Central
Government shall not make any order against
any person unless that person has had a
reasonable opportunity of showing cause
against the proposed order.
43. Any person aggrieved by a report of
analysis of sample made under this Act or the
rules and regulations made thereunder, may
request the Designated Officer for re-analysis
by a different laboratory of the Authority, or
an accredited laboratory, whose report shall be
final.
Appeal.
Power of
revision.
Re-analysis.

61
44. (1) Where any plant, animal, plant
product or animal product or other object not
confiscated is required to be sold for the
realisation of the dues of the Authority, or
otherwise under this Act, after ensuring that it
does not pose biosecurity risk to the country,
under this Act, the Authority shall, after the
notice to the owner thereof, sell by public
auction or by tender or with the consent of
the owner in any other manner such plant,
animal, plant product or animal product or
other object.
(2) The proceeds of any such sale referred
to in sub-section ( 1) shall be applied,—
(a) firstly to the payment of the expenses
of the sale;
(b) next to the payment of the dues of the
Authority in respect to the plant, animal, plant
product or animal product or other object sold;
(c) next to the payment of the charges, if
any, payable in respect of the plant, animal,
plant product or animal product or other object
sold, due to the person having the custody of
such plant, animal, plant product or animal
product or other object; and
(d) next to the payment of any amount due
from the owner of the plant, animal, their
product, or other object sold, to the Central
Government if any such intimation has been
received by the Authority, and the balance, if
any, remains after such payment shall be paid
to the said owner.
CHAPTER VIII
F
INANCE, ACCOUNTS AND AUDIT
45. The Central Government may, after
due appropriation made by Parliament by law
in this behalf, make to the Authority grants
and loans of such sums of money as the
Central Government may think fit for being
utilised for the purposes of this Act.
Procedure
for sale of
goods and
application
of sale
proceeds.
Grants by
Central
Government.

62
46. ( 1) There shall be constituted a Fund
to be called the Agricultural Biosecurity Fund
and there shall be credited thereto,—
(a) all grants and loans made by the
Central Government under section 45;
(b) all grants, fees, penalties and charges
received by the Authority under this Act; and
(c) all sums received by the Authority from
such other source as may be approved by the
Central Government.
(2) The Agricultural Biosecurity Fund shall
be applied,—
(A) for meeting—
(a) the cost of the measures taken
under this Act, or rules and regulations
made thereunder;
(b) the salaries, allowances and
other remuneration, as the case may be,
of the members of the Authority,
members of committees, special
invitees, officers and other employees
of the Authority;
(c) the administrative expenses of
the Authority and any other expenses
authorised by or under this Act; and
(d) repayment of any loan under
clauses ( a) and ( c) of sub-section ( 1).
(B) for the purpose of expanding
existing facilities or services, or creating
new facilities or services, or for the purpose
of providing against any temporary
decrease of revenue or increase of
expenditures from transient causes or for
purposes of replacement or for meeting
expenditures arising from loss or damage
from incidence of pest infestation or
infection, or for meeting any liability arising
out of any act or commission in the
discharge of its functions under this Act.
Constitution
of
Agricultural
Biosecurity
Fund.

63
(3) All moneys belonging to the fund shall
be deposited in such banks or invested in such
manner as may, subject to the approval of the
Central Government, be decided by the
Authority.
47. (1) The Authority shall maintain proper
accounts and other relevant records, and
prepare an annual statement of accounts
including profit and loss account and balance
sheet in such form as may be prescribed by
the Central Government in consultation with
the Comptroller and Auditor-General of India.
(2) The accounts of the Authority shall be
audited annually by the Comptroller and
Auditor-General of India and any expenditure
incurred by him in connection with such audit
shall be payable by the Authority to the
Comptroller and Auditor-General of India.
(3) The Comptroller and Auditor-General
of India, and any person appointed by him in
connection with the audit of the accounts of
the Authority, shall have the same rights,
privileges and authority in connection with
such audit as the Comptroller and Auditor-
General of India has in connection with the
audit of Government accounts and, in
particular, shall have the right to demand the
production of books, accounts, connected
vouchers and other documents and papers, and
inspect any place under, or any office of, the
Authority.
(4) The accounts of the Authority as
certified by the Comptroller and Auditor-
General of India, or any other person
appointed by him in this behalf, together with
the audit report thereon, shall be forwarded
annually to the Central Government, and that
Government shall cause the same to be laid
before both Houses of Parliament.
48. (1) The Authority shall prepare once
every year in such form and in such time as
may be prescribed, an annual report giving a
summary of its activities including information
relating to proceedings and policies during the
Accounts
and audit.
Annual
report and
its laying
before
Parliament.

64
previous year and such report shall also
contain annual accounts of the Authority.
(2) A copy of the report shall be forwarded
to the Central Government and the Central
Government shall cause such report to be laid,
as soon as may be after it is received, before
each House of Parliament.
CHAPTER IX
I
MPORT OF PLANTS AND ANIMALS, ETC.
49. (1) The law for the time being in force
relating to the customs and goods, the import
of which is prohibited under the Customs Act,
1962 or any other law for the time being in
force shall, subject to the provisions of
section 3 of this Act, apply in respect of pests
or plants or animals, the import of which
requires permit and certificate by the Authority
under the said section, or prohibited by the
Authority and officers of Customs and officers
empowered under the Customs Act, 1962 or
any other law for the time being in force, to
perform the duties imposed thereby on a
Commissioner of Customs and other officers
of Customs, shall have the same powers in
respect of such pests or plants or animals as
they have for the time being in respect of such
goods as aforesaid.
(2) Without prejudice to the provisions of
sub-section ( 1), the Commissioner of Customs
or any officer of the Government authorised
by the Central Government in this behalf, may
detain any imported package which he
suspects to contain any pests or plants or
animals which is the import of which requires
the permit and certificate under section 3, or,
prohibited by the Authority under the said
section and shall forthwith report such
detention to the Authority, and, if necessary,
forward, with the approval of the Authority,
the package or sample of any suspected pests
or plants or animals and its products found
therein to the laboratory notified or research
institution accredited under this Act.
Application
of law
relating to
customs
and
powers of
Customs
officers.
52 of 1962.

65
50. No plant, animal or plant product or
animal product or other object imported into
India shall be released unless—
(i) the importer has produced to the
Designated Officer all permits, certificates
and other documentation as may be
required under the provisions of this Act,
or rules and regulations made thereunder;
(ii) such plant, animal, plant product
or animal product or other object is, or
has been, presented to and cleared by the
Designated Officer in accordance with the
provisions of this Act, or rules and
regulations made thereunder.
51. (1) If the Designated Officer is satisfied,
either on a reference made to him in this
regard or otherwise, that—
(a) the import permit or the sanitary or
phytosanitary certificate has been granted
by misrepresentation of an essential fact;
or
(b) the holder of such import permit or
sanitary or phytosanitary certificate has
failed to comply with the conditions subject
to which such import permit or sanitary or
phytosanitary certificate was granted, or has
contravened any of the provisions of this
Act, or rules and regulations made
thereunder,
then, without prejudice to any other penalty
to which the holder of such permit or
certificate, as the case may be, is liable under
this Act, the Designated Officer may, after
giving the holder of such permit or certificate,
an opportunity of showing cause, revoke or
suspend such permit or certificate.
(2) Subject to any regulation that may be
made in this behalf, the Designated Officer
may also vary or amend the permit
or certificate granted under section 3 or
section 4.
Release of
imported
products.
Revocation
or
suspension
of permit
or
certificate.

66
52. (1) Where the Designated Officer has
reasons to believe that any plant, animal and
plant product or animal product or other object
imported into India—
(a) was imported in contravention of
the provisions of this Act, or rules and
regulations made thereunder; or
(b) contains a quarantine pest,
then, the Designated Officer may, give a
notice by registered post or through
electronic media or by any other verifiable
means to the owner of such plant, animal,
plant product or animal product or other
object, or to the person having the
possession, care or control of it, requiring
him within a period not exceeding thirty
days to remove it from India.
(2) Where the owner or the person referred
to in sub-section ( 1) fails to remove such plant,
animal, plant product or animal product or
other object within such time as may be
allowed for the purpose, the Designated officer
may seize it, cause it removed and destroyed
at the cost of such owner or person.
(3) The costs of such seizure, removal or
destruction shall be recoverable from such
owner or person in the manner provided by
the Code of Criminal procedure, 1973, for the
recovery of fines imposed by a Court, as if
such costs were fine imposed by the Court.
CHAPTER X
E
NFORCEMENT
53. (1) The Authority shall, by notification,
designate from amongst the officers of the
Authority, such Designated Officers as it may
deem fit, to perform functions and exercise
powers under this Act or rules and regulations
made thereunder for such areas, as may be
specified in the notification.
Removal of
imports.
Appointment
of
Designated
Officers.
2 of 1974.

67
(2) The Authority may, without prejudice
to the provisions contained in sub-section ( 1),
appoint by notification as the case may be,
with the prior approval of the Central
Government or State Government or research
institutes or any other public institution,
without prejudice to the provisions contained
in sub-section ( 1), such technically qualified
persons subject to such conditions as it deems
fit, from amongst the officers or employees
working under such Governments or
institutions to act as Designated Officers to
perform functions and exercise powers under
this Act, or rules and regulations made
thereunder for such areas, as may be specified
in the notification.
(3) The Designated Officers, who deal with
export certification, shall be deemed as public
officers for meeting the requirements of
international agreements and conventions for
the purposes of such certification.
54. (1) A Designated Officer shall have the
power to inspect, examine and take samples
of any plant, animal, plant product or animal
product or other object, for analysis or test.
(2) If the Designated Officer has reason to
believe that violation of this Act, or rules and
regulations made thereunder, has been or is
being or is likely to be committed, or for the
purpose of satisfying himself as to whether the
provisions of this Act or rules and regulations
made thereunder, or the conditions of any
import permit or sanitary or phytosanitary
certificate are being complied with, he may,—
(a) enter and search, at all reasonable
times and with such assistance, if any, as
he considers necessary, any land or
premises to require any person to produce
any import permit, sanitary or
phytosanitary certificate or other
documentation required under this Act or
rules and regulations made thereunder;
Powers of
Designated
Officers.

68
(b) inspect, examine and make copies
of such permit, certificate or other
documentation, or take extracts of registers
or records maintained by such person,
where he has reason to believe that any
offence under this Act has been committed
by such person and seize such registers or
records or portions thereof as he may
consider relevant in respect of that offence;
(c) search any person, baggage
(including luggage, bags, suitcase, hand bag
and personal belongings), package
(including boxes, parcel, containers, wooden
packaging material) and other packaging
material, conveyance (including boat, ship,
ferry, cruise, aircraft, vessel, hovercraft,
train, truck, car, cart, cargo, container and
animal) or other thing upon entry into or
exit from India by means of which the
offence under this Act has been or is being
committed or which may be employed for
commission of such offence;
(d) stop the distribution, sale or use of
any plant, animal, plant product or animal
product or other object, and seize the same,
which he has reason to believe is being
distributed, sold or used in contravention
of the provisions of this Act, or rules and
regulations made thereunder; and
(e) where he has reason to believe that
a pest is injurious to plant, animal, plant
product or animal product or other object,
order at the expenses of the owner the
treatment or disposal (including reshipment
and confinement in a quarantine station)
of the pest or any plant, animal, plant
product or animal product or other object
imported into India, whether or not covered
by an import permit or a sanitary or
phytosanitary certificate including treatment
of any incoming conveyance into India.
(3) The provisions of the Code of Criminal
Procedure, 1973, or, in relation to the State of
Jammu and Kashmir, any area in which that
2 of 1974.

69
Code is not in force, the provisions of any
corresponding law in force in that State or area,
shall, so far as may be, apply to any search or
seizure under this section as they apply to any
search or seizure made under the authority of
a warrant issued under section 94 of the said
Code or, as the case may be, under the
corresponding provisions of the said law.
55. (1) Where a Designated Officer has
reasons to believe that a quarantine pest is, or
could be, present in an area, he may prohibit
the owners or occupiers of any land or
building in that area or any other person
having the possession, care or control of plants,
animals and plant products or animal products
or other objects in that area from moving them
without the written authorisation of such
Designated Officer.
(2) The Designated Officer shall serve a
notice in writing upon the owners or occupiers
of any land or building in the area specified
in sub-section ( 1), and, if necessary, upon
owners or occupiers of any land or building
in any adjacent place, ordering each of them,
within a period to be indicated in such notice,
to perform such treatment and carryout such
measures, including the total destruction, of
any plant, plant product, animal or animal
product or other thing, whether or not infested
or infected with the quarantine pest, as such
Designated Officer may deem necessary for the
eradication, containment or prevention of the
spread of such quarantine pest.
(3) A notice under sub-section ( 2) shall be
communicated in writing to the concerned
owners or occupiers or other persons.
(4) Where no owner, occupier or any other
person referred to in sub-section ( 2) on whom
the notice is issued is present or found, or if
the concerned land or plants, animals, plant
products or animal products or other objects
Duties of
Designated
Officers.

70
are not under the ownership, occupation,
possession, care or control of such owner or
occupier, service of any notice under sub-
section (2) may be made by affixing such notice
in a conspicuous place where such plants,
animals, plant products or animal products or
other plants are located, and such affixing shall
be deemed to be the service of the notice on
concerned owner, occupier or such other
person.
(5) If the owner or occupier or person
referred to in sub-section ( 2), fails to comply
with the requirements of the notice served
under sub-section ( 2) or, as the case may be,
under sub-section ( 4) on him, the Designated
Officer shall proceed with the treatment, or
destruction, as the case may be, and take such
measures as may be necessary for properly and
effectively carrying out the requirements of the
notice.
56. Procedures for sampling, testing and
analysing plants, animals, plant products or
animal products and other objects, shall be
such as may be specified by regulations made
in this behalf.
57. Every agency of the Central
Government and the State Governments shall
render such help and assistance and furnish
such information to the Designated Officer or
a person or an agency authorised by him in
writing, as he may require for the discharge
of his functions under this Act, rules and
regulations made thereunder.
58. Notwithstanding anything contained in
any law for the time being in force, no
compensation shall be payable for any action
taken by the Designated Officer in good faith
under this Act and the rules and regulations
made thereunder in respect of—
(a) a plant, animal, plant product or
animal product or other object that is
Procedures
for
sampling
and
analysis.
All
agencies to
assist.
Compensation
not to be
paid in
certain
cases.

71
imported into India or exported from India
in contravention of this Act, or the rules
and regulations made thereunder, or such
plant, animal, plant product, animal product
or other object that is found to be infested
or infected with a quarantine pest when it
is inspected on importation or before
exportation; or
(b) the prohibition or restriction of the
sale or movement of any plant, animal,
plant product or animal product or other
object where such sale or movement is
prohibited or restricted as a result of the
suspension or revocation of, or the refusal
to grant, an import permit or a sanitary or
phytosanitary certificate that is required
under this Act, or the rules and regulations
made thereunder:
Provided that the authority may award a
reasonable compensation to a person for any
loss or damage incurred to him in respect of
non-infested or non-infected plant, animal,
plant product or animal product or any other
objects, land or premises, in the course of, or
as a result of the implementation of, any
sanitary or phytosanitary measure.
CHAPTER XI
O
FFENCES AND PUNISHMENT
59. Whoever contravenes any provision of
this Act or the rules or regulations made
thereunder, for the contravention of which no
penalty has been separately provided in this
Chapter, shall be liable to a penalty which may
extend to two lakh rupees.
60. If a person without the permission of
the Designated Officer, retains, removes or
tampers with any material or other thing that
has been seized under this Act, he shall be
punishable with imprisonment for a term
which may extend to six months and also with
fine which may extend to two lakh rupees.
Penalty for
contravent-
ions for
which no
specific
penalty is
provided.
Punishment
for
interfering
with seized
items.

72
61. If a person, in connection with a
requirement or direction under this Act,
provides any information or produces any
document that the person knows is false or
misleading, he shall be punishable with
imprisonment for a term which may extend to
three months and also with fine which may
extend to two lakh rupees.
62. If a person without reasonable excuse,
resists, obstructs, or attempts to obstruct,
impersonate, threaten, intimidate or assault a
Designated Officer in exercising his functions
under this Act, he shall be punishable with
imprisonment for a term which may extend to
three months and also with fine which may
extend to one lakh rupees.
63. Whoever, in contravention of the
provisions of sections 3 and 4, imports or
exports any plant, animal or animal product
or plant product or any other product, he shall
be punishable with imprisonment which may
extend to two years and shall also be
punishable with fine which may extend to two
lakh rupees.
64. (1) If any person, after having been
previously convicted of an offence punishable
under this Act subsequently commits and is
convicted of the same offence, he shall be liable
to—
(i) twice the punishment, which might
have been imposed on a first conviction,
subject to the punishment being maximum
provided for the same offence; and
(ii) a further fine on daily basis which
may extend up to one lakh rupees, where
the offence is a continuing one.
(2) The Court may also cause the offender’s
name and place of residence, the offence and
the penalty imposed to be published at the
offender’s expense in such newspapers or in
such other manner as the court may direct and
Punishment
for false
information.
Punishment
for
obstructing
or
imperso-
nating a
Designated
Officer.
Penalty for
contravention
in relation
to imports
and
exports.
Punishment
for
subsequent
offences.

73
the expenses of such publication shall be
deemed to be part of the cost attending the
conviction and shall be recoverable in the same
manner as a fine.
65. (1) Where an offence under this Act
has been committed by a company, every
person who at the time the offence was
committed was in charge of, and was
responsible to, the company for the conduct
of the business of the company, shall be
deemed to be guilty of the offence and shall
be liable to be proceeded against and punished
accordingly:
Provided that nothing contained in this
sub-section shall render any such person liable
to any punishment if he proves that the offence
was committed without his knowledge or that
he had exercised all due diligence to prevent
the commission of such offence.
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in
sub-section ( 1), where an offence under this
Act has been committed by a company and it
is proved that the offence has been committed
with the consent or connivance of, or that the
commission of the offence is attributable to any
neglect on the part of, any director, manager,
secretary or other officer of the company, such
director, manager, secretary or other officer
shall also be deemed to be guilty of that
offence and shall be liable to be proceeded
against and punished accordingly.
Explanation .— For the purposes of this
section,—
(a) “company” means any body
corporate and includes a firm or other
association of individuals; and
(b) “director”, in relation to a firm,
means a partner in the firm.
66. (1) No court shall take cognizance of
an offence punishable under this Act, except
upon the complaint in writing made by the
Authority or by any officer of the Authority
duly authorised by the Authority for this
purpose.
Offences
by
companies.
Cognizance
and trial of
offences.

74
(2) No court inferior to that of a
Metropolitan Magistrate or a Judicial
Magistrate of the first class, shall try any
offence punishable under this Act.
67. A penalty imposed under this Act or
any dues of the Authority under this Act, if it
is not paid, shall be recovered as an arrear of
land revenue.
CHAPTER XII
C
ONTROL BY CENTRAL GOVERNMENT
68. (1) Without prejudice to the foregoing
provisions of this Act, the Authority shall, in
exercise of its powers and in performance of
its functions under this Act, be bound by such
directions on questions of policy other than
those relating to technical and administrative
matters, as the Central Government may give
in writing to it from time to time:
Provided that the Authority shall, as far
as practicable, be given opportunity to express
its views before any direction is given under
this sub-section.
(2) If any dispute arises between the
Central Government and the Authority as to
whether the question is or is not of policy, the
decision of the Central Government thereon
shall be final.
(3) The Authority shall furnish to the
Central Government such returns or other
information, with respect to its activities, as
the Central Government may, from time to time
require.
69. Without prejudice to any other
provision contained in this Chapter, if the
Central Government is satisfied that the use
of any pests or plants or animals or its
products is likely to involve any risk to human
beings or animals or that in the public interest
it is necessary or expedient so to do then, that
Recovery
of penalty,
etc.
Directions
by Central
Government.
Power of
Central
Government
to prohibit
import of
pests or
plants or
animals
and its
products in
public
interest.

75
Government may, by notification, prohibit the
import of such pests or plants or animals and
or its products.
70. (1) If, at any time, the Central
Government is of the opinion—
(a) that on account of a grave
emergency, the Authority is unable to
discharge the functions and duties imposed
on it by or under the provisions of this
Act; or
(b) that the Authority has persistently
made default in complying with any
direction issued by the Central Government
under this Act or in the discharge of the
functions and duties imposed on it by or
under the provisions of this Act; or
(c) that circumstances exist which
render it necessary in the public interest so
to do,
the Central Government may, by notification,
supersede the Authority for such period, not
exceeding six months, as may be specified in
the notification:
Provided that before issuing a notification
under this sub-section for the reasons
mentioned in clause ( b), the Central
Government shall give a reasonable
opportunity to the Authority to show cause
why it should not be superseded and shall
consider the explanations and objections, if any,
of the Authority.
(2) Upon the publication of a notification
under sub-section ( 1) superseding the
Authority,—
(a) all the members shall, as from the
date of supersession, vacate their offices as
such;
(b) all the powers, functions and duties
which may, by or under the provisions of
this Act, be exercised or discharged by or
Power to
supersede
Authority.

76
on behalf of the Authority, shall until
the Authority is reconstituted under
sub-section (3), be exercised and discharged
by such person or persons as the Central
Government may direct;
(c) all property owned or controlled by
the Authority shall, until the Authority is
reconstituted under sub-section ( 3), vest in
the Central Government.
(3) On the expiration of the period of
supersession specified in the notification issued
under sub-section ( 1), the Central Government
may—
(a) extend the period of supersession
for such further term not exceeding six
months, as it may consider necessary; or
(b) reconstitute the Authority by fresh
appointment and in such case the members
who vacated their offices under clause ( a)
of sub-section ( 2) shall not be deemed
disqualified for appointment:
Provided that the Central Government may,
at any time, before the expiration of the period
of supersession, whether as originally specified
under sub-section ( 1) or as extended under this
sub-section, take action under clause ( b) of this
sub-section.
(4) The Central Government shall cause a
notification issued under sub-section ( 1) and a
full report of any action taken under this
section and the circumstances leading to such
action to be laid before both Houses of
Parliament at the earliest opportunity.
CHAPTER XIII
M
ISCELLANEOUS
71. The provisions of this Act shall be in
addition to, and not in derogation of, any other
law for the time being in force.
Act to
have effect
in addition
to other
laws.

77
72. The Authority shall furnish to the
Central Government such returns or other
information with respect to its activities as the
Central Government may, from time to time,
require.
73. The members, officers and other
employees of the Authority shall, be deemed,
when acting or purporting to act in pursuance
of this Act or the rules and regulations, made
thereunder, to be public servants within the
meaning of section 21 of the Indian Penal
Code.
74. No suit, prosecution or other legal
proceedings shall lie against the Government,
or the Authority , or any member of the
Authority, or officers or other employees of the
Central Government or Authority, for anything
which is in good faith done or intended to be
done under this Act, or the rules and
regulations made thereunder.
75. No civil court shall have jurisdiction in
respect of any matter which the Authority or
Central Government is empowered by or under
this Act to determine and no injunction shall
be granted by any court in respect of any
action taken or to be taken by the Authority
and the Central Government in pursuance of
any power conferred by or under this Act.
76. (1) The Central Government may, by
notification, make rules for carrying out the
provisions of this Act.
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to
the generality of the foregoing, such rules may
provide for all or any of the following matters,
namely:—
(a) experience of the years under
section 9;
(b) the powers and functions of the
Authority which may be exercised and
discharged by the Director General under
section 10;
Power of
Central
Government
to obtain
reports and
returns.
Officers
and
employees
of the
Authority
to be
public
servants.
Protection
of action
taken in
good faith.
Bar of
jurisdiction
of civil
courts.
Power of
Central
Government
to make
rules.
45 of 1860.

78
(c) the term of office and conditions of
service of, and the allowances payable to,
the Director General, Deputy Director
General and the other members other than
ex-officio members under sub-section ( 1) of
section 11;
(d) the powers and duties of secretary
under sub-section ( 1) of section 15;
(e) control and restrictions subject to
which the Authority may appoint other
officers and employees under section 16;
(f) the form in which the option of
willingness or otherwise to become
employees of the Authority be given under
sub-section ( 3) of section 22;
(g) other activities to be undertaken by
Authority under clause ( y) of section 23;
(h) the manner and fee for appeal
under section 41;
(i) the form in which the Authority
shall maintain proper accounts and other
relevant records, and prepare an annual
statement of accounts including profit and
loss account and balance sheet under sub-
section ( 1) of section 47;
(j) the form and time in which the
Authority shall prepare an annual report
under sub-section ( 1) of section 48;
(k) any other matter which is to be or
may be prescribed under the Act.
77. (1) The Authority may, with the
previous sanction of the Central Government,
by notification, make regulations not
inconsistent with the provisions of this Act or
rules made thereunder, to provide for all
matters necessary to give effect to the
provisions of this Act or rules made
thereunder.
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to
the generality of the foregoing, such regulations
Power to
make
regulations.

79
may provide for all or any of the following
matters, namely:—
(a) the form, manner, fee, conditions
and exemptions of the import permit under
clause ( i) of section 3;
(b) the authority of the country of origin
and the country of re-export which shall
issue the sanitary or phytosanitary
certificate under clause ( ii) of section 3;
(c) the manner in which and the fee on
payment of which the Designated Officer
shall issue the sanitary or phytosanitary
certificate under section 4;
(d) the times and places of meetings,
and procedures in regard to the transaction
of business at the meetings, including the
quorum of the Authority under sub-section (1)
of section 12;
(e) the method of appointment, the scale
of pay and allowances and other conditions
of service of other officers and employees
of the Authority under section 16;
(f) the manner in which the experts and
professionals may be engaged by the
Authority and their remuneration or fee
under section 18;
(g) post-entry quarantine measures
which may be implemented by the
Authority or through research institutes or
jointly with such research institutes under
clause ( f) of section 23;
(h) fee to be charged for services under
clause ( w) of section 23;
(i) the form and manner in which any
contract shall be made under subsection ( 2)
of section 34;
(j) procedures for sampling, testing and
analysing plants, animals, plant products or
animal products and other objects under
section 56;
(k) generally for the efficient conduct
of the affairs of the Authority.

80
78. Every rule and every regulation made
under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may
be after it is made, before each Houses of
Parliament, while it is in session, for a total
period of thirty days which may be comprised
in one session or in two or more successive
sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session
immediately following the session or the
successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses
agree in making any modification in the rule
or the regulation, as the case may be, or both
Houses agree that the rule or regulation should
not be made, the rule or regulation shall
thereafter have effect only in such modified
form or be of no effect, as the case may be;
so, however, that any such modification or
annulment shall be without prejudice to the
validity of anything previously done under that
rule or regulation.
79. (1) If any difficulty arises in giving
effect to the provisions of this Act, the Central
Government may, by order published in the
Official Gazette, make such provisions not
inconsistent with the provisions of this Act, as
may appear to be necessary, for removing the
difficulty:
Provided that no order shall be made
under this section after the expiry of the period
of three years from the date of commencement
of this Act.
(2) Every order made under this section
shall be laid, as soon as it is made, before
each House of Parliament.
80. (1) The Destructive Insects and Pests
Act, 1914 and the Livestock Importation Act,
1898 (hereafter referred to as the repealed
enactments) are hereby repealed:
Provided that such repeal shall not affect,—
(a) the previous operation of the said
enactments or anything duly done or
suffered thereunder; or
Laying of
rules and
regulations
before
Parliament.
Power to
remove
difficulties.
Repeal and
savings.
2 of 1914.
9 of 1898.

81
(b) any right, privilege, obligation or
liability acquired, accrued or incurred under
the said enactments; or
(c) any penalty, forfeiture or
punishment incurred in respect of any
offence committed against the said
enactments; or
(d) any investigation, legal proceeding
(including assessment proceeding) or
remedy in respect of any such right,
privilege, obligation, liability, forfeiture or
punishment as aforesaid,
and any such investigation, legal proceeding
or remedy may be instituted, continued or
enforced, and any such penalty, forfeiture or
punishment may be imposed as if this Act had
not been passed.
(2) Notwithstanding the repeal by sub-
section ( 1) of the repealed enactments,—
(a) any notification, order or notice
issued, or declaration made, or permit or
certificate granted, or any other thing done,
or any other action taken under the
repealed enactments, and in force
immediately before the commencement of
this Act shall, be deemed to have been
issued, made, granted, done or taken under
the corresponding provisions of this Act
until the notification, order or notice or
permit or certificate is issued under this
Act;
(b) all rules made under section 4 of
the Livestock Importation Act, 1898 and
section 4D and section 5 of the Destructive
Insects and Pests Act, 1914 shall continue
to have effect until the rules and regulations
are made under this Act.
(3) The mention of particular matters in
proviso to sub-section ( 1) and sub-section ( 2)
shall not be held to prejudice or affect the
general application of section 6 of the General
Clauses Act, 1897 with regard to the effect of
repeal.
9 of 1898.
2 of 1914.
10 of 1897.

82
STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
The new and emerging factors including genetic engineering,
climate change, bio-terrorism and transboundary diseases have
profound implications on the plant and animal health and environment
with strong connections to human health. The liberalisation of global
trade in agriculture since 1995 has opened new avenues for growth
and diversification of agriculture, but it has also brought in many
challenges. There is an increased risk of introduction of exotic pests
and weeds in the country with the potential to cause serious economic
losses. Advances in genetic engineering leading to the introduction
and release of living modified organisms or their products ( e.g.
genetically modified organisms) require proper risk assessment and
management. Climate change has the potential to alter the habitat of
known pests and even cause introduction of new pests. We have to
contend with the ever increasing threat of bio-terrorism. The emergence
and spread of transboundary diseases such as the avian influenza
and the Ug-99 wheat stem rust fungus pose new threats to human,
animal and plant safety.
2. A number of plant diseases, animal diseases and marine diseases
and pests have been introduced into India through import of seeds,
planting material, livestock and livestock products previously. Many
of them, including weeds such as Parthenium, Phalaris minor and
Lanatana camara, have got established in the country and continue to
cause enormous economic losses every year. Seen in this context, the
potential risks in the emerging scenario are a cause for concern.
3. Over the years systems have been developed and put in place
separately for protection of plant, animal and marine health. The
existing systems including infrastructure for agricultural biosecurity
of the country need major changes to meet the emerging challenges
which have highlighted agricultural biosecurity as an urgent issue
requiring policies and technological capabilities to prevent, detect, and
respond to such threats. An integrated approach towards agricultural
biosecurity would not only increase the national capacity to protect
human health, agricultural production and livelihood, safeguard the
environment, and protect against uncertain technologies and products,
but also equip the country to meet obligations under international
trade and sanitary and phytosanitary agreements in food and
agricultural products. Agricultural biosecurity is an essential element

83
of sustainable agricultural development. The National Commission on
Farmers has recommended developing a National Agricultural
Biosecurity System characterised by high professional, public, and
political credibility through integration of plant, animal and fish
management systems on biosecurity based on risk analysis and
management. It has also recommended establishment of synergies in
requirements of international agreements and national regulations
across these sectors to avoid duplication of resources. The National
Policy for Farmers (2007) has identified strengthening the biosecurity
of crops, farm animals, fish, and forest trees for safeguarding the
livelihood and income security of farmer families and the health and
trade security of the nation as a major policy goal.
4. In the 3rd meeting of the Agriculture Coordination Committee
held on the 15th February, 2008, it was recognised that it was essential
to establish an integrated national biosecurity system covering plant,
animal and marine issues. A Core Group was constituted by the
Department of Agriculture and Cooperation on the 22nd April, 2008
for formulating recommendations for establishment of an integrated
national biosecurity system. The Core Group in its report submitted
on the 26th February, 2009, inter alia, recommended establishment of
the National Agricultural Biosecurity System requiring a new
legislation which is more relevant in the context of the present
scenario. It suggested that the traditional approach of managing
agricultural biosecurity on a sectoral basis through the development
and implementation of separate policy and legislative frameworks (e.g.
for animal and plant life and health) would have to be converted to
a cohesive and convergent approach recognising the interdisciplinary
nature of biosecurity. In a harmonised and integrated system, various
authorities would work together towards the common goal of
agricultural biosecurity utilising expertise from various organisations
under the Ministries of Agriculture, Commerce and Industry, Defence,
Environment and Forests, Health and Family Welfare, Home Affairs,
Rural Development and Science and Technology. An autonomous
authority would be required for administering the biosecurity authority
on the lines of the Food Safety and Standards Authority of India, and
successful models of integrated biosecurity organisations in countries
like Australia, New Zealand and United States of America. Such an
authority would improve safety, efficiency, transparency and
compliance of quarantine and pest management regulations and
respond swiftly to contain emergent biosecurity problems. It will
ensure conduct of biosecure international trade in agriculture.
5. The Core Group pointed out that the Destructive Insects and
Pests Act, 1914 and the Livestock Importation Act, 1898 are age old
legislations and are subsidiary to the Customs Act, 1962 which does

84
not give direct powers to the quarantine officers to deport or destroy
or confiscate the consignment or lodge complaints under the Indian
Penal Code. Inadequate or obsolete definitions in these Acts need to
be updated. Adequate provisions for regulating plants, livestock and
aquatics and powers for inspecting transport vehicles and seizure and
destruction of infested or infected plants and livestock or their products
have to be incorporated. Punishment or penalty on the importers or
custom house clearing agents or other defaulters for violation of
provisions of the legislation has to be provided. Provisions for effective
domestic quarantine have to be incorporated. The enabling legislation
for the proposed biosecurity authority would have to be enacted.
6. In keeping with the recommendations of the National
Commission on Farmers and the Core Group, the Agricultural
Biosecurity Bill, 2013 has been prepared. The main objective of the
Bill is to bring together the plant, animal and marine protection and
quarantine set ups together under a high powered body with adequate
powers for a quantum jump in the capability to safeguard the
country’s agricultural biosecurity. The Bill seeks to set up an
autonomous authority encompassing the four sectors of agricultural
biosecurity, namely, plant health, animal health, living aquatic resources
(fisheries, etc.) and agriculturally important micro-organisms. It
provides for modernising the legal framework to regulate safe
movement of plants and animals within the country and in
international trade, and harmonise the legal requirements of the
various sectors of agricultural biosecurity. The proposed legislation
will ensure agricultural biosecurity of the country for common benefit
and for safeguarding the agricultural economy.
7. The salient features of the proposed legislation, inter alia , are as
follows:—
(a) integration of plant and animal quarantine services;
(b) establishment of an Authority for prevention, control,
eradication and management of pests and diseases of plants and
animals and unwanted organisms for ensuring agricultural
biosecurity;
(c) to meet international obligations of India for facilitating
imports and exports of plants, plant products, animals, animal
products, aquatic organisms and regulation of agriculturally
important micro-organisms;
(d) prevention and control of pest infestation or infection,
including declaration of an area as “controlled area” for this
purpose and measures for control of such infestation or infection;

85
(e) provision for inspection, taking samples, entry and search
of premises, checking of conveyances to ensure compliance of
phytosanitary and sanitary measures and also seizure, treatment
and disposal of plants, animals and their products to prevent spread
of pests by designated officers;
(f) declaration of biosecurity emergency in case of outbreak of
organisms threatening biosecurity and actions and procedures to
deal with it;
(g) removal of plant, animals, their products and other objects
imported in violation of the provisions of the proposed legislation.
8. The notes on clauses explain in detail the various provisions
contained in the Bill.
9. The Bill seeks to achieve the aforesaid objectives.
   N EW D ELHI; SHARAD PAWAR
The 30th August , 2012
————
PRESIDENT’S RECOMMENDATION UNDER ARTICLE 117 OF
THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA
————
[Copy of letter No. 8-13/2008-PP . II, dated 18th February, 2013
from Shri Sharad Pawar, Minister of Agriculture and Food Processing
Industries to the Secretary-General, Lok Sabha]
The President, having been informed of the subject matter of the
Agricultural Biosecurity Bill, 2013, recommends to the House the
introduction and consideration of the Bill under article 117 (1) (3) of
the Constitution.
————

86
Notes on Clauses
Clause 1.— The proposed legislation provides for short title, extent
and commencement.
Clause 2.—This clause defines certain terms and expressions used
in the proposed legislation which, inter alia , include “animal”, “animal
product”, “Authority”, “Beneficial organism”, “Biosecurity”,
“Controlled area”, “Designated Officer”, “eradication” and
“phytosanitary or sanitary measure”.
Clause 3.—This clause provides for prohibition of import. It
provides that no person shall import into India any plant, animal or
plant product or animal product or any other object in contravention
of any notification issued by the Authority specifying the plant, animal,
plant product or animal product or other object, or in contravention
of the guidelines issued by the Authority, the import of which shall
be prohibited except in accordance with an import permit issued by
the Designated Officer in such form, manner and on payment of such
fee and subject to such conditions and exemptions as may be specified
by regulations and the sanitary or phytosanitary certificate issued by
such authority of the country of origin and the country of re-export
of such imports as may be specified by the regulations.
Clause 4.—This clause provides for prohibition of export. It
provides that no person shall export any plant, animal, plant product
or animal product or other object except in accordance with the
sanitary or phytosanitary certificate issued by the Designated Officer
in such manner and on payment of such fee as may be specified by
regulations. However, no such certificate shall be necessary where the
country of destination does not require it.
Clause 5.—This clause provides for domestic quarantine. It provides
that except as provided under the proposed legislation, or rules and
regulations made thereunder, no person shall possess, move, grow,
raise, culture, breed or produce any plant, animal and plant product
or animal product or any other object, as the case may be, if he has
reasons to believe that it is carrying or harbouring, or may carry or
harbour, a quarantine pest, or that it is or could be infested or infected
with a quarantine pest.
Clause 6.—This clause provides about the duty of a person to
inform. It provides that where a person becomes aware of the existence
of a pest or disease of plant or animal which the person suspects to

87
be a quarantine pest or disease in an area where such pest or disease
has not previously been known to exist, it shall be the duty of the
person to inform immediately the existence of such pest or disease.
Clause 7.—This clause provides for the constitution and
incorporation of Authority. It provides that with effect from the
appointed day, the Central Government shall, by notification, constitute
an authority to be called the Agricultural Biosecurity Authority of
India. The Authority so constituted shall be a body corporate by the
name aforesaid, having perpetual succession and a common seal, with
power, subject to the provisions of the proposed legislation, to acquire,
hold and dispose of property, both movable and immovable, and to
contract, and shall by the said name sue or be sued. It also provides
that the head office of the Authority shall be at Faridabad.
Clause 8.—This clause provides for the composition of the
Authority. It provides for the following composition:
(a) a Director General to be appointed by the Central
Government;
(b) two Deputy Director Generals to be appointed by the
Central Government from amongst the persons having special
knowledge and experience of not less than ten years in plant and
animal sciences—Members;
(c) two members to be appointed by the Central Government,
from amongst persons having special knowledge and experience
of not less than ten years in plant and animal quarantine, or in
plant and animal protection, or in any other discipline pertaining
to plant and animal protection, which, in the opinion of the Central
Government, is related to the functions of the Authority —
Members;
(d) three members to be appointed by the Central Government
by rotation in the alphabetical order to represent the states and
the union territories, on the recommendation of the Government
of the State, or as the case may be, the union territory concerned;
(e) one representative of Ministry or Department dealing with
the Agriculture and Co-operation, not below the rank of Joint
Secretary—Member;
(f) one representative of Ministry or Department dealing with
the Animal Husbandary, Dairying and Fisheries, not below the
rank of Joint Secretary— Member;

88
(g) one representative of the Ministry or Department dealing
with the Commerce, not below the rank of Joint Secretary—
Member;
(h) one representative of Ministry or Department dealing with
the Environment and Forest, not below the rank of Joint Secretary—
Member;
(i) one representative from the Indian Council of Agricultural
Research, to be nominated by the Director-General, Indian Council
of Agricultural Research, not below the rank of Joint Secretary—
Member;
(j) one representative from the Indian Council of Forestry
Research and Education, to be nominated by the Director-General,
Indian Council of Forestry Research and Education, not below the
rank of Joint Secretary—Member;
(k) one representative of Ministry or Department dealing with
health or from Food Safety and Standards Authority of India, not
below the rank of Joint Secretary—Member;
(l) the Member (Customs) of Central Board of Excise and
Customs, Department of Revenue, Ministry of Finance—Member;
(m) one representative from the Ministry or Department dealing
with Biotechnology, not below the rank of Joint Secretary —
Member;
(n) one representative to be nominated by Director General,
Council of Scientific and Industrial Research, not below the rank
of Joint Secretary—Member;
(o) one representative from National Disaster Management
Authority, not below the rank of Joint Secretary—Member;
(p) one representative from Defence Research and Development
Organisation, not below the rank of Joint Secretary—Member;
(q) one representative of the Ministry or Department dealing
with legal or legislative affairs, not below the rank of Joint
Secretary—Member.
Clause 9.—This clause provides for the qualifications for
appointment of Director General. It provides that the Director General
of the Authority shall be appointed by the Central Government from
amongst persons who have special knowledge and professional
experience of such years as may be prescribed in plant and animal

89
quarantine or in plant and animal protection or any other discipline
pertaining to plant and animal protection or from amongst the persons
from the administration who have been associated with the subject.
However, a person who is in the service of Government shall not be
appointed as Director General unless he is holding or has held the
post not below the rank of Additional Secretary to the Government
of India.
Clause 10.—This clause provides for the powers of the Director
General. It provides that the Director General shall be the Chief
Executive Officer of the Authority and shall have the general
superintendence and directions in the conduct of the affairs of the
Authority and shall, in addition to presiding over the meetings of the
Authority, exercise and discharge such powers and functions of the
Authority as may be prescribed.
Clause 11.—This clause provides for the conditions of service of
the Director General and Members. It provides that term of office
and conditions of service of, and fee and allowances payable to, the
Director General, Deputy Director General and the other members
(other than ex-officio members) shall be such as may be prescribed.
Clause 12.—This clause provides for meetings of the Authority. It
provides that the Authority shall meet at such times and places, and
shall observe such procedures in regard to the transaction of business
at its meetings, including the quorum, as may be provided by
regulations. It further provides that the Director General, if for any
reason is unable to attend any meeting of the Authority, any other
member chosen by the members present from amongst themselves at
the meeting shall preside at the meeting. It also provides that all
questions which come up before the Authority in the meeting shall
be decided by a majority of votes of the members present and voting,
and, in the event of an equality of votes, the Director General, or in
his absence, the person presiding the meeting, shall have a second or
casting vote. It also empowers the Authority to make regulations for
the transaction of business at its meetings.
Clause 13.—This clause provides that vacancies, etc., should not
invalidate the proceedings of the Authority. It provides that no act or
proceeding of the Authority shall be invalid merely for reason of any
vacancy in, or any defect in the constitution of, the Authority or any
defect in the appointment of a person acting as a member of the
Authority or any irregularity in the procedure of the Authority not
affecting the merits of the case.

90
Clause 14.—This clause provides for removal of Director General,
Deputy Director General and Members. It provides that
notwithstanding anything contained in clause 11, the Central
Government may, by order, remove from office the Director General,
Deputy Director General or any member referred to in sub-clause ( c)
of clause 8, if the Director General or such other member has been
adjudged an insolvent or has been convicted of an offence, which in
the opinion of the Central Government, involves moral turpitude or
has become physically and mentally incapable of acting as a member
or has acquired such financial or other interests as are likely to affect
prejudicially his functions as a member or has so abused his position
as to render his continuance in office prejudicial to the public interest.
However, no member shall be removed under items ( d) and ( e) of out
clause (1) unless he has been given a reasonable opportunity of being
heard in the matter.
Clause 15.—This clause provides for the Secretary of Authority
and his powers. It empowers the Central Government to appoint a
Secretary to the Authority who shall exercise such powers and perform
such duties as may be prescribed or as may be delegated to him by
the Director General. It further provides that the Secretary shall be
entitled to such salary and allowances and shall be subject to such
conditions of service in respect of leave, pension, provident fund and
such other matters, as may, from time to time, be fixed by the Central
Government.
Clause 16.—This clause provides for officers and employees of the
Authority. It provides that subject to such control and restrictions as
may be prescribed, the Authority may appoint such other officers and
employees, as may be necessary, for the efficient performance of its
functions and the method of appointment, the scale of pay and
allowances and other conditions of service of such other officers and
employees of the Authority shall be such as may be provided by the
Authority by regulations.
Clause 17.—This clause prohibits the Director General etc., from
undertaking any other work. It provides that the Director General,
Deputy Director General, other members, the Secretary and other
employees of the Authority shall not undertake any work unconnected
with their duties under the proposed legislation, except with the
permission of the Central Government.
Clause 18.—This clause provides for appointment of experts. It
empowers the Authority to engage, in such manner and on such
remuneration or fee as may be specified by regulations such number

91
of experts and professionals of integrity and outstanding ability, having
special knowledge of, and experience in, plant pests and diseases and
animal diseases or such other disciplines related to agricultural
biosecurity as it deems necessary to assist the Authority in the
discharge of its functions under the proposed legislation.
Clause 19.—This clause provides for appointment of committees
by the Authority. It provides that the Authority may appoint such
committees as may be necessary for the efficient discharge of its duties
and performance of its functions under the proposed legislation. It
further provides that the Authority shall have the power to co-opt as
members of any committee appointed under sub-clause (1) such
number of persons, who are not members of the Authority, as it may
think fit and the persons so co-opted shall have the right to attend
the meetings of the committee and take part in its proceedings but
shall not have the right to vote. It also provides that the persons
co-opted as members of a committee under sub-clause (2) shall be
entitled to receive such allowances for attending meetings of the
committee as may be fixed by the Authority.
Clause 20.—This clause provides for transfer and vesting in the
Authority, undertakings of plant, animal quarantine stations, etc. It
provides that on and from the appointed day, there shall be transferred
to, and vest in, the Authority constituted under clause 7, the
undertakings of the existing Plant Quarantine stations, Central
Integrated Pest Management Centres, Locust Warning Organisation,
Secretariat of Central Insecticide Board and Registration Committee,
any other laboratories under the Directorate of Plant Protection,
Quarantine and Storage, Government of India and animal quarantine
stations and connected laboratories, referred to as “the undertakings”
in the proposed legislation. It further provides that the undertakings
which are transferred to, and which vest in the Authority under
sub-clause (1) shall be deemed to include all assets, rights, powers,
authorities and privileges and all property movable and immovable,
real or personal, corporeal or incorporeal, present or contingent, of
whatever nature and wheresoever situate, including lands, buildings,
machinery, equipments, works, workshops, cash balances, capital,
reserves, reserve funds, investments, tenancies, leases and book debts
and all other rights and interests arising out of such property as were
immediately before the appointed day in the ownership, possession
or power of the undertakings, in relation to their undertakings,
whether within or outside India, all books of account and documents
relating thereto and shall also be deemed to include all borrowings,
liabilities and obligations of whatever kind then subsisting of the
undertakings in relation to their undertakings.

92
Clause 21.—This clause relates to general effect of vesting of
undertaking in the Authority. It provides that all contracts, agreements
and working arrangements subsisting immediately before the
appointed day and affecting the undertakings, shall, in so far as they
relate to the undertakings cease to have effect or be enforceable against
the undertakings and shall be of as full force and effect against or in
favour of the Authority in which the undertakings have vested by
virtue of the proposed legislation and enforceable as fully and
effectually as if, instead of the undertakings the Authority had been
named therein or had been a party thereto. It further provides that
any proceeding, suit or cause of action pending or existing immediately
before the appointed day by or against the undertakings in relation
to their undertakings may, as from that day , be continued and enforced
by or against the Authority in which they have vested by virtue of
the proposed legislation, as it might have been enforced by or against
the undertakings if the proposed legislation had not been passed, and
shall cease to be enforceable by or against the undertakings.
Clause 22.—This clause provides for special provision for transfer
of employees to the Authority. It provides that on the establishment
of the Authority, it shall be lawful for Central Government to transfer
to the Authority, by order and with effect from such date or dates as
may be specified in the order, any officer or other employee holding
office as such in the Directorate of Plant Protection Quarantine and
Storage and Animal Quarantine Stations under the Central Government
immediately before the date on which the Authority is established.
However, the scale of pay of the post in the Authority to which such
officer or other employee is transferred shall not be lower than the
scale of pay of the post he was holding immediately before such
transfer and the other terms and conditions of service (including
pension, leave, provident fund and medical benefits) of the post to
which he is transferred shall not be less favourable than the terms
and conditions of service in relation to the post held by him
immediately before such transfer. It further provides that an order
under sub-clause (1) may be made so as to have retrospective effect
from a date not earlier than the date of the commencement of the
proposed legislation.
It further provides that before any order is issued under
sub-clause (1), all officers and employees of the aforesaid Directorate
of Plant Protection Quarantine and Storage and Animal Quarantine
Stations shall be given an option to express, in such form as may be
prescribed, and within such time as may be specified in that behalf
by the Central Government, their willingness or otherwise to become

93
employees of the Authority and such option once exercised shall be
final. However, no order under sub-clause (1) shall be made in relation
to any officer or other employee of the Directorate of Plant Protection
Quarantine and Storage and Animal Quarantine Stations who has
intimated his intention of not becoming an employee of the Authority
within the time specified in that behalf. Further, such of the officers
and employees of the Directorate of Plant Protection Quarantine and
Storage and Animal Quarantine Stations who do not express, within
the time specified in that behalf, their intention of becoming the
employees of the Authority, shall be dealt with in the same manner
and in accordance with the same laws and standing orders as would
have applied immediately before the commencement of the proposed
legislation to the employees of the Directorate of Plant Protection
Quarantine and Storage and Animal Quarantine Stations in the event
of the reduction of the strength of the officers and employees of the
Directorate of Plant Protection Quarantine and Storage and Animal
Quarantine Stations.
It also provides that an officer or other employee transferred by
an order made under sub-clause (1) shall, on and from the date of
transfer, cease to be an employee of the Directorate of Plant Protection
Quarantine and Storage and Animal Quarantine Stations and become
an officer or other employee of the Authority with such designation
as the Authority may determine and shall, subject to the provisions
of the proviso to sub-clause (1), be governed by the regulations made
by the Authority under the proposed legislation in respect of
remuneration and other conditions of service (including pension, leave,
provident fund and medical benefits) and shall continue to be an
officer or other employee of the Authority unless and until his
employment is duly terminated by the Authority. However, till such
time as the regulations referred to above governing the conditions of
service of its officers or other employees are framed by the Authority,
the relevant laws and standing orders applicable to the officers and
employees of the Directorate of Plant Protection Quarantine and
Storage and Animal Quarantine Stations shall continue to be applicable
to them. If a question arises whether the terms and conditions of
service specified in the regulations framed by the Authority in respect
of any matter, including remuneration, pension, leave, provident fund
and medical benefits, are less favourable than those attached to the
post held by an officer or other employee immediately before his
transfer to the Authority, the decision of the Central Government in
the matter shall be final.

94
Clause 23.—This clause relates to the functions of the Authority. It
provides that the functions of the Authority shall be to:
(a) prevent the introduction of quarantine pests in India from
outside the country by regulating the import of plants, animals
and plant products or animal products and other objects;
(b) regulate the export of plants, animals, plant products or
animal products and other objects, to meet the importing country’s
requirements in accordance with international agreements, and to
discharge such obligations under those international agreements;
(c) declare, by notification, any place to be a controlled area
under clause 25;
(d) regulate the spread of pests and diseases of plants and
animals from one State to another;
(e) regulate the introduction of new or beneficial organisms
into the country;
(f) implement such post entry quarantine measures wherever
necessary, either by itself or through research institutes, or jointly
with such research institutes, as may be provided by regulations;
(g) undertake pest risk analysis;
(h) undertake regular review and revision with a view to
update and harmonise sanitary or phytosanitary measures;
(i) undertake surveys and surveillance of pests and diseases of
plants and animals in India;
(j) interact with international, regional or national plant
protection organisations;
(k) interact with research institutes and State Governments on
matters relating to plant and animal protection and quarantine;
(l) provide such technical guidance and assistance as it
considers necessary to agriculture, horticulture, animal husbandry
and fisheries departments of State Governments and other statutory
bodies;
(m) arrange training programmes and hold workshops, seminars
and conferences periodically to review status of pests and
pathogens, and to spread awareness on plant and animal quarantine
through mass media;
(n) frame guidelines for the import and export of plants,
animals, plant products or animal products and other objects,
whether for trade or research;

95
(o) regulate the import of transgenic materials with respect to
sanitary and phytosanitary matters;
(p) establish plant and animal quarantine stations, pest
management centres or other units at such places as may be
deemed necessary;
(q) promote integrated pest management;
(r) watch and control locusts in such areas as the Central
Government may, by notification, specify;
(s) take steps to ensure availability of safer and effective
pesticides and their quality control;
(t) contribute towards development of human resource in plant
and animal protection technology;
(u) advise and assist the Central Government on all matters
including international obligations related to plant and animal
protection;
(v) establish and maintain diagnostic laboratories related to
pests and diseases of plants and animals;
(w) charge such fees for the services provided under the
proposed legislation, as may be specified by regulations;
(x) recommend to the Central Government to issue directions
to the State Governments for the purpose of enforcing obligations
under international agreements;
(y) undertake such other activities as may be prescribed.
Clause 24.—This clause provides for declaration of quarantine pests.
It empowers the Authority to declare, by notification, any pest to be
a quarantine pest.
Clause 25.—This clause provides for controlled areas. It provides
that where the Authority, on information received from the State
Government or any other information obtained suo-motu, suspects or
determines that an area is infested or infected with a quarantine pest,
and is of the opinion that the quarantine pest could spread, the
Authority may by notification declare that area to be a controlled
area.
Clause 26.—This clause provides for action to be taken by the
Authority on report of the State Government. It provides that where
the information has been received by the Authority from any source

96
other than the State Government, and the Authority has reason to
believe that an area is infested or infected with a quarantine pest,
and is of the opinion that the quarantine pest could spread, the
Authority shall forward such information to the State Government
requesting the State Government to send to the Authority a detailed
report on the said information within a period stipulated by the
Authority, or within such extended time as the Authority may deem
fit in consultation with the State Government, before issuance of the
declaration under clause 25. It further provides that where the
concerned State Government fails to take measures in a controlled
area declared under clause 25, then, it shall be lawful for the Authority
to take necessary steps for eradication, containment or prevention of
spread of the quarantine pest in such controlled area and such State
Government shall reimburse the Authority the costs incurred by it for
such purpose. However, the Central Government may exempt the
concerned State Government from whole or part of the reimbursement
of the costs, if the concerned State Government gives reasons to the
satisfaction of the Central Government for such exemption and
exempted costs shall be reimbursed by the Central Government to
the Authority. It also provides that where an area has been declared
as controlled area under clause 25 that area shall continue to be the
controlled area until the Authority, by notification, declares that the
controlled area is no longer infested or infected with quarantine pest.
Clause 27.—This clause relates to control measures and their
implementation. It provides that where an area is notified to be a
controlled area under clause 25, the Authority shall communicate to
the concerned State Government the quarantine measures which the
State Government may implement. It further provides that in particular,
and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing, such
quarantine measures include the following matters, namely:—
(a) treatment or disposal of plants, plant products, animals,
animal products or other objects, whether infested or infected or
not, as well as treatment of conveyances in order to limit the
spread of the quarantine pest and infected plants, plant products,
animals and animal products;
(b) prohibition, restriction or control on removal of any plant,
plant product, animal, animal product or other object from a
controlled area to any other part of India;
(c) stipulation of the period within which it shall not be lawful
to plant or replant with any particular plant, the whole or any
portion of such controlled area.

97
(d) any other measure which the Authority may communicate.
It also provides that the Designated Officer and the State
Government through its agencies shall jointly implement the quarantine
measures referred to in sub-clauses (1) and (2) and they shall also
co-ordinate surveys, reports and actions in case of new outbreak of
pests or during eradication campaign.
Clause 28.—This clause relates to prohibition on removal of plants,
animals, plant products or animal products or other objects, or pest
under quarantine. It provides that no plant, animal, plant product or
animal product or other object or pest in the area where quarantine
measure has been implemented under the proposed legislation, shall
be removed from that area or from a quarantine station situated in
that area, except with the approval in writing of the Designated Officer.
Clause 29.—This clause provides for recovery of expenses for the
State Government. It provides that where the State Government fails
to repay the costs of any measures taken under this Chapter, such
costs shall be recoverable from the State Government in the manner
provided by the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973, for the recovery
of fines imposed by a Court, as if such costs were a fine imposed by
a Court.
Clause 30.—This clause relates to accredited laboratories and
accredited quarantine facilities. It provides that the Authority may
accredit any laboratory, or any quarantine facility, subject to such
conditions and to carry out such activities as may be specified by the
regulation.
Clause 31.—This clause relates to delegation of powers by the
Authority. It provides that the Authority may , by general or special
order in writing, delegate to the Director General or any other member,
or to any officer of the Authority, subject to such conditions and
limitations, if any, as may be specified in the order, such of its powers
and functions under the proposed legislation (except the powers under
clause 76) as it may deem necessary.
Clause 32.—This clause relates to authentication of orders and other
instruments of Authority. It provides that all orders and decisions of
the Authority shall be authenticated by the signature of the Director
General, or any other member authorised by the Authority in this
behalf, and all other instruments executed by the Authority shall be
authenticated by the signature of an officer of the Authority authorised
by it in this behalf.

98
Clause 33.—This clause relates to contracts by the Authority. It
provides that subject to the provisions of clause 34, the Authority
shall be competent to enter into and perform any contract necessary
for the discharge of its functions under the proposed legislation.
Clause 34.—This clause relates to mode of executing contracts on
behalf of the Authority. It provides that every contract shall, on behalf
of the Authority, be made by the Director General or such other
member, or such officer of the Authority as may be generally or
specially empowered in this behalf by the Authority, and such contracts
or class of contracts shall be sealed with the common seal of the
Authority. However, no contract exceeding such value or amount, as
the Central Government may, from time to time, by order, fix in this
behalf, shall be made unless it has been previously approved by the
Authority. Further, no contract for the acquisition or sale of immovable
property or for the lease of any such property for a term exceeding
thirty years, and no other contract exceeding such value or amount
as the Central Government may, from time to time, by order fix in
this behalf, shall be made unless it has been previously approved by
the Central Government.
It further provides that subject to the provisions of sub-clause (1),
the form and manner in which any contract shall be made under the
proposed legislation, shall be such as may be specified by regulations.
It also provides that no contract, which is not in accordance with the
provisions of the proposed legislation and the regulations made
thereunder, shall be binding on the Authority.
Clause 35.—This clause relates to borrowing powers of the
Authority. It provides that the Authority may, with the prior consent
of the Central Government or in accordance with the terms of any
general or special authority given to it by the Central Government,
borrow money from any source by the issue of bonds, debentures or
such other instruments as it may deem fit for discharging all or any
of its functions under the proposed legislation. It further provides
that the Central Government may guarantee, in such manner as it
thinks fit, the repayment of the principal and the payment of interest
thereon with respect to the loans borrowed by the Authority under
sub-clause (1). It also provides that subject to such limits as the Central
Government may, from time to time lay down, the Authority may
borrow temporarily by way of overdraft or otherwise such amount as
it may require for discharging its functions under the proposed
legislation.

99
Clause 36.—This clause relates to the power of the Authority to
issue directions. It provides that the Authority may, for the discharge
of its functions under clause 23 issue such directions from time to
time to importers and exporters of plant, animal, plant product or
animal product or other object, as it may consider necessary.
Clause 37.—This clause provides for discharge of obligations of
the Authority under international agreements. It provides that the
Authority shall act as the National Plant Protection Organisation to
discharge obligations under the International Plant Protection
Convention, and on request by any international, regional or other
National Plant Protection Organisation, provide it free of charge or
on reciprocal basis, such information as the Authority may have in
regard to import and export of, and technical requirements for plants,
plant products and other objects. It further provides that the Authority
shall act as the National Organisation to discharge obligations under
the Office International des Epizooties, and on request by any regional
or national organization, provide it free of charge or on reciprocal
basis, such information as it may have in regard to import and export
of, and technical requirement for, animals, animal products, marine
products and other objects. However, before providing any information
under this clause, approval of the Central Government shall be
obtained. It further explains that, the expression “International Plant
Protection Convention” shall mean the International Plant Protection
Convention, 1951 of which India is a member and the expression
“Office International des Epizooties (OIE)” shall mean the Office
International des Epizooties created through an international agreement
of which India is a member.
Clause 38.—This clause empowers the Authority to declare
biosecurity emergency. It provides that if the Authority is satisfied,
on the information received by it that there is likelihood of an outbreak
or occurrence in India of an organism, which is not previously known
to be established in India and if it becomes established in India, it
has the potential to cause significant loss to the biosecurity of the
country or an organism, previously thought to be of restricted
distribution or abundance in India, which has become so distributed
and abundant in India or any part thereof that it has the potential to
cause significant loss to the biosecurity or spreading of a pest beyond
control by the application of the national pest management strategy
for that pest and it is in the public interest that action be taken
immediately to manage, or eradicate the organism and such
management or eradication is not effectively possible in normal course,
the Authority may recommend the Central Government to declare a

100
biosecurity emergency in respect of the whole of India or of such
part of the territory thereof as may be specified in the recommendation.
It further provides that the Central Government, if it is satisfied, on
the recommendation made under sub-clause (1) and after consultation
with such persons as it may deem reasonable, that such biosecurity
emergency exists, may make declaration to that effect in respect of
the whole of India or of such part of the territory thereof as may be
specified in the declaration. It also provides that a declaration made
under sub-clause (2) may be varied or revoked by subsequent
declaration. It also provides that the Central Government shall not
issue a notification varying such proclamation unless the
recommendations of the Authority are communicated to it. It also
provides that a declaration under sub-clause (2) shall cease to have
effect on the expiration of six months unless revoked earlier.
Clause 39.—This clause relates to effect of declaration of biosecurity
emergency. It empowers the Central Government to give all such
directions to the Authority and require all such acts to be done or
not to be done by the Authority as the Central Government may
deem necessary for the purpose of managing or eradicating the
organism in respect of which such biosecurity emergency is declared,
while the declaration of biosecurity emergency is in operation. Further,
during operation of the biosecurity emergency, the Authority may
take such measures and do all such acts and things which the
Authority deems necessary for the purpose of managing or eradicating
the organism in respect of which such biosecurity emergency is
declared.
Clause 40.—This clause provides for the biosecurity emergency
scheme. It provides that the Authority may, with the prior approval
of the Central Government, at any time while a declaration of
biosecurity emergency under sub-clause (2) of clause 38 is in force,
by notification, make a scheme for the management or eradication of
the organism in respect of which such emergency has been declared.
It further provides that the Central Government may, before giving
approval under sub-clause (1), consult such experts as it may deem
fit as to the desirability of such scheme.
Clause 41.—This clause provides for appeal as against the order
of the Designated Officer. It provides that any person aggrieved by
any order of the Designated Officer under the proposed legislation
may within a period of thirty days from the date on which the said
order is communicated to him, appeal, in such manner and on such
payment of fees as may be prescribed, to the Central Government

101
whose decision thereon shall be final. However, the Central
Government may entertain an appeal after the expiry of thirty days
if it is satisfied that such person was prevented by sufficient cause
from filing the appeal in time.
Clause 42.—This clause relates to power of revision of the Central
Government. It provides that the Central Government may, at any
time, call for and examine the record relating to any case on which
the Designated Officer has made an order for the purpose of satisfying
itself as to the legality or propriety of such order and make such
order as it may deem fit. However, no order under this clause shall
be made after the expiry of one year from the date of such decision.
Further, the Central Government shall not make any order against
any person unless that person has had a reasonable opportunity of
showing cause against the proposed order.
Clause 43.—This clause relates to request for re-analysis of sample.
It provides that any person aggrieved by a report of analysis of sample
made under the proposed legislation or the rules and regulations
made thereunder, may request the Designated Officer for re-analysis
by a different laboratory of the Authority, or an accredited laboratory ,
whose report shall be final.
Clause 44.—This clause provides for procedure for sale of goods
and application of sale proceeds. It provides that where any plant,
animal, plant product or animal product or other object not confiscated
is required to be sold for the realization of the dues of the Authority,
or otherwise under the proposed legislation, after ensuring that it
does not pose biosecurity risk to the country, under the proposed
legislation, the Authority shall, after the notice to the owner thereof,
sell by public auction or by tender or with the consent of the owner
in any other manner such plant, animal, plant product or animal
product or other object. It further provides that the proceeds of any
such sale referred to in sub-clause (1) shall be applied, firstly to the
payment of the expenses of the sale, next to the payment of the dues
of the Authority in respect to the plant, animal, plant product or
animal product or other object sold, next to the payment of the
charges, if any, payable in respect of the plant, animal, plant product
or animal product or other object sold, due to the person having the
custody of such plant, animal, plant product or animal product or
other object and next to the payment of any amount due from the
owner of the plant, animal, their product, or other object sold, to the
Central Government, if any such intimation has been received by the
Authority, and the balance, if any , remains after such payment, shall
be paid to the said owner.

102
Clause 45.—This clause empowers the Central Government, after
due appropriation made by Parliament by law in this behalf, to make
to the Authority grants and loans of such sums of money as the
Central Government may think fit for being utilised for the purposes
of the proposed legislation.
Clause 46.—This clause relates constitution of Agricultural
Biosecurity Fund. It provides that a Fund to be called the Agricultural
Biosecurity Fund shall be constitute and there shall be credited thereto
all grants and loans made by the Central Government under
clause 45, all grants, fees, penalties and charges received by the
Authority under the proposed legislation and all sums received by
the Authority from such other source as may be approved by the
Central Government. It further provides that the Agricultural
Biosecurity Fund shall be applied for meeting the expenditures
specified in sub-clauses ( a) to ( d) therein. It also provides that the
Agricultural Biosecurity Fund shall also be applied for the purpose of
expanding existing facilities or services, or creating new facilities or
services, or for the purpose of providing against any temporary
decrease of revenue or increase of expenditures from transient causes
or for purposes of replacement or for meeting expenditures arising
from loss or damage from incidence of pest infestation or infection,
or for meeting any liability arising out of any act or commission in
the discharge of its functions under the proposed legislation. It also
provides that all moneys belonging to the fund shall be deposited in
such banks or invested in such manner as may, subject to the approval
of Central Government, be decided by the Authority.
Clause 47.—This clause relates to accounts and audit of the
Authority. It provides for maintenance of proper accounts and other
relevant records, and for preparation of an annual statement of
accounts including profit and loss account and balance sheet in such
form as may be prescribed by the Central Government in consultation
with the Comptroller and Auditor-General of India. It further provides
that the accounts of the Authority shall be audited annually by the
Comptroller and Auditor-General of India and any expenditure
incurred by him in connection with such audit shall be payable by
the Authority to the Comptroller and Auditor-General of India. It
also provides that the Comptroller and Auditor-General of India, and
any person appointed by him in connection with the audit of the
accounts of the Authority, shall have the same rights, privileges and
authority in connection with such audit as the Comptroller and
Auditor-General of India has in connection with the audit of
Government accounts and, in particular, shall have the right to demand

103
the production of books, accounts, connected vouchers and other
documents and papers, and inspect any place under, or any office of,
the Authority. It also provides that the accounts of the Authority as
certified by the Comptroller and Auditor-General of India, or any
other person appointed by him in this behalf, together with the audit
report thereon, shall be forwarded annually to the Central Government,
and that Government shall cause the same to be laid before both
Houses of Parliament.
Clause 48.—This clause provides for preparation of an annual report
by the Authority every year giving a summary of its activities
including information relating to proceedings and policies during the
previous year, in the form prescribed and forwarding a copy of the
report to the Central Government. It further provides that the Central
Government shall cause the report to be laid, as soon as after it is
received, before each House of Parliament.
Clause 49.—This clause relates to application of law relating to
customs and powers of customs officers. It provides that the law for
the time being in force relating to the customs and goods, the import
of which is prohibited under the Customs Act, 1962 or any other law
for the time being in force shall, subject to the provisions of
clause 3 of the proposed legislation, apply in respect of pests or plants
or animals, the import of which requires permit and certificate by the
Authority under the said clauses, or prohibited by the Authority and
officers of customs and officers empowered under the Customs Act,
1962 or any other law for the time being in force, to perform the
duties imposed thereby on a Commissioner of Customs and other
officers of Customs, shall have the same powers in respect of such
pests or plants or animals as they have for the time being in respect
of such goods as aforesaid. It further provides that without prejudice
to the provisions of sub-clause (1), the Commissioner of Customs or
any officer of the Government authorised by the Central Government
in this behalf, may detain any imported package which he suspects
to contain any pests or plants or animals and the import of which
requires the permit and certificate under clause 3, or prohibited by
the Authority and shall forthwith report such detention to the
Authority, and, if necessary, forward, with the approval of the
Authority, the package or sample of any suspected pests or plants or
animals and its products found therein to the laboratory notified or
research institution accredited under the proposed legislation.
Clause 50.—This clause relates to release of imported products. It
provides that no plant, animal or plant product or animal product or

104
other object imported into India shall be released unless the importer
has produced to the Designated Officer all permits, certificates and
other documentation as may be required under the provisions of the
proposed legislation, or rules and regulations made thereunder and
unless such plant, animal, plant product or animal product or other
object is, or has been, presented to and cleared by the Designated
Officer in accordance with the provisions of the proposed legislation,
or rules and regulations made thereunder.
Clause 51.—This clause relates to revocation or suspension of
permit or certificate. It provides that if the Designated Officer is
satisfied, either on a reference made to him in this regard or otherwise,
that the import permit or the sanitary or phytosanitary certificate has
been granted by misrepresentation of an essential fact or the holder
of such import permit or sanitary or phytosanitary certificate has failed
to comply with the conditions subject to which such import permit or
sanitary or phytosanitary certificate was granted, or has contravened
any of the provisions of the proposed legislation, or rules and
regulations made thereunder, then, without prejudice to any other
penalty to which the holder of such permit or certificate, as the case
may be, is liable under the proposed legislation, the Designated Officer
may, after giving the holder of such permit or certificate, an
opportunity of showing cause, revoke or suspend such permit or
certificate. It further provides that subject to any regulations that may
be made in this behalf, the Designated Officer may also vary or amend
such permit or certificate granted under clause 3 or clause 4.
Clause 52.—This clause relates to removal of imports. It provides
that where the Designated Officer has reasons to believe that any
plant, animal and plant product or animal product or other object
imported into India was imported in contravention of the provisions
of the proposed legislation, or rules and regulations made thereunder
or contains a quarantine pest, then, the Designated Officer may, give
a notice by registered post or through electronic media or by any
other verifiable means to the owner of such plant, animal, plant
product or animal product or other object, or to the person having
the possession, care or control of it, requiring him within a period
not exceeding thirty days to remove it from India. It further provides
that where the owner or the person referred to in sub-clause (1) fails
to remove such plant, animal, plant product or animal product or
other object within such time as may be allowed for the purpose, the
Designated Officer may seize it, cause it removed and destroyed at
the cost of such owner or person. It also provides that the costs of
such seizure, removal or destruction shall be recoverable from such

105
owner or person in the manner provided by the Code of Criminal
procedure, 1973, for the recovery of fines imposed by a Court, as if
such costs were fine imposed by the Court.
Clause 53.—This clause relates to appointment of designated
officers. It provides that the Authority shall, by notification, designate
from amongst the officers of the Authority, such Designated Officers
as it may deem fit, to perform functions and exercise powers under
the proposed legislation or rules and regulations made thereunder for
such areas, as may be specified in the notification. It further provides
that the Authority may , without prejudice to the provisions contained
in sub-clause (1), appoint by notification as the case may be, with the
prior approval of the Central Government or State Government or
research institutes or any other public institution, without prejudice
to the provisions contained in sub-clause (1), such technically qualified
persons subject to such conditions as it deems fit, from amongst the
officers or employees working under such Governments or institutions
to act as Designated Officers to perform functions and exercise powers
under the proposed legislation, or rules and regulations made
thereunder for such areas, as may be specified in the notification. It
also provides that Designated Officers, who deal with export
certification, shall be deemed as public officers for meeting the
requirements of international agreements and conventions for the
purposes of such certification.
Clause 54.—This clause relates to powers of Designated Officers.
It provides that Designated Officer shall have the power to inspect,
examine and take samples of any plant, animal, plant product or
animal product or other object, for analysis or test. It further provides
that if the Designated Officer has reason to believe that violation of
the proposed legislation, or rules and regulations made thereunder,
has been or is being or is likely to be committed, or for the purpose
of satisfying himself as to whether the provisions of the proposed
legislation or rules and regulations made thereunder, or the conditions
of any import permit or sanitary or phytosanitary certificate are being
complied with, then he may act upon as envisaged in sub-clauses ( a)
to ( e) of this clause. It also provides that the provisions of the Code
of Criminal Procedure, 1973, or, in relation to the State of Jammu and
Kashmir, any area in which that Code is not in force, the provisions
of any corresponding law in force in that State or area, shall, so far
as may be, apply to any search or seizure under this clause as they
apply to any search or seizure made under the authority of a warrant
issued under section 94 of the said Code or, as the case may be,
under the corresponding provisions of the said law.

106
Clause 55.—This clause provides for duties of Designated Officers.
It provides that where a Designated Officer has reasons to believe
that a quarantine pest is, or could be, present in an area, he may
prohibit the owners or occupiers of any land or building in that area
or any other person having the possession, care or control of plants,
animals and plant products or animal products or other objects in
that area from moving them without the written authorisation of such
Designated Officer. It further provides for the manner and procedure
for communication and service of the notice of the Designated Officer
upon the owners or occupiers of any land or building in the area
specified in sub-clause (1), ordering each of them, within a period to
be indicated in such notice, to perform such treatment and carryout
such measures, including the total destruction, of any plant, plant
product, animal or animal product or other thing, whether or not
infested or infected with the quarantine pest, as such Designated
Officer may deem necessary for the eradication, containment or
prevention of the spread of such quarantine pest.
Clause 56.—This clause relates to procedures for sampling and
analysis. It provides that the procedures for sampling, testing and
analysing plants, animals, plant products or animal products and other
objects, shall be such as may be specified by regulations made in this
behalf.
Clause 57.—This clause provides that every agency of the Central
Government and the State Governments shall render such help and
assistance and furnish such information to the Designated Officer or
a person or an agency authorised by him in writing, as he may
require for the discharge of his functions under the proposed
legislation, rules and regulations made thereunder.
Clause 58.—This clause relates to certain cases where compensation
need not be paid. It provides that notwithstanding anything contained
in any law for the time being in force, no compensation shall be
payable for any action taken by the Designated Officer in good faith
under the proposed legislation and the rules and regulations made
thereunder in respect of a plant, animal, plant product or animal
product or other object that is imported into India or exported from
India in contravention of this Bill, or the rules and regulations made
thereunder or such plant, animal, plant product, animal product or
other object that is found to be infested or infected with a quarantine
pest when it is inspected on importation or before exportation or in
respect of the prohibition or restriction of the sale or movement of
any plant, animal, plant product or animal product or other object

107
where such sale or movement is prohibited or restricted as a result of
the suspension or revocation of, or the refusal to grant, an import
permit or a sanitary or phytosanitary certificate that is required under
this Bill, or the rules and regulations made thereunder. However, the
authority may award a reasonable compensation to a person for any
loss or damage incurred to him in respect of non infested or non-
infected plant, animal, plant product or animal products or any other
objects, land or premises, in the course of, or as a result of the
implementation of, any sanitary or phytosanitary measure.
Clause 59.—This clause provides for penalty for contraventions for
which no specific penalty is provided. It provides that whoever
contravenes any provision of the proposed legislation or the rules or
regulations made thereunder, for the contravention of which no penalty
has been separately provided in this Chapter, shall be liable to a
penalty which may extend to two lakh rupees.
Clause 60.—This clause relates to punishment for interfering with
seized items. It provides that if a person without the permission of
the Designated Officer, retains, removes or tampers with any material
or other thing that has been seized under the proposed legislation, he
shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend
to six months and also with fine which may extend to two lakh
rupees.
Clause 61.—This clause relates to punishment for false information.
It provides that if a person, in connection with a requirement or
direction under the proposed legislation, provides any information or
produces any document that the person knows is false or misleading,
he shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may
extend to three months and also with fine which may extend to two
lakh rupees.
Clause 62.—This clause relates to punishment for obstructing or
impersonating a Designated Officer. It provides that if a person without
reasonable excuse, resists, obstructs, or attempts to obstruct,
impersonate, threaten, intimidate or assault a Designated Officer in
exercising his functions under the proposed legislation, he shall be
punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to three
months and also with fine which may extend to one lakh rupees.
Clause 63.—This clause relates to penalty for contravention in
relation to imports and exports. It provides that whoever, in
contravention of the provisions of clauses 3 and 4, imports or exports
any plant, animal or animal product or plant product or any other

108
product, he shall be punishable with imprisonment which may extend
to two years and shall also be punishable with fine which may extend
to two lakh rupees.
Clause 64.—This clause relates to punishment for subsequent
offences. It provides that if any person, after having been previously
convicted of an offence punishable under the proposed legislation
subsequently commits and is convicted of the same offence, he shall
be liable to twice the punishment, which might have been imposed
on a first conviction, subject to the punishment being maximum
provided for the same offence and a further fine on daily basis which
may extend up to one lakh rupees, where the offence is a continuing
one. It further provides that the court may also cause the offender’s
name and place of residence, the offence and the penalty imposed to
be published at the offender’s expense in such newspapers or in such
other manner as the court may direct and the expenses of such
publication shall be deemed to be part of the cost attending the
conviction and shall be recoverable in the same manner as a fine.
Clause 65.—This clause relates to offences by companies. It provides
that where an offence under the proposed legislation has been
committed by a company, every person who at the time the offence
was committed was in charge of, and was responsible to, the company
for the conduct of the business of the company, shall be deemed to
be guilty of the offence and shall be liable to be proceeded against
and punished accordingly. However, nothing contained in this sub-
clause shall render any such person liable to any punishment if he
proves that the offence was committed without his knowledge or that
he had exercised all diligence to prevent the Commission of such
offence. It further provides that notwithstanding anything contained
in sub-clause (1), where an offence under the proposed legislation has
been committed by a company and it is proved that the offence has
been committed with the consent or connivance of, or that the
commission of the offence is attributable to any neglect on the part
of, any director, manager, secretary or other officer of the company,
such director, manager, secretary or other officer shall also be deemed
to be guilty of that offence and shall be liable to be proceeded against
and punished accordingly. Further clause the expressions “company”
and “director” have been explained therein.
Clause 66.—This clause relates to cognizance and trial of offences.
It provides that no court shall take cognizance of an offence punishable
under the proposed legislation, except upon the complaint in writing
made by the Authority or by any officer of the Authority duly

109
authorised by the Authority for this purpose. It further provides that
no court inferior to that of a Metropolitan Magistrate or a Judicial
Magistrate of the first class, shall try any offence punishable under
the proposed legislation.
Clause 67.—This clause provides for recovery of a penalty imposed
under this Bill or any dues of the Authority under the proposed
legislation, if it is not paid, as an arrear of land revenue.
Clause 68.—This clause relates to directions of the Central
Government to the Authority. It provides that without prejudice to
the foregoing provisions of this Bill, the Authority shall, in exercise of
its powers and in performance of its functions under the proposed
legislation, be bound by such directions on questions of policy other
than those relating to technical and administrative matters, as the
Central Government may give in writing to it from time to time.
However, the Authority shall, as far as practicable, be given
opportunity to express its views before any direction is given under
sub-clause (1). It further provides that if any dispute arises between
the Central Government and the Authority as to whether the question
is or is not of policy, the decision of the Central Government thereon
shall be final. It also provides that the Authority shall furnish to the
Central Government such returns or other information, with respect
to its activities, as the Central Government may, from time to time
require.
Clause 69.—This clause relates to the power of Central Government
to prohibit import of pests or plants or animals and its products in
public interest. It provides that without prejudice to any other
provision contained in this Chapter, if the Central Government is
satisfied that the use of any pests or plants or animals and or its
products is likely to involve any risk to human beings or animals or
that in the public interest it is necessary or expedient so to do them,
that Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, prohibit
the import of such pests or plants or animals and or its products.
Clause 70.—This clause empowers the Central Government to
supersede the Authority by notification for such period, not exceeding
six months, as may be specified in the notification. However, before
issuing a notification under this sub-clause for the reasons mentioned
in item ( b), the Central Government shall give a reasonable opportunity
to the Authority to show cause why it should not be superseded and
shall consider the explanations and objections, if any, of the Authority.
It further provides that upon the publication of a notification under

110
sub-clause (1) superseding the Authority, all the members shall, as
from the date of supersession, vacate their offices as such and all the
powers functions and duties which may, by or under the provisions
of the proposed legislation, be exercised or discharged by or on behalf
of the Authority, shall until the Authority is re-constituted under sub-
clause (3), be exercised and discharged by such person or persons as
the Central Government may direct. Further, all property owned or
controlled by the Authority shall, until the Authority is re-constituted
under sub-clause (3), vest in the Central Government. It also empowers
the Central Government, on the expiration of the period of
supersession specified in the notification issued under sub-clause (1),
to extend the period of supersession for such further term not
exceeding six months, as it may consider necessary or re-constitute
the Authority by fresh appointment and in such case the members
who vacated their offices under item ( a) of sub-clause (2) shall not be
deemed to be disqualified for appointment. However, the Central
Government may, at any time, before the expiration of the period of
supersession, whether as originally specified under sub-clause (1) or
as extended under sub-clause (3) , take action under item ( b) of sub-
clause (1). It also provides that the Central Government shall cause a
notification issued under sub-clause (1) and a full report of any action
taken under this clause and the circumstances leading to such action
to be laid before both Houses of Parliament at the earliest opportunity.
Clause 71.—This clause provides that the provisions of the
proposed legislation shall have effect in addition to, and not in
derogation of, any other law for the time being in force.
Clause 72.—This clause empowers the Central Government to
obtain reports and returns from the Authority in respect of its activities,
from time to time.
Clause 73.—This clause provides that the members, officers and
other employees of the Authority are deemed to be public servants
within the meaning of section 21 of the Indian Penal Code, when
acting or purporting to act in pursuance of the proposed legislation
or the rules and regulations, made thereunder.
Clause 74.—This clause provides for protection to the Government,
or the Authority, or any member of the Authority, or officers or other
employees of the Central Government or Authority against any suit,
prosecution or other legal proceedings, for anything which is in good
faith done or intended to be done under the proposed legislation, or
the rules and regulations made thereunder.

111
Clause 75.—This clause provides for bar of jurisdiction of civil
courts in respect of any matter which the Authority or Central
Government is empowered by or under the proposed legislation to
determine and also bars the civil courts from grant of any injunction
in respect of any action taken or to be taken by Authority and Central
Government in pursuance of any power conferred by or under this
Bill.
Clause 76.—This clause empowers the Central Government to make
rules, by notification, in respect of the matters enumerated in items
(a) to (k) of sub-clause (2) of this clause.
Clause 77.—This clause empowers the Authority to make
regulations with the previous sanction of the Central Government, by
notification in the Official Gazette, not inconsistent with and to provide
for all matters necessary to give effect to the provisions of the
proposed legislation or rules made thereunder. It further provides
that without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing, such
regulations may provide for all or any of the matters specified in
items (a) to (k) of sub-clause (2) of this clause.
Clause 78.—This clause provides for laying of rules and regulations
made under the proposed legislation before each House of Parliament.
Clause 79.—This clause empowers the Central Government to make
provision by order published in the Official Gazette, to remove
difficulties which may arise in giving effect to the provisions of the
proposed legislation. However, such order shall not be made after
expiry of two years from the commencement of the proposed
legislation. It further provides for laying of such order before each
House of Parliament.
Clause 80.—This clause provides for repeal of the Destructive
Insects and Pests Act, 1914 and the Livestock Importation Act, 1898.
However, such repeal shall not affect the previous operation of the
said enactments as specified in the proviso to the said clause. It further
provides that any notification, order or notice issued, or declaration
made, or permit or certificate granted, or any other think done, or
any other action taken under the repealed enactments, and in force
immediately before the commencement of the proposed legislation
shall, be deemed to have been issued, made, granted, done or taken
under the corresponding provisions of the proposed legislation and
all the rules made under the said repealed Acts shall continue to
have effect until such rules are rescinded or amended, as the case
may be. It also provides for applicability of section 6 of the General
Clauses Act, 1897 with regard to the effect of repeal.

112
FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 7 of the Bill provides that the Central Government shall
constitute an Authority to be called the Agricultural Biosecurity
Authority of India and the Head Office of the Authority shall be at
Faridabad. The Authority will exercise powers, conferred on and
perform functions assigned to it under the proposed legislation. Clause
8 of the Bill provides that the Central Government shall appoint a
Director General, two Deputy Director Generals and two members
other than ex-officio Members. Sub-clause (1) of clause 11 provides
that the conditions of service, fee and allowances payable to Director
General, Deputy Director General and the other members (other than
ex-officio Member shall be such as may be prescribed under the rules).
2. Clause 16 of the Bill provides that the Authority may appoint
officers and employees for efficient performance of its functions and
the scale of pay, allowances and other conditions of service will be
such as may be provided by the Authority by regulations.
3. Clause 22 of the Bill provides for transfer of existing employees
of the Directorate of Plant Protection and Quarantine Storage and
Animal Quarantine Stations under the Central Government to the
Authority. Sub clause (3) provides that the existing employees shall
be given an option to express their willingness or otherwise to become
employees of the Authority. The expenditure related to the employees
so transferred to the Authority shall be met with the existing budgetary
allocation.
4. Clause 45 of the Bill provides that the Central Government
after the appropriations made by Parliament, may make to the
Authority grants and loans for utilisation for the purposes of the
proposed legislation. Clause 46 of the Bill provides for constitution of
the Agricultural Biosecurity Fund to which all grants, loans, fees,
penalties and charges received by the authorities shall be credited.
5. It is estimated that there would be an expenditure of 726 crores
of rupees on the establishment of the Agricultural Biosecurity
Authority, to be borne by the Central Government, this would include
non-recurring capital expenditure of 506 crores of rupees on equipment,
land and building and a further recurring expenditure of 220 crores
of rupees towards salaries and allowances, establishment, etc.
6. The Bill if enacted and brought into operation would involve
expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India as mentioned above
and is not likely to involve any other recurring or non-recurring
expenditure.

113
MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION
Sub-clause (1) of clause 76 of the Bill empowers the Central
Government to make rules, by notification in the Official Gazette, to
carry out the provisions of the proposed legislation. Sub-clause (2) of
the said clause enumerates the matters in respect of which such rules
may be made under the proposed legislation. The matters, inter alia,
relate to (a) experience of the years under clause 9; (b) such powers
and functions of the Authority which may be exercised and discharged
by the Director General under clause 10; (c) the term of office and
condition of service of the Director General and the other members
other than ex-officio members under clause 11; (d) powers and duties
of secretary under sub-clause (1) of clause 15; (e) control and
restrictions subject to which the Authority may appoint other officers
under clause 16; (f) the form in which the option of willingness or
otherwise to become employees of the Authority under sub-clause (3)
of clause 22; (g) other activities to be undertaken by Authority under
clause (y) of clause 23; (h) manner and fee for appeal under clause
40; (i) form in which Authority shall maintain proper accounts and
other relevant records, and prepare an annual statement of accounts
including profit and loss account and balance sheet under sub-clause
(1) of clause 46; (j) form and time in which the Authority shall prepare
an annual report under sub-clause (1) of clause 47; (k) any other
matter which is to be or may be prescribed under the proposed
legislation.
2. Sub-clause (2) of clause 77 of the proposed legislation empowers
the Agricultural Bio-security Authority of India to make, in consultation
with the Central Government and by notification in the Official
Gazette, regulations, consistent with the provisions of the proposed
legislation and the rules made thereunder, to carry out the provisions
of the proposed legislation. Sub-clause (2) of the said clause enumerates
the matters in respect of which such regulations may be made under
the proposed legislation. The matters, inter alia, relate to (a) the form,
manner, fee, conditions and exemptions of the import permit under
clause (i) of clause 3; (b) the authority of the country of origin or
country of re-export which shall issue the sanitary of the country of
origin or country of re-export which shall issue the sanitary and
phystosanitary certificate under clause (ii) of clause 3; (c) the manner
in which and the fee on payment of which the Designated Officer
shall issue the sanitary and phytosanitary certificate under clause 4;

114
(d) times and places of meetings, and procedures in regard to the
transaction of business at the meetings, including the quorum of the
Authority under sub-clause (1) of clause 12; (e) the method of
appointment, the scale of pay and allowances and other conditions of
service of other officers and employees of the Authority under clause
16; (f) the manner in which the experts and professionals may be
engaged by the Authority and their remuneration or fee under clause
18; (g) post entry quarantine measures which may be implemented
by the Authority and the research institutes with which the Authority
jointly implement it under clause (f) of clause 23; (h) fee to be charged
for services under sub-clause (w) of clause 23; (i) the form and manner
in which any contract shall be made under sub-clause (2) of clause
34; (j) procedures for sampling testing and analysing plants, animals,
plant product or animal products and other objects under clause 56;
(k) generally for the efficient conduct of the affairs of the Authority.
3. Clause 78 of the proposed legislation provides that the rules
and regulations made under the proposed legislation are required to
be laid before each House of Parliament.
4. The matters in respect of which rules and regulations may be
made are matters of procedure or administrative details and it is not
practicable to provide for them in the proposed legislation itself. The
delegation of legislative powers is, therefore, of a normal character.

115
LOK SABHA
—————
A
BILL
to provide for establishment of an Authority for prevention,
control, eradication and management of pests and diseases
of plants and animals and unwanted organisms for
ensuring agricultural biosecurity  and  to meet
international obligations of India for facilitating
imports and exports of plants, plant products,
animals, animal products, aquatic organisms
and regulation of agriculturally important
micro organisms and for matters
connected therewith or
incidental thereto.
—————
(Shri Sharad Pawar, Minister of Agriculture and Food Processing Industries)

116
LOK SABHA
————
CORRIGENDA
to
THE AGRICULTURAL BIOSECURITY BILL, 2013
[To be/As introduced in Lok Sabha]
1. Page (i), in the Arrangement of Clauses, in clause 11,-
for “Service of the Director”
read “service of Director”
2. Page (iii), in the Arrangement of Clauses, in clause 73,-
for “of the Authority”
read “of Authority”
3. Page 14, line 17,-
for “the expression”
read “the expressions,”
4. Page 17, line 42,-
for “or animals which is the import of”
read “or animals, the import of”
5. Page 17, line 43,-
for “section 3 or prohibited”
read “section 3 or which is prohibited”
6. Page 24, line 13,-
for “and the allowances”
read “and fee and allowances”
7. Page 29, line 1 from the bottom,-
for “article 117(1) (3)”
read “article 117(1) and (3)”
8. Page 30, line 4,-
for “used in the the”
read “used in the”
9. Page 32, line 18 from the bottom,-
for “of out clause (1)”
read “of sub-clause (1)”

117
10. Page 38, line 26,-
for “organization”
read “organisation”
11. Page 39, line 12 from the bottom,-
for “realization”
read “realisation”
12. Page 40, line 11,-
for “constitute”
read “constituted”
13. Page 43, line 7,-
for “this Bill,”
read “the proposed legislation,”
14. Page 43, line 14,-
for “under this Bill, or”
read “under the proposed legislation, or”
15. Page 44, lines 28 and 29,-
for “under this Bill or any”
read “under the proposed legislation or any”
16. Page 44, line 12 from the bottom,-
for “of Central”
read “of the Central”
17. Page 45, line 15 from the bottom,-
for “by Authority”
read “by the Authority”
18. Page 45, line 14 from the bottom,-
for “under this Bill.”
read “under the proposed legislation.”
19. Page 48, line 15,-
for “40; (i) form”
read “41; (i) form”
20. Page 48, line 17, -
for “clause 46; (j) form”
read “clause 47; (j) form”
  N EW D ELHI;
March 7, 2013
Phalguna 16, 1934 ( Saka)

118
ANNEXURE II
LIST OF STATE GOVERNMENTS/UNION TERRITORIES WHICH
SUBMITTED WRITTEN MEMORANDA TO THE COMMITTEE
Sl.No. State Governments
1. Andhra Pradesh
2. Arunachal Pradesh
3. Chhattisgarh
4. Goa
5. Haryana
6. Himachal Pradesh
7. Karnataka
8. Kerala
9. Madhya Pradesh
10. Punjab
11. Rajasthan
12. Tamil Nadu
13. Uttarakhand
14. Uttar Pradesh
UNION TERRITORIES
1. Andaman and Nicobar
2. Chandigarh
3. Dadra and Nagar Haveli
4. Daman and Diu
5. Delhi
6. Puducherry

119
ANNEXURE III
LIST OF INDIVIDUALS/EXPERTS/ORGANISATIONS WHO
SUBMITTED WRITTEN MEMORANDA TO THE COMMITTEE
Sl.No. Name of Individuals/Experts/Organisations
1. Dr. Dishanta Dutta, Sivasagar, Assam
2. Shri Hemabja Panda, Bhubaneswar
3. Dr. Krishan Narayan Pandey, Rajajeepuram, Lucknow
4. Grama Shree Farmers Club, Kottayam, Kerala
5. Shri S. Balwinder Singh, Malout, Punjab
6. Dr. Dayamoy Mondal, Bhubaneswar
7. Shri Sunil Singh, Faridabad
8. Shri R. Santhanam, Kalkaji Extension, New Delhi
9. Prof. (Dr.) Mahendra Pal Yadav, Gurgaon
10. Dr. Susanta Kr. Mukherjee, West Bengal
11. Shri Rajendra Kumar Aggarwal, Retd. Economist, RBI,
Ghaziabad
12. Prof. Prem Kumar Uppal, Narayanpur, Punjab
13. Dr. S.G. Ramachandra, Bangalore
14. Shri Rajinder Singh, Bhiwani
15. Dr. K.C. Sunny, Trivandrum
16. Shri Pramod Sahu, Ahmedabad

120
ANNEXURE IV
LIST OF STATE GOVERNMENTS WHO TENDERED ORAL
EVIDENCE BEFORE THE COMMITTEE
Sl.No. State Governments
1. Andhra Pradesh
2. Haryana
3. Karnataka
4. Punjab
5. Tamil Nadu

121
ANNEXURE V
LIST OF INDIVIDUALS/EXPERTS/ORGANISATIONS WHO
APPEARED FOR PERSONAL HEARING BEFORE THE
COMMITTEE
NAME OF INDIVIDUALS/EXPERTS/ORGANISATIONS
Prof. M.P . Yadav

122
APPENDIX I
COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE
(2012-13)
MINUTES OF THE TWENTY-EIGHTH SITTING OF THE
COMMITTEE
The Committee sat on Tuesday, the 21st May, 2013 from
1500 hours to 1635 hours in Room No. G-074, Parliament Library
Building, New Delhi.
PRESENT
Shri Basudeb Acharia — Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Narayansingh Amlabe
3. Smt. Ashwamedh Devi
4. Smt. Paramjit Kaur Gulshan
5. Shri P . Kumar
6. Dr. (Smt.) Botcha Jhansi Lakshmi
7. Sardar Sukhdev Singh Libra
8. Shri Jagdish Singh Rana
9. Shri Rajaiah Siricilla
10. Dr. Vinay Kumar Pandey ‘Vinnu’
11. Shri Hukamdeo Narayan Yadav
Rajya Sabha
12. Shri Satyavrat Chaturvedi
13. Smt. Mohsina Kidwai
14. Dr. K.V .P . Ramachandra Rao
15. Shri Rajpal Singh Saini
16. Shri Darshan Singh Yadav

123
SECRETARIAT
1. Shri R.S. Kambo — Joint Secretary
2. Shri P .C. Koul — Director
3. Shri C. Vanlalruata — Deputy Secretary
WITNESSES
MINISTRY OF AGRICULTURE
(DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE AND CO-OPERATION)
1. Shri Ashish Bahuguna Secretary (A&C)
2. Shri A.K. Srivastava Additional Secretary
3. Shri Utpal Kumar Singh Joint Secretary
4. Dr. A.K. Sinha Plant Protection Adviser
5. Dr. P .S. Chandurkar Consultant
6. Shri D.D.K. Sharma Addl. Plant Protection Adviser
DEPARTMENT OF ANIMAL HUSBANDRY, DAIRYING &
FISHERIES
Shri Rajbir Singh Rana Joint Secretary
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the members to the
Sitting. The Committee, thereafter, deliberated for a while on the
subject before them. The Chairman, then directed the witnesses be
ushered in.
(At about 1510 hrs. the witnesses were ushered in)
3. The Chairman welcomed the witnesses and asked them to
introduce themselves. The witnesses briefed the Committee on the
various aspects regarding the ‘The Agricultural Biosecurity Bill, 2013’.
Thereafter, the members sought several clarifications pertaining to the
abovesaid Bill including ramifications of some of the proposed clauses
and the witnesses responded to them. Based on the responses of the
witnesses and the implications of some of the clauses of the Bill the
Committee also decided to seek the views of State Governments on
it.
4. Before the Sitting concluded, the Chairman thanked the
witnesses for appearing before the Committee and sharing their views
on the subject.
A verbatim record of the proceedings has been kept separately.
The Committee, then, adjourned.

124
APPENDIX II
COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE
(2012-13)
MINUTES OF THE THIRTY-FOURTH SITTING OF THE
COMMITTEE
The Committee sat on Monday, the 15th July, 2013 from
1500 hours to 1545 hours in Room No. 62, Parliament House,
New Delhi.
PRESENT
Shri Basudeb Acharia — Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Narayansingh Amlabe
3. Shri H.D. Devegowda
4. Shri Anant Kumar Hegde
5. Shri Premdas Katheria
6. Shri P . Kumar
7. Sardar Sukhdev Singh Libra
8. Dr. Jyoti Mirdha
9. Smt. Bhavana Gawali (Patil)
10. Shri Rajaiah Siricilla
11. Shri Patel Kishanbhai V .
12. Dr. Vinay Kumar Pandey ‘Vinnu’
13. Shri Hukamdeo Narayan Yadav
Rajya Sabha
14. Shri Satyavrat Chaturvedi
15. Shri A. Elavarasan
16. Smt. Mohsina Kidwai
17. Dr. K.V .P . Ramachandra Rao

125
18. Shri Parshottam Khodabhai Rupala
19. Shri Rajpal Singh Saini
20. Shri Shivanand Tiwari
21. Shri S. Thangavelu
22. Shri Darshan Singh Yadav
SECRETARIAT
1. Shri R.S. Kambo — Joint Secretary
2. Shri P .C. Koul — Director
3. Shri C. Vanlalruata — Deputy Secretary
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members to the
Sitting of the Committee. Thereafter, the Committee took up for
consideration the 08 Memoranda received from State Governments/
Union Territory Administrations and 15 Memoranda received from
other Experts/Stakeholders on ‘The Agricultural Biosecurity Bill, 2013’.
3. After some discussion, a few memoranda were shortlisted. The
Committee also decided that the comments of the Department of
Agriculture and Cooperation may be obtained in the meantime on
the memoranda submitted by the State Governments/Union Territory
Administrations. The Committee also considered the request of a State
Government for extension of time in submission of its views. It was
decided that fifteen more days may be granted for the purpose. The
Committee also desired that the Secretariat may also convey the fact
of extension in date of submission of memorandum to all other State
Governments/Union Territory Administrations who were yet to submit
their views/suggestions.
The Committee, then, adjourned.

126
APPENDIX III
COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE
(2012-13)
MINUTES OF THE THIRTY-SIXTH SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE
The Committee sat on Thursday, the 01 August, 2013 from
1500 hours to 1640 hours in Room No. 62, Parliament House, New Delhi.
PRESENT
Shri Basudeb Acharia — Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Narayansingh Amlabe
3. Shri Sanjay Singh Chauhan
4. Smt. Ashwamedh Devi
5. Shri Premdas Katheria
6. Shri P . Kumar
7. Dr. (Smt.) Botcha Jhansi Lakshmi
8. Sardar Sukhdev Singh Libra
9. Dr. Jyoti Mirdha
10. Smt. Bhavana Gawali (Patil)
11. Shri Rajaiah Siricilla
12. Shri Hukamdeo Narayan Yadav
Rajya Sabha
13. Shri Satyavrat Chaturvedi
14. Shri Dharmendra Pradhan
15. Shri Rajpal Singh Saini
16. Shri Shivanand Tiwari
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Shri R.S. Kambo — Joint Secretary
2. Shri P .C. Koul — Director
3. Shri C. Vanlalruata — Deputy Secretary

127
LIST OF W ITNESSES
GOVERNMENT OF ANDHRA PRADESH
(i) Shri M. Sudhakar,
Special Secretary,
Department of Agriculture & Cooperation
Government of Andhra Pradesh
(ii) Dr. S.J. Rehman,
Principal Scientist Biological Control,
Acharya N.G. Ranga Agriculture University,
Hyderabad
GOVERNMENT OF HARYANA
Dr. (Mrs.) Santosh Dhillon,
Dean, College of Basic Sciences & Humanities,
CCS, Haryana Agricultural University,
Hisar
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members to the
Sitting of the Committee. Thereafter, the Chairman directed that the
witnesses be ushered in.
(At about 1505 hrs. the representatives of Government of
Andhra Pradesh were ushered in)
3. The Chairman welcomed the witnesses to the Sitting and asked
them to introduce themself and brief the Committee about the views
and suggestions of the Government of Andhra Pradesh on ‘The
Agricultural Biosecurity Bill, 2013’. The Members sought several
clarifications on the various aspects of the Bill. The witnesses duly
responded to them.
4. The Chairman, thereafter, thanked the witnesses for appearing
before the Committee as well as for furnishing valuable information
desired by them on the Bill. He also directed them to send the replies
to the queries which could not be clarified by them during the Sitting
to the Committee Secretariat by 08 August, 2013, positively.
(At around 1605 hrs. the witness withdrew and the representative
of Government of Haryana, was ushered in)
5. The Chairman welcomed the witness to the Sitting and asked
her to introduce herself and brief the Committee about the views and
suggestions of the Government of Haryana on ‘The Agricultural
Biosecurity Bill, 2013’.

128
The members sought several clarifications from the witness on
the Memorandum submitted by the State Government previously. The
witness duly responded to them alongwith the justification for the
changes proposed in the Bill.
6. The Chairman, thereafter, thanked the witness for appearing
before the Committee as well as for furnishing valuable information
to the Committee on the Subject.
The witness, then, withdrew.
A verbatim record of the proceedings has been kept separately.
The Committee, then, adjourned.

129
APPENDIX IV
COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE
(2012-13)
MINUTES OF THE THIRTY-SEVENTH SITTING OF THE
COMMITTEE
The Committee sat on Wednesday, the 07 August, 2013 from
1500 hours to 1545 hours in Room No. 62, Parliament House,
New Delhi.
PRESENT
Shri Basudeb Acharia — Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Sardar Sukhdev Singh Libra
3. Dr. Jyoti Mirdha
4. Shri Rajaiah Siricilla
5. Dr. Vinay Kumar Pandey ‘Vinnu’
6. Shri Hukamdeo Narayan Yadav
Rajya Sabha
7. Shri Dharmendra Pradhan
8. Shri Parshottam Khodabhai Rupala
9. Shri Rajpal Singh Saini
10. Shri S. Thangavelu
11. Shri Darshan Singh Yadav
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Shri R.S. Kambo — Joint Secretary
2. Shri P .C. Koul — Director
3. Shri C. Vanlalruata — Deputy Secretary

130
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members to the
Sitting of the Committee. The Committee then took up Memorandum
No. 08 regarding extension of time for examination and Report on
‘The Agricultural Biosecurity Bill, 2013’.
3. After deliberating amongst themselves the Committee felt that
it would not be possible for them to complete the examination of the
Bill in their current term, which is to end on 30 August, 2013, as they
had still to hear the views of the State Governments of Punjab, Tamil
Nadu and Karnataka. Apart from that the Committee have also to
take Oral Evidence of non-official expert and Department of
Agriculture and Cooperation, the nodal Department of the Bill. They,
therefore, requested the Chairman to apprise the Hon‘ble Speaker,
Lok Sabha on their behalf of this fact and request her to grant
extension of time till the first week of Winter Session 2013 for
presentation of the Report on the Bill by their successor Committee.
*4. *** *** *** ***
The Committee, then, adjourned.
*Matter not related to this Report.

131
APPENDIX V
COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE
(2012-13)
MINUTES OF THE THIRTY-EIGHTH SITTING OF THE
COMMITTEE
The Committee sat on Monday, the 26 August, 2013 from
1500 hours to 1540 hours in Committee Room ‘A’, Parliament House
Annexe, New Delhi.
PRESENT
Shri Basudeb Acharia — Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Narayansingh Amlabe
3. Smt. Ashwamedh Devi
4. Smt. Paramjit Kaur Gulshan
5. Sardar Sukhdev Singh Libra
Rajya Sabha
6. Shri Satyavrat Chaturvedi
7. Shri Dharmendra Pradhan
8. Shri Darshan Singh Yadav
SECRETARIAT
1. Shri R.S. Kambo — Joint Secretary
2. Shri P .C. Koul — Director
3. Shri C. Vanlalruata — Deputy Secretary
*2. *** *** *** ***
*Matter not related to this Report.

132
3. It was, however, felt that since orders of Speaker, Lok Sabha
had been obtained under Direction 60 of the Directions by Speaker,
Lok Sabha for facilitating the interaction with the State Governments
and the representative of the State Government of Karnataka had
come all the way from Bengaluru to tender evidence before the
Committee, the views of the representative of State Government on
‘The Agricultural Biosecurity Bill, 2013’ be heard. The Chairman then
directed that the witness be ushered in.
(At about 1515 hrs. the witness was ushered in)
4. After the customary introduction, the witness briefed the
Committee on the State Government’s view on the Bill under
consideration. He then responded to the queries raised by Hon‘ble
Members.
(The witness, then, withdrew)
The Committee, then, adjourned.
(A verbatim record of the proceedings has been kept separately)

133
APPENDIX VI
COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE
(2013-14)
MINUTES OF THE FOURTH SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE
The Committee sat on Tuesday, the 08 October, 2013 from
1100 hours to 1245 hours in Room No. 53, Parliament House, New Delhi.
PRESENT
Shri Shivanand Tiwari — In the Chair
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Smt. Ashwamedh Devi
3. Smt. Paramjit Kaur Gulshan
4. Shri Premdas Katheria
5. Shri P . Kumar
6. Sardar Sukhdev Singh Libra
7. Shri Devji M. Patel
8. Shri Rajaiah Siricilla
Rajya Sabha
9. Shri N. Balaganga
10. Shri Satyavrat Chaturvedi
11. Smt. Mohsina Kidwai
12. Shri Dharmendra Pradhan
13. Dr. K.V .P . Ramachandra Rao
14. Shri Rajpal Singh Saini
15. Shri S. Thangavelu
16. Shri Darshan Singh Yadav
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Shri A. Louis Martin — Joint Secretary
2. Smt. Abha Singh Yaduvanshi — Director
3. Shri C. Vanlalruata — Deputy Secretary

134
2. The Committee chose Shri Shivanand Tiwari, MP (Rajya Sabha)
to act as Chairman for the Sitting under Rule 258 (3) of the Rules
and Procedure and Conduct of Business in Lok Sabha in the absence
of Chairman.
3. Thereafter, the representatives of the State Government of Punjab
named below were ushered in for evidence in connection with the
examination of ‘The Agricultural Biosecurity Bill, 2013’:—
1.  Shri K.S. Pannu — Secretary, Agriculture
2.  Dr. B.S. Sidhu — Commissioner, Agriculture
3.  Dr. T.S. Thind — Emeritus Scientist,
Punjab Agricultural
University, Ludhiana
4. The Chairman welcomed the representatives of the State
Government of Punjab and apprised them of the provisions of
Directions 55(1) and 58 of the Directions by Speaker regarding
confidentiality of the proceedings of the Committee. The witnesses
presented the views of the State Government on ‘The Agricultural
Biosecurity Bill, 2013’. In addition to the points already made in their
written Memorandum, the witnesses suggested that the function of
the Agricultural Biosecurity Authority of India should be not only to
regulate but also to facilitate exports and accordingly suggested
insertion of the word facilitate’ in Clause 23(b). The Members queried
the witnesses in regard to their suggestions relating to other aspects
of the Bill. The witnesses clarified the same. The Chairman thanked
the witnesses for appearing before the Committee and sharing their
views.
The witnesses, then, withdrew.
Thereafter, Prof. M.P . Yadav, President, National Academy of
Veterinary Sciences was ushered in.
5. The Chairman welcomed Shri M.P . Yadav and apprised him of
the provisions of Directions 55(1) and 58 of the Directions by Speaker
regarding confidentiality of the proceeding of the Committee. The
expert presented his views on ‘The Agricultural Biosecurity Bill, 2013’
and Members sought clarifications on the suggestions made by him
including the need for having separate Agricultural Biosecurity
Authority for Plants and Animals (including fish) to which the witness
responded in detail. The Chairman thanked the expert for appearing
before the Committee and sharing his views in person.
The expert, then, withdrew.

135
Thereafter, the representatives of the State Government of
Tamil Nadu named below were ushered in:—
1. Dr. M. Rajendran — Director, Agriculture
2.  Dr. K. Ramaraju — Director, Centre for Plant
Protection Studies, Tamil Nadu
Agricultural University
3.  Dr. K. Rajamani — Professor (Horti.) Tamil Nadu
Agricultural University
6. The Chairman welcomed the representatives of the State
Government of Tamil Nadu and apprised them of the provisions of
Directions 55(1) and 58 of the Directions by Speaker regarding
confidentiality of the proceedings of the Committee. The witnesses
presented the views of the State Government of Tamil Nadu on ‘The
Agricultural Biosecurity Bill, 2013’. They stressed upon the need for
membership of all States in the proposed Agricultural Biosecurity
Authority. They also stated that the clause 29 of the Bill regarding
recovery of expenses from State Governments is very harsh and should
be suitably amended. The Members sought several clarifications to
which the witnesses duly responded. Thereafter, the Chairman thanked
the witnesses for appearing before the Committee and sharing their
views.
(A verbatim record of the proceedings has been kept separately.)
The Committee, then, adjourned.

136
APPENDIX VII
COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE
(2013-14)
MINUTES OF THE SIXTH SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE
The Committee sat on Monday, the 11 November, 2013 from
1500 hours to 1615 hours in Committee Room ‘C’, Parliament House
Annexe, New Delhi.
PRESENT
Shri Basudeb Acharia — Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Sanjay Singh Chauhan
3. Smt. Ashwamedh Devi
4. Shri Premdas Katheria
5. Shri P . Kumar
6. Sardar Sukhdev Singh Libra
7. Smt. Bhavana Gawali (Patil)
8. Shri Patel Kishanbhai V .
9. Dr. Vinay Kumar Pandey ‘Vinnu’
Rajya Sabha
10. Shri N. Balaganga
11. Smt. Mohsina Kidwai
12. Dr. K.V .P . Ramachandra Rao
13. Shri Parshottam Khodabhai Rupala
14. Shri Rajpal Singh Saini
15. Shri S. Thangavelu
16. Shri Shivanand Tiwari
17. Shri Darshan Singh Yadav

137
SECRETARIAT
1. Shri A. Louis Martin — Joint Secretary
2. Shri T.H. Rao — Additional Director
3. Shri C. Vanlalruata — Deputy Secretary
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members to the
Sitting of the Committee. *** *** *** ***.
(i) *** *** *** ***
(ii) *** *** *** ***
3. *** *** *** ***
4. Thereafter, representatives of the Ministry of Agriculture
(Department of Agriculture and Cooperation), were ushered in for
evidence in connection with examination of ‘The Agricultural
Biosecurity Bill, 2013’. The following were present:—
W
ITNESSES
MINISTRY OF AGRICULTURE
(DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE AND CO-OPERATION)
1. Shri Ashish Bahuguna — Secretary
2. Shri A.K. Srivastava — Additional Secretary
3. Shri Utpal Kumar Singh — Joint Secretary
DEPARTMENT OF ANIMAL HUSBANDRY DAIRYING AND
FISHERIES
Shri Rajbir Singh Rana — Joint Secretary
INDIAN COUNCIL OF AGRICULTURAL RESEARCH
Dr. P .K. Chakrabarty — Assistant Director General
NATIONAL BUREAU OF PLANT GENETIC RESOURCES
1. Dr. K.C. Bansal — Director
2. Dr. P .S. Chandurkar — Consultant
DIRECTORATE OF PLANT PROTECTION QUARANTINE AND
STORAGE
1. Dr. S.N. Sushil — Plant Protection Advisor
2. Shri D.D.K. Sharma — Additional Plant Protection
***Matter not related to this Report.

138
Advisor
The Chairman welcomed the representatives and apprised them
of the provisions of the Directions 55(1) and 58 of the Directions by
the Speaker.
5. Thereafter, the Committee enquired from the representatives of
the Department of Agriculture and Cooperation the reasons for
inordinate delay in formulating ‘The Agricultural Biosecurity Bill, 2013’,
that aims to strengthen the plant and animal biosecurity mechanisms,
based on the recommendation of the Commission of Farmers (2007).
The Committee also enquired whether it would be appropriate to
have an offshore animal quarantine station for seized animals having
evidence of exotic disease/disease agent. The Secretary, DAC
responded to the queries. The Committee also discussed whether the
proposed Agriculture Biosecurity Authority may impinge upon the
authority and jurisdiction of National Bio-diversity Authority and a
possibility of confrontation between their respective role and
responsibilities; instances of plant, animal and marine diseases
introduced in the country during the last three years and economic
losses suffered on this account; a separate authority for animals
(inclusive of fish) and plant diseases; possibility of inclusion of the
term bio-products under clause 2 of the Bill; membership of the
Authority on regional basis; accreditation of diagnostic laboratories;
recovery of cost from State Governments, etc. The representatives of
the DAC responded to the queries. Thereafter, the Chairman desired
that the representatives may send written replies to the points within
a week which could not be covered during the evidence.
(A verbatim record of the proceedings has been kept separately.)

139
The Committee, then, adjourned.
APPENDIX VIII
COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE
(2013-14)
MINUTES OF THE TWELFTH SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE
The Committee sat on Monday, the 09 December, 2013 from
1500 hours to 1810 hours in Committee Room ‘B’, Parliament House
Annexe, New Delhi.
PRESENT
Shri Basudeb Acharia — Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Sanjay Singh Chauhan
3. Smt. Ashwamedh Devi
4. Shri Premdas Katheria
5. Sardar Sukhdev Singh Libra
6. Dr. Jyoti Mirdha
7. Shri Rajaiah Siricilla
8. Shri Hukumdeo Narayan Yadav
Rajya Sabha
9. Shri S. Thangavelu
10. Shri Darshan Singh Yadav
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Shri A. Louis Martin — Joint Secretary
2. Smt. Abha Singh Yaduvanshi — Director
3. Shri T.H. Rao — Additional Director
4. Shri C. Vanlalruata — Deputy Secretary

140
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members to the
Sitting of the Committee. The Committee first took up for consideration
Memorandum No. 07 regarding progress of examination of ‘The
Agricultural Biosecurity Bill, 2013’ and proposing additional time
required for preparation of Report thereon. The Committee noted that
time available for presentation of the Report on the Bill was till the
first week of the Winter Session. The Committee after considering all
aspects decided to seek extension of time till the last day of the
current Winter Session for presentation of Report on the Bill.
3. *** *** *** ***
4. *** *** *** ***
5. *** *** *** ***
*Matter not related to this Report.

141
The Committee, then, adjourned.
APPENDIX IX
COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE
(2013-14)
MINUTES OF THE THIRTEENTH SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE
The Committee sat on Thursday, the 19 December, 2013 from
1000 hours to 1030 hours in Committee Room ‘D’, Parliament House
Annexe, New Delhi.
PRESENT
Shri Basudeb Acharia — Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Narayansingh Amlabe
3. Shri Sanjay Singh Chauhan
4. Smt. Ashwamedh Devi
5. Smt. Paramjit Kaur Gulshan
6. Shri Premdas Katheria
7. Smt. Botcha Jhansi Lakshmi
8. Dr. Jyoti Mirdha
9. Shri Kachhadia Naranbhai
10. Shri Rajaiah Siricilla
11.D r. Vinay Kumar Pandey ‘Vinnu’
12. Shri Hukumdeo Narayan Yadav
Rajya Sabha
13. Smt. Mohsina Kidwai
14. Shri Shivanand Tiwari
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Shri A. Louis Martin — Joint Secretary
2. Smt. Abha Singh Yaduvanshi — Director
3. Shri T.H. Rao — Additional Director

142
4. Shri C. Vanlalruata — Deputy Secretary
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the members to the
Sitting of the Committee. The Committee, thereafter, took up the draft
Report on ‘The Agricultural Biosecurity Bill, 2013’ pertaining to the
Ministry of Agriculture (Department of Agriculture and Co-operation)
for consideration.
3. Para 9 of Part-II of the draft Report envisaged omission of the
words “in the manner provided by the Code of Criminal Procedure,
1973, for the recovery of fines imposed by a Court, as if such costs
were a fine imposed by a Court” from clause 29 of the Bill. The
Committee, however, decided that the entire clause 29 should be
omitted from the Bill and Para 9 be reworded giving reasoning as
shown below:—
“The Committee feel that a very stringent provision has been
made in clause 29 of the Bill regarding recovery of expenses from
the State Government. The Committee are of the view that if the
provision of recovery costs is kept in the legislation, the State
Government(s) may not bring out the cases of any outbreak of
pest(s)/diseases of plants and animals before the authority
proactively and may also not take necessary quarantine measures.
The Committee, therefore, desire that clause 29 of the Bill be
deleted.”
4. The Committee also decided that the words ‘High Courts’ and
be added before the words ‘Supreme Court’ in Para 10 of the
Part-II of the draft Report.
5. Subject to the above modifications, the Committee also
authorized the Chairman to finalise the draft Report on the basis of
factual verification by the Department of Agriculture and Cooperation
and present the same to Hon’ble Speaker and to Parliament.
6. *** *** *** ***
The Committee, then, adjourned.
*Matter not related to this Report.