1 
 
 
 
COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE 
(2011-2012) 
                 
         
FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA     
 
 
MINISTRY OF FOOD PROCESSING INDUSTRIES              
 
DEMANDS FOR GRANTS (2011-12) 
 
{Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/ 
Recommendations contained in the Twenty Fifth Report  
of the Committee on Agriculture (2010-2011)}         
 
THIRTIETH REPORT 
  
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
February, 2012/Magha, 1933 (Saka) 
 
 
 
30 

2 
 
THIRTIETH REPORT 
 
COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE 
(2011-2012) 
(FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
MINISTRY OF FOOD PROCESSING INDUSTRIES 
 
DEMANDS FOR GRANTS (2011-12) 
 
[Action Taken by the Government on the  
Observations/Recommendations contained in the Twenty Fifth Reportof the 
Committee on Agriculture (2010-2011)] 
 
Presented to Hon’ble Speaker, Lok Sabha on 16.02.2012  
Presented to Lok Sabha on       27.03.2012    
Laid on the Table of Rajya Sabha on  27.03.2012 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
February, 2012/Magha, 1933 (Saka) 
 
 


3 
 
 
COA No. 253 
 
 
         
         
         
         
         
         
 
         
         
        
Price:  Rs. 55 
         
         
         
         
         
 
 
 
 
© 2012 By Lok Sabha Secretariat 
 
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of 
Business in Lok Sabha (Fourteenth Edition) and Printed by  

4 
 
<CONTENTS>   
          PAGE 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE……………………………….  (iii) 
INTRODUCTION…………………………………………………………  (v) 
 
CHAPTER I   Report ………………………………………….   1 
CHAPTER II Observations/Recommendations which have been 
accepted by the Government ………………..  21 
CHAPTER III  Observations/Recommendations which the 
   Committee do not desire to pursue in view 
   of the Government’s replies …………………..  46     
 
CHAPTER IV  Observations/Recommendations in respect 
   of  which replies of the Government have  
   not been accepted by the Committee …………  47     
 
CHAPTER V  Observations/Recommendations in respect of  
   which final replies of the Government are  
   still awaited ……………………………………. 48 
 
  
   ANNEXURES 
Annexure –I NIFTEM Present status of various activities as on  
25 November, 2011.      56 
Annexure –II Minutes of the Twenty-third Sitting of the Committee 
held on  10 February, 2012.     58 
Annexure –III Analysis of Action Taken by the Government on the 
Recommendations contained in the Twenty-fifth Report                     
(Fifteenth Lok Sabha) of the Committee on Agriculture 
(2010-2011).         61 
              
    
 
 
 
 
 
(i)  

5 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE (2011-12) 
Shri Basudeb Acharia - Chairman 
MEMBERS 
 Lok Sabha 
2. Shri Narayansingh Amlabe 
3. Shri K.C. Singh ‘Baba’ 
4. Shri Thangso Baite  
5. Smt. Shruti Choudhary 
6. Smt. Ashwamedh Devi 
7. Shri Biren Singh Engti 
8. Shri Anant Kumar Hegde 
9. Shri Deepender Singh Hooda 
10. Shri Sk. Nurul Islam 
11. Shri Naranbhai Kachhadia 
12. Shri Premdas 
13. Shri Surendra Singh Nagar 
14. Shri Devji M. Patel 
15. Shri Vitthalbhai Hansrajbhai Radadiya 
16. Shri Nripendra Nath Roy 
17. Shri Jagdish Thakor 
18. Shri Laxman Tudu 
19. Shri D. Venugopal 
20. Shri Hukmadeo Narayan Yadav 
21. Shri Ramakant Yadav 
 
 Rajya  Sabha 
22. Shri Shashi Bhusan Behera 
23. Shri Narendra Budania 
24. Shri Satyavrat Chaturvedi 
25. Shri A. Elavarasan 
26. Shri Vinay Katiyar 
27. Shri Mohd. Ali Khan 
28. Shri Upendra Kushwaha 
29. Shri Bharatsinh Prabhatsinh Parmar 
30. Shri Rajpal Singh Saini 
31. Shri S. Thangavelu 
 
 
 (iii) 

6 
 
SECRETARIAT  
 
 
1. Shri Deepak Mahna  - Joint Secretary 
 
2. Shri P. V. L. N. Murthy - Director 
 
3. Shri P.C. Koul   - Additional Director 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(iv) 
  

7 
 
INTRODUCTION 
I, the Chairman, Committee on Agriculture (2011 -2012) having 
been authorized by the Committee to submit the Report on their behalf, 
present this Thirtieth Report on Action Taken by the Government on the 
Observations/ Recommendations contained in the Twenty -fifth Report of 
the Committee on Demands for Grants (2011 -12) of the Ministry of Food 
Processing Industries. 
 
2. The Twenty -fifth Report of the Committee on Agriculture (2010 -
2011) on Demands for Grants (2011 -12) of the Ministry of Food 
Processing Industries was presented to Lok Sabha and laid on the Table 
of Rajya Sabha  on 29 August, 2011. The Action Taken Replies on the 
Report were received on 25 November, 2011. 
 
3. The Report was considered and adopted by the Committee at their 
Sitting held on 10 February, 2012. 
 
4. An analysis of the Action Taken by the Government on the 
Observations/ Recommendations contained in the Twenty-fifth Report of 
the Committee is given in Annexure – III. 
      
                   
           
                                                                                    
                                                                                        
NEW DELHI;                    BASUDEB ACHARIA 
10 February, 2012                                          Chairman, 
21 Magha, 1933 (Saka)                               Committee on Agriculture. 
  
 
 
  
(v) 
 

8 
 
CHAPTER I 
 
REPORT 
This Report of the Committee on Agriculture deals with the action 
taken by the Government on the Observations/ Recommendations 
contained in the Twenty -fifth Report of th e Committee on Agriculture 
(2010-2011) on ‘Demands for Grants’ 2011-12 of the Ministry of Food 
Processing Industries which was presented to Lok Sabha and laid on the 
Table of Rajya Sabha on 29 August, 2011 respectively. 
1.2  The Ministry of Food Processing Industries have furnished Action 
Taken Replies in respect of all the 16  Observations/ Recommendations 
contained in the Report.  These have been categorised as under: 
 Observations/Recommendations that have been accepted 
by the Government . 
Recommendation Para Nos. 1.9, 2.16, 2.17, 2.18, 2.19,  
2.20, 2.21, 3.28, 3.29, 3.30, 3.32, 3.35, and 3.36. 
 Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do 
not desire to pursue in view of the Government’s reply.  
Recommendation  Para No.  Nil  
 Observations/Recommendations in respect of which action 
taken replies of the Government have not been accepted by 
the Committee. - Nil 
 
 Observations/Recommendations in respect of which final 
replies   of the  Government are still awaited. 
Recommendation Para Nos. – 3.31, 3.33 and 3.34 
 
1.3 The Committee trust that utmost importance would be given to 
implementation of the Observations/ Recommendations accepted by 
the Government. In cases, where it is not possible for the Ministry to 
implement the recommendations in letter and spirit for any r eason, 

9 
 
the matter should be reported to the Committee with reasons for 
non-implementation.  The Committee desire that further Action 
Taken Notes on the Observations/ Recommendations contained in 
Chapter-I and final Action Taken Replies to the Recommendatio ns 
contained in Chapter-V of this Report should be furnished to them at 
an early date. 
1.4 The Committee will now deal with the action taken by the 
Government on some of the Recommendations in the succeeding 
paragraphs. 
OVERVIEW OF DEMAND 
(Recommendation Para No.2.16) 
 
1.5 The Committee were a ghast at the way the financial requirements of 
the Ministry of Food Processing Industries have been attended to by the 
Planners and the Governments  starved the Ministry of the funds in four of 
the five years of the El eventh Plan resulting in hampering the  
implementation of schemes at the proper pace  They had expected the 
planners and the policy makers to do justice with the financial 
requirements of the Ministry  at least in Fiscal 2011 -12. The Committee 
were, however, hugely disappointed to note that against a sum of Rs. 
1490.86 crore sought by the Ministry, they had been allotted a paltry Rs. 
600 crore for the ter minal year of the Eleventh Plan  against the backdrop 
of the fact that the Ministry were allocated a sum of Rs. 4031 crore for the 
Eleventh Plan by the Planning Commission against their earlier 
projections in respect of 30 Mega Food Parks, 30 Cold Chain projects and 
30 Modernised Abbatoirs. Wondering h ow the Planners and the 
Government expect ed the Mi nistry to perform if they are not provided 
sufficient where-withal for the purpose and feeling clearly that their attitude 

10 
 
towards this fundamental re quirement of the Ministry defied  logic when in 
plain statistical terms, the Ministry got about  Rs. 1130 crore during first 
four years of the Eleventh Plan which  is one fourth or so of the Rs.4031 
crore allocated to them for the Eleventh Plan and when e ven with the Rs. 
600 crore BE for 2011 -12 the Ministry would not even reach halfway mark 
of their total allocation (Rs.1730 crore), the Committee  had recommended 
that though it may not be worth much to the food processing industries 
sector at large, the Government should, at least in the interest of the 
projects in pipeline enhance the allocation of the Ministry  substantially at 
the RE stage during Fiscal 2011-12. 
1.6. The Ministry of Food Processing Industries, in their Action Taken 
Note have stated that they did not propose for any additional allocation at 
RE stage as the existing BE provisions are adequate. For clearing backlog 
of Scheme for Technology Upgradation/ Establishment/ modernization of 
Food Processing Industries, the Ministry have proposed to seek required 
fund in First two years of the Twelfth  Plan. Rs. 50.00 Crores has been 
proposed as re -appropriation from internal savings in the Ministry during 
this year. 
 
1.7  The Committee find this about turn in the attitude of the 
Ministry quite inexplicable.  Time and again, during the course of the 
examination of Demands for Grants (2011 -12) the Ministry had 
submitted before the Committee that the budgetary allocation of Rs . 
600 crore for 2011 -12 would not suffice and would lead to down 
sizing of several ongoing Schemes.  Moreso, when the Government 
had also allowed them further expansion of some of their Schemes. 
The Committee, therefore, view this development as unfortunat e and 
against the interest of various Schemes being implemented by the 

11 
 
Ministry. Now that the Ministry have frittered this opportunity, the 
Committee desire them to work out their financial requirements 
meticulously and work purposefully to secure them in the Twelfth 
Plan in general and the initial year of the Twelfth Plan in particular so 
as to ensure that their inaction does not cost dear to their various 
Schemes.    While delving upon this issue, the Committee would also 
like the Ministry to apprise them  in detail as to how they proposed to 
re-appropriate the amount of Rs. 50 crore from internal savings in 
the Ministry during the year 2011-12 for the purpose. 
PLAN  ALLOCATION 
(Recommendation Para No. 2.18) 
 
1.8 Saddened that inspite  of the Committee pointing out to the 
Planners and the Government time and again about the need to fund this 
would be Sunshine Sector of Indian economy adequately, in several of 
their Reports, neither of the two had been spurred into requisite action, the 
Committee had highlighted  the staggering savings that could have been 
effected by more  focus on the food processing industry sector particularly 
when the post harvest losses, as per conservative estimates are a 
mammoth Rs. 50000 crore per annum in fruits and vegetables sector 
alone. Still feeling that though the Planners and the Government had  uptil 
then not appreciated the exact import of their Recommendations about the 
massive investment needed in the food processing industry sector, all was 
not lost, they had earnestly hoped the Planners and the Government could 
make amends by infusing  this fund  starved sector with optimum amount 
of funds at least in the Twelfth Plan so as to plug the massive losses 
occurring year after year, for decades together, to the agriculture and 
allied sector produce because of the lack of food processing and storage 
infrastructure.  

12 
 
1.9 In their Action Taken Note the Ministry have while taking note of the 
Observation/Recommendations of the C ommittee also communicated the 
same to the Ministry of Finance and Planning Commission to take a view 
on the enhancement of funds in the Twelfth Five Year Plan for the Food 
Processing Industry. 
 
1.10 The Committee note that their recommendation about 
enhancing the allocation of funds to the financially starved food 
processing industry sector has not only been noted by the Ministry 
but they have also conveyed it to the Planning Commission and the 
Ministry of Finance.  The Committee hope that the last two named 
agencies would consider their recommendation in right earnest this 
time, moreso, when the industrial downturn is a reality.  The 
Committee also expect that the Ministry won’t assume their job being 
over by merely passing on their recommendation to Planning 
Commission and Ministry of Finance but would strive at all relevant 
fora to obtain optimum infusion of funds in the Twelfth Plan for the 
food processing industry sector. 
PREPARATION FOR THE TWELFTH PLAN 
(Recommendation Para No. 2.20) 
 
1.11 Having analysed the cascading effect of delays in planning and 
approvals during the Eleventh Plan, t he Committee had  hoped that a 
similar fate will not befall the Twelfth Plan. They  had, therefore, 
recommended that all the formalities and preparatory work pertaining to 
the Twelfth Five Year Plan should be completed on a war footing basis. 
The Plan should be communicated to all line Ministries/Departments at the 
latest by 31 December, 2011. The Ministries/Depart ments should also be 

13 
 
directed to complete all formalities and incidental procedures in the last 
quarter of the ongoing Fiscal so that the implementation of the Schemes 
included in the Twelfth Plan commences from the very first day of the Plan 
viz. 1 April, 2012. 
1.12 The Government in their Action Taken Note have stated that th e 
Planning Commission have  constituted the Working Group on Food 
Processing Industries under the Chairmanship of Secretary, FPI.  The 
Report has been finalized by the Working Group on  Food Processing 
Sector and the same has been se nt to Planning Commission on 11 
November, 2011 for consideration.   
Ministry ha ve undertaken evaluation of their Plan S chemes and 
based on in depth review, the proposals for Twelfth Plan have been 
incorporated in the Working Group Report. 
1.13 The Committee note that pursuant to their Recommendations 
the Ministry have undertaken evaluation of their Plan Schemes and 
based on an in -depth review the proposals for Plan have been 
incorporated in the Report of the W orking Group constituted by 
Planning Commission. The Committee further note that the Report 
has been finalized by the Working Group and has been sent to 
Planning Commission on 11 November, 2011 for their consideration. 
However, the Committee are not sure whether these very initial steps 
would lead to the Plan being conveyed to all Ministries/Departments 
in advance as the 31 December, 2011 deadline has already gone by.  
With hardly any time left for the Commencement of the Twelfth Plan 
on 1 April, 2012, the Committee exhort the Planners and the 
Government to work overtime to ensure that the finalization of 

14 
 
Twelfth Plan should not be delayed as happened in the case  of the 
Eleventh Plan.  The present economic situation also warrants that 
the developmental process should be precisely delineated in 
advance so as to ensure there are no hiccups or delays in 
implementation leading to further worsening of the situation.  
Without such an extra effort it would be well nigh impossible for the 
Government to give clear cut directions about Schemes to various 
Ministries/ Departments when the Twelfth Plan commences on 1 
April, this year. 
SCHEME FOR INFRASTRUCTURE DEVELOPMENT 
(Recommendation Para Nos. 3.28 and 3.29) 
 
1.14 The Committee had noted that Scheme for Infrastructure 
Development is the main Scheme of the Ministry which aims to provide 
infrastructure and common facilities, which enhance value addition, for 
use by small and medium enterprises. The Scheme has  three 
components viz. (a) Mega Food Parks (b) Cold Chain, Value Addition and 
Preservation Infrastructure and (c) Establishment of new/modernisation of 
existing Abattoirs. 
 
 They had further noted that though i n the first phase only 10 Mega 
Food Parks and Cold Chains respectively were approved out of 30 
envisaged for the Eleventh Plan . T here was underutilisation of funds 
under this Scheme during the first four years of the Eleventh Plan. The 
underspending was mainly attributable to the inordinate delays in approval 
of the Scheme as also  staggering of timelines of the three components of 
the Scheme. The Committee also observed from  the financial 
performance of the Scheme, that the implementation had improved and 

15 
 
the Scheme had gained momentum from the fourth year onwards of the 
Eleventh Plan. Since this Scheme is likely to continue in the Twelfth Plan 
as well, the Committee had recommended that allocation for this Scheme 
be suitably enhanced by the Government so that substantial ground work 
for Twelfth Plan is done before hand.  
1.15 In their Action Taken Note the Government have stated that t he 
Working Group on Food Processing ha d highlighted the importance of 
Plan S cheme of Infrastructural Development for Mega Food  Park, Cold 
Chain and Abattoir  and  had recommended that the existing Col d Chain 
Scheme should be continued during Twelfth Plan period with higher 
allocation.  The Working Group ha d also recommended that for ensuring 
proper storage, enhancement in shelf -life and value addition of non -
horticultural produce, village level cold ch ain infrastructure should be 
promoted. 
 Similarly, the Infrastructure D evelopment S cheme for Mega Food 
Park has been proposed to be continued  and expanded  in the Twelfth 
Plan.  
During the Twelfth P lan perio d, the Ministry proposed  to approve 
120 projects and an outlay of Rs. 1675 crore had been envisaged for cold 
chain projects.  
 
 There are 3600 recognised slaughter houses in the country. As on 
date 10 abattoirs have been approved. Moreover, the MoFPI has further 
received 41 proposals for setting up and modernization of abattoirs. As the 
funds allocated for this scheme are limited, the Ministry of Urban 
Development have been approached for assisting this scheme under the 
JNNURM. The Department of Animal Husbandry, Dairying and Fisheries 
have also suggested inclusion of setting / modernization of existing 
abattoir under JNNURM. The MoFPI have  also approached the Planning 
Commission, Department of Expenditure, Ministry of Finance for infusion 

16 
 
of large funds for construction of new abattoirs/ modernization of existing 
abattoirs to be funded from JNNURM. The National Meat & Poultry 
Processing Board (NMPPB), a registered socie ty under the Societies 
Registration Act 1860 working under the aegis of Ministry of Food 
Processing Industries conducts outreach programmes in various parts of 
the country to train meat sector workers regarding various aspects of 
hygienic slaughtering and handling of meat. Moreover NMPPB has also 
conducted industry meets in meat concentrated districts to educate the 
industry. The proposal for upscaling of the scheme at a cost of Rs. 252.62 
crores for setting up 25 new projects and modernisation of 25 existi ng 
projects is being processed for approval by the EFC/approval by CCEA 
which will be   implemented by the Central sector in the first two years of 
the Twelfth Five Year Plan. Development and modernisation of abattoirs 
would be a part of National Mission f or Food Processing in the Twelfth 
Five Year Plan. Expenditure would be only from the third year. This is 
because the states would take some time to develop their facilities. The 
scheme would be implemented by State Governments since most of the 
proposals are from the Municipal Bodies who are closely connected to the 
State Governments. It is proposed to establish 90 new abattoirs and 
modernize 150 existing abattoirs at a cost of Rs.795.00 c rores during 12th 
Plan under NMFP. 
 
1.16 The Committee note with sati sfaction that the Plan Scheme of 
Infrastructure Development for Mega Food Parks, Cold Chain and 
Abattoir, etc. has caught the eye of the Working Group of the 
Planning Commission on Food Processing Industry Sector.  
Appreciating the importance of this cruci al link between the farm 
gate and consumers and the massive slippages taking place in the 
form of post harvest crop losses due to the inherent weaknesses of 

17 
 
the extant set -up, the Working Group has recommended several 
measures to promote development of inf rastructure.  These include 
creation of proper storage space, enhancement of shelf -life and 
value addition of non -agricultural produce, village level cold chain 
infrastructure, etc.  They have also recommended continuation of 
Mega Food Park Scheme in the T welfth Plan in view of critical need 
of infrastructure for development of food processing industry sector. 
 While all these developments are pointers in right direction it 
is needless for them to remind that we must not forget that all these 
measures sugge sted by the Working Group require massive 
infusions of funds.  The Committee, therefore, strongly feel that 
unless the Planning Commission wakes -up to this reality and 
allocates sufficient funds to the food processing industry sector in 
the Twelfth Plan al l efforts to revamp  the food processing industry 
sector, to stop the massive amount of post harvest crop losses and 
to enhance the income of the hapless farmer will come to a naught. 
 The Committee, therefore, strongly recommend the Planning 
Commission to heed to the advice of their own Working Group and 
ensure that the food processing industry sector does not continue to 
languish for want of funds in the Twelfth as happened during the 
Eleventh Plan as at the time of allocation of funds, more often than 
not, the Committee have been provided with the oft repeated reasons 
that competing inter sectoral demands, etc have forced the Planning 

18 
 
Commission to withhold the infusion of the requisite funds for 
various schemes recommended by different Working Groups of 
Planning Commission itself.  This in their considered opinion 
amounts to the defeat of the very purpose of setting up of working 
Groups.  
SCHEME FOR TECHNOLOGY UPGRADATION, ESTABLISH-MENT 
AND MODERNISATION OF FOOD PROCESSING INDUSTRIES 
(Recommendation Para No. 3.30)  
 
1.17 The S cheme for Technology Upgradation, Establishment and 
Modernisation of Food Processing Industries is meant for the existing 
Units in the food p rocessing industry sector. The S cheme provides 
financial assistance with a view to increase the level of processing, 
reduction of wastage, value addition, enhancement of income of farmers 
as well as increase exports. The Scheme has been provided BE of  
Rs. 333 crore during the four completed years of the Eleventh Plan which 
were modified to Rs. 393.53 crore  at the RE stage. The RE allocations 
were more than fully utilized in the first three Fiscals and as per the 
indications were expected to be spent fully in the year 2010-11 resulting in 
reasonably good financial performance benefit ting to the existing units in 
the food processing industry sector in numerably.  However, noting the 
apathetic attitude of the Government  in the form of minimal allocations 
towards this Scheme,  year after year, leading to increase in number of 
pending applications for assistance to 2500 plus has forced the Ministry to 
resort to rationing of the Scheme, which is  not a healthy state -of affairs. 
The Committee  had strongly recommend ed that the Ministry to 
immediately work out their funds requirements for this Scheme for the 
ongoing Fiscal with a view to liquidate as many eligible applications as 
possible and present it to the Ministry of Finance. The y had further 

19 
 
recommended that additional requirements of  funds for this Scheme 
should be released by the Ministry of Finance on top priority basis. 
1.18 In their Action Taken Note the Government have stated that i n the 
Eleventh Five Year Plan a total allocation of Rs. 600 crores  was made by 
Planning Commission for the Scheme. Out of total allocation, an amount 
of Rs 488.51 c rore has been allocated to the S cheme so far including 
Rs.98 crore BE of 2011-12. Ministry have utilized almost the entire budget 
allocated under this scheme (except NER) and has assisted 2532 Food 
Processing Industries (till 31 October, 2011).     
 
They have further stated that a s on today over 2700 cases are 
pending for grants of assistance. The shortage of funds has resulted in 
this large pendenc y of applica tions.  Ministry  have proposed for an 
additional allocation of Rs. 50.00 crore for this S cheme during the current 
year at RE stage. 
 
1.19 The Committee are happy to note that the Ministry have 
utilized the budget allocated under the scheme for Technology U p-
gradation, Establishment and Moderni -sation of Food Processing 
Industries except in NER. They are, however, deeply concerned to 
further note that due to paucity of funds with the Ministry the 
pending applications have gone further up to 2700 now.  Since the 
reply of the Ministry is silent on the fate of their RE request, the 
Committee are not in a position to comment on the exact situation in 
the matter.  They would, therefore like to be apprised of the disposal 
of the RE request of the Ministry at the ea rliest.  They are also 
equally concerned to note the non -utilisation of funds under the 

20 
 
Scheme in NE Regions and desire a detailed explanation from the 
Ministry in this regard. Moreover, it is also not clear from the Action 
Taken Notes as to what happened to RE projection. The large 
pendency of applications due to shortage of funds is another matter 
of grave concern which the Committee have noted. The Committee, 
therefore, desire, the Ministry to sort out the matter at the earliest 
possible time and furnish  a detailed note on the issues raised, 
herein, at the earliest. 
SCHEME FOR UPGRADATION OF QUALITY OF STREET FOOD 
(Recommendation Para No.3.31) 
 
1.20 The Committee opined that the Scheme for Upgradation  of Quality 
of Street Food  is another instance of the Government’s apathetic attitude 
forwards schemes of public welfare. Almost the entire Eleventh Five year 
Plan has gone by and this scheme is still looking askance for approvals. 
The assurance of the Ministry of Finance that the scaled down pilot project 
version can be considered subject  to availability of funds sound ed hollow 
at the fag end of the Eleventh Plan. More so, when the y in view of the 
inherent benefits of the Scheme had asked the Ministry in their Fifth 
Report to opera tionalise the scheme well before the commencement of 
the Commonwealth Games held in October, 2010.  Inspite of the step 
motherly treatment meted out to this Scheme by the Ministry of Finance, 
the Committee had recommended release of additional funds for it at the 
RE stage so that the ambit of the Scheme is extended a bit beyond the 
scaled down version thereby enable the Ministry to implement it with full 
speed during the Twelfth Plan with the benefit of experienced gained now.  
1.21 The Government in their action taken note stated that the  scheme 
has not been supported by Planning Commission and Ministry of Finance. 

21 
 
In view of recommendation of the 12 th Plan Working Group, the subject 
matter has been taken up with the Minis try of Housing and Urban Poverty 
Alleviation 
 
1.22 The Committee are surprised to note that the Planning 
Commission had not supported the ‘Scheme for Upgradation of 
Quality of Street Food’ thereby negating the efforts of the Ministry in 
the  implementation  of a Scheme which in their considered opinion 
could have made a huge difference not only in the Quality of Street 
Food presently being consumed by a vast majority of poor and 
deprived sections of population in the metropolitan and major cities 
of the Coun try but also would have vastly contributed to the 
lessening of avoidable unquantified expenditure being now incurred 
on healthcare. The Committee however, see a ray of hope in that the 
Working Group on Twelfth Plan has also recommended for the 
implementation of the Scheme and that the subject matter has been 
taken up by the Ministry with the Ministry of Housing and Urban 
Poverty Alleviation. The Committee would like to be apprised of the 
developments in this regard and desire the Ministry to vigorously 
pursue with Planning Commission in getting approvals for the 
Scheme for implementation in the first year itself of the Twelfth Plan. 
NATIONAL INSTITUTE OF FOOD TECHNOLOGY, 
ENTREPRENEURSHIP AND MANAGEMENT (NIFTEM) 
(Recommendation Para Nos.3.33 and 3.34) 

22 
 
 
1.23 The Committee were constrained to note that National Institute of 
Food Technology, Entrepreneurship and Management (NIFTEM) is being 
set up as an institute of global excellence in education and research in the 
areas of food technology at Kundli, Sonepat, H aryana.  CCEA had 
approved setting up of the institute on 31 August, 2006 at an estimated 
cost of Rs. 244.60 crore.  The estimated cost was revised to a staggering 
Rs. 604.75 crore compelling the Committee to recommend in depth review 
of the same by the Go vernment. The cost of the project later on was 
further revised to Rs. 479.94 crore.  Further probing of this vexed matter of 
fluctuating estimates revealed that it was the then Secretary’s inputs after 
his overseas visits that lead to the upscaling of earl ier estimates of Rs. 
244.60 crore to a massive Rs. 604.75 crore. This was apparently done 
with a view to make the Institute a world class facility. 
   
 On the execution part also the Committee found that the situation is 
far from satisfactory. During last five years only the institutional building 
has been completed. The status of the Institute as a Deemed University is 
a big question mark as on date. With the recruitment process also yet to 
be completed, the y wondered as to what would happen to the student s 
seeking admission in NIFTEM with high hopes. They were doubtful if the 
Ministry would be able to start the Institute even in this Academic Session 
in the prevailing chaos. 
 
1.24. The Ministry in their action taken note stated that CCEA in its 
meeting hel d on 31.8.2006 approved setting up of NIF TEM at an 
estimated cost of Rs. 244.60 crore including foreign exchange component 
of US $ 8.1 million. 
 

23 
 
With a view to obtain deemed to be University status from UGC, the 
legal status of NIFTEM as a company register ed under Section 25 of the 
Companies Act 1956 had to be changed to the Society. Accordingly, the 
Union Cabinet in its meeting held on 23.4.2010 approved registering 
NIFTEM as an autonomous organization under the Indian Societies Act, 
1860. Subsequently, Mi nistry of Food Processing Industries registered 
NIFTEM as a Society under Societies Registration Act, 1860 on 
19.5.2010.  Further, follow up action to transfer all assets and liabilities of 
NIFTEM as a Section 25 Company to the newly incorporated Society a nd 
winding up of the Company is being simultaneously taken as per 
provisions of Companies Act.   
CCEA in its meeting held on 28.4.2011 approved Revised Cost Estimates 
of project from Rs.244.60 crore to Rs.479.94 crore . The construction of 
NIFTEM campus covering 12000 sqm. is at an advanced stage. 
Infrastructure to commence activities in the institute from current financial 
year and 1 st academic session is ready (subject to UGC granting deemed 
to be University status under De Novo category). 
 NIFTEM has drawn up an operationalization plan to undertake 
several activities in the areas such as infrastructure development viz. 
residential complex, lab infrastructure, auditorium, library resources and 
neighbourhood facilities. Recruitment of the academic and non academic 
staff is at an advanced stage.  The present status of various activities is 
indicated in Annexure-I. 
   
To meet the compliance of the directions of UGC, the Institute is 
taking all possible steps for obtaining approval for Deemed to be 
University status under De Novo category from Ministry of HRD. The 
academic session can only commence after approval of the Ministry of 
HRD is received. The infrastructure has been made ready to run first two 
years of the B.Tech ( Food Technology & Management) course for the 
present. The Expert Committee appointed by UGC is expected to visit the 

24 
 
Institute shortly to make an on -the-spot assessment of all the facilities 
created in the Institute. 
1.25 The Committee are constrained to n ote that the reply of the 
Government is silent with regard to their recommendation that an  
in–depth review of the revision of cost estimates of NIFTEM as 
approved by CCEA from Rs. 244.60 crore though they have been 
informed that CCEA approved the revised cost estimates at Rs. 
479.94 crore on 28 April, 2011. They further observed that the reply of 
the Government gives details of present status of various activities 
viz infrastructure, recruitment process etc. leading to 
operationalisation of NIFTEM. They, h owever, observe that their 
doubts about commencement of the first Academic Session in the 
current academic session is still hanging fire as the same is subject 
to approval of Ministry of Human Resource Development with regard 
to Deemed to be University Sta tus under De Novo category have 
come true. The cannot but conclude that improper planning and lack 
of vision on the part of the Ministry has resulted in wasting of the 
entire  Eleventh Plan period in the operationalisation of NIFTEM 
which was touted to be an Institute of Global excellence in education 
and research in the areas of food  technology which could have 
contributed to some extent in reduction of huge post harvest crop 
losses being incurred by the country. In the backdrop of the present 
scenario in  this regard, they would at the cost of being repetitive 
urge the Ministry to put their house in order and get all requisite 

25 
 
approvals and strive to make NIFTEM fully functional before the 
Twelfth Plan commences in April, 2012. They would like to be 
apprised of the status of NIFTEM at the earliest. 
UTILISATION CERTIFICATES 
(Recommendation Para No.3.36)  
 
1.26 The Committee were constrained to find that while 2117 numbers 
of Utilisation Certificates amounting Rs. 330.65 crore  were pending in 
respect of grants -in-aid paid up to 31 March, 2008 and due as on 31 
March, 2009 the number ha d swelled to 2389 for an amount Rs. 385.70 
crore  for grant-in-aid paid up to 31 March, 2009 and due as on 31 March, 
2010.  What perturbed more is  the Ministry’s own admission that many 
pending UCs were very old. The situation further aggravated by current 
pendency, mostly with respect to last installments as the grant recipients 
were not submitting UCs in time. It was apparent that contrary to the 
claims of the Ministry that they were vigorously and continuously pursuing 
the matter with a view to expedite all pending utilization certificates things  
were not showing any improvement. The Ministry’s practice of stopping 
release of further installme nts also was not a sufficient deterrent. In fact 
the Ministry had sought the advice of the Ministry of Finance on this vexed 
issue of pendency was still awaited inspite of their follow  ups. The 
Committee in their previous Reports on Demands for Grants for the years 
2009-10 and 2010 -11 had exhorted that Ministry to pursue the liquidation 
of pending UCs with all seriousness so that such huge backlog is cleared 
at the earliest. But nothing tangible has happened. Being of the firm 
opinion that fiscal discipline is essential for implementation of Schemes as 
well as for accounting of precious public funds , t hey had desired the 
Ministry to take up the matter more forcefully with all concerned including 
the Ministry of Finance and to find out a lasting solution to t his c hronic 
problem.  

26 
 
1.27 In their Action Taken Note the present t rend of outstanding UCs 
year wise based on the latest information supplied by the Pay and 
Account Office  has been furnished in the following table by the 
Government: 
 
(Rs in crore)   
Date No. of 
UCs 
Amount of 
Pending 
UCs 
 
Unspent 
Balance 
 
Total Amount 
of pending 
UCs Including 
Unspent 
Balance  
1.4.2009 2117 321.88 8.77 330.65 
1.4.2010 2544 402.76 8.15 410.91 
1.4.2011 2829 454.29 1.47 455.76 
31.10.2011 2706 432.28 1.47 433.75 
 
Ministry have taken an initiative by writing to all the State Nodal 
Agencies (SNAs) and to Principal Secretaries of the State Governments 
seeking their assistance to ensure timely submission of UCs.  There have 
been positive responses in this regard and SNAs are se nding UCs and 
also enclosing copies of the UCs sent in the past to the concerned 
divisions.  This resulted in 123 UCs getting liquidated and amount has 
reduced by Rs.22.01 crore.  A policy decision has been taken in 
consultation with Ministry of Finance in  respect of Schemes where grants 
are released on reimbursement basis and will not invite provision of 
submission of UCs in terms of GFR rules.  This will help to bring down the 
number of outstanding UCs in the future. 
 
1.28 The Committee, take note of the various steps taken by 
Ministry to reduce the pending UCs. They also take note of the policy 

27 
 
decision taken by them in consultation with the Ministry of Finance.  
Though the immediate gains of these measures are not yet visible in 
the performance of the Ministry in liquidation of the pending UCs, the 
Committee are hopeful that as long term measures these may prove 
to be of help. 
 Coming to the policy decision taken in consultation with the 
Ministry of Finance, the Committee would at the outset like to be 
apprised of the exact contours and also the implications of the said 
policy decision.  They would also like to be further apprised about 
the time schedule laid down for implementation of the said decision 
and the number of UCs alongwith their total worth whi ch may stand 
liquidated under the said policy when implemented.  
 
 
  

28 
 
CHAPTER-II 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN 
ACCEPTED BY THE GOVERNMENT 
 
RECOMMNDATION SERIAL NO. 1.9 
 The Committee are greatly perturbed with the manner in which 
Statements under Direction 73A of Directions by the Speaker, Lok Sabha 
are being made in the context of the status of implementation of 
Recommendations contained in their Reports. Previously also ,  they had 
taken up this matter in their Fifth Report when they had found that the 
Statement under Direction 73A in the context of the Fortieth Report 
(Fourteenth Lok Sabha) was not only made after more than fifteen months 
from the presentation of that Re port to the Parliament but also contained 
incomplete information. Inspite of their well meaning advice, it seems, the 
situation has not improved. The Statements in the context of the Fifth and 
Ninth Report have been inordinately delayed and made after more  than a 
year and 10 months respectively. Both the Statements were deficient on 
several counts requiring them to be updated and made again. 
Furthermore, though they were to be made in the ongoing Session of 
Parliament, the needful is yet to be done. The Com mittee strongly 
deprecate this casual attitude towards a Direction by Speaker, Lok Sabha 
and recommend that Statements under Direction 73A in the context of the 
Fifth and Ninth Report duly updated and completed in all respects, be 
made in the ongoing Session of Parliament. 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT:        
The Ministry has laid both the reports in the Parliament in 
comprehensive and updated manner i.e. on dated 06.09.2011 in Lok 
Sabha and on dated 05.09.2011 in Rajya Sabha. Ministry has noted the 

29 
 
observation for strict compliance in making of statements under the 
direction 73 A. 
******* 
(Letter No. 6-8/2011.Parl dated 25th November, 2011) 
 
RECOMMNDATION SERIAL NO. 2.16 
 The Committee are really aghast at the way the financial  
requirements of the Ministry of Food Processing Industries have been 
attended to by the Planners and the Governments throughout  the 
Eleventh Plan.  As has been amply brought out in the Fifth and Ninth 
Reports of the Committee pertaining to the Demands for Grants of the 
Ministry for 2009-10 and 2010-11 respectively, the Ministry was starved of 
the funds in the initial two years of the Plan due to delays in 
approvals/clearances of the Schemes, most of whom were new initiatives. 
In the next two years also, when the momentum was picking up, the 
schemes of the Ministry though already reduced in the scale by the CCEA 
were again not provided the requisite funds, thereby hampering their 
implementation at the proper pace. For the ongoing Fiscal, at least, the 
Committee expected the planners and th e policy makers to do justice with 
the financial requirements of the Ministry. The Committee are, however, 
hugely disappointed to note that against a sum of Rs. 1490.86 crore 
sought by the Ministry, they have been allotted a paltry Rs. 600 crore for 
what is the terminal year of the Eleventh Plan. It would be noteworthy to 
mention here that the Ministry was allocated a sum of Rs. 4031 crore for 
the Eleventh Plan by the Planning Commission against their earlier 
projections in respect of 30 Mega Food Parks, 30  Cold Chain projects and 
30 Modernised Abbatoirs. The approvals were belatedly given for only 10 
each of them. The fund allocation, therefore, got pruned in the initial years 
due to delays in approvals as also scaling down of targets.  The targets 

30 
 
have, ho wever, been enhanced in the penultimate year of the Plan 
presumably after the Government and Planners were satisfied with the 
progress of the ongoing projects. Under such circumstances the Ministry 
were not only fully justified in asking for enhanced allocation, they ought to 
have been rightfully provided the same. How can the Planners and the 
Government expect the Ministry to perform if they are not provided 
sufficient where-withal for the purpose. Clearly their attitude towards this 
fundamental requiremen t of the Ministry defies logic. In plain statistical 
terms, the Ministry have got about Rs1130 crore during first four years of 
the Eleventh Plan. This is one fourth  or so of the Rs.4031 crore allocated 
to them for the Eleventh Plan. Even with the Rs. 600  crore BE for 2011-12 
the Ministry will not even reach halfway mark of their total allocation 
(Rs.1730 crore). The Committee, therefore, recommend that though it may 
not be worth much to the food processing industries sector at large, the 
Government should , at least in the interest of the projects in pipeline 
enhance the allocation of the Ministry substantially at the RE stage, this 
year. 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT: 
   Ministry has not proposed for any additional allocation at RE 
stage as the existing BE provisions are adequate. For clearing backlog of 
Scheme for Technology Upgradation/ Establishment/ modernization of 
Food Processing Industries, Ministry has proposed to seek required fund 
in 1st two years of 12 th Plan. Rs. 50.00 Crores has been proposed as re -
appropriation from internal savings in the Ministry during this year. 
****** 
(Letter No. 6-8/2011.Parl dated 25th November, 2011) 
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE 
For comments of the Committee please refer to Para No. 1.7 of 
Chapter I of this Report  

31 
 
RECOMMNDATION SERIAL NO. 2.17 
Plan Allocation 
 As has been stated previously in this Report, as also in several 
other Reports of the Committee, the food processing industries sector has 
never been a priority area for the Planners and Government alike for 
decades together though a separate Ministry is i n place for over  two 
decades now.  As a part of skewered priorities, both these entities have 
very smugly focused on increasing the production of foodgrains, cereals, 
oilseeds, dairy products, animal husbandry and fisheries produce over the 
last so many y ears but nobody has cared to ensure that post harvest and 
storage losses are minimized. Resultantly, while the farming community 
has kept on contributing their might selflessly towards making the nation 
self reliant and secure in food, the fruits of their toil are still being wasted 
in humungous quantities all over the Country for want of adequate 
processing measures and technologies. 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT: 
Minimization of Wastage and increasing the level of processing are 
dependent on adequate infrastru cture facilities and effective supply chain 
management.  Based on the learning experience of 11 th Plan Schemes, 
the efforts are being made to re-orient the present scheme in the 12 th Plan 
initiatives so as to cater to the needs of the time.  
******* 
(Letter No. 6-8/2011.Parl dated 25th November, 2011) 

32 
 
RECOMMNDATION SERIAL NO. 2.18 
           It is very sad that inspite of the Committee pointing out to the 
Planners and the Government time and again about the need to fund this 
would be Sunshine Sector of Indian economy adequately, in several of 
their Reports, neither of the two have been spurred into requisite action. 
One can only imagine the staggering savings that could have been 
effected by more  focus on the food processing industry sector particula rly 
when the post harvest losses, as per conservative estimates are a 
mammoth Rs. 50000 crore per annum in fruits and vegetables sector 
alone. The Committee can, therefore, at best say that though the Planners 
and the Government have uptil now not apprecia ted the exact import of 
their Recommendations about the massive investment needed in the food 
processing industry sector, all is not lost. They earnestly hope the 
Planners and the Government could make amends by infusing  this funds 
starved sector with opt imum amount of funds at least in the Twelfth Plan 
so as to plug the massive losses occurring year after year, for decades 
together, to the agriculture and allied sector produce because of the lack 
of food processing and storage infrastructure.  
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT: 
The observation/ recommendations of the committee has been 
communicated to Ministry of Finance and Planning Commission to take a 
view on the enhancement of funds in the 12 th Five Year Plan for the Food 
Processing Industry. 
****** 
(Letter No. 6-8/2011.Parl dated 25th November, 2011) 
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE 
For comments of the Committee please refer to Para No. 1.10 of 
Chapter I of this Report  

33 
 
 
RECOMMNDATION SERIAL NO. 2.19 
 
Preparation for the Twelfth Plan 
 The delayed finalization and approval of Eleventh Plan, as is 
evident from the implementation proper of Schemes by the 
Ministries/Departments under the jurisdiction of the Committee has led to 
staggering of timelines and resultant inflation in costs of alm ost the entire 
developmental process during these five years. This according to the 
Committee is not a happy situation. It goes without saying that proper and 
timely planning are sine qua non of any activity, the planning process of a 
developing economy no t excluded. The Committee have been, therefore, 
critical of the way the Eleventh Plan was dealt with by the Planners and 
Policy makers in all their Reports on the Demands for Grants of last two 
Fiscals pertaining to the Ministries/Departments under their j urisdiction. 
While ascertaining the preparedness of the Planners and the Government 
for the Twelfth Plan the Committee were informed by the representative of 
the Planning Commission that the Commission wished to encourage the 
Ministry to do stock taking of  all on going pregrammes at Mid -Term 
Appraisal Stage so that they get two years for course correction. The 
Committee find the advice of the Planning Commission totally uncalled for 
in view of the fact that the Mid-Term-Appraisal of the Eleventh Plan inspite 
of Committee’s Recommendations in their previous Reports for being 
expedited, was actually completed somewhere in the second half of the 
Fourth year of the Plan. What would the Ministries/Departments be able to 
do in the last year of the Plan as Course C orrection vis-à-vis the Schemes 
being implemented, is anybody’s guess. 
 
 

34 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT: 
         The observations of the Committee have been forwarded to the 
Planning Commission for suitable action.  
****** 
(Letter No. 6-8/2011.Parl dated 25th November, 2011) 
 
RECOMMNDATION SERIAL NO. 2.20 
 The Committee, however, hope that a similar fate does not befall 
the Twelfth Plan. They, therefore, recommend that all the formalities and 
preparatory work pertaining to the Twelfth Five Year Plan should be 
completed on a war footing basis. The Plan should be communicated to all 
line Ministries/Departments at the latest by 31 December, 2011. The 
Ministries/Departments should also be directed to complete all formalities 
and incidental procedures in the last qu arter of the ongoing Fiscal so that 
the implementation of the Schemes included in the Twelfth Plan 
commences from the very first day of the Plan viz. 1 April, 2012. 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT: 
The Planning Commission has constituted the Working Group on 
Food Processing Industries under the Chairmanship of Secretary, FPI.  
The Report has been finalized by the Working Group on Food Processing 
Sector and the same has been sent to Planning Commissio n on 
11.11.2011 for consideration.   
 

35 
 
Ministry has undertaken evaluation of its plan schemes and based 
on in depth review, the proposals for 12 th Plan have been incorporated in 
the Working Group Report. 
****** 
(Letter No. 6-8/2011.Parl dated 25th November, 2011) 
 
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE 
For comments of the Committee please refer to Para No. 1.13 of 
Chapter I of this Report  
 
RECOMMNDATION SERIAL NO. 2.21 
  The Committee observe that the Ministry of Food Processing 
Industries only implements Cent ral Sector Schemes and unfortunately 
Centrally Sponsored Schemes, which have their reach to common man, 
are not implemented by the Ministry. They further observe from the 
statement of the Minister of Food Processing Industries before full 
Planning Commission Meeting, that the Ministry will be preparing National 
Food Processing Mission as a Centrally Sponsored Scheme for the 
Twelfth Plan period. The Committee desire that this should be done in a 
comprehensive and holistic manner so that the benefits of the 
implementation of Schemes of the Ministry can reach the common man in 
an efficient and prompt manner. The Committee would like to be informed 
of the progress made by the Ministry in this direction at the earliest. 
 
 
 

36 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT: 
       To ensure more decentralization in implementation of this Ministry’s 
schemes as well as to enhance the schemes outreach to the different 
stakeholders including States/ UTs, Ministry has proposed a new Centrally 
Sponsored Scheme (National Mission of Food Proce ssing) during the 12 th 
Plan, which is a major shift in the Ministry’s approach from that of Central 
sector scheme in 11 th Plan.  Accordingly, the new centrally sponsored 
scheme of National Mission of Food Processing (NMFP) has been 
proposed by the Working Group on Food Processing Industries 
constituted by Planning Commission.  Draft Note of NMFP has already 
been circulated to all the states / UTs and two rounds of video 
conferencing had been done in the months of Aug. & Oct. 2011 in this 
regard.  Further, t he States / UTs have also been requested to undertake 
preparatory activities / advance action to put required infrastructure and 
systems in place so that the NMFP scheme could be implemented 
immediately after obtaining necessary approvals for NMFP during t he 12th 
Plan. A SFC Note for transfer of funds for preparatory activities in the 
current financial year to the States / UT Governments has also been 
circulated to the related Ministries / Departments for seeking their 
comments on the proposal.  Separately proposals have also been sent to 
Ministry of Finance and Planning Commission for approval of this new 
scheme. 
****** 
(Letter No. 6-8/2011.Parl dated 25th November, 2011) 
 
RECOMMNDATION SERIAL NO. 3.28 
 The Committee note that Scheme for Infrastructure Development is 
the main Scheme of the Ministry which aims to provide infrastructure and 
common facilities, which enhance value addition, for use by small and 

37 
 
medium enterprises. The Scheme has  three compon ents viz. (a) Mega 
Food Parks (b) Cold Chain, Value Addition and Preservation Infrastructure 
and (c) Establishment of new/modernisation of existing Abattoirs. 
RECOMMNDATION SERIAL NO. 3.29 
 In the first phase only 10 Mega Food Parks and Cold Chains 
respectively were approved out of 30 envisaged for the Eleventh Plan.  
The Committee note underutilisation of funds under this Scheme during 
the first four years of the Eleventh Plan. Against the B E figures of Rs.90 
crore, Rs.90 crore, Rs.135 crore and Rs.137.50 crore respectively for the 
four Fiscals of the Eleventh Plan, the RE figures have been Rs. 15 crore, 
Rs. 42.20 crore, Rs. 73.81 crore and Rs. 120.89 crore only.  The Actuals 
in these years h ave been Rs. 14.79 crore, Rs. 48.28 crore, Rs. 72.94 
crore and Rs. 86.67 crore (upto 31 January, 2011), respectively.  The 
underspending is mainly attributable to the inordinate delays in approval of 
the Scheme. Glitches in implementation of the Scheme hav e also resulted 
in under utilization as also staggering of timelines of the three components 
of the Scheme. As can be seen from the financial performance of the 
Scheme, the implementation has improved and the scheme has gained 
momentum from the fourth year  onwards of the Eleventh Plan. The 
Committee also find that the Government have accorded approval for five 
more Mega Food Parks and upscaled the Cold Chain, Value Addition and 
Preservation Infrastructure Component to the extent of balance, approved 
Eleventh Plan allocation. With these additional items of expenditure the 
Committee are sure the Ministry will be able to utilize the Rs. 300 crore 
allocated as BE to them for the ongoing Fiscal. Since this Scheme is likely 
to continue in the Twelfth Plan as well,  the Committee recommend that 
allocation for this Scheme be suitably enhanced by the Government so 
that substantial ground work for Twelfth Plan is done before hand.  
 
 

38 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT (Recommendations No. 3.28 & 3.29) 
The Working Group on Food Processing has highlighted the 
importance of plan scheme of Infrastructural Development for Mega Food 
Park, Cold Chain and Abattoir. Cold Chain logistics sector and it has 
recommended that the existing cold chain scheme should be continued 
during 12 th Plan period with higher allocation.  Working Group has also 
recommended that for ensuring proper storage, enhancement in shelf -life 
and value addition of non -horticultural produce, village level cold chain 
infrastructure should be promoted. 
Keeping in view the  critical need of infrastructure for development 
of Food Processing sector, the infrastructure development scheme for 
Mega Food Park has been proposed to be continued in the 12 th Plan with 
proposal for expansion of the scheme during 12 th Plan. The Working 
Group has submitted its recommendation which includes enhancement of 
plan allocation to meet the requirement of creating infrastructure 
throughout the nation. 
 
For the 12th Plan Period, it is proposed to take up 120 new projects 
including 20 of them for ir radiation projects with an outlay of Rs. 1200 
crore.  Apart from these, a fund of Rs. 425 crore will also be required 
towards implementation of projects approved & proposed during 11 th plan.  
A provision of Rs. 50 crore towards implementation expenses at a round 
3% of total outlay of Rs. 1625 crore is also envisaged.  Thus, during the 
12th plan period, the Ministry proposes to approve 120 projects and outlay 
of Rs. 1675 crore is envisaged.  
 
Approval Committee for the Scheme of Abattoir had approved 10 
projects to be taken up during 2008 -09 at a cost of Rs.129.00 Crores 
(Actual amount after DPR correction amounts to Rs.125.69 Crores). The 
expenditure incurred upto year 2010 -11 under this scheme is Rs. 35.55 

39 
 
Crores. 2 abattoirs projects have been completed til l date. A proposal for 
up-scaling the Scheme for Setting up of new Abattoirs and Modernization 
of existing abattoir is being proposed for EFC approval for Rs. 291.28 
crores as per EFC Note dated 13 -10-2011. Out of this allocation of Rs. 
291.28 Crores, it i s expected to fund approximately 25 new abattoirs and 
modernize 25 existing Abattoirs at a cost of Rs. 252.62 crores as well as 
complete the remaining eight running projects at a cost of Rs. 38.66 
crores. Each of these projects is likely to be completed in  18 months. 
However, small projects for modernization are likely to be completed in12 
months. As far as the location of the projects is concerned it is submitted 
that:- 
a.) The details of location of the project is submitted by State Govt. 
Agencies at the time  of submission of DPR itself. The projections, 
estimated expenditure details are made by the State Government 
on the basis of the location of land for which the DPR is sent by the 
project promoter / State Government. Thus, MoFPI approves the 
project on the  basis of DPR submitted by project promoter/ Sate 
Government Agency in which the location of the project is already 
indicated by the State Government / project Promoter. 
 
b.) The agitations by the local people are made only after the DPR is 
approved by the MoF PI. Hence, MoFPI is having no control of 
project site as these are recommended and chosen by the State 
Government itself before approval of project by the MoFPI. 
 
There are 3600 recognised slaughter houses in the country. As on 
date 10 abattoirs have been approved. Moreover, the MoFPI has further 
received 41 proposals for setting up and modernization of abattoirs. As the 
funds allocated for this scheme are limited, the Ministry of Urban 
Development has been approached for assisting this scheme under the 
JNNURM. The Department of Animal Husbandry, Dairying and Fisheries 
has also suggested inclusion of setting / modernization of existing abattoir 

40 
 
under JNNURM. The MoFP I has also approached the Planning 
Commission, Department of Expenditure, Ministry of Finance for infusion 
of large funds for construction of new abattoirs/ modernization of existing 
abattoirs to be funded from JNNURM. This will enable State Governments 
to take up large number of abattoirs for modernization resulting in better 
urban environment and availability of more hygienic meat to the 
consumer. The National Meat & Poultry Processing Board (NMPPB), a 
registered society under the Societies Registration A ct 1860 working 
under the aegis of Ministry of Food Processing Industries organizes 
Mayors Conference to educate the Mayors, Municipal Commissioners and 
Veterinary officers regarding the various aspects of hygienic and modern 
abattoirs. Two such conference s have already taken place. In addition, 
NMPPB also conducts outreach programmes in various parts of the 
country to train meat sector workers regarding various aspects of hygienic 
slaughtering and handling of meat. Moreover NMPPB has also conducted 
industry meets in meat concentrated districts to educate the industry. The 
proposal for upscaling of the scheme at a cost of Rs. 252.62 crores for 
setting up 25 new projects and modernisation of 25 existing projects is 
being processed for approval by the EFC/appr oval by CCEA which will be   
implemented by the Central sector in the first two years of the 12 th Five 
Year Plan. Development and modernisation of abattoirs would be a part of 
National Mission for Food Processing in the 12 th Five Year Plan. 
Expenditure would be only from the third year. This is because the states 
would take some time to develop their facilities. The scheme would be 
implemented by State Governments since most of the proposals are from 
the Municipal Bodies who are closely connected to the Sta te 
Governments. It is proposed to establish 90 new abattoirs and modernize 
150 existing abattoirs at a cost of Rs.795.00 Crores during 12th Plan 
under NMFP. 
****** 
(Letter No. 6-8/2011.Parl dated 25th November, 2011) 

41 
 
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE 
For comments of the Committee please refer to Para No. 1.16 of 
Chapter I of this Report  
 
RECOMMNDATION SERIAL NO. 3.30 
 
Scheme for Technology Upgradation, Establishment and 
Modernisation of Food Processing Industries 
 
 This scheme is meant for the existing Units in the food processing 
industry sector. The scheme provides financial assistance with a view to 
increase the level of processing, reduction of wastage, value addition, 
enhancement of income of farmers as well as increase exports. The 
Scheme has been provided BE of Rs. 72 crore, Rs. 90 crore, Rs. 90 crore 
and Rs. 81 crore during the four completed years of the Eleventh Plan. 
These amounts were modified to Rs. 113.50 crore, Rs. 91.50 crore, Rs. 
82.52 crore and Rs.  106.01 crore respectively at the RE stage. The RE 
allocations were more than fully utilized in the first three Fiscals and as per 
the indications be spent fully in the year 2010 -11. Apart from the 
reasonably good financial performance of the Scheme its ben efit to the 
existing units in the food processing industry sector are innumerable. 
Unfortunately, however, the Government’s attitude towards this Scheme 
can at best be termed apathetic. With such pittance as a budget, year 
after year, the number of pending  applications for assistance have 
burgeoned to 2500 plus. And the Ministry, have virtually been compelled 
to resort to rationing of the Scheme, which is not a healthy state -of affairs. 
The Committee, therefore, strongly recommend that the Ministry should 
immediately work out their funds requirements for this Scheme for the 
ongoing Fiscal with a view to liquidate as many eligible applications as 

42 
 
possible and present it to the Ministry of Finance. The Committee further 
recommend that additional requirements o f funds for this scheme should 
be released by the Ministry of Finance on top priority basis. 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT: 
 
In the 11 th Five Year Plan a total allocation of Rs. 600 crores was 
made by Planning Commission for the Scheme. Out of total allocation,  an 
amount of Rs 488.51 crore has been allocated to the scheme so far 
including Rs.98 crore BE of 2011 -12. Ministry has utilized almost the 
entire budget allocated under this scheme (except NER) and has assisted 
2532 Food Processing Industries (till 31.10.2011).     
 
As on today over 2700 cases are pending for grants of assistance. 
The shortage of funds has resulted in this large pendency of applications.  
Ministry has proposed for an additional allocation of Rs. 50.00 crore  for 
this scheme during the current year at RE stage. 
******* 
(Letter No. 6-8/2011.Parl dated 25th November, 2011) 
 
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE 
For comments of the Committee please refer to Para No. 1.19 of 
Chapter I of this Report  
 
 
 
 

43 
 
RECOMMNDATION SERIAL NO. 3.32 
Scheme for Quality Assurance, Codex Standard and Research and 
Development and Other Promotional Activities. 
 The Committee observe that the above Scheme has been launched 
by the Ministry with a view to motivate food processing industries to adopt 
food safety and quality assurance mechanisms so as to prepare 
themselves for global competition. They further observe that the BE for the 
Scheme required upward revision at RE stage during the first three years 
of the Plan viz. 2007-08,   2008-09 and 2009-10.  In all these years the BE 
was pegged at Rs. 18 crore and was hiked at RE stage to Rs. 19.30 crore 
Rs. 19 crore and Rs. 32.08 crore respectively. In the next year the trend 
got reversed. The BE amounts of Rs. 38 crore was reduced at RE stage to 
Rs. 31. 40 crore. Inexplicably, however, the actuals during the first three 
years have been less than the RE allocations at Rs. 15.12 crore, Rs. 
17.37 crore and Rs. 29.07 crore respectively in 2007 -08, 2008 -09 and 
2009-10.  During the Fourth year of the Plan the S cheme has gained 
momentum and the Ministry have been able to spend Rs. 31.22 crore i.e. 
about 98% of the RE, which is a good sign. The low expenditure in this 
Scheme is mainly due to the fact that assistance and the Scheme is 
released on request basis. The  Committee are, however, happy to note 
that the Ministry have now issued special calls seeking proposals under 
the food testing laboratories and R&D. The Committee recommend that 
apart from this welcome initiative, the Ministry should also launch a 
suitable publicity campaign to popularize this Scheme. This will not only 
facilitate the limited purpose of full utilization of the allocation of Rs. 45 
crore this year but also enable the local food processing sector to adhere 
to the stringent quality in hygiene  norms with a view to enhance the 
acceptance of local produce overseas.  

44 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT: 
The Ministry in its 11 th Plan document had proposed an overall 
budget outlay of Rs. 250 crores for the scheme of setting up of Food 
Testing Labs/HACCP/R& D/Promotional Activities etc. The overall 
objectives of the scheme is to motivate the various stakeholders in the 
food processing sector to adopt food safety and quality assurance 
mechanism.  
 
To achieve the targets of the 11 th Plan, the Ministry is contin uously 
publicizing the scheme through print media with special focus on North 
Eastern Region. Ministry has released advertisement on the salient 
features of the components of the scheme during March, 2011 to generate 
awareness about the schemes and also in viting proposals, to enable the 
local food processing sector to adhere to the quality and safety standards / 
norms laid down by the food regulatory authorities. Ministry has also 
released advertisements through print media in Oct., 2011 again to give 
wide publicity to the scheme on a pan India basis with special focus on 
North Eastern Region.   
****** 
(Letter No. 6-8/2011.Parl dated 25th November, 2011)  

45 
 
RECOMMNDATION SERIAL NO. 3.35 
Growth Rate in Food Processing Industry Sector 
 The apparent lack of a suitable information system to monitor and 
collate data pertaining to the food processing industry sector has been 
engaging the attention of the Committee for quite a long time now. They 
have recommended for creation of a reliable in formation system for the 
purpose within the Ministry instead of the present practice of using the 
inputs of stakeholders. Precisely for these reasons, the Committee have 
also put to question the reliability of the data regarding post harvest crop 
losses, g rowth rate of the sector as well as the Vision 2015 Document, 
etc. After persistent follow -up, the Ministry now seem to have realised the 
importance of having a in -house information system. The Ministry are 
contemplating taking up the matter with National Manufacturing 
Competitiveness Council or outsourcing for computation of growth rate in 
the food processing industry sector. They are also in the process of 
engaging a professional agency which will also help in establishing a 
mechanism for compilation of g rowth rate in the sector. Furthermore, the 
Committee note, that the Ministry have engaged a professional agency to 
develop web based financial and physical progress monitoring system. 
The Food Processing Information System, so developed, will compile 
State-wise and Sector -wise data on various aspects of the Sector for the 
Plan Schemes of the Ministry. The Committee while welcoming this 
belated initiative, exhort the Ministry to take all these initiatives to their 
logical conclusion at the soonest so that th e information system is 
operationalised without any further loss of time and in any case before the 
Twelfth Plan commences in April, 2012. 
 

46 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT: 
 
The lack of a comprehensive and reliable data base on Food 
Processing Industry sector is a constraint in policy formulation and 
decision making.  A professional agency has been engaged to assist the 
Economic Adviser (newly created post) in creating and updating the data 
base. Efforts have been made to collect authentic data that has been 
generated by Ministry of Statistics & Programme Implementation for both 
organized and unorganized units. A reliable data base is being created 
and consultations are on with all stake -holder departments to firm up the 
data base.  The data available with this Ministry is as follows: 
(Rs. in Crore) 
Contribution to GDP of Food Processing (Regd. & Unregd.) 
Activity  2004-
05  
2005-
06  2006-07  2007-08  2008-
09  
2009-
10  
Averag
e 
Manufacturing (Registered  & Unregistered) under Food Processing Sector  
Meat, Fish, Fruits, 
Vegetables and 
Oils  9236 8682 9548 10349 12043 12224 10347 
Dairy Products  3509 4342 4319 4608 5419 4762 4493 
Grain Mill Products  13467 12347 11903 12846 15947 17741 14042 
Other Food 
Products  14722 17794 20895 22522 25775 23664 20895 
Beverages   3421 4525 5499 6995 7938 7687 6011 
(X) Total 44355 47690 52164 57320 67122 66078 55788 
(A) Growth in 
contribution to 
GDP (FP 
Industries) (YoY) 
-   7.52 9.38 9.88 17.1 -1.56 
  

47 
 
(Y) GDP 
Agriculture   
47663
4 
50299
6 
52374
5 
55695
6 
55345
4 
55301
0 527799 
(B) Growth in 
contribution to 
GDP (Agriculture)  
(YoY) -  5.53 4.13 6.34 -0.63 -0.08   
Fishing 27152 28749 30650 32427 33561 35215 31292 
(Z) GDP 
(Agriculture+Fishin
g)   
50378
6 
53174
5 
55439
5 
58938
3 
58701
5 
58822
5 559092 
(C) Growth in 
contribution to 
GDP 
(Agriculture+Fishi
ng) (YoY) -  5.55 4.26 6.31 -0.40 0.21   
X/Z 0.088 0.090 0.094 0.097 0.114 0.112  
Source: NAS 2011 
 
As seen in the table above, the food processing sector has been 
growing faster than the agriculture sector. This is a positive development.   
2. Performance Indicators of Registered Units:   As far as the 
registered Food Processing Industry sector is concer ned, the latest data 
available is for 2007 -08, the source being Annual Survey of Industries.  
Important indicators are given below: 
 
Data of registered Food Processing Industries 
 
Indicato
rs 1998-99 1999-00 2000-
01 2001-02 2002-
03 
2003-
04 
2004-
05 
2005-
06 2006-07 2007-08 
No. of 
units 
2385
3 
2394
2 
2398
8 
2348
5 
2381
6 
2384
0 
2536
2 
2572
5 
2575
9 
2621
9 
Employ
ment 
(Nos) 
1346
826 
1347
418 
1332
588 
1306
677 
1308
335 
1297
073 
1342
925 
1391
616 
1476
351 
1505
246 

48 
 
Capital 
investe
d (Fixed 
Capital) 
(Rs. in 
Cr.) 
2675
6 
3164
2 
3188
7 
3390
7 
3762
7 
3741
2 
4138
8 
4535
7 
5746
0 
6833
5 
 
Source: Annual Survey of Industries, MoSPI 
 
3. Data on Un -organized Units:  As far as un -organized Food 
Processing Industry sector is concerned, the latest available data is for 
2005-06: 
 
i. No of enterprises      : 26,02,807 
ii. No. of workers employed                          :       63,45,768 
iii. Fixed capital (owned + hired) Rs.per unit  : 1,00,834 
iv. Value added Rs. per enterprise     : 59,189 
 
Source: NSSO 62nd round data 
4. Wastage of Agriculture produce: 
 
 A nation -wise s tudy on quantitative assessment of harvest and 
post harvest losses for 46 agricultural produces in 106 randomly 
selected districts was carried out by CIPHET. 
Percentage of losses estimated for major produces. 
 
 
Source : A study by CIPHET, 2010 
 
Crop Cumulative wastage (%) 
Cereals 3.9 – 6.0% 
Pulses 4.3-6.1% 
Oil seeds 6.0% 
Fruits & Vegetables 5.8-18.0% 
Milk 0.8% 
Fisheries 2.9% 
Meat 2.3% 
Poultry 3.7% 

49 
 
5. Data on FDI in Food Processing Sector : 
 
(From April 2000 to August 2011) 
S.N
o. Sector 
Amount of FDI Inflows  % age 
with 
total FDI 
Inflows 
(+) 
(In Rs 
crore 
(In US$ 
million) 
1 FOOD PROCESSING 
INDUSTRIES  5872.16 1,286.53 0.89 
2 FERMENTATION 
INDUSTRIES  4269.92 979.74 0.65 
3 VEGETABALE OILS AND 
VANASPATI 1103.22 238.72 0.17 
4 TEA AND COFFEE  446.61 99.38   
  Total Food Processing 
Sector 11691.91 2604.37 1.78 
TOTAL 
658586.4
3 147088.13 100 
Source: Department of Industrial Policy and Promotion 
 
Note: Data includes some investment for rubber, which is not a food 
processing industry. 
 
6. Value of Exports of food processing related commodities is given 
below: 
 
Year Rs. in Crore Year Rs. in Crore 
1997-98 15876 2004-05 26802 
1998-99 18699 2005-06 29211 
1999-00 16559 2006-07 34204 
2000-01 19313 2007-08 43783 
2001-02 19257 2008-09 49352 

50 
 
2002-03 23685 2009-10 50759 
2003-04 23766 2010-11 63733 
                                                  Source : DGCI&S 
 
The information system is already in place and will be continually 
updated as and when data is available from Government Agencies which 
are responsible for collecting primary data. Consultation with Ministry of 
Statistics and Programme Implementation, DGCI &S, Department of 
Agriculture and Co -operation, DARE, Planning Commission etc. are on -
going to consider various options to add to the data base. Consultations 
are also being undertaken to analyze the data trends and understand how 
these can help in policy formulation.   
****** 
(Letter No. 6-8/2011.Parl dated 25th November, 2011) 
 
RECOMMNDATION SERIAL NO. 3.36 
Utilisation Certificates 
3.36 The Committee are constrained to find that while 2117 numbers of 
Utilisation Certificates amounting Rs. 330.65 crore  were pending in 
respect of grants -in-aid paid up to 31 March, 2008 and due as on 31 
March, 2009 the number has swelled to 2389 for an amount Rs. 385.70 
crore in respect of grant -in-aid paid up to 31 March, 2009 and due as on 
31 March, 2010.  What is more perturbing as per the Ministry’s own 
admission is that many pending UCs are very old. The situation has been 
further aggravated by current pendency mostly with respect to last 
installments as the grant recipients are not submitting UCs in time. It is 
apparent that contrary to the claims of the Ministry that they are vigorously 
and continuously pursuing the matter with a view to expedite all pending 
utilization certificates things are not showing any improvement. The 
Ministry’s practice of stopping release o f further installments also is not a 

51 
 
sufficient deterrent. In fact the Ministry had sought the advice of the 
Ministry of Finance on this vexed issue of pendency but that advice of 
Ministry of Finance (Department of Expenditure) is still awaited inspite of 
their following up. The Committee in their previous Reports on Demands 
for Grants for the years 2009 -10 and 2010 -11 exhorted that Ministry to 
pursue the liquidation of pending UCs with all seriousness so that such 
huge backlog is cleared at the earliest. B ut nothing  tangible has 
happened. They are of the firm opinion that Fiscal discipline is essential 
for implementation of Schemes as well as for accounting of precious 
public funds. They, therefore, desire the Ministry to take up the matter 
more forcefully with all concerned including the Ministry of Finance with a 
view to find out a lasting solution to this cronic problem. They desire to be 
apprised of the steps taken/progress made in this regard.  
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT:    
 
Trend of outstanding UCs year wise based on the latest information 
supplied by the PAO is as follows: 
       
(Rs in 
crore)   
Date No. of UCs Amount of 
Pending UCs 
 
Unspent 
Balance 
 
Total Amount of 
pending UCs 
Including 
Unspent 
Balance  
1.4.2009 2117 321.88 8.77 330.65 
1.4.2010 2544 402.76 8.15 410.91 
1.4.2011 2829 454.29 1.47 455.76 
31.10.2011 2706 432.28 1.47 433.75 

52 
 
  
 Ministry has taken an initiative by writing to all the State Nodal 
Agencies and to Principal Secretaries of the State Governments seeking 
their assistance to ensure timely submission of UCs.  There have been 
positive responses in this regard and SNAs are s ending UCs and also 
enclosing copies of the UCs sent in the past to the concerned divisions. All 
divisions undertook a drive to retrieve the pending UCs and as a result, 
there has been reduction in number of pending UCs in the last 5 months. 
Thus 123 UCs have been liquidated and amount has reduced by Rs.22.01 
crore.  A policy decision has been taken in consultation with Ministry of 
Finance in respect of Schemes where grants are released on 
reimbursement basis and will not invite provision of submission of U Cs in 
terms of GFR rules.  This will help to bring down the number of 
outstanding UCs in the future. 
 
 Action will be initiated by the concerned officers of the Ministry to 
closely monitor pending UCs and not to allow any further payments to any 
grantee bodies who have not submitted UCs of previous releases.   
****** 
(Letter No. 6-8/2011.Parl dated 25th November, 2011) 
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE 
For comments of the Committee please refer to Para No. 1.28 of 
Chapter I of this Report  
 

53 
 
CHAPTER-III 
 
 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH THE 
COMMITTEE DO NOT DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE 
GOVERNMENT REPLY. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
-NIL- 

54 
 
CHAPTER-IV 
 
 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH 
REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY 
THE COMMITTEE. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
-NIL- 

55 
 
CHAPTER-V 
 
 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH THE 
FINAL REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT ARE STILL AWAITED. 
 
 
 
 
RECOMMNDATION SERIAL NO. 3.31 
 
Scheme for Upgradation of Quality of Street Food 
 
 The Scheme for Upgradation  of Quality of Street Food, in the 
opinion of the Committee is another instance of the Government’s 
apathetic attitude forwards schemes of public welfare. Almost the entire 
Eleventh Five year Plan has gone by and this scheme is still looking 
askance for ap provals. The lack of hygienic conditions, etc. are the main 
reasons behind sub -standard food being sold on streets almost on a pan 
India basis resulting in avoidable diseases in the consumers and 
avoidable unquantified expenditure on their healthcare. This scheme could 
have gone a long way in improving the quality of street food and thereby 
serving the cause of unsuspecting consumers, who belong to the poorer 
section of the society and for whom healthcare is still a pipedream. The 
assurance of the Ministry of Finance that the scaled down pilot project 
version can be considered subject to availability of funds sounds hollow at 
the fag end of the Eleventh Plan. More so, when the Committee had in 

56 
 
view of the inherent benefits of the Scheme asked the Ministry in  their 
Fifth Report to operationalise the scheme well before the commencement 
of the Commonwealth Games held in October, 2010. Still, not 
withstanding the step motherly treatment meted out to this Scheme by the 
Ministry of Finance, the Committee recommend release of additional funds 
for it at the RE stage so that the ambit of the Scheme is extended a bit 
beyond the scaled down version so that the Ministry is able to implement it 
with full speed during the Twelfth Plan with the benefit of experienced 
gained now.  
 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT: 
 
 The scheme has not been supported by Planning Commission and 
Ministry of Finance. In view of recommendation of the 12th Plan Working 
Group, the subject matter has been taken up with the Ministry of Housing 
and Urban Poverty Alleviation. 
***** 
(Letter No. 6-8/2011.Parl dated 25th November, 2011) 
 
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE 
For comments of the Committee please refer to Para No. 1.22 of 
Chapter I of this Report  
 

57 
 
RECOMMNDATION SERIAL NO. 3.33 
National Institute of Food T echnology, Entrepreneurship and 
Management (NIFTEM) 
 The Committee are constrained to note the sordid state of affairs in 
the National Institute of Food Technology, Entrepreneurship and 
Management (NIFTEM).  This Institute is being set up as an institute of 
global excellence in education and research in the areas of food 
technology at Kundli, Sonepat, Haryana.  CCEA had approved setting up 
of the institute on 31 August, 2006 at an estimated cost of Rs. 244.60 
crore.  The estimated cost was revised to a staggering Rs. 604.75 crore 
compelling the Committee to r ecommend in depth review of the same by 
the Government. The cost of the project later on was further revised to Rs. 
479.94 crore.  Further probing of this vexed matter of fluctuating estimates 
revealed that it was the then Secretary’s inputs after his over seas visits 
that lead to the upscaling of earlier estimates of Rs. 244.60 crore to a 
massive Rs. 604.75 crore. This was apparently done with a view to make 
the Institute a world class facility. 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT: 
CCEA in its meeting held on 31.8.2006 approved setting up of 
NIFTEM at an estimated cost of Rs.244.60 crore including foreign 
exchange component of US $ 8.1 million.  
With a view to obtain deemed to be University status from UGC, the 
legal status of NIFTEM  as a company registered under Section 25 of the 
Companies Act 1956 had to be changed to the Society. Accordingly, the 
Union Cabinet in its meeting held on 23.4.2010 approved registering 
NIFTEM as an autonomous organization under the Indian Societies Act, 
1860. Subsequently, Ministry of Food Processing Industries registered 
NIFTEM as a Society under Societies Registration Act, 1860 on 

58 
 
19.5.2010.  Further, follow up action to transfer all assets and liabilities of 
NIFTEM as a Section 25 Company to the newly incorporated Society and 
winding up of the Company is being simultaneously taken as per 
provisions of Companies Act.   
 
CCEA in its meeting held on 28.4.2011 approved Revised Cost 
Estimates of project from Rs.244.60 crore to Rs.479.94 crore. The 
construction of NIFTEM campus covering 12000 sqm. is at an advanced 
stage. Infrastructure to commence activities in the institute from current 
financial year and 1 st academic session is ready (subject to UGC granting 
deemed to be University status under De Novo category).   
****** 
(Letter No. 6-8/2011.Parl dated 25th November, 2011) 
 
RECOMMNDATION SERIAL NO. 3.34 
 On the execution part also the Committee find that the situation is 
far from satisfactory. During last five years only the institutional building 
has been completed. The status of the Institute as a Deemed University is 
a big question mark as on date. With the recruitment process also yet to 
be completed, the Committee wonder as to what would happen to the 
students seeking admission in NIFTEM with high hopes. They are doubtful 
if the Ministry would be able to start the Institute even in this Academic 
Session in the prevailing chaos. 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT: 
NIFTEM has drawn up an operationalization plan to undertake 
several activities in the areas such as inf rastructure development viz. 
residential complex, lab infrastructure, auditorium, library resources and 

59 
 
neighbourhood facilities. Recruitment of the academic and non academic 
staff is at an advanced stage.  The present status of various activities is 
indicated below:   
 
Infrastructure: 
  
Administration Block, Academic Block for meeting the requirement 
for 100 students for B.Tech (Food Technology & Management) are ready. 
 
(i) NBCC has started construction of residential buildings, hostels, 
studio apartments and other amenities required including 
horticulture work, STP, health club, play grounds etc. in the second 
phase.  
(ii) The work for designing and development of teaching labs i ncluding 
procurement and installation of equipments is in an advanced 
stage. Teaching Lab for the first year courses have been 
completed. 
(iii) Work relating to creation of IT infrastructure and Library in NIFTEM 
is being made functional in accordance with UGC norms.  
(iv)  The status of first phase of Recruitment process is as under: 
a. For the post of Director, Search cum selection Committee process 
has been completed and the approval of ACC is awaited. Offer of 
Appointment to the candidate selected as Registrar has be en 
issued.  
b. Against the 5 sanctioned posts of Professor, none of the applicants 
interviewed have been found suitable by the Committee. The posts 
have been readvertised.  
c. 3 candidates selected as Associate Professor out of 5 sanctioned 
posts have already jo ined. The remaining 2 candidates are 
expected to join shortly. 
d. 11 posts of Assistant Professor were sanctioned; out of which 
selection process has been completed in respect of 09 posts. 3 

60 
 
candidates for the posts of Assistant Professors have joined; 
remaining 07 will join in due course. The remaining 2 posts have 
been re-advertisement. 
e. 24 Non-Faculty posts have been sanctioned.  Selection process for 
15 Non Faculty posts has been completed out of which 11 
candidates have joined. 4 Candidates will join in du e course. 
Remaining 9 posts are in advanced stage of recruitment. 
 
NIFTEM has reviewed its Staffing Pattern and submitted a proposal 
for creation of additional posts. 
 
(v) NIFTEM has applied for grant of Deemed to be University status 
under De Novo category to  Ministry of HRD/UGC in May, 2010. 
The proposal is at advanced stage of consideration. Once the 
statutory recognition of its courses is granted by Ministry of HRD, 
admission of students in B.Tech (Food Technology & Management) 
will commence.   
(vi) NIFTEM has set up the following three divisions : 
 
(a) Consultancy Division: to act as a centralized nodal body to design 
and develop systems/processes to the desired need to FPI across 
the food value chain and resolve the problems by acquiring 360 
degree approach. 
(b) SME Upgradation Division:  this division will coordinate with 
Ministry of Food Processing Industries in its efforts to upgrade 
SMEs in FP Sector, prepare a network to upgrade and facilitate the 
SMEs through MFPI, Banks, NGOs, Industry Associations, MSME 
schemes, prepare standard modules for SMEs, undertake 
diagnostic study and maintain data of SMEs for the benefit of all 
stakeholders. 

61 
 
(c) Skill Development Division : to organize training courses of 
various durations for developing the skill base of management level 
people working in small and medium organized as well as 
unorganized food processing sectors. As part of its skill 
development initiative, NIFTEM has conducted two short term 
training programmes at its campus from 20 th to 22 nd July 2011 in 
association with IICPT & Quality Council of India on “Cold Chain 
Management in Food Processing Sector” and “Emerging Trends in 
Food Safety”.  
(d) Two more short training programmes on “Packaging of Fresh and 
Processed Foods” and “Upgradation of Food Processing Skills in 
Small and Medium Enterprises” were conducted from 19 th to 21 st 
September 2011 in association with Indian Institute of Packaging 
and Shri Ram Institute for Industrial Research.   
(e) In Nov’2011 2 Short term training programmes are being conducted 
from 16-18th Nov’2011 with IGNOU & QCI as knowledge partner. In 
Dec’2011 two more Training programmes are planned with Anand 
Agricultural University and IICPT as knowledge partners. 
 
To meet the compliance of the directions of UGC, the 
Institute is taking all possible steps for obtaining approval for 
Deemed to be University status under De Novo category from 
Ministry of HRD. The academic session can only commence after 
approval of the Ministry of HRD is received. The infrastructure has 
been made ready to run first two years o f the B.Tech (Food 
Technology & Management) course for the present. The Expert 
Committee appointed by UGC is expected to visit the Institute 
shortly to make an on -the-spot assessment of all the facilities 
created in the Institute.    
****** 
(Letter No. 6-8/2011.Parl dated 25th November, 2011) 

62 
 
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE 
For comments of the Committee please refer to Para No. 1.25 of 
Chapter I of this Report  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
New Delhi;                                                     BASUDEB ACHARIA, 
10   February, 2012                    Chairman, 
21 Magha, 1933 (Saka)                       Committee on Agriculture. 
  

63 
 
Annexure- I 
(Please see Para No. 1.24) 
 
NIFTEM 
 
(Present status of various activities as on 25 November, 2011) 
Infrastructure: 
 
Administration Block, Academic Block for meeting the requirement 
for 100 students for B.Tech (Food Technology & Management) are ready. 
 
(i) NBCC has started construction of residential buildings, hostels, studio 
apartments and other amenities required including horticulture work, STP, 
health club, play grounds etc. in the second phase.  
(ii) The work for designing and development of teaching labs including 
procurement and installation of equipments is in an advanced stage. 
Teaching Lab for the first year courses have been completed. 
(iii) Work relating to creation of IT infrastructure and Library in NIFTEM is 
being made functional in accordance with UGC norms.  
(iv)  The status of first phase of Recruitment process is as under: 
a. For the post of Director, Sear ch cum selection Committee process 
has been completed and the approval of ACC is awaited. Offer of 
Appointment to the candidate selected as Registrar has been 
issued.  
f. Against the 5 sanctioned posts of Professor, none of the applicants 
interviewed have been found suitable by the Committee. The posts 
have been readvertised.  
g. 3 candidates selected as Associate Professor out of 5 sanctioned 
posts have already joined. The re maining 2 candidates are 
expected to join shortly. 
h. 11 posts of Assistant Professor were sanctioned; out of which 
selection process has been completed in respect of 09 posts. 3 
candidates for the posts of Assistant Professors have joined; 
remaining 07 will join in due course. The remaining 2 posts have 
been re-advertisement. 
i. 24 Non-Faculty posts have been sanctioned.  Selection process for 
15 Non Faculty posts has been completed out of which 11 
candidates have joined. 4 Candidates will join in due course. 
Remaining 9 posts are in advanced stage of recruitment. 
 

64 
 
NIFTEM has reviewed its Staffing Pattern and submitted a proposal 
for creation of additional posts. 
(v) NIFTEM has applied for grant of Deemed to be University status under 
De Novo category to Ministry of HRD/UGC in May, 2010. The proposal is 
at advanced stage of consideration. Once the statutory recognition of its 
courses is granted by Ministry of HRD, admission of students in B.Tech 
(Food Technology & Management) will commence.   
(vi) NIFTEM has set up the following three divisions : 
(a) Consultancy Division: to act as a centralized nodal body to design and 
develop systems/processes to the desired need to FPI across the food 
value chain and resolve the problems by acquiring 360 degree approach. 
(b) SME Upgradation Division: this division will coordinate with Ministry of 
Food Processing Industries in its efforts to upgrade SMEs in FP Sector, 
prepare a network to upgrade and facilitate the SMEs through MFPI, 
Banks, NGOs, Industry Associations, MSME scheme s, prepare standard 
modules for SMEs, undertake diagnostic study and maintain data of 
SMEs for the benefit of all stakeholders. 
(c) Skill Development Division : to organize training courses of various 
durations for developing the skill base of management level people 
working in small and medium organized as well as unorganized food 
processing sectors. As part of its skill development initiative, NIFTEM has 
conducted two short term training programmes at its campus from 20 th to 
22nd July 2011 in association with IICPT & Quality Council of India on 
“Cold Chain Management in Food Processing Sector” and “Emerging 
Trends in Food Safety”.  
(d) Two more short training pro grammes on “Packaging of Fresh and 
Processed Foods” and “Upgradation of Food Processing Skills in Small 
and Medium Enterprises” were conducted from 19 th to 21 st September 
2011 in association with Indian Institute of Packaging and Shri Ram 
Institute for Industrial Research.   
(e) In Nov’2011 2 Short term training programmes are being conducted from 
16-18th Nov’2011 with IGNOU & QCI as knowledge partner. In Dec’2011 
two more Training programmes are planned with Anand Agricultural 
University and IICPT as knowledge partners. 
 
 
 
 

65 
 
ANNEXURE-II 
COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE 
(2011-12) 
 
MINUTES OF THE TWENTY THIRD SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE 
 
 The Committee sat on Friday, the 10 February, 2012 from 1430  hours to            
1810  hours in Room No. ‘53’, Parliament House, New Delhi.  
PRESENT 
Shri Basudeb Acharia –  Chairman 
MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA 
 
2.    Shri Narayansingh Amlabe 
3. Smt. Ashwamedh Devi 
4. Shri Sk. Nurul Islam 
5. Shri Devji M. Patel 
6. Shri Nripendra Nath Roy 
7. Shri D. Venugopal 
 
       RAJYA  SABHA 
 
8. Shri Shashi Bhusan Behera 
9. Shri Narendra Budania 
10. Shri Satyavrat Chaturvedi 
11. Shri Mohd. Ali Khan 
12. Shri Upendra Kushwaha 
13. Shri Bharatsinh Prabhatsinh Parmar 
14. Shri Rajpal Singh Saini 
 

66 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
 1. Shri Deepak Mahna - Joint Secretary 
 2. Shri P. V. L. N. Murthy- Director 
 3. Shri P.C. Koul  - Additional Director 
 4. Shri C. Vanlalruata - Deputy Secretary 
 
2. At the outset, the Hon’ble Chairman welcomed the members to the Sitting 
of the Committee. Thereafter, the Committee took up the following Draft Reports 
for consideration : - 
 
*(i) *** *** *** *** *** *** *** *** ***
 ***  
 
*(ii) *** *** *** *** *** *** *** *** ***
 ***  
(iii) Action taken by the Government on the 
 Observations/Recommendations contained in the Twenty -fifth
 Report of the Committee on Agriculture (2010-11) on Demands for 
 Grants (2011-12) of Ministry of Food Processing Industries 
  
3. After some deliberations, the Commit tee adopted the draft Reports 
without any modifications.  The Committee then authorized the Chairman to 
finalise the Reports after getting them factually verified from the concerned 
Ministry/Department.  The Committee also decided that since the House is n ot in 
Session these Reports may be presented to Hon’ble Speaker, Lok Sabha. 
 
*4. *** *** *** *** *** *** *** *** *** ***  

67 
 
*5. *** *** *** *** *** *** *** *** *** ***  
*6. *** *** *** *** *** *** *** *** *** ***  
*7. *** *** *** *** *** *** *** *** *** ***  
*8. *** *** *** *** *** *** *** *** *** *** 
*9. *** *** *** *** *** *** *** *** *** ***  
*10. *** *** *** *** *** *** *** *** *** *** 
  
The Committee then adjourned. 
 
 
 
 
________________________________________________________________ 
*Matter not related to this Report. 
 
 
 
  

68 
 
ANNEXURE-III 
(Vide Para 4 of Introduction of the Report) 
ANALYSIS OF ACTION TAKEN BY GOVERNMENT ON 
THE TWENTY THIRD REPORT OF COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE 
ON  
DEMANDS FOR GRANTS (2011-12) PERTAINING TO MINISTRY 
OF FOOD PROCESSING INDUSTRIES 
  
(i)  Total number of Recommendations             16 
(ii) Recommendations/Observations which have been 
Accepted by the Government  
Para Nos. 1.9, 2.16, 2.17,2.18, 2.19, 2.20, 2.21, 3.28, 3.29,  
 3.30, 3.32, 3.35 and 3.36  
Total         13 
Percentage            81%  
(iii) Recommendations/Observations which the Committee 
Do not desire to pursue in view of the Government’s replies  
Total                  NIL 
Percentage                      0% 
(iv) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies 
 of the Government have not been accepted by the Committee 
Para No.   
Total            NIL  
Percentage                          0% 
(v) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which  
 Final replies of the Government are still awaited 
 
Para Nos.  3.31, 3.33 and 3.34 
Total           03 
  
Percentage                             19% 