 
 
 
1 
 
 
 
COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE 
(2011-2012) 
                 
         
FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA 
                                                
MINISTRY OF AGRICULTURE  
(DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURAL RESEARCH AND EDUCATION) 
              
DEMANDS FOR GRANTS (2011-12) 
 
{Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/ 
Recommendations contained in the Twenty Third Report  
of the Committee on Agriculture (2010-2011)} 
 
                
TWENTY NINTH REPORT 
  
 
         
               
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
February, 2012/Magha, 1933 (Saka) 
29 

 
 
 
2 
 
TWENTY NINTH REPORT 
 
COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE 
(2011-2012) 
 
(FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
         
                 
MINISTRY OF AGRICULTURE  
(DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURAL RESEARCH AND EDUCATION) 
         
DEMANDS FOR GRANTS (2011-12) 
          
[Action Taken by the Government on the  
Observations/Recommendations contained in the Twenty Third Report 
of the Committee on Agriculture (2010-2011)] 
 
Presented to Hon’ble Speaker, Lok Sabha on 16.02.2012    
Presented to Lok Sabha on       ……     
Laid on the Table of Rajya Sabha on  …….     
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
February, 2012/Magha, 1933 (Saka) 
 

 
 
 
3 
 
COA No. ….. 
 
 
         
         
         
         
         
         
 
         
         
        
Price:  Rs.  
         
                                         
 
 
 
 
 
 
© 2012 By Lok Sabha Secretariat 
 
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of Business 
in Lok Sabha (Fourteenth Edition) and Printed by  

 
 
 
4 
 
<CONTENTS> 
                   PAGE 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE………………………………….  (iii) 
         
 
INTRODUCTION……………………………………………………………  (v) 
 
CHAPTER I   Report …………………………………………     1 
CHAPTER II  Observations/Recommendations which have  
   been accepted by the Government ……………   18 
CHAPTER III  Observations/Recommendations which the 
   Committee do not desire to pursue in view 
   of the Government‟s replies …………………..   26    
CHAPTER IV Observations/Recommendations in respect 
   of  which replies of the Government have  
   not been accepted by the Committee ………….   27    
CHAPTER V  Observations/Recommendations in respect of  
   which final replies of the Government are  
   still awaited …………………………………….  35 
 
APPENDIX 
 Minutes of the Twenty-third Sitting of the Committee               37 
held on  10 February, 2012.       
             
                                   ANNEXURE 
Analysis of Action Taken by the Government on the                39 
Recommendations contained in the Twenty-third Report                     
(Fifteenth Lok Sabha) of the Committee on Agriculture 
(2010-2011).            
              
 
 
 
(i)

 
 
 
5 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE (2011-12) 
Shri Basudeb Acharia - Chairman 
MEMBERS 
 Lok Sabha 
2. Shri Narayansingh Amlabe 
3. Shri K.C. Singh „Baba‟ 
4. Shri Thangso Baite  
5. Smt. Shruti Choudhary 
6. Smt. Ashwamedh Devi 
7. Shri Biren Singh Engti 
8. Shri Anant Kumar Hegde 
9. Shri Deepender Singh Hooda 
10. Shri Sk. Nurul Islam 
11. Shri Naranbhai Kachhadia 
12. Shri Premdas 
13. Shri Surendra Singh Nagar 
14. Shri Devji M. Patel 
15. Shri Vitthalbhai Hansrajbhai Radadiya 
16. Shri Nripendra Nath Roy 
17. Shri Jagdish Thakor 
18. Shri Laxman Tudu 
19. Shri D. Venugopal 
20. Shri Hukmadeo Narayan Yadav 
21. Shri Ramakant Yadav 
 Rajya  Sabha 
22. Shri Shashi Bhusan Behera 
23. Shri Narendra Budania 
24. Shri Satyavrat Chaturvedi 
25. Shri A. Elavarasan 
26. Shri Vinay Katiyar 
27. Shri Mohd. Ali Khan 
28. Shri Upendra Kushwaha 
29. Shri Bharatsinh Prabhatsinh Parmar 
30. Shri Rajpal Singh Saini 
31. Shri S. Thangavelu 
 
 (iii) 

 
 
 
6 
 
SECRETARIAT  
 
 
 
 1. Shri Deepak Mahna  - Joint Secretary 
 2. Shri P. V. L. N. Murthy - Director 
 3. Shri P.C. Koul  - Additional Director 
 4. Shri R.S. Negi  - Committee Officer 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(iv) 

 
 
 
7 
 
INTRODUCTION 
         
I, the Chairman, Committee on Agriculture (2011 -2012) having been authorized 
by the Committee to submit the Report on their behalf, present this Twenty-ninth Report 
on Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/ Rec ommendations contained 
in the Twenty -third Report of the Committee on Demands for Grants (2011 -12) of the 
Ministry of Agriculture (Department of Agricultural Research and Education). 
 
2. The Twenty -third Report of the Committee on Agriculture (2010 -2011) o n 
Demands for Grants (2011 -12) of the Ministry of Agriculture (Department of Agricultural 
Research and Education) was presented to Lok Sabha and laid on the Table of Rajya 
Sabha on 29 August, 2011. The Action Taken Replies on the Report were received on 
28 November, 2011. 
 
3. The Report was considered and adopted by the Committee at their Sitting held 
on 10 February, 2012. 
4. An analysis of the Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/ 
Recommendations contained in the Twenty-third Report of the Co mmittee is given in 
Annexure. 
 
 
      
                     
                                                                                          
                                                                                           
NEW DELHI;                    BASUDEB ACHARIA 
10 February, 2012                                                                         Chairman, 
21 Magha, 1933 (Saka)                                     Committee on Agriculture.   
 
 
  
 
  
 
(v) 

 
 
 
8 
 
CHAPTER-I 
 
R E P O R T 
 
 
This Report of the Committee on Agriculture deals with the action taken by the 
Government on the Recommendations contained in the Twenty-Third Report (Fifteenth 
Lok Sabha) of the Committee on Agriculture (20 10-2011) on “Demands f or Grants 
2011-12” pertaining to Ministry of Agriculture (Department of Agric ultural Research and 
Education) which was presented to Lok Sabha and laid on the Table of Rajya Sabha on 
29 August 2011.  
 
1.2 The Ministry of Agriculture (Department of Agricultural Research & Education) have  
furnished Action Taken Replies in respect of all the 1 3 Observations/Recommendations 
contained in the Report. These have been categorized as under:  
 
 . Observations/Recommendations that have been accepted by the Government:  
 
Recommendation Para Nos. 1.4, 2.30, 2.31, 3.23, 3.25, 3.27 and 3.30 
 
. Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to pursue in 
view of the Government’s reply:  
 
Recommendation Para Nos. NIL  
 
. Observations/Recommendations in respect of which action taken replies of the 
Government have not been accepted by the Committee: 
  
Recommendation Para Nos. 2.32, 3.22, 3.26, 3.28 and 3.29 
 
. Observations/Recommendations in respect of which final replies of the 
Government are still awaited :  
 
Recommendation Para No. 3.24  
 
 
1.3 The Committee trust that utmost importance would be given to 
implementation of the observations/recommendations accepted by the 
Government. In cases, where it is not possible for the Department to implement 

 
 
 
9 
 
the recommendations in letter and spirit for any reason, the matter should be 
reported to the Committee with reasons for non -implementation. The Committee 
desire that further Action Taken Notes on the Observations / Recommendations 
contained in Chapter -I and Final Action Taken Replies to the Recommen dations 
contained in Chapter-V of this Report be furnished to them at an early date.  
 
1.4  The Committee will now deal with the action taken by the Government on some 
of the Recommendations in the succeeding paragraphs.  
 
ELEVENTH PLAN ALLOCATION 
(RECOMMENDATION  PARA NO. 2.30)  
 
1.5 The Committee note d that the Working Group for the Eleventh Plan had 
proposed a sum of Rs. 37 ,672 crore for Department of Agricultural Research and 
Education for the Eleventh Plan.  During the currency of the Plan ,  the Department had 
proposed on an year to year basis , allocations amounting to Rs. 17,127 crore (approx) 
to the Planning Commission .  Against this, the Planning Commission made an 
allocation of  Rs. 12023  crore.  However , on perusal of the budgetary documents 
furnished by DARE, the Committee observed that the actual releases by the Planning 
Commission was to the tune of Rs. 10054 crore only.  The Committee were unable to 
comprehend the frugal approach adopted by the Planning Commission while allocating 
funds to DARE w hose fund utilization ha d always crossed 90% during the first four 
fiscals of the current Plan period.  The Department were also very candid in informing 
that scarcity of funds ha d negatively impacted all the Schemes  being implemented by 
them by sl owing do wn the pace of completion.  They were  further disconcerted to 
observe that a Scientific Department was being subjected to severe insensitivity 
because of the severe apathy of all concerned.  DARE is not only mandated with 
developing scientific, are a specific and economically viable agricultural practises  but 
also the National Agriculture Research System (NARS)  which is responsible for 
ensuring the food security of the nation and the prosperity and well being of the farmer.  
The Committee , inspite of soundin g repetitive for the um pteenth time, urged the 

 
 
 
10 
 
Government to mend their heaven may care attitude towards the Agriculture Sector and 
ensure that this sec tor was not starved of funds in future.  They further recommended 
that for the ongoing Fiscal , DARE take  up the issue of enhancement of funds at the 
highest level with the Ministry of Finance (Department of Expenditure) for a quantum 
jump at RE stage to ensure that the total allocation earmarked for the Eleventh Five 
Year Plan and the actual allocation made were in sync with each other. 
 
1.6 The Government in its action taken reply stated that the recommendation of the 
Committee was referred to Planning Commission which submits that “the GBS provision 
is broadly decided by the parameters like; (i.) Overall re sources position, (ii) competing 
sectoral demands / priorities, (iii) utilization of funds and absorptive capacity; and (iv) 
unspent balances.  Keeping these in view an outlay of Rs. 1620, 1760, 1760, 2300 and 
2800 crores have been provided to the DARE/ICAR as BE on an yearly basis.   
 
1.7 The Committee are deeply perturbed to note that the Department have 
restricted themselves to simply referring the recommendation to the Planning 
Commission.  The Planning Commission, as is their wont, have  cited the often 
repeated alibi of competing sectoral demands/ priorities to mix this very genuine 
requirement of funds of the Department. The basic intent of the Committee while 
recommending this measure was to ensure a quantum jump of funds at RE stage 
so that the total allocation earmarked for the Eleventh Five Year Plan and the 
actual allocations made are in sync with each other.   It is pertinent to reiterate 
here again that the position of the Department in respect of utilisation of 
funds/the absorptive capacity there of as brought out in the Twenty Third Report 
did not warrant such an approach by the Planning Commission.  Now that this 
phase is over and a golden opportunity has been lost with regard to enhancement 
of funds for the Department in the Eleventh Plan.  They  expect the Department to 
be more vigilant and result oriented while pursuing the r ecommendations of the 
Committee with all concerned authorities. 
 
 

 
 
 
11 
 
ALLOCATION FOR AGRICULTURE RESEARCH 
(RECOMMENDATION PARA NO. 2.31)  
 
1.8  The Committee having found that  inspite  of  DARE  and  the  Planning 
Commission having concurred with the recommendation of the Committee for allocation 
of 1% of Agriculture GDP for Agricultural Research, the allocation s for DARE from the 
Central Plan Outlay for the duration of the Eleventh Five Year Plan had never ever been 
more than a fraction of it had expressed their anguish over the fact that the allocation for 
the current Plan period was also a mere 0.46 % of the Central Outlay.  The Committee 
strongly deprecated this sordid state o f affairs which was endemic of the shortcomings 
plaguing the prevalent sy stem of planning in the Country.  The Committee  had, 
therefore, exhort ed the Department as well as the Planning Commission to ensure 
allocation of 1% of Agriculture GDP  for Research ri ght from the inaugural year of the 
Twelfth Five Year Plan and ensure that it remains constant. 
  
1.9  The Government in their Action Taken Note have stated that t he recommendation 
of the Committee was referred to Planning Commission which submits that “t his issue is 
under consideration of Planning Commission. The allocation for R esearch and 
Education would be suitably increased taking into consideration the performance of 
previous years and resource availability.”  
 
1.10 The Committee take the assurance of the Planning Commission  as a 
gesture in the right direction as the Commission  have concurred with the 
recommendation of the Committee for allocation of 1% of Agricultural GDP for 
Agriculture Research.  They would , however, exhort the Planning Commission  
not to forget that amongst the various competing claims the allocation of funds 
for Agricultural Research  ought to be accorded the highest priority as the food 
security of the Country would depend on it to a large extent in the coming years . 
The Committee further desire the Department of Agricultural Research and 
Education to pursue the issue vigorously with the Planning Commission  at all 
levels to fructify this long overdue benchmark. 
 

 
 
 
12 
 
TWELFTH PLAN PLANNING 
(RECOMMENDATION PARA NO. 2.32) 
 
1.11 During the Eleventh Plan the Committee  had observed that the first two to three 
years of the Plan were spent on obtaining approvals of various Schemes of the 
Department of Agricultural Research and Education from various agencies, thereby 
leaving precious little time f or their  proper implementation which  admittedly impacted 
negatively the implementation of the Schemes leading to substantial cost and time 
overruns, staggering/curtailing of targets, reduced allocations, etc.  They further noted 
that advance exercise for f inalizing requirements and proj ections for the Twelfth Plan 
had been initiated by the Department of Agricultural Research and Education on the 
advice of the Planning Commission and the major thrust areas had been identified.  A 
draft Approach Paper for the  Twelfth Plan (2012-17) had been presented before the full 
Planning Commission and the issues highlighted in the Approach Paper were in the 
public domain , t he Committee desire d the Department to initiate timely action for 
preparation of SFC/EFC Documents s o that the experience of Eleventh Plan does not 
recur in the Twelfth Plan and implementation of Twelfth Plan starts in time.   They had 
further desire d that the Planning Commission and the Ministry of Finance and other 
agencies involved in according approv als to a project reduce their time frame so as to 
ensure prompt implementation of Schemes and thereby avoiding staggering of timelines 
and increase viability of the Scheme (s).  The Committee had strongly recommend ed  
the Planning Commission and the Governm ent to ensure that all formalities relating to 
the Twelfth Plan are completed well in advance so that the Plan is conveyed to the 
Ministries/Departments latest by December 2011 so that  they are able to start proper 
implementation of their Schemes from day one of the Twelfth Plan.  
 
1.12  The Department in their Action Taken Note have stated that they had  referred 
the Recommendation of the Committee to Planning Commission which submits that “the 
scheme approval moves through well established procedures  viz EFC/SFC/CCEA etc.” 
They have further stated that the  Department will try their best to expedite the process 
of EFC,  etc.  
 

 
 
 
13 
 
1.13  The Committee are shocked by the casual and incomplete reply of the 
Planning Commission to a Recommendation which rather than a ddressing the 
issue of reduction of time flame for approval of schemes and related matters 
attempts to educate the Committee about the soundness of the well established 
procedures of EFC/SFC/CCEA etc. which they were more than aware while 
recommending so.  In their considered opinion this recommendation  if not 
implemented in right earnest and with utmost professionalism would thereby 
render the Twelfth Plan also to meets the same fate of Eleventh Plan with no work 
being done on any of the schemes almost thr ough the entire first two years and 
the remainder  of the Plan year being rendered virtually ineffective due to the 
staggered start. The Planning Commission cannot shrug from their responsibility 
of working out and e merging with a Plan Document well before  the Plan 
commences by citing procedural alibis, however, well established such 
procedures may be. With January, 2012 also gone by and the first Budget of the 
Twelfth Plan an anvil, the Committee reiterate their Recommendation and desire 
that the Plan be c onveyed to Ministries/Departments without any further delay. 
They expect that the Parliament  should discuss the DFGs 2012 -13 in the light of 
and under the policy and framework of  the Twelfth Plan Document so that a 
purposeful, more effective and meaningful scrutiny of the Demands for Grants is 
ensured unlike in the previous Plan. 
   
NEW SCHEMES 
(RECOMMENDATON PARA NO. 3.22)  
 
1.14 The Committee had noted that the ills besetting the extant system of according 
clearance/approvals to a Scheme by the various agencies involved which the 
Committee ha d highlighted unequivocally on numerous occasions in their earl ier 
Reports seems to be falling o n deaf ears, as was evident in the extant case.  The New 
Schemes of the Department, namely, National Institute of Agriculture Biotechnology and 
National Institute o f Biotic Stress Management held up since the inception of the 
Eleventh Five Year Plan till date while the Plan itself was in its terminal stage.  ....... The 
Committee had empathized with DARE on this issue as fo r no fault of their s they were 

 
 
 
14 
 
facing the wrong end of the stick.  The Committee while strongly deprecating this sordid 
state of affairs had called for a complete overhaul of the extant system of planning when 
the Planning Commission and the Government sat together to sort out the modalities for 
the soon to be implemented Twelfth Five Year Plan.  The Committee had also exhorted 
the Department to play a pro -active role in this matter and take up this issue with all 
concerned at the highest level to ensure th at all New Schemes were accorded 
clearances by all concerned in good time, thereby ensuring timely implementation , 
timely review and ultimately achieving their assigned target in the next Plan period.   As 
regard the two Schemes in question, the Committee had desired that a time bound 
schedule of implementation be worked out by DARE and presented to them within three 
months of presentation of the Report in question to Parliament. 
 
1.15 In their Action Taken Note the Government have stated that t he EFC propos als 
for setting up the (i) Indian Institute of Agricultural Biotechnology (IIAB), Ranchi, 
Jharkhand and (ii) National Institute of Biotic Stress Management (NIBSM), Raipur, 
Chhattisgarh was held on 26  July, 2011 under the Chairmanship of Secretary , 
Department of Expenditure, Govt. of India which considered the EFC proposals for 
setting up of the IIAB, Ranchi, Jharkhand and NIBSM, Raipur,  Chhattisgarh  and 
decided that “HRD Ministry needs to be consulted as these institutes are proposed to be 
„deemed‟ universities”.  
Accordingly, the modified proposals along -with a copy of the EFC minutes held 
on 26  July, 2011 were forwarded to the Secretary, Ministry of Human Resource 
Development (Department of Higher Education) for their comments.  
In response, the Ministr y of Human Resource Development requested ICAR to 
ask the institutes to submit their proposal for seeking status of deemed to be  University 
in accordance with UGC Regulations (Institutions deemed to be Universities), 2010. 
1.16 The Committee feel that this  particular instance is a glaring lapse on the 
part of the Department. It is beyond comprehension as to how the Department 
have not taken such as elementary step of seeking status of deemed to be 
University under the relevant UGC Regulations while mooting the proposals for 
these two Institutes of higher learning. They condemn this serious lapse of the 

 
 
 
15 
 
Department in unequivocal terms for its  has contributed to the delay in 
commissioning of these two Institutes of immense importance  which they were 
all along trying hard to impress upon the Government to reduces . The Committee 
expect that at least now the Department would take up this matter with the 
urgency it deserves so that the operationalization of these two Institutes is not 
delayed even for a day. 
 
NATIONAL AGRICULTURE EDUCATION PROJECT 
(RECOMMENDATION PARA NO. 3.24)  
 
1.17 The Committee had noted that to achieve excellence, enhanced relevance, and 
high efficiency in higher agricultural education system, and the agricultural universities 
to offer enhanced  services to benefit farmers, rural women and other stakeholders, the 
Department of Agricultural Research and Education were trying to formulate the 
National Agriculture Education Project (NAEP).  Under this Project it was proposed to 
attract young talent to agricultural education sector, major reforms in governance for 
bringing efficiency in the system, embedding system for attracting and retaining talented 
faculty continued emphasis on capacity building through quality improvement 
programmes nationally an d internationally, development of Centres of Excellence, 
developing public-private partnership for curriculum delivery and educational research, 
partnership with foreign universities for sandwich programmes, inviting international 
faculty for capacity building, etc.  In addition to these, there was a proposal to start non-
formal education with the objective of reaching the untapped sections for tapping 
agricultural potential in disadvantaged regions.   
 
The Committee while appreciating that the Department had consulted a large 
number of stakeholders, experts, scientists, industries and their associations etc. and 
incorporated their valuable suggestions in the National Agriculture Education Project  
had found inexplicable  the reasons stalling the implementatio n of the said project and 
had desired the Department to get the approval for NAEP expedited in a stipulated time 
frame, thereby, clearing the decks for implementation of a project of vital importance 
without any further delay. 

 
 
 
16 
 
 
1.18 The Government in their  Action Taken Note have stated that t his project has 
been prepared for implem entation sometime in the XIIth P lan, and has to go through a 
process of approvals, including consideration of the funding agency. 
 
1.19 The Committee are glad to note that the Dep artment of Agricultural 
Research and Education finally decided to initiate action with a view to implement 
this project in the XII Five Year Plan.  They however, hope that the project would 
be finalised after obtaining all requisite clearances and approval s expeditiously 
and a decision on funding agency would also be arrived well in time so that the 
project will become a reality  at the beginning of Twelfth Plan.  
 
AGRICULTURE  EXTENSION 
(RECOMMENDATION PARA NO. 3.26)  
 
1.20  The Committee had noted that Agriculture Extension consisting of Plan Schemes -  
KVK, DRWA, AICRP on Home Science and DIPA for which an outlay of Rs. 2102.74  
crore was earmarked for the Eleven th Plan  had been allocated  Rs. 1378.50 crore 
during the first four years of Eleventh Plan and BE for 2011-12 was Rs. 432 crore.  The 
Department had been able to spend Rs. 1 140.76 crore in first four years and with Rs. 
432 crore as anticipated expenditure in the Fiscal  2011-12 the total spending set to 
reach Rs. 1572.76 crore.  The Committee were not at all convinced with the plea of the  
Department that due to less allocation of funds prioritization of activities and the 
infrastructure had to be made and accordingly infrastructural facilities like farmers‟ 
hostels, staff quarters, equipments and dem onstration units could not be provided in 
certain KVKs which did not affect the mandated activities.  The Committee had found it 
inexplicable that if such shortcomings in certain KVKs did not /do not  affect the 
mandated activities then why the Department ha d made provisions for such activities in 
the KVKs in the Country.  They had, therefore, recommended the Department to rework 
on their priorities in the KVKs and strengthen the system so that funds allocated for the 
Scheme c ould be fully utilized in future.   Since KVKs are the bulwark of agriculture 
extension network in the Country, the Committee had also desired the Department to 

 
 
 
17 
 
work out reasonable fund requirements for them in the Twelfth Plan and make all out 
efforts to get them approved from the Planning Commission. 
 
1.21 In their Action Taken Note the current position has been given as under by the 
Government: 
                                                             (Rs. In crore) 
Year Funds 
allocated  
(BE) 
Funds 
allocated  
II (RE) 
Funds 
Utilized 
I 
Percentage 
utilization 
against RE 
2007-08 288.53 320.50 288.52 90.02  
2008-09 315.31 315.00 313.52 99.52  
2009-10 328.41 328.00 327.79 99.93  
2010-11 440.80 636.30 635.46 99.86  
Total  1599.80 1565.29 97.33 
 
      It is clear from the above ta ble that for the last four years, Agricultural Extension 
Division was allocated Rs. 1599 .80  crore of approved RE. Out of this, the Actual 
Expenditure during the last four years comes to Rs. 1565 .29 crore which is around 
97.33% of allocated budget.  
1.22 The foll owing figures were provided about the financial performance of 
Agriculture Extension Scheme during the Eleventh Plan by the Department while 
furnishing information for and in connection with the examina tion of the 
Demands for Grants 2011-12: 
(Rs. In crore) 
Year Funds 
Allocated 
BE 
Funds 
Allocated 
RE 
Funds 
Utilised 
2007-08 281.00 320.50 256.17 
2008-09 301.00 315.00 273.44 
2009-10 307.00 328.00 327.79 
2010-11 400.00 415.00 283.36 upto 
Jan. 2011 
1289.00 1378.50 1140.76 

 
 
 
18 
 
 The fund allocation at RE stage wh ich is normally the final allocation for 
the Fiscal for any Scheme, in the case of this particular scheme totals to Rs. 
1378.50 crore for the first four fiscals. It may also be seen that there has been 
considerable underspending under the scheme in 2007 -08 and 2008-09. In 2010 -
11 also the Department had spent Rs. 283.36 only upto January, 2011 out of RE 
allocation of  Rs. 415.00 crore leaving a massive sum of Rs. 131 crore plus for the 
last two months of the Fiscal.   In percentage terms, the actual expendit ure, 
therefore, worked out to.....  Based on these very figures the performance of the 
Department was commented upon by the Committee.  
 From the action taken notes furnished by DARE the Committee find that 
most of the figures pertaining to the financial pe rformance of Agriculture 
Extension Scheme have been changed. And these changes are not restricted to 
updation of figures requiring updation  in respect of the Financial Year 2010 -11. 
The Department could have at i.e. the end of Fiscal best updated the Actua ls of 
2010-11 to March, 2011 since at the time of examin ation of Demands for Grants 
2011-12, the  final figures for that year would normally be not available. The 
Committee find this methodology of DARE highly disconcerting. Changing 
figures of years gone b y with a view to improve their spending performance in 
order to negate the recommendations of the Committee is a deplorable practice 
which needs to be unequivocally  condemned. In their Fourth Report also the 
Committee had pointed out a wrong in the accoun ting practice of the Department 
under Crop Sciences Head.   After initially denying any wrong doing in the matter, 
the Department had after persistent queries admitted to the mistake and 
promised Course -Correction from the next Fiscal. The present action o f DARE, 
however, in the view of the Committee is a very serious matter. They would, 
therefore, like the Planning Commission and the Ministry of Finance to go into the 
entire gamut of the matter and submit a detailed Report to the Committee through 
DARE wit hin one month of presentation of this Report of the Committee to the 
Parliament. They further desire that DARE shall not club the report sought by the 
Committee from Planning Commission and Ministry of Finance with the replies of 

 
 
 
19 
 
other recommendations cont ained in this Report on which action by Planning 
Commission and Ministry of Finance is not required.  
 
ICAR HQ 
(RECOMMENDATION PARA  NO. 3.27)  
 
1.23 The Committee had noted that the Department had failed to fulfil their assurance 
regarding utilisation of allocation under the Major Head ICAR Headquarter Plan Head 
during 2009-10.  The y had found that the construction of Auditorium planned for could 
not be started for want of clearances from MCD, Delhi Fire Service and Delhi Urban Art 
Commission, etc.  The De partment ha d submitted Layout Plan to Town Planning 
Division of MCD on 27 June, 2010 and approval was received on 17 February, 2011.  
Thereafter, it was submitted to Building Section of MCD on 4 March 2011 for 
examination and also seeking approval from Delhi Urban Art Commission and Delhi Fire 
Service.  In the meantime, this dilly dallying had led to the revised cost getting escalated 
from Rs. 35 crore to Rs. 101.90 crore, of which Rs. 66.90 crore wa s ascribed to 
additional items.  Surprised to note that th e Department allocated Rs. 2 crore for 
construction of Auditorium during 2009 -10 when the basic requirements viz. Layout 
Plan, Building Plan, etc. for construction were not completed  the Committee w hile 
expressing their disapproval of such practices desire d the Department to strengthen 
their internal planning mechanism so that the cases of non -utilisation are avoided in 
future.  They  had also desired the Department to expedite the clearance of the project 
from various local civic authorities, so that the fu rther cost escalation of the project can 
be avoided. 
  
1.24 In their Action Taken Note the Government have stated that t he revised estimate 
amounting to Rs. 101.90 crores has been approved in the Revised EFC of ICAR 
Headquarters which was held on 24 August , 2011. Revised layout plan of National 
Agricultural Science Complex including auditorium has been approved by Delhi Urban 
Arts Commission on 24 August, 2011. Pre -engineering works for auditorium is in 

 
 
 
20 
 
process and process for finalization of construction a gency is underway. The 
construction agency is also being mobilized at site.  
 
1.25   The Committee appreciate that the Government have been able to get the 
revised lay out plan of the National Agriculture Science Complex approved from 
the Delhi Urban Arts Commission.  The Committee are, however, unhappy to note 
the silence of DARE in regard to strengthening their internal planning mechanism 
to avoid non utilisation of funds.  Furthermore, the Committee observe some 
contradiction from the Action Taken Note o f DARE on the instant 
Recommendation.  At one place it has been mentioned that process for 
finalisation of construction agency is underway.  However, on the other, it has 
been stated that the construction agency is also being mobilised at site.  How the 
construction agency is being mobilised at site without being finalised needs to be 
clarified by the Department. 
 
 
AGRICULTURE ENGINEERING 
(RECOMMENDATION PARE NO. 3.28)  
 
1.26 Under the Major Head Agriculture Engineering , the Outlay for Eleventh Plan was 
Rs. 262.20 crore.  SFC/EFC approved an amount of Rs. 274.03 crore. Rupees 11.83 
crore was taken into account while preparing the Eleventh Plan SFC/EFC document for 
the Indian Institute of Natural Resins and Gu ms (INRG) to strengthen the infrastructure 
and oth er research contingencies of Institute.  The Committee had found that the 
Department ha d not utilized their original outlay of Rs. 262.20 crore under the H ead.  
They had further found that during the current Five Year Plan the Department would  be 
able to u tilise Rs. 176.33 crore (first four years RE plus Fifth Year BE Rs. 67.40  crore 
totalling to Rs. 243.73  crore) thereby resulting in underutilisation of more than Rs. 30 
crore under the H ead.  Previously also t he Committee in their Fourth Report on 
Demands for Grants (2009 -10) had already recommended the Department to ensure 
that both the cost and ti melines of the Schemes under this H ead are not staggered.  
Therefore, deprecating this sordid state of a ffairs the Committee had impressed upon 

 
 
 
21 
 
the Department to review the reasons leading to under-utilization of allocated funds and  
Plan their fund utilisation in a more even  spread and proper manner so that under -
utilization of  precious funds could be avoided in future. 
 
1.27 The current position as submitted to the Committee by the Government is as 
under: 
                                                                                             (Rs. In crore) 
Year Allocation Expenditure Percentage 
utilization 
against RE 
2007-2008 40.00 34.06 85.13 
2008-2009 42.00 41.87 99.68 
2009-2010 43.00 43.00 99.99 
2010-2011 52.63 52.62 99.97 
Grand Total 177.63 171.54 96.56 
 
It is clear from the above ta ble that for the last four years, Agricultural Engineering 
Division was allocated Rs. 177.63 crore. Out of this, the  Actual Expenditure during the 
last four years comes to Rs. 171.54 crore which is around 96.56% of allocated budget. 
 
 
1.28 The Table below shows the figures submitted by the Department while 
Demands for Grants 2011 -12 were examined in respect of Agricultu re 
Engineering:-  
 
         
        (Rs. In crore) 
Year Allocation Expenditure 
2007-2008 40.00 32.30 
2008-2009 42.00 48.40 
2009-2010 43.00 42.99 
2010-2011 52.63 36.90 
 
 As the case of Agricultural Extension, in respect of Agriculture Engineering 
also the Department have indulged in changing figures of  previous fiscals while 

 
 
 
22 
 
submitting the Action Taken notes on the Recommendations made in the context 
of Demands for Grants 2011-12.  The changed figures (actual) are at variance with 
what were (Table above) submitted to the Committee at the time of examination of 
Demands for Grants 2011 -12.  Obviously, these changes have again resulted in 
negation of the Recommendation of the Committee.  The Committee, therefore, 
desire a Report on this aspect as well from the Planning Commission and 
Ministry of Finance within one month of presentation of this Report to the 
Parliament. 
 
ANIMAL SCIENCE 
(RECOMMENDATION PARA NO. 3.29)  
 
1.29 The Committee having observed that out of the earmarked outlay of Rs. 920.83 
crore appr oved by SFC/EFC for animal sciences, the Department have been able to 
utilize only Rs. 374.69 crore during the first f our Years of the Plan, which in percent age 
terms amounted to a mere  40.7% of the approved amount during the period. On finding 
that the last year of the current Plan, a provision of Rs. 165.30 crore, which was 17.95% 
of the EF C/SFC had  been allocated as BE  they had felt that e ven if the Department 
were able to utilize the entire BE amount, the total utilization during the current Plan 
period would be only Rs. 540 crore .  I n percentage terms this amounted to 58.64% of 
the Outlay. They had, therefore, opined that t his particular Scheme is a poor reflection 
on the overall utilization of DARE which is otherwise in the range of 90% and above.  
The consistent under performance of the Animal Science Sector does diminish the 
overall gloss of a high performance Department like DARE as here the blame fell 
squarely on their shoulders.  The Committee, therefore, desire d DARE to  put their 
house in order a nd improve the implementation of Schemes under the Animal Science 
Sector so as to ensure optimum utilization of allocated funds and thus escape the 
chopping scissors of Ministry of Finance at RE stage.  
 
 
 

 
 
 
23 
 
1.30 In their Action Taken Note the Department hav e furnished the current position in 
this regard as follows: 
 
 (Rs. In crore) 
Year Proposed 
BE 
Approved 
BE 
Approved 
RE 
Actual 
expenditure 
Percentage 
utilization 
against RE 
2007-08 149.52 90.00 80.00 71.75 89.69% 
2008-09 254.97 90.00 90.00 89.51 99.46% 
2009-10 221.96 92.00 92.00 91.68 99.65% 
2010-11 232.56 108.00 112.68 110.66 98.16% 
Total 859.01 380.00 374.68 363.59 97.04% 
2011-12 219.66 165.30    
 
They have further submitted that i t is clear from the above table that for the last 
four years, Animal S cience Division was allocated Rs. 374 .68 crore as approved RE 
against the proposed BE of Rs. 859.01 crore which comes to 43.61 per cent only. Out of 
Rs. 374.68 crore allocated to Animal Science Division the actual expenditure during the 
last four years com es to Rs. 363 .59 crore which is around 97.04 percent of allocated 
budget.  
 
1.31 The following figures were submitted by the Department to the Committee 
at the time of examination of Demand for Grants 2011 -12 in regard to Animal  
Sciences:- 
                                                                                                       (Rs. In crores) 
Year Proposed 
BE 
Approved 
BE 
Approved 
RE 
Actual 
expenditure 
2007-08 149.52 90.00 80.00 79.49 
2008-09 288.92 90.00 90.00 104.31 
2009-10 337.00 92.00 92.00 91.68 
2010-11 341.45 108.00 112.68 74.02 
2011-12 342.02 165.30   

 
 
 
24 
 
  
Under the head also the Department have resorted to changing of figures 
of previous years which is inexplicable.  As in the case of some of the previous 
replies of the Department, th e Committee desire Planning Commission and 
Ministry of Finance to report to them in the context of this Head as well within a 
month of presentation of this Report to the Parliament.   
 
 
/--------------------/

 
 
 
25 
 
CHAPTER-II 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE 
GOVERNMENT 
RECOMMENDATION PARA NO. 1.4     
 The Committee are deeply perturbed to note that the Minister of Agriculture is yet 
to make a Statement under Direction 73 -A of Direction by Speaker, Lok Sabha in the 
context of Eighth Rep ort of the Committee.  The Statement which is to be mandatorily 
made within six months of the presentation of an Original Report to the Parliament has 
not been forthcoming even after more than fifteen months have elapsed.  A similar 
delay in making of Stat ement under Direction 73 -A took place in the context of the 
Thirty-eighth Report (Fourteenth Lok Sabha) and was adversely commented upon by 
the Committee in their Fourth Report.  The Committee take strong exception to the 
repeated failure of the Ministry t o adhere to stipulations laid down in Direction 73 -A.  
They also desire that the Statement may be made during the ongoing Session itself.  
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
 The Minister of State in the Ministry of Agriculture has laid a Statement on behalf 
of Min ister of Agriculture in Lok Sabha on 30 th August, 2011 regarding the status of 
implementation of the recommendations contained in the 8 th and 19 th Reports of the 
Standing Committee on Agriculture on Demands for Grants (2010 -11), pertaining to the 
Department of Agriculture Research and Education. Further, Shri Kapil Sibal, Minister of 
Human Resource Development and Minister of Communications and Information 
Technology, on behalf of Minister of Agriculture  laid on the Table in Rajya Sabha on 2 nd 
September, 2011, a statement (in English and Hindi) on the status of implementation of 
observations/recommendations contained in the Eighth and Nineteenth Reports of the 
Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Agriculture on Demands for 
Grants, for the year 2010 -11, of the Department of Agricultural Research and 
Education.  
(Ministry of Agriculture O.M. No. 7(9)/2011, dated 28 th November, 2011, Department of 
Agricultural Research and Education) 

 
 
 
26 
 
ELEVENTH PLAN ALLOCATION 
(RECOMMENDATION PARA NO. 2.30)  
 
 The Committee note that the Working Group for the Eleventh Plan had proposed 
a sum of Rs. 37672 crore for Department of Agricultural Research and Education for the 
Eleventh Plan.  During the currency of the Plan, the Department have proposed on an 
year to y ear basis, allocations amounting to Rs. 17,127 crore (approx) to the Planning 
Commission.  Against this, the Planning Commission made an allocation of Rs. 12023 
crore.  However, on perusal of the budgetary documents furnished by DARE, the 
Committee observe d that the actual releases by the Planning Commission are to the 
tune of Rs. 10054 crore only.  The Committee are unable to comprehend the frugal 
approach adopted by the Planning Commission while allocating funds to DARE whose 
fund utilization has always c rossed 90% during the first four fiscals of the current Plan 
period.  The Department were also very candid in informing the Committee that scarcity 
of funds has negatively impacted all the Schemes being implemented by them by 
showing down the pace of completion.  What is further disconcerting to observe is that a 
Scientific Department is being subjected to severe insensitivity because of the severe 
apathy of all concerned.  DARE is not only mandated with developing scientific, area 
specific and economically  viable agricultural practises but also the National Agriculture 
Research System (NARS) which is responsible for ensuring the food security of the 
nation and the prosperity and well being of the farmer.  The Committee, inspite of 
sounding repetitive for th e umpteenth time, urge the Government to mend their heaven 
may care attitude towards the Agriculture Sector and ensure that this sector is not 
starved of funds in future.  The Committee further recommend that for the ongoing 
Fiscal, DARE take up the issue of enhancement of funds at the highest level with the 
Ministry of Finance (Department of Expenditure) for a quantum jump at RE stage to 
ensure that the total allocation earmarked for the Eleventh Five Year Plan and the 
actual allocation made are in sync with each other. 
 

 
 
 
27 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
 The Recommendation of the Committee was referred to Planning Commission 
which submits that “the GBS provision is broadly decided by the parameters like; (i.) 
Overall resources position, (ii) competing sectoral dem ands / priorities, (iii) utilization of 
funds and absorptive capacity; and (iv) unspent balances.   Keeping these in view an 
outlay of Rs. 1620, 1760, 1760, 2300 and 2800 crores have been provided to the 
DARE/ICAR as BE on an yearly basis.   
 
(Ministry of Agriculture O.M. No. 7(9)/2011, dated 28 th November, 2011, Department of 
Agricultural Research and Education) 
 
 
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE 
 
 For comments of the Committee please refer to Para No. 1.7 of Chapter I of this 
Report. 
 
ALLOCATION FOR AGRICULTURE RESEARCH 
(RECOMMENDATION PARA NO .2.31)  
 
 The Committee are dismayed to find that inspite of DARE and the Planning 
Commission having concurred with the recommendation of the Committee for allocation 
of 1% of Agriculture GDP for Agricultural Research, the a llocations for DARE from the 
Central Plan Outlay for the duration of the Eleventh Five Year Plan has never ever been 
more than a fraction of it.  It anguishes the Committee no end that the allocation for the 
current Plan period is a mere 0.46% of the Centr al Outlay.  The Committee strongly 
deprecate this sordid state of affairs which is endemic of the shortcomings plaguing the 
prevalent system of planning in the Country.  However, the Committee are pretty 
sanguine that if all concerned are committed to the task at hand, the same can be 
achieved from the next Five Year Plan.  The Committee, therefore, exhort the 
Department as well as the Planning Commission to ensure allocation of 1% of 

 
 
 
28 
 
Agriculture GDP for Research right from the inaugural year of the Twelfth  Five Year 
Plan and ensure that it remains constant. 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
 The Recommendation of the Committee was referred to Planning Commission 
which submits that “this issue is under consideration of Planning Commission. The 
allocation for researc h and Education would be suitably increased taking in to 
consideration the performance of previous years and resource availability.”  
 
(Ministry of Agriculture O.M. No. 7(9)/2011, dated 28 th November, 2011, Department of 
Agricultural Research and Education) 
 
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE 
 
 For comments of the Committee please refer to Para No. 1.10 of Chapter I of this 
Report.  
 
ATTRACTING TALENT TOWARDS AGRICULTURE SECTOR 
(RECOMMENDATION PARA NO. 3.23)  
 
 The Committee express their happiness over the fact tha t the Department of 
Agriculture Research and Education have at last realised the need for making element 
of agriculture an attractive profession.  The Committee are of the firm opinion that in 
order to break the now prevailing stereo -typed image of the agr iculture sector and to 
attract the youth of the Country towards it, agriculture has to be made a viable and 
lucrative vocation in all aspects. Towards this end, the slew of measures being taken by 
DARE is indeed laudable as they have embarked upon incorpor ation of the latest 
scientific and technology development in agriculture, like Nanotechnology, 
biotechnology, remote sensing in the syllabi, of Agricultural Universities.  This has 
resulted in interest being rekindled amongst the youth to take up Agricultu re as a 
subject at graduate and post -graduate levels.  In the considered opinion of the 
Committee, this will ultimately result in young agriculture graduates taking to agriculture 

 
 
 
29 
 
in a big way and changing the overall face of Indian Agriculture by putting their 
theoretical knowledge into practice in a scientific and well planned manner guided by 
their youthful zeal.  However, the Committee caution the Department not to sit on their 
laurels and continue to work on this aspect as in their opinion this is a co ntinuous 
process and thus requiring constant updates keeping in view the latest technological 
and scientific advancements taking place worldwide. 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
Noted. 
(Ministry of Agriculture O.M. No. 7(9)/2011, dated 28 th November, 2011, Department of 
Agricultural Research and Education) 
 
CENTRAL AGRICULTURE UNIVERSITY 
(RECOMMENDATION PARA NO. 3.25)  
 
 The Committee have been informed that the comments from various agencies on 
the proposal for Expenditure Finance Committee for setting up of Cent ral Agriculture 
University, Barapani were received and a revised note for EFC has been prepared.  In 
regard to Central Agriculture University, Pusa, Bihar, the Planning Commission had 
sought some clarifications on the proposal received from the Government of Bihar.  The 
modalities for transfer of manpower, infrastructure, etc. are in progress.  Once all these 
issues are settled the EFC note will be firmed up and circulated for comments to various 
agencies.  In case of CAU, Bundelkhand the EFC note was circu lated way back in 31 
December, 2009 and the EFC meeting has been held almost one and a half year later 
on 28 April, 2011. In the mean time, a provision of Rs. 30 crore for CAU Bundelkhand 
and Rs. 28 crore for CAU Barapani has been made for 2011 -12.  The Co mmittee take 
umbrage at the tardy progress made in regard to setting up of Central Agriculture 
University, Barapani and CAU, Pusa, Bihar.  In the considered opinion of the 
Committee, the Central Agricultural University at these places would be a much neede d 
interface with the agriculture sector and allied activities in these States and act as a fillip 
for a holistic development of agriculture in these areas and therefore its timely sanction 
and implementation needs to be accorded highest priority by the Gov ernment.  They, 
therefore, recommend the Department to take up this issue in right earnest with the 

 
 
 
30 
 
concerned agencies to ensure timely approval for setting up of CAU at Barapani, Pusa 
and Bundelkhand from EFC and CCEA and thereby avoid further staggering of 
timelines. 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
Noted. 
 
(Ministry of Agriculture O.M. No. 7(9)/2011, dated 28 th November, 2011, Department of 
Agricultural Research and Education) 
 
ICAR HQ 
(RECOMMENDATION PARA NO. 3.27)  
 
 The Committee note that the Department have failed to fulfil their assurance 
regarding utilisation of allocation under the Major Head ICAR Headquarter Plan Head 
during 2009-10.  The Committee found that the construction of Auditorium planned for 
could not be started for want of clearances from MCD, Delhi Fire Service and Delhi 
Urban Art Commission, etc.  The Department have submitted Layout Plan to Town 
Planning Division of MCD on 27 June, 2010 and approval was received on 17 February, 
2011.  Thereafter, it was submitted to Building Section of MCD on  4 March 2011 for 
examination and also seeking approval from Delhi Urban Art Commission and Delhi Fire 
Service.  In the meantime, this dilly dallying has led to the revised cost getting escalated 
from Rs. 35 crore to Rs. 101.90 crore, of which  Rs. 66.90 crore is ascribed to additional 
items.  The Committee are surprised to note that the Department allocated Rs. 2 crore 
for construction of Auditorium during 2009 -10 when the basic requirements viz. Layout 
Plan, Building Plan, etc. for construction were not c ompleted.  While expressing their 
disapproval of such practices they desire the Department to strengthen their internal 
planning mechanism so that the cases of non -utilisation are avoided in future.  They 
also desire the Department to expedite the clearanc e of the project from various local 
civic authorities, so that the further cost escalation of the project can be avoided and it 
can finally see the light of the day. 
 
 
 

 
 
 
31 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
 The revised estimate amounting to Rs. 101.90 crores has been approved in the 
Revised EFC of ICAR Headquarters which was held on 24.08.2011. Revised layout 
plan of National Agricultural Science Complex(NASC) including auditorium has been 
approved by Delhi Urban Arts Commission (DUAC) on 24.08.2011. Pre -engineering 
works for auditorium is in process and process for finalization of construction agency is 
underway. The construction agency is also being mobilized at site.  
 
(Ministry of Agriculture O.M. No. 7(9)/2011, dated 28 th November, 2011, Department of 
Agricultural Research and Education) 
 
 
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE 
 
 For comments of the Committee please refer to Para No. 1.25 of Chapter I of this 
Report.  
 
MEMORANDUM OF UNDERSTANDINGS 
(RECOMMENDATION PARA NO. 3.30)  
 
 The Committee note that the Indian Council of Ag riculture Research have signed 
Memorandum of Understandings with institutions in USA, Mexico and El. Salvador for 
cooperation in Agricultural Research and Education Sector and the work plans for 
implementation of the activities by the Divisions concerned w ith these Memoranda are 
being worked out.  The Committee desire the Department to expedite the finalisation of 
work plan for implementation of all activities under these MoUs with purposefulness and 
due promptitude, so that the objective of promoting co -operation in the field of 
agriculture research and training, exchange of scientists and technicians, exchange of 
genetic resources, scientific literature, information methodology can be successfully 
carried out, thereby forging a symbiotic relationship betwe en the signatories to the 
MoUs and enriching the Indian Agriculture Sector and vice-versa.  They desire to be 
apprised of the progress made in this regard. 

 
 
 
32 
 
 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
  
 Pursuant to the signing of MoUs with certain institutions in USA, Mexic o and El 
Salvador for cooperation in Agricultural Research and Education, the work relating to 
formulation/finalization of Work Plans is in progress.  
 
 The Work Plan with Cornell University has already been signed. Efforts are being 
made to finalise Work Plans with the other universities of USA with whom MoUs have 
been signed. The Work Plans for cooperation with the Institutes in Mexico and El 
Salvador will be formulated after the requisite internal clearances from the Government 
appraisal agencies are obt ained on the MoUs signed with them. Necessary action in 
this regard has already been taken and the matter is being actively pursued.  
 
(Ministry of Agriculture O.M. No. 7(9)/2011, dated 28 th November, 2011, Department of 
Agricultural Research and Education) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
33 
 
 
 
CHAPTER-III 
 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH THE COMMITTEE 
DO NOT DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE GOVERNMENT’S REPLY 
 
 
 
 
 
 
-NIL- 
 

 
 
 
34 
 
 
CHAPTER-IV 
 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF THE 
GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE 
 
TWELFTH PLAN PLANNING 
(RECOMMENDATION PARA NO. 2.32) 
 
 During the Eleventh Plan the Committee observed that the first two to three years 
of the Plan were spent on obtaining approvals of various Schemes of the Depar tment of 
Agricultural Research and Education from various agencies, thereby leaving precious 
little time for their proper implementation. This has admittedly impacted negatively the 
implementation of the Schemes leading to substantial cost and time overrun s, 
staggering/curtailing of targets, reduced allocations, etc.  The Committee note that the 
advance exercise for finalizing requirements and projections for the Twelfth Plan has 
been initiated by the Department of Agricultural Research and Education on the  advice 
of the Planning Commission and the major thrust areas have been identified.  A draft 
Approach Paper for the Twelfth Plan (2012 -17) has been presented before the full 
Planning Commission and the issues highlighted in the Approach Paper are in the 
public domain.  The Committee desire the Department to initiate timely action for 
preparation of SFC/EFC Documents so that the experience of Eleventh Plan does not 
recur in the Twelfth Plan and implementation of Twelfth Plan starts in time.   They 
further de sire that the Planning Commission and the Ministry of Finance and other 
agencies involved in according approval to a project reduce their time frame so as to 
ensure prompt implementation of Schemes and thereby avoiding staggering of timelines 
and increase viability of the Scheme.  Before concluding, the Committee would strongly 
recommend that the Planning Commission and the Government should ensure that all 
formalities relating to the Twelfth Plan are completed well in advance so that the Plan is 

 
 
 
35 
 
conveyed to the Ministries/Departments latest by December this year and they are able 
to start proper implementation of their Schemes from day one of the Twelfth Plan.  
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT  
 
 The Department has referred this Recommendation to Planning Commissio n 
which submits that “the scheme approval moves through well established 
procedures viz EFC/SFC/CCEA etc.” This Department will try to its best to expedite the 
process of EFC etc.  
 
(Ministry of Agriculture O.M. No. 7(9)/2011, dated 28 th November, 2011, Department of 
Agricultural Research and Education)  
 
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE 
 
 For comments of the Committee please refer to Para No. 1.13 of Chapter I of this 
Report.  
 
NEW SCHEMES 
(RECOMMENDATION PARA NO. 3.22)  
 
 The ills besetting the extant system of according clearance/approvals to a 
Scheme by the various agencies involved which the Committee have highlighted 
unequivocally on numerous occasions in their earlier report seems to be falling on deaf 
ears, as is evident in the extant case.  The New Schemes  of the Department, namely, 
National Institute of Agriculture Biotechnology and National Institute of Biotic Stress 
Management have been held up since the inception of the Eleventh Five Year Plan till 
date while the Plan itself is in its terminal stage.  T hough the Committee are well aware 
that majority of the New Schemes have staggered timelines for their implementation, 
this procrastination of the Government, however, in these two cases is totally 
bewildering.  The Committee empathize with DARE on this is sue as for no fault of theirs 
they are facing the wrong end of the stick.  The Committee strongly deprecate this 

 
 
 
36 
 
sordid state of affairs and call for a complete overhaul of the extant system of planning 
when the Planning Commission and the Government sit t ogether to sort out the 
modalities for the soon to be implemented Twelfth Five Year Plan.  The Committee 
exhort the Department to play a pro -active role in this matter and take up this issue with 
all concerned at the highest level to ensure that all New Sc hemes are accorded 
clearances by all concerned in good time, thereby ensuring timely implementation, 
timely review and ultimately achieving its assigned target in the next Plan period.  As 
regard the two Schemes in question, the Committee desire that a tim e bound schedule 
of implementation be worked out by DARE and presented to them within three months 
of presentation of this Report to Parliament. 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
 The EFC proposals for setting up the (i) Indian Institute of Agricultural 
Biotechnology (IIAB), Ranchi, Jharkhand and (ii) National Institute of Biotic Stress 
Management (NIBSM), Raipur, Cahttisgarh was held on 26.7.2011 under the 
Chairmanship of Secretary(Expenditure), Govt. of India which considered the EFC 
proposals for setting up of t he IIAB, Ranchi, Jharkhand and NIBSM, Raipur,  
Chhattisgarh  and decided that “HRD Ministry needs to be consulted as these institutes 
are proposed to be „deemed‟ universities”.   
 Accordingly, the modified proposals along -with a copy of the EFC minutes hel d 
on 26.7.2011 were forwarded to the Secretary, Ministry of Human Resource 
Development (Higher Education) for their comments.  
 In response, the Ministry of Human Resource Development requested ICAR to 
ask the institutes to submit their proposal for seekin g status of deemed to be university 
in accordance with UGC Regulations (Institutions deemed to be Universities), 2010. 
  
(Ministry of Agriculture O.M. No. 7(9)/2011, dated 28 th November, 2011, Department of 
Agricultural Research and Education) 
 

 
 
 
37 
 
 
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE 
 
 For comments of the Committee please refer to Para No. 1.16 of Chapter I of this 
Report.  
 
AGRICULTURE  EXTENSION 
(RECOMMENDATION PARA NO. 3.26)  
 
 The Committee note that Agriculture Extension consists of Plan Schemes -  KVK, 
DRWA, AICRP  on Home Science and DIPA for which an outlay of Rs. 2102.74 was 
earmarked for the Eleventh Plan.  Out of the earmarked outlay Rs. 1378.50 crore has 
already been allocated during the first four years of Eleventh Plan and BE for 2011-12 is      
Rs. 432 crore.  The Department have been able to spend Rs. 1140.76 crore in first four 
years and with Rs. 432 crore as anticipated expenditure in the current Fiscal the total 
spending will reach to Rs.1572.76 crore.  The Committee are not at all convinced with 
the plea of the Department that due to less allocation of funds prioritization of activities 
and the infrastructure had to be made and accordingly infrastructural facilities like 
farmers‟ hostels, staff quarters, equipments and demonstration units could not be 
provided in certain KVKs which did not affect the mandated activities.  The Committee 
find it inexplicable that if such shortcomings in certain KVKs did not/do not affect the 
mandated activities then why the Department have made provisions for such activitie s 
in the KVKs in the Country.  They, therefore, recommend the Department to rework on 
their priorities in the KVKs and strengthen the system so that funds allocated for the 
Scheme can be fully utilized in future.  Since KVKs are the bulwark of agriculture 
extension network in the Country, the Committee also desire the Department to work 
out reasonable fund requirements for them in the Twelfth Plan and make all out efforts 
to get them approved from the Planning Commission. 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
38 
 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
 The current position is as under: 
               (in lakh) 
Year Funds 
allocated  
(BE) 
Funds 
allocated 
(RE) 
Funds 
Utilized 
Percentage 
utilization 
against RE 
2007-08 28852.5 32050.00 28852.20 90.02 
2008-09 31531.34 31500.00 31351.71 99.52 
2009-10 32841.27 32800.00 32778.79 99.93 
2010-11 44079.65 63630.00 63546.20 99.86 
Total  159980.00 156528.90 97.33 
 
 It is clear from the above table that for the last four years, Agricultural Extension 
Division was allocated Rs. 159980.00 lakhs of approved RE. Out of this , the Actual 
Expenditure during the last four years comes to Rs. 156528.90 lakhs which is around 
97.33% of allocated budget.  
 
(Ministry of Agriculture O.M. No. 7(9)/2011, dated 28 th November, 2011, Department of 
Agricultural Research and Education) 
 
 
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE 
 
 For comments of the Committee please refer to Para No. 1.22 of Chapter I of this 
Report.  
 
AGRICULTURE ENGINEERING 
(RECOMMENDATION PARA NO. 3.28)  
 
 Under the Major Head Agriculture Engineering the Outlay for Eleventh Plan was 
Rs. 262.20 crore.  SFC/EFC approved an amount of Rs. 274.03 crore. Rupees 11.83 
crore was taken into account while preparing the Eleventh Plan SFC/EFC document for 

 
 
 
39 
 
the Indian Institute of Natural Resins and Gums (INRG) to strengthen the infrastructure 
and other  research contingencies of Institute.  The Committee found that the 
Department have not been able to utilize their original outlay of Rs. 262.20 crore under 
the Head.  They further find that during the current Five Year Plan the Department will 
be able to utilise Rs. 176.33 crore (first four years RE plus Fifth Year BE Rs. 67.40 crore 
totalling to Rs. 243.73 crore) thereby resulting in underutilisation of more than Rs. 30 
crore under the Head.  The Committee in their Fourth Report on Demands for Grants 
(2009-10) had already recommended the Department to ensure that both the cost and 
timelines of the Schemes under this Head are not staggered.  The Committee 
deprecate this sordid state of affairs and impress upon the Department to review the 
reasons leading to under-utilization of allocated funds and  Plan their fund utilisation in a 
more even spread and proper manner so that under-utilization of  precious funds can be 
avoided in future. 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 The current position is as under: 
                                                                                                      (in lakh) 
Year Allocation Expenditure Percentage 
utilization 
against RE 
2007-2008 4000.00 3405.56 85.13 
2008-2009 4200.00 4186.77 99.68 
2009-2010 4300.00 4299.59 99.99 
2010-2011 5263.00 5261.73 99.97 
Grand Total 17763.00 17153.65 96.56 
 
 It is clear from the above table that for the last four years, Agricultural 
Engineering Division was allocated Rs. 17763.00 lakhs. Out of this, the Actual 
Expenditure during the la st four years comes to Rs. 17153.65 lakhs which is around 
96.56% of allocated budget. 
 
(Ministry of Agriculture O.M. No. 7(9)/2011, dated 28 th November, 2011, Department of 
Agricultural Research and Education) 
 
 

 
 
 
40 
 
 
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE 
 
 For comments of the Committee please refer to Para No. 1.28 of Chapter I of this 
Report.  
 
 
ANIMAL SCIENCE 
(RECOMMENDATION PARA NO. 3.29)   
 
 
 The Committee observe that out of the earmarked outlay of Rs. 920.83 crore 
which was approved by SFC/EFC for animal sciences, th e Department have been able 
to utilize only Rs. 374.69 crore during the first four Years of the Plan, which in 
percentage terms amounts to a mere  40.7% of the approved amount during the period.  
Now in the last year of the current Plan, a provision of Rs.  165.30 crore, which is 
17.95% of the EFC/SFC has been allocated as BE.   Even if the Department were able 
to utilize the entire BE amount, the total utilization during the current Plan period would 
be only Rs. 540 crore, which in percentage terms would am ounts to 58.64% of the 
Outlay. This particular Scheme is a poor reflection on the overall utilization of DARE 
which is otherwise in the range of 90% and above.  The consistent under performance 
of the Animal Science Sector does diminish the overall gloss o f a high performance 
Department like DARE as here the blame falls squarely on their shoulders.  The 
Committee, therefore, desire DARE to put their house in order and improve the 
implementation of Schemes under the Animal Science Sector so as to ensure opti mum 
utilization of allocated funds and thus escape the chopping scissors of Ministry of 
Finance at RE stage.  
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
41 
 
 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
 The current position is as under:  
( in lakh) 
Year Proposed 
BE 
Approved 
BE 
Approved 
RE 
Actual 
expenditure 
Percentage 
utilization 
against RE 
2007-08 14952.00 9000.00 8000.00 7174.95 89.69% 
2008-09 25497.48 9000.00 9000.00 8950.97 99.46% 
2009-10 22196.00 9200.00 9200.00 9167.94 99.65% 
2010-11 23256.00 10800.00 11268.00 11065.50 98.16% 
Total 85901.48 38000.00 37468.00 36359.36 97.04% 
2011-12 21965.72 16530.00    
 
 It is clear from the above table that for the last four years, Animal Science 
Division was allocated Rs. 37468.00 lakh as approved RE against the proposed BE of 
Rs. 85901.48 lakhs which comes to 43.61 pe r cent only. Out of Rs. 37468.00 lakhs 
allocated to Animal Science Division the actual expenditure during the last four years 
comes to Rs. 36359.36 lakhs which is around 97.04 percent of allocated budget.  
 
(Ministry of Agriculture O.M. No. 7(9)/2011, date d 28th November, 2011, Department of 
Agricultural Research and Education) 
 
 
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE 
 
 For comments of the Committee please refer to Para No. 1.31 of Chapter I of this 
Report.  
 
 
 

 
 
 
42 
 
 
CHAPTER-V 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH THE FINAL 
REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT ARE STILL AWAITED 
 
 
NATIONAL AGRICULTURE EDUCATION PROJECT 
(RECOMMENDATION PARA NO. 3.24)   
 
 The Committee note that to achieve excellence, enhanced relevance, and high 
efficiency in higher agricultural education syst em, and the agricultural universities to 
offer enhanced services to benefit farmers, rural women and other stakeholders, the 
Department of Agricultural Research and Education are trying to formulate the National 
Agriculture Education Project (NAEP).  Under this Project it is proposed to attract young 
talent to agricultural education sector, major reforms in governance for bringing 
efficiency in the system, embedding system for attracting and retaining talented faculty 
continued emphasis on capacity building  through quality improvement programmes 
nationally and internationally, development of Centres of Excellence, developing public -
private partnership for curriculum delivery and educational research, partnership with 
foreign universities for sandwich program mes, inviting international faculty for capacity 
building, etc.  In addition to these, there is a proposal to start non -formal education with 
the objective of reaching the untapped sections for tapping agricultural potential in 
disadvantaged regions.  The Committee appreciate that the Department have consulted 
a large number of stakeholders, experts, scientists, industries and their associations etc. 
and incorporated their valuable suggestions in the National Agriculture Education 
Project. 
 The Committee ho wever fail to comprehend the reasons stalling the 
implementation of the said project when the Department have already finalized all 
modalities.  Keeping in view the potential importance of this Project, they desire the 
Department to get the approval for NA EP expedited in a stipulated time frame thereby 

 
 
 
43 
 
clearing the decks for implementation of a project of vital importance without any further 
delay. 
 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
 This project has been prepared for implementation sometime in the XIIth plan, 
and has to go through a process of approvals, including consideration of the funding 
agency. 
 
(Ministry of Agriculture O.M. No. 7(9)/2011, dated 28 th November, 2011, Department of 
Agricultural Research and Education) 
 
 
 
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE 
 
 For comments of the Committee please refer to Para No. 1.19 of Chapter I of this 
Report.  
 
 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI;                    BASUDEB ACHARIA 
10  February, 2012                                          Chairman 
21 Magha, 1933, (Saka)                                     Committee on Agriculture 
 
 

 
 
 
44 
 
APPENDIX 
COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE 
(2011-12) 
 
MINUTES OF THE TWENTY THIRD SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE 
 The Committee sat on Friday, the 10 February, 2012 from 1430  hours to            
1810 hours in Room No. „53‟, Parliament House, New Delhi.  
PRESENT 
 
Shri Basudeb Acharia –  Chairman 
       MEMBERS 
 
LOK SABHA 
 
32. Shri Narayansingh Amlabe 
33. Smt. Ashwamedh Devi 
34. Shri Sk. Nurul Islam 
35. Shri Devji M. Patel 
36. Shri Nripendra Nath Roy 
37. Shri D. Venugopal 
 
 Rajya  Sabha 
38. Shri Shashi Bhusan Behera 
39. Shri Narendra Budania 
40. Shri Satyavrat Chaturvedi 
41. Shri Mohd. Ali Khan 
42. Shri Upendra Kushwaha 
43. Shri Bharatsinh Prabhatsinh Parmar 
44. Shri Rajpal Singh Saini 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
 1. Shri Deepak Mahna  - Joint Secretary 
 2. Shri P. V. L. N. Murthy - Director 
 3. Shri P.C. Koul  - Additional Director 
 4. Shri C. Vanlalruata  - Deputy Secretary 

 
 
 
45 
 
2. At the outset, the Hon‟ble Chairman welcomed the members to the Sitting of the 
Committee. Thereafter, the Committee took up the following Draft Reports for 
consideration : - 
*(i)  
(ii) Action taken by the Government on the  Observations/Recommendations 
contained in the Twenty-third Report of the Committee on Agriculture (2010 -
11) on Demands for  Grants (2011 -12) of Ministry of Agriculture 
(Department of  Agricultural Research and Education); and 
*(iii) *** *** *** *** *** *** *** *** *** ***   
3. After some deliberations, the Committee adopted the draft Reports without any 
modifications.  The Committee then authorized the Chairman to finalise the Reports 
after getting them factually verif ied from the concerned Ministry/Department.  The 
Committee also decided that since the House is not in Session these Reports may be 
presented to Hon‟ble Speaker, Lok Sabha. 
*4. *** *** *** *** *** *** *** *** *** ***  
*5. *** *** *** *** *** *** *** *** *** ***  
*6. *** *** *** *** *** *** *** *** *** ***  
*7. *** *** *** *** *** *** *** *** *** ***  
*8. *** *** *** *** *** *** *** *** *** *** 
*9. *** *** *** *** *** *** *** *** *** ***  
*10. *** *** *** *** *** *** *** *** *** ***   
The Committee then adjourned. 
 
________________________________________________________________ 
*Matter not related to this Report. 

 
 
 
46 
 
ANNEXURE 
(Vide Para 4 of Introduction of the Report) 
ANALYSIS OF ACTION TAKEN BY GOVERNMENT ON 
THE TWENTY THIRD REPORT OF COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE ON  
DEMANDS FOR GRANTS (2011-12) PERTAINING TO MINISTRY 
OF AGRICULTURE (DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURAL RESEARCH AND 
EDUCATION) 
  
(i)  Total number of Recommendations               13 
(ii) Recommendations/Observations which have been 
Accepted by the Government  
Para Nos. 1.4, 2.30, 2.31, 3.23, 3.25, 3.27 and 3.30  
Total           07 
Percentage                           54%  
(iii) Recommendations/Observations which the Committee 
Do not desire to pursue in view of the Government‟s replies  
Total                    NIL 
Percentage                               0% 
(iv) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies 
 of the Government have not been accepted by the Committee 
Para Nos.  2.32, 3.22, 3.26, 3.28 and 3.29 
Total              05  
Percentage                          38% 
(v) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which  
 Final replies of the Government are still awaited 
 
Para No.  3.24 
Total             01 
  
Percentage                               8% 