 
 
COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE 
(2010-2011) 
                 
         
FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA 
                                         
MINISTRY OF AGRICULTURE  
(DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURAL RESEARCH AND EDUCATION) 
              
DEMANDS FOR GRANTS (2009-10) 
 
{Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/ 
Recommendations contained in the Fourth Report  
of the Committee on Agriculture (2009-2010)} 
 
         
        
FIFTEENTH REPORT 
  
 
         
              LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
 
March, 2011/Phalguna, 1932 (Saka) 
 
 
 
 
15 

 
FIFTEENTH  REPORT 
 
COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE 
(2010-2011)  
          
(FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
         
                 
MINISTRY OF AGRICULTURE  
(DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURAL RESEARCH AND EDUCATION) 
         
                 
DEMANDS FOR GRANTS (2009-10) 
          
Action Taken by the Government on the  
Observations/Recommendations contained in the Fourth Report 
of the Committee on Agriculture (2009-2010) 
 
 
  Presented to Lok Sabha on  08.03.2011      
  Laid on the Table of Rajya Sabha on 08.03.2011     
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
                 
March, 2011/Phalguna, 1932 (Saka)  
 

 
COA No. 238 
 
 
         
              
         
         
         
 
         
         
        
Price:  Rs.  
         
         
         
         
         
 
 
 
© 2011 By Lok Sabha Secretariat 
 
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of Business in 
Lok Sabha (Thirteenth Edition) and Printed by  
 

 
 
<CONTENTS> 
                   PAGE 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE………………………………….  (iii) 
         
 
INTRODUCTION……………………………………………………………  (v) 
 
CHAPTER I   Report …………………………………………     1  
 
CHAPTER II  Observations/Recommendations which have  
   been accepted by the Government ……………    11 
 
CHAPTER III  Observations/Recommendations which the 
   Committee do not desire to pursue in view 
   of the Government’s replies …………………..    35 
 
CHAPTER IV Observations/Recommendations in respect 
   of  which replies of the Government have  
   not been accepted by the Committee ………….    36 
 
CHAPTER V  Observations/Recommendations in respect of  
   which final replies of the Government are  
   still awaited …………………………………….     42 
 
APPENDIX 
 Minutes of the Eighteenth Sitting of the Committee 
held on 03 March, 2011.             43 
    
                                   ANNEXURE 
Analysis of Action Taken by the Government on the 
Recommendations contained in the Fourth Report                   45 
(Fifteenth Lok Sabha) of the Committee on Agriculture 
(2009-2010).             
           
 
(i)

 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE (2010-11) 
 
Shri Basudeb Acharia   -   Chairman 
 
MEMBERS 
 
LOK SABHA 
2.  Shri Narayansingh Amlabe 
3.  Shri K.C. Singh ‘Baba’ 
4.  Shri Thangso Baite 
5.  Shri Jayant Chaudhary 
6.  Smt. Shruti Choudhary 
7.  Smt. Ashwamedh Devi 
8.  Shri Biren Singh Engti 
9.  Smt. Paramjit Kaur Gulshan 
10.  Shri Anant Kumar Hegde 
11.  Shri Sk. Nurul Islam 
12.  Shri Naranbhai Kachhadia 
13.  Shri Surendra Singh Nagar  
14.  Shri Prabodh Panda  
15.  Shri Premdas  
16.  Shri Vitthalbhai Hansrajbhai Radadiya 
17.  Shri Nripendra Nath Roy 
18.  Shri Bhoopendra Singh 
19.  Shri Uday Singh 
20.  Shri Jagdish Thakor 
21.  Shri Hukmadeo Narayan Yadav 
  
 RAJYA SABHA 
22.  Shri Shashi Bhusan Behera 
23.  Shri Narendra Budania 
24.  Shri Satyavrat Chaturvedi 
25.  Shri A. Elavarasan 
26.  Shri Vinay Katiyar 
27.  Shri Mohd. Ali Khan 
28.  Shri Upendra Kushwaha 
29.  Shri Bharatsinh Prabhatsinh Parmar 
30.  Shri Rajpal Singh Saini 
31.  Shri S. Thangavelu 
 
 
 (iii) 

 
SECRETARIAT  
 
1. Shri S. Bal Shekar   - Additional Secretary 
2. Shri Raj Shekhar Sharma  - Joint Secretary 
3. Shri P.V.L.N. Murthy  - Director 
4. Shri P. C. Koul   - Additional Director  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(iv) 

 
INTRODUCTION 
 
         
I, the Chairman, Committee on Agriculture (20 10-2011) having been 
authorized by the Committee  to submit the Report on their behalf, present this 
Fifteenth Report on Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/ 
Recommendations contained in the Fourth Report of the Committee on Demands for 
Grants (2009 -10) pertaining to Ministry of Agricultur e (Department of Agricultural 
Research and Education). 
 
2. The Fourth Report of the Committee on Agriculture (2009-2010) on ‘Demands 
for Grants’ (2009-10) pertaining to Ministry of Agriculture (Department of Agricultural 
Research and Education) was first p resented to Speaker, Lok Sabha on 18 
February, 2010  and later to Lok Sabha on 03 March, 2010. The Report was laid on 
the Table of Rajya Sabha on 03 March, 2010. The Action Taken Replies on the 
Report were received on 18 May, 2010. 
 
3. The Report was consi dered and adopted by the Committee at their Sitting 
held on 03 March, 2011. 
 
4. An analysis of the Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/ 
Recommendations contained in the Fourth Report of the Committee is given in 
Annexure. 
 
 
                      
                                                                                           
                                                                                           
NEW DELHI;                    BASUDEB ACHARIA 
7 March, 2011                                                                         Chairman, 
16 Phalguna, 1932 (Saka)                          Committee on Agriculture. 
  
 
 
  
 
  
 
(v) 

 
CHAPTER-I 
 
R E P O R T 
This Report of the Committee on Agriculture deals with the action take n by 
the Government on the Recommendations contained in the Fourth Report (Fifteenth 
Lok Sabha) of the Committee on Agriculture (2009 -2010) on “Demands for Grants 
(2009-10) pertaining to Ministry of Agriculture (Department of Agri cultural Research 
and Education) which was first presented to Speaker, Lok Sabha on 18.02.2010 and 
later to Lok Sabha on 03.03.2010.  The Report was laid on the Table of Rajya Sabha 
on 03.03.2010.   
 
1.2  The Ministry of Agriculture (Department of Agricultural Research & Education) 
have furnished Action Taken Replies in respect of all the 22 
Observations/Recommendations contained in the Report. These have been 
categorized as under:  
 
(i)  Observations/Recommendations that have been accepted by the 
Government:  
 
Recommendation Para N os. 2.8, 3.49, 3.50, 3.51, 3.52, 3.53, 3.54, 3.55, 
4.45, 4.46, 4.47, 4.48, 4.49, 4.50, 4.51, 4.55, 4.56 
and 4.57                            
 
(ii)  Observations/Recommendations in respect of which the Committee do not 
desire to pursue in view of the Government’s reply:  
 
Recommendation Para Nos. NIL 
  
(iii)  Observations/Recommendations in respect of which action taken replies of 
 the Government have not been accepted by the Committee:  
 
 Recommendation Para Nos. – 3.48, 4.52, 4.53 and 4.54                           
 
(iv)  Observations/Recommendations in respect of which final replies of the 
Government are still awaited :  
 
Recommendation Para No .  NIL 
 
 

 
1.3  The Committee trust that utmost importance would be given to 
implementation of the Observations/Reco mmendations accepted by the 
Government. In cases, where it is not possible for the Department to 
implement the Recommendations in letter and spirit for any reason, the matter 
should be reported to the Committee with reasons for non -implementation. 
The Committee desire that further Action Taken Notes on the Observations / 
Recommendations contained in Chapter -I and final Action Taken Replies to 
the Recommendations contained in Chapter -V of this Report be furnished to 
them at an early date.  
   
1.4  The Commit tee will now deal with the action taken by the Government on 
some of the Recommendations in the succeeding paragraphs.  
 
BUDGETARY PLANNING AND ZERO BASED BUDGETING 
(RECOMMENDATION PARA NO. 3.48) 
 
1.5 Amongst various aspects, the Committee in their instant  Recommendation 
had asked the Department that instead of the present practice of Zero Based 
Budgeting exercise being done by the Planning Commission, the Department ought 
to do this Exercise themselves as the ZBB is a handy tool for better rational, pruden t 
and more focussed financial planning.  This would have also  in the opinion of the 
Committee enabled the Planning Commission to analysis and appreciate the 
performance and achievements of the Department in a more focussed and 
professional manner apart fro m providing a sound base to the ZBB Exercise 
conducted by the Planning Commission and considerably reducing the time taken 
presently in the finalisation of allocations.  The Committee had also desired the 
Department to consider the feasibility of carrying out ZBB Exercise for Annual Plans 
as well since they are the fundamental units of the Planning System in the Country.   
 
1.6 The Government in their Action Taken Note have stated that Schemes, 
specially in agriculture, by their very nature, require a perio d of five years or so, 
before an assessment can be made of success/failure or need for their continuation 
or otherwise.  Therefore, once the Zero Based Budgeting exercise is done at the 

 
beginning of the Plan period, annual Zero based Budgeting may be diffi cult to 
implement.  However, a continuous watch is kept on all schemes/expenditure, to 
avoid infractuous expenditure.  
 
1.7 The Committee are not at all satisfied with the reply of the Government 
about ZBB being difficult to implement in the context of Ann ual Plans as there 
is no rational link between Annual Plan budgeting and the reasons adduced by 
the Government viz. Schemes in agriculture requiring a period of five years or 
so before assessment of their success/failure or need for their continuation or 
otherwise.  In their considered opinion , the ZBB concept if applied to the 
Annual Plans would only help in  evaluating the performance of various 
Schemes during a particular financial year, both in terms of financial 
implications and physical achievements there against so that funds for the 
next fiscal are accordingly allocated.  The Committee would, therefore, 
reiterate their earlier recommendation and desire the Government to give a 
relook to this rather than expressing their apprehension in doing so.  
 
 The Committee are further constrained to note that the Department have 
inexplicably not responded to the more important aspect of this 
Recommendation viz. conducting a ZBB Exercise for a Five Year Plan on their 
own and letting the Planning Commission create their edifice over it.  While 
deprecating this oversight, the Committee desire that the Department should, 
at the time of furnishing their reply to the first aspect of this Recommendation 
also furnish their considered views in this matter as well  and cauti on the 
Government to henceforth furnish full and complete replies to their 
recommendations.  
 
 
 

 
BUDGETING OF A SCIENTIFIC DEPARTMENT        
(RECOMMENDATION PARA NOS. 3.49 AND 3.50) 
 
1.8 Appreciating the typical requirements of human resources, working and 
finances of a Scientific Department and noting with consternation that for decades 
together the Government had been neglecting this fact and clubbing the Scientific 
Departments like DARE with other general administrative Ministries/Departments in 
the asses sment of their organizational, functional and financial requirements, the 
Committee had recommended that DARE ought not be kept on the same footing as 
the general administrative Ministries/Departments. The Committee had further 
desired the Department that rather than merely demanding things in thin air, should 
get down to the task of working out a well considered and cogent proposal 
delineating their typical requirements of manpower, functions and finances and the 
amendments / changes required to be made in  the extant rules and regulations 
concerning these elements and project them to the authorities concerned with a view 
to fructify them.   
1.9 The Ministry of Agriculture (Department of Agricultural Research and 
Education) in their Action Taken Note have st ated that they have constituted a 
Committee to examine and submit specific recommendations on this issue. 
1.10 The Committee note with satisfaction that pursuant to their 
Recommendation, the Department of Agricultural Research and Education   
have constitu ted a Committee to examine and submit specific 
recommendations on the issue of treating a Scientific Department  separately 
from other general Ministries/Departments in assessment of their 
organizational, functional and financial requirements.  The Committ ee, 
however, desire  that the C ommittee constituted for the purpose should be 
asked to complete the task assigned to it with due promptitude and in a highly 
time bound manner so that at least now DARE/ICAR are treated by Ministry of 
Finance and Planning Commission in a more professional manner in so far as 

 
their typical requirements are concerned.  The Committee would like to be 
apprised of the endeavours of the Department in this regard at the earliest.   
 
LAUNCHING OF NEW SCHEMES 
(RECOMMENDATION PARA NO. 3.53) 
 
1.11 Concerned over the inordinate delay in implementation of two new Schemes 
viz National Institute of Agriculture Biotechnology and the National Institute of Biotic 
Stress Management, as they were still on paper, the Committee desired the 
Department to try their level best to ensure that all formalities pertaining to these 
Schemes of national importance were completed with utmost promptitude and their 
implementation commenced at the earliest.  
 
1.12 The Government in their Action Taken Note have sta ted that they have 
already requested the Department of Expenditure to urgently indicate a date of EFC 
meeting to be chaired by Secretary, Department of Expenditure for the new 
schemes of National Institute of Agriculture Biotechnology and the National Inst itute 
of Biotic Stress Management. 
 
1.13 The Committee strongly deprecate the casual approach of the 
Department of Agricultural Research and Education in responding to their 
recommendation.  This is precisely what they had stated before the Committee 
during the course of examination of Demand s for Grants 2009-10.  It is indeed 
very surprising that even when faced with the looming threat of climate 
change and its adverse impact on Agriculture, the Department of Agricultural 
Research and Education are yet to complete formalities pertaining to the 
commencement of National Institute of Agriculture Biotechnology and the 
National Institute of Biotic Stress Management Schemes with even a trace of 
urgency.  The Committee, therefore, would at the cost of sounding rep etitive, 
exhort the Department to take all necessary actions with utmost promptitude.  

 
EDUCATIONAL QUALITY AND REFORMS 
(RECOMMENDATION PARA NO. 4.52) 
1.14 Having noted with concern the contention of the Department that there had 
been no under performance s o far as physical targets of a vital component of 
Agricultural Education viz. Educational Quality and Reforms are concerned inspite of 
the Department having been able to spend just 1 per cent of the total allocation of 
Rs. 3.10 crore in the first two years  and measly a sum of Rs. 11 lakh  has been 
earmarked for the Scheme in the year 2009 -10,  the Committee had sought a 
detailed explanation from the Department in the matter. Likewise noting that in 
another component of Agricultural Education ‘Nitch Areas of  Excellence’ the 
Department had spent Rs. 12.03 crore out of a BE of Rs. 43.50 crore in the year 
2007-08 and nothing during the year 2008 -09 out of the BE of Rs. 25.15 crore and 
the gross under utilization in the first year being attributed by the Departme nt to the 
delayed approval of the Scheme at the second year of the Plan, the Committee had 
been highly intrigued since the expenditure in the second year was nil.  The 
Committee had, therefore, sought a detailed explanation from the Department within 
one month of presentation of their Fourth Report.  
 
1.15 The Government in their reply, which incidently has been their constant 
refrain in the context of several other Recommendations of the Committee, have  
stated that the Department will like to reassure tha t they will be able to spend the 
allocated amount subject to availability of funds.   
 
1.16 The Committee find the response of the Government to both these 
recommendations reflective of their casual attitude towards the Parliament 
and its entities and cond emn it in unequivocal terms.  They also desire that 
specific explanations in both the cases may be furnished to them within 15 
days of presentation of this Report to the Parliament.     
 
EXPERIMENTAL LEARNING  COMPONENT 
(RECOMMENDATION PARA NOS. 4.53 & 4.54) 
 
1.17 Observing that no allocations had been made for Schemes like Experimental 
Learning Component, Modernisation of University Reforms, Library  component, 

 
Maharishi Phule Krishi Vidyapeeth, etc. in certain years and certain columns of the 
documents submitted by the Department for an d in connection with the examination 
of the Demands for Grants, the Committee while taking strong exception to the way 
facts and figures had been furnished to them had sought detailed explanation from 
the Department in all such cases.   
 
1.18 In response the Government in their Action Taken Notes have stated that the 
Plan ceiling in respect of Experiential Learning Component (which is inadvertently 
reflected as Experimental Learning Component in the document) was communicated 
to ICAR in the month of October, 2008 for the XIth Plan and the expenditure will be 
incurred as per allocation.   
 
 They have further stated that the Plan ceiling in respect of Library Component 
was communicated to ICAR in the month of October, 2008.  The pace of expenditure 
picked up in year 2008 -09 and the actual expenditure was Rs. 39.41 crores 
amounting to 31.61% of the outlay under the subhead. 
 
 The special grant of Rs. 100 crore included the total allocation of the 
Education division was approved thr ough a separate EFC and the grant was 
received from Ministry of Finance in the month of January, 2009.   
 
1.19 The Committee find it disappointing that the reply of the Department is 
totally silent in regard to the inconsistencies pointed out in the docume nt of 
Modernisation of University Reforms component and Maharishi Phule Krishi 
Vidyapeeth (MPKV).  The clarifications submitted by the Department in case of 
the remaining two components have also failed to pinpoint the exact reasons 
for the inconsistencies  other than the delayed communication of Plan 
Ceilings. The Committee are not satisfied with the way in which the 
Department have dealt with these two Recommendations of the Committee 
and they desire detailed explanations from the Department in respect of all the 

 
four components within fifteen days of the presentation of this Report to 
Parliament.  
 
CENTRAL AGRICULTURAL UNIVERSITY, IMPHAL 
(RECOMMENDATION PARA NO. 4.55) 
 
1.20 Noting that the work on the Central Agricultural University, Imphal, which had 
remained slack during the first two fiscals of the Eleventh Plan, had picked up with 
the appointment of a new executing agency and the construction work was going on 
satisfactorily, the Committee had desired the Department to work out a rigid time 
schedule for the completion of this Project at the earliest.  
 
1.21 In their Action Taken Note, the Government have stated that the newly 
appointed construction agency Engineering Projects India Ltd. (Govt. of India 
undertaking) started the work in full swing.  Howeve r, on 11.06.09 some anti -social 
elements came into the labour camp and asked labourers to come out and four of 
them were shot dead in front of Boy’s Hostel.  One more later succumbed to his 
injuries in the Regional Institute of Medical Sciences.  Most of the labourers left the 
work site and work came to standstill.  It took almost four months to resume the work 
by contractors.  The Professor of Engineering looking after the duties of the post of 
Executive Engineer was threatened by proscribed organization m aking demands for 
money.  He was abducted one morning and kept in captivity for seven days.  
Following this incident, the supervisory staff posted by E.P.I.L. is not in a position to 
place suitable staff to supervise the work. However, after lot of persuat ion, some 
local engineers are employed by the agency, and now the work is going on, although 
with slow speed, as a result of which time lines are difficult to lay down.  However, all 
the efforts will be made to see that work is completed in the earliest possible times.  
 
1.22 The Committee are deeply concerned with the developments on the law 
and order situation reported by the Department.  They feel that in view of the 
immense importance of the Central Agricultural University, Imphal in creating 
an interface with the agriculture sector and allied activities in the North -East, 
the Department will have to walk an additional mile to tide over the situation.  

 
The Committee would like them to take  up this matter at sufficiently high level 
with the Ministry of Ho me Affairs and the State Government to ensure that a 
secure environment is provided to the people working on the Project and the 
implementation proceeds with utmost speed.        
 
EXTERNALLY AIDED PROJECTS 
(RECOMMENDATION PARA NO. 4.57) 
 
1.23    Having found that the approval for the Externally Aided Project viz. National 
Fund for Basic and Strategic Research was received late from the Ministry of 
Finance due to which  implementation of this Scheme was delayed during the first 
two years of the Plan period r esulting in an expenditure of only Rs. 15.66 crore out 
of an Outlay of Rs. 100 crore, the Committee desired the Department to pursue this 
important Scheme earnestly so that the delay till now does not affect its targets in 
the remaining period of the curre nt Plan as all the approvals/sanctions were already 
in place.    
 
1.24 The Government in their Action Taken Note have stated that in so far as 
National Fund for Basic, Strategic and Frontier Application Research is concerned, it 
is to mention that the said  project is a Plan project. An Empowered Committee has 
now been constituted to review the progress of the project. The Committee had its 
first meeting on 7 May, 2010 and further action on how to progress in this regard will 
be taken upon receipt of the Committee’s report.  
 
1.25 The Committee find the reply of the Government highly perplexing.  For 
the first two years of the Plan, the performance of the Scheme, according to 
DARE, suffered due to delay in approval from the Ministry of Finance  as a 
result thereof only Rs. 15.66 crore could be spent ou t of Rs. 100.00 crore 
allocated during these two years.  Now when all approvals/sanctions are in 
place, it was reasonably expected that the Department would go full steam 
ahead to implement the Scheme.  Unfortunat ely, the Department have chosen 
to constitute an Empowered Committee to review the progress of the project 

 
and the Department will proceed further only on receipt of the report of this 
Empowered Committee. The Committee have a strong feeling that such a st ep 
will only further delay the implementation of this important Scheme.  
Therefore, while seeking the compelling reasons necessitating the 
appointment of the Empowered Committee, they desire that the Department 
should expeditiously obtain the report of the  Empowered Committee and take 
corrective actions urgently so as to ensure that there is no further delay in the 
implementation of this Scheme.    
_______________ 

 
 
CHAPTER - II 
 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS THAT HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE 
GOVERNMENT 
 
Enhanced Allocation for Agricultural Research & Education 
(Recommendation Para No. 2.8) 
 
 The Committee note that agricultural research, education and extension, 
because of their significant contribution to growth of agriculture sector, economy, 
food and nutrition security of the Country, are of critical importance for an agrarian 
economy like ours. They, therefore, are of the considered opinion that keeping in 
view the national interest, DARE is provided with sufficient funds, so that these 
activities are carrie d out unhindered and without any constraints or impediments. 
With this concern uppermost in their mind, the Committee have been 
recommending in their successive Reports to the Government to enhance 
investment for these activities to at least 1 percent of t he Agricultural GDP, the 
latest being their Thirty -eighth Report (Fourteenth Lok Sabha) on the Demands for 
Grants (2008-09) and the Forty -third Report (Fourteenth Lok Sabha) on the Action 
Taken by the Government on their Thirty -eighth Report. They are, how ever, highly 
disappointed with the response of the Government, as reflected in the Demands of 
DARE for the ongoing Fiscal. There is no increase in the allocation in the Plan side 
with the RE of Rs.1760.00 crore for 2008 -09 being retained as BE for the curr ent 
year. The Committee wonder as to how Government expects phenomenal, if not 
astounding results with such a pittance of an allocation. The meagre allocation for 
agricultural research and education becomes all the more galling when emerging 
threats like c limate change and global warming, declining natural resources, 

 
increasing natural calamities, growing soil infertility, declining water resources, 
technology fatigue, etc. are taken into consideration which all will require capital 
intensive solutions. The  Committee, therefore, even at the cost of sounding 
repetitive exhort the Government to wake up to realities and enhance substantially, 
allocations for agricultural research and education to ensure that solutions to the 
above mentioned crippling problems a re found before it is too late. They hope this 
recommendation gets adequately reflected in the Demands for Grants of DARE in 
the next fiscal, i.e. 2010-11. 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
 During the year 2010 -11, originally a ceiling of Rs. 2100 crores was 
communicated. However, keeping in view the concerns about increased support for 
agricultural research,  the allocation was enhanced to Rs. 2300 crores including an 
amount of Rs 200 crore for Climate Resilient Agriculture Initiative. Thus, from Rs 
1760 crores in 2009-10, the Plan allocation for the year 2010 -11 is Rs 2300 crore, 
which represents an increase of over 30% over the previous year.  
 
[Ministry of Agriculture  (Department of Agricultural Research and Education)  O.M. 
No. 7(4)/2010-PIM, dated 18th May, 201]  
 
Budgeting of a Scientific Department  
(Recommendation Para Nos. 3.49 & 3.50) 
 
The Committee while noting with appreciation the contribution of ICAR in the 
past in enabling the Country acquire self -sufficiency in food production are, 
however, aghast to find that the Government never cared to nurture DARE / ICAR 
as an entity that has performed. This resulted in this Scientific Department getting 
continuously clubbed with other general administrative Ministries / Departments in 
the assessment of their orga nizational, functional and financial requirements. That 
this sorry situation is obtaining six decades after independence and with a well laid 

 
down system of planning and decision making in place is incomprehensible to 
them. Having noted further that the Pl anning Commission have acknowledged this 
bitter truth in the Eleventh Plan document that the Government need to treat the 
Scientific Departments on a different footing vis -à-vis other Ministries / 
Departments for their functional, human resource and financ ial requirements, the 
Committee are certain that the Government is well aware of this plain speaking of 
the Plan body. It becomes highly untenable in view of the above fact that it is not 
the lack of awareness but the lack of will that is prohibiting the G overnment from 
bringing in the required reforms in the budgeting procedures and in subsequent 
allocations for the Scientific Departments. They strongly feel that the Government 
and the planners need to do what they, ought to have done decades ago. It is 
needless to emphasise that Scientific Departments have their own typical 
requirements of human resource, working and finances. And to keep them at the 
cutting edges of performance, they ought not be kept on the same footing as the 
general administrative Mini stries / Departments. They, therefore, desire the 
Government to immediately extricate themselves from the inertia they are in and 
undo this wrong of decades together so that the Scientific Department are given 
their due, if not more, to enable, DARE / ICAR  to perform in a conducive 
atmosphere and deliver to their optimum. 
Further, the Committee are highly disappointed with the attitude of the 
Department and the response about the requirements as a Scientific Department. 
The replies were too vague and genera l in nature, for the Committee to come to 
right conclusions about the exact requirements of the Department. The Committee 
are of the firm opinion that the endeavors of the Government in this matter will 
fructify only if they are presented with some concret e proposals by the Department 
for consideration and approval. They would like to caution the Department that 

 
merely saying that they feed the Nation inspite of severe handicaps or that major 
policy decisions are required to usher in changes in their workin g would not suffice. 
They, therefore, desire the Department immediately to get down to the task of 
working out a well considered and cogent proposal delineating their typical 
requirements of manpower, functioning and finances and the amendments / 
changes required to be made in the extant rules and regulations concerning these 
elements with a view to fructify them. The Committee would like such a proposal to 
be worked out by the Department and sent for the consideration of the Government 
before their next Demands for Grants are presented to the Parliament. 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
  As desired by the Committee, the Department has decided to 
constitute a Committee to examine and submit specific recommendations on this 
issue. 
 
[Ministry of Agriculture  (Department of Agricultural Research and Education) O.M. 
No. 7(4)/2010-PIM, dated 18th May, 2010]  
 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 For comments of the Committee please refer to Para No. 1.10 of Chapter I of 
this Report. 
Delinking of Annual Plan (2007-08) from the Eleventh Plan 
(Recommendation Para No. 3.51) 
 
During the course of the examination of the Demands for Grants of the 
Department of Agricultural Research & Education, the Committee note that the 
Planning Commission had informed the Department in December, 2006 / January, 
2007 that only their Annual Plan (2007 -08) proposals would be considered and not 
the Eleventh Plan as a whole. This, according to the Department was done 

 
because the Planning Commission had to communicate the Annual Plan 2007 -08 
outlay of the Depa rtments in February, 2007, while the Eleventh Plan related 
Report of the Steering Group on Agriculture and Allied Sectors, constituted by the 
Planning Commission itself was finalized only in April, 2007. Besides, it was also 
done to ensure that the reports  of the Sub -Committee of National Development 
Council and the Eleventh Plan Working Group on Agricultural Research and 
Education are taken into account while taking up overall formulation of the Eleventh 
Five Year Plan Document. The Committee further note that on the consequences 
of this delinking, initially the Department merely stated that it was just an 
administrative technicality on the part of the Planning Commission and they 
followed procedures as desired by agencies like Planning Commission. However,  
after persistent queries by them, it was finally admitted that the delinking of 
Financial Year 2007-08 from the Eleventh Plan was a factor impacting some delay 
in the process of clearance of various schemes of Eleventh Plan for 
implementation. The Committ ee are greatly distressed to find that the 
communication of the Planning Commission after the endorsement of the Eleventh 
Plan by the National Development Council was received in the Department only in 
January, 2008 resulting in the loss of a precious year  in this preliminary process. 
Although the Department through their efforts got all EFCs and SFCs cleared in 
about one year from the date of receipt of the communication from the Planning 
Commission, the sad fact remains that by then virtually the first tw o years of the 
Eleventh Plan were over resulting  in timelines of all schemes going haywire. This 
according to them would very obviously entail an inflated financial cost also. While 
deprecating this sloppy planning process, the Committee find it inexplica ble as to 
why the Government or the other agencies involved in the process did not consider 
to convert 2007 -08 as an Annual Plan year, as has been done in the past, so that 

 
the Eleventh Plan could have started from 2008-09. This would have cushioned the 
Plan from the cascading effects of the procedural delays, staggering of timelines 
and risking inflated costs during the ongoing Plan. The Department cannot be 
absolved of their inaction in this crucial matter as knowing fully well the negative 
connotations of the delinking of Annual Plan 2007 -08 from the Eleventh Plan, they 
did not take any initiative of pointing out to the appropriate authorities instead 
claiming that compliance with the procedure of other agencies and general 
elections in the Country as ali bis for their inaction before the Committee. They 
desire the Department to be more proactive in future in such mattes of crucial 
importance. 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
  As suggested by the committee, the Department will take up such 
matters with Planning Commission in time. 
 
[Ministry of Agriculture  (Department of Agricultural Research and Education O.M.  
No. 7(4)/2010-PIM, dated 18th May, 2010]  
 
Budgetary Allocation 
(Recommendation Para No. 3.52) 
 
The Committee note that the Department were allocated a sum of Rs.12023 
crore for the Eleventh Plan against Rs.12176.40 crore sought by them while the 
Department had sought a far greater amount of Rs.15000 crore for the Tenth Plan. 
Seen in real terms, the allocation of Rs.12176.40 crore sought for Eleventh Plan is 
substantially less than what was sought five years back for the Tenth Plan. The 
Department advanced a strange logic for downsizing their outlay for the Eleventh 
Plan stating that the Planning Commission had asked them to project the Eleventh 
Plan fund requ irements using three scenarios viz. reflecting an increase of 5%, 

 
10% and 15% respectively with respect to the terminal year of Tenth Plan. The 
Committee can in no way justify such restrictive mathematical formulae prescribed 
by the Planning Commission whi le asking a Scientific Department to workout their 
projections for as important a thing as the Five Year Plan outlay. This becomes 
inexplicable given the fact that the Eleventh Plan Working Group and the Expert 
Group, both constituted by the Planning Commi ssion itself had recommended a 
whopping Rs.31672.00 crore and Rs.36000.00 crore respectively for the purpose. 
The Committee cannot but deprecate such casual attitude towards financial 
planning and management. 
 They observe a similar fate befalling the allo cations made to the Department 
for the Annual Plans of the Eleventh Plan. For 2007 -08, a sum of Rs.1620.00 crore 
was allocated as BE. This was reduced to Rs.1434.00 crore at RE stage. In 2008 -
09, a sum of Rs.1760.00 crore was allocated as BE. The same amou nt has been 
allocated as BE for the ongoing Fiscal as well when the Department had sought an 
allocation of Rs.4000.00 crore. The Department have also not acquitted 
themselves well by failing to utilize even these reduced allocations. In 2007 -08 and 
2008-09 they could spend only Rs.1284.25 crore and Rs.1653.80 crore 
respectively and in the ongoing Fiscal just 37% of the allocation viz. Rs.652.28 
crore in the first six months was spent. The consequence of the low releases and 
still lower utilizations is that halfway through the Eleventh Plan, the Department has 
barely managed to spend 30% of the total allocations. The way things stand as of 
now, the Committee have every reason not to share the optimism of the 
Department that the balance funds would be spent in  the remaining period of the 
Eleventh Plan. Rather, the Committee apprehend that schemes would get 
staggered resulting in cost and time overruns. Another serious dimension would be 
that in order to spend funds in this Plan itself, half baked schemes would be rushed 

 
through with scant regard for either qualitative or quantitative norms. In both the 
cases, the prospects appear to be really very grim. They, therefore, are of the 
considered opinion that the ongoing midterm appraisal should chalk out specific 
implementation and execution strategies to ensure that balance funds to the 
maximum possible extent are utilized during the remainder of the Eleventh Plan 
without compromising on qualitative and quantitative parameters. They would like 
to be apprised of the efforts made by the Department in this regard at the earliest. 
 Further, it would not be out of context to comment upon the manner in which 
the Department have been furnishing information to them while the Demand for 
Grants (2009 -10) were examined. The Dep artment continued to invite their 
attention to the Document on DFG without ever realizing that the figures of 
allocations sought for Annual Plans are not mentioned in the said Document. 
Attention of the Committee was also invited to Annual Plans of previou s years 
without appreciating the fact that these were not made available to them. The 
Committee are not at all impressed by this thoroughly condescending attitude of 
the Department in the matter of supply of papers and records sought by the 
Parliamentary C ommittee. They express serious displeasure and desire the 
Department to be extremely careful while furnishing information to the Parliament 
and its Committees in future. 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
The Department will strictly adhere to the instruction of the  Committee in the 
future. 
[Ministry of Agriculture  (Department of Agricultural Research and Education ) O.M. 
No. 7(4)/2010-PIM, dated 18th May, 2010]  
 
 

 
Launching of New Schemes 
(Recommendation Para No. 3.53) 
 
The Committee find that the Department were imp lementing 71 Schemes in 
the Tenth Plan.  With the addition of three new Schemes this figure has gone upto 
74 in the Eleventh Plan. They are, however, concerned to note that out of these 
three new Schemes only one viz. National Institute of Abiotic Stress M anagement 
has been approved by the Government in 2008 -09.  The remaining two namely 
National Institute of Agriculture Biotechnology and the National Institute of Biotic 
Stress Management are still on paper.  Though earmarked for implementation in 
the ongoi ng Financial year, the EFC proposals of these two Schemes were 
circulated to the appraisal agencies only on 25 September, 2009.  While the 
comments of Planning Commission, Department of Biotechnology, Department of 
Animal Husbandry, Dairying and Fisheries have been received, the comments of 
Department of Agriculture and Co -operation, Department of Science and 
Technology and the Ministry of Environment and Forest are yet to be received.  In 
the meantime, the Department have requested the Department of Expend iture to 
convene the EFC for the two Schemes.  The Committee strongly feel that these 
two new Schemes have already been delayed inordinately. They, therefore, desire 
the Department to try their level best to ensure that all formalities pertaining to 
these Schemes of national importance are completed with utmost promptitude and 
their implementation commences at the earliest. 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
 The Department has already requested to the department of expenditure to 
urgently indicate a date of EFC meet ing to be chaired by Secy. Expenditure for the 
new schemes of National Institute of Agriculture Biotechnology and the National 
Institute of Biotic Stress Management. 
 

 
[Ministry of Agriculture  (Department of Agricultural Research and Education ) O.M. 
No. 7(4)/2010-PIM, dated 18th May, 2010]  
 
Comments of the Committee 
 For comments of the Committ ee please refer to Para No. 1.13  of Chapter I of 
this Report. 
 
Quarter - 4 and March Spending Slippages 
(Recommendation Para No. 3.54) 
 
The Committee note that Minist ry of Finance modified the Budget and Cash 
Management guidelines issued in 2006 -07 stipulate maximum spending ceiling of 
33% in Quarter – 4 of a Fiscal and of 15% in the month of March and that any 
breach of these two ceiling limits require regularization by the Ministry of Finance.  
The Committee, however, note with concern that the Department have breached 
Q-4 norms in both the previous years with spending of 35.79% in Q -4 of 2007 -08 
and of 43.64% in Q -4 of 2008 -09.  They have also not adhered to the Marc h 
spending ceiling of maximum 15% in March, 2009.  What is more disturbing is that 
the Department have not even bothered to report these violations to the Ministry of 
Finance for regularization.  They consider this a major failure on the part of the 
Department, and are of the strong opinion that unless financial prudence is 
practiced in letter and spirit, the entire purpose of this initiative for systemic 
improvement will be defeated.  The Committee, therefore, desire that rather than 
seeking regularization  of all such violations in future, as promised by the 
Department to them, the Department should endeavour to adhere to Q -4 and 
March expenditure norms without fail in future. 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
The Department will strictly adhere to the instruction of  the Committee in the 
future. 

 
 
[Ministry of Agriculture  (Department of Agricultural Research and Education ) O.M. 
No. 7(4)/2010-PIM, dated 18th May, 2010]  
 
 
Mid-Term Appraisal 
(Recommendation Para No. 3.55) 
 
 The Committee observe that mid -term appraisal o f the Eleventh Plan 
schemes of the Department is presently underway and the first meeting was held 
on 5 November, 2009. The Department is awaiting the proceedings of the first 
meeting and the appraisal is yet to be completed. They further observe that ICAR  
has developed mechanisms for evaluation through independent agencies. 
Evaluation of 8 institutions have so far been completed by the outside agencies. 
The Committee desire the Department to get the mid -term appraisal by Planning 
Commission completed at th e earliest and the findings and recommendations be 
gainfully utilized for drawing up the proposals for allocations to various schemes for 
the next year’s Budgetary Outlay of the Department. 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 The draft mid-term review appraisal document was circulated by the Planning 
Commission on 26 February, 2010 and comments have been called for. Once final 
report is received from the Planning Commission, the Department will initiate further 
action accordingly. 
 
[Ministry of Agriculture  (Department of Agricultural Research and Education ) O.M. 
No. 7(4)/2010-PIM, dated 18th May, 2010]  
 
 Poor Utilization in Crop Science Scheme 
(Recommendation Para No. 4.45) 
 
The Committee find that the Department have been provided with Rs.1958.76 
crore for this Scheme in the Eleventh Plan which almost matches their requirement 
(Rs. 1991.08 crore).  What, however, is a matter of anxiety for the Committee is 
that the Department have been able to spend roughly 26.5% of the total Plan 

 
allocation in the first two Fiscals.  Even during the current year, and in spite of their 
assertions to the contrary, the spending in the first six months has been Rs.95.24 
crore only out of Rs.304.00 crore.  Thus, at halfway stage of the Plan, the 
Department have been able to spend a mere Rs .620.32 crore out of Rs.1958.76 
crore which is less than 32% in percentage terms. Given this scenario of gross 
under allocations and still lesser utilization, year after year, the Committee are 
compelled to conclude that the Crop Science Scheme is bound to  miss both its 
cost as well as time lines.  While expressing their displeasure on the extant poor 
financial management of this important Scheme till date in the Eleventh Plan, they 
exhort the Department to atleast pull their socks up now and implement Sche me 
more professionally and judiciously during the remaining part of the Eleventh Plan.  
They also expect the Planning Commission to ensure that the Department will not 
remain cash strapped as in the previous years of the Eleventh Plan and all justified 
requirement of funds for the Crop Science Scheme will be met with alacrity. 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
The Figures for Crop Science Division are Rs. 1991.08 crore (proposed 
outlay for XIth Plan) and Rs. 1958.76 crore (earmarked outlay for XIth Plan) and 
Rs. 165 4.07 crore (approved by EFC/SFC). Up to year 2009 -10 the actual 
allocations (REs) to Crop Science Division had been Rs. 848.00 crore of which Rs. 
822.08 crore ( two years actual + RE for year 2009 -10) has been spent, which is 
96.90 percent of the actual allocation. 
 
 The department reassures the Committee that the actual expenditure over the 
five year Plan period would be over 90 percent of the actual allocation; which is 
anticipated to increase further.  
 
[Ministry of Agriculture  (Department of Agricultura l Research and Education ) O.M. 
No. 7(4)/2010-PIM, dated 18th May, 2010]  
 

 
Horticulture 
(Recommendation Para No. 4.46) 
 
The Committee observe  that the Horticulture Scheme suffers from a different 
malaise. While the Department sought an amount of Rs.702.52 crore for this 
Scheme, they have been allocated Rs.726.75 crore, which is slightly higher than 
what they had asked for.  Hereagain, the Department have been able to spend 
hardly 23% of the total allocation in the first two years of the Plan.  In the third year 
i.e. 2009-10 when according to the Department the spending could have picked up, 
they have been allocated a sum of Rs.90.00 crore against Rs.260.00 crore sought 
by them. Further, the Department have already spent a major chunk i.e. Rs.76.53 
crore in the first six months of the ongoing Fiscal. At such a speed, the Department 
would face a funds crunch sooner than later or else they may have to go slow on 
the implementation side.  The Committee are dismayed with this method of funds 
allocation.  Keeping t he extant scenario in view, they desire the Government to 
infuse the Department with funds immediately at RE stage for the Horticulture 
Scheme to ensure that the Scheme continues unhindered. 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
The Figures for Horticulture Division ar e Rs. 702.52 crore (proposed  outlay 
for XIth Plan) and Rs. 726.75 crore (earmarked outlay for XIth Plan) and Rs. 
629.76 crore(approved by EFC/SFC). Upto year 2009 -10 the actual allocations 
(REs) to Horticulture Division had been Rs. 263.60 crore of which Rs. 263.82  crore 
( two years actual + RE for year 2009 -10) has been spent, which is approximately 
100 percent of the actual allocation. 
 The department reassures the Committee that the actual expenditure over the 
five year Plan period would be over 90 per cent of the actual allocation; which is 
anticipated to increase further. 

 
 It may further be added that plan allocation for the year 2009 -10 has been 
enhanced from Rs. 90.00 crores to Rs. 98.00 crores, which will help in furthering the 
research activities in the Horticultural Sector. 
 
[Ministry of Agriculture  (Department of Agricultural Research and Education ) O.M. 
No. 7(4)/2010-PIM, dated 18th May, 2010]  
 
Natural Resource Management 
(Recommendation Para No. 4.47) 
 
 The Committee observe that an allocation of Rs. 630.12 crore was sought for 
this Scheme against which a substantially higher amount of Rs.745.09 crore was 
allocated for the purpose.  The Committee, are, however, disappointed to observe 
further that the Department could spend less than one fourth of the sum allocated 
during first two years of the Plan.  In the Third year also , upto September, 2009,  
they have been able to spend only 40% or so of Rs. 102.00 crore allocated to 
them.  As usual, the Department attributed the delays in sanctions/approvals as the 
reason for not making much headway in the first two years of the Plan.  However, 
the assurance that the Department would work with full vigour in the remaining 
three years of the Plan and funds utilization would be higher remains to be seen.  
With half of the Eleventh Plan over and barely 30% of the funds spent, the situation 
is not as rosy as  the Department would let the Committee believe.  The Committee 
strongly believe that enough time has been wasted in the ongoing Plan on matters 
of plannin g and conceptualizing and what is required at this juncture is the 
execution and implementation of the Scheme with single minded purpose so that 
its intended benefits start accruing without any delay. They expect the Department 
to keep its assurance given to them in this regard. 
 
 

 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
The Figures for NRM Division are Rs. 630.12 crore  (proposed  outlay for XIth 
Plan) and Rs. 745.09 crore (earmarked outlay for XIth Plan) and Rs. 801.36 crore 
(approved by EFC/SFC). Upto year 2009 -10 the a ctual allocations (REs) to NRM 
Division had been Rs. 291.10 crore of which Rs. 284.03 crore ( two years actual + 
RE for year 2009-10) has been spent, which is 97.60 percent of the actual allocation. 
 The department may reassure the Committee that the actual expenditure over 
the  five year Plan period would be over 90 percent of the actual allocation; which is 
anticipated to increase further. 
 
[Ministry of Agriculture  (Department of Agricultural Research and Education ) O.M. 
No. 7(4)/2010-PIM, dated 18th May, 2010]  
 
Agricultural Engineering  
(Recommendation Para No. 4.48) 
 
 The Committee note that in this Scheme also the Department have been 
allocated substantially higher sum (Rs. 300 crore) than what was sought (Rs. 
262.20 crore).  They, however, find it dis concerting that the actual expenditure at 
Rs.73.15 crore in the first two fiscals is even less than one -fourth of the total 
Outlay.  In the ongoing Fiscal also, the Department have been able to spend only 
Rs.15.20 crore out of the BE of Rs. 43.00 crore in the first six months.  In 
percentage terms, it works out to roughly one-third of the allocation.  As in the case 
of replies to the other such instances, the Department have expressed optimism 
about higher utilization during the current Fiscal and the remai ning two years of the 
Eleventh Plan which the Committee can only take with a pinch of salt.  The 
Committee strongly feel that if the Department have to ensure that the remaining 
two-thirds of the allocations are spent judiciously  in the remaining two and a half 
years of the Eleventh Plan they have to really make a herculean effort.  They, 
therefore, recommend the Department to rework their priorities in the Agricultural 

 
Engineering Scheme in the light of the mid-term appraisal and implement them in a 
focused and time bound manner in the remainder of the Eleventh Plan so as to 
ensure that both the cost and timelines of these Schemes are not staggered. 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
The Figures for Agricultural Engineering Division are Rs. 262.20 crore 
(proposed ou tlay for XIth Plan) and Rs. 300.00 crore (earmarked outlay for XIth 
Plan) and Rs. 274.03 crore (approved by EFC/SFC). Upto year 2009 -10 the actual 
allocations (REs) to Agricultural Engineering Division had been Rs. 125.00 crore of 
which Rs. 116.15  crore (  two years actual + RE for year 2009 -10) has been spent, 
which is 92.90 percent of the actual allocation. 
 The department reassures the Committee that the actual expenditure over the 
five year Plan period would be over 90 percent of the actual allocation; which is 
anticipated to increase further. 
 
[Ministry of Agriculture  (Department of Agricultural Research and Education ) O.M. 
No. 7(4)/2010-PIM, dated 18th May, 2010]  
 
Animal Science 
(Recommendation Para No. 4.49) 
 
 The Committee observe that out of the earmarked outlay of Rs. 1035.39 crore 
the Department have been able to spend just Rs. 158.89 crore which translates to 
about 15 per cent of the total outlay during the first two years of the Plan. This in 
their opinion is one of the worst performances of the  Department in the Eleventh 
Plan. In the ongoing year also, the BE of Rs. 92.00 crore is not at all indicative of 
any extraordinary efforts by the Department. Assuming that the entire amount  is 
spent, the total expenditure in the first three years of the Plan would still be 
approximately one-fourth of the earmarked outlay.  The Committee are distressed 
to note that two of the major Schemes under Animal Science viz. NDRI and IVRI 
have been cleared as recently as in the months of March and August, 2009 

 
respectively, which mirrors the sorry state of affairs on the planning and approvals 
front. Now that the approvals/sanctions in respect of the Schemes of the Division 
are in place, they hope the Department would move full steam ahead and be able 
to utilize the balance three-fourth funds in the last two years of the Eleventh Plan in 
a judicious and professional manner. 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
The Figures for Animal Science Division are Rs. 1074.99 crore (proposed  
outlay for XIth Plan) and Rs. 1035.39 crore (ear marked outlay for XIth Plan) and Rs. 
881.23 crore (approved by EFC/SFC). Upto year 2009 -10 the actual allocations 
(REs) to Animal Science Division had been Rs. 260.00 crore of which Rs. 248.89  
crore ( two years actual + RE for year 2009 -10) has been spent , which is 95.70 
percent of the actual allocation. 
 
The department reassures the Committee that the actual expenditure over the 
five year Plan period would be over 90 percent of the actual allocation; which is 
anticipated to increase further. 
 
[Ministry of  Agriculture (Department of Agricultural Research and Education ) O.M. 
No. 7(4)/2010-PIM, dated 18th May, 2010]  
 
 
Agricultural Extension  
(Recommendation Para No. 4.50) 
 
 The Committee note that Agricultural Extension consists mainly of the Krishi 
Vigyan Kendras (KVKs) component which is a flagship Scheme of the Department 
of Agricultural Research and Education.  Out of the earmarked outlay of Rs. 
2100.00 crore for Agricultural Extension in the Eleventh Plan, Rs.  2052.00 crore 
stands allocated to KVKs.  Th e Committee are, however, disheartened to observe 
that even the flagship Scheme of the Department suffers from the malaise of gross 
underspending.  In the first two years of the Plan, only 27 odd per cent have been 

 
spent out of the total allocation.  The C ommittee are one with the Department on 
the point that if CCEA approval for the allocation had not been delayed upto end 
December, 2008, the performance of the Department could  have been different.  
They expect that with the approvals/sanctions stages now  being over, the 
Department would make a sincere effort to utilize the outstanding balance during 
the remainder of the Eleventh Plan so that the KVKs are not affected by the self -
inflicted resource crunch and hope for much better if not outstanding results  on this 
front. 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
The Figures for Agricultural Extension Division are Rs. 2300 crore (proposed 
outlay for XIth Plan) and Rs. 2100.00 crore (earmarked outlay for XIth Plan) and Rs. 
2102.75 crore (approved by EFC/SFC). Upto year 2009 -10 the actual allocations 
(REs) to Agricultural Extension Division had been Rs. 937.11 crore of which Rs. 
864.90  crore ( two years actual + RE for year 2009 -10) has been spent, which is 
92.30 percent of the actual allocation. 
 
The department reassures the Committee that the actual expenditure over the 
five year Plan period would be over 90 percent of the actual allocation; which is 
anticipated to increase further. 
 
[Ministry of Agriculture  (Department of Agricultural Research and Education ) O.M. 
No. 7(4)/2010-PIM, dated 18th May, 2010]  
 
Agricultural Education 
(Recommendation Para No. 4.51) 
 
 The Committee are not at all satisfied with the manner in which various 
schemes under Agricultural Education have been handled by the Department.  
Overall they have be en able to spend Rs. 729.19 crore out of Rs. 2414.97 crore 
during first two years of the Plan which is less than one third of the Plan allocation. 
It is needless for them to point out that here too, the Department had furnished 

 
information to them in a ver y casual manner as commented elsewhere in this 
Report. This is evident from the varying figures furnished in respect of Eleventh 
Plan Outlay of Rs.2585.00 crore which was subsequently changed to Rs.2414.97 
crore as approved for this Division by the compete nt authority. They would like to 
have an explanation from the Department as to how, when and by whom the 
Outlay of Rs. 2855.00 crore was scaled down to Rs.2414.97 crore and why the 
same was not conveyed to them when the first set of figure was provided to them. 
They cannot but caution the Department to be very careful in such matters in 
future. 
Further, the Committee observe that out of the total allocation of Rs. 
2119.35 crore a sum of Rs. 233.83 crore only has been spent during the first two 
years of the Eleventh Plan in respect of the scheme under Agricultural Education 
viz. Development and Strengthening of Agricultural Universities.  This is roughly 11 
per cent of the total allocation.  The Department chose to defend this under -
utilisation by stating tha t the utilization of Rs.233.83 crore is 56.28 per cent of RE 
allocation of Rs.415.50 crore for the first two years of the Plan.  But, the sad fact, 
that stares us in the face is that almost 90 per cent of the allocation is still unspent 
and needs to be abs orbed in the remaining three years of the Plan which in the 
view of the Committee is virtually an insurmountable task. 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
 The factual position regarding outlay for Education Division is that the figure 
of Rs.2584.97 crores includes s pecial grants to three universities (PAU, Ludhiana; 
Institution of Excellence, TNAU; and Institution of Excellence, GB Pant Univ.) and 
the figure of Rs.2414.97 crores excludes the special grant. 
The proposed outlay for XIth Plan for Education Division is R s. 2705.00 
crores and Rs. 2585.00 crore is the earmarked outlay for this Plan. The approved 
outlay by EFC/SFC for Agricultural Education is Rs. 2495.87 crores (including 

 
additional fund for NAARM, Hyderabad as per revised EFC). Upto year 2009 -10 the 
actual allocations (REs) to Education Division had been Rs. 1111.00 crore of which 
Rs. 1099.20  crore ( two years actual + RE for year 2009 -10) has been spent, which 
is 98.94 percent of the actual allocation. 
 The department reassures the Committee that the actual expenditure over the 
five year Plan period would be over 90 percent of the actual allocation; which is 
anticipated to increase further. 
 In so far as MPKV, Rahuri is concerned, during 2008 – 09, an amount of Rs. 
22.64 crore and during 2009 – 10 an amoun t of Rs. 61.32 crore was released by 
Ministry of Finance as special grant to MPKV, Rahuri from out of the Social and 
Infrastructure Development Fund as part of the Rs. 100 crore grant.      
 
[Ministry of Agriculture  (Department of Agricultural Research and  Education) O.M. 
No. 7(4)/2010-PIM, dated 18th May, 2010]  
 
Central Agricultural University, Imphal 
(Recommendation Para No. 4.55) 
 
The Committee note that in case of the Central Agricultural University, Imphal 
also that the Department have not acquitted t hemselves well.  In the last two 
Fiscals, less than 25 per cent of the total allocation of Rs. 552.27 crore has been 
spent.  It is most unfortunate that approval of the Government for the 
implementation of the Scheme was received as late as on 16 December,  2008 and 
for an amount of Rs. 499.07 crore only.  The delay in this case has been further 
aggravated by the fact that the agency entrusted with the implementation of the 
Project backed out because of law and order situation and the formalities to 
engage another agency took almost a year.  The Committee are, however, happy 
to note that the new executing agency has already awarded works and 
construction is going on satisfactorily.  In the considered opinion of the Committee, 
the Central Agricultural Universi ty, Imphal would be a much needed interface with 
the agriculture sector and allied activities in the North -east and therefore its 

 
implementation needs to be accorded highest priority by the Department.  They, 
therefore, desire the Department to work out a rigid time schedule for the 
implementation of this Project at the earliest.  The Committee would like to be 
apprised of the same. 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 The newly appointed construction agency Engineering Projects India ltd. 
(Govt. of India undertaking) started the work in full swing. However, on  11.06.09 
some anti -social elements came in to the labour camp and asked labourers to 
come out and 4 of them were shot dead in front of Boy’s Hostel. One more later 
succumbed to his injuries in the Regional Insti tute of Medical Sciences. Most of the 
labourers left the work site and work came to standstill. It took almost 4 months to 
resume the work by contractors. The professor of Engineering looking after the 
duties of the post of Executive Engineer was threatened by proscribed organization 
making demands for money. He was abducted one morning and kept in the 
captivity for seven days. Following this incident, the supervisory staff posted by 
E.P.I.L. has left Imphal.  E.P.I.L. is not in a position to place suitable  staff to 
supervise the work. However, after lot of persuasion, some local engineers are 
employed by the agency, and now the work is going on, although with slow speed, 
as a result of which time lines are difficult to lay down. 
 However, all the efforts wi ll be made to see that work is completed in the 
earliest possible time.  
[Ministry of Agriculture  (Department of Agricultural Research and Education ) O.M. 
No. 7(4)/2010-PIM, dated 18th May, 2010]  
 
Comments of the Committee 
 For comments of the Commit tee please refer to Para No. 1.22  of Chapter I of 
this Report. 
 
ICAR Headquarters – Proper Reflection Of Schemes 
(Recommendation Para No. 4.56) 
 
 The Committee note that the Department had to resort to a drastic downsizing 
of the BE 2007 -08 from Rs.37.50 crore to Rs.21.00 crore at RE stage. The 

 
Department could, however, spend only Rs.11.03 crore out of this reduced amount. 
According to the Department, the curtailing was necessitated because initially, a 
sum of Rs.20.00 crore under ICAR Headquarters was included  for the Scheme 
`Oversight Committee’ which is otherwise operated by the Education Division of 
ICAR. At the RE stage, the allocation was made as per the budgetary heads 
approved in the Eleventh Plan sanction which did not include Oversight Committee 
since it was meant to be taken up by another Division separately. Apart from this, 
the Committee also observe that the Actuals, Shortfall / Excess figures in respect of 
support to Prof. Soc. Including NAAS, Support to CGIAR and Evaluation of Plan 
Schemes had not  been indicated in the Document on DFG (2009 -10). The 
Committee are not convinced with the Department’s contention that ICAR 
Headquarter is a single scheme and budget / expenditure is shown for it as a single 
entity. They wish to point out that when the de tailed figures for these components 
were subsequently furnished to them, substantial shortfall / excess was observed in 
both the years.  
 Again, the Committee find that no funds had been allocated for the 
component 3 New Institutes but a sum of Rs.3.85 cro re had been shown as RE for 
2007-08 and a sum of Rs.50.00 crore has been proposed as Outlay for the ongoing 
Fiscal, though no allocations have been made against it in the BE. The Department 
have explained these two amounts as token provisions for the Schem es which are 
yet to be approved. The Committee find it strange as to how such substantial 
amount can be treated as token provisions for Schemes which are yet to be 
approved. From all the instances cited above, the Committee feel that the system 
of budgeting under the ICAR Headquarters has a lot of scope for improvement so 
as to introduce more clarity and transparency in it. With the clubbing of all Schemes 
/ Components under one entity, it becomes very difficult to come to right 

 
conclusions on individual Sc hemes / Components having sizable investments of 
public money. The Committee would, therefore, like to have the well considered 
opinion of the Department to make the budgetary provisions reflective of the true 
performance of all Schemes / Components. They would like to be apprised of the 
action taken in the matter at the earliest. 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 As suggested by the committee, the Annual Plan outlays for the ICAR (HQ) 
have been distributed component wise for the next financial year 2010 -11. In so far 
as funds for Over Sight Committees are concerned, they have been included in the 
respective Institutes as per approval of the XIth Plan EFC i.e it is not reflected 
separately after the year 2007 -08. In so far as allocations for the Institutes are 
concerned, there was no adverse impact, as the unutilized allocations were re -
allocated at RE stage, and funds were than utilized. 
 
[Ministry of Agriculture  (Department of Agricultural Research and Education ) O.M. 
No. 7(4)/2010-PIM, dated 18th May, 2010]  
 
Externally Aided Projects 
(Recommendation Para No. 4.57) 
 
 The Committee after going through the information relating to the Externally 
Aided Projects find that the situation is not any better. In case of Indo -US 
Knowledge Initiative which was launched with muc h fanfare there has been 
consistent low release of funds. The result being that even if the entire BE of 
Rs.5.00 crore is utilized this year, the total spending in three years of the Eleventh 
Plan would be less than one third of the total Outlay of Rs.50.0 0 crore. The 
Department’s explanation attributing low expenditure to non -availability of matching 
grant from the US side does not cut ice with the Committee. Almost three years of 
the Plan have gone by and the Department have not been able to persuade the 
other side to release matching grants in suitable proportions is nothing but the 
failure of the Department to work towards a mutually beneficial arrangement. The 

 
Committee would, therefore, urge the Department to take up the matter with the US 
side through  appropriate channels to ensure that matching grants in requisite 
proportions are contributed by them from the current fiscal itself so that the Initiative 
is not frittered away. 
 The Committee have found more or less similar situation obtaining in the case 
of another Externally Aided Project viz. National Fund for Basic and Strategic 
Research. Out of an Outlay of Rs.100.00 crore, a sum of Rs.15.66 crore only has 
been spent during the first two years of the Plan purportedly due to the fact that the 
approval of this Scheme from the Ministry of Finance has been received very 
recently. Now that the approvals / sanctions are in place, the Committee expect the 
Department to pursue this important Scheme earnestly so as to ensure that delays 
till date do not affect  its implementation proper in the remaining period of the 
current Plan. They would like to be apprised of the progress made in respect of 
both these Externally Aided Projects at regular intervals. 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 Non-availability of funds from the  US side was taken up with the USA, but 
there was the lack of an adequate response. The Indo -US Knowledge Initiative in 
Agriculture was closed on March, 2010.  
 In so far as National Fund for Basic, Strategic and Frontier Application 
Research is concerned,  it is to mention that the said project is a plan project. An 
Empowered Committee has now been constituted to review the progress of the 
project. The committee had its first meeting on 7.5.2010 and further action on how to 
progress in this regard will be taken upon receipt of the Committee’s report.  
 
[Ministry of Agriculture (Department of Agricultural Research) O.M. No. 7(4)/2010-
PIM, dated 18th May, 2010]  
 
Comments of the Committee 
 For comments of the Committee please refer to Para No. 1. 25 of Chapter I of 
this Report. 

 
  
CHAPTER III 
 
OBSERVATION/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO NOT DESIRE TO 
PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE GOVERNMENT’S ACTION TAKEN REPLY 
 
- N I L - 
 

 
CHAPTER IV 
 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH ACTION TAKEN 
REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE 
 
Budgetary Planning and Zero Based Budgeting 
(Recommendation Para No. 3.48) 
 
 The Committee observe that as far as Budgetary Planning is concerned, the 
Annual Plan and Five Year Plan requirements of the Depa rtment are initially 
projected as individual schemes of national research centre / project directorate. 
These are further considered inhouse. New programmes are formulated at ICAR 
Headquarters based on expert consultations, workshops, conferences, etc. 
Thereafter, a consolidated proposal for the Department is submitted to Planning 
Commission after complying with prescribed procedures / guidelines and a Five 
Year Plan or the Annual Plan is thus finalized after a process of consultation 
between the Department  and the Planning Commission. In the Tenth Plan, for 
instance, after extensive discussions the number of schemes was brought down to 
71 by merging / subsuming various schemes and sub schemes to introduce a more 
focused and efficient approach in the impleme ntation process. With the addition of 
three new / upgraded schemes, the number has gone up to 74 in the XI Plan. 
The Committee find that Zero Based Budgeting is resorted to in the 
budgetary planning process but only at the time of finalization of a Five Ye ar Plan 
by the Planning Commission. The Committee are of the considered opinion that 
ZBB concept need to be applied not only at the stage of finalization of the 
budgetary allocation but also as a tool for better, rational, prudent and more 
focused financial planning requiring ab-initio planning. They feel ideally it need to 
be applied at the initial planning stage within the Department, not only to give a 
much needed reorientation to the budgetary planning of the Department but also to 

 
enable the Planning C ommission to analyse and appreciate the performance and 
achievements in a more focused and professional manner. On the functional plane, 
such an initiative by the Department, as will be borne out by the subsequent 
narrative, will be of immense utility as i t may provide a sound base to the ZBB 
exercise conducted by the Planning Commission and thereby reduce considerably 
the time taken in finalization of allocations at the extant ZBB exercise stage. The 
Committee also desire the Department to consider the fea sibility of carrying out 
Zero Based Budgeting for Annual Plans also. Being the fundamental unit of 
planning system in the Country, the Annual Plans need to be worked out with all 
meticulousness and care unlike the present system in which goals are dependen t 
on funds and not vice -versa. The Committee would like to be apprised of the 
considered views of the Department on this aspect well before they take up the 
examination of the Demands for Grants of the Department for the next fiscal in 
Feb-March, 2010. 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
Schemes, specially in agriculture, by their very nature, require a period of five 
years or so, before on assessment can be made of success/failure or need for their 
continuation or otherwise. Therefore, once the Zero Based Budgeting exercise is 
done at the beginning of the Plan period, annual Zero Based Budgeting may be 
difficult to implement. However, a continuous watch is kept on all 
schemes/expenditure, to avoid infractuous expenditure. 
  
[Ministry of Agriculture  (Department of Agr icultural Research and Education ) O.M. 
No. 7(4)/2010-PIM, dated 18th May, 2010]  
 
Comments of the Committee 
 For comments of the Commit tee please refer to Para No. 1. 7 of Chapter I of 
this Report. 

 
Educational Quality and Reforms 
(Recommendation Para No. 4.52) 
 
 The Committee are concerned to note that in another vital Component of 
Agricultural Education viz. Educational Quality and Reforms, the Department have 
been able to spend just 1 per cent of the total allocation of Rs. 3.10 crore in the first 
two years and a measly sum of Rs. 11.00 lakh has been earmarked as BE for the 
ongoing Fiscal.  The Committee are not at all convinced by the long winding reply 
about the several massive exercises being conducted under the Scheme and the 
unprecedented and exemplary quality of reform initiatives undertaken by the ICAR. 
What matters is that either the projection of Rs. 3.10 crore as Outlay for this 
Scheme for the Eleventh Plan was woefully off the mark or that the Department 
have miserably failed on the implementation  side of this Scheme.  The 
Department’s contention that there has not been under performance in this 
Scheme so far as physical  targets are concerned goes on to further confirm the 
Committee’s apprehensions about the financial projections of the Scheme.   
Similarly, the Committee are distressed to note that in another Component 
of Agricultural Education i.e. `Nitch Area of Excellence’, the Department have been 
able to spend just 5.84 per cent of the total outlay in the last two years.  Out of the 
BE of Rs.4 3.50 crore for 2007 -08, the spending was Rs.12.03 crore.  In 2008 -09 
nothing was spent from the BE of Rs.25.15 crore.  The gross under -utilisation was 
attributed by the Department in the first year to the delayed approval of the 
Scheme at the end of the se cond year of the Plan.  The Committee are highly 
intrigued by this reply of the Department since in the second year the expenditure 
has been nil.  They would, therefore, like a detailed explanation in the matter from 
the Department within one month of presentation of this Report in the Parliament. 
 
 

 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
    
  The Department will like to reassure that it will be able to spend the allocated 
amount subject to availability of funds. 
   
[Ministry of Agriculture  (Department of Agricultural Res earch and Education ) O.M. 
No. 7(4)/2010-PIM, dated 18th May, 2010]  
 
Comments of the Committee 
 For comments of the Committee please refer to Para No. 1.1 6 of Chapter I of 
this Report. 
 
Experimental Learning Component 
(Recommendation Para No. 4.53) 
 
 During the course of their scrutiny of the Demand for Grants and other 
documents furnished to them by the Department, the Committee found several 
inconsistencies in the figures.  Under the ‘Experimental Learning Component of the 
Agricultural Education Scheme’, allocations have neither been indicated for the 
Eleventh Plan as such nor for the first two years of the Plan.  However, an amount 
of Rs. 26.36 crore has been shown as RE for 2008 -09 and a similar amount has 
been shown as BE for the current year.  The Depa rtment in a clarification have 
informed them that the Experimental Learning Component has already been 
included in the Eleventh Plan and is one of the agreed activities in the EFC/CCEA 
note.   
 Similarly, in case of the Component ‘Modernisation of Universi ty Farms’ no 
allocations have been indicated for the Eleventh Plan as also in the first two years 
of the Plan.  However, an amount of Rs. 85.53 crore has been shown as RE for 
2008-09 and a similar amount has been shown as BE for 2009 -10.  In the context 

 
of this Component too, the Department stated that it stands approved with an 
outlay of Rs. 421.95 crore for three years i.e. 2008-09 to 2010-11. 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
The Plan ceiling in respect of Experiential Learning Component (which is 
inadvertently reflected as Experimental Learning Component in the document) was 
communicated to ICAR in the month of October 2008 for the XIth Plan and the 
expenditure will be incurred as per allocation. 
  
[Ministry of Agriculture  (Department of Agricultural Research and Education) O.M. 
No. 7(4)/2010-PIM, dated 18th May, 2010]  
 
Comments of the Committee 
 For comments of the Committee please refer to Para No. 1.1 9 of Chapter I of 
this Report. 
Mis-match and Inconsistencies in Figures 
(Recommendation Para No. 4.54) 
 
 The Com mittee further observe mismatches in the figures under various 
columns of ‘Library Component’ of Agricultural Education Scheme.  In like manner 
they also observe that the Department indicated Maharishi Phule Krishi Vidyapeeth  
(MPKV) as a Component of Agri cultural Education Scheme while no allocations 
have been indicated for the same either in the Eleventh Plan nor in each of the 
three years of the Annual Plans. The Department clarified that MPKV is a 
University accredited to ICAR.  The special grant of Rs.  100.00 crore to MPKV was 
announced during the current Plan and funds towards this are provided separately 
by the Government of India.  Additionally, a sum of Rs. 6.50 crore during 2007 -08, 
Rs. 7.67 crore during 2008-09 and Rs. 2.67 crore so far during 200 9-10 have been 
provided to MPKV under the ongoing Scheme Strengthening and Development of 
AUs.   

 
The Committee take strong exception to the way facts and figures pertaining 
several important Schemes of the Department have been furnished to them.  They 
are also not convinced by the clarifications given by the Department in this regard.  
They, therefore, desire a detailed explanation from the Department on how and 
why figures pertaining to the Schemes mentioned above were reflected in a 
particular manner in t he document pertaining to Demand for Grants as also the 
manner in which the Department propose to reflect the figures furnished by them 
as clarifications.  
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 The Plan ceiling in respect of Library Component was communicated to ICAR 
in the month of October 2008. The pace of expenditure picked up in year 2008 -09 
and the actual expenditure was Rs 39.41 crores amounting to 31.61% of the outlay 
under the subhead. 
 The special grant of Rs 100 crore included the total allocation of the 
Education division was approved through a separate EFC and the grant was 
received from Ministry of Finance in the month of January 2009. 
 
[Ministry of Agriculture  (Department of Agricultural Research and Education ) O.M. 
No. 7(4)/2010-PIM, dated 18th May, 2010]  
 
Comments of the Committee 
 For comments of the Committee please refer to Para No. 1.1 9 of Chapter I of 
this Report. 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
CHAPTER V 
 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH FINAL REPLIES OF 
THE GOVERNMENT ARE STILL AWAITED 
 
- N I L - 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                                                           
NEW DELHI;                    BASUDEB ACHARIA 
3 March, 2011                                                                         Chairman, 
12 Phalguna, 1932 (Saka)                          Committee on Agriculture. 
  

 
COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE 
(2010-11) 
 
MINUTES OF THE EIGHTEENTH SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE 
  
 The Committee sat on Thursday, the 3 rd March, 2011 from 1500 hours to 
1515 hours in Committee Room ‘D’, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.  
PRESENT 
      Shri Basudeb Acharia - Chairman 
 
 LOK SABHA 
 
2. Shri Narayansingh Amlabe 
3. Shri Thangso Baite  
4. Shri Jayant Chaudhary 
5. Smt. Shruti Choudhary 
6. Smt. Ashwamedh Devi 
7. Smt. Paramjit Kaur Gulshan 
8. Shri Naranbhai Kachhadia 
9. Shri Prabodh Panda 
10. Shri Premdas 
11. Shri Uday Singh  
12. Shri Hukmadeo Narayan Yadav  
  
 RAJYA  SABHA 
 
13. Shri Mohd. Ali Khan 
14. Shri Rajpal Singh Saini 
15.  Shri S. Thangavelu 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Shri P.V.L.N. Murthy - Director 
2. Shri P.C. Koul - Additional Director 

 
 
2. At the outset the Chairman welcomed the members to the Sitting of the 
Committee.  They Committee, thereafter, took up the following Draft Reports for 
consideration:  
 
*(i) ***  ***  ***  ***  *** *** 
 
*(ii) ***  ***  ***  ***  *** *** 
 
(iii) Action Taken Report on Observations/Recommendations contained in 
the Fourth Report of the Committee (2009 -10) on Demands for Grants 
(2009-2010) relating to the Ministry of Agriculture (Department of 
Agricultural Research and Education). 
 
*(iv) ***  ***  ***  ***  *** *** 
 
3. After some deliberations, the Committee adopted the draft Reports.  They 
also authorized the Chairman to finalise the above Draft Reports in the light of the 
factual verifications made by the concerned Ministry/Departmen t and present the 
same to the Houses.   
 
*4. ***  ***  ***  ***  ***  *** 
 
The Committee then adjourned. 
 
*******   
*Matter not related to this Report. 
 
 

 
 
ANNEXURE 
(Vide Para 4 of Introduction of the Report) 
ANALYSIS OF ACTION TAKEN BY GOVERNMENT ON  THE FOURTH REPORT 
OF COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE (15TH LOK SABHA) 
  
(i)  Total number of Recommendations              22 
(ii) Recommendations/Observations which have been 
Accepted by the Government  
Para Nos. 2.8, 3.49, 3.50, 3.51, 3.52, 3.53, 3.54, 3.55, 4.45, 4.46, 4.47,  
  4.48, 4.49, 4.50, 4.51, 4.55, 4.56 and 4.57 
Total          18 
Percentage                    81.82% 
(iii) Recommendations/Observations which the Committee 
Do not desire to pursue in view of the Government’s replies  
Total                     NIL 
Percentage                     0% 
(iv) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies 
 of the Government have not been accepted by the Committee 
Para Nos.  3.48, 4.52, 4.53 and 4.54 
Total            4 
Percentage                                     18.18% 
(v) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which  
 Final replies of the Government are still awaited 
Para Nos.                  NIL 
Total                   NIL 
       
Percentage                 0%  