      
COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE 
(2012-2013) 
 
 
 
 
FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA 
 
 
 
 
MINISTRY OF AGRICULTURE 
(DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE & CO-OPERATION)  
 
 
DEMANDS FOR GRANTS (2013-2014) 
 
 
 
FORTY SIXTH REPORT 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
APRIL, 2013/ VAISAKHA, 1935 (Saka) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
46 

 
 
2 
 
FORTY SIXTH REPORT 
 
COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE 
                 (2012-2013) 
 
 
         (FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
 
 
MINISTRY OF AGRICULTURE 
(DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE & CO-OPERATION) 
 
 
 
    DEMANDS FOR GRANTS (2013-2014) 
 
 
 
 
         Presented to Lok Sabha on             23.04.2013 
     Laid on the Table of Rajya Sabha on      25.04.2013 
 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
APRIL, 2013/ VAISAKHA, 1935 (Saka)  

 
 
3 
 
 
COA No. ….. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
     
         
         
         
         
 
         
         
         
Price :  Rs. 
         
         
         
         
         
 
 
 
         
     
                     
 
 
         
© 2013 By Lok Sabha Secretariat 
 
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of Business in            
Lok Sabha (Fourteenth Edition) and Printed by  
 

 
 
4 
 
CONTENTS 
Page No. 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE …………………………………………  (iii) 
INTRODUCTION …………………………………………………………………..  (v)         
ABBREVIATIONS …………………………………………………………………..   (vii) 
                          
  REPORT 
 
CHAPTER I IMPLEMENTATION OF THE COMMITTEE’S RECOMMENDATIONS 01 
 
CHAPTER II CHALLENGES CONFRONTING INDIAN AGRICULTURE  03-21 
Introductory               03  
    
 
CHAPTER III OVERVIEW         22-35 
                     
(i) Overview        22  
(ii) Overview of Demands      22 
(iii) Allocation & Utilization of Funds during 
Eleventh Plan period      24 
 
(iv) Twelfth Plan Document      26 
(v) Financial Allocation and Utilization during 
First Year of the Twelfth Plan i.e. 2012-13   30 
 
CHAPTER IV SCHEMATIC ANALYSIS       36-85 
     
  (i) National Food Security Mission (NFSM)   36 
  (ii) National Mission on Micro-Irrigation (NMMI)   42 
        (iii) National Mission on Oilseeds and Oil Palm (NMOOP) 45 
Oilseeds Production under Integrated Scheme 
 of Oilseeds, Pulses, Oilpalm and Maize   45 
 
(iv) National Mission on Agricultural Extension 
 and Technology (NMAET)     52 
 
   Support to State Extension Programmes for 
 Extension Reform       52 
 
(v) National Mission on Sustainable Agriculture (NMSA) 58 
   National Project on Management of Soil Health  
and Fertility          58 
 

 
 
5 
 
(vi) Outstanding Utilization Certificates (UCs)   69 
 
(vii) Budgetary Allocation for North Eastern States 
out of Central Plan Allocation     73 
    
 
APPENDICES 
 
 
I. Minutes of the Twenty-second Sitting of the Committee 
 held on 2nd April, 2013        86 
     
II. Minutes of the Twenty-fifth Sitting of the Committee 
 held on 17th April, 2013        89 
      
 
   
  
 
 

 
 
6 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE (2012-13) 
 
Shri Basudeb Acharia   -   Chairman 
 
MEMBERS 
 
LOK SABHA 
 
2.  Shri Narayansingh Amlabe 
3.  Shri Sanjay Singh Chauhan 
4.  Shri H.D. Devegowda 
5.  Smt. Ashwamedh Devi 
6.  Shri L. Raja Gopal 
7.   Smt. Paramjit Kaur Gulshan 
8.  Shri Anant Kumar Hegde 
9.  Shri Premdas  Katheria 
10.  Shri P. Kumar 
11.  Dr. (Smt.) Botcha Jhansi Lakshmi 
12.  Sardar Sukhdev Singh Libra 
13.  Dr. Jyoti Mirdha 
14.  Shri Naranbhai Kachhadia 
15.  Shri Devji M. Patel 
16.  Smt. Bhavana Gawali (Patil) 
17.  Shri Jagdish Singh Rana 
18.  Shri Rajaiah Siricilla 
19.  Shri Patel Kishanbhai V.  
20.  Dr. Vinay Kumar Pandey ‘Vinnu’ 
21.  Shri Hukamdeo Narayan Yadav 
  
 RAJYA SABHA 
 
22.  Shri Satyavrat Chaturvedi 
23.  Shri A. Elavarasan 
24.  Smt. Mohsina Kidwai 
25.  Shri Dharmendra Pradhan 
26.  Dr. K.V.P. Ramachandra Rao 
27.  Shri Parshottam Khodabhai Rupala 
28.  Shri Rajpal Singh Saini 
29.  Shri Shivanand Tiwari 
30.  Shri S. Thangavelu 
31.  Shri Darshan Singh Yadav 
 
 (iii) 

 
 
7 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
 
1. Shri R.S. Kambo   - Joint Secretary 
 
2. Shri C. Vanlalruata   - Deputy Secretary 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(iv)

 
 
8 
 
INTRODUCTION 
         
I, the Chairman, Committee on Agriculture, having been authorized by the 
Committee to submit the Report on their behalf, present this Forty -sixth Report on the 
Demands for Grants (20 13-2014) of the Ministry of Agriculture (Department of 
Agriculture &   Co-operation). 
 
2. The Committee under Rule 331E(1)(a) of the Rules of Procedure considered the 
Demands for Grants (2013 -14) of the Department of Agriculture and Co -operation, 
which were laid on the table of the House on 19 March, 2013.  The Committee took 
evidence of the representatives of the Department of Agriculture & Co-operation and the 
Planning Commission at their Sitting held on 02 April, 2013.   The Committee wish to 
express their thanks to the officers of the Department of Agriculture & Co -operation and 
the Planning Commission for appearing before the Committee and furnishing the 
information that they desired in connection with the examination of Demands for Grants 
of the Department. 
 
3. The Report was considered and adopted by the Committee at their Sitting held 
on 17 April, 2013. 
 
4. For facility of reference, the Observations/Recommendations of the Committee 
have been printed in bold letters at the end of each Chapter of the Report. 
            
NEW DELHI;                        BASUDEB ACHARIA 
17  April, 2013                               Chairman, 
27 Chaitra, 1935 (Saka)                                      Committee on Agriculture  
 
 
 
(v) 
 

 
 
9 
 
ABBREVIATIONS 
AES Agricultural Extension System 
AMDP 
ASEAN 
Accelerated Maize Development Programme 
Association of Southeast Asian Nation 
ATMA  Agricultural Technology Management Agency 
BTT Block Technology Team 
CCEA Cabinet Committee on Economic Affairs 
CFQC&TI Central Fertilizer Quality Control & Training Institute 
CPO Crude Palm Oil 
CRS Community Radio Stations 
CSS Centrally Sponsored Scheme 
DAC Department of Agriculture and Cooperation 
EFC Expenditure Finance Committee 
FACs Farmer Advisory Committees 
FOs Farmers Organisation 
FQCLs 
FTAs 
Fertilizer Quality Control Laboratories 
Free Trade Agreements 
GB Governing Board 
GDP Gross Domestic Product 
HMNEH Horticulture Mission for North East and Himalayan States 
HYVs High Yielding Varieties 
ICAR Indian Council of Agricultural Research 
ICRISAT International Crops Research Institute for the Semi-Arid Tropics 
ICT Information and Communication Technology 
IEC Information Education and Communication 
IFFCO Indian Farmers Fertiliser Cooperative Limited  
IIPR Indian Institute of Pulses Research 
INM Integrated Nutrient Management 
IPM Integrated Pest Management 
ICARDA International Centre for Agricultural for Research in the Dry Areas 
ISOPOM Integrated Scheme of Oilseeds, Pulses, Oilpalm and Maize 
IDWG Inter Departmental Working Group 
KRIBHCO Krishak Bharati Cooperative Limited 
KVKs Krishi Vigyan Kendras 
MANAGE National Institute of Agricultural Extension Management 
MMA Macro Management of Agriculture 
MPRs Cumulative Monthly Progress Reports  
MSP Minimum Support Price  
NABS National Agricultural Biosecurity System  
 
(vii) 

 
 
10 
 
 
(viii) 
NAFED National Agricultural Cooperative Marketing Federation of India Limited 
NAPCC National Action Plan on Climate Change  
NDC National Development Council 
NER North Eastern Region 
NFSM National Food Security Mission 
NFSMEC National Food Security Mission Executive Committee 
NGO Non-Government Organisation 
NHM National Horticulture Mission 
NLCPR Non-Lapsable Central Pool of Resources  
NMAET National Mission for Agricultural Extension & Technology  
NMMI National Mission on Micro Irrigation 
NMOOP National Mission on Oilseeds and Oil Palm   
NMSA National Mission for Sustainable Agriculture  
NPDP National Pulses Development Programme  
NPMSH&F National Project on Management of Soil Health & Fertility  
NRM Natural Resource Management   
NSC National Seed Corporation Limited 
NWDPRA National Watershed Development Project for Rainfed Areas  
OPP Oilseeds Production Programme 
OPDP Oil Palm Development Programme  
PSB Phosphate Solubilising Bacteria  
MMA Macro Management of Agriculture 
PPP Public Private Partnership 
PRIs Panchayati Raj Institutions 
RADP Rainfed Area Development Programme 
RKVY Rashtriya Krishi Vikas Yojana 
SAMETI State Agriculture Management and Extension Training Institute 
SAUs State Agricultural Universities 
SEWPs State Extension Work Plans 
SFCI State Farms Corporation of India Limited  
SHC Soil Health Cards 
SMR Seed Multiplication Ratio 
SRR Seed Replacement Rate  
SREP Strategic Research and Extension Plan 
STL Seed Testing Laboratory 
TBOs Tree Borne Oilseeds 
TMO Technology Mission on Oilseeds 
STCR Soil Test Crop Response 
UC Utilisation Certificates 
VRR Varietal Replacement Rate 

 
 
11 
 
CHAPTER – I 
 
 
IMPLEMENTATION OF COMMITTEE’S RECOMMENDATIONS 
 
 
The Thirty-fourth Report o f Committee on Agriculture on Demands for Grants 
(2012-13) of the Ministry of Agriculture (Department of Agriculture and Cooperation ) 
was presented to the Lok Sabha on 30 April, 2012. The Report was laid on the Table of 
Rajya Sabha on the same day. 
 
1.2 In terms of Direction 73 A of Directions by the Speaker, Lok Sabha the Minister 
of State for Agriculture and Food Processing Industries  made a Sta tement in the Lok 
Sabha on 18 December , 201 2 giving the status of implementation of various 
Recommendations made by the Committee in their Thirty-fourth Report. 
 
1.3 On the basis of Action Taken Notes received from the Department in respect of 
the above Report on 30 July, 2012, the Committee presented their Thirty-eighth Report  
to the Lok Sabha and laid it on the Table of Rajya Sabha on 30 August, 2012. Out of the 
17 Recommendations of the Committee, 11 have been accepted by the Government. 
Replies to one Recommendation viz. Para No.  2.36 were of interim nature.  The 
Committee commented upon the Action Taken Notes f urnished by the Government in 
respect of Recommendations at Para Nos . 2.32, 2.34, 2. 35, 2.36, 3.46, 3.47, 3.50 and 
3.55 in the Original Report.  
  
 
 

 
 
12 
 
1.4 The Committee note that the Action Taken Replies regarding the action 
taken by the Government on the O bservations / Recommendations contained in 
the Thirty -fourth Report of the Committee were furnished by the Government 
within the stipulated three months. The Committee further note that in pursuance 
of Direction 73-A of Directions by the Speaker, Lok Sabha, the Minister concerned 
is required to make a Statement on the status of implementation of Observations / 
Recommendations contained in the Original Reports of the Committee within six 
months of their presentation to the Parliament. However, the Committee are 
deeply perturbed to note that the Minister concerned did not make the Statement 
under Direction 73 -A in the context of Thirty -fourth Report of the Committee 
within the stipulated  time. The Committee take strong exception to the failure of 
the Ministry time and again to adhere to stipulations laid down in Direction 73 -A 
in respect of Statements to be made by the Minister concerned . They expect that 
there will not be a repeat of such lapses in future. The analysis of the action taken 
by the Government rev eals that 65% Recommendations have been implemented. 
29% Recommendations have not been implemented and 6% of Recommendations 
are in various stages of implementation. The Committee desire the Government 
to take conclusive action in respect of the eighth Rec ommendations commented 
upon in their Thirty -eighth Action Taken Report and furnish further action taken 
notes to the Committee expeditiously. 
 

 
 
13 
 
CHAPTER – II 
 
CHALLENGES CONFRONTING INDIAN AGRICULTURE 
 
Introductory 
 
 The Department have informed the Committ ee that India accounts  for only 2.4% 
of the world‟s geographical area and 4% of its water resources, but has to support about 
17% of the world‟s human population and 15% of the livestock.  Agriculture is an 
important sector of the Indian economy, accountin g for 14% of the nation‟s GDP, about 
11% of its exports, about half of the population still relies on agriculture as its principal 
source of income and it is a source of raw material for a large number of industries.  
Accelerating the growth of agriculture  production is therefore necessary not only to 
achieve an overall GDP target of 8 per cent during the 12 th Plan and meet the rising 
demand for food, but also to increase incomes of those dependent on agriculture to 
ensure inclusiveness. 
2.2 The Committee h ave observed that Agriculture is one of the important sector of 
Indian Economy, contributing 14% of Nation‟s GDP providing employment to 58.2% of 
the population.   This sector witnessed a growth rate 3.6% during the Eleventh Plan, as 
against a target of 4% . The Indian Agriculture is faced with a myriad of challenges like 
Land Degradation, Deterioration of soil Health, Low Falling Productivity and Profitability 
of Small Land Holdings, Low Water Productivity, Productivity of Rainfed / Dryland 
Agriculture, Dec lining factor productivity of Intensive Agriculture, Impact of Climate 
Change on Agriculture etc. 

 
 
14 
 
2.3 In response to the Committee‟s query on the preparedness of the Government to 
tackle these challenges and ensure accelerated growth during the Twelfth Fiv e Year 
Plan, the Department of Agriculture and Cooperation in their written submission 
informed that while several indicators such as overall food grain production (reaching 
record levels), drought resilience and extension of Green Revolution to Eastern Re gion 
have shown marked improvement, several challenges remain. Amongst these are :  a 
shrinking land base, dwindling water resources, the adverse impact of climate change, 
shortage of farm labour, and increasing costs and uncertainties associated with vola tility 
in international markets. The Twelfth Plan will need to face these challenges boldly. 
 
The key drivers of growth will remain as follows: 
1. Viability of farm enterprise and returns to investment keeping in view issues of 
scale, market access, prices and risk; 
2.  Availability and dissemination of appropriate technologies that depend on quality 
of research and extent of skill development; 
3.  Plan expenditure on agriculture and in infrastructure which together with policy 
must aim to improve functioning of markets and more efficient use of natural 
resources; and 
4.  Governance in terms of Institutions that enable better delivery of services like  
credit,  animal health and of quality inputs like seeds, fertilisers, pesticides and 
farm machinery. 
 
 In addi tion, certain regional imbalances are still there which have to be 
addressed. A national priority from the view of both food security and sustainability is to 
fully extend Green Revolution to areas of low productivity in the Eastern Region where 
there is ample ground water, and thereby help reduce water stress elsewhere. Rain -fed 
areas continue to be at a disadvantage, and their development still requires some 
mindset changes. 
 
 

 
 
15 
 
2.4 On being queried about the details of headway made during the first fiscal of the 
Twelfth Plan on the above mentioned topic, as well as gearing themselves for 
overcoming these challenges and ensuring its commitment of providing Food Security 
to the Nation, the Department vide their written replies submitted that the average of 
annual growth rate of GDP achieved in agriculture and allied sectors during the 
Eleventh Plan improved to 3.64% as opposed to 2.5% and 2.4% in the 9th and 10th Plan, 
respectively. It is commendable that this growth was achieved in spite of a drought year 
in 2009-10 and drought like conditions in some parts of the country during 2010-11. The 
total food grain production rose to a record level of about 260 million tonnes from 
217.28 million tonnes in 2006 -07.  Sugarcane and cotton production estimated at 
357.67 million tonnes and 35.2 million bales respectively have also touche d new record 
levels in 2011-12. Horticultural production has recorded an average annual growth rate 
of 4.7% during the 11th Plan. 
 
Strategy for the 12th Five Year Plan 
 The major concern in  regard to agriculture and allied sector at the time of 
finalizing the 11th Five Year Plan was to arrest the decline in the average annual growth 
rate and profitability. Therefore, a target of 4% average growth per annum was set for 
the agriculture and all ied sector in the 11 th Plan.  Accordingly, a number of new 
initiatives were launched by government, viz. Rashtriya Krishi Vikas Yojana (RKVY) 
incentivizing the states for mobilizing higher investment in agriculture; National Food 
Security Mission (NFSM) to bridge yield gaps; National Horticulture Mission (NHM) and 
Horticulture Mission for North East and Himalayan States (HMNEH) to address the 
horticulture in mission mode; strengthening agricultural marketing system through 

 
 
16 
 
market reforms and providing adequate support services to the farmers, to name a few. 
Under RKVY, new initiatives such as Bringing Green Revolution to Eastern Region, 
Integrated Development of 60,000 pulses villages in rainfed areas, Promotion of Oil 
Palm, Initiative on Vegetable Clusters,  Initiative for Nutritional Security through 
Intensive Millets Promotion, National Mission for Protein Supplements, Accelerated 
Fodder Development Programme, Vidarbha Intensive Irrigation Development 
Programme etc. were also taken up.  This approach and strategy delivered the desired 
results. The gains from the 11 th Plan experience have now to be consolidated in the 
12th Plan. A target of 4% average growth per annum has been set for the agriculture 
and allied sector in the 12 th Plan also. This is necessary not only to achieve the 8% 
average growth rate of GDP set for the 12 th Plan but more importantly to achieve 
inclusive growth.  To sustain the momentum gained during the 11th Plan as also to 
consolidate the gains, it is necessary to ensure adequate capital formation in the 
agriculture and allied sector. Therefore, “ Public Private Partnership ( PPP) for 
Integrated Agriculture Development” has been launched as a pilot scheme under 
RKVY during 2012 -13 with the objective of augmenting governmental effort in 
leveraging the capability of private sectors in agriculture development. The outlay for 
RKVY during the 12th Plan is also proposed to be stepped up to Rs.63,246 crore. 
 Department of Agriculture & Cooperation is in the process of restructuring and 
merging of mo re than 50 Centrally Sponsored / State Plan / Central Plan Schemes of 
agriculture development that were implemented during the 11th Plan, into 5 missions, 5 
programmes and 1 state plan scheme of Rashtriya Krishi Vikas Yojana (RKVY) to have 
focused approach  and to avoid overlap. These proposed Missions and the schemes 
are at stages of finalisation at present.  To sustain desired growth and achieving 

 
 
17 
 
country‟s key developmental goals in Indian agriculture while negotiating impacts of 
climate change, Ministry of Agriculture has formulated „National Mission for Sustainable 
Agriculture (NMSA)‟ under aegis of National Action Plan on Climate Change (NAPCC, 
2008). NMSA strategizes transformation of Indian Agriculture into sustainable and 
climate resilient production system by mainstreaming/embedding appropriate climate 
change adaptation measures onto ongoing and future programmatic/schematic 
interventions. While doing so, NMSA  would focus on ten key dimensions namely; 
„Improved crop seeds, livestock and fish cultures ‟, „Water Use Efficiency‟, „Pest 
Management‟, „Improved Farm Practices‟, „Nutrient Management‟, „Agricultural 
insurance‟, „Credit support‟, „Markets‟, „Access to Information‟ and „Livelihood 
diversification‟ that encompass entire agricultural sector.  
 
2.5 In response to a specific query on the Department „s approach to the thrust areas 
like sustainable development, climate change, bio -security, bio-safety, improvement in 
soil health and productivity, so as to bring a turnaround in Indian agriculture, the 
Department stated that Climate change is emerging as a major challenge to our 
agriculture, indeed to the management of our economy as a whole.  Immediate 
problems that our farmers face relate to intra -seasonal variability of rainfall, extreme 
events and unseasonal rains.  These aberrations cause heavy losses to our crops every 
year.  There is, therefore, urgent necessity to speed up our efforts to evolve climate 
resilient cropping patterns and management practices.   
The Indian Council of Agricultural Resear ch is continually engaged in research 
including developing climate resilient varieties of various crops for sustainable 
agriculture. ICAR is surging ahead to provide scientific and technological support for 

 
 
18 
 
enhancing production and productivity for sustain able agriculture through innovative 
approaches. Through its research, education and extension programmes, the Council is 
committed for transforming Indian agriculture primarily from food self -sufficiency to 
enhancing profitability. Enhanced production coup led with productivity spurts has led 
the country to witness a record production of food grains in recent years. 
With a view   to prevent soil erosion, land degradation and to sustain agricultural 
production, Natural Resource Management (NRM) Division, Depa rtment of Agriculture 
& Cooperation (DAC) is implementing various Soil & Water Conservation Programmes. 
The aims and objectives of various schemes/ programmes being implemented by NRM 
Division are as under:- 
o Implementation of location specific soil & water  conservation programmes for 
prevention of soil erosion & land degradation and facilitating sustainable 
agricultural production on watershed approach basis. 
o Formulation of strategies, policies and programmes to address issues relating to  
“sustainable agri culture” in the context of risks associated with climate change 
and suggesting appropriate adaptation measures to combat adverse impact of 
climate change on agricultural production and natural resources. 
o Reclamation and development of lands affected by alkalinity and acidity. 
o Providing scientific database on soil and land uses for facilitating planning and 
implementation of various watershed based interventions. 
o Prevention of runoff and premature siltation of reservoirs for sustaining irrigation 
potential and enhancing water storage capacity of reservoirs across the country. 
o Development of human resources through training and capacity building in areas 
of soil and water conservation. 
         
National Mission for Sustainable Agriculture (NMSA)  is one of the eight 
Missions under the National Action Plan on Climate Change (NAPCC).  It seeks to 
address issues regarding „Sustainable Agriculture‟ in the context of risks associated 
with climate change by devising appropriate adaptation and mitigation strategies for  
ensuring food security, enhancing livelihood opportunities and contributing to economic  

 
 
19 
 
stability at the national level. This mission acknowledges that the risks to Indian 
Agriculture sector due to climatic variabilities and extreme events would be felt at the 
levels of crop or livestock, farm or cropping system and the food system.  Further, 
adverse impacts on agricultural production are likely to be severe in the absence of 
appropriate adaptation and mitigation measures with far reaching consequences in  
terms of shortages of food articles and rising prices thereby endangering the food and 
livelihood security across the Country.  
„National Mission for Sustainable Agriculture‟ (NMSA) will be a programmatic 
intervention during XII Plan to impart special emp hasis on conservation and sustainable 
use of natural resources especially in the context of threats emanating from a changing 
climate. NMSA will cater to areas viz. „Water use efficiency‟, „Improved Farm Practices‟ 
and „Nutrient Management‟ that will promo te adoption of sustainable development 
pathway by progressively shifting to environmental friendly technologies, adoption of 
energy efficient equipment, conservation of natural resources etc. Besides, these 
interventions will promote location specific agro nomic practices, like improved soil 
health management, increased water use efficiency, judicious use of chemicals, energy 
and increased soil carbon sinks. Implementation strategy of NMSA includes                 
(i) promoting integrated farming system cove ring crops, livestock & fishery, plantation 
and pasture based composite farming for enhancing livelihood opportunities, ensuring  
food security and minimizing risks  from crop failure through supplementary/ residual 
production systems; (ii) popularizing re source conservation technologies both on -farm 
and off -farm and introducing practices that will support mitigation efforts in times of 
extreme climatic events or disasters like prolonged dry spells, floods etc. (iii) promoting 
effective management of availa ble water resources and enhancing water use efficiency 

 
 
20 
 
through application of technologies coupled with demand and supply side management 
solutions; (iv) encouraging improved agronomic practices for higher farm productivity, 
improved soil treatment, increa sed water holding capacity, judicious use of chemicals, 
energy and enhanced soil carbon storage;  (v) creating database on soil and land use 
survey, soil profile and soil analysis to facilitate adoption of location and soil -specific 
management practices; ( vi) Promoting location and crop specific integrated nutrient 
management practices for improving soil health, enhancing crop productivity  and 
maintaining quality of land and water resources; etc.   
National Watershed Development Project for Rainfed Areas ( NWDPRA) 
programme was launched in 1990 -91;  and from November, 2000, it has been 
susbsumed in Macro Management of Agriculture Scheme.  Objectives of the 
programme include: conservation, development and sustainable management of natural 
resources; enhanceme nt of agricultural production and productivity in a sustainable 
manner; restoration of ecological balance in degraded and fragile rainfed ecosystems 
by greening these areas through an appropriate mix of trees, shrubs and grasses; 
reduction in regional disp arity between irrigated and rainfed areas; and creation of 
sustained employment opportunities for rural community including landless. 
Bio-security 
 
The new and emerging factors including genetic engineering, climate change, 
bio-terrorism and transboundary diseases have profound implications on the plant and 
animal health and environment with strong connections to human health.  The 
liberalization of global trade in agriculture since 1995 has opened new avenues for 
growth and diversification of agriculture, but it has also brought in many challenges.  

 
 
21 
 
There is an increased risk of introduction of exotic pests and weeds in the country with 
the potential to cause serious economic losses.  Advances in genetic engineering 
leading to the introduction and release o f living modified organisms or their products 
(e.g. genetically modified organisms) require proper risk assessment and management.  
Climate change has the potential to alter the habitat of known pests and even cause 
introduction of new pests.  We have to c ontend with the ever increasing threat of bio -
terrorism.  The emergence and spread of transboundary diseases such as the avian 
influenza and the Ug -99 wheat stem rust fungus pose new threats to human, animal 
and plant safety.    
The National Commission on Farmers (NCF) has recommended developing a 
National Agricultural Biosecurity System characterized by high professional, public, and 
political credibility through integration of plant, animal and fish management systems on 
biosecurity based on risk analysis  and management.  It has also recommended 
establishment of synergies in requirements of international agreements and national 
regulations across these sectors to avoid duplication of resources.  The National Policy 
for Farmers (2007) has identified strengt hening the biosecurity of crops, farm animals, 
fish, and forest trees for safeguarding the livelihood and income security of farmer 
families and the health and trade security of the nation as a major policy goal. In the 3 rd 
meeting of the Agriculture Coord ination Committee held on the 15 th February, 2008, it 
was recognised that it was essential to establish an integrated national biosecurity 
system covering plant, animal and marine issues.   A Core Group was constituted by 
the Department of Agriculture and Cooperation on the 22 nd April, 2008 for formulating 
recommendations for establishment of an integrated national biosecurity system.  The 
Core Group in its report submitted on the 26 th February, 2009, inter alia recommended 

 
 
22 
 
establishment of the National Agr icultural Biosecurity System (NABS) requiring a new 
legislation which is more relevant in the context of the present scenario.  It suggested 
that the traditional approach of managing agricultural biosecurity on a sectoral basis 
through the development and implementation of separate policy and legislative 
frameworks (e.g. for animal and plant life and health) would have to be converted to a 
cohesive and convergent approach recognising the interdisciplinary nature of 
biosecurity.    
The Core Group pointed out that the Destructive Insects and Pests Act (DIP Act), 
1914 and the Livestock Importation Act, 1898 are age old legislations and are 
subsidiary to the Customs Act  which does not give direct powers to the quarantine 
officers to deport or destroy or confisca te the consignment or lodge complaints under 
the Indian Penal Code.   Inadequate or obsolete definitions in these Acts need to be 
updated.  Adequate provisions for regulating plants, livestock and aquatics and powers 
for inspecting transport vehicles and s eizure and destruction of infested/infected 
plants/livestock or their products have to be incorporated.  Punishment or penalty on the 
importers or custom house clearing agents or other defaulters for violation of provisions 
of the legislation has to be pro vided.  Provisions for effective domestic quarantine have 
to be incorporated.  The enabling legislation for the proposed biosecurity authority 
would have to be enacted. In keeping with the recommendations of the National 
Commission on Farmers and the Core Group, the Agricultural Biosecurity Bill, 2013 has 
been prepared and introduced in Lok Sabha on 11 th March, 2013.  The main objective 
of the Bill is to bring together the plant, animal and marine protection and quarantine set 
ups together under a high powe red body with adequate powers for a quantum jump in 
the capability to safeguard the country‟s agricultural biosecurity.   The Bill seeks to set 

 
 
23 
 
up an autonomous authority encompassing the four sectors of agricultural biosecurity, 
namely, plant health, anim al health, living aquatic resources (fisheries, etc.) and 
agriculturally important micro -organisms.  It provides for modernising the legal 
framework to regulate safe movement of plants and animals within the country and in 
international trade, and harmonis e the legal requirements of the various sectors of 
agricultural biosecurity.  The proposed legislation will ensure agricultural biosecurity of 
the country for common benefit and for safeguarding the agricultural economy. 
Integrated Nutrient Management 
National Project on Management of Soil Health & Fertility (NPMSH&F) is being 
implemented for promoting balanced use of fertilizer through setting up / strengthening 
soil testing laboratories, trainings, demonstrations and promotion of organic manure/soil 
amendments/micronutrients with an outlay of Rs. 429.85 crore during 11th Plan.   
 In order to improve soil health and productivity the scheme is proposed to be 
continued during 12th Plan in mission mode as a Sub-Mission under National Mission for 
Sustainable Ag riculture. The District having no soil testing labs are proposed to be 
saturated.  Soil Health Maps are proposed to be prepared for the states where these 
are not available. 
2.6 During the course of his oral deposition, the Secretary of the Department on 
being asked about the Department‟s perspective on the problems plaguing agriculture 
sector in the Country and its possible solutions stated as under:-  
  
“Sir, you have rightly pointed out that the most important challenge facing 
Indian agriculture today, is of viability, whether it is viability of the holding in terms 
of technological feasibility or whether it is the viability of the farming enterprise in 
monetary terms.  As you are aware, the holding average size in India has now 
dipped to an all time low of 1.16 hectares.  This by any standards is extremely 
unviable if the holding is used to continue with traditional agricultural cropping 
systems.  For holding s of small size to be economically viable, it is necessary 

 
 
24 
 
that we have to graduate to high value agriculture.  We have also got to ensure 
that infrastructure is created at various levels so that the farmers are able to get 
the best value for their produce.  I think that is the prime challenge facing the 
Indian agriculture today.  Now because of the ce iling legislation and the 
continuing fragmentation of land holdings due to inheritance, the only way we 
can address this challenge is to set up institutionalised mechanisms for 
aggregation of farmers into interest groups and producer organisations so that on 
the one hand, they can purchase their inputs from the market at more 
competitive prices and on the other, they can aggregate themselves into interest 
groups and be able to sell their produce to the mandis or to the other vendors at 
the market driven pri ces.  This is the foremost challenge facing us today and 
allied to that is the rest of the work of this Ministry. 
  
As you are aware, we had conducted a situational assessment survey 
through the NSSO in 2003.  At that time, the average income per person , not per 
family, in agriculture was about, if I remember correctly, Rs.2174 per month.  We 
feel that with the interventions that have been made in the sector, especially over 
the past five or six years, we have been able to generate substantial income and 
revenues in the sector.  We have requested NSSO to conduct a situational 
assessment survey for which, we have released them the money.  Hopefully, by 
the end of this year, we would be in a position to tell you how far we have 
progressed and what is the gap, if any, that is remaining.  But we feel that with 
the increased focus that has been given to agriculture in the Government, largely 
as a result of the interventions of this Committee, as you are aware, over the past 
ten years the annual budget of the Depar tment of Agriculture and Cooperation 
has increased by ten -folds which is no small achievement.  This is possibly the 
largest increase in plan size in various Departments of the Government of India.  
So, there is a lot of focus on this sector.  But still , as you are aware and as the 
hon. Committee is aware, the issues that remain to be addressed are so 
multifarious and they cut across each and every activity, that sometimes we feel 
that whatever we can do will not be enough or sufficient.   
Sir, as you are a ware, in the last 11 th Plan, we saw a growth rate of 3.64 
per cent in the agriculture and allied sectors which is a considerable 
improvement over the growth rate in the 9th and 10th Plans.  If we break down this 
growth rate, we find that the forestry and l ogging sector, which is included as a 
part of the agriculture and allied sector, showed a growth rate of only 2.2 per cent 
which is why the growth rate of the entire sector came down to 3.6 per cent.  
Otherwise, the growth rate of agriculture sector, if we  just look at agriculture , is 
closer to 3.8 per cent which though still 0.2 per cent short of the target that we 
stipulated for ourselves and which the NDC had imposed upon us for the 11 th 
Plan, though we fell short of that , but you would surely agree that  in view of the 
initiatives we had taken in the past five years and despite the occurrence of 
major droughts – 2009 drought was all pervasive across the country and 2010 
drought extended to large parts of eastern India – despite that to achieve nearly 
3.8 per cent average growth in the agriculture sector, I think is fairly satisfactory.   
However, we are fully aware that there is a lot of distance to be travelled 
before we can take some satisfaction at the work that we have done whether it is 
in the instance of increase in the credit flow to the farmers where again over the 

 
 
25 
 
past five years the credit flow has I think increased by more than five times or 
whether it is increased risk coverage where admittedly the risk  coverage 
mechanisms at our disposal still remain somewhat unsatisfactory and still remain 
not to the liking of the farmers.  We are trying to address this in a major way.   
 
We have made substantial improvements in the availability of inputs and 
in the availability of quality seeds.  We are on th e verge of a break through of 
releasing new varieties especially of pulses and oilseeds, especially in the case 
of pulses the genome of the pigeon pea and chickpea have been decoded and 
that we feel is a very encouraging step for our scientists to be able to take 
forward their research and engineer such varieties that would suit local agro -
climatic situations, be pest tolerant, be pest resistant and serve to increase yields 
and increase the prosperity of the farmers.  
 
We are trying to focus on establishmen t of farmer producer organisations,  
through SFAC, who we have directed to focus mainly on the rain -fed areas in the 
country so that they can aggregate the farmers of these areas, especially the 
pulses and oil seeds farmers, aggregate their produce, help in  realising better 
money for their produce by pledging their crops to the accredited warehouses 
and then disposing it of at times when the prices are the most suitable.  This is a 
direction that we have been trying to take. We are aware that the marketing 
channels in the country still remain fragmented, the value chain still remains 
fragmented and broken and the farmer is not in a very good position to realise 
best value for his produce. As you are aware, there is a Committee of Agricultural 
Marketing Ministers of all the States that is looking into the aspect of marke ting 
reforms. We hope that this Committee will come up with suggestions that would 
be acceptable and amenable to all States so that farmers are in a position to 
obtain best value for their produ ce. Even today, except in a few States, except in 
the crops of wheat and rice in which there is a credible procurement mechanism, 
farmers of other crops are still not in a position to obtain even the Minimum 
Support Prices and the best value for their produce. So, the issue of markets and 
the issue of aggregation is what we are wanting to focus on.  We are trying to 
initiate a lot of new activities as far as extension is concerned. As you are aware, 
after the late sixties and early seventies, when there was  a huge induction of 
village level workers in the agricultural sector through training  & visit programme 
which was funded by the World Bank at that time, after that practically in every 
State the induction of employees into the agricultural sector had virt ually dried 
up. Through our A TMA Programme over the past two years, we have been 
successful in creating at least 18,000 more posts which have been spread across 
various States.  This move, I believe, will help in reaching out to the people in a 
more credib le manner where the best technologies, and the best agronomic 
practices can be delivered to them more effectively. There are other agencies, 
there are other instrumentalities of the ICT that we are trying to take advantage 
of in this endeavour. But, as alw ays, we will be guided by the wisdom of this 
Committee in trying to look at the way forward and we will constantly strive to 
improve ourselves.  It is with the help of this Committee, we have been able to 
ensure a lot of flexibility in the functioning of t his Ministry.  Now, nearly half of our 
Budget goes to the RKVY which is available to the States. Even the other 

 
 
26 
 
Centrally-sponsored schemes, we basically accept and approve whatever is 
proposed to us by the States by way of their Annual Action Plans that t hey 
present in the months of March and April every year. So, I think, we are on the 
right track. With the blessings of the Committee and with the cooperation of the 
Finance Ministry, most importantly, I am sure we will be able to achieve the 
target of the 12th Five Year Plan in the agricultural sector”. 
 
 
2.7 The Committee was concerned about the non-remunerative agricultural practices 
which leads to migration t o the urban areas and creates uncertainty of future and 
pressure on the service sector in the urban areas.  When the Committee enquired about 
this transition, the Secretary informed that the retention in agriculture sector is not an 
easy task.  The transition from agrarian to industrial society will certainly lead to 
reduction in number of people invo lved in agriculture practice.  On being queried as to 
what role was being played by DAC to ensure that this transition is smooth, t he 
Secretary submitted that those who are practising non -agriculture vocations in villages, 
their development is the mandate of Ministry of Rural Development those who have 
migrated to the urban areas, their development falls in purview of Ministry of Urban 
Development and Ministry of Labour & Justice.  Further, the  National Skill Development 
Crop (NSDC) is entrusted the respons ibility of skill development of the migrated labour 
and road side dwellers. The NSDC is an umbrella organisations hav ing mandate over 
14 Departments, including Department of Agriculture and Cooperation 
 
 He further submitted that according to the estimates of 2009-10, the per capita 
average income was Rs. 4 4,000.  When we further break this up, agriculture and allied 
sectors contribute  only Rs. 10,000 per capita income whereas the services sector 
contributes around Rs. 80,000 to this figure.   
 

 
 
27 
 
2.8 Land degradation, deteriorating Soil Health, shrinking land base, dwindling 
water resources, adverse impact of climate change, shortage of farm labour and 
increasing costs of inputs, declining returns  and uncertainties associated with 
volatility in international  markets are some of the challenges besetting Indian 
Agriculture.  Some of these have been there in the past and some are recent 
phenomenon.  However, these challenges pose a real and serious threat to our 
farming community and the Nation as a whole too.  Enhancing public sector 
investment particularly in research and technology transfer, institutional reforms 
towards delivery, conservation of land water and biological resources, 
development of rain -fed agriculture, efficient use of water, timely and adequa te 
availability of inputs, developing efficient marketing infrastructure and increasing 
flow of credit particularly to the small and marginal farmers, are some of the 
areas requiring focussed policy interventions so as to ensure food security 
commitments.  
 
Inspite of the fact that India being an agrarian dominant economy, the 
Committee have observed that this sector is not getting its due from the planners 
in terms of public investment, which with the advancing years is on the decline.  
Further, though the  Schemes being implemented by the Central and State 
Governments seem well meaning on paper, yet their implementation on the 
ground has left a lot to be desired.  And unless the gap between formulation and 
implementation is narrowed down comprehensively, In dian agriculture will 
unfortunately continue to be stuck in a quagmire.  
  

 
 
28 
 
The burgeoning population too is posing a serious challenge to our aim of 
food security to all.  Thus, the need of the hour is to increase productivity as well 
as ensure viability, sustainability and induce profitability in this vital sector.  The 
Committee, therefore, recommend that all agencies entrusted in functioning of 
the agriculture sector across the length and breadth of the Country work in 
unison and tandem from now on and not work at cross -purposes as is evidently 
in vogue now.  If the implementing agencies justly keep the farming community at 
the epicentre of all their activities and then start their formulation of Schemes, a 
turnaround in the fortunes of this Sector would  surely be on the anvil.  In 
addition, a judicious blend of modern scientific techniques alongwith traditional 
agricultural practices would act as a fillip.  Lastly, the Committee are sanguine 
that if concerned parties pay heed to their recommendation, the  Nation would be 
able to tactfully confront these challenges and successfully overcome them. 
 
2.9 The Committee note that as the developing economy moves from a 
traditional agriculture-based to industrial including service sector, the growth in 
agriculture sector dips.  The Department too have  informed that transition from 
agricultural to industrial society will lead to  decline in the size of population 
involved in the agriculture sector.  Also, the agriculture sector is becoming non -
remunerative day-by-day leading many to migrate towards urban areas for better 
employment opportunities.  Since these migrants are not skilled, there is an 
added handicap to their employment opportunities, coupled with the pressure of 
leaving behind their social support group, b eing rendered landless and with  no 
assured source of income. 

 
 
29 
 
 Expressing their serious  concern over the fact that the Department of 
Agriculture and Cooperation have no mechanism/ provision that would provide 
succour  to  such migrants who have shifted from  agricultural to non-agricultural 
sector,  t he Committee recommend the Department to proactively take up in 
coordination with the other concerned agencies so as to enable these 
economically and socially vulnerable strata of our society  to find gainful 
employment at the earliest and not to be left at the mercy of vested interest s of 
the unscrupulous  sections of the society . They further desire that the progress 
achieved herein  be intimated to them at the earliest. 
2.10 On a more alarming note, the Committee  express their concern over the 
Free Trade Agreements (FTAs) entered in the agriculture sector.  Having 
experienced that Indian farmers have been hit hard by the earlier FTAs which 
have negatively impacted the plantation and cash crops, cheap imports of th ese 
commodities have led to drastic fall in domestic production and destruction of 
livelihoods.  Sudden spurt in farmer’s suicides in regions where these crops are 
grown optimise the stark reality of domestic interests being blind sighted at the 
altar of f ree trade.  However, rather than adopt of policy of going slow on these 
FTAs, the Government went on entering into more FTAs.  Inspite of the 
widespread protests against Indo -ASEAN FTA, the Government is not yet ready 
to introspect on this contentious issu e.  Strongly deprecating this parochial 
attitude of the Government of carrying forward its agenda of trade liberalization, 
which has cost farming community heavily, the Committee exhort upon the 
Government to first work on building the broad consensus amon gst various 
stakeholders across the country encompassing all strata of society, for not only 

 
 
30 
 
safeguarding the interests of the ever tolling farmer, but simultaneously negate 
the nefarious designs of vested interests, before entering into further FTAs. 
2.11 Another area of concern is the price support mechanism in agricultural 
commodities, which is perceived to be distorted.   Non remunerative prices of 
agricultural commodities and deficient institutionalised price support mechanism 
have impacted the agriculture sector badly. Distress sale of various commodities; 
have been reported, for one reason or the other, causing great economic loss and 
temptation to withdraw from the profession for ever.     Market interventions price 
support, which is seldom conducted  timely, has not been able to ameliorate the 
sufferings of the farmers. The present support price mechanism, which is 
applicable for few commodities, has been found to be wanting since the farmers’ 
interest is not being protected adequately for variety of reasons.  In the absence 
of state sponsored price support for majority of the crops, the farmers are left to 
fend for themselves.  The unbridled market forces which come into play and 
determines the price structure of agriculture commodities do not often m eet the 
aspirations and expectations of farmers.  Many a times, the farmers have been 
reported to unable to recover the production cost even.  It has been also noticed 
that sometime import  of agricultural produce resorted to contain inflationary 
trends, tend to depress domestic price, causing manifold loss and untold misery 
to the farmers.  In order to harmonise the interest of farmers and consumers, the 
Committee desire that Govt. should maintain price parity between imports and 
domestic price, so as to af ford reasonable fair and just price to the farmers, for 
his produce.  At the same time, the Committee recommend that all the agricultural 
commodities including cash and plantation crops be subjected to state 

 
 
31 
 
determined price support mechanism, so as to pre vent distress sale and protect 
farmers’ interest. The Committee is of the view that if implemented, these steps 
will go a long way in improving the conditions of the farmers.  The Committee 
would like to be apprised of the action taken in   the matter. 
2.12 The subsequent narratives deals with detailed examination of the working 
of the Department in terms of implementation of its Schemes and financial 
performance during the Fiscal, 2012 -13 and projections for the year 2013 -14.  The 
Committee desire that the  Demand No. 1 of the Ministry of Agriculture, 
Department of Agriculture and Cooperation, be approved. 

 
 
32 
 
 
CHAPTER – III 
 
OVERVIEW 
 
(i) Overview 
 
 Agriculture provides livelihood to majority of population and thus remains linchpin 
of Indian economy. Though ag riculture sector‟s contribution to national GDP has 
declined to 13.9% in 2011 -12 due to relatively higher growth experienced in industries 
and services sectors, agriculture remains the principal source of livelihood for more than 
58% of country‟s populatio n. Indian economy is growing and to sustain this growth 
agriculture sector has to perform well. How to produce more of agriculture produce with 
limited natural resources in sustainable manner for ensuring food and nutritional 
security and increasing income of farmers, are major challenges before the Nation.  
 
3.2 As per the land use statistics 2009-10, the total geographical area of the country 
is 328.7 million hectares, of which the net sown area is 140.0 million hectares. The 
gross cropped area is 192.2 m illion hectares and thus the cropping intensity works out 
to 137.3%. The net irrigated area is 63.3 million hectares. 
 
(ii) Overview of Demands 
3.3 Demand No. 1 pertaining to the Department of Agriculture & Co -operation for the 
year 201 3-14 was laid in  the Lok Sabha on 19 March, 201 3. It provides for 
implementation of various Central Sector, Centrally Sponsored and State Plan 
Schemes, for Plan and Non-Plan activities.    
 
 

 
 
33 
 
3.4 The macro-level break-up of Demand No. 1 is given below : 
        (Rs. in Crore) 
Section Plan Non-
Plan 
Total 
REVENUE    
Voted 21550.55 323.79 21874.34 
Charged - - - 
CAPITAL    
Voted 58.45 0.71 59.16 
Charged - - - 
GRAND 
TOTAL 
21609.00 324.50 21933.50 
 
 
3.5 The total allocation for Department of Agriculture & Co -operation is Rs. 21933.50 
crore for the Fiscal 2013-14.  Out of this Rs.  21550.55 crore and Rs. 323.79 crore are 
on Plan and Non -Plan sides respectively under the Revenue Section. Similarly,          
Rs. 58.45 crore and Rs. 0. 71 crore are  on the Plan and Non -Plan sides res pectively 
under the Capital Section.   
3.6 The comparison of Revised Estimates for the year 201 2-13 and Budg et 
Estimates for 2013-14 is given in the table below:  
  (Rs. in crore) 
 RE 2012-13 BE 2013-14 
 Plan Non-Plan Plan Non-Plan 
REVENUE 17822.03 306.02 21550.55 323.79 
CAPITAL 45.29 0.60 58.45 0.71 
Total 17867.32 306.62 21609.00 324.50 
GRAND 
TOTAL 
18173.94 21933.50 
 
 The Revenue Section (Plan Side) BE for 2013-14 at Rs. 21550.55 crore shows 
an increase of Rs. 3728.52 crore from RE 2012-13 of Rs. 17822.03 crore.  Similarly on 
Non-Plan Side, in comparison to B E 201 3-14 of Rs. 323.79 crore, the 2012-13 RE 

 
 
34 
 
allocation was only Rs. 306.02 crore.  The BE for 201 3-14 in the Ca pital Section Plan 
Side is Rs. 58.45  crore, in comparison to RE 201 2-13 of Rs. 45.29 crore.  On the Non-
Plan Side BE for 2013-14 at Rs. 71 lakh is higher in comparison to RE at Rs. 60 lakh for 
2012-13.  
(iii) Allocation & Utilization of Funds during Eleventh Plan period 
 
3.7 For the Eleventh Plan the Planning Commission had approved an o utlay of 
RS.66,577.00 crore for the Department of Agriculture and Cooperation .  However, the 
Department was allocated Rs.59137.61 crore as BE.  The allocation and expenditure for 
the Eleventh Plan period under Plan and Non-Plan is as under:- 
Plan 
 
                                                                                                (Rs. in crore) 
Year BE RE Expenditure/ 
Release 
2007-08  5560.00 6927.94 7058.50 
2008-09 10105.67 9865.68 9530.30 
2009-10 11307.07 10965.23 10870.15 
2010-11 15042.00 17254.00   17052.59 
2011-12 17122.87 16515.05 16558.4 
Total 59137.61 61527.90 61069.68 
 
Non-Plan 
        (Rs. in crore) 
Year BE RE Expenditure 
2007-08 387.21 885.57 972.68 
2008-09 628.78 644.66 644.99 
2009-10 608.15 1151.40 1064.84 
2010-11 605.97 441.48 281.09 
2011-12 400.00 310.26 194.96 
Total 2630.11 3433.37 3158.56 
 

 
 
35 
 
The above table shows that RE figures have exceeded the BE figures and actual 
expenditure has always been lower in comparison to the RE during the course of the 
Eleventh Plan. 
 
3.8 In response to a query regarding allocation of funds not being commensurate 
with the approved Outlays, the Department in their written submission stated that 
although Planning Commission had approved an  allocation of Rs. 66577 crore for XI 
Plan, it provided Rs. 59137.61 crore at BE stage after taking into consideration resource 
availability and demands from other competing national priorities. An amount of          
Rs. 3500 crore was provided for Rainfed Area Development Programme (RADP) for XI 
Plan. This scheme was approved towards the end of XI Plan as a part of RKVY.  As 
against the Rs.25,000 crore under RKVY for XI Plan, Planning Commission has 
provided about  Rs. 22378 crore under RKVY for the same period.  They f urther stated 
that Budgetary figures fo r Annual Plan & Five Year Plan are projected based on 
requirement scheme -wise and based on pattern of expenditure during past years. 
Based on overall budget allocation made by the Planning Commission, scheme -wise 
allocations are made in the Department base d on their inter -se priorities and focussed 
areas for the governments. The allocations are made in such a way that the chances of 
over spending / savings are a rare phenomenon.  
 
3.9 In their  written response to a query regarding the reasons for RE figures  
exceeding the BE figures, the Committee were informed that a dditional allocation is 
provided, at the revised estimate stage, at the time of half yearly review of the plan 
schemes. Additional allocation is sought for schemes which have more demand leading 
to, at times, RE exceeding BE. Revised Estimate is finalized in the month of November 

 
 
36 
 
or December. Accordingly funds are received in the last quarter of the Financial Year 
with rider of releasing only 33% of the approved amount. This entails limiting the release 
of funds leading to less expenditure than the RE. 
 
3.10 When asked as to why the Department were unable to fully utilize the allocated 
funds during the Eleventh Plan period, the Secretary, Department of Agriculture and 
Cooperation during Oral Evidence submitted: 
“This shortfall in expenditure over the RE is possibly less than 0.2 per cent 
or something like that. It is a very small amount. It is about Rs.500 crore in a sum 
of Rs.61,000 crore. So, the shortfall is not very much if you look at it in 
percentage terms. However, I take your point that we should not leave any 
money that is put at our disposal unspent. What happens is that in any typical 
budgeting exercise, once funds are allocated for each activity and each 
component, sometimes, some activit ies and components fail to take off. For 
instance, historically, we had a problem in spending fully the extent of funds 
allocated for the North -East. There is a problem of lack of absorption capacity in 
the North-East. But, over time, that has improved and , I believe, last year it was 
something like 93 per cent which has been able to be utilised in the North -East. 
Similarly, there are components of various programmes in which the allocation, 
as we envisaged, has not been able to be utilised. But if you look  at this 
allocation in its entirety, you would agree that it is a very small amount in 
percentage terms”. 
 
(iv) Twelfth Plan Document 
3.11 The Committee have been informed that the Twelfth Five Year Plan (2012 -17) 
was to be operationalized from 01 April, 2012.  Having been a witness to the detrimental 
effects of delay in finalization and implementation the Eleventh Five Year Plan by all 
agencies concerned leading to reduced allocation, staggering of timelines which 
ultimately reduced the viability and effic acy of a Scheme, the Committee had 
recommended that the multi -level planning process be streamlined.   However, they 
have observed that till date the Twelfth Plan Document has not been finalized. 

 
 
37 
 
3.12 On being queried about the reasons for this delay in fin alizing the Twelfth Plan 
Document, its possible ramifications and the likely time period by which the Twelfth Plan 
Document would finally see the light of the day, the Committee were informed that the 
Twelfth Five Plan has been finalized by National Develo pment Council (NDC), headed 
by the Prime Minister on 27 th December 2012. As most of the schemes of the 
Department, which were in operation in 11 th Five Year Plan, are continuing in the first 
and second year of 12 th Five Year Plan, no adverse impact in the Agriculture sector is 
envisaged due to late finalization of the schemes during 12 th Five Year Plan. It may, 
however, be stated that various schemes of the Department in the revised format are 
presently at various stages of finalization.   
 
3.13 In response  to a query on the New Schemes that are to be introduced in the 
Twelfth Plan and their present status, the Department submitted a list of the following 
Schemes:   
 
1. National Mission on Agriculture Extension and Technology 
2 National Mission on Sustainable Agriculture 
3. National Mission Oilseeds & Oil Palm 
4. Integrated Scheme for Farmers Income Security (ISFIS) 
5. Integrated Scheme on Agriculture Census 
6. Integrated Scheme on Agriculture Marketing 
7. Integrated Scheme on Agriculture Cooperation 
 
On their present status, it was stated that Planning Commission has given “In -
principle” approval of the missions/schemes proposed by the Department for Twelfth 
Five Year Plan.  Draft Note for  Expenditure Finance Committee ( EFC) has been  

 
 
38 
 
circulated to all  concerned for seeking comments.   As and when the EFC approves, 
restructured new missions/schemes will be operationalized.  
 
3.14 When enquired about -procedures that ought to be followed for initiating new 
Schemes, t he Department stated that introduction o f any new scheme is through an 
established procedure of formulation of the scheme, which entails appraisal of the 
proposed scheme through comments of the relevant Departments/Ministries of the 
Government and Planning Commission.  Thereafter, the proposal i s evaluated through 
EFC and then CCEA‟s approval is obtained wherever necessary. Department is trying 
its level best to approve all the new mission/schemes which will be  operationlized  
during 2013-14. 
 
3.15 During the course of Oral Evidence in response t o a pointed query as to whether 
it was desirable that all Schemes be implemented from the first day of the Plan period, 
the representative of the Planning Commission submitted as under:- 
“The NDC approved the  10th Plan in December, 2002, in the first year  
itself.  In the 11 th Five Year Plan, it was from 19 th December, 2007. It was again 
the first year of the Plan.  This year it is 27 th December, 2012, which is the first 
year of the Plan”. 
 
3.16 On being pressed further, he admitted that: 
“It is desirable. But we have to see the circumstance, which led to this 
delay.  In the present case, the plans have been prepared in the context of rural 
term loan, which affected the projection of the sources. This was an 
unprecedented situation with which this plan has b een prepared.  So, it took time 
for finalization of the resources by the Planning Commission and arriving at the 
final projections. But in the meantime, the plan was launched. A lot of schemes 
are going to be continued”. 
 

 
 
39 
 
3.17 On being asked his view poin t on the extant system of planning presently in 
vogue, the Secretary of the Department of Agriculture and Cooperation stated: 
“It is not the view of the Department of Agriculture, but it is my personal 
view. I think it is now high time that we appreciate t hat planning has to be a 
dynamic exercise.  The tendency to fall back upon on a five year plan does not 
make sense these days.  And, we are increasingly dependent upon the global 
scenario, which is not in our control. For instance, when the State Governmen ts 
come to the Planning Commission for their annual plans, then the situation is all 
the more irrelevant because the devolution of  funds to the State are decided by 
a formula. There is nothing that the Planning Commission can really give to the 
States by way of additions or deletions.  
So, the planning exercise probably needs to be restructured; it needs to 
be dynamic; it needs to be able to address the current issues, the issues that 
immediately take shape year to year.  What happens is that occasionally,  we are 
handicapped by the fact that the Five Year Plan allocation is fixed; and therefore, 
we cannot go beyond that even though we have something new to suggest. 
To answer your question, Madam, there are four schemes of the previous 
plan, which did not take off at all.  They were rejected.  But I do not think that it is 
such a serious issue.  They were rejected for reasons which were considered to 
be good at that time.  The point that I am trying to make is that you are right that 
ideally the plan should c ommence on the first day; and everybody should have  
knowledge of the resources at their command; and they should know exactly how 
they are going to proceed in the five years.  As it happens for all practical 
purposes, the plan like you said, commences more  or less after two years after 
its inception.  And, it continues for five years. It is not a very satisfactory 
outcome.  But that is the way it has been happening and that is the way it would 
continue to happen.  I do not understand why our scheme s have to be tied down 
to a finite and artificial time period created by a plan? 
If there are schemes which are inherently good, they should be allowed to 
continue for all time to come until they are stopped expressly by the Government. 
But our schemes are only approved for finite periods.  That is the p roblem. This 
is a kind of self -goal that we inflicted upon us. So, I think it is an extremely 
important issue that the Committee has raised but obviously it has to be tackled 
at a larger forum. It cannot be tackled a t the level of the single Department or a 
Ministry because it concerns the Government as a whole but it does create 
unnecessary complications in implementation of the schemes. The Member is 
absolutely right when she says that for the first few years of the  Plan period, in 
fact, we struggle with getting new approvals, even for the existing schemes. For 
instance, the National Horticulture Mission , though it  continues albeit under  a 
different nomenclature, but we have to take fresh approval for it at every stage”.  
 

 
 
40 
 
3.18 He further submitted that: 
“.…I am bound by the rules of business of the Government of India. I 
cannot breach those rules, obviously. Planning is an exercise which has been 
given under the rules of business to the Planning Commission. This iss ue has to 
be addressed by the Planning Commission and the larger Government”.  
 
(v) Financial Allocation and Utilization during First Year of the Twelfth Plan i.e. 
2012-13 
 
3.19 The Department have submitted that for the Fiscal 2012 -13, they had proposed 
an Outlay of Rs. 49674.34 crore against which the Planning Commission allocated a 
sum of Rs. 20, 208.00 crore only.  Due to the slow utilization of funds during the course 
of the first six months, the Ministry of Finance (Department of Expenditure) curtailed  the 
allocation at RE stage to Rs. 17867.32 crore and the actual expenditure Rs. 13478.19 
(till 31.12.2012). 
 
3.20 The Department further informed that Fiscal 2012 -13 was projected based on 
requirement scheme-wise and based on pattern of expenditure during  past years. Rs. 
25,000 crore was proposed for RKVY whereas the Department got only Rs. 9217 crore 
at BE stage. Funds were provided after taking into consideration resource availability 
and demands for other competing national priorities. 
 
 3.21 On being q ueried about the reasons leading to reduction of BE at RE stage, as 
well as the Contingency Plan drawn to cope with this reduced allocation, the 
Department in their written reply submitted as under:   
 An amount of Rs.9217 crore was provided at BE stage to  RKVY which is a State 
Plan Scheme. This allocation has been reduced to Rs.8400 crore at RE stage.  The 
main reason is reduction of allocation to the Department at RE stage. New 

 
 
41 
 
Missions/schemes proposed in 12 th Plan are likely to be approved during the 20 13-14 
then the allocation is likely to be enhanced to cater to emerging needs.    
 
3.22 During the course of his Oral deposition before the Committee, the Secretary of 
the Department in response to a query on the Mismatch between proposal and 
allocation stated as under:- 
“…..Sir, it is a negotiation ploy.  It is like I say a first offer that was made 
from our side.  We know that the ways and means position and the financial 
health of the Government would not permit such a huge outlay.  But, 
nevertheless we strive to take as much as we can”.  
 
He further stated that:-  
 
“Sir always we ask for more, but we get slightly less.  There is a bit of 
negotiation and we settle for something in between. These are stratagems we 
employ.  Everybody sees through these stra tagems unfortunately because every 
Department does it”. 
 
 
ALLOCATION AND UTILIZATION OF FUNDS DURING ELEVENTH PLAN PERIOD 
 
3.23 During the course of the Eleventh Plan period the Committee have 
observed the Department were allocated an amount of Rs. 59137.6 1 crore only 
against the approved outlay of Rs.66577.00 crore by the Planning Commission.  
This, inspite of the fact that the Department’s expenditure being in the range of 
95% of the amount finalized in the revised estimates. They are of the firm opinion 
that had the balance Rs.5049.10 crore been allocated, the Department would have 
been able to acquit themselves better in the implementation of Schemes. The 
Committee further observe that the allocations at BE vis-à-vis RE stage fluctuated 
in that while for  the fiscals 2007 -08 and 2010 -11, showed increased RE, in the 
remaining three Fiscals the RE was less than the approved BE. They are 

 
 
42 
 
aggrieved to note that their constant pleas to rectify the imbalances have gone 
unheard during the Eleventh Five Year Plan.   Not wanting to ponder over the past 
and noting that the Twelfth Five Year Plan is in its nascency, the Committee 
impress upon all the agencies concerned i.e. the Planning Commission and the 
Ministry of Finance (Department of Expenditure) to approach allo cation to the 
Department on a new platform and not cling onto the past as a benchmark.  The 
allocation of funds to the Department must be evenly spread across all the five 
fiscals to avoid back loading  of plan funds.  This wo uld ensure that the 
Department are allocated maximum funds out of the approved outlay and are able 
to absorb these funds easily and ensure optimum utilization of allocated 
resources.   
3.24 The Committee also observe that the Department have not accredited 
themselves well as they have b een unable to utilize even this reduced allocation 
in its entirety during the  course of the Eleventh Plan .  Being well aware of the 
reasons for this, they exhort the Department to take proactive steps to utilise 
even the reduced allocations to the hilt as in the entire Eleventh Plan period, the 
Department consistently failed to utilise the same.  They also impress upon the 
Department to incorporate the views of States / UTs while drawing up the 
modalities of a Scheme.  This in their considered opinion would  ensure active 
participation of States / UTs in all Centrally Sponsored and Central Schemes 
which would result in optimum utilization of allocated funds. 
3.25 Noting that the lack of absorption capacity in the North -Eastern States was 
blotting the other -wise excellent performance of the Department in terms of 

 
 
43 
 
utilization of funds, the Committee desire that agriculture related developmental 
schemes / projects specifically tailor made for North -Eastern be drawn up for 
implementation.  At the same time, the No rth-Eastern States be motivated to 
improve their absorption capacity by furnishing utilization certificates of past 
utilizations as well as furnishing of fresh proposals on a timely basis.  If worked 
upon methodically, the Department would be in a position to ensure cent per cent 
utilization of allocation in the years to come. 
TWELFTH PLAN DOCUMENT 
3.26 The Committee are exasperated to be apprised that all agencies concerned 
with finalization of the Twelfth P lan Document have not paid any h eed to their 
advise contained in their Thirty -fourth Report on Demands for Grants (2012 -13) 
for streamlining the planning process as the incumbe nt process is riddled with 
the need for obtaining multi -agency clearances which are time consuming.  The 
fate that befell the Ele venth Plan was the guiding factor for the Committee’s 
instant recommendation. On being informed that though the National 
Development Council approved the Twelfth Plan on 27 December, 2012, yet it is 
unable to see the light of the day, further aggravates th e Committee.  The 
representatives of the Planning Commission have confessed during the Oral 
Evidence that even during the Tenth and Eleventh Five Year Plan, there had been 
remarkable delay in their finalization, which had a negative impact on not only the 
new Schemes but also the prospects of ongoing Schemes were also severely 
hampered.  Such a pos ition on this important issue worries the Committee that 
the coming Thirteenth Five Year Plan would also be delayed.                               
The concerned a gencies taking refug e that extant planning process a s well 

 
 
44 
 
thought of and one that has stood the test of time does not cut any ice with the 
Committee.  Having been a witness to the detrimental effects of the prevalent 
system in terms of reduced outlays and  staggering of timelines, the Committee 
recommend that all the concerned should break free fro m the shackles of the 
past and streamline this time consuming process and also ensure compliance  to 
the guidelines of the extant  planning process, and thereby  aid the planning 
process in getting rid of its systemic ills. 
 
FINANCIAL ALLOCATION AND UTILIZATION DURING FIRST YEAR OF THE 
TWELFTH PLAN  
 
3.27 The Committee are aggrieved to note the quantum variation in the funds 
sought by the Department and the actual all ocation done by the                        
Planning Commission, which seems to make a mockery of the extant planning 
process.  The rather candid admittance of the Secretary that their proposal for 
allocation of funds to the Planning Commission is a negotia tion ploy and is more 
like a first offer in a negotiation process to arrive at negotiated amount does not 
augur well for the process of planning being witnessed in the Country.  The 
Committee further note the contradiction in the above -stated stand of the          
Ministry and the one stated by them in their written replies wherein they 
submitted that proposed allocation for Fiscal 2012 -13 was projected based on 
allocation for Fiscal 2012 -13 was projected  based  on  requirement           
Scheme-wise and based on pattern of expenditure during past year. The Planning 
Commission on its part have stated  that funds are provided after taking into 

 
 
45 
 
consideration resource availability and demands for other competing national 
priorities.  
 Having enlightened themselv es with the viewpoint of the Department and 
the Planning Commission, the Committee impress upon  both the agencies to 
arrive at a model wherein the figures of proposed allocation and actual allocation 
are brought on an even keel. 
 3.28 Constrained to note t hat the financial performance of the Department 
during the first fiscal of the Twelfth Plan is reminiscent of the problems plaguing 
the system of planning and implementation.  During the year 2012 -13 against a 
proposal of Rs. 49,674.34 crore, the allocatio n by the Planning Commission as 
reflected in BE for 2012 -13 was mere Rs. 20,308.00 crore.  Further, due to the 
tardy utilization of funds by implementing agencies during the first two quarters, 
the RE was curtailed to Rs. 17867.32 crore.  The actual expend iture was 
approximately Rs. 13478.19 crore (till 31 December, 2012).  The Department 
attributed this to reduction at BE in funds sought for RKVY.  Though the 
Department sought Rs. 25,000.00 crore, they were allocated only Rs. 9217.00 
crore as BE.  This was further pruned at RE to Rs. 8400.00 crore. 
 Being concerned to note that the first Fiscal of the Twelfth Plan is 
reminiscent of the past ones, the Committee urge all the agencies concerned to 
introspect at their working, identify their weak areas, work on  them and thereby 
ensure that things turnaround in the next Fiscal and the variation between 
proposals, allocation and utilization is negated to the extent possible. 

 
 
46 
 
CHAPTER – IV 
 
SCHEMATIC ANALYSIS 
 
 
(i) National Food Security Mission (NFSM) 
 
 Based on the resolution adopted by the National Development Council (NDC) to 
launch a Food Security Mission in the country to enhance the production of rice, wheat 
and pulses by 10, 8 and 2 million tones, respectively by the end of XI Plan, a Centrally 
Sponsored Scheme on National Food Security Mission has been launched from Rabi, 
2007-08 with three major components viz. NFSM -Rice, NFSM -Wheat and NFSM -
Pulses. 
 The aim of the Mission is to increase production of rice, wheat and pulses 
through area expansion and produc tivity enhancement; restoring soil fertility and 
productivity; creating employment opportunities; and enhancing farm level economy to 
restore confidence of farmers of targeted districts. 
 
4.2 The following main strategies are being followed under the Scheme: 
(i) Implementation in a mission mode through active engagement of all the 
stakeholders at various levels, 
(ii) Promotion and extension of improved technologies i.e. seed, integrated 
nutrient management including micro-nutrients, soil amendments, Integrated 
Pest Management (IPM) and resource conservation technologies along with 
capacity building of farmers, 
(iii) Flow of fund would be closely monitored to ensure that interventions reach 
the target beneficiaries in time, 
(iv) Various interventions proposed would be integrated  with the district plan 
and targets for each identified districts would be fixed, and 
 

 
 
47 
 
(v) Constant monitoring and concurrent evaluation for assessing the impact of 
the interventions for a result oriented approach by the implementing 
agencies. 
 
4.3 During the Eleventh Plan , NFSM –Rice was implemented in 144 districts of        
16 States, NFSM-Wheat in 142 districts of 9 States and NFSM -Pulses in 468 districts of 
16 States.  From the year 2012-13, six (6) NE States, viz, Arunachal Pradesh, Manipur, 
Meghalaya, Mizoram, Nagaland and Sikkim have been included under NFSM -Rice and 
two Hill States, viz, Himachal Pradesh and Uttarakhand under NFSM - Rice and Wheat 
and J&K under NFSM-Wheat. Thus, the NFSM is being implemented during 2012 -13 in 
27 States of the country.  The programme is implemented through State Departments of 
Agriculture, ICAR, Central and State Seed Producing Agencies, IIPR, Kanpur, ICRISAT, 
ICARDA, etc. Panchayati Raj Institutions are actively involved for undertaking following 
activities: 
(i) Selection of beneficiaries and identification of priority areas for the 
implementation of Mission interventions; and  
(ii) Implementation of local initiatives in identified districts. 
4.4 NFSM is a Centrally Sponsored S cheme of G overnment of India .  Funds for 
implementing the NFSM programmes are directly released to the identified State Level 
Implementing Agency with the approval of National Food Security Mission Executive 
Committee (NFSMEC).  The State Level Agency would make funds available to District 
Level Agency/Nodal D epartments in accordance with approved programmes of the 
District.  The expenditure for implementation of the scheme is 100% funded by the 
Government of India. Beneficiary farmers have to contribute 50% of cost of the activities 
to be taken up at their / i ndividual farm holdings. Beneficiaries may choose to draw 

 
 
48 
 
loans from the Banks, in which case subsidy amount prescribed for a particular 
component for which the loan has been availed will be released to the Banks. 
4.5 Financial allocation and expenditure during the last two Fiscals is as under 
               (Rs. in crore) 
Year BE RE Expenditure 
2011-12 1350.00 1316.00 1285.95 
2012-13 1850.00 1763.57 1672.63  
( as on 22.03.2013) 
 
 Allocations have been reduced at RE stage during 2011 -12 due to reduction in 
allocation of North-East States from Rs. 100 crore at BE to Rs. 66 crore at RE.  Also in 
2011-12 only two North -East States of Tripura and Assam were covered under NFSM 
and Rs. 100 crore was not able to be allocated to these two States.  During 2012 -13, 
there has been overall reduction in the funds provided to the Department at RE stage; 
therefore, there was proportionate decrease in NFSM from Rs. 1850 crore to               
Rs. 1763.57 crore.    
 
4.6 On being asked to explain the reasons for a quantum e nhancement in BE for 
2012-13, the Department in their written submission informed that BE for the current 
fiscal was enhanced as the Pulses Villages scheme was subsumed under NFSM - 
Pulses and to make provision for incorporation of Nutri -Cereals and fodder Crops in 
NFSM in Twelfth Plan.  They further stated that in the current fiscal year, 94.84% of 
funds has been already released as on 22.03.2013 and it is expected that the balance 
funds would be released by 31st March, 2013 and no shortfall is expected. 
 

 
 
49 
 
4.7 The Committee have also been informed that NFSM has helped to widen the 
food basket of the country with significant contributions coming from the NFSM districts. 
The focussed and target oriented implementation of mission initiatives has resulted in 
bumper production of wheat, rice and pulses. The production of wheat has increased 
from 75.81 million tonnes (in Pre -NFSM year of 2006-07) to 94.88 million tonnes during 
2011-12, i.e., 19.00 million tonnes against the envisaged target of 8 million tonnes. 
Similarly, the total production of rice has increased from 93.35 million tonnes (in pre –
NFSM year 2006 -07) to 105.31 million tonnes in 2011 -12 with an increase of nearly 
12.00 million tonnes against the target of 10 million tonnes.  The total production of  
pulses has also increased from 14.20 million tonnes during 2006 -07 to 18.24 million 
tonnes during 2010 -11 with an increase of 4.04 million tonnes against the envisaged 
target of 2.0 million tonnes.  During 2011 -12, production of 17.09 million tonnes of 
pulses is achieved. Farmers have enthusiastically responded to NFSM supported farm 
machinery components, especially to Zero till seed drill, rotavator etc. which is evident 
from the increased sale of these machines supported by Mission. The awareness 
generated through demonstration and distribution of seed minikits of newly released 
varieties to the farmers has triggered substantial  increase in the  use of high yielding 
varieties of wheat and rice  seeds in identified district.  Capacity building exercises f or 
farmers through Farmers Field Schools were helpful in orienting the farmers towards 
adoption of new agriculture technologies.  Significant output under NFSM have been 
recorded during the course of implementation of Programme during 2007 -08 to 2011 -
12.  New farm practices have been encouraged as nearly 8.19 lakhs demonstrations of 
improved varieties of rice, wheat and pulses have taken place.  System of Rice 
Intensification (SRI) for rice as well as hybrid rice has been promoted.  Nearly, 174.56 

 
 
50 
 
lakhs qtls of seed of rice (high yielding variety/hybrids), wheat and pulses have been 
distributed. More than 122.90 lakhs ha area has been treated with soil ameliorants 
(gypsum/lime/micro nutrients) to restore soil fertility.   About 49.53 lakh ha of crops land 
has been covered under Integrated Pest Management (IPM) and 74.70 lakh improved 
farm machineries/water saving devices (including sprinkler, pumpsets/pipes) have been 
distributed.  Capacity building of farmers has been encouraged through conduct 
/organization of 49182 Farmers‟ Field Schools. 
 
4.8 On being asked by the Committee to explain the reasons the physical 
achievements under the Scheme for Fiscals 2011 -12 and 2012-13 being nowhere near 
the target set as well as the steps taken to ensure that achievement match the target 
set, the Ministry in their written replies stated that i n the year 2011 -12, physical 
achievement against targets of demonstrations under NFSM (rice, wheat, pulses) has 
been more than 110%, for HYV seed distribution  93.52%, FFS 91.95%, IPM  90.12%, 
machineries (including machines, sprinklers, pumps, pipes) 179.65%, which have offset 
relatively lower performance of certain other components/sub -components like 
distribution of hybrid seeds of rice (44.41%), INM (76.44%), sprinklers (63.56%), wh ich 
are below physical targets set.  Owing to climatic conditions and other administrative 
measures, States‟ action plans are revised to give additional allocation to needed 
technical components. In the current Fiscal, the achievement reported so far under  
demonstrations is 79.42%, cropping based trainings 75.15%, seed distribution 73.72%, 
IPM 66.51%, machineries 91.25%.  However, reports for 2012 -13 are yet to be received 
and the position is expected to be favourable.  States are being requested time and 
again to submit their monthly progress reports along with fund utilization regularly.  The 
progress of the States in terms of physical and financial achievements against targets is 

 
 
51 
 
also monitored in the NFSM Executive Committee meetings quarterly as well as through 
monitoring visits of DAC officials. 
 
4.9 During the course of his oral deposition, on being asked to clarify whether the 
continued shortfall in achievement of physical targets was because of reduced 
allocations or any other factors, the Secretary,  Department of Agriculture and 
Cooperation, clarified as under:- 
“Under the NFSM, we have achieved the target of production with a lot to 
spare. In terms of physical targets, we had exceeded the target by a fairly 
considerable degree. On the rice side, und er the NFSM, we introduced Assam 
later into it, and later Tripura. The allocation that was earmarked, as you are 
aware, we have to earmark a certain percentage of plan outlays for expenditure 
in the North Eastern Region.  
If you look at the each component,  there will be variations because the 
State Governments have been provided with the authority for inter se transfer of 
components from one to the other. But if you look at the overall picture, I do not 
think, the situation is that bad. These are components  that were prescribed, but 
what is actually demanded for in the local situation is what has actually been 
expended. Overall, under the NFSM, the expenditure has been adequate except 
admittedly in the North Eastern Region last year; this year, we have spent  that 
also, because after the inclusion of the North Eastern Region under NFSM, that 
expenditure is also made”. 
 
4.10 On a specific query of the Committee regarding there being any delay on the part 
of the States in furnishing their monthly progress report  along fund utilization report, the 
Department in their Post-Evidence reply submitted that funds are released to the States 
/ Implementing Agencies under NFSM only on receipt of Provisional Utilisation 
Certificates (UC) and Cumulative Monthly Progress Repo rts (MPRs) indicating both 
physical and financial progress of the previous financial year.  Thereafter, second and 
final instalments are released on receipt of Audited Utilisation Certificates, Audited 
Statement of Accounts and latest Monthly Progress Repo rts during the current year.  
Since the scheme is basically a crop oriented one and action plans are devised keeping 

 
 
52 
 
in view the Kharif and Rabi priorities of the States, inter componental changes are made 
during the course of implementation, which require  modifications in the physical and 
financial targets and achievements.  
Generally MPRs along with status of expenditure from the States are received in 
time.  As a result during 2012 -13, an amount of Rs.1725.65 crore has been released 
under NFSM against RE 2012-13 of Rs.1763.57 crore, which is 97.85% of RE.  
 
(ii) National Mission on Micro-Irrigation (NMMI) 
 
4.11 Micro Irrigation is an advanced irrigation technology carrying desired water and 
nutrients mixture directly to the root zone of the plant, drop by drop or in tiny streams or 
sprays through a network of plastics pipes and emitters resulting in enhanced water 
use efficiency, increased productivity and higher return for the farmer. 
 As per recommendation of Task Force on Micro Irrigation constituted by  
Government of India during 2004, “Centrally Sponsored Scheme on Micro Irrigation” 
was launched in January 2006. The scheme is continuing in mission mode since June 
2010 as the  “National Mission on Micro Irrigation “(NMMI) with enhanced scope for 
coverage incorporating revised cost norms as well as inclusion of additional 
components.  
 Under this scheme Government subsidy is provided to farmers for limited area of 
5 ha per beneficiary.  Assistance is provided @ 60% of the system cost for small and 
marginal farmers and @ 50% for general farmers out of which 10% is from State 
Government. Besides, assistance is also provided for technology support towards 
conducting demonstration, training, awareness and publication.  
 

 
 
53 
 
4.12 The National Mission on Micro -Irrigation (NMMI) has a three tier structure i.e. 
National, State and District level for its implementation, coordination and monitoring.  
The expected outcome of NMMI is as under: 
i) Enhance water use efficiency through MI technology implementation in both 
agriculture and horticulture field; 
ii) Savings in use of irrigation water, fertilizer and electricity; 
iii) Increase in production, productivity and quality of crops; 
iv) Convergence with other ongoing schemes of DAC and other Ministries on 
creation of water harvesting structures, linking the same with micro-irrigation 
system for higher water use efficiency; 
v) Enhanced return to the farmers. 
 
4.13 Allocation and Expenditure for NMMI during the last six Fiscals is enumerated 
below. 
             (Rs. in crore) 
Year BE RE Expenditure 
2007-08 550.00 430.00 411.26 
2008-09 500.00 470.00 470.00 
2009-10 430.00 480.00 480.00 
2010-11 1000.00 982.00 997.25 
2011-12 1150.00 1150.00 1227.00 
2012-13 1500.00 1217.29 1032.13 (As on 11.02.2013) 
2013-14 1693.00 - - 
 
 From the above table, it can be inferred that BE figures were pruned at RE stage 
during the Fiscals 2007 -08, 2008 -09, 2010 -11 and 2012 -13.  However, the actual 
expenditure has more or less matched the RE figures and in the Fiscal 2011 -12, actual 
expenditure has exceeded the RE. 
 
4.14 The Department in their written submission have attributed the reason far pruning 
of BE funds to the fact that in 2007 -08 and 2008-09, funds were released directly to the 
districts and the scheme was not so popular. After the Scheme was launched in mission 

 
 
54 
 
mode during 2010 -11 and funds were released to the State Headquarters, expenditure 
was more in the subsequent years.  In 2010 -11, pruning was marginal. In 2011 -12, 
expenditure was more than BE.  In 2012 -13, pruning of BE was due to overall cut in t he 
budget of the Ministry.  It was further submitted that the Scheme  is extremely popular in 
most of the states and there is huge demand of funds.  Hence, Rs.1693.00 crore during 
the current Fiscal shall be utilized. 
 
4.15 The physical achievements under t his Scheme during the last six Fiscals is as 
follows:  
   (Area in lakh ha) 
Year Target Achievement 
2007-08 3.32 4.32 
2008-09 4.56 5.59 
2009-10 4.54 5.96 
2010-11 7.15 6.90 
2011-12 7.09 6.08 
2012-13 (Upto 28th Feb, 2013) 7.77 4.80 
Total 34.43 33.65 
 
 The achievements during the Fiscals 2007 -08, 2008 -09 and 2009 -10 were in 
excess of the targets fixed.  The Department have attributed this due to utilization of 
unspent balance of earlier years. 
4.16 On being queried about the under -achievement of target  for the Fiscal 2012 -13, 
the Committee were informed that t arget of 7.7 lakh hectare was set against the BE of 
Rs. 1500.00 crore.  However, as RE has been reduced to Rs.1217.29 crore, it may not 

 
 
55 
 
be possible to achieve the original target. As on 20th February 2013, 4.10 lakh hectare is 
covered under Micro Irrigation.  By 31 st March 2013, it is expected to be 6.00 lakh 
hectare.     
The Department also submitted that the basis of the target of 10.25 lakh hectare 
for the Fiscal 2013 -14 has been made on the basi s of popularity, success and demand 
from the State Governments.  
 
(iii) National Mission on Oilseeds and Oil Palm (NMOOP) 
 Oilseeds Production under Integrated Scheme of Oilseeds, Pulses, Oilpalm 
and Maize 
 
4.17 The Technology Mission on Oilseeds (TMO) was  launched by the Central 
Government to increase the production of oilseeds to reduce import and achieve self -
sufficiency in edible oils. Subsequently, pulses, oilpalm and maize were also brought 
within the purview of the Mission in 1990 -91, 1992 and 1995 -96 respectively.  The 
Technology Mission on Oilse eds, Pulses, Oilpalm & Maize have  since been 
discontinued and merged in to a Centrally Sponsored Integrated Scheme of Oilseeds, 
Pulses, Oil Palm and Maize (ISOPOM) w.e.f.1.4.2004. The ISOPOM scheme was 
launched during tenth plan and has continued during XI Five Year Plan.  In order to 
provide flexibility to the States in implementation based on regionally differentiated 
approach, to promote crop diversification and to provide focused approach to the 
programmes, the four erstwhile schemes of Oilseeds Production Programme(OPP), Oil 
Palm Development Programme(OPDP),  National Pulses Development Programme 
(NPDP) and Accelerated Maize Development Programme(AMDP) have been merged 
into one Centrally Sponsored Integra ted Scheme of Oilseeds, Pulses, Oilpalm and 

 
 
56 
 
Maize (ISOPOM) since 1.4.2004. The pulses component of ISOPOM has been merged 
with National Food Security Mission (NFSM) –Pulses w.e.f. 1.4.2010. Now, ISOPOM 
scheme focuses on the oilseeds, maize and oil palm crops.   Under ISOPOM,  
assistance is provided for various critical inputs like production and distribution of seed, 
distribution of seed minikits,  sprinkler sets, rhizobium culture and Phosphate 
Solubilising Bacteria (PSB), supply of plant protection chemicals/ weedicides/bio-
pesticides and plant protection equipment, micro -nutrients, improved farm implements, 
distribution of bio -fertilizers and gypsum etc. In order to disseminate the production 
technology amongst farmers, integrated pest management demonstration s are 
organized through State Department of Agriculture Frontline demonstrations are 
conducted by the Indian Council of Agricultural Research (ICAR) for oilseeds and maize 
crop development programmes. For Oil Palm,  assistance is provided towards the  
maintenance of plantation  made during implementation of oil palm development 
programme  under ISOPOM, cultivation inputs, installation of drip irrigation system, 
diesel pump sets, training, development of waste -land, extension and publicity, 
establishment & st aff, frontline demonstrations, and innovative interventions etc. In 
compliance to the announcement made in the budget for 2011-12, a special programme 
for Oil Palm Area Expansion (OPAE) was launched under RKVY during 2011-12.  
 
4.18 Oilseeds production pro gramme is being implemented under ISOPOM from       
1st April, 2004 in 14 states (Andhra Pradesh, Bihar, Chhattisgarh, Gujarat, Haryana, 
Karnataka, Madhya Pradesh, Maharashtra, Orissa, Punjab, Rajasthan, Tamil Nadu, 
U.P. & West Bengal).   
The diverse agro -ecological conditions in the country are favourable for growing 
9 annual oilseeds which include 7 edible oilseeds (groundnut, rapeseed mustard, 

 
 
57 
 
soybean, sunflower, sesamum, safflower and niger) and 2 non -edible oilseeds (castor 
and linseed).  The oilseeds, raised mostly under rainfed conditions, are important for the 
livelihood of small and marginal farmers in arid and semi arid regions of the country. 
The area, production and productivity of oilseeds from 2008-09 to 2012-13 (2nd Advance 
Estimates for Kharif-2012 and Rabi 2012-13 is as under : 
(Area-Million hectares; Production – Million Tonnes; Yield-kg/hectare) 
Year 
Oilseeds 
Area 
Production 
Yield Target Achievement
s 
2008-2009 27.56 31.75 27.72 1006 
2009-2010 25.96  31.60 24.88 958 
2010-2011 27.22 33.20 32.48 1193 
2011-2012*             
26.31 33.60 29.80 1133 
2012-13** 26.32 33.50 29.47 1120 
  * Final Estimates 
 ** 2nd  Advance estimates for 2012-13  
The Committee have been informed that Implementation of oilseeds production 
programme has helped i n increasing the production of oilseeds from 10.83 million 
tonnes in 1985 -86 to 29.80 million tonnes during 2011 -12. The productivity of oilseed 
achieved was 1133 kg/ha during 2011-12.  
However, the Department have also submitted that the  production of oil seeds 
had shown a fluctuating trend and in production of oilseeds past years, particularly in 
2009-10 when major oilseeds growing states faced a severe drought in Kharif 2009. 
The total production of oilseeds declined to 24.88 million tonnes in 2009 -10. However, 
the production of oilseeds was increased to a level of 32.48 million tonnes due to 

 
 
58 
 
favorable weather condition and impact of oilseeds programme. The final Estimates 
released for 2011-12, however, indicate decline in production over 2010-11 due to slight  
decrease in total area coverage. During the year 2012 -13 the oilseeds area maintained 
at 26.32 million hectare as per 2 nd advance estimates of Dte. of E & S, production will 
be 29.47 million tonnes. 
 
4.19 The Department have also listed the following constraints in oil seeds production: 
 Low productivity primarily due to cultivation in un-irrigated drought prone areas. 
 Highly risky crop affected by vagaries of nature like floods and drought in Kharif 
and frost in Rabi. 
 Susceptibility to a number of pests and diseases which lower productivity. 
 Use of poor quality seeds by the farmers and their reluctance to provide cash 
inputs as growing of oilseeds is risky. 
 Lack of proper marketing infrastructure and higher fluctuation in the prices lead to 
uncertainty in economic returns. 
 Lack of high-yielding varieties suitable to the local agro-climatic regions. 
 Non-availability of hybrids in Mustard, Groundnut, Sesame, soybean, Niger and 
pests and disease resistant varieties. 
  
 On being queried as to why the Govern ment have not been able to eliminate 
these long -standing constraints that were hampering the production/productivity of 
oilseeds, the Department in their written submission furnished that about 72% oilseeds 
are grown under rain fed conditions in the countr y. The oilseeds crops are also prone to 
various biotic stresses. Productivity of oilseeds is directly influenced by the rainfall 
pattern during the crop season. Seed Replacement Rate (SRR) is also low in case of 
major oilseeds crops like groundnut and soybean mainly due to high seed rates and low 
Seed Multiplication Ratio (SMR). Besides, due to lack of assured procurement unlike 
wheat and rice, the price of oilseeds falls below Minimum Support Price (MSP) during 

 
 
59 
 
the bumper crop season. The international pri ces of Crude Palm Oil (CPO) have 
declined during 2012-13 leading to increase in imports of CPO. This has put downward 
pressure on prices of edible oils in domestic market, further discouraging farmers to 
take up oilseeds cultivation. Despite all these fact ors, the production of oilseeds has 
increased from 25.19 million tonnes in 2003 -04 (prior to ISOPOM) to 29.80 million 
tonnes in 2011 -12. This was brought about not only by increase in area but also by 
improving the productivity from 1064 kg. to 1133 kg. pe r hectare during the above 
period. Despite increase in production and productivity, the production of oilseeds is 
less than the demand. Today, India is one of the fastest growing economies of the world 
with enough resilience; India had successfully weathered the recent economic downturn 
globally. Income levels, standards of living and consequently levels of consumption 
have risen at a faster pace. During the last few years, from 2007 -08 to 2011 -12, the 
domestic demand of edible oils have increased substanti ally from 14.25 million tonnes 
to 18.96 million tonnes. The import of vegetable oils during the oil year 2011 -12 (Nov.-
Oct) was 9.94 million tonnes. The growth in production of domestic edible oils has not 
been matched with that of growth in consumption. A s a result, the gap is met by 
imports. Hence, there is an imperative need to give a serious thought for increasing 
domestic production of oilseeds/edible oils. 
 
4.20 In response to a query on the remedial measures undertaken the Department 
stated that In o rder to enhance production of oilseeds, the Government of India is 
implementing various schemes viz; Integrated Scheme of Oilseeds, Pulses, Oil Palm 
and Maize (ISOPOM), Macro Management of Agriculture (MMA) and Rashtriya Krishi 
Vikas Yojana (RKVY). ISOPOM is implemented in 14 major oilseeds growing States to 
increase the production of oilseeds. The Macro Management of Agriculture (MMA) 

 
 
60 
 
Scheme provides assistance for oilseeds development to the States not covered under 
ISOPOM. Under Rashtriya Krishi Vikas Yo jana (RKVY), the States can support crop 
development activities approved by the State Level Sanctioning Committee headed by 
the Chief Secretary of the State. 
  In order to overcome the constraints and to narrow down the gaps between 
existing productivity a nd yields of oilseeds achieved under demonstrations,  the 
Government of India have  focused on transfer of technology through demonstration 
and trainings and supply of critical inputs under the scheme.  The various interventions 
under ISOPOM scheme are:  
 Seeds: Assistance for purchase of breeder seed and  also for production of  
foundation seed and certified seed. 
 Information Education and Communication (IEC) : To transfer new 
technology, front line demonstrations are conducted at the farmers fields under 
the supervision of scientists through Indian Council of Agricultural Research 
(ICAR). Besides this, assistance for publicity, block demonstration and Integrated 
Pest Management (IPM) demonstration is given through State Department of 
Agriculture. 
 Minikits: Seed minikits of oilseeds are supplied to the states for the 
varieties/hybrids released during last 10 years free of cost.  
 Seed Infrastructure : Assistance is also given for creation of seed production 
infrastructure at government farms for production of quality seeds. 
 Training: Training of farmers and extension workers  
 Other inputs : Distribution of plant protection chemicals, plant protection 
equipments, weedicides, supply of rhizobium culture/phosphate solubilising 
bacteria, distribution of gypsum/pyrite/liming/dolomite 

 
 
61 
 
 Further, to make ISOPOM more effective, the Government of India has 
modified/restructured Centrally Sponsored Integrated Scheme of Oilseeds, Pulses, Oil 
Palm and Maize (ISOPOM) during XI plan period. The details of modification made 
under ISOPOM are as under; 
i)  Pulses have been taken out from the ISOPOM to National Food Security 
Mission NFSM) w.e.f. 1.4.2010 so that greater thrust will be on oilseeds. 
ii) To increase the Seed Replacement Rate (SRR), the assistance on Production of 
Foundation and Certified Seed has been enhanced from Rs. 500/ - per qtl to Rs. 
1000/- per qtl.  Similarly, the subsidy on Distribution of Certified Seed has been 
enhanced from Rs. 800/- per qtl to Rs. 1200/- per qtl during 11th Plan Period. 
iii) The Private Sector seed produ cing agencies have been involved in the 
distribution of Certified Seeds of Oilseeds besides NSC, SFCI, NAFED, 
KRIBHCO and IFFCO.   
iv) Enhancement / rationalization of subsidy on demonstration, sprinkler sets, 
rhizobium cultures, irrigation pipes inclusion of new components i.e.  supply of 
improved farm implements and micronutrients  have already been made during 
11th Plan Period.   
 
4.21 The Committee were also informed that the Government of India is 
contemplating to launch a National Mission on Oilseeds and Oil Palm (NMOOP) during 
XII Plan period to strengthen and focus on oilseeds production that envisages a strategy 
for minimizing the gap in demand and supply of edible oils  by way of improving 
productivity of major oilseeds, harnessing potential of possibl e areas, enhancing on 
farm investment, resource conservation, speedy inclusion of new varieties and hybrids, 
supply of quality seeds  with high Seed Replacement Rate ( SRR) and Varietal 
Replacement Rate (VRR), training and  demonstrations etc and also to br ing more area 
under oil palm cultivation to create permanent reservoir of  palm oil in potential states 
besides efforts to maximize output from Tree Borne Oilseeds (TBOs). An allocation of 
Rs. 3507.00 crore (including Rs. 57.00 crore for TBOs) has been mad e for NMOOP 

 
 
62 
 
during XII plan. The proposed NMOOP will consist of three mini -missions i.e., MM-I on 
Oilseeds, MM-II on Oil Palm and MM -III on Tree Borne Oilseeds. The above Mission is 
under consideration.  
  
(iv) National Mission on Agricultural Extension and Technology (NMAET) 
 Support to State Extension Programmes for Extension Reform 
4.22 This Scheme launched during 2005 -06, aims at making extension system farmer 
driven and farmer accountable by way of new institutional arrangements for technology 
dissemination in the form of an Agricultural Technology Management Agency (ATMA) at 
district level to operationalize the extension reforms.  ATMA has active participation of 
farmers/farmer groups, NGOs, Krishi Vigyan Kendras (KVKs), Panchayati Raj 
Institutions and other stakeholders operating at district level and below. The release of 
funds under ATMA scheme is based on State Extension Work Plans (SEWPs) prepared 
by the State Governments.  At present the scheme is under implementation in 614 
districts in 28 States and 3 UTs in the Country.  
 
4.23 In order to promote key reforms under the scheme, ATMA Cafeteria 2010 
continues to support activities in line with the following policy parameters: 
 Multi-agency extension strategies:  Minimum 10% of allocation on recurring 
activities at district level is to be used through non -governmental sector viz. 
NGOs, Farmers Organization (FOs), Panchayati Raj Institutions (PRIs), para -
extension workers, agri-preneurs, input suppliers, corporate sector, etc. 
 Farming system approach:  The activities specified in the cafeteria are broad 
enough to promote extension delivery consistent with farming systems approach 
and extension needs emerging through Strategic Research and Extension Plan 
(SREP). 

 
 
63 
 
 Farmer centric extension services:  The cafete ria provides for group -based 
extension and it has necessary allocation for activities related to organizing and 
supporting farmer groups. In order to supplement these efforts, a provision for 
rewards and incentives to the best organized farmer groups has a lso been 
provided. 
 Convergence: The SREP and SEWP would also be mechanisms for ensuring 
convergence of all activities for extension.  At present, resources for extension 
activities are being provided under different schemes of Centre/State 
Governments. It is mandated that the SEWP to be submitted by the State 
Governments for funding under the scheme shall explicitly specify the activities to 
be supported from the resources of other ongoing schemes as well as from this 
scheme. 
 Mainstreaming gender concerns:  It is mandated that minimum 30% of 
resources on programmes and activities are utilized for women farmers.  
Similarly, 30% of resources meant for extension workers are to be utilized for 
women extension functionaries.  
 Sustainability of extension services:  Minimum 10% contribution should be 
realized from beneficiaries with respect to beneficiary oriented activities. 
  
4.24 The important features of the Revised cafeteria include:- 
o Support for specialists and functionaries at State, District and Block Level 
o Innovative support through a „Farmer Friend‟ at Village Level @ 1 Farmer 
Friend per two villages  
o Farmers Advisory Committees at State, District and Block levels 
o Farm Schools in the field of outstanding farmers being promoted at Block/ 
Gram Panchayat level by integrating the Progressive farmers into Agricultural 
Extension System (AES) (3-5 Farm Schools/ block). 
o Farmer-to-farmer extension support at the village level to be promoted 
through Farmers‟ Group. 
o Funding window provided at both State and District leve ls for implementing 
innovative extension activities not specifically covered under the Programme. 
o Farmers‟ Awards instituted at Block, District and State levels. 

 
 
64 
 
o Community Radio Stations (CRS) set up by KVKs/SAUs are being promoted 
under the Programme. 
o For Non-Governmental implementing agencies, States have been given the 
flexibility of having Extension Work Plans prepared and approved at the State 
level. Minimum 10 per cent of outlay of the Programme is to be utilized 
through them. Non -governmental impleme nting agencies (excluding the 
corporate sector) are also eligible for service charge up to a maximum of 10 
percent of the cost of the extension activities implemented through them. 
Apart from other NGOs, financial assistance is also available for 
implementation of extension activities through agri-preneurs. 
o Public extension functionaries being made more effective through trainings 
and exposure visits. National Institute of Agricultural Extension Management 
(MANAGE), Hyderabad is offering PG Diploma in Agric ulture Extension 
Management for public extension functionaries which is fully funded under the 
ATMA Programme.  
4.25 The allocation and expenditure during the last six years alongwith BE for the 
current Fiscal for the Scheme is as follow: 
(Rs.in crore) 
Year BE RE Actual Expenditure 
2007-08 230.00 153.52 155.80 
2008-09 298.00 198.00 193.01 
2009-10 298.00 188.98                    178.59 
2010-11 250.00 220.00 240.28 
2011-12 500.00 458.60 433.87 
2012-13 600.00 504.13 369.59 
(upto January, 2013) 
2013-14 550.00 - - 
 
 The above table reveals that the BE for the Scheme has consistently been 
reduced at RE stage during the last six years.  When asked to furnish the reasons for 
the same, the Department in their written submission stated that during the During the 
year 2007 -08, the Centrally Sponsored Scheme “Support to State Extension 

 
 
65 
 
Programmes for Extension Reforms” was sought to be modified. An EFC Memorandum 
was prepared and budgetary provisions were made accordingly for the year 2008 -09. 
The approval of re vamped Scheme was delayed, as the EFC, in its first meeting on 
30.01.2009, directed the Department to recast the Memorandum for administrative and 
financial reasons. The Scheme was finally considered by EFC on 04.08.2009 and its 
approval was conveyed on 29 .10.2009. The Cabinet Committee on Economic Affairs 
(CCEA) approved the Scheme on 19.03.2010. Thus, the budget outlays planned in 
anticipation of the approval of the Scheme during the period 2007 to 2010 had to be 
reduced at RE stage. Moreover, the States were unable to utilize the funds available to 
them in the absence of dedicated manpower for extension activities during this period.  
 
4.26 When asked to furnish the reasons for doubling of BE for the Fiscal 2011 -12, the 
Committee were informed that the Sc heme has been modified in 2010 inter -alia with 
provision of manpower down to the block level and infrastructure support at State 
Agriculture Management and Extension Training Institute ( SAMETI) level. 90% of the 
expenditure on manpower at various levels from the State to Block level and 50% of the 
expenditure on Farmer Friends is to be borne by the Government of India. This is why 
allocation was doubled. Against over 18,000 sanctioned posts during 2012 -13, 27 
States/UTs have reported filling up of 12276 pos ts upto March 25, 2013 (information 
collected on different dates from various States/UTs till 25.03.2013). The remaining 
posts are being filled on priority basis. With sanctioned manpower being gradually 
deployed and the States chalking out comprehensive S tate Extension Work Plans 
(SEWPs), speed and extent of implementation of field activities also is picking up. 
 

 
 
66 
 
4.27 Observing that the BE for the current Fiscal at Rs. 550.00 crore was lower in 
comparison to Rs. 600.00 crore for the preceding Fiscal, the D epartment submitted that 
Budget Estimate (BE) of Rs. 550 crore for the year 2013 -14 may not be adequate in 
view of latest monthly pace of expenditure reported by the States. In fact, the States 
could not deploy full sanctioned contractual staff due to the less remuneration 
particularly for the post of Subject Matter Specialists.  
 
4.28 The Department have furnished the following information regarding 
implementation status of the Scheme: 
 Institutional arrangements viz. Inter Departmental Working Group (IDWG) / in 
28 States and 3 UTs, ATMA Core Committees – Governing Board (GB) and 
ATMA Managing Committee in 614 districts and Block Technology Team 
(BTT) in 5533 Blocks and Farmer Advisory Committees (FACs) in 5533 
Blocks have been constituted at District level (416) and State level (15).  
 SEWP of 30 States/ UTs in prepared and approved based on District 
Agriculture Action Plans of 613 ATMA districts.   
 As against the B.E. of Rs. 600.00 crore, which has been reduced to            
Rs. 504.13 crore at RE stage, an a mount of Rs. 416.75 crore has been 
released to the States up to February, 2013 for implementation of the 
scheme. 
 
4.29 Responding to the Committee‟s specific query on how to motivate States to 
improve their participation during the current Plan period, the Department stated that the 
National Mission for Agricultural Extension & Technology (NMAET) is expected to 
enhance participation of the States in the Scheme. Additional provisions have been 
suggested for strengthening and accelerating implementation of va rious ongoing 
initiatives and introducing some new components which includes increasing number of 
SMSs at Block level to 3/4 with increased remuneration of Rs.15000 per month, support 
for women food security groups, low cost publications, display boards, p rovision for 

 
 
67 
 
operational expenses on FAC meetings, hand -held devices and pico -projector for 
technology dissemination, Kala Jatha , National e -Governance Plan -Agriculture in all 
States, joint visits by scientist and extension functionaries and incentive for exemplary 
extension work etc.  
 
4.30 The Scheme of Support to State Extension Programmes Reforms Scheme 
(ATMA Model) launched during 2005 -06, aims at making extension system farmer 
driven and farmer accountable by way of new institutional arrangements for technology 
dissemination in the form of an Agricultural Technology Management Agency (ATMA) at 
district level to operationalize the extension reforms.  The Committee have been 
apprised that ATMA is supposed to have active participation of farmers / farmer‟s group, 
NGOs, Krishi Vigyan Kendras (KVKs), Panchayati Raj Institutions and other 
stakeholders operating at district level and below.  The release of funds under ATMA 
scheme is based on State Extension Work Plans (SEWPs) prepared by the State 
Government.  At present the scheme is under implementation in 614 districts in 28 
States and 3 Union Territories in the Country. 
4.31 However, the Committee based on their vast experience have noted that there 
lies a large gap between the position as present in the Go vernment‟s documents and 
the actual position on the ground.  Expressing deep anguish over this sordid state of 
affairs, the Committee on Agriculture during the course of oral evidence of the 
representatives of the Department on Agriculture and Cooperation observed as under:  
“…..The district plan is never prepared in consultation with the stakeholder 
which is required to be done. The ATMAs rarely meets. This Committee in its 
earlier recommendations suggested that District Magistrate have multifarious 
activities.  He is so busiest officer in the District. We have entrusted this ATMA 
with the District Magistrate.  You were there in one meeting. I was attending a 
meeting of District Level Bankers Coordination Committee meeting. The District 

 
 
68 
 
Magistrate is the Chairman of that Committee. He did not have the time to attend 
the meeting also.  I pointed out that.  So, the District Magistrate has hardly any 
interest in this matter and he is still the Chairman of ATMAs.  The District Level 
Committee very rarely meets b ecause it not only needs preparation of District 
Level Plan but there is a need for monitoring.” 
The Secretary of the Department responded as under: 
“Sir, when I was a referring to the practice of approval of District Agriculture 
Plans, I was referring to the onus cast upon the District Planning Committees. 
The onus cast upon the District Planning Committee is by virtue of the 
Constitution. These plans are discussed and decided.  I do accept the fact that 
they are not the best documents that can be prepared  because there is lack of 
capacity in the Districts and sometimes, more often than not, may be these plans 
become more a list of demands rather than actual planning exercise. But at least 
this list of demands is there on paper, out of which we expect that proposals 
should flow up in the form of projects to the State Level sanctioning Committee” 
 
(v) National Mission on Sustainable Agriculture (NMSA) 
 National Project on Management of Soil Health and Fertility 
4.32 Department of Agriculture & Cooperation has  introduced “National Project on 
Management of Soil Health & Fertility” (NPMSH&F) to promote balanced and judicious 
use of fertilizer in conjunction with organic manure on soil test basis.  The scheme has 
been taken up from 2008 -09 with an outlay of Rs.429 .85 crore during 11 th Plan period.  
The Central Sector Scheme  on Central Fertilizer Quality Control & Training Institute / 
Regional Laboratories has been subsumed in the new scheme from 01.04.2009. The 
major activities under the Scheme are:- 
I. Strengthening of soil testing service 
(i) Setting up/ strengthening of Static/Mobile Soil Testing Laboratories   
(STLs).  
(ii)  Trainings/ Field demonstrations on balanced use of fertilizers. 
(iii) Preparation of digital district soil maps. 
 

 
 
69 
 
II. Promoting use of Integrated Nutrient Management 
(i) Promotion of Organic Manures/Soil Amendments (Lime/basic slag) in 
acidic soils/micro-nutrients.  
III. Strengthening of fertilizer testing services 
(i) Setting up/ strengthening of Fertilizer Quality Control Laboratories (FQCLs).  
IV. Continuation / strengthening of Central Fertilizer Quality Control & 
Training Institute / Regional Laboratories 
 
4.33 Regarding performance under the Scheme, the Committee have been informed 
that during 2009-10, a total of 66 new Static STLs, 62 n ew Mobile STLs, strengthening 
of 107 existing STLs, 11 new FQCLs and strengthening of 19 FQCLs were sanctioned.  
During the year, a total expenditure of Rs.42.27 crore was incurred against BE of 
Rs.47.00 crore for the above components including other compo nents on Integrated 
Nutrient Management and expenditure incurred by Central Fertilizer Quality Control & 
Training Institute (CFQC&TI).  There was a shortfall of Rs.4.73 crore due to non 
furnishing of UC and progress by some States and less demand from Cent ral/Regional 
Fertilizer Quality Control Labs for building/infrastructure. 
 During 2010 -11, a total of 16 new Static STLs, 10 new Mobile STLs, 
strengthening of 9 existing STLs, 1 new Fertilizer Testing lab for advisory purpose and 
strengthening of 1 FQCL ha ve been sanctioned and total of Rs.20.82 crore incurred 
against BE of Rs.25.00 crore for the above components including other components on 
Integrated Nutrient Management and expenditure incurred by CFQC&TI.  There was a 
shortfall of Rs.4.18 crore due to n on furnishing of UC and progress by some States and 
less demand from CFQC&TI for building and infrastructure.  
 During 2011-12, a total of 2 new mobile STLs, strengthening of 15 existing STLs, 
1 new FQCL and strengthening of 6 FQCLs has been sanctioned and  total of Rs. 15.02 

 
 
70 
 
crore incurred against BE of 30.00 crore for above components including other 
components on Integrated Nutrient Management and expenditure incurred by 
CFQC&TI.  There was a shortfall of Rs.14.98 crore due to non furnishing of UC and 
progress by some States and no demand from CFQC&TI for building and infrastructure.  
 The actual expenditure during 11 th Plan is Rs. 94.74 crore (i.e. 22.04%) against 
approved outlay of Rs.429.85 crore for whole plan.  The physical achievement is full for 
the components of training, however, there has been shortfall in setting up/ 
strengthening of soil testing/ fertilizer quality control laboratories..  The main reasons for 
shortfall are late start of scheme during 2008 -09 (i.e. Nov 2008), non sanction of new 
STL/FQCLs to some States during 2009 -10,2010-11 and 2011-12 due to non furnishing 
of UCs & progress, lack of proposal from State/ implementing agencies and less 
demand from CFQC&TI for building and infrastructure.          
 During 2012 -13, against BE of Rs .30.00 crore, RE 2012 -13 is Rs.13.20 crore 
which is likely to be fully utilized.  The physical achievement is likely to be full for the 
components of trainings, however, there is likely to be shortfall in setting up of 
laboratories due to non -furnishing of UCs and progress from states and less demand 
from CFQC&TI for building and infrastructure.                                                                                                                                    
4.34 The financial allocation and  utilization of funds during the last five Fiscals in 
enumerated below: 
(Rs. In crore) 
Year BE RE Actual 
Expenditure 
Shortfall/excess if 
any 
2008-09 47.00 19.98 16.63 30.37 
2009-10 47.00 42.71 42.27 4.73 
2010-11 25.00 23.85 20.82 4.18 

 
 
71 
 
2011-12 30.00 21.59 15.02 14.98 
2012-13 30.00 13.20 13.20 16.80 
2013-14 30.00       
 
On being queried about the reasons leading to pruning of BE funds at RE stage 
during the last five Fiscals, the Committee were informed that t he reasons for curtailing 
of funds under th e scheme at RE stage are that during the 1 st year of implementation, 
i.e. 2008 -09, the Scheme was started late in November, 2008 after finalization of 
guidelines of the scheme. Under utilization of funds has been due to non furnishing of 
UCs and progress b y States and less demand from Central Fertilizer Quality control & 
Training Institute for building/infrastructure.  In addition, the States developed 
preference for seeking funds for these components under RKVY due to flexible 
guidelines under that scheme. 
 State-wise/year-wise details of outstanding balances are enumerated below: 
S. 
No. 
Name of State Unspent amount as on (Rs. In lakhs) 
  31.03.09 31.03.10 31.03.11 31.03.12 25.03.13 
1. Andhra Pradesh 175.00 186.82 8.21 145.64 0.00 
2. Arunachal Pradesh 75.00 0.00 75.00 0.00 0.00 
3. Bihar 0.00 904.687 95.00 95.00 95.00 
4. Chhattisgarh 0.00 0.00 59.40 43.64 2.27 
5. Goa 05.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 
6. Gujarat 0.00 0.00 0.00 186.25 162.50 
7. Haryana 0.00 0.00 144.10 0.00 121.00 
8. Himachal Pradesh 35.00 83.47 0.00 0.00 0.00 
9. Jharkhand 0.00 255.80 255.80 255.80 15.69 
10. Karnataka 125.40 395.97 316.98 250.59 51.63 
11. Kerala 150.00 327.30 286.20 42.04 0.00 
12. Madhya Pradesh 86.00 86.00 86.00 86.00 0.00 
13. Maharashtra 65.00 280.00 340.00 60.00 323.25 
14. Manipur 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 
15. Meghalaya 0.00 60.00 60.00 0.00 0.00 

 
 
72 
 
16. Mizoram 60.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 
17. Nagaland 15.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 
18. Odisha 217.50 217.50 230.00 0.00 0.00 
19. Punjab 35.00 170.00 145.00 37.27 161.89 
20. Puducherry 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 10.00 
21. Rajasthan 415.00 682.60 686.25 686.25 281.53 
22. Sikkim 0.00 0.00 65.00 65.00 65.00 
23. Tamil Nadu 0.00 250.00 250.00 0.00 83.28 
24. Tripura 0.00 136.50 136.50 136.50 62.51 
25. Uttar Pradesh 15.00 240.00 82.60 82.60 82.60 
26. Uttarakhand 25.00 25.00 25.00 25.00 20.68 
27. West Bengal 163.75 163.75 163.75 163.75 163.75 
28. IISS Bhopal 0.00 389.873 288.873 480.76 480.76 
       
 Total 1662.65 4855.27 3799.66 2842.09 2183.34* 
*Including Rs. 851.33 lakh released during the current year 2012-13 
 
4.35 The department further submitted that in order to expedite furnishing of UCs by 
errant States, apart from seeking periodical UCs and progress  from States, regular 
letter and d.o. letters from Senior Officers are being written to the States for furnishing 
UCs and progress report.  Time to time review meetings are also being held with errant 
States for furnishing UCs and progress. 
4.36 The Committee were also informed that one of the reasons attributed to under -
utilization of funds was owing to less demand from Central Fertilizer Quality Control and 
Training Institute for building/infrastructure.  On being asked to furnish reasons for the 
same, th e Department submitted that during the 11 th Plan four Regional Fertilizer 
Quality Control Laboratories were approved at Kandla Vizag, Mangalore and Kanpur 
respectively.  The matter regarding allotment of land was pursued with State 
Government of Gujarat, A ndhra Pradesh, Karnataka, National Sugar Institute, Kanpur; 

 
 
73 
 
Kandla Port Trust and Mangalore Port Trust. However, the land deed could not be 
finalized at any place.  
 State-wise detail of Fertilizer Quality Control Laboratories (FQCLs) set -up since 
2008-09 is listed below: 
Sl. No State  New FQCLs 
Target (No) Achievement (No) 
1. Andhra Pr. 2 1 
2. Maharashtra 1 1 
3. Orissa 1 0 
4. Punjab 1 1 
5. Rajasthan 3 0 
6. Uttar Pradesh 3 0 
7. Bihar 1 0 
8. Jharkhand 1 0 
9. Fert Cos. 1 0 
10. Gujarat 1 0 
 Total 15 3 
 
4.37 On the issue of Soil Health Cards, the Department in their written submission 
informed the Committee that Soil Health Card  is a documented account of result of soil 
analysis communicated to respective farmers an d contains information on soil health 
aimed at soil fertility management with focus on fertilizer use for enhancing crop 
productivity.  Soil Health Cards lists outcome of tests conducted on soil sample.  By 
maintaining data of soil tests, record of soil he alth may be built which facilitates soil 
fertility management.   
 
The State Governments are issuing soil health cards to the farmers. As per 
Agricultural Statistics at a Glance, 2011, there are 1292.22 lakhs land holdings in the 
country and as per information provided by States about 505 lakh soil health cards have 
been issued. 

 
 
74 
 
 
It was further submitted that Indian Institute of Soil Science Indian Institute of Soil 
Science (IISS), Bhopal has been sanctioned a project for preparation of Geo -referenced 
soil f ertility maps including interlinking of soil fertility status with Soil Test Crop 
Response (STCR) data to generate site specific recommendations in 19 major States 
(171 districts).  IISS, Bhopal has uploaded the digitized soil fertility maps of 118 districts.  
The project is scheduled to be completed by 31.3.2013 in all 171 districts.  In addition, 
certain states such as Karnataka, Haryana, Andhra Pradesh, Orissa, West Bengal, 
Gujarat etc are also in the process of preparing their Soil Health Maps. 
 
4.38 State-wise details of number of land holdings and number of Soil Health Cards 
issued is listed below: 
(No. in lakhs) 
Sl. 
No. 
State No. of land 
holdings 
No. of Soil Health 
Cards 
1 Andhra Pradesh 120.44 42.08 
2 Arunachal Pradesh 1.08 1.75 
3 Assam 27.50 5.72 
4 Bihar 146.57 8.11 
5 Chhattisgarh 34.60 4.72 
6 Goa 0.53 2.18 
7 Gujarat 46.61 44.73 
8 Haryana 16.03 15.17 
9 Himachal Pradesh 9.33 10.46 
10 Jammu & Kashmir 13.78 1.45 
11 Jharkhand N.A. 1.66 
12 Karnataka 75.81 59.12 
13 Kerala 69.04 18.63 
14 Madhya Pradesh 79.08 20.93 
15 Maharashtra 137.15 27.18 
16 Manipur 1.50 1.54 
17 Meghalaya 2.03 0.84 
18 Mizoram 0.90 1.42 
19 Nagaland 1.69 0.37 
20 Odisha 43.56 21.22 
21 Punjab 10.04 25.29 
22 Rajasthan 61.86 24.77 

 
 
75 
 
23 Sikkim 0.73 0.64 
24 Tamil Nadu 81.93 39.84 
25 Tripura 5.65 1.16 
26 Uttarakhand 9.21 2.29 
27 Uttar Pradesh 224.57 118.27 
28 West Bengal 61.92 3.08 
29 A & N Islands 0.11 0.03 
30 Chandigarh 0.01 0.00 
31 Dadra & Nagar Haveli 0.14 0.05 
32 Daman & Diu 0.07 0.00 
33 Delhi 0.25 0.07 
34 Lakshadweep 0.10 0.00 
35 Puducherry 0.31 0.23 
 Total 1292.22 505.01 
 
On being asked to justify the reasons due to which against total landholdings of 
1292.22 lakh, only 505 lakh Soil Health Cards being issued, the Department i n their 
written submission stated that Soil Health Cards are issued by the State Governments. 
This is an ongoing process which is to be repeated every 3 -4 years and there is no time 
period fixed. In addition there are other methods available like digital s oil health maps, 
which give soil health status of districts.  Package of practices developed by State 
Governments also provide fertilizer recommendations.  
 
4.39 State-wise details of Static/Mobile Soil Testing Laboratories set-up under the 
Scheme since 2008-09 are given below: 
Sl. 
No 
State  New Static STLs New Mobile STLs 
Target 
(No) 
Achieve-
ment 
Target 
(No) 
Achievement 
1. Andhra Pr. 5 5  3 3  
2. Arunachal Pr. 2 2  3 3  
3. Goa 0 0 0 0 
4. Himachal Pr. 0 0 2 2 
5. Karnataka 17 16  1 0  
6. Kerala 3 3  7 4  

 
 
76 
 
7. Madhya Pr. 3 0  3 3  
8. Maharashtra 12 9 8 4 
9. Mizoram 1 1  3 3  
10. Nagaland 0 0 0 0 
11. Orissa 6 2  5 5  
12. Punjab 0 0 0 0 
13. Rajasthan 24 14  19 15  
14. Uttar Pradesh 0 0 0 0 
15. Uttarakhand 0 0 0 0 
16. West Bengal 1 0  7 0  
17. Bihar 15 0 15 0 
18. Jharkhand 8 0 3 0 
19. Meghalaya 0 0 3 0 
20. Tamil Nadu 0 0 13 0 
21. Tripura 2 0 1 0 
22. Fert Companies 17 2 13 1 
23. Haryana 4 3 3 1 
24. Sikkim 2 0 2 2 
25. Chhattisgarh 2 1 2 1 
26. Gujarat 0 0 2 0 
 Total 124 58 118 47 
 
 It was stated that the remaining Soil Testing Laboratories are under the process 
of being set up.  The Department further furnished a list of STLs/FCLs set-up under 
Rashtriya Krishi Vikas Yojana since 2008-09: 
Sl. No Zone/State No of Soil Testing Laboratories / FCL 
 Static Mobile Mobile Total 
I South Zone       
1 Andhra Pr. Nil  Nil  Nil  
2 Karnataka 22 +7 FCL   29 
3 Kerala Nil Nil Nil 
4 Tamil Nadu 30 16 46 
5 Pondicherry Nil  Nil  Nil  
6 A&N Island Nil Nil Nil 

 
 
77 
 
 S. Zone Total 59 16 75 
II West Zone    
7 Gujarat 81  81 
8 Madhya Pr. 15 + 4 FCL  19 
9 Maharashtra 29  29 
10 Rajasthan 21 +4 FTL 11 36 
11 Chhattisgarh 8  4 12 
12 Goa Nil Nil Nil 
 W Zone Total 162 15 177 
III North Zone    
13 Haryana 30 1 31 
14 Punjab Nil Nil Nil 
15 Uttarakhand 7  7 
16 Uttar Pradesh 27  27 
17 Himachal 
Pradesh 
6 +5 FCL 3 14 
18 J&K  13 7 20 
19 Delhi Nil Nil Nil 
 N. Zone Total 88 11 99 
IV East Zone    
20 Bihar Nil  Nil  Nil  
21 Jharkhand 8 2 10 
22 Odisha  21 0 21 
23 West Bengal 11 0 11 
 East  Zone 
Total 
   
V N.E. Zone       
24 Assam 8 6 14 
25 Tripura Nil Nil Nil 
26 Manipur Nil Nil Nil 
27 Meghalaya Nil Nil Nil 
28 Nagaland Nil Nil Nil 
29 Arunachal Pr. Nil Nil Nil 

 
 
78 
 
30 Sikkim Nil Nil Nil 
31 Mizoram Nil Nil Nil 
 NE Zone 
Total 
48 8 56 
 Grand Total 357 50 407 
 
4.40 During the course of his oral deposition before the Committee on being queried 
as to why the reach of Soil Testing Laboratories was not widespread, the Secretary 
responded as under: 
“That i s true but the problem is actually in the sanction of manpower to 
use these soil testing labs. It is easy to set up physical infrastructure but it is 
difficult to actually operate. For that State Governments have to create requisite 
posts of the people who  can take, test and analyse and give the report. That 
State Governments as you are aware are reluctant to create additional 
manpower. We have also been advising the State Governments to  try this out in 
PPP mode with other third party that they can operate under restrictions or 
parameters laid out by States. Some States have done that but not all States 
have gone in for that model. Main problem is regarding manpower that is 
something we are unable to address through this scheme”.   
 
4.41 Asked to furnish details on the number of STLs operational out of the sanctioned 
407 STLs under RKVY, the Secretary pleaded that the information was not readily 
available with him and he would have to  get it.  Regarding under -utilization of funds 
under the Scheme, the Secretary submitted: 
 “It is true that under the specific scheme of soil testing laboratories 
expenditure has not taken place to the desired level as per the allocation.  
However, expenditure has taken place under the RKVY model.  Obviously States 
find it much better because then there is no question of counter -part funding and 
States find it much easier to sanction it under RKVY.  A lot of States are 
sanctioning.  When you sanction in a project type mode you can also sanction 
posts under RKVY.  So, the State Gover nments are reluctant to fund under this 
scheme.  That is the difference”.  
 
He further stated that: 
“Under the regular scheme National Project on Management of Soil Health 
and Fertility we only sanction the equipment and the building, if need be.  That is 

 
 
79 
 
why the States are adopting RKVY as a preferred mode of establishing labs 
because what they do is that they sanction the project which comprises not only 
the building and equipment but also within the project component sanctions 
contractual staff”. 
 
4.42 On the specific issue of Mobile Soil Testing Kit, the representative of the 
Department stated as under:  
“How much of it is an improvement over the earlier kit, I do not know. But 
a Mobile Soil Testing Kit has been developed by ICAR. In a soil testing lab, if you 
are doing micro nutrient analysis as well, then you need a much larger 
complement of staff, about 7 to 8 people per lab. Even that can be funded. We 
can approach the Ministry of Finance for funds to make this possible. But 
somehow, I think all of us  need to appreciate that while everybody talks about 
agriculture, there is a strange reluctance on the part of everybody to do 
something about it. Under the ATMA Programme, we sanctioned 18,000 posts.  
Despite lot of pressure from our side , it took four ye ars and even now only 
12,500 people are in place. We fund 90 per cent of the cost of there posts. In any 
scheme where there is a sharing of resources, I find that the approach of State 
Governments towards the agriculture sector in not very forthcoming. But we will 
certainly take it up with the Ministry of Finance. If we are successful, it is good”. 
 
 
(vi) Outstanding Utilization Certificates (UCs) 
 
 
 
4.43 The Department in one of their document furnished to the Committee in the 
context of examination of Dem ands for Grants (2013 -14) have submitted the following 
statement highlighting the status of pending Utilization Certificates:- 
 
 UCs Pending 
as on  
1.4.2011 
UCs Pending 
as on  
1.4.2012 
Amount 
liquidated 
upto 
31.12.2012 
Amount of 
UCs pending  
as on  
31.12.2012 
No. Of UCs 857 1306 1017 289 
Amount (Rs/ 
crore) 
4142.17 5575.67 5066.76 508.91 
  

 
 
80 
 
It was further submitted that the Department is making concerted efforts for 
liquidating outstanding Utilization Certificates due from State Governments/ 
Implementing Agencies.  No. release is made to State Governments/Implementing 
Agencies who have not furnished UCs. 
 A State -wise outstanding UCs in respect of Grant No. 1 as on 31 December, 
2012 for grant release upto 31 March, 2011 is list below:  
    
State-wise Outstanding Utilisation Certificates   in respect of Grant No. 1  
as on 31-12-2012 for the grant released upto 31-03-2011 
 
 
 
  
Name of State No. of 
Ucs 
Amount in 
Rs. 
 Andhra Pradesh 14 1742733800 
 Assam 6 62935000 
 Bihar 11 211242343 
 Chhattisgarh 5 91488700 
 Daman & Diu 2 1200000 
 Gujarat 8 81295000 
 Haryana 10 43141000 
 Himachal Pradesh 7 79485000 
 J & K 3 1302078 
 Jharkhand 9 66301000 
 Karnataka 20 655014000 
 Kerala 20 50241528 
 Lakshadweep 1 200000 
 Madhya Pradesh 16 93866378 
 Maharashtra 15 103013856 
 Manipur 3 21150000 
 MEGHALAYA 3 22673000 
 Mizoram 2 40869000 
 Nagaland 2 1100000 
 New Delhi 41 471601760 
 Orissa 18 96562878 
 Puducherry  1 2722000 
 Punjab 4 24869000 
 Rajasthan 13 225838500 
 

 
 
81 
 
Sikkim 3 14600000 
 Tamil Nadu 12 34641000 
 Tripura 3 13680000 
 Uttar Pradesh 22 75824937 
 Uttrakhand 4 5629000 
 West Bengal 11 753833750 
 Grand Total 289 5089054508 
  
4.44 On being queried about the reasons for this backlog, the Department in their 
written reply stated that the backlog of UCs was created because of the either late 
submission of the UCs or incorrect UCs submitted by the Grantee Institutions.  The 
Grantee Institutions submit the UCs without adjustment of unspent balance and is not 
provided in standard format duly countersigned by the Dy. Secretary/Under Secretary. 
 
4.45 The Department further stated that Principal Accounts Office, M/o Agriculture has 
taken various steps to liquidate the outstanding Utilisation Certificates.  The special UCs 
Audit have been conducted for  the various States which has yielded tremendous 
results.  Principal Accounts Office is monitoring status of UCs rigorously for all the 
Divisions and had directed PAOs not to make any payment without submission of the 
UCs by the Divisions.  Divisions have also responded positively and submitted many 
UCs and only 289 UCs were pending as on 31.12.2012.  Divisions have given 
undertaking to the Pay and Accounts Offices concerned to submit the remaining UCs by 
31.03.2013.   
 
As on 15.03.2013 there are only 201 U Cs for Rs.419.56 Crores are outstanding.  
Out of these UCs only 02 UCs for RKVY Rs. 235.98 Crores are pending.  All the efforts 
are being made to liquidate the remaining UCs.  RKVY Division has also been 
requested to liquidate the outstanding UCs before 31.03.2013. 

 
 
82 
 
  State-wise Outstanding Utilisation Certificates   
in respect of Grant No. 1  as on 15-03-2013 for 
the grant released upto 31-03-2011 
 
 
 
 
 
Name of states 
No. Of 
Ucs  Amount in Rs. 
 Andhra Pradesh 9 1726558800 
 Assam 1 2156000 
 Bihar 10 192285343 
 Chhattisgarh 2 34788700 
 Daman & Diu 2 1200000 
 Gujarat 2 6006000 
 Haryana 6 34945000 
 Himachal Pradesh 6 4249000 
 J & K 3 1302078 
 Jharkhand 4 29935000 
 Karnataka 13 495448000 
 Kerala 15 31448528 
 Lakshadweep 1 200000 
 Madhya Pradesh 10 65546300 
 Maharashtra 11 94387856 
 Manipur 3 21150000 
 MEGHALAYA 3 22673000 
 Mizoram 1 1000000 
 Nagaland 2 1100000 
 New Delhi 36 445431760 
 Orissa 13 49912878 
 Punjab 1 3500000 
 Rajasthan 9 114326500 
 Sikkim 2 7100000 
 Tamil Nadu 7 11723000 
 Tripura 3 13680000 
 Uttar Pradesh 13 45557937 
 Uttrakhand 4 5629000 
 West Bengal 9 732353750 
 Grand Total 201 4195594430 
 
    
    

 
 
83 
 
(vii) Budgetary Allocation for North Eastern States out of Central Plan 
Allocation 
 
 
4.46 As per inst ructions of Planning Commission, 10% of Central Plan Allocation has 
to be provided for North Eastern States.  Also, as per instruction of Ministry of Finance, 
provisions for North-Eastern States is to be provided under Major Head 2552/4552 and 
funds from these Major Heads are to be re-appropriated to functional heads for eventual 
expenditure for benefit of North Eastern States. 
 
4.47 The allocation and utilization for the period from 2007 -08 to 2010 -11 is given 
below: 
    (Rs. in crore) 
 
4.48 On being asked to State the reasons for pruning of BE funds at RE stage, i t was 
submitted that in case of RE being decreased, allocation for North Eastern States also 
got reduced proportionately. 
4.49 Regarding under utilization of RE funds during the years 2008 -09, 2009-10 and 
2010-11, the Committee were informed that this was mainly on account of less 
proposals/non-finalization of proposals by these States.  Also, some of the Schemes 
being demand driven, the expenditure is dependent on the initiatives taken by the 
stakeholders. 
Year BE RE Re-
appropriation 
to functional 
head 
% age with reference 
to RE 
2007-08 552.00 588.80 531.74 90 
2008-09 690.00 686.83 515.01 75 
2009-10 720.00 694.82 522.64 75 
2010-11 828.00 950.59 730.62 77 

 
 
84 
 
4.50 The Committee were further informed that during 2011-12 and 2012-13 out of the 
provision kept for NES, Rs. 694.77 crore and Rs. 783.50 crore were re -appropriated to 
functional heads for eventually release for the benefit of NES which was 92.75% and 
93.69% of R.E.   Also during the Twelfth Plan period  the Department will monitor 
utilization of North Eastern States and will try to utilize allocation for North Eastern 
States. 
NATIONAL FOOD SECURITY MISSION (NFSM) 
 
4.51 The Centrally Sponsored Scheme of National Food Security Mission 
(NFSM) was launched fr om Rabi 2007 -08 to increase production of rice, wheat 
and pulses by 10 million tonnes, 8 million tonnes and 2 million tonnes 
respectively by the end of the Eleventh Five Year Plan i.e. March, 2012.  From the 
year 2012 -13 NFSM is being implemented in 27 Sta tes of the Country.  The 
Committee, however, note with concern that under this Scheme, BE 2011 -12 of 
Rs. 1350.00 crore was revised downward at RE stage to Rs. 1316.00 crore and the 
actual expenditure was Rs. 1285.95 crore only.  Similarly, during 2012 -13 B E of 
Rs. 1850.00 crore was revised downward to Rs. 1763.57 crore and actual 
expenditure was Rs. 167 2.63 crore (as on 22.03.2013).  The Department have 
attributed the grant between BE, RE and Actual Expenditure in the Fiscal 2011 -12 
due to reduction in allo cation of North-East States from Rs. 100.00 crore at BE to 
Rs. 66 crore at RE.  It has further been stated that during the year 2011 -12 only 
two North -East States viz. Assam and Tripura were covered under NFSM.  The 
Committee, however, note with appreciation that the Department acted upon their 
recommendation contained in their Thirty -fourth Report on Demands for Grants 

 
 
85 
 
(2012-13) wherein they had emphasized the need to increase the coverage of the 
Scheme in the North-East States and also re-work the guidelines to suit the needs 
of this geographically unique area.  From the year 2012 -13 with the inclusion of 
Arunachal Pradesh, Manipur, Meghalaya, Mizoram, Nagaland and Sikkim, the 
whole North East Region has been brought under the ambit of NFSM.  However, 
they note with concern that the geographical expansion of the Scheme has not 
resulted in improved financial performance of the Scheme during the last Fiscal.  
Keeping in view the pivotal nature of this Scheme in enhancing the production of 
rice, wheat and puls es in the identified areas, the Committee exhort upon the 
Department to motivate all implementing agencies to come forward and actively 
participate in the Scheme, which would ensure optimum utilization of funds and 
ensure synergy between allocation and utilization during the current Plan period. 
 
4.52 The Committee note with concern that the malaise afflicting the physical 
achievements against the target set have continued unabated during the year 
2011-12 and 2012-13.  The Ministry on their part have pleade d that this mismatch 
between achievement and target during the Fiscal 2012 -13 is because reports 
from States are yet to be received.  However, they have been requesting all 
concerned States repeatedly to submit their monthly reports along with fund 
utilization regularly.  Also, the progress of States in terms of physical and 
financial achievements against targets is also monitored in the NFSM Executive 
Committee meetings quarterly as well as through monitoring visits of the 
Department’s officials.  The Comm ittee deprecate this delay in timely furnishing 
of data by the States as this hamper s the monitoring and evaluation of the 
Scheme.  This ultimately delays the initiation of corrective measures that would 

 
 
86 
 
ensure increased viability of the National Food Secu rity Mission.  They also do 
not buy the argument of the Department that rather than looking at individual 
components, the overall picture should be looked into.   Guided by the adage that 
“Drops make an Ocean”, the individual components should be looked in to as 
they ultimately shape the overall picture.  They, therefore, recommend that all 
implementing agencies undertake an in -depth analysis into the performance of 
individual components of this Scheme and thereby ensure that the existing gap 
between achievements and the targets set is bridged in quick time. 
 
4.53 The Committee note that inspite of various inherent shortcomings, the 
National Food Security Mission since its inception has helped to widen the food 
basket of the Country with significant contributions coming from the NFSM areas.  
The focussed and target oriented implementation of mission initiatives by 
resulted in bumper production of wheat, rice and pulses.  The production of 
wheat has increased from 75.81 million tonnes in the year 2006-07 to 94.88 million 
tonnes in 2011-12.  Similarly, the total production of rice has increased from 93.35 
million tonnes in the year 2006 -07 to 105.31 million tonnes in 2011 -12.  The total 
production of pulses has also increased from 14.20 million tonnes during 2006 -07 
to 18.24 million tonnes during 2010 -11.  They further note that  interventions via 
NFSM seem to have gone done well with the farming community who have 
enthusiastically responded to NFSM supported farm machinery components, 
capacity building exercises,  awareness generation programmes which have 
resulted in new farm practises.  However, they exhort the Government not to rest 
upon their laurels and continue to further fine tune the NFSM in accordance with 
the needs and requirements of the States and farme rs.  If done so, the Committee 

 
 
87 
 
are sanguine that NFSM will usher in the desired results and bring the Nation 
closer towards attaining Food Security to all in near future. 
NATIONAL MISSION ON MICRO-IRRIGATION 
4.54 The Committee observe that as per the recom mendation of the Task Force 
on Micro -Irrigation constituted by the Government of India during 2004, the 
Centrally Sponsored Scheme on Micro -Irrigation was launched in January, 2006.  
The Scheme is continuing in mission mode since June 2010 as the National 
Mission on Micro -Irrigation.  They are, however, discerned to note that the BE 
figures have generally been pruned at RE stage during the last six Fiscals, 
though the actual expenditure has matched the RE figures and exceeded the RE 
in the year 2011 -12.  Th e rationale put forth by the Department for pruning of 
funds at RE stage to the fact that in 2007 -08 and 2008 -09, funds were released 
directly to the districts which resulted in the Scheme not being so popular.  
However, consequent to the Scheme being laun ched in mission mode during 
2010-11, wherein funds were released to the State Headquarters, the pace of 
expenditure improved.  Notwithstanding, the arguments put forth by the 
Department, the Committee note that apart from the Fiscal year 2011 -12 where BE 
funds were maintained at RE stage and the actual expenditure was in excess of 
the allocation, the same story has been repeated in the Fiscal 2012-13.  Pruning of 
BE funds at RE stage is resorted to by the Ministry of Finance (Department of 
Expenditure) based on the financial performance of a Scheme during the first six 
months of a Fiscal.  As witnessed here, the slow -paced utilization in the first two 
quarters results in Department of Expenditure using its sniping scissors.  As this 
is a perennial problem, t he Committee exhort the nodal agency and the 

 
 
88 
 
implementing agencies to make a concerted effort and reverse this dismal trend.  
In the instant Scheme wherein actual utilization more or less matches the 
allocation, an even paced utilization of funds would ens ure optimal utilization of 
funds and avoid pruning of BE funds at RE stage.   If successful, the National 
Mission on Micro-Irrigation would go a long way in freeing the toiling agriculturist 
from over dependence on rainfed irrigation and ensure that his ir rigation woes 
would be greatly limited, which then would be greatly limited, which then would 
have a positive impact on his produce. 
4.55 On the physical achievements front, the Committee have observed that as 
against the target of 34.43 lakh hectares, the  actual achievement is 33.65 lakh 
hectares for the last six Fiscals.  The gap between achievement and target has 
attributed to reduction of funds at RE stage.  However in percentage terms, the 
achievement rate is a healthy 97%.  The achievement for the Fis cal Years 2011-12 
& 2012-13 (upto Feb. 2013) does not inspire much confidence.   However, being 
aware of the pitiable situation prevalent at the ground level, the Committee 
impress upon the Government to work on brining greater areas under the 
coverage of micro-irrigation by not only increasing the targets, but also ensuring 
that the same are achieved as well in the ensuring years.  This will then ultimately 
contribute to NMMI being able to attain its five pronged outcome. 
OILSEEDS PRODUCTION UNDER INTEGRAT ED SCHEME OF OILSEEDS, 
PULSES, OILPALM AND MAIZE 
4.56 Oilseeds production programme is being implemented under ISOPOM from 
1 April, 2004 in the States of Andhra Pradesh, Bihar, Chhatisgarh, Gujarat, 
Haryana, Karnatka, Madhya Pradesh, Maharashtra, Orissa, P unjab, Rajasthan, 

 
 
89 
 
Tamil Nadu, Uttar Pradesh and West Bengal.  As informed, this programme has 
helped in increasing the production of oilseeds from 10.83 million tonnes in 1985 -
86 to 29.80 million tonnes during 2011 -12.  The maximum yield achieved was 
1133kg/ha during the Fiscal 2011-12.   Although, various schemes / projects, were 
instrumental, in improving the productivity, much more needs to be desired to 
enhance it further.  Then there is yawning gap between demonstration average 
yield and local average obtained in the fields. For instance demonstration yield of 
mustard, soyabean and sunflower is in the vicinity of 14 -16 q/ha, whereas it just 
12 in a famers’ field.   However, what concern s the Committees is not only the 
fluctuating trend in production of oil seeds, as a result of the vagaries of climate 
but also yielded.  The Committee, therefore, impress upon the Government to 
look into these areas urgently and ensure that oilseeds production and 
productivity receives a shot in the arm,  as this will not only enable to Country to 
attain self-sufficiency in oils, whilst reducing the nation’s import bill as well.  This 
would also help boost the production of anima fodder. 
4.57 On a serious note, the Committee deprecate the repetitive constraints in oil 
seeds production as listed by the Government.  It has further been stated that 
72% oilseeds are grown under rainfed conditions in the Country and oilseed 
crops are also prone to various biotic stresses.  This further gets compounded by 
low Seed Replacement Rate (SRR) and low Seed Multiplication Ratio (SMR).  Lack 
of Minimum Support Price (MSP) also compounds the problems.  Noting the 
above-mentioned systemic inadequacies, which in the Committee’s opinion have 
to be tackled headon, they urge the Government to syn ergize various 
programmes being implemented in the Agriculture Sector to ensure that benefits 

 
 
90 
 
from Schemes are interlinked.  Then only the constraints in oil seeds production 
will be overcome.  They, further desire that the Government embark upon an 
action plan as suggested post haste and intimate the Committee of the same.  As 
efforts to tap potential fr om Tree Borne Oilseeds (TBO) have  not yielded the 
desired results , t he Committee desire focussed attention towards this nascent 
area 
SUPPORT TO STATE EXTENSION PROGRAMMES FOR EXTENSION REFORMS 
4.58 The Committee note that the Scheme of Support to State Extension 
Programmes for Extension Reforms was launched in 2006 and aimed at making 
extension system farmer driven and farmer accountable by way of new 
institutional arrangements for technology dissemination in the form of an 
Agricultural Technology Management Agency (ATMA) at District Level to 
operationalise extension reforms.  However, the Committee observe that Budget 
Outlays for the last six fiscals were always revised downward at Revised Estimate 
stage.  This was attributed to procedural delays by various agencies involved in 
according clearances/approvals for this revised Scheme, which lead to timelines 
being staggered for this Scheme till 19 March, 2010.  However, much to their 
chagrin they note that nothing much has changed here as it evident in periodic 
reduction of BE at RE stage and actual utilization being lower in comparison to 
the allocation save  for the Fiscal 2010 -11.  The ills plaguing the Scheme  in the 
Eleventh Plan have spilled over to the Twelfth Plan as well.  It is disheartening to 
note that manpower including subject matter specialists, were not be employed, 
as per sanctioned strength, impacting the implementation of the scheme.  
Keeping in view the vital nature of this Scheme, the Committee implore upon the 

 
 
91 
 
Government to take a pro -active approach in the instant matter and ensure the 
removal of systemic bottlenecks retarding the progress of this Scheme which 
aims at making extension system farmer driven and farmer accountable by way of 
new institutional arrangements for technology dissemination during the course of 
the Twelfth Plan period and thereby ensure optimum utilization of funds that 
would directly lead to increased dissemination of technology to farmer. 
4.59 Guided by the fact that under the provisions of the Indian Constitution, 
wherein Agricultural is listed as a State Subject, the Committee cannot but over -
emphasize the pivotal nature played by the State Governments and Union 
Territory Administration in determining the outcome of the Schemes of the 
Central Government.  Thus, in the opinion of the Committee, the need of the hour 
is to motivate the States/UTs to enhance their participation in the said Scheme 
and avail more funds.  As t he Committee have been recommending time and 
again, the Central Government should consult the States/UTs while devising the 
Modalities of the Scheme and call for periodic feedback and then accordingly 
revise the guidelines of the Scheme under consideration .  This would ensure that 
States/UTs consider themselves as active partners in the Scheme , which would 
ultimately result in optimum utilization of funds and ensure that the benefits of 
Extension Programmes percolate down to the field. 
4.60 Observing that A gricultural Technology Management Agency (ATMA) is a 
purportedly farmer -driven institutionalized arrangement at district level for 
dissemination of farm technology and knowledge. Notwithstanding the 
arguments put forth by the Government, the Committee are  flabbergasted to 
know that formulation of District Level Plans are being held up as the District 

 
 
92 
 
Magistrate being preoccupied with other work is unable to Chair the meeting of 
ATMA.  The meetings of ATMA are hardly being held, which has a cascading 
effect down the lane in terms of delay in finalization of District Plans, which 
ultimately further delay finalization of State Extension Work Plans which then 
block release of funds for extension activities.  In view of the fact that District 
Magistrate is rathe r hard pressed for time, the Committee recommend that either 
the Chairmanship of ATMA be entrusted to some other senior official or 
otherwise the District Magistrate be duty bound to Chair the Sitting of ATMA.  
Further, they desire that elected representatives of the people be also co-opted in 
the working body of ATMA to ensure accountability of the executive, which will 
ensure that extension system, is truly farmer driven and farmer accountable. 
NATIONAL PROJECT ON MANAGEMENT OF SOIL HEALTH AND FERTILITY 
4.61 The National Project on Management of Soil Health and Fertility was taken 
up from 2008 -09 in order to promote balanced and judicious use of fertilizer in 
conjunction with organic manure on soil test basis.  The Central Sector Scheme 
on Central Fertiliz er Quality Control and Training Institute/Regional Laboratories 
has been subsumed in the Scheme from 1 April, 2009. 
 The Committee are, however, constrained to note that actual expenditure 
under the Scheme during the last five fiscals has always been lower  than the 
allocated funds.  The Department have attributed the same to non -furnishing of 
Utilization Certificates and progress by States and less demand from Central 
Fertilizer Quality Control and Training Institute.  It was further stated that States 

 
 
93 
 
were developing preference for seeking funds for these components under RKVY 
due to flexible guidelines. 
 Guided by the candid explanation put forth by the Department, the 
Committee are of the opinion that this Scheme be subsumed with the Rashtriya 
Krishi Vikas Yojana as the success of RKVY was one of the factors retarding the 
progress of this Scheme.  They further recommend that the Department take up 
post haste the construction of Fertilizer Quality Control Laboratories after 
obtaining the land clearance for these Labs from the concerned State 
Governments. 
4.62 The Committee has taken note of the fact that presently as against 1292.22 
lakhs land holdings, only 505 lakh soil health cards issued.  Further, Geo -
referenced soil fertility maps of only 118 districts  have been completed.  As 
against target of 242 static / mobile Soil Testing Labs, only 105 are in position.  
The Committee take the issue of deteriorating Soil Health/Fertility across the 
Country very seriously and direct the Government to embark upon the  task of 
firstly obtaining the Soil Health status and then the remedial measures post 
haste.  As stated by the Department this could be achieved by the three pronged 
strategy of issue of Soil Health Cards/digital soil maps/increasing the number of 
Static/Mobile Soil Testing Laboratories/development of Mini Soil Testing Kit.  The 
testing should be comprehensive both in terms of Macro/Micro nutrients and this 
information should not be confined to District Headquarters, but be readily 
available at the farm level. 

 
 
94 
 
 Once this exercise is accomplished then only can the process of improving 
soil health be initiated.  The Committee, therefore, desire that the process of soil 
testing be completed across the Country during the next two fiscals.  This would 
not only en sure in arresting the deteriorating soil health but would also ensure 
the inception of soil health improvement which directly reflects upon the 
production and productivity.   
OUTSTANDING UTILIZATION CERTIFICATES (UCs) 
4.63 The Committee applaud the Departm ent for their concerted efforts which 
have resulted in a drastic reduction in the number of pending UCs from a figure 
of 1306 as on 1 April, 2012 to 289 as on 31 December, 2012.  The figure has 
further been lowered to 201.  However, as the liquidation of a ll Outstanding 
Utilization Certificates has not been achieved till date, the Committee recommend 
that the Government tackle this issue on a warfront and impress upon all 
States/UTs to clear their backlog.  They further observe that this pendency is 
reflective of bad accounting and financial management being practised by the 
errant States/UTs, and urge them to initiate corrective measures at the earliest as 
in absence of the same, they are the ones who have to bear the consequences.  
Lastly, they plead upon the Government to ensure that the case of outstanding 
utilization certificates is eliminated during the current Plan period. 
BUDGETARY ALLOCATION FOR NORTH EASTERN STATES OUT OF CENTRAL 
PLAN ALLOCATION 
4.64 The Committee are aware that all Ministries/Depar tments of the 
Government of India, except a few specifically exempted ones , earmark 10 % of 
their annual budget, less allocation for externally aided schemes and local or 

 
 
95 
 
event specific schemes / projects, for expenditure in North Eastern Region.    
However, they are unhappy to note that utilization of funds has been lower in 
comparison to the RE during the Fiscals 2007 -08 to 2010 -11. The Committee are 
given to understand that the broad reasons for gross underutilization of funds 
earmarked for North Easter n States are reduction in BE at RE stage, absence of 
proposals/non-finalization of proposals from States.  Also, as some of the 
Schemes are demand driven, expenditure is dependent on the initiatives taken by 
the stakeholder. They are, however, happy to note that the situation is not beyond 
redemption and with all North -Eastern States having been covered under the 
ambit of the National Food Security Mission, the change in fortunes is almost 
knocking at the door.  
 The Committee, therefore, recommend that the  reasons for poor 
performance of these States augurs an in -depth study  and the problems 
addressed with the feed back from the recipient States, their farmers and other 
Stakeholders. The Committee would also like the Department to prepare a case 
for ensurin g that the funds accumulated in the Non -Lapsable Central Pool of 
Resources (NLCPR) be invariably utilized for development of infrastructure for 
the agriculture sector, that can help implementation of Schemes more effectively.  
They also desire that the Dep artment should take up this matter, with utmost 
alacrity in the North East Council and impress upon all State Governments to 
come up with initiatives through Schemes specific to the special requirements of 
the Region.    
NEW DELHI;                        BASUDEB ACHARIA 
17 April, 2013                                 Chairman, 
27 Chaitra, 1935 (Saka)                                     Committee on Agriculture  

 
 
96 
 
 
APPENDIX-I 
COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE 
(2012-13) 
MINUTES OF THE TWENTY SECOND SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE 
***** 
 The Committee sat on Tuesday, the 02 April, 2013 from 1100 hours to  
1310 hrs. and from 1410 hrs to 1645 hours in Room  No. „53‟, Parliament House,            
New Delhi.  
PRESENT 
Shri Basudeb Acharia   -   Chairman 
 
MEMBERS 
 
LOK SABHA 
2.  Shri Narayansingh Amlabe 
3.  Smt. Ashwamedh Devi 
4.  Shri L. Raja Gopal 
5.  Shri Premdas Katheria 
6.  Shri P. Kumar 
7.  Sardar Sukhdev Singh Libra 
8.  Dr. Jyoti Mirdha 
9.  Shri Naranbhai Kachhadia 
10.  Shri Devji M. Patel 
11.  Shri Jagdish Singh Rana 
12.  Shri Rajaiah Siricilla 
13.  Shri Patel Kishanbhai V.  
14.  Dr. Vinay Kumar Pandey „Vinnu‟ 
15.  Shri Hukamdeo Narayan Yadav 
  
 RAJYA SABHA 
 
16.  Smt. Mohsina Kidwai 
17.  Shri Rajpal Singh Saini 
18.  Shri Shivanand Tiwari 
19.  Shri S. Thangavelu 
20.  Shri Darshan Singh Yadav 
 
SECRETARIAT 
1.  Shri R.S. Kambo   - Joint Secretary 
2. Shri C. Vanlalruata   - Deputy Secretary 

 
 
97 
 
WITNESSES 
 MINISTRY OF AGRICULTURE 
(DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE AND CO-OPERATION) 
 
                 S.No.       NAME OF THE OFFICER              DESIGNATION 
 
1.     Shri Ashish Bahuguna Secretary (A&C) 
2.     Shri Siraj Hussain Special Secretary 
3.     Shri Anup Kumar Thakur Special Secretary 
4.     Shri Avinash K. Srivastava Additional Secretary 
5. Shri Dalip Singh  Additional Secretary 
6. Mrs. Bhavani Principal Adviser 
7. Shri Raghav Chandra Addl. Secretary & Financial Adviser  
8. Shri R. Viswanathan Economic and Statistical Advisor 
(ESA) 
9. Dr. Jeet Singh Sandhu Agriculture Commissioner 
10. Dr. Anandi Subramanian Member Secretary (CACP) 
11. Dr. Gorakh Singh Horticulture Commissioner 
12. Shri E.K. Majhi Joint Secretary 
13. Shri Mukesh Khullar Joint Secretary 
14. Shri Sanjeev Gupta Joint Secretary 
15. Shri R.K. Tiwari Joint Secretary 
16. Shri Atanu Purkayastha Joint Secretary 
17. Shri Sanjeev Chopra Joint Secretary 
18. Shri Utpal Kumar Singh  Joint Secretary 
19. Shri Narendra Bhooshan Joint Secretary 
20. Shri Raj Singh Joint Secretary 
21. Shri Vimlendra Sharan Joint Secretary 
22. Shri R.B. Sinha Joint Secretary 
23. Dr. Vidya Dhar  DDG (AC) 
24. Shri Sanjay Kumar DDG(NBM) 
25. Shri Vilas R. Ghodeswar Chief Control of Accounts (CCA) 

 
 
98 
 
 
 
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the mem bers of the Committee and 
representatives of the Ministry of Agriculture (Department of Agriculture and 
Cooperation) and Planning Commission to the Sitting.  
 
3. After the witnesses introduced themselves, the Secretary briefly highlighted the 
activities / achievements made by the Department during the Eleventh Plan Period and 
preceding Financial Year. The proposed outlay for Twelfth Plan, including various 
schemes to be taken up was also discussed.  The Committee, thereafter, took oral 
evidence of the representatives of Ministry of Agriculture (Department of Agriculture and 
Cooperation) on Demands for Grants (2013-14) of the Department.  
 
 [At around 1310 hours the Committee adjourned for Lunch.  The Sitting resumed at 
1410 hours] 
 
4. The Chairman and member s of the Committee raised queries on several issues 
concerning progress made and the Demands for Grants of the ongoing Fiscal and 
proposed projection for Financial Year 2013-14.  The witnesses replied, thereto. 
 
5. The Chairman, thereafter thanked the witn esses for appearing before the 
Committee as well as for furnishing valuable information desired by them.  He also 
directed them to furnish information on points on which the Department could not clarify 
during the Sitting, to the Committee Secretariat by 08 April, 2013.  
 
6. A verbatim record of the proceedings has been kept separately. 
 
The Committee then adjourned.  
 
 
PLANNING COMMISSION 
 
1. Dr. J.P. Mishra Adviser 
2. Shri Surinder Singh Adviser 

 
 
99 
 
APPENDIX-II 
 
COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE 
(2012-13) 
 
 
MINUTES OF THE TWENTY FIFTH SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE 
 
 
 The Committee sat on Wednesday, t he 17 th April, 2013 from 1500 hours to 1600 
hours in Room No. „53‟, Parliament House, New Delhi.  
 
         PRESENT 
 
Shri Basudeb Acharia   -   Chairman 
 
MEMBERS 
 
                           LOK SABHA 
 
2.  Shri Narayansingh Amlabe 
3.  Shri Sanjay Singh Chauhan 
4.  Smt. Ashwamedh Devi 
5.  Smt. Paramjit Kaur Gulshan 
6.  Shri P. Kumar 
7.  Dr. (Smt.) Botcha Jhansi Lakshmi 
8.  Sardar Sukhdev Singh Libra 
9.  Dr. Jyoti Mirdha 
10.  Dr. Vinay Kumar Pandey „Vinnu‟ 
  
RAJYA SABHA 
 
11.  Shri Dharmendra Pradhan 
12.  Dr. K.V.P. Ramachandra Rao 
13.  Shri Shivanand Tiwari 
14.  Shri S. Thangavelu 
15.  Shri Darshan Singh Yadav 
 
     
SECRETARIAT 
 
 1. Shri R.S. Kambo  - Joint Secretary 
     2. Shri C. Vanlalruata  - Deputy Secretary 
 

 
 
100 
 
2. At the outset the Chairman welcomed the members to the Sitting of the Committee.  
They Committee, thereafter, took up the following draft Report(s) for consideration:  
 
(i) draft Report on Demands for Grants (2013 -2014) relating to the Ministry of 
Agriculture (Department of Agriculture & Co-operation); 
*(ii) xxxx            xxxx                  xxxx                  xxxx                     xxxx;  
*(iii) xxxx            xxxx                  xxxx                  xxxx                     xxxx 
 
3. After some deliberations, the Committee adopted the above draft Report(s ) with 
some modifications.  They also authorized the Chairman to finalise the above Draft 
Report(s) in the light of the factual verifications got done by the concerned Departments of 
the Ministry of Agriculture and present them to the Parliament.   
 
 
The Committee then adjourned. 
 
***** 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
*  Matter not related to this Report. 
 