1 
 
 
COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE 
(2012-2013) 
 
 
 
 
FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA 
 
 
 
 
MINISTRY OF AGRICULTURE 
(DEPARTMENT OF ANIMAL HUSBANDRY, DAIRYING AND FISHERIES)  
 
 
DEMANDS FOR GRANTS 
(2013-14) 
 
 
 
FORTY EIGHTH REPORT 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
APRIL, 2013 / VAISAKHA, 1935 (Saka) 
 
 
 
48 

2 
 
FORTY-EIGHTH REPORT 
 
COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE 
(2012-2013) 
 
 
(FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
 
 
MINISTRY OF AGRICULTURE 
(DEPARTMENT OF ANIMAL HUSBANDRY, DAIRYING AND FISHERIES) 
 
 
 
DEMANDS FOR GRANTS 
(2013-14) 
 
 
 
  Presented to Lok Sabha on         23.04.2013 
  Laid on the Table of Rajya Sabha on 25.04.2013 
 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
APRIL, 2013 / VAISAKHA, 1935 (Saka) 
  


3 
 
 
COA No. ...… 
 
 
 
 
 
 
     
         
         
         
         
 
         
         
         
Price :  Rs. 
         
         
         
         
         
 
 
 
         
     
                     
 
 
         
© 2013 By Lok Sabha Secretariat 
 
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of Business in 
Lok Sabha (Fourteenth Edition) and Printed by  
 
  

4 
 
CONTENTS 
PAGE 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE       (iii) 
INTRODUCTION          (v) 
ABBREVIATIONS          (vii) 
 
CHAPTER I IMPLEMENTATION OF THE COMMITTEE’s 
RECOMMENDATIONS       
CHAPTER II CHALLENGES CONFRONTING ANIMAL HUSBANDRY, 
DAIRYING AND FISHERIES SECTORS IN INDIA  3 
  (i) Introductory        3 
(ii) Major Challenges       5 
(a) Control of Animal Diseases    7 
   (b) Improvement in Genetic Resources of Livestock 7 
   (c) Impact of Climate Change     9 
(d) Challenges for Fisheries Sector    9 
(e) Exploitation of Marine Fisheries    10 
(f) Convergence of Various Schemes    11 
(g) Proposed Free Trade Agreement (FTA) between  
India and European Union (EU)    13 
 
CHAPTER III  OVERVIEW OF DEMANDS     19 
  (i) Structure        19 
  (ii) Functions        19 
  (iii) Overview         19 
(iv) Comparison between Plan Allocations of Department of  
Animal Husbandry, Dairying & Fisheries with other  
Departments of Ministry of Agriculture    21 
(v) Financial Performance during Eleventh Plan   22 
(vi) Strategy for the Twelfth Five Year Plan    25 
(vii) Budgetary Plan        29 
(viii) Utilisation Certificates      30 
(ix) Result Framework Document (RFD)    32 
(x) Discrepancies in Information Furnished in 
 Outcome Budget (2013-14)     33 
(xi) Mass Awareness Campaigns     34 
 
CHAPTER IV SECTORAL AND SCHEMATIC ANALYSIS   41 
  (i) Animal Husbandry       41 
  (a) Allocation for Animal Husbandry Sector   42 
(b) New Services / Instruments of Service in 
Twelfth Plan 2012-17      43 
  (c) National Livestock Mission     44 
  (d) National Project for Cattle and Buffalo Breeding (NPCBB)  45 
(e) National Programme for Bovine Breeding  
and Dairy (NPBBD)      47 
  (f) Foot and Mouth Diseases Control Programme (FMD-CP) 48 
  (g) National Control Programme of Classical Swine Fever 49 

5 
 
(h) Establishment and Strengthening of existing  
Veterinary Hospitals and Dispensaries (ESVHD)  51 
(i) Upgradation/ Strengthening of Infrastructure of Veterinary 
Colleges       53 
(j) Establishment of Veterinary Drug Control Authority  54 
 
(ii) Poultry Development       56 
(iii) Dairy Development       57 
(a) Strengthening Infrastructure for Quality in  
Clean Milk Production (SIQ&CMP)    58 
(b) National Dairy Plan      59 
 
(iv) Fisheries Development      60 
(a) National Fisheries Development Board (NFDB)  61 
(b) Fishery Survey of India (FSI)     62 
(c) Welfare Programme of Fishermen    63 
 
ANNEXURE 
 
I. Minutes of the 23rd Sitting of the Committee held on 03 April, 2013  73 
II Minutes of the 25th Sitting of the Committee held on 17 April, 2013  76 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  

6 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE (2012-13) 
 
 
Shri Basudeb Acharia   -   Chairman 
 
MEMBERS 
 
LOK SABHA 
 
2.  Shri Narayansingh Amlabe 
3.  Shri Sanjay Singh Chauhan 
4.  Shri H.D. Devegowda 
5.  Smt. Ashwamedh Devi 
6.  Shri L. Raja Gopal 
7.                 Smt. Paramjit Kaur Gulshan 
8.  Shri Anant Kumar Hegde 
9.  Shri Premdas Katheria 
10.  Shri P. Kumar 
11.  Dr. (Smt.) Botcha Jhansi Lakshmi 
12.  Sardar Sukhdev Singh Libra 
13.  Dr. Jyoti Mirdha 
14.  Shri Naranbhai Kachhadia 
15.  Shri Devji M. Patel 
16.  Smt. Bhavana Gawali (Patil) 
17.  Shri Jagdish Singh Rana 
18.  Shri Rajaiah Siricilla 
19.  Shri Patel Kishanbhai V.  
20.  Dr. Vinay Kumar Pandey ‘Vinnu’ 
21.  Shri Hukamdeo Narayan Yadav 
   
RAJYA SABHA 
 
22.  Shri Satyavrat Chaturvedi 
23.  Shri A. Elavarasan 
24.  Smt. Mohsina Kidwai 
25.  Shri Dharmendra Pradhan 
26.  Dr. K.V.P. Ramachandra Rao 
27.  Shri Parshottam Khodabhai Rupala 
28.  Shri Rajpal Singh Saini 
29.  Shri Shivanand Tiwari 
30.  Shri S. Thangavelu 
31.  Shri Darshan Singh Yadav 
 
 
 

7 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
 
1. Shri R.S. Kambo   - Joint Secretary 
 
2. Shri C. Vanlalruata   - Deputy Secretary 
 
3. Shri Pragyanshu Amaoni  - Committee Officer 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  

8 
 
 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
 
I, the Chairman, Committee on Agriculture, having been authorized by the 
Committee to submit the Report on their behalf, present this Forty-eighth Report on 
the Demands for Grants (20 13-2014) of the Ministry of Agriculture (Department of 
Animal Husbandry, Dairying and Fisheries). 
 
2. The Committee under Rule 331 E(1)(a) of the Rules of Procedure and 
Conduct of Business in Lok Sabha considered the Demands for Grants  (2012-13) 
of the Department of Animal Husbandry, Dairying and Fisheries, which  were laid 
on the table of the House on        19th March, 2013.  The Committee took evidence 
of the representatives of the Department of Animal Husban dry, Dairying and 
Fisheries, Planning Commission and other organisations at their Sitting held on 03 
April, 20 13.   The Committee wish to express their thanks to the officers of the 
Department of Animal Husbandry, Dairying and Fisheries , Planning Commission 
and other Organisations for appearing before the Committee and for furnishing the 
information they desired in connection with the examination of Demands for Grants 
(2013-14) of the Department. 
 
3. The Report was considered and adopted  by the Committee at their S itting 
held on       17 April, 2013. 
 
4. For facility of reference, the Observations  / Recommendations of the 
Committee have been printed in bold letters at the end of each Chapter  of the 
Report. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI;                               BASUDEB ACHARIA 
17 April, 2013                                     Chairman, 
27 Chaitra, 1935 (Saka)                                                      Committee on Agriculture 
 

9 
 
 
ABBREVIATIONS 
 
 
APVMA   Australian Pesticides and Veterinary Medicine Authority 
ASCAD  Assistance to State for Control of Animal Diseases 
ATMA   Agriculture Technology Management Agencies 
BE   Budget Estimate 
BPL   Below Poverty Line 
CSF   Classical Swine Fever 
CSO   Central Statistics Office 
CSS    Centrally Sponsored Schemes 
DAC   Department of Agriculture and Cooperation 
DADF   Department of Animal Husbandry, Dairying & Fisheries 
DARE   Department of Agricultural Research and Education 
DAVP   Directorate of Advertising and Visual Publicity  
DCGA   Drug Controller General of India 
DDR   Dry Docking and Repair 
DEDS   Dairy Entrepreneurship Development Scheme 
DFP   Directorate of Field Publicity 
DIPP   Department of Industrial Policy and Promotion 
DMS   Delhi Milk Scheme 
DTAB   Drug & Technical Advisory Board 
EEZ   Exclusive Economic Zone 
EFC Expenditure Finance Committees 
EIAs End-Implementing Agencies 
ESVHD Establishment and Strengthening of Existing Veterinary 
Hospitals / Dispensaries 
EU   European Union 
FFA   Fire Fighting Appliances 
FMD   Foot & Mouth Disease 
FMD-CP  Foot & Mouth Disease Control Programme 
FTA   Free Trade Agreement 
GBS   Gross Budgetary Support 
GDP   Gross Domestic Product 
GI   Geographical Indication 
GMP   Good Manufacturing Practice 
HPC   High Powered Committee 
ICAR   Indian Council of Agriculture Research 

10 
 
 
IEBR   Internal and Extra Budgetary Resource 
IEC   Information, Education and Communication 
ISO   International Organization for Standardization 
KVK   Krishi Vigyan Kendras 
LH&DC  Livestock Health and Disease Control 
LSA   Life Saving Appliances 
MAFF    Ministry of Agriculture, Forestry and Fisheries (Japan)  
MGNREGS Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment Generation 
Scheme 
MoHFW  Ministry of Health & Family Welfare 
NABARD  National Bank for Agriculture and Rural Development  
NADRS  National Animal Disease Reporting System 
NBFGR  National Bureau of Fish Genetic Resources  
NDC   National Development Council 
NDDB   National Dairy Development Board  
NDP   National Dairy Plan 
NFDB   National Fisheries Development Board 
NLM   National Livestock Mission 
NPBB   National Programme for Bovine Breeding 
NPBBD  National Programme for Bovine Breeding and Dairy 
NPCBB  National Project for Cattle and Buffalo Breeding 
NSSO   National Sample Survey Office  
PAO   Principal Accounts Office 
PER   Performance Evaluation Report 
PIB   Press Information Bureau 
PPR   Peste des Petits Ruminants 
R&D   Research and Development 
RE   Revised Estimate 
RFD   Result Framework Document 
RKVY   Rashtriya Krishi Vikas Yojana 
RTI   Right to Information 
SIAs   State Implementing Agencies 
SIQ&CMP Strengthening Infrastructure for Quality and Clean Milk 
Production 
SPS   Sanitary and Phyto Sanitary 
SPV   Special Purpose Vehicle 

11 
 
UCs   Utilisation Certificates 
USFDA  US Food and Drug Administration 
VCI   Veterinary Council of India 
VDD    Veterinary Drugs Directorate (Canada) 
  

12 
 
CHAPTER – I 
IMPLEMENTATION OF COMMITTEE’S RECOMMENDATIONS 
The Thirty -fifth Report of Committee on Agriculture on Demands for Grants 
(2012-13) of the Ministry of Agriculture (Department of Animal Husbandry, Dairying and 
Fisheries) was presented to the Lok  Sabha on 30 April, 2012. The Report was laid on 
the Table of Rajya Sabha on the same day. 
1.2 In terms of Direction 73 A of Directions by the Speaker, Lok Sabha , the Minister 
for Agriculture and Food Processing Industries made a Statement in the Lok Sabha  on 
28 August, 2012 giving the status of implementation of various Recommendations made 
by the Committee in their Thirty-fifth  Report. 
1.3 On the basis of Action Taken Notes received from the Department in respect of 
the above Report on 23 July, 2012, the  Committee presented their Forty-third Report to 
the Lok Sabha and laid it on the Table of Rajya Sabha on 26 February, 2013. Out of the 
18 Recommendations of the Committee, 08 have been accepted by the Government. 
Replies to two Recommendations viz. Para N os. 3.58 and 3.60 were of interim nature.  
The Committee commented upon the Action Taken Notes furnished by the Government 
in respect of Recommendations at Para Nos. 1.4, 2.33, 2.34, 2.35, 2.36, 2.37, 2.39, 
3.55, 3.56, 3.56, 3.57, 3.58, 3.60, 3.61 and 3.63 in the Original Report.  
1.4 The Committee note that the Action Taken Replies regarding the action 
taken by the Government on the Observations / Recommendations contained in 
the Thirty-fifth Report of the Committee were furnished by the Government within 
the stipulated three months and the Statement of the Minister under Direction    
73-A was made within the stipulated six mo nths period.  An analysis of the action 

13 
 
taken by the Government reveals that 45% Recommendations ha ve been 
implemented, 44% Recommendations have not been implemented and 11% of 
Recommendations are in various stages of implementation. While the Committee 
hope and trust that the scheduled time line, prescribed for submission of Action 
Taken Statement, under Direction 73-A would be adhered to in future, without fail, 
at the same time, they urge the Government to take conclusive action in respect 
of recommendations commented upon in their Forty -third Action Taken Report 
and furnish further action takes notes to the Committee expeditiously. 
  

14 
 
CHAPTER – II 
CHALLENGES CONFRONTING ANIMAL HUSBANDRY, DAIRYING 
AND FISHERIES SECTORS IN INDIA 
INTRODUCTORY 
Animal Husbandry, Dairy Development and Fisheries sectors play an important  
role in the national economy and in the socio -economic development of the Country.  
These sectors also play a significant role in supplementing family incomes and 
generating gainful employment in the rural sector, particularly among the landless 
labourers, small and marginal farmers and women, besides providing cheap nutritional 
food to millions of people  as l ivestock are the best insurance against the vagaries of 
nature like drought, famine and other natural calamities.  
2.2 India is endowed with the  largest livestock population in the world.  It accounts 
for 56.8 per cent of the world’s buffalo population and 14.5 per cent of the cattle 
population. There are about 71.6 million sheep, 140.5 million goats and about 11.1 
million pigs in the country. The popu lation of livestock is still increasing rapidly in India.  
The fisheries potential is also vast owing to country’s coastline of over 8000 km. and 
immense inland water resources.  According to estimates of the Central Statistics Office 
(CSO), the value of output from livestock and fisheries sector together at current prices 
was about Rs. 4,61,434 crore during 2010 -11 which is about 28.4% of the value of 
output of Rs 16,23,968 crore from total agricultural and allied sector. Also, the estimate 
of GDP from li vestock and fisheries sector together at current prices was about Rs. 
3,22,894 crore during 2010 -11, which is about 30.40  percent of the Gross Domestic 
Product (GDP) of Rs. 10,62,004 crore from agriculture and allied sectors.  

15 
 
2.3 The livestock sector also  contributes to export in spite of the fact very few  
livestock enterprises function in the country on commercial basis. Total export earnings 
from livestock, poultry and related products were Rs. 25,408.86 crore in 2010 -11 
compared to Rs. 19,036.44 crore i n previous year i.e., 200 9-10.  Animal husbandry 
sector provides large self -employment opportunities. According to National Sample 
Survey Office's latest quinquennial Survey (NSS 66th round; July 2009 -June 2010),  
total number of workers in usual status, engaged in farming of animals is 13.6 million in 
rural areas and 14.9 million in rural and urban areas combined. Total number of workers 
engaged in farming of animals and fishing is 14.9 million in rural area and 16.5 million in 
rural and urban areas combined.  
2.4 When asked to explain the role played by animal husbandry, dairying and 
fisheries sector in the economic empowerment of especially small and marginal 
farmers, the Secretary , Department of Animal Husbandry, Dairying and Fisheries 
(DADF) during the oral evidence, stated: 
“Animal Husbandry, Dairying and Fisheries sector is an important sub sector of 
the Indian agriculture, particularly from the perspective of small , marginal 
farmers, landless farmers and women farmers. The livestock and fisheries play a 
significant role in supplementing the household income of the landless, small and 
marginal farmers and women farmers.  This is particularly so in the context of 
declining agricultural landholding, which sometimes makes agricultural 
operations not very viable.  These small holdings can be made viable if it is 
supplemented with  animal husbandry activities.  We are fully conscious of this 
fact.  Secondly, any developmen t of this sector will be more inclusive.  The 
statistics shows that about 87 per cent of the livestock are owned by small, 
marginal and semi -medium farmers having a land holding of less than four 
hectare.  The marginal farmers having landholding less than one hectare own 

16 
 
about 37 per cent of the livestock resources. Therefore, any development in the 
livestock sector will be more inclusive from that point of view”. 
MAJOR CHALLENGES 
2.5 The animal husbandry sector is confronted with challenges like (i) veterinary 
hospitals, dispensaries and technical manpower are inadequate (ii) the disease 
reporting system is neither timely nor complete which delays proper interventions and 
(iii) inadequate availability of vaccines and lack of cold storage infrastructure.  Similarly, 
the dairy sector is facing numerous challenges and include small herd size and poor 
productivity, inadequate availability of credit, poor access to organized markets , 
improper milk price, poor artificial insemination ( AI) service net work, shortage of 
manpower and funds, limited availability of quality breeding bulls, disease outbreaks , 
mortality and morbidity, induction of crossbred animals in areas poor in feed resources, 
majority of grazing lands are either degraded or encroached, diversion of feed & fodder 
ingredients for industrial use. 
2.6 To overcome these challenges and ensure accelerated growth during the Twelfth 
Five Year Plan, the Department have taken slew of measures.  Explaining the details, 
the Department informed in written submission:-  
(i) Taking into account the importance of effective control of animal diseases, 
the Department has proposed strengthening the on -going Scheme 
‘Livestock Health and Disease Control, which  envisages expanding Foot 
and Mouth Disease Control Programme so as to cover all districts of the 
country in phased manner, covering all remaining States/UTs under PPR 
Control Programme and inclusion of new component namely  “National 
Control Programme for C lassical Swine Fever”.  Under Assistance to 
States for Control of Animal Diseases (ASCAD), funds are proposed to be 
provided for vaccination against canine rabies under immunization 

17 
 
programme and also to upgrade the State Vaccine Production Units to 
Good Manufacturing Practice (GMP) compliant to facilitate production of 
quality vaccines for livestock.  Under the Act for Prevention and Control of 
Infectious and Contagious Disease s for Animals, the States are required 
to fram e rules with the approval of Central Government to strengthe n 
regulatory capability of the States for effective control of animal diseases. 
To strengthen the system of report of animal diseases and disease 
surveillance a software based system for reporting  of animal diseases, 
National Animal Disease Reporting System (NADRS) has been launched.  
More than 6,000 nodes with internet connectivity have been installed at 
the block, district and state level to facilitate real time online reporting of 
the data relat ing to outbreak of animal diseases, which will greatly 
facilitate the control and preventive measures.   
(ii) Strengthening the bovine breeding programme by adopting scientific 
principles for production of high quality bulls for breeding , production of 
frozen semen for use in artificial insemination programme , emphasis on 
developing recognized indigenous breeds of the country and  improving 
quality of training of inseminators would be emphasized in Twelfth Plan.  
Minimum standard protocol regulating producti on of quality semen and 
protocol for production progeny bulls through progeny testing and 
pedigree selection have been finalized in consultation with National Dairy 
Development Board (NDDB). The schemes of dairy development will be 
integrated and converged alongwith bovine breeding and the dairy 
cooperatives would be encouraged to take up the breeding and providing 
veterinary services to the farmers. 
(iii) National Livestock Mission ( NLM) will have major co mponents relating to 
development of feed and fodder, development of small ruminants, poultry 
development, piggery development in North -East region, livestock 
insurance and skill development etc.  In case of fodder development the 
emphasis will be given to having in place a seed chain for enhancing the 
availability of quality fodder seeds to the farmers. Tapping the resources 

18 
 
available under other ongoing programmes and schemes like Mahatma 
Gandhi National Rural Employment Generation Scheme ( MGNREGS) 
would be encouraged for augmenting production and availability of qua lity 
fodder for the livestock. 
(a) Control of Animal Diseases 
2.7 High prevalence of various animal diseases is serious impediment to growth of 
livestock sector.  Most of these animal diseases can be prevented through timely 
immunization.  Elaborating further, the steps taken to prevent -spread of animal 
diseases, Secretary, during the oral evidence, stated: 
“We are strengthening the efforts to control animal diseases, expanding the 
National Control Progrmame for FMD, expediting the State Rules under 
Prevention and Control of Infectious and Contagious Diseases in Animals Act, 
2009 so that the States will have a be tter regulatory mechanism for preventing 
spread of animal diseases and for better control, by strengthening the diseases 
reporting and surveillance system.” 
(b) Improvement in Genetic Resources of Livestock 
2.8 Genetic up-gradation with a focus on developm ent and conservation of important 
indigenous breed in bovines is hallmark to enhance productivity.  For improving genetic 
resources of livestock, Secretary, Dep artment of Animal Husbandry, Dairying and 
Fisheries, explained the strategy drawn for the purpose and stated during evidence: 
“Our strategy of breeding cattle and buffaloes has been to use the exotic breeds 
like Jersey and Holstein Friesian to crossbreed the non -descript indigenous 
cattle, and for buffaloes, the approach has been to use our indigenous improved 
breed like Murrah to upgrade the indigenous buffalo  population. So far because 
of this crossbreeding strategy, our percentage of crossbred population has 
increased to about 16 per cent of the total and that segment is growing.  

19 
 
The introduction of crossbred cattle has resulte d in other problems like incidence 
of diseases. Our indigenous cattle are much more resistant to the diseases, while 
the crossbred cattle are not. So, we are trying to revise our approach from that 
point of view. We would now like to give much more emphasi s on developing our 
own improved indigenous varieties or breeds which are there. In case of 
buffaloes, as I had explained, we are not going for any crossbreeding. We are 
using on our own improved breeds like Murrah and other indigenous breeds. 
Similar approach we will try in case of cattle”.  
2.9 When the Committee specifically sought measures to increase the coverage of 
breedable population under artificial insemination  during Twelfth Plan, the Secretary 
replied:  
“To increase the coverage of breedable population under artificial insemination 
from the existing level of about 20 to 22 per cent of the breedable cattle and 
buffaloes to the level of about 35 per cent by the end of the Twelfth Plan. If we 
take the actual number of cattle and buffaloes which require the insemination, 
that number is less than the breedable population. The percentage will be  
50 percent of the cattle and buffaloe s population, which require this insemination 
service. We are trying to increase this coverage from the existing level of about 
20 to 25 percent to around 50 per cent for which we require about 100 million 
doses of frozen semen and 100 million doses of artificial insemination as against 
64 million or 65 million doses of frozen semen that we are producing now.” 
2.10 When Committee enquired about the breeding of indigenous bulls, the Secretary 
during evidence stated: 
“We have a dearth in terms of supply of quality bulls and breeding animals for 
upgrading the indigenous breeds. Unlike agric ulture, where improved varieties 
can be developed very quickly, here we require time to develop a new breed, 
which will acclimatize with the local conditions, and hence it takes a much longer 
time. Our best strategy would be to select the best indigenous b reed that we 
have which are already acclimatized with the local conditions, utilize these 

20 
 
improved indigenous breeds to upgrade the other indigenous breeds and go for 
crossbreeding in selected cases”. 
(c) Impact of Climate Change  
2.11 The fast-changing environment is posing multi-faceted challenges to the ecology 
and livestock.  When enquired about Government’s efforts to combat the adverse 
impact of climate change, the Secretary deposed before the Committee: 
“Regarding the climate research, this area is  not commensurate with agriculture. 
There is a need for increasing the effort in this area and we have been in 
constant interaction with the ICAR to address this particular issue. We are trying 
to identify certain focused issues and which are the breeds wh ich are better 
resilient to the impact on climate change. It is already established that our 
indigenous breeds are much better in our climate compared to the cross breed 
animals. That is why, our focus in the Twelfth Plan will shift towards improved 
indigenous breeds which we would like to use in artificial insemination and also 
for selecting quality goats.”    
(d) Challenges for Fisheries Sector 
2.12 The fisheries sector is beset with problems of shortage of quality and healthy fish 
seeds and other critical inputs, lack of resource -specific fishing vessels, inadequate 
awareness about nutritional and economic benefits of fish, inadequate extension and 
training to staff and personnel in fisheries sector, low utilization and productivity of water 
bodies. 
2.13 When the Committee sought to know of roadmap drawn, if any, to overcome 
such challenges during Twelfth Five Year Plan, the Ministry in a written note  stated as 
under : 

21 
 
“Fisheries sector contributes to a great extent in development and employment 
generation besides ensuing food and nutritional security for millions of our 
population.  The road map for development of fisheries in Twelfth Plan include 
production of quality fish seeds and fingerlings, production of quality fish feed 
using the locally available materials and feed ingredients, skill development and 
capacity building of fishers to strengthen their livelihood a mechanism for 
surveillance for aquatic animal diseases, dissemination of improved technologies 
like cage culture, mariculture etc.  for improving the productivity and income of 
the farmers and strengthening of NFDB by merging different schemes relating to 
development of inland, marine fis hermen under NFDB etc.  The schemes under 
NFDB are being modified keeping in view their priorities.”   
As regards to initiatives taken to boost fisheries sector, the principal witness 
informed: 
“In fisheries sector, an important initiative of Government of  India has been to 
launch ‘National Fisheries Development Board’ (NFDB) in the year 2006 for 
implementing fishery developmental schemes in an integrated manner.  During 
Twelfth Plan, the existing schemes for development of inland and marine 
fisheries excluding the scheme relating to welfare of fishers will be transferred to 
NFDB to facilitate expansion of fisheries through integration of different activities 
for development of fisheries.  In case of marine fisheries, attempt would be ma de 
to achieve greater  sustainability by strengthening the regulations as per the 
existing laws and by strengthening the monitoring system.  Expediting completion 
of the projects for fishermen, biometric ID cards and online registration of vessels 
would be important.”  
(e) Exploitation of Marine Fisheries 
2.14 Database of inland and marine fisheries resources, the analysis of such data 
efficiently and effectively and census of marine wealth enables fishery professionals to 
evaluate the health and status of fishery resources and evolve management plans. 
Over-exploitation of marine fisheries is a major problem in th is sector. When enquired 

22 
 
about the same, Secretary, Department of Animal Husbandry, Dairying and Fisheries  
replied: 
“The problem of over -exploitation of the territor ial water is sometimes by way of 
over-fishing and also because of lack of breeding facilities. So, the problem for 
increasing the production is becoming more and more acute.  So, our focus in 
marine fishery would be to try to achieve higher level of sustai nability.  Although 
initially there will be some reduction in production, but in the medium term, the 
production will be much more sustainable.  Our present level of exploitation by 
the marine fisheries is about 80 per cent of the potential sustainable yie ld which 
we can achieve for the country. There is another big gap in marine fisheries i.e. 
the EEZ - deep sea fishing that has not been adequately exploited by us.  There 
is a critical gap in law.  We do not have any to law to regulate fishing in deep sea.  
So, we have started the process of drafting a legislation for that purpose which 
we have now referred to Ministry of Law and this legislation has been drafted 
after wider consultation among the stakeholders in the States.  Hopefully we will 
be able to finalize that draft law quickly and place it before the Cabinet and take it 
forward as soon as possible.  Once we have a law for the deep sea, our 
regulation will be much better and that will encourage investment from the 
entrepreneurs in this important area  of activity.  As I mentioned, our level of 
exploitation of the marine fisheries is not very low but  we can still improve upon 
it”. 
(f) Convergence of Various Schemes  
2.15  The integration of animal breeding with the dairy development schemes is pre-
requisite so as to obtain better output by effective and coordinated way of policy 
formulation and implementation.  When asked about steps taken in this regard, the 
principal witness stated during evidence: 
“The efforts for dairy development are req uired to be integrated and converged 
with the breeding and marketing activities through dairy cooperatives. Emphasis 
for dairy development would be on creation of village based infrastructure like 

23 
 
cold chain for procurement and marketing of milk along with  improved breeding 
programme and improved practices of animal nutrition, which are the basic 
objectives of National Dairy Plan which has been launched since 2011 -12. We 
have started implementing this National Dairy Plan since 2012-13”. 
 He further stated that: 
“The Scheme of DADF could be synergised with the National Dairy Plan during 
the Twelfth Plan. For the Twelfth Plan, the Department proposes to launch 
National Livestock Mission which has been announced in the Union Budget this 
year. The National Livestock Mission will have major components relating to feed 
and fodder, development of small ruminants, poultry and piggery development 
and any other initiatives relating to animal husbandry which cannot be supported 
under any other scheme of the Department.  
The focus under the National Livestock Mission is to allow necessary flexibility to 
the States to formulate and implement the schemes relating to livestock 
development taking into account the local conditions instead of prescribing a 
straightjacket schematic structure from the Department.”  
2.16 Going a step further, he advocated coordination among the various schemes of 
not only of his Department but also among schemes of similar nature of the sister 
Departments:  
“Another priority for the Department will be to try to achieve convergence with 
other on-going schemes like MGNREGA, Rashtriya Krishi Vikas Yojana ( RKVY), 
Agriculture Technology Management Agencies  (ATMA), Integrated Watershed 
Development Management Programme, etc., under which lot of activities relating 
to animal husbandry can be taken up, to enhance the availability of quality feed 
and fodder and other development efforts relating to livestock and fisheries. This 
has been taken as a priority area for the D epartment. This convergence will 
augment the resources required for development of this sector.”  
  

24 
 
He further stated:  
“As you know, under MNREGA and RKVY guidelines, substantial activities can 
be taken up relating to livestock and fishery development. For example, 
construction of cattle shed; pasture land development; fodder cultivation like 
cultivation of azolla, which is  a protein rich fodder for the livestock, etc. can be 
taken up in MNREGA. So, we are regularly requesting the States to promote 
these activities by availing the funds from MNREGA so that to that extent the 
demand on Department’s fund will be reduced.  
Secondly, the RKVY is not only meant for agriculture but also for allied sectors. 
The overall utilization of RKVY fund for these animal husbandry and fishery 
sectors during the Eleventh Plan had been about 18.5 per cent. There is lot of 
scope to increase this share from 18.5 per cent to 25 per cent. Hon. Agriculture 
Minister has requested the State Chief Ministers to ensure allocation of at least 
25 per cent from RKVY to livestock and fi shery sectors. If this additional six to 
seven per cent is made available by the States, then it can result in additional 
investment of above Rs.4000 crore for these sectors during Twelfth Plan. 
Thirdly, there is an ATMA scheme, which is implemented by Agr iculture 
Department for agriculture and allied sectors. This is basically for strengthening 
the extension, training, technology demonstration, etc. All these activities relating 
to livestock as fisheries sector can be taken up in ATMA. The utilization of A TMA 
fund for allied sector activities is not upto the mark. Roughly, it is about eight to 
ten per cent. We want to increase it to at least 25 per cent.” 
(g) Proposed Free Trade Agreement (FTA ) between India and European Union 
(EU) 
2.17  During evidence, ma tter regarding proposed Free Trade Agreement (FTA) with 
European Union (E U) was taken note of.  It was informed that the European Union is 
not permitting import of dairy products from India in the name of SPS (Sanitary and 
Phyto Sanitary) measures on the grounds that Indian milch animals are not maintained  

25 
 
as per EU norms and as much the dairy products are not fit for consumption.  EU 
allegedly intends to exploit the Indian markets since their dairy products are cheaper 
due to government subsidies. Further, EU have protection for their products like Gouda, 
Feta, Emmenthal under Geographical Indication (GI) but sells Lassi and Paneer in their 
own market without giving any protection to India. 
2.18 The Department of Animal Husbandry, Dairying and Fisheries in a note furnished 
to the Committee, stated that the Government have not agreed for any tariff 
concessions to be given to EU for dairy products  and the same has been conveyed to 
the Department of Commerce and the matter is under negotiation.  
2.19 Regarding actions of Department for procurement of GI for the  indigenous dairy 
products like Lassi, Paneer etc. which are sold in European market , the Department 
informed that the applications for GI protection have to be filed in the Geographical 
Indications Regis try under the Department of Industrial Policy and Promotion (DIPP).  
Since dairy products like lassi, paneer etc. are generic products and their production is 
not limited to any particular geographical location , procuring GI for these products may 
not be feasible. 
2.20 Crop-livestock farming system is vital for livelihood and financial security 
of farmers, especially small and marginal ones.  In such a system, livestock 
supplements income of the farmers, provides durable employment, draught 
power and manure .  The recent food inflation, whereunder high increase in price 
of animal products, have renewed interest in the animal husbandry and dairying 
sector.  The sector also assumes special significance owing to spurring 
economic growth, rising income, increasin g urbanization, change in taste and 

26 
 
dietary preferences, consumption of high -value food and shift from consumption 
of plant-based protein to animal-based protein.   
2.21 The animal husbandry sector is plagued with myriad problems like 
shortage of veterinary hospitals, infrastructure and technical manpower; 
inadequate disease reporting system and lack of infrastructure related with the 
vaccination of livestock.  The major challenges encountered in the dairy sector 
includes inadequate availability of credit, low production and productivity of 
cattle, poor success rate of artificial insemination, poor breeding facilities, 
immortality and morbidity due to disease outbreak, non -availability of grazing 
lands etc.  The constraints of fisheries sector include lack o f breeding facilities, 
low production, lack of scientific and technological interventions, inadequate 
infrastructure and resources for fishing, low institutional credit to fishermen,  
non-availability of quality fish seeds.  Many of these challenges, both in animal 
husbandry and fisheries sectors owe their genesis to the past and some are the 
products of fast - changing contemporary scenario.   Although, these challenges 
are grave and serious but are not insurmountable.   
The Committee observe that mandate of Department of Animal Husbandry, 
Dairying and Fisheries encompasses the cattle – rearers, small dairy 
entrepreneurs, fishermen, which also include the marginal sections of the society 
throughout the Country.  These vocations provide opportunities for the   
cattle – rearers and fishermen to sustain themselves during lean season, by not 
only being as a source of income generation but also a dietary supplement. 
However, the Committee are constrained to note that in -spite of the fact 
that India being an agrarian economy, these sectors are not getting their due from 

27 
 
the planners in terms of public investment.  The fluctuating allocations by the 
planners results in fluctuating fortunes of cattle – reares, small dairy 
entrepreneur and fisherfolk.  The Committee fu rther believe that although the 
policy / programmes of the Government appears meaningful on paper, the reality 
on ground level is in stark contrast to it.  There is a wide gap between the policy 
formulation and implementation.  The Committee strongly belie ve that unless the 
gap between the formulation and implementation of the policies / programmes is 
bridged, important sectors of animal husbandry, dairying and fisheries will 
remain continue to be neglected and in doldrums. 
The burgeoning population coupled  with resolve to make the sector 
sustainable, remunerative and employment generating venture, is a serious 
challenge both for the planner and Govt. alike.  Thus, it became all the more 
important to increase productivity, generate employment alongwith ensur ing 
viability, sustainability and profitability to the population involved in these 
segments.  The pressing need of the hour for all concerned agencies is to work in 
tandem and unison so as to ensure the effective functioning of the animal 
husbandry, dairying and fisheries sector for achieving not only a high growth rate 
trajectory but also induce development and capacity-building of these sections. 
The Department, whilst formulating any scheme, should keep the 
beneficiaries i.e. the cattle – rearers, dairy producers and fishermen at the focal 
point and then formulates their schemes / programmes.  Further, scientific 
knowledge / techniques support should be a value addition to the traditional 
practices in these sectors.  The Committee are pretty sanguine tha t if the 
concerned agencies adhere to their advise, the Department would be able to 

28 
 
tactfully overcome the challenges, in the years to come and thereby jumpstart the 
revival process of these invaluable sectors which have a direct bearing on the 
fortunes of the farming community, especially the small and marginal ones.  The 
Committee desire that Govt. should align their plans / programmes / schemes in 
the light of above observations. 
PROPOSED FREE TRADE AGREEMENT (FTA) BETWEEN INDIA AND EUROPEAN 
UNION (EU) 
2.22 During oral evidence of the Dep artment in connection with examination of 
Demands for Grants (2013 -14), proposed Free Trade Agreement (FTA) between 
India and European Union (EU), came for discussion.  It was noted that EU is not 
permitting the import o f dairy products citing Sanitary and Phyto Sanitary (SPS) 
clause and alleged that the Indian milch animals were not being maintained as 
per EU norms.  As such, the Indian dairy products are unfit for consumption in 
Europe.  On the contrary, EU continue to export and sell their dairy products in 
India seeking protection under Geographical Indication (GI).  On the other hand, 
the indigenous dairy items like, Lassi and Paneer were freely sold in European 
market without giving any protection to India.  When the  Committee enquired 
about the Government’s stand on the issue, it was intimated that India oppose 
any tariff concessions to EU for their dairy products and the same has been 
conveyed to the Department of Commerce.  The matter is under negotiation. 
 Observing that India is global leader in the dairy production, which is a 
mainstay for a wider section of small and marginal farmers, landless farmers, 
cattle rearers, womenfolk and urban poor, the Committee desire that the interest 
of the dairy producers of the country which is paramount be protected from 

29 
 
monopolistic, discriminatory and lopsided trade practices.  As the EU 
Government provides heavy subsidies for the farm produce and dairy sector, the 
Government is urged not only to ensure a level-playing field but also prevail upon 
EU to accord concessions for their domestic dairy produc ers.  The Committee 
hope and trust that Government would take adequate actions in the matter for the 
benefit of farmers. 
2.23 The subsequent narratives deals with detailed examination of the working 
of the Department in terms of implementation of its schemes and financial 
performance during the Fiscal, 2012 -13 and projections for the year 2013 -14.  The 
Committee desire that the Demand No. 3 of the Ministry of Agriculture 
(Department of Animal Husbandry, Dairying and Fisheries) be approved. 
  

30 
 
CHAPTER – III 
OVERVIEW OF DEMANDS 
STRUCTURE 
The Department of Animal Husbandry, Dairying & Fisheries  is one of the three 
Departments under the Ministry of Agriculture. It came into existence on February 1, 
1991 by merger of two Divisions of the Department of Agriculture and Cooperation 
(DAC) viz. Animal Husbandry and Dairy Development into a separate Dep artment.  The 
Fisheries Division of the Department of Agriculture & Cooperation and a part of the 
Ministry of Food Processing Industries was later transferred to this Department on  
10th October, 1997. 
FUNCTIONS 
3.2 The Department is responsible for matter s relating to livestock production, 
preservation, protection & improvement of stocks, dairy development, matters relating to 
the Delhi Milk Scheme (DMS) and the National Dairy Development Board  (NDDB).  It 
also looks after all matters pertaining to fisheries, which includes inland and marine 
sectors and matters related to the National Fisheries Development Board (NFDB). 
OVERVIEW  
3.3 Demand No. 3 which relates to Department of Animal Husbandry, Dairying and 
Fisheries of the Ministry of Agriculture wa s laid in the Lok Sabha on 19th March, 2013.  
The Demand provides for implementation of various Central and Centrally Sponsored 
Schemes (CSS) both for Plan and Non -Plan activities.  The details of Revenue as well 

31 
 
as Capital expenditure under the Plan and N on-Plan sides of Demand No. 3 are given 
hereunder:- 
Table 3.1: Demand No. 3 Department of Animal Husbandry, Dairying and Fisheries 
 
(Rs. in Crore) 
 Plan Non-Plan Total 
Revenue 
Voted 1999.74 534.73 2534.47 
Charged - - - 
Capital 
Voted 25.26 1.48 26.74 
Charged - - - 
Grand Total 2025.00 536.21 2561.21 
 
3.4  The total allocation for the Department of Animal Husbandry, Dairying and 
Fisheries is Rs.  2561.21 crore for the fiscal 201 3-14. Out of this , Rs. 2025 crore and  
Rs. 536.21 crore are on the Plan and n on-Plan sides respectively under the Revenue 
section. Similarly, Rs. 25.26 crore is on the Plan side under the Capital section. 
3.5 It may be pertinent to mention here that during the year 2013 -14, the Department 
have proposed a n amount of Rs . 3,025.00 crore on the Plan side to the Planning 
Commission against which an amount of Rs.  2,025.00 crore on plan side have been 
allocated. 
3.6  The details of Revised Estimates for the year 2012-13 are given below:  
Table 3.2: Details of Revised Estimates for the year 2012-13 
  RE 2012-13 BE 2013-14 
 Plan Non-Plan Plan Non-Plan 
Revenue 1783.08 444.66 1999.74 534.73 
Capital 16.92 00 25.26 1.48 
 

32 
 
 From the above table it may be inferred that there is an increment of 12.1 percent 
in the RE  of 2012-13, from Rs. 1,783.08 crore to Rs. 1,999.74 crore in BE of 2013 -14.  
An increase of 20.2 percent is witnessed from previous fiscal on the non -Plan side.  In 
the Capital Section, an increase of almost 50 percent is witnessed from the RE of  
2012-13 to RE of 2013-14. 
COMPARISON BETWEEN PLAN ALLOCATIONS OF DA DF WITH OTHER 
DEPARTMENTS OF MINISTRY OF AGRICULTURE 
3.7  When the Committee enquired about the share of Department in Central Plan 
allocations compared with the sister Departments d uring Eleventh Five Year Plan,  the 
Department stated that the Central Plan outlay stands at Rs. 21,56,571  crore, out  of 
which, the approved outlay for the Department of Animal Husbandry, Dairying and 
Fisheries is Rs. 8,174 crore, which is 0.38% of Central Plan outlay.  Thus, there is an 
increase in the share of this Department from the total Central Plan outlay during the 
Eleventh Five Year Plan. A comparative statement of the Plan allocation of this 
Department vis-à-vis other important Departments of Ministry of Agriculture are 
following: 
Table 3.3:  Comparative statement of Plan allocation of the Department of Animal 
Husbandry, Dairying & Fisheries vis-à-vis other Departments of Ministry of Agriculture 
 
  Particulars Tenth Plan Eleventh Plan Twelfth Plan 
Central Plan Outlay 
of Govt. of India 
Budgetary Resources 4,05,735 10,96,860 27,10,840 
IEBR 4,87,448 10,59,711 16,22,899 
Total 8,93,183 21,56,571 43,33,739 
Departments   Tenth Plan Eleventh Plan Twelfth Plan 
Department of Animal 
Husbandry, Dairying 
and Fisheries 
Amount 2,500 8,174 14,179 
% of total Outlay 0.28% 0.38% 0.33% 
Department of 
Agriculture and Coop. 
Amount 13,200 66,577 71,500 
% of total Outlay 1.48% 3.09% 1.65% 

33 
 
Department of 
Agriculture Research 
and Education 
Amount 5,368 12,589 25,553 
% of total Outlay 0.60% 0.58% 0.59% 
 
It can be inferred from the above table that the Department of Animal Husbandry, 
Dairying & Fisheries  not only gets the least of funds as compared to the other two 
Departments of the Ministry, but also has a slip of allocation of funds from 0.38 percent 
in Eleventh Plan to 0.33 under the same head for the Twelfth Plan. 
FINANCIAL PERFORMANCE DURING ELEVENTH PLAN  
3.8 The Department furnished following data related with sector-wise Eleventh Plan 
Outlay and Annual Plan allocations are as under: 
Table 3.4: Sector-wise Eleventh Plan Outlay and Annual Plan allocations 
Sector Elevent
h Plan 
Outlay 
2007-
08 
2008-09 2009-10 2010-
2011 
%  
increase/ 
decrease 
over 
previous 
year 
2011-12 %  
increas
e/ 
decreas
e over 
previou
s year 
2012-13 %  
increa
se/ 
decrea
se 
over 
previo
us 
year 
2013-14 %  
increa
se/ 
decrea
se 
over 
previo
us 
year BE BE BE BE BE BE  BE 
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 
Animal 
Husbandry 
4323.00 350.92 481.00 558.29 792.15 41.89 874.36 10.38 1063.10 21.59 1051.49 -1.09 
Dairy 
Development 
580.00 88.50 98.00 101.10 87.76 -13.19 200.25 128.18 274.00 36.83 416.01 51.83 
Fisheries 2776.00 205.68 215.00 298.50 262.44 -12.08 298.00 13.55 340.70 14.33 371.50 9.04 
Sectt. & Eco. 
Services 
35.00 4.90 6.00 6.00 5.80 -3.33 6.50 12.07 7.00 7.69 7.00 0.00 
Special 
Package  
340.00 170.00 160.00 75.00 95.85 27.80 98.69 2.96 35.00 -64.54 15.00 -57.14 
Externally 
Aided Project  
120.00 37.00 40.00 61.11 56.00 -8.36 122.20 118.21 190.20 55.65 162.00 -14.83 
Grand Total 8174.00 810.00 1000.00 1100.00 1300.00 18.18 1600.00 23.08 1910.00 19.38 2025.00 6.21 
 

34 
 
The above table shows that the p lan allocation for the financial year 2013-14 is 
Rs. 2025.00 crore  is higher in tune of 6 percent  than the allocation for 2012 -13 which 
was Rs. 1910.00  crore. This was mainly due to the increase of 51.83 percent of 
allocation in the dairy development from the previous fiscal year.  Further, the allocation 
for Animal Husbandry sector records a negative growth of 1.09 over last fiscal.   
3.9 On the basis of the recommendations made by the Working Groups on Animal  
Husbandry and Fisheries, the Department had proposed a Plan allocation of 
Rs.17,695.17 crore for the Eleventh Five Year Plan. The Planning Comm ission, 
however, approved an outlay of  Rs. 8,174 crore. Following is the year -wise proposed 
funds by the Department, funds allocated by the Planning Commission  and actual 
expenditure incurred during the Eleventh Five Year Plan. 
Table 3.5: Plan allocation during different years of Eleventh Plan vis a vis funds 
demanded by the Department  
       (Rs. in crore) 
Year Funds demanded by 
Department 
Funds allocated by 
Planning Commission 
Expenditure made 
by the Department 
Eleventh Plan  
(2007-2012) 
17695.12  8174.00  4870.54  
2007-08 1435.10 910.00 784.09 
2008-09 1891.25 1000.00 865.27 
2009-10 1889.07 1100.00 873.38 
2010-11 1836.53 1300.00 1104.68 
2011-12 1952.91 1600.00 1243.11 
 
3.10 As against allocation of Rs. 8174 crore, the Department could manage to expend 
Rs. 4870.54 cr ore during Eleventh Plan period.  Explaining the reasons for the same 
and steps taken to ensure that such low utilization do not recur in future, Secretary 
during evidence, stated: 

35 
 
“During the Eleventh Plan, as against the allocation of Rs.8,174 crore approved 
for the Department for livestock and fishery sector, the BE was about Rs.5,910 
crore which was reduced to Rs.5,293 crore in RE but our expenditure was less 
than that. This is the immediate priority which  we want to address to ensure that 
the approved allocation is made available in the Budget during the Twelfth Plan 
and this Budget allocation is utilised to the maximum extent.  
We have taken a special drive in 2012 -13 where the major thrust was given to 
utilise the allocated resources. As against the Budget Estimates of Rs.1,910 
crore, the RE of the Department was reduced to Rs.1,800 crore during 2012 -13 
and our expenditure as per the provisional figure is about Rs.1,737 crore, which 
is about 96.5 per cent  of the RE. This has been achieved by taking a special 
drive in collecting the pending utilisation certificates and expenditure from the 
States, which we would like to continue in the current year also. With the type of 
flexibility in the schematic structu re that we are proposing, I am sure the 
utilisation level will be much better in the subsequent years of the Twelfth Plan.” 
3.11 Confessing that the Department has poor performance in utilization of allocated 
funds, he further stated: 
“As you know, our major problem is our ability to utilize even the allocated 
amount. We need to improve that at least in the initial two years. Last year, it has 
been 96 per cent. We could have achieved higher per cent of the Budget 
Estimates, had there been no reduction at  the RE stage. At present, this is a 
liability of more than Rs.100 crore, which we need to release to NABARD on 
account of Dairy Entrepreneurship Development Scheme, which is outstanding. 
We could not release it during the last year because of the reductio n in the 
budget in the Revised Estimates. But, we are now in a position to achieve almost 
100 per cent of budget allocation”. 
3.12  When asked about the constrains in utilization of allocated funds, the 
Department in a  written reply stated that inadequate infrastructure in terms of veterinary 
manpower and extension services in the States due to which there is delay in utilizing 

36 
 
the amounts released to the States  which affects the sanctioned projects/ schemes. 
Further, a large number of relatively smaller s chemes which generate additional 
administrative work load and increase the number of Utilisation Certificates (UCs) to be 
furnished for these schemes. The Department aims to restructure the existing smaller 
schemes by merging them into four major schemes d uring Twelfth Plan to expedite 
implementation of projects and utilization of funds. 
STRATEGY FOR THE TWELFTH FIVE YEAR PLAN 
3.13 In connection with the preparation for the Twelfth Plan, Planning Commission 
had constituted two Working Groups namely “Working Group on Animal Husbandry and 
Dairy Sector” and “Working Group on Fisheries Sector”. Both the Working Groups had 
submitted the report to the Steering Committee on Agriculture and Allied Sectors 
constituted by Planning Commission.  
The Department has proposed Rs. 25,639.24 crore for the Animal Husbandry 
Dairying and Fisheries sector. The Working Group on Animal Husbandry & Dairying  
recommended budgetary outlay of Rs. 31,560 crore fo r animal husbandry and dairying  
sector and the Working Group on Fisheries have recommended Rs. 6,000 crore  for 
fisheries sector during Twelfth Plan .  However, the Planning Commission allocated an 
amount of Rs. 14 ,179 crore (including Rs.1,584.00 crore as e xternal aid) for Twelfth 
Plan. 
When enquired if the se amounts are adequate, the Department replied that the 
allocated amount of Rs. 14,179 crore is inadequate and the Department had taken up 
the matter for enhancing the outlay at least to the extent of Rs. 20,000 crore. 

37 
 
3.14 When the Committee enquired about the parameters for plan allocation for 
different sectors, the Department informed that there are different criteria for plan 
allocation; such as expenditure over the previous year or previous years, absorption 
capacity of the Department and unspent balance s. Other criteria which are taken into 
account are strategic initiatives and programmes pro posed by the Department, sector al 
and inter-sectoral priorities and above all, the overall position of the resources available 
with the Government. 
3.15 When the Committee sought justification of pruning down the allocation 
suggested by the Working Groups, the representative of the Planning Commission 
replied:  
“The importance of the Working Group is that they consider not only the 
programmes but also the policies of the Government of India afresh and their 
recommendations are not restricted by the resources which are going to be 
available to the country. There are separate Working Groups which are set up to 
assess what the total resources are going to be. They project the total financial 
resources which would be therefore, impact the entire plan. Since the Working 
Groups on individual subjects do not have that information at that point of time, 
they make their recommendations considering unlimited resources at their 
disposal. Thereafter, it has to be prioritised regarding which of those 
recommendations can be implemented immediately and which of those 
recommendations need some gradual implementation.  These are the kinds of 
prioritisation which the Department has to undertake later on and of course, the 
Planning Commission also. While deciding the allocation of any Department, the 
key consideration with the Planning Commission is the total size of kitt y available 
with the Planning Commission and what the performance of the Department has 
been in the past. In the case of Department of Animal Husbandry, Dairying and 
Fisheries, their realisation was Rs. 4,970 crore during the Eleventh Five Year 
Plan and fr om that, we have now given an allocation of Rs. 14,179 crore, which 
is a step up of 185 per cent over their previous Plan allocation. This is the highest 

38 
 
step up which has been given within the Ministry of Agriculture, to all these three 
Departments.” 
3.16 The Twelfth Plan Document has not been finalized yet which will lead to reduced 
allocation, staggering of timelines which in turn reduce  the viability and efficacy of a 
many s cheme/programmes of the department . When enquired about the reasons for 
delay in the finalization of the Twelfth Plan  and its ramifications on the implementation 
of the schemes of the Government, the Department in a written reply stated that the 
schemes/ programmes of the Eleventh Plan continued during 2012-13 with the existing 
pattern to achieve the set targets for the year. The Twelfth Plan has been approved by 
the National Development Council (NDC) in its 57 th Meeting held on 27th December, 
2012.  Most of the  Expenditure Finance Comm ittees (EFCs) of Centrally Sponsored  
Schemes (CSS) of the Department to be implemented during XII Plan have been 
appraised by the Planning Commission and these are pending approval.  The 
Department was allocated Rs.1,910 crore for its Plan schemes during f irst year of 
Twelfth Plan i.e. 2012 -13 which was reduced to Rs.1,800 crore in the RE stage by the 
Finance Ministry due to resource constraints, in spite of the committed liability for 
release of subsidy to  National Bank for Agricultural and Rural Development (NABARD) 
in respect of the Dairy Entrepreneurship Development Scheme  (DEDS).  The allocation 
for 2013 -14 as intimated by Planning Commission is Rs.  2,025 crore. As such there 
would not be much effect on on -going schemes/programmes due to delay in finalization 
of Twelfth Plan.  Resource constraint s and allocation of inadequate fund s may affect 
overall performance.  
3.17 Regarding expected timeline for finalization of the Twelfth Plan , the Department 
stated that the Twelfth Plan has been approved by the NDC, which is likely to be tabled 

39 
 
in the Parliament during the Budget Session.  When asked about the impact of delay in 
Twelfth Plan documents on the Schemes of the Department, the Secretary replied: 
“The new schemes that we are proposing are under finalisation. We have prepared 
the draft EFC Note which is under circulation to the respective Ministries for 
comments and we are expediting these comments. Most of the Departments have 
furnished the comments and thereafter the EFC,  hopefully, will be approved before 
30th June during the first quarter.” 
He further stated: 
“For the proposed new schemes, we have provided for some token allocation with 
an understanding that after approval of these revised schemes the provision will be 
augmented during the supplementary stage. Then, we will start implementing the 
restructured schemes as per the guidelines that will be approved.” 
3.18 Elaborating further as regard to delay in finalization of Twelfth Plan Document, 
the Committee was informed by the representatives of the Planning Commission during 
evidence:  
“The way we have been looking at it is slightly different. So far as the clearance of 
the schemes are concerned, that process has already been started.  It is not waiting 
for layi ng of document in the Parliament. That is a separate exercise. It will 
continue. It will be there in the second half, but the approval of schemes has already 
been started after 27 th December, immediately after approval of the Plan document 
by the NDC.  The  total allocations and scheme -wise allocations have been made 
and these have been shared with the Department of Animal Husbandry, Dairying 
and Fisheries. Draft EFC Notes have been circulated and now, they are pursuing to 
convene an early meeting with the Finance Ministry. So, that will have no impact so 
far as clearances are concerned.” 
 

40 
 
3.19 When pressed further regarding the desirability to operationalise the schemes / 
projects from 1st April of the First Year of the Five Year Plan Period, he stated: 
“Ideally, Yes.” 
He, however, justified the delay by adding that:  
“The fact of the matter is that about 140 Working Groups were set up by the 
Planning Commission on different aspects and the timings of the finalisation of 
the Report of each Working Group do  not match. They (Working Group Chains 
and Members) are the experts, and they need  consult different stakeholders.  
The exercise for formulation of the Plan was taken up in the right earnest with the 
approval of Approach Paper to the Twelfth Five Year Plan on 22nd October, 2011. 
However, the global economic slowdown and consequent likely impact on 
domestic economy necessitated revisions in the projections. The Twelfth plan 
was launched from 1 st April of the first year of the plan on the basis of the on -
going programmes/ schemes of the Eleventh Plan till finalization of the plan 
document for the Twelfth Plan by the NDC.”  
The Secretary, DADF made an intervention and added: 
“Actually, for the livestock sector the Working Group recommended something 
like Rs. 31,000 crore, and for fisheries sector it is about 6,000 crore. So, as 
against Rs. 37,000 crore that were recommended, we, in the Department, while 
preparing the Annual Pl an for the Twelfth Plan projected and reduced it to Rs. 
25,639 crore because that was the type of resources, which we felt could have 
been utilized by the States. So, taking into account all these constraints we 
projected Rs. 25,639 crore.” 
BUDGETARY PLAN  
3.20 When enquired about the  impact of reduction of funds on ongoing/proposed  
projects including proposals revised/dropped/postponed by the Department in the 
aftermath of the Planning Commission’s directive, and short/long -term strategies/plan to 

41 
 
overcome funds constraints, the Department in the post -evidence reply stated that the 
ongoing schemes which are likely to be affected due to curtailment of the proposed 
allocation of this Department are as under:- 
 (i) Foot & Mouth Disease Control Programme (FMD-CP); 
 (ii) Establishment & Strengthening of Existing Veterinary Hospitals & 
Dispensaries (ESVHD); 
 (iii) Dairy Entrepreneurship Development Scheme (DEDS);   
 (iv) Livestock Insurance; 
 (v) Integrated Development of Small Ruminants & Rabbits; and  
 (vi) National Fisheries Development Board (NFDB). 
 Besides, the proposed new schemes like National Livestock Mission and National 
Programme for Bovine Breeding & Dairy (NPBBD) may also be affected due to reduced 
allocation. It was f urther informed that the  schemes of the Department have been 
scaled down to accommodate the allocation in the Twelfth Five Year Plan as approved 
by Planning Commission. To overcome the fund constraint, the department is trying to 
ensure convergence with the budgetary resources ava ilable under different schemes 
like Rashtriya Krishi Vikas Yojana (RKVY), MGNREGA, ATMA etc. 
UTILISATION CERTIFICATES (UCs) 
3.21  The Department has furnished the status of pending Utilisation Certificates (UCs) 
in respect of grants/loans released upto 31st December, 2012: 
 
 

42 
 
Table 3.6: Status of Pending UCs 
No. of UCs 
due on 
01.04.2012 
Amount 
(in Crores) 
No. Of 
UCs 
received 
Amount involved 
in respect of UCs 
received 
(in Crores) 
No. Of 
UCs o/s 
as on 
31.1.2012 
Amount involved 
in respect of 
UCs outstanding 
(in Crores) 
452 1131.06 130 148.69 322 982.37 
 
 When enquired about the  reasons for in pendency of Utilisation Certificates , the 
Department informed that the backlog of UCs was either because of the late submission 
of the UCs or incorrect UCs submitted by the implementing agencies/institutions. UCs 
are sometime submitted without adjustment of unspent balance and are not provided in 
standard format duly countersigned by the competent authority. Despite regular 
persuasions and reminders implementing agencies do not submit the UCs in time and in 
proper format and as on 25 th March, 2013,  252 UCs from 2004 -05 to 2010 -11 are 
pending. The Principal Accounts Office (PAO) is monitoring status of UCs rigorously for 
all the Divisions and had directed PAOs not to make any payment without submission of 
the UCs by the Divisions, who have also responded positively to liquidate the remaining 
UCs.   
3.22 Updating the Committee about the status of the pending of utilization certific ates, 
the Secretary during evidence stated:  
“From the Department side, we have adopted two -pronged strategy – firstly to 
make a special drive to collect the outstanding UCs. Last year we had very good 
response from the States due to this special drive. Th e second strategy is, we 
are restructuring the schemes of the Department.  We have seen that one of the 
main reasons why these UCs are pending is that we have a large number of 
small schemes. The Department had about 25 -26 small schemes with little 
allocations, as a result of which the States will have to submit UCs of all the 
schemes. A State which has received small allocations for all these small 

43 
 
schemes will have to deal with UCs in respect of each individual scheme. What 
we have tried now, following the recommendation of the Planning Commission, is 
that we have merged the small schemes into four mega schemes, as we have 
proposed in the Twelfth Plan. In the bigger schemes, flexibility will be given to the 
States to devise their own strategy.”  
RESULT FRAMEWORK DOCUMENT (RFD) 
3.23 The Department ha ve informed that since the introduction of the concept of 
Result Framework Document ( RFD) in 2009, the y have been preparing and placing 
them for greater transparency and public scrutiny.  The High Powered Comm ittee 
(HPC) headed by the Cabinet Secretary awards the composite scores on the basis of 
performance of the Department against the targets set to fulfill its objectives. 
3.24 The Performance Evaluation Report (PER) of 2011-12 provides the RFD score of 
the Department was 80.27, down from the previous year’s score of 92.91.  When asked 
about the reasons for the same, the Department stated that t he achievements of 
Department came down during 2011 -12 due to less weighed score obtained in success 
indicators like:  
a) Independent audit of implementation of grievance redressal mechanism;  
b) Number of items on which information uploaded by 10.2.2012 (in com pliance 
with the RTI Act, 2005);  
c) Finalize an action plan to mitigate potential areas of corruption;  
d) Finalize an action plan to implement ISO 9001 certification;  
e) Fodder seed production; 
f) Area of grassland developed;  
g) Construction of houses for fishermen;  

44 
 
h) New ponds constructed; and  
i) Ponds renovated, where achievement was less than the target. 
DISCREPANCIES IN INFORMATION FURNISHED IN OUTCOME BUDGET (2013-14) 
3.25 Outcome Budget has become an integral part of the budgeting process since 
2005-06. It is the endeavour of the Govt. to convert ‘outlays’ into ‘outcomes’ by planning 
expenditure, fixing appropriate targ ets, quantifying deliverables in each scheme and 
bringing out “outcomes” of budget outlays provided for each scheme/ programme. It is  
also intended to serve as a policy tool to establish an effective linkage with allocation 
and disbursement of public funds, on the basis of measurable performance. 
3.26 The Committee pointed out the grave discrepancies in the factually inaccurate 
data furnished to them as evident in the ‘Physical Targets and Achievements ’ in 
Chapter 4 – ‘Review of Past Performance ’ of the Outcome Budget (2013-14) in various 
schemes. Some of them include , Centrally Sponsored Scheme on Fodder 
Development, Demonstration of Azol la Cultivation, Central Fodder Development 
Organisation, Assistance to States for Control of Animal Diseases (ASCAD) u nder 
Livestock Health, Regulation of Veterinary Practices, Strengthening of Existing 
Hospitals and Dispensaries, National Control Programme of Peste des Pettits 
Ruminants, NADRS, National Control Programme on Brucellosis, Animal Quarantine &  
Certification Services under Directorate of Animal Health etc.  
When enquired about the same from the Department, they furnished a written 
reply that in column 5 of Chapter -IV of Outcome Budget 2013 -14, the outlay of 2013 -14 
is indicated inadvertently in place of outlay for 2012-13 due to computer formatting error 
and there are inadvertent errors in some other columns which could not be detected 

45 
 
due to the urgency/ time limit of submission and the extra pressure due to the closing of 
financial year. They regretted the errors  and a copy of the revised/ updated version of 
Chapter-IV of outcome budget incorporating the corrected/ updated achievements and 
targets to the Committee is being submitted seperately.  
MASS AWARENESS CAMPAIGNS  
3.27 It is noted that the Department are implementing various important Schemes in  
diversified fields and several new Schemes are proposed during the Twelfth Plan.  
However, many of these schemes have not reached the intended beneficiaries due to 
lack of awareness, which not on ly hampers the absorption capacity of the allocated 
funds by the Department, but also has an adverse impact on the welfare of the cattle 
rearers, fishermen and small and marginal farmers.  When asked about the the 
initiatives taken and expenditure incurred for increasing awareness of the 
policies/programmes amongst stakeholders, the Department in a note furnished to the 
Committee stated that they do not have any  specific scheme for mass awareness 
campaign.  However, Department have supported training program mes under various 
schemes for generating awareness among official s and farmers. Under the scheme of 
Livestock Health and Disease Control (LH&DC), funds are being provided to the States 
for Information, Education and Communication (IEC)  activities as a part of vaccination 
cost.  Under ASCAD, awareness camps are being organized for farmers at district/ 
block level. The agricultural extension schemes , programmes like  Krishi Darshan  and 
Kisan Vani on Doordarshan and Akashvani respectively and Kisan Call Centre will be 
utilized for disseminating livestock -related information to larger sections of farmers.  
Media Units of the Ministry of Information & Broadcasting [i.e. Press Information Bureau 
(PIB), Directorate of Advertising and Visual Publ icity (DAVP), Directorate of Field 

46 
 
Publicity (DFP), Doordarshan and Akashvani)] are being associated in content creation  
and dissemination for mass awareness relating to livestock and fisheries sector . Some 
important of these entities include Agriculture T echnology Management Agencies 
(ATMAs) set up by Department of Agriculture & Co -operation, Krishi Vigyan Kendras 
(KVKs) set up by Indian Council of Agriculture Research  (ICAR) etc. to avoid any 
duplicity of efforts between the extension efforts in the agriculture and allied sectors. 
3.29 During the course of examination of Demands for Grants (2013 -14) of the 
Department, the Committee  noted that the Planning Commission have allocated 
Rs. 8,174.00 crore, which was only 46 percent of the proposed allocation for 
Eleventh Plan of the Department.  Further, the actual expenditure of the 
Department was Rs. 4870.54 crore which was a mere 60 pe rcent of the allocated 
funds during the Eleventh Plan.  They, are of the opinion that had the balance Rs. 
3,304.00 crore been utilized, the implementation of schemes would have been far 
better and more fruitful.  They are pained to note that their constant  pleas to 
rectify the imbalances at BE and RE stages have gone unheard during the 
Eleventh Plan period.  As the Twelfth Plan is in final stage of finalization, the 
Committee impress upon all the agencies concerned i.e. Planning Commission 
and the Ministry of Finance (Department of Expenditure) to adopt a holistic 
approach and not cling on the past.  The allocation of funds to the Department 
must be uniformly spread so as to avoid backloading of Plan funds.  This would 
ensure that the Department not only get  maximum funds out of the approved 
outlay but also able to optimally utilize the allocated resources. 
3.30 The Committee observe that one of the major constraints of the 
Department is its inability to entirely utilize even the reduced allocated funds 

47 
 
during the Eleventh Plan period.  This is attributed to the failure of the 
Department in motivating the States / UTs to send their proposals as well as 
Utilization Certificates in time and hence, an even pace of utilization of funds in 
each fiscal year could not be ensured.  The Committee, therefore, exhort upon the 
Department to finally adopt a pro -active approach and impress upon the 
implementing agencies to come forward and participate actively in the schemes 
run by the Department.  In order to ensure this, t hey desire the Department to 
take into confidence and incorporate the views of States / UTs while planning the 
modalities of the schemes / programmes and thereby ensure their active 
participation in the schemes of the Department. 
TWELFTH FIVE YEAR PLAN 
3.31 Being well aware of the prolonged delay in the finalization of Eleventh Plan 
which had detrimental impact on the implementation of various schemes of the 
Government, the Committee had recommended a slew of measures in their 
Second Report on the Demands f or Grants (2009 -10) of the Department and 
reiterated the same in their Twenty-fourth Report that the Twelfth Plan documents 
should be finalized before 1 st April, 2012.  The adverse impact on schemes / 
projects was also confessed by the representatives of P lanning Commission 
during oral deposition in connection with the examination of Demands for Grants 
(2012-13) of the Department.  However, much to their disappointment, the 
Committee note that in  spite of their having repeatedly espoused the cause of 
initiating corrective measures to expedite the finalization of Twelfth Plan 
document, so as to avoid procedural delay in according clearance to schemes 
and resulting staggering of timelines and reduced allocation, no concrete action 

48 
 
seems to have been taken in t his regard.  The Plan Document is stuck with the 
Planning Commission and as and when the Twelfth Plan is finally operationalized, 
the implementations of the schemes are  likely to be severely hampered.  The 
fears of the Committee are further compounded on b eing informed that the final 
approval of the new schemes of the Department may not be cleared before 
October-November, 2013, i. e. after RE stage of the second year of the Twelfth 
Plan.  Such development does  cast a question mark on the very desirability o f 
planning procedures practices and processes.  Hoping against hope, the 
Committee, however, not wanting to shirk away from its responsibility, once 
again recommend the expeditious finalization of the Twelfth Plan document so as 
to ensure its implementation in real time, thereby scuttling the negative impact of 
this delay on the efficiency of the various schemes of the Department.   At the 
same time, Govt. should re-look into and review, if necessary, system of planning 
procedures, process and practices esp ecially in context of protracted delays in 
the finalization of Five Year Plans.   
INTER – SECTORAL ALLOCATIONS 
3.32 The Committee note with disappointment that despite their repeated 
recommendations, the Plan allocation of the Department of Animal Husbandr y, 
Dairying and Fisheries be scaled up, so as to increase its share, compared to the 
other two Department of Ministry of Agriculture viz. Department of Agriculture 
and Cooperation (DAC) and Department of Agricultural Research and Education 
(DARE) have not fructified, but rather slipped to 0.33 percent from 0.38 percent of 
the total share of Central Plan Outlay of Government of India in Twelfth Plan and 
Eleventh Plan respectively.  The Committee again urge upon the Planning 

49 
 
Commission to quantumly enhance th e share of Department of Animal 
Husbandry, Dairying and Fisheries in plan allocation. 
3.33 At the same time, the Committee reiterate that the Department should get 
their house in order and address the pressing issues of pending Utilisation 
Certificates on priority basis so that the States / UTs avail Central funds.  The 
Committee strongly believe that if State Governments are genuinely concerned 
about envigorating the sections of population engaged in animal husbandry, 
dairying and fisheries sector  then th ey should avail more Central funds by 
ensuring timely submission of Utilisation Certificates, so that the last beneficiary 
is benefitted in true sense.  This, in result, would lead to positive outcomes at 
later stages of financial allocations, and hence, desired growth rate. 
RESULT FRAMEWORK DOCUMENT (RFD) 
3.34 The concept of RFD was introduced in 2009 to measure the performance of 
Ministries / Department of Government of India  and the Department of Animal 
Husbandry, Dairying and Fisheries have also been preparing the RFDs since 
then.  The Committee note that  the RFD score during 2010 -11 was 92.91 percent 
which slid to 80.27 percent in 2011 -12.  The Department have attributed this slide 
to result of less -weighted score obtained in success indicators related with 
independent audit of grievance redressal mechanism, compliance of RTI Act, 
2005, finalisation of action plan on mitigation of potential areas of corruption , ISO 
9001 certification, fodder seed production , construction of houses for fishermen 
etc.  They believe  that the outcomes of RFD provides an opportunities for 
Department to introspect the areas where they are not performing well and hence 
can reorient their focus and work towards achieving the target.  However, they do 

50 
 
not take kindly to the drop in RFD score of the Department in the year 2011 -12 as 
they view it to be reflecting the Department in a negative light.  They therefore 
impress upon the Department to put their house in  order and ensure that the RFD 
score of the Department surges past 90 percentage points during the coming 
years and stays intact there. 
DISCREPANCIES IN INFORMATION SUBMITTED IN OUTCOME BUDGET (2013-14)  
3.35 The Committee observe that the Outcome Budget i s an integral part of the 
budgeting process since 2005 -06, wherein the Government aims to converge the 
outlays into outcome by planning expenditure, fixing suitable targets, quantifying 
deliverables of each scheme and finally, arrive at ‘outcomes’ of each scheme /  
programme.  Th us, the Outcome Budget serves as a policy tool to establish an 
effective linkage with allocation and disbursement of public funds on the basis of 
measurable performance.  However, much to their bewilderment, they observe 
that the Ou tcome Budget which was presented to the Parliament on 19 th March, 
2013 was riddled with several discrepancies / errors and misinformation, which 
were highlighted by the Committee during the course of Oral Evidence of the 
Department in examination of Demand s for Grants (2013 -14).  As the Outcome 
Budget serves as an accurate measurable tool for the performance of various 
schemes / programmes, the Committee is shocked to note that factually wrong 
information was furnished to the Parliament. Strongly deprecatin g this slipup on 
the part of the Department, the Committee recommend that utmost care should 
be taken by the Department in furnishing factually correct information to 
Parliament and its authorities and also ensure that such slippages are not 
repeated in the future.  While strongly recommending the Department to maintain 

51 
 
the sanctity of the document s presented to the House , they also desire that  the 
Outcome Budget may again be re -looked into and the misinformation, 
deficiencies etc. made good.  The Committee would also like to be apprised of the 
action taken in the matter. 
MASS AWARENESS CAMPAIGNS 
3.36 The Committee note that the Department is implementing various important 
schemes in diversified fields and many new schemes are proposed for the 
Twelfth Plan.  They are also aware that many of the important schemes of the 
Department could not achieve the d esired targets due to lack of awareness 
amongst the intended beneficiaries, which resulted in the non -utilization of 
allocated funds by the Department.  Surprisingly, no departmentalized 
institutionalize mechanism exists for generating mass awareness of th e schemes 
for the intended beneficiaries, unlike ATMA and KVKs.  The argument of the 
Department that  ATMAs of Department of Agriculture and Cooperation (DAC) and 
Krishi Vigyan Kendras  of Indian Council of Agricultural Research (ICAR) are 
being engaged in extension services and they do not want any duplicity in this 
regard is hardly convincing.  The Committee, therefore, recommend that on the 
line of KVK / ATMA, a separate scheme for the mass awareness campaigns, 
exclusively for animal husbandry, dairy and fisheries sector be initiated at the 
earliest, so as to ensure focused attention and high reach.  The Committee feel 
that a dedicated extension service for the sector, is likely to overcome the 
obstacle of lack of awareness of the various schemes related w ith the 
Department. 
 

52 
 
CHAPTER IV 
SECTORAL AND SCHEMATIC ANALYSIS 
ANIMAL HUSBANDRY 
India, with 2.39 percent of the land area of world, maintains nearly 17 percent of 
world’s human population and a share of about 10.7 percent of total livestock resources 
of World. India's livestock population is presently 529.69 million as per the 18th livestock 
census, in addition to 648.83 million poultry. Availability of feed and fodder for livestock 
is a serious concern in view of pressure on land for ensurin g food securi ty. The 
Department is implementing various Central Sector and Centrally -Sponsored Schemes 
for the development of requisite infrastructure and supplementing efforts of the State 
Governments in achieving accelerated growth of animal husbandry sector. 
4.2 When enquired about major achievements during 2012 -13, the Department  in a 
written reply stated that they have  made significant achievement in production  of milk, 
fish, and egg. Several measures have been initiated by the Government to increase the 
productivity of milch animals, which has resulted in increasing the milk production 
significantly from the level of 102.6 million tonnes at the end of the Tenth Plan (2006-07) 
to 127.9 million tonnes at the end of the Eleventh Plan (2011-12). Milk production during 
2012-13 is anticipated to be 133 million tonne in spite of droughts in a number of States 
during Kharif 2012 and Rabi 2012 -13. Poultry development in the country has shown 
steady progress over the years. Currently egg production is around  billion in
- , is about 5  percent over the previous year production of about 63.02 
billion eggs. Fish production in India has increased from 41.57 lakh tonnes (24.47 lakh  
tonnes for marine and 17.10 lakh tonnes for inland fisheries) in 1991 -92 to 86.66 lakh 

53 
 
tonnes (33.71 lakh tonnes for marine and 52.95 lakh tonnes for inland fisheries) in 
2011-12. Other important achievements of the Department during 2012-13 include: 
(i) Implementation of National Dairy Plan has started from the current year. 
(ii) Reduction in outbreaks of important animal diseases like FMD and  Peste des 
Petits Ruminants (PPR). 
(iii) Expansion of activities relating to fodder development. 
(iv) Initiation of skill development training through ICAR institutes.  About 18,309 
fishers and fish farmers have been trained during 2012-13. 
(v) The National Freshwater Fish Brood Bank Project has been launched at 
Bhubaneswar to ensure supply of quality brood stock to the hatcheries. 
(vi) Project on fish  disease surveillance and monitoring has been approved for 
implementation through National Bureau of Fish Genetic Resources  (NBFGR), 
Lucknow. 
(vii) Expansion of cage culture to enhance the productivity of fisheries has been 
taken under the prog ramme of National Mission for Protein Supplements which 
is a component under RKVY. 
(a) ALLOCATION FOR ANIMAL HUSBANDRY SECTOR 
4.3 The summary of proposed outlay for Annual Plan 2013 -14 under Centrally 
Sponsored and Central Sector schemes is given below: 
Table 4.1 Proposed Outlay for Annual Plan 2013-14 under Centrally Sponsored and Central 
Sector Schemes 
(Rs. in crore) 
 
Sector 
Annual Plan(2013-14) 
Central Sector Centrally 
Sponsored 
Total 
Animal Husbandry 360.09 991.20 1351.29 
Dairy Development 885.00 290.00 1175.00 
Fisheries 386.71 70.00 456.71 
Secretariat & Economic Services 7.00  7.00 
Special Livestock Sector and Fisheries 
Package for Idukki District of Kerala 
 35.00 35.00 
Total 1638.80 1386.20 3025.00 

54 
 
 
The Department have informed that a fter restructuring of schemes of DADF, it is 
proposed to implement a total of 19 schemes in the Annual Plan (2013 -14).  Of these, 
one relates to Secretariat and Economic Services, 9 relate to Animal husbandry 
(including 2 new schemes), 4 to Dairy Developme nt, 4 to Fisheries sector and a Special 
Package for Idukki and Kuttanad Package for Kerala.  
 4.4 Sector-wise details of BE, RE and Expenditure during different years of the 
Eleventh Five Year Plan are given in the table on next page: 
Table 4.2 Sector-wise Annual Plan Allocations and Expenditure 
(In crores) 
Sector Outlay 
Eleventh 
Plan 
2007-08 2008-09 2009-10 2010-11 2011-12 
    BE RE Exp BE RE Exp BE RE Exp BE RE Exp BE RE Exp 
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 
Animal 
Husbandry 
4323.00 350.92 320.46 338.14 481.00 461.31 444.54 558.29 459.20 435.84 792.15 776.30 668.75 874.36 798.51 722.88 
 
(b) NEW SERVICES / INSTRUMENTS OF SERVICE IN TWELFTH PLAN 2012-17 
4.5 The Department have proposed following 4 Centrally Sponsored Schemes during 
Twelfth Five Year Plan for implementation after a detailed exercise for  restructuring of 
the existing Schemes in consultation with the Planning Commission: 
1. National Livestock Mission (NLM) 
2. National Programme for Bovine Breeding and Dairy (NPBBD) 
3. Livestock Health and Disease Control which will have the following new 
Schemes as components:  
(a) National Control Programme for Classical Swine Fever 
(b) Establishment of Veterinary Drug Control Authority 

55 
 
(c) Upgradation/ Strengthening of Infrastructure of Veterinary Colleges 
4. National Scheme for Welfare of Fisherman (existing Scheme). 
(c) NATIONAL LIVESTOCK MISSION 
4.6 The Department have also informed that with appropriate technology, backward 
and forward linkages and participation of farmers , productivity of the animals as well as 
income of the farmers can be radically improved, as has happened in case of dairy and 
commercial poultry. However, a similar approach for other livestock species is yet to 
materialise. It is, therefore, necessary to have an umbrella scheme by merging smaller 
schemes to address major challenges of the livestock sector and to incentivise 
establishment of backward and forward linkages. 
4.7 Existence of a plethora of schemes relating to livestock sector (excluding bovine 
breeding, dairying and livestock health schemes) is a major constraint to growth of the 
sector, since it limits the capability of states to effectively access funding under various 
schemes.  In order to provide greater flexibility to states in formulating and implementing 
various projects for development of livestock, the department proposed to merge these 
schemes as the National Livestock Mission (NLM) during Twelfth Plan, with the main 
objective of achieving sustainable development and growth of the lives tock sector. 
There are 135 registered breeds of livestock and poultry (cattle – 34; buffalo – 12; 
sheep – 39; goat – 21; horse / pony – 6; camel – 8; poultry – 15) and yet much of the 
genetic resources are yet to be characterized and catalogued.  
4.8 The a dvantages of subsuming small schemes into a National Mission include 
greater flexibility to the states to prioritize the interventions required for accelerating 

56 
 
development of livestock sector by formulating and implementing different projects and 
initiatives in the pattern adopted for RKVY.  
Any other inn ovative initiative proposed by S tates for development of the 
livestock sector can also be considered under NLM in case there is no funding available 
for such initiative from other schemes. Attempt will be made to synergize the efforts of 
various agencies and organisations in this regard, using different on -going schemes like 
MGNREGA and RKVY, etc.  The allocation earmarked for NLM for the Twelfth Plan is 
Rs 2,800 crore. Besides, funds from other related sch emes like RKVY, MGNREGA, 
etc., will be converged. 
(d) NATIONAL PROJECT FOR CATTLE AND BUFFALO BREEDING (NPCBB)  
4.9 Genetic improvement in bovines is a long term activity and Government of India 
has initiated a major programme “National Project for Cattle and Buffalo Breeding” 
(NPCBB) from October 2000 over a period of ten years, with plan allocation of Rs. 375 
crore for Phase –I ( Tenth Plan) and Rs. 554 crore ( Eleventh Plan). The NPCBB 
envisages genetic up gradation on priority basis with a focus on develop ment and 
conservation of important indigenous breeds. Under the project 100% grants -in-aid is 
given to State Implementing Agencies (SIAs). 
4.10 When the huge reduction in the grants for The National Project for Cattle and  
Buffalo Breeding (NPCBB) was enquired by the Committee, the Department replied that 
Budget allocation of Rs .180.39 crore was made available for 2012 -13, which was 
reduced to Rs.117.66 crore at the RE stage due to reduction in overall allocation for the 
Department by Ministry of Finance and additional requirement of funds under DEDS . 
Higher allocation was kept at BE stage because new scheme namely National 
Programme on Bovine Breeding and Dairy was proposed to be launched from 2012-13. 

57 
 
Due to delay in approval of Twelfth Plan allocation, proposed new scheme could not be 
initiated.  Against the RE of Rs. 117.76 crore an expenditure of Rs .108.02 has been 
made as on 25th March, 2013 under the scheme. 
4.11 The Com mittee expressed their desire to be apprised about the 
hindrances/bottlenecks in the implementation of the project and the corrective steps 
proposed in the direction, to which the Department informed that for  evaluation of 
NPCBB in Phase I (i.e. till 2005 -06), an independent agency ( NABARD) was engaged 
and agency has completed impact analysis in 12 States, which have implemented 
NPCBB.  Some of the major bottlenecks identified during evaluation and review of 
NPCBB include the following:   
i). Private AI workers established under the project are not viable in the three 
months time in which tapering grant was provided during Phase I. Thus long term 
performance linked assistance as tapering grant may be provided to the private 
AI workers to ensure them time to establish them and their viability.  
ii). Sourcing and use of quality breeding bulls needs emphasis and for this there 
must be identification of some agencies to take up bull production programme. 
iii). The fund flow for NPCBB needs to be enhanced to expand coverage. Funds may 
also be supplemented  through resources available under other ongoing 
Government schemes. 
iv). Mechanism for monitoring of focal points (AI centres, sperm stations, farms and 
breeding programmes  etc.) may be strengthened to ensu re timely action for 
removal of deficiencies and corrective action. 
v). Establishment of Central Monitoring Cell for monitoring of project activities. 
vi).  R&D backstopping, networking and qualitative improvement in R&D support in 
hi-tech areas (e.g. embryo technology, Marker Assisted Selection etc).  
 

58 
 
(e) NATIONAL PROGRAMME FOR BOVINE BREEDING AND DAIRY (NPBBD) 
4.12 Genetic upgradation with a focus on development and conservation of important 
indigenous breeds in bovines is key to improve productivity.  There are 304 million cattle 
and buffalo in the country whose average low productivity is a matter of concern.  The 
fact that nearly 80 per cent of the cattle and 60 per cent of buffaloes do not belong to 
any defined breed makes a strong case for their genetic up-gradation on priority basis.  
The major inadequacies include, genetic up -gradation of cattle and buffalo; 
conservation of breeds; production and distribution of breeding inputs; quality control of 
services; human resource development as well as instituti onal and policy framework 
etc. In order to address these concerns, a n umbrella Programme for "National 
Programme on Bovine Breeding and Dairy " (NPBBD) has been launched which 
envisaged merger and restructuring of ongoing Centrally Sponsored Schemes. 
4.13 NPBBD scheme will have two main components namely, National Programme 
for Bovine Breeding (NPBB) and Dairy Development.  For continuing the breed 
improvement programme mostly in areas not covered under NDP, the NPCBB will be 
continued during Twelfth Plan.  H owever, the combined activities in respect of breeding 
and dairying will be more effective in extension of artificial insemination services, feed 
management and marketing of good quality of milk which are essential for improving 
productivity and income of farmers.  The scheme for bovine breeding will be merged 
with dairy development schemes to create synergies of resources.  The important 
components proposed under NPBBD include the following: 
• Assistance for Marketing infrastructure beyond the State jurisdiction. 
• Establishing Milk Powder plant upto capacity of 30 MT at a cost of Rs.40 Crore 
subject to overall ceiling of Rs 15 Crore per district. 

59 
 
• Milk processing plants with capacity of 1 LLPD at a cost of Rs.25 Crore and 50 
TLPD at a cost of Rs.15 Crore subject to overall ceiling of Rs 15 Crore per district 
which has been hiked from Rs. 3 crore. 
• Cattle induction to be restricted to SC/ST and BPL families subject to an overall 
ceiling of 10% of the total project cost and subsidy restricted to 50% (75% for 
women milk producers) of the NABARD cost of cattle plus transportation cost 
and cost of animal insurance.  
• RFID tag to be made mandatory in case of cattle induction. 
• Centralized MIS facility for DADF 
(f) FOOT AND MOUTH DISEASES CONTROL PROGRAMME (FMD-CP) 
4.14 Foot and Mouth Disease (FMD) is the most important livestock disease in terms 
of economic impact. The economic losses caused by the disease are mainly due to loss 
in milk production, reduction in the working ability of work animals, reduction in the body 
weight leading to reduced yields of meat.  FMD-CP is being implemented in 221 
specified districts of the country with 100% central funding as cost of vaccine, 
maintenance of cold chain and other logistic support to undertake vaccination. In these 
districts, about 110 million cattle and buffaloes are expected to be vaccinated twice a 
year.  
4.15 The actual expenditure under FMD-CP is in the vicinity of Rs. 104 to 105 crore 
for the years 2011 -12 and 2012-13.  However, Rs.250 crore have provided for the year 
2013-14. When asked to justify such an increment in allocation, the Department stated 
in the written reply that the  programme w ill be extended to cover all 33 districts of 
Rajasthan and remaining 55 districts in Uttar Pradesh from 2013 -14 immediately after 
approval of the revised scheme , keeping in mind geographical contiguity with already 
covered districts, raising the total number of districts being covered from the current 221 

60 
 
to 309. It is proposed to cover about 52.6 million additional cattle and buffalo population 
under the programme during 2013 -14. Regarding actual expenditure and allocation at 
BE/ RE Stage during 2011 -12, i t is stated that the actual expenditure under FM D-CP 
was Rs 105.96 crore as against the RE of Rs 108.15  crore. During 2012 -13, the 
expenditure till 25th March 2013 is about Rs 143.71 crore  as against RE of Rs 160.00 
crore. The budget outlay for 2013 -14 has been proposed at Rs. 300 crore including for 
proposed expansion and a target of 155 million vaccinations has been fixed under FMD 
control programme. 
4.16 In response to a query regarding the targeted date of elimination of the disease 
for the Country, the  Committee were informed that to cover the entire cattle and buffalo 
population in the Country, total 610 million doses of FMD vaccine per year will be 
required. The same will be subject to overall availability of fund and sufficient vaccines. 
However, it is expected that with the implementation of a planned control programme 
covering the whole country in a phased manner and the disease is expected to be 
controlled in entire country by the year 2025. Till then, the remaining districts in the 
country are und ertaking need -based FMD vaccination programme by availing 
assistance under “Assistance to States for Control of Animal Diseases (ASCAD)”, which 
is a component of LH&DC. 
(g) NATIONAL CONTROL PROGRAMME OF CLASSICAL SWINE FEVER  
4.17 Classical Swine Fever (CS F) (commonly called as Swine Fever or Hog Cholera) 
is a highly devastating viral disease of the pigs. The disease is highly infectious and 
contagious. In India, it is rated under the diseases of high economic importance and 
losses are occurring directly du e to mortality, retardation of growth, reproductive 
problems of affected pigs and indirectly by bringing restrictions on exports of pork and 

61 
 
pork products. Both morbidity and mortality are high in acute infections. The mortality 
rate in acute cases can rea ch 90%. Chronic infections are also fatal in most cases.  At 
present, there is provision to provide the funds on 75:25 basis under ASCAD for 
prevention and control of this disease.  
4.18 The Department have informed that Swine Husbandry is the major source of 
livelihood for the farmers in North -Eastern States. As per 2007 Census, the pig 
population in India is 11.1 million, out of which, the North -Eastern States has a 
population of 4.58 million. The cell culture attenuated CSF virus vaccine may overcome 
this constraint and will be the only alternative to protect pigs against the disease. There 
are attempts to produce this cell culture vaccine in the country. Besides the vaccine, 
early diagnosis and understanding on the epidemiology of the disease are importan t not 
only to prevent the spread. At present, there is provision to provide the funds on 75:25 
basis under ASCAD for prevention and control of this disease. The states are procuring 
the required vaccine under ASCAD as per their requirement.  However, looki ng at the 
importance of the disease causing huge loss to the piggery industry and small farmers 
and need to have dedicated control programme for control Classical Swine Fever in the 
country, it is proposed to add a new component namely, ‘Classical Swine Fe ver Control 
Programme CSF-CP in the existing scheme of ‘Livestock Health and Disease Control’ 
under which 100% funding will be provided to the States/UTs for carrying out the 
vaccination of entire eligible pig population. Initially the focus will be on NE states and 
depending on the vaccine availability, the scope will be enlarged to cover entire country 
in a phased manner.  
 

62 
 
(h) ESTABLISHMENT AND STRENGTHENING OF EXISTING VETERINARY 
HOSPITALS AND DISPENSARIES (ESVHD) 
4.19 The Department have informed that various livestock health related schemes are 
not able to yield optimum results due to poor veterinary infrastructure in various States. 
The prevailing situation underscores an urgent need to establish new veterinary 
hospitals and dispensaries in the countr y and to improve the condition of existing ones. 
Any investment made in these areas will have a multiplier effect in raising the 
productivity of the animals and providing economic gains to their owners. There are 
about 10,094 veterinary hospitals/ polyclin ics and 21,269 veterinary dispensaries in the 
country. In order to help the states to set up infrastructure for new veterinary hospitals 
and dispensaries and to strengthen/equip the existing ones, the Department is providing 
funds on 75:25 (Centre:  State) sharing basis except NE States, where the grants are 
provided on 90:10 basis.   
4.20 Only 12 States have been supported under this programme.  When enquired 
about the reasons that why other States are not showing much interest in availing 
assistance under this programme , the Department stated that since the scheme is 
demand driven , the Department is providing financial assistance to the States/UTs to 
set up new veterinary hospitals/dispensaries and to strengthen the existing ones as per 
the project proposal  received from the States under the scheme . The details of funds 
provided to the States/UTs under ‘Establishment & Strengthening of existing Hospitals 
& Dispensaries (ESVHD)’ since inception of the Scheme (2010 -11 to 2012 -13) are as 
under: 
  

63 
 
Sl.No. States/UTs Year-2010-11 Year-2011-12 Year 2012-13  
1 Andhra Pradesh 1420.00 0.00 0.00 
2 Bihar  0.00 1282.58 0.00 
3 Chattishgarh 0.00 595.58 162.50 
4 Goa 0.00 0.00 75.75 
5 Gujarat  85.40 0.00 0.00 
6 Haryana  200.00 382.38 0.00 
7 Himachal Pradesh 367.50 365.49 0.00 
8 Jammu & Kashmir 0.00 649.64 0.00 
9 Jharkhand 1211.03 0.00 0.00 
10 Karnataka 414.38 414.38 751.00 
11 Kerala  768.75 768.75 0.00 
12 Madhya Pradesh 0.00 1391.25 1389.75 
13 Maharashtra 1000.00 0.00 600.00 
14 Orissa   154.14 0.00 0.00 
15 Punjab  400.00 780.00 0.00 
16 Rajasthan 0.00 1037.44 0.00 
17 Tamilnadu 671.84 0.00 1242.00 
18 Uttar Pradesh 534.38 0.00 225.00 
19 Uttarakhand 266.78 0.00 0.00 
20 West Bengal 700.00 0.00 0.00 
21 Arunachal Pr. 297.00 232.00 0.00 
22 Assam  872.00 978.00 0.00 
23 Manipur 0.00 428.63 0.00 
24 Mizoram  233.33 233.33 108.00 
25 Nagaland 0.00 158.40 253.80 
26 Sikkim  0.00 143.64 120.00 
27 Tripura 100.00 0.00 147.05 
28 NCT Delhi 0.00 0.00 40.00 
29 Pondicherry 0.00 30.00 0.00 
30 Chandigarh   0.00 0.00 9.90 
31 Lakshadweep 0.00 0.00 51.61 
 
4.21 Since inception of the scheme, about 2514 Veterinary Hospitals and 2701 
Veterinary Dispensaries have been supported for construction/ strengthening under the 
scheme till 2011 -12. During 2012 -13, funds have been provided for construction/ 
strengthening of 2 10 Veterinary Hospitals and 700 Veterinary Dispensaries under the 
scheme till date.  A sum of Rs.98.81 crore was released to the States/UTs during  

64 
 
2011-12 as against BE of Rs.90.00 crore. The budgetary allocation for the year 2012-13 
was 91 crore which ha s been slipped to 60 crore in the year 2013 -14.  When the same 
was enquired by the Committee, the Department stated that t he funds are being 
released to the States/UTs based on the achievement of physical progress and 
expenditure incurred out of the funds released in previous years. During 2012-13, the 
expenditure under the Scheme was less till September, 2012. Hence, availab ility of 
funds was reduced to Rs. 46.87 crores at RE stage. They further informed that till 25th 
March 2013 , a sum of Rs 38.74 crore ha s already been released to the S tates/UTs.  
During 2013-14, the provision of Rs .60 crore has been kept as for the Scheme within 
the overall allocation for LH&DC during 2013-14. The States will be encouraged to avail 
the funds for this purpose under RKVY in case of additional funding is required. 
4.22  On being queried about the shortage of manpower in veterinary and animal 
sciences, the Department submitted that the Department have constituted an expert 
committee to look into the minimum standards of veterinary education and to suggest 
necessary changes in the Indian Veterinary Council Act for facilitating veterinary 
education enabling more veterinary graduates to pass out.  
(i) UPGRADATION/ STRENGTHENING OF INFRASTRUCTURE OF 
VETERINARY COLLEGES 
4.23  There are 7 veterinary universities and 35 Veterinary Colleges in the country and 
approximately 2000 students are passing out annually from these colleges/ Universities. 
The infrastructure facilities in these colleges are not adequate to meet the requirements 
of minimum standard of the Veterinary Education Regulation and the Veterinary Council 
of India ( VCI) which is mandated  to inspect these colleges for ensuring the minimum 
standards is observing deficiencies in infrastructure facilities in these colleges, which 

65 
 
need to be improved for imparting quality veterinary education. Grant-in-aid to these 
colleges is proposed  for imp roving the facilities of the veterinary clinic/ hospitals, 
laboratory facilities, lecture rooms and deployment of qualified veterinary staff etc. to 
meeting the minimum standard of veterinary education regulations by the veterinary 
colleges. 
(j) ESTABLISHMENT OF VETERINARY DRUG CONTROL AUTHORITY 
4.24 The Veterinary drugs and biologicals are being regulated presently under the 
provision of the Drugs and Cosmetic Act, 1940 .The regulatory role in respect of import 
and marketing /manufacture & marketing includ ing testing are being done by Drug 
Controller General of India (DCGI) which functions under the administrative control of 
the Ministry of Health & Family Welfare (MoHFW).  
4.25 The Department further submitted that The Working Group on Animal Husbandry 
proposed a separate Veterinary Drug Control Authority during Tenth Plan. This was 
further reiterated by the Working Group in Eleventh Plan and Twelfth Plan. In view of 
these recommendations, the Department proposed for  a separate Ve terinary Drug 
Control Authority  whose objective will be to lay down the standard separately for 
veterinary drugs including testing protocol and safety standards for registrations & 
marketing.  
4.26  When the Committee enquired into the need a nd efficacy of such an institution, 
the Department in their post-evidence reply stated that there is no separate wing under 
DCGI to look into the Veterinary medicinal products and the Department has very 
limited role in this arrangement. Tangible efforts h ave also been made by DCGI to lay 
down standards for veterinary drug, trial protocol, testing facilities, toxicity and safety 

66 
 
standards etc. Drug & Technical Advisory Board (DTAB) which have major role in policy 
decision on type of veterinary drugs to be allowed in Indian market for use which has no 
representation o f Department  of Animal Husbandry, Dairying and Fisheries .  It is 
proposed to establish a separate Veterinary Drug Control Authority during the Twelfth 
plan.  The proposed Authority will handle quality control, registration of new products 
and approval of manufacturing and marketing veterinary drugs, veterinary vaccines, 
feed supplements and other substances which are generally used for feeding animals.  
4.27 When enquired by the Committee about the desirability of separate regulatory 
authorities for veterinary sciences like as in Veterinary Council of India as existing in 
other countries where separate authorities / regulators exist for human being and 
animals, the Department furnished following information:  
a) In USA, there is a separate cell known as Centre for Veterinary Medicines for 
regulating Veterinary drugs which function under the Control of US Food and 
Drug Administration (FDA). 
b) A statutory authori ty, Australian Pesticides and Veterinary Medicine Authority 
(APVMA) has been established in 1993 for c entralized registration of all 
agricultural and Veterinary Medicinal Products into Australian market. 
c) In Japan, Ministry of Agriculture, Forestry and Fisheries (MAFF) Control 
veterinary drugs exclusively used for animals whereas Ministry of Health there 
control drugs for Human use. Under MAFF, Animal Product Safety Division 
(APSD) is responsible for regulation of Veterinary drug. 
d) To protect human and animal health and the safety of Canada's food supply, the 
Veterinary Drugs Directorate (VDD) evaluates and monitors the safety, quality 
and effectiveness, sets standards, and promotes the prudent use of veterinary 
drugs administered to food-producing and companion animals. 
 

67 
 
POULTRY DEVELOPMENT 
4.28 The scheme has three components namely, ‘Assistance to State Poultry Farms, 
‘Rural Backyard Poultry Development’ and ‘Poultry Estates’.  The Secretary, DAD F 
mentioned the progress of the poultry sector during the course of oral evidence as 
follows: 
“The poultry development in the country has shown very steady progress over 
the years, mainly driven by private sector commercial poultry farms.  Currently, 
its production in the country is around 66.45 billion eggs in 2 011-12, which is 
about five per cent growth compared to the previous year. 
The poultry meat production is estimated to be 2.47 million metric tonne.  The 
overall me at production in the country has registered a production level of 5.5 
million tonne in 11-12, which is about 13 per cent more compared to the previous 
years. This meat segment has recorded the highest growth in production last 
year compared to other segments of livestock sector.” 
4.29 On being queried about the reasons for drastic reduction in  allocation for poultry 
development at RE Stage during the year 2012 -13, the Department furnished in written 
reply that due to large proportion of unspent amount of previous releases and non -
furnishing of commensurate  physical performance, some proposals f rom States could 
not be taken up during 2012 -13 resulting in  reduction in allocation for poultry 
development at RE stage from Rs. 52.50 crore to Rs. 35.62 crore. It is also noted that 
due to increase in prices like inputs in feed/ feed ingredients etc., th e cost of reared 
chicks and some other material have gone up leading to some difficulty in 
implementation of Rural Backyard Poultry Development compone nt as expressed by 
some States. It is, therefore, proposed to make suitable provisions in NLM so that the  
escalation in costs is taken care of. 

68 
 
4.30 When the Committee enquired about the achievements realised under the Rural 
Backyard Scheme since its inception in 2009-10, the Department submitted that around 
21 States have  been funded to the tune of Rs. 95.82 crores providing for coverage of 
nearly 4.4 lakh BPL beneficiaries. During 2012 -13, six States have been assisted to the 
tune of about Rs.30.63 crore covering nearly 1.4 lakh Below Poverty Line ( BPL) 
beneficiaries. 
DAIRY DEVELOPMENT 
4.31 When the Committee wanted to know about the present status of dairies sector, 
the Secretary emphasised the role of dairying sector as a promising one, and stated as 
under: 
“The value of the milk alone is two -third of the total production of the livestock 
sector of about Rs.  4,59,051 crore.  Out of that, the milk constitutes about Rs. 
3,05,484 crore, which is more than two -third of the total value of production.   
India is the largest producer of milk in  the world; and set to produce over 133 
million tonne of milk during 2012-13.  Several measures have been initiated by 
the Government to increase the productivity of the milk animals, which has 
resulted in achieving a growth of about four to five per cent in milk production 
during the Eleventh plan.  The production in 2011-12 was 127.9 million tonne of 
work, which is about 17 per cent of the world’s milk production.  The per capita 
milk availability has increased to 290 g rams per day.   As per the NSSO 
household consumption data, this increase i n milk production has also been 
reflected in the increase in the per capita  consumption of liquid milk. This has 
increased by about 14.2 percent during the period from 2004 -05 to 2009 -10.  
However in the Twelfth plan, we need to increase the growth rate fu rther to, at 
least, five per cent to meet the growing demand for milk and also to generate a 
surplus for export of value added dairy products for augmenting the income of 
the farmers.” 

69 
 
(a) STRENGTHENING INFRASTRUCTURE FOR QUALITY AND CLEAN MILK 
PRODUCTION (SIQ&CMP) 
4.32 This scheme, introduced during the year 2003 -04 and modified during 2011 -12 
has the objective of improving the quality of raw milk produced at village level by 
creating awareness among farmer members, setting up of bul k milk coolers at Dairy 
Cooperative Society level, strengthening of laborato ry facilities and marketing of q uality 
milk & milk products.   
4.33 When asked about the basis on which the Department had projected an  
allocation of Rs. 100 crore for the year 201 3-14, the Department furnished a written 
reply stating that the actual expenditure for project of dairy development including clean 
milk production In the year 2012 -13 is likely to be Rs.83.29 crore against BE of Rs. 100 
crore and RE of Rs.84.08 crore for the year. The BE for 2013 -14 has been kept at 
Rs.85 crore keeping in view the overall budgetary allocation for the Department and the 
need to balance the requirement for various schemes.  It further informed that till 31 
December, 2012, the Department has approved 167 projects spread over 22 States and 
one UT at a total cost of Rs .309.03 crore with a Ce ntral share of Rs.254.43 crore.  O ut 
of this 90 projects have been completed and remaining 77 projects are at various 
stages of implementation. An amount of Rs.204.01 crore has been released upto the 
year 2012 -13 for implementation of approved projects . Also, till 31 December, 2012 , 
about 6.87 lakh farmer members have been trained, 2,179 Bulk Milk Coolers (BMCs) 
installed with a total milk chilling capacity of 44.47 lakh litres and 1,480 laboratories 
upgraded/strengthened under the scheme Strengthening Infrastructure for Quality in 
Clean Milk Production (SIQ&CMP).     
                                                       

70 
 
(b) NATIONAL DAIRY PLAN 
4.34 The Government has approved the National Dairy Plan (NDP) Phase -I to be 
implemented during the period 2011 -12 to 2016-17. The World Bank would provide IDA 
Credit of USD 350 Million (Rs.1, 584 crore) for the Scheme.  The scheme is being 
implemented for incr easing productivity of milch animals, increase milk production and 
provide rural milk producers with greater access to the organised milk -processing 
sector. The NDP-I is to be implemented in 14 major States – Uttar Pradesh, Punjab, 
Haryana, Gujarat, Rajast han, Madhya Pradesh, Bihar, West Bengal, Maharashtra, 
Karnataka, Tamil Nadu, Andhra Pradesh, Orissa and Kerala.  
4.35 When asked about the  reasons of mismatch between BE/RE and actual 
expenditure during the year 2012 -13, the Department informed that t he BE  for  
NDP-I for 2013-13 was Rs.130 crore.  It was reduced to Rs.123 crore at the RE stage. 
The entire amount of Rs.123 crore for 2012 -13 has been released to National Dairy 
Development Board (NDDB), which is implementing the scheme.  
4.36 In response to a specific query regarding  the reasons for remaining States not 
showing enthusiasm under this Plan , the Department in their written reply stated that 
the projects are considered as and when the States confirm compliance and EIAs 
submit sub -project proposal t o NDDB for consideration.  Hence the number of sub 
projects approved till November 2012 were for 39 sub p rojects from 8 States.  As on  
1st April, 2013 all the State Governments of 14 eligible States have met the eligibility 
criteria and 139 sub project pr oposals from all 14 States have been received , out of 
which 81 sub projects from 12 States have been approved. The remaining 58 projects, 
including from the remaining 2 States, are under examination by NDDB. 

71 
 
FISHERIES DEVELOPMENT 
4.37 The Department have informed that fisheries is a source of livelihood to about 
14.49 million people engaged fully, partially or in subsidiary activities pertaining to the 
sector, with an equally impressive segment of the population engaged in ancillary 
activities associated with fisheries and aquaculture. As per the estimates for the year 
2011-12, the total fish production is about 8.67 million metric tonnes (3.37 million metric 
tonnes for marine and 5.30 million metric tonnes for inland fisheries).  During the oral 
evidence, the Secretary deposed that India is second largest producer of marine fish as 
well as fresh water fish in the world. The fish product ion has increased from 41.57 la kh 
tonne in 91-92 to 86.66 lakh tonne in 2011-12.   
4.38 Detail of year-wise allocation expenditure during Eleventh Plan is given as under: 
Table 4.2: Allocation and Expenditure of Fishery Sector in Eleventh Plan 
Year Eleventh  Plan  Approved BE Revised Estimate 
(RE) 
Actual Exp. (Rs. in 
crore) 
2007-08 205.65 168.14 162.04 
2008-09 215.00 180.39 178.77 
2009-10 298.50 271.40 274.93 
2010-11 262.44 294.25 290.07 
2011-12 298.00 309.63 306.24 
Total 1279.62 1223.81 1212.05 
 
 From the above table , it can be inferred that during the year 2007 -08 and 2009-
10, BE  figures were revised downward at RE stage.  BE was revised upward at RE 
during the years 2010-11 and 2011-12 on the expenditure from it is observed except for 
the fiscal 2010-11 allocated funds how not been utilized in.  Thus, it is noted that during 
the Eleventh Plan period against the allocation of Rs. 2726.00 crore the actual 
expenditure was to the tune of Rs. 1105.74 crore for fisheries sector in Eleventh Plan. 

72 
 
When asked about the reasons for such a high disparity between the approved 
outlay and actua l expenditure during Eleventh Plan , the Department informed that   
though an outlay of Rs. 2776 crore was approved for fisheries sector  during Eleventh 
Plan, a sum of Rs.1279.62 crore was provided in BE which was reduced to 
Rs.1223.81crore in RE for the period from 2007-08 to 2011-12. 
(a) NATIONAL FISHERIES DEVELOPMENT BOARD (NFDB) 
4.39 The Committee were informed that the National Fisheries  Development Board  
(NFDB) was launched as a Special Purpose Vehicle (SPV) in the year 2006 for 
implementing fishery developmental schemes in an integrated manner.  It is a central 
sector scheme implementing wide range of activities like intensive aquaculture in ponds 
and ta nks, fisheries development in reservoirs, coastal aquaculture, mariculture, 
development of infrastructure, fishing harbours and landing centers, fishing dressing 
centers, domestic marketing, technology upgradation, deep sea fishing and tuna 
processing, ornamental fisheries, trout culture and capacity-building of fishermen etc. 
4.40  The Statement of Outlays and Outcomes / Targets (2012 -13) of Annual Plan  
2013-14 provides following information regarding the objectives and outcome of NFDB:  
Table 4.3 The Statement of Outlays and Outcomes / Targets (2012-13) 
Sl. 
No. 
Name of Scheme / 
Programmes 
Objectives / 
Outcome 
Outlay 
2012-13 Quantifiable Deliverables Process / 
Timelines 
Achievements 
w.r.t. Col (5) Remarks 
24 National Fisheries 
Development 
Board (NFDB) 
To bring all 
activities 
relating to 
Fisheries and 
Aquaculture 
under a single 
umbrella with a 
view to improve 
the production, 
processing and 
marketing of 
the fishing 
products.  
110.00 i.    Construction of ponds = 1,000 ha 
ii.   Fish hatcheries (Nos.) =60 
iii.  Renovation of Gove fish seed farms & 
hatchery = 50 ha 
iv.  Fish seed rearing farms (ha) =  
350 ha 
v.   No. of trainees trained = 5,000 
vi.  Establishment of Fish dressing centre 
= 2 
vii. Establishment of backyard  
 hatcheries/aquarium units=1,000                                                                                                                 
viii. Modernization of fishing harbours = 5 
ix.   Construction/Modernization of 
wholesale fish markets/retail outlets=40 
April 2012 
to March 
2013 
i. 163 ha 
ii. 9 
iii. 2 
iv. - 
v. 5,205                                                                
vi. - 
vii. 127 
viii. 2                                                                           
ix. 20 
  
 

73 
 
The achievements shown in the above table with respect to the quantifiable 
deliverables clearly indicates that the ambitious Programme of NFDB is falling short of 
expectations in most of the areas of given mandate.  When asked to state the reasons 
for such a sluggish performance during the in itial stage of establishment of the NFDB , 
the Department informed that NFDB was set up by Government in 2006 and being 
relatively new, it  had initial teething problems like recruitment of staff, finalisation of 
scheme guidelines and modalities for implementation of the schemes based on the 
needs of the States.  However, actions have been initiated to improve the performance 
of NFDB schemes in subsequent years by the way of revising the guidelines, recruiting 
the essential staff s and conducting regular meetings and reviews with the States/ UTs 
for preparation of the project reports  and for effective implementation of the schemes. 
NFDB has been instrumental in providing focussed att ention and thrust to the fisheries 
sector.  Processes of NFDB have been streaml ined for ensuring utilisation of allocated 
funds. 
(b) FISHERY SURVEY OF INDIA (FSI) 
4.41    The Fishery Survey of India (FSI) is responsible for survey and assessment of 
marine fishery resources of the Indian Exclusive Economic Zone  (EEZ) with its 
headquarters at Mumbai. The on -going activities of fishery resources survey and 
monitoring in the Indian EEZ by FSI include survey of marine resources in the 
continental shelf and slope, survey of deep -swimming oceanic tunas in the Indian EEZ 
and preliminary survey of coastal pelagic resources by mid-water trawling.  
4.42 The Department have submitted the following information relati ng with the 
achievements of FSI: 
 

74 
 
Table 4.4: Statement of Outlays & Outcomes/Targets (2012-13) 
     
(Rs. Crore) 
Sl. 
No. 
Name of 
Scheme/ 
Programme 
Objective/ 
Outcome 
 Outlay 
(2012-13) 
Quantifiable / Deliverables Process/ 
Timelines 
Achievement w.r.t  
Column (5) upto 
October/Nov., 2012 
Remarks 
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 
23 d) Fishery 
Survey of 
India 
Survey and 
assessment of 
marine fishery 
resources of 
the Indian 
EEZ. 
 
37.00 
 
i.    No. of fishing days by vessels  = 2,000 
ii.   Sampling hours for bottom and mid-water 
trawling= 5,300 
iii.  No. of hooks operated for Tuna long lining   
= 4,00,000 
iv.  Trap fishing = 1,600 
v.   Handline fishing=3,840 
vi.  Bottom set vertical line   =18,000 
vii.Days out during cuisse = 2,400 
viii. No. of voyages=130 
April 2012 
to March 
2013 
 
i. 526 
ii. 1309 
iii. 1,26,770 
iv. NA 
v. NA 
vi. NA 
vii. 751 
viii. 46 
  
When the Committee enquired about the dismal achievement of the quantifiable / 
deliverables and the reasons thereof, the Department have stated that t he shortfall in 
performance was due to inordinate delay in the Dry Docking and Repair (DDR) and Life 
Saving Appliances (LSA) / Fire Fighting Ap pliances (FFA) of certain vessels as well as 
some serious technical problems in some other vessels. The age of the vessels and 
non-priority given to our vessels by the shipyards were further aggravating the situation.  
Adequate measures  have been taken  to rectify the problems and speed up the DDR 
and to deploy the vessels for survey.  Except a few vessels in the dock others are now 
operational.  FSI is also gradually shifting focus towards preparing management plans 
for sustainable fisheries and training,  which is expected to bring about  reduction in its 
erstwhile activities of conducting only surveys through fishing effort. 
(c) WELFARE PROGRAMME OF FISHERMEN 
4.43 The Centrally Sponsored Scheme “ National Scheme for the Welfare of 
Fishermen” has four components namely , viz.  Group Accident Personal Insurance ; 
Saving-cum-Relief; Model Fishermen Village (includes assistance for low cost houses 
for fishermen, tube wells and community hall ); and Training and E xtension. Since the 
first two components are com mitted liabilities, first priority is accorded to these 

75 
 
components. Due to budgetary constraints, the fund release d for housing is affected 
despite good response from the States for availing the funds for providing low cost 
houses to fishermen. 
4.44 When the reasons for scaling down targets from 3500 to just 4 in the year 2012 -
13 was enquired, the Committee w ere informed that t he number of fishermen targeted 
to be covered under Saving -cum-Relief was 3.5 lakh  for 2011-12 instead of 3500 lakh 
reported erroneously, which is regretted. The actual achievement against this target has 
been 4.3 lakh and not 0.43 as erroneously printed in the Outcome Budget (2012-13). A 
higher target of covering 4 lakh fishers during 2012 -13 has been set taking into account 
previous years achievement.  
4.45 As far as fishermen’s training is  concerned, no targets have been assigned for 
the year 2012-13.  The Department informed that component on training and extension 
is being discontinued during the Twelfth Plan to avoid duplic ity as similar programme 
exists under the schemes of NFDB. Instead, a new component – capacity building for 
alternative livelihood for fishers has been proposed during the Twelfth Plan replacing 
the component on Training and Extension. 
ALLOCATION OF ANIMAL HUSBANDRY SECTOR 
4.46 The proposed outlay for Annual Plan (2013-14) for animal husbandry sector 
under the Centrally Sponsored and Central Sector Schemes are Rs.  991.20 crore 
and Rs. 360.09 crores, respectively, which aggregates to Rs. 1351.29 crore. 
However, the BE for 2013 -14 is Rs. 1051.49 crore, which is Rs. 11.61 crore less 
than the allocation in previous fiscal.  The Committee highly deprecates this, as 
they believe that the animal husbandry sector has immense potential for the 

76 
 
welfare of small and marginal farmers, small dairy producers and cattle rearers.  It 
not only offers financial help to the womenfolk of the society but also helps them 
during the lean season.  The Committee, therefore, impress upon the Department 
to deeply introspect in the matter and work out a detailed roadmap to claim its 
due place in the economy and developmental process.  From the past 
performance during the Eleventh Five Year Plan  period, the Committee 
recommends the Department to gear themselves appropriately, failing which it 
may be difficult for them to utilize this amount, which would further hamper the 
implementation of the major schemes of the Department.  They further 
recommend the Department to come clean of the impression of ‘low absorption 
capacity of the utilization of funds’, so that it can get the reasonable and 
adequate from the Planning Commission at BE stage.  The optimum utilization of 
funds will help in claiming an  enhanced allocation at RE stage from the Ministry 
of Finance (Department of Expenditure) to achieve the desired targets. 
  The Committee observe that Annual Plan allocations and expenditure of 
Animal Husbandry sector shows that its outlay for Eleventh Plan was Rs. 4,323.00 
crore, which is 52.8 percent of the total plan allocation of Rs. 8,174.00 crore for 
the three sectors viz., Animal Husbandry, Dairying and Fisheries.  However, the 
Department could utilize only to the tune of Rs. 2,610.00 crore, which re flects 
under-utilization of more than Rs. 205 crore from the RE level which negatively 
impacted the implementation of schemes of this sector. 
 The Committee note that the Department has averred that delay in 
finalization of Twelfth Plan document may impact  and hamper, the viability of 
many schemes including major schemes like NLM, NPBDD, FMD -CP, ESVHD, 

77 
 
DEDS, NFDB etc. The Committee, therefore, recommend that the Department 
should take pro -active action so as to optimally utilize the allocated funds for 
existing schemes failing which, it may have cascading effect on the 
implementation of schemes in years to come. 
NATIONAL PROGRAMME ON BOVINE BREEDING AND DAIRYING (NPBBD) 
4.47 Genetic upgradation of cattle, buffalo, conservation of breeds, production 
and distribution of breeding inputs, quality control of goods and services, lack of 
human resources and incongruent institutional and policy framework with the 
ground realities are some of the major challenges in the animal breeding and 
dairying sectors.  The NPBBD  will have two main components namely, National 
Programme for Bovine Breeding (NPBB) and Dairy Development to create 
synergy of resources.  It is believed that the combined activities of breeding and 
dairying will be more effective in Artificial Inseminati on (AI) services, feed 
management, extension services and lead to increase dairy productivity and 
enhanced income of farmers.  The Committee share the optimism of the 
Department that the convergence of breeding and dairying activities will have a 
positive impact on the livestock and enhanced production and productivity of the 
animals.  The Committee however, concerned with the current focus of the 
Government wherein emphasis is increased number of Artificial Insemination 
without paying any heed to its succe ss rate as evident in the rather low success 
of Artificial Insemination.  Noting this to be a rather discouraging factor, the 
Committee therefore, recommend the Department to shift their focus from myopic 
quantitative one to a qualitative one, by laying em phasis on increasing the 
success rate of Artificial Insemination activities.  Alongwith this, it also stress 

78 
 
that emphasis should be placed on the genetic improvement of the indigenous 
varieties so that the segment of farmers who can not afford the exotic breeds may 
also get a means of profit to sustain their livelihood.  A positive step, herein, 
would be to ensure proper / scientific training of field staff under expert guidance.   
ESTABLISHMENT AND STRENGTHENING OF EXISTING VETERINARY HOSPITAL 
AND DISPENSARIES (ESVHD) 
4.48 The Committee note with concern that there is an acute shortage of 
veterinary hospitals / dispensaries in the Country to cater the pressing need to 
counter the challenge of control of animal diseases.  The Committee was 
informed that out  of the total 31,000 odd Veterinary Hospitals / Dispensaries in 
the Country, only 5200, which are spread over 12 States have availed benefit 
under this programme.  The Committee is of the view that a desired investment 
made in these areas will have a multi plier effect in raising the productivity of 
animals and providing economic gains to their owners.  The shortage of skilled 
manpower further compounds the woes of this perennial suffering sector.  The 
Committee was also informed that an Expert Committee hav e been constituted to 
look into the minimum standards of veterinary education and to suggest 
necessary changes in the Indian Veterinary Council Act, to enable more 
veterinary graduates to pass out. 
The Department further informed that the fiscal aspect of the Scheme that 
during year 2011-12, the Department have released Rs. 98.81 crore against BE of 
Rs. 90.00 crore which was lauded by the Committee in the Thirty -fifth Report on 
the Demands for Grants (2012-13) of the Department.  However, things took a turn 
for the worse in the fiscal 2012 -13 as this sector received only Rs. 46.87 crore 

79 
 
against the BE of Rs. 91.00 crore and the actual utilization is only Rs. 31.25 crore 
till December, 2012.  This has impacted the allocation of current fiscal with the 
budgetary allocation of Rs. 60.00 crore only.  This is a classic example of past 
performance guiding the future allocations as is evident in reductions starting at 
the BE level, due to under-utilization in the current fiscal. 
 Deeply concerned at this sordid stat e of affairs, the Committee has no 
option, but to reiterate that the strengthening of veterinary services be taken up 
without fail and the Committee strongly recommend that the allocation of the 
scheme be enhanced and utilized optimally and the shortage of  veterinary 
doctors and technical staff be bridged at the earliest so as to improve the quality 
of veterinary services. 
ESTABLISHMENT OF VETERINARY DRUG CONTROL AUTHORITY 
4.49 The Committee note that Drugs and Cosmetic Act, 1940 regulates the 
import, manufacture and marketing of drugs and biological including veterinary 
drugs and biological.  The regulatory role for the purpose is discharged by Drug 
Controller General of India (DCGI) which is under the administrative control of 
Ministry of Health and Family Welfare.  The Department of Animal Husbandry has 
informed that the Working Group of Animal Husbandry has proposed a separate 
Veterinary Drug Controller Authority during Tenth Plan which was further 
reiterated by Working Group in Eleventh and Twelfth Plan.  The Drug and 
Technical Advisory Board (DTAB) which has a major role in policy decision on 
type of veterinary drugs to be allowed in Indian markets has no representation  
from the DADF.  The plea of the Department that they have very limited role in the 
present arrangements of medical products and almost negligible efforts made by 

80 
 
DCGI to lay down standards for veterinary drug, trial protocol , testing facilities, 
toxicity and safety standards is hardly convincing.  The Committee ha ve taken 
note of the prevalent practice in various parts of the World in regard to separate 
or unified regulatory authorities in the matter of drugs and biological,  both for 
human beings and animals and find that US FDA (Food and Drug Administration) 
has a unified and umbrell a authority for food , drugs both for human beings and 
animals.  The Committee fail to understand the logic of separate dr ug regulatory 
authority for veterinary drugs and human drugs , when US FDA encompasses 
single regulatory authority for all these matters .  The Committee is of the view 
that there is no justification of separate regulatory authority and as such the 
status-quo may continue.   The Department may, however, prevail upon the 
Ministry of Health and Family Welfare to enlarge the composition of DTA B so as 
to assign a meaningful  and fruitful role to the representatives of the Department 
in matters of veterinary drugs, whenever required. 
POULTRY DEVELOPMENT 
4.50 The poultry sector has recorded a growth of about five percent in the fiscal 
2012-13 compared to the year 2011 -12, with production touching 66.45 billion 
tonnes.  However, in fiscal terms the allocation of Department has reduced to Rs. 
35.62 crore at RE st age from Rs. 52.50 crore at BE stage, whereas the actual 
expenditure was only Rs. 23.77 crore till December, 2012.  The Department  
reasoned that such a reduction in allocation of funds is due to increase in cost of 
reared chicks and input prices of feed / feed ingredients.  Taking a cue from the 
Department’s reasoning, the Committee implore upon the Government to make 
suitable provisions in the programme that would ensure that escalation in the 

81 
 
cost is taken care of.  The Committee further recommend the Dep artment to 
stretch its arms in terms of allocated funds so that it can act as a source of 
sustenance for the poultry farmers and also act as a fillip to the rural backyard 
poultry.  
NATIONAL DAIRY PLAN 
4.51 The Committee have been informed that the National Dairy Plan  – I  
(NDP – I) is to be implemented in only 14 major States – Uttar Pradesh, Punjab, 
Haryana, Gujarat, Rajasthan, Madhya Pradesh, Bihar, West Bengal, Maharashtra, 
Karnataka, Tamil Nadu, Andhra Pradesh, Odisha and Kerala.   The Department 
have received 139 sub project proposals from 13 States as on 25 th March, 2013.  
The Department have also informed that only 14 states confirmed compliance and 
End-Implementing Agencies (EIAs) submitted sub project proposals to National 
Dairy Development Board (N DDB) for consideration.  The Committee is surprised 
to note that the 14 States which are found eligible for consideration under NDP - I, 
are already performing well in milk and dairy production.  The Committee would 
concerned over the fate of the other Sta tes which are kept out of purview of  
NDP – I as these States are faring poor in dairy production, like to be apprised of 
the rationale leading to selection of those States who are leaders in the field of 
milk production and exclusion of the States who cur rently lag behind.  
Endeavouring to ensure a level playing field for all the States and to ensure a 
comprehensive development of the dairying sector, the Committee urge upon the 
Government to expand the scope of NDP – I and also include the urgently need 
the intervention of Government to upgrade the resources, infrastructure and 
facilities related with the dairy sector. Thus, the Committee recommends the 

82 
 
inclusion of other States like Jharkhand, Chhattisgarh, Himachal Pradesh under 
its ambit. 
NATIONAL FISHE RIES DEVELOPMENT BOARD (NFDB) AND FISHERY SURVEY 
OF INDIA (FSI) 
4.52 The Committee are discerned to note that the information furnished by the 
Department regarding the functions and achievements of NFDB and FSI are not at 
all satisfactory as it is reflective of their tardy performance.  The Department have 
attributed the low performance of NFDB to teething problems, viz. recruitment of 
staff, finalization of scheme guidelines, modalities for implementation of the 
schemes based on needs of the States etc.  A s the NFDB is still in its infancy, the 
present achievements will guide the future of the institution and as such the 
Committee do not buy argument assigned for below par performance and 
recommend the Department to provide full infrastructure and resources  to the 
NFDB as it has the potential and has been entrusted with the responsibility of the 
development of fishery sector. Regarding the performance of FSI, the Department 
have stated that the shortfall in performance was due to inordinate delay in the 
Dry Docking and Repair (DDR) and Life Saving Appliances (LSA) / Fire Fighting 
Appliances (FFA) of certain vessels as well as some serious technical problems 
in some other vessels. Also, the age of the vessels and non -priority given to the 
vessels by the shipyards were further aggravating the situation.  
Notwithstanding, the systemic constraints hampering the performance of these 
institutes, the Committee urge the Department to overcome these functional 
shortcomings in real time and ensure a  judicious balance between physical and 
fiscal targets and achievements of the institution so that it can fulfill its mandate. 

83 
 
WELFARE PROGRAMME OF FISHERMEN 
4.53 The Centrally Sponsored Scheme “National Scheme for the Welfare of 
Fishermen” has four compon ents, viz.  Group Accident Personal Insurance;  
Saving-cum-Relief;  Model Fishermen Village (that includes assistance for low 
cost houses for fishermen, tube wells and community hall ); and Training and 
Extension. The Department have stated that due to budge tary constraints, the 
fund released for housing is affected despite good response from the States for 
availing the funds to provide  low cost houses to fishermen. The Department 
informed that component on training and extension is being discontinued during 
the Twelfth Plan to avoid duplicacy as similar programme exists under the 
schemes of NFDB. In stead, a new component, c apacity-building for alternative 
livelihood for fishers, has been proposed during the Twelfth Plan. The Committee 
are bewildered to note that the component on training and extension is entrusted 
to NFDB whereas a new component – capacity-building for alternative livelihood 
for fishers has been proposed under the Welfare Programme of Fishermen, 
which, in view of the Committee , points towards lack of foresight while 
formulating the schemes as this had lead to overlapping and duplicity.  
Deprecating this act of callousness on the part of the Government, the Committee 
recommend that capacity-building for alternative livelihood for fishermen may be 
merged with the Training and Extension component and should be placed under 
Welfare Programme of Fishermen. 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI;                                   BASUDEB ACHARIA 
17 April, 2013                                           Chairman, 
27 Chaitra, 1935 (Saka)                                                     Committee on Agriculture 

84 
 
APPENDIX - I 
 
COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE 
(2012-13) 
 
MINUTES OF THE TWENTY THIRD SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE 
 
***** 
 The Committee sat on Wednesday, the 03 April, 2013 from 1115 hours to 1350 hours in 
Room  No. ‘53’, Parliament House, New Delhi. 
 
PRESENT 
Smt. Mohsina Kidwai -   Acting Chairperson 
 
MEMBERS 
 
 
LOK SABHA  
 
 
2.  Shri Narayansingh Amlabe 
3.  Smt. Ashwamedh Devi 
4.  Dr. (Smt.) Botcha Jhansi Lakshmi 
5.  Sardar Sukhdev Singh Libra 
6.  Dr. Jyoti Mirdha 
7.  Shri Devji M. Patel 
8.  Shri Rajaiah Siricilla 
9.  Dr. Vinay Kumar Pandey ‘Vinnu’ 
                                      RAJYA SABHA 
 
10.  Shri Parshottam Khodabhai Rupala 
11.  Shri S. Thangavelu 
12.  Shri Darshan Singh Yadav 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1.  Shri R.S. Kambo   - Joint Secretary 
2. C. Vanlalruata   - Deputy Secretary  
 
  

85 
 
WITNESSES  
 
            MINISTRY OF AGRICULTURE 
(DEPARTMENT OF ANIMAL HUSBANDRY, DAIRYING AND FISHERIES) 
 
S.No.           NAME OF THE OFFICER         DESIGNATION 
1. Shri G.C. Pati Secretary (ADF) 
2. Shri  Raghav Chandra Additional Secretary & Financial 
Adviser 
3. Dr. A.S. Nanda  Animal Husbandry Commissioner 
4. Shri Tarun Shridhar Joint Secretary (FY) 
5. Shri Rajbir Singh Rana Joint Secretary (LH) 
6. Shri Sanjay R. Bhoosreddy Joint Secretary (APF) 
7. Ms. Rajni Sekhri Sibal Joint Secretary (CDD) 
8. Shri S.K. Das Adviser (Stats) 
9. Dr. O.P. Mishra Deputy Director  
General (Fy Admn & Stat) 
10. Shri B. Vishnu Bhat Fisheries Development  
Commissioner 
PLANNING COMMISSION 
1. Shri Surinder Singh Adviser 
2. Dr. J.P. Mishra Adviser 
NATIONAL FISHERIES DEVELOPMENT BOARD 
1. Dr. M.V. Rao Chief Executive Officer 
2. Dr. P. Paul Pandian C&MD 
INDIAN COUNCIL OF AGRICULTURAL RESEARCH 
1. Dr. Meenakumari DDG (Fisheries) 
2. Dr. Gaya Prasad ADG (AH) 
NATIONAL BANK FOR AGRICULTURE AND RURAL DEVELOPMENT 
 
 Shri A.D. Ratnoo CGM 
 
NATIONAL DAIRY DEVELOPMENT BOARD 
 Shri Dilip Rath Managing Director 
 

86 
 
2. In the absence of Chairman the Committee chose Smt. Mohsina Kidwai,  MP (Rajya 
Sabha) to act as Chairman for the Sitting under Rule 258(3) of the Rules of Procedure and 
Conduct of Business in Lok Sabha.  
 
3. Thereafter, the Acting Chairperson welcomed the Members of the Committee and 
representatives of the Ministry of Agriculture (Department of Animal Husbandry, Dairying and 
Fisheries), Planning Commission and other Organisations to the Sitting.  
 
4. After the witnesses introduced themselves, the Principal Witness briefly highlighted the 
activities / achievements made by the Department during the Eleventh Plan Period.  The 
proposed outlay for Twelfth Plan, including various schemes to be taken up was also discussed.  
The Committee, thereafter, took oral evidence of the representatives of Department of Animal 
Husbandry, Dairying and Fisheries on Demands for Grants (2013-14).  
 
5. The Acting Chairperson and members of the Committee raised queries on several 
schemes/projects of the Department and sought details of progress made thereunder.  The 
Demands for Grants of the ongoing Fiscal and proposed projection for Financial Year 2013 -14 
and Twelfth Plan were also discussed.  The witnesses replied, thereto. 
 
6. The Act ing Chairperson, thereafter thanked the witnesses for appearing before the 
Committee as well as for furnishing desirable information.  She also directed them to furnish 
information on points on which the Department could not clarify during the Sitting, to the 
Committee Secretariat by 08 April, 2013.  
7. A verbatim record of the proceedings has been kept separately. 
 
The Committee then adjourned.  

87 
 
APPENDIX - II 
 
COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE 
(2012-13) 
 
 
MINUTES OF THE TWENTY FIFTH SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE 
 
 The Committee sat on Wednesday, the 17 th April, 2013 from 1500 hours to 1600 hours in 
Room No. ‘53’, Parliament House, New Delhi.  
   PRESENT 
MEMBERS 
 
                           LOK SABHA 
2.  Shri Narayansingh Amlabe 
3.  Shri Sanjay Singh Chauhan 
4.  Smt. Ashwamedh Devi 
5.  Smt. Paramjit Kaur Gulshan 
6.  Shri P. Kumar 
7.  Dr. (Smt.) Botcha Jhansi Lakshmi 
8.  Sardar Sukhdev Singh Libra 
9.  Dr. Jyoti Mirdha 
10.  Dr. Vinay Kumar Pandey ‘Vinnu’ 
  
RAJYA SABHA 
11.  Shri Dharmendra Pradhan 
12.  Dr. K.V.P. Ramachandra Rao 
13.  Shri Shivanand Tiwari 
14.  Shri S. Thangavelu 
15.  Shri Darshan Singh Yadav 
 
     

88 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
 1. Shri R.S. Kambo  - Joint Secretary 
     2. Shri C. Vanlalruata  - Deputy Secretary 
2. At the outset the Chairman welcomed the members to the Sitting of the Committee.  They 
Committee, thereafter, took up the following draft Report(s) for consideration:  
 
*(i) xxxx            xxxx                  xxxx                  xxxx                     xxxx 
*(ii) xxxx            xxxx                  xxxx                  xxxx                     xxxx 
 (iii) draft Report  on  Demands  for Grants (2013 -2014) relating to the Ministry of 
Agriculture (Department of Animal Husbandry, Dairying and Fisheries). 
3. After some deliberations, the Committ ee adopted the above draft Report (s) with some 
modifications.  They also authorized the Chairman to finalise the above Draft Report (s) in the light 
of the factual verifications got done by the concerned Departments of the Ministry of Agriculture 
and present them to the Parliament.   
 
 
The Committee then adjourned. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
* Matter not related to this report. 