1 
 
 
 
COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE 
(2013-2014) 
                 
         
FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA 
         
         
                                 
 
MINISTRY OF AGRICULTURE  
(DEPARTMENT OF ANIMAL HUSBANDRY, DAIRYING & FISHERIES) 
              
 
OPTIMIZATION OF EMPLOYMENT GENERATION POTENTIAL OF ANIMAL 
HUSBANDRY SECTOR  
 
 
{Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/ 
Recommendations contained in the Thirty-sixth Report  
of the Committee on Agriculture (2011-2012)} 
 
         
        
 
FIFTY-THIRD REPORT 
  
 
         
               
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
December 2013 / Agrahayana, 1935 (Saka) 
 
53 

2 
 
FIFTY – THIRD  REPORT 
 
COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE 
(2013-2014) 
          
(FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
         
                 
MINISTRY OF AGRICULTURE  
(DEPARTMENT OF ANIMAL HUSBANDRY, DAIRYING & FISHERIES) 
         
                 
OPTIMIZATION OF EMPLOYMENT GENERATION POTENTIAL OF ANIMAL 
HUSBANDRY SECTOR 
  
         
(Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/ 
Recommendations contained in the Thirty - sixth Report of the Committee on 
Agriculture (2011-2012) 
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on    09.12.2013  
Laid on the Table of Rajya Sabha on  09.12.2013 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
                 
December 2013 / Agrahayana, 1935 (Saka) 
 
 
 

3 
 
 
COA No. 276 
 
 
         
         
         
         
         
         
 
         
         
        
Price:  Rs.  
         
         
         
         
         
 
 
 
         
     
                     
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
© 2012 By Lok Sabha Secretariat 
 
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Pr ocedure and Conduct of Business in Lok 
Sabha (Fourteenth Edition) and Printed by  
 

4 
 
CONTENTS 
                   PAGE 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE……………………………  (iii) 
         
 
INTRODUCTION………………………………………………………  (v) 
 
CHAPTER I   Report …………………………………………   1 
 
CHAPTER II  Observations/Recommendations which have   
   been accepted by the Government ……………   22 
 
CHAPTER III  Observations/Recommendations which the 
   Committee do not desire to pursue in view 
   of the Government‟s replies …………………..  48 
 
CHAPTER IV Observations/Recommendations in respect 
   of  which replies of the Government have  
   not been accepted by the Committee ………….  50 
 
CHAPTER V  Observations/Recommendations in respect of  
   which final replies of the Government are  
   still awaited …………………………………….  61 
 
                                    ANNEXURES 
 
 
I.  Minutes of the 5th Sitting of the Committee   63 
held on 29 October, 2013. 
       
II.  Analysis of Action Taken by the Government on the  65 
Recommendations contained in the Thirty-sixth Report 
 (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) of the Committee on Agriculture 
(2011-2012). 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
               
        
(i)

5 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE  COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE (2013-14) 
 
Shri Basudeb Acharia   -   Chairman 
 
MEMBERS 
 
LOK SABHA 
 
2.  Shri Narayansingh Amlabe 
3.  Shri Sanjay Singh Chauhan 
4.  Shri H.D. Devegowda 
5.  Smt. Ashwamedh Devi 
6.  Shri L. Raja Gopal 
7.   Smt. Paramjit Kaur Gulshan 
8.  Shri Anant Kumar Hegde 
9.  Shri Premdas  Katheria 
10.  Shri P. Kumar 
11.  Smt. Botcha Jhansi Lakshmi 
12.  Sardar Sukhdev Singh Libra 
13.  Dr. Jyoti Mirdha 
14.  Shri Kachhadia Naranbhai  
15.  Shri Devji M. Patel 
16.  Smt. Bhavana Gawali (Patil) 
17.  Shri Jagdish Singh Rana 
18.  Shri Rajaiah Siricilla 
19.  Shri Patel Kishanbhai V.  
20.  Dr. Vinay Kumar Pandey ‘Vinnu’ 
21.  Shri Hukumdeo Narayan Yadav 
  
 RAJYA SABHA 
 
22.  Shri N. Balaganga 
23.  Shri Satyavrat Chaturvedi 
24.  Smt. Mohsina Kidwai 
25.  Shri Dharmendra Pradhan 
26.  Dr. K.V.P. Ramachandra Rao 
27.  Shri Parshottam Khodabhai Rupala 
28.  Shri Rajpal Singh Saini 
29.  Shri S. Thangavelu 
30.  Shri Shivanand Tiwari 
31.  Shri Darshan Singh Yadav 
 
 (iii) 

6 
 
SECRETARIAT  
 
1. Shri Louis Martin  - Joint Secretary 
2. Shri P. C. Koul  - Director 
3. Shri Pragyanshu Amaoni - Committee Officer 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(iv) 

7 
 
 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
I, the Chairman, Standing Committee on Agriculture (2013-2014) having been authorized 
by the Committee to submit the report on their behalf, present this Fifty -third Report on Action 
Taken by the Government o n the Observations/Recommendations contained in the Thirty -sixth 
Report of the Committee on Optimization of Employment Generation Potential of Animal 
Husbandry Sector pertaining to the Ministry of Agriculture (Department of Animal Husbandry, 
Dairying & Fisheries). 
 
2. The Thirty-sixth Report of the Committee on Agriculture (2011 -2012) on Optimization 
of Employment Generation Potential of Animal Husbandry Sector pertaining to the Ministry of 
Agriculture (Department of Animal Husbandry, Dairying & Fisheries) was presented to Lok 
Sabha and laid on the Table of Rajya Sabha on 22 May, 2012.  The Action Taken Replies on the 
Report were received on 21 August, 2012. 
 
3. The Report was considered and adopted by the Committee at their Sitting held on 29 
October, 2013. 
 
4. An analysis of the Action Taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in the Thirty -sixth Report of the Committee is given 
in Annexure- II. 
 
 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI;                   BASUDEB ACHARIA 
29 November, 2013                          Chairman, 
08 Agrahayana, 1935 (Saka)                                        Committee on Agriculture 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
(v) 

8 
 
CHAPTER I 
REPORT 
This Report of the Committee on Agriculture deals with the action taken by the 
Government on the recommendations contained in the Thirty-sixth Report (Fifteenth Lok 
Sabha) of the Committee on Agriculture (201 1-12) on the Subject, “ Optimization of 
Employment Generation Potential of Animal Husbandry Sector ” pertaining to the 
Ministry of Agriculture (Department of Animal Hu sbandry, Dairying and Fisheries) which 
was presented to Lok Sabha and laid on the Table of Rajya Sabha on 22 May, 2012.  
1.2 The Department of Animal Husbandry, Dairying and Fisheries have furnished 
Action Taken Replies in respect of all the 2 3 Observations / Recommendations 
contained in the Report. These have been categorized as under:-  
(i) Observations / Recommendations that have been accepted by the 
Government:  
Recommendation Nos.  1.14, 2.44, 2.45, 2.46, 2.48, 2.49, 2.51, 2.52, 2.53, 
2.54, 3.29, 3.30, 3.31, 3.33, 3.34 and 3.35.    (Chapter – II) 
           Total - 16 
 
(ii) Observations / Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to 
pursue in view of the Government‟s reply:  
Recommendation Nos. 3.32      (Chapter – III) 
           Total - 01 
 
(iii)  Observations / Recommendations in respect of which action taken replies of 
the Government have not been accepted by the Committee:  
Recommendation Nos. 1.15, 1.16, 2.47, 2.55 and 2.56 (Chapter – IV) 
           Total - 05 
 
(iv) Observations / Recommenda tions in respect of which final replies of the 
Government are still awaited:  
Recommendation Nos. 2.50     (Chapter – V) 
           Total - 01 

9 
 
1.3 The Committee trust that utmost importance would be given to 
implementation of the Observations/Recommendatio ns accepted by the 
Government. In cases, where it is not possible for the Government to implement 
the Recommendations in letter and spirit for any reason, the matter should be 
reported to the Committee with reasons for non -implementation. The Committee 
desire that further Action Taken Notes on the Observations/Recommendations 
contained in Chapte r-I and Final Action Taken Reply  to the Recommendation 
contained in Chapter-V of this Report be furnished to them at an early date.  
1.4 The Committee will now deal with the action taken by the Government on some of 
the Recommendations in the succeeding paragraphs. 
 
ALLOCATION DURING ELEVENTH PLAN 
 
(Recommendation Para Nos. 1.15 And 1.16) 
 
 
1.5 Noting that the Animal Husbandry and Dairying sector  which was already 
contributing a significant 4.89% in the national GDP  still ha d a lot of untapped 
employment potential, and worried to note that the allocations and investments in this 
sector throughout the Eleventh Plan period remained far below the levels required for its 
growth as the Approved Outlay during the Eleventh Year Plan at Rs. 9,466.17 crore, 
was a mere 34.67% of the proposed amount, the Committee had urged the Department  
of Animal Husbandry, Dairying and Fisheries  and the Planning Commission to work in 
unison so that the yawning gap between the projections and approved outlays is 
reduced to a great extent in the course of the Twelfth Plan period.  Further finding that 
during the Eleventh Year Plan, the actual expenditure had always been less than the 
actual allocation and the Department could not provide any valid reason for the same , 
the Committee had opined that unless the Department first put their house in order, the 

10 
 
gap between allocation and expenditure will not narrow down .  Accordingly, with a view 
to benefit the targeted beneficiaries as well as ensure optimum utilization of funds, the 
Committee had recommended the Department to furnish their utilization certificates and 
fresh proposals in time for smooth disbursement of funds throughout the year. 
1.6 The G overnment in their Action Taken Note have stated that the year-wise 
allocation of Animal Husbandry and Dairy Sector has increased substantially as per the 
table given below. However the expenditure was less, though it has gone up in 
Financial Year 2010 -11 and 2011-12. The Plan allocation of Animal Husbandry Sector 
of this Department for the year 2012 -13 is 21.64% higher than the allocation for  
2011-12. 
(Rs. in crore) 
Year Approved 
outlay RE Expenditure % of Exp. 
w.r.t. RE 
11th Plan  
(2007-2012) 
 
5023.00    
2007-08 529.42 466.71 484.98 104% 
2008-09 619.00 593.61 548.87 92% 
2009-10 720.50 577.60 534.04 92% 
2010-11 935.91 874.39 762.41 87% 
2011-12 1196.81 1010.39 945.36 94% 
TOTAL 4001.64 3522.70 3275.66  
2012-13 1527.30    
 
1.7 In addition to the allo cation for this sector in budget of the Department, the 
livestock sector is also getting the funding support under Rashtriya Krishi Vikas Yojana 
(RKVY) which is implemented by Department of Agriculture & Cooperation (DAC) which 

11 
 
results in the enhancement o f the share of Plan allocation for this sector. The details of 
Year wise / Sector wise summary of approved projects in the Eleventh Plan for Animal 
Husbandry and Dairy Development under RKVY for activities in  Animal Husbandry and 
Dairying sector is given in the following table: 
(Rs. in crore) 
Year Animal Husbandry Dairy 
Development 
Total 
2007-08 104.80 56.76 161.56 
2008-09 666.31 203.45 869.76 
2009-10 712.02 154.85 866.87 
2010-11 734.71 333.36 1068.07 
2011-12 847.31 281.58 1128.89 
TOTAL 3065.15 1030.00 4095.15 
 
1.8 Apart from the above, National Mission on Protein Supplements (NMPS) was 
launched in the year 2011-12 in 22 identified States as a component of Rashtriya Krishi 
Vikas Yojana, with an outlay of Rs. 300 Crore. Of which, the outlay for Animal  
Husbandry was earmarked to the tune of Rs. 200 crore. The objective of this 
programme is to increase production of animal protein in order to meet rising demand 
for these products. In the year 2012 -13, an amount of Rs. 500 crore has been allocated 
under d ifferent components of NMPS of which, the outlay for animal husbandry has 
been earmarked to Rs. 300 crore. 
1.9 Thus, under RKVY and NMPS, an amount of about Rs. 4,295.15 crore was 
allocated for Animal Husbandry and Dairying Sector during Eleventh Plan in a ddition to 
the approved outlay of Rs. 4,001.64 crore for this Department. 

12 
 
1.10 In the context of the observation of the Standing Committee that the expenditure 
has been less than allocation, the Department are constantly taking up the matter with 
States to  expense utilization of funds and submission of utilization certificates. The 
Department is regularly monitoring the progress on implementation of Schemes and the 
utilization of funds by States through video conferencing and visits by the senior officers 
of this Department to States and review meetings from time to time. During 2011-12, the 
expenditure through releases made by the Department was about 94% of the RE 
compared to 87% of previous year. 
1.11 In order to liquidate to unspent balances, the Departm ent are constantly taking 
up the matter with the State Governments to take urgent action to reduce the unspent 
balance with the States. The recommendations of the Committee for the Department to 
take steps, to improve the pace of utilization of funds are noted and necessary steps will 
be taken to improve the utilization by strengthening the monitoring mechanism further. 
The constraints for improving utilization of funds will be removed while revising the 
schemes for the Twelfth Plan period. 
1.12 The Committ ee are not at all convinced by the reply of the Government 
about the funding requirements of animal husbandry and dairying sectors being 
met from schemes run by other departments.  The Thirty -sixth Report of the 
Committee was on the ‘Optimization of the Em ployment Potential of Animal 
Husbandry Sector’ with specific reference to the Schemes and activities of the 
Department of Animal Husbandry Dairying and Fisheries.  The 
observations/recommendations of the Committee were also accordingly made in 
the context o f Department specific schemes and activities.  It can also not be 
overlooked that the Department in successive appearances before the Committee 
during the examination of their Demands for Grants have been impressing upon 

13 
 
enhancement of their budgetary allo cation.  The Committee, therefore, while 
disagreeing with the reply of the Department reiterate that the schemes of the 
Department for Animal Husbandry sector ought not be starved for funds so that 
they are able to deliver optimally and the Department and the Planning 
Commission should strive for that.     
 
IMBALANCED GROWTH OF INDIGENOUS / CROSS BREED CATTLE 
 
(Recommendation Para No. 2.47) 
 
 
1.13 The Committee observe d that as per the figures of the livestock census carried 
out in the year 2007, the popula tion of exotic/crossbreed cattle ha d increased by 
33.92% in comparison to the 2003 census, while the population of indigenous variety 
had increased by only 3.44% and the population of buffalo had witnessed a growth of 
7.58%.  Since a majority of Indian agriculturists are small and marginal farmers who due 
to their small land holdings are at the bottom run g of the economical ladder and thus 
cannot afford to raise and maintain the expensive exotic/crossbreed cattle.  The 
Committee urged the Department to undertake a slew of measures which would resul t 
in a remarkable increase in the population of indigenous cattle inspite of their milk 
output being less, their maintenance cost is low and they are more in tune with the 
environment. 
1.14 The Government in their Action Taken Note have stated that in order to improve 
the genetic makeup of bovine population and availability of indigenous cattle, 
Government of India has launched a major programme “National Project for Cattle and 
Buffalo Breeding” (NPCBB) from October  2000. NPCBB emphasizes genetic 
upgradation of non -descriptive cattle and development / conservation of indigenous 
breeds.  In addition to this, Government of India is also implementing three Central 

14 
 
Sector Schemes namely, Central Cattle Breeding Farms (CC BFs), Central Frozen 
Semen Production & Training Institute (CFSP&TI) and Central Herd Registration 
Scheme (CHRS) for development of bovine population. All the Schemes give special 
emphasis and support for enhancing productivity and quality of indigenous br eeds of 
cattle and buffalo. Under these schemes, there is a component of training of farmers to 
support these activities. Generally breeding policies of the States aim to preserve and 
improve the quality indigenous breeds through artificial insemination us ing semen of the 
quality bulls of the same breed. 
1.15 The scheme CCBFs promotes indigenous breeds like Red Sindhi & Tharparkar 
cattle breeds  and Surti & Murrah buffalo breeds which have excellent productivity 
potential. These farms provide elite germplasm and training to the farmers for promotion 
of these breeds. Incentives are also made available to the farmers of finally registered 
animals under CHRS. 
1.16 The Committee are not at all impressed by the various steps enumerated 
by the Department in the di rection of increasing the population of quality 
indigenous breed of cattle and buffalo.  The statistics speak for themselves.  The 
population of exotic/cross bred cattle, which are capital intensive and fall prey to 
diseases, etc. have shown an increase of  33.92%.  These are unaffordable for the 
small and marginal farmers who form the majority of agriculture sector.  The 
indigenous breeds which though yield less milk are very affordable to rear and 
and are adapted well to the local environment have increased by only 3.44%.  This 
paltry increase in the population of the indigenous breeds is indicative of the 
failure of the measures enumerated by the Government in their Action Taken 
Reply.  The Committee, therefore, desire that since the extant schemes of the 
Department viz. CCBFs, CFSP&TI and CHRS have not produced desired results 

15 
 
as far as the increase in the population of quality indigenous breeds of cattle and 
buffaloes is concerned they be overhauled without any further delay to make 
them more effective and fruitful.  
  
EMPLOYMENT POTENTIAL OF LIVESTOCK SECTOR 
 
(Recommendation Para No. 2.50) 
 
 
1.17 Noting that there have been no systematic and specific studies on the level of 
employment and its potential in the livestock sector and there had been no detaile d 
studies on the labour requirement for rearing cattle and buffaloes inspite of cogent 
pointers that in rural areas 61 females are primarily engaged in animal farming as 
against 21 males per thousand work force;  In urban areas these figures are 25 females 
against 7 males per thousand ;  A total of 24.6 million persons are engaged in animal 
farming, 18.6% million women against 6 million men constituting 75.6 percent; total man 
power requirement for full day employment work ed out to 33.1 million, 26.6 million  for 
livestock and 6.5 million for poultry sectors , etc. the Committee desired the Department 
to infuse more funds and innovative ideas to tap the employment potential of the 
livestock sector to the fullest so that not only this sector‟s contribution to economy is 
enhanced but also the nation continues to maintain its supremacy in this aspect in the 
world.  They also desire d that along with the livestock census a study to assess the 
employment potential of the livestock sector may also be undertaken  and the y be 
apprised of the same. 
1.18 The Government in their Action Taken Note have stated that the National Sample 
Survey Office (NSSO), a premier organization in the conduct of sample surveys, 
conducts quinquennial surveys on employment and unemployment situa tion and 
provides sector -wise information on employment generated, including in the Animal 

16 
 
Husbandry sector. NSS O has conducted the last survey on employment and 
unemployment situation in their 68 th Round (2011-12).  The results of the survey would 
be avai lable by June 2013. The Technical Committee on 19 th Livestock Census has 
therefore decided to wait and use the results of the 68 th round of NSSO on Employment 
Generation through livestock sector and not to duplicate the work in 19 th Livestock 
Census.  
1.19 The Committee concur with the logic of the Department about waiting for 
the results of the 68th Round of NSSO Survey on Employment Generation through 
Livestock Sector before taking further the implementation of the 
Recommendation of the Committee in the 1 9th Livestock Census.  As the results 
of the 68 th Round of NSSO Survey were to become available in June, 2013, the 
Committee expect that the Department would expeditiously complete the work on 
19th Livestock Census and share the outcome with them without any delay.     
 
(Recommendation Para No. 2.51) 
 
 
1.20 Noting that there was scope for integration of animal husbandry activities with 
MNREGA and the same was also being advised by the State Department s of Animal 
Husbandry Sector and finding that the beneficiaries belonging to Scheduled Castes and 
Scheduled Tribes are allowed to avail of MNREGA resources for land development and 
provision of irrigation facilities, etc. on land owned by them as also  in some States man 
days are allowed for construction of anima l sheds on their own land to MNREGA 
beneficiaries belonging to these categories the Committee, desired that steps should be 
taken by the Department in conjunction with the Ministry of Rural Development to attract 
more and more landless and poor farmers tow ards MNREGA so that more man days of 
employment could be generated which would help in success of both the programmes 

17 
 
having commonality of intended beneficiaries.  They had also desired that they be 
apprised of the steps initiated in this direction. 
1.21 In their Action Taken Note the Government have stated that t he Department are 
in agreement with the observation of the august Committee regarding integration of 
animal husbandry activities with MNREGA. The guidelines of MNREGA provide for 
location-specific grassland development for ensuring adequate fodder supply. 
Plantation of fodder trees, shrubs, and other forage varieties for developing grazing 
land, common property resources and waste land can be undertaken by States under 
MNREGA funds. Such a step wil l enable landless animal rearers to have access to 
sources of fodder required for their livestock. States have accordingly been requested 
by the Department. 
1.22 To strengthen the synergy between MNREGA and agriculture and allied rural 
livelihoods, to resp ond to the demands of the States for greater location specific 
flexibility in permissible works and to help improve the ecological balance in rural India 
and to provide a cleaner, healthier environment for the rural population, the Ministry of 
Rural Development have expanded the list of permissible works under MNREGA. The 
following activities related to livestock and fisheries have been included under the new 
guidelines of MNREGA.  
 Poultry Shelter 
 Goatery Shelter 
 Construction of Pucca Floor, Urine Tank and Fodder Trough for Cattle 
 Azolla as Cattle Feed Supplements 
 Fisheries in seasonal water bodies on public land 
 Fish Drying Yards 
 
The Department ha ve issued advisory to States for steps to be taken for ensuring 
availability of fodder and feed. The advisory includes convergence with MNREGA.  

18 
 
1.23 The Committee note with satisfaction the various meas ures taken by the 
Government in  pursuance of their instant Recommendation.  The States have 
been requested in terms of extant MNREGA Guidelines to undertake plantat ion of 
fodder trees, shrubs and other forage varieties for developing grazing land, 
common property resources and waste land.  This , in view of the Committee , is a 
right step towards ensuring access of the landless and marginal farmers to 
affordable fodder for their livestock.  Furthermore, activities like Poultry Shelter, 
Goatery Shelter, Construction of Pucca Floor, Urine Tank and Fodder Trough for 
Cattle, Azolla as Cattle Feed Supplements, Fisheries in seasonal water bodies on 
public land , Fish Drying Ya rds, etc. have also been included under the new 
Guidelines of MNREGA.  This will go a long way  in ameliorating the lot of the 
intended beneficiaries viz. the landless and marginal farmers who are involved in 
animal husbandry activities.  The Committee desi re to be apprised of the impact 
of these initiatives on the animal husbandry activities at the field level.   
 
WOMEN CENTRIC SCHEMES 
 
(Recommendation Para No.2.52) 
 
 
1.24 Noting that women have all along been at the forefront of dairy cooperative 
movement and the majority of the work force in this sector i.e. 75.6% comprises women  
and taking further note that in schemes like Rural Backyard Poultry Development 
component of the centrally sponsored scheme of Poultry Development  which covers 
beneficiaries from BPL population and the „Integrated Development for Small 
Ruminants and Rabbits where t he intended beneficiaries are landless and marginal 
farmers and preference is given to women the Committee, had recommended focussed 
attention be given to Women Centric Schemes, during the course of the Twelfth Plan so 

19 
 
as to  ensure their financial self sufficiency to them and that pride of place is given to 
women in the schemes of the Department. 
1.25 In their Action Taken Note the Government have stated that in  the poultry sector, 
women mostly look after rural poultry enabling gender -empowerment. The backyard 
poultry farming is one of the important means to empower the landless BPL families 
with assets (20 to 50 birds) that would provide some income.  
1.26 It is intended to focus attention during XII Plan for empowering women 
beneficiaries in particular through the „Rural Backyard Poultry Development‟ component 
of Centrally Sponsored Scheme, “Poultry Development”. Similarly, under the Scheme 
Integrated Development of Small Ruminants and Rabbits (IDSRR) and Conservation of 
Threatened Breeds more women will be associated in implementation of such schemes. 
1.27 In addition, the Department ha ve decided that 10 to 15% of funds will be 
earmarked under the existing Centrally Spons ored/Central Sector Schemes from        
2013-14 onwards for Empowerment of Women component.  
1.28 The recommendations of the Committee are noted for suitably incorporating 
women centric schemes while modifying the Department‟s Schemes for Twelfth Five 
Year Plan. 
1.29 The Committee note that the Government, in pursuance of their 
Recommendation are now associating more and more women in implementation 
of Schemes like ‘Rural Backyard Poultry Development’, the ‘Integrated 
Development of Small Ruminants and Rabb its’, ‘Conservation of Threatened 
Breeds’, etc.  The Committee also note that from the ongoing Fiscal (2013 -14) 
onwards the Department have decided that 10% to 15% of funds will be 
earmarked under the existing Centrally Sponsored/Central Sector Schemes for  
Empowerment of Women Component.  Furthermore, women centric schemes will 

20 
 
be suitably incorporated while modifying their schemes for the Twelfth Five Year 
Plan.  While appreciating all these initiatives of the Government , the Committee 
desire that details of actual achievements of these initiatives during the current 
year may be furnished to them for their information.  
 
(Recommendation Para No. 2.53) 
 
 
1.30 Noting that inspite of  the key to the success of any Scheme hinging on easy 
access to institutional credit for the beneficiaries women being the bulwark of the 
majority of livestock rearing and other allied activities were mostly not in a position to 
avail of institutional credit due to procedural and other inhibiting factors ,  the Committee 
had recommended the Department to work in tandem with other agencies involved in 
the implementation of these Schemes to  ensure that women willing to avail the benefits 
under these Scheme are able to obtain financial assistance from banks easily and do 
not encounter a ny hardships in obtaining bank loans.  They had further recommended 
that all procedural hindrances , as obtained from the feedback , be sorted out to make 
them beneficiary friendly to ultimately enhance the effectiveness of the schemes being 
implemented by t he Department  and that preference be given to Women Self Help 
Groups (SHGs) in Animal Husbandry activities also as they have been very successful 
in executing Schemes of various Ministries of the Government of India.    
1.31 In their Action Taken Note the Government have stated that t he Department are 
advising to Implementing Agency (NABARD) that preference be given to women self 
help groups in animal husbandry activities in implementation of credit linked schemes. 
States are also being advised to cover wom en beneficiaries under animal husbandry 
schemes under RKVY and NMPS. The administrative approval for the scheme 
specifically mentions the target group of beneficiaries including women. 

21 
 
1.32 The Committee note the Government’s reply that the Department are 
advising NABARD to give preference to women SHGs in animal husbandry 
activities while implementing credit linked schem es or the State Governments to 
cover women beneficiaries under animal husbandry schemes under Rashtriya 
Krishi Vikas Yojana and National M ission for Protein Supplements.  The 
Committee hope that the Department would have, by now, issued these 
instructions.  They would like to be furnished of copies of the same.     
 
LIVESTOCK HEALTH AND DISEASE CONTROL 
 
(Recommendation Para No. 2.54) 
 
 
1.33 Taking note of the efforts of the Government towards disease control in livestock 
and appreciating the fact that the Food and Mouth Disease Control Programme has 
been expanded from 54 districts to 221 districts , the Committee had also expressed 
their concern over the estimated loss of Rs.20,000.00 crore per annum on account of 
reduced production of milk and meat due to Foot and Mouth Disease (FMD) which was 
reducing our access to the international trade.  Given the fact that the scheme has 
reduced the occur rence of the disease and the Government intended to expand its 
outreach in a phased manner so as to control FMD totally by the year 2025 , the 
Committee had desired the Department to implement the Scheme more vigorously and 
take concrete steps to strive to eradicate totally FMD from the Country to ensure 
livestock health and thereby sustain and enhance the production of milk and milk 
products, meat, etc. and promote international trade. 
1.34 The Government in their Action Taken Note have informed that a s of now, whole 
of Southern peninsula (Andhra Pradesh, Karnataka, Kerala, Tamil Nadu) along with 
Maharashtra, Goa, Gujarat, Punjab, Haryana, Uttar Pradesh(16 districts), Delhi and UT 

22 
 
of Andaman & Nicobar Islands, Dadra & Nagar Haveli, Daman & Diu have been 
covered under Foot and Mouth Disease Control Programme (FMD -CP). The 
implementation of the FMD – CP has shown desired results in terms of reduction in the 
number of outbreaks in these areas. The systematic vaccination of all the eligible target 
population is being undertaken in the Southern States as well as Puducherry to control 
the disease.  
1.35 It is proposed to expand the scope of the FMD  - CP in Twelfth Plan and beyond 
in a phased manner so as to cover the entire Country. In the meantime, FMD  - CP will 
further be extended to cover all the districts of Rajasthan and as many districts in Uttar 
Pradesh as possible in the first year of the Twelfth Plan itself, keeping in mind 
geographical contiguity with already covered districts and availability of the FMD 
vaccine.   
1.36 Apart from increasing coverage under FMD -CP, the Department has been 
vigorously pursuing  in  (a) testing/ensuring quality control of the vaccine produced; (b) 
increasing the availability of FMD vaccine from 150 million doses to around 280 mi llion 
doses and in regularly taking up the issues with the vaccine suppliers to enhance the 
vaccine production output  ultimately to around 800 million doses; (c) monitoring of the 
FMD-CP to ensure at least 80% of the eligible population is vaccinated in t he States 
under FMD -CP; (d) encouraging the education to farmers to be more proactive in 
disease reporting and receptive in our control programme and (e) encouraging the  
States to exercise animal movement control and ensure certification of the vaccinated  
animals as to be allowed entry into a State.   
1.37 The Committee though satisfied with the progress made by the Departmen t 
under the Scheme Foot and Mouth Disease Control Programme till now have the 
recurring colossal losses of  Rs. 20000 crore per year c aused by this dreaded 

23 
 
disease  weighing over their mind.   They, therefore, strongly feel that the sooner 
the disease is eradicated from the Country the better.  In this context the present 
target of the Department to increase availability of the vaccine f rom the present 
150 million doses to 280 million doses when the ultimate requirement is of the 
tune of 800 million doses does not go to assuage the concern of the Committee .   
In the opinion of the Committee, investments have to be made in FMD – CP on a 
far higher scale so that the reach and coverage of the Programme is expanded 
expeditiously and the damage caused to the livestock health and to the economy 
is controlled at the earliest.  The Committee would appreciate a clear cut roadmap 
from the Department in this context.     
 
INSURANCE OF LIVESTOCK 
 
(Recommendation Para No.2.55) 
 
 
1.38 Observing the poor health status of livestock in the Country a nd the frequent 
occurrence of natural calamities and noting that the Livestock Insurance Scheme covers 
300 selected districts from 10 December, 2009 with the benefit of subsidy is restricted to 
two animals per beneficiary per household , the Committee had desired the Scheme be 
implemented in full swing to attract more and more poor and marginal farmers of the 
Country towards this Scheme in view of the poor livestock health and recurrence of 
natural calamities and reduce the losses of these farmers. They had further urged the 
Department to consider the feasibility of removing the extant restriction of two animal 
per beneficiary per household and to popularise the Scheme in rural and remote areas, 
extend incentives and encourage small and poor farmers to come forward to avail the 
benefit of the Scheme so that the objective of employment generation also could be 
enhanced.  

24 
 
1.39 In their Action Taken Note the Government have stated that t he Department 
propose to implement the Livestock Insurance Scheme in all the District s of the Country 
instead of 300 selected districts and to insure upto 5 animals per beneficiary per 
household instead of 2 animals per beneficiary per household so as to attract more and 
more poor and marginal farmers of the Country towards this Scheme in view of the poor 
livestock health and recurrence of natural calamities resulting in losses to the farm ers. 
The existing premium subsidy will be reviewed to enable more small and poor farmers 
to avail the benefit of the scheme.   
1.40 The Committee take note of the proposal of the Department to implement  
the Livestock Insurance Scheme in all the districts o f the Country from the 
present 300 districts.  They also take note of the proposal of the Department to 
cover 5 animals per beneficiary per household instead of the present 2 animals 
per beneficiary per household.  They, however, consider the se only as hal f 
measures as they are still at proposal stage.  The Livestock Insurance Scheme 
has the potential of providing substantial safeguard to the small and marginal 
farmers from unforeseen situations and the frequently occurring natural 
calamities.  The Committe e, therefore, desire that both these proposals be 
immediately acted upon by the Department and the Committee be apprised of the 
same without any delay.    
 
SCHEMES FOR FARMERS GROWING FODDER CROPS 
 
(Recommendation Para No. 2.56) 
 
 
1.41 In their Thirty-sixth Report, the Committee had noted that an area of 15.6 million 
hectare is classified as wasteland and is available for grazing.  However, this is mostly 
degraded or has been encroached upon restricting availability for livestock grazing.  

25 
 
They had also noted that the gap between demand and availability of feed and fodder 
varies between 36% for greenfed, 40% for dry fodder and 57% for fodder concentrate.  
The Committee had further noted that to address the above issues, the Department had 
launched a comprehe nsive modified „Centrally Sponsored Fodder and Feed 
Development Scheme‟ from 01  April, 2010, which include d components that would 
encourage farmers, State Government Departments (Animal Husbandry, Agriculture, 
Forest, other Public Sector undertakings), Gos halas, NGOs, Milk Federation , etc. to 
increase fodder production and also private entrepreneurs to take up feed production by 
establishing feed production units, mineral mixture plants , etc.  Moreover, t he 
Department had increased free of cost distribution fodder minikits among the farmers to 
11.79 lakh to encourage more fodder production.  They had however, regretted to find 
that all these measures had not resulted in any remarkable increase in the production of 
feed and fodder due to the absence of dedicated forward linkages for farmers producing 
fodder crops i.e. arrangements for buy back of fodder seeds produced by the farmers. 
Resultantly, the State Governments would assess the requirement of fodder seeds and 
make an agreement for 3-5 years with a seed supplying agency for rates of seed (Crop-
wise) to be supplied, including transportation cost up to delivery place, for each year. 
Time frame for supply of seeds was also decided with seed supplying agency. The seed 
supplying agencies in turn makes a buy-back arrangement of fodder seeds produced by 
the farmers and there was no mechanism to regulate prices which are market linked. 
The Committee  had, therefore, desire d the Department to become proactive for the 
proper implementation of this Scheme.  They had also desired the Department to take 
up the issue of removal of encroachments and upgradation of the classified wastelands 
which could be put to fodder crop production, reduce the wide gap in demand and 
supply as the Department had admitted the importance of  feed and fodder in sustaining 

26 
 
productivity of the livestock sector.  They  had further desired the Department to assess 
the requirement of fodder seeds in the Country to generate more employment 
opportunities for the landless and poor farmers. 
1.42 In their Action Taken Note the Government have stated that f odder and feed is 
obtained from a variety of sources including cultivation of fodder varieties, crop 
residues, dual -purpose crops, trees, forest areas, grasslands, etc.  Most of these 
sources are not exc lusive contributors to feed and fodder owing to different competing 
uses.  Therefore, it has not been possible to capture reliable data on availability of feed 
and fodder.  However, the efforts of the Department have definitely resulted into 
improvement in the availability of feed and fodder in the Country.  Although the report of 
the Working Group on Animal Husbandry for the 12 th Five Year Plan has mentioned 
about increase in availability of various types of feed and fodder over the last two 
decades, but there is a need to further increase the availability of feed and fodder so as 
to reduce the gap between demand and availability, which is necessary to sustain 
productivity of the livestock sector. 
 1.43 This Department has requested Ministry of Statistics a nd Programme 
Implementation for assessment of consumption of Feed and Fodder under the NSSO.  
They have intimated that this will be considered by the Working Group on NSS 70 th 
Round (Jan. 2013 – June 2013).   
1.44 The component of 'Seed Procurement and Dis tribution' under the Centrally 
Sponsored Fodder and Feed Development Scheme provides for a buy -back 
arrangement by the seed supplying agencies with the farmers. The guidelines under 
this component also provide for distribution of seeds so procured by the Seed Supplying 
Agencies to the farmers free of cost. States have been advised to expand 

27 
 
implementation of this component of the Scheme to increase production and availability 
of fodder seeds. Steps are being taken to strengthen implementation of this Scheme. 
1.45 The issue of use of cultivable wasteland for fodder crop production is being taken 
up by the Department with the State Governments by way of providing 100% assistance 
under the component of „Grasslands Development including Grass Reserves‟ under the  
„Centrally Sponsored Scheme on Fodder and Feed Development‟. The advisory issued 
by this Department to the State Governments regarding various steps to be taken for 
increasing availability of fodder and feed includes advice on optimum utilization of land 
resources, improvement of grasslands/wastelands and other community lands.  
1.46 The Committee while taking note of the various steps enumerated in the 
Action Taken Reply of the Government are of the considered view that far more 
concerted efforts are requ ired on the part of the Department as the follow -up 
action on reclaiming wastelands as also the lands encroached upon would 
mostly be taken by the State Governments and their agencies.  The huge gap 
between the demand and supply of feed and fodder , inspite of the fact that vast 
tracts of land measuring 15.6 million hectare are  wasteland and available for 
grazing, defies logic.  The Committee also find it inexplicable as to how the 
Department as also the  Working Group of Animal Husbandry for Twelfth Plan 
have concluded about improved feed and fodder availability during the last two 
decades when the Department has itself confessed its inability to capture feed 
and fodder availability data due to various constraints.  Now that NSSO has 
completed its 70 th Survey which also inter-alia assessed feed and fodder 
consumption, the Committee desire the Department to rework its analysis in the 
matter and come-up with more proactive measures to tackle the acute shortage of 

28 
 
feed and fodder promptly.  The Committee would a ppreciate a feedback in this 
context at the earliest.  

29 
 
CHAPTER II 
 
OBSERVATIONS / RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE 
GOVERNMENT 
 
ROLE OF ANIMAL HUSBANDRY IN THE ECONOMY 
 
(Recommendation Para No.1.14) 
 
 
The Committee‟s examination of the subje ct reveals that at 529.7 million the 
nation is endowed with the second largest livestock population spread over 100 million 
households in about 6 lakh villages as per the provisional Report of Livestock Census 
2007.  In percentage terms it comes to 56.8% a nd 14.5% of world‟s buffalo and cattle 
population.  They further note that the growth rate of cattle and buffalo is 7.5% while in 
respect of pigs and other animals is in the negative balance at -17.65% and -23% over 
the figures of 2003.  Given the fact tha t livestock production and agriculture in the 
Country are intrinsically linked and dependent on each other it goes without saying that 
both play a very crucial role in contributing to the overall food security, the Country is 
aspiring for.  Coupled with their interdependency it is also a known fact that contribution 
of livestock sector to agriculture GDP is as high as 70% in arid areas and 40% in semi -
arid areas as well as the sector‟s total export earnings in the year 2009 -10 amounted to 
Rs 10,844.76 crore despite the fact that only a very small fraction of the entire livestock 
sector is functioning on a commercial scale.  The above narrative further reveals that 
the rapid urbanization and rise in per capita income levels is fuelling the demand for 
products derived from this sector.  This is also an indicator of the vast employment and 
income generation potential of this sector.  The role played and the income and 

30 
 
employment generation potential of this sector vis -a-vis the allocations and the level of 
investment are dealt in the succeeding paragraphs. 
 
Reply of the Government: 
 
The observations of Parliamentary Standing Committee are noted. 
[Letter No.25-5(2)/2012-AHD (Coord) dated 21st August, 2012] 
 
DISTRIBUTION OF LIVESTOCK AMONGST LANDLESS SEGMENT  
 
(Recommendation Para 2.44 ) 
 
 
The Committee observe that inspite of the existence of a plethora of Schemes 
being implemented by the Department for distribution of livestock amongst the landless, 
the ground realities as reflected in the documents furnished to t hem are not at all 
encouraging.  What is further disconcerting is the fact that livestock holding percentage 
amongst this most vulnerable class of the agricultural community runs into single digits.  
The Committee cannot, but deprecate the extant sordid st ate of affairs as they are of 
the firm opinion that the Scheme of DVCF / DEDS has not borne the desired results in 
favour of the targeted sections of landless and marginal farmers.  The reasons 
attributed therefore by the Department are not at all convinci ng.  Though they 
acknowledge that there might be genuine constraints holding back the success of this 
Scheme, but they at the same time are also confident that these are not insurmountable 
constraints.  They, therefore, recommend the Department to sort out  with the 
implementing agencies viz. State Governments and others and address this vexed 
issue in a holistic manner while keeping in focus the main objective of this Scheme.  
They further recommend that with a view to provide assured access to feed to the 
landless segments to enable them to raise livestock, the Department need to initiate  

31 
 
urgent measures to resurrect the dwindling Common Property resources under 
Panchayat lands if need be with proper coordination with Ministry of Panchayati Raj to 
enable them to support livestock.  They are pretty sure that if these measures are taken 
in a coordinated way, then this Scheme could be successfully implemented. 
 
Reply of the Government: 
 
The Dairy/Poultry Venture Capital Fund scheme was launched during the year  
2004-05 to attract investment by private sector in the Dairy sector. This scheme is open 
for private entrepreneurs, NGOs, farmers, group of all sector of unorganized as well as 
organized sector. The objective of the scheme is to generate self employment a nd 
provide infrastructure, mainly to un -organized dairy sector for improving quality of milk 
resulting in food safety and to help in bringing a significant portion of this unorganized 
sector in the ambit of organized sector, which will increase the commerc ial viability of 
these activities.  The DVCF scheme was modified and renamed as Dairy 
Entrepreneurship Development Scheme (DEDS) from 1 st September, 2010. The 
Scheme has become very popular since then which is reflected by the fact that out of 
Rs.150 crore  allocated for the year 2012 -13, an amount of Rs.140 crore has already 
been released to NABARD by 30.6.2012.  NABARD has further indicated that they have 
pending applications for which more amount is required to be released as subsidy to the 
beneficiaries. During the year 2011 -12 as against BE allocation of Rs.88 crore, Rs.110 
crore was released to NABARD.  Since inception of DEDS (1.09.2010), an amount of 
Rs. 270.40 crore has been released to NABARD, against which NABARD has 
sanctioned 46,829 Dairy Units a nd released back ended capital subsidy of Rs.186.14 
crore till 30.06.2012.  

32 
 
Landless and marginal farmers are eligible to participate under the scheme and 
are beneficiaries of the scheme though no separate data is collected and maintained by 
NABARD in this regard. Availability of feed and fodder is a major constraint for landless 
livestock holder. Department has advised States to take steps for increasing availability 
of feed and fodder and for improving common property resources and grazing lands by 
utilizing funds under ongoing s chemes of Government. States ha ve also been advised 
to promote cultivation of Azolla, which is a rich source of protein for animals and as per 
the guidelines of the Ministry of Rural Development , MNREGS funds can be utilized for 
Azolla cultivation. 
[Letter No.25-5(2)/2012-AHD (Coord) dated 21st August, 2012] 
(Recommendation Para 2.45) 
 
 
The Committee observe that though the landless segment constitutes 32% of 
rural population, the distribution of livestock of Sheep and Goat and poul try is to the 
extent of 6.5%.  With a view to increase their distribution, they desire the Department to 
lay extra stress on providing sheep, goat and poultry to the landless segment as these 
require very minimal investment in terms of infrastructure with rearing cost being pretty 
low.  Further, in their opinion these animals would provide the much needed dietary 
supplement to the targeted class in terms of milk and eggs in the initial stage and later 
on enable them to venture into such activities that coul d augment their income levels 
besides providing gainful employment to these sections during the lean cropping 
season.  They would like to be apprised of the steps taken in this regard. 
 
 
 

33 
 
Reply of the Government: 
 The scheme „Rural Backyard Poultry Develop ment‟ component of Centrally 
Sponsored Scheme, “Poultry Development” aims at supporting Below Poverty Line 
beneficiary families, wherein 4 -week old chicks, suitable for rearing in the backyard, 
reared at the „mother units‟ are further distributed to them i n batches. Further, to raise 
the birds in a bio -secure manner, a provision of Rs. 750/ - per beneficiary for night -
shelter etc. is made in the scheme. 
The backward linkage for supply of the low -input technology birds suitable for 
family for backyard poultry  (particularly by landless and marginal farmers) is also 
ensured through support to State Government farm infrastructure under the „Assistance 
to State Poultry Farm‟ component of Centrally Sponsored Scheme, “Poultry 
Development”. It is envisaged in XII Pla n to modernize the infrastructure through proper 
automation and bio -security measures for improving productivity and production of 
poultry and its products. S ince the inception of the erstwhile scheme, „Assistance to 
State Poultry Farms‟ (now subsumed unde r Centrally Sponsored Scheme “Poultry 
Development” as a component), a total of 233 State Poultry Farms have been assisted 
across the Country.  
As far as Goatery is concerned, the scheme “Integrated Development on Small 
Ruminants and Rabbits (IDSRR)” suppor ts establishment of small rearing unit and 
breeding farms of sheep and goat through NABARD.  Target groups for this beneficiary 
oriented programme include women, poor and marginal farmers.  Under National 
Mission on Protein Supplements, the goat rearing sc heme has been supported by 
Department though RKVY to provide the much needed protein supplements for targeted 
group includes women, poor and marginal farmers. 
 

34 
 
As a follow up to the recommendation of the Committee, the State Governments 
are being advised t o give to preference to landless farmer beneficiaries for distribution 
of goatery, sheep, piggery and backyard poultry units under NMPS and RKVY by 
forming Self Help Groups of such beneficiaries as clusters and by providing suitable 
linkage to veterinary services required for such projects. 
 
[Letter No.25-5(2)/2012-AHD (Coord) dated 21st August, 2012] 
 
CATTLE AND BUFFALO POPULATION 
 
(Recommendation Para 2.46) 
 
 
The examination of the subject by them revealed lack of clarity in the data 
generated on the grow th of cattle and buffalo population by the Department is at 
variance with that of the assertion of the Ministry of Food Processing Industries that the 
cattle and buffalo population is not showing any signs of increase causes them deep 
anguish. Since they a re given to understand that the Ministry of Food Processing 
Industries have taken up the matter with the Department, they desire the Department to 
urgently remove the ambiguity in perception on this aspect and apprise the Committee 
of the factual position within three months of the presentation of this Report.   
 
Reply of the Government: 
 
The number of cattle and buffalo population as per the Livestock Census from 
1951 onwards is given below: 

35 
 
Number of cattle & Buffaloes as per Livestock Censuses 
                                                          (In Millions) 
Year Species 
Cattle Buffalo 
1951 155.30 43.40 
1956 158.70 44.90 
1961 175.60 51.20 
1966 176.20 53.00 
1972 178.30 57.40 
1977 180.00 62.00 
1982 192.54 69.78 
1987 199.69 75.97 
1992 204.58 84.21 
1997 198.88 89.92 
2003 185.18 97.92 
2007 199.08 105.34 
 
The above table shows that the buffalo population is in increasing trends. 
However, the cattle population decreased from 204.58 million in 1992 to 198.88 million 
in 1997 and further decreased to 185.18 million in 2003.  
The Ministry of Food Processing Industries has informed that they do not have 
independent source of data on cattle population and have been using the data 
generated by the Department of Animal Husbandry, Dairying and Fisheri es through the 
Livestock Census. Between 1997 and 2003, the Census showed a drop in total 
livestock population. However, it is observed that as per the Livestock Census, 2007, 
the total livestock population has increased from 485 million to 529.7 million d uring the 
period from 2003 to 2007 indicating the growth of 9.2%.  
 
[Letter No.25-5(2)/2012-AHD (Coord) dated 21st August, 2012] 
 

36 
 
LIVESTOCK CENSUS 
 
(Recommendation Para 2.48 ) 
 
 
The Committee observe that the last livestock census was undertaken more than  
five years ago and that the Department is relying on information generated by the 59 th 
round of NSSO when already NSSO has carried out further surveys. They desire the 
Department to conduct a fresh livestock survey in real quick time independently through  
the Animal Husbandry Department of States so as to get an authentic as well as up -to-
date data on the livestock population in the Country.  They further desire that the 
parameters of this census be broadened to include the livestock owners as well which in 
their view would enable the Department to revisit / reorient their schemes to benefit the 
target groups at the earliest.  
 
Reply of the Government: 
The Department is in the process of conducting the next Livestock Census (19 th 
Livestock Census) through A nimal Husbandry Departments of the States in the year 
2012 for getting up-to-date data of livestock population in the Country.  The Census will 
provide information on number of households having various species of livestock and 
poultry.   
The information o n distribution of land and livestock holding in the Country is 
collected through the survey on land and livestock holding which was conducted by 
NSSO during its 59 th Round (January to June, 2003). The NSSO will again conduct this 
survey in its 70th round (January to June, 2013). 
 
[Letter No.25-5(2)/2012-AHD (Coord) dated 21st August, 2012] 

37 
 
(Recommendation Para 2.49) 
The Committee note that the Department is implementing many Schemes viz. 
NPCBB, CCBFs, CHRS and CFSP&TI to name a few, for genetic upgradation of bovine 
population to enhance their productivity and availability of quality animals in the 
Country.  Though the Department have formulated many Schemes to upgrade the 
quality of bovines, still a lot more needs to be done as the growth rate of cattle and  
buffalo does not give a true picture of the efficacy of their programmes.  They, therefore, 
desire that special emphasis be placed first on preserving indigenous breeds and then 
through genetic engineering upgrade their quality and quantity as well.  The Department 
also needs to popularize these Schemes to enhance their reach thereby increase 
quality livestock throughout the Country. 
 
Reply of the Government: 
The NPCBB emphasizes on (a) Genetic upgradation of non -descriptive cattle 
population and (b) Devel opment and Conservation of indigenous bovine breeds. In 
addition, efforts are on to promote high producing indigenous breeds of cattle & buffalo 
in their respective breeding tracts. For that, some State Agriculture Universities and 
NGOs have also been asso ciated in implementation of NPCBB. Funds have been 
released to Guru Angad Dev Veterinary and Animal Science (GADVASU), Ludhiana 
and to BAIF for establishment of Embryo Transfer Technology Lab. Incentives are made 
available to the farmers maintaining elite animals of indigenous breeds under bull 
production programme being implemented under the scheme.  
 
 

38 
 
 In order to attain higher productivity of milk through rapid genetic improvement 
and better feed management, the Government has launched the National Dairy  Plan 
Phase I (NDP) with World Bank assistance with an outlay of Rs. 2242 crores. NDP 
envisages genetic upgradation of bovine population through production of high genetic 
merit disease free bulls. Development and conservation of 11 important indigenous 
dairy breeds i.e. Rathi, Tharparkar, Kankrej, Gir, Hariana, Sahiwal, Murrah, Mehsana, 
Jaffarabadi, Pandharpuri and Nili-Ravi will also be covered under the project. 
The Indian Council of Agriculture Research (ICAR) is working on development of 
various genetic engineering protocols to upgrade genetic potential of dairying animals. 
The same will be implemented in the Department effectively to promote high production 
of animals as and when available.  
 
[Letter No.25-5(2)/2012-AHD (Coord) dated 21st August, 2012] 
 
(Recommendation Para 2.51) 
 
 
During the course of examination of the subject, the Committee observe that 
there is a scope of integration of animal husbandry activities with MNREGA and the 
same was also being advised by the State Department of Animal Husb andry Sector.  
They further observe that the beneficiaries belonging to Scheduled Castes and 
Scheduled Tribes are allowed to avail of MNREGA resources for land development and 
provision of irrigation facilities etc. on land owned by them.  In their conside red opinion 
these activities have a bearing on successful rearing of livestock by them.  In some 
States man days are allowed for construction of animal sheds on their own land to 
MNREGA beneficiaries belonging to these categories.  They, therefore, desire that 
steps should be taken by the Department in conjunction with the Ministry of Rural 

39 
 
Development to attract more and more landless and poor farmers towards MNREGA so 
that more man days of employment could be generated which would help in success of 
both the programmes having commonality of intended beneficiaries.  They desire to be 
apprised of the steps initiated in this direction. 
 
Reply of the Government: 
 
The Department is in agreement with the observation of the august Committee 
regarding integration of animal husbandry activities with MNREGA. The guidelines of 
MNREGA provide for location -specific grassland development for ensuring adequate 
fodder supply. Plantation of fodder trees, shrubs, and other forage varieties for 
developing grazing land, common  property resources and waste land can be 
undertaken by States under MNREGA funds. Such a step will enable landless animal 
rearers to have access to sources of fodder required for their livestock. States have 
accordingly been requested by the Department. 
To strengthen the synergy between MNREGA and agriculture and allied rural 
livelihoods, to respond to the demands of the States for greater location specific 
flexibility in permissible works and to help improve the ecological balance in rural India 
and to pr ovide a cleaner, healthier environment for the rural population, the Ministry of 
Rural Development has expanded the list of permissible works under MNREGA. The 
following activities related to livestock and fisheries have been included under the new 
guidelines of MNREGA.  
 Poultry Shelter 
 Goatery Shelter 
 Construction of Pucca Floor, Urine Tank and Fodder Trough for Cattle 
 Azolla as Cattle Feed Supplements 

40 
 
 Fisheries in seasonal water bodies on public land 
 Fish Drying Yards 
The Department has issued advisory to  States for steps to be taken for ensuring 
availability of fodder and feed. The advisory includes convergence with MNREGA.  
 
 [Letter No.25-5(2)/2012-AHD (Coord) dated 21st August, 2012] 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
 For comments of the Committee please refer to Para No. 1.23 of Chapter I of this 
Report. 
 
WOMEN CENTRIC SCHEMES 
 
(Recommendation Para 2.52) 
 
 
The Committee note that women have all along been at the forefront of dairy 
cooperative movement. Certain activities like feeding and milking animals are mostly 
performed by women and the majority of the work force in this sector i.e. 75.6% 
comprises women. The Committee are happy to note further that the scheme Rural 
Backyard Poultry Development component of the centrally sponsored scheme of Poultry 
Development envisages to cover beneficiaries from below poverty line including women 
to enable them to gain supplementary income and nutritional support. Besides income 
generation, the Scheme provides nutritional supplementation in form of valuable animal 
protein thereby empowering women in rural areas.  Under the scheme „Integrated 
Development for Small Ruminants and Rabbits (IDSRR)‟ there is provision for 
establishment of commercial sheep and goat rearing units which are supported with a 
mix of loan-cum-subsidy. The intended beneficiaries are landless and marginal farmers 
and preference is given to women. The Committee, therefore, desire focussed attention 

41 
 
be given to Women Centric Schemes, during the course of the Twelfth Plan so as to  
ensure financial self sufficiency to them and that pride of place is given to women in the 
schemes of the Department. 
 
Reply of the Government:  
 
In the poultry sector, women mostly look after rural poultry enabling gender-
empowerment. The backyard poultry farming is one of the important means to empower 
the landless BPL families with assets (20 to 50 birds) that would provide some income.  
  It is intended to focus attention during XII Plan for empowering women 
beneficiaries in particular through the „Rural Backyard Poultry Devel opment‟ component 
of Centrally Sponsored Scheme, “Poultry Development”. Similarly, under the scheme 
Integrated Development on Small Ruminants and Rabbits (IDSRR) and Conservation of 
Threatened Breeds more women will be associated in implementation of such schemes. 
In addition, the Department has decided that 10 to 15% of funds will be 
earmarked under the existing centrally Sponsored/Central Sector schemes from 2013 -
14 onwards for Empowerment of Women component.  
The recommendations of the committee are note d for suitably incorporating 
women centric schemes while modifying the Department‟s schemes for Twelfth Five 
Year Plan. 
 [Letter No.25-5(2)/2012-AHD (Coord) dated 21st August, 2012] 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 For comments of the Committee please refer to Para No. 1.29 of Chapter I of this 
Report. 

42 
 
(Recommendation Para 2.53) 
 
 
The Committee recognizes that the key to the success or failure of any Scheme 
lies in the easy access to institutional credit for the beneficiaries.  They, however, 
observe that women  being the bulwark of the majority of livestock rearing and other 
allied activities are mostly not in a position to avail of institutional credit due to 
procedural and other inhibiting factors.  The Committee, therefore, recommend the 
Department to work in  tandem with other agencies involved in the implementation of 
these Schemes to  ensure that women willing to avail the benefits under these Scheme 
are able to obtain financial assistance from banks easily and do not have to encounter 
any hardships in obtai ning bank loans.  They further recommend that all procedural 
hindrances as obtained from the feedback are sorted out to make them beneficiary 
friendly to ultimately enhance the effectiveness of the schemes being implemented by 
the Department.   They furthe r desire that preference be given to Women Self Help 
Groups (SHGs) in Animal Husbandry activities also as they have been very successful 
in executing Schemes of various Ministries of the Government of India.  They desire to 
be informed of the steps taken in this regard.  
 
Reply of the Government: 
 
 The Department is advising to Implementing Agency (NABARD) to give 
preference be given to women self help groups in animal husbandry activities in 
implementation of credit linked schemes. States are also being ad vised to cover women 
beneficiaries under animal husbandry schemes under RKVY and NMPS. The 
administrative approval for the scheme specifically mentions the target group of 
beneficiaries including women. 
 [Letter No.25-5(2)/2012-AHD (Coord) dated 21st August, 2012] 

43 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 For comments of the Committee please refer to Para No. 1.32 of Chapter I of this 
Report. 
 
LIVESTOCK HEALTH AND DISEASE CONTROL 
 
(Recommendation Para 2.54) 
 
 
The Committee observe that schemes to control diseases in livestock and ensure 
their well being are of vital importance in maintaining the level of employment and 
income generation capacity of the Animal Husbandry Sector to the national GDP.  They 
also observe that the Department is implementing schemes such as ASCAD,  NPRE, 
FMD-CP to name a few towards the above stated objective. They, however, are 
constrained to observe that an estimated loss of Rs.20,000.00 crore per annum on 
account of reduced production of milk and meat due to Foot and Mouth Disease (FMD) 
is reducing our access to the international trade. The Committee are happy to note that 
the Department have now expanded the FMD scheme to a total of 221 districts from 54  
districts earlier as the implementation of the scheme has reduced the occurrence of the 
disease and expand its outreach in a phased manner so as to control FMD totally by the 
year 2025. They, therefore, desire the Department to implement the scheme more 
vigorously and take concrete steps to strive to eradicate totally the FMD from the 
Country to ensure livestock health thereby sustain and enhance the production of milk 
and milk products, meat etc and promote international trade. 
 

44 
 
Reply of the Government: 
  
As of now, whole of Southern peninsula (Andhra Pradesh, Karnataka, Kerala, 
Tamil Nadu) along with Maharashtra, Goa, Gujarat, Punjab, Haryana, Uttar Pradesh(16 
districts), Delhi and UT of Andaman & Nicobar Islands, Dadra & Nagar Haveli, Daman & 
Diu have been covered under Foot and Mouth Disease Control Programme (FMD -CP). 
The implementation of th e FMD control programme has shown desired results in terms 
of reduction in the number of outbreaks in these areas. The systematic vaccination of all 
the eligible target population is being undertaken in the Southern States as well as 
Puducherry to control the disease.  
It is proposed to expand the scope of the FMD Programme in 12 th Plan and 
beyond in phased manner so as to cover the entire Country. In the meantime, FMD 
control programme will further be extended to cover all the districts of Rajasthan and as  
many districts in Uttar Pradesh as possible in the first year of the 12 th Plan itself, 
keeping in mind geographical contiguity with already covered districts and availability of 
the FMD vaccine.   
Apart from increasing coverage under FMD -CP, the Departmen t has been 
vigorously pursuing  in  (a) testing/ensuring quality control of the vaccine produced; (b) 
increasing the availability of FMD vaccine from 150 million doses to around 280 million 
doses and in regularly taking up the issues with the vaccine suppl iers to enhance the 
vaccine production output  ultimately to around 800 million doses; (c) monitoring of the 
FMD-CP to ensure at least 80% of the eligible population is vaccinated in the States 
under FMD -CP; (d) encouraging the education to farmers to be m ore proactive in 
disease reporting and receptive in our control programme and (e) encouraging the  
States to exercise animal movement control and ensure certification of the vaccinated 
animals as to be allowed entry into a State.   

45 
 
[Letter No.25-5(2)/2012-AHD (Coord) dated 21st August, 2012] 
 
Comments of the Committee 
For comments of the Committee please refer to Para No. 1.37 of Chapter I of this 
Report. 
 
MILK PRODUCTION IN INDIA 
 
(Recommendation Paragraph 3.29) 
 
 
The Committee are constrained to note that  the growth rate of milk production in 
the Country which in the year 2004 -05 and 2005 -06 was 5% decreased to 3.7% in 
2009-10 though the incremental growth in production was around 4 million MT in 2009 -
10 over the figure of 2008 -09. They further note that m any reasons contributed to lower 
production of milk due to less rainfall in northern States, reduced production of major 
agricultural crops like cereals and pulses, reduced availability of feed ingredients and 
above all the low availability of feed and fod der. They also note that though the Country 
may be heading the global list of milk producing Countries they are of the strong opinion 
that we should not rest on the laurels but continue to strive to not only maintain the 
position so attained but also take proactive steps to mitigate the problems inhibiting the 
production in the required quantities to meet the demand of our burgeoning population 
in the years to come.  The Committee, therefore, desire the Department give more 
thrust to the schemes like Intens ive Dairy Development Scheme, Strengthening 
Infrastructure for Quality and Clean Milk Production, Centrally Sponsored Feed & 
Fodder Development and the National Project for Cattle and Buffalo Breeding so that 
the problems being faced in low milk production  in the Country are solved and at the 
earliest. These measures would definitely increase the production of milk as well as 

46 
 
enable us to attain the world average per capita availability of 265 grams per day and 
help in direct and indirect employment generation in the Country. 
 
Reply of the Government: 
 
Milk production in 2010 -11 was 121.85 million tonnes [MT]. Anticipated 
production in 2011-12 is around 127.29 MT. 
 2006-07 2007-08 2008-09 2009-10 2010-11 2011-12 
Milk Production (in million 
Tonnes) 
102.58 107.93 112.18 116.43 121.85 127.29* 
Incremental production - 5.35 4.25 4.25 5.42 5.44* 
Growth over previous year 
(%) 
 5.21 3.93 3.79 4.65 4.65* 
* anticipated 
 
It may be seen from the above table that the incremental production as well as the 
growth in pr oduction in percentage terms has started to look up since last year with 
achievement of 5.4 MT and 4.65% respectively.  With the implementation of National 
Dairy Plan Phase-I from the year 2012 it is expected that the growth in milk production 
would see a further increase in the coming years.  On the basis of problem and 
constraints faced in the implementation of the schemes/programmes in the 11 th Five 
Year Plan, the above schemes/programmes will be strengthened in the 12 th Five Year 
Plan. The a verage per capita availability has also increased to 281 grams per day in 
2010-11 compared to of 265 grams per day in 2009 -10 and is closer to the World 
average of 284 grams per day.   
 
[Letter No.25-5(2)/2012-AHD (Coord) dated 21st August, 2012] 
 

47 
 
DAIRY DEVELOPMENT 
 
(Recommendation Para 3.30) 
 
3.30 The Committee is perturbed to note that since inception in 2005 -06 only 18,184 
beneficiaries have been provided assistance under the Dairy Venture Capital Fund 
Scheme of the Department now renamed as Dairy Entrepreneurship D evelopment 
Scheme (DEDS). The Committee further note that the guidelines for the Dairy 
Entrepreneurship Development Scheme have been issued by NABARD to Banks on 21 
September, 2010. To make the scheme popular and increase the coverage area the 
Department h as appointed an independent agency Centre for Management 
Development for evaluation of the scheme Dairy Venture Capital Fund. Based on the 
evaluation report, the Department have (i) changed the mode of central assistance 
under the scheme from interest free  loan (IFL) of 50%  to Back -ended Capital Subsidy 
of 25 %  (33.33% in case of SC/ST beneficiaries); (ii) for the „ Establishment of small 
dairy farms‟ component of DVCF, the Operation Flood areas were excluded.  This 
restriction has been removed in DEDS; (i ii) new components have been added to the 
scheme like assistance for (a) rearing of heifer calves (b)  establishing vermicompost 
unit with milch animal unit and (c) establishing dairy marketing outlet /dairy parlor; and 
(iv) the financial limits for individ ual components under the scheme have also been 
raised. The Committee feel these steps when implemented effectively would not only 
spread the coverage of DEDS but also contribute to generation of more employment 
opportunities under the Scheme as well as in the ancillary sector as well and help in 
uplifting the well being of small and marginal dairy farmer who are the backbone of the 
dairy sector.  They would like to be apprised of the outcome of the changes so initiated 
both in physical and financial terms. 

48 
 
Reply of the Government: 
The performance of Dairy Entrepreneurship Development Scheme (DEDS) of the 
Department which provides indirect employment generation in the Country through 
setting up of dairy units has been very good over the last two years and the  current year 
since the Scheme was modified with effect from 1.9.2010 as may be seen from the 
following table: 
Performance of DVCF/DEDS Scheme      
(Rs. in crore) 
* Funds released to NABARD as on 25.6.2012  
Since inception in 2005 -06 only 18,184 beneficiaries were pro vided assistance under 
the Dairy Venture Capital Fund Scheme of the Department now renamed as Dairy 
Entrepreneurship Development Scheme (DEDS) till 31.3.2011. However during 2011-12 
alone assistance has been provided to 27,319 beneficiaries.   Looking at th e 
performance of the scheme the Department express higher coverage under the scheme 
in future. 
 
[Letter No.25-5(2)/2012-AHD (Coord) dated 21st August, 2012] 
 
 2009-10 2010-11 2011-12 2012-13 
(Financial) DVCF DVCF/DEDS DEDS DEDS 
BE allocation 38.00 32.40 88.00 150.00 
RE Allocation 20.00 32.40 110.00 - 
Expenditure 20.00 32.40 110.00 140.00 
No. of beneficiaries 
(physical) 
 
4719 
 
   4794 
 
27,319 
 

49 
 
WOMEN DAIRY COOPERATIVE LEADERSHIP PROGRAMME (WDCLP) 
(Recommendation Para 3.31) 
3.31 The Committe e note that with a view to encourage involvement of women in 
dairy cooperatives, NDDB continued to provide need based support under the project 
WDCLP which was under implementation between 1997 -98 to 2002-03 wherein part of 
the unspent funds of EEC (EEC / EU) component of Operation Flood programme were 
being utilized.   Till 2002 -03 Rs. 437.33 lakh were spent in 14 States.  The programme 
is no longer under implementation. However, the Department is contemplating various 
modifications in the guidelines with a view to promote greater participation of women in 
dairy sector during the course of Twelfth Plan.  The Committee while recognizing the 
pivotal role played by women in the dairy sector as admitted by the Secretary during his 
deposition before them on the subject desire the Department to devise modifications 
based on the experience gained in the WDCLP project and take concrete steps in the 
Twelfth Plan to encourage participation of women in dairy and  the entire spectrum of 
activities in animal husbandry se ctor so as to optimally utilize the employment potential 
available in the activities of the animal husbandry sector.  They would like to be 
informed of the steps taken in this direction. 
Reply of the Government: 
The Department is working on incentives that  could be provided exclusively to 
women under the schemes of the Department to encourage and promote greater 
participation of women in dairy sector during the course of Twelfth Plan.  These 
incentives/modifications would be incorporated in the scheme while  seeking approval of 
the Government for continuation during Twelfth Plan. 

50 
 
 
[Letter No.25-5(2)/2012-AHD (Coord) dated 21st August, 2012] 
 
ADVISORY INSTITUTE FOR LIVESTOCK SECTOR 
(Recommendation Para 3.33) 
3.33 The Committee‟s examination of this subject rev ealed that as per their own 
admission, one of the major weaknesses afflicting the livestock sector is the absence of 
an autonomous institute or think tank on the lines of BICP or CACP to provide 
information on production systems, policy, trade and cost of production of major 
livestock products and for coordination of various surveys and studies and to provide 
advise for attaining further growth in the sector. There is a lack of authentic data and 
data gaps which would have encouraged entrepreneurship and in vestment in the 
livestock sector. Such an institution will not only create market intelligence, national 
livestock production and development programmes but also generate ideas, plan of 
action and advise on appropriate inputs on the pattern of CACP. They f urther observe 
that the comments received from the States on the revision of methodology of 
estimation of major livestock products and the revised inquiry schedules of ISS 
circulated earlier are under examination in the Department.  The methodology and 
schedule for data collection are proposed to be revised suitably during the Twelfth Plan 
based on the recommendations of the Committee constituted under the Chairmanship 
of Animal Husbandry Commissioner of the Department.  They, therefore, desire the 
Department to examine the feasibility of setting up an advisory body urgently so that 
such an organisation is in place to aid / advise the Department on all policies pertaining 
to livestock sector.  They further desire the Department also to finalise / revise the 

51 
 
methodology and schedule for data collection under ISS within the next six months 
which would bridge the data gaps and generate authentic data on various aspects 
concerning livestock sector. 
 
Reply of the Government: 
Technical Committee of Direction for Im provement of Animal Husbandry 
Statistics guides the Department in the conduct of the Integrated Sample Survey (ISS) 
for Estimation of Production of Major Livestock Products. Director General, Central 
Statistical Office is the chairman of this Committee, wh ich meets at least once in every 
year to review the progress of the implementation of the ISS besides approving the 
annual estimates of production of milk, eggs, wool and meat. The recommendations of 
the Committee are implemented by all Animal Husbandry De partments of States. The 
report of the Committee under the Chairmanship of Animal Husbandry Commissioner of 
the Department on „Revision of Methodology/Schedules for Integrated Sample Survey‟ 
was finalized in August 2011.The State Animal Husbandry Departmen ts have been 
requested to use the revised methodology and schedules for data collection from the 
Summer Season of 2012-13 i.e. from March, 2012.  
 
[Letter No.25-5(2)/2012-AHD (Coord) dated 21st August, 2012] 
 
POULTRY 
 
(Recommendation Para 3.34 ) 
 
 
The Committee observe that poultry development - a house hold activity in India -
production on scientific lines started about four decades ago through the concerted 

52 
 
efforts of Governments policies and institutions.  Under the scheme „Assistance to State 
Poultry Far ms‟ initiated in 1999 -2000, so far a total of 218 State poultry Farms have 
been assisted.  To enable BPL beneficiaries gain supplementary income and nutritional 
support, the Rural Backyard Poultry Development was started in August, 2009.  During 
2009-10 and 2010-11 (upto 31 October, 2010) assistance has been provided to 24,476 
and 1,39,800 BPL families respectively.  These figures suggest that the RBPD scheme 
is doing well.  The Committee, therefore, desire that this particular scheme should be 
implemented more vigorously to cover more number of BPL beneficiaries in the Twelfth 
Plan which in their opinion would help in not only supplementing the income and 
nutritional support of BPL families but also generate more employment opportunities in 
particular for women both directly and indirectly in the sector. 
 
Reply of the Government: 
 
 Under „Rural Backyard Poultry Development‟ component of Centrally Sponsored 
Scheme, “Poultry Development” which was launched in the middle of 2009 -10, during 
the two and a half years i.e. upto  2011-12, assistance has been provided to the tune of 
over Rs. 67 crore covering 3 lakh beneficiaries in 21 States so far. This Department 
intends to continue with the scheme component of „Rural Backyard Poultry 
Development‟.  
 
[Letter No.25-5(2)/2012-AHD (Coord) dated 21st August, 2012] 
 
 
 

53 
 
(Recommendation Para 3.35) 
 
 
The Committee note that as per APEDA the poultry exports increased from Rs. 
11 crore in 1993 -94 to Rs. 422 crore in 2008 -09. What, however, surprises them is that 
no future targ ets / projections of poultry exports has been made by Agricultural and 
Processed Food Products Export Development Authority (APEDA).  The absence of 
proper projections shows APEDA in very poor light.  In their opinion expectation of 10% 
increase in the pou ltry exports for a developing Country like ours would not just suffice.  
In the light of the admission of the Department that the commercial and industrial poultry 
sub-sector needs conducive environment, policy support and intervention in areas of 
Standardisation and quality control, compliance with WTO and Codex norms and a host 
of other such issues, they cannot but conclude that a lot more needs to be done to 
make investments and returns from the poultry sector more enviable thereby help in 
generating more direct employment opportunities for poultry farmers.  They, therefore, 
desire the Department to take all measures needed to pep up the performance of the 
poultry sector in time bound manner in the areas as outlined by them.  They desire to be 
apprised of the steps taken in this direction. 
 
Reply of the Government: 
 
The recommendation of the Standing Committee is noted for taking necessary 
follow up action in consultation with APEDA for increasing poultry exports from India. 
It may be pertinent to mention that this Department is also implementing a 
Central Sector Scheme, „Poultry Venture Capital Fund‟ from 2011 -12 on back -ended 
Capital Subsidy mode.  Farmers, individual entrepreneurs, NGOs, companies, 
cooperatives, groups of unorganized and organized sector which include Self Help 
Groups (SHGs), Joint Liability Groups (JLGs) etc are eligible to avail this Scheme. This 

54 
 
provides a basket of poultry activities to the entrepreneurs to choose from and this 
scheme aims to generate self employment and provide infras tructure for making 
improvement in quality. 
 
[Letter No.25-5(2)/2012-AHD (Coord) dated 21st August, 2012] 

55 
 
CHAPTER III 
 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH 
THE COMMITTEE DO NOT DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE 
GOVERNMENT’S REPLY 
 
 
QUALITY CONTROL IN DAIRY SECTOR 
 
(Recommendation Para 3.32) 
 
 
The Committee observe that under the Dairy Development project so far 19.16 
lakh farmers in 28,569 villages have benefited by procuring more than 21.73 lakh litres 
of milk and marketing of 17.81 lakh litres  of milk per day.  Also 6.26 lakh farmers have 
been trained, 1,974 bulk milk coolers with a total capacity of 39.24 lakh litres have been 
installed and 1,344 testing laboratories have been strengthened. They further observe 
that as of now there is inadequa cy of number of BSL -III level labs to handle the testing 
requirement in the Country. The projects to establish six BSL III Laboratories with the 
help of World Bank to be functional in a phased manner are being implemented under 
the Scheme of SIQ & CMP.  Ke eping in view the level of infrastructure established till 
now to handle the quality control aspects of the quantity of milk produced and being 
procured for further processing / marketing, the Committee recommend the Department 
to take urgent steps to not only ensure timely completion of these projects of 
establishing of BSL-II and BSL-III level labs but also ensure that the small and marginal 
farmers and others involved are fully aware of the infrastructure available and is put to 
maximum use by way distri bution of education materials, hold publicity and awareness 
camps etc. in this regard.  They would like to be informed of the progress made in this 
direction.  

56 
 
Reply of the Government: 
The establishment of 23 BSL -II, 6 BSL-III laboratories for effective d iagnosis and 
control of animal diseases under livestock health programme under the project 
“Prevention, Control and Containment of Avian Influenza” are under different stages of 
Implementation.  There is no proposal for establishing such laboratories under  
SIQ&CMP. However, strengthening of laboratories for testing of milk is funded as a 
component under SIQ&CMP at various levels starting from the Dairy Co -operative 
Societies (DCSs) in the villages to the Laboratory in the Dairy Processing Plants. 
 
[Letter No.25-5(2)/2012-AHD (Coord) dated 21st August, 2012] 

57 
 
CHAPTER IV 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF 
WHICH REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE 
COMMITTEE 
 
 
ALLOCATION DURING ELEVENTH PLAN 
 
(RECOMMENDATION PARA 1.15 And 1.16) 
 
 
The Committee note that though the Animal Husbandry and Dairying sectors are 
immensely contributing to the national GDP which was in the range of 4.89% in 2009-10 
and that there is a lot of untapped employment potential, they are constrained to note 
that the allocations to this sector as well as the level of investments pouring in have 
throughout the Eleventh Plan period remained far below the optimum levels required for 
pepping up its growth trajectory. They are concerned to note the huge difference 
between the Proposed Allocation and the Approved Outlay for the Department during 
the course of the Eleventh Five Year Plan amounting to Rs. 9,466.17 crore.  They are 
further appalled to find that the Approved Outlay was a mere 34.67% of the Proposed 
amount.  This matter has been a cause of concern and was amply commented upon by 
them in their Reports on Demands for Grants of the Department in successive years till 
now.  Either the Department‟s projections have gone horribly wrong or the Planning 
Commission does not  consider these to be accurate though both sides have all along 
justified their respective stand with the end result being the fact that the Department 
stands to be at the receiving end continuing to be starved of funds.  They being further 
aware that noth ing much would be achieved by pointing fingers, they urge the 
Department and the Planning Commission to work in unison so that the yawning gap 
between the projections and approved Outlays is reduced to a great extent in the 

58 
 
course of the Twelfth Plan perio d.  They would await fructification of their instant 
recommendation in the years to come. 
Notwithstanding, the fact that the Department have not been getting the due from 
the Planning Commission as observed above, the Department too have not acquitted 
themselves as well as is expected of it which is reflected in the actual expenditure being 
less than the allocated funds.  During the years 2007 -08, 2008-09, 2009-10 and 2010 -
11 the actual expenditure has always been less than the actual allocation.  The 
arguments put forth by the Department do not cut much ice with them as these have 
been lingering on endlessly for years.  They are of the firm opinion that unless the 
Department first puts its house in order, the gap between allocation and expenditure will 
not narrow down.  This further gets compounded at Revised Estimates stage when the 
Ministry of Finance (Department of Expenditure) further reduces the Budget Estimates 
based on the slow paced expenditure during the first six months of the financial year.  
The Committee, therefore, impress upon the Department to pull themselves up and all 
the implementing agencies too need to furnish their utilization certificates and fresh 
proposal in time so that the cycle of disbursement of funds flows smoothly throughout 
the year, thereby benefitting the targeted beneficiaries as well as ensuring optimum 
utilization of funds.  The Committee is positive that if these vital factors are taken care 
of, the Department would be successful in achieving its mandate. 
 
Reply of the Government: 
 
The year -wise allocation of Animal Husbandry and Dairy Sector has increased 
substantially as per the table given below. However the expenditure was less, though it 
has gone up in Financial Year 2010 -11 and 2011 -12. The Plan allocation of Animal 

59 
 
Husbandry Sector of this department for the year 2012 -13 is 21.64% higher than the 
allocation for 2011-12. 
(Rs. in crore) 
Year Approved 
outlay RE Expenditure % of Exp. 
w.r.t. RE 
11th Plan (2007-
2012) 5023.00    
2007-08 529.42 466.71 484.98 104% 
2008-09 619.00 593.61 548.87 92% 
2009-10 720.50 577.60 534.04 92% 
2010-11 935.91 874.39 762.41 87% 
2011-12 1196.81 1010.39 945.36 94% 
TOTAL 4001.64 3522.70 3275.66  
2012-13 1527.30    
 
In addition to the allocation for this sector in budget of the Department,  the 
livestock sector is also getting the funding support under Rashtriya Krishi Vikas Yojana 
(RKVY) which is implemented by Department of Agriculture & Cooperation (DAC) which 
results in the enhancement of the share of plan allocation for this sector. The  details of 
Year wise / Sector wise summary of approved projects in the 11 th Plan for Animal 
Husbandry and Dairy Development under RKVY for activities in  Animal Husbandry and 
Dairying sector is given in the following table: 
(Rs. in crore) 
Year Animal Husbandry Dairy 
Development 
Total 
2007-08 104.80 56.76 161.56 
2008-09 666.31 203.45 869.76 
2009-10 712.02 154.85 866.87 
2010-11 734.71 333.36 1068.07 
2011-12 847.31 281.58 1128.89 
TOTAL 3065.15 1030.00 4095.15 
 
Apart from the above, National Mission on Protein Supplements (NMPS) was 
launched in the year 2011 -12 in 22 identified States as a component of Rashtriya Krishi 

60 
 
Vikas Yojana, with an outlay of Rs. 300 Crore. Of which, the outlay for Animal 
Husbandry was earmarked to the tune of Rs. 200 crore. The objective of this 
programme is to increase production of animal protein in order to meet rising demand 
for these products. In the current year 2012 -13, an amount of Rs. 500 crore has been 
allocated under different components of NMPS of which, the outlay fo r animal 
husbandry has been earmarked to Rs. 300 crore. 
Thus, under RKVY and NMPS, an amount of about Rs. 4,295.15 crore was 
allocated for Animal Husbandry and Dairying Sector during Eleventh Plan in addition to 
the approved outlay of Rs. 4,001.64 crore for this Department. 
In the context of the observation of the Standing Committee that the expenditure 
has been less than allocation, the Department is constantly taking up the matter with 
States to expense utilization of funds and submission of utilization c ertificates. The 
Department is regularly monitoring the progress on implementation of Schemes and the 
utilization of funds by States through video conferencing and visits by the senior officers 
of this Department to States and review meetings from time to time. During 2011-12, the 
expenditure through releases made by the Department was about 94% of the RE 
compared to 87% of previous year. 
In order to liquidate to unspent balances, the Department is constantly taking up 
the matter with the State Governments to take urgent action to reduce the unspent 
balance with the States. The recommendations of the Committee for the Department to 
take steps, to improve the pace of utilization of funds are noted and necessary steps will 
be taken to improve the utilization b y strengthening the monitoring mechanism further. 
The constraints for improving utilization of funds will be removed while revising the 
schemes for the Twelfth Plan period. 
 [Letter No.25-5(2)/2012-AHD (Coord) dated 21st August, 2012] 

61 
 
Comments of the Committee 
For comments of the Committee please refer to Para No. 1.12 of Chapter I of this 
Report. 
 
IMBALANCED GROWTH OF INDIGENOUS / CROSS BREED CATTLE 
 
(Recommendation Para 2.47) 
 
 
The Committee observe that as per the figures of the livestock census carried out 
in the year 2007 the population of exotic/crossbreed cattle has increased by 33.92% in 
comparison to the 2003 census, while the population of indigenous variety has 
increased by only 3.44% and the population of buffalo had witnessed a growth of 
7.58%.  They are rather perplexed to note that the growth in population of indigenous 
cattle is very low and is a matter of grave concern which needs to be resolved at the 
earliest.  They are of the firm opinion that as the majority of Indian Agriculturists are 
small and marginal farmers category who due to their minuscule landholding are at the 
bottom rung of the economical ladder and thus cannot afford to raise and maintain the 
expensive exotic/crossbreed cattle.  Thus, they are forced to be content with the 
indigenous breed though their output in terms of milk is less, whose maintenance cost is 
low as well.  For the sake of this stratum of agriculturists, the Committee urges the 
Department to undertake a slew of measures which would result in a remarkable 
increase in the population of indigenous cattle as they are more in tune with the 
environment. 
 
Reply of the Government: 
 
In order to improve the genetic makeup of bovine population and availability of 
indigenous cattle, Government of India has launched a major programme “National 

62 
 
Project for Cattle and Buffalo Breeding” (NPCBB) from October 2000. NPCBB 
emphasizes genetic upgradation of non -descriptive cattle and development / 
conservation of indigenous breeds.  In addition to this, Government of India is also 
implementing three Central Sector Schemes namely, Central Cattle Breeding Farms 
(CCBFs), Central Frozen Semen Production & Training Institute (CFSP&TI) and Central 
Herd Registration Scheme (CHRS) for development of bovine population. All the 
Schemes give spe cial emphasis and support for enhancing productivity and quality of 
indigenous breeds of cattle and buffalo. Under these schemes, there is a component of 
training of farmers to support these activities. Generally breeding policies of the States 
aim to pres erve and improve the quality indigenous breeds through artificial 
insemination using semen of the quality bulls of the same breed. 
The scheme “Central Cattle Breeding Farms (CCBFs) promotes indigenous 
breeds like Red Sindhi & Tharparkar cattle breeds  and Surti & Murrah buffalo breeds 
which have excellent productivity potential. These farms provide elite germplasm and 
training to the farmers for promotion of these breeds. Incentives are also made available 
to the farmers of finally registered animals under Central Herd Registration Scheme 
(CHRS). 
 [Letter No.25-5(2)/2012-AHD (Coord) dated 21st August, 2012] 
 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 For comments of the Committee please refer to Para No. 1.16 of Chapter I of this 
Report. 
 

63 
 
INSURANCE OF LIVESTOCK 
 
(Recommendation Para 2.55) 
 
 
The Committee observe that the livestock health in the Country is very poor and 
natural calamities are also very common. The Committee are given to understand that 
the Livestock Insurance Scheme being implemented in all the States has twin objectives 
of providing protection mechanism to the farmers and cattle rearers against any 
eventual loss of their animals due to death and to demonstrate the benefit of the 
insurance of livestock to the people and popularize it. The scheme covers 300 s elected 
districts from 10 December, 2009. Benefit of subsidy is restricted to two animals per 
beneficiary per household. The Committee, therefore, desire the Livestock Insurance 
Scheme be implemented in full swing to attract more and more poor and marginal  
farmers of the Country towards this Scheme in view of the poor livestock health and 
recurrence of natural calamities and reduce the losses of poor and marginal farmers. 
They further urge the Department to consider the feasibility of removing the extant 
restriction of two animal per beneficiary per household and to popularise the scheme in 
rural and remote areas, extend incentives and encourage small and poor farmers to 
come forward to avail the benefit of the scheme so that the objective of employment 
generation also could be enhanced.  They desire to be informed of the action taken in 
this respect. 
 
Reply of the Government: 
 
The Department proposes to implement the Livestock Insurance Scheme in all 
the District of the Country instead of 300 selected distri cts and to insure upto 5 animals 
per beneficiary per household instead of 2 animals per beneficiary per household so as 
to attract more and more poor and marginal farmers of the Country towards this 

64 
 
Scheme in view of the poor livestock health and recurrenc e of natural calamities 
resulting in losses to the farmers. The existing premium subsidy will be reviewed to 
enable more small and poor farmers to avail the benefit of the scheme. 
 
 [Letter No.25-5(2)/2012-AHD (Coord) dated 21st August, 2012] 
 
Comments of the Committee 
For comments of the Committee please refer to Para No. 1.40 of Chapter I of this 
Report.   
 
SCHEMES FOR FARMERS GROWING FODDER CROPS 
 
(Recommendation Para 2.56) 
 
 
The Committee note that an area of 15.6 million hectare is classified as 
wasteland and is available for grazing.  These, however, are mostly degraded or have 
been encroached upon restricting availability for livestock grazing.  They also note that 
the gap between demand and availability of feed and fodder varies between 36% for 
greenfed, 40% for dry fodder and 57% for fodder concentrate.  The Committee further 
note that to address the above issues the Department has launched a comprehensive 
modified „Centrally Sponsored Fodder and Feed Development Scheme‟ from 
01.04.2010, which includ es components that would encourage farmers, State 
Government Departments (Animal Husbandry, Agriculture, Forest, other Public Sector 
undertakings), Goshalas, NGOs, Milk Federation etc. to increase fodder production and 
also private entrepreneurs to take up  feed production by establishing feed production 
units, mineral mixture plants etc. The Department has increased free of cost distribution 
of 11.79 lakh fodder minikits among the farmers to encourage more fodder production.  

65 
 
They however, regret to note th at all these measures have not resulted in any 
remarkable increase in the production of feed and fodder. The root cause of this 
problem is the absence of dedicated forward linkages for farmers producing fodder 
crops i.e. arrangements to buy back of fodder seeds produced by the farmers. 
Moreover, as stated by the Department, the State Governments will assess the 
requirement of fodder seeds and make an agreement for 3 -5 years with a seed 
supplying agency for rates of seed (Crop -wise) to be supplied, including  transportation 
cost up to delivery place, for each year. Time frame for supply of seeds is also decided 
with seed supplying agency. The seed supplying agencies in turn will make a buy -back 
arrangement of fodder seeds produced by the farmers and that their is no mechanism to 
regulate prices which are market linked. The Committee, therefore, desire the 
Department to become proactive in the proper implementation of this scheme.  They 
also desire the Department to take up the issue of removal of encroachments and 
upgradation of the classified wastelands which could be put to fodder crop production, 
reduce the wide gap in demand and supply as the Department had admitted the 
importance of feed and fodder in sustaining productivity of the livestock sector.  They 
further desire the Department to assess the requirement of fodder seeds in the Country 
to generate more employment opportunities for the landless and poor farmers. 
 
Reply of the Government: 
 
 Fodder and feed is obtained from a variety of sources including c ultivation of 
fodder varieties, crop residues, dual-purpose crops, trees, forest areas, grasslands, etc.  
Most of these sources are not exclusive contributors to feed and fodder owing to 
different competing uses.  Therefore, it has not been possible to capture reliable data on 
availability of feed and fodder.  However, the efforts of the Department have definitely 

66 
 
resulted into improvement in the availability of feed and fodder in the Country.  Although 
the report of the Working Group on Animal Husbandry fo r the 12 th Five Year Plan has 
mentioned about increase in availability of various types of feed and fodder over the last 
two decades, but there is a need to further increase the availability of feed and fodder 
so as to reduce the gap between demand and ava ilability, which is necessary to sustain 
productivity of the livestock sector. 
  This Department has requested Ministry of Statistics and Programme 
Implementation for assessment of consumption of Feed and Fodder under the NSSO.  
They have intimated that th is will be considered by the Working Group on NSS 70 th 
Round (Jan. 2013 – June 2013).   
 The component of 'Seed Procurement and Distribution' under the Centrally 
Sponsored Fodder and Feed Development Scheme provides for a buy -back 
arrangement by the Seed S upplying Agencies with the farmers. The guidelines under 
this component also provide for distribution of seeds so procured by the Seed Supplying 
Agencies to the farmers free of cost. States have been advised to expand 
implementation of this component of th e scheme to increase production and availability 
of fodder seeds. Steps are being taken to strengthen implementation of this Scheme. 
 The issue of use of cultivable wasteland for fodder crop production is being taken 
up by the Department with the State Governments by way of providing 100% assistance 
under the component of „Grasslands Development including Grass Reserves‟ under the 
„Centrally Sponsored Scheme on Fodder and Feed Development‟. The advisory issued 
by this department to the State Governments reg arding various steps to be taken for 
increasing availability of fodder and feed includes advice on optimum utilization of land 
resources, improvement of grasslands/wastelands and other community lands.  
 

67 
 
[Letter No.25-5(2)/2012-AHD (Coord) dated 21st August, 2012] 
 
Comments of the Committee 
For comments of the Committee please refer to Para No. 1.23 of Chapter I of this 
Report. 

68 
 
CHAPTER V 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF 
WHICH FINAL REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT ARE STILL AWAITED 
 
 
EMPLOYMENT POTENTIAL OF LIVESTOCK SECTOR 
 
(Recommendation Para 2.50 ) 
 
 
Their examination of this subject reveals that there have been no systematic and 
specific studies on the level of employment and its potential in the livestock sector.  
They are dismayed to note that on  different aspects the Department is relying on 
different NSSO studies.  These varied sources however, point out that in Rural areas 61 
females are primarily engaged in Animal farming as against 21 males per thousand 
work force.  In urban areas these figur es are at 25 females against 7 males per 
thousand.  A total of 24.6 million are engaged in animal farming 18.6% million women 
against 6 million men constituting 75.6 percent.  Similarly, there have been no detailed 
studies on the labour requirement for rea ring of cattle and buffaloes.    They also note 
that as per Livestock Census 2007 (Provisional Report) the total man power 
requirement for full day employment works out to 33.1 million, 26.6 million for livestock 
and 6.5 million for poultry sectors.  While  recognising that success of Operation Flood 
Programme proved that livestock farmers are receptive to new ideas and technologies, 
the Committee desire the Department to infuse more funds and innovative ideas to tap 
the employment potential of the livestock  sector to the fullest so that not only this 
sector‟s contribution is enhanced but also the nation continues to maintain its 
supremacy in this aspect in the world.  They also desire that along with the livestock 

69 
 
census a study to assess the employment pote ntial of the livestock sector may also be 
undertaken.  They would like to be apprised of the action taken in the matter. 
 
Reply of the Government: 
 
National Sample Survey Office, NSSO, a premier organization in the conduct of 
sample surveys, conducts quinq uennial surveys on employment and unemployment 
situation and provides sector -wise information on employment generated, including in 
the Animal Husbandry sector. NSS has conducted the last survey on employment and 
unemployment situation in their 68 th Round (2011-12).  The results of the survey would 
be available by June 2013. The Technical Committee on 19 th Livestock Census has 
therefore decided to wait and use the results of the 68th round of NSSO on Employment 
Generation through livestock sector and not to  duplicate the work in 19 th Livestock 
Census.  
[Letter No.25-5(2)/2012-AHD (Coord) dated 21st August, 2012] 
 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 For comments of the Committee please refer to Para No. 1.19 of Chapter I of this 
Report. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI;       BASUDEB ACHARIA 
29 November, 2013                      Chairman 
08 Agrahayana, 1935, (Saka)                Committee on Agriculture 

70 
 
ANNEXURE - I 
COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE 
(2013-14) 
MINUTES OF THE FIFTH SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE 
******** 
 The Committee sat on Tues day, the 29 October, 2013 from 1100 hours to            
1325 hours in Committee Room „C‟ (G/F), Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
PRESENT 
  Shri Basudeb Acharia   -   Chairman 
MEMBERS 
LOKSABHA 
2.  Shri Sanjay Singh Chauhan 
3.  Shri H.D. Devegowda 
4.  Smt. Paramjit  Kaur Gulshan 
5.  Shri Premdas Katheria 
6.  Shri P. Kumar 
7.  Smt. Botcha Jhansi Lakshmi 
8.  Sardar Sukhdev Singh Libra 
9.  Dr. Jyoti Mirdha 
10.  Shri Kachhadia Naranbhai  
11.  Dr. Vinay Kumar Pandey „Vinnu‟ 
12.  Shri Hukmadeo Narayan Yadav 
               RAJYA SABHA 
13.  Shri Satyavrat Chaturvedi 
14.  Shri Dharmendra Pradhan 
15.  Dr. K.V.P. Ramachandra Rao 
16  Shri Parshottam Khodabhai Rupala 
17.  Shri Rajpal Singh Saini 
18.  Shri S. Thangavelu 
19.  Shri Darshan Singh Yadav 

71 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Shri  A. Louis Martin  - Joint Secretary  
2. Smt. Abha Singh Yadhuvanshi - Director 
3. Shri  T.H. Rao   - Additional Director 
4. Shri C. Vanlalruata   - Deputy Secretary 
 
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members to the Sitting of  the 
Committee.  Then, the Committee took up for consideration the following; 
*(i)  xxx   xxx   xxx    xxx  xxx   xxx   xxx  xxx  xxx        xxx  xxx  xxx 
 xxx   xxx   xxx   xxx  xxx  xxx   xxx  xxx  xxx        xxx  xxx  xxx 
*(ii) xxx   xxx   xxx    xxx  xxx   xxx   xxx  xxx  xxx        xxx  xxx  xxx 
 xxx   xxx   xxx   xxx  xxx  xxx   xxx  xxx  xxx        xxx  xxx  xxx 
(iii) Memorandum No. 04 pertaining to the draft Report on the Action Taken by 
the Government on the Observations/Recommendations contained i n the 
Thirty-sixth Report of the Committee on Agriculture (201 1-12)  on 
Optimization of Employment generation Potential of Animal Husbandry 
Sector of Ministry of Agriculture (Department of Animal Husbandry, 
Dairying and Fisheries);  
3. After some deliberat ions, the Committee approved the categorization of action 
taken replies as shown in the Memoranda and adopted the draft Reports without any 
modification.  They authorized the Chairman to present these Reports to Parliament 
after getting them factually verified from the concerned Departments. 
*4. xxx   xxx   xxx   xxx  xxx  xxx    xxx  xxx  xxx        xxx  xxx  xxx 
 xxx   xxx   xxx   xxx  xxx  xxx    xxx  xxx  xxx       xxx  xxx  xxx. 
*5. xxx   xxx   xxx   xxx  xxx  xxx    xxx  xxx  xxx        xxx  xxx  xxx 
xxx   xxx   xxx   xxx  xxx  xxx    xxx  xxx  xxx       xxx  xxx  xxx. 
The Committee then adjourned. 
*Matter not related to this Report. 

72 
 
ANNEXURE-II 
(Vide Para 4 of Introduction of the Report) 
ANALYSIS OF ACTION TAKEN BY GOVERNMENT ON THE THIRTY-SIXTH REPORT 
OF COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE  (2011-12) ON OPTIMIZATION OF 
EMPLOYMENT GENERATION POTENTIAL OF ANIMAL HUSBANDRY SECTOR  
PERTAINING TO MINISTRY  OF AGRICULTURE (DEPARTMENT OF ANIMAL 
HUSBANDRY, DAIRYING AND FISHERIES) 
  
(i)  Total number of Recommendations              23 
(ii) Recommendations/Observations which have been 
Accepted by the Government  
Para Nos. 1.14, 2.44, 2.45, 2.46, 2.48, 2.49, 2.51, 2.52 
 2.53, 2.54, 3.29, 3.30, 3.31, 3.33, 3.34 and 3.35  
Total          16 
Percentage                          70%  
(iii) Recommendations/Observations which the Committee 
Do not desire to pursue in view of the Government‟s replies  
Para No. 3.32 
Total                   01 
Percentage                              4% 
(iv) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies 
 of the Government have not been accepted by the Committee 
Para Nos.  1.15, 1.16, 2.47, 2.55 and 2.56 
Total             05 
Percentage                   22% 
(v) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which  
 Final replies of the Government are still awaited 
Para Nos.  2.50 
Total            01 
Percentage                    4% 
 
 