 
COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE 
(2009-2010) 
                 
         
FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA 
         
         
                                 
 
MINISTRY OF AGRICULTURE  
(DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE & CO-OPERATION) 
              
 
PRICING POLICY OF AGRICULTURAL PRODUCE  
 
{Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/ 
Recommendations contained in the Forty-first Report (Fourteenth Lok Sabha) 
 of the Committee on Agriculture (2007-2008)} 
 
         
        
 
THIRD REPORT 
  
 
         
               
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
December, 2009/Agrahayana, 1931 (Saka) 
 
 
 
 
 
 3 
 

THIRD REPORT 
 
COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE 
(2009-2010) 
          
 
(FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
         
         
         
MINISTRY OF AGRICULTURE  
(DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE & COOPERATION) 
         
         
         
PRICING POLICY OF AGRICULTURAL PRODUCE  
  
         
Action Taken by the Government on the  
Observations/Recommendations contained in the Forty-first Report         
(Fourteenth Lok Sabha) of the Committee on Agriculture (2007-2008) 
 
  Presented to Lok Sabha on       18.12.2009 
  Laid on the table of Rajya Sabha on     18.12.2009   
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
                 
December, 2009/Agrahayana, 1931 (Saka) 
 
 
 


 
COA No. 226 
 
 
         
         
         
         
         
         
 
         
         
        
Price:  Rs.  
         
         
         
         
         
 
 
 
         
     
                     
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
© 2009 By LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
 
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of Business in 
Lok Sabha (Thirteenth Edition) and Printed by  
 
  

 
CONTENTS 
                   
                  PAGE 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE………………………………….  (iii) 
         
 
INTRODUCTION……………………………………………………………  (v) 
 
CHAPTER I   Report …………………………………………     1
  
 
CHAPTER II  Observations/Recommendations which have  
   been accepted by the Government ……………    26 
 
CHAPTER III  Observations/Recommendations which the 
   Committee do not desire to pursue in view 
   of the Government’s replies …………………..    51 
CHAPTER IV  Observations/Recommendations in respect 
   of  which replies of the Government have  
   not been accepted by the Committee ………….    52 
 
CHAPTER V  Observations/Recommendations in respect of  
   which final replies of the Government are  
   still awaited …………………………………….    60 
 
 
APPENDIX 
 
 Minutes of the sitting of the Committee 
held on 16 December, 2009.        67
     
                                   ANNEXURE 
 
Analysis of Action Taken by the Government on the 
Recommendations contained in the Forty-first Report                69 
(Fourteenth Lok Sabha) of the Committee on Agriculture 
(2007-2008).            
            
 
 
 
 
 
(i)  

COMPOSITION OF  THE COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE (2009-2010) 
       
 
      Shri Basudeb Acharia   -   Chairman 
 
 
 MEMBERS 
 
 
 LOK SABHA 
 
2. Shri Narayan Singh Amlabe 
3. Shri K.C. Singh „Baba‟ 
4. Shri Thangso Baite  
5. Shri Jayant Chaudhary  
6. Smt. Shruti Choudhry  
7. Smt. Ashwamedh Devi 
8. Shri Biren Singh Engti  
9. Smt. Paramjit Kaur Gulshan 
10. Shri Anant Kumar Hegde 
11. Sk. Nurul Islam 
12. Shri Naranbhai Kachhadiya 
13. Shri Surendra Singh Nagar  
14. Shri Prabodh Panda  
15. Shri Premdas  
16. Shri Vitthalbhai Hansrajbhai Radadiya 
17. Shri Nripendra Nath Roy  
18. Shri Bhoopendra Singh 
19. Shri Uday Singh  
20. Shri Jagdish Thakor  
21. Shri Hukmdeo Narayan Yadav 
 
  
RAJYA SABHA 
 
22. Shri Narendra Budania  
23. Shri Satyavrat Chaturvedi 
24. Shri A. Elavarasan  
25. Shri Sharad Anantrao Joshi 
26. Shri Vinay Katiyar 
27. Shri Mohd. Ali Khan 
28. Shri M. Rajasekara Murthy 
29. Shri Bharatsinh Prabhatsinh Parmar 
30. Prof. M.S. Swaminathan 
31. Shri Khekiho Zhimomi 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(iii) 
  

 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Shri S. Bal Shekar   - Joint Secretary 
2. Shri P.V.L.N. Murthy  - Director 
3. Shri P. C. Koul   - Additional Director  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(iv) 
  

 
INTRODUCTION 
 
         
I, the Chairman, Committee on Agriculture (2009 -2010) having been 
authorized by the Committee to submit the Report on their behalf, present this 
Third Report on Action Taken by the Government on the observations/ 
recommendations contained in the Forty -first Report  (Fourteenth Lok Sabha)  
of the Committee on Agriculture (2007 -2008) on „Pricing Policy of Agricultural 
Produce.‟ 
2. The Forty-first Report of the Committee on Agriculture (2007 -2008) on 
„Pricing Policy of Agricultural Produce‟ was presented to the  Hon‟ble Speaker 
on          27 June and to Lok Sabha on 22 July, 2008 respectively.  The Report 
was laid on the Table of Rajya Sabha on 17 October, 2008.  The Ministry of 
Agriculture (Department of Agriculture & Cooperation) furnished their Action 
Taken Notes on the Observations/Recommendations contained in the Report 
on 16 July, 2009. 
 
3. The Report was considered and adopted by the Committee at their 
Sitting held on 16 December, 2009. 
 
4. An analysis of the Action Taken by the Government on the 
Observations/ Recommendations contained in the Forty -first Report 
(Fourteenth Lok Sabha) of the Committee is given in Annexure. 
 
 
      
                   
           
                                                                                   
                                                                                         
NEW DELHI;                    BASUDEB ACHARIA 
16 December, 2009                                                                    Chairman, 
25 Agrahayana, 1931(Saka)                        Committee on Agriculture.
   
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(v) 
 
 

CHAPTER I 
 
Report 
 
 
This Report of the Committee on Agriculture deals with the action taken 
by the Government on the recommendations contained in the Forty First 
Report (Fourteenth Lok Sabha) of the Committee on Agriculture (200 7-2008) 
on „Pricing Policy of Agricultural Produce ‟ which was presented to the Hon‟ble 
Speaker and Lok Sabha on 27 June and 22 July, 2008 respectively and laid on 
the Table of Rajya Sabha on 17 October, 2008. 
 
1.2  The Ministry of Agriculture (Department of Agriculture & Co -operation) 
have furnished Action Taken Replies in  respect of all the 12 
recommendations/observations contained in the Report.  These have been 
categorised as under: 
 
(i) Observations/Recommendations that have been accepted by the 
Government : 
Recommendation Nos. 1, 2, 3, 6, 7 and 11  
 
(ii) Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not 
desire to pursue in view of the Government‟s reply:  
Recommendation Nos. – Nil 
 
(iii) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which action taken 
replies of the Government have not been accepted by the 
Committee  
Recommendation Nos. 4, 5, 8, and 9  
 
(iv) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which final replies 
of the Government are still awaited.   
Recommendation Nos. 10 and 12  
 
1.3 The Committee trust that utmost importance would be given to 
implementation of the observations/recommendations accepted by the 
Government in cases, where it is not possible for the Department to 
implement the recommendations in letter and spirit for any r eason, the 
matter should be reported to the Committee with reasons for non -
implementation.  The Committee further desire that Action Taken notes 
on the observations/recommendations contained in Chapter -I and final 

action taken replies to the recommendation s contained in Chapter -V of 
this Report should be furnished to them at an early date. 
 
1.4 The Committee will now deal with the action taken by the Government 
on some of the recommendations in the succeeding paragraphs. 
 
Pricing Policy 
(Recommendation Para No. 1) 
 
1.5 Having traced the evolution of the pricing policy of agricultural produce 
since pre-independence era; noting the various mechanisms and commissions 
that had determined the costs and prices and their inadequacy in fixing 
remunerative prices, th e Committee had observed in their Forty -first Report 
that their had been far -reaching changes in the agricultural scenario and the 
MSPs suggested by CACP and announced by the Government have not 
addressed the problems faced by the farmers in running their house-hold 
activities, family and social responsibilities such as Roti, Kapda and Makan 
and education of their children and family marriages, etc . and other social 
functions.   
 
 The Committee had also questioned the relevance of factors considered 
by CACP such as (i) effect on industrial cost structure and (ii) assessment of 
objective needs of economy at a particular point of time  while fixing the MSP 
as they had  never come across a situation in which the industry -produced 
goods were ever related/compared to the agricultural crop prices. 
 
 In view of the labour intensive nature of Indian agriculture and the 
animal wealth being a part of agricultural activities, the Committee had felt that 
it was imperative to promote crop -livestock integrated farming system  rather 
than monoculture of the same crop and variety as in contract farming.  They 
had also stressed upon the need to promote conservation farming and 
sustainable rural livelihoods, which  could lead to evergreen revolution and 
improve productivity in perpetuity without associated ecological harm. 
  
Further, observing that in the era of climate change our dependency on 
wheat and rice will enhance vulnerability to climatic factors, the Committee had 
asked the Government to  frame such policies that can revita lize the earlier 
food traditions of rural and tribal area people .  The relevant crops should be 

included under MSP Scheme to generate remunerative income to the farmers 
and which can be grown as alternatives to wheat and rice , which presently are 
over-subscribed crops eating into our fast depleting irrigation water resources.  
In view of the rising demand for food, the Committee had also suggested the 
Government to declare „Right to Food‟ as a fundamental human right and 
enforce it legally and socially.    
 
 The Committee had also recommended the Government to launch a 
„Bridge the yield gap movement‟ in order to close the gap between potential 
and actual yields in major food and fodder crops and to achieve this objective, 
the technologies, services and public policies needed to be reinforced.  The 
post-harvest technology including processing, storage, value -addition and 
marketing should be strengthened. 
 
 Asking the Government to accord highest priority to provide the small 
and marginal farmers opportunities for assured and remunerative marketing of 
their pr oduce at the time of harvesting, t he Committee had reiterated  that in 
addition to 24 food crops covered under MSP fixed by CACP, the minor 
millets, the horticulture crops such as potatoes and onions; should also be 
covered under food crops and CACP should be a sked to fix the MSP for these 
crops also, however, for other horticulture crops which are covered and also 
others that are not covered under Market Intervention Scheme, Government 
should explore the possibility of setting up of a separate Central Horticult ure 
Price Commission for major horticulture crops on the lines of the Central 
Agriculture Price Commission.  To encourage the farmers to go for horticulture 
crops, the Committee had recommended that infrastructure facilities such as 
good roads, cold chain facilities including cold storages, warehouses and 
marketing facilities near the farmers fields be developed by the Government in 
a big way. 
 
 The Committee had also recommended an expeditious decision on the  
recommendations of the Expert Committee set up  under the Chairmanship of 
Prof. Y.K. Alagh to examine Methodological Issues in the Fixation of Minimum 
Support Prices which were under consideration of the Government.   
 The Committee had further recommended formulation of farmer and 
agriculture centric policies with a view to check the bias towards 
industrialization at the cost of agriculture; to arrest exodus from rural areas to 

urban centres; and to generate remunerative employment opportunities in the 
rural areas.  
 
1.6 The Ministry of Agriculture (Department of Agriculture and                  
Co-operation), in their Action Taken Note, have stated as follows:  
„A new scheme entitled – National Project on Management of soil 
health and fertility provides for promotion and distribution of micro -
nutrients to State Government/State designated agencies. Under the 
scheme, one fully -fitted mobile testing laboratory shall be provided 
through State Government and other agencies to 250 districts during 
2008-09. 500 soil testing laboratories will be set up in p ublic/private 
sector during  11th Plan Period. To provide integrated nutrient 
management, distribution of green manure, soil amendments/  
reclamation of acidic soils is also included under the scheme.    
Government implements the Market Intervention Scheme ( MIS) 
for crops other than those for which MSP is fixed. Under this Scheme, 
horticultural commodities and other agricultural commodities which are 
perishable in nature and which are not covered under the minimum 
support price scheme are included. In order t o protect the growers of 
these horticulture / agricultural commodities from low prices in an event 
of bumper crop during the peak arrival period, the Government 
implements MIS for a particular commodity on the request of the State 
Government concerned. Los ses suffered are shared on 50:50 basis 
between Central and the State Government. In the case of north -
eastern States, losses shared are on 75:25 basis between Central and 
the State Government. In view of the perishable nature of these crops 
they are covered under the MIS scheme. 
Agricultural markets in most parts of the country are established 
and regulated under the State‟s APMC Act.  To facilitate varying models 
of ownership of markets to accelerate investment in the area and 
enable private investment in owning, establishing and operating 
markets, the Ministry has prepared a model Act and circulated to all 
States/UTs for guidance. Several States/UTS have initiated steps for 
amending APMC Act.   
Government has considered the Recommendations of the Expert 
Committee to Examine Methodological Issues in Fixing MSP  and has 
decided that for recommending Minimum Support Price (MSP), the 
following items of cost shall also be considered by CACP; 
 
(i) The premium actually paid by farmers for crop insurance; 
(ii) Marketing and transport charges incurred by farmers; 
(iii) Imputing value of family l abour on actual market rate for 
casual labour in cost estimates and 
(iv) The likely effect of the price policy on the rest of the 
economy, particularly on the cost of living, level of wages, 
cost structure of agro -based products and the 

competitiveness of agriculture and agro -based 
commodities.  
Allocation and supply of food  grains by Government of India 
under the Targeted Public Distribution System includes distribution of 
coarse grains such as ragi, jowar, bajra, maize, etc.  The Department of 
Food & Public Distribution, accordingly, makes allocation of these 
coarse grains und er TPDS to various States/UTs based on the 
request/demand received from them.  During the current year, 2009 -10, 
different coarse grains have been allocated to Andhra Pradesh, 
Karnataka, Madhya Pradesh and Gujarat based on the requirements 
intimated by the se State Governments.  Potatoes and onions are not 
allocated to the States for distribution under TPDS.  Being perishable 
commodities requiring specialized storage, it would not be possible or 
desirable to include them in the general PDS basket. 
    
Agricultural Research Institutes and State Agricultural 
Universities have prime responsibilities to provide research inputs in 
terms of varietal development, seeds and the nutrients essential for 
balanced growth whereas the policy on prices are to be undertaken by 
State Agriculture Departments. Accordingly, necessary research efforts 
are constantly undertaken by various research institutes and SAUs to 
help the farmers‟.  
 
1.7 The Committee note that the Government have launched a new 
Scheme ‘National Project on M anagement of Soil Health and Fertility’.  
500 soil testing laboratories are proposed to be set up in public/private 
sector during the Eleventh Plan Period under this Scheme.   The Scheme 
also envisages provisions of integrated nutrient management, 
distribution of green manure, soil amendments/reclamation of acidic 
soils, etc.   The Committee are sure that if implemented judiciously and 
expeditiously, this Scheme would address the concerns voiced by the 
Committee about the alarming deterioration in Soil Heal th and fertility, 
nation-wide, to a considerable extent.   The Committee would like to be 
updated on the progress of implementation of this Scheme at the 
earliest. 
 The Committee are, however, highly perturbed over the complete 
silence of the Government on  their recommendation regarding 
declaration of ‘Right to Food’ as a fundamental human right and its 
enforcement, both legally and socially.   Instead of taking a proactive 
stand in the matter , the Government have maintained an intriguing 
silence on this issue of vital national interest.   The Committee firmly 

believe that in the absence of a firm commitment on this issue the 
Government’s declared stand of ‘Food for All’ will remain a mere sloga n.   
The Committee, therefore, strongly deprecate the failure of the 
Government to respond to their instant recommendation and desire that 
the stand of the Government in the matter be conveyed to them without 
any further delay. 
 Further, the Committee are pained to note a similar apathy of the 
Government in regard to their recommendation about the Government 
proposal of launching a ‘Bridge the yield Gap’ movement with a view to 
close the gap between potential and actual yields in  major food and 
fodder crops . The Committee while disapproving failure of the 
Government to furnish their Action Taken Note on this important matter, 
strongly feel that unless a cogent and well laid out road -map consisting 
of effective long term strategies and proven technologies is given shape 
and implemented on a war fo oting to bridge the yield gap , it will be well 
nigh impossible to not only ensure food availability to the masses but 
also maintain food sovereignty of the Country. The Committee, therefore, 
desire a specific response  from the Government in the matter at the 
earliest. 
 The Committee tend to agree with the reply of the Government that 
in view of the perishable nature of commodities like potato and onion it 
will not be possible to include them in the PDS basket, as the s torage 
and other infrastructural facilities of the PDS are  woefully inadequate .   
The Committee, however, fail to understand as to what is stopping the 
Government from bringing the minor millets under the MSP regime as 
recommended by the Committee in their Forty-first Report.  The specious 
plea of these being taken care of under the Market Intervention Scheme 
(MIS) programme does not cut ice with the Committee.   The fact that 
MSP being a pre -cultivation phenomenon is the single most important 
factor enabling the farmer to decide what should be cultivated from the 
point of view of cost/price economics.   The MSP of wheat and paddy last 
year was the determining factor for the farmers overwhelmingly going for 
the cultivation of these two crops at the expense o f sugarcane, which led 
to record production of food  grains on one hand and shrinking of 
sugarcane cultivation resulting in shortage of sugar on the other  hand.   

The MIS is merely a post-harvest fire-fighting device meant for obviating, 
to some extent, distress sales by the farmers in situations of bumper 
crops, etc.   By no stretch of imagination can th us MSP and MIS be 
equated.   The Committee, therefore, desire that the Government should 
seriously consider inclusion of minor millets under the MSP regi me.   
This will not only make cultivation of these crops remunerative for the 
farmers but also lend var iety to the crop basket of the c ountry, which, to 
our great disadvantage, is largely dependent on only two crops viz. 
wheat and rice.   They desire to be  apprised of the action taken/progress 
made in respect of these recommendations within 3 months of the 
presentation of this Report.    
Fixation of Minimum Support Price (MSP) 
(Recommendation para Nos. 2 and 3) 
 
1.8 On the issue of cost and other factors considered for fixation of MSP, 
the Committee in their earlier Report had revisited the working of CACP.   
Having noted several infirmities and shortcomings in the present system of 
fixing of MSP by CACP as also the other problems besetting the agriculture  
sector in the Country viz. coverage of only 24 crops under the MSP, 
considerations of factors like (i) effect on industrial cost structure; (ii) effect on 
cost o living; and (iii) assessment of objective needs of the economy at a 
particular point of time,  etc; not taking into account the risk factors and their 
consequences; Government interventions and market forces both at national 
and international levels; the lack of access to majority of farmers to information 
on best agricultural practices from Govern ment machinery , better pesticides 
and fertilizers, farm machinery and implements, high yielding seeds; the down 
turn in food  grain production and availability climate change, etc, the 
Committee had felt that the only way out in the face of these 
shortcomings/problems was by making agriculture a profitable vocation.   
Further more, improving of conditions of soil, its nutrient content, water 
management, growing of alternative crops, research and development of small 
farm technologies which are useful and affordable were also to be attended to. 
 
They had, therefore, strongly recommended that while fixing MSP, the 
CACP should stop counting the factors, such as (i) effect on industrial cost 
structure; (ii) „effect on cost of living‟ and (iii) assessment of objec tive needs of 
the economy relating to industrial development etc.; and reassess the factor 

relating to „effect on general price level/inflation‟ by including wholesale price 
index and not the market rate.  They had also recommended that the risk 
factors enumerated by them should invariably be considered while calculating 
the level of Minimum Support Price of an agriculture commodity.  Besides, 
50% risk co -efficient and so also the self -insurance premium of the farmers 
and premiums of MNAIS and WBCIS should form part of costing factors 
considered by CACP for fixing MSP.  
 
The Committee had also opined  that where States ha d their own 
Agriculture Price Committee for giving inputs to CACP, while calculating the 
cost of a crop in their States, they should include per unit cost of electricity 
charges and should also consider the comparative advantages of cropping 
pattern in their States and suggest to the farmers as to which crop would fetch 
them more remunerative prices on comparative scale. 
 
Finding that CACP‟s role is restricted to the announcement of MSP,  the 
Committee suggested that CACP should take into account all the min or and 
major cost factors including risk factors natural as well as man -made and must 
take into account a profit margin of at least 50% of the cost price, that a farmer 
should get to run his household, perform his social & family responsibilities and 
rear his animals, etc. 
   
The Committee after considering the methodology adopted by CACP for 
calculating the MSP, had recommended that apart from inclusion of all paid out 
costs, such as, those incurred on account of hired human labour, bullock 
labour/machinery labour (both hired & owned) and rent paid for leased in land , 
CACP should also include  cash and kind expenses on use of material inputs 
like seeds, fertilizers, manures, irrigation charges including actual cost of 
diesel/electricity for operation of pump-sets, etc. as a part of  production cost. 
 
The Committee having observed that while calculating the Cost of 
production, CACP takes into account the rent for leased land and not the cost 
incurred towards owned land  a m any a farmers enter ed this avocation b y 
purchasing land on payment of agreed price  had also recommended  that 
interest foregone on owned land should also be counted towards calculation of 
cost of production.  

The Committee had further note d that in addition to paid out costs, 
some imputed costs are also incurred and are counted by CACP towards fixing 
of MSP.  The y, therefore, recommended that the farmer and his family should 
be considered as skilled labour as they are, in a sense, a techn o-managerial 
group who knows better about the land formati on, irrigation requirements of a 
particular crop, seed quality, farm implements needed, weather conditions and 
when and how the crop is to be sown, grown and harvested, how to control the 
pests, when to use insecticides, etc. and   when to sell the crops in the market.  
So far the owned animal labour cost which include cost of green and dry 
fodder, depreciation on animals and cattle sheds etc., are concerned , they had 
desired that the expenses incurred on imputed costs , should also be 
considered by CACP while fixing up of MSP. 
  Not convinced by the justification of the Government about the use of 
average cost method for fixing of MSP by CACP, the Committee had opined 
that though synthetic model is time consuming for collecting the cost data of 
the raising certain crops, however, when completed, it will be more useful from 
the farmers point of view for fixing up of MSP of his crops. 
 
The Committee had also recommended that : 
(i)  Higher labour charges, actual or minimum, of human, animal and 
machinery; whichever is higher, should be counted. 
(ii) Maintenance expenses for owned animals, machinery and land 
should also be included. 
(iii)  The micro -nutrients used in agricu ltural production and cost of 
depletion of these micro and macro nutrients should also form 
part of the paid out costs. The computation should include both 
pre and post harvest operational data. 
(iv) Expenses on material inputs such as seed (home grown and  
purchased), fertilizer, manure (owned & purchased), pesticides, 
insecticides and irrigation facilities should be counted as if these 
have been purchased at market rates. 
(v) Depreciation of farm buildings such as cattle sheds, machine 
sheds, storage sheds , etc. should be 10% or more per year on 
pucca sheds; and depreciation on wooden farm implements 
should be @ 20% and on metal implements @ 10% per year. 

(vi) For land revenue, the paid out cost should include, income loss 
on account of investment in land p lus the tax paid to the 
Government on purchase price or stamped value of agricultural 
land. 
1.9 In their Action Taken Note the Government have stated as follows:  
“The price policy also seeks to provide a fair return to the farmers 
while keeping in view the interest of the consumers, especially the large 
majority of poor consumers both in rural and urban areas in the sense 
that it tries to keep the prices of food and other agricultural commodities 
at reasonable levels. As any policy regarding agriculture ca nnot be 
looked in isolation of the overall economy, agricultural price policy also 
has to keep the objective needs of the economy in consideration.   
Government has considered the Recommendations of the Expert 
Committee to Examine Methodological Issues in Fixing MSP  and has 
decided that for recommending Minimum Support Price (MSP), the 
following items of cost shall also be considered by CACP; 
 
(i) The premium actually paid by farmers for crop insurance;  
(ii) Marketing and transport charges incurred by farmers;  
(iii) Imputing value of family labour on actual market rate for 
casual labour in cost estimates and  
(iv)  The likely effect of the price policy on the rest of the 
economy, particularly on the cost of living, level of wages, 
cost structure of agro-based products and the 
competitiveness of agriculture and agro -based 
commodities.  
As regards consideration of risk factors in cultivation, at present 
the production risk is taken care by the National Agricultural Insurance 
System (NAIS) in force and the price risk is covered under the MSP. 
MSP is a price guarantee that is provided to the farmers to ensure that 
the price does not fall below that floor limit and the chances of distress 
sale by the farmers are eliminated. Regarding the production risk in  
farming, it seems appropriate that the farmers are provided with farmer -
friendly insurance cover and the cost on account of insurance premium 
is included in the overall cost of production”.  
 
The Government in their Action Taken Note have further stated 
that t he value of owned land is imputed at market rate subject to the 
ceiling prescribed by the State Government. Family labour is imputed 
on the basis of statutory casual wage rate or actual market rate, 
whichever is higher. Value of owned animal labour is eval uated on the 
basis of cost of their maintenance. Similarly, value of owned machinery 
charges is imputed on the basis of cost of maintenance of farm 
machinery. Expenditure towards preparatory tillage of land during 
intervening period of two crops is counted  in estimated cost of 
production of crops for next season. Paid out cost by farmer include 
depreciation of implements and farm building and material inputs. 
Regarding income loss on account of investment in land plus taxes paid 

and cost of depletion of mic ro and macro nutrients, these are not taken 
into account as per existing methodology.   
 
The Government has, from time to time, set up expert 
committees to revise the methodology and system of calculation of the 
cost of cultivation/production of agricultur al produce. These include 
Special Committee on “Cost of Production Estimates” under the 
Chairmanship of  Dr. S.R.Sen in 1980, Expert Committee to review the 
Methodology of cost of Production of Crops under the Chairmanship of 
Dr. Hanumantha Rao in 1990, Na tional Statistical Commission under 
the Chairmanship of Dr. C. Rangarajan in 2000 and Expert Committee 
under the Chairmanship of Dr. Y.K. Alagh in May, 2003.  As per the 
recommendation of the Expert Committee under the Chairmanship of 
Dr. Hanumantha Rao, t he expenditure incurred on cow/buffalo‟s calves 
for first three years, till they are grown up for use in Agriculture and/or 
milking, and also old animals that are not good for production is not 
taken into account. The work done by house ladies in different  items of 
work other than relating to agriculture is also not counted.   
  
 
Government has considered the Recommendations of the Expert 
Committee to Examine Methodological Issues in Fixing MSP  and has 
decided that for recommending Minimum Support Price (MS P), the 
following items of cost shall also be considered by CACP; 
(i) The premium actually paid by farmers for crop insurance;  
(ii) Marketing and transport charges incurred by farmers;  
(iii) Imputing value of family labour on actual market rate for 
casual labour in cost estimates and  
(iv)  The likely effect of the price policy on the rest of the 
economy, particularly on the cost of living, level of wages, 
cost structure of agro -based products  and the 
competitiveness of agriculture and agro -based 
commodities.  
 
1.10 The Committee have noted that the Government have consider ed 
the recommendations of the E xpert Committee se t up to Examine 
Methodological Issues in Fixing MSP and have decided that items of cost 
like premium paid by farmer for crop insurance; marketing and transport 
charges; family labour on actual market rate for casual labour shall also 
be considered by CACP while recommending the MSP.   They firmly 
believe that though not amountin g to much, such value additions are a 
right step in the direction of making prices of agricultural produce 
remunerative and provide the much need ed incentive to farming in the 
country to some extent. 
  

The Committee are, however, least convinced by the rat ionale for 
continuing with present pricing policy of agricultural produce. The 
contention of the Government that while keeping in view the interest of 
the consumers, especially the large majority of poor consumers both in 
rural and urban areas and trying t o keep the prices of food and other 
commodities at reasonable rates , the pricing policy seeks to provide a 
fair return to the farmers is not at all tenable being devoid of factual 
basis.   They are of the strong opinion that Government policies over a 
period have rendered agriculture, as the least profitable vocation in the 
country.   Besides, the poor and hapless consumer, for whose benefit the 
Government is purportedly taking recourse to the extant pricing policy, 
continues to bear the brunt of unpreceden ted and continuous hike in 
prices of food grains and other agricultural commodities for years now , 
without any respite.   The present pricing policy, has neither benefited 
the farmer nor the consumer.   The Government, therefore, needs to 
seriously introspect on the question of continuing with such a skewed 
policy.   The Committee also feel that a farm er friendly pricing policy 
would not only automatically take care of rural poor, who form a majority 
of the farming community but also act as a counter magnet for the 
current exodus to urban areas. This, thereby, would reduce the 
population of the urban po or, who are living in abominable conditions 
considerably, as the lack of gainful opportunities, is driving the rural 
poor to urban centres. 
  
The Comm ittee, therefore, desire a serious rethink by the 
Government on the various remedial steps suggested in  these two 
recommendations .  
  
The Committee also expect, at the earliest , specific responses 
from the Government on their recommendation about CACP stopping 
counting factors, such as  
(i) effect on industrial cost structure; 
(ii) effect on cost of living; and 
(iii) assessment of objective needs of the economy relating to 
industrial development, etc, while fixing the MSP.    
 

 
 
 
 
This is all the more necessary as a similar view on the effect of 
pricing of industrial products on the rural consumer is not taken into 
consideration except that the profit motive of the industrial enterprises is 
the sole guiding factor. 
    
They would also like to be apprised of the views of the 
Government on keeping a profit margin of 50% of the cost price as a part 
of MSP so as to enable the farmer to run his household, perform his 
social and family responsibilities and take care of his livestock , etc. 
  

MSP of Jute vis-à-vis other Crops 
(Recommendation para 4) 
 
 
1.11 The Committee had observed that generally the MS P, is fixed at the 
time of sowing of crops, months later when the said crop comes for marketing 
is treated as the procurement price by the Government, irrespective of the 
market price obtaining at that point of time.   However, in case of jute, though a 
single MSP was recommended by CACP and approved by the Government, 
subsequently, based on this MSP, different MSPs were announced, keeping in 
view the quality considerations and consequent input price differentials.   The 
Committee had, therefore, recommended that the system of calculating MSP 
for Jute should also be adopted for other crops. 
  
In view of the increasing costs of inputs, the Committee had also 
recommended that the MSP should be announced well before the sowing 
season of the crops covered under the MSP Scheme and should include cost 
+ 50 per cent. 
  
With a view to create a stake of the farmer  in the profits accruing to the 
exporters of their produce, the Committee had recommended that the new 
APMC Act should recognize whether the purchases of essential commodities 
were for public good or for commercial profit, and in the latter case the farmer  
deserved a share in profit, if his produce was exported for a profit. 
 
1.12 The Government in their Action Taken Note have stated as follows :  
“MSP is expected to operate as a price signal for the farmers so 
as to decide regarding the crops to be cultiva ted and the area to be 
allocated for growing any particular crop. Accordingly, it is endeavoured 
to announce the MSP before the sowing season of crop.   
 
Considering the terms of reference of CACP and the long term 
price policy, a mechanical linkage of cos t of production with MSP would 
not be desirable. The cost of cultivation/production is a major factor in 
fixing the MSPs. While estimating the cost of cultivation/production 
CACP considers both paid -out cost and fixed cost. Under the category 
of paid-out cost are included all expenses borne in cash and kind by the 
farmers. These expenses cover the cost on account of human labour, 
bullock labour/machine labour (both hired and owned), rent for leased-in 
land, seeds, fertilizers, manures, irrigation charges, i nterest value of 
owned capital assets, etc. It is attempted to ensure that the MSP is 
remunerative and provides adequate margin over the cost of 
cultivation/production.  
  

The powers and functions of APMCs are governed under the 
respective of Agricultural Produce Marketing (Regulation) Acts of 
different States. The main functions of APMCs are to ensure correct 
weighment, prompt payment and creating environment for orderly 
marketing of agricultural produce in the market yards and settlement of 
disputes, etc.  Regarding issue of Smart Card in recognition of the 
farmer selling his agricultural produce for public good and have share of 
profit, when the same produce is exported, it is mentioned that the 
maximum procurement of agricultural produce for public good i s being 
coordinated by Department of Food and Public Distribution with different 
agencies in the country. Accordingly, the share of the profit to the 
farmer from the agricultural produce sold by him is to be given by these 
agencies which are not covered un der the domain of State APMC Act 
as the Act has to ensure correct weighment, prompt payment and 
creating environment for orderly marketing of agricultural produce in the 
market yards and settlement of disputes, etc”.   
 
1.13 The Committee are not at all satisfied with the repetitive and 
perfunctory reply of the Government on the issue of having a variable 
MSP as in case of jute for all other crops covered under the MSP 
Scheme.   They are of the firm opinion that variable MSP for other crops 
would definite ly be an important incentive to the farmer after the basic  
MSP acts as a price signal to him in the matter of selection of crop for 
cultivation.   The reply of the Government instead of throwing some light 
on this matter merely repeats about the inputs tak en into account for 
arriving at the MSP in the extant regime as replied to in earlier 
recommendations of the Forty-first Report.   The Committee would 
expect a well considered and cogent reply from the Government on the 
desirability of having a variable MSP for all crops on the lines of the MSP 
for jute. 
 As regards the reply of the Government about the State APMC Act, 
the Committee wish to remind the Government that they are well aware of 
the various provisions of the APMC Acts in different States and they 
would like the Government to respond to the limited question of the new 
APMC Act recognising , if the purchase is for public good or for 
commercial profit.   They desire to be apprised of the response to this 
recommendation at an early date. 
Inclusion of more crops under MSP 
(Recommendation para No. 5) 
 

1.14 The Committee had noted that inspite of demands for a long time 
several cash crops had note been included under the MSP Scheme because 
of the element of subsidy involved, the perishable nature of such crops and the 
existence of Market Intervention Scheme.   Not convinced by the arguments 
extended by the Government , the Committee had recommended that in order 
to prepare ourselves to the challenges of climate change and global warming 
the Government shoul d widen the food security basket by including tubers, 
minor millets and other such crops under the MSP.  
1.15 In their Action Taken Note, the Government have stated that they are  
implementing Market Intervention Scheme (MIS) on the request of a State/UT 
Government for procurement of agricultural and horticultural commodities 
generally perishable in nature and not covered under Price Support Scheme. 
The MIS is implemented in order to protect the growers of these commodities 
from making distress sale in the event of bumper crop when there is glut in the 
market and the prices tend to fall below economic levels/cost of production. 
Procurement under MIS is made by NAFED as Central agency and by the 
State designated agencies. Losses, if any, incurred by the procu ring agencies 
are shared between Central Government and the concerned State 
Government on 50:50 basis (75:25 in case of North -Eastern States) restricted 
to 25% of the procurement cost. Profit, if any, earned by the procuring 
agencies is retained by them.  
 
The proposal for implementing MIS received from any State 
Government/ UT administration is evaluated as per MIS guidelines in this 
Department in consultation with concerned Departments/Divisions and 
State/UT Government. The Market Intervention Price (MIP)  is fixed at the cost 
of production. 
 
1.16 The Committee are not convinced by the Government’s contention 
that Market Intervention Scheme (MIS) is efficiently playing the role of 
MSP in case of crops such as tubers, minor millets, and other cash 
crops. As stated previously in this Report , the MSP which is a pre -
cultivation phenomenon helps the farmer arrive at a well considered 
choice of crop to be cultivated.   MIS at best is a device to salvage the 
cost incurred on a crop so as to prevent distress sales in bumper harvest 
situations.  MIS does not necessarily help the farmer to get remunerative 

price for his produce. Crops like minor millets, etc.  mentioned previously 
are very important constituents of the food baskets in the regions of their 
production. Absence of price support mechanism for such crops results 
in gradual loss of farmers’ interest in cultivation of these crops.  
Sustainable cultivation of such crops will reduce the excessive 
dependence on staple cereal  foods like wheat and rice. The Committee 
believe that w hen alternative food crops are available , food scarcity 
created by situations like drought  could be  better tackled through 
augmentation of the nation ’s food security basket. They, therefore,  
reiterate their recommendation that the Government should widen the 
food security basket by including tubers, minor millets and other such 
crops under the MSP Scheme without any further delay.  
 
Farmer as Skilled Labour 
(Recommendations para No. 8) 
 
1.17 Taking note of the huge disparities in th e wages of the farming 
community vis -à-vis other classes of employees, the Committee had 
recommended that farming being a skill based profession, the farmer and his 
family members should be treated as skilled labour and the CACP should 
compute the relevant  values accordingly.   They had also recommended that 
the statutory wage rate or actual market rate of farm labour should also be 
revised accordingly.  
 
1.18 In their Action Taken Note the Government have stated that as per the 
existing methodology farmer and his family members are not treated as skilled 
labour. However, the manpower employed in agriculture is treated as 
agricultural labour. The relevant market wages for ploughing, sowing, weeding, 
transplanting and harvesting , etc. are considered to determ ine the cost of 
labour engaged in agriculture.  
 
1.19 The Committee deprecate the view taken by the Government which 
equates the labour put in by the farmer and his family in agriculture and 
allied activities at par with  casual labour. The farmer and his family 
should rather  be considered as a tech no-managerial group with 
exhaustive knowledge of the nature of land under cultivation, the crops 
to be cultivated, the  best agricultural practis es, etc.  The National 

Commission for Farmers has also emphasised on this fact by proposing 
training to farmers at the farms of outstanding farmers. The Commission 
in fact wished the Government to see farmers as partners in their effort 
to improve the way agriculture is practised in the c ountry. The 
Committee, therefore, once again recommend that Government should 
take immediate steps to declare farm labour in the category of skilled 
labour for the purpose of computing MSP.  
 
Crop Loan 
(Recommendation para No. 9) 
 
1.20 In view of the insuf ficiency of the present ceiling of Rs. 3 lakh for short 
term crop loans and the high interest rate of 7 % charged on it, the Committee 
had recommended that the ceiling be hiked to Rs. 5 lakh and interest be 
reduced to 4 %. 
 
The Committee had further recommended that the period of calculating 
the rate of interest should be fixed from the date of sowing crops to the date 
when the farmers actually gets the money in hand after selling his crops i.e. 
based on the cycle of the Rabi or Kharif crop season.  This to tal sum of 
interest paid on crop loans during this period should be taken as one of the 
cost factors while calculating the total cost fixation of MSP. 
 
1.21 The Government in their Action Taken Note have stated that as of now, 
there is no proposal either to increase the loan amount of crop loan to             
Rs.5 lakhs on principal amount for farmers or to extend crop loans to farmers 
at the rate of 4%. However, banks have already been advised to follow the 
practice of charging interest on agricultural advances linked to crop seasons. 
Banks have also been advised to charge interest on agricultural advances for 
long duration crops at annual rests. For short duration crops and other allied 
agricultural activities banks a re advised to take into consideration due dates 
fixed on the basis of fluidity with borrowers and harvesting/marketing season 
while charging interest and compound ing the same if the loan/instal ment 
becomes overdue. As per CCEA decision on the recommendatio ns of the 
Expert Committee to examine Methodological Issues in the Fixation of 
Minimum Support Prices, interest rate of 12.5% is already being allowed on 
working capital for half the crop period. 

 
1.22 The Committee do not approve of the reply of the Gover nment and 
emphasise that the farmers should be provided  with a fair enough short 
term crop loan, which in any case he is going to repay with interest.   The 
Committee cannot but comment on this apathetic attitude of Government 
towards farming community and  the stark contrast of the benevolence 
bestowed upon the borrowers of other sectors, notably the industrial 
sector. 
   
The rising cost of all inputs compounded with the conditions 
created due to global recessionary trends are more than sufficient 
justification for enhancing the short term crop loan limit as also reducing 
the rate of interest charged on it.  The Committee, therefore, 
unequivocally reiterate that the Government should revisit the issue 
urgently and raise the short term credit limit to  Rs. 5 lakh and also 
reduce the interest charged on it from 7 % to 4 %.  They further desire to 
be apprised of the status of the positive action taken in the matter. 
 
  

Agricultural Subsidies 
(Recommendation para No.10) 
 
1.23 The Committee had noted that agricultural subsidies are given by both 
the Central and the State Governments.  The Central Government give 
subsidies on fertilizers, seeds, machinery, etc. and the State Governments 
give subsidies for irrigation, power, etc. under various schemes. The current 
pricing mechanism of fertilizers has also encouraged nutrient imbalance in the 
agriculture land.  
  The Committee had, therefore, recommended that as the price 
mechanism of chemical fertilizers have created nutrient imbal ance in the 
agriculture land it needs to be balanced and farmers be given fertilizer as well 
as water and power subsidy directly, rather than the producers and suppliers, 
as the farmers knows better about the quality/quantity of seeds, fertilizers and 
water to be used in the fields to make the agricultural production a profitable 
avocation. 
1.24 The Ministry in their Action Taken Note have stated as under:  
“The pricing of subsidized fertilizers in the country has been 
rationalized w.e.f. 18th June, 2008 wherein the cost of nutrients NP&K 
has been made uniform across all subsidized fertilizers to control 
overuse of urea due to the fact that the price of “N” in urea was much 
lower than that in complex fertilizers.   
 
So far as recommendation to provide subsidy directly to farmers 
is concerned, the proposal was flagged for consideration in Group of 
Minister (GOM), which has been constituted under the Chairmanship of 
Agriculture Minister to look into sustainable use of fertilizers and 
pertinent pri cing and subsidy issues. The GOM in its final 
recommendations has not recommended any change in the existing 
delivery mechanism for fertilizer subsidy through the producers. 
However, as announced by the Finance Minister in his Budget speech 
2008, the Gover nment is exploring the feasibility of nutrient based 
subsidy and other alternative modes of delivery of subsidy to the 
farmers.  
  
The National Seed Policy of 2002 calls upon the Government of 
India to make best quality seeds and planting material availabl e to 
Indian farmers to increase productivity. In this context, price control 
regime may have detrimental effect and may discourage private seed 
companies to make quality seed available in Indian markets, including 
high yielding varieties and hybrids, which have proved to be of immense 
benefit to Indian farmers. This underlines the importance of non -
regulation of prices of seeds in India. The price of seeds should also be 

decided by the producers themselves as it is done for agricultural 
equipment and machinery, pesticides, etc”. 
 
1.25 The Committee note that the pricing of  subsidized fertilizers in the 
country has been rationalized w.e.f. 18 June, 2008.   Now, the cost of 
nutrients NP&K has been made uniform across all subsidi zed fertilizers 
to control over-use of urea due to the fact that the price of ‘N’ in urea was 
much lower than that in complex fertilizers.   The Committee consider 
this as a welcome step, which was long overdue, and which will surely 
help in tackling the nutrient imbalance. 
 The Committe e also note with satisfaction that as a follow -up to 
the announcement made by the Finance Minister in his Budget Speech, 
the Government is exploring the feasibility of nutrient based subsidy and 
other alternative modes of delivery of subsidy to the farmers .   The 
Committee expect the Government to come up with a well considered 
and a farmer friendly decision without any further delay. 
 It is disconcerting to note that the Government is thinking of non -
regulation of prices of seeds in In dia with a view to let the seed price be 
decided by the producers and make available quality seed in Indian 
markets for the benefit of the Indian farmer.  The Committee would, in 
view of the socio-economic condition of the agriculture sector and a vast 
majority of farming community being small and marginal farmers, like the 
Government to consider all pros and cons of the matter and come to a 
decision after extensive consultations with all stakeholders.  They would 
further caution the Government not to allow the situation to b ecome like 
the one prevailing on fertilizer subsidy front where the farmer per-se is 
not able to avail directly the benefit of the subsidy being given by 
Government on fertilizers.   The Committee would like to be apprised in 
the matter at the earliest opportunity. 
 
 
 
Contract Farming 
(Recommendation para No. 11) 
1.26 Alarmed by the alacrity with which some national and multinational food 
processors and fast food chains were entering into contracts with farmers to 
encourage them to cultivate farm produce like fruits, vegetables, etc and noting 

that a host of issues rela ting to contract far ming remained to be legally 
streamlined, the Committee had recommended that the Government should 
take corrective steps to ensure that the agriculture land of small and marginal 
farmers is not manipulated and a situation of „bonded farming‟ is avoided. 
 
1.27 The Government in their Action Taken Note have stated as under:  
“Promotion of direct marketing and contract farming and 
development of competitive agricultural markets in private and 
cooperative sectors have been identified as key a reas of reforms in the 
agricultural sector, to be implemented through the amendments to the 
State APMC Acts. Contract farming arrangements will provide an 
effective method of linking small farm sector to sources of extension 
advice, mechanization, seeds, f ertilizers and credit and assured and 
profitable markets, with due protection to farmer‟s rights over his hand. 
  
In most of the States which have amended their APMC Acts, a 
legal framework is in place now to regulate contract farming.  This 
framework provides for – 
(i) Contract Farming Sponsor to register himself with the 
Market Committee or with a prescribed officer. 
(ii) The Contract Farming Sponsor to get the contract farming 
agreement recorded with a prescribed officer. 
(iii) No title, rights, ownership or possession  of land shall be 
transferred or alienated or vest in the contract farming 
sponsor or his successor or his agent as a consequence 
arising out of the contract farming agreement. 
(iv) Dispute Redressal Mechanism. 
(v) The agricultural produce covered under the Contrac t 
Farming agreement may be sold to the Contract Farming 
Sponsor out side the market yards. 
(vi) Specification of Model Agreement for Contract Farming so 
that producers can ensure inclusion of various required 
clauses in their agreement.  
 
It is expected that th e regulatory provisions being made in the 
State APMC Acts and Rules thereunder, will ensure that under the 
contract farming agreement both sponsors and the producers will be 
accountable to the terms & conditions laid down for the farming through 
a written agreement, which will be recorded in a public office and will be 
available for any dispute resolution.  Further, the rights of the farmer 
cover the title, ownership or possession, etc. will be protected over the 
land under contract farming and as a consequ ence of the failure of the 
contract; they will not lose any right over the land.  The agreement 
prescribed under the law will ensure that farmers get the assured price 
on supply of the required quantity of produce and the sponsors provide 
them certain agreed services and technical know-how, if so preferred by 
both the parties. 
 

Ministry of Agriculture is of the view that the State Governments 
through their designated authorities shall ensure that the contract 
farming, which is generally commodity specific does not grow beyond 
proportion to disturb bio-diversity and agricultural ecology. 
  
However, since contract farming is happening at a very small 
scale at the moment, no such threat is being experienc ed in any part of 
the Country at present”. 
 
1.28 The rep ly of the Government indicates that reform/amendment of 
the State APMC Acts will provide the necessary legal frame work 
governing contract farming in the country. However, it is a known fact 
that all States are yet to carry out the necessary amendments  in their 
APMC Act s.  The Committee wonder how corrective steps could be 
ensured and enforced nation -wide in the still evolving scenario of 
contract farming. The Committee are of the opinion that the Government 
need to prod all States to have sufficient legal framework in place before 
allowing contract farming.   Unless and until the Government is able to 
ensure this, the Committee ’s apprehensions about ‘bonded farming’ and 
risk to the food security of the country will remain unallayed.  
 
Restructuring and Strengthening of Forward Market Commission  
(Recommendation para No.12) 
  
1.29 The Committee had noted that forward market in agricultural 
commodities enable the stakeholders/market participants to hedge their price 
risk in an open market environment. It also helps them in price discovery 
based on which the producers take informed de cisions. However, they felt that  
forward markets in India till now, have not been beneficial to the farmers, or to 
the consumers, though, the traders in the market or say the middle man is 
earning at the cost of farmers.  
The Committee had, therefore, recommended that future trading in 
agricultural commodities should be discouraged to contain the speculative and 
paper trading which generally results in artificial rise in prices. The Committee 
also recommended that the Gover nment should expedite the setting up of a 
regulatory authority for forward market trading on the lines of Securities and 
Exchange Board of India.  
1.30 The Government in their Action Taken Note have stated that the 
primary role of the futures trading is pr ice discovery and price risk 

management. Price discoveries in futures market help the producers, namely 
the agriculturists, to plan their agricultural operations. The producer armed with 
the knowledge of the futures, can avoid resorting to distress sale. H e is also 
empowered to properly negotiate with the private trader regarding the prices 
having regard to the informed circumstances.  
           To ensure that the benefits of the futures market reach the farmers and 
they are able to derive benefits of the advance price signals, the FMC, 
Exchanges, AGMARKNET are also working on a project to place ticker boards 
in APMCs to disseminate future prices on real time basis so that farmers may 
take appropriate decision about acreage and marketing of their produce.  
 The regulatory framework needs to be overhauled to bring it on par with 
those of similar regulators like SEBI, RBI and restructured and strengthen the 
Forward Market Commission to meet the regulatory challenges. In this 
connection, a Bill to amend the For ward Contracts (Regulation) Act, 1952 was 
introduced in Parliament on 13.03.2008. 
 
1.31 The Committee appreciate that the Government have, at last been 
persuaded by their recommendation to realize the need for overhauling 
the regulatory framework to bring it on par with those of similar 
regulators like SEBI, RBI and for having a restructured and strengthened 
Forward Market Commission to meet the regulatory challenges.  The 
Committee are disappointed to note that the Government have 
introduced a Bill to amen d the Forward Contract (Regulation) Act, 1952 
on 13 March, 2008 but have not bothered to give an update  to the 
Committee about the fate of the Amending Bill while furnishing the 
Action Taken Note more than one and a half year later .  The Committee 
would li ke the Government to get the Bill to amend the Forward 
Contracts (Regulation) Act, 1952, enacted expeditiously so that the 
restructuring and strengthening of the Commission is not delayed any 
further.  They would like to be apprised of the status to obtain ing in this 
regard at the earliest. 
 
  

CHAPTER II 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN  
ACCEPTED BY THE GOVERNMENT 
 
 
Pricing Policy 
(Recommendation para No.1) 
  
The Committee note that agriculture price policies were evolved in the 
pre-independence era but were not strictly enforced.  The focus of agriculture 
production during British rule was to grow more cash crops, which could be 
exported, resulting in a big shift against the growth of food grains. This 
phenomenon continued even d uring early years of Independence.  Thereafter, 
the Government focused on promoting organized marketing of agricultural 
commodities through a network of regulated markets to ensure reasonable 
gain to the farmers.  However, the infrastructural facilities re mained highly 
inadequate in most of the States and with the increase in population, the 
demand for food grains particularly rice and wheat was on the increase from 
year to year. Another reason for increase in demand of rice and wheat was the 
increase in in come level of the consumers and substitution of coarse grains 
like maize, jawar, bajra, etc. by wheat and rice.  Over a period, the shortage of 
scarcity, unregulated purchase and movement of food grains by private traders 
lead to indiscriminate and specula tive rise in prices by movement of food 
grains from surplus producing areas to high purchasing areas.  To deal with 
this situation, the Government of India appointed L.K. Jha Committee in 
August, 1964 to determine price of rice and wheat for the 1964 -65 season and 
to suggest terms of reference for an agency which could provide an advice on 
a continuous basis in respect of future season.  Based on this Committee 
report, the Agriculture Prices Commission (APC) was set up on 1 st January, 
1965 to advise the Government on price policy of major agriculture 
commodities.  With certain charges in its terms of reference, such as , terms of 
trade between agricultural and non -agricultural sectors, the Commission was 
renamed as the Commission for Agricultural Costs and Prices (CACP) in 1985, 
which presently consists of a Chairman, a Member Secretary, two official 
members and three non-official members from the farming community. 
The Committee have been apprised that the Government announces  
minimum support prices after considering the recommendations of the CACP, 

the views of Central Ministries and State Governments and such other factors, 
which are considered important for fixation of MSPs. 
  
The Committee observe that in recent times, ther e have been far -
reaching changes in the agricultural scenario and the MSPs suggested by the 
CACP and announced by the Government have not addressed the problems 
faced by the farmers in running their household -activities, family and social 
responsibiliti4es such as Roti, Kapada and Makan and education of their 
children and family marriages, etc. and other social functions.  Even the 
Agricultural Price Policy and the credit policy of the Government have not been 
able to stop the spate of suicides by the farme rs which is spreading from one 
State to another and the Government has admitted that it has already spread 
to 31 districts in Andhra Pradesh, Karnataka, Maharashtra and Kerala.  There 
are also reports of suicides by the Punjab & U.P. farmers.  It has come to the 
notice of the Committee that even the samples study for assessing cost 
incurred for raising a  crop, supposed to be done at fields, is carried lout, at 
times falsely even by sitting in office. 
 
The Committee are unable to understand the relevance of  factors 
considered by CACP such as (i) effect on industrial cost structure and (ii) 
assessment of objective needs to economy at a particular point of time.  They 
have never come across a situation in which the industry produced goods are 
even related/compared to the agricultural crop prices. 
The agriculture of industrialized nations is energy intensive, while the 
agriculture in developing countries like India is labour intensive and their 
animal wealth is part of their agriculture activities.  Since India is having 20% of 
the world‟s cattle, buffalo, sheep and goat population and 82% of the 
landholdings are very small, so it is imperative to promote crop -livestock 
integrated farming system rather than monoculture of the same crop and 
variety as a in contrac t farming.  There is a need to promote conservation 
farming and sustainable rural livelihoods, that can lead to evergreen revolution 
and improve productivity in perpetuity without associated ecological harm. 
The Committee urge upon the Government, agricult ural research 
institutes and agriculture universities to take the responsibility for providing 
necessary inputs, particularly seeds of appropriate varieties and the nutrients 
essential for balanced fertilization, at the right time and place and at affordab le 

price.  The research and development effort should focus on the adoption of 
risk-minimizing and soil enriching technologies. 
 
The Committee observe that climate change through global warming 
may bring changes in temperature, rainy days and sea level and  dependency 
on wheat and rice will enhance vulnerability to climatic factors.  So the 
Government should frame such policies that can revitalize the earlier food 
traditions of rural and tribal area people, who in the past depended for their 
daily food on a wide range of millets, grain legumes, tubers and vegetables.  
The Public Distribution System, should include, wherever appropriate, ragi, 
minor millets and other wide range of nutritious cereals such as Jawar, 
Bajra,Maize, etc. and tubers such as potatoes,  onions, etc.  These crops 
should be included under MSP Scheme to generate remunerative income to 
the farmers and can be grown as alternative to whe at and rice which presently 
are over-subscribed crops eating into our fast depleting irrigation water 
resources. As per Food & Agriculture Organization Report, the food production 
needs to be increased by 50% by 2030 to meet the rising demand. To save the 
hungry from eating only promises and platitudes, this is the opportune time for 
the Government to declare „R ight to Food‟ as fundamental human right and 
enforce it legally and socially. “Food for all” should be effectively provided in 
this house of grave energy and food crises or else, we may confront 
widespread hunger and the consequent food riots. 
 
The Governm ent should launch a „Bridge the yield gap movement‟ in 
order to close the gap between potential and actual yields in major food and 
fodder crops and to achieve this objective, the technologies, services and 
public policies will have to be reinforced.  The post-harvest technology 
including processing, storage, value -addition and marketing should be 
strengthened. 
 
The Committee are of the considered view that the Government should 
give highest priority to provide the small and marginal farmers opportunities f or 
assured and remunerative marketing of their produce at the time of harvesting. 
 
The Committee also recommend that in addition to 24  food crops 
covered under MSP fixed by CACP, the minor millets, the horticulture crops 
such as potatoes and onions; shoul d also be covered under food crops and 

CACP should be asked to fix the MSP for these crops also, however, for other 
horticulture crops which are covered and also others that are not covered 
under Market Intervention Scheme, Government should explore the po ssibility 
of setting up of a separate Central Horticulture Price Commission for major 
horticulture crops on the lines of the Central Agriculture Price Commission.  To 
encourage the farmers to go for horticulture crops, the Government needs to 
develop infra structure facilities such as good roads, cold chain facilities 
including cold storages, warehouses and marketing facilities near the farmers 
fields in a big way. 
 
The recommendations of the Expert Committee set up under the 
Chairmanship of Prof. Y.K. Alagh  to examine Methodological Issues in the 
Fixation of Minimum Support Prices are under consideration of the 
Government.  The Committee recommend that the decision on the 
recommendations of Expert Committee should be expedited and they may be 
apprised of the same. 
 
The Committee also deprecate the apprehension that the inflation is 
being led by food crop rising prices, as there is only 20% contribution of food 
grain prices in over all calculation of inflation rates. 
 
The Committee note that since the time of liberalization of economic 
development started in early 90s, till date, the focus of our development is 
more towards raising industrial production and recently on the service sector 
and agriculture development has been ignored to the extent that fertile lands 
are being acquired from farmers at throw away prices to develop Special 
Economic Zones (SEZs) and Government are giving them tax holidays for 
years together. The Committee are of the opinion that instead of dev eloping 
SEZ on agricultural land, the Government should develop Special Agricultural 
Zones for intensive production of food grains, pulses and oilseeds, etc.  The 
agriculture sector is being ignored and neglected in favour of industrial sector, 
as if, the poor man in a remote village will be able to earn his livelihood and 
food from these industrial islands in his area.  The prices of agricultural 
produce received by the farmers are lower than the prices of the same 
prevailing in a free market and are often  less than the cost of cultivation.  The 
ever growing population of our country cannot be fed regularly only by 
importing food grains and that too at the twice or at least one and half rate 

more than the domestic MSP rate fixed by the Government as was don e in 
2007 by importing wheat up to $393 per tonne through different international 
supplier companies.  It seeds that the farmer centric policies which can only 
solve our food security and unemployment problem are not on the agenda of 
the successive governm ents leading to pressure on the cities to generate 
employment for the poor farmers and labourers of rural India, who are flooding 
the big cities, in a big way.  If the farmers are provided with easily affordable 
new technologies and trained to use it, club bed with remunerative prices for 
their produce, more than 50% of the unemployment problem can be solved 
and the city governments could also be saved from amenities to the ever 
increasing population of the big cities.  This lop -sided  growth of our economy 
is increasing the gap between the rich of the cities & poor farmers of the 
villages, which is not being given the required attention, though both these 
groups are contributing towards the progress and development of our country.  
There is a need of a polic y for farmers whose roots are embedded to the 
ground for developing Indian economy first and world economy later. 
The food security means a situation where all the people of this country 
could buy enough nutritious food of their choice to live an active an d healthy 
life in all circumstances.  It has been noted that this year the Government have 
imposed a ban on export of non -Basmati varieties and heavy tax burden on 
export of Basmati varieties of rice, which is directly against the interest of 
farmers, resulting in loss of their income and will also discourage them to grow 
these crops.  The Committee, therefore, are of firm opinion that the food 
security can be achieved only by making farmer and agriculture centric policies 
through which farmers are encourag ed to grow more food crops which earn 
them enough income to smoothly run their household activities and perform 
their social responsibilities.   
 
Reply of the Government 
 
A new scheme entitled – National Project on Management of soil health 
and fertility p rovides for promotion and distribution of micro -nutrients to State 
Government/State designated agencies. Under the scheme, one fully -fitted 
mobile testing laboratory shall be provided through State Government and other 
agencies to 250 districts during 2008-09. 500 soil testing laboratories will be set 
up in public/private sector during11th Plan Period. To provide integrated 

nutrient management, distribut ion of green manure, soil amend ments/ 
reclamation of acidic soils are also included under the scheme.   
Government implements the Market Intervention Scheme (MIS) for 
crops other than those for which MSP is fixed. Under this Scheme, horticultural 
commodities and other agricultural commodities which are perishable in nature 
and which are not covered under the minimum support price scheme are 
included. In order to protect the growers of these horticulture / agricultural 
commodities from low prices in an event of bumper crop during the peak 
arrival period, the Government implements MIS for a particular commodity on 
the request of the State Government concerned. Losses suffered are shared 
on 50:50 basis between Central and the State Government. In the case of 
north-eastern States, losses shared are on 75:25 basis between Central and 
the State Government. In view of the perishable nature of these crops they are 
covered under the MIS scheme. 
Gramin Bhandaran Yojna (GBY) seeks to create scientific storage 
capacity with allied facilities in rural areas to meet out various requirements of 
farmers for storing farm produce , processed farm produce, agricultural inputs, 
etc and prevention of distress sale by creating the facility of pledge loan and 
marketing credit.  The scheme has been made farmer friendly by allowing 
subsidy for smaller godown of 50 MTs in general, and of 2 5 MT in hilly areas.   
By the end of March, 2008 16186 godown having a capacity of 214.28 lakh 
tonnes involving subsidy of Rs.479.43 crores have been sanctioned by 
NABARD and NCDC. 
           Agricultural markets and most parts of the country are establish ed and 
regulated under the State‟s APMC Act.  To facilitate varying models of 
ownership of markets to accelerate investment in the area and enable private 
investment in owning, establishing and operating markets the Ministry has 
prepared a model Act and ci rculated to all States/UTs for guidance. Several 
States/UTS have initiated steps for amending APMC Act.   
Government has considered the Recommendations of the Expert 
Committee to Examine Methodological Issues in Fixing MSP  and has decided 
that for recommending Minimum Support Price (MSP), the following items of 
cost shall also be considered by CACP; 
(i)  The premium actually paid by farmers for crop insurance;  

(i) Marketing and transport charges incurred by farmers;  
(ii) Imputing value of family labour on actual market rate for casual labour 
in cost estimates and  
(iv) The likely effect of the price policy on the rest of the economy, 
particularly on the cost of living, level of wages, cost structure of agro -
based products and the competitiveness of agriculture and agro -based 
commodities. 
 
         With regard to the acquisition of land for SEZ‟s it may be mentioned that 
land is a State subject.   Land for SEZs is procured as per the policy and 
procedures of the respective State Gove rnments. State Governments have 
been advised that in case of land acquisition for Special Economic Zones, first 
priority should be for acquisition of waste and barren land and if necessary 
single crop agricultural land could be acquired for the SEZs.   If p erforce a 
portion of double cropped agricultural land has to be acquired to meet the 
minimum area requirements, especially for multi -product Special Economic 
Zones, the same should not exceed 10% of the total land required for the 
SEZ.  The Board of Approv al on SEZs only considers those proposals, which 
have been duly recommended by the State Government. Further, pursuant to 
the decision of Empowered Group of Ministers (EGOM) in its meeting held on 
5th April 2007, the State Governments have been informed th at the Board of 
Approval will not approve any SEZs where the State Governments have 
carried out or propose to carry out compulsory acquisition of land for such 
SEZs after 5th April, 2007. Accordingly, no proposal involving compulsory 
acquisition is approved for setting up of SEZs. 
            The total land area involved in 568 SEZs for which formal approval has 
been granted till date is 69781 hectares out of which over 114 approvals are 
for State Industrial Development Corporations/State Government Venture s 
which account for 21053 hectares approximately and the land was already in 
their possession. As per available information in Department of Commerce in 
respect of 299 SEZs, the total area of land involved in these SEZs is about 
29821 hectares.  Out of this, 78% is reported to be barren/waste/Dry/Industrial 
land, 19% of the land is single crop and the double crop land is only 3%. 
 Department of Commerce is of the view that the implementation of SEZs will 
not affect food security of the country in any way.  
 
 Allocation and supply of food  grains by Government of India under the 
Targeted Public Distribution System includes distribution of coarse grains such 

as ragi, jowar, bajra, maize, etc.  The Department of Food & Public 
Distribution, accordingly, makes all ocation of these coarse grains under TPDS 
to various States/UTs based on the request/demand received from them.  
During the current year, 2009 -10, different coarse grains have been allocated 
to Andhra Pradesh, Karnataka, Madhya Pradesh and Gujarat based on  the 
requirements intimated by these State Governments.  Potatoes and onions are 
not allocated to the States for distribution under TPDS.  Being perishable 
commodities requiring specialized storage, it would not be possible or 
desirable to include them in the general PDS basket. 
 
 Agricultural Research Institutes and State Agricultural Universities have 
prime responsibilities to provide research inputs in terms of varietal 
development, seeds and the nutrients essential for balanced growth whereas 
the policy on prices are to be under taken by State Agriculture Departments. 
Accordingly, necessary research efforts are constantly undertaken by various 
research institutes and SAUs to help the farmers.  
 
 
(Vide Ministry of Agriculture (Department of Agriculture & Co -operation), 
Directorate of Economics & Statistics Letter No. F.No. 7/19/2007 -FES-ES 
dated 16 July, 2009). 
 
  

Comments of the Committee 
For comments of the Committee please refer to Para No. 1.7 of   
Chapter I of this Report.  
 
Factors considered for fixation of MSP 
(Recommendation para No.2) 
 
The Committee note that CACP covers only 24 crops under the MSP.  
These crops are Wheat, Paddy, Barley, Gram, Jowar, Bajra, Maize, Ragi, 
Arhar, Moong, Urad, Cotton, Groundnut in shell, Sunflower seed, Soyabean, 
Sesames, Niger seed, Tobacco, Masur, Rapeseed/Mustard, Safflower, Copra, 
Jute and sugarcane.  These are important food crops which are grown and 
consumed in a vast area of the country.  For recommendation of MSP, the 
CACP takes into account, the entire structure of economy  of a particular 
commodity or group of inter -related commodities and considers a number of 
factors such as (i) cost of production/cultivation; (ii) Demand & Supply; (iii) 
Trends in market prices-both domestic and international; (iv) changes in import 
prices; (v) parity between prices paid and prices received by the farmers, (vi) 
inter-crop price parity; (vii) effect on industrial cost structure; (viii) effect on cost 
of living; (ix) effect on general price level/inflation; (x) assessment of objective 
needs of the economy at a particular point of time, including food security, 
agricultural diversification, etc. 
  
The Committee have been informed that the CACP also issue 
questionnaire to the Central Ministries, State Governments and other 
organizations related  to trade, industry, processors and farmers both in 
cooperative and private sector and seeks their views on relevant issues and 
factual information on related variables.  The Commission also obtains 
extensive feedback from the State Governments and other a gencies as also 
estimates of cost of cultivation obtained through surveys conducted by the 
respective State Governments themselves.  The Commission also makes use 
of the wholesale price indices of the relevant inputs as are available from the 
office of Economic Adviser, Ministry of Industry and Commerce. 
 
The Committee are unable to understand the relevancy of factors – vi; 
(i) effect on industrial cost structure; (ii) effect on cost of living; and (iii) 
assessment of objective needs of the economy at a par ticular point of time.  

The total economic growth during 2007-08 was 9% whereas agriculture growth 
was just 2.7%.  It has nowhere been mentioned that the targets fixed or 
achieved by the industrial growth are ever calculated in the light of agriculture 
growth or production.  The profit margin on the industrial products, even in 
case of medicines is sometimes more than 300% and it has generally never 
been below 100%, whereas agriculture produce are never sold at these profit 
margins.  The factor „effect on c ost of living‟ is not directly related to 
agriculture, it is general cost of living of people of the country and production 
categories, other than agriculture, do not consider this factor while calculating 
their sale price.  Cost of living is very high in cities and in rural areas, where 
the farmers live, is very low compared to cities.  Both can‟t be compared. 
 
The CACP also does not take into account the „risk factors‟ and their 
consequences.  Natural risk factors which include weather aberrations, rains,  
floods, famine conditions, pest, temperature fluctuations, hail -storm etc. are 
not given due weightage in calculating the cost factors.  There are other risk 
factors which are man created viz., Government intervention and market 
forces including national and international both, which try to control the prices 
of agricultural produce to their advantage. The risk factors mentioned above 
are not addressed by CACP/Government, the way they need to be handled for 
fixing MSP of a particular crop. In 1980s, then t he Union Agriculture Minister 
had admitted in Parliament that the risk factor was not taken into account by 
Agriculture Price Commission now Commission for Agricultural Costs and 
Prices while calculating MSP. The Committee have observed that the physical 
crop is only 20 -30% of the crop that can be expected on the basis of applied 
levels of technology, management and inputs and if one adds the market risks 
involved in the Indian situation, the risk factor is unlikely to be lower than 50%. 
The majority of far mers do not have access to Government machinery that 
could provide information on how to control pests and stem declining 
productivity of land. Soil tests, information on pests, weather forecasts, field 
demonstrations, advisory services for use of seeds, i nformation on use of 
fertilizers and pesticides are not made available to the farmers on demand. 
They need to be provided with the high yield variety seeds, fertilizers, farm 
implements and machinery etc. at a subsidized rate. There is a saying „where 
hunger rules, peace can not prevail‟. If India does not produce 100 million 
tones of wheat a year by 2020, the Government will be forced to shell out 

Rs.40,000 crore to import 20 to 25 million tones of food grains to fill the gap. 
The huge gap between the supp ly and demand may lead to rampant hunger 
and malnutrition throughout the country.  
 
 The Committee note that there is a problem in food grain production. 
Around 2004-05, the per capita food grain production was back to 1970s level, 
from 476.5 gram per day per person in 1979 to 422 gram per day per person in 
2005. Pulses per capita availability has declined from 60.7 gram per day in 
1951 to 32.5 gram per day in 2006. Between 1996 and 2004 there was almost 
zero growth in food grains.  
 
 The Committee are of t he opinion that if farm ecology and economics 
go wrong, nothing else will go right in agriculture. Everything can wait but not 
agriculture, as 65% of the population in one way or other is employed in 
agriculture and allied activities to grow food and fodde r for its 100% human 
and animal population. If agriculture production does not remain above 
population growth rate, then there is every likelihood of a situation of recurrent 
famines. The threat of famines and food scarcity becomes all the more serious 
on account of the Climate Change. The grain -stocks are disapp earing and 
today we are in the e ra of diminishing grain reserves, escalating price and 
persistence of widespread under-nutrition.  
 
 The Committee are of the firm view that these aforesaid condition s can 
be changed only if we can make the agriculture a profitable avocation. We 
have to improve the conditions of soil, its nutrient contents, water management 
and grow alternative crops, organize research and development of small farm 
technologies which a re useful and affordable. The factors such as „effect on 
industrial cost structure‟ is not even indirectly related to agriculture production 
and effect on cost of living is related to all sectors, be it economic growth, 
industrial growth, service sector gr owth or agricultural growth. The Committee 
consider that effect on cost of living if related to farmers, then its relation with 
other factors and to population other than farming community, do not auger 
well to keep the food crop prices low and discourage the farmers from growing 
more food crops. The factor relating to „the assessment of objective needs of 
the economy at a particular point of time‟, if only related to food security and 
agricultural diversification, then it is understandable, but if it relat ed to other 
objectives of economy e.g. industrial growth, then the CACP has to do away 

with it as industrial growth or its product‟s price structure never takes into 
account the prices of food grains and living standard of farmers or whole of the 
rural population.  
 
 The Committee strongly recommend that while fixing MSP, the CACP 
should stop counting the factors, such as (i) effect on industrial cost structure; 
(ii) „effect on cost of living‟ and (iii) assessment of objective needs of the 
economy relating to industrial development etc.; and re assess the factor 
relating to „ effect on general price level/inflation‟ by including wholesale price 
index and not the market rate. The risk factors mentioned above should 
invariable be considered while calculating the  level of minimum support price 
of an agriculture commodity. Besides, 50% risk co -efficient and so also the 
self-insurance premium of the farmers and premiums of MNAIS and WBCIS 
should form part of costing factors considered by CACP for fixing MSP.  
 
 The Committee are of the view that where States have their own 
Agriculture Price Committee for giving inputs to CACP, while calculating the 
cost of a crop in their States, they should include per unit cost of electricity 
charges and should also consider the co mparative advantages of cropping 
pattern in their States and suggest to the framers as to which crop would fetch 
them more remunerative prices on comparative scale.  
 
 The CACP‟s role is restricted to the announcement of MSP, however, 
the Committee are of the view that it should take into account all the minor and 
major cost including risk factors natural as well as man -made and must take 
into account the profit margin of at least 50% of the cost price, that a farmer 
should get to run his household, perform his social & family responsibilities and 
rear his animals etc.  
Reply of the Government 
 
The price policy also seeks to provide a fair return to the farmers while 
keeping in view the interest of the consumers, especially the large majority of 
poor consumers both in rural and urban areas in the sense that it tries to keep 
the prices of food and  other agricultural commodities at reasonable levels. As 
any policy regarding agriculture cannot be looked in isolation of the overall 

economy, agricultural price policy also has to keep the objective needs of the 
economy in consideration.  
Government has considered the Recommendations of the Expert 
Committee to Examine Methodological Issues in Fixing MSP  and has decided 
that for recommending Minimum Support Price (MSP), the following items of 
cost shall also be considered by CACP; 
(i) The premium actually paid by farmers for crop insurance;  
(ii) Marketing and transport charges incurred by farmers;  
(iii) Imputing value of family labour on actual market rate for casual 
labour in cost estimates and  
(iv) The likely effect of the price policy on the rest of t he economy, 
particularly on the cost of living, level of wages, cost structure of 
agro-based products and the competitiveness of agriculture and 
agro-based commodities. 
  
As regards consideration of risk factors in cultivation, at present the 
production ri sk is taken care by the National Agricultural Insurance System 
(NAIS) in force and the price risk is covered under the MSP. MSP is a price 
guarantee that is provided to the farmers to ensure that the price does not fall 
below that floor limit and the chanc es of distress sale by the farmers are 
eliminated. Regarding the production risk in farming, it seems appropriate that 
the farmers are provided with farmer -friendly insurance cover and the cost on 
account of insurance premium is included in the overall cost of production.  
 
(Vide Ministry of Agriculture (Department of Agriculture & Co -operation), 
Directorate of Economics & Statistics Letter No. F.No. 7/19/2007 -FES-ES 
dated 16 July, 2009). 
 
  

Comments of the Committee 
 
For comments of the Committee please refer to Para No. 1. 10 of   
Chapter I of this Report.   
 
Cost Factors for fixing MSP  
(Recommendation para No.3) 
  
The Committee have been apprised that under the sampling design of 
the comprehensive scheme for studying the cost of cultivation of principal  
crops, each State is demarcated into a homogenous agro -climatic zones base 
on cropping pattern, soil type, rainfall etc. The sampling design of the scheme 
continues to be three -stage stratified random sampling design with Tehsil as 
the first stage unit, v illage/cluster of villages as the second stage unit and 
holding as the third and ultimate stage unit. Based on this, the cost of 
production per quintal is worked out for major growing State for specific crops, 
and their weighted average is estimated and co nsidered by CACP, among 
other factors, for recommending MSP. The cost of cultivation/production taken 
into account includes all paid out costs, such as, those incurred on account of 
hired human labour, bullock labour/machinery labour (both hired & owned) a nd 
rent paid for leased in land. In addition, cash and kind expenses on use of 
material inputs like seeds, fertilizers, manures, irrigation charges including 
actual cost of diesel/electricity for operation of pump -sets, etc. should also 
count towards production cost.  
 
The Committee observe that while calculating the Cost of production, 
CACP takes into account the rent for leased land and not the cost incurred 
towards owned land. Many a farmers enter this avocation by purchasing land 
on payment of agreed pr ice. It is, therefore, necessary that interest foregone 
on owned land should also be counted towards calculation of cost of 
production.  
 
The Committee further note that in addition to paid out costs, some 
imputed costs are also incurred and are counted by  CACP towards fixing of 
MSP. The imputed costs include family labour, owned animal labour, own 
machinery charges, implements, farm produced manure, rent of own land, 
interest on owned fixed capital, interest on working capital, kind payments and 
main products and by -products. The family labour is counted on the basis of 

statutory wage rate or actual market rate, whichever is higher. The Committee 
recommend that the farmer and his family should be considered as skilled 
labour as they are, in sense, a technic al managerial group who knows better 
about the land formation, irrigation requirements of a particular crop, seed 
quality, farm implements needed, weather condition and when and how the 
crop is to be sown, grown and harvested, how to control the pests, whe n to 
use insecticides etc. and when to sell the crops in the market. So far the 
owned animal labour cost which include cost of green and dry fodder, 
depreciation on animals and cattle sheds etc., are concerned, the Committee 
desire that the expenses incurred on cow or buffalo calves for first three years, 
till they are grown up for use in agriculture or for milking, and also the 
expenses incurred on the old animals, cow, buffalo or oxen when they are 
grown old and are not good for agriculture or other produ ctive use, should also 
be considered by CACP towards calculating the cost of family labour and 
owned animal labour for fixing up of MSP.  
 
The Committee further recommend that house ladies labour used for 
processing of crops for domestic use, domiciliary l abour, attending to babies in 
the family should also count towards family labour costs as there are crèches 
for industrial labour and none exists in rural areas. 
 
The Committee also recommend that the interest charged on short and 
long term farm loan shoul d also form part of cost factors and include the 
amount charged from the date of loan taken, till the farmer gets the money in 
hand from the sale of his crops as sometimes, even after selling his crops, he 
gets money even a year after selling his crops, th is has particularly been seen 
in case of sugarcane in some of the States, where the sugar -mill owners 
sometimes do not pay the farmers even after one year of buying of his 
sugarcane crop.  Though the Government has justified the use of average cost 
method for fixing of MSP by CACP, however, the Committee are of the opinion 
that though synthetic model is time consuming for collecting the cost data of 
the raising certain crops, however, when completed, it will be more useful from 
the farmers point of view for fixing up of MSP of his crops. 
 
The Committee are of the considered view that if it is not desired to take 
into account the State wise expenditure of per hectare crop, then the cost of 

production of food grains incurred on Government and Agricultural Univ ersity 
farms should be counted as per hectare cost of the farmers in that region. 
 
The averaging of the costs incurred in different States, is loss to the 
farmers of the States like Haryana, Punjab for wheat & rice and Karnataka for 
rice, as the per hectare expenditure in raising the wheat/rice crops in these 
States is almost twice the cost in other States such as Chhatisgarh and 
Jharkhand. 
 
The Tubewell irrigation cost in the rainfed areas where water table has 
gone down to 400 ft. or more as in Raja sthan, is several times more than 
Western UP and Northern Haryana and Punjab where water -table is around 
60-80 ft. below surface level.  The farmers of those areas should be 
encouraged to grow water -resistant varieties of food grains such as Jawar, 
Bajra, Gram, Mustard, minor millets and remunerative MSP should be fixed to 
give extra income to the farmers of these rainfed/dryland areas. 
 
The Committee are in agreement with Alagh Committee on its 
recommendation that crop insurance premium should be included as a part of 
cost of a crop. 
 
The Committee also recommend that 
(i) higher labour charges, actual or minimum, of human, animal and 
machinery; whichever is higher, should be counted. 
(ii) Maintenance expenses for owned animals, machinery and land 
should also be included. 
(iii) The micro -nutrients used in agriculture production and cost of 
depletion of these micro and macro nutrients should also form part 
of the paid out costs.  The computation should include both pre and 
post harvest operational data. 
(iv) Expenses on material inputs such as seed (home grown and 
purchased), fertilizer, manure (owned & purchased), pesticides, 
insecticides and irrigation facilities should be counted as if these 
have been purchased at market rates. 
(v) Depreciation of farm buildings such as cattle shed s, machine sheds, 
storage sheds, etc. should be 10% or more per year on pucca 

sheds; and depreciation on wooden farm implements should be @ 
20% and on metal implements @ 10% per year. 
(vi) For land revenue, the paid out cost should include, income loss on 
account of investment in land plus the tax paid to the Government 
on purchase price or stamped value of agricultural land. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
The value of owned land is imputed at market rate subject to the ceiling 
prescribed by the State Government. Family labour is imputed on the basis of 
statutory casual wage rate or actual market rate, whichever is higher. Value of 
owned animal labour is eva luated on the basis of cost of their maintenance. 
Similarly, value of owned machinery charges is imputed on the basis of cost of 
maintenance of farm machinery. Expenditure towards preparatory tillage of 
land during intervening period of two crops is counte d in estimated cost of 
production of crops for next season. Paid out cost by farmer include 
depreciation of implements and farm building and material inputs. Regarding 
income loss on account of investment in land plus taxes paid and cost of 
depletion of micro and macro nutrients, these are not taken into account as per 
existing methodology.   
 
 The Government has, from time to time, set up expert committees to 
revise the methodology and system of calculation of the cost of 
cultivation/production of agricult ural produce. These include Special 
Committee on “Cost of Production Estimates” under the Chairmanship of       
Dr. S.R.Sen in 1980, Expert Committee to review the Methodology of cost of 
Production of Crops under the Chairmanship of Dr. Hanumantha Rao in 1 990, 
National Statistical Commission under the Chairmanship of Dr. C. Rangarajan 
in 2000 and Expert Committee under the Chairmanship of Dr. Y.K. Alagh in 
May, 2003.  As per the recommendation of the Expert Committee under the 
Chairmanship of Dr. Hanumantha  Rao, the expenditure incurred on 
cow/buffalo‟s calves for first three years, till they are grown up for use in 
Agriculture and/or milking, and also old animals that are not good for 
production is not taken into account. The work done by house ladies in 
different items of work other than relating to agriculture is also not counted.   

Government has considered the Recommendations of the Expert 
Committee to Examine Methodological Issues in Fixing MSP  and has decided 
that for recommending Minimum Support Price (MSP), the following items of 
cost shall also be considered by CACP; 
(i)   The premium actually paid by farmers for crop insurance;  
(ii)   Marketing and transport charges incurred by farmers;  
(iii) Imputing value of family labour on actual market rate for casual 
labour in cost estimates; and  
(iv) The likely effect of the price policy on the rest of the economy, 
particularly on the cost of living, level of wages, cost structure of 
agro-based products and the competitiveness of agriculture and 
agro-based commodities. 
 
(Vide Ministry of Agriculture (Department of Agriculture & Co -operation), 
Directorate of Economics & Statistics Letter No. F.No. 7/19/2007 -FES-ES 
dated 16 July, 2009). 
 
Comments of the Committee 
For comments of the Committee please refer to Para No. 1. 10 of   
Chapter I of this Report.   
 
Awareness about MSP amongst Farmers 
(Recommendation para No.6) 
  
The Committee note that as per the National Sample Survey 
Organization (NSSO) report, at the all-India level only 19% farmers understood 
the idea of MSP and they knew the agency to which they could sell their crops 
if their market price fell below the MSP.  It shows that extension machinery is 
not fully oiled even though the MSP is being fixed for more than four decades.  
Though the Government have enumerated a number of schemes such as 
State Extension Programme, Mass Media Support to Agriculture, Kisan Call 
Centers, etc. to make the farmers aware about the MSP, however, the 
Committee are pained to observe that it is the will -power of successive 
Governments, which is lacking and not the number of programmes/schemes, 
which are being implemented half -heartedly only on paper.  They, therefore, 
recommend that the Government at Central as well as State level should 
develop strong extension services to help the farmers to get remunerative 
prices of their produce. 
 

Reply of the Government 
 
1. Mass Media Scheme: The existing infrastructure of Doordarshan and All 
India Radio is being utilized u nder the scheme “Mass Media Support to 
Agriculture Extension” for providing agriculture related information and 
knowledge to the farming community.  
The Free Commercial Time (FCT) of 150 seconds for each programme 
of 30 minutes duration by Doordasrshan and  All India Radio is being used for 
telecast of Audio/Video spots on Kharif/Rabi Advisories, MSP, Kisan Call 
Centre No. – 1551, Kisan Credit Card, Potential Fishing Zone Advisories for 
Coastal Region, etc.  
On the request of DAC, Doordarshan and AIR have pr oduced a 50 
seconds capsule on “Minimum Support Price (MSP)” which is being updated 
on a regular basis. The capsule is being telecast on National, 18 Regional 
Kendras and 180 HPTs/ SPTs of Doordarshan, 5 -6 days a week in Krishi 
Darshan programme and 96 FM Radio Stations of all India Radio everyday 
during the Kisan Vani programme.  
2.  Support to State Extension Programmes for Extension Reforms: 
The scheme aims at providing farmer -friendly bottom -up and demand -
driven extension support to the farming community through a Cafeteria of 
activities developed in line with the Policy Framework for Agriculture 
Extension. During the 10 th plan 262 ATMAs were set up in the country to 
implement the programme. This scheme is now being implemented through 
565 ATMAs set up in 27 States/ Uts of the country. It is proposed to cover all 
the rural districts under the programme.  
The District level activities supported under the scheme include - Farmer 
Oriented Activities, Farm Information Dissemination Activities, Research -
Extension Farmer Linkages and Innovative Activities.  
Under the category Farm Information Dissemination, the farmers are 
provided relevant information on all important aspects of agriculture including 
marketing of their produce and Minimum Support Price e tc. through Print 
Media, Local level Agriculture Exhibitions and development of Technology 
Packages in Electronic form. The Scheme has been strengthened both by 

increasing the physical coverage and by allocating substantial funds under the 
programme during the 11th plan.  
3. Kisan Call Centre: The “Kisan Call Centres”, scheme was launched by 
the Ministry of Agriculture to provide the information on agriculture and allied 
aspects including the information on schemes and projects for the welfare of 
the farmer s. The Kisan Calls Certers have been expanded from 14 to 25 
centres from July, 2008 with a view to enhance accessibility to the maximum 
farmers. The state departments of Agriculture provide the information on a 
regular basis to the call centers agents abou t the provisions under different 
schemes, which in turn is given by the L-1 agents to the calling farmers. 
(Vide Ministry of Agriculture (Department of Agriculture & Co -operation), 
Directorate of Economics & Statistics Letter No. F.No. 7/19/2007 -FES-ES 
dated 16 July, 2009). 
 
Need to increase 50% Food Production 
(Recommendation para No.7) 
 
The Committee note that agricultural commodity prices rose sharply in 
the past two years and continue to rise even more sharply during the first half 
of this year.  Accordingly to a joint report by Food and Agricultural Organisation 
(FAO) and Organisation for Economic Cooperation and Development (OECD) 
the food prices are expected to remain high over the next decade even if they 
would ease from their recent peaks.  Accordin g to UN Security General‟s 
report, food production needs to rise by 50% by 2030 to meet the rising 
demand. The investment in agriculture is vital to ensure global food security.  It 
has been reported that in American, Australian and European countries 
production of wheat has gone down even 15 to 20%. So it is not possible to 
control the these prices artificially for the benefit of the middleman to buy at the 
MSP and then sell it in international market at twice the prices and the farmers 
suffer losses in be tween.  So far India is concerned, this is absolutely 
necessary to find out ways and means to enhance food production capacity of 
farmers so that they may produce enough food grains, not for their own 
families but also contribute to national food security system.  If we count the 
price of wheat in Euro instead of Dollar, then according to experts in field, the 
prices of wheat are almost stable since 1996.  To offset this stagnation, the 
Committee urge upon the Government to take concrete steps to enhance th e 

food availability to vulnerable people.  Distributing high -yielding seeds and 
fertilizers on time should urgently boost small farmers food crop production 
capacity and they should be given remunerative price of their produce. 
Global food crisis is a wake-up call for Indian agriculture food grains 
production.  We should now build our own national food security system and 
should not depend on imports, which are very expensive as compared to the 
food grain prices prevalent in the Indian market. 
 
 The Com mittee are of the opinion that there is a dire need of an 
evergreen revolution to cop up with the over increasing populating of our 
country and that can be achieved only developing new high yield variety seeds 
which can be grown in a near dry situation due  to shortage of irrigation 
facilities, coupled with remunerative prices, which will encourage the farmers 
to grow those crops. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
A Centrally Sponsored Scheme on „National Food Security Mission‟ has 
been launched in view of the resolution of National Development Council 
(NDC) to launch a Food Security Mission in the country to enhance the 
production of rice, wheat and pulses by 10, 8  and 2 million tonnes respectively 
by the end of XI Plan. The Mission aims at increasing production of rice, wheat 
and pulses through area expansion and productivity enhancement; restoring 
soil fertility and productivity; creating employment opportunities; and enhancing 
farm level economy to restore confidence of farmers of targeted districts.   
Integrated Cereals Development Programme Rice/ Wheat/ Coarse 
Cereals (except Maize) based Cropping System Areas (ICDP -Rice/ Wheat/ 
Coarse Cereals (except Maize) are  also being implemented under Macro 
Management Mode. The scheme is being implemented only in areas/districts 
which are not covered under NFSM. Under these scheme assistance is given 
to the farmers for Demonstration of improved package of practices, SRI/hyb rid 
Rice production technology demonstration, support for quality seeds of high 
yielding varieties and hybrids, resource conservation technologies, integrated 
nutrient and pest management, training. Besides, Frontline Demonstrations 
are also organized by the Indian Council of Agricultural Research (ICAR)/State 

Agriculture Universities on farmer‟s field to popularize the frontier technologies 
among farmers. 
 
(Vide Ministry of Agriculture (Department of Agriculture & Co -operation), 
Directorate of Economics & Statistics Letter No. F.No. 7/19/2007 -FES-ES 
dated 16 July, 2009). 
 
Contract Farming 
(Recommendation para No.11) 
  
The Committee note that several national and multinational food 
processors or fast food chains are increasingly entering into contract with the 
farmers to encourage them to cultivate farm produce mainly fruits, vegetables, 
etc. of the desired quality by providing them not only seeds and other inputs 
but also assured procurement of the produce at pre -determined contracted 
prices. The Committee feel that in the absence of any rules/guidelines 
governing the operations of contract farming, it is vulnerable to manipulation of 
agriculture land of small and marginal farmers by the contracting companies.  
Till now whole lot of issues relating to contra ct farming remain to be legally 
streamlined and will need foremost consideration towards the interests of the 
farmers.  Otherwise, such a situation can even result in „bonded farming‟ 
instead of „contract farming‟ and expansion of contract farming may lead  to 
imbalance in land and irrigation water use for the contracted crops.  Even 
agricultural production under contract farming may not cater to the regional 
requirements of the food grains and the crops that are not used by the local 
population, may be pref erred by the contracting companies, thereby causing 
rise in price of locally used food crops.  If the MSP is fixed, keeping in view the 
local conditions and expenses involved and risk factors taken into account, the 
farmers may not have to enter into contr act with the national or multinational 
companies and can bargain effectively and earn more from the same company 
eve jn without entering into any contract farming for them.  The interests of 
farmers particularly of the small and marginal farmers have to be  protected, so 
that these farmers can also contribute to national food basket and produce 
food crops of their choice to fulfi l the needs of their families and fodder for 
cattle, poultry, etc. which may earn them extra income by selling milk, butter, 
eggs, checks, etc. 
 

The Committee are of the unanimous opinion that contract farming will 
be beneficial to the contracting companies and the food security of the nation 
and farmers‟ family interest will take a back seat, as he will work like a machine 
to earn his livelihood by growing the crops for the contracting partners and will 
not be able to even rear any animal of his choice to earn extra money.  They, 
therefore recommend that the Government should take corrective steps to 
save the contracting farmers from becoming „bonded farmers‟ working only for 
the contracting firms/companies, so that they may also contribute to the food -
basket of the country. 
 
Reply of the Government  
Promotion of direct marketing and contract farming and development of 
competitive agricultural markets in private and cooperative sectors have been 
identified as key areas of reforms in the agricultural sector, to be implemented 
through the amendments to the State APMC Acts. Contract farming 
arrangements will provide an effective method  of linking small farm sector to 
sources of extension advice, mechanization, seeds, fertilizers and credit and 
assured and profitable markets, with due protection to farmer‟s rights over his 
hand. 
 
In most of the States which have amended their APMC Acts, a legal 
framework is in place now to regulate contract farming.  This framework 
provides for –  
(i) Contract Farming Sponsor to register himself with the Market 
Committee or with a prescribed officer. 
(ii) The Contract Farming Sponsor to get the contract f arming 
agreement recorded with a prescribed officer. 
(iii) No title, rights, ownership or possession of land shall be 
transferred or alienated or vest in the contract farming sponsor or 
his successor or his agent as a consequence arising out of the 
contract farming agreement. 
(iv) Dispute Redressal Mechanism. 
(v) The agricultural produce covered under the Contract Farming 
agreement may be sold to the Contract Farming Sponsor out 
side the market yards. 

(vi) Specification of Model Agreement for Contract Farmi ng so that 
producers can ensure inclusion of various required clauses in 
their agreement. 
  
It is expected that the regulatory provisions being made in the State 
APMC Acts and Rules thereunder, will ensure that under the contract farming 
agreement both sponsors and the producers will be accountable to the terms & 
conditions laid down for the farming through a written agreement, which will be 
recorded in a public office and will be available for any dispute resolution.  
Further, the rights of the farmer cove r the title, ownership or possession, etc. 
will be protected over the land under contract farming and as a consequence 
of the failure of the contract; they will not lose any right over the land.  The 
agreement prescribed under the law will ensure that farm ers get the assured 
price on supply of the required quantity of produce and the sponsors provide 
them certain agreed services and technical know -how, if so preferred by both 
the parties. 
 
Ministry of Agriculture is of the view that the State Governments through 
their designated authorities shall ensure that the contract farming, which is 
generally commodity specific does not grow beyond proportion to disturb bio -
diversity and agricultural ecology. 
  
However, since contract farming is happening at a very small scale at 
the moment, no such threat is being experienced in any part of the country at 
present.  
(Vide Ministry of Agriculture (Department of Agriculture & Co -operation), 
Directorate of Economics & Statistics Letter No. F.No. 7/19/2007 -FES-ES 
dated 16 July, 2009). 
 
Comments of the Committee 
For comments of the Committee please refer to Para No. 1. 28 of   
Chapter I of this Report.    
  

CHAPTER III 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH  
THE COMMITTEE DO NOT DESIRE TO PURSUE  
IN VIEW OF THE GOVERNMENT’S REPLY 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
-Nil-

CHAPTER IV 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF 
 WHICH REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT  
HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE  
 
 
Fixing of MSP 
(Recommendation para No.4) 
  
The Committee observe that the minimum support price is being treated 
as procurement price even by the Government, though it is fixed at the time of 
sowing of the crops and in between, till the time, the crop is ripe for harvesting 
and taken out for marketing, the national and international rates of th e crops 
may have undergone sea -change depending on the scarcity/availability and 
demand for a particular crop.  However, the farmers are given the price fixed 
five months back, say for example in case of wheat, the Government fixed the 
MSP # Rs.1000/ - per quintal in October, 2007 and it procured it at the same 
rate in April/May, 2008, and the private traders were discouraged to enter the 
field till the Government‟s quota of procurement was fulfilled.  The day the 
private traders were allowed to purchase, th e wheat price went up by Rs.100/ - 
per quintal. 
  
The Committee do not see any parity between prices paid for inputs 
such as seeds, insecticides, pesticides and fertilizers and prices received by 
the farmers for their produce. Even the subsidy provided for fertilizers, go to 
the manufacturers of the fertilizers and not to the farmers in whose name, the 
subsidy is given and many of fertilizer manufacturing industries are run 
because they get lot of money in the name of agriculture/fertilizer subsidy in 
the absence of which they would have closed long back. 
 
The Committee observe that without giving remunerative prices to the 
farmers for their produce, they cannot produce more per unit of land and 
water, under conditions of diminishing per capital arable land a nd irrigation 
water availability and expanding biotic and abiotic stresses.  Assured and 
remunerative prices of the agricultural produces, hold the key to stimulate and 
sustain farmers‟ interest in producing more than their own household 
requirements.  The  Committee recommend that the MSP should be 

announced well before the sowing season of the crops covered under this 
scheme and should include Cost C2 + 50 per cent. 
 
The Committee also note that in the case of jute, a single MSP is 
recommended by the CACP and approved by the Government.  Based on this 
basic MSP, different MSPs for jute are announced subsequently, keeping in 
view the quality considerations and consequent input price differentials, which 
vary from place to place.  These MSPs are in fact derived prices from the basic 
MSP fixed by the Government, mainly to ensure that the farmers are paid 
better prices for their better varieties.  The Committee, therefore, recommend 
that this system of calculating MSP should be adopted for other crops also for 
which Government announces MSP to give better price for better varieties and 
to compensate regional imbalances in cost -inputs and risk factors of different 
crops as is being done for Jute and Cotton crops. 
 
The Committee are also of the opinion that whenever, there is bumper 
crop and every likelihood of its surpluses in the market or even otherwise, at 
the time of procurement, the farmer should be issued a smart -card in his name 
giving the information about the crop and the quantity procured from him by 
the Government or by the private traders, as the case may be, thereby giving 
his post -procurement recognition for selling his produce for public good.  
Whenever, the Government or private traders export that food crop, at a much 
higher rate at a later d ate, the post-procurement, adjustment should get him a 
certain profit out of his share of export.  For example, if the wheat is procured 
for Rs.1000/ - per quintal from the farmer is exported at a later data @ 
Rs.2000/- per quintal, then the farmer must be recognized for the contribution 
he made in that export.  The aim of this smart -card issuance is that we must 
insulate our farmers from the exploitative trade.  The NEW APMC Act must 
recognize the purchasers of essential commodities as to whether they are 
buying for public good, e.g. FCI, NAFED or whether they are buying for 
commercial profit e.g., Kargil, ITC, etc.  Since a large majority of the farmers 
are unable to hold their produce for a long time, they deserve to have a smart 
card and a share in profit, if their produce is exported for a profit, in future. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 

MSP is expected to operate as a price signal for the farmers so as to 
decide regarding the crops to be cultivated and the area to be allocated for 
growing any particular crop . Accordingly, it is endeavoured to announce the 
MSP before the sowing season of crop.  
 
 Considering the terms of reference of CACP and the long term price 
policy, a mechanical linkage of cost of production with MSP would not be 
desirable. The cost of cul tivation/production is a major factor in fixing the 
MSPs. While estimating the cost of cultivation/production CACP considers 
both paid -out cost and fixed cost. Under the category of paid -out cost are 
included all expenses borne in cash and kind by the farm ers. These expenses 
cover the cost on account of human labour, bullock labour/machine labour 
(both hired and owned), rent for leased -in land, seeds, fertilizers, manures, 
irrigation charges, interest value of owned capital assets, etc. It is attempted to 
ensure that the MSP is remunerative and provides adequate margin over the 
cost of cultivation/production.   
 
The powers and functions of APMCs are governed under the respective 
of Agricultural Produce Marketing (Regulation) Acts of different States. The 
main functions of APMCs are to ensure correct weighment, prompt payment 
and creating environment for orderly marketing of agricultural produce in the 
market yards and settlement of disputes, etc. Regarding issue of Smart Card 
in recognition of the farmer sell ing his agricultural produce for public good and 
have share of profit, when the same produce is exported, it is mentioned that 
the maximum procurement of agricultural produce for public good is being 
coordinated by Department of Food and Public Distributio n with different 
agencies in the country. Accordingly, the share of the profit to the farmer from 
the agricultural produce sold by him is to be given by these agencies which are 
not covered under the domain of State APMC Act as the Act has to ensure 
correct weighment, prompt payment and creating environment for orderly 
marketing of agricultural produce in the market yards and settlement of 
disputes, etc.  
(Vide Ministry of Agriculture (Department of Agriculture & Co -operation), 
Directorate of Economics & Statistics Letter No. F.No. 7/19/2007 -FES-ES 
dated 16 July, 2009). 
 
Comments of the Committee 

For comments of the Committee please refer to Para No. 1. 13 of 
Chapter I of this Report.   
 
Inclusion of more crops under MSP 
(Recommendation para No.5) 
  
The Committee have been informed that presently 24 agricultural 
produce viz. Paddy, Jowar, Bajra, Maize, Ragi, Arhar (Tur), Moong, Urad, 
Cotton, Groundnut in Shell, Sunflower seed, Soyabean, Sesamum Nigerseed, 
Tobacco, Wheat, Barley, Gram, Masur (Lentil), Rape seed/Mustard, Safflower, 
Cropra, Jute, and Sugarcane are covered under the MSP.  The Committee 
note that there have been demands for inclusion of banana crop, green 
coconut, red variety of rice (common in Kerala), arecanut, tea, coffee, spices, 
tomato, pot ato and other cash crops for fixation of MSP.  But in view of the 
subsidy involved, their perishable nature and existence of Market Intervention 
Scheme, the system of minimum support price was not introduced.  The 
Committee are unable to buy this argument of the Government and also that in 
the absence of MSP, how the value of subsidy is calculated under MIS for 
these crops.  The Committee are of the opinion that in order to prepare 
ourselves to face the climate change due to global warming, the Government 
should widen the food security basket by including tubers (viz. potato, onions, 
etc.) and orphan crops such as minor millets (viz. kodu, ramdana, etc.), 
banana crops, red variety of rice (Kerala), green coconut and other such crops 
under MSP.  In several co untries the tubers/crops such as potatoes, onions, 
etc. and minor millets are recognized as food crops.  The Committee, therefore 
recommend that these crops should also be covered under MSP and ensure 
that adequate storage and processing facilities are pro vided to save these 
crops from going waste. 
Reply of the Government 
The Government is implementing Market Intervention Scheme (MIS) on 
the request of a State/UT Government for procurement of agricultural and 
horticultural commodities generally perishable in nature and not covered under 
Price Support Scheme. The MIS is implemented in order to protect the 
growers of these commodities from making distress sale in the event of 
bumper crop when there is glut in the market and the prices tend to fall below 
economic levels/cost of production. Procurement under MIS is made by 

NAFED as Central agency and by the State designated agencies. Losses, if 
any, incurred by the procuring agencies are shared between Central 
Government and the concerned State Government on 50:5 0 basis (75:25 in 
case of North-Eastern States) restricted to 25% of the procurement cost. Profit, 
if any, earned by the procuring agencies is retained by them.   
The proposal for implementing MIS received from any State 
Government/ UT administration is evaluated as per MIS guidelines in this 
Department in consultation with concerned Departments/Divisions and 
State/UT Government. The Market Intervention Price (MIP) is fixed at the cost 
of production.     
 
(Vide Ministry of Agriculture (Department of Agriculture & Co -operation), 
Directorate of Economics & Statistics Letter No. F.No. 7/19/2007 -FES-ES 
dated 16 July, 2009). 
 
Comments of the Committee 
For comments of the Committee please refer to Para No. 1. 16 of 
Chapter I of this Report.   
 
Farmer as Skilled Labour 
(Recommendation para No.8) 
 
The Committee note that CACP recommends only the Minimum 
Support Prices with an objective to provide the farmers a reasonable and 
remunerative price of a commodity. The cost of nourishment of farmers, their 
income parity with the Government employees are not taken into account with 
the result that the farmers are not even treated as skilled labour and the living 
standard of small and marginal farmer is even below that of a Group “D” 
Government employee, in terms of his standard of living, reading & educating 
his children and his monthly income, though they fully engage themselves in 
agriculture and allied activities for the whole day and even at night. 
 
The Committee have been apprised by the Government that farmers 
skill is certainly taken into consideration as one of the cost factor for fixing 
MSP, however, the value of family labour is imputed at actual market rate paid 
to the hired labour or statutory  wage rate. The Committee recommend that as 
has been admitted by the Government, considering the managerial skill and 
experience in various agricultural activities such as ploughing and watering the 

fields, roping of different crops at different times and other related activities 
such as rearing of animals, etc., the farmer and his family members should be 
treated as skilled labour and CACP should also treat the farmers that way 
while computing the value of their family labour and the statutory wage rate or  
actual market rate of farmers labour should also be revised accordingly. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
As per the existing methodology farmer and his family members are not 
treated as skilled labour. However, the manpower employed in agriculture is 
treated as agricultural labour. The relevant market wages for ploughing, 
sowing, weeding, transplanting and ha rvesting etc. are considered to 
determine the cost of labour engaged in agriculture.  
(Vide Ministry of Agriculture (Department of Agriculture & Co -operation), 
Directorate of Economics & Statistics Letter No. F.No. 7/19/2007 -FES-ES 
dated 16 July, 2009). 
 
Comments of the Committee 
For comments of the Committee please refer to Para No. 1. 19 of 
Chapter I of this Report.    
 
  

Crop Loan  
(Recommendation para No.9) 
 
The Committee have been apprised that farmers are provided short 
term crop loan from Commercial Banks, Regional Rural Banks, Cooperative 
Credit Structure, etc. upto Rs.3 lakh at 7% rate of interest. The Committee are 
of the considered view that keeping in view the MSP announced for different 
crops, the loan amount of Rs.3 lakh is quite low and the ra te of interest is very 
high.  As the MSP for agricultural crops is not remunerative enough for the 
farmers to take up agriculture as first priority to earn their livelihood, the 
Committee, therefore, recommend that the loan amount should be raised to 
Rs.5 lakh and as suggested by the National Commission on Farmers, the rate 
of interest in crop loan to farmers should be fixed at the rate of 4%. 
 
The Committee further recommend that the period of calculating the 
rate of interest should be fixed from the date of sowing crops to the date when 
he farmers actually gets the money in hand after selling his crops i.e. based on 
the cycle of the Rabi or Kharif crop season. This total sum of interest paid on 
crop loans during this period should be taken as one of the co st factors while 
calculating the total cost fixation of MSP. 
 
Reply of the Government 
As of now, there is no proposal either to increase the loan amount of 
crop loan to Rs.5.00 lakhs on principal amount for farmers or to extend crop 
loans to farmers at the rate of 4%. However, banks have already been advised 
to follow the practice of charging interest on agricultural advances linked to 
crop seasons. Banks have also been advised to charge interest on agricultural 
advances for long duration crops at annual re sts. For short duration crops and 
other allied agricultural activities banks are advised to take into consideration 
due dates fixed on the basis of fluidity with borrowers and 
harvesting/marketing season while charging interest and compounding the 
same if the loan/instalment becomes overdue. As per CCEA decision on the 
recommendations of the Expert Committee to examine Methodological Issues 
in the Fixation of Minimum Support Prices, interest rate of 12.5% is already 
being allowed on working capital for half the crop period.  

(Vide Ministry of Agriculture (Department of Agriculture & Co -operation), 
Directorate of Economics & Statistics Letter No. F.No. 7/19/2007 -FES-ES 
dated 16 July, 2009). 
 
Comments of the Committee  
For comments of the Committee please refe r to Para No. 1. 22 of 
Chapter I of this Report.    
  

 
 
 
CHAPTER V 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF 
 WHICH REPLIES OF THE FINAL REPLIES OF GOVERNMENT 
 ARE STILL AWAITED  
 
 
Agriculture Subsidies 
(Recommendation para No.10) 
 
The Committee have noted that agricultural subsidies are given by both 
the Central and the State Governments.  The Central Government gives 
subsidies on fertilizers, seeds, machinery, etc. and the State Governments 
give subsidies for irrigation, power, etc. under various schemes. The estimated 
subsidy on fertilizer alone is Rs.60649.36 crore for 2008 -09.  How and to 
whom this subsidy is given remains a puzzle to be solved, as the total cropped 
area/net sown area and cropping intensity have been stagnating o r rather 
decreasing over the years.  On the one hand, it is an admitted fact that a 
gradual degradation of natural resources through excessive and inappropriate 
use of chemicals fertilizers has affected the soil quality, resulting in stagnation 
in the yield levels, and on the other hand, Government are increasing subsidy 
on chemical fertilizers and the bio -fertilizers and manures are yet to be 
considered for any subsidy or financial help. So the Committee are unable to 
comprehend as to how the amount of sub sidy on chemical fertilizers is 
increasing year after year and is given in the name of agriculture subsidy with 
no direct benefit to the farmers.  The current system of fertilizer subsidy has 
allowed the inefficient units to persist.  The Committee view this fact seriously.  
Even in Economic Survey 2007 -08, Go vernment has admitted that a large 
proportion of fertilizer subsidy goes to the fertilizer units, which is paid on a 
(group based) cost plus basis. The current pricing mechanism of fertilizers has 
also encouraged nutrient imbalance in the agricultur e land. The excessive use 
of urea is a bias against micro -nutrients.  As against the desirable NPK 
proportion of 4:2:1, the average use us 6.2:4:1. The Steering Committee of the 
Planning Commission has also o bserved that “because nitrogenous fertilizers 
are subsidized more than potassic and phosphatic fertilizers, the subsidy tends 
to benefit more the crops and regions which require higher use of nitrogenous 
fertilizers as compared to crops and regions which require higher application  

 
 
 
P&K”.  The excessive use of urea has also affected the soil profile adversely.  
A healthy plan growth is possible only if all the 16 nutrients are available in 
soil. The farmers should be encouraged to use bio -fertilizers and manures and 
for that they should be given monetary help so that the fertility of the soil is 
increased resulting in higher production of crops. 
 
The Committee also note that the prices of GM/Hybrid/high yield 
varieties of seeds are hardly subject to any re gulation, which need to be 
regulated without any further delay. 
  
The Committee recommend that as the price mechanism of chemical 
fertilizers have created nutrient imbalance in the agriculture land it needs to be 
balanced and farmers should be given fertil izer as well as water and power 
subsidy directly, rather than the producers and suppliers, as it is the farmers 
who knows better about the quality/quantity of seeds, fertilizers and water to 
be used in the fields to make the agricultural production a profitable avocation. 
Reply of the Government 
 
The pricing of subsidized fertilizers in the country has been rationalized 
w.e.f 18 th June, 2008 wherein the cost of nutrients NP&K has been made 
uniform across all subsidized fertilizers to control overuse of urea  due to the 
fact that the price of “N” in urea was much lower than that in complex 
fertilizers.  
 
          So far as recommendation to provide subsidy directly to farmers is 
concerned, the proposal was flagged for consideration in Group of Minister 
(GOM), which has been constituted under the Chairmanship of Agriculture 
Minister to look into sustainabl e use of fertilizers and pertinent pricing and 
subsidy issues. The GOM in its final recommendations has not recommended 
any change in the existing delivery mechanism for fertilizer subsidy through the 
producers. However, as announced by the Finance Ministe r in his Budget 
speech 2008, the Government is exploring the feasibility of nutrient based 
subsidy and other alternative modes of delivery of subsidy to the farmers.  

 
 
 
The National Seed Policy of 2002 calls upon the Government of India to 
make best quali ty seeds and planting material available to Indian farmers to 
increase productivity. In this context, price control regime may have 
detrimental effect and may discourage private seed companies to make quality 
seed available in Indian markets, including hig h yielding varieties and hybrids, 
which have proved to be of immense benefit to Indian farmers. This underlines 
the importance of non-regulation of prices of seeds in India. The price of seeds 
should also be decided by the producers themselves as it is don e for 
agricultural equipment and machinery, pesticides etc. 
(Vide Ministry of Agriculture (Department of Agriculture & Co -operation), 
Directorate of Economics & Statistics Letter No. F.No. 7/19/2007 -FES-ES 
dated 16 July, 2009). 
 
Comments of the Committee  
For comments of the Committee please refer to Para No. 1. 25 of 
Chapter I of this Report.     
 
Forward Market Trading 
(Recommendation para No.12) 
  
The Committee note that forward market in agricultural commodities 
enable the stakeholders/market participant s to hedge their price risk in an 
open market environment. It also helps them in price discovery based on 
which the producers take informed decisions. But the Committee feel that 
forward market in India till now, has not been beneficial to the farmers, or to 
the consumers, however, the traders in the market or say the middle man is 
earning at the cost of farmers. 82% of the farming community in India is 
constituted of small and marginal farmers who are resource poor and not 
aware of the pros and cons of the  speculative price discovery in the forward 
market trading, hence unable to take its advantage. These farmers have to be 
protected against any sharp fall in the prices of their produce. Recently the 
commodity market has attracted a lot of investment and th ey have earned a lot 
through speculative price discover of the prices of the commodities in 
international market. Again the loser is the farmer, who is unaware of such  

 
 
market forces, who fix up the price of their food grains, without going through 
the heat and strain of growing the food grains, the middle man fixes their 
prices and earn huge profit, at the cost of farmers‟ earnings.  
The forward market can wait but the s mall farmers can‟t wait, as they 
are forced to sell their produce just after it is harvested, so the remunerative 
price at the time of harvesting is more important to these farmers, than higher 
price at a future date. The present trade must be fair than pr ofit making future 
trade. The future trade benefit the big farmers, traders and exporters and it 
needs a large number of warehouses at different places to store the 
agricultural produce for future trade which can be built only with an extra 
expenditure by the Government as well as the private sector.  
  
Forward market trading can boost the sale artificially by speculating the 
price at a future date and the consumers have to pay a higher price, even after 
a bumper crop near their home. We should remember tha t farmers is the 
largest group of consumers of their produce, once they sell it at a fixed price of 
MSP at the harvesting time, they also suffer when buy the same food crops in 
future.   
 
The Farmers all over India have to be made aware about the future 
trading in agricultural commodity so that they know the prices of their 
commodities in futures market well in advance and plan their production 
accordingly. Unless this is done and minimum contract size of agricultural 
commodity for trading is fixed and a fa rmers-friendly platform by restructuring 
agricultural commodity trading is set up, the Indian agricultural commodity 
futures market should not be linked to international futures trading market. As 
has been admitted by the representatives of the Ministry of  Agriculture that 
markets are not always perfect and market failures an market imperfections 
are well established and we cannot entirely depend on the market, particularly 
in a developing country like ours with large number of small farmers and where 
there is a lot of non availability of even market infrastructure, communication 
facilities, etc., the Committee, therefore, recommend that future trading in 
agricultural commodities should be discouraged to contain the speculative and  

 
paper trading which gene rally result in artificial rise in prices. The Committee 
also recommend that the Government should expedite the setting up of a 
regulatory authority for forward market trading on the lines of Securities and 
Exchange Board of India.  
 
Reply of the Government 
 
The primary role of the futures trading is price discovery and price risk 
management. Price discoveries in futures market help the producers, namely 
the agriculturists, to plan their agricultural operations. The producer armed with 
the knowledge of the futures, can avoid resorting to distress sale. He is also 
empowered to properly negotiate with the private trader regarding the prices 
having regard to the informed circumstances.  
         
Regarding whether and to what extent futures trading in a gricultural 
commodities influence the wholesale and retail pries of these commodities, the 
Government had set up an Expert Committee to study this aspect. The 
analysis made by the Expert Committee led it to conclude that no strong 
conclusion can be drawn on whether introduction of futures trade is associated 
with decrease or increase in spot price volatility. Although inflation increased 
post-futures in some sensitive commodities but it is not possible to make any 
general claim that inflation accelerated mo re in commodities with futures 
trading. The Committee further opined that the period during which futures 
trading has been in operation is too short to discriminate adequately between 
the effect of opening up of futures markets and what might simply be nor mal 
cyclical adjustment. FMC had also assigned a study to Indian Institute of 
Bangalore (IIMB) to analyze the performance of futures markets and their 
impact on farmers. The study has concluded that market fundamental seems 
to be the major factors behind changes in the prices of these commodities.  
          To ensure that the benefits of the futures market reach the farmers and 
they are able to derive benefits of the advance price signals, the National 
Exchanges are required to widely disseminate price inf ormation through (a) 
Their own web sites, (b) print media, (c) T.V. Channels and (d) Radio. The 
FMC, Exchanges, AGMARKNET are also working on a project to place ticker 
boards in APMCs to disseminate future prices on real time basis so that  

 
 
farmers may t ake appropriate decision about acreage and marketing of their 
produce. FMC proposes to cover 1000 APMC mandis/rural post offices in the 
current year but in the long term to cover all such mandis and public places 
frequently visited by the farmers. The Gove rnment has also initiated steps 
towards creation of awareness about the concept of futures market among 
various stake holders including farmers. The Commission has launched an 
awareness campaign in collaboration with the recognized exchanges, various 
Government organizations, farmers representative bodies, Banks, Department 
of Posts, major agricultural universities/institutions, B -schools, various 
institutions involved in rural development such as NABARD, prestigious 
institutes involved in improving manager ial skills of professionals involved in 
rural development and several other organizations aimed at creating 
awareness among various stake holders regarding the useful role played by 
the futures market, towards price discovery and risk management and educat e 
them on how they can participate in the futures market. The Commission has 
organized 114 programmes in 2007 -08, of which 75 programmes were 
exclusively for farm sector. As regards the compulsion of farmers to sell 
immediately after the harvest as they ar e not in position to wait to get better 
price in future, it is only the futures market which may enable the farmer to sell 
his produce in the present at a price which is likely to prevail in future.  
 
         The commodity Exchanges as well as the Regulat or are making all 
possible efforts to put the infrastructure in place so that the farmers are 
benefited. Besides, the very facility of sale at a future price enables various 
stockholders to sell in future and buy in the present if there is a glut in the sp ot 
market because of harvest season. This reduces pressure of sale in the spot 
market thereby stabilizing the prices in the present, i.e., in the spot market. 
Therefore, even if the farmer is not able to participate directly in the immediate 
future he can be benefited by the price discovery taking place on the 
Commodity Exchanges platform. This price discovery takes into account the 
off-season demand of the commodity in a more transparent and rational 
manner, thereby, avoiding unrealistically depressed pric es because of over 
supply in the spot market at the time of harvest. 

  
 
The regulatory framework needs to be overhauled to bring it on par with 
those of similar regulators like SEBI, RBI and restructured and strengthen the 
Forward Market Commission to meet  the regulatory challenges. In this 
connection, a Bill to amend the Forward Contracts (Regulation) Act, 1952 was 
introduced in Parliament on 13.03.2008. 
(Vide Ministry of Agriculture (Department of Agriculture & Co -operation), 
Directorate of Economics & St atistics Letter No. F.No. 7/19/2007 -FES-ES 
dated 16 July, 2009). 
 
 Comments of the Committee  
For comments of the Committee please refer to Para No. 1. 25 of 
Chapter I of this Report.      
 
 
 
NEW DELHI;                    BASUDEB ACHARIA 
16  December, 2009                    Chairman 
25 Agrahayana,1931 (Saka)               Committee on Agriculture
            

APPENDIX 
COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE 
(2009-10) 
 
MINUTES OF THE THIRTEENTH SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE  
 
The Committee sat on Wednesday, the 16 th December, 2009 from 1530 
hours to 1600 hours in Committee Room „C‟, Parliament House Annexe, New 
Delhi.   
PRESENT 
 
Shri Basudeb Acharia     - Chairman 
 
 
MEMBERS 
 
Lok Sabha 
 
2. Shri Narayan Singh Amlabe 
3. Shri Thangso Baite  
4. Smt. Shruti Choudhry 
5. Shri Sk. Nurul Islam 
6. Shri Naranbhai Kachhadia 
7. Shri Prabodh Panda 
8. Shri Hukmdeo Narayan Yadav 
 
Rajya  Sabha 
 
9. Shri Sharad Anantrao Joshi 
10. Shri Mohd. Ali Khan 
11. Shri Khekiho Zhimomi 
 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Shri S. Bal Shekar    -  Joint Secretary 
2.        Shri P.V.L.N. Murthy            -        Director 
3.        Shri P.C. Koul                      -        Additional Director 
 

2. At the outset the Hon‟ble Chairman welcomed the members to the 
sitting of the Committee. Thereafter, the Committee took  up the following Draft 
Reports for consideration:-   
 
*(i) *** *** *** *** *** *** *** *** *** ***
  
 
 *(ii) *** *** *** *** *** *** *** *** *** ***
  
 
(iii) Action Taken Report on 41 st Report (14t h Lok Sabha) of the 
Committee on Agriculture (2007-2008) on „The Pricing Policy of 
Agricultural Produce‟. 
 
After some discussion, the Committee adopted the said draft Reports. 
 
3. The Committee, then, authorized the Chairman to finalise the above 
Draft Reports after getting them factually verified form the concerned 
Ministry/Department and present the same to the Houses of Parliament.  
 
 
The Committee then adjourned. 
 
***** 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
*Matter not related to this Report. 

ANNEXURE 
 
(Vide Para 4 of Introduction of the Report) 
 
ANALYSIS OF ACTION TAKEN BY GOVERNMENT ON 
THE FORTY-FIRST REPORT OF COMMITTEE 
ON AGRICULTURE (14TH LOK SABHA) 
  
 
(i)  Total number of Recommendations             12 
 
(ii) Recommendations/Observations which have been 
Accepted by the Government  
 
Serial Nos. 1, 2, 3, 6, 7 and 11 
 
Total          6 
 
Percentage                 50 %
   
 
(iii) Recommendations/Observations which the Committee 
Do not desire to pursue in view of the Government‟s replies  
 
Total                  NIL
        
Percentage                   0% 
 
(iv) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies 
 of the Government have not been accepted by the Committee 
 
Serial Nos.  4, 5, 8 and 9 
 
Total          4
   
 
Percentage             33.33% 
 
(v) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which  
 Final replies of the Government are still awaited 
 
Serial Nos.  10 and 12 
 
Total            2
   
 
Percentage            16.67%
  