 
 
      
     COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE 
    (2012-2013) 
 
 
 
 
FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA 
 
 
 
 
MINISTRY OF AGRICULTURE 
(DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE AND COOPERATION)  
 
 
‘THE NATIONAL COOPERATIVE DEVELOPMENT 
CORPORATION (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2012’ 
  
 
 
 
FORTY FIFTH REPORT 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
MARCH, 2013 / CHAITRA, 1935 (Saka) 
 
 
45 

 
 
2 
 
FORTY FIFTH REPORT 
 
COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE 
(2012-2013) 
 
 
         (FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
MINISTRY OF AGRICULTURE 
(DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE AND COOPERATION) 
 
 
 
‘THE NATIONAL COOPERATIVE DEVELOPMENT 
CORPORATION (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2012’ 
  
 
 
         Presented to Lok Sabha on           22.03.2013           
     Laid on the Table of Rajya Sabha on        22.03.2013 
 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
MARCH, 2013 / CHAITRA, 1935 (Saka)  
 


 
 
3 
 
 
COA No. 268 
 
 
 
 
 
 
     
         
         
         
         
 
         
         
         
Price :  Rs. 
         
         
         
         
         
 
 
 
         
     
                     
 
 
         
© 2012 By Lok Sabha Secretariat 
 
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of Business in            
Lok Sabha (Fourteenth Edition) and Printed by  
 
  

 
 
4 
 
CONTENTS 
PAGE 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE (2012-13)    (iii) 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE (2011-12)    (v) 
INTRODUCTION         (vii) 
 
I REPORT         1 
  
(i) Introduction         1 
(ii) Amendments Proposed       3 
(iii) Justification         3 
(iv) Producer Companies       7 
a) Evolution        7 
b) Legal Position        9 
c) Evaluation        11 
(v) Impact on Cooperative Sector Funding     14 
   
  
APPENDICES 
        
   
 I Minutes of the 37th Sitting of the Committee held     
on 27 June, 2012 (2011-12).       30  
 II Minutes of the 39th Sitting of the Committee held 
on 13 July, 2012 (2011-12).      33 
III Minutes of the 43rd Sitting of the Committee held  
on 09 August, 2012 (2011-12).      35 
IV Minutes of the 44th Sitting of the Committee held  
on 28th August, 2012 (2011-12).      37 
V Minutes of the 10th Sitting of the Committee held  
on 19th December, 2012 (2012-13).     39 
VI Minutes of the 14th Sitting of the Committee held  
on 15th January, 2013 (2012-13).      41 
VII Minutes of the 15th Sitting of the Committee held  
on 22nd January, 2013 (2012-13).      43 
VIII Minutes of the 19th Sitting of the Committee held  
on 5th March, 2013 (2012-13).      45 
IX Minutes of the 20th Sitting of the Committee held  
on 20th March, 2013 (2012-13).      47  
         
ANNEXURE 
 
I ‘The National Cooperative Development Corporation  
(Amendment) Bill, 2012‟       49 
  
 (i)  

 
 
5 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE (2012-13) 
 
 
Shri Basudeb Acharia   -   Chairman 
 
MEMBERS 
 
LOK SABHA 
 
2.  Shri Narayansingh Amlabe 
3.  Shri Sanjay Singh Chauhan 
4.  Shri H.D. Devegowda 
5.  Smt. Ashwamedh Devi 
6.  Shri L. Raja Gopal 
7.
  
 Smt. Paramjit Kaur Gulshan 
8.  Shri Anant Kumar Hegde 
9.  Shri Premdas  Katheria 
10.  Shri P. Kumar 
11.  Dr. (Smt.) Botcha Jhansi Lakshmi 
12.  Sardar Sukhdev Singh Libra 
13.  Dr. Jyoti Mirdha 
14.  Shri Naranbhai Kachhadia 
15.  Shri Devji M. Patel 
16.  Smt. Bhavana Gawali (Patil) 
17.  Shri Jagdish Singh Rana 
18.  Shri Rajaiah Siricilla 
19.  Shri Patel Kishanbhai V.  
20.  Dr. Vinay Kumar Pandey ‘Vinnu’ 
21.  Shri Hukamdeo Narayan Yadav 
  
 RAJYA SABHA 
 
22.  Shri Satyavrat Chaturvedi 
23.  Shri A. Elavarasan 
24.  Smt. Mohsina Kidwai 
25.  Shri Dharmendra Pradhan 
26.  Dr. K.V.P. Ramachandra Rao 
27.  Shri Parshottam Khodabhai Rupala 
28.  Shri Rajpal Singh Saini 
29.  Shri Shivanand Tiwari 
30.  Shri S. Thangavelu 
31.  Shri Darshan Singh Yadav 
 
 
 
 
(iii) 

 
 
6 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE (2011-12) 
 
 
Shri Basudeb Acharia   -   Chairman 
 
MEMBERS 
 
LOK SABHA 
 
2.  Shri Narayansingh Amlabe 
3.  Shri K.C. Singh ‘Baba’ 
4.  Shri Thangso Baite 
5.  Smt. Shruti Choudhary 
6.  Smt. Ashwamedh Devi 
7.  Shri Biren Singh Engti 
8.  Shri Anant Kumar Hegde 
9.  Shri Deepender Singh Hooda 
10.  Shri Sk. Nurul Islam 
11.  Shri Naranbhai Kachhadia 
12.  Shri Premdas  
13.  Shri Surendra Singh Nagar  
14.  Shri Devji M. Patel 
15.  Shri Vitthalbhai Hansrajbhai Radadiya 
16.  Shri Nripendra Nath Roy 
17.  Shri Jagdish Thakor 
18.  Shri Laxman Tudu 
19  Shri D. Venugopal 
20.  Shri Hukmadeo Narayan Yadav 
21.  Shri Ramakant Yadav 
  
 RAJYA SABHA 
 
22.  Shri Shashi Bhusan Behera 
*23.  Shri Narendra Budania 
*24.  Shri Satyavrat Chaturvedi 
25.  Shri A. Elavarasan 
*26.  Shri Vinay Katiyar 
27.  Shri Mohd. Ali Khan 
28.  Shri Upendra Kushwaha 
29.  Shri Bharatsinh Prabhatsinh Parmar 
30.  Shri Rajpal Singh Saini 
31.  Shri S. Thangavelu 
 
 ______________________________________________________________ 
*   Nominated to the Committee on 04.05.2012.         
  
(v) 

 
 
7 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
I, the Chairman, Committee on Agriculture having been authorized by the 
Committee to present the Report on their behalf, present this Forty -fifth Report 
on „The National Cooperative Development Corporation (Amendment) Bill, 2012‟.  
 
2.  „The National Coope rative Development Corporation (Amendment) Bill, 
2012‟ was introduced in Lok Sabha on 17 May, 2012. The Speaker under Rule 
331E (1) (b) of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of Business in Lok Sabha 
referred the Bill to the Committee on 25 May, 2012 for examination and Report.  
 
3. With a view to complete their examination of the Bill, the Committee 
sought two extensions from Hon‟ble Speaker, Lok Sabha for presentation of their 
Report.  The first extension was upto the end of the Winter Session, 2012.  The 
second extension was upto the first half of the Budget Session, 2013. 
 
4.  The Committee were briefed by the representatives of the Ministry of 
Agriculture (Department of Agriculture and Cooperation) and National 
Cooperative Development Corporation on 27 J une, 2012.  To gain the holistic 
view of the „producer companies‟, the Committee had a Sitting with Ministry of 
Corporation Affairs on 13 July, 2012 and with Department of Agriculture and 
Cooperation, Ministry of Corporation Affairs, Ministry of Law and Ju stice 
(Legislative Department) and National Cooperative Development Corporation on 
09 August, 2012.  The Committee took the oral evidence of Prof. Y.K. Alagh who 
chaired the „High Powered Committee for Formation and Conversion of 
Cooperative Business into Companies‟ on 15 January, 2013. Finally, the 
representatives of Department of Agriculture and Cooperation, Ministry of 
Corporate Affairs and National Cooperative Development Corporation appeared 
before the Committee on 22 January, 2013. 
 
5.  The Committee at their Sitting held on 20 March, 2013 considered and 
adopted         the Report. 
  
6.  The Committee wish to express their thanks to the Officers of the Ministry 
of Agriculture (Department of Agriculture and Cooperation), Ministry of Corporate 
Affairs an d Ministry of Law and Justice (Legislative Department) for placing 
before them the material and information in connection with examination of the 
Bill.  
 
7. For facility of reference, the Observations/Recommendations of the 
Committee have been printed in bold at the end the Report.  
 
 
 
NEW DELHI;          BASUDEB ACHARIA  
20 March, 2013         Chairman,  
29 Phalguna, 1934 (Saka)                          Committee on Agriculture. 
(vii) 

 
 
8 
 
REPORT 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
The National Cooperative Development Corporation (Amendment) Bill, 
2012 was referred to the Standing Committee on Agriculture by Hon‟ble Speaker, 
Lok Sabha on 25 May, 2012 for examination and Report.  The text of the Bill is at 
Annexure – I. 
 
1.2 The Committee have been informed that the National Cooperative 
Development Corporation Act, 1962 provides for the incorporation and regulation 
of a corporation for the purpose of planning and promoting programmes for 
production, processing, marketing, stor age, export and import of agricultural 
produce, food stuffs, industrial goods, livestock, and other commodities and 
services on co-operative principles and for related matters. 
 
1.3 The Committee have also noted that Section 9 of the National Cooperative 
Development Corporation Act, 1962 provides for the function s of National 
Cooperative Development Corporation (NCDC).  It inter alia states as follows:  
(1) Subject to the provisions of this Act, the functions of the Corporation 
shall be to plan, promote and finance programmes through co -
operatives societies, for -   
(a) the production, processing, marketing, storage, export and import 
of agricultural produce, foodstuffs, poultry feed and notified 
commodities;  

 
 
9 
 
(b) the collection, processing,  marketing, storage and export of minor 
forest produce. 
(2) In particular and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing 
provision, the Corporation may –  
(a) advance loans or grant subsidies to State Government s for 
financing co -operatives society and for employment of staff for 
implementing programmes of cooperative development; 
(b) provide funds to State G overnment for financing co -operative 
societies for the purchase of agricultural produce, foodstuffs, 
livestock, poultry feed, industrial  goods, notified commodities and 
notified services on behalf of the Central Government.    
(c) plan and promote programmes through co -operative societies for 
the supply of seeds, manures, fertilizers, agricultural implements 
and other articles for the development of agricultural produce.  
(d) provide loans and grants directly to the national level co -operative 
societies and other co -operative societies having objects extending 
beyond one State;  
(e) provide loans to co -operatives societies on the guarantee of State 
Governments or in the case of co -operative societies in the Union 
territories, on the guarantee of Central Government; 
  Provided that no such guarantee shall be required in cases 
in which security to the satisfaction of the Corporation is furnish ed 
by the borrowing co-operative society;  

 
 
10 
 
(f) participate in the share capital of the national level co -operative 
societies and other c o-operative societies having objects extending 
beyond one State.     
(3) The Corporation shall so exercise its functions  under this section as 
not to interfere with the activities of the Khadi and Village Industries 
Commission established under the Khadi and Village Industries 
Commission Act, 1956.  
 
AMENDMENTS PROPOSED 
 
1.4 The major amendments proposed in the said Amendment Bill relate to: 
(i) Include producer company  in the definition of „Cooperative Society‟ 
under „The National Cooperative Development Corporation  Act, 
1962‟. [Section 2(c)] 
(ii) Empowering NCDC to provide loans and grants to the producer 
companies and the cooperative societies engaged in notified services 
and trading in notified commodities. [Section 9(2)(dd)]  
(iii) Advancing loans and granting subsidies from the National 
Cooperative Development Fund to State Governments to enable 
them to subscribe  to the share capital of cooperative societies or 
otherwise financing them only in such manner and to such extent as 
the Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, 
specify. [Section 13(2)(a)]    
 
JUSTIFICATION 
 
1.5 The Statement of Objects and Reasons appended to  the Bill states that 
the producer companies can play a major role in improving the livelihood of 
primary producers and boosting growth of rural economy.  However, the ma jor 
impediment being faced by the producer companies in  their expansion and 

 
 
11 
 
growth is the lack of availability of institutional support and lending.   Thus, it is 
proposed to include them in the definition of cooperative societies so that they 
can get financial assistance through NCDC.   
 
1.6 It has been furthe r stated that t he proposed amendment to bring the 
producer companies in the definition of the cooperative societies as notified in 
clause (c) of section 2 of National Cooperative Development Corporation Act, 
1962 would provide an additional source of credi t and financial support through 
NCDC to the producer companies, which mostly comprise of small and marginal 
farmers.  The proposed amendment would enable the NCDC to plan, promote 
and finance programmes for the benefit of the producers through cooperative 
societies including producer companies . Clause (a) of sub -section (2) of section 
13 of the National Cooperative Development Corporation Act, 1962 provides that 
NCDC shall maintain a Fund.  The said Fund shall, inter alia , be applied for 
advancing loans and granting subsidies to State governments on such terms and 
conditions as the corporations may deem fit for the purpose of enabling State 
Government to subscribe to the share capital of cooperation societies or for 
otherwise financing cooperative societies.  It is also proposed to amend said 
clause (a) to provide that such advancing of loans and granting of subsidies shall 
be in such manner and to such extent as may be specified by the Central 
Government by notification in Official Gazette. 
 
1.7 During the Sitting of the Committee on 27 June, 2012, Secretary, 
Department of Agriculture and Cooperation gave the following justification for the 
inclusion of producer companies in the definition of cooperative societies:  

 
 
12 
 
“...the main idea behind the NCDC is n ot merely to develop cooperatives 
but through the cooperatives to promote people forming those 
cooperatives.  Cooperatives are just the nomenclature given for a 
grouping of people.  We thought that if the grouping of people is more 
comfortable under the nomenclature of a company, then the assistance of 
NCDC should not be denied to them. So, the whole idea was to provide 
the small farmer interest groups, the small self help groups, joint liability 
groups of farmers into viable commercial enterprises that wou ld be able to 
access credit and we thought that the best means to do so would be 
through an institution which is directly reportable to our Ministry rather 
than to the Ministry of Finance where all the other commercial and the 
rural banks work. That is one  part of it. Secondly, by this step of providing 
a larger market through the NCDC, we would also be strengthening the 
capacity of it.  We will be increasing the turnover of NCDC and we would 
be hopefully also be increasing the profits of NCDC and that woul d enable 
the NCDC to grow to an extent that it can cater more effectively through 
larger funding programmes for this sector”. 
 
1.8 Dwelling upon further on this aspect during the Oral Evidence on 09 
August, 2012 the witness further added: 
“We find that the  gap between the farm gate price and retail price is 
immense.  This is where I think the producer companies can step in, have 
the conglomeration of farmers, not only provide all the facilities but also 
provide them with necessary support services for marke ting and value 
addition and thereafter retail.  I think in the agricultural sector the role of 
the small producer companies would be extremely necessary for the 

 
 
13 
 
development of this sector because try as we might we may not be in a 
position to reach to the cooperatives of every nook and corner of the 
country”.  
 
1.9 On the aspect of expanding the portfolio of NCDC, the Secretary, 
Department of Agriculture and Cooperation, replied: 
 “By expanding portfolio of National Cooperative Development 
Corporation, we can increase our turnover so that we can expand our 
business, as we are drawing the Capital from market.  There is a slight 
difference on rate of interest of 1.5 to 2 percent.  The cooperative societies 
are getting lending at higher rate of interest.” 
 
1.10 When queried as to why the Government then took ten long years to bring 
the proposed amendment now when t he producer companies were included in 
the Companies Act, 1956 in 2002, the witness clarified:  
“...for the last more than 10 years or so we have been trying to constitute 
groups of farmers through structural arrangements like ATMA. The idea is 
to have a group of farmers, farmers‟ interest groups , they would be able to 
with the help of the Government and through development of backward 
and forward l inkages not only address their needs for various kinds of 
inputs including credit inputs but also linkages to the market thereby 
realise better returns for their produce. While we were doing this activity, 
we found that once after the development of the fa rmers‟ interest groups 
the next step, that is to form either joint liability groups which can access 
the loan from commercial institutions used to become difficult to 
operationalise because of the inherent weaknesses in the banking system 
to be able to reach out to the last mile. In most areas of the country where 
the cooperative credit institutions are strong the last mile coverage is done 
by the cooperative sector. The Committee is aware that in large parts of 
the country the cooperative sector is beset w ith problems and sometimes 

 
 
14 
 
credit is not available due to variety of reasons like lack of finance, lack of 
governance issues, lack of even professional management capacity”. 
 
PRODUCER COMPANIES  
(a) Evolution  
1.11 From the material furnished to the Committee, they observed that 
producer companies derive sustenance from the Companies Act, 1956.  Tracking 
the ev olution of producer companies , the Committee noted that the Ministry of 
Corporate Affairs had set -up a High Powered Committee for Formation and  
Conversion of Cooperative Business in Companies under the Chairmanship of 
Prof. Y.K. Alagh.  The Committee submitted its report in 2000.  The Companies 
Act, 1956 was, thereafter, amended in 2002 so as to treat the producer 
companies as companies.  With a view to get a holistic understanding of the finer 
points pertaining to producer companies, the Committee also took the Oral 
Evidence of the Ministry of Corporate Affairs on 13 July, 2012. 
 
1.12 When the Secretary of the Ministry of Corporate Affairs was asked about 
the r easons necessitating amendment s in the Companies Act, 1956 to include 
the producer companies , he  was unable to throw any light in the matter and 
stated: 
“I must be quite frank in this Committee that the proposal to include 
producer companies or to include this new concept of producer companies 
as company law did not emanate from the then Ministry of Company 
Affairs.  From the records, what we find is that the decision to have the 
High Powered Committee under this Ministry, that is, the presen t Ministry 
of Corporate Affairs, which was then the Ministry of Company Affairs, was 
taken by the Prime Minister‟s Office”. 

 
 
15 
 
 
1.13 When the Committee put the same question to Secretary, Department of 
Agriculture and Cooperation and also desired to know further from him about the 
initial communication of Prime Minister‟s Office with regard to producer 
companies, he testified: 
 “Many things came up when the Hon‟ble Committee took the 
evidence of the Secretary, MCA.  In order to corroborate with the facts 
when they enquired in their Ministry, they could not get it.  They enquired  
with us, but we also couldn‟t locate it, It was not traceable i n Prime 
Minister‟s Office also.” 
 
1.14 Both the Ministry of Agriculture and Ministry of Corporate Affairs  were 
asked to locate the relevant papers and submit them subsequently to the 
Committee.    However, in a written submission they informed that the  letter of 
the Prime Minister‟s Office (PMO), from which the idea of the producer company 
originated was not traceable at their and as also in PMO.  Keeping these 
developments in view , the Committee then decided to seek the views of Prof. 
Y.K. Algh, presently Chancellor, Gujarat Central University who had headed the 
Committee set-up in the context of producer companies  so as to have a better 
appreciation of the matter.  
 
1.15 Prof. Y.K. Alagh appeared before the Committee on 15  January, 2 013.  
He discussed the „equity‟ and „efficiency‟ principles enshrined in the concept of 
producer companies which is based on “one vote, one share ” principle of 
cooperatives.  Clarifying further on the equity principle and financial inclusion  for 
the benefit of the agriculture and allied sectors he stated: 

 
 
16 
 
“One vote, one share principle means that in the governance structure of 
the producer company, a small farmer will be there. That has to be there 
even when the producer company interacts with the big corporate or with 
NABARD. If that is there, then it is good; that is a structure -question. That 
is why, it has very correctly been put up to you, because structure can 
only be decided by the laws of the land, by the Parliament, not by saying 
that the small farmers are not a part of the corporate, that is not the issue. 
So, in the legislation, in the governing structure, both of the company 
itself, the small man and the small woman has to be represented. Also, 
this is a question which is to be addressed by t he Department of 
Agriculture and the Ministry of Corporate Affairs, what was originally 
intended was that if they have strategic alliances with other big groups, 
then they should be there in the governance structure. That is the surety 
so that this does no t become a way of big companies exploiting the small 
men. The NCDC does not have the freedom that a producer company can 
be lashed on to anybody without the necessary safeguards, or the 
Department of Agriculture and Cooperation”.  
 
1.16 He also brought to the notice of the Committee the uncertainty over the 
producer companies in the Companies Act, 1956, as there are demands for fresh 
legislation.  He stated: 
“we should try and strengthen the producer companies legislation in the 
Companies Act. Any attempt to belittle it should be avoided”. 
 
(b) Legal Position 
1.17 As stated previously in this Report, the producer companies were included 
in the Companies Act, 1956 in 2002 on the basis of the report of the High 
Powered Committee for Formation and Conversion of  Cooperative Business into 
Companies.  As of now, the producer companies are governed by Section 581A 
and 581B of the Companies Act, 1956.   The National Cooperative Development 
Corporation (Amendment) Bill, 2012 was referred to the Committee in May, 2012.  

 
 
17 
 
In between, however, the Government appointed a Committee under the 
Chairmanship of Dr. J.J.  Irani in 2005 to look into the entire gamut of company 
laws.  The said Committee in its report recommended exclusion of producer 
companies from Companies Act.  The Companies Act (Amendment) Bill, 2012 as 
passed by Lok Sabha on 18 December, 2012 does not contain the specific 
provisions relating to producer companies. When the Committee desired to know 
as to what would be the legal status of producer companies after the enactment 
of the Compa nies Act (Amendment) Bill, 2012,  Secretary, Department of 
Agriculture and Cooperation during the oral evidence before the Committee on 
22 January, 2013 stated:   
 
“Whether or not Producer Companies form a part of the Companies Act  or 
not is not relevant to the amendment we have proposed in NCDC Act.   
Firstly, even in regard to the Companies Act, Clause 465 provides that till 
a separate law is enacted for Producer Companies, the existing provisions 
of the existing Companies Act woul d continue to apply. So, as of now, the 
Producer Companies are covered under the Companies Act. But be that 
as it may, Sir, the amendment that we have proposed to the NCDC Act is 
merely to increase the portfolio of financing of NCDC so that Producer 
Companies also come within the ambit of the organizations which are 
eligible to receive funding from NCDC. That is the limited purpose of the 
amendment that we have proposed”. 
 
1.18 When the Committee sought the response of Secretary, Ministry of 
Corporate Affairs in the matter , he stated during the Oral Evidence on 13 July, 
2012: 
“As you are aware, there is a Companies Bill which is currently 
under the consideration of the Parliament.   In this Bill, there is 
provision which repeals the earlier Companies Act  of which the 
'producer companies' is a part.   It says that for the purpose of 
'producer companies', the old Companies Act will continue to 

 
 
18 
 
operate till such time a separate law on 'producer companies' is 
enacted.  Now we have written to the Ministry of Ag riculture 
pointing out to them this particular provision in the pr oposed 
Companies Bill and saying that they should take a view about 
enactment of a separate law or continuance on the 'producer 
companies'. 
Secondly, I must also mention that the Companies B ill is 
based primarily on the recommendations of the J.J. Irani 
Committee.  That Committee also recommended that 'producer 
companies' should out of the purview of the Companies Bill.   I 
may mention this fact because there are different views on the 
subject and I must also admit my inability to very clearly say 
what led to the origination of the idea.” 
 
(c) Evaluation  
1.19 The Statement of Objects and Reasons, appended to the text of the Bill 
mentions the lack of availability of institutional support and credit as a major 
impediment in expansion and growth of producer companies.  The Committee 
desired to know the bas is of such a finding and the result, thereof.  The 
Department of Agriculture and Cooperation furnished the Study , „Integration of 
small produc ers into Producer Companies‟  by NABARD Consultancy Services 
(NABCONS), on 27 February, 2013, which has surmised that “Low equity capital 
base is a problem of producer companies, as the members being small and 
marginal, find it difficult to subscribe to higher levels of equity.” 
 
1.20 The NABCONS study reveals that  even though the producer company 
legislation was expected to facilitate transformation of well -functioning 

 
 
19 
 
cooperatives into producer companies, very few cooperatives have exercised this 
option.  Out of the nine producer companies under study, only one producer 
company showed positive indicators for business viability. 
 
1.21 However, the NABCONS study affirms that the integration of small 
producers into producer company may not generally be a viabl e proposition, 
unless these organisations attains financial and management viability.  
NABCONS has further observed in the said report that the small and marginal 
producers have benefitted in term of better price realizations, alternate 
employment opportun ities and better payment, in almost nine producer 
companies studied, though the extent of such benefits realized, varied from case 
to case and remained closely linked to the financial performance of the producer 
company. 
 The major recommendations of the study by NABCONS are: 
  a) Inability to mobilize start-up capital. 
b) Primary members  are not the direct members of the 
producer company. 
 
c) Absence of wealth accumulation. 
d) Weak balance sheet, making difficult to access capital from 
market. 
 
e) Although, the Directors are primary producers, their role in 
understanding the business and taking important decision is 
minimal. 
 
f) Absence of long-term Business Development Plan. 
1.22 During the course of briefing, t he Department of Agriculture and 
Cooperation provided a list of 139 producer companies in the Country, out of 
which, only a few were related with the agricultural activities, and others were 

 
 
20 
 
related with services and marketing.  The Secretary, Department of Agriculture 
and Cooperation when asked how this has happened when the producer 
companies are to consist of the primary producers only, stated during the briefing 
on 27 June, 2012:  
“…these are 139 producer companies in the country.  A large number of 
them are outside the agricultural field.   They are not covered under the 
NCDC Act because they are mandated to the Government”. 
 
1.23 Further, clarifying in the matter, the representative of Ministry of Corporate 
Affairs, during the Oral Evidence on 9 August, 2012 stated: 
“…as on date the producer companies in the entire country, as registered, 
is 337.  Out of these 63 companies are such which are not producer companies.  
They were wrongly entered and were taken out.  So, factually the number of 
producer companies is 274”. 
 
1.24 On being asked about such low number of producer companies, the 
representative of Ministry of Law and Justice ( Legislative Department ) stated 
during the Oral Evidence on 9 August , 2012: 
 
 “As on today, though the Companies Act provide for and make enabling 
provision for registration or incorporation of producer company but I think 
because of the reason that the producer compan ies - when they are 
formed they have to work on their own – may be for this reason during the 
last one decade only a fe w hundred companies could be formed.  Once, 
this company is brought within the ambit of the definition of cooperative 
societies under the NCDC Act, then it will be attractive provision for the 
producer companies to form such producer companies and take the  
benefit from the NCDC”. 
 

 
 
21 
 
IMPACT ON COOPERATIVE SECTOR FUNDING  
 
1.25 The Committee have also been informed that with the passage of time 
and develop ments in the cooperative movement in the Country, certain 
difficulties have been experienced by the cooperative societies.  One of the basic 
such problem is the lack of institutional lending to the cooperative societies, 
which hampers their growth. 
 
1.26 When asked about the possible misuse of NCDC funds by big players in 
the garb of producer companies, the Secretary, Ministry of Corporate Affairs 
stated: 
“Sir, I cannot say that, that apprehension is incorrect, but I can only share 
with you some data as of now.  Currently there are 308 companies.  Out of 
those 308 companies, as many as 96%, i.e., roughly 285 -290 companies 
have an authorised capital or either Rs. 50 lakh or less.  Further, out of 
that, 93% have a paid up capital which is not exceeding Rs. 10 lakh.  
Today the position is this.  I canno t say that the apprehension is correct 
because I do not have that information.  I cannot give such an opinion, but 
the point is that at this stage, currently, almost every producer company is, 
if I may say so, smaller than an ordinary partnership.  That is  today the 
position.  If the producer companies continue, what may be the position 
tomorrow, of course, that is something which I cannot rule out that there 
might be misuse or some very big players come in.  That apprehension, of 
course, may or may not be well founded”. 
 
1.27 When queried about varied and uneven development of agricultural 
cooperative sector in the various States, and the impact of introduction of 
producer companies in t hese States, DAC in a  written reply furnished on           
27 February, 2013 stated that N CDC, in consultation with Planning Commission, 

 
 
22 
 
classifies the States as Cooperatively Developed, Cooperatively Under -
Developed and Cooperatively Least Developed States  based on the broad 
parameters, viz., level of Agriculture Development , Agricultural Infrastructure and 
Inputs, Institutional credit and Cooperative Development of the State. For the 
purpose of funding by NCDC, the Planning Commission, in November, 2004, 
categorized 11 States as cooperatively least-developed and 10 States and 2 UTs 
as cooperatively under-developed States. S ince inception, overall assistance of 
Rs.16223.98 crore has been provided for the development of Cooperatives in 
cooperatively under-developed/ least-developed states under various schemes of 
the Corporation which is about 45.39% of the overall total assis tance of 
Rs.35745.18 crore released by the Corporation till 31 March, 2012.  
 
1.28 To a specific query about the registration of the new cooperative societies, 
year-wise, Department of Agriculture and Cooperation furnished the following 
information: 
No. of MSCS as on 19.8.2002 314 
2002 (after 19.8.2002) 06 
2003 17 
2004 35 
2005 29 
2006 15 
2007 17 
2008 32 
2009 26 
2010 57 
2011 95 
2012 247 

 
 
23 
 
1.29 There are several reports about lending by the commercial banks meant 
for the agriculture sector generally  going to the rich farmers and the people 
involved in agri -business activities.  The Committee , therefore,  enquired about 
the provisions in the Bill so that big producers will not be able to corner the 
funding facility of the NCDC. Secretary, Department of  Agriculture and 
Cooperation during the course of Briefing on 27 June, 2012 stated: 
“we do not directly have a provision of exclusion of large producer 
companies. What we do have is, an amendment that allows the Central 
Government to direct NCDC to finance  the cooperative societies in a 
particular manner and to a particular extent. But we do not have, as of 
now, a provision through which to exclude certain sections of the producer 
companies to the best of my knowledge. We do not have exclusion 
criterion”.  
 
1.30 On the apprehension of the Committee regarding indirect benefit to the 
large agri -business companies, Secretary, Department of Agriculture and 
Cooperation further testified: 
“That (proposed amendment) does not prohibit large conglomerates to 
also be constituents of a producer company.  That can well happen.  But 
the experience is that generally it is the agglomeration of small producers, 
the individual producers who get together and form a producer company.  
That is the general experience.  However, y ou can have larger people as 
components of a producer company.” 
 
1.31 On being apprised of the Committee ‟s apprehension regarding the misuse 
of National Cooperative Development Corporation funds by the big agri-business 
or corporate houses, Prof. Alagh stated during the Oral Evidence on 15 January, 
2013: 

 
 
24 
 
“Simply referring to the US or Australia  to weakening those safeguards 
would be wrong because they do not have the kind of agriculture that we 
have. The first is that in a producer company, there is a one vote, one 
share principle which goes back to the heart of the cooperative movement 
in India”. 
 
1.32 To a pointed query r egarding the future of producer co mpanies and 
cooperatives, Prof. Alagh clarified: 
“I think, the more we introduce transparency in elections, the better it is.  
Two things are important as Dr. V. Kurien used to say.  One is ele ction, 
second it is audit.  These are both required under the Companies Act.  We 
should do it in cooperatives also.  You are right.  If we have good work 
culture in cooperatives, there is no reason why it should not be there?  
Why not have more than one?  Why are we scared of?  You cannot make 
this as a vehicle for exploitation by the big fishes, in the sector.  There 
should be an explicit provision for that.  There should be adequate 
safeguards”.  
 
1.33 About the definition of individual producer and an owner of a producer 
company, Secretary, Department of Agriculture and Cooperation clarified  during 
the Oral Evidence: 
“…if I may clarify, it is not for NCDC to determine who is a producer 
company or not. That will be decided by the Registrar of the Compani es 
and the producer company has to be registered as such by the Registrar 
of Companies. It is only then that it becomes a producer company. Before 
registering, the Registrar of Companies has to satisfy himself or herself 
regarding the fulfilment of certain  criteria. To say that an individual 
producer automatically becomes a producer company is not correct. They 
are two separate entities”. 
 

 
 
25 
 
1.34 On the question of safeguarding the interest of small and marginal farmers 
from the agri -business corporate houses , the Secretary, Department of 
Agriculture and Cooperation shared the apprehension on the Committee and 
assured during the Oral Evidence on 22 January, 2013:  
“It is our endeavour to see that NCDC services all the eligible applications 
that it receives from the cooperative sector. It is also the endeavour of the 
NCDC to expand its portfolio to increase its turnover like any other 
financial institution should do”. 
 
1.35 Further, when querried about the safeguards for the primary producers 
belonging to agriculture sector, the witness affirmed: 
“...the NCDC Rules provide us with the scope to cap funding to any sector.  
So, if the proposed amendments pass through, we will legitimately be 
within our rights to cap the assistance  given to producer companie s. The 
NCDC may provide funds to the producer companies either by way of 
proportion of their total lending or even on a case by case basis by putting 
a cap on that”. 
 
1.36 The advent of cooperative societies/movements has empowered the small 
and marginal f armers but a lot is yet to be done. The marginalized sections, 
which includes Scheduled Castes, Scheduled Tribes and Women constitute a 
majority of these groups. When querried about the safeguards for these weaker 
sections from the negative impact of the c ompanies based on profitability, the 
Department in a written reply  stated formation of companies including producer 
companies is a voluntary process and therefore allotment of this nature cannot 
be provided under the law. However, it is open for a producer  company to make 
suitable provisions on this line in its Articles of Association.  NCDC may , 

 
 
26 
 
however, consider making suitable provisions in the schemes to be floated by 
NCDC once the Amendment Bill goes through.  
 
1.37 Regarding shift of focus of funding of NCDC from areas outside the 
cooperative sector, the Secretary , DAC  stated that they  can be capped either 
sector-wise or in respect of assistance given to each company.  When queried 
about inclusion of producer companies wh ich dealt only in agriculture and allied 
sector, to be eligible to get benefit from the NCDC funds, he opined that: 
“…the Committee can recommend this and we will accept it.  National 
Cooperative Development Corporation cannot refuse to provide funds to 
any cooperative, which is eligible.  If the Hon‟ble Committee desires that 
the scope of producer companies be limited to the agriculture and allied 
sector only, that is fine by us, and we would welcome it.  It is the proposal 
of the Government so I am duty bound to propose, propound and explain” 
 
1.38 The Companies Act, 1956 provides for the producer companies whose 
areas of operation include  transport, travel, tourism, hospitals and health etc.  
When an explanation was sought in regard to dilute the mandate and scope of 
the cooperative societies by including producer companies operating in these 
areas, the Secretary, Department of Agriculture  and Cooperation during the 
Sitting of 27 June, 2012 assured that the financing of the producer companies 
will remain confined to the areas of interest to the Ministry of Agriculture and will 
serve its interest and the primary mandate of NCDC will remain f inancing of 
cooperatives.  Further, when queried about the technical and consultancy 
services, insurance, power distribution, transmission and generation  as sectors 
of  producer  companies  are  also  eligible  for  the  funding  by  the  NCDC,  the 
Secretary, Department of Agriculture and Cooperation, clarified: 

 
 
27 
 
“There can be sectors far outside agriculture and rural development which 
are also cooperatives. But NCDC is not allowed to fund that. So, producer 
companies can also exist outside the agriculture and rural development 
sector but that will not necessarily bring them under the ambit and the 
scope of this provision. So, while the scope and the definition of a 
producer company will be defined by the Companies Act, it is only the 
component relating to t he agriculture and the sectors which NCDC is 
entitled by law to provide assistance to, it is only those that will be taken 
into NCDC”. 
 
1.39 However, the Secretary, Department of Agriculture and Cooperation could 
not defend the non -agriculture sectors in t he ambit of definition of producer 
companies, NCDC has been allowed to provide assistance to the cooperative 
sector in other six sectors  in 2010.  On considering tourism as one of the sector 
of the producer companies he admitted: 
“I actually honestly canno t think of a producer company concept in the 
tourism sector, but I can think of it in the power sector. So, the worst case 
scenario, you can have a producer company in the power sector; you can 
have it, but the way to address the issue that the efforts of NCDC do not 
automatically focus on such kind of companies or sectors is by providing a 
cap on assistance to those companies and sectors”. 
 
1.40  About the inclusion of tourism , hospitality and transport, electricity & 
power and rural housing as areas of operation of the co -operatives, the 
Department furnished a written replied on 27 June, 2012 that the Secretary, 
Planning Commission, in October, 1999, advised that  
(i) NCDC should act as a f inancial Institution with equity base and mobilize 

 
 
28 
 
resources through leverage as this would give operational freedom and  
(ii) provide adequate resources to NCDC for expanding its activities.  The 
Department also stated that in view of the potential for development and demand 
from cooperatives in some other sectors, DAC, on the request of NCDC, 
permitted Tourism, Hospitality and Transport, Electricity & Power and Rural 
Housing as „Notified Services‟ vide notification dated 18 May, 2010 in terms of 
section 2(ea) of NCDC Act 1962 (26 of 1962) for funding by NCD C.  
Subsequently, vide notification dated 19 August, 2010, services like Hospital, 
Healthcare and Education Cooperatives were also brought under the purview of 
NCDC by prescribing an overall ceiling of 25% of annual budget of NCDC for 
financing such notified services.   
 
1.41 About t he apprehension s of the Committee regarding inclusion of non -
agriculture sectors, e.g. tourism and hospitality, transport, electricity, energy etc. 
in the mandate of areas of operation of NCDC, Secretary, Department of 
Agriculture and Cooperation stated during the Briefing on 27 June, 2012: 
“The NCDC is a cooperative development corporation. It is not an 
agricultural cooperative development corporation.  Its mandate stands to 
all cooperatives across sectors. That is one.   The activities which you 
mentioned were specially notified and the NCDC was allowed to extend its 
credit in these cooperatives also.  There is no participation of the farmers”. 
 
  

 
 
29 
 
1.42 The National Co -operative Development Corporation (Amendment) 
Bill, 2012 was referred to the Committee by Speaker, Lok Sabha on 25 May, 
2012 for examination and Report.  The Committee during the course of their 
examination noted that the National Co-operative Development Corporation 
Act, 1962 in its present form provides for the incorporation and regulation 
of a corporation for the purpose of planning and promoting programmes 
for production, processing, marketing, storage, export and import, 
livestock and other commodities and services on co -operative principles 
and for related ma tters.  The Committee further note that for this purpose 
the Corporation advances loans and subsidies to State Governments for 
financing co -operative societies and for employment of staff for 
implementing programmes for co -operative development.  It also p rovides 
funds to State Governments for financing co -operative societies for 
purchase of agricultural produce, foodstuffs, livestock, poultry feed, 
industrial goods, notified commodities and notified services on behalf of 
the Central Government.   The Corporation also provides loans and grants 
directly to national level co -operative societies and other co -operative 
societies having objects extending beyond one State as also it participates 
in the share capital of such societies.  The Committee also note that  
through the Amendment Bill the main purpose of the Government is to 
bring the producer companies, which are presently governed by the 
Companies Act 1956, under the ambit of NCDC Act, 1962 and at par with 
the co -operative societies; providing loans and gra nts to the producer 
companies and the co-operative societies engaged in notified services and 

 
 
30 
 
trading in notified commodities; and regulating the advancing of loans and 
granting of subsidies by the Corporation from the National Co -operative 
Development Fund to the State Governments in such a manner and to such 
extent as the Central Government may by notification in the official gazette 
specify. 
 
1.43 The intent behind the amendments is twofold.  One, inclusion of 
producer companies as eligible entities for financial assistance from NCDC 
with a view to improving the livelihoods of primary producers and boosting 
growth of rural economy and providing a much needed additional source of 
credit and financial support to these companies which mostly comprise of 
small and marginal farmers; and two by this step the Government intend to 
create a larger market for NCDC for increasing the turnover of NCDC and 
its products as well.     
 
1.44 The Committee find that while the concept of producer companies 
was formalized through an amendment in the Companies Act, 1956 in 2002,  
the present piece of legislation to amend the NCDC Act, 1962 with a view to 
assign some role to the Corporation in the financial matters of the producer 
companies has been mooted ten years later in 2012.  The Government’s 
has contended that the intervening ten years or so have been spent by 
them in making various efforts to create backward and for ward linkages to 
address the needs of stakeholders including farmers, markets, farmers’ 
groups, etc.  However, since access to the loans from market institutions 
was proved difficult in the absence of last mile reach of the banking 

 
 
31 
 
system.  The last mile c overage by the co -operative sector was thought 
prudent.  Irrespective of the merits of inclusion of Producer Companies in 
the ambit of NCDC Act, 1956, the Committee feel that the Government as 
the subsequent narration will bear out has attended to this mat ter in a 
casual and piecemeal manner.  There has been a strong disconnect 
between the various arms of the Government when dealing with this issue 
over the years.  Resultantly, while the intention of Department of 
Agriculture and Corporation in moving this Amendment Bill may be 
laudable, the inordinate delay in deciding about bringing this amendment 
in NCDC Act, 1962 needs to be frowned upon as several events have 
overtaken this proposed piece of legislation, thereby raising a few question 
marks about the ef ficacy and the implementation of the proposed 
amendment.  
 
1.45 During the course of this examination, the Committee gathered a 
distinct impression that the concept of producer company has not been 
handled properly by the Government. The crucial documentation pertaining 
to how the producer companies came into being is untraceable in Prime 
Minister’s Office, Department of Agriculture and Corporation and Ministry 
of Corporate Affairs, the three entities who have been concerned with the 
conceptualization, crea tion and propagation of producer companies at 
varying points of time.  The Committee, however found out that on a 
reference from the Prime Minister Office, which was in pursuance of the 
initiative taken by Prof. Y.K. Alagh with then Prime Minister, a High 
Powered Committee for Formation and Conversion of Co -operative 

 
 
32 
 
Business into Companies was constituted by the Ministry of Corporate 
Affairs (then known as Ministry of Company Affairs).  The High Powered 
Committee submitted its report in 2000 and necessary amendments to treat 
the Producer Companies as companies were carried out in Companies Act, 
1956 in 2002.  However, within a span of three years inexplicably another 
Committee was appointed by the Ministry of Corporate Affairs in 2005 to 
review the Companie s Act recommended the exclusion of the provisions 
pertaining to the producer companies viz. 581A and 581B from the 
Companies Act.  In fact in the Companies Act (Amendment) Bill, 2012 
which was passed by the Lok Sabha on 18 December, 2012 and which is 
pending with the Rajya Sabha now, the Producer Companies simply derive 
their existence from a residuary clause viz. Clause 465, which provides that 
till a suitable law is enacted for producer companies, the existing 
provisions of the Companies Act would continue to apply.   
 
1.46 The Committee note this apparent dichotomy in the perception of the 
various agencies of the Government.  The Department of Agriculture and 
Corporation and even the Ministry of Corporate Affairs, a few years back, 
have been the strongest  votaries of according prominence and better 
assistance to the producer companies through legal measures as well as 
through hand-holding.  However, there has been a change of mind within a 
short span of three years and the producer companies find themselve s 
regulated to a residuary clause of the Companies (Amendment) Bill, 2012 
which has already be passed by Lok Sabha.  The Committee don’t find it a 
happy augury.  If the Government is confident that given the not so 

 
 
33 
 
encouraging performance of co -operative s ector, producer companies 
need to be encouraged in the interest of the rural population, rural 
economy and the rural enterprise then the fate of producer companies 
should not be kept hanging in balance under a residuary clause.  There 
should be a clear cut  law specifying their aims, objectives and all other 
attributes in a crystal clear manner so that groups of producers, who are 
mostly small and marginal farmers or other underprivileged sections of the 
society are aware of the legal and other ramifications before they launching 
their venture.  
 
1.47 The Committee tend to agree with the opinion tendered by the 
Ministry of Corporate Affairs before them that the Department of 
Agriculture and Corporation, keeping in view its immense stake in the 
matter, should immediately work out a legislation for the producer 
companies so that the present Bill and related matters fit into a broader 
picture, seamlessly and at the earliest.         
 
1.48 The Committee during the course of the examination of the Bill also 
had the opportunity to evaluate the producer companies in their extant 
form.  Varying figures were provided to the Committee about the number of 
producer companies in India.  The Departmen t of Agriculture and Co -
operation had furnished details of 139 producer companies out of which 
most were not active in agricultural related sectors.  The Ministry of 
Corporate Affairs conveyed their number as 337 but in the very next breath, 
hastened to add that 63 of these companies were not producer companies 
and were wrongly entered.  So according to them factually the number of 

 
 
34 
 
producer companies was 274.  They also gave another figure of 308 in 
another context. Given the fact that the producer companie s are being 
propagated as best option for boosting the sagging co -operative sector in 
the Country, giving a fillip to the rural economy, small and marginal 
farmers and producers and the rural enterprise in general, the Committee 
find these numbers, which a re the culmination of a decade or so of the 
existence and furtherance of the producer companies, very disappointing.  
Although non-availability of finances from financial institutions and banks 
could be a reason for such less number of producer companies i n the 
Country, the ground reality of these minimal numbers of producer 
companies conclusively proves that all is not well with the way the 
producer companies have been conceptualized and developed. To begin 
with, the basic surmise that even ten producers c ould form a producer 
company implies that the concept of producer companies will only flourish 
and deliver when it has the advantage of sheer numbers.  Unfortunately, 
the number of producer companies in existence proves it has not 
happened that way in the past decade or so.  The Committee’s conclusions 
are further cemented by the study conducted by NABARD Consultancy 
Services (NABCONS) on ‘Integration of Small Producers into Producer 
Companies’.  The study reveals that even though the producer company 
legislation was expected to facilitate transformation of well functioning 
cooperatives into producer companies very few cooperative have opted for 
the same. Out of 9 producer companies studied by them only one showed 
positive indicators for business viability.  The study also affirms that the 

 
 
35 
 
integration of small producers into producer companies may not generally 
be a viable proposition unless these organizations attain financial and 
management viability.  Some major shortcoming pointed out in the study 
include, inability to mobilize startup capital; primary members not being 
the direct members of the producer company; absence of wealth 
accumulation; weak balance sheets; inspite of directors being primary 
producers their role in understanding the business and ta king important 
decisions is minimal; absence of long term business development plan, 
etc.  In such a depressing scenario, the Committee wonder as to whether 
the toe -hold being provided to the producer companies for access to 
finances from NCDC Fund through this Amendment would be of much help.  
There is all likelihood of financial assistance from NCDC Fund being 
availed by well established big companies for whom registering a producer 
company would not a difficult task.  Thus, there is a strong possibility of 
the financial assistance from NCDC Fund being availed by corporate 
houses and agri-business houses almost akin to the agri-credit sector.  The 
Committee, therefore, recommend that NCDC Act 1962 and the rules and 
guidelines framed, thereunder, should be so modified as to ensure that the 
funds of NCDC do not land into the hands of undeserving because in that 
eventuality the very purpose of setting up of the Corporation will be 
defeated.  The Committee also strongly feel that the compulsion of the 
Government to enhance the profile and products of the Corporation with a 
view to improving its profitability should not be the sole guiding criteria in 
the matter.  

 
 
36 
 
1.49  The Committee are of the view that empowerment of small and 
marginal   farmers is one of the i mportant plank of cooperative movement.  
The marginalized sections, including Scheduled Castes, Scheduled Tribes 
and Women constitute a majority of these groups.  The Committee have 
learnt that since formation of producer company is a voluntary process, no  
law or mechanism exist at present to safeguard the interest of these 
marginal sections   from negative impact of  companies which are primarily 
based  on the concept of  profitability.  However, it is open to producer 
company for compulsorily allotment fo r weaker sections in the 
management of producer companies and amend for their Articles of 
Association accordingly. The Committee desire that for protecting the 
interest of marginalized sections, NCDC should make similar provisions in 
their schemes. 
1.50  The Committee further note that non agriculture sector such as 
tourism and hospitality, transport, electricity are some of the new services 
admissible for concessional NCDC funding. As the primary mandate of 
NCDC is financing of agriculture related activiti es, it should channelize its 
energy and attention towards farm related portfolio, rather than frittering 
away their resources for services other than agriculture. 
1.51 The Committee expect that the concerns voiced on the various 
issues involved and the suggestions contained in this Report would get the 
fullest attention of the Government.     
NEW DELHI;                        BASUDEB ACHARIA 
20 March, 2013                               Chairman, 
29 Phalguna, 1934 (Saka)                                 Committee on Agriculture  

 
 
37 
 
APPENDIX-I 
 
COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE 
(2011-12) 
 
MINUTES OF THE THIRTY-SEVENTH SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE 
 
 The Committee sat on Wednesday, the 27 th June, 2012 from 1500 hours 
to 1645 hours in Room No. 53, Parliament House, New Delhi.  
 
PRESENT 
 
Shri Basudeb Acharia     - Chairman 
 
MEMBERS 
 
Lok Sabha 
 
2. Shri Narayansingh Amlabe 
3. Shri K.C. Singh „Baba‟ 
4. Smt. Shruti Choudhary 
5. Smt Ashwamedh Devi 
6. Shri Biren Singh Engti 
7. Shri Anant Kumar Hegde 
8. Shri Sk. Nurul Islam 
9. Shri Naranbhai Kachhadia 
10. Shri Premdas 
11. Shri Surendra Singh Nagar 
12. Shri Nripendra Nath Roy 
13. Shri Jagdish Thakor 
 
Rajya Sabha 
 
14. Shri Shashi Bhusan Behera 
15. Shri Narendra Budania 
16. Shri A. Elavarasan 
17.  Shri Mohd. Ali Khan 
18.  Shri Upendra Kushwaha 
19.  Shri Rajpal Singh Saini 
20.       Shri S. Thangavelu 

 
 
38 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
 
Shri Deepak Mahna  - Joint Secretary  
   Shri P.C. Koul  - Additional Director 
 
WITNESSES  
 
MINISTRY OF AGRICULTURE 
(DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE AND CO-OPERATION) 
 
S.No.    NAME OF THE OFFICER DESIGNATION 
 
1. Shri Ashish Bahuguna  Secretary (A&C) 
2. Shri Anup Kumar Thakur  Additional Secretary 
3. Shri Rajendra Kumar Tiwari Joint Secretary  
 
NATIONAL COOPERATIVE DEVELOPMENT CORPORATION (NCDC) 
 
1. Shri C.B. Paliwal          MD, NCDC 
2. Shri P.K. Chaudhuri          Chief Director, NCDC  
 
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the members to the Sitting. The 
Committee, thereafter, deliberated for a while on the subject before them. The 
Chairman, then directed the witnesses be ushered in. 
(At about 1505 hrs. the witnesses were ushered in). 
3. The Chairman welcomed the witnesses and asked them to introduce 
themselves. The Secretary of the Ministry and other witnesses briefed the 
Committee on the various aspects regarding the „National Co -operative 
Development Corporation (Amendment) Bill, 2012  through an audio -visual 
presentation. Thereafter, the members sought several clarifications pertaining to 
the above said Bill including ramifications of some of the proposed clauses and 
the witnesses responded to them. 

 
 
39 
 
 4. Before the Sitting concluded, the Chairman thanked the witnesses for 
appearing before the Committee and sharing their views on the subject. 
A verbatim record of the proceedings has been kept separately. 
 
The Committee then adjourned. 
 
 
/---------------------/ 
  

 
 
40 
 
APPENDIX-II 
 
COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE 
(2011-12) 
 
MINUTES OF THE THIRTY-NINTH SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE 
 
 The Committee sat on Friday, the 13 th July, 2012 from 1500 hours to 1620 
hours in Committee Room „C‟ Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.  
 
PRESENT 
 
Shri Basudeb Acharia     - Chairman 
 
MEMBERS 
 
Lok Sabha 
 
2. Shri Narayansingh Amlabe 
3. Smt. Shruti Choudhary 
4. Smt Ashwamedh Devi 
5. Shri Biren Singh Engti 
6. Shri Anant Kumar Hegde 
7. Shri Deepender Singh Hooda 
8. Shri Sk. Nurul Islam 
9. Shri Naranbhai Kachhadia 
10. Shri Premdas 
11. Shri Devji M. Patel 
12. Shri Nripendra Nath Roy 
13. Shri Jagdish Thakor 
14. Shri Hukmadeo Narayan Yadav 
15. Shri Ramakant Yadav 
 
Rajya Sabha 
 
16. Shri Shashi Bhusan Behera 
17. Shri Narendra Budania 
18. Shri A. Elavarasan 
19. Shri Vinay Katiyar 
20. Shri Mohd. Ali Khan 
21.  Shri Upendra Kushwaha 

 
 
41 
 
22.     Shri Rajpal Singh Saini 
23.     Shri S. Thangavelu 
SECRETARIAT 
 
    Shri P.C. Koul  - Additional Director 
 
WITNESSES  
 
MINISTRY OF CORPORATE AFFAIRS  
 
       S.No.    NAME OF THE OFFICER DESIGNATION 
 
1.    Shri Naved Masood  Secretary  
2.    Smt. Renuka Kumar  Joint Secretary 
 
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the members to the Sitting. He then 
directed the witnesses be ushered in. 
3. The Chairman welcomed the witnesses and asked them to introduce 
themselves. The Secretary of the Ministry of Corporate Affairs briefed the 
Committee on the various aspects related to the „producer companies‟, their 
inclusion in the Companies Act, the present views of the Ministry on the producer 
companies and the ramif ication of the „National Co -operative Development 
Corporation (Amendment) Bill, 2012.  Thereafter, the members sought several 
clarifications pertaining to the above said Bill and its various implications and the 
witness responded to them. 
4. Before the Sitt ing concluded, the Chairman thanked the witnesses for 
appearing before the Committee and sharing their views on the subject.  He also 
directed them to furnish to the Secretariat of the Committee information on 
various points raised by members during the Sitting immediately. 
A verbatim record of the proceedings has been kept separately. 
The Committee then adjourned. 
/---------------------/ 

 
 
42 
 
APPENDIX-III 
 
COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE 
(2011-12) 
 
MINUTES OF THE FORTY-THIRD SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE 
 
 The Committee sat on Thursday, the 9 th August, 2012 from 1530 hours to            
1700 hours in Committee Room „D‟, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.  
 
PRESENT 
 
Shri Basudeb Acharia     - Chairman 
 
MEMBERS 
 
Lok Sabha 
 
 2.  Shri Narayansingh Amlabe 
 3.  Shri Thangso Baite 
 4.  Smt. Shruti Choudhary 
 5.  Shri Premdas  
            6.  Shri Hukmadeo Narayan Yadav 
 
Rajya Sabha 
 
   7.  Shri Narendra Budania 
   8.  Shri Vinay Katiyar 
 9.  Shri Mohd. Ali Khan 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
 Shri P.C. Koul  - Additional Director 
 
WITNESSES  
 
MINISTRY OF AGRICULTURE 
(DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE AND CO-OPERATION) 
 
S.No.    NAME OF THE OFFICER DESIGNATION 
1. Shri Ashish Bahuguna  Secretary (A&C) 
2. Shri Anup Kumar Thakur  Additional Secretary 
3. Shri Rajendra Kumar Tiwari  Joint Secretary 
   
  

 
 
43 
 
MINISTRY OF CORPORATE AFFAIRS 
 
 1. Shri Sudhir Mital Special Secretary 
 2. Smt. Renuka Kumar Joint Secretary 
 
MINISTRY OF LAW AND JUSTICE 
(DEPARTMENT OF LEGISLATIVE) 
 
Dr. Sanjay Singh   Additional Secretary 
 
NATIONAL COOPERATIVE DEVELOPMENT  CORPORATION     
  Shri C.B. Paliwal   Managing Director 
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the members to the Sitting. The 
Committee deliberated for a while and decided to continue with the examination of the 
Bill. The Chairman, then directed the witnesses be ushered in. 
(At about 1540 hrs. the witnesses were ushered in). 
3. The Chairman welcomed the witnesses and asked them to introduce themselves. 
The representatives of Ministry of Agriculture (Department of Agriculture and 
Cooperation), Ministry  of Corporate Affairs and Legislative Department briefed the 
Committee on the various aspects regarding the „National Co -operative Development 
Corporation (Amendment) Bill, 2012 . Thereafter, the members sought several 
clarifications pertaining to the above said Bill including ramifications of some of the 
proposed clauses and the witnesses responded to them. 
4. Before the Sitting concluded, the Chairman thanked the witnesses for appearing 
before the Committee and sharing their views on the subject and directe d them to send 
information on points on which information could not be readily provided by them during 
the Sitting to the Committee Secretariat by 22 August, 2012. 
A verbatim record of the proceedings has been kept separately. 
The Committee then adjourned. 
/---------------------/  
  

 
 
44 
 
APPENDIX-IV 
 
COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE 
(2011-12) 
 
MINUTES OF THE FORTY-FOURTH SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE 
******** 
 The Committee sat on Tuesday, the 28 August, 2012 from 1000 hours to 
1025 hours in Committee Room  No. „D‟, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
PRESENT 
  Shri Shashi Bhusan Behera   -   Chairman 
 
MEMBERS 
 
LOKSABHA 
 
2.  Shri Narayansingh Amlabe 
3.  Shri Thangso Baite 
4.  Smt. Ashwamedh Devi 
5.  Shri Naranbhai Kachhadia 
6.  Shri Devji M. Patel 
7.  Shri Vitthalbhai Hansrajbhai Radadiya 
8.  Shri Hukmadeo Narayan Yadav 
 
               RAJYA SABHA 
  9.  Shri Vinay Katiyar 
10.  Shri Mohd. Ali Khan 
11.  Shri Upendra Kushwaha 
12.  Shri Bharatsinh Prabhatsinh Parmar 
13.  Shri Rajpal Singh Saini 
14.  Shri S. Thangavelu 
SECRETARIAT 
1. Shri  K. Vijayakrishnan - Joint Secretary  
2. Shri P.C. Koul   - Additional Director 
3. Shri C. Vanlalruata  - Deputy Secretary 

 
 
45 
 
2. At the outset, the Joint Secretary, Lok Sabha Secretariat informed the 
Committee that as the Chairman was admitted in All India Institute of Medical 
Sciences, it would not be possible for him to Chair the Sitting. Therefore, the 
Committee chose Shri Shashi  Bhusan Behera, MP (Rajya Sabha) to act as 
Chairman for the Sitting under Rule 258 (3) of the Rules and Procedure and 
Conduct of Business in Lok Sabha.  
3. Hon‟ble Chairman welcomed the members to the Sitting of the Committee.  
The Committee then took up M emorandum No. 09 regarding extension of time 
for examination and report on “The National Cooperative Development 
Corporation (Amendment) Bill, 2012”.  
4. After some deliberations, the Committee decided to seek extension of time 
from Hon‟ble Speaker, Lok Sa bha for examination and Report on the said Bill 
upto the end of Winter Session, 2012.  The Committee authorized the Chairman 
to request Hon‟ble Speaker, Lok Sabha accordingly for extension of time.  
*5. XXX   XXX   XXX   XXX  
  
*6. XXX   XXX   XXX   XXX 
 
The Committee then adjourned. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
*Matter not related with this Report  

 
 
46 
 
APPENDIX-V 
 
COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE 
(2012-13) 
 
MINUTES OF THE TENTH SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE 
******** 
 The Committee sat on Wednesday, the 19 December, 2012 from 1000 
hours to 1030  hours in Committee Room  „B‟ (G/F), Parliament House Annexe, 
New Delhi. 
PRESENT 
  Shri Basudeb Acharia   -   Chairman 
 
 
MEMBERS 
 
LOKSABHA 
 
2.  Shri Narayansingh Amlabe 
3.  Shri Sanjay Singh Chauhan 
4.  Smt. Paramjit  Kaur Gulshan 
5.  Shri Premdas Katheria 
6.  Shri P. Kumar 
7.  Sardar Sukhdev Singh Libra 
8.  Dr. Jyoti Mirdha 
9.  Shri Devji M. Patel 
10.  Smt. Bhavana  Gawali (Patil) 
11.  Shri Rajaiah Siricilla 
12.  Shri Hukamdeo Narayan Yadav 
 
               RAJYA SABHA 
 13.  Shri Satyavrat Chaturvedi 
14.  Shri Parshottam Khodabhai Rupala 
15.  Shri Rajpal Singh Saini 
16.  Shri Shivanand Tiwari 
17.  Shri S. Thangavelu 
 
SECRETARIAT 
1. Shri  R.S. Kambo  - Joint Secretary  
2. Shri  P.C. Koul  - Additional Director 
3. Shri  C. Vanlalruata  - Deputy Secretary 

 
 
47 
 
*2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members to the Sitting of the 
Committee.  XXX   XXX   XXX   XXX 
*3. XXX   XXX   XXX   XXX  
4. The Committee then took up Memorandum No.05 regarding extension of 
time for examination and report o n “The National Cooperative Development 
Corporation (Amendment) Bill, 2012”.  
5. After some deliberations, the Committee decided to seek extension of time 
from Hon‟ble Speaker, Lok Sabha for examination and Report on the said Bill 
upto the first week of Bu dget Session, 2013.  The Committee authorized the 
Chairman to request Hon‟ble Speaker, Lok Sabha accordingly for extension of 
time.  
*6. XXX   XXX   XXX   XXX  
The Committee then adjourned. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
*Matter not related with this Report  

 
 
48 
 
APPENDIX-VI 
 
COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE 
(2012-13) 
 
MINUTES OF THE FOURTEENTH SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE 
 
 
 The Committee sat on Tuesday, the 15 th January, 2013, from 1645 hours 
to 1735 hours in Committee Room „E‟, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.  
 
PRESENT 
 
Shri Basudeb Acharia   -   Chairman 
 
MEMBERS 
 
LOK SABHA 
 
2.  Shri Narayansingh Amlabe 
3.  Shri H.D. Devegowda 
4.  Smt. Paramjit Kaur Gulshan 
5.  Shri P. Kumar 
6.  Sardar Sukhdev Singh Libra 
7.  Shri Naranbhai Kachhadia 
8.  Shri Devji M. Patel 
9.  Shri Rajaiah Siricilla 
10.  Shri Hukamdeo Narayan Yadav 
  
 RAJYA SABHA 
 
11.  Smt. Mohsina Kidwai 
12.  Shri Dharmendra Pradhan 
13.  Shri Parshottam Khodabhai Rupala 
14.  Shri Rajpal Singh Saini 
15.  Shri Shivanand Tiwari 
 
  
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Shri R.S. Kambo - Joint Secretary 
2. Shri P.C. Koul  - Additional Director 
3. Shri C. Vanlalruata - Deputy Secretary 

 
 
49 
 
  
WITNESS 
 
 
            NAME OF THE OFFICER  DESIGNATION 
 
Dr. Y.K. Alagh  -    Chancellor, Gujarat Central University 
 
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the members and the witness to 
the Sitting.  
3. The witness, thereafter, introduced himself and proceeded to brief the 
Committee on the various aspects related to the „producer companies‟, their 
inclusion in the Compani es Act, his views on the producer companies and their 
convergence with the cooperative sector and the need for a comprehensive 
legislation to safeguard the interests of the farmers.  The members sought 
several clarifications pertaining to the producer comp anies and its various 
implications on the National Co -operative Development Corporation 
(Amendment) Bill, 2012 presently being examined by them and the witness 
responded to their queries.   
4. Before the Sitting concluded, the Chairman thanked the witness for 
appearing before the Committee and sharing his views on the Subject.   
 
 A verbatim record of the proceedings has been kept separately. 
The Committee then adjourned. 
/---------------------/ 
  

 
 
50 
 
APPENDIX-VII 
 
COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE 
(2012-13) 
 
MINUTES OF THE FIFTEENTH SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE 
 
 The Committee sat on Tuesday, the 22 nd January, 2013, from 1500 hours 
to 1645  hours in Room No. 62 (F/F), Parliament House, New Delhi.  
 
PRESENT 
 
Shri Basudeb Acharia   -   Chairman 
 
MEMBERS 
 
                                 LOK SABHA 
 
 
2.  Shri Narayansingh Amlabe  
3.  Shri Sanjay Singh Chauhan  
4.  Shri H.D. Devegowda  
5.  Smt. Ashwamedh Devi  
6.  Shri L. Raja Gopal  
7.  Shri Premdas Katheria  
8.  Shri P. Kumar  
9.  Dr. (Smt.) Botcha Jhansi Lakshmi  
10.  Sardar Sukhdev Singh Libra  
11.  Dr. Jyoti Mirdha  
12.  Smt. Bhavana Gawali (Patil)  
13.  Shri Rajaiah Siricilla  
14.  Dr. Vinay Kumar Pandey „Vinnu‟  
15.  Shri Hukamdeo Narayan Yadav  
  
RAJYA SABHA 
 
 
16.  Shri A. Elavarasan  
17.  Smt. Mohsina Kidwai  
18.  Shri Dharmendra Pradhan  
19.  Dr. K.V.P. Ramachandra Rao  
20.  Shri Parshottam Khodabhai Rupala  
21.  Shri Rajpal Singh Saini  
22.  Shri Shivanand Tiwari  
23.  Shri S. Thangavelu  
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Shri R.S. Kambo  - Joint Secretary 
2. Shri P.C. Koul   - Additional Director 

 
 
51 
 
WITNESSES  
 
MINISTRY OF AGRICULTURE 
(DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE AND COOPERATION) 
 
S.No.    NAME OF THE OFFICER DESIGNATION 
 
1. Shri Ashish Bahuguna  Secretary (A&C) 
 
NATIONAL COOPERATIVE DEVELOPMENT CORPORATION (NCDC) 
 
Shri C.B. Paliwal   Managing Director 
 
MINISTRY OF CORPORATE AFFAIRS 
 
Smt. Renuka Kumar Joint Secretary 
 
*2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the members to the Sitting of the 
Committee.  XXX  XXX   XXX  XXX         XXX. 
*3. XXX   XXX   XXX    XXX. 
 
The Chairman then directed that the witness be ushered in. 
(At about 1510 hrs., the witnesses took their seats in the Committee Room). 
 
4. The Chairman welcomed the representatives of the Ministry of Agriculture 
(Department of Agriculture and Cooperation), Ministry of Corporate Affairs and 
National Cooperative Development Corporation to the Sitting.  After the 
customary introduction, the Memb ers sought several clarifications on various 
aspects of the National Cooperative Development Corporation (Amendment) Bill, 
2012, to which the witness responded. 
 
5. The Chairman, thereafter, thanked the witnesses for appearing before the 
Committee as well as for furnishing valuable information on the Subject. He also 
directed them to send the replies to the queries which could not be clarified by 
them during the Sitting to the Committee Secretariat by 30 January, 2013.   
The witnesses then withdrew. 
A verbatim record of the proceedings has been kept separately. 
The Committee then adjourned. 
___________________________________________________ 
*Matter not related with this Report.  

 
 
52 
 
APPENDIX-VIII 
 
COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE 
(2012-13) 
 
MINUTES OF THE NINETEENTH SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE 
******** 
 The Committee sat on Tuesday, the 05 March, 2013 from 1500 hours to 
1540 hours in Committee Room  „B‟, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
PRESENT 
Shri Basudeb Acharia   -   Chairman 
MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA 
2.  Shri Narayansingh Amlabe 
3.  Shri Sanjay Singh Chauhan 
4.  Shri H.D. Devegowda 
5.  Smt. Ashwamedh Devi 
6.  Smt. Paramjit Kaur Gulshan 
7.   Dr. (Smt.) Botcha Jhansi Lakshmi 
8.  Sardar Sukhdev Singh Libra 
9.  Dr. Jyoti Mirdha 
10.  Shri Naranbhai Kachhadia 
11.  Shri Rajaiah Siricilla 
12.  Shri Patel Kishanbhai V.  
13.  Shri Hukamdeo Narayan Yadav 
  
                             RAJYA SABHA 
14.  Shri Satyavrat Chaturvedi 
15.  Dr. K.V.P. Ramachandra Rao 
16.  Shri S. Thangavelu 
SECRETARIAT 
 1. Shri R.S. Kambo  - Joint Secretary 
2. Shri P.C. Koul   - Director 

 
 
53 
 
*2. At the outset the Chairman welcomed the members to the Sitting of the 
Committee.  XXX  XXX   XXX  XXX         XXX. 
 
*3. XXX   XXX   XXX    XXX. 
4. The Chairman then informed the Members that out  of three Bills referred 
to the Committee, the Committee had already presented their Report on „The 
Multi-State Cooperative Societies (Amendment) Bill, 2010‟ and the examination 
of the remaining two Bills viz. „The National Cooperatives Development 
Corporation (Amendment) Bill, 2012 and „The Rani Lakshmi Bai Central 
Agricultural University Bill, 2012 was almost nearing completion .  He felt that 
some more time will be required to present Reports on these two Bills. 
5. The Committee, therefore, decided to seek extension of time from 
Speaker, Lok Sabha for examination and Report on „The National Cooperatives 
Development Corporation (Amendment) Bill, 2012 and „The Rani Lakshmi Bai 
Central Agricultural University Bill, 2012 upto the end of the first half of th e 
ongoing Budget Session and authorized the Chairman to request the Speaker, 
Lok Sabha accordingly.  
 
 
The Committee then adjourned. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
___________________________________________________ 
*Matter not related with this Report.  
  

 
 
54 
 
APPENDIX- IX 
COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE 
(2012-13) 
 
MINUTES OF THE TWENTIETH SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE 
******** 
The Committee sat on Wednesday, the 20 March, 2013 from 1500 hours 
to 1515  hours in Committee Room  „B‟, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
 
  PRESENT 
 
Shri Basudeb Acharia   -   Chairman 
MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA 
2.  Shri Narayansingh Amlabe 
3.  Shri Sanjay Singh Chauhan 
4.  Smt. Ashwamedh Devi 
5.  Smt. Paramjit Kaur Gulshan 
6.  Shri Premdas Katheria 
7.  Shri P.Kumar 
8.   Dr. (Smt.) Botcha Jhansi Lakshmi 
9.  Sardar Sukhdev Singh Libra 
10.  Shri Rajaiah Siricilla 
11.  Shri Hukamdeo Narayan Yadav 
  
                              RAJYA SABHA 
12.  Shri Satyavrat Chaturvedi 
13.  Shri Dharmendra Pradhan 
14.  Shri S. Thangavelu 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Shri R.S. Kambo  - Joint Secretary 
2. Shri C. Vanlalruata   - Deputy Secretary 

 
 
55 
 
2. At the outset the Chairman welcomed the members to the Sitting of the 
Committee.  The Committee, then, took up the draft Report on „The National 
Cooperatives Development Corporation (Amendment) Bill, 2012‟. 
3. After some deliberations, the Committee adopted the draft Report without 
any modifications, and authorized the Chairman to present it after getting it 
factually verified from the concerned Department. 
 
The Committee then adjourned. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 