1 
 
      
COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE 
(2010-2011) 
 
 
 
FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA 
 
 
MINISTRY OF AGRICULTURE  
(DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURAL RESEARCH AND EDUCATION) 
 
 
DEVELOPMENT OF ABIOTIC STRESS RESISTANT 
CROP VARIETIES AND DISSEMINATION OF 
PRODUCTION ENHANCING TECHNOLOGIES – 
REVIEW OF R&D AND EXTENSION EFFORTS IN THE 
COUNTRY 
 
 
TWENTY SIXTH REPORT 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
AUGUST, 2011/ BHADRAPADA, 1933 (Saka)
26 

2 
 
TWENTY SIXTH REPORT 
 
COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE 
(2010-2011) 
 
(FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
MINISTRY OF AGRICULTURE 
(DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURAL RESEARCH AND EDUCATION)  
  
 
DEVELOPMENT OF ABIOTIC STRESS RESISTANT 
CROP VARIETIES AND DISSEMINATION OF 
PRODUCTION ENHANCING  
TECHNOLOGIES – REVIEW OF R&D AND EXTENSION 
EFFORTS IN THE COUNTRY 
 
 
        Presented to Lok Sabha on              30.08.2011 
     Laid on the Table of Rajya Sabha on        30.08.2011 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
AUGUST, 2011/ BHADRAPADA, 1933 (Saka) 

3 
 
COA No. 249 
 
 
 
 
 
 
     
         
         
         
         
 
         
         
         
Price :  Rs. 
         
         
         
         
         
 
 
 
         
     
                     
 
 
         
© 2011 By Lok Sabha Secretariat 
 
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of Business 
in Lok Sabha (Fourteenth Edition) and Printed by 

4 
 
CONTENTS                                     Page 
 COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE (2010-11)     (iii) 
 COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE (2009-10)     (v) 
 INTRODUCTION                  (vii) 
 ABBREVIATIONS                   (ix) 
CHAPTER  I INTRODUCTION         1 
CHAPTER II IMPACT OF ABIOTIC STRESS ON AGRICULTURE    9 
 Increasing climatic risks due to climate change   13 
 Impacts of climate change on agriculture    14 
CHAPTER III ONGOING ENDEAVOURS      22 
CHAPTER IV EXTENSION SERVICES      43 
 Set Up         43 
 Performance Appraisal       45 
ANNEXURES 
 (I) State-wise Drought Prone Areas       59 
(II) Crop-wise list of Varieties resistant to different aboitic stresses   63 
(III) Financial Implications of National Institute of Aboitic Stress Management 68 
APPENDICES 
 (I) Minutes of the 2nd sitting of the Committee held on 16.09.2009 (2009-10) 69 
 (II) Minutes of the 16th sitting of the Committee held on 21.01.2010 (2009-10) 71 
 (III) Minutes of the 10th sitting of the Committee held on 25.11.2010 (2010-11) 73 
(IV) Minutes of the 40th sitting of the Committee held on 29.08.2011 (2010-11) 75 

5 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE (2010-2011) 
 
Shri Basudeb Acharia   -   Chairman 
 
 MEMBERS 
 
 LOK SABHA 
 
2. Shri Narayansingh Amlabe 
3. Shri K.C. Singh ‘Baba’ 
4. Shri Thangso Baite  
5. Shri Jayant Chaudhary  
6. Smt. Shruti Choudhary  
7. Smt. Ashwamedh Devi 
8. Shri Biren Singh Engti  
9. Smt. Paramjit Kaur Gulshan 
10. Shri Anant Kumar Hegde 
11. Shri Sk. Nurul Islam 
12. Shri Naranbhai Kachhadia 
13. Shri Surendra Singh Nagar  
14. Shri Prabodh Panda  
15. Shri Premdas  
16. Shri Vitthalbhai Hansrajbhai Radadiya 
17. Shri Nripendra Nath Roy  
18. Shri Bhoopendra Singh 
19. Shri Uday Singh  
20. Shri Jagdish Thakor  
21. Shri Hukmadeo Narayan Yadav 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
22. 
23. 
Shri Shashi Bhusan Behera 
Shri Narendra Budania  
24. Shri Satyavrat Chaturvedi 
25. Shri A. Elavarasan  
26. Shri Vinay Katiyar 
27. Shri Mohd. Ali Khan 
28. Shri Upendra Kushwaha 
29. Shri Bharatsinh Prabhatsinh Parmar 
30. Shri Rajpal Singh Saini 
31. Shri S. Thangavelu 
(iii)

6 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Shri Deepak Mahna  - Joint Secretary 
2. Shri P.V.L.N. Murthy  - Director 
3. Shri P. C. Koul   - Additional Director  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(iv)  

7 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE (2009-2010) 
Shri Basudeb Acharia   -   Chairman 
 MEMBERS 
 LOK SABHA 
 
2. Shri Narayan Singh Amlabe 
3. Shri K.C. Singh ‘Baba’ 
4. Shri Thangso Baite  
5. Shri Jayant Chaudhary  
6. Smt. Shruti Choudhry  
7. Smt. Ashwamedh Devi 
8. Shri Biren Singh Engti  
9. Smt. Paramjit Kaur Gulshan 
10. Shri Anant Kumar Hegde 
11. Shri Sk. Nurul Islam 
12. Shri Naranbhai Kachhadia 
13. Shri Surendra Singh Nagar  
14. Shri Prabodh Panda  
15. Shri Premdas  
16. Shri Vitthalbhai Hansrajbhai Radadiya 
17. Shri Nripendra Nath Roy  
18. Shri Bhoopendra Singh 
19. Shri Uday Singh  
20. Shri Jagdish Thakor  
21. Shri Hukmdeo Narayan Yadav 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
^22. 
23. 
Shri Narendra Budania 
Shri Satyavrat Chaturvedi 
24. 
$25.            
Shri A. Elavarasan 
Shri Sharad Anantrao Joshi 
26. Shri Vinay Katiyar 
27. Shri Mohd. Ali Khan 
28. Shri M. Rajasekara Murthy 
29. Shri Bharatsinh Prabhatsinh Parmar 
30. Prof. M.S. Swaminathan 
        *31.           Shri Khekiho Zhimomi          
 
*   Vice Shri Khekiho Zhimomi who ceased to be the Member of the Co mmittee on 
his  retirement from Rajya Sabha on 2 April, 2010 and Smt. B. Jayashree 
nominated on 2 July, 2010. 
^  Vice Shri Narendra Budania who ceased to be the Member of the Committee on 
his  retirement from Rajya Sabha on 4 July, 2010. 
$  Vice Shri Sharad Anantrao Joshi who ceased to be the Member of the Committee 
on his  retirement from Rajya Sabha on 4 July, 2010. 
(v)

8 
 
INTRODUCTION 
         
 
I, the Chairman, Committee on Agriculture, having been authorized by the 
Committee to submit the Report on their behalf, present this Twenty-Sixth Report 
on the subject ‘Development of Abiotic Stress Resistant Crop Varieties and 
Dissemination of Production Enhancing Technologies – Review of R&D and 
Extension Efforts in the Country’. 
2. The Committee (2009-10), taking into consideration the serious challenges 
in the form of climate change and consequent global warming and feeling that a 
lot needs to be done  to face these challenges, had selected this subject for 
detailed examination and Report to Parliament.  The Commi ttee (2009-10) were 
briefed on the subject by the representatives of the Ministry of Agriculture 
(Department of Agricultural Research and Education) on 16 September, 2009 and 
took their Oral Evidence at the Sitting held on 21 January, 2010. The Committee 
on Agriculture (2010-11) decided to continue the examination of the Subject and 
took further Oral Evidence of the representatives of the Department on 25 
November, 2010. The Committee wish to express their thanks to the officers of 
the Department of Agricul tural Research and Education  and Indian Council of 
Agricultural Research for appearing before them and furnishing the information 
desired by it in connection with the examination of the subject. 
3. The Committee also wish to express their sincere thanks to  their 
predecessor Committee for the significant contribution made by them in the 
examination of the subject.  The Report was considered and adopted by the 
Committee at their Sitting held on 29 August, 2011. 
4. For facility of reference the Observations/Re commendations of the 
Committee have been printed in bold letters at the end of each Chapter of the 
Report.        
    
NEW DELHI;                                  BASUDEB ACHARIA 
29 August, 2011                           Chairman, 
7 Bhadrapada,1933 (Saka)                                                 Committee on Agriculture  
                                              (vii) 

9 
 
ABBREVIATIONS 
 
AICRP All India Coordinated Research Projects 
 
BE Budget Estimate 
 
CG INSTITUTES Central Government Institutes 
 
CICR Central Institute of Cotton Research 
 
CIMMYT International Maize and Wheat Improvement Centre 
 
DARE Department of Agricultural Research and Education 
 
DBT Department of Biotechnology 
 
DG Director General 
 
DNA Deoxyribonucleic acid 
 
GDP Gross Domestic Product 
 
GHGs Greenhouse Gases 
 
GIS Geographical Information System 
 
GM Genetically Modified 
 
IASRI Indian Agricultural Statistical Research Institute 
 
ICAR Indian Council of Agricultural Research 
 
ICARDA International Centre for Agricultural Research in the 
Dry Areas 
 
ICRISAT International Crops Research Institute for the Semi-
Arid Tropics 
 
IIPR Indian Institute of Pulses Research 
 
IIVR Indian Institute of Vegetable Research 
IMD Indian Meteorological Department 
IPCC Inter Governmental Panel on Climatic Change 
IRRI International Rice Research Institute 
 
(ix) 

10 
 
 
KVKs Krishi  Vigyan  Kendras 
NARS National Agricultural Research System 
NGOs Non Governmental Organizations 
NIC National Informatics Centre 
NPK Nitrogen Phosphorus Potassium 
NPTC Network Project on Tangencies in Crops 
NRCPB National Research Centre on Plant Biotechnology 
NRCRM National Research Centre on Rapeseed Mustard 
PSUs Public  Sector  Undertakings 
QTL Quantitative Trait Loci 
R&D Research and Development 
RE Revised Estimate 
SAU State Agriculture University 
UAS University of Agricultural Sciences 
ZPDs Zonal Project Directors 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(x)

11 
 
CHAPTER I 
INTRODUCTORY 
 The Indian Council of Agricultural Research with its vast network of 
Institutes spread all over the Countr y is surging ahead to provide scientific 
and technological support for enhancing production and productivity for 
sustainable agriculture through innovative approaches. Through its 
research, education and extension programmes, the Council is committed to 
transforming Indian agriculture primarily for food self -sufficiency to 
enhancing profitability.  Department of Agricultural Research and 
Education/ICAR have 45 Research Institutes, 4 Deemed Universities,  
6 National Bureaus, 17 National Research Centres, 25 Directorates/Project 
Directorates, 61 All India Coordinated Research Projects and 17 Network 
Projects. Besides 45 States Agricultural Universities, one Central 
Agricultural University and 584 Krishi Vigyan Kendras (Agricultural Science 
Centers) (KVKs) supporting agriculture in the Country. 
 
1.2  The Department have informed the Committee that agriculture is 
inherently sensitive to climatic conditions and is among the sectors most 
vulnerable to weather and climate risks. Globally, over 70 per cent of natural 
disasters are related to weather and climate.  Variability in weather 
elements, especially rainfall has been, and continues to be, the principal 
source of fluctuation in food production. Droughts, floods, tropical cyclones, 
heavy precipitation events, ho t extremes and heat waves are known to 
negatively impact agricultural production and farmers‟ livelihood. Almost 80 
million hectares of our land is rainfed; the Country has had 26 droughts in 
last 130 years; with 1987 and 2002 being the major drought years  in recent 
times.  Droughts have always caused considerable loss in food production; 
for example, the recent drought of 2002 led to reduced coverage of more 
than 15 million hectares of the kharif crops and resulted in a loss of more 
than 10% in food produc tion. On the other hand, floods are also frequent, 
especially in eastern India, which adversely affect the livelihood security of 
 

12 
 
million of farmers. Frost and cold waves also often cause yield losses in 
north-western India.  During December, 2002 -January, 2003, there was a 
cold wave all over northern Indian that caused considerable damage to 
crops, such as mustard, mango, guava, papaya, brinjal, tomato and potato.  
The nation has also witnessed frequent episodes of heat stress, which 
cause   loss in crop production. In March, 2004, temperatures were higher in 
the India-Gangetic plains by 3 -60C, which is equivalent to almost 1 0C per 
day over the whole crop season. As a result, wheat crop matured earlier by 
10-20 days and its production dropped by more than 4  million tonnes in the 
Country. Losses were also very significant in other crops, such as mustard, 
peas, tomatoes, and other vegetables and fruit crops. Cyclones, common in 
eastern coast of India are again a nother major source of concern.  Coastal 
ecosystem are subjected to periodic surge in salinity and cyclonic floods.  
 
1.3 During the course of Oral Evidence of the representatives of the 
Department on 21 January, 2010, the representative of the Department 
clarified further in this regard: 
“I would also like to give a little background of the whole problem and 
come to specifics also………….. Abiotic stress as you mentioned 
rightly, is nothing new to this Country with the kind of variations we 
have from 8 degree North latitude to 34 degree latitude.  This is t he 
range we have from coastal to Himalyan ecosystem. With this out of 
about 327 million hectares in this Country, about 140 + 2 million 
hectares is under cultivation. In that area we have different kinds of 
problems. As was rightly pointed out, drought pro ne area is about 12 
million hectares and salt affected area is about 6.7 million hectares. 
There is an area about 90 million hectares which is acid affected, 
while such area under cultivation is about 12 million hectares.  These 
are the situations under which we are cultivating”. 
 
   
1.4 There are several other abiotic stresses that crops experience. 
Intensive agriculture in some places has caused depletion of natural 
resources such as soil organic matter water and nutrients, leading to 
lowered water table and nutrient imbalances in the production system.  

13 
 
Alkalinity and salinity have increased in large parts of north western plains 
and soils in the north eastern hills are affected due to acidity. A large 
number of marginal and small farmers generally do not  invest in application 
of micronutrients which also has led to increase in deficiencies of nutrients 
such as zinc, boron, sulphur and iron. This imbalanced nutrient use coupled 
with degrading environments or pollution has led to increasing toxicities of 
arsenic, selenium and other heavy metals. 
 
1.5 According to the written information furnished by the Department to 
the Committee, the major abiotic stresses encountered by agriculture sector 
are drought, floods/water logging, soil and water salinity, soil ac idity and 
nutrient deficiency. Indian soils are generally deficient in nitrogen, 
phosphorus, sulphur and micro-nutrients like zinc and boron. About 25 m ha 
of soils with pH less than 5.4 are critically degraded and have very less 
productivity.  These stres ses can reduce crops productivity by as much as 
65% in India depending on the crop, region and severity of the stresses at 
the national level. Animal and fish productivity are also significantly affected 
by these stresses. About 80 m ha area out of total 1 40 m ha cultivable area 
is rainfed, which is frequently prone to a combination of several stresses 
coupled with drought stress.  The state -wise/zone-wise information is at 
Annexure - I. 
 
1.6 During further Oral Evidence on 25 November, 2010 the Secretary, 
DARE and DG, ICAR informed the Committee as under: 
“Today, we are into several kinds of abiotic stresses, but in many 
places severe cold witnessed in winter, Cold is also one thing and 
last year due to frost in many districts of Rajasthan particularly ther e 
was a extensive loss to crops.  These are all different kinds of abiotic 
stresses which we were not used to experience earlier.  As you 
stated that situation of drought and floods has come up 
simultaneously in various parts of the country.  Now it has be en seen 
that there is flood in Northern portion and drought in Southern portion 
of the same state.  In some districts we came across, say, some 

14 
 
Talukas are under kind of water stress and some under floods.  
These are the kinds of wavering pattern.  This is  what we have been 
submitting. We talk of nitrogen, phosphate and potassium but do not 
talk zinc & sulphur.  First time even for the last five years we have 
been attempting this.  The cloud burst which is rare event but that 
has also added to the frequency .  Of about 327 million hectares, 104 
million hectares are under some on the other stresses”. 
 
1.7 Research and Development in Scientific d isciplines is a capital intensive 
proposition.  Moreso, in frontier science areas.  The Committee, therefore, 
desired to know about the allocations over the years to the Department for 
carrying out their mandated responsibilities professionally and in a time 
bound manner. In response, Secretary, DARE and DG, ICAR stated during 
the Oral Evidence: 
 
“Sir, on the first point  with regard to allocation against Rs.5600 crore 
that we had as Plan allocation during the Tenth Plan, the Working 
Group recommended something like Rs.36000 crore. Then it was 
stated as Rs.31000 crore.  As against that we got a tentative 
allocation of Rs.1 2500 crore, whereas, the actual allocation was 
Rs12023 crore”.  
 
1.8 Carrying further he added: 
“We have also given areas where it might be difficult for us to achieve 
the full objectives because during the current year, we have set very 
specific programme s like enhancing input use efficiencies, our 
programmes in     bio -technology, breed development, diagnostics 
and vaccines. These are some of areas, which we have listed for 
ourselves. We have been told that next year, we could get full 
amount. So we had g iven detailed justification. But as I understand 
now it would be that kind of figure. May be it might go to 20 per cent; 
it may not be beyond that so in that context also, we have submitted 
recently what are those areas, which we can address and what are 
those areas where it might me a problem for us to achieve all the 
targets.  I would again seek you guidance and support in getting 
greater allocations to achieve the full objectives”. 

15 
 
 
 
1.9 In the considered opinion of the Committee, apart from the 
Indian farmer, it is the National Agricultural Research System with 
ICAR as its guiding spirit which has ensured the food security and 
safety of the Country.  With 45 Research Institutes, 4 Deemed 
Universities, 6 National Bureaux, 17 National Research Centers, 25  
Directorates/Project Directorates, 61 All India Coordinated Research 
Projects and 17 Network Projects forming the Research and 
Development core and 45 State Agricultural Universities, one Central 
Agricultural University and 584 KVK forming the bulwark of the 
Extension Services , the DARE/ICAR network has contributed 
significantly towards   self -reliance and development of agriculture 
and allied sectors in India.  Having successfully met the challenge of 
ensuring food security during the last five odd decade s, ICAR need to 
now gear up to face many different types of challenges. The increased 
economic and industrial activities have led to a paradigm shift in the 
climate and environment of the world. Apart from the diseases and 
pestilence, new threats are emerg ing to agriculture sector due to 
global warming and climate change etc.  In such a scenario, 
agriculture which is inherently sensitive to climat ic conditions had 
acquired ad ditional vulnerability, which  at the present juncture is 
highly unpredictable.  
 

16 
 
1.10 Variability in weather particularly when almost 80 million 
hectares of land in India is rainfed poses serious ramifications on the 
agri-sector.  The Committee observe that inspite of the declining 
contribution of this sector to GDP drastically  over the years, 
agriculture continues to provide livelihood to almost 60% of our 
workforce. The Committee note that though abiotic stresses are as old 
as agriculture itself, the changing dimension due to climate change 
are a worrisome aspect.  The growing vagaries of weather apart, 
abiotic stresses are also  a result of  depletion of water table and 
nutrient  imbalances in soil like zinc, boron, sulphur and iron, 
increased salinity and alkalinity, deficiencies of nitrogen, phosphorous 
and sulphur, imbalanced use of fe rtilizers, increasing toxicities of 
selenium and other heavy metals, etc. The Committee realizing the 
emerging threats, had in their Forty Seventh Report (Fourteenth Lok 
Sabha) on the ‘Impact of Global Climate Change on Agriculture and 
Allied Sectors in In dia’ suggested several remedial measures and 
strategies to cope up with the situation.  What has, however,  
dis-appointed them was that the Government, despite being forwarned 
of the impending threats and their likely ramifications on the 
agriculture sector and livelihoods of million of people has chosen to 
remain impervious to the gravity of the situation.  The Committee had 
in view of the capital intensive solutions to these vexed problems 
recommended in their  said Report that National Agriculture Researc h 

17 
 
System ought to be provided sufficient funds to ensure that the 
Research and Development efforts are not hindered.  The Committee 
are, however, highly perturbed to note that the Government has 
singularly failed to adequately fund the research efforts of our 
research scientists.  As has been time and again brought out in 
previous Reports of the Committee, the allocation of Rs.12023 crore 
against Rs.31000 crore recommended by the Working Group  for 
DARE for  the Eleventh Plan, shows complete lack of concern  of the 
Government towards this important aspect. They hope against hope 
that the situation on this front would witness a signifi cant 
improvement at least during  Twelfth Plan. They would like to be 
apprised of the action taken and results obtain in this re gard at the 
earliest. 
 
1.11 The Committee would like to caution the Government that 
climate change presents an unprecedented situation before a 
developing Country like India. The most worrisome aspect being the 
unpredictability of the dimensions of the pro blem;  the overt 
dependence of Indian agri culture on monsoon; the pre-dominance of 
small and marginal farmers and several landless who do not have 
secure livelihoods; the more or less plat eauing of the agricultural 
production;  the continuing socio -economic downgrading of 
agriculture as a profession to cite a few. 
 

18 
 
1.12 As would be clear from the succeeding Chapters, the National 
Agricultural Research System is fully seized of the gravity of the 
problem and is also working on several solutions both long and  short 
term, to mitigate the problems that are arising/may arise from climate 
change. Unfortunately, however, the requisite support of the political 
leadership and the policy  makers is not forthcoming at the requisite 
levels and with due alacrity. The food security of the Country has been 
earned through the relentless toil of our farmers and the selfless 
services of our scientists in the public sector and it should not be 
frittered away due to unimaginative planning and wrong priorities.  If 
we have to ens ure food security for our population in the coming 
years, the Research and Development efforts of National Agricultural 
Research System in agriculture sector are to be catered to the fullest 
and with all promptitude. The Committee expect the Government to 
wake from its slumber and do the needful at least in the Twelfth Plan.  
The Committee also expect the Department to put their proposals 
before the planners and the Government more forcefully and 
purposefully so that their voice is heard and their financial  
requirements are met on priority.      

19 
 
 
CHAPTER-II 
IMPACT OF ABIOTIC STRESS ON AGRICULTURE 
 
The Committee have been informed that during 2008 -09, the area 
under foodgrains was 122.83 million ha with highest ever production of 
234.47 million tonnes. Howev er, during 2009 -10, drought-like situation with 
23% deficit rainfall was experienced in mo st of the States.  Consequently, 
the area under foodgrains declined to 121.37 million ha and the foodgrain 
production to 218 million tonnes (IVth advance estimate, 20 09-10).  The 
table below indicates acreage, production and percentage of monsoon 
during the period 2000-01 to 2009-10: 
 
Years Cropped area 
(million ha) 
Food Production 
(million tonnes) 
 
Monsoon (%) 
2000-01 121.05 196 91 
2001-02 122.78 212 91 
2002-03 113.86 174 81 
2003-04 123.45 213 102 
2004-05 120.08 198 87 
2005-06 121.60 208 99 
2006-07 123.71 217 99 
2007-08 124.07 231 105 
2008-09 122.83 234 98 
2009-10 121.37 218 77 
 
2.2 The above table shows  that there were no linkages between the 
acreage, produ ction and monsoon during the years 2003 -04, 2005 -06, 
2006-07, 2008 -09 and 2009 -10, when inquired the reasons for the same , 
the Department in their written submission informed the Committee that 
these data indicate that cropped area and foodgrains productio n decrease 
when there is deficit rainfall/drought as observed in  
2009-10. However, the distribution of rainfall, both in temporal and spatial 

20 
 
dimensions, is also important. The other factors like input supply and  
agro-climatic conditions also affect foodgrain production. 
  
2.3 When asked the reasons for not developing any mechanism so far to 
find out the loss in acreage  production due to various abiotic stresses, the 
Department responded that sown acreage is largely a function of the 
temporal and spatial nature of precipitation each year and is not impacted in 
a major way by subsequent abiotic stresses. Other abiotic stresses may 
impact production. The correlation between each abiotic stress and its 
impact on production is a matter of long-term research. 
 
2.4 To a pointed query regarding loss of acreage , the Secretary, DARE 
and DG, ICAR submitted during the further Oral Evidence: 
 
“The second point was with regard to the acreage.  On this Sir, we 
would require some more time because we are continuously looking 
into the satellite data.  From there also, we are taking information as 
to what is the kind of increase o r decrease in crop coverage.  So we 
had said that as we go along, we would come up with these figures” 
 
2.5 Another representative of ICAR amplified furthe r on the problem 
during the further Oral Evidence: 
 
“In addition to abiotic stress, when the crop is grown in the farmer‟s 
field, the biotic stress also comes together.  Many times abiotic stress 
makes plant weaker.  Even certain plants which we consider a s 
resistant to certain biotic stress they become susceptible to biotic 
stress.  Sometimes when the yield loss comes, it is just not coming 
for abiotic stress, there are multiple factors attributed to this loss.  
That is the reason we could not pinpoint exa ctly that this loss is 
because of this particular abiotic stress, we only consider when there 
is an extreme climate change or there is a determined climate 
change that we can measure”  
 
2.6 During 2009 drought, ICAR compiled all the available research 
information that included varietal and emergent strategies on contingency 
plans due to delay in monsoon and mid -season breaks. These contingency 

21 
 
plans for facing anticipated eventualities were prepared and coordinated for 
implementation in the Ministry of Agri culture.  Such pro -active steps were 
fortified by each State Agricultural University‟s agro -advisories based on 
weather forecasting in local languages, which helped farmers to minimize 
the loss of food grain production to certain extent. 
 
2.7 Explaining it further Secretary, DARE & DG, ICAR stated during the 
further Oral Evidence: 
“I would like to mention that the year 2010 has experience good 
heavy rainfall.  But several places particularly in Bihar, Jharkhand 
and some places in eastern UP have received de ficient rainfall.  But 
then we would also like to mention that some of these things that we 
are doing, as we submitted here.  What we had in the year 2008 -09, 
what has happened in drought like situation in the year 2009.  We 
have submitted that 122 million  hectares decreased to 121 in last 
year.  But one thing is that ICAR has been doing in its technology, we 
call it drought proofing.  We have done a lot of things during the last 
five years.  It was cropping pattern.  This time when there were 
adequate rains in some districts of Bihar, we recommended pulses, 
like toor dal  and also rabi is going to be very good.  That is the kind 
thing. 
 
I would like to submit that same situation was there in the year 2002 
as we have experienced in the year 2009.  But the ra infall deficit was 
almost the same and the good grain production was reduced.  It has 
decreased to 9 percent, this was earlier 21 percent , production of oil 
seeds reduced to 22 percent , from 44 percent, sugarcane, the point 
is that drought proofing that w e have been trying to recommend in 
terms of packages, cropping pattern and several other kinds of  
agro – advisories that we are providing, and then conservation of 
agricultural technology, zero tillage, etc. we are able to clearly 
demonstrate the drought p roofing efficiency in 2009 has been a very 
clear contribution of the Department”. 
 
2.8 In the short term, these efforts have reduced the impact of 
anticipated adversities due to drought –like situations. In the long-term also, 
when the district level conti ngency plans will be implemented by the State 
Governments, the fruits of agricultural research will reach the farmers and 
would improve the knowledge and skill to face severe adversities. 

22 
 
 
2.9 Intensive agriculture in some places has caused depletion of na tural 
resources such as water and nutrients, leading to lowered water table and 
nutrient imbalances in  the production system.  Alkalinity and salinity in large 
parts of north western plains have increased and soils in the north eastern 
hills are affected due to acidity.  A large number of marginal and small 
farmers generally does not invest steps towards amelioration as well as in 
application of micronutrients which has led to increase in deficiencies of 
nutrients such as zinc, boron, sulphur, iron and als o prevent degrading 
environment or pollution. 
  
2.10 The Department of Agricultural Research and Education informed the 
Committee that soil fertility aspect of Agriculture has never been a neglected 
area in any of the ecological zones of the Country. Three  All India 
Coordinated Research Projects (AICRP on Micro and Secondary Nutrients, 
AICRP on Soil Test Crop Response Correlation Studies and AICRP on 
Long Term Fertilizer Experiments) have been making sincere and dedicated 
efforts in collaboration with SAUs and ICAR Institutes and have undertaken 
to assess the soil fertility status of Indian soils periodically. 
 
2.11 The Committee desired to know the details of work undertaken to 
map and classify the soil nutrition or health conditions and to educate the 
farmers to cultivate their land accordingly. The Department of Agricultural 
Research and Education/ICAR informed that they have prepared soil fertility 
maps of macronutrients (NPK) for 20 States and micronutrient maps for 10 
States. Majority of the districts w ere low to medium in N and P and medium 
to high in K. The Council has undertaken preparation of GIS -based soil 
fertility maps (both macro and micronutrients) for different Districts/States. 
The fertilizer recommendations developed have become part of State s‟ 
package of practices for various crops. Decision support systems have been 
developed by National Informatics Centre ( NIC), Pune , in Tamil Nadu, 

23 
 
Andhra Pradesh, Maharashtra, Punjab, Chhattisgarh, Himachal Pradesh 
and Orissa for soil test based fertilizer  recommendations for the benefit of 
farmers. 
 
2.12 Elaborating further on this vital aspect a representative of the 
Department stated during the further Oral Evidence: 
 
“Sir, you mentioned about soil health, I would like to inform this 
august Committee tha t we have prepared roadmaps for 21 States 
and they have been created recently.  Out of these, in 12 Stats, we 
have developed a support system which is based on the soil, crop 
and what the farmer would like to get, including crops yield,  
district-wise.  Out of these 21 States, nine States have it up to Tehsil 
level.  In a State, anybody can go to that particular Tehsil, click on it, 
and the information is there.  If he can feed soil test values, he will 
get exact recommendation.  Otherwise based on the valu es that are 
available, the recommendation is made.   This information is  
crop-wise, soil -wise, and this Tehsil -wise information takes care of 
the agro-climatic conditions.  We know that it is the decrease in the 
organic carbon which has a bearing on the s oil health.  We have 
initiated and we have come up with recommendations for integrated 
nutrient management so that one knows how much of chemical 
fertilizers could be substituted by organic so that soil health is 
maintained.  We have got those recommendati ons for different crops 
and for different soils.  
  
 We also have an organic farming project which has been in 
operation since 2004 at 13 location s in the Country plus the State 
Agricultural Universities.  Now, we have in fact compiled all the 
available in formation.  It is available with our Institute which is 
coordinating this at Modipuram.  The information on what are the 
best practices for organic farming is available.  There are many gaps 
which the farmers are not aware of.  We have addressed this also”.          
 
 
Increasing climatic risks due to climate change 
 
2.13 The global atmospheric concentration of Carbon Dioxide (CO 2), a 
Greenhouse Gas (GHG) largely responsible for global warming has 
increased from a pre -industrial value of about 280 ppm in 175 0 AD to 379 

24 
 
ppm in  2005.  Similarly, the global atmospheric concentration of methane 
and nitrous oxides, other important GHGs, has also increased considerably.  
The Inter -governmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) has shown that 
this has resulted in warm ing of the climate system by 0.74 0C between 1906 
and 2005 and twelve of the last fourteen years (1995 -2008) rank among the 
warmest years in the instrumental record of global surface temperature 
since 1850.  Global average sea level rose at an average rate of 1.8 mm per 
year over 1961 to 2003 and IPCC has projected that the global annual 
temperature is likely to increase in the range of 1.4 to 4.5 0C by the end of 
this century.  Overall, the temperature increases are likely to be much 
higher in winter ( rabi) season then in rainy season ( kharif). Precipitation is 
likely to increase; tropical cyclones will become more intense in future, with 
larger peak wind speeds and more heavy precipitation. It is very likely that 
hot extremes, heat waves, and heavy precipita tion events will continue to 
become more frequent. 
 
Impacts of climate change on Agriculture 
 
2.14 Photosynthesis of several crops increases as atmospheric carbon 
dioxide increases.  Such carbon accumulation  effects are important for 
crops such as rice, wheat and pulses.  The yields of these crops, in general, 
increase by 10-15% as CO2 goes up from 380 ppm (almost current level) to 
550 ppm.  Despite this, associated increase in temperatures and increased 
variability of rainfall are likely to considerabl y impact food production. The 
IPCC report and few other global studies indicate a probability of 10 -40% 
loss in crop production in India with increases in temperature by 2080-2100. 
 Small changes in temperature and rainfall causes significant effect on 
quality of fruits, vegetables, tea, coffee, aromatic, and medicinal plants with 
resultant implications on their prices and trade. 
 
2.15 The Department of Agriculture Research and Education have 
informed that after the IPCC report and a few other studies, simulati on 

25 
 
analyses were carried out under the Network Project on Climate Change 
with following observations:  
(1) Likely loss of 4 -5 million tons in wheat production with every rise of 
1oC temperature throughout the growing period. 
(2) Reduce the irrigated wheat production by ~5% in 2030                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               
and up to 25% in 2080 scenarios.  
(3) Reduction in irrigated rice production is likely to be about 2% in 
2030 scenario and up to 10% loss in different climate change 
scenario for 2080 time period, while the rainfed rice production is 
likely to benefit by about 2% in 2030 scenario  but in 2080 scenario, 
a 8% loss is projected.  
(4) Reduction in the yields of irrigated kharif maize is likely to be 
around 6.83% in 2030 scenario  
(5) Global climate change may increase production of potato in Punjab, 
Haryana and western and central UP b y 3.46 to 7.11% in 2030 
scenario, but in rest of India particularly West Bengal and plateau 
region potato production may decline by 4 to 16%. Such climatic 
changes are likely to result in increased soybean yields by 8 -13%. 
Effect of climate change on groun dnut is likely to be variable  with 
yields varying between -5% and +7% as compared to current yield. 
(6) Simulation studies indicate positive effect of climate change on 
coconut yields Kerala, Maharastra, North -Eastern states and parts 
of Tamil Nadu and par ts of Karnataka while they are projected to 
decline in Andhra Pradesh, Orissa, Gujarat and parts of Tamil Nadu 
and parts of Karnataka in 2020, 2050 and 2080 scenarios. In west 
coast, yields are projected to increase by up to 10% in 2020, up to 
16% in 2050 and up to 39% by 2080 while in east coast yields are 
projected to decline by up to 2% in 2020, 8% in 2050 and 31% in 
2080 scenario.   
(7) North-ward extension of abundance  of fishes oil saradine  and  
mackerel and shift in spawning period of some species ha s taken 
place due to increase in sea surface temperature. 
(8)  Heat stress is projected to decrease the milk production in 
livestock. This would require better shelter management in 
livestock.  
 

26 
 
2.16 When asked the direct and indirect, short term as well a s long term 
effects and implications of climate change and global warming on 
enhancement of abiotic stress in the agricultural sector in the Country and 
the extent to which the Government were equipped to face the challenges , 
the Department stated that the  direct and indirect effects of climate change 
on enhancement of abiotic stresses such as floods, droughts, heat waves, 
are studied by the Ministry of Earth Sciences and its affiliated institutions, 
especially Indian Meteorology Department and Indian Insti tute of Tropical 
Meteorology, Pune.  At the same time, Inter -Governmental Panel on 
Climate Change, a UN body assesses the global research on this theme 
and periodically produces analytical reports.  These studies based on  
long-term climatic modeling of fu ture have indicated that future tropical 
cyclones will become more intense, with larger peak wind speeds and 
heavier precipitation in India.  It is very likely that hot extremes, heat waves, 
and heavy precipitation events will continue to become more frequ ent.  That 
would mean greater frequency of drought and floods events. 

27 
 
 
 
2.17 The Committee note with a sense of trepidation the continued 
havoc caused by abiotic stresses to the agriculture and allied sector 
produce of the Country.  The abiotic stresses a lone as also in tandem 
with other factors like input supply deficiencies, agro -climatic 
conditions, biotic stresses, etc. continue to be a major worry for the 
farming community and the agriculture scientists alike since till date 
effective solutions for ta ckling them are not readily available.  The 
extensive loss caused to food grain production by the droughts, which 
are abiotic stresses, during 1987 and 2002 are well documented.  As 
admitted by the Department the cold waves, which are also a form of 
abiotic stress caused substantial damage to mustard, mango, guava, 
papaya, brinjal, tomato and potato corps during 2002.  In like manner 
the heat stress in 2004 in the Indo -Gangetic Plains led to the wheat 
crop maturing earlier by 10 -20 days.  The Committee further note that 
as compared to these staggering losses during the 2009 drought, loss 
of food grain production was prevented to a certain extent.  This 
happened because ICAR took several pro -active measures.  These 
include compiling all the available research  information including 
varietal and emergent strategies on contingency plans for facing 
anticipated eventualities.  The efforts of ICAR were also ably 
supplemented by weather forecasting of agro -advisories in local 
languages by the State Agriculture Univer sities.  According to the 

28 
 
Committee, the example drought mitigation efforts of 2009 can be a 
trend setter for the future strategies for tackling calamities caused by 
abiotic stresses.  The Committee, however, feel that apart from the 
need of institutionali zing a coordinated multi -agency,  
multi-disciplinary strategy a lot needs to be done on the research and 
development front by the ICAR.   
 
2.18 The abiotic and biotic stresses have as old a history as 
agriculture itself.  The only difference now being that  the climate 
change and global warming have fastened the pace of natural 
vagaries.  This can be gauged from the fact that the twelve of the years 
between 1995 and 2008 have been the warmest in the instrumental 
record of global surface tem perature since 185 0. The  
Inter-Governmental Panel on Climate Control a UN body has projected 
that global annual temperature is likely to increase in the range of 1.4 
to 4.5ºC by the end of this century ,  leading to increased precipitation, 
more intense tropical cyclones, h igher peak wind speeds causing hot 
extremes, heat waves and heavy precipitation events more frequently.  
The Committee have also been informed by the Department that in the 
aftermath of IPCC report and other studies , simulation studies have 
been carried out under Network Project on Climate Change.  T o them, 
the outcome of these simulations presents a very bleak scenario in the 
Indian context.  The irrigated wheat production may reduce by 5% in 

29 
 
2030 and by almost one fourth in 2080; reduction in irrigated rice 
production likely to be about 2% in 2030 and upto 10% upto 2080; 
refined rice production to increase by 2% upto 2030 but dip by 8% by 
2080; irrigated Kharif maize to decrease by almost 9% by 2030; varying 
effects on production of potato, soybean, ground nut, etc; decreased 
milk production in livestock.   
 
2.19 Even in such a scenario , the Committee draw consolation from 
the fact that atleast the Government are fully aware of what all 
problems the Country  might face in future due to abiotic stress 
factors.  What is now required is that the various 
Ministries/Departments of the Government have to put their heads 
together and devise strategies, both short term and long term, to take 
care of the problems arising out of or incidental to various abiotic 
stresses.  Merely, passing around pressing issues or issues which 
may acquire pressing dimensions later on, just because of 
jurisdictional considerations or constraints is not going to pay any 
dividends on an all encompassing matter like abiotic stress resulting 
from climate change.  The Government need to take a cue from the UN 
initiative of the Inter-Governmental Panel on Climate Change and form 
an inter-ministerial body consisting of all Ministries/Departments, who 
have some or the other mandate relevant to work ing out a holistic 
response and putting in place a suitable mechanism for ta ckling 

30 
 
climate change, abiotic stress not excluded.    DARE/ICAR being the 
nodal body of the National Agricultural Research System, the 
Committee expect them to play a more proacti ve role in facilitating the 
creation of such an inter -ministerial body for devising the strategies, 
working out interfaces, putting a suitable mechanism in place and 
finally for implementation of those strategies for consoling and or 
mitigating the effects  of abiotic stress on the agriculture and allied 
sectors.  The Committee would like to have a detailed Action Plan in 
this regard from DARE detailing all the action that has already been 
taken and what all still needs to be done for fructification of the 
strategies, wherewithal and infrastructure for combating climate 
change and mitigating the resultant aggravation in abiotic stresses.      
 
2.20 Coming to the immediate task ahead for DARE/ICAR, the 
Committee note that the intensive agriculture in various p arts of the 
Country has caused depletion of natural resources such as water and 
nutrients, leading to lowered water table and nutrient imbalances in 
the production systems. The Government have so far prepared soil 
fertility maps of micronutrients (NPK) for  only 20 States and 
micronutrient maps for 10 States. The Committee express their 
unhappiness over the tardy progress of mapping of soil fertility. Due 
to this, a large number of marginal and small farmers do not invest in 
application of micronutrients whi ch has lead to increase in 

31 
 
deficiencies of nutrients such as zinc, boron, sulphur and iron and 
also degrading environment or pollution. The Committee, therefore, 
urge the Department of Agricultural Research and Education  to 
complete the mapping of soil fe rtility of all the remaining States in a 
time bound manner as this step would also contribute significantly in 
the strategies being evolved for tackling abiotic stresses.  
 

32 
 
CHAPTER-III 
 
 
ONGOING ENDEAVOURS 
 
  
  ICAR have taken up various crop breeding activities to overcome the 
effects of abiotic stresses by developing varieties which have the capability 
to minimize the impact of abiotic stresses.  This has been made possible by 
utilizing both natural genetic variability in the crop and its related species  
through conventional means of introgressing the abiotic stress tolerant 
genes.  Plant breeders in India have gained expertise in employing the 
conventional tools , integrated with non -conventional means such as  
bio-technological approaches, in strengtheni ng their efforts in breeding for 
abiotic stress resistance. However, the major constraints at present are:  
(i) Research infrastructure such as state -of-the art facilities comprising 
phytotron (growth chambers and green houses), rainout shelters, Rhizotron , 
multi-location soil micro-climate recording systems, free air Carbon di -oxide  
enrichment set -up, etc.; and (ii) Capacity building for expertise 
enhancement in India and abroad. 
 
3.2 The research for development of abiotic stress resistant crop 
varieties and animal and fish breeds needs greater infrastructure, capacity 
building for which adequate financial support is necessary. While some 
efforts are underway in terms of research projects for assessment of impact 
of climate change and adaptation strategie s in crops, livestock and fish and 
on mitigation of greenhouse gases, gene allele mining, etc., it is necessary 
that a strong national effort is initiated to comprehensively address all 
aspects of abiotic stress management. The contemplated activities incl ude 
application of short, medium and long range weather forecasts in 
agricultural risk management, establishment of controlled environment 
facilities for Carbon di -oxide, temperature and rainfall and adaptation 
research to develop crop varieties and animal/fish breeds for traits/genes for 

33 
 
adaptation. This requires an additional financial allocation of at least  
Rs.1000 crore during the current Plan period and continued allocation 
during the Twelfth Plan. 
 
3.3 The National Agricultural Research System has built over the last five 
decades a robust system of testing, evaluating and advancing the products 
of crop breeding in different crops independent of the developer institution 
under the All India Coordinated Crop Improvement Programme (AICCIP) of 
ICAR.  Thro ugh this programme, all the public and now private sector 
products of research in crop improvement get tested as well as targeted to 
different agro-ecologies of the Country.  This system is one of the best in 
the world in general and near ideal when it com es to identification of most 
suitable varieties for different stresses and yield limiting situations. The 
AICCIP enables not only the evaluation of the stress resistance traits in 
multiple locations, but also enables the identification of varieties suitabl e for 
diverse situations of production conditions.  Some of the achievements 
made in evolving suitable varieties, hybrids, etc. have been given for 
different crops in Annexure – II 
 
3.4 When asked about the status of finance, human resources, 
infrastructure facilities, R & D infrastructure, extension network etc. available 
with ICAR to confront the challenges and climate change and the resultant 
abiotic stress, the Department in their written submission stated that ICAR 
has made some re -allocation of finances etc. to strengthen the research on 
climate change and abiotic stresses.  It has a national network on climate 
change impacts, adaptation and mitigation with 23 research centers.  In the 
Eleventh Plan, a National Institute on Abiotic Stress has been established to 
further strengthen research in this area.  At the same time, several 
individual projects have also been approved including shelter management 
in livestock as an adaptation strategy for climate change. 
 

34 
 
3.5 The impact of climate change is likely to be very large and cannot be 
adequately met unless additional funds and human resource are made 
available over and above the current allocations.  The additional allocation 
of over the next five years and hundred scientists especially recruited and 
trained in best laboratories of the world will be desirable. This allocation of 
additional research grant will be used to strengthen R & D infrastructure 
facilities and operational research grants particularly for genomic and 
phonemics. The existing infrastruct ure will be used for climate change as 
well. The extension services need to be strengthened to disseminate 
technologies to face climate change and resultant abiotic stresses. 
 
3.6 ICAR had initiated a network project on climate change in the Tenth 
Plan period with 15 centers which were expanded to 23  during the Eleventh 
Plan period under this project.  The impact of climate change on field crops, 
horticultural crops, fisheries, dairy and poultry sector is being studied using 
the field experiments, Controll ed Environment Facilities, Free Atmospheric 
CO2 Enrichment, Open Top Chamber, Temperature Growth Tunnel facilities 
and through crop simulation modelling.   
 
 
3.7 On being queried  if the genetically Modified seed can be a healthy 
solution for combating the  abiotic stress, the Department in their written 
reply stated that Genetically Modified seeds can be a healthy solution for 
combating the abiotic stress. Work is in progress at ICAR and other 
institutes in the Country to develop GM crops resistant to abiot ic stresses, 
such as drought, salinity, high temperature, cold stress, etc. Genes that are 
used for developing GM crops have in many cases multiple effects and 
have potential to provide tolerance to multiple stresses.  ICAR Network 
Project on Transgenics i n Crops (NPTC) and several projects funded by 
DBT are in place. GM seeds are being developed with improved tolerance 
to abiotic stresses in rice, wheat, mustard, groundnut, sugarcane, cotton 
and tomato. 

35 
 
 
3.8  From abiotic stress -wise point of view, it is i mportant that GM crops 
are developed for all stresses in a single genotype. This is possible by gene 
pyramiding using transgenic approach, by marker -assisted selection of 
breeding lines and combining both. However, more emphasis needs to be 
given to drough t tolerance than for any other type of abiotic stresses 
because of the water scarcity that is linked with the change in global 
climate. Water/phosphorous use efficiency will allow crops to grow with less 
water. The current water level situation in Punjab a nd Haryana is alarming 
as is arsenic problem in West Bengal. Instead of pumping more ground 
water, built-in drought stress tolerant crops could be a better solution which 
will require less water. 
 
3.9 The ICAR has been taking several new initiatives based on the tools 
of modern science to develop crop varieties resistant to abiotic stresses.  
These initiatives include : 
a) Bio-prospecting of genes and allele mining; 
 
b) Research on c onversion of C3 crops like rice and wheat to more 
efficient C4 type for inc reased productivity under abiotic stress 
conditions; 
 
c) Functional genomics, QTL mapping and marker development;  
 
d) Transgenic development using the tools of genomics and genetic 
engineering; 
 
e) Establishment of National Institute of Abiotic Stress Man agement; 
and 
 
f) Climate Resilient Agriculture. 
 
 
3.10 The ICAR has initiated a mega project involving 36 research 
institutions for bio -prospecting of genes and allele mining for abiotic stress 
tolerance with a sanctioned budget of Rs. 57.132 crore for th ree years 
starting from 4 May, 2009. This is expected to be expanded in the second 

36 
 
phase to capitalize on the leads obtained in the first three years of the 
programme. Specific research strategies have been designed and are being 
executed to create genomic  resource base and prospect new genes and 
alleles. Besides, efforts have been made to create relevant infrastructure 
and generate trained human resources in the area of research. For human 
resource development, 21 scientists have been identified for traini ng 
in/study visit to reputed laboratories of the world. Besides, training of 
research staff employed in the project is being undertaken in specific areas. 
 
3.11 The Government have sanctioned and released the following 
budgetary provisions for Bio-prospecting of Genes and Allele Mining project 
during the Eleventh Plan: 
 2009-10 2010-11 2011-12 Total 
 
Sanctioned Budget 
in Crore Rs. 
32.09 14.28 10.74 57.13 
Release 16.02 - - - 
 
3.12 The Department of Agricultural Research and Education further 
informed the follo wing specific quantifiable results of the Bio -prospecting 
Programme:-  
 (i)  1,488 microbes including 998 bacteria, 160 fungi, 200 cyanobacteria 
and 130 phyto and zoo -planktons isolated from extreme 
environments have been found tolerant to a wide range of abiotic 
stresses including moisture deficit, cold, heat, salinity and anoxia. 
Significantly, one of the extremophilic fungi is unique that grows in  
35 % salinity. All these prospected microbes are valuable resources 
for finding new genes and alleles; 
(ii)   Core collection of rice, Lathyrus, mothbean and Cucumis consisting 
of 7227, 295, 175 and 223 diverse germplasm lines respectively have 
been identified and value -added by phenotypic characterization for 
abiotic stress tolerance; 

37 
 
(iii) Novel stress respon sive genes have been identified from rice 
varieties Nagina 22 and Dangaddeshi for drought tolerance, and 
Pokali, Nonabokra and CSR30 for salinity tolerance, from moth bean 
for drought (RMO -435) and heat (RMO -40 tolerance, from 
Arthobactersulfures for cold tolerance, from Dromedarian camesl for 
cold tolerance, from cat fish for anoxic stress tolerance. Full length 
cDNA for two genes (Na +K+ATPase and carbonic anhydrase) for salt 
tolerance have been cloned from marine shrimp; 
(iv)  Functional validation of two  stress responsive bzip transcription 
factor genes of rice has been carried out using model plant system 
Arabidopsis, early observations suggest that one of these genes 
would be promising in imparting stress tolerance. Besides, stress 
responsive promoter o f PYL5 gene has been cloned from sorghum 
genotypes; 
(v) New alleles have been identified for the transcription factor gene 
AP37 having role in drought tolerance in sorghum and for catalase 2 
gene in moth bean; and 
(vi) Facilities created (a) High throughpu t Genotyping Facility at NRCPB, 
New Delhi; and (b) Statistical and Computational Genomics Facility 
at IASRI, New Delhi. 
 
3.13 When asked the details of funds received and actual expenditure 
incurred under the project funded by National Agriculture Innovati on Project 
of ICAR with the object of isolating the necessary genes of C -3 crops like 
rice and wheat to more efficient C -4 type for increased productivity under 
abiotic stress condition, the Department informed that a sum of Rs. 2.61 
crore has been receive d and a sum of Rs. 2.36 crore were spent during 
2008-09 to 2010-11 under the said Project. 
 
3.14 Asked further about the Plans/Schemes/Projects devised and 
designed specially with focus on abiotic stress resistant crop varieties by the 

38 
 
Department of Agricu lture Research and Education and Indian Council of 
Agriculture Research, the Department responded that there was no specific 
scheme/plan project operative except project on transgenics in crops which 
includes abiotic stress also.  In addition, development of abiotic stress 
tolerant varieties are integrated in Institutes/Directorate/concerned AICRPs 
research programmes. 
   
3.15 The Committee were further informed that the ICAR have initiated in 
house project on development of transgenic wheat and rice in imp roved 
resistance to abiotic stresses.  To supplement the in -house project, ICAR 
have also approved a Network project on Transgenics in Crops in 
September, 2005 with an emphasis on resistance to insect/pests, viral and 
bacterial diseases and for tolerance t o abiotic stresses.  The following 
institutions have been assigned with the task of development of gene 
constructs and development of transgenic crop varieties for resistance  to 
abiotic stresses.  
S. No. Item Institution 
1. Development of gene constructs  NRCPB, New Delhi 
2. Development of transgenics: 
Rice 
Wheat 
Mustard 
Tomato 
Chickpea 
Groundnut 
Cotton 
  
 
NRCPB, DRR, Hyderabad, CRRI, 
Cuttack, 
NRCPB 
NRCPB, NRCRM, 
Bharatpur 
NRCPB, IIHR, Bangalore, 
IIVR, Varanasi 
IIPR, Kanpur 
NRCG, Junagadh 
CICR, Nagpur UAS, 
Dhaward and NRCPB 
 
3.16 During the Tenth and Eleventh plans, a sum of Rs. 95.93 crore was 
allocated and a sum of Rs.70.32 crore was spent under NPTC project only 

39 
 
rice and tomato were included for abiotic tolerance in the Tenth Plan , but in 
the Eleventh Plan, chickpea and groundnut have also been included. 
 
3.17 They further informed the Committee that the National Institute of 
Abiotic Stress Management has already started functioning with following 
objects:  
1. To assess and quantify the effects of major abiotic stresses on 
agriculture and develop a repository of information on abiotic 
stress management; 
 
2. To develop screening techniques and evolve stress tolerant 
genotypes/breeding stock/strains of crops, horticulture, 
animals, fish and microorganisms through mining and 
deploying novel genes for tolerance to abioti stresses; 
 
3. To evolve technologies for mitigation of drought, other edaphic 
and atmospheric stresses through frontier science tools such 
as nano technology, geo-informatics; etc. 
 
4. To dev elop human resource through advanced training and 
capacity building on the use of modern tools and techniques in 
abiotic stress research and management; 
 
5. To conduct policy support research on abiotic stress 
management in collaboration with institutes/or ganisations/ 
SAUs; and 
 
6. To forge national and international linkages with other 
organizations working on abiotic stress. 
 
3.18 The Institute will implement important research programmes in a 
thematic mode and will function through four schools, namely, Drought 
Stress Management; Atmospheric Stress Management; Adaphic Stress 
Management and Policy Support Research.  The Institute will also focus on 
strategic human resource development for long term tackling of different 
stresses in the frontier areas with the participation of wide network of Indian 
and International institutes involving visiting fellowships and exchange 
programmes.  A amount of Rs. 73.5 crore has been approved for the 

40 
 
Institute during the Eleventh Plan Period.  Detailed information is given  in 
Annexure – III. 
 
3.19 On being queried about the present status of the Institute the 
Department furnished the following information:  
(a) The Institute will be fully functional by the end of XI 
Plan/beginning of XII Plan. The approval for 71 posts incl uding 
Heads of Schools, scientists and Registrar has been received 
from Ministry of Finance. The process of recruitment for these 
posts has started; 
 
(b) In addition to Director, 6 Scientists have been posted in the 
Institute to carry out research. One Adm inistrative Officer, One 
Finance & Accounts Officer, One Assistant Administrative Officer, 
5 Technical Officers and one upper divisional clerk have also 
been posted in the Institute to support the research and 
administration. The office has started functioning from its campus; 
and 
 
(c) The total sanction for the Institute is Rs. 73.50 crores during the 
XI Plan. Till date, an amount of Rs. 13.01 crores has been spent 
for the purpose. 
 
3.20 The Committee were informed that a new Scheme on National 
Initiative on Climate Resilient Agriculture with an outlay of Rs. 350 crore has 
been initiated during the Eleventh Plan with the administrative approval of 
Department of Agricultural Research and Education on 6 January, 2011 and 
financial sanction of ICAR on 12 Janua ry, 2011. This Sche me has become 
operational with its  launching on 1 February, 2011 and finalization of 
technical programme in consultation with all the partner institutions. It will be 
fully functional in 2011-12. 
 
3.21 A national network entitled „Impact s, Adaptation and vulnerability of 
Indian Agriculture to climate change‟ was launched in 2004 with the 
objective of quantifying the sensitivity of crops including horticultural crops 
and plantations, soils, water, fish and livestock to climate changes. The  
project has 23 partners in ICAR institutes and SAUs. 

41 
 
 
 
3.22 The details of BE, RE and expenditure incurred since the inception of 
the project is as follows: 
(Rs. in Lakhs) 
Indicator 2004-05 2005-06 2006-07 2007-08 2008-09 2009-10 
BE RE Expdt* BE RE Expdt BE RE Expdt BE RE Expdt BE RE Expdt BE RE Expdt 
Crop 111.01 111.01 45.79 343.59 358.57 358.57 153.00 153.00 152.90 146.84 146.84 128.00 162.59 237.59 150.01 154.55 -- 80.70 
Fisheries 25.14 27.14 9.02 77.23 77.23 77.23 24.00 24.00 24.00 35.75 35.75 33.00 36.00 51.00 33.81 12.33 -- 10.55 
Livestock 12.30 12.30 5.08 37.00 37.00 37.00 12.00 12.00 11.95 15.86 15.86 6.88 17.86 22.86 15.26 15.72 -- 11.50 
Soil 7.30 7.30 1.17 28.50 28.50 28.50 12.00 12.00 11.95 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 14.69 -- 10.50 
Water 7.30 7.30 4.56 33.70 33.70 33.70 12.00 12.00 12.00 11.55 11.55 2.50 13.55 18.55 10.92 2.71 -- 2.75 
Total 163.05 165.05 65.62 520.02 535.00 535.00 213.00 213.00 212.80 210.00 210.00 170.38 230.00 330.00 210.00 200.00 0.00 116.00 
* Note : During 2004-05 the project came into operation in December, 2004 with the launching of the pr oject by the DDG 
at CRIDA. So, the expenditure was restricted to Rs. 65.62 lakhs. 
 
3.23 When asked about the steps taken by the Department of Agricultural 
Research and Education to set up Meteorological Kendras in each KVK, the 
Department informed the Committee that there is no provision for 
establishing of such Kendras in KVKs. It was further stated that the setting 
up of Meteorological Kendra is being looked by the Indian Meteor ological 
Department.  
  
3.24 The Department of Agricultural Research and Education/ICAR further 
informed that a national conference was organized on climate change and 
Indian Agriculture in 2007.  When queried about the details of steps taken 
by them as a follow up of the conference in respect of establishment of 
automatic weather station in each KVK for agro met observations, 
developmental project on agriculture intelligence and weather watch group 
etc. and development of new infrastructure, policies and institutional support 
„Green Research Fund‟ etc., the  Department informed that they have so far 
established weather stations/automatic weather Stations in following KVKs 
which will be funded by the IMD, National Horticulture Mission, Department 
of Agriculture and Cooperation, State Governments, etc: 
 
 

42 
 
Sl. 
No. 
State No. of 
Weather 
Station 
Name of KVK 
1. Zone-I 
 Punjab 6 Amritsar, Hoshiarpur, Jalandhar, 
Kapurthala, Muktsar, Faridkot 
 Himachal 
Pradesh 
1 Una 
2. Zone-II 
 Jharkhand 13 Bokaro, Chatra, Dhanbad , Dumka, East 
Singhbhum, Garhwa, Giridih, Lohardga, 
Pakur, Palamu, Ranchi, Sahibganj, West 
Singhbhum 
3. Zone-III 
 Manipur 1 Senapti 
4. Zone-IV 
 Uttar 
Pradesh 
15 Saharanpur, Ghaziabad, Rampur, 
Shahjahanpur, Budaun, Aligarh, 
Lakhimpurkheri, Etawah, Raeba reli, 
Jhansi, Siddharthnagar, Gorakhspur, 
Ballia, Jaunpur & Barabanki 
 Uttarakhand 2 Rudraprayag & Champawat 
 
5. Zone-V 
 Maharashtra 3 Ahmednagar, Pur & Nashik 
6. Zone-VI 
 Rajasthan NIL -- 
 Gujarat NIL -- 
7. Zone-VII 
 Orissa NIL -- 
 Chattisgarh 
MP 
NIL -- 
8. Zone-VIII 
 Karnataka 8 Raichur, Gulbarga, Uttar Kannada, 
Bellary, Bidar, Tunkur, Bangalore Rural, 
Hassan 
 Tamil Nadu 5 Thiruvarur, Madurai, Virudhunagar, 
Trichy, Villupuram 
 Kerala 2 Calicut, Kasaragod 
 Goa 1 North Goa 
  
 
 

43 
 
3.25 The Department is regularly monitoring the status of crop situations 
and putting inputs on the ICAR website on different crop management  
practices including contingency planning. The Development project on 
agricultural intelligence and weather watch group etc. will  be taken up in the 
National Mission on sustainable agriculture.  In regard to Green Research 
Fund, the Department informed that a concept note has already discussed 
in the Multi -Disciplinary Expert Group on climate change and function of 
proposal is under  active consideration. The present and proposed 
infrastructures will be utilized for conducting the research activities at 
difference institutes to study the impact of climate change on agriculture. 
 
3.26 When asked about the number of farmers benefited in   each of the 
agro-climate zones following the alternative cropping s ystems evolved and 
propagated by ICAR to face various abiotic stress either by mitigating the 
crop or the financial  losses by alternative crops, the Department of 
Agricultural Research and Education stated that no specific study has been 
conducted on the adaption of contingency cropping strategy , but many of 
the less expensive strategies are being adopted by more than 30 -40% of 
the farmers in some States which have a strong seed supply an d 
information dissemination systems. 
 
3.27 Asked further the  reasons for failure of actual and feasible 
implementation of various alternative cropping systems developed by ICAR 
for various abiotic stress situations, the Department of Agricultural Research 
and Education informed that the ground level implementation of the 
contingency cropping systems strategy requires extensive coordination 
between the State department of agriculture, seed supplying agencies and 
the State Agricultural Universities. At presen t this is somewhat weak and 
needs to be strengthened.  
3.28 On being queried about the  status of the District Level Contingency 
Plan in the Country, the Department in their written reply stated that a total 

44 
 
of 575 Districts Contingency Plans have been tar geted out of which 102 
Plans have already been completed and 257 Plans are under preparation. 
The State -wise status of the District Contingency Plans is presented in 
following table: 
 
State-wise status on preparation of district contingency plans  
(As on 24 February, 2011) 
 
State(total 
district) 
Targeted 
Plans 
Plans 
completed 
Plans under 
preparation 
Plans yet to 
be taken up 
Andhra Pradesh 
(23) 
22 22 0 0 
Karnataka (30) 30 20 10 0 
Kerala (14) 13 1 12 0 
Tamil Nadu (32) 32 25 6 1 
Gujarat (26) 26 12 14 0 
Maharashtra (35) 33 13 15 5 
Madhya Pradesh 
(50) 
50 0 12 38 
Rajasthan (33) 32 6 23 3 
Haryana (21) 21  19 2 
Himachal 
Pradesh (12) 
12  2 10 
Jammu & 
Kashmir (22) 
22  1 21 
Punjab (20) 20  20 0 
Uttar Pradesh 
(71) 
69  27 42 
Uttarakhand (13) 13  1 12 
Bihar (38) 38  19 19 
Chhattisgarh (18) 18  0 18 
Jharkhand (24) 24  6 18 
Orissa (30) 30  30 0 
West Bengal (19) 18  18 0 
Assam (27) 21  1 20 
Manipur (9) 6  4 2 
Tripura (4) 2  1 1 
Sikkim (4) 4 2 2 0 
 Nagaland (11) 11  10 1 
Arunachal 
Pradesh (16) 
4  1 3 
Mizoram (8) 1  1 0 
Meghalaya (7) 3 1 2 0 
 575 102 257 216 
 

45 
 
 
 
3.29 When asked about the major countries presently engaged in 
appreciable research in the field of developing abiotic stress resistant crop 
varieties and their approach, the Department infor med the Committee that 
most of the developed countries like USA, Australia, UK, China, Japan, etc. 
as well as Government centres such as IRRI, CIMMYT, ICRISA T, ICARDA, 
etc. are engaged in d evelopment of resistant varieties through conventional 
methods as w ell as transgenics and other bio -technological approaches.  
The Committee were also informed that our approaches are also similar to 
those adopted by these developed Countries.  ICAR/DARE also have 
collaborative projects with some of them. There is scope f or common 
strategy in dealing the abiotic stress crops specially with CG Institutes. 
Already work plans are in operation with CG Institutes.  One of the 
significant finding of such an approac h is development of Swarna Sub -1 
variety of rice which can tolerate the water logging submergence upto 12-15 
days.  Normal Swrana Variety has no tolerance.  This is in collaboration with 
IRRI, Phillipines.  This gene is being introduced in a number of other rice 
varieties. 
 
 
3.30 On the question of the number of Awareness Programmes conducted 
on the theme of Abiotic Stress Management in the Country during the last 
10 years by the DARE/ICAR and the impact of such Awareness 
Programmes, the Department of Agricultural Research and Education 
informed that they have conducted Awareness Programmes during 2008 at 
different locations across the Country and approximately 3100 farmers 
participated actively. The feedback of the farmers were collected and 
compiled in a bulletin entitled “Farmers awareness programme on climate 
change in India”. 
 
 

46 
 
3.31 To a querry regarding any impact assessment of these programmes, 
it was stated that the Department have not made any specific assessment 
of the impact of recently initiated awareness programmes, however, impact 
studies will be conducted in future programmes. 

47 
 
ONGOING ENDEVOURS 
3.32 The Committee note with satisfaction that ICAR have taken up 
various crop breeding activities with a view to develop varieties that 
have the capability to minimize the impact of abiotic stresses.  They 
are, however, constrained to observe that the efforts of ICAR  face  the 
twin roadblocks of lack of requisite infrastructure and facilities for 
these activities and availability of suitably trained human resource.  In 
their considered opinion   no research system can  make any headway 
in the absence of state -of-the-art facilities and trained manpower to 
operate the systems.  It is, therefore, but imperative that both these 
constraints are attended to with utmost urgency to enable the 
research and development activities  continue unhindered in this 
frontier area of science.  The Committee understand that all this can 
not be achieved till sufficient funds are placed  at the disposal of the 
Department on priority basis exclusively to attend to the requirements 
of men and ma terial for the activities and endeavours being 
undertaken to mitigate the effect of abiotic stresses on agriculture and 
allied activities.  From the requirements of infrastructure and facilities 
communicated, it is abundantly clear to them that even the Department  
are yet to work out a holistic and comprehensive proposal with a long 
term perspective.  They, therefore, desire that an exercise be carried 
out by the Department detailing  all of their specific and precise 
requirements in the first instance.  T he financial proposals incidental 
to these requirements be then accordingly worked out and presented 

48 
 
to the Planning Commission and the Ministry of Finance. The 
Committee would like to advise the Department to complete these two 
activities with utmost speed not only due to the gravity of the problem 
to be tackled but also in view of the fact that the Twelfth Plan is being 
finalized and there is a greater chance of their proposals being given 
consideration at this stage rather than in the middle of the Plan.  The 
Committee also recommend the Government to give a serious 
consideration to these proposals of DARE/ICAR for allocation of funds 
as these investments are of utmost relevance to ensure food safety 
and security in the years to come.  
 
3.33 The Committee note that the ICAR as an interim measure have 
made some reallocation of finances, etc. to strengthen the research on 
climate change and abiotic stresses. The National Network to Study on 
Climate Change Impacts, Adaption and Mitigation has been expanded 
to 23 centres during Eleventh Plan period.  The Committee while 
appreciating the constraints of ICAR in limiting this Programme to 
only 23 centres due to the obvious resource constraints desire that as 
this study would be the backbone of the strategies to cou nter the 
various consequences of climate change and abiotic stresses, the 
Department should approach the Planning Commission and the 
Ministry of Finance at the highest level to get additional funds released 
for these studies without any further delay.   Th ereafter, the 
Department should expand such studies to all of their centres and take 

49 
 
initiatives to enhance the strength of scientists in these centres and 
impart them the best of training to enable them to concentrate their 
research on tangible, effective  and economical solutions to tackle the 
effects of climate change and abiotic stresses with a view to work out 
long term strategies to ensure food safety and security of the Nation.  
 
3.34 With regard to bio -prospecting of genes and allele mining for 
abiotic stress tolerance it transpires that a project with an approved 
allocation of Rs. 57.13 crore was started in 2009 -10. However only Rs. 
32.10 crore was sanctioned in 2009 -10of which Rs. 16.03 crore only 
has been released for the project. The Committee are  of the firm 
opinion that starving this Scheme of funds in the initial stages will 
hamper the research activities in this vital field. They, therefore, 
recommend that funds once sanctioned for such pivotal projects 
should be released in time in the future so as to ensure that research 
is carried on uninterruptedly and is unaffected in any manner by 
paucity of funds. 
3.35 The Committee find that the National Agriculture Innovation 
Project to increase the productivity under abiotic stress conditions 
has been allocated a sum of Rs. 2.61 crore for the period 2008 -09 to 
2010-11.   Out of this an expenditure of Rs. 2.36 crore has been 
incurred on the said project till date.   The Committee view  agriculture 
innovation to be a constant bedrock of the future R&D in agriculture.  

50 
 
This area, therefore, needs to be funded adequately for well defined 
and cogent proposals.  Accordingly, they feel that DARE need to 
rework on the future funds requirement for this Project and get the 
same released from Planning Commission with due promptitude.  
 
3.36 The Committee note that as of now Department of Agricultural 
Research and Education have some projects on transgenics in crops 
which includes abiotic stress tolerant varieties under the Network 
Project of Transgenic Crops (NPTC).   Due to the very specialized 
nature of such research, there are very few ICAR Institutes who have 
been assigned the task of development of gene constructs and 
development of transgenic crop varieties for resistance to abiotic 
stresses. Rice, Wheat, Mustar d, Tomato, Chickpea, Groundnut and 
Cotton have been included for development of gene constructs and 
development of transgenic crop varieties for resistance of abiotic 
stresses.  During the Tenth and Eleventh Plans, out of Rs. 95.33 crore, 
a sum of Rs.70.32  crore was incurred under the NPTC project.  The 
Committee would like to caution the Department for such under 
utilisation of funds when avowedly there is paucity of money.  They, 
therefore, recommend that funds allocated for the Project should be 
utilized in a planned manner.   The Committee deliberately refrain from 
commenting on other aspects of transgenic crop varieties as they are 
separately examining the Subject ‘Cultivation of Genetically Modified 

51 
 
Food Crops – Prospects and Effects’ on which they intend to Report to 
the Parliament shortly.  
 
3.37 The Committee note that the project entitled ‘Impacts, adaption 
and vulnerability of Indian Agriculture to climate change’ with the 
objective of quantifying the sensitivity of crops including horticultural 
crops and plantations, soil, water, fish and livestock to climate 
changes was launched in 2004. A very important component of 
agriculture is soil. They, however, find that the ICAR have not 
undertaken any projects on soil under this project during the year 
2007-08 and 2008-09. They also find that the funds allocated under the 
projects were not fully utilized during the year 2007 -08, 2008 -09 and 
2009-10. They, therefore, desire   the Department to improve their 
management of finances so that not only precious resources are fully 
utilized but also the timelines for various components of the Project 
are achieved without any cost over runs.   
 
3.38 The Committee appreciate that different crop management 
practices including Contingency Planning are being worked out  by the 
Department by monitoring of the status of crops situations. 575 
Districts have been targeted for the Contingency Plans and out of this 
102 Plans have been completed and 257 Plans are under preparation. 
The Committee, however, note that 102 district s in which the 
Contingency Plan have been completed present a very lop -sided 

52 
 
picture and a large number of States are not being attended to at the 
requisite pace.  Thus, a large number of districts in States like Madhya 
Pradesh, Himachal Pradesh, Jammu and  Kashmir, Uttar Pradesh, 
Bihar, Chhattisgarh, Jharkhand and Assam are yet to be taken up by 
the Government for District Contingency Planning. The Committee, 
therefore, recommend that the Government to take up these activities 
in a uniform manner so that al l the States can avail the benefit of 
Contingency Plan   simultaneously. The Committee also recommend 
that the preparations of Plans in the remaining 216 Districts be 
completed by the Government at the earliest. They would like to be 
apprised of the progress made in this regard at the earliest. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

53 
 
CHAPTER – IV 
EXTENSION SERVICES 
SET-UP 
 
Agriculture being a State subject, extension efforts are primarily 
undertaken by respective State Governments.  However, frontline extension 
efforts by ICAR revolve rou nd the assessment, refinement and 
demonstration of technology/products.  The activities include on-farm testing 
to identify the location specificity of agricultural technologies under various 
farming systems, particularly under abiotic stress C cnditions, f rontline 
demonstrations to establish the production potentials of improved 
agricultural technologies on the farmers‟ fields, and/or  training of farmers 
and extension personnel to update their knowledge and skills.  These 
activities are carried out under t he crop/discipline -specific All India 
Coordinated Research Projects (AICRPs)/ Network Projects and also 
through the Krishi Vigyan Kendras (KVKs).   
 
4.2 On being asked to furnish a detailed note on the Extension System of 
ICAR and how effectively it has be en put to use to disseminate production 
enhancing technologies, the Department stated that the ICAR has 
strengthened and structured the Krishi Vigyan Kendra system as an 
innovative institutional model for assessment, refinement and on -farm 
demonstration of  agricultural technologies and training to farmers and 
extension personnel.  The first KVK was established at Pondicherry (now 
Puducherry) in 1974 and till X Plan 589 KVKs were approved for 
establishment and out of them 551 were sanctioned till the end of Xth Plan.  
In the XIth Plan, 28 KVKs are to be established in new districts which were 
created in the recent past and one additional KVK in each of 50 larger 
districts keeping in view the potential of the district for agricultural growth 
and scope of diversification in addition to geographical area, rural population 
and net sown area.  At present, 569 KVKs have been sanctioned and efforts 

54 
 
are on for establishment of remaining KVKs in the Country.  It was further 
stated that the ICAR has a network of 61 AICR Ps and 17 Network Projects 
in the Country to cater to the technology identification and 
dissemination/extension needs.  Further, there is a network of 569 KVKs 
that work as resource and knowledge centers of agricultural technology for 
supporting initiatives of public, private and voluntary sector for improving the 
agricultural economy at the district level.    
 
4.3 During the further Oral Evidence on 25 November, 2010, Secretary, 
DARE/DG, ICAR while explaining in detail the extension education service 
system in the Country stated:  
 
“As on date we have 589 KVKs and others are in the process of 
establishment.  Till the end of this Plan we have to establish a total of  
667 KVKs.  Today I must say that there are agencies under which, 
for example under the State  Agricultural Universities, there are about 
298 KVKs.  Of the 589 KVKs that we have today, under ICRK, there 
are about 47 KVKs; under the NGOs, there are 4 KVKs; PSUs have 
three; the State Governments have 33 KVKs and the Central 
Universities and others ha ve 14 KVKs.  So, this brings about 259 
KVKs as on today.  
I would like to submit that the Country has been divided into 
eight zones.  There are eight Zonal Project directorates at different 
places.  They coordinates in a given State.  Two to three States a re 
put together.  They are treated as one zone each.  I am not going into 
the details.  Otherwise, we have all the details of the eight zones.      
Basically, we have Zonal Project Directorates who are 
coordinating the activities of the KVKs.  What we have  done is that 
the Directors of Extension of the State Agricultural Universities have 
been mandated to provide the technical backstopping to all the KVKs 
in the zone.  This has been done and this has been monitored and it 
is working well.  We also conduct N ational Conference of KVKs 
annually.  Four years are over.  The fifth conference is going to be 
held at Udaipur next month.  We sit for three long days where the 
experts come in both from the public and private sector, both 
scientists and farmers.  Everybody is there.  
We have their interaction but what we have further done is that 
we have regional committee meetings.  For example, we have met 
already five times.  Sixth time we are meeting next month in Bhopal.  

55 
 
In each of the Regional Committee Meeting, we  sit with all the KVKs 
in that zone – they number somewhere between 70 and 120 – 
interact with each of the programme coordinator and we are seeing 
where the deficiencies are.  I would also like to submit that there had 
been a National Committee earlier whi ch went into evaluation of this.  
At the same time, each of these KVKs undergoes a process of 
quinquennial review, a five yearly review where we have again farm 
experts coming in and they are looking into these aspects. 
I would like to mention here that th e main functions of the 
KVKs are technology, assessment and refinement.  I would like to 
repeat here that whatever technology packages that are given by the 
researchers in the institutes and in the universities, have to go to the 
fields for evaluation.  If there is any deficiency, give a feedback to the 
researcher so that he perfects his technology.  This is the main 
function of KVKs. 
The process is, we conduct on farm trials; we conduct frontline 
demonstration; we conduct training programme for extension o fficial 
and we conduct training progrmme for farmers, apart from 
demonstration.  These are the main five functions”.   
 
Performance Appraisal 
 
4.4 When asked about the achievements of KVKs during the Eleventh 
Plan till date and the expectations from the Sy stem during the remaining 
part of the Plan , it was stated by the Department that the achievement of 
KVKs during the first two years of Eleventh Plan (2007 -08 and 2008-09) are 
summarized in the following table: 
 
S.No. Activities Years 
  2007-08 2008-09 
1. Technologies Assessed 893 520 
2. No. of Frontline Demonstration 71640 75825 
3. Training for Farmers and Farm women (in lakh) 11.74 12.42 
4. Training of Extension Functionaries (in lakh) 0.80 0.90 
5. Participants in Extension activities (in lakh) 49.63 80.69 
6. Production of Seeds (in q) 1111.64 201675 
7. Planting Material (in lakh) 91.29 133.2 
8. Livestock Strains/ Fingerlings (in lakh) 40.08 60.47 
9. Bio products/Bio fertilizers (in lakh kg) 8.94 11.97 
 

56 
 
 The target of KVKs for Eleventh Plan inclu des 6010 technologies for 
on-farm trial and 3.63 lakh frontline demonstrations, training of 60.94 lakh 
farmers and 4.5 lakh extension personnel, creating awareness through 
extension activities involving 255.63 lakh farmers; and production of 60111 
ton seed , 465.28 lakh planting materials and 270.00 lakh livestock 
strains/fingerlings for availability to the farmers.  
 
4.5 On being asked about how the coordination is maintained among st 
the Department, ICAR, Agricultural Universities and KVKs, the Secretary 
replied during the further Oral Evidence:  
 
“As regards the second point, I would like to mention that the 
interaction between the ICAR Institutes and the State Agricultural 
Universities, which actually form the National Agricultural Research 
Systems, over t he years have been very intense.  We do not find 
really any gap.  I would like to submit two or three points in this 
regard.  Apart from the Annual Conferences or whatever we hold, we 
also have the kind of arrangement that the scientists in the ICAR 
Institutes almost get to become some kind of faculty in the 
universities.   The students from the   universities can go and do their 
research related programmes in the ICAR Institutes.  It is that kind of 
harmonisation that has taken place.  The All India Coordi nated 
Research Projects that we have in all the divisions are virtually 
bringing together everybody.  Recently, we had the National Project 
on Climate Change or National Project on Transgenic Crops or the 
Gene Bio-prospecting.  So, whatever project we take n, we integrate 
the researchers from across.  I would like to submit, that kind of gap 
is not there.  Even if there is some problem with regard to dealing 
with the Development Departments, that is also taken care of in the 
Biennial Regional Committee Meetings.   Every quarter we meet in a 
given region.  There are eight regions.  So, that makes Biennial 
Regional Committee meeting in each given region where all the State 
Secretaries, Commissioners, Directors of concerned Departments 
including Department of Agriculture, Horticulture, and Fisheries come 
there.  Even Vice Chancellors are there, Directors of the Institutes 
are there.  So virtually, everybody is there to look at the region 
specific problems and to develop research priorities and R&D 
programmes.  We  have also the Annual Conference of the Vice 
Chancellors.  In fact, next month, we are holding both the 
Conferences where we would get to address all the issues, be it 
research, education and other related aspects.  I would like to submit 

57 
 
that to that exte nt, we have absolutely harmonised the total National 
Agricultural Research System”.      
 
4.6 Dwelling further on the aspect of the delivery of research outputs 
through the Extension System now in place the Secretary, DARE/DG, ICAR 
stated during the further Oral Evidence: 
 
“But the point is, as the Hon‟ble Chairman said, in all the new 
varieties that we have, there was a concern earlier that varieties are 
released but are not adopted it later years altogether.  I would like to 
submit that what appeared in C entral Variety Committee all this we 
have taken.  I have got the full data.  Even whatever is released in 
2008, we have taken it to the farmers.  I have got the complete data 
of what we did during this year in pulses, in different crops, in pigeon 
pea, urad bean, mung bean and also summer mung bean.  Already 
we have taken these new varieties. 
 As regards Krishi Vigyan Kendras, I have made some 
submissions.  I would like to say that apart from the pulse productivity 
demonstrations, the main problem was the r eclamation of acidic soil.  
We talked of lime, the substitute of lime and where there was sodic 
soil, there ws also giypsum, with gypsum we have got another 
special package on phosphogypsum which is very effective.  So 
reclamation of soil was one thing.  S econd thing is water productivity, 
water harvesting.  That also we have taken up through the KVKs.  
During this year more than 182 KVKs were connected.  Just 15 days 
back, we have had a special farm innovators meet. Two hundred 
farmers from all over the Co untry participated.  They all presented 
with great enthusiasm what they had invented.  There were small 
inventions.  This also we are facilitating in every district. 
 Then, every year we are taking more than 200 hybrids in 
different seasons.  This is a con tinuous process of evaluation and 
recommendation.  Regarding abiotic stress, we have come across 
many good plant types that are able to resist some of these abiotic 
stresses.  In addition to this, our special projects in biotechnology 
include novel genes and in this we already have submitted that in the 
Eleventh Plan we have got a Special National Project on 
Bioprospecting of Genes and Allele Mini ng, that is from extreme 
environments from lakes with high pH or salt content or in animals or 
fish or plants wh atever whether it is desert or cold desert or  ocean 
depths.  So we are trying to collect those materials whether it is 
bacteria or insect or plant whatever it is; we are trying to look at those 
properties how they are able to resist some of these abiotic s tresses.  
We are trying to continuously take some of these and trying to 
incorporate in plants that we desire.  Also a network on Transgenics 

58 
 
is in place.  I would also like to mention that this year, we added a 
platform on bioinformatics. Whatever result we find from Bio 
technology.  We compile all such results together after analysing 
them.  To get more results out of it, a bioinformatics platform has 
been put in place.  We are also trying to look at several other things.  
We have done rice gene sequencin g but now wheat genomics is 
another thing that we are trying to address.  After considering all this, 
a national project on climate resilient agriculture initiative has been 
planned.  It is already in process.  This year it will be initiated.  The 
point is  mainly strategic research in the context of climate change, 
technologies that we have and also capacity building.  I must submit 
here that even in this project while there is high science, there is also 
extension.  We have also include many KVKs to take t his process 
forward”  
 
4.7 In a written submission the Department while apprising the 
Committee about the achievement of the extension services stated that the 
implementation of the ICAR scheme on Seed Production in Agricultural 
Crops has resulted in quali ty seed production of field crops to a record 
levels during 2008 -09.  Breeder seeds to the tune of 7162.4 tonnes of 
centrally released varieties and 2778.1 tonnes of state released varieties 
were produced.  The KVKs also produced 2.01 lakh quintal seeds an d 
133.20 lakh planting materials for their availability to farmers. 
A large number of equipments (zero till drill, strip till drill, raised bed 
planter, happy combo -seeder, pneumatic planter) and technology have 
been developed/demonstrated to suit the requ irement of various categories 
of farmers for different agro climatic regions, for different crops and also for 
increasing the revenue of the farmers by value addition.  A solar photo -
voltaic (PV) mobile unit was designed and developed to provide complete 
self-sustained mobile power unit for domestic, small agricultural and other 
rural applications in isolated cluster of houses of arid region.   
 
4.8 The Government have introduced the Nutrient Based Subsidy 
Scheme for Fertilisers w.e.f. 1 April, 2010.  The p roper implementation of 
this Scheme requires a lot many inputs on soil, nutrient status, agricultural 
practices, etc.  During the course of further Oral Evidence the Committee 

59 
 
desired to know about any feedback received by the Department on the 
Scheme and also the action being taken by them for enhancing the efficacy 
of the Scheme.  In response Secretary, DARE/DG, ICAR stated:  He further 
stated: 
 
“As was mentioned, it was only implemented from I st April this 
year.  We do not have the exact feedback because  the first demand 
is now for the Kharif, and now for the Rabi.  There was already a 
deficit of eight million tonnes between what was being consumed and 
what was being produced in the Country.  In the last few years, there 
was not much of an enhancement in terms of capacity.  No new 
fertilizer unit was set up, but only the efficiency of some units got 
improved in the last ten years.  
But earlier nutrient based subsidy did not include the micro 
nutrients.  Now we have micro nutrients.  They are also important  
and they have permitted fortification.  Micro nutrient deficiency are 
going to vary from district to district and from area to area.  What we 
are trying  is to collect this information so that we can now calculate 
exactly what would be the requirement on a district level and then 
aggregate it at State and National level.  So, we have started this 
exercise.  
I would also like to inform you that we have been assigned a 
job of having a geo -reference database on major and micro nutrients 
created.  We started f rom the April of this year and we expect to 
cover 170 districts upto March, 2012.  We have already finished 35 
districts and we are expected to finish this by 2012.  This will give you 
the latest information of the exact status of all the major and micro 
nutrients.  This will help us in working out the exact fertilizer 
requirement of the crop”.    
 
4.9 The Department of Agricultural Research and Education further 
informed that e -connectivity is being utilized by KVKs and ZPD, to access 
the e -enabled agricul tural technologies available on i nternet/websites of 
Agricultural Institutes and Universities, e -mailing and voice communication 
with other remote sites connected under this facility. The facility is also 
being used for multicasting/broadcasting and web -casting with one -way 
video and two -way voice communication, which is used for Human 
Resource Development interventions of KVKs and ZPDs. A number of 
presentations by National Experts have been made using the facility. These 

60 
 
include (i) IARI technologies for kharif season; (ii) Coping with monsoon 
aberrations; (iii) Dairying in India: Problems and Prospects; (iv) Commercial 
cultivation of flower crops; (v) Protected cultivation of horticultural Crops; (vi) 
Upscaling of IPM through networking: (vii) Relevance o f micronutrients in 
augmenting livestock productivity; (viii) Strategy for maximizing sesame and 
niger production under diverse agro production situations; (ix) Bio -fertilizer 
technology for improving crop yields and soil health (x) Training on software 
application for online-reporting by KVKs and ZPDs. The facility is also being 
utilized for conducting interactions/review meetings with Zonal Project 
Directors and online guidance to KVKs by senior officers of the Council. 
 
4.10 Though there is an elaborate system of extension services in place in 
the Country, there is a strong view that the system has not been able to 
deliver the requisite services and technologies at the requisite pace.  When 
asked about the mechanism of review, etc. within DARE/ICAR for th e 
purpose, the Department informed that the assessment of performance of 
Krishi Vigyan Kendras are being done regularly at National level by the 
Division of Agricultural Extension by conducting Special Committees like 
Quinquennial Review Team; Independent Evaluation & Impact Assessment 
Committee; National Interface with KVKs and Annual National Conference 
on KVKs. In addition, the Zonal Project Directorates are also assessing the 
performance by organizing Annual Zonal Workshop, State level Workshop 
on Front line Demonstrations, Regional KVK interface and Scientific 
Advisory Committee meetings at KVK level. 
 
4.11 He however, admitted later on the subject during the Oral Evidence  
as under: 
 
“The thing is that we also have evaluated, yes there are some KVKs 
which need to be further strengthened.  We are looking into that 
aspect. Infrastructure in the Eleventh Plan has been strengthened 
greatly, and in some cases vacancies are there.  In some cases, they 
are the State Agricultural Universities because there they are virtually 

61 
 
the employers.  So, now in some cases we have seen that the 
vacancies have not been filled up.  We have taken this aspect in 
Vice-Chancellors‟ meeting, and in some cases we have written even 
to the Governments to ensure that these vacancies are filled. 
In some cases, we understand that they need to be rally 
strengthened in terms of their approach.  I would also like to submit 
here that we had a special two days meeting of those KVKs where 
we felt that they are not performing very well.  When we  are running 
with 589 KVKs, it is possible that there is somewhere deficiency here 
and there which we have addressed during this year”. 
 
4.12 On being asked about the problems besetting the Extension System 
and the systemic and other requirements for the r evival of extension 
services, the Secretary informed the Committee during the Oral Evidence: 
 
“But the basic job of extension – I am not trying to pass on the 
buck – the mandated requirement is it is a State Government 
extension machinery.  Sir, in the 80‟ s – 90‟s, it was going on well.  
But I was just submitting that what happened to it these days the 
vacancies are so high.  There are no people available.  They have 
been given several kinds of jobs.  With the result they are not into 
core extension.  Our job has been to back-stop as mush as possible, 
train as much as possible but I admit that this is not enough.  In a 
district where we require 50,000 soil samples to be analysed – I am 
taking one example – we are trying to back -stop that effort.  We 
analyse 1500 to 2000 samples in KVKs but the requirement may be 
of 50,000 to 60,000 or 1 lakh samples to be analysed in a given 
district.  So, the extension work, which is the basic job of the State 
Government, State after State are not doing and KVKs have to 
perform all these and there is a problem coming up.  What is the 
mechanism? 
We are not going away from it.  We have developed a 
complete protocol.  We submitted this to the hon. Committee.  We 
have given a Research Extension Continuum.  We have given 
models.  One model will not work throughout the Country.  So, we 
have given region specific, commodity specif ic – for milk, Gehu, 
mustard - models.  Research Extension Continuum was discussed 
and people have appreciated it.  But in that effort we said that we will 
establish those models wherever necessary.  We will train people 
with literature, with hands on training and with demonstration.  For 
example people say you have a variety yielding 7 tonnes but the yield 
is 3 tonne.  We said that we will demonstrate”.   
 
 

62 
 
4.13 A representative of the Department further added on this aspect 
during the further Oral Evidence that: 
“Sir, so far as extension is concerned, we discuss this everywhere, 
but there is a system in place, that the extension work is the 
responsibility of the State Government, because 5000 scientists in 
one ICAR can not go everywhere.  Hence, two mechanisms – one 
regarding Seed Production Extension under which we have to 
produce breeder seeds and that foundation - 1 and foundation - 2 
and certified seeds reach the farmers through the State 
Governments.  For this several large corporations have been formed.  
In some states corporations are functioning.  But, in Bihar it has been 
shut down.  Thus they did not get the seeds, resulting in crisis.  As 
our DG said bas ed on the experience of this open pollinated seed, 
not hybrid, if supplied in a village it will multiply for three generations 
and retain the purity.  Due to this effort in Bihar this year 11 percent, 
the work which we also began when I was there, you also saw the 
emphasis laid on seed production.  I had used the Pusa seed also.  It 
is because of all this Bihar had 11 percent growth rote.  Due to which 
our hon‟ble Chief Minister got several awards.  If our research is not 
fruitful, how come there is growth?   But as you said we have to 
address the problems.  If state department and other arms perform 
their role timely, in a coordinated manner and it reaches the farmers 
only then benefit would accrue.  In this way, as you referred to the 
ATMA, when we analyse our work and bring about better  
co-ordination, and if all our available technology reaches the farmers, 
in my estimate the production can increase up to 1.5 times.  This is 
my firm conviction”. 

63 
 
 
4.14 Inspite of the fact that  agriculture is a State Subject and thereby 
the extension efforts are being primarily undertaken by the State 
Governments, the fact still remains that ICAR at the apex of the 
National Agriculture Research System (NARS) have a pivotal role in 
the assessment, refinement and demonstratio n of 
technology/products.  For this purpose , the ICAR has a network of 61 
All India Coordinated Research Projects and 17 Network Projects in 
the Country to take care of technology identification and 
dissemination/extension requirements. The State Agricultu re 
Universities are also  an integral component of the extension system 
and the field level dissemination of the extension services is the 
responsibility of Krishi Vigyan Kendras (KVKs).  The first KVK was 
establish in Puducherry in 1974.  The Committee fin d that the ir 
numbers, over the years, increased to 589, as on date.  The 
Department plan to establish a total of 667 KVKs by end of the 
Eleventh Plan.  The Committee also note that out of 589 KVKs 
operational now, some are under the ICAR, some under SAUs, some 
with the State Governments.  The remaining KVKs are under PSUs, 
Central Universities and NGOs.  As a part of the perspective planning, 
the Department intend to establish one additional KVK in each of the 
50 larger districts keeping in view the potenti onal of the district for 
agricultural growth and scope of diversification in addition to the 

64 
 
geographical area, rural population and net sown area.  The 
Committee appreciate this long overdue initiative of DARE/ICAR to 
increase the number of KVKs in the Co untry.  Knowing fully well the 
state of connectivity and access of rural areas with a KVK, at district 
level, the Committee strongly feel that the norms of establishing a KVK 
need an urgent review with the intention of improving the accessibility 
of the fa rmers to them.   This is their considered opinion would  
enhance the reach and spread of the extension services run by the 
KVKs.  The y, therefore, desire the Department to immediately get 
down to the task of preparing an action plan for this purpose and 
getting it fructified on priority as the Twelfth Plan is already on the 
anvil.   
 
4.15  The Committee note with satisfaction that the extension services 
system of NARS has been able to transfer several 
technologies/equipment for demonstration as well as for ac tual use to 
suit the requirements of various categories of farmers in different 
agro-climatic regions for different crops.  These have led to value 
addition of the agriculture produce and consequently the income of 
the farmers  alongwith improving this .  Th ey have also been able to 
availability of breeder seeds in sufficient quantities.  They further note 
with satisfaction that the KVKs system as a part of its goal of 
rendering agriculture technologies and training farmers through 

65 
 
development and demonstrati on is providing e -connectivity amongst 
the KVKs to facilitate access to the e-enabled agricultural technologies 
to the KVKs and ZPD s.  This also enables them to access the e -
enabled agricultural technologies available on internet/websites of 
Agriculture In stitutes and Universities, e -mailing and voice 
communication with other remote sites connected.  The Committee 
desire that all KVKs sho uld be provided e -connectivity as early as 
possible enabling the farmers to avail the benefits of various latest 
technologies related to agriculture sector.  
 
4.16 The Nutrient Based Subsidy Scheme for fertilizers was 
introduced by the Government with effect from 1 April, 2010.  The 
Committee find that DARE/ICAR as of now lack exact feedback on this 
Scheme as it has been implemented only recently.  The Committee are, 
however, of the view that to effectively implement the Nutrient Based 
Subsidy Scheme for fertilizers,  the Government would require 
substantial inputs from NARS on the soil health and related matters, 
nutrient status of soil, the agricultural practices, etc.  DARE/ICAR have 
to, therefore, do a lot of spade work in this direction.  The Committee 
note that DARE/ICAR have been assigned the job of having geo -
reference database on major and micro nutrients created. The y have 
already commenced work on the Project from April this year and 
intend to cover 170 districts by March, 2012.  The geo -reference 

66 
 
databasing will help in working out the exact fertiliser requirement of a 
crop in a district.  The Committee, therefore, desire that this task be 
completed by DARE/ICAR on top priority basis in a highly time bound 
manner t o not only attain the target of 170 districts  this year is fully 
met within the stipulated timeline but also accomplish the geo -
reference databasing of maj or and micro nutrients for the remaining 
districts at the earliest.  
 
4.17 Keeping the farmers constantly updated on weather information 
can play a major role in improving the agriculture production in the 
Country.  The matter has already been touched upon by the Committee 
in the previous Chapter of this Report.  The Committee find that there 
are very few Kisan Vikas Kendras in which weather stations have so 
far been established by the Indian Meteorological Department. The 
Committee, therefore, recommend th e Department of Agricultural 
Research and Education to take up the issue of setting up of weather 
stations/automatic weather stations with the Indian Meteorological 
Department so that all the KVKs are provided with agromet 
observatory and are in a position  to provide farmers weather updates 
timely and in the event of any natural calamities enable them to take a 
pre-emptive course of action to save their precious produce from 
falling prey to the fury of nature. 

67 
 
4.18 Having assessed the performance of the pre sent extension 
system on the basis of various inputs received by them, the 
Committee, have a distinct feeling that the Extension Services in the 
Country are at present not in an optimal state of readiness to cope 
with the responsibilities that will enjoin upon them in view of the fast 
paced developments, due to climate change and global warming.  The 
Department have also admitted as much about the deficiencies in 
NARS and consequently in extension services due to paucity of funds, 
lack of infrastructure and  shortage of human resource  etc.  In such a 
scenario, it is but apparent that the challenges posed to agriculture 
and allied sectors, climate change and resultant abiotic stresses 
cannot be met upto the desired level causing avoidable distress to the 
farming community.  Furthermore, such an eventuality also has 
serious implications for the food security and safety of the Country.  
 
4.19 The NARS has now to be oriented on a two way system where 
technologies and products are disseminated downwards and data 
base and feedbacks are generated upwards from the lowest tier.  In 
this endeavour , the KVKs because of their district level positioning 
and, therefore, their limitation of reach and spread cannot be the 
ultimate panacea.  The Committee, therefore, feel that another tier 
below the KVKs needs to be developed under them  especially under 
those KVKs having a wider area to cover .  In their considered view, an 

68 
 
entity at the block level called Krishi Vigyan Up -kendra, etc. can act as 
the terminal point for disseminat ion of technologies and other outputs 
of extension services in a more effective and time bound manner than 
the district level KVKs.  They can also act as the generation/collection 
points for database and feedback not only for DARE/ICAR but for the 
other Mi nistries/Departments of the Government who have some or 
the other stake in agriculture, in a far comprehensive manner at the 
block levels.  As far as funding of such bl ock level entities is 
concerned, DARE can think of working out the modalities for the 
purpose in coordination with Department of Agriculture and 
Cooperation for including it as a component under Ras htriya Krishi 
Vikas Yojana.  They desire to be apprised of the progress made in this 
regard. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI;                          BASUDEB ACHARIA 
29 August, 2011                                  Chairman, 
7 Bhadrapada 1933 (Saka)                         Committee on Agriculture 
 
 
 
 
  
  

69 
 
ANNEXURE- I 
(Para 1.5 refer) 
(a) State-wise Drought Prone Areas 
 
Sl. 
No. 
State Reference  Year Drought prone area* 
1 Andhra Pradesh 2008 4,691 
2 Bihar 2004 319 
3 Chattishgarh  2004 1,863 
4 Gujarat 2002 5,844 
5 Haryana 2006 394 
6 Himachal Pradesh 2000 88 
7 Jammu & Kashmir 2000 142 
8 Jharkhand 2000 1,023 
9 Karnataka 2006 6,558 
10 Madhya Pradesh 2004 5,260 
11 Maharashtra 2002 13,003 
12 Orissa 2004 1,178 
13 Rajasthan 2006 9,576 
14 Tamil Nadu 2005 1,556 
15 Uttar Pradesh 2006 1,741 
16 Uttaranchal 2004 321 
17 West Bengal 2000 1,334 
    Total 54891 
 
* Rainfed area in districts covered under Drought Prone Area Programme (DPAP) 
and/or  Desert Development Programme (DDP) in each State has been aggregated. 

70 
 
 
(b) Flood Prone Area in Eastern Region 
 
S. No. States Area (Mha) 
1 Bihar 4.26 
2 Assam 3.15 
3 West Bengal 2.65 
4 Orissa 1.40 
5 Madhya Pradesh 0.26 
6 Uttar Pradesh 7.34 
 
 
(c) Salt affected soils in India (ha) 
 
State Saline Sodic Total 
Andhra Pradesh 77598 196609 274207 
Andaman & Nicobar Island 77000 0 77000 
Bihar 47301 105852 153153 
Gujarat 1680570 541430 2222000 
Haryana 49157 183399 232556 
Karnataka 1893 148136 150029 
Kerala 20000 0 20000 
Madhya Pradesh 0 139720 139720 
Maharashtra 184089 422670 606759 
Orissa 147138 0 147138 
Punjab 0 151717 151717 
Rajasthan 195571 179371 374942 
Tamil Nadu 13231 354784 368015 
Uttar Pradesh 21989 1346971 1368960 
West Bengal 441272 0 441272 
Total 2956809 3770659 6727468 
 
 
 
 
 

71 
 
(d) Extent and distribution of salt affected soils in different Agro -climatic Zones 
 (Planning Commission) in India. 
 
Zone No. Name of the Zone Salt affected area (000 ha) 
1 Western Himalayan Region Nil 
2 Eastern Himalayan Region Nil 
3 Lower Gangetic Plains Region 800.00 
4 Middle Gangetic Plains Region 606.00 
5 Upper Gangetic Plains Region 1080.00 
6 Trans- Gangetic Plains Region 974.50 
7 Eastern Plateau & Hills Region 22.00 
8 Central Plateau & Hills Region 915.81 
9 Western Plateau & Hills Region 562.13 
10 Southern Plateau & Hills Region 681.21 
11 East Coast Plains and Hills Region 1276.01 
12 West Coast Plains and Hills Region 73.95 
13 Gujarat Plains and Hills Region 1214.40 
14 Western Dry Region 359.02 
15 The Island Region Nil 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

72 
 
(e) Acid soils in India (M ha) 
 
State Area 
(mha) 
Cultivated 
are (mha) 
with  
pH <  5.5 
Districts having pH < 5.5 
Assam 21.23 Assam-1.54 
Other NEH 
States -1.3 
Dibrugarh, Sibsagar, Lakhimpur, Bongaigaon, 
Nagaon, Kamrup, Darrang, Golpara, Cachar, 
Jorhat, Golaghat, Tinsukia and Sonitpur 
Meghalaya   East and West Khasi hills, Jaintia hills and 
East Garo hills 
Nagaland   Kohima, Tuensang, Mokokchung and Mon 
Mizoram   Champhai, Aizwal, Kolaship, Lunglei and 
Saiha 
Arunachal Pradesh   West Siang, Upper and Lower Subansiri, 
West Kameng and Changlang 
Manipur   Churachandpur, Ukhrul, Chandel and 
Tamenlong 
Tripura   West Tripura, Sought Tripura and Dhalia 
Sikkim   North and West Sikkim 
West Bengal 4.76 1.5 Bankura, Midnapur, Purulia, Birbhum, West 
Dinajpur, Jalapaiguri, Murshidabad, Burdwan, 
Cooch Behar and Malda 
Jharkhand 6.77 0.4 Dumka, Jamtara, East Singhbhum, Ranchi, 
Gumla and Garhwa 
Orissa 8.67 4.0 Cuttack, Kendrapara, Ja garsinghpur, Jajpur, 
Dhenkanal, Anugul, Koraput, 
 
Nawarangpur, Khurda, Nayagarh, Puri and 
Mayurbhanj 
Kerala 3.76 3.2 Trivandram, Alleppey, Ernakulam, Trichur, 
Palghar and Cannanory 
Maharashtra 4.54 0.02 Ratnagiri and Thane 
Himachal Pradesh 1.78 0.07 Kangra, Kullu, Mandi, Simla and Solan 
Madhya Pradesh 11.72 -- -- 
Bihar 2.36 -- -- 
Tamil Nadu 4.85 -- -- 
Karnataka 3.31 -- -- 
Goa 0.30 -- -- 
Chhatisgarh 10.84 -- -- 
Uttrakhand 3.48 -- -- 
Jammu & Kashmir 1.57 -- -- 
Total 89.94 12.03 -- 
 
______________________ 
Source : Sharma & Sarkar (2005) 
 
 
 

73 
 
 

74 
 
 

75 
 
 

76 
 
 

77 
 
 

78 
 
ANNEXURE – III 
(Para 3.18 refers) 
 
Financial Implications of National Institute of Abiotic Stress Management 
(Rupees in lakhs) 
Head XI Plan requirement (2007-2012) 
     A. Recurring 
Pay & Allowances and Wages 1209.00 
Travelling Allowances 60.00 
HRD 50.00 
Contingencies  1094.50 
Total A 2413.50 
 B. Non-recurring 
Equipment 2189.50 
Furniture and fixtures 100.00 
Vehicles 66.00 
Information Technology 120.00 
Library 100.00 
Works 2361.00 
Total B 4936.50 
Grand total (A+B) 7350.00 
 

79 
 
APPENDIX-I 
COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE 
(2009-10) 
 
MINUTES OF THE SECOND SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE 
  
***** 
 
The Committee sat on Wednesday, the 16 th September, 2009 from 1100 hours to 
1300 hours in Room No. 62, Parliament House, New Delhi.  
 
PRESENT 
Shri Basudeb Acharia –  Chairman 
 
MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA 
 
2. Shri Narayan Singh Amlabe 
3. Shri K.C. Singh ‘Baba’ 
4. Shri Thangso Baite 
5. Shri Jayant Chaudhary 
6.   Smt. Ashwamedh Devi 
7.   Shri Biren Singh Engti 
8. Shri Sk. Nurul Islam 
9. Shri Naranbhai Kachhadia  
10. Shri Prabodh Panda 
11. Shri Premdas 
12. Shri Vittalbhai Hansrajbhai Radadiya 
13. Shri Nripendra Nath Roy 
14. Shri Uday Singh 
15. Shri Jagdish Thakor 
16. Shri Hukmdeo Narayan Yadav 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
17. Shri Narendra Budania 
18. Shri Satyavrat Chaturvedi 
19. Shri A. Elavarasan 
20. Shri Sharad Anantrao Joshi 
21. Shri Vinay Katiyar  
22. Shri Mohd. Ali Khan 
23. Shri M. Rajasekara Murthy 
24. Shri Bharatsinh Prabhatsinh Parmar 
25. Shri Khekiho Zhimomi 
 

80 
 
SECRETARIAT 
1. Shri S. Bal Shekar      -      Joint Secretary  
2. Shri P.V.L.N. Murthy   -   Director 
3. Shri P.C. Koul     -   Additional Director 
 
REPRESENTATIVES OF MINISTRY OF AGRICULTURE  
(DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURAL RESEARCH & EDUCATION) 
 
1. Dr. Swapan Kumar Datta -  Deputy Director General (CS) 
2. Dr. A.K. Singh  -  Deputy Director General (NRM) 
3. Dr. P.K. Agarwal  -  National Professor (AR) 
 
2. At the outset the Chairman informed the members about the sad demise of 
eminent agricultural scientist, Prof. Norman Ernest Borlaug.  The Committee passed a 
Resolution appreciating the significant contribution of Prof. Borlaug to the Green 
Revolution in India and also stood in silence for a while in the memory of the 
departed soul.  
3. The representatives of the Ministry of Agriculture (Dep artment of Agricultural 
Research and Education) were, thereafter, ushered in. The Chairman welcomed them 
to the sitting of the Committee and asked them to introduce themselves.  
 
4. The representatives of the Department then made an audio-visual presentation 
on the subject ‘Development of Abiotic Stress Resistant Crop Varieties - Review of 
R&D efforts in the Country‘.  They also briefed the Committee on the latest 
developments on the subject, the world over, and the R&D efforts made/on the anvil 
in the Country. 
5. The members sought several clarifications on various aspects of the subject. 
The representatives of the Department responded to the same. 
 
6. The Chairman thanked the witnesses for appearing before the Committee as 
well as for furnishing valuable in formation desired by the Committee on the subject. 
He also directed them to send at the earliest information on points which had 
remained unclarified during the sitting or on which information was not readily 
available, to the Secretariat of the Committee.  
  
A verbatim record of the proceedings has been kept separately. 
The Committee then adjourned. 

81 
 
APPENDIX-II 
COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE 
(2009-10) 
 
MINUTES OF THE SIXTEENTH SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE 
 
 The Committee sat on Thursday, the 21 st January, 2010 from 1510 hours to  1720 
hours in Room No. 53, Parliament House, New Delhi.  
 
PRESENT 
 
Shri Basudeb Acharia     - Chairman 
 
 
MEMBERS 
 
Lok Sabha 
 
2. Shri Narayan Singh Amlabe 
3. Shri K. C. Singh `Baba’  
4. Shri Biren Singh Engti 
5. Sk. Nurul Islam 
6. Shri Prabodh Panda 
7. Shri Prem Das 
8. Shri Vitthalbhai Hansrajbhai Radadiya 
9. Shri Bhoopendra Singh 
10. Shri Uday Singh 
11. Shri Hukmdeo Narayan Yadav 
 
Rajya Sabha 
 
12. Shri Sharad Anantrao Joshi 
13. Shri Mohd. Ali Khan 
14. Shri M. Rajasekara Murthy 
15. Shri Khekiho Zhimomi 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Shri S. Bal Shekar  - Joint Secretary 
2. Shri P.V.L.N. Murthy  - Director 
2. Shri P.C. Koul  - Additional Director 

82 
 
REPRESENTATIVES OF MINISTRY OF AGRICULTURE 
(DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURAL RESEARCH & EDUCATION) 
 
1. Dr. S. Ayyappan,  Secretary, DARE & DG, ICAR 
2. Shri Rajiv Mehrishi,  Additional Secretary (DARE) & Secy (ICAR) 
3. Dr. S. K. Datta,  DDG (CS &AS) 
4. Dr. H.P Singh,  DDG (Horticulture) 
5. Dr. K.D. Kokate,  DDG (Extension) 
6. Dr. Arvind Kumar,  DDG (Education and Fisheries) 
7. Dr  M.M. Pandey,  DDG (Engineering) 
 
2. At t he outset the Hon’ble Chairman welcomed the members to the Sitting of the 
Committee. Thereafter, the Committee took up the Draft Report on Demands for Grants 
(2009-2010) relating to the Ministry of Food Process ing Industries for consideration. After 
some discussion it was decided to defer the consideration of the Report to the next Sitting of 
the Committee. 
 
3. The Chairman, then directed that the representatives of the Ministry of Agriculture 
(Department of Agricultural Research & Education) be ushered in. 
 (At around 1520 hours the officials of DARE took their seats in the Room) 
 
4. The Chairman welcomed the representatives of Department to the Sitting of the 
Committee and conveyed best wishes on behalf of the Committee and on his behalf to     Dr. 
S. Ayyappan for assuming the charge as Secretary, DARE and Director General, ICAR. He 
then asked them to introduce themselves. 
 
5. The Committee then took Oral Evidence of the representatives of the Department in 
connection with examination of the subject `Development of Abiotic Stress Resistant Varieties 
and Dissemination of Production Enhancing Technologies – Review of R&D and Extension 
Efforts in the Country’. The members sought several clarifications on the various  aspects of 
the Subject. The representatives of the Department responded to them. 
 
6. The Chairman, thereafter, thanked the witnesses for appearing before the Committee 
as well as for furnishing valuable information desired by the Committee on the Subject.  He 
also directed them to send, within a week, information on points which could not be clarified 
by them during the Sitting to the Committee Secretariat. 
 
 A verbatim record of the proceedings has been kept separately. 
The Committee then adjourned. 
/---------------------/ 

83 
 
APPENDIX-III 
 
COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE 
(2010-11) 
 
MINUTES OF THE TENTH SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE 
 
 The Committee sat on Thursday, the 25 th  November, 2010 from 1520 hours to 
1700 hours in Committee Room ‟B‟, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.  
 
PRESENT 
 
Shri Basudeb Acharia     - Chairman 
 
MEMBERS 
Lok Sabha 
 
2. Shri Narayansingh Amlabe 
3. Shri Jayant Chaudhary 
4. Smt. Shruti Choudhary 
5. Smt Ashwamedh Devi 
6. Smt. Paramjit Kaur Gulshan 
7. Shri Naranbhai Kachhadia 
7. Shri Premdas 
9. Shri Hukmadeo Narayan Yadav 
 
Rajya Sabha 
 
10. Shri Satyavrat Chaturvedi 
11. Shri Mohd. Ali Khan 
12. Shri Upendra Kushwaha 
13. Shri Bharatsinh Prabhatsinh Parmar 
14. Shri S. Thangavelu 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Shri P.V.L.N. Murthy  - Director 
2. Shri P.C. Koul  - Additional Director 
 
 
 
 

84 
 
REPRESENTATIVES OF MINISTRY OF AGRICULTURE 
           (DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURAL RESEARCH & EDUCATION AND ICAR) 
1.        Dr. S. Ayyappan, Secretary (DARE) & Director General 
(ICAR) 
2. Dr. S. K. Datta,   Deputy Director General (CS), ICAR 
3. Dr. K.M.L. Pathak,   Deputy Director General (AS), ICAR 
4. Dr. A.K. Singh   Deputy Director General (NRM), ICAR 
5. Dr. H.P Singh,   Deputy Director General (Hort.), ICAR 
6. Dr. Arvind Kumar,   Deputy Director General (Edn.), ICAR 
7. Dr  M.M. Pandey,   Deputy Director General (Engg.), ICAR 
8. Dr. B. Meenakumari,  Deputy Director General (Fy.), ICAR 
9. Dr. V. Venkatasubramanian,  Assistant Director General (Extn.), ICAR 
10. Dr. Bangali Baboo   National Director (NAIP), ICAR 
11. Dr. A.K. Vasisht   Assistant Director General (PIM), ICAR 
12. Dr. T.P. Rajendaran   Assistant Director General (PP), ICAR 
13.    Dr. H.C. Joshi  Principal Scientist & Head, 
                                                   Environmental Science Division,IARI, Pusa, 
  New Delhi. 
14. Dr. P. Ananda Kumar         Project Director, National Research 
Centre on Plan Biotechnology 
 
2. The Sitting commenced with the Chairman welcoming the Members of the 
Committee and representatives of the Depar tment of Agricultural Research &  Education 
and ICAR to the Sitting. After the customary introduction of the representatives of the 
Department of Agricultura l Research & Education and ICAR, the Committee took Oral 
Evidence on the subject „Development of Abiotic Stress Resistant Crop Varieties and 
Dissemination of Production Enhancing Technologies - Review of R&D and Extension 
Efforts in the Country‟.  
3. During the course of the Oral Evidence, the Members raised several queries on 
various aspects of the subject and the representatives of the Department r esponded to 
them. 
4. Before the Sitting concluded, the Chairman thanked the witnesses for appearing 
before the Committee. He also directed them to send information on points on which 
information could not be provided by them during the Sitting to the Secre tariat of the 
Committee by 3 December, 2010. 
 A verbatim record of the proceedings has been kept separately. 
The Committee then adjourned. 
/---------------------/ 

85 
 
APPENDIX-IV 
COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE 
(2010-11) 
 
MINUTES OF THE FORTIETH SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE 
***** 
 
The Committee sat on Monday, the 29 th August, 2011 from 1500 hours to 1530 
hours in Committee Room „B‟, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.  
 
PRESENT 
 
Shri Basudeb Acharia –  Chairman 
 
MEMBERS 
Lok Sabha 
 
2. Shri Narayansingh Amlabe 
3. Shri Thangso Baite  
4. Shri Jayant Chaudhary 
5. Smt. Shruti Choudhary 
6. Smt. Paramjit Kaur Gulshan 
7. Shri Naranbhai Kachhadia 
8. Shri Premdas 
9. Shri Hukmadeo Narayan Yadav 
 
     Rajya Sabha 
 
10. Shri Narendra Budania 
11. Shri Vinay Katiyar 
12. Shri Mohd. Ali Khan 
13. Shri Rajpal Singh Saini 
14. Shri S. Thangavelu 
 
   Secretariat 
 
1. Shri P.V.L.N. Murthy  -    Director 
2. Shri P.C. Koul  -    Additional Director 
  

86 
 
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the members to the Sitting of the 
Committee. Thereafter, the C ommittee took up the Draft Report on the Subject 
„Development of Abiotic Stress Resistant Crop Varieties and Dissemination of Production 
Enhancing Technologies – Review of R&D and Extension Efforts in the Country‟ for 
consideration.  After some discussion, the Committee adopted the draft Report.  
 
3. The Committee, then, authorized the Chairman to finalise the above Draft Report 
in the light of the factual verification got done from the concerned Department and present 
the same to the Parliament.    
 
The Committee then adjourned.   
 
/…………………………/ 
 
 
 