1 
 
      
     COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE 
    (2012-2013) 
 
 
 
 
FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA 
 
 
MINISTRY OF AGRICULTURE 
(DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURAL RESEARCH AND EDUCATION)  
 
 
‘THE RANI LAKSHMI BAI CENTRAL AGRICULTURAL UNIVERSITY  
BILL, 2012’ 
  
 
FORTY FOURTH REPORT 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
MARCH, 2013 / PHALGUNA, 1934 (Saka) 
44 

2 
 
 
FORTY FOURTH REPORT 
COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE 
                 (2012-2013) 
 
         (FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
MINISTRY OF AGRICULTURE 
(DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURAL RESEARCH AND EDUCATION) 
 
 
‘THE RANI LAKSHMI BAI CENTRAL AGRICULTURAL UNIVERSITY  
BILL, 2012’ 
  
        Presented to Lok Sabha on           14.03.2013           
     Laid on the Table of Rajya Sabha on        14.03.2013 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
MARCH, 2013 / PHALGUNA, 1934 (Saka)  
 


3 
 
COA No. 267 
 
 
 
 
 
 
     
         
         
         
         
 
         
         
         
Price :  Rs. 
         
            
 
 
 
         © 2012 By Lok Sabha Secretariat 
 
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of Business in            
Lok Sabha (Fourteenth Edition) and Printed by  

4 
 
CONTENTS 
PAGE 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE(2012-13)………………………………   (iii) 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE(2011-12)………………………………   (v) 
INTRODUCTION……………………………………………………………………  (vii) 
REPORT 
PART - I 
(i)  Introduction       1  
(ii) Salient Features of the University    2 
  (iii) Background       3 
  (iv) Criteria for Selection of Site     13 
  (v) Model Act and Deans’ Committee Report   18 
  (vi) Legal Position       19 
    
PART – II 
  Clause-Wise Analysis       33 
     APPENDICES 
 I Minutes of the 41st  Sitting of the Committee held  
on 27 July, 2012(2011-12).        42  
 II Minutes of the 5th  Sitting of the Committee held 
on 16 November, 2012(2012-13).      44 
III Minutes of the 8th Sitting of the Committee held  
on 29 November, 2012(2012-13).      46 
IV Minutes of the 19th Sitting of the Committee held  
on 05 March, 2013(2012-13).       49 
 
    
ANNEXURES 
 
I The Rani Lakshmi Bai Central Agricultural University Bill, 2012  51 
II PMO Letter Dated 05 August, 2009      94 
III DARE Letter Dated 26 August, 2009      95 
IV  PMO Letter Dated 25 September, 2009     96 
V Expenditure Finance Committee Note      99 
VI Comments of Various Ministries/Departments    122 
VII Government of Uttar Pradesh Letter Dated 11 February, 2010  166 
VIII Government of Madhya Pradesh Letter Dated 15 February, 2010  168 
IX Prof. M.S. Swaminathan Letter Dated 10 July, 2010    169 
X Prof. M.S. Swaminathan Letter Dated 10 July, 2010    170 
XI Model Act for Agricultural Universities in India    171 
XII Abstracts of Fourth Deans’ Committee Report on  
Agricultural Education in India      185 
  
 (i)  

5 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE  COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE (2012-13) 
 
Shri Basudeb Acharia   -   Chairman 
 
MEMBERS 
 
LOK SABHA 
 
2.  Shri Narayansingh Amlabe 
3.  Shri Sanjay Singh Chauhan 
4.  Shri H.D. Devegowda 
5.  Smt. Ashwamedh Devi 
6.  Shri L. Raja Gopal 
7.  Smt. Paramjit Kaur Gulshan 
8.  Shri Anant Kumar Hegde 
9.  Shri Premdas  Katheria 
10.  Shri P. Kumar 
11.  Dr. (Smt.) Botcha Jhansi Lakshmi 
12.  Sardar Sukhdev Singh Libra 
13.  Dr. Jyoti Mirdha 
14.  Shri Naranbhai Kachhadia 
15.  Shri Devji M. Patel 
16.  Smt. Bhavana Gawali (Patil) 
17.  Shri Jagdish Singh Rana 
18.  Shri Rajaiah Siricilla 
19.  Shri Patel Kishanbhai V.  
20.  Dr. Vinay Kumar Pandey ‘Vinnu’ 
21.  Shri Hukamdeo Narayan Yadav 
  
 RAJYA SABHA 
 
22.  Shri Satyavrat Chaturvedi 
23.  Shri A. Elavarasan 
24.  Smt. Mohsina Kidwai 
25.  Shri Dharmendra Pradhan 
26.  Dr. K.V.P. Ramachandra Rao 
27.  Shri Parshottam Khodabhai Rupala 
28.  Shri Rajpal Singh Saini 
29.  Shri Shivanand Tiwari 
30.  Shri S. Thangavelu 
31.  Shri Darshan Singh Yadav 
 
(iii) 
  

6 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
 
1. Shri R.S. Kambo   - Joint Secretary 
2. Shri P. C. Koul   -  Director  
 
3. Shri R.S. Negi   - Committee Officer 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(iv)  

7 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE  COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE (2011-12) 
Shri Basudeb Acharia   -   Chairman 
 
MEMBERS 
 
LOK SABHA 
 
2.  Shri Narayansingh Amlabe 
3.  Shri K.C. Singh ‘Baba’ 
4.  Shri Thangso Baite 
5.  Smt. Shruti Choudhary 
6.  Smt. Ashwamedh Devi 
7.  Shri Biren Singh Engti 
8.  Shri Anant Kumar Hegde 
9.  Shri Deepender Singh Hooda 
10.  Shri Sk. Nurul Islam 
11.  Shri Naranbhai Kachhadia 
12.  Shri Premdas  
13.  Shri Surendra Singh Nagar  
14.  Shri Devji M. Patel 
15.  Shri Vitthalbhai Hansrajbhai Radadiya 
16.  Shri Nripendra Nath Roy 
17.  Shri Jagdish Thakor 
18.  Shri Laxman Tudu 
19  Shri D. Venugopal 
20.  Shri Hukmadeo Narayan Yadav 
21.  Shri Ramakant Yadav 
  
 RAJYA SABHA 
 
22.  Shri Shashi Bhusan Behera 
*23.  Shri Narendra Budania 
*24.  Shri Satyavrat Chaturvedi 
25.  Shri A. Elavarasan 
*26.  Shri Vinay Katiyar 
27.  Shri Mohd. Ali Khan 
28.  Shri Upendra Kushwaha 
29.  Shri Bharatsinh Prabhatsinh Parmar 
30.  Shri Rajpal Singh Saini 
31.  Shri S. Thangavelu 
 
 _____________________________________________________________ 
*   Nominated to the Committee on 04.05.2012.   

8 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
I, the Chairman, Committee on Agriculture having been authorized b y the 
Committee to present the R eport on their behalf, present this Forty -fourth Report on 
“The Rani Lakshmi Bai Central Agricultural University Bill, 2012 “.  
 
2.  The Rani Lakshmi Bai Central Agricultural University Bill, 2012 was introduced 
in Rajya Sabha on 22 May, 2012. The Speaker under Rule 331E (1) (b) of the Rules 
of Procedure and Conduct of Business in Lok Sabha referred the Bill to the 
Committee on 11 June, 2012 for examination and Report.  
 
3. With a view to complete their examination of the Bill, the Committee sought 
two exte nsions from Hon’ble Speaker, Lok Sabha for presentation of their Report.  
The first extension was upto the end of the Winter Session, 2012.  The second 
extension was upto the first half of the Budget Session, 2013. 
 
4.  The Committee were  briefed by the representatives of t he Ministry of 
Agriculture (Department of Agricultural Research and Education ) and Ministry of Law 
(Departments of Legal Affairs and Legislative Department) on the Bill on 16 
November, 2012. Thereafter, th e Committee too k Oral E vidence of the 
representatives of the Ministry of Agriculture (Department of Agricultural Research 
and Education ) and Ministry of Law and Justice (Department s of Legal Affairs and 
Legislative Department) on 29 November, 2012.   
 
5.  The Committee a t their Sitting held on 05 March, 201 3 considered and 
adopted         the Report. 
  
6.  The Committee wish to express their thanks to the officers of the Ministry of 
Agriculture (Department of Agricultural Research and Education ) and Ministry of Law 
and Justice (Department s of Legal Affairs and Legislative Department) for placing 
before them the material and information in connection with examination of the Bill.  
 
7. For facility of reference, the Observations/Recommendations of the Committee 
have been printed in bold at the end of each Part of the Report.  
 
 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI;           BASUDEB ACHARIA  
12 March, 2013          Chairman,  
21 Phalguna,1934 (Saka)                             Committee on Agriculture. 
  
 
 
(vii) 

9 
 
R E P O R T 
P A R T – I 
  
INTRODUCTION 
The Rani Lakshmi Bai C entral Agricultural University Bill, 2012 (Annexure – I) 
was introduced on 22 May, 2012 in Rajya Sabha.  The Bill was referred by Speaker, 
Lok Sabha in consultation  with Chairman, Rajya Sabha to the Committee on 8 June, 
2012 for examination and Report.     
1.2 The Statement of Object s and Reasons appended to the Bills states that 
spread over 70,000 square kilometers of the central plains in India, the Bundelkhand  
region covers seven districts of southern Uttar Pradesh viz., Jhansi, Jalaun, Lalitpur, 
Banda, Chitrakoot, Hamirpur and Mahoba, and six districts of Madhya Pradesh  viz., 
Sagar, Damoh, Tikamgarh, Panna, Chhatarpur and Datia .  The region is backward 
relative to other regions in the country.    
1.3 Agriculture is the mainstay of Bundelkhand economy.  The semi -arid climate 
with uncertain rainfall and poor quality soils have made agriculture a difficult and non -
beneficial propos ition in the entire region.  It is a hard rock area with limited or 
inadequate ground water resources, lacks infrastructure, access to improved 
technologies, markets and inputs as a result of which the crop productivity is amongst 
the lowest in the Country .  Inadequacy  of resources has prevented many farmers 
from switching to more efficient farming methods.  As such, most of the agriculture 
has become subsistence agriculture and keeps the farmers of the region trapped in 
poverty.  

10 
 
1.4 Educational opportuni ties are few and the adult literacy remains low in the 
region. Since poverty levels are high, few families can afford to send their children 
outside the region for obtaining good quality education.   
 
SALIENT FEATURES OF THE UNIVERSITY 
 
1.5 As per the Background Note furnished to the Committee t he University will 
integrate teaching, research and extension education functions. The University will 
cover all the thrust areas in agriculture, horticulture, forestry, animal sciences and 
fisheries.  To begin w ith, the University is proposed to have following two constituent 
colleges: 
(i) College of Agriculture at Jhansi (Uttar Pradesh); 
(ii) College of Horticulture & Forestry at Jhansi (Uttar Pradesh).Apart from the 
above two colleges at Jhansi, two more colleges are  proposed to be 
established in Madhya Pradesh as under at a later date; 
 
(iii) College of Animal Sciences; and 
(iv) College of Fisheries 
 
1.6 The Rani Lakshmi Bai Central Agricultural University Bill, 2012, inter alia , 
provides the following: 
 
(a) establishment of Rani Lakshmi Bai Central Agricultural University with 
its head-quarters at Jhansi in the State of Uttar Pradesh. 
 
(b) the objects of the university, inter alia,  shall be, to impart education in 
different branches of agriculture and allied  sciences, to undertake 
research in agriculture and programmers of extension education, to 
promote partnership and linkages with National and International 
Educational Institutions:  
(c) the University shall have powers, to make provisions for instructions  in 
agriculture and allied sciences, conduct research in agricultural and 
allied sciences, to disseminate the findings of research and technical 
information through extension programmers, to confer degrees, 
diplomas or other academic distinctions, to estab lish and maintain 
colleges relating to agriculture, horticulture, animal husbandry, fisheries, 
etc; 

11 
 
 
(d) keeping the University open to all classes, castes, creed or races; 
(e) providing for the President of India to be the Visitor of the University; 
(f) provide for the Chancellor, the Vice -Chancellor, the Deans, the 
Directors, the Registrar, the Comptroller, the University Librarian and 
such other officers as may be prescribed by the Statutes; 
(g) the statutes of the University to be amended by the Board o f 
Management; 
(h) the Ordinances of the University to be made by the Vice-Chancellor; 
(i) to make provision for the reference of the disputes between the 
University and its employees to a Tribunal of Arbitration for its decision. 
 
1.7 Adding further, in a written submission DARE informed the Committee that the 
establishment of Rani Lakshmi Bai Central Agricultural University will strengthen 
technical backstopping, and will contribute to development of quality human 
resources in this backward region.  
 
BACKGROUND 
 
 
1.8 The Committee desired to know the background and the chronology of events 
leading to the decision regarding setting up of a Central Agricultural University (CAU) 
in Bundelkhand region.  They were informed by DARE that a memorandum dated 2 7 
July, 2009 was submitted to the Prime Minister by a delegation of MPs/MLAs 
requesting that a comprehensive package for Bundelkhand region including a CAU 
may be considered.  The relevant portion of the said memorandum reads as follows:    
 
“A Central Agr icultural University to impart scientific education and 
training to the farmers to enable them to derive greater advantage from their 
available resources; which may be established by amalgamating  Indian 
Grassland and Fodder Research Institute (IGFRI) and National Research 
Centre for Agroforestry (NRCAF) and upgrading it to a status of ‘deemed 
Agriculture University.”  
 
1.9 Consequently, on the directions of Prime Minister , a meeting was held on       
30 July, 2009 under the Chairmanship of Member, Planning Commission (Shri B.K. 
Chaturvedi) to discuss integrated development of Bundelkhand region.  The 

12 
 
Committee noted the following reference to the matter in the minutes of the said 
meeting:  
“9. The Samra Committee had recommended strengthening of 
agricultural college at Tikamgarh, MP and upgrading IGFRI, Jhansi to a 
‘deemed University’ status.  Additional Secretary, Department of 
Agriculture stated that ICAR is of the view that IGFRI, Jhansi is involved 
in research and it may not be possible for the Insti tute to conduct 
teaching activities.”  
 
1.10 On 5 August, 2009 DARE were informed by PMO that Prime Minister desired 
them to urgently consider establishing a CAU in Bundelkhand , possibly by 
amalgamating the IGFRI, Jhansi and NRCAF, Jhansi and upgrading it to the status of 
‘deemed Agriculture University’ (Annexure–II).  In response, the Committee find, 
DARE informed PMO on 26 August, 2009 that changing status of IGFRI and NRCAF, 
Jhansi would not be appropriate  as it may affect focused research or grassland and 
fodder management and Agro-forestry System.  However, a CAU can be established 
in Bundelkhand, if specific funds are made available (Annexure–III).  DARE 
endorsed a copy of this Communication to Planning Commission as well.  
 
1.11 The Committee note that the Plan ning Commission, thereafter, on 26 August, 
2009 sought from DARE (i) the year -wise estimated budget for the current Plan and 
spill over for next Plan alongwith (ii) j ustification on works/activities to be executed.  
The requisite information was forwarded by DARE to the Planning Commission on 31 
August, 2009.  The proposals of DARE were agreed to during a meeting held on 14 
September, 2009 in the Office of Principal Se cretary to the Prime Minister.  The 
summary record of meeting states as follows in this context:      
 
(ii) Establishing a central agricultural university, by amalgamating 
IGFRI and NCRAF and upgrading it to the status of deemed 
agricultural university:  
 
  Proposal for a new University, as proposed by Department of 
Agricultural Research and Education, will be considered as the existing 
two institutions are specialized ones and it may not be desirably 
possible to dispense with their existing specialized mod e.  Secretary, 
Planning Commission endorsed this approach.  Planning Commission 
would process the proposal expeditiously to convey in principle 
approval and the Ministry of Agriculture would follow-up with the usual 
steps involved in the establishment of a central agricultural university.   
 
 

13 
 
1.12 It is also noted that PMO through a communication dated 25 September, 2009 
forwarded a note of the Chief Executive Officer.  Na tional Rainfed Area Authority 
(Annexure–IV).  The Officer in his note has stated that his recommendation 
regarding granting of ‘Deemed Agricultural University’ status for IGFRI was made 
after consultation with Secretary DARE and DG, ICAR and he came to know about 
the alternative suggestion for setti ng up of an independent University in the meeting 
only.  He has further stated that after the meeting he contacted States of Uttar 
Pradesh and Madhya Pradesh.  UP State has already declared setting up of a 
University in Bundelkhand, therefore, it may insis t for financial assistance to their 
proposal and may not spare land for an independent university.  As regards MP, the 
Officer has stated in his note that MP had an agricultural university in Jabalpur and 
opened another at Gwalior last year which is almost  a Bundelkhand region.  The MP 
Government may also insist for assistance to the University at Gwalior and may not 
spare land for an independent central agricultural university in Bundelkhand.  There 
are, therefore, chances that the proposal of setting up a n independent agricultural 
university may be bogged down in the above said nitty gritty of the two States.  He 
has also opined that the 13 districts of Bundelkhand have a population density less 
than half of UP and MP.  Enrolment of the students in the exi sting agricultural 
university has also gone down drastically due to availability of alternative courses in 
IT based subjects.  It is difficult to assess  whether there will be sufficie nt number of 
students for maintaining the central university at Bundelkhand.  
 
1.13 On 7 October, 2009 the Planning Commission conveyed in principle approval 
for setting up a new CAU in Bundelkhand and asked DARE  to provide a token 
amount of fund from within the approved outlay/budget.   
 
1.14 DARE, thereafter prepared and circulated the  EFC note and the Detailed 
Project Report (Annexure–V) to various ministries/departments and the Planning 
Commission on 31 December, 2009 for their comments .  The comments of some of 
these entities alongwith replies thereto by DARE are at (Annexure-VI). 
 
 
 

14 
 
1.15 In their comments the Departme nt of Expenditure, Ministry of F inance have 
inter-alia stated the following:     
(a) It is not clear how by imparting education in different branches of 
agricultural and allied sciences, which one of the objectives of the 
Scheme is, would translate into benefits of local community.        
(b) As per the DPR “The supporting staff in the offices, maintenance and 
services has been kept bare minimum and will be the core staff.  
Provision is made for outsourcin g these works”.  But as per the EFC 
Memo for the scheme, total number of Teachers/Professors (11+9 
Professors, 22 + 18 Associate and 41 + 34 Assistant Professors and 
around 15 Professor level posts including VC, Dean, Registrar, 
Comptroller, Director etc.)  to be employed is around 150.  Memo 
however, does not mention the number of Students to be admitted at 
various levels (Undergraduates and post graduates and Ph.D scholars) 
every year.  It also does not provide the modalities/terms of reference 
for outsour cing works.  It is not clear how DPR, without having 
estimated the number of Students have prescribed the number of 
Teachers/Professors and Hostels to be built under the scheme.  
Department may consider to have a detailed DPR done before the 
commencement of work under the scheme. 
(c) It can be seen from the EFC Memo and DPR that “the new university 
will be established in different pattern and is expected to be a model 
agricultural university”.  Department may indicate how the proposed 
University would be di fferent and in what sense this would be a model 
university.  
(d) While appraising other schemes of similar nature it has been seen that 
the paucity of quality faculty has been one of the major constraints in 
the implementation of such projects.  Steps being taken by the 
Department to overcome this likely problem may be brought on board. 
 (e) Department may indicate the progress in procuring/acquisition of land 
towards constructing the structures under the scheme.  Department 
may also indicate costs, if any with respect to procurement of land. 
     

15 
 
1.16 The Department of Animal Husbandry Dairying and Fisheries , Ministry of 
Agriculture had the following comments to offer: 
 
For the equitable development of the region the three colleges should 
be established in three different regions of Bundelkhand depending on the 
scope of various activities that are proposed to be undertaken through these 
colleges, instead of at one place.   
 
1.17 The Planning Commission has offered the following comments in the matter: 
 Sl. 
No. 
Comments Response of DARE 
6. As regards the need and justification for 
the project, the EFC memo underlines 
the following facts in support of the 
proposal: 
 
 Bundelkhand region spreads 
over 70,000 sq kilometers of 
plains in states of UP and MP 
and covers 13 districts viz. (i) 
Jhansi, (ii) Jalaun, (iii) Lalitpur, 
(iv) Banda, (v) Chitrakoot, (vi) 
Hamirpur, (vii) Mahoba, (viii) 
Sagar, (ix) Damoh, (x) 
Tikamgarh, (x i) Panna (xii) 
Chhatarpur and (xiii) Datia. 
 
 Majority of people in 
Bundelkhand region live in rural 
areas and annual per capita 
income is Rs. 8114 as against 
national average figure of Rs. 
13193 in 1997-98. 
 
 Though the farming is the 
predominant occupation , the 
region is characterized by 
shortage of water, low cropping 
intensity and fertilizer 
consumption and lack of market 
chain.  Semi arid climate with 
uncertain rainfall and poor soils 
of the region lead to significantly 
lower contribution of the region 
in the overall economy. 
 
 Though the region falls within 
jurisdiction of 3 Agricultural 
 
 
 
 
 
Noted. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Noted. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Noted. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Noted. 
 

16 
 
Universities viz. (i) JNKVV, 
Jabalpur, (ii) RSVAU, Gwalior 
and (iii) CSUA&T, Kanpur, these 
institutes reportedly do not focus 
exclusively on agriculture sector 
of Bundelkhand region. 
 
 It is necessary to ensure 
integrated development of the 
region through training of youths 
and farmers in respect of 
modern and latest scientific and 
technological developments in 
agriculture sector. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The University will address all the 
three i.e. education, research and 
extension education including training 
needs in the region. 
7. The need and justification of the 
proposed CAU, Bundelkhand  are still 
open to question and in view of the 
following a debatable issue in view of 
the following observations: 
 
 Chhatarpur (MP) is the central 
location for entire Bundelkhand 
region.  So ideal location would 
be Chhatarpur for CAU, which 
has not been con sidered by 
ICAR.  The State Government of 
MP is prepared to provide land 
for this purpose. 
 
 
 
 There will be as many as 5 
educational institutions for 
addressing the problems of 
agriculture sector of 
Bundelkhand region including 
three existing SAUs viz., (i) 
JNKVV, Jabalpur, (ii) NDAUT, 
Faizabad and (iii) CSUA&T, 
Kanpur plus another one i.e. 
SAU, Gwalior which is also 
nearby to Jhansi plus fifth SAU 
at Banda for which requisite 
process has already been 
started by the State Government 
of UP.  In addition, two  institutes 
of ICAR viz. IGFRI and NRCAF 
will also look at the issues 
relating to grassland and fodder 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Input provided in preceding item 
refers. Further, the Govts. of  MP and 
UP have agreed to provide support for 
setting up the CAU in Bundelkhand 
region. Decision about the location of 
CAU i.e. to establish it at Jhansi, using 
part of the land of IGFRI, Jhansi, 
without disturbing the Institute itself, 
was taken in consul tation with 
Planning Commission in the interest of 
enabling quicker execution of work.  
 
ICAR feels that there is still a huge 
gap in the requirement and availability 
of agricultural education for vast 
country like India where food security 
is to be addres sed in respect of an 
estimated population of 1.6 billion by 
the year 2050. However, if the 
Planning Commission feels that there 
is adequacy of such institutions, then 
ICAR may be directed to drop this 
project. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

17 
 
and agro-forestry of the region. 
 
 So there would be hardly scope 
for the CAU, Jhansi to fill up the 
developmental gap of the region 
from education point of view.  It 
would have been better if an 
exhaustive survey had been 
conducted for taking cognizance 
of the preference of the students 
of the Bundelkhand region for 
another Agricultural University in 
the region. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 The point is whether by merely 
opening a new educational 
institute like CAU, Jhansi for 
imparting education in different 
disciplines of Agricultural sector 
will be sufficient  for ensuring 
development of agricultural 
sector of the region and render 
benefits to local community.  
Since there would be a large 
number of students passing out 
from these institutes may start 
looking for the employment 
opportunities in the 
Bundelkhand region itself which 
may not meet their aspirations. 
 
 It may be noted that there is one 
Central Agricultural University, 
Imphal (Manipur) in existence 
whereas “in principle approval” 
has already been accorded for” 
CAU, Bihar, and CAU, Barapani 
(Meghalaya) a part from third 
one of CAU, Bundelkhand.  
There could be some 
comparatively more backward 
regions in the country, which 
may also raise voice for similar 
CAUs requiring exclusive focus 
 
 
Since an in -principle approval for 
setting up the CAU at Bundelkhand 
was given by the Planning 
Commission as far back as October 
2009, perhaps this issue does not 
arise at this stage. ICAR does not 
agree with the viewpoint that there is 
no scope for a CAU at Jhansi. This is 
an under -developed region with very 
limited educational and research 
facilities even counting those listed by 
the Planning Commission. However, 
if, after giving in -principle approval, 
the Planning Commission now feels 
that a CAU at Jhansi is not justified, 
then ICAR may be directed to drop the 
project. 
 
 
Naturally, merely opening a new 
educational institution or merely doing 
a single project cannot solve all the 
problems of development of any 
region. However, ICAR does believe 
that this is one important major and 
critical step towards solving these 
problems. ICAR has never posed this 
as the final and only solution for the 
problems of Bundelkhand region. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
As above  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

18 
 
for their development resulting 
into proliferation of CAUs in 
various backward regions. 
 
 In fact, there needs to be 
precise Government Policy 
framework for opening of new 
Central Agricultural University 
and new autonomous bodies 
under DARE/ICAR otherwise 
there would be mushrooming of 
such universities, which would 
lead to increasing the burden on 
exchequer due to increase in 
Plan as well as Non -Plan 
expenditure. 
 
 The study on availability of 
trained manpower and induction 
of vocational education in 
agriculture and allied sectors 
along with exploring the 
possibility of convergen ce of the 
resources already available 
needs to be undertaken on 
priority  basis for ensuring 
optimal utilization of resources 
available before allowing 
creation of new institutes. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Noted. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Noted. 
8. Further, it is necessary to put on 
records the total land requirement and 
dimensions of the infrastructure to be 
created for University campus as well 
as 2 constituent colleges viz.  College of 
Agriculture and College of Horticulture 
& Forestry.  Whether 3 00 acres of land 
available at this juncture with IGFRI and 
NRCAF would be sufficient for setting 
up of University campus and 2 colleges, 
needs to be categorically spelt out.  
Secondly, there should be clear 
indication as to whether future 
expansion of the CAU could also be 
undertaken within the 300 acres of land.  
If not, how additional land would be 
acquired? Earlier, it was given to 
understand that the adjoining 1000 
acres of barren land of State 
Government of UP would be used for 
that purpose.  It would be necessary to 
It is stated that 300 acres of land is 
adequate for setting up the CAU at 
Bundelkhand. 

19 
 
have categorical commitment of UP 
Government on this account.  
 
13 On perusal of the details of the cost 
estimates (EFC memo, Tables at Page 
10), it is noted that “Civil Works and 
Equipment” will be costing around Rs. 
156 crore i.e. 75.3% of the total 
projected expenditure for 11 th Plan 
period while budget for salaries an d 
recurring contingency have been 
pegged at Rs. 22 crore each i.e. 11% 
each of total projected expenditure for 
11th Plan.  Cost of Equipment has been 
pegged at Rs 10 crore only.  In this 
context, EFC may like to discuss the 
following points. 
 
 Civil works c osting Rs 146 
crores include provision for 
students’ hostel, guest houses, 
residential quarters, auditorium 
etc., and the requirement for the 
same needs to be revisited.  It 
would be prudent to create 
requisite yet bare minimum 
infrastructure, which could be 
expanded in future after 
evaluating the performance of 
the CAU. 
 
 As regards the provision of Rs 
22 crore made for contingency, 
it is necessary to point out that 
this provision needs to be scaled 
down.  Whether this provision 
has been worked on the basis  of 
scientists to be recruited and as 
per the standard norms of 
ICAR? It is also necessary to 
split this provision in terms of 
research and general 
contingency. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
These works are very important 
requirement to set up a Central 
Agricultural University, specially in an 
area where such facilities do not exist, 
and are not even rentable.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Since Rs. 22 crore  is for both salaries 
and recurring contingency, the figure 
appears to be correct vis -à-vis Rs.200 
crore. Naturally, now with only 13 
months to go, this figure would be 
revised and contingency will also be 
reduced in proportion. 
14 The proposal envisages additional 293 
posts (including about 150 posts of 
scientific category) for university 
headquarters and 2 new colleges (refer 
para 1.4 of this appraisal note for 
details).  But there is no mention about 
the number of students’ strength and 
Staffing pattern and infra -structure 
requirement has been proposed 
according to the ICAR 
recommendations based on the IV 
Deans Committee Report which are in 
line with UGC norms. 

20 
 
annual intake ca pacity for each 
discipline to be taught at the CAU at 
undergraduate, postgraduate and Ph.D. 
levels.   Creation of infrastructure like 
class rooms, hostels, laboratories etc.  
will have to be decided on this basis of 
hard core data on these parameters.  
The norms of the UGC/AICTE regarding 
infrastructure and manpower vis -à-vis 
being proposed by the project 
authorities also need to be placed on 
the record. 
 
18. As regards the targeted completion of 
the CAU by 2011 -12, it is necessary to 
indicate some realistic date of 
completion as within a period of 1 1/4 
years it seems to be difficult to create 
new infrastructure for the CAU and start 
functioning.  The project authorities 
need to spell out the realistic completion 
schedule of administrative - cum- 
educational campus along with requisite 
laboratories etc.  The construction 
activity could be undertaken in a 
phased manner.  How the objective of 
quick start of the university campus will 
be achieved needs to be spelt out. 
  
The time for completion is going to be 
2¼ years. Since the approval is now 
likely only by March -April at the 
earliest, completion date will be 2¼ 
years from that date. 
  
1.18 Further in the sequence , the Committee found that the Government of Uttar 
Pradesh wrote a letter to the Planning Co mmission on 11 February, 2010           
(Annexure–VII).  The letter is a follow-up to the meeting taken by Secretary, Planning 
Commission on 19 January, 2010  on setting up of the CAU in Bundelkhand.  The 
letter clearly mentions that the State Government in view of Banda district of 
Bundelkhand region representing the geographical and socio -economic condition of 
the region have decided to establish Bundelkhand Agriculture University at Banda.  
The State Government had already acquired 346.6 hectare land for the purpose and 
the possession of the land was to be over by 10 February, 2010.  The State 
Government were bringing the necessary bill for setting -up the said Agriculture 
University during the ongoing Budget Session of the State.  The State Government 
have further requested in the letter that keeping these developments in view the 
Planning Commission may consider setting -up of the CAU in Banda or approving 
central assistance to the Agricultural University being established by the State 

21 
 
Government.  A copy of the letter had also been endorsed to  the Department of 
Agriculture and Cooperation, Ministry of Agriculture, Government of India.   
1.19 A few days later on 15 February, 2010 Chief Minister, Madhya Pradesh wrote 
a letter (Annexure–VIII) to the Minister  of Agriculture, Food & Civil supplies, 
Consumer Affairs and Public Distribution offering 596 acres, 1110 acres and 998 
acres respectively of land in three tehsils of Chhatarpur district in Bundelkhand region 
for the proposed CAU.   
1.20 From the records made available to the C ommittee they also found that Prof. 
M.S. Swaminathan, MP, Rajya Sabha addressed both the Prime Minister and the 
Minister of Agriculture, Food and Civil S upplies, Consumer Affairs and Public 
Distribution on 10 July, 2010 asking them to reconsider the proposal for conversion of 
IGFRI into a deemed to be University because of its uniqueness of character 
(Annexures - IX & X)  In his above-cited letters Dr. Swaminathan wrote to the Prime 
Minister that it would not be in our national interest to close the only In stitute in our 
Country for fodder and grassland development.  To the Minister he wrote that ‘we can 
always find land for a new Central University in Bundelkhand but we cannot find a 
substitute to IGFRI.  
1.21 The Union Agriculture Minster vide letter No. 3(3)/2009 -A&P (Edn.) dated 
28.10.2010 addressed to the Chief Minister, Government of Uttar Pradesh indicated 
that the Government of India have decided to set up a Central Agricultural University 
for Bundelkhand re gion. Offers of alternative sites have been received from Madhya 
Pradesh Government also.  Jhansi is one probable option for setting it up. The CAU 
Headquarters is proposed to be set up on 300 acres of land currently with the ICAR 
campuses of Indian Grassl and & Fodder Research Institute (IGFRI) and National 
Research Centre for Agroforestry (NRCAF) with colleges in both Uttar Pradesh and 
Madhya Pradesh portions of the Bundelkhand region.  
CRITERIA FOR SELECTION OF SITE 
1.22 Since the proposed CAU is being es tablished with the primary intent of 
triggering developmental activity in Bundelkhand region , the Committee desired to 
know from the Government the criteria laid down for selection of site for the proposed 

22 
 
CAU and reasons necessitating the establishing of the headquarters of the proposed 
University and two out of its four colleges in Jhansi.  
1.23  DARE in their written submission in this context stated that the immediate 
availability of land at that point of time and complementaries to be extended by 
IGFRI, Jhansi and the NRCAF, Jhansi with regard to faculty expertise, facilities for 
experimental and field work were the criteria for selection of site for setting up of the 
headquarters of ‘The Rani Lakshmi Bai Central Agricultural University’. Further 
adjoining to this, there is land of State Government farm over 1000 acres. 
 
1.24 During the course of the Oral Evidence on 16 November, 2012 justifying the 
choice of Jhansi the representative of DARE stated: 
 
“<ºÉ ¤ÉÉiÉ àÉå BÉEÉä<Ç nÉä ®ÉªÉ xÉcÉÓ cé ÉÊBÉE UiÉ ®{ÉÖ® BÉEÉ AÉÊ®ªÉÉ ÉÊ{ÉU½É cÖ+ÉÉ cè* ãÉäÉÊBÉExÉ ªÉä ºÉÉ®ä ÉÊxÉhÉÇªÉ 
ºÉÉ®ÉÒ SÉÉÒVÉÉå BÉEÉä näJÉiÉä cÖA ´ÉcÉÄ VÉÉä nÚºÉ®ä ºÉÆºlÉÉxÉ cé ªÉÉ ºÉèx]ÅãÉ ãÉÉäBÉEä¶ÉxÉ cè, BÉE<Ç SÉÉÒVÉÉå BÉEÉä näJÉiÉä c ÖA 
ºÉÉàÉÉÊªÉBÉE ÉÊxÉhÉÇªÉÃ ÉÊãÉªÉÉ MÉªÉÉ +ÉÉè® {ãÉÉÉËxÉMÉ BÉEàÉ ÉÒ¶ÉxÉ uÉ®É VÉÉä àÉÉÒÉË]MÉ BÉEÉãÉ BÉEÉÒ MÉ<Ç, =ºÉàÉå ªÉc ÉÊxÉhÉÇªÉ 
ÉÊãÉªÉÉ MÉªÉÉ +ÉÉè® =ºÉBÉEä +ÉxÉÖ°ô{É ªÉc ¤ÉxÉÉªÉÉ MÉªÉÉ cè*“ 
 
1.25 With a view to understand the issue in all its ramification the Committee further 
desired to know as to whether while zer oing on Jhansi the factors like situation 
obtaining in various districts of the region , percentage of population depending on 
agriculture and livestock activities, poverty levels, migration and employment 
generation avenues, centraling of headquarters and per capita income of people 
living in each of the districts of Uttar Pradesh and Madhya Pradesh covered under the 
RLBCAU was actually taken into consideration. In response the Department 
furnished the following district-wise information to the Committee: 
DISTRICT-WISE FIGURES OF BUNDELKHAND REGION 
District   Area 
(Sq. 
Km.) 
Population 
(lakhs) 
Poverty 
level 
Migration Employment 
generation 
(in lakhs) 
per capita 
annual 
income 
(Rs/annum 
UTTAR PRADESH 
Jhansi 5024 20.00 29% 32 4.37 26,447 
Lalitpur 5039 12.18 30%  39 3.80 22,914 

23 
 
Jalaun 4565 16.71 48% 37 4.31 34,199 
Hamirpur 4325 11.04 45% 40 3.58 18,682 
Mahoba   2847   8.76 21% 42 2.53 24,452 
Banda 4113 17.99 41% 48 5.52 18,019 
Chitrakoot 3202   9.91 55% 45 3.03 12,728 
MADHYA PRADESH 
Datia 2691*   7.86 25% N A 2.70 25,273 
Chhatarpur 8687 17.63 61% 50 4.93 20,032 
Tikamgarh 5048 14.45 50% 49 4.89 18,879 
Panna 7135 10.16 49% 30 3.41 19,730 
Damoh 7306 12.64 59% 25 4.16 25,304 
Sagar     10252 23.78 61% 42 6.37 24,760 
 
* The most central amongst the districts is Chhatarpur. 
 
 
1.26 Based on the above facts when the Committee further querried Secretary, 
DARE during the Oral Evidence on 29 November, 2012, he stated: 
“We would only like to submit that we considered the whole 
Bundelkhand as a region which requires some immediate support. In that 
immediate support, whether it was the Planning Commission or it was the 
Committee headed by Dr.Samra as I mentioned earlier, ev erybody went by 
this that we should have it at Jhansi.” 
1.27 He further added:  
“I would like to submit that a university basically has the requirement of 
faculty, some kind of facilities and all that. In this regard, a committee headed 
by Dr. J.S. Samra , the Chairman of the National Rainfed Area Authority, also 
went there. We have an established institute in terms of the Indian Grassland 
Fodder Research Institute at Jhansi. So, only for this that it has also the same 
component – the kind of population, t he population below poverty line, the 
income levels, the migration levels – it is chosen. All these components are 
comparable, without any major significant differences between the two portions 
or between the districts. We have brought the data before. Tha t was the only 
concern.   Otherwise, there was no bias that it should be in Jhansi. All the 
districts were considered, and Jhansi was decided upon because there is a 
facility of not only the Fodder Research Institute, but adjacent to it is the 
National Research Centre for Agro forestry. Since, they have been functioning 
for many years, the immediate attention was that we can draw the faculty and 
teachers from there and we can start the colleges immediately. This was how 
Jhansi was considered. It is not that other districts were not considered. 
Now also, the University setup will be in terms of colleges. At this moment, 
there will be four colleges, but as we go along maybe more colleges would be 

24 
 
coming up, and as we are having in other agricultural universiti es, more and 
more colleges will be located in different districts. It does not in any way 
confine to Jhansi. So, I wanted to submit and clarify on this point. 
Now, if I may draw your kind attention to some of the other things with regard 
to area of the dif ferent districts. We have gone by these details. For example, 
the district -wise population in Bundelkhand. If we take the UP region, the 
population density is 343 per sq. kms. whereas in MP it is 202 per sq. kms. if 
we take these seven districts and six di stricts into consideration. Similarly, the 
average poverty levels in UP is about 38 per cent, and in the MP region it is of 
the order of 50 per cent. There is a difference here. As regards migration, it is 
40 per cent in UP, and 38 per cent .” 
1.28 When asked pointedly about the differences in indices of the two districts he 
admitted: 
“in case of Jhansi, migration is of the order of 32 per cent, and in 
Chhatarpur it is of the order of 50 per cent. Similarly, when it comes to Jhansi 
with regard to poverty le vels, it is 29 per cent, and it is 61 per cent in 
Chhatarpur. The initial consideration was only this that we can immediately 
start with functioning of the college as against we starting de novo  in some 
place where we are not able to. This was the only con sideration. Otherwise, I 
must submit that the kind of linkages that we can have in this location with 
regard to both teaching and research exposure and the farms readily available. 
Otherwise, we also had been of the view that we do not want to part with th e 
existing infrastructure of the institute.  
We had brought up all these points. In fact, initially, the proposal was to 
upgrade the institute to a deemed university. We have submitted all those. 
Then, it was brought out that this is the only institute in the country, namely, 
the Grassland and Fodder Research Institute, which just by upgrading it into 
deemed university might be a loss to the national research system. So, we 
have submitted that there could be another Central Agricultural University and 
not to upgrade it. But I would only submit and seek your appreciation to this 
fact that if we locate and again I am submitting colleges will be across, but if 
we have some kind of a Central / coordination unit in this place, then the 
advantage will be access to students to ready farm facilities.  
I would also like to submit that agro forestry Centre is again one of its kind  in 
the country. We do not have a replica of it. So, the submission was that in that 
ambience / atmosphere the students will have an immediate access to these 
facilities, and while we are recruiting faculty for these university we can draw 
from these scien tist strength in both the institutes. Hence, Jhansi was 
proposed. But then we would also like to submit here that Chhatarpur colleges 
are being located. We have brought out, for example, that in case of 
indigenous cattle population again it is appalling in  some of these areas, and 
we need lot of interventions and that is why animal husbandry. All those 
interventions that we talk about in terms of veterinary science are mainly with 
regard to medicines, and animal husbandry is mainly with regard to 
improvement. So, we have said that there will be a focussed attention in 

25 
 
Chhatarpur as has been indicated / proposed by the Government of Madhya 
Pradesh. Also, the fisheries potential is quite high in this part.  
When we compare two regions, Madhya Pradesh has again  been offered. So, 
we have gone by this. At the same time, as we go along, maybe, there could 
be another one. We are just now starting. So, I would not be able to say much 
on that. But maybe, as time demands, there could be another College of 
Agriculture in the other region also. We have not closed any of these options. 
At this stage, having considered all these, it is absolutely not for the sake of 
convenience of teachers or anything like that. We are ready to go and work 
anywhere. But at this time, I woul d like to submit that the consideration was 
linkages.” 
1.29 Defending their decision about location of proposed CAU in Jhansi the 
Secretary, DARE informed the Committee during Oral Evidence on 29 November, 
2012: 
“This is the submission. Now, I would like to also submit one more thing. 
Right now, there are three Agricultural Universities in the State of Madhya 
Pradesh. They are JNKVV, Jabalpur; Rajamata Vijaya Raje Scindia University 
in Gwalior, and the Veterinary and Animal Husbandry University in Jabalpur. I 
would like to mention, at this stage, that these three Universities are having 
some kind of an attention or oversight role or some kind of a backstopping 
happening to these districts in Madhya Pradesh. At this  time, when we took up 
this particular matter, Chandrasekhar Azad University, Kanpur, was the only 
Agricultural University looking after these districts of Uttar Pradesh. Much later, 
very recently, came the University in Banda. That point was also discusse d 
whether Banda University should be upgraded and so on. This also was taken 
into consideration that there is an oversight role of three Universities over the 
districts of Madhya Pradesh, while there is only one University taking note of 
these districts. A gain, I must mention that just because we locate the 
University in Jhansi does not mean that attention will be focussed only on Uttar 
Pradesh side and not on Madhya Pradesh side. The discussion was that there 
is only one University, so let us have this loc ated in Jhansi. As everybody 
knows, Jhansi is in the border of these two States. It has several other things, 
like railway links. Again, the point is should everything go there. No, absolutely 
not. Our consideration was this that linkages, logistics and ev erything would 
work out faster. The only consideration was to fast track the functioning of this 
University. Many a time, I would like to submit that from the time we start, even 
after five or seven years, the Universities do not take off. But here we thou ght 
that there is a good possibility, the ambience and the availability of academics. 
The moment we establish the University, we can start with the admissions. 
This was the consideration. However, we also seek your kind guidance in this 
matter.” 
  

26 
 
1.30 When asked specifically about the comparative situation in Bundelkhand 
region of both the States he admitted: 
 
“ºÉ®, +É£ÉÉÒ ´ÉcÉÆ SÉÉ® AOÉÉÒBÉEãSÉ® ªÉÖÉÊxÉ´ÉÉÌºÉ]ÉÒºÉ cé* =kÉ® |Énä¶É àÉå +É£ÉÉÒ SÉÉ® BÉßEÉÊ­É  ÉÊ´É¶´ÉÉÊ´ÉtÉÉãÉªÉ 
cé* There are five agricultural-related Universities in Uttar Pradesh. In Madhya 
Pradesh, there are two Agricultural Universities and one Veterinary and Animal 
Husbandry University.”   
 
1.31 When pointed out by the Committee that based on various indices of 
backwardness and socio-economic factors why Chhatarpur was not being considered 
for the purpose a representative of DARE stated during the Oral Evidence on             
29 November, 2012: 
 
“Being agriculture, it is a developmental institution. Its success primarily 
depends upon two to three things. One is that if it is able to attract talented 
scientists to it or not. If we put it at a place where we feel that talented 
scientists will be reluctant to come, then the purpose of setting up an 
agricultural university will be defeated.” 
1.32 He further added: 
“Sir, there is no doubt that if we have to use poverty criteria and other 
kinds of criteria, then Chhatarpur  stands better than Jhansi. But my humble 
submission is that university is not basically a welfare institution, it is a 
developmental institution. “ 
1.33 Secretary, DARE after throughout maintaining that the central location of 
Jhansi was one of the import ant reasons behind its choice finally after persistent 
queries admitted during the Oral Evidence on 29 November, 2012: 
 
“I agree that Chhatarpur is absolutely central.” 
  
MODEL ACT AND DEANS’ COMMITTEE REPORT 
 
1.34 The Committee then sought from DARE the Model Act quoted by DARE in 
their response to the various ministries/departments/agencies as also the Report of 
Fourth Deans’ Committee on Agriculture Education in India.  The Model Act and 
relevant excerpts from the  Deans’ Committee are at Annexures XI and XII 
respectively.  The Model Act for Agricultural Universities in India as per the document 
furnished to the Committee is not a Model enactment. It is infact model draft of a 

27 
 
legislation based on which the bills of proposed agricultural universities can be based 
and developed.  The draft of model legislation contains various clauses relevant to 
establishing State Agricultural Universities. It is, however, does not contain 
references or clauses germane to a Central Agriculture University.  
1.35 In so far as the Report of Fourth Deans’ Committee is concerned it is observed 
that the projections for faculty and other wherewithal have been made in the DPR of 
the Department are more or less in consonance with the norms prescribed in the said 
Report.   
LEGAL POSITION 
 
1.36 The Background Note submitted to the Committee states that t he University 
shall be established under an Act of the Parliament.  The University was proposed to 
be established under Entry 25 of the List III (Concurrent List) of the Constitution of 
India. Accordingly, the Bill was moved for introduction in the Rajya Sabha on            
28 December, 2011. However, the introducti on of the Bill under the above e ntry was 
opposed by some members in the Rajya Sabha stating that the Central Government 
does not have jurisdiction for est ablishment of University under E ntry 25, List III 
(Concurrent List) and the introduction was deferred. The Bill was again moved for 
introduction in the Rajya Sabha on 22 May, 2012. Some of the members again 
opposed the introduction on the same grounds. After discussion on the issue, the 
Leader of Opposition in the Rajya Sabha suggested that if the institution is of national 
importance, it could  be established under Entry 63 of List I( Union List), which 
provides for any Institution declared by Parliament by law to be an institution of 
national importance. The suggestion was agreed to by the Union Agriculture Minister 
and the Bill was introduced in the Rajya Sabha.  The matter of amendment as 
proposed, is under examination in consultation with the Legislative Department. 
 
1.37 When the Committee during the oral evidence asked the representatives of the 
Legislative Department as to whether any such amendment(s) had been worked out 
and if so why the same had  not been furnished to the Committee.  In response the 
representative of Legislative Department stated:  
“We have given the draft of whatever amendment is requir ed for the 
purpose o f Entry 63, that is declaration of Rani Lakshmi Bai Central 

28 
 
Agricultural University as an institution of national university.  It is covered 
under Entry 63 of the Union List.  Amendment is as 1(a) which reads as under: 
“Whereas the objects of the institution known as Rani Lakshmi Bai Central 
Agricultural University are such as to make the institution one of the national 
importance, it is hereby declared that the institution known as the Rani 
Lakshmi Bai Central Agricultural University is an institution of national 
importance”.  That is why it is now covered under En try No.63 and the Bill is of 
the national importance.” 
 
1.38 The Committee further desired to know that whether the proposed CAU could 
be covered under Entry 64 which states that the institution for scientific or technical 
education, financed by the Govern ment of India wholly or in part declared by 
Parliament by law to be institution of national importance .  The representative of 
Legislative Department stated that it could be covered as in one way it is a technical 
Bill and Agriculture is a technical subject. 
 
1.39 Clarifying further on this aspect the representative of DARE added: 
 
“As you have rightly said, earlier it was under the Entry 25 and the Bill 
was introduced.  At present we have only one university, that is the Central 
Agricultural University est ablished in Imphal which was established by this 
particular Entry.  Therefore, the earlier Bill was introduced.  As per the 
discussion in Rajya Sabha, the hon. members of Parliament and the hon. 
Leader of Opposition suggested that since it involves more th an one State; 
Uttar Pradesh and Madhya Pradesh, like Aligarh Muslim University, Delhi 
University and Banaras Hindu University which have been established and 
declared by the Parliament as institutions of national importance, this 
university may also be est ablished as institution of national importance.  Our 
hon. Agriculture Minister accepted this and suggested to bring an official 
amendment.” 
 
1.40 The Committee further desired to know the Entry under which Central 
Agricultural University at Imphal ha d been established and reasons for opposition by 
the members of Rajya Sabha.  The representative of DARE informed the Committee 
that CAU, Imphal has been established under Entry 25.  He further stated: 
“Sir, it was pointed out that since agriculture, includ ing agricultural 
education and research, protection against pest and prevention of plant 
diseases under Entry 14 of the List 2, is a State subject it cannot be 
established under this particular clause which is in the Concurrent List of 7 th 
Schedule and agriculture is a State subject.” 

29 
 
1.41 On the query as to how agriculture being State subject  prevent this Act from 
being enacted under Entry 25 the representative stated: 
“Hon. member of Parliament had indicated his objections and based on 
his objection there was a suggestion by the Leader of the Opposition which 
was agreed upon by the hon. Agriculture Minister.  If you permit, I would read 
the objection raised by the hon. Member.”   
1.42 Adding further, he stated: 
“The central message was only that agriculture is a State subject.  It 
was suggested that we cannot incorporate an agricultural university through 
this Act.  We can have an institute of national importance but cannot 
incorporate agricultural university through Entry 25.   Article 25 reads: 
“Education, including technical education, medical education and 
universities subject to the provisions of entries 63, 64, 65 and 66 of 
List1, Vocational and technical training of labour.” 
So, they have quoted 63, 64, 65 and 66.  It was said that it is a State subject 
and the Concurrent List does not include it.  So, how can we establish a 
Central Agricultural University under this?  Therefore , it was suggested by the 
hon. member that it coul d be established only through the institute of national 
importance. 
 
1.43 When the Committee further desired to know that when CAU Imphal had been 
established earlier u nder Entry 25 why RLBCAU could not be established under the 
same entry and was there a need to amend CAU Imphal Act too.   In response t he 
representative of Legislative Department stated: 
“Sir i t can be covered under 63, 64, 65 as well as 25.  Earlier we h ad 
established it under Entry 25 also but when objections were raised we brought 
amendment.  But it can be established under 63 and 64 also.” 
 
 Clarifying further the representative of DARE stated:  
“Sir, 63 is better because it is very omnibus sort of clause whereas 64 talks 
about scientific and technical education, so again a debate will come whether 
agriculture is a scientific subject or not.” 
 
  

30 
 
1.44 During the further Oral Evidence on  29.11.2012 the representative of 
Department of Legal Affairs further clarified before the Committee :   
 
‘Sir, The file was received in the Ministry of Law and Department of Legal Affairs 
which I am representing had to give its advice.  This Department assess it as t o 
whether it is covered under any law or as per the provisions of the constitution or not.  
After seeing it broadly we can tell whether this is under the power of Parliament and 
this field of legislation is covered under this entry.  According to the Artic le 246 and 
entry 25 this advice was given.  After that our Sister Department, i.e. Legislative 
Department had drafted this. 
Sir, Then the point was that whether this should be covered under entry 63 or 64.  In 
entry 63, there are two things – one is about those Institutes which were already 
existing there like Banaras University and Aligarh Muslim University and second one 
is about those Universities which will be set up at some other places under 371A and 
the Parliament has the competence over it.  Any oth er institution declared by 
Parliament, by law, as institution of national importance , if Parliament declares any 
Institution as an institution of national importance then the competence also over it is 
according to this entry.  In this context, when we fel t like this last time when 
discussion was held then this thing came before us as to how it should be resolved.  
At that time, the leader of the opposition that it should be considered under entry 63.  
At that time the Minister of Agriculture immediately agreed to it and said that he would 
get it examined.  After that the file received back and it was stated that you can cover 
it under entry as the institute of national importance.  The Committee had asked about 
the possibility whether this can be covered under entry 63 or not ? 
 
The opinion in this regard is that when we after considering the matter we find that we 
have both kinds of precedents and in which first institution was already in existence 
and functioning properly.  After observing its performance the Parliament decided 
later on that this institution should be declared as of national importance.  We have 
seen two such precedents wherein both the things were done simultaneously.  In that 
case an institution was established and at the same time it was  declared as an 
institute of national importance too I could have brought Section -5 of the All Indian 
Institute of Medical Sciences, there was a proposal and if you permit then I can read 
out that when it comes to the matter of Establishment it is mentione d in the Section – 
3 that it will be established and it is written in the Section-5.  “It is hereby declared that 
the institute shall be an institution of national importance”. This provision is approved 
by the Parliament.  A few days back, according of Sc ientific and Innovative Research 
Act, 2011 was enacted.  In which this institution was established and then it was  also 
declared as institution of national importance Under Section – 6.  If you allow me , I 
would like to read it out.  “It is hereby declared  that the academy of scientific and 
innovative research shall be an institution on national importance.” 
 
Sir, We have both kinds of precedents and now it is upto the Committee or Parliament 
to decide whether we should do it now or later on because when there was a question 
of Imphal, we left this matter to our Administrative Department.  We do not raise legal 
objections and we only say that if you have to do this, then you will have to do so 
under 63.  Parliament has competence to declare any institution a s an institution of 
national importance entry 63 only. “ 
  
 
  

31 
 
1.45 The R ani Lakshmi Bai Central Agricultural University Bill, 2012 was 
introduced in Rajya Sabha on 22 May, 2012.  On 8 June, 2012 , Speaker, Lok 
Sabha asked the Committee to examine the Bill and Report to the Parliament.  
Bundelkhand region which is spread over 70000 square kilometers in the 
Central plains of India consists of six districts of Madhya Pradesh viz., Sagar, 
Damoh, Tikamgarh, Panna, Chhatarpur and Datia and seven districts of Uttar 
Pradesh viz., Jhansi, Jalaun, Lalitpur, Banda, Chitrakoot, Hamirpur and 
Mahoba.  The Committee note that the setting -up of the proposed Central 
Agricultural University(CAU) is one of the several measures being 
contemplated/undertaken by the Government with a view to give impetus to 
development of this relatively backward region of the Country.  The proposed 
CAU will be headquartered at Jhansi and have four colleges viz. Agriculture, 
Horticulture and Forestry, Anima l Sciences and Fisheries at different locations 
in the Region.  The intention being to integrate teaching, research and 
extension education with a view to strengthen technical back -stopping and to 
contribute to development of quality human resource in this backward region. 
1.46 The Committee find that the idea of the proposed CAU germinated in the 
middle of 2009 when a memoranda was submitted to the Prime Minister by a 
delegation of MPs/MLAs on 27 July, 2009 requesting that a comprehensive 
package for Bunde lkhand region be considered.  The Memoranda in fact 
suggested that the proposed CAU be established by amalgamating India n 
Grassland and Fodder Research Institute (IGFRI) and National Research Centre 
for Agro Forestry (NRCAF) both located in Jhansi and upgradation to the status 
of deemed to be a gricultural university.  The Committee note that the idea of 
amalgamation of these t wo premier ICAR research institutions and their 

32 
 
upgradation to a deemed to be university status was opposed by the India n 
Council for Agriculture Research.  Their stand being that IGFRI was involved in 
research and it may not be possible for the Institute to conduct teaching 
activities.  DARE/ICAR instead proposed that a Central Agricultural University 
could be established in Bundel khand subject to availability of funds.  This 
stand of DAR E/ICAR was endorsed by both the Planning Commission , as well 
as, the Prime Minister’s Office , as it was felt that ‘the two institutions in 
question are specialized ones and it may not be desirably possible to dispense 
with their existing specialized mode’.  Both these agencies also concurred with 
the view of DARE/ICAR about establishment of a Central Agricultural University 
in Bundelkhand region and the Planning Commission was asked to process the  
proposal expeditiously to convey in principle approval.  Simultaneously, the 
Ministry of Agriculture w ere also asked to follow up with the usual steps 
involved in the establishment of a CAU.   
1.47 The Committee , however,  also note that while on one hand t he 
aforementioned decisions were arrived at on 14 September, 2009 , only a few 
days later on 25 September, 2009 the Prime Minister’s Office forwarded a note 
of Chief Executive Officer, National Rainfed Area Authority  to DARE, wherein, it 
was categorically mentioned that Uttar Pradesh had already declared setting up 
of a University in Bundelkhand and thus it may not spare land for an 
independent university.  Madhya Pradesh already had an agricultural university 
in Jabalpur and had opened another at Gwalior in 2008 which was almost in 
Bundelkhand region.  The official  had also stated that in the given situation 
setting up of an independent CAU may be bogged down as both the States 
would insist on financial assistance for their respective proposals.  More 

33 
 
tellingly, the Offic ial had also opined that 13 districts of Bundelkhand have 
population density less than half of Madhya Pradesh and Uttar Pradesh  and 
enrollment of students in a gricultural universities had gone down drastically 
due to availability of alternative subjects in IT based subjects.  Therefore, it 
would be difficult to assess whether there will be sufficient number of students 
for maintaining the proposed CAU.  Inspite of this note of caution, the 
Committee note that the Planning Commission conv eyed in principle approval 
for setting up of a new CAU costing Rs. 500 odd crore to begin with , in 
Bundelkhand on 7 October, 2009 and accordingly asked DARE to provide a 
token amount of fund from within the approved outlay/budget.  DARE , 
thereafter, prepared and circulated the EFC  Memo and Detailed Project Report 
(DPR) to concerned Ministries/Departments and Planning Commission o n        
31 December, 2009.  The Committee note that the Department of Expend iture in 
the Ministry of Finance raised several questions on the EFC Memo and DPR 
including how the activities of the proposed CAU would translate into benefits 
for local community; how without having estimated number of students , the 
number of teachers/professors and hostels to be built had been prescribed in 
the DPR; how and in what sense would the propose d CAU be a model 
university; steps taken by the Department to overcome the paucity of quality 
faculty which has been one of the major constraints in implementation of other 
such projects , procurement/acquisition of land and the indicative cost of  the 
same; etc.   
1.48 Similarly, the Department of Animal Husbandry, Dairying and Fisheries 
which is a sister department of DARE and also an important stakeholder in any 
CAU, had also recommended that for the equitable development of the region, 

34 
 
three colleges should be established in three different regions of Bundelkhand 
depending on the scope of various activities that are proposed to be 
undertaken through these colleges, instead of at one place.   
1.49 The Planning Commission which had agreed in principle for setting up of 
the proposed CAU had also raised some very pertinent questions in the matter 
including why Chhat arpur, the most central location in entire Bundelkhand 
region had not been considered by ICAR inspite of its centrality and even when 
the Government of Madhya Pradesh was prepared to provide large tracks of 
land in that district for this purpose; the scope of CA U in view of the fact that 
five SAUs viz. at Jabalpur, Faizabad, Kanpur, Banda and Gwalior (adjacent to 
Jhansi) alongwith two institutes of ICAR viz. IGFRI and NRCAF already existed 
in the region,  merely opening a new institute may not be sufficient for 
development of agricultural sector of the region and render benefits to local 
community as a large number of students passing out from these institutes 
may start looking for employment opportunities in the Bundelkhand region 
itself which may not meet their a spirations; possibility of some comparatively 
more backward regions in the Country seeking CAUs resulting into 
proliferation of CAUs in various backward regions; need for a Government 
Policy framework for opening of new CAU and autonomous bodies under 
DARE/ICAR to control mushrooming of such universities and the resultant 
burden on exchequer; assessment of availability of trained manpower before 
allowing creation of new institutes; sufficien cy of the 300 acres of land being 
carved out of  IGFRI cite a few for the requirements of the proposed CAU  to.  
The Planning Commission had even gone to the extent of stating that in view of 
the proliferation of so many institutions in the region there would hardly be 

35 
 
scope for CAU, Jhansi to fill up the developmental ga p of the region from the 
education point of view.  They had also opined that an extensive survey for 
taking cognizance for preference of Bundelkhand region for another agriculture 
university should have been conducted before mooting the proposal. 
1.50 The Committee find that inexplicably, the response of DARE to most of 
these important questions raised by the various agencies is a monotonous 
‘noted’ or a reply couched in general or vague terms.  Furthermore, in response 
to more germane ones , including financial matters , DARE ha ve rather than 
resolving the queries or attending to the apprehensions of the concerned 
agency, brazened out by asking them to direct ICAR to drop the project.  The 
Committee are in agreement with most of the issues rai sed by the various 
agencies and find it intriguing as why DARE/ICAR have proceeded in such an 
unusual haste, ignoring and suppressing the ground realities as well as facts , 
to push this proposal in a very unprofessional manner.  Most of their action s 
have, infact not only been against the interest of the region and proper 
implementation of the project but have also been downright detrimental to the 
existing institution s in and around the Bundelkhand region , including two of 
their own premier research instit utions.  The Committee are constrained to say 
that for the reasons best known to DARE/ICAR a half baked and unscientific 
proposal, far away  from ground reality and the genuine requirements of the 
region, was worked out and relentlessly pushed forward even after its 
shortcomings were exposed and more reasonable and rational options were 
available to them for the purpose.   

36 
 
1.51 It is beyond comprehension as to why the offer of Government of Uttar 
Pradesh on 11 February, 2010 for setting up the CAU in Banda where 346.6 
hectare land had been acquired was ignored.  
1.52 It also defies logic why the letter of 10 July, 2010 of Chief M inister, 
Government of Madhya Pradesh, to the Union Agriculture Minister offering 
huge chunks of lands measuring 596 acres, 110 acres and 998 acres 
respectively in three tehsils of Chhatarpur in Bundelkhand region went 
unanswered.  The Committee also fail to understand as to why DARE/ICAR , 
who were initially themselves reluctant to divert the resources of IGFRI for the 
proposed CAU, later on decided about  carving out of 300 acres of land from 
this premier research institution and also utilizing their infras tructure and 
academic resources inspite of the well reasoned strong objections of Professor 
M.S. Swaminathan, MP, Rajya Sabha addressed to both the Prime Minister and 
the Minister of Agriculture.  
1.53 The Committee are also not convinced by the logic and reasoning 
extended by the Department for establishing the headquarters and two colleges 
of the proposed CAU in Jhansi.  Facts were misrepresented in various 
proposals, EFC Memo and the DPR by showing Jh ansi as central location in 
Bundelkhand region though it is situated at one of the corners of the region.  
Once the Committee pinned the Department about the centrality of Chhatarpur 
in the region and its justifiable claim to be the location for establishment of the 
proposed CAU, DARE took refuge behind alibis like availability of infrastructure 
and academic resources of IGFI and NRCAF, Jhansi , a prospect which they 
were vehemently opposed to earlier.  In their zeal to zero in on Jhansi , 

37 
 
important socio -economic indices regarding area, population, poverty levels, 
rate of migration, employment generation, per capita income were all given a 
go by.  DARE , forgetting that the primary aim of the proposed CAU was 
development of the impoverished Bundelkhand regi on even cited such 
unconvincing reasons viz. lack of connectivity and supposed inconvenience to 
the faculty of the proposed University in districts other than Jhansi , as they 
were lacking in infrastructure.   
1.54 Keeping the forgoing in view , the Committee recommend that  if the 
proposed CAU is to be established in Bundelkhand region and if it has to be 
nurtured into a successful endeavour, then it ought to located in a central 
location. A fter giving due consideration to all socio -economic fact ors 
enumerated previously in this Report, the Committee are of the firm opinion 
that from all points of view Chhatarpur qualifies to be the most appropriate 
location for the proposed CAU rather than Jhansi.  They, therefore, strongly 
recommend that the proposed CAU, including its headquarters and one college 
be immediately established in Chhatarpur, MP where the State Government has 
already offered three large tracts of land for the purpose.  A college may also 
be set-up at Jhansi but without encroaching upon the land and infrastructure of 
IGFRI and/or NRCAF.  The adjoining 1000 acres of land of the State 
Government should be utilized for the purpose. Thereafter, the remaining two 
colleges should be established, one in Madhya Pradesh portion of 
Bundelkhand and the other on the Uttar Pradesh side.  The Committee desire 
that the Bill be reworked accordingly.   

38 
 
The Committee also find that inspite of the undue hurry shown by the 
Government the proposed CAU is still stuck at the proposal stage since 2009 
middle.  The Committee strongly deprecate this inertia in planning and 
establishing an institute which purportedly will help development of a 
backward region.  They, therefore, desire that the reworking of the Bill and 
other formalities be completed expeditiously so that proposed CAU is set -up 
and operationalised in Twelfth Plan without fail. 
 Furthermore, the Committee fully agree that CAUs should be established 
only after ascertaining their need and viability and keeping in view the 
availability of human resource , both in scientific and technical streams, so as 
to not render such institutions while elephants. They, therefore, strongly 
recommend that before contemplating any such future venture the Government 
should come up with a well considered and well laid out policy on CAUs before 
the Parliament. 
1.55 The Committee have also had the occasion of going through Model Act 
and the Fourth Deans’ Committee Report cited by DARE in their various 
proposals.  The Model Act is nothing but a draft on which the bills of state 
agricultural universities can be based upon.  It is not an enactment.  DARE 
have continued to cite it in their various proposals though several of its 
clauses are not even remotely relevant to a Central Agricultural University.  The 
Committee also no te that with minor variations the projections for faculty and 
other wherewithal for the proposed CAU have been made in consonance with 
the Fourth Deans ’ Committee Report.  However, keeping in view the acute 
shortage of scientific and technical manpower in the agricultural education 

39 
 
sector, the Committee desire DARE/ICAR to have a relook in the matter to make 
it workable. 
1.56 Coming to the legal position of the Bill , the Committee have been hugely 
disappointed by the lack of clarity about the Entry under wh ich the proposed 
CAU should be established.   It transpire s that the sole CAU in the Country at 
Imphal was established under Entry 25 of List -III (Concurrent List ) of the 
Constitution of India).  However , when the RL BCAU Bill, 2012 was moved for 
introduction in Rajya Sabha on 28 December, 2011 its introduction under  the 
above Entry was opposed by some members citing that the Central 
Government did not hav e jurisdiction for establishing a  university under the 
said Entry.  This led to the introduction of the Bill being deferred.  The Bill was 
again introduced in Rajya Sabha almost 5 months later on 22 May, 2012 whe n it 
was again opposed on the same grounds.  It wa s subsequently introduced on 
the same day after the Leader of Opposi tion in Rajya Sabha suggested its 
establishment under Entry 63 of List -I (Union List) as an institution of national 
importance and the Agriculture Minister concurred with the suggestion.  During 
the course of the examination of the Bill no convincing justification were 
forthcoming from the administrative department  of the Bill  viz. DARE or 
Legislative Department or Department of Legal Affairs as to why CAU, Imphal 
could be established under Entry 25 of List -III but still RLBCAU could not be 
afforded the same  consideration.  Similarly, none of these Departments could 
give a categorical reply about the most appropriate Entry under which the 
proposed CAU could be established from amongst Entries 63, 64 and 65 of    
List – I.  According to th em the proposed CAU could be established under any 
of these three Entries and even under Entry 25 of List – III, had the members 

40 
 
not objected to the introduction of the Bill in Rajya Sabha , as the Bill qualified 
to be included under each of these Entries.  The Committee find this rationale 
unbelievable.  In their opinion the proposed CAU has to go a long way for it 
being established and operationalised given the circumstances and ground 
realities enumerated previously in this Report.  Furthermore, the Commi ttee 
strongly feel that a place under Entry 63 which signifies institution of national 
importance should not be randomly assigned but earned by sheer 
performance.  They, therefore, recommend that the proposed CAU may be 
considered for being established eit her under Entry 64 as it is undoubtedly an 
institution for scientific and technical education or under Entry 25 under which 
CAU, Imphal was established.  In the case of former, the Department may also 
have to think of a solution for CAU, Imphal too.  The C ommittee also desire that 
the Entry arrived at finally, out of these two , may also be factored in the Policy 
for CAUs recommended previously in this Report to pre -empt any confusion in 
this regard in future.    

41 
 
PART II 
CLAUSE-WISE ANALYSIS 
 
 
2.1 The purport of the Bill states as follows: 
 
“A Bill to provide for the establishment and incorporation of a University 
for the Bundelkhand region for the development of agriculture and for the 
furtherance of the advancement of learning and prosecution of resea rch in 
agriculture and allied sciences in that region.”  
 
 The Committee find the use of words ‘prosecution of research’ 
inappropriate.  The said usage, as state d previously also in this Report 
indicates the tearing hurry in which this piece of legislation has been 
brought before the Parliament.  The Committee desire the sentence be 
appropriately reworded as ‘pursuit of research’.  
 
2.2 CLAUSE 3 
 
“(2) the headquarters of the University shall be at Jhansi in the State of 
Uttar Pradesh and it may also establish campuses at such other places within 
its jurisdiction as it may deem fit: 
Provided that the University shall, initially establish two colleges at 
Jhansi in the  State of Uttar Pradesh and subsequently two colleges in the 
State of Madhya Pradesh.”    
  
 In the light of the facts emerging out of the examination of the 
matter in Part 1 of this Report and to ensure that the proposed CAU is 
able to serve its mandated purpose of revolutionizing agricultural and 

42 
 
allied sectors of the impoverished Bundelkhand Region  the Committee 
recommend that sub-Clause 3(2) may be modified as under: 
(2) The headquarters of the University shall be at Chattarpur 
in the State of Madhya Pradesh and it may also establish 
campuses at such other places within its jurisdiction as it may 
deem fit. 
Provided th at the University shall, initially establish one 
college at Chattarpur in the State of Madhya Pradesh and one 
college at Jhansi in the Bundelkhand Region of the State of Uttar 
Pradesh and subsequently two colleges in two other Districts of 
the State of Mad hya Pradesh and the State of Uttar Pradesh 
respectively.    
2.3 Clause - 4 
 
  
 
 The Committee recommend the word ‘Objects’ in Clause 4 be 
replaced with the word ‘objectives’.  
   
 
 
 


43 
 
2.4 Clause - 5(ix) 
 
 
  
 The Krishi Vigyan Kendras  are established by the Department of 
Agricultural Research and Education of the Ministry of Agriculture, 
therefore, the power to establish KVKs c annot be vested with the 
proposed CAU.  The Committee, therefore, recommend that the words 
‘Krishi Vigyan Kendras’ be deleted from Clause 5(ix).  Furthermore, the 
word ‘objects’ at the end of Clause5(ix) be changed to ‘objectives’. 
 
2.5 Clause 5(xv) 
 
 
  
The Committee recommend that Clause 5 (xv ) may be reworded as 
‘to supervise the residential accommodation of the students and 
employees of the University as mentioned in Clause 5(xiv) and to make 
arrangements for promoting their health and general welfare’ to make the 
import of the Clause clear.  
 
2.6 Sub-Clause 6(1) 
 


44 
 
 The Committee find that as in the case of several other Clauses, 
Clause 6(i ) has also been picked up by the Department from the draft 
Model of the State Agricultural University Act.  Apparently, therefore, the 
territorial jurisdiction and the responsibility of the CAU with respect to 
teaching and research alongwith programme of e xtension education 
have been restricted to only seven districts of U ttar Pradesh and six 
Districts of Madhya Pradesh comprising the region of Bundelkhand.  The 
Committee find it incomprehensible as to how the mandate of  a Central 
University c an be scuttled due to such misapplication of logic and 
reasonableness and it be virtually  restricted to the status of  a State 
Agricultural University.  The Committee, therefore, strongly recommend 
that the jurisdiction and responsibility of the proposed CAU be 
appropriately modified to reflect its central/national character and Clause 
6(i) be accordingly changed.  
 
2.7 Sub Clause 6(2) 
 
 As in the case of Sub Clause 6(1 ), Sub Clause 6( 2) has also been 
modeled after the draft meant for State Agricultural Universit y.  This  is 
surely bound to create confusion about the authority of the proposed 
CAU as it is an entity of the Union which would be functioning in the 
territorial jurisdiction of two different States.  The Committee, there fore, 
desire that Sub Clause 6(2)  also be suitably modified to avoid any 
confusion regarding jurisdiction of the proposed CAU over the colleges, 


45 
 
research and experimental stations, KVKs and other institutions which 
purportedly fall under its territorial juris diction but are situated in two 
different States.      
  
2.8 Clause 7 
 The proviso of Clause 7 states a follows: 
 
The Committee recommend that the proviso of Clause 7 should be 
redrafted to be in complete conformity  and consonance  with the 
Constitutional provisions in the matter.  
 
2.9 Clause 9 
 
 However in Statute 11 of the Schedule there is a mention of more than 
one librarian.  The Committee desire the contradiction be reconciled.  
 


46 
 
2.10 Clause 15 
 The manner of appointment and powers and duties of the other officers of the 
University shall be prescribed by the Statutes. 
 The Committee recommend that Clause 15 be reworded as follows:  
after the word shall be ‘as prescribed in the Statutes’.  
 The Committee further recommend that wherever the term “shall be 
prescribed by the statu tes” has been used in the Bill it may replaced by the 
words “shall be as prescribed in the statutes”.  
2.11 Statute 1(2) under the Schedule prescribed by Clause 26 of the Bill 
stipulates as follows:  
  
 The Committee are  of the opinion that the timelines for the selection 
procedure of the Chancellor should be well defined and the process should 
commence well before the incumbent Chancellor’s term of five years is coming 
to an end.  So that the next incumbent is appointed by the Visitor and 
announced by the Government will before the term of the incumbent Chancellor 
is over.  They, therefore, recommend that Statute 1(2) be accordingly modified 
and the proviso of Statute 1(2) be deleted.  
 


47 
 
2.12 Statute 2(4) under the Schedule prescribed by Clause 26 of the Bill 
stipulates as follows in the context of term of the Vice-Chancellor:  
 
 As in the case of Schedule 1(2) the Committee strongly feel that in the 
case of Vice Chancellor also the timel ines for the appointment procedure 
should be clearly stipulated in the Schedule itself to ensure advance planning 
and her/his appointment well before the term of the incumbent Vice Chancellor 
ends.  The Committee, therefore, recommend Schedule 2(4) be accordingly 
redrafted and the proviso of Schedule 2(4) be deleted.     
2.13 Statute 12(1)(ii) under the Schedule prescribed by Clause 26 of the Bill 
stipulates as follows:  
 
 The Committee are of the view that given the overbearing mandate of the 
proposed CAU over the areas of Madhya Pradesh and Uttar Pradesh falling in 
Bundelkhand region, it is but imperative that the Department of Agriculture and 
Department of Animal Husbandr y, Fishery and Horticulture of both the States 
be intrinsically involved with the affairs of the proposed CAU.  The said Statute 
should, therefore, be reworded as follows:   


48 
 
Secretaries in charge of Department of Agriculture and Department 
of Animal Husban dry, Fishery and Horticulture of the States of Madhya 
Pradesh and Uttar Pradesh.  
2.14 Similarly, Statute 12(1)(viii) reads as follows: 
 
 The Committee feel that compared to a women social worker , a woman 
representative of farmers on the Board of Management would be more suitable 
given the fact that the Board  has to oversee the functioning of an agricultural 
university.  The C ommittee, therefore, recommend that Statute 12(1)(viii) be 
deleted and Statute 12(1)(vii) be modified as follows:  
“Three persons including at least a woman representing farmers in 
Bundelkhand to be nominated by the Vice -Chancellor by rotation in 
alphabetical order of States of Madhya Pradesh and Uttar Pradesh. 
Provided that th ere shall not be more than two 
representatives from a State in the Board at a particular time.”    
The Committee also recommend that wherever in the Bill and it s 
Schedule the term alphabetical order has been used the States of Madhya 
Pradesh and Uttar Pradesh be mentioned in that order.  
 
 


49 
 
 
2.15 Statute 13  
 Statute 13 which prescribes the quorum for the meetings of the Board 
reads as follows: 
Five members of the B oard shall form the quorum for a meeting of the 
Board.  
The Board of Management of the proposed CAU is vested with vast 
powers and responsibilities.  The Committee, therefore, feel that the decision 
making of the Board should be broad based and ideally involve maximum 
number of members of the Board .  In any case the quorum for the meetings of 
the Board should not be less than one -third of the membership of the Board.  
As the membership of the Board will go upto 21 in view of changes 
recommended by the Committee in Statute 12(1)(ii) , the Committee recommend 
the quorum of the meetings of the Board should be seven.   
2.16 In para 5(a) of the Statement of Objects and Reasons the words ‘wit h its 
headquarters at Jhansi….’ be replaced with ‘with its headquarters and one 
college at Chhatarpur in the State of Madhya Pradesh and one college at Jhansi 
in the State of Utter Pradesh’. 
2.17 The Notes on Clauses and the Financial Memorandum may also be 
accordingly amended. 
 
NEW DELHI;         BASUDEB ACHARIA  
12 March, 2013          Chairman,  
21 Phalguna,1934 (Saka)                  Committee on Agriculture. 

50 
 
APPENDIX-I 
 
COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE 
(2011-12) 
 
MINUTES OF THE FORTY-FIRST SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE 
 
 The Committee sat on Friday, the 27 th July, 2012 from 1100 hours to 1310 
hours in Committee Room ‘D’, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.  
PRESENT 
Shri Basudeb Acharia     - Chairman 
MEMBERS 
Lok Sabha 
 2.  Shri Narayansingh Amlabe 
 3.  Shri K.C. Singh ‘Baba’ 
 4.  Smt. Ashwamedh Devi 
 5.  Shri Sk. Nurul Islam 
 6.  Shri Naranbhai Kachhadia 
 7.  Shri Premdas  
 8.  Shri Surendra Singh Nagar  
 9. 
           10. 
 Shri Nripendra Nath Roy 
Shri Jagdish Thakor 
           11.  Shri Hukmadeo Narayan Yadav 
 12.  Shri Ramakant Yadav 
Rajya Sabha 
 13.  Shri Shashi Bhusan Behera 
   14.  Shri Narendra Budania 
   15.  Shri Vinay Katiyar 
 16.  Shri Mohd. Ali Khan 
 17.  Shri Upendra Kushwaha 
 18.  Shri Bharatsinh Prabhatsinh Parmar 
 19.  Shri Rajpal Singh Saini 
 20.  Shri S. Thangavelu 
 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
 Shri P.C. Koul  - Additional Director 

51 
 
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the members to the Sitting. The 
Committee, thereafter, took up Memoranda No. 8 pertaining to ‘The Rani Lakshmi Bai 
Central Agricultural University Bill, 2012’ for consideration. The Chairman explained 
to the Committee regarding the reference of the Bill by the Hon’ble Speaker, Lok 
Sabha to the Committee for examination and Report by 31 July, 2012.  He also 
recounted the reasons necessitating the postponement of examination and R eport of 
the Bill.  The Committee then authorized the Chairman to request the Hon’ble 
Speaker, Lok Sabha for grant of extension of time for examination and Report on the 
Bill till the last day of Winter Session 2012. *** *** ***.    
*3. *** *** *** *** *** *** *** *** *** *** ***   
*4. *** *** *** *** *** *** *** *** *** *** *** 
*5. *** *** *** *** *** *** *** *** *** *** *** 
 
 
The Committee then adjourned. 
 
 
________________________________________________________________________________ 
* Matter not related with this Report 
  
  

52 
 
APPENDIX-II 
 
COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE 
(2012-13) 
 
MINUTES OF THE FIFTH SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE 
 
 The Committee sat on Friday, the 16th November, 2012, from 1 430 hours to            
1530  hours in Room No. 53 (F/F),  Parliament House, New Delhi.  
PRESENT 
Shri Basudeb Acharia   -   Chairman 
 
MEMBERS 
 
LOK SABHA 
 
2. Shri Narayansingh Amlabe 
3. Shri Sanjay Singh Chauhan 
4. Smt. Ashwamedh Devi 
5. Shri L. Raja Gopal 
6. Smt. Paramjit Kaur Gulshan 
7. Shri Premdas Katheria 
8. Shri P. Kumar 
9. Dr. (Smt.) Botcha Jhansi Lakshmi 
10. Sardar Sukhdev Singh Libra 
11. Shri Jagdish Singh Rana 
12. Shri Rajaiah Siricilla 
13. Dr. Vinay Kumar Pandey ‘Vinnu’ 
14. Shri Hukamdeo Narayan Yadav 
 
 RAJYA SABHA 
 
15. Shri Satyavrat Chaturvedi 
16. Smt. Mohsina Kidwai 
17. Shri Dharmendra Pradhan 
18. Dr. K.V.P. Ramachandra Rao 
19. Shri Rajpal Singh Saini 
20 Shri Shivanand Tiwari 
21. Shri S. Thangavelu 
 
SECRETARIAT 
1. Shri P.C. Koul  - Additional Director 
2. Shri C. Vanlalruata  - Deputy Secretary 

53 
 
WITNESSES 
S.No.    NAME OF THE OFFICER DESIGNATION 
1. Shri P.K. Pujari   Additional Secretary & FA  
(DARE/ICAR) 
2. Dr. Arvind Kumar   Deputy Director General (Edn.),  
ICAR 
 
MINISTRY OF LAW AND JUSTICE 
(LEGISLATIVE  DEPARTMENT) 
 
  Smt. Sharda Jain  Joint Secretary and Legislative Counsel 
 
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members to the Sitting of the 
Committee.  Thereafter, the Chairman directed that the representatives of the Ministry 
of Agriculture (Depar tment of Agricultural Research and Education ) and Ministry of 
Law and Justice (Legislative Department) be ushered in . The Chairman then 
welcomed the witnesses and asked them to introduce themselves. Once the 
introductions were over the witnesses briefed th e Committee on ‘The Rani Lakshmi 
Bai Central Agricultural University Bill, 2012’.  
3. The Members raised several queries pertaining to the Bill to which the witness 
duly responded. 
4. The Chairman thanked the witnesses for appearing before the Committee. H e 
also directed them to send information on points on which information could not be 
provided by them during the Sitting to the Secretariat of the Committee latest by 26 
November, 2012. 
The witnesses then withdrew. 
 
A verbatim record of the proceedings has been kept separately. 
 
The Committee then adjourned. 

54 
 
APPENDIX-III 
 
COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE 
(2012-13) 
 
MINUTES OF THE EIGHTH SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE 
 
 The Committee sat on Thursday, the 29 th November, 2012, from 1600 hours to            
1720 hours in Room No. 62 (F/F),  Parliament House, New Delhi.  
PRESENT 
Shri Basudeb Acharia   -   Chairman 
 
MEMBERS 
 
LOK SABHA 
 
2. Shri Narayansingh Amlabe 
3. Shri Sanjay Singh Chauhan 
4. Smt. Ashwamedh Devi 
5. Shri L. Raja Gopal 
6. Smt. Paramjit Kaur Gulshan 
7. Shri Premdas Katheria 
8. Dr. (Smt.) Botcha Jhansi Lakshmi 
9. Sardar Sukhdev Singh Libra 
10. Dr. Jyoti Mirdha 
11. Dr. Vinay Kumar Pandey ‘Vinnu’ 
12. Shri Hukamdeo Narayan Yadav 
 
 RAJYA SABHA 
 
13. Shri Satyavrat Chaturvedi 
14. Dr. K.V.P. Ramachandra Rao 
15 Shri Shivanand Tiwari 
16. Shri S. Thangavelu 
 
SECRETARIAT 
1. Shri R.S. Kambo  - Joint Secretary 
2. Shri P.C. Koul  - Additional Director 
3. Shri C. Vanlalruata  - Deputy Secretary 
 

55 
 
WITNESSES 
MINISTRY OF AGRICULTURE 
(DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURAL RESEARCH AND EDUCATION) 
S.No.    NAME OF THE OFFICER DESIGNATION 
1. Dr. S. Ayyappan   Secretary (DARE) & DG, ICAR 
2. Shri P.K. Pujari   Additional Secretary & FA 
3. Dr. Arvind Kumar   Deputy Director General (Edn.), ICAR 
4. Dr. B.S. Bisht          Assistant Director General (EQR), ICAR 
 
MINISTRY OF LAW AND JUSTICE 
 
(i) (LEGISLATIVE  DEPARTMENT) 
  
  Smt. Sharda Jain   Joint Secretary and Legislative Counsel 
 
(ii) (DEPARTMENT OF LEGAL AFFAIRS) 
 
1. Shri M.K. Sharma   Additional Secretary  
2. Shri. O. Venkateswarlu  Deputy Legal Adviser  
 
2. At the outset, t he Chairman welcomed the witnesses and asked them to 
introduce themselves. After the introductions, the witnesses briefed the Committee on 
‘The Rani Lakshmi Bai Central Agricultural University Bill, 2012’.  
3. The Members raised several queries pertaining to the Bill including the 
competing claims of States involved, about infrastructure availability, reach and 
spread of the University, location of colleges and other criteria for setting up o f 
Central Agricultural University etc. to which the witness duly responded.   The 
members also sought clarifications from the representatives of Department of Legal 
Affairs and Legislative Department regarding the enactment of the said Bill under 
Entry 63 and 64 of List I of the Constitution of India. 
(At about 1700 hours the Chairman withdrew from the Sitting and Shri Hukamdeo 
Narayan Yadav, M.P. took  the Chair). 

56 
 
 
4. The Acting Chairman thanked the witnesses for appearing before the 
Committee. He also directed them to send information on points on which information 
could not be provided by them during the sitting to the Secreta riat of the Committee 
latest by 07 December, 2012. 
The witnesses then withdrew. 
 
A verbatim record of the proceedings has been kept separately. 
 
The Committee then adjourned. 
  

57 
 
APPENDIX-IV 
 
COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE 
(2012-13) 
 
MINUTES OF THE NINETEENTH SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE 
******** 
 The Committee sat on Tuesday, the 05 March, 2013 from 1500 hours to 1540 
hours in Committee Room  ‘B’, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
PRESENT 
Shri Basudeb Acharia   -   Chairman 
MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA 
2.  Shri Narayansingh Amlabe 
3.  Shri Sanjay Singh Chauhan 
4.  Shri H.D. Devegowda 
5.  Smt. Ashwamedh Devi 
6.  Smt. Paramjit Kaur Gulshan 
7.   Dr. (Smt.) Botcha Jhansi Lakshmi 
8.  Sardar Sukhdev Singh Libra 
9.  Dr. Jyoti Mirdha 
10.  Shri Naranbhai Kachhadia 
11.  Shri Rajaiah Siricilla 
12.  Shri Patel Kishanbhai V.  
13.  Shri Hukamdeo Narayan Yadav 
  
 RAJYA SABHA 
14.  Shri Satyavrat Chaturvedi 
15.  Dr. K.V.P. Ramachandra Rao 
16.  Shri S. Thangavelu 
SECRETARIAT 
 1. Shri R.S. Kambo  - Joint Secretary 
2. Shri P.C. Koul  - Director 

58 
 
2. At the outset the Chairman welcomed the members to the Sitting of the 
Committee.  The Committee, then, took up the draft Report on “The Rani Lakshmi Bai 
Central Agricultural University Bill, 2012”. 
3. After some deliberations, the Committee adopted the dra ft Report with some 
modifications and authorized the Chairman to finalise the Report in the light of the 
said modifications and present it after getting it factually verified from the concerned 
Department. 
*4. *** *** *** *** *** *** *** *** *** *** *** 
*5. *** *** *** *** *** *** *** *** *** *** *** 
 
 
The Committee then adjourned. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
________________________________________________________________________________ 
* Matter not related. 
 
 
 
 