 
 
COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE 
(2010-2011)                 
         
FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA 
                                        
 
MINISTRY OF AGRICULTURE  
(DEPARTMENT OF ANIMAL HUSBANDRY, DAIRYING AND FISHERIES) 
              
DEMANDS FOR GRANTS (2010-11) 
 
{Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/ 
Recommendations contained in the Seventh Report  
of the Committee on Agriculture (2009-2010)} 
 
                
EIGHTEENTH REPORT  
 
         
               
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
March, 2011/Chaitra, 1933 (Saka) 
 
 
 
 
 
18 

 
 
EIGHTEENTH REPORT 
 
COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE 
(2010-2011) 
 
(FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
MINISTRY OF AGRICULTURE 
(DEPARTMENT OF ANIMAL HUSBANDRY, DAIRYING AND FISHERIES) 
 
 
DEMANDS FOR GRANTS (2010-11) 
 
Action Taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in the Seventh Report 
of the Committee on Agriculture (2009-2010) 
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on  24.3.2011 
 
Laid on the Table of Rajya Sabha on  24.3.2011 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
                 
March, 2011/Chaitra, 1933 (Saka)  


 
 
 
 
 
COA No. 241 
 
 
         
         
         
         
   
        
        
Price:  Rs.  
         
         
         
         
         
 
 
 
         
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
© 2011 By Lok Sabha Secretariat 
 
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of Business 
in Lok Sabha (Fourteenth Edition) and Printed by  
 
  

 
 
 
<CONTENTS> 
                  
 PAGE 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE………………………………….  (iii) 
         
INTRODUCTION……………………………………………………………  (v) 
 
CHAPTER I   Report …………………………………………     1
  
CHAPTER II  Observations/Recommendations which have  
   been accepted by the Government ……………    15 
 
CHAPTER III  Observations/Recommendations which the 
   Committee do not desire to pursue in view 
   of the Government‟s replies …………………..    40 
 
CHAPTER IV Observations/Recommendations in respect 
   of  which replies of the Government have  
   not been accepted by the Committee ………….    41 
 
CHAPTER V  Observations/Recommendations in respect of  
   which final replies of the Government are  
   still awaited …………………………………….    46 
 
APPENDIX 
 Minutes of the Twenty First Sitting of the Committee 
held on 22 March, 2011.           52
                                      ANNEXURE 
Analysis of Action Taken by the Government on the 
Recommendations contained in the Seventh Report                54 
(Fifteenth Lok Sabha) of the Committee on Agriculture 
(2009-2010).            
            
 
 

 
 
 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE (2010-11) 
 
 
Shri Basudeb Acharia   -   Chairman 
 
MEMBERS 
 
LOK SABHA 
 
2.  Shri Narayansingh Amlabe 
3.  Shri K.C. Singh ‘Baba’ 
4.  Shri Thangso Baite 
5.  Shri Jayant Chaudhary 
6.  Smt. Shruti Choudhary 
7.  Smt. Ashwamedh Devi 
8.  Shri Biren Singh Engti 
9.  Smt. Paramjit Kaur Gulshan 
10.  Shri Anant Kumar Hegde 
11.  Shri Sk. Nurul Islam 
12.  Shri Naranbhai Kachhadia 
13.  Shri Surendra Singh Nagar  
14.  Shri Prabodh Panda  
15.  Shri Premdas  
16.  Shri Vitthalbhai Hansrajbhai Radadiya 
17.  Shri Nripendra Nath Roy 
18.  Shri Bhoopendra Singh 
19.  Shri Uday Singh 
20.  Shri Jagdish Thakor 
21.  Shri Hukmadeo Narayan Yadav 
  
 RAJYA SABHA 
 
22.  Shri Shashi Bhusan Behera 
23.  Shri Narendra Budania 
24.  Shri Satyavrat Chaturvedi 
25.  Shri A. Elavarasan 
26.  Shri Vinay Katiyar 
27.  Shri Mohd. Ali Khan 
28.  Shri Upendra Kushwaha 
29.  Shri Bharatsinh Prabhatsinh Parmar 
30.  Shri Rajpal Singh Saini 
31.  Shri S. Thangavelu 
   
(iii) 

 
 
SECRETARIAT  
 
1. Shri S. Bal Shekar   - Additional Secretary 
2. Shri Raj Shekhar Sharma  - Joint Secretary 
3. Shri P. C. Koul   - Additional Director  
 
4. Shri C. Vanlalruata   - Under Secretary 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(iv) 

 
 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
         
I, the Chairman, Committee on Agriculture (2010 -2011) having been 
authorized by the Committee to submit the Report on their behalf, present this 
Eighteenth Report on Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/ 
Recommendations contained in the Seventh Report of the Committee on Agriculture 
on Demands for Grants (2010-11) pertaining to Ministry of Agriculture (Department of 
Animal Husbandry, Dairying and Fisheries). 
 
2. The Seventh Report of the Committee on Agriculture (200 9-2010) on 
„Demands for Grants‟ (2010 -11) pertaining to Ministry of Agriculture (Department of 
Animal Husbandry, Dairying and Fisheries) was presented to the Lok Sabha and laid 
on the Table of Rajya Sabha on 27 April, 2010 . The Action Taken Replies on the 
Report were received on 27 July, 2010. 
 
3. The Report was considered and adopted by the Committee at their Sitting held 
on 22 March, 2011. 
4. An analysis of the Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/ 
Recommendations contained in the Seventh Report of the Committee is given in 
Annexure. 
 
 
                 
                                                                                          
                                                                                           
NEW DELHI;                    BASUDEB ACHARIA 
23 March, 2011                                                                  Chairman, 
2 Chaitra, 1933 (Saka)                            Committee on Agriculture.
   
 
 
  
 
  
(v) 

 
 
CHAPTER  I 
REPORT  
 
This Report of the Committee on Ag riculture deals with the action taken by 
the Government on the recommendations contained in the Seventh Report 
(Fifteenth Lok Sabha) of the Committee on Agriculture (2009-10) on `Demands 
for Grants (2010 -11)‟ pertaining to the Ministry of Agriculture, Depa rtment of 
Animal Husbandry, Dairying and Fisheries which was presented to Lok Sabha 
and laid on the Table of Rajya Sabha on 28 April, 2010. 
 
1.2 The Department of Animal Husbandry, Dairying and Fisheries have 
furnished Action Taken Replies in respect of all the 28 Observations / 
Recommendations contained in the Report. These have been categorized as 
under :- 
(i) Observations / Recommendations that have been accepted by 
the Government : 
 Recommendation Nos. 1.17, 1.18, 1.21, 2.12, 2.14, 2.15, 2.16, 
2.18, 2.19, 2.21, 2.22, 3.12, 3.13, 3.15, 3.16,  4.15, 4.16, 4.17, 
4.18, 4.19, 4.20 and 4.21  
(ii) Observations / Recommendations which the Committee do not 
desire to pursue in view of the Government‟s reply : 
 Recommendation Nos.  NIL 
(iii) Observations / Recommendations in respect of which action 
taken replies of the Government have not been accepted by the 
Committee : 
 Recommendation Nos.  2.13, 2.17 and 3.14  
(iv) Observations / Recommendations in respect of which final replies 
of the Government are still awaited : 
 Recommendation Nos. 1.19 , 1.20 and 2.20  

 
 
 
1.3 The Committee trust that utmost importance would be given to 
implementation of the Observations/Recommendations accepted by the 
Government. In cases, where it is not possible for the Department to 
implement the Recommendations in letter and spirit for any reason, the 
matter should be reported to the Committee with reasons for non -
implementation. The Committee desire that further Action Taken notes 
on the Observations/Recommendations contained in Chapter -I and Final 
Action Taken Replies to the Recommendations contained in Chapter -V of 
this Report be furnished to them at an early date.  
 
1.4 The Committee will now deal with the action take n by the Government 
on some of the Recommendations in the succeeding paragraphs. 
 
STATUS OF NEW SCHEMES  
(Recommendation Para Nos. 1.19 and 1.20) 
 
1.5 Observing that eleven of the New Schemes of Eleventh Plan were yet to 
be implemented, the Committee in their Second Report had desired the 
Department to take prompt and conclusive action so that their implementation 
proper commences at least in the Fourth Year of the Plan.  However, while 
examining the Demands for Grants of the Department for 2010 -11 the 
Committee on noticing that that several formalities in regard to these New 
Schemes remained to be completed had in their Seventh Report reiterated 
their pr evious recommendation and asked the Department to complete the 
remaining formalities expeditiously so as to ensure implementation of these 
Schemes during 2010-11 itself.  
 
1.6 In their Action Taken Reply the Ministry of Agriculture (Department of 
Animal Hu sbandry, Dairying and Fisheries) have stated that the Department 

 
 
included the following New Schemes for implementation during the Eleventh 
Five Year Plan:- 
 
1.7 The Schemes mentioned at serial numbers 1 to 6 are under 
implementation after receiving requisite approvals.  The Department are also in 
consultation with NABARD to speed up implementation of the Schemes which 
involve their participation. 
1.8 A revise d EFC Memorandum has been circulated to the appraisal 
agencies on the scheme „Poultry Venture Capital Fund‟ mentioned at Sl. No.7 
above on 3 June, 2010. However, this scheme is currently being implemented 
under existing interest-free loan pattern. 
1.9 The Department‟s proposal to implement Schemes mentioned at 
Sl.Nos. 5, 8, 9, 10 and 11 and expansion of the coverage of Foot and Mouth 
Disease Control Programme from 54 districts to 221 districts in the Country 
under the on -going Centrally Sponsored Scheme „Li vestock Health and 
Disease Control‟ was considered by the Expenditure Finance Committee 
(EFC) in its meeting held on 25 June, 2010, which recommended their 
1 Poultry Development  
2 Integrated Development of Small Ruminants & Rabbits  
3 Establishment/Modernisation of Rural Slaughter Houses  
4 Utilisation of Fallen Animals 
5 Pig Development 
6 Salvaging and Rearing of Male Buffalo Calves 
7 Poultry Venture Capital Fund 
8 National Animal Disease Reporting System (NADRS) 
9 National Control Programme of Peste des Petitis Ruminants (PPR) 
10 Strengthening of Existing Hospitals/Dispensaries 
11 National Control Programme of Brucellosis 
12 Food Safety and Traceability 
13 Livestock Extension & Delivery Services 
14 National Dairy Plan 

 
 
approval to the competent authority Cabinet Committee on Economic Affairs 
(CCEA). Further action is in hand in this regard.  
1.10 The Scheme „Food Safety and Traceability‟ mentioned at Sl.No.12 deals 
with an uncharted area in this Country. Hence, the Department thought it fit to 
seek international expertise, through FAO, for drawing up a blueprint of 
introducing animal identification and traceability. An FAO mission visited the 
country on 12 and 13 April, 2010 and held discussions with different 
stakeholders.  Based on these discussions, the FAO has submitted a strategy 
and action plan, which is being examined in the Department. 
1.11 In regard to the Scheme „Livestock Extension and Delivery Services‟ 
Scheme mentioned at Sl.No.13, comments of the appraisal agencies on the 
EFC memorandum have been received. Further action is in hand to finalize 
contours of the Scheme for consideration of the EFC. 
1.12 Plan of Action along with schedule for next four to six months of 
implementation of „National Dairy Plan‟ mentioned at Sl.No.14 is as follows: 
 
S.No. Activity Schedule 
(i) Consultations with State Governments for providing 
appropriate policy and regulatory framework for 
ensuring quality of programme delivery as also 
consultation with State Government/State 
Cooperative Dairy Federation/other related 
agencies on eligibility criteria, institutional 
mechanism for d elivery of services, proposed 
targets, investments and result framework. 
June-July 2010 
(ii) Evolving clarity on the terms and conditions for the 
transfer of project funds from GOI to NDDB. 
August 2010. 
(iii) Decision relating to synergy in activities proposed 
under NDP and those under Central/State scheme 
to avoid overlap. 
September 2010. 
 
1.13 From the reply of the Department it is abundantly clear that not 
much headway has been made in the direction of completing the 

 
 
formalities pertaining to the Ne w Schemes, what to speak about their 
implementation proper.  Out of the 14 New Schemes now in pipeline, 6 
are under implementation while the remaining 7 continue to meander on 
and the National Dairy Plan, because of its obvious multi -agency 
implications is  still a long way from fructification.  The Committee 
consider this a very disconcerting situation as hardly any time is left in 
the Eleventh Plan to implement these Schemes, in a worthwhile manner 
and with a view to derive maximum benefits from these Sche mes.  With 
just one year of the Plan left, the Committee exhort the Government to at  
least implement the remaining new Schemes in the Fifth Year.  They 
would also like the Department to conduct a quick review of these 
Schemes with a view to assess the fact ors due to which these schemes 
have remained bogged down for years together and modify the 
proposals accordingly so that the approvals and sanctions don’t hold 
them up any further.    
 
POULTRY DEVELOPMENT 
(Recommendation Para No. 2.13) 
 
1.14 Keeping in view that poultry is a very important source of supplementary 
income for the small and marginal farmers and other poor segments of the 
rural community and on observing that during the first three years of the 
Eleventh Plan a sum of Rs. 43.98 crore only had been spent out of the Rs. 150 
crore earmarked for the Scheme „Poultry Development‟ the Committee had 
recommended that the allocation of Rs. 44.40 crore for the Scheme for 2010 -
11 may not only be fully spent but additional funds be allocated to the Scheme 
without waiting for the RE stage.  
  

 
 
1.15 In their Action Taken Note the Government have stated that an amount 
of Rs.1,123.04 lakh has been sanctioned in 2010 -11, for „Rural Backyard 
Poultry Development‟ component of the „Poultry Development‟ scheme.  This 
is the component under which major expend iture may be considered during 
current year.  Presently, proposals under the same are financed at the level of 
50% as first instalment.  Based on physical progress and utilization of funds, 
second instalment will be released.  Further expenditure will depe nd on the 
performance of State Governments, as presently no new proposals are in 
hand.  It is also proposed to strengthen manpower at Headquarters for 
implementation of the scheme so that monitoring can be done properly.  
Subject to this and expenditure of  balance amount before RE stage, 
enhancement in allocation may be considered.   
 
1.16 The committee express their strong disapproval of the way the 
Government have responded to their instant recommendation.   Instead 
of providing a reply to the aspect of utilizing Rs. 44.40 crore for the entire 
Scheme of Poultry Development and providing additional sums for it, the 
Department have circumvented the issue and furnished a vague reply on 
only one aspect of the Scheme viz. ‘Rural Backyard Poultry 
Development’.  The reply is also silent on the efforts put in by the 
Department to ensure that the earmarked allocation of Rs. 44. 40 crore is 
spent during the year and also additional funds are obtained.  The 
Committee while deprecating the casual attitude of the Depart ment 
desire a comprehensive and updated reply to their Recommendation at 
the earliest.  
  

 
 
VETERINARY HEALTH SERVICES  
(Recommendation Para Nos. 2.16 & 2.17) 
 
1.17 Keeping in view the poor state of existing veterinary health services in 
the country, the Com mittee had recommended that the allocation for the new 
stand alone component of „Strengthening of existing Hospitals/Dispensaries‟ 
be augmented appropriately so as to provide the much needed improvement in 
the existing hospitals and dispensaries. They had also asked the Department 
to work out a 100% Centrally Sponsored Scheme for establishment of 
dispensaries in all State/UTs with a view to kickstart the process immediately 
and to begin with, establish one dispensary each, in all blocks of the Country. 
The Department were also asked to mull over the option of requesting the 
members of Parliament to utilize the funds provided under the MPLAD Scheme 
for construction of dispensaries in Consultation with the Ministry of Programme 
Implementation and Stastics and other authorities concerned. 
 
1.18 The Department in their Action Taken Note have stated that a provision 
of Rs.144.12 crore for the Eleventh Plan has been made for the component 
Establishment and Strengthening of Veterinary Hospitals and Dispensaries in 
the revised „Livestock Health & Disease Control‟ scheme. Depending on the 
response of the States, the Department will consider required augmentation of 
financial allocation. They have further stated that the scheme for Establishment 
and Strengthening of Vet erinary Hospitals and Dispensaries, which is 
proposed to be implemented as a component of the existing scheme Livestock 
Health & Disease Control envisages providing assistance to States for 
establishment/construction of 104 new hospitals & 266 news dispens aries and 
strengthening of 732 existing veterinary hospitals & 1,199 existing dispensaries 
at an investment of Rs.144.12 crore in 2010 -11 and 2011 -12. The EFC 
considered a Memorandum seeking approval of the aforementioned 
component, alongwith other proposa ls for expanding the scheme Livestock 
Health & Disease Control in its meeting held on 25 th June, 2010 and 
recommended the same for approval to the CCEA.  
 
 

 
 
1.19 The Department have been motivating the States to seek additional 
sources of funding for establ ishing new veterinary hospitals and dispensaries 
from the Rashtriya Krishi Vikas Yojana and Rural Infrastructure Development 
Fund.   
 
1.20 The Committee note with satisfaction that a provision of Rs.144.12 
crore for the last two years of the Eleventh Plan has been made for the 
component, Establishment and Strengthening of Veterinary Hospitals 
and Dispensaries in the revised ‘Livestock Health & Disease Control’ 
Scheme. The Committee are hopeful that with the infusion of these 
funds, the existing veterinary h ospitals and dispensaries will definitely 
get a new lease of life.  The Committee, however, feel that when faced 
with such a critical shortage of Veterinary Services in the Country, 
merely motivating the State s to seek additional sources of funding for 
establishing new veterinary hospitals and dispensaries from the 
Rashtriya Krishi Vikas Yojana and Rural Infrastructure Development 
Fund won’t suffice, as there are several conflicting claims on the 
resources of States, be it their own or those received from t he Union 
Government. They, therefore, recommend again that the Government 
should work out a 100 % Centrally Sponsored Scheme for establishment 
of dispensaries in all States/U Ts immediately and to begin with one 
dispensary each may be established in each bl ock of the Country. The 
Committee would also like to be apprised of the action taken by the 
Department, in regard to mulling over the possibility of requesting the 
members of Parliament to utilize the funds provided under the MPLAD 
Scheme for construction of dispensaries in consultation with the Ministry 

 
 
of Programme Implementation and Sta tistics and `other authorities 
concerned. 
FOOD SAFETY AND TRACEABILITY 
(Recommendation Para No. 2.20) 
 
1.21 Appreciating the immense value of the Food Safety and Traceability 
Scheme particularly in the context of boosting exports from the animal 
husbandry, dairying and fisheries sectors and noting that the Scheme had 
failed to fructify till then because NABCONS,  the agency which was initially 
entrusted with the task of preparing an approach paper and blueprint of the 
Scheme had expressed its inability to do so as it lacked experience and the 
consultations with the Food and Agriculture Organisation, which had been  
subsequently roped in by the Department for the purpose, were taking their 
own time, the Committee had recommended that the Department while 
proceeding with due caution, so that any step taken does not have to be 
retreated and public money spent infructuo usly, should work expeditiously 
towards formulation and implementation of the Scheme.   
1.22 In the Action Taken Notes it has been stated that the Department would 
like to respectfully submit to the Committee that animal identification and 
traceability is an uncharted area in the country. Keeping inv view the nature of 
livestock holding in the country, indigenous expertise was explored. Hence, the 
Department had approached NABCONS, which is the only agency within the 
country who could have answered the requ irement. However, after sincerely 
exploring the subject and assessing what it involved, the agency expressed 
that it was not adequately equipped to provide the deliverables. Thereafter, the 
Department approached the FAO for technical assistance in the area . Hence, 
the submissions earlier made by the Department may not be considered an 
alibi. It was an effort to develop a home -grown solution for implementing 
animal identification and traceability.  
1.23 An FAO Mission held a meeting with the Department on 12  and 13th 
April, 2010 and discussed their experience of implementing the animal 

 
 
identification system in other countries and possible options of doing the same 
in this country. Based on these discussions, FAO has formulated a technical 
cooperation project and forwarded its draft to the Department recently. The 
same is under consideration and a further decision on this is expected to be 
taken before long.  
1.24 The Committee note with satisfaction that till now the Department 
have met their deadlines and the  meeting with the Food and Agriculture 
Organisation Mission to discuss their experience of implementation the 
Animal Identification System in other countries and possible option of 
doing the same in India has been held as per schedule on 12 and 13 
April, 2 010.  Subsequent to that the FAO has formulated the Technical 
Cooperation Project and forwarded the draft to the Department and the 
same is under consideration of the Department.  The Committee desire 
that an appropriate decision in the matter may be taken  at the earliest so 
that implementation of this important Scheme becomes a reality in near 
future.  The Committee would like to be apprised of the progress in this 
regard from time to time.  
DELHI MILK SCHEME 
(Recommendation Para No. 3.14) 
 
1.25 Finding that the corporatisation of DMS had been hanging fire for years 
together, while DMS continued to incur losses and being of the view that if a 
rational and expeditious decision on such major changeover in the set up 
remained elusive, it created a lot of appre hensions and misgivings and the 
functioning of the organization suffered, the Committee had recommended that 
instead of wasting their time any further on the vexed and controversial issue 
of corporatisation, the Government should immediately improve the 
infrastructure and wherewithal of DMS with state -of-the-art machinery and 
equipments, so that it turns around and starts making profits like its sister 

 
 
concern Mother Dairy.  They had also asked the Government to think of some 
diversification of product rang e being offered by DMS to further augment its 
financial positions.  
1.26 The Government in their Action Taken Notes have stated that DMS has 
been assessed and approved in accordance with requirements of ISO 
22000:2005 in respect of raw material procurement, processing, packing, 
storage and distribution of liquid milk and milk products. Apart from ISO 
22000:2005 Certification, DMS has also been found to conform to the 
requirements of the Standard ISO 14001:2004 for satisfactory maintenance of 
the Food Safety Management System and Environmental Management 
System of the organization to the standards described under above 
certifications. 
 
1.27 In order to run it as a commercial entity and make it financially viable, 
the Union Cabinet has given “in principle approval” to the Department‟s 
proposal for corporatisation of DMS.  The Department have entrusted National 
Dairy Development Board (NDDB) wi th the task of finalization of modalities for 
corporatisation of DMS.  The NDDB in turn have engaged M/s IDBI Capital to 
conduct a feasibility study and submit a draft assessment report.  The work on 
submission of assessment report by NDDB to the Departmen t is in progress 
and is likely to be expedited shortly.  After completion of formalities, the 
Department will bring a comprehensive proposal on corporatisation of DMS 
before the Union Cabinet for formal approval.  The corporatisation of DMS will 
pave the way for setting up of a state of art plant with upgraded machinery and 
equipments, which will enable DMS to turn around.  With corporatisation of 
DMS, funds are likely to be resourced from the internal sources for setting up 
of the state of art plant with c omplete automation of milk processing and 
packaging, CIP (cleaning in place) operations, refrigeration, boiler, electrical 
and instrumentation and commissioning of casein plant like other modern dairy 
plants of the country.  Apart from this, modernization and upgradation of DMS 
booth structures scattered all over NCT of Delhi is also to be undertaken.   
 

 
 
1.28 The Committee are hugely disappointed with the reply of the 
Government.  Even now nothing tangible has been done in the direction 
of corporatisation, which in any case, is under consideration for several 
years now.   The Government is not waking up to the reality and DMS 
continues to bleed.  The Committee, therefore, even at the cost of 
sounding repetitive desire that Government ought to now really put the 
plan for corportisation on backburner and immediately improve the 
infrastructure and wherewithal of DMS with state -of-the-art machinery 
and equipments so that it turns around and starts making profit.  
 
FISHERY SURVEY OF INDIA 
(Recommendation Para No. 4.16) 
 
1.29 Having noticed that the under utilization of funds by Fishery Survey of 
India (FSI) during the last two fiscals is due to non -procurement of survey 
vessels and finding it inexplicable as to why year after year the efforts of FSI to 
procure survey vessels were not yielding the desired results, the Committee 
had recommended that the Department should workout a fresh strategy to 
acquire survey vessels so that the acquisition of the vessels is completed at 
the earliest and the Department may als o explore the possibility of taking the 
required vessels on lease if other option fail to materialize. 
 
1.30 In their Action Taken Note the Department have stated that Fishery 
Survey of India (FSI) has initiated fresh action for acquisition of fishing vess els 
and has approached the Cochin Shipyard Limited (CSL), Kochi. Major 
specifications of the vessels required and the design have been finalized and 
handed over to CSL. Regarding the possibility of leasing of required fishing 
vessels, the FSI and Central I nstitute of Fisheries, Nautical and Engineering 
Training have been directed to initiate action. Accordingly, the FSI has 
constituted a committee under the chairmanship of Deputy Director General 
(Fy), FSI to finalize the modalities. 

 
 
1.31 The Committee note with appreciation that Fishery Survey of India 
(FSI) has initiated fresh action for acquisition of fishing vessels and the 
design have been finalized and handed over to Cochin Shipyard Limited 
which is a public sector undertaking. FSI and Central Institut e of 
Fisheries, Nautical and Engineering Training have been directed to 
initiate action for possibility of leasing of required fishing vessels. The 
Committee hope that these two agencies would be able to arrive at a 
decision regarding leasing of required f ishing vessels at the earliest and 
thereby ensure that FSI is able to utilize allocated funds judiciously and 
increase the yield of fish catch.  
 
DEVELOPMENT OF FRESH WATER AQUACULTURE  
(Recommendation Para No. 4.18) 
 
1.32 Observing that the Scheme for Dev elopment of Fresh Water 
Aquaculture, if implemented with due diligence, can enhance the growth 
potential of inland fisheries and apart from augmenting the inland fisheries 
potential, fresh water aquaculture concept of fish farmers fully engaged in 
aquaculture will also be a significant source of employment generation the 
Committee had recommended that while handholding measures and other 
incentivisation efforts should continue unbridled, the Department should also 
vigorously pursue the adoption and enactmen t of the Model Bill on Inland 
Aquaculture by the States at an early date. They should also immediately get 
down to the task of providing extension and training activities, exposure visits 
and forward and backward linkages in the Fisheries Sector which are being 
contemplated.  
 
1.33  The Department in their Action Taken Note have stated that adequate 
Training for the Department functionaries and fish farmers are being imparted 
by them, the National Fisheries Development Board (NFDB) and National 
Federation on Fishermen Cooperative Lim ited through the Centrally 

 
 
Sponsored National Scheme of Welfare of Fishermen. Provisions for arranging 
exposure visits have also been incorporated. Departments of Fisheries of 
States were advised to have linkages with the line Departments and other 
organizations dealing with extension activities like Krishi Vigyan Kendras and 
Agriculture Technology Management Agency. Guidelines for a Model Inland 
Fisheries Bill with an objective of providing regulatory frame work for 
sustainable development and management o f inland fisheries and aquaculture 
have been drafted and circulated to the Departments of Fisheries. It is also 
proposed to involve 25 KVKs in the promotion of programmes relating to 
development of aquaculture activities on a pilot basis. Diverse areas suc h as 
pond aqua culture, reservoir management, value added products etc. are 
being covered in these programmes. 
 
1.34 The Committee are happy to note that the Department, National 
Fisheries Development Board and Fishermen Cooperative Limited are 
imparting a dequate training for the departmental functionaries and fish 
farmers. Furthermore, the Guidelines for a Model Inland Fisheries Bill 
with an objective of providing regulatory framework for sustainable 
development and management of inland fisheries and aquac ulture have 
been drafted and circulated to the Departments of Fisheries of States. 
The Committee are hopeful that as soon as the Model Inland Fisheries 
Bill will be enacted it will not only augment the inland fisheries potential 
but will also be a signific ant source of employment generation.  They, 
therefore, desire the Government to pursue the matter with the State 
Governments with utmost promptitude to ensure speedy enactment of 
the said Bill. 
 
 

 
 
CHAPTER II 
 
OBSERVATIONS / RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN 
ACCEPTED BY THE GOVERNMENT 
 
 
ELEVENTH PLAN ALLOCATION  
(Recommendation Serial No. 1, Para No. 1.17)  
 
The Committee note that the approved outlay of the Department for 
Eleventh Five Year Plan is Rs. 8174.00 crore, whereas the fund allocation (BE) 
of the first four years is of the order of Rs. 4310.00 crore. REs for the first three 
years of the Plan have be en to the extent of Rs. 2680.00 crore which is only 
32.78% of the Eleventh Plan Outlay. The Actuals of the first three years add 
upto a further lowly Rs. 2481.67 crore, which includes a sum of Rs. 831.31 
crore spent by the Department till 23 March, 2010 in  2009-10 Fiscal. The 
Committee are deeply disturbed by this pathetic situation. The continuous 
neglect of the animal husbandry, dairying and fisheries sectors by the Planners 
and the Government has resulted in the Department getting into a vicious 
circle of delayed approvals, meager allocations, still meager and unpredictable 
releases of funds. Consequently, their performance over the years has 
suffered to an extent where they are not able to show desired results. The 
step-motherly treatment to the Departme nt is clear from the measly share of 
0.25% provided to them from the Central Plan Outlay. It is further confirmed 
from the mere 10% of the total allocation of the Ministry of Agriculture coming 
their way inspite of they contributing a healthy 26.8% of the value of output 
from agriculture and allied sectors. This unprofessional handling of these 
sectors has resulted in a situation where the Department have been able to 
utilize hardly 30% of the allocation for Eleventh Plan in the first three years of 
the Plan. Even if they are able to utilize the Rs.1300.00 crore earmarked for 
the ongoing Fiscal, provided it is not curtailed at RE stage, they would not have 
even touched the halfway mark. The Committee can safely guess the fate of 
the more than 50% of funds remaining to be utilized in the last year of the Plan. 
Apparently, the Planners and Government have either erred in the initial 
working out of the allocation for the Department for the Eleventh Plan or there 

 
 
is lack of seriousness in dealing with the Departm ent, subsequently. The 
Committee, therefore, recommend that rather than starving the various 
Schemes of the Department this year and leaving more than 50% of total 
allocation for the last year of the Plan, which the Department surely cannot 
absorb, the Gov ernment should allocate the Department atleast a sum of Rs. 
2800.00 crore this year so that a similar amount is left for the last year of the 
Plan for being utilized by the Department.  
 
Reply of the Government   
 
The Department has already forwarded the a bove observations/ 
recommendation of the committee to the Planning Commission. It is sincerely 
hoped that the Planning Commission would find it feasible to provide need -
based enhanced budgetary allocations to the Department in the Annual Plan 
2011-12 and thereafter.   
 
[Letter No.25-5(3)/2010-AHD (Coord) dated 27.07.10] 
 
ANNUAL PLAN 2010-11 ALLOCATIONS 
(Recommendation Serial No. 2, Para No. 1.18)  
 
The Committee are concerned to note that there is not much to speak 
about as regards the funds allocation position of the Department of Animal 
Husbandry, Dairying and Fisheries for the year  2010-11. Though the sum of 
Rs.1300.00 crore for Plan activities on a mere statistical interpretation would 
appear about 18 per cent or so more than the allocation made for the purpose 
in 2009 -10, still the fact remains that it is not at all in consonance with the 
requirements of these sectors which contribute significantly to the GDP of the 
Country. The Committee have been time and again recommending to the 
Government not on ly appropriate enhancement of funds for these sectors but 
also to mull over seriously the creation of a separate Ministry of Animal 
Husbandry, Dairying and Fisheries thereby veering away from their agriculture 
centric funding mindsets. It, however appears that the Planning Commission 
and the Government, inspite of being aware of the present commendable 
contribution of these sectors to the Indian economy and their huge future 

 
 
potential, are dragging their feet over this issue. The Committee firmly believe 
that unless and until the animal husbandry, dairying and fisheries sectors are 
provided with such levels of funds infusion as to take them on a fast track 
course they cannot contribute optimally to the creation of wealth and would 
remain confined to fringe e fforts like today. They, therefore, expect that reality 
should dawn upon the planners and the Government at  least now when the 
resilience of rural economy of India because of contributions of these sectors 
has been proved even during the global recession a nd they recommend that 
the Department should be given a substantial enhancement of funds for them 
at the RE stage of the ongoing Fiscal.  
 
 
Reply of the Government    
 
While making effort to persuade the Planning Commission to provide 
enhanced budgetary allocation in the Annual Plan 2011 -12, the Department is 
striving to improve utilization of funds in the current financial year as well so 
that there is no case for the M inistry of Finance to impose any cut at the R.E. 
stage.  
 
[Letter No.25-5(3)/2010-AHD (Coord) dated 27.07.10] 
 
DEVELOPMENT OF ANIMAL HUSBANDRY AND DAIRYING  
(Recommendation Serial No. 5, Para No. 1.21) 
 
The Committee note that the Planning Commission had c onstituted an 
advisory committee on Animal Husbandry and Dairying. The advisory 
committee have submitted their Report in January, 2010. During the course of 
examination of Demands for Grants (2010 -11) the Committee were apprised 
by the Planning Commission that if the recommendations of the advisory 
committee are strongly followed by the Department their performance was 
bound to improve in the last two years of the Plan. The Committee have gone 
through the major suggestions of the advisory committee and the action taken 
by the Department in pursuance, thereof, in the meanwhile. The Committee 
find that some of the recommendations of the advisory committee on National 

 
 
Project for Cattle and Buffalo Breeding, Intensive Dairy Development 
Programme, Dairy Venture Capital Fund, Livestock Health and Disease 
Control, Fodder Development Scheme and Central Fodder Development 
Organisation are well thought of and would definitely improve performance of 
these Schemes. They, however do not agree with the Planning Commission ‟s 
view that if the Department implement recommendations of the advisory 
committee their performance in the remaining two years of the Eleventh Plan is 
bound to improve because most of the recommendations would require 
substantial time to implement and as such the benefits cannot be 
instantaneous. The Committee would like the Department to immediately get 
down to implementing the recommendations of the advisory committee with 
due promptitude and within set timelines so that their benefits would accrue to 
the maximum extent in the last two years of the Eleventh Plan.  
Reply of the Government   
 
The Department has already taken necessary action to implement a 
number of recommendations of the advisory committee. Other 
recommendations of the committee would also  be considered for 
implementation at appropriate junctures. 
 
[Letter No.25-5(3)/2010-AHD (Coord) dated 27.07.10] 
 
ALLOCATION TO ANIMAL HUSBANDRY SECTOR  
(Recommendation Serial No. 6 Paragraph No. 2.12)  
 
The Committee are perturbed to note that the Animal Husbandry Sector 
has borne the brunt of the inconsistent funding of Department of Animal 
Husbandry, Dairying and Fisheries by the Government. Right from the 
inception of the Eleventh Plan the Sector has s een very small quantities of 
funds being allocated to it, each year, even from within a modest Rs. 4323.00 
crore earmarked for this Sector in the Plan. The result being that it was 
allocated Rs. 350.92 crore, Rs. 481.00 crore and Rs. 558.20 crore respectiv ely 
for the first three years of the Plan. In percentage terms these work out to 8%, 
11% and 13% respectively of the total allocation for Eleventh Plan. These 

 
 
allocations have been, as usual, curtailed further at the RE stages, thereby, 
putting a spanner i n the implementation schedule of various schemes. 
Consequently, the actuals have also fluctuated accordingly. The total actual 
expenditure during these three years (upto 23 March, 2010) has been about 
Rs. 1614.00 crore which is hardly 37% of the total allo cation for the sector. 
Even if the Department are able to spend the BE of Rs. 792.15 crore allocated 
for 2010-11 in entirety, their sectoral spending would barely reach about 56% 
of the total leaving more that 44% funds for the last year. This lop sided wa y of 
funding is a matter of concern for the Committee. If insufficient funds are 
provided to the Department in such an inconsistent manner they cannot be 
blamed for the shortfalls in their performance. For obvious reasons of cash 
crunch the Department, as per their own admission have chosen to 
accommodate the reduction in funding in the Schemes which were yet to be 
launched. Having noticed innumerable such instances, the Committee are of 
the considered view that the planners and the Government while working  out 
initial allocations should be more realistic about what they can mop up on the 
revenue side and then plan the allocations. Lofty outlays ought to be avoided. 
Once this is done the BE, RE and actuals will also be rationalized to a large 
extent and infructuous efforts made on planning and working out on Schemes 
which cannot be implemented due to the actual resource availability position 
will be avoided.  
 
Reply of the Government   
 
The observations/ recommendation of the Committee have been 
forwarded to the Planning Commission for necessary action. 
 
[Letter No.25-5(3)/2010-AHD (Coord) dated 27.07.10] 
 
 
 
 

 
 
POULTRY DEVELOPMENT 
(Recommendation Serial No. 8, Para No. 2.14)  
 
Since the allocation for the Scheme has been shown as  Rs. 141.00 
crore in one of the documents furnished to the Committee, they would also like 
the Department to clarify on the exact amount earmarked for the Scheme for 
the Eleventh Plan.  
 
Reply of the Government   
 
The scheme „Poultry Development‟ scheme was  sanctioned by the 
CCEA with an allocation of Rs.150 crore during 11 th Five Year Plan.  The 
scheme was launched by the Department in August, 2009 with an outlay of 
Rs.141 crore  during the 11 th Five Year Plan.  Necessary resource 
augmentation as required will be done. 
 
[Letter No.25-5(3)/2010-AHD (Coord) dated 27.07.10] 
 
VETERINARY HEALTH SERVICES  
(Recommendation Serial No. 9 Paragraph No. 2.15)  
 
The Committee note with satisfaction that at last, after three years of the 
Eleventh Plan having gone by, the wrangle about the four new components of 
the Livestock Health and Disease Control Programme has been sorted out. 
The Department will now be implementing the four new components viz. 
strengthening of existing hospitals/dispensaries; National Control Programme 
of PPR; National Control Programme of Brucellosis and National Animal 
Disease Reporting System as stand alone components of the ongoing 
Livestock Disease and Health Control Programme. A cons olidated EFC 
Memorandum seeking comments of the appraisal agencies has already been 
circulated and the Department intend to secure the approval of EFC in the first 
quarter of 2010 -11 so as to ensure that funds earmarked for these Schemes 
for the Fiscal are  utilized for the purpose. The Committee expect the 
Department now to complete all related formalities promptly so that these 

 
 
Schemes are implemented in right earnest in the remaining two years of the 
Eleventh Plan.  
 
Reply of the Government   
 
The EFC considered the Department‟s ongoing Livestock Disease and 
Health Control scheme, with new components of Establishment and 
Strengthening of Veterinary Hospitals and Dispensaries, National Control 
Programme of PPR, National Control Programme of Brucellosis a nd National 
Animal Disease Reporting System  and Expansion of the Foot and Mouth 
Disease Control Programme from 54 districts to 221 districts in the country 
was considered by the Expenditure Finance Committee on 25.06.2010, which 
recommended their approval to the competent authority (CCEA). Further 
action is in hand in this regard.  
 
[Letter No.25-5(3)/2010-AHD (Coord) dated 27.07.10] 
 
VETERINARY HEALTH SERVICES  
(Recommendation Serial No. 10, Para No. 2.16)   
 
The Committee would also take this opportunity to make a special 
mention of the existing status of the veterinary health services in the Country. 
The veterinary health services are in shambles and woefully inadequate to 
take care of the increasing suscepti bility of livestock to various diseases, 
including the exotic ones, due to cross breeding programmes. There is an 
acute shortage of veterinary hospitals/dispensaries. The representative of the 
Department himself quoted a figure of 10000 dispensaries in thi s context. The 
situation is further aggravated by the perennial shortage of manpower in the 
existing hospitals/dispensaries. By citing jurisdictional compulsions due to 
these services being in the domain of State Governments, the Union 
Government is helpin g nobody‟s case. The resource position of the State 
Governments is known to all. Therefore, expecting them to pro -actively plan 
and invest in the area of veterinary health services is wishful thinking. The 
Committee, therefore, recommend that the allocatio n for the new stand alone 

 
 
component of „Strengthening of existing Hospitals/Dispensaries‟ be augmented 
appropriately so as to be able to provide the much needed improvement in the 
existing hospitals and dispensaries.  
 
Reply of the Government   
  
A provision of Rs.144.12 crore for the 11 th Plan has been made for the 
component Establishment and Strengthening of Veterinary Hospitals and 
Dispensaries in the revised „Livestock Health & Disease Control‟ scheme. 
Depending on the response of the States, the Depart ment will consider 
required augmentation of financial allocation. 
 
[Letter No.25-5(3)/2010-AHD (Coord) dated 27.07.10] 
 
Comments of the Committee  
  
For comments of the Committee please refer to Para No . 1.20  of 
Chapter I of this Report. 
 
SALVAGING AND REARING OF MALE BUFFALO CALVES 
(Recommendation Serial No. 12, Para No. 2.18)   
 
The Committee are shocked to note that about 8 million male buffalo 
Calves lose their lives due to imposed starvation and deliberate neglect by the 
owners, who are guided by the petty motive of saving milk for commercial use. 
In such a grim situation, the proposed scheme Salvaging and Rearing of Male 
Buffalo Calves has come not a day too soon. The Committee are, however, 
extremely disappointed to find the Scheme being virtually confined to the files 
being tossed around. As a result, three precious years of the Eleventh Plan 
have gone by and many more million male calves have also been lost. It 
seems that even the vast potential of these calves, when reared properly, in 
the farming activities, in rural transport and other traditional activities, for 
development of meat, by -products and leather industry has also been lost to 
the Government.  
 

 
 
Reply of the Government 
The above has been answered along with reply to the next paragraph.  
 
[Letter No.25-5(3)/2010-AHD (Coord) dated 27.07.10] 
 
SALVAGING AND REARING OF MALE BUFFALO CALVES 
(Recommendation Serial No. 13, Para No. 2.19)   
 
The Committee note further with dismay that this inordinate delay in 
approvals has led to the Outlay for the Scheme being brought down from      
Rs. 300.00 crore to Rs. 121.62 crore for the remaining two years of the Plan. 
With only Rs. 27.70 crore being provided for the year 2010 -11 and leaving 
almost Rs. 94.00 crore for the last year makes the intentions of the 
Government very very clear and the Committee deprecate the same in strong 
terms. They, therefore, recommend even at this late Stage that the 
Government put their act together and complete all formalities pertaining to this 
Scheme without any further loss of time. This is the only way the De partment 
can salvage the Scheme for „Salvaging and Rearing of Male Buffalo Calves‟.  
 
Reply of the Government (Paras 2.18 and 2.19)  
In order to implement the scheme quickly, this Department will hold 
consultation with NABARD on regular basis. Suitable pub licity campaign 
through NABARD is expected to create awareness among the potential 
beneficiaries and help in reaching the targets. The Empowered Committee 
chaired by the Secretary of the Department will resolve any impediment during 
the course of the implementation.  
 
[Letter No.25-5(3)/2010-AHD (Coord) dated 27.07.10] 
 
 
  

 
 
 
 
UTILISATION OF FALLEN ANIMALS  
(Recommendation Serial No. 15, Para No. 2.21)  
 
Utilisation of Fallen Animals, which is again a Scheme of substantial 
utility for the farmers and livestock rearers has been languishing for want of the 
requisite clearances/approvals during the three years of Eleventh Plan gone 
by. The Committee note that at last the Scheme has been considered by EFC 
on 26 February, 2010. The Scheme has also met the a pproval of Minister of 
Agriculture. The Administrative Approval of the Scheme will be issued once the 
approval of the Ministry of Finance is obtained. On their part the Department 
intend to expedite implementation of the Scheme through regular consultation  
with NABARD and by conducting a suitable campaign for awareness 
generation amongst the potential beneficiaries. 
 
Reply of the Government 
Reply to the above has been combined with reply to the next paragraph.  
 
[Letter No.25-5(3)/2010-AHD (Coord) dated 27.07.10] 
 
 
UTILISATION OF FALLEN ANIMALS  
(Recommendation Serial No. 16, Para No. 2.22)  
 
As the Scheme has already been delayed badly, the Committee 
recommend that Ministry of Finance should grant the requisite approvals with 
the alacrity it deserves. They also recommend that the Department should 
leave no stone unturned with a view to make this Scheme a success, even so 
belatedly, by suitably interacting with NABARD and launching a publicity blitz 
through media, ATMA, KVKs, SAUs, State Governments including  Panchayati 
Raj Institutions etc. to create awareness about this Scheme amongst the 
targeted beneficiaries. 
 

 
 
Reply of the Government (Paras 2.21 & 2.22)   
After securing approval of the Ministry of Finance, administrative 
approval to the scheme has been issued. Guidelines for implementation of the 
scheme are being finalized in consultation with NABARD. Recommendations 
of the Committee have been noted for compliance. 
 
[Letter No.25-5(3)/2010-AHD (Coord) dated 27.07.10] 
 
ALLOCATION TO DAIRY SECTOR  
(Recommendation Serial No. 17, Para No. 3.12)  
 
The Committee are distressed to observe that dairying which is an 
important secondary source of income of millions of families in the rural areas 
and also a regular source of income for countless of their urb an brethren 
involved in bulk processing, transportation, retailing and other allied activities, 
is yet to catch the eye of the Government as a sunshine sector of the national 
economy. India‟s number one position in the world as producer of milk 
notwithstanding, the Government‟s assistance and handholding of the sector is 
not much worth reporting back, while last three years saw allocations of Rs. 
88.50 crore, Rs. 98.00 crore and Rs. 101.10 crore respectively. The allocation 
for the year 2010 -11 has been peg ged at Rs. 87.76 crore, being the lowest till 
date in the Eleventh Plan. With the past record of expenditure in the first three 
years of the Eleventh Plan which adds to Rs. 281.68 crore upto 11 March, 
2010 and the allocation of Rs. 87.76 crore in the ongoi ng fiscal, the 
Department would be left with a huge balance of more than Rs. 200 crore for 
the terminal year of the Eleventh Plan. The Committee find this a very 
disquieting situation and they are not satisfied by the explanation of the 
Planning Commission  that the meager allocation coming the way of dairy 
sector is the fault of the Department, as inter se allocation is their forte. The 
Planning Commission‟s explanation is also on a weak ground in view of the 
fact that the Eleventh Plan Document prepared by  them candidly admits that 
the reduction in State funding has been detrimental to the growth of the dairy 
sector. The Committee, therefore, reiterate their recommendation made 
previously in this Report that the Department of Animal Husbandry, Dairying 
and Fisheries should not be starved of funds so that their hands are tied while 

 
 
deciding inter se allocation for various sectors. They urge upon the 
Government to, therefore, consider the recommendation of this Committee 
about hiking the allocation for the cur rent Financial Year for the Department to 
Rs. 2800.00 crore in all seriousness, so that the various sectors including 
dairying sector get requisite boost to perform optimally and contribute further to 
the Country‟s economy.  
 
Reply of the Government   
The details regarding the allocation and expenditure under various dairy 
development schemes for the 11 th plan is given in Annexure. In this regard, it 
may be mentioned that the scheme Dairy Venture Capital Fund has been 
modified and renamed as Dairy Entrepren eurship Development Scheme with 
back ended subsidy. Accordingly, it is expected that due to wide spread 
coverage, the remaining allocation of Rs.162.61 crore under this scheme will 
be utilized during 2010 -11 & 2011 -12. Thus, the Department will be able to 
utilize the remaining allocation of Rs.195.81 crore within 11 th Five Year Plan. 
Against the requirement of Rs.55 -60 crore, only Rs.16.75 crore will be 
remaining as balance for implementation of merged scheme of IDDP & CMP 
i.e., Project for Dairy Developmen t including Clean Milk Production during 
2011-12. 
Annexure 
11th Five year Plan Allocation & Expenditure for Dairy Development 
Schemes 
 
 
[Letter No.25-5(3)/2010-AHD (Coord) dated 27.07.10] 
Name of the 
Scheme 
11
th
 Plan Allocation 2007-08 
BE   /   RE 
Expenditure 
   2007-08 
Allocation 2008-09 
BE   /   RE 
Expenditure 
   2008-09 
Allocation 
2009-10 
BE 
Allocation 
2009-10 
RE 
Expenditure 
2009-10 
Total 
Allocation 
(till date) 
Total 
Expenditure 
(2007-08 to 
2009-10) 
Allocation 
2010-11BE 
Remaining 
11
th
 Plan 
 
Outlay
  
Project for Dairy 
Development 
Including clean 
milk 
Production  
225.00 39.00 52.76 55.56 49.99 53.09 52.91 53.09 57.03 53.73 162.88 162.20 46.05 16.75 
Dairy Venture 
Capital Fund 
(DVCF) 
300.00 45.00 49.99 49.99 40.00 35.00 35.00 38.00 20.00 20.00 104.99 104.99 32.40 162.61 
Assistance to 
Cooperatives (A 
to C) 
50.00 3.50 5.50 5.05 7.00 9.00 9.00 9.00 11.20 11.20 25.70 25.25 8.30 16.45 
National Dairy 
Plan* 0.00 1.00 1.00 0.00 1.00 1.00 0.00 1.00 1.00 0.00 3.00 0.00 1.00  
Total 575.00 88.50 109.25 110.60 97.99 98.09 96.91 101.09 89.23 84.93 296.57 292.44 87.75 195.81 
*A token provision of Rs 1.00 crore has been provided for National Dairy Plan every year. 

 
 
NATIONAL DAIRY PLAN  
(Recommendation Serial No. 18, Para No. 3.13) 
 
The National Dairy Plan is one of the most ambitious Schemes of the 
Government. With an estimated Outlay of Rs. 17371.00 crore, the NDP intends 
to strategise increase in the milk production of the Country beyond the 
projected demand of about 180 million tones by 2021-22 and also enhance the 
share of organised sector from the present 30% to about 65%. The Committee 
are, however, disturbed to observe that not much headway has been made in 
the direction of fructification of NDP since the time they presented their Second 
Report to the Parliament on 18 December, 2009. After the Preliminary Report 
was passed on to the World Bank on 17 February, 2009, a World Bank 
Identification Mission visited Gujarat, Punjab and Uttar Pradesh during 8 -17 
February, 2010 in connect ion with this Project. While the World Bank is of the 
view that overall content of proposed investment appears generally sound, 
greater clarity is required on certain issues like terms and conditions for the 
transfer of the project funds from Government of  India, roles and 
responsibilities of various stakeholders, like Department of Animal Husbandry, 
Dairying and Fisheries, State Governments, National Dairy Development 
Board and other related agencies, provision of appropriate policy and 
regulatory framework to ensure quality of programme delivery, eligibility criteria 
for state implementing agencies for participating and receiving funds and 
development of effective institutional mechanism to provide quality service 
deliver to small and marginal dairy farmers. The Department have informed the 
Committee that these issues will be addressed and resolved through 
consultative process with various stakeholders in the next four to six months. 
The Committee are very much aware that the issues mentioned above are 
complex ones and may require extensive consultations with the various 
stakeholders which may be a time consuming affair. They, therefore, 
recommend that if the Department have to stick to their originally envisaged 
timelines of four to six months for completin g the consultation process with 
various stakeholders, they should prepare a well laid out Plan of Action, with 
rigid timelines so that there is no further spill over on this ground and the NDP 
is finalized and ready for implementation at the earliest. The Committee would 

 
 
like to be apprised of this Plan of Action alongwith a well laid out schedule for 
implementation of NDP in the context of the position as it stands today.  
 
Reply of the Government 
Plan of action along with  schedule of implementation of National Dairy 
Plan . 
The schedule for next four to six months is given below: 
S.No. Activity Schedule 
(i) Consultations with State 
Governments for providing 
appropriate policy and regulatory 
framework for ensuring quality of 
programme delivery as also 
consultation with State 
Government/State Cooperative Dairy 
Federation/other related agencies on 
eligibility criteria, institutional 
mechanism for delivery of services, 
proposed targets, investments and 
result framework. 
June, July 
2010 
(ii) Evolving clari ty on the terms and 
conditions for the transfer of project 
funds from GOI to NDDB. 
August 
2010. 
(iii) Decision relating to synergy in 
activities proposed under NDP and 
those under Central/State scheme to 
avoid overlap. 
September 
2010. 
 
[Letter No.25-5(3)/2010-AHD (Coord) dated 27.07.10] 
 
 
 
 

 
 
ASSISTANCE TO COOPERATIVES 
(Recommendation Serial No. 20, Para No. 3.15)  
 
The Committee note that the Assistance to Cooperatives Scheme aims 
at revitalizing the sick dairy cooperative unions at the district level and 
cooperative federations at the State level. Since the inception of the Scheme, 
the Department have approved 36 re habilitation proposals of milk unions. Out 
of these 36 Unions, they have been able to achieve turnaround /profitability in 
case of 18 Unions as on 15 March, 2010, which is commendable. Of the 
remaining 18, rehabilitation plan has been started recently in t he case of 7 
unions, while the remaining 11 continue to accumulate losses due to various 
reasons explained previously in this Chapter.  
 
Reply of the Government 
Reply to the above has been combined with reply to the next paragraph. 
 
[Letter No.25-5(3)/2010-AHD (Coord) dated 27.07.10] 
 
ASSISTANCE TO COOPERATIVES 
(Recommendation Serial No. 21, Para No. 3.16) 
 
The Committee are of the firm opinion that the cooperative movement in 
the dairy sector has made laudable contributions towards the Country 
becoming the  largest producer of milk in the world. The milk 
cooperatives/unions therefore, deserve to be provided a special hand holding 
dispensation in their bad days. It is not only in the interest of the dairy sector 
but also in the interest of countless small and  marginal farmers and other poor 
sections of the society for whom the income from the small quantities of the 
milk they contribute to these cooperatives and unions is an importance source 
for making out a living. The Committee, therefore, recommend that th e 
Department should expand the ambit of good work being done by them under 
the Scheme of Assistance to Cooperatives by working out rehabilitation plans 
for the remaining 11 loss making unions immediately, so that their turnaround 
is also achieved at the ea rliest. The Committee hope that the Government 

 
 
would not shirk from providing the necessary additional funds to the 
Department for this endeavour, right away.  
 
Reply of the Government (Paras 3.15 and 3.16)  
As per the guidelines of the scheme „Assistance to Cooperatives‟, every 
rehabilitation project is for a period of seven years from the date of approval of 
the rehabilitation project. Out of the 11 loss making unions, eight unions have 
already completed their term of seven years by March 2010 and three 
rehabilitation projects are ongoing projects and are yet to be revived. 
 
[Letter No.25-5(3)/2010-AHD (Coord) dated 27.07.10] 
 
 
ALLOCATION TO FISHERIES SECTOR  
(Recommendation Serial No. 22, Para  No. 4.15)  
 
The Committee observe that for the Fisheries Sector an allocation of 
Rs. 2776.00 crore has been made in the Eleventh Plan. The Outlays provided 
in the first four years of the Plan add upto Rs. 981.62 crore. Similarly, the 
actual expenditure of the first th ree years of the Plan and the BE for the 
ongoing Fiscal amount to a still lower figures of Rs. 848.01 crore, leaving 
thereby a huge unutilised amount of Rs. 1928.00 crore for the last year of the 
Plan. This is more than one and a half times the entire Depa rtment‟s allocation 
for 2010 -11. The Committee are in agreement with the Department‟s 
apprehension that it is highly unlikely that such a huge Outlay can be provided 
to them in 2011 -12, leading to the most unfortunate situation of the actual 
allocation for the Fisheries Sector for the Eleventh Plan as a whole falling far 
short of the approved Outlay for no fault of the Department. Though, similar 
sentiments have already been expressed by the Committee previously in this 
Report, they again express their extr eme displeasure at the unprofessional 
manner in which the allocation of the funds to the Department of Animal 
Husbandry, Dairying and Fisheries has been handled by the authorities 
concerned. The Committee expect that once their recommendation about 
enhancing the allocation of the Department for the ongoing Fiscal to Rs. 

 
 
2800.00 crore is implemented, the Department would be able to make 
sufficient funds available for the Fisheries Sector in the ongoing Financial Year 
through inter se allocations so that more  and more Schemes in the grossly 
neglected area of the welfare of fishermen are worked out and implemented by 
the Department from this year itself. Another benefit would be that once this is 
done the Department would also be saved of the unenviable task of  utilizing 
the huge unspent balance of Rs. 1928.00 crore in the last year of the Eleventh 
Plan.  
 
Reply of the Government  
An outlay of Rs.274.44 crore was allocated for the year 2010 -11 for 
implementation of Centrally Sponsored and Central Sector Schemes of 
fisheries sector out of the overall allocated outlay of Rs.1300.00 crore for the 
Department. This allocation is based on the funds made available for the 
Department for all the sectors and performance of the schemes in the previous 
years. In addition to  this, funds are also made available to the States for 
implementation of schemes of fisheries sectors through the Rashtriya Krishi 
Vikas Yojana (RKVY). Measures are being taken up to utilize the unspent 
balance available in addition to the current year all ocation, so that the 
implementation of fisheries schemes would not suffer. Further, additional 
allocation would be depending upon the enhancement of overall allocation to 
the Department. 
[Letter No.25-5(3)/2010-AHD (Coord) dated 27.07.10] 
 
FISHERY SURVEY OF INDIA 
(Recommendation Serial No. 23, Para No. 4.16) 
 
The Committee note with concern that Fishery Survey of India (FSI) has 
not been able to utilize the funds allocated during the last two years. The BE of 
Rs. 43.00 crore in 2008 -09 was reduced to Rs. 38.50 crore at RE stage. 
However, the actual expenditure during the year was significantly less at Rs. 
31.87 crore. In the next year, the BE of Rs. 38.50 crore was reduced to Rs. 
37.50 crore at RE stage. The actual expenditure (upto 11 March, 2010) is 

 
 
however, far less at Rs. 28.14 crore. The Department have sta ted that the 
„slight‟ reduction in the allocation of the FSI is due to the non -procurement of 
survey vessels. The reasons extended by the Department for the failure of FSI 
to procure the survey vessels are that though the Institute have made 
repetitive attempts to procure/fabricate the vessels, they could not succeed in 
getting valid quotations from suitable firms capable of fabricating the required 
fishing vessels. The Committee find it inexplicable as to why year after year the 
efforts of FSI to procure s urvey vessels is not yielding the desired results. 
They, therefore, recommend that the Department should themselves analyse 
the issue in its entire gamut and work out a fresh strategy to acquire survey 
vessels so that the acquisition of the vessels is comp leted at the earliest. As 
recommended by the Committee in their Second Report, the Department may 
also explore the possibility of taking the required vessels on lease if other 
options fail to materialize.  
 
Reply of the Government   
Fishery Survey of India  (FSI) has initiated fresh action for acquisition of 
fishing vessels and has approached the Cochin Shipyard Limited (CSL), Kochi. 
Major specifications of the vessels required and the design have been finalized 
and handed over to CSL. Regarding the possibil ity of leasing of required 
fishing vessels, the FSI and Central Institute of Fisheries, Nautical and 
Engineering Training (CIFNET) have been directed to initiate action. 
Accordingly, the FSI has constituted a committee under the chairmanship of 
Deputy Director General (Fy), FSI to finalize the modalities. 
[Letter No.25-5(3)/2010-AHD (Coord) dated 27.07.10] 
Comments of the Committee  
  
For comments of the Commit tee please refer to Para No. 1.31  of 
Chapter I of this Report.  
 
 
 

 
 
INLAND FISHERIES  
(Recommendation Serial No. 24, Para No. 4.17)  
 
The Committee note that there is a huge untapped potential in Inland 
Fisheries from the existing sources. They further note that in the present 
demand driven scenario, further benefits can be derived from the  Inland 
Fisheries Sector by having focused attention on development of the high value 
fresh water fish species like Hilsa and air breathing fish varieties like Magur, to 
cite a few examples. The Committee have been given to understand that the 
Government/ Department in collaboration with the Government of Bangladesh 
have taken up a research project on Hilsa fishery under the joint Bay of Bengal 
Programme. The Department also intend to replicate this Programme in the 
Arabian Sea. The National Fisheries Devel opment Board has also embarked 
upon four pilot projects on Magur. The Central Inland Fisheries Research 
Institute and the Central Institute of Freshwater Aquaculture also regularly 
conduct research and development programme for improvement and value 
addition of fresh water species.   
The Committee, however, have a growing realisation, which has also 
been corroborated by the candid  admission of the Department, that in their 
quest for development of Chinese and exotic Carp varieties, the high value 
Indian var ieties have unfortunately been neglected in the present scheme of 
things. To undo this damage and in order to fully exploit the potential of Indian 
fish varieties, the Committee recommend the Department to prepare more and 
more schemes for the research and  development and aquaculture of such 
varieties on a priority basis. While such a step would augment the production 
of these hitherto neglected varieties, the Department would be well advised to 
also take a lead in coordination with all concerned to suitabl y highlight and 
publicize the excellent nutritive and culinary qualities of these varieties so that 
they are household names globally, in no time.  
 
Reply of the Government   
Guidelines for a Model Inland Fisheries Bill with an objective of 
providing regulatory frame work for sustainable development and management 

 
 
of inland fisheries and aquaculture have been drafted and circulated to the 
Department of Fisheries of the States. The States have been requested to take 
steps to enact suitable legislatives in accordance with these guidelines. New 
varieties of high value species are being introduced and encouraged after 
detailed risk analysis and scientific studies. The Department and  National 
Fisheries Development Board (NFDB) are conducting regular dialogue with the 
States and research institutions. 
[Letter No.25-5(3)/2010-AHD (Coord) dated 27.07.10] 
 
DEVELOPMENT OF FRESH WATER AQUACULTURE  
(Recommendation Serial No. 25, Para No. 4.18)  
 
The Committee note that the main objectives of the Scheme 
„Development of Fresh Water Aquaculture‟ are to popularize fish farming, 
create employment opportunities, diversify aquaculture practices and provide 
assistance to fish farmers with a view to create a cadre of trained and well 
organized fish farmers fully engaged in aquaculture. The target set for 
constructions/ponds and tanks for undertaking fresh water aquaculture is 
23700 hectares. The Committee note with satisfaction that the Department 
have taken several measures with a view to incentivise the Scheme. This 
include issue of revised guidelines of the Scheme last year, increase in ceiling 
limit of activities in terms of unit cost by almost 50% over the cost ceiling fixed 
for the Tenth Five Year Plan, circulation of guidelines for management of small 
reservoirs to the States to optimize production potential from small reservoirs 
in the Country, circulation of a Model Bill on inland aquaculture to the States 
for adoption to attract investment int o the sector. The Department are also 
making provisions for extension and training activities, exposure visits and 
forward and backward linkages in the fisheries sector, etc. 
In the opinion of the Committee there is huge potential for growth in 
inland fisheries and the Scheme for Development of Fresh Water Aquaculture, 
if implemented with due diligence, can enhance the growth potential of inland 
fisheries. Apart from augmenting the inland fisheries potential, fresh water 
aquaculture concept of fish farmers fully engaged in aquaculture will also be a 
significant source of employment generation. The Committee, therefore, 

 
 
recommend that while handholding measures and other incentivisation efforts 
should continue unbridled, the Department should also vigo rously pursue the 
adoption and enactment of the Model Bill on inland aquaculture by the States 
at an early date. They should also immediately get down to the task of 
providing extension and training activities, exposure visits and forward and 
backward linkages in the Fisheries Sector which are being contemplated.  
 
Reply of the Government 
 Adequate Training for the Department functionaries and fish farmers are 
being imparted by the National Fisheries Development Board (NFDB) and the 
Department of Animal Husbandry,  Dairying and Fisheries and National 
Federation on Fishermen Cooperative Limited (FISHCOPFED) through the 
Centrally Sponsored National Scheme of Welfare of Fishermen. Provisions for 
arranging exposure visits have also been incorporated. Department of Fisheries 
was advised to have linkages with the line Departments and other organizations 
dealing with extension activities like Krishi Vingyan Kendra (KVK) and 
Agriculture Technology Management Agency (ATMA). Guidelines for a Model 
Inland Fisheries Bill with an  objective of providing regulatory frame work for 
sustainable development and management of inland fisheries and aquaculture 
have been drafted and circulated to the Department of Fisheries. It is also 
proposed to involve 25 KVKs in the promotion of program mes relating to 
development of aquaculture activities on a pilot basis. Diverse area such as 
pond aqua culture, reservoir management, value added products etc. are being 
covered in the programmes. 
 
[Letter No.25-5(3)/2010-AHD (Coord) dated 27.07.10] 
 
Comments of the Committee 
  
For comments of the Committee please refer to Para No. 1.3 4 of 
Chapter I of this Report.  
 

 
 
BRACKISH WATER AQUACULTURE 
(Recommendation Serial No. 26, Para No. 4.19)  
 
The Committee note that the Brackish Water Aquaculture inspite of its 
substantial potential is yet to pick up the requisite pace. This is mainly due to 
not much priority being assigned to aquaculture in brackish waters. It is noted 
that the target set for constructions/ponds for Brackish Water Aquaculture is 
3000 hectare s. The low figures is indicative of the importance given to this 
form of aquaculture. Due to low incentivisation and lack of sufficient awareness 
about the scheme, no State could access funds for undertaking brackish water 
aquaculture in 2007 -08 and 2008 -09 under the then operational Brackish 
Water Aquaculture Scheme of the Department. This led the Department to 
revise the relevant guidelines in 2009 -10. Under these revised guidelines, the 
level of incentivisation of various types has gone upto 50 per cent over the cost 
ceiling fixed for the Tenth Plan. The Committee find that due to these steps 
taken by the Department three States have come forward for implementing this 
component.  
The Committee feel  that the revision of guidelines on Brackish Water 
Aquaculture is a step in the right direction and should be appreciated. 
However, this step  needs to be followed by several more proactive steps to 
persuade other States to opt for the Scheme. The Committee are of the firm 
view that brackish water bodies being qui te in abundance, can be very 
successfully exploited for enhancing the fisheries production of the country. In 
this context the Committee would like to draw the attention of the Government 
to their Second Report in which fast track development of estuaries,  which are 
some of the biggest sources of brackish water was recommended. The 
Committee would also recommend that apart from taking concrete positive 
action on development of estuaries, the Department should also prepare 
Action Plan on priority to develop other brackish water habitats like mangroves, 
brackish water lakes, brackish water marshes etc., for utilizing their fisheries 
potential.  
 
 

 
 
Reply of the Government  
 As the unit cost of various activities under the component of brackish 
water aquaculture was increased by 50 per cent over the cost ceiling fixed for 
the 10 th Plan, the scheme has become more attractive among the State 
Governments. During the Regional Review meeting of the Department of 
Animal Husbandry, Dairying and Fisheries also, concerned States have been 
advised to formulate plans for development of bracki sh water aquaculture as 
per the revised guidelines. Many of the brackish water aquaculture farmers 
have large scale commercial operations and, hence, do not come forward to 
avail the benefits of this scheme.  
 
[Letter No.25-5(3)/2010-AHD (Coord) dated 27.07.10] 
 
DEVELOPMENT OF DEEP SEA FISHING  
(Recommendation Serial No. 27, Para No. 4.20)  
 
The Committee note with deep dismay that inspite of various measures 
and efforts cited by the Department, we are not able to reach anywhere near 
our assessed potential of 3.9 million tonnes in marine fisheries, as the latest 
capture is only 2.92 million tonnes, which is about three-fourth of the assessed 
potential. The Committee, therefore feel that if the Department are serious 
about achieving the full potential of marine fisheries they have to develop deep 
sea fishing on a far more proactive basis so that  the Tuna and allied resources 
are suitably exploited. The Committee would also like the Department to focus 
on the capacity building for deep sea fishing on a more sustained basis 
because with the well-known limitations of shore and coastal stock of fishe ries, 
the deep sea fishing provides a ray of hope for augmenting marine fisheries 
production. The Committee would like the Department to draw a roadmap for 
the purpose at the earliest accordingly and submit it to the Committee within 
three months of the presentation of this Report to the Parliament.  
 
 
 

 
 
Reply of the Government   
 The Department has drafted a Bill for Management and Regulation of 
Deep Sea Fisheries. The proposed Bill envisages drawing up of detailed 
fisheries management and development plans. The Department has 
constituted a three member Committee for studying the I mpact of Uniform Ban 
on Fishing in east and west coast of India. The Committee has studied the 
aspect in depth after a series of meeting, discussion and interactions with the 
stakeholders and recently submitted the final report. The Committee has 
recommended that as the fisheries developments and issues have changed in 
the last three decades, the Department, in consultation with fisheries research 
institutions like Central Marine Fisheries Research Institute (CMFRI), may 
prepare a model Marine Fisheries Regulation Act (MFRA), which may pave the 
way for revising the MFRA by the State Governments to cater to the needs of 
current issues. In addition, another scientific and professional Committee is 
studying the resource availability in our seas to validate the estimated 
potential.  
 
[Letter No.25-5(3)/2010-AHD (Coord) dated 27.07.10] 
 
FISH FARMERS DEVELOPMENT AGENCY SCHEME 
(Recommendation Serial No. 28, Para  No. 4.21) 
  
The Committee note with satisfaction the laudable role that the Fish 
Farmers Development Age ncy Scheme has played towards convincing the 
farmers about the viability of fisheries as an alternative occupation which can 
be more rewarding. They have also played a significant role in accelerating the 
growth of culture fisheries in the rural areas. The  Committee note that as of 
now there is a network of 429 Fish Farmers Development Agencies and 39 
Brackish Water Fish Development Agencies working in various States and UTs 
with the aim of implementing the Development of Fresh Water Aquaculture and 
Development Of Brackish Water Aquaculture Schemes of the Department. The 
Committee are, however disappointed to note that the Scheme suffered some 
setback because the Union Government have, some years back, withdrawn 

 
 
funding of the Non -Plan Component of the FFDAs  thinking that enough hand -
holding of the Scheme had been done. As of now the Union Government are 
funding upto 100% of the development component of FFDAs in terms of 
bringing more areas under culture, in terms of subsidy for the new ponds, in 
terms of subsidy for the new and also backward and forward linkages, financial 
assistance for setting up hatcheries of multiplication centres, marketing 
support, etc. The Committee feel that in view of the excellent record of the 
services rendered by the FFDAs, the De partment should seriously reconsider 
their decision regarding discontinuing of funding of Non -Plan Component of 
FFDAs Scheme so that the gains of the Schemes of the recent past are not 
squandered away because of such minor pitfalls. They, therefore recomme nd 
that the funding pattern of few years back, may be restored for another five 
years or so till the Scheme is fully capable of carrying on its own. Keeping in 
view the pivotal position of the FFDAs in the development of fisheries sector, 
the Committee fee l that they have immense potential for acting as the 
convenient delivery systems for the Schemes meant for fishermen welfare. 
They, therefore, desire that the Department should give a serious thought to 
this matter and revert with their considered views at the earliest.  
 
Reply of the Government  
 Restoration of funding pattern for Non -Plan component of FFDAs 
scheme would be taken up while finalizing the schemes on Fisheries for the 
12th Five Year Plan.   
[Letter No.25-5(3)/2010-AHD (Coord) dated 27.07.10] 
  

 
 
CHAPTER III 
 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH  
THE COMMITTEE DO NOT DESIRE TO PURSUE  
IN VIEW OF THE GOVERNMENT’S REPLY 
 
 
 
 
-Nil- 
  

 
 
CHAPTER IV 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF 
 WHICH REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT  
HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE 
 
 
POULTRY DEVELOPMENT  
(Recommendation Serial No. 7, Para No. 2.13) 
 
In this Scheme the Committee find that a sum of Rs. 150.00 crore has 
been provided as Outlay for the Eleventh Plan. Out of this a sum of Rs. 43.98 
crore has been spent during first three years of the Plan (upto 11 March, 2010) 
which is about 30% of the total. Even if the entire allocation of Rs. 44.40 crore 
is spent this year, provided it does not witness a drastic reduction at RE stage 
as in previous years, more than 50% funds would be carried forward to the last 
year of the Plan. Poultry is a very important source of supplementary income 
for the small and marginal farmers and other poor segments of the rural 
community. It is, therefore, but imperative that this S cheme should perform at 
the optimum levels for the benefit of these groups. The Committee, therefore, 
desire that the Department should be provided additional funds for „Poultry 
Development‟ for 2010-11 without waiting for the RE stage.  
 
Reply of the Government   
 
An amount of Rs.1,123.04 lakh has been sanctioned in 2010 -11, for 
„Rural Backyard Poultry Development‟ component of the „Poultry Development‟ 
scheme.  This is the component under which major expenditure may be 
considered during current year.  Presently, pr oposals under the same are 
financed at the level of 50% as first instalment.  Based on physical progress 
and utilization of funds, second instalment will be released.  Further 
expenditure will depend on the performance of State Governments, as 
presently no  new proposals are in hand.  It is also proposed to strengthen 
manpower at Headquarters for implementation of the scheme so that 
monitoring can be done properly.  Subject to this and expenditure of balance 
amount before RE stage, enhancement in allocation may be considered.   
 
[Letter No.25-5(3)/2010-AHD (Coord) dated 27.07.10] 

 
 
 
Comments of the Committee 
  
For comments of the Committee please refer to Para No. 1.16 of 
Chapter I of this Report.   
 
VETERINARY HEALTH SERVI CES 
(Recommendation Serial No. 11, Para No. 2.17)  
 
They also recommend that the Department should work out a 100% 
Centrally Sponsored Scheme for establishment of dispensaries in all 
States/UTs with a view to kickstart the process immediately. To begin with one 
dispensary each may be establ ished by the Department in all Blocks of the 
Country. Apart from the funding of these dispensaries from the Central Coffers, 
the Department may mull over the option of the possibility of requesting the 
members of Parliament to utilize the funds provided under the MPLAD Scheme 
for construction of dispensaries in consultation with the Ministry of Programme 
Implementation and Statistics and other authorities concerned, so as to 
provide added impetus to the Scheme.  
 
Reply of the Government  
The Department has formulated a scheme for Establishment and 
Strengthening of Veterinary Hospitals and Dispensaries, which is proposed to 
be implemented as a component of the existing scheme Livestock Health & 
Disease Control. The scheme envisages providing assistance to Sta tes for 
establishment/construction of 104 new hospitals & 266 news dispensaries and 
strengthening of 732 existing veterinary hospitals & 1,199 existing dispensaries 
at an investment of Rs.144.12 crore in 2010 -11 and 2011 -12. The EFC 
considered a Memorandum  seeking approval of the aforementioned 
component, alongwith other proposals for expanding the scheme Livestock 
Health & Disease Control in its meeting held on 25 th June, 2010 and 
recommended the same for approval to the CCEA.  
 

 
 
The Department has been mot ivating the states to seek additional 
sources of funding for establishing new veterinary hospitals and dispensaries 
from the Rashtriya Krishi Vikas Yojana (RKVY) and Rural Infrastructure 
Development Fund.   
 
[Letter No.25-5(3)/2010-AHD (Coord) dated 27.07.10] 
 
 
Comments of the Committee  
  
For comments of the Committee please refer to Para No. 1.20 of 
Chapter I of this Report.  
 
 
DELHI MILK SCHEME  
(Recommendation Serial No. 19, Para No. 3.14)  
 
The Daily Milk Scheme was established with the objective of providing 
reasonably priced milk and dairy products to the residents of the Country‟s 
Capital. Inspite of burgeoning population of the Capital, DMS has been able to 
cater to requirements of milk a nd dairy products of the City only to a limit 
extent. Though the production capacity of DMS has almost doubled from the 
installed 2.55 lakh liter per day to 5 lakh liter per day, due to various reasons 
like low procurement of milk and utilization of commod ities like skimmed milk, 
butter, whole milk scheme, butter for regeneration for meeting the market 
requirements, constant increase in the cost of major components e.g. light 
diesel oil water, polythene film, electricity, etc., the DMS continues to incur 
losses continuously while DMS has taken certain steps to improve its 
functioning. The Committee feel that the delay in a decision regarding 
corporatisation of DMS is a major reason for the inept performance of the 
Organisation. In this context the Committee note that the Department had 
entrusted NDDB with the task of finalisation of modalities for corporatisation of 
DMS. The NDDB in turn have commissioned IDBI Capital to conduct a 
feasibility study. IDBI has submitted a draft assessment report, which has been 
discussed by the Department with the representatives of IDBI, NDDB and 
DMS. The final report is expected by the Department by end of May this year. 

 
 
In the opinion of the Committee, the matter of corporatisation of DMS has been 
hanging fire for quite a num ber of years now. Since such a major changeover 
in the set up creates a lot of apprehensions and misgivings, the functioning of 
any organization suffers, if a rational and expeditious decision in the matter 
remains elusive. This is there to see for everyon e, from the losses being 
incurred by DMS, continuously, over the years. The Committee, therefore, 
recommend that instead of wasting their time any further on the vexed and 
controversial issue of corporatisation, the Government should immediately 
improve th e infrastructure and wherewithal of DMS with state -of-the-art 
machinery and equipments, so that it turns around and starts making profits 
like its sister concern „Mother Dairy‟ and numerous other such industries in the 
profitable Dairy Sector. The Committee also feel that the Government can think 
of some diversification of product range being offered by DMS to further 
augment its financial position.  
 
Reply of the Government   
DMS has been assessed and approved in accordance with 
requirements of ISO 22000:2005 in respect of raw material procurement, 
processing, packing, storage and distribution of liquid milk and milk products. 
Apart from ISO 22000:2005 Certification, DMS has also been found to conform 
to the requirements of the Standard ISO 14001:200 4 for satisfactory 
maintenance of the Food Safety Management System and Environmental 
Management System of the organization to the standards described under 
above certifications.  
In order to run it as a commercial entity and make it financially viable, 
the Union Cabinet has given “in principle approval” to the Department‟s 
proposal for corporatization of DMS.  The Department has entrusted National 
Dairy Development Board (NDDB) with the task of finalization of modalities for 
corporatization of DMS.  The ND DB in turn have engaged M/s IDBI Capital to 
conduct a feasibility study and submit a draft assessment report.  The work on 
submission of assessment report by NDDB to the Department is in progress 
and is likely to be expedited shortly.  After completion of formalities, the 

 
 
Department will bring a comprehensive proposal on corporatization of DMS 
before the Union Cabinet for formal approval.  The corporatization of DMS will 
pave the way for setting up of a state of art plant with upgraded machinery and 
equipments, which will enable DMS to turn around.  With corporatization of 
DMS, funds are likely to be resourced from the internal sources for setting up 
of the state of art plant with complete automation of milk processing and 
packaging, CIP (cleaning in place) operations, refrigeration, boiler, electrical 
and instrumentation and commissioning of casein plant like other modern dairy 
plants of the country.  Apart from this, modernization and upgradation of DMS 
booth structures scattered all over NCT of Delhi is also to be undertaken.   
 
[Letter No.25-5(3)/2010-AHD (Coord) dated 27.07.10] 
 
Comments of the Committee  
  
For comments of the Committee please refer to Para No. 1.2 8 of 
Chapter I of this Report.  
  

 
 
 
CHAPTER V 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF 
 WHICH FINAL REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 ARE STILL AWAITED 
 
 
STATUS OF NEW SCHEMES  
(Recommendation Serial No. 3, Para No. 1.19) 
 
 The Committee in their Second Report, which was presented to the 
Parliament on 18 December, 2009, had an observing that 11 new  schemes of 
the Eleventh Plan were yet to be implemented had recommended prompt and 
conclusive action so that their implementation proper, commences at least 
from the fourth year of the Plan. From the update sought by the Committee on 
these schemes during the course of the examination of the Demands for 
Grants 2010-11, they note that though some progress has been made in case 
of some of these schemes, still they continue to remain on paper and the 
Department have not been able to furnish any concrete timeli nes as to when 
their implementation would commence, which is a matter of grave concern.  
 
Reply of the Government  
 
Reply to the above has been combined with reply to the next 
observation.  
 
[Letter No.25-5(3)/2010-AHD (Coord) dated 27.07.10] 
 
Comments of the Committee  
  
For comments of the Committee please refer to Para No. 1.13 of 
Chapter I of this Report.  
  

 
 
STATUS OF NEW SCHEMES  
(Recommendation Serial No. 4, Para No. 1.20)  
 
Some of these new schemes and the action taken by the Government 
with a view to fructify them have been discussed in detail in subsequent 
Chapters of this Report. It would, however, suffice to state here that the 
Committee are not at all happy with the sta te of affairs prevailing vis -à-vis 
these new schemes which are of immense value for the animal husbandry, 
dairying and fisheries sectors. Therefore, the Committee at the cost of 
sounding repetitive recommend that all remaining formalities concerning these 
Schemes should be got completed by the Government without any further 
wastage of time so that the Department are able to implement them in right 
earnest during the current financial year itself.  
 
Reply of the Government (Para 1.19 and 1.20) 
 
The Department included the following new schemes for implementation 
during the 11th Five Year Plan:- 
1 Poultry Development  
2 Integrated Development of Small Ruminants & Rabbits  
3 Establishment/Modernisation of Rural Slaughter Houses  
4 Utilisation of Fallen Animals 
5 Pig Development 
6 Salvaging and Rearing of Male Buffalo Calves 
7 Poultry Venture Capital Fund 
8 National Animal Disease Reporting System (NADRS) 
9 National Control Programme of Peste des Petitis Ruminants 
(PPR) 
10 Strengthening of Existing Hospitals/Dispensaries 
11 National Control Programme of Brucellosis 
12 Food Safety and Traceability 
13 Livestock Extension & Delivery Services 
14 National Dairy Plan 

 
 
The schemes mentioned at serial number 1 to 6 are under 
implementation after receiving requisite approvals.  The Department is also in 
consultation with NABARD to speed up implementation of the schemes which 
involve their participation.  
A revised EFC Memorandum has been circulated to the appraisal 
agencies on the scheme „Pou ltry Venture Capital Fund‟ mentioned at Sl. No.7 
above on 03.06.2010. However, this scheme is currently being implemented 
under existing interest-free loan pattern. 
The Department‟s proposal to implement schemes mentioned at 
Sl.No.8, 9, 10 and 11 and expan sion of the coverage of Foot and Mouth 
Disease Control Programme from 54 districts to 221 districts in the country 
under the on -going Centrally Sponsored Scheme „Livestock Health and 
Disease Control‟ was considered by the Expenditure Finance Committee in i ts 
meeting held on 25.06.2010, which recommended their approval to the 
competent authority (CCEA). Further action is in hand in this regard.  
The scheme „Food Safety and Traceability‟ mentioned at Sl.No.12 deals 
with an uncharted area in this country. Hence, the Department thought it fit to 
seek international expertise, through FAO, for drawing up a blueprint of 
introducing animal identification and traceability. An FAO mission visited the 
country on 12 and 13 th April, 2010 and held discussions with different 
stakeholders.  Based on these discussions, the FAO has submitted a strategy 
and action plan, which is being examined in the Department. 
In regard to the scheme „Livestock Extension and Delivery Services‟ 
scheme mentioned at Sl.No.13, comments of the appraisal agencies on the 
EFC memorandum have been received. Further action is in hand to finalize 
contours of the scheme for consideration of the EFC. 
 
 

 
 
Plan of Action along with schedule for next four to six mon ths of 
implementation of „National Dairy Plan‟ mentioned at Sl.No.14 is as follows:  
 
S.No. Activity Schedule 
(i) Consultations with State 
Governments for providing 
appropriate policy and regulatory 
framework for ensuring quality of 
programme delivery as also 
consultation with State 
Government/State Cooperative Dairy 
Federation/other related agencies on 
eligibility criteria, institutional 
mechanism for delivery of services, 
proposed targets, investments and 
result framework. 
June-July 
2010 
(ii) Evolving c larity on the terms and 
conditions for the transfer of project 
funds from GOI to NDDB. 
August 
2010. 
(iii) Decision relating to synergy in 
activities proposed under NDP and 
those under Central/State scheme to 
avoid overlap. 
September 
2010. 
 
[Letter No.25-5(3)/2010-AHD (Coord) dated 27.07.10] 
 
Comments of the Committee 
  
For comments of the Committee please refer to Para No. 1.13 of 
Chapter I of this Report.   
 
FOOD SAFETY AND TRACEABILITY 
(Recommendation Serial No. 14, Para No. 2.20)  
 
The Food Safety and Traceability Scheme, in the opinion of the 
Committee, is of immense value particularly in the context of boosting exports 
from the animal husbandry, dairying and fisheries sectors. The Committee had, 
therefore, in their Second Report re commended expeditious action for 

 
 
implementation of the Scheme. The Committee are, however pained to note 
that NABCONS which was engaged to prepare an approach paper and 
blueprint of the Scheme in November, 2008 with specific terms of reference, 
has failed to provide a workable scheme. More surprisingly the Agency has 
now conceded that it lacked experience in the Subject. The result is that 
almost one and a half years later the Department are back to square one and 
are approaching Food and Agriculture Organization (FAO) for identification and 
provision of the services of an international expert in the field. An FAO Mission 
would be visiting India for a meeting on the subject with the Department in 
middle of April, 2010. The Committee strongly feel that this i nstance is 
indicative of a very casual attitude of the Department towards this Scheme of 
substantial importance and should be deprecated. Rather than doing the 
background work to identify an alternative source of expertise, which led them 
to contact FAO no w, they could have done this one and a half years back 
when they assigned the task to NABCONS. Notwithstanding the alibi extended 
by the Department that this faux pas happened because this is entirely a new 
area for the Country for which neither expertise nor experience is available, the 
Committee consider this as a case of bad planning. The Committee, however, 
share the view of the Department that it is necessary to proceed with due 
caution so that any step taken does not have to be retreated and public mo ney 
spent infructuously. The Committee expect the Department to follow this 
dictum in letter and spirit and work expeditiously towards the formulation and 
implementation of this Scheme.  
 
Reply of the Government   
The Department would like to respectfully submit to the Committee that 
animal identification and traceability is an uncharted area in the country. 
Keeping inv view the nature of livestock holding in the country, indigenous 
expertise was explored. Hence, th e Department had approached NABCONS, 
which is the only agency within the country who could have answered the 
requirement. However, after sincerely exploring the subject and assessing 
what it involved, the agency expressed that it was not adequately equippe d to 

 
 
provide the deliverables. Thereafter, the Department approached the FAO for 
technical assistance in the area. Hence, the submissions earlier made by the 
Department may not be considered an alibi. It was an effort to develop a 
home-grown solution for implementing animal identification and traceability.    
An FAO Mission held a meeting with the Department on 12 and 13 th 
April, 2010 and discussed their experience of implementing the animal 
identification system in other countries and possible options of d oing the same 
in this country. Based on these discussions, FAO has formulated a technical 
cooperation project and forwarded its draft to the Department recently. The 
same is under consideration and a further decision on this is expected to be 
taken before long.  
[Letter No.25-5(3)/2010-AHD (Coord) dated 27.07.10] 
 
Comments of the Committee 
  
For comments of the Committ ee please refer to Para No. 1.24  of 
Chapter I of this Report.   
 
 
 
NEW DELHI;       BASUDEB ACHARIA 
22  March, 2011                      Chairman 
01 Chaitra, 1933, (Saka)                       Committee on Agriculture 
 
 
  

 
 
APPENDIX 
COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE 
(2010-11) 
 
MINUTES OF THE TWENTY-FIRST SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE 
 
 The Committee sat on Tuesday, the 22 nd March, 2011 from 1515 hours 
to 1700 hours in Committee Room „D‟, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.  
PRESENT 
      Shri Basudeb Acharia - Chairman 
LOK SABHA 
2. Shri Narayansingh Amlabe 
3. Shri Jayant Chaudhary 
4. Smt. Shruti Choudhary 
5. Smt. Paramjit Kaur Gulshan 
6. Shri Naranbhai Kachhadia 
7. Shri Premdas 
8. Shri Hukmadeo Narayan Yadav 
RAJYA  SABHA 
9. Shri Shashi Bhusan Behera 
 
10. Shri Narendra Budania 
 
11. Shri Satyavrat Chaturvedi 
 
12. Shri Vinay Katiyar 
 
13. Shri Mohd. Ali Khan 
 
14. Shri Upendra Kushwaha 
 
SECRETARIAT 
1. Shri P.V.L.N. Murthy -        Director 
2. Shri P.C. Koul  -        Additional Director 

 
 
 
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the members to the Sitting of the 
Committee.  The Committee, thereafter, took up the following Draft Re ports for 
consideration:  
*(i) *** *** ***  *** *** *** *** *** *** *** 
(ii) Action Taken Report on Observations  / Recommendations 
contained in the Seventh Report of the Committee on Demands for 
Grants (2010-2011) pertaining to the Ministry of Agriculture (Department 
of Animal Husbandry, Dairying and Fisheries). 
 
*(iii) *** *** ***  *** *** *** *** *** *** *** 
 
*(iv) *** *** ***  *** *** *** *** *** *** *** 
 
3. After some deliberations, the Committee adopted the draft Reports 
without any modifications.  The  Committee then authorized the Chairman to 
finalise the above Draft Reports after getting them factually verified from the 
concerned Ministry/Department and present the same to the Parliament.  
*4 *** *** ***  *** *** *** *** *** *** *** 
 
*5 *** *** ***  *** *** *** *** *** *** *** 
 
*6 *** *** ***  *** *** *** *** *** *** *** 
 
The Committee then adjourned. 
 
 
*Matter not related to this Report.   

 
 
ANNEXURE 
(Vide Para 4 of Introduction of the Report) 
ANALYSIS OF ACTION TAKEN BY GOVERNMENT ON 
THE SEVENTH REPORT OF COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE ON  
DEMANDS FOR GRANTS (2010-11) PERTAINING TO MINISTRY 
OF AGRICULTURE (DEPARTMENT OF ANIMAL HUSBANDRY, DAIRYING AND 
FISHERIES) 
  
(i)  Total number of Recommendations               28 
(ii) Recommendations/Observations which have been 
Accepted by the Government  
Para Nos. 1.17, 1.18, 1.21, 2.12, 2.14, 2.15, 2.16, 2.18, 2.19, 2.21 
 2.22, 3.12, 3.13, 3.15, 3.16, 4.15, 4.16, 4.17, 4.18, 4.19,  
4.20 & 4.21  
Total          22 
Percentage                          78%
  
(iii) Recommendations/Observations which the Committee 
Do not desire to pursue in view of the Government‟s replies  
Total                   NIL 
Percentage                              0% 
(iv) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies 
 of the Government have not been accepted by the Committee 
Para Nos.  2.13, 2.17 & 3.14 
Total             3
  
Percentage              11% 
(v) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which  
 Final replies of the Government are still awaited 
 
Para Nos.  1.19, 120 & 2.20 
Total            3
   
Percentage             11% 
 