 
 
 
COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE 
(2010-2011) 
                 
         
FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA 
         
         
                                 
 
MINISTRY OF FOOD PROCESSING INDUSTRIES  
 
              
 
DEMANDS FOR GRANTS  
(2010-2011) 
 
{Action Taken by the Government on the  
Observations/Recommendations contained in  
the Ninth Report of the Committee on Agriculture (2009-2010)} 
 
         
        
 
TWENTIETH REPORT 
  
 
         
               
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
March, 2011/Chaitra, 1933 (Saka) 
 
 
20 

 
 
TWENTIETH REPORT 
 
COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE 
(2010-2011) 
          
 
(FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
         
         
         
MINISTRY OF FOOD PROCESSING INDUSTRIES  
         
         
DEMANDS FOR GRANTS  
(2010-2011) 
 
  
         
{Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations 
contained in the Ninth Report of the Committee on Agriculture (2009-
2010)}  
 
 
 
                                  Presented to Lok Sabha on          24.03.2011      
                            Laid on the table of Rajya Sabha on    25.03.2011      
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
                 
March, 2011/Chaitra, 1933 (Saka) 
 


 
 
COA No. 243 
 
 
         
         
         
         
         
         
 
         
         
        
Price:  Rs.  
         
         
         
         
         
 
 
 
         
     
                     
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
© 2011 By Lok Sabha Secretariat 
 
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of 
Business in Lok Sabha (Thirteenth Edition) and Printed by  
 
  

 
 
<CONTENTS> 
                   
                 PAGE 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE………………………………….  (iii) 
         
 
INTRODUCTION……………………………………………………………  (v) 
 
CHAPTER I   Report …………………………………………     
  
 
CHAPTER II  Observations/Recommendations which have  
   been accepted by the Government ……………    
 
CHAPTER III  Observations/Recommendations which the 
   Committee do not desire to pursue in view 
   of the Government‟s replies …………………..   
 
CHAPTER IV Observations/Recommendations in respect 
   of  which replies of the Government have  
   not been accepted by the Committee ………….    
 
CHAPTER V  Observations/Recommendations in respect of  
   which final replies of the Government are  
   still awaited …………………………………….     
 
APPENDIX 
 
 Minutes of the Twenty First sitting of the Committee 
held on  22  March, 2011.        
     
                                   ANNEXURE 
 
Analysis of Action Taken by the Government on the 
Recommendations contained in the Ninth Report                 
(Fifteenth Lok Sabha) of the Committee on Agriculture 
(2009-2010).         
            
 
 
 
 
 
 
(i)

 
 
COMPOSITION OF  THE COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE (2010-2011) 
 
 Shri Basudeb Acharia   -   Chairman 
 
 MEMBERS 
 
 Lok Sabha 
 
2. Shri Narayansingh Amlabe 
3. Shri K.C. Singh „Baba‟ 
4. Shri Thangso Baite  
5. Shri Jayant Chaudhary  
6. Smt. Shruti Choudhary  
7. Smt. Ashwamedh Devi 
8. Shri Biren Singh Engti  
9. Smt. Paramjit Kaur Gulshan 
10. Shri Anant Kumar Hegde 
11. Shri Sk. Nurul Islam 
12. Shri Naranbhai Kachhadia 
13. Shri Surendra Singh Nagar  
14. Shri Prabodh Panda  
15. Shri Premdas  
16. Shri Vitthalbhai Hansrajbhai Radadiya 
17. Shri Nripendra Nath Roy  
18. Shri Bhoopendra Singh 
19. Shri Uday Singh  
20. Shri Jagdish Thakor  
21. Shri Hukmadeo Narayan Yadav 
 
 
 RAJYA SABHA 
 
 
22. Shri Shashi Bhusan Behera  
23. Shri Narendra Budania 
24. Shri Satyavrat Chaturvedi  
25. Shri A. Elavarasan 
26. Shri Vinay Katiyar 
27. Shri Mohd. Ali Khan 
28. Shri Upendra Kushwaha 
29. Shri Bharatsinh Prabhatsinh Parmar 
30. Shri Rajpal Singh Saini 
31. Shri S. Tangavelu 
 
 
 
 
(iii) 
  

 
 
 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Shri S. Bal Shekar   - Additional Secretary 
2. Shri Raj Shekhar Sharma  - Joint Secretary 
3. Shri P. C. Koul   - Additional Director  
4. Shri C. Vanlalruata   - Under Secretary 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(iv) 

 
 
 INTRODUCTION 
 
         
I, the Chairman, Committee on Agriculture (2010 -11) having been 
authorized by the Committee to submit the Report on their behalf, present this  
Twentieth Report on Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/ 
Recommendations contained in the Ninth Report  of the Committee on 
Demands for Grants (2010 -11) pertaining to Ministry of Food Processing 
Industries. 
 
2. The Ninth Report of the Committee on Agriculture on Demands for 
Grants (2010 -11) was presented to Lok Sabha on 3  May, 2010.  The Report 
was laid on the Table of Rajya Sabha on 3 May, 2010. The Action Taken 
Replies on the Report were received on 28 February, 2011. 
 
3. The Report was considered and adopted by the Committee at their 
Sitting held on   22 March, 2011. 
 
4. An analysis of the Action Taken by the Government on the 
Observations/ Recommendations contained in the Ninth Report of the 
Committee is given in Annexure. 
 
 
      
                   
           
                                                                                   
                                                                                         
NEW DELHI;                BASUDEB ACHARIA 
23 March, 2011                                                             Chairman, 
02 Chaitra, 1933(Saka)                                     Committee on Agriculture.
   
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(v) 
  

 
 
 
CHAPTER I 
 
REPORT 
 
This Report of the Committee on Agriculture deals with the action taken 
by the Government on the Recommendations contained in the Ninth Report 
(Fifteenth Lok Sabha) of the Committee on Agriculture (2009 -2010) on 
„Demands for Grants‟ (2010 -11) of the Ministry of Food Processing Industries 
which was presented to Lok Sabha on 03 May, 2010 respectively and laid on 
the Table of Rajya Sabha on 03 May, 2010. 
 
1.2  The Ministry of Food Processing Industries have furnished Action Taken 
Replies in respect of all the 13 Observations/Recommendations contained in 
the Report.  These have been categorised as under: 
 
 Observations/Recommendations that have been accepted by the 
Government  
Recommendation Para Nos. 1.23, 1.25, 1.26, 1.27, 1.28, 2.47, 
2.48, 2.49, 2.50 and 2.52 
 
 
 Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not 
desire to pursue in view of the Government‟s reply  
Recommendation  Para No.  2.51  
 
 Observations/Recommendations in respect of which action taken 
replies of the Government have not been accepted by the 
Committee. 
Recommendation Para No. 1.24  
 
 Observations/Recommendations in respect of which final replies   
of the Government are still awaited.   
Recommendation Para No. 2.46  
 
1.3 The Committee trust that utmost importance would be given to 
implementation of the Observations/Recommendations accep ted by the 
Government. In cases, where it is not possible for the Ministry to 

 
 
implement the recommendations in letter and spirit for any reason, the 
matter should be reported to the Committee with reasons for non -
implementation.  The Committee desire that further Action Taken Notes 
on the Observations/Recommendations contained in Chapter -I and final 
Action Taken Replies to the Recommendations contained in Chapter -V of 
this Report should be furnished to them at an early date. 
 
1.4 The Committee will now deal with the action taken by the Government 
on some of the Recommendations in the succeeding paragraphs. 
 
OVERVIEW OF DEMAND 
(Recommendation Para No.1.24) 
 
1.5  Noting with huge disappointment that the Ministry had been allocated a 
sum of Rs. 400 .00 crore onl y for 2010 -11 and their total Allocation for four 
years of the Eleventh Plan added to Rs. 1280 .00 crore only against the total 
Plan Allocation of Rs. 4031 .00 crore   the Committee had recommended that 
the allocation of the Ministry be enhanced to at least Rs. 1500.00 crore during 
the year 2010 -11 so as to provide much needed funds to them and also leave 
as balance, manageable funds for the last fiscal of the Eleventh Five Year Plan. 
1.6 The Ministry of Food Processing Industries, in their Action Taken Note,  
have stated that the Plan allocation of the Ministry for 2010 -11 was kept at Rs. 
400.00 crore. Ministry had taken up issue for enhancement of allocation from 
time to time. Ministry had finally proposed RE for Rs. 600.00 crore which was 
also not approved and RE was retained at Rs. 400.00 crore only. 
 

 
 
1.7 The Committee express their deep concern over the way Planning 
Commission and Ministry of Finance have given short shrift to the 
genuine requirements of funds of the Ministry during the fiscal 2010 -11.  
The Committee had recommended allocation of Rs. 1500 .00 crore with a 
view to ensure that the Schemes of the Ministry were not starved of funds 
during 2010 -11 and they had a manageable balance to spend during   
2011-12.  However, both these entities have faile d to see merit in this 
argument and have retained the paltry sum of Rs. 400.00 crore for 2010-11 
at the RE stage as well . The  Committee strongly deprecate this lack of 
concern on the part of the Planners as well as the Government which has 
led to the backl oading of  funds resulting in an amount of Rs.2351.00 
crore being left for the terminal year of the  current Plan period. Going by 
the past performance of the Planners as well as the Government, the 
Committee have an apprehension that the Ministry not bein g able to 
absorb this huge unspent balance may now be touted as an alibi for not 
allocating the entire amount to them. Being well aware of the deleterious 
effect of this reduced allocation on all the Schemes of this much flaunted 
sunshine sector of our eco nomy, the Committee impress upon the 
Planners and the Ministry to put their  house in order and ensure 
maximum allocation during the fiscal 2011-12. 
 
MEGA FOOD PARKS 
(Recommendation Para No.2.46) 
 
1.8 Noting that the Mega Food Parks Component, though inten ded to be an 
improvement on the failed erstwhile Food Parks, still had several rough edges 
to be smoothened and concurring with the decision of the Government to 

 
 
sanction assistance for only 10 out of 30 MFPs in the first phase on the pilot 
basis the Committee had recommended that the Government should constantly 
monitor the execution of the 10 proposals that had been approved for 
assistance in the first phase before taking further initiatives in the matter.  The 
Committee had also felt that an amount of Rs . 10 lakh as earnest money was a 
modest collateral guarantee from the side of the SPVs and while the bidder 
only risked the forfeiture of this amount, the Projects got delayed for months 
together.  They had therefore, recommen ded better collateral guarantee for the 
purpose.     
 
1.9 The Ministry of Food Processing Industries, in their  Action Taken Note 
have stated the earlier Scheme of Food Parks was operated during Eighth to 
Tenth Plan periods. During these periods, a total of 56 Food Parks were 
sanctioned at an approved grant of Rs. 208.544 Crore, out of which total grant 
released so far is Rs. 137.98 Crore. In the case of 20 Food Parks, funds have 
been fully released and in case of 34 Food Parks, which are at different stages 
of progress, the funds have b een partially released. The objective of the Food 
Park Scheme was to develop Common Infrastructure Facilities to facilitate 
setting up of units by Micro, Small & Medium Enterprises. So far, a total of 2210 
plots have been allotted to industrial units out o f total approved plots of 4150. 
The number of units commissioned is more than 200.   The Scheme of Food 
Parks could not achieve desired results due to various reasons. To identify the 
bottlenecks and find out solutions thereto, Ministry of Food Processing 
Industries had commissioned reputed external agencies such as EDI, 
Ahmadabad, Consulting Engineers Ltd, etc to carry out evaluation of the Food 
Park scheme. As most of these Food Parks have been promoted by State 
Industrial Development Agencies, they have b een conceptualized in traditional 
industrial estate mode with no forward and backward linkages. This has 
resulted in valuable real estate being acquired but utilized at low levels of 
efficiency. Major reasons for the poor functioning of parks are mentioned below: 

 
 
 Poor site selection 
 Delay in providing basic infrastructure facilities like power, water, 
road etc. 
 Absence of strong backward linkages 
 Weak linkages with the market 
 Delay in release of financial assistance 
 Poor management and implementation capabilities 
 The studies have also pointed towards the lack of :                                            
i. A comprehensive project report from the raw material 
supply chain to the market, assessing infrastructure needs 
at every stage 
ii. Funding for components such  as internal roads, drainage, 
environmental control facilities and solid waste 
management facilities etc, which are also important 
infrastructure needed in the park. 
iii. A competent proposal appraisal. 
 
1.10 The study concluded suggesting that the Food Park wi ll be successful 
only if infrastructure for (1) On Farm Storage (2) Primary Processing (3) 
Minimal Processing (4) linkages with Retail Outlet (5) Mobile Processing Unit 
(6) Mobile Pre -cooling Unit (7) Packaging Centre (8) Palletisation etc., is 
provided in  the Park. Production area remained under developed and not 
integrated with the requirements of the market. There was no assurance of 
steady supply of raw materials. The benefits of Value addition rarely percolated 
to the farming community. 
 
1.11 These Stu dies thus recommended need for providing higher scale of 
assistance for building infrastructure items in the pattern of schemes like 
Industrial Infrastructure Upgradation Scheme (IIUS) under the Department of 
Industrial Promotion Policy, Ministry of Commerce and Industry and Scheme for 
Integrated Textile Parks (SITP) under the Ministry of Textiles and Scheme for 

 
 
Pack Houses, Cold Storages and Mobile Processing Units under National 
Horticulture Board, Ministry of Agriculture. These schemes carry higher rates  of 
subsidy as compared to MFPI‟s Infrastructure Schemes. Based on these 
findings and also recommendation of Working Group proposal addressing the 
above issues were initiated for Infrastructure Development Scheme for Mega 
Food Parks. The proposal for Mega Food Park was placed before the EFC and 
the EFC in its meeting held on 19.03.2008 had recommended the Infrastructure 
Development Scheme for Mega Food Parks, which aims at providing state of 
art infrastructure along the value chain from farm gate to retaile r‟s outlet with 
strong backward and forward linkages.  
 
1.12 The CCEA accorded approval on 11.09.2008 for setting up of 10 Mega 
Food Park Projects out of 30 projects envisaged in the Eleventh Plan.  In other 
words although Eleventh Plan commenced with effe ct from the year 2007, 
approval of the Scheme was received by the Ministry precisely after 1 year and 
5 months.  Also only 10 projects were approved in the first phase.   
  
1.13 The Mega Food Projects have long gestation periods as they seek to 
address both forward and backward linkage and create adequate infrastructure 
facilities along the supply chain from the farms to retailer outlets. Various 
statutory clearances are necessary from the State Governments also. The 
statutory clearances and land issues etc  delay the project implementation 
considerably. The Ministry is vigorously monitoring the progress of 
implementation by holding periodical review meetings and taking follow up 
action to expedite the process. An online MIS system has been developed 
under wh ich the Project Management Consultants (PMCs) of the respective 

 
 
SPVs are required to upload data on monthly basis regarding the physical 
progress of constructions at site. The online MIS system also aims at providing 
links to various related schemes of the  Central Govt. undertaken by various 
Ministries. The nature and dimension of the projects are quite enormous and 
the Ministry constantly making efforts to fine tune the process based on the 
learning experience the Ministry gains by way of implementation of the projects. 
To take care of the problems of SPV formation the minimum constituent 
members has been reduced from 5 to 3.  To ensure participation of Food 
processor(s) having a considerable say in the SPV  one of the member should 
be from food processing sector having a minimum net worth of 10.00 Crore and 
must have at least 26% equity in the SPV . 
 
1.14 To take care of the situation of midway withdrawal of the SPVs from the 
approved projects, the Ministry is considering enhancement of EMD and to 
keep it in case of successful bidders as a performance guarantee amount. Also, 
the SPV in the event seeking withdrawal after receipt of the grant in aid, the 
amount along with interest accrued thereon needs to be refunded by the SPV. 
Based on the progress made in th e implementation the Government have 
approved setting up of 5 more Mega Food Parks.                                              
1.15 The Committee subscribe to the view of the Ministry that the Mega 
Food Parks Project have long gestation period as they se ek to address 
both forward and backward linkage s and create adequate infrastructure 
facilities along the supply chain from the farms to retailer outlets.  Apart 
from this , various statutory clearances are necessary from the State 
Governments also which cou pled with land issues, etc. delay the project 

 
 
implementation considerably. The Committee desire that Ministry should 
take cogent steps to ensure that Special Purpose Vehicles get statutory 
clearances from State Governments in a time bound manner. Further, the 
Committee have been apprised by the Ministry that they are considering 
enhancement of Earnest Money Deposit (EMD) and to retain it in case of 
successful bidders as a performance guarantee amount. The Committee 
recommend that the Ministry should expedit e the issue of enhancement 
of EMD, so as to negate the scope of withdrawal from the Scheme by 
successful SPVs. The Committee would like to be apprised about the 
further developments in the instant matter. 
  
SCHEME FOR TECHNOLOGY UPGRADATION/ESTABLISHMENT/ 
MODERNISATION OF FOOD PROCESSING INDUSTRIES 
(Recommendation Para No.2.47) 
 
1.16 Feeling that the cap of Rs. 50 lakh as subvention on cost of plants, 
machinery and civil works in general areas and 75 lakh in difficult areas under 
the Scheme for Technology U pgradation/Establishment/Modernisation of Food 
Processing Industries is grossly insufficient, the Committee had recommended 
that these ceilings should be enhanced to Rs. 1 .00 crore in general area and 
1.50 crore in difficult areas with immediate effect.   
 
1.17 Noting further that there was a total absence of any consultancy 
mechanism in the Ministry to provide hand holding to the prospective 
entrepreneur or to advise, facilitate and guide him/her on the matters pertaining 
to this Scheme, the Committee had desired the Ministry to give a serious 
thought to this matter and workout a consultancy mechanism that provided a 
single window clearance system for the Scheme.  

 
 
    
1.18 The Ministry of Food Processing Industries, in their Action Taken Note, 
have stated that the Ministry acknowledge that cap of Rs. 50 lakhs and Rs. 75 
lakhs (NE area) will be a constraining factor as far as modernization/setting up 
of food processing units are concerned. On the basis of average total project 
cost of food processing units, i t would be prudent to revise the grant amount 
appropriately. Due to Budgetary constraints in the terminal year of the plan the 
upscaling of grant -in-aid will be proposed in the Twelfth Plan, while proposing 
continuation of scheme after its evaluation durin g Eleventh Plan period. So far, 
consultancy mechanism in the Ministry is concerned; the system to provide 
hand holding to the prospective entrepreneurship or to advise, facilitate and 
guide him/her on the matters pertaining to this scheme is being establis hed by 
National Institute of Food Technology Entrepreneurship and Management. 
Ministry has also posted model project proposal on it website for reference 
apart from providing a link to the information about technology providers.   
 
1.19 The Committee are g lad to note that the Ministry have belatedly 
woken upto the gross inadequacy of the present cap of Rs. 50 Lakh in 
general areas and Rs. 75 lakh in difficult areas as subvention on cost of 
plant and machinery and civil areas under the Scheme for Technology 
Upgradation/Establishment/Modernisation of Food Processing Industries. 
However, they express their concern on being apprised that due to 
budgetary constraints in the terminal year of the Plan , the upscaling of 
grant-in-aid will be proposed in the Twelfth F ive Yea r Plan  while 
proposing continuation of the Scheme after its evaluation during Eleventh 
Plan period. Keeping in view the importance of this Scheme for 

 
 
upgradation and modernisation of existing processing capabilities, the 
Committee reiterate their re commendation to enhance the existing cap to 
Rs. 1.00 crore in general areas and Rs. 1.5 0 crore in difficult areas with 
immediate effect and take up the issue of additional allocation with the 
Planning Commission and Ministry of Finance accordingly.  
 
UTILISATION CERTIFICATES 
(Recommendation Para No. 2.52) 
 
1.20 Finding that the 2117 Utilisation Certificates (UCs) amounting to a huge 
Rs. 330.65 crore are pending in respect of grants paid up by the Ministry till 31 
March, 2008 and due as on 31 March, 2009 and  concerned to note that the 
Ministry could not furnish them the number and value of the Utilisation 
Certificates received by the Ministry during 2008 -09 and 2009 -10, the 
Committee had exhorted the Ministry to pursue the liquidation of pending 
Utilisation C ertificates so as to clear the huge backlog as also provide them 
details of the number and value of UCs received by the Ministry during 2008 -09 
and 2009-10 alongwith details of 10 oldest pending UCs . 
 
1.21 The Ministry of Food Processing Industries, in their Action Taken Notes, 
have stated that the Ministry have been taking the issue of pending UCs 
seriously and has been reviewing the matter on weekly basis at the level of 
Additional Secretary & Financial Ad visor and Secretary. It has been found that 
many of the old Utilisation Certificates (which have been reported as 
outstanding) are pertaining to grants -in-aid released by the Ministry against the 
reimbursed expenditure already incurred by the grantee organ izations. Thus, in 

 
 
terms of GFR Rule 212(1), Note 1. We are consulting Ministry of Finance to 
consider them as liquidated. Accordingly, the Ministry have taken steps to 
liquidate the number of outstanding UCs. As desired by the Hon‟ble Members 
of the Commi ttee, the number and amount of UCs received by the Ministry 
during FY 2008-09 are 453 (Rs. 67.48 crore), and  during FY 2009 -10 are 166 
(Rs 70.63 crore).  Details of ten oldest pending UCs are also enclosed 
herewith. 
 
1.22 The Committee are satisfied to no te that the Ministry pursuant to 
their Recommendation are taking  up the issue of pending Utilisation 
Certificates seriously and the matter is now being reviewed on a weekly 
basis at the level of Additional Secretary &  Financial Advisor and the 
Secretary of the Ministry. The Committee also appreciate the move of the 
Ministry to liquidate old Utilisation Certificates in consultation with the 
Ministry of Finance.  They are, however, concerned to note that the 
pendency has acquired serious dimensions, with all the 10 oldest cases 
whose details have been furnished by the Ministry being two decades old 
or so.  They, therefore, desire an expedient solution of this problem from 
the Ministry. 
 
 
  

 
 
CHAPTER II 
 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN 
ACCEPTED BY THE GOVERNMENT 
 
 
 
FOOD PROCESSING INDUSTRY SECTOR 
(Recommendation Para No. 1.23) 
 
The Committee note with concern the existing demographic and food 
production situation in the Country. While, on one hand, we have a burgeoning 
population, on the other, the rate of food production is not keeping pace with it. 
In such a grim scenario one i mmediate way out is to somehow salvage, the 
huge amounts of agriculture produce that perishes each year due to lack of 
adequate food processing facilities in the Country. Though no estimates of the 
agriculture and allied produce losses are available in tot ality, the estimated loss 
of Rs. 50000 crore per annum in just fruit and vegetables sector gives a fair 
idea of the colossal loss that might be taking place in the agriculture and allied 
produce sector as a whole, at the post harvest stage. Given these com pulsion, 
development of the food processing industries sector becomes a sina qua non 
for ensuring the food security of the Country, albeit in an indirect manner. 
Handled judiciously and more pro -actively, a well -developed food processing 
industries sector can also contribute handsomely, to the growth of household 
income at the micro level and at the macro level to the nation‟s economy 
through enhanced GDP and exports. Unfortunately, however, as the 
succeeding narrative will prove, the Government though being aware of the  

 
 
merits of the development of food processing industries sector has been 
affected by a strange inertia when it comes to initiating pro -active measures. 
Resultantly, the sun of this avowedly sunshine sector of Country‟s economy is , 
for decades together now, stuck in the eastern horizon. The Committee have 
made some very relevant recommendations on these matters recently in their 
Fifth Report on the Demands for Grants 2009 -10 of the Ministry. The 
Committee are confident that coupled with them, the recommendations made in 
the present Report, if implemented with a sense of purpose and sincerity, will at 
last, no only kickstart the much awaited ascent of sun in the eastern horizon but 
also take it to its zenith. 
 
Reply of the Government:  
The Ministry is in full agreement with the observations of the Committee. 
Ministry is trying to deliver optimally out of Budgetary support being made 
available for growth and development of food processing sector. The policies 
and programmes have been able to show  sustained growth of this sector over 
last four years. A lot more is however required to be done.   
[Vide Ministry of Food Processing Industries O.M. No. 6 -3/2010-Parl.          
dated 28 February, 2011] 
 
PLAN OUTLAY AND ANNUAL PLAN ALLOCATIONS  
(Recommendation Para No. 1.25) 
  
 During the course of their examination of the Demands for grants of the 
Ministry, the Committee considered the contentious issue of huge disparities 
between the Approved Outlay of the Ministry for the Eleventh Plan and the  

 
 
Actual Allocations made to them in each of the Annual Plans of the Eleventh 
Plan. 
 The Planning Commission have justified the lower allocations, which are 
not at all commensurate with the total Plan Outlay of the Ministry, under the 
plea that it is mainly  because the Ministry have not been able to utilize, in the 
previous years, even the lesser allocations made to them. 
 The Ministry on the other side have ascribed the low spending in 
successive years to the delays in the planning process an the 
approvals/clearness of their Schemes. For instance, the Schemes for Eleventh 
Plan, which commenced from April, 2007, were approved in October, 2008. 
The completion of other related formalities, etc. took further time. The 
implementation proper of Schemes, therefore,  commenced from Fiscal 2009 -
10, which happens to be the third year of Eleventh Plan. As a consequence, the 
Ministry could not achieve anything tangible in the first two years of the Plan. 
The Committee note that with most of the approvals/clearances in bag  the 
Ministry have acquitted themselves in a far better manner in the year 2009 -10.
  
The committee find a lot of merit in the argument of the Ministry that 
since most of the under spending in the initial years of Eleventh Plan was due 
to delays in approvals/clearances of the Schemes, their performance in these 
years, need not be the sole b enchmark for the allocations in the subsequent 
years.  
 The Committee, therefore, recommend that the Planning Commission 
should not take a purely mechanical view while deciding the allocations for the 

 
 
next Annual Plan. Apart from considering the spending in the previous year, the 
Planning Commission ought to consider the status of Schemes that were to be 
implemented, the release position of funds, the timing of approvals/clearness 
so that a fair target is given to the Ministry with a fair expectation and wi th a fair 
amount of money. Apart from the Ministry of Food Processing Industries, the 
Committee have found a similar situation prevailing in the case of other 
Ministries/Departments. The Planning commission would, therefore, be well 
advised to systemize, t he advice of the/Committee so that it is applied on all 
Ministries/Departments uniformly and the situation that has, unfortunately, been 
witnessed till now in the Eleventh Plan is a thing of past. 
Reply of the Government:   
The Ministry is in full agreemen t with the observations of the Committee. 
Ministry has requested Planning Commission to considered Annual Plan 
allocation of the Ministry on need based approach. 
[Vide Ministry of Food Processing Industries O.M. No. 6 -3/2010-Parl.          
dated 28 February, 2011] 
 
ALLOCATION TO NORTH EAST REGION  
(Recommendation Para No. 1.26) 
 
 The Committee observe that out of the BE of Rs. 340.00 for 2009 -10, the 
Ministry had made a provision of Rs. 34.00 crore for the North East Region. With the 
allocation of the ministry getting reduced to Rs. 290.00 crore at the RE stage the 
mandatory 10% allocation to the NE Region has also gone down to Rs. 29.00 crore. 
Sadly, however, out of the actual spending of Rs. 148.83 crore till 30 November, 

 
 
2009, the expenditure for NE Region has been a mere Rs. 5.54 crore which is not 
even 4% of the total.  
It has been the experience of the Committee that for various reasons, the 
funds allocated for the North East Region, remain unspent and are, thereafter, 
mechanically transferred to the Non -lapsable NER Funds. This is a worrisome 
situation. The non -utilization of funds in the NE Region apart from affecting the 
development efforts also creates a sense of being discriminated against among the 
people of the Region. The Committee, therefore, strongly deprecate the casual 
approach of the Ministry towards implementation of schemes in the NE region and 
recommend that since the NE Region is brimming with raw materials for the food 
processing industries sector, the Ministry should urgently reorient their strategy for 
the Region with a view to ensure that inspite of the const raints being faced, their 
Schemes meant for the Region are successfully implemented. 
Reply of the Government:   
Ministry has noted the recommendation of committee and formulated its 
strategy to ensure utilization of 10% of the allocation for NER. In fact d uring 2010-
11, so far as against BE of Rs. 40.00 crore, Ministry has utilized over Rs. 26.00 crore 
which is highest ever utilization in a year.  
Ministry has taken up special advertisement in NER, investor‟s meet, follow 
up meetings, out reach programmes and close monitoring to ensure utilization of NE 
allocation.  
[Vide Ministry of Food Processing Industries O.M. No. 6 -3/2010-Parl.          
dated 28 February, 2011] 
 

 
 
MID TERM APPRAISAL  
(Recommendation Para No. 1.27) 
 
The Committee note that the Mid Term Appraisal Review Meeting of the 
performance of the Ministry, halfway through the Eleventh Plan, was held on 23 
August, 2009. The Minutes of the said meeting are yet to be received by the 
Ministry for implementation. Que ries with the representative of the Planning 
Commission during the Oral Evidence revealed that normally this procedure 
takes about a year. The Mid Term Appraisal being such a long winding 
process, for whatever reasons, the Committee feel that its results cannot be put 
to optimal use by the Ministries/Departments in the extant form. In the instant 
case thought he MTA was to be readied by March, 2010, it is supposed to take 
another six weeks for Cabinet approval. It can be safely assumed that the 
remaining fo rmalities may take a few more weeks if not months. Thus, no 
inputs from could provided to the Ministry for the Fourth Year Annual Plan of 
the Eleventh Plan which commenced from 1 April, 2010. At best these can be 
utilized while drawing the Annul Plan for 2 011-12 i.e. the last year of Eleventh 
Plan. But then the inputs based on the performance of the Ministry in 2010 -11 
would be of more relevance. The Committee find this a very unsatisfactory 
state of affairs. The MTA is a tool for performance assessment and  
recommending mid course corrections. If it is lingered on for months together or 
a year, the very purpose and relevance of MTA is lost. The Committee, 
therefore, recommend that the Government and the planners should put their 
heads together and devise way s and means to ensure that the MTA is 
completed at the soonest after the Five Year Plan is halfway through, and the 

 
 
mid course corrections are suitably co -opted at the first available opportunity in 
the Annual Plan or the RE stage, as the case may be.  
Reply of the Government:   
The Ministry is in full agreement with the observations of the Committee.  
The observations of the Committee have been forwarded to the Planning 
Commission for suitable action. 
[Vide Ministry of Food Processing Industries O.M. No. 6 -3/2010-Parl.          
dated 28 February, 2011] 
INTERNAL EVALUATION AND PERSPECTIVE PLANNING  
(Recommendation Para No. 1.28) 
 
 The Committee, with a view to evaluate the internal evaluation 
mechanism of the Ministry, had sought information about any evalua tion of the 
Schemes being done, in view of the slippages in implementation during the first 
three years of the Eleventh Plan. They have been informed that the Ministry are 
already evaluating all Schemes for the period of four years from 2005 -06 to 
2008-09. The Committee find it inexplicable, as to what purpose such an 
evaluation will serve, when it is covering two years of the Tenth Plan and two 
years of the  ongoing Eleventh Plan. Moreso, when several 
Schemes/components of the Tenth Plan have been discontinued or revamped 
and new Schemes which were not there in the Tenth Plan have been started in 
the Eleventh Plan. The Committee are of the opinion that in order to make a 
more realistic an t o the point assessment, the Ministry should evaluate the 
performance of their Schemes in the first three years of the Eleventh Plan. This 
will not only enable them to understand the shortcomings and constraints being 

 
 
faced in their implementation but also facilitate corrective measures down the 
line and perspective planning for the Annual Plan 2011 -12 and Twelfth Five 
Year Plan. 
Reply of the Government:   
The process of evaluation of the schemes of the Ministry being 
implemented in the Eleventh Plan has started.  Expert agencies have been 
hired to evaluate the performance of the schemes of the Ministry for the 
uncovered period, i.e. 2005 -06 and 2006-07 of the 10 th Plan and the first three 
years of the current Eleventh Plan, i.e. 2007-08 to 2010-11. The agencies have 
been asked to complete their assignment within a period of 6 months. It is 
expected that these evaluation reports would be available by the time the 
exercise of preparation of Twelfth Plan commences.  
Evaluation of discontinued scheme s of Tenth Plan for last two years of 
Tenth Plan i.e. 2005 -06 and 2006 -07 is relevant to assess the impact of 
schemes and also to ascertain relevance of findings in present context, so that 
if so found, some of the recommendations may form part of Twelfth Plan 
proposals. 
[Vide Ministry of Food Processing Industries O.M. No. 6 -3/2010-Parl.          
dated 28 February, 2011] 
  

 
 
SCHEME FOR TECHNOLOGY UPGRADATION/ESTABLISHMENT AND 
MODERNIZATION OF FOOD PROCESSING INDUSTRIES 
(Recommendation Para No. 2.47)  
 
The Committee note that the Scheme for Technology Upgradation / 
Establishment and Modernization of Food Processing Industries is meant for 
upgradation and modernization of processing capabilities.   Being a continuing 
Scheme from the Tenth Plan, it was luckily  not stuck in the maze of 
approvals/clearances at the beginning of Eleventh Plan.  Therefore, the Ministry 
have  performed satisfactorily in implementation of this Scheme.   In fact, as stated 
previously  in this Report, this Scheme has also caught the eye  of the Planning 
Commission, as all allocated CE funds have not only been utilized  additional 
infusions were also required at the RE stages.  The Committee, however, find two 
areas of concern in this Scheme.  The Committee feel that the Cap of Rs.50 lakh as 
subvention on cost of plant and machinery and civil works in general areas and 
Rs.75 lakh in difficult areas in grossly insufficient.   The modern food processing 
industries sector is a capital intensive where such small doses of financial 
assistance are not going to prove effective.   The Committee, therefore, recommend 
that the Government should enhance this sum to Rs.1.00 crore in the general areas 
and Rs.1.5 crore in the difficult areas, with immediate effect. 
  
The second shortcoming that has come t o the notice of the Committee is the 
absence of a consultancy mechanism in the Ministry.    There is nothing available in 
the system to provide hand holding to the prospective entrepreneur or to advise, 
facilitate and guide him/her on the matters pertainin g to this Scheme, particularly on 
how to go about the balance funding of the project proposal through banks/financial 
institutions.  The Committee can well imagine the plight of a prospective or even an 

 
 
existing entrepreneur who has to wade through a strea m of formalities in 
banks/financial institutions to reach the Ministry for securing the subvention part and, 
thereafter, go through another round of similar formalities to secure the balance 
funds from various sources.  The Committee, therefore, desire tha t the Ministry 
should give a serious thought to this matter and workout a consultancy mechanism, 
immediately approaching them are provided a much needed Single Window 
Clearance System for the Scheme. 
Reply of the Government:   
The Ministry acknowledges tha t cap of Rs. 50 lakhs and Rs. 75 lakhs (NE 
area) will be a constraining factor as far as modernization/setting up of food 
processing units are concerned. On the basis of average total project cost of food 
processing units, it would be prudent to revise the grant amount appropriately. 
Due to Budgetary constraints in the terminal year of the plan the upscaling of 
grant-in-aid will be proposed in the 12 th Plan, while proposing continuation of 
scheme after its evaluation during 11th Plan period.  
So far, consul tancy mechanism in the Ministry is concerned, the system to 
provide hand holding to the prospective entrepreneurship or to advise, facilitate and 
guide him/her on the matters pertaining to this scheme is being establish by National 
Institute of Food Technology Entrepreneurship and Management (NIFTEM). Ministry 
has also posted model project proposal on it website for reference apart from 
providing a link to the information about technology providers.   
[Vide Ministry of Food Processing Industries O.M. No. 6 -3/2010-Parl.          
dated 28 February, 2011] 
 

 
 
Comments of the Committee 
For Comments of the Committee please refer to Para No. 1.1 9 of 
Chapter-I of this Report. 
NIFTEM 
(Recommendation Para No. 2.48) 
 
The National Institute of Food Technology, Entrepreneurship and 
Management (NIFTEM) is one of the components of the Scheme „ 
Strengthening of Institutions‟ The cost of the project which was originally 
estimated to cost of Rs.244.60 crore is set to escalate substantially to Rs. 
604.75 crore due o ce rtain changes in civil works, technical facilities, etc. 
suggested by the knowledge sharing partner viz. Cornell Sathguru Foundation 
for Development, Hyderabad.  The Committee, concerned with such a high 
jump in estimates, have already recommend, a careful  consideration of the 
same by the Government, in their Fifth Report on Demands for Grants 2009-10. 
 
Apart from the cost factor, they have also note that the CCEA had fixed 
an implementation scheme for the operationalisation of NIFTEM according to 
which the Institute ought to have been fully functional academic session 2010 -
11.   For this purpose NIFTEM has to be granted the deemed University status 
by University Grants Commission, it has to also have a faculty, furthermore 
being an institution offering tech nical degrees also, a recognition of its courses 
by AICTE will be required .  The Committee are, however, shocked to note that 
Ministry have not been able to make any headway in these crucial matters.  A 
Cabinet note to change legal status of NIFTEM from a  Section 25 Company to 
that of a society to be registered under Indian Societies Act is being submitted 

 
 
to the Cabinet Secretariat shortly.  The Ministry have informed that Committee, 
that any further action on issues like Deemed University status, filling  up of 
faculty and other positions, recognition by AICTE, etc. will arise only after the 
approval of the Cabinet is received.  
 
The Committee are aware of the time consuming nature of all the issues 
referred to above.  They, therefore, can say without thin king twice that the 
Ministry will not be able to meet the deadline academic activity i n NIFTEM from 
2010-11 Session. The Committee feel that that if the Ministry plan it very 
professionally and in a highly time bound manner, they can at best think of 
making NIFTEM fully operational by the next academic session viz. 2011 -12 
only.   Nothing the lack of clarity in the matter of how to proceed further with the 
Project the Committee would like the Ministry to come out with a blue print in 
the matter and submit the same to the Committee on priority. 
Reply of the Government:   
o CCEA in its meeting held on 31.8.2006 approved setting up of NIFTEM 
at an estimated cost of Rs.244.60 crore including foreign exchange 
component of US $ 8.1 million. 
o For achieving NIFTEM‟s ma ndate as an international centre of 
excellence review of Rabo DPR was made. 
o The following additional focus areas not considered in the Rabo DPR but 
considered essential components were incorporated. 
 Focus on comprehensive spectrum of Food Science, Technology 
& Management 

 
 
 Creation of comprehensive incubators. 
 Creation of tenancy area within the incubator. 
 Creation of bio resource centre, sensory facility and other 
essential research facilities. 
 
o Accordingly, the revised proposal of RCE at a cost of R s.604.75 crore 
was submitted to Ministry of Finance and all other concerned 
Ministries/Deptt. and Planning Commission on 29.9.2009. 
o Planning Commission on October 14, 2009 reviewed the proposal and 
desired MFPI to submit RCE as they are not in a position t o support 
enhancement of the cost due to proposed area expansion in certain 
building components. 
o Ministry of Finance on December 2, 2009 also desired reconsideration of 
the RCE-Rs.604.75 crore and scaling down the cost based on the clear 
demand from the in dustry for NIFTEM graduates who would be passing 
out subsequently. It was also desired that implementation schedule of 
CCEA should be followed to avoid cost and time overruns in the project. 
o On the directions of Ministry of Finance and Planning Commission,  a 
detailed review of the enhanced cost was undertaken. As a result, the 
project cost was scaled down from Rs.605.94 crore to Rs.494.66 crore. 
o The RCE proposal was considered by EFC in its meeting held on 
29.6.2010. EFC directed the Ministry to take follow ing actions and then 
revert back to EFC. 

 
 
 
 To review the revised cost estimate closely with a view to paring 
the cost to the extent possible. 
 Requirement of funds for NIFTEM to be rephased having regard 
to availability of funds. 
 To approach Planning Commiss ion for allocation of additional 
funds. 
o As directed by EFC, MFPI again reviewed and further rationalized the 
RCE by bringing down the revised project cost from Rs.494.66 crore to 
Rs.479.94 crore. MFPI reassessed the requirements of funds based on 
the ratio nalized RCE of Rs.479.94 crore and phased out year wise 
requirement of funds during 2010-11, 2011-12 & 2012-13. The additional 
requirement of funds for the year 2010 -11 of Rs.20 crore has been 
identified internally from saving in other Schemes within the B E 2010-11 
and re appropriation proposal sent to Ministry of Finance in the last 
batch of supplementary.  
o With a view to obtain Deemed to be University status from UGC, the 
legal status of NIFTEM as a company registered under Section 25 of the 
Companies Act 1956 had to be changed to that of a Society. 
o The Union Cabinet in its meeting held on 23.4.2010 approved as under : 
 Registering National Institute of Food Technology 
Entrepreneurship and Management as an autonomous 
organization under the Indian Societies Act, 1860. 

 
 
 Transfer all assets and liabilities of NIFTEM as a Section 25 
Company to NIFTEM Society. 
 Winding up of NIFTEM under the Indian Companies Act, 1956. 
 
o In pursuance of above decision of the Union Cabinet follow up action 
was taken as under: 
 Ministry of Food Processing Industries registered NIFTEM as a 
Society under Societies Registration Act, 1860 on 19.5.2010 and 
directed NIFTEM Company to take follow up action on the 
remaining two decisions of the Cabinet.  
 In pursuance of Cabinet decision, NIFTEM  transferred all assets 
and liabilities of NIFTEM Company to new NIFTEM Society on 
11.11.2010 and has now initiated action for voluntary winding up 
of the Company as per provisions of the Companies Act. 
o Immediately after registration of NIFTEM as a Society , an application 
was submitted to UGC on 20.5.2010 for grant of Deemed to be 
University status under De Novo category. 
o UGC constituted an Expert Committee to recommend suitability of 
NIFTEM proposal for grant of Deemed to be University status under De 
Novo category. The Committee held a meeting on 13.1.2011 in which a 
detailed presentation was given by NIFTEM. As per advice of the UGC 
Expert Committee, the course curriculum of B.Tech (Food Technology & 
Management) course has been revamped by accentuating ma nagement 
content of the course and designed new course curriculum for M.Tech 

 
 
(Food Technology & Management) for consideration of UGC. UGC is 
now to take final decision on the proposal to  recommend the case for 
grant of Deemed to be University status under De Novo category for final 
approval of Ministry of HRD.  
o NIFTEM campus construction covering 12000 sq. mtr. area would be 
ready by the end of February, 2011 alongwith peripheral infrastructure to 
commence activities from the current financial year and firs t academic 
session from 2011-12.  
o In the Annual Plan discussions 2011 -12 held in January 2011 with 
Planning Commission, MFPI explained the status of preparedness of 
NIFTEM campus and its commitment to start academic session 2011 -12 
which was duly appreciated by the Commission. 
o Planning Commission has provided Rs.100 crore out of GBS Rs.600 
crore in Annual Plan of MFPI for the year 2011-12 for this project.   
o The meeting of EFC under the Chairmanship of Secretary, Expenditure 
was convened on 18.2.2011 to con sider the revised (enhanced) cost 
proposal of NIFTEM. The EFC has recommended the proposal for 
consideration of CCEA subject to certain conditions. 
o In the 1 st phase, 62 posts were proposed to be created to make the 
Institute functional in 2010-11. 46 posts including the post of Director has 
been created, Recruitment Rules for these posts have been finalized 
and recruitment process started. It is scheduled to be completed by April 

 
 
2011. Proposal for creation of additional posts has been sent to the 
Ministry of Finance for approval. 
o NIFTEM intends to start residential training courses under various 
subject areas from March 2011. 
o Outreach programmes in different areas across the country for brand 
building of NIIFTEM are being undertaken. 
o All preparatory activit ies are being undertaken to commence academic 
session 2011 -12 with B.Tech (Food Technology & Management) by 
June 2011.   
[Vide Ministry of Food Processing Industries O.M. No. 6 -3/2010-Parl.          
dated 28 February, 2011] 
 
FOOD PROCESSING TRAINING CENTRES 
(Recommendation Para No. 2.49) 
 
The Committee note that the objectives of setting up of Food Processing 
Training Centre (FPTCs) include development of rural entrepreneurship, 
transfer of technology for processing of food products by utilizing local ly grown  
produce  and providing hand -on experience.   The FPTCs basically function as 
production-cum-training centers.  The Ministry have a Scheme for providing 
grant-in-aid for setting up of FPTCs.   Till date, the Ministry have assist ed 533 
FPTCs in the country. However, when queried about the FPTCs, which are fully 
functional, they have informed that they planned a n evaluation in this regard. 
With regard to adequacy or otherwise of the existing FPTCs the Ministry have 
again taken refuge behind the said „planned evaluation‟. Simultaneously, 

 
 
however, the Ministry have informed the Committee, that during EFC meeting, 
a total of 270 FPTCs were proposed during the Eleventh Plan period.  The 
Committee are dismayed at the ad hoc manner in which the Scheme of FP TCs 
is being implemented.  The food processing industries sector is witnessing 
substantial growth.  If the growing requirements of trained manpower fro the 
sector  are to be ensured, the FPTCs are to be set up/revamped on a priority 
basis.  The Committee w onder, why the aspect of FPTCs augmentation, in a 
desired manner, has not stuck, the Ministry even when they cam out with the 
grandiose Vision – 2015.  Being production -cum-training centers, the FPTCs 
have a vital role in further progression of the food pr ocessing sector.    On one 
hand, they will ensure a regular supply of training and skilled manpower for the 
sector on the other, they will also add to the processed food produc tion 
capacity.   The Committee have a feeling that the Ministry‟s belated intent ion to 
evaluate the Scheme, seems to have occurred only when the Committee 
prodded them for the information in the matter.  Notwithstanding, whatever has 
happened, the Committee recommend that the Ministry may complete the 
planned evaluation within three m onths of presentation of this Report to the 
Parliament and come back to the Committee with a detailed feedback on the 
FPTCs. 
Reply of the Government:   
The objective of Scheme of setting up of Food Processing Training 
Centres (FPTCs) includes development o f rural entrepreneurship, transfer of 
technology for processing of food by utilizing locally grown produce and 
providing hands-on experience. The Ministry in its Eleventh Plan Document had 
proposed an overall budget outlay of Rs. 100 crore for the scheme o f Human 

 
 
Resource Development in FPI which included Rs. 25 crore for setting up of 270 
FPTCs in the country. However, the budget outlay was restricted to only Rs. 65 
crore for the scheme of HRD. Further, the actual allocation of funds during the 
first four years of the Eleventh Plan was hardly Rs. 31.75 crore for the entire 
scheme of HRD. Out of which Rs. 4.70 crore was provided for setting up of 
FPTCs. The year -wise break-up of the FPTCs in the EFC document vis -a-vis 
actual achievement is as under: 
(Rs. in crore) 
S.N Year 11th Plan Target 
Actual Achievement 
Financial  
 
Physic
al  
 
BE/RE Expenditu
re  
No. of FPTCs 
Approved 
1 2007-08 3.50 35 1.20 1.20 41 
2 2008-09 5.00 52 0.50 0.50 19 
3 2009-10 5.50 61 1.50 1.48 32 
4 2010-11 5.50 61 1.50 1.12 26*  
(30 targeted) 
5 2011-12 5.50 61 4.00*  80** 
 Total  25.00 270 8.70 4.30 202 
*   up to 22-02-2011. 
** proposed for FY 2011-12. 
 
The scheme of HRD, which was operational during 10 th Plan, was 
continued in the 11 th Plan with higher level of assistance. The actual 
achievement during the year 2007 -08 was more compared to the physical 
targets with lesser availability of fund as the cases were processed as per the 

 
 
pattern of assistance of 10 th Plan. During the 10 th Plan, the pattern of 
assistance for a Single line FPTC was Rs. 3.00 lakhs and for a Multi line FPTC 
was Rs. 7.50 lakhs. In the 11 th Plan the pattern of assistance was enhanced to 
Rs. 6.090 lakhs for single line FPTC and Rs. Rs. 15.00 lakhs for a multi line 
FPTC. The Scheme of HRD with enhanced level of assistance for the 11 th Plan 
was approved in the 2nd half of financial year 2008-09. 
 
Even with the less allocation of funds under the scheme, the Ministry has 
so far approved 118 FPTCs during the first four of t he Eleventh Plan period. 
The Ministry has already commenced evaluation of the scheme and the report 
will be placed before the Committee.  
 
The Ministry will carry out the publicity of the scheme on sustained basis 
and also through the State Nodal Agencies/ State Gov ernments for inviting 
proposals with an objective that at least one FPTC in each District is 
established during the Twelfth Plan period.   
[Vide Ministry of Food Processing Industries O.M. No. 6 -3/2010-Parl.          
dated 28 February, 2011] 
 
FOOD TESTING LABORATORIES  
(Recommendation Para No. 2.50) 
 
The existing Food Testing Laboratories (FTLs) network in the Country 
came out as another major area of concern during the examination by the 
Committee.   There is an acute shortage of food testing laboratories.   As per a 
study conducted at the Ministry‟s behest in 2006, there were 312 food testing 
laboratories in the country with  only 10 of them located in the NE Region.  The 

 
 
study had recommended setting up/upgradation of 620 laboratories.  The 
break-up being at least 285 labs at the district levels.   Unfortunately, however, 
the Scheme of FTLs has not been accorded the requisite priority in the scheme 
of things of the Ministry.  Till date, they have provided grant to only 45 FTLs out 
of 312 under the Scheme meant for the purpose.  Only 2 of these laboratories 
are in NE Region.   The Committee feel that the increasing importance of 
quality control, standardization and accreditation in the global importance of  
quality context, demands a comprehensi ve network of FTLs which are dotted 
all over the  country at easily accessible distances to facilitate the food 
processing sector.   The Committee, therefore, strongly recommend that 
Ministry should come out with detailed road map on how to ensure the 
coverage of all districts of the country under the FTL scheme on a priority basis 
within three months of presentation of this Report to the Parliament.  If need be 
further incentives may be added to achieve this goal at the earliest.  
 
Reply of the Government:   
 The objective of Scheme is to establish a surveillance system for 
monitoring the quality and composition of food, analysis the samples received 
from food processing industries, and other stakeholders, reduce the time of 
analysis of samples by reducing transportation time of samples, ensure 
compliance of International standards on food in case of exports as well as 
imports. 
 The Ministry in its Eleventh Plan Document had proposed an overall 
budget outlay of Rs. 250 crore for the s cheme of setting up of Food Testing 
Laboratories/HACCP/R7D/Promotional Activities etc. which included Rs. 84 

 
 
crore for setting up of 74 Food Testing Laboratories (FTLs) in the country 
during the Eleventh Plan period/ During the first four years of the Eleventh plan 
an amount of Rs. 31.82 crore was provided under the scheme, and accordingly 
the Ministry have already assisted 15 Food Testing labs and accorded “in -
principle” approvals to another 5 laboratories. The year -wise break -up of the 
proposed Food Testi ng Laboratories in the CCEA document vis -à-vis actual 
achievement is a sunder: 
(Rs. in crore) 
S. No Year 11th Plan Target Actual Achievement 
  Financial Physical BE/RE Expenditure No. of 
FPTCs 
Approved 
1 2007-
08 
9.94 2 9.94 9.94 2 
2 2008-
09 
2.08 6 2.08 2.08 1 
3 2009-
10 
9.00 16 9.80 9.799 8 
4 2010-
11 
25.00 22 10.00 6.353 4* (10 
targeted) 
5 2011-
12 
37.98 28 25.00**  20** 
 Total 84.00 74 56.82 28.172 41 
* Upto 22/11/2010 
** Proposed during 2011-12 
 
In the NE Region, the Ministry has assisted 3 Food Testing Laboratories 
during Eleventh Plan period and “in -principle” approval to 1 laboratory in NE 

 
 
Region was granted. Since there is very encouraging response from the 
stakeholders with the enactment of I ntegrated Food Law  (IFL) there would be 
more need for Food Testing Labs across the country. Further, the Ministry is in 
the process of commissioning evaluation of the scheme and, thereafter, 
increase in the level of assistance and the number of Food Testin g Labs will be 
proposed at the time of preparing the road map for 12th plan. 
 
[Vide Ministry of Food Processing Industries O.M. No. 6 -3/2010-Parl.          
dated 28 February, 2011] 
UTILIZATION CERTIFICATES 
(Recommendation Para No. 2.52) 
 
The Committee find that the Ministry have to cover a lot of ground in the 
matter of liquidation of pending Utilization Certificates (UCs).   There are 2117 
UCs amounting to a huge Rs.330.65 crore pending in respect of grants paid up 
till 31 March, 2008 and due as on 31 Marc h, 2009.   This is a substantial 
amount for a Ministry, whose Annual Budget had been Rs.290.00 crore last 
year and who have barely reached the Rs.400.00 crore BE allocation mark in 
the ongoing Fiscal.  What is the matter of further concern to the Committee , is 
the fact that the Ministry did not /could not furnish to them the number and 
value of the UCs received by the Ministry during 2008 -09 and 2009 -10.  
Likewise, they also did not could not furnish to the Committee, details of the ten 
oldest pending UCs.  The Committee deprecate this tendency of laissez faire of 
the Ministry, on an important issue like the liquidation of pending UCs.   It 
should be clearly understood that the responsibility of the Ministry does not end 
merely with release of grants.  Their  proper utilization is rather more important.  

 
 
The Committee, therefore, exhort the Ministry to pursue the liquidation of 
pending UCs with all seriousness so that such huge backlog is cleared at the 
earliest.  They would also like to be apprised about the two matters referred to 
above, on which information is still pending. 
Reply of the Government:   
The Ministry has been taking the issue of pending UCs seriously and 
has been reviewing the matter on weekly basis at the level of AS & FA and 
Secretary. It has  been found that many of the old UCs (which have been 
reported as outstanding) are pertaining to grants -in-aid released by the Ministry 
against the reimbursed expenditure already incurred by the grantee 
organizations. Thus, in terms of GFR Rule 212(1), Not e 1. we are consulting 
Ministry of Finance to consider them as liquidated. Accordingly, the Ministry has 
taken steps to liquidate the number of outstanding UCs. As desired by the 
Hon‟ble Members of the Committee, the number and amount of UCs received 
by the Ministry during FY 2008 -09 are 453 (Rs. 67.48 crore), and  during FY 
2009-10 are 166 (Rs 70.63 crore).  Details of ten oldest pending UCs are also 
enclosed herewith. 
[Vide Ministry of Food Processing Industries O.M. No. 6 -3/2010-Parl.          
dated 28 February, 2011] 
Comments of the Committee 
For Comments of the Committee please refer to Para No. 1. 22  of 
Chapter-I of this Report. 
 
  

 
 
CHAPTER III 
 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH 
THE COMMITTEE DO NOT DESIRE TO PURSUE 
IN VIEW OF THE GOVERNMENT’S REPLY 
 
 
OUTCOME BUDGET  
(Recommendation Para No. 2.51) 
 
The Outcome Budget, which is the successor of Performance Budget of 
the yore, contains details of performance of any Ministry /Department on both 
the physical and financial parameters.  I t also contains the salient features of 
the forthcoming Annual Plan and other relevant details pertaining to the 
Demands for Grants, financial projections, physical targets, etc. By virtue of the 
information it contains, the Outcome Budget is an important tool for the 
Departmentally Related Standing Committees in assessing the performance of 
the Ministry/Department in question, more so, in the context of the examination 
of the Demands for Grants.  It is because of the time bound requirements of 
reporting on  the Demands for Grants to the Parliament that the Outcome 
Budget is invariably presented to the Parliament along with the Demands for 
Grants.  
The Committee are, however, unhappy to note that in the instant cases, 
the Ministry did not lay the Outcome Budg et alongwith the Demands for Grants 
2010-11, laid in the Lok Sabha on the last day (16 March, 2010) of the first half 
the ongoing Budget Session.   Copies of the Outcome Budget were provided to 
the Committee only during the Oral Evidence of the Ministry on  31 March, 
2010.  The Oral Evidences, therefore, remained inconclusive on that day and  

 
 
further Oral Evidence, therefore, remained inconclusive on that day and further 
Oral Evidence was necessitated on 9 April ,2010.   Inspite of the assurance of 
the Secre tary of Ministry of Food Processing Industries during the Oral 
Evidence on 31 March, 2010, that the Outcome Budget will be laid in the 
Parliament immediately in the next Sitting (15 April, 2010) of the Lok Sabha in 
the ensuing Session, this was done only on 29 April, 2010. 
The Committee consider that as a serious lapse on the part of the 
Ministry.   If timely submission of documents to the Parliament and its entities is 
not ensured by the Government, the concept of the accountability of the 
executive to the  legislature is severally dented, which is a matter of grave 
concern.  While cautioning the Ministry to ensure that there is no recurrence of 
such nature in future, the Committee also desire a report in the instant matter 
one month of presentation of this Report. 
Reply of the Government:   
Delay in presentation of Outcome Budget 2010-11 in the Lok Sabha was 
due to delay in compilation/preparation of the document because of late receipt 
of inputs from concerned Divisions of the Ministry. There was further delay in 
translation of the document into Hindi version. Printing of the documents was 
given to an agency, which also took time more than expected. In future, such 
delay will not be occur. We request Hon‟ble Members to pardon us this time. 
The Ministry has already taken appropriate steps in order to make available the 
copies of Outcome Budget 2011-12 in the Lok Sabha in time. 
[Vide Ministry of Food Processing Industries O.M. No. 6 -3/2010-Parl.          
dated 28 February, 2011] 

 
 
CHAPTER IV 
 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES 
OF THE GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE 
COMMITTEE 
 
OVER VIEW OF DEMAND  
(Recommendation Para No. 1.24) 
 
 Coming to the immediate task of the examination of the Demands for 
grants of the Ministry for the year 2010 -11, the Committee have extensively 
covered several matters pertaining to the Ministry in their Fifth Report on 
Demands for Grants (2009 -10) of the Ministry, which was presented to the 
Hon‟ble Speaker on 18 February, 2010 and presented/laid in the  two Houses of 
Parliament on 3 March, 2010. As not much time has elapsed since the Fifth 
Report was presented and the Action Taken Replies of the Government on the 
observation/recommendations contained in the Report are not yet due, the 
Committee in their present Report have either recommended additional 
measures which are warranted in matters already covered in their Fifth Report 
or on such matters which did not find mention in that Report. 
Having examined Demand No. 17 pertaining to the Ministry of Food 
Processing Industry, the Committee note that the Ministry have been allocated 
a sum of Rs. 400.00 crore on the Plan side. Out of this Rs. 297.49 crore is in 
the Revenue Section and the balance Rs. 102.51 crore in the Capital Section. 
The allocation on the P lan side is about 43% higher than RE 2009 -10 which 
stood at Rs. 280.00 crore. 
  

 
 
The Ministry have also been allocated a sum of Rs. 19.72 crore on the 
Non-Plan side, which is all in the Revenue Section. The Non -Plan allocation 
has seen an almost 19% decline  from the RE 2009 -10 of Rs. 11.57 crore. If 
maintained till the end of the Fiscal it would be a commendable effort. 
Notwithstanding, the statistics quoted above, the Committee are hugely 
disappointed to find that as in the previous several years, the Minis try have 
been given a raw deal in allocation of funds for 2010 -11 as well. The allocation 
of Rs. 400.00 odd crore for 2010-11 takes the tally of allocations in the first four 
years of the Eleventh Plan to a measly Rs. 1280.00 crore. What to speak of the 
Rs. 4816.00 crore initially sought by the Ministry for the Eleventh Plan, this 
amount is not even a patch on the total allocation of Rs. 4031.00 crore 
approved by the Planning Commission. 
 
The Committee can understand that the overall availability of resource 
position and the inter -se prioritization amongst various Ministries/Departments 
may cause some up  downs in the actual allocations. But the yawning gaps 
between the allocations made for the Eleventh Plan and the actual allocations 
in the context of  the Ministry of Food Processing Industries is indicative of a 
very disdainful attitude towards proper planning and management of finances 
by the Government. This needs to be deprecated in the strongest terms. The 
Committee, therefore, recommend that the G overnment should, without waiting 
till the Revised Estimates stage, immediately enhance the allocation of the 
Ministry for the year 2010 -11 to at least Rs. 1500.00 crore. This will only 
provide much needed funds to the Ministry at a juncture, where they re quire it 

 
 
the most, but will also leave, as balance, manageable funds for the last year of 
the Plan. 
Reply of the Government:   
The plan allocation  of the Ministry for 2010 -11 was kept at Rs. 400.00 
crore. Ministry had taken up issue for enhancement of allo cation from time to 
time. Ministry had finally proposed RE for Rs. 600.00 crore which was also not 
approved and RE was retained at Rs. 400.00 crore only.  
[Vide Ministry of Food Processing Industries O.M. No. 6 -3/2010-Parl.          
dated 28 February, 2011] 
Comments of the Committee 
For Comments of the Committee please refer to Para No. 1. 7 of 
Chapter-I of this Report. 
  

 
 
CHAPTER V 
 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF 
WHICH REPLIES OF THE FINAL REPLIES OF GOVERNMENT 
ARE STILL AWAITED 
 
MEGA FOOD PARKS  
(Recommendation Para No. 2.46) 
 
The Committee note that the Ministry was implementing a Scheme of 
Food Parks in the Ninth and Tenth Plans with a view to boost the food 
processing industry sector.  56 Food Parks were covered under the Scheme by 
the Ministry over the years.  The Scheme, as per own admission of the Ministry, 
did not yield the desired results because of new Mega Food Parks (MFPs) 
component under the Infrastructure Development Scheme, the Mega Food 
Parks, as the name suggests are on a substantially larger canvas and Special 
Purpose Vehicle (SPV) driven entities.   Apart from the large  and all 
encompassing infrastructure, they will also be having sufficient backward and 
forward linkages to ensure their viability.  
 The Committee further note that though the CCEA had approved in  
principle 30 MFPs during the Eleventh, only ten have been approved in the first 
stage on pilot basis.  The Ministry received bids for all the ten MFPs.  However, 
four of the proposals relating to setting up of MFPs in Karnataka, Maharastra, 
Punjab and UP could not proceed beyond shortlisting stage.   While the SPVs,  
  

 
 
themselves, sought withdrawal in case of Maharastra and UP.  Two remaining 
ones in Karnataka and Punjab forfeited their claim  being unable to submit the 
Detailed Project Report, as they cou ld not identify and acquire the requisite 
land within the stimulated time.  As a consequence, the earnest money amount 
of Rs.10.00 lakh deposited by each of these four places for selection of fresh 
SPVs.  Till date, the Ministry have released a sum of Rs.3 5.00 crore as grant 
assistance to the remaining SPVs.  Being cost and time intensive projects the 
MFPs require 24  to 30 months for comp letion. The Committee have been 
informed by the Ministry that due to delay in approvals/clearances none of the 
MFPs is c omplete as of now.  The earliest, they expect some of them to be 
completed somewhere in the last year of the Eleventh Plan viz. 2011-12. 
 
The Committee feel that the Mega Food Parks component, though intended 
to be an improvement over the failed erstwhile Food Parks  still have several 
rough edged to be smoothened.   The Government have, therefore, rightly 
decided to sanction assistance for only ten out of 30 MFPs in the first phase on 
pilot basis.   Since these projects are having a long gestation period, any 
glitches at any interim stage, delay the entire process.  The Committee, 
therefore, feel that that Government should constantly monitor the execution of 
the ten proposals, that have been approved for assistance in first phase on pilot 
basis, before taking further initiatives in the matters.  
The Committee also feel that these projects should have better collateral 
guaranties from the side of the SPVs rather than the modest amount of 
Rs.10.00 lakh as earnest money.   As can be seen from the four cases wh ich 
did not go beyond the short listing stage, the bidder have to only face the risk of 

 
 
forfeiting the earnest money of Rs.10.00 lakhs but the projects have b een 
delayed for months together, as the entire thing is to be started afresh.   
Besides, this exer cise though infructuous would surely have been a big drain 
on the Government resources, time and money. 
Reply of the Government:   
The earlier Scheme of Food Parks was operated during 8 th to 10th Plan 
Periods. During these periods, a total of 56 Food Parks  were sanctioned at an 
approved grant of ` 208.544 Cr., out of which total grant released so far is ` 
137.98 Cr. In the case of 20 Food Parks, funds have been fully released and in 
case of 34 Food Parks, which are at different stages of progress, the funds  
have been partially released. The objective of the Food Park Scheme was to 
develop Common Infrastructure Facilities to facilitate setting up of units by 
Micro, Small & Medium Enterprises. So far, a total of 2210 plots have been 
allotted to industrial unit s out of total approved plots of 4150. The number of 
units commissioned is more than 200.   The scheme of Food Parks could not 
achieve desired results due to various reasons. To identify the bottlenecks and 
find out solutions thereto, Ministry of Food Proce ssing Industries had 
commissioned reputed external agencies such as EDI, Ahmadabad, Consulting 
Engineers Ltd, etc to carry out evaluation of the Food Park scheme. As most of 
these Food Parks have been promoted by State Industrial Development 
Agencies, they have been conceptualized in traditional industrial estate mode 
with no forward and backward linkages. This has resulted in valuable real 
estate being acquired but utilized at low levels of efficiency. Major reasons for 
the poor functioning of parks are mentioned below: 
 Poor site selection 

 
 
 Delay in providing basic infrastructure facilities like power, water, road 
etc. 
 Absence of strong backward linkages 
 Weak linkages with the market 
 Delay in release of financial assistance 
 Poor management and implementation capabilities 
 The studies have also pointed towards the lack of :                                            
i. A comprehensive project report from the raw material supply chain to the 
market, assessing infrastructure needs at every stage 
ii. Funding for components such as internal roads, drainage, environmental 
control facilities and solid waste management facilities etc, which are 
also important infrastructure needed in the park. 
iii. A competent proposal appraisal 
 The study concluded suggesting that the Food Park wi ll be successful 
only if infrastructure for (1) On Farm Storage (2) Primary Processing (3) 
Minimal Processing (4) linkages with Retail Outlet (5) Mobile Processing Unit 
(6) Mobile Pre -cooling Unit (7) Packaging Centre (8) Palletisation etc., is 
provided in  the Park. Production area remained under developed and not 
integrated with the requirements of the market. There was no assurance of 
steady supply of raw materials. The benefits of Value addition rarely percolated 
to the farming community. 
These Studies t hus recommended need for providing higher scale of 
assistance for building infrastructure items in the pattern of schemes like 

 
 
Industrial Infrastructure Upgradation Scheme (IIUS) under the Department of 
Industrial Promotion Policy, Ministry of Commerce and Industry and Scheme for 
Integrated Textile Parks (SITP) under the Ministry of Textiles and Scheme for 
Pack Houses, Cold Storages and Mobile Processing Units under National 
Horticulture Board, Ministry of Agriculture. These schemes carry higher rates of 
subsidy as compared to MFPI‟s Infrastructure Schemes. Based on these 
findings and also recommendation of Working Group proposal addressing the 
above issues were initiated for Infrastructure Development Scheme for Mega 
Food Parks. The proposal for Mega Food P ark was placed before the EFC and 
the EFC in its meeting held on 19.03.2008 had recommended the Infrastructure 
Development Scheme for Mega Food Parks, which aims at providing state of 
art infrastructure along the value chain from farm gate to retailer‟s ou tlet with 
strong backward and forward linkages.  
The CCEA accorded approval on 11.09.2008 for setting up of 10 Mega 
Food Park Projects out of 30 projects envisaged in the 11 th Plan.  In other 
words although 11 th Plan commenced with effect from the year 2007, approval 
of the Scheme was received by the Ministry precisely after 1 year and 5 
months.  Also only 10 projects were approved in the first phase.   
  
The Mega Food Projects have long gestation periods as they  seek to 
address both forward and backward linkage and create adequate infrastructure 
facilities along the supply chain from the farms to retailer outlets. Various 
statutory clearances are necessary from the State Governments also. The 
statutory clearances  and land issues etc delay the project implementation 
considerably.  

 
 
 
The Ministry is vigorously monitoring the progress of implementation by 
holding periodical review meetings and taking follow up action to expedite the 
process. An online MIS system has b een developed under which the Project 
Management Consultants (PMCs) of the respective SPVs are required to 
upload data on monthly basis regarding the physical progress of constructions 
at site. The online MIS system also aims at providing links to various related 
schemes of the Central Govt. undertaken by various Ministries . The nature and 
dimension of the projects are quite enormous and the Ministry constantly 
making efforts to fine tune the process based on the learning experience the 
Ministry gains by wa y of implementation of the projects. To take care of the 
problems of SPV formation the minimum constituent members has been 
reduced from 5 to 3.  To ensure participation of Food processor(s) having a 
considerable say in the SPV  one of the member should be from food 
processing sector having a minimum net worth of ` 10.00 Cr. and must have at 
least 26% equity in the SPV . 
To take care of the situation of midway withdrawal of the SPVs from the 
approved projects, the Ministry is considering enhancement of EMD and to 
keep it in case of successful bidders as a performance guarantee amount. Also, 
the SPV in the event seeking withdrawal after receipt of the grant in aid, the 
amount along with interest accrued thereon needs to be refunded by the SPV. 
Based on the pr ogress made in the implementation , the Gov ernment 
have approved setting up of 5 more Mega Food Parks.                                              
[Vide Ministry of Food Processing Industries O.M. No. 6 -3/2010-Parl.          
dated 28 February, 2011] 

 
 
Comments of the Committee 
For Comments of the Committee please refer to Para No. 1. 15 of 
Chapter-I of this Report. 
 
 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI;                    BASUDEB ACHARIA 
22  March, 2011                    Chairman 
01 Chaitra, 1933 (Saka)                        Committee on Agriculture
            

 
 
APPENDIX 
COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE 
(2010-11) 
 
 
MINUTES OF THE TWENTY-FIRST SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE 
 
 The Committee sat on Tuesday, the 22 nd March, 2011 from 1515 hours 
to 1700 hours in Committee Room „D‟, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.  
 
PRESENT 
 
      Shri Basudeb Acharia - Chairman 
 
LOK SABHA 
 
2. Shri Narayansingh Amlabe 
3. Shri Jayant Chaudhary 
4. Smt. Shruti Choudhary 
5. Smt. Paramjit Kaur Gulshan 
6. Shri Naranbhai Kachhadia 
7. Shri Premdas 
8. Shri Hukmadeo Narayan Yadav 
 
RAJYA  SABHA 
 
9. Shri Shashi Bhusan Behera 
 
10. Shri Narendra Budania 
 
11. Shri Satyavrat Chaturvedi 
 
12. Shri Vinay Katiyar 
 
13. Shri Mohd. Ali Khan 
 
14. Shri Upendra Kushwaha 
 

 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Shri P.V.L.N. Murthy -        Director 
2. Shri P.C. Koul  -        Additional Director 
 
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the members to the Sitting of the 
Committee.  The Committee, thereafter, took up the following Draft Reports for 
consideration:  
 
*(i) *** *** ***  *** *** *** *** *** *** *** 
 
*(ii) *** *** ***  *** *** *** *** *** *** *** 
 
*(iii) *** *** ***  *** *** *** *** *** *** *** 
 
(iv) Action Taken Report on Observations/Recommendations contained in 
the Ninth Report of the Committee on Demands for Grants (2010 -2011) 
pertaining to the Ministry of Food Processing Industries. 
 
3. After some del iberations, the Committee adopted the draft Reports 
without any modifications.  The Committee then authorized the Chairman to 
finalise the above Draft Reports after getting them factually verified from the 
concerned Ministry/Department and present the same to the Parliament.  
 
*4 *** *** ***  *** *** *** *** *** *** *** 
 
*5 *** *** ***  *** *** *** *** *** *** *** 
 
*6 *** *** ***  *** *** *** *** *** *** *** 
 
The Committee then adjourned. 
 
 
 
*Matter not related to this Report.  
 
 

 
 
ANNEXURE 
 
(Vide Para 4 of Introduction of the Report) 
 
ANALYSIS OF ACTION TAKEN BY GOVERNMENT ON THE NINTH REPORT 
OF COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE (15TH LOK SABHA) 
  
 
(i)  Total number of Recommendations              13 
 
(ii) Observations/Recommendations which have been 
Accepted by the Government  
 
Para Nos. 1.23, 1.25, 1.26, 1.27, 1.28, 2.47, 2.48, 2.49,  
2.50 and 2.52  
 
Total           10 
 
Percentage                76.90% 
  
 
(iii) Observations/Recommendations which the Committee 
Do not desire to pursue in view of the Government‟s replies  
 
Para No. 2.51 
 
Total                  1
        
Percentage                  7.7% 
 
(iv) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies 
 of the Government have not been accepted by the Committee 
 
Para No.  1.24 
 
Total          1
   
 
Percentage                                  7.7% 
  
(v) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which  
 Final replies of the Government are still awaited 
 
Para No.  2.46 
 
Total            1
   
 
Percentage                  7.7%
   