1 
 
COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE 
(2013-2014) 
                  
         
FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA 
          
         
                                 
 
MINISTRY OF AGRICULTURE  
(DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE & CO-OPERATION) 
              
 
DEMANDS FOR GRANTS (2013-2014)  
 
{Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/ 
Recommendations contained in the Forty-Sixth Report  
of the Committee on Agriculture (2012-2013)} 
 
         
        
 
FIFTY SECOND REPORT 
  
 
         
               
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
December 2013/Agrahayana,1935 (Saka) 
 
 
52 

2 
FIFTY SECOND REPORT 
 
COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE 
(2013-2014) 
          
 
(FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
                  
         
MINISTRY OF AGRICULTURE  
(DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE & COOPERATION) 
         
                  
DEMANDS FOR GRANTS 
(2013-2014) 
  
         
(Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/ 
Recommendations contained in the Forty-Sixth Report of the  
Committee on Agriculture (2012-2013) 
 
           Presented to Lok Sabha on                             09.12.2013 
           Laid on the Table of Rajya Sabha on                           09.12.2013 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
                    
December, 2013/Agrahayana, 1935 (Saka) 
 


3 
COA No. …. 
 
 
         
         
         
         
         
         
 
         
         
        
Price:  Rs.  
         
         
         
         
         
 
 
 
         
     
                     
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
© 2013 By Lok Sabha Secretariat 
 
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of Business in Lok 
Sabha (Fourteenth Edition) and Printed by  
 

4 
<CONTENTS> 
                   PAGE 
  
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE………………………………….    (iii) 
         
 
INTRODUCTION……………………………………………………………    (v) 
 
CHAPTER I   Report …………………………………………     01 
 
CHAPTER II  Observations/Recommendations which have   
   been accepted by the Government ……………     20 
 
CHAPTER III  Observations/Recommendations which the 
   Committee do not desire to pursue in view 
   of the Government‟s replies …………………..    51 
 
CHAPTER IV  Observations/Recommendations in respect 
   of  which replies of the Government have  
   not been accepted by the Committee ………….    52 
 
CHAPTER V  Observations/Recommendations in respect of  
   which final replies of the Government are  
   still awaited …………………………………….   61 
 
                                    ANNEXURES 
 
I. State-wise Outstanding Utilisation Certificates  
 in respect of Grant No. 1  as on 30-04-2013 for  
the grant released upto  31-03-2011     64 
   
II. Year-wise Outstanding Utilisation Certificates 
 in respect of Grant No. 1  as on 09-05-2013 for 
 the grant released upto 31-03-2011     65 
 
III. Component details of the Central Sector Scheme 
 „Development and Strengthening of Infrastructure 
 Facilities for Production and Distribution of Quality Seeds‟  66 
 
IV.                All India Requirement (Demand) & Production 
 (Availability) of Certified / Quality Seed.     69 
 
V.  Commodity-wise/State-wise/Year-wise procurement of  
  Oilseeds, Pulses  & Cotton under Price Support Scheme 
 from 2006-2007 to 2011-2012.      70 
 
VI. Commodity-wise/State-wise/Year-wise procurement  
under Market Intervention Scheme (MIS) from 2001-02 to 2011-12 75 
 
APPENDICES 
I.  Minutes of the Fifth Sitting of the Committee    81   
held on 29 October, 2013.      
II.  Analysis of Action Taken by the Government on the   83 
Recommendations contained in the Forty-Sixth Report              
 (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) of the Committee on Agriculture  
(2012-2013).           
(i)

5 
COMPOSITION OF THE  COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE (2013-14) 
 
Shri Basudeb Acharia   -   Chairman 
 
MEMBERS 
 
LOK SABHA 
 
2.  Shri Narayansingh Amlabe 
3.  Shri Sanjay Singh Chauhan 
4.  Shri H.D. Devegowda 
5.  Smt. Ashwamedh Devi 
6.  Shri L. Raja Gopal 
7.  Smt. Paramjit Kaur Gulshan 
8.  Shri Anant Kumar Hegde 
9.  Shri Premdas  Katheria 
10.  Shri P. Kumar 
11.  Smt. Botcha Jhansi Lakshmi 
12.  Sardar Sukhdev Singh Libra 
13.  Dr. Jyoti Mirdha 
14.  Shri Kachhadia Naranbhai  
15.  Shri Devji M. Patel 
16.  Smt. Bhavana Gawali (Patil) 
17.  Shri Jagdish Singh Rana 
18.  Shri Rajaiah Siricilla 
19.  Shri Patel Kishanbhai V.  
20.  Dr. Vinay Kumar Pandey ‘Vinnu’ 
21.  Shri Hukumdeo Narayan Yadav 
  
 RAJYA SABHA 
 
22.  Shri N. Balaganga 
23.  Shri Satyavrat Chaturvedi 
24.  Smt. Mohsina Kidwai 
25.  Shri Dharmendra Pradhan 
26.  Dr. K.V.P. Ramachandra Rao 
27.  Shri Parshottam Khodabhai Rupala 
28.  Shri Rajpal Singh Saini 
29.  Shri S. Thangavelu 
30.  Shri Shivanand Tiwari 
31.  Shri Darshan Singh Yadav 
  
(iii) 

6 
SECRETARIAT  
 
1. Shri A. Louis Martin   - Joint Secretary 
2. Smt. Abha Singh Yaduvanshi - Director 
3. Shri C. Vanlalruata   - Deputy Secretary 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(iv) 

7 
  INTRODUCTION 
        I, the Chairman, Committee on Agriculture (2013 -14), having been authorized by 
the Committee to submit the Report on their behalf, present this Fifty -second Report on 
action taken by the Government on the Observations/Recom mendations contained in 
the Forty -sixth Report of the Committee on Agriculture (201 -2-13) on Demands for 
Grants (2013-2014) pertaining to the Ministry of Agriculture (Department of Agriculture 
and Cooperation). 
 
2. The Forty -sixth Report of the Committee w as presented to Lok Sabha on                
23 April, 2013 and laid on the Table of Rajya Sabha on 25 April, 2013.  The Action 
Taken Notes on the Report were received on 16 July, 2013. 
 
3. The Report was considered and adopted by the Committee at their Sit ting held 
on 29 October, 2013. 
 
4. An analysis of the action taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in the Forty-sixth Report of the Committee is 
given in Appendix-II.  
  
 
 
             
                                                                                          
NEW DELHI;                   BASUDEB ACHARIA 
03 December, 2013                              Chairman, 
12 Agrahayana, 1935 (Saka)                                    Committee on Agriculture 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
(v) 
  

8 
CHAPTER - I 
REPORT 
This Report of the Committee on Agriculture deals with the action taken by the 
Government on the Recommendations contained in the Forty -sixth Report of the 
Committee on Demands for Grants (2013 -14) pertaining to the Ministry of Agriculture 
(Department of A griculture and Cooperation) which was presented to Lok Sabha on         
23 April, 2013 and laid on the Table of Rajya Sabha on 25 April, 2013.   
 
 
1.2 The Government have furnished Action Taken Replies in respect of all the             
26 Observations/Recommendations contained in the Report.  These have been 
categorised as under: 
(i) Observations/Recommendations that have been accepted by the 
Government : 
Recommendation Nos. 1.4, 2.8, 2.9, 2.10, 2.11, 2.12, 3.23, 3.24, 3.25, 
3.27, 4.51, 4.53, 4 .54, 4.55, 4.58, 4.59, 4.61 and 
4.64          (Chapter II – 18) 
 
(ii) Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to 
pursue in view of the Government‟s reply:  
Recommendation Nos. Nil          (Chapter III – Nil) 
 
(iii) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which action taken replies 
of the Government have not been accepted by the Committee  
Recommendation Nos 3.26, 3.28, 4.52, 4.60, 4.62 and 4.63. 
(Chapter IV – 6) 
 
(iv) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which final replies of the 
Government are still awaited.   
Recommendation Nos. 4.56 and 4.57         (Chapter V – 2) 
 
1.3 The Committee trust that utmost importance would be given to 
implementation of the Observations/Recommendations accepted by the 
Government.  In cases where it is not possible for the Government to implement 

9 
the Recommendations in letter and spirit for any reason, the matter should be 
reported to the Committee with reasons for non -implementation.  The Committee 
desire that further Action Taken Notes on the Observations/Recommendations 
contained in Chapter -I and Chapter -V of this Report be furnished to them a t an 
early date.  
1.4 The Committee will now deal with the action taken by the Government on some 
of the Recommendations in the succeeding paragraphs. 
TWELFTH PLAN DOCUMENT  
(Recommendation Para No. 3.26)                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                
 
1.5 The Committee were exasperated to be apprised  that all agencies concerned 
with finalization of the Twelfth Plan Document had not paid any heed to the advice 
contained in their Thirty-fourth Report on Demands for Grants (2012-13) for streamlining 
the planning process as the extant process is riddled w ith the need for obtaining multi -
agency clearances which are time consuming.  The National Development Council 
approved the Twelfth Plan on 27 December, 2012, yet it had not seen the light of the 
day.   
The Committee also took an adverse view of the concer ned agencies taking 
refuge that extant planning process as well thought of and one that has stood the test of 
time even after the representatives of the Planning Commission had confessed during 
the Oral Evidence that even during the Tenth and Eleventh Five  Year Plan, there had 
been remarkable delay in their finalization, which had a negative impact on not only the 
new Schemes but the prospects of ongoing Schemes were also severely hampered. 
Having been a witness to the detrimental effects of the prevalent s ystem in terms of 

10 
reduced outlays and staggering of timelines, the Committee had recommended that all 
the concerned should break free from the shackles of the past and streamline this time 
consuming process and also ensure compliance to the guidelines of t he extant planning 
process, and thereby aid the planning process in getting rid of its systemic ills. 
 
1.6 The Government in their Action Taken Note, have submitted that there is a 
standard procedure to finalize the Five Year Plan which starts with constit ution of 
Working Groups of various sectors and ends with approval by NDC. The schemes as 
have been decided to be continued are required to go through the process of obtaining 
fresh in-principle approval of Planning Commission.  Thereafter, these schemes ar e put 
up before EFC/CCEA for approval as required in the guidelines after which, the 
schemes are implemented in the revised format, as approved.  It may however be 
stated that the schemes being implemented during the Eleventh Five Year Plan 
continue to be implemented as per extant guidelines till EFC/CCEA approvals are 
obtained.  This ensures that ongoing schemes are not affected by the approval process. 
1.7 Based on their experience during the course of the Eleventh Plan period, 
the Committee had witnessed  first hand, the systemic weaknesses in the present 
planning process which being riddled with multi -agency clearances was time 
consuming.  This ultimately resulted in staggering of timelines and under -
utilization of funds, ultimately reducing the efficacy of all Schemes of the 
Government.  To save the Twelfth Plan Document from the same fate, the 
Committee had recommended for streamlining the extant planning process.  
However, much to their dis may, the Department have sought refuge behind their 

11 
stock reply about there being a standard procedure to finalize the Five Year Plan 
which starts with Constitution of Working Groups of various sectors and ends 
with approval by National Development Council (NDC).  The Committee are also 
not at all happy with the reply that all the Schemes being implemented during the 
Eleventh Five Year Plan continue to be implemented as per extant guidelines till 
Expenditure Finance Committee/Cabinet Committee on Economic Affairs, 
approvals are obtained.  The Committee also take strong umbrage to the 
Department’s assertion that the procedure being followed in the absence of 
formal Plan and requisite clearances/approvals ensures that ongoing Schemes 
are not affected by the approval process.  The Department has conveniently 
forgotten that during the Twelfth Plan the Government wants to drastically prune 
down the number of schemes to usher better efficiency in implementation and 
financial management with more than a third of the duration of Twelfth Plan being 
over, the Committee can draw the ir own conclusions about the in action of the 
Government towards systemic improvement in the development delivery system.   
The Department in the past, on being queried about the under-utilization of funds, 
non-achievement of physical targets have always attributed the same to delay in 
approval of the Plan Document. The Committee, therefore, reiterate their earlier 
recommendation that all concerned agencies streamline the time consuming 
process. 
 
 
 

12 
FINANCIAL ALLOCATION AND UTILIZATION DURING FIRST YEAR OF THE 
TWELFTH PLAN 
(Recommendation Para No 3.28)  
 
1.8 The Committee were constrained to note that the financial performance of the 
Department during the first fiscal of the Twelfth Plan was reminiscent of the problems plaguing 
the system of planning and implementation in previous years. During the year 2012-13 against a 
proposal of Rs.49,674.34 crore, the allocation by the Planning Commission as reflected in BE 
for 2012-13 was a mere *Rs.20,308.00 crore.  Further, due to the tardy utilization of funds by 
implementing agencies during the first two quarters, the RE was curtailed to Rs.17867.32 crore.  
The actual expenditure was approximately ^Rs.13478.19 crore (till 31 December, 2012).  The 
Department attributed this to reduction at BE in funds sought by RKVY.  Though the Department 
sought Rs.25,000.00 crore, they were allocated only Rs.9217.00 crore as BE.  This was further 
pruned at RE to Rs.8400.00 crore.  The Committee had, therefore, urged all the agencies 
concerned to introspect at their working, identi fy their weak areas, work on them and thereby 
ensure a turnaround in the next Fiscal so that the variation between proposals, allocation and 
utilization is negated to the extent possible. 
 
1.9 In their Action Taken Note, the Government have stated that the outlay of the 
Department for Fiscal 2012 -13 was reduced to Rs. 17867.32 crore at RE stage. Out of this, 
Department utilized an amount of **Rs.17690.19 crore which works out to# 99% of the allocated 
amount.  In respect of RKVY, entire allocated amount at RE stage has been utilized. To reduce 
the variation between allocation and expenditure, State Governments were exhorted by the 
Department at various levels to increase their pace of utilization o f funds, submission of 
Utilization Certificates and approval of projects under the schemes. The concern of the 
Committee has been noted. 
 
 
* At the time of factual verification of the Report DAC updated this figure to Rs.20,208.00 
crore as on 31.10.2013.  
^ At the time of factual verification of the Report DAC updated  this figure to Rs.14238.46 
crore as on 31.10.2013.   
** At the time of factual verification of the Report DAC updated this figure to Rs.17730.72 
crore as on 31.10.2013. 
# At the time of factual verification of the Report DAC updated this figure to 99.24% as on 
31.10.2013. 
  

13 
 
1.10 The Committee express their serious concern over that fact that a high 
priority Department like DAC, continues to witness curtailing of BE funds at RE 
stage due to tardy utilization of funds by implementing agencies i.e. State 
Governments and Union Territory Administrations during the first two quarters of 
the Fiscal.  Rather than just noting the concern of the Committee and drawing 
solace from having  spent 99% of their RE allocation the Department tackle this 
perennial problem in right earnest and with the alacrity it deserves.  The 
implementing agencies need to be apprised in no uncertain terms that procedural 
delays on their part are hampering the p rogress of Schemes, which ultimately 
proves detrimental to the overall progress of the Agriculture sector firstly in their 
own administered areas and finally culminates in the same holding true at the 
National level. The Committee would appreciate being in formed of the efforts of 
the Department in this regard at the earliest. 
NATIONAL FOOD SECURITY MISSION (NFSM) 
(Recommendation Para No. 4.52) 
 
1.11 The Committee having noted with concern that the malaise afflicting the physical 
achievements against the target set under NFSM had continued unabated during the 
years 2011 -12 and 2012 -13 and on being apprised by the Department that this 
mismatch was due t o non-receipt of report from States had deprecated this delay as it 
hampered the monitoring and evaluation of the Scheme and ultimately delayed the 
initiation of corrective measures that would ensure increase the viability of the National 
Food Security Mis sion. Also, not buying the argument of the Department that rather 
than looking at individual components, the overall picture should be looked into, they 

14 
had recommended that all implementing agencies undertake an in -depth analysis into 
the performance of i ndividual components of this Scheme and thereby ensure that the 
existing gap between achievements and the targets set gets bridged in quickly. 
1.12 In their Action Taken Note, the Government have stated that for the fiscal year 
2012-13, achievement against  targets under demonstrations is *92.19%, cropping 
based trainings ^224%, seed distribution $80.94%, IPM #82.77% and machineries 
@134.24%.  States and implementing agencies are regularly pursued for submission of 
component-wise progress reports as also effective implementation of programmes. 
Progress of implementation is also monitored through correspondence, constant 
dialogue, monitoring visits and in NFSM EC and GC meetings.  States have also been 
asked to complete process of concurrent evaluation of the scheme.  ! 
 
* At the time of factual verification of the Report DAC updated this figure to 96.08% as on  
    31.10.2013.  
^ At the time of factual verification of the Report DAC updated this figure to 227.05% as on  
   31.10.2013. 
$ At the time of factual verification of the Report DAC updated this figure to 81.23% as on  
   31.10.2013. 
# At the time of factual verification of the Report DAC updated this figure to 87.98% as on  
   31.10.2013. 
@ At the time of factual verification of the Report DAC updated this figure to 149.12%  as on  
    31.10.2013. 
! At the time of factual verification of the Report DAC indicated that s o far, state of Andhra 
Pradesh, Rajasthan and Tamil  Nadu have submitted Report of Concurrent Evaluation. 
  

15 
 
1.13 The Committee are pained at the rather casual reply of the Government 
towards their instant recommendation for timely furnishing of component -wise 
progress reports by the States/Union Territories under the National Food Security 
Mission (NFSM).  They also note that the nodal Department have till date not been 
successful in being able to ensure timely submission of data.  What further 
aggrieves the Committee is that in the absence of data of individ ual components, 
overall data for the physical parameters of the Scheme is being accepted by the 
nodal Department, as they are of the view that rather than looking at individual 
components, the overall picture should be looked into.  Deprecating this rather  
callous reply of the Department as it clouds the authenticity of the data received 
from the implementing agencies, and ultimately would lead to compromising of 
the final data, the Committee recommend that the Central Government start 
insisting upon the St ates/Union Territories to firstly collect data of individual 
components of the physical achievements under NFSM and then furnish the 
same to the Centre in the stipulated time.  This would ensure timely furnishing of 
accurate data that would help in a thoro ugh analysis of this pivotal Scheme and 
thus increase its viability. 
 
OILSEEDS PRODUCTION UNDER INTEGRATED SCHEME OF OILSEEDS, 
PULSES, OILPALM AND MAIZE 
(Recommendation Para Nos. 4.56 and 4.57) 
 
1.14 Noting the yawning gap between demonstration average yield and local average 
obtained in field in Oilseeds Production Programme being implemented under ISOPOM 
from 1 April, 2004 in the states of Andhra Pradesh, Bihar, Chhattisgarh, Gujarat, 

16 
Haryana, Karnataka, Madhya Pradesh, Maharashtra, Orissa, Punjab, Rajasthan, Tamil 
Nadu, Uttar Pradesh and West Bengal and expressing their concern over the fluctuating 
trend in production of oil seeds, due to the vagaries of climate and the yields as well, the 
Committee had impressed upon the Government to look into these areas urgently and 
ensure that oilseeds production and productivity receives a shot in the arm, as this 
would enable to Country to attain self sufficiency in oils, whilst reducing the nation‟s 
import bil l and also help boost the production of animal fodder. Furthermore,  
deprecating the repetitive constraints in oilseeds production as listed by the 
Government, the Committee had urged the Government to synergize various 
programmes being implemented in the Agriculture Sector to ensure that benefits from 
Schemes are interlinked and constraints in oil seeds production are overcome.  They 
had further desired the Government embark upon an action plan as suggested, post 
haste and intimat e the Committee of the same.  As efforts to tap potential from Tree 
Borne Oilseeds (TBO) have not yielded the desired results, the Committee had also 
desired focused attention towards this nascent area. 
1.15 The Government in their Action Taken Note have s ubmitted that *they are  in the 
process of finalizing the National Mission on Oilseeds & Oil Palm (NMOOP) for 
increasing production/productivity of oilseeds and area expansion under oil palm/Tree 
Born Oilseeds (TBOs) for augmenting the domestic availabilit y of vegetable oils in the 
country.  The broad strategy would include: 
 
 
* At the time of factual verification of the Report DAC intimated that NMOOP has been finalized.   

17 
 Strategies for yield improvement in districts with low yield high spread and to 
explore the possibilities of area expansion in districts with low spread high yield; 
 Cluster demonstrations on improved production technologies of oilseeds 
including use of micro-nutrients, gypsum; etc. 
 Augmenting production and availability of certified/q uality seeds with emphasis 
on seed treatment; 
 Enhancing irrigation through Sprinklers/Rain -guns/water carrying pipes and 
pump-sets; 
 Encouraging cultivation of oilseeds in areas of low wheat  productivity , rice 
fallows and intercropping with coarse cereals, pulses; 
 Promotion of Sunflower cultivation in Zaid season; 
 Capacity building through Frontline demonstrations/ Farmers Field 
Demonstration in Pest & Disease Management; 
 Procurement tie-up through NAFED. 
They have further stated that NAFED would be involv ed for procurement of 
Oilseed Crops to ensure that the benefit of MSP reaches the farmers.  As regard, 
harnessing potential of TBOs, TRIFED a multi State Cooperative Society would be 
involved to facilitate the procurement of TBOs, which are largely collect ed by the 
Tribals. National Mission on Oilseeds & Oil Palm would encourage/ provide linkage for 
dovetailing of resources from other schemes like Mahatma Gandhi National Rural 
Employment Guarantee Act (MGNREGA), National Mission on Sustainable Agriculture 
(NMSA), National Mission on Agriculture Extension & Technology (NMAET) and 
National Food Security Mission (NFSM) for enhancing production of oilseeds in the 
country. Efforts would be made by National Mission on Oilseeds & Oil Palm (NMOOP) 
and NFSM to promot e inter/mix -cropping of oilseeds and pulses under similar agro -
climatic conditions. # 
 
 
 
# At the time of factual verification DAC  stated that  mission containing support for opening of  
   procurement centres and operational charges and support to TRIFED for collection and  
   procurement for TBOs has been approved by CCEA.  The details of guidelines of Mission,which  
  includes linkage of resources from other schemes, is being prepared.   

18 
1.16 The Committee are highly disappointed to note that the Department have 
not yet # finalized the National Mission on Oilseeds and Palm (NMOOP) which 
was intended for increasing productivity/productivity of oilseeds and extra 
expansion under Oil Palm/Tree Borne Oilseeds (TBOs) for augmenting the 
domestic availability of vegetable oils in the Country. The inordinate delay in 
finalisation of this Scheme of immense national importance is a sad 
manifestation of the delay in finalisation of the Twelfth Plan.  The Committee 
wonder how many other such Schemes of national interest would be similar ly 
stuck for want of necessary approvals/clearances, thereby, derailing the 
developmental process.  Keeping in view the present deficiency in domestic 
oilseeds production, due to which the nation has to resort to costly imports to 
cater to the domestic nee ds, the Committee urge the Department to immediately 
push for the finalization of the NMOOP and also work towards speedy multi -
agency clearances so that the  Scheme sees the light of the day without any 
further delay.   
SUPPORT TO STATE EXTENSION PROGRAMMES FOR EXTENSION REFORMS 
(Recommendation Para No. 4.58)  
 
1.17 Having noted that manpower including subject matter specialists, were not be 
employed, as per sanctioned strength, impacting the implementation of the Scheme.  
The Committee had accordingly reco mmended the removal of systemic bottlenecks 
retarding the progress of this Scheme which aims at making extension system farmer  
______________________________________________________________________  
# At the time of factual verification of the Report DAC intimated that NMOOP has been finalized.   
 

19 
driven and farmer accountable by way of new institutional arrangements for technology 
dissemination during the course of the Twelfth Plan period and thereby ensure optimum 
utilization of funds that would directl y lead to increased dissemination of technology to 
farmer. 
1.18 The Government in their ATRs have stated that the Centrally Sponsored Scheme 
“Support to State Extension Programmes for Extension Reforms”, popularly known as 
ATMA Scheme was launched in May, 2005 and aimed at making extension system 
farmer driven and farmer accountable by way of institutional arrangements for 
technology dissemination in the form of an Agricultural Technology Management 
Agency (ATMA) at district level to operationalize Extensio n Reforms. The detail of year -
wise budgetary position under the Scheme is given below: - 
                                                                                                  (Rs. in Crore) 
Year B.E. R.E. Release 
2005-06 45.00 45.00 43.44 
2006-07 75.00 50.00 48.27 
2007-08 230.00 150.00 155.81 
2008-09 298.00 198.00 193.01 
2009-10 298.00 188.98 178.59 
2010-11 250.00 220.00 240.28 
2011-12 500.00 458.60 434.02 
2012-13 600.00 504.13 508.07 
2013-14 550.00 - -* 
 
Above table reveals that public investment in Agricultural Extension by Central 
Government has increased from Rs.43.44 crore during the year 2005 -06 to Rs.508.07 
Crore in 2012 -13 under the Scheme. Since modification of the Scheme in the year 
2010, the incr ease has been more substantial. Amount released to the States during 
last 3 years is nearly 100% of the Revised Estimates.  Expenditure incurred by the 
States during these 3 years has also been keeping pace with the releases by the 
centre.  On the basis of experience gained during the implementation of Extension 
 
* At the time of factual verification of the Report DAC furnished  the figure of Rs. 272.94 crore as 
on 31.10.2013.   

20 
Reforms Scheme from 2005 to 2009 and after consulting the State Governments, the 
Government of India has revised the ATMA Scheme in the year 2010 -11. The revised 
scheme provides for dedicated specialist and functionary support to take-up training and 
extension initiatives at State, District and Block level. Besides this, improvemen t in 
extension outreach right down to the village level was expected to be achieved through 
Farmers Friends. 12,276 posts have been filled up as against 18,326 sanctioned.  
There is a short fall due to the fact that there are administrative delays in the S tates as 
the process involves approval of the Finance Department/ Cabinet of the State 
Government.  If contractual posts are filled up through outsourcing, bidding process also 
takes time. Further, the current emoluments paid to ATMA functionaries are rath er low 
in current scenario especially in the case of Subject Matter Specialists (SMSs) at the 
block level.  This has led to some States actually not finding any takers for these posts.  
In some other States, there is attrition due to low emoluments paid to  SMSs.  
Enhancement in emoluments is under consideration.  #  The States are also being 
pursued continuously to clear the backlog vacancies.  Regular follow-up has been taken 
up with States to accelerate implementation of Modified ATMA Scheme through Review  
Meetings, Conference/ Workshops and field visits.  ** In the last 9 months 100 districts 
have been extensively traversed down to village level.   As a result of regular and 
concerted efforts, a record State Extension Work Plans (SEWPs) of ^30 States for 
@613 districts across the country were approved and an ~ expenditure of Rs.544.01 
crore reported during 2012 -13 (excluding expenditure from 6 States, the Reports of 
which are still awaited). 
 
____________________________________________________________________________ 
 # At the time of factual verification of the Report DAC stated that EFC for National Mission on 
Agriculture Extension  and Technology for 12th plan has been approved on 19th July, 2013. 
 ** At the time of factual verification of the Report DAC stated that during last one year 108. 
 ^ At the time of factual verification of the Report DAC revised this figure to 29 as on 31.10.2013.   
@ At the time of factual verification of the Report DAC updated this figure to 628 as on 31.10.2013.   
~ At the time of factual verification DAC  stated that amount of Rs. 272.94 crore has been rele ased 
during 2013-14 (upto 31.10.2013) against BE of Rs. 550.00 crore.  
  

21 
1.19 Taking note of various administrative and procedural infirmities, which 
have impacted the implementation of the Agricultural Technology Management 
Agency (ATMA) to a very large extent, the Committee had recommended 
corrective measures in their Forty -sixth Report.  They find that some corrective 
steps have been initiated by the Government which will affect positively the 
performance of the Scheme.  Unfortunately, one measure which would impact the 
performance of ATMA in a significant way i.e. the enhancement  of emoluments of 
Subject Matter Specialists (SMSs)  is still under consideration.  The Committee 
would appreciate an expeditious decision in the matter so that further attrition of 
manpower at this level in the ATMA mechanism is checked. 
 
SUPPORT TO STATE EXTENSION PROGRAMMES FOR EXTENSION REFORMS 
(Recommendation Para No. 4.60)  
 
1.20 Hugely perturbed to know that formulation of District Level Plans were being held 
up as the District Magistrate being preoccupied with other work is unable to Chair the 
meeting of Agricultural Technology Management Agency (ATMA) which is the farmer 
driven institutional arrangement at district level for dissemination of farm technology and 
knowledge and this was affecting upstream as delay in finalization of District Plans,  
ultimately further delay finalization of State Extension Work Plans which then block  
release of funds for extension activities. The Committee had recommended that if the 
District Magistrate was hard pressed for time, either the Chairmanship of ATMA be 
entrusted to some other senior official or otherwise the District Magistrate be duty bound 
to Chair the Sitting of ATMA.  They had further desired that elected representatives of 
the people be also co-opted in the working body of ATMA to ensure accountability of the 

22 
executive and also to ensure that extension system is truly farmer driven and  farmer 
accountable. 
1.21 The Government in their Action Taken Note, have informed that convergence 
among the developmental departments is sine qua non  for effective implementation of 
agricultural extension activities.  In particular, all Agriculture &  allied departments and 
associated offices like the District Administrative Centre, Agriculture Marketing Board, 
lead bank etc. all have to work together for effective delivery of extension services.  
District Magistrate is associated with all such departm ents in one way or the other.  
Hence, it was decided to have District Magistrate/Collector as the Chairman of ATMA 
Governing Body.  It has also been provided in the Guidelines for various schemes such 
as National Food Security Mission, National Project on Management of Soil Health & 
Fertility that their implementation should be done through ATMA. In case of RKVY also, 
the State Governments have to base their District Agriculture Plans on Strategic 
Research and Extension Plans developed under ATMA.  The Stat es have been 
requested that all these and other related schemes should also be discussed in the 
ATMA Governing Body Meeting to be held under the chairmanship of District 
Magistrate/Collector.     In case of such a scenario of limited meetings on Agricultur e, 
presence of DM/Collector can be better ensured.  In any case, there is a provision in the 
Scheme Guidelines that the States may choose anyone else as the Chairman of 
Governing Body of ATMA but such an officer should not be below the rank of CEO, Zila 
Parishad / Additional District Collector in place of District Collector. In order to ensure 
accountability of the executives, ATMA Governing Board also includes one Farmer 
Representative, one Horticulture Farmer, one Livestock Farmer and Representatives of 
women SHG & SC/ST Farmers. All these farmers are nominated to the Governing 
Board by the District Farmers Advisory Committee. The Scheme has a provision of 
constitution of Farmers Advisory Committees (FACs) at State Districts and Block levels 
comprising a g roup of farmers to advise and provide Field level inputs to the 
administrative bodies. A total of *5913 such Committees have been constituted in the 
country.   
* At the time of factual verification of the Report DAC updated this figure to 5933 as on 31.10.2013. 

23 
1.22 Notwithstanding, the elaborate response of the Department, it is an open 
secret that ATMA has failed to serve its purpose and the single most important 
factor for its dormancy is the pre -occupation of its Chairman, the District 
Magistrate/Collector with here/his responsibilities, which are several. The 
Committee, therefore, strongly feel that the time has finally dawned for a revision 
of the guidelines for ATMA especially regarding the provision dealing with the 
Chairmanship of ATMA by the co ncerned District Magistrate/Collector. As a first 
step it ought to be made mandatory that ATMA would meet at least a specific 
number of times in a year.  If due to paucity of time, a District Magistrate is unable 
to Chair the meeting of ATMA, then an alter nate authority to Chair such meetings 
has also to be codified so that these mandatory meetings are held even in her/his 
absence.  The Committee desire that necessary changes in the guidelines for 
ATMA be accordingly made without any further loss of time.  The reply of the 
Government is silent on the recommendation about the elected representatives 
being co-opted on ATMA.  The Committee consider the reply of the Government 
incomplete to that extent and desire that the considered views of the Government 
in this aspect be furnished to them without any further delay. 
NATIONAL PROJECT ON MANAGEMENT OF SOIL HEALTH AND FERTILITY 
(Recommendation Para No. 4.62) 
 
1.23 Noting with concern that out of 1292.22 lakhs land holdings, only 505 lakh  soil 
health cards had been issued.  Further, Geo -referenced soil fertility maps of only 118 
districts had been completed and against the target of 242 static/mobile Soil Testing 
Labs, only 105 were in position, the Committee had directed the Government to  embark 
upon the task of firstly obtaining the Soil Health status by the three pronged strategy of 

24 
issue of Soil Health Cards/digital soil maps/increasing the number of Static/Mobile Soil 
Testing Laboratories/development of Mini Soil Testing Kit and then p utting in place the 
remedial measures post haste.  They had also desired that the testing should be 
comprehensive both in terms of Macro/Micro nutrients and this information should not 
be confined to District Headquarters, but be readily available at the f arm level and the 
process of improving soil health be initiated once this exercise is completed.  The 
Committee had further desired that the process of soil testing be completed across the 
Country during the next two fiscals.   
 
1.24 In their Action Taken Note, the Government have stated that as per latest 
information received from Indian Institute of Soil Science, digital soil maps of 152 
districts out of 171 districts have been completed.   This component on preparation of 
digitized maps is proposed to be  continued in Twelfth Plan period to cover remaining 
districts. Similarly, setting up/strengthening of soil testing laboratories is proposed to be 
continued in Twelfth Plan period. Provision for soil testing kits has been incorporating in 
the Twelfth Plan proposal @ Rs.15,000 per kit subject to the approval of National 
Mission for Sustainable Agriculture. The Soil Testing Laboratories being sanctioned 
under NPMSH&F include comprehensive testing facilities both for macro and micro 
nutrients.  Most of the sta tes are using innovative methods of making information 
available to farmers through internet & SMS, apart from conventional methods like 
through extension staff and by post. Soil testing is an ongoing process which is to be 
repeated every 3-4 years and the re is no fixed time period to complete this activity.  In 
addition, there are other methods available like digital soil maps to give soil fertility 

25 
status and package of practices developed by State Governments also provide fertilizer 
recommendations. 
1.25 The instant recommendation of the Committee was made with full 
awareness that soil testing is an ongoing process which is to be repeated every 
three-four years and apart from Soil Health Cards, there are other methods 
available like digital Soil Maps to g ive Soil Fertility Status and package of 
practices developed by State Governments also provide fertilizer 
recommendations.  But this all warrants complete and comprehensive coverage 
of the entire Country once and at the soonest.  Once that is done and a da ta base 
is available to the Government and the other stakeholders, all the other ways and 
means which have been detailed by the Department can be utilised as follow -up 
measures.  The Committee not only recommend that the Government get 
completed the process of soil testing across the Country in a stipulated time but 
also desire that Soil Health Cards be issued to all farmers without wasting time as 
these cards would be under the direct possession of the farmers, whereas the 
digital soil maps would be restricted to Government agencies. 
OUTSTANDING UTILIZATION CERTIFICATES (UCs) 
(Recommendation Para No. 4.63) 
 
1.26 The Committee while applauding the efforts of the Department for their concerted 
efforts leading to substantial reduction of pending Utilization Certificates from 1306 as 
on 1 April, 2012 to 201 at that point of time had recommended that since the pendency 
was reflective of bad accounting and financial management being practiced by State 
Governments/Union Territories, necessary correctives needed t o be put in place as 
ultimately it was they who had to be on the consequences.  The Committee had also                    
desired the Government to ensure that all pending Utilization Certificates got eliminated 
in the current Plan period. 
 
1.27 In their Action Taken Note, the Government have submitted that as on 30 April 
2013, 187 UCs for amount of Rs.416.50 crores are outstanding. (The state wise and 
year wise break up of the 187 UCs pending as on 30 April, 2013 is enclosed as                  

26 
Annexures-I & I I).  Principal Accounts Office, Ministry of Agriculture has taken various 
steps to liquidate the outstanding Utilisation Certificates.  The special UCs Audit have 
been conducted for the various States which has yielded tremendous results.  Pr incipal 
Accounts Office is monitoring status of UCs rigorously for all the Divisions and had 
directed PAOs not to make any payment without submission of the UCs by the 
Divisions.  Divisions have also responded positively and submitted many UCs and only 
187 UCs were pending as on 30 April, 2013. Out of these 187 UCs, only 02 UCs for 
RKVY Rs. 235.98 crores are pending.  All efforts are being made to liquidate the 
remaining UCs.  RKVY Division has also been requested to liquidate the outstanding 
UCs before 31 March, 2013. Further, special UCs Audit of the States/Implementing 
Agencies against whom more number of UCs are outstanding shall be conducted to 
liquidate the UCs during special audit itself.  
 
1.28 From the reply furnished by the Department, it is eviden t that action is 
ongoing to ensure liquidation of outstanding utilization certificates.  Principal 
Accounts Office of the Ministry is monitoring status of UCs rigorously for all the 
Divisions and has directed PAOs not to make any payment without submission  of 
UCs by the Divisions.  These steps have resulted in reduction in the number of 
pending UCs being reduced to 187 as on 30 April, 2013.  Moreover, out of these 
187 pending UCs amounting to Rs. 416.50 crore only two UCs of RKVY account 
for staggering sum of Rs. 235.98 crore. Appreciating the efforts put in by the 
Department, the Committee desire that they continue with their good work and 
motivate all States/Union Territories to furnish UCs of past utilization, so as to 
ensure liquidation of all outstanding utilization certificates at the soonest.  
 
  

27 
CHAPTER-II 
 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE 
GOVERNMENT 
 
IMPLEMENTATION OF COMMITTEE’S RECOMMENDATION 
(Recommendation Para No. 1.4)  
 
The Committee note that the Action Taken Replies regarding the action taken by 
the Government on the Observations/Recommendations contained in the Thirty -fourth 
Report of the Committee were furnished by the Government within the stipulated three 
months.  T he Committee further note that in pursuance of Direction 73 -A of Directions 
by the Speaker, Lok Sabha, the Minister concerned is required to make a Statement on 
the status of implementation of Observations/Recommendations contained in the 
Original Reports of the Committee within six months of their presentation to the 
Parliament.  However, the Committee are deeply perturbed to note that the Minister 
concerned did not make the Statement under Direction 73 -A in the context of Thirty -
fourth Report of the Commi ttee within the stipulated time.  The Committee take strong 
exception to the failure of the Ministry time and again to adhere to stipulations laid down 
in Direction 73-A in respect of Statements to be made by the Minister concerned.  They 
expect that there will not be a repeat of such lapses in future.  The analysis of the action 
taken by the Government reveals that 65% of Recommendations have been 
implemented.  29% Recommendations have not been implemented and 6% of 
Recommendations are in various stages of  implementation. The Committee desire the 
Government to take conclusive action in respect of the eight Recommendations 
commented upon in their Thirty -eighth Action Taken Report and furnish further action 
taken notes to the Committee expeditiously. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
In respect of Statement to be made by Hon‟ble AM under Direction 73 -A, it is 
stated that Parliament was not in session during the months of September and October, 

28 
hence the Statement could be made by the Hon‟ble AM only during Winter Sess ion of 
Parliament.  The Committee‟s direction to avoid repeat of such delays in future is noted 
and would be complied with.  
Regarding further action taken notes on 38 th report of the Committee, it is 
mentioned here that the required number of copies of En glish and Hindi versions of 
ATN were duly submitted by this Department to the Lok Sabha Secretariat on 31 st 
October, 2012. 
[Ministry of Agriculture (Department of Agriculture & Co-operation), 
                                  OM No.6-3/2013-B&A dated the 15th July, 2013]  
 
  
CHALLENGES CONFRONTING INDIAN AGRICULTURE 
(Recommendation Para No. 2.8)  
 
Land degradation, deteriorating Soil Health, shrinking land base, dwindling water 
resources, adverse impact of climate change, shortage of farm labour and increasing 
costs of inputs, declining returns and uncertainties associated with volatility in 
international markets are some of the challenges besetting Indian Agriculture. Some of 
these have been there in the past and some are recent phenomenon.  However,  these 
challenges pose a real and serious threat to our farming community and the Nation as a 
whole too.  Enhancing public sector investment particularly in research and technology 
transfer, institutional reforms towards delivery, conservation of land wate r and biological 
resources, development of rain -fed agriculture, efficient use of water, timely and 
adequate availability of inputs, developing efficient marketing infrastructure and 
increasing flow of credit particularly to the small and marginal farmers,  are some of the 
areas requiring focussed policy interventions so as to ensure food security 
commitments. 
 In spite of the fact that India being an agrarian dominant economy, the 
Committee have observe that this sector is not getting its due from the planners in terms 
of public investment, which with the advancing years is on the decline.  Further, though 
the S chemes being implemented by the Central and State Governments seem well 
meaning on paper, yet their implementation on the ground has left a lot to be desired.  

29 
And unless the gap between formulation and implementation is narrowed down 
comprehensively, Indi an agriculture will unfortunately continue to be stuck in a 
quagmire. 
 The burgeoning population too is posing a serious challenge to our aim of food 
security to all.  Thus, the need of the hour is to increase productivity as well as ensure 
viability, sust ainability and induce profitability in this vital sector.  The Committee, 
therefore, recommend that all agencies entrusted in functioning of the agriculture sector 
across the length and breadth of the Country work in unison and tandem from now on 
and not w ork at cross -purposes as is evidently in vogue now.  If the implementing 
agencies justly keep the farming community at the epicentre of all their activities and 
then start their formulation of Schemes, a turnaround in the fortunes of this Sector 
would sure ly be on the anvil. In addition, a judicious blend of modern scientific 
techniques along with traditional agricultural practices would act as a fillip. Lastly, the 
Committee are sanguine that if concerned parties pay heed to their recommendation, 
the Natio n would be able to tactfully confront these challenges and successfully 
overcome them. 
Reply of the Government 
1. DAC assesses the requirement of fertilizers of all the States before each cropping 
season in consultation with State Government and Department of  Fertilizers.  After the 
requirement of various fertilizers is assessed, statement indicating month -wise 
requirement of various fertilizers is prepared by the States, which is forwarded to 
Department of Fertilizers (DOF).  On the basis of this month wise r equirement, 
Department of Fertilizers prepare monthly supply/allocation plan for each State and 
arranges for supply of fertilizers accordingly. 
 
2. In addition, DAC and Department of Fertilizers (DOF) jointly organise weekly audio -
visual conference with all the States to monitor availability of fertilizers as per monthly 
supply plan.  If any problem is raised by any State in the video conference, the same is 
addressed by Department of Fertilizers.   
 

30 
  For conservation of land, water and biological resources,  DAC (NRM/RFS 
Divisions) has been implementing watershed development programmes, namely, 
National Watershed Development Programme in Rainfed Areas (NWDPRA) and River 
Valley Project & Flood Prone Rivers. However, these programmes have been 
discontinued w.e.f. 1st March, 2013 due to closure of Macro Management of Agriculture 
Scheme.  The programmes of Macro Management of Agriculture have been subsumed 
under Rashtriya Krishi Vikas Yojana from 2013-14.  
 
To promote agriculture growth in the rainfed  areas, this Department has 
launched the scheme “Rainfed Area Development Programme (RADP)” in the year 
2011-12 as a sub -scheme under Rashtriya Krishi Vikas Yojana (RKVY). It aims at 
improving quality of life of farmers, especially small and marginal farme rs, by offering a 
complete package of activities to maximize farm returns.  RADP focuses on Integrated 
Farming System (IFS) for enhancing productivity and minimizing risks associated with 
climatic variabilities. It seeks to harness efficiency of natural 
resources/assets/commodities by supporting location -specific farming systems.  Apart 
from promoting crop specific farming systems, activities like construction of ponds, land 
development, water management are converged/supplemented to promote value 
addition through a sustainable farming system.  
 
Similarly, to address issues regarding „Sustainable Agriculture‟ in the context of 
risks associated with climate change, Ministry of Agriculture is in the process of  
launching National Mission for Sustainable Agricu lture (NMSA) under National Action 
Plan on Climate Change (NAPCC).  The NMSA has devised appropriate adaptation and 
mitigation strategies for ensuring food security, enhancing livelihood opportunities and 
contributing to economical stability at national le vel.  Further, it has identified ten key 
dimensions for promoting sustainable agricultural practices, which will be 
operationalised by implementing a Programme of Action (POA) that covers both 
adaptation and mitigation measures through four functional area s, namely, Research 
and Development, Technologies, Products and Practices, Infrastructure and Capacity 
Building.  While recognizing the role of modern technologies and research in promoting 
the sustainability of agricultural production, the Mission also em phasizes the need to 

31 
harness traditional knowledge and agricultural heritage for in -situ conservation of 
genetic resources. As approved by the Planning Commission, the Programme of Action 
has been embedded and mainstreamed under the on -going schemes/Missio ns of 
Ministry of Agriculture through selective up-scaling and course correction measures.   
 
   Experiences from Green Revolution demonstrate that agricultural research and 
development (R&D) investments have greatly contributed to economic growth, 
agricultural progress and poverty reduction in developing regions over the past five 
decades. Effectively disseminated new technologies and crop varieties resulting from 
R&D investments have enhanced the quantity and quality of agricultural products, at the 
same time increasing sustainability, reducing consumer food prices, providing rural 
producers with access to markets, and improving gender -based allocations and 
accumulations of physical and human capital within households. Given important 
challenges-such as ra pid population growth, adaptation to climate change, increasing 
weather variability, water scarcity, and the volatility of prices in global markets -
policymakers are increasingly recognizing the value of greater investment in agricultural 
R&D as an essential element in increasing agricultural productivity.  
The public spending on agri. R& D and education, as percent of GDP agri. has 
now increased from 0.44 in 1997 -98 to around 0.6% in the recent years. The ICAR had 
made efforts to get more funds through the highest levels in the Ministry of Finance and 
Planning Commission. Adequate funding of NARS has been emphasized in the past at 
various fora, like Parliamentary Standing Committee on Agriculture, which has 
recommended an allocation equivalent to 1 % of AGDP and the XII Plan Working Group 
on Agricultural Research and Education which has rec ommended a sum of Rs. 55,000 
crore. However, the Planning Commission has communicated a total outlay of Rs. 
25,553 crore against the DARE/ICAR‟s proposed outlay of Rs. 57,887.21 crore for XII 
Plan.   
 
Developing multi -enterprise Integrated Farming System (IFS) comprising of 
crops, horticulture, agro -forestry, livestock, fisheries, poultry, piggery, mushroom 
cultivation, bee-keeping etc. is considered to be the appropriate approach for enhancing 

32 
agricultural productivity & profitability ensuring viability, sustainability and livelihood of 
farm sector. Accordingly, the Council through Project Directorate on Farming System 
Research, Modipuram has initiated an AICRP on Development of Integrated Farming 
System (IFS) models for small and marginal farmers of different agro -ecological zones 
in the country during XI Plan which is being further strengthened during the current 
Plan. The project is being implemented in farmers„  participatory mode with due 
cognizance of farmers‟ resource availability imbibing improved scientiﬁc technologies 
with indigenous technology knowhow and grass -root innovations. The ICAR Research 
Complexes for Eastern Region, Goa and NEH region, NRC Agro -forestry, CRIDA 
Hyderabad, CAZRI Jodhpur, CSSRI Karnal, CSWCRTI, Dehradun are also engaged in 
a similar endeavour. Few examples of IFS models developed are listed below. 
 Crop-dairy based farming system for small farming families of Bihar having 1 
acre of irrigated land and four crossbred cows. 
 Watermill based integrated farming system for north western Himalayas. 
 Trench cum raised bed based horticulture -fish fanning system for seasonally 
waterlogged areas of Bihar. 
 Multi-enterprise farming system model for reclaimed sodic lands. 
 Rice, coconut and rabbit based integrated farming system for Western Ghats. 
 Rainfed farming system model with 1.15 ha area for small and marginal farmers 
in Telangana region of AP.  
 
       Within Agriculture, Horticulture sector has been a prime mover in accelerating 
growth besides providing increased returns per unit area.   In order to capitalize this 
potential, National Horticulture Mission (NHM) Scheme is being implemented since 
2005-06 in 18  
states and three union territories of Andaman Nicobar Islands, Lakshadweep and 
Pondicherry. North Eastern States including Sikkim and the State of Jammu & 
Kashmir, Himachal Pradesh and Uttarakhand are covered under a similar scheme 
called the Horticulture Mission for North East & Himalayan States (HMNEHS).  
 
  The main focus of NHM Scheme is on increasing profitability of the farmers 
through various interventions and through creation of infrastructure for production of 
planting material, Post Harvest Management, marketing, capacity building of farmers 

33 
and field functionaries. Modern techniques, such as protected cultivation, precision 
farming and organic farming are also promoted under the scheme.  
 
        For ensuring better delivery, the sch eme is being implemented through State 
Horticulture Missions (SHMs) which are registered societies formed for this purpose. 
State Government is contributing 15% of the total outlay since Eleventh Plan. The 
Scheme is implemented on the basis of annual Actio n Plan which is prepared by the 
SHMs in consultation with district level functionaries. 
 
          Water being a critical input for agriculture as well as horticulture, efficient 
methods of irrigation, such as drip and sprinkler irrigation system are being  promoted 
under National Mission on Micro Irrigation Scheme. 
 
         Strengthening of farmer‟s capabilities and their bargaining power by mobilizing 
them into Farmer Interest Groups (FIG) and Farmer Producer Organizations are other 
interventions to enable them to harness full benefits and realizations of their produce. 
 
 About 72% oilseeds are grown under rain fed conditions in the country. The 
oilseeds crops are also prone to various biotic stresses. Productivity of oilseeds is 
directly influenced b y the rainfall pattern during the crop season. Seed Replacement 
Rate (SRR) is also low in case of major oilseeds crops like groundnut and soybean 
mainly due to high seed rates and low Seed Multiplication Ratio (SMR). The 
international prices of Crude Palm Oil (CPO) have declined during 2012 -13 leading to 
increase in imports of CPO. This has put downward pressure on prices of edible oils in 
domestic market, further discouraging farmers to take up oilseeds cultivation. Despite all 
these factors, the productio n of oilseeds has increased from 25.19 million tonnes in 
2003-04 (prior to ISOPOM) to 30.72 million tonnes in 2012 -13. This was brought about 
not only by increase in area but also by improving the productivity from 1064 kg. to 1147 
kg. per hectare during the above period (as per 3 rd Advance Estimates of DES of DAC). 
Despite increase in production and productivity, the production of oilseeds is less than 
the demand.  
 

34 
In order to enhance production of oilseeds, the Government of India is 
implementing Integrated Scheme of Oilseeds, Pulses, Oil Palm and Maize (ISOPOM) to 
increase the production of these crops including oilseeds.  An amount of Rs. 500/ -crore 
has been allocated for the year 2013-14 under ISOPOM. 
  In order to overcome the constraints and t o narrow the gaps between existing 
productivity and yields of oilseeds achieved under demonstrations,  the Government of 
India has  focused on transfer of technology through demonstration and trainings and  
supply of critical inputs under the scheme throug h production and distribution of seeds, 
seed minikits, critical inputs, transfer of technologies, and training. 
 
           For sustainable agriculture growth in the context of Climate Change, Ministry of 
Agriculture has formulated National Mission for Sus tainable Agriculture (NMSA) under 
the aegis of National Action Plan on Climate Change (NAPCC).  The NMSA  aims at 
transforming Indian Agriculture into a sustainable and climate resilient production 
system by mainstreaming/embedding appropriate climate chan ge adaptation measures 
onto ongoing and future programmatic/schematic interventions in ten key dimensions 
namely; „Improved crop seeds, livestock and fish cultures‟, „Water Use Efficiency‟, „Pest 
Management‟, „Improved Farm Practices‟, „Nutrient Management ‟, „Agricultural 
insurance‟, „Credit support‟, „Markets‟, „Access to Information‟ and „Livelihood 
diversification‟. During XII Five Year Plan, DAC proposes to address t hese dimensions 
through a matrix of restructured programmatic/schematic interventions.   
 
        To address the concerns of rainfed areas with particular focus to small and 
marginal farmers, Rainfed Area Development Programme (RADP) has been introduced 
as a sub scheme of Rastriya Krishi Vikas Yojana (RKVY) w.e.f 2011 -12. The scheme 
promotes Integrated Farming Systems (IFS) suitable to local land use and agro -climatic 
condition to help farmers opportunities of diverse source of livelihood by integrating 
horticulture, livestock, fishery, forestry, agri based small value addition units „etc. int o 
cropping systems.  
 
 
 

35 
 
 The Department of Agriculture implements various crop development 
programmes. 
 National Food Security Mission aims to increase production of rice, wheat and 
pulses through area expansion and productivity enhancement by focusing on low 
yielding districts with exploitable yield potential.  The implementation of the Mission 
includes active involvement of all stakeholders in planning, execution and monitoring of 
the programme, promotion and extension of improved technologies (seed, nutrients, 
plant protection, soil amendments, resource conservation technologies and farm 
machineries), capacity enhancement of extension functionaries and farmers, integration 
of interventions with district plans, regular monitoring and concrete evaluation for impact 
assessment.   
To focus on tapping the yield potential of Eastern States, scheme of Bringing 
Green Revolution to Eastern India (BGREI)  is being implemented from 2010 -11 to 
promote rice based cropping system in Eastern India so as to widen the food basket 
and reduce dependence on North -West India for foodgrain availability.  Sustained 
efforts over the past three years have produced very encouraging outcomes resulting in 
significant increase in the share of Eastern Region in the total production of rice in the 
country to more than 50%.   
To ensure long term -sustainability of agriculture and ecological balance, crop 
diversification programme is being introduced to shift cropping pattern away from rice -
wheat farming system, especially in the original Green Revolution states of Punjab, 
Haryana and Western UP, which are suffering due to over exploitation of  natural 
resources and ground water as a result of intensive cereal-cereal cropping. 
Production of coarse cereals is also being promoted through the INSIMP 
programme, and is to be included under NFSM from the XII Plan. 
The Department is implementing number  of schemes for development of 
agriculture for the ultimate benefit of the farmers and to make agriculture vocation as 
remunerative as possible.  Several new initiatives have been undertaken in the recent 

36 
past for the purpose.  To provide flexibility to th e States, a state plan scheme, Rashtriya 
Krishi Vikas Yojana, has been started where states are funded 100% on agricultural 
related activities/projects.  States can take any project for development of agriculture 
considering its special requirements and agro climatic conditions. 
 The Budget provision of the DAC is on the rise continually.  As against a 
provision of Rs.10105.67 crore in the year 2009 -10, it is now Rs.21609.00 crore.  
Taking Ministry of Agriculture as a whole the provision for 2013 -14 is Rs.2 7,049.00 
crore. 
 The schemes of the DAC are proposed to be restructured into five missions, five 
central sector schemes and one state plan scheme in order to have focussed approach 
in XII Plan. 
 Implementing agencies are exhorted by the Department at vario us levels to 
increase their pace of utilization of funds. 
 A Central Sector Scheme „Development and Strengthening of Infrastructure 
Facilities for Production and Distribution of Quality Seeds‟ is being implemented by the 
Division since 2005-06 on an all India basis.  The objective of the ongoing scheme is to 
ensure production and multiplication of high yielding certified/quality seeds of all crops 
in sufficient quantities and make the seeds available to farmers, including those in 
remote areas, not easily accessible by rail/road on time.  Component-wise details of the 
scheme is enclosed at Annexure – III. 
The production/availability of seed is consistently more than the 
requirement/demand throughout last five years. Statement showing details is enclosed 
at Annexure – IV. 
 
[Ministry of Agriculture (Department of Agriculture & Co-operation), 
                                  OM No.6-3/2013-B&A dated the 15th July, 2013]  
 
 
 
 

37 
CHALLENGES CONFRONTING INDIAN AGRICULTURE 
(Recommendation Para No. 2.9)  
 
The Committee note that as the developing economy moves from a traditional 
agriculture-based to industrial including service sector, the growth in agriculture sector 
dips.  The Department too have informed that transition from agricultural to industrial 
society will lead to decline in the size of population involved in the agriculture sector.  
Also, the agriculture sector is becoming non -remunerative day-by-day leading many to 
migrate towards urban areas for better employment opportunities.  Since these migrants 
are not skilled, there is an added handicap to their employment opportunities, coupled 
with the pressure of leaving behind their social support group, being rendered landless 
and with no assured source of income. 
 Expressing their serious concern over th e fact that the Department of Agriculture 
and Cooperation have no mechanism/provision that would provide succour to such 
migrants who have shifted from agricultural to non -agricultural sector, the Committee 
recommend the Department to proactively take up i n coordination with the other 
concerned agencies so as to enable these economically and socially vulnerable strata 
of our society to find gainful employment at the earliest and not to be left at the mercy of 
vested interests of the unscrupulous sections of the society.  They further desire that the 
progress achieved herein be intimate to them at the earliest. 
Reply of the Government  
It may be noted that the agriculture sector has grown @ 2.5% and 2.4% during 
9th and 10 th Plan period respectively and @ 3.64 % during the 11 th Plan period.  
However, the share of agriculture in GDP of the country is declining consistently which 
is the normal case in respect of any economy transiting from agrarian to a modern, 
developed economy.  Thus, Agriculture and allied sect or accounted for 19.0% of GDP 
of the country in 2004 -05.  Its share came down to 15.8% in 2008 -09 and 14% during 
2011-12.  Notwithstanding, agriculture continues to remain very important for the 
economy as its share in total employment continues to be high. 

38 
  The Ministry has been taking various steps for development of agriculture and 
allied sectors so that it remains a remunerative vocation.   A budget provision of 
Rs.21609 cr. has been provided to the Department of Agriculture and Cooperation for 
the year 2013-14. 
  For attracting youth to Agriculture sector, the National Policy for Farmers (NPF), 
2007 envisages support to educated youths for setting up agri -clinics and production -
cum-processing centres, introduction of vocational training courses in d ifferent aspects 
of agricultural & allied activities and support to trained persons to launch self -
employment ventures. Under Agri-Clinics and Agri-Business Centres (ACABC) scheme, 
31,008 candidates have been trained and 11,675 agri -ventures established in  the 
country till January, 2013.  
        Further Krishi Vigyan Kendras (KVKs) and State Agricultural Universities train rural 
youth on various aspects of agriculture like productivity enhancement, orchard 
management, value addition, livestock production a nd management, protective 
cultivation, farm machinery, fishery, production of inputs etc.  Similarly, Small Farmers‟ 
Agro-Business Consortium (SFAC) promotes agri -business projects for generating 
income and employment in rural areas.  
[Ministry of Agriculture (Department of Agriculture & Co-operation), 
                                  OM No.6-3/2013-B&A dated the 15th July, 2013]  
 
 
CHALLENGES CONFRONTING INDIAN AGRICULTURE 
(Recommendation Para No. 2.10)  
 
On a more alarming note, the Committee express their concern over the Free 
Trade Agreements (FTAs) entered in the agriculture sector.  Having experienced that 
Indian farmers have been hit hard by the earlier FTAs which have negatively impacted 
the plantation and cash crops, cheap imports of these commodities have led to drastic 
fall in domestic production and destruction of livelihoods.  Sudden spurt in farmer‟s 
suicides in regions where these crops are grown optimise the stark reality of domestic 
interests being blind sighted at the altar of free trade.  However, rather than adopt of 
policy of going slow on these FTAs, the Government went on entering into more FTAs.  

39 
In spite of the widespread protests against Indo-ASEAN FTA, the Government is not yet 
ready to introspect on this contentious issue.  Strongly deprecating this parochial 
attitude of the Government of carrying forward its agenda of trade liberalization, which 
has cost farming community heavily, the Committee exhort upon the Government to first 
work on building the broad consensus amongst various stakeholders across the country 
encompassing all strata of society, for not only safeguarding the interests of the ever 
tolling farmer, but simultaneously negate the nefarious designs of vested interests, 
before entering into further FTAs. 
Reply of the Government  
The Government has initiated several measures for mitigation of farmers‟ 
distress. The major steps taken by the Government are as follows:  
(i) Implementation of the rehabilitation package for mit igation of agrarian distress in 31 
identified farmer‟s suicide prone districts of Andhra Pradesh, Karnataka, Kerala and 
Maharashtra.  
(ii) Other schemes/ programs such as, Rashtriya Krishi Vikas Yojna (RKVY), National 
Food Security Mission (NFSM), Macro Ma nagement of Agriculture (MMA), National 
Horticulture Mission (NHM), Agriculture Extension, National Agriculture Insurance 
Scheme (NAIS) etc. are being implemented to rejuvenate agriculture sector, improve 
productivity, production & viability of farm operations, increase income of farmers and 
thereby ameliorate agrarian distress.  
 (iii) Other measures taken by the Government for the benefit of farmers include 
enhancement in minimum support prices of agricultural commodities, increase in credit 
flow to agriculture sector, debt waiver / relief, interest subvention on crop loans, etc.  
 
While negotiating Free Trade Agreements (FTAs)/ Preferential Trade 
Agreements (PTAs), important agricultural products of India are kept in negative list on 
which no tariff  concession is offered. While protecting India‟s sensitive agricultural 
products, efforts have been made to obtain market access and duty reduction for 
agricultural products of India‟s export potential in FTAs/PTAs. Unilateral concessions 
have been offered by India only for countries of South Asian Free Trade Area (SAFTA) 

40 
and Least Developed Countries (LDCs) under Duty Free Tariff Preference Scheme 
(DFTP).  
[Ministry of Agriculture (Department of Agriculture & Co-operation), 
                                  OM No.6-3/2013-B&A dated the 15th July, 2013]  
 
CHALLENGES CONFRONTING INDIAN AGRICULTURE 
(Recommendation Para No. 2.11)  
 
Another area of concern is the price support mechanism in agricultural 
commodities, which is perceived to be distorted.  Non remunerative prices of agricultural 
commodities and deficient institutionalised price support mechanism have impacted the 
agriculture sector badly.  Distress sale of various commodities; have been reported, for 
one reason or the other, causing great economic loss and temptation to withdraw from 
the profession forever.  Market interventions price support, which is seldom conducted 
timely, has not been able to ameliorate the sufferings of the farmers.  The present 
support price mechanism, which is applicable for few commodities, has been found to 
be wanting since the farmers‟ interest is not being protected adequately for variety of 
reasons.  In the absence of state sponsored price support for majority of the crops, the 
farmers are left to fend for themselves.  The unbridled market forces which come into 
play and determines the price structure of agriculture commodities do not often meet the 
aspirations and expectations of farmers.  Many a times, the farmers have been reported 
to unable to recover the production cost even.  It has been also noticed that sometime 
import of agricultural produce resorted to contain inflationary trends, tend t o depress 
domestic price, causing manifold loss and untold misery to the farmers.  In order to 
harmonise the interest of farmers and consumers, the Committee desire that Govt. 
should maintain price parity between imports and domestic price, so as to afford  
reasonable fair and just price to the farmers, for his produce.  At the same time, the 
Committee recommend that all the agricultural commodities including cash and 
plantation crops be subjected to state determined price support mechanism, so as to 
prevent distress sale and protect farmers‟ interest.  The Committee is of the view that if 
implemented, these steps will go a long way in improving the conditions of the farmers.  
The Committee would like to be apprised of the action taken in the matter. 

41 
Reply of the Government 
      Assurance of a remunerative and stable price environment for growers/farmers is 
very important for increasing agricultural production and productivity.  The agricultural 
markets tend to be unstable and volatile which may result into undue losses to the 
growers and discourage adoption of the modern technology and required inputs.  The 
Government‟s price policy for agricultural commodities seeks to ensure remunerative 
prices to the growers for their produce with a view to encourage high er investment and 
production and to safeguard the interest of consumers by making available supplies at 
reasonable prices with low cost of intermediation.  The price policy also seeks to evolve 
a balanced and integrated price structure in the perspective o f the overall needs of the 
economy.    Towards this end, the Government announces, Minimum Support Prices 
(MSP) for 25 major agricultural commodities each year in both the Crop seasons after 
taking into account the recommendations of the Commission for Agr icultural Costs and 
Prices (CACP).  Besides, announcement of MSP, the Government also organizes 
procurement operations of these agricultural commodities through various public and 
cooperative agencies such as Food Corporation of India (FCI), Cotton Corpora tion of 
India (CCI), Jute Corporation of India (JCI), Central Warehousing Corporation (CWC), 
National Agricultural Cooperative Marketing Federation of India Ltd. (NAFED), National 
Consumer Cooperative Federation of India Ltd. (NCCF) and Tobacco Board.  Bes ides, 
State Governments also appoint state agencies to undertake PSS operations. 
 While deciding the Minimum Support Price for various agricultural commodities, 
the recommendations of CACP, the views of Central Ministries and State Governments 
and such oth er relevant factors which are important in the opinion of the Government 
are considered.  The CACP, while recommending the Minimum Support Price keeps in 
view (i) the need to provide incentives to the producers for adopting improved 
technology and for deve loping a production pattern broadly in the light of national 
requirements (ii) the need to ensure rational utilization of land, water and other 
production resources and (iii) the likely effect of the price policy on the rest of the 
economy, particularly, on the cost of living, level of wages, industrial cost structure etc.   

42 
During the last two-three years the prices of most of the oilseed and pulses ruled 
above the Market Support Price (MSP) hence, the necessity of implementation of Price 
Support Scheme (PSS) was not required except for copra , urad, gram etc. A statement 
indicating the commodities procured under PSS for the last five years is placed at 
Annexure –V.  
 Similarly, the Division is also implementing the Market Intervention Scheme 
(MIS) for procurement of horticultural and agricultural commodities which are generally 
perishable in nature and not covered under Price Support Scheme (PSS) to provide 
remunerative prices to the growers and protect their interest. The MIS is implemented 
when the prices  tend to fall below the economic levels/cost of production to avoid 
distress sale during the peak arrival period of the produce. The Scheme is implemented 
when there is at  least 10% increase in production or 10% decrease in the ruling rates 
over the previo us normal year. Further proposal of MIS is approved on the specific 
request of State/UT Government ready to bear 50% loss (25% in case of North -Eastern 
States), if any, incurred on its implementation.  However, the loss is restricted to 25% of 
the total pr ocurement value which includes Market Intervention Price (MIP) paid to the 
farmers plus permitted overhead expenses.  Profit earned, if any, in implementing the 
MIS is retained by the procuring agencies.  Procurement is made by the Central and 
State agencies 
 A statement indicating the MIS sanctioned by the Department for procurement of 
various commodities from 2001 -02 to 2011 -12 is placed at Annexure-VI.  The said 
procurement details indicates that various commodities have been procured under MIS 
in different states.  Further, the MIS guidelines stipulates that the state government 
should furnish the MIS proposal to the Department 15 days before the proposed date of 
its implementation and the D epartment sanctioned the proposal within 15 days from the 
date of its receipt.  Hence, no such delay is made in sanctioning the MIS proposal.    
       
[Ministry of Agriculture (Department of Agriculture & Co-operation), 
                                  OM No.6-3/2013-B&A dated the 15th July, 2013]  
 

43 
 (Recommendation Para No. 2.12)  
 
The subsequent narratives deals with detailed examination of the working of the 
Department in terms of implementation of its Schemes and financial performance during 
the Fiscal, 2012-13 and projections for the year 2013 -14.  The Committee desire that 
the Demand No.1 of the Ministry of Agriculture, Department of Agriculture and 
Cooperation, be approved.  
Reply of the Government 
No reply is required. 
 
[Ministry of Agriculture (Department of Agriculture & Co-operation), 
                                  OM No.6-3/2013-B&A dated the 15th July, 2013]  
 
ALLOCATION AND UTILIZATION OF FUNDS DURING ELEVENTH PLAN PERIOD 
(Recommendation Para No. 3.23) 
 
During the course of the Eleventh Plan period the Committee have observed the 
Department were allocated an amount of Rs.59137.61 crore only against the approved 
outlay of Rs.66577.00 crore by the Planning Commission.  This in spite of the fact that 
the Department‟s expenditure being in the range of 95% of the amount finalized in the 
revised estimates.  They are of the firm opinion that had the balance of Rs.5049.10 
crore been allocated, the Department would have been able to acquit themselves better 
in the implementation of Schemes.  The Committee further observe that the allocations 
at BE vis -a-vis RE stage fluctuated in that while for the fiscals 2007 -08 and 2010 -11, 
showed increased RE, in the remaining three fiscals the RE was less than the approved 
BE.  They are aggrieved to note that their constant pleas to rectify the imbalances have 
gone unheard during the Eleventh Five Year Plan is in its nascency, the Committee 
impress upon all the agencies concerned i.e. the Planning Commission and the Ministry 
of Finance (Department of Expenditure) to approach allocation to the Department on a 
new platform and not cling onto the past as a benchmark.  The allocation of funds to the 
Department must be evenly spread across all the five fiscals to avoid back loading of  

44 
plan funds.  This would ensure that the Department are allocated maximum funds out of 
the approved outlay and are able to absorb these funds easily and ensure optimum 
utilization of allocated resources. 
Reply of the Government 
The concern of the Committee  has been noted.  Planning Commission has also 
been apprised of Committee‟s observations for suitable necessary action in future.   
[Ministry of Agriculture (Department of Agriculture & Co-operation), 
                                  OM No.6-3/2013-B&A dated the 15th July, 2013]   
 
 
 
 
ALLOCATION AND UTILIZATION OF FUNDS DURING ELEVENTH PLAN PERIOD 
(Recommendation Para No. 3.24)   
 
The Committee also observe that the Department have not accredited 
themselves well as they have been unable to utilize even this reduced allocation in its 
entirety during the course of the Eleventh Plan.  Being well aware of the reasons for 
this, they exhort the Department to take proactive steps to utilise even the reduced 
allocations to the hilt as in the entire Eleventh Plan  period, the Department consistently 
failed to utilise the same.  They also impress upon the Department to incorporate the 
views of States/UTs while drawing up the modalities of a Scheme.  This in their 
considered opinion would ensure active participation of States/UTs in all Centrally 
Sponsored and Central Schemes which would result in optimum utilization of allocate d 
funds. 
Reply of the Government 
Department has utilized about 99.85% of outlay allocated at RE stage during 
Eleventh Plan period and also utilized  99% of allocated outlay at RE stage during 2012-
13, the first year of the Twelfth Plan.  All Annual Action Plans of the States under 
various Centrally Sponsored Schemes are finalized after discussions with the States.  
[Ministry of Agriculture (Department of Agriculture & Co-operation), 
                                  OM No.6-3/2013-B&A dated the 15th July, 2013]   

45 
 
ALLOCATION AND UTILIZATION OF FUNDS DURING ELEVENTH PLAN PERIOD 
(Recommendation Para No. 3.25)   
 
Noting that the lack of absorption capacity in the North -Eastern States was 
blotting the otherwise excellent performance of the Department in terms of utilization of 
funds, the Committee desire that agriculture related developmental schemes/projects 
specifically tailor made for North -Eastern be drawn up for implementation.  At the same 
time, the North -Eastern States be motivated to improve their absorption capacity by 
furnishing utilization certificates of past utilizations as well as furnishing of fresh 
proposals on a timely basis.  If worked upon methodically, the Department would be in a 
position to ensure cent per cent utilization of allocation in the years to come. 
Reply of the Government 
(1) Infrastructure projects 
 
Considering special circumstances in NER, the Department is providing higher rates 
of subsidy for the Region. Under Rural Godown Schemes, the subsidy is @33.33% in 
NER as against 15% to 25% in other areas (33.33% for SCs/STs). Similarly, under the 
scheme f or creating Marketing infrastructure projects, the subsidy is 33.33% for NE 
Region as against 25% in other areas. The Department will endeavour to ensure cent 
per cent utilization of allocation in the 12th Plan.  
2. Venture Capital Assistance Scheme of SFAC for NE Region and Sikkim:-  
         Efforts have been made in periodical meetings with State Govt. Officials of NE 
Region and Sikkim to motivate entrepreneurs/farmers to set up agri -business projects 
under SFAC scheme.    As against target of 12.57 crore  for Xth Plan, XIth Plan and 
2012-13 the achievement has been 9.30 crore.  
RKVY  
RKVY does not prescribe any specific project/activity to be taken up under the 
scheme.  Any project that can contribute to generation of additional growth in agriculture 
and allied sectors can be taken up by the states under the scheme.  States have also 
been empowered in selection, planning, approval of projects/programmes under RKVY 

46 
and execution of the same on the basis of their priorities and local needs.  As such all 
states have flexibility to choose projects under RKVY as per their requirement. 
[Ministry of Agriculture (Department of Agriculture & Co-operation), 
                                  OM No.6-3/2013-B&A dated the 15th July, 2013]   
 
FINANCIAL ALLOCATION AND UTILIZATION DURING FIRST YEAR OF THE 
TWELFTH PLAN 
(Recommendation Para No. 3.27)   
 
The Committee are aggrieved to note the quantum variation in the funds sought 
by the Department and the actual allocation done by the Planning Commission, which 
seems to make a mockery of the extant planning process.  The rather candid 
admittance of the Se cretary that their proposal for allocation of funds to the Planning 
Commission is a negotiation ploy and is more like a first offer in a negotiation process to 
arrive at negotiated amount does not augur well for the process of planning being 
witnessed in t he Country.  The Committee further note the contradiction in the above -
stated stand of the Ministry and the one stated by them in their written relies wherein 
they submitted that proposed allocation for Fiscal 2012 -13 was projected based on 
allocation for Fiscal 2012 -13 was projected based on requirement Scheme -wise and 
based on pattern of expenditure during past year.  The Planning Commission on its part 
have stated that funds are provided after taking into consideration resource availability 
and demands for other competing national priorities. 
 Having enlightened themselves with the viewpoint of the Department and the 
Planning Commission, the Committee impress upon both the agencies to arrive at a 
model wherein the figures of proposed allocation and actual  allocation are brought on 
an even keel. 
Reply of the Government 
The concern of the Committee has been noted and communicated to Planning 
Commission.    
[Ministry of Agriculture (Department of Agriculture & Co-operation), 
                                  OM No.6-3/2013-B&A dated the 15th July, 2013]    

47 
 
NATIONAL FOOD SECURITY MISSION (NFSM) 
(Recommendation Para No. 4.51) 
 
The Centrally Sponsored Scheme of National Food Security Mission (NFSM) 
was launched from Rabi 2007-08 to increase production of rice, wheat and pulses by 10 
million tonnes, 8 million tonnes and 2 million tonnes respectively by the end of the 
Eleventh Five  Year Plan i.e. March, 2012. From the year 2012 -13 NFSM is being 
implemented in 27 States of the Country.  The Committee, however, note with concern 
that under this Scheme, BE 2011 -12 of Rs.1350.00 crore was revised downward at RE 
stage of Rs.1316.00 crore  and the actual expenditure was Rs.1285.95 crore only.  
Similarly, during 2012-13 BE of Rs.1850.00 crore was revised downward to Rs.1763.57 
crore and actual expenditure was Rs.1671.63 crore (as on 22.03.2013).  The 
Department have attributed the grant betw een BE,RE and Actual Expenditure in the 
Fiscal 2011-12 due to reduction in allocation of North -East States from Rs.100.00 crore 
at BE to Rs.66 crore at RE.  It has further been stated that during the year 2011 -12 only 
two North -East States viz. Assam and T ripura were covered under NFSM.  The 
Committee, however, note with appreciation that the Department acted upon their 
recommendation contained in their Thirty -fourth Report on Demands for Grants (2012 -
13) wherein they had emphasized the need to increase the  coverage of the Scheme in 
the North -East States and also re -work the guidelines to suit the needs of this 
geographically unique area.  From the year 2012 -13 with the inclusion of Arunachal 
Pradesh, Manipur, Meghalaya, Mizoram, Nagaland and Sikkim, the who le North East 
Region has been brought under the ambit of NFSM.  However, they note with concern 
that the geographical expansion of the Scheme has not resulted in improved financial 
performance of the Scheme during the last Fiscal.  Keeping in view the pivo tal nature of 
this Scheme in enhancing the production of rice, wheat and pulses in the identified 
areas, the Committee exhort upon the Department to motivate all implementing 
agencies to come forward and actively participate in the Scheme, which would ensu re 
optimum utilization of fund and ensure synergy between allocation and utilization during 
the current Plan period. 
 

48 
Reply of the Government 
 The details of allocation and release in 2012-13 are as under : 
                                                                                                            (Rs. in crore) 
S.No. Year Allocation Actual 
Expenditure 
(Released) 
Percentage (%) 
with reference to 
RE 
BE RE 
1. 2012-13 1850.00 1763.57 1725.65 97.85 
 
All efforts are made to ensure active participation of States and implementing 
agencies in planning and implementation of NFSM.  Finalisation of Action Plans is done 
in consultation with States and progress of implementation of the Mission is reviewed 
through monthly progress reports, utilization certificates, monitoring visits and also in 
NFSM Executive Committee (EC) and General Council (GC) meetings.  Mid -course 
corrections, wherever required, are also discussed and approved in EC/GC meetings.   
[Ministry of Agriculture (Department of Agriculture & Co-operation), 
                                  OM No.6-3/2013-B&A dated the 15th July, 2013]     
 
NATIONAL FOOD SECURITY MISSION (NFSM) 
(Recommendation Para No. 4.53) 
 
The Committee note that in spite of various inherent shortcomings, the National 
Food Security Mission since its inception has helped to widen the food basket of the 
Country with significant contributions coming from the NFSM areas.  The focussed and 
target oriented implementation of mission initiatives by resulted in bumper production of 
wheat, rice and pulses.  The production of wheat has increased from 75.81 million 
tonnes in the year 2006 -07 to 94.88 million tonnes in 2011 -12.  Similarly, the total 
production of rice has increased from 93.35 million tonnes in the year 2006 -07 to 
105.31million tonnes in 2011 -12.  The total production of pulses has also increased 
from 14.20 million tonnes during 2006 -07 to 18.24 million tonnes during 2010 -11.  They 
further note that interventions via NFSM seem to have gone done well with the farming 
community who have enthusiastically responded to NFSM supported farm machinery 
components, capacity building exercises, awareness generation programmes which 
have resulted in new  farm practises.  However, they exhort the Government not to rest 

49 
upon their laurels and continue to further fine tune the NFSM in accordance with the 
needs and requirements of the States and farmers.  If done so, the Committee are 
sanguine that NFSM will usher in the desired results and bring the Nation closer 
towards attaining Food Security to all in near future.  
Reply of the Government 
 NFSM is proposed to be strengthened on the basis of experiences and feedback 
from States in the XI Plan.  Accordingly, NFSM is being extended to include all food 
crops, including rice, wheat, pulses, coarse cereals and commercial crops (cotton, jute 
and su garcane). Accelerated Crop Production Programme is proposed for holistic 
treatment through adoption of cropping system based implementation of package of 
practices in compact blocks in cluster approach for maximum benefit to farmers.  
Special projects have  also been proposed for promoting resource conservation 
technologies in high productive areas.  To improve access to technology for small 
holders, special projects are being included for remote and inaccessible areas involving 
NGOs and promoting agri -services in farm operation.  Inclusion of Value chain 
integration and marketing support, especially for pulses and coarse cereals will also 
improve economic returns to farmers.  The overall target of additional foodgrain 
production for the XII Plan period has a lso been enhanced to 25 million tonnes (Rice - 
10 million tonnes, Wheat - 8 million tonnes, Pulses – 4 million tonnes and Coarse 
Cereals – 3 million tonnes).   
[Ministry of Agriculture (Department of Agriculture & Co-operation), 
                                  OM No.6-3/2013-B&A dated the 15th July, 2013]     
 
 
NATIONAL MISSION ON MICRO-IRRIGATION 
(Recommendation Para No. 4.54)  
 
The Committee observe that as per the recommendation of the Task Force on 
Micro-Irrigation constituted by the Government of India during 2004, the Centrally 
Sponsored Scheme on Micro-Irrigation was launched in January, 2006.  The Scheme is 
continuing in mission mode since June 2010 as the National Mission on Micro-Irrigation.  

50 
They are, however, discerned to note that the BE figures have generally been pruned at 
RE stage during the last six Fiscals, though the actual expenditure has matched the RE 
figures a nd exceeded the RE in the year 2011 -12.  The rationale put forth by the 
Department for pruning of funds at RE stage to the fact that in 2007 -08 and 2008 -09, 
funds were released directly to the districts which resulted in the Scheme not being so 
popular.  However, consequent to the Scheme being launched in mission mode during 
2010-11, wherein funds were released to the State Headquarters, the pace of 
expenditure improved.  Notwithstanding, the arguments put forth by the Department, the 
Committee note that ap art from the Fiscal year 2011 -12 where BE funds were 
maintained at RE stage and the actual expenditure was in excess of the allocation, the 
same story has been repeated in the Fiscal  2012 -13.  Pruning of BE funds at RE stage 
is resorted to by the Ministry  of Finance (Department of Expenditure) based on the 
financial performance of a Scheme during the first six months of a Fiscal.  As witnessed 
here, the slow -paced utilization in the first two quarters results in Department of 
Expenditure using its sniping scissors.  As this is a perennial problem, the Committee 
exhort the nodal agency and the implementing agencies to make a concerted effort and 
reverse this dismal trend.  In the instant Scheme wherein actual utilization more or less 
matches the allocation, an even paced utilization of funds would ensure optimal 
utilization of funds and avoid pruning of BE funds at RE stage.  If successful, the 
National Mission on Micro -Irrigation would go a long way in freeing the toiling 
agriculturist from over dependence o n rain fed irrigation and ensure that his irrigation 
woes would be greatly limited, which then would have a positive impact on his produce. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 The recommendations of the Committee have been noted for compliance.  It has 
been observed that the demand for Micro Irrigation System is higher from November till 
June.  During monsoon period, demand for installation of Micro Irrigation system is less.  
However, efforts will be made to achieve even paced utilization of funds.  
[Ministry of Agriculture (Department of Agriculture & Co-operation), 
                                  OM No.6-3/2013-B&A dated the 15th July, 2013]      
 

51 
NATIONAL MISSION ON MICRO-IRRIGATION 
(Recommendation Para No. 4.55)  
 
On the physical achievements front, the Committee have observed that as 
against the target of 34.43 lakh hectares, the actual achievement is 33.65 lakh hectares 
for the last six Fiscals.  The gap between achievement and target has attributed to 
reduction of funds at RE stage.  However in percentage terms, the achievement rate is 
a healthy 97%.  The achievement for the Fiscal Years 2011 -12 & 2012 -13 (upto 
Feb.201) does not inspire much confidence.  However, being aware of the pitiable 
situation prevalent at the ground level, the Committee impress upon the Government to 
work on bringing greater areas under the coverage of micro -irrigation by not only 
increasing the targets, but also ensuring that the same are achieved as well in the 
ensuring years.  This will then ultimately contribute to NMMI being able to attain its five 
pronged outcome. 
Reply of the Government 
 The recommendations of the Committee have been noted for compliance.  The 
target of 7.7 lakh hectare was set against the BE of Rs. 1500.00 crore.  Th e achievement 
for the F.Y. 2012-13 is 5.8 lakh hectare as against the RE of Rs.1217.29 crore.  
 
[Ministry of Agriculture (Department of Agriculture & Co-operation), 
                                  OM No.6-3/2013-B&A dated the 15th July, 2013]       
 
SUPPORT TO STATE EXTENSION PROGRAMMES FOR EXTENSION REFORMS 
(Recommendation Para No. 4.58) 
 
The Committee note that the Scheme of Support to State Extension Programmes 
for Extension Reforms was launched in 2006 and aimed at making extension system 
farmer d riven and farmer accountable by way of new institutional arrangements for 
technology dissemination in the form of an Agricultural Technology Management 
Agency (ATMA) at District Level to operationalise extension reforms.  However, the 
Committee observe tha t Budget Outlays for the last six fiscals were always revised 
downward at Revised Estimate stage.  This was attributed to procedural delays by 

52 
various agencies involved in according clearances/approvals for this revised Scheme, 
which lead to timelines bein g staggered for this Scheme till 19 March, 2010.  However, 
much to their chagrin they note that nothing much has changed here as it evident in 
periodic reduction of BE at RE stage and actual utilization being lower in comparison to 
the allocation save for the Fiscal 2010-11.The ills plaguing the Scheme in the Eleventh 
Plan have spilled over to the Twelfth Plan as well.  It is disheartening to note that 
manpower including subject matter specialists, were not be employed, as per 
sanctioned strength, impacting  the implementation of the Scheme. Keeping in view the 
vital nature of this Scheme, the Committee implore upon the Government to take a pro -
active approach in the instant matter and ensure the removal of systemic bottlenecks 
retarding the progress of this Scheme which aims at making extension system farmer 
driven and farmer accountable by way of new institutional arrangements for technology 
dissemination during the course of the Twelfth Plan period and thereby ensure optimum 
utilization of funds that would directly lead to increased dissemination of technology to 
farmer. 
Reply of the Government 
The Centrally Sponsored Scheme “Support to State Extension Programmes  for 
Extension Reforms”, popularly known as ATMA Scheme was launched in May, 2005 
and aimed at making extension system farmer driven and farmer accountable by way of 
institutional arrangements for technology dissemination in the form of an Agricultural 
Technology Management Agency (ATMA) at district level to operationalize Extension 
Reforms. The detail of year-wise budgetary position under the Scheme is given below: - 
                                                                                                      (Rs. in Crore) 
Year B.E. R.E. Release 
2005-06 45.00 45.00 43.44 
2006-07 75.00 50.00 48.27 
2007-08 230.00 150.00 155.81 
2008-09 298.00 198.00 193.01 
2009-10 298.00 188.98 178.59 
2010-11 250.00 220.00 240.28 
2011-12 500.00 458.60 434.02 
2012-13 600.00 504.13 508.07 
2013-14 550.00 - - 

53 
 
Above table reveals that public investment in Agricultural Extension by Central 
Government has increased from Rs.43.44 crore  during the year 2005 -06 to Rs.508.07 
Crore in 2012 -13 under the Scheme. Since modification of the Scheme in the year 
2010, the increase has been more substantial. Amount released to the States during 
last 3 years is nearly 100% of the Revised Estimates.  Expenditure incurred by the 
States during these 3 years has also been keeping pace with the releases by the 
centre.   
 
On the basis of experience gained during the implementation of Extension 
Reforms Scheme from 2005 to 2009 and after consulting the State Governments, the 
Government of India has revised the ATMA Scheme in the year 2010 -11. The revised 
scheme provides for dedicated specialist and functionary support to take-up training and 
extension initiatives at State, District and Block level. Besides thi s, improvement in 
extension outreach right down to the village level was expected to be achieved through 
Farmers Friends. 12,276 posts have been filled up as against 18,326 sanctioned.  
There is a short fall due to the fact that there are administrative de lays in the States as 
the process involves approval of the Finance Department/ Cabinet of the State 
Government.  If contractual posts are filled up through outsourcing, bidding process also 
takes time. Further, the current emoluments paid to ATMA functiona ries are rather low 
in current scenario especially in the case of Subject Matter Specialists (SMSs) at the 
block level.  This has led to some States actually not finding any takers for these posts.  
In some other States, there is attrition due to low emolu ments paid to SMSs.  
Enhancement in emoluments is under consideration.  The States are also being 
pursued continuously to clear the backlog vacancies.   
 
Regular follow-up has been taken up with States to accelerate implementation of 
Modified ATMA Scheme t hrough Review Meetings, Conference/ Workshops and field 
visits.  In the last 9 months 100 districts have been extensively traversed down to village 
level.   As a result of regular and concerted efforts, a record State Extension Work Plans 
(SEWPs) of 30 Sta tes for 613 districts across the country were approved and an 

54 
expenditure of Rs.544.01 crore reported during 2012 -13 (excluding expenditure from 6 
States, the Reports of which are still awaited).  
 
[Ministry of Agriculture (Department of Agriculture & Co-operation), 
                                  OM No.6-3/2013-B&A dated the 15th July, 2013]       
 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
For comments of the Committee please refer to Para No. 1.19 of Chapter I of this 
Report.   
 
SUPPORT TO STATE EXTENSION PROGRAMMES FOR EXTENSION REFORMS 
(Recommendation Para No. 4.59) 
 
Guided by the fact that under the provisions of the Indian Constitution, wherein 
Agricultural is listed as a State Subject, the Committee cannot but overemphasize the 
pivotal nature played by the State Governments and Union Territory Administration in 
determining the outcome of the Schemes of the Central Government.  Thus, in the 
opinion of the Committee, the need of the hour is to motivate the States/UTs to enhance 
their participation in the said Scheme and avail more funds.  As the Committee have 
been rec ommending time and again, the Central Government should consult the 
States/UTs while devising the Modalities of the Scheme and call for periodic feedback 
and then accordingly revise the guidelines of the Scheme under consideration.  This 
would ensure that States/UTs consider themselves as active partners in the Scheme, 
which would ultimately result in optimum utilization of funds and ensure that the benefits 
of Extension Programmes percolate down to the field. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
In order to motivate the States/UTs to enhance their active participation in 
planning and implementation of ATMA Scheme, a regular follow -up is taken up through 
periodic review meetings and written communication at various levels. The progress of 
implementation of the scheme i s also reviewed in Zonal Conferences for Agriculture 

55 
Inputs for Rabi and Kharif Seasons and National Conferences. Apart from above, 
officers from Department of Agriculture & Cooperation and experts from MANAGE have 
been visiting the States to get feedback from the field and suggest appropriate solutions 
to overcome the constraints.  
[Ministry of Agriculture (Department of Agriculture & Co-operation), 
                                  OM No.6-3/2013-B&A dated the 15th July, 2013]        
 
  
NATIONAL PROJECT ON MANAGEMENT OF SOIL HEALTH AND FERTILITY 
(Recommendation Para No. 4.61) 
 
 The National Project on Management of Soil Health and Fertility was taken up 
from 2008-09 in order to promote balanced and judicious use of fertilizer in conjunction 
with organic manure on soil test basis.  The Central Sector Scheme on Central Fertility 
Quality Control and Training Institute/Regional Laboratories has been subsumed in the 
Scheme from 1st April, 2009. 
  
The Committee are , however, constrained to note that actual expenditure under 
the Scheme during the last five fiscals has always been lower than the allocated funds.  
The department  have attributed the same to non -furnishing of Utilization Certificates 
and progress by Stat es and less demand from Central Fertilizer Quality Control and 
Training Institute.  It was further stated that States were developing preference for 
seeking funds for these components under RKVY due to flexible guidelines. 
  
Guided by the candid explanation put forth by the Department, the Committee 
are of the opinion that this Scheme be subsumed with the Rashtriya Krishi Vikas Yojana 
as the success of RKVY was one of the factors retarding the progress of this Scheme.  
They fu rther recommend that the Department take up post haste the construction of 
Fertilizer Quality Control Laboratories after obtaining the land clearance for these Labs 
from the concerned State Governments. 
 
Reply of the Government 
National Project on Manageme nt of Soil Health and Fertility (NPMSH&F) is 
proposed to be subsumed under National Mission for Sustainable Agriculture (NMSA). 

56 
 
 The matter regarding allocation of land for establishment of Regional Fertilizer 
Control Laboratories (RFCLs) at Kandla, Vizag  and Mangalore is being pursued 
vigorously with concerned authorities. 
 
(a) This Ministry has requested Ministry of Shipping to allot land nearby Kandla Port 
Trust on easy terms and conditions for establishment of Lab at Kandla. 
 
(b) Director of Agricultur e, Government of Andhra Pradesh has requested Collector 
& DM, Visakhapatnam for early allotment of land for establishment of RFCL at Vizag. 
 
(c) We have also requested Secretary (Agriculture), Government of Karnataka and 
Chairman, New Mangalore Port Trust for allotment of land at Mangalore for 
establishment of RFCL at Mangalore.  
 
[Ministry of Agriculture (Department of Agriculture & Co-operation), 
                                  OM No.6-3/2013-B&A dated the 15th July, 2013]         
 
 
 
BUDGETARY ALLOCATION FOR NORTH EASTERN STATES OUT OF CENTRAL 
PLAN ALLOCATION 
(Recommendation Para No. 4.64) 
 
The Committee are  aware that all Ministries/Departments of the Government of 
India, except a few specifically exempted ones, earmark 10% of their annual budget, 
less allocation for externally aided schemes and local or event specific 
schemes/projects, for expenditure in No rth Eastern Region.  However, they are 
unhappy to note that utilization of funds has been lower in comparison to the RE during 
the Fiscals 2007-08 to 2010-11.  The Committee are given to understand that the broad 
reasons for gross underutilization of funds  earmarked for North Eastern States are 
reduction in BE at RE stage, absence of proposals/non - finalization of proposals from 
States.  Also, as some of the Schemes are demand driven, expenditure is dependent on 
the initiatives taken by the stakeholder.  Th ey are, however, happy to note that the 
situation is not beyond redemption and with all North -Eastern States having been 

57 
covered under the ambit of the National Food Security Mission, the change in fortunes 
is almost knocking at the door. 
 
 The Committee, therefore, recommend that the reasons for poor performance of 
these States augurs an in -depth study and the problems addressed with the feed back 
from the recipient States, their farmers and other Stakeholders.  The Committee would 
also like the Department  to prepare a case for ensuring that the funds accumulated in 
the Non -Lapsable Central Pool of Resources (NLCPR) be invariably utilized for 
development of infrastructure for the agriculture sector, that can help implementation of 
Schemes more effectively.  They also desire that the Department should take up this 
matter, with utmost alacrity in the North East Council and impress upon all State 
Governments to come up with initiatives through Schemes specific to the special 
requirements of the Region. 
 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
Utilization of funds for NE Region during the last few years has been in the range 
of 75%-90% of the funds allocated.  During XII Plan period the Department will monitor 
utilization of funds for NR Region and will try to fully utilize the allocation.    
The committee‟s suggestions on utilization of NLCPR have been noted. 
  No specific percentage of RKVY funds are earmarked to North Eastern states 
under RKVY.  The year -wise states‟ share of allocation of RKVY funds are decided on 
the basis of the allocation criteria prescribed in the scheme guidelines. 
 
[Ministry of Agriculture (Department of Agriculture & Co-operation), 
                                  OM No.6-3/2013-B&A dated the 15th July, 2013]          
 
 
 
 

58 
CHAPTER - III 
 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO NOT 
DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE GOVERNMENT’S REPLIES 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
-NIL- 
 
  

59 
CHAPTER - IV 
 
OBSERVATIONS/ RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF 
THE GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE 
 
 
TWELFTH PLAN DOCUMENT 
(Recommendation Para No. 3.26) 
 
The Committee are exasperated to be apprised that all agencies concerned with 
finalization of the Twelfth Plan Document have not paid any heed to their advise 
contained in their Thirty-fourth Report on Demands for Grants (2012-13) for streamlining 
the plan ning process as the incumbent process is riddled with the need for obtaining 
multi-agency clearances which are time consuming.  The fate that befell the Eleventh 
Plan was the guiding factor for the Committee‟s instant recommendation.  On being 
informed that though the National Development Council approved the Twelfth Plan on 
27 December, 2012, yet it is unable to see the light of the day, further aggravates the 
Committee.  The representatives of the Planning Commission have confessed during 
the Oral Evidenc e that even during the Tenth and Eleventh Five Year Plan, there had 
been remarkable delay in their finalization, which had a negative impact on not only the 
new Schemes but also the prospects of ongoing Schemes were also severely 
hampered.  Such a position  on this important issue worries the Committee that the 
coming Thirteenth Five Year Plan would also be delayed.  The concerned agencies 
taking refuge that extant planning process as well thought of and one that has stood the 
test of time does not cut any i ce with the Committee.  Having been a witness to the 
detrimental effects of the prevalent system in terms of reduced outlays and staggering 
of timelines, the Committee recommend that all the concerned should break free from 
the shackles of the past and str eamline this time consuming process and also ensure 
compliance tot the guidelines of the extant planning process, and thereby aid the 
planning process in getting rid of its systemic ills. 
 
 

60 
Reply of the Government 
There is a standard procedure to finalize the Five Year Plan which starts with 
constitution of Working Groups of various sectors and ends with approval by NDC. The 
schemes as have been decided to be continued are required to go through the process 
of obtaining fresh in -principle approval of Planni ng Commission.  Thereafter, these 
schemes are put up before EFC/CCEA for approval as required in the guidelines after 
which, the schemes are implemented in the revised format, as approved.  It may 
however be stated that the schemes being implemented during  the 11th Five Year Plan 
continue to be implemented as per extant guidelines till EFC/CCEA approvals are 
obtained.  This ensures that ongoing schemes are not affected by the approval process. 
 
 [Ministry of Agriculture (Department of Agriculture & Co-operation), 
                                  OM No.6-3/2013-B&A dated the 15th July, 2013] 
 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
For comments of the Committee please refer to Para No. 1.7 of Chapter I of this 
Report.  
 
FINANCIAL ALLOCATION AND UTILIZATION DURING FIRST YEAR OF THE 
TWELFTH PLAN 
(Recommendation Para No. 3.28)   
 
Constrained to note that the financial performance of the Department during the 
first fiscal of the Twelfth Plan is reminiscent of the problems plaguing the system of 
planning and implementation. During the year 2012 -13 against a proposal of 
Rs.49,674.34 crore, the allocation by the Planning Commission as reflected in BE for 
2012-13 was mere Rs.20,308.00 crore.  Further, due to the tardy utilization of funds by 
implementing agencies  during the first two quarters, the RE was curtailed to 
Rs.17867.32 crore.  The actual expenditure was approximately Rs.13478.19 crore (till 
31 December, 2012).  The Department attributed this to reduction at BE in funds sought 

61 
by RKVY.  Though the Department sought Rs.25,000.00 crore, they were allocated only 
Rs.9217.00 crore as BE.  This was further pruned at RE to Rs.8400.00 crore. 
 Being concerned to note that the first Fiscal of the Twelfth Plan is reminiscent of 
the past ones, the Committee urge all t he agencies concerned to introspect at their 
working, identify their weak areas, work on them and thereby ensure that things 
turnaround in the next Fiscal and the variation between proposals, allocation and 
utilization is negated to the extent possible. 
Reply of the Government 
The outlay of the Department for fiscal year 2012 -13 was reduced to Rs. 
17867.32 crore at RE stage. Out of this, Department utilized an amount of Rs.17690.19 
crore which works out to 99% of the allocated amount.  In respect of RKVY, e ntire 
allocated amount at RE stage has been utilized. To reduce the variation between 
allocation and expenditure, State Governments were exhorted by the Department at 
various levels to increase their pace of utilization of funds, submission of Utilization 
Certificates and approval of projects under the schemes. The concern of the Committee 
has been noted. 
[Ministry of Agriculture (Department of Agriculture & Co-operation), 
                                  OM No.6-3/2013-B&A dated the 15th July, 2013]  
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
For comments of the Committee please refer to Para No. 1.10 of Chapter I of this 
Report.  
 
NATIONAL FOOD SECURITY MISSION (NFSM) 
(Recommendation Para No. 4.52) 
 
The Committee note with concern that the malaise afflicting the physical 
achievements against the target set have continued unabated during the year 2011 -12 
and 2012 -13.  The Ministry on their part have pleaded that this mismatch between 
achievement and target during the Fiscal 2012-13 is because report from States are yet 

62 
to be received.  However, they have been requesting all concerned States repeatedly to 
submit their monthly reports along with fund utilization regularly.  Also, the progress of 
States in terms of physical and financial achievements against targets is also monitored 
in the NFSM Executive Committee meetings quarterly as well as through monitoring 
visits of the Department‟s officials.  The Committee deprecate this delay in timely 
furnishing of data by the States as this hampers the monitoring and evaluation of the 
Scheme.  This ultimately delays the initiation of corrective measures that would ensure 
increased viability of the National Food Security Mission.  They also do not buy the 
argument of the Department that rather than looking at individual components, the 
overall picture should be looked into.  Guided by the adage that “Drops make an 
Ocean”, the individual components should be looked into as they ultimately shape the 
overall picture.   They, therefore, recommend that all implementing agencies undertake 
an in-depth analysis into the performance of individual components of this Scheme and 
thereby ensure that the existing gap between achievements and the targets set is 
bridged in quick time. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 In the fiscal year 2012 -13, achievement against targets under demonstrations is 
92.19%, cropping based trainings 224%, seed distribution 80.94%, IPM 82.77% and 
machineries 134.24%.  States and implementing agencies are regularly pursued for 
submission of c omponent-wise progress reports as also effective implementation of 
programmes. Progress of implementation is also monitored through correspondence, 
constant dialogue, monitoring visits and in NFSM EC and GC meetings.  States have 
also been asked to complete process of concurrent evaluation of the scheme.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           
[Ministry of Agriculture (Department of Agriculture & Co-operation), 
                                  OM No.6-3/2013-B&A dated the 15th July, 2013]  
 
 
 
 

63 
Comments of the Committee 
 
For comments of the Committee please refer to Para No. 1.13 of Chapter I of this 
Report.  
 
SUPPORT TO STATE EXTENSION PROGRAMMES FOR EXTENSION REFORMS  
 (Recommendation Para No. 4.60)  
 
Observing that Agricultural Technology Management Agency (ATMA) is a 
purportedly farmer-driven institutionalized arrangement at district level for dissemination 
of farm technology and knowledge.  Notwithstanding the arguments put forth by the 
Government, the Committee are flabbergasted to know that formulation of District Level 
Plans are being held up as the District Magistrate being preoccupied with other work is 
unable to Chair the meeting of ATMA.  The meeting of ATMA are hardly being held, 
which has a c ascading effect down the lane in terms of delay in finalization of District 
Plans, which ultimately further delay finalization of State Extension Work Plans which 
then block release of funds for extension activities.  In view of the fact that District 
Magistrate is rather hard pressed for time, the Committee recommend that either the 
Chairmanship of ATMA be entrusted to some other senior official or otherwise the 
District Magistrate be duty bound to Chair the Sitting of ATMA.  Further, they desire that 
elected representatives of the people be also co -opted in the working body of ATMA to 
ensure accountability of the executive, which will ensure that extension system, is truly 
farmer driven and farmer accountable. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 Convergence among the developmental departments is sine qua non  for 
effective implementation of agricultural extension activities.  In particular, all Agriculture 
& allied departments and associated offices like the District Administrative Centre, 
Agriculture Marketing Board, lead bank etc. all have to work together for effective 
delivery of extension services.  District Magistrate is associated with all such 
departments in one way or the other.  Hence, it was decided to have District 

64 
Magistrate/Collector a s the chairman of ATMA Governing Body.  It has also been 
provided in the Guidelines for various schemes such as National Food Security Mission, 
National Project on Management of Soil Health & Fertility that their implementation 
should be done through ATMA.  In case of RKVY also, the State Governments have to 
base their District Agriculture Plans on Strategic Research and Extension Plans 
developed under ATMA.  The States have been requested that all these and other 
related schemes should also be discussed in the ATMA Governing Body Meeting to be 
held under the chairmanship of District Magistrate/Collector.     In case of such a 
scenario of limited meetings on Agriculture, presence of DM/Collector can be better 
ensured.  In any case, there is a provision in the  Scheme Guidelines that the States 
may choose anyone else as the Chairman of Governing Body of ATMA but such an 
officer should not be below the rank of CEO, Zila Parishad / Additional District Collector 
in place of District Collector.   
 
In order to ensure  accountability of the executives, ATMA Governing Board also 
includes one Farmer Representative, one Horticulture Farmer, one Livestock Farmer 
and Representatives of women SHG & SC/ST Farmers. All these farmers are 
nominated to the Governing Board by the D istrict Farmers Advisory Committee. The 
Scheme has a provision of constitution of Farmers Advisory Committees (FACs) at 
State Districts and Block levels comprising a group of farmers to advise and provide 
Field level inputs to the administrative bodies. A total of 5913 such Committees have 
been constituted in the country.   
 
[Ministry of Agriculture (Department of Agriculture & Co-operation), 
                                  OM No.6-3/2013-B&A dated the 15th July, 2013]  
 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
For comments of the Committee please refer to Para No. 1.22 of Chapter I of this 
Report.  
 

65 
 
NATIONAL PROJECT ON MANAGEMENT OF SOIL HEALTH AND FERTILITY 
(Recommendation Para No. 4.62) 
 
 
 The Committee has taken note of the fact that presently as against 1292.22 lakhs 
land holdings, only 505 lakh soil health cards issued.  Further, Geo -referenced soil 
fertility maps of only 118 districts have been completed.  As against target of 242 
static/mobile Soil Testing Labs, only 105 are in position.  The Committee ta ke the issue 
of deteriorating Soil Health/Fertility across the Country very seriously and direct the 
Government to embark upon the task of firstly obtaining the Soil Health status and then 
the remedial measures post haste.  As stated by the Department this  could be achieved 
by the three pronged strategy of issue of Soil Health Cards/digital soil maps/increasing 
the number of Static/Mobile Soil Testing Laboratories/development of Mini Soil Testing 
Kit.  The testing should be comprehensive both in terms of Ma cro/Micro nutrients and 
this information should not be confined to District Headquarters, but be readily available 
at the farm level. 
 
 Once this exercise is accomplished then only can the process of improving soil 
health be initiated.  The Committee, ther efore, desire that the process of soil testing be 
completed across the Country during the next two fiscals.  This would not only ensure in 
arresting the deteriorating soil health but would also ensure the inception of soil health 
improvement which directly reflects upon the production and productivity. 
 
Reply of the Government 
As per latest information received from Indian Institute of Soil Science, digital soil 
maps of 152 districts out of 171 districts have been completed.   This component on 
preparation of digitized maps is proposed to be continued in 12 th plan period to cover 
remaining districts. Similarly, setting up/strengthening of soil testing laboratories is 
proposed to be continued in 12 th Plan period. Provision for soil testing kits has been 
incorporating in the 12 th Plan proposal @ Rs.15,000 per kit subject to the approval of 
National Mission for Sustainable Agriculture. 

66 
 
The Soil Testing Laboratories being sanctioned under NPMSH&F include 
comprehensive testing facilities both for macro and micro nutrients.  Most of the states 
are using innovative methods of making information available to farmers through 
internet & SMS, apart from conventional methods like through Extension staff and by 
post. 
 
Soil testing is an ongoing process which is to be repe ated every 3 -4 years and 
there is no fixed time period to complete this activity.  In addition, there are other 
methods available like digital soil maps to give soil fertility status and package of 
practices developed by State Governments also provide fertilizer recommendations. 
 
[Ministry of Agriculture (Department of Agriculture & Co-operation), 
                                  OM No.6-3/2013-B&A dated the 15th July, 2013]  
 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
For comments of the Committee please refer to Para No. 1.25 of Chapter I of this 
Report.   
 
OUTSTANDING UTILIZATION CERTIFICATES (UCs) 
(Recommendation Para No. 4.63)  
 
The Committee applaud  the Department for their concerted efforts which have 
resulted in a drastic reduction in the number of pending UCs from a figure of 1306 as on 
1 April, 2012 to 289 as on 31 December, 2012.  The figure has further been lowered to 
201.  However, as the liqu idation of all Outstanding Utilization Certificates has not been 
achieved till date, the Committee recommend that the Government tackle this issue on 
a warfront and impress upon all States/UTs to clear their backlog. They further observe 
that this pendency  is reflective of bad accounting and financial management being 
practiced by the errant States/UTs, and urge them to initiate corrective measures at the 

67 
earliest as in absence of the same, they are the ones who have to bear the 
consequences.  Lastly, they plead upon the Government to ensure that the case of 
outstanding utilization certificates is eliminated during the current plan period. 
 
Reply of the Government  
As on 30.04.2013, 187 UCs for amount of Rs.416.50 Crores are outstanding. 
(The state wise and year wise break up of the 187 UCs pending as on 30.04. 2013  is 
enclosed as Annexures- I & II). 
 
Principal Accounts Office, M/o Agriculture has taken various steps to liquidate the 
outstanding Utilisation Certificates.  The special UCs Audit have been conducted for the 
various States which has yielded tremendous results.  Principal Accounts Office is 
monitoring status of UCs rigorously for all the Divisions and had directed PAOs not to 
make any payment without submission of the UCs by the Divisions.  Divisions have also 
responded positively and submitted many UCs and only 187 UCs were pending as on 
30.04.2013.   
 
Out of these 187 UCs, only 02 UCs for RKVY Rs. 235.98 Crores are pending.  All 
efforts are being made to liquidate the remaini ng UCs.  RKVY Division has also been 
requested to liquidate the outstanding UCs before 31.03.2013.  
 
Further, special UCs Audit of the States/Implementing Agencies against whom 
more number of UCs are outstanding shall be conducted to liquidate the UCs duri ng 
special audit itself.  
 
[Ministry of Agriculture (Department of Agriculture & Co-operation), 
                                  OM No.6-3/2013-B&A dated the 15th July, 2013]   
 
 
   Comments of the Committee  
 
For comments of the Committee please refer to Para No. 1.28 of Chapter I of this 
Report.   
 

68 
CHAPTER - V 
 
OBSERVATIONS/ RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF 
 WHICH FINAL REPLIES OF GOVERNMENT 
 ARE STILL AWAITED  
 
OILSEEDS PRODUCTION UNDER INTEGRATED SCHEME OF OILSEEDS, 
PULSES, OILPALM AND MAIZE 
(Recommendation Para No. 4.56) 
 
Oilseeds production programme is being implemented under ISOPOM from  1 
April, 2004 in the states of Andhra Pradesh, Bihar, Chhatisgarh, Gujarat, Haryana, 
Karnataka, Madhya Pradesh, Maharas htra, Orissa, Punjab, Rajasthan, Tamil Nadu, 
Uttar Pradesh and West Bengal.  As informed, this programme has helped in increasing 
the production of oilseeds from 10.83million tonnes in 1985 -86 to 29.80 million tonnes 
during 2011-12.  The maximum yield achi eved was 1133kg/ha during the Fiscal 2011 -
12.  Although, various schemes/projects, were instrumental, in improving the 
productivity, much more needs to be desired to enhance it further.  Then there is 
yawning gap between demonstration average yield and loc al average obtained in the 
fields.  For instance demonstration yield of mustard, soyabean and sunflower is in the 
vicinity of 14-16 q/ha, whereas it just 12 in a farmers‟ field.  However, what concerns the 
Committees is not only the fluctuating trend in pr oduction of oil seeds, as a result of the 
vagaries of climate but also yielded. The Committee, therefore, impress upon the 
Government to look into these areas urgently and ensure that oilseeds production and 
productivity receives a shot in the arm, as this  will not only enable to Country to attain 
self sufficiency in oils, whilst reducing the nation‟s import bill as well.  This would also 
help boost the production of animal fodder. 
Reply of the Government 
The Department is in the process of finalizing the National Mission on Oilseeds & Oil 
Palm (NMOOP) for increasing production/productivity of oilseeds and area expansion 
under oil palm/Tree Born Oilseeds (TBOs) for augmenting the domestic availability of 
vegetable oils in the country.  The broad strategy would include: 
 Strategies for yield improvement in districts with low yield high spread and to 
explore the possibilities of area expansion in districts with low spread high yield; 

69 
 Cluster demonstrations on improved production technologies of oilseeds 
including use of micro-nutrients, gypsum; etc. 
 Augmenting production and availability of certified/quality seeds with emphasis 
on seed treatment; 
 Enhancing irrigation through Sprinklers/Rain -guns/water carrying pipes and 
pump-sets; 
 Encouraging cultivation of oils eeds in areas of low wheat  productivity , rice 
fallows and intercropping with coarse cereals, pulses; 
 Promotion of Sunflower cultivation in Zaid season; 
 Capacity building through Frontline demonstrations/ Farmers Field 
Demonstration in Pest & Disease Management; 
 Procurement tie-up through NAFED. 
 
[Ministry of Agriculture (Department of Agriculture & Co-operation), 
                                  OM No.6-3/2013-B&A dated the 15th July, 2013]   
    
Comments of the Committee  
 
For comments of the Committee please refer to Para No. 1.16 of Chapter I of this 
Report.    
 
OILSEEDS PRODUCTION UNDER INTEGRATED SCHEME OF OILSEEDS, 
PULSES, OILPALM AND MAIZE 
(Recommendation Para No. 4.57) 
 
 
On a serious note, the Committee deprecate the repetitive constraints in oilseeds 
production as listed by the Government.  It has further been stated that 72% oilseeds 
are grown under rainfed conditions in the Country and oilseed crops are also prone to 
various biotic stresses.  This further gets compounded by low Seed Replacement Rate 
(SRR) and low Seed Multiplication Ratio (SMR).  Lack of Minimum Support Price (MSP) 
also compounds the problems. Noting the above -mentioned systemic inadequacies, 
which in the Committee‟s opinion have to tackled head on, they urge the Government to 
synergize various programmes being implemented in the Agriculture Sector to ensure 
that benefits from Schemes are interlinked.  Then only the constraints in oil seeds 
production will be overcome.  They, further desire that t he Government embark upon an 
action plan as suggested post haste and intimate                                                                  
the Committee of the same.  As efforts to tap potential                                                                                                 

70 
from Tree Borne Oilseeds (TBO) have not yielded the desired results, the Committee 
desire focused attention towards this nascent area. 
 
Reply of the Government 
NAFED would be involved for procurement of Oilseed Crop to ensure that the 
benefit of MSP reaches the farmers.  As regard, harnessing potential of TBOs, TRIFED 
a multi State Cooperative Society would be involved to facilitate the procurement of 
TBOs, which are largely collected by the Tribals. 
 
National Mission on Oilseeds & Oilpalm would encourage/ provide linkage for 
dovetailing of resources from other schemes like Mahatma Gandhi National Rural 
Employment Guarantee Act (MGNREGA), National Mission on Susta inable Agriculture 
(NMSA), National Mission on Agriculture Extension & Technology (NMAET) and 
National Food Security Mission (NFSM) for enhancing production of oilseeds in the 
country. Efforts would be made by National Mission on Oilseeds & Oil Palm (NMOOP ) 
and NFSM to promote inter/mix -cropping of oilseeds and pulses under similar agro -
climatic conditions.  
[Ministry of Agriculture (Department of Agriculture & Co-operation), 
                                  OM No.6-3/2013-B&A dated the 15th July, 2013]   
 
Comments of the Committee  
 
For comments of the Committee please refer to Para No. 1.16 of Chapter I of this 
Report.     
 
 
  
 
NEW DELHI;                        BASUDEB ACHARIA 
03 December, 2013                   Chairman 
12 Agrahayana,1935 (Saka)                      Committee on Agriculture 

71 
Annexure - I 
 
State-wise Outstanding Utilisation Certificates   in 
respect of Grant No. 1  as on 30-04-2013 for the grant 
released upto 31-03-2011 
Name of states No. Of Ucs  Amount in Rs. 
Andhra Pradesh 8 1726482800 
Assam 1 2156000 
Bihar 10 192285343 
Chhattisgarh 2 34788700 
Daman & Diu 2 1200000 
Gujarat 1 5900000 
Haryana 5 32725000 
Himachal Pradesh 6 4249000 
J & K 3 1302078 
Jharkhand 3 29335000 
Karnataka 13 495448000 
Kerala 13 30248528 
Lakshadweep 1 200000 
Madhya Pradesh 10 65546300 
Maharashtra 10 94247856 
Manipur 3 21150000 
MEGHALAYA 3 22673000 
Mizoram 1 1000000 
Nagaland 2 1100000 
New Delhi 33 420731760 
Orissa 12 49312878 
Punjab 1 3500000 
Rajasthan 8 113726500 
Sikkim 2 7100000 
Tamil Nadu 7 11723000 
Tripura 3 13680000 
Uttar Pradesh 13 45557937 
Uttrakhand 4 5629000 
West Bengal 7 731953750 
Grand Total 187 4164952430 
 

72 
                             Annexure -II 
Year-wise Outstanding Utilisation Certificates   in 
respect of Grant No. 1  as on *09-05-2013 for the grant 
released upto 31-03-2011 
Year No. of Ucs Amount in Rs. 
1992-93 1 410800 
1993-94 3 216234 
1994-95 1 250000 
1995-96 2 1191080 
2000-01 2 331500 
2001-02 7 905856 
2002-03 4 162550 
2003-04 6 375400 
2004-05 6 15272987 
2005-06 6 49955950 
2006-07 15 27439343 
2007-08 22 31725500 
2008-09 24 2942695500 
2009-10 33 600116730 
2010-11 55 493903000 
Grand Total 187 4164952430 
 
______________________________________________________________________ 
* At the time of factual verification of the Report DAC  revised this figure  to 30.04.2013 as on 
31.10.2013.   
  

73 
Annexure-III 
Component details of the Central Sector Scheme ‘Development and 
Strengthening of Infrastructure Facilities for Production and Distribution of 
Quality Seeds’ 
The Department of Agriculture and Co -operation is implementing a Central 
Sector Scheme known as „Development and Strengthening of Infrastructure Facilities 
for Production and Distribution of Quality Seeds‟ since 2005 -06 on an all India basis.   
The objective of the ongoing scheme is to ensure production and multiplication of high 
yielding certified/quality seeds of all crops in sufficient quantities and make the seeds 
available to farmers, including those in remote areas, not easily accessible by rail/road 
on time.  The Scheme has the following components:- 
 
S. 
No 
Name of the 
Component 
Details of the component 
(i)  Transport 
Subsidy on 
Movement of 
Seeds 
This component covers North -Eastern States including Sikkim, 
Jammu & Kashmir, Himachal Pradesh, Uttarakhand and hill areas of 
West Bengal. The component provides for (a) 100% reimbursement 
of difference between rail and road transportation cost for the 
movement of seeds produced outside the State and (b) the actual 
cost, restricted to maximum limit of Rs.60 per quintal whichever is 
less for the movement of seed within the State from State capital / 
district headquarters to sale outlets/sale counters. 
(ii)  Establishment 
& Maintenance 
of Seed Bank. 
 
In order to ensure that seeds are available to the farmers at the time 
of natural calamities like floods, droughts, etc. this component is 
implemented to establish a  seed bank to maintain stocks of 
foundation and  certified seeds of different crops / varieties which 
can be utilised for such contingent requirements. 
 
Under this component, grants-in-aid are released to National Seeds 
Corporation, State Farms Corporation of India, State Seeds 
Corporation, Kerala Seed Development Authority, Govt. of Tamil 
Nadu, Jharkhand, etc. 
(iii)  Quality Control 
Arrangement 
on Seeds  
 
This component deals with arrangement to regulate the quality of 
seeds under the Seeds Act, 1966 to strengthen quality control 
organisations like State Seed Certification Agencies, State Seed 
Testing Laboratories, Central Seed Testing Laboratory and Centra l 
Seed Committee apart from imparting training to officials engaged in 
the seed sector and for enforcing the seed law in order to ensure 
the production and distribution of quality seeds to protect the 
interest of farmers. This component also deals with the  
strengthening of National Seed Research and Training Centre at 

74 
Varanasi (Uttar Pradesh). This Centre is accredited as Central Seed 
Testing Laboratory and acts as referral seed testing laboratory as 
well as a premier training centre on all aspects of seed technology 
to different stakeholders.  
 
Under this component, grants -in-aid are released to State/UT 
Departments of Agriculture, National Seeds Corporation, State 
Farms Corporation of India, State Seed Certification Agencies, State 
Seed Corporations, State Agricultural Universities, etc. 
(iv)  Seed Village 
Programme 
 
To upgrade the quality of farmer -saved seed, which is about 70 -
75% of the total seed used for crop production programme, financial 
assistance is provided for distribution of foundation/certified seeds 
at 50% cost of the seed of crops for production of certified/quality 
seeds only and for training on seed production and technology to 
the farmers. 
 
The seed produced in these seed villages are preserved/stored  till 
the next sowing season. In order to encourage farmers to develop 
storage capacity of appropriate quality, assistance is given to 
farmers for making/procuring of Pusa Bin/Mud bin/Bin made from 
paper pulp for storing of seed produced by the farmers on their 
farms. 
 
Under this component, grants -in-aid are released to State/UT 
Departments of Agriculture, National Seeds Corporation, State 
Farms Corporation of India, State Seed Certification Agencies, State  
Seed Corporations,  State Agricultural Universities,  Krishi Vigyan 
Kendras, etc. 
(v)  Assistance for 
Creation/ 
Strengthening 
of 
Infrastructure 
Facilities in 
Public Sector. 
In order to establish/strengthen infrastructure facilities for production 
and distribution of quality seeds, assistance for c reating facilities of 
seed cleaning, grading, processing, packing and seed storage is 
provided. Assistance for strengthening of the existing seed 
corporation with respect to above mentioned infrastructure is also 
considered on case to case basis. The assis tance is available in the 
form of grants -in-aid for specific purpose of creating infrastructure 
facilities mentioned above only. 
 
Assistance is provided at the standard rate of Rs.22.25 lakh per 
seed processing plant of 1000 MTs (including construction of 
building and machinery/equipment) or multiples thereof. For 
construction of seed storage godown, assistance is provided at the 
standard rate of Rs.25 lakh per seed godown of 1000 MT capacity 
and multiples thereof. 
 
Under this component, grants -in-aid are r eleased to State/UT 
Departments of Agriculture, National Seeds Corporation, State 

75 
Farms Corporation of India, State  Seed Corporations,  etc. 
(vi)  Application of 
Biotechnology 
in Agriculture. 
 
This component is being implemented for providing financial 
assistance for post -release monitoring of transgenic crops through 
State Agricultural Universities (SAUs)/Department of Agriculture of 
States/Krishi Vigyan Kendras, strengthening of State Seed Testing 
Laboratories for quality control of GM seeds, public aw areness 
campaign through SAUs, scientific organisations/Institutes and for 
promotion of tissue culture through SAUs/specialised 
institutions/seed corporations. 
  
Under this component, grants -in-aid are released to State/UT 
Departments of Agriculture, Natio nal Seeds Corporation, State 
Farms Corporation of India, State  Seed Corporations,  State 
Agricultural Universities,  etc. 
(vii)  Assistance for 
Boosting Seed 
Production in 
Private Sector 
 
Under this component, credit linked back -ended capital subsidy is 
provided at the rate of 25% of the project cost subject to a 
maximum limit of Rs.25.00 lakh per unit on seed infrastructure 
development. Private companies, individual entrepreneurs, self 
help groups, seed cooperatives, partnership firms are eligible for 
subsidy. The component is implemented through 
nationalised/scheduled commercial banks. The assistance is for 
creation of infrastructure facilities relating to seed cleaning, 
grading, processing, seed treating, packaging and storage units as 
well as for seed testing facilities. This assistance is primarily for 
high volume low value seeds. National Seeds Corporation is the 
nodal agency for implementation and monitoring of this 
component.  
 
(viii)  Promoting for 
Hybrid Rice 
Seed 
Production 
 
Under this component, assistance is provided for production as 
well as distribution of hybrid rice seeds. Production subsidy @ 
Rs.20/- per kg. and 
distribution subsidy @Rs.25/- per kg. are given to beneficiaries. 
 
Under this component, grants -in-aid are released to State/UT 
Departments of Agriculture, National Seeds Corporation, State 
Farms Corporation of India, State  Seed Corporations, etc. 
(ix)  Assistance for 
Boosting Seed 
Export 
 
Under this component, assistance is provided for obtaining the 
membership of international organisations like International Seed 
Testing Association (ISTA) and to participate in the Organisation 
for Economic Cooperation and Development (OECD) schemes for 
the development of Indian seed industry and promotion of export of 
seeds.  
 
 
 

76 
Annexure-IV  
                ALL INDIA REQUIREMEN T (DEMA ND) & PRODUCTION (AV AILABILITY) OF 
CERTIFIED / QUALITY SEED. 
QTY. IN LAKH QUINTAL  
Year Requirement/ 
Demand 
Production/ 
Availability 
2007-2008 180.74 194.31 
2008-2009 207.28 250.35 
2009-2010 249.12 279.72 
2010-2011 290.76 321.36 
2011-2012 330.41 353.62 
2012-2013 315.19 328.58 
Kharif -2013 139.88 153.94 
 
  

77 
Annexure-V  
 
Commodity-wise/State-wise/Year-wise procurement of Oilseeds, Pulses 
  & Cotton under Price Support Scheme from 2006-2007 to 2011-2012. 
S. 
No 
Year Commodity / Crop 
Season 
State Quantity 
procured  
  (in MTs) 
MSP 
 (Rs. Per 
Qtl) 
1. 2006-2007 Groundnut 
Rabi 2006 
Orissa 116 1520 
2. 2006-2007 Sunflower seed 
Rabi 2006 
Chhattisgarh 1094 1500 
Andhra Pradesh 14 
Punjab 1947 
Bihar 1000 
West Bengal 1187 
    
3. 2006-2007 Safflower seed 
Rabi 2006 
Maharashtra 32855 1565 
Andhra Pradesh 6362 
Karnataka 11532 
    
4. 2006-2007 Mustard seed 
Rabi 2006 
Rajasthan 14,18,000 1715 
Haryana 4,58,000 
Gujarat 1,04,000 
Madhya Pradesh 2,00,000 
Uttar Pradesh 17,000 
Delhi 3,000 
Punjab 4,000 
Chhattisgarh 1,000 

78 
 
        
5. 2006-2007 Soyabean 
Kharif 2006 
Andhra Pradesh 7 1020 
6. 2006-2007 Seasam seed 
Kharif 2006 
West Bengal 
  
377 
  
1550 
7. 2007-2008 Ball Copra 
2007 season 
Karnataka 19,000 3870 
Kerala 156 
    
8. 2007-2008 Milling copra  
2007 season 
Kerala 3502 3620 
Tamil Nadu 5707 
A&N Island 2800 
     
9. 2007-2008 Milling copra 
(below FAQ grade)  
2007 season 
Andhra Pradesh 15649 3350 
10. 2007-2008 Mustard seed 
Rabi 2007 
Rajasthan 21,274 1715 
Gujarat 225 
Madhya Pradesh 162 
Punjab 218 
Chhattisgarh 26 
11. 2007-2008 Safflower seed 
Rabi 2007 
Maharashtra 27 1565 
Andhra Pradesh 94 

79 
 
12. 2007-2008 Sesamum seed 
Rabi 2007 
West Bengal 
   
91 
  
1560 
13. 2008-2009 Ball copra 
Season 2008 
Karnataka 174 3910 
14. 2008-2009 Milling copra 
Season 2008 
Kerala 489 3660 
15. 2008-2009 Cotton  
Kharif 2008 
Maharashtra 
(Bales) 
16,79,161 
(35,20,671) 
2500 & 
3000 
Andhra Pradesh 
(Bales)  
70,718 
(1,34,018) 
Gujarat 
(Bales) 
58,582 
(1,17,618) 
16. 2008-2009 Groundnut 
Kharif 2008 
Uttar Pradesh  40 2100 
17. 2008-2009 Urad  
Kharif 2008 
West Bengal 
  
481 
  
2520 
18. 2009-2010 Sunflower seed 
Kharif 2008/ 
Rabi 2009 
Maharashtra 2,801 2215 
Karnataka 4,599 
Andhra Pradesh 4,670 
Haryana 1,648 
    
 
19. 2009-2010 Milling copra 
Season 2009 
Kerala 12,926 4450 
Tamil Nadu 10,018 
A&N Islands 2,333 
Lakshdweep 1,537 

80 
    
 
20. 2009-2010 Ball copra 
Season 2009 
Karnataka 1250 4700 
21. 2009-2010 AP Copra Andhra Pradesh 
  
510 
  
3900 
22. 2010-11 Milling Copra 
Season 
Kerala 
Tamil Nadu 
A&N Islands 
Lakshadweep 
                
14770 
7434 
5015 
3381 
  
4450 
23. 2010-11 Ball Copra Season Karnataka 895 4700 
24. 2010-11 Milling Copra (Spl. 
Grade) 
Season 2010 
Andhra Pradesh 2,156 3900 
25. 2010-11 De-Husked Coconut 
Season 2010 
Kerala 22,144 
Converted 
into Copra 
1200 
26. 2010-11 Sunflower Seed Haryana 
Orissa 
                   
861 2350 
27. 2010-11 Sessum Seed West Bengal 1,914 2850 
28. 2010-11 Tur  459 3000 + 
Rs.500/-per 
Qtl. as 
bonus 
29. 2010-11 Urad Madhya Pradesh 131 2000+500 
bonus 
31. 2010-11 Gram Rajasthan 
   
63440 
  
2100 
32. 2011-12 Milling copra  4525 5100 

81 
  
33. 2011-12 Urad  1.66 3300 + 
Rs.500/-per 
Qtl. as 
bonus 
34. 2011-12 Gram  
   
6,344 
  
2100 
35 2012 Milling Copra Tamil Nadu 
Lakshdweep 
Kerala 
Andhra Pradesh 
A&N 
30,000 
2900 
18101 
6628 
9207 
5100 
36 2012 Ball copra Kerala 
Karnataka 
2 
9228 
5350 
37 2012 Spl.Grade copra Andhra Pradesh 49 4335 

82 
ANNEXURE - VI 
Commodity-wise/State-wise/Year-wise procurement under Market Intervention Scheme  
(MIS) from 2001-02 to 2011-12 
Commodity State Procurement 
period 
Procuremen
t price (MIP)  
(Rs. per 
Qtl.) 
Procurement 
target 
(in MT) 
Actual 
procure- 
ment 
(in MT) 
Value of 
Qty. 
procure
d  
(Rs. in 
lakh) 
Loss 
incurred 
(Rs. in 
lakh) 
  
Chilli Andhra 
Pradesh 
2001-2002 
20.03.2001 to 
30.06.2001 
2400.00 15000.00 601.99 144.48 13.81 
Oil Palm Andhra 
Pradesh 
2001-2002 
01.03.2001 to  
31.10.2001 
275.00 105000.00 2750.00 75.63 99.76 
Oil Palm Karnataka 2001-2002 
01.04.2001 to 
31.10.2001 
275.00 8000.00 2489.71 68.47 18.66 
Arcanut Goa 2001-2002 
01.05.2001 to 
31.07.2001 
7300.00 208.53 208.53 152.23 53.07 
(A) Total of 2001-02 10250.00 128208.53 6050.23 440.80 185.30 
Arcanut Karnataka 2002-2003 
25.06.2002 to 
31.10.2002 
6000.00 10000.00 3097.00 1858.20 77.05 
Arcanut A & N 
Islands 
2002-2003 
01.06.2002 to 
31.10.2002 
5500.00 3250.00 204.85 112.67 13.96 
(B) Total of 2002-03 11500.00 13250.00 3301.85 1970.87 91.01 
Potato Uttar 
Pradesh 
2003-04 
22.02.2003 to 
25.04.2003 
190.00 100000.00 885.00 16.82 16.32 
 
Ginger Mizoram 2003-04 
01.04.2003 to 
30.06.2003 
400.00 15000.00 15000.00 600.00 167.25 
Potato West 
Bengal 
2003-04 
07.04.2003 to 
06.05.2003 
200.00 20000.00 8275.00 165.50 133.06 
Chilli Andhra 
Pradesh 
2003-04 
03.03.2004 to 
29.06.2004 
2650.00 30000.00 27677.00 7334.41 4754.37 

83 
Potato Uttar 
Pradesh 
2003-04 
15.02.2004 to 
30.04.2004 
195.00 100000.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 
 
Orange Rajasthan 2003-04 
15.02.2004 to 
30.03.2004 
244.00 5000.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 
 
Coriander 
Seeds 
Rajasthan 2003-04 
29.03.2004 to 
28.05.2004 
1450.00 2000.00 591.00 85.70 3.73 
Cumin 
Seeds 
Rajasthan 2003-04 
29.03.2004 to 
28.05.2004 
5200.00 2000.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 
(C) Total of 2003-04 10529.00 274000.00 52428.00 8202.42 5074.73 
Ginger Mizoram 2004-05 
15.04.2004 to 
15.06.2004 
500.00 5900.00 5900.00 295.00 279.70 
Onion Rajasthan 2004-05 
11.06.2004 to 
25.07.2004 
280.00 5000.00 26.60 0.74 0.22 
 
Hatkora Mizoram 2004-05 
17.08.2004 to 
16.09.2004 
450.00 1410.00 1410.00 63.45 44.45 
Apple 'C'  
Grade 
Himachal 
Pradesh 
2004-05 
01.08.2004 to 
31.10.2004 
400.00 32500.00 32500.00 1300.00 1591.75 
Apple 'C'  
Grade 
Jammu & 
Kashmir  
2004-05 
15.10.2004 to 
31.12.2004 
300.00 45000.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 
Ginger Mizoram 2004-05 
01.02.2005 to 
15.03.2005 
500.00 6400.00 6400.00 320.00 301.51 
Black 
Pepper 
Kerala 2004-05 
15.02.2005 to 
15.04.2005 
7000.00 5050.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 
 
Chilli Andhra 
Pradesh 
2004-05 
23.03.2005 to 
20.06.2005 
2700.00 30000.00 9581.00 2586.87 2010.50 
(D) Total of 2004-05 12130.00 131260.00 55817.60 4566.06 4228.13 
Garlic Rajasthan 2005-06 
10.05.2005 to 
10.06.2005 
700.00 2000.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 

84 
Onion Rajasthan 2005-06 
01.06.2005 to 
31.07.2005 
250.00 5000.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 
Apple 'C'  
Grade 
Uttara- 
khand 
2005-06 
01.08.2005 to 
31.10.2005 
350.00 10000.00 31.44 1.10 0.00 
Apple 'C'  
Grade 
Himachal 
Pradesh 
2005-06 
01.08.2005 to 
31.10.2005 
425.00 50000.00 50000.00 2125.00 296.29 
Malta Uttara- 
khand 
2005-06 
15.12.2005 to 
15.02.2006 
400.00 8000.00 39.20 1.57 0.00 Report  
Awaited 
Hatkora Mizoram 2005-06 
01.10.2005 to 
10.11.2005 
450.00 1700.00 1700.00 76.50 55.99 
  
Chilli Mizoram 2005-06 
15.02.2006 to 
15.03.2006 
2800.00 1250.00 1250.00 350.00 161.45 
(E) Total of 2005-06 5375.00 77950.00 53020.64 2554.17 513.73 
Onion Rajasthan 2006-07 
29.05.2006 to 
28.06.2006 
280.00 5000.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 
Apples 'C'  
grade 
Uttara- 
khand 
2006-07 
01.09.2006 to 
30.11.2006 
425.00 1000.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 
Malta Uttara- 
khand 
2006-07 
07.12.2006 to 
15.02.2007 
425.00 2000.00 14.52 0.62 0.00 
(F) Total of 2006-07 1130.00 8000.00 14.52 0.62 0.00 
Ginger Mizoram 2007-08 
05.05.2007 to 
04.06.2007 
500.00 10000.00 10000.00 500.00 156.00 
Chilli Mizoram 2007-08 
10.06.2007 to 
 10.07.2007 
2800.00 4250.00 4250.00 1190.00 606.00 
Passion  
Fruit 
Mizoram 2007-08 
10.06.2007 to 
10.07.2007 
700.00 8000.00 8000.00 560.00 251.15 
Apples 'C'  
grade 
Himachal 
Pradesh 
2007-08 
01.08.2007 to 
31.08.2007 
450.00 27000.00 29300.00 1318.50 1059.26 

85 
Apples 'C'  
grade 
Uttara- 
khand 
2007-08 
20.08.2007 to 
20.09.2007 
450.00 1500.00 114.94 5.17 3.58 
Malta 'C' 
grade 
Uttara- 
khand 
2007-08 
04.12.2007 to 
31.01.2008 
500.00 2000.00 108.65 5.43 4.57 
Onion Karnataka 2007-08 
01.01.2008 to 
31.01.2008 
450.00 30000.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 
(G) Total of 2007-08 5850.00 82750.00 51773.59 3579.10 2080.56 
Potato Uttar 
Pradesh 
2008-09 
08.04.2008 to 
07.05.2008 
250.00 100000.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 
 
Chilli Mizoram 2008-09 
21.04.2008 to 
21.05.2008 
2800.00 1810.00 1810.00 506.80 295.92 
 
Potato West 
Bengal 
2008-09 
12.05.2008 to 
11.06.2008 
230.00 100000.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 
Passion 
Fruit 
Mizoram 2008-09 
10.07.2008 to 
10.08.2008 
700.00 9000.00 9000.00 630.00 306.00 
Apples 'C'  
grade 
Uttara- 
khand 
2008-09 
01.08.2008 to 
31.08.2008 
450.00 1500.00 84.46 3.80 0.00 Report  
Awaited 
Apples 'C'  
grade 
Himachal 
Pradesh 
2008-09 
01.08.2008 to 
30.09.2008 
450.00 38000.00 28452.00 1280.34 2533.00 
  
Malta 'C' 
grade 
Uttara- 
khand 
2008-09 
01.11.2008 to 
31.12.2008 
525.00 1600.00 66.13 3.47 0.00 Report  
Awaited 
Chow-chow Mizoram 2008-09 
15.10.2008 to 
15.12.2008 
450.00 6450.00 6450.00 290.25 218.98 
  
Ginger Nagaland 2008-09 
03.02.2009 to 
02.03.2009 
500.00 15000.00 15000.00 750.00 498.30 
Oil-palm Andhra 
Pradesh 
2008-09 
01.03.2009 to 
30.04.2009 
500.00 30000.00 30000.00 1500.00 346.12 
  

86 
Arecanut Karnataka 2008-09 
01.03.2009 to 
30.06.2009 
White 6000.00 6900.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00  
Red 4000.00 8900.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 
Potato Uttar 
Pradesh 
2008-09 
25.03.2009 to 
24.04.2009 
285.00 100000.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 
 
(H) Total of 2008-09 17140.00 419160.00 90862.59 4964.66 4198.32 
Orrange Nagaland 2009-10 
25.03.2009 to 
24.04.2009 
510.00 16000.00 16000.00 816.00 506.55 
Oil-palm Karnataka 2009-10 
25.03.2009 to 
24.04.2009 
500.00 800.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 
Arecanut 
(White) 
Karnataka 2009-10 
19.01.2010 to 
25.03.2010 
6900.00 6000.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 
 
 
I) Total of 2009-10 7910.00 22800.00 16000.00 816.00 506.55 
 
Potato Uttar 
Pradesh 
2010-11 
22.03.2010 to 
30.04.2010 
300.00 100000.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 
Potato West 
Bengal 
2010-11 
17.03.2010 to 
15.04.2010 
300.00 900000.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 
Oil-palm Andhra 
Pradesh 
2010-11 
01.09.2010 to 
31.10.2010 
500.00 47500.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 
Apples 
'C' 
grade 
Himachal 
Pradesh 
2010-11 
01.09.2010 to 
31.10.2010 
515.00 61000.00 61000.00 3141.50 0.00 Report  
Awaited 
Potato Uttar 
Pradesh 
2010-11 
12.03.2011 to 
11.04.2011 
305.00 100000.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 
  
(J) Total of 2010-11 1920.00 1208500.00 61000.00 3141.50 0.00   
  

87 
Arecanut Karnataka 2011-12 
06.04.2011 to 
31.05.2011 
White 7590.00 8000.00 0.00 0.00 0.00   
Red 9790.00 4000.00 0.00 0.00   
Apples 
'C' 
grade 
Himachal 
Pradesh 
2011-12 
15.08.2011 to 
15.10.2011 
525.00 50600.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 Report  
Awaited 
Onion Karnataka 2011-12 
14.12.2011 to 
14.01.2012 
600.00 54000.00 40747.00 3009.00 0.00 Report  
Awaited 
Turmeric Karnataka 2011-12 
10.02.2012 to 
31.05.2012 
4092.00 12400.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 Report  
Awaited 
Potato Uttar 
Pradesh 
2011-12 
10.02.2012 to 
10.03.2012 
328.00 100000.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 
  
Turmeric Andhra 
Pradesh 
2011-12 
20.03.2012 to 
31.05.2012 
4000.00 54000.00 4000.00 1600.00 0.00 Report  
Awaited 
Garlic Rajasthan 2012-13 
06.06.2012 to 
06.07.2012 
1700.00 60000.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 Report  
Awaited 
Chilli Andhra 
Pradesh 
2012-13 
25.05.2012 to 
25.06.2012 
Hybrid 
Variety 
4100.00 31200.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 Report  
Awaited 
Straight  
Variety 
3700.00 20800.00 0.00 0.00 
Turmeric Tamil 
Nadu 
2012-13 
01.06.2012 to 
30.06.2012 
4000.00 35000.00 5.09 2.04 0.00 Report  
Awaited 
Iskut Mizoram 2012-13                 
1.12.2012 to           
31.12 2012                                  
400.00 
  
 
4000.00  
 
 
    
  
  
 
 
 
  
(K) Total of 2011-12 40425.00 430000.00 44752.09 4611.04 0.00 
  
Grand Total of (A) to (K) 124159.00 2795878.53 2795878.53 34847.23
265 
16878.33 
 
 
 
  

88 
APPENDIX-I  
 
COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE 
(2013-14) 
 
MINUTES OF THE FIFTH SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE 
******** 
 The Committee sat on Tuesday, the 29 October, 2013 from 1100 hours  to            
1325 hours in Committee Room „C‟ (G/F), Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
PRESENT 
  Shri Basudeb Acharia   -   Chairman 
 
 
MEMBERS 
 
LOKSABHA 
 
2.  Shri Sanjay Singh Chauhan 
3.  Shri H.D. Devegowda 
4.  Smt. Paramjit  Kaur Gulshan 
5.  Shri Premdas Katheria 
6.  Shri P. Kumar 
7.  Smt. Botcha Jhansi Lakshmi 
8.  Sardar Sukhdev Singh Libra 
9.  Dr. Jyoti Mirdha 
10.  Shri Kachhadia Naranbhai  
11.  Dr. Vinay Kumar Pandey „Vinnu‟ 
12.  Shri Hukmadeo Narayan Yadav 
 
               RAJYA SABHA 
13.  Shri Satyavrat Chaturvedi 
14.  Shri Dharmendra Pradhan 
15.  Dr. K.V.P. Ramachandra Rao 
16  Shri Parshottam Khodabhai Rupala 
17.  Shri Rajpal Singh Saini 
18.  Shri S. Thangavelu 
19.  Shri Darshan Singh Yadav 
 
 

89 
SECRETARIAT 
1. Shri  A. Louis Martin  - Joint Secretary  
2. Smt. Abha Singh Yadhuvanshi - Director 
3. Shri  T.H. Rao   - Additional Director 
4. Shri C. Vanlalruata   - Deputy Secretary 
 
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members to the Sitting of the 
Committee.  Then, the Committee took up for consideration the following; 
*(i) xxx   xxx   xxx   xxx  xxx  xxx   xxx  xxx  xxx        xxx  xxx  xxx 
 xxx   xxx   xxx   xxx  xxx  xxx   xxx  xxx  xxx       xxx  xxx  xxx. 
 (ii) Memorandum No. 03 pertaining to the draft Report on the Action Taken by 
the Government on the Observations/Recommendations contained in the 
Forty-Sixth Report of the Committee on Agriculture (2012 -13)  on 
Demands for Grants (2013 -14) of Ministry of Agricul ture (Department of 
Agriculture and Cooperation);  
*(iii) xxx   xxx   xxx   xxx  xxx  xxx   xxx  xxx  xxx        xxx  xxx  xxx 
 xxx   xxx   xxx   xxx  xxx  xxx   xxx  xxx  xxx       xxx  xxx  xxx. 
3. After some deliberations, the Committee approved the cat egorization of action 
taken replies as shown in the Memoranda and adopted the draft Reports without any 
modification.  They authorized the Chairman to present these Reports to Parliament 
after getting them factually verified from the concerned Departments. 
*4. xxx   xxx   xxx   xxx  xxx  xxx    xxx  xxx  xxx        xxx  xxx  xxx 
 xxx   xxx   xxx   xxx  xxx  xxx    xxx  xxx  xxx       xxx  xxx  xxx. 
xxx   xxx   xxx   xxx  xxx  xxx    xxx  xxx  xxx        xxx  xxx  xxx 
xxx   xxx   xxx   xxx  xxx  xxx    xxx  xxx  xxx       xxx  xxx  xxx. 
*5. xxx   xxx   xxx   xxx  xxx  xxx    xxx  xxx  xxx        xxx  xxx  xxx 
xxx   xxx   xxx   xxx  xxx  xxx    xxx  xxx  xxx       xxx  xxx  xxx. 
The Committee then adjourned. 
*Matter not related to this Report. 

90 
APPENDIX-II 
(Vide Para 4 of Introduction of the Report) 
 
ANALYSIS OF ACTION TAKEN BY GOVERNMENT ON 
THE FORTY SIXTH REPORT (15th LOK SABHA) OF  
COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE (2012-13)    
 
  
(i)  Total number of Recommendations                         26 
 
(ii) Observations/ Recommendations which have been 
Accepted by the Government  
 
Para Nos. 1.4, 2.8, 2.9, 2.10, 2.11, 2.12, 3.23, 3.24, 3.25, 
 3.27, 4.51, 4.53, 4.54, 4.55, 4.58, 4.59, 4.61 and 4.64 
 
Total                  18 
  
Percentage                                     69.23% 
   
(iii) Observations/ Recommendations which the Committee 
Do not desire to pursue in view of the Government‟s replies  
 
Total                         NIL 
       
Percentage                                      0% 
 
(iv) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies 
 of the Government have not been accepted by the Committee 
 
Para Nos.  3.26, 3.28, 4.52, 4.60, 4.62 and 4.63 
 
Total           06 
 
Percentage                            23.07% 
 
 
(v) Observations/ Recommendations in respect of which  
 Final replies of the Government are still awaited 
 
Para Nos.  4.56 and 4.57 
 
Total                  02 
  
Percentage                         7.70% 
 