COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE
(2013-2014)
FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA
MINISTRY OF AGRICULTURE
(DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE
AND COOPERATION)
‘PRICING OF AGRICULTURAL PRODUCE’
SIXTIETH REPORT
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
March, 2014 / Phalguna, 1935 (Saka)
60


SIXTIETH REPORT
COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE
(2013-2014)
( FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA )
MINISTRY OF AGRICULTURE
(DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE
AND COOPERATION)
‘PRICING OF AGRICULTURAL PRODUCE’
Presented to Hon’ble Speaker Lok Sabha on 15.03.2014
Presented to Lok Sabha on ............................................
Laid on the Table of Rajya Sabha on .............................
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
March, 2014 / Phalguna, 1935 (Saka)

C.O.A. No. 283
Price : Rs. 119.00
© 2014 B Y L OK S ABHA S ECRETARIAT
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of
Business in Lok Sabha (Fourteenth Edition) and Printed by National Printers,
New Delhi-110 028.

(i)
CONTENTS
PAGE
COMPOSITION OF THE C OMMITTEE (2013-14) ........................................... (v)
COMPOSITION OF THE C OMMITTEE (2012-13) ........................................... (vii)
INTRODUCTION ........................................................................................... (ix)
REPORT
PART I
CHAPTER I Introductory .................................................................... 1
(i) Historical Background ........................................... 1
(ii) Mandate of CACP ................................................... 1
(iii) Composition of CACP ............................................ 3
CHAPTER II Role and Structure of CACP ......................................... 6
(i) Statutory Status to CACP ...................................... 6
(ii) Region-wise CACPs ................................................ 8
(iii) Distress Sale ............................................................. 10
C
HAPTER III Cost Estimation............................................................... 15
(i) Methodology for estimating the cost of
production ................................................................ 15
(ii) Cost of cultivation/production .............................. 17
(iii) Factors in the cost of production .......................... 19
C
HAPTER IV Pricing of Agricultural Produce ................................... 24
(i) Fixation of MSP ....................................................... 24
(ii) Delay in Announcement of MSPs ......................... 27
(iii) Need for counter veiling duty ............................... 33
C
HAPTER  V Other Issues ..................................................................... 35
(i) Procurement............................................................. 35
(ii) Market Intervention Scheme ................................. 39
(iii) Impact of MGNREGA ............................................ 42

PART II
Recommendations/Observations of the Committee ................. 45
ANNEXURES
I. Suicide by farmers due to agrarian reasons from 2010 to 2013
as reported by State Governments ........................................... 51
II. Minimum Support Prices .......................................................... 53
III. Av erage Gross and Net Rate of Returns over Cost of
Cultivation during 2000-01 to 2003-04 and 2008-09 to
2011-12 .......................................................................................... 55
IV . All India average Gross Rate of Returns over A2+FL during
time periods 2000-01 to 2003-04 and 2008-09 to 2011-12. ...... 57
V . All India Cost of Production (COP) – (A2+FL, C2), Minimum
Support Price and margins of MSP over COP of major crops
during 2009-10 to 2013-14 .......................................................... 58
VI. Replies received from the State Governments........................ 60
VII. Price Policy Meetings ................................................................. 66
VIII. Dates of submission of recommendations by the CACP ...... 67
IX. State-wise production and procurement of wheat, rice,
oil seeds, cotton, jute and pulses during last 5 years ............. 69
A
PPENDICES
I. List of experts/stakeholders/representatives of State
Governments who appear before the Committee .................. 73
II. Minutes of the Twenty-seventh Sitting of the Committee
(2012-13) held on 14.05.2013 ...................................................... 76
III. Minutes of the Thirtieth Sitting of the Committee (2012-13)
held on 03.06.2013 ....................................................................... 79
IV . Minutes of the Thirty-fifth Sitting of the Committee
(2012-13) held on 24.07.2013 ...................................................... 82
V . Minutes of the Seventh Sitting of the Committee (2013-14)
held on 11.11.2013 ....................................................................... 84
VI. Minutes of the Eighth Sitting of the Committee (2013-14) held
on 18.11.2013 ................................................................................ 86
VII. Minutes of the Ninth Sitting of the Committee (2013-14) held
on 18.11.2013 ................................................................................ 89
(ii)

VIII. Minutes of the Tenth Sitting of the Committee (2013-14)
held on 25.11.2013 ....................................................................... 92
IX. Minutes of the Eleventh Sitting of the Committee (2013-14)
held on 25.11.2013 ....................................................................... 95
X. Minutes of the Twelfth Sitting of the Committee (2013-14)
held on 09.12.2013 ....................................................................... 98
XI. Minutes of the Fourteenth Sitting of the Committee
(2013-14) held on 02.01.2014 ...................................................... 100
XII. Minutes of the Fifteenth Sitting of the Committee (2013-14)
held on 13.01.2014 ....................................................................... 102
XIII. Minutes of the Sixteenth Sitting of the Committee (2013-14)
held on 24.01.2014 ....................................................................... 104
XIV . Minutes of the Twentieth Sitting of the Committee (2013-14)
held on 03.03.2014 ....................................................................... 107
(iii)

(v)
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE
(2013-2014)
Shri Basudeb Acharia — Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Narayansingh Amlabe
3. Shri Sanjay Singh Chauhan
4. Shri H.D. Devegowda
5. Smt. Ashwamedh Devi
*6. Vacant
7. Smt. Paramjit Kaur Gulshan
8. Shri Anant Kumar Hegde
9. Shri Premdas Katheria
10. Shri P . Kumar
11. Dr. (Smt.) Botcha Jhansi Lakshmi
12. Sardar Sukhdev Singh Libra
13. Dr. Jyoti Mirdha
14. Shri Kachhadia Naranbhai
15. Shri Devji M. Patel
16. Smt. Bhavana Gawali (Patil)
17. Shri Jagdish Singh Rana
18. Shri Rajaiah Siricilla
19. Shri Patel Kishanbhai V .
20. Dr. Vinay Kumar Pandey ‘Vinnu’
21. Shri Hukamdeo Narayan Yadav
*Vice Shri L. Raja Gopal who ceased to be the Member of the Committee on his resignation
from Lok Sabha vide Notification No. 21/1/2014/T(B) dated 19.02.2014.

(vi)
Rajya Sabha
22. Shri N. Balaganga
23. Shri Satyavrat Chaturvedi
24. Smt. Mohsina Kidwai
25. Shri Dharmendra Pradhan
26. Dr. K.V .P . Ramachandra Rao
27. Shri Parshottam Khodabhai Rupala
28. Shri Rajpal Singh Saini
29. Shri S. Thangavelu
30. Shri Shivanand Tiwari
31. Shri Darshan Singh Yadav
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Shri A. Louis Martin — Joint Secretary
2. Smt. Abha Singh Yadhuvanshi — Director
3. Shri R.S. Negi — Committee Officer

(vii)
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE
(2012-2013)
Shri Basudeb Acharia — Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Narayansingh Amlabe
3. Shri Sanjay Singh Chauhan
4. Shri H.D. Devegowda
5. Smt. Ashwamedh Devi
6. Shri L. Raja Gopal
7. Smt. Paramjit Kaur Gulshan
8. Shri Anant Kumar Hegde
9. Shri Premdas Katheria
10. Shri P . Kumar
11. Dr. (Smt.) Botcha Jhansi Lakshmi
12. Sardar Sukhdev Singh Libra
13. Dr. Jyoti Mirdha
14. Shri Naranbhai Kachhadia
15. Shri Devji M. Patel
16. Smt. Bhavana Gawali (Patil)
17. Shri Jagdish Singh Rana
18. Shri Rajaiah Siricilla
19. Shri Patel Kishanbhai V .
20. Dr. Vinay Kumar Pandey ‘Vinnu’
21. Shri Hukamdeo Narayan Yadav

(viii)
Rajya Sabha
22. Shri Satyavrat Chaturvedi
*23. Vacant
24. Smt. Mohsina Kidwai
25. Shri Dharmendra Pradhan
26. Dr. K.V .P . Ramachandra Rao
27. Shri Parshottam Khodabhai Rupala
28. Shri Rajpal Singh Saini
29. Shri Shivanand Tiwari
30. Shri S. Thangavelu
31. Shri Darshan Singh Yadav
*Vice Shri A. Elavarasan who ceased to be the Member of the Committee on his retirement
from Lok Sabha on 24 July, 2013.

(ix)
INTRODUCTION
I, the Chairman, Committee on Agriculture having been authorized
by the Committee to submit the Report on their behalf, present this
Sixtieth Report on ‘Pricing of Agricultural Produce;
2. The Committee (2012-13) had briefing meetings on the subject
on 14.05.2013 and on 03.06.2013 with the representatives of the Ministry
of Agriculture (Department of Agriculture and Cooperation) and the
Ministry of Textiles respectively. The Committee took evidence of the
representatives of the Ministry of Agriculture (Department of Agriculture
and Cooperation) and the Department of Food and Public Distribution
at their sitting held on 24.01.2014.
3. The Committee held 14 Sittings in connection with the
examination of the subject. The Committee received 81 memoranda from
stakeholders/experts, 14 memoranda from State Governments and 4 from
Union Territory Administrations. The list of representatives of
stakeholders/experts and representative of State Governments who
appeared before the Committee is given at Appendix—I.
4. The Committee wish to express their thanks to the Ministry of
Agriculture (Department of Agriculture and Cooperation), Commission
for Agricultural Costs and Prices, the Ministry of Textiles, the Department
of Food and Public Distribution, Jute Corporation of India, Cotton
Corporation of India for furnishing requisite information and to their
representatives who appeared before the Committee to tender evidence
in connection with examination of the Committee.
5. The Committee also wish to thank all the stakeholders/experts,
representative of States and Union Territory Administrations who
appeared before the Committee for personal hearing or submitted their
memorandum in connection with the examination of the subject.
6. The Report was considered and adopted by the Committee at
their Sitting held on 03 March, 2014.
7. For facility of reference, the observations/recommendations of
the Committee have been printed bold at Part II of the Report.
N
EW DELHI; BASUDEB ACHARIA,
03 March, 2014 Chairman,
12 Phalguna, 1935 (Saka) Committee on Agriculture.

REPORT
PART I
CHAPTER I
INTRODUCTORY
(i) Historical Background
In the sixties, when the country was facing a food crisis, it was
felt that technological change alone might not bring the required
dynamism in the growth of agricultural sector which needed to be
supported with proper institutional backup. Accordingly, a series of
institutional reforms were undertaken in the sphere of land reforms,
agricultural extension, etc. An important initiative taken was in regard
to agricultural price policy to encourage growth through price measures.
In order to understand and construct a proper price policy, the
Government of India set up the Foodgrains Prices Committee under the
Chairmanship of Shri L.K. Jha, the then Secretary to the Prime Minister,
on 1st August 1964. Based on the recommendations of the Committee,
the Agricultural Prices Commission (APC) was set up in January 1965
to advise the Government on price policy for major agricultural
commodities. The thrust of the policy in 1965 was to meet the overall
needs of the economy with due regard to the interest of the producer
and the consumer. Recognising the importance of cost of production in
price determination, APC was renamed in 1985 as the Commission for
Agricultural Costs and Prices (CACP).
(ii) Mandate of CACP
1.2 The mandate of the Commission for Agricultural Costs and
Prices is to advise on the price policy of paddy, wheat, jowar, bajra,
maize, ragi, barley, gram, arhar (tur), moong, urad, lentil (masoor),
groundnut, safflower, soyabean, sunflowerseed, sesamum, nigerseed,
rapeseed/mustard, sugarcane, cotton, jute, and copra with a view to
evolving a balanced and integrated price structure in the perspective of
the overall needs of the economy and with due regard to the interests
of the producer and the consumer.

2
1.3 While recommending the price policy and the relative price
structure, the Commission keeps in view the following:—
(a) The need to provide incentive to the producer for adopting
improved technology and for developing a production pattern
broadly in the light of national requirements.
(b) The need to ensure rational utilization of land, water and
other production resources.
(c) The likely effect of the price policy on the rest of the
economy.
(1) The Commission may also suggest such non-price
measures as would facilitate the achievement of the
objectives set out in 1 above.
(2) To recommend from time to time, in respect of different
agricultural commodities, measures necessary to make
the price policy effective.
(3) To take into account the changes in terms of trade
between agricultural and non-agricultural sectors.
(4) To examine, where necessary, the prevailing methods
and cost of marketing of agricultural commodities in
different regions, suggest measures to reduce costs of
marketing and recommend fair price margins for
different stages of marketing.
(5) To keep under review the developing price situation
and to make appropriate recommendations, as and
when necessary, within the framework of the overall
price policy.
(6) To undertake studies in respect of different crops
as may be prescribed by Government from time to
time.
(7) To keep under review studies relating to the price policy
and arrangements for collection of information
regarding agricultural prices and other related data and
suggest improvements in the same, and to organize
research studies in the field of price policy.
(8) To advise on any problems relating to agricultural
prices and production that may be referred to it by
Government from time to time.

3
(iii) Composition of CACP
1.4 CACP comprises Chairman, Member Secretary, One official
Member and two non-official Members. The non-official Members are
representatives of the farming community. It has been suggested to the
Committee that there is a need for broad basing the composition of
CACP to include more number of farmers’ representatives to enable them
to have their say in CACP .
1.5 Department of Agriculture and Cooperation has stated in this
connection that before, recommending the MSP to the Government the
Commission invites the views of the State Governments through a
questionnaire as well as holds meetings with the stake holders like FCI,
Department of Consumer Affairs, Agriculture Commissioner (DAC),
Indian Institute of Pulses Research (UP), Central Rice Research Institute
(Odisha), Dte. of Sorghum Research, (AP), Rice Millers Asso. (Haryana),
Indian Oilseeds and Produce Export Promotion Council (Mumbai),
Farmer’s Association, Fertilizer Assoc. of India, NAFED etc. In the meeting,
the farmers are also invited to know their views on the price policy. The
Commission is already equipped with the experts from the statistical and
economic services in the field.
1.6 As per Recruitment Rules, the post of Chairman, Member
(Official) and Member Secretary, CACP are to be filled on deputation
(including short term contract) basis. There are no recruitment rules for
the post of Member (Non-Official) in the CACP . The following procedure
and criteria are adopted for selection of Member (Non-Official):—
(i) Regional balance should be maintained. The entire country
can be divided into four regions for this purpose and one
Member can be nominated from each region. Since there are
only three posts of Non-Official Members, each region can
be given representation by rotation;
(ii) Only those Members should be appointed whose main
profession is farming;
(iii) Names of farmers who have made some outstanding
achievements in crop production, farming practices or any
other agricultural field can be considered. The leaders of kisan
movements may also be considered for appointments against
these posts;
(iv) There should be a system of collection of information about
persons whose main profession is agriculture and who have
made significant contribution to agricultural production or

4
marketing and other allied activities or made outstanding
achievements in the agriculture production. This system
should enable the Department to collect information regarding
such persons throughout the year. The information can also
be collected from the States in an informal manner. ICAR,
‘Extension Division’ and other agencies may also be asked
to send information on this matter. On the basis of the
information received, the Members can be appointed.
A Selection Committee is constituted for screening applications
for the posts of Chairman and Members in the CACP as follows:—
(1) Member (Agriculture) — Planning Commission Chairman
(2) Secretary (Commerce) — Member
(3) One or two renowned — Member
experts in agriculture/
agricultural economics
(4) Secretary (Agriculture) — Member
As per procedure, the above Selection Committee recommends
suitable candidate(s) for the post of Chairman and Members in CACP .
Thereafter, the proposal for appointment of the recommended candidate
is referred to ACC for approval.
Data Collection
1.7 Directorate of Economics and Statistics (DES), an attached office
of Department of Agriculture and Cooperation (DAC), is guided by the
vision of enriching economic and statistical data and analytical inputs
required for formulating better agricultural economic development
policies. Its mission is to generate and provide important statistics on
area, production and yield of principal crop to facilitate appropriate policy
decisions including price policy and Minimum Support Price (MSP)
regime; implement schemes related to improvement of agricultural
statistics; and carrying out agro-economic research. The Directorate’s main
functions include (i) furnishing agricultural economic and statistical inputs
to DAC and Commission for Agricultural Costs and Prices (CACP);
(ii) providing coordination services to DAC on matters concerning
agricultural economics and policy.
1.8 CACP , which is an independent body of experts considers,
among other factors, the costs of production of various crops for all the

5
major producing States, as collected by different State Agricultural
Universities under the Comprehensive Scheme for the study of cost of
cultivation.
1.9 The Expert Committee under Chairmanship of Prof. Y.K. Alagh
to examine methodological issues in fixing MSP also inter-alia stated that
the data collected under Comprehensive Scheme are fairly good quality
and it will not be any other source with the data collected under the
scheme and therefore, the existing practice of deriving the yield rate
from the Comprehensive Scheme should continue.

6
CHAPTER II
ROLE AND STRUCTURE OF CACP
(i) Statutory Status of CACP
One of the suggestions made by experts in their Memoranda
submitted to the Committee is about transforming the CACP into a
statutory body involving representatives of the peasantry, states, social
scientists and experts. The Department of Agriculture and Cooperation
(DAC) stated in this regard that the CACP while formulating its
recommendations on price policy holds wide discussion with
representatives of farmers, State Governments and other stakeholders.
Transforming CACP into statutory body may not provide any additional
benefit.
2.2 During evidence, the Secretary , DAC stated in this regard as
follows:—
“When we say statutory, statutory status is not to CACP , it is actually
to the recommendations and the operations of what CACP
recommends. Otherwise, CACP is a body which has enjoyed all
the autonomies. It is not only the recommendations that have to
be binding. The implementation has to be enforced as a statutory
obligation which I am not sure that the States in any part of the
country, are in a position to actually implement.”
“We have a lot of laws in our country. Some of those laws are
enforced well and some not so well. These kinds of laws where
enforceability is a major issue, I think, where we should make
haste slowly. Secondly , the whole idea is to make agriculture
competitive not regulated by law. If you start regulating farm
operations by law, we are probably going to end up making a mess
of things. The idea is to make them competitive. Make the farmers
able to stand on their own feet. So, provide them with a competitive
regime where they can exploit their inherent potential to the fullest
extent. On the statutory status of CACP and cultivation mechanism,
procurement mechanism, I would point out that there is one aspect
of agriculture which is actually statutorily regulated which is opium
cultivation. The problems associated even with the cultivation of

7
such a minor crop. The regulation and operability of the pricing
regime and the processes need to be put in place to ensure that
the produce does not go here and there. There are a lot of issues
involved. I do not think that we would be in a position to accept
either on the basis of practicality or may be even on the basis of
desirability they need for statutory status to this body. The thinking
of the Government is to move in terms of direct transfers. If there
are direct cash transfers to the farmers then all these other issues
would not carry any meaning. Cash transfers may be made on the
basis of any criteria that the Government may adopt. If they are
provided with direct funds then they are free to use those funds
as per their best judgement and, I think, this needs to be left to
the farmers. We are trying to push towards that direction.”
2.3 During the evidence, the Secretary, Department of Agriculture
and Cooperation elaborated:—
“The policy of Direct Cash Transfer will actually culminate into all
subsidies including agricultural subsidy through cash transfer
mechanism. That is the end objective. As of now, we are not in
a position to transfer the subsidies directly to farmers on any
particular issue because as of now subsidies are consumed in a
variable pattern. Some farmers use more fertilizers; some States
use more fertilizers and so on. We do not have a firm grip on that.
But as a matter of policy , the Government has already decided that
the Direct Cash Transfer is the way forward.”
2.4 The Chairman of CACP stated in this connection as follows:—
“I think, the current system, as far as the pricing part is concerned
without the statutory status, is somewhat beneficial to the farmers
because if it is a statutory body. Supposing, if CACP recommends
only seven per cent increase in MSP for a particular crop, if you
look at the history, if at all CCEA has analysed it, it has given a
more than that rather than less. But the second problem, on which
we are worried, on the statutory status, is the implementation.
Supposing in Bihar, farmers are getting the MSP , 15 to 20 per cent
below. Can they go to court against CACP or whom? What will
happen then? Does statutory status mean this that the State is
legally obliged to give this?
The Secretary, DAC stated as follows:—
in the entire history of CACP , there has only been one season,
which you are aware of, where the CCEA approved MSP at levels

8
lower than what was recommended. Generally , Cabinet either agrees
with CACP or recommends it at higher level.”
2.5 The Secretary, DAC informed that in most of the developed
countries there is no concept of price determination or MSP and instead
a fixed amount through the method of domestic support is provided to
the farmers.
(ii) Region-wise CACPs
2.6 Some experts/stakeholders made a suggestion in their
Memoranda submitted to the Committee that there should be a state/
region wise Commission for Agricultural Costs and Prices so that the
dynamics of varying factors region-wise like soil type, usage of fertilizers,
credit accessibility, local crops can be considered at the time of calculation
of cost. When asked about the views of the DAC in this regard, it was
stated that DAC do not agree with the suggestion of State-wise/region
wise CACPs as this will distort the market. CACP already keeps into
consideration various factors such as cost of fertilizers, machine labour,
animal labour, family labour, diesel prices, rental value of own land,
interest on working capital manures, seeds, insecticides and irrigation
charges etc. while recommending MSP . Besides, this move will not
encourage farmers to bring down the cost of cultivation at par with the
efficient producers. The MSP fixed by the Government on the
recommendation of CACP provides adequate margin over all paid out
costs including family labour (A2+FL).
2.7 The cost of cultivation in Kerala is reportedly much more in
comparison to that of other States because of high labour cost. Citing
this point when the Committee enquired about desirability of having
State wise CACP , the Secretary, DAC explained the difficulties in
operationalisation of differential MSP as follows:—
“First, the practical difficulties in the operationalisation of a
differential MSP regime. Second, and more important, I think, is
the desirability of whether such a differential price regime should
at all be adopted in the country. Let us take the first issue of
operational difficulties. The whole idea behind the MSP regime is
that we promote cultivation of crops in the regions which have the
best and maximum competitive advantage so that the farmers of
that region can concentrate on the production of that crop which
is more suitable to that agro-climate. Unfortunately, what happened
is that partly because of the MSP regime and the procurement
regime, the incentive for farmers to produce crops which are not

9
suitable is greater than the need for sustainability. Therefore, it is
a very tricky thing. For instance, you took the example of Kerala.
If we have a differential MSP for Kerala, why cannot we have a
differential MSP for Tiruvananthapuram, Mallapuram, for all the
districts of Kerala? Why not for all the Tehsils, and later for all the
farms? Because each farmer would have a different cost of
cultivation, and he would get different results? How far should we
extend this? Secondly, will this be accompanied by a differential
pricing regime for our PDS so that the States where the cost of
cultivation is higher will get the foodgrains, under our PDS at a
higher price? How far will that extend? These are extremely complex
issues which need to be actually appreciated fully .
If the cost of cultivation in Kerala, as you have rightly pointed out
is probably the highest in the country and the MSP is increased
for the State why won’tnot the farmers of Tamil Nadu take their
paddy to Kerala and sell it there? Who would stop it? There will
be a lot of round tripping issues.”
2.8 Regarding bonus provided by some States in addition to MSP
the Secretary, Department of Agriculture and Cooperation stated as
follows:—
“This is happening in Madhya Pradesh, Chhattisgarh, and
whichever State announces bonuses, farmers will go there. That is
the natural phenomenon. The State Government does not want to
insensitive the farmers of other States, and if the farmers come
there, they have to buy the produce. The idea behind MSP regime
is two fold. One is that the farmer should get the reasonable price
so that they do not have to undertake distress sale. That is the
commitment of the Government to also insensitive, and farmers
to grow more suitable crop. xxx xxx xxx the problems of the Green
Revolution is also of over exploitation of resources and that is one
of the features that in MSP regime, if wrongly applied, would
promote because it would promote the cultivation of crops which
are not suitable for an agro climatic region. I would call ‘bonuses’
as a problem because it is accentuating this problem. If the bonus
is given by the State Government to all crops across the board,
then, I have no issues. Then, the farmers are free to choose.
But it is the pick and choose policy. Certain crops are given
bonuses and certain are not; therefore the farmers are persuaded
to opt for those crops, whether those crops are good for that placed
in the long run or not. I think, these are very slightly complex
issues.

10
2.9 While clarifying the manner in which the region-wise CACP
will distort the market, the DAC in a Post Evidence Reply stated that
the cost of cultivation for each crop varies from State to State. In fact
these costs vary from region to region, district to district, village to village
and in fact, from field to field. Fixing different MSPs for the same crop
may neither be practical nor desirable. It would lead to movement of
agricultural produce from regions where MSP is low to regions where
MSP is high, resulting in complete distortion of the market. One of the
aims of fixing MSPs is to promote production in regions where such
production is most efficient. Fixing of MSPs on cost plus basis would
discourage efficiency in the agriculture sector and negate our efforts to
bring down cost of cultivation.
(iii) Distress Sale
2.10 There were reports of small and marginal farmers selling their
produce below the MSP fixed by the Government in some parts of the
country particularly in Bihar, West Bengal and Orissa. During evidence
when the Committee desired to know the reasons for distress sale in the
country, a representative of CACP stated as follows:—
“The issue is, if the cost of fertiliser has increased by 30 per cent
or 40 per cent, the proportion of that in the overall cost may be
just 5 per cent or 10 per cent or 20 per cent or even if fertiliser
price has increased by 40 per cent, it will lead to 8 per cent increase
or 10 per cent increase. So, we do take care of that and assure the
House here that the profitability across all crops over the last decade
has substantially improved and it is because of that you are finding
a lot of demand for tractors. The demand for tractors is growing
at 23 per cent per annum today and the demand for urea again
is more by 10 per cent. So, there is huge demand and prosperity
that is emerging. There are pockets of distress xxx xxx xxx in certain
crops there is distress sale.
2.11 Regarding the mechanism adopted by the Ministry to provide
relief to farmers in the event of distress sale by farmers the DAC stated
as follows:—
Government is making all possible efforts to increase the reach of
Minimum Support Price (MSP) operations to avoid distress sale of
foodgrains by the farmers.
(i) To spread awareness, Minimum Support Price (MSP)
operations are given wide publicity through pamphlets,
banners, signboards and advertisements through print and

11
electronic media regarding MSP , quality, specifications,
purchase system, etc.
(ii) In order to maximise the outreach of MSP operations,
especially in respect of rice and wheat, Food Corporation of
India (FCI) in consultation with State Governments operates
number of purchase centres.
(iii) The State Governments also engage Self Help Groups (SHGs)/
Societies etc. for procurement operations.
(iv) Arrangements have been made to make payments to farmers
through account payee cheque/electronic mode, whenever
possible.
(v) State Governments are encouraged to undertake decentralized
procurement, so as to enhance the procurement of foodgrains
from the farmers.
2.12 According to an expert, due to inefficient backward linkages
of agriculture produce marketing in State, the middlemen make most of
the profit out of farmer produce. When asked as to what are DAC’s
views in this regard and how Union Government ensures that such
activities are checked so that the phenomenon of distress sale is curbed,
DAC stated in a written reply as follows:—
“The farm produce, especially of small and marginal farmers (who
constitute 84% of the land holdings) may go through a chain of
intermediaries even before it reaches the market yard, incurring
thereby multiple transaction costs and transportation cost which
all add to escalation of costs. At the yard the produce again goes
through a chain of intermediaries thereby incurring unnecessary
transaction costs and margins. Instead what is needed are alternate
channels of marketing which will help purchase the produce nearer
the farm gate, such as through direct marketing and contract
farming. When such end users/buyers are integrated with the
producers directly effective backward linkages are established,
which cut on avoidable transportation cost and eliminate
unnecessary intermediations.
The role of intermediaries in the long supply chain can be
diminished by allowing processors/bulk retailers/whole sellers/
exporters to purchase nearer the farm gate directly from the farmers.
Once multiple options are available to the farmer for the sale of
his produce, he will opt for what suits him best without having
to undergo distress sale. Department of Agriculture and Cooperation

12
has been actively pursuing the Government of States/UTs to reform
their APMC Acts and Rules to provide inter alia alternate channels
of marketing to the farmer and single point levy of market fees.
Besides simplification of procedures for obtaining purchaser license
to operate within the market will cut on the role of cartels in
manipulating prices. This will be further facilitated by going a step
further by removing the need for license for transaction outside
the yard, for which simple registration could suffice”.
2.13 To a query whether DAC agree with the suggestion that there
should be an amendment in the APMC Act, 2003 so to allow the farmers
to sell their produce in open market and they are not compelled to make
distress sale in local mandis, DAC stated in a written reply as follows:—
“DAC has formulated the Model State Agricultural Produce
Marketing (Development and Regulation) (APMC) Act in 2003 and
Rules in 2007 and has been pursuing the Governments of States/
UTs to reform their respective APMC Acts and Rules accordingly.
The Model Act advocates inter alia  provision for private markets
and E-markets, contract farming, direct purchase of agricultural
produce from farmers by processors/bulk retailers/wholesalers/
exporters nearer to the production centre, direct sale of produce
by farmers to the consumers, etc. Such multiple options will enable
the farmer to sell the produce for optimum returns without being
compelled to make distress sale in local mandis.”
2.14 This Ministry has been requesting States/UTs to amend their
respective State APMC Acts so as to include among other things provisions
for regulation of contract farming. So far, 16 States have amended their
APMC Act on the lines of Model Act, 2003 in respect of direct marketing,
contract farming and establishing markets in private and cooperative
sectors while 21 States [Andhra Pradesh, Arunachal Pradesh, Assam,
Chhattisgarh, Goa, Gujarat, Himachal Pradesh, Jharkhand, Karnataka,
Madhya Pradesh, Maharashtra, Nagaland, Orissa, Rajasthan, Sikkim,
Mizoram, Tripura, Tamil Nadu, Punjab (separate Act) , Uttarakhand and
Haryana] have made legal provision for practice of contract farming in
their respective State Laws.
2.15 Agriculture Marketing reforms are intended to benefit the
farmers by increasing marketing efficiency through development of
alternative marketing channels, reduction in the supply chain/
intermediaries, transparency in the pricing system, mitigate the price
risk and enable better price discovery. Due to contract farming, small and
marginal farmers get the benefit of quality inputs and new technology
from the sponsoring firms/companies to increase production and

13
productivity. In many instances, the larger companies provide their own
extension support to contracting farmers to ensure that production is
according to the required specifications. Through the mechanism of
contract farming the farmers acquire skills such as record keeping,
improved methods of applying chemicals and fertilizers and knowledge
of the importance of quality and the demands of export markets. Contract
Farming can significantly reduce the risk and uncertainty of market.
Through Contract Farming, sponsoring firms/companies can get raw
materials of desired quality and quantity to run their business round the
year.
2.16 Giving the number of suicides by farmers during the last five
years, as reported by the National Crime Records Bureau, the Ministry
stated as follows:
Year No. of farmer’s suicides
2008 16196
2009 17368
2010 15964
2011 14027
2012 13754
2.17 Elaborating the reasons for cases of suicides by farmers due
to economic depravity in spite of implementation of MSP and MIS in
the country, the DAC stated as follows:—
Causes of suicides include family problems, illness, drug abuse/
addiction. Unemployment, poverty dispute, bankruptcy or sudden
change in economic status, poverty, professional/career problem,
love affair, barrenness/impotency, cancellation/non-settlement of
marriage, dowry dispute, fall in social reputation, causes not known
etc.
State wise details of suicides by farmers due to agrarian reasons
during the last three years and the current year i.e. from 2010
to 2013, as reported by respective State Governments are at
Annexure I.
2.18 The Government announced a Special Rehabilitation Package
of Rs. 16978.69 crore for 31 suicide prone districts in the four States of
Andhra Pradesh, Maharashtra, Karnataka and Kerala in the year 2006.
The package was in operation till 30.11.2011 and Rs. 19998.85 crore (as
on Sept. 2011) had been released to these States. The approach adopted
under the package was basically convergence of the benefits available

14
to the eligible farm households under various ongoing government
schemes/programmes to improve the income and livelihood of farmers
in a time bound and sustainable manner. The package stabilized the
conditions of the farmers in the identified districts and further
consolidation can be done through various ongoing schemes and
programmes like RKVY, NFSM etc. State Governments have been advised
to constitute special teams in the identified districts to oversee the
implementation of the various schemes/programmes.1 Packages for
Development of Kuttanad Wetland Eco-system and Mitigation of agrarian
distress in Idukki district of Kerala envisaging an outlay of Rs. 1840.75
crore and Rs. 764.45 crore, respectively are under implementation.

15
CHAPTER III
COST ESTIMATION
(i) Methodology for estimating the cost of production
The Commission for Agricultural Costs and Prices (CACP), which
is an independent body of experts considers, among other factors, the
costs of production of various crops for all the major producing States,
as collected by different State Agricultural Universities under the
Comprehensive Scheme for the Study of Cost of Cultivation  of Ministry of
Agriculture. The sample size consists of 8,400 holdings. The sample covers
the different regions of the country. Thus, CACP considers the cost of
production of crops in different States, while recommending the MSPs.
The Commission also considers the costs data as submitted by State
Governments.
3.2 In the existing methodology used for estimating the cost of
production of various crops in the country with the help of State
Agricultural Universities/select centers, the cost on account of fixed assets
is taken as 10% of the value of such assets and included in the cost of
production. Apart from this, imputed rental value is also taken into
account as one of the components of cost of production. Further, variable
costs on account of labour, seed, fertilizer, interest on working capital
and other inputs are also considered. As such, a mechanism for an
objective estimate of cost of production is already in position, which is
the CACP .
3.3 The CACP takes into account actual cost as assessed for various
crops based on studies conducted by the State Agricultural Universities,
on a regular basis. For some inputs when farmer does not pay out of
his pocket, certain imputed value is taken into account to arrive at a cost
of production which is closer to the actual cost. Based on this and other
factors MSP of various crops is worked out by CACP .
3.4 From time to time, expert committees were constituted to
revise the methodology and system of calculation of the cost of
cultivation/production of agricultural produce, to arrive at MSPs. The
Government had set up an Expert Committee under the Chairmanship
of Prof. Y.K. Alagh in May 2003 to examine the methodological issues

16
in fixation of MSP . On its recommendations, the premium actually paid
by farmers for crop insurance and marketing and transport charges
incurred by farmers have also been included as items of cost for
recommending MSP .
3.5 While making projections, the data for the latest available year
are treated as the base. The total input cost is broadly divided into two
parts:— variable input cost and fixed cost. Because of its greater
significance in the total cost, the Commission concentrates more on
updating the estimated variable input cost items. After constructing the
individual price indices for each of the variable inputs, a composite
weighted index is constructed. While explaining the factors comprising
the composite index, the DAC stated as follows:—
“Commission for Agricultural Costs and Prices (CACP) arrives at
the likely levels of cost of production in different states on the
basis of latest cost of cultivation/production data available. In order
to make the projections consistent and as accurate as possible, the
latest three years data pertaining to each state is projected and
their projected averages are taken. To carry out the projection
exercise, state specific composite variable input price index is
constructed to capture the movement of input prices between the
base year and the year of projection. Lastly, the all India weighted
average cost is computed, with weights being the shares of
production of each state in the total production.”
Elaborating further the projection of costs the DAC stated as
follows:—
“The share of each of these variable inputs in the total operational
cost, prevailing in the base year, is taken as the weight for each
specific input. This composite weighted input price index thus
measures the likely changes in variable input prices for each of the
later years in relation to the base period. The increase in variable
input price index over the base period is then used for projecting
cost. The interest on working capital is worked out separately on
the projected variable cost net of interest on working capital, and
then the same is added to arrive at the total projected variable cost
per hectare. Further, the apportionment of total cost of cultivation
between the main product and the by-product is done in proportion
to their contribution to the total value of output. For fixed cost,
the main components considered are the rental value of owned
land and interest on fixed capital. Both these fixed cost items are
taken as imputed values implying that farmers do not make any
cash payments for them.”

17
(ii) Cost of cultivation/production
3.6 The cost of cultivation/production includes all paid out costs,
such as those incurred on account of hired human labour, bullock labour/
machine labour (both hired and owned) and rent paid for leased in land
besides cash and kind expenses on use of material inputs such as seeds,
fertilizers, manures, irrigation charges including cost of diesel/electricity
for operation of pump sets etc. Besides, cost of production includes
imputed value of wages of family labour and rent for owned land. The
cost also covers depreciation for farm machinery, building, transportation
and insurance charges. As such, the cost of production covers not only
actual expenses in cash and kind but also imputed value of owned assets
including land and family labour.
3.7 A former Chairman of CACP pointed out that the methods of
data collection is questionable and stated as follows, during his personal
hearing:—
“The farmers will not get justice from the approach that we normally
follow in the CACP . I say this because I have seen this closely
working using the same methodology that is being followed by
the CACP and I tried to alter it. I succeeded to a certain extent
in the last years but again it was changed. I do not know about
it now. At least my concern still remains.
Then the methods of data collection and cost calculation also are
questionable because the data for this purpose, that is, the data on
cost cultivation, is collected by the Directorate of Economics and
Statistics with the help of several State Agricultural Universities.
Two problems come into this aspect. First of all, some State
Agricultural Universities say that sometimes money comes through
the State Government and so, they do not get money on time. If
they have to go to the field for data collection and supervision of
data collection, they have no funds. They cannot even send a person
with Rs. 1000 to the field to see whether the data collection is done
properly or not. This is one thing which happens in some cases.
I tried to check it in Bihar and then suggested change in it. In
Karnataka also, the same problem was there. We asked the
Directorate to give some additional money for them on ad hoc
basis.”
3.8 The estimates of cost of production are generated under the
Comprehensive Scheme for studying the cost of production of Principal
crops and made available to the Commission by the Directorate of

18
Economic and Statistics. On being asked about improving methods of
data collection/cost calculation and the manner in which CACP account
for the difference in cost data due to time lag the Ministry in their written
reply stated that the Scheme envisages collection of representative data
on inputs and outputs in physical and monetary terms on a comparable
and comprehensive basis following uniform methodology. The field data
are collected following Cost Accounting Method. Under the scheme, daily
entries of debit/credit for the expenditure/income are made in order to
assess the total cost/benefit incurred/accrued to each farmer covered under
the scheme. The field data are collected on daily basis by the field man,
each one of them fills around 40 schedules. Of these 40 schedules, 20
show details of operations like use of fertilizers, power and water, etc.
and are filled up after making inquiries from 10 farmers from each selected
village. The supervision of collection of the field-data is done by the
Field Supervisors. Each Field Supervisor, on an average, supervises work
of 10 field man. Overall supervision of data collection process, scrutiny
and validation is with Field Officer.
3.9 As per cost concepts adopted under Cost of Cultivation Scheme,
Cost of Production (C2) includes both Paid-out costs (out-of-pocket) and
Imputed costs. Paid-out Costs include the cost incurred by the farmers
towards value of seed, insecticides and pesticides, manure, fertilizer,
irrigation charges, hired human, animal and machine labour, land revenue,
rent paid for lease in land, and Imputed Costs include value of family,
animal and machine (owned) labour, rent of own land and interest of
own fixed capital, depreciation on implements and farm buildings etc.
for which the farmers do not incur any direct cash expenses.
3.10 Further, according to the DAC, the data provided to CACP
at the time of finalizing its report involve a time lag of two to three years
due to which various components of cost are projected for the ensuring
season of the crops. In reply to query of the Committee to reduce the
time lag, the DAC stated that the steps have been taken to revamp the
existing FARMAP Software and making the online submission of data
which will not only reduce the time lag but also improve the quality of
data. Recently, a committee under the Chairmanship of Dr. Ramesh Chand,
Director, National Centre for Agricultural Economics and Policy Research
(NCAP) has also been set up by the Government to review the
methodology and mandate of CACP vis-à-vis cost of cultivation study .
The committee is yet to submit its report.
3.11 According to DAC, at the time of constitution of CACP , the
infrastructure and network of Central Agriculture Department was very
limited in the country. Now, infrastructure and network of Agriculture
in the country has expanded in all districts, regions by setting up of

19
Krishi Vigyan Kendras, ATMA, Research Institutes/Projects etc. The
Committee when desired to know the reasons for not utilizing the
information regarding collection of data for calculation of Prices of
Agricultural Produces from these institutes, the Secretary , DAC stated
as follows before the Committee:—
“The suggestion on including other people rather than the SAUs
for determination of the cost of cultivation, ….. off-hand I would
not like to reply very quickly because I need to think this over
because the data sheet that is collected by these people is done
after a lot of work. There are many economists and statisticians
involved in that but once that data sheet has been collected, I
suppose it should be possible to increase the ambit to bring in
more people and that will be more as a cross check. If nothing,
it will at least act as a cross check. We will try and incorporate
that.
During the evidence, the Secretary, Agriculture agreed as follows:—
“we need to broad-base our data, broad-base the machinery from
which we collect the data. I take that suggestion and to the extent
that it is possible, we will try to incorporate it because we do
recognise that the data that we collect presently is limited. In the
sense, that the sample is not very large and by doing so, certainly,
we can improve it further ***  ***  ***   we will certainly try and
broad-base it.”
(iii) Factors in the cost of production
3.12 The estimates of cost of cultivation/production in respect of
the major producing states of a particular crop covered under the scheme
are taken into consideration for arriving at a weighted all India average
cost of cultivation/production. Since for a single crop there is one uniform
MSP for the whole country, CACP tries to ensure that the MSP
recommended covers the C2 cost of production ( i.e. actual expenses in
cash and kind, including rent paid for leased-in land, and imputed
value of wages for family labour, depreciation of farm machinery and
buildings, rent for owned land and interest on fixed capital) in relatively
more efficient/well-endowed States and A2 + FL costs (actual expenses
in cash and kind, including rent paid for leased-in land, and imputed
value of wages of family labour) in relatively less efficient/less-endowed
States.

20
3.13 While clarifying the observation that the Cost calculation of
CACP does not take into account the cost involved in maintaining
minimum standard of living by the farmer and his family from the
earnings from the agricultural produce, the DAC in a written reply stated
that the Commission has to consider following factors as per its terms
of reference while recommending the MSP to the Government:—
(i) The need to provide incentive to the producer for adopting
improved technology and for developing a production pattern
broadly in the light of national requirements. The Commission
may also suggest such non-price measures as would facilitate
the achievement of these objectives.
(ii) The need to ensure rational utilization of land, water and
other production resources.
(iii) The likely effect of the price policy on the rest of the economy,
particularly on the cost of living, level of wages, industrial
cost structure.
3.14 On the basis of above, the Commission takes into account the
following factors while recommending MSP to the Government:—
(1) Cost of production
(2) Demand and supply
(3) Trends in market prices—both domestic and international
(4) Changes in input prices
(5) Parity between prices paid and prices received by the farmers
(6) Inter-crop price parity
(7) Effect on industrial cost structure
(8) Effect on cost of living
(9) Effect on general price level
(10) Assessment of objective needs of the economy at a particular
point of time, including food security, agricultural
diversification, etc.
3.15 A non-official from Maharashtra during the personal hearing
informed the Committee that Maharashtra Government has adopted

21
different methodologies for fixation of prices of agricultural produces.
Elaborating in this regard he stated:—
“They have Agricultural Prices Cell at present, two States, namely
Maharashtra and Karnataka are going ahead. They are calling it
a Cell; Karnataka is calling it Agriculture Price Commission (APC).
This methodology that we are following today actually the basis
of this was discussed way back. If you recall the Report of
Prof. S.R. Sen Committee, those were the days when all these things
had been very much discussed and debated. There can be only
minor refinements here and there. But fundamentally, I think, the
principles that they have taken to evaluate the cost structures are
very fundamental.”
3.16 Explaining that the methodology followed by APC,
Maharashtra is more or less same as being followed by the Directorate
of Economics and Statistics in DAC in cost of cultivation survey, the
DAC stated that the criteria followed by DES vis-a-vis  APC are as
follows:—
Sl. Item
No.
1. Interest on
working
capital
2. Rental value
of land
3. Family
human labour
4. Profit on the
cost of
production
5. Transport and
marketing
charges
Methodology followed
by APC, Mumbai
Interest on working
capital is calculated @ 6%
per annum for the entire
crop period.
The rental value of land
is worked out at the rate
of 1/6 of the gross value
of the main produce
minus land revenue.
Family human labour is
valued at the rate of 25%
more than the wage rates
paid for the hired human
labour.
On per quintal cost of
production 15% profit
margin is considered.
Expenditure incurred by
the farmer for transporta-
tion and marketing the
agricultural produce is
taken into the considera-
tion.
Methodology followed by
DES, New Delhi/CACP
Interest is charged at the rate
of 12.5% per annum on the
working capital for half the
period of crop.
Estimated on the basis of
prevailing rents in the village
for identical type of land or as
reported by the sample farmers
subject to the ceiling of fair
rents given in the land legislation
of the concerned State.
On the basis of statutory wage
rate or the actual market rate,
whichever is higher.
No specific profit margin over
cost of production is
considered by the CACP .
Considered by CACP at the
time of fixing MSP .

22
3.17 During the evidence, the Secretary DAC submitted before the
Committee as follows:—
“If you go recommendation by recommendation, issue by issue,
intervention by intervention, there is not that much difference
between what the methodology they follow and the methodology
that is followed by the CACP . In fact, Sir, you mentioned,
6 per cent interest on working capital they follow; we follow
12.5 per cent. The only thing that they are actually giving, which
is not being given by us is supervision charges directly. That is one,
I think at the rate of 10 per cent. Another thing is that they are
computing cost of family labour as one and a quarter times the
cost of ordinary labour. These are the two fundamental things that
they are doing that we are not accepting. Otherwise, I think, on
all issues, if you look at it issue by issue and intervention by
intervention, our computations are actually slightly more liberal
than what has been done in Maharashtra.”
Elaborating further, the Chairman, CACP:—
“I will give you one example of Maharashtra particularly because
cost of most of the commodities in Maharashtra and Karnataka is
very high.”
He added:—
“In Maharashtra the biggest problem is that their irrigation level
are only 11%. In cotton, in Vidarbha, where the problem took place
and they were asking for MSP of Rs. 6000, I said, at Rs. 6000,
Gujarat will not be growing anything else but only cotton. So,
where your cotton will go? It is because, Gujarat has 50 per cent
land under irrigation. Maharashtra, the Vidarbha belt is only
5 per cent under irrigation. Their productivity is half of Gujarat.
So, if you want to give double price to Maharashtra farmers, think
about what Gujarat farmers will do to cotton. So, I think we have
to be careful on opening up this Pandora’s box. As Secretary, DAC
said earlier, if the State wants to really give some extra incentive,
it should be crop neutral. Otherwise, we will distort the production
structure. If Maharashtra wants to give higher price because they
do not have irrigation, their costs are high. I do not disagree, their
costs are high. They should announce Rs. 5000, Rs. 1000 per hectare
to all the farmers. That is crop neutral. But I would say, give
investment subsidy so that those who want can go for investment
of irrigation whether it is drip or sprinkler or any other method.
Water is a major problem in Maharashtra. Same thing in Karnataka

23
is there. So the solution of that problem in Maharashtra and
Karnataka will lie in better investments in water augmenting
technologies or better water management technologies, drips and
others. I mean, Maharashtra is growing sugarcane on one side.
Less than about 4 per cent of the cropped area is taking away two-
third of the irrigation water of the State, 66 per cent water of the
State for just 4 per cent land uses. Naturally , other crops do not
get water and therefore their productivity remains low. If you are
not charging for water, you have all that type of distortions in the
system. So, my submission would be, instead of counting these
things, we must keep our canvas very clear, what we are aiming
at. I would love to give an extra package for drought prone States,
less irrigated States, give Rs. 5000, Rs. 10000 crore extra for irrigation
or better water so that it increases their productivity. The winner
at the end will be those who have better productivity rather than
higher prices. Higher price is not a solution. Globally you will have
to compete on most of these things. So, better productivity, better
seeds, better fertilizer applications, soil, that is the way to be the
winner. Any help on that they want, I would support it ten times
and pick up a package specifically for that belt.”
3.18 The methodology of generating the cost estimate under the
Cost of Cultivation Scheme was developed by Indian Agricultural Statistics
Research Institute (IASRI), which has been reviewed by various expert
committees from time to time. The basic objective of the existing
methodology of Cost of Cultivation Scheme is to generate cost estimates
to facilitate the Commission for Agricultural Cost and Prices (CACP) to
recommend Minimum Support Prices (MSP) of selected agricultural
commodities. Recently, a committee under the chairmanship of Director
NCAP has been constituted to examine the methodological issues in fixing
Minimum Support Prices.

24
CHAPTER IV
PRICING OF AGRICULTURAL PRODUCE
(i) Fixation of MSP
The Government decides on the support price for various
agricultural commodities taking into account the recommendations of
the Commission for Agricultural Costs and Prices (CACP), the views of
State Governments and Central Ministries as well as such other relevant
factors which are considered important for fixation of support prices. A
statement indicating the MSPs fixed since 2010-11 is at Annexure II .
4.2 MSP fixed by the Government acts as the floor price of an
agriculture commodity. In a situation of fall in the price of a commodity
below MSP , the Government intervenes and arranges purchase of the
commodity through procurement agencies at the MSP rate to safeguard
the interest of farmers. In normal situations when market price of a
commodity is higher than MSP , the farmer is free to sell his produce in
the open market which generally remains higher than MSP .
4.3 CACP recommends MSP for twenty two (22) crops and Fair
and Remunerative Price (FRP) for sugarcane. Apart from Sugarcane for
which FRP is declared by the Department of Food and Public Distribution,
twenty two crops covered under MSP are Paddy , Jowar, Bajra, Maize,
Ragi, Arhar, Moong, Urad, Groundnut-in-shell, Soyabean, Sunflower,
Sesamum, Nigerseed, Cotton, Wheat, Barley, Gram, Masur (Lentil),
Rapeseed/Mustardseed, Safflower, Jute and Copra. In addition, MSP for
Toria and De-Husked coconut is fixed by the DAC on the basis of MSPs
of Rapeseed/Mustardseed and Copra respectively.
4.4 Agriculture is becoming unremunerative, particularly, for small
and marginal farmers. On being asked whether this problem has been
considered, a representative of CACP stated as follows:—
“We have done, in the last three months, an analysis of, at least,
ten years as to what has happened to different crops’ profitability
structure. If you permit me to say, there are two types of costs that
we take into account. One is what we call the A2 Plus, that is, what

25
he pays from the pocket plus the family labour. The other cost is
the C2 cost. It includes the imputed return on land and on the
capital. So, there are there.
If you look at what has happened to profitability structure over
the last ten years, I will give you an example of cereals in the first
three years of two decades, the return over paid out cost plus
family labour was 56 per cent, but over C2 it was less than one
per cent because C2 includes the returns of the imputed cost of
land and capital. By the end of the decade, on cereals on A2, the
return was 81 per cent and on C2 it is 19 per cent.
That is the structure. So, the trend is towards increasing. But your
point is very valid, that small holders are finding and over time
the average holding size is coming down. Still there is a lot of
pressure on land. So the question is how we augment the income
of the farmers. My submission would be that the country has to
think today of income policy because if you try to take prices too
high to augment income, that may not be the most appropriate
instrument to use. It is better on a per hectare basis, and this is
what China has started doing. On paddy cultivation, on per hectare
basis, they have started giving about 200 dollars as a support to
the farmers. We have to move towards per hectare support as an
income policy because the moment you do pricing, there will be
lot of disturbances in demand and supply and the markets will
get messed up. So the country has to think now in terms of that.
But the ultimate solution to augmenting the income of the farmers
is increasing productivity and also freeing up the land market.
Many big farmers are not operating their lands as much but they
are afraid to lease it out to others. So, I think, the land lease markets
may have to be thought of in terms of freeing up so that the average
holding size has to increase.”
4.5 Regarding specific recommendations of the National
Commission on Farmers headed by Prof. M.S. Swaminathan and the
extent to which the DAC concur with those recommendations concerning
Agriculture pricing, the Secretary, DAC stated as follows:—
“The National Commission on Farmers had recommended that the
MSP be fixed at C2 plus 50 per cent in respect of major crops. The
Government had difficulty in accepting this proposition. They felt
about a uniform yardstick for fixation of MSP . This is precisely the

26
reason that there should not be an over-fixation on cost of
cultivation for fixation of MSP; but other considerations should
also be kept in mind so that the right signals are given. Today, the
signals need to be given, in respect of pulses and oilseeds first and
foremost.
These priorities will keep shifting. It is a dynamic sector and the
priorities also need to be dynamic. Our country is so large that
we cannot afford to be import dependent. If we are import
dependent, we can be held at ransom by various countries. We are
becoming increasingly import dependent especially on edible oils.
This is an issue that we all of us need to address more determinately.
Therefore, obviously the higher rates of increase that we suggest
in MSP would naturally be for the oilseed sector.”
4.6 The DAC has furnished the following details of the major
recommendations of National Commission on Farmers and action taken
by the Government thereon:—
Recommendation of NCF
(i) The Minimum Support
Price (MSP) mechanism has
to be developed, protected
and implemented
effectively across the
country. MSP of crops
needs to keep pace with the
rising input costs.
(ii) The MSP should be at least
50% more than the
weighted average cost of
production.
(iii) Arrangement for MSP need
to be put in place for crops
other than paddy and
wheat.
(iv) MSP and procurement
operations should be
treated as two separate
initiatives.
Action taken by Government
The government, while fixing MSP , seeks
to ensure that the farmers receive
remunerative prices for their produce.
MSPs take into account the cost of
cultivation which includes input cost.
MSP is recommended by CACP on
objective criteria considering variety of
relevant factors. Prescribing an increase of
50% on cost of production may distort
market. A mechanical linkage between MSP
and cost of production may be counter-
productive.
At present 25 crops are covered under MSP
regime. DAC is also implementing Market
Intervention Scheme (MIS) for procurement
of agricultural and horticultural
commodities generally perishable in nature
and not covered under MSP/PSS.
MSP has no relevance if it is not backed by
effective procurement operations.

27
The Standing Committee on Agriculture in their Forty-First Report
(14th Lok Sabha) in 2007-08 had recommended that in CACP should take
into account the profit margin of at least 50% of the cost price.
4.7 In reply to a query regarding the average margin of MSP over
the cost of cultivation, crop wise over the last five years, the DAC stated
as follows:—
“The cost of cultivation is calculated per hectare basis. Therefore,
margins of MSP over cost of cultivation cannot be derived. However,
returns over cost of cultivation are calculated and are given in the
Annexure-III and in a chart in Annexure-IV . The margins of MSP
over All India cost of production are given in the
Annexure-V .”
4.8 When asked about the mechanism for incorporating the increase
in cost of cultivation, if any, after fixing of MSP , the Ministry in their
written reply stated that the Commission has to submit its
recommendations of MSP of agricultural commodities to the Government
within stipulated time. The MSPs are recommended by the Commission
after taking into account increases in the prices of inputs. However, in
such situations the Government also asks the Commission to revisit its
recommendation after the submission of the report by the Commission.
(ii) Delay in Announcement of MSP
4.9 Regarding the timing of announcement of MSP, a former
Chairman of CACP stated during a personal hearing as follows:—
“Minimum Support Price that the Government announces, in most
cases, is not announced in time. The objective is to announce the
MSP much before the sowing season so that the farmers get a clear
signal as to how much area under which crops they should put.
But if you delay the announcement of the MSP and announce it
only at the time of harvest or something like that, as it happened
in many years, does not serve the purpose of MSP . In my time
what I did was that I tried to prepare a schedule like much before
the sowing season, at least three months before the sowing season,
the report will be submitted to the Government and the
Government, anyway, takes sometime to circulate to the State
Governments and also amongst the concerned Ministries so they
will have one month time to consider and then the Cabinet takes
a decision in another one month. But sometimes, it used to be lying
with the Ministries for months and there was a time I remember,
in 2008, when this was not announced for six months and only just

28
a few days before the harvest, this was announced. Unfortunately,
this kind of treatment to the Minimum Support Price does not
really help the farmers and the farming economy as such.”
4.10 When desired to know the opinion of another expert regarding
the need for announcement of MSP much before the cropping season
starts so that farmers also are able to know what price they will get, the
witness stated before the Committee as follows:—
“Definitely. On this, there are norms. Unfortunately, in certain years,
these norms are not adhered to. But the norms are very clear that
the MSP announced should be before the sowing season so that
for most kharif crops, MSP should be announced latest by June
and for most rabi crops, it should be announced latest by November
and in both cases on the 1st November and 1st of June. I think
things are better on the announcement in recent years than when
there was a period in the middle where sometimes the
announcement was not even made till the harvest was about to
arrive which makes MSP quite useless. So, you are right in this
but I think that is the philosophy of MSP and if that does not
happen in a particular year, that has to do with factors certainly
not that of the CACP but is the Cabinet decision which comes late
on these matters. CACP reports are well in before those dates.”
4.11 The Committee when desired to know the number of occasions
the MSP was announced in time during the last five years and the reasons
for delay for the announcements of MSP . The DAC in their written reply
stated as follows:—
“The sowing season of various crops varies in a vast country like
India. The sowing season for Kharif crops is generally between
May-August and for Rabi between October-December. The date of
submission of report of CACP and date of Announcement of MSP
is given below:—
Year Kharif Rabi
Date of Date of Date of Date of
Submission of Announcement Submission of Announcement
Report of MSP  Report  of MSP
2009-10 29.05.2009 20.08.2009 10.08.2009 05.11.2009
2010-11 12.04.2010 10.06.2010 26.07.2010 20.10.2010
2011-12 31.03.2011 09.06.2011 29.07.2011 25.10.2011
2012-13 04.04.2012 25.06.2012 09.08.2012 15.11.2012
2013-14 25.03.2013 10.07.2013 22.07.2013 23.10.2013

29
4.12 Sometimes, there is a delay in announcement of MSP due to
time taken in consultation with various Ministries/Departments in the
Central Government namely Ministry of Finance, Ministry of Food, Public
Distribution and Consumer Affairs, Planning Commission, Department
of Commerce, Ministry of Textiles, etc. In addition the views of State
Governments on the recommendations of CACP are also sought before
the finalization of MSPs.
4.13 The details of receipt of information from the State Government
for the last five years and date of submission of reports by the Commission
are given in the Annexure-VI, Annexure-VII and Annexure-VIII
respectively.
4.14 When the Committee desired to know whether any
consultation takes place between the CACP and the Ministry of Textiles
in case of MSP for Jute and Cotton, a representative of the Ministry of
Textiles stated as follows:—
“The CACP formally conducts consultation processes with the office
of Textile Commissioner with regard to cotton and also inputs are
sought from State Governments. When we submit our
memorandum to the CACP , we take into account the cost of product
and also the demand and supply situation because we formulate
the cotton balance-sheet which indicates the production,
consumption and the closing stock that is there and also the
exportable surplus. We see the trends in market prices about
domestic as well as the international market prices, then parity
between prices paid and parity received by the farmers, inter-crop
price parity also, and also the effect on generational price level.
In the cotton season 2011-12, we have witnessed major riots in
Aurangabad and in Akola of Vidarbha regions which had major
drought in that period. We also had a period wherein the cotton
production was at the highest level 353 lakh bales in India and
however, the prices which moderated did not touch MSP levels.
For the year 2012-13, there has been increase in the MSP prices on
cotton. The State Government had asked for 4,300 rupees per
quintal. The CACPs recommendations were 3,900 rupees a quintal.
The Ministry of Textiles had recommended at that point of time
4,000 rupees a quintal.”
4.15 The Committee when queried whether there has been any
instances of difference of opinion between the Ministry of Textiles and

30
the CACP on the issue of fixation of price of Cotton, a representative
of Ministry of Textile stated about MSP of 2011-12 as follows:—
“ A formal reference was made by the Textile Minister to the
Agriculture Minister that the MSP price of cotton for the 2011-12
was not adequately remunerative and there was a need to enhance
the MSP price for the 2013 cotton season. So, that recommendation
did have a specific number for the MSP price and we broadly feel
that the recommendations of the Ministry of Textiles have been
accepted.”
4.16 When asked about the experience of the Ministry of Textiles
in the case of Jute, the representative stated as follows:—
“For the current year, the Minimum Support Price is Rs. 2200.
Before that, it was Rs. 1675 and before that, it was Rs. 1575. There
was an increase from Rs. 1575 to Rs. 1675. At that time, our Jute
Commissioner and field offices were of the view that the cost of
production is more like Rs. 1800. That is the time when the Ministry
felt that it should not be so. Then, it was subsequently increased
from Rs. 1675 to Rs. 2200. This has happened about two years
ago.”
4.17 The Central Government fixes Fair and Remunerative Price
(FRP) of sugarcane having regard to the factors mentioned in Clause 3(1)
of the Sugarcane (Control) Order 1966 viz., cost of production of sugarcane;
return to the growers from alternative crops and the general trend of
prices of agricultural commodities; availability of sugar to consumers at
a fair price; price at which sugar produced from sugarcane is sold by
sugar producers; recovery of sugar from sugarcane; realization made
from sale of by-products viz. molasses, bagasse and press-mud or their
imputed values; and reasonable margins for the growers of sugarcane
on account of risk and profits. The FRP so fixed is based on
recommendations of the Commission for Agricultural Costs and Prices
(CACP) and after consultations with State Governments and other
stakeholders.
4.18 According to Secretary, DAC, MSP of Sugarcane declined from
Rs. 300 in the previous year to Rs. 260 in the current year. The Government
has sanctioned interest free funds for Mill Owners so that the arrears
of Sugarcane can be made by them.
4.19 While furnishing the details of recommendations of Rangarajan
Committee for resolving the issue of difference in pricing of sugarcane

31
as fixed by CACP vis-a-vis State government of Uttar Pradesh, the DAC
stated as follows:—
“The Committee has been of the view that there is a need to
rationalize the pricing of sugarcane. There should be a sharing of
the revenues/value created in the sugarcane value chain between
the farmers and the millers in a fair and equitable manner. Based
on an analysis of the data available for the by-products (molasses
and bagasse/cogeneration), the revenue-sharing ratio has been
estimated to amount to roughly 75 per cent of the ex-mill sugar
price alone. This ratio corresponds to a recovery ratio of 10.31 per cent
at the all India level. For a particular mill, the ratio will vary in
the proportion of the mill’s recovery ratio to the above all India
recovery ratio. The actual payment would happen in two steps.
The first would be payment of a floor price based on FRP as per
extant mechanism. Balance payment of cane dues will be done
subsequent to publication of monthly ex-mill prices, on the lines
indicated. Such a system would obviate the need for State Advised
Price.”
4.20 Supplementing him, a representative of Department of
Consumer Affairs and Food stated as follows:—
”As far as sugarcane is concerned, the CACP fixes the fair
remunerative price the FRP which is the benchmark price below
which no sugar mill can purchase sugarcane from the farmers. But
the States are generally fixing a very high price, much above the
FRP . Most of the States are having their own Acts. For example,
UP . They have got a separate Act for enforcing the SAP fixed by
the State Government. As per the Act, the farmers are supposed
to be paid within 14 days from the date of purchase. Otherwise,
the mills have to pay interest on that money. However, the
Government can take some action against the mills. That is being
enforced in UP .
Now informal Group of Ministers has been constituted to look into
various problems of the sugar industry; and the Government has
extended a loan worth about Rs. 6,600 crore, which is interest free.
The interest will be met from the Sugar Development Fund. The
payment period is about five years with a moratorium of two years.
xxxx xxxx xxx It is for the purpose of loan. It is basically for making
cane payment and cane price arrears payment. That will be
monitored. We have issued the guidelines. The Cane Commissioner
and the Principal Secretary, have to monitor it.”

32
4.21 The Cane Commissioner has to certify that money has been
paid to the farmers, the Committee were informed that it has come into
being in mid January and they have to sanction it by 31.03.2014 and it
should be disbursed latest by 30th September, which is the end of the
sugar season. They have to make the payment also as support.
4.22 A statement indicating cane price arrear for 2013-14, 2012-13
sugar seasons and earlier period as on 15.12.2013 is as under:—
(Rs. in crore)
Sl. State Cane Price Cane Price Arrears For Total Cane
No. Arrears Arrears 2011-12 Price
2013-14  2012-13   and Earlier  Arrears
1 2 3 4 5(2+3+4)
1. Punjab 113.88 0.00 0.00 113.88
2. Haryana 108.64 0.00 0.00 108.64
3. Rajasthan 0.00 5.65 0.00 5.65
4. Uttar Pradesh 0.00 2177.28 110.24 2287.52
5. Uttarakhand 183.66 78.53 24.92 287.11
6. Madhya Pradesh 0.00 0.00 13.39 13.39
7. Gujarat 273.36 0.17 13.41 286.94
8. Maharashtra 422.05 0.00 49.32 471.37
9. Bihar 0.00 34.62 33.04 67.66
10. Andhra Pradesh 216.58 24.97 0.00 241.55
11. Karnataka 1482.66 17.32 32.86 1532.84
12. Tamil Nadu 103.07 84.35 17.03 204.45
13. Odisha 0.00 26.72 2.02 28.74
14. West Bengal 0.00 0.05 0.00 0.05
15. Puducherry 0.00 2.50 0.07 2.57
16. Goa 0.00 3.75 0.00 3.75
Total 2903.90 2455.91 296.30 5656.11
4.23 In a post evidence clarification regarding FRP for sugarcane
and state advised prices announced by the State government of Uttar
Pradesh, the DAC has furnished as follows:—
The position regarding the Fair and Remunerative Price (FRP) of
sugarcane, as determined by the Central Government during the last five

33
years, is given in the following table:—
(Rs. per Quintal)
Sugar FRP accepted by the Basic recovery rate Premium over basic
Season  Government recovery rate
(in Rs. for increase
of every 0.1%)
2009-10 129.84 9.5 1.37
2010-11 139.12 9.5 1.46
2011-12 145.00 9.5 1.53
2012-13 170.00 9.5 1.79
2013-14 210.00 9.5 2.21
(iii) Need for counter-veiling duty
4.24 Cultivators of palm oil are facing difficulties as they are not
able to get inputs like labour, fertilizer etc. The Government has been
giving subsidy for imported palm oil. In this situation, the Committee
wondered whether Palm oil growers would continue this crop and if the
cultivators switch to other crops, it would take time to get back to
cultivation of Palm Oil plants. When asked about the corrective steps
taken by the Government in this regard, the Secretary, DAC stated as
follows:—
“I think, this has long-term implications for the entire edible oil
security of the country. Palm oil is the cheapest edible oil in the
world and we have, over the years, increasing dependence on
imports. Now, about 50 per cent of our total consumption of edible
oils comes from imports. This is despite the fact that domestic
oilseed production and productivity both have been increasing,
but our consumption levels, because of our improving economy,
have increased at a much higher pace.
The maximum production of palm oil in the world comes from
Indonesia and Malaysia. If you recall, in 2008-09 also, there was
a spurt in the prices of palm oil and in order to check food inflation,
the Government had taken a decision to allow imports at zero level
of duty for crude palm oil and 7.5 per cent duty for refined palm
oil. Indonesia and Malaysia have their own system to promote
export of refined palm oil vis-à-vis export of crude palm oil. They
have an export duty . So, they levy more export duty on crude palm
oil and less export duty on refined palm oil. Actually, the benefit
of reduction of import duty in India is derived by the Governments
of Malaysia and Indonesia by increasing their duties. They have

34
a flexible duty structure in which as per the price band of these
oils in the world market, their duty structure also keeps fluctuating.
If we want to promote the domestic production of palm oil, we
have to do certain things. We have to promote palm oil because
it is increasingly coming into the consumption basket not only for
commercial products, but also especially in East India because it
is very inexpensive oil. So, we have to produce it locally. If the
landed cost of import palm oil is such that the domestic palm oil
production becomes viable, it would be better. The prices received
by the farmers have dropped by 30 per cent over the past two
years because Indonesia and Malaysia are unloading their stocks
at very low levels and the global prices have fallen. We have
requested the Government to put in a counter-cyclical duty structure
so that the landed cost of palm oil is at least Rs. 6,500 per quintal
because the price formula on which the palm oil growers are paid
is dependent, to a very large extent, on the imported price of palm
oil. So, if the import price of palm oil is fixed at a level which
cannot go below Rs. 6,500, then the domestic cultivation of palm
oil in India becomes viable. We have moved a proposal, but, as
you know, sometimes the interests of the consumer overtake the
interests of the farmer. So, we have not yet been successful. All
that we have been able to manage to do is that the duty level of
zero was increased to 2.5 per cent in February, but the duty level
of refined oil remains at 7.5 per cent. As a result, even the processing
facilities in India are now under-utilised because the importers
find profit in importing refined produce from abroad. So, we would
request the protection of this Committee in supporting our case
with the Department of Revenue so that we can have a viable duty
structure in place.
The same issue is there in regard to pulses also. We still import
about three million tonnes of pulses from across the world. The
imported price, especially of urad and tur, is lower than the MSP .
If that is so, that depresses the market price and the farmer does
not get a good value for his produce. We have been requesting the
Department of Revenue. The concept of minimum import price is
now counter to WTO and we are not able to do that, but we can
still impose a counter-cyclical duty so that the entry price of import
is kept above the MSP level. If that happens, that will give a good
signal and good incentive to the domestic producers to increase
production both of palm oil as well as pulses.”

35
CHAPTER V
OTHER ISSUES
(i) Procurement
Implementation of MSP through procurement is undertaken by
Central and State level agencies. Food Corporation of India (FCI), under
the charge of Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food and Public Distribution,
is the nodal agency for procurement of foodgrains. Decentralized
procurement was introduced by the Government in 1997-98 with a view
to encourage local procurement to the maximum extent thereby extending
the benefits of MSP to local farmers, to enhance efficiency of procurement
and PDS, to provide foodgrains more suited to the local taste under the
PDS and also to effect savings in transportation and handling costs of
the FCI. Under the decentralized procurement scheme, the State
Government itself undertakes direct purchase of paddy and wheat and
procurement of levy rice on behalf of Government of India. National
Agricultural Cooperative Marketing Federation (NAFED) hitherto was
the only nodal agency for procurement of pulses and oilseeds but their
procurement has now been entrusted to Central Warehousing Corporation
(CWC) and National Cooperative Consumers’ Federation (NCCF) and
Small Farmers Agri-Business Consortium (SFAC) also. Cotton Corporation
of India (CCI), Ministry of Textiles, alongwith NAFED, is the nodal agency
for procurement of Cotton. Jute Corporation of India, Ministry of Textiles,
is the nodal agency for procurement of Jute.
5.2 As on 27.09.2013, a total of 34.01 million tonnes of rice has been
procured in the country during 2012-13. In Assam, during this period
20.05 thousand tonnes of rice has been procured as compared to 23.00
thousand tonnes procured in the corresponding period of the last season.
During 2012-13, a total of 3.196 lakh bales of 180 kgs. each of raw jute
have been procured in the country. During the same period 0.405 lakh
bales of raw jute have been procured in Assam while 0.182 lakh bales
of 180 kgs. each were procured during 2011-12.
5.3 When desired to know the details of infrastructural inadequacies
and possibilities of engagement of private agencies to fulfil such

36
inadequacies, the Department of Agriculture and Cooperation in their
Written Reply stated as follows:—
“Department of Food and Public Distribution deals with the
procurement of rice, wheat and coarse grains. The inadequacies
faced in procurement are lack of proper marketing infrastructure,
storage capacity, milling capacity and qualified technical staffs.
The States are asked to improve marketing infrastructure, taken
advantage of various schemes to improve the storage, take
advantage of the schemes of Department of Food Processing to
improve milling capacity and appoint qualified technical staff. As
for FCI, the following steps have been taken:—
(i) To augment the storage capacity in various States, Private
Entrepreneur Guarantee (PEG) scheme has been formulated
by Government of India for construction of covered storage
godowns through private entrepreneurs, CWC and State
Warehousing Corporation (SWC). Under the scheme, FCI
gives guarantee for the storage charges to the private investors
for ten years. The total capacity planned to be created under
the scheme is 203.75 lakh MT.
(ii) Food Corporation of India (FCI) is undertaking a process of
recruitment of qualified technical staff for filling up the
vacancies.
(iii) National Agricultural Cooperative Marketing Federation of
India (NAFED) undertakes the procurement of Pulses, Cotton
and Oil seeds. Cotton Corporation of India and Jute
Corporation of India undertake the procurement of Cotton
and Jute respectively. The NAFED has to engage the services
of Cooperative federations in the State Government for
procurement even though they do not have requisite
infrastructure for the same which has to be put in place
temporarily as per requirement from time to time.”
5.4 During evidence when desired to know the details of
procurement made as compared to the previous year and whether the
government has examined the causes of poor performance, if any, a
representative of the Ministry of Consumer Affairs and Food and Civil
Supplies stated as follows:—
“In Bihar, last year procurement has increased over 2009-10 and
2010-11. But last year it was less. Maybe, the reason was, perhaps,

37
some crop also was less last year. I mean, the production was less.
That is what they have been telling. Last year only they expanded
their procurement machinery to all Primary Cooperative Societies
and they spread it to about 8,000 centres, but the procurement was
lesser than the previous year, the Kharif marketing season 2011-12.
But this year they have become a decentralised State. But they
have been telling that prices are better in the market. So,
procurement so far has been very dismal even though they have
become a decentralised State for procurement. So, it will depend
on various factors, not only the machinery which they have
expanded, not only the infrastructure which they are improving,
not only the decentralised mode which they have adopted now,
but other market factors will also control procurement…….The
procurement in West Bengal is only 11.8 per cent. It is
poor……..Though they are a decentralised State for procurement,
again their procurement infrastructure has to improve.”
5.5 In a Post Evidence query, the DAC furnished the information
in regard to annual production and procurement by Central and State
government agencies for all 24 agricultural produce for which MSP are
fixed (Annexure IX).
5.6 When the Committee desired to know how distress sale can
be stopped, the Chairman, CACP stated as follows:—
“Your point is hitting really the crux of the problem. There is no
doubt about it and that is the biggest concern that we also have.
But the solution of that does not lie as much with CACP or even
with the Centre. Lately, two States Chhattisgarh and Madhya
Pradesh have set up a system in the last 3-4 years where, in fact,
they are going somewhat overboard in procuring everything with
the Government giving huge bonus and all that. But the structure
is set. It is computerised, farmers are coming, farmers are being
sent SMS as to on what day they can bring in their produce etc.
So, there is a lot of institutional and infrastructure issues where
the State has to take the initiative to make sure that the farmers,
whoever wants to sell, can get at least the MSP . This is the first
point.
Secondly, the futuristic models of ensuring that there is no distress
sale, it is not really the FCI or this type of procurement. What we
need to develop is a system which has already been initiated and
that is the warehouse receipt system and through warehouse receipt
system, he can bring it there and get 70 per cent or 80 per cent

38
as advance against that and he can sell it after 3-4 months if the
prices are better.
So, those are the marketing systems that we need to put in place
and the Ministry has already initiated those things. They need to
be scaled up. These are the ways in which we can help the small
holders of land and those who have the capacity to hold back the
grain.
xxxx xxxx xxxx They are setting up things. It is going somewhat
slow. Hopefully it will improve. Maybe, the Centre can help in that
process jointly getting the infrastructure in place.”
5.7 Decentralized procurement was introduced by the Government
in 1997-98 to encourage local procurement to the maximum extent thereby
extending the benefits of MSP to local farmers, to enhance procurement
and PDS, to provide foodgrains more suited to the local taste under the
PDS and also to effect savings in transportation and handling costs of
the FCI. When desired to know the extent to which objectives of
Decentralized procurement have been achieved, agricultural produces
procured and farmers have been benefited by the Scheme, the DAC in
their written reply furnished the following:—
“The Government of India tried to persuade State Governments
to adopt the decentralized system of procurement (DCP) scheme.
13 States have so far adopted DCP scheme namely—Madhya
Pradesh, Uttarakhand, Gujarat, Chhattisgarh, West Bengal, Odisha,
Tamil Nadu, Kerala, Karnataka, Andaman and Nicobar Islands,
Andhra Pradesh, Bihar and Rajasthan (Alwar District only). The
efforts are on. Once a State Government agrees to adopt DCP
system, the assistance is provided to State Government for
augmenting their infrastructure, training of manpower and logistic
support by the Government of India.
When FCI procures wheat, rice and coarse grains through State
Governments/Agencies, they in turn involve Farmers’ Cooperatives
and Self Help Groups etc. in the process of procurement. Over the
years the procurement of foodgrains in DCP States has increased
considerably.
Procurement centres are opened in the neighbourhood of the
farmers by the State Governments/Agencies keeping in view the
availability of foodgrains for procurement and other factors. The
payment is made to the farmers through account pay cheques and
ECS, as such removing the middle-men.”

39
5.8 The Department of Agriculture Cooperation has further
supplemented that Government of Bihar has adopted DCP scheme of
procurement from KMS 2013-14 onwards and Government of Andhra
Pradesh has adopted the DCP mode of procurement to ten districts in
KMS 2013-14. The State Government has been requested to adopt the
DCP mode in the entire State from 2014-15 onwards. The Governments
of Assam, Haryana, Himachal Pradesh, Jammu and Kashmir,
Jharkhand, Maharashtra, Punjab, Rajasthan and Uttar Pradesh have
been requested to adopt the DCP scheme from RMS 2014-15 and
KMS 2014-15 onwards. The decision regarding adoption of DCP system
lies with the State Government. Whenever State Government agree to
adopt DCP system, assistance is provided to State Government for
augmenting their infrastructure, training of manpower and logistic
support.
5.9 During evidence when Committee asked in the context of
procurement of Jute by Jute Corporation of India, the reasons for reduction
in the number of procurement centres almost by 50 per cent and reduction
in staff strength. The Secretary, Ministry of Textiles while clarifying the
position submitted as follows:—
“The business plan proposal has been approved by the JCI Board
and it is under consideration of Ministry of Textiles including the
shortage of manpower. Increasing the age of retirement from
58 to 60 years has also been recommended by the Board of
Directors for consideration and these steps could alleviate the
situation.”
(ii) Market Intervention Scheme
5.10 Government implements Market Intervention Scheme (MIS)
on the request of State/UT Government for procurement of agricultural
and horticultural commodities not covered under the Minimum Support
Price. The MIS is implemented in order to protect the growers of these
commodities from making distress sale in the event of bumper crop
when the prices tend to fall below the economic level/cost of production.
Losses, if any, incurred by the procuring agencies are shared by the
Central Government and the concerned State Government on 50:50 basis
(75:25 in case of North-Eastern States). However, the amount of loss to
be shared between Central Government and the concerned State
Government is restricted to 25% of the procurement cost. Profit, if any,
earned by the procuring agencies is retained by them.

40
5.11 During the personal hearing of representatives of Alliance for
Sustainable and Holistic Agriculture, a representative stated as follows:—
“The way the market intervention scheme has been designed, it
has been created for only those commodities which are not procured;
for onions, certain vegetables and so on whereas the market
intervention scheme scope should be expanded and should be made
more effective with enough financing in a manner that whenever
market prices are going below the MSP , the Government as a player
should be able to step in and procure enough quantities that traders
are forced to match at least the price that the Government is paying.
So, there is much scope for improving the market intervention
scheme.”
5.12 The Committee when desired to know the extent to which the
scheme has been able to achieve its objectives in various States, details
of Central share provided to various States during each of the last three
years for procurement under the scheme and the details of criteria for
fixation of minimum prices at which crops are procured under the Scheme,
the DAC in their written reply stated as follows:—
“The Market Intervention Scheme is implemented on the request
of a State/UT Government ready to bear 50% loss (25% in case of
North-Eastern States), if any, incurred on its implementation. The
MIS is implemented when there is at least 10% increase in
production or 10% decrease in the ruling rates over the previous
normal year. The loss is shared on 50:50 basis between the Central
Government and the State Government (75:25 between Central
Government and North-Eastern States). However, the loss is
restricted to 25% of the total procurement value which includes
Market Intervention Price (MIP) paid to the farmers plus permitted
overhead expenses. Profit earned, if any, in implementing the MIS
is retained by the procuring agencies.
The various aspects of MIS like the proposed quantity for
procurement, MIP , period of operation etc. are discussed and
finalized in a meeting convened in consultation with State
Government and other concerned Departments/Divisions. Under
the scheme, a pre-determined quantity at a fixed MIP is procured
by NAFED as Central agency and the agencies designated by the
State Government for a fixed period or till the prices are stabilized
above the MIP whichever is earlier. The area of operation is restricted
to the concerned State only.

41
As stated above, the MIS is implemented on the specific request
of State/UT Government willing to share the loss with Central
Government on 50:50 basis (25:75 in case of N-E States). However,
during the last three years, MIS has been implemented in various
States namely U.P ., West Bengal, Andhra Pradesh, Himachal
Pradesh, Karnataka, Rajasthan, Tamil Nadu, Mizoram, and
Nagaland for procurement of various horticultural produce like
potato, oil palm, arecanut, onion, turmeric, garlic, chilli, iskut,
pineapple etc. This clearly shows that the MIS has achieved its
mandate.
It is experienced that the moment MIS is sanctioned for a specific
commodity in a specific State, the market sentiments goes up which
helps the farmers to fetch better realization for their produce. As
such, in most of the cases the necessity for implementation/
procurement of the sanctioned commodity has not arisen. However,
during the last three years, the Department has released central
share loss under MIS as per following details:—
State Commodity Amount Release in the
Released Year
(Rs. in crores)
Himachal Pradesh Apple 1.90 2010
Andhra Pradesh Oil palm 1.66 2011
Nagaland Ginger 1.76 2013
Nagaland Orange 1.90 2013
Rajasthan Garlic 1.39 2013
Mizoram Chilli 1.15 2013
The various aspects of cost of production of a specific commodity
to be considered in the MIS in a specific State are discussed and
finalized in a meeting convened under the chairmanship of Joint
Secretary, (Cooperation), Department of Agriculture and
Cooperation. The other members of the MIS Committee are
representatives of the concerned State Government, Central Agency,
State Agency , Department of Expenditure, Horticultural Division,
Internal Finance Dn., Economics and Statistics Dn. etc. of DAC.
Under the MIS, a pre-determined quantity at a fixed MIP for a
fixed period is allowed.”
5.13 In the case of potato, onion and other vegetables the MIS does
not help the farmers to get the price. Explaining the difficulties for

42
extending MSP to certain commodities of horticulture produce, the
Secretary Department of Agriculture-Cooperation stated as follows:—
“MSP regime typically is meant for non-perishable crops, those
crops which can be stored by whoever procures it and then dispose
it of later when the price is stabilised so that there is no pressure.
Horticulture produce, by its very nature, is all perishable. They are
not amenable to long term storages, except onions and potatoes
which can still be stored for a slightly longer period. After a week,
even they lose their quality; especially in case of potatoes, if the
storage is not very good, it starts sprouting and it cannot be used
for human consumption. Therefore, whoever procures it, they will
have to dispose it of within a very short while. Sometimes, in case
of most perishable commodities, they will have to dispose it of
within that week. It is not going to make a difference on the
prevailing price mechanism unless the market which they chose
is somewhere else. So, generally what happens is that MIS is a very
difficult operation to implement. The scheme is that the State will
have to agree to bear 50 per cent of the cost. The States are generally
reluctant to do that.
Secondly, the machinery for procurement does not exist because
these are sporadic cases. With perishables, this happens more often
than not. Take the case of onions. Onion prices were extremely
high last year, and this year there are going to be floods. There
are already huge problems in onions because naturally farmers
want to go for crops which will fetch them better returns. But all
of them simultaneously grow it and that results in crash in prices.
While we do have a Market Intervention Scheme, it is only to
provide relief to farmers in the sense that they get a minimum
kind of price for their produce. It does not really help increase the
prevailing market price for any appreciable time. The idea is that
if we just intervene during the time of peak arrivals, that should
lift the market and help getting better prices.”
(iii) Impact of MGNREGA
5.14 Several State Governments, farmers, experts and stakeholders
have informed the Committee that the implementation of MGNREGA
has impacted the availability of labour for critical agricultural operations
like sowing and harvesting. Further, as per the findings of a Study
conducted by the Agro Economic Research Centres of Department of
Agriculture and Cooperation and the Institute of Social and Economic
Change, Bengaluru on MGNREGA, the implementation of MGNREGA
has created competition for demand of labour and consequently, shortage

43
of labour for agricultural operations particularly during peak seasons
like sowing and harvesting. Increase in cost of cultivation/production
due to increase in wages of agricultural labourers was also brought out
in the study.
5.15 The MGNREGA guidelines have been amended in 2012 with
a view to correct the above situation. As per the amendment to
schedule 1 of MGNREGA guidelines issued in May 2012, a large number
of activities/works having significant impact on agriculture and farm
sector relating to provision of irrigation facility, dug out farm pond,
horticulture, plantation, farm bunding and land development; agriculture
related works such as vermin-composting, liquid bio-manures etc. are
included as eligible activities under MGNREGA. The works permissible
on individual lands or homesteads are expected to help small/marginal
farmers to solve the issue of shortage of agricultural labourers.
5.16 The DAC in their Post Evidence reply informed the Committee
that the primary objective of Mahatma Gandhi National Rural
Employment Guarantee Act (MGNREGA) is to enhance the livelihood
security of the rural households by providing up to 100 days of guaranteed
wage employment in a year to every household on demand for doing
unskilled manual work. The objective of MGNREGA is to supplement
the income of a rural household and it is not intended to be the sole
means of earning livelihood for the rural population. The workers are
free to avail any other employment opportunities available to them.
5.17 As per operational guidelines of MGNREGA, normal
agriculture operations such as land preparation, ploughing, sowing, weed
removal, turning the soil, watering, harvesting, pruning and such similar
operations are not permissible.
5.18 However, as per the Amendment to Schedule I of Mahatma
Gandhi National Rural Employment Guarantee Act, 2005, issued vide
notification dated 4th May, 2012, the following activities on the lands of
small or marginal farmers as defined in the Agriculture Debt Waiver and
Debt Relief Scheme, 2008 have been included in the list of activities for
focus in schemes formulated by States under section 4 of the Act:—
(i) provision of irrigation facility, dug out farm pond,
horticulture, plantation, farm bunding and land development;
(ii) agriculture related works, such as, NADEP composting,
vermin-composting, liquid bio-manures;

44
(iii) livestock related works, such as, poultry shelter, goat shelter,
construction of pucca floor, urine tank and fodder trough for
cattle, azolla as cattle-feed supplement;
(iv) w orks in coastal areas, such as, fish drying yards, belt
vegetation;
(v) rural drinking water related works, such as, soak pits,
recharge pits;
(vi) rural sanitation related works, such as, individual household
latrines, school toilet units, anganwadi toilets, solid and liquid
waste management.
5.19 A large number of activities/works having significant impact
on agriculture and farm sector relating to provision of irrigation facility,
dug out farm pond, horticulture, plantation, farm bunding and land
development; agriculture related works, such as, NADEP composting,
vermin-composting, liquid bio-manures are included in para 1B of
Schedule I of the MGNREGA and the works permissible on individual
lands or homesteads. These activities are expected to help small/marginal
farmers in dealing with this issue.
5.20 In addition, as per amendment vide notification dated
3rd January, 2014 to Schedule I Para 4 (III) Category C (i), works for
promoting agricultural productivity by creating durable infrastructure
required for bio-fertilizers and post-harvest facilities including pucca
storage facilities for agricultural produce has been permitted under
Mahatma Gandhi NREGA.

45
PART II
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
1. Minimum Support Price (MSP) fixed by the Government acts
as the floor price of an agricultural commodity and safeguards the
interests of farmers. Presently, 24 crops are covered under MSP and
only one crop viz. sugarcane is covered under Fair and Remunerative
Price (FRP) mechanism. The Committee have been informed that no
specific profit margin over cost of production is considered by the
CACP . Since agriculture is becoming unremunerative particularly for
small and marginal farmers due to variety of reasons, the Committee
feel that the Government should move towards remunerative pricing
mechanism for all the 24 crops. The Committee do not agree with the
view of DAC that prescribing an increase of 50% on cost of production
as recommended by the National Commission on Farmers headed by
Prof. M. S. Swaminathan may distort the market. What is paramount
is the lively-hood of farmers. Distortion, if any, in market on account
of remunerative pricing of agricultural produce must be suitably
addressed. The Committee urge that steps should be taken to fix
remunerative pricing with 50% profit margin over cost of production,
for all the 24 crops without any further delay as already recommended
by this Committee in their Forty-first Report (14th Lok Sabha) in the
year 2007-08.
2. Although cost of cultivation for each crop widely varies from
region to region, regrettably, MSP is uniform for a single crop for the
whole country. According to the Deptt. of Agriculture and Co-operation
(DAC), fixing different MSPs (region-wise MSP) for the same crop
may neither be practical nor desirable and would defeat the aim of
promoting cultivation of crops best suited to a region with maximum
competitive advantage. Another reason advanced against differential
MSP is that it would lead to movement of agricultural produce to the
region having highest MSP , thereby negating the very purpose of
differential MSP . The Committee feel that if the country is to sustain
self-sufficiency in production, competitive advantage alone cannot be
the criterion for promotion of crops. In Committee’s view, region-wise
MSP , pre-supposes enforcement of appropriate restrictions by respective
regions. The Committee, therefore, desire that steps should be taken
in a time bound manner to fix region-wise MSP , initially on

46
experimental basis and its continuation or otherwise decided on the
basis of results of the experiment.
3. One of the suggestions made to the Committee by various
experts relates to transforming the CACP into a statutory body and
making its recommendations binding on the Government. According
to the DAC, binding nature of recommendations of statutory CACP
on various aspects of agriculture would be fraught with practical
difficulties. It would also preclude the Government from enhancing
the MSP over and above what is recommended by CACP as had often
been done in the past. The Committee note that the Government has
plans for giving agricultural subsidy through direct cash transfer
mechanism. The Committee would like to point out that the proposed
direct transfer mechanism is not free of bottlenecks and challenges.
In Committee’s view, the MSP mechanism ought to be continued with
the existing procurement system for implementation of Food Security
Act and expeditious steps should also be taken for introduction of
direct cash transfer mechanism for agricultural subsidy. The Committee
would await steps taken in this regard.
4. The estimates of costs of production used by the CACP suffer
on account of small sample size, outdated data and poor quality of
collection. The sample size is as small as 8,400 holdings. The CACP
report is based on outdated data due to time lag of two to three years
between the time of collection of data and finalization of report by
CACP . Further, according to a former Chairman of the CACP , the
methods of data collection and cost calculation by some State
Agricultural Universities are questionable. There is a need to broad-
base the data, broad-base the machinery and bridge the time gap to
make the basis of MSP realistic. The Committee desire that immediate
action be taken to address the aforesaid shortcomings and ensure that
CACP’s exercise of fixing MSP is meaningful.
5. Incidentally, the Committee have been informed that a
Committee under the Chairmanship of Dr. Ramesh Chand, Director,
National Centre for Agricultural Economics and Policy Research (NCAP)
has been set up to review the methodology and mandate of CACP vis-
à-vis cost of cultivation study. The Committee hope that the Ramesh
Chand Committee will examine the shortcomings in the present system
of MSP calculation and complete its tasks expeditiously under
intimation to this Committee.
6. The Committee note that CACP has only two non-official
members representing the farming community. The Committee desire
that the composition of CACP should be broad based to include at

47
least four non-official members representing the farming community
from all the four regions of the country to enable them to have their
say in the CACP. Further, there should be transparency in the
appointment of non-official members of CACP .
7. Timely announcement of MSP ahead of the sowing season i.e.
by 1st June for kharif crops and by 1st November for rabi crops would
enable farmers to decide about the type and quantum of crops to
cultivate during the season. Admittedly, there had been delays in
announcement of MSP in the past though there is stated to be
improvement in this regard in recent years. Despite timely submission
of reports by CACP , the delay reportedly takes place, due to time taken
in consultation with various Ministries at the Centre and the State
Governments. The Committee hope that considering the importance
of timely announcement of MSP to the farming community, the
Government will ensure in future that there is no delay whatsoever
in this regard.
8. The main objective of MSP is to ensure that there is no distress
sale of agriculture produce by farmers at the harvest season. Sadly,
there are reports of small and marginal farmers selling their produce
below the MSP in some parts of the country particularly in Bihar, West
Bengal and Orissa. Implementation of MSP is done through
procurement which has been decentralized since 1997-98 with a view
to encouraging local procurement thereby extending the benefits of
MSP to local farmers. There is a need to increasingly involve Farmers’
Co-operatives and Self-Help Groups in the process of procurement. It
has been stated that lack of proper marketing infrastructure, storage
capacity, milling capacity, etc. adversely affect procurement activity.
The Committee would urge the DAC to impress upon those State
Governments facing these inadequacies to address the problems on
priority and ensure that there is no distress sale by farmers anywhere
in the country.
9. Warehouse receipt system is another important measure which
will go a long way in curbing distress sale by farmers. The Committee,
however, regret to learn that the progress of system of farmers availing
advance amounts through warehouse receipt is slow. The Committee
are of the view that scaling up this system in a planned manner is a
priority area and suggest that necessary action should be taken in this
regard. The Committee would also like to know the progress achieved
so far and plans for the future.
10. The Committee note that alternate channels of marketing
would enable farmers to sell their produce for optimum returns. The

48
Model State Agricultural Produce Marketing (Development and
Regulation) Act, 2003 (APMC Act) advocates, among other things,
provision of direct purchase of agricultural produce from farmers by
processors/bulk retailers/whole sellers/exporters nearer the farm gate.
So far, only 16 State Governments have reportedly amended their APMC
Acts providing for direct marketing, contract farming, etc. The
Committee desire that the DAC should actively pursue with the
remaining State Governments and ensure that APMC Acts are reformed
at the earliest and the farmers are protected from exploitation by middle
men.
11. The Committee have been informed that the prices received
by palm oil growers have dropped by 30% over the past two years,
making the domestic palm oil production unviable due to increasing
dependence on import at very low prices. It has been stated that about
50% of our total consumption of edible oils come from imports and
as a result of fall in global prices and low level of import duty (2.5%
for crude palm oil and 7.5% for refined palm oil), stocks of palm oil
are unloaded in our country jeopardizing the interests of domestic
growers. The Committee are concerned to note that this phenomenon
has long-term implications for the entire edible oil security of the
country. It has been pleaded before the Committee that there should
be counter-cyclical duty at rates which would make the landed cost
of palm oil is at least Rs. 65,00 per quintal so that the domestic
cultivation becomes viable. Similar problem is also faced in import of
pulses accounting for 3 million tonnes at a price lower than the MSP .
The Committee are at a loss to understand why the Deptt. of Revenue
and the Ministry of Commerce have not taken necessary steps to
protect the interests of farmers and ensure that edible oil security of
the country is not adversely affected. The Committee would urge the
Deptt. of Revenue to put in place a dynamic counter-vailing duty
structure in this regard without further delay, under intimation to the
Committee.
12. The Rangarajan Committee which looked into the issue of
difference in pricing of sugarcane as fixed by the CACP vis-à-vis State
Government of Uttar Pradesh reportedly emphasized the need to
rationalize the pricing of sugarcane and that there should be a sharing
of revenues/value created in the sugarcane value chain between the
farmers and the millers in a fair and equitable manner. In pursuance
of this recommendation and having looked into the problems of the
sugar industry, the Government is stated to have extended an interest
free loan of about Rs. 6,600 cr. for making loan cane payment and cane
price arrear payment. The Committee note that cane price arrears for
the year 2012-13 was as much as Rs. 2177 cr. in Uttar Pradesh as on

49
15.12.2013. The Committee hope that the Cane Commissioner would
monitor the payment and ensure that issues are resolved at the earliest.
13. One of the objectives of creation of the Jute Corporation of
India (JCI) is procurement of Jute. The Committee learnt that the
number of procurement centres operated by JCI has come down by
50 per cent and that there has been drastic reduction in the manpower
of JCI. Considering the importance of Jute procurement for the lives
of jute growers particularly in the States of West Bengal, Bihar, Orissa,
Assam and Andhra Pradesh, the Committee desire that the JCI
operations should be strengthened with adequate manpower and
increase in the number of procurement centres.
14. The Market Intervention Scheme (MIS) is implemented to
protect the growers of agricultural and horticultural commodities (those
not covered under MSP) from making distress sale in the event of
bumper crop when the prices fall below the cost of production. It has
been stated that MIS is a very difficult operation to implement and
the machinery for procurement does not exist. MIS is implemented
only on the specific request of State/UT willing to share the loss with
Central Government on 50:50 basis (25:75 in case of NE States).
Admittedly, States are reluctant to do that. All this indicates that MIS
has not achieved its mandate. The Committee feel that if the objective
of protecting farmers from distress sale is to be achieved, the MIS
must be re-oriented and broad based with well prepared machinery
ever ready to undertake the task at very short notice. DAC should
chalk out the ways and means to achieve this. The Committee would
also suggest that the cost sharing between States and the Centre should
be such that the latter does not feel the burden. For instance the ratio
could be 25:75 between States and the Centre and 10:90 in the case of
NE States.
15. According to the findings of a study conducted by the Agro
Economic Centres and the Institute of Social and Economic Change,
Bangaluru, the implementation of Mahatma Gandhi National Rural
Employment Act (MGNREGA) has impacted the availability of labour
for critical agricultural operations like sowing and harvesting. The
Committee note that in order to tackle this problem, NGNREGA
guidelines of May 2012 have included activities having significant
impact on agriculture such as provision of irrigation facility, dug out
farm pond, farm bunding and land development, etc. as eligible
activities under MGNREGA. One beneficial fallout of the aforesaid
problem appears to be the increasing mechanisation of farm activities
which would hopefully bring about desired transformation of
agricultural operations. The Committee feel that it is high time that

50
an objective assessment is undertaken of the impact of MGNREGA
on various aspects of agricultural operations and take such
remedial measures as may be necessary to overcome the adverse impact,
if any.
N
EW DELHI; BASUDEB ACHARIA,
03 March, 2014 Chairman,
12 Phalguna, 1935 (Saka) Committee on Agriculture.

51
ANNEXURE I
(Vide Para No. 2.17)
Suicide by farmers due to agrarian reasons from 2010 to 2013 as
reported by State Governments
SI. Name of State/UT Period/ Number of suicides
No. (Date of report)  by farmers due to
agrarian reasons
as reported by
State Government
12 3 4
1. Andhra Pradesh 2010 267
2011 302
2012 177
2013 36
2. Karnataka 2009-10 (F/Y) 145
2010-11 (F/Y) 117
2011-12 (F/Y) 107
2012-13 (F/Y) 60
2013-14 09
(12.08.2013) (F/Y)
3. Maharashtra 2010 572
2011 608
2012 642
2013 407
4. Kerala* 2010 Nil
2011 21
2012 17
2013 (13.08.2013) 01
5. Punjab 2010-2013 Not reported
6. Tamil Nadu 14.11.2013 Nil
7. Gujarat 13.08.2013 Nil
8. Assam 05.12.2013 Nil

52
9. Arunachal Pradesh 11.12.2013 Nil
10. Bihar 20.12.2013 Nil
11. Chhattisgarh 30.04.2013 Nil
12. Goa 05.12.2013 Nil
13. Haryana 09.12.2013 Nil
14. Himachal Pradesh 09.12.2013 Nil
15. Jammu and Kashmir 14.12.2013 Nil
16. Jharkhand 12.12.2013 Nil
17. Manipur 07.12.2013 Nil
18. Meghalaya 03.10.2013 Nil
19. Madhya Pradesh* 2010 1237
2011 1323
2012 Not reported
2013 Not reported
20. Mizoram 11.12.2013 Nil
21. Nagaland 27.09.2013 Nil
22. Odisha 03.09.2013 Nil
23. Rajasthan 30.10.2013 Nil
24. Sikkim 10.07.2013 Nil
25. Tripura 03.09.2013 Nil
26. Uttar Pradesh 28.04.2011 Nil
27. Uttarakhand 16.12.2013 Nil
28. West Bengal 28.03.2013 Nil
29. A & N Islands 07.02.2014 Nil
30. NCT of Delhi 09.12.2013 Nil
31. Daman and Diu 17.09.2013 Nil
32. Dadra and Nagar Haveli 06.12.2013 Nil
33. Lakshadweep 11.12.2013 Nil
34. Puducherry 18.12.2013 Nil
35. Chandigarh 11.02.2014 Nil
*Total number of suicide in farming/agriculture (due to various reasons).
12 3 4

53
ANNEXURE II
(Vide Para No. 4.1)
Minimum Support Prices
(Rs. per quintal)
Commodity Variety 2010-11 2011-12 2012-13 2013-14
1 2 3456
Kharif Crops
Paddy Common 1000 1080 1250 1310
Grade A 1030 1110 1280 1345
Jowar Hybrid 880 980 1500 1500
Maldandi 900 1000 1520 1520
Bajra 880 980 1175 1250
Maize 880 980 1175 1310
Ragi 965 1050 1500 1500
Arhar (Tur) 3000 & 3200 & 3850 4300
Moong 3170 & 3500 & 4400 4500
Urad 2900 & 3300 & 4300 4300
Cotton Medium Staple 2500 2800 3600 3700
Long Staple 3000 3300 3900 4000
Groundnut in 2300 2700 3700 4000
shell
Sunflower seed 2350 2800 3700 3700
Soyabean Black 1400 1650 2200 2500
Yellow 1440 1690 2240 2560
Sesamum 2900 3400 4200 4500
Nigerseed 2450 2900 3500 3500
Rabi Crops
Wheat 1120$ 1285 1350
Barley 780 980 980
Gram 2100 2800 3000
Masur (Lentil) 2250 2800 2900

54
Rapeseed/ 1850 2500 3000
Mustard
Safflower 1800 2500 2800
Toria 1780 2425 2970
Other Crops
Copra Milling 4450 4525 5100 5250
Ball 4700 4775 5350 5500
De-Husked 1200 1200 1400 1425
Coconut
Jute 1575 1675 2200 2300
Sugarcane# 139.12 145.00 170.00 210.00
Notes:
$ An additional incentive bonus of Rs. 50 per quintal was payable over the MSP .
& Additional incentive of Rs. 500 per quintal was payable in respect of kharif pulses sold
to procurement agencies during the harvest/arrival period of two months.
# Fair & Remunerative Price (FRP).
1 2 3456

55
ANNEXURE III
(Vide Para No. 4.7)
Average Gross and Net Rate of Returns over Cost of Cultivation
during 2000-01 to 2003-04 and 2008-09 to 2011-12
Crop Average during Average during
2000-01 to 2003-04*  2008-09 to 2011-12*
Rate of Gross Net Rate of Rate of Gross Net Rate of
Returns over Returns over Returns over Returns over
A2+FL (%)  C2 (%) A2+FL (%) C2 (%)
1 2345
Cereals 52 5 . 78 19
Paddy 43 1 63 13
Wheat 91 22 127 36
Maize 15 -15 58 12
Jowar 21 -11 51 6
Bajra 25 -7 42 3
Barley 73 16 112 38
Ragi -5 -31 2 -25
Pulses 85 19 96 26
Tur 85 18 97 27
Gram 118 32 105 28
Moong 21 -8 62 15
Urad 60 8 75 17
Lentil 121 25 158 44
Oilseeds 61 11 82 23
Groundnut 40 2 51 9
Soyabean 58 8 72 18
Sunflower 11 -16 31 1
Rapeseed/ 120 36 167 53
Mustard
Sesamum 66 14 86 26

56
Safflower 24 -7 62 16
Nigerseed 26 -5 39 -3
Commercial 70 15 119 43
Crops
Cotton 48 5 92 30
Jute 22 -10 65 16
Sugarcane 98 27 165 62
* Average returns are calculated so as to eliminate the effect of drought years.
1 2345

57
ANNEXURE IV
(Vide Para No. 4.7)
All India Average Net Rate of Returns over C2 during Time Periods
2000-01 to 2003-04 and 2008-09 to 2011-12
All India Average Gross Rate of Returns over A2+FL during Time
Periods 2000-01 to 2003-04 and 2008-09 to 2011-12

58
ANNEXURE V
(Vide Para No. 4.7)
All India Cost of Production(COP)-(A2+FL,C2), Minimum Support Price (MSP) and Margins of
MSP over COP of major crops during 2009-10 to 2013-14
(Rs./qtl.)
Crops2009-10$ 2010-11$ 2011-12$ 2012-13* 2013-14#
C2* A2+ MSP Mar- Mar- C2* A2+ MSP Mar- Mar- C2* A2+ MSP Mar- Mar- C2* A2+ MSP Mar- Mar- C2* A2+ MSP Mar- Mar-
FL* gin gin FL* gin gin FL* gin gin FL* gin gin FL* gin gin
over over over over overover over over over over
C2(%) A2+ C2(%) A2+ C2(%) A2+ C2(%) A2+ C2(%) A2+
FL(%) FL(%) FL(%) FL(%) FL(%)
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26
Paddy 84.7 600.9 1000 13.0 66.4 939.9 658.5 1000 6.4 51.9 1026.8 719.8 1080 5.2 50.0 1152.2 813.9 1250 8.5 53.6 1234.0 961.0 1310 6.2 36.3
Jowar 1122.1 814.9 840 -25.1 3.1 1454.5 1028.4 880 -39.5 -14.4 1493.0 1010.9 980 -34.4 -3.1 1611.5 1246.4 1500 -6.9 20.4 1648.0 1269.0 1500 -9.0 18.2
Bajra 812.77 560.09 840 3.4 50.0 755.67 535.39 880 16.5 64.4 982.09 734.88 980 -0.2 33.4 1059.1 779.0 1175 10.9 50.8 1003.0 768.0 1250 24.6 62.0
Maize 861.64 615.11 840 -2.5 36.6 816.90 579.60 880 7.7 51.8 976.58 693.13 980 0.3 41.4 1070.0 813.6 1175 9.8 44.4 1112.0 860.0 1310 17.8 52.3
Ragi 1354.78 996.8 915 -32.5 -8.2 1390.56 1064.4 965 -30.6 -9.3 1729.55 1058.1 1050 -39.3 -0.8 1884.2 1411.9 1500 -20.4 6.2 1687.0 1338.0 1500 -11.1 12.1
Tur 2860.4 1658.0 2300 -19.6 38.7 3225.9 2185.0 3000 -7.0 37.3 2979.5 1944.1 3200 7.4 64.6 4167.2 2765.3 3850 -7.6 39.2 3958.03090.0 4300 8.6 39.2
Moong 4058.7 2720.6 2760 -32.0 1.4 3199.4 2338.7 3170 -0.9 35.5 3921.6 2968.1 3500 -10.8 17.9 4698.8 3430.1 4400 -6.4 28.3 4759.0 3775.0 4500 -5.4 19.2
Urad 3490.0 2328.5 2520 -27.8 8.2 3076.8 2043.0 2900 -5.7 42.0 3871.6 2785.0 3300 -14.8 18.5 4333.6 3101.9 4300 -0.8 38.6 4112.0 3144.0 4300  4.6 36.8
Groundnut 2492.1 1851.92100 -15.7 13.4 2477.8 1806.2 2300 -7.2 27.3 3364.9 2503.2 2700 -19.6 7.9 3714-5 2873.0 3700 -0.4 28.8 3397.0 2720.0 4000 17.8 47.1
Soyabean 1670.5 1135.2 1350 -19.2 18.9 1606.1 1096.6 1400 -12.8 27.7 1739.1 1176.5 1650 -5.1 40.2 2343.1 1725.8 2200 -6.1 27.5 2216.0 1692.0 2560 15.5 51.3

59
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26
Sunflower 2558.9 1894.1 2215 -13.4 16.9 2690.9 1997.3 2350 -12.7 17.7 3023.4 2164.1 2800 -7.4 29.4 3698.0 2954.7 3700 0.1 25.2 3679.0 3000.0 3700 0.6 23.3
Sesamum 4328.3 2576.2 2850 -34.2 10.6 3533.6 2467.3 2900 -17.9 17.5 4270.5 3062.1 3400 -20.5 11.0 4185.7 2893.3 4200 0.3 45.2 4134.0 2919.0 4500 8.9 54.2
Nigerseed 2935.8 1903.12405 -18.1 26.4 3160.0 ! 2130.4 2450 -22.5 15.0 3028.8 2307.3 2900 -4.3 25.7 4554.6 3428.5 3500 -23.2 2.1 3628.0 2279.0 3500 -3.5 53.6
Cotton 2356.7 1602.8 3000 !27.3 87.2 2916.9 1876.0 3000 2.8 59.9 3271.9 2181.6 3300 0.9 51.3 2772.2 1970.3 3900 40.7 97.9 3533.0 2485.0 4000 13.2 61.0
Wheat 832.8 497.1 1100 32.1 121.3 815.5 489.7 1170 43.5 138.9 891.5 530.5 1285 44.1 142.2 1066.3 654.8 1350 26.6 106.2 1138.8 679.3 1400 22.9 106.1
Barley 643.2 409.2 750 16.6 83.3 704.9 471.2 780 10.7 65.5 942.0  629.9 980 4.0 55.6 862.0 593.6 980 13.7 65.1 1056.1 676.4 1100 4.2 62.6
Gram 2052.6 1146.7 1760 -14.3 53.5 1815.0 1189.0 2100 15.7 76.6 2666.5 1594.9 2800 5.0 75.6 2327.7 1646.1 3000 28.9 82.2 2913.0 1786.2 3100 6.4 73.6
Lentil 1626.0 1207.3 1870 15.0 54.9 2207.51277.3 2250 1.9 76.2 2312.5 1288.7 2800 -21.1 117.3 3161.5 1879.0 2900 -8.3 54.3 2802.1 1798.7 2950 5.3 64.0
R&M 1482.4 849.1 1830 23.4 115.5 1392.5 782.6 1850 32.9 136.4 2229.6 126.3 2500 12.1 92.9 1987.4 1215.9 3000 50.9 146.7 2410.5 1306.7 3050 26.5 133.4
Safflower 2614.0 1932.8 1680 -35.7 -13.1 2187.8 1563.9 1800 -17.7 15.1 2073.5 1490.9 2500 20.6 67.7 2708.4 3338.4 2800 3.4 -16.1 3466.4 2543.5 3000 -13.5 17.9
Sugarcane 109.4 61.2 130 18.7 112.3 120.7 75.0 139  15.2 85.4 139.4 87.3 145 4.0 66.1 148.0 100.9 170 14.9 68.5 184.8 120.4 210 13.6 74.4
Jute 1452.2 97671 1375 -5.3 40.9 1959.51295.0 1575 -19.6 21.5 1979.6 1475.5 1675 -15.4 13.5 1808.3 1435.5 2200 21.7 53.3 2160.3 1015.3 2300 6.5 126.4
$ The COP (C2.A2+FL) for the years 2009-10, 2010-11 and 2011-12 are actual estimates
# The COP (C2.A2+FL) for the years 2012-13 and 2013-14 are projected estimates
* C2: Overall Cost Inclusive of A2+FL
Note: Paid out cost covers the cost on account of all inputs like human labour, bullock labour, machine labour, seeds, fertilisers, manure, insecticides,
irrigation charges.

60
ANNEXURE VI
(Vide Para No. 4.13)
Replies received from the State Governments
StateKharifRabi
2010-11 2011-12 2012-13 2013-14 2014-15 2010-11 2011-12 2012-13 2013-14 2014-15
Mkt. Season Mkt. Season  Mkt. Season  Mkt. Season  Mkt. Season Mkt. Season Mkt. Season  Mkt. Season  Mkt. Season  Mkt. Season
DoAg DoFD DoAg DoFD DoAg DoFD DoAg DoFD DoAg DoFD DoAg DoFD DoAg DoFD DoAg DoFD DoAg DoFD DoAg DoFD
1 23456789 1 0 1 1 1 2 1 3 1 4 1 5 1 6 1 7 1 8 1 9 2 0 2 1
Andhra Pradesh 18.2.10 14.2.11 27.2.12 5.2.13 * 28.6.12 5.6.13
Arunachal Pradesh 1.2.10 20.12.10 *
Assam 13.1.10 19.1.11 2.1.11 * 22.2.12 15.1.13 24.1.14 * * * 30.5.13 14.6.13
Bihar 15.2.10 24.1.11 * 6.3.12 8.2.13 7.1.14 * • 26.5.11 3.7.12 5.6.13
Chhattisgarh 1.2.10 15.2.10 1.1.11 *10.1.13 6.1.14 * * 19.6.12 31.5.13
Delhi 11.12.09 30.12.10 17.1.11 * 20.5.09 * * 1.6.13
Goa 23.2.10 16.2.11 18.12.13 *
Gujarat 16.2.10 29.1.10 17.2.11 7.2.11 * 22.2.12 23.1.14 * * * 24.7.12 1.6.13 16.5.13
Haryana 1.1.10 18.12.09 3.1.11 * * 28.12.12 23.12.13 1.1.14 * 22.5.09 * 10.5.10 * 20.6.12 14.6.12 31.5.13 8.5.13
Himachal Pradesh 23.2.10 6.4.10 1.2.11 27.2.12 9.1.13 8.1.14 13.1.14 * 29.5.09 * * 27.6.12 28.5.13 3.7.13
Jammu and Kashmir 31.12.10 *26.4.10 * 27.6.12 6.6.13
Jharkhand 16.2.10 1.3.12 6.2.136.6.13

61
1 23456789 1 0 1 1 1 2 1 3 1 4 1 5 1 6 1 7 1 8 1 9 2 0 2 1
Karnataka 4.2.10 6.4.10 13.1.11 8.2.11 16.3.12 1.1.14 * 19.5.09 * 25.6.12 5.6.13
Kerala 20.1.10 23.12.10 * 6.1.14 29.4.10
Madhya Pradesh 6.1.10 7.1.11 * 21.12.12 9.1.14 * * * 3.7.12 4.5.13
Maharashtra 7,12.09 14.1.11***
Manipur
Meghalaya
Mizoram 18.2.10 2.2.1128.5.09
Nagaland 17.1.11 28.12.10 22.2.12 13.2.12
Orissa * 5.2.13 9.1.14 9.1.14 * * 27.6.12 6.6.13 5.6.13
Punjab 23.2.10 22.12.09 30.12.10 2.1.11 * 5.2.12 6.2.13 30.1.13 28.1.14 * 21.5.09 * 30.4.10 * * 27.6.12 27.6.12 14.6.13 14.6.13
Rajasthan 12.2.10 : 15.2.10 25.1.11 27.1.11 * 30.1.13 8.2.13 6.1.14 23.1.14 * * * * * 27.6.12 27.6.12 27.5.13 6.6.13
Sikkim 21.12.09 20.1.11 23.12.10 19.1.12
Tamil Nadu 29.12.09 31.12.10* 7.5.10 *
Tripura 30.12.09 23.12.10 * * *
Uttar Pradesh 16.12.09 2.2.10 20.12.10 13.2.12 24.1.13 6.1.14 7.1.14 29.6.09 * * 3.6.11 11.6.12 27.6.12 5.6.13 15.5.13
Uttarakhand 30.12.09 4.2.10 30.12.10 * * 31.1.13 9.1.14 10.1.14 * * * * * 20.6.12 14.6.13 6.5.13
West Bengal 23.12.09 12.1.11 * 15.1.13 8.2.13 17.6.09 * * 27.6.12 5.6.13 7.5.13
Andaman & Nicobar 7.1.10 23.12.10 10.1.11 6.2.12 8.1.13 23.1.14 *
D&N Haveli
Daman and Diu

Lakshadweep
Pondicherry
Abbreviation : DoAg.- Department of Agriculture. DoFD—Department of Food.
Note : * : Dates are not available.
# : Dates are not available so information taken from the meeting register. Meeting dates were 6.8.2009, 15.7.2010 for Sugarcane and 31.8.2010,
   24.8.2011 for Copra.
1 23456789 1 0 1 1 1 2 1 3 1 4 1 5 1 6 1 7 1 8 1 9 2 0 2 1
62

63
Replies received from the State Governments
State Jute Sugarcane Copra
2010-11 2011-12 2012-13 2013-14 2014-15 2010-11 2011-12 2012-13 2013-14 2014-15 2010-11 2011-12 2012-13 2013-14 2014-15
Mkt. Mkt. Mkt. Mkt. Mkt. Mkt. Mkt. Mkt. Mkt. Mkt. Mkt. Mkt. Mkt. Mkt. Mkt.
Season Season Season Season Season Season Season Season Season Season Season Season Season Season Season
DoAg DoAg DoAg DoAg DoAg DoAg DoAg DoAg DoAg DoAg DoAg DoAg DoAg DoAg DoAg
1 23456789 1 0 1 1 1 2 1 3 1 4 1 5 1 6
Andhra Pradesh 29.9.10 * # 15.7.11 30.5.13 19.8.09 # # 28.8.12 7.8.13
Arunachal Pradesh
Assam 29.10.09 30.8.10 * 19.9.12 23.9.13
Bihar 27.9.11 19.9.12 4.9.13 # # 28.6.12 6.6.13
Chhattisgarh
Delhi
Goa
Gujarat # # 20.7.11 14.1.13
Haryana # # 15.7.11 3.7.13
Himachal Pradesh
Jammu and Kashmir
Jharkhand
Karnataka # # 20.7.11 June, 12 24.6.13 * # # 28.8.12

64
Kerala# 24.8.12 6.8.13
Madhya Pradesh
Maharashtra # # 26.7.11 30.6.12 24.6.13
Manipur
Meghalaya 8.10.09 6.8.10
Mizoram
Nagaland
Orissa 29.9.09 27.9.10 * 17.9.12 8.9.13
Punjab # # 20.7.11 29.5.13
Rajasthan
Sikkim
Tamil Nadu24.6.11 24.6.13 27.8.09 # # 28.8.12 6.8.13
Tripura 26.8.10 17.8.11
Uttar Pradesh # # 15.7.11 3.7.13
Uttarakhand # # 15.7.11 * 24.6.13
West Bengal 26.8.10 11.8.11 5.10.12 30.8.13
Andaman and Nicobar 7.7.11 * 22.8.12 6.8.13
D and N Haveli
1 23456789 1 0 1 1 1 2 1 3 1 4 1 5 1 6

Daman and Diu
Lakshadweep26.7.11 17.10.12 6.8.13
Pondicherry
Abbreviation : DoAg.—Department of Agriculture.
Note: * : Dates are not available.
# : Dates are not available so information taken from the meeting register. Meeting dates were 6.8.2009, 15.7.2010 for Sugarcane and 31.8.2010,
24.8.2011 for Copra.
1 23456789 1 0 1 1 1 2 1 3 1 4 1 5 1 6
65

ANNEXURE VII
(Vide Para No. 4.13)
Price Policy Meetings
Crop 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013
2010-11 Mkt. Season 2011-12 Mkt. Season 2012-13 Mkt. Season 2013-14 Mkt. Season 2014-15 Mkt. Season
StatesOrganisationsStatesOrganisationsStatesOrganisationsStatesOrganisationsStatesOrganisations
Rabi 29.6.2009 30.6.2009, 19.5.2010 21.5.2010, 15.6.2011 16.6.2011, 26.6.2012 27.6.2012 4.6.2013 5.6.2013
1.7.2009 24.6.2010, 17.6.2011
 25.6.2010
Sugarcane 6.8.2009 7.8.2009 15.7.2010 16.7.2010 19.7.2011 20.7.2011, 3.7.2012 3.7.2012 11.6.2013 12.6.2013
5.8.2011
Copra 28.8.2009 28.8.2009 31.8.2010 31.8.2010 24.8.2011 24.8.2011 28.8.2012 28.8.2012 12.8.2013 12.8.2013
Jute 6.10.2009 7.10.2009 24.9.2010 23.9.2010 22.9.2011 23.9.2011 3.10.2012, 19.10.2013
at Kolkata at Kolkata  at Kolkata  at kolkata  at kolkata  at kolkata 4.10.2012 at Kolkata
and
5.10.2012
at kolkata
Kharif 17.2.2010 18.2.2010, 17.2.2011 18.2.2011 1.3.2012 2.3.2012, 5.2.2013 6.2.2013 9.1.2014 10.1.2014
19.2.2010, 5.3.2012
25.2.2011
66

ANNEXURE VIII
(Vide Para No. 4.13)
Dates of Submission of Recommendations by the CACP
Year/particulars Stipulated date Date of submission of
recommendations by the CACP
12 3
Price Policy Report for Kharif (Marketing Season 2014-15) 31st March Under finalization, likely
submission by Feb., 2014
Price Policy Report for Rabi (Marketing Season 2014-15) 31st July 22.07.2013
Price Policy Report for Sugarcane (Marketing Season 2014-15) 15th August 14.08.2013
Price Policy Report for Copra (Marketing Season 2014-15) 7th September 6.09.2013
Price Policy Report for Jute (Marketing Season 2014-15) 15th October 11.10.2013
Price Policy Report for Kharif (Marketing Season 2013-14) 31st March 25.03.2013
Price Policy Report for Rabi (Marketing Season 2013-14) 31st July 9.08.2012
Price Policy Report for Sugarcane (Marketing Season 2013-14) 15th August 29.08.2012
Price Policy Report for Copra (Marketing Season 2013-14) 7th September 12.09.2012
Price Policy Report for Jute (Marketing Season 2013-14) 15th October 22.10.2012
Price Policy Report for Kharif (Marketing Season 2012-13) 31st March 03.04.2012
Price Policy Report for Rabi (Marketing Season 2012-13) 31st July 29.07.2011
67

12 3
Price Policy Report for Sugarcane (Marketing Season 2012-13) 15th August 18.08.2011
Price Policy Report for Copra (Marketing Season 2012-13) 7th September 12.09.2011
Price Policy Report for Jute (Marketing Season 2012-13) 15th October 21.10.2011
Price Policy Report for Kharif (Marketing Season 2011-12) 31st March 31.03.2011
Price Policy Report for Rabi (Marketing Season 2011-12) 31st July 26.07.2010
Price Policy Report for Sugarcane (Marketing Season 2011-12) 15th August 10.08.2010
Price Policy Report for Copra (Marketing Season 2011-12) 7th September 08.09.2010
Price Policy Report for Jute (Marketing Season 2011-12) 15th October 28.10.2010
Price Policy Report for Kharif (Marketing Season 2010-11) 31st March 12.04.2010
Price Policy Report for Rabi (Marketing Season 2010-11) 31st July 10.08.2009
Price Policy Report for Sugarcane (Marketing Season 2010-11) 15th August 24.08.2009
Price Policy Report for Copra (Marketing Season 2010-11) 7th September 09.09.2009
Price Policy Report for Jute (Marketing Season 2010-11) 15th October 16.10.2009
68

69
ANNEXURE IX
(Vide Para No. 5.5)
State-wise Production and Procurement of Wheat during last five years
(In lakh tonnes)
State Production (Crop Year) Procurement (RMS) # % Procurement
2008-09 2009-10 2010-11 2011-12 2012-13* 2009-10 2010-11 2011-12 2012-13 2013-14$ 2009-10 2010-11 2011-12 2012-13 2013-14
Punjab 157.53 152.63 164.72 172.06 161.06 107.25 102.05 109.58 128.34 108.97 68.08 66.86 66.53 74.59 67.66
Haryana 105.93 105 116.3 126.84 111.17 69.24 63.35 69.28 86.65 58.73 65.36 60.33 59.57 68.31 52.83
Uttar Pradesh 285.64 278.1 300.01 302.93 303.01 38.82 16.73 34.61 50.63 6.82 13.59 6.02 11.54 16.71 2.25
Madhya Pradesh 65.22 78.46 76.27 105.8 131.33 19.68 35.38 49.65 84.93 63.55 30.17 45.09 65.10 80.27 46.39
Bihar 43.96 46.23 40.98 47.87 53.75 4.96 1.83 5.56 7.72 0 11.28 3.96 13.57 16.13 0.00
Rajasthan 69.9968.27 72.15 93.19 89.53 11.52 4.76 13.03 19.64 12.68 16.46 6.97 18.06 21.08 14.16
Uttarakhand 8.56 8.37 8.78 8.74 8.38 1.45 0.860.42 1.39 0.05 16.94 10.27 4.78 15.90 0.60
Gujarat 28.97 26.48 40.2 41 31.35 0.75 3.67 1.05 1.56 0 2.59 13.86 2.61 3.80 0.00
Maharashtra 14.71 17.57 23.01 13.13 8.75 — — — 0.03 0 0.00 0.23 0.00
West Bengal 7.98 8.37 8.74 8.84 9.07 — 0.09 — 0.02 0.02 1.08 0.23 0.22
All India Total 806.8 808 868.74 948.8 924.58 253.81 225.14 283.85 381.48 250.92 31.46 27.86 32.67 40.21 27.14
# Shows crop year from Oct. to Sept. RMS for wheat is succeeding year, e.g., Crop Year 2011-12 corresponds to RMS 2012-13.
*As per 4th Advance Estimates. (22.7.2013) $ As on 01.08.2013.

State-wise Production a and Procurement of Rice during last five fears
(In lakh tonnes)
Production (Crop Year) Procurement (KMS) % Procurement
State 2008- 2009- 2010- 2011- 2012- 2013- 2008- 2009- 2010- 2011- 2012- 2013- 2008- 2009- 2010- 2011- 2012- 2013-
09 10 11 12 13** 14$ 09 10 11 12 13# 14$$ 09 10 11 12 13# 14$
1 23456789 1 0 1 1 1 2 1 3 1 4 1 5 1 6 1 7 1 8 1 9
Andhra Pradesh 142.41 105.38 144.18 128.88 109.14 77.27 90.61 75.4 96.09 75.42 64.86 14.18 63.63 71.55 66.65 58.52 59.43 18.35
Assam 40.0943.96 47.37 40.09 45.62 38.37 0.03 0.08 0.16 0.23 0.20.000010.07 0.18 0.34 0.57 0.44 0.00
Bihar 55.9 35.99 31.02 72.01 73.36 55.69 10.83 8.9 8.83 15.34 13.03 0 19.37 24.73 28.47 21.30 17.76 0.00
Chhattisgarh 43.92 41.161.59 60.28 66.08 73.4 28.48 33.51 37.46 41.15 48.04 24.61 64.85 81.53 60.82 68.26 72.70 33.53
Gujarat 13.03 12.92 14.97 17.64 15.03 16.17 0 0 0 0.04 0.0008 0 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.23 0.01 0.00
Haryana 32.98 36.25 34.72 37.59 39.76 38.66 14.25 18.19 16.87 20.07 26.09 23.96 43.21 50.18 48.59 53.39 65.62 61.98
Himachal Pradesh 1.18 1.06 1.29 1.32 1.34 1.11 0 0 0.05 0.05 0.00723 0 0.00 0.00 3.88 3.79 0.54 0.00
Jharkhand 34.2 15.38 11.1 34.18 30.26 23.71 1.35 0.23 0.002 2.75 2.15 0 3.95 1.50 0.02 8.05 7.11 0.00
Karnataka 38.02 36.91 41.88 40.38 32.83 26.15 1.07 0.86 1.8 3.56 0.59 0 2.81 2.33 4.30 8.82 1.80 0.00
Kerala 5.9 5.98 5.23 5.55 5.31 2.77 2.37 2.61 2.63 3.76 2.4 0 40.17 43.65 50.29 67.75 45.20 0.00
Madhya Pradesh 15.6 12.61 17.72 18.38 27.75 29.5 2.46 2.14 5.16 6.35 8.98 6.26 15.77 16.97 29.12 34.55 32.36 21.22
Maharashtra 22.84 21.83 26.96 28.06 30.42 38.69 2.61 2.2 3.08 1.78 1.92 0.51 11.43 10.08 11.42 6.34 6.31 1.32
Odisha 68.12 69.18 68.28 58.15 76.39 63.41 27.9 24.96 24.65 28.66 36.14 0 40.96 36.08 36.10 49.29 47.31 0.00
Punjab 110 112.36 108.37 105.42 113.74 108.15 85.53 92.75 86.35 77.31 85.58 81.05 77.75 82.55 79.68 73.34 75.24 74.94
Rajasthan 2.41 2.28 2.66 2.53 2.22 2.34 0.11 0 0 0 0 0 4.56 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00
70

Tamil Nadu 51.83 56.65 57.92 68.94 43.99 42.5 11.99 12.41 15.43 15.96 4.81 0.57 23.13 21.91 26,64 23.15 10.93 1.34
Uttar Pradesh 130.97 108.07 119.92 140.25 144.13 146.46 36.87 27.26 25.54 33.57 22.86 3.24 28.15 25.22 21.30 23.94 15.86 2.’21
Uttarakhand 5.82 6.08 5.5 5.99 5.81 5.66 3.49 3.75 4.223.78 4.97 1.25 59.97 61.68 76.73 63.11 85.54 22.08
West Bengal 150.37 143.4 130.46 148.53 149.61 112.04 16.67 12.4 13.1 20.41 17.66 1.67 11.09 8.65 10.04 13.74 11.80 1.49
All India Total: 991.82 890.93 959.8 1042.2 1043.98 923.19 341.04 320.32 341.98 350.41 340.44 157.43 34.39 35.95 35.63 33.62 32.61 17.05
**AS per 4th Advance Estimates
#As on 02.01.2014
$ As per 1st Advance Estimates
$$ As on 02.01.2014
1 23456789 1 0 1 1 1 2 1 3 1 4 1 5 1 6 1 7 1 8 1 9
71

Production and procurement
Year Oilseeds cotton  Jute pulses
Production Procurement Production Procurement Procurement Production Procurement Production Procurement
(Millions (Metric (Quintals) (Quintals) (Quintals) (Quintals) (Lacs (Millions (Metric
Tonnes) Tonnes) (Quintals) Tonnes) Tonnes)
NAFED CCI
2008-09 277.19 40 37869200 18085370.5 44967357 17341200 1.84 14.57 481
2009-10 248.82 13718 40837400 13923 3060476 20214000 - 14.66 -
2010-11 2775 227 56100000 - 834 18016200 - 18.24 64030
2011-12 297.99 - 59870000 - 40367 19324800 2.308 17.09 6345.66
2012-13 308.66 1499 58174000 1815103.47 12104921 18312000 5.752 18.34 95542.58
72

73
APPENDIX I
List of Experts/Stakeholders/Representatives of State Governments
who appear before the Committee
1. (i) Shri Hannan Mollah - General Secretary , All India
(ii) Shri Bijoo Krishan - Joint Secretary , All India
Kisan Sabha
2. Shri Ravinder Singh Cheema - Vice Chairman, Punjab
State Agricultural
Marketing Board
3. Shri Balbir Singh Rajewal - President, Bharti Kisan
Union
4. Shri Pramod Choudhary - All India General
Secretary , Bhartiya Agro
Economic Research Centre
5. Shri Chanderbhusan Pandey - Regional President,
Bhartiya Kisan Sangh,
Lucknow
6. Shri Ramchandra Chacharia - Agriculturist, from
Khandwa, Madhya Pradesh
7. Shri Shivcharan Singh - Agriculturist from
Muktsar, Punjab
8. Shri Jeeva Bhai K. Latta - Bharati Kisan Sangh,
(Sabankantha) Gujarat,
Secretary
9. State Government of Tamil Nadu
(i) Dr. M. Rajendern - Director, Department of
Agriculture
(ii) Dr. M. Chinadurai - Director, Tamil Nadu
Agriculture University
10. State Government of Arunanchal Pradesh
Shri M. Butang - Director (Agri. Marketing)
cum Chief Executive Officer

74
11. State Government of Andhra Pradesh
(i) Shri K. Madhusudhana Rao - Commissioner and
Director of Agriculture
(ii) Shri Z. Venkateshwara Rao - Joint Director of
Agriculture
(iii) Shri (Prof.) N. Vasudev - Honorary Director (CCS
ANGRAU)
(iv) Shri M. Balram Naik - Additional Director
Agriculture
12. State Government of West Bengal
(i) Shri Priyadarshi Sen - Assistant Director
Agriculture Marketing
(ii) Shri Hareram Ray Mondal - Director Marketing
13. Dr. T. Hague - Former Chairman,
Commission for
Agricultural Costs and
Prices
14. Ms. Kavitha Kuruganti - Co-convener, Alliance for
Sustainable and Holistic
Agriculture
15. State Government of Kerala
(i) Shri K.R. Jyothilal -
(II) Shri R. Ajith Kumar - Representatives of State
Government of Kerala
16. State Government of Madhya Pradesh
(i) Shri M.M. Upadhyay - Agriculture Production
Commissioner
(ii) Shri D.N. Sharma - Director
(iii) Shri A.P .S. Solanki - Additional Director
(iv) Shri R.M. Sahu - Professor (Agro
Economist)

75
17. Dr. D.B. Yadav, - Mahatma Phule Krishi
Vidyapeeth, Rahuri,
Maharashtra
18. Prof. Abhijit Sen, - Former Chairman of
CACP and Member,
Planning Commission

76
APPENDIX II
COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE
(2012-13)
MINUTES OF THE TWENTY SEVENTH SITTING
OF THE COMMITTEE
The Committee sat on Tuesday, the 14th May, 2013, from
1500 hours to 1710 hours in Room No. ‘53’, Parliament House,
New Delhi.
PRESENT
Shri Basudeb Acharia— Chairman
M
EMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Narayansingh Amlabe
3. Smt. Ashwamedh Devi
4. Shri Anant Kumar Hegde
5. Shri P . Kumar
6. Sardar Sukhdev Singh Libra
7. Shri Naranbhai Kachhadia
8. Shri Rajaiah Siricilla
9. Shri Patel Kishanbhai V .
10. Dr. Vinay Kumar Pandey ‘Vinnu’
Rajya Sabha
11. Shri Satyavrat Chaturvedi
12. Shri A. Elavarasan
13. Smt. Mohsina Kidwai

77
14. Dr. K.V .P . Ramachandra Rao
15. Shri Rajpal Singh Saini
16. Shri S. Thangavelu
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Shri R.S. Kambo — Joint Secretary
2. Shri P .C. Koul — Director
3. Shri C. Vanlalruata — Deputy Secretary
WITNESSES
Ministry of Agriculture
(Department of Agriculture and Co-operation)
1. Shri Ashish Bahuguna, Secretary
2. Ms. S. Bhavani, Principal Adviser
3. Shri Raghav Chandra, Additional Secretary and FA
4. Shri Ashish Bhutani, Joint Secretary
5. Dr. B. Gangaiah, Adviser and Incharge ESA
6. Shri S.K. Mukherjee, Adviser
7. Shri T.K. Datta, Adviser
8. Shri P .K. Srivastava, Addl. Economic Adviser
Commission for Agricultural Costs and Prices
1. Dr. Ashok Gulati, Chairman
2. Dr. Anandi Subramanian, Member Secretary
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the members to the Sitting
of the Committee. The Committee, then deliberated upon their future
programme of business. It was decided by the Committee to seek the
opinion of various stakeholders on the subject under consideration via
a Press Communication ***   ***  ***. They also decided that Memoranda
may also be sought from State Governments on the subject.
3. *** *** *** *** ***
The Chairman then directed that the witness be ushered in.
(At about 1515 hrs., the witnesses took their seats in
the Committee Room).

78
4. The Chairman welcomed the representatives of the Ministry of
Agriculture (Department of Agriculture and Cooperation) and
Commission for Agricultural Costs and Prices (CACP). After the
customary introduction, the principal witness briefed the Committee on
the Subject ‘Pricing of Agricultural Produce’. The Members sought several
clarifications on various aspects of the subject matter, to which the witness
responded.
5. The Chairman, thereafter, thanked the witnesses for appearing
before the Committee as well as for furnishing valuable information on
the Subject.
The witnesses then withdrew.
A verbatim record of the proceedings has been kept separately.
The Committee then adjourned.

79
APPENDIX III
COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE
(2012-13)
MINUTES OF THE THIRTIETH SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE
The Committee sat on Monday, the 03 June, 2013 from 1500 hours
to 1730 hours in Room No. ‘62’, Parliament House, New Delhi.
PRESENT
Shri Basudeb Acharia —  Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Narayansingh Amlabe
3. Shri Sanjay Singh Chauhan
4. Shri Anant Kumar Hegde
5. Shri Premdas Katheria
6. Dr. (Smt.) Botcha Jhansi Lakshmi
7. Sardar Sukhdev Singh Libra
8. Shri Naranbhai Kachhadia
9. Shri Devji M. Patel
10. Shri Rajaiah Siricilla
11. Shri Patel Kishanbhai V .
12. Dr. Vinay Kumar Pandey ‘Vinnu’
13. Shri Hukamdeo Narayan Yadav
Rajya Sabha
14. Smt. Mohsina Kidwai
15. Shri Dharmendra Pradhan

80
16. Dr. K.V .P . Ramachandra Rao
17. Shri Parshottam Khodabhai Rupala
18. Shri Rajpal Singh Saini
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Shri R.S. Kambo — Joint Secretary
2. Shri. P .C. Koul — Director
3. Shri C. Vanlalruata — Deputy Secretary
WITNESSES
Ministry of Textiles
1. Ms. Zohra Chatterji, Secretary
2. Shri V . Srinivas, Joint Secretary
3. Shri Sujit Gulati, Joint Secretary
Ministry of Agriculture
(Department of Agriculture and Cooperation)
Shri Sudhir Tiwari, Economic Adviser
Commission for Agricultural Costs and Prices
Shri S.R. Joshi, Adviser
Jute Corporation of India
Shri A.K. Chakraborty, CMD
Cotton Corporation of India
Shri B.K. Mishra, CMD
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the members and the
witnesses to the Sitting. After the customary introduction, the principal
witness briefed the Committee on the role of the Ministry of Textiles on
the Subject “Pricing of Agricultural Produce”, with special reference to
Jute and Cotton.
3. Thereafter the representatives of the Ministry of Textiles
gave two audio-visual presentations on pricing and procurement of
Jute and Cotton, respectively. The Members then, sought several
clarifications on various aspects of the subject matter, to which the witness
responded.

81
4. The Chairman, thereafter thanked the witnesses for appearing
before the Committee as well as for furnishing valuable information on
the Subject. He also requested them to furnish written information to the
Committee Secretariat on matters on which information was not readily
available with them.
The witnesses then withdrew.
A verbatim record of the proceedings has been kept separately.
The Committee then adjourned.

82
APPENDIX IV
COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE
(2012-13)
MINUTES OF THE THIRTY-FIFTH SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE
The Committee sat on Wednesday , the 24th July, 2013 from
1100 hours to 1130 hours in Room No. ‘62’, Parliament House,
New Delhi.
PRESENT
Shri Basudeb Acharia— Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Narayansingh Amlabe
3. Shri Sanjay Singh Chauhan
4. Shri H.D. Devegowda
5. Smt. Ashwamedh Devi
6. Smt. Paramjit Kaur Gulshan
7. Shri Anant Kumar Hegde
8. Shri Premdas Katheria
9. Dr. (Smt.) Botcha Jhansi Lakshmi
10. Sardar Sukhdev Singh Libra
11. Dr. Jyoti Mirdha
12. Shri Naranbhai Kachhadia
13. Shri Jagdish Singh Rana
14. Shri Patel Kishanbhai V .
15. Dr. Vinay Kumar Pandey ‘Vinnu’
16. Shri Hukamdeo Narayan Yadav

83
Rajya Sabha
17. Shri Satyavrat Chaturvedi
18. Shri A. Elavarasan
19. Smt. Mohsina Kidwai
20. Shri Dharmendra Pradhan
21. Dr. K.V .P . Ramachandra Rao
22. Shri Rajpal Singh Saini
23. Shri Shivanand Tiwari
24. Shri S. Thangavelu
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Shri R.S. Kambo — Joint Secretary
2. Shri P .C. Koul — Director
3. Shri C. Vanlalruata — Deputy Secretary
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members to the Sitting
of the Committee. Thereafter, the Committee took up for consideration
10 Memoranda received from State Governments/Union Territory
Administrations and another 69 Memoranda received from other Experts/
Stakeholders on the Subject ‘Pricing of Agricultural Produce’.
3. After some discussion a few memoranda were shortlisted and
the Chairman was authorized to finalise the names of State Governments/
Union Territory Administrations to be requested to appear before the
Committee for tendering Oral Evidence. As regards the memoranda
received from other stakeholders, while some Members offered their
suggestions and views on them and also proposed a few of them for
being considered for personal appearance before the Committee, some
others asked for some more time to go through the voluminous material
submitted by the various stakeholders. After some deliberation, it was
decided that the Members may offer their views/suggestions on the
memoranda received from stakeholders other than State Governments/
Union Territory Administrations by 30 July, 2013 so that these may be
considered by the Committee in their next Sitting scheduled for 1 August,
2013. The Chairman directed the Secretariat that all the members of the
Committee be informed about this decision immediately.
The Committee then adjourned.

84
APPENDIX V
COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE
(2013-14)
MINUTES OF THE SEVENTH SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE
The Committee sat on Monday , the 11th November, 2013 from
1630 hours to 1755 hours in Committee Room ‘C’ (G/F), Parliament
House Annexe, New Delhi.
PRESENT
Shri Basudeb Acharia— Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Sanjay Singh Chauhan
3. Smt. Ashwamedh Devi
4. Shri Premdas Katheria
5. Shri P . Kumar
6. Sardar Sukhdev Singh Libra
7. Smt. Bhavana Gawali (Patil)
8. Shri Patel Kishanbhai V .
9. Dr. Vinay Kumar Pandey ‘Vinnu’
Rajya Sabha
10. Shri N. Balaganga
11. Smt. Mohsina Kidwai
12. Dr. K.V .P . Ramachandra Rao
13. Shri Parshottam Khodabhai Rupala
14. Shri Rajpal Singh Saini

85
15. Shri S. Thangavelu
16. Shri Shivanand Tiwari
17. Shri Darshan Singh Yadav
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Shri A. Louis Martin — Joint Secretary
2. Shri Prof. T.H. Rao — Additional Director
3. Shri C. Vanlalruata — Deputy Secretary
 NON-OFFICIAL WITNESSES
Shri Hannan Mollah — General Secretary, All India Kisan Sabha
Shri Bijoo Krishan — Joint Secretary, All India Kisan Sabha
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the representatives of All
India Kisan Sabha Shri Hannan Mollah, General Secretary and
Shri Bijoo Krishan, Joint Secretary  for personal hearing in connection
with the examination of ‘Pricing of Agricultural Produce’ and apprised
them of the provisions of Directions 55(1) and 58 of the Directions by
Speaker regarding confidentiality of the proceedings of the Committee.
Thereafter, the representatives of All India Kisan Sabha presented their
views and suggestions on ‘Pricing of Agricultural Produce’. The Members
raised queries and sought clarification on the suggestions made by the
representatives who clarified the same. Thereafter, the Chairman thanked
the representatives of All India Kisan Sabha for appearing before the
Committee and sharing their views.
The representatives of All India Kisan Sabha then withdrew.
3. Thereafter, another expert Shri Ravinder Singh Cheema,
Vice Chairman, Punjab State Agricultural Marketing Board was ushered
in.
The Chairman welcomed Shri Ravinder Singh Cheema and apprised
him of the provisions of Directions 55(1) and 58 of the Directions by
Speaker regarding confidentiality of the proceeding of the Committee.
The expert presented his views and suggestions before the Committee
on ‘Pricing of Agricultural Produce’. The expert also clarified the points
raised by Members. The Chairman, thereafter, thanked him for appearing
before the Committee and sharing his views in person.
A verbatim record of the proceedings has been kept separately.
The Committee then adjourned.

86
APPENDIX VI
COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE
(2013-14)
MINUTES OF THE EIGHTH SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE
The Committee sat on Monday , the 18th November, 2013 from
1100 hours to 1330 hours in Committee Room ‘D’ (G/F), Parliament House
Annexe, New Delhi.
PRESENT
Shri Basudeb Acharia— Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Smt. Ashwamedh Devi
3. Smt. Paramjit Kaur Gulshan
4. Shri Premdas Katheria
5. Smt. Botcha Jhansi Lakshmi
6. Sardar Sukhdev Singh Libra
7. Shri Hukumdeo Narayan Yadav
Rajya Sabha
8. Shri N. Balaganga
9. Smt. Mohsina Kidwai
10. Shri Dharmendra Pradhan
11. Dr. K.V .P . Ramachandra Rao
12. Shri Rajpal Singh Saini
13. Shri S. Thangavelu

87
14. Shri Shivanand Tiwari
15. Shri Darshan Singh Yadav
SECRETARIAT
1. Shri A. Louis Martin — Joint Secretary
2. Smt. Abha Singh Yaduvanshi — Director
3. Shri T.H. Rao — Additional Director
 NON-OFFICIAL WITNESSES
Shri Balbir Singh Rajewal — President, Bharti Kisan Union
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the representative of
Bharti Kisan Union Shri Balbir Singh Rajewal, President  for personal
hearing in connection with the examination of ‘Pricing of Agricultural
Produce’ and apprised him of the provisions of Directions 55(1) and 58
of the Directions by Speaker regarding confidentiality of the proceedings
of the Committee. Thereafter, the representative of Bharti Kisan Union
presented his views and suggestions on ‘Pricing of Agricultural Produce’.
The Members raised queries and sought clarification on the subject. The
representative clarified the same. Thereafter, the Chairman thanked him
for appearing before the Committee and sharing their views.
The representative of Bharti Kisan Union then withdrew.
3. Thereafter, another expert Shri Pramod Choudhary, All India
General Secretary, Bhartiya Agro Economic Research Centre was
ushered in.
The Chairman welcomed Shri Pramod Choudhary and apprised
him of the provisions of Directions 55(1) and 58 of the Directions by
Speaker regarding confidentiality of the proceeding of the Committee.
The expert presented his views and suggestions before the Committee
on ‘Pricing of Agricultural Produce’. The expert also clarified the points
raised by Members. The Chairman, thereafter, thanked him for appearing
before the Committee and sharing his views in person.
The expert then withdrew.
4. Thereafter, another expert Shri Chanderbhusan Pandey, Regional
President, Bhartiya Kisan Sangh, Lucknow was ushered in.
The Chairman welcomed Shri Chanderbhusan Pandey and apprised
him of the provisions of Directions 55(1) and 58 of the Directions by
Speaker regarding confidentiality of the proceeding of the Committee.

88
The expert presented his views and suggestions before the Committee
on ‘Pricing of Agricultural Produce’. The expert also clarified the points
raised by Members. The Chairman, thereafter, thanked him for appearing
before the Committee and sharing his views in person.
The representative of Bhartiya Kisan Sangh then withdrew.
A verbatim record of the proceedings has been kept separately.
The Committee then adjourned.

89
APPENDIX VII
COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE
(2013-14)
MINUTES OF THE NINTH SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE
The Committee sat on Monday , the 18th November, 2013 from
1430 hours to 1615 hours in Committee Room ‘D’ (G/F), Parliament House
Annexe, New Delhi.
PRESENT
Shri Basudeb Acharia— Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Smt. Ashwamedh Devi
3. Smt. Paramjit Kaur Gulshan
4. Shri Premdas Katheria
5. Smt. Botcha Jhansi Lakshmi
6. Sardar Sukhdev Singh Libra
7. Shri Hukumdeo Narayan Yadav
Rajya Sabha
8. Shri N. Balaganga
9. Smt. Mohsina Kidwai
10. Shri Dharmendra Pradhan
11. Dr. K.V .P . Ramachandra Rao
12. Shri Rajpal Singh Saini
13. Shri S. Thangavelu

90
14. Shri Shivanand Tiwari
15. Shri Darshan Singh Yadav
SECRETARIAT
1. Shri A. Louis Martin — Joint Secretary
2. Smt. Abha Singh Yaduvanshi — Director
3. Shri T.H. Rao — Additional Director
Expert
Shri Ramchandra Chacharia — Agriculturist, from Khandwa,
 Madhya Pradesh
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed Shri Ramchandra
Chacharia for personal hearing in connection with the examination of
‘Pricing of Agricultural Produce’ and apprised them of the provisions
of Directions 55(1) and 58 of the Directions by Speaker regarding
confidentiality of the proceedings of the Committee. Thereafter,
Shri Chacharia presented his views and suggestions on ‘Pricing of
Agricultural Produce’. The Members raised queries and sought
clarification on the suggestions made by him who clarified the same.
Thereafter, the Chairman thanked him for appearing before the Committee
and sharing their views.
Shri Chacharia then withdrew.
3. Thereafter, another agriculturist Shri Shivcharan Singh, from
Muktsar, Punjab was ushered in.
The Chairman welcomed Shri Shivcharan Singh and apprised him
of the provisions of Directions 55(1) and 58 of the Directions by Speaker
regarding confidentiality of the proceeding of the Committee.
Shri Shivcharan Singh, presented his views and suggestions before the
Committee on ‘Pricing of Agricultural Produce’. He also clarified the
points raised by Members. The Chairman, thereafter, thanked him for
appearing before the Committee and sharing his views in person.
Shri Shivcharan Singh then withdrew.
4. Thereafter, a representative of Bharati Kisan Sangh, (Sabarkantha)
Gujarat, Shri Jeeva Bhai K. Latta, Secretary , was ushered in.
The Chairman welcomed Shri Jeeva Bhai K. Latta and apprised
him of the provisions of Directions 55(1) and 58 of the Directions by

91
Speaker regarding confidentiality of the proceeding of the Committee.
He requested the Chairman to permit his two colleagues viz. Shri Amarat
Bhai H. Patel and Shri Dhane Sinh Ramlawat, who had accompanied
him. The Chairman acceded to his request. The representatives then
presented their views and suggestions before the Committee on ‘Pricing
of Agricultural Produce’. They also clarified the points raised by Members.
The Chairman, thereafter, thanked them for appearing before the
Committee and sharing their views in person.
The representatives of Bharati Kisan Sangh, (Sabarkantha)
Gujarat then withdrew.
A verbatim record of the proceedings has been kept separately.
The Committee then adjourned.

92
APPENDIX VIII
COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE
(2013-14)
MINUTES OF THE TENTH SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE
The Committee sat on Monday , the 25th November, 2013 from
1100 hours to 1335 hours in Committee Room ‘C’ (G/F), Parliament House
Annexe, New Delhi for hearing the views of the representatives of State
Governments in connection with examination of the subject ‘Pricing of
Agricultural Produce’.
PRESENT
Shri Basudeb Acharia— Chairman
M
EMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Sanjay Singh Chauhan
3. Smt. Paramjit Kaur Gulshan
4. Smt. Botcha Jhansi Lakshmi
5. Sardar Sukhdev Singh Libra
6. Shri Rajaiah Siricilla
7. Shri Hukumdeo Narayan Yadav
Rajya Sabha
8. Smt. Mohsina Kidwai
9. Shri Dharmendra Pradhan
10. Dr. K.V .P . Ramachandra Rao
11. Shri Rajpal Singh Saini
12. Shri Shivanand Tiwari
13. Shri Darshan Singh Yadav

93
SECRETARIAT
1. Shri A. Louis Martin — Joint Secretary
2. Smt. Abha Singh Yaduvanshi — Director
3. Shri T.H. Rao — Additional Director
First the representative of the State Government of Kerala named
below was ushered in:
Shri Gyanesh Kumar — Resident Commissioner
2. After the representative’s introduction, the Committee took
exception to the fact that no representative of the Department of
Agriculture was deputed and no communication about deputing the
Resident Commissioner was sent by the State Government till the sitting
of the Committee commenced. The Committee felt that only the Head
of the Department handling agriculture would be in a position to give
authoritative information on the subject and hence oral evidence of the
Resident Commissioner of Kerala was not recorded. The Committee took
exception to the manner in which the State Government has responded
to the invitation of the Committee. The Committee hoped that the
Government of Kerala will be represented before the Committee as per
the Directions of the Speaker in future. The Committee then decided to
postpone the hearing of the State Government of Kerala.
The Resident Commissioner then withdrew.
3. Thereafter, the representatives of the State Government of Tamil
Nadu named below were ushered in:
(i) Dr. M. Rajendern — Director, Department of Agriculture
(ii) Dr. M. Chinadurai — Director, Tamil Nadu Agriculture
University
The Chairman welcomed the representatives of the State
Government of Tamil Nadu and apprised them of the provisions of
Directions 55(1) and 58 of the Directions by Speaker regarding
confidentiality of the proceeding of the Committee. The witnesses
presented the views and suggestions of the State Government on ‘Pricing
of Agricultural Produce’. They also clarified the points raised by Members.
The Chairman, thereafter, thanked them for appearing before the
Committee.
The representatives of State Government of Tamil Nadu then withdrew.

94
4. Thereafter, a representative of State Government of Arunachal
Pradesh, Shri M. Butang, Director (Agri. Marketing) cum Chief Executive
Officer, was ushered in.
The Chairman welcomed the representative of State Government
of Arunachal Pradesh and apprised him of the provisions of Directions
55(1) and 58 of the Directions by Speaker regarding confidentiality of
the proceeding of the Committee. The witness presented the views of
the State Government on ‘Pricing of Agricultural Produce’. He also
clarified the points raised by Members. The Chairman, thereafter, thanked
him for appearing before the Committee.
The representative of State Government of Arunachal Pradesh then withdrew.
A verbatim record of the proceedings has been kept separately.
The Committee, then, adjourned.

95
APPENDIX IX
COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE
(2013-14)
MINUTES OF THE ELEVENTH SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE
The Committee sat on Monday , the 25th November, 2013 from
1415 hours to 1550 hours in Committee Room ‘C’ (G/F), Parliament House
Annexe, New Delhi for hearing the views of the representatives of the
State Governments in connection with examination of the subject ‘Pricing
of Agricultural Produce’.
PRESENT
Shri Basudeb Acharia— Chairman
M
EMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Sanjay Singh Chauhan
3. Smt. Paramjit Kaur Gulshan
4. Smt. Botcha Jhansi Lakshmi
5. Sardar Sukhdev Singh Libra
6. Shri Rajaiah Siricilla
7. Shri Hukumdeo Narayan Yadav
Rajya Sabha
8. Smt. Mohsina Kidwai
9. Shri Dharmendra Pradhan
10. Dr. K.V .P . Ramachandra Rao
11. Shri Rajpal Singh Saini
12. Shri Shivanand Tiwari
13. Shri Darshan Singh Yadav

96
SECRETARIAT
1. Shri A. Louis Martin — Joint Secretary
2. Smt. Abha Singh Yaduvanshi — Director
3. Shri T.H. Rao — Additional Director
2. The following representatives of the State Government of Andhra
Pradesh were ushered in:
(i) Shri K. Madhusudhana Rao — Commissioner and Director
of Agriculture
(ii) Shri Z. Venkateshwara Rao — Joint Director of Agriculture
(iii) Shri (Prof.) N. Vasudev — Honorary Director (CCS ANGRAU)
(iv) Shri M. Balram Naik — Additional Director Agriculture
The Chairman welcomed the representatives of the State
Government of Andhra Pradesh and apprised them of the provisions of
Directions 55(1) and 58 of the Directions by Speaker regarding
confidentiality of the proceeding of the Committee. The witnesses
presented the views and suggestions of their State Government on ‘Pricing
of Agricultural Produce’. They also clarified the points raised by Members.
The Chairman, thereafter, thanked them for appearing before the
Committee.
The representatives of State Government of Andhra Pradesh
then withdrew.
3. Thereafter, the representatives of State Government of West
Bengal named below were ushered in:
(i) Shri Priyadarshi Sen — Assistant Director
Agriculture Marketing
(ii) Shri Hareram Ray Mondal — Director Marketing
The Chairman welcomed the representatives of the State
Government of West Bengal and apprised them of the provisions of
Directions 55(1) and 58 of the Directions by Speaker regarding
confidentiality of the proceeding of the Committee. The witnesses
presented the views and suggestions of their State Government on ‘Pricing
of Agricultural Produce’. They also clarified the points raised by Members.

97
The Chairman, thereafter, thanked them for appearing before the
Committee.
The representatives of State Government of West Bengal then withdrew.
A verbatim record of the proceedings has been kept separately.
The Committee then adjourned.

98
APPENDIX X
COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE
(2013-14)
MINUTES OF THE TWELFTH SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE
The Committee sat on Monday, the 09 December, 2013 from
1500 hours to 1810 hours in Committee Room ‘B’ (G/F), Parliament House
Annexe, New Delhi.
PRESENT
Shri Basudeb Acharia— Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Sanjay Singh Chauhan
3. Smt. Ashwamedh Devi
4. Shri Premdas Katheria
5. Sardar Sukhdev Singh Libra
6. Dr. Jyoti Mirdha
7. Shri Rajaiah Siricilla
8. Shri Hukumdeo Narayan Yadav
Rajya Sabha
9. Shri S. Thangavelu
10. Shri Darshan Singh Yadav
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Shri A. Louis Martin — Joint Secretary
2. Smt. Abha Singh Yaduvanshi — Director
3. Shri T.H. Rao — Additional Director
4. Shri C. Vanlalruata — Deputy Secretary

99
2. *** *** *** *** ***
3. Thereafter, Dr. T. Haque, Former Chairman, Commission for
Agricultural Costs and Prices was ushered in. The Chairman welcomed
Dr. T. Haque and apprised him of the provisions of Directions 55(1) and
58 of the Directions by Speaker regarding confidentiality of the proceeding
of the Committee. Dr. T. Haque, presented his views and suggestions
before the Committee on ‘Pricing of Agricultural Produce’. He also
clarified the points raised by Members. The Chairman, thereafter, thanked
him for appearing before the Committee and sharing his views in person.
Dr. T. Haque then withdrew.
4. Thereafter, the Chairman welcomed Ms. Kavitha Kuruganti,
Co-convener, Alliance for Sustainable and Holistic Agriculture for personal
hearing in connection with the examination of ‘Pricing of Agricultural
Produce’ and apprised them of the provisions of Directions 55(1) and 58
of the Directions by Speaker regarding confidentiality of the proceedings
of the Committee. Thereafter, Ms. Kavitha Kuruganti presented her views
and suggestions on ‘Pricing of Agricultural Produce’. The Members raised
queries and sought clarification on the suggestions made by her who
clarified the same. The Committee desired a detailed note from her on
WTO agreement at Bali vis-à-vis its impact on agriculture sector in general
and prices of agriculture produce in particular. Thereafter, the Chairman
thanked her for appearing before the Committee and sharing her views.
Ms. Kuruganti then withdrew.
5. Thereafter, the representatives of State Government of Kerala,
were ushered in. The Chairman welcomed Shri K.R. Jyothilal, and
Shri R. Ajith Kumar, and apprised them of the provisions of Directions
55(1) and 58 of the Directions by Speaker regarding confidentiality of
the proceeding of the Committee. The representatives then presented
their views and suggestions before the Committee on ‘Pricing of
Agricultural Produce’. They also clarified the points raised by Members.
The Chairman, thereafter, thanked them for appearing before the
Committee and sharing their views in person and to forward detailed
note on certain aspects discussed during the evidence.
The representatives of State Government of Kerala, then withdrew.
A verbatim record of the proceedings has been kept separately.
The Committee then adjourned.
*** Matter not related to this Report.

100
APPENDIX XI
COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE
(2013-14)
MINUTES OF THE FOURTEENTH SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE
The Committee sat on Thursday, the 2 January, 2014 from
1430 hours to 1640 hours in Committee Room ‘B’ (G/F), Parliament
House Annexe, New Delhi.
PRESENT
Shri Basudeb Acharia— Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Narayansingh Amlabe
3. Shri H.D. Devegowda
4. Smt. Ashwamedh Devi
5. Shri Premdas Katheria
6. Sardar Sukhdev Singh Libra
7. Shri Rajaiah Siricilla
8. Shri Patel Kishanbhai V .
9. Shri Hukumdeo Narayan Yadav
Rajya Sabha
10. Shri N. Balaganga
11. Smt. Mohsina Kidwai
12. Dr. K.V .P . Ramachandra Rao
13. Shri Rajpal Singh Saini
14. Shri S. Thangavelu
15. Shri Shivanand Tiwari

101
SECRETARIAT
1. Shri A. Louis Martin — Joint Secretary
2. Smt. Abha Singh Yaduvanshi — Director
3. Shri T.H. Rao — Additional Director
4. Shri C. Vanlalruata — Deputy Secretary
2. *** *** *** *** ***
3. *** *** *** *** ***
4. *** *** *** *** ***
5. *** *** *** *** ***
6. Thereafter, the representatives of Madhya Pradesh Government
were ushered in.
7. The Chairman welcomed the representatives of Madhya Pradesh
Government for appearing before the Committee in connection with the
examination of ‘Pricing of Agricultural Produce’ and apprised them of
the provisions of Directions 55(1) and 58 of the Directions by Speaker
regarding confidentiality of the proceedings of the Committee and asked
them to introduce themselves. Thereafter, the representatives of
Government of Madhya Pradesh presented their views on the subject
‘Pricing of Agricultural Produce’ before the Committee.
8. The Members raised queries and sought clarification on various
issues including region specific Minimum Support Prices for some crops,
procurement of Agricultural Produce procured by Madhya Pradesh under
Decentralized Procurement Scheme and Market Intervention Scheme etc.
The representatives clarified all the same. Thereafter, the Committee
thanked the representatives for appearing before the Committee and
sharing their views.
A verbatim record of the proceedings has been kept separately.
The Committee then adjourned.
*** Matter not related to this Report.

102
APPENDIX XII
COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE
(2013-14)
MINUTES OF THE FIFTEENTH SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE
The Committee sat on Monday, the 13 January, 2014 from
1500 hours to 1735 hours in Committee Room ‘B’ (G/F), Parliament
House Annexe, New Delhi.
PRESENT
Shri Basudeb Acharia— Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri H.D. Devegowda
3. Smt. Ashwamedh Devi
4. Shri P . Kumar
5. Sardar Sukhdev Singh Libra
6. Dr. Vinay Kumar Pandey ‘Vinnu’
7. Shri Hukumdeo Narayan Yadav
Rajya Sabha
8. Shri N. Balaganga
9. Smt. Mohsina Kidwai
10. Shri Dharmendra Pradhan
11. Dr. K.V .P . Ramachandra Rao
12. Shri Rajpal Singh Saini
13. Shri Shivanand Tiwari

103
SECRETARIAT
1. Shri A. Louis Martin — Joint Secretary
2. Smt. Abha Singh Yaduvanshi — Director
3. Shri T.H. Rao — Additional Director
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed Dr. D.B. Yadav, Mahatma
Phule Krishi Vidyapeeth, Rahuri, Maharashtra for personal hearing in
connection with examination of Subject ‘Pricing of Agricultural Produce’
and apprised him of the provisions of Directions 55(1) and 58 of the
Directions by Speaker regarding confidentiality of the proceedings of the
Committee. Thereafter, Dr. D.B. Yadav made a Power-point presentation
and briefed the Committee on the Subject. The Members raised queries
on methodology of fixing Minimum Support Price benefits etc. which
were responded to by the expert. Thereafter, the Chairman thanked him
for appearing before the Committee and sharing his views.
The witness then withdrew.
3. Thereafter, Prof. Abhijit Sen, Former Chairman of CACP and
Member, Planning Commission was ushered in.
The Chairman welcomed Prof. Abhijit Sen and apprised him of the
provisions of Directions 55(1) and 58 of the Directions by Speaker
regarding confidentiality of the proceeding of the Committee. The expert
presented his views and suggestions before the Committee on ‘Pricing
of Agricultural Produce’. He also clarified issues regarding formula for
calculations of Minimum Support Price, calculation of cost of production,
labour cost, decentralized storage for foodgrains and timely announcement
of Minimum Support Price etc. The Chairman, thereafter, thanked him
for appearing before the Committee and sharing his views in person.
A verbatim record of the proceedings has been kept separately.
The Committee then adjourned.

104
APPENDIX XIII
COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE
(2013-14)
MINUTES OF THE SIXTEENTH SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE
The Committee sat on Friday, the 24 January , 2014 from 1100 hours
to 1315 hours in Committee Room ‘E’ (Basement), Parliament House
Annexe, New Delhi.
PRESENT
Shri Basudeb Acharia— Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Sanjay Singh Chauhan
3. Shri Premdas Katheria
4. Shri P . Kumar
5. Smt. Botcha Jhansi Lakshmi
6. Sardar Sukhdev Singh Libra
7. Smt. Bhavana Gawali (Patil)
Rajya Sabha
8. Shri N. Balganga
9. Smt. Mohsina Kidwai
10. Shri Dharmendra Pradhan
11. Dr. K.V .P . Ramachandra Rao
12. Shri Rajpal Singh Saini
13. Shri S. Thangavelu

105
SECRETARIAT
1. Shri A. Louis Martin — Joint Secretary
2. Smt. Abha Singh Yaduvanshi — Director
3. Shri T.H. Rao — Additional Director
4. Shri C. Vanlalruata — Deputy Secretary
WITNESSES
Ministry of Agriculture
(Department of Agriculture and Cooperation)
1. Shri Ashish Bahuguna, Secretary
2. Shri Ashok Gulati, Chairman, CACP
3. Shri Raghav Chandra, Addl. Secretary
4. Dr. Joseph Abraham, Sr. Adviser
5. Shri A.K. Vishandass, Member, CACP
6. Shri Ashish Bhutani, Joint Secretary
7. Shri T.K. Dutta, Adviser
8. Shri S.K. Mukherjee, Adviser
Department of Food and Public Distribution
1. Shri U.K.S. Chauhan, Joint Secretary
2. Shri T. Jacob, Joint Secretary
Department of Consumer Affairs
Smt. Chanderlekha Malviya, Sr. Adviser
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the members of the
Committee and the representatives of the Ministry of Agriculture
(Department of Agriculture and Cooperation) and other officials to the
Sitting in connection with examination of the subject, “Pricing of
Agricultural Produce” and apprised the witnesses of the provisions of
the Directions 55(1) and 58 of the Directions by the Speaker.
3. Thereafter, the Committee sought information and raised queries
regarding the statutory status to Commission of Agricultural Costs and
Prices, feasibility of region-wise Minimum Support Prices, distress sale
of agricultural produce by small and marginal farmers etc. The
representatives of the Ministry responded to the queries. The Committee,

106
desired the Ministry to furnish written replies to the queries which could
not be responded to readily by them.
A verbatim record of the proceedings has been kept separately.
The Committee then adjourned.

107
APPENDIX XIV
COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE
(2013-14)
MINUTES OF THE TWENTIETH SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE
The Committee sat on Monday, the 03 March, 2014 from 1100 hours
to 1130 hours in Committee Room ‘E’, Parliament House Annexe,
New Delhi.
PRESENT
Shri Basudeb Acharia— Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Sanjay Singh Chauhan
3. Smt. Ashwamedh Devi
4. Shri Premdas Katheria
5. Sardar Sukhdev Singh Libra
6. Dr. (Smt.) Jhansi Lakshmi Botcha
7. Shri Rajaiah Siricilla
8. Shri Patel Kisanbhai V .
9. Dr. Vinay Kumar Pandey ‘Vinnu’
10. Shri Hukumdeo Narayan Yadav
Rajya Sabha
11. Smt. Mohsina Kidwai
12. Dr. K.V .P . Ramchandra Rao
13. Shri Rajpal Singh Saini
14. Shri S. Thangavelu
15. Shri Shivanand Tiwari

108
SECRETARIAT
1. Shri A. Louis Martin — Joint Secretary
2. Smt. Abha Singh Yaduvanshi — Director
3. Shri T.H. Rao — Additional Director
4. Shri C. Vanlalruata — Deputy Secretary
2. At the outset the Chairman welcomed the members to the Sitting
of the Committee. The Committee, then, took up the draft Reports for
their consideration:—
(i) *** *** *** *** ***
(ii) Thereafter, the Committee took up the draft Report on
“Pricing of Agricultural Produce” and adopted the same
subject to addition of a para regarding “strengthening of Jute
Corporation of India (JCI), with adequate manpower and
increase in number of procurement centres.
(iii) *** *** *** *** ***
3. The Committee authorized the Chairman to finalise the aforesaid
reports on the basis of factual verification and present the same to the
Hon’ble Speaker, as the Parliament is not in Session.
4. *** *** *** *** ***
The Committee then adjourned.
*** Matter not related to this Report.

“All Parliamentary Publications including DRSC Reports are 
available on sale at the Sales Counter, Reception, Parliament House 
(Tel. Nos. 23034726, 23034495, 23034496), Agents appointed 
by Lok Sabha Secretariat and Publications Division, Ministry 
of Information and Broadcasting, CGO Complex, Lodhi Road, New 
Delhi (Tel. Nos. 24367260, 24365610) and their outlets. The said 
information is available on website ‘www.parliamentofindia.nic.in’.
The Souvenir Items with logo of Parliament are also available at Sales 
Counter, Reception, Parliament House, New Delhi. The Souvenir 
items with Parliament Museum logo are available for sale at Souvenir 
Shop (Tel. No. 23035323), Parliament Museum, Parliament Library 
Building, New Delhi. List of these items are available on the website 
mentioned above.”