 
 
 
      
COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE 
(2009-2010) 
 
 
FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA 
 
MINISTRY OF AGRICULTURE 
(DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURAL RESEARCH AND EDUCATION)  
 
DEMANDS FOR GRANTS (2009-2010) 
 
FOURTH  REPORT 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
     LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
FEBRUARY, 2010 / MAGHA, 1931 (Saka) 
4 

 
 
 
 
FOURTH  REPORT 
 
COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE 
                 (2009-2010) 
 
         (FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
MINISTRY OF AGRICULTURE 
(DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURAL RESEARCH AND EDUCATION) 
DEMANDS FOR GRANTS (2009-2010) 
 
     Presented to  Speaker, Lok Sabha on         18.02.2010 
             Presented to Lok Sabha on                 03.03.2010           
          Laid on the Table of Rajya Sabha on              03.03.2010 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
FEBRUARY, 2010 / MAGHA, 1931 (Saka) 
  


 
 
 
 
 
COA No. 227 
 
 
 
 
 
 
     
         
         
         
         
 
         
         
         
Price :  Rs. 
         
         
         
         
        © 2009 By Lok Sabha Secretariat 
 
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of Business in Lok 
Sabha  (Twelfth Edition) and Printed by  

 
 
 
      
                         CONTENTS 
PAGE 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE…………………………………………………       (iv) 
INTRODUCTION……………………………………………………………………….….       (vi) 
ABBREVIATIONS………………………………………………………………………..          (vii) 
 
CHAPTER  I  IMPLEMENTATION OF THE COMMITTEE’S 
RECOMMENDATIONS        
 
CHAPTER  II  ANALYSIS OF DEMANDS 
  (I) Introductory         
  (II) Overview of Demands       
   
CHAPTER  II I PLANNING PROCESS 
  (I) Budgetary Planning and Zero Based Budgeting     
  (II) Budgeting of a Scientific Department      
  (III) Approach to XI Plan         
  (IV) Budgetary Allocation        
  (V) Launching of New Schemes       
  (VI) Budget & Cash Management Scheme      
  (VII) Annual Plan 2009-10        
  (VIII) Flow of Funds in 2009-10        
  (IX) Mid- Term Appraisal        
   
CHAPTER  IV SECTORAL  PROGRAMMES 
  (I) Crop Science         
  (II) Horticulture          

 
 
   
 
(III) Natural Resource Management       
  (IV) Agricultural Engineering        
  (V) Animal Sciences         
  (VI) Agricultural Extension        
  (VII) Agricultural Education        
  (VIII) Central Agriculture University, Imphal      
  (IX) ICAR Headquarters         
  (X) Externally Aided Projects        
 
 
APPENDICES 
 
I. Minutes of the 10th Sitting of the Committee held on 5th November, 2009 
II. Minutes of the 12th Sitting of the Committee held on 12th November, 2009 
III. Minutes of the 14th Sitting of the Committee held on 4th January, 2010 
 
  

 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE (2009-2010) 
 
Shri Basudeb Acharia   -   Chairman 
 MEMBERS 
 
 LOK SABHA 
 
2. Shri Narayan Singh Amlabe 
3. Shri K.C. Singh ‘Baba’ 
4. Shri Thangso Baite  
5. Shri Jayant Chaudhary  
6. Smt. Shruti Choudhry  
7. Smt. Ashwamedh Devi 
8. Shri Biren Singh Engti  
9. Smt. Paramjit Kaur Gulshan 
10. Shri Anant Kumar Hegde 
11. Sk. Nurul Islam 
12. Shri Naranbhai Kachhadiya 
13. Shri Surendra Singh Nagar  
14. Shri Prabodh Panda  
15. Shri Premdas  
16. Shri Vitthalbhai Hansrajbhai Radadiya 
17. Shri Nripendra Nath Roy  
18. Shri Bhoopendra Singh 
19. Shri Uday Singh  
20. Shri Jagdish Thakor  
21. Shri Hukmdeo Narayan Yadav 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
22. Shri Narendra Budania  
23. Shri Satyavrat Chaturvedi 
24. Shri A. Elavarasan  
25. Shri Sharad Anantrao Joshi 
26. Shri Vinay Katiyar 
27. Shri Mohd. Ali Khan 
28. Shri M. Rajasekara Murthy 
29. Shri Bharatsinh Prabhatsinh Parmar 
30. Prof. M.S. Swaminathan 
31. Shri Khekiho Zhimomi 
 
 
 
 
(iii) 

 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Shri S. Bal Shekar   - Joint Secretary 
2. Shri P.V.L.N. Murthy  - Director 
3. Shri P. C. Koul   - Additional Director  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(iv)  

 
 
 
 
 
INTRODUCTION 
         
I, the Chairman, Committee on  Agriculture, having been authorized by the 
Committee to submit the Report on their behalf, present this Fourth Report on the 
Demands for Grants (2009 -2010) of the Ministry of Agriculture (Department of 
Agricultural Research & Education). 
 
2. The Committee considered the Demands for Grants (2009 -10) of the Department of 
Agricultural Research & Education which were laid on the Table of the House on 7 July, 
2009. The Committee took evidence of the representatives of the Department of 
Agricultural Research & E ducation at their Sittings held on 5 and 12 November, 2009 
respectively. The Committee wish to express their thanks to the officers of the 
Department of Agricultural Research & Education for appearing before the Committee 
and for furnishing the information  the Committee desired in connection with the 
examination of Demands for Grants of the Department. 
 
3. The Report was considered and adopted by the Committee at their Sitting held on     
4 January, 2010. 
 
4. For facility of reference, the Observations/Reco mmendations of the Committee have 
been printed in bold at the end of each Chapter. 
 
           
 
NEW DELHI;                        BASUDEB ACHARIA 
January, 2010                                      Chairman, 
Magha, 1931 (Saka)                                           Committee on Agriculture  
 
 
 
(v) 

 
 
ABBREVIATIONS 
 
AU  Agriculture University 
AES  Agricultural Education Scheme 
BE  Budget Estimate 
B&CM  Budget & Cash Management 
CCEA  Cabinet Committee on Economic Affairs 
CGIAR  Consultative Group on International Agricultural Research 
DARE  Department of Agricultural Research and Education 
DPR  Detailed Project Report 
EFC  Expenditure Finance Committee 
GDP  Gross Domestic Product 
ICAR  Indian Council of Agricultural Research 
IRC  Institute Research Council 
IVRI  Indian Veterinary Research Institute 
KVK  Krishi Vigyan Kendra 
MPKV  Mahatma Phule Krishi Vidyapeeth 
NAAS  National Academy of Agricultural Sciences 
NARS  National Agricultural Research System 
NDC  National Development Council 
NDRI  National  Dairy Research Institute 
NIAB  National Institute of Agriculture Biotechnology 
 
NIASM National Institute of Abiotic Stress Management 
NIBSM National Institute of Biotic Stress Management 
QRT  Quinquennial Review Team 
Q-4  Quarter -4 

 
 
RAC  Research Advisory Committee 
RE  Revised Estimate 
SAU  State Agriculture University 
SFC  Standing Finance Committee 
ZBB  Zero Based Budgeting  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  

 
 
 
 
CHAPTER – I 
 
IMPLEMENTATION OF THE COMMITTEE’S RECOMMENDATIONS 
 
 The Thirty -eighth Report ( Fourteenth Lok Sabha) of Committee on 
Agriculture on D emands for Grants (2008-09) of the Ministry of Agriculture 
(Department of Agricultural Research & Education) was presented to Lok 
Sabha and laid on the Table of  Rajya Sabha on 16 April, 2008. The Report 
contained 21 Observations / Recommendations. 
1.2 On the basis of the A ction Taken Replies received from the Ministry of 
Agriculture (Department of Agricultural Research & Education) in respect of 
the above Report, the Committee presented their Forty -third Action Taken 
Report ( Fourteenth Lok Sabha) to the House on 18 December, 2008. The 
Committee commented on the Action Taken Replies furnished by the Ministry 
in respect of Recommendations at S.Nos.1 to 9, 11 to 14, 16 and 18 to 21 in 
the Original Report. 
1.3 The Minister concerned is required to make a Statement under 
Direction 73-A of Directions by the Speaker, Lok Sabha about the status of 
implementation of Recommendations contained in the Original Report of the 
Committee within six months of the presentatio n of the Report to the 
Parliament. However, t he Statement under Direction 73 -A in the context of 
Thirty-eighth Report was made by the Minister of Agriculture and Minister of 
Consumer Affairs, Food & Public Distribution on 4 August, 2009. An analysis 
of the  Statement revealed that satisfactory action has been taken by the 

 
 
Government in respect of 9 Recommendations while in case of the remaining 
12 action was still incomplete / not taken. 
1.4 The Committee note that in pursuance of Direction 73 -A of 
Directions by the Speaker, Lok Sabha, the Minister concerned is 
required to make a Statement on the status of implementation of 
Recommendations contained in the Original Report s of the Committee 
within six months of their presentation to the Parliament. The 
Committee are deeply perturbed to note that the Minister of Agriculture 
and Minister of Consumer Affairs, Food & Public Distribution made the 
Statement under Direction 73 -A in the context of Thirty-eight Report of 
the Committee  on 4 August, 2009 i.e. more than 15  months after its 
presentation on 16 April, 2008. The analysis of the Statement also 
reveals that less than 43 per cent R ecommendations have been 
implemented while 5 7 per cent R ecommendations are either yet to be 
implemented or are under various stages of implementation. The 
Committee take strong exception to the failure of the Ministry to adhere 
to stipulations laid down in Direction 73 -A and the inordinate delay in 
the making of the Statement by the Minister concerned .  They expect 
that there will not be a repeat of such lapses in future. 
  

 
 
CHAPTER – II 
ANALYSIS OF DEMANDS 
(i) Introductory 
 The Department of Agricultural Research and Education (DARE) under 
the Ministry of Agriculture, was created in December 1973 on the 
recommendation of Shri P.  V. Gajendragadkar Committee which was 
appointed to examine the functioning of ICAR to deal with the policy matters 
and provide the Indian Council of Agricultural Research (ICAR) with the 
requisite linkages with the Government of India, the State Governments, 
foreign governments and international agencies.  Before the Department 
came into being ICAR was functioning as a registered society under the 
administrative control of the Ministry of Food and Agriculture.  DARE is 
headed by a Secretary to the Government of India  who is also the ex -officio 
Director-General of the ICAR. 
2.2 The Department provides the necessary governmental linkages for the 
Indian Council of Agricultural Research.  The major functions of DARE are: 
* To look after all aspects of agricultural research and education 
(including horticulture, natural resource management, agricultural 
engineering, agricultural extension, animal science, economics 
statistics and marketing and fisheries) involving coordination between 
the central and state agencies. 
* To attend all matters relating to the Indian Council of Agricultural 
Research. 
* To attend to all matters concerning the development of new 
technology in agriculture, horticulture, natural resource management, 
engineering, extension, animal husbandry, ec onomics statistics and 
marketing and fisheries including such functions as plant and animal 
introduction and exploration of soil and land use survey and planning. 
* International co -operation in the field of agricultural research and 
education including re lations with foreign and international agricultural 

 
 
research, educational institutions and organizations, including 
participation in international conferences, associations and other 
bodies dealing with agricultural research and education and follow -up 
decisions at such international conferences etc. 
* Fundamental, applied and operational research and higher education 
including co -ordination of such research and higher education in 
agriculture including agroforestry, animal husbandry, dairying, 
fisheries, agricultural statistics, economics and marketing. 
 ICAR is the apex body for coordinating guiding and managing research 
and education in agriculture including horticulture, fisheries and animal 
sciences in the entire Country. With 97 ICAR Institutes and 45 agricultural 
universities spread across the Country, this is one of the largest National 
Agricultural Research System in the world. 
2.3 ICAR is organized into eight Subject Matter Divisions (SMDs), each of 
them having a number of research institutes or Sch emes. This network of 
institutes spread throughout the Country has well-established and time tested 
institutional linkages with the State Agricultural Universities and other 
Ministries / D epartments of the Central and State Governments. Frontline 
technologies developed by these research organizations are initially assessed 
and dem onstrated by the multidisciplinary centres called Krishi Vigyan 
Kendras (KVK s), which are funded by ICAR. These KVKs also provide 
training to farmers and rural entrepreneurs and al so work w ith the State 
extension system. 
2.4 The ICAR is mandated with the following responsibilities  :- 
 
* To plan, undertake, aid, promote and coordinate education, research 
and its application in agriculture, animal science, fisheries, 
agroforestry, home science and allied sciences. 
 
* To act as a clearing -house for resea rch and general information 
relating to agriculture, animal husbandry, fishery, agro -forestry, home 

 
 
science and allied sciences through its publications and information 
system and ins tituting and promoting transfer of technology 
programmes. 
 
* To provide, undertake and promote consultancy services in the field 
of research, education, training and dissemination of information in 
agriculture, animal science, fisheries, agro -forestry, home science and 
other allied sciences. 
 
* To look into the problems relating to broader areas of rural 
development concerning agriculture, including post -harvest technology 
by developing co-operative programmes with other organizations such 
as the Indian Council of Social Science Research, Council of Scientific 
and Industrial Research, Bhabha Atomic Res earch Centre, 
Universities, etc. 
 
* To do other things considered necessary to attain the objectives. 
 
2.5 The Committee are given to understand that ICAR has played a 
pioneering role in ushering in the Green Revolution and subsequent 
developments in agriculture in India through it s research and technology 
development that has enabled the Country to increase the production of 
foodgrains by 4 times, horticulture crops by 6 times, fisheries by 9 times, milk 
by 6 times and eggs by 27 times since 1950 -51, thus making a visible impact 
on the national food and nutritional security. 
(ii) Overview of Demands 
2.6 Demand No.2 pertaining to the Department of Agricultural Research & 
Education for the year 2009 -10 was presented to the Lok Sabha on 7 July, 
2009. Prior to that the Government had taken a Vote on Account for the first 
four months (April - July, 2009) of the current Fiscal, in view of the General 
Election in May -June, 2009. The details of allocations proposed in Demand 
No. 2 are as under :- 
  

 
 
DEMAND NO. 2 
                                                                                                         (Rs. in crore) 
 Plan Non Plan Total 
Revenue 
(Voted) 
1760.00 1481.40 3241.40 
Revenue 
(Charged) 
00 00 00 
Capital 
(Voted) 
00 00 00 
Capital 
(Charged 
00 00 00 
 
GRAND TOTAL 
 
3241.40 
 
 
 It may be seen that a sum of Rs .3241.40 crore has been allocated to 
the Department for 2009-10. Out of this Rs. 1760.00 c rore is on the Plan side 
in the Revenue Section and the balance Rs.1481.40 crore is on Non -Plan 
side under the Revenue Section. 
2.7 The details of Revised Estimates for the year 2008 -09 and Budget 
Estimates for 2009-10 are given in the table below: 
                                                                                                                (Rs. In crore) 
 RE 2008-09 BE 2009-10 
Plan Non-Plan Plan Non-Plan 
Revenue  1760.00 1200.00 1760.00 1481.40 
Capital 00 00 00 00 
 
It may be seen that there is no hike in the BE of Rs.1760.00 crore on 
the Plan side as compared to RE of 2008 -09. However, on the Non-Plan side 
of Revenue Section in BE 2009 -10 there is a pronounced hike of 23% over 
RE 2008-09 with Rs.1481.40 crore being allocated this year against last year 
RE of Rs.1200.00 crore. 
 

 
 
Enhanced Allocation for Agricultural Research & Education 
2.8 The Committee note that agricultural research, education and 
extension, because of their significant contribution to growth of 
agriculture sector, economy, food and nutrition security of the Country , 
are of critical importance for an agrarian economy like ours.  They, 
therefore, are of the considered opinion that keeping in vi ew the 
national interest, DARE is provided with sufficient funds, so that the se 
activities are carried out unhindered and without any constraints or 
impediments. With this concern uppermost in their mind, the Committee 
have been recommending in their succe ssive Reports to the 
Government to enhance investment for these activities to at least 1 
percent of the Agricultural GDP, the latest being their Thirty -eighth 
Report ( Fourteenth Lok Sabha) on the Demands for Grants (2008 -09) 
and the Forty -third Report ( Fourteenth Lok Sabha) on the Action Taken 
by the Government on their Thirty -eighth Report. They are, however, 
highly disappointed with the response of  the Government, as reflected 
in the Demands of DARE for the ongoing Fiscal. There is no increase in 
the allocation in the Plan side with the RE of Rs.1760.00 crore for 2008-
09 being retained as BE for the current year. The Committee wonder as 
to how Government expects phenomenal, if not astounding results with 
such a pittance of an allocation. The meagr e allocation for agricultural 
research and education becomes all the more galling when emerging 
threats like climate change and global warming, declining na tural 
resources, increasing natural calamities, growing soil infertility, 
declining water resources, technology fatigue, etc. are taken into 
consideration which all will require capital intensive solutions. The 

 
 
Committee, therefore, even at the cost of sou nding repetitive exhort the 
Government to wake up to realit ies and enhance substantially, 
allocations for agricultural research and education to ensure that 
solutions to the above mentioned crippling problems are found before it 
is too late. They hope this recommendation gets adequately reflected in 
the Demands for Grants of DARE in the next fiscal, i.e. 2010-11. 
 
  

 
 
CHAPTER – III 
PLANNING  PROCESS 
(i) Budgetary Planning and Zero Based Budgeting 
 On the question of the procedure being followed while working out the 
financial requirements for their various activities, both for the Five Year Plan 
and the Annual Plan and to the extent to which the concept of Zero Based 
Budgeting (ZBB) is resorted to/relied upon by the Department while working 
out t heir Plan projections , the Department informed the Committee that the  
Annual Plan and Five Year Plan requirements are initially projected by the 
individual schemes (institutes/national research centres/project directorates , 
etc.) as needed for execution of  approved activities (for Annual Plan) and for 
ongoing/proposed new activities (Five Year Plan). These financial projections 
are further deliberated/assessed in-house. Also, new programmes are 
formulated at the ICAR H eadquarters based on expert consultatio ns, 
workshops, conferences, etc. Subsequently, a consolidated proposal for the 
Department as a whole is put forward to the Planning Commission following 
prescribed procedures/guidelines. 
3.2 To a query as to how the proposed allocations are duly prioritize d, 
rational and realistic so as to not invite drastic cuts at various subsequent 
stages of reallocation of resources, the Department replied that the lump-
sump allocation as communicated by the Planning Commission during 2009 -
10 was distributed among the v arious schemes of the Department after in -
house intensive assessment of the requirement of funds for individual 
schemes.  Accordingly, the proposed allocations were prioritized and were 

 
 
rational & realistic in the context of total allocation communicated t o the 
Department by the Planning Commission. 
3.3 The Planning Commission had undertaken a ZBB exercise in the 
context of the Eleventh Plan in the middle of 2007 for all 
Ministries/Departments.  They had suggested several measures to streamline 
budgetary pr ocess, weed out redundant schemes, merge similar schemes 
into one umbrella scheme, converge schemes, etc. so as to have a holistic 
view for synergizing the planning process.  On the question of the outcome of 
ZBB exercise carried out by the Planning Commiss ion for DARE   and 
specific action initiated by the Department in pursuance of the broad 
directions / guidelines, if any, issued by the Planning Commission after the 
ZBB exercise , the Department in a written submission informed that the 
concept of ZBB was introduced in Tenth Plan and at that time the Planning 
Commission had undertaken an intensive exercise in this regard in 
consultation with the Department with the result that all th e earlier on -going 
schemes were merged / integrated / converged into 71 main schemes along -
with relevant sub-schemes. 
3.4 In so far as various directions/guidelines on ZBB issued by the 
Planning Commission are concerned, the exercise of ZBB was undertaken 
during X Plan primarily to reduce the number of SFCs/EFCs so as to have 
flexibility in operation within a particular scheme and to effect commensurate 
savings in cost by sharing the major facilities of the institutions located at o ne 
place or nearby. Howev er, n o specific ZBB guidelines were issued by 
Planning Commission during XI Plan. 

 
 
3.5 When asked if apart from the Zero Based Budgeting exercises 
undertaken by the Planning Commission usually at the start of the Five Year 
Plan, were the Department also res orting to ZBB while making Five Year 
Plans or Annual Plans and the views of the Department on the system of ZBB 
as a tool for better and focused financial planning , the Department stated that 
before formulating the Five Year  Plan proposal s, each scheme (I nstitute / 
National Research Centre / Project Directorate, etc.) is thoroughly deliberated 
/ assessed at in -house level; subsequently these Five Year Plan proposals 
are critically examined by the respective SFCs/EFCs which constitute the 
representatives fr om Planning Commission, Ministry of Finance  and other 
concerned organizations alongwith the field experts/concerned persons of the 
Department. The SFC/EFC is the most appropriate forum w hich usually 
examines/assesses each scheme with reference to its research and technical 
relevance, alongwith the need f or related infrastructure, etc. and 
commensurative fund provision. This process of  considering  a scheme for 
approval/implementation in a Plan period is quite relevant and effective in 
ensuring that the budgeted amount is utilized judiciously and optimally and in 
order of priority; thus covering the very important aspects of Zero Base 
Budgeting. The Annual Plans are only the part of Five Year Plans; hence, in 
Annual Plans the funds are projected for the already approved activities. 
 (ii) Budgeting of a Scientific Department  
3.6 Asked if they were satisfied with the extant procedure of allocation of 
resources or they would like their financial requirements to be assessed 
differently from other general administrative Ministries / Departments . Since 
DARE is a Scientific Department, whose main area of activity is Research 

 
 
and Development, the Department stated that DARE being a Departmen t of 
the Government ha ve to follow various existing procedures  / guidelines / 
instructions and which are issued from time to time by the Government.  For 
scientific Departments, like DARE, wherever felt necessary, the Government 
issues various guidelines/i nstructions accordingly. However, looking to the 
needs of agricultural research to meet existing and emerging challenges such 
as climate change, soil health, water quality and scarcity a greater thrust and 
support is considered essential. We in India have 17% population of world 
with only 4.2% water and 2.3% land. We are having cultivation in only 140.0 ±  
2.0 million hectare for the last forty years during which population is doubled. 
As we are always called upon to produce more and more with less and less , 
substantially enhanced allocation for agricultural research, technology 
development and human resource development is considered essential for 
food, nutrition and environmental security of our Country. 
3.7 Asked further to elaborate upon their suggestion  as the reply was 
vague, the Department clarified that the submission in the preceding para 
explicitly highlighted the fact that in order to meet the emerging challenges of 
food security of the Country, the activities related to agricultural research, 
technology development and human resource development needed 
substantially enhanced allocation, particularly in the background of limited 
availability of resources like land and water but ever increasing human 
population. The Department informed that a request for Rs. 2250 crore as RE 
2009-10 as against the allocation of Rs 1760 crore was made to carry out the 
envisaged research programmes during XI Plan. 

 
 
3.8 The Committee were informed that since the research activities being 
carried out by the Department are of continuing nature they feel handicapped 
as the funds at RE stage are received as late as in December. It would be in 
the interest of research that RE is intimated by September/October each year 
by the Ministry of Finance so that the funds may be judiciously utilized. This is 
considered essential as the research activities of the Department are directly 
concerned with nation‟s food and nutrition security. 
 
3.9 Incidentally, the Eleventh Plan Document states the following in the 
context of budgeting aspect of the National Agricultural Research System :- 
 `The biggest problem with National Agriculture Research System 
remains that it is strictly governed by the same rules and regulations 
relating to expenditure and filling up of positions as o perative in 
Government Departments of States and the Centre. This robs the 
system of flexibility and discretion which are essential for healthy 
functioning of scientific institutions.‟ 
3.10 On the question of what exactly has been done by the  Department in 
the light of such crucial leverage offered by the Plan Document to them with 
regard to financial planning, recruitments, etc. , the Committee were informed 
that the Department ha ve earlier also emphasized that there needs to be 
greater flexibility with regard to financial planning and recruitment procedures, 
being a Scientific Department. However, this would require major policy 
decisions on the part of the Government. 
 
 
 

 
 
APPROACH TO XI PLAN  
3.11 The Committee were informed that the Planning Commission ha d 
communicated to the Department that Eleventh Plan will have to be delinked 
from the First Year (2007 -08) of the Plan period to ensure that Reports of the 
Sub-Committee of National Development Council, the Steering Group of 
Agriculture and Allied Sectors a nd the Eleventh Plan Working Group on 
Agricultural Research and Education are taken into account wh ile the overall 
Eleventh Five Year Plan Document is formulated. 
3.12 When queried about the modus operandi and the exact import of this 
delinking, the Department in a written reply stated that in so far as delinking of 
the Department‟s Annual Plan 2007 -08 proposals are concerned, a 
communication to this effect was received f rom Member, Planning 
Commission. The meetings of the Annual Plan (2007-08) proposals of  the 
Department were held in Planning Commission in December  2006/January 
2007. The Planning Commission had to communicate the Annual Plan    
2007-08 Outlay of the Department in February  2007. The XI Plan related 
Report of Steering Group on Agriculture an d Allied Sectors, constituted by 
Planning Commission was finalized in April 2007. Due to this reason, the 
Planning Commission had intimated in December 2006/January 2007  that 
they would consider the Department‟s Annual Plan 2007 -08 proposals only 
and not the XI Plan as a whole.  
3.13 Queried further about instances of such delinking in the past it was 
stated that n o such delinking has taken place in the recent past.  Asked 
further, their views about the consequences of such a delinking on the 
physical and financial performance of the Department in the Eleventh Plan 

 
 
and suggestions to avoid recurrence of such situations in future, the 
Department informed that this kind of arrangement was just an administrative 
technicality on the part of Planning Commission and the Department ha d to 
follow the procedures as desired by the concerned agencies like Planning 
Commission, etc. 
3.14 On the question of the impact of delinking of Financial Year 2007 -08 
from the Eleventh Five Year Plan on the various schemes of DARE , the 
Department stated that the delinking of the financial year 2007 -08 from the XI 
Five Year Plan was also a factor impacting some delay in the process of 
clearance of various schemes of XI Plan for implementation. 
3.15 The Committee understand that there was a practice of declaring 
certain years to be Annual Plan years whenever planning process got 
delayed for some reasons so that subsequently a fresh Five Year Plan could 
be drawn. This was perhaps done t o ensure that the impact of delay in 
planning, etc. is restricted to the Annual Plan in question and the next Five 
Year Plan is worked out in a holistic manner. Asked, if  the Department 
suggested anything of this sort to the concerned authorities when this  
delinking was proposed and the outcome of the efforts made, the Department 
replied that they  did not propose to the Planning Commission or any other 
authority for not de -linking the financial year 2007 -08 from the XI Five Year 
Plan. 
3.16 Asked why the Dep artment had not suggested to the Planning 
Commission to treat the financial year 2007 -08 as „Annual Plan‟ when 
delinking was proposed by them as there were ample instances in the past 
when certain years were treated as „Annual Plan‟ years viz. 1966 -67, 1967-

 
 
68, 1968-69 and 1989 -90 and 1990 -91, the Department in a post -evidence 
reply stated that this was then necessitated due to the general elections in the 
Country and the Department had little role to play in this regard. 
3.17 Asked further as to why delinking of financial year 2007 -08 from XI 
Five Year Plan would cause delay in clearance and implementation of XI Plan 
schemes when according to the Department themselves,  the XI Plan 
Schemes would have already passed the scrutiny of SFC/EFC consisting  
amongst others representati ves from Planning Commission, Ministry of 
Finance and experts/concerned persons of other organization s connected 
with the particular scheme  / programme to be i mplemented in a particular 
Plan, the Department in another post -evidence reply stated that the  delay in 
the process of implementation of XI Plan schemes was mainly due to the fact 
that the communication by the Planning Commission after the endorsement of 
the XI Five Year Plan by the NDC was received in the Department only i n 
January, 2008, that resulted in loss of almost an year in this preliminary 
process.  However, the Department could clear all the EFCs and SFCs in a 
record period of about one year from the date of receiving the communication 
from the Planning Commission.  
BUDGETARY ALLOCATION  
3.18 The De partment had been allocated Rs. 5368.00 crore for the Tenth 
Plan against proposed allocation of Rs.15000 crore.  For the Eleventh Plan, 
the Department proposed a sum of Rs.12176.40 crore and have been 
allocated a sum of Rs.12023.00 crore. 
The Table below indicates the year -wise BE, RE and Actuals in the 
Tenth Plan and the three years of the Eleventh Plan: 

 
 
         (Rs. in crore) 
Year BE RE Actuals 
Tenth Plan 
2002-03 
 
775.00 
 
725.00 
 
680.56 
2003-04 775.10 775.00 701.78 
2004-05 1000.00 900.00 858.98 
2005-06 1150.00 1070.00 1048.96 
2006-07 1400.00 1430.00 1368.02 
TOTAL 5100.10 4900.00 4658.30 
Eleventh Plan 
2007-08 
1620.00 1434.00 1284.25 
2008-09 1760.00 1760.00 1653.80 
2009-10 1760.00 -- 652.28* 
TOTAL 5140.00 3194.00 3590.33 
* Upto 30.9.2009 
 The BE for the ongoing Fiscal has been pegged at Rs. 1760.00 crore 
against the proposed Outlay of Rs. 4000.00 crore. 
3.19 Asked why in-spite of price rise and inflationary trends during the last 
five years, the  Department had sought only Rs.12176.40 crore for the 
Eleventh Plan while a sum of Rs.15000 crore was sought for the Tenth Plan,  
the Department replied that they had to restrict the XI Plan outlay to Rs. 
12176.40 crore as asked for by the Planning Commissi on through their 
circular.  The Department w ere asked to formulate three scenarios in respect 
of the proposals for XI Plan outlay i.e. reflecting an increase of 5% per annum 
with respect to the terminal year of X Plan; and similarly other two scenarios 
with an increase of 10% per annum and 15% per annum, respectively.  In 
reality,  the XI Plan Working Group constituted by Planning Commission itself 

 
 
had recommended Rs.31,672 .00 crore as XIth Plan outlay for DARE / ICAR 
but the P lanning Commission provided Rs .12,023.00 crore only. The Expert 
Group constituted by Planning Commission under the chairmanship of DG, 
ICAR recommended Rs.36,000.00 crore for XIth Plan. 
3.20 When asked how could the financial requirements of a scientific 
department like DARE, be justif ied within such restrictive mathematical 
formulae and had the Department brought the constraints in this regard to the 
notice of the concerned authorities in Planning Commission, the Department 
stated in a written reply as under:- 
“Agreed please.  The Expert Group constituted by Planning 
Commission under the chairmanship of DG -ICAR had recommended 
Rs 36000.00 crore for the XI Five Year Plan of the Department. Even 
the XI Plan Working Group on Agricultural Research and Education 
constituted by Planning C ommission had recommended Rs 31672 .00 
crore. The Planning Commission did not enhance the XI Plan Outlay of 
the Department, which was kept at Rs.12,023.00 crores.” 
 
3.21 When asked further if they were satisfied with the allocations finally 
made for each of  the schemes/programme/activity and the resultant progress 
made during the Tenth Plan as well as the first two years of the Eleventh 
Plan, the Department stated that t he allocations as communicated by 
Planning Commission during Xth Plan and XIth Plan were distributed among 
various schemes/ programmes after reprioritizing the requirement keeping in 
view the research priorities. In so far as the performance of fund utilization for 
each scheme during Xth Plan as well as in the first two years of XIth Plan is 
concerned, the same are already given in the scheme -wise details contained 
in the Demands for Grants (2009-10) document on pages 116 to 158. 

 
 
3.22 On the question of the efforts made by the Department to convince the 
Planning Commission to allocate funds as projected and if the matter was 
taken up at the other appropriate levels as well so as to ensure the 
fructification of allocations sought , the Department stated that the year-wise 
projections are usually submitted to Planning Commission each year through 
Annual Plan proposals. The scheme -wise proposed outlays for each year 
were discussed in Planning Commission under the chairmanship of 
Secretary, Planning Commission. The Department had strongly taken up the 
matter with Planning Commission that the projected  outlays be provided to 
them. As the Annual Plan allocations are communicated each year by the 
Planning Commission, hence, the matter was taken up with the Planning 
Commission only. 
3.23 About the impact of the pruning down of funds sought, on the activities 
being pursued, both in short and long term perspective  and the steps taken 
by the Department to ensure that funds sought are actually released , the 
Department stated that w hatever allocation is communicated by the Planning 
Commission for each year, the same is distributed among the various 
schemes of the Department after re -prioritizing the fund requirement. This 
was done to ensure that the schemes/projects of high priority could be funded 
adequately as far as possible out of the total allocated fund as allocated each 
year by the Planning Commission. The Department have always taken up the 
matter strongly at higher level s in the Planning Commission for getting the 
proposed outlays. The scheme -wise funds are allocated by the Department 
after reprioritizing the requirement and keeping in view the national priorities. 

 
 
3.24 Against an allocation of Rs.12023 .00 crore for XI Plan, the Actuals 
have been only Rs.2938.05 crore for the first two Years of the Plan amounting 
to less than 25% utilisation of the Plan allocation. 
3.25 The Committee understand that the trend of allocations being followed 
in the Eleventh Plan was backloading i.e. allocating maximum funds in the 
last two years of the Plan. When enquired the reasons behind the 
backloading of funds for the Ele venth Plan, the Department in a written reply 
stated that the formulation of XI Plan SFC/EFC proposals is a lengthy 
procedure and the Department had to follow the various 
formats/guidelines/instructions/ procedures etc. as prescribed by Planning 
Commission/Ministry of Finance. This process of getting clearance from XI 
Plan SFCs/EFCs could be accomplished by the end of 2nd year of XI Plan. 
 
3.26 When asked about views of the Department on the method of fund 
allocation/release during the last two years of the Plan and the impact of such 
backloading of allocations on the Schemes of DARE included in the Five Year 
Plan, the Department clarified that a s we have received the approval of 
EFC/SFC of all the ongoing schemes as well as one new scheme, the funds 
during the remaining part of the XI Plan could be fully utilized for construction 
of approved civil works, acquiring of new equipments, strengthening  of library 
etc. so that  all the envisaged programmes of the ongoing/new schemes 
could be implemented as  scheduled. 
3.27 When asked if in the above scenario, would the Department be able to 
spend the remaining 75% in the last three years of the Eleventh Plan and the 
steps being contemplated to step up utilization of the allocations in the 
remaining Plan period , the Department stated that all the ongoing schemes 

 
 
were cleared by the  XI Plan SFCs/EFCs by the end of second year of XI Plan 
as it was a very le ngthy exercise.  Until a scheme is approved for 
implementation, the process of fund utilization is limited to committed 
expenditure only (like Pay & Accounts, contingencies, etc.) whereas the items 
of infrastructure development could be taken up after a sch eme is duly 
approved by SFC/EFC/Competent Authority for implementation. Due to this 
less funds were utilized during the  first two years of XI Plan. Now as all the 
ongoing schemes have been cleared, the Department ha ve to implement all 
the approved activit ies/programmes including related infrastructure 
development etc., with full vigour, therefore the Department anticipate higher 
utilization during the current financial year 2009 -10 and the remaining two 
years of XI Plan. 
3.28 In the current Fiscal also the Department have been allocated a sum of 
Rs.1760 crore. Till September, 2009 Rs.652.28 crore only  have been spent. 
This is about 37% of the BE.  Assuming full utilization by the Department 
during the current Fiscal, which is not likely in view of their pas t record, 60% 
of the Eleventh Plan allocation would still be left for the last two years of the 
Plan. 
3.29 Asked why the funds allocated have not been spread more evenly to 
avoid huge accumulation of unallocated funds in the last two years of the Plan 
and their suggestions to improve the financial planning aspect at all levels so 
as to ensure that such situations are avoided in future,  the Department stated 
that as the initial period of the XI Plan was used in getting approval of the XI 
Plan SFCs/EFCs of ea ch Plan scheme, this was the reason that less funds 
were projected/utilized in the first two years of XI Plan. 

 
 
3.30 It was further stated that the process of getting clearance of SFC/EFC 
and financial approval of competent authority for each individual scheme is 
quite lengthy i.e. first they invite proposals from the individual schemes 
(institutes/national research centres/project directorates , etc) which are  
formulated by them after having thorough in-house assessment and  following 
the various formats  / guidelines / instructions from Planning Commission  / 
Ministry of Finance. Subsequently these proposals after critical scrutiny at 
concerned subject matter divisional levels are made available for circulati on 
to appraisal agencies (Planning Commission, Ministry of Finance etc.) for 
getting their comments. Further, after following laid down procedures, these 
proposals are considered by the respective S FCs/EFCs. The 
recommendations of SFCs/EFCs are submitted to the prescribed competent 
authorities for approval. Hence, this process takes substantial time and the 
Department has to follow the same. The Department always takes 
expeditious steps to accomplish this process. 
3.31 Elaborating further on this matter the Secretary of the Department 
stated during the Oral Evidence as under :- 
“I would like to mention that the kind of problem which has been faced 
by us in the Eleventh Five Year Plan is a perpetual problem Plan after 
Plan. Why does it happen? After NDC meeting is made almost in the 
second year of any Plan period. So, upto two years, one only goes on 
the existing basis. Even if marginally little more money is allocated for 
undertaking new activities, they  are not initiated. That is one issue 
which I would like to bring to the notice of the hon. Committee. 
 
Secondly, I would like to mention that in the last three or four or five 
Plan periods, Eleventh Five Year Plan is one Plan period in which 74 
schemes, 71+3 new schemes including the new National Institute of 
Abiotic Stress Management, has already been sanctioned. Only two or 
three new schemes such as the University in Bundelkhand which has 
been talked in the last one or two months are likely to be pu t in place. 
We are in the best position to utilise the money if it is allocated. 
 

 
 
The Third problem is, although overall Rs.12,000 crore has been 
allocated, when we are capable of spending based on the programmes 
already approved by the Government, money i s not available. For 
example, in the ongoing year in 2009 -10, 74 schemes have been 
approved and sanctioned. We wanted an allocation of Rs.4,000 crores 
and we were kept at Rs.1,760 crore which was the allocation last year. 
We wrote a letter to this effect a t the RE stage and we hope to get the 
amount. But today, at Rs.4,000 crores, we will not be able to spend 
because the time available is limited. We have now asked Rs.2,250 
crores against an allocation of Rs.1,760 crores which was on the basis 
of the allocation last year. 
 
The fourth point which I would like to mention and which is coming up 
time and again is our requirement to provide the much needed fillip to 
research in agriculture sector. ………….. 
 
Regarding the works, since the Plan was on the existing ba sis, the 
existing activities have continued. For undertaking new activities, we 
need funds. Since they were only existing activities, and they are 
continued, there is no loss of work but acceleration has not been there 
and new works has not been there. We need some money there.” 
 
3.32 While seeking information for and in connection with the examination 
of Demands for Grants of the Department, the Committee desired the detailed 
break up of allocations sought and allocations actually made sector  / scheme 
/ programme / activity wise for the each of the years of X th and so far during 
the XI th Plan. The Department replied that these details are available in the 
Demands for Grants (2009 -10) document (on page Nos.116 to 158 ). Since 
the scheme -wise, year -wise prop osed Outlay were not reflected in the 
material cited by the Department, they were asked to clarify in the matter. In 
response the Department further stated that d uring Xth Plan, the scheme -
wise proposed outlays are reflected in col. No. 3 from page 116 to 126 for the 
Xth Plan as a whole. In so far as scheme -wise proposed outlays are 
concerned they are contained in the Annual Plan proposals of each year. 
Similarly, for XI Plan, the scheme -wise proposed outlays are reflected in col. 
3 from page 140 to 158 and  the scheme-wise proposed outlays for each year 

 
 
of the Annual Plan are contained in the respective Annual Plan documents.  
The detailed break-up was, however, not made available to the Committee. 
LAUNCHING OF NEW SCHEMES 
3.33 On the question of the procedure followed by the Department while 
proposing a new scheme or totally revamping or recasting an old scheme  in 
their Five Year/Annual Plan , the Department stated that after a new scheme 
to Planning Commission  is proposed, first a concept note is sent to Plan ning 
Commission for their consideration and seeking in -principle approval.  After 
receiving the in -principle approval, the Department get s the detailed 
SFC/EFC proposal alongwith  Detailed Project Report(DPR) and circulate s it 
to appraisal agencies including Planning Commission and Ministry of Finance 
for seeking their specific comments. Subsequently, the proposal is considered 
by the respective SFC/EFC, whose recommendations are submitted to the 
competent authority for approval (for schemes costing Rs. 150  crore and 
above the EFC recommendations are submitted to CCEA for ong oing 
schemes and to the Cabinet for new schemes for their respective 
consideration/ approval) following the prescribed procedure. In so far as 
revamping/recasting of an ongoing scheme is  concerned, such proposals are 
deliberated/decided by the respective SFC/EFC of a  particular scheme. 
 The Committee have been further informed that the SFC/EFC of a new 
scheme thoroughly deliberates the proposal and thereafter accords its 
Recommendation for implementation of the same. 
3.34 As regards new schemes being taken up during the ongoing Fiscal, the 
Committee have been informed that the Veerappa Moily Oversight Committee 
on the implementation of new reservation policy in higher education for OBC 

 
 
had recommended creation of 3 new institutes viz. National Institute of Abiotic 
Stress Management (NIASM), National Institute of Agriculture Biotechnology  
(NIAB) and  National Institute of Biotic Stress Management(NIBSM). Out of 
these the NIASM had already  been approved by the Government for 
establishment during 2008-09. 
3.35 Asked if these two Schemes were earmarked for implementation 
during the ongoing Financial Year, when exactly were the proposals for these 
two new Schemes circulated and with what timelines, the Department replied 
that both the schemes were to be implemented in the ongoing year. The EFC 
proposals for these two new schemes were circulated on 25 September, 2009 
to the appraisal agencies i.e. Planning Commission, Ministry of Finance, 
Department of Agriculture and Cooperation, Department of Animal 
Husbandry, Dairying & Fisheries, Ministry of Environment and Forest, 
Department of Biotechnology and  Department of Science and Technology.  
As per Ministry of Finance guidelines the maximum period for offering 
comments by the appraisal agencies is six weeks. 
3.36 On the present status of these scheme , the Committee were informed 
further that the comments from Planning Commission, Department of 
Biotechnology, Department of Animal Husbandry, Dairying and Fisheries 
have been received. The Department ha ve already requested the Office of 
Secretary, Expenditure, Ministry of Finance for a convenient date for 
convening the EFC for these two new schemes, which is awaited. 
  

 
 
BUDGET &  CASH MANAGEMENT  SCHEME 
3.37 The Ministry of Finance had launched a modified Budget and Cash 
Management (B&CM) Scheme in 2006 -07 with the intention to reduce 
expenditure asymmetry and to plan market borrowings more realistically . The 
scheme stipulates amongst other things the following: 
 Disclosure of monthly expenditure of major Departments. 
 Quarterly exchequer control with a limit of maximum 33% funds in 
Quarter-4 (Q-4). 
 March spending control with a maximum ceiling of 15% of funds. 
 
Any breaches in this regard are to be reported  to the Ministry of 
Finance and their permission / approval is required for regularization. When 
asked to what extent these measures are being implemented by the 
Department since Finan cial Year 2006 -2007, the Department stated that 
these orders were circulated to all ICAR institutes as well as to all concerned 
sections and officials at ICAR Headquarter s. In this regard the data furnished 
by the Department is at Annexures A & B. 
3.38 It is noted from the figures provided by the Department the Committee 
found that in the years 2006 -07 and 2008 -09, the expenditure in Quarter -IV 
worked out to 35.79% and 43.64% respectively. 
3.39 When asked why Quarter -IV spending norms of maximum 33 percent 
spending were not adhered to by the Department in these two years, the 
Department stated that one of the main reasons is due to late receipt of RE. 
Further in order to clear the financial commitments (like civil constructions, 
purchase of equipments, purchase of library books/journals etc) the 
expenditure during the last quarter leads to expenditure being bit higher. 

 
 
3.40 When enquired whether there would be a repeat of such spending 
beyond specified limits in Quarter -IV in this year as well, the Department 
replied that in future, efforts would be made to restrict the expenditure to 33% 
during the last quarter. In case of any deviation, the Ministry of Finance will be 
communicated. Copies of instructions of Ministry of Finance have already 
been circulated to institutes for strict compliance and it is being monitored 
regularly. 
3.41 It is further noted that t he Department had spent 20.43 percent of the 
funds allocated for 2008 -09 in March 2009. Thereby, exceeding the March 
ceiling of 15%. However, the Ministry of Finance was not informed. Asked 
why this was not reported to the Ministry of Finance and how would this 
violation be regularised without approaching the Ministry of Finance in the 
matter, the Department replied that in future, instructions of Ministry of 
Finance will be kept in view while monitoring the expenditure and any 
deviation would be reported to the competent authority. 
ANNUAL PLAN 2009-10 
3.42 There are 74 Schemes of ICAR which could be classified as (a) 
deemed and Central Universities of ICAR for conducting basic and strategic 
research and i mparting higher education ; (b) national institutes for upstream 
research; (c) bureau for collection, conservation, evaluation, classification and 
documentation of natural resources and strategic research support for their 
management and effective utilizati on; (d) national research centres for basic 
and strategic mission -oriented research for feeding into the coordinated 
research system ; (e) project directorates to support research through 

 
 
coordinated programmes for location, situation and system specific 
technologies; and (f) centres for frontline extension. 
3.43 The number and budget outlays for these schemes / institutes by the 
Subject Matter Divisions are given below :- 
S.No. Name of Subject Matter Division No. of 
Schemes 
/ Institutes 
Plan outlays for 
2009-10 (BE) 
(Rs. in Crore) 
1. Crop Sciences 15 304.00 
2. Horticulture 9 90.00 
3. Natural Resource Management 13 102.00 
4. Animal Sciences 14 92.00 
5. Fisheries 6 45.00 
6. Agricultural Extension 3 307.00 
7. Agricultural Engineering 5 43.00 
8. Agricultural Education 2 370.00 
9. Economics, Statistics and Marketing 1 4.00 
10. ICAR Headquarters including IPR 6 30.00 
11. Indo US Knowledge Initiative - 5.00 
12. Externally-funded scheme, NAIP - 257.00 
13. DARE - 1.00 
14. National Fund for Basic and Strategic 
Research 
- 20.00 
15. Central Agricultural University, Imphal - 90.00 
 Total 74 1760.00 
 
FLOW OF FUNDS IN 2009-10 
3.44 The funds for the first four months of the current Fiscal were met 
through a Vote on Account and provisions for the remaining eight months 
have been made through regular Demands for Grants. 
3.45 When enquired how did the Department reconcile with the two systems 
of flow of funds to ensure that ongoing schemes and new schemes of 2009 -
10 do not suffer resource crunch and to what extent has the funding pattern 
adversely affected the implementation of schemes and pro jects during the 
current Fiscal, the Department stated that they had allocated funds to various 

 
 
schemes based on the  prioritized requirement to see that  none o f the  
scheme is adversely affected due to  shortage of funds. 
3.46 Due to these restrictions some Ministries/Departments ha d admitted 
before the Committee that the timelines of several new as well as exis ting 
Schemes will be staggered. When enquired on th is aspect the Department 
replied that till now only one new scheme namely “National  Institute of Abiotic 
Stress Management” to address the impact of climate change on agriculture 
was approved for implementation at the fag end of 2008 -09 and the  Director 
has joined just a couple  of months back. Hence, its activities did not suffer 
due to shortage of funds. The prioritized programmes under different existing 
schemes were not affected due to funding pattern during 2009-10. 
MID -TERM APPRAISAL 
3.47 As regards mid -term appraisal of the Eleventh Plan , the Committee 
have been informed that the Department have an in-built system to review the 
working of its schemes (institutes/national research centres/project 
directorates etc.) through Quinquennial Review Team (QRT), Research 
Advisory Committee (RAC) and Institute Research Council (IRC) for 
monitoring the performance of various plan schemes. In addition, ICAR has 
also developed mechanism s for evaluation through independent agencies in 
specific cases. Alread y independent evaluation has been carried out in 
respect of 8 institutions by the outside agencies. The Department ha ve 
already submitted the document to Planning Commission for Mid -Term 
Appraisal, its first meeting has already been held under the Chairman ship of 
Member(Science) on 5 November, 2009. The proceedings of the meeting are 
still awaited. 

 
 
Budgetary Planning and Zero Based Budgeting 
3.48 The Committee observe that as far as Budgetary Planning is 
concerned, the Annual Plan and Five Year Plan require ments of the 
Department are initially projected as individual schemes of national 
research centre / project directorate. These are further considered 
inhouse. New programmes are formulated at ICAR Headquarters based 
on expe rt consultations, workshops, conf erences, etc. Thereafter, a 
consolidated proposal for the Department is submitted to Planning 
Commission after complying with prescribed proce dures / guidelines  
and a Five Year Plan or the Annual Plan is thus finalized after a process 
of consultation betwe en the Department and the Planning Commission. 
In the Tenth Plan, for instance, after extensive discussions the number 
of schemes was brought down to 71 by merging / subsuming various 
schemes and sub schemes to introduce a more focused and efficient 
approach in the implementation process. With the addition of three new 
/ upgraded schemes, the number has gone up to 74 in the XI Plan. 
The Committee find that Zero Based Budgeting is resorted to in 
the budgetary planning process but only at the time of finalization of a 
Five Year Plan by the Planning Commission. The Committee are of the 
considered opinion that ZBB concept need to be appli ed not only at the 
stage of finalization of the budgetary allocation  but also as a tool for 
better, rational, prudent and more focused financial planning requir ing 
ab-initio planning. They feel i deally it need to be applied at the initial 
planning stage wi thin the Department , not only to give a much needed 
reorientation to the budgetary planning of the Department but also to 

 
 
enable the  Planning Commission  to analyse and appreciate the 
performance and achievements in a more focused and professional 
manner. On the functional plane , such an initiative by the Department, 
as will be borne out by the subsequent narrative, will be of immense 
utility as it may provide a sound base to the ZBB exercise conducted by 
the Planning Commission and thereby reduce considerab ly the time 
taken in finalization of allocations at the extant ZBB exercise stage.  The 
Committee also desire the Department to consider the feasibility of 
carrying out Zero Based Budgeting for Annual Plans also. Being the 
fundamental unit of planning syste m in the Country, the Annual Plans 
need to be worked out with all meticulousness and care unlike the 
present system in which goals are dependent on funds and not vice -
versa. The Committee would like to be apprised of the considered views 
of the Department on this aspect well before they take up the 
examination of the Demands for Grants of the Department for the next 
fiscal in Feb-March, 2010. 
Budgeting of a Scientific Department 
3.49 The Committee while noting with appreciation the contribution of 
ICAR in the past in enabling the Country acquire self -sufficiency in food 
production are, however, aghast to find that the Government never 
cared to nurture DARE / ICAR as an entity that has performed. Th is 
resulted in this Scientific Department getting continuously clubbed with 
other general administrative Ministries / Departments in the assessment 
of their organizational, functional and financial requirements . That this 
sorry situation is obtaining six decades after independence and with a 

 
 
well laid down system of  planning and decision making in place is 
incomprehensible to them. Having noted further that the Planning 
Commission have acknowledged this bitter truth in the Eleventh Plan 
document that the Government need to treat the Scientific Departments 
on a differ ent footing vis -à-vis other Ministries / Departments for their 
functional, human resource and financial requirements, the Committee 
are certain that the Government is well aware of this plain speaking of 
the Plan body. It becomes highly untenable in view o f the above fact 
that it is not the lack of awareness but the lack of will that is prohibiting 
the Government from bringing in the required reforms in the budgeting 
procedures and in subsequent allocations  for the Scientific 
Departments. They strongly feel that the Government and the planners 
need to do what they, ought to have done decades ago. It is needless to 
emphasise that Scientific Departments have their own typical 
requirements of human resource, wo rking and finances. And to keep 
them at the cutting edges of performance, they ought not be kept on the 
same footing as the general administrative Ministries / Departments. 
They, therefore, desire the Government to immediately extricate 
themselves from the inertia they are in and undo this wrong of decades 
together so that the Scientific Department are given their due, if not 
more, to enable, DARE / ICAR to perform in a conducive atmosphere 
and deliver to their optimum. 
3.50 Further, the Committee are h ighly disappointed with the attitude 
of the Department  and the response about the requirements as a 
Scientific Department. The replies were too vague and general in nature, 

 
 
for the Committee to come to right conclusions about the exact 
requirements of the Department. The Committee are of the firm opinion 
that the endeavors of the Government in this matter will fructify only if 
they are presented with some concrete proposals by the Department for 
consideration and approval. They would like to caution the Departm ent 
that merely saying that they feed the Nation inspite of severe handicaps 
or that major policy decisions are required to usher in changes in their 
working would not suffice. They, therefore, desire the Department 
immediately to  get down to the task of w orking out a well considered 
and cogent proposal delineating their typical requirements of 
manpower, functioning and finances and the amendments / changes 
required to be made in the extant rules and regulations concerning 
these elements with a view to fruc tify them. The Committee would like 
such a proposal to be worked out by the Department and sent for the 
consideration of the Government before their next Demands for Grants 
are presented to the Parliament. 
Delinking of Annual Plan (2007-08) from the Eleventh Plan 
3.51 During the course of the examination of the Demands for Grants 
of the Department of Agricultural Research & Education, the Committee 
note that the Planning Commission had informed the Department in 
December, 2006 / January, 2007 th at only th eir Annual Plan (2007 -08) 
proposals would be considered and not the Eleventh Plan as a whole. 
This, according to the Department was done because the Planning 
Commission had to communicate the Annual Plan 2007 -08 outlay of the 
Departments in February, 2007, while the Eleventh Plan related Report 

 
 
of the Steering Group on Agriculture and Allied Sectors, constituted by 
the Planning Commission itself was finalized only in April, 2007. 
Besides, it was also done to ensure that the reports of the  Sub-
Committee of National Development Council and the Eleventh Plan 
Working Group on Agricultural Research and Education are taken into 
account while taking up overall formulation of the Eleventh Five Year 
Plan Document. The Committee further note that on  the consequences 
of this delinking, initially the Department merely stated that it was just 
an administrative technicality on the part of the Planning Commission 
and they follow ed procedures as desired by agencies like Planning 
Commission. However, after persistent queries by the m, it was  finally 
admitted that the delinking of Financial Year 2007 -08 from the Eleventh 
Plan was a factor impacting some delay in the process of clearance of 
various schemes of Eleventh Plan for implementation. The Committee 
are greatly distressed to find that the communication of the Planning 
Commission after the endorsement of the Eleventh Plan by the National 
Development Council was received in the Department only in January, 
2008 resulting in the loss of a precious year in thi s preliminary process. 
Although the Department through their efforts got all EFCs and SFCs 
cleared in about one year from the date of receipt of the communication 
from the Planning Commission, the sad fact remains that by then 
virtually the first two years  of the Eleventh Plan were over resulting  in 
timelines of all schemes going haywire. This according to them would 
very obviously entail an inflated financial cost also. While deprecating 
this sloppy planning process, the Committee find it inexplicable as to 
why the Government or the other agencies involved in the process did 

 
 
not consider to convert 2007-08 as an Annual Plan  year, as has been 
done in the past, so that the Eleventh Plan could have started from 
2008-09. This would have cushioned the Plan from the cascading effects 
of the procedural delays , staggering of timelines and risking inflated 
costs during the ongoing Plan. The Department can not be absolved of 
their inaction i n this crucial matter  as k nowing fully well the negative 
connotations of the d elinking of Annual Plan 2007 -08 from the Eleventh 
Plan, they did not take any initiative of pointing out to the appropriate 
authorities instead claiming that compliance with the procedure of other 
agencies and general elections in the Count ry as alibis for their inaction 
before the Committee. They desire the Department to be more proactive 
in future in such mattes of crucial importance. 
Budgetary Allocation 
3.52 The Committee note that the Department were allocated a sum of 
Rs.12023 crore for the Eleventh Plan against Rs.12176.40 crore sought 
by them  while the Department had sought a far greater amount of 
Rs.15000 crore for the Tenth Plan. Seen in real terms , the allocation of 
Rs.12176.40 crore sought for Eleventh Plan is substantially less than 
what was sought five years back for the Tenth Plan. The Department 
advanced a strange logic for downsizing their outlay for the Eleventh 
Plan stating that the Planning Commission had asked them to project 
the Eleventh Plan fund requirements using three scenarios viz.  
reflecting an increase of 5%, 10% and 15% respectively with respect to 
the terminal year of Tenth Plan. The Committee can in no way justify 
such restrictive mathematical formulae prescribed by the Planning 

 
 
Commission while asking a Scientific Department t o workout their 
projections for as important a thing as the Five Year Plan outlay. This 
becomes in explicable given the fact that  the Eleventh Plan Working 
Group and the Expert Group, both constituted by the Planning 
Commission itself had recommended a whopping Rs.31672.00 crore and 
Rs.36000.00 crore respectively for the purpose. The Committee cannot 
but deprecate such ca sual attitude towards financial planning and 
management. 
 They observe a similar fate befalling the allocations made to the 
Department for the Annual Plan s of the Eleventh Plan. For 2007 -08, a 
sum of Rs.1620.00 crore was allocated as BE. This was reduced to 
Rs.1434.00 crore at RE stage. In 2008 -09, a sum of Rs.1760.00 crore was 
allocated as BE. The same amount has been allocated as BE for the  
ongoing Fiscal as well when the Department had sought an allocation of 
Rs.4000.00 crore. The Department have also not acquitted themselves 
well by failing to utilize even these reduced allocations. In 2007 -08 and  
2008-09 they could spend only Rs.1284.25 crore and Rs.1653.80 crore 
respectively and in the ongoing Fiscal just 37% of the allocation viz. 
Rs.652.28 crore in the first six months  was spent. The consequence of 
the low releases and still lower utilizations is that halfway through the 
Eleventh Plan, the Department has barely managed to spend 30% of the 
total allocations. The way things stand as of now, the Committee have 
every reason not to share the optimism of the Department that the 
balance funds would be spent in the remaining period of the Eleve nth 
Plan. Rather, the Committee apprehend that schemes w ould get 

 
 
staggered resulting in cost and time overruns. Another serious 
dimension would be that in order to spend funds in this Plan itself, half 
baked schemes would be rushed through with scant regar d for either 
qualitative or quantitative norms. In both the cases , the prospects 
appear to be really very grim. They, t herefore, are of the considered 
opinion that the ongoing midterm appraisal should chalk out specific 
implementation and execution strategies to ensure that balance funds 
to the maximum possible extent are utilized during the remainder of the 
Eleventh Plan without compromising on qualitative and quantitative 
parameters. The y would like to be apprised of the efforts made by the 
Department in this regard at the earliest. 
 Further, it would not be out of context to comment upon the 
manner in which the Department have been furnishing information to 
them while the Demand for Grants (2009 -10) were examined . T he 
Department continued to invite  their attention to the Document on DFG 
without ever realizing that the figures of allocations sought for Annual 
Plans are not mentioned in the said Document. Attention of the 
Committee was also invited to Annual Plans of previous years without 
appreciating the fact that these were not made available to the m. The 
Committee are not at all impressed by this thoroughly condescending 
attitude of the Department in the matter of supply of papers and records 
sought by the Parliamentary Committee . They express seri ous 
displeasure and desire the Department to be extremely careful while 
furnishing information to the Parliament and its Committees in future. 
  

 
 
Launching of New Schemes 
3.53 The Committee find that the Department were implementing 71 
Schemes in the Tenth Plan.  With the addition of three new Schemes 
this figure has gone upto 74 in the Eleventh Plan. They are, however, 
concerned to note  that out of these three new Schemes only one viz. 
National Institute of Abiotic Stress Management has been approved by 
the Government in 2008 -09.  The remaining two namely National 
Institute of Agriculture Biotechnology and the National Institute of Biotic 
Stress Management are still on paper.  Though earmarked for 
implementation in the ongoing Financial year, the EFC proposa ls of 
these two Schemes were circulated to the appraisal agencies only on 25 
September, 2009.  While the comments of Planning Commission, 
Department of Biotechnology, Department of Animal Husbandry, 
Dairying a nd Fisheries have been received , the comments o f 
Department of Agriculture and Co-operation, Department of Science and 
Technology and the Ministry of Environment and Forest are yet to be 
received.  In the meantime, the Department have requested the 
Department of Expenditure to convene the EFC for the t wo Schemes.  
The Committee strongly feel that these two new Schemes have already 
been delayed inordinately. They, therefore, desire the Department to try 
their level best to ensure that all formalities pertaining to these 
Schemes of national importance are completed with utmost promptitude 
and their implementation commences at the earliest. 
  

 
 
Quarter -4 and March Spending Slippages 
3.54 The Committee note that Ministry of Finance modified the Budget 
and Cash Management guidelines issued in 2006 -07 stipulate maximum 
spending ceiling of 33% in Quarter – 4 of a Fiscal and of 15% in the 
month of March  and that any breach of these two ceiling limits require 
regularization by the Ministry of Finance.  The Committee, however, 
note with concern that the Department have breached Q-4 norms in both 
the previous years with spending of 35.79% in Q -4 of 2007 -08 and of 
43.64% in Q -4 of 2008 -09.  They have also not adhered to the March 
spending ceiling of maximum 15% in March, 2009.  What is more 
disturbing is that the Depar tment have not even bothered to report 
these violations to the Ministry of Finance for regularization.  The y 
consider this a major failur e on the part of the Department, and are of 
the strong opinion that u nless financial prudence is practiced in letter 
and spirit, the entire purpose of this initiative for systemic improvement 
will be defeated.  The Committee, therefore, desire that rather than 
seeking regularization of all such violations in future, as promised by 
the Department to them, the Department sho uld endeavour to adhere to 
Q-4 and March expenditure norms without fail in future. 
Mid-Term Appraisal 
3.55 The Committee observe that mid -term appraisal of the Eleventh 
Plan schemes of the Department is presently underway and the first 
meeting was held on 5 November, 2009. The Department is awaiting the 
proceedings of the first meeting and the appraisal is yet to be 
completed. They further observe that ICAR has developed mechanisms 

 
 
for evaluation through independent agencies. Evaluation of 8 
institutions ha ve so far been completed by the outside agencies. The 
Committee desire the De partment to get the mid -term appraisal by 
Planning Commission completed at the earliest and the findings and 
recommendations be gainfully utilized for drawing up the proposals for  
allocations to various schemes for the next year’s Budgetary Outlay of 
the Department. 
  

 
 
CHAPTER – IV 
SECTORAL  PROGRAMMES 
 Some of the important Sectoral Programmes of the Department 
evaluated during the course of examination of Demands for Grants (2009 -10) 
by the Committee are discussed in the succeeding paragraphs. 
 
CROP SCIENCE 
4.2 For Crop Science Scheme, the Department sought Rs.1991.08 crore 
for the Eleventh Plan and the Outlay provided viz. Rs. 1958.76 crore more or 
less matches the same.  The BE, RE and Actuals during the first two years of 
the Eleventh Plan are as under: 
          (Rs. in crore) 
Year BE RE Actuals 
2007-08 310.00 240.50 232.92 
2008-09 315.00 303.50 285.16 
 
4.3 About the reasons necessitating downsizing of BE at RE stage in both 
the years and the Actuals be ing lesser than even the RE in both the years , 
the Department stated that the EFC proposals of different Schemes could be 
approved by 2008 -09, and therefore pr oposals for purchase of equipments 
and for works could not materialise. 
4.4 Asked whether they would be able to spend the balance three-fourth of 
Plan allocation of the Scheme in the remaining less than three years of the 
Eleventh Plan with hardly 26.5% of Plan allocation spent in the first two years 
resulting in under utilization of earmarked funds and the extent to which 
various projects were affected, the Department replied that the SFC/EFC of 
different Schemes are now approved and th erefore the purchase of 

 
 
equipments and items of works are being processed i.e. substantial funds will 
be needed during current Financial Year and remaining 2 years of XIth Plan.  
Since the major amount was planned to be spent from third year onwards on 
works and some costly equipments , therefore, affected the earmarked 
programme of the Schemes of Crop Science Division.  In the ongoing Fiscal 
the Department have spent Rs.95.24 crore as on 30 September, 2009 out of 
BE of Rs.304.00 crore. 
HORTICULTURE 
4.5 Under this Scheme an amount of Rs.702.52 crore was proposed by 
the Department for the Eleventh Plan against which the approved allocation is 
Rs.726.75 crore.  The Actuals during the first two Fiscals add upto Rs.165.82 
crore only. For the ongoing Fiscal the Department have been provided 
Rs.90.00 crore against Rs.260.00 crore sought by them.  The Plan 
expenditure for Horticulture Division up to September 2009 has been Rs 
76.53 crore.  All the ongoing schemes were cleared by the  XI Plan 
SFCs/EFCs by the end of second year of XI Plan,  as this was a very lengthy 
exercise, less funds were utilized during the  first two years of XI Plan. Now , 
as all the ongoing schemes have been cleared, the Department has to 
implement all the approved activities/programmes inc luding related 
infrastructure development etc., with full vigour, so the Department anticipates 
higher utilization during the current financial year 2009 -10 and the remaining 
two years of XI Plan. 
4.6 When asked if the Department had projected the Revised Estimates 
for Horticulture Scheme , it was stated that the Horticulture Division has 
projected the RE of Rs .136.00 crore for 2009-10 which is awaiting allocation. 

 
 
As research is a continuous process, delay in funding in one year will not 
have cascading effect on the schemes, provided full funding is received 
during the remaining part of the XI Plan. 
4.7 To a query regarding the projects under the Horticulture Scheme which 
may miss timelines because of lower release /underutilization of funds i n the 
first three years, the Department stated all the projects would be completed 
as per schedule. 
NATURAL RESOURCE MANAGEMENT 
4.8 The Department have got an allocation of Rs.745.09 crore for this 
Scheme which is one fifth more than the outlay sought  for Ele venth Plan viz. 
Rs.630.12 crore. The allocation during 2007 -08 and 2008 -09 was Rs .80.00 
crore and Rs.100.00 crore respectively. During the last two Financial Years , 
the Department have been able to spend a sum of Rs.182.83 crore.  The BE 
for 2009 -10 is pegged at Rs.102.00 crore. The Plan expenditure upto 
September, 2009 is Rs.44.78 crore. 
4.9 On the issue of higher allocation under NRM Scheme, the Department 
have clarified that substantially higher fund s were allocated to this Division 
because an amount of Rs 99.45 crore for the scheme of Scaling Up of Water 
Productivity  in Agriculture was additionally provided in line with Union Budget 
announcement of 2007-08. Besides, the schemes of N orth East Region were 
also provided substan tially higher funds as  felt necessary by the XI Plan 
SFC/EFC to provide adequate funds to the schemes of North East Region on 
a priority. 
4.10 Asked if the Department would be able to absorb the rest of the 
allocation in the remaining period of the Plan  since not even 25% allocation 

 
 
has been spent in the first two years of the Plan,  it was stated that all the 
ongoing schemes were cleared by the  XI Plan SFCs/EFCs by the end of 
second year of XI Plan,  because it was a very lengthy exercise, this was the 
reason that less funds were utilized during the  first two years of XI Plan. Now 
as all the ongoing schemes have been cleared, the Department has to 
implement all the approved activities/programmes including related 
infrastructure development etc., with full vigour, so the Department anticipates 
higher utilization during the current financial year 2009 -10 and the remaining 
two years of XI Plan. 
AGRICULTURAL ENGINEERING 
4.11 The Department have been allocated Rs.300.00 crore for this Scheme 
against the propose d Outlay of Rs.262.20 crore.  The actual expenditure 
during the first two Fiscals at Rs.73.15 crore is less than 25% of the total 
Outlay.  This year  the BE is Rs.43.00 crore and a sum of Rs.15.20 crore has 
been spent upto September, 2009 out of this. 
4.12 When asked w hy have allocations not been spread more evenly so 
that in the first three Years , the Scheme should not have faced a resource 
crunch like situation inspite of ample fu nds being available in totality and only 
44% funds spent/committed in the thr ee Years of the Plan and the 
Department‟s assessment of full utilisation of the allocated am ount in the 
remaining two Years, the Department reiterated the position as stated in reply 
to similar queries with regard to schemes under Crop Sciences, Horticultu re 
and Natural Resource Management as referred to in preceding paras. 
ANIMAL SCIENCE 
4.13 The BE, RE and Actuals during the first two years of the Eleventh Plan 
under Animal Science Scheme are as under :- 

 
 
(Rs. in crore) 
Year BE RE Actuals 
2007-08 90.00 80.00 71.71 
2008-09 90.00 90.00 87.18 
 
 The performance of the Department in implementing this Scheme is 
not at all encouraging.  Out of the earmarked Outlay of Rs.1035.39 crore for 
Eleventh Plan only Rs.158.89 crore has been spent during the first two years 
which is 15% of the earmarked Outlay.  The BE for 2009 -10 is Rs.92.00 
crore. 
4.14 When enquired about the reasons behind such unrealistic annual 
allocations vis-à-vis total funds earmarked for the Scheme during each  of the 
three Years of the Plan  and its effect on the implementation of var ious 
Projects under this Scheme, the Department informed that during the first two 
years the utilization of funds has been low as the EFCs of various schemes 
were under the process of clearance and the two major sche mes i.e. NDRI 
and IVRI have recently been cleared in the months of March, 09 and August, 
09, respectively.  Since all the schemes have now been cleared and the 
major portion of allocation was for new initiatives/ new works and equipments, 
proposed during X I Plan, the Division will be able to utilize the balance of 
three fourth funds in the remaining XI Plan period. 
  

 
 
 
AGRICULTURAL EXTENSION 
4.15 The BE, RE and Actuals during the first two years of the Eleventh Plan 
for Agricultural Extension are as under :- 
(Rs. in crore) 
Year BE RE Actuals 
2007-08 281.00 320.50 268.45 
2008-09 301.00 315.00 292.48 
 
Out of the earmarked Outlay of Rs.2100.00 crore for this Scheme 
during Eleventh Plan, the Department have been able to spend Rs.560.93 
crore i.e. 26.71% of the  total during the first two years of the Plan.  Even in 
case of the KVKs, which have been allocated Rs.2052 .00 crore out of the 
total Rs.2100.00 crore under this Scheme, the spending is 26.72% of the total 
allocation. 
4.16 When asked why has this self infl icted resource cut been imposed by 
the Department on one of their  Flagship Schemes viz. the KVKs and t o what 
extent would th e scarcity of resources  in the first three years of the Plan 
affect the overall achievements of the Agriculture Extension Scheme in  
general and the KVKs component in particular, the Department stated that the 
Government(CCEA) approved the XI Plan proposals with the total allocation 
of Rs.205 2.00 crore  by the end of December, 2008.  Anticipating the time 
taken for approval of the XI Pl an proposals , no provision was made for 
construction of new works, procurement of new equipments , furniture, 
vehicles etc. under non -recurring head during the first two years of the Plan 
period. All the planned and targeted technical activities have been a chieved 

 
 
during the first two years of XI Plan. During the third year of XI Plan i.e. RE 
2009-10  allocation of Rs.358 .02 crore has been proposed and on availability 
of the said amount the targeted achievements will not be affected. 
AGRICULTURAL EDUCATION 
4.17 The BE, RE and Actuals during the first two years of the Eleventh Plan 
for Agricultural Education are as under :- 
(Rs. in crore) 
Year BE RE Actuals 
2007-08 312.00 361.00 349.23 
2008-09 350.00 380.00 379.97 
 
 The Department have been able to utilise 28.21% of the funds 
earmarked for various components of Agricultural Education Scheme in the 
first two years of Plan i.e. Rs.729.20 crore out of Rs.2585.00 crore.  With a 
BE of Rs.370.00 crore for the ongoing Fiscal , the funds spent/committed 
would still be hardly 40% of the total Outlay. 
4.18 When asked how would the balance funds be utilised during the 
remaining two years of the Plan, the Department stated that the amount of Rs 
2585 crore was only the earmarked provision for XI Plan for Education 
Division. However, as per XI Plan an amount of Rs 2414.97 crore was 
approved for this Division by the competent authority. The utilization during 
first two years of XI Plan was  Rs 729.20 crore against the RE of Rs 741 crore 
implying that the utilization during first two years was more than 98%. 
4.19 Under the „Development and Strengthening of Agricultural Universities‟ 
component of the Agricultural Education Scheme , the Department have been 
able to spend only Rs.233.83 crore in the last two years.  This is 11% of the 
total alloca tion of Rs.2119.35 crore.  The Department justified the low 

 
 
expenditure by stating that in so far as the development and strengthening of 
agricultural universities component is concerned, during first two years, a total 
amount of Rs 427.42 crore was allocated as BE and Rs 415.50 crore as RE 
against which the utilization was Rs 233.83 crore which is 56.28% , because 
this scheme was approved in the end o f second year, hence, utilization was 
less. The Department anticipates higher utilization during third year and 
remaining two year of the Plan period. The Department will be providing the 
projected funds at RE 2009 -10 and in the remaining two years subject  to 
overall fund availability. 
4.20 In respect of another vital Component of the Scheme viz. „Educational 
Quality and Reforms‟, the Department have been able to spend just 1% of the 
total allocation of Rs.3.10 crore in the first two years.  A sum of Rs.11.00 lakh 
has been earmarked as BE for 2009-10. 
4.21 On the reasons for such a slack performance,  justification for 
projection of Rs.3.10 crore for this Component  and how the huge balance 
would be utilised in the remaining two years of the Plan , the Departmen t 
stated that there is no slackness in performance. Beginning this Plan, 
particularly the year 2007 -08, unprecedented and exemplary quality and 
reform initiatives were undertaken by the Education Division of the ICAR, 
comprising first ever and massive exer cise of PG course curricula and syllabi 
revision, implementation of the revised UG course curricula and syllabi, a 
great fillip to Accreditation process, revision for ICAR Model Act for 
Agricultural Universities, and establishment of Coordination Committee for the 
ICAR Deemed Universities etc. 
4.22 Elaborating further on the steps taken in this regard, the Department in 
a detailed reply stated :- 

 
 
“(a)  The first ever massive exercise to revise the Common Academic 
Regulations, Course Curricula and Syllabi of  all Post -graduate 
(masters and doctoral) programmes (about 95) was undertaken 
through a National Core Group, 18 Subject Matter Area Committees, 
one Review Committee and thus, through involvement of about 1000 
academicians and other stakeholders of agricul tural education.  Many 
of the AUs have already implemented the revised curricula and syllabi 
and others have conveyed to implement from the next academic year. 
 
Thirteen more SAUs/DUs were accredited and accreditation renewal 
was carried out in 5 SAUs/DUs.   Process of accreditation of five more 
SAUs and of extension of accreditation of 4 SAUs is in progress.  
Thus, a total of 27 AUs have been accredited. The remaining AUs 
have also been pursued to expedite their accreditation process. 
 
The Meetings of Accre ditation Board and its three Sectoral 
Committees on (i)  Accreditation Norms and New Institutions & 
Programs; (ii) Curricula & Equivalence; and (iii) Governance , 
Personnel & Financial Policies were regularly held. 
 
A first ever Workshop on „Quality Assuranc e in Higher Agricultural 
Education‟ for NEH region was organized on March 26, 2009 at Assam 
Agricultural University Campus at Khanapara. 
 
The quantifiable parameters for accreditation have been worked out. 
 
The course curricula and syllabi of the UG progra mmes was got 
revised through a Deans‟ Committee, and circulated to all AUs for 
implementation.  Most of the AUs have already implemente d the 
revised course curricula and syllabi. 
 
Advisories are sent to AUs for implementing National Eligibility Test 
(NET) as an essential qualification for recruitment to Assistant 
Professor and equivalent positions for reducing inbreeding and 
education quality enhancement. 
For uniformity in structure and effective governance of agricultural 
universities in India, the Model A ct for Agricultural Universities in India 
(1994) has been revised and communicated to all AUs for adoption.  
 

 
 
A Coordination Committee for the ICAR Deemed Universities has been 
set up under the Chairmanship of DG, ICAR to bring in uniformity in 
academic regulations and systems.  Already, one meeting is held. 
 
(b)  Depending upon the availability of lower than the demanded 
funds, the allocation to the sub -scheme „Quality Assurance and 
Reforms‟ was restricted to Rs. 11.00 lakhs each during 2008 -09 and 
2009-10.  Against the allocation of Rs. 11.00 lakhs during 2008 -09, Rs. 
10.83 lakhs was spent.  It is expected that the budget for 2009 -10 will 
be enhanced and fully utilized. Plans are already under way to utilize 
the projected demand in the next two years.” 
 
4.23 It has also been stated that there has not been under performance in 
this scheme in so far as the physical targets are concerned.  The efforts 
mentioned earlier have benefited the higher agricultural education system 
through review of the governance mechanism and available infrastructure and 
facilities, identifying the weaknesses and threats, and making the curricula 
and syllabi, knowledge as well as skill oriented, utilitarian and up-dated. 
4.24 Similarly, in case of another component „Nitch Area of E xcellence‟, the 
Department have been able to spend 5.84% of the total Outlay in the last two 
years. The BE for 2007 -08 was Rs. 43.50 crore while for 2008-09 it was 
Rs.25.15 crore.  The corresponding spending being Rs .12.03 crore and Rs . 
`Nil‟ respectively. On the reasons for such gross under -utilisation and the 
likelyhood of meeting the Eleventh Plan targets and goals for this Component 
in the remaining years of the Plan , the Department stated that in so far as the 
`Nitch Area of Excellence‟ is concerned, during first two years, a total amount 
of Rs 12.03 crore was utilized against the f unds provided at RE level of 
Rs.30.10 crore which is 39.95% , because this scheme was approved in the 
end of second year, hence, util ization was less. The Department anticipates 
higher utilization during third year and remaining two years of the Plan period. 

 
 
4.25 Under the „Experimental Learning‟ Component of the Agricultural 
Education Scheme, allocations have neither been indicated for  the Eleventh 
Plan as such nor for the first two years of the Plan.  However, an amount of 
Rs.26.36 crore has been shown as RE for 2008 -09 and similar amount has 
been shown as BE for the current year. 
4.26 When asked to explain the reason for the funding p attern under the 
`Experimental Learning Component‟, the Department stated that it has 
already been included in the XI Plan and is one of the agreed activities in the 
EFC/CCEA note. 
4.27 Similarly, in case of the Component „Modernisation of University 
Farms‟ no allocations have been indicated for the Eleventh Plan as also the 
first two years of the Plan. However, an amount of Rs.85.53 crore has been 
shown as RE for 2008 -09 and a similar amount has been shown as BE for 
2009-10.  
4.28 Asked wherefrom the funds would be released for this Component 
when no provisions have been made in the Eleventh Plan for it , the 
Department stated that under the XI Plan the component of „Modernization of 
AU Farms” stands  approved with an outlay of Rs. 421.95 crores for t hree 
years (2008-09 to 2010 -11) and accordingly, the budget provision has been 
made. 
4.29 A provision of Rs.65.00 crore has been made in the RE of 2008 -09 for 
the Component „Special Grants‟.  In 2009 -10, Rs.31.16 crore have been 
proposed for this Component but no corresponding BE is indicated.  Clarifying 
in the matter, the Department stated that a  provision of Rs 65 crore has been 
made in RE 2008-09  and Rs.31.16 crore  for 2009-10 for 3 universities (PAU, 
Ludhiana, Institution of Excellence, TNAU and Insti tution of Excellence 

 
 
GBPUAT). The special grants are announced by the Govt. of India 
considering the achievements of the Universities and the requirement of 
funds for further upgradation of infra -structure and facilities for enhancement 
of quality of educa tion. Particularly, the reputed Universities of long standing 
are covered under such provision. 
4.30 There were mismatches in the figures under various columns for the 
Library Component of the Scheme , asked to reconcile the same,  the 
Department stated that the total outlay included in the EFC/CCEA document 
for the Library component is Rs. 125.00 crores that includes Rs. 20.00 crores 
for 2007 -08, Rs.25.00 crores for 2008 -09, Rs.25.00 crores for 2009 -10, 
Rs.25.00 crores for 2010-11 and Rs.30.00 crores for 2011-12. 
4.31 The Department have indicated the Mahatma Phule Krishi Vidyapeeth 
as a Component of the Agricultural Education Scheme.  However, no 
allocations have been indicated for the same either in the Eleventh Plan as a 
whole or in each of the three years of the Plan. When asked about the status 
of M ahatma Phule Krishi  Vidyapeeth and w hy no allocations have been 
made for it in the Eleventh Plan, the Department informed them that Mahatma 
Phule Krishi Vidyapeeth (MPKV) is a univer sity accredited by the ICAR. The 
special grant of Rs. 100.00 crores to the MPKV, was announced during the 
current Plan and the funds towards this, are provided separately by the 
Government of India. Additionally, a sum of Rs. 6.50 crores during 2007 -08, 
Rs.7.67 crores during 2008 -09 and Rs. 2.67 crores so -far during 2009 -10 
have been provided to MPKV  under the ongoing scheme „Strengthening  and 
Development of AUs‟. 
  

 
 
CENTRAL AGRICULTURE UNIVERSITY IMPHAL 
4.32 Under this Scheme, an expenditure of Rs.135 .33 crore has been 
incurred on Central Agriculture University, Imphal in last two Fiscals.  This is 
less than 25% of the total allocation of Rs.552.27 crore. When enquired about 
the reasons for low allocation and utilisation of funds till date, the timelines for 
the various projects concerning the University during the Eleventh Plan and to 
what extent would they be met, the Department informed that the approval of 
Government of India for the implementation of XI Plan proposal of Central 
Agricultural University, Imphal was received for Rs. 499.07 crore only towards 
the end of financial year, 2008 -09 vide letter No. 5 -7/2006-CAU dated           
16 December, 2008.  The expenditure of Rs. 135.33 crore  is therefore, 
27.11% during the first two Fiscals of the Plan. Furthermore, due to delay in 
the approval of Plan proposal no expenditure was possible on the New 
Schemes (New Initiatives) and construction works proposed for 
implementation during the Eleventh Plan period which alone accounted for 
Rs. 40.00 crore for the initial two financial years of 2007-08 and 2008-09. 
4.33 Out of the total provision of Rs. 115.56 crore for the X Plan for carried 
over construction works, Rs. 58.25 crore was to be utilized on civil works of 
CAU (HQ) and College of Agriculture both of w hich are located at Imphal.  
Due to difficult law and order situation, the National Buildings Construction 
Corporation a Gov ernment of India Undertaking which was entrusted with 
both these Projects backed out of their agreement result ing the University to 
identify another executing agency for this purpose.  For doing so, lot many 
codal formalities had to be completed a fresh which took almost full one year.  
Hence no utilization of funds except the nominal mobilization expenditure 
could be  made.  However, the new executing agency  i.e. Engineering 

 
 
Projects India Ltd. another Government of India Undertaking has now 
awarded the works to contactors and the construction is going on 
satisfactorily. 
 As the sanction to the XI Plan proposal of CAU  was issued in 
December 2008, the University anticipates to carry out various projected 
activities, though there is difficult administrative and political situation in the 
region. 
ICAR HEADQUARTERS 
4.34 The ICAR Headquarters Scheme has been allocated a sum  of 
Rs.100.00 crore instead of Rs.85.00 crore proposed by the Department.  The 
financial performance of the Department in regar d to this Scheme is as 
follows :- 
(Rs. in crore) 
Year BE RE Actuals 
2007-08 37.50 21.00 11.03 
2008-09 15.00 26.50 21.21 
2009-10 30.00 - - 
 
4.35 When asked about the reasons for drastic downsizing of BE 2007 -08 
from Rs.37.50 cror e to Rs.21.00 crore at RE stage and not even half of this 
drastically reduced RE could actually be spent , the Department replied that 
the BE for 2007-08 (Plan) for Rs.37.50 Crore included Rs.20.00 Crore for the 
Oversight Committee being operated by the Education Division of the 
Council.  However, at the RE stage, the budget was made as per the 
budgetary heads approved in the XI Plan , sanction for which did not include 
Oversight Committee Budget which was meant to be taken up by the 
Education Division separately in their budget.   

 
 
 The shortfall du ring 2007-08 was mainly under the sub -head “Support 
to CGIAR system” to a tune of Rs.4.00 crore and in t he sub-head “Publicity 
and Public relations” to a tune of Rs.1 crore. This shortfall was due to the 
reason that EFC of ICAR Headquarter was then yet to be cleared. 
4.36 About the reasons for doubling RE from Rs.15 crore (BE) to Rs.26.50 
crore in 2008 -09 and not fully utilising the same, the Department stated that 
the BE 2008-09 was Rs.15.00 crore for ICAR H eadquarters. However, at the 
RE stage, an additional sum of Rs.3.25 Crore was required under sub -head 
Works for releasing first instalment for the newly approved work item of XI 
Plan viz. construction of Auditorium . Further, a separate EFC of IPR was 
conducted under title “Intellectual Property Management and transfer of 
Commercialization of Agricultural technology scheme (up -scaling of existing 
component i.e. IPR under ICAR Headquarters. Scheme on management and 
information services) and sanction issued on 06.06.08. After the issue of 
sanction of IPR, the budget of IPR for 2008 -09 to the tune of Rs.7.28 Crore 
was projected in ICAR Headquarters budget at the RE stage 2008-09. Due to 
above reasons, the RE nearly doubled in respect of its BE 2008-09.  
4.37 The major shortfall under RE 2008 -09 was under the component “IPR” 
as the XI Plan sanction of IPR which was issued on 06.06.2008 has major 
portion of budget  under sub -head “pay and allowances and operational 
expenses”. Similarly, the budget of IPR under RE 2008 -09 mainly contained 
provision for “pay and allowances and operational expenses” but as the 
suitable manpower approved in XIth Plan has yet not been ap proved by the 
Ministry of Finance hence the funds allocated for under RE 2008 -09 could not 
be fully utilized. 

 
 
 
4.38 The Actuals and shortfall  / excess figures have not been indicated 
against the following components of ICAR Headquarters Scheme viz. Support 
to Prof. Soc. Including NAAS  ; Support to CGIAR  ; and Evaluation of Plan 
Schemes. Clarifying this, the Department stated that the ICAR Headquarter is 
a single scheme and the budget/ Expenditure is shown for ICAR Headquarter 
as a single entity. However, th e components viz. Support to Professional 
Societies including National Academy of Agricultural Sciences (NAAS), 
Support to Consultative Group on International Agricultural Research 
(CGIAR) and Evaluation of Plan Schemes are part of I CAR Headquarters 
Scheme. 
In so far as reflection of actuals and shortfalls/ excess in respect of the 
three components viz Support to Professional Societies including NAAS, 
Support to CGIAR and Evaluation of Plan Schemes is concerned, the same is 
summarized as under: 
 
Support to Professional Societies including NAAS 
             (Rs. In Lakhs) 
2007-08 2008-09 
BE RE Actual 
Expdtr 
Shortfall/ 
Excess 
BE RE Actual 
Expdtr 
Shortfall/ 
Excess 
200 250 206.46 -43.54 175 275 197 -78 
 
Support to CGIAR 
   (Rs. In Lakhs) 
2007-08 2008-09 
BE RE Actual 
Expdtr 
Shortfall/ 
Excess 
BE RE Actual 
Expdtr 
Shortfall/ 
Excess 
1210 1210 800 -410 600 800 1020 +420 
  
  

 
 
Evaluation of Plan Schemes 
   (Rs. In Lakhs) 
2007-08 2008-09 
BE RE Actual 
Expdtr 
Shortfall/ 
Excess 
BE RE Actual 
Expdtr 
Shortfall/ 
Excess 
0 25 14.91 -10.09 0 27 7.24 -19.76 
 
4.39 Funds have not been allocated in the Eleventh Plan to the component 
„3 New Institutes‟ under the ICAR Headquarters Scheme.  However, a sum of 
Rs.3.85 crore has been shown as RE for 2007 -08 and a sum of Rs.50.00 
crore has been proposed as Outlay for the ongoing Fiscal, though no 
allocation has been made there against in the BE. 
4.40 When asked about the status of th e Component as on date and the 
reasons for allocation mismatches , the Department stated that the Veerappa 
Moily Oversight Committee on the implementation of new reservation policy in 
higher education for OBC had recommended creation of 3 new institutes viz. 
National Institute of Abiotic Stress Management(NIASM), National Institute of 
Agriculture Biotechn ology(NIAB) and  National Institute of Biotic Stress 
Management(NIBSM). Out of these the NIASM had already been approved 
by the Government for establishment during 2008 -09. The proposals of the 
remaining two new schemes have already been circulated to the appraisal 
agencies for comments. Some more time was taken in the formulation of 
these two schemes (NIAB and NIBSM) as various kinds of background 
information had to be  gathered and  deliberated at length before formulating 
the EFC proposals. It is expecte d that the EFC of these two schemes will be 
held shortly. In so far as the provision of Rs 3.85 crore at RE 2007 -08 is 
concerned, it was just a token provision. During current financial year 2009-10 
a token provision of Rs 50 crore was kept for the  left o ver 2 new schemes 

 
 
(NIAB and NIBSM) for which the EFC is expected to be held shortly after 
receiving the comments from appraisal agencies (Planning Commission, 
Ministry of Finance etc.). 
4.41 No sums have been allocated to the Component „Oversight 
Committee‟ in the Eleventh Plan.  However, a sum of Rs.20.00 crore has 
been shown as BE for the year 2007 -08.  No further details about RE or 
Actuals have been indicated there against.  No sums have been allocated for 
the purpose during 2008-09 or the ongoing Fiscal. 
EXTERNALLY AIDED PROJECTS 
4.42 The BE, RE and Actuals during the first two years of the Eleventh Plan 
for Externally Aided Projects is as under :- 
(Rs. in crore) 
Year BE RE Actuals 
2007-08 285.00 85.70 51.88 
2008-09 257.00 257.00 207.99 
 
 Under the Indo-US Knowledge Initiative for which a sum of Rs.50.00 
crore has been allocated only 22% funds have been utilised in the first two 
years i.e. Rs.11.10 crore.  In the third year also the BE is Rs.5.00 crore. 
4.43 When enquired how do the Department propose to utilise the allocated 
amount in entirety during the Plan when hardly a third of the total funds were 
spent, it was stated that in the SFC document of the Indo -US AKI, a sum of 
Rs. 32.28 crores was approved for three years i.e. 2007 -08 to 2009-10.  The 
guidelines of the scheme envisage the matching grant from the US side. The 
low expenditure, particularly during the last two years i.e. 2008 -09 and 2009-
10 is mainly due to the non -availability of committed funds from the US -side. 
Therefore, India-side invested accordingly. 

 
 
4.44 Similarly, in case of „Nation al Fund for Basic and Strategic Research‟ 
the Department have been able to spend Rs.15.66 crore in the last two years.  
This is hardly 16% of the total allocated i.e. Rs.100.00 crore.  About the 
reasons for this less than optimal utilisation of funds  and the Department ‟s 
plans to utilise the balance funds in the remaining part of the Eleventh Plan, it 
was stated that the XI Plan approval of this scheme has been just received 
from Ministry of Finance  and  now it is anticipated that substantial  funds will 
be utilized in the remaining period of 2009 -10 and remaining two years of XI 
Plan. 
Poor Utilization in Crop Science Scheme 
4.45 The Committee find that the Department have been provided with 
Rs.1958.76 crore for this Scheme in the Eleventh Plan which almost 
matches their requirement (Rs. 1991.08 crore).  What, however, is a 
matter of anxiety for the Committee is that the Department  have been 
able to spend roughly 26.5% of the total Plan allocation in the first two 
Fiscals.  Even during the current year, and in spite of their assertions to 
the contrary, the spending in the first six months has been Rs.95.24 
crore only out of Rs.304.0 0 crore.  Thus , at halfway stage of the Plan , 
the Department hav e been able to spend a mere Rs. 620.32 crore out of 
Rs.1958.76 crore which is less than 32% in percentage terms. Given this 
scenario of gross under allocations and still lesser utilization, yea r after 
year, the Committee are compelled to conclude that the Crop Science 
Scheme is bound to miss both its cost as well as time lines.  While 
expressing their displeasure on the extant poor financial management 
of this important Scheme till date in the E leventh Plan, they exhort the 

 
 
Department to atleast pull their socks up now and implement Scheme 
more professionally and judiciously during the remaining part of the 
Eleventh Plan.  They also expect the Planning Commission to ensure 
that the Department wil l not remain cash strapped as in the previous 
years of the Eleventh Plan and all justified requirement of funds for the 
Crop Science Scheme will be met with alacrity. 
Horticulture 
4.46 The Committee observe that the Horticulture Scheme suffers from 
a diffe rent malaise. While the Department sought an amount of 
Rs.702.52 crore for this Scheme , they have been allocated Rs.726.75 
crore, which is slightly higher than what they had asked  for.  Hereagain, 
the Department have been able to spend hardly 23% of the to tal 
allocation in the first two years of the Plan.  In the third year i.e. 2009 -10 
when according to the Department the spending could have picked up, 
they have been allocated a sum of Rs.90.00 crore against Rs.260.00 
crore sought by them.  Further, the Department have already spent a 
major chunk i.e. Rs.76.53 crore in the first six months of the ongoing 
Fiscal. At such a speed, the Department would face a funds crunch 
sooner than later or else they may have to go slow on the 
implementation side.  The Commit tee are dismayed with this method of 
funds allocation.  Keeping the extant scenario in view, the y desire the 
Government to infuse the Department with funds immediately at RE 
stage for the Horticulture Scheme to ensure that the Scheme continues 
unhindered. 
  

 
 
NATURAL RESOURCE MANAGEMENT 
4.47 The Committee observe that an allocation of Rs. 630.12 crore was 
sought for this Scheme  against which a substantially higher amount of 
Rs.745.09 crore was allocated for the purpose.  The Committee, are, 
however, disappointed to observe further that the Department could 
spend less than one fourth of the sum allocated during first two years of 
the Plan.  In the Third year also , upto September, 2009,  they have been 
able to spend only 40% or so of Rs. 102.00 crore allocated to them.  As 
usual, the Department attributed the delays in sanctions/approvals as 
the reason for not making much headway in the first two years of the 
Plan.  However, the assurance that the Department would work with full 
vigour in the remaining three years of the Plan and funds utilization 
would be higher remains to be seen.  With half of the Eleventh Plan over 
and barely 30% of the funds spent, the situation is not as rosy as  the 
Department would l et the Committee believe.  The Committee strongly 
believe that enough time has been wasted in the ongoing Plan on 
matters of planning and conceptualizing  and what is required at this 
juncture is the execution and implementation of the Scheme with single 
minded purpose so that its intended benefits start accruing without any 
delay. They expect the Department to keep its assurance given to them 
in this regard. 
AGRICULTURAL ENGINEERING  
4.48 The Committee note that in this Scheme also the Department 
have been allocated substantially higher sum (Rs. 300 crore) than what 
was sought (Rs. 262.20 crore).  They, however, find it disconcerting tha t 
the actual expenditure at Rs. 73.15 crore in the first two fiscals is even 

 
 
less than one -fourth of the total Outlay.  In t he ongoing Fiscal also , the 
Department have been able to spend  only Rs.15.20 crore out of the BE 
of Rs. 43.00 crore in the first six months.  In percentage terms , it works 
out to roughly one -third of the allocation.  As in the case of replies to 
the other such instances , the Department have expressed optimism 
about higher utilization during the current Fiscal and the remaining two 
years of the Eleventh Plan which the Committee can only take with a 
pinch of salt.  The Committee strongly feel that if the Depa rtment have 
to ensure that the remaining two -thirds of the allocations are spent 
judiciously  in the remaining two and a half years of the Eleventh Plan 
they have to really make a herculean effort.  The y, therefore, 
recommend the Department to rework their priorities in the Agricultural 
Engineering Scheme in the light of the mid -term appraisal and 
implement them in a focused and time bound manner in the remainder 
of the Eleventh Plan so as to ensure that both the cost and timelines of 
these Schemes are not staggered. 
ANIMAL SCIENCE 
4.49 The Committee observe that out  of the earmarked outlay of Rs. 
1035.39 crore the Department have been able to spend just Rs. 158.89 
crore which translates to about 15 per cent of the total outlay  during the 
first two years of the Plan. This in their opinion is one of the worst 
performances of the Department in the Eleventh Plan. In the ongoing 
year also , the BE of Rs. 92.00 crore is not at all indicative of any 
extraordinary efforts by the Departm ent. Assuming that the entire 
amount  is spent, the total expenditure in the first three years of the Plan 

 
 
would still be approximately one -fourth of the earmarked outlay.  The 
Committee are distressed to note that two of the major Schemes under 
Animal Science viz. NDRI and IVRI have been cleared as recently as in 
the months of March and August, 2009 respectively, which mirrors the 
sorry state of affairs on the planning and approvals front. Now that the 
approvals/sanctions in respect of the Schemes of the D ivision are in 
place, they hope the Department would  move full steam ahead and be 
able to utilize the balance three -fourth funds in the last t wo years of the 
Eleventh Plan in a judicious and professional manner. 
AGRICULTURAL EXTENSION  
4.50 The Committee note that Agricultural Extension consists mainly 
of the Krishi Vigyan Kendra s (KVKs) component which is a flagship 
Scheme of the Department of Agricultural Research and Education.  Out 
of the earmarked outlay of Rs. 2100.00 crore for Agricultural Extension  
in the Eleventh Plan, Rs.  2052.00 crore stands allocated to KVKs.  The 
Committee are, however, disheartened to observe that even the flagship 
Scheme of the Department suffers from the malaise of gross 
underspending.  In the first two years of the Plan , only 27 odd per cent 
have been spent out of the total allocation.  The Committee are one with 
the Department on the point that if  CCEA approval for the allocation 
had not been delayed upto end December, 2008,  the performance of the 
Department could  have been different.  The y expect that with the 
approvals/sanctions stages now being over , the Department would 
make a sincere effort to utilize the outstanding balance during the 
remainder of the Eleventh Plan so that the KVKs are not affected by the 

 
 
self-inflicted resource crunch and hope for much better if not 
outstanding results on this front. 
AGRICULTURAL EDUCATION 
4.51 The Committee are not at all satisfied with the manner in which 
various schemes under Agricultural Education have been handled by 
the Department.  Overall they have been able to spend Rs. 729.19 crore 
out of Rs. 2414.97 crore during first two years of the Plan  which is less 
than one third of the Plan allocation. It is needless for them to point out 
that here too, the Department had furnished information to them in a 
very casual manner as commented elsewhere in this Report. This is 
evident from the varying figures furnished in respect of Eleventh Plan 
Outlay of Rs.2585 .00 crore which was subsequently changed to 
Rs.2414.97 crore as approved for this Division by the competent 
authority. They would like to have an explanation from the Department 
as to how, when and by whom the Outlay of Rs. 2855.00 crore was 
scaled down to Rs.2414.97 crore and why the same was not conveyed to 
them when the first set of figure  was provided to them. They cannot but 
caution the Department to be very careful in such matters in future. 
Further, the Committee observe that out of the total allocation of 
Rs. 2119.35 crore a sum of Rs. 233.83 crore only has been spent during 
the first two years of the Eleventh Plan  in respect of the scheme under 
Agricultural Education viz. Development and Strengthening of 
Agricultural Universities.   This is roughly 11 per cent of the to tal 
allocation.  The Department chose to defend this under -utilisation by 
stating that the utilization of Rs. 233.83 crore is 56.28 p er cent of RE 

 
 
allocation of Rs.415.50 crore for the first two years of the Plan .  But, the 
sad fact , that stares us in the f ace is that almost 90 per cent of the 
allocation is still unspent and needs to be absorbed in the remaining 
three years of the Plan which in the view of the Committee is virtually an 
insurmountable task. 
Educational Quality and Reforms 
4.52 The Committee a re concerned to note that in another vital 
Component of Agricultural Education viz. Educational Quality and 
Reforms, the Department have been able to spen d just 1 per cent of the 
total allocation of Rs. 3.10 crore in the first two years and a measly sum 
of Rs. 11.00 lakh has been earmarked as BE for the ongoing Fiscal.  The 
Committee are not at all convinced by the long winding reply about the 
several massive exercises being conducted under the Scheme and the 
unprecedented and exemplary quality of reform in itiatives undertaken 
by the ICAR. What matters is that either the projection of Rs. 3.10 crore 
as Outlay for this Scheme for the Eleventh Plan was woefully off the 
mark or that the Department have miserably failed on the 
implementation side of this Scheme.   The Department’s contention that 
there has not been under performance in this Scheme so far as physical  
targets are concerned goes on to further confirm the Committee’s 
apprehensions about the financial projections of the Scheme.   
Similarly, the Commit tee are distressed to note that in another 
Component of Agricultural Education i.e. `Nitch Area of Excellence ’, the 
Department have been able to spen d just 5.84 per cent of the total 
outlay in the last two years.  Out of the BE of Rs.43.50 crore for 2007 -08, 

 
 
the spending was Rs.12.03 crore.  In 2008 -09 nothi ng was spent from 
the BE of Rs. 25.15 crore.  The gross under-utilisation was attributed by 
the Department in the first year to the delayed approval of the Scheme 
at the end of the second year  of the Plan .  The Committee are highly 
intrigued by this reply of the Department since in the second year the 
expenditure has been nil.  The y would, therefore, like a detailed 
explanation in the matter from the Department within one month of 
presentation of this Report in the Parliament. 
Experimental Learning Component 
4.53 During the course of their scrutiny of the Demand for Grants and 
other documents furnished to them by the Department, the Committee 
found several inconsistencies in the figures.  Under the ‘Experim ental 
Learning Component of the Agricultural Education Scheme ’, allocations 
have neither been indicated for the Eleventh Plan as such nor for the 
first two years of the Plan.  However, an amount of Rs. 26.36 crore has 
been shown as RE for 2008 -09 and a similar amount has been shown as 
BE for the current year.  The Department in a clarification have informed 
them that the Experimental Learning Component has already been 
included in the Eleventh Plan and is one of the agreed activities in the 
EFC/CCEA note.   
 Similarly, in case of the Component ‘Modernisation of University 
Farms’ no allocations have been indicated for the Eleventh Plan as also 
in the first two years of the Plan.  However, an amount of Rs. 85.53 crore 
has been shown as RE for 2008 -09 and a sim ilar amount has been 
shown as BE for 2009 -10.  In the context of this Component too, the 

 
 
Department stated that it stands approved with an outlay of Rs. 421.95 
crore for three years i.e. 2008-09 to 2010-11. 
Mis-match and inconsistencies in figures 
4.54 The Committee further observe mismatches in the figures under 
various columns of ‘Library Component’ of Agricultural Education 
Scheme.  In like manner they also observe that the Department 
indicated Maharishi Phule Krishi Vidyapeeth  (MPKV) as a Component of 
Agricultural Education Scheme while no allocations have been indicated 
for the same either in the Eleventh Plan nor in each of the three years of 
the Annual Plans. The Department clarified that MPKV is a University 
accredited to ICAR.  The special grant of  Rs. 100.00 crore to MPKV was 
announced during the current Plan and funds towards this are provided 
separately by the Government of India.  Additionally, a sum of Rs. 6.50 
crore during 2007 -08, Rs. 7.67 crore during 2008 -09 and Rs. 2.67 crore 
so far during  2009-10 have been provided to MPKV under the ongoing 
Scheme Strengthening and Development of AUs.   
The Committee take strong exception to the way facts and figures 
pertaining several important Schemes of the Department have been 
furnished to them.  They are also not convinced by the clarifications 
given by the Department in th is regard.  They, therefore, desire a 
detailed explanation from the Department on how and why figures 
pertaining to the Schemes mentioned above were reflected in a 
particular manner in the document pertaining to Demand for Grants as 
also the manner in which the Department propose to reflect the figures 
furnished by them as clarifications. 

 
 
CENTRAL AGRICULTURAL UNIVERSITY, IMPHAL 
4.55 The Committee note that in case of the Central Agricultural 
University, Imphal also that the Department have n ot acquitted 
themselves well.  In the last two Fiscals , less than 25 per cent of the 
total allocation of Rs. 552.27 crore has been spent.  It is most 
unfortunate that approval of the Government  for the implementation of 
the Scheme was received as late as on 16 December, 2008 and for an 
amount of Rs. 499.07 crore only.  The delay in this case has been further 
aggravated by the fact that the agency entrusted with the 
implementation of the Project backed out because of law and order 
situation and the formalities to engage another agency took almost a 
year.  The Committee are, however, happy to note that the new 
executing agency has already awarded works and construction is going 
on satisfactorily.  In the considered opinion of the Committee, the 
Central Agricultural University, Imphal would be a much needed 
interface with the agriculture sector and allied activities in the North -
east and therefore its implementation needs to be accorded highest 
priority by the Department.  They, therefore, desire the Department to 
work out a rigid time schedule for the implementation of this Project at 
the earliest.  The Committee would like to be apprised of the same. 
ICAR Headquarters – Proper reflection of Schemes 
4.56 The Committee note that the Department had to resort to a drastic 
downsizing of the BE 2007 -08 from Rs.37.50 crore to Rs.21.00 crore at 
RE stage . The Department could, however, spend only Rs.11.03 crore 
out of this reduced amount. According to the Department, the curtailing 

 
 
was necessitated because initially, a sum of Rs.20.00 crore under ICAR 
Headquarters was included for the Scheme `Oversight Committee’ 
which is otherwise operated by the Education Division of ICAR. At the 
RE stage, the allocation was made as per the budgetary heads approved 
in the Eleventh Plan sanction which did not include Oversight 
Committee since it was meant to be taken up by another Division 
separately. Apart from this , the Committee also observe that the 
Actuals, Shortfall / Ex cess figures in respect of support to Prof. Soc. 
Including NAAS, Support to CGIAR and Evaluation of Plan Schemes had 
not been indicated in the Document on DFG (2009 -10). The Committee 
are not con vinced with t he Department’s contention that ICAR 
Headquarter is a single scheme and budget / expenditure is shown for it 
as a single entity . They wish to point out that when the detailed figures 
for these components were subsequently furnished to the m, substantial 
shortfall / excess was observed in both the years.  
 Again, the Committee f ind that no funds had been allocated for 
the component 3 New Institutes but a sum of Rs.3.85 crore had been 
shown as RE for 2007 -08 and a sum of Rs.50.00 crore has been 
proposed as Outlay for the ongoing Fiscal, though no allocation s have 
been made against it in the BE. The Department have explained these 
two amounts as token provisions for the Schemes which are yet to be 
approved. The Committee find it strange as to how such substantial 
amount can be treated as token provisions for Schemes which are yet to 
be approved. From all the instances cited above, the Committee feel that 
the system of budgeting under the ICAR Headquarters has a lot of 
scope for improvement so as to introduce more clarity and 

 
 
transparency in it. With the clubbi ng of all Schemes / Components 
under one entity, it becomes very difficult to come to right conclusions 
on individual Schemes / Components having sizable investments of 
public money. The Committee would, therefore, like to have the well 
considered opinion of the Department to make the budgetary provisions 
reflective of the true performance of all Schemes / Components.  They 
would like to be apprised of the action taken in the matter at the earliest. 
Externally Aided Projects 
4.57 The Committee after going th rough the information relating to the 
Externally Aided Projects find that the situation is not any better. In case 
of Indo-US Knowledge Initiative which was launched with much fanfare 
there has been consistent low release of funds. The result being that 
even if the entire BE of Rs.5.00 crore is utilized this year, the total 
spending in three years of the Eleventh Plan would be less than one 
third of the total Outlay of Rs.50.00 crore. The Department ’s explanation 
attributing low expenditure to non-availability of matching grant from 
the US side does not cut ice with the Committee. Almost three years of 
the Plan have gone by and the Department have not been able to 
persuade the other side to release matching grant s in suitable 
proportions is nothing but the failure of the Department to work towards 
a mutually beneficial arrangement. The Committee would, therefore, 
urge the Department to take up the matter with the US side through 
appropriate channels to ensure that matching grants in requisite 
proportions are contributed by them from the current fiscal itself so that 
the Initiative is not frittered away. 

 
 
 The Committee have found more or less similar situation 
obtaining in the case of another Externally Aided Project viz. National 
Fund for Basic and Strategic  Research. Out of an Outlay of Rs.100.00 
crore, a sum of Rs.15.66 crore only has been spent during the first two 
years of the Plan purportedly due to the fact that the approval of this 
Scheme from the Ministry of Finance has been received very recently. 
Now that the approvals / sanctions are in place, the Committee expect 
the Department to pursue this important Scheme earnestly so as to 
ensure that delays till date do not affect its implementation proper in the 
remaining period of the current Plan. They wou ld like to be apprised of 
the progress made in respect of both these Externally Aided Projects at 
regular intervals. 
 
New Delhi ;           BASUDEB ACHARIA, 
February, 2010          .         Chairman, 
Magha, 1931 (Saka)    Committee on Agriculture 
 
  

 
 
Appendix-I 
 
COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE 
(2009-10) 
 
MINUTES OF THE TENTH SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE 
  
***** 
 
The Committee sat on Thursday, the 5 th November, 2009 from 1100 hours to 1305 
hours in Committee Room ‘D’, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.  
 
PRESENT 
Shri Basudeb Acharia –  Chairman 
 
MEMBERS 
 
LOK SABHA 
 
2. Shri Narayan Singh Amlabe 
3. Shri Shri K.C. Singh ‘Baba’ 
4. Shri Thangso Baite 
5. Shri Jayant Chaudhary 
6. Smt. Ashwamedh Devi 
7. Smt. Paramjit Kaur Gulshan 
8. Shri Sk. Nurul Islam 
9. Shri Naranbhai Kachhadia 
10. Shri Prabodh Panda 
11. Shri Nripendra Nath Roy 
12. Shri Hukmdeo Narayan Yadav 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
13. Shri Satyavrat Chaturvedi 
14. Shri A. Elvarasan 
15. Shri Mohd. Ali Khan 
16. Shri M. Rajasekara Murthy 
17. Shri Bharatsinh Prabhatsinh Parmar 
18. Prof. M.S. Swaminathan 
 
   
 
   
  

 
 
 SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Shri S. Bal Shekar      -      Joint Secretary  
2. Shri P.V.L.N. Murthy   -      Director 
3. Shri P.C. Koul        -      Additional Director 
 
REPRESENTATIVES OF MINISTRY OF AGRICULTURE  
(DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURAL RESEARCH AND EDUCATION) 
 
1. Dr. Mangala Rai - Secretary, DARE & DG, ICAR 
2. Shri Chaman Kumar  - Additional Secretary & FA (DARE/ICAR)  
3. Dr. S.P. Tewari - Deputy Director General (Education) 
4. Dr. S. Ayyappan - Deputy Director General (Animal Sciences & Fisheries) 
5. Dr. A.K. Singh - Deputy Director General (Natural Resource 
Management) 
6. Dr. H.P. Singh - Deputy Director General (Horticulture) 
7. Dr. S.K. Datta - Deputy Director General (Crop Sciences) 
8. Dr. M.M. Pandey - Deputy Director General (Agriculture Engineering) 
9. Dr. K.D. Kokate - Deputy Director General (Agriculture Extension) 
 
2. xx  xx  xx  xx  xx 
3. xx  xx  xx  xx  xx 
4. xx  xx  xx  xx  xx 
5. xx  xx  xx  xx  xx 
6. xx  xx  xx  xx  xx 
7. The Chairman welcomed the representatives of DARE to the Sitting of  the 
Committee and asked them to introduce themselves.   
8. The Committee then took the Oral Evidence of the representatives of the 
Department for and in connection with examination of Demands for Grants          
(2009-10) of the Department.  The members sought several clarifications on the 
various aspects of the Subject.  The representatives of the Department responded to 
them.  As the examination of the Demands for Grants (2009 -10) remained 
inconclusive, the witnesses were directed to appear before the C ommittee again on 12 
November, 2009 at 1100 hours for further Oral Evidence on the subject. 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
9. The Chairman, thereafter, thanked the witnesses for appearing before the 
Committee as well as for furnishing valuable information desired by the Committee o n 
the subject. He also directed them to send at the earliest information on points on 
which information could not be provided by them during the Sitting to the Committee 
Secretariat.  
  
A verbatim record of the proceedings has been kept separately. 
  
The Committee then adjourned. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
xx   Matter not related to this Report 

 
 
Appendix-II 
 
COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE 
(2009-10) 
 
MINUTES OF THE TWELFTH SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE 
  
***** 
 
The Committee sat on Thursday, the 12 th November, 2009 from 1100 hours to 1330 
hours in Committee Room ‘D’, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.  
 
PRESENT 
Shri Basudeb Acharia –  Chairman 
MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA 
 
2. Shri Jayant Chaudhary 
3. Smt. Ashwamedh Devi 
4. Shri Biren Singh Engti 
5. Shri Prabodh Panda 
6. Shri Premdas 
7. Shri Vitthalbhai Hansrajbhai Radadiya 
8. Shri Nripendra Nath Roy 
9. Shri Uday Singh 
10. Shri Hukmdeo Narayan Yadav 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
11. Shri Narendra Budania 
12. Shri Satyavrat Chaturvedi 
13. Shri A. Elvarasan 
14. Shri Sharad Anantrao Joshi  
15. Shri Mohd. Ali Khan 
16. Shri M. Rajasekara Murthy 
17. Shri Bharatsinh Prabhatsinh Parmar 
     
   
 
 
   SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Shri S. Bal Shekar      -      Joint Secretary  
2. Shri P.V.L.N. Murthy   -      Director 
3. Shri P.C. Koul          -      Additional Director 
 

 
 
REPRESENTATIVES OF MINISTRY OF AGRICULTURE  
(DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURAL RESEARCH AND EDUCATION) 
 
10. Dr. Mangala Rai - Secretary, DARE & DG, ICAR  
11. Dr. S.P. Tewari - Deputy Director General (Education) 
12. Dr. S. Ayyappan - Deputy Director General (Animal Sciences & Fisheries) 
13. Dr. A.K. Singh - Deputy Director General (Natural Resource 
Management) 
14. Dr. H.P. Singh - Deputy Director General (Horticulture) 
15. Dr. S.K. Datta - Deputy Director General (Crop Sciences) 
16. Dr. M.M. Pandey - Deputy Director General (Agriculture Engineering) 
17. Dr. K.D. Kokate - Deputy Director General (Agriculture Extension) 
 
2. xx  xx  xx  xx  xx 
3. xx  xx  xx  xx  xx 
4. xx  xx  xx  xx  xx 
5. The Chairman welcomed the representatives of DARE to the Sitting of th e 
Committee and asked them to introduce themselves.   
6. The Committee then took further  Oral Evidence of the representatives of the 
Department  in connection with examination of Demands for Grants  (2009 -10) of the 
Department.  The members sought several  clarifications on the various aspects of the 
Subject.  The representatives of the Department responded to them.  
 
(At around 1215, hours the Chairman withdrew from the Sitting and Shri 
Satyavrat Chaturvedi took the Chair). 
7. The Acting  Chairman, thereafter, thanked the witnesses for appearing before 
the  Committee  as  well  as  for  furnishing   valuable  information  desired  by  the  
Committee on the subject. He also directed them to send at the earliest information on 
points on which information could not be provided by them during the Sitting to the 
Committee Secretariat.  
 A verbatim record of the proceedings has been kept separately. 
    The Committee then adjourned. 
 
xx   Matter not related to this Report 

 
 
Appendix-III 
 
COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE 
(2009-10) 
 
MINUTES OF THE FOURTEENTH SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE 
 
 The Committee sat on Monday, the 4 th January, 2010 from 1500 hours to 1530 hours in 
Room No. 53, Parliament House, New Delhi.  
 
PRESENT 
Shri Basudeb Acharia     - Chairman 
MEMBERS 
Lok Sabha 
 
2. Shri Narayan Singh Amlabe 
3. Shri Thangso Baite  
4. Smt. Ashwamedh Devi 
5. Smt. Paramjit Kaur Gulshan 
6. Shri Naranbhai Kachhadia 
7. Shri Prabodh Panda 
8. Shri Nripendra Nath Roy 
9. Shri Uday Singh 
10. Shri Hukmdeo Narayan Yadav 
 
Rajya Sabha 
 
11. Shri Narendra Budania 
12. Shri Satyavrat Chaturvedi 
13. Shri A. Elavarasan 
14. Shri Sharad Anantrao Joshi 
15. Shri Mohd. Ali Khan 
16. Shri M. Rajasekara Murthy 
 

 
 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Shri P.V.L.N. Murthy  - Director 
2. Shri P.C. Koul  - Additional Director 
 
2. At the outset the Hon’ble Chairman welcomed the members to the Sitting of the 
Committee. Thereafter, the Committee took up the Draft Report on Demands for Grants (2009 -
2010) relating to the Ministry of Agriculture (Department of Agr icultural Research and 
Education) for consideration. 
 
After some discussion and some minor modifications suggested by Members, the 
Committee adopted the draft Report.  
 
3. The Committee, then, authorized the Chairman to finalise the Draft Report after gett ing 
it factually verified from the concerned Department.  Being inter -session, the Committee also 
authorized the Chairman to present the Report to the Hon’ble Speaker at the earliest. 
 
4. xx  xx  xx  xx  xx 
The Committee then adjourned. 
 
 
/---------------------/ 
 
 
xx  Matter not related to this Report 
  

 
 
 
ANNEXURE `A’ 
7(b) 
Quantum of funds spent by the ICAR during 2006-07, 2007-08, 2008-09 & 2009-10 - Quarterwise spendings in % terms of total funds 
                                                                              Under Plan                                                                                                                     (Rs. In Lakhs) 
Quarters during Finiancial Year 
                                                                       Financial years 
                 2006-07                   2007-08                   2008-09                   2009-10 
BE Exp. Exp.% BE Exp. Exp.% BE Exp. Exp.% BE Exp. Exp.% 
1st Quarter (April to June) 
                           
ICAR(Including Supp Grants of Rs. 5000 lakhs) 129950.00 21661.32 16.67 155550.00 15514.15 9.97 161500.00 16543.78 10.24 164900.00 24327.05 14.75 
DARE+ NFBSRA 4550.00 2.62 0.06 950.00 420.40 44.25 1100.00 173.88 15.81 2100.00 8.98   
CAU 5500.00 1527.40 27.77 5500.00 708.19 12.88 13400.00 1200.00 8.96 9000.00 2000.00   
Total 140000.00 23191.34 16.57 162000.00 16642.74 10.27 176000.00 17917.66 10.18 176000.00 26336.03 14.96 
2nd Quarter (July to Sept.) 
                           
(Progressive Exp.)                          
ICAR(Including Supp Grants of Rs. 5000 lakhs) 129950.00 57685.47 44.39 155550.00 44061.63 28.33 161500.00 57474.44 35.59 164900.00 62043.17 37.62 
during 2006-07 only               
 
    
 
    
DARE+ NFBSRA 4550.00 6.77 0.15 950.00 701.18 73.81 1100.00 430.67 39.15 2100.00 314.28 14.97 
CAU 5500.00 2913.00 52.96 5500.00 2513.38 45.70 13400.00 2233.00 16.66 9000.00 2871.22 31.90 
Total 140000.00 60605.24 43.29 162000.00 47276.19 29.18 176000.00 60138.11 34.17 176000.00 65228.67 37.06 
3rd Quarter (Oct. to Dec.) 
                           
(Progressive Exp.)                          
ICAR(Including Supp Grants of Rs. 5000 lakhs) 129950.00 83588.29 64.32 155550.00 74014.37 47.58 161500.00 91101.12 56.41       
during 2006-07 only               
 
          
DARE+ NFBSRA 4550.00 21.65 0.48 950.00 781.00 82.21 1100.00 437.60 39.78       
CAU 5500.00 4761.00 86.56 5500.00 4100.06 74.55 13400.00 4733.00 35.32       
Total 140000.00 88370.94 63.12 162000.00 78895.43 48.70 176000.00 96271.72 54.70       
4th Quarter (Jan. to March) 
                           
(Progressive Exp.)                          
ICAR(Including Supp Grants of Rs. 5000 lakhs) 129950.00 128535.48 98.91 155550.00 125068.57 80.40 161500.00 158814.59 98.34       
during 2006-07 only               
 
          

 
 
DARE+ NFBSRA 4550.00 472.05 10.37 950.00 1150.14 121.07 1100.00 677.44 61.59       
CAU 5500.00 8049.00 146.35 5500.00 5500.00 100.00 13400.00 8033.0 59.95       
Total 140000.00 137056.53 97.90 162000.00 131718.71 81.31 176000.00 167525.03 95.18       
ICAR 134301.00 128535.48 95.71 136430.00 125068.57 91.67 165900.00 158814.59 95.73       
DARE+ NFBSRA 650.00 472.05 72.62 1470.00 1150.14 78.24 1100.00 677.44 61.59       
CAU 8049.00 8049.00 100.00 5500.00 5500.00 100.00 9000.00 8033.00 89.26       
Total 143000.00 137056.53 95.84 143400.00 131718.71 91.85 176000.00 165261.03 93.90       
Note- Figures of Expenditute are based on Audited Annual Accounts. 
         
 
NFBSRA=National Fund for Basic and  
Strategic Research in Agriculture. 
          
  

 
 
 
 
ANNEXURE `B’ 
7 (c) 
      
(Rs. In Lakhs) 
     Quantum of funds spent by ICAR in March 2006-07, 2007-08, 2008-09-March spendings in % terms of total BE & total RE funds 
   Under Plan 
   Period 2006-07 2007-08 2008-09 
     BE/RE Expenditure Exp.% BE/RE Expenditure Exp.% BE/RE Expenditure Exp.% 
   
BE                   
   ICAR 129950.00 7556.86 5.82 155550.00 15358.58 9.87 161500.00 34054.79 21.09 
   DARE+ NFBSRA 4550.00 435.14 9.56 950.00 206.16 21.70 1100.00 209.31 19.03 
   CAU 5500.00 687.82 12.51 5500.00 1041.06 18.93 13400.00 1700.00 12.69 
   
Total 140000.00 8679.82 6.20 162000.00 16605.8 10.25 176000.00 35964.10 20.43 
                         
   
RE                   
   ICAR 134301.00 7556.86 5.63 136430.00 15358.58 11.26 165900.00 34054.79 20.53 
   DARE+ NFBSRA 650.00 435.14 66.94 1470.00 206.16 14.02 1100.00 209.31 19.03 
   CAU 8049.00 687.82 8.55 5500.00 1041.06 18.93 9000.00 1700.00 18.89 
   
Total 143000.00 8679.82 6.07 143400.00 16605.8 11.58 176000.00 35964.10 20.43 
   Note- Figures of Expenditute are based on Audited Annual Accounts. 
        
 
 
NFBSRA=National Fund for Basic and  Strategic Research in Agriculture. 
         
 