 
 
1 
 
COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE 
(2011-2012) 
                 
         
FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA 
         
         
                                 
 
MINISTRY OF AGRICULTURE  
(DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE & CO-OPERATION) 
              
 
‘DEFICIENT MONSOON AND STEPS TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT TO 
MITIGATE ITS IMPACT ON AGRICULTURE SECTOR’ 
 
{Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/ 
Recommendations contained in the Eleventh Report  
(Fifteenth Lok Sabha) of the Committee on Agriculture (2009-2010)} 
 
         
        
 
TWENTY SEVENTH REPORT 
  
 
         
               
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
December, 2011/Agrahayana, 1933 (Saka) 
 
 
 
 
27 

 
 
2 
 
TWENTY SEVENTH REPORT 
 
COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE 
(2011-2012) 
 
 
(FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
         
         
         
MINISTRY OF AGRICULTURE  
(DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE & COOPERATION) 
         
         
         
‘DEFICIENT MONSOON AND STEPS TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT TO 
MITIGATE ITS IMPACT ON AGRICULTURE SECTOR’ 
  
 
{Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/ 
Recommendations contained in the Eleventh Report  
(Fifteenth Lok Sabha) of the Committee on Agriculture (2009-2010)} 
 
  Presented to Lok Sabha on       19.12.2011 
  Laid on the Table of Rajya Sabha on     19.12.2011 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
                 
December, 2011/ Agrahayana, 1933 (Saka)  


 
 
3 
 
COA No. 250 
 
 
         
         
         
         
         
         
 
         
         
        
Price:  Rs.  
         
         
         
         
         
 
 
 
         
     
                     
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
© 2011 By Lok Sabha Secretariat 
 
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of Business 
in Lok Sabha (Fourteenth Edition) and Printed by  
 

 
 
4 
 
<CONTENTS> 
                  
 PAGE 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE………………………………….    (iii) 
         
 
INTRODUCTION……………………………………………………………    (v) 
 
CHAPTER I   Report …………………………………………     1 
 
CHAPTER II  Observations/Recommendations which have   
   been accepted by the Government …………     13 
 
CHAPTER III  Observations/Recommendations which the 
   Committee do not desire to pursue in view 
   of the Government‟s replies …………………..     24 
 
CHAPTER IV  Observations/Recommendations in respect 
   of  which replies of the Government have  
   not been accepted by the Committee ………     25 
 
CHAPTER V  Observations/Recommendations in respect of  
   which final replies of the Government are  
   still awaited …………………………………….     31 
 
                                    ANNEXURES 
 
I.  Contingency Agriculture Plan for Kharif 2010    34
   
II.  Financial sanction for release to the Government of Bihar  66
  towards reimbursement of GoI‟s share of expenditure incurred  
  during Kharif 2009 under the Diesel Subsidy Scheme for 
  drought/deficit rainfall affected areas. 
 
III. Financial sanction for release to the Government of Tamil Nadu  67 
 towards  reimbursement of GoI‟s share of expenditure  incurred 
 during Kharif 2009 under the Diesel Subsidy Scheme for 
  drought/deficit rainfall affected areas.  
 
IV. Financial sanction for release to the Government of Jharkhand   68 
towards    reimbursement of Government of India‟s share of expenditure  
incurred during Kharif 2010 under the „Diesel Subsidy Scheme in  
Drought and Deficit Rainfall Affected Areas.” 
 
V. „On Account‟ payment of Additional Central Assistance (ACA)   70 
for other projects (Grant Component) for the states‟ Annual Plan 
 2009-10. 
 
VI.  Minutes of the 16th Sitting of the Committee    72 
held on 14 Decemebr, 2011. 
       
VII.  Analysis of Action Taken by the Government on the   74 
Recommendations contained in the Eleventh Report              
 (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) of the Committee on Agriculture 
(2009-2010).          
(i)  

 
 
5 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE  COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE (2011-12) 
 
Shri Basudeb Acharia   -   Chairman 
 
MEMBERS 
 
LOK SABHA 
 
2.  Shri Narayansingh Amlabe 
3.  Shri K.C. Singh ‘Baba’ 
4.  Shri Thangso Baite 
5.  Smt. Shruti Choudhary 
6.  Smt. Ashwamedh Devi 
7.  Shri Biren Singh Engti 
8.  Shri Anant Kumar Hegde 
9.  Shri Deepender Singh Hooda 
10.  Shri Sk. Nurul Islam 
11.  Shri Naranbhai Kachhadia 
12.  Shri Premdas  
13.  Shri Surendra Singh Nagar  
14.  Shri Devji M. Patel 
15.  Shri Vitthalbhai Hansrajbhai Radadiya 
16.  Shri Nripendra Nath Roy 
17.  Shri Jagdish Thakor 
18.  Shri Laxman Tudu 
19  Shri D. Venugopal 
20.  Shri Hukmadeo Narayan Yadav 
21.  Shri Ramakant Yadav 
  
 RAJYA SABHA 
 
22.  Shri Shashi Bhusan Behera 
23.  Shri Narendra Budania 
24.  Shri Satyavrat Chaturvedi 
25.  Shri A. Elavarasan 
26.  Shri Vinay Katiyar 
27.  Shri Mohd. Ali Khan 
28.  Shri Upendra Kushwaha 
29.  Shri Bharatsinh Prabhatsinh Parmar 
30.  Shri Rajpal Singh Saini 
31.  Shri S. Thangavelu 
 
 (iii) 

 
 
6 
 
SECRETARIAT  
 
1. Shri Deepak Mahna   - Joint Secretary 
2. Shri P.V.L.N. Murthy  - Director 
3. Shri C. Vanlalruata   - Deputy Secretary 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(iv) 
  

 
 
7 
 
 
INTRODUCTION 
         
I, the Chairman, Standing Committee on Agriculture (2011 -2012) having been 
authorized by the Committee to submit the report on their behalf, present this Twenty  
Seventh Report on Action Taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in the Eleventh Report of the Committee on 
“Deficient Monsoon and Steps taken by the Government to Mitigate its Impact on the 
Agriculture Sector”. 
 
2. The Eleventh Report of the Committee on Agriculture (2009 -2010) on 
“Deficient Monsoon and Steps taken by the Government to Mitigate its Impact on the 
Agriculture Sector” was presented to the Hon’ble Speaker on 13 July, 2010 and 
subsequently presented to Lo k Sabha and laid on the table of Rajya Sabha on 03 
August, 2010.  The Action Taken Replies on the Report were received on 16 May, 
2011. 
 
3. The Report was considered and adopted by the Committee at their Sitting held 
on 14 December, 2011. 
 
4. An analysis o f the Action Taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in the Eleventh Report of the Committee is 
given in Annexure- VII.   
 
 
 
           
            
NEW DELHI;                   BASUDEB ACHARIA 
 15 December, 2011                          Chairman, 
 24 Agrahayana, 1933 (Saka)                               Standing Committee on Agriculture 
 
  
 
  
 
 
(v) 

 
 
8 
 
 
CHAPTER I 
Report 
 
This Report of the Committee on Agriculture deals with the action taken 
by the Government on the Recommendations contained in the Eleventh 
Report (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) of the Committee on Agriculture on „Deficient 
Monsoon and steps taken by the Government to mitigate its impact on 
Agriculture Sector‟  which was presented to the  Hon‟ble Speaker on 13 July, 
2010 and subsequently presented to Lok Sabha and laid on the Table of Rajya 
Sabha on 3 August, 2010.   
 
2. The Ministry of Agriculture (Department of Agriculture & Co -operation) 
have furnished Action Taken Replies in respect of all the 18 
recommendations/observations contained in the Report.  These have been 
categorised as under: 
(i) Observations/Recommendations that have been accepted by the 
Government : 
Recommendation Nos. 3.50, 3.51,  3.58, 3.59, 3.60, 3.61, 3.63, 
3.64, 3.65, 3.66 and 3.67 
 
(ii) Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not 
desire to pursue in view of the Government‟s reply:  
Recommendation Nos. Nil  
 
(iii) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which action taken 
replies of the Government have not been accepted by the 
Committee  
Recommendation Nos. 3.52, 3.53, 3.54, 3.55, 3.56 and 3.57 
 
 
(iv) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which final replies 
of the Government are still awaited.   
Recommendation Nos. 3.62. 

 
 
9 
 
 
3. The Committee trust that utmost importance would be given to 
implementation of the observations/recommendations accepted by the 
Government.  In cases, where it is not possible for the Department to 
implement the Recommendations in letter and spirit for any reason, the 
matter should be reported to the Committee with reasons for non -
implementation.  The Committee desire that further Action Taken Notes 
on the Observations/Recommendations contained in Chapter -I and 
Chapter V of this Report be furnished to them at an early date.  
4. The Committee will  now deal with the action taken by the Government 
on some of the Recommendations in the succeeding paragraphs. 
NATIONAL SEED BANK 
(Recommendation Para Nos. 3.52, 3.53, 3.54 and 3.55) 
 
5. The Committee while noting that during Kharif 2009, deficient South 
West Monsoon necessitated relaxation of seed standards and increased 
subsidy on seeds  observed that just as grain reserves are important for food 
security, seed reserves are essential for crop security.  The number of mini-kits 
of seeds provided under various Schemes was also enhanced. 
 They further observed that split second response to natural calamities in 
a vast country like India is possible only when a detailed mapping of alternate 
cropping pattern is  undertaken and desired that such an exercise be ca rried 
out by the Government with due diligence and promptitude so that in any such 
future eventuality, crucial days of sowing are not lost in futile and unrealistic 
planning. 

 
 
10 
 
Noting that climate changes are quick and difficult to predict, they 
recommended the Government to take measures to ensure enough buffer 
stock of seeds to cater to contingency situations.  Preservation of seeds by 
agencies other than that of the Go vernment, including individual farmers is to 
be promoted. 
They also strongly felt that establishment of a National Seed Bank shall 
go a long way in ensuring availability of seeds on a priority basis and therefore 
desired that the Scheme of Seed Villages being implemented in 60,000 
villages be expanded at the earliest to cover all villages of  the Country so that 
seed availability is decentralized without any further delay. 
 
6. The Depar tment of Agriculture & Cooperation in its reply  to these 
recommendations stated that State Governments are primarily responsible for 
production and distribution  of certified/quality seeds to farmers during nor mal 
as well as during natural calamities  and unforeseen conditions.  State 
Governments make arrangements for production and distribution of seeds to 
farmers, through State Department of Agriculture, State Se eds Corporation, 
NSC, SFCI and private institutions.  However, Government of India reviews 
situation of availability of seeds in advance during each Kharif and Rabi 
Season and issues necessary guidelines for ensuring adequate stocks and 
procurement of seeds, by State Government and other agencies. 
However, „Establishment and Maintenance of Seed Bank‟ component of 
Central Sector Scheme “Development and Strengthening of Infrastructure 
facilities for production and distribution of quality seeds” has been under 
implementation by this Department since 1999-2000 onwards through National 

 
 
11 
 
Seeds Corporation (N SC), State Farms Corporation of India (SFCI)  and State 
Seeds Corporation s (SSCs).  Seed Stocks reserved under seed bank are 
utilized to meet exigencies  like drought, floods etc.  Far mers are not directly 
maintaining seed banks but are ultimate benefici aries under Seed Bank 
Scheme.  
All implementing agencies are advised to maintain seeds of only shor t 
and medium duration, late sowing  varieties of different crops having 
adaptability in respective States.  Varieties (under calamities situations) are 
selected b y Seed Corporation for various contingencies from contingency 
plans, prepared in consultation with State Department of Agriculture, Indian 
Council of Agricultural Research (ICAR) or Agriculture Universities. 
 
7. The Committee note that while bunching the recommendations 
together on the topic of National Seed Bank, the reply of the Government 
has not addressed many aspects contained in the above paragraphs.  
The Committee are well aware of the fact that Agriculture is a State 
Subject and primary responsibility in the matter rests with State 
Governments and with that in view only they desired the Gov ernment of 
India to become more pro -active in times of natural calamities like 
drought and floods and recommended certain m easures which when 
implemented would go a long way in mitigating the plight of farmers in 
times of drought.  They, however, find that the aspects of detailed 
mapping of alternate cropping patterns, the establishment of a National 
Seed Bank, extension of th e Scheme of Seed Villages throughout the 
country to decentralise availability of seeds and measures taken to 

 
 
12 
 
promote preservation  of Seeds by other than State agencies including 
individual farmers all of which are important aspects of the availability of 
seeds in calamitous conditions , have remained unanswered.  They, 
further note that the achievements of physical targets set for see ds 
during the period 2006 -07 to  2010-11 have been below the targets 
throughout this period while the financial assistance relea sed in the 
corresponding period a mounts to Rs. 29.34 crore.   They, therefore, 
reiterate their earlier recommendation of establishment of an exclusive 
Seed Bank at the national level as it is felt that the  ‘Establishment and 
Maintenance of Seed Bank ’ as a component of the Central Sector 
Scheme is not yielding the desired results.  They expect the Department 
to furnish full and complete replies to their recommendation s in future.  
They also desire to be apprised of the action taken with regard to the 
aspects that remained unanswered or partially answered at the earliest. 
 
FODDER POLICY 
(Recommendation Para Nos. 3.56 & 3.57) 
 
8. The Committee noted that during the drought situation of Kharif 2009, 
the Government provided fodder mini-kits to avoid any shortage and allowed 
Rashtriya Krishi Vikas Yojana funds to be used for purchase of fodder seeds to 
ensure that drought affected farmers don‟t resort to distress sale of animals, as 
sustenance of li vestock can form an integral par t of the strategy to tackle 
effects of drought by crop-livestock integrated farming.  However, having noted 
that at the ground level there is still a lot of avoidable fodder loss due to bulk 
harvesting machines and perturbed by the alarming shrinking of land used for 

 
 
13 
 
growing of fodder and g razing of cattle, the Committee recommended for 
formulation of National Fodder Policy without any further delay. 
 
9. The Department of Agriculture and Co-operation have stated that t he 
National Policy for Farmers (NPF), 2007 inter alia, provides for attention to 
animal feed including fodder.  In pursuance to NPF, 2007, Government of India 
announced “Accelerated Fodder Development Programme (AFDP)” in GOI‟s 
Budget 2011-12 for increasing income of farmers, dependent on livestock. The 
programme envisages accelerating production of fodder through promotion of 
integrated technologies and processes for enhancing availability of fodder 
throughout the year.  The strategies include production of quality seeds, 
production of fodder and adoption of appropriate te chnologies for Post-Harvest 
Management. The programme will be implemented on location specific 
approach in twelve States, viz., Andhra Pradesh, Bihar, Chhattisgarh, Gujarat, 
Haryana, Karnataka, Madhya Pradesh, Maharashtra, Punjab, Rajasthan, Tamil 
Nadu and  Uttar Pradesh, as a sub -scheme of Rashtriya Krishi Vikas Yojana 
(RKVY) during 2011-12 with allocation of Rs. 300 crores. 
 
10. Notwithstanding the explanation put forth by the Department, the 
Committee are of the firm opinion that until and unless  the Government 
formulates the National Fodder Policy at the earliest , the perennial 
problem of shrinking of grazing lands as well as land used for growing 
fodder will show no signs of ebbing.  This problem gets compounded 
during times of natural cala mities like drought when  farmers face a 
serious threat to their sustenance and resort to dist ress sale of their  
animals  to be able to survive during tho se harsh times.  I f provided with 

 
 
14 
 
adequate amount of fodder during natural calamities , the farming 
community would be in a position to sustain themselves via crop – 
livestock integrated farming.  Taking this vital fact into consideration, the 
Committee reiterate their earlier reco mmendation that even though the 
National Policy on Farmers - 2007 pays attention to animal feed including 
fodder, much remains to be done to make fodder available in times of 
natural calamities like droughts and floods and therefore urge the 
Government to formulate a National Fodder Policy in real -quick time and 
not just rely on stop-gap arrangements as is in vogue. 
 
AGRICULTURAL CREDIT 
(Recommendation Para No. 3.61) 
 
11. The Committee noted that all States had complie d with the RBI 
guidelines of conducting State Level Banker‟s Committee (SLBC) meetings to 
provide relief to farmers in view of the drought.  They had further noted that as 
proposed by the Finance Minister in the General Budget 2010 -11 the period of 
repayment of loan by farmers under “The Debt Wa iver and Debt Relief 
Scheme for Farmers” had been extended till 30 June, 2010.  However, 
observing that such one time measures were not capable of providing the 
requisite relief to farmers , they had recommended that t here should be a 
specific Credit Relief Plan, which should come into operation automatically in 
case of natural calamities like flood & drought to provide credit relief to farmers 
especially the small and marginal ones.  
 

 
 
15 
 
12.  In their Action Taken Notes, the Department have stated that Reserve 
Bank of India is operating an action plan for providing credit relief to the 
farmers in event of occurrence of natural calamities, through issue of standing 
guidelines.   Guidelines issued by Reserve Bank of India (RBI) to the banks for 
providing relief , are effective automatically for farmers in areas affected by 
natural calamities  and are  issued to enable the banks to take uniform and 
concerted action expeditiously, particularly to provide financial assistance to 
the farmers.  Salient features of the guidelines are as under:  
 District Consultative Committees of affected district s are required to meet 
immediately after occurrence of natural calamities. 
 In event of calamity covering a larger part of a State, State Le vel Bankers‟ 
Committee will also convene a meeting. 
 As per guidelines, immediate credit facilities are given for protecting and 
rejuvenating standing crops/orchards/plantation etc. 
 Credit for grains and fodder storage structures, drainage, pumping and 
other measures and operations to repair pump sets, motors, engines and 
other necessary implements, is also given. 
 Principal amount of short-term loan as well as interest due for repayment in 
year of occurrence of natural calamity is converted into term loan. 
 Repayment period of restructured term loan varies depending on severity 
of calamity and its recurrence, extent of loss of economic assets and 
distress caused. 
 Generally, restructured period of repayment is 3 to 5 years extendable upto 
7 years and in extreme  cases of hardship upto a maximum period of 10 
years. 
 In all cases of restructuring, moratorium period of at least one year should 
be considered. 
 Further, banks should not insist for additional collateral security for such 
restructured loans. 
 
13. The Committee note with satisfaction  that the Reserve Bank of 
India is operating a Plan for providing credit relief to farmers i n the event 
of occurrence of natural calamities through issue of standing guidelines, 
which are effective automatically for farmers in areas affected by natural 
calamities so as to enable the banks to take uniform and concerted 

 
 
16 
 
action expeditiously.  What perturbs the Committee is that in spite of 
these RBI guidelines, their  implementation proper leaves much  to be 
desired as farmers h ave to go through a myriad of processes and 
cumbersome procedures before they finally receive some financial 
support to help them tide over the crisis brought about by natural 
calamities.  It is precisely these bottlenecks which force farmers to knock 
at the doors of private moneylenders who by virtue of their informal and 
speedy disbursal of credit force farmers into the vicious and never 
ending debt cycle from which they get no  respite.  The Committee, 
therefore, urge  all concerned Government agencies to ensure that 
guidelines of RBI are followed in letter and spirit thereby enabling 
farmers to easily obtain institutional credit in times of natural calamities. 
 
SOIL HEALTH 
(Recommendation Para No. 3.62) 
 
14. The Committee had wondered as to what purpose the new scheme of 
Nutrient Based Fertilizers Scheme launched from 1 April, 2010 would serve in 
the absence of authentic data on soil fertility. They also felt that the 
Government have not responded with the alacrity it deserves to the serious 
problem of deterioration of soil health of the entire cultivable are a in the 
Country brought about by  unscientific agricultural practices, depleting water 
resources, excessive/indiscriminate use of fertilizers and pesticides, 
deforestation etc.  They, therefore, recommended the Government to get down 
to the task of completing Soil Health Cards Scheme in co -ordination with the 
State Governments and their own field institutions with utmost urgency.  They 

 
 
17 
 
were hopeful that once this  is done the NBS would  also be implemented in a 
more professional and purposeful manner. 
 
15. The Department in their Action Taken Notes have stated that 
Government of India is promoting the concept of balanced use of fertilizers and 
also advocating concept of  soil test based fertilizer use to maintain soil health 
for increased productivity.  National Project on Management of Soil Health and 
Fertility (NPMSH&F) was launched during 2008 -09 with objective of setting up 
and strengthening Soil Testing L aboratories (STLs), promoting Integrated 
Nutrient Management (Organic manure, soil amendment and micronutrients) 
and strengthening of Fertilizer Quality Control Laboratories with envisaged 
outlay of Rs. 429.85 crores during 11th Five Year Plan.  During first three years 
of implementation, 124 new static Soil Testing Laboratories (STLs), 116 new 
Mobile STLs and strengthening of 155 existing STLs has been sanctioned 
under the scheme.  Setting up/strengthening of STLs is the first step to issue 
soil health cards to the farmers.   
In order to promote application of balanced used of fertilizers, Indian 
Institute of Soil Science  (IISS), Bhopal under Indian Council of Agricultural 
Research ( ICAR) was sanctioned Rs. 10.32 crore s under scheme “National 
Project on Management of Soil Health & Fertility” for preparation of “Geo -
Referenced Soil Fertility Maps” including interlinking of soil fertility status with 
Soil Test Crop Response data to generate site specific recommendations in  19 
major States (171 Districts). ICAR has already collected GPS based soil 
samples in 18 States and analysis of samples is i n progress.  IISS, Bhopal   
with  help of soil test data of State Department of Agriculture, GIS based soil 

 
 
18 
 
fertility maps of NPK f or 21 States at d istrict level and 12 States at t ehsil level 
have been prepared for NPK.  The maps are available for public domain at 
website www.iiss.nic.in. 
 
16. The issue of deteri orating soil health and steps for its control is 
one issue  vociferously espoused by the Committee, while  impressing 
upon the Government to expeditiously undertake soil testing all over the 
Country and subsequently issue Soil Health Cards to the farmers.  
However, much to their chagrin, the Government is lagging way behind 
in this aspect and Soil Health Cards for farmers is still a distant dream, 
leaving the Committee to ponder over the efficacy of the Nutrient Based 
Fertilizers Scheme launched by the Governme nt from 1 April, 2010.   
They are also constrained to note that reply to this recommendation is 
also silent on the number of Soil Testing Laboratories (STL), Mobile STLs 
set up and STLs strengthened out of those sanctioned under the Scheme 
NPMSH&F for which a sum of Rs. 429.85 crores was the envisaged outlay 
during the Eleventh Plan.  Similarly, they find that no time frame has 
been set for IISS, Bhopal to complete the task of “Geo -Referenced Soil 
Fertility Maps’.  Also, no time bound action is being taken to prepare GIS 
based soil fertility maps of NPK for remaining states at district and tehsil 
levels.  They note with satisfaction that finally the States have realized 
the importance of soil testing and  are working towards resto ring its 
health.  They, therefore, urge upon the Government to conduct  soil 
testing across the Country in a time -bound manner, issue Soil Health 
Cards to all farmers and based on the results of these tests draw up 

 
 
19 
 
measures to improve  the soil health.  They are  of the firm opinion that 
once this exercise is carried out, the Nu trient Based Subsidy Scheme 
could be implemented in a more professional and purposeful manner and 
thereby contribute towards increased agricultur e production in the 
Country and thus providing food security to the nation .  They desire to 
be apprised of the progress made in the setting up of STLs, mobile STLs 
and strengthening of STLs so far along  with the expenditure incurred in 
respect of each, year-wise, during the Eleventh Plan. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  

 
 
20 
 
CHAPTER II 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN  
ACCEPTED BY THE GOVERNMENT 
 
 
 
CONTINGENCY PLANS FOR NATURAL CALAMITIES 
(Recommendation Para Nos. 3.50 & 3.51) 
 
 The Committee note  that general State specific contingency plans for 
specific agro-climatic conditions were prepared by Central Research Institute 
for Dryland Agriculture (CRIDA), Hyderabad and ICAR Research Institute for 
Eastern Region, Patna. Based on this and on the Stat e Specific Drought 
Management Strategies provided by the National Rainfed Area Authority 
(NRAA), States prepared the Contingency Plans for catch crops during Kharif 
2009. The Committee further note that Indian Council of Agricultural Research 
(ICAR) is pre paring district -wise contingency plans for Agriculture and Allied 
Sectors for different Agro Climatic Zones, to meet adverse eventualities arising 
due to extreme climatic variabilities (droughts, floods, heat waves, cold waves 
etc.). ICAR is soliciting par ticipation of State Agriculture Universities (SAUs) 
and Line Departments of different States of the country. The Committee expect 
that, as being contemplated by the Government, contingency plans based on 
all the 127 Agro -Climatic Zones (demarcated accordin g to their weather 
patterns and farming systems) would have been ready for utilisation by Kharif, 
2010. 
 
 Notwithstanding the above -cited endeavours of Government, the 
Committee find  it highly perturbing that till date the Government have no 
National Contingency Plan for Drought and other such natural Calamities. 
More so, when the cataclysmic changes resulting from global warming and 
climate change are relentlessly manifesting themsel ves in substantial 
measures.  It should dawn upon the Government at least now that the times of 
kneejerk reactions to individual drought or any other such natural calamity are 
long past. With its unpredictability of occurrence and the areas affected, the 
drought of 2009 should serve as an eye opener for the Government. Several 

 
 
21 
 
areas which were drought prone got ample rains this time, while several flood 
prone or abundant rain areas were singed by the drought of 2009. It is, 
therefore, imperative that a Nati onal Contingency Plan for such eventualities 
be worked out immediately and kept in readiness for any such future 
eventuality. The Contingency Plans for the 127 Agro -Climatic Zones being 
worked out should be factored into this National Contingency Plan for 
facilitating micro level implementation as and when the situation arises. 
 
Reply of the Government 
Government of India prepared National level Contingency Agriculture 
Plan for Kharif 2010 and issued necessary guidelines to State Governments 
for preparation of Crop Plans for three scenarios excess, normal and less of 
rainfall conditions.  This Contingency Plan is valid for next three years (A copy 
of the Contingency Agriculture Plan for Kharif 2010 is at Annexure-I).  
Guidelines include meteorological Sub -Division-wise and State -wise crop 
varieties and options for different situations in rainfed areas of agro -eco 
regions.  States are encouraged to prepare state / district specific plans ; based 
on requirement, assessment of agro -climatic conditions prevailing and 
resources available to put into action such specific plans. Central Research 
Institute for Dryland Areas (CRIDA), an ICAR institution, is helping States in 
preparation of District-wise Contingency Plan with Support of State Agriculture 
Universities (SAUs).  District-wise Plans for certain districts of Andhra Pradesh, 
Gujarat, Karnataka, Maharashtra, Rajasthan and Tamil Nadu is now available 
on website of this Department www.agricoop.nic.in. 
 
(Vide Ministry of Agriculture (Department of Agriculture &  Co-operation), 
Drought Management Division  Letter No.  17-1/2009-DMC dated 16 May, 
2011).  
  

 
 
22 
 
RAINFED AREA FARMING 
(Recommendation Para Nos. 3.58, 3.59 & 3.60)  
 
The Committee are aware that sixty percentage of area under 
cultivation in India is rainfed, but contributes only around 45% of total 
agricultural production. The crippling dependence on rain renders these areas 
perennially vulnerable to weather related exigencies like drought, etc. Hence, it 
is natural that crops grown in these areas like pulses and oilseeds see a drop 
in production, which ultimately leads to situations like misery to farmers, price 
escalation, costly imports of agricultural produce, etc. 
 
It is, however, a matter of great regret that Schemes like the Rainfed 
Area Development Prog ramme (RADP) proposed for initialization in the 
Eleventh Plan have not yet taken off owing to procedural delays and delays 
due to poor planning / conceptualization that has led to last minute 
restructuring and revision of the Scheme. The Committee have drawn attention 
of the Government to the need for initiatives like RADP to be taken up on war 
footing basis to improve rainfed agriculture in the Country in their several 
previous Reports. However, nothing significant seems to have happened on 
this front as t he drought during Kharif 2009 saw all the problems of these 
areas unfolding as in the past. Therefore, even at the cost of sounding 
repetitive the Committee recommend that development of rainfed areas in the 
Country needs to be assigned top priority by the  Government. A very welcome 
first step in this direction would be the finalization and implementation of 
RADP, without any further loss of time. 
 
The Committee are also of the opinion that post -harvest infrastructure, 
marketing and pricing, etc. are also a reas that cry for urgent attention. Even 
the slightest of improvements in these areas can make cultivation of several 
crops like pulses, etc. more remunerative for the farmer. The Government 
should, therefore, chalk out fresh strategies on these fronts wit hout any further 
delay. 
 
 

 
 
23 
 
Reply of the Government    
 
To address various problems of rainfed areas and to ensure evolving a 
coordinated strategy for integrated development, watershed programmes  are 
being implemented by Ministry of Agriculture and Ministry of Rural 
Development in terms of Common Guidelines published by National Rainfed 
Area Authority (NRAA). National Rainfed Area Authority under administrative 
control of Planning Commission has been constituted for focused monitoring of 
implementation of various schemes in rainfed areas. Besides, programmes like 
Rashtriya Krishi Vikas Yojana (RKVY), Macro Management of Agriculture 
(MMA), National Horticulture Mission (NHM), National Food Security Mission 
(NFSM), National Mission on Micro Irrigation (NMMI) etc. also provide special 
focus on rainfed areas for improving livelihood security and agricultural 
productivity.  Programme of Integrated Development of 60,000 Pulses Villages 
in Rainfed  Areas was launched in 2010 -11 under Rashtriya Krishi Vikas 
Yojana and is being continued in year 2011 -12, to focus on production and 
productivity enhancement of pulses and oilseeds in rainfed areas.  To address 
key areas , like  technology promotion for add ressing constraints that are 
impeding agricultural productivity in states like Assam, Bihar, Jharkhand, 
Eastern UP, Chhattisgarh, Orissa and West Bengal, Scheme „Extending Green 
Revolution to Eastern India‟ , is being implemented since 2011 -11 under 
Rashtriya Krishi Vikas Yojana (RKVY). 
 
 Realizing importance of dryland agriculture, Rainfed Area Development 
Programme (RADP) has been finalized as farmer centric -farming system 
based programme. Planning Commission has approved implementation of 
RADP during remaining period of XI Plan though a window of Rashtriya Krishi 
Vikas Yojana (RKVY).  Guidelines for implementation of Rainfed Area 
Development Programme have been circulated to targeted States. 
 
 Concern expressed by the Committee about need to provide post -
harvest infrastructure, marketing and pricing in rainfed areas of the country for 
improvement of agricultural marketing facilities, is being addressed under 

 
 
24 
 
Central Sector Schemes (i) Marketing Research and Information network 
(MRIN), (ii) Development / Str engthening of Agricultural Marketing 
Infrastructure, Grading and Standardization (AMIGS) and Rural Godown 
Scheme (RGS). 
 MRIN Scheme aims at progressively linking important agricultural 
produce markets spread all over the country for effective exchange of market 
information.  It facilitates farmers in collecting and disseminating information 
for better price realization.  The information collected covers market, price, 
infrastructure and promotion related issues for efficient marketing.  Presently, 
markets are reporting daily prices and arrivals data using comprehensive 
national level database at Agmarketnet Portal ( http://agmarketnet.nic.in).  
Wholesale prices and arrivals information in respect of more than 300 
commodities and 2000 varieties are being disseminated through the portal on 
daily basis.  Nearly, 3000 markets have been linked to Central Agmarketnet 
Portal and more than 1900 markets are reported data on daily basis.  Weekly 
prices and arrivals trends are als o being disseminated through the portal.  
Monthly prices and arrivals bulletins are also being generated using national 
database. 
 
 AMIGS scheme provides credit linked investment subsidy on capital 
cost of general or commodity specific marketing infrastruc ture, for agricultural 
commodities and for strengthening and modernization of existing agricultural 
markets wholesale, rural periodic or in tribal areas.  The scheme covers all 
agricultural and allied sectors including dairy, poultry, fishery, livestock an d 
minor forest produce.  The scheme is reform linked and is being implemented 
in those States / UTs which permit setting up of agricultural markets in private 
and cooperative sector and allow direct marketing and contract farming.  Rate 
of subsidy is 25% of capital cost of project with limit of Rs. 50 lakhs per project.  
In case of North Eastern States, Uttarakhand, Himachal Pradesh, Jammu & 
Kashmir, hilly & tribal areas and to entrepreneurs belonging to Scheduled 
Caste (SC) / Scheduled Tribe (ST) and their  cooperatives, rate of subsidy is 
33.33% of capital cost of project, with limit of Rs. 60 lakhs per project.  There is 
no upper ceiling on subsidy for these projects promoted by state agencies. 

 
 
25 
 
 RGS, „Grameen Bhandaran Yojana‟ inter alia includes, creation  of 
scientific storage capacity with allied facilities in rural areas to meet 
requirements of farmers for storing farm produce, processed farm produce, 
agricultural inputs, etc., and prevention of distress sale by creating the facility 
of pledge loan and m arketing credit.  Under the Scheme, subsidy @ 25% is 
given to all categories of farmers, agricultural graduates, cooperatives & CWC 
/ SWCs.  All other categories of individual companies and corporations are 
given subsidy @ 15% of the project cost.  In case  of NE States / hilly areas 
and SC/ST entrepreneurs and their cooperatives and women farmers, subsidy 
is 33.33%.  The scheme will continue during XI Plan with target of 80 lakh 
tonne and a budget allocation of Rs. 400 crores.  The scheme is demand 
driven a nd not location specific.  Banks sanction projects depending on 
viability.  The scheme has now been made more farmers‟ friendly by allowing 
subsidy for smaller godowns of 50 MT size in general and 25 MT in hilly areas.  
Five lakh tonnes of storage capacity , to be created will be reserved for small 
farmers. 
 
(Vide Ministry of Agriculture (Department of Agriculture & Co -operation), 
Drought Management Division  Letter No.  17-1/2009-DMC dated 16 May, 
2011).  
 
AGRICULTURAL CREDIT 
(Recommendation Para No. 3.61) 
 
The Committee find that the Reserve Bank of India have issued 
standing guidelines to banks for providing to relief to farmers in areas affected 
by natural calamities, which particularly aims at providing financial assistance. 
They also note that States wer e asked to conduct State Level Banker ‟s 
Committee (SLBC) meetings in view of the drought to provide relief to farmers 
as per RBI guidelines. All the States have completed this procedure. Further, 
the Committee also note that as proposed by the Finance Mini ster in the 
General Budget 2010 -11 the period of repayment of loan by farmers under 
“The Debt Waiver and Debt Relief Scheme for Farmers ‟ has been extended 
by six months from 31 December, 2009 to 30 June, 2010 in view of drought 
and flood situation during 2 009. However, the Committee feel that such one 

 
 
26 
 
time measures, which are basically meant to tackle situations resulting from 
accumulations of years together, are not capable of providing requisite relief to 
farmers faced with an emergent natural calamity. T hey, therefore, recommend 
that there should be a specific Credit Relief Plan, wherein, provisions are 
made to provide credit relief to farmers, especially small and marginal ones, 
affected by natural calamities like flood and drought, which should come int o 
operation automatically in such eventualities. The Committee desire they be 
apprised of the considered views of the Government in this regard more so in 
the context of the alarming frequency with which the natural calamities are 
occurring due to climate change, etc. 
 
Reply of the Government    
 
 Reserve Bank of India has is operating action plan for providing credit 
relief to the farmers in event of occurrence of natural calamities, through issue 
of standing guidelines.   Guidelines issued by Reserve Bank of India (RBI) to 
banks for providing relief, are effective automati cally for farmers in areas 
affected by natural calamities and are issued to enable banks to take uniform 
and concerted action expeditiously, particularly to provide financial assistance 
to the farmers.  Salient features of the guidelines are as under:  
 District Consultative Committees of affected district s are required to meet 
immediately after occurrence of natural calamities. 
 In event of calamity covering a larger part of a State, State Level Bankers‟ 
Committee will also convene a meeting. 
 As per guidelin es, immediate credit facilities are given for protecting and 
rejuvenating standing crops/orchards/plantation etc. 
 Credit for grains and fodder storage structures, drainage, pumping and 
other measures and operations to repair pump sets, motors, engines and 
other necessary implements, is also given. 
 Principal amount of short-term loan as well as interest due for repayment in 
year of occurrence of natural calamity is converted into term loan. 
 Repayment period of restructured term loan varies depending on sever ity 
of calamity and its recurrence, extent of loss of economic assets and 
distress caused. 

 
 
27 
 
 Generally, restructured period of repayment is 3 to 5 years extendable upto 
7 years and in extreme cases of hardship upto a maximum period of 10 
years. 
 In all cases of restructuring, moratorium period of at least one year should 
be considered. 
 Further, banks should not insist for additional collateral security for such 
restructured loans. 
 
 
(Vide Ministry of Agriculture (Department of Agriculture &  Co-operation), 
Drought Management Division Letter No. 17 -1/2009-DMC dated 16 May, 
2011).  
 
Comments of the Committee  
 
For comments of the Committee please refer to Para No. 13 of Chapter 
I of this Report.      
 
DIESEL AND POWER SUBSIDY 
(Recommendation Para Nos. 3.63, 3.64, 3.65, 3.66 & 3.67) 
 
The Committee note that The scheme of “Diesel Subsidy” was 
introduced during Kharif  2009 for the drought / deficit rainfall affected areas, 
with a view to give protective irrigation and save the standing crops. The 
scheme was operational upto 30 September, 2009. Though launched with 
much fanfare the Scheme was destined to fail due to its  poor structuring and 
the impractical and restrictive conditionality‟s included in it. The result was that 
till first week of February, 2010. There were no takers for this Rs. 300.00 crore 
Scheme, which was applicable upto 30 September, 2009. The Committee  are 
not at all convinced by the explanation of the Government that funds constraint 
led to inclusion of some of the restrictive clauses. As a more prudent step the 
Government could have included Diesel Subsidy Scheme as a part of RKVY 
which is flush with funds and where the States have a lot of flexibility of 
operations. However, taking cognizance of the fact that this Scheme was 
implemented for the first time by the Union Government and as per their own 
admission was a spur of the moment reaction to tackl e drought conditions, the 
Committee desire that the nitty -gritty of the Scheme be worked out, afresh, in 

 
 
28 
 
finer details and it may be implemented as a part of RKVY, as and when such 
exigencies arise. 
 
The Committee also note that the Governments of Bihar an d Tamil 
Nadu have reported about implementation of the Scheme and submitted re -
imbursement claims during February and March 2010 for Rs.21.52 crores and 
Rs.1.43 crores respectively, which are being processed in accordance with the 
guidelines of the Scheme.  The Committee expect these claims to be settled 
expeditiously. 
 
The Committee further note that the Government provided additional 
allocation of power to the States with deficit rainfall for agricultural operations 
during the month of July and August, 200 9. The States of Haryana, Punjab, 
Assam, Uttar Pradesh, Bihar and Andhra Pradesh were provided additional 
power in this manner. 
 
The Committee understand that both these measures were taken to 
help farmers draw more groundwater for saving standing Kharif c rops. They 
have been informed that though farmers were encouraged under these 
Schemes to mine water, a host of measures were also employed to ensure 
that farmers are made aware of the importance of recharging groundwater. 
The Committee recommend that recha rge of aquifers through artificial means 
has to be provided further impetus by ensuring that the farmers who give 
priority to this are rewarded through suitable means. 
 
The Committee also recommend that States like Punjab and Haryana 
that have submitted pr oposal for special financial package for saving standing 
crops in the field may also be given due consideration, as they have, through 
proactive measures like subsidizing power for agriculture, helped in salvaging 
the crops production during the drought. 
 
 
 

 
 
29 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
As per RKVY Scheme, States are free to take up diesel subsidy 
scheme for saving distressed and standing crops within their RKVY allocations 
as they have complete flexibility under RKVY to take up appropriate scheme / 
interventions for growth / protection of agriculture. 
 
An amount of Rs. 21.52 crore for Bihar and Rs.  1.43 crore  for Tamil 
Nadu towards reimbursement under “Diesel Subsidy Scheme” for Kharif 2009 
had been settled (Copies of sanction orders are at Annexure-II & III ). 
Government of India has continued Diesel Subsidy Scheme for Kharif 2010.  
For Kharif 2010, claim was received from Government  of Jharkhand and an 
amount of Rs. 4, 21, 520 was reimbursed to State Government. (A copy of the 
sanction order is at Annexure-IV).  
 
 
Subject matter of rainwater harvesting and artificial recharge is dealt in the 
Ministry of Water Resources.  Ministry of Water Resources has informed that 
Ministry and Central Ground Water Board have undertaken following 
measures to promote rain water harvesting and artificial recharge: 
 
 Ministry of Water Resources has instituted Ground Water Augmentation 
Awards & National Water Award to encourage Non -Governmental 
Organizations (NGOs) /Gram Panchayats/ Urban Local Bodies/ Institutions/ 
Corporate Sector and Individuals for adopting innovative practices of ground 
water augmentation by rainwater harvesting and artificial recharge, 
promoting water use efficiency, recycling & re -use of water and creating 
awareness through people's participati on.  In total, there are 20 Ground 
Water Augmentation Awards fo r six categories consisting of Rs.  1 lakh and  
plaque with citation and one National Water Award  consisting of a cash 
award of Rs. 10 lakhs and plaque with citation.  
 
 A scheme of dug well rech arge is under implementation in Over -exploited, 
Critical and Semi -Critical assessment units of seven States viz. Andhra 
Pradesh, Maharashtra, Karnataka, Rajasthan, Tamil Nadu, Gujarat and 

 
 
30 
 
Madhya Pradesh, underlain predominantly by hard rock terrain, to provide 
sustainability to dugwells.  Under the scheme 100 % subsidy is provided to 
small and marginal farmers and 50% to other farmers for construction/ 
installation of artificial recharge st ructures in their farms.   Expenditure of     
Rs. 283.457 crore, including Rs.   263.58 crore as subsidy to beneficiaries, 
Rs. 17 crores to states for IEC/Capacity Building activities and Rs. 0.2417 
crore to Ministry for awareness and Rs. 2.6358 crore (1% of  net subsidy 
amount) to NABARD as operating cost , has been incurred under the 
scheme.   
 
 Mass awareness campaigns on various aspects of ground water 
management, protection and regulation including rain water harvesting and 
artificial recharge are organized  throughout the country involving 
Central/State/ NGO‟s, VO‟s, welfare organizations, farmers, village 
panchayats, Water User Associations, educational institutions, industries 
and individuals. 
 
Proposal for special package from State Governments of Punjab and 
Haryana for sustaining agricultural production during drought 2009 was 
considered and Government of India sanctioned Rs. 400 crores to Government 
of Haryana and Rs.  800 crores to Government of Punjab (A Copy of the 
sanction orders is at Annexure-V).  
 
(Vide Ministry of Agriculture (Department of Agriculture & Co -operation), 
Drought Management Division  Letter No.  17-1/2009-DMC dated 16 May, 
2011).  
  

 
 
31 
 
CHAPTER III 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH  
THE COMMITTEE DO NOT DESIRE TO PURSUE  
IN VIEW OF THE GOVERNMENT’S REPLY 
 
 
 
-NIL-

 
 
32 
 
CHAPTER IV 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF 
 WHICH REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT  
HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE  
 
 
NATIONAL SEED BANK 
(Recommendation Para Nos. 3.52, 3.53, 3.54 & 3.55) 
 
In the opinion of the Committee, seed is the most crucial input in 
agriculture. First and foremost, the future of any crop depends on the quality of 
the seed. The other inputs like fertilizer, conducive weather conditions, etc. 
come into play, only subsequ ently. During a calamity, the quantity and 
availability of seed assumes immense importance. Just as grain reserves are 
important for food security, seed reserves are essential for crop security. The 
Committee note that during Kharif 2009, deficient South W est Monsoon 
necessitated relaxation of seed standards and increased subsidy on seeds. 
The number of minikits of seeds provided under various Schemes was also 
enhanced. Besides, Truthfully Labeled seeds were also allowed to meet the 
additional seed demand. The Committee are unsure about the preparedness 
of the Government to provide seeds in the eventuality of a drought recurring 
during Monsoon 2010 as they already had to resort to measures like relaxation 
of seed standards this year due to non -availability of seeds of prescribed age 
limit. 
 
 A more comprehensive approach would, therefore, be necessary 
hereafter and the Government needs to be ready for all eventualities, more so 
with the vagaries of weather becoming increasingly unpredictable due to 
climate change. In case the first sowing or the initial effort goes waste, it ought 
not be the question of using the same seed. Calculations ought to be made in 
the quickest possible time, as to what is the best alternative crop. The same 
should be procured without any loss of time and made available for sowing. 
This type of split second response to natural calamities in a vast Country like 
India is possible only when a detailed mapping of alternate cropping pattern is 
undertaken. For this purpose, the Government wil l need to take steps to have 

 
 
33 
 
district-wise plans in which even major shifts can be made in crop pattern 
depending upon the evolving climate situation. The Committee, therefore, 
desire that such an exercise be carried out by the Government with due 
diligence and promptitude so that in any such future eventuality, crucial days of 
sowing are not lost in futile and unrealistic planning. 
 
 The Committee have a perception that the Government machinery, as 
of now is only inadequately prepared to meet the situation , where the climate 
change can operate like terrorists, whose entry points or modus operandi are 
difficult to guess. It is very important that not only the crops which could be 
alternative crops but also the variety suitable for an early sowing, late sowin g, 
mid-sowing be classified and suitable reserves be built up. Taking this into 
account, the Committee recommend that the Government have to take 
measures to ensure enough buffer stock of seeds to cater to contingency 
situations. Preservation of seeds by a gencies other than that of the 
Government, including individual farmers, should also be promoted. 
 
 The Committee also strongly feel that establishment of a National Seed 
Bank shall go a long way in this direction and Government have to consider its 
establishment on a priority basis. In the same context, the Committee also 
desire that the Scheme of Seed Villages which is to be implemented in 60000 
villages to begin with, should be expanded at the earliest to cover all villages of 
the Country so that seed availability is decentralized without any further delay. 
 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 State Governments are primarily responsible for production and 
distribution of certified/quality seeds to farmers during normal as well as during 
natural calamities and unforeseen conditions.  State Governments make 
arrangements for production and distribu tion of seeds to farmers, through 
State Department of Agriculture, State Seeds Corporation, NSC, SFCI and 

 
 
34 
 
private institutions.  However, Government of India reviews situation of 
availability of seeds in advance during each Kharif and Rabi Season and 
issues necessary guidelines for ensuring adequate stocks and procurement of 
seeds, by State Government and other agencies. 
However, „Establishment and Maintenance of Seed Bank‟ component of 
Central Sector Scheme “Development and Strengthening of Infrastructure 
facilities for production and distribution of quality seeds” - has been under 
implementation by this Department since 1999-2000 onwards through National 
Seeds Corporation (NSC), State Farms Corporation of India (SFCI) and State 
Seeds Corporation (SSCs). Go vernment of India fixes tentative target which is 
about 1% requirement of certified / quality seeds for the country, through SSCs 
functioning in States of Andhra Pradesh, Assam, Bihar, Gujarat, Haryana, 
Jharkhand, Karnataka, Maharashtra, Madhya Pradesh, Or issa, Punjab, 
Rajasthan, Tamil Nadu, Uttarakhand, Uttar Pradesh and West Bengal.  For 
remaining States this is done by NSC and SFCI.  Kerala State Seed 
Development Authority has also started participating in this programme from 
year 2011-12 to meet requirements of the State.  Seed Stocks reserved under 
seed bank are utilized to meet exigencies like drought, floods etc.  Farmers are 
not directly maintaining seed banks but are ultimate beneficiaries under Seed 
Bank Scheme.  
All implementing agencies are advis ed to maintain seeds of only short 
and medium duration, late sown varieties of different crops having adaptability 
in respective States.  Varieties (under calamities situations) are selected by 
Seed Corporation for various contingencies from contingency pl ans, prepared 

 
 
35 
 
in consultation with State Department of Agriculture, Indian Council of 
Agricultural Research (ICAR) or Agriculture Universities. 
Under Seed Bank Scheme, grant is provided for maintenance charges 
of certified and foundation seeds of identifie d crops, for meeting 50% cost, as 
revolving funds for procurement of seed.  Price differential for leftover seeds 
and used as non-seed is reimbursed.  Financial assistance is also provided for 
development of necessary infrastructure for construction of see d storage and 
for setting up of “Data Bank and Information System” for facilitating faster flow 
of information on availability of seeds.  
Physical Target for various seeds to be stored in Seed Bank, during 
2011-12, is 2.77 lakh quintals.  The physical targets allotted and achievement 
made during last five years is as under:- 
       (in lakh quintals) 
Year Target 
allotted 
Achievement  
2006-07 1.67 1.37 
2007-08 1.69 1.47 
2008-09 1.85 1.60 
2009-10 2.02 1.66 
2010-11 2.50 2.00 (anticipated) 
 
Financial assistance released to implementing agencies for 
Establishment & Maintenance of Seed Bank, during last five years is:- 
 
Year Rs. in Crores 
2006-07 8.00 
2007-08 5.63 
2008-09 4.53 
2009-10 4.45 
2010-11 6.73 

 
 
36 
 
 
(Vide Ministry of Agriculture (Department of Agriculture & Co -operation), 
Drought Management Division  Letter No.  17-1/2009-DMC dated 16 May, 
2011).  
 
 
Comments of the Committee  
 
For comments of the Committee please refer to Para No. 7 of Chapter I 
of this Report.      
 
FODDER POLICY 
(Recommendation Para Nos. 3.56 & 3.57)  
 
The very first indication of the impact of drought is the sale of animals. 
With their land gone or rendered useless due to drought, people resort to 
distress sale of animals. Unfortunately, however, enough attention is not given 
at all to saving the animals and feeding them. Handled more meaningfully, the 
sustenance of livestock can form an important part of the strategy to tackle the 
effects of natural calamities lik e drought, as crop -livestock integrated farming 
can provide avenues of alternate income in case of crop failure. Such income 
provided by well fed/maintained cattle/milch animals provides the much 
needed succour to the farmers to tide over the hard times an d avoids their 
falling into debt trap. The Committee note that during the drought situation of 
Kharif 2009, the Government provided fodder minikits to avoid any shortage 
and allowed RKVY funds to be used for purchase of fodder seeds. States with 
inadequate fodder availability were asked to tie up with those with surplus. The 
Committee were also informed that the Government have not received any 
reports of shortage of green fodder from affected States. 
 
However, the Committee know that at the ground level, there is still a lot 
of avoidable loss of fodder due to reasons like the use of bulk harvesting 
machines. The alarming shrinking of land area, hitherto, used for growing of 
fodder and grazing of cattle is also a perturbing factor. The imbalance in fodder 
availability among States is also to be addressed. The Committee are of the 

 
 
37 
 
opinion that it is high time a National Fodder Policy is formulated and 
recommend that this may be undertaken without any further delay.  
 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 
 National Policy for Farmers (NPF), 2007 inter alia, provides for attention 
to animal feed incl uding fodder.  In pursuance to NPF, 2007, Government of 
India announced “Accelerated Fodder Development Programme (AFDP)” in 
GOI‟s Budget 2011 -12 for increasing income of farmer s, dependent on 
livestock. The programme envisages accelerating production of fodder through 
promotion of integrated technologies and processes for enhancing availability 
of fodder throughout the year.  The strategies include production of quality 
seeds, production of fodder and adoption of appropriate technologies for Post -
Harvest Management. The programme will be implemented on location 
specific approach in twelve States, viz., Andhra Pradesh, Bihar, Chhattisgarh, 
Gujarat, Haryana, Karnataka, Madhya Prade sh, Maharashtra, Punjab, 
Rajasthan, Tamil Nadu and Uttar Pradesh, as a sub -scheme of Rashtriya 
Krishi Vikas Yojana (RKVY) during 2011-12 with allocation of Rs. 300 crores.  
 
(Vide Ministry of Agriculture (Department of Agriculture & Co -operation), 
Drought Management Division  Letter No.  17-1/2009-DMC dated 16 May, 
2011).  
 
Comments of the Committee  
 
For comments of the Committee please refer to Para No. 10 of Chapter 
I of this Report.      
  

 
 
38 
 
 
 
CHAPTER V 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF 
 WHICH FINAL REPLIES OF GOVERNMENT 
 ARE STILL AWAITED  
 
 
 
SOIL HEALTH 
(Recommendation Para No. 3.62)   
 
The Committee have been time and again emphasizing upon the 
Government, the pressing need for focusing on the Soil Health of the 
agriculture land in the Country. The unscientific agricultural practices, depleting 
water resources, excessive/indiscriminate use of fertilizers and pesticides, 
deforestation, etc. have all led to serious deterioration in soil health of almost 
the entire cultivable area in the C ountry. The Government, unfortunately, 
however, have not responded to this serious problem with the alacrity it 
deserves. The Soil Health Cards for farmers are still a distant dream, though 
the Nutrient based Fertilizers Scheme has already been launched fr om 1 April, 
2010. The Committee wonder as to what purpose this new Scheme will serve 
in the absence of authentic field data on soil fertility. They, therefore, 
recommend Government should get down to the task of completing the Soil 
Health Cards Scheme in c oordination with the State Governments and their 
own field institu tions with utmost urgency. The submission of the Secretary, 
Department of Agriculture & Cooperation before the Committee on 7 May, 
2010 that they were getting a very enthusiastic response in  the matter at the 
highest levels from the State Government s, is a pointer to the fact that the 
States also realize the immense importance of restoring soil health. Once this 
is done, the Committee are hopeful that the NBS will also be implemented in a 
more professional and purposeful manner. 
 
  

 
 
39 
 
Reply of the Government  
 
 
 Government of India is promoting concept of balanced use of fertilizers 
and also advocating concept of soil test based fertilizer use to maintain soil 
health for increased productivity.  National Project on Management of Soil 
Health and Fertility (NPMSH&F)  was launched during 2008 -09 with objective 
of setting up and strengthening Soil Testing Laboratories (STLs), promoting 
Integrated Nutrient Management (Organic manure, soil amendment and 
micronutrients) and strengthening of Fertilizer Quality Control Laboratories with 
envisaged outlay of Rs. 429.85 crores during 11 th Five Year Plan.  During first 
three years of implementation, 124 new static Soil Testing Laboratories 
(STLs), 116 new Mobile STLs and strengthening of 155 existing STLs has 
been sanctioned under the scheme.  Setting up/strengthening of STLs is the 
first step to issue soil health cards to the farmers.   
In order to promote application of balanced used of fertilizers, Indian 
Institute of Soil Science (IISS), Bhopal under Indian Council of Agricultural 
Research (ICAR) was sanctioned Rs. 10.32 crores under sch eme “National 
Project on Management of Soil Health & Fertility” for preparation of “Geo -
Referenced Soil Fertility Maps” including interlinking of soil fertility status with 
Soil Test Crop Response data to generate site specific recommendations in 19 
major States (171 Districts). ICAR has already collected GPS based soil 
samples in 18 States and analysis of samples is in progress.  IISS, Bhopal   
with  help of soil test data of State Department of Agriculture, GIS based soil 
fertility maps of NPK for 21 Stat es at district level and 12 States at tehsil level 

 
 
40 
 
have been prepared for NPK.  The maps are available for public domain at 
website www.iisss.nic.in. 
 
(Vide Ministry of Agriculture (Department of Agriculture & Co -operation), 
Drought Management Division  Letter No.  17-1/2009-DMC dated 16 May, 
2011).  
 
Comments of the Committee  
 
For comments of the Committee please refer to Para No. 16 of Chapter 
I of this Report.      
 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI;                    BASUDEB ACHARIA 
14 December, 2011           Chairman 
23 Agrahayana,1933 (Saka)                  Committee on Agriculture
            
  

·.~
-_."--'...:.;,
"
" '
.CONTINGENCY .. . . '.
. AGRICULTURE
PLAN'
, 'FOR KHARIF 2010 '
DepartmentofAgriculture& Cooperation- ,
,MinistryofAgriculture
GovernmentofIndia
KrishiBhawan,New Delhi-110001
~....-•..-------------------;...-----------------.~


,. . .
. :,,- --~.' 0,',
, '
',- :. , - , " '
. ." .
, "
<, ....•.
." ..' .
",CONTINGENCY
AGRICULTURE'
PLAN
,FOR KHARIF 2010
-35-


51.No.
1.;
;...
·.2.:
6.
7.,.
8.
9.
10.
11.
12.
.CONTENTS
, \ Subject
.r ,
Page No.
1
2
10
12
14
....:
15
16
23
24
26
27
Introduction ",.-,.,-",,;
Date bound contingency crop plan for ralnted areas located in
different rneteoroloqlcal sub-divisions
,Crop-group/crop~~ise contingency plan ·forkharifseason
Contingency plan r.elevant to allcrops and cropping systems ..' ..;.
Judicious use of surface and ground water during scanty rainfalll
drought '. .. ..
Specific.c.oritingentplan for rainfed regions of Rajasthari.~nd Haryana
Contingent plan specificto irrigated areas of Punjab, Haryana and
western UP
A listof drought tolerant and early maturing varieties of different
kharifcrops
(a) State wise listof pulse crops varieties
(b) Listof varieties! hybridsof sunflower and castor released
between 2005-2010
.Availabilityof certified seed of kharifcrops during 2010 from
publicsector seed corporations
Contingent plan for livestock during drought
(a) Ensuring availabilityof quality fodder
(b) Extended rainfallvis-a-vis green fodder strategy
Crop Contingent plan for flood affected districtsof Haryana and
Punjab
A briefcrop contingent plan for Rabi 2010-11
-3b-


CONTINGENCY AGRICULTURE 'PLAN FOR KHARIF 2010
Introduction :
The India Meteorological D~epartment (IMD)has issued the second stage long
range forecast fortheSouthWest monsoon season rainfall(June- September) over the
countryas a whole on 25th June, 2010. The IMD has predicted thatrainfallforthe 2010
Sou~h West monsoon islikelyto b~""1'02%of~ongPeriOd Average (LPA),over North
West India, 103% of LPAover NorthEast India, 99070of LPAover Central India and
102% of LPAoverSouth",Peninsul~;allwitha"~odel erro~ of ±8%,Onan averaqe the"
country is!ikeiyto receive 102% of LPAmonsoon "season r~infallwitha model error~f
±4%. Rainfallover the country.as a whole forthe months of Julyand Auqust islikelyto
be"98% arid 101%6f LPA,respectively'witha 'model errorof ±9%.
Occurrenceof normal rainduring SouthWest Monsoon season (June - September)
isvery crucialforagriculturalproduction as nearly 65% of Indian:agricultureisrainfedl. . . '.. '.'.
raindependent. Thenormal predictionof south west monsoon season rainfallby IMD." ."'
during 2010 isa welcome sign. However, from agriculturalproduction and productivity, .
view point,uniformspa,tialand temporal distributionof rainfallinallregions of theCountry
isvery crucialand more relevant than average rainfallforthe whole country. Even
during a normal rainfallyear some regions! districtswithinthe states may get less or
scanty rainfall.Timelyformulation and implementation of contingent agricultureplan helps
to negate/ moderate the illeffects of low/scanty rainfallon production and productivityof
crops insuch regions! areas.
The Department of Agriculture& Cooperation (DAC)has prepared a contingent
cropplan to suitto differentsouthwest monsoon scenarios indifferentagro-c1imaticregions
of the country.A copy of thiscontingent crop plan isbeing circulatedto allthe States for
initiatingtimelyinterventionsto deal withsub-duedl scanty monsoon, incase suchsituation
arises, during Kharif,2010. Thestates willuse thiscontingent plan as a broad guideline
and willimplement strategies after incorporating location specific modificationsl
adjustments.
TheCentralResearch InstituteforDryland Agriculture(CRIDA!ICAR), Hyderabad
ispreparing districtwise contingency plans. Theywillcomplete the job forabout 200
districtsby September - October, 2010. The AgricultureCommissioner, DAC isvisiting
States to review the preparedness of differentstates for Kharif,2010 interms of input
availabilityand cropcontingent plans. The exercise has been completed forthe states
of West Bengal, Bihar,Orissa, Chhatishgarh,Jharkhand, Andhra Pradesh, Karnataka,
TamilNadu, Kerala, Madhya Pradesh and Maharashtraby July13, 2010. Allthese States
1
-3"::/-


have been advised to prepare district-wisecontingent plans in collaboration with SAU'sl
ICAR Institutes/KVK's.
Till114ii1JUly,2P10the monsoon have covered almost the entire country.'1l'le
spread of monsoon intime and space seems to be quite satisfactoryexcept some regions/
districtsinUp, Bi:har,Jharkhar;c,r·APand Rajasthan. A crop contingent plan according l'
toprobable date of occurrence of monsoon in different agro-eco regions for rainfed areas' ,
ispresented below. The states may implement thiscrop contingent plan to coup-up with. . . .
less/scanty rainfall,in case such sltuationarisesdurinq Kharifseason.,. '-'. . ."
81.
No.
IMD/Agro-ec9' region
1 .' 2
,"Probable date of occurrence' of railfall "
15-31 July Crop Plan 16-31 August
1-15 August
43
1.', IMSD' sub division (IMSD): Short duration maize"
Pu'njab Agro ecoreqion (AER): moong, .rnash as grain
9.1 Major'production systems crops. Bajra, guar,
(MPS) :Maize! Rlce-Wheat ' sorghum and maize as
Area domain (AD):,' fodder crops. Vegetable
Submontaneous districts of cowpea and
Punjab. J&K, HP and Westem c1usterbean.
UP
"
2. IMSD :Plains of western UP;
AER:4.1
MPS :Pearlmilletl Rapeseed
and Mustard
AD :Agra, Mathura, ,~!igarh.
Bulandshahar, Meerut. Etah,
Mainpuri and Western part of
Muzaffamagar
3. IMSD :Plains of Western U.P.
AER :4.4
MPS :Fodder sorghum!
pulses
AD :Jhansi, Banda, Hamirpur,
Lalitpur,Morena, Gwalior
4. IMSD: Haryana, 'Chandigarh &
Delhi
AER :2.3
MPS :Pearlmillet - Rapeseed!
Mastard
AD :Hissar, Bhiwani, Sirsa,
!0.lil, Gurq30n g, P2rf
Pearlmillet, c1usterbean,
green gram, short
duration pigeonpea,
vegetable type cowpea
and clusterbean
Bajra, guar, cowpea,
lablab bean, pigeon pea
and black gram as grain
crops
Short duration bajra
(HHB- 67),· moong;
urdbean (T-9), Cowpea
(Charodi), guar (HG 365)
and also vegetable type'
clusterbean and guar
, 5
Moong and mash B8jra as '
as grain crop. fodder crop
Bajra, guar and
maize as fodders.
Sunhemp or
Sesbania as green
Manure, Vegetable
type clusterbean
and cowpea ..
Transplanted
pearmillet.
clusterbean, green
gram and cowpea.
Cowpea and
clusterbean (veg-
etable type)
Bajra, guar and
cowpea as grain
and fodder.
Pigeonpea and
black gram as
grain crops
Transplanting of
HHB-67 variety of
bajra as grain crop
or direct sowing as
fodder crop
Clusterbean,
cowpea
Bajra, guar
and cowpea
as grain and
fodder
Moisture may
be conserved
for toria
sowing during
Rabi
[·<:"'i,i:-;·,,"-~.i'..;._IISLrl',~l
~----~-'~o------,J_,--~--~-~_."~__ ~~ L ~__ ~ .....:__~~,~_, __,_ ~~_--..-J
2


51.
No.
IMD/Agro-eco region Probable date of occurrence of railfall
1>31 July Crop Plan 16-31August
1-15August
3 4 5
Sesame (RT-45),green
gram (K851, RM G 52),
'Sorghum and cowpea ~s
fodder, Snapmelon and
mateera as vegetable
crops,
Sesame (RT-125),
green gram (RMG
62), sorghum as
fodder crop
,
Bajra, cowpea, moong Bajra + cowpea!
'(direct sown), bajra guar(f9dder),
'.(transplanting) Jowar + cowpeal
guar (fodder),
maize + cowpea!
guar (fodder)
, ,
Shortduration
upland rice
varieties (NDR-97, NOR
118, Baranl . deep,
Cauvery, " Akashl,
Mutmuri). Inlighttexture
soils green gram (T44.
Pant moong 1). black
gram (T9,Pant Urd 19,
35, Narendra Urd 1).
Pigeonpea (Bahar and
Narendra Arhar1).
sesame (T-4.T-12.T-13).
Vegetable type cowpea.
lablab bean and guar
Sunflower.
pigeonpea, horsegram,
setaria, castor,
pea rImillet
Sunflower +
Pigeonpea (2:1);
Pearlmillet +
horsegram (2:1);
Pigeonpea +
Clusterbean (1:2);
Castor +
C1usterbean (1:2)
Pigeonpea,
Pearlmillet.maize,
Sunflower
3
Hybridbajra ..
(NHB-3.NHB-4,
BJ-104,green
gram, black gram.
pigeonpea,
sesame. niger (GA
10,Ootacamund),
shortduration
upland rice
varieties.veg-
etable type
cowpea. guar and
lablab bean.
Sunflower,
Pigeonpea, castor.
Sunflower +
pigeon pea (2:1)
Pigeonpea,
Pearlmillet, maize,
sunflower, castor
I
Sorghum as
fodder, toria
(TL15),
taramira
o "(T27) . ',:
.:~,' .
Fodder as
shown in,1-15
August and lor
field reparation
forSeptember
sowing of
toria,gobhi
sarson.
Green gram.
bahar variety
of pigeonpea.
Niger varieties
GA 10 and
Ootacamund
Sunflower,
Pigeonpea.
castor.
Sunflower +
pigeonpea
(2:1)
Sorghum for
. fodder
Pigeonpea,
castor or
reserve the
land forrabi
safflower
I
1 2
5. IMSD: Eastern Rajasthan,
AER :4.2/2.1
MPS :Maize IPearlmillet
AD: Bhilwara, Tonk,Dungarpur,
0" Ajmer. Chittaurgah,
Rajasamand,Jajore,Sik-a.r,'-
Jodhpur, Churu :CO'.,...
6. IMSD :Jammu and Kashmir
AER:14.2/14.3-.'
MPS :Maize"
AD :Jammu, Punch, Riasi;'..
Muzzafarbad, Udharnpur; .,
Kathua '.
7.IMSD: Eastern U.P.
A~R: 9.2
MPS :Ricel Pearlmillet"
AD :Varanasi, Mirzapur,
Jaunpur, Ghazipur.Sitapur,
partsof Shahjahanpur,'
Lucknow, Barabanki, Rai
Beraeli.Sultanpur
8. IMSD: Madhya Maharashtra
AER: 6.1
MPS :Rabi sorghum
AD :Solapur, Bidar
Osmanabad, Ahmednagar.
partsof Satara. Laturand
Sangli
9. IMSD :Vidarbha
AER: 6.3
MPS :Cotton/ sorghum
AD :Akola, Warda, partsof
Amravati, Yeotmal, Parbhani,
Buldana and l-<hi3ncr;:;hand
partof Adilabad of A.P
-3C['-


Probable date of occurrence of railfaH
15-31 Ju!y Crop Plan 16-31 August
1,,1~ AUQiLlst
!--:/-'1-~--~__~-;:;~-'-..-.~[:=~'-~~-~-~~~=-=-~=-=~'~--\~=~-~:-=---{~:=-~:-.=~-=-F~~--5-==1Jill, . j U :~~UUUi 1j d 1':1 l I ( I); I ' !; 1
Karnataka varieties duration varieties of shortduration
AER: 8.2 (Indaf 8, L-5,MR1) or (GPU 28, HR 911, varieties (GPU
IV1PS:Firigermille, Transplanting of nursery PR 202)or 28, HR 911 and
AD :Bangalore, Kolar and of above varieties transplanting.PR202).
Tumkur .', - Fingemillet + red Sowing of short Cowpea (KBC1,
Gram (8:1) and duration varieties KBC2, Lolita),',
Fingermillet + field bean, (GPU 26) as H 0 rse g r'am
Littlernilletand foxtail, nursery.Sun- (KBH1/PGG9).
Grou~dnut, . flower hybrids Transplanting'
Sunflower hybrids, (KBC 2) and ' of Chiliesif.
castor, soybean, chilies. soyabean (KBSH protective :
2).Transplanting 'irrigation
of'chilies.Maize,' 'available.
sorghum. bajra as Maize,'
fodder crop sorghum, bajr.a
.as fodder
.Crops.
51.
No.
IMD/Agro-eco region
.''. ~.
11. IMS~Westem MP'
AER: 5.2 ,
MPS :Soybean, Sorghum :'
AD :Indore, Ratlam, Ujjain;
Dewas, Dhar,Khandwa, parts
of sehore
12. lMD: Rayalaseema
AER: 3,0
MPS :Groundnut
AD :Anantapur, Kumool,
Chittoordistrictsof A.P.
Shortduration
Maize, (Navjot, Sathi
etc.),
.Pigeonpea (OCPKL
151, T21,Kh2,ICPL87,
ICPL
88039) in deep soils,
Sunflower (Modern,
Surya,
Manjira and other
Hybrids).
Sesame (Bhadeli, TGK
22, TKG 37), Cowpea
(Pusa Kamal, Pusa
Baisakhi,Castor
(Ganesh and Varuna).
Sorghum, sudangrass,
maize (Africantall)
Dinanath grass and
bajra as fodder crops.
Groundnut
(vemana, TMV 2)
+ redgram
(Palandu)
I
l__~_t.~_._.__.~~_~.~_..~~,_.__, ~1.~_~_~..,,,.,,-''--
4
Sunflower,
sesame, cowpea,
castor (Varities
same as for 15 to
31
Julyseason)
Sorghum,
Sudangrass, maize
(Africantall),
Dinanath grass
and
Bajra as fodder.
Groundnut
(TMV2,ICGV
91114)
I
J
Safflower (JSF
1, JSF7, JSF 73,
Sharda):
sunflower
(Modem, Surya
and Manjira);
Sesame (RT
46); Rajgira
(Cal, .
C02: caster.
Maize (African
tall)as fodder
crop)
Pearlmillet
(ICTP8203,
ICMV221);
Green gram
(MGG295,
MGG40,
PDM 54);dual
purpose
sorghum
(M 35-1-1,NTJ
1,2,3,4);
Horsegram
(AK21)
--_._---------,--------~-~~--- -------~~-_. -~- -----------------'--'---'-~._---
~.--J--{C>---


51.
No.
IMD/Agro-eco region
1 2 ..
..
lMSD :Gujarat, Daman,
Dadra and Nagar
AER: 4.2
'. MPS: Pearlmillet
AD :Khera, Gandhinagar,
, .Mehsana, Sabarkanta, parts
\.,.~.'olAt1medabad,Panchmahal.
Banaskantha and Vadodara
Districts.
13.
..
;.~ .
14~ IMSD :Saurashtra, Kutchand
Diu,
,AER:2.4
'l.MPS :PearimillEltlGroundnut
AD :.Rajkot, Sunder'garh,
Jamnagar, partsof Junagarh,
Bhavnagar and Amr~li
15. IMSD :Orissa .
AER: 18.4
AD: Uplands and medium
lands of Balasore, Cuttack,
Puriand Ganjam
Probable date of occurrence of railfan
15-31 July Crop Plan 16-31August
1-15 August
3 4 5
Clusterbean,
castor, fodder
sorghum
.
Ertectground nut
(GG 2;·5,7);
Sesame' (<31,G2):
Hybridbajra (GHB ;-.
235, 31-6, 558); .
Green' gram (KB51, GM4);
t:llackgram (T9);
pigeonpea
(ICPL87,GT 101
A.Upland
(Rainfed)
Blackgram (Setaria!Pant
30);
Greengram (PDM
54/K851); .sesame
(Uma or local),
Earlypigeonpea
(UPAS120/lCPL
87); shortduration
raddish, okra,
cowpea (SEB 1,2)
and clusterbean as
vegetables
B.Medium land
(rainfed shallow
submerged low
land)
Directline sowing
of shortduration
(about 100 days)
rice varieties such as
Khandaqlr, Pathra,
Lalitgirior
Udaygiri
5
Thinningof already
planted crops. '
Castor and fodder
sorghum
Castor, fodder
sorghum,
fodder
sorqhum +
cowpeas
;<-,
Blackgram (T9); Forage maize!
Forage maize/': .sorghum
sorghum '(GFS 5), '(Gundri
castor (Gauch 1);; GF~ 5),
sesame (Puruat) sesame
,'. (Purua1)
A.Upland
(Rainfed)
Niger, blackgram,
raddish, beans and
cowpea as veg..;
etables, early
Pigeonpea (ICPL
871UPAS 120)
B. Medium land
(rainfed shallow
sUbmerged low
land)
Directlinesowing of
extra early ricevari-
eties such as
Heera, Vandana,.
Kalinga 111, ZHU
11-26, Rudra,
Sankar and Jaldi5
I
A.Upland
(Rainfed)
Horsegram,
sesame,
Niger,
Cowpea
B. Medium
land
Land
preparation
F or sowing of
pre- rabicrops
like mustard!
greengraml
early
pigeonpea.


3. Crop-Group and Crop-wise Conting~tricyPlan for Kberit Seeson
!tel,
ill JjC;(-; j j~j \
and where a normal transplanted rice crop is ruled out, SI1011:duration upland
ricevarieties or those ricevarieties that are suitable for direct seeding eitherin
dry or wet condition and subsequent ftoodinq are recommended by direct seeding.
Incertain areas, delayed iransplantinqcan be done witholder nurseries ifthese
varieties are suitable. Suitable ricevarieties for different situations are listed in
section 8 .
".
.b.' Irrigated
.:r ,Irrigationat 1 to'.4days after disappearance Of ponded water in case ot rice
produces almost similaryields as are 'obtained with continuous submergence.
Thispractice economizes more than.3d%.of irrigationwater without lowering
the riceyields: Farmers maybe advised to -strictlytollowthisirrigationschedule'
for already transplanted ricecrop.
•:.....Last irrigationto paddy can' be terminated 14-17 days before harvest. Thissaves ....
about '16 cm of irrigationwater without any yield reduction. The farmers need to"
be apprized about thispractice well .lnadvance as the short duration early
maturing paddy varieties are likelyto mature by mid September. The irrigationto
such varieties may be withheld beyond August 31 and the same water can be
effectively used for main season planted varieties. .
.:.In case rainsare delayed beyond July31, 2010, maize, green gram and black
gram crops should be preferred .
•:. Certain varieties of maize and pulses can be grown upto AugList15, 2010 .
•:. Under delayed monsoon arrivalsituation ricenurseries are over matured. While'
transplanting such nurseries 1/3rd upper portion can be cut! removed before
planting.
B. Pulses
.:.In the event of late monsoon arrivalthe pulse crops which can be planted
.preferably up to. 15th August or till151 week of September are: Blackgram,
Greengram, Pigeonpea and Mothbean
.:.-Incase of greengram and blackgram allvarieties recommended forkharifseason
may be grown up to firstweek of September. Sowing after firstweek of
.September may be done only forthe purpose of fodder .
•:. Only specificvarieties of pigeonpea may be grown up to firstweek of September
whichare recommended forpre-rabiplanting.These varieties are Bahar, Pusa 9
and rabiArhar20(5) forthe States of Bihar,W. Bengal, Orissa, Andhra Pradesh,
Maharashtra and Gujarat.
fo rharvp,,;i
6


-:.Crops likemothbean can be grown forgrain as well as fodder tillthe second
week of August inthe states of Rajasthan and Gujarat.
.:.Most of the pulses crops are sensitive to water logging. Incase, heavy rains
occur over a shortperiod, excess water should be drained immediately .
•:. As far as possible Kharifpulses should be cultivated following Ridge-"'french
system.
c. Oilseeds
-·:·In case of oilseed crops, sesame dln'b~ planted up to thirdweek of August
whereas niger can be sown upto September. Since the per hectare requirement
of seed in case of sesame.is very low, allout effortsmust be made to cover
more 'area under sesame to utilize;the land inthe event of failureof other'-kharif
crops likemaize, pearlmilletand other minor millets.. .. . .
-.:._Similarly,castor can be grown successfullyup to firstweek of September in
'areas whichare suitable forcastor cultivation.
•:. Theothertwo important oilseed crops likesoybean and groundnutare likelyto -
.sufferheavily in case rainsare delayed beyond end JUly.Howeve(groundnut
can be planted up to Se-ptember in a f~w southern states. Therefore,efforts
should.be made to cover more area under groundnut inthe States of Ahdhra
Pradesh, Tamil Nadu andKarnataka.
- -
.:.Since the monsoon rains-during2010 are likelyto be continued tillSeptember,
there seems good possibilityof coverage for toria!mustard in the States of
.Rajasthan, Punjab, Haryana, Madhya Pradesh, UttarPradesh, Biharand W.
Bengal. Therefore greater -emphasis isto be given to cover more area under
Toria/mustard crop in case of extended rainfallscenario. Seed of all
recommended varieties of torianeeds to be assured to take fulladvantage of
extended monsoon phase.
D. Sugarcane
Thefollowing contingency plan forthe benefit of the cane growers to protectthe
crop from complete failureincase of scanty rainsldrought issuggested.
a. Soil Moisture Conservation
.:.Incase drought likesituationarises the dried lower ieaves of the standing cane
crop may be stripped and used as mulch inthe inter-rowspaces of the crop.
Thiswillconserve available soilmoisture by controllingweeds and cuttingdown
surface evaporation .
•:. The interculturaloperations may be undertaken to create dust mulch to break
soilcapillariesforchecking surface moisture loss.
b. EfficientIrrigationManagement
.:.Extensive (lightlifesaving) irrigationover largercane area ratherthanintensive
(heavy) irrigationinlimited area may be practiced.
•:. 10 adopt to alternate furrowirrigationto effect water economy.
7


e- Under limited water availabilityconditions, irrigationsshould be scheduled to
cover the drought susceptible varieties and ratoon stands in the firstinstance.
The irrigationmay be phytophased to avoid soil moisture stress at consecutive
criticalstages of crop grovvth.
, i
'land to maintain optimum soilmoisture regime.
ent of shortfallinth~~h"ailabili'tiofcanal water, itissuggested thatth~
may, .adopt alternate furrow irrigationwhich will economize water
ent by.nearty 50%). '
, '
nlcro-lrnqation,system' such as drip and, sprinklermay be advocated'
.feasible arid in the event of limited water avallability.
rone is mainly rainted. ,In thiszone, .cotton is grown mainly as rainfed
iis subjected to the .vagaries of monsoon. 'The following moisture
itlon measures are suggested for effective utilizationof the available
the soil as 'well as the likelyprecipitationin the' remaining part of the ', .'
rientof ridge and furrow across the slope for effective conservation of
.tureas well as rainwater.
rqanicmulches such as subabul lopping, straw etc to conserve the soil
d intercultureoperation to keep the field weedfree.
srwater resources are available such as lakes, ponds, wells etc.
e irrigationscan be provided to the crop.
igatiol1 system as suggested above may also be adopted wherever
for improving the water use efficiency and to cover more area.
input management through foliarapplications issuggested.
areas of central zone where sowing has not been undertaken so far,
nation varieties recommended for respective states by State Variety
Committee/Central Variety Release Committee may be planted latest
31, ~!01O. Beyond end July,alternative crops such as castor and
ea may be cultivated looking to the local conditions.
Itingency measures suggested for central zone are also applicable
ralnfed areas of south zone especially Andhra Pradesh and
lka
mtral zone, varieties of arboretumwhichhave higherdegree of tolerance
Ihtconditions such as Maljari(forMadhya Pradesh), AKH 4, AKA 8401,
Sweta, AKA 5, Turab,Y1 (forMaharashtra) and varieties of -herbaceum
arat) may be cultivated.
aturlrq v8Jif,ties of G, hitsutumsuch as P!{V 081, Rajat, Anja!', LRA
~fmonsoon.
8
~f~.'I'...··."~! ,.


F. Pearlmillet
.:.Planting of pearl millethybridsisnot advisable. Even early maturing hybridslike
HHS 67 should not be planted beyond end July.
·:·Wherever crop has been planted and sufferingfor moisture stress, the plant
population may be reduced and shallow interculture(dust mulching) may be
practiced.
·:·..•::l:Oepearl milletmay be grown mixed with pulses up to 1st 'week of August as
fodder crop,whichmay give at .leastfodder to some extent.
G. Sorghum.
In case.mere isdelay inmonsoon by.2-3weeks, shortduration cultivarssuch
as CSH6and CSH 14 can be preferred. Incase of staggered planting where
some farmers have already sown and others did not, increase seed rate to an
extent of 1.5times of therecommended rate and applicationof 20 kg 'ofcarbofuran "
or phorate (3g) granules inmeseed rows before sowing. are recommended to ..
safeguard against the anticipated shoot-flyattack. Other shoot-tlyoontrol :
measures (sprayingof endosulphan 2 rril!'itreof water aftersowing) can .alsobe
followed ifsoilapplicationisnot adopted. . .
H. Small Millets
a) Rayal Seema region ~f Andhra Pradesh, parts of Karnataka and
Maharashtra
Foxtail millet(knagni) isone of the choice cropsof these regions in.view of
itsdrought tolerance, freedom from major pests and diseases, photo
insensitivityand assured modest yield.For fox-tailmilletinAndhra Pradesh,
Kamataka and Maharashtra,applicationof 40:30:0kg NPKlhaas basal dose
forachieving quickgrowth and withstanding drought isrecommended.
b) Western Rajasthan
Foxtail millet(knagni) a well known drought hardy crop can give reasonable
harvest inareas where annual rainfallisless than400 mm. Varietiesof fox-
tailmillets,viz.SR 11 (Gauri)and SR 16 (Meera) are suitable fordelayed
plantingand mature in80 days. SR 16 has stay green characterand gives
higherfodder yield also.'Applicationof 10-20 kg N/ha as basal dose is
beneficialinwithstanding drought and giving higheryield. '
c) Gujarat
Small milletsare not important inthe state except inthe region of Dangs and
adjoining areas. Inyears of extreme drought and erraticmonsoon small millets
likekodo, proso and littlemilletcould be ideal cropsforcontingency planning
forproducing quicklyfodder and grain.
d) Madhya Pradesh and Chattishgarh
Littlemillet(kutki)isone of the important crops of tribalareas of M.P.and
well known forearlymaturityand resilience.Kodo milletisanother cropgrown
extensively inthese states and popular intribalareas. Kodo milletvarieties
viz.JK-76 matures in 80-85 days and RSK 155 matures in 90-95 days.
Applicationof 10-20kg N/haas basal isbeneficial.
9


I. Vegetables
<>~<> Mulching soil surface with organic material (leaf mould, FYM) and clean
cultivation.
0:0Enhancing cucurbitaceous veqetables by raising nursery in polytheriebags
followed by transplanting in order to save 2-3 irrigations.
"go:Sowing/planting cucurbitaceous vegetables adopting hilland channel system
to economise water.
._......~. :-~).' -.
.Crop andNutrient Management
:J'lncasesuqarcane crop experiences drought like situation 'inparticular'area it
.would be advisable to adopt thefollowinq management practices to save thecrop and
reviveits furthergrowth., . '. ,
.•~'Ne~dcontrol through herbicidesmay be taken-up particularlyin"lateplanted cane.
, 1 Where herbicide applicatiOnis not feasible, the weeds may be. cut and' used as'
.' surface mulch to conserve soil moisture. . "
.:. Earthing-Lipoperation coutd also be taken in autumn and timely planted. crops
"which have attained reasonable height.The furrows created in thisway may be
utilized.for lightirrigationscovering more cane area, ,
.:. If.drouqht persists,the sugarcane crop withpoor growth failing to form millable
.canes may be harvested in October to raise ratoon stand from such crop.The
harvested material may be used as seed cane forautumn planting and/or feeding
to the cattle.' .
•:. The lastdose of nitrogen meant for elongation phase, ifalready not applied, may.
be top dressed only withlightirrigationor after rains. .
.:.Spray of 2.5% urea with2.5% KCI or MOP may be useful in areas Where some.
soilmoisture isavailable. Thiswillimpart drought tolerance to plants.
Plan for autumn planting of sugarcane crop (2010-2011)
.:.The area meant forautumn sugarcane planting should be kept free of weeds and
conserve soil moisture to startearly planting .
•:. Autumn sugarcane may be intercropped withshortduration highvalue mid season
income generating crops like torie,mustard, peas, spices etc. Thiswill also
encourage farmers to go forplanting more acreage under autumn sugarcane giving
highercane yield and sugar recovery .
•:.'Winter initiated rataon of early sugarcane varieties may be intercropped withhigh
density early bulking forage crops like senjito protect .thestubble sprouts from
cold injury,enhance soilfertilityand provide forage to animals .
.It.(ConlUB1Qjelj"u::ylP!a!i1l1R~~e\f@!i1lK to AnCCmps aJ!lrdJCm~1pi[l'i]gSY5~(i?,mSl
ClOpS
10


r: I
(ii) Reduction of plant density: Incase of mid season drought the cropsshould
be suitablythinned out. In case drought occurs at very early stage, itis
always betterto resow withsubsequent rainratherthanallowing sub-optional
poor plantstand to persist.
.(iii)For drought conditions anticipatingprolonged dry spellbreaks the practices
of inter-rowcropping helps in riskdistribution.Thiscan be achieved by
including a companion crop likegreen gram, black gram, cowpea thanthe
main cropslikesorghum, pearlmillet,maize:;, ..
'(iv) The recommended dose of nitrogen applicationshoulqbe reduced by 40%
under unirrigatedconditions and should always be applied at sowing/planting ..
.On the arrivalof rains N fertilizercan be top dressed. '; .
...•., ;,,(v) .Fullrecommended dose of P and K should be ptacedasbasat dose. These: .
nutrientshelpincreasing tolerance to moisture stress. '
,.(vi) Resorting to maxi~um 'possibleuse 61organic bUlky~anures.These orqanlc .
materials helpconseniing moisture inthe soil., ..
,(vii) Recommended plant protection measures to be adopted for allthe kharif
crops as per package. ~f practicesof respective states.
(viii)Seed of sorghum, pigeonpea, mung,bean,urd bean, cow pea; groundnut,
sunflower 'and castor must be treated withThiramor Captan @ 2-2.5'g1kg .
seed before sowing.
····8.Soil and water management practices
(i) Seed beds to be kept ready so as to facilitatesowing immediately withthe
onset of rains.Fields should be properlyleveled foruniform water distribution
withinthesub-plot.
. (ii) Broad bed and furrow,ridge and furrow,compartmental' bundinq and contour
trenchland configuration may be adopted in shallow alfisolsas moisture
conservation practices. '
(iii)Furrow sowing of kharifcrops at closure plant to plantdistance withwider
interrow spacing.
(iv) Wherever economically viable, mulching should be practicedinbetween crop .
rows using locallyavailable mulching material.
(v) Wherever possible run-offmay be harvested to make provisionforprotective
irrigationat laterstage/crop ripening.
.(Vi) Major emphasis on in-siturainwater conservation, harvesting excess run-
off forre-use and groundwater recharge.
C. Some other useful irrigationwater saving practices
.:. Reduction of conveyance losses while irrigatingthe lighttextured soils.A
simple and cheap technique isto spread a polythene sheet inthefieldchannel
before irrigatingthe field and then rollitback forirrigatingthe otherfield.
•:. Wherever possible the crops should be sown on ridged plots and irrigating
every alternate furrow on rotation.Thishelps insaving of irrigationwater
and better growth and productivityof crops when planted on ridges/beds.
11
-47-~


·> Ensuring best use of rainwater. In case a rainfallof about 3-5 cm occurs
near to irrigationdate, the irrigationmay be avoided.
,,~c Ligrlterirriqatior:may bel applied durinD initialgrovvtll sto.ges \f\I!181lroot growth
islimited ..
is the most dependable source 01 irrigation,itsindiscriminate exploitation
must be avoided. In hard rock areas, for improving well yields,long and
continuous pumping should be substituted by interrnltantpumpaqo.. . .,--. -;', . ;::-" .
5..' Judicious use of Surface and Ground Water During Scanty Rainfal!! Dmught
Rainwater isthe main source of sUrfacea~dgroundwaterrecharge.ln case of.
deficient and scanty monsoon. rainfallrecharging of grQundwater may hot take place.·
Water management issues related to deficient rainfalland need attention include (a) less
exploitation a! groundwater for irrigation,(b) increased concentration of salts in the soil
profileand groundwater, (c) increased concentration pf specificions likefluorides and
nitrates in water and (d) non-availability/less availabilityof drinking water for animals in'
naturalstorage ,structuressuch as ponds, lakes etc. Immediate steps needed to make'
efficientuse of available sUrfa~e and groundwater in such'areas are :
a) Resorting to drip and sprinkler irrigation practices wherever possible
particulartyfor commercial crops ineiiJdingfruitorchards and widely spaced
'vegetables. For rowcrops alternate rows may be irrigated. Raised bed planters
save 35 to 50% irrigationwater and enable raised bed farming which'
particularlysuitsto vegetable cultivationbesides cereals, pulses and oilseeds:
b) Studies on groundwater resources indicate that25 to 84% of the poor quality
water are also being used for cropping in several states of the country such
as Ap, Gujarat, Haryana, Karnataka, MP, Rajasthan and UP. Based upon
climate, soil,water and crop factors, the Central SoilSalinityResearch Institute,
Kamal has standardized water qualityguidelines whichmust be kept in mind
while irrigatingthe crops using poor qualitygroundwater indrought prone areas.
Ina normal rainfallyear salinitydeveloped insoildue to poor qualityirrigation
water gets leached or washed. However, thisdoes not happen in a below
normal rainfallyear and one has to deal withrelatively highersalinitylevels.
Some specificstrategies forefficientuse of poor qualitywater during deficient
rainyear are :
i) Mixed and/ or alternate use of limited good qualityand underground poor
qualitywaters forirrigation.
ii) Cultivation of salt tolerant varieties likeCSR-10, CSR-13, CSR-27, CSR-
30 and CSR-36 of rice;KRL 1-4, KRL-19of wheat; CS-52, CS-54 and
CS-56 of mustard; CSG-8962 of gram.
iii) Farmers having residual sodium carbonate (RSC) water for irrigation
should be encouraged to use thiswater judiciously by applying gypsum
as soilamendment. Inorder to facilitatequickutilization,itisrecommended
that gypsum should be kept in baskets (made from bamboo/mulberry
sticks) and covered with jute sack and placed under the source of
(:-_~)i-,_-J (r ",li ~--);.~i-..)
12


c)
iv) The states of Haryana, Punjab, Rajasthan, Madhya Pradesh, Uttar
Pradesh and Andhra Pradesh should therefore, need to take special
extension programmes and provide gypsum freely!and or soft loan term
basis to promote use of alkaliwaters.
v) Inthe saline areas, ifthere isless rainfalland farmers are unable to take
,Kharifcrop, itis proposed thatthey be advised to give pre-sowing
irrigationwithsaline waters and .go infortoriecultivationinSeptember.
The farmers having sali~e:wate~ may go forIsabgolcultivationas this
crop can withstand the'saline water irrigationupto EC 8dS/m during the
rabiseason and give profitable·yield." Matricariaisanother medicinal
crop whichcan be cultivated even upto soilpH9.5.
-lna sizeable are~ of Hajasthan, '~;jrouRdwaterisalso loaded withfluorides
.and nitrates.Hand pumps have been· designed by state agencies forsafe
"use of these waters fordrinking.Each pump costs about Rs.5000-GOOO.
Immediate effortsare required toinstallthese attachments inalldrougtit .
prone .areas having fluoride and-nitrate problem ingroundwater .
. vi)
.....
13


6. Specmc Contingefit Crop Plan for Rainied Regioi'il§ of Rajasthan and Haryana
~lrObJahledatl~ oil Duration of
tt,ecmns.m:e 01 ociln1zil! crop, seed--'~-----I~---'-------11 .~(ell I i; )/- t ii':' " ::'~ ' .
I
L Pearl millet -j- Raj. "171, Yes Yes Yes 185-90days
Cowpea (for. MH 169 + 65-95 days -
Fodder) C 152, Charodi-t , _ Yes_ Yes Yes 10% higher
Or B 16,R8 19 _ Seed rate
Pearl millet + - Raj. 171, MH J69 Yes Yes. No 85-g0da~h~
Moth (for +
Fodder) - .RM040, RM025~. .60-75 days,
(forfodder) 1.0% higherseed
rate
2. -Moth bean ' RMO 40, RM0257 Yes Yes .-
Moth 60-75 days,
(forfodder) Bean 10% higher
RM040 seed rate
3. Cluster bean RGC 936, Yes Yes For fodder 85-90 days,
,- RGC 1002 (RGC 936) 10% higher
seed rate
4. Cluster bean Pusa Nav Bahar Yes Yes Yes 65-70 days,
(Vegetable Pusa Sada Bahar 10% higher
Type) seed rate
5. Cowpea Pusa Kamal . Yes Yes Yes 65-70 days,
(Vegetable Pusa Do Fasli 10% higher
Type) seed rate
14
.--_.~-----~--------------- ---------- .. - - --- ------_._------


":;;':.-
7. Contingent Plan Specificto Irrigated Areas of Punjab, Haryana and Western
Uttar Pradesh .
51. Situation Option Rainfall Status
No. Crop Variety Before August August Remarks
,- August 2-10 11-20,
. 1
1. Rice area Shortduration Govinda Yes No No Seed
-- ~'Nhichcould early maturing .. -", availability'C ,,
not be trans-, rice, AllHybrids Yes Yes For to
planted till ·Maize Fodder be ensured ,
July31,2010 ;
,
'2. In'case rain is Maize:.-.,. AllHybrids Yes.- Yes Yes Seed
delayed Caster. Hybrids Yes Yes No availabilityto
beyond first Black gram ..Mash338 Yes .. Yes . No be ensured. '
week of Green 'gram Moong 613, . YeS Yes No Conserve
August nearly : 668 moisture for
to% of .. "
early Rabi '
transplanted oilseeds and
paddy may pulses
with~rand
may need
"replacement
3. In a situation Maize, Sorghum, Ohaincha
of delayed Pearlmillet may seed may not
rains beyond be grown as be available
August 20 fodder crops. in sufficient
Dhaincha may quantity
be planted as a
green manure
crop
15
- 51--


2.
68, Raj 171, ICMH 356, ~8B 2
iFm Ra1asthau! :CSH5, CSf-113, CSH 9, CSH i6, CSH 14, SPV 96,
CSH 17, CSV 15, CSV 10. ,"
For Gujarat : CSH 9, CSH 13, CSH16, CSV 15, CSV13,GJ 39,
GJ37, GSH 1, GH 40, GH 41. :
For Andhra Pradesh: .CSH16, CSH 9, CSH 13, PSH 1; C5V 13,
SPV 462, CSV 15.
For Rajasthan: Mahikanchan, Prakash, Ganga-ll, Shakti,Pusa Hybrid
.1, Pusa Hybrid 2. .
For GUjarat : Gui Makkit , GUj Makki 2, Prakash; Pusa Hybj , Pusa
Hyb 2, Gaurav, Shakti... '..•'. ,
For Andhra Pradesh .:Harsha, Deccan 103, Deccan 1'09, Deccan
107, MMH 133, Prakash, Pro 311, Bio 9681.
For Rajasthan: AT.124 "
For Gujarat: AT 54, AT 103
For Andhra Pradesh :'YLM 11, T 78, Sweta Til
Allavailable hybridsand varieties .
For AndhraPradesh : Jyoti,Deepti, Kranti.
For Rajasthan: PKVSH27(H), PKVSH 9
For Gujarat :Guj Sunflower, Sungene 85 (H)
For Andhra : TNAU-SUP-l0 .
Allavailable improved varieties such as RMO 40, RMO'257
For Rajasthan : V 50S, Pusa Kamal, Pusa Do Fasli
For Gujarat: GC 3, Pusa Kamal, Pusa Do Fasli
For Rajasthan: ML-267, Pusa 105,HMG 62, MUM 2-
For Gujarat : PDM 11, Pusa 105, BM 4, Guj Mung 3
For Rajasthan: WWG 2, Pusa 9072, Madhura 295, IGG 407, IGG 450
For Madhya Pradesh: JM -721 TJM-3
For Rajasthan: T-9,Pant U-19
For Gujarat: T-9,Pant U-19
For Andhra Pradesh: T-9,Pant U-19, LBG -17, LBG-402, LBG-20
For Madhya Pradesh: Barkha (ABU-38), Azad Urd-3
For Rajasthan: AK-21, PHG 9
For Rajasthan: Gavari, Meera.
For Andhra Pradesh: Prasad, Krishnadevaraya, Narasiharaya, AK-132-1
For Rajasthan: DP safed, FS 277, HFG 119, HFG 156, Bundel Guar
1, Bundel Guar 2
For Gujarri31t: Bunde! Guar 1, Bundel Guar 2
, ".~,',.
3. Maize
4. Sesamum
5. Castor
6. Sunflower
7.
8.
Mothbean
Cowpea
9. Green gram
10. Blackgram
11.
12.
Horsegram
Foxtait millet
13. Fodder Crops
Clusterbean
16


'Sf.No-.·
1
.Crop
2
Suitable'varieites
3
.~..-..;
,.•••j
~-
Sugarcane
For Gujarat: SSG 59-3;MFSH 3, Harasona, GUj Forage Sorghum 1,
HC 136, Raj Chari1, PC 6, PC 9, PC 23.
For Andhra Pradesh: PC 6, PC 9, PC 23, He 136, Raj Chari1, SSG
59-3, X 998, MFSH 3, Hara sona.
For Rajasthan: Bundel Deenanath 1, Bundel Deenanath 2.'
For Gujarat :Bundel Deenanath 1;Buildel Dennanath 2.
For Andhra Pradesh :Bundel Deenanath 1, Bundel Dennanath 2.
For Guiarat: Bundellobl8:'1','·: l3una~ltobia 2,EL 4216"UPC 287,
UPC 5286, UPC .8705 ..,
For Gujarat: .cei
For Andhra Pra4esh' :NB 221.,IGFRI1 0, CO 1. .
For Rajasthan ':'Africantall
.For Gujarat: Africantall ,
ForAndhra' pradesh:.African·tall.-.
'ForGujarat :B~ndel sem-t, JlP4~.,
:For Andhra Pradesh: Bu'ndel"sem-f,JLP4 ';
For Andhra Prad~h: Ma,cue~ni Hamail
(I)".NorthZone (Haryana, Punjab, Rajasthan Western U.P.),
, (ar· Desivarietles :, " .
L0327,lD 491,HD,~07,GR8,l:.ohit
. (b) American varieties:BikaneriNarma; H 777. ' , .' ..
(Ii) Central zone (M.P.,Maharashtra;Gujarat)
,;(a)·.OesiVarieties :Maljarl,AKH 4, AKA 8401, Y-1, G.Got 11, G.
, Cot 13.~.Cot 17,G.Cot19. '
(b), American varieties: Bikanen Narma, H 777
South zone (Kamataka, TarnnNadu, A.P.)
(a) Desi Varieties:RaichurSf.OB3-12, K 10, K 12
(b) American :LRA5166"" ,',' '" '"
TropicalZone (A.P.;M.S."Ka~a:tal<a.TamiiNadu. Kerala. Orissa,M,P..
Gujarat)
Co 740, Co7219. Co8011, Co 8014, Co 86010. Co 86 032.Co 92002,
Co 85019, Co 91010, CoM 88121 . "
(Krina)CoG 93076, '85 R186 (Harna), CoV 92102, GoA 89085 (85 A
261), CoR 80001. CoC 671. ." '
Sub TropicalZone (Punjab.Haryana, u.P..Bihar)
Co 1148, CoS 767, Co 7717, Co 87263, BO 91.80 128
Suitable'Upland ricevarieties
Sulta,ble across the states: Tulasi,Vandana. Aditya, Rasi.Jawahar
Rice 3-45,Anjali .
Andhra Pradesh:somasila
Chattisgarh:Dateswari
Kerala: Harsha
Madhya Pradesh: Rasmi
Orissa:lalitagiri,Udayagiri
Rajasthan:Vagadhan
West Bengal: Kanika, Jamini.
19.
.20.,. Fietd bean..•..:
, .
21. GUi,:,eagrass
22. CottOn
/.'
i·".
24. Rice "
17


,.--_~-~'~_'~'---'-'-"~""~,,"-"'-~·'---,,--~---~--,-~,,~~-,.'---'-'------"--,,~_-,~-,---'~_-~_--~--~i'
rz~"©[g} 5JlIJalEllQ;~®\j'~rr:a®ar""~ !
,_25. 'Millets
__' t7
Krishnaladevaraya and Narasimaharaya: produce more stover than
prasad.
AK i32~1: highlydrougt1Holer~nt.o" ,"_",_ .. _,. :L;, ,.- ,...:.
(Ii)>W~tem Rajasth~m-,;-a=::::""---:-~~
Foxtail- millet:'
SA 11 (Gavari), SR16 (Meera) .' •
,(iii)for M.P.and Chhatisgarh ,-
Littlemillet: .,~ . "'} - _ c-' •
JK~8 Matures in 70-75 days. SuiteiblEffor contingency planning._
Evolved at JNKW" Jabalpur~ "
Kodo millet:JK-76,RBK-155
26.c Fodder crops (i) ,ForWestem Rajasthan (under hitsonSet'ot,Monsoon)
_Field bean:' , •Bunder Sem-1 ' "--v "-
"Anjan Grass: ' Marwar '-"jan '.
YellowAnjan:'-':MarwarOhaman ,,-', <,
, For.sclu",shtra~e{lIO~'OfGuja.:at(ur1derlate onset of Monsoon)
.'Marver,grass:.: m.t1G~1' "
Oharaf grass: GAUD-l... :'.,0-:."'
F~rPunjab & Haryana (under late onset of Monsoon) ,
, -. Sorghum (Single cut), HC';1~, He 171. HC-308. HC-6
,Sorghum (Multicut),Punjab Sudex, LX-250. . .
Maize:" J-100<) ,
teosInte:'.". ~.rt-r.
~" cs-sa ....." ...Guar.' '. HFG-156. Guara-80. Bundel Guar-3
L8blab bean: JL.P-4.' . , - '
Guinea grass: PGG-10, PSG-101
FoiWeStem' UttarPradesh(under late enset of Monsoon)
Sorghum (Single cut):Pusa chari-6,HC-136, UP chari-1,UP chari-
.2, Pant chari-3sOn.;Jhum(Multicut):Meethi Sudan SSG-59-3, Pusa
C~ii-23. _'., ." '.. ' .'
Cowpea : UPC-287, Bundel Lobia-2.
Lablab bean : JLP-4~'
(v) .ForMadhya Pradesh &, Chattisgarh (under late onset of
.Monsoon)
Sorghum (Single cut):JC-6, HC-171. He-308
Sorghum (Multicut)JC-69. .
Cowpea: UPC-287, UPC-5286.
Lablab bean: JLP-4. .
_,_~~_. ' ,-_~_~ ,_,__~_~_~' ._~~.,'~...~~_._~~~. ~' ~ ..~_~. ~.J
II
i
tit..~
~.
r~.
~'-'-'.'"
[.
I',,'
r;


Shortduration rice'varieties.and! hybrids,released during; fast five-)lears fF1€ru.ded!:Vrll'endel7"~
CR Dhan 40, Sahyadri 4, Abhishek, Gontra Sidhan, Sushak Samrat, PA,5129:, DASH 2
and GK 500 3 .
(a) State-wise listof pulse crops varieties is as under:
Mungbean
f
State Varieties -
Andhra Pradesh WGG 2, LGG 407, LGG 450, Madhira 295
" -,.,'-. I
Assam Pant Maong 4, Meha . ','
..
Bihar& Jharkhand Pant Maang 2, Pant-Maang 4,Narendra Maong 1, HUM 1, IPM 02-3
Delhi MH-Q2-25, IPM 02-3
..
Gujarat Gujarat Maang 4, IPM.02-3, Meha,PKVAKM4
Haryana .. MH 02-15, IPM 02-3! 'Pusa Vish~1
. ..
Himachal Pradesh Pant Maang 6
andJ&K
-.....
Kamataka HUM 1, China Maang ',.
Madhya Pradesh & . BM 4,JM 721, TJM 3, PKVAKM.4, HUMf.
Chhattisgarh
Maharashtra Phule M 2, TARM 1, HUM 1, PKAKM 4.
Orissa TARM1, PDM 139, Pusa 9072, OBGG -52, LGG 460. . + .
Punjab ML 613. MH 02-15, IPM 02-3, Pusha Vishal,SML 668, Pant Maong-S
Rajasthan RMG 268, SML 668, Meha, MH -15, IPM'02-3
Uttar Pradesh & Narendra Maang 1, ~ant Maang 4, Pant Maang 5
Uttaranchal
.
TamilNadu COGG 912, CO 5, VBN (Gg) 2, TM 96-2, Pusa 9072, ADT-3,TM 96-2
West Bengal Pant Maang 4, Pant Maang 5


Andhra Pradesh KU 301, Pant U 31, WBG 26, IPU 2-43, Ttl94~2,LBG 685, LBG 402,
,,--_~-_~ ..--'-I
l~,~,;;-~r.l!:T! I
;.<..•
i',.j
Bihar 8,Jharhlland iPU 94-"/(Uttara), Birsaurdt , Pant U 30, Pant U 31,
Gularat TPU 4, AKLJ4, GU,PU 3111
, Mash 338,'PantU 31, Sekhar
Pant U 19, UG 218~ Pant U 31, NDCJ 99-2
KU 301, WBG 26,WBU, 108, L,BG 4.02, LBG Mariikya, 1, Pant U 30i ,
TU94-2 '.
,- Haryana
Himachal Pradesh
Kamataka
Madhya Pradesh & , ' TPU4, Jawahar Urd 2, Jawahar Urd 3, Pant U 30, Azad urd 3, ."
'Chhattisgarh' '
Maharashtra TPU 4, Pant U 30,'TAU 1,TAU 2, Azad Urd 3, AKU15, AKU 4
(Melghat)
KU,301, WBG 26, IPU2-43
IPU94-1, (Uttara), Krishna
IPU94-1(Uttara), Krishna.Pant U31, KU 300
IPU 94-1 (Uttara), Narendra Urd 1, Pant U 30, Pant urd 31, KU 92-1
Orissa
Punjab
, Rajasthan
UttarPradesh &
Uttaranchal
'-.'
Tamil Nadu." !
,West Bengal
ADT5,Pant U 30, Vainban-3, Vamban-4, C06
IPU94-1 (Uttara), KU 92-1, WBU 109
Pigeonpea
State Shortduration varieties
Punjab UPAS 120, Pusa 855, AI201. AL 15, Pusa 992
Haryana Manak, UPAS 120, Pusa 855. Pusa 922
Delhi Pusa992
Rajasthan Manak, UPAS 120, Pusa 855
West u.P. Manak,UPAS 120, Pusa 855
Tamil Nadu CORG 9701, Co 5, Vambean 3
" -~
Madhya Pradesh ICPL87,
:----------~.-----.-'~-lGAUT-OiHE,TT 401 i
.-._.---_.~_-_.-----_~_-_~_--_.-..--.. - ----_.-----
·-sL--


(b) Listof varietiesl Hybrids of sunflower and Castor released by Central Variety
Release Committee during 2005-2010 '
SUNFLOWER
SI. Name of the varietyl .'.' "
Characteristics/Traits States
No. hybrid! inbred line ,
',-
1. CO-5 V Yield (Kg/ha) - 1000-17000 Tamil Nadu,',
Days of maturity - 85-90~
~ - Oil-content (%) - 39-42.,.," ~.' ,-:'"
,-'/"
YI~ld ,(Kglha) -1300-1600
,
2. RSFH-I , :;"!-f' Kamataka
(Tunga) - -c-,-,
-Days of maturity - 95:-100
- '-~: -Oilcontent (%) - 40-41 -
" '
,
3. HSFH-848 H Yield (Kglha) - 1200-1500 -, Haryana, - ' -
.- - .: - Days-of maturity - 95-,100 '- -Oilcontent (%) ~ 40-4,2 ;
, ,
-'
..
4. TAS-82 V Black seed variety Maharashtra ...'
Yield (Kglha) - 800:-1200
Days. ofmaturity -:-90-100
<, Oilcontent (%) - 40-42 ....-
5. LSF-8 V Tolerant to downy mildew, rust Maharashtra
"
and Altemetie,
Yield (Kglha) - 1300-1400
Days of maturity - 90-95
Oilcontent (%) - 36-39
6. DRSH-I -+ H Yield (Kglha) - 1300-1600 AllIndia during
(PCSH-243) Days of maturity - 95-100 Rabi-summer
Oilcontent (%) - 40-42
7. DRSH-113 V Yield (Kglha) - 1200-1500 AllIndia-
Days of maturity - 90-98
. Oilcontent (%) - 36-39
8. KBSH-53 H Yield (Kglha) - 1700-2700 Kamataka
Days of maturity - 95-100
Oilcontent (%) - 42-44
Tolerant to powdery mildew
9. PSH-569 Yield (Kglha) - 2000-2200 Punjab
Days of maturity - 100
Oilcontent (%) - 40
21
·-S'-.:f--


f~v" ~")j:t.lfiidllilJ,l){~dlin""
-/. DCH5-j9 ~-~ Resistant to Fusarium wilt, Bornrainfed and
.leaf hoppers irrigated areas, all
Yield (Kglha) - 1740-2130 over the country
Days of maturity - 105-110
Oilcontent-,50
2. GCH7 Resistant to nernadote-wilt Irrigated areas of.
complex Gujarat
.Yield (Kglha)- 2450
Days of maturity "':'110-120
Oil-content s- 49
3. Jwala- (48-1) V Resistant to wilt,capsule AllIndia
borer and tolerant to Jassid
and Botrytis
, Yield (Kglha) - 1100-2000
Oilcontent (D!~)_48
4. GC-3 V Yield (Kglha) - 2340 Irrigated areas of
Oilcontent('Yo) - 49,6 Gujarat
Resistant to wilt,tolerant to
Macrophomina root rot
5. YRCH~I H Yield (Kglha) -1800 Tamil Nadu
Days of maturity -120 -115
. Oilcontent ('Yo)- 49
.V=Variety;H=Hybrid
22
----_~~~_-------------_~_----- . _~._-_. __._--_~~_--------------_ ..
---5 1:;'----


9. Availabilityof Certified Seed of khar;!Crops During 2010 from PublicSector
Seed Corporations (quintals)
Crops Requirement Availability
,
~Paddy 5353906 5999845
Ragi 27241 \ 30874
Awdo 400 429"-'
"
,.-"-- ' .
'.";,'Maize 755761 903034" ,
~:,~~'. ~-. . 254608 2~5094::;,:~"BaJra , '
,..-'9war.: 157105 1?4420 ,,'
. ,
"
~:.:l~,; Total Cereals 6549021 7403696"
,..,:Urd .'
133984 188109
Cowpea 21458, 21458,
" Moong 179612 ..
189873"~j
,
.
Horse Gram 372!3 650·
Field Bean 350 350,
Moth 15300 5759
Arhar 200677 226985
Rajmash 1102 700
Total Pulses 556211 633883
Castor 43716 64378
Ground Nut 1825967 2006427
Niger 1517 1069,
Til 20502 , 27488
Soybean 2962515 3580675
Sun Flower 45001 52295
Total Oilseeds 4899218 5732332
Cotton 192686 253320
Jute .
38392 84775
Total Fiber 231078 338095
Bajra Napier Hybrid 25 25
Guar 76003 84830
Sudan Grass 200 200
.TotalFodder 76228 85055.~_._--'-- -----------_.
v \~....... i .:» .» j~ .•-, ,l-:"r' ;' !~ "" Z .r -'1 •~i iGradO ~otal 1 "_2,_'_I 1_7_;:JO '_'_L_!J_C_6", _
23


(1 Livestock suffers even more than human beinqs during ()below normal! scanty
minfail year. Dutin~Jbelow normal !c:inJaily08.ddrougllt year there islarqe scale
I) j I
.-"T.-'.
fodder. Migration of the animals from Rajasthan to Madhya Pradesh and Uttar
Pradesh is an age-old drought escaping strategy. Fodder grasse~; are also
generally transported from Madhya Pradesh Plateu to Maharashtraand Gujarat.
'" '~-The.best option isto establishcattle camps in-assured irrigationpa~t:~f the-drouqht
prone areas. in case of Rajasthan, these camps should be established along
i~di':aGandhi Canal where water fordrinking and growing fodder ISeasily a~~i·iable.·
--Facilities_likestoring densified roughages transported from othe-rparts-of the-
c~untry'should also be-established adjacent to _these ~amps. In'~ase 6fsev~re
_drought immediate efforts willP~-needed to grow fodder crops like.oats,' barley,
Kasniari.~lucernetc. during September-October in Indira Gan~hi-Canal areas ..
• Resorting to alternate day watering tocamel, sheep and goats. Experimental------
evidences show that even watering twice a week did not have much adverse
effect on body weight of the sheep.
• Avoiding long distance grazing during scanty rainfall/drought period as tired
animals need more and frequent watering and feeding
+ • _Periodic health check-up of all animals in the cattle camps and following of
recommended vaccination schedule forallmajor diseases of the livestock should
be taken on priority.Deworming willimprove fodder and feed .absorption.
• Special care is required for productive, lactating and pregnant animals. These
animals must be supplemented with additional concentrates.
(a) Ensuringavailabilityofqualityfodder
During sub-optimal monsoon/drought, availabilityof green fodder and natural
grasses is drastically reduced. Even the supply of crop residue, normally used as
maintenance ration , is reduced whereas demand is increased due to lesser supply of
greens. To mitigate/ moderate the situation and to save the animals, following strategy
may be adopted in those areas where there isscarcityof rain or drought like situation.
(i) Catch fodder crops of maize, bejre,cowpea, bajra+ cowpea, maize + cowpea
may be taken-up on availabilityof lightshowers even upto Auqust-Soptember.
24


productive animals. However, substandard wheat having very highaflotoxin
content should be avoided as the same may resultinabortion inpregnant
animals.
.,\ ',~,
(iiil-Effortsshould be made to increase the production of supplements likeUMMB
(Urea Molasses Mineral Block) lick,whichcan be easily transported (as
animal chocolate) to ~,e _o~ere~, to the animals along withcrop residues to
increase theirpalatabilityand digestibility:".'., .
'.(iv) Possibilityof feeding of tree leaves after lopping anc(grazing of grasses in
forest areas may be explored inconsultation withForest Department. Pods,
of trees 'like'Prosopis juliflo;acan be 'collected andsupplemented as feed
source. These pods contain nearly 1;3% protein and 25-30% sucrose. In.. ~ '. . . " . .
Gujarat, these pods are already used .upto:30%ofth~ total rationofthe
animals. Itsleaves can 'also 'be used' as fodder upto 100/0of the ration.
Similarly,leaves and fruitso! othertrees such as Leticaenaleucocephala,
Alianthusexcels,Prosopis cinereris,Salvadorapersica,AcaciaSPP,Albizia
spp, etc.may be collected to supplement proteincontent i~ roughages and'
moderating fodder. scarcity.
(v) Vegetable! fruitwaste may be collected from sabzimandies and factories
processing such foods (likeSAFAL). These are generally highmoisture
feeds. In moist form, these could be distributedto farmers around the
factories.Aftersun-drying these could be transported to deficitareas. The
nutritivevalue6f these byproductsisreported quiethigh.Apartfrom providing
additional feed resources, suchtype of recycling also helpsinreducing the
environmental pollution. '
, (vi) Animal camps may be organized along nearby canals like IndiraGandhi
Nahar of Rajasthan having adequate drinking water. Farmers along the
canals may be persuaded to cultivatefodder crops only and may even be
compensated suitably.
(vii)A preliminaryestimate indicates thatabout 20 milliontones of ricestraw is
burnt in Punjab, Haryana and UP alone which creates problem of
environmental pollutiori.Thiscan be properlyharvested, bailed, densified
and fortifiedusinq 4% urea or molasses and transported to areas of fodder
scarcity.Standardised machinery for harvesting, bailing,densification and
fortificationisavailable in the market. Some budget should be earmarked
out of the Calamity Relief Fund or National Calamity Contingency Fund for
10,t
25


implementation of thisplan on priority.Perennial grasses likeBhabhar grass
tEuteiopstsbinafa), guinea grass (Penicum maximum), napier hybrid,
Oicharithiurnennutetutn,Chloris'gcwana etc. whichgrow naturally Ourinr,]
bailed and fortifiedfor animal iee,ding eitherat site or transported to scarcity\
areas.
. .
(viii)Sugarcane tops arid dry sugarcane leaves from sugarcane growing areas
may be transported,enrich~dcfo~crUde proteincontent and fed in scarcity_. .
areas. Inareas where sugarcane crop maybe drying due to moisturestress,
whole crop can be harvested :a.nd used as fodder .:
(b) Extended rainfallvls-a-vls green fodder. strategy
(i) F~dder crops iike rapeseed af1d'~ust~rd,':Chin~se cabbage, gobhi.sarson
.and maize maybe sown inSeptember forfodder purpose wherever feasible.. , ,
These crops wi I,'be harvested by November to facilitatethe sowing of rabi
cereals. '<, . "
. . .'.
(ii) Under irrigatedconditions, sowing of be,rseemwithChinese cabbage inlast
week of September may be taken up for early availabilityof green fodder.
Under less availabilityof irrigationwater Senji and lucern may be preferred
over berseem cultivation.
(iii)Dual purpose crops like barely (variety BH 75) may be sown in October.
One cuttingmay be taken forfodder, 50-60 days after sowing and subsequent
one leftforgrain production.
(iv) Oats may be grown in October as multicut fodder to ensure availabilityof
green fodder forlonger period.
(v) For quick growth in cereal fodders and higher crude protein contents,
application of urea as foliarspray may be taken up.
11. Crop Contingent Plan for Flood Affec::ted Districtsof Punjab and Haryana
Heavy rain during the 1st week of JUlyfollowed by breaches in Ghagar riverand
SutlejYamuna Canef (SYL) resulted in large scale flooding in5 districtsof Haryana viz.
Ambala, Kurukshetra, Kaitthal,Fatehbad and Sirsaand 4 districtsof Punjab viz.Patiala,
Sanqrur, Mansa and Hepar Flood water caused extensive damage to the already planted
26


Thefollowing contingency plan issuggested to negate/ moderate impact of flood
on agricultureinthese two States .
•:. Incase the flood water receded within2-3days thetransplanted paddy crops
willsurvive and regain regrowth. To push up re-growth and to off set the
adverse affect of flood water; the farmers may apply one bag of urea per\
acre when the water isreceded completely. Incase some transplanted rice
plantsare washed away, immediate gap fillingcan be undertaken .
•~ Thefarmers may not be ,having rice.nurseriesat thisstage to re-plantricein
.theflood affected areas, However, Basrnatiricevarieties likeCSR-30, Pusa, ,
1121 and PB-1 etc. can be planted up to July'end. Incase .nurserlesof. . ,:
.these varieties are available fortransplantthatcould be preferred.option to
raise Basmati ricecrop. However, :incase nurseriesare not'~~ai'lable, the
farmers may go fordirectsowing of riceusing zero TillSeed Drill:Proper. . . .. .- .. . .-
Weed Management willbe a priorityaction indirectseeded-dee crop.The
States may inform th'~farmers to follow complete package of practicesas
suggested by the 5'tate Agric~lt~-,aLUniversities for effective weed
management indlrectseeded rice.
•:. Maize isan excellent substitutefor riceinPunjab and Haryana, Several
maize varieties including hybridscan be grown up to .151week of August.
Thefarmers are advised to go forlarge scale maize cultivationinflood affected
districtsafter rece~ing the flood water. .•
.> Pulses like'moong and urd can also be cultivated up to end of July.The
area remained uri sown because of late receding of flood water, can be
covered by shortduration crops likemoong, urd and cowpea .
•:. Since fodder crops have been damaged by the floods, therefore, there isa
strong case to maintain supplyof green fodder foranimals intheflood affected
districts.The farmers may go for cultivationof maize, maize + cowpea,
jowar and bajra as fodder crops to supplement the fodder requirements of
milchcattle. Most of the fodder crops can be grown upto 15111 August.
.:. Flood affected areas generally experience out break of human and animal
diseases. Special campaigns may be organized forvaccination of animals
against out break of major diseases.
12. A BriefCrop Contingent Plan for Rabi 2010-11
IMD forecast for South West monsoon indicates extended monsoon scenario
and SeplerniJermay be the wettest month. The states may plan from now onwards how
27


the excess rainwater during the month of September, 2010 can be stored and re-used
for early Rabi sowinq and for providing lifesaving irrigationto Rabi crops.
f..)>.1
Ii
grown during September.
(ii)-Incase rains.are received by end September, mixed sowing of wheat +grarn
, and_bmley+gr~m can be taken up inalmost allrainfed regions. Mustard inter~'
cropped withgram inrows about. 3 m apart isanother option. Lentilisanother"
..'pulsecrop whichcan be raised with 2-3 irrigations.V~getable crops such as
peas, broad bean, F~ench bean and spice crop fennel can be raised with,,"
availabilityof one irriqatlon..
(iii)',In tt,le.'ightof tower avallabilityof surface and ground water for irrigation;the.." . '. -. . .' ,
farmers particularlyinthe .Indo-gangetic alluvialplains are advised to resort
to zero....tillage and .strip-till'drillswheat cultivation after :.utilizingthe.residue
moisture available after riceharvest. Zero tilledwheat saves on about 30%
water, energy and labour and also gives. either equal or enhanced yield
compared to conventional tillage. Perfect zero tillmachines are available in
the market. Some budget may be earmarked for supply of such drillson
subsidized rate to the farmers. No-tilldrillsand strip-tilldrillsinlarge numbers
should beprocured and distributed; and theirmanufacturing regionalized so. +
that interested farmers or service providers could easily purchase them.
(iv) Resorting to bed planting furrow. irrigated system for wheat cultivation
wherever feasible and practical.Itsaves about 30% irrigationwater and
increases wheat yield. Planting of cauliflower and tomato on beds to save
irrigationwater.
(v) The area leftunsown during kharifshould preferably be sown withrabifodder
crops, oilseeds and pulses taking advantage of extended monsoon rainfall
during currentyear.
(vi) Need based location specificagronomic manipulations such as application
of mulch available locally,to conserve moisture, application of P and K as
basal dose, reducing N dose and seed rate etc. can be adopted. Special
care should be taken for plant protection aspects during drought phase.
28
.- ---------._---'-,.,- ----- ------ ---------_~_-----,---- ~_-------------------


be chosen from the rabicontingency plans of respective states. For example,
wheat variety WH 157 and WH 283'can be successfully cultivated with limited
water in Punjab, Haryana and Madhya Pradesh. Kundan variety of wheat is
another such example whichhas comparatively higherdry matter production
efficiency per unit water consumed. Vegetable crops such as garden pea\
(Arkel,Pragati), winter bean and vegetable mustard are the examples requiring
-I~ssirl'igationwater, '. ,'- ",
(viii)Rotavators are efficienttillage equipment for preparing 'fine-seed bed in 1-2
, passes saving time and energy used in seed bed preparation, especially'
crops that need fine tilth.Since in'dry farming' time available inseed bed
.preparation and sowing :islimited, large size~, tractors with ~matching
, implements be used for carrying out different farm operations whichshould~ -".' .- ,,' 1'. •. ~ • • .' .
, be available through custom' service. Seed-cum-fertilizer drillsirTlUlti-crop. .. '.' . .
planters should be available for sowing different crops dunng rebi.Utere
after rice,should be replaced by d~iIIed crop using zero-tilldrillorother seed-
cum-fertilizerdrillsthatcan work. For timely harvesting and threshingof crops. .
inthe fields, verticalconveyor reapers forharvestinq and highcapacity multi-
crop threshersand combines are needed on custom hire.Thiswould help in
, .1
timely clearing of fields and sowing next crop.
+
29
-65-


--- -----------_._~---------------._-----_.- .._-. -----~---
-(''


v '." I" L.>',,' IJ K t " I i
-----------~~~----~~~~~~--~~~~~ --~-----'
-'~~:~;',.j----,----.--~---~--' ------~~~,-~-' ------~_._-------------_ ..
. . ;, . ' Immediate
No.3S-7/2010-DM
Governmentof India
,Ministryof Agriculture
Department ofAgriculture & Cooperation
(Drought Management Division)~.' . {. .-
Krishi Bhawan, New Delhi
Dated the7~ April,2010
The Pay & Accounts Officer(Sectt.)~'-
.Departmentof Agriculture ~ _9~_cJpera~ion,
16, AkbarRoad ~utments,.:.! ...• '••~ v- '
NewDelhi. . ','-'".. '..
' ...
'Subject:' .Fin~cia(; ,sa:nction.for·release to,the Government of, Bihar -towards,
._rei~bu.~eritentof Go~'sshare of expenditureincurred during Kharif 20Q9',.
. under theDieselSubsi(Jy'Sche~efordroughtIdeficitrainfalla,!~ctedareas.
Sir,
Iam directedtorefertoletterof evertNumber datedthe 23rd'March, 2010 regarding
sanction ofRs. 21,51,65,8021-totheGovernment ofBihar 'onthe above subject.under Demand
No. 01 - Agriculture Cooperation. 3601 - Grant-in-aidtoStateGovernments.01 - Grantsfor
,Non-plan schemes, 446 - Crop Husbandry - othergrants,04.,.Diesel subsidyin droughtand
deficitrainfall affectedareas, 040031 - Grants-in-aidand to say thatbased.on expenditure
.actually incurred by the StateGovernment,as reportedby them.the amount indicatedabove has
been sanctionedtothem. As thereimbursementisbased on expenditurealreadyincurred bythe
StateGovernment,submission of UtilizationCertificateisnotnecessary in accordance' withNote
(1) under R~le212(1) of General Financial Rules.2005. . ,
Yours faithfully,
.,! •
, . •
/a.~: ,__--::.--
(S.Janakiraman)
Under SecretarytotheGovernmentofIndia
TelefaxNo.23383309
Copyto informationto:
1. Accountant General,Central Revenue, IPEstate,New Delhi.
2. Principal Accounts Officer,Akbar Road Hutments,New 'Delhi.
3: Director of AGCW & M. AGCR Building.IPEstate.New Delhi.
4., Chief Secretary.Government of'Bihar.Patna. -
5., Commissioner of Agriculture;DepartmentofAgriculture,GovernmentofBihar, Patna.
6. ResidentCommissioner. GovernmentofBihar. New Delhi. .
~ PPStoSecretary(A&C) I PPStoAS (GCP) I PStoIS (OM) /DS (OM) I US (P).
8. Budget~ection/B&A. Section. "----\
9. Guard FIleISpare copies, lth-, ~
Zit -i"~l-\\~ ~=.J . (S,Janakirarnan)
.~ Under SecretarytotheGovernmentofIndia
--~---~--_._-------~_._- ~--~-~.---------~-_ ..--
-&7--


ANNFXVP--E-Dl
-_._-----_._---~-_ .._----~ ---------'-----------~-----~---
------- -----~------------_ .. _----~~-----------
Immediate
No.3S .•.7/2010-Dj\1I
GovernmentofIndia
MinistryofAgriculture
DepartmentofAgriculture& Cooperation
(Drought Management Division)
KrishiBhawan, New Delhi
Datedthe7th April,2010
.To,
'The Pay & Accounts Officer{Sectt.),
DepartmentofAgriculture& Cooperation,
i6, Akbar RoadHutments,
New Delhi. .'
Subject: Financial sanction for·release to·the.Government of Tamil Nadu towards
reimbursement of Go~'sshare of expenditureincurred 'durlng Kharif 2009
under theDieselSub5.~dyScheme.fordrought'ldeficitrainfallaffectedareas,
Sir,
Iam directedtoreferto'letter'of even Number datedthe23rd March, 2010 regarding
sanction'of Rs.1,42,96,622/-:-totheGovernmentof Tamil Nadu on .theabove subject,under
Demand No. 01 - AgricultureCooperation,3601 ..•..Grant-in-aidtoStateGovernments,01 -
GrantsforNon-plan schemes, 446 - Crop Husbandry- .othergrants,04 - Diesel subsidyin
droughtand deficitrainfallaffectedareas, 040031 - Grants-in-aidand tosay thatbasedon
·expenditureactuaIIyincurred by the StateGovernment,as 'reportedby them,the amount
indicatedabove has been sanctionedtothem. As thereimbursementisbasedon expenditure
alreadyincurredbytheStateGovernment,submissionofUtilizationCertificateisnotnecessary
inaccordance'withNote(1) underRule 212(1) ofGeneralFinancial Rules,2005.· ;l '.. . .
'1 '.
'. :Yours faithfully,
" .
~-.(S.Janakiraman)
Under SecretarytotheGovernmentofIndia
TelefaxNo ..23383309
·Copy toinformationto:
. .
1. Accountant'General,CentralRevenue, IPEstate,New Delhi.
2. PrincipalAccounts Officer,Akbar RoadHutments,New Delhi.
3. DirectorofAGCW & M, AGCR Building,IFEstate,New Delhi.
4. Chief Secretary,GovernmentofTamilNadu, Chennai.
5. Commissioner'ofAgriculture,Departmentof Agriculture,Governmentof Tamil Nadu,
Chepauk, Chennai-S. :
6. ResidentCommissioner,GovernmentofTamilNadu, TamilNadu.House, KautilyaMarg,
Chankya Puri,New Delhi-II0021.
~. Sr.PPStoSecretary(A&C) /PPStoAS (GCP) iPStoJS(DIVi) ;LiS(DM) I'L (1)).
8. Budget~ection/B&A. Section: II_ .9. GuardFile/Sparecopies. ~ ~'?' \
~-----1----~~-------------~--f~\':t t· ~ .
.....[:;.,~ (S.Janakiraman)
B-.~ UnderSecretarytotheGovernmentofIndia
,~ fiLl -b~-,


---- ----------------------No-.-31---112-0--1-0---D-M---~- -----.----
Government of India
~ Ministryof Agriculture.'.
(Department of Agriculture& Cooperation)
.' ./'
KrishiBhawan, New Delhi
Dated the zs"March,2011
To
.The Pay & Ac:60unts.Officer(Sectt.):·,
'. Department of Agdculture.:&Coopera~ion,
" 16,'Akbar Road HLitment$,'. .
New Delhi.~ 110001. ,.: . .' .
.:" -:';.,....
Sub:,,··FinanciaL·~anctiori·f~~ >felease to 'Government, of Jharkh~ndtoWards ."'..
. ~imbursenjeht of.,G:overnment:of India's' share of eXpenditure incurred ,~;'.J
during khanf 20.10:un~er ~~e 'Diesel Subsidy Scheme In Drqught ~nct: '"-
DeficitRainfallAffected Areas." , .' . , .: ,
," .~. .",;..,.'
S~ ,
I am directed to convey, the 'sanction of the President for, payment of .
Rs.4,21';S20.(Rupees F~Lir'IakhJwenty One Thousand Five Hundred· Twenty
only) to' Govemm~nt of Jharkhandtow~rd~ reimbursement, of.Government of. .. .
India's 'share of expenditure incurred during Kharif2010 under- the "Diesel. ' .
Subsidy Scheme inDroughtand QeficitRainfallAffected .Areas".
2. The release lssubjectto terms & conditions laid down inthisDepartment's..
letterNo.31-112010-DMdated 11;10.2010. ..'
3." The expenditure debitable against' the funds, available under Demand. .
No.01-AgricultureCooperation, .3601-Grantin aid to States Governments, 01-. ....
Grants for Non-Plan Sch~mes, 446-Crop Husbandry- Other Grants~' 04-Diesel
Subsidy in Drought'and Deficitrainfallaffected aress, 040031-Grants in aid -
General.


4.-, Thisissues with the concurrence of the Finance Divisicn.of the
Oep©lrtment of Agriculture&, Cooperation vide theirOi~ryNo.422IAS&FA dated
. . ('.
"
Yoursfaithfully,-
~"-," ,"
....'~'~S.y, P~iil)r ••.....
. Under Secre~ary to the Government of lndla . . - "," . .' ~. • ,.... ' r 1'" ....;"-'-'l._•...: ( ~
z• -" •• J ••
....' "- ..'.' ..'
.0 • " ,
• j
'0 ..: ' •
."';--':'~'.~~_:P'~~-.;~,;~:.~.~~,.·~::..-,> ;.".,:.",:»:, '.::.',' • ., ....- e, - "; ",:•.-. ," ,'" ..": ..: ", - -. .".'" ",;. - ••• -.. •. ~;~;- ~:1~~_~j.:-t-~::;."~~:
~~;,,':r:AccountanfGener:al,' Central, Revenue, J.P.Estate,New Delht.~:~- ":
,{i.t:2.,Piin;cipa!A~b6untsQffj(:~r,Akbar Road Hutrnents, New Qe!hi'.;:.-,:i_
.','-3.-Directorof ACW&M, AGCR Building, IPEstate, NewD~lhL~.:::
4.;Chief Secretary, Govt. of Jharkhand, RanchL -. -. "
5 ...Secretary (Agriculture);-Government of Jharkhand, Nepal House, Post
Doranda, Ranchi.. .... ,
.6. Diredorof Agriculture,'Government of Jharkhand, Ranchi.
7.' ResidentCommissioner, Govt. of Jharkhand, Kusurn Pur.PhSri,Vasant
Kunj,New Delhi , - ,-.
8, ~r.PPS to Secretary(A&C)/ P.S to Spl.Secretary (DAC)/PS to
-JS(DM)/Director(DM) .:.... -.' .' " - . - '
-1":9.·Budget SectionlB&A Section:
10.Guard File/Spare copies. '.
."
L; .~
------- -----------------------------------------
'jnr >


;\;lostimme;::-Jjate
F. No.44(7)PFI/2009-809
Government of India
Ministryof Finance
Department of Expenditure
Plan Finance-I Division
New Delhi,31/03/2010
To,
The Pay & Accounts Officer,.
Department of Expenditure,
Ministryof Finance,
New Delhi
, ,
Subject: 'On Account' payment of Additional Central Assistance (ACA) For
other projects (Grant Component) forthe states' Annual Plan 2009,-:-2010.
.sir,
The undersigned isdirected to convey the sanction of the President of India
to the payment of Rs. 120000.00 Lakh (Rupees One Thousand Two Hundred, . .
crore only) being the grant component of ACA for Other Projects to the
respective States Governments forannual plan 2009-2010 as under:
(Rs in lakh)
1. Haryana Central Assistance for Additional cos
incurred by the Government of Punjab
2. Punjab and Haryana in providing Power-to the
gricultureSector during Kharif2009
40000.00
80000.00 J
i
J-,
Total For 2 State's (2Projects)=Rs. 120000 lakh
2. The Payment may kindly be released to the respective State Government
immediately. The funds may thereafter be released to the implementing agency'
without .any delay failingwhichthe amounts would be recovered from the State
Governmentwith interest forthe period' of default.
- "
3.The payments are adjustable inthe account of the Central Government inthe
books under the sub-head indicated as below:-
Grant
Demand NO.35
3601-GRANTS-IN-AIDTO STATEGOVERNMENTS
02-GRANTS FOR STATEPU\N SCHEMES
101-BLOCK GRANTS
07 lJUiTION/\LC[[\jTi\!\L;\SSISr CE f 01':'() :iH'~f<
PROJECTS:,
0031-GRANTS-IN-AID
4, The payment may be released to the state governments immediately Loan
component isto be raised by the State Govt. from the market directlyinlinewith
the recommendations of the TwelfthFinance Commission


-.) I H:; p r__<:.'31".jCSUU-LG~~ai~-J r.::<~~j '~(J1" CZ.:;ri ! a:)'-~,L:HJCC; i ~U (~
S~2te Covernrnents under tne sub-head at para '.3above in the current financial
~-~------~-ye8f-2eH9-::':0+e-so-far-indtrding----amounheiecfs-e-dinln is sa Iicrion lene r lsa-s------
follows:
(Hs in lakh)
6. The action taken on thislettermay be acknowledged and correctness of the
progressive totals be indicated.
Copy To:
(Deena,'th)
Dy.Director~ .F.I)
Ph.23095644
••
+
(De' . a~)
Dy.Director(Fi~.1)
Ph,2309~644
;p/
.-+2-.~


 
 
41 
 
ANNEXURE-VI 
COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE 
(2011-12) 
 
MINUTES OF THE SIXTEENTH SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE 
 
 The Committee sat on Wednesday, the 14 December, 2011 from 
1500 hours to 1600 hours in Committee Room ‘D’, Parliament House 
Annexe, New Delhi.  
PRESENT 
 
      Shri Basudeb Acharia - Chairman 
 
LOK SABHA 
 
2. Shri Narayansingh Amlabe 
3. Shri Thangso Baite 
4. Smt. Ashwamedh Devi 
5. Shri Sk. Nurul Islam 
6. Shri Naranbhai Kachhadia 
7. Shri Premdas 
8. Shri Devji M. Patel 
9. Shri Jagdish Thakor 
10. Shri Hukmadeo Narayan Yadav 
 
RAJYA  SABHA 
11. Shri Shashi Bhusan Behera 
12. Shri Narendra Budania 
13. Shri Vinay Katiyar 
14. Shri Mohd. Ali Khan 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Shri P.V.L.N. Murthy - Director 
2. Shri P. C. Koul - Additional Director 
3. Shri C. Vanlalruata - Deputy Secretary 
   

 
 
42 
 
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the members to the Sitting of 
the Committee.  The Committee, thereafter, took up for consideration the 
Draft Report on Action Taken by the Government on 
Observations/Recommendations contained in the Eleventh Report on 
‘Deficient Monsoon and Steps Taken by the Government to Mitigate its 
Impact on Agriculture Sector’. 
 
 
3. After some deliberations, the Committee adopted the draft Report 
without any modifications.  The Committee then authorized the Chairman 
to finalise the above Draft Report after getting it factually verified from the 
concerned Ministry and present the same to the Parliament.   
 
 
*4. xxx    xxx     xxx   xxx  
  
 
 
*5.  xxx    xxx    xxx   xxx 
 
 
*6. xxx    xxx    xxx   xxx 
 
 
 
 
The Committee then adjourned. 
 
 
*  Matter not related to this Report. 

 
 
43 
 
ANNEXURE-VII 
(Vide Para 4 of Introduction of the Report) 
 
ANALYSIS OF ACTION TAKEN BY GOVERNMENT ON 
THE ELEVENTH REPORT (15th LOK SABHA) OF  
COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE (2009-10)    
 
  
(i)  Total number of Recommendations             18 
 
(ii) Recommendations/Observations which have been 
Accepted by the Government  
 
Para Nos. 3.50, 3.51, 3.58, 3.59, 3.60, 3.61, 3.63, 3.64, 3.65, 3.66  
and 3.67 
 
Total          11 
 
Percentage                            61%
   
 
(iii) Recommendations/Observations which the Committee 
Do not desire to pursue in view of the Government‟s replies  
 
Total                  NIL
        
Percentage                             0% 
 
(iv) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies 
 of the Government have not been accepted by the Committee 
 
Para Nos.  3.52, 3.53, 3.54, 3.55, 3.56 and 3.57 
 
Total          6
  
Percentage               33% 
 
(v) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which  
 Final replies of the Government are still awaited 
 
Para No.  3.62 
 
Total            1
   
Percentage                  6% 
 
 