SIXTY-FIRST REPORT
COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE
(2013-2014)
(FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA)
MINISTRY OF AGRICULTURE
(DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE AND COOPERATION)
RASHTRIYA KRISHI VIKAS YOJANA—AN EVALUATION
Presented to the Hon’ble Speaker on 15.03.2014
Presented to Lok Sabha on .........2014
Laid on the Table of Rajya Sabha on .........2014
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
March, 2014/Phalguna, 1935 (Saka)


C.O.A. No. 284
Price : Rs. 87.00
© 2014 BY LOK SABHA S ECRETARIAT
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct
of Business in Lok Sabha (Fourteenth Edition) and printed by
Anupam Art Printers, New Delhi.

(i)
CONTENTS
PAGE
COMPOSITION OF THE C OMMITTEE (2013-14) .......................................... (iii)
COMPOSITION OF THE C OMMITTEE (2012-13) .......................................... (v)
COMPOSITION OF THE C OMMITTEE (2011-12) .......................................... (vii)
INTRODUCTION ............................................................................................ (ix)
PART I
CHAPTER I INTRODUCTORY
(i) Objectives ............................................................... 1
(ii) Operative Strategy ............................................... 2
CHAPTER II CRITERIA FOR FUND ALLOCATION
(i) Eligibility Criteria for Fund Allocation .......... 4
(ii) Sanctioning of Projects by States ..................... 9
(iii) Public Private Partnership under RKVY ....... 11
(iv) Fund Utilisation .................................................... 12
C
HAPTER III IMPLEMENTATION
(i) Schemes under RKVY ......................................... 14
(ii) Monitoring of RKVY ........................................... 17
(iii) Representation from a Former Managing
Director, Haryana Seeds Development
Corporation, Panchkula, Haryana (HSDC) .... 24
PART II
Recommendations/Observations of the Committee ..... 27
ANNEXURES
I. State-wise/Sector-wise number of Projects ..................... 32
II. State-wise list of flagship projects documented by
National Institute of Rural Development, Hyderabad ... 34

PAGE
(ii)
III. Representation from a Former Managing Director of
Haryana Seeds Development Corporation Ltd.,
Panchkula, Haryana .............................................................. 39
IV . Response received from the Ministry of Agriculture
(Department of Agriculture and Cooperation) on the
representation ......................................................................... 50
APPENDICES
I. Minutes of the Twelfth sitting held on 7.1.2013 .......... 68
II. Minutes of the Eighteenth sitting held on
12.2.2014 ................................................................................... 71
III. Minutes of the Twentieth sitting held on 3.3.2014 ...... 73

COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE
ON AGRICULTURE (2013-2014)
Shri Basudeb Acharia— Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Narayansingh Amlabe
3. Shri Sanjay Singh Chauhan
4. Shri H.D. Devegowda
5. Smt. Ashwamedh Devi
6. Vacant*
7. Smt. Paramjit Kaur Gulshan
8. Shri Anant Kumar Hegde
9. Shri Premdas Katheria
10. Shri P . Kumar
11. Smt. Botcha Jhansi Lakshmi
12. Sardar Sukhdev Singh Libra
13. Dr. Jyoti Mirdha
14. Shri Naranbhai Kachhadia
15. Shri Devji M. Patel
16. Smt. Bhavana Gawali (Patil)
17. Shri Jagdish Singh Rana
18. Shri Rajaiah Siricilla
19. Shri Patel Kishanbhai V .
20. Dr. Vinay Kumar Pandey ‘Vinnu’
21. Shri Hukumdeo Narayan Yadav
Rajya Sabha
22. Shri N. Balaganga
23. Shri Satyavrat Chaturvedi
(iii)
*Vice Shri L. Rajagopal who ceased to be the Member of the Committee after resigning
from Lok Sabha on 19.02.2014.

24. Smt. Mohsina Kidwai
25. Shri Dharmendra Pradhan
26. Dr. K.V .P . Ramachandra Rao
27. Shri Parshottam Khodabhai Rupala
28. Shri Rajpal Singh Saini
29. Shri S. Thangavelu
30. Shri Shivanand Tiwari
31. Shri Darshan Singh Yadav
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Shri A. Louis Martin — Joint Secretary
2. Smt. Abha Singh Yaduvanshi — Director
3. Shri T.H. Rao — Additional Director
4. Shri Pragyanshu Amaoni — Committee Officer
(iv)

COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE
ON AGRICULTURE (2012-2013)
Shri Basudeb Acharia— Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Narayansingh Amlabe
3. Shri Sanjay Singh Chauhan
4. Shri H.D. Devegowda
5. Smt. Ashwamedh Devi
6. Shri L. Rajagopal
7. Smt. Paramjit Kaur Gulshan
8. Shri Anant Kumar Hegde
9. Shri Premdas Katheria
10. Shri P . Kumar
11.D r. (Smt.) Botcha Jhansi Lakshmi
12. Sardar Sukhdev Singh Libra
13. Dr. Jyoti Mirdha
14. Shri Naranbhai Kachhadia
15. Shri Devji M. Patel
16. Smt. Bhavana Gawali (Patil)
17. Shri Jagdish Singh Rana
18. Shri Rajaiah Siricilla
19. Shri Patel Kishanbhai V .
20. Dr. Vinay Kumar Pandey ‘Vinnu’
21. Shri Hukumdeo Narayan Yadav
Rajya Sabha
22. Shri Satyavrat Chaturvedi
*23. Vacant
(v)
* Vice Shri A. Elavarasan who ceased to be the Member of the Committee on his
retirement from Rajya Sabha on 24 July, 2013.

24. Smt. Mohsina Kidwai
25. Shri Dharmendra Pradhan
26. Dr. K.V .P . Ramachandra Rao
27. Shri Parshottam Khodabhai Rupala
28. Shri Rajpal Singh Saini
29. Shri Shivanand Tiwari
30. Shri S. Thangavelu
31. Shri Darshan Singh Yadav
(vi)

COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE
ON AGRICULTURE (2011-2012)
Shri Basudeb Acharia— Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Narayansingh Amlabe
3. Shri K.C. Singh ‘Baba’
4. Shri Thangso Baite
5. Smt. Shruti Choudhary
6. Smt. Ashwamedh Devi
7. Shri Biren Singh Engti
8. Shri Anant Kumar Hegde
9. Shri Deepender Singh Hooda
10. Shri Sk. Nurul Islam
11. Shri Naranbhai Kachhadia
12. Shri Premdas Katheria
13. Shri Surendra Singh Nagar
14. Shri Devji M. Patel
15. Shri Vitthalbhai Hansrajbhai Radadiya
16. Shri Nripendra Nath Roy
17. Shri Jagdish Thakor
18. Shri Laxman Tudu
19. Shri D. Venugopal
20. Shri Hukumdeo Narayan Yadav
21. Shri Ramakant Yadav
(vii)

Rajya Sabha
22. Shri Shashi Bhusan Behera
*23. Shri Narendra Budania
*24. Shri Satyavrat Chaturvedi
25. Shri A. Elavarasan
*26. Shri Vinay Katiyar
27. Shri Mohd. Ali Khan
28. Shri Upendra Kushwaha
29. Shri Bharatsinh Prabhatsinh Parmar
30. Shri Rajpal Singh Saini
31. Shri S. Thangavelu
(viii)
*Nominated to the Committee on 04.05.2012.

(ix)
INTRODUCTION
I, the Chairman, Committee on Agriculture, having been authorized
by the Committee to submit the Report on their behalf, present this
Sixty-first Report on ‘Rashtriya Krishi Vikas Yojana—An Evaluation’.
2. The Committee held a Sitting for briefing of the subject by the
representatives of the Ministry of Agriculture (Department of
Agriculture and Cooperation) on 07 January, 2013 and took their oral
evidence on 12 February, 2014.
3. The Committee considered and adopted the Report at their
Sitting held on 03 March, 2014.
4. The Committee wish to express their thanks to the representatives
of the Department of Agriculture and Cooperation for furnishing the
requisite information to the Committee in connection with the
examination of the subject.
5. For facility of reference and convenience, the Observations/
Recommendations of the Committee have been printed in bold letters
in Part II of the Report.
   N EW D ELHI; BASUDEB ACHARIA,
03 March, 2014 Chairman,
12 Phalguna, 1935 (Saka) Committee on Agriculture.

PART I
CHAPTER I
INTRODUCTORY
Rashtriya Krishi Vikas Yojana (RKVY) was launched in the Eleventh
Plan against the backdrop of faltering growth in agriculture during
Ninth and Tenth Plan period. In the 53rd meeting of the National
Development Council it was resolved to introduce an Additional
Central Assistance Scheme (ACAS) for agriculture & allied sector. RKVY
Scheme was announced by the Prime Minister in his Independence
Day speech and it was rolled out in the month of September, 2007
itself. Accordingly, RKVY was designed as an ACA scheme, with
complete flexibility and autonomy to the States to choose projects
specifically tailored to their conditions for generating growth and
development in agriculture and allied sectors. It had a built in incentive
mechanism to encourage States to allocate more on agriculture and
allied sectors. According to the Ministry of Agriculture (Department of
Agriculture and Cooperation), the scheme has been able to meet its
objectives to a large extent during the XI Plan period with rejuvenation
of State agriculture through RKVY project based activities leading to
agriculture growth of nearly 3.64%, despite two major droughts. Further,
by linking RKVY allocation with State plan expenditure on agriculture
& allied sector, RKVY was able to catalyse significant growth in
percentage share of States’ allocation to agriculture and allied sectors
from 4.88 % (Rs 8770.16 crore) in 2006-07 to 6.04% (Rs. 22,158 crore)
in 2011-12 and 6.33% (Rs. 36,720 crore) during 2012-13. In addition,
introduction of sub schemes under RKVY window has helped to
address national priorities in chosen sectors/crops in a focused manner.
1.2 The Department of Agriculture and Cooperation (DAC) have
stated that RKVY is a transformational jump in evolution of agricultural
development schemes from variegated schematic approach followed
so far through diverse but strait-jacketed schemes to a completely new
approach in agriculture planning by allowing the States to plan their
strategy and design appropriate schemes to implement that strategy
with complete flexibility in scheme designs and autonomy in its
implementation.
(i) Objectives
1.3 Broad objectives of RKVY Scheme are as under:
(i) To incentivize the States so as to increase public investment
in agriculture and allied sectors;

2
(ii) To provide flexibility and autonomy to the States in the
process of planning and executing agriculture and allied
sector schemes;
(iii) To ensure the preparation of Agriculture Plans for the
districts and the States based on agro-climatic conditions,
availability of technology and natural resources;
(iv) To achieve the goal of reducing the yield gaps in important
crops through focused interventions;
(v) To maximize returns to the farmers in agriculture and allied
sectors;
(vi) To ensure that the local needs/crops/priorities are better
reflected in the agricultural plans of the States; and
(vii) To bring about quantifiable changes in the production and
productivity of various components of agriculture and allied
sectors by addressing them in a holistic manner.
(ii) Operative Strategy
1.4 In their Annual Report (2012-13), the Department of Agriculture
and Cooperation has stated that RKVY Scheme has been formulated
with two strategic objectives in mind:
(i) to incentivize States to allocate more funds for agriculture
and allied sector; and
(ii) to ensure that States focus on additional growth in
agriculture and allied sectors by better planning and
undertaking appropriate growth oriented projects to achieve
the goal.
1.5 This is to be done by drawing up plans for their agriculture
and allied sector more comprehensively, by integrating livestock, poultry
and fisheries reflecting needs/crops/ priorities taking into account their
agro-climatic conditions, natural resources and technology. Funds under
the scheme are provided to the States as 100% grant by the Central
Government.
1.6 Allocation of funds to States is dependent upon additional
resources committed by States for agriculture and allied sectors in
their state plans and the growth projected and generated. There are
no prescriptions about the projects, schemes and other programmes to
be undertaken by States under RKVY. The Scheme provides complete

3
flexibility to States to choose what is best suited to their conditions to
generate growth so as to enable the country to achieve the national
target of 4% growth in agriculture and allied sector during Eleventh
Plan and Twelfth Plan period.
1.7 During oral evidence on 12.02.2014, the Secretary, DAC
submitted before the Committee as follows:
“In the Eleventh Plan, finally as per the revised statistics furnished
by the CSO, earlier they had furnished statistics that suggested
that the agriculture and allied sector grew at the rate of 3.64 per
cent during the 11th Plan, with agriculture itself growing at
3.8 per cent, but it was dragged down slightly by the forestry
sector, which grew at 2.2 per cent. But as per the latest estimates
that have been released by the CSO, actually we have achieved
and surpassed the target of four per cent - the overall growth of
the agriculture and allied sector during the 11th Plan period is
now stated to be in the vicinity of 4.1 per cent. To that extent,
RKVY has achieved the objective set for it during the 11th Plan
period”.
1.8 Regarding the coverage of the Scheme, the Department of
Agriculture and Cooperation (DAC) in their Background Note stated
that the projects under RKVY cover the entire gamut of activities in
the agriculture and allied sectors. RKVY supplements and complements
ongoing schemes and projects in the agriculture & allied sectors. RKVY
emphasises on convergence through District Agriculture Plans (DAPs)
and State Agriculture Plan (SAP) so as to eliminate overlap of resources
& efforts to ensure optimal utilization of funds available through
various Centrally Sponsored/State Plan Schemes.

4
CHAPTER II
CRITERIA FOR FUND ALLOCATION
(i) Eligibility Criteria for Fund Allocation
According to the DAC, the eligibility for assistance under the
scheme depends upon the amount provided in State Plan Budgets for
agriculture and allied sectors, over and above the baseline percentage
expenditure incurred by the State Governments on agriculture & allied
sectors. Each State has to ensure that the baseline share of agriculture
in its total State Plan expenditure (excluding the assistance under
RKVY) was at least maintained, and upon doing so, it will be able to
access the RKVY funds. Earlier, at the time of introduction of the
scheme the baseline was to be a moving average of the previous three
years. However, in October 2007, the Planning Commission modified
the baseline to be the minimum of the last three years.
2.2 In addition, for States to become eligible they were required to
prepare Agriculture Plans for the districts and the State that
comprehensively cover resources, identify gaps and indicate definite
action plans.
2.3 Further, the DAC informed that the eligibility for assistance
under RKVY largely depended upon growth and quantum of allocation
provided for agriculture and allied sectors in the State Plan Budget.
Once a State becomes eligible for accessing funds under RKVY, the
quantum of assistance (or fund allocation) and the process of
subsequent allocation to the State would be in accordance with the
parameters stipulated by Planning Commission.
2.4 Regarding allocation of funds, the DAC stated that on becoming
eligible, the States are allocated funds based on three parameters:
• Percentage share of net unirrigated area in a state to the
net unirrigated area of the eligible states—20%
•P rojected growth rates to a base year (2005-06) Gross State
Domestic Product (GSDP) for agriculture and allied sectors
to be applied to GSDPs to be by the end of the 11th Plan
by the States—30%
• Increase in the total Plan expenditure in agriculture and
allied sectors in the previous years over the year prior to
that year—50%

5
2.5 The Secretary, DAC pointed out during evidence that the States
had major issues in regard to the criteria drawn up for allocation of
funds. He further informed the Committee that the DAC have
conducted several rounds of discussion with various State Governments
right from the first year of implementation of RKVY and the Member
(Agriculture) of the Planning Commission had taken a meeting with
the State Governments basically to understand and try and resolve the
issues that the State Governments had on the apportionment of the
funds because that was the most critical thing of the agricultural sector.
So, during the Eleventh Plan while some minor corrections were made
in the apportionment and eligibility formulas, but those modifications
have actually been concretised during the Twelfth Plan.
2.6 While complaining the eligibility and criteria for allocating the
funds under RKVY to the States, the Secretary, DAC stated as follows:
“First of all, we see as to whether the State is eligible for receipt
of funds under RKVY. There are two grounds of eligibility. The
first and the simpler ground is that the State must have prepared
the district agricultural plan and the State agricultural plan. Without
this, they are not theoretically eligible to receive funds. Secondly,
the State must have increased the relative budgetary allocation to
agriculture and allied sectors over the past few years. That is, if
the State had, for instance, been spending 5 per cent of the total
plan budget allocation for agriculture and allied sectors, for them
to be eligible to receive funds under RKVY for the current year,
they have to spend slightly more than five per cent. If they go
below that, then they become ineligible and they do not receive
any funds. That is for the eligibility part of it.
Once the State becomes eligible, then the funds are allocated on
the basis of three criterias. One is the static criteria, which is the
percentage share of net unirrigated area in the State to the net
unirrigated area in the country. So, there is an inherent bias in
RKVY for devolution of funds to rainfed areas. That is given a
weightage of 20 per cent in the total allocation of funds. Then
30 per cent of the allocations of funds are governed by the projected
growth rates in the agriculture and allied sectors till the end of
the 11th Plan. The third and the most important criteria, where
50 per cent weightage is given, is, on the basis of the increase in
the total plan expenditure of the State in agriculture and allied
sectors. The more money the States put into agriculture and allied
sectors through their own budgets, the more money they will be
eligible to get under RKVY.”

6
2.7 He further added:
“...release of funds would depend upon whether the State has
expended all the money allocated to it in the previous year. For
the current year, after the release of the first instalment - the first
instalment is always released immediately on the basis of the
approval of the minutes of the State level sanctioning committee
by the Chief Secretary, once the Chief Secretary approves the
minutes, the projects are approved, 50 per cent of the funds
earmarked to the State are released - the next 50 per cent of the
funds are only released if the State submits Utilisation Certificate
for the previous year’s allotment and 60 per cent of the current
year’s allotment.”
2.8 Citing an example in the matter, the Secretary, DAC stated:
“.... during the Eleventh Plan there were two conditions set forth
for States to become eligible for any kind of RKVY grants. One
was the drawing up of the District Agricultural Plan and the State
Agricultural Plan. That condition has been retained in the Twelfth
Plan as well. Other than that, the condition was that the baseline
share of agriculture and allied sector in the State Plan should be
at least maintained over the baseline expenditure of the past three
years. Now, that started giving problems to the States. A lot of
States felt problems because sometimes in the agriculture sector
there are heavy dosages of investment required during certain years.
For instance, there are certain projects which receive international
funding, World Bank, or OECD or some other funding, may be
Japanese funding. Once that funding pulls out, then the overall
investment in the agriculture sector comes down and for no fault
of the State the funding was reduced.”
2.9 He further added that:
“…the change that has been made in the Twelfth Plan is that we
have said that instead of the average level, earlier we were saying
that it should be the average level of the past three years that has
to be exceeded in relative terms for a State to become eligible for
RKVY funding, now we are saying that the minimum level of the
past three years should be maintained by a State for it to become
eligible. So, that provides a little bit of comfort to the States for
gaining eligibility for receiving RKVY funds.
Secondly, the States had major issues in regard to the formula we
had drawn up for allocation of funds. After gaining eligibility how

7
are funds to be allocated amongst States. All states came up with
different ideas and last time round, … there were three criterias
for apportionment of funds. One was the percentage of unirrigated
area in the State with reference to the total unirrigated area in the
country. The idea being that States with maximum aridity or semi
aridity would get a higher percentage of RKVY funds. Second was
the growth in agriculture in the State and the third was the
increased expenditure on the agriculture and allied sector in the
States over the past three years. So, these three were the main
criterias. Now, this time around, some States were finding it difficult
to get what they thought was their appropriate share of funds
because of this formula. For instance, the well irrigated States,
such as Punjab felt they were being deprived of funds because
most of agriculture in their State was irrigated.
Some States like the smaller States and the hilly States and the
North-Eastern States, for example, Himachal Pradesh was saying
that they already have been spending 10 to 11 per cent of their
Plan expenditure on agriculture and there was no room of
increasing that. So, this time we have tried to increase the number
of criteria through which funds apportionment will take place so
that there is broadening of the basket and when the State falls
short of one particular criteria, it can make ground in the other
criteria and therefore gain additional funds. So, while we have
retained the percentage share of net irrigated area in an eligible
State to the net unirrigated area, it was earlier 30 per cent it has
now come down to 15 per cent. Also, because we want to
incentivise the production of pulses and oilseeds of which India is
always short of demand and we have to resort to import. So, we
have taken the last three years average area under oilseeds and
pulses. That becomes a criteria for distribution of funds. Then we
have said that wherever the State has improved the Gross State
Domestic Product in agriculture and allied sector, the highest GDP
over the five years has been taken into account. …. One is increase
in overall expenditure on agriculture and allied sector and within
that, we have given emphasis to increase in expenditure on animal
husbandry, dairying and fisheries as this has not been given that
much importance by the State Governments like that of mainstream
agriculture and horticulture. So, we have given special emphasis
on animal husbandry, fishery and dairies and agricultural research
and education. The increase in budget in the States will lead them
to get better outlays under RKVY. Wherever the States have
performed well, if they manage to bridge the yield gaps, we
propose to reward them for that so that the State with the

8
minimum yield gap between potential yield and actual yield will
get more funds as the States improve their performance, they will
gain”.
2.10 To a query about the growth in private investment as
compared to public investment during the last five years, the Secretary,
DAC said,
“Sir, I will have to actually collect and check the data on that.”
2.11 When the Committee enquired about growth in productivity
per hectare, the Secretary further said:
“We are looking at it in the yield gap. That portion is in the yield
gap. If the yield gap narrows, that means the productivity has
increased. That also has been given weightage.”
2.12 The Secretary further added:
“The yield gaps are actually on the basis of existing technologies.
There are huge yield gaps across the Country…Punjab is close to
maximizing and actualizing its potential yield. But there are other
States in the Country, where the gaps are huge and in certain
crops the gaps are bigger than in other crops.”
2.13 RKVY funds were available to the States in two streams. Under
Stream I which accounts for at least 75% of the allocation specific
projects/schemes/programmes as approved by the State Level
Sanctioning Committee and in line with the priorities defined in the
district and State Plans, can be takenup. Under Stream II which
accounts for the remaining 25% of the allocation, the States can spend
on strengthening of the existing State schemes and for filling resource
gaps under the State Plans. Funds are released under RKVY in two
installments of 50% each.
2.14 The DAC further stated that based on feedback received from
States, experiences garnered during implementation in XI Plan and
inputs provided by Stakeholders; Operational Guidelines of RKVY were
revised to not only enhance efficiency and efficacy of the programme
but also its inclusiveness during XII Plan period. Restructured RKVY,
which would be operational from 2014-15, would have four streams of
funding:
(1) RKVY (Production Growth) with 35% of annual outlay,
(2) RKVY (Infrastructure and Assets) with 35% of annual outlay;

9
(3) RKVY (Special Schemes) with 20% of annual outlay; and
(4) RKVY (Flexi Fund) with 10% of annual outlay (States can
undertake either Production Growth or Infrastructure &
Assets projects with this allocation depending upon State
specific needs/priorities).
2.15 States can take up any project under RKVY (Production
Growth) to raise production and productivity in agriculture and allied
sectors that were not included in other two channels/streams. Projects
proposed under RKVY (Production Growth) shall normally emanate
from the District and State Agriculture Plans. RKVY (Infrastructure
and Assets) would include projects that would be selected on the
basis of normative requirement of infrastructure, actual availability
thereof and the gap in agriculture infrastructure in the State.
2.16 RKVY (Special Schemes) would continue to comprise of those
national priorities which might be so notified by Government of India
from time to time. Funds under the special schemes as well as for
‘production growth’ and ‘infrastructure & assets’ streams would be
made available to the States as determined by DAC in two instalments
of 50% each.
(ii) Sanctioning of Projects by States
2.17 When asked to state the procedure for sanctioning of Projects,
the DAC informed that RKVY has provided considerable flexibility
and autonomy to the States in the planning and executing of agriculture
and allied sectors schemes. Each State has a State Level Sanctioning
Committee (SLSC) under the chairmanship of the Chief Secretary and
with representation of all concerned departments including agriculture
universities. SLSC can meet as often as required but at least once in
a quarter. The SLSC is responsible for:
• Sanctioning the projects under Stream I of RKVY.
• Monitoring the progress of the sanctioned projects.
• Ensuring that no duplication of efforts and resources takes
place.
• Commissioning/Undertaking field studies to monitor the
implementation of the projects.
• Initiating evaluation studies from time to time, as may be
required.
• Undertaking any other project of importance to the State’s
agricultural growth.

10
• Ensuring that there are no inter-district disparities with
respect to financial patterns/subsidy assistance in the
projects.
2.18 Accordingly, under the Scheme, State Level Sanctioning
Committees (SLSCs) have been constituted under the Chairmanship of
Chief Secretary with Secretary (Agriculture) as Member Secretary of
the concerned State/UT along with other members from allied
departments, State Agriculture Universities, Department of Agriculture
& Cooperation (GoI), Department of Animal Husbandry, Dairying &
Fisheries (GoI), and Planning Commission (GoI). The SLSC appraises
and approves the projects under Stream-I. The State Agriculture
Department is the nodal Department for implementation of the scheme.
2.19 The DAC clarified that the physical target set out for RKVY
are post-facto. They are set only after the SLSC sanctioning a particular
project. This physical target would depend upon each project and is
fixed in each project separately. So once, a project stands approved,
then funding is automatically followed for that project.
2.20 An indicative list of focus areas has been provided for in the
RKVY guidelines. Some of the areas covered were:
(i) Integrated development of major food crops such as wheat,
paddy, coarse cereals, minor millets, pulses and oilseeds
(ii) Agricultural Mechanisation
(iii) Activities related to enhancement of soil health
(iv) Development of rainfed farming systems
(v) Support to State Seed Farms
(vi) Integrated Pest Management
(vii) Strengthening of Market Infrastructure
(viii) Extension Services
(ix) Animal Husbandry and Fisheries
(x) Promotion of Horticulture
The States were however free to choose other components/activities,
but ensure that they were reflected in the District and the State Plans.
2.21 State Governments, keeping in view their priorities, have
approved project proposals for implementation under RKVY in wide
ranging sectors which include crops, horticulture, organic farming, farm

11
mechanization, micro irrigation, watershed development, marketing,
storage, dairy development, fisheries, etc. Critical infrastructure such
as State Seed Farms, Soil and Fertiliser Testing Labs, etc have received
substantial support under RKVY. In all, 5,768 projects have been
approved by the States for implementation of which 3,163 projects
have been completed so far.
(iii) Public Private Partnership under RKVY
2.22 In order to augment the current government efforts in
agricultural development by leveraging the capabilities of the private
sector, Public Private Partnership for Integrated Agriculture
Development (PPPIAD) has been recently launched under RKVY. The
scheme envisages facilitating large scale integrated projects, led by
private sector players in the agriculture and allied sectors, with a view
to aggregating farmers, and integrating the agriculture supply chain
with financial assistance through RKVY. The main features of PPPIAD
are:
• Corporates to propose integrated agricultural development
projects across the spectrum of agriculture and allied sectors,
taking responsibility for delivering all the interventions. Each
project is to target at least 5000 farmers, spread over the
project life of around 3 to 5 years.
• Complete flexibility in design, but ensuring an integrated
value chain approach, covering all aspects from production
to marketing.
•A verage investment per farmer to be quantified with an
average of Rs. 1 lakh per farmer as a desirable benchmark.
Government support through RKVY to be limited to 50%
of the overall per farmer investment proposed with a ceiling
of Rs. 50,000 per farmer through the project cycle.
• Key interventions must include, mobilising farmers into
producer groups, technology infusion, value addition and
marketing solutions.
2.23 During the oral evidence, the Secretary, Agriculture stated as
follows:
“The idea was that this scheme would incentivize the States to
increase their plan allocation to the agriculture and allied sector
because as this Committee is aware, the gross capital formation in
agriculture and allied sector was generally perceived to be

12
unsatisfactory. It was thought that if the Government starts
pumping in more money into this sector, that would crowd in or
pull in the private sector investment as well, which would be to
the overall benefit and to the overall growth of the agriculture
sector.”
2.24 According to the preliminary findings by the Institute for
Social and Economic Change, Bengaluru, RKVY has had a very good
impact and there is a very strong correlation between RKVY spending
and private gross capital formation. It is not only pubic but private
capital formation. The Committee were also informed that 70 percent
of the growth in the investments in agriculture is from private
investment.
(iv) Fund Utilisation
2.25 Planning Commission had made a Plan Allocation of Rs. 25000
crore for RKVY for the 11th Plan. During XI Plan, Rs. 22,408.76 crore
was released to States out of which Rs. 21,586.6 crore was utilized in
implementing 5768 projects in certain broad categories namely; crop
development, horticulture, agricultural mechanization, natural resource
management, marketing & post-harvest management, animal husbandry,
dairy development, fisheries, extension etc.
2.26 Elaborating on the allocation and utilization of funds under
this scheme, the Secretary, DAC stated:
“...it was rolled out in the first year of the 11th Plan. For the first
year, there was only a token allocation of just about Rs. 1000
crore. Even that was difficult to fully utilize because once the
scheme was conceptualized, rolled out and informed to the States,
all the States were tasked with the responsibility of creating the
budget lines and heads for implementation of this scheme. Unless
that happens, funds cannot be transferred from the Centre to the
States and utilized effectively by the States. So, the first year or
the first year and a half of the scheme was spent in addressing
the structural problems relating to implementation. When this
scheme was first conceptualized, the over-arching objective was to
achieve growth of four percent during the 11th plan.”
2.27 Sectoral break-up of projects approved is at Annexure-I. Year
wise allocation, release and utilisation since inception are given below:
(Rs. in crore)
Year Allocation Release Utilisation %Utilisation
1 2345
2007-08 1,489.70 1,246.89 1,246.39 99.96%
2008-09 3,165.67 2,886.80 2,868.15 99.35%

13
2009-10 3,806.74 3,760.93 3,756.51 99.88%
2010-11 6,722.00 6,720.08 6,718.64 99.98%
2011-12 7,810.87 7,794.09 7,537.25 96.70%
TOTAL 22,994.98 22,408.79 22,126.94 98.74%
2012-13 8,400.00 6,822.00* 3,303.86* -
(*) Expenditure and Allocation status as on 11.02.2013.
2.28 Cabinet Committee on Economic Affairs (CCEA) has approved
continuation of RKVY during XII Plan with an allocation of Rs. 63,246
crore. However, during first two years of XII Plan, total outlay available
was only Rs. 15,489 crore (24.5% as against normative 40%). During
2013-14, an allocation of Rs. 9,954 crore has been earmarked for RKVY.
2.29 When enquired about the low allocation of funds in the first
two years of the XIIth Plan i.e. only 24.5 percent against the normal
of 40 percent of the Plan, the Secretary , DAC explained:
“...it is always towards the later part of the Plan that allocations
increase, and this is the general practice across the scheme. So, it
is not an arithmetical division divided by 5. It always increases
over years. This has happened during the 11th Plan, and it will
happen during the 12th Plan as well....the first two years of the
12th Plan have been particularly difficult. The country has been
passing through a huge fiscal crisis due to which the allocations
that we were expecting and hoping for have not materialised. This
is true. Certainly, if we had got more money, then we would have
been able to use that money. This has not happened. So, that, I
admit, is a cause for concern, but I am hopeful that in the
remaining three years of the Plan hopefully the allocations should
increase, and it is said that the economy is also looking up. So,
the money available for budgetary allocations to all schemes,
especially, the RKVY will increase.”
1 2345

14
CHAPTER III
IMPLEMENTATION
(i) Schemes under RKVY
The DAC informed that RKVY does not prescribe any particular
strategy, programme or project to be implemented by States. RKVY is
designed to focus funds allocation and States’ attention to selection of
strategy and projects which will best help generate growth in
agriculture and allied sectors. State Governments, keeping in view their
priorities, have approved project proposals for implementation under
RKVY in wide ranging sectors which include crops, horticulture, organic
farming, agriculture/farm mechanization, micro/minor irrigation,
watershed development, agriculture marketing and storage, seed farms
and soil/fertilizer testing laboratories, animal husbandry, dairy
development, fisheries, extension and research, etc. Critical infrastructure
such as State Seed Farms, soil and fertilizer testing laboratories, starved
over the years due to paucity of funds, got a much needed dose of
assistance under RKVY across the States.
3.2 The Ministry of Agriculture in their Annual Report has indicated
that while, growth in agriculture and allied sector in States is not
attributable entirely to RKVY projects as there are many other
programmes and policies contributing for it, RKVY has definitely
emerged as a principal instrument of development of agriculture and
allied sector in States and has indeed accelerated revival of agriculture.
3.3 Schemes of national priorities or Sub-Schemes were introduced
in RKVY since 2010-11. These schemes are formulated and monitored
by the concerned subject matter Divisions in DAC but implemented
through the States under RKVY umbrella. Implementation of the sub-
schemes have helped in focusing efforts of the Centre and the States
in areas that require special attention. Notable among these schemes
are Bringing Green Revolution to Eastern India (BGREI), Accelerated
Fodder Development Programme (AFDP), Crop Diversification
Programme in original green revolution States, Saffron Mission, National
Mission for Protein Supplements (NMPS), Vegetable Initiative in Urban
Clusters (VIUC), Rainfed Area Development Programme (RADP) etc.
3.4 The DAC informed that RKVY format has enabled launch of
new schemes/programmes by keeping States’ flexibility and authority
intact. Since 2010-11, several sub-schemes have been introduced under

15
RKVY with focused objectives. In all, nine special programme/schemes
are being implemented as sub-schemes of RKVY with a total allocation
of Rs. 2,675 crore for 2012-13. The sub-schemes of RKVY and their
allocations are as under:
(i) Bringing Green Revolution to Eastern Region: This
programme was initiated in 2010-11 targeting the
improvement in the rice based cropping systems of Assam,
West Bengal, Odisha, Bihar, Jharkhand, Eastern Uttar Pradesh
and Chhattisgarh. Allocation for this scheme in 2010-11 &
2011-12 was Rs. 400 crore each, which has been enhanced
to Rs. 1000 crore in 2012-13 as announced by Finance
Minister in his Budget Speech.
(ii) Integrated Development of 60,000 pulses villages in rainfed
areas: The scheme aimed at attaining self-sufficiency in
production of pulses was initiated in 2010-11 as pulses and
oil seeds villages. In 2011-12, it was limited to 60,000 pulses
villages only. During 2011-12, an amount of Rs. 300 crore
had been allocated to promote 60,000 pulses villages in
rainfed areas for increasing crop productivity and
strengthening market linkages. In the current year, this sub-
scheme has been merged with the Accelerated Pulses
Production Programme under NFSM.
(iii) Promotion of Oil Palm: To achieve a major breakthrough
in edible oil production, special attention is needed to be
paid to oil palm as it is one of the most efficient oil crops.
Accordingly, this sub-scheme had been launched during
2011- 12 with an allocation of Rs. 300 crore to bring 60,000
hectares under oil palm plantation by integrating the farmers
with the markets. The allocation for 2012-13 is Rs. 100 crore.
(iv) Initiative on V egetable Clusters: Growing demand for
vegetables was proposed to be met by a robust increase in
the productivity and market linkage. For the purpose an
efficient supply chain needed to be established to provide
quality vegetables at competitive prices. The allocation for
this sub-scheme has been Rs. 300 crore each in 2011-12 and
2012-13.
(v) Nutri-cereals: To promote balanced nutrition, higher
production of bajra, jowar, ragi and other millets would be
taken up in 1000 compact blocks covering about 25,000
villages. Additionally, projects were to be taken up to
upgrade their processing technologies and create awareness

16
regarding their health benefits. This initiative was expected
to provide market linked production support to ten lakh
millet farmers in the arid and semi-arid regions of the
country. Outlay for this programme was Rs. 300 crore during
2011-12 and Rs. 175 crore in 2012-13.
(vi) National Mission for Protein Supplements: National
Mission for Protein Supplements was launched with an
allocation of Rs. 300 crore during 2011-12 to take up activities
to promote animal based protein production through
livestock development, dairy farming, piggery, goat rearing
and fisheries in selected blocks. The allocation for this
scheme during 2012-13 is Rs. 500 crore.
(vii) Accelerated Fodder Development Programme:  To accelerate
the production of fodder through intensive promotion of
technologies to ensure its availability throughout the year,
Rs. 300 crore had been provided during 2011-12 for this
programme to benefit farmers in 25,000 villages. Allocation
for the scheme during 2012-13 is Rs. 100 crore.
(viii) Rainfed Area Development Programme: The scheme was
implemented with an allocation of Rs. 250 crore during
2011-12. The allocation for the scheme during 2012-13 is
Rs. 150 crore.
(ix) Saffron Mission: The Scheme was initiated in 2010-11 for
revival of Saffron cultivation in Jammu & Kashmir.
Allocation for the scheme was Rs. 39.44 crore in 2010-11
and Rs. 50 crore each in 2011-12 and 2012-13.
(x) Vidarbha Intensive Irrigation Development Programme:
This is a new scheme announced for 2012-13 with allocation
of Rs. 300 crore to bring in more farming areas in Vidarbha
region under protective irrigation.
3.5 States have also taken up several flagship and innovative
projects under RKVY, which reflect best practices, innovative approaches
and achievements under RKVY. A list of such projects is at
Annexure-II.
3.6 According to the DAC, it is of greater importance to analyse
the difficulties and shortcomings faced during the implementation and
take corrective action to fine tune the scheme in keeping with the
requirements of the country. RKVY has imparted definite momentum
to the agriculture sector. Regular activities starved of resources,

17
promising strategies languishing for lack of support, and limited
opportunities for experimentation and innovation, have found a new
hope in RKVY. States are allocating more funds to agriculture to take
up schemes of agriculture development. This is reflected in additional
plan allocation to agriculture sector. There is a sense of hope and
optimism. Agriculture, which had slid back stage, is making a
comeback. One timely policy instrument - RKVY - has accelerated
revival of agriculture and put it on growth path.
(ii) Monitoring of RKVY
3.7 DAC has put in place a web-based Management Information
System for RKVY, called RKVY Database and Management Information
System (RDMIS), to collect and disseminate relevant information and
data related to each RKVY project and also to collect progress and
completion details of each project over its life cycle. The States are
entering data on approval and implementation of projects under RKVY
online in the RKVY website. It is expected that this system will provide
all stakeholders with up to date and authenticated data on outputs,
outcomes and growth impact of projects taken up under RKVY.
3.8 When asked about the system of monitoring with regard to
proper utilization of allocation of funds for RKVY projects, the Secretary,
DAC, stated as follows:
“There are two systems. One is for the 11th Plan, as you are
aware, this Scheme was run through Additional Central Assistance.
That was essentially State Government’s money. The idea was that
the State level Sanctioning Committee which is there to sanction
projects also has to monitor the implementation of this Scheme.
So, the State Level Sanctioning Committee, under the Chief
Secretary, in which the Government of India used to participate
through the Joint Secretaries of Agriculture, Animal Husbandry
and Planning Commission, were supervising this. In addition,
whenever the State Governments used to come back, as has been
the practice in all Government schemes for release of second
installment, such release was incumbent upon satisfactory utilisation
of funds released in the first installment. At the time of release of
second installment we took stock of progress and we took stock of
all the utilisation and releases. That was the basic structure that
we had put forward.”
3.9 The Secretary, DAC put forth the challenges in monitoring of
RKVY before the Committee as under:
“The RKVY is a broad spectrum scheme and it covers every part
of the agriculture and allied sectors, except forestry. So, it is difficult

18
to have a cohesive or a unified or integrated physical target
approach. So, each project under RKVY has to be monitored
separately.”
3.10 He further added:
“For the past two years what we have also tried to do because
the difficulty or the challenge in RKVY's monitoring was the
projects sanctioned by the State Level Committees were so diverse
in nature, it was difficult to group them together. For example, in
Kerala, there were at least 100 different projects sanctioned. To
monitor 100 projects became a very challenging task for us. So,
we devised electronic software in which the State Government
was uploading all this information. So, they are available in the
public domain for whoever wants to access it. But still it is such
a diverse portfolio. For instance, if I get information on dairying,
I cannot monitor it myself and I have to pass it to my colleagues
in the Department of Animal Husbandry to monitor that. That
remains an area of concern where I think there is the maximum
challenge of monitoring and supervision of this Scheme.”
3.11 When the Committee emphasized the need for monitoring
mechanism, the Secretary, DAC submitted as follows:
“I agree, Sir. The monitoring mechanism, the coordination
mechanism, the supervision mechanism, all needs to be
strengthened at various levels. But at the same time, the
implementation will remain at the field level. So, to that extent,
even a very strict and a very comprehensive monitoring mechanism
may not be able to capture these kinds of nuances. But we can
certainly look at whether expenditure is taking place on time. That
is a very important factor to ensure that there is correct utilization
of money. Whether it is being spent on the appropriate kind of
interventions or not and whether the utilizations and all are coming
and whether the outcomes of those interventions are actually being
achieved or not, that we can certainly try and do. But, what are
the chemicals that are being applied for each crop, that is not
something that will be able to be monitored. Even at the State
Government level, it will be difficult to be monitored. The
application of chemical is depending upon situation to situation,
depending upon what are the post incidents and what was the
outcrop. So that might be a difficulty in that. But certainly greater
monitoring and supervision is necessary to improve the quality of
any programme.”

19
3.12 During evidence, the Secretary, DAC, stated as follows:
“We have kept to ourselves the flexibility of changing the criteria
midstream based upon what advice and feedback we get from the
States. If we find that the introduction of these criteria has led to
lopsidedness of allocations to particular States and exclusion of
particular States, then we will revisit and revise these criteria.”
3.13 When the Committee pointed out that there is diversion of
funds due to flexibility in utilisation of funds under RKVY Scheme
and cited an instance of Melas being organised spending huge funds
for campaigning purpose, the Secretary, DAC, stated that from 2013
onwards, the CAG had started auditing RKVY. The CAG audit will
help in long run to stream line the system. So the first report of CAG
will start being received very shortly at the end of the year. That itself
will result in some improvement. Specially , in view of the fact that
amount of funds involved in this scheme have increased exponentially
over the years from Rs. 25000 crores in the Eleventh Plan to Rs. 60000
crores in Twelfth Plan. He also stated that:
“…..in past 10 years, the budget of this Ministry has gone up by
10 times. So we have to be very careful. I accept your point.”
3.14 National Institute of Rural Development (NIRD), Hyderabad
was commissioned in 2008 to undertake concurrent evaluation of RKVY.
Following are some of salient findings of implementation monitoring
study conducted by NIRD, Hyderabad:
(i) RKVY has been preferred by the States for its inbuilt
flexibility in selecting State specific interventions.
(ii) RKVY succeeded motivating States to pay greater attention
to agriculture, besides providing increased Central assistance
for the sector.
(iii) RKVY assistance was particularly useful for the funds
starved animal husbandry, dairying and fisheries sectors.
Projects amounting to over Rs. 5000 crore were sanctioned
under RKVY for these sectors during 11th Plan, which is
about 20% of the total sanctioned RKVY projects, and more
than the allocation on schemes of Department of Animal
Husbandry Dairying & Fisheries (DAHD&F).
3.15 However, the report revealed that States have not been able
to balance investments in growth oriented projects and projects for
development of agricultural infrastructure. Infrastructure development,

20
if any, by the States was not found to be based on any definite vision
or plan. Further, there has been thin spread of RKVY resources across
all sectors and amongst all districts of the State.
3.16 The DAC in their background note submitted that the findings
of the NIRD study as well those which have emerged during the
interactions with the States are enumerated below:—
• States have not been able to balance investments in growth
oriented projects and projects for development of agricultural
infrastructure. Infrastructure development, if any, by the
states was not found to be according to any definite vision
or plan. One of the reasons could also be the annual budget
utilisation framework which is not very suitable for financing
infrastructure projects.
• Increasing number of special schemes under the RKVY
window, where the States’ flexibility is compromised, need
a relook to determine what percentage of RKVY funds, if
any, should be committed to such special schemes.
• Lack of focussed approach—priority areas given a miss due
to thin spread of resources across all sectors and amongst
all districts of the State.
• Comprehensive District Agriculture Plan (C-DAPs) & State
Agriculture Plans (SAPs) were prepared by all the States to
determine priorities and identify gaps in development of
agriculture and allied sectors. It was assumed that States
would prepare projects under RKVY in line with the
identified gaps and priority areas of development. In many
instances these were not adhered to.
• Flow of funds to implementing agencies was found to be a
tedious and lengthy process despite State Governments
receiving the funds well in time.
• Quality of Detailed Project Reports (DPRs) leaves much to
be desired. In many cases they are anything but detailed.
Often the implementing agencies are unable to quantify
outputs and outcomes of the project.
• State Level Sanctioning Committees (SLSC) under the Chief
Secretary is unable to devote adequate time for detailed
discussion of the projects before it for approval. In many
States prior scrutiny of the projects are not done thus
compromising on the quality of the project sanctioned by
the SLSC.

21
• Some States have used RKVY funds without exhausting
provisions available under different schemes of GoI. This
may be so as States might be finding accessing RKVY funds
less tedious than accessing GoI funds under other schemes.
States are thus losing out on additional finance available
from GoI.
• Despite a robust web based MIS put in place by the
Ministry, State governments have faltered in providing real
time report on the progress made, especially physical
progress and impact.
Services of NIRD were discontinued later as it reportedly, did not
have the desired level of in-depth examination and assessment as
required by the DAC.
3.17 The DAC informed the Committee that recently, Agricultural
Development and Rural Transformation Centre (ADRTC) under Institute
for Social and Economic Change (ISEC), Bengaluru has been entrusted
for evaluating RKVY over 11th Plan period. They were expected to
give their first report by March, 2013 and the final report by June,
2013. The Secretary, DAC, however, informed the Committee on
12.02.2014 that ADRTC had not submitted the final report till then.
The preliminary findings of ADRTC’s report however, suggest that
RKVY has been making a significant impact in rejuvenating agriculture
& allied sector in the country. The preliminary report also finds the
following:
• The macro-level impact measured using three indicators e.g.
(a) growth in GDP , overall GSDP and agricultural GSDP ,
(b) growth in agricultural production, and (c) growth in
percentage of agricultural spending out of State Plan and
agricultural GSDP , indicates that RKVY has been playing a
major role in catalysing growth in agriculture & allied sector;
• Empirical data indicates that there is a strong correlation
between RKVY spending and private gross capital formation
(GCF);
• States are giving more emphasis on infrastructure projects.
During 11th Plan, States implemented 1584 infrastructure
projects under RKVY absorbing about 30% of total
expenditure of which 566 were flagship projects od States
absorbing 17% of total expenditure under RKVY;
•V ery high expenditure allocation ratio for these infrastructure
projects (upto 0.85) also points to growing emphasis by
States for timely completion.

22
• Out of these projects, major focus was on Minor and micro
irrigation projects (about 32%) that has significantly helped
enhancing agricultural productivity;
• Increased irrigation coverage has also led to increased
expenditure for agricultural input like fertiliser use (positive
correlation between RKVY expenditure and fertiliser use kg./
ha has been noted), mechanisation, high quality seeds etc.
3.18 The Government has informed that they have taken the
following measures:
• The States will be required to revisit and modify the
Agriculture Plans for the districts and the State in keeping
with their vision of agriculture development over the next
plan period.
• Infrastructure projects will be selected and taken up on the
basis of the normative requirement of infrastructure, actual
availability thereof and the gap in agriculture infrastructure
in the State.
• The State Agriculture Department shall be the nodal
department for the implementation of the scheme. For
administrative convenience and ease of implementation, the
State Governments may identify, or create an exclusive
agency for implementing the scheme on the fast-track.
•T o ensure proper implementation of the schemes and ensure
it compliance with the norms laid down, twenty five per
cent of the projects sanctioned by the State each year under
the two streams shall be taken up for third party monitoring
and evaluation.
•A  State Level Screening Committee headed by an officer
nominated by the Chief Secretary of the State will screen
all the DPRs prepared by the various departments for
consideration of the SLSC for its suitability, its linkage to
DAP , SAIDP and SAP and its adherence to the RKVY
guidelines. The Screening Committee would also certify that
funds available under other schemes of the State
Government and/or Government of India for the proposed
projects have been accessed and utilised before they are
brought under the RKVY umbrella.
• Assign funds to the States exclusively for preparation of
DPRs. With the uncertainty of project receiving sanction by
SLSC, the implementing agencies have been reluctant to
spend on DPR preparation.

23
3.19 The Secretary, DAC informed the Committee as follows:
“.....based upon the NIRD evaluation report, we had taken out a
small booklet called 'Thought for Food'. In that booklet, State-wise
strategies and State-wise priorities were listed and the areas where
the State should focus under RKVY, and the State Governments
have made good use of that. If we look at the preliminary findings
of the study that we have given to ISEC for the entire Eleventh
Plan period, they have said that now States have started
increasingly funding infrastructure projects to the extent of 30 per
cent. However, what we have now done for the Twelfth Plan is
that we have actually examined areas for utilisation of funds, just
to impose some discipline. Earlier, we were expecting that States
will discipline themselves and provide for funding for critical gaps.
But in the Twelfth Plan now, we have ourselves prescribed the
areas where funds can be allocated. Now 35 per cent of the funds
for RKVY will be for production oriented programmes; 35 per
cent will be for infrastructure; 20 per cent will be for schemes and
interventions that Government of India would like to introduce,
like we have got a scheme for bringing green revolution to Eastern
India, like we have got a scheme for diversification in North West
India, like we have had a scheme for fodder development, etc.
There are several schemes through which the Government of India
wants to pay special focus, and all such schemes get 20 per cent,
and 10 per cent is untied, which can be used by the States in any
of those three dispensations. That gives flexibility to the States,
but also it gives a direction to the States that they have to spend
at least 35 per cent of the funds in each of the categories.”
3.20 In view of the encouraging response of the states and the
positive impact of the scheme which has helped boost agriculture
growth across the country , RKVY is to continued in the 12th Plan as
ACA.
3.21 DAC has held detailed meetings with State Governments at
its level and in the Planning Commission to reorient the scheme in
order to meet the requirements of agriculture and allied sectors over
the 12th Plan period. Based on these discussions and the experiences
and findings enumerated above, modifications in the guidelines have
been proposed by DAC which are under active consideration of the
Planning Commission.
3.22 The Planning Commission has indicated an overall allocation
of Rs. 63,246 crore under RKVY for the 12th Five Year Plan. The
importance accorded to the scheme can be gauged by the fact that it

24
alone accounts for nearly 50% of the total budget allocation of DAC
for the plan period.
(iii) Representation from a former Managing Director, Haryana Seeds
Development Corporation Ltd., Panchkula
3.23 A representation dated 03.12.2013 addressed to the Chairperson
of the Committee on Agriculture was received from a former Managing
Director, Haryana Seeds Development Corporation Ltd., (HSDCL)
(Shri Ashok Khemka). Copy of the representation is at Annexure-III.
The response received from the Department of Agriculture and
Cooperation (DAC) on the representation is enclosed at Annexure-IV .
3.24 Regarding the allegations made by the complainant relating
to misuse of central subsidies in purchase of RAXIL (pesticide) for
non-approved use and the legal requirement of registration process,
the Secretary, DAC, during the evidence, submitted as follows:—
“The then Managing Director had sent a copy of the same letter
he had addressed to the Agriculture Minister and a copy of that
was sent to me. We had, in fact, conducted inquiry at our level.
There were two issues in that letter. One was in relation to the
use of pesticide formulation and the other one was in relation to
the procedure adopted in Haryana for purchase of seeds. We did
two things. One is that as the law stands, even if the law is
amended, it says that no pesticide can be used on any crop unless
it is permitted to be so used by the Registration Committee. This
particular pesticide had been approved by the Registration
Committee but not for wheat. That is a fact. What is also a fact
is that this particular pesticide was tested by the Haryana
Agriculture University, Hisar on wheat and they found it to be
effective. They included it in their recommendations, in the package
of practices. This was as far as back as in 2002, if I remember
correctly, and which was wrong. What they should have done was
to have submitted those results to the Registration Committee and
asked the Committee to approve the use of the pesticide on wheat
for controlling whatever disease is there. They did not do that.
They made a recommendation. The Haryana Government started
implementation of that recommendation. When this letter came to
me, we took it up with the Government of Haryana. It is not only
the Government of Haryana but it is quite likely that similar
practices are being indulged in other parts of the country as well.
We, especially those people in the field, feel that if a
recommendation comes from a research institution, then it carries

25
weight of science and everything behind it. We do not question its
validity. I have written to all the Chief Secretaries and the
Agriculture Production Commissioners in all the States and asked
the DG, ICAR to write to all the research institutions saying that
no pesticide can be or should be allowed to be used unless it is
as per the registration conditions imposed by the Registration
Committee.
We have issued instructions to the Government of Haryana not to
utilise this pesticide for unapproved crops. However, HAU’s
recommendations came in 2002. This complaint came much later,
like you pointed out in 2013. This was probably a bona fide
mistake. It was nevertheless a mistake. It should not have
committed.”
3.25 When enquired whether the Government of Haryana had
purchased seeds without open and competitive tenders and subsidizing
the high cost of purchase with Government subsidies, the Secretary,
DAC submitted before the Committee as follows:
“It was a limited tender and the rate was very high. It was rejected
by Haryana Seed Development Corporation, which called a large
number of PSUs, NAFED, etc. negotiated rates and arrived at a
rate which was lower than the tendered amount and gave the
supply order. When we asked for an explanation, they said that it
was necessary to do so because the tender rate was not found
favourable and the wheat seeds had to be provided on time to
meet the requirement of the farmers. That report we had shared
with you. Nonetheless, we have taken one more action on that
complaint. We had forwarded the entire matter to CVC because at
the end of the day, it was difficult for the Central Government to
enquire into the actions taken by an agency of the State
Government. We have forwarded the complaint in the matter along
with our comments to the CVC. It is expected that they would be
taking up appropriate action on this.”
3.26 Regarding the issue concerning misuse of Central financial
assistance under the Seed Village Scheme, the Secretary , DAC apprised
the Committee as follows:
“…there are two slightly different things. I think the complainant
also is not fully aware of the intricacies of the seed sector. What
is given for the seed village programme are foundation seeds which
are meant to be multiplied in the villages and shared by the
villagers themselves. What is given as subsidy under the National

26
Food Security Mission Programme is subsidy for cultivation of
certified seed, which comes after one stage of multiplication from
foundation seeds. But in any case, the allegation is now with
reference to the quality of seeds of two seasons ago. Now, there
is no way that we can assess after two seasons whether seeds
were good or bad. It is not possible to assess the quality of the
seeds except by looking at productivity on which count there is
nothing that can lead us to assume otherwise.”
3.27 The Committee enquired whether there is a subsidy for
purchase of pesticides also and if the insecticide is not approved and
if non-approved insecticide is purchased and used whether there is
any scope of misuse of subsidy. Also, whether the subsidy outgo would
be higher if rate of purchase of wheat seed is high. The Committee
also desired to know whether it is the responsibility of the Central
Government to look into these aspects and take remedial measures.
Responding to the queries of the Committee, the Secretary, DAC stated
as follows:
“No, subsidy outgo is fixed. Under the Government of India
schemes, the subsidy rate is flat. Irrespective of what the cost of
the seed is, the subsidy outgo from Government is the same.”
3.28 He further added:
“...there are two things. One is, if there is a blatant case of
irregularity where the subsidy has been taken and no seeds were
supplied or no pesticides were used, that is a completely straight
forward case of corruption in which we can direct the State
Government to take action. This is a case of where wheat seeds
were also provided and pesticide was also applied. Now, as it
turns out, the pesticides were applied incorrectly based on the
recommendations of the agriculture university. To my mind, we
can take a legalistic view and say it is incorrect. Otherwise, we
have to recognise it as a bona fide mistake. This has happened
since 2002. I think we have to distinguish between two different
cases.”

27
PART II
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
The primary objectives of launching Rashtriya Krishi Vikas
Yojana (RKVY) in the 11th Plan, among other things, were to reduce
the yield gaps in important crops and to ensure that States increase
their plan allocation to the agriculture and allied sector, as the gross
capital formation in the sector was unsatisfactory. The Committee
find that not much headway has been made in this regard during
the 11th Plan. Admittedly, there are huge yield gaps across the
country and in certain crops, the gaps are bigger than in other crops.
Presently, the Department of Agriculture and Cooperation (DAC) has
no data about growth in private investment as compared to public
investment in agriculture and allied sector. In the absence of relevant
data, the Committee are not in a position to asses the performance
of RKVY. The Committee desire that data regarding yield gaps in
major crops and quantum of private investment in agriculture and
allied sector at the beginning of the 11th Plan and achievements
during the plan period be collected and furnished to the Committee
at the earliest to enable an objective assessment about the
achievements under RKVY. The Committee also urge the DAC to
initiate concrete measures to ensure that yield gaps in important
crops are reduced as aimed in RKVY.
2. Other objectives of Rashtriya Krishi Vikas Yojana (RKVY) are
to incentivize the States to increase their plan allocation to the
agriculture and allied sector, to ensure preparation of district and
State agricultural plans and to achieve the national target of 4 per
cent growth in agriculture and allied sector during the 11th and 12th
plan periods. The Committee note that the first two objectives were
made prerequisites for availing funds by the States under RKVY.
The Committee are glad to learn that despite two major droughts,
the overall growth of the agriculture and allied sector during the
11th plan is in the vicinity of 4.1 per cent surpassing the target of
4 per cent. The Committee would, however, like to caution the
Government that there should be no complacency in sustaining the
growth momentum achieved in the 11th plan and all efforts be made
to further accelerate the agricultural growth during the 12th plan.
3. The Committee have been informed that the States had major
issues in regard to the criteria prescribed for apportionment of funds
under RKVY. The criteria relate to percentage share of net

28
un-irrigated area in a State to the net un-irrigated area; projected
growth rate and increase in the total plan expenditure in agriculture
and allied sectors. It has been stated that in order to address the
grievances of States, the number of criteria was increased so that a
State which falls short of one criteria can make ground in other
criteria to gain additional funds. The additional criteria for
apportionment of funds include, average area under oilseeds and
pulses, increase in expenditure on animal husbandry, dairying and
fisheries and reduction in yield gap. The Committee hope that
allocation of funds under RKVY will be just and equitable to all
States without room for perceived injustice.
4. According to the findings of the National Institute of Rural
Development (NIRD), Hyderabad which was commissioned in 2008
by the DAC to undertake concurrent evaluation of RKVY during
the 11th plan period, the States have not been able to balance
investments in growth oriented projects and projects for development
of agricultural infrastructure. Infrastructure development, if any by
the States was not found to be based on any definite vision or plan.
Further, there has been thin spread of RKVY resources across all
sectors and amongst all districts of the States. The Committee would
urge the DAC to look into the issues brought out by the NIRD in
the implementation of RKVY and take necessary action to ensure
that there are no such deficiencies in future.
5. In a note submitted to the Committee, the DAC stated that
the services of NIRD were discontinued as it did not have the desired
level of in depth examination and assessment as required by the
DAC. The Secretary, DAC was, however, candid in his deposition
on 12.2.14 that NIRD conducted evaluation efficiently and the
document brought out through it was of great help in bringing back
the focus on to the implementation issues of RKVY. The Committee,
however, fail to understand why then the services of NIRD, which
made an objective evaluation, were discontinued. The Committee
would await an explanation in this regard.
6. Another Institute engaged by the DAC for evaluating RKVY
over the 11th Plan period is Agricultural Development and Rural
Transformation Centre (ADRTC) under the Institute for Social and
Economic Change (ISEC), Bangaluru. ADRTC was expected to give
its first report by March 2013 and final report by June 2013. It has
not, however, submitted its report even seven months after the
deadline. As the 11th Plan period was over almost two years ago,
the Committee desire that ADRTC should complete its task without

29
further delay to enable an objective assessment of RKVY. The
Committee would also like to know the methodology being followed
by ADRTC to evaluate RKVY.
7. According to the preliminary findings of ADRTC, there is a
strong co-relation between RKVY spending and private gross capital
formation. The Committee note that the Public Private Partnership
for Integrated Agriculture Development (PPPIAD) launched under
RKVY recently envisages facilitating large scale integrated projects
led by private sector players in the agriculture and allied sector.
Each project is to target at least 5,000 farmers with an average
investment of Rs. 1 lakh per farmer through a project cycle of 3 to
5 years. The intervention to include mobilizing farmers into producer
groups, technology infusion, value addition and marketing solutions.
The Committee would like the Government to ensure that PPPIAD
does not in any way result in exploitation of farmers.
8. Monitoring the implementation of RKVY is an area of concern.
At the Central level, there is hardly any monitoring except taking
stock of the progress and receiving utilisation certificate at the time
of release of second instalment of allocation. According to the
Secretary, Agriculture, the difficulty in RKVY’s monitoring is that
the projects are so diverse in nature, it is difficult to group them
together. It has further been stated that a web based management
information system containing upto date and authenticated data on
RKVY projects is available for access in the public domain. In
Committee’s view, it is the responsibility of the DAC to ensure that
the projects/schemes for which funds are made available to the States
are monitored and coordinated properly to ensure timely and effective
implementation and that there is no misuse or diversion of funds
for unintended purposes. The Committee desire that the DAC should
immediately devise a suitable mechanism for effective co-ordination
and monitoring under intimation to the Committee. The Committee
in this connection draw the attention of the Government to a
representation received by the Committee alleging misuse of subsidy
given under RKVY for purchase of pesticides and seeds. The issues
raised in the representation are discussed in the succeeding
paragraphs.
9. One of the allegations made in the representation was that
the Government of Haryana had misused Central subsidy under
RKVY by purchasing the pesticide RAXIL for non-approved use on
the basis of a recommendation made by Haryana Agricultural
University (HAU) that treatment of wheat seeds with RAXIL 2% DS

30
is effective against Karnal Bunt disease. According to the Secretary,
Agriculture, it is a fact that this particular pesticide was tested by
the HAU on wheat and found to be effective and included in the
package of practices in 2002. The results were, however, not submitted
to the Registration Committee as required under the Insecticides
Act. No pesticides can be used on any crop unless it is permitted to
be so used by the Registration Committee. Though this matter has
since been taken up with all the States and the research institutions
to prevent recurrence of such lapses, the Committee would like to
stress that since pesticides are potentially hazardous chemicals and
have significant bearing on human and environmental health, no
lapse whatsoever in this regard can be condoned. The Central
Insecticides Board & Registration Committee (CIB&RC) is reportedly
inquiring into the matter. The Committee desire that inquiry should
inter-alia, cover the following points:-
— Reasons why the Chaudhary Charan Singh Haryana
Agriculture University, Hisar recommended Tebuconazle
fungicide by specific brand name of RAXIL to farmers in
its Package of Practices forum approved treatment of
Karnal bunt disease in wheat crop.
— Propriety and legality of the action of M/s Bayer Crop
Science India publishing the recommendation of some
State Agriculture Universities in its advertisements wherein
RAXIL’S effectiveness in treating Karnal Bunt disease in
wheat crop is claimed.
— Has any study been carried out regarding the infestation
of loose smut, flag smut or Karnal bunt diseases in wheat
crop in Haryana before mandating the use of RAXIL
fungicide in Rabi 2010-11. Was such a study carried out
afterwards?
— Propriety and legality of the State Agriculture Department
of Haryana spending Central money on RAXIL, a specific
brand of M/s Bayer Crop Science India, for unapproved
treatment.
10. Another allegation made in the representation relates to
purchase of seeds at high cost with Government subsidies. It has
been stated in this connection that there has been no  mis-utilisation
or mis-appropriation of subsidy under RKVY. According to the
Secretary, Agriculture, under the Government of India Scheme, the
subsidy rate is fixed. Irrespective of the cost of the seed, the subsidy

31
outgo from the Government is the same. However, since the seeds
were purchased under limited tender at very high rate, the entire
matter is stated to have been referred to the Central Vigilance
Commission for appropriate action. The Committee further desire
that the DAC should ensure that open and competitive tenders are
floated where Central money is spent and that no specific brand
name(s) for seeds or insecticides are specified in tender enquiries.
In case private producers are prohibited from participating in a tender
enquiry, the DAC should ensure that the seeds supplied are
produced/co-produced by the eligible Government agency and
certification of the seeds supplied is in its own name. The Central
money spent on subsidizing the cost of seeds purchased from
Government/Cooperative agencies in restrictive of limited tenders
where private seed producers were ineligible to bid, but the seeds
supplied were not certified in the name of the supplying
Government/Cooperative agency should be recovered from the State
Government.
The DAC should take adequate steps to ensure that the benefit
of Central subsidies reach the farmers.
   N
EW D ELHI; BASUDEB ACHARIA,
03 March, 2014 Chairman,
12 Phalguna, 1935 (Saka) Committee on Agriculture.

32
ANNEXURE I(Vide 
Para 2.27)
RASHTRIYA KRISHI VIKAS YOJANA (RKVY)
MANAGEMENT INFORMATION SYSTEMState-wise/Sector-wise Number of Projects
New and ongoing projectsSl.No. STATE NAME CROP HORT SERI ANHB OTHR FISH COOP MI
PT SEED FINM AMEC EXTN MRKT NONF ITEC AGRE NRM IRRI ORFM DDEV TOTAL
12 3 4
56 7 8 9 1 01 11 21
31 41 51 61 71 8 1 9 2 02 1 2 2 2 3
1.
Andhra Pradesh 5 16 0 30 3 23 0 2 7 1 6 4 4 0 2 38 0 2 5 11 159
2.
Arunachal Pradesh 11 15 8 19 4 7 0 0 2 0 3 4 3 0 0 0 0 3 1 0 80
3. Assam 6 13 0 25 1 20 0 0 9 5 6 6 7 0 0 10 4 3 2 13 1304. Bihar 22 6 0 66 7 20 8 3 8 2 7 19 6 3 3 22 2 1 6 20 2415. Chhattisgarh 8 59 0 60 11 51 4 9 31 6 7 19 12 1 1 4 1 8 8 3 3036. Goa 4 3
073400284613122115 5 7
7. Gujarat 28 32 2 45 18 8 2 10 30 10 14 9 24 6 0 11 36 9 11 25 3308. Haryana 7 18 0 31 5 6 0 9 17 8 13 5 7 0 0 13 4 19 8 3 1739.
Himachal Pradesh 7 44 0 28 2 13 0 2 10 2 3 2 12 1 1 4 4 8 6 2 151
10.
Jammu and Kashmir 10 91 10 92 0 11 4 8 14 6 14 38 26 6 1 0 8 22 11 0 372
11.
Jharkhand 14 21 2 19 4 17 1 3 11 8 10 14 7 1 0 4 4 5 6 13 164
12. Karnataka 7 29 1 38 11 4 0 2 9 3 12 11 17 10 1 44 3 2 5 1 21013. Kerala 78 72 9 163 8 116 2 5 13 3 34 46 25 17 1 144 40 19 11 40 846

33
14.
Madhya Pradesh 9 26 0 67 3 43 0 6 31 10 16 19 13 2 1 10 1 25 12 4 298
15. Maharashtra 2 7 3 31 3 5 2 9 10 4 9 9 25 0 2 0 5 24 0 6 15616. Manipur 2 8 0 10 0 3 0
0006 1 032
002031 5 0
17. Meghalaya 3 16 1 14 2 15 1 1 0 1 2 0 2 1 0 0 18 8 1 1 8718. Mizoram 7 4 2 2 1 2 0 0 0 0 2 0 1 0 0 0 5 1 0 0 2719. Nagaland 5 10 1 11 2 12 0 3 1 3 4 3 7 5 0 1 9 1 4 0 8220. Odisha 31 23 0 16 3 12 2 4 22 6 12 17 23 2 0 24 10 8 13 11 23921. Punjab 5 16 0 33 1 13 0 3 4 3 6 2 4 0 1 20 8 2 3 20 14422. Rajasthan 13 31 0 29 10 11 8 5 18 10 9 20 8 0 1 27 6 12 4 10 23223. Sikkim 2 5 0 8 3 1 0 0 3 2 0 1 1 2 0 0 4 1 3 1 3724.
Tamil Nadu 35 10 1 56 11 30 3 2 7 3 9 8 21 1 5 3 1 8 3 34 253
25. Tripura 18 29 0 30 3 22 0 1 3 4 6 3 7 2 0 1 2 6 4 1 14226.
Uttar Pradesh 28 18 8 40 9 27 3 9 30 11 7 17 1 1 6 4 11 17 10 5 262
27. Uttarakhand 9 17 1 23 8 2 0 2 1 2 2 6 12 0 0 3 4 3 7 3 10528.
West Bengal 1 81 12 71 12 59 41 6 20 7 9 12 34 15 1 3 18 21 8 9 440Total 377 720 61 1064 148 557 81 104 313 128 232 310 313 81 28 392 212 239 156 252 5768Total No. of Projects : 5768
12 3 4
56 7 8 9 1 01 11 21
31 41 51 61 71 8 1 9 2 02 1 2 2 2 3
CROP-CROP DEVELOPMENT; HORT-HORTICULTURE; SERI-SERICULTURE; ANHB-ANIMAL HUSBANDRY; OTHR-INNOV ATIVE PROGRAMMES/OTHERS; FISH-FISH
ERIES; COOP-COOPERA
TIVES/COOPERATION;
MIPT-INTEGRATED PEST MANAGEMENT; SEED-SEED; FINM-FERTILISERS AND INM; AMEC-AGRICULTURE MECHANISATION; EXTN-EXTENSION; MRKT-MARK
ETING AND POST HARVEST MANAGEMENT;
NONF-NON FARM ACTIVITIES; ITEC-INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY; AGRE-RESEARCH (AGRI/HORTI/ANIMAL HUSBANDRY ETC.); NRM-NATURAL RESOURCE M
ANAGEMENT; IRRI-MICRO/MINOR
IRRIGATION; ORFM-ORGANIC FARMING/BIO-FERTILISER; DDEV-DAIRY DEVELOPMENT.

34
ANNEXURE II
(Vide Para 3.5)
STATE-WISE LIST OF FLAGSHIP PROJECTS DOCUMENTED BY
NIRD
12 3
1. Andhra Pradesh (ii) Seed Management
(ii) Expansions of Non-Pesticide
Management (NPM) in A.P . through
SERP
(iii) Expansions in Oil palm
(iv) Integrated vegetable programme in
A.P .
2. Arunachal Pradesh (i) Ar ea expansion by land terracing for
paddy
(ii) Development of way side market
sheds for fruits and vegetables
(iii) Development of commercial fish
farms through private fish farmers
3. Assam (i) Shallow Tube Wells with electrically
operated pump sets-increase in
irrigated area and crop production
in areas where SWT have been
installed
(ii) Establishment of Organic agriculture
produce market
4. Bihar (i) Farm mechanization especially
Power tillers
(ii) Seed production and distribution
programme
(iii) Dairy activities undertaken under
RKVY
5. Chhattisgarh (i) Establishment of model villages
‘Adarsh Gram’
(ii) Performance linked incentives to Al
workers
(iii) Al lab to produce semen

35
6. Goa (i) Establishing modern rice mill
processing facilities
(ii) Incentivizing paddy cultivation
through SHGs
7. Gujarat (i) Water & Soil Conservation Project
including reclamation of degraded
Bhal areas and checking of salinity
ingress in coastal areas and farm
ponds
(ii) Export oriented clustering and
infrastructure in PPP mode for
banana
(iii) Large animal surgery at Anand
(iv) Soil testing lab operated in PPP
mode
8. Haryana (i) Green manuring (dhaincha seeds)
(ii) pr oviding assistance on laying
underground pipeline system for
water conveyance so that water
losses can be avoided and additional
land brought under cultivation from
the irrigation channels
(iii) Intercropping of sugarcane With
onion, cucurbits, gram lentil and
even wheat
9. Himachal Pradesh (i) Construction of low cost
greenhouses/poly houses and
irrigation tank scheme
(ii) Pr omotion and development of
cultivated fodder crops like
sorghum, berseem, oats etc.
(iii) Organic cultivation
10. Jammu and Kashmir (i) Protected cultivation of flowers
(ii) Creation of irrigation infrastructure
for Horticulture
11. Jharkhand (i) Micro Lift Irrigation
(ii) V ermi-composting
(iii) Breed improvement programme by
BAIF to improve milk production
12 3

36
12. Karnataka (i) Extension services to Raitha
Samparka Kendras
(ii) Automated weather monitoring
system
(iii) Jaggery — sugarcane breed &
processing technology improvement
(iv) Rainfed agriculture — Bhoochetana
13. Kerala (i) Paddy cultivation in fallow lands by
leasing land to Padasekaram
Samities
(ii) Farm mechanization for paddy
harvesting, includes custom hiring of
farm machinery by KAICO and
giving agricultural machinery to
district Panchayats and
Padasekarams for collective use.
(iii) Development of fishery seed farms,
seed production and group
mobilization
14. Madhya Pradesh (i) Per colation tanks, khettalab, micro
minor tanks
(ii) Seed replacement
(iii) Development and promotion of
hybrid rice varieties
(iv) Kisan Call Centres
15. Maharashtra (i) Construction of farm ponds repair
of malguzari tanks;
(ii) Creation of low cost onion storage
structures
(iii) Surveillance and Monitoring of Pest
and Disease on soybean and cotton
16. Manipur (i) SRI paddy cultivation
17. Meghalaya (i) Water conservation structures - mini
irrigation check dams
(ii) Strawberry cultivation through hub
and spoke model
(iii) Fisheries
1    23

37
18. Mizoram —
19. Nagaland (i) Pigs and poultry development
(ii) Horticultural development
20. Odisha (i) Development of 100 new watersheds
(ii) Acidic soil treatment
(iii) Renovation of horticulture farms
21. Punjab (i) Milk units and bulk milk chiller
(ii) Animal insurance
(iii) Conservation of irrigation water
22. Rajasthan (i) Date palm for specific study
(contrast with Gujarat)
(ii) Hybrid maize
(iii) Dighi Programme
23. Sikkim (i) High-tech green houses
(ii) Integrated farming system for
sustainable agriculture
24. Tamil Nadu (i) Pr ecision Farming — sugarcane,
banana
(ii) Automated weather stations in 224
Blocks
(iii) Promoting SRI through conduct of
demonstrations in 40,000 ha.
(iv) Use of Paddy transplanters in
outsourced mode
25. Tripura (i) SRI cultivation of Rice
(ii) Pineapple cultivation
(iii) Development of demonstration unit
on piggery
26. Uttar Pradesh (i) Promote soil health improvement by
green manuring, organic manures
and bio-fertilizers & Promotion of
organic farming
(ii) Production of high value vegetable
crops through nursery production in
low tunnels
(iii) Energization of tube wells
(iv) Reclamation of Katri Land
(v) Rejuvenation of State seed farms
1  2 3

38
27. Uttarakhand (i) Strengthening milk grid
(ii) Strengthening organic vision
28. West Bengal (i) Prani Bandhu Scheme
(ii) Quality seed production involving
NGOs
1      2 3

39
ANNEXURE III
(Vide Para 3.23)
REPRESENTATION FROM A FORMER MANAGING DIRECTOR OF
HARYANA SEEDS DEVELOPMENT CORPORATION LTD.,
PANCHKULA, HARYANA
From
Ashok Khemka,
Ex-Managing Director,
Haryana Seeds Development Corporation Limited, Panchkula
(Presently posted as Secretary to Government of Haryana, Archives
Department)
To
Shri Basudev Acharia,
Hon’ble Member of Parliament,
Chairman, Standing Committee on Agriculture
Subject: Inquiry into, the misappropriation of central subsidies of
the Agriculture Ministry meant for farmers.
Abbreviations used:
CBI Central Bureau of Investigation
CCSHAU Chaudhary Charan Singh Haryana Agricultural
University, Hisar
CIBRC Central Insecticides Board & Registration Committee
CVC Central Vigilance Commission
HSDC Haryana Seeds Development Corporation Limited
HSSCA Haryana State Seed Certification Agency
NAFED National Agricultural Cooperative Marketing Federation
NCCF National Cooperative Consumers’ Federation
NFSM National Food Security Mission
NSC National Seeds Corporation
RKVY Rashtriya Krishi Vikas Yojana

40
Respected Sir,
I was posted as Managing Director of HSDC from 15th October,
2012 to 4th April, 2013. During my short stint of 170 days in the
company, I discovered a well-organized scam of misappropriation of
central subsidies administered by the Ministry of Agriculture in
collusion with some Central/State agencies in the northern region.
The subsidies meant for farmers were siphoned off by corrupt and
vested elements employed in these agencies. However, I had to
encounter extreme adverse reactions from these corrupt elements
adversely affected by the action taken and was abruptly transferred
out of HSDC
2. HSDC is a Government company owned and controlled by the
State Government of Haryana and falls within the meaning of section
2 (d) of the CVC Act, 2003. The share of Haryana Government in
HSDC’s equity is 55.2% and that of NSC is 22.3%. NSC is also a
Government company owned and controlled by the Central
Government. NCCF and NAFED are multi-state cooperative bodies
under the administrative control of the Ministry of Consumer Affairs
and the Ministry of Agriculture respectively. The employees of the
Central Government or any public servant employed in a Government
company or body owned or controlled by that Government can be
inquired into or investigated by the CVC under section 8 (1) (c) of the
CVC Act on a reference from the Central Government, if the said
public servant is accused of an offense under the Prevention of
Corruption Act. Specific cases of misappropriation of central subsidies
are highlighted below.
3. MISUSE OF CENTRAL SUBSIDIES IN PURCHASE OF RAXIL FOR
NON-APPROVED USE
3.1 RAXIL is a specific brand of M/s Bayer CropScience for the
fungicide Tebuconazole and is registered by CIBRC under the
Insecticides Act for treatment of loose smut and flag smut diseases in
wheat crop. RAXIL 2% DS was recommended by specific brand name
in the Package of Practices for Rabi-2003 of Haryana Agricultural
University for use by farmers for treating wheat seeds against three
diseases: loose smut, flag smut and Karnal bunt. The basis for the
illegal recommendation by the Haryana Agricultural University was
some experiment carried out by its scientists which was published in
a journal, “Tests of Agrochernicals and Cultivars”. The articles published
in the said journal are not peer-reviewed and the results of individual-
experiments/published therein do not carry authenticity amongst the

41
peer scientific community. The articles published in the said journal
are like advertorials published by the experimenter at his own cost.
3.2 However, after seven years in October 2010, the State
Agriculture Department acted upon the above illegal recommendation
of Haryana Agricultural University and mandated compulsory treatment
of wheat seeds with RAXIL 2% DS at public cost before the seeds
could be certified by the HSSCA. The fact that the fungicide was not
registered with the CIBRC for treatment of Karnal bunt disease was
completely ignored. An amount of Rs. 60-65 crores was spent from the
public purse to reimburse the cost of RAXIL purchased by producers
of wheat seeds since the month of October-2010, of which 50% was
spent from the central RKVY scheme. Haryana accounts for 99% sale
of RAXIL 2% DS in the country, whereas the area in Haryana is a
mere 13.5% of the total area in the country under wheat.
3.3 Against stiff opposition, I tried to stop the illegality by
subjecting future supplies of RAXIL from M/s. Bayer CropScience by
imposing the following condition amongst three other conditions in
the supply order dated 29.03.2013 of HSDC:
“M/s. Bayer CropScience India and M/s Bayer AG admit that the
treatment of wheat seeds with RAXIL 2% DS controls Loose Smut,
Flag Smut and Karnal Bunt diseases in wheat crops: The Company,
will ensure statutory registration of Tebuconazole for control of
Karnal bunt disease in wheat crop with the Central Insecticides
Board & Registration Committee u/s 9(3) of the Insecticides Act
1968 before commencement of the supplies and shall accept full
responsibility for all consequent punitive liabilities otherwise.”
Unfortunately, the essential conditions included in the supply order
dated 29.03.2013 of HSDC for supply of RAXIL 2% DS. 40 gram
pouches were wrongly removed and substituted with a new supply
order dated 13.05.2013 sans the four essential conditions, causing
wrongful gains to M/s. Bayer CropScience India and its appointed
private dealer, M/s. Vishal Trading Company, through whom the sales
of RAXIL to private seed producers for reimbursement are canalized
in the State of Haryana. HSDC was bound to ensure that the rate
offered to them by M/s. Bayer CropScience India was not below the
net rate oifered to M/s. Vishal Trading Company. It is reliably learnt
that the net sale rate to M/s. Vishal Trading Company is much lower,
which is likely to cause wrongful losses of an estimated 3-4 crores to
public funds during Rabi 2013-14 alone. The cost of 30-35 lakh pouches
of RAXIL will be reimbursed to private seed producers in the Rabi

42
2013-14 season, out of central RKVY and State funds in equal share at
the purchase rate of HSDC.
3.4 M/s. Bayer CropScience also indulged in illegal marketing,
claiming in its advertisements that RAXIL 2% DS is extensively tested
and included in the package of practices recommendations of Haryana
Agricultural University, Govind Ballabh Pant University of Agriculture
and Technology and Punjab Agricultural University for the control of
loose smut, flag smut and Karnal bunt seed borne disease of wheat.
This claim was also made by Mr. Joerg Rehbein, Head of Bayer
CropScience Indian sub-continent, in his written reply dated 27.02.2013
addressed to me when I was posted as Managing Director of HSDC.
A copy of the reply dated 27.02.2013 of Mr. Joerg Rehbein and the
advertisement for RAXIL published by the Company in a newspaper
was sent to the Union Agriculture Secretary vide my letter dated
25.09.2013,
3.5 In his DO No. 13029/01/2013-PP .l dated May 2, 2013 addressed
to all the Chief Secretaries of States, the Union Agriculture Secretary
had written against the non-approved recommendation and use of
pesticides being a danger to human, animal and environmental health.
In this case, central RKVY grants were used to purchase RAXIL
fungicide for an unapproved use. In the normal course, the illegal
advertisement and marketing by the Company, the illegal
recommendation by the State Agricultural University and the spending
of central RKVY grants for unapproved use of the fungicide ought to
have been subject to a thorough inquiry, but because of the close
nexus between the Company and State level institutions, there was no
action. Were such offense to be committed in European Union or United
States of America, M/s. Bayer CropScience would be burdened with
huge penalties running into billions of dollars in addition to stiff
imprisonment sentences. The Company would have been asked to make
amends by coming out with large advertisements prominently in all
major newspapers stating unequivocally that the use of RAXIL
fungicide to control Karnal bunt disease for which it is not registered
with the CIBRC is illegal and not safe. The matter was brought to the
specific notice of the Union Agriculture Secretary vide my letter dated
25th September, 2013, but there is no response till date. A CWP (PIL)
No. 6757 of 2013 is pending in the matter in Hon’ble Punjab & Haryana
High Court, but the Agriculture Ministry did not file a reply. This
may indicate the possible involvement and collusion of some officers
within the Agriculture Ministry with the multinational company ,
M/s. Bayer CropScience India in the illegal spending of public money
on one specific brand of fungicide for unapproved treatment.

43
3.6 Whether the public expenditure on RAXIL was at all useful,
no study was carried out to ascertain the actual reduction in the
infestation of flag smut, loose smut or Karnal bunt disease in wheat
crops in Haryana before and after Rabi 2010-11, i.e., the year when the
compulsory treatment of wheat seeds with RAXIL at public expense
was started.
3.7 The collateral damage of corruption in purchase of RAXIL was
the decline in wheat productivity by 20% in 2012-13 and consequent
decline in wheat procurement under the Minimum Support Programme
by 32.6% in 2013, relegating Haryana behind Madhya Pradesh to 3rd
position in the country. This collateral damage was completely
avoidable had the infestation of yellow rust disease in wheat crop
been treated with Propiconazole 25 EC instead of spending public
money on RAXIL. A copy of the letter dated 25.10.2013 written to the
Chief Secretary, Haryana, in this regard is enclosed at Annexure II*.
The incomes of farmers in the State reduced by over Rs. 3,000 crores,
adversely affecting state GSDP by 1%, VAT revenues by Rs. 150 crores
and Market Committee/Infrastructure Development fees by another
Rs. 120 crores. Decline in wheat productivity would adversely affect
the implementation of National Food Security in the country in the
long run.
3.8 Action required to be taken at Ministry level:
(i) A CVC inquiry or investigation may be ordered into the
conduct of concerned scientists of CCSHAU and officers of
State Agriculture department acting in collusion with
M/s. Bayer CropScience India leading to avoidable direct
loss of Rs. 60-65 crores to the public exchequer, of which
50% belonged to the central RKVY scheme, in the last four
crop years on the purchase of a specific branded fungicide
(RAXIL) for unapproved treatment.
(ii) Action against M/s Bayer CropScience India for illegal
marketing of RAXIL playing upon the illegal
recommendations obtained from some State Agricultural
Universities.
(iii) The Agriculture Ministry ought to file an appropriate reply
without delay in the pending CWP (PIL) No. 6757 of 2013
before the Hon’ble Punjab & Haryana High Court. The next
date in the case is fixed for 20 January, 2014. It is
*Not enclosed in this Report.

44
confounding as to why the Ministry did not file a reply
even though central grants were used to purchase a specific
brand of fungicide for illegal and unapproved treatment
without open and competitive tenders and M/s. Bayer
CropScience India had indulged in illegal marketing of its
branded fungicide, RAXIL.
4. CORRUPTION IN SEED PURCHASE WITHOUT OPEN,
COMPETITIVE TENDERS AND SUBSIDISING THE HIGH COST
OF PURCHASE WITH GOVERNMENT SUBSIDIES
4.1 In a blatant manner, 45,605 quintals of wheat seeds were
purchased at high rates (weighted average of Rs. 1,730/- per quintal)
in HSDC in the month of November, 2009 from two private seed
traders without any tender enquiry. The seeds purchased at high rates
were offloaded to farmers at the then prevailing market rate of
Rs. 1,400/- by utilising a subsidy of Rs. 400/- per quintal from the
central RKVY scheme.
4.2 Another massive scam took place next year in the month of
November, 2010, in which 99,996 quintals of wheat seeds were
purchased at very high rates of Rs. 2,050/- per quintal without open
& competitive tenders. The purchases were from the trading firms of
a particular private middleman-broker, who routed seeds purchased
privately from the market through the regional offices of NAFED and
NCCF. The middleman had purchased uncertified wheat stocks from
32 different private seed firms in the name of his trading firms. The
certification of the seeds after purchase was got arranged illegally from
HSSCA by the end buyer, i.e., HSDC. The wheat seeds purchased by
HSDC could be sold off to farmers because the State Agriculture
Department released Government subsidy @ Rs. 634.30 per quintal on
the entire stock of seeds purchased. The whole thing was done by
public servants employed in the State Agriculture Department, HSSCA,
HSDC, NAFED and NCCF. The State Agriculture Department aided
and abetted the scam by restricting the purchase of sseds through
Government/Cooperative agencies and directing HSSCA to certify the
uncertified wheat stocks of private traders after purchase for supply
to HSDC under the banners of NAFED and NCCF and releasing
Rs. 5.67 crores subsidy from the central RKVY scheme and another
Rs. 67 lakhs from the State funds to offset the high cost of purchase.
A simple check that the seeds supplied were not certified in the name
of NCCF/NAFED was ignored by design.
4.3 This man and his trading firms acted as the middleman-broker
to State/Central agencies in the region, including NAFED, NCCF, NSC
and HSDC. The man acted as the kingpin of the supply racket by first

45
empanelling his trading firms as “co-producer” of the partnering
Government/Cooperative organization. There was no co-production of
seeds. The entire process of purchase was managed by the middleman-
borker from both the buyer and the supplier ends. The seeds were
purchased from other private traders by the trading firms of the
middleman-borker and transferred on paper to the partnering
Government organization at a fat margin. These seeds were then
supplied to the buyer agency after adding 3% margin of the partnering
Government organization in whose name the seed supplies were made.
The partnering Government organization received 3% commission for
lending its name to the supplies done by the trading firms of this
middleman. The wrongful gains accruing to the middleman would
possibly be shared with the officers of both the supplier and the buyer
Government/Cooperative agencies. This corrupt racket could be
sustained because of two critical factors which were conveniently
overlooked—
(i) A limited tender enquiry was made restricted to
Government/Cooperative agencies. The buyer ignored by
design that the seeds were not certified in the name of the
supplying Government/Cooperative agency.
(ii) Huge Government subsidies would lower the net costs of
the seeds purchased, so that the seeds can be sold off
without the buyer agency incurring losses.
4.4 A complaint dated 4.3.2013 against cheating by NCCF/NAFED
causing wrongful gains to the trading firms of the particular middleman
broker and wrongful losses to central Government subsidies was filed
with the CBI in my official capacity as Managing Director of HSDC.
The complaint after verification and finding of criminality upto the
level of Director is registered as a Preliminary Enquiry bearing No.
PECHG2013A0003 by the CBI. The main suspects in the complaint are
the officers posted at that time in the Chandigarh regional office of
NCCF, Ludhiana agro service centre of NAFED, the State Agriculture
Department, HSDC and HSSCA. It is likely that part of the wrongful
benefits accruing to the middleman-broker was passed on to the public
servants involved in the above seed deal.
4.5 HSDC was also lending its name to the supplies of seeds to
other State agencies by the trading firms of this middleman broker
purchased from the open market HSDC had lent its name to the
supplies of seeds worth 77.5 crores of rupees by the trading firms of
this middleman broker in this fraudulent manner during the 30-month
period from April, 2010 to September, 2012, prior to my joining HSDC

46
on October 15, 2012. The Commission earned by HSDC from such
fraudulent supplies to other State/Central agencies was Rs. 2.32 crores.
A statement of such fraudulent seed supplies by HSDC to other
organizations in the years 2010-11, 2011-12 and 2012-13 are enclosed at
Annexure*. The actual purchase by the firms of the middleman from
the open market was at far lower rates. The trading firms of the
middleman enjoyed a high margin of 25% to 50% and part of the
benefits was shared with the officers of HSDC and the buyer-agencies.
Such fraudulent supplies were completely stopped after my joining as
Managing Director of HSDC on October 15, 2012, but were
re-commenced after my transfer on April 4, 2013.
4.6 Central money was also used to subsidise the loss of HSDC by
buying unsold guar seeds from HSDC in July, 2013 at three times the
market rate and supplied to farmers after the sowing season was over.
Guar seed is a highly speculative commercial crop grown in the dry
regions of Rajasthan and western Haryana. HSDC had earned a net
profit of Rs. 341 lakhs in 2012-13 from selling guar seed due to
abnormal speculative increase in its price. Due to this, the co-production
of guar seeds was increased three times to 3,573 quintals in the Kharif-
2012 season. HSDC fixed the sale price of guar seed at Rs. 21,420/-
per quintal, which was reduced to Rs. 17,500/- due to its unsaleability
at the high rate. Even at the reduced rate, HSDC managed to sell just
352 quintals from its sales counters. Another 292 quintals was sold
using the benefit of 50% central subsidy under the Seed Village Scheme.
A quantity of 2,783 quintals remained unsold twoards the end of the
sowing season. The sowing season of guar seed is between 1st June
and 10th July, but before the onset of the monsoons. After all chances
of sale of guar seeds at the fixed rate of Rs. 17,500/- was finished,
central RKVY funds were used in the month of July 2013 to bail out
HSDC and the entire unsold 2,783 quintals of guar seed was purchased
by the Agriculture Department at Rs. 17,500/- per quintal for the
ostensible purpose of “free” supply to farmers, when the market rate
was much lower. As per the price chart of NCDEX and two major
mandis at Hisar and Adampur of Haryana State, the market rate of
guar seed showed a secular decline from Rs. 7,000/- in the beginning
of July 2013 to Rs. 5,000/- per quintal towards the end of the month.
The guar seeds were purchased from HSDC towards the end of the
sowing season sometime in July 2013 without tender at three times
the then market rate using central money. The free distribution of
guar seeds to farmers took place between 10th July and 15th August,
2013 on paper. An independent inquiry would establish the truth
*Not enclosed in this Report.

47
whether the guar seeds were distributed to farmers and to wheat use
the guar seeds distributed free to farmers after the sowing season was
put to. The intention of the State Agriculture Department was to bail
out HSDC and this was accomplished by spending Rs. 513 lakhs from
central money (RKVY = Rs. 487 lakhs and Seed Village Scheme =
Rs. 26 lakhs), while the same quantity of certified Guar seeds could
have been purchased from the open market at l/3rd the rate of HSDC.
4.7 Another mode in vogue to misappropriate central subsidies
was the purchase of specific branded seeds and weedicides belonging
to specific private companies. An indent for the purchase of specific
branded seeds and weedicides would be sent to HSDC and
premeditated rates in sham enquiries would be communicated by
HSDC to the State Agriculture Department, which would be approved.
The private brand seeds would thus be purchased at high rates in this
manner and sold to farmers after applying subsidies between 50% and
100% from the central RKVY or NFSM schemes. The officers of
Agriculture Department and HSDC would receive their “baksheesh”
from the private seed companies. There were examples of hybrid maize
and sunflower seeds during my tenure in HSDC. There was another
case during my tenure in HSDC of free supply to.farmers through the
district offices of the State Agriculture Department of TOPPLE
weedicide (a specific brand of M/s. Swal Corporation) purchased out
of the funds of the central NFSM scheme. Some packets of TOPPLE
weedicide purchased under the central NFSM scheme found their way
to private dealers instead of free supply to farmers.
4.8 Action required to be taken at Ministry level:
(i) A CVC inquiry or investigation may be ordered into all
cases of seeds sold or purchased in restricted or limited
tender inquiries, in which the seeds purchased were not
produced/co-produced and certified in the name of the
supplying Government/Cooperative agency and the high
cost of purchase was offset in the buyer agency using central
subsidies. The scope of the preliminary enquiry no.
PECHG2013A0003 registered by CBl may be expanded to
cover all such seed supplies made by NCCF, NSC, NAFED
and HSDC in their names, but actually sourced from private
unscrupulous trading firms at high rates without open and
competitive tenders. This would help in determining the
extent of wrongful losses caused to the central exchequer,
by offsetting the high cost of purchase using central
subsidies in the buyer agency.

48
(ii) Central subsidies administered by the Agriculture Ministry
either subsidizes gross inefficiencies or promote corruption
Ln implementing agencies at the State level. To prevent
misappropriation of central subsidies in the name of
subsidies to farmers, it is suggested that central subsidies
meant for farmers may be credited directly into their bank
accounts under the Direct Benefits Transfer scheme. This is
easy to implement in most-states where farmers have a bank
account. Direct transfer of benefits to farmers would enable
more choice amongst the farmers and promote greater
competition amongst the producers of agricultural inputs.
5. MISUSE OF CENTRAL FINANCIAL ASSISTANCE UNDER THE
SEED VILLAGE SCHEME
5.1 Seed Village Scheme is a central sector scheme in which
financial assistance at 50% of the cost of seeds is provided to farmers
for production of seeds. The assistance is limited to half acre per
individual farmer. The assistance is therefore limited to 20 kg of seeds
per farmer in the case of wheat. It was reported during my field tours
while posted in HSDC that the central financial assistance under the
Scheme was largely misappropriated. The wheat seeds sold under the-
Scheme were not used for production of seeds, but were instead
diverted at a premium to individuals and flour mills for consumption
as grain. A premium between Rs. 300/- and Rs. 400/- per quintal
accrued to the Implementing officials due to the wrong diversion from
seed production to consumption as grain. The central financial
assistance at 50% of the gross seed sale rate fixed by HSDC acted as
a cushion to meet part of the wage & salary bills of an overstaffed
and inefficient organization.
5.2 In Rabi 2011-12, the quantity of wheat seeds sold under the
Seed Village Scheme was 36,858 quintals and HSDC appropriated
central financial assistance at around Rs. 1,200/- per quintal amounting
to around Rs. 4.5 crores. The sale of 36,858 quintals of wheat seeds
under the scheme to farmers for production of seeds meant that there
were 1,84,290 different beneficiary farmers and that 18 lakh quintals of
wheat seeds were produced under the scheme in Rabi 2011-12, which
would normally be available for sowing in Rabi 2012-13, The total
sown area under wheat in the State of Haryana is less than 25 lakh
hectares. The seed replacement rate is estimated at between 55-60%.
The sale of certified seeds by registered seed producers in Rabi 2012-
13 was over 15 lakh quintals which can be corroborated from the
corresponding reimbursement of RAXIL pouches to the seed producers.

49
The total wheat seeds sown on paper in Rabi 2012-13 was therefore
33 lakh quintals (= 18+15). This translates to a seed replacement rate
of 132% (= 33/25 * 100), which is argumentum ad absurdum .
5.3 I had, therefore, issued instructions that the sale of wheat seeds
under the Seed Village Scheme should be strictly for .the production
of seeds by farmers because of which the sale of wheat seeds under
the Seed Village Scheme in Rabi 2012-13 was only 9,101 quintals against
36,858 quintals in the previous year, a drop of 75%.
5.4 Action required to be taken at Ministry level:
(i) A-CVC inquiry or investigation may be ordered into the
sale of 36,858 quintals of wheat seeds under the Seed Village
Scheme in Rabi 2011-12 and the actual outcome in terms of
quantity of wheat seeds produced and the quantity sown
in Rabi 2012-13.
(ii) The central financial assistance under the Seed Village
Scheme should be credited directly into the bank accounts
of farmers under the Direct Benefits Transfer scheme to
prevent misuse of central financial assistance in some State
implementing agencies.
6. Through this letter, it is humbly requested in the interest of the
agriculture sector and the farmers of this country that the Department
of Agriculture and Cooperation may be directed to take necessary
action as suggested in Para Nos. 3.8, 4.8 and 5.4 above. It is further
suggested that the Department may be directed to ensure direct transfer,
of  subsidies into the bank accounts of farmers. This measure will
help in controlling the recurrence of misappropriation of Government
subsidies meant for farmers in the future.
With warm regards,
Yours sincerely,
Sd/-
(Ashok Khemka)
3.12.2013

50
ANNEXURE IV
(Vide Para 3.23)
RESPONSE RECEIVED FROM THE MINISTRY OF AGRICULTURE
(DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE AND COOPERATION) ON
THE REPRESENTATION
3. MISUSE OF CENTRAL SUBSIDIES IN PURCHASE OF RAXIL FOR
NON-APPROVED USE
Reply to para 3.1 to 3.8 of the representation
Shri Ashok Khemka, Ex-Managing Director; Haryana Seeds
Development Corporation Limited (HSDCL) has alleged that
Government of Haryana has misused central subsidy by purchasing
the pesticide RAXIL for non-approved use on the basis of a
recommendation made by Haryana Agricultural University (HAU) that
treatment of wheat seeds with RAXIL 2% DS is effective against Karnal
bunt disease. It has further been alleged that M/s Bayers Crop Science
indulged in illegal marketing of RAXIL 2% DS, claiming, on the basis
of recommendations of Haryana Agriculture University, Govind Ballabh
Pant Agriculture University and Punjab Agriculture University, that
the pesticide formulation is effective in controlling loose smut, flag
smut and Karnal Bunt in wheat. It has been pointed out that the
Union Agriculture Secretary has alerted Chief Secretaries of
State Governments against non approved usage of pesticides by a letter
dated May 2, 2013. Shri Khemka has demanded (i) a CVC inquiry
into the conduct of scientists of HAU and Officers of State Agriculture
Department acting in collusion with M/s Bayers Crop Science India;
(ii) action against M/s Bayers Crop Sciences India for illegal marketing
of RAXIL; and (iii) filing an appropriate reply in CWP (PIL) No. 6757
of 2013 in the Punjab and Haryana High Court.
Response:
(a) Registration Process of Pesticides in India:  The legal and
regulatory framework for the import, manufacture, sale,
transport, distribution and use of pesticides is provided
under the Insecticides Act, 1968 and the Insecticides Rules,
1971. The Act provides for the constitution of a Registration
Committee (RC) to ‘register insecticides after scrutinizing
their formulae and verifying claims made by the importer
or the manufacture; as the case may be as regards their

51
efficacy and safety to human being and animals....’. The RC
has devised detailed guidelines which cover a wide gamut
of technical information and data on chemistry, efficacy,
toxicity, pesticides residues, packaging, shelf-life etc. to verify
efficacy and safety of a pesticide before the application for
registration for import, manufacture, distribution and sale
is granted approval. Pesticides are toxic and potentially
hazardous chemicals and hence these aspects of evaluation
have a significant bearing on human and environmental
health. The registrants are therefore required to generate
data in laboratories and supervised trials in fields located
in different agro-climatic zones of the country and satisfy
the RC on their safety and efficacy .
(b) Action taken by Central Insecticides Board and
Registration Committee (CIB&RC): Tebuconazole 2% DS is
registered by RC for loose/flag smut on wheat. However, it
is not registered for Karnal Bunt. Therefore, the Department
of Agriculture and Cooperation referred the matter
pertaining to unapproved use of Tebuconazole 2% DS
generic name for the Bayer Crop Science product by the
trade name RAXIL, against Karnal Bunt to the Secretariat
of CIB&RC. CIB&RC issued Show Cause Notice on 29th
April, 2013 to M/s Bayer Crop Science Limited with respect
to allegations made in the Writ Petition No. 6757 of 2013
that the firm supplied/sold the above product knowingly,
for control of Karnal Bunt in wheat even though the
pesticide formulation was not approved by the RC for this
purpose. M/s Bayer Crop Science Limited replied to the
Show Cause Notice on 13th May , 2013 and clarified that
Raxil 2% DS (Tebuconazole 2% DS) is also extensively tested
and included in the package of practices recommendations
of premier State. Agricultural Universities i.e. Haryana
Agricultural University, Hissar and Govind Ballabh Pant
University of Agriculture and Technology, Pantnagar for the
control of loose smut, false smut and Karnal Bunt which is
also a seed borne disease of wheat.
The matter was then taken up in 342nd meeting of the RC
held on 27.9.2013 wherein a Sub-committee was constituted
under the Chairmanship of Assistant Director General (Plant
Protection) in the Indian Council of Agriculture Research to
evaluate the reply from M/s Bayer Crop Science Limited,
Mumbai to the Show Cause Notice. The evaluation report
is yet to be submitted by the sub-committee.

52
(c) Action taken by Department of Agriculture and
Cooperation (DAC): Taking cognizance of a news article in
The Tribune dated 14.3.2013 on unapproved use-of RAXIL
for seed treatment against Karnal Bunt, Department of
Agriculture and Cooperation, Ministry of Agriculture sought
a factual report from Government of Haryana on 8th April,
2013 on the issue. Haryana Government sent its report on
9th May, defending their decision to recommend the use of
RAXIL against Karnal Bunt on the basis of recommendation
of HAU, Hissar and G.B. Pant University of Agriculture
and Technology for application of RAXIL 2% DS for
treatment of three fungal diseases namely , Loose Smut, Flag
Smut and Karnal Bunt. A copy of the report is at Annexure*.
In the report the State Government has stated that as per
the recommendation of HAU, RAXIL is most cost effective
and environment friendly fungicide for treatment of wheat
seed and that there is no research based finding to prove
that RAXIL 2% DS does not control Karnal Bunt diseases of
wheat crop whereas there are research based
recommendations of at least two leading Agricultural
Universities of the country to the effect that RAXIL 2% DS
is effective against the control of Karnal Bunt.
However, this action is not in consonance with the process
of registration followed in the CIB&RC as per the mandate
of the Insecticides Act. Very often, State Agricultural
Universities conduct supervised trials on efficacy of a
pesticide against a crop-pest complex alone, without going
into the details related to pesticides residues in the crop,
persistence in the environment etc. Besides, the legal sanction
for registration of pesticides for application on specified
crops and specified pests vests with the RC alone.
Accordingly, a letter dated 18.09.2013 was sent to Principal
Secretary, Agriculture, Government of Haryana from DAC
explaining in detail the legal/regulatory framework in
relation to registration of pesticides and the need to respect
the system for the sake of safety of human, animals and
environment.
DAC once again sought response on the issue raised by
Shri Khemka on 17.12.2013. In their reply dated 30.12.2013
(Copy enclosed at Annexure-II), Government of Haryana
has rejected all allegations made against the decision to
*Not enclosed in this Report.

53
procure RAXIL 2% DS formulation for treatment of wheat
seeds against Karnal Bunt on the grounds that the matter
is sub-judice in a Civil Writ Petition (CWP) before the Punjab
and Haryana High Court filed by Bhiwani Sudhar and Vikas
Samiti. Further, it has been reiterated that the application of
RAXIL 2% DS in treatment of wheat seeds was based on
advice from the Haryana Agriculture University.
(d) Civil Writ Petition No. 6757 of 2013: It is further averred
that in the Civil Writ Petition No. 6757 of 2013 filed by
Bhiwani Sudhar and Vikas Samiti Limited in Punjab and
Haryana High Court a counter affidavit has been filed by
UOI through the DAC well in time before the first date of
hearing held on 15.5.2013. In the writ petition, the petitioner
has prayed that the respondent need to produce complete
records of the case including scientific test results of the
universities supporting the claim that RAXIL controls Karnal
Bunt disease in wheat crop. Secondly, it has prayed for
appointment of an independent investigating agency like
CBI or special investigation team to unearth the corrupt
role of the respondent and recovery of misappropriated
public funds and for interim order regarding further use
and purchase of RAXIL 2% DS.
(e) Procurement of RAXIL 2% DS by Government of Haryana:
This matter has been referred to Chief Vigilance Officer in
the DAC.
4. CORRUPTION IN SEED PURCHASE WITHOUT OPEN,
COMPETITIVE TENDERS AND SUBSIDISING THE HIGH COST
OF PURCHASE WITH GOVERNMENT SUBSIDIES
Since the aforesaid purchase of seeds was the decision of the
Government of Haryana, the complaint was forwarded to Government
of Haryana for comments. The comments received from Government
of Haryana are enclosed in Annexure*. Gist of para-wise reply/
response/comments received from Government of Haryana are as
follows:
4.1 During Rabi 2009-10, the Agriculture Department of the State
vide letter dated 4.11.2009 had directed HSDC to stock additional 50,000
quintals of certified seed of wheat to meet demand of the farmers.
The general sale rate of certified seed of wheat by HSDC was fixed
*Not enclosed in this Report.

54
by the State Government at Rs. 2100 per quintal and subsidized sale
rate for the farmers was fixed at Rs. 1400 per quintal after allowing
a subsidy of Rs. 700 per quintal. Accordingly, HSDC requested UP
Seeds and Tarai Development Corporation, SFCI, Rajasthan State Seed
Corporation, UP Seed Development Corporation, Punjab State Seed
Corporation, NSC, NCCF, Chandigarh and Delhi to confirm the
availability and rates of certified seed of wheat varieties, namely,
PBW-343 and WH-711. The response was received only from National
Seed Corporation (NSC) which intimated the availability of only 2000
quintals of PBW-343 at the rate of Rs. 2100 per quintal with 5% trade
discount. Thus, the net rate quoted by NSC came to Rs. 1995 per
quintal F.O.R. destination. Since this rate was very much on the higher
side, HSDC constituted a committee comprising of senior officers of
the Corporation to explore the availability of seeds in the market and
negotiate the rates with the private seed producers. After ..negotiations,
the average purchase rate of certified seed of wheat of the requisite
varieties was finalized at Rs. 1729.04 per quintal F.O.R. destination.
After adding the service charges of HSDC the sale rice of the said
additional quantity of seed was fixed at Rs. 1800 per quintal which
was lower by Rs. 195 per quintal than, the rate demanded by NSC.
After providing a subsidy of Rs. 400 per quintal, this seed was sold
to the farmers at the rate of Rs. 1400 per quintal. It is pertinent to
mention here that on HSDC’s own produced seed the subsidy at the
rate of Rs. 700 per quintal was given to the farmers. Since this
additional quantity was procured by HSDC at a rate which was lower
than its own sale rate of Rs. 2100 per quintal, therefore, a subsidy of
only Rs. 400 per quintal was provided to the farmers keeping the
subsidized rate for the farmers at the same rate of Rs. 1400 per quintal.
Therefore, there has been no mis-utilization of subsidy. It is further
added that since the sowing season was at its peak, therefore, there
was no time left for floating open tenders. Sometimes in order to
meet emergent demand of the farmers even spot purchasing has to be
done because delay of sowing even by 3-4 days reduces the
productivity of wheat. The entire additional quantity of 45605 quintals
of certified seed of wheat purchased by HSDC during Rabi 2009-10
was sold to the farmers and there has been no complaint whatsoever
by any farmer of the State either against the quality of the seed so
supplied or about the sale rate of the said seed. Therefore, the
allegations levelled by Sh. Ashok Khemka in this Sub-para are
imaginary and without any substance.
4.2 to 4.4 The purchase of additional 99,974 quintals of certified
seed of wheat was made by HSDC in an emergency situation during
Rabi 2010-11 in the interest of the farmers with the prior approval of

55
the State Government as the private seed producers had withheld
supply of certified seed as they had challenged the decision of the
State Government for 100% treatment of certified seed of wheat by
filing CWPs No. 19016 & 19017 of 2010 in the Hon’ble Punjab and
Haryana High Court. The seed available with HSDC was insufficient
to meet the requirements of the farmers who would have faced a
crisis situation during the peak sowing season. But for the purchase of
this additional quantity of certified seed of wheat there would have
been an alarming situation if the seed was not made available to the
farmers. It could have also caused an embarrassment to the
State Government apart from leading to unrest among the farmers of
the State. It is further submitted that the 32 seed producing firms
which supplied the said additional quantity of certified seed of wheat
are duly registered with Haryana State Seed Certification Agency
(HSSCA) and they had followed the required procedure/norms of seed
certification. The entire quantity of such seed had duly passed the
requisite field and laboratory tests.
Government of Haryana stated that Sh. Ashok Khemka is not at
all aware about the procedure and process of seed certification. The
HSSCA had certified the seed of only those producers which were
duly registered with it and HSSCA had not certified any seed illegally
as alleged by Sh. Ashok Khemka. The seed certification is a time
consuming process and takes about 10 to 12 months.
It is further added that the sale rate of certified seed of wheat
fixed by the State Government during 2010-11 for HSDC and other
Seed Supplying Agencies in the public/cooperative sector was Rs. 2150
per quintal on which a subsidy of Rs. 500 per quintal was provided
to the farmers as per Government of India guidelines. It is pointed
out that a subsidy of Rs. 500 per quintal subject to a maximum of
50% of the cost of the seed, was admissible as per GoI norms.
Therefore, there has been no mis-utilisation or misappropriation of
subsidy under RKVY as alleged by Sh. Ashok Khemka. Further, in
order to promote the seed treatment the State Government had also
provided fungicide for 100% treatment of certified seed of wheat by
all the seed suppliers including those in the private sector out of
RKVY funds and State plan. It is further added that the entire quantity
of 99,974 quintals was sold and there has been no complaint whatsoever
by any farmer of the State either against the quality of the seed or
against the sale rate thereof. No farmer has made any complaint against
the non supply of fungicide along with the seed bags sold to them
during the Rabi 2010-11. Moreover, the productivity of wheat of the
State during 2010-11 had increased to 4624 Kg./ha. and the State got

56
the Krishi Karman Award for being the best performing State under
wheat for 2010-11. The State was awarded the Krishi Karman Award
once again for Rabi 2011-12. The citation of the Krishi Karman Award
for Rabi 2010-11 and 2011-12 specifically mentions the initiative of
100% treatment of certified seed of wheat taken by the State
Government.
The complaint dated 4.3.2013 sent to CBI by Sh. Khemka was
examined by the Department of Agriculture, Government of Haryana
and after examining the facts it was found that the purchase of the
additional 99,974 quintals was made by HSDC in an emergency
situation in the interest of the farmers with the prior approval of the
State Government as the private seed producers had deliberately
withheld their stocks in view of the pendency of CWPs No. 19016 and
19017 of 2010 in the Hon’ble Punjab and Haryana High Court. The
purchase of the said additional quantity of seed during the peak sowing
season was made through reputed Cooperative Federations, namely,
NCCF and NAFED which have their own established procedures of
procurement and sale of certified seeds. The most important advantage
in making purchases from such reputed, organizations is that in case
the seed supplied by them fails the quality parameters than they Can
be held accountable. On the other hand, such a comfort is not normally
available in case of the private seed suppliers. The rates of seed quoted
by Sh. Ashok Khemka in his complaint dated 4.3.2013 sent to CBI are
not supported by any credible documentary evidence. On the other
hand, he had enclosed only pamphlets, and letter heads purportedly
issued by some private seed producers without any actual bills of sale
of certified seed of wheat during the relevant period. The
State Government after detailed examination of the said complaint
dated 4.3.2013 had decided that the said complaint made by Sh. Ashok
Khemka was baseless which was not supported by any documentary
evidence and the allegations levelled in the said complaint were
unfounded as the same were based on mere assumptions and unreliable
information and DIG, CBI, Chandigarh was informed accordingly by
the State Government after approval of the Hon’ble Chief Minister.
Decision to procure seeds for distribution is taken by the
State Government on the basis its assessment of the requirement and
availability of seeds.
NAFED has informed that its Agro Service Centre, Ludhiana
received a letter No. HSDC/Seeds/F-/2010/SPL-I dated 31.10.2010
through fax from Chief Manager Production, Haryana State Seeds
Development Corporation Limited (HSDCL), Panchkula informing that
HSDC is in need of One lakh quintal certified seed of Wheat (varieties

57
and quantities mentioned in the letter) in 40 kg. Size bags treated
with Raxil 2DS fungicide as recommended by CCS, HAU. The
availability of Wheat seeds and their rates against enquiry dated
31.10.2010 received from HSDCL for different varieties were obtained
by NAFED Agro Service Centre Ludhiana from empanelled seed
supplier, namely, M/s United Agri. Seeds Corporation, Delhi.
Accordingly NAFED Agro Service Centre Ludhiana conveyed to MD,
HSDCL, Panchkula vide their letter No. ASC/LDH/HAR/2010-11/201
dated 3.11.2010 that they are ready to supply 10000 quintal of wheat
seed @ Rs. 2050 per quintal of Wheat variety PBW 343 certified and
untreated and the same was supplied to HSDCL at the given
destination.
Principal Secretary, Agriculture Department, Chandigarh forwarded
to MD, NAFED a copy of the complaint dated 19.3.2013 against NAFED
by Managing Director, HSDCL to the DIG, CBI, Chandigarh for
appropriate action by NAFED.
Accordingly a Fact Finding Enquiry was got conducted by NAFED
to ascertain the veracity of the complaint filed by MD, HSDCL,
Punchkula with DIG, CBI, Chandigarh. As per the fact finding enquiry
report, quotation from only one non empanelled party was obtained
and therefore there was no competition, (copy enclosed as Annexure*.
Accordingly, the services of the concerned officer, Shri R.P . Sharma,
the then In-charge Agro Service Centre, Ludhiana has been placed
under suspension followed by disciplinary proceedings against him.
As regards supply of seeds by NCCF to HSDC, Ministry of
Consumer Affairs, has informed that seeds were supplied to HSDC by
NCCF during 2010. The processing of supply order was done by their
branch office at Chandigarh and the records have been verified by
both the MD and CVO of NCCF and it has been reported that there
has been no irregularity whatsoever in supply of seeds. The local CBI,
Chandigarh has taken copies of records of NCCF and they have also
been intimated that there has been no procedural, lapses by NCCF in
supply of seeds to HSDC.
NSC reported that purchase being made through a man and his
trading firm, alleged to have acted as middleman/broker to central
agencies, is not correct and far from truth.
4.5 HSDC is a self-sustaining Corporation and no grant or assistance
is received by the Corporation either from the State Government or
*Not enclosed in this Report.

58
the Central Government. About 80% of the turnover of HSDC comes
from the sale of certified seed of Wheat. The survival of this
Corporation is very much necessary to stabilize the prices in the market.
Whenever the seed with HSDC is exhausted, the private seed producers
jack up the prices of certified seed of wheat which puts an extra
burden on the farmers. Moreover, the quality of seed sold by HSDC
is perceived by the farmers to be much better than the seed sold by
the private producers.
One of the main objects as contained in Clause 3A(e) of the
Memorandum of Association of HSDC is as under:-
“To enter into contract with individuals, co-operative societies,
corporations and Government agencies in the growing, processing,
drying, storing, distributing, transporting, buying and selling of
agricultural seeds.”
Further, as per Clause 3B(19) of the Memorandum of Association
one of the objects incidental or ancillary to the attainment of the main
objects, the HSDC is permitted:-
“To enter into partnership or into any arrangement for joint
working, sharing o or pooling profits, amalgamation, union of
interest, co-operation, joint venture, reciprocal concession or
otherwise or amalgamate with any person or company carrying
on or engaged in or about to carry on or engage in any business
or .-transaction which the Company is authorized to carry on or
engage in or any business undertaking or transaction which may
seem capable of being carried on or conducted so as directly or
indirectly to benefit the Company.”
Since an amount of about Rs. 18 crore is spent annually on the
establishment cost of the Corporation, and hence, in order to keep it
financially viable, HSDC also supplied seed to other States and
Agencies through their co-suppliers in tune with the Objects of the
Corporation as mentioned above. Co-producers/Co-suppliers were
.engaged for this purpose and terms and conditions for the supply of
seed were approved after thorough examination of the credibility and
genuineness of the co-suppliers. The entire responsibility for the supply
of seeds including the quality of seeds was that of the co-suppliers.
HSDC had also kept a check on the quality of the seed supplied by
such co-suppliers for which HSDC charged 3% service charges on the
supply of such seeds by the co-suppliers, as is done by all the National
and State Seed Corporations/Cooperative Federations, like NSC,
NAFED and NCCF. The seeds supplied by such co-suppliers in various

59
States fulfilled the demand of certified seed in such States which
ultimately improved the Seed Replacement Rate (SRR) there also. HSDC
had never claimed any subsidy either from the Central Government
or the State Government on the seed supplied by its co-suppliers.
However, the scheme of empanelling the co-suppliers by HSDC was
reviewed in the month of September, 2012 and the same was
discontinued with effect from 18.9.2012 and it was decided that HSDC
should expand the volume of its own business. It is pointed out that
Sh. Ashok Khemka had joined as MD, HSDC only on 15.10.2012 after
the decision to stop the empanelment of co-suppliers had already been
taken on 18.9.2012. Sh. Ashok Khemka had absolutely no role
whatsoever in the decision to discontinue the empanelment of co-
suppliers which was taken before his joining as MD, HSDC. Therefore,
the claim made by Sh. Ashok Khemka that he had stopped the
fraudulent supplies through co-suppliers is not correct. Therefore, his
allegation that the supplies of seed through co-suppliers were
re-commenced after his transfer on 4.4.2013 is baseless as no such
re-commencement has taken place after his transfer from HSDC till
date. Moreover, no empanelment of co-suppliers had been done by
HSDC after a formal decision to discontinue the said practice was
taken on 18.9.2012. Sh. Ashok Khemka as MD, HSDC had not taken
a single step to improve the financial viability of the Corporation as
he did not take any interest in increasing the volume of its business.
He rather caused a huge loss to the Corporation by not taking adequate
interest in liquidating the stocks of certified seed of Wheat worth
Rs. 22 crore during his tenure as MD, HSDC. It is also clarified that
the decision dated 18.9.2012 to discontinue the empanelment of
co-suppliers by HSDC was not taken because there was any illegality
therein. For the present the corporation is concentrating on increasing
the volume of its own business. However, it is further pointed out
that National Seed Corporation, NAFED, NCCF and other State Seed
Corporations also empanel their co-producers/co-suppliers for
improving their financial viability under their respective guidelines
adopted for the purpose.
Therefore, there has been neither any illegality in the matter of
empanelling the co-suppliers by HSDC nor the supplies so made by
HSDC through its co-suppliers were, fraudulent as alleged by Sh. Ashok
Khemka in this sub-para.
4.6 It is submitted that the Guar crop is one of the most important
commercial crops which has a number of industrial uses. The crop is
leguminous in nature and is, therefore, good for soil health also. This
crop has a great potential in the State of Haryana to replace paddy,
cotton and bajra crops in some of the areas and, therefore, it is an

60
important crop under the crop diversification programme launched by
the Government of India in the original Green Revolution States.
However, its prices are very volatile which keep on fluctuating every
year. HSDC has a well laid-down policy for fixation of the sale rate
of Guar crop every year. There is a great demand of the Guar seed
particularly when the prices of Guar shoot-up in the market. It is
further pointed out that the quality of Guar seed produced in the
State of Haryana is one of the best in the Country. Sometimes HSDC
is not in a position to meet the entire demand of Guar seed of the
farmers. Keeping in view the specific advantages of Guar Crop, HSDC
has increased the seed production programme of this crop.
The optimum time for sowing of Guar crop is by mid-July to
harvest good yield as per the recommendations of CCS HAU, Hisar
as contained in its package of practices. The yield is considerably
reduced if sowing is done after 3rd week of July. The yield of the
crop is also reduced due to more vegetative growth if sown early. As
per the policy adopted by HSDC, 30% higher than the average of
5 highest mandi rates of Hisar from 14th December to 31st December
or 30% premium on prevailing average of higher rates published in
the newspapers of different mandis, whichever is higher, is given to
the farmers for procuring the Guar seed. Accordingly, 2539 quintals of
Guar seed was procured from the registered seed growers of HSDC
under its policy during October, 2012 @ Rs. 15224/- per quintal during
the tenure of Sh. Ashok Khemka as MD of the Corporation, as per the
policy approved by the Board of Directors.
As per the approved cost structure of HSDC, general sale rate of
Guar seed was o fixed @ Rs. 21420/- per quintal for Kharif-2013 which
was approved by Sh. Ashok Khemka himself. These rates were further
reduced to Rs. 17500/- per quintal by the State Government in the
month of May, 2013 on the recommendation of the present MD, HSDC
keeping in view the prevailing market rates. HSDC sold 353 quintals
of Guar seed from its sale counters and 293 quintals under the seed
village scheme. In the meantime, Department of Agriculture requested
HSDC to intimate the availability and supply rate of Guar seed required
under Crop Diversification Programme. HSDC intimated the availability
and supply rate of Guar seed @ Rs. 17500/- per quintal to the
department. On getting the supply order, HSDC supplied 2745 quintals
of Guar seed to the Agriculture Department which included its own
produced seed as well as seed of Guar procured from National Seed
Corporation (NSC), State Farms Corporation of India (SFCI) and
KRIBCHO. The entire quantity of seed by the HSDC was supplied at
the cost price by 11.7.2013 which was the most optimum time for the

61
sowing of the crop. No complaint regarding the quality of the Guar
seed was received from any part of the State. The complete record of
the farmers to whom the Guar seed has been supplied is available
with the Agriculture Department. Timely supply of certified seed of
Guar facilitated the department to promote Guar crop in the State
under the Crop Diversification Programme which is required to break
the paddy-wheat cycle in some parts of the State. It is also pointed
out that the rate of certified seed of Guar cannot be compared with
the rate of Guar sold in the open market. The farmers have to be
provided only the certified seed of Guar to ensure the quality of the
crop and they cannot be supplied whatever seed is available in the
market.
It is also added here that Sh. Ashok Khemka as the then MD,
HSDC had himself ordered the purchase of 2539 quintals of Guar
seed from the seed growers of HSDC @ Rs. 15,224 per quintal and he
himself had fixed the sale price of Guar seed @ Rs. 21,420 per quintal;
He could have fixed a lower rate but he did not do so. Now he
suggests that HSDC should have not sold the seed of Guar even at its
cost price even though they would have suffered huge losses on this
account by keeping the seed unsold. The allegation of Sh. Ashok
Khemka that the distribution of Guar seed was made to the farmers
at the end of the sowing season and that it was aimed to bail out
HSDC is mischievous, baseless and unfounded. HSDC is a Government
company which is bound to follow the price policy approved by its
Board of Directors/State Government from time to time.
4.7 Assistance for seed distribution and weedicide are approved
interventions under NFSM. Under NFSM Wheat, subsidy for seed
distribution is provided @ 5/kg. or 50% of the cost, whichever is less.
The rate of assistance for weedicide is Rs. 500 per ha. or 50% of the
cost, whichever is less.
The Annual Action Plans under NFSM giving intervention-wise
targets are finalized in consultation with the States. Thereafter, States
implement the interventions as per approved guidelines/assistance
norms, including those for seed and weedicide distribution. However,
seed and weedicide procurement for distribution under NFSM is done
by the States and GoI has no role in these transactions. Since the
aforesaid purchase of seeds and weedicide was the decision of the
Government of Haryana, the complaint was forwarded to Government
of Haryana for furnishing its comments. The response/comments
received from Government of Haryana is as follows:
The allegations levelled by Sh. Ashok Khemka regarding the mis-
appropriation of central subsidy in the purchase of specific branded
seeds and weedicides are mischievous and unfounded which show his

62
lack of knowledge about the specific preferences of the farmers for
particular brands only. To promote some specific crops in the State
under the crop diversification programme, branded seeds and
weedicides as demanded by the Agriculture department were made
available by HSDC. The rates of these items were fixed by the
Agriculture Department by following due procedure and the rates were
quite competitive which were approved by the competent authority in
the State Government. An option was provided to the farmers to
purchase any brand of seed/weedicide as per their choice. The seeds/
weedicides were supplied to the farmers in a transparent manner on
the basis of the permits issued by the Field Officers of the Agriculture
department.
The quality of the seeds and weedicides is very important. There
are some hybrids of maize which give a much higher yield as compared
to other hybrids. Therefore, it becomes necessary to promote only those
hybrids of maize, which give much higher yield to motivate the farmers
towards growing maize so that paddy crop which is a water-guzzling
crop could be replaced under Crop Diversification Programme.
Similarly, the farmers also have a specific preference for certain brands
of weedicides like Topple (Swal Corporation), Topik (Syngenta India
Ltd.), Total and Vesta (United Phosphorus Ltd.), etc. There is no point
in purchasing weedicides by HSDC which have no demand from the
farmers.
It is surprising that the rate of Topple weedicide was fixed by
Sh. Ashok Khemka himself. This weedicide was supplied free of cost
for a limited number of demonstrations and also on 50% subsidy under
National Food Security Mission (Wheat). It is also relevant to mention
that the demonstrations under NFSM (Wheat) are laid under the direct
supervision of the field functionaries of the Agriculture Department
and the weedicide was supplied directly by HSDC to the Agriculture
Development Officers/Block Agriculture Officers for further supplies
to the farmers for demonstration purposes. Therefore, the allegation of
Sh. Khemka that Topple weedicide found its, way to the private dealers
instead of the farmers is too far-fetched and unsubstantiated.
4.8 The allegations levelled by Sh. Ashok Khemka are baseless
and emanate from the lack of his knowledge of the subject. He infact
did not take adequate interest in his job as MD, HSDC with the result
that the Corporation was burdened with an all time high unsold
quantity of more than 87,000 quintals of certified seed of Wheat worth
Rs. 22 crore at the end of Rabi 2012-13 which has caused a huge

63
financial loss to the Corporation making its financial position highly
vulnerable. Sh. Ashok Khemka perhaps wants to cover up his own
acts of omission and commission for which disciplinary action is
contemplated against him. Comments regarding the complaint dated
4.3.2013 made by Sh. Ashok Khemka to CBI have already been given
above in Sub-Paras 4.2 to 4.4.
5. MISUSE OF CENTRAL FINANCIAL ASSISTANCE UNDER THE
SEED VILLAGE SCHEME
Para-wise replies are as follows:
5.1 To upgrade the quality of farmers saved seed used for crop
production programme, the Seed village Scheme provide financial
assistance for distribution of foundation/certified seed at 50% cost of
the seed of crops for production of quality seeds by farmers themselves
and provide training on seed production and seed technology to
farmers. The State Government and the implementing agencies will
have to identify a compact area/cluster approach, suitable responding/
willing minimum 50 farmers for the same crop will be identified/
selected in consultation with the concerned State Department of
Agriculture by the implementing Agencies. The number of farmers
may be more than 50 also subject to maximum of 150. The crop
varieties normally grown in the seeds villages will be decided in
consultation with the farmers preferably the same crop for all the
farmers.
The concerned implementing agencies will distribute the
foundation/certified seeds at 50% cost to the already identified farmers.
The seeds for half an acre per farmer will be allowed. The concerned
implementing agencies distributing foundation/certified seed will
provide the training on seed production and seed technology to farmers
for the seed crops grown in the seed villages. The duration of the
training would be three days.
The seeds produced by the farmers are used by the farmer(s)
himself/themselves in the next sowing season and the remaining seeds
are exchanged/sold to the other farmers in the seed villages and other
villages.
Implementation of Seed Village Scheme is the full responsibility of
the State Government. Under the scheme, funds are released to the
State Government/implementing agencies on the basis of proposal
received through the State Government. The Government of Haryana
was requested for furnishing its comments on the matter.

64
The response/comments received from Government of Haryana
are as follows:
Seed Village Scheme is a well-conceived Centrally Sponsored
Scheme aimed at improving the stock of farm saved seeds for
enhancing crop production/productivity. Implementation of this scheme
has gone a long way in improving the quality of seeds and in
improving the productivity of various crops in the State. Under the
scheme, 20 kg. of certified seed of Wheat for half an acre area is
provided to one farmer on 50% subsidy subject to a minimum of 50
and maximum of 150 farmers per village. The subsidy per farmer
comes to around Rs. 250 only. These farmers are also provided training
during the crop growing season to educate them regarding the
improved agronomic practices of seed production. Wheat is the main
Rabi foodgrain crop of the State and promotion of this crop is also
essential for the food security of the country. Hence, certified seed of
wheat was supplied under the Seed Village Scheme as per the
requirement under the GoI policy. It is pointed out that Sh. Khemka
had not conducted any field tour as MD, HSDC to supervise the seed
village scheme. Therefore, his allegation that a premium between
Rs. 300/- and Rs. 400/- per quintal accrued to the implementing
officials due to the wrong diversion from seed production to
consumption as grain is only based on assumptions, imagination and
therefore, is unfounded. He has not enclosed any documentary proof
to substantiate this allegation nor did he initiate any such study or
evaluation when he was the MD, HSDC himself.
The project proposal under Seed Village Scheme is prepared and
submitted to the Agriculture Department well before the sowing season
of the crops and the programme is implemented after the same is
approved by the State Agriculture Department and Government of
India. The certified seed of the crops is distributed to the beneficiaries
under the direct supervision of a Technical Officer of HSDC in the
presence of the Sarpanch/Panch of the village concerned. Proper record
of the farmers is maintained in the prescribed proforma and the
progress report is submitted to the Government of India from time to
time.
5.2 & 5.3 Implementation of Seed Village Scheme is the full
responsibility of the Government of Haryana and HSDC. As reported
by Government of Haryana, the details of wheat seed supplied under
the Seed Village Scheme by HSDC since 2010-2011 are as under:—
Year Quantity Area Expected seed
supplied covered produced
(quintal) (hec.) (quintal)
2010-11 4,284 4,284 1,07,100
2011-12 36,856 36,856 9,20,000
2012-13 9,101 9,101 2,10,000

65
As pointed out above in Sub-Paras 4.2 to 4.4, during the year
2010-11 there was an emergent situation and HSDC faced acute shortage
of certified seed of wheat. HSDC had even purchased 99,974 quintals
of certified seed of wheat through NCCF and NAFED. Therefore, only
limited quantity of seed could be supplied under the Seed Village
Scheme during 2010-11. However, during the year 2011-12 the
implementation of the scheme was started well in time in the month
of November, 2011 and with the active involvement of the then
Managing Director, HSDC a much larger quantity of certified seed of
wheat could be distributed under the Seed Village Scheme whereas,
during the year 2012-13 when Sh. Khemka was the MD, HSDC the
implementation of the Seed Village Scheme was started by him only
with effect from 12.12.2012 with the result that only a limited quantity
of 9,101 quintals was distributed even though HSDC was having huge
unsold stocks of certified seed of wheat.
It is further pointed out that the average conversion rate of wheat
seed in the State of Haryana is 1:25 as under the Seed Village Scheme,
the beneficiary farmers are given the seed of half an acre area and
they are advised to maintain isolation distance of 3 meters around the
seed plot. It is also not necessary that the entire seed so produced by
the beneficiary farmers would be used as seed for sowing purpose.
Some of the seed so produced could also be used as grain as about
67% farmers of the State are small and marginal. Sh. Ashok Khemka,
being a Computer Engineer has only made mathematical calculations
by assuming a conversion ratio of 1:49 which is ridiculous as far as
seed production is concerned. This also shows the lack of his
knowledge of the subject. In actual field conditions in agriculture 2+2
may not always be 4.
It is surprising to note that Sh. Ashok Khemka is now levelling
wild allegations regarding the implementation of this scheme. He did
not take any active interest in the timely implementation of this scheme
when he himself was the MD, HSDC as he started the implementation
of the scheme only w.e.f. 12.12.2012 with the result that HSDC could
distribute only 9,101 quintals of certified seed of Wheat under the
Seed Village Scheme which deprived a large number of farmers of the
State who could, have been benefited under the scheme and would
have improved the stock of their farm saved seed. In fact, Sh. Ashok
Khemka wants to cover up his own inefficiency and negligence in the
poor implementation of this scheme during his tenure as MD, HSDC.
The mere apprehension that seed distributed under the scheme would
be sold by the beneficiary farmers as grain in the open market is not
a sufficient ground for non-implementation of the scheme. Sh. Ashok

66
Khemka is claiming credit for very poor implementation of the scheme.
Why did he not take steps for timely implementation of the Seed
Village Scheme in the month of November, 2012 itself? Sh. Khemka
was of the view that if the seed was distributed on 50% subsidy
under the Seed Village Scheme, the same would adversely affect the
general sale of certified seed of wheat of HSDC. Resultantly, the
distribution of certified seed of wheat during Rabi 2012-13 had dropped
by 75% under this Scheme as compared to the previous year. A
complaint against the poor implementation of the scheme by HSDC
during the tenure of Sh. Ashok Khemka was also received by the
Government as the poor implementation deprived the farmers of the
benefit of the said scheme. The said complaint is being inquired into
by the Vigilance Department of the State Government. Sh. Khemka is
projecting this as his achievement whereas such a poor implementation
calls for action against him. It is also intriguing to note that Sh. Khemka
in Para-5.1 has mentioned that it was reported during his field tours
while posted in HSDC that the assistance under this scheme was largely
misappropriated, then what prevented him from making this
representation immediately after it came to his notice or why did he
not make such a representation immediately after his transfer from
HSDC on 4.4.2013? Why did it take him 8 months after his transfer
to make such a representation? His representation dated 3.12.2013,
therefore seems to be motivated and an after thought. It is also added
here that the implementation of the seed village scheme in the State
of Haryana is one of the best amongst all the States of the Country
implementing this scheme. Therefore, a comparative evaluation of this
scheme across all the implementing States would reveal comparative
status of the quality of implementation of the scheme in Haryana vis-
a-vis other States of the country implementing the scheme.
5.4 The response/comments received from Government of Haryana
is as follows:
Sh. Ashok Khemka is trying to project himself as a champion of
the farmers whereas as MD, HSDC he did not take a single step for
the welfare of the farmers. In order to cover up his own lapses in
implementing the seed village scheme during his tenure as MD, HSDC,
he has made such a representation. The Seed Village Scheme in the
State has been implemented strictly as per the guidelines governing
the scheme and there has been no complaints from any farmer against
the quality of implementation of this scheme. It is further submitted
that the scheme in its present form is quite well conceived and is
practicable and easily implementable. The farmers are motivated to
adopt this scheme as they get 50% subsidy across the board and

67
contribute the remaining 50% from their own pocket. If Direct Benefit
Transfer scheme is adopted for implementing the seed village scheme,
the farmers would have to first bear 100% cost of the seed and they
will be getting the subsidy of 50% through their bank account
subsequently. Moreover, the amount of subsidy comes to around
Rs. 250 per farmer who is provided only 20 kg of seed for sowing in
half an acre area. Such a move will definitely de-motivate the farmers
from adopting this scheme. However, introduction of DBT Scheme in
this regard is a policy decision to be taken by the Union Government.
It is relevant to point out that so far the Government of India has not
been able to implement the DBT Scheme for transfer of fertilizer
subsidy into the accounts of the farmers in Sonepat district of the
State which had been identified as one of the districts for launching
this scheme, on pilot basis as the implementation of DBT Scheme is
directly linked to the Aadhar Cards which are yet to be issued to a
large number of farmers.
6. The response/comments received from Government of Haryana is
as follows: In view of the above Para-wise comments, the allegations
levelled by Sh. Ashok Khemka in his representation dated 3.12.2013
are baseless, unfounded and imaginary which show the lack of his
knowledge and understanding of the subject. He perhaps wants to
cover up his own acts of omission and commission in order to prempt
any action which may be taken by the Government against him for
lapses on his part. If the Government of India so desires, it may get
the evaluation of all the centrally sponsored schemes of the Ministry
of Agriculture conducted in all the States of the country to know the
comparative status of the quality of implementation of the said schemes.
Only a comparative study of various States implementing various
centrally sponsored schemes of the Ministry of Agriculture would
demonstrate the quality of implementation in the State of Haryana
vis-a-vis other States of the country. It is submitted that the quality of
implementation of all the centrally sponsored schemes of the Ministry
of Agriculture in the State of Haryana will not be found inferior to
any other State of the country.

68
APPENDIX I
COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE
(2012-13)
MINUTES OF THE TWELFTH SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE
The Committee sat on Monday, the 7th January, 2013, from 1500
hours to 1725 hours in Room No. ‘62’, Parliament House, New Delhi.
PRESENT
Shri Basudeb Acharia — Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Sanjay Singh Chauhan
3. Smt. Ashwamedh Devi
4. Shri L. Raja Gopal
5. Shri Premdas Katheria
6. Shri P . Kumar
7. Dr. (Smt.) Botcha Jhansi Lakshmi
8. Sardar Sukhdev Singh Libra
9. Dr. Jyoti Mirdha
10. Shri Patel Kishanbhai V .
11.D r. Vinay Kumar Pandey ‘Vinnu’
12. Shri Hukamdeo Narayan Yadav
Rajya Sabha
13. Shri Satyavrat Chaturvedi
14. Smt. Mohsina Kidwai
15. Dr. K.V .P . Ramachandra Rao
16. Shri Parshottam Khodabhai Rupala
17. Shri S. Thangavelu
18. Shri Darshan Singh Yadav

69
SECRETARIAT
1. Shri R.S. Kambo — Joint Secretary
2. Shri P .C. Koul — Additional Director
3. Shri C. Vanlalruata — Deputy Secretary
WITNESSES
Ministry of Agriculture
(Department of Agriculture and Co-Operation)
1. Shri Ashish Bahuguna Secretary (A&C)
2. Shri Siraj Hussain Additional Secretary
3. Shri E.K. Majhi Joint Secretary (RKVY & DM)
4. Shri Mukesh Khullar Joint Secretary (Crops)
5. Shri Atanu Purkayastha Joint Secretary (Seeds)
6. Shri Narendra Bhooshan Joint Secretary (INM, M&T &
Mktg.)
7. Shri Vimlendra Sharan Joint Secretary (Trade)
Department of Animal Husbandry, Dairying and Fisheries
Shri Sanjay R. Bhoosreddy Joint Secretary (P&F)
Planning Commission
1. Shri J.P . Mishra Adviser
2. Shri Surender Singh Adviser
*2. *** *** *** ***
The Chairman then directed that the witnesses be ushered in.
(At about 1510 hrs., the witnesses took their
seats in the Committee Room)
3. The Chairman welcomed the representatives of the Ministry of
Agriculture (Department of Agriculture and Cooperation and
Department of Animal Husbandry, Dairying and Fisheries) and
Planning Commission. After the customary introduction, an audio-visual
presentation was made on Rashtriya Krishi Vikas Yojana—An
*Matter not related to this Report.

70
Evaluation. Thereafter, the principal witness briefed the Committee on
the Subject ‘Rashtriya Krishi Vikas Yojana—An Evaluation’. The
Members sought several clarifications on various aspects of the subject
matter, to which the witness responded.
4. The Chairman, thereafter, thanked the witnesses for appearing
before the Committee as well as for furnishing valuable information
on the Subject. He also directed them to send the replies to the queries
which could not be clarified by them during the Sitting to the
Committee Secretariat by 14 January, 2013.
The witnesses then withdrew.
A verbatim record of the proceedings has been kept separately .
The Committee then adjourned.

71
APPENDIX II
COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE
(2013-14)
MINUTES OF THE EIGHTEENTH SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE
The Committee sat on Wednesday, the 12th February, 2014 from
1500 hours to 1650 hours in Committee Room ‘E’ (Basement),
Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
PRESENT
Shri Basudeb Acharia — Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Sanjay Singh Chauhan
3. Smt. Ashwamedh Devi
4. Smt. Paramjit Kaur Gulshan
5. Dr. (Smt.) Botcha Jhansi Lakshmi
6. Sardar Sukhdev Singh Libra
7. Shri Kachhadia Naranbhai
8. Shri Hukumdeo Narayan Yadav
Rajya Sabha
9. Shri Parshottam Khodabhai Rupala
10. Shri Rajpal Singh Saini
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Shri A. Louis Martin — Joint Secretary
2. Smt. Abha Singh Yaduvanshi — Director
3. Shri T.H. Rao — Additional Director
4. Shri C. Vanlalruata — Deputy Secretary
WITNESSES
Ministry of Agriculture
(Department of Agriculture and Cooperation)
1. Shri Ashish Bahuguna Secretary
2. Shri R. Jamuda Additional Secretary
3. Shri E.K. Majhi Joint Secretary

72
Department of Animal Husbandry, Dairying and Fisheries
Shri Rajbir Singh Rana Joint Secretary
Planning Commission
Shri Surinder Singh Advisor
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the members of the
Committee and the representatives of the Ministry of Agriculture
(Department of Agriculture and Cooperation) and other officials to the
Sitting and apprised the witnesses of the provisions of the Directions
55(1) and 58 of the Directions by the Speaker.
3. Thereafter, the representatives of the Department of Agriculture
and Cooperation briefed the Committee on issues relating to the Subject
‘Rashtriya Krishi Vikas Yojana—An Evaluation’. The Members sought
clarifications on various issues relating to the contribution made by
RKVY in the growth of Indian agriculture, evaluation of the scheme
during the course of the Eleventh Plan, the roadmap for the Twelfth
Plan, instances of misuse/misappropriation/re-appropriation of Central
funds, the action initiated by the Central Government on such cases
and mechanism put in place to check misuse/misappropriation of
Central funds. The representatives of the Ministry responded to the
same.
The Committee, directed the representatives of the Ministry to
furnish written replies to the queries which could not be responded to
readily by them.
A verbatim record of the proceedings has been kept separately .
The Committee then adjourned.

73
APPENDIX III
COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE
(2013-14)
MINUTES OF THE TWENTIETH SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE
The Committee sat on Thursday, the 3rd March, 2014 from
1100 hours to 1130 hours in Committee Room ‘E’, Parliament House
Annexe, New Delhi.
PRESENT
Shri Basudeb Acharia — Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Sanjay Singh Chauhan
3. Smt. Ashwamedh Devi
4. Shri Premdas Katheria
5. Sardar Sukhdev Singh Libra
6. Dr. (Smt.) Botcha Jhansi Lakshmi
7. Shri Rajaiah Siricilla
8. Shri Patel Kishanbhai V .
9. Dr. Vinay Kumar Pandey ‘Vinnu’
10. Shri Hukumdeo Narayan Yadav
Rajya Sabha
11. Smt. Mohsina Kidwai
12. Dr. K.V .P . Ramachandra Rao
13. Shri Rajpal Singh Saini
14. Shri S. Thangavelu
15. Shri Shivanand Tiwari
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Shri A. Louis Martin — Joint Secretary
2. Smt. Abha Singh Yaduvanshi — Director
3. Shri T.H. Rao — Additional Director
4. Shri C. Vanlalruata — Deputy Secretary

74
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the members to the Sitting
of the Committee. The Committee, then, took up the draft Reports for
their consideration:
*(i) *** *** *** ***
*(ii) *** *** *** ***
(iii) Then, the Committee considered the draft Report on
“Rashtriya Krishi Vikas Yojana — An Evaluation” and
adopted the same, subject to addition of the following in
the Report:-
(a) To insert in para 9 of the Part-II:
“The Committee desire that the CIB & RC inquiry should inter alia,
cover the following points:—
— Reasons why the Chaudhary Charan Singh Haryana
Agriculture University, Hisar recommended Tebuconazle
fungicide by specific brand name of RAXIL to farmers in
its Package of Practices forum approved treatment of Karnal
bunt disease in wheat crop.
—P ropriety and legality of the action of M/s Bayer Crop
Science India publishing the recommendation of some State
Agriculture Universities in its advertisements wherein
RAXIL'S effectiveness in treating Karnal bunt disease in
wheat crop is claimed.
— Has any study been carried out regarding the infestation of
loose smut, flag smut or Karnal bunt diseases in wheat
crop in Haryana before mandating the use of RAXIL
fungicide in Rabi 2010-11. Was such a study carried out
afterwards?
—P ropriety and legality of the State Agriculture Department
of Haryana spending central money on RAXIL, a specific
brand of M/s Bayer Crop Science India, for unapproved
treatment.”
(b) To insert at the end of Para 10 of Part-II:
“The Committee further desire that the DAC should ensure that
open and competitive tenders are floated where central money is
*Matter not related to this Report.

75
spent and that no specific brand name(s) for seeds or insecticides
are specified in tender enquiries. In case private producers are
prohibited from participating in a tender enquiry, the DAC should
ensure that the seeds supplied are produced/co-produced by the
eligible Government agency and certification of the seeds supplied
is in its own name. The Central money spent on subsidizing the
cost of seeds purchased from Government/Cooperative agencies
in restrictive of limited tenders where private seed producers were
ineligible to bid, but the seeds supplied were not certified in the
name of the supplying Government/Cooperative agency should
be recovered from the State Government. The DAC should take
adequate steps to ensure that the benefit of Central subsidies reach
the farmers.”
3. The Committee authorized the Chairman to finalise the aforesaid
reports on the basis of factual verification and present the same to the
Hon’ble Speaker, as the Parliament is not in session.
*4. *** *** *** ***
The Committee then adjourned.
*Matter not related to this Report.