FORTY SECOND REPORT
STANDING COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE
(2016-2017)
(SIXTEENTH LOK SABHA)
MINISTRY OF AGRICULTURE AND FARMERS WELFARE
(DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE, COOPERATION AND FARMERS WELFARE)
ÔDEMANDS FOR GRANTS
(2017-2018)Õ
[Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations
contained  in the Thirty-Fifth  Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha)
of the Standing Committee on Agriculture (2016-2017)]
Presented to Lok Sabha on 10.03.2017
Laid on the Table of Rajya Sabha on 10.03.2017
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
August, 2017/Shravana, 1939 ( Saka)


COA No. 330
Price : R 91.00
' 2017 B Y L OK SABHA S ECRETARIAT
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct
of Business in Lok Sabha (Fifteenth Edition) and printed by
Anupam Art Printers, New Delhi.

CONTENTS
PAGE
COMPOSITION OF THE C OMMITTEE ............................................. (iii)
INTRODUCTION ................................................................. (v)
CHAPTER I Report......................................................... 1
CHAPTER II Observations/Recommendations which have been
accepted by the Government............................ 24
CHAPTER III Observations/Recommendations which the Committee
do not desire to pursue in view of the GovernmentÕs
replies ........................................................ 40
C
HAPTER IV Observations/Recommendations in respect of which
replies of the Government have not been accepted
by the Committee .......................................... 41
C
HAPTER V Observations/Recommendations in respect of which
final replies of the Government are still awaited... 53
ANNEXURE
I. Copy of the output/outcome framework for schemes of
Department of Agriculture, Cooperation & Farmers Welfare
from 2017-18 to 2019-20 ....................................... 57
II. Minutes of the 25th Sitting of the Committee held on
03.08.2017 ......................................................... 63
APPENDIX
Analysis of Action Taken by the Government on the
Recommendations contained in the Thirty Fifth Report
(Sixteenth Lok Sabha) of the Standing Committee on
Agriculture (2016-2017) ......................................... 66
(i)

COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE
(2016-2017)
Shri Hukm Deo Narayan Yadav — Chairperson
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Prof. Ravindra Vishwanath Gaikwad
3. Shri Sanganna Karadi
4. Shri Nalin Kumar Kateel
5. Smt. Raksha Khadse
6. Md. Badaruddoza Khan
7. Shri C. Mahendran
8. Dr. Tapas Mandal
9. Shri Janardan Mishra
10. Shri Devji Patel
11. Shri Nityanand Rai
12. Shri Mukesh Rajput
13. Shri Neiphiu Rio
14. Shri Konakalla Narayana Rao
15. Shri C.L. Ruala
16. Shri Arjun Charan Sethi
17. Shri Satyapal Singh (Sambhal)
18. Shri Virendra Singh
19. Shri Dharmendra Yadav
20. Shri Jai Prakash Narayan Yadav
21. Shri B.S. Yeddyurappa
Rajya Sabha
22. Shri Sambhaji Chhatrapati
23. Sardar Sukhdev Singh Dhindsa
24. Shri Janardan Dwivedi
25. Shri Meghraj Jain
(iii)

26. Shri Vinay Katiyar
27. Shri Mohd. Ali Khan
28. Shri Ram Nath Thakur
29. Shri R. Vaithilingam
30. Shri Shankarbhai N. Vegad
31. Shri Darshan Singh Yadav
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Shri D.S. Malha Ñ Joint Secretary
2. Shri Arun K. Kaushik Ñ Director
3. Shri C. Vanlalruata Ñ Deputy Secretary
4. Shri N. Amarathiagan Ñ Committee Officer
(iv)

(v)
INTRODUCTION
I, the Chairperson, Standing Committee on Agriculture (2016-17),
having been authorized by the Committee to submit the Report on
their behalf, present this Forty Second Report on action taken by the
Government on the Observations/Recommendations contained in the
Thirty Fifth Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) of the Standing Committee
on Agriculture (2016-17) on ÔDemands for Grants (2017-18)Õ pertaining
to the Ministry of Agriculture and Farmers Welfare (Department of
Agriculture, Cooperation and Farmers Welfare).
2. The Thirty Fifth Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) of the Standing
Committee on Agriculture (2016-17) on ÔDemands for Grants (2017-18) Õ
pertaining to the Ministry of Agriculture and Farmers Welfare
(Department of Agriculture, Cooperation and Farmers Welfare) was
presented to Lok Sabha and laid on the Table of Rajya Sabha on
10 March, 2017. The Action Taken Notes on the Report were received
on 09 June, 2017.
3. The Report was considered and adopted by the Committee at
their Sitting held on 03.08.2017.
4. An analysis of the action taken by the Government on the
Observations/Recommendations contained in the Thirty Fifth Report
(Sixteenth Lok Sabha) of the Committee is given in Appendix.
   N
EW D ELHI; HUKM DEO NARAYAN YADAV,
07 August, 2017 Chairperson,
16 Shravana, 1939 (Saka) Standing Committee on Agriculture.

1
CHAPTER I
REPORT
This Report of the Standing Committee on Agriculture deals with
the action taken by the Government on the recommendations contained
in the Thirty Fifth Report of the Standing Committee on Agriculture
(2016-17) on ÔDemands for Grants (2017-18) of the Ministry of Agriculture
and Farmers Welfare (Department of Agriculture, Cooperation and
Farmers Welfare) which was presented to Lok Sabha and laid on the
Table of Rajya Sabha on 10 March, 2017.
1.2 The Ministry of Agriculture and Farmers Welfare (Department
of Agriculture, Cooperation and Farmers Welfare) have furnished Action
Taken Replies in respect of all the 19 Observations/Recommendations
contained in the Report. These replies have been categorized as under:Ñ
(i) Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted
by the Government:
Recommendation Para Nos. 1, 2, 4, 5, 10, 12, 14, 15, 16 &
17
(Chapter II - Total 10)
(ii) Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not
desire to pursue in view of the Government Õs replies:
Recommendation Para Nos. Nil
(Chapter III - Total 00)
(iii) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which action
taken replies of the Government have not been accepted by
the Committee:
Recommendation Para Nos. 3, 6, 7, 8, 13, 18 & 19
(Chapter IV - Total 07)
(iv) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which final
replies of the Government are still awaited:
Recommendation Para No. 9 & 11
(Chapter V - Total 02)
1.3 The Committee trust that utmost importance would be given
to implementation of the Observations/Recommendations accepted
by the Government. In cases, where it is not possible for the

2
Department to implement the Recommendations in letter and spirit
for any reason, the matter should be reported to the Committee
with reasons for non-implementation. The Committee desire that
further Action Taken Note on the Observations/Recommendations
contained in Chapter-I and Final Action Taken Replies to the
Observations/Recommendations contained in Chapter-V of this Report
be furnished to them at an early date.
1.4 The Committee will now deal with the action taken by the
Government on some of the Recommendations in the succeeding
paragraphs.
DOUBLING THE FARMERS INCOME BY 2022
Recommendation (Para No. 2)
1.5 The Committee had observed/recommended as under:Ñ
ÒThe Committee are happy to note that the Government proposes
to double the income of farmers by the year 2022. A Committee
has also been constituted by the Department to examine the issue
relating to doubling of farmers income by the year 2022. The
Department has also written to all State Governments for working
on an appropriate strategy to realize the target of doubling of
farmers Õ income and in this regard some of the States like
Chhattisgarh and Madhya Pradesh have already devised suitable
strategies for the purpose. Further , the States have been requested
to share their strategies with the Central Government also. The
Committee also take note that Chairman, Commission for Agricultural
Costs and Prices (CACP) has been requested to consider the role of
Minimum Support Price (MSP) in ensuring a remunerative price and
higher income to the farmers from the farming activity while
formulating the recommendations on MSP . However, the Committee
have genuine apprehensions about the presence of any definite
strategy with the Government as yet, on attaining the targeted
goal to double the farmers income by 2022. The Committee,
therefore, strongly recommend that the Department should finalize
their strategy and chalk out a detailed plan and implement it on
priority basis on mission mode to achieve the target of doubling
farmers income by 2022. The Committee would like to be apprised
of the initiative undertaken by the Department for the purpose and
the progress made there in so far. Ó
1.6 In its Action Taken reply, the Department has stated as under:Ñ
ÒTo achieve the target of Doubling FarmersÕ Income, the Department
of Agriculture, Cooperation and Farmers Welfare has constituted a
Committee under the Chairmanship of Additional Secretary (Policy)

3
with members from all related departments and NITI Aayog to
examine issues relating to doubling of farmers Õ income by year
2022. As of now, five meetings of the Committee have been held.
NCAER has been associated with the Committee as a Ôknowledge
partnerÕ. As ÔKnowledge Partner Õ, NCAER has submitted its first
draft report.
Further, the Department has also written to all the State
Governments for working on an appropriate strategy, as the States
have a primary role in working towards realization of doubling of
farmerÕs income. The strategy should take into account the status
of end-to-end activities from production to post-production stages.
Some of the States like Chhattisgarh and Madhya Pradesh have
already devised suitable strategies in this regard. State Governments
were requested to hold across-the-board deliberations and prepare
a strategy that will lead to doubling the income of the farmers. The
States were requested to share their strategies with the Central
Government also.
Secretary (AC&FW) has requested Chairman, CACP to consider the
role of Minimum Support Price (MSP) for ensuring a remunerative
price and higher income to the farmers from farming activity, while
formulating the recommendations on MSP .
NABARDÕs Foundation day Seminar was held on 12th July, 2016 on
doubling of farmers Õ income, subsequently, NABARD had been
requested to organize Regional Conferences on Doubling of FarmersÕ
Income, for preparing strategies and also to sensitize the State
Governments. For this purpose, six Nodal States viz. Assam, Odisha,
Uttar Pradesh, Rajasthan, Maharashtra and Karnataka were identified
where the regional conferences may take place. The remaining
States were attached to these nodal States. NABARD has organized
the Regional Conferences in these Nodal States, giving invitation to
the other attached States to attend the Conferences at the nodal
States. Besides, 12 Agro-Economic Research Centres and 03 Agro-
Economic Research Units were invited by NABARD to these Regional
Conferences.
The approach of the Department is to initiate various activities
towards doubling of farmer Õs income from the last Kharif season
itself; some interventions are already in place which are in addition
to imparting greater efficiency and establishing greater synergy in
implementing various ongoing schemes. These are, a roadmap to
scale up pulse production to 24 mmts by 2021, working out specific
interventions under the schemes implemented by this Department,
promoting ancillary activities like bee-keeping, etc.

4
From the foregoing paragraphs, it may be seen that systematic
efforts are being made by the Department of Agriculture,
Cooperation and Farmers Welfare towards the doubling of farmers Õ
income by the year 2022. Ó
1.7 The Committee had noted that towards achieving the goal
of doubling of farmers income by 2022, the Department of
Agriculture, Cooperation and Farmers Õ Welfare (DAC&FW) had taken
many steps like constitution of a Committee to examine related
issues and sending request to stepup work on appropriate strategies
to the CACP to consider the role of Minimum Support Price (MSP)
to ensure remunerative price and higher income to farmers from
farming activity, etc. However, not being convinced with the steps
taken by the Department had expressed apprehensions over the
strategy with the Government on attaining the targeted goal to
double the farmers income by 2022 and had strongly recommended
that the Department should finalize their strategy and chalk out a
detailed plan and implement it on priority basis on mission made to
achieve the targeted goal by 2022. In their action taken notes the
Department has elaborated on the steps already taken by it and
about its request to NABARD to organize regional conferences on
doubling of farmers income. The DAC&FW has also stated that it has
undertaken various initiatives like roadmap to scale up pulse
production to 24 mmts by 2021, imparting greater efficiency and
establishing greater synergy in implementing various ongoing schemes
including specific interventions of scheme and promoting ancillary
activities like bee-keeping, etc. The Committee, however, find that
no definite strategy has been finalized as yet by the Department to
double the income of farmers by 2022. The Committee are of the
firm opinion that the problems faced by the Indian Agriculture
characterized by subsistence agriculture, overcrowding, lower-
return, low share Gross Value Added (GVA), fluctuating and low
growth rate in GVA, etc. need to be tackled by chalking out the
detailed plan at national level. Further, it should be ensured that
the strategies followed by different States do not work at cross
purposes. The Committee, therefore, reiterate there earlier
recommendation that the Department chalk out the strategy at
national in consultation with the Committee constituted by it for
the purpose and implement the same at the earliest, so as to meet
the targeted deadline.
BUDGETARY SUPPORT DURING 12TH PLAN PERIOD
Recommendation (Para No. 3)
1.8 The Committee had observed/recommended as under:Ñ
ÒThe Committee note that the funds demanded by the Department
for 12th Plan was Rs. 3,23,024.42 crore against which Rs. 1,34,746.00

5
crore was approved. This works out only 41.80% of the funds
demanded by the Department. However , against the said plan outlay,
only Rs. 88,322.54 crore has been expended till 16, February, 2017,
which works out 87.18% of RE. The Committee are distressed to
note that the Department is not getting the budgetary allocation
commensurate with projected/proposed requirement of the
Department. The Committee are deeply concerned that in the
absence of inadequate funds, it will be difficult for the Department
to accomplish its various activities or to run its programme effectively
and efficiently. According to the Department, the budget allocation
could not be utilized due to reduction in allocation under Revised
Estimates and non-utilization of funds under NER/SCSP/TSP
categories. Allocations are normally decided by the Ministry of
Finance based on its criteria as well as progress of expenditure by
middle of the financial year. While the Department has been adhering
to the MEP targets as approved by the Ministry of Finance, allocations
are being reduced by them at RE Stage inspite of request for higher
allocations at RE stage by the Department. The Committee are not
convinced with the explanation of the Department for the reduced
allocation by the Ministry of Finance. Even the funds allocated at
RE stage could not be utilized fully by the Department during each
of the year of 12th Plan period. The Committee feel that no one
except the Department is to be blamed for its failure to convince
the Ministry of Finance to allocate funds as proposed by them as
per their plan. It is also entirely the responsibility of the Department
to prepare a road map in coordination with all stakeholders, for
smooth execution of the activities/programmes ensuring optimum
utilization of funds allocated to them. The Committee, therefore,
recommend that the Department should strongly place its case
before the Ministry of Finance for allocation of funds commensurate
with the requirement so that various activities/programmes
undertaken by them, are not hampered for want of adequate funds.
The Committee would like to be apprised of the initiatives
undertaken by the Department in this regard. Ó
1.9 In its Action Taken reply, the Department has stated as under:Ñ
ÒDuring the period of the 12th Five Year plan, Ministry of Finance
has allocated funds to Department of Agriculture, Cooperation and
Farmers Welfare as per the following table:-
XII PLAN (Rs. in crore)
 Year Budget Revised Actual
Estimates Estimates Expenditure
   1 2 3 4
2012-13 20530.22 18173.94 18028.38
2013-14 21933.50 19306.82 19027.58

6
2014-15 22652.25 19852.00 19513.58
2015-16 17004.35 15809.54 15333.92
2016-17 35983.69 48840.50 40585.60
Total 118104.01 121982.80 112489.06
For the year 2017-18, the allocation for the Department has been
fixed at Rs. 52,655.00 crore. Ó
1.10 The Committee had inter-alia recommended that the
Department should strongly place its case before the Ministry of
Finance for allocation of funds commensurate with the requirement
so that various activities/programmes undertaken by them are not
hampered for want of adequate funds and the Committee expressed
their desire to know about the initiatives undertaken by the
Department in this direction. The action taken notes of the
Department merely highlighted BE, RE and AE figures for the Twelfth
Plan period and do not address the concerns of the Committee.
Further, the Department has not given reasons for under utilization
of funds during the 12th Plan Period as actual expenditure was
Rs. 1,12,489.06 crore against the approved 12th Plan allocation of
Rs. 1,34,746.00 crore. The Department has also not stated about
action taken or proposed to be taken for chalking out roadmap for
smooth execution of activities/programmes ensuring optimal
utilization of funds allocated to them in the coming years. Expressing
concern at the rather casual reply of the Government, the Committee
caution the Department not to repeat such instances. Being well
aware of the detrimental effect on the implementation of various
schemes of the Department, the Committee reiterate their
recommendation that the Department strongly takes up case for
allocation of funds commensurate with the requirement with the
Ministry of Finance, so as to ensure that implementation of schemes
are not hampered for want of adequate funds.
UTILIZATION OF FUNDS FOR NER
Recommendation (Para No. 6)
1.11 The Committee had observed/recommended as under:Ñ
ÒThe Committee are unhappy to note that the DAC&FW has not
been able to fully utilize their budgetary allocation meant for
   1 2 3 4

7
North East Region (NER) in each of the last three years. Under-
utilization of funds for North Eastern Region has been a regular
cause of concern for the Committee. Needless to say, effective
utilization of allocated funds is critical for holistic development of
the region. Non-utilization of funds has its cascading effect on
development goals. Under utilization of allocated funds, defeats
the very purpose of having a separate sub-allocation for NER. The
Committee are of the view that it is the responsibility of the
Department, being the nodal authority, to impress upon the States/
Implementing Agencies to utilize the funds allocated to them in a
time bound manner for various activities meant for development
of the region. The issue needs to be addressed through coordinated
approach amongst all stakeholders involved in the process removing
basic constraints which hinder optimum utilization of funds. The
Committee, therefore, desire that a mechanism may be put in
place to address the issue ensuring optimum utilization of funds
earmarked for North East States. The Committee would like to be
informed of the initiatives undertaken by the Department in this
regard.Ó
1.12 In its Action Taken reply, the Department has stated as under:Ñ
ÒAn amount of Rs. 765.10 crores was earmarked for North East
Region in Budget Estimates 2016-17 which was enhanced to
Rs. 1195.57 crores in RE 2016-17. In 2017-18, amount of Rs. 4116.60
crores has been earmarked for schemes to be implemented in
North East Region. Government of India has initiated a scheme of
ÒOrganic Value Chain Development for North Eastern Region Ó from
2015-16 whereby development of organic farming in the region
would be supported in a substantial manner. Apart from this, a
Horticulture Mission for North Eastern and Himalayan (HMNEH) States
is under implementation as part of the Umbrella Mission for
Integrated Development of Horticulture (MIDH). Implementing
schemes that cater to specific requirement of NER would ensure
better acceptance by the beneficiaries, and hence, better fund
utilization. Department is regularly taking up the matter regarding
effective and expeditious utilization of funds in various review
meetings held from time to time with NER States. Ó
1.13 The Committee having noted that the DAC&FW was not
able to fully utilize their budgetary allocation meant for North East
Region in each of the previous three years, had recommended that
the issue needs to be addressed through coordinated approach
amongst all stakeholders involved in the process and constraints

8
which hinder optimum utilization of funds be moved. The Committee
had also recommended for putting in place a mechanism to address
the issues to ensure optimum utilization of funds earmarked for
North East Region. Although, the Department, in their Action Taken
notes have intimated that an amount of Rs. 4116.60 has been
earmarked for schemes to be implemented in the North East Region
and also furnished views that schemes that cater to specific
requirements of NER would ensure better acceptances by the
beneficiaries and have better utilization, no any definite plan of
action has been shown to be implemented to ensure optimal
utilization of funds. The Committee, therefore, would like to
re-emphasize putting in place a definite mechanism to ensure optimal
utilization of funds earmarked for North East Region by DAC&FW at
the earliest.
PRADHAN MANTRI FASAL BIMA YOJANA (PMFBY)
Recommendation (Para Nos. 7 & 8)
1.14 The Committee had observed/recommended as under:Ñ
ÒThe Committee note that the Pradhan Mantri Fasal Bima Yojana
(PMFBY), a comprehensive crop insurance scheme, is being
implemented from Kharif 2016-17 season. In addition, a Unified
Package Insurance Scheme (UPIS) covering their assets and life of
farmers besides crop insurance like house, tractor , pump set, student
safety etc. has also been approved for implementation on pilot
basis in selected 45 districts. PMFBY and Restructured Weather
Based Crop Insurance Scheme (RWBCIS) has been implemented by
23 States during Kharif 2016 season and 24 States and UTs during
Rabi 2016-17 season. PMFBY provides financial protection to insured
88 farmers against crop losses due to natural non-preventable risks.
According to the Department, the sum insured has been made
equal to scale of finance decided by the District Level Technical
Committee (DLTC), which is broadly equal to cost of cultivation.
The farmers are being indemnified based on indemnity level adopted
by the concerned State Government for particular notified crops
viz. 70%, 80% and 90%. Ó Premium over and above of the fixed
premium is met by the Government both Central and State on
50:50 basis as upfront subsidy. All claims liabilities are to be met
by the insurance companies. The Government has proposed to
increase the coverage of cropped area under the PMFBY from the
present 30% to 40% in 2017-18 and to 50% in 2018-19. Payment of
claims is required to be completed in three weeks from receipt of

9
yield data/weather data from concerned State Governments/
agencies. While appreciating all positive features of the scheme,
the Committee find that the scheme, being optional for States, is
not being implemented by some of the States/UTs or are taking
time to put the implementation mechanism in place. However , the
Government is persuading all the remaining States/UTs to implement
the scheme at various forums and meeting etc. The Committee
trust that earnest efforts will be made by the Department to
impress upon the remaining States/UTs to implement PMFBY in the
interest of the farmers of the States/UTs. The Committee also
note that the data regarding average time taken for settlement of
claims by Insurance Companies and pending claims are awaited
from States/UTs/Insurance Companies. The Committee desire that
an institutional mechanism may be put in place for monitoring
expeditious settlement of pending claims by insurance companies
within a stipulated time. The data regarding average time taken
for settlement of claim by insurance companies may also be
collected and furnished to the Committee. The Committee also
expect the Department to implement UPIS on pilot basis without
further delay and a comprehensive review of the Scheme be
undertaken speedily so that the scope and coverage thereof be
expanded for the benefit of farmers of the country. As informed
by the representative of the Department that some States are not
readily accepting and adopting the use of technology for assessment
of yield loss. Further the exercise of crop cutting experiments for
arriving at yield loss is not being carried out with due diligence.
Being aggrieved at this sordid state of affairs, the Committee
exhort upon the Nodal Ministry to impress upon all States/UTs to
adopt the latest technology aids that would provide credence to
the data generated from crop-cutting experiments. This in their
considered opinion would aid the implements of Agri-Insurance
Schemes to obtain an accurate data on yield loss, which would
then decide the quantum of loss and compensation figures. They
further desire that use of satellite imagery for Crop Cutting
Experiments be also adopted on a large scale. The progress achieved
in this regard may also be forwarded to the Committee. Ó
1.15 In its Action Taken reply, the Department has stated as under:Ñ
ÒDue to efforts made by the Government, 24 States and 3 Union
Territories have implemented the PMFBY/RWBCIS during Rabi
2016-17 season as against 23 States during Kharif 2016-17 season.
In order to encourage more and more States and Union Territories
to take up crop insurance it is proposed to launch intensive

10
Information, Education and Communication (IEC) campaign.
Committee has desired than an institutional mechanism be put in
place for monitoring expeditious settlement of pending claims.
Besides the guidelines which stipulates that the claims must be
settled within two months from harvest, the crop insurance portal
with multi-stakeholder interface will help to ensure that the claims
are settled on time. The Department also conducts weekly video
conferences to follow up on claim settlement. Recently, the National
Level Monitoring Committee (NLMC) meeting on 17th April, 2017
also reiterated timely settlement of claims. Regarding average
time taken for settlement of claims by insurance companies, this
will be submitted to Committee as soon as Kharif 2016 season is
closed or all undisputed claims are settled. Regarding Pilot Unified
Package Insurance Scheme (UPIS), the details of the UPIS were
circulated to all stakeholders and also available on the DepartmentÕs
website/Crop Insurance PortalÑwww.agriinsurance.gov.in. Some
States had selected the pilot districts and notified the scheme. As
per provisions of the scheme in addition to crop insurance (PMFBY/
RWBCIS), selection of two other sections is mandatory. Many States
have sought that the selection of 2 sub-section other than Crop
Insurance may be made voluntary rather than mandatory. Meanwhile
for the one year of operation during the pilot phase it will be kept
as mandatory as per original provisions of UPIS. Now all the
stakeholders including State Governments, insurance companies
have been requested to furnish the details of coverage etc. under
the pilot so that review of pilot be made on completion of one
year. Regarding use of technology for capturing CCEs data on
smartphone/CCE Agri App, despite the fact it was made mandatory
for States, so far only 232378 CCEs have been captured in this
manner. Some States like Tamil Nadu, Chhattisgarh and Odisha
have taken the lead in this direction. This matter is being
continuously pursued with the State Governments through regular
weekly video conferences and was also discussed during NLMC
meeting on 17th April, 2017. Besides this efforts are on to
rationalise/reduce the number of CCEs through development of a
robust statistical model through the aegis of Indian Agricultural
Statistics Research Institute (IASRI) of Indian Council of Agricultural
Research (ICAR). Regarding CCEs, the Mahalanobis National Crop
Forecasting Centre (MNCFC) has proposed three pronged strategy,
firstly for yield data collection Smartphone/CCE Agri App which
has already been rolled out; secondly planning for CCEs optimisation
for selected crops can be rolled out within a year subject to
acceptance by National Sample Survey Organisation (NSSO) and
other stakeholders; thirdly use of satellite imagery for yield
estimation at village level large scale pilot study are proposed in
2017-18 for validation of approach. Ó

11
1.16 The Committee had sought to know about the action
initiated and progress achieved by the Department in regard to the
observations/recommendations made by the Committee pertaining
to implementation of Pradhan Mantri Fasal Bima Yojana (PMFBY).
The points on which the Committee had made their observations/
recommendations related to coverage of cropped area under PMFBY,
steps for implementation of PMFBY in all States/UTs, average time
taken for settlement of insurance claims, pending claims, institutional
mechanism for monitoring of settlement of claims by insurance
companies, speedy review of implementation Unified Package
Insurance Scheme (UPIS), expansion of its scope and coverage and
adoption of latest technology aids for assessing yield loss. The
Department in its Action Taken Notes have stated that it is proposed
to launch intensive Information, Education and Communication (IEC)
campaign to encourage more States/UTs to implement PMFBY.
Regarding institutional mechanism for monitoring expeditious
settlement of pending claims, Department has stated that the
guidelines on the scheme and the crop insurance portal with
multistakeholder interface will help ensure that the claims are settled
on time. The Department has also stated that it conducts weekly
video conferences to follow up on claim settlement and the point
of timely settlement of claims was also reiterated in the National
Level Monitoring Committee (NLMC) meeting on 17.05.2017. As
regards average time taken for settlement of claims by insurance
companies, the Department has intimated that the same will be
submitted as soon as Kharif 2016 season is closed or all undisputed
claims are settled. As far as implementation of UPIS is concerned,
the Department has informed that all the stakeholders including
State Governments, insurance companies have been requested to
furnish the details of coverage etc. under UPIS in order that review
of the Pilot Scheme be made on completion of one year. In regard
to adoption of use of technology for assessment of yield loss, the
Department has inter alia stated that efforts are on to rationalize/
reduce the number of Crop Cutting Experiments (CCEs) through
development of robust statistical model through the aegis of Indian
Agricultural Statistics Research Initiatives (IASRI) of India Council of
Agricultural Research (ICAR) and the Mahalanobis National Crop
Forecasting Centre (MNCFC). The Committee are anguished to note
that not much progress has been achieved by the Department in
respect of those aspects of implementation of PMFBY regarding
which the Committee had made observations/recommendations
pointing out the steps that were required to be taken for effective
implementation of the scheme. No new States/UTs since have opted
for implementation of PMFBY. Information regarding increase in the

12
coverage area of PMFBY has also not been provided. The Committee
are not convinced with the reply with regard to setting up of
institutional mechanism for monitoring expeditious settlement of
pending claims. The Committee would like to know about
effectiveness of functioning of the crop insurance portal with multi-
stakeholder interface towards expeditious settlement of insurance
claims. PMFBY covers all crops in addition to major crops cultivated
during Kharif/Rabi. Hence, strong institutional mechanism is very
essential for both effective implementation of the scheme and for
increasing the coverage area of the scheme. Further, this mechanism
will also be able to resolve the issue of calculation of average time
taken for settlement of claims by insurance companies. The
Committee, therefore, reiterate their earlier recommendations
pertaining to PMFBY, particularly those relating to coverage of
cropped area, establishment of strong mechanism to implement and
monitor expeditious settlement of insurance claims and adoption of
new technology for speedy assessment of crop/yield loss etc. to
settle insurance claims. The Committee expect that the Department
would take new initiatives for effective implementation of PMFBY
and apprise the Committee of the action taken in the matter.
PRADHAN MANTRI KRISHI SINCHAYEE YOJANA (PMKSY)
Recommendation (Para No. 10)
1.17 The Committee had observed/recommended as under:Ñ
ÒKeeping in view the factors such as net un-irrigated land area in
the country, additional food-grain requirement, fluctuation in
monsoon rainfall, drought, etc., the Committee are keen to see
that the ÔPer Drop More Crop Õ component of Pradhan Mantri Krishi
Sinchayee Yojana (PMKSY) is effectively and efficiently implemented
by the Department of Agriculture, Cooperation & Farmers Welfare.
However , the Committee are displeased to note that budgetary
support for the scheme was reduced at RE stage during the last
two years. In 2015-16, BE of Rs. 1,800 crore was reduced to
Rs. 1,550 at RE stage. Again in the current financial year 2016-17,
BE of Rs. 2,340 crore has been reduced to Rs. 1,990 crore at RE
stage. Against this backdrop, the Committee are deeply concerned
that PMKSY may be adversely affected for want of adequate funds.
Nevertheless, during 2017-18, an amount of Rs. 3050 crore has
been allocated for PDMC component of PMKSY . The Committee,
therefore, stress that the Department should take all steps to
ensure that the amount allocated for PMKSY is optimally utilized

13
by them. In this context, the Committee note that States draw up
their own irrigation development based on District Irrigation Plans
(DIPs) and State Irrigation Plans (SIPs). DIPs, are the cornerstone
for planning and implementation of PMKSY . It is, therefore,
imperative that District Irrigation Plans and State Irrigation Plans
from the States/UTs be obtained in a time bound manner so as to
ensure effective implementation of the scheme. States/UTs which
have been affected by drought need to be given special attention
for the implementation of the Scheme. In view of the foregoing,
the Committee would like the Department to act accordingly. Ó
1.18 In its Action Taken reply, the Department has stated as under:Ñ
ÒThe funds allocated under PMKSY-Per Drop more Crop are being
utilized optimally for both components of PMKSY-PDMC i.e. Micro-
irrigation and other Interventions components. DIPs for most of
the districts have been prepared. Till date, 664 DIPs have been
prepared and only 11 DIPs are due from one state and one UT .
They are being persuaded to complete the DIP at the earliest. The
Rainfed and Drought affected states are given higher weightage
for allocation in the PMKSY-PDMC component. During 2017-18, also
rainfed area dominated States and States witnessing frequent
drought are being considered for giving additional weightage for
allocation of fund. Ó
1.19 The Committee had inter alia expressed concern that there
were short-falls in the utilization of funds allocated for PMKSY during
2015-16 and 2016-17 and therefore, stressed that the Department
should take all steps to ensure optimal utilization of funds allocated
for 2017-18. In the action taken notes, the Department has submitted
that the funds allocated under PMKSY-PDMC are being utilized
optimally. The Committee would like to be apprised about the
progress achieved in the implementation of PMKSY during 2017-18
in terms of States/UTs-wise projects sanctions as well as in monetary
terms and steps taken for effective implementation by States/UTs.
NATIONAL MISSION ON OILSEEDS AND OIL PALM (NMOOP)
Recommendation (Para No. 13)
1.20 The Committee had observed/recommended as under:Ñ
ÒThe Committee are unhappy to note that while there has been a
continuous shortfall in the domestic production of oilseeds and
vegetable oil from 101.90 LT in 2013-14 to 87.70 LT in 2015-16 in

14
the country, the Demand of the same has increased from
211.70 LT to 244.10 LT for the same period. As a result, the import
of vegetable oil has increased from 109.80 lakh tonnes in 2013-14
to 156.40 lakh tonnes in 2015-16. The various schemes implemented
by the Department namely, Integrated Scheme of Oilseeds, Pulses,
Oil Palm and Maize (ISOPOM) implemented during 2004-05 to
2013-14, Oil Palm Area Expansion (OPAE) programme implemented
during 2011-12 to 2013-14 and the National Mission on Oilseeds and
Oil Palm (NMOOP) being implemented from 2014-15 have not
produced the satisfactory results in terms of increased domestic
production to meet the shortage of vegetable oil in the Country.
The Committee are also pertubed to note that the proposed outlay
of Rs. 3507.00 crore for 12th Plan was reduced to Rs. 2377.50
crore at BE stage, which was further curtailed to Rs. 1945.60 crore
at RE stage, out of which Rs. 1893.65 crore was spent. According
to the Department, most of the States found it difficult to match
State share due to change in funding pattern from 75:25 to 60:40
(General State) and 90:10 (North Eastern States and Himalayan
States). It has also been informed that the Division proposes to
continue the scheme (NMOOP) on the same funding pattern for the
next 5 years with certain modification/improvements and increased
subsidy. However , the Committee are of the view that it is
imperative that all aspects of the scheme NMOOP may be thoroughly
reviewed in consultation with all States and a holistic view may be
taken for smooth running of the scheme for augmenting production
of Oilseeds and Vegetable Oil in the Country. The Committee also
note that against the proposed demand of Rs. 551.00 crore, only
Rs. 403 crore has been allocated for NMOOP for the year 2017-18.
The Committee are of the considered opinion that reduction in
allocation of funds adversely affect the implementation of the
scheme smoothly and efficiently. It is, therefore, imperative that
the funds demanded by the Department for the scheme are allocated
to them by the Ministry of Finance. In view of the foregoing, the
Committee recommend that the Department should conduct a
through review of all aspects of the scheme (NMOOP) for increasing
oilseeds production in the country and come out with result oriented
initiatives for both optimum utilization of budgetary support and
for increasing oilseeds production in the country in a mission mode.
The Committee also urge the Department to impress upon the
Ministry of Finance to allocate adequate funds for NMOOP at RE
Stage. The details of follow-up action taken by the Department
may be intimated to the Committee along with outcome thereto. Ó

15
1.21 In its Action Taken reply, the Department has stated as under:Ñ
ÒThe Oilseeds Division, Department of Agriculture, Cooperation
and Farmers Welfare, Ministry of Agriculture and Farmers Welfare
is implementing National Mission on Oilseeds and Oil Palm (NMOOP)
since 2014-15. NMOOP aims to enhanced production of oilseeds
from 28.93 million tonnes to 35.51 million tonnes, to bring additional
area of 1.25 lakh ha. under Oil palm with focus on productivity
improvement of oilseeds and Fresh Fruit Bunches (FFBs) of oil palm
by end of 2016-17.
1. Oil seeds Production Scenario
➢ Despite, delayed and deficit monsoon during last two
consecutive years, oilseeds production has been sustained at
an estimated production of 33.60 million tonnes during
2016-17 as against highest production 32.75 million tonnes
in 2013-14.
➢ An average of 30.30 million tonnes has been achieved during
12th plan (2012-13 to 2016-17) period as against an average
production of 28.93 million tonnes during 11th Plan
(2007-08 to 2011-12) period.
During the course of its three years implementation of following
modifications were made in the pattern of assistance under NMOOP
for the benefits of oilseeds growers.
➢ Seed subsidy for certified seed distribution oilseeds was
increased by more than 100% (from Rs. 1200/- to 2500/- per
qtl. and from Rs. 2500/- to Rs. 5000/- per qtl. for hybrids
and sesame from 2016- 17).
➢ Subsidy on water carrying pipes increase from Rs. 25/- per
mt. to Rs. 50/- per mt. for HDPE pipes, Rs. 35/- per mt. for
PVC pipes and inclusion of HDPE laminated woven lay flat
tubes with subsidy of Rs. 20/- mt. from Kharif - 2016.
➢ A Special scheme under RKVY ÒTargeting rice fallow areas in
Eastern India for Pulses and Oilseeds Ó has been initiated
from Rabi 2016 and covered 19.00 lakh ha. as against target
of 10.0 lakh hectare rice fallows of six eastern States during
2016-17.
➢ 423 KVKs of ICAR and more than 25 SAUs are involved for
cluster demonstrations and FLDs of various oilseeds crops
during 2016- 17.
➢ Age relaxation of varieties under distribution subsidy from
10 years to 15 years.

16
2. Special attention on Oil Palm
➢ The total area under oil palm cultivation in India was
2.19 lakh ha. in 2011-12 (end of 11th plan). During 12th plan
an area of 95,000 ha. have been brought under oil palm as
against targeted area of 1.25 lakh ha. Due to drastic fall in
CPO prices in international market and subsequent fall in
FFBs price in 2014-15/2015-16, had resulted setback for oil
palm growers and slow area coverage (76%). Therefore, oil
palm growers have been supported through MIS to assured
FFBs prices as and when the international price of CPOs falls
below $800.
➢ States are being regularly pursued to declare oil palm as
plantation crop and to avail the benefit of 100% FDI on oil
palm & olive. State of Karnataka has declared oil palm and
State of Rajasthan declared olive as plantation crops. Ó
1.22 The Committee had inter alia recommended that DAC&FW
should conduct a thorough review of all aspects of National Mission
on Oilseeds and Oilpalm (NMOOP) and come out with a result oriented
initiative for both optimum utilization of budgetary support and for
increasing oilseeds production in a mission mode. They further urged
DAC&FW to take up case for adequate allocation of funds for MNOOP
at RE stage. However, the Committee are dismayed to note that the
Action Taken notes of the Department do not contain any specific
reply with reference to both recommendations of the Committee.
Also, no new initiatives has been taken or proposed to be taken for
increasing oilseeds-production in the country in a time bound manner.
Nor any reply has been given with reference to taking up of case
with Ministry of Finance for additional allocation of funds for NMOOP
for 2017-18 at RE stage. Deeply anguished at the absence of any
action initiated by the Department, the Committee reiterate their
earlier recommendation in the matter and expect that the DAC&FW
tackle this issue with the alacrities it deserves and initiate concrete
measure to increase the cultivation area of oilseeds and oilseeds
production in the country in good time, so as to ensure that the
country attains self sufficiency in oilseeds production at the earliest.
Constitution of Vigilance Committee
Recommendation (Para No. 17)
1.23 The Committee had observed/recommended as under:Ñ
ÒThe Committee are of the view that a committee separate from
the committee of DISHA should be constituted under the
Chairmanship of Member of Parliament at the District Level for

17
review, monitoring and evaluation of all schemes related to
agriculture implemented by the Government. Only officers concern
with agriculture from block level to KVK and Chairman of the
Advisory Committee of ATMA should be made members of the
proposed Committee. The Committee feel that only such a
Committee will be able to present ground realities and the problems
actually being faced by the small and marginal farmers so that
various schemes implemented by the Government are reviewed,
evaluated and improved/modified in order to address the difficulties
of the farmers comprehensively and effectively by the Government.
The Committee also suggest that a small leaflet/booklet may also
be distributed amongst the farmers in their vernacular to create
awareness amongst farmers about the various schemes being
implemented by the Government. The Committee would like the
Government to initiate action in this regard. Ó
1.24 In its Action Taken reply, the Department has stated as under:Ñ
ÒIn order to ensure that all the activities of various Departments
and Ministries of Government of India, and also those of the
Government of the States and Union Territories are implemented in
a systematic and comprehensive manner to promote growth of
agriculture and allied sectors and the welfare of the farmers, an
institutional mechanism for strengthening the policy & advisory
support and review and monitoring system has been devised. The
aim is to cover all the farmers throughout the country and ensure
that the intended benefits under various schemes/programs reach
them. Committees would be constituted at District/State level to
work synergistically to achieve welfare of the farmers. The
Committees would also closely monitor the developing field situation
and enable prior detection of indigence and suicidal tendencies
amongst farmers and respond with alacrity and needed sharpness
to prevent such an eventuality. These Committees can also ensure
speed and quality of implementation, coordination and harmonization
of efforts and convergence of resources for achieving the targeted
growth rates and farmers Õ welfare.
The main objectives to be achieved by these Committees are as
follows:
(i) Focus on increasing the net income from each unit of farm
by reducing the cost of cultivation, increasing per unit yield
and higher market return on the farmers Õ produce.
(ii) Make efforts to offer security to farmers against unpredictable
nature of agriculture through Comprehensive Crop Insurance,
Unified Insurance Package (UIP), speedy & efficient delivery
of relief entitlements and the like.

18
(iii) Enhance access to institutional credit both by increasing the
volume of credit and also by better targeting.
(iv) Supplement the farmers Õ income, particularly during off-
season times by creating an enabling environment for
generating alternate off- farm activities.
(v) Build farmers Õ resilience and prepare them to negotiate
unpredictable nature of farm activities and low level of
income by coverage under various welfare schemes of the
Government.
(vi) Check every possibility of farmer-suicide by working to remove
indigence and vulnerability among the farming community.
(vii) Improve Governance with a view to achieve efficiency and
transparency in delivery of agricultural services.
The District Level Review and Monitoring Committee shall be chaired
by Minister In-charge of the District and the State Level Review
and Advisory Committee shall be Chaired by the Chief Minister of
the State concerned. The State Government may also make
necessary changes to the suggested composition of the Committee
at both District and State levels, as felt necessary.
Both the District level and State Level Committees shall conduct
meetings at least three times in a year  i.e. in the months of
January, May and September. State Level Committee meeting may
follow the District Level Committee meetings, so as to benefit
from the data, information and recommendations of the District
Level Committees.
While the District Level Committees should focus on implementation,
State Level Committee may like to focus on providing policy,
coordination and budgetary support. Ó
1.25 The Committee had recommended for constitution of a
separate Vigilance Committee at the District level comprising of
officers concerned with agriculture from block level to Krishi Vigyan
Kendras (KVKs) and Chairperson of the advisory Committee to ATMA
as members under the chairpersonship of Member of Parliament, on
the lines of DISHA for review, monitoring and evaluation of all
schemes related to agriculture implemented by the Government in
order to address the difficulties of farmers comprehensively and
effectively. The Committee had also suggested that leaflet/booklet
on various schemes implemented by Government be distributed to
create awareness amongst farmers. In this regard, the Department

19
in their action taken note, has not given any reply with reference
to the recommendation for distribution of vernacular leaflet/booklet
on various schemes. In regard to the recommendation for constitution
of separate Vigilance Committee, the Department has furnished
details about the mechanism in the existing system for review of
and monitoring of the implementation of the Schemes of the
Department at the District and State levels. The Committee are of
the opinion that an additional Vigilance Committee at District level
is felt necessary to address the problems faced by farmers in availing
the benefits of the schemes implemented by the Government for
agriculture sector. Hence, the Committee hope that necessary follow
up action will be taken on the recommendations for distributions of
leaflet/booklet on schemes among farmers and constitution of a
separate Vigilance Committee at the District level so that the benefits
of schemes implemented by the Government for agriculture sector
reaches the targeted persons.
Pendency of Utilization Certificates
Recommendation (Para No. 18)
1.26 The Committee had observed/recommended as under:Ñ
ÒThe Committee are deeply anguished to note that the Department
fails to get utilization certificates from the States/Implementing
Agencies for the funds released to them under various schemes.
Pendency of a large number of UCs only goes to show that no
sincere efforts have been made by the Department to liquidate
outstanding UCs or the corrective measures, if any, undertaken by
them have been proved to be futile. The issue of liquidation of
Outstanding Utilization Certificates (UCs) has been raised time and
again by the Committee in their earlier Reports. However, much to
their chagrin, the Committee note that as on 14.02.2017 429 UCs
amounting to Rs. 1,491 crore are pending out of which, 69 UCs
pertain to the year 2012-13, 144 UCs to 2013-14 and the remaining
216 UCs pertain to the year 2014-15. The Committee are of the
view that several ambitious schemes like Soil Health Cards and PM
Fasal Bima Yojana have been implemented by the Government
after lot of deliberations which may improve the socio-economic
conditions of poor farmers in the country. However , it is essential
that these schemes be implemeted and completed timely without
any hindrances so that the benefits of the schemes may accrue to
the farmers. The Committee, therefore, desire that the Department
needs to have a serious introspection to find out the reasons for

20
pendency of a large number of UCs and come out with clear and
innovative action plan for liquidation of outstanding UCs. If felt
necessary, the Department may sit together with the States/
Implementing Agencies and review/evaluate the schemes to address
the constraints in its implementation for optimum and timely
utilization of funds. The Committee would like to be apprised of
the initiatives taken by the Department in this regard. Ó
1.27 In its Action Taken reply, the Department has stated as under:Ñ
ÒIt has been mentioned in the observation/recommendation No. 18
titled ÔPendency of Utilization Certificate Õ that ÔCommittee noted
that as on 14.02.2017, 429 UCs amounting to Rs. 1491 crore are
pending out of which, 69 UCs pertain to the year 2012-13, 144 UCs
to 2013-14 and the remaining 216 UCs pertain to the year
2014-15Õ.
Sl. Year UCs pending UCs pending UCs pending
No. As on As on As on
01.04.2016 14.02.2017 22.03.2017
AB C D E
No. Amount No. Amount No. Amount
(In cr.) (In cr.) (In cr.)
1. 2012-13 77 42.16 69 37.56 67 37.15
2. 2013-14 160 450.98 144 436.75 142 435.63
3. 2014-15 601 1936.55 216 1017.20 213 1016.76
Grant Total 838 2429.69 429 1491.50 422 1489.54
From above table, it may please be seen that from 01.04.2016 to
22.03.2017, department has reduced 416 UCs amounting to
Rs. 940.15 crore.
UC clearance and accumulation is a continuous process. Every year
new UCs become due and are added to previous pending list of
UCs, while clearing pending UCs simultaneously.
However the department do not release any fresh grant to any
implementing agency till previous UCs are obtained. Ó
1.28 The Committee had desired that the Department introspect
on the reasons for pendency of a large number of UCs and come out

21
with clear and innovative action plan for liquidation of outstanding
UCs. The Committee also recommended that, if felt necessary, the
Department might sit together with the States/Implementing Agencies
and review/evaluate the schemes to address the constraints in its
implementation for optimum and timely utilization of funds. In
response, the Department has stated that from 01.04.2016 to
22.03.2017 it has reduced 416 UCs amounting to Rs. 940.15 crore.
UC clearance and accumulations is a continuous process. Every year
new UCs become due and are added to previous pending list of UCs
while clearing pending UCs simultaneously. Further, the Department
do not release any fresh grant to any implementing agency till
previous UCs are cleared. The Committee feel that the Department
has not given due importance to the recommendations of the
Committee and furnished replies in a routine manner. The Committee
chose to make their recommendations on this point after finding
that optimal utilization of funds for the implementation of major
programmes like NFSM, RKVY, NMOOP, PMKSY etc. are affected by
pendency of UCs and therefore, recommended to the Department
to come out with clear and innovative action plan for liquidation of
outstanding UCs. However, the action taken reply of the Department
does not give any indication regarding new initiatives taken by the
Department. Deeply anguished at the State of affairs which shows
no signs of abating, the Committee desire the Department come
forth with a new initiative that would ensure a lasting solution to
this perennial problem. They would also like the Department to
continue to motivate all States/UTs for furnish timely the UCs of
past allocations.
Minimum Support Price
Recommendation (Para No. 19)
1.29 The Committee had observed/recommended as under:Ñ
ÒThe Committee are not happy with the methodology adopted by
CACP for determining MSP . The Committee are of the considered
opinion that CACP do not take into consideration various factors
which add to the cost of their product. Needless to say, irrigation
through diesel pump is costlier as compared to electric pump.
Further , the kind of labour put in by the farmers in sowing seeds
or cutting or threshing of crops or protecting crops from rats or
animals are not taken into consideration for evaluation for the
purpose of determining MSP . Further , there is no arrangement for
purchase of their produce or to store their produce, as a result

22
they are compelled to sell their produce less than MSP under
distress. In this context, the Committee are of the view that farmers
who are progressive and winners of awards like Jagjivan Ram
Puruskar or those who are selected by ATMA for awards and are
identified or recognised, should be consulted for working out MSP
for various crops. In this context, the Committee were informed
that Ramesh Chand Committee, which was constituted to examine
the various aspects of fixation of MSP , has submitted its report to
revamp methodology to calculate MSP and its recommendation will
be implemented at the earliest. It is unquestionable that the farmers
need to be incentivized to produce more crops so as to ensure
food security in the Country. The Committee, therefore, recommend
that the entire issue may be relooked into and a holistic view may
be taken for determining MSP for the benefits of farmers. The
Committee would like to be apprised of the action taken by the
Department in this regard. Ó
1.30 In its Action Taken reply, the Department has stated as under:Ñ
ÒGovernment fixes the Minimum Support Prices (MSPs) of various
agricultural crops on the recommendations of the Commission for
Agricultural Costs & Prices (CACP), the views of concerned State
Governments and Central Ministries/Departments. Cost of production
is one of the important factors considered by CACP in recommending
MSP . The cost of production, inter-alia, includes all paid out costs
such as those incurred on account of hired human labour , bullock
labour/machine labour , rent paid for leased in land, expenses
incurred on use of material inputs like seeds, fertilizers, manures,
irrigation charges, diesel/electricity for operation of pump sets,
insurance, transport charges etc. and imputed value of family labour
(A2+FL). In addition, the CACP also considers, inter-alia, a number
of factors which include trends in market prices, demand and supply
situation, effect on general price level, effect on cost of living etc.
The MSP fixed by the Government provides adequate returns over
all India weighted average all paid out costs including family labour
(A2+FL) as estimated by CACP . The Government offers to procure
the crops at MSP . Food Corporation of India (FCI) is the designated
central nodal agencies for undertaking price support operations for
paddy, wheat, coarse cereals, pulses and oilseeds. The National
Agricultural Cooperative Marketing Federation of India Limited
(NAFED), National Cooperative Consumers Õ Federation (NCCF),
Central Warehousing Corporation (CWC) and Small Farmers AgriÑ
Business Consortium (SFAC) supplement the efforts of FCI for
undertaking price support operations for pulses and oilseeds. Cotton

23
Corporation of India (CCI) is the Central Nodal Agency for undertaking
price support operations for Cotton. NAFED supplements the efforts
of Cotton Corporation of India (CCI) for undertaking cotton
procurement. All the crops conforming to the prescribed
specifications offered for sale at specified centres are bought by
the public procurement agencies. The producers have the option to
sell their produce to FCI/NAFED/State Agencies at MSP or in the
open market as is advantageous to them. Cost of production is one
of the important factors taken into account in fixing the Minimum
Support Prices (MSPs). The estimates of cost of cultivation/cost of
production are made available to the Commission through the
Comprehensive Scheme for Studying the Cost of Cultivation of
Principal Crops, operated by Directorate of Economics and Statistics,
Department of Agriculture, Cooperation and Farmers Welfare,
Ministry of Agriculture and Farmers Welfare, Government of India.
These data are collected with the help of State Agricultural
Universities/Institutions located in various States. Bringing in
refinement in the methodology for collecting cost of cultivation/
production of principal crops in the country is a continuing process.
From time to time, expert committees were constituted to review
the methodology and system of calculation of the cost of cultivation/
production of agricultural produce, to arrive at Minimum Support
Prices (MSPs).Ó
1.31 The Committee express their dissatisfaction over the
unconvincing reply of the Government in reference to the
recommendation of the Committee in regard to Minimum Support
Price (MSP) mechanism in the country and the need for review of
all aspects of functioning of MSP mechanism. The Committee had
inter-alia pointed out the issues of underestimation of the cost of
labour put in by farmers, distress sale of agricultural produces at
below MSP rate by farmers, and the need for incorporating a
consultation process with progressive farmers and award winners in
agriculture for working out MSP for various principal crops. None of
the issues pointed out by the Committee nor the problems connected
therewith have been addressed or resolved. The Committee,
therefore, exhort the Government to tackle this serious issue with
the alacrity it deserves. They, therefore, reiterate their
recommendation that the entire MSP mechanism and all aspects of
functioning of MSP mechanism may be relooked into at the earliest
so as to address the issues pointed out by the Committee.

24
CHAPTER II
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN
ACCEPTED BY THE GOVERNMENT
Recommendation (Para No. 1)
The Committee note that as per the 2011 census figures about
54.6% of our populace is engaged in agriculture and allied activities.
The share of Agriculture and Allied Sector in total GVA was
Rs. 20,93,081.00 crore and it contributed 17% to the country Õs Gross
Value Added (GVA) at current prices during 2015-16. The percentage
share of net irrigated area in the net area sown has increased from
40.46% in 2001-02 to 48.15% in 2013-14. As a result cropping intensity
has increased from 133.6% in 2001-02 to 142% in 2013-14. However, the
Committee also observe that as per the land use statistics for 2013-
14, net un-irrigated area in the country is 73.33 million hectares as
against 68.10 million hectares of net irrigated area and 12.39 million
hectares of agricultural land is culturable waste land. Further, current
fallow land is 14.15 million hectares, and the fallow lands other than
current fallow is 10.69 million hectares and culturable waste land is
12.39 million hectares land. While accepting the reality that Indian
agriculture is broadly reliant on monsoon rains, the Committee feel
that there is immense potential in the country to tap the 12.39 million
hectares of culturable waste land and more than 10.00 million hectares
of fallow land. The Committee, therefore, recommend that all efforts
should be made to increase the net irrigated area in the country,
undertake cultivation in culturable wastelands/fallow land and thereby
increase the cropping intensity. The Committee also recommend that
the Department should chalk out long term perspective plan in
consultation and coordination with all States/UTs and stakeholders in
the matter so as to increase agricultural produce and productivity to
meet the increasing needs of the country in a time bound manner. The
Committee would like to be apprised of the initiatives undertaken by
the Department in this regard.
Reply of the Government
The information on the parameters such as Cropping Intensity, Net
Un-irrigated Area Net Irrigated Area, Culturable Waste Land, Fallow
Land and Fallow land other than current fallow have been verified and
found correct. However the Value of GVA in Agriculture and Allied

25
Sector was Rs. 23,82,289.00 crore and it contributed 17.3% to the
countryÕs Gross Value Added (GVA) at current prices during 2016-17 as
per Second Advance Estimates of National Income, 2016-17 (latest
available) released on 28th February 2017 by Central Statistics
Office(CSO), M/o Statistics & PI.
Under NFSM, Department has proposed further measures to utilize
fallow lands:Ñ
(i) More area coverage under pulses cultivation in rice fallow
area in Eastern States.
(ii) Additional allocation for increasing Pulses production during
Rabi and Summer season.
(iii) Enhancement of production of breeder seeds of pulses through
Indian Council of Agricultural Research (ICAR) institutes and
State Agriculture Universities (SAUs).
(iv) Creation of seed hubs of pulses at ICAR institutes/SAUs/KVKs
for sustainable seed production.
(v) Cropping system based demonstration of pulses as second
crop after harvesting of rice.
(vi) Targeted rice fallow area in Eastern states for production of
pulses and oilseeds.
Pradhan Mantri Krishi Sinchayee Yojana (PMKSY) has been made
operational from 1st July, 2015 with the motto of ÔHar Khet Ko Paani Õ
for providing end-to end solutions in irrigation supply chain, viz. water
sources, distribution network and farm level applications. PMKSY not
only focuses on creating sources for assured irrigation, but also creating
protective irrigation by harnessing rainwater at micro level through
ÔJal Sanchay Õ and ÔJal Sinchan Õ.
Union Cabinet in its meeting held on 27th July, 2016 approved
implementation of PMKSY in a mission mode. The mission objective is
to complete 99 major and medium irrigation projects having potential
of 76.03 lakh ha. in phases by Dec., 2019, including command area
development. The Mission is being administered by Ministry of Water
Resources, RD & GR.
[Ministry of Agriculture & Farmers Welfare (Department of
Agriculture, Cooperation and Farmers Welfare) No.6-4/2017-B&A,
dated 9.6.2017]

26
Doubling the Farmers Income by 2022
Recommendation (Para No. 2)
The Committee are happy to note that the Government proposes
to double the income of farmers by the year 2022. A Committee has
also been constituted by the Department to examine the issue relating
to doubling of farmers income by the year 2022. The Department has
also written to all State Governments for working on an appropriate
strategy to realize the target of doubling of farmers Õ income and in
this regard some of the States like Chhattisgarh and Madhya Pradesh
have already devised suitable strategies for the purpose. Further , the
States have been requested to share their strategies with the Central
Government also. The Committee also take note that Chairman,
Commission for Agricultural Costs and Prices (CACP) has been requested
to consider the role of Minimum Support Price (MSP) in ensuring a
remunerative price and higher income to the farmers from the farming
activity while formulating the recommendations on MSP . However , the
Committee have genuine apprehensions about the presence of any
definite strategy with the Government as yet, on attaining the targeted
goal to double the farmers income by 2022. The Committee, therefore,
strongly recommend that the Department should finalize their strategy
and chalk out a detailed plan and implement it on priority basis on
mission mode to achieve the target of doubling farmers income by
2022. The Committee would like to be apprised of the initiative
undertaken by the Department for the purpose and the progress made
there in so far.
Reply of the Government
To achieve the target of Doubling FarmersÕ Income, the Department
of Agriculture, Cooperation and Farmers Welfare has constituted a
Committee under the Chairmanship of Additional Secretary (Policy)
with members from all related departments and NITI Aayog to examine
issues relating to doubling of farmers Õ income by year 2022. As of now,
five meetings of the Committee have been held. NCAER has been
associated with the Committee as a Ôknowledge partnerÕ. As ÔKnowledge
PartnerÕ, NCAER has submitted its first draft report.
Further , the Department has also written to all the State Governments
for working on an appropriate strategy, as the States have a primary
role in working towards realization of doubling of farmer Õs income.
The strategy should take into account the status of end-to-end activities
from production to post-production stages. Some of the States like
Chhattisgarh and Madhya Pradesh have already devised suitable

27
strategies in this regard. State Governments were requested to hold
across-the-board deliberations and prepare a strategy that will lead to
doubling the income of the farmers. The States were requested to
share their strategies with the Central Government also.
Secretary (AC&FW) has requested Chairman, CACP to consider the
role of Minimum Support Price (MSP) for ensuring a remunerative price
and higher income to the farmers from farming activity, while
formulating the recommendations on MSP .
NABARDÕs Foundation day Seminar was held on 12th July, 2016 on
doubling of farmersÕ income, subsequently, NABARD had been requested
to organize Regional Conferences on Doubling of Farmers Õ Income, for
preparing strategies and also to sensitize the State Governments. For
this purpose, six Nodal States viz. Assam, Odisha, Uttar Pradesh,
Rajasthan, Maharashtra and Karnataka were identified where the
regional conferences may take place. The remaining States were
attached to these nodal States. NABARD has organized the Regional
Conferences in these Nodal States, giving invitation to the other
attached States to attend the Conferences at the nodal States. Besides,
12 Agro-Economic Research Centre and 03 Agro-Economic Research
Units were invited by NABARD to these Regional Conferences.
The approach of the Department is to initiate various activities
towards doubling of farmer Õs income from the last Kharif season itself;
some interventions are already in place which are in addition to
imparting greater efficiency and establishing greater synergy in
implementing various ongoing schemes. These are, a roadmap to scale
up pulse production to 24 mmts by 2021, working out specific
interventions under the schemes implemented by this Department,
promoting ancillary activities like bee-keeping, etc.
From the foregoing paragraphs, it may be seen that systematic
efforts are being made by the Department of Agriculture, Cooperation
and Farmers Welfare towards the doubling of farmers Õ income by the
year 2022.
[Ministry of Agriculture & Farmers Welfare (Department of
Agriculture, Cooperation and Farmers Welfare) No.6-4/2017-B&A,
dated 9.6.2017]
Comments of the Committee
For comments of the Committee please refer to Para No. 1.7 of
Chapter I of this Report.

28
Allocation of Funds for the Year 2017-18
Recommendation (Para Nos. 4 & 5)
The Committee note that a budgetary provision of Rs. 52,655.00
crore has been made for DAC&FW for the year 2017-18. This amount
constitutes only 0.69 per cent of the total budgeted amount of
Rs. 75,46,144.03 crore of the Union Government. The Committee find
that BE of Rs. 52,655.00 for the year 2017-18 shows an increase of
7.81% over the RE of Rs. 48,840.50 for 2016-17. However , the Committee
observe that inspite of this increase, the allocation for the Department
is less as compared to some other social sector Departments/Ministries
such as the Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Ministry of Rural Development
and Ministry of Human Resource Development. Taking into focus the
plight of our farmers, desired level of agricultural credit flow, need for
effective and extensive implementation of crop insurance schemes and
the set target to double the income of farmers by 2022 and being well
aware that the country has miles to go before it can achieve the goal
of Food and Nutritional Security for all, the Committee urge the Ministry
of Finance to increase the share of the Department in Central Plan so
that various schemes undertaken by them do not suffer for want of
funds. The Committee would like the Department to pursue the matter
with the Ministry of Finance for allocating funds to them as per their
requirement at RE stage.
During the course of examination of Demands for Grants 2017-18,
the Committee sought to know the tangible positive outcome of the
financial allocation made to the Agriculture Sector. The Secretary,
DAC&FW while deposing before the Committee simply stated that the
same is being quantified. Not being convinced with this evasive reply,
the Committee desire that the Department should pay special attention
to this vital aspect and work out a formula for quantifying the tangible
outcome of financial allocations made for various agri-schemes so that
policy makers are acquainted with the situation prevalent at the ground
level. The Committee would like to be apprised of the progress achieved
in this regard.
Reply of the Government
The budget allocation of Department of Agriculture, Cooperation
and Farmers Welfare has been enhanced from Rs. 48840.50 crores in
2016-17 to Rs. 52,655.00 crores in 2017-18.
A copy of the output/outcome framework for schemes of
Department of Agriculture, Cooperation & Farmers Welfare from
2017-18 to 2019-20 is placed at Annexure I.
[Ministry of Agriculture & Farmers Welfare (Department of
Agriculture, Cooperation and Farmers Welfare) No.6-4/2017-B&A,
dated 9.6.2017]

29
Pradhan Mantri Krishi Sinchayee Yojana (PMKSY)
Recommendation (Para No. 10)
Keeping in view the factors such as net un-irrigated land area in
the country, additional foodgrain requirement, fluctuation in monsoon
rainfall, drought, etc., the Committee are keen to see that the ÔPer
Drop More Crop Õ component of Pradhan Mantri Krishi Sinchayee Yojana
(PMKSY) is effectively and efficiently implemented by the Department
of Agriculture, Cooperation & Farmers Welfare. However , the Committee
are displeased to note that budgetary support for the scheme was
reduced at RE stage during the last two years. In 2015-16, BE of
Rs. 1,800 crore was reduced to Rs. 1,550 at RE stage. Again in the
current financial year 2016-17, BE of Rs. 2,340 crore has been reduced
to Rs. 1,990 crore at RE stage. Against this backdrop, the Committee
are deeply concerned that PMKSY may be adversely affected for want
of adequate funds. Nevertheless, during 2017-18, an amount of
Rs. 3050 crore has been allocated for PDMC component of PMKSY . The
Committee, therefore, stress that the Department should take all steps
to ensure that the amount allocated for PMKSY is optimally utilized by
them. In this context, the Committee note that States draw up their
own irrigation development based on District Irrigation Plan (DIPs) and
State Irrigation Plan (SIPS). DIPs, are the cornerstone for planning and
implementation of PMKSY . It is, therefore, imperative that District
Irrigation Plans and State Irrigation Plans from the States/UTs be
obtained in a time bound manner so as to ensure effective
implementation of the scheme. States/UTs which have been affected
by drought need to be given special attention for the implementation
of the Scheme. In view of the foregoing, the Committee would like the
Department to act accordingly.
Reply of the Government
The funds allocated under PMKSYÑPer Drop more Crop are being
utilized optimally for both components of PMKSY-PDMC i.e. Micro-
irrigation and other Interventions components. DIPs for most of the
districts have been prepared. Till date, 664 DIPs have been prepared
and only 11 DIPs are due from one state and one UT . They are being
persuaded to complete the DIP at the earliest. The Rainfed and Drought
affected states are given higher weightage for allocation in the PMKSY-
PDMC component. During 2017-18, also rainfed area dominated States
and States witnessing frequent drought are being considered for giving
additional weightage for allocation of fund.
[Ministry of Agriculture & Farmers Welfare (Department of
Agriculture, Cooperation and Farmers Welfare) No.6-4/2017-B&A,
dated 9.6.2017]

30
Comments of the Committee
For comments of the Committee please refer to Para No. 1.19 of
Chapter I of this Report.
National Food Security Mission (NFSM)
Recommendation (Para No. 12)
The Committee note that the National Food Security Mission was
launched from Rabi 2007-08 (11th Plan) to increase the production of
rice, wheat and pulses and coarse cereals through area expansion and
productivity enhancement, in a sustainable manner in the identified
districts of the country, restoring soil fertility and productivity at the
individual farm level and enhancing farm level economy to restore
confidence amongst the farmers. The Mission achieved the targeted
additional production of rice, wheat and pulses. The expenditure for
implementation of NFSM scheme was funded 100% by Government of
India. However, from 2015-16, the mission is being implemented on
60:40 sharing basis between Centre and States/UTs (90:10 for North-
Eastern & Himalayan States). However , the Committee note with distress
that against the proposed allocation of Rs. 12,350 crore for 12th Plan,
only Rs. 9,130 crore was allocated at BE Stage which was further
reduced to Rs. 8092.78 crore, out of which actual expenditure was
Rs. 7,896.72 crore, till 12.01.2017, for 2017-18, Rs. 1500 crore has
been allocated for NFSM which is less than allocation made for
2016-17 i.e. Rs. 1700 crore. In the opinion of the Committee reduction
in plan allocation and the under-utilization may adversely affect the
implementation of NFSM and achievements of planned targets. However,
the Committee are happy to note that focused and target oriented
implementation of the mission has helped to widen the food basket of
the Country. The various intervention of the mission have been
instrumental in bringing about significant yield gain to the farmers
resulting into increase in their income level. The average annual
production of about 202.5 MT of food grains during 10th Plan rose to
the level of about 237.5 MT during the 11th Plan and 252.02 MT in
2014-15. However, the Committee observe that there were shortfalls
in actual expenditure for the NFSM- (Rice, Wheat, Pulses & Coarse
cereals) from 2012-13 onwards and for NFSM (commercial crops) from
2013-14 and 2014-15 onwards due to unspent balances lying with States/
Implementing Agencies. The Committee, therefore, would like the
Department to impress upon the States/Implementing Agencies to
expedite optimum utilization of funds allocated for the purpose so as
to sustain continuous growth in production of food grains as well as
commercial crops in the coming years. The Committee would like to
be apprised of the initiatives undertaken by them in this regard.

31
Reply of the Government
NFSM programme was approved by CCEA for an amount of
Rs. 12,350 crores for 12th Five Year Plan. The allocation of funds was
provided under NFSM on the basis of budget allocation of the Department
on priority basis.
The financial performance during for 12th Five Year Plan (2012-13
to 2016-17), the BE/RE and actual release position of NFSM is given
below:
(Rs. in crore)
Sl. Year Allocation Actual Percentage
No. Expenditure (% ) with
BE RE Final (Release) reference
Grant to RE
1. 2012-13 1850.00 1763.57 - 1725.65 97.85
2. 2013-14 2250.00 1962.60 2044.84 2027.08 103.29
3. 2014-15 2030.00 1830.00 1874.64 1872.77 102.34
4. 2015-16 1300.00 1136.61 1164.03 1162.39 102.27
5. 2016-17 1700.00 1280.00 1286.81 1286.24* 100.49*
Total 9130.00 7972.78 8074.13 101.27
*As on 31.03.2017.
It may be seen that against the proposed allocation of Rs. 12350.00
crore for 12th Plan, only Rs. 9130.00 crore was allocated at BE Stage
which was further reduced to Rs. 7972.78 crore at RE stage, out of
which actual expenditure is Rs. 8074.13 crore, till 31.03.2017, for
2017-18, Rs. 1720.00 crore has been allocated for NFSM which is higher
than the allocation made for 2016-17 i.e. Rs. 1700.00 crore. During
the 12th Plan Period, there was overall reduction in the funds provided
to this Department at BE/RE stage; therefore there was proportionate
decrease in the funds under NFSM.
The unspent balances available with the States/Implementing
agencies at the beginning of the financial year are adjusted from the
release made to them during the year with the approval of IFD. During
2014-15, funds were released to the States through respective States
Treasures. No reduction of the funds was made because as per the

32
recommendations of the 14th Finance Commission, from 2015-16, the
National Food Security Mission (NFSM) is being implemented on 60:40
sharing basis between Centre and States/UTs (90:10 for North-Eastern
& Himalayan States) and no reduction was made in the allocation of
the funds for NFSM Programme.
During the year 2013-14 and 2014-15, funds were released as
compared to Revised Estimates which is about 103.29% and 103.24%
respectively.
(i) Department has already in touch with State Governments to
release the funds from Government of India to States and request to
State Governments to release the Central share with matching State
share to State Agriculture Departments for timely release of funds to
districts. Review of the progress of the Scheme by National Consultant,
Senior Officers of the Department and Crop Development Directrorate
under control of this Department to visit with States and districts for
proper implementation of the programme. Besides, the Scheme is also
reviewed by the HonÕble Agriculture Minister in NFSM-Governing Council
Meeting, Executive Committee Meetings and National Conferences on
Kharif and Rabi Campaign. Department has put more focus on pulse
production and major initiatives have been taken by the Government
which are as under:-
(ii) Total allocation of funds under NFSM-Pulses is from total
allocation of NFSM for NFSM- Pulses during 2017-18, which is
60% of total allocation of Rs. 1700.00 crore.
(iii) In order to boost faster adoption of newer varieties of pulses,
distribution of certified seeds of less than 10 years old
varieties as seed mini kits of pulses were done free of cost
to farmers.
(iv) Additional area coverage under cultivation of pulses through
inter-cropping with food & commercial crops and promotion
of Arhar on Rice Bunds.
(v) Promotion of stress tolerant varieties of rice under cluster
demonstrations and seed distribution.
(vi) Use of drum seeder and seed drills in rainfed areas of rice
to promote line sowing.
(vii) Under NFSM, more area coverage under pulses cultivation in
rice fallow area in Eastern States.
(viii) Additional allocation for increasing Pulses production during
Rabi and Summer season.

33
(ix) Enhancement of production of breeder seeds of pulses through
Indian Council of Agricultural Research (ICAR) institutes and
State Agriculture Universities (SAUs).
(x) Creation of seed hubs of pulses at ICAR institutes/SAUs/KVKs
for sustainable seed production.
(xi) Cluster frontline demonstrations of pulses through Krishi
Vigyan Kendras (KVKs) have been organized.
(xii) 15% allocation of pulses component of NFSM is earmarked
for production of quality seeds of pulses.
(xiii) Cropping system based demonstration of pulses as second
crop after harvesting of rice.
(xiv) Targeted rice fallow area in Eastern States for production of
pulses and oilseeds.
[Ministry of Agriculture & Farmers Welfare (Department of
Agriculture, Cooperation and Farmers Welfare) No.6-4/2017-B&A,
dated 9.6.2017]
Soil Health Cards
Recommendation (Para No. 14)
The Committee find that a target has been set to provide 14 crore
Soil Health Cards to farmers households during the 12th Plan period.
Soil Health Card will provide information to farmers on soil nutrient
status of their soil and recommendation on appropriate dosage of
nutrients to be applied for improving soil health and its fertility. Soil
Health Card will be issued every two years for all land holding in the
Country so as to promote balanced and integrated use of plant nutrients.
During the course of evidence, the Secretary of the Department reported
to the Committee that 2.65 crore soil samples have been collected on
the basis of which 14 crore soil health cards will be issued. So far 5.50
crore soil health cards have been distributed. However , the Secretary
of the Department candidly accepted that they would not be able to
issue rest of the cards by March, 2017. According to him, inadequacy
of soil testing facilities has been the main reason for slow progress in
the distribution of Soil Health Cards. The Committee also note that BE
2016-17 was Rs. 360 crore which was increased to Rs. 418 crore at RE
stage against which the actual expenditure was only Rs. 198.08 crore
and thus Rs. 219.92 crore remained unutilized during 2016-17, as on
15.02.2017. BE for 2017-18 is Rs. 450 crore, out of which Rs. 72 crore
will be used for strengthening of soil testing facilities in the Country.

34
The Secretary assured that by May-June, 2017, Soil Health Cards will
be issued to all the 14 crore farmers. The Committee trust that genuine
efforts will be made in coordination with all concerned to issue soil
health cards to all the 14 crore farmers by May-June, 2017 as assured
by the Secretary of the Department. The Committee also feel that the
existing procedure of soil testing of the sample taken from 5-10 places
does not seems to be correct for accurate and reliable results and
therefore, desire that same may be reviewed to find out more reliable
and scientific way to analyze soil status and its fertility accurately, for
generation of Soil Health Cards for judicious use of chemical fertilizers
and micro nutrients by the farmers for increasing production and
productivity of their crops. In this regard, the Committee strongly
recommend that rural youths trained in Agri-Clincs and Agri-Business
Centres (ACABCs) may be involved as consultant for soil testing from
time to time and to advise the farmers about the appropriate doses
and nutrients required for improving the soil health and its fertility.
The Committee would like to be apprised of the progress made in this
regard from time to time.
Reply of the Government
As on 21.03.2017, against the target of 253.54 lakh soil samples,
States has collected 273.73 lakh samples and tested 210.76 lakh samples
tested and issued 582.90 lakh soil health cards. As regards release of
funds, many State Governments have not furnished utilization
certificates and progress reports. In the absence of the above
documents, it is not feasible to release funds to the errant States.
However , as on 20.03.2017, funds amounting to Rs. 217.76 crore have
been released. Efforts are being made to complete the target by May-
June, 2017. The State Governments have been advised to engage the
rural youths trained in Agri-Clinics and Agri-Business Centres (ACABCs)
as consultant for soil testing from time to time and to advise the
farmers about the appropriate doses and nutrients required for
improving the soil health and its fertility.
[Ministry of Agriculture & Farmers Welfare (Department of
Agriculture, Cooperation and Farmers Welfare) No.6-4/2017-B&A,
dated 9.6.2017]
Sub-Mission of Agricultural Extension (SMAE)
Recommendation (Para No. 15)
The Committee note that State Extension infrastructure, Agricultural
Technology Management Agencies (ATMAs), Agri-Clinics and Agri-Business

35
Centres (ACABCs), play an important role in providing Agricultural
Extension services to farmers. However , the Committee are distressed
to note that out of an approved outlay of Rs. 5580.24 crores for 12th
Plan under SMAE, only Rs. 3224.95 crore could be utilized during 12th
Plan. Further , the Committee note that there are shortfalls against
targets in the implementation of some of the components of SMAE
Programmes during the 12th plan period. For illustration, as against
the target of 1200 training courses under MANAGE for higher and
middle level functionaries of the State Governments who in terms
provide training and extension support to the farmers, only 881 courses
were organised during 12th Plan. 750 Model testing courses were to be
organized in ICAR Institutes and SAUs on thrust areas of Agriculture,
Horticulture, Animal Husbandry and Fisheries Extension against which
only 296 courses were conducted during 12th Plan. Under Centrally
Sponsored Component, 1 crore farmers were to be trained but only
58,01,498 farmers could be trained during 12th Plan. Considering the
pivotal role of SMAE programmes, the Committee recommend that
bottlenecks which impede the effective implementation of the scheme
be addressed at the earliest. The Department being the nodal agency
should play pro-active role and motivate the Implementing Agencies to
ensure optimum utilization of central funds. The Committee also desire
that a detailed note on the outcome of the indepth independent
evaluation of ATMA and ACABCs being undertaken may be furnished
along with action proposed to be taken thereon.
Reply of the Government
As against an approved outlay of Rs. 5880.24 crores for the XII Five
Year Plan (2012-13 to 2016-17), only a sum of Rs. 3662.366 crores was
made available for various Extension initiatives under Sub-Mission on
Agriculture Extension (SMAE). This amount was further reduced to
Rs. 3352.96 crores at RE stage against which an expenditure of
Rs. 3403.31 crores has been made up to 31.03.2017.
It was only due to the reduced availability of funds that the
achievements against the targets with respect to training courses by
MANAGE; Model Training Courses being organized by ICAR Institutes/
SAUs and number of farmers trained under Centrally Sponsored
initiatives viz. ATMA of SMAE were less.
It may be worthwhile to mention here that against a drop of 40%
of funds (from allocation to RE stage), the percentage drop in physical
targets was only 27% in case of Model Training Courses and 42% in case
of number of farmers trained.

36
The aforesaid contention is substantiated from the fact that with
a 2% reduction in budgetary allocation under ACABC Scheme (from
Rs. 126.56 crore of allocation to Rs. 124.23 crore as per RE), the no.
of trained persons (24426) has surpassed the targeted nos. (23695).
As regards the evaluation of ATMA and ACABC scheme, it is submitted
that an Impact Study of ACABC Scheme has already been conducted by
the Directorate of Economics and Statistics through Agricultural
Economics Research Centre (AERC) and Report is about to be submitted.
As regards ATMA initiative of SMAE, the process of undertaking the
Impact Study has already been initiated.
[Ministry of Agriculture & Farmers Welfare (Department of
Agriculture, Cooperation and Farmers Welfare) No.6-4/2017-B&A,
dated 9.6.2017]
Sub-Mission on Seed and Planting Material
Recommendation (Para No. 16)
The Committee being aware that seeds are the basic and critical
input for agricultural production, are keen to see that there is no
shortage of the availability of seeds in the country and farmers get
quality seeds at affordable prices. The Committee in particular , would
like to emphasize on conservation of traditional seed varieties which
can withstand adverse conditions, pest attack and require less spraying
of pesticides. The Committee in this regard recommend that important
traditional seed varieties of different crops be identified, conserved
and production of the same be undertaken on demand basis. Also top
priority be accorded to Seed Village Scheme so as to maintain the
quality of farm saved seeds as well as their storage. The Government
should provide all help to the producers of traditional seeds so that
farmers need not to depend on companies for hybrid seeds. The
Committee are also of the view that mobile seed processing machines
should be given to all the Districts through KVK or ATMA to enable the
farmers to get their seeds processed, graded and certified. In this
context, it was informed to the Committee that an Impact Evaluation
Study at the National Level is proposed to be undertaken through an
independent agency to assess the impact of the SMSP in achieving its
objectives and accordingly, Expression of Interest has been invited
from the IIMs, DU and other agencies. The Committee would like to be
apprised of the progress made in this regard.
Reply of the Government
The Department of Agriculture, Cooperation & Farmers Welfare is
making efforts through various schemes and programmes to ensure
adequate availability of quality seeds to the farmers. During 2016-17,

37
the total availability of quality seeds in the country is 380 lakh quintal
against requirement of 353 lakh quintal. Thus, adequate quantity of
quality seeds are available to the farmers in the country. Further, in
order to improve the quality of seeds saved by the farmers, the
Department of Agriculture, Cooperation & Farmers Welfare is
implementing a Seed Village Scheme. During last three years, the
quality of farm saved seed of sixty six lakh farmers in about 94,000
villages have been improved under the Seed Village Scheme and total
316 lakh quintal quality seed was produced.
The Ministry of Agriculture & Farmers Welfare is also encouraging
the conservation and protection of traditional varieties of various crops.
The National Bureau of Plant Genetic Resources (NBPGR) in ICAR has
so far conserved 64,829 traditional varieties in Gene banks located in
different parts of the country. Similarly, the Protection of Plant Varieties
and Farmers Rights Authority (PPV & FRA) (a statutory body in DAC&FW)
encourages the community and individuals engaged in conservation,
improvement and preservation of plant genetic resources of economic
plants and their wild relatives particularly in the areas identified as
agro-biodiversity hotspots by awarding the community and individuals
who have played stellar roles in such activities. PPV & FRA has so far
registered 1070 traditional varieties in different crops.
The mandate of ATMA scheme is to provide capacity building to
the farmers in latest agricultural technologies to enable them to adopt
those technologies for enhancing production and productivity through
various extension activities namely, farmers training, demonstration,
kisan meals, exposure visits, farm schools and mobilization of FIGs/
CIGs. Under this scheme, there is no specific provision for distribution
of agricultural equipments/machineries including mobiles seeds
processing machine to all the districts to enable the farmers to get
their seeds processed, graded and certified. However , they have been
requested to explore the feasibility to include mobile seed processing
machines under ATMA/KVK scheme.
The work of Evaluation/Impact Assessment Study of the Central
Sponsored Scheme Sub-Mission on Seeds and Planting Material under
National Mission on Agricultural Extension and Technology (NMAET) has
been awarded to the Department of Management Studies, IIT , Delhi.
[Ministry of Agriculture & Farmers Welfare (Department of
Agriculture, Cooperation and Farmers Welfare) No.6-4/2017-B&A,
dated 9.6.2017]

38
Constitution of Vigilance Committee
Recommendation (Para No. 17)
The Committee are of the view that a committee separate from
the committee of DISHA should be constituted under the Chairmanship
of Member of Parliament at the District Level for review, monitoring
and evaluation of all schemes related to agriculture implemented by
the Government. Only officers concern with agriculture from block
level to KVK and Chairman of the Advisory Committee of ATMA should
be made members of the proposed Committee. The Committee feel
that only such a Committee will be able to present ground realities
and the problems actually being faced by the small and marginal
farmers so that various schemes implemented by the Government are
reviewed, evaluated and improved/modified in order to address the
difficulties of the farmers comprehensively and effectively by the
Government. The Committee also suggest that a small leaflet/booklet
may also be distributed amongst the farmers in their vernacular to
create awareness amongst farmers about the various schemes being
implemented by the Government. The Committee would like the
Government to initiate action in this regard.
Reply of the Government
In order to ensure that all the activities of various Departments
and Ministries of Government of India, and also those of the Government
of the States and Union Territories are implemented in a systematic
and comprehensive manner to promote growth of agriculture and allied
sectors and the welfare of the farmers, an institutional mechanism for
strengthening the policy & advisory support and review and monitoring
system has been devised. The aim is to cover all the farmers throughout
the country and ensure that the intended benefits under various
schemes/programs reach them. Committees would be constituted at
District/State level to work synergistically to achieve welfare of the
farmers. The Committees would also closely monitor the developing
field situation and enable prior detection of indigence and suicidal
tendencies amongst farmers and respond with alacrity and needed
sharpness to prevent such an eventuality. These Committees can also
ensure speed and quality of implementation, coordination and
harmonization of efforts and convergence of resources for achieving
the targeted growth rates and farmers Õ welfare.
The main objectives to be achieved by these Committees are as
follows:Ñ
i. Focus on increasing the net income from each unit of farm
by reducing the cost of cultivation, increasing per unit yield
and higher market return on the farmers Õ produce.

39
ii. Make efforts to offer security to farmers against unpredictable
nature of agriculture through Comprehensive Crop Insurance,
Unified Insurance Package (UIP), speedy & efficient delivery
of relief entitlements and the like.
iii. Enhance access to institutional credit both by increasing the
volume of credit and also by better targeting.
iv. Supplement the farmers Õ income, particularly during off-
season times by creating an enabling environment for
generating alternate off- farm activities.
v. Build farmers Õ resilience and prepare them to negotiate
unpredictable nature of farm activities and low level of
income by coverage under various welfare schemes of the
Government.
vi. Check every possibility of farmer-suicide by working to remove
indigence and vulnerability among the farming community.
vii. Improve Governance with a view to achieve efficiency and
transparency in delivery of agricultural services.
The District Level Review and Monitoring Committee shall be chaired
by Minister In-charge of the District and the State Level Review and
Advisory Committee shall be Chaired by the Chief Minister of the State
concerned. The State Government may also make necessary changes
to the suggested composition of the Committee at both District and
State levels, as felt necessary.
Both the District level and State Level Committees shall conduct
meetings at least three times in a year i.e. in the months of January,
May and September. State Level Committee meeting may follow the
District Level Committee meetings, so as to benefit from the data,
information and recommendations of the District Level Committees.
While the District Level Committees should focus on implementation,
state level committee may like to focus on providing policy, coordination
and budgetary support.
[Ministry of Agriculture & Farmers Welfare (Department of
Agriculture, Cooperation and Farmers Welfare) No.6-4/2017-B&A,
dated 9.6.2017]
Comments of the Committee
For comments of the Committee please refer to Para No. 1.25 of
Chapter I of this Report.

40
CHAPTER III
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO NOT
DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE GOVERNMENT ÕS REPLIES
-NIL-

41
CHAPTER IV
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF
THE GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE
Budgetary Support during 12th Plan Period
Recommendation (Para No. 3)
The Committee note that the funds demanded by the Department
for 12th Plan was Rs. 3,23,024.42 crore against which Rs. 1,34,746.00
crore was approved. This works out only 41.80% of the funds demanded
by the Department. However , against the said plan outlay, only
Rs. 88,322.54 crore has been expended till 16, February, 2017, which
works out 87.18% of RE. The Committee are distressed to note that the
Department is not getting the budgetary allocation commensurate with
projected/proposed requirement of the Department. The Committee
are deeply concerned that in the absence of inadequate funds, it will
be difficult for the Department to accomplish its various activities or
to run its programme effectively and efficiently. According to the
Department, the budget allocation could not be utilized due to reduction
in allocation under Revised Estimates and non-utilization of funds under
NER/SCSP/TSP categories. Allocations are normally decided by the
Ministry of Finance based on its criteria as well as progress of
expenditure by middle of the financial year. While the Department has
been adhering to the MEP targets as approved by the Ministry of
Finance, allocations are being reduced by them at RE Stage inspite of
request for higher allocations at RE stage by the Department. The
Committee are not convinced with the explanation of the Department
for the reduced allocation by the Ministry of Finance. Even the funds
allocated at RE stage could not be utilized fully by the Department
during each of the year of 12th Plan period. The Committee feel that
no one except the Department is to be blamed for its failure to
convince the Ministry of Finance to allocate funds as proposed by them
as per their plan. It is also entirely the responsibility of the Department
to prepare a road map in coordination with all stakeholders, for smooth
execution of the activities/programmes ensuring optimum utilization
of funds allocated to them.
The Committee, therefore, recommend that the Department should
strongly place its case before the Ministry of Finance for allocation of
funds commensurate with the requirement so that various activities/

42
programmes undertaken by them, are not hampered for want of
adequate funds. The Committee would like to be apprised of the
initiatives undertaken by the Department in this regard.
Reply of the Government
During the period of the 12th Five Year plan, Ministry of Finance
has allocated funds to Department of Agriculture, Cooperation and
Farmers Welfare as per the following table:Ñ
XII PLAN (Rs. in crore)
 Year Budget Revised Actual
Estimates Estimates Expenditure
2012-13 20530.22 18173.94 18028.38
2013-14 21933.50 19306.82 19027.58
2014-15 22652.25 19852.00 19513.58
2015-16 17004.35 15809.54 15333.92
2016-17 35983.69 48840.50 40585.60
Total 118104.01 121982.80 112489.06
For the year 2017-18, the allocation for the Department has been
fixed at Rs. 52,655.00 crore.
[Ministry of Agriculture & Farmers Welfare (Department of
Agriculture, Cooperation and Farmers Welfare) No.6-4/2017-B&A,
dated 9.6.2017]
Comments of the Committee
For comments of the Committee please refer to Para No. 1.10 of
Chapter I of this Report.
Utilization of Funds for NER
Recommendation (Para No. 6)
The Committee are unhappy to note that the DAC&FW has not
been able to fully utilize their budgetary allocation meant for North
East Region (NER) in each of the last three years. Under-utilization of
funds for North Eastern Region has been a regular cause of concern for
the Committee. Needless to say, effective utilization of allocated funds
is critical for holistic development of the region. Non-utilization of

43
funds has its cascading effect on development goals. Under utilization
of allocated funds, defeats the very purpose of having a separate
sub-allocation for NER. The Committee are of the view that it is the
responsibility of the Department, being the nodal authority, to impress
upon the States/Implementing Agencies to utilize the funds allocated
to them in a time bound manner for various activities meant for
development of the region. The issue needs to be addressed through
coordinated approach amongst all stakeholders involved in the process
removing basic constraints which hinder optimum utilization of funds.
The Committee, therefore, desire that a mechanism may be put in
place to address the issue ensuring optimum utilization of funds
earmarked for North East States. The Committee would like to be
informed of the initiatives undertaken by the Department in this regard.
Reply of the Government
An amount of Rs. 765.10 crores was earmarked for North East
Region in Budget Estimates 2016-17 which was enhanced to Rs. 1195.57
crores in RE 2016-17. In 2017-18, amount of Rs. 4116.60 crores has
been earmarked for schemes to be implemented in North East Region.
Government of India has initiated a scheme of ÒOrganic Value Chain
Development for North Eastern Region Ó from 2015-16 whereby
development of organic farming in the region would be supported in
a substantial manner. Apart from this, a Horticulture Mission for North
Eastern and Himalayan (HMNEH) States is under implementation as
part of the Umbrella Mission for Integrated Development of Horticulture
(MIDH). Implementing schemes that cater to specific requirement of
NER would ensure better acceptance by the beneficiaries, and hence,
better fund utilization. Department is regularly taking up the matter
regarding effective and expeditious utilization of funds in various review
meetings held from time to time with NER States.
[Ministry of Agriculture & Farmers Welfare (Department of
Agriculture, Cooperation and Farmers Welfare) No.6-4/2017-B&A,
dated 9.6.2017]
Comments of the Committee
For comments of the Committee please refer to Para No. 1.13 of
Chapter I of this Report.
Pradhan Mantri Fasal Bima Yojana (PMFBY)
Recommendation (Para Nos. 7 & 8)
The Committee note that the Pradhan Mantri Fasal Bima Yojana
(PMFBY), a comprehensive crop insurance scheme, is being implemented

44
from Kharif 2016-17 season. In addition, a Unified Package Insurance
Scheme (UPIS) covering their assets and life of farmers besides crop
insurance like house, tractor , pump set, student safety etc. has also
been approved for implementation on pilot basis in selected 45 districts.
PMFBY and Restructured Weather Based Crop Insurance Scheme (RWBCIS)
has been implemented by 23 States during Kharif 2016 season and
24 States during Rabi 2016-17 season. PMFBY provides financial
protection to insured 88 farmers against crop losses due to natural
non-preventable risks. According to the Department, the sum insured
has been made equal to scale of finance decided by the District Level
Technical Committee (DLTC), which is broadly equal to cost of
cultivation. The farmers are being indemnified based on indemnity
level adopted by the concerned State Government for particular notified
crops viz. 70%, 80% and 90%. Ó Premium over and above of the fixed
premium is met by the Government both Central and State on 50 : 50
basis as upfront subsidy. All claims liabilities are to be met by the
insurance companies. The Government has proposed to increase the
coverage of cropped area under the PMFBY from the present 30% to
40% in 2017-18 and to 50% in 2018-19. Payment of claims is required
to be completed in three weeks from receipt of yield data/weather
data from concerned State Governments/agencies. While appreciating
all positive features of the scheme, the Committee find that the scheme,
being optional for States, is not being implemented by some of the
States/UTs or are taking time to put the implementation mechanism
in place. However, the Government is persuading all the remaining
States/UTs to implement the scheme at various forums and meeting
etc. The Committee trust that earnest efforts will be made by the
Department to impress upon the remaining States/UTs to implement
PMFBY in the interest of the farmers of the States/UTs. The Committee
also note that the data regarding average time taken for settlement
of claims by Insurance Companies and pending claims are awaited
from States/UTs/Insurance Companies. The Committee desire that an
institutional mechanism may be put in place for monitoring expeditious
settlement of pending claims by insurance companies within a stipulated
time. The data regarding average time taken for settlement of claim
by insurance companies may also be collected and furnished to the
Committee. The Committee also expect the Department to implement
UPIS on pilot basis without further delay and a comprehensive review
of the Scheme be undertaken speedily so that the scope and coverage
thereof be expanded for the benefit of farmers of the country.
As informed by the representative of the Department that some
States are not readily accepting and adopting the use of technology
for assessment of yield loss. Further the exercise of crop cutting

45
experiments for arriving at yield loss is not being carried out with due
diligence. Being aggrieved at this sordid state of affairs, the Committee
exhort upon the Nodal Ministry to impress upon all States/UTs to adopt
the latest technology aids that would provide credence to the data
generated from crop-cutting experiments. This in their considered
opinion would aid the implements of Agri-Insurance Schemes to obtain
an accurate data on yield loss, which would then decide the quantum
of loss and compensation figures. They further desire that use of
satellite imagery for Crop Cutting Experiments be also adopted on a
large scale. The progress achieved in this regard may also be forwarded
to the Committee.
Reply of the Government
Due to efforts made by the Government, 24 States and 3 Union
Territories have implemented the PMFBY/RWBCIS during Rabi 2016-17
season as against 23 States during Kharif 2016-17 season. In order to
encourage more and more States and Union Territories to take up crop
insurance it is proposed to launch intensive Information, Education and
Communication (IEC) campaign.
Committee has desired than an institutional mechanism be put in
place for monitoring expeditious settlement of pending claims. Besides
the guidelines which stipulates that the claims must be settled within
two months from harvest, the crop insurance portal with multi-
stakeholder interface will help to ensure that the claims are settled
on time. The Department also conducts weekly video conferences to
follow up on claim settlement. Recently, the National Level Monitoring
Committee (NLMC) meeting on 17th April, 2017 also reiterated timely
settlement of claims. Regarding average time taken for settlement of
claims by insurance companies, this will be submitted to Committee
as soon as Kharif 2016 season is closed or all undisputed claims are
settled.
Regarding Pilot Unified Package Insurance Scheme (UPIS), the details
of the UPIS were circulated to all stakeholders and also available on
the Department Õs website/Crop Insurance Portal www.agri-
insurance.gov.in. Some States had selected the pilot districts and
notified the scheme. As per provisions of the scheme in addition to
crop insurance (PMFBY/RWBCIS), selection of two other sections is
mandatory. Many States have sought that the selection of 2 sub-section
other than Crop Insurance may be made voluntary rather than
mandatory. Meanwhile for the one year of operation during the pilot
phase it will be kept as mandatory as per original provisions of UPIS.

46
Now all the stakeholders including State Governments, insurance
companies have been requested to furnish the details of coverage etc.
under the pilot so that review of pilot be made on completion of one
year.
Regarding use of technology for capturing CCEs data on smartphone/
CCE Agri App, despite the fact it was made mandatory for States, so
far only 232378 CCEs have been captured in this manner. Some States
like Tamil Nadu, Chhattisgarh and Odisha have taken the lead in this
direction. This matter is being continuously pursued with the State
Governments through regular weekly video conferences and was also
discussed during NLMC meeting on 17th April, 2017. Besides this efforts
are on to rationalise/reduce the number of CCEs through development
of a robust statistical model through the aegis of Indian Agricultural
Statistics Research Institute (IASRI) of Indian Council of Agricultural
Research (ICAR). Regarding CCEs, the Mahalanobis National Crop
Forecasting Centre (MNCFC) has proposed three pronged strategy, firstly
for yield data collection Smartphon/CCE Agri App which has already
been rolled out; secondly planning for CCEs optimisation for selected
crops can be rolled out within a year subject to acceptance by National
Sample Survey Organisation (NSSO) and other stakeholders; thirdly use
of satellite imagery for yield estimation at village level large scale
pilot study are proposed in 2017-18 for validation of approach.
[Ministry of Agriculture & Farmers Welfare (Department of
Agriculture, Cooperation and Farmers Welfare) No.6-4/2017-B&A,
dated 9.6.2017]
Comments of the Committee
For comments of the Committee please refer to Para No. 1.16 of
Chapter I of this Report.
National Mission on Oil Seeds and Oil Palm (NMOOP)
Recommendation (Para No. 13)
The Committee are unhappy to note that while there has been a
continuous shortfall in the domestic production of oilseeds and vegetable
oil from 101.90 LT in 2013-14 to 87.70 LT in 2015-16 in the country,
the Demand of the same has increased from 211.70 LT to 244.10 LT for
the same period. As a result, the import of vegetable oil has increased
from 109.80 lakh tonnes in 2013- 14 to 156.40 lakh tonnes in 2015-16.
The various schemes implemented by the Department namely, Integrated
Scheme of Oilseeds, Oil Palm and Maize (ISOPOM) implemented during

47
2004-05 to 2013-14, Oil Palm Area Expansion (OPEA) programme
implemented during 2011-12 to 2013-14 and the National Mission on
Oilseeds and Oil Palm (NMOOP) being implemented from 2014-15 have
not produced the satisfactory results in terms of increased domestic
production to meet the shortage of vegetable oil in the Country. The
Committee are also pertubed to note that the proposed outlay of
Rs. 3507.00 crore for 12th Plan was reduced to Rs. 2377.50 crore at
BE stage, which was further curtailed to Rs. 1945.60 crore at RE stage,
out of which Rs. 1893.65 crore was spent. According to the Department,
most of the States found it difficult to match State share due to
change in funding pattern from 75:25 to 60:40 (General State) and
90:10 (North Eastern States and Himalayan States).
It has also been informed that the Division proposes to continue
the scheme (NMOOP) on the same funding pattern for the next 5 years
with certain modification/improvements and increased subsidy. However,
the Committee are of the view that it is imperative that all aspects
of the scheme NMOOP may be thoroughly reviewed in consultation
with all States and a holistic view may be taken for smooth running
of the scheme for augmenting production of Oil Seeds and Vegetable
Oil in the Country. The Committee also note that against the proposed
demand of Rs. 551.00 crore, only Rs. 403 crore has been allocated for
NMOOP for the year 2017-18. The Committee are of the considered
opinion that reduction in allocation of funds adversely affect the
implementation of the scheme smoothly and efficiently. It is, therefore,
imperative that the funds demanded by the Department for the scheme
are allocated to them by the Ministry of Finance. In view of the
foregoing, the Committee recommend that the Department should
conduct a through review of all aspects of the scheme (NMOOP) for
increasing oilseeds production in the country and come out with result
oriented initiatives for both optimum utilization of budgetary support
and for increasing oilseeds production in the country in a mission
mode. The Committee also urge the Department to impress upon the
Ministry of Finance to allocate adequate funds for NMOOP at RE Stage.
The details of follow-up action taken by the Department may be
intimated to the Committee along with outcome thereto.
Reply of the Government
The Oilseeds Division, Department of Agriculture, Cooperation and
Farmers Welfare, Ministry of Agriculture and Farmers Welfare is
implementing National Mission on Oilseeds and Oil Palm (NMOOP) since
2014-15. NMOOP aims to enhanced production of oilseeds from 28.93
million tonnes to 35.51 million tonnes, to bring additional area of 1.25

48
lakh ha. under Oil palm with focus on productivity improvement of
oilseeds and fresh fruit bunches (FFBs) of oil palm by end of 2016-17.
1. Oil seeds Production Scenario
➢ Despite, delayed and deficit monsoon during last two
consecutive years, oilseeds production has been sustained at
an estimated production of 33.60 million tonnes during
2016-17 as against highest production 32.75 million tonnes
in 2013-14.
➢ An average of 30.30 million tonnes has been achieved during
12th plan (2012-13 to 2016-17) period as against an average
production of 28.93 million tonnes during 11th Plan
(2007-08 to 2011-12) period.
During the course of its three years implementation of following
modifications were made in the pattern of assistance under NMOOP for
the benefits of oilseeds growers.
➢ Seed subsidy for certified seed distribution oilseeds was
increased by more than 100% (from Rs. 1200/- to 2500/- per
qtl. and from Rs. 2500/- to Rs. 5000/- per qtl. for hybrids
and sesame from 2016-17).
➢ Subsidy on water carrying pipes increase from Rs. 25/- per
mt. to Rs. 50/- per mt for HDPE pipes, Rs. 35/- per mt for
PVC pipes and inclusion of HDPE laminated woven lay flat
tubes with subsidy of Rs. 20/- mt from Kharif - 2016.
➢ A Special scheme under RKVY ÒTargeting rice fallow areas in
Eastern India for Pulses and Oilseeds Ó has been initiated
from Rabi 2016 and covered 19.00 lakh ha as against target
of 10.0 lakh hectare rice fallows of six eastern states during
2016-17.
➢ 423 KVKs of ICAR and more than 25 SAUs are involved for
cluster demonstrations and FLDs of various oilseeds crops
during 2016-17.
➢ Age relaxation of varieties under distribution subsidy from
10 years to 15 years.
2. Special attention on Oil Palm
➢ The total area under oil palm cultivation in India was
2.19 lakh ha in 2011-12 (end of 11th plan). During 12th plan
an area of 95,000 ha. have been brought under oil palm as

49
against targeted area of 1.25 lakh ha. Due to drastic fall in
CPO prices in international market and subsequent fall in
FFBs price in 2014-15/2015-16, had resulted setback for oil
palm growers and slow area coverage (76%). Therefore, oil
palm growers have been supported through MIS to assured
FFBs prices as and when the international price of CPOs falls
below $800.
States are being regularly pursued to declare oil palm as plantation
crop and to avail the benefit of 100% FDI on oil palm & olive. State
of Karnataka has declared oil palm and state of Rajasthan declared
olive as plantation crops.
[Ministry of Agriculture & Farmers Welfare (Department of
Agriculture, Cooperation and Farmers Welfare) No.6-4/2017-B&A,
dated 9.6.2017]
Comments of the Committee
For comments of the Committee please refer to Para No. 1.22 of
Chapter I of this Report.
Pendency of Utilization Certificates
Recommendation (Para No. 18)
The Committee are deeply anguished to note that the Department
fails to get utilization certificates from the States/Implementing
Agencies for the funds released to them under various schemes.
Pendency of a large number of UCs only goes to show that no sincere
efforts have been made by the Department to liquidate outstanding
UCs or the corrective measures, if any, undertaken by them have been
proved to be futile. The issue of liquidation of Outstanding Utilization
Certificates (UCs) has been raised time and again by the Committee
in their earlier Reports. However, much to their chagrin, the Committee
note that as on 14.02.2017 429 UCs amounting to Rs. 1,491 crore are
pending out of which, 69 UCs pertain to the year 2012-13, 144 UCs to
2013-14 and the remaining 216 UCs pertain to the year 2014-15. The
Committee are of the view that several ambitious schemes like Soil
Health Cards and PM Fasal Bima Yojana have been implemented by the
Government after lot of deliberations which may improve the socio-
economic conditions of poor farmers in the Country. However, it is
essential that these schemes be implemented and completed timely
without any hindrances so that the benefits of the schemes may accrue
to the farmers. The Committee, therefore, desire that the Department

50
needs to have a serious introspection to find out the reasons for
pendency of a large number of UCs and come out with clear and
innovative action plan for liquidation of outstanding UCs. If felt
necessary, the Department may sit together with the States/
Implementing Agencies and review/evaluate the schemes to address
the constraints in its implementation for optimum and timely utilization
of funds. The Committee would like to be apprised of the initiatives
taken by the Department in this regard.
Reply of the Government
It has been mentioned in the observation/recommendation No.18
titled ÔPendency of Utilization Certificate Õ that ÒCommittee noted that
as on 14.02.2017, 429 UCs amounting to Rs. 1491 crore are pending
out of which, 69 UCs pertain to the year 2012-13, 144 UCs to 2013-14
and the remaining 216 UCs pertain to the year 2014-15 Ó.
Sl. Year UCs pending UCs pending UCs pending
No. As on As on As on
01.04.2016 14.02.2017 22.03.2017
AB C D E
No. Amount No. Amount No. Amount
(In cr.) (In cr.) (In cr.)
1. 2012-13 77 42.16 69 37.56 67 37.15
2. 2013-14 160 450.98 144 436.75 142 435.63
3. 2014-15 601 1936.55 216 1017.20 213 1016.76
Grant Total 838 2429.69 429 1491.50 422 1489.54
From above table, it may please be seen that from 01.04.2016 to
22.03.2017, department has reduced 416 UCs amounting to Rs. 940.15
crore.
UC clearance and accumulation is a continuous process. Every year
new UCs become due and are added to previous pending list of UCs,
while clearing pending UCs simultaneously.
However , the department do not release any fresh grant to any
implementing agency till previous UCs are obtained.
[Ministry of Agriculture & Farmers Welfare (Department of
Agriculture, Cooperation and Farmers Welfare) No.6-4/2017-B&A,
dated 9.6.2017]

51
Comments of the Committee
For comments of the Committee please refer to Para No. 1.28 of
Chapter I of this Report.
Minimum Support Price
Recommendation (Para No. 19)
The Committee are not happy with the methodology adopted by
CACP for determining MSP . The Committee are of the considered opinion
that CACP do not take into consideration various factors which add to
the cost of their product. Needless to say, irrigation through diesel
pump is costlier as compared to electric pump. Further , the kind of
labour put in by the farmers in sowing seeds or cutting or threshing
of crops or protecting crops from rats or animals are not taken into
consideration for evaluation for the purpose of determining MSP . Further,
there is no arrangement for purchase of their produce or to store their
produce, as a result they are compelled to sell their produce less than
MSP under distress. In this context, the Committee are of the view
that farmers who are progressive and winners of awards like Jagjivan
Ram Pushkar or those who are selected by ATMA for awards and are
identified or recognised, should be consulted for working out MSP for
various crops. In this context, the Committee were informed that
Ramesh Chand Committee, which was constituted to examine the various
aspects of fixation of MSP , has submitted its report to revamp
methodology to calculate MSP and its recommendation will be
implemented at the earliest. It is unquestionable that the farmers
need to be incentivized to produce more crops so as to ensure food
security in the Country. The Committee, therefore, recommend that
the entire issue may be relooked into and a holistic view may be taken
for determining MSP for the benefits of farmers. The Committee would
like to be apprised of the action taken by the Department in this
regard.
Reply of the Government
Government fixes the Minimum Support Prices (MSPs) of various
agricultural crops on the recommendations of the Commission for
Agricultural Costs & Prices (CACP), the views of concerned State
Governments and Central Ministries/Departments. Cost of production
is one of the important factors considered by CACP in recommending
MSP . The cost of production, inter alia, includes all paid out costs such
as those incurred on account of hired human labour, bullock labour/
machine labour , rent paid for leased in land, expenses incurred on use
of material inputs like seeds, fertilizers, manures, irrigation charges,
diesel/electricity for operation of pump sets, insurance, transport
charges etc. and imputed value of family labour (A2+FL). In addition,

52
the CACP also considers, inter alia, a number of factors which include
trends in market prices, demand and supply situation, effect on general
price level, effect on cost of living etc. The MSP fixed by the
Government provides adequate returns over all India weighted average
all paid out costs including family labour (A2+FL) as estimated by
CACP .
The Government offers to procure the crops at MSP . Food
Corporation of India (FCI) is the designated central nodal agencies for
undertaking price support operations for paddy, wheat, coarse cereals,
pulses and oilseeds. The National Agricultural Cooperative Marketing
Federation of India Limited (NAFED), National Cooperative Consumers Õ
Federation (NCCF), Central Warehousing Corporation (CWC) and Small
Farmers Agri Ñ Business Consortium (SFAC) supplement the efforts of
FCI for undertaking price support operations for pulses and oilseeds.
Cotton Corporation of India (CCI) is the Central Nodal Agency for
undertaking price support operations for Cotton. NAFED supplements
the efforts of Cotton Corporation of India (CCI) for undertaking cotton
procurement. All the crops conforming to the prescribed specifications
offered for sale at specified centres are bought by the public
procurement agencies. The producers have the option to sell their
produce to FCI/NAFED/State Agencies at MSP or in the open market as
is advantageous to them.
Cost of production is one of the important factors taken into account
in fixing the Minimum Support Prices (MSPs). The estimates of cost of
cultivation/cost of production are made available to the Commission
through the Comprehensive Scheme for Studying the Cost of Cultivation
of Principal Crops, operated by Directorate of Economics and Statistics,
Department of Agriculture, Cooperation and Farmers Welfare, Ministry
of Agriculture and Farmers Welfare, Government of India. These data
are collected with the help of State Agricultural Universities/Institutions
located in various States. Bringing in refinement in the methodology
for collecting cost of cultivation/production of principal crops in the
country is a continuing process.
From time to time, expert committees were constituted to review
the methodology and system of calculation of the cost of cultivation/
production of agricultural produce, to arrive at Minimum Support Prices
(MSPs).
[Ministry of Agriculture & Farmers Welfare (Department of
Agriculture, Cooperation and Farmers Welfare) No.6-4/2017-B&A,
dated 9.6.2017]
Comments of the Committee
For comments of the Committee please refer to Para No. 1.31 of
Chapter I of this Report.

53
CHAPTER V
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH FINAL
REPLIES OF GOVERNMENT ARE STILL AWAITED
Interest Subvention Scheme
Recommendation (Para No. 9)
The Committee note that the Interest Subvention Scheme which
was earlier implemented by the Department of Financial Services, has
been transferred to the Department of Agriculture, Cooperation and
Farmers Welfare from the current financial year 2016-17. The
Government has allotted a sum of Rs. 15000 crore to the DAC&FW for
setting the claims under Interest Subvention Scheme. Under the Scheme,
farmers are provided with 3% additional interest subvention for the
short term crop loan of upto Rs. 3 lakh for a maximum period of one
year for prompt repayment on or before the due date. Thus, farmers,
who promptly repay their crop loans as per the repayment schedule
fixed by the banks, are extended loans at an effective interest rate of
4% per annum. Further , in order to discourage distress sale by farmers
and to encourage them to store their produce in warehouses against
warehouse receipts, the benefit of interest subvention scheme has
been extended to small and marginal farmers having Kisan Credit Card
for a further period upto six months post harvest on the same rate as
available to crop loan against negotiable warehouse receipt for keeping
their produce in warehouses. To provide relief to farmers affected by
natural calamities, the interest subvention of 2% continues to be
available to banks for the first year of the restructured amount. The
Committee find that the agriculture credit flow has increased
consistently over the years. While during 2013-14, Rs. 322007.31 crore
was disbursed to the small and marginal farmers, Rs. 379997.67 crore
was disbursed during 2015-16. Against the set target of Rs. 8,50,000.00
crore for 2015-16, the agricultural credit flow was to the tune of
Rs. 8,77,527.00 crore including Rs. 3,79,997.67 crore for small and
marginal farmers. As per provisional data upto December , 2017, an
amount of Rs. 3,06,162.45 crore has been disbursed to small and
marginal farmers during the year 2016-17. The Government has
announced Rs. 10.00 lakh crore as agricultural credit target for
2017-18. However , the Committee note with concern that the budgetary
allocation for implementation of the Interest Subvention Scheme has
been far below the actual requirement, resulting in backlog of

54
settlement of audited claims received from banks. The budgetary
support of Rs. 15,000.00 crore for 2017-18, is grossly inadequate
considering the estimated cumulative liabilities of Rs. 41,748.00 crore
including the carry over balance liability of Rs. 23,472.00 crore and
estimated claim amount of Rs. 18,276.00 crore for the year 2016-17.
Being of the considered opinion that inadequate budgetary support
should not hamper agricultural credit flow particularly to the small
and marginal farmers, the Committee urge the Government that
additional budgetary support be provided to the Department at the RE
Stage and would like the Department to pursue the matter with the
Ministry of Finance with the alacricity and seriousness it deserves. It
has also been reported that the Sarangi Committee was set up in
October , 2015 to suggest feasible measures/options for improving
targeted lending to small and marginal farmers. The said Committee
has given its report and its recommendation are under consideration
of the Government. The Committee, desire that the recommendations
made by the Sarangi Committee may be considered and implemented
at the earliest. The Committee would like to be apprised of the progress
made in this regard.
Reply of the Government
The observations of the Committee regarding inadequate budgetary
support for Interest Subvention Scheme has been noted and depending
upon the claims received from Reserve Bank of India (RBI) and National
Bank for Agriculture & Rural Development (NABARD), the implementing
agencies, the matter will be actively taken up with Ministry of Finance
for allocation of additional budgetary support at Revised Estimate (RE)
Stage during 2017-18.
As regards recommendations made by the Sarangi Committee, the
Department has had a series of inter-ministerial consultations on the
recommendations and after firming up the Departmental views will
shortly seek approval of Cabinet on the same.
[Ministry of Agriculture & Farmers Welfare (Department of
Agriculture, Cooperation and Farmers Welfare) No.6-4/2017-B&A,
dated 9.6.2017]
Rashtriya Krishi Vikas Yojana (RKVY)
Recommendation (Para No. 11)
Rashtriya Krishi Vikas Yojana, launched in 2007-08, is one of the
flagship schemes of the Ministry. The scheme was fully funded by the

55
Central Government till 2014-15. An amount of Rs. 22,408.77 crore
was released for RKVY during the 11th Plan period. In the 12th Plan,
against an outlay of Rs. 63,246.00 crore the year-wise allocation for
RKVY was very less. The RE for RKVY in 2012-13 was Rs. 8,400.00 crore
and in the subsequent two financial years of 2013-14 and 2014-15, the
RE amounts were Rs. 7,089.00 crore and Rs. 8,444.00 crore respectively.
In the year 2015-16, BE of Rs. 4500.00 crore was curtailed at RE stage
to Rs. 3,900.00 crore. For 2016-17, BE of Rs. 5400.00 crore was reduced
to Rs. 3,800 crore in 2016-17. Thus, a drastic and continuous reduction
of funds for RKVY were witnessed during each of the year of the
12th Plan period. BE for the current fiscal is Rs. 4500.00 crore. The
Committee also note that as per the revised operational guidelines of
RKVY , the funding pattern of the scheme has been changed from
2015-16, under which funds are shared between Centre and States in
the ratio of 60:40 (90:10 for 8 North-Eastern and 3 Himalayan States).
As a result, States have to arrange their share of 40% or 10% as the
case may be. Thus, the Committee have reasons to believe that the
changes in the funding pattern have lead to decline in allocation and
utilization of funds under RKVY . The Committee are also distressed to
note that only 12 State Agriculture Plans (SAP) and out of 652 districts,
only 247 District Agriculture Plans (DAPs) have been prepared as on
15.02.2017. It has also been reported that the Department does not
circulate the national priority areas and special sub-schemes under
RKVY , to States/UTs in advance. The Committee are of the considered
opinion that the benefits under RKVY would not accrue to the farmers
if the funds allocated under the scheme are not utilized optimally. It
is, therefore imperative that funds allocated under RKVY are utilized
optimally and timely by the States. It is also essential that DAP/SAP
are prepared and approved by the States to avoid reduction of allocation
of funds at RE stage. Timely release of matching State share would
enable implementation of RKVY projects in time. In view of the
foregoing, the Committee, recommend that the entire scheme of RKVY
may be reviewed holistically and constraints involved in the smooth
implementation of RKVY may be addressed in consultation with all
States. The Committee would also like that a definite timeline be set
for the preparation and submission of DAPs/SAPs by the States. The
Department should periodically circulate national priority areas and
proposed special sub-schemes under RKVY to States/UTs to enable
them to prepare and submit their annual proposals and action plan in
time. The Committee desire that the Department should also prevail
upon the States/UTs through appropriate intervention measure to ensure
that the matching State share (40% or 10%) is released by them in
time. The Committee would like to be apprised of the action taken by
the Department in this regard.

56
Reply of the Government
The existing guidelines of Rashtriya Krishi Vikas Yojana (RKVY) is
undergoing a revision for the holistic development of the scheme and
with a view to remove the constraint being faced by the States for
implementation of the scheme after obtaining suggestions from the
State Governments. The preparation of EFC Note for the revision of
the Guidelines is under progress . Setting Timeline for completion of
various activities such as submitting various documents by the State
are being considered for incorporating in the revised scheme guidelines.
Allocation to States under the sub-scheme of RKVY can be communicated
only after Budget provision for RKVY is made available as RKVY can
utilize a maximum of 20% of its allocation for sub-schemes. As soon as
each sub-scheme under RKVY for a year is approved by the Agriculture
Minister , this has been communicated to the State Governments by the
Subject Matter Division of this department. The issue of under-utilization
of funds and the need for effective implementation of RKVY scheme
is being taken up with the officials of the concerned State Governments
in various meeting and also reviewed in the Desk Review meetings held
for reviewing the progress of implementation of RKVY in the States by
the Department every year with concerned officials of the States during
the month of October/November. Department has also time and again
impressed upon all the States in Desk Review meetings and also through
various communications the need for timely utilization of fund to avail
2nd installment for which the States have to submit UCs of fund
released including UCs for State share utilized. Besides communications
are also being issued to defaulting States to furnish UCs for matching
share to become eligible for release of 2nd installment.
[Ministry of Agriculture & Farmers Welfare (Department of
Agriculture, Cooperation and Farmers Welfare) No. 6-4/2017-B&A,
dated 9.6.2017]
   N
EW D ELHI; HUKM DEO NARAYAN YADAV,
07 August, 2017 Chairperson,
16 Shravana, 1939 (Saka) Standing Committee on Agriculture.

57
ANNEXURE I
OUTPUT/OUTCOME FRAMEWORK FOR SCHEMES 2017-18
Demand No. 01 - Department of Agriculture, Cooperation and
Farmers Welfare
(Rs. in crore)
Sl.No. Name of the Scheme/ Financial Output/Deliverables Projected Medium Term
Sub-scheme Outlay against the Outlay Outcomes
2017-18 2017-18
12 3 4 5
A Central Sector Scheme
1. Pradhan Mantri Fasal 9000.00 Insurance coverage of 40% Risk minimization by 60% of
Bima Yojana of the gross cropped area about 60 million farmer
in country households (40% cropped area)
2. Interest Subsidy for Short 15000.00 Crop loans upto Rs. 3 lakh Annual growth in foodgrain
term Credit to Farmers per annum to about 7.5 crore productivity at 2% (CAGR)
farmers at 7% annual
interest and at 4% on timely
repayment of crop loans.
3. Market Intervention 199.30 Need based intervention in Ensure remunerative prices to
Scheme and Price Support distress conditions farmers and avoid distress sale.
Scheme
B. Centrally Sponsored Scheme
4 Green Revolution 13091.00
4.1 Rashtriya Krishi Vikas 4500.00 States are given complete 4% growth in agriculture &
Yojana (RKVY) flexibility to choose projects allied sector
as per needs, priorities and
resources.
4.2 Krishi Unnati Schemes
4.2.1 Mission for Integrated 2120.00 ¥ Area coverage 140986 ha Achieving 5% growth in output
Development of ¥ Cold chain/cold room/ of horticulture and vegetables
Horticulture (MIDH); CIH, chambers by NHB 2650
Nagaland, NHB & CDB new projects
¥ New plantation 4125 ha
¥ Training 2790 persons
4.2.2 Integrated Scheme on Agriculture Census & Statistics

58
4.2.2.1 Agricultural Census 225.00 ¥ Agriculture Census 2015-16 ¥ Final Report of Agriculture
Scheme ¥ Collection of Input data Census 2015-16-Recent
(survey) 2016-17 in profile of farm and farmers
States/UTs in different States of India.
¥ All India report on Input
Survey 2016-17
4.2.2.2 Comprehensive Scheme Cost of cultivation estimates ¥ Final report of cost of
for Studying the Cost of of 25 crops cultivation estimates of 25
Cultivation of Principal crops-Finalization of MSP for
Crops in India crops for price support
4.2.2.3 Improvement of Area estimates under ¥ Cropping scenario and likely
Agricultural Statistics principal crops of kharif and production of the country
Scheme rabi seasons
4.2.3 Integrated Scheme on ¥ Registration of 20 new Occupation diversification over
Agriculture Cooperation cooperatives 100000 persons through
¥ Income generating cooperatives
programmes to benefit
10000 persons
¥ 25 SHGs to be converted
into cooperatives
¥ Organisation of 100
training programmes
4.2.4 Integrated Scheme on Agricultural Marketing
4.2.4.1 Agriculture Market 1190.00 ¥ 55 lakh tons capacity Reduce the gap in storage
Infrastructure rural godowns capacity by 16%
¥ 880 other storage
infrastructure projects
4.2.4.2 National Agriculture Integration of 585 wholesale Achieve at least 1% of the total
Market (NAM) markets with e-market turnover of the mandis
platform (weighted average) connected
to the NAM
4.2.5 National Food Security 1600.00 Additional production of ¥ Surplus foodgrain production
Mission ¥ Rice 2.00 million tons by 10 million tons for export
¥ Wheat 1.50 million tons ¥ Reducing the pulses imports
¥ Pulses 0.75 million tons by 15%.
¥ Coarse Cereals 0.6
¥ Total Food grains 4.85
million tons
4.2.6 National Mission on 403.00 ¥ Use of new seed of high ¥ Achieving 35.5 million tons
Oilseeds & Oilpalm yielding varieties in oilseeds production.
(NMOOP) 20-25 lakh ha. ¥ Reduce the edible oil imports
¥ Additional area of by 5%.
30,000 ha. under oilpalm
¥ Planting of tree borne
oilseeds like Neem,
Karanga, Olive, Jajoba
12 3 4 5

59
4.2.6 National Mission for Sustainable Agriculture (NMSA)
4.2.6.1 National Project on Agro 100.00 ¥ Planting of 1.5 crore trees Enhancing green cover by
forestry farmersÕ fields 25000 ha.
4.2.6.2 National Project on 101.00 ¥ Adoption of Organic 50,000 farmers grouped into
Organic Farming/Value production with 1412 FIG 100 farmer producer companies;
Chain Development for with participation of 50,000 ha area converted into
North East Region 23,372 farmers commercial organic cultivation
¥ Organic farming on
35,912 ha.
4.2.6.3 Paramparagat Krishi 270.00 ¥ Adoption of organic 2 lakh ha. more area under
Vikas Yojana farming clusters organic certification
demonstrations on
143,700 ha.
¥ Assistance to 3.5 lakh
farmers for Participatory
Guarantee System (PGS)
certification
4.2.6.4 National Project on Soil 452.00 ¥ Collection and analysis of ¥ Reducing the distorted use
Health Fertility (including 126 lakh soil samples of nutrients and achieve
Soil Health Card) ¥ Distribution 700 lakh Soil balanced application of
Health Cards nutrients on 160350 ha.
¥ Capacity building training ¥ Economy of fertilizer
583 application
4.2.7 National Mission on Agriculture Extension and Technology
4.2.7.1 Sub Mission on Seeds and 200.00 ¥ Organization of seed ¥ Increase in SRR by 3% in
Planting Material (SMSP) Villages programme in the catchment area
30,000 villages ¥ Increase in productivity by
¥ Increase in seed 5% in the catchment area
processing capacity by
90000 qtls.
¥ Creation of 1.30 lakh qtls.
seed storage capacity
¥ Creation of seed reserve
of 3.65 lakh qtls. for
contingency plans
4.2.7.2 Sub Mission on 912.00 ¥ Conducting 173 courses Enhancing the technology
Agriculture Extension for knowledge adoption rate by 5%
upgradation of extension
functionaries
¥ Training of 5500 Agripreneurs
for developing
agri-preneurship.
¥ Outreach programme
benefiting 27664 farmers
12 3 4 5

60
4.2.7.3 Strengthening/Promoting 65.00 Attending 30 million calls Reaching out to about 50%
Agricultural Information from farmers to provide farm households to solve their
System solutions on agri-related queries
issues
4.2.7.4 Sub Mission on Plant 50.00 ¥ Surveillance of Locust on Arresting the pest epidemic and
Protection and Plant 150 lakh ha. reducing the crop loss by
Quarantine ¥ Monitoring of pest approximately 10% (It is
incidence on 9 lakh ha. subjective and depends upon
area in the country the pest attack intensity and
¥ Release of 3300 million manifestations)
bio-agents for biological
control of pests
¥ Augmentation and
conservation of bio agents
on 9 lakh ha.
¥ Analysis of 25800
samples for estimation of
pesticides residues
4.2.7.5 Sub Mission on 550.00 ¥ Training 15000 farmers, Increase the farm power
Agricultural and other stakeholders availability from 1.84 kw/ha. to
Mechanization ¥ Establishment of 160 2.2 kw/ha. by 2020
post-harvest units
¥ Promotion of Farm
Mechanization in 5382
selected villages
¥ Farm Machinery
promotion in 2600
habitats in NER
5 Pradhan Mantri Krishi 3050.00 Bringing 9 lakh ha. additional ¥ Precision irrigation on
Sinchai Yojana (Per Drop area under Micro Irrigation 10 lakh ha. Increase in
More Crop) and 84000 ha. area under productivity by 25-30%
protective irrigation ¥ Water economy of 25%
(about 3 lakh litre per ha.)*
40340.30
*For 2 irrigations. Assuming that 6 cm deep water applied in one irrigation through open field channels (traditional
system) with 40% irrigation efficiency.
12 3 4 5

61
OUTPUT-OUTCOME FRAMEWORK FOR SCHEMES 2017-18
Demand No. 2: Department of Agricultural Research and
Education
(Rs. in crore)
Sl. Name of the Financial Output/Deliverables against the Projected Medium
No. Scheme/Sub- Outlay 2017-18 Outlay 2017-18 Term Outcomes
Scheme
12 3 4 5
Central Sector Scheme
1. Natural Resource 732.17 ¥ Soil inventory and characterization Efficient and cost
Management+ (including salary in 6 blocks (1:10,000 scale) effective management
NICRA Rs. 418.46 crore ¥ Designing, developing and testing of natural resources in
and pension of 4 soil & water conservation the project area is
Rs. 104.03 crore) measures for supplementary expected to lead to
irrigation productivity gain of 2
¥ Designing and developing of 10 percent
system-based farm production
technologies
¥ Designing and developing of 3
organic farming package of
practices
¥ Designing, developing and
demonstration of 5 Climate resilient
technologies
¥ Designing and developing 5
Technologies for Managing soil
health
¥ Designing, developing and testing
of 3 technologies for Irrigation
water Management
2. Crop Science 1486.59 ¥ Evaluation of 20000 Germplasm Expected improvement
(including salary and breeding lines in potential productivity
Rs. 817.58 crore ¥ Conservation of 4000 Germplasm of crops by 2% due to
and pension for long term storage development of new
Rs. 281.6 crore) ¥ Conservation of 200 microbial varieties and
genetic resources management technologies
¥ Identify 30 Genotypes and register in project areas
for unique traits
¥ Clone and characterise 10 Genes
¥ Testing 2000 Entries in AICRP multi-
location trials; Identification of
40 Varieties including pulses and
oilseeds by AICRP Varietal
Identification Committees

62
¥ Production of 56000 quintal Breeder
seed
¥ Developing and testing 25 New
technologies
¥ Conducting 10000 Front line
demonstrations
¥ Organising 220 Farmers trainings
organized
¥ Human Resource Development - 175
Masters and Doctoral Degree awarded
3. Horticulture 602.66 ¥ Collection of 400 germplasm Expected increase in
(including salary ¥ Characterization of 500 germplasm productivity of fruits
Rs 354.79 crore ¥ Development of 100 pre-breeding and vegetables by 5 %
and pension lines due to development of
Rs. 92.97 crore) ¥ Identification of 60 promising/elite new varieties and
breeding lines management technologies
¥ Release of 30 varieties/hybrids in project areas
¥ Standardization of 50 production
technologies
¥ Organization of 155 Front Line
Demonstrations
¥ Developing 167 modules for capacity
building of farmers and other
stakeholders
¥ Production of 2261 tonne breeders/
Truthfully Levelled seed
¥ Production of 2250 tonne breeders
seed of tuber crops
12 3 4 5

63
ANNEXURE II
STANDING COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE
(2016-17)
MINUTES OF THE TWENTY FIFTH SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE
The Committee sat on Thursday, the 03rd August, 2017 from 1500
hrs. to 1700 hrs. in Committee Room No. 1 (Block-A), Extension to
Parliament House Annexe Building, New Delhi.
PRESENT
Shri Hukm Deo Narayan Yadav Ñ  Chairperson
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Prof. Ravindra Vishwanath Gaikwad
3. Shri Nalin Kumar Kateel
4. Smt. Raksha Khadse
5. Md. Badaruddoza Khan
6. Shri Janardan Mishra
7. Shri Neiphiu Rio
8. Shri B.S. Yeddyurappa
Rajya Sabha
9. Shri Sambhaji Chhatrapati
10. Shri Janardan Dwivedi
11. Shri Mohd. Ali Khan
12. Shri Ram Nath Thakur
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Shri D.S. Malha Ñ Joint Secretary
2. Shri Arun K. Kaushik Ñ Director
3. Smt. Juby Amar Ñ Additional Director
4. Shri C. Vanlalruata Ñ Deputy Secretary
5. Shri Sumesh Kumar Ñ Under Secretary

64
LIST OF W ITNESSES
Ministry of Agriculture and Farmers Welfare
(Department of Agricultural Research and Education)
1. Dr. Trilochan Mohapatra Secretary (DARE) &DG (ICAR)
2. Dr. K. Alagusundaram Deputy Director General (NRM),
ICAR
3. Dr. S.K. Chaudhari Assistant Director General (SWM),
ICAR
4. Dr. P .K. Chakrabarty Assistant Director General (PP&B),
ICAR
5. Dr. P .P . Biswas Principal Scientist (Soils), ICAR
6. Dr. Krishan K. Sharma Principal Scientist, IAR, New Delhi
7. Shri B.S. Phogat Additional Plant Protection
Advisor
8. Shri D.D.K. Sharma Secretary, Central Board of
Insecticides & Registration
Committee
Ministry of Agriculture and Farmers Welfare
(Department of Agriculture, Cooperation and Farmers Welfare)
1. Shri Shobhana Pattanayak Secretary
2. Shri Ashwani Kumar Joint Secretary
Ministry of Chemicals & Fertilizers
(Department of Chemicals & Petrochemicals)
1. Shri Rajeev Kapoor Secretary (Department of
Chemicals & Petrochemicals)
2. Shri Samir Kumar Biswas Joint Secretary (Chemicals)
3. Dr. Jitendra Kumar Director (IPFT)
4. Shri S.P . Mohanty Chairman & Managing Director
(HIL)
Ministry of Chemicals & Fertilizers
(Department of Fertilizers)
1. Shri Dharam Pal Addl. Secretary

65
2. At the outset, the Chairperson welcomed the Members to the
Sitting of the Standing Committee. Then, the Committee took up the
following draft Reports for consideration and adoption:
*(i) XXXX XXXX XXXX XXXX
*(ii) XXXX XXXX XXXX XXXX
*(iii) XXXX XXXX XXXX XXXX
(iv) Draft Report on the Action Taken by the Government on the
Observations/Recommendations contained in the Thirty-fifth
Report of the Standing Committee on Agriculture on ÔDemands
for Grants (2017-18)Õ pertaining to the Ministry of Agriculture
and Farmers Welfare (Department of Agriculture, Cooperation
and Farmers Welfare) (English Version).
3. After some deliberations, the Committee adopted the draft
Reports without any amendments and authorized the Chairperson to
finalise the Reports and present the same to Parliament.
[Witnesses were ushered in]
*4. XXXX XXXX XXXX XXXX
*5. XXXX XXXX XXXX XXXX
*6. XXXX XXXX XXXX XXXX
A verbatim record of the proceedings has been kept separately.
The Committee then adjourned.
*Matter not related to this Report.

66
APPENDIX
(Vide Para 4 of Introduction of the Report)
ANALYSIS OF ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE THIRTY
FIFTH REPORT OF STANDING COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE
(2016-17) ON ÔDEMANDS FOR GRANTS (2017-18) Õ OF THE
MINISTRY OF AGRICULTURE AND FARMERS WELFARE
(DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE, COOPERATION
AND FARMERS WELFARE)
(i) Total number of Recommendations 19
(ii) Observations/Recommendations which have been
Accepted by the Government
Para Nos. 1, 2, 4, 5, 10, 12, 14, 15, 16 & 17
Total 10
Percentage 52.63%
(iii) Observations/Recommendations which the Committee
Do not desire to pursue in view of the Government Õs
replies
Para No. Nil
Total NIL
Percentage 00.00%
(iv) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which
replies of the Government have not been accepted
by the Committee
Para Nos. 3, 6, 7, 8, 13, 18 & 19
Total 07
Percentage 36.84%
(v) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which
Final replies of the Government are still awaited
Para No. 9 & 11
Total 02
Percentage 10.53%