COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE
(2014-2015)
SIXTEENTH LOK SABHA
MINISTRY OF AGRICULTURE
(DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE
AND CO-OPERATION)
‘RASHTRIYA KRISHI VIKAS YOJANA—
AN EV ALUATION’
[Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations contained in the
Sixty-first Report (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) of the Committee on Agriculture (2013-2014)]
SEVENTH REPORT
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
March, 2015/Phalguna, 1936  (Saka)
7


SEVENTH REPORT
COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE
(2014-2015)
( SIXTEENTH LOK SABHA )
MINISTRY OF AGRICULTURE
(DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE AND
CO-OPERATION)
‘RASHTRIYA KRISHI VIKAS YOJANA—
AN EVALUATION’
[Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations
contained in the Sixty-first Report (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) of the
Committee on Agriculture (2013-2014)]
Presented to Lok Sabha on 17.03.2015
Laid on the Table of  Rajya Sabha on 17.03.2015
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
March, 2015/Phalguna,1936 (Saka)

C.O.A. No. 314
Price : Rs. 38.00
© 2015 B Y L OK S ABHA S ECRETARIAT
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of
Business in Lok Sabha (Fifteenth Edition) and Printed by National Printers,
New Delhi-110 028.

(i)
CONTENTS
PAGE
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE ............................................................. (iii)
INTRODUCTION ........................................................................................... (v)
CHAPTER I Report ............................................................................... 1
CHAPTER II Observations/Recommendations which have been
accepted by the Government ........................................ 9
CHAPTER III Observations/Recommendations which the
Committee do not desire to pursue in view of the
Government’s replies ..................................................... 17
CHAPTER IV Observations/Recommendations in respect of which
replies of the Government have not been accepted
by the Committee ........................................................... 18
C
HAPTER V Observations/Recommendations in respect of which
final replies of the Government are still awaited ...... 21
ANNEXURES
I. Minutes of the Eighth Sitting of the Committee held
on 13 November, 2014 ................................................... 24
II. Minutes of the Fourteenth Sitting of the Committee
held on 15 January, 2015 ............................................... 26
III. Minutes of the Eighteenth Sitting of the Committee
held on 4 March, 2015 ................................................... 29
APPENDICES
Analysis of Action Taken by the Government on the
Recommendations contained in the Sixty-First
Report (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) of the Committee on
Agriculture (2013-2014) ................................................ 31

(iii)
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE
(2014-2015)
Shri Hukm Deo Narayan Yadav — Chairperson
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Sanganna Amarappa
3. Prof. Ravindra Vishwanath Gaikwad
4. Shri Nalin Kumar Kateel
5. Md. Badaruddoza Khan
6. Shri C. Mahendran
7. Dr. Tapas Mandal
8. Shri Janardan Mishra
9. Shri Ajay Nishad
10. Shri Dalpat Singh Paraste
11. Shri Nityanand Rai
12. Shri Mukesh Rajput
13. Shri Konakalla Narayana Rao
14. Shri C.L. Ruala
15. Shri Arjun Charan Sethi
16. Shri Satyapal Singh
17. Shri Virendra Singh
18. Shri Kadiyam Srihari
19. Shri Jai Prakash Narayan Yadav
20. Shri Dharmendra Yadav
21. Shri B. S. Yeddyurappa

(iv)
Rajya Sabha
22. Shri A.W. Rabi Bernard
23. Shrimati Renuka Chowdhury
24. Sardar Sukhdev Singh Dhindsa
25. Shri Janardan Dwivedi
26. Shri Vinay Katiyar
27. Shri Mohd. Ali Khan
28. Shri Rajpal Singh Saini
29. Shri Ram Nath Thakur
30. Shri Shankarbhai N. Vegad
31. Shri Darshan Singh Yadav
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Shri Abhijit Kumar — Joint Secretary
2. Smt. Abha Singh Yaduvanshi — Director
3. Shri C. Vanlalruata — Deputy Secretary

(v)
INTRODUCTION
I, the Chairperson, Committee on Agriculture (2014-15), having
been authorized by the Committee to submit the Report on their behalf,
present this Seventh Report on action taken by the Government on the
Observations/Recommendations contained in the Sixty-first Report
(Fifteenth Lok Sabha) of the Committee on Agriculture (2013-14) on
‘Rashtriya Krishi Vikas Yojana—An Evaluation’ pertaining to the Ministry
of Agriculture (Department of Agriculture and Cooperation).
2. The Sixty-first Report (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) of the Committee
on Agriculture (2013-14) on ‘Rashtriya Krishi Vikas Yojana—An Evaluation’
of the Ministry of Agriculture (Department of Agriculture and
Cooperation) which was presented to the Hon’ble Speaker on 15 March,
2014 and Lok Sabha on 10 June, 2014 by the Secretary General under
Direction 71A(6) of the Directions by the Speaker, Lok Sabha and laid
on the Table of Rajya Sabha on 11 June, 2014. The Action Taken Notes
on the Report were received on 10 June, 2014.
3. The Committee at their Sitting held on 13 November, 2014
decided to hear the views of Ministry of Agriculture (Department of
Agriculture and Cooperation) and Government of Haryana before
finalizing their Action Taken Report. Accordingly, the Committee took
evidence of representatives of Ministry of Agriculture (Department of
Agriculture and Cooperation) and Government of Haryana at their Sitting
held on 15 January , 2015.
4. The Report was considered and adopted by the Committee at
their Sitting held on 4th March, 2015.
5. An analysis of the action taken by the Government on the
Observations/Recommendations contained in the Sixty-first Report
(Fifteenth Lok Sabha) of the Committee is given in Appendix.
N
EW DELHI; HUKM DEO NARAYAN YADAV,
13 March, 2015 Chairperson,
22 Phalguna, 1936 (Saka) Committee on Agriculture.

CHAPTER I
REPORT
This Report of the Committee on Agriculture deals with the action
taken by the Government on the Recommendations contained in the
Sixty-First Report (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) of the Committee on Agriculture
(2013-14) on ‘Rashtriya Krishi Vikas Yojana – An Evaluation’ pertaining
to the Ministry of Agriculture (Department of Agriculture and
Cooperation) which was presented to the Hon’ble Speaker on 15 March,
2014 and Lok Sabha on 10 June, 2014 by the Secretary General under
Direction 71A(6) of the Directions by Speaker, Lok Sabha and laid on
the Table of Rajya Sabha on 11 June, 2014.
1.2 The Government have furnished Action Taken Replies in respect
of all the 10 Observations/Recommendations contained in the Report.
These have been categorised as under:—
(i) Observations/Recommendations that have been accepted by
the Government:
Recommendation Nos. 1, 2, 3, 4, 6, 7 and 8
Chapter - II
Total : 07
(ii) Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not
desire to pursue in view of the Government’s reply:
-Nil-
Chapter - III
Total : Nil
(iii) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which action
taken replies of the Government have not been accepted by
the Committee:
Recommendation Nos. 5 and 10
Chapter - IV
Total : 02

2
(iv) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which final
replies of the Government are still awaited:
Recommendation No. 9
Chapter - V
Total : 01
1.3 The Committee trust that utmost importance would
be given to implementation of the Observations/Recommendations
accepted by the Government. In cases where it is not possible for the
Government to implement the Recommendations in letter and spirit
for any reason, the matter should be reported to the Committee with
reasons for non-implementation. The Committee desire that further
Action Taken Notes on the Observations/Recommendations contained
in Chapter-I and Chapter-V of this Report be furnished to them at an
early date.
1.4 The Committee will now deal with the action taken by the
Government on some of the Recommendations in the succeeding
paragraphs.
Reduction in yield gaps in important crops
Recommendation (Para No. 1)
1.5 The primary objectives of launching Rashtriya
Krishi Vikas Yojana (RKVY) in the 11th Plan, among other things,
were to reduce the yield gaps in important crops and to ensure
that States increase their plan allocation to the agriculture and
allied sector, as the gross capital formation in the sector was
unsatisfactory. The Committee find that not much headway has
been made in this regard during the 11th Plan. Admittedly,
there are huge yield gaps across the country and in certain crops
the gaps are bigger than in other crops. Presently, the Department
of Agriculture and Cooperation (DAC) has no data about growth
in private investment as compared to public investment in
agriculture and allied sector. In the absence of relevant data, the
Committee are not in a position to assess the performance of
RKVY. The Committee desire that data regarding yield gaps
in major crops and quantum of private investment in
agriculture and allied sector at the beginning of the 11th Plan
and achievements during the plan period be collected and furnished

3
to the Committee at the earliest to enable an objective assessment about
the achievements under RKVY. The Committee also urge the DAC to
initiate concrete measures to ensure that yield gaps in important crops
are reduced as aimed in RKVY.
1.6 The Department in the Action Taken Note have stated
that average annual growth rate of yield during the period 2007-08 to
2012-13 has been 2.7% for foodgrains, 3.8% for pulses and 2.2%
for oilseeds. In absolute terms, there has been significant rise in yield
in respect of rice, wheat, pulses and oilseeds from pre-XI Five Year Plan
to post-XI Five Year Plan period. Yield, measured in terms of kg/ha,
has increased from 2131 to 2462 for rice, 2708 to 3119 for wheat,
612 to 786 for pulses and 916 to 1169 for oilseeds between 2006-07 to
2012-13. Contribution of private sector in Gross Capital Formation
(GCF) in agriculture and allied sectors has increased from
Rs. 75,496 crore in 2006-07 (before XI Plan period) to Rs. 195,756 crore
in 2011-12 (terminal year of XI Plan period). In relative terms, contribution
of private sector in GCF has increased from 74.6% (2006-07) to 83.56%
by the end of XI Plan period (2011-12). For sustaining capital
investment under RKVY, revised Guidelines of RKVY have mandated at
least 35% of State’s allocation for implementing infrastructure and asset
projects.
Various sub-schemes have been introduced under RKVY with
focused objective to reduce the yield gaps in principal crops. Notable
among these schemes are Bringing Green Revolution in Eastern India
(BGREI) targeting higher rice production, 60,000 pulse villages for
enhancing productivity of pulses, Initiative for Nutritional Security
through Intensive Millets Promotion (INSIMP) etc. For bringing more
focus in bridging yield gaps at State level, revised Guidelines of RKVY
has introduced ‘inverse of yield gaps between state average yield and
potential yields’ as one of the parameters for determining inter-State
allocation of RKVY funds. From 2014-15 onward, States having lesser
yield gaps will have relative advantage in accessing more funds under
RKVY.
1.7 The Committee had noted that since its inception
in the Eleventh Plan, Rashtriya Krishi Vikas Yojana (RKVY)
has contributed towards increased yield for rice, wheat, pulses and
oilseeds as well as increased contribution of private sector in
Gross Capital Formation (GCF) in agriculture and allied
sectors. However, they would like to caution the Government

4
that a lot still remains to be done before RKVY achieves its objectives.
The Committee, therefore, reiterate their earlier recommendation that
Department of Agriculture and Cooperation (DAC) should initiate
concrete measures to ensure that yield gaps in important crops are
reduced further.
Discontinuation of Services of National Institute of Rural Development
(NIRD)
Recommendation (Para No. 5)
1.8 In a note submitted to the Committee, the DAC
stated that the services of NIRD were discontinued as it did not have
the desired level of in depth examination and assessment as required by
the DAC. The Secretary, DAC was, however, candid in his deposition
on 12.2.14 that NIRD conducted evaluation efficiently and the
document brought out through it was of great help in bringing back
the focus on to the implementation issues of RKVY. The Committee,
however, fail to understand why then the services of NIRD, which made
an objective evaluation, were discontinued. The Committee would await
an explanation in this regard.
1.9 In their Action Taken Note, the Department of Agriculture
and Cooperation have stated that the agreement entered into with
NIRD by the Department of Agriculture and Cooperation (DAC) for
monitoring and evaluation of implementation of RKVY was on year to
year basis which was not renewed after 2010-11 as NIRD failed to comply
with terms and conditions especially in respect with conducting field
visits and timely furnishing of reports.
1.10 The divergent views of the Secretary, Department of
Agriculture and Cooperation and as furnished in the action taken notes
by Department of Agriculture and Cooperation in regard to the
discontinuation of the services National Institute of Rural Development
(NIRD) baffles the Committee. They are unable to comprehend as to
how an agency that had failed to comply with the terms and conditions,
especially, in respect of conducting of field visits and timely furnishing
of reports be able to conduct an efficient evaluation of the RKVY
Scheme and bring out a document that was of great help in bringing
back the focus on the implementation issues of RKVY. Strongly
deprecating this lack of clarity on the part of the Department on this
issue, they urge the Department in the first instance to reconcile this

5
issue amongst themselves and then furnish a comprehensive and correct
reply to the Committee.
Delay in submission of report by Agriculture Development and Rural
Transformation Centre (ADRTC)
Recommendation (Para No. 6)
1.11 Another Institute engaged by the DAC for evaluating
RKVY over the 11th Plan period is Agriculture Development
and Rural Transformation Centre (ADRTC) under the Institute
for Social and Economic Change (ISEC), Bengaluru. ARDC was expected
to give its first report by March, 2013 and final report by June, 2013. It
has not, however, submitted its report even seven months after the
deadline. As the 11th Plan period was over almost two years ago, the
Committee desire that ADRTC should complete its task without further
delay to enable an objective assessment of RKVY. The Committee would
also like to know the methodology being followed by ADRTC to evaluate
RKVY.
1.12 The Department in their Action Taken Note have stated that
the Institute of Social and Economic Change (ISEC), Bengaluru has been
engaged for impact evaluation study of RKVY implementation during
11th Plan period. Salient features of the methodology followed by ISEC
for this study are as under:—
(a) All States and Union Territories will be covered
under the study following a standard statistical sampling
technique.
(b) Implementation of major components and activities will be
incorporated in the study.
(c) ISEC shall lead the study but will have several
institutions as partners to support it across States. The
partner-institutions will be selected by following a transparent
process.
(d) ISEC shall prepare the template, guidelines, questionnaires
and software packages for the study.
(e) ISEC shall consolidate the report of all partner-
institutions, integrate them and prepare a consolidated

6
report for Department of Agriculture and Cooperation
(DAC).
(f) Infrastructural and individual project silos shall be analyzed
in the sectoral reports whereby major infrastructure and
individual projects will be considered based on total
expenditure/allocation share.
(g) ISEC shall use a variety of data sources including
Detailed Project Report (DPR) for the schemes, total
allocation, objectives, implementing agency and the
progress achieved, impact and outcome of the project at macro
level.
ISEC, Bengaluru has already submitted its first report.
1.13 The Committee are appalled at the inordinate delay
on the part of Agriculture Development and Rural
Transformation Centre (ADRTC) in submitting its First Report,
which has consequently delayed the submission of its Final
Report. Being of the considered view that this ordinate delay
greatly reduces the efficacy of the work done by ADRTC as
we are past the halfway stage of the Twelfth Plan period, the
Committee urge upon the Department to be proactive in the
matter and ensure in the future that before engaging a third party
for evaluation of any scheme deadlines set up with mutual consent
are strictly adhered to and such instances are not repeated. The
Committee would like to be intimated of the findings of the final
report of ISEC.
Misuse of Central Subsidy by Government of Haryana
Recommendation (Para No. 10)
1.14 Another allegation made in the representation relates
to purchase of seeds at high cost with Government subsidies. It
has been stated in this connection that there has been no
mis-utilisation or mis-appropriation of subsidy under RKVY.
According to the Secretary, Agriculture, under the Government
of India Scheme, the subsidy rate is fixed. Irrespective of the cost
of the seed, the subsidy outgo from the Government is the same.
However, since the seeds were purchased under limited tender
at very high rate, the entire matter is stated to have been referred

7
to the Central Vigilance Commission for appropriate action.
The Committee further desire that the DAC should ensure that
open and competitive tenders are floated where central money
is spent and that no specific brand name(s) for seeds or
insecticides are specified in tender enquiries. In case private
producers are prohibited from participating in a tender enquiry, the DAC
should ensure that the seeds supplied are produced/co-produced
by the eligible Government agency and certification of the
seeds supplied is in its own name. The Central money spent on
subsidizing the cost of seeds purchased from Government/
Cooperative agencies in restrictive of limited tenders where
private seed producers were ineligible to bid, but the
seeds supplied were not certified in the name of the supplying
Government/Cooperative agency should be recovered from the State
Government.
The DAC should take adequate steps to ensure that the benefit of
Central subsidies reach the farmers.
1.15 In their Action Taken Note, the Department have
stated under RKVY, concerned State Governments undertake
the activities of production and distribution of certified/quality
seeds through State Department of Agriculture, State Seeds
Corporation, State Seed Farms, etc. However, subsidy level or
pattern of assistance mandated for this purpose under various
Central Government schemes/programmes has to be adhered to.
State Governments, if they so desire, are free to add their own
funds to provide increased subsidy to farmers. To further
ensure that technical requirements and financial norms (cost
norms and pattern of assistance) of States’ proposal are consistent
with relevant Central Government/State Government schemes, the revised
guidelines of RKVY has stipulated that all project proposals will have
to be screened by State Level Project Screening Committee (SLPSC) before
they are placed before State Level Sanctioning Committee (SSLC) for
approval.
1.16 The Committee are not satisfied with the reply
of the Government, as the issues raised by the Committee
in their original report have not been addressed to. They,
therefore, reiterate their earlier recommendation that

8
Department of Agriculture and Cooperation take adequate
steps to ensure that misuse of Central subsidies do not take place,
thereby ensuring that the benefit of Central subsidies reach the farmers.
The Committee would await the Government’s response on the concerns
expressed by them.

9
CHAPTER II
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN
ACCEPTED BY THE GOVERNMENT
Reduction in yield gaps in important crops
Recommendation (Para No. 1)
The primary objectives of launching Rashtriya Krishi Vikas Yojana
(RKVY) in the 11th Plan, among other things, were to reduce the yield
gaps in important crops and to ensure that States increase their plan
allocation to the agriculture and allied sector, as the gross capital formation
in the sector was unsatisfactory. The Committee find that not much
headway has been made in this regard during the 11th Plan. Admittedly,
there are huge yield gaps across the country and in certain crops the gaps
are bigger than in other crops. Presently, the Department of Agriculture
and Cooperation (DAC) has no data about growth in private investment
as compared to public investment in agriculture and allied sector. In the
absence of relevant data, the Committee are not in a position to assess
the performance of RKVY. The Committee desire that data regarding
yield gaps in major crops and quantum of private investment in agriculture
and allied sector at the beginning of the 11th plan and achievements
during the plan period be collected and furnished to the Committee at
the earliest to enable an objective assessment about the achievements
under RKVY. The Committee also urge the DAC to initiate concrete
measures to ensure that yield gaps in important crops are reduced as
aimed in RKVY.
Reply of the Government
Average annual growth rate of yield during the period 2007-08 to
2012-13 has been 2.7% for foodgrains, 3.8% for pulses and 2.2 % for
oilseeds. In absolute terms, there has been significant rise in yield in
respect of rice, wheat, pulses and oilseeds from pre-XI five year plan to
post-XI five year plan period. Yield, measured in terms of kg/ha, has
increased from 2131 to 2462 for rice, 2708 to 3119 for wheat, 612 to 786
for pulses and 916 to 1169 for oilseeds between 2006-07 to 2012-13.

10
Contribution of private sector in Gross Capital Formation (GCF) in
agriculture and allied sectors has increased from Rs. 75,496 crore in
2006-07 (before XI Plan period) to Rs. 195,756 crore in 2011-12 (terminal
year of XI Plan period). In relative terms, contribution of private sector
in GCF has increased from 74.6% (2006-07) to 83.56% by the end of XI
Plan period (2011-12). For sustaining capital investment under RKVY,
revised guidelines of RKVY have mandated at least 35% of State’s
allocation for implementing infrastructure and asset projects.
Various sub-schemes have been introduced under RKVY with
focused objective to reduce the yield gaps in principal crops. Notable
among these schemes are Bringing Green Revolution in Eastern India
(BGREI) targeting higher rice production, 60,000 pulse villages for
enhancing productivity of pulses, Initiative for Nutritional Security
through Intensive Millets Promotion (INSIMP) etc. For bringing more
focus in bridging yield gaps at State level, revised Guidelines of RKVY
has introduced ‘inverse of yield gaps between State average yield and
potential yields’ as one of the parameters for determining inter-State
allocation of RKVY funds. From 2014-15 onward, States having lesser
yield gaps will have relative advantage in accessing more funds under
RKVY.
[Ministry of Agriculture (Department of Agriculture and
Co-operation), F. No.6-3/2014-RKVY dated the 10 June, 2014]
Comments of the Committee
For comments of the Committee please refer to Para No. 1.7 of
Chapter I of this Report.
Increased growth rate in agriculture
Recommendation (Para No. 2)
Other objective of Rashtriya Krishi Vikas Yojana (RKVY) are to
incentivize the States to increase their plan allocation to the agriculture
and allied sector, to ensure preparation of district and State agriculture
plans and to achieve the national target of 4 per cent growth in agriculture
and allied sector during the 11th and 12th plan periods. The Committee
note that the first two objectives were made prerequisites for availing
funds by the States under RKVY. The Committee are glad to learn that
despite two major droughts, the overall growth of the agriculture and
allied sector during the 11th plan is in the vicinity of 4.1 per cent

11
surpassing the target of 4 per cent. The Committee would, however, like
to caution the Government that there should be no complacency in
sustaining the growth momentum achieved in the 11th plan and all efforts
be made to further accelerate the agricultural growth during the 12th
plan.
Reply of the Government
Agriculture and Allied sector grew at a rate of 4.7% during
2013-14. Department of Agriculture and Cooperation (DAC) will continue
to strive for sustaining growth momentum during 12th Plan period.
[Ministry of Agriculture (Department of Agriculture and
Co-operation), F. No.6-3/2014-RKVY dated the 10 June, 2014]
Major issues raised by States regarding criteria prescribed for
apportionment of funds
Recommendation (Para No. 3)
The Committee have been informed that the States had major issues
in regard to the criteria prescribed for apportionment of funds under
RKVY. The criteria relate to percentage share of net un-irrigated area in
a State to the net un-irrigated area; projected growth rate and increase
in the total plan expenditure in agriculture and allied sectors. It has been
stated that in order to address the grievances of States, the number of
criteria was increased so that a State which falls short of one criteria can
make ground in other criteria to gain additional funds. The additional
criteria for apportionment of funds include, average area under oilseeds
and pulses, increase in expenditure on animal husbandry, dairying and
fisheries and reduction in yield gap. The Committee hope that allocation
of funds under RKVY will be just and equitable to all States without
room for perceived injustice.
Reply of the Government
Department of Agriculture and Cooperation would like to assure
the Committee that allocation of funds under RKVY will adhere to scheme
guidelines and will be just and equitable to all States without room for
perceived injustice.
[Ministry of Agriculture (Department of Agriculture and
Co-operation), F. No.6-3/2014-RKVY dated the 10 June, 2014]

12
Findings of National Institute of Rural Development (NIRD)
Recommendation (Para No. 4)
According to the findings of the National Institute of Rural
Development (NIRD), Hyderabad which was commissioned in 2008 by
the DAC to undertake concurrent evaluation of RKVY during the 11th
plan period, the States have not been able to balance investments in
growth oriented projects and projects for development of agricultural
Infrastructure. Infrastructure development, if any by the States was not
found to be based on any definite vision or plan. Further, there has been
thin spread of RKVY resources across all sectors and amongst all districts
of the States. The Committee would urge the DAC to look into the issues
brought out by the NIRD in the implementation of RKVY and take
necessary action to ensure that there are no such deficiencies in future.
Reply of the Government
Issues brought out by NIRD regarding implementation of RKVY
in the States have already been shared with States for initiating remedial
measures. Further, to ensure that RKVY funds are adequately utilized for
developing agricultural infrastructure, the revised RKVY guidelines that
have come into effect from 01.04.2014, have mandated that at least 35%
of State’s allocation should be utilized for implementing infrastructure
and asset development projects.
Besides, the revised guidelines have also mandated that States will
draw up a State Agriculture Infrastructure Development Programme
(SAIDP) for identifying resource gaps and effectively utilizing RKVY as
well as other Central funds for bridging the gaps.
[Ministry of Agriculture (Department of Agriculture and
Co-operation), F. No.6-3/2014-RKVY dated the 10 June, 2014]
Delay in submission of report by Agriculture Development and Rural
Transformation Centre (ADRTC)
Recommendation (Para No. 6)
Another Institute engaged by the DAC for evaluating RKVY over
the 11th Plan period is Agriculture Development and Rural Transformation
Centre (ADRTC) under the Institute for Social and Economic Change
(ISEC), Bengaluru. ARDC was expected to give its first report by March
2013 and final report by June 2013. It has not, however, submitted its

13
report even seven months after the deadline. As the 11th Plan period was
over almost two years ago, the Committee desire that ADRTC should
complete its task without further delay to enable an objective assessment
of RKVY. The Committee would also like to know the methodology being
followed by ADRTC to evaluate RKVY.
Reply of the Government
Institute of Social and Economic Change (ISEC), Bengaluru has
been engaged for impact evaluation study of RKVY implementation during
11th Plan period. Salient features of the methodology followed by ISEC
for this study areas under:—
(a) All States and Union Territories will be covered under the
study following a standard statistical sampling technique.
(b) Implementation of major components and activities will be
incorporated in the study.
(c) ISEC shall lead the study but will have several institutions
as partners to support it across States. The partner-institutions
will be selected by following a transparent process.
(d) ISEC shall prepare the template, guidelines, questionnaires
and software packages for the study.
(e) ISEC shall consolidate the report of all partner-institutions,
integrate them and prepare a consolidated report for
Department of Agriculture and Cooperation (DAC).
(f) Infrastructural and individual project silos shall be analyzed
in the sectoral reports whereby major infrastructure and
individual projects will be considered based on total
expenditure/allocation share.
(g) ISEC shall use a variety of data sources including Detailed
Project Report (DPR) for the schemes, total allocation,
objectives, implementing agency and the progress achieved,
impact and outcome of the project at macro level.
ISEC, Bengaluru has already submitted its first report.
[Ministry of Agriculture (Department of Agriculture and
Co-operation), F. No.6-3/2014-RKVY dated the 10 June, 2014]

14
Comments of the Committee
For comments of the Committee please refer to Para No. 1.13 of
Chapter I of this Report.
Preliminary findings of Agriculture Development and Rural
Transformation Centre (ADRTC)
Recommendation (Para No. 7)
According to the preliminary findings of ADRTC, there is a strong
co-relation between RKVY spending and private gross capital formation.
The Committee note that the Public Private Partnership for Integrated
Agriculture Development (PPPIAD) launched under RKVY recently
envisages facilitating large scale integrated projects led by private sector
players in the agriculture and allied sector. Each project is to target at
least 5,000 farmers with an average investment of Rs. 1 lakh per farmer
through a project cycle of 3 to 5 years. The intervention to include
mobilizing farmers into producer groups, technology infusion, value
addition and marketing solutions. The Committee would like the
Government to ensure that PPPIAD does not in any way result in
exploitation of farmers.
Reply of the Government
The guidelines of Public Private Partnership for Integrated
Agriculture Development (PPPIAD) has mandated that State Government
should appoint an independent monitoring agency to closely track the
performance of the project implemented under PPPIAD. In addition, Small
Farmers’ Agri-Business Consortium (SFAC), under Dept. of Agriculture
and Cooperation will examine State’s proposal from technical viewpoint
before proposing for funding to the concerned State. These safeguards
will ensure that PPPIAD does not in any way result in exploitation of
farmers.
[Ministry of Agriculture (Department of Agriculture and
Co-operation), F. No.6-3/2014-RKVY dated the 10 June, 2014]
Monitoring Implementation of RKVY
Recommendation (Para No. 8)
Monitoring the implementation of RKVY is an area of concern. At
the central level, there is hardly any monitoring except taking stock of

15
the progress and receiving utilization certificate at the time of release of
second installment of allocation. According to the Secretary , Agriculture,
the difficulty in RKVY’s monitoring is that the projects are so diverse in
nature, it is difficult to group them together. It has further been stated
that a web based management information system containing upto date
and authenticated data on RKVY projects is available for access in the
public domain. In Committee’s view, it is the responsibility of the DAC
to ensure that the projects/schemes for which funds are made available
to the states are monitored and coordinated properly to ensure timely
and effective implementation and that there is no misuse or diversion
of funds for unintended purposes. The Committee desire that the
DAC should immediately devise a suitable mechanism for effective
co-ordination and monitoring under intimation to the Committee.
The Committee in this connection draw the attention of the
Government to a representation received by the Committee alleging
misuse of subsidy given under RKVY for purchase of pesticides and
seeds. The issues raised in the representation are discussed in the
succeeding paragraphs.
Reply of the Government
Acknowledging the need for better co-ordination and monitoring,
the revised RKVY guidelines have mandated that at twenty five per cent
(25%) of the projects sanctioned by the State each year under the three
streams e.g. RKVY (production growth), RKVY (Infrastructure and Assets)
and RKVY (Sub-schemes) shall have to be compulsorily taken up for
third party monitoring and evaluation by the implementing States. In
addition, it has also been stipulated that action plan for monitoring and
evaluation will be chosen by SLSC every year in its first meeting based
on project cost, importance of the project, etc. preferably covering all
sectors.
At central level, DAC will engage suitable agency for conducting
State specific/Pan India periodic implementation monitoring and/or
concurrent evaluation of the scheme.
All of these will be over and above online monitoring through
web-based Management Information System (MIS) that provides
authenticated data on outputs, outcome and contribution of RKVY projects
in the public domain (http://www.rkvy.nic.in). Through this system, States
will continue online submission/updating of project data on a regular
basis.

16
RKVY revised guidelines also suggest that assets created under
this scheme should be captured digitally and mapped on a GIS platform
for future integration onto National-GIS system for bringing more
transparency and accountability.
[Ministry of Agriculture (Department of Agriculture and
Co-operation), F. No.6-3/2014-RKVY dated the 10 June, 2014]

17
CHAPTER III
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE
DO NOT DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE
GOVERNMENT’S REPLIES
-NIL-

18
CHAPTER IV
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH
REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN
ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE
Discontinuation of Services of National Institute of Rural Development
(NIRD)
Recommendation (Para No. 5)
In a note submitted to the Committee, the DAC stated that the
services of NIRD were discontinued as it did not have the desired level
of in depth examination and assessment as required by the DAC. The
Secretary, DAC was, however, candid in his deposition on 12.2.14 that
NIRD conducted evaluation efficiently and the document brought out
through it was of great help in bringing back the focus on to the
implementation issues of RKVY. The Committee, however, fail to
understand why then the services of NIRD, which made an objective
evaluation, were discontinued. The Committee would await an explanation
in this regard.
Reply of the Government
The agreement entered into with NIRD by the Department of
Agriculture and Cooperation (DAC) for monitoring and evaluation of
implementation of RKVY was on year to year basis which was not renewed
after 2010-11 as NIRD failed to comply with terms and conditions
especially in respect with conducting field visits and timely furnishing
of reports.
[Ministry of Agriculture (Department of Agriculture and
Co-operation), F. No.6-3/2014-RKVY dated the 10 June, 2014]
Comments of the Committee
For comments of the Committee please refer to Para No. 1.10 of
Chapter I of this Report.

19
Misuse of Central Subsidy by Government of Haryana
Recommendation (Para No. 10)
Another allegation made in the representation relates to purchase
of seeds at high cost with Government subsidies. It has been stated in
this connection that there has been no mis-utilisation or mis-appropriation
of subsidy under RKVY. According to the Secretary, Agriculture, under
the Government of India Scheme, the subsidy rate is fixed. Irrespective
of the cost of the seed, the subsidy outgo from the Government is the
same. However, since the seeds were purchased under limited tender at
very high rate, the entire matter is stated to have been referred to the
Central Vigilance Commission for appropriate action. The Committee
further desire that the DAC should ensure that open and competitive
tenders are floated where central money is spent and that no specific
brand name(s) for seeds or insecticides are specified in tender enquiries.
In case private producers are prohibited from participating in a tender
enquiry, the DAC should ensure that the seeds supplied are produced/
co-produced by the eligible Government agency and certification of the
seeds supplied is in its own name. The Central money spent on subsidizing
the cost of seeds purchased from Government/Cooperative agencies in
restrictive of limited tenders where private seed producers were ineligible
to bid, but the seeds supplied were not certified in the name of the
supplying Government/Cooperative agency should be recovered from
the State Government.
The DAC should take adequate steps to ensure that the benefit of
Central subsidies reach the farmers.
Reply of the Government
Under RKVY, concerned State Governments undertake the activities
of production and distribution of certified/quality seeds through State
Department of Agriculture, State Seeds Corporation, State Seed Farms,
etc. However, subsidy level or pattern of assistance mandated for this
purpose under various Central Government schemes/programmes has to
be adhered to. State Governments, if they so desire, are free to add their
own funds to provide increased subsidy to farmers.
To further ensure that technical requirements and financial norms
(cost norms and pattern of assistance) of States’ proposal are consistent
with relevant Central Government/State Government schemes, the revised
guidelines of RKVY has stipulated that all project proposals will have

20
to be screened by State Level Project Screening Committee (SLPSC) before
they are placed before State Level Sanctioning Committee (SSLC) for
approval.
[Ministry of Agriculture (Department of Agriculture and
Co-operation), F. No.6-3/2014-RKVY dated the 10 June, 2014]
Comments of the Committee
For comments of the Committee please refer to Para No. 1.16 of
Chapter I of this Report.

21
CHAPTER V
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH
FINAL REPLIES OF GOVERNMENT ARE STILL AWAITED
Usage of non-approved Pesticide by Government of Haryana
Recommendation (Para No. 9)
One of the allegations made in the representation was that the
Government of Haryana had misused central subsidy under RKVY by
purchasing the pesticide RAXIL for non-approved use on the basis of a
recommendation made by Haryana Agriculture University (HAU) that
treatment of wheat seeds with RAXIL 2% DS is effective against Karnal
Bunt disease. According to the Secretary, Agriculture, it is a fact that this
particular pesticide was tested by the HAU on wheat and found to be
effective and included in the package of practices in 2002. The results
were, however, not submitted to the Registration Committee as required
under the Insecticides Act. No pesticides can be used on any crop unless
it is permitted to be so used by the Registration Committee. Though this
matter has since been taken up with all the States and the research
institutions to prevent recurrence of such lapses, the Committee would
like to stress that since pesticides are potentially hazardous chemicals
and have significant bearing on human and environmental health, no
laps whatsoever in this regard can be condoned. The Central Insecticides
Board and Registration Committee (CIB&RC) is reportedly inquiring into
the matter. The Committee desire that inquiry should inter-alia, cover the
following points:—
• Reasons why the Chaudhary Charan Singh Haryana
Agriculture University , Hisar recommended Tebuconazle
fungicide by specific brand name of RAXIL to farmers in its
Package of Practices forum approved treatment of Karnal
Bunt disease in wheat crop.
• Propriety and legality of the action of M/s Bayer Crop Science
India publishing the recommendation of some State
Agriculture Universities in its advertisements wherein
RAXIL’s effectiveness in treating Karnal Bunt disease in wheat
crop is claimed.

22
• Has any study been carried out regarding the infestation of
loose smut, flag smut or Karnal bunt disease in wheat crop
in Haryana before mandating the use of RAXIL fungicide in
Rabi 2010-11. Was such a study carried out afterwards?
• Propriety and legality of the State Agriculture Department
of Haryana spending Central money on RAXIL, a specific
brand of M/s Bayer Crop Science India, for unapproved
treatment.
Reply of the Government
Government of India has advised State Governments and
Agricultural Universities to desist from permitting use of pesticides which
run contrary to their terms of registration. All State Agriculture
Universities have also been advised to review the package of practices
devised by them. Any recommendation for use of any pesticide that is
in contravention of Central Insecticides Board and Registration Committee
(CIB&RC) approvals should be withdrawn forthwith.
State Government of Haryana has been separately apprised about
the details of legal/regulatory framework in relation to registration of
pesticides and the need to respect the system for the sake of safety of
human, animals and environment.
In addition, State Government of Haryana has been requested to
conduct investigation and fix accountability for non-approved usage of
pesticide in the State, particularly with regard to recommendation for
use of RAXIL 2% DS for seed treatment in wheat against Karnal Bunt.
Government of Haryana has also been asked to issue clear instruction
to all concerned authorities to desist from making recommendation of
pesticide usage which is not approved by CIB&RC.
CIB&RC has set up a Sub-Committee under Assistant Director
General, ICAR to investigate any possible wrongdoing on the part of
M/s Bayer Crop Science Limited (Bayer) in the sale of RAXIL 2% DS for
control of Karnal Bunt when such label claim was not approved. This
Sub Committee, inter-alia will also look into following issues:—
• Why the Chaudhary Charan Singh Haryana Agriculture
University, Hisar recommended Tebuconazle fungicide by
specific brand name of RAXIL to farmers in its Package of
Practices for treatment of Karnal bunt disease in wheat crop?

23
• Propriety and legality of the action of M/s Bayer Crop Science
India in publishing the recommendation of some State
Agriculture Universities in its advertisements wherein
RAXIL’s effectiveness in treating Karnal Bunt disease in wheat
crop is claimed.
• Whether any study been carried out, before and/or afterwards,
regarding the infestation of loose smut, flag smut or Karnal
bunt disease in wheat crop in Haryana before mandating the
use of RAXIL fungicide in Rabi 2010-11?
• Propriety and legality of the State Agriculture Department
of Haryana spending Central Government money on RAXIL,
a specific brand of M/s Bayer Crop Science India, for
unapproved treatment.
[Ministry of Agriculture (Department of Agriculture and
Co-operation), F. No.6-3/2014-RKVY dated the 10 June, 2014]
N
EW DELHI; HUKM DEO NARAYAN YADAV,
13 March, 2015 Chairperson,
22 Phalguna, 1936 (Saka) Committee on Agriculture.

24
ANNEXURE I
COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE
(2014-15)
MINUTES OF THE EIGHTH SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE
The Committee sat on Thursday, the 13th November, 2014 from
1100 hrs. to 1315 hrs. in Committee Room No. 53, Parliament House,
New Delhi.
PRESENT
Shri Hukm Deo Narayan Yadav — Chairperson
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Md. Badaruddoza Khan
3. Shri Konakalla Narayana Rao
4. Shri C.L. Ruala
5. Shri Arjun Charan Sethi
6. Shri Satyapal Singh
7. Shri Virendra Singh
8. Shri Jai Prakash Narayan Yadav
Rajya Sabha
9. Sardar Sukhdev Singh Dhindsa
10. Shri Janardan Dwivedi
11. Shri Vinay Katiyar
12. Shri Mohd. Ali Khan
13. Shri Rajpal Singh Saini
14. Shri Ram Nath Thakur

25
15. Shri Shankarbhai N. Vegad
16. Shri Darshan Singh Yadav
SECRETARIAT
1. Smt. Abha Singh Yaduvanshi — Director
2. Shri C. Vanlalruata — Deputy Secretary
2. At the outset, the Chairperson welcomed the Members of the
Committee to the Sitting. The Committee then took up for consideration
Memorandum No.2 regarding request of the Government of Haryana for
an opportunity of hearing in connection with the 61st Report of the
Committee on ‘Rashtriya Krishi Vikas Yojana – An Evaluation’. After
some deliberation, the Committee decided to accede to the request of the
State Government, subject to approval by Hon’ble Speaker. They further
decided that the representatives of Department of Agriculture and
Cooperation may also be asked to appear before the Committee
simultaneously.
*3. *** *** *** *** ***
*4. *** *** *** *** ***
*5. *** *** *** *** ***
The Committee, then, adjourned.
*** Matter not related to this Report.

26
ANNEXURE II
COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE
(2014-15)
MINUTES OF THE FOURTEENTH SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE
The Committee sat on Thursday, the 15th January, 2015 from
1500 hrs. to 1640 hrs. in Committee Room ‘139’ Parliament House Annexe,
New Delhi.
PRESENT
Shri Hukm Deo Narayan Yadav — Chairperson
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Prof. Ravindra Vishwanath Gaikwad
3. Dr. Tapas Mandal
4. Shri Ajay Nishad
5. Shri Dalpat Singh Paraste
6. Shri Nityanand Rai
7. Shri Mukesh Rajput
8. Shri Konakalla Narayana Rao
9. Shri Satyapal Singh
10. Shri Kadiyam Srihari
11. Shri Jai Prakash Narayan Yadav
12. Shri Dharmendra Yadav
Rajya Sabha
13. Sardar Sukhdev Singh Dhindsa
14. Shri Janardan Dwivedi

27
15. Shri Vinay Katiyar
16. Shri Mohd. Ali Khan
17. Shri Ram Nath Thakur
18. Shri Shankarbhai N. Vegad
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Shri Abhijit Kumar — Joint Secretary
2. Smt. Abha Singh Yaduvanshi — Director
3. Shri C. Vanlalruata — Deputy Secretary
WITNESSES
Ministry of Agriculture
(Department of Agriculture and Cooperation)
1. Shri Ashish Bahuguna — Secretary
2. Shri R.L. Jamuda — Special Secretary
3. Shri Narendra Bhooshan — Joint Secretary
4. Shri Utpal Kumar Singh — Joint Secretary
5. Shri Rajesh Kumar Singh — Joint Secretary
6. Shri J.S. Sandhu — Agriculture Commissioner
Ministry of Agriculture
(Department of Animal Husbandry, Dairying and Fisheries)
Shri Rajbir Singh Rana — Joint Secretary
Government of Haryana
1. Shri D.S. Dhesi — Chief Secretary
2. Shri Dhanpat Singh — Additional Chief Secretary
3. Shri Ramesh Krishan — Director General
4. Dr. B.S. Duggal — Managing Director
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members of the
Committee and the representatives of the Ministry of Agriculture
(Department of Agriculture and Cooperation) and Government of Haryana
to the Sitting and apprised the witnesses of the provisions of the Directions
55(1) and 58 of the Directions by the Speaker.

28
3. After the customary introduction, the Committee heard the views
of the representatives of the Ministry of Agriculture and State Government
of Haryana on the Subject ‘Rashtriya Krishi Vikas Yojana – An Evaluation’.
4. The Committee after deliberating upon the Subject under
consideration decided to close the matter and accordingly prepare the
Action Taken Report on the recommendations of the Committee contained
in their 61st Report (15th Lok Sabha).
A verbatim record of the proceedings has been kept separately.
The Committee then adjourned.

29
ANNEXURE III
COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE
(2014-15)
MINUTES OF THE EIGHTEENTH SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE
The Committee sat on Wednesday, the 4th March, 2015 from 1430
hrs. to 1500 hrs. in Chamber of the Chairperson, Committee on Agriculture,
Room No. 138 (Third Floor), Parliament House, New Delhi.
PRESENT
Shri Hukm Deo Narayan Yadav — Chairperson
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Prof. Ravindra Vishwanath Gaikwad
3. Shri Nalin Kumar Kateel
4. Md. Badaruddoza Khan
5. Dr. Tapas Mandal
6. Shri Janardan Mishra
7. Shri Ajay Nishad
8. Shri Dalpat Singh Paraste
9. Shri Nityanand Rai
10. Shri Mukesh Rajput
11. Shri C.L. Ruala
12. Shri Satyapal Singh
13. Shri Jai Prakash Narayan Yadav

30
Rajya Sabha
14. Shrimati Renuka Chowdhury
15. Shri Janardan Dwivedi
16. Shri Mohd. Ali Khan
17. Shri Ram Nath Thakur
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Shri Abhijit Kumar — Joint Secretary
2. Smt. Abha Singh Yaduvanshi — Director
3. Shri C. Vanlalruata — Deputy Secretary
2. At the outset, Chairperson welcomed the Members to the Sitting
of the Committee. Then, the Committee took up for consideration the
following:—
*(i) *** *** *** *** ***
*** *** *** *** ; and
(ii) Memorandum No. 5 pertaining to the draft Report on the
Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/
Recommendations contained in the 61st Report (15th Lok
Sabha) of the Committee on Agriculture (2013-14) on
‘Rashtriya Krishi Vikas Yojana—An Evaluation’ of the Ministry
of Agriculture (Department of Agriculture and Cooperation).
3. After some deliberations, the Committee approved the
categorization of action taken replies as shown in the Memoranda and
adopted the draft Reports without any modification. They authorized the
Chairperson to present these Reports to Parliament after getting them
factually verified from the concerned Departments.
The Committee then adjourned.
* Matter not related to this Report.

31
APPENDIX
(Vide Para 4 of Introduction of the Report)
ANALYSIS OF ACTION TAKEN BY GOVERNMENT ON THE
SIXTY-FIRST REPORT (15TH LOK SABHA) OF COMMITTEE
ON AGRICULTURE (2013-14)
(i) Total number of Recommendations 10
(ii) Observ ations/Recommendations which have been Accepted by the
Government
Para Nos. 1, 2, 3, 4, 6, 7 and 8
Total : 07
Percentage : 70%
(iii) Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not desire
to pursue in view of the Government’s replies
Total : NIL
Percentage : 0%
(iv) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies of the
Government have not been accepted by the Committee
Para Nos. 5 and 10
Total : 02
Percentage : 20%
(v) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which Final replies
of the Government are still awaited
Para No. 9
Total : 01
Percentage : 10%

“All Parliamentary Publications including DRSC Reports are 
available on sale at the Sales Counter, Reception, Parliament House 
(Tel. Nos. 23034726, 23034495, 23034496), Agents appointed 
by Lok Sabha Secretariat and Publications Division, Ministry 
of Information and Broadcasting, CGO Complex, Lodhi Road, New 
Delhi (Tel. Nos. 24367260, 24365610) and their outlets. The said 
information is available on website ‘www.parliamentofindia.nic.in’.
The Souvenir Items with logo of Parliament are also available at Sales 
Counter, Reception, Parliament House, New Delhi. The Souvenir 
items with Parliament Museum logo are available for sale at Souvenir 
Shop (Tel. No. 23035323), Parliament Museum, Parliament Library 
Building, New Delhi. List of these items are available on the website 
mentioned above.”