THIRTY-FOURTH REPORT
STANDING COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE
(2016-2017)
(SIXTEENTH LOK SABHA)
MINISTRY OF AGRICULTURE AND FARMERS WELFARE
(DEPARTMENT OF ANIMAL HUSBANDRY , DAIRYING AND FISHERIES)
“Steps taken to Bridge the Gap between the Demand and Availability of
Fodder through Sub-Mission on Fodder and Feed Development”
Presented to Lok Sabha on 15.12.2016
Laid on the Table of Rajya Sabha on 15.12.2016
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
December, 2016/Agrahayana, 1938 ( Saka)


COA No. 354
Price : Rs. 108.00
© 2017 B Y L OK S ABHA S ECRETARIAT
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct
of Business in Lok Sabha (Fourteenth Edition) and printed by
Jainco Art India, New Delhi-110 005.

CONTENTS
PAGE
COMPOSITION OF THE C OMMITTEE ............................................ (iii)
INTRODUCTION ................................................................. (v)
REPORT
PART I
CHAPTER I Introductory ................................................. 1
CHAPTER II Schematic Analysis ......................................... 3
(i) National Livestock Mission ......................... 3
(ii) Sub-Mission on Fodder and Feed Development .. 5
(iii) Regional Fodder Stations under NLM ............ 6
(iv) Release of Funds to States and UTs and their
Utilization .............................................. 8
(v) Funding Pattern, Assistance and
Implementation ....................................... 8
(vi) Pending Utilization Certificates ................... 11
(vii) Central Sector Scheme of Central Fodder
Development Organization.......................... 12
(viii) Additional Fodder Development Programme .... 12
CHAPTER III Feed and Fodder Development .......................... 17
(i) Increasing Availability of Fodder to Mitigate the
effect of Natural Calamities ....................... 17
(ii) Fodder Shortage and its Import .................. 28
(iii) Utilization of Barren Lands for Multi-perennial
Fodder Crops .......................................... 28
(iv) R esearch, Quality Production and Efficient
Utilization of Fodder ................................ 28
(v) Demand and Availability of Fodder............... 29
(vi) Cattle Breeds, their health and nutrition
security ................................................. 32
(vii) Gender Perspective in Animal Husbandry ....... 34
(i)

PAGE
PART-II
Recommendations and Observations of the Committee .. 35
ANNEXURES
I. State-wise allocations for Centrally Sponsored Schemes
of National Livestock Mission for the years 2014-15 &
2016-17 ............................................................. 47
II. The physical target of Submission of Feed and Fodder
Development of National Livestock Mission ................. 49
III. List of Fodder Seeds available for sale at Regional Fodder
Stations of DADF and Lifting by the States as on
23.05.2016 ......................................................... 51
IV . Details of fund allocated to States under Feed and Fodder
Development Sub-Mission under National Livestock Mission
implemented by Department of Animal Husbandry,
Dairying and Fisheries (DADF) ................................. 54
V. Area under Fodder Crops and Permanent Pastures and
Other Grazing Lands During 2006-07 to 2012-13 .......... 55
VI. List of Forage Grasses, Legumes, Shrubs and Trees for
Grassland/Grazing Land Improvement on Agro-Ecological
Basis ................................................................. 57
VII. Stratified fodder-production potential of the best fodder
crop combinations ................................................ 61
VIII. Following are high yielding fodder varieties for improving
fodder yield per hectare in respect of existing area under
fodder ............................................................... 63
IX. State/UT-wise fodder cultivation during 2013-14 .......... 65
A
PPENDICES
I. Minutes of the 25th Sitting of the Standing Committee
on Agriculture (2015-16) held on 02.06.2016 ............... 67
II. Minutes of the 30th Sitting of the Standing Committee
on Agriculture (2015-16) held on 23.08.2016 ............... 72
III. Minutes of the 7th Sitting of the Standing Committee on
Agriculture (2016-17) held on 09.12.2016 .................. 77
77
(ii)

COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE
(2016-2017)
Shri Hukm Deo Narayan Yadav — Chairperson
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Prof. Ravindra Vishwanath Gaikwad
3. Shri Sanganna Karadi
4. Shri Nalin Kumar Kateel
5. Smt. Raksha Khadse
6. Md. Badaruddoza Khan
7. Shri C. Mahendran
8. Dr. Tapas Mandal
9. Shri Janardan Mishra
10. Shri Devji Patel
11. Shri Nityanand Rai
12. Shri Mukesh Rajput
13. Shri Neiphiu Rio
14. Shri Konakalla Narayana Rao
15. Shri C.L. Ruala
16. Shri Arjun Charan Sethi
17. Shri Satyapal Singh (Sambhal)
18. Shri Virendra Singh
19. Shri Dharmendra Yadav
20. Shri Jai Prakash Narayan Yadav
21. Shri B.S. Yeddyurappa
Rajya Sabha
22. Shri Sambhaji Shahu Chhatrapati
23. Sardar Sukhdev Singh Dhindsa
24. Shri Janardan Dwivedi
25. Shri Meghraj Jain
(iii)

26. Shri Vinay Katiyar
27. Shri Mohd. Ali Khan
28. Shri Ram Nath Thakur
29. Shri R. Vaithilingam
30. Shri Shankarbhai N. Vegad
31. Shri Darshan Singh Yadav
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Shri U.B.S. Negi — Joint Secretary
2. Shri Arun K. Kaushik — Director
3. Shri C. Vanlalruata — Deputy Secretary
4. Ms. Divya Rai — Executive Assistant
(iv)

(v)
INTRODUCTION
I, the Chairperson, Standing Committee on Agriculture (2016-17),
having been authorized by the Committee to submit the Report on their
behalf, present this Thirty Fourth Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) on the
subject ‘Steps Taken to Bridge the Gap Between the Demand and
Availability of Fodder Through Sub-Mission on Fodder and Feed
Development’ pertaining to the Ministry of Agriculture (Department of
Animal Husbandry, Dairying and Fisheries).
2. The Committee took evidence of the representatives of the
Ministry of Agriculture and Farmers Welfare (Department of Animal
Husbandry, Dairying and Fisheries) on the subject at their Sitting held
on 23.08.2016.
3. The Report was considered and adopted by the Committee at
their Sitting held on 09.12.2016.
4. For facility of reference, the Observations/Recommendations of
the Committee have been printed in bold at Part-II of the Report.
5. The Committee wish to express their thanks to the representatives
of the Ministry of Agriculture and Farmers Welfare (Department of
Animal Husbandry, Dairying and Fisheries) for furnishing requisite
information to the Committee in connection with examination of the
subject.
6. The Committee would also like to place on record their deep
sense of appreciation for the invaluable assistance rendered to them by
the officials of Lok Sabha Secretariat attached to the Committee.
   N
EW D ELHI; HUKM DEO NARAYAN YADAV ,
09 December, 2016 Chairperson,
18 Agrahayana, 1938 (Saka) Standing Committee on Agriculture.

1
REPORT
PART I
CHAPTER I
INTRODUCTORY
1.1 The Department of Animal Husbandry, Dairying and Fisheries is
one of the Departments under the Ministry of Agriculture and Farmers
Welfare. It came into existence on February 1, 1991 by merger of two
Divisions of the Department of Agriculture and Cooperation viz. Animal
Husbandry and Dairy Development into a separate Department. The
Fisheries Division of the Department of Agriculture & Cooperation and
a part of the Ministry of Food Processing Industries was later transferred
to this Department on October 10, 1997.
1.2 The Department is responsible for matters relating to livestock
production, preservation, protection & improvement of stocks, dairy
development and matters relating to Delhi Milk Scheme and the National
Dairy Development Board. It also looks after all matters pertaining
fisheries, which includes inland and marine sectors and matters related
to the National Fisheries Development Board.
1.3 The Department advises the State Governments/Union Territories
in the formulation of policies and programmes in the field of animal
husbandry, dairy development and fisheries. The main focus of the
activities is on (a) Development of requisite infrastructure in States/
UTs for improving animal productivity; (b) Promoting infrastructure for
handling, processing and marketing of milk and milk products;
(c) Preservation and protection of livestock through provision of health
care; (d) Strengthening of central Livestock farms (Cattle, Sheep and
Poultry) for development of superior germplasm for distribution to States;
and (e) Expansion of aquaculture in fresh and brackish water ,
development of marine fisheries infrastructure & post harvest operations
and welfare of fisherfolk, etc.
1.4 The nutritive value of feed and fodder has a significant bearing
on productivity of livestock. The major reasons for shortage of feed
and fodder are, increasing pressure on land for growing food grains, oil
seeds and pulses, adequate attention has not been given to the
production of fodder crops. Further , on account of diversified use of

2
agricultural residues, the grazing lands are gradually diminishing. The
area under fodder cultivation is also limited. Majority of the grazing
lands have either been degraded or encroached upon restricting their
availability for livestock grazing. The area under fodder cultivation is
only about 4% of the cropping area, and it has remained static for a
long period of time. Owing to the importance of food crops and other
cash crops, it is very unlikely that the area under fodder cultivation
would increase substantially.
1.5 Though the availability of feed and fodder has improved in the
last decade, still a lot is required to be done to bridge the gap between
the demand and availability of fodder in the country, particularly during
the lean periods and crisis situations.
1.6 To overcome the shortage of feed and fodder and to improve
the nutritive value, this Department has included a Sub-Mission on
Fodder and Feed Development in the National Livestock Mission from
2014-15 onwards.

3
CHAPTER II
SCHEMATIC ANALYSIS
(i) National Livestock Mission
2.1 For sustainable and continuous growth of livestock sector , the
National Livestock Mission (NLM) was launched in 2014-15 with the
objectives of sustainable development of livestock sector , focusing on
improving availability of quality feed and fodder , risk coverage, effective
extension, improved flow of credit and organization of livestock farmers/
rearers, etc. with the following four Sub-Missions:
I. Sub-Mission on Livestock Development,
II. Sub-Mission on Pig Development in North Eastern Region,
III. Sub-Mission on Fodder and Feed Development,
IV . Sub-Mission on Skill Development, Technology Transfer and
Extension.
2.2 The National Livestock Mission (NLM) has been launched in
2014-15 with an approved outlay of Rs. 2,800 crore during XII Plan as
per the following details:
(Rs. in crore)
Sl. Components 2013-14 2014-15 2015-16 2016-17 Total
No. (sub-mission)
A. Livestock 349.00 431.00 467.00 513.00 1760.00
Development
B. Pig Development 11.50 17.50 20.50 25.50 765.00
in North-Eastern
Region
C. Fodder and Feed 96.00 111.00 121.00 137.00 465.00
Development
D. Skill Development, 111.00 119.50 128.00 141.50 500.00
Technology Transfer
and Extension
Total 567.50 679.00 736.50 817.00 2800.00

4
2.3 On being asked about the actual allocations for the National
Livestock Mission, the Department in its written reply stated as under:
“The actual budget allocation for National Livestock Mission for
2014-15 was Rs. 273.00 crore against the approved outlay of
Rs. 679.00 crore and the actual budget allocation for National
Livestock Mission for 2015-16 was Rs. 106.37 crore against the
approved outlay of Rs. 736.50 crore. Therefore, the allocations
have been lower due to less budget allocation. The allocation for
National Livestock Mission for 2016-17 is Rs. 292.00 crore against
the approved outlay of Rs. 817.00 crore. The funds released under
the Sub-Mission Fodder and Feed Development during 2014-15 and
2015-16 have been utilized. ”
2.4 On being asked whether lesser allocation against an approved
outlay has hampered the implementation of the Sub-Mission, the
Department replied as under:
“Yes, the implementation of the Sub Mission has been hampered by
the less allocation of funds as against the approved outlay. ”
2.5 On being questioned about the plan of the Department to meet
the physical targets and objectives of the Sub Mission with such an
acute reduction in allocated funds, the Department submitted in writing
as under:
“Due to acute reduction in the funds physical targets have been
modified to the extent the available budget. ”
2.6 The BE and RE of National Livestock Mission is as under:
(Rs. in crore)
Year BE RE
2014-15 273.00 272.28
2015-16 106.37 102.22
No separate allocation are given for sub-missions.
2.7 During the course of briefing on 02.06.2016, the Secretary of
the Department briefed the Committee as under:
“Sir , here I would like to say one important thing that it depends
upon the State Government as to which of the four Sub-Missions of

5
the National Livestock Mission, they would like to stress upon.
Therefore, the development of fodder actually depends upon the
needs of the State Government. We, the Centre, do not impose
anything on them. ”
2.8 On being asked about the basis for allocation of funds to different
schemes and Sub-Missions under the NLM, the Department in its written
reply stated as under:
“Sub-Missions have not been allocated funds separately. The States/
UTs are given tentative allocation of funds as per the budget in the
beginning of the financial year and accordingly they submit the
proposals as per their requirement which are further examined by
the Department as per the existing guidelines of National Livestock
Mission and funds are then released to States/UTs. During 2015-16
allocation could not be made due to very low allocation and budget
of 2015-16 was used to meet previous year liability. ”
2.9 The State-wise allocations for Centrally Sponsored Schemes of
NLM for the year 2014-15 and 2016-17 are given in Annexure I.
(ii) Sub-Mission on Fodder and Feed Development
2.10 To overcome the shortage of feed and fodder and to improve
the nutritive value, this Department is implementing the Sub-Mission on
Fodder and Feed Development. It is to mention that India with only
2.29% of the land area of the world, is maintaining about 10.71% of the
livestock population of the world.
2.11 The approved outlay and actual allocation of the Sub Mission
on Fodder and Feed Development under the NLM are as follows:
(Rs. in crore)
Approved Outlay Actual Allocation
2014-15 111.00 47.68
2015-16 121.00 16.85
2016-17 137.00 -
2.12 When asked about the details of the physical targets under the
Sub-Mission and how does the Department plan to meet the same, the
Department in its written reply stated as under:
“The physical targets as were proposed under Submission of Feed
and Fodder Development of National Livestock Mission as per the
outlay proposed is given at Annexure II. The actual budget allocations
are very low for achieving these targets. ”

6
2.13 On being questioned about implications of drastically reduced
actual allocation on implementation and physical targets of the Sub-
Mission and steps taken by the Department to minimize the impact due
to this, the Department in its written reply stated as under:
“The achievement of targets have been very low. ”
(iii) Regional Fodder Stations under NLM
2.14 Under the National Livestock Mission there are Eight Regional
Fodder Stations which are located in different agro-climatic zones of
the country with the following objectives:
(a) Introduction of fodder crops in existing crop rotation.
(b) Demonstration of superior package of practices for use of
fertilizers, water and soil management in production of
cultivated fodder crops, studies of these practices with
regard to new and promising species of fodder crops and
grasses.
(c) Evolution of fodder calendars suitable to the region.
(d) Demonstration for improvement and management of village
grazing land and natural grassland and study their proper
utilization in combination with forage crops.
(e) Demonstration of different methods of fodder conservation
and utilization.
(f) Production of high quality foundation seeds of forage crops
for further multiplication and distribution.
(g) Conducting training programmes to educate State Government
officials and dairy farmers.
(h) Organizing farmers ’ fair/field days.
2.15 The Eight Regional Fodder Stations (RFS) are at Hessarghatta,
Bengaluru (Karnataka), Mamidipally, Hyderabad (Telangana), Dhamrod
Surat (Gujarat), Hisar (Haryana), Suratgarh (Rajasthan), Suhama (Jammu
& Kashmir), Alamadhi (Tamil Nadu) and Kalyani (West Bengal).
2.16 These stations have produced 255 tonnes of Fodder seeds,
conducted 8500 demonstrations and organized 135 training programmes
and 135 farmers’ fairs/field days, during this financial year till December,
2015.
2.17 The Stations produce specific foundation seeds for States/UTs.
Despite sustained efforts by the Department the States/UTs are not
interested in purchasing the seeds from the Regional Fodder Stations of

7
the Department, though, the States/UTs purchase and utilize a large
quantity of seeds under their own fodder development programmes.
The Government of India even gives funds for purchase of seeds under
Fodder Seed Procurement/Production & Distribution component of Sub-
Mission on Fodder and Feed Development. The availability of seeds at
the RFS and the quantity purchased by the various States since April,
2016 onwards is placed at Annexure III.
2.18 During the course of briefing on 02.06.2016, the representative
of the Department stated as under:
“…. The Department is working with Indian Grassland and Fodder
Research Institute (IGFRI) on grasslands and with National Institute
of Animal Nutrition and Physiology (NIANP), which is in Bengaluru,
on Rhode Grass, Stylo grass, Napier , Guinea, Synchrous Grass etc.
In this seeds of these are only available with us. Besides, we also
produce seeds which we take from IGFRI and give to the farmers.
Silage making which you have said, is a very old technology, but we
now use plastic bags which do not require digging into the ground.
There are new methodologies which are being worked upon and
Haryana and Punjab are picking this up very fast. ”
2.19 On being questioned about the steps being taken by the
Department to impress upon States and UTs to go for purchasing specific
foundation seeds produced by the Regional Fodder Stations (RFS) and
to curb the wastage of resources thus caused, the Department in its
written reply stated as under:
“This has been ensured in the guidelines itself. Annexure-C-III of
Operational Guidelines of National Livestock Mission mentions it as
given below:
“The State Governments will assess the requirement of fodder
seeds of the State & procure foundation seeds of desired varieties
from the Regional Fodder Stations (RFS) of GOI and thereafter
if seeds are not available with RFS then same can be procured
from Universities, NSC, SFCI and Research Institutes of ICAR.
States will further multiply these seeds through farmers,
Department of Animal Husbandry/Agriculture, SHGs, Government
Corporations, Milk Cooperatives/Federation/Central and State
Agriculture or Veterinary Colleges/Universities and may enter
into a buy back arrangement of fodder seeds produced by these
agencies for preparation of mini-kits for further distribution
among the farmers for fodder production, thereby passing the

8
Central subsidy to the farmers. Only certified seeds will be
distributed to the farmers, alternatively the States may make
an agreement with seed supplying agencies (excluding Private
Entrepreneurs) for supply of fodder seeds inclusive of
transportation cost up to delivery point of mini-kits. ”
2.20 On being enquired as to whether there is any proposal under
consideration to set up more Regional Fodder Stations as Uttar Pradesh
and Bihar do not have such a Station, the Department in its written
reply stated as under:
“No, Uttar Pradesh is covered by RFS Hisar and Bihar is covered by
RFS Kalyani. ”
(iv) Release of funds to the States and UTs and their utilization
2.21 On being asked about the State-wise expenditure incurred by
the States and UTs during implementation of schemes under the Sub-
Mission on Fodder and Feed Development, the Department in its written
reply stated as under:
“The funds provided to States by the Department under the Sub-
Mission on Fodder and Feed Development are given in Annexure IV .
The States provide matching grants as per the sharing pattern fixed
by the Government of India. ”
(v) Funding pattern, assistance and implementation
2.22 State Governments have been given liberty to choose the
development of any or all the sectors mentioned in the four Sub-
Missions of NLM, with a restriction of availability of budget with the
Department. The scheme of a State/UT for all the four Sub-Missions
including Sub-Mission on Fodder and Feed Development is approved by
State Level Executive Committee (SLEC) headed by the Chief Secretary.
The tentative budget outlay to each State/UT is conveyed in the month
of April each year so that they can formulate the plans best suited to
their State/UT . Afterward, the plan is received in the Department and
processed for release of budget to the State/UT .
The components of the scheme under Sub-Mission on Feed and
Fodder Development are enlisted as follows:
Sl.No. Name of the Components
12
1. Forage production from Non-forest wasteland/rangeland/
grassland/non-arable land (ha)

9
2. Forage production from Forest Land (ha)
3. Cultivation of coarse grains and dual purpose crops (ha)
4. Fodder seed production/procurement and distribution (MT)
5. Conservation of fodder through post harvest technologies:
(i) Distribution of hand driven chaff cutters (No.)
(ii) Distribution of power driven chaff cutters (No.)
(iii) Establishment of high capacity Fodder Block Making units (No.)
(iv) Distribution of low capacity, tractor mountable Fodder Block
Making units/Hay Bailing Machine/Reaper/Forage Harvester (No.)
(v) Establishment of Silage making units (No.)
(vi) Establishment of Bypass protein/fat making units (No.)
(vii) Establishment of area specific mineral mixture/feed processing
units (No.)
(viii) Establishment/modernization of Feed testing laboratories (No.)
2.23 The funding of the components has been changed vide
No. 32/PSO/FS 2015 from 28th Oct. 2015 to the sharing ratio of 60:40
between the Centre and the States for those schemes for which the
Central share is higher. However, for those scheme for which the Central
share is 60% or lower the same will continue as per the existing
Guidelines. Further , for the eight North-Eastern and three Himalayan
States this ratio of sharing between Centre and State will be 90:10. It
is clarified that in these eight North Eastern States and three Himalayan
States for those schemes for which the Central Share was 90% or lower
the same will continue as per the existing Guidelines. Similarly for
Union territories, the Centrally Sponsored Schemes will be funded 100
percent by the Central Government except for those schemes for which
the Central share was lower than 100%, the same will continue as per
the existing Guidelines.
2.24 During the course of briefing on 02.06.2016, on the issue of
subsidy on chaff cutters, the Secretary of the Department responded as
under:
“I would like to bring to your notice that there is subsidy on power
driven chaff cutters. 75% on the manual, which is provided as a
share of the Centre, whereas 50% subsidy is on chaff cutters driven
with electricity or diesel..... ”
12

10
2.25 On being asked about the steps taken by the Department to
raise awareness and willingness among farmers to take up cultivation
of coarse grains and dual purpose crops, as is being operated under the
National Food Security Mission and to ensure effective implementation
of this component under the scheme, the Department in its written
reply stated as under:
“The Department of Animal Husbandry is having 8 Regional Fodder
Stations located in different agro-climatic zones of the country
[Srinagar (J&K), Hisar (Haryana), Suratgarh (Rajasthan), Dhamrod
(Gujarat), Kalyani (W.B.), Hessarghatta (Karnataka), Hyderabad (A.P .)
& Chennai (Tamil Nadu)]. These stations conduct field trials of
fodder crops and disseminate information about the schemes of the
Department including cultivation of coarse grains and dual purpose
crops. The guidelines of the schemes are sent to the States/UTs
which further disseminate the information. The guidelines of the
schemes are also available on the website of the Department
(www.dadf.gov.in).”
2.26 On being questioned about the steps being taken by the
Department to ensure that the components covered under the Sub-
Mission are being implemented effectively in the States and UTs, the
Department in is written reply responded as under:
“This (2016-17) being the third year of the implementation of NLM,
the fund allocations have been very low and States/UTs could not
be given sufficient funds or no funds at all for implementation. The
States/UTs are given tentative allocation of funds as per the budget
in the beginning of the financial year and accordingly they submit
the proposals as per their requirement which are further examined
by the Department as per the existing guidelines of National Livestock
Mission and funds are then released to States/UTs. ”
2.27 On being asked about guidelines or criteria adopted by the
Department for releasing of funds to various States/UTs, the Department
in its written reply submitted as under:
“The States/UTs are given tentative allocation of funds as per the
budget in the beginning of the financial year and accordingly they
submit the proposals as per their requirement which are further
examined by the Department as per the existing guidelines of
National Livestock Mission and funds are then released to States/
UTs. The tentative allocations for 2014-15 & 2016-17 are given.
During 2015-16 allocation could not be made due to very low
allocation which were used to meet previous year liability. ”

11
2.28 On being questioned about the specific requirements of the
States/UTs being considered while releasing funds, the Department in
its written reply stated as under:
“The proposals are received from States/UTs as per their
requirement which is examined as per the existing guidelines of
National Livestock Mission for release of funds. ”
2.29 On being asked as to whether the State Level Executive
Committee (SLEC), responsible for approving schemes of a State/UT
under the Sub-Mission, conducts any study or survey to ascertain the
overall impact of the schemes of the Sub-Mission, the Department in
its written reply stated as under:
“This being (2016-17) the third year of the implementation of NLM,
the funds allocations have been very low and States/UTs could not
be given sufficient funds or no funds at all for implementation.
Therefore, the States/UTs could not be asked to ascertain the overall
impact of the schemes of the Sub-Mission. ”
(vi) Pending Utilization Certificates
2.30 During the course of briefing on 02.06.2016, on the issue of
pending utilization certificates, the Secretary of the Department
responded as under:
“….So far as some of the States have not received any allocation
in 2015-16 or no allocation could be made, the main reason was
that utilization certificates have not been received. Here, I would
like to inform that out of the total budget, utilization certificates
worth Rs. 490 crores remain outstanding and an unspent balance of
Rs. 810 crores remain with the States. This amount has been carried
over the past few years. We have arranged for a special meeting
on this matter.
Secondly, where there is no UC and presuming we could have made
efforts, but we could not allocate as the budget for 2014-15 was
Rs. 273 crore. For whatever reasons, it was reduced for 2015-16 to
Rs. 106 crore. The allocation was about Rs. 100 crore lesser and
thus the States could not be allocated. This year, 2016-17, it is
Rs. 292 crore, which is much more than 2014-15. We have shown
the allocations in the chart. We have started a tradition, since the
2nd of May, to have a meeting of the Secretaries of Animal Husbandry,
Fisheries and Dairying from all the States, on every third Wednesday.”

12
2.31 When asked about the mechanism adopted to ensure proper
utilization of allotted funds to the States/UTs and if the Department
had taken up the issue of non-utilization and liquidation of pending
utilization certificates (UCs) with the States/UTs and the response of
the States/UTs on this issue, the Department in its written reply stated
as under:
“The Secretary (ADF) holds monthly review meetings with Principal
Secretary, Animal Husbandry of the States/UTs. Apart from the
other issues, utilization of funds and proper implementation of
schemes remains the main agenda point. Secretary (ADF) held two
rounds of meetings with Principal Secretary, Animal Husbandry of
the States/UTs for utilization of funds and making of Action Plan for
year 2016-17 between 21st -30th June, 2016. Besides matters are
followed by writing D.O. letters, through video conferences and
making phone calls. ”
(vii) Central Sector Scheme of Central Fodder Development Organization
2.32 The BE and RE of Central Sector Scheme of Central Fodder
Development Organization is as under:
(Rs. in crores)
Year BE RE Actual Expenditure
2014-15 13.00 10.09 9.86
2015-16 4.29 8.28 7.63
2.33 The details of the physical targets and achievements under
the scheme are as under:
        P arameters 2014-15 2015-16
Target Achievement Target Achievement
Seed Production (Quintals) 3740 6027.3 3440 3500.77
Fodder Demonstrations (Nos.) 8000 10607 8000 9685
Trainings (Nos.) 200 186 200 200
Farmers Fair (Nos.) 200 188 200 196
(viii) Additional Fodder Development Programme (AFDP)
2.34 Crop resides contribute significantly to fodder availability also.
Any decline in area under various crops results in shortage of fodder

13
causing severe hardship to livestock. Substantial gaps already exist in
availability of green fodder , dry fodder and concentrates. The situation
is likely to worsen in probable rainfall deficit states of Gujarat,
Rajasthan, Karnataka, Madhya Pradesh, Andhra Pradesh, Maharashtra,
etc. Mitigating this situation would require additional area coverage
under fodder and efficient post-harvest management. Accordingly, it is
necessary to imitate special measures for enhancing production of fodder
during drought conditions.
2.35 The AFDP was formulated with the objective of facilitating
adoption of additional interventions for production of fodder for
mitigating adverse impact of drought on livestock. The scheme is
proposed to be implemented in the districts/blocks declared as drought
affected in the country.
2.36 When asked about the details and adoption of special measures
for enhancing production of fodder during drought conditions, the
Department in their written reply stated as under:
“Cabinet Committee on Economic Affairs (CCEA) in the meeting
held on 12th August, 2015 has approved Additional Fodder
Development Programme (AFDP) with an outlay of Rs. 50.00 crore
as a sub-scheme of Rashtriya Krishi Vikas Yojana (RKVY) for mitigating
adverse impact of drought in drought affected districts/blocks of
the country during the year 2015-16 with guidelines in event of
drought declaration by the respective States/Districts/Blocks. As
per prevailing AFDP Guideline norms, the maximum ceiling is
Rs. 3200/ha for individual farmers/Farmers Association/Federation/
Cooperatives and NGOs with restriction of 2 ha per beneficiary. ”
Level of assistance
Farmers in the drought affected districts/blocks are provided
assistance @ Rs. 3200/- per hectare as per cost norms for a maximum
area of two ha per beneficiary for taking up additional production of
fodder in these districts/blocks.
Eligible interventions and rate of assistance:
Sl. Intervention Approximate Rate of
No. Cost assistance
(Rs./Ha) (Rs./Ha)
1. Fodder Production kit comprising 3200 3200
of critical inputs likes seeds of
improved varieties/hybrids, nutrients,
plant protection measures etc.

14
The fund allocation during current year (2016-17) is Rs. 100.00
crores. The proposals are submitted by the States/UTs as per the
requirement for release of funds.
2.37 The beneficiaries may be individual farmers, Farmers Producer
Organizations, Federations of Cooperatives. In the event of declaration
of drought by the State Government, the State Government will
implement this scheme as a special intervention under RKVY .
2.38 The details of State-wise allocation and releases of Additional
Fodder Development Programme for the year 2014-15 and 2015-16 are
given below:
(Rs. in crores)
Name of the 2014-15 2015-16
States/UTs Allocation Release Allocation* Release Area
(Central (Ha.)
Share-60%)
Andhra Pradesh 10.00 10.00 2.4084 1.21 12545
Chhattisgarh 0.96 0.48 5000
Haryana 5.12 2.56
Karnataka 7.68 3.84 12.50** 6.25 79000
Madhya Pradesh 0.97 0.49 5050
Maharashtra 12.50 12.50
Odisha 14.40 14.40 75000
Rajasthan 4.840 2.42 25210
Telangana 12.00 6.00 50000
Uttar Pradesh 4.33 2.17 1.92 10000
Total 39.63 31.07 50.00 31.25 261805
*GoI share of 60% has been approved by Ministry of Finance
**50% GoI share
2.39 The State-wise tentative allocation of AFDP during 2016-17 is
given below:
Sl.No. Name of the State Tentative Allocation
(Rs. in crores)
12 3
1. Andhra Pradesh 4.00
2. Arunachal Pradesh 0.21

15
3. Assam 3.50
4. Bihar 3.10
5. Chhattisgarh 4.32
6. Goa 0.12
7. Gujarat 8.00
8. Haryana 0.60
9. Himachal Pradesh 0.60
10. Jammu & Kashmir 0.60
11. Jharkhand 1.30
12. Karnataka 9.00
13. Kerala 2.00
14. Madhya Pradesh 9.70
15. Maharashtra 18.00
16. Manipur 0.40
17. Meghalaya 0.29
18. Mizoram 0.11
19. Nagaland 0.39
20. Odisha 4.20
21. Punjab 0.64
22. Rajasthan 14.10
23. Sikkim 0.16
24. Tamil Nadu 2.70
25. Telangana 4.00
26. Tripura 0.26
27. Uttar Pradesh 4.40
28. Uttarakhand 0.50
29. West Bengal 2.50
Total 100.00
12 3

16
2.40 The State-wise proposals received and Central Share
recommended under Additional Fodder Development Programme for
the year 2016-17, is given below:
(Rs. in crores)
(Name of the Project Recommended Central share
States/UTs) submitted recommended
Andhra Pradesh 6.67
Chhattisgarh 1.60 1.60 0.89
Karnataka 16.8 16.8 10.08
Madhya Pradesh 16.0 16.0 9.60
Maharashtra 30
Rajasthan 23.488 23.488 14.09
Telangana 10.0 10.0 6.0
Uttar Pradesh 6.60 3.20 1.92
Total 119.158 79.088 47.38

17
CHAPTER III
FEED AND FODDER DEVELOPMENT
(i) Increasing availability of fodder to mitigate the effect of natural
calamities:
3.1 Department of Animal Husbandry, Dairying and Fisheries have
issued Advisory on measures to be taken for increasing availability of
fodder to mitigate the effect of natural calamities on 18.04.2016. The
advisory is also available on the website of the Department. The details
of the said advisory have been stated in the succeeding paragraphs.
3.2 Availability of adequate quantity of feed and fodder for livestock
is essential for improving livestock productivity. Government of India
has released funds in the last financial year under the Centrally Sponsored
Scheme for various components of fodder development both for
production and post harvest management, and also distributed ‘Mini-
kits’ of high yielding fodder varieties to assist the States in their endeavor
to augment the availability of quality feed and fodder. The State
Governments have been requested to firm up their fodder requirement
to avail the benefit of the recently launched National Livestock Mission
(NLM), which has a “Sub-Mission on Fodder Development ”.
3.3 The Sub-Mission on Fodder Development comprehensively
addresses the feed and fodder issues. The Department had issued the
guidelines of the NLM, which is also available on the Department’s web-
site for ready reference. Department of Animal Husbandry is having
8 Regional Fodder Stations, located in different agro-climatic zones of
the country, which are producing foundation seeds. These foundation
seeds would be made available to the State Governments to multiply
and produce certified seeds to be made available to animal rearers and
dairy farmers for fodder production for which funds are available under
NLM. Coarse cereals have been included under National Food Security
Mission (NFSM) from 2014-15, which provides additional funds to all
States except Goa, for production of coarse grain. The States also have
sufficient funds and autonomy to undertake development of feed and
fodder besides other agricultural and allied activities under the Rashtriya
Krishi Vikas Yojna (RKVY). Further , as per the latest guidelines, MNREGA
Scheme funds can also be utilized for improving availability of fodder.

18
3.4 Though the availability of feed and fodder has improved in the
last decade, still there exists a substantial gap between the demand
and availability of fodder in the country, particularly during the lean
periods and at the time of natural calamities including droughts/floods.
Following measures may be taken for ensuring maximum availability of
fodder for sustaining livestock production:
(a) Optimum utilization of land resources
3.5 The number of livestock is growing rapidly, but the grazing
lands are gradually diminishing due to pressure on land for agricultural
and non-agricultural uses. Most of the grazing lands have either been
degraded or encroached upon restricting its availability for grazing.
The area under fodder cultivation is limited to about 4% of the cropping
area, and it has remained static for the last four decades. Owing to the
importance of food crops and other cash crops, it is very unlikely that
the area under fodder cultivation would increase substantially.
3.6 Therefore, the need of the time is to adopt the practice of land
use with multiple crops in a sustainable manner. Adopting Silvi-pastoral
and Horti-pastoral models suitable to the area can help in substantially
enhancing the availability of forage for the livestock. About 29 million
ha. area in the country falls under the category of open forests with
less than 0.4 canopy density which can be developed with fodder trees.
This huge land resource can be utilized for growing fodder , mostly as
an under-storey on the partially shaded ground without affecting standing
trees. Similar development is also possible in the area under horticulture
orchards. While the forest department can undertake Silvi-pastoral
plantations through the Joint Forest Management Committees, the Horti-
pastoral activities can be initiated by incentivizing the farmers who are
owners of the orchards. The land area under fodder crops, permanent
pastures and other grazing lands during 2006-07 to 2013-14 is given at
Annexure V.
(b) Improving production by using high yielding fodder varieties
3.7 Use of quality fodder seeds including dual purpose grains like
bajra, maize and jowar , etc., is essential for improving productivity.
Some of the cultivated fodder species for different regions are indicated
below (list is illustrative):
Type of land Rainfed Irrigated
      1 2 3
(a) Arid Tracts Jowar, Bajra, Moth, Guar , Lobia Lucerne, Berseem, Oats, Maize, Jowar ,
Bajra, Barley

19
(b) Semi-dry Tracts Jowar, Bajra, Moth, Guar , Lobia, Jowar, Maize, Lobia,Teosinte, Lucerne,
Velvet Bean, Field Bean, Guinea Berseem, Sarson, Turnips, Hybrid
grass, Setaria sphacelata, Napier , Oats, Sudan grass, Guinea grass
Rhodes grass
(c) Semi-wet Tracts Dinanath Grass, Jowar, Lobia, Berseem, Oats, Sudan grass, Hybrid
Rice Bean, Velvet Bean, Teosinte, Napier , Guar , Jowar, Maize, Para grass,
Sun hemp Rhodes, Setaria
(d) Wet regions Jowar, Dinanath, Rice Bean, Coix Berseem, Oats, Hybrid Napier, Guinea,
Lucerne, Sarson, Turnips, Setaria, Para
grass, Jowar
(e) Lower Hills Jowar, Lobia, Bajra, V elvet Bean, Maize, Jowar, Oats, Berseem, Lucerne,
Field Bean, Guar Hybrid Napier, Sudan grass, Setaria,
Rhodes
3.8 An illustrative list of trees, shrubs and grasses for development
of pastures, suitable for different regions are enclosed in the
Annexure VI.
3.9 Inadequate availability of quality fodder seeds is a major
constraint. Fodder seed production is not remunerative in many of the
fodder crops. State Governments may take initiatives to encourage
farmers for taking up the production of high yielding varieties by
providing sufficient incentives to farmers for production of fodder seeds
of high yielding varieties by way of assured procurement with a
remunerative price and assistance of inputs. State Governments can
avail the benefit of the component of ‘Fodder Seed Procurement and
Distribution’ under the National Livestock Mission (NLM). Provisions under
NFSM can also be utilized for this purpose.
3.10 Following high yielding fodder varieties may be considered for
seed production programme for improving fodder yield per hectare in
respect of existing area under fodder:
Sl. Name of the Name of varieties
No. fodder crop
12 3
1. Maize African tall, J-1006, Vijay composite.
2. Sorghum SSG 59-3, PC-23, PC-9, PC-6, HC-136, MP Chari, CO-FS-29,
      1 2 3

20
3. Hybrid Napier IGFRI-6, IGFRI-10, CO-4, C-23, Yashwant, NB-21, PNB-84
4 Bajra Giant bajra, L-74, GFB-1, Raj. Bajra chari-2, HC 20, AVKB-19
5. Cowpea BL-1, BL-2, UPC-622, UPC-5286, UPC-4200, EC-4216, NP-3,
6. Guar BG-1, BG-2, BG-3, Bundel-2, HG-365, HG-563, RG-1003
7. Berseem Wardan, Bundel berseem-2, BL-1, BL-10
8. Oats JHO-851, JHO-822, UPO-212, Kent, OS-6,
9. Chinese cabbage -
3.11 Forage crops and their varieties suitable for waterlogged soil
Soil condition Suitable crop
Standing water Almon grass (Echinochloa polyptachya), Para grass, Coix
sps., Iseilema laxum, Chloris gayana, signal grass, karnal
grass, congosignal grass
Shallow water table Teosinte (Zea mexicana), shevary (Sesbania sesban)
Temporary water logged Sasuna (Medicago denticulata), teera (Lathyrus sativus),
soil drained in rabi season chatarimatri (Vicia sativa), oats and Berseem
Riverine flood water logging Sorghum (PC-6), Teosinte (TL-6)
Saline water logged Casuarinas and Populus
3.12 Emphasis be also laid on availability of seeds of short duration
and dual purpose crops, which can be used in emergency of drought/
floods, for getting fodder in short period. States may ensure availability
of such dual purpose quality seeds in consultation with respective
Agricultural Universities.
(c) Adopting suitable crop combinations
3.13 Productivity potential of most lands can be best utilized through
not only crop rotation, but also adopting suitable crop combinations.
An indicative list of possible production under different combinations
of fodder crops is at Annexure VII, which shows higher productivity for
different crops.
3.14 There is a need to disseminate the benefits of using high
yielding quality fodder seeds and combination of crops among the farmers
through front line demonstrations (FLD) and mini-kits. For this purpose,
12 3

21
funds available under RKVY , NFSM for coarse grain and National Livestock
Mission (NLM) can be utilized.
3.15 Cultivation of Azolla may be taken up on a large scale as it
is highly nutritious, rich in protein and ready within a week ’s period
and available every day thereafter. For establishment of Azolla Production
Units, States can avail the benefit for the same, besides utilizing funds
under National Livestock Mission (NLM) and RKVY for the purpose.
(d) Improvement of grasslands/wastelands and other community lands
3.16 This Department is implementing the component of grassland
development in non- forest waste land, range land, grass land, non-
arable land and forest land under NLM with 75% Central grant. States
can avail benefit under the scheme. Besides, other marginal lands like
roadside land, canal side land, land along the railway tracks, etc., may
also be utilized for forage cultivation. The forest department can also
undertake Silvi-pastoral plantations in degraded forest areas through
the Joint Forest Management Committees for use of the communities.
3.17 Wasteland like waterlogged areas, saline soils, sodic soils,
etc., can also be utilized for cultivation of fodder varieties suitable for
such areas.
(e) Conservation and Utilization of Crop Residue/By-products
3.18 Diversion of crop residues for industrial use, etc., may be
restricted/banned.
3.19 The Government of Haryana has imposed a ban on burning of
agricultural refuge in the fields. Other States may also adopt similar
controls to prevent wastage or diversion of dry fodder.
3.20 The State Governments should make it a priority programme
to install chaff cutters and construction of manger in each and every
household keeping cattle, in order to economize the use of available
fodder. This measure can result in saving of upto about ~30% fodder .
3.21 Though, in general, there is scarcity of green fodder in the
country, but still in most places surplus green fodder is available during
the monsoon. A major part of this surplus green fodder goes waste or
is improperly stored, reducing its nutritional value. The farmers may be
trained in the techniques like making silage and be provided assistance
under the Central or State schemes to facilitate silage making at
household level.

22
3.22 The availability of dry fodder can be enhanced by installation
of low capacity Fodder-block making units at each Primary Milk
Cooperative/Panchayat level. Tractor mounted fodder block making units
are now available, which can be operated in the fields to store surplus
fodder/dry fodder. Agricultural refuge can be condensed with or without
mixing it with easily available material like urea, molasses, butter
milk, etc., for easy storage and use during the lean period.
3.23 State Governments may promote use of crop residues and
agricultural wastes/bye-products as animal feed by enriching it through
available technologies like treatment of straw with urea and molasses
along with silage. Green topping of sugarcane and other crops should
be saved for use as fodder.
(f) Development of Fodder Banks
3.24 The Milk Cooperatives and Panchayat are assisted for keeping
surplus fodder for use during crisis periods. Gaushalas are encouraged
and trained to popularize high- yielding fodder and forage crops and
supported for creating fodder banks through silage or fodder blocks and
enrichment of crop residues, etc. States with surplus dry fodder will
indicate the quantity and type of fodder available with them, so that
necessary arrangements for supply to scarcity area can be made.
(g) Strengthening of extension activities and use of technology
3.25 It has been seen that very less emphasis is given on extension
activities for feed and fodder development. States may strengthen
extension activities by associating KVKs, which must play a lead role in
educating the farmers in maximizing fodder output with limited land
and ensuring quality of feed. Progressive livestock farmers may be
identified for training through KVKs/SAUs for growing improved varieties
of fodder. The progressive farmers can in turn train other farmers.
3.26 Use of leguminous crops with forage varieties may be
popularized through frontline demonstrations through the KVKs. The
Regional Fodder Stations of the Government of India have the latest
varieties and recommended crop mixtures for the region.
(h) Convergence of Fodder schemes with MGNREGA Scheme
3.27 State Governments have been requested earlier to dovetail
the fodder and feed development programmes with the MGNREGA. The
guidelines of MGNREGA scheme provide for location-specific grassland
development for ensuring adequate fodder supply. The guidelines for

23
the new/additional works permitted under MNREGA scheme also
prescribe various livestock related works, including construction of fodder
trough (manger) and Azolla units. It is suggested that all the beneficiaries
who receive or have received the chaff cutters under any of the Govt.
schemes must be provided assistance under MNREGA for construction of
fodder trough and Azolla.
3.28 There is a need of low cost transportation of fodder from
fodder Surplus States/Regions to fodder Deficit States/Regions. In case
of natural calamity i.e. Drought or Flood Department immediately
identifies fodder surplus States and deficit States. Fodder deficit States
will enter into an agreement with fodder surplus States for buying the
fodder. In the surplus States nearest Rail Heads are identified were
fodder can be stacked for transportation. Similarly Rail Heads of deficit
States till where the fodder can be transported are identified. Railway
Authorities are roped in to transport the fodder for mitigating the
effects of the calamity. This system can even be continued for normal
times if the States so desired. This will reduce scarcity in some areas
and earn revenue for others.
3.29 During the course of oral evidence on 23.08.2016, the Secretary
of the Department stated as under:—
“...We are formulating a National Steering Group which will, for
the first time, collaborate with scientists. ICAR is with us. This
effort was made for the first time. Director NIANP has been
designated as Chairman of the Technical Committee. You have
pointed out wastage of potatoes and tomatoes, how to increase the
area under cost crop. When there is no profitable farming till then
nothing will happen even if we give lakhs of sermon, nothing will
happen. The farmers are aware whether they have to cultivate
wheat or ragi…. ”
3.30 When asked about the plan of the Department to tackle the
issue arising due to use of dwarf varieties of crops which has drastically
reduced the amount of fodder derived from it, the Department in its
written reply stated as under:—
“The different high yielding fodder varieties and forage grasses,
legumes, shrubs and trees for grassland/grazing land improvement
on agro-ecological basis, cover the requirement of fodder and even
are more nutritious. ”
3.31 On being asked whether the Department has undertaken
measures other than establishment of Azolla Production Units, to enable

24
States/UTs to take up cultivation of Azolla, the Department in its
written reply stated as under:—
“Azolla production units produce Azolla (Azolla grows in water)
which is used as Animal feed. ”
3.32 On being asked whether the Department has explored the
usage of Spirulina as a versatile alternative to fodder , the Department
in its written reply stated as under:—
“Spirulina (Althrospira sp.) is an edible microalgae and a highly
nutritious potential feed resource for many animal species.
Experiments conducted so far using dietary Spirulina in different
animals have shown improvements in productivity, health and product
quality. It contains all essential amino acids, vitamins and minerals.
It is also a rich source of carotenoids and fatty acids, especially y-
linolenic acid (GLA). However , it is a new area and further research
with Spirulina in livestock diets is required to evaluate its utility as
animal feed. ”
3.33 When asked about the planning of the Department in the
direction of discovering and developing plant varieties as alternatives
to fodder , the Department in its written reply stated as under:—
“The different high yielding fodder varieties of crops and list of
forage grasses, legumes, shrubs and trees for grasslands/grazing
land improvement on agro-ecological basis are given at Annexure
VIII and Annexure VI respectively. ”
3.34 On being asked about the States that have started using Hybrid
Napier , which has emerged as a popular animal fodder in many States
and whether the same has been tested for its nutritive value and its
effect, the Department in its written reply stated as under:—
“The funds provided by the Department under the component
“Fodder Seed Procurement, Production and Distribution” are utilized
by the States/UTs for growing major high yielding fodder varieties
including Hybrid Napier. Regional Fodder Stations are also
popularizing Hybrid Napier through regular demonstrations. ”
3.35 Regarding the extent of usage of short duration dual purpose
quality seeds, steps being taken to encourage States/UTs and farming
communities to adopt suitable crop combinations along with using high
yielding quality fodder seeds, steps taken to address unwanted changes
in the farming pattern, promoting cultivation of coarse grains like Jowar,

25
Bajra, Ragi etc. and finding alternatives to coarse grains as dry fodder ,
the Department in its written reply stated as under:—
“The cropped area under fodder is given in the Annexure IX. The
fodder crops grown are of high yielding fodder varieties. Major high
yielding fodder varieties of seeds developed by ICAR are being used
by the States/UTs regularly. It is ensured that the funds provided
by the Department under the component “Fodder Seed Procurement,
Production and Distribution ” are utilized by the States/UTs for
growing major high yielding fodder varieties. The list of such verities
is given at Annexure VIII. ”
3.36 When asked about its contemplation on the issue of burning
of crop residues widely practiced among farmers in villages and steps
taken to curb such practices and educate farmers in this regard, the
Department in its written reply stated as under:—
“Advisories are issued by the Department from time to time. The
latest advisory was issued on 18.04.2016 and is enclosed at Annexure
F . Besides the following steps have been taken:—
(1) Discouraging of Burning of straws; (2) Crop residue
Management through Bailing, fodder block making, Chaffing,
Urea Treatment & Total Mixed Ration (TMR); and (3) Hay and
silage making as well. ”
3.37 On being asked about the details of provisions and schemes
being adopted by the States/UTs to train farmers in techniques of
silage making at the household level, measures being undertaken by
the Department to promote maximum conservation of crop residue and
its development as animal feed and fodder , to encourage farming of
perennial fodder grass, to prevent burning of crop residues and instead
diverting these to drought prone areas to be used as fodder, the
Department in its written reply furnished as under:—
“Under the component “Establishment of silage making Units ” of
Sub Mission on Feed and Fodder Development funds are provided to
farmers through State/UTs as follows:—
• For a unit of 50 MT capacity 75% of the cost, or Rs. 75,000/
- whichever is minimum towards civil work & in additional
grant will be provided towards cost of the three HP motor
chaff cutter as per the norms given under the component of
Distribution of Power Driven Chaff Cutter.

26
• For a unit of 25 MT capacity 75% of the cost, or Rs. 55,000/
- whichever is minimum towards civil work & in additional
grant will be provided towards cost of the two HP motor
chaff cutter as per the norms given under the component of
Distribution of Power Driven Chaff Cutter.
• For a unit of 10 MT capacity 75% of the cost, or Rs. 40,000/
- whichever is minimum towards civil work & in additional
grant will be provided towards cost of the one HP motor
chaff cutter as per the norms given under the component of
Distribution of Power Driven Chaff Cutter.
The above pattern is subject to general sharing of funds between
Centre and States/UTs. ”
3.38 During the course of briefing on 02.06.2016, when asked about
using Railway and Defence Lands for cultivation of grasses, the Secretary
and Joint Secretary of the Department responded as under:—
“This Department has been trying since 2014-15. The Hon ’ble Prime
Minister in 2014 also talked of fodder purchase and directed using
Defence and Railway land. At a high level meeting it was decided
that fodder cropping or development works could not be done on
these lands… Defence and Rail lands have been prohibited for such
uses from a very high level. ”
3.39 On being asked about the steps taken by the Department to
encourage States/UTs to utilize wastelands and vacant lands allocated
to railways, defence etc. to grow feed and fodder , the Department in
its written reply submitted as under:—
“A letter was written to Chairman, Railway Board regarding allowing
for growing of grass to be used as fodder for livestock feeding along
the sides of Railway tracks. They have replied that it is not feasible
due to safety of train operations. Letters have been written to
Ministry of Defence and Ministry of Urban Development regarding
suggesting alternative spots/unused lands which could be utilized
for cultivating animal fodder. ”
3.40 When asked about the progress made in setting up fodder
banks and the Department ’s plans to set up fodder depots in villages
to balance the demand and supply of fodder , the Department in its
written reply stated as under:—
“It is submitted that earlier this Department was implementing the
component of establishment of fodder banks, but it was dropped
from the Central scheme on the recommendations of Planning

27
Commission in the year 2005. The main reason behind this
recommendation was that the States were not coming forward to
implement the component. A major constraint in sustaining fodder
banks is the limited shelf-life of stored fodder , coupled with uncertain
and fluctuating demands. Higher transportation costs also make the
price of stored fodder inhibitory, even if densified fodder blocks
are transported. Generally, in a normal rainfall year , sufficient fodder
is available in the form of green fodder and crop residues at much
cheaper rates. This is the reason as to why the component of
fodder block making units is not being utilized by entrepreneurs, as
they are never sure of the demands and storing fodder beyond few
months may reduce the quality of fodder to the extent of rendering
it unfit for consumption by livestock. ”
3.41 The Department provided no specific reply on being asked
about the practices included under extension activities and if the
Department had succeeded in encouraging farmers to take up such
activities, State-wise details of which were sought by the Committee.
3.42 During the course of briefing on 02.06.2016, on the issue of
transporting fodder from surplus to deficient areas, the Secretary of
the Department responded as under:—
“Sir , if I do not say the truth, thus it will be wrong. Probably there
was a demand from the State in the name of Fodder trains, as you
might have read in the newspaper. Where fodder is available like
Haryana, Punjab as told by Hon’ble Members that should be utilized.
Particularly during this drought, we have made arrangement. We
have also discussed with the Railway Chairman that if there is any
need then you may arrange wagon train and cargo. ”
3.43 On being asked by the Committee about the States that have
surplus production and stock of fodder and the States that have a
shortage and if the Department has collected latest data for availability
of feed and fodder at the national level, the Department in its written
reply stated as under:—
“No detailed studies have been done. Whenever a report is asked
about the deficiency of fodder States/UTs mention self sufficiency.
Video Conferencing held during May 2016 indicated that all States/
UTs are self sufficient in fodder. ”
3.44 On being asked about the measures taken to ensure that
States and UTs implement the idea of Silvi-pastoral plantations and

28
Horti-pastoral activities for increasing availability of fodder, the
Department in its written reply stated as under:—
“Advisories are issued by the Department from time to time. The
latest advisory was issued on 18.04.2016 .... ”
(ii) Fodder shortage and its import
3.45 On being asked about the possibility of importing fodder from
neighbouring or African countries to meet the acute shortage of fodder,
the Department, in its written reply, negated any such possibility.
(iii) Utilization of barren lands for multi-perennial fodder crops
3.46 On being questioned about the incentives to farmers for utilizing
empty spaces and barren lands across the country for multi-perennial
fodder crops, the Department in its written reply stated as under:—
“Under the component “Fodder production from Non-forest
wasteland/rangeland/grassland/non-arable land” of Sub-Mission on
Feed and Fodder Development, assistance is provided to the farmers
through States/UTs for developing these areas for growing fodder .”
(iv) Research, Quality Production and Efficient Utilization of Fodder
3.47 During the course of oral evidence on 23.08.2016, when
enquired by the Committee about the processing of jackfruit as fodder ,
the Director , NIANP , responded as under:—
“Sir, the seeds of jackfruit are extracted in Kerala and the remaining
part is used as silage. ”
3.48 On being asked about the steps being taken to reduce vegetable
and fruit wastages for its utilization as fodder , the Department in its
written reply stated as under:—
“Excess vegetables and fruits wastes like apple, tomato, potato,
pineapple, carrots etc. are used as feed resources in many places.
The processing techniques/models are also available to convert or
preserve them as good feed resources. ICAR-NAINP developed
‘Pineapple fruit residue storage based total mixed ration for livestock
feeding’ and is promoting the technology. ”
3.49 During the course of briefing on 02.06.2016, on being asked
about the collaboration of the Department with ICAR, the Secretary of
the Department responded as under:—
“…..Coordination with ICAR is an important issue. Yesterday only,
we talked to ICAR Secretary Dr. Mahapatra that we will hold special

29
sitting on coming 10th June. There are 14 institutes and ICAR labs
related to Animal Husbandry. We have summoned the Heads of
each of these. We and Secretary ICAR will jointly conduct this
meeting and seek the work being done for Animal Husbandry, be it
development of fodder or development of Animal Husbandry and as
to how it would be taking research from lab to land. We have
thought about this. ”
3.50 When the Committee asked about the plans of the Department
to involve and consult ICAR in helping research reach from lab to land
and the achievements of the Department in this direction, the
Department, in its written reply, apprised the Committee as under:—
“Regular consultation meetings are held by the Department with
ICAR Institutes like Indian Grassland Fodder Research Institute
(IGFRI), National Institute of Animal Nutrition and Physiology (NIANP),
etc. New varieties developed by ICAR are conveyed to States/UTs
by the Department and also directly by ICAR. ”
3.51 When asked by the Committee about the plan of the Department
to promote utilization of abundant grasses such as ‘Kaas’ grown in
water logged areas of India and with the help of ICAR develop these
grasses into nutritious and quality fodder for animals, the Department
in its written reply stated as under:—
“Presently, it is not possible to use ‘Kaas’ as fodder for animals. ”
3.52 When the Committee enquired about the plan of the
Department to use technology through Central Government schemes
such as Digital India to empower farmers engaging in production of
fodder crops and to provide them with alternate marketing channels
for sale of fodder and if the Department had a warning mechanism for
warning livestock owners of impending adversities of weather so as to
alert them to store fodder for use during those times, the Department,
in its written reply stated as under:—
“Government has launched www.mkisan.gov.in and
www.farmer .gov.in for disseminating information about all aspects
of farming and animal husbandry. Kisan SMS portal has also been
launched to provide SMS to the farmers using this portal. Advisories
related to fodder are also sent through this portal which are also
in the regional languages. ”
(v) Demand and availability of Fodder
3.53 On being asked if the NABCONS had conducted any recent
study post 2007 to assess the gap between demand and availability of

30
different types of fodder available in the country, the Department in
its written reply furnished as under:
“The estimates regarding feed and fodder in India by NIANP are as
below:
(Dry matter in million tonnes)
Type of Parameters 2012 2015 2020 2025
Fodder
Dry Fodder Requirement 480 491 530 550
Availability 375 387 408 433
Deficit (%) -22 -21 -23 -23
Green Fodder Requirement 820 840 880 1000
Availability 614 619 596 600
Deficit (%) -25 -26 -32 -40
Concentrate Requirement 82 87 96 105
Availability 55 58 61 65
Deficit (%) -33 -34 -36 -38
3.54 On being questioned about the steps taken to overcome the
shortage of seeds of high yielding fodder varieties of cultivated crops,
the Department in its written reply submitted as under:
“Major high yielding fodder varieties of seeds developed by ICAR
are being used by the States/UTs regularly. It is ensured that the
funds provided by the Department under the component “Fodder
Seed Procurement, Production and Distribution ” are utilized by the
States/UTs for growing major high yielding fodder varieties. Private
companies are also growing and importing fodder seeds and selling
in the market. ”
3.55 When asked about measures adopted to address the concern
of improvement of grasslands and problems arising out of the lack of
this as this not only affects the availability of fodder but also the
productivity of the livestock feeding on these, the Department in its
written reply stated as follows:
“Under the component ‘Fodder production from Non-forest
wasteland/rangeland/grassland/non-arable land’ of the Sub-Mission
of Feed and Fodder Development assistance is provided to the

31
farmers through States/UTs for developing these areas for growing
fodder.”
3.56 On being asked whether the Department has conducted any
detailed State-wise study about the extent to which the newly developed
high yielding fodder varieties/crops have helped in bridging the gap
between demand and availability of feed and fodder , the Department
in its written reply stated as under:
“No detailed studies have been conducted. However , answer to the
question of para 3.54 shows an improvement in the situation. ”
3.57 When asked if the Department has engaged experts to work
on feed and fodder development schemes being implemented in States
and UTs, the Department in its written reply stated as under:
“No. Budgetary allocations are not given. ”
3.58 On being questioned about the State-wise details of measures
taken by the Department to improve the already diminishing grazing
lands available for livestock, the Department in its written reply stated
as under:
“Under the component ‘Fodder production from Non-forest
wasteland/rangeland/grassland/non-arable land’ of the Sub-Mission
of Feed and Fodder Development assistance is provided to the
farmers through States/UTs for developing these areas for growing
fodder.”
3.59 During the course of oral evidence on 23.08.2016, the Secretary
of the Department stated as under:
“..I would like to do one practical about Gochar land and is i told
for that we and our Department are making continuous efforts. Milk
cooperatives have a huge role to play, be it land cultivation of
Gochar or the idea of professional forward cultivation on the
farmlands owned by a farmer. One such example is that of the
Dharmad Gram Sabha near Anand in Gujarat, where the Panchayat
is taking up this practice on a land area of 60 hectares. Presently,
the Chief of Kerala Milk Union shared that the owner of 5 ha of
farmland is given an assistance of Rs. 1,00,000/- through the
Cooperative Society. The farmer is provided with means and the
fodder is bought back from him. Through this, farmers providing
milk to the dairy can obtain fodder at a good price. We are looking
forward to such experiments in order to make fodder a profitable
enterprise. We have thought like that. We are collaborating with
MGNREGA, Panchayat Raj and NRLM for the same. ”

32
3.60 On being asked about the achievements of the Department as
a result of the commissioned study conducted for the demand and
availability of various types of fodder , the Department in its written
reply stated as under:
“No such study has been conducted so far. ”
(vi) Cattle breeds, their health and nutrition security
3.61 When questioned about the measures taken by the Department
to bring about fodder development to feed the upcoming improved
breeds of livestock, to ensure nutrition security in the livestock
population, for developing feed and fodder which is palatable to animals
as well as an adequate source of nutrition for them and if the Department
has ventured in the direction of innovating ways of collaborating with
veterinary graduates, agri-business dealers, agri-clinics etc. in order to
support hybrids and foreign breeds of animals being introduced to the
local climate, the Department in its written reply submitted as follows:
“Department of Animal Husbandry, Dairying and Fisheries (DAHDF),
Government of India has taken necessary steps to increase fodder
production in various parts of the country by providing financial
assistance to the States/UTs under Centrally Sponsored National
Livestock Mission with a Sub-Mission on Feed and Fodder
Development. The detailed components of the Sub-Mission are as
below:
Sl.No. Name of the Components
1. Fodder Production from Non-forest wasteland/rangeland/
grassland/non-arable land
2. Fodder production from Forest land
3. Fodder Seed Procurement/Production & Distribution
4. Introduction of Hand Driven Chaff-Cutter
5. Introduction of Power Driven Chaff-Cutter
6. Distribution of low capacity, tractor mountable Fodder Block
Making units, hay baling machines/reapers/forage harvesters
7. Establishment of silage making Units
8. Establishment of by-pass protein production units
9. Establishment of Area Specific Mineral Mixture/Feed
Pelleting/Feed Manufacturing Unit.
10. Establishment/modernization of Feed Testing Laboratories”

33
3.62 During the course of briefing on 02.06.2016, on being asked
about the disaster management plans for livestock, the representative
of the Department responded as under:
“...The Department has a disaster management plan with the NDMA
and it is notified as well as available on our website.... ”
3.63 On being asked about the disaster management plans for
livestock in order to shield them from disasters, the Department in its
written reply responded as under:
“Department has already formulated disaster management plan for
livestock population to shield them from disasters. ”
3.64 When asked about the measures taken by the Department to
encourage traditional Indian practice of free range feeding of animals
which has been proven to increase nutritive value of animal produce,
the Department in its written reply stated as under:
“Under the component “Fodder production from Non-forest
wasteland/rangeland/grassland/non-arable land” of the Sub-Mission
of Feed and Fodder Development, assistance is provided to the
farmers through States/UTs for developing these areas for growing
fodder. Development of grasslands will encourage the traditional
Indian practice of free range feeding of animals. ”
3.65 In the light of stagnation of the cropping area of fodder in the
country, the Committee enquired if the Department has taken any
steps to enhance the nutritive value of feed and fodder to augment the
productivity of the livestock, to which the Department, in its written
reply stated as under:
“Nutritive value may be broadly defined as the ability of a feed to
provide the nutrients required by an animal for maintenance, growth
and reproduction. It is a function of both voluntary feed intake (FI)
and the efficiency of extraction of nutrients from the feed
(digestibility, D). The following steps have been taken to augment
the productivity of the livestock:
1. Discouraging of Burning of straws.
2. Crop residue Management through Bailing, Chaffing, Urea
Treatment & Total Mixed Ration (TMR)
3. Strengthening of Fodder seed Chain
4. Better utilization of Common Property Resources (CPR)
5. Hay and silage as well. ”

34
3.66 On being asked if the Department has conducted any study
to assess the nutritive value of commonly available feed and fodder
in the country, the Department in its written reply stated as under:
“Department has not conducted any study to assess the nutritive
value of commonly available feed and fodder in the country. However,
ICAR and Agriculture Universities sponsor such studies which are
available in their publications. ”
(vii) Gender Perspective in Animal Husbandry
3.67 The National Agriculture policy formulated in the year 2000,
accorded high priority to recognition and mainstreaming of women ’s
role in agriculture and highlighted incorporation of ‘Gender Issues ’ in
the agriculture development Agenda. Within overall mandate, goals
and objective, DAHDF places special emphasis on women participation
and contribution in the Animal Husbandry, Dairying and Fisheries.

35
PART II
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS
Need for increasing availability of Feed and Fodder
1. The Committee note that availability of adequate quality of
feed and fodder for livestock is essential for improving livestock
productivity. However, the Committee are constrained to note that
there is substantial shortage of feed and fodder in the country. As
per the estimates of National Institute of Animal Nutrition and
Physiology (NIANP), the deficit in the requirement and availability of
Dry Fodder, Green Fodder and Concentrates during 2015 was to the
extent of 21 MT, 26 MT and 34 MT which will increase further to
23 MT, 40 MT and 38 MT respectively by the year 2025. This shortage
is due to increasing pressure on land for growing food grains, oil
seeds and pulses and inadequate attention being given to the
production of fodder crops. Further, on account of diversified use of
agricultural residues, the grazing lands are gradually diminishing.
The area under fodder cultivation is also limited. Majority of the
grazing lands have either been degraded or encroached upon
restricting their availability for livestock grazing. The area under
fodder cultivation is only about 4% of the cropping area, and it has
remained static for a long period of time. According to the
Department, owing to the importance of food crops and other cash
crops, it is very unlikely that the area under fodder cultivation
would increase substantially. While the availability of feed and fodder
has improved in the last decade, the Committee note that still a lot
is required to be done to bridge the gap between the demand and
availability of fodder in the country, particularly during the lean
periods and crisis situations. Needless to say, livestock is a major
source of livelihood for a majority of the rural population in the
country. The contribution of livestock to the household income of
the farmers can not be ignored. It generate sustainable livelihood
for small and marginal farmers in the country. Thus, livestock is an
important and integral part of Indian agriculture and rural economy.
However, livestock husbandry can not be sustained with out
addressing the development of feed and fodder resources. It is,
therefore, imperative that forage production and its quality may be
augmented to improve productivity of livestock. In this context, the
Committee note that the Government has launched “Sub Mission on
Fodder and Feed Development “under the National Stock Mission

36
from 2014-15 to comprehensively address the feed and fodder issue.
The Government has also issued advisory on measures to be taken
for increasing availability of fodder to mitigate the effect of natural
calamities. However, the Committee feel that the Department being
the nodal agency need to make concerted and coordinated efforts
ensuring that the shortage of feed and fodder in the country is
addressed effectively and comprehensively. The Committee,
therefore, would like the Department to take up the issue with all
its seriousness and coordinate with all stakeholders on the issue.
The Committee would also like to be apprised of the initiatives
undertaken by the Government in this regard and the progress made
therein.
Allocation of Funds
2. The Committee note that States have been given liberty to
choose the development of any or all the four Sub Missions under
the National Livestock Mission (NLM) with a restriction of availability
of budget with the Department. The tentative budget outlay to each
State/UT is conveyed in the month of April each year so that they
can formulate the plans best suited to their State/UT. Afterword, the
plan is received in the Department and processed for release of
budget to the State/UT. The Committee are of the opinion that the
practice of tentative allocation of funds to States should be done
away with and instead need based funds as per the requirement of
the States be allocated by the Department. However, the Committee
are anguished to note that funds being allocated to the Sub Missions
under NLM in the States were woefully inadequate during the years
2014-15 and 2015-16. This has resulted in meager allocation to the
Sub-Missions in 2014-15, with the situation worsening in the year
2015-16 when no separate allocations to the Sub-Missions could be
made due to very less funds and the budget of 2015-16 was used to
meet liabilities of the previous year. Also, funds released under the
Sub Mission on Fodder and Feed Development in the years 2014-15
and 2015-16 are 47.63 crores and 16.86 crores, respectively. Needless
to say, insufficient funds have severely hampered the implementation
of physical and financial targets of the Sub Mission on Fodder and
Feed Development. The Department has also accepted the fact that
the implementation of the Sub-Mission has been hampered by the
less allocation of funds as against the approved outlay. According to
the Department, owing to very low allocations of funds for NLM,
overall impact of the schemes of Sub-Mission could not be ascertained
from the States/UTs as the States/UTs could not given sufficient
funds or no funds at all for implementation. In the absence of such
study, the Committee feel that the Department would not get the
opportunity to undertake corrective interventions to reorient its

37
schemes/Sub Missions for the benefit of intended beneficiaries.
Deprecating this sordid state of affairs, the Committee, therefore,
recommend that the Department should take up this issue with the
Ministry of Finance and impress upon them to provide adequate
funds so that schemes/Sub Missions of the National Livestock Mission,
particularly the Sub Mission on Fodder and Feed Development, do
not suffer for want of funds.
3. During the course of evidence, the Secretary of the
Department informed the Committee that a National Perspective
Plan is being formulated which would also be circulated to the
States asking them to furnish integrated Plan so that funds could be
allocated accordingly with in the limited resources of the Central
Government. The Committee, therefore, recommend that the
formulation of National Perspective Plan as proposed by the
Government be expedited in consultation with all States/UTs so that
funds could be allocated to them as per their demand for effective
implementation of schemes/Sub-Missions undertaken by them. The
Committee would like to be apprised of the actions taken and
progress made by the Department in this regard.
Optimum Utilisation of Land Resources for Fodder Development
4. The Committee note that the number of livestock is growing
rapidly but the grazing lands are gradually diminishing due to pressure
on land for agricultural and non-agricultural uses. According to the
Department, the need of the time is to adopt the practice of
land use with multiple crops in a sustainable manner. Adopting
Silvi-pastoral and Horti-pastoral models suitable to the area can help
in substantially enhancing the availability of forage for the livestock.
About 29 million ha. area in the country falls under the category
of open forests with less than 0.4 canopy density which can be
developed with fodder trees. This huge land resource can be utilized
for growing fodder, mostly as an under-storey on the partially shaded
ground without affecting standing trees. Similar development is also
possible in the area under horticulture orchards. While the forest
department can undertake Silvi-pastoral plantations through the
Joint Forest Management Committees, the Horti-pastoral activities
can be initiated by incentivizing the farmers who are owners of the
orchards. While the Department has issued advisory to the States in
this regard, the Committee would like the Department to pursue its
advisory and coordinate with all stakeholders including State
Governments to utilize huge land resources which fall under the
category of open forests and area under horticulture orchards for

38
growing fodder. Barren land or non-forest wasteland or non-arable
land across the country should also be utilized for multi-perennial
fodder crops for which adequate incentives should be given to the
farmers. In this context, the Committee strongly feel that the
unutilised land of Railways and Defence should also be utilised for
cultivation of fodder crops. It was pointed out by the Committee
that during British regime, unutilized land along both sides of the
railway lines were being used either for grazing or for production
of fodder. According to the Department, the matter was taken up
at the highest level and after lot of deliberations over the issue, it
was decided that the unutilised land of Railways and Defence could
not be utilised for development of fodder. Nevertheless, the
Committee still feel that the issue needs to be re-looked in to by
all the stakeholders as a large chunk of Railways and Defence land
is being encroached upon by unscrupulous elements. The Committee
would like to apprised of the action taken by the Department in this
regard.
Utilisation of Alloted Funds by the States
5. According to the Department, monthly review meetings with
Principal Secretary, Animal Husbandry of the States/UTs are held by
the Secretary (ADF) in which apart from other issues, utilization of
funds and proper implementation of schemes remain the main agenda
point. Besides matters are followed by writing DO letters, through
video conferences and making phone calls. During the course of
evidence also, the Secretary of the Department informed the
Committee that the Department holds review meetings with the
States/UTs regularly, in order to ensure proper and optimum
utilization of allocated funds. It was also informed to the Committee
during the course of evidence that utilization certificates worth Rs.
490 crores remain outstanding and an unspent balance of Rs. 810
cores remain with the States and therefore, a special meeting on
this issue has been called by the Department. While expressing its
anguish over the issue of outstanding Utilisation Certificates (UCs)
and unspent balance with the States, the Committee pointed out
that this issue was raised by them several times in the past. However,
the Committee regret to note that the Department does not appear
to bother to find out the constraints which hampers utilization of
funds by the States. The Committee also feel that there is no
effective mechanism in place to coordinate with the States at district
or block level and to monitor the pace of utilization of funds by the
States at the ground level. In this context, the Committee also feel
that one of the reasons for non-utilisation of funds may be
formulation of Plan or Mission or Sub Mission by the Central
Government without consulting the State Governments as a result

39
of which the States are reluctant to cooperate with the Centre for
timely utilisation of funds for the purpose. The Committee, therefore,
recommend that the Department may find out the constraints which
hamper timely utilization of funds and submission of UCs therefor
by the States. The Committee also recommend that a mechanism
may be put in place in coordination with State Governments to
monitor the pace of utilization of funds at the ground level. The
Committee would like to be apprised of the action taken by the
Department in this regard.
Funding of the Components of Sub-mission on Feed and Fodder
Development
6. The Committee note that the Department has taken necessary
steps to increase fodder production in various part of the country by
providing financial assistance to the States/UTs under Centrally
sponsored National Livestock Mission with a Sub Mission on Feed and
Fodder Development. The Committee also note that from 28th Oct.,
2015, the funding of the components has been changed to the sharing
ratio of 60:40 between the Centre and the States for those schemes
for which the Central share is higher. However, for those scheme for
which the Central share is 60% or lower the same will continue as
per the existing Guidelines. Further, for the eight North-Eastern and
three Himalayan States this ratio of sharing between Central and
State will be 90:10. It is clarified that in these eight North Eastern
States and three Himalayan States for those schemes for which the
Central Share was 90% or lower the same will continue as per the
existing Guidelines. Similarly for Union territories, the Centrally
Sponsored Schemes will be funded 100 per cent by the Central
Government except for those schemes for which the Central share
was lower than 100%, the same will continue as per the existing
Guidelines. During the evidence, the Secretary of the Department
informed the Committee that subsidy is granted on manual as well
as on power driven chaff cutters. While 75% subsidy is being granted
on manual driven chaff cutter, the same is 50% on power driven
chaff cutter. There is no doubt that power driven chaff cutter has
given the farmers the convenience to chop fodder for livestock with
ease and has also saved their time and the labour involved in the
process, particularly those women fold who are involved therein.
The time saved by using power driven chaff cutter could be utilised
by them for their other activities. However, the Committee still feel
that there are certain things in the processing of chopping of fodder
which could not be done without the help of manpower. The
Committee, therefore, recommend that power driven chaff cutter

40
may also be given subsidy to the extent of 75% as being given on
manual driven chaff cutter as also assured by the Secretary of the
Department on the issue.
Utilisation of Crop Residues
7. The Committee note that the crop residues are being wasted
either by diverting it for industrial use or by burning agricultural
refuge in the fields itself causing environmental pollution. One of
the reasons for such wastage is attributed to the fact that the farmers
have very little time available between two crops. Further, non-
availability of labour or high cost of labour, lack of space, hazards
of fire and damage caused by rains are other factors which influence
farmers to dispose off their crop residues/agricultural wastes as early
as possible and they have no interest to process and store the crop
residues till completion of sowing of their next crop. The Committee
feel that to avoid such practices, it would be necessary that crop
residues and agricultural wastes are promoted as animal feed by
improving its nutritional value and its palatability through available
techniques like treatment of straw with urea and molasses along
with silage. Issue of advisory by the Department to the States on the
issue is not enough unless opportunities related to production and
efficient use of crop residues/by-products is addressed by the
Department in coordination with the State Governments for improving
the forage resources in the country. The Department being the nodal
agency can not ignore its responsibility on the issue. The Committee,
therefore, recommend that wastage of crop residues/agricultural
wastes by way of burning and diverting its uses for industrial purposed
may be checked on priority basis and the same may be converted
and stored as forage for its supply to the regions/areas having scarcity
of fodder. The Committee would like to be apprised of the initiatives
undertaken by the Department in this regard.
Fruits and Vegetables Wastes as Livestock Feed
8. A significant percentage of fruits and vegetables like apple,
tomato, potato, pineapple, carrots etc. go as waste due to
non-availability of market. Further, processing of fruits and vegetables
and its packing, distribution and consumption also generate a huge
quantity of fruit and vegetable wastes. The huge quantity of fruit
and vegetable wastes can be effectively utilized as livestock feed,
without effecting the palatability, nutrient utilization, health or
performance of livestock. The effective and efficient utilization of
fruit and vegetable wastes will reduce the cost of animal feeding

41
thereby increasing farmers ’ profits and help in waste management
and reduction of environmental pollution. For this purpose, suitable
methods need to be adopted to conserve such resources so that
these can be fed to the livestock throughout the year or specifically
during the lean period of green fodder production. It was informed
to the Committee that excess vegetable and fruits wastes like apple,
tomato, potato, pineapple, carrots etc. are used as feed resources
in many places. The processing techniques/models are also available
to convert or preserve them as good feed resources. In view of the
foregoing, the Committee, therefore, recommend that conversion of
fruit and vegetable wastes as an alternate of fodder resources may
be vigorously promoted by the Department in coordination with all
stakeholders including State Governments. The Committee also
recommend that awareness may also be created amongst the farmers
and those involved in the processing of fruits and vegetables. Further,
technologies involved for producing quality forage from fruit and
vegetable wastes may also be demystified to them.
Development of High Yielding Forage-rich Food Crops
9. The Committee note that major high yielding fodder varieties
of seeds developed by ICAR are being used by the States/UTs regularly.
It is also ensured that the funds provided by the Department under
the component “Fodder Seed Procurement, Production and
Distribution” are utilized by the States/UTs for growing major high
yielding fodder varieties. Private companies are also growing and
importing fodder seeds and selling in the market. In this context,
the Committee pointed out that earlier our crops used to be long,
one part of which gave foodgrain and the remaining three parts was
used as fodder for the livestock. But during the era of Green
Revolution, deliberate attempts were made by plant breeders and
agro-scientists to release dwarf varieties of crops which although
gave high yields and made us self-dependent in production of grain,
the same seriously affected fodder production in the country. The
Committee regret to note that the agro-scientists ignored this aspect
conveniently without addressing the problem. While it was essential
to develop seeds for dwarf varieties of crops for making the country
self-dependent in the matter of food, at the same time, it was also
essential for the agro-scientists to think comprehensively and in an
integrated manner for development of varieties of crops which would
have given high quality of fodder and yield for livestock without any
reduction in production of foodgrain. The Committee, therefore,
recommend that agro-scientists may be encouraged to develop
varieties of food crops having high forage value with out affecting

42
yield of food grain and their efforts in this regard may also be
supplemented with adequate funding. Further, vigorous efforts may
also be made for creating awareness amongst the farmers for selection
of new varieties of forage-rich food crops replacing the old varieties.
Wastelands for Forage Cultivation
10. The Committee note that wasteland like waterlogged areas,
saline soils, sodic soils etc. can also be utilized for cultivation of
fodder varieties suitable for such areas. The Committee also note
that the Department is implementing the component of grassland
development in non-forest waste land, range land, grass land, non-
arable land and forest land under NLM with 75% Central grant. States
can avail benefit under the scheme. Besides, other marginal lands
like roadside land, canal side land, land along the railway tracks,
etc., may also be utilized for forage cultivation. The forest department
can also undertake Silvi-pastoral plantations in degraded forest areas
through the Joint Forest Management Committees for use of the
communities. Considering the limitations of traditionally cultivated
fodder crops, the Committee are of the view that it is imperative to
introduce non-traditional fodder crops which can be grown on
wastelands. Fast growing shrubs and trees need to be grown which
can be lopped regularly as fodder. Fodder shrubs, trees and grasses
which are suitable for wastelands and tolerant to drought and harsh
soil conditions and resistant to pests and diseases need to be
developed. The Committee feel that development of these lands for
forage production may not only ensure enhanced supply of forage
but also help in conserving the natural resources and recharging
groundwater, while improving the bio-diversity. The Committee,
therefore, recommend that a holistic plan may be formulated for
development of wasteland for its utilization for cultivation of fodder
varieties in coordination with all stakeholders including States. The
Committee would like to be apprised of the initiatives undertaken
by the Department in this regard.
Enhancing Nutritive Value of Fodder
11. The Committee note that as the land area under fodder
cultivation remaining static for the last few decades, there is an
urgent need to work on enhancing the nutritive value of fodder as
it has a significant bearing on the productivity of the livestock.
Straws and cellulosic waste such as residues of cereals like paddy,
sorghum, pearl millet, maize etc. which have poor nutritive value,
can be enriched by treating with urea. The Department may seek

43
the expertise of the National Institute of Animal Nutrition and
Physiology (NIANP), Bengaluru in this regard. Production of straw-
based feed pellets and focused nutrition for milch animals and their
off-springs are also some of the steps that need to be adopted.
There is also the need to ensure nutrition security in our livestock
population as these contribute immensely to the food basket of the
country and to identify feed and fodder that may cause harm to
animals, when consumed in the long run. The Committee would like
to be apprised of the initiatives taken by the Government in this
regard.
Dissemination of Forage-based Research Information
12. The Committee note that a significant research has been
carried out by ICAR Institutes like Indian Grassland Fodder Research
Institute (IGFRI), National Institute of Animal Nutrition and Physiology
(NIANP) etc. to identify suitable forage crops, breed new varieties
for large scale production of fodder. However, it is a matter of
concern that even then there is significant gap between the demand
and supply of fodder in the country and production of forage has not
picked up on a massive scale to meet the demand of the farmers in
times of need particularly during natural calamities. This calls for an
in-depth study to understand and address the problem. The
Committee are of the view that there is a wide communication gap
between the forage development programme and the livestock
extension department of the States. There is no coordination between
ICAR and Animal Husbandry department of the State. As a result,
there is no free flow of information from either side. Agro-scientists
need to interact with farmers to apprise their needs and develop
suitable technologies and systems which can benefit them. It is
imperative that there is regular interaction between ICAR/Department
and stakeholders including the States. The Committee, therefore,
feel that a well established communication network would help the
agro scientists to understand the problem of the farmers of particular
regions/areas and they in turn can offer suitable interventions. For
this purpose, research units could be set up to promote on-farm
studies and tests of technologies under field conditions. Research
studies also need to be carried out in association with farmers ’
organizations, State Agriculture and Animal Husbandry Departments,
Krishi Vigyan Kendras. Further, Kisan Melas and seminars need to be
organised on regular basis for dissemination of information and
technologies to the intended beneficiaries. The Committee, therefore,
recommend that a mechanism may be put in place to establish a
vibrant communication between Agro scientists and the farmers to
address the problems confronting them. The Committee would like
to be apprised of the steps taken by the Department in this direction.

44
Fodder and Pasture Management
13. Grazing lands and pastures play an important role in the
livestock economy of the country and the State. However, the
Committee are anguished to witness the collapse of traditional
agro-forestry practices and invasion of pastures and grazing lands by
invasive species. Such instances have only added to the woes of the
livestock owners and burdened the already limited fodder resources.
Grazing lands are gradually diminishing due to pressure on land for
agricultural and non-agricultural uses. Most of the grazing lands have
either been degraded or encroached upon restricting its availability
for grazing for livestock. The number of livestock is also growing
rapidly in the country. Gradual collapse of traditional agro-forestry
practices, sub-par performance of major fodder resources such as
grasslands, wastelands, common fallows etc. and invasion of pastures
and grazing lands by invasive alien plant species as well as
encroachment of pastures and their diversification for building
purposes has only worsened the fodder situation of the country.
The Committee feel that it is the need of the hour to conserve and
preserve grasslands in the country. However, the absence of a nodal
agency to coordinate and steer grassland and fodder development
programmes within the country has led to lack of channelized efforts
in this direction. The Committee, therefore, recommend that a
holistic plan may be formulated in coordination with States for
conservation and preservation of grasslands for pasture in the
country. The Committee would also like to be apprised of the
initiatives taken by the Government in this direction.
Additional Fodder Development Programme
14. The Committee note that the Additional Fodder Development
Programme (AFDP), a sub-scheme of Rashtriya Krishi Vikas Yojana
(RKVY), aims at mitigating the adverse impact of drought on fodder
production by providing financial and technical assistance to farmers
undertaking fodder cultivation. The Committee are, however,
displeased with the fact that the Department has not succeeded in
encouraging State to purchase high yielding variety fodder seeds
from the Regional Fodder Stations (RFS) that have been set up in
different agro-climatic zones. The Committee, therefore, recommend
that the Department persuade States to purchase high yielding variety
fodder seeds from the Regional Fodder Stations and to adhere to the
advisory issued to the States and UTs from time to time so that AFDP
can perform successfully while using land resources optimally,
adopting suitable crop combinations, improving grasslands/wastelands,

45
conserving and utilizing crop residue and strengthening extension
activities etc. Furthermore, the role of private sector in equipment,
financing and commercial feed and fodder production needs to be
assessed and harnessed to aid AFDP and other such programmes
aimed at fulfilling the need for fodder and providing equipment to
farmers and livestock owners undertaking fodder cropping. The
Committee also note that as per the prevailing AFDP Guidelines,
farmers in the drought affected districts/blocks are provided
assistance at the rate of Rs. 3200/- per hectare as per cost norms
for a maximum area of 2 ha per beneficiary for taking up additional
production of fodder in these districts/blocks. The Committee feel
that assistance of Rs. 3200/- per hectare does not seem to be
adequate and therefore, desire that said assistance needs to be
raised suitably. In this context, the Committee would like to know
the number of farmers who have been given such financial assistance
and the benefits accrued as a result therefor since inception of the
programme. The Committee also urge the Department to raise
awareness about the convergence of fodder schemes with MGNREGA
Scheme, so that the Department can fulfill twin objectives of attaining
self-sufficiency in fodder as well as generating gainful employment
opportunities for the rural masses. Furthermore, the Department
also needs to formulate a action plan to make fodder cropping a
profitable enterprise. The Committee would like to be apprised of
the actions initiated by the Government in this direction.
Gender Perspective in Animal Husbandry
15. The Committee note that the National Agriculture Policy
formulated in 2000 accorded high priority to recognition and
mainstreaming of women ’s role in agriculture and highlighting
incorporation of ‘Gender Issues ’ in the agriculture development
agenda. The Committee also note that within the overall mandate,
goals and objectives, the DAHDF places special emphasis on women
participation and contribution in the Animal Husbandry, Dairying and
Fisheries Sector. While appreciating the emphasis of the Department,
the Committee urge them to take this forward by creating more
opportunities for women in the Sector and involving more number
of women in the workforce by way of MGNREGA component of
construction works under the Sub Mission, by training women into
silage making, providing higher subsidies for women using chaff
cutters, both power and hand driven, by aiding formation of women
self help groups which are able to take up entrepreneurial activities
in the field of cattle rearing, fodder storage, milk cooperatives etc.
Taking forward the work of Krishi Vigyan Kendras (KVKs) in training

46
women in activities like fodder management, wasteland development
etc. and helping them form Self Help Groups (SHGs), the Department
may very well emulate the success of cooperatives in the field of
feed and fodder development which will not only have a positive
impact on the livestock but also foster dairy development in the
long run. The Committee, therefore, recommend that the Department
may work out plans drawing more and more women folk into the
Animal Husbandry, Dairying and Fisheries sector and set an example
of opening up gainful and profitable employment opportunities and
bringing about gender balance in the workforce in the agriculture
sector, particularly in the sector of Animal Husbandry, Dairying and
Fisheries. The Committee would like to apprised of the initiatives
taken by the Government in this regard.
   N
EW D ELHI; HUKM DEO NARAYAN YADAV ,
15 December, 2016 Chairperson,
24 Agrahayana, 1938 (Saka) Standing Committee on Agriculture.

47
ANNEXURE I
STATE-WISE ALLOCATIONS FOR CENTRALL Y SPONSORED SCHEMES OF
NATIONAL LIVESTOCK MISSION FOR THE YEARS 2014-15 AND 2016-17
(Rs. in lakh)
State/UT 2014-15 2016-17
12 3
Andhra Pradesh 1370 860
Bihar 1365 1238
Chhattisgarh 886 688
Goa 77 10
Gujarat 1032 1225
Haryana 725 493
Himachal Pradesh 447 180
Jammu and Kashmir 524 260
Jharkhand 838 630
Karnataka 1625 873
Kerala 559 105
Madhya Pradesh 1706 1670
Maharashtra 1838 1340
Odisha 1005 780
Punjab 686 460
Rajasthan 2137 1735
Tamil Nadu 1638 704
Telengana 979 617
Uttar Pradesh 2616 3042
Uttarakhand 450 190
West Bengal 1654 1100

48
Andaman and Nicobar Islands 18 10
Chandigarh 10 10
Dadra and Nagar Haveli 12 10
Daman and Diu 9 10
Delhi 23 25
Lakshadweep 14 10
Puducherry 17 25
Arunachal Pradesh 276 270
Assam 1782 1064
Manipur 142 200
Meghalaya 241 266
Mizoram 82 200
Nagaland 229 225
Sikkim 53 205
Tripura 236 270
NABARD
NABARD Grants-in-aid General 6100
NABARD SCSP 500
NABARD NER States 1600
TOTAL 27300 29200
12 3

49
ANNEXURE II
THE PHYSICAL TARGET OF SUBMISSION OF FEED AND FODDER
DEVELOPMENT OF NATIONAL LIVESTOCK MISSION
Sl.No. Components CS/CSS 2013-14 2014-15 2015-16 2016-17 T otal
1 2 345678
1. Forage production from CSS 200 300 300 300 1100
Non-forest wasteland/
rangeland/grassland/
non-arable land (ha.)
2. Forage production from CSS 1000 1100 1200 1300 4600
Forest Land (ha.)
3. Cultivation of coarse grains To be serviced under the NFSM (Except pure Fodder crops like
and dual purpose crops (ha.) African Tall Maize)
4. Fodder seed production and CSS 8000 8500 10000 12000 38500
distribution (Tonne)
5. Conservation of fodder CSS
through post harvest
technologies
i. Distribution of hand driven 20000 20000 20000 20000 80000
chaff cutters (Nos.)
ii. Distribution of power driven 3000 3500 4000 4500 15000
chaff cutters (Nos.)
iii. Establishment of high 5555 2 0
capacity Fodder Block
Making units (Nos.)
iv. Distribution of low capacity, 50 100 100 100 350
tractor mountable Fodder
Block Making units (Nos.)
v. Establishment of Silage 300 400 500 600 1800
making units (Nos.)
vi. Establishment of Bypass 3577 2 2
protein making units (Nos.)
vii. Establishment of area specific 3555 1 8
mineral mixture/feed processing
units (Nos.)

50
viii. Establishment/modernisation 3333 1 2
of Feed testing laboratories
(Nos.)
6. Regional fodder stations (Nos.) CS 88888
7. Strengthening of Research From ICAR funds
8. Training and Human Resource To be met from the 5 % Administration Cost
Development
9. Institutional strengthening To be met from the 5 % Administration Cost
and support
1 2 345678

51
ANNEXURE III
LIST OF FODDER SEEDS AVAILABLE FOR SALE AT REGIONAL FODDER
STATIONS OF DADF AND LIFTING BY THE STATES AS ON 23.05.2016
Sl. Name of Crop V ariety Type of Quantity Rates Fodder Seed lifting
No. RFS Seed available
in Kgs State/UT kgs Date
12 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 1 0
1. RFS, Dhamrod Sorghum MP CHARI T/L 1480 50
Sorghum PC-9 FS 2430 50
Sorghum COFS-29 FS 343 350
Sorghum COFS-29 T/L 255 350
Bajra HC-20 T/L 15 65
Total 4523
2. RFS, Kalyani Maize *+ TL 13287 45
Maize J-1006 FS 15980 55
Cowpea BL-2 TL 1530 85 West 220 26.4.2016,
Bengal 9.5.2016,
13.5.2016,
17.5.2016,
18.5.2016
Rice bean BIDHAN -2 CS 3330 115
Rice bean BIDHAN-2 FS 6650 120 West 70 9.5.2016,
Bengal 13.5.2016,
18.5.2016
Sorghum PC-23 FS 396 65 West 210 26.4.2016,
Bengal 9.5.2016,
18.5.2016
Total 41173
3. RFS, Suratgarh Bajra Co (cu) 9 FS 2141 45
Sorghum PC-23 TL 1300 40
Sorghum PC-23 FS 2700
Total 6141

52
4. RFS, Hisar Chinese TL 1126 70
cabbage
Rye Grass PB-1 TL 894 200
Maize J-1006 TL 0 50
Sorghum PC-23 FS 900 45
Sorghum PC-23 CS 2175 40
Sorghum PC-23 TL 600 40
Bajra HC-20 TL 1000 30
Teosinte TL-1 TL 200 45
Total 6895
5. RFS, Chennai Sorghum COFS-31 TL 165 380
Cowpea EC-4216 C-I 2920 100
Cowpea EC-4216 TL 100 90
Stylosanthes SCABRA TL 335 300
Stylosanthes HAMATA TL 1040 300
Stylosanthes SCHOFIELD TL 35 300
Total 4595
6. RFS, Maize J-1006 FS 0 55
Hyderabad Subabool Peru TL 378 80
Cowpea APFC-10- TL 70 125
1/B-1
Stylosanthes scabra TL 122 400 Telengana 6 13.5.2016
Sorghum COFS29 TL 48 380
Guar BG-2 TL 21 125
Total 639
7. RFS, Bengaluru Maize AT FS 40150 50 Andhra 1000 19.5.2016
Pradesh
Maize AT TL 42229 46.5 Karnataka 5000 21.5.2009
Sorghum PC-23 TL 13619 62
Sorghum CoFS29 TL 1050 350
Cowpea EC4216 TL 2930 70 Rajasthan 500 19.5.2016
Guinea Makueni TL 105 400
Guinea G2 TL 19 400
Total 100102
12 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 1 0

53
8. RFS, Srinagar T all fescue Demeter TL 479.65 550
Orchard Commet TL 33.5 550
grass
Orchard Currie TL 30.5 550
grass
Orchard Apunui TL 1.6 550
grass
P . Rye Grass Ranui TL 4.75 550
Anl. Rye G selection TL 2.9 550
Grass
Anl. Rye Grasslands TL 297 225
Grass Manawa
Sain Foin Melrose TL 43 550
Crown Local TL 69 550
Vetch
Winter Hairy TL 2.8 550
Vetch
Red Clover Mount T/L 1.5 1000
Total 966.2
Grand Total 165034.2
Note: F .S. = Foundation Seed; T .L. = Truthfully Labeled Seed.
Total Seeds- 165.03MT .
12 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 1 0

54
ANNEXURE IV
DETAILS OF FUND ALLOCATED TO STATES UNDER FEED AND FODDER
DEVELOPMENT SUB-MISSION UNDER NATIONAL LIVESTOCK MISSION
IMPLEMENTED BY DEPARTMENT OF ANIMAL HUSBANDRY ,
DAIRYING AND FISHERIES (DADF)
Name of the States/UT s 2014-15 2015-16
Bihar 343.00
Chhattisgarh 212.61
Gujarat 1500.00
Haryana 490.00
Himachal Pradesh 74.99
Jharkhand 500.00
Karnataka 422.00
Maharashtra 157.14 500.00
Nagaland 39.94 23.25
Odisha 178.50 72.60
Rajasthan 338.817
Sikkim 7.65 15.11
Tamil Nadu 600.00 0.00
Tripura 5.70
Uttarakhand 101.55
Uttar Pradesh 321.00
West Bengal 550.35
Total 4762.57 1685.937

55
ANNEXURE V
AREA UNDER FODDER CROPS AND PERMANENT PASTURES AND OTHER
GRAZING LANDS DURING 2006-07 TO 2012-13
(in thousand hectares)
Sl. States/UTs Fodder Crops Permanent Pastures and Other Grazing Land
No. 2006- 2007- 2008- 2009- 2010- 2011- 2012- 2006- 2007- 2008- 2009- 2010- 2011- 2012-
07 08 09* 10* 11* 12* 13* 07 08 09* 10* 11* 12* 13*
1 2 3456789 1 0 1 1 1 2 1 31 4 1 5 1 6
1. Andhra Pradesh 212 201 100 86 85 102 87 602 571 569 566 554 553 515
2. Arunachal Pradesh ------- 1 8 1 9 1 9 1 8 1 8 1 8 1 8
3. Assam 8 8 9 10 10 10 10 160 160 160 160 160 160 160
4. Bihar 16 16 13 18 18 16 24 17 16 16 16 16 16 16
5. Chhattisgarh 0000011 8 5 7 8 5 7 8 5 5 8 5 9 8 5 5 8 6 3 8 6 1
6 . G o a ------- 1111111
7. Gujarat 901 850 850 850 850 850 850 853 851 851 851 851 851 851
8. Haryana 684 755 620 420 408 334 432 27 26 30 28 27 28 25
9. Himachal Pradesh 10 10 10 11 8 8 8 1491 1500 1503 1504 1508 1508 1508
10. Jammu & Kashmir 55 61 54 52 53 55 53 128 126 128 120 119 123 114
11. Jharkhand ------- 1 1 0 1 1 0 1 1 0 1 1 0 1 1 0 1 1 0 1 1 4
12. Karnataka 47 35 31 39 35 33 33 934 930 923 914 912 908 908
13. Kerala 55555450000000
14. Madhya Pradesh 539 513 490 476 462 433 406 1348 1352 1337 1338 1328 1321 1286
15. Maharashtra 969 851 1043 1001 901 901 901 1252 1249 1246 1242 1242 1244 1245
16. Manipur ------- 1111111
17. Meghalaya --------------
18. Mizoram ------- 5555555
19. Nagaland --------------
2 0 . O d i s h a ------- 4 9 4 4 9 4 4 9 4 5 1 8 5 1 3 5 0 8 5 3 6
21. Punjab 488 539 573 534 540 522 510 2374445
22. Rajasthan 3172 3229 3627 2875 3287 3386 4853 1706 1703 1699 1697 1694 1694 1694
23. Sikkim --------------
24. Tamil Nadu 188 172 173 173 195 240 179 110 110 110 110 110 110 110

56
25. Tripura -------- 332222
26. Uttarakhand 36 35 35 35 35 34 32 230 199 199 198 199 199 192
27. Uttar Pradesh 872 859 838 831 824 806 800 65 65 65 65 66 66 66
28. West Bengal 74334336676543
29. A & N Islands ------- 6454444
30. Chandigarh --------------
31. Dadra & N. Haveli 11111111111111
32. Daman & Diu - - 00000 -------
33. Delhi 11111110000000
34. Lakshadweep ---- 0 0 0-------
35. Puducherry 0000000 -------
All India 8212 8144 8477 7419 7722 7738 9188 10418 10362 10344 10340 10305 10311 10240
“-”Not available/not received.
“0” relates to the area below 500 hectares.
Source: Directorate of Economies & Statistics; Ministry of Agriculture & Farmers Welfare.
*provisional.
1 2 3456789 1 0 1 1 1 2 1 31 4 1 5 1 6

57
ANNEXURE VI
LIST OF FORAGE GRASSES, LEGUMES, SHRUBS AND TREES FOR
GRASSLAND/GRAZING LAND IMPROVEMENT ON AGRO-
ECOLOGICAL BASIS
Agro-eco Regions Grasses Legumes Shrubs/Trees
12 3 4
Western Himalaya, Agrostis spp., Poa Medicago sativa/ Hippophae rhamonides
cold arid with alpina, Trisetum subsp sativa,
shallow skeletal spicatum M. sativa, subsp
soils fslcuta
Western plains and Cenchrus ciliaris, Cassia rotundifolia Acacia nilotica, A.
Kaccha Peninsula, C. setigerus (Sandy tortilis, Albizia lebbeck,
hot arid with desert plains), Lasiurus Ailanthes excelsa,
and saline soils scindicus (Sandy Dichrostachys cinerea,
interdunal plains), Prosopis cineraria,
Panicum turgidum Ziziphus nummularia,
(Sand dunes) P . juliflora, Salvadora
Chloris gayana, oleoides, S. persica
Sporobolus (Saline soil)
marginatus (salt
affected lands)
Deccan Plateau, Andropogon Clitoria ternatea, Acacia nilotica, Albizia
hot arid with red gayanus, Stylosanthes amara, A. lebbeck,
and black soils Chrysopogon fulvus hamata, Desmanthus virgatus,
(Red soil), S. scabra Leucaena leucocephala,
Dichanthium T amarindus indica
annulatum,
Bothriochloa
intermedia
(Black soil)
Northern plains and Bothriochloa Macroptilium Acacia nilotica, A.
central highlands intermedia, atropurpureum, holosericea, Albizia
inclulding Aravallis, Cenchrus ciliaris, Stylosanthes amara, A. lebbeck,
hot semi-arid with Chrysopogon hamata, S. scabra A. procera, Azairachta
Alluvium fulvus, indica, Dichrostachys
Dichanthium cinerea, Hardwickia
annulatum, binata, Leucaena
Sehima neroosum leucocephala, Sesbania
grandiflora, S. sesban

58
Central (Malwa) Bothrichloa Arachis Albizia lebbeck,
highlands, Gujarat intermedia, Chloris hagenbackii, Artocarpus lackoocha,
plains & Kathiawar gayana, Cynodon Clitoria ternatea, Dendrocalamus strictus,
Peninsula, hotsemi- dactylon, Stylosanthes Gliricidia sepium,
arid with red Dichanthium hamata, S. scabra Faidherbia albida,
loamy soils annulatum, Holoptelia integrifolia,
Pancium maximum Pithecellobium dulce
Deccan Plateau, Bothriochloa Arachis Acacia nilotica, Albizia
hot semi-arid with intermedia, hagenbackii, procera, Anogeissus
shallow and Brachiaria Stylosanthes pendula, Bauhinia
medium black soils decumbens, hamata, S. scabra variegata, B. purpurea,
Cenchrus setigerus, Leucaena leucocephala,
Dichanthium Moringa oleifera,
annulatum, Pterocarpus marsupium,
Pennisetum Sesbania sesban,
pedicellatum, Terminal ia arjuna
Panicum
maximum
Deccan (Telangana) Andropogon Atylosia Albizia lebbeck, Gliricida
Plateau and Eastern gayanus, scrabaeoides, sepium, Faidherbia
Ghats, hot semi-arid Bothriochloa Macrotyloma albida, Holopteaia
with red and black intermedia, axillare, integrofolia, Leucaena
Soils Chrysopogon fulvus, Macroptilium leucocephala
Pennisetum atropurpureum,
pedicellatum, Stylosanthes
Dichanthium scabra
annulatum
Eastern Ghats, Brachiaria Arachis Ailanthes malabarica,
TN uplands and decumbens, hagenbackii, albizia falcataria,
Deccan (Karnataka) B. ruziziensis, A. glabrata, Erythrina variegata,
Plateau, hot semi- Cynodon dactylon, Stylosanthes E. poppygyana
arid with red Dichanthium guinensis,
and black soils annulatum, S. hamata
Bothriochloa
intermedia
Northern plains, Bothriochloa Clitoria ternatea, Albizia stipulata,
hot sub-humid intermedia, Macroptilium Desmathus virgatus,
(dry with Alluvium Cynodon dactylon, atropurpureum, Azadirachata indica,
derived soils) Chloris gayana, Stylosanthes Ficus racemosa,
Dicanthium hamata Leucaena leucocephala,
annulatum, R obinia, pseudoacacia
Pennisetum
pedicellatum
12 3 4

59
Central Highlands Andropogon Atylosia Albizia amara,
(Malwa, Bundelkhand gayanus, scarabaeoides, A. lebbeck, Anogeissus
& Satpura) north Pennisetum Macroptilium latifolia, A. pendula,
sub-humid with pedicellatum atropurpureum, Dichrostachys cinera,
black and red soils (redsoil), Stylosanthes Hardwickia binata,
Bothriochloa hamata, S. scabra Leucaena leucocephala
intermedia,
Chrysopogon
fulvus, Sehima
nervosum,
Dichanthium
annulatum
(black soil)
Eastern Plateau Bothriochloa Arachis Bauhinia variegata,
(Chhattisgarh), intermedia, hagenbackii, Dalbergia sissoo,
hot sub-humid Cynodon dacty lon, Stylosanthes Leucaena leucocephala,
with red soils dichanthium hamata Moringa oleifera
annulatum,
Panicum maximum,
Pennisetum
pedicellatum,
Setaria sphacelata
Eastern Andropogon Atylosia Artocarpus heterophyllus,
(Chhotanagpur) gayanus, scarabaeoides, A. lakoocha, Leucaena
Plateau and Eastern Bothriochloa Macrop tilium leucocephala, Moringa
Ghats, hot sub- intermedia, atropurpureum, oleifera
humid with red Chrysopogon fulvus, Macrotyloma
and laterite soils Pennisetum, axillare,
pedicellatum, Stylosanthes
Urochloa hamata
mosambicensis
Eastern plain, hot Brachiaria Arachis glabrata, Bauhinia variegata,
sub-humid (moist) brizantha, A. hagenbackii Dalbergia latifolia,
with Alluvium B. decumbens, D. sissoo, Desmanthus
derived soils B. mutica, virgatus, Pterocarpus
Cynodon dactylon, marsupium
Paspalum notatum
Western Himalayas, Dactylis glomerata, Trifolium pratense, Quercus incana, Robinia
warm sub-humid Festuca rubra, T . repens, Lotus pseudoacacia, Grewia
with brown forest Lolium perenne, comiculatus optiva, Celtis australis,
and Podzolic soils Poa spp. Fagus sylvatica, Celtis
australis, Morus alba
12 3 4

60
Bengal and Assa m Brachiaria Desmodium Artocarpus heterophyllus,
plains, hot sub- decumbens, uncinatum, A. lakoocha, Ficus
humid (moist) to B. mutica, D. heterophyllum hookeri, F . nermoralis,
humid with Paspalum Parkia roxburghii, Morus
Alluvium derived notatum alba
soils
Eastern Himalayas, Coix lacryma-jobi, Desmodium spp., Celtis australis, Ficus
warm per-humid P ennisetum Pueraria hookeri, F . nemoralis,
with brown and clandestinum, phaseoloides F .  semicordata
red soils Tripsacum
dactyloides
North-eastern Hills Brachiaria Arachis spp. Dendrocalamus
(Purvanchal), warm decumbens, Desmodium hamiltonii, Parkia
per-humid with red Pennisetum uncinatum roxbrughii, Morus alba,
and laterite soils clandestinum, Robinia pseudoacacia
Tripsacum
dactyloides
Eastern Coastal Chloris gayana, Stylosanthes Ailanthes malabarica,
plain, hot sub-humid Cynodon dactylon, guinensis Erythrina variegata,
to semi-arid Dichanthium E. poeppigiana, Ficus
with coastal annulatum, retusa
Alluvium derived Pennisetum
soils pedicellatum,
Stenotaphrum
dimidiatum,
Urochloa
mosambicensis
Western Ghats and Cynodon dactylon, Clitoria ternatea, Ailanthes malabarica,
Coastal Plain, hot Dichanthium Desmodium Erythrina variegata
humid per-humid annulatum, heterophyllum,
laterite and Panicum maximum, Pueraria
Alluvium derived Pennisetum thunbergiana,
soils clandestinum, Stylosanthes
P . polystachyon, hamata,
Setaria sphacelata S. guinensis
Islands of Andaman Andropogon Centrosema Bauhinia purpurea,
Nicobar and gayanus, Cynodon pubescens, Erythrina variegata,
Lakshdweep, hot dactylon, Cenchrus Clitoria ternatea, Leucaena leucocephala,
humid to per- ciliaris, Pennisetum Macroptilium Trema tomentosa,
humid island with pedicellatum, atropurpureum, P ithecellobium dulce,
red loamy and P . polystachyon, Stylosanthes Gliricidia sepium
sandy soils Brachiaria guinensis,
ruziziensis, S. scabra
Tripsacum laxum
12 3 4

61
ANNEXURE VII
STRATIFIED FODDER-PRODUCTION POTENTIAL OF THE
BEST FODDER CROP COMBINATIONS
Best 2-3 rotations at various Centres Green fodder
yield (q./ha.)
                1 2
(1) Jhansi
1. Hybrid Napier + Cowpea - Berseem + Sarson 2,863
2. Maize + Cowpea - M.P . Chari - Berseem + Sarson 1,972
3. M.P . Chari - Turnips - Oats 1,256
(2) Hyderabad
1. Hybrid Napier + Cowpea - Hybrid Napier + Cowpea - 1,334
Hybrid Napier + Berseem
2. Maize + Cowpea - Bajra + Cowpea + Berseem 1,267
3. Madikattujonna + Cowpea - Jonna (Ratoon) + 1,098
Cowpea - Berseem
(3) Anand
1. Hybrid Napier alone 2,877
2. Hybrid Napier + Guar - Lucerne 2,529
3. Maize + Cowpea - Maize - Cowpea - Oats - 1,685
Maize + Cowpea
(4) Kalyani
1. Maize + Cowpea - P .  Pedicellatum - Oats 1,308
2. Maize + Cowpea - Rice Bean - Berseem + Sarson 1,115
3. Maize + Cowpea + Jowar + Cowpea - Oats 884
(5) Kanker
1. Maize + Cowpea - Oats - Bajra + Cowpea 1,026
2. Jowar + Cowpea - Berseem + Sarson - Maize + Cowpea 960
3. Bajra + Cowpea - Berseem + Sarson - Maize + Cowpea 959

62
(6) Pantnagar
1. Napier + Berseem intercropped and cut at the 2,141
optimum time
2. Napier + Berseem intercropped and cut at the 1,998
same time
3. Napier +Lucerne intercropped and cut at the 1,960
optimum time
(7) Jorhat
1. Hybrid Napier alone 1,442
2. Maize + Cowpea - Maize - Jowar - Oats 664
3. Guinea alone 607
(8) Hissar
1. Napier - Bajra Hybrid intercropped with Berseem 2,117
2. Napier - Bajra Hybrid + Lucerne 1,760
3. Berseem + Japan Rape - Jowar + Cowpea - 1,705
Jowar + Cowpea
(9) Coimbatore
1. Sorghum + Cowpea - Maize + Cowpea - Maize + Cowpea 1,107
2. Maize + Cowpea - Maize + Cowpea - Maize + Cowpea 1,060
3. Guinea grass round the year 935
(10) Palampur
1. Maize + Cowpea - Lucerne + Oats + Sarson 844
2. Maize + Cowpea - Turnip - Oats + Pea - Cowpea 833
3. M.P . Chari + Cowpea - Oats + Pea - Cowpea 782
(11) Jabalpur
1. Hybrid Napier intercropped with Cowpea - Berseem 1,761
and Cowpea
2. M.P . Chari - Cowpea - Berseem + Sarson - 1,686
Jowar + Cowpea
Based on All-India Coordinated Project for Research on Forage Crops of ICAR
                1 2

63
ANNEXURE VIII
FOLLOWING ARE HIGH YIELDING FODDER VARIETIES FOR IMPROVING
FODDER YIELD PER HECTARE IN RESPECT OF EXISTING AREA UNDER
FODDER
Sl. Name of the Name of varieties
No. fodder crop
1. Maize African tall, J-1006, Vijay composite
2. Sorghum SSG 59-3, PC-23, PC-9, PC-6, HC-136, MP
Chari, CO-FS-29
3. Hybrid Napier CO-4, C-23, NB-21,PNB-84
4. Bajra Giant, L-74, GFB-1, Bajra rajco, HC20, AVKB-
19
5. Cowpea EC-4216, NP-3
6. Guar BG-1, BG-2, BG-3, Bundel-2, HG-365,
HG-563, RG-1003
7. Berseem BL- I, BL-10
8. Oats Kent, OS-6
9. Chinese cabbage
Type of Land Rainfed Irrigated
12 3
(a) Arid Tracts Jowar, Bajra, Moth, Lucerne, Berseem, Oats,
Guar , Lobia Maize, Jowar , Bajra, Barley
(b) Semi-dry Bajra, Jowar, Lobia, Jowar, Maize, Lobia, Teosinte,
Moth, Guar , Velvet Lucerne, Berseem, Sarson,
Bean, Field Bean, Turnips, Hybrid Napier, Oats,
Guinea grass, Setaria Sudan grass, Guinea grass
sphacelata,
Rhodes grass
(c) Semi-wet Dinanath Grass, Jowar , Berseem, Oats, Sudan grass,
Lobia, Rice Bean, Hybrid Napier , Guar , Jowar ,
Velvet Bean, Teosinte, Maize, Para grass, Rhodes,
Sunnhemp Setaria

64
(d) Wet regions Jowar, Dinanath, Rice Berseem, Oats, Hybrid Napier,
Bean, Coix Guinea, Lucerne, Berseem,
Sarson, Turnips, Hybrid Napier ,
Oats, Setaria, Para grass,
Jowar
(e) Lower hills Jowar, Lobia, Bajra, Maize, Jowar , Oats, Berseem,
Velvet Bean, Field Lucerne, Hybrid Napier ,
Bean, Guar Sudan, Setaria, Rhodes
12 3

65
ANNEXURE IX
STATE/UT-WISE FODDER CULTIVATION DURING 2013-14
Name of the States/UTs 2013-14
       1 2
Andhra Pradesh 61
Arunachal Pradesh
Assam 10
Bihar 21
Chhattisgarh 1
Goa
Gujarat 850
Haryana 583
Himachal Pradesh 8
Jammu and Kashmir 53
Jharkhand
Karnataka 33
Kerala 5
Madhya Pradesh 399
Maharashtra 969
Manipur
Meghalaya
Mizoram
Nagaland
Odisha
Punjab 521
Rajasthan 5370
Sikkim

66
Tamil Nadu 115
Telangana 26
Tripura
Uttarakhand 31
Uttar Pradesh 800
West Bengal 3
Andaman and Nicobar Islands
Chandigarh
Dadra and Nagar Haveli 1
Daman and Diu 0
Delhi 1
Lakshadweep 0
Puducherry 0
All India 9859
       1 2

67
APPENDIX I
STANDING COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE
(2015-16)
MINUTES OF THE 25TH SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE
The Committee sat on Thursday, the 2nd June, 2016 from 1100
hours to 1245 hours in Committee Room B, Parliament House Annexe,
New Delhi.
PRESENT
Shri Hukm Deo Narayan Yadav —  Chairperson
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Sanganna Karadi
3. Shri Nalin Kumar Kateel
4. Smt. Raksha Nikhil Khadse
5. Md. Badaruddoza Khan
6. Dr. Tapas Mandal
7. Shri Ajay Nishad
8. Shri Nityanand Rai
9. Shri Mukesh Rajput
10. Shri Konakalla Narayana Rao
11. Shri Satyapal Singh (Sambhal)
12. Shri Virendra Singh
13. Shri Jai Prakash Narayan Yadav
Rajya Sabha
14. Shri A.W. Rabi Bernard
15. Smt. Renuka Chowdhury
16. Sardar Sukhdev Singh Dhindsa
17. Shri Janardan Dwivedi
18. Shri Vinay Katiyar
19. Shri Mohd. Ali Khan
20. Shri Rajpal Singh Saini
21. Shri Ram Nath Thakur
22. Shri Shankarbhai N. Vegad

68
SECRETARIAT
1. Shri U.B.S. Negi — Joint Secretary
2. Shri Arun K. Kaushik — Director
3. Shri C. Vanlalruata — Deputy Secretary
4. Shri Sumesh Kumar — Under Secretary
2. At the outset the Chairperson welcomed the members to the
Sitting of the Committee. The Committee, then, took up the subject
‘Steps Taken to Bridge the Gap between the Demand and Availability
of Fodder through Sub-Mission on Fodder and Feed Development ’, with
the representatives of the Department of Animal Husbandry, Dairying
and Fisheries.
3. After the introduction, the Chairperson initiated the discussion
which was taken forward by the representatives of the Department and
the Members of the Standing Committee. The Committee raised several
issues/points as briefly mentioned below and sought opinions and views
on various issues:
(1) Need to work for maximum conservation of crop residue and
also take up farming of perennial fodder grass.
(2) Need to promote cultivation of Azola fern found to be rich
in micro-nutrients as an important alternative to green fodder.
(3) Need to focus on coarse grains as an integral part of the
National Food Security Mission as farming of coarse grains
has constantly declined due to commercial cropping trends
in farming. Moreover , coarse grains also form an important
component of animal fodder .
(4) Shortage of fodder in present times due to change in farming
pattern.
(5) Earlier , due to increased height of crops, these yielded one
third crop whereas the remaining two thirds was used as
fodder as opposed to the current situation wherein half the
height of the plant comprises crop and as a result, only half
is available as fodder .
(6) Paddy and wheat form an important base for the fodder
which when mixed with green fodder can be fed to animals.
(7) Shortage of fodder due to reduced cropping of coarse grains
like Jowar , Bajra, Ragi etc.

69
(8) Shortage in the availability of fodder due to present day
cropping pattern which yields more of green fodder which is
not an adequate substitute to coarse grains.
(9) Need to find an alternative to coarse grains as dry fodder.
(10) Need for cooperation and collaboration between ICAR and
DAHDF to work towards research on developing varieties of
animal feed and fodder.
(11) Need for fodder development for the upcoming improved
breeds of cattle.
(12) Channelizing post harvest crop loss towards animal feed and
fodder , especially in case of potatoes and tomatoes which
are highly perishable in nature and bear huge potential to
be developed into fodder for animals.
(13) Identification of such crops which are lost post harvest,
especially horticulture crops, which can further be diverted
towards development of fodder.
(14) Development of crop residues into animal feed and fodder.
(15) Shortage of animal feed and fodder needs to be tackled
through a multi-dimensional approach.
(16) Need to discover and develop varieties of plants which can
be used as alternatives to fodder.
(17) Need to ensure nutrition security in our livestock population
as these contribute immensely to the food basket of the
country and to identify feed and fodder that may cause
harm to animals, when consumed in the long run.
(18) To look for innovative ways to collaborate with veterinary
graduates, agri-business dealers, agri-clinics etc. in order to
support hybrids, foreign breeds of animals etc. being
introduced to the local climate.
(19) Need to develop feed and fodder palatable to the animals.
(20) Use of wastelands and vacant lands allocated to railways,
defence etc. to grow feed and fodder .
(21) Status of availability of fodder in drought prone areas.
(22) Diversion of crop residues to drought prone areas to be used
as fodder , instead of wasting it by burning.
(23) Storage facilities for fodder to be used in adverse times.

70
(24) Aiding the ICAR in reaching out to the general public with
their newly developed crop variety which resembles sugarcane
and has extremely high nutritive value.
(25) Encouraging traditional Indian practice of free range feeding
of animals as it has been proven to increase nutritive value
of animal produce.
(26) To explore the usage of Spirulina, which is an algae with
high nutritive value and which can be used as brilliant feed
for fish farming, animal fodder etc.
(27) Spirulina is a versatile alternative which can be grown and
stored after dehydrating it, to be rehydrated and used later
during scarcity of fodder and during adverse conditions such
as drought.
(28) To put in place a warning system for warning livestock owners
of impending adversities of weather and to alert them to
have enough stock of fodder stored for use in those times.
(29) Looking into drought prone areas where tribal livestock owners
and farmers are forced to abandon their livestock due to an
inability to feed them, thus incurring huge losses and leading
to increasing incidents of farmer suicide and also turning the
livestock owners into non-performing assets (NPAs) who are
unable to repay loans to the Bank.
(30) Value addition to crop residue can make it a palatable fodder
to the livestock.
(31) Need to have in place disaster management plans for livestock
population to shield them from disasters.
(32) To provide the farmers with up-to-date information with
respect to efficient usage of crop residue and crop lost post
harvest, thus enabling them to develop fodder for animals
using these.
(33) Subsidizing fodder cutting and chopping machines.
(34) To take up the issue of non-utilization and liquidation of
pending utilization certificates (UCs) with the States.
(35) States should be encouraged to put in place State Perspective
Plans on the lines of the National Perspective Plan.
(36) ICAR to be consulted to enable research reach from lab to
land.
(37) Focus on popularizing techniques of silage making among
farmers.

71
(38) Wasteland development and use for growing fodder.
(39) Transportation of fodder from areas with excess to those
with deficit, via wagons and trains.
(40) To utilize the abundance of grasses growing in water logged
areas of India and with the help of ICAR develop into
nutritious and quality fodder for animals. One such successful
example is that of ‘Kaas’.
4. A copy of verbatim proceedings has been kept for record.
The Committee then adjourned.

72
APPENDIX II
STANDING COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE
(2015-16)
MINUTES OF THE 30TH SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE
The Committee sat on Tuesday, the 23rd August, 2016 from 1500
hours to 1700 hours in Committee Room C, Parliament House Annexe,
New Delhi.
PRESENT
Shri Hukm Deo Narayan Yadav —  Chairperson
M
EMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Prof. Ravindra Vishwanath Gaikwad
3. Shri Nalin Kumar Kateel
4. Md. Badaruddoza Khan
5. Dr. Tapas Mandal
6. Shri Ajay Nishad
7. Shri Mukesh Rajput
8. Shri C.L. Ruala
9. Shri Satyapal Singh (Sambhal)
10. Shri Jai Prakash Narayan Yadav
11. Shri B.S. Yeddyurappa
Rajya Sabha
12. Sardar Sukhdev Singh Dhindsa
13. Shri Janardan Dwivedi
14. Shri Meghraj Jain
15. Shri Vinay Katiyar
16. Shri Mohd. Ali Khan
17. Shri Ram Nath Thakur
18. Shri Shankarbhai N. Vegad
19. Shri Darshan Singh Yadav

73
SECRETARIAT
1. Shri U.B.S. Negi — Joint Secretary
2. Shri C. Vanlalruata — Deputy Secretary
2. At the outset the Chairperson welcomed the members to the
Sitting of the Committee. The Committee, then, took up the subject
‘Steps Taken to Bridge the Gap Between the Demand and Availability
of Fodder through Sub-Mission on Fodder and Feed Development ’, with
the representatives of the Department of Animal Husbandry, Dairying
and Fisheries.
3. After the introduction, the Chairperson initiated the discussion
which was followed by a slide presentation by the representatives of
the Department and the discussion was taken forward by them and the
Members of the Standing Committee. The Committee raised several
issues/points as briefly mentioned below and sought opinions and views
on various issues:
(1) Reasons behind deficit of fodder and measures taken to
overcome this deficit and achieve sufficiency in production
of feed and fodder .
(2) Dwarf varieties of crops which yield meagre crop residue
and resultant fodder material.
(3) Loss of grasslands and pastures in villages due to unauthorized
encroachment which leaves livestock owners with no grazing
grounds for their livestock.
(4) Lack of quality seeds of fodder crop varieties such as Jowar ,
Ragi etc.
(5) Research to focus on fodder seeds that yield adequate fodder
which is palatable and is of high nutritive value.
(6) To focus on production of green fodder crops during Rabi
and Kharif seasons and the role of scientific research on the
same.
(7) Exploring the possibility of grasses such as ‘Kaas/Kaasni’
growing in water logged areas to be used as animal feed and
fodder .
(8) Redirecting post harvest losses towards feed and fodder .
(9) Steps taken to deal with the issue of lack of monitoring and
under utilization of funds and pending Utilization Certificates
in States and UTs.

74
(10) Discussions with various stakeholders such as States, UTs,
farming community, milk cooperatives and livestock owners
etc. before formulating policies, Missions, Sub Missions etc.
and also seek their views regarding funding of schemes by
the Centre.
(11) ICAR to work towards discovering ways in which the wastage
of crop residue, in the form of burning, is curbed and is
diverted as manure to fertilize the fields after being
decomposed.
(12) Formulating a long term plan to enable fodder to meet
increasing population of livestock and enhance their quality
of produce.
(13) Development of waste based fodder , especially from post
harvest losses of food crops and vegetables such as potatoes
and tomatoes which suffer huge post harvest losses.
(14) Time bound delivery and usage of waste based fodder to
avoid accumulation of toxins caused due to decomposition,
such as aflotoxins.
(15) To explore whether Azolla, Sugar beet etc. can be used as
animal feed and fodder.
(16) To find ways to divert fruit and vegetable waste, especially
Jackfruit waste, Pineapple pulp residue etc. towards
developing fodder.
(17) Need of firstly satiating the hunger of the existing and
upcoming livestock population by providing them with
adequate feed and fodder and then focusing on its nutritive
value.
(18) Reasons for gaping deficit between targets and achievements
of schemes.
(19) To find ways to destroy aflotoxins in vegetable and fruit
waste and to focus on diverting such fruit and vegetable
wastes towards fodder , which do not produce aflotoxins or
other such toxins.
(20) Non-arable, sandy and rocky terrain and water logged areas
to be used as avenues for producing fodder .
(21) To guide farmers in using dual crop varieties etc. in order to
produce an optimum yield of fodder.
(22) To look for ways to direct wild grasses growing alongside
railway tracks to be used as fodder.

75
(23) To promote optimal usage of easily available crop residue
and to use it to feed livestock and reduce deficiency of
fodder .
(24) R easons for deficit of fodder in present times despite
reduction in population of livestock as compared to earlier
times.
(25) ‘Charai’ production to be increased to augment production
of milk in milch animals.
(26) ’Gau-Pashu’ Camps in villages should provide adequate funds
for feeding livestock owned by villagers.
(27) Need for a National Fodder Production Programme to aid
expertise in North Eastern states such as Mizoram, in the
field of providing fodder to livestock.
(28) Need for experts to visit and appreciate the situation of
Mizoram and other NE states which despite having good
rainfall experience deficiency of fodder during dry seasons
and then show the way forward.
(29) Adopt a multi-dimensional approach towards utilizing
vegetable waste, most of which comes from potatoes and
tomatoes.
(30) To utilize traditional wisdom along with the knowledge and
experience of the tiller , to approach the issue of deficit of
feed and fodder.
(31) Special crops growing in regional areas must be utilized in
a way that both the food and nutritive requirement of the
cattle are met.
(32) Formulating a National Action Plan to make fodder cropping
a profitable enterprise.
(33) Need for ICAR to take up research in the direction of
promoting plant varieties such as Israeli Babul, also known
as Kamdhenu, which apart from being a rich source of protein
to the cattle, is also used as timber in building material etc.
More such dynamic plants species should be explored and
put to good use.
(34) To train more farmers, livestock owners and cooperatives in
the technique of silage making.
(35) To address the dichotomy arising out of increasing livestock
population by artificial means as opposed to the feed and

76
fodder currently available in the country. The Department
must work towards bringing sustainability and devising a
long term plan to increase the availability of fodder
exponentially in proportion to the growing livestock
population.
(36) To work towards popularizing cropping of coarse grains and
dual purpose grains to augment the production of fodder
along with fulfilling the objectives of the NFSM.
(37) Steps being taken to provide demonstration and training to
farmers to use dual crop variety seeds and to increase
production of such seeds and their sale from Regional Fodder
Stations (RFS).
(38) Need for the Department to issue advisories to States and
UTs for the expenditure of funds allotted to them by the
Centre.
(39) To ensure timely issue of SDRF and NDRF funds to States and
UTs in adverse times.
(40) To work towards providing encroachment free Gochar lands
in all the districts of the country.
4. A copy of verbatim proceedings has been kept for record.
The Committee then adjourned.

77
APPENDIX III
STANDING COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE
(2016-17)
MINUTES OF THE SEVENTH SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE
The Committee sat on Friday, the 09th December , 2016 from 1000
hrs. to 1050 hrs. in the Chamber of the Hon ’ble Chairperson, Standing
Committee on Agriculture, Room No. 138 (Third Floor), Parliament House,
New Delhi.
PRESENT
Shri Hukm Deo Narayan Yadav —  Chairperson
M
EMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Prof. Ravindra Vishwanath Gaikwad
3. Shri Sanganna Karadi
4. Shri Nalin Kumar Kateel
5. Md. Badaruddoza Khan
6. Shri Janardan Mishra
7. Shri Devji Patel
8. Shri C.L. Ruala
9. Shri Satyapal Singh (Sambhal)
Rajya Sabha
10. Shri Sambhaji Chhatrapati
11. Shri Meghraj Jain
12. Shri Mohd. Ali Khan
13. Shri Ram Nath Thakur
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Shri U.B.S. Negi — Joint Secretary
2. Shri Arun K. Kaushik — Director
3. Smt. Juby Amar — Additional Director
4. Shri C. Vanlalruata — Deputy Secretary
5. Shri Sumesh Kumar — Under Secretary

78
2. At the outset, Chairperson welcomed the Members to the Sitting
of the Committee. Thereafter, the Committee took up for consideration
the following draft Reports:
*(i) **** **** **** **** ****
*(ii) **** **** **** **** ****
*(iii) **** **** **** **** ****
(iv) Draft Report on the Subject ‘Steps taken to bridge the gap
between the demand and availability of fodder through
Sub-Mission on Fodder and Feed Development’ of the Ministry
of Agriculture and Farmers Welfare (Department of Animal
Husbandry, Dairying and Fisheries).
3. After some deliberations, the Committee adopted the draft
Reports without any modifications and authorized the Chairperson to
finalize and present these Reports to Parliament after getting them
factually verified from the concerned Departments/Ministries.
The Committee then adjourned.
*Matter was not related to this Report.