FIFTY SIXTH REPORT
STANDING COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE
(2017-2018)
(SIXTEENTH LOK SABHA)
MINISTRY OF AGRICULTURE AND FARMERS WELFARE
(DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE, COOPERATION
AND FARMERS WELFARE)
DEMANDS FOR GRANTS
(2018-2019)
[Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations
contained in the Forty Seventh Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) of the
Standing Committee on Agriculture (2017-2018)]
Presented to Lok Sabha on 03.08.2018
Laid on the Table of Rajya Sabha on 03.08.2018
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
August, 2018/Shravana, 1940 ( Saka)


COA No. 378
Price : R 106.00
' 2018 B Y L OK SABHA S ECRETARIAT
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct
of Business in Lok Sabha (Fifteenth Edition) and printed by
Anupam Art Printer, New Delhi.

CONTENTS
PAGE
COMPOSITION OF THE C OMMITTEE ............................................. (iii)
INTRODUCTION ................................................................. (v)
CHAPTER I Report ......................................................... 1
CHAPTER II Observations/Recommendations which have been
accepted by the Government ............................ 17
CHAPTER III Observations/Recommendations which the Committee
do not desire to pursue in view of the GovernmentÕs
replies......................................................... 38
C
HAPTER IV Observations/Recommendations in respect of which
replies of the Government have not been accepted
by the Committee .......................................... 39
CHAPTER V Observations/Recommendations in respect of which
final replies of the Government are still awaited... 46
ANNEXURES
I&II. Details of production/procurement of seeds by the
NSC (through seed growers and production at their
farm) and sale of seeds by the NSC for the years
2014-15, 2015-16 and 2016-17 ........................... 55
III&IV. Details of production and sale of Hybrid seeds by
the NSC during the years 2014-15, 2015-16 and
2016-17 ....................................................... 57
V . Production/availability of hybrid seeds in the
country ....................................................... 62
VI. Seed Replacement Rate of major crops during the
years 2004-05 to 2016-17 ................................. 63
VII. Details of Assistance/Subsidy for hybrid seed
distribution provided under various Existing Schemes/
Programmes implemented by States .................... 65
VIII. Recent measures taken by Government in Agricultural
Trade Policy .................................................. 66
IX. Total allocation for Ministry of Agriculture,
Cooperation & Farmers Welfare ......................... 68
(i)

PAGE
X. List of selected commodities/foodgrains covered
under MSP Scheme ......................................... 71
XI. Crops having MSP more than 50% of Cost of Production
A2+FL, Crops having MSP less than 50% of Cost of
Production A2+FL............................................ 72
XII. Production and Procurement of Oilseeds, Pulses, Rice
and Wheat at MSP/PSS .................................... 74
XIII. Extracts of the Minutes of the 27th Sitting of the
Committee held on 31.07.2018 .......................... 75
APPENDIX
Analysis of Action Taken by the Government on the
Recommendations contained in the Forty Seventh
Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) of the Standing
Committee on Agriculture (2017-2018)................. 77
(ii)

COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE
(2017-2018)
Shri Hukmdev Narayan Yadav — Chairperson
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Sanjay Dhotre
3. Prof. Ravindra Vishwanath Gaikwad
4. Shri Sanganna Amarappa Karadi
5. Shri Nalin Kumar Kateel
6. Smt. Raksha Tai Khadse
7. Md. Badaruddoza Khan
8. Shri C. Mahendran
9. Dr. Tapas Mandal
10. Shri Janardan Mishra
11. Shri Praveen Kumar Nishad
12. Shri Devji M. Patel
13. Shri Nityanand Rai
14. Shri Mukesh Rajput
15. Shri Konakalla Narayana Rao
16. Shri C.L. Ruala
17. Shri Arjun Charan Sethi
18. Shri Virendra Singh
19. Shri Dharmendra Yadav
20. Shri Jai Prakash Narayan Yadav
#21. Vacant
Rajya Sabha
22. Sardar Sukhdev Singh Dhindsa
23. Shri Rajmani Patel
24. Shri Narayan Rane
(iii)
#Vacant due to resignation of Shri B.S. Yeddyurappa from the Membership of Lok Sabha
w.e.f. 18.05.2018 vide Bulletin Part-II Table Office (B) No. 6885 dated 19.05.2018.

25. Shri Kailash Soni
26. Shri Mohd. Ali Khan
27. Shri K.K. Ragesh
28. Shri Ram Nath Thakur
29. Shri R. Vaithilingam
30. Shri Harnath Singh Yadav
31. Dr. Chandrapal Singh Yadav
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Shri D.S. Malha Ñ Joint Secretary
2. Shri Arun K. Kaushik Ñ Director
3. Shri Sumesh Kumar Ñ Under Secretary
(iv)

(v)
INTRODUCTION
I, the Chairperson, Standing Committee on Agriculture (2017-18),
having been authorized by the Committee to submit the Report on their
behalf, present this Fifty Sixth Report on action taken by the Government
on the Observations/Recommendations contained in the Forty Seventh
Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) of the Standing Committee on Agriculture
(2017-18) on ÔDemands for Grants (2018-19) Õ pertaining to the Ministry
of Agriculture and Farmers Welfare (Department of Agriculture,
Cooperation and Farmers Welfare).
2. The Forty Seventh Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) of the Standing
Committee on Agriculture (2017-18) on ÔDemands for Grants (2018-19) Õ
pertaining to Ministry of Agriculture and Farmers Welfare (Department
of Agriculture, Cooperation and Farmers Welfare) was presented to
Lok Sabha and laid on the Table of Rajya Sabha on 06.03.2018. The
Action Taken Notes on the Report were received on 14.06.2018.
3. The Report was considered and adopted by the Committee at
their Sitting held on 31.07.2018.
4. An analysis of the action taken by the Government on the
Observations/Recommendations contained in the Forty Seventh Report
(Sixteenth Lok Sabha) of the Committee is given in Appendix.
   N
EW D ELHI; HUKMDEV NARAYAN YADAV,
02 August, 2018 Chairperson,
11 Shravana, 1940 (Saka) Standing Committee on Agriculture.

1
CHAPTER I
REPORT
This Report of the Committee on Agriculture deals with the action
taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations
contained in the Forty-Seventh Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) of the
Standing Committee on Agriculture (2017-2018) on ÒDemands for Grants
(2018-19) Ó pertaining to Ministry of Agriculture (Department of
Agriculture, Cooperation and Farmers Welfare) which was presented to
Lok Sabha on 06.03.2018 and laid on the Table of Rajya Sabha on
06.03.2018.
1.2 The Ministry of Agriculture and Farmers Welfare (Department of
Agriculture, Cooperation and Farmers Welfare) have furnished Action
Taken Replies in respect of all the 15 Observations/Recommendations
contained in the Report. These replies have been categorized as under:
(i) Observations/Recommendations that have been accepted by
the Government:
Recommendation Nos. 1, 2, 3, 6, 8, 12, 13 and 15
Total 08
Chapter-II
(ii) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which the
Committee do not desire to pursue in view of the
GovernmentÕs reply:
Recommendation No. NIL
Total NIL
Chapter-III
(iii) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which action
taken replies of the Government have not been accepted by
the Committee:
Recommendation Nos. 4 and 10
Total 02
Chapter-IV
(iv) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which final
replies of the Government are still awaited:
Recommendation Nos. 5, 7, 9, 11 and 14
Total 05
Chapter-V

2
1.3 The Committee trust that utmost importance would be given
to implementation of the Observations/Recommendations accepted
by the Government. In cases, where it is not possible for the
Department to implement the Recommendations in letter and spirit,
the matter should be reported to the Committee with reasons for
non-implementation. The Committee desire that further Action
Taken Notes on the Observations/Recommendations contained in
Chapter-I and final Action Taken Replies to the Recommendations
contained in Chapter-V of this Report be furnished to them at an
early date.
1.4 The Committee will now deal with the action taken by the
Government on some of the Recommendations in the succeeding
paragraphs.
A. National Seeds Corporation
Recommendation (Serial No. 4)
1.5 The Committee had observed/recommended as under:Ñ
ÒThe Committee note that National Seeds Corporation (NSC) is sole
PSU under the administrative control of DAC&FW which is engaged
in production and distribution of seeds, monitoring availability of
Breeder, Foundation and Certified Seeds of all India Varieties and
ensuring their timely availability. The NSC is engaged in setting of
adequate processing facilities and storing capacity to ensure timely
processing and storage of seed. The Committee have been informed
that NSC have earned a net profit of 38.84, 49.71 and 51.80 crore
during 2014-15, 2015-16 and 2016-17. The Committee also note
that NSC has achieved target for production of raw seeds during
2015-16 and 2016-17. However , the Committee were not provided
other details such as procurement of seeds, supply of seeds etc.
which would have enabled the Committee to properly assess the
performance of NSC for which it has been incorporated as a
Government Company. The Committee also observe that supply of
certified hybrid seeds in country is less than their demand which
is reflected in low Seed Replacement ratio in the country.
This fact has also been brought out by the Committee in their 39th
Report. The Committee are of view that there Õs greater need of
Government intervention to ensure adequate supply of good quality
hybrid seeds at reasonable rates to the farmers of the country.
Against this background, role of NSC as a Government Company in
achieving this aim become quite crucial. The Committee, therefore,
recommend the Government to broaden the horizon of working of

3
NSC so that it become a significant player in seed market in the
country to ensure adequate supply of quality seeds to the farmers.
The Committee desire the Government to take steps to enhance
financial and professional capacity of NSC and enhance targets for
production, procurement and sale of seeds based on realistic
assessment of demand in Indian agriculture market. The Committee
would like to be apprised about steps taken in this regard within
three months of presentation of this Report. Ó
Reply of the Government
1.6 The Department of Agriculture, Cooperation and Farmers Welfare
in the Action Taken Reply has stated as under:Ñ
ÒApart from National Seeds Corporation (NSC), multiplication of
Breeder/Foundation Seeds and production and distribution of quality
seeds to farmers are undertaken by 16 State Seed Corporations,
State Department of Agriculture, State Seeds Farms, State Agriculture
Universities Farm, State Seed Cooperatives, Krishak Bharati
Cooperative (KRIBHCO), Indian Farmers Fertiliser Cooperative
(IFFCO), Indian Farm Forestry Development Co-Operative Limited
(IFFDC), National Agricultural Cooperative Marketing Federation of
India (NAFED), National Fertizliers Limited (NFL), Hindustan
Insecticide Limited (HIL) as well as by Private Seed Companies and
major seed producers.
Details of production/procurement of seeds by the NSC (through
seed growers and production at their farm) and sale of seeds by
the NSC for the years 2014-15, 2015-16 and 2016-17 are at
Annexure-I &II, respectively. Details of production and sale of Hybrid
seeds by the NSC during the years 2014-15, 2015-16 and 2016-17
are at Annexure-III & IV , respectively.
The production/availability of hybrid seeds in the country are more
than the demand during the year 2014-15 to 2017-18 as detailed at
Annexure-V . Seed Replacement Rate of major crops during the year
2004-05 to 2016-17 are at Annexure-VI. The Seed Replacement Rate
has shown an increasing trend except few crops. The Government
also provides assistance for production and distribution of hybrid
seeds under National Food Security Mission (NFSM), Bringing Green
Revolution in Eastern Indian (BGREI) and National Mission Oilseeds
and Oilpalm (NMOOP) as detailed at Annexure-VII.
NSC is producing and supplying good quality hybrid seeds of Paddy,
Bajra, Maize, Sorghum, Arhar , Sunflower, Castor & Vegetable Seeds.

4
The actual production of hybrid seeds by NSC were 26041, 36242
& 13909 Qtls. during 2014-15, 2015-16 and 2016-17, respectively.
These hybrids seeds are being supplied to the farmers at reasonable
prices, which is lesser than the market price of hybrid seeds e.g.
the sale price of NSC for tomato hybrids are approximately 66% less
than the market price of other tomato hybrids.
After soliciting the approval of the Cabinet and completion of codal
formalities of the Ministry of Corporate Affairs, the erstwhile State
Farms Corporation of India (SFCI) was amalgamated with the NSC
w.e.f. 01.04.2014 to bring about greater synergy in production and
distribution for quality seeds.
In order to enhance financial and professional capacity of NSC and
for ensuring enhanced targets for production, procurement and
sale of seeds as well as increase in turnover , following steps have
been taken:
Financial Capacity:
¥ Higher targets are fixed every year for making available
good quality seed and their sale but actual performance
depend on the agro climate conditions.
¥ Efforts are made to increase the profitability and
corresponding net worth of the corporation. The net woth of
the corporation (as on 31.3.2017) is Rs. 585.20 crore against
Rs. 547.37 crore as on 31.3.2016. Similarly the capital
employed has increased from Rs. 674.67 crore (as on
31.3.2016) to Rs. 705.96 crore (as on 31.3.2017) and working
capital of the corporation has also increased from Rs. 530.21
crore (as on 31.3.2016) to Rs. 554.81 crore (as on 31.3.2017).
¥ Continuous efforts have been made to bring un-cultivable
land into cultivable by improving irrigation facilities which
resulted in reduction in cost of production.
¥ Diversification of the corporation through activities like fish
seed production, fodder seed production and converting the
non seed into value added products for commercial sale are
undertaken.
¥ Regular investment in construction of seed godown, seed
processing plants and other agricultural machineries are made
to reduce the cost of hiring and maintenance of machinery.

5
Professional capacity:
¥ NSC has revised its Recruitment Rules in 2013 and amended/
updated the same in June, 2017 for selection of
knowledgeable professionals as per industry norms to achieve
the objective of the corporation.
¥ Recruitment at various levels are made through all India
competitive examination both in executive and non-executive
cadre from 2015/2016 onwards.
¥ One year training are provided to all recruited professionals
and exposure at central state farm, regional offices and
area offices are given to them and their performance are
evaluated periodically.
¥ Trainees are also deputed in reputed institutions like Indian
Agriculture Research Institute (IARI), National Institute of
Agricultural Extension Management (MANAGE), Indian Cost
and Works Accounts (ICWA), Institute of Secretariat Training
and Management (ISTM), National Archive of India (NAI) etc.
to improve their professional knowledge in the related field.
¥ Cluster promotion scheme has been revised to motivate the
highly qualified employees which helped in reducing the
attrition rate.
¥ For motivating the employees social security coverage like
defined contribution superannuation pension scheme,
benevolent social scheme for the family and post retirement
contributory medical benefit scheme has been introduced.
¥ Electronic Annual Performance Appraisal Report (e-APAR) has
been introduced after 2017 for employees (E-0 and above
level) to bring transparency in evaluation of their
performance.
Seed production:
¥ To increase production of Breeder, Foundation and Certified
Seeds in farms, NSC is regularly enhancing its irrigation
facilities through Micro irrigation, construction of tanks and
lining of water course as well as by converting non-cultivable
land.
¥ More area has been brought for enhancing Pulses certified
seed production.

6
¥ Action has been taken to increase the production of oil
seeds and ensure availability of good quality certified seed
of oilseeds to the farmers in the country for enhancing
commercial production of oil seed crops, which will reduce
imports.
¥ Production of Minor Millets is being added and increased by
making available quality seeds of these crops.
¥ Production targets of important Hybrid cereals like maize,
Sorghum, Bajra and Paddy has been increased. For paddy
hybrid seed production, NSC entered into MoU with M/s SL
Agritech Philippines for production of SL-8H variety which is
a short duration, having good adaptability and yield
potentiality in India.
¥ The seed production target is also being increased in respect
of hybrid vegetable crops like Brinjal, Tomato, Bhindi and
Grounds Vegetables.
¥ Seed production of fodder Maize, sorghum, fodder bajra,
and F . Gaur has been increased for increasing milk production
in the country.
¥ Due to uncertainty in Monsoon and Abiotic conditions, seed
production for varieties like high yielding, short duration,
stress tolerant, drought tolerant, resistant to insect, pest
and diseases have been adopted by NSC. More than 60%
product basket consists of these varities.
¥ Bt. Cotton seed production has been started at Central State
Farm (CSF), Hissar , Haryana.
¥ Seed production of Jute has been increased by executing a
MoU with Jute Corporation of India.
Seed procurement:
¥ To bring maximum farmers either under seed production
chain or under supply of seed at reasonable rates, NSC has
made a uniform procurement policy for procurement of seed.
¥ The seed villages model is being adopted to ensure maximum
procurement in a particular village.
¥ Payment to seed growers are ensured promptly.
¥ Timely processing of seed is being ensured to return non-
productive seeds to growers in time.

7
¥ Mobile processing plant has been introduced to ensure
procurement at village level in Uttarakhand.
Turnover of NSC:
¥ NSC Õs main focus is to provide quality certified seed to the
farmers for which breeder and foundation seeds are produced
at growers farms.
¥ To improve the quality, desired infrastructure is being created.
¥ Aggressive sales promotion activities undertaken including
publicity through jeep campaign, advertisement in print
media.
¥ Business diversification made through sale of fish seeds,
fodder blocks and value added product.
¥ Emphasis given on High Value and Low Volume seeds like
vegetable seeds.
¥ Special attention given to increase sale of Pulses, Oilseeds,
Fodder Seeds, Green Manure seeds and Hybrid seeds.
¥ Conduced personal interaction programme with dealers/
farmers for feedback on NSC products and popularize brand
NSC.
¥ New packing materials like poly pouches and laminated bags
etc. have been introduced to make the seed packets
attractive to compete with private seed companies.
¥ Enrolled new dealers to strengthen the dealership network
of NSC to ensure last mile connectivity.
¥ To popularize vegetable cultivation among urban public, sale
of seeds through automated vending machine has been
introduced.
¥ Finalized system for online sale of seeds.
¥ Introduced scheme to award best performing area office,
regional office and dealers to boost the morale of the hard
working staff and loyal dealers.
¥ Development of separate marketing cadre to strengthen
market activities. Ó
1.7 While observing low Seed Replacement ratio in the country,
the Committee have recommended the Government to broaden the
horizon of working of National Seed Corporation (NSC) by augmenting

8
financial and professional capacity of NSC so that it become a
significant player in seed market in the country to ensure adequate
supply of quality seeds to the farmers. The Department in their
Action Taken Replies apart from stating steps being taken to augment
financial and professional capacity has also submitted about other
agencies engaged in multiplication of Breeder/Foundation Seeds and
production and distribution of quality seeds to farmers. The
Department has once again reiterated that production/availability of
hybrid seeds in the country are more than the demand during the
years 2014-15 to 2017-18 and stated about increasing trend of Seed
Replacement Rate of most crops. The Committee also note that
prices of hybrids seeds being supplied by NSC to the farmers are
lesser than the market price of hybrid seeds of other companies.
The Committee are of view that assumption of the Government
regarding demand of hybrid seeds in the country is erroneous as it
does not take into account of target of higher seed replacement
ratio. The Committee are of further view that most of the farmers
are not able to use hybrid seeds due to their high prices which is
reflected in low seed replacement ratio and lower productivity of
major crops in the country. The Committee, therefore, recommend
the Government to analyze the requirement of hybrid seeds in the
country keeping in view of target of maximum seed replacement
ratio. Further, the Government should take steps to enhance the
market share of National Seed Corporation so that quality hybrid
seeds could be made available to the farmers at reasonable prices.
The Committee also desire the NSC to involve and train more numbers
of progressive farmers in production of hybrid seeds in the country.
B. National Horticulture Board (NHB)
Recommendation (Serial No. 5)
1.8 The Committee had observed/recommended as under:Ñ
ÒThe Committee note that National Horticulture Board (NHB) has
mandate to strengthen Commercial Horticulture hubs in various
parts of the country through integrated hi-tech horticulture projects
and also strengthening post harvest and cold chain infrastructure in
the country. Objective of NHB is to improve integrated development
of Horticulture industry and to help in coordinating, sustaining the
production and processing of fruits and vegetables. The Committee
were informed that NHB is implementing five schemes namely
Development of Commercial Horticulture through Production and

9
Post Harvest Management of Horticulture Crops, Capital Investment
Subsidy for Construction/Expansion/Modernization of Cold Storages
and Storages for Horticulture Produce, Technology Development and
Transfer for Promotion of Horticulture, Market Information Service
for Horticulture Crops and Horticulture Promotion Services/Expert
Services and Strengthening Capability of NHB for Comprehensive
development of Horticulture sector in the country.
The Committee note that NHB has been provided the budgetary
support of Rs. 1927.64 crore since 2010. The Committee further
note that NHB has earned a revenue of Rs. 14.18 crore during the
same period as application fee from the applicants which is used
for miscellaneous purpose such as printing of application forms,
brochures & guidelines of NHB Schemes, technical bulletins, various
technical standards, horticulture data base etc. The Committee
were also informed that investment of NHB amounting to Rs. 1513.51
crore through back ended schemes from 2010 onwards have attracted
4-5 times investment from the private sector/financial Institutions.
The Committee note that schemes of NHB helped in setting of
17982 integrated commercial horticulture projects relating to
production and post harvest management with back ended subsidy
amounting to Rs. 953.69 crore and 3113 cold chain/primary
processing involving subsidy of Rs. 559.82 crore. The NHB has also
done Accreditation of 1653 nurseries and supported several projects
for promotion of new technology and its transfer. The Committee
are of view that benefits of schemes being financed by the Public
Money should reach all parts of the Country. There should be proper
awareness campaign should be done in print and digital media so
that applicants from different parts of the country may apply for
the funds available under the scheme. The Committee, therefore,
recommend the Government to take steps for awareness campaign
about schemes being implemented by the NHB and other Autonomous
Bodies. The committee would like to be apprised about steps taken
in this regard within three months of presentation of this Report. Ó
1.9 The Department of Agriculture, Cooperation and Farmers Welfare
in the Action Taken Reply has stated as under:Ñ
ÒIn compliance to the Report, NHB has undertaken critical analysis
on the distribution of Scheme across the states and UTs and social
groups so that the benefit of NHB Schemes is availed by all the
States and UTs and social groups evenly.

10
NHB scheme has already evoked very good response and presently
there is huge backlog of pending proposals. Hence, currently Board
is not accepting new applications except for SC/ST category. Fresh
applications are likely to be accepted in the month of August, 2018
after giving wide publicity through print and digital media. To ensure
benefits of NHB schemes reach all parts of the country, following
steps are being taken to create awareness of NHB scheme:
¥ Scheme information is being uploaded on NHB website in
22 languages.
¥ Focused awareness programme will be undertaken in
identified States/districts having low awareness of NHB
scheme.
¥ In Annual Action Plan 2018-19, NHB has also proposed
following awareness programme:
District level-500
State level-100
National level-25. Ó
1.10 In order to enhance the ambit of various schemes being
implemented by the National Horticulture Board (NHB), the Committee
had recommended the Government to take steps for proper awareness
campaign about schemes being implemented by the NHB and other
Autonomous Bodies in print and digital media so that applicants from
different parts of the country may apply for the funds available
under the scheme and benefits of schemes being financed by the
Public Money should reach all parts of the country.
The Department in their action taken reply has submitted that
consequent to recommendation of the Committee, NHB has
undertaken critical analysis on the distribution of Scheme across the
States and UTs and social groups so that the benefit of NHB Schemes
is availed by all the States and UTs and social groups evenly. The
Committee were informed that NHB scheme has already evoked very
good response and presently there is huge backlog of pending
proposals. Hence, currently Board is not accepting new applications
except for SC/ST category. The Committee were assured that fresh
applications for various schemes will be accepted in the month of
August, 2018 after giving wide publicity through print and digital
media. The Committee were also informed about various steps such
as uploading of scheme information on NHB website in 22 languages,
plan for focused awareness programme in identified States/districts
having low awareness of NHB scheme and proposed 625 awareness
campaign at District, State and National Level in the country.

11
The Committee note that Department Õs reply is silent on
State-wise distribution of beneficiaries of various schemes of the
NHB. Further, the Department also failed to furnish details of
awareness campaign being planned in print and digital medium and
allocation for the purpose. The Committee are of view that uploading
of information in local language will not suffice as majority of farmer
community in our country still lack access to internet and digital
skill to apply for these schemes. Further, for balanced growth of
agriculture sector in all States of Country, it is imperative that benefits
of Government Schemes are evenly distributed across the States.
The Committee, therefore, once again reiterate their earlier
recommendation and desire the Department to frame a uniform
policy for wide publicity of various schemes being implemented by
Autonomous bodies under the administrative purview of the DAC&FW
and allocate adequate funds for the purpose. The Committee also
desire the Department to furnish list of State-wise beneficiaries of
various schemes being implemented by NHB and other Autonomous
bodies and funds allocated for their publicity during the last 5 years.
C. Import and Export of Agriculture Commodities
Recommendation (Serial No. 10)
1.11 The Committee had observed/recommended as under:Ñ
ÒThe Committee also note that India imports a lot of agricultural
and allied products from other countries. The total agricultural and
allied products imports of the Country has increased from
Rs. 95718.89 crore during 2012-13 to Rs. 164680.56 crore during
2016-17. As a result, the share of agriculture import in total import
in the country has increased from 3.59% in 2012-13 to 6.42% during
2016-17. The Committee further observes that vegetable oils, pulses,
fresh fruits, cashew, spices and sugar are some of the major
agricultural commodities in terms of value which were imported in
the country during the same period. The Committee are of
considered opinion that demands for agriculture products in the
country is bound to change significantly with changing dietary pattern
associated with rising income and impact of globalization,
necessitating import and thereby, causing strain on foreign exchange.
The Committee are of the view that there is need for enhancing
production of agriculture products which are currently being
imported. The Committee, therefore, recommend that a detailed
study to find ways to enhance production of these agriculture
produce in different agro-climatic zones and subzones in the country

12
be conducted. The Committee also recommend the Department to
start a special project for development of local varieties of dry
fruits, spices, olive etc. which are currently being imported in the
country. The Committee also desire the Department to take steps
and provide special incentives to the farmers for cultivation of
these agriculture products in the country in order to reduce their
import. The Committee would like to be apprised of the initiatives
undertaken by the Department in this regard. Ó
1.12 The Department of Agriculture, Cooperation and Farmers
Welfare in the Action Taken Reply has stated as under:Ñ
ÒImport of agricultural products is influenced by various factors like
demand, supply, domestic production and availability, seasonality,
international prices, domestic quality, Government policies etc. it
is mentioned that vegetable oils and pulses constitute about 70% of
IndiaÕs agricultural imports, to meet the gap between demand and
availability from domestic sources, imports are made. Sugar is mainly
imported in raw form from domestic processing and then exporting.
To incentivize farmers to invest more in increasing productivity and
production and protect their interests, Government has recently
taken various trade policy measures. A list of the recent trade
policy measures in chronological order taken by Government is at
Annexure-VIII.Ó
1.13 While showing their concern on increasing share of
agriculture import in the country, the Committee had recommended
the Government to conduct a study to find ways to enhance
production of agriculture produce currently being imported. The
Committee had also recommended the Department to start a special
project for development of local varieties of dry fruits, spices, olive
etc. which are currently being imported in the country and to provide
special incentives to the farmers for cultivation of these agriculture
products in the country in order to reduce their import. The
Department in their Action Taken replies apart from explaining about
factors affecting import of agricultural commodities in the Country
has furnished list of recent trade policy measures taken by
Government to incentivize farmers to invest more in increasing
productivity and production.
The Committee are of view that the Government has not taken
their recommendation in letter and spirit. The Committee are of
view that our Country being blessed with varied agro-climatic zones

13
has potential to emerge as a major producer of most of the agricultural
products required. Further, investment in agriculture research over
the years has established a dedicated and efficient agriculture
research manpower which has capacity to solve problems being faced
by the Country. The Committee are of opinion that these two factors
can be effectively utilized to identify areas in which production of
agriculture produce which are currently being imported, develop
local varieties of exotic crops and fruits and provision of necessary
technical and extension services to the farmers to reduce share of
agriculture import in the Country. The Committee are of view that
a new agricultural strategy on these lines will not only be able to
reduce agriculture import but will also help to enhance income of
farmers which is stated aim of the Government. The Committee
therefor, once again reiterate their earlier recommendations and
desire the Government to chalk on a strategy on these lines for the
benefit of the farmers of the country.
D. Gramin Agricultural Markets (GrAMs)
Recommendation (Serial No. 11)
1.14 The Committee had observed/recommended as under:Ñ
ÒThe Committee note that Government is planning to develop and
upgrade existing 22,000 rural haats into Gramin Agricultural Markets
(GrAMs) which will provide farmers facility to make direct sale to
consumers and bulk purchasers. The Committee were informed that
physical infrastructure will be strengthened using MGNREGA and
other Government Schemes in these GrAMs,. The Government is
planning to electronically link GrAMs to e-NAM and keep it exempted
from regulations of APMCs. The Department also informed that an
Agri-Market Infrastructure Fund with a corpus of Rs. 2,000 crore is
to be set up for upgrading 22,000 Haats into GrAMs and further
development of 585 APMCs.
The Committee also note that DAC&FW has initiated process of
discussion and consultation with other Ministries and NABARD for
convergence of schemes to provide basic infrastructure requirements
such as platforms, office block, small storage godowns, Garbage
pits, drinking water facility, toilets, drains, internal roads etc. under
proposed GrAMs Scheme. The Government intend to use Agri Market
Infrastructure Fund for provision of other infrastructure like
e-trading platform, Electronic Weighing Machines, price information
board etc.
However , the Committee are astonished to note that Government
did not undertake any study/survey to access the actual numbers
of rural agriculture markets in the country and Government is relying

14
on data available on National Asset Directory about number of
assets including Grameen Haats/Rural Markets maintained by Ministry
of Panchayati Raj, Government of India. According to this data,
there are 2090 market yards and 14756 sheds in the Country. The
Committee were further informed that as per different State
agencies, there are approximately 22,000 rural haat in the country.
The Department have also informed that collection of data on Rural
Periodic Market has been initiated by Directorate of Marketing and
Inspection (DMI) and is under progress.
The Committee appreciate the Government for taking initiative for
strengthening the network of Rural Periodic Haat or ÔGrameen HaatÕ
As they are popularly called across the Country. The Committee
had selected the subject ÔAgriculture Marketing and Role of Weekly
Grameen Haats Õ in 2017-18 and drawn the attention of the
Department towards utilization of ÔRural Grameen HaatÕ as a platform
for rural marketing which will help the farmers to realize reasonable
price of their agriculture produce. The Committee are of view that
these Grameen haats being integral part of Indian culture provide
excellent platform for provision of facilities meant for farmers and
to take awareness campaign about schemes being implemented by
the Government in Agriculture sector. These Grameen Haats, if
properly developed, can emerge as a fulcrum around which the
Government can develop the agrarian economy and achieve the
aims of doubling the income of farmers. However , target of
development of 22000 rural haats is too small a number to serve
the needs of ÔGrameen HaatsÕ in a country of 6,49,481 Villages. The
Committee are of view that number of ÔRural Grameen Haat Õ may
be many times more in the Country. The Government should take
step to identify all marginal, small or big ÔRural Grameen Haat Õ
across the Country. The Committee, therefore, recommend the
Government to implement this scheme in every ÔRural Grameen
HaatÕ in the country. The Committee also desire the Government to
implement this scheme in mission mode with a defined time frame.
The Committee are also of view that provision of small cold storage
facility in proposed GrAM Scheme will go a long way to reduce post
harvest crop losses of agriculture produce. The Committee,
therefore, desire the Government to make provision of small cold
storage facility in GrAM. Ó
1.15 The Department of Agriculture, Cooperation and Farmers
Welfare in the Action Taken Reply has stated as under:Ñ
ÒAs already submitted to the Committee, the Department is in
consultation with NABARD, Ministries of Panchayati Raj, Ministry of

15
Rural Development and Ministry of Tribal Affairs for developing and
upgrading existing 22,000 rural haats into Grameen Agriculture
Markets (GrAMs) as announced in Budget 2018-19. In these proposed
GrAMs, physical infrastructure shall be strengthened by convergence
various schemes like MGNREGA, PMGSY etc. These GrAMs after
development will be electronically linked to e-NAM and shall be
exempted from regulations of APMC Act. An Agri-Market
Infrastructure Fund with a corpus of Rs. 2,000 crore is to be set up
by NABARD for requisite marketing infrastructure in GrAMs and
further development of 585 APMCs. NABARD is working out modalities
for the same.
An Expenditure Finance Committee (EFC) Memorandum is being
prepared by the Department for seeking Rs. 2,000 crore. After
approval of EFC, approval of Cabinet Committee on Economic Affairs
(CCEA) will be solicited. As recommended by the Committee to
implement the scheme in every Grameen Rural Market, it is to
inform that there is an initial target to implement the scheme in
22,000 Rural Haats as announcement.
Department is undertaking survey of grameen rural markets in
country, through its associated office Directorate of Marketing &
Inspection (DMI) w.r.t. their location, status of infrastructure,
commodities traded etc. This will help to identify number of village
haats and requirement of marketing infrastructure including the
requirement of small cold storage etc. in GrAMs. The survey is
under progress. Ó
1.16 While appreciating the initiative of the Government for
taking initiative for strengthening the network of Rural Periodic Haat
or ÔGrameen HaatÕ had opined that number of ÔRural Grameen HaatÕ
may be many times more in the Country and recommended the
Government to undertake a survey to to identify all marginal, small
or big ÔRural Grameen HaatÕ across the Country. The Committee had
also desired the Government to make provision of small cold storage
facility in GrAM. The Department in their action Taken Reply has
submitted that survey of grameen rural markets in country, through
its associated office Directorate of Marketing & Inspection (DMI) w.r.t.
their location, status of infrastructure, commodities traded etc is
being undertaken and yet to be completed. The Committee were
also informed that Department is in consultation with NABARD,
Ministries of Panchayati Raj, Ministry of Rural Development and
Ministry of Tribal Affairs for developing and upgrading existing 22,000
rural haats into Grameen Agriculture Markets (GrAMs) as announced

16
in Budget 2018-19 and Expenditure Finance Committee (EFC)
Memorandum is being prepared by the Department for seeking
Rs. 2,000 crore. After approval of EFC, approval of Cabinet Committee
on Economic Affairs (CCEA) will be solicited.
The Committee appreciate the Department to take steps for
undertaking the survey about Grameen Haat across the country. The
Committee are of view that this data obtained from this survey will
be very useful for properly implementing the Scheme. However, the
Committee desire the Government to provide adequate manpower
and funds to the Directorate of Marketing & Inspection (DMI) in order
to complete the survey within shortest possible time. The Committee
also desire the Government to complete all formalities for inter-
Departmental consultation and Coordination with State Governments
in order to initiate this scheme in 2018.

17
CHAPTER II
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN
ACCEPTED BY THE GOVERNMENT
Analysis of Demands
Recommendation (Serial No. 1)
Indian farmers with their hard work, ingenuity and limited resources,
were able to script a success story to bring a turnaround in food
production of the Country and made our country self reliant. They
helped the country to achieve a remarkable growth in agriculture,
increasing food grain production from 83 million tonnes in 1960-61 to
about 275.68 million tonnes in 2016-17. Now, our country is not only
self sufficient in production of food grain to meet food requirement of
the country but agriculture is also contributing towards foreign earning.
Indian Farmers, whenever provided with adequate financial and technical
support, have helped the Country in enhancing food production and
thereby, ensuring food security of the country. However, barring few
States and regions, socio-economic condition of majority of farmers has
not improved vis-a-vis other sections of Indian Society. Against this
backdrop, emphasis of current Government on doubling the income of
farmers by 2022 assumes significance and will help to bring a turnaround
in fortunes of our ÔAnndataÕ (farmers). The Committee note that the
budgetary provision of Rs. 46,700.00 crore has been made for DAC&FW
for the year 2018-19, which is enhancement of about 11.58% as compared
to allocations of Rs. 41,105.00 crore (RE) during 2017-18. However , the
Committee note that this amount constitutes only 1.91 percent of the
total budgeted amount of the Union Government. The Committee also
note that the Government has enhanced allocations for implementation
of some schemes such as PMFBY , PMKSY , KUY and NMSA by 44.59 percent,
17.65 percent, 14.59 percent and 25.14 percent respectively whereas,
allocations for some important schemes such as Rashtriya Krishi Vikas
Yojana (RKVY) and National Project on Soil Health and Fertility were
reduced by 24.21 percent and 11.10 percent. Taking into focus the
plight of our farmers and with a view to achieve the target to double
the income of farmers by 2022, the Committee urge the Ministry of
Agriculture and Farmers Welfare to take up the matter with Ministry of
Finance to increase the share of the Department in Central Plan so that
various schemes undertaken by them do not suffer for want of funds.

18
Reply of the Government
The Plan/Non-Plan distinction of expenditure has been abolished
w.e.f. FY 2017-18. Therefore, there are no Central Plan component in
the Budget of Department of Agriculture, Cooperation and Farmers
Welfare.
Further , the budget of DAC&FW has been rising over the years and
a number of schemes has been introduced to strengthen the Agriculture
Sector (Annexure-IX).
The budget is allocated after taking into consideration the resource
availability, unspent balances available with the Ministry, spending
capacity etc. The Government will make every effort to increase
allocation for Agriculture.
[Ministry of Agriculture & Farmers Welfare (Department of
Agriculture, Cooperation and Farmers Welfare) O.M. No.6-5/2018-
B&A, dated 14 June, 2018]
Recommendation (Serial No. 2)
The Committee note that many new schemes such as
Computerization of Primary Agricultural Cooperative Societies (PACS),
Corpus fund for micro irrigation, implementation of Market Assurance
Scheme, Bhavantar Bhugtan Yojana (Price Deficiency Procurement
Scheme), Restructured National Bamboo mission etc. have been
announced by the Government in the Budget 2018-19.
The Committee have been informed that Computerization of PACS
scheme envisage Computerization of 63000 functional PACS in three
years with a project cost of Rs. 1985 crore from 2018-2021.The project
estimated cost will be borne in the ratio of 60:35:05 by Central
Government, State Governments and PACS, whereas funding pattern for
the NEAR states and Himalayan States will be 80:20.
Dedicated Micro irrigation fund with an initial corpus amount of
Rs. 5000 crore has been envisaged to be instituted with NABARD for
encouraging public and private investment in modern irrigation methods
such as drip and sprinkler irrigation and offering support for expanding
coverage of micro irrigation by encouraging States to avail this credit
at lower interest rates. This Scheme aims to encourage water use
efficiency to realize the objective of Ôper drop more crop Õ.
The Committee appreciates the initiatives in current budget and
they are pretty sanguine that these will ease down the difficulties
being faced by the farmers of the Country. The Committee are of view

19
that there is urgent need to modernize the functioning of Primary
Agricultural Cooperative Societies (PACS) and plan for computerization
of PACS will help to bring efficiency and transparency in their functioning.
However , the Committee are of considered view that most of the PACS
in the Country will not be able to contribute their share as proposed
in the scheme. Further , there is need for augmenting the financial
resources of the PACS. The Committee, therefore, desire the Government
to adopt a more liberal financing ratio for the implementation of the
scheme and do away with the requirement of share of PACS for the
scheme. The Committee also desire the Government to complete all
formalities for constitution of Dedicated Micro irrigation fund with
NABARD so that interested States can avail credit facilities for promotion
of efficient irrigation methods among farmers. The Committee would
like to be apprised about steps taken in this regard within three months
of presentation of this Report.
Reply of the Government
Primary Agricultural Cooperative Societies (PACS)
The Computerization of Primary Agricultural Cooperative Societies
(PACS) has been envisaged as a Central Sector Scheme by the Government
to be implemented through NABARD. The Computerization of 63,000
viable PACS will be undertaken across the country in phased manner
over a period of three years w.e.f. 2018-19 to 2020-21 at a total cost
of Rs. 2142.50 crore. For continuity of the project, the Government
also propose to extend handholding support on cluster mode for the
2nd and 3rd stage of PACS computerization and it will run beyond
March, 2021 upto March 2023. Computerization of PACS is seen as a
measure that will facilitate PACS in streamlining the functioning, which
in turn should improve their credit/non-credit business and ultimately
augment their financial resources/capital base.
Regarding the need for augmenting the financial resources of the
PACS, it is mentioned that PACS is a State subject and to augment their
financial resources, PACS should make efforts for increasing its borrowing
members which will help them in increasing its share capital. Further,
they may be strengthened by providing financial resources by the State
Governments.
The matter regarding retaining share of PACS at 5% of project cost
has been deliberated by all stakeholders and it was considered necessary
that PACS must have a stake in the project, even if minimum, to
encourage them to align with the objective of the project, that is to
ensure improved service delivery to the large rural base financial
enclosure.

20
Micro Irrigation Fund (MIF)
In the Union Budget 2017-18, Hon Õble Finance Minister announced
setting up of a dedicated Micro Irrigation Fund (MIF) to be instituted
in NABARD with initial corpus of Rs. 5000 crore. The main objective of
the fund is to facilitate the States in mobilizing the resources for
expanding coverage of Micro Irrigation by taking up special and innovative
projects and also for incentivising micro irrigation beyond the provisions
available under PMKSY-PDMC to encourage farmers to install micro
irrigation systems.
(2) Expenditure Finance Committee (EFC) considered the proposal
of MIF in its meeting held on 23.02.2018.
(3) The Cabinet Committee on Economic Affairs (CCEA) held on
16.05.2018 considered the note on ÔPradhan Mantri Krishi Sinchayee
Yojana (PMKSY)- Corpus for Micro Irrigation Fund to be created with
National Bank for Agriculture and Rural Development (NABARD) Õ and
approved the proposal for setting up of a dedicated ÔMicro Irrigation
FundÕ (MIF) in NABARD with an initial corpus of Rs. 5000 crores to be
utilised during 2018-19 and 2019-20.
(4) Strategy for implementation of MIF:Ñ
(i) The loan will be extended by NABARD to the State
Governments during the remaining period of 14th Finance
Commission i.e. during 2018-19 and 2019-20 with allocation
of Rs. 2000 crore and Rs. 3000 crore respectively. Borrowings
from NABARD shall be paid back in 7 years including the
grace period of 2 years starting from 2018-19 to 2026-27
under Micro Irrigation Fund.
(ii) States may access MIF for innovative integrated projects,
including projects in the Public Private Partnership (PPP)
mode and also for incentivizing micro irrigation through an
additional (top up) subsidy over and above the one available
under PMKSY-PDMC Guidelines and for covering additional
areas. It should not be a substitute for State Õs share in
PMKSY-PDMC.
(iii) The lending rate under MIF has been proposed at 3% lower
than the cost of raising the fund by NABARD. This interest
subvention amount shall be paid to NABARD on annual/
periodical basis by Government of India. This cost shall be
met from the ongoing scheme of PMKSY-PDMC.

21
(iv) An Advisory Committee chaired by Secretary, DAC&FW has
been set up to provide directions and ensure effective
planning, coordination and monitoring.
(v) A Steering committee has also been set up for examining
and approving the Projects/proposals from State
Governments.
[Ministry of Agriculture & Farmers Welfare (Department of
Agriculture, Cooperation and Farmers Welfare) O.M. No.6-5/2018-
B&A, dated 14 June, 2018]
Revenue Receipt
Recommendation (Serial No. 3)
The Committee note that the DAC&FW has various sources for
Revenue Receipt (Interest Receipt, Dividends and Profit, Guarantee
Fees, Receipts From Plant Protection Services, Manures & Fertilizers,
Fee for Quality Control Grading Of Agricultural Products and Receipt
from other Services). The Committee were informed that the Department
has received revenue receipt of Rs. 449.36 crore and Rs. 533.83 crore
during 2016-17 and 2017-18 respectively. The Committee were further
informed that the Department have set a target of Rs. 472.62 crore for
revenue Receipt for 2018-19. However, the Department failed to furnish
any response on details of fee received by the training institutes under
the DAC&FW for consultancy/training services provided to other
organizations during 2016-17 and 2017-18.
The Committee also note that the Budget Grants of the DAC&FW
has other sources of recoveries [Rs. 3713.61 Crore during 2016-17 and
5000 crore for 2017-18 (RE)]. However, the Department did not furnish
the anticipated recoveries for 2018-19. The Committee were informed
sources for recovery were mainly on account of the expenditure met
out of Krishi Kalyan Kosh and refunds of unspent balances by the
implementing agencies. In this regard, the Committee were further
informed that Krishi Kalyan Kosh has been abolished by M/o Finance
after introduction of GST and the level of unspent balances has come
down on implementation of Public Financial Management System (PFMS).
Therefore no deduct recovery has been assumed in the budget of
2018-19. The Committee were informed that the Ministry does not
utilize the revenue receipts generated by it. However the receipts
credited to Krishi Kalyan Kosh were being utilized for offsetting the
expenditure through the mechanism of deduct recoveries. The accounting
procedure being followed had been approved by O/o Controller General
of Accounts with the concurrence of Comptroller and Auditor General
(C&AG) of India.

22
The Committee regret to note that the Department were not
forthcoming to furnish the information as desired by them. This led to
lack of comprehensive financial details about the Department and other
Agencies under their administrative control which would have helped
the Committee to analyze their performance and offer comments for
better financial management. The Committee deprecate this callous
attitude of the DAC&FW and hope that these mistakes will not be
repeated in future. Further , the Committee are of view that the
Department is erroneous in assuming the zero assumption for revenue
recovery for 2018-19 as unspent balances may not be practically nil
even after implementation of PFMS. The Committee, therefore,
recommend the Department to fine tune their financial management
system in order to reflect correct financial projection and position. The
committee would like to be apprised about steps taken in this regard
within three months of presentation of this Report.
Reply of the Government
The information sought by the Committee may be provided in two
parts:
(a) Details of revenue generated by training institutes during
2016-17 and 2017-18:
Revenue Generated by the Training Institutes of DAC&FW during
2016-17 and 2017-18 as on 28.02.2018:
1. Mechanization & Technology Training Institutes:
REVENUE GENERATED BY THE TRAINING INSTITUTES
(Rupees in crore)
2016-17 2017-18 as on (28.2.2018)
7.78 9.96
2. National Institute of Plant Health Management (NIPHM):
Activity 2016-17 2017-18
Fee received for consultancy/ Rs. 1.94 crore Rs. 3.32 crore
training services provided to
other organizations

23
3. Ch. Charan Singh National Institute, NIAM, Jaipur:
(Rs. in crore)
Sl. Name of the organisation Financial Amount of Souce of Revenue
No. from which revenue Year revenue
receipts reported
2016-17 100.94
2017-18 65.00
(estimated)
2018-19 85
(Estimated)
4. Directorate of Marketing & Inspection
(Rs. in crore)
Sl. Name of the organisation Financial Amount of Souce of Revenue
No. from which revenue Year revenue
receipts reported
2016-17 16.98
2017-18 21.20
2018-19 20.00 Approx.
5. National Institute for Agricultural Extension Management (MANAGE)
MANAGE has generated an amount of Rs. 2.93 crore during the
financial year 2016-17 and 2017-18 (upto January, 2018) respectively by
conducting consultancy programme and other receipts.
Detail 2016-17 2017-18 (upto January, 2018)
Consultancy Programmes 1.17 cr. 0.45 cr.
AC & ABC Receipts 0.57 cr. 0.19 cr
PGDM (ABM) Programme 1.19 cr. 1.50 cr.
2.93 cr. 2.14 cr.
(b) PFMS and its impact on unspent balances and reason for having
Zero budget under the head deduct recovery.
The Department is in agreement with the observation of the
committee regarding unspent balances, which may not be practically
Include Professional
Consultancy charges,
Training & Seminar
fee etc.
Ch. Charan Singh
National Institute of
Agricultural Marketing
(CCS NIAM), Jaipur
AGMARK Certification
under Agriculture
Produce Grading
Directorate of Marketing
& Inspection, DAC&FW

24
nil even after implementation of Public Finance Management (PFM). It
is a fact that unspent balance remains available with implementing
agencies even after implementation of PFMS. The rules itself provide
a period of one year in case of recurring Grant and 18 months in case
of Non Recurring Grant to the implementing agencies for full utilization
of grants released by Central Government.
With regards to assumption of Zero budget under the head ÔDeduct
RecoveryÕ (revenue Recovery). It is brought to the notice of committee
that the total amount of Rs. 3713.67 crores booked under the head
deduct recovery had a major component of expenditure adjusted from
Krishi Kalyan Kosh. The refund of unspent balances accounted for only
Rs. 117 crores.
Basis of Zero assumption of Deduct Recovery:
a. Abolition of Krishi Kalyan Cess, which has been the major
contributor in deduct recovery through Krishi Kalyan Kosh,
b. Implementation of PFMS,
c. Improved monitoring of expenditure at state level and
national level.
It is submitted that the Department is taking utmost care in reporting
information to the committee and in ensuring that the funds provided
to the State/UT Governments and implementing agencies do not remain
unutilized for a long periods.
[Ministry of Agriculture & Farmers Welfare (Department of
Agriculture, Cooperation and Farmers Welfare) O.M. No.6-5/2018-
B&A, dated 14 June, 2018]
Recommendation (Serial No. 6)
The Committee note that two out of 4 complaints of financial
irregularities since 2010 received in NHB were closed being of anonymous
nature. In case of one complaint, the penalty order for imposing major
penalty, after conducting formal inquiry, is under consideration of
Disciplinary Authority, NHB, while in case of other complaint, the matter
is under preliminary investigation. However , the Department have
furnished details of three cases of financial irregularities being dealt by
disciplinary authority of NHB. The Committee observe that contradiction
in details of financial irregularities clearly shows that Department do
not have a centralized database for reporting of financial irregularities
in Autonomous bodies/PSUs under their administrative control. The

25
Committee are of view that presence of a robust mechanism for reporting
of financial irregularities will go a long way to promote transparency
and ensure smooth functioning in Autonomous Bodies under
administrative control of DAC&FW. The Committee, therefore, desire
the Department to develop a mechanism for reporting of complaints of
financial irregularities in Autonomous Bodies under administrative control
of DAC&FW. The Committee also desire the Department to furnish
status of all cases of complaints reported to Department since 2010.
The committee would like to be apprised about steps taken in this
regard within three months of presentation of this Report.
Reply of the Government
So far as the complaints of financial irregularities since 2010, the
Board received 4 complaints, out of which two were closed being of
anonymous nature. In case of one complaint, the penalty order for
imposing major penalty has been issued on 27.02.2018, while in case
of other complaint, the matter is under preliminary investigation since
03.11.2017.
In so far as the penalty imposed since 2010, in case of disciplinary
proceedings, penalty has been imposed in 8 cases. Year-wise details are
as under:Ñ
Sl.No. Year of penalty No. of Penalty Nature of penalty
1. 2012 2 Major penalty
2. 2013 3 Major penalty
3. 2015 2 Major penalty
4. 2016 1 Major penalty
CVC & DoPT have already developed a mechanism with regard to
checking the vigilance cases pending in Ministry/Department. CVC/DoPT
has developed online reporting mechanism for faster reporting and
proper action. All the report with respect to this Department,
Subordinate Offices, Autonomous Bodies and organization are collected
in this Department and uploaded on CVC and DoPT websites by 15th of
every month. Also review meeting with stakeholders are held under the
Chairmanship of CVO/Deputy Secretary(Vig.) of the Department to
expedite processing of complaints.
[Ministry of Agriculture & Farmers Welfare (Department of
Agriculture, Cooperation and Farmers Welfare) O.M. No.6-5/2018-
B&A, dated 14 June, 2018]

26
Minimum Support Price for Agriculture Produce
Recommendation (Serial No. 8)
The Committee note that Government has decided to fix Minimum
Support Price (MSP) of all Kharif crops at least at one and half times
of their cost of production. The Committees have been informed that
Government has already declared MSP of majority of Rabi crops at least
one and half times of their cost of production. The Committee has been
informed that CACP recommendations about MSP is based on A2+FL
cost which includes all paid cost such as those incurred on hired human
labour , machine/bullock cart labour, rent paid on leased land, expenses
on input such as seeds, fertilizer, manure, irrigation etc. In addition,
it also includes imputed value of wages of family labour and depreciation
of farm machinery and building. The MSP fixed by the Government
provide adequate return over A2+FL. The Committee have been informed
that MSP fixed by the government for 2017-18 have been in excess of
50 per cent for 9 crops out of 22 mandated crops.
The Committee appreciate the decision of the Government to fix
MSP of 22 crops one and half times of production cost i.e. A2+FL.
However , the committee note that there has been demand from various
stakeholders including farmers and eminent scientists such as MS
Swaminathan to fix MSP of crops one and half times of C2 which also
takes into account of rental value of owned land and interest on fixed
capital apart from A2+FL. The Committee are of view that issue of
fixation of MSP needs a comprehensive reorientation in order to ensure
remunerative prices of agriculture produce. The Committee recall that
in their Sixtieth Report (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) on Pricing of Agriculture
Produce, many issues such as need of region-wise MSP , , broad basing
of Data used by the CACP , enhancement of representation of farmers
in CACP , timely announcement of MSP etc. were discussed in length and
recommendations were suggested by the Committee to make the process
of MSP farmers friendly. The Committee are of view that decision of
the Government to fix MSP at least one and half times is a praiseworthy
step to solve the problems of farmers of country. However , there is
need to take further steps in these areas so that farmers may get
comprehensive justice. The Committee would like the Government to
take a fresh look on recommendations of the Government as suggested
in aforementioned Report of the Committee.
Reply of the Government
Regarding CommitteeÕs views on comprehensive reorientation, from
time to time, Government constitutes expert committees to review the
methodological issues related to costs/support prices of agricultural

27
produce. This Ministry is guided by the recommendations of the Expert
Committee, which factors inputs from all stakeholders.
Regarding uniform Minimum Support Price (MSP), Government fixes
MSP for agricultural crops on the basis of recommendations of Commission
for Agricultural Costs & Prices (CACP). Region specific parameters are
kept in view by the CACP while recommending MSP for agricultural
crops. Since the cost of production varies in different States on account
of differences in levels of irrigation, resource endowment, farm
mechanization, land holding size etc., CACP uses all-India weighted
average cost of production while making its recommendations and
recommends uniform MSP which is applicable to all states and not
region or state- specific. Region-specific MSPs would encourage inefficient
production and would not only go against the principle of comparative
advantage in producing specific crops but also against the need for
development of a national market. The possible market distortions
involved in following such a system, are also to be kept in view. The
objective is to promote regionally differentiated production strategy
and encourage an efficient level of agricultural production in the country.
Regarding timely announcement of MSP , Government announces MSPs
of agricultural crops well in advance before the sowing season in order
to provide farmers an opportunity to choose the crop for cultivation.
Methodology of Price fixing by the Commission for Agricultural Costs
and Prices (CACP)
The Commission for Agricultural Costs & Prices (CACP) recommends
Minimum Support Price (MSP) at national level for 23 mandated
agricultural commodities (Annexure-X) including Fair and Remunerative
Price (FRP) for Sugarcane to the Government as per its Terms of
Reference while recommending the price policy, the Commission keeps
in view the following:
(i) The need to provide incentive to the producer for adopting
new/improved technology and developing a production
pattern broadly in the light of national requirements. The
Commission may also suggest such non-price measures as
would facilitate the achievement of these objectives.
(ii) The need to ensure rational utilization of land, water and
other production resources.
(iii) The likely effect of the price policy on the rest of the
economy, particularly on the cost of living, level of wages,
industrial cost structure and competitiveness of agriculture
and agro-based industries.

28
Therefore, in formulating the recommendations in respect of the
level of minimum support prices and other non-price measures, apart
from a comprehensive view of the entire structure of the economy of
a particular commodity or group of commodities, the Commission takes
into account the following factors:
i. Cost of production.
ii. Demand and supply situation in domestic and world markets.
iii. Trends in market pricesÑboth domestic and international.
iv. Changes in input prices.
v. Parity between prices paid and prices received by the farmers
(Terms of Trade).
vi. Inter-crop price parity.
vii. Effect on cost structure of agro-based products and
competitiveness of agriculture and agro-based products.
viii. Effect on cost of living.
ix. Effect on general price level and level of wages.
x. Assessment of objective needs of the economy at a particular
point of time, including food security, agricultural
diversification, etc.
The estimates of cost of cultivation, which is an important input for
forming the recommendation of MSP , are made available to the
Commission through the ÔComprehensive Scheme for Studying the Cost
of Cultivation of Principal Crops in India Õ, operated by Directorate of
Economics and Statistics, Department of Agriculture, Cooperation and
Farmers Welfare, Ministry of Agriculture and Farmers Welfare,
Government of India. These data are collected with the help of State
Agricultural Universities/Agro-Economic Research Centres/other
Universities located in various states and the sample size is as large as
8100. These estimates take into account real factors of production and
include all actual expenses in cash and kind incurred in production of
a crop by the farmer, rent paid for leased-in land, imputed value of
family labour , interest value of owned capital assets (excluding land),
rental value of owned land (net of land revenue), depreciation on farm
implements and buildings and other miscellaneous expenses.
The related data that become available to CACP at the time of
finalizing its reports has a time lag of two to three years. As a
consequence, various components of cost are required to be projected

29
for the ensuing season of the crops, after taking into account the
changes in prices of different inputs subsequent to the period to which
the data pertain. Based on the available data, the Commission constructs,
a variable input price index beginning with the base year and ending
with the year of projection for each state and each crop. The input
items for which price indices are constructed in the Commission for the
purpose of cost projections are human labour , bullock labour, machine
labour , fertilizers, manures, seeds, insecticides and irrigation charges.
While making projections, the data for the latest available year are
treated as the base. The total input cost is broadly divided into two
parts: variable input cost and fixed cost. Because of its greater
significance in the total cost, the Commission concentrates more on
updating the estimated variable input cost items. After constructing
the individual price indices for each of the variable inputs, a composite
weighted index is constructed. The share of each of these variable
inputs in the total operational cost, prevailing in the base year , is taken
as the weight for each specific input. This composite weighted input
price index thus measures the likely changes in variable input prices for
each of the later years in relation to the base period. The increase in
variable input price index over the base period is then used for projecting
cost of cultivation A2+FL per hectare [which includes costs of all the
variable inputs actually incurred by farmers, rent paid for leased-land
and imputed cost on account of use of family labour (FL)]. Further , the
apportionment of total cost of cultivation between the main product
and the by-product is done in proportion to their contribution to the
total value of output. For fixed cost of cultivation C2 per hectare, the
main components considered are the rental value of owned land and
interest on fixed capital. Subsequently, after using projected yield,
costs of production A2+FL and C2 per quintal are projected. The
Commission takes into account the weighted average cost of production
(calculated on the basis of proportion of each State in the total
production) at the national level for recommending the MSP .
Crops having MSP more than 50% of cost of production and crops
having MSP less than 50% of cost of production are at Annexure-XI.
[Ministry of Agriculture & Farmers Welfare (Department of
Agriculture, Cooperation and Farmers Welfare) O.M. No.6-5/2018-
B&A, dated 14 June, 2018]
Agriculture Planning
Recommendation (Serial No. 12)
The Committee observe that farmers growing Tomato, Onion, Potato
and other horticulture products do not get remunerative price for their
agriculture produce in case of falling prices due to glut production.

30
Sometimes, prices of these agriculture produce fall much below the
production cost causing huge financial strain to the farmers. In this
regard, the Committee are happy to note that the Government is
planning to develop cluster based model in a scientific manner for
identified agriculture produces in our districts in the same manner as
we have cultivation of horticulture crops in clusters bring advantages
of scales of operations and can spur establishment of entire chain from
production to marketing, besides giving recognition to the districts for
specific crops. The Committee were assured that the Ministry of
Agriculture & Farmers Õ Welfare will reorient its ongoing Schemes and
promote cluster based development of agri-commodities and regions in
partnership with the Ministries of Food Processing, Commerce and other
allied Ministries.
The Committee also observe that sometimes Central/State
Governments do intervene through their agencies for procurement to
ensure remunerative pricing. However , such steps are few and far
between and approach is reactive which do not serve the purpose. The
Committee are of view that there is need of a well laid out agriculture
planning which may take care of local agri-climatic classification and
projected demands for agriculture produce. This information, if properly
disseminated among farmers, will help them to plan cultivation of
crops, which can fetch them remunerative price by preventing glut
production. Preparation of agriculture Plan will not only help to maximize
income of farmers but will also help to save precious natural resources.
The Committee, therefore, recommend the Government to take steps
for promotion of cultivation of crops according to a well laid out
agriculture plan. The Committee desire the Government to initiate
consultation with all stakeholders for preparation of agriculture plan
which can take care of above mentioned factors and promote a culture
of cultivation where return of farmers can be maximized with optimum
utilization of Natural resources.
Reply of the Government
Recommendations of the Committee are very useful to the
Department and it also help in making the schemes more effective. We
are happy to inform to the Committee that the Hon Õble Prime Minister
has also set a target before the Department to double the farmers Õ
income by 2022. The focus areas can be indicated as follows:
i. Special focus on irrigation with sufficient budget, with the
aim of ÒPer Drop More Crop Ó.
ii. Provision of quality seeds and nutrients based on soil health
of each field.

31
iii. Large investments in Warehousing and Cold Chains to prevent
post-harvest crop losses.
iv. Promotion of value addition through food processing.
v . Creation of an integrated National Agricultural Market
(e-NAM), removing distortions and e-platform across 585
Stations.
vi. Introduction of a New Crop Insurance Scheme to mitigate
risks at affordable cost.
vii. Promotion of ancillary activities like poultry, beekeeping and
fisheries.
To achieve the target of doubling the income of farmers by 2022,
the Government has constituted an Inter-Ministerial Committee on
13.04.2016 under the Chairmanship of Chief Executive Officer , National
Rainfed Area Authority, Department of Agriculture, Cooperation and
Farmers Welfare to examine issues relating to doubling of farmers Õ
income and recommend a strategy to achieve the same. Based on the
some recommendations of the Committee, the Department has initiated
the following steps:
i. Model State/UT Agricultural Produce and Livestock Marketing
(Promotion & Facilitation) Act, 2017 has been drafted,
approved and has been shared with the States.
ii. Model Contract Farming Act has been released.
iii. Restructuring of Directorate of Marketing & Inspection (DMI),
so as to provide technology backstopping to a system for
price and demand forecast.
iv. A five year Roadmap for Pulses Production and achieve a
production status of 24 million MTs.
v. A comprehensive roadmap for increasing the production of
oilseeds in the country.
vi. Rashtriya Krishi Vikas Yojana (RKVY) scheme has been
approved for continuation for three years as Remunerative
Approaches for Agriculture & Allied Sector Rejuvenation  i.e.
(RKVY-RAFTAAR) which aims at making the farming as a
remunerative economic activity through multi pronged
approach along with holistic development of agriculture and
allied sector. The new Guidelines provide for major allocation
for creation of production and post-production infrastructure,
beside promoting agri-enterprises and incubation facilities.

32
vii. An institutional mechanism at State and District levels to
undertake integrated and comprehensive review of agriculture
and allied activities and farmers welfare.
viii. Computerization of Primary agriculture cooperative societies
(PACSs)ÑA budgeting provision has been made to computerize
all the PACSs in a period of 3 years (2017-18 to 2019-20).
ix. A new market architecture under which 22,000 rural haats
to be upgraded as centers of aggregation and direct sell-
purchase of agri-commodities.
x. Adopt crop realignment by making it value driven and not
merely by advocacy but market driven.
xi. Making procurement more broad based by introducing new
MSP policy focusing beyond rice and wheat.
xii. Reinvigorate agricultural extension.
xiii. Promoting climate resilient agriculture as climate change
implications are more severe for small and marginal farmers.
The Government is aiming to reorient the agriculture sector by
making it income-centric rather than purely a production-centric activity.
A farmer Õs income is a basket of earnings from agriculture (including
horticulture), allied activities like dairy, livestock, poultry, fishery etc.
and ancillary activities like beekeeping etc. Apart from these farm
incomes, he also earns from other activities like wage labour , off-farm
activities etc. Earnings from agriculture constitute the principal source
of income of a farmer.
At present, the Government is implementing various schemes to
synchronise with higher gains for the farmers. Details are as follows:-
¥ For higher production through productivity gains:
o National Food Security Mission (NFSM)Ñcereals, pulses,
oilseeds, nutri-rich cereals, commercial crops.
o Mission for Integrated Development of Horticulture
(MIDH)Ñhigh growth rate of horticulture crops.
¥ For reduction in cost of cultivation:
o Soil Health Card (SHC) (2 year cycle)Ñensure judicious
use of fertilizer application and thus save money of
farmers.
o Neem Coated Urea (NCU) (universal)Ñis being promoted
to regulate use of urea, enhance availability of nitrogen
to the crop and reduce cost of fertilizer application.

33
o The Pradhan Mantri Krishi Sinchai Yojana (PMKSY)Ñmicro
irrigation component (1.2 million ha/yr target)- with
the motto of ÔHar Khet Ko Paani Õ for providing end-to-
end solutions in irrigation supply chain, comprising water
sources, distribution network and farm level applications.
o Paramparagat Krishi Vikas Yojana (PKVY)ÑPKVY is being
implemented with a view to promote organic farming in
the country. This will improve soil health and organic
matter content and increase net income of the farmer
so as to realise premium prices.
¥ To ensure remunerative returns:
o National Agriculture Market Scheme (E-NAM)Ñan
innovative market process to revolutionize agri-markets
by ensuring better price discovery, bringing in
transparency and competition to enable farmers to get
improved remuneration for their produce moving towards
ÔOne Nation One Market Õ.
o Warehousing and post-harvest loans at concessional rate
of interest so as to discourage distress sale by farmers
and to encourage them to store their produce in
warehouses against negotiable receipts.
o Minimum Support Price (MSP)Ñnotified by the
Government for certain crops.
o Procurement of oilseeds, pulses and cotton being
undertaken by central agencies at MSP under Price
Support Scheme (PSS) at the request of the concerned
State Government.
o Market Intervention Scheme (MIS) for procurement of
agriculture & horticulture products, which are perishable
in nature and are not covered under PSS.
¥ For risk management and sustainable practices:
o Pradhan Mantri Fasal Bima Yojana (PMFBY) &
Restructured Weather Based Crop Insurance Scheme
(RWCIS) to cover 50% Gross Cultivated Area (GCA) by
2018-19Ñprovides insurance cover at all stages of the
crop cycle including post-harvest risks in specified
instances and available to the farmers at very low rates
of premium.
o Paramparagat Krishi Vikas Yojana (PKVY)Ñbeing
implemented with a view to promote organic farming in
the country. This will improve soil health and organic
matter content and increase net income of the farmer

34
o Mission organic Farming in North-East- MoVCD (NE) being
implemented realizing the potential of organic farming
in the North Eastern Region of the country.
o Allied activities as follows:
ÒHar Medh Par Ped Ó launched during 2016-17 to
encourage tree plantation on farm land Ò Har Medh Par
PedÓ, along with crops/cropping system.
Bee-Keeping - During the last 3 year (2014-15 and 2016-
17) the number of honey bee colonies that were 20 lacs
in 2014-15 have increased to 30 lacs during 2016-17,
registering an increase of 10 lacs. Honey production in
2011-14 was 2,18,950 metric tons which has increased
to 2,63,930 metric tons during 2014-17 i.e. an increase
of 20.54%.
Dairying - Dairy sector is being promoted through
schemes like Rashtriya Gokul Mission, National Bovine
Productivity Mission and various dairy development
related projects.
Fisheries - Foreseeing high potential in fisheries sector,
a Blue Revolution with multi dimensional activities mainly
focusing on fisheries production, both inland and marine
is being implemented.
[Ministry of Agriculture & Farmers Welfare (Department of
Agriculture, Cooperation and Farmers Welfare) O.M. No. 6-5/2018-
B&A, dated 14 June, 2018]
National Bamboo Mission
Recommendation (Serial No. 13)
Bamboo is an important agriculture product of our Country and an
integral part of culture especially in North-East India. However , there
was significant hurdle in development of industries based on bamboo
products due to legal restriction posed on movement of bamboo due to
Forest Act. The Committee are happy to note that recent decision of
the Government to announce bamboo as grass will do away with these
legal hurdles. The Committee also note that the Government has
announced restructured National Bamboo Mission with an outlays of
Rs. 1290 crore including State share for the three years till 2020 for
holistic development of bamboo sector by giving simultaneous emphasis
to plantation, product development and value addition. The mission

35
aims to give emphasis on primary processing and treatment, micro,
small and medium enterprises, market and skill development and thereby
addressing complete value chain of bamboo. The Government aims to
develop the sector bringing in coordinated efforts between a dozen
Ministries and Departments both at Central and State level. During the
oral evidence, the Committee have been informed that the Government
aims to encourage development of industries based on bamboo by
involving individual farmers, Farmers Producer Organization and Co-
operative Societies through hand holding and financial, technical and
professional assistance. The Government is planning for changes required
in existing Laws and Custom duties structure to encourage domestic
industry based on bamboo products. The Committee appreciate this
noble initiatives envisaged under National Bamboo Mission. The
Committee are of view that development of small and medium
enterprises based on local agriculture produce is one of the important
way by which we can achieve the aim of doubling the income of
farmers and enhancing their life standard. Development of economy
based on Bamboo, being one of the important agriculture Produce of
our Country, can spur a movement which can change the course of
agrarian economy of the Country. However , the Committee would like
the Government to keep farmers as a central platform while engaging
in multi-sectoral coordination involving State Governments, Agriculture
Research agencies and Skill development organization etc. The
Committee also desire the Government to keep the State share minimal
for implementation of this scheme.
Reply of the Government
The Committee has rightly observed the importance of multi-sectoral
coordination involving State Governments, Agriculture Research Agencies
and Skill Development Organizations etc. Adoption of end to end solution
in bamboo sector i.e. complete value chain approach starting from
bamboo growers to consumers would be emphasized. Focus will not
only be given on production and productivity enhancement and good
agronomic practices, but also on preservation, processing, product
development, and marketing in an integrated manner adopting cluster
approach involving inter alia  Farmers Producer Organizations and
Cooperatives. Since end to end solution for development of bamboo
sector is envisaged, each stage of the value chain will require relevant
expertise and networking for its effective implementation. Accordingly
Mission has been developed as a platform for integration with
implementation responsibilities given to specific Ministries/Departments/
Agencies based on their , competency and allocation of business rules
ensuring appropriate synergy and seamless development process. Besides,

36
product development, emphasis will also be given for higher economic
realization to growers/producers through initiatives on export promotion
and benefit of domestic market through market infrastructure, e-trading
etc. Capacity building of the officials, field functionaries, entrepreneurs
and farmers through skill development and trainings will be emphasized.
Focus will be given on Research & Development (R&D) to increase the
production and productivity of bamboo by identifying its superior clones,
improvement of processing technology, development of new products
and tools & machinery, etc.
To ensure effective coordination at National Level an Executive
Committee (EC) headed by Secretary (DAC&FW) will be established to
oversee the implementation and monitoring of the Mission at national
level. It will approve the Annual Action Plan (AAP) of the States and
help coordinating partnership, convergence & synergy among various
Ministries/Departments. The EC will be assisted by two sub-committees.
The Government has decided to implement the mission with funding
pattern 60:40 between Centre and State Government for all States
excepting NE & Hilly States, where it would be 90:10 and 100% in case
of Union Territories/R&D Institutes/Bamboo Technology Support Groups
(BTSGs) and National Level Agencies.
[Ministry of Agriculture & Farmers Welfare (Department of
Agriculture, Cooperation and Farmers Welfare) O.M. No. 6-5/2018-
B&A, dated 14 June, 2018]
Soil Health Management (SHM)
Recommendation (Serial No. 15)
The Committee note that Soil Health Management component is
being implemented under National Mission For Sustainable Agriculture.
Some of the components of the Soil Health Management are distribution
of Soil Health Card, setting up of new Soil Test Laboratories (STL)
(Static/mobile/Mini labs) and strengthening of soil testing laboratories.
The Committee are happy to note that the Government were able to
distribute around 11.2 crore soil health cards to the farmers till date
as against the target distribution of 12 crore Soil Health Cards till
March, 2019. The Committee hope that the Government will be able to
achieve a target of distribution of 18.24 crore Soil Health Cards to the
farmers till March, 2018. However, the Committee are of the view that
there should be continuity in updation of Soil Health Cards as it will
help the farmers to bring changes in their cultivation pattern according
to the changing nature of soil and take steps for restoration of soil

37
health. The Committee in this regard recall that Indian Council of
Agriculture Research (ICAR) has developed a Mini Soil Testing Kit which
is far cheaper than the imported soil testing kits. The Committee are
of the view that these mini soil testing kits can be provided to the
unemployed youth in Rural areas who may provide services for testing
of soil to the Farmers at reasonable fee. The Committee, therefore,
recommended the DAC&FW to utilize Indigenous Mini Soil Testing Kits
developed by ICAR in soil testing laboratories in Government sector and
those financed by the Government under the Scheme.
Reply of the Government
Soil Health Cards is being continued during 2018-19 to help farmers
to adopt cultivation pattern according to changing fertility of soil.
So far, 8752 Mini Soil Testing laboratories/Kits designed by the
Indian Council of Agricultural Research have been sanctioned to the
States and also Krishi Vigyan Kendras of Indian Council of Agricultural
Research. A component on providing assistance for setting up of Village
Level Soil Testing Labs to Rural Youth has been taken up during
2017-18.
[Ministry of Agriculture & Farmers Welfare (Department of
Agriculture, Cooperation and Farmers Welfare) O.M. No. 6-5/2018-
B&A, dated 14 June, 2018]

38
CHAPTER III
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO NOT
DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE GOVERNMENT ÕS REPLIES
-NIL-

39
CHAPTER IV
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF
THE GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE
National Seeds Corporation
Recommendation (Serial No. 4)
The Committee note that National Seeds Corporation (NSC) is sole
PSU under the administrative control of DAC&FW which is engaged in
production and distribution of seeds, monitoring availability of Breeder,
Foundation and Certified Seeds of all India Varieties and ensuring their
timely availability. The NSC is engaged in setting of adequate processing
facilities and storing capacity to ensure timely processing and storage
of seed. The Committee have been informed that NSC have earned a
net profit of 38.84, 49.71 and 51.80 crore during 2014-15, 2015-16 and
2016-17. The Committee also note that NSC has achieved target for
production of raw seeds during 2015-16 and 2016-17. However , the
Committee were not provided other details such as procurement of
seeds, supply of seeds etc. which would have enabled the Committee
to properly assess the performance of NSC for which it has been
incorporated as a Government Company. The Committee also observe
that supply of certified hybrid seeds in country is less than their demand
which is reflected in low Seed Replacement ratio in the country.
This fact has also been brought out by the Committee in their 39th
Report. The Committee are of view that there Õs greater need of
Government intervention to ensure adequate supply of good quality
hybrid seeds at reasonable rates to the farmers of the country. Against
this background, role of NSC as a Government Company in achieving
this aim become quite crucial. The Committee, therefore, recommend
the Government to broaden the horizon of working of NSC so that it
become a significant player in seed market in the country to ensure
adequate supply of quality seeds to the farmers. The Committee desire
the Government to take steps to enhance financial and professional
capacity of NSC and enhance targets for production, procurement and
sale of seeds based on realistic assessment of demand in Indian
agriculture market. The Committee would like to be apprised about
steps taken in this regard within three months of presentation of this
Report.

40
Reply of the Government
Apart from National Seeds Corporation (NSC), multiplication of
Breeder/Foundation Seeds and production and distribution of quality
seeds to farmers are undertaken by 16 State Seed Corporations, State
Department of Agriculture, State Seeds Farms, State Agriculture
Universities Farm, State Seed Cooperatives, Krishak Bharati Cooperative
(KRIBHCO), Indian Farmers Fertiliser Cooperative (IFFCO), Indian Farm
Forestry Development Co-Operative Limited (IFFDC), National Agricultural
Cooperative Marketing Federation of India (NAFED), National Fertilizers
Limited (NFL), Hindustan Insecticide Limited (HIL) as well as by Private
Seed Companies and major seed producers.
Details of production/procurement of seeds by the NSC (through
seed growers and production at their farm) and sale of seeds by the
NSC for the years 2014-15, 2015-16 and 2016-17 are at Annexure-I & II,
respectively. Details of production and sale of Hybrid seeds by
the NSC during the years 2014-15, 2015-16 and 2016-17 are at
Annexure-III & IV , respectively.
The production/availability of hybrid seeds in the country are more
than the demand during the year 2014-15 to 2017-18 as detailed at
Annexure-V . Seed Replacement Rate of major crops during the year
2004-05 to 2016-17 are at Annexure-VI. The Seed Replacement Rate has
shown an increasing trend except few crops. The Government also
provides assistance for production and distribution of hybrid seeds under
National Food Security Mission (NFSM), Bringing Green Revolution in
Eastern Indian (BGREI) and National Mission Oilseeds and Oilpalm
(NMOOP) as detailed at Annexure-VII.
NSC is producing and supplying good quality hybrid seeds of Paddy,
Bajra, Maize, Sorghum, Arhar, Sunflower, Castor & Vegetable Seeds.
The actual production of hybrid seeds by NSC were 26041, 36242 &
13909 Qtls. during 2014-15, 2015-16 and 2016-17, respectively. These
hybrids seeds are being supplied to the farmers at reasonable prices,
which is lesser than the market price of hybrid seeds e.g. the sale price
of NSC for tomato hybrids are approximately 66% less than the market
price of other tomato hybrids.
After soliciting the approval of the Cabinet and completion of codal
formalities of the Ministry of Corporate Affairs, the erstwhile State
Farms Corporation of India (SFCI) was amalgamated with the NSC w.e.f.
01.04.2014 to bring about greater synergy in production and distribution
for quality seeds.

41
In order to enhance financial and professional capacity of NSC and
for ensuring enhanced targets for production, procurement and sale of
seeds as well as increase in turnover , following steps have been taken:
Financial Capacity:
¥ Higher targets are fixed every year for making available
good quality seed and their sale but actual performance
depend on the agro climate conditions.
¥ Efforts are made to increase the profitability and
corresponding net worth of the corporation. The net worth
of the corporation (as on 31.3.2017) is Rs. 585.20 crore
against Rs. 547.37 crore as on 31.3.2016. Similarly the capital
employed has increased from Rs. 674.67 crore (as on
31.3.2016) to Rs. 705.96 crore (as on 31.3.2017) and working
capital of the corporation has also increased from Rs. 530.21
crore (as on 31.3.2016) to Rs. 554.81 crore (as on 31.3.2017).
¥ Continuous efforts have been made to bring un-cultivable
land into cultivable by improving irrigation facilities which
resulted in reduction in cost of production.
¥ Diversification of the corporation through activities like fish
seed production, fodder seed production and converting the
non seed into value added products for commercial sale are
undertaken.
¥ Regular investment in construction of seed godown, seed
processing plants and other agricultural machineries are made
to reduce the cost of hiring and maintenance of machinery.
Professional Capacity:
¥ NSC has revised its Recruitment Rules in 2013 and amended/
updated the same in June, 2017 for selection of
knowledgeable professionals as per industry norms to achieve
the objective of the corporation.
¥ Recruitment at various levels are made through all India
competitive examination both in executive and non-executive
cadre from 2015/2016 onwards.
¥ One year training are provided to all recruited professionals
and exposure at central State farm, regional offices and
area offices are given to them and their performance are
evaluated periodically.

42
¥ Trainees are also deputed in reputed institutions like Indian
Agriculture Research Institute (IARI), National Institute of
Agricultural Extension Management (MANAGE), Indian Cost
and Works Accounts (ICWA), Institute of Secretariat Training
and Management (ISTM), National Archive of India (NAI) etc.
to improve their professional knowledge in the related field.
¥ Cluster promotion scheme has been revised to motivate the
highly qualified employees which helped in reducing the
attrition rate.
¥ For motivating the employees social security coverage like
defined contribution superannuation pension scheme,
benevolent social scheme for the family and post retirement
contributory medical benefit scheme has been introduced.
¥ Electronic Annual Performance Appraisal Report (e-APAR) has
been introduced after 2017 for employees (E-0 and above
level) to bring transparency in evaluation of their
performance.
Seed Production:
¥ To increase production of Breeder, Foundation and Certified
Seeds in farms, NSC is regularly enhancing its irrigation
facilities through Micro irrigation, construction of tanks and
lining of water course as well as by converting non-cultivable
land.
¥ More area has been brought for enhancing Pulses certified
seed production.
¥ Action has been taken to increase the production of oil
seeds and ensure availability of good quality certified seed
of oilseeds to the farmers in the country for enhancing
commercial production of oil seed crops, which will reduce
imports.
¥ Production of Minor Millets is being added and increased by
making available quality seeds of these crops.
¥ Production targets of important Hybrid cereals like maize,
Sorghum, Bajra and Paddy has been increased. For paddy
hybrid seed production, NSC entered into MOU with M/s SL
Agritech, Philippines for production of SL-8H variety which is
a short duration, having good adaptability and yield
potentiality in India.

43
¥ The seed production target is also being increased in respect
of hybrid vegetable crops like Brinjal, Tomato, Bhindi and
Ground.
¥ Seed production of fodder Maize, sorghum, fodder bajra,
and F . Gaur has been increased for increasing milk production
in the country.
¥ Due to uncertainty in Monsoon and Abiotic conditions, seed
production for varieties like high yielding, short duration,
stress tolerant, drought tolerant, resistant to insect, pest
and diseases have been adopted by NSC. More than 60%
product basket consists of these varieties.
¥ Bt. Cotton seed production has been started at Central State
Farm (CSF), Hissar , Haryana.
¥ Seed production of Jute has been increased by executing a
MoU with Jute Corporation of India.
Seed Procurement:
¥ To bring maximum farmers either under seed production
chain or under supply of seed at reasonable rates, NSC has
made a uniform procurement policy for procurement of seed.
¥ The seed villages model is being adopted to ensure maximum
procurement in a particular village.
¥ Payment to seed growers is ensured promptly.
¥ Timely processing of seed is being ensured to return non-
seed to growers in time.
¥ Mobile processing plant has been introduced to ensure
procurement at village level in Uttarakhand.
Turnover of NSC:
¥ NSC Õs main focus is to provide quality certified seed to the
farmers for which breeder and foundation seeds are produced
at growers farms.
¥ To improve the quality, desired infrastructure is being created.
¥ Aggressive sales promotion activities undertaken including
publicity through jeep campaign, advertisement in print
media.
¥ Business diversification made through sale of fish seeds,
fodder blocks and value added product.

44
¥ Emphasis given in High Value and Low Volume seeds like
vegetable seeds.
¥ Special attention given to increase sale of Pulses, Oilseeds,
Fodder Seeds, Green Manure seeds and Hybrid seeds.
¥ Conduced personal interaction programme with dealers/
farmers for feedback on NSC products and popularize brand
NSC.
¥ New packing materials like poly pouches and laminated bags
etc. have been introduced to make the seed packets
attractive to compete with private seed companies.
¥ Enrolled new dealers to strengthen the dealership network
of NSC to ensure last mile connectivity.
¥ To popularize vegetable cultivation among urban public, sale
of seeds through automated vending machine has been
introduced.
¥ Finalized system for online sale of seeds.
¥ Introduced scheme to award best performing area office,
regional office and dealers to boost the morale of the hard
working staff and loyal dealers.
¥ Development of separate marketing cadre to strengthen
market activities.
[Ministry of Agriculture & Farmers Welfare (Department of
Agriculture, Cooperation and Farmers Welfare) O.M. No. 6-5/2018-
B&A, dated 14 June, 2018]
Comments of the Committee
For comments of the Committee please refer to Para No. 1.7 of
Chapter I of this Report.
Import and Export of Agriculture Commodities
Recommendation (Serial No. 10)
The Committee also note that India imports a lot of agricultural
and allied products from other countries. The total agricultural and
allied products imports of the country has increased from Rs. 95718.89
crore during 2012-13 to Rs. 164680.56 crore during 2016-17. As a result,
the share of agriculture import in total import in the country has
increased from 3.59% in 2012-13 to 6.42 % during 2016-17.The Committee

45
further observes that vegetable oils, pulses, fresh fruits, cashew, spices
and sugar are some of the major agricultural commodities in terms of
value which were imported in the country during the same period. The
Committee are of considered opinion that demands for agriculture
products in the country is bound to change significantly with changing
dietary pattern associated with rising income and impact of globalization,
necessitating import and thereby, causing strain on foreign exchange.
The Committee are of the view that there is need for enhancing
production of agriculture products which are currently being imported.
The Committee, therefore, recommend that a detailed study to find
ways to enhance production of these agriculture produce in different
agro-climatic zones and subzones in the country be conducted. The
Committee also recommend the Department to start a special project
for development of local varieties of dry fruits, spices, olives etc.
which are currently being imported in the country. The Committee also
desire the Department to take steps and provide special incentives to
the farmers for cultivation of these agriculture products in the country
in order to reduce their import. The Committee would like to be apprised
of the initiatives undertaken by the Department in this regard.
Reply of the Government
Import of agricultural products is influenced by various factors like
demand, supply, domestic production and availability, seasonality,
international prices, domestic quality, Government policies etc. It is
mentioned that vegetable oils and pulses constitute about 70% of IndiaÕs
agricultural imports, to meet the gap between demand and availability
from domestic sources, imports are made. Sugar is mainly imported in
raw form from domestic processing and then exporting.
To incentivize farmers to invest more in increasing productivity and
production and protect their interests, Government has recently taken
various trade policy measures. A list of the recent trade policy measures
in chronological order taken by Government is at Annexure-VIII.
[Ministry of Agriculture & Farmers Welfare (Department of
Agriculture, Cooperation and Farmers Welfare) O.M. No. 6-5/2018-
B&A, dated 14 June, 2018]
Comments of the Committee
For comments of the Committee please refer to Para No. 1.13 of
Chapter I of this Report.

46
CHAPTER V
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH FINAL
REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT ARE STILL AWAITED
National Horticulture Board (NHB)
Recommendation (Serial No. 5)
The Committee note that National Horticulture Board (NHB) has
mandate to strengthen Commercial Horticulture hubs in various parts
of the country through integrated hi-tech horticulture projects and also
strengthening post harvest and cold chain infrastructure in the country.
Objective of NHB is to improve integrated development of Horticulture
industry and to help in coordinating, sustaining the production and
processing of fruits and vegetables. The Committee were informed that
NHB is implementing five schemes namely Development of Commercial
Horticulture through Production and Post Harvest Management of
Horticulture Crops, Capital Investment Subsidy for Construction/
Expansion/Modernization of Cold Storages and Storages for Horticulture
Produce, Technology Development and Transfer for Promotion of
Horticulture, Market Information Service for Horticulture Crops and
Horticulture Promotion Services/Expert Services and Strengthening
Capability of NHB for Comprehensive development of Horticulture sector
in the country.
The Committee note that NHB has been provided the budgetary
support of Rs. 1927.64 crore since 2010. The Committee further note
that NHB has earned a revenue of Rs. 14.18 crore during the same
period as application fee from the applicants which is used for
miscellaneous purpose such as printing of application forms, brochures &
guidelines of NHB Schemes, technical bulletins, various technical
standards, horticulture data base etc. The Committee were also informed
that investment of NHB amounting to Rs. 1513.51 crore through back
ended schemes from 2010 onwards have attracted 4-5 times investment
from the private sector/financial Institutions.
The Committee note that schemes of NHB helped in setting of
17982 integrated commercial horticulture projects relating to production
and post harvest management with back ended subsidy amounting to
Rs. 953.69 crores and 3113 cold chain/primary processing involving
subsidy of Rs. 559.82 crores. The NHB has also done Accreditation of

47
1653 nurseries and supported several projects for promotion of new
technology and its transfer. The Committee are of view that benefits
of schemes being financed by the Public Money should reach all parts
of the country. There should be proper awareness, campaign should be
done in print and digital media so that applicants from different parts
of the country may apply for the funds available under the scheme.
The Committee, therefore, recommend the Government to take steps
for awareness campaign about schemes being implemented by the NHB
and other Autonomous Bodies. The Committee would like to be apprised
about the steps taken in this regard within three months of presentation
of this Report.
Reply of the Government
In compliance to the Report, NHB has undertaken critical analysis
on the distribution of Scheme across the States and UTs and social
groups so that the benefit of NHB Schemes is availed by all the States
and UTs and social groups evenly.
NHB scheme has already evoked very good response and presently
there is huge backlog of pending proposals. Hence, currently Board is
not accepting new applications except for SC/ST category. Fresh
applications are likely to be accepted in the month of August, 2018
after giving wide publicity through print and digital media. To ensure
benefits of NHB schemes reach all parts of the country, following steps
are being taken to create awareness of NHB scheme:Ñ
¥ Scheme information is being uploaded on NHB website in
22 languages.
¥ Focused awareness programme will be undertaken in
identified States/districts having low awareness of NHB
scheme.
¥ In Annual Action Plan 2018-19, NHB has also proposed
following awareness programme:
District level-500
State level-100
National level- 25
[Ministry of Agriculture & Farmers Welfare (Department of
Agriculture, Cooperation and Farmers Welfare) O.M. No. 6-5/2018-
B&A, dated 14 June, 2018]
Comments of the Committee
For comments of the Committee please refer to Para No. 1.10 of
Chapter I of this Report.

48
Market Assurance Scheme (MAS) and Price Deficiency Procurement
Scheme (PDPS)
Recommendation (Serial No. 7)
The Committee note that Market Assurance Scheme (MAS) is being
proposed as a decentralized scheme for procurement of pulses, oilseeds
and coarse grains produced in respective States whose MSP are declared
by the Central Government. This scheme will be implemented by the
respective State/UT Government through their own agencies. They will
have freedom to take decision regarding procurement of above
mentioned crops whenever Market prices of these crops drop below
MSP . The Central Government will reimburse State Government up to
40 % (50% for Himalayan & NE States) of losses incurred by the State
agencies. Similarly, Price Deficiency Procurement Scheme (PDPS) envisage
direct payment of the difference between the MSP and the selling price
to the farmers selling his produce in the APMC yard through a transparent
auction process. The payment will be done directly into farmer bank
account. The losses incurred on implementation of this scheme will be
shared between Central and State Governments. The Committee were
informed that ratio of Central and State share is yet to be finalized.
The Committee note that these schemes are under consideration and
NITI Aayog has been entrusted with the responsibility to finalize the
same in consultation with the States.
The Committee appreciate the Government for taking initiative to
meet a long standing demand which would have helped the farmers in
getting reasonable price for their agriculture produce. This attempt to
decentralize the decision making process for procurement of agriculture
produce will help to ease the pain of farmers who lose their investment
in case of falling prices in the market dominated by the brokers. The
Committee hope that the NITI Aayog will complete the process of
consultation with all stake holders for launch of the scheme in upcoming
financial year. However, the Committee desire the Government to
incorporate suitable measures in scheme to exclude brokers during
implementation of the scheme. The Committee also desire the
Government to adopt liberal financing pattern for implementation of
the Scheme especially during the early years of its implementation.
Reply of the Government
In the budget speech of Finance Minister for 2018, NITI Aayog has
been mandated to finalize a fool proof mechanism for delivery of MSP
to farmers in consultation with Central and State Governments. In this
regard, NITI Aayog has recommended three proposed schemes viz. Market

49
Assurance Scheme (MAS), Price Deficiency Payment Scheme (PDPS) and
Private Procurement and Stockists Scheme (PPSS). Accordingly, a draft
Cabinet Note in this regard, has been prepared and circulated for Inter-
Ministerial Consultation to NITI Aayog, Department of Economic Affairs,
Department of Expenditure, DONER, Department of Consumer Affairs,
Department of Food and Public Distribution, Ministry of Textile and
Department of Financial Services.
[Ministry of Agriculture & Farmers Welfare (Department of
Agriculture, Cooperation and Farmers Welfare) O.M. No. 6-5/2018-
B&A, dated 14 June, 2018]
Recommendation (Serial No. 9)
Procurement of crops from farmers in case of lowering of market
price below MSP should be aim of the Government. However , the
Committee regret to note that the Department failed to furnish requisite
information of total production and procurement of agriculture produce
for which Government announce MSP . The Committee also observe that
farmers are facing problems in sale of agriculture produce at MSP in
some States. During the evidence, the Committee were informed that
failure of State Governments concerned to send request for procurement
of specific agriculture produce is the reason behind slow pace of
procurement. The Committee are of the view that fixing of MSP without
proper arrangements for procurement of agriculture produce wouldn Õt
be able to solve the plight of farmers in the country. In this regard, the
Committee note that proposal under Market Assurance Scheme (MAS)
and Price Deficiency Procurement Scheme (PDPS) for further
decentralization of decision making procedure for procurement of
agriculture produce at MSP in case falling market prices will be able to
solve the problems of farmers to certain extent. The Committee are
disturbed to note that even after launching of farmer friendly schemes
in the Budget 2016-17 and 2017-18, they have not been implemented
in the States/UTs as to enhance the income of farmers thereby depriving
them of the benefits of these schemes. However , the Committee are
of the view that State level procurement agencies require financial and
professional support to be able to take the onerous task of procurement
of agriculture produce from farmers at MSP and ensuring its disposal.
The Committee, therefore, recommend the Government to take steps
for strengthening of State level procurement agencies. Further, the
Committee are of view that proposed funding pattern of MAS and PDPS
scheme may strain financial resources of State Government concerned.
The Committee, therefore, recommend the Government to consider
more liberalized funding pattern for implementation of these schemes.
The Committee would like to be apprised about steps taken in this
regard within three months of presentation of this Report.

50
Reply of the Government
The schemes of Market Assurance Scheme (MAS) and Price Deficiency
Procurement Scheme (PDPS) are under active consideration of the
Government and are yet to be finalized. Recommendations of the
Committee in this respect have been noted and will be examined for
implementation at the time of finalization of the schemes. The year-
wise details of production and procurement of pulses, oilseeds, rice
and wheat for which Government announced MSP is at Annexure-XII.
[Ministry of Agriculture & Farmers Welfare (Department of
Agriculture, Cooperation and Farmers Welfare) O.M. No. 6-5/2018-
B&A, dated 14 June, 2018]
Gramin Agricultural Markets (GrAMs)
Recommendation (Serial No. 11)
The Committee note that Government is planning to develop and
upgrade existing 22,000 rural haats into Gramin Agricultural Markets
(GrAMs) which will provide farmers facility to make direct sale to
consumers and bulk purchasers. The Committee were informed that
physical infrastructure will be strengthened using MGNREGA and other
Government Schemes in these GrAMs. The Government is planning to
electronically link GrAMs to e-NAM and keep it exempted from regulations
of APMCs. The Department also informed that an Agri-Market
Infrastructure Fund with a corpus of Rs. 2,000 crore is to be set up for
upgrading 22,000 Haats into GrAMs and further development of 585
APMCs.
The Committee also note that DAC&FW has initiated process of
discussion and consultation with other Ministries and NABARD for
convergence of schemes to provide basic infrastructure requirements
such as platforms, office block, small storage godowns, Garbage pits,
drinking water facility, toilets, drains, internal roads etc. under proposed
GrAMs Scheme. The Government intend to use Agri-Market Infrastructure
Fund for provision of other infrastructure like e-trading platform,
Electronic Weighing Machines, price information board etc.
However , the Committee are astonished to note that Government
did not undertake any study/survey to access the actual numbers of
rural agriculture markets in the country and Government is relying on
data available on National Asset Directory about number of assets
including Grameen haats/Rural Markets maintained by Ministry of
Panchayati Raj, Government of India. According to this data, there are

51
2090 market yards and 14756 sheds in the country. The Committee
were further informed that as per different State agencies, there are
approximately 22,000 rural haats in the country. The Department have
also informed that collection of data on Rural Periodic Market has been
initiated by Directorate of Marketing and Inspection (DMI) and is under
progress.
The Committee appreciate the Government for taking initiative for
strengthening the network of Rural Periodic Haat or ÔGrameen HaatÕ as
they are popularly called across the country. The Committee had selected
the subject ÔAgriculture Marketing and Role of Weekly Grameen Haats Õ
in 2017-18 and drawn the attention of the Department towards utilization
of ÔRural Grameen Haat Õ as a platform for rural marketing which will
help the farmers to realize reasonable price of their agriculture produce.
The Committee are of view that these Grameen haats being integral
part of Indian culture provide excellent platform for provision of facilities
meant for farmers and to take awareness campaign about schemes
being implemented by the Government in Agriculture sector. These
Grameen Haats, if properly developed, can emerge as a fulcrum around
which the Government can develop the agrarian economy and achieve
the aims of doubling the income of farmers. However , target of
development of 22000 rural haats is too small a number to serve the
needs of ÔGrameen Haats Õ in a country of 6,49,481 Villages. The
Committee are of view that number of ÔRural Grameen Haat Õ may be
many times more in the country. The Government should take step to
identify all marginal, small or big ÔRural Grameen Haat Õ across the
country. The Committee, therefore, recommend the Government to
implement this scheme in every ÔRural Grameen Haat Õ in the country.
The Committee also desire the Government to implement this scheme
in mission mode with a defined time frame. The Committee are also
of view that provision of small cold storage facility in proposed GrAM
Scheme will go a long way to reduce post harvest crop losses of
agriculture produce. The Committee, therefore, desire the Government
to make provision of small cold storage facility in GrAM.
Reply of the Government
As already submitted to the Committee, the Department is in
consultation with NABARD, Ministry of Panchayati Raj, Ministry of Rural
Development and Ministry of Tribal Affairs for developing and upgrading
existing 22,000 rural haats into Grameen Agriculture Markets (GrAMs)
as announced in Budget 2018-19. In these proposed GrAMs, physical
infrastructure shall be strengthened by convergence various schemes
like MGNREGA, PMGSY etc. These GrAMs after development will be

52
electronically linked to e-NAM and shall be exempted from regulations
of APMC Act. An Agri-Market Infrastructure Fund with a corpus of Rs.
2,000 crore is to be set up by NABARD for requisite marketing
infrastructure in GrAMs and further development of 585 APMCs. NABARD
is working out modalities for the same.
An Expenditure Finance Committee (EFC) Memorandum is being
prepared by the Department for seeking Rs. 2,000 crore. After approval
of EFC, approval of Cabinet Committee on Economic Affairs (CCEA) will
be solicited. As recommended by the Committee to implement the
scheme in every Grameen Rural Market, it is to inform that there is an
initial target to implement the scheme in 22,000 Rural Haats as per
announcement.
Department is undertaking survey of grameen rural markets in
country, through its associated office Directorate of Marketing &
Inspection (DMI) w.r.t. their location, status of infrastructure,
commodities traded etc. This will help to identify number of village
haats and requirement of marketing infrastructure including the
requirement of small cold storage etc. in GrAMs. The survey is under
progress.
[Ministry of Agriculture & Farmers Welfare (Department of
Agriculture, Cooperation and Farmers Welfare) O.M. No. 6-5/2018-
B&A, dated 14 June, 2018]
Comments of the Committee
For comments of the Committee please refer to Para No. 1.16 of
Chapter I of this Report.
Educational Criteria for Retail Dealership of Fertilizers
Recommendation (Serial No. 14)
The Committee note that the Government have notified educational
qualification under clause 8(4) of Fertilizer Control Order 1985 for the
retail dealers of Fertilizer in the country. Under this, authorization
letter will be granted to only those applicants who will be possessing
B.Sc. degree either in Agriculture Science or Chemistry, Diploma in
Agriculture Science or Certified course on agri-inputs for a minimum
period of six months from MANAGE, NIPHM or any other Government
institute. The Committee have been informed that dealers who have
been granted authorisation letter before the commencement of the
Fertilizer (Control)(Fourth) Amendment order , 2015 shall not be required

53
to possess the qualifications at the time of renewal of their authorization
letter. The Committee have also been informed that registered
agriculture cooperative societies and State marketing federation shall
engage a person with such qualifications.
The Committee were informed that fixing of educational criteria
for fertilizer dealership will help the Government to ensure sale of
Fertilizers based on scientific basis such as soil test, which in turn, will
help to optimize agriculture productivity and enhance farmers income.
However , the Committee observe that fixing of these criteria is
preventing farmers and their dependents who engage in seasonal sale
of Fertilizers in rural areas. Further , there is practical difficulty in
payment of salary or income to such qualified persons as sale of
Fertilizers is a seasonal business. The Committee also observe that
there are few institutions offering certificate course on agriculture
inputs as mandated in abovementioned notification for dealership of
Fertilizers. The Committee, therefore, recommend the Government to
take steps to initiate Certificate Courses on agriculture inputs across
the country so that farmers in rural areas can be trained and provided
dealership for Fertilizers. It will help to achieve the aims of the
Government to ensure sale of Fertilizers based on soil testing. The
Committee would like to be apprised about steps taken in this regard
within three months of presentation of this Report.
Reply of the Government
Department of Agriculture, Cooperation and Farmers Welfare in
consultation with IARI has formulated a common curriculum of 100
hours for certificate course. The same is under examination and after
its finalization may be circulated to all the State Governments with a
request to the State Government that they may take the matter with
State Agriculture Universities/Krishi Vigyan Kendras to arrange the
certificate course as per the prescribed curriculum.
Further this Department is incorporating an amendment in clause
8(4) of Fertilizer Control Order wherein the State Governments are
empowered to notify all such bachelor/degree/certificate courses where
the agri input is one of the subject for fertilizer dealership. The matter
is referred to M/o Law for vetting of draft notification.
Apart from above, NIPHM is also organizing one-year diploma in
agriculture inputs for the input dealers from 2017. The Agri-Input Dealers
acquire knowledge on critical issues such as weather , soil health,
different agronomic practices, pests and management methods,

54
legislations, acts and rules, bio-intensive methods etc. In the year
2017, 17 input dealers enrolled for the said diploma and all of them
belonged from rural areas. Similarly MANAGE is also conducting one-
year diploma in agriculture extension for input dealers in association
with SAMETI across the country in order to build technical competency
in agriculture and inputs.
[Ministry of Agriculture & Farmers Welfare (Department of
Agriculture, Cooperation and Farmers Welfare) O.M. No. 6-5/2018-
B&A, dated 14 June, 2018]
   N
EW D ELHI; HUKMDEV NARAYAN YADAV,
02 August, 2018 Chairperson,
11 Shravana, 1940 (Saka) Standing Committee on Agriculture.

55
ANNEXURE I
DETAILS OF PRODUCTION/PROCUREMENT OF SEEDS BY NSC FOR THE
YEARS 2014-15, 2015-16 AND 2016-17
(Qty. in Lakh Qtl.)
Sl. Crop 2014-15 2015-16 2016-17
No. Procure- Produ- Total Procure- Produ- Total Procure- Produ- Total
ment ction ment ction ment ction
of seed of seeds of seed of seeds of seed of seeds
through at NSC through at NSC through at NSC
growers farms growers farms growers farms
1. Cereals 9.55 0.83 10.38 9.19 1.25 10.44 8.55 0.95 9.49
2. Pulses 1.72 0.21 1.93 2.59 0.21 2.80 3.67 0.27 3.94
3. Oilseeds 2.26 0.14 2.40 2.24 0.25 2.49 1.88 0.31 2.19
4. Others 0.73 0.07 0.80 1.35 0.13 1.48 0.94 0.08 1.02
Total 14.26 1.25 15.51 15.37 1.84 17.21 15.04 1.61 16.65

56
ANNEXURE II
DETAILS OF CROP GROUP-WISE SALE OF SEEDS BY NSC FOR THE
YEARS 2014-15, 2015-16 AND 2016-17
Sl. Crop Group 2014-15 2015-16 2016-17
No. Qty. in Value in Qty. in Value in Qty. in Value in
Qtls. Rs. Lakh Qtls. Rs. Lakh Qtls. Rs. Lakh
1. Cereals 996068.29 42395.60 840494.62 28574.67 939359.83 31496.76
2. Pulses 281650.44 17222.06 244919.30 21688.06 179271.94 22402.42
3. Oilseeds 274023.53 17914.16 167576.76 10652.15 224108.49 15535.31
4. Others 123724.67 8353.05 145506.42 9802.26 117198.08 8321.07
Total 1675466.93 85884.87 1398497.10 70717.13 1459938.34 77755.55

57
ANNEXURE III
DETAILS OF HYBRID SEEDS PRODUCTION BY NSC DURING THE YEARS
2014-15, 2015-16 AND 2016-17
(Quantity in Quintals)
Sl.No. Crop Variety 2014-15 2015-16 2016-17
12 3 4 5 6
1. PADDY DRRH-2 0 29 41
DRRH-3 0 3436 1852
Total Paddy 0 3465 1893
2. BAJRA HHB 67-2 1124.47 911
HHB-197 557.96 121
HHB-226 348.18 307
RHB-177 2389.22 3391
RHB-173 263.88 2481
ICPT-8203 268
RCB-164 170
Total 4853.71 7211 268
3. MAIZE PEHM-5 2011.15 2128
HQPM-1 6840.6 6066 4841
DHM-1 139.5
GSH-2 600
HM-4 50
DHM-117 34.3 63 225
VIVEK 2
HQPM-5 3636.9 816
VHM-45 20
Total 13312.45 8259 5902

58
4. SORGHUM CSH-24 1645.53
5. ARHAR ICPH-2740 353.16 446.32 674
6. SUNFLOWER KBSH-44 71
KBSH-41 79.88 67
KBSH-53 8
DRSH-113 22.18 40
DRSH-108 4.45 20
Total 106.51 206
7. CASTOR DCH-7 190.7 415.08 653
8. F . SORGHUM SUDEX CHARI 998.34 7000
RED CHARI 4580.68 9240 4519
Total 5579.02 16240 4519
Hyb. Veg. 4.78 7.98 8.57
Grand Total 26041.08 36242.4 13909
12 3 4 5 6

59
ANNEXURE IV
DETAILS OF HYBRID SEEDS SALE BY NSC DURING THE
YEARS 2014-15, 2015-16 AND 2016-17
Sl. Crop Variety 2014-15 2015-16 2016-17
No. Qty. in Value in Qty. in Value in Qty. in Value in
Qtls. Rs. Lakh Qtls. Rs. Lakh Qtls. Rs. Lakh
1 2 3 45 6789
1. Arhar ICPH-2671 0.83 0.13 1.12 0.18 0.00 0.00
2. Arhar ICPH-2740 63.22 9.49 353.33 61.91 446.24 97.02
Arhar Total 64.05 9.63 354.45 62.09 446.24 97.02
3. Bajra HHB-197 0.00 0.00 198.18 17.84 0.00 0.00
(MH-1302)
4. Bajra HHB-226 0.00 0.00 76.89 6.92 0.00 0.00
(MH-1479)
5. Bajra HHB-50 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00
6. Bajra HHB-67 424.30 41.12 210.36 21.04 0.75 0.06
7. Bajra HHB-67 2022.14 194.12 720.90 72.09 468.79 37.48
IMPROVED
8. Bajra HHB-94 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00
9. Bajra JKBH-676 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 58.97 13.69
10. Bajra RHB-173 0.00 0.00 226.29 27.15 1856.09 213.45
(MH-1446)
11. Bajra RHB-177 795.44 76.36 1385.62 157.82 2936.31 312.81
(MH-1486)
Bajra Total 3241.87 311.61 2818.24 302.86 5320.90 577.49
12. Castor GCH-7 576.68 94.62 310.76 42.71 1276.00 230.12
Castor Total 576.68 94.62 310.76 42.71 1276.00 230.12
13. F . Sorghum REDCHARI 10856.61 536.86 11753.01 657.99 3955.38 231.70
(HYBRID)

60
14. F . Sorghum SUDEX CHARI 1295.71 64.49 1643.50 93.67 2763.53 169.94
NO.1 (HYBRID)
F . Sorghum 12152.32 601.35 13396.51 751.66 6718.91 401.64
Total
15. Maize DHM-117 0.00 0.00 0.30 0.03 0.90 0.10
16. Maize GANGASAFED-2 1179.20 82.20 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00
(GSF-2)
17. Maize HM-4 106.10 3.97 8.55 0.94 0.00 0.00
18. Maize HQPM-1 13519.75 1446.70 9738.80 991.53 7871.47 808.53
19. Maize HQPM-4 0.00 0.00 0.35 0.04 0.00 0.00
20. Maize HQPM-5 4231.90 418.57 3771.35 354.64 1547.52 147.84
21. Maize HQPM-7 430.90 36.69 3.00 0.02 0.00 0.00
22. Maize NAH-2049 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00
23. Maize PUSA EARLY 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 150.00 12.00
HY-5 (AH-421)
24. Maize PUSA EARLY 370.12 27.51 11.53 1.46 158.92 2.24
HYBRID
MAKKA-2
(PEHM-2)
25. Maize PUSA EXTRA 3112.52 250.73 417.89 29.25 5.95 0.39
EARLY HYBRID
MAKKA-5
(PEEHM-5)
Maize Total 22950.49 2266.36 13951.77 1377.90 9734.76 971.10
26. Paddy DRRH-2 0.00 0.00 37.99 8.55 4.62 1.04
27. Paddy DRRH-2 IR 4912.40 1180.19 4933.00 1113.97 24.10 5.42
68897B
28. Paddy DRRH-3 0.00 0.00 0.06 0.01 3436.30 773.17
(DRRH-44)
(IET-19543)
29. Paddy KRH-2 1020.49 66.85 30.35 4.31 0.00 0.00
30. Paddy KRH-4 0.06 0.01 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00
Paddy Total 5932.95 1247.05 5001.40 1126.84 3465.02 779.63
1 2 3 45 6789

61
31. Sorghum CSH-24 3469.12 173.72 1644.92 92.12 6.62 0.27
Sorghum Total 3469.12 173.72 1644.92 92.12 6.62 0.27
32. Sunflower DRSF-108 20.58 2.66 3.43 0.56 0.00 0.00
33. Sunflower DRSF-113 33.13 3.41 27.29 1.87 0.00 0.00
34. Sunflower KBSH-1 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00
35. Sunflower KBSH-41 10.74 1.69 238.24 65.53 0.00 0.00
36. Sunflower KBSH-44 8.08 2.01 1.00 0.22 49.10 15.28
37. Sunflower KBSH-53 5.74 0.90 0.00 0.00 7.86 1.40
Sunflower 78.27 10.67 269.96 68.18 56.96 16.68
Total
Veg. 7.97 66.77 2.89 23.10 2.36 17.40
Grand Total 48473.72 4781.78 37750.90 3847.45 27027.77 3091.34
1 2 3 45 6789

62
ANNEXURE V
DEMANND/REQUIREMENT AND AVAILABILITY OF CERTIFIED/QUALITY SEEDS OF HYBRIDS IN THE COUNTRY
(Quantity in Quintals)
Sl.No. CROP 2014-15 2015-16 2016-17 2017-18
Demand Production/ Demand Production/ Demand Production/ Demand Production/
Availability Availability Availability Availability
1. PADDY 151501 195041 385400 614240 192142 220936 523745 585223
2. MAIZE 935524 1069035 1015670 1205390 1001970 1252908 1134359 1296257
3. JOWAR 156507 190614 177250 199810 132465 195706 165321 182247
4. BAJRA 210167 248028 240940 266130 196408 249772 259317 288101
5. ARHAR 870 923 1260 0 3630 4560
6. SUNFLOWER 28716 29656 44330 46150 61038 62593 7682 8513
7. SAFLOWER 339 339
8. CASTOR 70690 84405 60450 61460 49149 57759 52304 54852
9. COTTON 179626 217636 186900 198040 183618 197268 198738 222743
TOTAL 1733601 2035338 2112200 2591220 1816790 2236942 2345434 2642835

63
ANNEXURE VI
REPLACEMENT RATE OF MAJOR CROPS IN THE COUNTRY DURING 2004-05 TO 2016-17 THROUGH AVAILABILITY OF
CERTIFIED/QUALITY SEEDS
(Figure in %)
Crop 2004-05 2005-06 2006-07 2007-08 2008-09 2009-10 2010-11 2011-12 2012-13 2013-14 2014-15 2015-16 2016-17
1 23456789 1 0 1 1 1 2 1 3 1 4
Wheat 16.48 17.64 21.76 25.23 26.84 31.86 32.63 32.55 33.82 34.90 35.53 35.07 40.30
Paddy 16.27 21.33 22.41 25.87 30.05 33.60 37.46 40.21 39.05 57.55 32.80 36.76 39.81
Maize 31.50 35.39 43.78 44.24 48.48 46.85 54.09 56.58 54.22 63.50 71.80 70.48 64.68
Jowar 19.28 19.03 19.37 19.87 26.16 26.34 25.86 23.85 26.01 27.95 40.08 50.04 38.22
Bajra 44.90 55.36 55.10 48.47 62.92 48.85 61.43 60.40 56.67 54.85 53.61 58.03 57.09
Ragi 28.09 24.72 23.60 30.34 36.05 7.89 40.21 40.09 44.72 25.46 52.43 56.14 53.39
Barley 8.89 10.61 14.32 16.84 26.91 28.21 26.64 56.46 29.12 19.78 28.62 29.69 30.27
Urd 17.24 15.70 13.65 23.89 26.31 30.91 29.19 34.41 33.96 49.55 30.27 33.72 37.97
Moong 12.34 12.50 19.97 21.75 21.94 23.01 26.68 30.29 32.41 49.63 23.55 30.72 33.55
Arhar 9.80 10.48 11.56 16.05 16.02 27.79 17.51 22.16 21.46 46.25 40.97 45.24 48.11

64
Peas 9.02 12.13 13.76 16.27 20.64 33.12 23.45 21.76 28.48 36.12 34.09 29.97 30.23
Gram 9.87 9.41 9.04 11.90 14.38 21.97 18.38 19.35 21.17 31.43 25.35 27.64 31.83
Lentil 14.73 12.75 15.30 15.86 18.08 16.86 22.60 20.23 21.46 34.12 31.49 26.65 35.40
Groundnut 7.11 6.89 9.79 14.29 17.04 22.95 24.50 22.51 24.91 25.38 23.65 23.56 25.24
Rape/Must 58.48 55.36 60.71 58.62 52.67 74.80 63.64 78.88 57.31 51.28 54.56 62.20 68.03
Til 13.64 15.91 18.18 25.00 19.49 18.54 20.05 22.82 19.84 23.62 19.48 30.92 42.36
Sunflower 60.15 67.67 66.92 62.88 43.64 51.46 61.20 32.47 35.83 86.29 96.32 86.20 30.67
Soyabean 23.88 25.54 25.11 29.53 29.26 38.95 35.85 52.75 51.63 37.46 30.48 37.74 38.17
Castor 30.60 37.31 26.87 31.34 41.95 31.56 28.32 60.63 61.54 41.06 42.94 54.12 80.80
Safflower 15.69 15.69 13.73 15.69 26.04 23.15 28.63 32.89 14.62 32.91 29.05 29.52 29.32
1 23456789 1 0 1 1 1 2 1 3 1 4

65
ANNEXURE VII
DETAILS OF ASSISTANCE/SUBSIDY FOR HYBRID SEED DISTRIBUTION
PROVIDED UNDER VARIOUS EXISTING SCHEMES/PROGRAMMES
IMPLEMENTED BY STATES
Scheme/ Crop Scale of Assistance
Component
1. National Food Rice Rs. 5000/- per quintal or 50% of seeds cost whichever is
Security Mission less for certified hybrid rice seed distribution.
(NFSM)
Coarse cereals- Rs. 5000/- per quintal or 50% of cost of seeds whichever
HYVs seed is less for Hybrid coarse cereal certified seeds distribution
Hybrid seed for less than 10 years old varieties.
2. Bringing Green Rice Distribution of seeds
Revolution in Rs. 5000/- per quintal or 50% of seeds cost whichever is
Eastern India less for certified hybrid rice seed distribution.
(BGREI)
3. National Mission on All oilseeds, Rs. 5000/- per quintal for hybrids not older than 15
Oil Seeds and Oil Hybrid seeds years.
Palm (NMOOP) Oil Palm Full cost of Seed Minikits of high yielding varieties/hybrids
Sprouts which are less than 10 years. (Implementing agency NSC/
Cultivation NAFED/KRIBHCO etc).
cost as 85% of cost of planting material with a ceiling of
assistance Rs. 8000/ha. for entire land holding of farmers for oil
for gestation palm.
period for 50% cost during gestation period for 4 years with ceiling
oil palm. of Rs. 16000/per ha. for oil palm.

66
ANNEXURE VIII
RECENT MEASURES TAKEN BY GOVERNMENT IN AGRICULTURAL
TRADE POLICY
Sl.No. Date of measure Description of measure
12 3
1. 17.01.2017 Minimum Import Price on Arecanut has been enhanced from
Rs. 162/kg to Rs. 251/Kg. w.e.f. 17.1.2017.
2. 27.03.2017 Bulk export of groundnut oil, sesame oil, soyabean oil and maize
(Corn) oil has been permitted w.e.f. 27.03.2017, removing consumer
pack restriction of (upto 5 kg).
3. 28.03.2017 Import duty on tur has been raised from zero to 10% w.e.f. 28.3.2017
4. 05.08.2017 Quantitative restrictions of 2 lakh tons per year on import of tur
(pigeon pea) w.e.f. 5.8.2017
5. 21.08.2017 Quantitative restrictions of 3 lakh tons on urad & moong per year
w.e.f. 21.08.2017 have been imposed.
6. 08.11.2017 Import duty on wheat has been raised from 10% to 20% w.e.f.
8.11.2017
7. 08.11.2017 Import duty on peas has been raised from 0% to 50% w.e.f. 8.11.2017
8. 17.11.2017 Import duty on soyabean seed has been raised form 30% to 45%
w.e.f. 17.11.2017
9. 17.11.2017 Import duties on major edible oils have been raised w.e.f. 17.11.2017
maintaining an appropriate difference between crude and refined
oil as given below:
❖ crude palm oil from 15% to 30% and refined palm oil from 25%
to 40%,
❖ crude sunflower oil from 12.5% to 25% and refined sunflower
oil from 20% to 35%,
❖ crude soyabean oil from 17.5% to 30% and refined soyabean oil
from 20% to 35%,
❖ crude rapeseed oil including canola oil (Low erucic and rapeseed
oil), mustard oil and colza oil from 12.5% to 25% and on refined
rapeseed oil including canola oil (Low erucic acid and rapeseed
oil), mustard oil and colza oil from 20% to 35% w.e.f. 17.11.2017

67
10. 22.11.2017 Export of all varieties of pulses including organic pulses has been
made ÒfreeÓ without any quantitative restriction w.e.f. 22.11.2017
11. 24.11.2017 Under Foreign Trade Policy 2015-20, rates of reward under
Merchandise Exports from India (MEIS) have been enhanced on export
of various agriculture items from 2% to 4%, from 3% to 5% and from
5% to 7% w.e.f. 01st November , 2017 upto 30th June, 2018 to offset
high transit cost.
12. 06.12.2017 Minimum Import Price (MIP) of Rs. 500/kg on pepper has been imposed
w.e.f. 6.12.2017
13. 21.12.2017 Import duty on lentil ( masur) and chana (gram) has been raised
from zero to 30% w.e.f. 21.12.2017
14. 02.02.2018 Import duties on the following vegetable edible oils have been raised
on 2nd Feb 2018 in view of Budget 2018-19.
¥ crude vegetable oils namely - Ground nut, Olive oil, cotton seed
oil, safflower seed oil, saffola oil, coconut oil, plam kernel/
Babassu oil, linseed oil, maize corn oil, sesame oil, other fixed
veg fats and oils, raised from 12.5% to 30%.
¥ refined edible oils namely - Ground nut, Olive oil, cotton seed
oil, safflower seed oil, saffola oil, coconut oil, plam kernel/
Babassu oil, linseed oil, maize corn oil, castor oil, sesame oil,
other fixed veg fats and oils, have been raised from 20% to 35%.
15. 06.02.2018 Import duty on chickpeas (gram) raised from 30% to 40% on 6th
February 2018
16. 01.03.2018 Import duty on chickpeas (gram) raised from 40% to 60% on 01st
March, 2018
17. 01.03.2018 Import duty on crude palm oil from 30% to 44% & on refined palm
oil (all grades) from 40% to 54% on 01 March, 2018
18. 06.04.2018 All varieties of edible oils , except mustard oil, have been made
ÔfreeÕ for export without any quantitative restrictions. However ,
export of mustard oil in branded consumer packs of upto 5 kgs will
continue to be permitted for export with a Minimum Export Price of
USD 900/MT .
12 3

68
ANNEXURE IX
DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE, COOPERATION AND FARMERS WELFARE
(Rs. in crore)
Sl. Name of the 2013-14 2014-15 2015-16 2016-17 2017-18 2018-19
No. Schemes BE RE BE RE BE RE BE RE BE RE BE
1 2 34 56 7 89 1 0 1 1 1 2 1 3
1. Crop Insurance 2151.00 2551.00 2823.00 2784.93 2823.00 3185.09 5500.00 13240.04 9000.00 10698.00 13000.00
2. Interest Subsidy for 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 15000.00 13619.13 15000.00 14750.00 15000.00
Short Term Credit
to Farmers
3. Market Intervention 84.50 46.00 80.00 70.00 80.00 48.25 80.00 145.69 199.30 950.00 200.00
Scheme Price
Support Scheme
4. Pradhan Mantri Krishi 1693.00 1342.00 1121.00 1055.39 1850.00 1550.11 2340.00 1990.00 3400.00 3000.00 4000.00
Sinchai Yojana
5. Rashtriya Krishi 9954.00 7089.00 9954.00 8444.00 4500.00 3900.00 5400.00 3550.00 4750.00 3050.00 3600.00
Vikas Yojana
6. National Food 2272.00 1979.72 2029.73 1830.00 1300.00 1136.61 1700.00 1280.00 1720.00 1400.00 1690.70
Security Mission

69
7. National Mission on 2556.00 2948.73 2263.00 1990.07 2000.00 1769.59 1620.00 1660.00 2320.00 2190.00 2536.00
Horticulture
8. Sub-Mission on 807.00 756.90 719.00 700.58 655.50 598.65 635.00 590.50 912.00 821.00 1020.00
Agriculture
Extension
9. Sub-Mission on 58.00 59.29 208.30 194.87 177.85 153.10 180.00 373.00 550.00 776.71 1165.29
Agriculture
Mechanization
10. Integrated Scheme 720.00 884.50 1400.00 1085.10 1450.00 1490.36 837.90 1070.00 1190.00 750.00 1050.00
on Agricultural
Marketing
11. National Bamboo 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 300.00
Mission
1 2 34 56 7 89 1 0 1 1 1 2 1 3

70
Total allocation for Ministry of Agriculture,
Cooperation & Farmers Welfare
Year BE RE
2013-14 29772.83 26070.87
2014-15 31062.94 26622.57
2015-16 24909.78 22958.20
2016-17 44485.20 48072.50
2017-18 51026.00 50263.74

71
ANNEXURE X
LIST OF SELECTED COMMODITIES/FOODGRAINS COVERED UNDER MSP
SCHEME
Sl.No. Commodities
Kharif Crops
1. Paddy (Common)
Paddy (Grade-A)
2. Jowar (Hybrid)
Jowar (Maldandi)
3. Bajra
4. Maize
5. Ragi
6. Tur (Arhar)
7. Moong
8. Urad
9. Cotton (F414/H777)
Cotton (H4)
10. Groundnut
11. Sunflower seed
12. Soyabean (Black)
Soyabean (Yellow)
13. Sesamum
14. Nigerseed
Rabi Crops
15. Wheat
16. Barley
17. Gram
18. Lentil (Masur)
19. Rapeseed/Mustard
20. Safflower
Other Crops
21. Copra (Milling)
Copra (Ball)
22. Jute (TD5)
23. Sugarcane

72
ANNEXURE XI
A. Crops having MSP more than 50% of Cost of Production A 2+FL
Sl. Crop Latest Crop          Rs./qtl. % Growth
No. Season in MSP over
A2+FL MSP cost A 2+FL
1. Wheat 2017-18 817 1735 112.36
2. R&M 2017-18 2123 4000 88.41
3. Lentil (Masur) 2017-18 2366 4250 79.63
4. Gram 2017-18 2461 4400 78.79
5. Sugarcane 2016-17* 152 255 67.52
6. Barley 2017-18 845 1410 66.86
7. Urad 2017-18 3265 5400 65.39
8. Tur (Arhar) 2017-18 3318 5450 64.26
9. Jute 2016-17* 2160 3500 62.05
10. Bajra 2017-18 949 1425 50.16
B. Crops having MSP less than 50% of Cost of Production A
2+FL
Sl. Crop Latest Crop          Rs./qtl. % Growth
No. Season in MSP over
A2+FL MSP cost A 2+FL
12 3 4 5 6
1. Copra 2017-18 5007 7500 49.79
2. Soybean $ 2017-18 2121 3050 43.80
3. Groundnut 2017-18 3159 4450 40.87
4. Paddy 2017-18 1117 1550 38.76
5. Maize 2017-18 1044 1425 36.49
6. Cotton
# 2017-18 3276 4320 31.87
7. Safflower 2017-18 3125 4100 31.20
8. Sesamum 2017-18 4067 5300 30.32

73
9. Moong 2017-18 4286 5575 30.07
10. Sunflower 2017-18 3481 4100 17.78
11. Jowar 2017-18 1556 1700 9.25
12. Nigerseed 2017-18 3912 4050 3.53
13. Ragi 2017-18 1861 1900 2.10
A2+FL: Paid out cost inclusive Family Labour
Note: Paid out cost covers the cost on account of all inputs like human labour, bullock
labour , machine labour, seeds, fertilisers, manure, insecticides, irrigation charges.
$The MSP is for Soybean (Yellow)
#The MSP is for Cotton Long Staple (LS)
*MSPs for 2017-18 has yet to be announced
12 3 4 5 6

74
ANNEXURE XII
PRODUCTION AND PROCUREMENT OF OILSEEDS, PULSES,
RICE AND WHEAT AT MSP/PSS
(Million Tonnes)
2015-16 2016-17 2017-18*
Production Procurement Production Procurement Production Procurement
Pulses 163.50 0.00 231.30 2.05 245.10 15.72
Oilseeds 252.51 0.04 312.76 2.22 306.38 11.68
Rice 104.41 34.22 109.70 38.11 111.01 35.42
Wheat 92.29 28.09 98.51 22.96 97.11 30.82
*Estimated Production as per 3rd advance estimates.

75
ANNEXURE XIII
STANDING COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE
(2017-18)
MINUTES OF THE TWENTY SEVENTH SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE
The Committee sat on Tuesday, the 31st July, 2018 from 1500 hrs.
to 1635 hrs. in the Committee Room ÒBÓ, Ground Floor, Parliament
House Annexe, New Delhi.
PRESENT
Shri Hukm Deo Narayan Yadav Ñ  Chairperson
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Sanjay Dhotre
3. Prof. Ravindra Vishwanath Gaikwad
4. Shri Nalin Kumar Kateel
5. Smt. Raksha Nikhil Khadse
6. Md. Badaruddoza Khan
7. Shri C. Mahendran
8. Dr. Tapas Mandal
9. Shri Nityanand Rai
10. Shri Mukesh Rajput
11. Shri Virendra Singh
12. Shri Dharmendra Yadav
13. Shri Jai Prakash Narayan Yadav
Rajya Sabha
14. Shri Rajmani Patel
15. Shri Kailash Soni
16. Shri Harnath Singh Yadav
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Shri D.S. Malha Ñ Joint Secretary
2. Shri Arun K. Kaushik Ñ Director
3. Smt. Juby Amar Ñ Additional Director
4. Shri Sumesh Kumar Ñ Under Secretary

76
*2. ***** ***** ***** *****
*3. ***** ***** ***** *****
[THE WITNESSES WITHDREW]
4. Thereafter, the Committee took up for consideration the following
draft Reports:
*(i) ***** ***** ***** *****
*(ii) ***** ***** ***** *****
(iii) Draft Report on the Action Taken by the Government on the
Observations/Recommendations contained in the 47th Report
(16th Lok Sabha) of the Standing Committee on Agriculture
(2017-18) on ÔDemands for Grants (2018-19) Õ of the Ministry
of Agriculture and Farmers Welfare (Department of
Agriculture, Cooperation and Farmers Welfare).
*(iv) ***** ***** ***** *****
*(v) ***** ***** ***** *****
*(vi) ***** ***** ***** *****
5. After some deliberations, the Committee adopted the draft
Reports at para (i), (ii), (iii), (v) and (vi) without any modifications and
Draft Report at para (iv) with minor modification and authorized the
Chairperson to finalize and present these Reports to Parliament after
factual verification of Subject report from the concerned Departments/
Ministries.
*6. ***** ***** ***** *****
The Committee then adjourned.
(A copy of the verbatim proceedings of the Sitting
has been kept separately).
*Matter not related to this Report.

77
APPENDIX
ANALYSIS OF ACTION TAKEN BY GOVERNMENT ON THE FORTY
SEVENTH REPORT (16th LOK SABHA) OF STANDING
COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE (2017-18)
(Vide Para 4 of Introduction of the Report)
(i) Total number of Recommendations 15
(ii) Recommendations/Observations which have been
accepted by the Government
Para Nos. 1, 2, 3, 6, 8, 12, 13 and 15
Total 8
Percentage 53.33%
(iii) Recommendations/Observations which the Committee
do not desire to pursue in view of the Government Õs
replies
Para No. Nil
Total Nil
Percentage 0.00%
(iv) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which
replies of the Government have not been accepted
by the Committee
Para Nos. 4 and 10
Total 2
Percentage 13.33%
(v) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which
final replies of the Government are still awaited
Para Nos. 5, 7, 9, 11 and 14
Total 5
Percentage 33.33%