MINISTRY OF AGRICULTURE AND
FARMERS WELFARE
(DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURAL
RESEARCH AND EDUCATION)
‘DEMANDS FOR GRANTS (2016-17)’
[Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations contained
in the Twenty Sixth Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) of the Standing
Committee on Agriculture (2015-2016)]
THIRTIETH REPORT
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
August 2016/Shravana,1938 (Saka)
STANDING COMMITTEE ON
AGRICULTURE
(2015-2016)
SIXTEENTH LOK SABHA
30

THIRTIETH REPORT
STANDING COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE
(2015-2016)
(SIXTEENTH LOK SABHA)
MINISTRY OF AGRICULTURE AND
FARMERS WELFARE
(DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURAL
RESEARCH AND EDUCATION)
‘DEMANDS FOR GRANTS (2016-17)’
[Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations
contained in the Twenty Sixth Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) of the
Standing Committee on Agriculture (2015-2016)]
Presented to Lok Sabha on 11.8.2016
Laid on the Table of Rajya Sabha on 11.8.2016
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
August 2016/Shravana,1938 (Saka)

C.O.A. No. 346
Price : Rs. 53.00
© 2016 B Y L OK S ABHA S ECRETARIAT
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of
Business in Lok Sabha (Fifteenth Edition) and Printed by National Printers,
New Delhi-110 028.

(i)
CONTENTS
PAGE
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE ............................................................. (iii)
INTRODUCTION ........................................................................................... (v)
CHAPTER I Report ............................................................................... 1
CHAPTER II Observations/Recommendations which have been
accepted by the Government ........................................ 11
CHAPTER III Observations/Recommendations which the
Committee do not desire to pursue in view of the
Government’s replies ..................................................... 26
CHAPTER IV Observations/Recommendations in respect of which
replies of the Government have not been accepted
by the Committee ........................................................... 27
C
HAPTER V Observations/Recommendations in respect of which
final replies of the Government are still awaited ...... 28
ANNEXURE
Extract of Minutes of the 29th Sitting of the  Committee
Committee held on 8.8.2016 ............... .......................... 33
APPENDIX
Analysis of Action Taken by the Government on the
Recommendations contained in the Twenty Sixth
Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) of the Standing
Committee on Agriculture (2015-16) .......................... 35

(iii)
COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON
AGRICULTURE (2015-16)
Shri Hukm Deo Narayan Yadav — Chairperson
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Prof. Ravindra Vishwanath Gaikwad
3. Shri Sanganna Karadi
4. Shri Nalin Kumar Kateel
*5. Smt. Raksha Nikhil Khadse
6. Md. Badaruddoza Khan
7. Shri C. Mahendran
8. Dr. Tapas Mandal
9. Shri Janardan Mishra
10. Shri Ajay Nishad
$11. Vacant
12. Shri Nityanand Rai
13. Shri Mukesh Rajput
14. Shri Konakalla Narayana Rao
15. Shri C.L. Ruala
16. Shri Arjun Charan Sethi
17. Shri Satyapal Singh (Sambhal)
18. Shri Virendra Singh
19. Shri Dharmendra Yadav
20. Shri Jai Prakash Narayan Yadav
21. Shri B. S. Yeddyurappa
* Smt. Raksha Nikhil Khadse, MP Lok Sabha, nominated to the Committee w.e.f. 13.04.2016
vice Prof. Richard Hay who ceased to be the Member of the Committee w.e.f. 13.04.2016.
$ Vacant due to sad demise of Shri Dalpat Singh Paraste w.e.f. 01.06.2016.

(iv)
Rajya Sabha
^22. Vacant
23. Shrimati Renuka Chowdhury
#24. Sardar Sukhdev Singh Dhindsa
25. Shri Janardan Dwivedi
@26. Shri Meghraj Jain
27. Shri Vinay Katiyar
28. Shri Mohd. Ali Khan
29. Shri Ram Nath Thakur
30. Shri Shankarbhai N. Vegad
31. Shri Darshan Singh Yadav
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Shri U.B.S. Negi — Joint Secretary
2. Shri Arun K. Kaushik — Director
3. Shri Sumesh Kumar — Under Secretary
^ Vacant due to retirement of Shri A.W. Rabi Bernard from the Membership of
Rajya Sabha w.e.f. 29.06.2016 vide CB-I Note dated 28.06.2016.
# Sardar Sukhdev Singh Dhindsa, MP Rajya Sabha, nominated to the Committee w.e.f.
23.05.2016 vide Lok Sabha Bulletin- Part II, No.3581 dated 23.05.2016.
@ Shri Meghraj Jain, MP Rajya Sabha, nominated to the Committee w.e.f. 28.07.2016 vide
Rajya Sabha Bulletin- Part II, dated 28.07.2016.
Shri Rajpal Singh Saini from the Membership of Rajya Sabha w.e.f. 04.07.2016 vide
CB-I Note dated 28.06.2016.

(v)
INTRODUCTION
I, the Chairperson, Standing Committee on Agriculture (2015-16),
having been authorized by the Committee to submit the Report on their
behalf, present this Thirtieth Report on action taken by the Government
on the Observations/Recommendations contained in the Twenty Sixth
Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) of the Standing Committee on Agriculture
(2015-16) on ‘Demands for Grants (2016-17)’ pertaining to the Ministry
of Agriculture and Farmers Welfare (Department of Agricultural Research
and Education).
2. The Twenty Sixth Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) of the Standing
Committee on Agriculture (2015-16) ‘Demands for Grants (2016-17)’
pertaining to the Ministry of Agriculture and Farmers Welfare (Department
of Agricultural Research and Education) was presented to Lok Sabha and
laid on the Table of Rajya Sabha on 02 May, 2016. The Action Taken Notes
on the Report were received on 04 July, 2016.
3. The Report was considered and adopted by the Committee at
their Sitting held on 08.08.2016.
4. An analysis of the action taken by the Government on the
Observations/Recommendations contained in the Twenty Sixth Report
(Sixteenth Lok Sabha) of the Committee is given in Appendix.
N
EW DELHI; HUKM DEO NARAYAN YADAV,
8 August, 2016 Chairperson,
17 Shravana, 1938 (Saka) Standing Committee on Agriculture.

CHAPTER I
REPORT
This Report of the Standing Committee on Agriculture deals with
the action taken by the Government on the recommendations contained
in the Twenty Sixth Report of the Standing Committee on Agriculture
(2015-16) on ‘Demands for Grants (2016-17)’ of the Ministry of Agriculture
and Farmers Welfare (Department of Agricultural Research and Education)
which was presented to Lok Sabha and laid on the Table of Rajya Sabha
on 02 May 2016.
1.2 The Ministry of Agriculture and Farmers Welfare (Department
of Agricultural Research and Education) have furnished Action
Taken Replies in respect of all the 14 Observations/Recommendations
contained in the Report. These replies have been categorized as
under:—
(i) Observations/Recommendations that have been accepted by
the Government:
Recommendation Para Nos. 1, 2, 3, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 12
and 13
(Chapter II - Total 11)
(ii) Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not
desire to pursue in view of the Government’s reply:
Recommendation Para No. NIL
(Chapter III - Total NIL)
(iii) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which action
taken replies of the Government have not been accepted by
the Committee:
Recommendation Para No. NIL
(Chapter IV - Total NIL)

2
(iv) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which final
replies of the Government are still awaited:
Recommendation Para Nos. 4, 11 and 14
(Chapter V - Total 03)
1.3 The Committee trust that utmost importance would be given
to implementation of the Observations/Recommendations accepted by
the Government. In cases, where it is not possible for the Department
to implement the Recommendations in letter and spirit for any reason,
the matter should be reported to the Committee with reasons for non-
implementation. The Committee desire that further Action Taken Note
on the Observations/Recommendations contained in Chapter-I and Final
Action Taken Replies to the Observations/Recommendations contained
in Chapter-V of this Report be furnished to them at an early date.
1.4 The Committee will now deal with the action taken by the
Government on some of the Recommendations in the succeeding
paragraphs.
A. Planning in the era of NITI Aayog
Recommendation (Para No. 4)
1.5 The Committee had noted that the Government are yet to initiate
process of formulation of next plan after replacement of Planning
Commission by NITI Aayog. In this regard, the Committee had been
informed that as per Allocation of Business Rules, the NITI Aayog is
mandated to evolve a shared vision of national development priorities,
sectors and strategies with the active involvement of States in the light
of national objectives. NITI Aayog is also assigned the responsibility to
develop mechanisms to formulate credible plans at the village level and
aggregate these progressively at higher levels of Government. To design
strategic and long term policy and programme frameworks and initiatives,
and monitor their progress and their efficacy, the lesson learnt through
monitoring and feedback will be used for making innovative
improvements, including mid-course corrections. According to the
Department, they have envisaged overall allocation of 1.0% of total
agricultural GDP for the Department (DARE/ICAR) for attaining required
growth of agriculture sector in the country. The Department will require
fund of Rs. 45878.13 crore under Plan and Non-plan Heads for next five
years. However, the Committee were astonished to know that Department
is not aware about future course of planning process and NITI Aayog
is yet to take any decision regarding formulation of next five year plan.

3
The Committee were of view that formulation of long term plan is sina-
qua-non  for development of economy in general and science and
technology in particular. NITI Aayog need to take up this issue on urgent
basis and specify the future course of action for planning so that necessary
steps could be taken up to fix targets and assign resources accordingly.
The Committee, therefore, recommended that the NITI Aayog be urged
to design strategic and long term policy frameworks of the Department
to enable them to take initiatives and formulate action plan accordingly
to achieve the physical and financial targets for the purpose. The
Committee also expected the DARE/ICAR to utilize in-house mechanism
and expertise for the development of long term vision and plan for all
institutions under its purview for the next five years.
Reply of the Government
1.6 In its action taken reply, the Ministry has stated as under:—
“NITI Aayog has been entrusted to prepare a 15-years vision
document beginning from the financial year 2017-18 along with
seven years plan for execution and midterm appraisal/review during
every 3 years. This will replace prevailing five year planning system,
which was prepared for over six decades by its predecessor Planning
Commission. NITI Aayog started deliberations for a 15-year vision
document and will hold stakeholder consultations in groups over
the next few months and aims to prepare the documents by the
end of this year. The consultations would also seek suggestion for
framing a seven year (2017-18 to 2023-24) strategy to convert the
longer vision into implementable policy as part of the National
Development Agenda, which will be reviewed after three years
(2019-20) fiscal. In addition, the department has already considered
recommendation/concern of the Committee. Institutions under
DARE/ICAR have developed long term vision 2050 by utilizing
in-house expertise of each sector namely Crop Sciences, Animal
Sciences, Fisheries Sciences, Horticulture Sciences, Natural Resource
Management, Agriculture Engineering, Agriculture Education and
Agricultural Extension.”
1.7 Keeping in view the need for long term vision and strategic
planning to achieve aims in the field of agriculture, the Committee
had recommended the Department to take up issue with NITI Aayog
for formulation of plan for the Department. The Committee had also
desired the Department to utilize in-house expertise for the
development of long term vision and plan for all institutions under

4
its purview for the next five years. In its Action Taken Reply, the
Department has stated that NITI Aayog started deliberations for a 15-
year vision document and will hold stakeholder consultations in groups
over the next few months and aims to prepare the documents by the
end of this year. The consultations would also seek suggestion for
framing a seven year (2017-18 to 2023-24) strategy to convert the longer
vision into implementable policy as part of the National Development
Agenda, which will be reviewed after three years (2019-20) fiscal. The
Committee have also been informed that Institutions under DARE/
ICAR have developed long term vision 2050 by utilizing in-house
expertise. The Committee hope that NITI Aayog would complete their
deliberations for preparation of a 15-year vision document after
consulting all stakeholders by the end of the current year and also
frame seven year implementation policy as part of the National
Development Agenda so that Department could be in a position to
explain their needs and demands and formulate its action plan. The
Committee, therefore, desire the Department to impress upon NITI
Aayog to prepare 15 year vision document within its stipulated time
without further delay.
B. Promotion to cultivation of pulses
Recommendation (Para No. 7)
1.8 The Committee were distressed to note that despite being the
largest producer of pulses in the world, India has to resort to import a
large quantity of pulses to meet the demand in the country. The Committee
had noted that production of pulses in the country is around 17-19 million
tonnes during the last 3-4 years which falls short of domestic requirement
of about 22.5 million tonnes processed dal. 3.09 mt of pulses were imported
by the country bringing a burden of Rs. 11038 crore during 2013-14.
ICAR has developed a number of area and season specific high yielding
and pest resistant varieties of pulses which has positive impact of
14-16% in increasing production of pulses in the country. The ICAR has
also developed crop production, management and protection technologies
which can safeguard pulse crops from pests and insects. The Committee
had also been informed that a scheme for enhancing indigenous pulse
production to achieve self-sufficiency by 2020-21 has been initiated besides
existing National Food Security Mission and Borlaug Global Rust Initiative.
However, the Committee were anguished to note that failure of State and
National seed companies to provide quality seeds of improved varieties,
slow pace of farm mechanization in pulses cultivation, failure of the

5
Government to create efficient market intervention scheme, lack of liberal
credit policy and poor economic capacity of the farmers to make
investment are hindering country to achieve self-sufficiency in production
of pulses. The Committee were of view that pulses are a major source
of protein for majority of people in India and availability of adequate
quantity of pulses at reasonable prices is a way to deal with the problem
of malnutrition in the country . The Committee, therefore, desired the
Government should invest aggressively not only in R&D for pulses but
should also provide adequate incentives to the farmers in the form of
support to availability of improved varieties of seeds at subsidized rate,
farm mechanization and credit facility at lower interest rate. The
Committee also desired that the Department should impress upon all
stake holders including State Governments to expedite farm mechanization
and use quality seeds of the improved varieties to achieve self-sufficiency
in pulse production in the country in the near future. Further, the
Government should also provide adequate financial support for the
purpose so that the time bound mission to achieve self-sufficiency in
pulses production do not suffer for want of funds.
Reply of the Government
1.9 In their action taken reply the Ministry has stated as under:—
“Indian Council of Agriculture Research (ICAR) and Department
of Agriculture, Cooperation and Farmers Welfare (DAC&FW) under
the Ministry of Agriculture and Farmers Welfare, Government of
India are jointly working on a comprehensive action plan for
attaining self-sufficiency in pulses with a two-pronged approach
of productivity enhancement and increasing production through
expansion of pulses’ area, since rabi 2015-16. In order to ensure
self-sufficiency in pulses, a road map to achieve 21 million tonnes
pulses production in 2017-18 and 24 million tonnes by 2020-21 has
been envisaged. To bring 3-4 million ha additional area under pulses,
promotion of summer Mung bean after the harvest of wheat, potato
and rapeseed mustard in Punjab, Haryana, Western UP and parts
of Rajasthan; Lentil and chickpea in rice fallows of Eastern UP ,
Bihar, Jharkhand, Odisha, Chhattisgarh and West Bengal; and
Mungbean/Urdbeanin rice fallows of Andhra Pradesh, Tamil Nadu,
Odisha and Karnataka has been targeted. Department has planned
to enhance the availability of quality seed of pulses at subsidized
rate by strengthening breeder seed production and establishment
of pulses seed-hubs at selected State Agricultural Universities, Krishi

6
Vigyan Kendras and ICAR research institutes from 2016-17. For
that, a provision of Rs. 250 crore for strengthening breeder seed
production at selected centers and enhancing quality seed
production of pulses through proposed 150 seed-hubs have been
made under National Food Security Mission (NFSM). In addition,
the DAC&FW, is taking up a new sub-schemes under RKVY for
pulses ‘area expansion especially in rice fallow areas of Eastern
India with a total allocation of Rs. 200 crore comprising central
share of Rs. 130 crore. During rabi 2015-16, about 32037
demonstrations on latest varieties and production and protection
technologies of rabi pulses were conducted in about 12811 ha area
by 300 Krishi Vigyan Kendras of ICAR across the country, for which
a budget allocation of Rs. 12 crore was made under NFSM.”
1.10 The Committee are happy to note that Indian Council of
Agriculture Research (ICAR) and Department of Agriculture,
Cooperation and Farmers Welfare (DAC&FW) are working in
coordination on a comprehensive action plan for attaining self-
sufficiency in production of pulses and a road map for the purpose
has been envisaged. In this regard, promotion of summer Mung bean
in Punjab, Haryana, Western UP and parts of Rajasthan; Lentil and
chickpea in rice fallows of Eastern UP , Bihar, Jharkhand, Odisha,
Chhattisgarh and West Bengal; and Mungbean/Urdbean in rice fallows
of Andhra Pradesh, Tamil Nadu, Odisha and Karnataka has been
targeted. A provision of Rs. 250 crore for strengthening breeder seed
production at selected centers and enhancing quality seed production
of pulses through proposed 150 seed-hubs has been made under
National Food Security Mission (NFSM). About 32037 demonstrations
on latest varieties and production and protection technologies of rabi
pulses were conducted by 300 Krishi Vigyan Kendras of ICAR across
the country during rabi 2015-16. The Committee hope that these steps
will help the Country to achieve self sufficiency in the production of
pulses. However, the Committee note that the reply is silent on the
issues of support to the farmers in the form of farm mechanization and
credit support at lower interest rates for the cultivation of pulses. The
Committee are of view that unless farmers are provided with adequate
financial support in the form of subsidized seeds, farm machinery and
credit at affordable interest rates, shift from wheat/paddy towards
farming of pulses will not happen as farming of pulses is of long
duration and is fraught with dangers of loss of crops due to diseases/
pests. The Committee, therefore, reiterate their earlier recommendation
to provide adequate incentives to the farmers in the form of support

7
to farm mechanization and credit facility at lower interest rate. The
Committee desire the Government to make provision for the same to
achieve the aims set for pulses production in country. Further, the
Committee also desire the Government to allocate sufficient funds to
ICAR for development of short duration and disease resistant varieties
of pulses. The Committee would like to be informed about the steps
taken by the Government in this regard within three months of
presentation of this Report.
C. Agricultural Extension Division
Recommendation (Para No. 11)
1.11 The Committee had noted that Agricultural Extension Division
has been entrusted with the responsibility of implementing Plan Scheme
on continuation and establishment of new Krishi Vigyan Kendras (KVKs).
The KVK scheme concerns with technology assessment, refinement and
demonstration of technology/products and its transfer through training
of farmers and extension personnel, besides organizing extension
programmes for creating awareness on improved agricultural technology.
The scheme is being monitored through eight Zonal Project Directorates.
ICAR has 643 KVKs in the country. Further, the Government has also
approved to establish 109 more KVKs in newly created districts, one
additional KVK in larger districts, border and mountainous districts during
12th Plan. However, the Committee noted that out of approved additional
121 KVKs, only 12 KVKs have been established so far. The Committee
also noted that Agricultural Extension Division has been one of the
recipient of lowest allocations during 12th plan. The Division has received
only Rs. 2964.9 crore (BE) till 2016-17 against earmarked allocations of
Rs. 5739.56 crore for 12th plan. The Committee were of the considered
opinion that agricultural extension is most important link between lab
and farmers. The result of investment made on R&D and efforts of scientist
could not be fructified unless information regarding seeds, planting
materials, fertilizers, technologies, farming methods, contingency plan
etc. reaches the farmers. The Committee, in their previous Reports, had
time and again emphasized upon this important aspect and called for
enhanced allocations for implementation of KVK scheme. However, the
Committee were distressed to note that Government have failed to provide
adequate funds required for the scheme over the last few years. The
Committee were of view that stated objective of doubling the income of
farmers of the country in next five years could not be achieved unless
agricultural extension support through KVKs are provided to them. The

8
Committee had, therefore, recommended that the allocations to the
KVK scheme may be enhanced at RE stage to enable the Department
to establish additional 121 KVKs as approved for 12th Plan. The
Committee also, desired that each KVK should have an artificial
insemination centre for animals with proper infrastructure and adequate
Veterinary Doctors.
Reply of the Government
1.12 In action taken reply , the Ministry has stated as under:—
“The department will endeavor to enhance the allocations for the
Division at RE stage during 2016-17 within the available allocations
to the Department. The requirement of the Division in
RE 2016-17 is being assessed in consultation with all ATARI and
the same will be proposed in the Plan RE 2016-17.
Additional strength for each KVK have been approved in the 12th
Plan EFC which includes a Scientist/SMS position in Veterinary
Science. A proposal has been initiated and being examined in
consultation with the Ministry of Finance for creating these
additional positions for each KVK. In respect of developing the
facilities of “ Artificial Insemination” Centre for animals in each
KVK, the department has noted the recommendation of Committee
and will take steps to implement this in due course of time.”
1.13 Keeping in view the importance of extension services for
development of agriculture sector, the Committee had recommended
the Department to enhance allocations to the Agricultural Extension
Division so that plan for establishment of 121 KVKs during 12th plan
may be achieved. The Department in its action taken reply has stated
that they will endeavor to enhance the allocations for the Division at
RE stage during 2016-17 within the available allocations to the
Department. The Committee have also been informed that a proposal
for creation of additional positions of Scientist/SMS position in
Veterinary Science for each KVK is being examined in consultation
with the Ministry of Finance. The Committee trust and expect that the
Department will impress upon the Ministry of Finance for enhanced
allocations of funds to the division so that aims of establishment of
121 KVKs may be established within 12th Plan. Further, the Committee
also hope that the recommendation of the Committee for development
of an artificial insemination centres for animals in each KVK would
be given logical conclusion without further delay.

9
D. Agrinnovate India Limited (AgIn)
Recommendation (Para No. 14)
1.14 The Committee had noted that Agrinnovate India Limited
(AgIn) is DARE/ICAR owned PSU company working towards promotion
and commercialization of ICAR technologies. AgIn has generated revenue
of Rs. 48,99,770 during 2014-15 as compared to Rs. 1,26,34,405 during
2013-14. Similarly net profit of the Company which mostly include interest
of the deposit were Rs. 2,94,16,569, Rs. 3,19,09,667 and Rs. 2,89,21,501
during 2012-13, 2013-14 and 2014-15, respectively. The Committee also
noted that HR policy and organizational structure of the Company is yet
to be finalized. There are two permanent staff members (one Company
Secretary and one Chief Executive Officer) recruited through open
advertisement followed by Interview by the Directors of the Company
and the rest of the employees of the Company are engaged on contract
basis. The Committee also noted that Company is focusing on selected
promising technologies therefore the services of AgIn is taken by few
ICAR Institutes. However, if required, AgIn could facilitate
commercialization of technologies to national and international clients
with the technical backstopping from ICAR institutes. The Committee
are were of view that there is tremendous scope for commercialization
of products and technologies of ICAR institutes in domestic and
international market and AgIn could be modeled on the line of Amul
or NDDB pattern for harnessing potential in agriculture sector. The
Committee, therefore, recommended that HR policy and organizational
structure of Agln may be finalized without further delay and best possible
talent in agricultural marketing may be recruited for the purpose. The
Committee also liked to be apprised of the initiatives undertaken by the
Department in this regard.
Reply of the Government
1.15 The Ministry have stated that Agrinnovate India Limited is
making concerted efforts to finalize the organization structure and HR
Policy of the Company. The board of directors of the company in its
meeting held on 12th May, 2016 has also formed a Committee for fast
tracking the process and finalization of the same. Recruitment process
will be initiated as and when the organization structure gets finalized.
1.16 The Committee are anguished to note that the Government
are yet to finalize HR policy and organizational structure of Agrinnovate
India Limited despite a time gap of 5 years since its incorporation.

10
The Committee desire the Government to finalize the HR policy and
organisational structure without further delay so that the company could
achieve its aims of commercialization of knowledge generated by the
vast network of ICAR institutions in the country.

11
CHAPTER II
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN
ACCEPTED BY THE GOVERNMENT
Recommendation (Para No. 1)
The Committee note that the Action Taken Replies regarding the
action taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations
contained in the Tenth Report of the Committee were furnished by the
Government within the stipulated three months. The Committee further
note that in pursuance of Direction of 73-A of the ‘Directions by the
Speaker, Lok Sabha’, the Minister concerned is required to make a
Statement on the status of implementation of Observations/
Recommendations contained in the Original Reports of the Committee
within six months of their presentation to the Parliament. The Committee
note that the Ministry of Agriculture and Farmers Welfare (Department
of Agricultural research and Education) adhered to the deadline fixed
for making Statement of Minister of Agriculture under Direction 73-A
of Directions by Speaker, Lok Sabha in the context of Tenth Report of
the Committee which was presented to the Parliament on 27 April, 2015
and the Statement was made on 04 August, 2015. The analysis of action
taken by the Government reveals that 78.26% recommendations were
accepted by the Government, replies in respect of 8.68% recommendations
were not accepted by the Committee and 4.34% were of interim nature.
The Committee hope that the Department will continue to follow the
tradition in future as well.
Reply of the Government
Noted for compliance.
[Ministry of Agriculture and Farmers Welfare
(Department of Agricultural Research and Education)
O.M. No. 7(4)/2016, dated 4th July , 2016]
Overview of Demands
Recommendation (Para No. 2)
The Committee note that a sum of Rs. 3700.00 crore has been allocated
under Plan Head to the Department for the financial year 2016-17. The

12
Committee have also observed that the allocations to the
Department under the Plan Head has been reduced by Rs. 691 crore
i.e.  18.72% at RE stage during the financial year 2015-16. It was
explained to the Committee that drastic cut in the allocation of the
Department in RE 2015-16 was apparently due to the overall reduction
effected by the Ministry of Finance, Government of India, in the Plan
allocation of DARE/ICAR in RE 2015-16. The Committee also note
that the Department had failed to fully utilize allocated fund during
2014-15 when only Rs. 2268.57 crore were utilized out of RE allocations
of Rs. 2500 crore under Plan Head. During financial year 2015-16,
out of total allocations of Rs. 3000 crore, only Rs. 1734.82 crore
could be spent till 31 December, 2015. The Committee are not
convinced with the explanation of the Department that the major
programmes/activities falling in the mandate of the each Subject
Matter Division were not impacted by the cut due to sustained efforts
made by all the constituent units falling under the purview of the
various Subject Matter Divisions and some strategic planning by
assigning priorities to the ongoing research programmes and
allocation of adequate funds from the available budget of the
department for this purpose in order to accomplish the research
targets set for the year. The Committee note with a great sense of
disappointment that the story of the yesteryears has been repeated
by the Planners and the Government in the matter of allocations of
funds to DARE during this year also. The Committee are of view
that agriculture sector being a major avenue for employment
generation, require significant support in terms of R&D so as to
ensure cost effective and best quality seeds, insecticides, fertilizers
and agricultural equipments are available to the farmers to bring down
cost of cultivation significantly. The Committee, therefore, recommend
that Ministry of Finance be impressed upon to allocate funds as per their
requirement at RE stage so that R&D in agriculture sector do not suffer
for want of funds.
Reply of the Government
Noted for compliance. Accordingly , the department has taken steps
at appropriate level to get enhanced allocations. The copy of the letter
is enclosed as Annexure-1
[Ministry of Agriculture and Farmers Welfare
(Department of Agricultural Research and Education)
O.M. No. 7(4)/2016, dated 4th July , 2016]

13
Funds Allocation During Twelfth Plan
Recommendation (Para No. 3)
The Committee note that an outlay of only Rs. 17741 crore
i.e. 69.42% allocations (BE) has been made during all five fiscal as against
earmarked outlays for 12th plan Outlay of Rs. 25553.00 crore. It has been
further observed that allocations (BE) has been drastically reduced at RE
stage in first four financial year. Allocations to the Department in first
four financial years (RE) is Rs. 10620 i.e. only 41.56% of 12th plan. Out
of the allocated amount, the Department have been able to spend a sum
of Rs. 8847.29 crore only upto December, 2015. The Committee have also
been informed that allocations to other Scientific Ministries/Departments
and related ones ranges in between 45.70 to 73.53 as percentage of
XII-Plan earmarked outlay. The Committee have also been informed that
due to reduced allocations during 12th Plan period, they have to prioritize
research and allocate funds accordingly . The Committee have also been
informed that the ICAR could not develop additional facilities in many
pioneer institutes such as IARI, Pusa which is required to maintain its
reputation as world class Research Institution in the area of agriculture.
The Committee are concerned to note the apathy of the Government
towards fund allocations to the important area of agricultural research.
The Committee are of view that significant investment is required in the
area of R&D in general and in the field of agriculture in particular.
Scientific intervention is absolutely essential for lowering the cost of
agriculture and for doubling the income of the farmers within next five
years. For this purpose scientific community should not face financial
constraints while addressing the challenges being faced by the farming
community in the country . The Committee, therefore, recommend that
significant investment to the extent of 1% of agricultural GDP may be
made in the field of agricultural research during next plan period.
Reply of the Government
The Department has conveyed the above concern/recommendation
of the Committee to the Ministry of Finance for allocation of enhanced
funds to the tune of 1% of Agricultural GDP as investment in agriculture
research and education during coming plan periods (copy enclosed as
Annexure-1).
[Ministry of Agriculture and Farmers Welfare
(Department of Agricultural Research and Education)
O.M. No. 7(4)/2016, dated 4th July , 2016]

14
ICAR Publications in Regional Languages
Recommendation (Para No. 5)
The Committee note that ICAR through Directorate of Knowledge
Management in Agriculture (DKMA) is entrusted with responsibility to
showcase ICAR’s Technologies Policy and other activities through modern
dissemination methods that cater various stakeholders in the field of
agriculture. The Department have informed that 11 magazine/journals/
periodicals are being published by DKMA. Alternative system such as
ICAR website, ICAR Facebook page and ICAR Youtube channel are also
being used by them for undertaking information dissemination to farmers
other than publication. Besides, two magazines namely ‘Kheti’ and
‘PhalPhool’ and ‘ Agbiotech digest’ are being published in Hindi. However,
the Committee observe that no magazine/periodical is being published
in regional languages. The Committee are of considered view that ICAR
publications and information about the works of ICAR Institutions
regarding newly developed seeds, plant varieties, farming methods,
integrated pest and nutrient management practices etc. should reach
among farmers of the country and that too in their regional languages.
Further, the DARE/ICAR are required to bring more publications and
take steps to enhance its circulation so that more numbers of farmers
could be benefited from these initiatives. The Committee, therefore,
recommend the Department to take steps for availability of ICAR
publications in all regional languages of the country to ensure
dissemination of information about agriculture research among all farmers
of the country.
Reply of the Government
The department has noted the recommendation of the Committee
for compliance. Accordingly, necessary steps have been taken and
accelerated by the ICAR-DKMA to make sure availability of ICAR
Publications in all regional languages of the country to ensure
dissemination of information about agriculture research among all farmers
of the country. In this regard, following points are submitted:—
1. The Indian Council of Agricultural Research is the apex body
for coordinating, guiding and managing research, education
and extension in agriculture including horticultural science,
fisheries Science and animal sciences in the entire country.
ICAR has a wide network of 109 research institutes and
643 Krishi Vigyan Kendras across the country . Besides, it also

15
provides technical leadership and financial support to
73 agricultural universities located across the country. All
agricultural Universities and KVKs are disseminating
agricultural knowledge and technological know-how among
the farmers/end users in the preferred regional language of
the location.
2. ICAR research institutes are engaged in regular publication
of farmer friendly publications in regional languages of the
respective State and are being distributed among farmer
community, so that they can take benefit of recent technologies
such as newly developed seeds, plant varieties, farming
methods, integrated pest and nutrient management practices
etc. Similarly, at district level, KVKs are regularly publishing
and distributing farmer-friendly publications in farmers’
vernacular language on various technologies, schemes, new
varieties, animal husbandry practices and on other relevant
issues. All these efforts have been accelerated to reach out
to farmers of the country in their own language.
3. ICAR-DKMA maintains close coordination and provide
facilitates to ICAR institutes and KVKs for publication and
distribution of farmer-friendly literature among farming
community.
[Ministry of Agriculture and Farmers Welfare
(Department of Agricultural Research and Education)
O.M. No. 7(4)/2016, dated 4th July , 2016]
Crop Science Division
Recommendation (Para No. 6)
The Committee note that Crop Science Division has released
81 improved varieties/hybrids of different crops during 2015. The
Committee were also informed that the division has been able to produce
a total of 978, 17562, 12847, 14000 and 3418 tonnes of breeder, foundation,
certified, truthful labeled seeds and planting material respectively during
2015. However, the Committee note that allocations to the division has
been reduced to Rs. 495 crore at RE stage from allocated Rs. 570 crore
at BE stage. Accordingly, the Division has to allocate limited resources
to critical areas needing focused attention for accomplishing the target.
The Committee are of view that the Crop science Division needs to be

16
given enough resources to enable them to develop improved varieties of
crops and planting materials required by the farmers of the country not
only to improve productivity but also to reduce dependence on
multinational companies for seeds. Better performance of the division is
crucial for ensuring food security of the country and to augment
the income of the farmers. The Committee, therefore, recommend
that allocations to the Division may be enhanced suitably at RE stage to
ensure them to fulfill expectations of the farmers and planners of the
country.
Reply of the Government
Noted for compliance. Accordingly , the department has taken steps
at appropriate level to get enhanced allocations (Copy enclosed).
[Ministry of Agriculture and Farmers Welfare
(Department of Agricultural Research and Education)
O.M. No. 7(4)/2016, dated 4th July , 2016]
Promotion to Cultivation of Pulses
Recommendation (Para No. 7)
The Committee are distressed to note that despite being the largest
producer of pulses in the world, India has to resort to import a large
quantity of pulses to meet the demand in the country. The Committee
note that production of pulses in the country is around 17-19 million
tonnes during the last 3-4 years which falls short of domestic requirement
of about 22.5 million tonnes processed dal. 3.09 mt of pulses were imported
by the country bringing a burden of Rs. 11038 crore during 2013-14.
ICAR has developed a number of area and season specific high yielding
and pest resistant varieties of pulses which has positive impact of
14-16% in increasing production of pulses in the country. The ICAR has
also developed crop production, management and protection technologies
which can safeguard pulse crops from pests and insects. The Committee
have also been informed that a scheme for enhancing indigenous pulse
production to achieve self-sufficiency by 2020-21 has been initiated besides
existing National Food Security Mission and Borlaug Global Rust Initiative.
However, the Committee are anguished to note that failure of State and
National Seed Companies to provide quality seeds of improved varieties,
slow pace of farm mechanization in pulses cultivation, failure of the
Government to create efficient market intervention scheme, lack of liberal
credit policy and poor economic capacity of the farmers to make

17
investment are hindering country to achieve self-sufficiency in production
of pulses. The Committee are of view that pulses are a major source of
protein for majority of people in India and availability of adequate quantity
of pulses at reasonable prices is a way to deal with the problem of
malnutrition in the country. The Committee, therefore, desire the
Government should invest aggressively not only in R&D for pulses but
should also provide adequate incentives to the farmers in the form of
support to availability of improved varieties of seeds at subsidized rate,
farm mechanization and credit facility at lower interest rate. The
Committee also desire that the Department should impress upon all stake
holders including State Governments to expedite farm mechanization
and use quality seeds of the improved varieties to achieve self-sufficiency
in pulse production in the country in the near future. Further, the
Government should also provide adequate financial support for the
purpose so that the time bound mission to achieve self-sufficiency in
pulses production do not suffer for want of funds.
Reply of the Government
Indian Council of Agriculture Research (ICAR) and Department of
Agriculture, Cooperation and Farmers Welfare (DAC&FW) under the
Ministry of Agriculture and Farmers Welfare, Government of India are
jointly working on a comprehensive action plan for attaining self-
sufficiency in pulses with a two-pronged approach of productivity
enhancement and increasing production through expansion of pulses’
area, since rabi 2015-16. In order to ensure self-sufficiency in pulses, a
road map to achieve 21 million tonnes pulses production in 2017-18 and
24 million tonnes by 2020-21 has been envisaged. To bring 3-4 million ha
additional area under pulses, promotion of summer Mungbean after the
harvest of wheat, potato and rapeseed mustard in Punjab, Haryana,
Western UP and parts of Rajasthan; Lentil and chickpea in rice fallows
of Eastern UP , Bihar, Jharkhand, Odisha, Chhattisgarh and West Bengal;
and Mungbean/Urdbean in rice fallows of Andhra Pradesh, Tamil Nadu,
Odisha and Karnataka has been targeted. Department has planned to
enhance the availability of quality seed of pulses at subsidized rate by
strengthening breeder seed production and establishment of pulses seed-
hubs at selected State Agricultural Universities, Krishi Vigyan Kendras
and ICAR research institutes from 2016-17. For that, a provision of
Rs. 250 crore for strengthening breeder seed production at selected centers
and enhancing quality seed production of pulses through proposed
150 seed-hubs have been made under National Food Security Mission
(NFSM). In addition, the DAC&FW, is taking up a new sub-schemes

18
under RKVY for pulses area expansion especially in rice fallow areas of
Eastern India with a total allocation of Rs. 200 crore comprising central
share of Rs. 130 crore.During rabi 2015-16, about 32037 demonstrations
on latest varieties and production and protection technologies of rabi
pulses were conducted in about 12811 ha area by 300 Krishi Vigyan
Kendras of ICAR across the country, for which a budget allocation of Rs.
12 crore was made under NFSM.
[Ministry of Agriculture and Farmers Welfare
(Department of Agricultural Research and Education)
O.M. No. 7(4)/2016, dated 4th July , 2016]
Comments of the Committee
For comments of the Committee please refer to Para No. 1.10 of
Chapter I of this Report.
Natural Resource Management (NRM) Division
Recommendation (Para No. 8)
The Committee note that Natural Resource Management (NRM)
Division is engaged in developing location specific, cost effective and
eco-friendly technologies for conservation and management of natural
resources through the network of 06 central research Institutes, 03 research
complexes, 03 project directorates, 01 bureau, 02 National Research Centres,
03 network projects and 10 All India Coordinated Research Projects in
the country. However, the Committee note that allocations to the Division
were reduced at RE stage which are not adequate to meet the responsibility
assigned to them. The Committee note that allocations to the Division
has been reduced from Rs. 370 crore at BE stage to Rs. 321 crore at RE
stage for the year 2015-16. The Committee further observe that Division
was allocated only Rs. 1061 crore (RE) till 2015-16 against earmarked
outlays of Rs. 2183.5 crore during 12th plan. The Committee were informed
that due to lack of funds, no new activities were undertaken during 2015.
The Committee are of view that NRM Division has to perform crucial
role to develop methods and technologies in the areas of soil quality
assessment, micro level land use planning, integrated soil-water-nutrient
management, watershed management, crop diversification etc. that are
very crucial keeping in view of the decreasing land availability and
deteriorating soil health and water crisis. Further, it has to devote resources
for fundamental research in the field of impact of climate change on
Indian agriculture. Therefore, it is absolutely essential that adequate

19
financial support to the Division is provided so that agricultural scientists
devote their time and energy without financial constraints to address
problems of farmers associated with climate change. The Committee,
therefore, recommend that allocations to the Division may be augmented
as per their requirement to enable them to focus on agricultural research.
Reply of the Government
The department has noted the recommendation of the Committee
for compliance.
[Ministry of Agriculture and Farmers Welfare
(Department of Agricultural Research and Education)
O.M. No. 7(4)/2016, dated 4th July , 2016]
Enhancement of Research Centres and Technology Demonstration
Centres under NICRA Project in Eastern India
Recommendation (Para No. 9)
The Committee note that Natural Resources Management Division
has also been given responsibility for coordinating research under NICRA
project. The project aims to enhance resilience of Indian agriculture to
climate change and climate vulnerability through strategic research and
technology demonstration. The project is being run through a network
of 49 strategic research Centres, 6 sponsored grants component centres,
25 AICRPAM Centres, 23 AICRPDAA Centres and 129 technology
demonstration component. However, the Committee note that numbers
of Technology Demonstration Centre and Strategic Research Station are
quite less in Eastern India especially in West Bengal where only 3
Technology Demonstration Centres and 01 Strategic Research Centre is
working on the project. The Committee are of the view that there is need
to enhance focus on climate research on agriculture in eastern parts of
the country keeping in view the numbers of Agro-climatic zones and sub
zones in the areas. The Committee, therefore recommend the Department
to increase the number of research stations and technology demonstration
centres in Eastern India especially in West Bengal so that region specific
problems associated with climate change could be studied properly and
appropriate solutions could be arrived at.
Reply of the Government
There are 23 Technology Demonstration Centres (TDC) under
National Innovations on Climate Resilient Agriculture (NICRA) in eastern

20
region covering Bihar, Jharkhand, West Bengal, Andaman and Nicobar
and Odisha to demonstrate appropriate location specific mitigation
strategies to cope up with climatic abberations. Eastern region has been
allocated largest number of TDC centres compared to other regions in
the country keeping in view the types and extent of climatic vulnerability
projected in this region. In addition to this, 6 institutes including CIFRI
Barrackpore and CSSRI Regional Centre, Canning Town are addressing
the issues of climate change under Strategic Research component of
NICRA. Further, the Department has noted the recommendations of the
Committee for increasing the number of research stations and TDC in
eastern region particularly in West Bengal and efforts shall be made in
due course of time.
[Ministry of Agriculture and Farmers Welfare
(Department of Agricultural Research and Education)
O.M. No.7 (4)/2016, dated 4th July , 2016]
Agricultural Engineering Division
Recommendation (Para No. 10)
The Committee note that Agricultural Engineering Division of ICAR
is mandated to plan, coordinate and monitor R&D programmes and serve
as an information repository in agricultural engineering to make Indian
agriculture profitable, sustainable and globally competitive enterprise
through engineering interventions. However, the Committee are
constrained to note that the Division has been allocated only Rs. 254 crore
(RE) during first four years i.e. only 23.10 % against earmarked outlays
of Rs. 1100 crore for 12th Plan. The Committee are of view that the
mechanization of agricultural operation in the country needs to be
expedited in order to reduce drudgery of farmers and reduce cost of
agricultural operations for which the Division needs to focus on
development of agricultural machineries and implements which can be
used effectively in fragmented land holdings of small and marginal
farmers of the country. The Committee, therefore recommend that
allocations to the Division may be enhanced suitably at RE stage during
the current year and in coming years so that the Division could fulfill
the mandate entrusted upon without fund constraints. The Committee
also recommend that a time bound R&D may be planned by the
Department for development of region specific small and cost effective
farm machineries. The Committee would like to be informed about the
steps taken by the Department in this regard.

21
Reply of the Government
The department will endeavor to enhance the allocations for the
Division at RE stage during 2016-17 and coming years. The
recommendation of the Committee for development of region specific
small and cost effective farm machineries has already been undertaken
by the Division. The Division has initiated 5 new Consortia Research
Platforms on (i) Farm Mechanization and Precision Farming, (ii) Energy
from Agriculture, (iii) Secondary Agriculture, (iv) Health Foods, and
(v) Natural Fibers during the XII Plan. The focus is to fastrack location
and region specific development, popularization and commercialization
of agricultural machineries and implements for fragmented land holdings
of small and marginal farmers of the country. In case Ministry of Finance
provides enhanced fund at RE stage during the current year and in coming
years, the Agriculture Engineering Division anticipates to take-up
following work on above platforms at large scale in due course of time:—
• Development of region specific small and cost effective farm
machineries.
• Development of manufacturing technology, production
process and product refinement of developed technologies
• Popularization and promotion of technologies through
prototype production and supply , monitoring and feed back
• Popularization of improved technologies through exhibitions,
extension literature, catalogues, electronic media, display and
demonstration.
• Training of Farmers, Processors, Extension Officers,
manufacturers, artisans and entrepreneurs for mechanization
promotion.
• Commercialization of developed technologies.
[Ministry of Agriculture and Farmers Welfare
(Department of Agricultural Research and Education)
O.M. No.7 (4)/2016, dated 4th July , 2016]
Agricultural Education Division
Recommendation (Para No. 12)
The Committee note that Agricultural Education Division is
entrusted with the responsibility of maintaining and upgrading quality,

22
relevance and strengthening of higher agricultural education through a
network of 73 Agricultural Universities. The Division is implementing
a scheme on “Strengthening and Development of higher Agricultural
Education in India” for up-gradation of academic environment by
modernization and strengthening of educational structures, laboratories,
computer labs, ICT facilities/NISAGENET, smart classrooms, state of art
equipment, support for effective course curriculum delivery, educational
tours, text book/manual preparations, and strengthening library facilities
including, e-resources. However, the Committee are constrained to note
that the Division has not been provided with the funds as earmarked
for them during 12th plan. The Division has been provided only Rs. 2371
crore during the Plan period till the current financial year against
earmarked outlays of Rs. 4000 crore. As a result of lower allocation of
funds, two sub-schemes namely ‘Strengthening and Enhancing Research
and Instructional capabilities of Universities’ (an amount of Rs. 500 crores
was allocated for this component) and ‘Support for Old/Historical colleges’
(an amount of Rs. 250 crore was allocated for this activity) could not be
implemented. The Committee are of the firm view that investment in
education especially in agricultural education fetch rich reward in terms
of experienced human resources along with research output useful for
the agriculture sector in the country. The Committee, therefore,
recommend that the allocations to the Agricultural Education Division
may be suitably enhanced at RE stage in ongoing financial year as well
as in coming years so that important work of strengthening agricultural
education does not get hampered due to paucity of funds.
Reply of the Government
Noted for compliance. Accordingly , the department has taken steps
at appropriate level to get enhanced allocations (Copy enclosed).
[Ministry of Agriculture and Farmers Welfare
(Department of Agricultural Research and Education)
O.M. No.7 (4)/2016, dated 4th July , 2016]
Vacancy in ICAR Institutions
Recommendation (Para No. 13)
Availability of adequate scientific, technical and administrative
staff in Institutes of ICAR is pre-requisite for better performance.
However, the Committee are anguished to note that large number of
these posts continue to remain vacant over long period. The Committee

23
note that 893 posts of scientists, 1087 posts of administrative personnel
and 1603 technical posts are vacant in institutes of ICAR. The Committee
have been informed that an advertisement for 97 vacancies for ARS-2015
has already been issued. The Committee are of the view that ICAR is
required to streamline the process for recruitment for all the posts in
ICAR institutes including that of Scientist and the process should be
completed before the vacancies arise so that R&D work do not suffer for
lack of scientists, technical or administrative staff. The Committee have
expressed this view in several of their earlier reports including 10th Report
on examination of Demands for Grants (2015-16). However, the
ICAR is yet to take the recommendation of the Committee in right
spirit and take the required steps. The Committee, therefore, recommend
that the existing policy for recruitment at all post in ICAR institutions
including for the post of scientists may be reviewed and streamlined in
order to complete the process of recruitment in a time bound manner.
The Committee would like to be informed of the action taken in this
regard.
Reply of the Government
Recruitment of ICAR scientists is a continuous process and
requisition driven. All possible steps are being initiated by Agricultural
Scientists Recruitment Board (ASRB)to get the vacancies of Agricultural
Scientists filled up on priority basis and for other categories too. The
requisitions will be processed expeditiously.
Scientific positions:
During the last year (2015-16) the ASRB has completed the process
of recruitment for the following Scientific positions:—
• 228 entry level Scientists
• 158 lateral entry scientific positions
• 257 recommendations in 48 disciplines under Career
Advancement Scheme (CAS)
• This year the Board has received requisition for recruiting
97 entry level scientists in different specializations. The ARS
(Prelims) and the ARS (Main) Examination has been held
and the recommendations are likely to be forwarded to the
ICAR headquarters by ASRB by the end of 2016.

24
• Requisitions for 84 positions comprising of 34 Research
Management Posts and 50 non-Research Management Posts
for lateral entry senior scientific positions is under different
stages of process.
Technical, Administrative, Finance and other positions
• During 2015-16, the ASRB has completed the recruitment
process of 45 Administrative Officers and Finance and
Account officers, and 11 Assistant Director (OL).
• In the Administrative category the Board has completed the
recruitment process for filling up 309 positions of Assistants
in the ICAR headquarters and its institutes. The final select
list is being forwarded to the ICAR Hqrs. shortly.
• Further, recruitment action has been initiated for filling up
284 positions of LDCs/Steno Grade-III and approximately 500
positions of Technical Assistants and Technicians for the
various ICAR institutes.
• Earlier, the ICAR Institutes were making recruitments for
filling up of the posts of Technician (T-1), Technical Assistant
(T-3) and Senior Technical Officer (T-6). However, it has been
decided with the approval of the Governing Body of ICAR
that from 2016 onwards the vacant posts of Technician
(T-1) in category-1 and Technical Assistant (T-3) in Category-
II may be filled through a centralised examination by ASRB.
The ASRB is in the process of conducting a Common Written
Examination for filling up positions of Technical Assistant
(T-3) in the ICAR Institutes on 17.07.2016 and Technician
(T-1) on 04.09.2016.
• It has also been decided by the department that the vacant
posts of Senior Technical Officer (T-6) in Category-III, may
also be filled up through a centralised examination by ASRB.
Approval of this process is being sought from the Governing
Body of ICAR.
• Besides the direct recruitments, vacancies are also filled by
promotion as per the provisions of the recruitment rule. As
the posts are scattered in the 109 institutes located in the
country, the action to fill-up the vacancies under the mode

25
of promotion is taken at respective institutes by following
laid down procedure.
[Ministry of Agriculture and Farmers Welfare
(Department of Agricultural Research and Education)
O.M. No.7 (4)/2016, dated 4th July , 2016]

26
CHAPTER III
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE
DO NOT DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE
GOVERNMENT’S REPLIES
-Nil-

27
CHAPTER IV
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH
REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN
ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE
-Nil-

28
CHAPTER V
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH
FINAL REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT ARE STILL AWAITED
Planning in the ERA of NITI Aayog
Recommendation (Para No. 4)
The Committee note that the Government are yet to initiate process
of formulation of next plan after replacement of Planning Commission
by Niti Aayog. In this regard, the Committee have been informed that
as per Allocation of Business Rules, the Niti Aayog is mandated to evolve
a shared vision of national development priorities, sectors and strategies
with the active involvement of States in the light of national objectives.
Niti Aayog is also assigned the responsibility to develop mechanisms to
formulate credible plans at the village level and aggregate these
progressively at higher levels of Government. To design strategic and
long term policy and programme frameworks and initiatives and monitor
their progress and their efficacy, the lesson learnt through monitoring
and feedback will be used for making innovative improvements, including
mid course corrections. According to the Department, they have envisaged
overall allocation of 1.0% of total agricultural GDP for the Department
(DARE/ICAR) for attaining required growth of agriculture sector in the
country. The Department will require fund of Rs. 45878.13 crore under
Plan and Non-plan Heads for next five years. However, the Committee
are astonished to know that Department is not aware about future course
of planning process and Niti Aayog is yet to take any decision regarding
formulation of next five year plan. The Committee are of view that
formulation of long term plan is sina-qua-non for development of economy
in general and science and technology in particular. Niti Aayog need to
take up this issue on urgent basis and specify the future course of action
for planning so that necessary steps could be taken up to fix targets and
assign resources accordingly. The Committee, therefore, recommend that
the Niti Aayog be urged to design strategic and long term policy
frameworks of the Department to enable them to take initiatives and
formulate action plan accordingly to achieve the physical and financial
targets for the purpose. The Committee also expect the DARE/ICAR to

29
utilize in-house mechanism and expertise for the development of long
term vision and plan for all institutions under its purview for the next
five years.
Reply of the Government
NITI Aayog has been entrusted to prepare a 15-year vision
document beginning from the financial year 2017-18 along with seven
years plan for execution and mid term appraisal/review during every 3
years. This will replace prevailing five year planning system, which was
prepared for over six decades by its predecessor Planning Commission.
NITI Aayog started deliberations for a 15-year vision document and will
hold stakeholder consultations in groups over the next few months and
aims to prepare the documents by the end of this year. The consultations
would also seek suggestion for framing a seven year (2017-18 to 2023-
24) strategy to convert the longer vision into implementable policy as
part of the National Development Agenda, which will be reviewed after
three years (2019-20) fiscal. In addition, the department has already
considered recommendation/concern of the Committee. Institutions under
DARE/ICAR have developed long term vision 2050 by utilizing in-house
expertise of each sector namely Crop Sciences, Animal Sciences, Fisheries
Sciences, Horticulture Sciences, Natural Resource Management,
Agriculture Engineering, Agriculture Education and Agricultural
Extension.
[Ministry of Agriculture and Farmers Welfare
(Department of Agricultural Research and Education)
O.M. No. 7(4)/2016, dated 4th July , 2016]
Comments of the Committee
For comments of the Committee please refer to Para No. 1.7 of
Chapter I of this Report.
Agricultural Extension Division
Recommendation (Para No. 11)
The Committee note that Agricultural Extension Division has been
entrusted with the responsibility of implementing Plan Scheme on
continuation and establishment of new Krishi Vigyan Kendras (KVKs).
The KVK scheme concerns with technology assessment, refinement and
demonstration of technology/products and its transfer through training
of farmers and extension personnel, besides organizing extension

30
programmes for creating awareness on improved agricultural technology.
The scheme is being monitored through eight Zonal Project Directorates.
ICAR has 643 KVKs in the country. Further, the Government has also
approved to establish 109 more KVKs in newly created districts, one
additional KVK in larger districts, border and mountainous districts during
12th Plan. However, the Committee note that out of approved additional
121 KVKs, only 12 KVKs have been established so far. The Committee
also note that Agricultural Extension Division has been one of the recipient
of lowest allocations during 12th plan. The Division has received only
Rs. 2964.9 crore (BE) till 2016-17 against earmarked allocations of
Rs. 5739.56 crore for 12th plan. The Committee are of the considered
opinion that agricultural extension is most important link between lab
and farmers. The result of investment made on R&D and efforts of scientist
could not be fructified unless information regarding seeds, planting
materials, fertilizers, technologies, farming methods, contingency plan
etc. reaches the farmers. The Committee, in their previous Reports, had
time and again emphasized upon this important aspect and called for
enhanced allocations for implementation of KVK scheme. However, the
Committee are distressed to note that Governments have failed to provide
adequate funds required for the scheme over the last few years. The
Committee are of view that stated objective of doubling the income of
farmers of the country in next five years could not be achieved unless
agricultural extension support through KVKs are provided to them. The
Committee, therefore, recommend that the allocations to the KVK scheme
may be enhanced at RE stage to enable the Department to establish
additional 121 KVKs as approved for 12th Plan. The Committee also,
desire that each KVK should have an artificial insemination centre for
animals with proper infrastructure and adequate Veterinary Doctors.
Reply of the Government
The department will endeavour to enhance the allocations for the
Division at RE stage during 2016-17 within the available allocations to
the department. The requirement of the Division in RE 2016-17 is being
assessed in consultation with all ATARI and the same will be proposed
in the Plan RE 2016-17.
Additional strength for each KVK have been approved in the 12th
Plan EFC which includes a Scientist/SMS position in Veterinary Science.
A proposal has been initiated and being examined in consultation with
the Ministry of Finance for creating these additional positions for each
KVK. In respect of developing the facilities of “ Artificial Insemination”

31
Centre for animals in each KVK, the department has noted the
recommendation of Committee and will take steps to implement this in
due course of time.
[Ministry of Agriculture and Farmers Welfare
(Department of Agricultural Research and Education)
O.M. No. 7(4)/2016, dated 4th July , 2016]
Comments of the committee
For comments of the Committee please refer to Para No. 1.13 of
Chapter I of this Report.
Agrinnovate India Limited (AgIn)
Recommendation (Para No. 14)
The Committee note that Agrinnovate India Limited (AgIn) is
DARE/ICAR owned PSU company working towards promotion and
commercialisation of ICAR technologies. AgIn has generated revenue of
Rs. 48,99,770 during 2014-15 as compared to Rs. 1,26,34,405 during
2013-14. Similarly net profit of the Company which mostly include interest
of the deposit were Rs. 2,94,16,569, Rs. 3,19,09,667 and Rs. 2,89,21,501
during 2012-13, 2013-14 and 2014-15, respectively. The Committee also
note that HR policy and organisational structure of the Company is yet
to be finalized. There are two permanent staff members (one Company
Secretary and one Chief Executive Officer) recruited through open
advertisement followed by Interview by the Directors of the Company
and the rest of the employees of the Company are engaged on contract
basis. The Committee also note that Company is focusing on selected
promising technologies therefore the services of AgIn is taken by
few ICAR Institutes. However, if required, AgIn could facilitate
commercialisation of technologies to national and international clients
with the technical backstopping from ICAR institutes. The Committee
are of view that there is tremendous scope for commercialisation of
products and technologies of ICAR institutes in domestic and international
market and AgIn could be modelled on the line of Amul or NDDB pattern
for harnessing potential in agriculture sector. The Committee, therefore,
recommend that HR policy and organizational structure of AgIn may be
finalized without further delay and best possible talent in agricultural
marketing may be recruited for the purpose. The Committee would also
like to be apprised of the initiatives undertaken by the Department in
this regard.

32
Reply of the Government
AgrInnovate India Limited is making concerted efforts to finalize
the organization structure and HR Policy of the Company. The board of
directors of the company in its meeting held on 12th May, 2016 has also
formed a Committee for fast tracking the process and finalization of the
same. Recruitment process will be initiated as and when the organization
structure gets finalized.
[Ministry of Agriculture and Farmers Welfare
(Department of Agricultural Research and Education)
O.M. No. 7(4)/2016, dated 4th July , 2016]
Comments of the Committee
For comments of the Committee please refer to Para No. 1.16 of
Chapter I of this Report.
N
EW DELHI; HUKM DEO NARAYAN YADAV,
8 August, 2016 Chairperson,
17 Shravana, 1938 (Saka) Standing Committee on Agriculture.

33
ANNEXURE
STANDING COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE
(2015-16)
MINUTES OF THE TWENTY NINTH SITTING OF THE
COMMITTEE
The Committee sat on Monday, the 08th August, 2016 from
1000 hrs. to 1100 hrs. in Room No. ‘138’, Chairperson’s Chamber,
Parliament House, New Delhi.
PRESENT
Shri Hukm Deo Narayan Yadav — Chairperson
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Sanganna Karadi
3. Shri Nalin Kumar Kateel
4. Smt. Raksha Nikhil Khadse
5. Shri C. Mahendran
6. Shri Janardan Mishra
7. Shri Ajay Nishad
8. Shri Mukesh Rajput
9. Shri Konakalla Narayana Rao
10. Shri Satyapal Singh (Sambhal)
11. Shri Virendra Singh
Rajya Sabha
12. Shrimati Renuka Chowdhury
13. Shri Janardan Dwivedi

34
14. Shri Meghraj Jain
15. Shri Mohd. Ali Khan
16. Shri Ram Nath Thakur
17. Shri Shankarbhai N. Vegad
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Shri U.B.S. Negi — Joint Secretary
2. Shri Arun K. Kaushik — Director
3. Smt. Juby Amar — Additional Director
4. Shri C. Vanlalruata — Deputy Secretary
5. Shri Sumesh Kumar — Under Secretary
2. At the outset the Chairperson welcomed the members to the
Sitting of the Committee. The Committee, then, took up the following
draft Reports for consideration:—
*(i) *** *** *** *** ***
*(ii) *** *** *** *** ***
*(iii) *** *** *** *** ***
 (iv) Thirtieth Report on the Action Taken by the Government on
the Observations/Recommendations contained in the Twenty
Sixth Report on ‘Demands for Grants (2016-17)’ of the Ministry
of Agriculture and Farmers Welfare (Department of
Agricultural Research and Education).
3. After some deliberations, the Committee adopted the draft
Reports without any modification and authorised the Chairperson to
finalise the Reports on the basis of factual verification from the concerned
Ministry/Department and present the same to Parliament.
The Committee then adjourned.
* Matter not related to this Report.

35
APPENDIX
(Vide Para 4 of Introduction of the Report)
ANALYSIS OF ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE TWENTY
SIXTH REPORT OF STANDING COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE
(2015-16) ON ‘DEMANDS FOR GRANTS (2016-17)’ OF
THE MINISTRY OF AGRICULTURE AND FARMERS
WELFARE (DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURAL
RESEARCH AND EDUCATION)
(i) Total number of Recommendations 14
(ii) Recommendations/Observations which have been Accepted by the
Government:
Para Nos. 1, 2, 3, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 12 and 13
Total : 11
Percentage : 78.57%
(iii) Recommendations/Observations which the Committee Do not desire
to pursue in view of the Government’s replies:
Para No. Nil
Total : NIL
Percentage : 0%
(iv) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies of the
Government have not been accepted by the Committee:
Para No. Nil
Total : NIL
Percentage : 0%
(v) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which Final replies
of the Government are still awaited:
Para Nos. 4, 11 and 14
Total : 03
Percentage : 21.43%

“All Parliamentary Publications including DRSC Reports are 
available on sale at the Sales Counter, Reception, Parliament House 
(Tel. Nos. 23034726, 23034495, 23034496), Agents appointed 
by Lok Sabha Secretariat and Publications Division, Ministry 
of Information and Broadcasting, CGO Complex, Lodhi Road, New 
Delhi (Tel. Nos. 24367260, 24365610) and their outlets. The said 
information is available on website ‘www.parliamentofindia.nic.in’.
The Souvenir Items with logo of Parliament are also available at Sales 
Counter, Reception, Parliament House, New Delhi. The Souvenir 
items with Parliament Museum logo are available for sale at Souvenir 
Shop (Tel. No. 23035323), Parliament Museum, Parliament Library 
Building, New Delhi. List of these items are available on the website 
mentioned above.”