STANDING COMMITTEE ON
AGRICULTURE
(2017-2018)
SIXTEENTH LOK SABHA
MINISTRY OF AGRICULTURE AND
FARMERS WELFARE
(DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURAL
RESEARCH AND EDUCATION)
'DEMANDS FOR GRANTS (2018-2019)'
[Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/
Recommendations contained in the Forty-Eighth Report
(Sixteenth Lok Sabha) of the Standing Committee
on Agriculture (2017-2018)]
59
FIFTY-NINTH REPORT
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
August, 2018/Shravana, 1940 (Saka)
lR;eso t;rs


FIFTY-NINTH REPORT
STANDING COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE
(2017-2018)
(SIXTEENTH LOK SABHA)
MINISTRY OF AGRICULTURE AND
FARMERS WELFARE
(DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURAL
RESEARCH AND EDUCATION)
'DEMANDS FOR GRANTS (2018-2019)'
[Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/
Recommendations contained in the Forty Eighth Report
(Sixteenth Lok Sabha) of the Standing Committee
on Agriculture (2017-2018)]
Presented to Lok Sabha on 03.08.2018
Laid in Rajya Sabha on 03.08.2018
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
August, 2018/Shravana, 1940 (Saka)
lR;eso t;rs


C.O.A No. 377
Price : Rs. 75.00
© 2018 B Y LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of Business
in Lok Sabha (Fifteenth Edition) and printed by M/s. Akashdeep,
New Delhi- 110 002.

CONTENTS
PAGE
(i)
COMPOSITION  OF THE C OMMITTEE  (2017-18) ..................................... (iii)
INTRODUCTION .............................................................................. (v)
CHAPTER I Report................................................................ 1
CHAPTER II Observations/Recommendations that have been
accepted by the Government................................ 16
CHAPTER III Observations/Recommendations which the
Committee do not desire to pursue in view
of the Government's replies.................................. 40
CHAPTER IV Observations/Recommendations in respect of
which replies of the Government have not been
accepted by the Committee................................... 43
CHAPTER V Observations/Recommendations in respect of
which final replies of the Government are
still awaited......................................................... 45
ANNEXURES
I. Minutes of the Twenty-seventh Sitting of the
Committee held on 31.07.2018............................. 48
II. Analysis of Action Taken by the Government on
the Recommendations contained in the Forty-Eighth
Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) of the Standing
Committee on Agriculture (2017-18).................. 50

(iii)
COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON
AGRICULTURE (2017-18)
Shri Hukmdev Narayan Yadav — Chairperson
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Sanjay Dhotre
3. Prof. Ravindra Vishwanath Gaikwad
4. Shri Sanganna Amarappa Karadi
5. Shri Nalin Kumar Kateel
6. Smt. Raksha Tai Khadse
7. Md. Badaruddoza Khan
8. Shri C. Mahendran
9. Dr. Tapas Mandal
10. Shri Janardan Mishra
@11. Shri Praveen Kumar Nishad
12. Shri Devji M. Patel
13. Shri Nityanand Rai
14. Shri Mukesh Rajput
15. Shri Konakalla Narayana Rao
16. Shri C.L. Ruala
17. Shri Arjun Charan Sethi
18. Shri Virendra Singh
19. Shri Dharmendra Yadav
20. Shri Jai Prakash Narayan Yadav
@ Shri Praveen Kumar Nishad, MP, Lok Sabha nominated vice Shri Nephiu Rio, MP
Lok Sabha w.e.f. 27.04.2018 vide Bulletin Part II No. 6866 dated 27.04.2018.

#21. V acant
Rajya Sabha
22. Sardar Sukhdev Singh Dhindsa
*23. Shri Rajmani Patel
*24. Shri Narayan Rane
*25. Shri Kailash Soni
26. Shri Mohd. Ali Khan
27. Shri K.K. Ragesh
28. Shri Ram Nath Thakur
29. Shri R. Vaithilingam
*30. Shri Harnath Singh Yadav
31. Dr. Chandrapal Singh Yadav
S
ECRETARIA T
1. Shri D.S. Malha — Joint Secretary
2. Shri Arun K. Kaushik — Director
3. Shri Nirantar Kumar Singh — Sr. Committee Assistant
(iv)
# Vacant due to resignation of Shri B.S. Yeddyurappa from the Membership of Lok Sabha
 w.e.f. 18.05.2018 vide Bulletin Part-II Table Office (B) No. 6885 dated 19.05.2018.
* Vice Shri Janardan Dwivedi, Shri Meghraj Jain, Shri Vinay Katiyar and Shri Shankarbhai
  N. Vegad, who ceased to be the Member of the Committee on their retirement from
  Rajya Sabha on 27.01.2018, 02.04.2018, 02.04.2018 and 02.04.2018 respectively.

(v)
INTRODUCTION
I, the Chairperson, Standing Committee on Agriculture (2017-18),
having been authorized by the Committee to submit the Report on their
behalf, present this Fifty-ninth Report on action taken by the Government
on the Observations/Recommendations contained in the Forty-eighth Report
(Sixteenth Lok Sabha) of the Standing Committee on Agriculture (2017-18)
on ‘Demands for Grants (2018-19)’ pertaining to the Ministry of Agriculture
and Farmers Welfare (Department of Agricultural Research and Education).
2. The Forty-eighth Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) of the Standing
Committee on Agriculture (2017-18) on ‘Demands for Grants (2018-19)’
of the to Ministry of Agriculture and Farmers Welfare (Department of
Agricultural Research and Education) was presented to Lok Sabha and laid
on the Table of Rajya Sabha on 06.03.2018. The Action Taken Notes on
the Report were received on 29.05.2018.
3. The Report was considered and adopted by the Committee at
their Sitting held on 31.07.2018.
4. An analysis of the action taken by the Government on the
Observations/Recommendations contained in the Forty-eighth Report
(Sixteenth Lok Sabha) of the Committee is given in Appendix.
NEW D ELHI; HUKMDEV NARAYAN YADA V,
02 August, 2018 Chairperson,
11 Shravana, 1940 (Saka) Standing Committee on Agriculture.

1
CHAPTER I
REPORT
This Report of the Standing Committee on Agriculture deals with the
action taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations
contained in the Forty-eighth Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) of the Standing
Committee on Agriculture (2017-18) on “Demands for Grants (2018-19)’’
pertaining to Ministry of Agriculture and Farmers Welfare (Department of
Agricultural Research and Education) which was presented to Lok Sabha
and laid on the Table of Rajya Sabha on 06.03.2018.
1.2 The Ministry of Agriculture and Farmers Welfare (Department of
Agricultural Research and Education) have furnished Action Taken Replies
in respect of all the 13 Observations/Recommendations contained in the
Report. These replies have been categorized as under:
(i) Observations/Recommendations that have been accepted by the
Government:
Recommendation Nos. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 11 Total- 11
and 12
Chapter- II
(ii) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which the Committee
do not desire to pursue in view of the Government’s replies:
Recommendation No. 13 Total- 01
Chapter- III
(iii) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which action taken replies
of the Government have not been accepted by the Committee:
Recommendation No. 10 Total- 01
Chapter- IV

2
(iv) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which final replies of
the Government are still awaited:
Recommendation No. 9 Total- 01
 Chapter- V
1.3 The Committee trust that utmost importance would be given
to implementation of the Observations/Recommendations accepted
by the Government. In cases, where it is not possible for the
Department to implement the Recommendations in letter and spirit
for any reason, the matter should be reported to the Committee with
the reasons for non-implementation. The Committee desire that
further Action Taken Notes on the Observations/Recommendations
contained in Chapter-I and final replies in respect of recommendation
contained in Chapter-V of this Report be furnished to them at an
early date.
1.4 The Committee will now deal with the action taken by the
Government on some of the Recommendations in the succeeding paragraphs.
A. Allocation and Utilisation of Funds
Recommendation (Para No. 1)
1.5 The Committee had observed/recommended as under :–
"The Committee note that the budgetary allocation for the Department
of Agricultural Research and Education for fiscal year 2018-19 has been
substantially enhanced from Rs. 6800 crores during 2017-18(BE) to
Rs. 7800 crores. The total Demand for 2018-19 under Scheme and
Non-Scheme Heads together is Rs. 7800.00 crore as against proposal of
Rs. 8380.92 crore. Out of total allocation for 2018-19, Rs. 2914.77 crore
is under the Scheme Head and Rs. 4885.23 crore under the Non-Scheme
Head. The Committee note that the allocation at RE stage for Non-Scheme
head during 2017-18 was increased from Rs. 4633.54 crore to Rs. 4825.54
crore during 2017-18 whereas there was no change for Scheme head
which remained as Rs. 2166.46 crore. The Committee have been informed
that the actual expenditure under Scheme Head is Rs. 1078.81 crore up to
31.12.17. The Committee observe that despite no change in allocation of
funds at RE stage during 2017-18 for Scheme Head, the actual expenditure
of the Department was only around 50% up to December 2017. The
Committee have been informed the reasons for less expenditure are that the
termination of XIIth plan during 2016-17 and subsequent formulation,

3
processing and approvals of SFC/EFCs for next phase i.e. 2017-18 to
2019-20 took substantial time. The process of approvals of SFC/EFC for
the next phase completed by September-October, 2017, which is the main
reason for low expenditure during first three quarters of current financial
year. Recognizing the importance of agricultural research, education and
extension for agriculture growth and development in the country, the
Committee in its earlier reports have been emphasizing on the need for
increase in allocation to DARE. The Committee are happy to note that the
allocation has been substantially enhanced for 2018-19. However, the
Committee feel that mere enhancement is not suffice, rather optimal utilization
of funds is more important because non-utilization of funds defeats the
very purpose of enhancement. The reasons cited by the Ministry for
under-utilization of funds during the year 2017-18 are administrative and
procedural delays which could have been easily avoided with proper planning
and foresight. The Committee, therefore, recommend that the Department
should realistically assess its requirement of funds and seek funds only on
the basis of this assessment and closely monitor expenditure so that situation
of large amount of funds remaining unutilized at the end of the financial
year can be avoided."
1.6 In its reply, the Ministry has stated as under:–
“Recommendation of the Committee has been noted for necessary
compliance. Accordingly, Department is monitoring the utilisation of
allocated funds regularly at monthly intervals during Senior Officers
meeting. The Department will make full efforts so that the allocated
funds are utilized as per respective SFC/EFC approvals."
1.7 While examining the Demands For Grants (2018-19), the
Committee had noted with concern that the pace of implementation
of Schemes are not satisfactory due to tardy utilization of funds by
DARE. The Committee also noted that mere enhancement is not
suffice, rather optimal utilization of funds is more important because
non-utilization of funds defeats the very purpose of enhancement.
Therefore the Committee had recommended the Department to
realistically assess its requirement of funds and seek funds only on
the basis of this assessment and closely monitor expenditure so that
situation of large amount of funds remaining unutilized at the end of
the financial year can be avoided. The Department in its Action Taken

4
Reply has stated that recommendation of the Committee has been
noted for necessary compliance and the Department is monitoring
the utilization of allocated funds regularly at monthly intervals during
Senior Officers meeting. The Department has assured the Committee
that they will make full efforts to utilize the allocated funds as per
respective SFC/EFC approvals. The Committee desired to be informed
of the efforts of the Department in this regard at regular intervals.
B. Proportion of Budgetary Allocation vis-a-vis Central Outlay
Recommendation (Para No. 2)
1.8 The Committee had observed/recommended as under :—
"The Committee note that the proportion of budgetary allocation of
the Department was 0.30% of total Central Plan Outlay in 2015-16,
0.31% in 2016-17 and 0.32% in 2017-18. The Department has informed
that the budgetary allocation for the year 2018-19 is Rs. 7800.00
crore which is also 0.32% of total Central Plan Outlay as against the
proposed amount of Rs. 8380.92 crores for the fiscal year 2018-19.
The Committee have also been informed that the proportion of budgetary
allocations made in favour of Department out of total budget of the
Government during the last three fiscal years are much less as
compared to the Ministries/Departments like Higher Education, Food
& Public Distribution and Fertilizers. The Committee note that for the
last three fiscal year the proportion of budgetary allocation of the
department is more or less same. While noting the increase in allocation
for 2018-19, the Committee are of the opinion that this increase is just
incremental and falls way short of what the agriculture research,
education and extension actually needs. The Committee urge the
Department to impress upon the Ministry of Finance to allocate funds
to them as per their requirement at RE stage so that agricultural
research, education and extension do not suffer for want of funds."
1.9 In its reply, the Ministry has stated as under:–
"Recommendation of the Committee has been noted for necessary
compliance."
1.10 During the course of examination of Demands for Grants
(2018-19) the Committee noted that for the last three fiscal years the

5
proportion of budgetary allocation of the department is more or less
same and therefore, the Committee had recommended the Department
to impress upon the Ministry of Finance to allocate funds to them as
per their requirement at RE stage so that agricultural research,
education and extension do not suffer for want of funds. The
Committee are not satisfied with the casual reply of the Department
that the recommendation of the Committee has been noted for
compliance. The Committee desire the Department to spell out the
steps taken in this regard.
C. Horticulture Science
Recommendation (Para No. 4)
1.11 The Committee had observed/recommended as under :–
"The Committee note that the thrust areas of Horticulture Science
Division are enrichment of genetic resources, development of new
cultivars with resistance mechanism to biotic and abiotic stresses,
appropriate production technology and health management system.
The perceived threats on climate change pose greater challenge in
achieving the targets in the horticultural crops now than ever before.
Some of the issues like collection, conservation and characterization
of germ plasm for breeding improved varieties, production technology
with special reference to abiotic stresses and protected cultivation,
seed and planting material, plant health management and food safety,
post-harvest handling, processing and value addition, labour needs
and mechanization are being addressed in a well defined timeframe.
The Committee note that Rs. 200 crore has been allocated for 2018-
19 at BE stage to the Horticulture Division. However, this Division
was able to utilize only Rs. 91.14 crore (to 31.12.17) out of the
allocated funds of Rs. 154.90 crore during the year 2017-18. Stating
the reasons for under utilisation, the Department has submitted that
the EFCs of all the five Schemes were approved during September-
October to December, 2017. As a result, expenditure involving policy
decisions were deferred for the time being, and hence there was
reduced expenditure. However, research activities were carried out
within the available funds and there was no adverse impact on major
research programmes. The Department has observed that henceforth,
the budget utilization will be hastened by taking up pending works and

6
creation of assets and strengthening of research facilities. The under-
utilization of funds is not acceptable to the Committee. They desire
the Department to take all required steps for optimal utilization of
funds, especially when the allocation for the year 2018-19 has been
substantially increased.
The Committee note that horticulture sector has great scope for
expansion and has vast potential for enhancing production, productivity
and value added products. The Committee have been informed that
during 12th Five Year Plan considerable efforts were made and 12
varieties of tomato, 10 varieties of onion and 4 varieties of potato
were evolved. Apart from having tolerance/resistance to important
pests and diseases, these are high yielding and have better shelf-life
with potential to minimize wastage. It has also been submitted that to
address the issues pertaining to post-harvest-losses, researches have
been taken up to develop the value added products in various crops.
During the last three years, fifty technologies have been developed
which are largely helpful in minimization of post-harvest losses. The
Committee recommend the Department to develop technology for
minimizing post-harvest losses and make the farmers aware about
value addition technology. The Committee are of the considered opinion
that proper marketing of post-harvest technologies are not only
important from the point of revenue generation but also for providing
alternate avenues to farmers of the country so that they can get
remunerative prices for their products.
The Committee also recommend the Department to conduct a study
for recognition of State/District specific horticulture crops in the
country and to rope in KVKs, Agricultural Universities in the State/
Districts to encourage cultivation of horticulture crops, create
awareness about their marketability for enhancement of income. There
is a huge potential for cultivation of medicinal and aromatic plants in
the country. The Committee recommend the ICAR to give impetus to
cultivation of medicinal and aromatic plants for raising the income of
farmers."
1.12 In its reply, the Ministry has stated as under:–
"Recommendation of the Committee has been noted for compliance.
Accordingly, Department will put all required steps to utilize enhanced
allocation of funds during 2018-19 and subsequent years for approved
programmes/activities.

7
Department has taken initiatives on development of value added
products to minimize post-harvest losses in important horticultural
crops. Department has developed several post-harvest technologies
and some of these namely; Ready to Serve (RTS) beverage from acid
lime, carbonated beverage from acid lime and Nagpur mandarin, Aonla
Dill RTS, Aonla Fennel Squash, Aonla Fennel RTS, Aonla Coriander
Squash, Aonla Coriander RTS, Aonla Tea, Aonla Biscuits, Aonla Cider,
apricot fruit bar, cape gooseberry jam, osmo-dehydrated rose hips,
Ready-to-Serve beverage and juice of pomegranate, minimal processing
of pomegranate arils, pomegranate wine, extraction of high value
virgin pomegranate seed oil, dehydration of potato tubers, potato chips
and French Fries, chocolate from cocoa etc. and were commercialized.
All these post-harvest and value addition technologies are being
popularized through training of farmers and other stakeholders.
The country has eight agro-climatic zones and all the mandated
horticultural crops and relevant technologies are being identified and
demonstrated by KVKs, agricultural universities and other line
departments for adoption as per their suitability/need in different
agro-climatic zones and at State/ Districts level to create awareness
about productivity enhancement and marketability for raising farm
income.
Department is promoting cultivation of medicinal and aromatic plants
in the country through ICAR-Directorate of Medicinal and Aromatic
Plants at Anand, Gujarat along with 23 Centres of the ICAR—All
India Coordinated Research Project (AICRP) on Medicinal and Aromatic
Plants. In order to promote cultivation of medicinal and aromatic
plants for raising the income of farmers, a total of 12 trainings on
different aspects of Conservation, Cultivation and Post-harvest
Management including Good Agricultural Practices and primary
processing of Medicinal and Aromatic Plants were organized, and a
total of 1029 farmers and other stakeholders were benefitted."
1.13 During the course of examination of Demands for Grants
(2018-19) the Committee observed that the funds allocated under
Horticulture Division were under-utilized and therefore had
categorically stated that the under-utilization of funds is not acceptable

8
to the Committee. The Committee desired the Department to take
all required steps for optimal utilization of funds, especially when the
allocation for the year 2018-19 has been substantially increased. In
its Action Taken Reply, the Department has submitted that it will put
all required steps to utilize enhanced allocation of funds during
2018-19 and subsequent years for approved programmes/activities.
Doubling of Farmers’ Income by 2022, a noble and welfare vision
of the Government has been acknowledged by the Committee and
therefore the Committee had recommended the Department to conduct
a study for recognition of State/District specific horticulture crops in
the country and to rope in KVKs, Agricultural Universities in the
State/Districts to encourage cultivation of horticulture crops, create
awareness about their marketability for enhancement of income. There
is a huge potential for cultivation of medicinal and aromatic plants in
the country. The Committee had recommended the ICAR to give
impetus to cultivation of medicinal and aromatic plants for raising
the income of farmers. The Committee are happy to note that all the
mandated horticultural crops and relevant technologies are being
identified and demonstrated by KVKs, agricultural universities and
other line departments for adoption as per their suitability/need in
different agro-climatic zones and at State/District level to create
awareness about productivity enhancement and marketability for
raising farm income. The Committee would like the Department to
continue its efforts in this direction more vigorously.
D. Recommendation (Para No. 6)
1.14 The Committee had observed/recommended as under:—
"The Department has informed that it has undertaken a number of
steps to augment nutritive value of feed and fodder and meet demand
for feed and make quality fodder available to the increasing animal
population. ICAR is utilizing exotic and indigenous genetic resources
through breeding and selection for improving the forage productivity
and nutritive value of different cultivated and pasture species from
different agro-climatic regions in India. Fodder crop improvement is
being carried out by involving multi-disciplinary integrated approach
for development of high yielding varieties. Main fodder crops include
cultivated dual purpose cereal/grain crops, annual legumes, as well as

9
perennial grasses (cultivated/rainfed) and range legumes. The
Committee feel that availability of quality feed and fodder is essential
for improvement of livestock health and productivity. They are of the
view that often huge quantity of vegetables such as potatoes, onions
etc. get wasted in the country for various reasons. The Committee
recommend the Department to carry out research on use of such
vegetable wastages for feed and fodder for livestock.
Regarding use of antibiotics or medicated feed for livestock husbandry,
the Committee were informed that research is being carried out on
antibiotic resistance in livestock and creating awareness among farmers,
veterinarians and students regarding use of antibiotics through joint
collaboration with FAO and CDC sponsored schemes on anti-microbial
resistance. Research on “Medicinal herbs as alternative to antibiotics
as growth promoter in chicken” is being undertaken, value added feed
formulations are being prepared to substitute the antibiotics as growth
promoter in rearing of chicken. Research is also being carried out on
exploring alternatives to antibiotics i.e. probotics, prebiotics, sinbiotics
(pre and probiotics in combination), organic assets, essential oils/
herbs in poultry. The Committee desire the Department to create
awareness among stakeholders about restricted use of antibiotics in
poultry because it can have adverse effect on human health. The
Committee recommend the Department to expedite the research on
use of medicinal herbs as an alternative to antibiotics."
1.15 The Ministry in its Action Taken Reply has stated as under:—
"In-order to make use of vegetable waste in animal feeding system,
research on region specific locally available feed ingredients in the
north-east region has been carried on Pig centers located in different
parts of the country. Research indicated that Vegetables viz. cabbage,
potato, tapioca, radish, pumpkin can be used as a supplement of pig
feed to replace energy ration 10% to 15%. The use of vegetable
kitchen waste available in rural household has been assessed and the
feeding of average quantity of 1.5 kg. dry matter/day can support
1 kg. of milk production. Nutritive value of pineapple fruit, residues
silage is better than maize green fodder and can be used as an alternate
green fodder for ruminants. Work is also being carried out to improve
shelf life of tomato pomace for use of livestock feed. It is submitted
that the work on suggested lines will be further intensified/up scaled
through the institutes with animal component in particular.

10
The research work on the alternative to antibiotics by using medicinal
herbs is already being carried out by the Department. Accordingly, an
Outreach Programme on Ethno-Veterinary Medicine, under which herbal
feed additives is being explored to overcome antibiotics residues in
poultry. Research on replacement of antibiotic growth promoter (AGP)
with medicinal herbs, prebiotics, probiotics, symbiotic and organic
acids is in progress. Further, awareness (trainings, workshop and
advisory services) is being created among farmers and entrepreneurs
for restricted use of antibiotics in poultry. A proposal under CAAST
has been submitted to undertake evaluation of some herbiotic and
combiotic preparations to be tested in vitro and in some animal models."
1.16 Keeping in view the need to augment nutritive value of
feed and fodder and to make quality fodder available to the increasing
animal population, the Committee had recommended the Department
to carry out research on use of vegetable wastages for feed and
fodder for livestock. The Committee are happy to note that in order
to make use of vegetable waste in animal feeding system, research
on region specific locally available feed ingredients in the north-east
region has been carried on Pig Centres located in different parts of
the country. Work is also being carried out to improve shelf life of
tomato pomace for use of livestock feed. It has also been stated that
the work on suggested lines will be further intensified/up scaled
through the institutes with animal component in particular. The
Committee are of the view that research on feasibility of use of
vegetable wastages as feed and fodder for livestock be carried out on
priority basis and it should not be limited to only north-eastern part
of the country.
Regarding the research work on the alternative to antibiotics by
using medicinal herbs in poultry, the Department in its action taken
reply, has submitted that research on replacement of antibiotic growth
promoter (AGP) with medicinal herbs, prebiotics, probiotics, symbiotic
and organic acids is in progress and awareness (trainings, workshop
and advisory services) is being created among farmers and
entrepreneurs for restricted use of antibiotics in poultry. While
reiterating their recommendation, the Committee feel that since the

11
matter pertains to human health, steps be undertaken to expedite
the research on use of medicinal herbs as an alternative to antibiotics.
E. Recommendation (Para No. 8)
1.17 The Committee had recommended as under:—
"The Committee appreciate the performance of KVKs during the last
three years. The KVKs, as per mandated activities, conducted 97188
On-farm trials (OFTs) for assessment and refinement of technologies;
conducted 3.21 lakh Frontline Demonstrations (FLDs); trained 40.9
lakh farmers including rural youth and farm women; trained 4.48 lakh
extension personnel; benefited 392.54 lakh farmers through various
extension activities; produced 87900 tonnes of seeds, 1252.42 lakh of
planting material and 909.04 lakh of livestock strains and fingerlings;
tested 13.36 lakh soil samples; and provided mobile agro-advisories
on various facets of agriculture and allied sectors to 395.44 lakh
farmers. The Committee, however, note that the infrastructure of
some KVKs are not up to the desired level. The Committee desire that
the infrastructure in all the 681 KVKs of the country should be
strengthened. There should be a Farmers’ Hostel in each and every
KVK with separate rooms and dormitories where farmers can stay
comfortably during their visit to a KVK. The Committee note that a
study was conducted by the National Institute of Labour Economics
Research and Development (NILERD), an autonomous institute under
NITI Aayog to find out the impact of KVKs on dissemination of
improved practices and technologies, in terms of outreach, knowledge,
accessibility etc. The Study found that on an average each KVK
covers 43 villages and 4,300 farmers about 80% of villages covered
by KVK are over 10 km away from the KVK and 42% of technologies
adopted by farmers resulted in higher productivity. In view of this the
Committee feel that KVKs may be made a hub of activities to attract
not only the farmers but also their families. Educational fairs, exhibitions
etc. may be organized at these KVKs from time to time to impart
knowledge to farmers and their families. Also, KVKs are an important
link between the farmers and ICAR. The communication at these
places should be a two-way process i.e. in addition to dissemination
of available agricultural knowledge and technology to the farmers, the
specialist at KVKs should listen to their problems and communicate
the same to ICAR for carrying out further research.

12
The Committee feel that the extension schemes such as ATARIs,
KVKs, DKMA, ARYA etc. are highly beneficial means to work as a
link between agricultural research and farmers. The objective, Lab to
land, could only be accomplished by strengthening the outreach
programmes. The Committee note though the existing system of KVKs
requires to be strengthened by augmenting manpower, infrastructure
etc, funds for the same are not being provided adequately. The
Committee in their earlier reports have also been recommending for
adequate allocation for extension schemes. The Committee recommend
the Department to take up the matter of more allocation of funds with
the Ministry of Finance. The Committee also desire that the Department
should make all out efforts to spend the whole amount allocated under
this Head."
1.18 The Ministry in its Action Taken Reply has stated as under:—
"In accordance of recommendation of the Committee, the Department
with the available funds for KVKs, supported establishment of
Administrative Building, Farmers’ Hostel, Soil & Water Testing Lab
and Soil Testing Kits have been provided to 534, 470, 436 and 650
KVKs, respectively. The need based infrastructure including Farmers’
Hostel in rest of the KVKs will be provided as per the availability of
funds during 2018-19 and 2019-20.
The KVKs are regularly organizing different extension education activities
for creating awareness on improved farm technologies and speeding
up large scale diffusion of latest scientific information among farmers
including farm women and rural youth. During 2017-18, a total of
6.07 lakh extension education activities like, exhibitions, exposure
visits, farmers’ seminar, kisan ghosthi, kisan melas, field days,
ex-trainees sammelan, advisory services, diagnostic and clinic services,
method demonstrations, soil-health camps, soil-test campaigns, etc.
were organized by KVKs in the country by which 144.15 lakh farmers,
farm women and rural youth were benefited.
The KVKs obtain the feedback from farmers on various demonstrated
technologies and these feedbacks are forwarded to the ICAR Research
Institutes and Agricultural Universities for further improvement of
technologies and future research.

13
The recommendation of the Committee for allocation of additional
funds for KVKs has been noted and shall be taken up at the RE
stage."
1.19 The Committee had recommended that the existing system
of KVKs requires to be strengthened by augmenting manpower,
infrastructure etc., and since funds for the same are not being
adequately provided the committee recommended the Department to
take up the matter for more allocation of funds with the Ministry of
Finance. The Committee in their earlier reports had also been
recommending for adequate allocation for extension schemes. The
Department in its Action Taken Reply, has submitted that allocation
of additional funds for KVKs has been noted and shall be taken up
at the RE stage. The Committee hope that the Department will pursue
the matter with the concerned Ministry. The Committee are pleased
to note that the KVKs are regularly organizing different extension
education activities for creating awareness on improved farm
technologies and speeding up large scale diffusion of latest scientific
information among farmers including farm women and rural youth.
The Committee also desire the Government to allocate sufficient
funds to the extension programmes. The Committee would like to be
informed about the steps taken by the Government in this regard
within three months of presentation of this Report. KVKs are an
important link between the farmers and research in agriculture. The
Committee had recommended that Educational fairs, exhibitions etc.
may be organized at the KVKs from time to time to impart knowledge
to farmers and their families. The communication at these places
should be a two-way process i.e. in addition to dissemination of available
agricultural knowledge and technology to the farmers, the specialist
at KVKs should listen to their problems and communicate the same
to ICAR for carrying out further research. In its Action Taken Reply,
the Department has stated that the KVKs obtain the feedback from
farmers on various demonstrated technologies and these feedbacks
are forwarded to the ICAR Research Institutes and Agricultural
Universities for further improvement of technologies and future
research. The Committee desire the KVKs to identify the problems
of the area as per the need of the farmers and prioritization of the
identified problems as per their importance. The Committee further
recommend the Department to identify and strengthen the KVKs

14
whose performance are not up to the mark particularly in the backward
districts of the country. Further the Committee reiterate that more
and more programmes at KVKs be organized to encourage the
participation of farmers.
F. National Agricultural Higher Education Project
Recommendation (Para No. 10)
1.20 The Committee had recommended as under:—
"The Committee have been informed that a new programme National
Agricultural Higher Education Project (NAHEP) has been launched.
The objective of the Project is to support Participating Agricultural
Universities and ICAR in providing more relevant and higher quality
education to Agricultural University students. The challenges faced by
AUs mirror those faced in general by higher education in India. The
needs of the agricultural sector resonate with other sectors, i.e.,
highly trained workforce and relevant cutting-edge research. The
current ICAR-Agricultural Universities (AU) System reform agenda
requires global knowledge and international expertise to refine its
approach and implementation. For this reason, ICAR has requested
World Bank support as a knowledge adjunct to the proposed NAHEP.
The Project supports the Country Partnership Strategy and addresses
the three engagement areas of integration, transformation and inclusion.
These engagement areas foresee increased agricultural productivity
and support quality improvements of higher education to create a
more skilled workforce that continuously improves the productivity
of key sectors, including agriculture. The proposed Project is also a
multi-Global Practice collaboration (Agriculture and Education) and is
expected to support activities and results directly related to cross-
cutting strategic areas of climate change, jobs and gender. The
Committee have been informed that there was no separate allocation
of fund during 2017-18 at BE/RE stage, however Rs 5.0 crore was
marked from the Budget of Education division at BE Stage. So far the
said amount has not been utilized. The Committee note that Rs. 7.89
crore has been provided for NAHEP for 2018-19 at BE stage. The
Committee are not happy with the non-utilization of funds. The
Committee advise the Department to be more prudent in future. The
Committee are aware of the fact that ICAR through its institutes and

15
rich human resource have immensely contributed to the growth and
development of agriculture in the country but a lot remains to be
done. The Committee hope that the project would contribute in
strengthening and development of agricultural higher education in the
country."
1.21 The Ministry in its Action Taken Reply has stated as under:–
"The NAHEP is at the preliminary stage of its operation. Efforts are
being made to make programme fully functional by creating the need
based infrastructure and manpower. Despite all the constraints, the
project has made some headway by utilizing an allocation of Rs.28.00
lakhs during the current FY 2017-18 for taking up various activities
under the project. All efforts will be made to ensure maximum utilization
of allocation earmarked in the BE 2018-19 through strategic planning
and participation of all stakeholders to ensure that the targets set for
the year are fully achieved without any shortfall."
1.22 While noting that a new programme National Agricultural
Higher Education Project (NAHEP) has been launched with an objective
to support Participating Agricultural Universities and ICAR in
providing more relevant and higher quality education to Agricultural
University students, the Committee had expressed its displeasure
over non-utilization of funds earmarked for the Project during
2017-18. The Department in its Action Taken Reply has submitted
that the NAHEP is at the preliminary stage of its operation and
efforts are being made to make programme fully functional by
creating the need based infrastructure and manpower. The Department
has also submitted that all efforts will be made to ensure maximum
utilization of allocation earmarked in the BE 2018-19 through strategic
planning and participation of all stakeholders. The Committee are of
the view that strengthening of agricultural research system is sine
qua non for development of agriculture in the country and that for
better coherence, cooordination and collaboration reforms are required
in ICAR-Agricultural Universities (AU) System. The Committee,
therefore, desire that steps be undertaken to expedite the
implementation of the programme. The Committee would like to be
informed of the efforts made by the Department in this regard at the
earliest.

16
CHAPTER II
OBSERV ATIONS/RECOMMENDA TIONS THAT HA VE BEEN
ACCEPTED BY THE GOVERNMENT
Allocation and Utilisation of Funds
Recommendation (Para No. 1)
The Committee note that the budgetary allocation for the Department
of Agricultural Research and Education for fiscal year 2018-19 has been
substantially enhanced from Rs. 6800 crores during 2017-18(BE) to
Rs. 7800 crores. The total Demand for 2018-19 under Scheme and
Non-Scheme Heads together is Rs. 7800.00 crore as against proposal of
Rs. 8380.92 crore. Out of total allocation for 2018-19, Rs. 2914.77 crore
is under the Scheme Head and Rs. 4885.23 crore under the Non-Scheme
Head. The Committee note that the allocation at RE stage for Non-Scheme
head during 2017-18 was increased from Rs. 4633.54 crore to Rs 4825.54
crore during 2017-18 whereas there was no change for Scheme head
which remained as Rs. 2166.46 crore. The Committee have been informed
that the actual expenditure under Scheme Head is Rs. 1078.81 crore up to
31.12.17.
The Committee observe that despite no change in allocation of funds
at RE stage during 2017-18 for Scheme Head, the actual expenditure of the
Department was only around 50% up to December 2017. The Committee
have been informed the reasons for less expenditure are that the termination
of 12th plan during 2016-17 and subsequent formulation, processing and
approvals of SFC/EFCs for next phase i.e. 2017-18 to 2019-20 took
substantial time. The process of approvals of SFC/EFC for the next phase
completed by September-October, 2017, which is the main reason for low
expenditure during first three quarters of current financial year. Recognizing
the importance of agricultural research, education and extension for
agriculture growth and development in the country, the Committee in its
earlier reports have been emphasizing on the need for increase in allocation
to DARE. The Committee are happy to note that the allocation has been
substantially enhanced for 2018-19. However, the Committee feel that mere

17
enhancement is not suffice, rather optimal utilization of funds is more
important because non-utilization of funds defeats the very purpose of
enhancement. The reasons cited by the Ministry for under-utilization of
funds during the year 2017-18 are administrative and procedural which
could have been easily avoided with proper planning and foresight. The
Committee, therefore, recommend that the Department should realistically
assess its requirement of funds and seek funds only on the basis of this
assessment and closely monitor expenditure so that situation of large amount
of funds remaining unutilized at the end of the financial year can be
avoided.
Reply of the Government
Recommendation of the committee has been noted for necessary
compliance. Accordingly, Department is monitoring the utilization of allocated
funds regularly at monthly intervals during Senior Officers meeting. The
Department will make full efforts so that the allocated funds are utilized as
per respective SFC/EFC approvals.
Comments of the Committee
For comments of the Committee please refer to Para No.1.7 of
Chapter-I of this Report.
[Ministry of Agriculture & Farmers Welfare O.M. No.7 (5)/2018, dated
29th May, 2018, Department of Agricultural Research and Education]
Proportion of Budgetary Allocation vis-a-vis Central Outlay
Recommendation (Para No. 2)
The Committee note that the proportion of budgetary allocation of the
Department was 0.30% of total Central Plan Outlay in 2015-16, 0.31% in
2016-17 and 0.32% in 2017-18. The Department has informed that the
budgetary allocation for the year 2018-19 is Rs. 7800.00 crore which is
also 0.32% of total Central Plan Outlay as against the proposed amount of
Rs 8380.92 crores for the fiscal year 2018-19. The Committee have also
been informed that the proportion of budgetary allocations made in favour
of Department out of total budget of the Government during the last three
fiscal years are much less as compared to the Ministries/Departments like
Higher Education, Food & Public Distribution and Fertilizers. The Committee
note that for the last three fiscal year the proportion of budgetary allocation

18
of the department is more or less same. While noting the increase in
allocation for 2018-19, the Committee are of the opinion that this increase
is just incremental and falls way short of what the agriculture research,
education and extension actually needs. The Committee urge the Department
to impress upon the Ministry of Finance to allocate funds to them as per
their requirement at RE stage so that agricultural research, education and
extension do not suffer for want of funds.
Reply of the Government
Recommendation of the Committee has been noted for necessary
compliance.
Comments of the Committee
For comments of the Committee please refer to Para No. 1.10 of
Chapter-I of this Report.
[Ministry of Agriculture & Farmers Welfare O.M. No.7 (5)/2018, dated
29th May, 2018, Department of Agricultural Research and Education]
Crop Science
Recommendation (Para No. 3)
The Committee note that improvement of crops is the mandate of
Crop Science Division. The main emphasis of the Division has been on
development of trait-specific high yielding crop varieties and hybrids. During
2017-18 a total 209 including 13 bio-fortified, new varieties/hybrids tolerant
to various biotic and abiotic stresses with enhanced quality have been
developed for Cereals, Pulses, Oilseeds, Commercial and Forage crops.
The Committee have been apprised that in order to enhance productivity
and improve farmers income in the country, ICAR Institutes under crop
science division in collaboration with SAUs are conducting basic and strategic
research related to improvement and production of rice, wheat, maize,
millets, fodder crops, oilseeds, pulses, sugarcane, cotton and other fibre
crops through 26 commodity based research institutes and 32 All India
Coordinated Research Projects (AICRPs) and All India Network Projects
(AINPs to develop location specific crop varieties and matching technologies
as per the agro ecological needs. Newer approaches like millets for
diversification of food basket and nutritional security, terminal heat tolerance

19
in wheat, improved rice hybrids and basmati varieties, quality protein maize
hybrids with better adaptability, tobacco seed oil for edible purpose, high
sugar varieties with novel research methodology for better sugar recovery
from sugarcane, well adapted high yielding oilseeds and pulses for better
nutrition, high strength cotton genotypes and high density planting system
for cotton besides enhanced fibre quality in jute and allied fibres are other
areas that have received attention.
While appreciating the work done by this Division, the Committee feel
that a lot still remains to be done. Often the quality of seeds which actually
reach the farmers is different from that developed by ICAR. Even the
Secretary, DARE agreed to this fact, during the evidence. The Committee
desire that efforts be made in this direction so that the good quality seeds
reach the farmers.
The Committee note that 13 bio-fortified varieties of field vegetables
and fruits crops have been developed by ICAR. The Committee recommend
that in addition to high-yielding and resistant varieties the ICAR should also
focus on developing more of bio-fortified varieties which can solve the
problems of malnutrition in the country to a large extent. The Committee
observe that efforts have been made by ICAR to bring all the newly
released varieties in seed chain so that quality seeds of these varieties may
reach the farmers in minimum time which helps in enhancing the productivity
and improve farmers’ income. The Committee recommend that while keeping
pace with the demands for new varieties ICAR should also strive to conserve
the traditional varieties of seeds with some specific qualities so as to save
them from becoming extinct.
Reply of the Government
The ICAR is producing breeder seed of released varieties as per the
indented requirement of Department of Agriculture Cooperation and Farmers
Welfare (DAC&FW) for uses by public as well as private sector organizations
in production of foundation, certified and labelled seeds to maintain the
effective seed production chain in making quality seed available to the
farmers at affordable price. ICAR has nation-wide network of 41 centres
representing 23 States of Seed Projects for quality seed production. In
addition, ICAR is also strengthening the infrastructure under seed domain
of National Agricultural Research System with network of 63 partners

20
across the country involving ICAR Institutes, SAUs and CAUs for making
available quality seed to farmers.
The concerted efforts of NARS (ICAR institutes, State Agricultural
Universities, Public Sector Undertakings and other universities) led to
production of 1.22 lakh qnital breeder seeds of different field crops during
2016-17 as against an indent of 1.04 lakh quintal ICAR is also contributing
sizably in Indian Seed Domain by producing quality seed to the tune of 6.0
lakh quintals per annum with an increment of 0.4 to 0.8 per cent per
annum amounting to a cumulative 2.5 per cent in Seed Replacement Rate
(SRR) of major crop species during 12th plan period. During 2016-17,
ICAR produced 6.20 lakh quintals of quality seed including foundation,
certified and labelled seeds under National Seed Project (Crops) and produced
2.91 lakh quintals seeds through Farmers Participatory Seed Production
programme. All possible efforts are being made by ICAR to maintain the
quality of seed through strict monitoring during the cropping system involving
specialist/officials from producing Institutes, Crop Breeder, National Seed
Corporation, State Seed Certification Agencies and Project Coordinating
Units of respective crops.
The quality seed which include foundation, certified and labelled, is
also being produced by the National Seed Corporation, State Seed
Corporations, Public Sector Undertakings, NGOs and Private seed companies.
ICAR’s main role is limited upto the monitoring the quality of Breeder Seed
and the other classes of seed produced under ICAR Seed Project. Rest of
the seed production is controlled by Seed Certification agencies of respective
States in terms of quality control at all stages from seed source to field
selection, harvesting, processing, storage, quality evaluation, marketing and
so on. Utmost care is being taken in production of best quality breeder seed
following all principles of seed production under Seed Projects and its
associated centres. Annual Breeder Seed Review Meetings are held to review
the programme periodically involving all the centres and DAC&FW, all
public sector seed producing organizations and representatives of Seed
Associations. Issues related to seed quality, availability, short falls, non-
lifting, varietal mismatches, breeder seed price etc. are discussed, accordingly
directives and advisories are issued time to time.
Department has taken initiatives on development of bio-fortified varieties
in crops such as sweet potato, cauliflower, etc. under crop improvement

21
programmes. Sweet potato varieties with higher β carotene and anthocyanin
contents and cauliflower variety rich in Vitamin-A have been identified and
released. The sweet potato variety ‘BhuSona’ is a β carotene rich (12.5 -
14.0 mg/100g) with tuber yield 20-25 t/ha, another variety ‘Bhu Krishna’
anthocyanin rich (85 to 90 mg/100g) have 22-25 t/ha tuber yield.The
cauliflower variety Pusa Kesarivit A-1 is rich in β carotene (5 to 10ppm)with
40-50t/ha yield potential. Efforts are being made to breed improved varieties
of horticultural crops for desired traits. After identification and/or multi-
location trial and notification, varieties of horticultural crops are being put
in seed/plant material chain. In addition, some of the varieties are being
licensed to Private Sector Undertakings for large scale multiplication for the
larger benefit of farmers.
Department is placing all efforts to conserve the traditional varieties
of seeds with some specific qualities so as to save them from becoming
extinct. Regular explorations are being conducted and germplasm accessions
of target horticultural crops are being collected, evaluated and further used
in crop improvement programms. Traditional varieties are being registered
with the Protection of Plant Varieties and Farmers Rights Authority (PPV
& FRA), of the Government of India. ICAR-National Bureau of Plant
Genetic Resources (NBPGR), New Delhi is the nodal institute at national
level for collection, characterization, evaluation, conservation and exchange
of plant genetic resources which also include traditional varieties and land
races with specific qualities for protecting them from getting extinct. The
NBPGR has collected and conserved 76799 accessions (cereals 17927,
millets 15979, grain legumes 10272, oilseeds 21250, forages 1413, fibre
crops 258, vegetables 6032, fruits and nuts 08, pseudo-cereals 1475, spices
949, medicinal and aromatic 882, ornamentals 07 and agroforestry 345) of
traditional varieties/landraces of various agri-horticultural crops in the National
Gene bank belonging to 34 States of the country. A total of 16052 (979
Traditional varieties; 15073 Landraces)accessions are multiplied as per the
viability aspects of the seeds and the seeds of these varieties are being
shared in the crop improvement programmes.
[Ministry of Agriculture & Farmers Welfare O.M. No.7 (5)/2018, dated
29th May, 2018, Department of Agricultural Research and Education]

22
Horticultre Science
Recommendation (Para No. 4)
The Committee note that the thrust areas of Horticulture Science
Division are enrichment of genetic resources, development of new cultivars
with resistance mechanism to biotic and abiotic stresses, appropriate
production technology and health management system. The perceived threats
on climate change pose greater challenge in achieving the targets in the
horticultural crops now than ever before. Some of the issues like collection,
conservation and characterization of germ plasm for breeding improved
varieties, production technology with special reference to a biotic stresses
and protected cultivation, seed and planting material, plant health management
and food safety, post-harvest handling, processing and value addition, labour
needs and mechanization are being addressed in a well-defined time-frame.
The Committee note that Rs. 200 crore has been allocated for 2018-19 at
BE stage to the Horticulture Division. However, this Division was able to
utilize only Rs.91.14 crore (upto 31.12.2017) out of the allocated funds of
Rs.154.90 crore during the year 2017-18. Stating the reasons for under-
utilization, the Department has submitted that the EFCs of all the five
Schemes were approved during September-October to December, 2017. As
a result, expenditure involving policy decisions were deferred for the time
being and hence there was reduced expenditure. However, research activities
were carried out within the available funds and there was no adverse
impact on major research programmes. The Department has observed that
henceforth, the budget utilization will be hastened by taking up pending
works and creation of assets and strengthening of research facilities. The
under-utilization of funds is not acceptable to the Committee. They desire
the Department to take all required steps for optimal utilization of funds,
especially when the allocation for the year 2018-19 has been substantially
increased.
The Committee note that horticulture sector has great scope for
expansion and has vast potential for enhancing production, productivity and
value added products. The Committee have been informed that during 12th
Five Year Plan considerable efforts were made and 12 varieties of tomato,
10 varieties of onion and 4 varieties of potato were evolved. Apart from
having tolerance/resistance to important pests and diseases, these are high
yielding and have better shelf-life with potential to minimize wastage. It has

23
also been submitted that to address the issues pertaining to post-harvest
losses, researches have been taken up to develop the value added products
in various crops. During the last three years, fifty technologies have been
developed which are largely helpful in minimization of post-harvest losses.
The Committee recommend the Department to develop technology for
minimizing post-harvest losses and make the farmers aware about value
addition technology. The Committee are of the considered opinion that
proper marketing of post-harvest technologies are not only important from
the point of revenue generation but also for providing alternate avenues to
farmers of the country so that they can get remunerative prices for their
products.
The Committee also recommend the Department to conduct a study
for recognition of State/District specific horticulture crops in the country
and to rope in KVKs, Agricultural Universities in the State/Districts to
encourage cultivation of horticulture crops, create awareness about their
marketability for enhancement of income. There is a huge potential for
cultivation of medicinal and aromatic plants in the country. The Committee
recommend the ICAR to give impetus to cultivation of medicinal and
aromatic plants for raising the income of farmers.
Reply of the Government
Recommendation of the Committee has been noted for compliance.
Accordingly, Department will put all required steps to utilize enhanced
allocation of funds during 2018-19 and subsequent years for approved
programmes/activities.
Department has taken initiatives on development of value added
products to minimize post-harvest losses in important horticultural crops.
Department has developed several post-harvest technologies and some of
these namely; Ready to Serve (RTS) beverage from acid lime, carbonated
beverage from acid lime and Nagpur mandarin, Aonla Dill RTS, Aonla
Fennel Squash, Aonla Fennel RTS, AonlaCoriander Squash, Aonla Coriander
RTS, Aonla Tea, Aonla Biscuits, Aonla Cider, apricot fruit bar, cape gooseberry
jam, osmo-dehydrated rose hips, Ready-to-Serve beverage and juice of
pomegranate, minimal processing of pomegranate arils, pomegranate wine,

24
extraction of high value virgin pomegranate seed oil, dehydration of potato
tubers, potato chips and French Fries, chocolate from cocoa etc. and were
commercialized.
All these post-harvest and value addition technologies are being
popularized through training of farmers and other stakeholders.
The country has eight agro-climatic zones and all the mandated
horticultural crops and relevant technologies are being identified and
demonstrated by KVKs, agricultural universities and other line departments
for adoption as per their suitability/need in different agro-climatic zones and
at State/Districts level to create awareness about productivity enhancement
and marketability for raising farm income.
Department is promoting cultivation of medicinal and aromatic plants
in the country through ICAR-Directorate of Medicinal and Aromatic Plants
at Anand, Gujarat along with 23 Centers of the ICAR-All India Coordinated
Research Project (AICRP) on Medicinal and Aromatic Plants. In order to
promote cultivation of medicinal and aromatic plants for raising the income
of farmers, a total of 12 trainings on different aspects of Conservation,
Cultivation and Post-harvest Management including Good Agricultural
Practices and primary processing of Medicinal and Aromatic Plants were
organized, and a total of 1029 farmers and other stakeholders were benefited.
Comments of the Committee
For comments of the Committee please refer to Para No. 1.13 of
Chapter-I of this Report.
[Ministry of Agriculture & Farmers Welfare O.M. No.7 (5)/2018, dated
29th May, 2018, Department of Agricultural Research and Education]
Animal Science
Recommendation (Para No. 5)
The Committee note that Animal Science Division is engaged in
development of new technologies to support production enhancement,
profitability, competitiveness and sustainability of livestock and poultry sector
for food and nutritional security. The mission is to facilitate need based
priority research in livestock and poultry sector in on-going and new
emerging areas to support productivity increase, thereby reducing the gap
between potential and actual yield in the current era of globalization to meet
the challenges ahead. The Committee further note that to conserve indigenous

25
cattle breeds of superior quality and genetical improvement of the indigenous
varieties the Department in collaboration with state agricultural/veterinary
universities, NGOs/state animal husbandry departments is undertaking
indigenous improvement programme covering three indigenous breeds i.e.
Sahiwal, Gir and Kankrej in their respective breeding tracts. The project is
aimed to conserve, propagate and improve the genetic potential of these
three indigenous cattle breeds. During the course of evidence, the Department
informed that the steps have been taken to identify non-descript livestock
in the country. The Committee are of the view that improvement of traditional
varieties of livestock is very important as these varieties can provide farmers
an option to increase productivity and profitability at low cost as maintenance
of traditional livestock is easy as compared to breeds based on imported
varieties. The Committee, therefore, desire the Department to give impetus
for identification, registration, conservation and improvement of traditional
and non-descript varieties of livestock throughout the country
Reply of the Government
ICAR characterized 18 new animal populations during the 12th Plan.
Nine populations have been registered as breeds and many more are under
process. Two native cattle (Ongole & Bargur) one sheep (Poonchi) and one
chicken (Harringhatta Black) were conserved with the animal keepers.
Till date, 169 animals have been registered as breeds and during the
last one year, 9 new populations (3 cattle, 2 goat, one sheep, 2 camel, one
duck) are being characterized, one camel (Kharai) and chicken (Ankleswar)
breed is being conserved in their natural habitat.Thirteen (13) native indigenous
sheep breeds are identified, registered, maintained, conserved and being
improved through research across the country. About 1800 indigenous
native sheep breeds are made available to farmers in different states of the
country for genetic improvement of their flocks. Genetic improvement of
14 indigenous goat breed/genotypes in their natural habitat is being
undertaken. Three native chicken breeds namely Aseel, Ghagus and Nicobar
are being conserved and improved for the economic traits (body weight
and egg production). The improved Aseel birds are being provided to the
farmers for better egg production and body weight. One chicken line PD-
1 has also been registered. Conservation and genetic improvement of the
important indigenous cattle breeds of our country viz., Gir, Kankrej and
Sahiwal is implemented in collaboration with State Agricultural/ Veterinary

26
Universities, NGOs, Livestock Development Boards and Gaushalas and also
involving farmer herds. So far, 3500 Kankrej, 10740 Gir and 1073 Sahiwal
cows from the farmer herds covered under the programme. A total of 1084
Sahiwal, 4623 Gir and 1537 Kankrej daughters born. 159500, 121100 and
157500 frozen semen doses of Gir, Kankrej and Sahiwal bulls have been
frozen. A total of 120880 frozen semen doses of the three breeds viz., Gir,
Kankrej and Sahiwal were made available to the stakeholders for improvement
of farmer’s animals of the respective breeds/non-descript. The available
semen doses may be used under the development schemes like Gokul
Mission, etc. of DADF, GoI.
Five important breeds of chicken namely, Aseel (Kagar, Peela),
Kadaknath, Nicobari, Ankleswar and Silkie breeds are being conserved in
pure form and improved for 20-week body weight (Aseel Peela). The
ecotypes like frizzle and naked neck are also being conserved.
Identification and characterization of local pig varieties for seven pig
breeds (viz. Ghungroo of West Bengal, Niang Megha of Meghalaya, Agonda
Goan of Goa, Nicobari of A&N Island, Doom of Assam, TenyiV o of
Nagaland and Zovak of Mizoram) in collaboration with respective State
Government organizations is being undertaken and these varieties have been
registered with National Database. Improvement of local varieties of
germplasm was done by purposive cross-breeding programme. Region
specific eight new improved crossbred varieties of pig with higher production
potential were developed and releaseed by the farmers’ benefit. These
include Rani, Asha and HD-K75 from Assam, Lumsniang from Meghalaya,
Jarshuk from Jharkhand, Mannuthy White from Kerala, TANUV AS KPM
Gold from Tamil Nadu and SVVU T-17 from Andhra Pradesh.
A total of five (5) buffalo breeds are being improved through progeny
testing across 6 states viz. Haryana, Punjab, Rajasthan, Gujarat, UP and
Bihar. The State and Central Animal Husbandry Departments of Government
of India may use the progeny testing semen of cattle and buffalo available
with the ICAR in their development schemes being undertaken across the
country for giving impetus productivity enhancement.
[Ministry of Agriculture & Farmers Welfare O.M. No.7 (5)/2018, dated
29th May, 2018, Department of Agricultural Research and Education]

27
Recommendation (Para No. 6)
The Department has informed that it has undertaken a number of
steps to augment nutritive value of feed and fodder and meet demand for
feed and make quality fodder available to the increasing animal population.
ICAR is utilizing exotic and indigenous genetic resources through breeding
and selection for improving the forage productivity and nutritive value of
different cultivated and pasture species from different agro-climatic regions
in India. Fodder crop improvement is being carried out by involving multi-
disciplinary integrated approach for development of high yielding varieties.
Main fodder crops include cultivated dual purpose cereal/grain crops, annual
legumes, as well as perennial grasses (cultivated/rainfed) and range legumes.
The Committee feel that availability of quality feed and fodder is essential
for improvement of livestock health and productivity. They are of the view
that often huge quantity of vegetables such as potatoes, onions etc. get
wasted in the country for various reasons. The Committee recommend the
Department to carry out research on use of such vegetable wastages for
feed and fodder for livestock.
Regarding use of antibiotics or medicated feed for livestock husbandry,
the Committee were informed that research is being carried out on antibiotic
resistance in livestock and creating awareness among farmers, veterinarians
and students regarding use of antibiotics through joint collaboration with
FAO and CDC sponsored schemes on anti-microbial resistance. Research
on “Medicinal herbs as alternative to antibiotics as growth promoter in
chicken” is being undertaken, value added feed formulations are being
prepared to substitute the antibiotics as growth promoter in rearing of
chicken. Research is also being carried out on exploring alternatives to
antibiotics i.e. probitalics, prebiotics, symbiotics (pre and probiotics in
combination), organic assets, essential oils / herbs in poultry. The Committee
desire the Department to create awareness among stakeholders about
restricted use of antibiotics in poultry because it can have adverse effect
on human health. The Committee recommend the Department to expedite
the research on use of medicinal herbs as an alternative to antibiotics.
Reply of the Government
In order to make use of vegetable waste in animal feeding system,
research on region specific locally available feed ingredients in the

28
north-east region has been carried on Pig centers located in different parts
of the country. Research indicated that Vegetable viz. cabbage, potato,
tapioca, radish, pumpkin can be used as a supplement of pig feed to replace
energy ration 10 to 15%.The use of vegetable kitchen waste available in
rural household has been assessed and the feeding of average quantity of
1.5 kg. dry matter/day can support 1 kg. of milk production. Nutritive
value of pineapple fruit, residues silage is better than maize green fodder
and can be used as an alternate green fodder for ruminants. Work is also
being carried out to improve shelf life of tomato pomace for use of livestock
feed. It is submitted that the work on suggested lines will be further
intensified / up scaled through the institutes with animal component in
particular.
The research work on the alternative to antibiotics by using medicinal
herbs is already being carried out by the Department. Accordingly, an
Outreach Programme on Ethno-Veterinary Medicine, under which herbal
feed additives is being explored to overcome antibiotics residues in poultry.
Research on replacement of Antibiotic Growth Promoter (AGP) with
medicinal herbs, prebiotics, probiotics, symbiotic and organic acids is in
progress. Further, awareness (trainings, workshop and advisory services)
is being created among farmers and entrepreneurs for restricted use of
antibiotics in poultry. A proposal under CAAST has been submitted to
undertake evaluation of some herbiotic and combiotic preparations to be
tested in vitro and in some animal models.
Comments of the Committee
For comments of the Committee please refer to Para No.1.16 of
Chapter-I of this Report.
[Ministry of Agriculture & Farmers Welfare O.M. No.7 (5)/2018, dated
29th May, 2018, Department of Agricultural Research and Education]
Agriculture Extension
Recommendation (Para No. 7)
The Committee note that Agricultural Extension Division has mandate
of dissemination of available agricultural knowledge and technologies to end
users through 11 Agricultural Technology Application Research Institutes,
01 Directorate of Knowledge Management in Agriculture (DKMA) and
Krishi Vigyan Kendras (KVKs). The Committee note that the Division with

29
network of 681 KVKs in the country is carrying out on farm testing of
location specific agricultural technology and frontline demonstration to
demonstrate the production and protection potential of different crops,
livestock, poultry and fisheries. The Committee, however, are concerned to
note that out of the budgetary allocation of Rs.232.51 crore during the year
2017-18, the actual expenditure has only been Rs.165.24 crore. The
Committee note that for the year 2018-19 the budgetary allocation has been
increased only marginally to Rs. 241.81 crore. Explaining the reasons for
the marginal increase in allocation for agriculture extension, the Department
informed that after merging of Plan & non-Plan from 2017-18 onwards the
Salaries, TA, Pension and other administrative expenses have been separated
out and being provided for under the Non-Scheme component. Rs. 232.00
crore for 2017-18 and Rs. 241.81 crore under BE for 2018-19 are provided
for Grant in Aid Capital & Grant in Aid-General only. The new programmes
shall be initiated keeping in view the budgetary allocation. The horizontal
expansion of the activities may have to be re-adjusted in accordance with
the budgetary provisions during the year.
Reply of the Government
Recommendations of the Committee have been noted for compliance.
Department shall initiate/implement/ expansion of activities of agriculture
extension programmes for making available the benefits of new agricultural
technologies to the Farmers within the budgetary allocations. The available
funds shall also be utilized for carrying out the mandated activities and
development of need based infrastructure at KVKs.
[Ministry of Agriculture & Farmers Welfare O.M. No.7 (5)/2018, dated
29th May, 2018, Department of Agricultural Research and Education.]
Recommendation (Para No. 8)
The Committee appreciate the performance of KVKs during the last
three years. The KVKs, as per mandated activities, conducted 97188
On-Farm Trials (OFTs) for assessment and refinement of technologies;
conducted 3.21 lakh Frontline Demonstrations (FLDs); trained 40.9 lakh
farmers including rural youth and farm women; trained 4.48 lakh extension
personnel; benefited 392.54 lakh farmers through various extension activities;
produced 87900 tonnes of seeds, 1252.42 lakh of planting material and
909.04 lakh of livestock strains and fingerlings; tested 13.36 lakh soil

30
samples; and provided mobile agro-advisories on various facets of agriculture
and allied sectors to 395.44 lakh farmers. The Committee, however, note
that the infrastructure of some KVKs are not up to the desired level. The
Committee desire that the infrastructure in all the 681 KVKs of the Country
should be strengthened. There should be a Farmers’ Hostel in each and
every KVK with separate rooms and dormatories where farmers can stay
comfortably during their visit to a KVK. The Committee note that a study
was conducted by the National Institute of Labour Economics Research
and Development (NILERD), an autonomous institute under NITI Aayog to
find out the impact of KVKs on dissemination of improved practices and
technologies, in terms of outreach, knowledge, accessibility etc. The Study
found that on an average each KVK covers 43 villages and 4,300 farmers
about 80% of villages covered by KVK are over 10 km. away from the
KVK and 42% of technologies adopted by farmers resulted in higher
productivity. In view of this the Committee feel that KVKs may be made
a hub of activities to attract not only the farmers but also their families.
Educational fairs, exhibitions etc. may be organized at these KVKs from
time to time to impart knowledge to farmers and their families. Also, KVKs
are an important link between the farmers and ICAR. The communication
at these places should be a two-way process i.e. in addition to dissemination
of available agricultural knowledge and technology to the farmers, the
specialist at KVKs should listen to their problems and communicate the
same to ICAR for carrying out further research.
The Committee feel that the extension schemes such as ATARIs,
KVKs, DKMA, ARYA etc. are highly beneficial means to work as a link
between agricultural research and farmers. The objective, Lab to land,
could only be accomplished by strengthening the outreach programmes.
The Committee note though the existing system of KVKs requires to be
strengthened by augmenting manpower, infrastructure etc. funds for the
same are not being provided adequately. The Committee in their earlier
reports have also been recommending for adequate allocation for extension
schemes. The Committee recommend the Department to take up the matter
of more allocation of funds with the Ministry of Finance. The Committee
also desire that the Department should make all out efforts to spend the
whole amount allocated under this Head.

31
Reply of the Government
In accordance of recommendation of the Committee, the Department
with the available funds for KVKs, supported establishment of Administrative
Building, Farmers’ Hostel, Soil & Water Testing Lab and Soil Testing Kits
have been provided to 534, 470, 436 and 650 KVKs, respectively. The need
based infrastructure including Farmers’ Hostel in rest of the KVKs will be
provided as per the availability of funds during 2018-19 and 2019-20.
The KVKs are regularly organizing different extension education
activities for creating awareness on improved farm technologies and speeding
up large scale diffusion of latest scientific information among farmers
including farm women and rural youth. During 2017-18, a total of 6.07
lakh extension education activities like, exhibitions, exposure visits, farmers’
seminar, kisangoshthi, kisan melas, field days, ex-trainees sammelan, advisory
services, diagnostic and clinic services, method demonstrations, soil-health
camps, soil-test campaigns, etc. were organized by KVKs in the country
by which 144.15 lakh farmers, farm women and rural youth were benefited.
The KVKs obtain the feedback from farmers on various demonstrated
technologies and these feedbacks are forwarded to the ICAR Research
Institutes and Agricultural Universities for further improvement of
technologies and future research.
The recommendation of the Committee for allocation of additional
funds for KVKs has been noted and shall be taken up at the RE stage.
Comments of the Committee
For comments of the Committee please refer to Para No.1.19 of
Chapter-I of this Report.
[Ministry of Agriculture & Farmers Welfare O.M. No.7 (5)/2018, dated
29th May, 2018, Department of Agricultural Research and Education]
Agriculture Education
Recommendation (Para No. 9)
The Committee note that Agriculture Education Division of the
Department strives for maintaining and upgrading quality, relevance and
strengthening of higher agricultural education through partnership with 6
Agricultural Universities, ICAR Deemed-to-be-Universities, Central

32
Agricultural University and Central Universities with Agriculture Faculty by
providing support for student and faculty amenities and for holistic
development of students. Quality assurance in higher agricultural education
is pursued through Accreditation of agricultural universities, their constituent
colleges and programmes.
The Committee note that Agriculture Education Division coordinates
various activities related to education planning, human resource development
and quality reforms. The Committee also note that out of total allocation
i.e Rs. 694.66 crore during 2017-18 for agriculture education, the actual
utilization was Rs. 211.14 crore till 31.12.17. The allocation for the Division
during 2018-19 has been enhanced to Rs. 725. 13 crore as against proposed
allocation of Rs. 731.22 crore by the Department. The Committee have
been informed that under-utilization of funds has been mainly due to the
approval of the SFC/EFCs of the schemes which have made mostly in the
latter half of the financial year and CCEA note of the scheme is yet to be
approved by the Government. Hence, funds allotted for non-recurring items
(works and equipments) could not be utilized. As soon CCEA note is
approved, efforts will be made to expend the remaining amount. While
appreciating the enhancement in allocation for agriculture education, the
Committee are of the considered view that the Department can justify its
demand for additional resources only when it is able to first utilize the entire
resources allocated to it. The Committee, therefore, recommend that the
Department must make sincere efforts to utilize the allocated funds by way
of meticulous planning, timely implementation and stricter monitoring of
schemes/projects. As informed by DARE, four Institutes namely, Indian
Agricultural Research Institute, Indian Veterinary Institute, National Dairy
Research Institute (NDRI) and Central Institute of Fisheries Education
under ICAR, have been bestowed with Deemed-to-be University status.
The Committee also recommend the Department to make efforts for expansion
of NDRI as to strengthen its R&D capacity along with up gradation of its
institutes viz. NAARM, Hyderabad etc to Deemed-to-be University status.
The Committee desire to be apprised of the outcome of report of external
independent committees constituted to review the utilization of grants in
XII Plan.
Reply of the Government
The recommendation of the Committee to make sincere efforts to

33
utilize the allocated funds by way of meticulous planning, timely
implementation and stricter monitoring of schemes/projects has been noted
for compliance. Accordingly, ICAR made all efforts to utilize the budget
allotted at the RE 2017-18 and was able to utilize about 92.12% of its
allocation with strategic and meticulous planning towards the end of the FY
2017-18. As per the recommendation of the Committee, the funds utilization
efficiency, planning and monitoring of schemes projects will be further
accelerated at various levels.
The NAARM is the only unique institution in the National Agricultural
Research and Education System (NARES) for providing capacity building,
training programs and strategic planning for better implementation of policy
decisions. Over the years, the mandate of NAARM has expanded
tremendously including activities of approximately 75 state agri-related
universities, off-campus training programs, PGDMA education programs
and NAARM is the hub of entrepreneurship/agri-start up incubations.
NAARM with its 62 faculty strength and world class infrastructure facilities
conducts national level academic and education programs. Department is
taking all necessary steps to strengthen the R&D capacity of NAARM.
Two external committees were constituted for review of ICAR and its
outcome during 12th Plan. The first committee under the Chairmanship of
Dr. T. Ramasami, constituted for External Peer Review has submitted its
report and the recommendations are under examination. Another committee
was constituted under the Chairmanship of Dr. Deepak Pental to review
research and other outcomes of schemes. The committee has made
deliberations and the 2nd meeting was convened on 3rdApril, 2018. The
committee is likely to submit the report shortly.
[Ministry of Agriculture & Farmers Welfare O.M. No.7 (5)/2018, dated
29th May, 2018, Department of Agricultural Research and Education]
Agricultural Engineering
Recommendation (Para No. 11)
The Committee note that Agricultural Engineering Division is involved
in development and demonstration of technologies related to mechanization
of production and post-production agriculture using conventional and non-
conventional energy sources and includes mechanization of irrigation and

34
drainage activities; post-harvest and value addition of agricultural products
and by products. During 2017-18, division developed 55 Technologies/
equipment/machines, 16 products and 07 process protocols for farm
mechanization, post-harvest processing and value addition. A total of 7610
different designs of prototypes were manufactured and supplied to different
stakeholders. The Committee note that agriculture engineering being the
backbone of agriculture sector a lot needs to be done in this field. The
Committee are not happy with the financial performance of this area. Out
of the allocated funds of Rs.42.6 crore during 2017-18 actual expenditure
has only been Rs.26.46 crore. Now, Rs.100 crore have been allocated for
the year 2018-19. The Committee recommend that the Department should
strive to utilize this huge amount during the year 2018-19 through meticulous
planning and monitoring.
The Committee note that Agricultural Engineering research is devoted
to agricultural mechanization leading to enhancing agricultural productivity,
identifying the mechanization gaps and future needs of improved farm
equipment and machinery for different agro-climatic regions, crops and
operations, reducing drudgery of agricultural workers and conducting
research and development, prototype production, feasibility testing, frontline
demonstration and promoting custom hiring of farm equipment and
machinery to bridge identified mechanization gaps and creating employment
opportunities in the rural sector.
The Committee observe that most of the farmers in the country are
small and marginal farmers with small land holdings. The development of
small, effective and economical agricultural implements are sine qua non
for development small and marginal farmers in the country. The mission of
the government to double the farmers’ income can only be achieved through
mechanization of agriculture with emphasis on mechanization of small
holdings. The low cost input in mechanization would help the farmers in
increasing the productivity and raising their income. The Committee,
therefore, recommend the Department to develop small and economical
machinery keeping in mind the need of small and marginal farmers. The
Committee also note that Custom Hiring Centers for farm implements and
equipments have been helpful in mechanization of agriculture. The Centers
not only create employment opportunities for rural youth but also provide
the farmers implements and equipments at low cost. The Committee

35
recommend that the rural youth from all over the country be involved to
promote Custom Hiring Centers and training be imparted to custom hiring
entrepreneurs so as to ensure maximum expansion of these centers
Reply of the Government
The Department is putting all efforts to utilize the allocated funds,
during 2017-18 98.88% of allocated (Rs 42.6 Corers) funds were utilized
(Rs 41.99 Crores). Similarly, sincere efforts are being made in utilizing
allocated funds of Rs 100 Crores during 2018-19.
On the lines of the recommendations of the Committee, Department
is working to develop small and economical machinery keeping in mind the
need of small and marginal farmers, also on farm implements and equipments
for Custom Hiring Centers to help in mechanization of agriculture.
Accordingly, Department is developing manually and bullock operated
implements and machines, small and economical renewable energy gadgets
considering the need of small and marginal farmers. For tractor and power
operated machines also, the economization of machines is kept in view.
Department is also developing farm implements suitable for small and
marginal farmers on individual ownership basis and high capacity equipment
to be used through custom hiring services. Ten centers have R&D and
eight centers have Prototype Manufacturing Workshop activities. Seventy-
seven proven designs of farm implements for different unit operations were
developed and are being promoted among small and marginal farmers.
Department has already developed several improved animals drawn
implements, jute related equipment with special emphasis on marginal farmer,
small gadgets/tools especially suitable for small and marginal farmers and
women friendly,
Department is conducting of entrepreneurship development programmes
which lead to setting up of enterprises based on agricultural engineering
technologies. Custom hiring of agricultural machinery as an enterprise is
one such flagship programme. The programme, conducted in collaboration
with Directorate of Agricultural Engineering, Govt. of Madhya Pradesh has
helped in establishment of about 1000 custom hiring centers across Madhya
Pradesh State. Setting up of these centers has multifaceted benefits, that
entrepreneurs use these machines for own farms as well as earn annual
income of about Rs. 3 to 4 lakhs, the small farmers get required machinery

36
at required time at an affordable cost, with enhanced mechanization,
productivity is increased and cost of production is reduced, employment
for 2-3 persons is generated per custom hiring centre. Entrepreneurs are
mandatorily trained prior to setting up of their custom hiring centers to
entrepreneurs in running custom hiring centers professionally and profitably.
Department continues subsequent technical advices and support to these
entrepreneurs. Further, farmers of different states are continuously being
trained on operation, adjustments and repair/ maintenance of farm machines.
About 2500 farmers from different states of India have been trained during
last two years.
[Ministry of Agriculture & Farmers Welfare O.M. No.7 (5)/2018, dated
29th May, 2018, Department of Agricultural Research and Education]
Doubling Farmers Income by 2022
Recommendation (Para No. 12)
The Committee note that the Government has indicated a change in
policy stance from excessive emphasis on food production towards improving
farmers’ income, and has set a target of doubling it by 2022. The emphasis
is on generating higher income for farmers. The Committee are aware of
the fact that doubling of farmers income within time frame is a mammoth
task and it would require concerted, coordinated and committed approach.
The Department informed that it is actively participating with Government’s
national mission of doubling the farmers’ income in collaboration with
sister departments through technological, skill development, propagation of
critical inputs and various service interventions to increase farm level
production and productivity. In order to facilitate the farmers for enhanced
income generation, DARE/ICAR has undertaken a number of steps. 1.65
lakh Soil Health Cards have been issued to the farmers, 4.69 lakh extension
programmes have been organized, involving 198.67 lakh participants for
creating awareness among farmers about all the efforts being made to
improve the condition of rural India. A new initiative “Pandit Deen Dayal
Upadhyay Unnat Krishi Shiksha Yojana” to train farmers in organic and
sustainable farming has been launched. Krishi Vigyan Kendra (KVKs) play
important role in frontline extension system in the country for technology
assessment, demonstration and capacity building under different farming
situations across the country and to realize Digital India vision in agriculture

37
sector, the farmers now have access to web-based ‘KVK Portal and KVK
App,’ mobile based ‘Kisan Mobile Advisory -KMA’ SMS portal, ‘toll free
help lines’, ICAR data Centre and mobile apps for different commodities.
Further during the course of evidence the Committee were informed that
in addition to above, in order to further boost the efforts towards doubling
farmers’ income by 2022, the ICAR has also constituted the State Level
Committees. The Vice-chancellor of one of the Agricultural Universities in
the State is the Chairman and one of the Directors of ICAR Institutes /
ATARIs, is the convener of the Committee. All the other Vice-Chancellors
and the ICAR Directors, Director of ATARI of the concerned region, one
nominee of DAC&FW, DAHDF, Ministry of Food Processing Industries
and Ministry of Water Resources as well as the senior representatives of
the concerned State Department of Agriculture are the members of the
Committee. The Committee hope that these efforts will help the Government
to a great extent in achieving these ambitious plan of doubling the farmers’
income by 2022.
The Committee feel that technological advancement along with
dissemination of knowledge would help in raising the income of farmers.
It is a known fact that almost 85% of the farmers in the country are small
and marginal farmers, who have small land holdings. And to raise the
income of such farmers is a big challenge. The Committee recommend the
Department to find ways for making agriculture remunerative to these
small and marginal farmers so that they can get more profit with lesser
investment. The Committee also recommend the Department to help the
farmers in increasing production, ensuring quality, providing sustainability
through creating awareness about diversification of crops, new technology,
integrated farming system and agro forestry etc.
Reply of the Government
The recommendations regarding ‘Doubling of Farmers’ Income by
2022' have been laid out in the document focusing on technological
advancements, information dissemination and extension led approaches to
double the farmers’ income by 2022. Department produced a Policy Paper
on Strategy for Doubling Income of Farmers in India, which entails on
various sources of income growth broadly under four categories viz.
technology and cropping system related, post-harvest management and
value addition; marketing and price related and non-farm income sources.

38
Besides, the ICAR has undertaken a number of Sect oral and geographical
case studies to facilitate designing of appropriate policies for enhancing the
incomes.
ICAR conducted several programmes for making agriculture
remunerative for small and marginal farmers for getting more profit with
less investment. In this direction, ICAR organized National level programme
on ‘Let’s Listen to Farmers’ by involving farmers from 24 states and
received suggestions/feedback of the farmers for technology needs in their
respective states/ecosystems. Also organized national programs for farmers
for interaction, training and capacity building so that advantages of several
national programmes of Government of India such as Soil Health programme,
Fasal Bhima Yojana, Krishi Sinchayi Yojana, Climate adaptation, e-NAM,
etc. can be harnessed by the farmers in improving productivity and
profitability of agri-produce, thereby increasing the income.
Department through its network of 681 Krishi Vigyan Kendras ismaking
all efforts to help the farmers by creating awareness through field
demonstration and Kisan melas about diversification of crops, new
technology, integrated farming system and agro forestry, and through supply
of quality seed/ animals and planting materials. Advisories are also being
provided to farmers in increasing production, ensuring quality and
sustainability of resources. One of the successful farming system
demonstrated in IARI as a show window to the farmers across the country,
has been established for both irrigated and rain fed agro-ecosystems, which
will be replicated in other Institutes also and it is being popularized among
the farmers in different states.
In order to increase income of farmers engaged in horticulture crops
and vegetables production, department conducted research on standardization
of Integrated Cropping/Farming System models to enhance the total system
productivity and technologies such as coconut based multi-storey cropping
system integrating spices, coffee, banana, pine apple etc. Coconut based
cropping system, areca nut based cropping system, horti-silvi-pastoral system
for semi-arid regions, integration of seed spices in fruit crops, integration
of vegetables in seed spices were developed and successfully demonstrated.

39
The Department developed precision equipments for conservation
agriculture and organized training programmes for the farmers, farm women,
rural youths and other stakeholders to build capacity to increase production
and productivity and improve quality. Various awareness programmes are
also conducted to get those exposed to new technologies, crop rotation,
diversification of crops, agro-forestry and integrated farming, so that their
farming is sustainable and provide more income with lesser investment.
Awareness among the farmers has been created on adoption of low cost
protected cultivation technologies for quality nursery raising, off season
production of leafy vegetables and educated on low cost micro irrigation
systems for horticulture as well as field crops. Department is also promoting
multi-crop and multi-unit operations, improved equipment and technologies
for precise use of inputs with timeliness, processing and value addition of
major crops in reducing postharvest losses, which will ultimately help the
farmers to increase their farm output and income.
[Ministry of Agriculture & Farmers Welfare O.M. No.7 (5)/2018, dated
29th May, 2018, Department of Agricultural Research and Education]

40
CHAPTER III
OBSERV A TIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE
DO NOT DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE
GOVERNMENT’S ACTION TAKEN REPLY
Mainstreaming of Women in Agriculture
Recommendation (Para No. 13)
The Committee note that with the changing dynamics of agriculture
in the country the role of women farmers will be the key to improve
agriculture productivity. As has been highlighted in Economic Survey
(2017-18) with growing rural to urban migration of men, there is feminization
of agriculture sector with increasing number of women in multiple role as
cultivators, entrepreneurs and laborers. However, the differential access of
women to resources like land, credit, water, seeds and markets needs to
be addressed. Towards this, Government has been implementing various
schemes which will help improve the entitlements of women farmers and
prove to be advantageous in bridging the existing policy gaps in the sector.
The Committee have been apprised of the steps undertaken viz. training,
skill development etc. by ICAR for empowering women in agriculture for
their economic betterment and livelihood security. The Committee observe
that ICAR-Central Institute for Women in Agriculture (ICAR-CIWA), a
prime research institute, has the mandate of carrying out research exclusively
on gender issues in agriculture. The Department informed the Committee
that in view of the importance of development of women farmers, it has
been made mandatory to have one Subject Matter Specialist of Home
Science in every KVK who is responsible for coordinating and organizing
different activities related to farm women including livestock rearing,
processing & value addition of produces, drudgery reducing interventions,
nutria-farming and their empowerment through entrepreneurship development,
organic farming and sustainable farming and is a step towards food quality
and safety. The Committee recommend that the Department should orient
their research towards the specific needs of farm women. For this purpose
user-friendly farm implements may be developed.

41
The Committee note that the Department has taken various initiatives
like ARYA, Mera Gaon- Mera Gaurav, Pandit Deen Dayal Upadhyay Unnat
Krishi Shiksha Yojana to increase interface between farmers and scientist.
The ARYA project was implemented to empower the Youth in Rural Areas
to take up various Agri-enterprises in Agriculture, allied and service sector
for sustainable income and gainful employment. The project is running in
25 districts of 25 States through KVKs. With the target of 5000 youths,
the project has been started. Under this initiative, a total of 3879 rural youth
have been trained and 930 different enterprise units related to agriculture
and allied sector have been established benefitting 2467 rural youth in the
selected districts. Mera Gaon- Mera Gaurav programme has been initiated
to effectively promote direct interface of scientists of ICAR Institutes and
State Agricultural Universities with the farmers to hasten the lab to land
process. For this, a group of four scientists each is adopting 5 villages. The
project is intended to connect with 25,000 villages. At present, agricultural
scientists have started providing information on newer technologies to the
farmers in 13,500 villages. Pt. Deen Dayal Upadhyay Unnat Krishi Shiksha
Yojna scheme was started in 2016 with a budget of Rs.534.925 lakhs under
Unnat Bharat Abhiyan. 100 training centers have been started under this
scheme in various states. 150 trainings have been conducted by different
centers and more than 4500 farmers were trained in Organic Farming/
Natural Farming/Cow Based Economy etc. The scheme is envisaged to
bring changes in rural economy, create awareness of environmental issues,
eg. soil health, sustainability and productivity. It will help to rejuvenate the
tradition of natural farming. The Committee recommend that under all these
initiatives specific targets be fixed for training women farmers so that the
benefit of these initiatives can also be reaped by them.
Reply of the Government
Department is operating a Central Institute for Women in Agriculture
(CIWA), Bhubaneswar, which is undertaking research on issues affecting
women and improving the livelihood opportunities of women in agriculture.
It is also focusing on participatory action research in different technology
based thematic areas involving farm women to test suitability of farm
technologies for them and suggest refinement. The institute is also working
to catalyze and facilitate research and development institutions to bring
farm women perspectives in their research and development programmes.

42
For gender mainstreaming and empowering women in agriculture, CIWA is
implementing various research projects with mandates of (i) Research on
gender issues in agriculture and allied fields, (ii) Gender-equitable agricultural
policies/programs and (iii) gender-sensitive agricultural-sector responses,
(iv) Coordinate research on Home Science. Training and awareness programs
such as Women centric ICTs and Women Entrepreneurship Development
and skill development for SHGs including farm women at adopted villages
are being organized.
Another institute which is at the forefront to develop women friendly
equipment and tools is Central Institute of Agricultural Engineering (CIAE),
Bhopal along with a couple of All India Co-ordinated Research Projects on
Farm Implements and Machinery and Ergonomics and Safety in Agriculture
which are also involved in such Endeavour. More than 43 women friendly
equipments/tools have recently been developed and efforts are being made
to commercialize them to ensure their easy availability to the women farmers.
The centers of these schemes are also working towards making workplace
of tractors, combines etc. women friendly so that woman workers can
operate these equipments.
[Ministry of Agriculture & Farmers Welfare O.M. No.7 (5)/2018, dated
29th May, 2018, Department of Agricultural Research and Education]

43
CHAPTER IV
OBSERV ATIONS/RECOMMENDA TIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH
REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT  BEEN
ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE
National Agricultural Higher Education Project
Recommendation (Para No. 10)
The Committee have been informed that a new programme National
Agricultural Higher Education Project (NAHEP) has been launched. The
objective of the Project is to support Participating Agricultural Universities
and ICAR in providing more relevant and higher quality education to
Agricultural University students. The challenges faced by AUs mirror those
faced in general by higher education in India. The needs of the agricultural
sector resonate with other sectors, i.e. highly trained workforce and relevant
cutting-edge research. The current ICAR-Agricultural Universities (AU)
System reform agenda requires global knowledge and international expertise
to refine its approach and implementation. For this reason, ICAR has
requested World Bank support as a knowledge adjunct to the proposed
NAHEP. The Project supports the Country Partnership Strategy and addresses
the three engagement areas of integration, transformation and inclusion.
These engagement areas foresee increased agricultural productivity and
support quality improvements of higher education to create a more skilled
workforce that continuously improves the productivity of key sectors,
including agriculture. The proposed Project is also a multi-Global Practice
collaboration (Agriculture and Education) and is expected to support activities
and results directly related to cross-cutting strategic areas of climate change,
jobs and gender. The Committee have been informed that there was no
separate allocation of fund during 2017-18 at BE/RE stage, however
Rs 5.0 crore was marked from the Budget of Education division at BE
Stage. So far the said amount has not been utilized. The Committee note
that Rs. 7.89 crore has been provided for NAHEP for 2018-19 at BE stage.
The Committee are not happy with the non-utilization of funds. The
Committee advise the Department to be more prudent in future. The

44
Committee are aware of the fact that ICAR through its institutes and rich
human resource have immensely contributed to the growth and development
of agriculture in the country but a lot remains to be done. The Committee
hope that the project would contribute in strengthening and development of
agricultural higher education in the country.
Reply of the Government
The NAHEP is at the preliminary stage of its operation. Efforts are
being made to make program fully functional by creating the need based
infrastructure and manpower. Despite all the constraints, the project has
made some headway by utilizing an allocation of Rs. 28.00 1akhs during
the current FY 2017-18 for taking up various activities under the project.
All efforts will be made to ensure maximum utilization of allocation earmarked
in the BE 2018-19 through strategic planning and participation of all
stakeholders to ensure that the targets set for the year are fully achieved
without any shortfall.
Comments of the Committee
For comments of the Committee please refer to Para No. 1.22 of
Chapter-I of this Report.
[Ministry of Agriculture & Farmers Welfare O.M. No.7 (5)/2018, dated
29th May, 2018, Department of Agricultural Research and Education]

45
CHAPTER V
OBSERV ATIONS/RECOMMENDA TIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH
FINAL REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT ARE STILL AWAITED
Agriculture Education
Recommendation (Para No. 9)
The Committee note that Agriculture Education Division of the
Department strives for maintaining and upgrading quality, relevance and
strengthening of higher agricultural education through partnership with
6 Agricultural Universities, ICAR Deemed-to-be Universities, Central
Agricultural University and Central Universities with Agriculture Faculty by
providing support for student and faculty amenities and for holistic
development of students. Quality assurance in higher agricultural education
is pursued through Accreditation of agricultural universities, their constituent
colleges and programmes.
The Committee note that Agriculture Education Division coordinates
various activities related to education planning, human resource development
and quality reforms. The Committee also note that out of total allocation
i.e Rs. 694.66 crore during 2017-18 for agriculture education, the actual
utilization was Rs. 211.14 crore till 31.12.17. The allocation for the Division
during 2018-19 has been enhanced to Rs. 725. 13 crore as against proposed
allocation of Rs. 731.22 crore by the Department. The Committee have
been informed that under-utilization of funds has been mainly due to the
approval of the SFC/EFCs of the schemes which have made mostly in the
latter half of the financial year and CCEA note of the scheme is yet to be
approved by the Government. Hence, funds allotted for non-recurring items
(works and equipments) could not be utilized. As soon CCEA note is
approved, efforts will be made to expend the remaining amount. While
appreciating the enhancement in allocation for agriculture education, the
Committee are of the considered view that the Department can justify its
demand for additional resources only when it is able to first utilize the entire
resources allocated to it. The Committee, therefore, recommend that the
Department must make sincere efforts to utilize the allocated funds by way

46
of meticulous planning, timely implementation and stricter monitoring of
schemes/projects. As informed by DARE, four Institutes namely, Indian
Agricultural Research Institute, Indian Veterinary Institute, National Dairy
Research Institute (NDRI) and Central Institute of Fisheries Education
under ICAR, have been bestowed with Deemed-to-be University status.
The Committee also recommend the Department to make efforts for expansion
of NDRI as to strengthen its R&D capacity along with up gradation of its
institutes viz. NAARM, Hyderabad etc. to Deemed-to-be University status.
The Committee desire to be apprised of the outcome of report of external
independent committees constituted to review the utilization of grants in
12th Plan.
Reply of the Government
The recommendation of the Committee to make sincere efforts to
utilize the allocated funds by way of meticulous planning, timely
implementation and stricter monitoring of schemes/projects has been noted
for compliance. Accordingly, ICAR made all efforts to utilize the budget
allotted at the RE 2017-18 and was able to utilize about 92.12% of its
allocation with strategic and meticulous planning towards the end of the
FY 2017-18. As per the recommendation of the Committee, the funds
utilization efficiency, planning and monitoring of schemes projects will be
further accelerated at various levels.
The NAARM is the only unique institution in the National Agricultural
Research and Education System (NARES) for providing capacity building,
training programs and strategic planning for better implementation of policy
decisions. Over the years, the mandate of NAARM has expanded
tremendously including activities of approximately 75 state agri-related
universities, off-campus training programs, PGDMA education programs
and NAARM is the hub of entrepreneurship/agri-start up incubations.
NAARM with its 62 faculty strength and world class infrastructure facilities
conducts national level academic and education programs. Department is
taking all necessary steps to strengthen the R&D capacity of NAARM.
Two external committees were constituted for review of ICAR and its
outcome during 12th Plan. The first committee under the Chairmanship of
Dr. T. Ramasami, constituted for External Peer Review has submitted its
report and the recommendations are under examination. Another committee

47
was constituted under the Chairmanship of Dr. Deepak Pental to review
research and other outcomes of schemes. The committee has made
deliberations and the 2nd meeting was convened on 3rd April, 2018. The
committee is likely to submit the report shortly.
[Ministry of Agriculture & Farmers Welfare O.M No.7 (5)/2018, dated
29th May, 2018, Department of Agricultural Research and Education]
  N
EW D ELHI; HUKMDEV NARAYAN YADA V ,
02 August, 2018 Chairperson,
11 Shravana,1940 (Saka) Standing Committee on Agriculture.

48
APPENDIX I
STANDING COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE (2017-18)
MINUTES OF THE TWENTY-SEVENTH SITTING
OF THE COMMITTEE
The Committee sat on Tuesday, the 31st July, 2018 from 1500 hrs.
to 1635 hrs. in the Committee Room “B”, Ground Floor, Parliament House
Annexe, New Delhi.
PRESENT
Shri Hukmdev Narayan Yadav — Chairperson
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Sanjay Dhotre
3. Prof. Ravindra Vishwanath Gaikwad
4. Shri Nalin Kumar Kateel
5. Smt. Raksha Nikhil Khadse
6. Md. Badaruddoza Khan
7. Shri C. Mahendran
8. Dr. Tapas Mandal
9. Shri Nityanand Rai
10. Shri Mukesh Rajput
11. Shri Virendra Singh
12. Shri Dharmendra Yadav
13. Shri Jai Prakash Narayan Yadav
Rajya Sabha
14. Shri Rajmani Patel
15. Shri Kailash Soni
16. Shri Harnath Singh Yadav

49
SECRETARIA T
1. Shri D.S. Malha — Joint Secretary
2. Shri Arun K. Kaushik — Director
3. Smt. Juby Amar — Additional Director
4. Shri Sumesh Kumar — Under Secretary
*2. ***      *** *** ***
*3. ***      *** *** ***
[The Witnesses Withdrew]
4. Thereafter, the Committee took up for consideration the following
draft Reports:
*(i) ***      *** *** ***
*(ii) ***      *** *** ***
*(iii) ***      *** *** ***
*(iv) ***      *** *** ***
*(v) ***      *** *** ***
(vi) Draft Report on the Action Taken by the Government on the
Observations/Recommendations contained in the 48th Report
(16th Lok Sabha) of the Standing Committee on Agriculture
(2017-18) on ‘Demands for Grants (2018-19)’ of the Ministry
of Agriculture and Farmers Welfare (Department of Agricultural
Research and Education).
5. After some deliberations, the Committee adopted the draft Reports
without any modifications and authorized the Chairperson to finalize and
present these Reports to Parliament after getting them factually verified
from the concerned Departments/Ministries.
*6. ***      *** *** ***
The Committee then adjourned.
(A copy of the verbatim proceedings of the Sitting
has been kept separately).
***Matter not related to this Report.

50
APPENDIX II
(Vide Para 4 of Introduction of the Report)
ANALYSIS OF ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE
FORTY EIGHTH REPORT (16TH LOK SABHA) OF THE
STANDING COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE
(2017-18)
(i) Total number of Recommendations: 13
(ii) Recommendations/Observations which have been accepted by the
Government:
Recommendation Nos. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 11 and 12
Total 10
Percentage 76.92%
(iii) Recommendations/Observations which the Committee do not desire
to pursue in view of the Government’s replies:
Recommendation No. 13
Total 1
Percentage 7.69%
(iv) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies of the
Government have not been accepted by the Committee:
Recommendation No. 10
Total 1
Percentage 7.69%
(v) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which Final replies of
the Government are still awaited:
Recommendation No. 9
Total 1
Percentage 7.69%

"All Parliamentary Publications including DRSC Reports are available on
sale at the Sales Counter, Reception, Parliament House (T el. Nos. 23034726,
23034495, 23034496), Agents appointed
by Lok Sabha Secretariat and Publications Division, Ministry
of Information and Broadcasting, CGO Complex, Lodhi Road,
New Delhi (Tel. Nos. 24367260, 24365610) and their outlets. The said
information is available on website ‘www.parliamentofindia.nic.in’.
The Souvenir items with logo of Parliament are also available
at Sales Counter, Reception, Parliament House, New Delhi.
The Souvenir items with Parliament Museum logo are available for sale
at Souvenir Shop (T el. No. 23035323), Parliament Museum, Parliament
Library Building, New Delhi. List of these items are available on the website
mentioned above."