COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE
(2014-2015)
SIXTEENTH LOK SABHA
MINISTRY OF AGRICULTURE
(DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE
AND CO-OPERATION)
‘PRICING OF AGRICULTURAL PRODUCE’
[Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations contained in the
Sixtieth Report (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) of the Committee on Agriculture (2013-2014)]
TWELFTH REPORT
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
April, 2015/Vaisakha, 1937 (Saka)
12


TWELFTH REPORT
COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE
(2014-2015)
(SIXTEENTH LOK SABHA)
MINISTRY OF AGRICULTURE
(DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE AND
CO-OPERATION)
‘PRICING OF AGRICULTURAL PRODUCE’
[Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations
contained in the Sixtieth Report (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) of the
Committee on Agriculture (2013-2014)]
Presented to Lok Sabha on 29.04.2015
Laid on the Table of  Rajya Sabha on 29.04.2015
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
April, 2015/Vaisakha, 1937 (Saka)

C.O.A. No. 319
Price : Rs. 42.00
© 2015 B Y L OK S ABHA S ECRETARIAT
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of
Business in Lok Sabha (Fifteenth Edition) and Printed by National Printers,
New Delhi-110 028.

(i)
CONTENTS
PAGE
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE ............................................................. (iii)
INTRODUCTION ........................................................................................... (v)
CHAPTER I Report ............................................................................... 1
CHAPTER II Observations/Recommendations which have been
accepted by the Government ........................................ 11
CHAPTER III Observations/Recommendations which the
Committee do not desire to pursue in view of the
Government’s replies ..................................................... 23
CHAPTER IV Observations/Recommendations in respect of which
replies of the Government have not been accepted
by the Committee ........................................................... 24
C
HAPTER V Observations/Recommendations in respect of which
final replies of the Government are still awaited ...... 30
ANNEXURE
Minutes of the 22nd Sitting of the Committee held
on 15.04.2014 ................................................................... 34
APPENDIX
Analysis of Action Taken by the Government on the
Recommendations contained in the Sixtieth
Report (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) of the Committee on
Agriculture (2013-2014) ................................................ 36

(iii)
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE
(2014-2015)
Shri Hukm Deo Narayan Yadav — Chairperson
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Sanganna Amarappa
3. Prof. Ravindra Vishwanath Gaikwad
4. Shri Nalin Kumar Kateel
5. Md. Badaruddoza Khan
6. Shri C. Mahendran
7. Dr. Tapas Mandal
8. Shri Janardan Mishra
9. Shri Ajay Nishad
10. Shri Dalpat Singh Paraste
11. Shri Nityanand Rai
12. Shri Mukesh Rajput
13. Shri Konakalla Narayana Rao
14. Shri C.L. Ruala
15. Shri Arjun Charan Sethi
16. Shri Satyapal Singh
17. Shri Virendra Singh
18. Shri Kadiyam Srihari
19. Shri Jai Prakash Narayan Yadav
20. Shri Dharmendra Yadav
21. Shri B.S. Yeddyurappa

(iv)
Rajya Sabha
22. Shri A.W. Rabi Bernard
23. Shrimati Renuka Chowdhury
24. Sardar Sukhdev Singh Dhindsa
25. Shri Janardan Dwivedi
26. Shri Vinay Katiyar
27. Shri Mohd. Ali Khan
28. Shri Rajpal Singh Saini
29. Shri Ram Nath Thakur
30. Shri Shankarbhai N. Vegad
31. Shri Darshan Singh Yadav
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Shri Abhijit Kumar — Joint Secretary
2. Smt. Abha Singh Yaduvanshi — Director
3. Shri C. Vanlalruata — Deputy Secretary
4. Shri Deepak Kumar — Executive Assistant

(v)
INTRODUCTION
I, the Chairperson, Committee on Agriculture (2014-15), having
been authorized by the Committee to submit the Report on their behalf,
present this Twelfth Report on action taken by the Government on the
Observations/Recommendations contained in the Sixtieth Report (Fifteenth
Lok Sabha) of the Committee on Agriculture (2013-14) on ‘Pricing of
Agricultural Produce’ pertaining to the Ministry of Agriculture
(Department of Agriculture and Cooperation).
2. The Sixtieth Report (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) of the Committee on
Agriculture (2013-14) on ‘Pricing of Agricultural Produce’ of the Ministry
of Agriculture (Department of Agriculture and Cooperation) which was
presented to the Hon’ble Speaker on 15 March, 2014 and Lok Sabha on
10 June, 2014 by the Secretary General under Direction 71A(6) of the
Directions by Speaker, Lok Sabha and laid on the Table of Rajya Sabha
on 11 June, 2014. The Action Taken Notes on the Report were received
on 13 May, 2014.
3. The Report was considered and adopted by the Committee at
their Sitting held on 15.04.2015.
4. An analysis of the action taken by the Government on the
Observations/Recommendations contained in the Sixtieth Report (Fifteenth
Lok Sabha) of the Committee is given in Appendix.
N
EW DELHI; HUKM DEO NARAYAN YADAV,
21 April, 2015 Chairperson,
01 Vaisakha, 1937 (Saka) Committee on Agriculture.

CHAPTER I
REPORT
This Report of the Committee on Agriculture deals with the action
taken by the Government on the recommendations contained in the
Sixtieth Report of the Committee on Agriculture (2013-14) on ‘Pricing of
Agricultural Produce’ of the Ministry of Agriculture (Department of
Agriculture and Cooperation) was presented to Hon’ble Speaker on
15 March, 2014, subsequently in accordance with Direction 71(A)(6) of
the Directions by the Speaker, Lok Sabha, the Report was laid on the
table of the Lok Sabha on 10 June, 2014 and on the Table of Rajya Sabha
on 11 June, 2014.
1.2 The Ministry of Agriculture (Department of Agriculture and
Cooperation) have furnished Action Taken Replies in respect of all the
15 Observations/Recommendations contained in the Report. These have
been categorized as under:—
(i) Observations/Recommendations that have been accepted by
the Government:
Recommendation Para Nos. 3, 8, 9, 10, 11, 13, 14, 15
(Total : 08)
(Chapter-II)
(ii) Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not
desire to pursue in view of the Government’s reply:
Recommendation Para No. NIL
(Total : NIL)
(Chapter-III)
(iii) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which action
taken replies of the Government have not been accepted by
the Committee:
Recommendation Para Nos. 1, 2, 6, 7
(Total : 04)
(Chapter-IV)

2
(iv) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which final
replies of the Government are still awaited:
Recommendation Para Nos. 4, 5, 12
(Total : 03)
(Chapter-V)
1.3 The Committee trust that utmost importance would be given
to implementation of the Observations/Recommendations accepted by
the Government. In cases, where it is not possible for the Department
to implement the Recommendations in letter and spirit for any
reason, the matter should be reported to the Committee with reasons
for non-implementation. The Committee desire that further Action
Taken Note on the Observations/Recommendations contained in
Chapter-I and Final Action Taken Replies to the Recommendations
contained in Chapter-V of this Report be furnished to them within a
period of three months.
1.4 The Committee will now deal with the action taken by the
Government on some of the Recommendations in the succeeding
paragraphs.
Moving Towards Remunerative Pricing Mechanism
Recommendation (Para No. 1)
1.5 Minimum Support Price (MSP) fixed by the  Government  acts
as the floor price of an agricultural commodity and safeguards the interests
of farmers. Presently, 24 crops are covered under MSP and only one crop
viz. sugarcane is covered under Fair and Remunerative Price (FRP)
mechanism. The Committee have been informed that no specific profit
margin over cost of production is considered by the CACP . Since
agriculture is becoming unremunerative particularly for small and
marginal farmers due to variety of reasons, the Committee feel that the
Government should move towards remunerative pricing mechanism for
all the 24 crops. The Committee do not agree with the view of DAC
that prescribing an increase of 50% on cost of production as
recommended by the National Commission on Farmers headed by
Prof. M.S. Swaminathan may distort the market. What is paramount
is the lively-hood of farmers. Distortion, if any, in market on account
of remunerative pricing of agricultural produce must be suitably
addressed. The Committee urge that steps should be taken to fix

3
remunerative pricing with 50% profit margin over cost of production,
for all the 24 crops without any further delay as already recommended
by this Committee in their Forty-first Report (14th Lok Sabha) in the year
2007-08.
1.6 The Department in the Action Taken Note have stated that
Minimum Support Prices (MSPs) are fixed by the Government on the
recommendations of Commission for Agricultural Costs and Price
(CACP) which considers a number of important factors while
recommending MSPs, the views of State Governments and Central
Ministries as well as such other relevant factors which are considered
important for fixation of support prices. MSP fixed by the Government
is in the nature of minimum guaranteed price offered by the
Government. In case the market offers higher price than the MSP , the
farmers are free to sell at that higher price. As of now, the Commission
for Agricultural Costs and Prices (CACP) recommends MSP of
22 commodities, besides recommending Fair and Remunerative Price
(FRP) of sugarcane. While recommending MSP/FRP , various factors
including demand and supply; cost of production; price trends in the
market, both domestic and international; inter-crop price parity; terms
of trade between agriculture and non-agriculture; and likely
implications of MSP on consumers of that product are kept in view.
It may be pertinent to point out that MSP is a pricing policy and
should not be the main instrument of achieving the objective of equity/
income. CACP , which is an independent body of experts considers,
among other factors, the costs of production of various crops for all
the major producing States, as collected by different State Agricultural/
General Universities/Institutions under the Comprehensive
Scheme for the Study of Cost of Cultivation of Ministry of Agriculture.
The sample size is as large as 8,100 holdings. The sample covers the
different regions of the country. Thus, CACP considers the cost
of production of crops in different States, while recommending
the MSPs. The Commission also considers the costs data as
submitted by State Governments. The estimates of cost of cultivation/
production in respect of the major producing States of a
particular crop covered under the scheme are taken into consideration
for arriving at a weighted all India average cost of cultivation/
production.
The National Commission on Farmers had recommended that
the MSP should be at least 50% more than the weighted average cost
of production. This recommendation, however, has not been accepted

4
by the Government because MSP is recommended by CACP based on
objective criteria and considering variety of relevant factors. Hence,
prescribing a mechanical increase of 50% on cost may distort the
market and prove to be counterproductive by encouraging inefficient
production and would go against the principle of comparative
advantage in producing specific crops. One of the aims of fixing MSPs
is to promote its production in regions where such production is
most efficient. Fixing of MSPs on cost plus basis would discourage
efficiency in the agriculture sector and negate our efforts to bring
down cost of cultivation.
1.7 The Committee are not satisfied with the replies furnished
by the Government as they have neither accepted the
recommendation of National Commission on Farmers (NCF) nor
the Committee’s concerns of safeguarding farmers interest and no
suitable alternative being explored for remunerative prices as
recommended by Committee and NCF other than Minimum Support
Price (MSP). It must be emphasized that MSP is not the only option
available and a more pragmatic approach can be adopted as has
been in the case with sugarcane and the prices offered which
maintains a fine balance between the Market forces as well as Food
Security in the country. Keeping in view, the interests of our farmers,
the Committee, reiterate their earlier recommendation that the
Government take urgent steps to fix remunerative pricing with 50%
profit margin over cost of production, for all the 24 crops without
any further delay.
Differential Minimum Support Price Region Wise
Recommendation (Para No. 2)
1.8 Although cost of cultivation of each crop widely varies
from region to region, regrettably, MSP is uniform for a single crop
for the whole country. According to the Department of Agriculture
and Co-operation (DAC), fixing different MSPs (region-wise MSP)
for the same crop may neither be practical nor desirable and
would defeat the aim of promoting cultivation of crops best
suited to a region with maximum competitive advantage. Another
reason advanced against differential MSP is that it would lead
to movement of agricultural produce to the region having highest
MSP, thereby negating the very purpose of differential MSP .
The Committee feel that if the country is to sustain self-sufficiency

5
in production, competitive advantage alone cannot be criterion for
promotion of crops. In Committee’s view, region-wise MSP pre-
supposes enforcement of appropriate restrictions by respective regions.
The Committee, therefore, desire that steps should be taken in a time
bound manner to fix region-wise MSP , initially on experimental basis
and its continuation or otherwise decided on the basis of results of
the experiment.
1.9 In their Action Taken Note, Department of Agriculture and
Cooperation have stated that the mandate of the Commission for
Agricultural Costs and Prices (CACP) is to recommend uniform MSP
for any given crop for the entire country . The cost of production
(CoP) is one of the factors that is taken into account while
recommending MSP . The Commission is conscious of the fact that
CoP varies from State to state, region to region, district to district,
village to village and even farm to farm. When all India weighted
average cost is factored into MSP , some of the farmers may have
higher CoP than the All India weighted average, while others may
have lower than the all India weighted average cost. This methodology
is time tested and is being applied for almost five decades now. The
Commission is of the considered opinion that there is no justification
for introducing region-wise MSP .
1.10 The Committee voice their concern over the reply of the
Ministry which does not give much weightage to the factor of cost
of production while deciding upon the MSP for a crop for the entire
country. In the opinion of the Committee, cost of production is a
very vital factor that has to be considered while deciding MSP ,
otherwise the farmer would never be able to recover his input cost.
They also do not buy the second argument against region-wise MSP
i.e. the present methodology is time tested and is being applied for
almost five decades now, as this time tested method has worked
towards the detriment of the majority of farmers, whilst benefiting
a selected few. Wanting the Government to break free from the
shackles of the past and to actually work towards a sustainable
development of agriculture in the country, the Committee reiterate
their earlier recommendation that immediate steps should be taken
in a time bound manner to fix region-wise MSP , initially on
experimental basis and its continuation or otherwise decided on
the basis of results of the experiment.

6
Transforming Commission for Agricultural Costs and Prices Into a
Statutory Body
Recommendation (Para No. 3)
1.11 One of the suggestions made to the Committee by various
experts relates to transforming the CACP into a statutory body and making
its recommendations binding on the Government. According to the DAC,
binding nature of recommendations of statutory CACP on various
aspects of agriculture would be fraught with practical difficulties. It
would also preclude the  Government  from enhancing the MSP over
and above what is recommended by CACP as had often been done in
the past. The Committee note that the  Government  has plans for giving
agricultural subsidy through direct cash transfer mechanism. The
Committee would like to point out that the proposed direct transfer
mechanism is not free of bottlenecks and challenges. In Committee’s view,
the MSP mechanism ought to be continued with the existing procurement
system for implementation of Food Security Act and expeditious steps
should also be taken for introduction of direct cash transfer mechanism
for agricultural subsidy. The Committee would await steps taken in this
regard.
1.12 The Department in their Action Taken Note have submitted
that CACP is an autonomous organisation and granting of statutory status
to CACP implies statutory status to its recommendations and their
implementation. The implementation shall have to be enforced as a
statutory obligation. Government feels that the States are not in a position
to implement the recommendations as a statutory obligation. Government
aims to make agriculture competitive to make the farmers self reliant
rather than regulating the farm operations and making the farmers over
dependent on Government. Government generally agrees with CACP’s
recommendations or at times, due to the exigencies of the situation, even
improves upon CACP’s recommendations. The benefit of MSP is availed
by the farmers directly through the procurement operations undertaken
by Food Corporation of India (FCI) and various Agencies of the State
Governments. Government aims to move towards direct cash transfers
which would be more efficient, effective and inclusive in serving the
interests of all the farmers of the country, irrespective of their region and/
or the crops cultivated by them.
1.13 Irrespective of the arguments put forth by the Government
for maintaining status quo on the status of CACP , the Committee

7
are of the view that the Government should grant statutory
status to CACP otherwise it would continue to remain a toothless
tiger and not be able to carry out its mandate. They also feel
that granting statutory status to CACP would in no way regulate
the farm operations but would in the long run benefit the majority
of the farmers. The Committee desire that the Government relook into
this matter.
With regard to steps taken by the Government for introduction
of Direct Cash Transfer Mechanism for agricultural subsidy, the
Committee desire that expeditious steps be taken in that regard and
they be apprised of the same.
Restructuring of Composition of CACP
Recommendation (Para No. 6)
1.14 The Committee note that CACP has only two non-official
members representing the farming community. The Committee desire
that the composition of CACP should be broad based to include at
least four non-official members representing the farming community
from all the four regions of the country to enable them to have their
say in the CACP . Further, there should be transparency in the
appointment of non-official members of the CACP .
1.15 The Department in their Action Taken Note have informed
the CACP has a Chairman, Member (Official), two Non-Official
Members (Farmers Representatives) and a Member Secretary. The post
of Chairman is vacant since 01.03.2014 and Member is holding the
charge at present. The Chairman and Members of CACP are appointed
on the basis of recommendation of a Committee constituted as per
instructions of Department of Personnel and Training (DoPT) duly
approved by the Appointments Committee of Cabinet (ACC). Before,
recommending the MSP to the Government the Commission invites
the views of the State Governments through a questionnaire as well
as holds meetings with the stakeholders like FCI, Department of
Consumer Affairs, Agriculture Commissioner (DAC), Indian Institute
of Pulses Research (UP), Central Rice Research Institute (Odisha),
Directorate of Sorghum Research, (AP), Rice Millers Association
(Haryana), Indian Oilseeds and Produce Export Promotion Council
(Mumbai), Farmer’s Association, Fertilizer Association of India,
NAFED etc. Farmers are also invited to know their views on the price

8
policy. CACP is already equipped with experts from the statistical
and economic services in the field.
1.16 Notwithstanding, the argument put forth by the Department
that before recommending the MSP to the Government, the Commission
invites the views of the State Governments through a questionnaire
as well as holds meetings with all stakeholders including farmers, the
Committee are of the considered view that the issue of insufficient
representation of farms in CACP has not been addressed to by the
Government. Being of the firm conviction that the time has finally
dawned for empowering the farming community, they, therefore
reiterate their earlier recommendation that the composition of CACP
should be broad based to include at least four non-official members
representing the farming community from all the four regions of the
country to enable them to have their say in the CACP as per their
regional vagaries.
Announcing MSP Before Sowing Season
Recommendation (Para No. 7)
1.17 Timely announcement of MSP ahead of the sowing season
i.e. by 1st June for Kharif crops and by 1st November for Rabi crops
would enable farmers to decide about the type and quantum of crops
to cultivate during the season. Admittedly, there had been delays in
announcement of MSP in the past though there is stated to be
improvement in this regard in recent years. Despite timely submission
of reports by CACP , the delay reportedly takes place, due to time
taken in consultation with various Ministries at the Centre and the
State Governments. The Committee hope that considering the
importance of timely announcement of MSP to the farming community,
the Government will ensure in future that there is no delay whatsoever
in this regard.
1.18 In their Action Taken Note, the Department submitted that
there is wide variation in the sowing season of various crops varies
in a vast country like India. The sowing season for Kharif crops is
generally between May-August and for Rabi between October-
December. Sometimes there is a delay in announcement of MSP due
to time taken in with consultation with various Ministries/Departments
in the Central Government namely Ministry of Finance, Ministry of
Food, Public Distribution and Consumer Affairs, Planning

9
Commission, Department of Commerce, Ministry of Textiles etc. In
addition, the views of State Governments on the recommendations
of CACP are also sought before the finalization of MSPs. The MSPs
are invariably announced before the harvest season.
1.19 The Committee are not inclined to accept the reply of the
Government that sometimes there is delay in announcement of MSP
as the CACP engages in consultation with various stakeholders involved
in agriculture. They are also of the firm opinion that the CACP needs
to put its house in order and ensure that the process of consultation
with stakeholders is completed in a time-bound manner which would
be in the interests of the farming community. The Committee, therefore,
reiterate that modalities must be workout to ensure timely
announcement of MSP , before the sowing season which would enable
the farmers to take prudent decisions and crop planning in the wake
of prices at market level and MSP . They can thus make much more
informed decision about the sowing of the crop rather being left with
no choice at harvest season.
Drastic Reduction in Number of Procurement Centers Operated by
Jute Corporation of India (JCI) and its Manpower
Recommendation (Para No. 13)
1.20 One of the objectives of creation of the Jute Corporation of
India (JCI) is procurement of Jute. The Committee learn that the number
of procurement centres operated by JCI has come down by 50 per cent
and that there has been drastic reduction in the manpower of JCI.
Considering the importance of Jute procurement for the lives of jute
growers particularly in the States of West Bengal, Bihar, Odisha, Assam
and Andhra Pradesh, the Committee desire that the JCI operations should
be strengthened with adequate manpower and increase in the number
of procurement centres.
1.21 The Government in their Action Taken Note have stated
that Jute Corporation of India (JCI) at present is having operations
in 171 centers consisting of 16 Regional Offices, 143 DPCs and
28 Sub Centers. In order to rationalize its manpower, JCI had stopped
recruitment since 1991. Therefore, on account of natural attrition, the
manpower is coming down every year. In order to increase efficiency
of JCI, a study has been conducted to prepare a strategic plan on
HRD and business with the aim to review, restructure and revamp
the existing organization’s structure.

10
1.22 The Committee note that in order to increase efficiency
of JCI, a study has been conducted to prepare a strategic plan on
Human Resource Development (HRD) and business with the aim
to review, restructure and revamp the existing organisation’s
structure. Viewing this as a step in the right direction, the Committee
desire that this exercise be completed in good time and they be
informed about the progress achieved herein.

11
CHAPTER II
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN
ACCEPTED BY THE GOVERNMENT
Transforming Commission for Agricultural Costs and Prices into a
Statutory Body
Recommendation (Para No. 3)
One of the suggestions made to the Committee by various experts
relates to transforming the CACP into a statutory body and making its
recommendations binding on the Government. According to the DAC,
binding nature of recommendations of statutory CACP on various aspects
of agriculture would be fraught with practical difficulties. It would also
preclude the  Government  from enhancing the MSP over and above
what is recommended by CACP as had often been done in the past. The
Committee note that the  Government  has plans for giving agricultural
subsidy through direct cash transfer mechanism. The Committee would
like to point out that the proposed direct transfer mechanism is not free
of bottlenecks and challenges. In Committee’s view, the MSP mechanism
ought to be continued with the existing procurement system for
implementation of Food Security Act and expeditious steps should also
be taken for introduction of direct cash transfer mechanism for agricultural
subsidy. The Committee would await steps taken in this regard.
Reply of the Government
CACP is an autonomous organisation and granting of statutory
status to CACP implies statutory status to its recommendations and their
implementation. The implementation shall have to be enforced as a statutory
obligation. Government feels that the States are not in a position to
implement the recommendations as a statutory obligation. Government
aims to make agriculture competitive to make the farmers self reliant
rather than regulating the farm operations and making the farmers over
dependent on Government. Government generally agrees with CACP’s
recommendations or at times, due to the exigencies of the situation, even
improves upon CACP’s recommendations.

12
The benefit of MSP is availed by the farmers directly through the
procurement operations undertaken by Food Corporation of India (FCI)
and various agencies of the State Governments.
Government aims to move towards direct cash transfers which
would be more efficient, effective and inclusive in serving the interests
of all the farmers of the country, irrespective of their region and/or the
crops cultivated by them.
[Ministry of Agriculture (Department of Agriculture and
Cooperation), F.No. 8-3/2014-FES-ES dated 13 May 2014]
Comments of the Committee
For comments of the Committee please refer to Para No. 1.13 of
Chapter I of this Report.
Preventive Steps for Reducing Distress Sale
Recommendation (Para No. 8)
The main objective of MSP is to ensure that there is no distress
sale of agriculture produce by farmers at the harvest season. Sadly, there
are reports of small and marginal farmers selling their produce below
the MSP in some parts of the country particularly in Bihar, West Bengal
and Odisha. Implementation of MSP is done through procurement which
has been decentralized since 1997-98 with a view to encouraging local
procurement thereby extending the benefits of MSP to local farmers. There
is a need to increasingly involve Farmers’ Cooperatives and Self-Help
Groups in the process of procurement. It has been stated that lack of
proper marketing infrastructure, storage capacity, milling capacity, etc.
adversely affect procurement activity. The Committee would urge the
DAC to impress upon those State Governments facing these inadequacies
to address the problems on priority and ensure that there is no distress
sale by farmers anywhere in the country.
Reply of the Government
Government is making all possible efforts to increase the reach of
Minimum Support Price (MSP) operations to avoid distress sale of
foodgrains by the farmers. Steps taken to ensure payment of MSP are
as follows:—
(i) To spread awareness, Minimum Support Price (MSP)
operations are given wide publicity through pamphlets,

13
banners, signboards and advertisements through print and
electronic media regarding MSP , quality, specifications,
purchase system, etc. so that the farmers may bring their
produce conforming to the specifications.
(ii) In order to maximise the outreach of MSP operations, Food
Corporation of India (FCI) in consultation with State
Governments operates sufficient number of purchase centres
at appropriate places.
(iii) The State Governments engage Self Help Groups (SHGs)/
Societies etc. who have better reach and increase the volume
at appropriate places.
(iv) To ensure that the benefit of MSP reaches the farmers,
arrangements have been made to make payments to farmers
through account payee cheque/electronic mode, whenever
possible.
(v) State Governments are encouraged to undertake decentralized
procurement, so as to enhance the procurement of foodgrains
from the farmers.
Bihar, West Bengal and Odisha have adopted Decentralised
Procurement (DCP) mode for procurement of foodgrains. As such
procurement, storage and distribution of foodgrains is being handled by
the State Government themselves through State Agencies. State
Government and Agencies are involving Farmers’ Co-operatives and
Self Help Groups in the process of procurement.
SFAC is involved in MSP operations since Kharif-2013 specifically
for pulses and oilseeds. SFAC works exclusively with Farmer Producer
Organisations (FPOs) to enable these institutions to act as procurement
agents on SFACs behalf at field level. These FPOs procure pulses and
oilseeds at MSP from farmers, especially small and marginal farmer at
farm gate. SFAC bears the entire cost of procurement and FPOs get a
fee for their services.
In order to ensure that there is no distress sale of oilseeds and
pulses and to reach the Government machinery to the farmers in the
remotest part of the country Government has nominated three other
agencies, namely, Central Warehousing Corporation and Small Farmers
Agri-Business Consortium (SFAC), in addition to NAFED to undertake
procurement operations.

14
In order to protect the interest of the jute growers and to ensure
that the raw jute producers receive Minimum Support Prices (MSP), Jute
Corporation of India (JCI), a Public Sector Undertaking under the Ministry
of Textiles has been mandated to undertake support price operations for
raw jute from farmers at MSP through its Departmental Purchase Centers
and State cooperative bodies. The Government of India has ensured that
the crop at MSP is purchased by the Jute Corporation of India directly
from the growers wherever and whenever market price rules below MSP .
The role of the Jute Corporation of India has ensured that there is no
distress sale of raw jute.
The Cotton Corporation of India Ltd. (CCI) is the primary agency
for undertaking procurement operations of cotton under MSP and losses,
if any, incurred by it for MSP operations are reimbursed by the
Government. As and when cotton prices of any variety touch the level
of MSP , CCI as a Nodal Agency of Government of India, resorts to
immediate market intervention and makes purchases of cotton at MSP
without any quantitative limits.
[Ministry of Agriculture (Department of Agriculture and
Cooperation), F.No. 8-3/2014-FES-ES dated 13 May 2014]
Scaling Up of Warehousing Receipt System
Recommendation (Para No. 9)
Warehouse receipt system is another important measure which will
go a long way in curbing distress sale by farmers. The Committee,
however, regret to learn that the progress of system of farmers availing
advance amounts through warehouse receipt is slow. The Committee are
of the view that scaling up this system in a planned manner is a priority
area and suggest that necessary action should be taken in this regard.
The Committee would also like to know the progress achieved so far and
plans for the future.
Reply of the Government
The Negotiable Warehouse Receipts (NWRs) issued by the
warehouses registered under the Warehousing (Development and
Regulation) Act, 2007 would help farmers in seeking loans from banks
against NWRs to avoid distress sale of agricultural produce. The
Warehousing Development and Regulatory Authority (WDRA) has also
introduced negotiable warehouse receipt system in the small warehouses/

15
godowns of Primary Agriculture Cooperatives Societies (PACSs) so that
the small farmers in rural areas may also avail the benefit of loan from
banks on NWRs issued by these small warehouses.
The WDRA has registered 390 warehouses till date including PACSs
godowns and more warehouses would be registered, which shall be
issuing negotiable warehouses receipts and the number of farmers availing
loan against NWRs will increase. The WDRA is organizing awareness
programmes for the farmers on the benefit of negotiable warehouses
receipts. All Banks and financial institutions have been requested to extend
pledge finance to goods kept in WDRA registered warehouses. The crop
loan scheme of cheaper loan to the farmers has been extended to the
small and marginal farmers having Kissan Credit Cards.
In order to encourage development of modern warehousing
facilities, the Banks have been advised by the Department of Financial
Services to consider:—
(i) Setting internal target for lending against Warehouse Receipts;
(ii) Better terms for finance against Warehouse Receipts of
registered warehouses;
(iii) Introduction of conditions of registration of Warehouses for
financing.
Distress sale by farmers can be curbed through creation of increased
storage capacity and providing greater access to the farmers’ to finances
through appropriate Pledge Finance Schemes without having to sell their
produce at the peak harvest season when the prices could be at the
lowest. This Department’s Integrated Scheme for Agricultural Marketing
(ISAM), sub-component of Agricultural Marketing Infrastructure (AMI)
also promotes creation of scientific storage capacity (erstwhile scheme
of Grameen Bhandaran Yojana). This sub-component aims to create
additional 230 lakh tonnes of storage capacity across the country during
XII Five Year Plan/2017. With this in view, the erstwhile scheme of GBY
has been reformulated ( w.e.f. 1.4.2014) and assistance is provided under
two categories of 25% and 33.33% of project cost. Further, more categories
(Registered FPOs, Panchayats, women entrepreneurs under 33% category)
and more States (UTs of Andaman and Nicobar and Lakshadweep islands
under the 33% category) have been made eligible for assistance.
Additionally, stand-alone silos have also been made eligible for assistance.
In order to discourage distress sale by farmers and to encourage
them to store their produce in warehouses against warehouse receipts,

16
benefit of applicable interest subvention schemes is available to banks
for extending credit support to small and marginal farmers having Kisan
Credit Card against Negotiable Warehouse Receipt (NWR) for keeping
their produce in warehouses. Additionally several pledge finance schemes
are operational in different States which may be availed by farmers against
their produce.
[Ministry of Agriculture (Department of Agriculture and
Cooperation), F.No.8-3/2014-FES-ES dated 13 May , 2014]
Reforming Agricultural Produce Marketing (Development and
Regulation) Act, 2003
Recommendation (Para No. 10)
The Committee note that alternate channels of marketing would
enable farmers to sell their produce for optimum returns. The Model
State Agricultural Produce Marketing (Development and Regulation) Act,
2003 (APMC Act) advocates, among other things, provision of direct
purchase of agricultural produce from farmers by processors/bulk retailers/
wholesalers/exporters nearer the farm gate. So far, only 16 State
Governments have reportedly amended their APMC Acts providing for
direct marketing, contract farming, etc. The Committee desire that the
DAC should actively pursue with the remaining State Governments and
ensure that APMC Acts are reformed at the earliest and the farmers are
protected from exploitation by middle men.
Reply of the Government
APMC reforms are critical to the development of agriculture market.
Agriculture Marketing is a State subject. Some of the initiatives by the
Department include:—
(i) A model Agricultural Produce Marketing Committee
(Development and Regulation) (APMC) Act in 2003 and
Model Rules in 2007 for adoption by the States.
(ii) Further, in order to encourage the States to undertake reform
of their agri marketing regulations, assistance to the State
Agencies for creation of marketing infrastructure (except
storage) under this department’s scheme of Agricultural
Marketing Infrastructure (AMI) has been tied up to the action
taken by them to reform their agri marketing sector to allow
competitive marketing channels such as Direct marketing and

17
Contract farming and permit setting up of markets in private
and cooperative sector.
(iii) Over and above the three conditionalities stated at (ii) above,
an additional rider imposed in 2010 for eligibility for
assistance for creation of infrastructure under the department
schemes was waiver of market fees on perishable horticultural
products. This is a measure to encourage alternate marketing
channels to come up outside the APMC market yard for quick
transaction in these perishable commodities.
(iv) Further, the e-market platform as implemented by Karnataka
is seen as a solution to issues of transparency and market
barriers. This department plans to pursue this marketing
platform individually with each State.
(v) A Committee of State Ministers in charge of Agriculture
Marketing was set up in 2010 to look into promotion of
reforms. The Committee submitted its report in July, 2013
which has been circulated to States to elicit their views and
take necessary action. The main recommendations of the
Committee were forwarded to State Governments for
amending their APMC Acts accordingly.
(vi) A proposal has been sent to 14th Finance Commission in
April, 2013 to link devolution of additional funds with
marketing reforms (to disincentivise the States from
announcing bonus over MSP and levying mandi taxes on
procurement, thereby increasing financial burden on
exchequer).
[Ministry of Agriculture (Department of Agriculture and
Cooperation), F.No. 8-3/2014-FES-ES dated 13 May, 2014]
Countervailing Duty on Palm Imports
Recommendation (Para No. 11)
The Committee have been informed that the prices received by
palm oil growers have dropped by 30% over the past two years, making
the domestic palm oil production unviable due to increasing dependence
on import at very low prices. It has been stated that about 50% of our
total consumption of edible oils come from imports and as a result of
fall in global prices and low level of import duty (2.5% for crude palm
oil and 7.5% for refined palm oil), stocks of palm oil are unloaded in

18
our country jeopardizing the interests of domestic growers. The Committee
are concerned to note that this phenomenon has long-term implications
for the entire edible oil security of the country. It has been pleaded before
the Committee that there should be counter-cyclical duty at rates which
would make the landed cost of palm oil is at least Rs. 65.00 per quintal
so that the domestic cultivation becomes viable. Similar problem is also
faced in import of pulses accounting for 3 million tonnes at a price lower
than the MSP . The Committee are at a loss to understand why the Deptt.
of Revenue and the Ministry of Commerce have not taken necessary
steps to protect the interests of farmers and ensure that edible oil security
of the country is not adversely affected. The Committee would urge the
Deptt. of Revenue to put in place a dynamic counter-vailing duty structure
in this regard without further delay , under intimation to the Committee.
Reply of the Government
This Department had submitted a proposal to put in place a duty
structure wherein rate of import duty varies with international edible oil
prices in a counter– cyclical manner with a view to stabilize domestic
prices of edible oils. However, while it was felt by the Government that
this could be a desirable objective in the long term, in view of the
prevailing high food inflation and likely price rise due to the proposed
structure, this could be considered at a more appropriate time.
Nevertheless, proposal for raising the import duty rate on refined edible
oils from present level of 7.5% to 10% was approved on 9th January, 2014.
Similarly, Department had written to Department of Revenue to
impose import duty of 20-30% on pulses in December, 2013 and July,
2013. However, the proposal was also not agreed to in view of price
implication. The Department of Commerce has allowed the export of
pulses subject to import of equivalent quantity of raw pulses to promote
the value addition of pulses in the country w.e.f. November, 2013.
[Ministry of Agriculture (Department of Agriculture and
Cooperation), F.No. 8-3/2014-FES-ES dated 13 May, 2014]
Drastic Reduction in Number of Procurement Centers Operated by
Jute Corporation of India (JCI) and its Manpower
Recommendation (Para No. 13)
One of the objectives of creation of the Jute Corporation of India
(JCI) is procurement of Jute. The Committee learn that the number of
procurement centres operated by JCI has come down by 50 per cent and

19
that there has been drastic reduction in the manpower of JCI. Considering
the importance of Jute procurement for the lives of jute growers
particularly in the States of West Bengal, Bihar, Orissa, Assam and Andhra
Pradesh, the Committee desire that the JCI operations should be
strengthened with adequate manpower and increase in the number of
procurement centres.
Reply of the Government
The Jute Corporation of India (JCI) at present is having operations
in 171 centers consisting of 16 Regional Offices, 143 DPCs and 28 Sub-
Centers. In order to rationalize its manpower, JCI had stopped recruitment
since 1991. Therefore, on account of natural attrition, the manpower is
coming down every year. In order to increase efficiency of JCI, a study
has been conducted to prepare a strategic plan on HRD and business
with the aim to review, restructure and revamp the existing organization’s
structure.
[Ministry of Agriculture (Department of Agriculture and
Cooperation), F.No. 8-3/2014-FES-ES dated 13 May, 2014]
Comments of the Committee
For comments of the Committee please refer to Para No. 1.22 of
Chapter I of this Report.
Re-orienting Market Intervention Scheme
Recommendation (Para No. 14)
The Market Intervention Scheme (MIS) is implemented to protect
the growers of agricultural and horticultural commodities (those not
covered under MSP) from making distress sale in the event of bumper
crop when the prices fall below the cost of production. It has been stated
that MIS is a very difficult operation to implement and the machinery
for procurement does not exist. MIS is implemented only on the specific
request of State/UT willing to share the loss with Central  Government
on 50:50 basis (25:75 in case of NE States). Admittedly, States are reluctant
to do that. All this indicates that MIS has not achieved its mandate. The
Committee feel that if the objective of protecting farmers from distress
sale is to be achieved, the MIS must be re-oriented and broad based with
well prepared machinery ever ready to undertake the task at very short
notice. DAC should chalk out the ways and means to achieve this. The
Committee would also suggest that the cost sharing between States and
the Centre should be such that the latter does not feel the burden. For

20
instance the ratio could be 25:75 between States and the centre and 10:90
in the case of NE States.
Reply of the Government
The MIS is implemented on all India basis for procurement of
various agricultural and horticulture commodities which are generally
perishable in nature and not covered under Price Support Scheme (PSS).
During the last ten years, MIS has been implemented in 14 States for
than 20 commodities. This clearly indicates the positive response of various
State Governments in implementing the MIS scheme, as and when need
arises. However, the recommendations of Committee have been noted for
consideration at the time of review of existing guidelines.
[Ministry of Agriculture (Department of Agriculture and
Cooperation), F.No. 8-3/2014-FES-ES dated 13 May, 2014]
MGNEREGA and its Impact on V arious Agricultural Operations
(Recommendation Para No. 15)
According to the findings of a study conducted by the Agro
Economic Centres and the Institute of Social and Economic Change,
Bengaluru, the implementation of Mahatma Gandhi National Rural
Employment Act (MGNREGA) has impacted the availability of labour
for critical agricultural operations like sowing and harvesting. The
Committee note that in order to tackle this problem, MGNREGA
guidelines of May 2012 have included activities having significant impact
on agriculture such as provision of irrigation facility, dug out farm pond,
farm bunding and land development, etc. as eligible activities under
MGNREGA. One beneficial fallout of the aforesaid problem appears to
be the increasing mechanization of farm activities which would hopefully
bring about desired transformation of agricultural operations. The
Committee feel that it is high time that an objective assessment is
undertaken of the impact of MGNREGA on various aspects of agricultural
operations and take such remedial measures as may be necessary to
overcome the adverse impact, if any.
Reply of the Government
With the objective of expanding and deepening the positive synergy
between MGNREGA and agriculture, especially in the context of small
and marginal farmers, Ministry in MGNREGA operational guidelines
2013 has included new works under MGNREGA. The Ministry of Rural
Development has engaged Institutions like Indian Institutes of

21
Management (IIMs), Indian Institutes of Technology (IITs), National
Institute of Rural Development (NIRD), National Sample Survey
organization (NSSO) and other professional institutions to conduct studies
and surveys on the implementation of Mahatma Gandhi National Rural
Employment Guarantee Act (MGNREGA). Some major findings of
Research studies conducted to evaluate the impact of Mahatma Gandhi
National Rural Employment Guarantee Act (MGNREGA) are given
below:—
i. Increase in Agriculture Minimum Wages and wage earned
per day due to impact of MGNREGA has given a bargaining
power to the labour (IIM Lucknow, NDUAT Faizabad).
ii. Reduction in distress migration: Studies report reduction in
distress migration (council for Social Development, Centre
for Science and Environment, Indian Institute of Management,
Shillong).
iii. Creation of “Green Jobs”: Nearly 70% works relate to water
conservation, water-harvesting, restoration, renovation and
desilting of water bodies, drought-proofing, plantation and
afforestation (Indian Institute of Science, Bangalore and IIFM,
Bhopal).
iv . Improvement in groundwater, improved agricultural
productivity and cropping intensity, mono crop to two crops
(Administrative Staff college of India (ASCI).
v . Reduction in water vulnerability index, agriculture
vulnerability, livelihood vulnerability index (Indian Institute
of Science, Bangalore).
In order to promote agricultural growth and thereby boost the
rural economy by the following works has also been included in the
approved list:—
i. Community Storage facilities for the agricultural produce.
ii. Creation of ‘Farmnet’ roads that link rural production centres
with PMGSY roads,
iii. Works for preparation of organic fertilizers to make available
affordable and organic fertilizers in the village itself.

22
iv. Comprehensive watershed-based treatment of undulating
lands to make them productive irrespective of the size of the
landholding.
v . Removing restrictions on maintenances of irrigation tanks/
canals/drains to keep them in good shape at all times.
Recommendations of Committee have been noted for conducting
a further study on the subject.
[Ministry of Agriculture (Department of Agriculture and
Cooperation), F.No. 8-3/2014-FES-ES dated 13 May, 2014]

23
CHAPTER III
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE
DO NOT DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE
GOVERNMENT’S REPLIES
- NIL -

24
CHAPTER IV
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH
REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN
ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE
Moving Towards Remunerative Pricing Mechanism
Recommendation (Para No. 1)
Minimum Support Price (MSP) fixed by the  Government  Acts as
the floor price of an agricultural commodity and safeguards the interests
of farmers. Presently, 24 crops are covered under MSP and only one crop
viz. sugarcane is covered under Fair and Remunerative Price (FRP)
mechanism. The Committee have been informed that no specific profit
margin over cost of production is considered by the CACP . Since,
agriculture is becoming unremunerative particularly for small and
marginal farmers due to variety of reasons, the Committee feel that the
Government should move towards remunerative pricing mechanism for
all the 24 crops. The Committee do not agree with the view of DAC
that prescribing an increase of 50% on cost of production as
recommended by the National Commission on Farmers headed by
Prof. M.S. Swaminathan may distort the market. What is paramount
is the livelihood of farmers. Distortion, if any, in market on account
of remunerative pricing of agricultural produce must be suitably
addressed. The Committee urge that steps should be taken to fix
remunerative pricing with 50% profit margin over cost of production,
for all the 24 crops without any further delay as already recommended
by this Committee in their Forty-first Report (14th Lok Sabha) in the
year 2007-08.
Reply of the Government
Minimum Support Prices (MSPs) are fixed by the Government
on the recommendations of Commission for Agricultural Costs and
Price (CACP) which considers a number of important factors
while recommending MSPs, the views of State Governments
and Central Ministries as well as such other relevant factors

25
which are considered important for fixation of support prices.
MSP fixed by the Government is in the nature of minimum
guaranteed price offered by the Government. In case the market
offers higher price than the MSP , the farmers are free to sell at that
higher price.
As of now, the Commission for Agricultural Costs and Prices
(CACP) recommends MSP of 22 commodities, besides recommending
Fair and Remunerative Price (FRP) of sugarcane. While recommending
MSP/FRP , various factors including demand and supply; cost of
production; price trends in the market, both domestic and international;
inter-crop price parity; terms of trade between agriculture and non-
agriculture; and likely implications of MSP on consumers of that product
are kept in view. It may be pertinent to point out that MSP is a pricing
policy and should not be the main instrument of achieving the objective
of equity/income.
CACP , which is an independent body of experts considers,
among other factors, the costs of production of various crops for all the
major producing States, as collected by different State Agricultural
Universities under the Comprehensive Scheme for the Study of Cost of
Cultivation of Ministry of Agriculture. The sample size is as large as
8,400 holdings. The sample covers the different regions of the country.
Thus, CACP considers the cost of production of crops in different
States, while recommending the MSPs. The Commission also
considers the costs data as submitted by State Governments. The
estimates of cost of cultivation/production in respect of the major
producing States of a particular crop covered under the scheme are taken
into consideration for arriving at a weighted all India average cost of
cultivation/production.
The National Commission on Farmers had recommended that
the MSP should be at least 50% more than the weighted average cost
of production. This recommendation, however, has not been accepted
by the Government because MSP is recommended by CACP based
on objective criteria and considering variety of relevant factors.
Hence, prescribing a mechanical increase of 50% on cost may
distort the market and prove to be counterproductive by
encouraging inefficient production and would go against the
principle of comparative advantage in producing specific crops. One
of the aims of fixing MSPs is to promote its production in regions
where such production is most efficient. Fixing of MSPs on cost plus

26
basis would discourage efficiency in the agriculture sector and negate
our efforts to bring down cost of cultivation.
[Ministry of Agriculture (Department of Agriculture and
Cooperation), F.No. 8-3/2014-FES-ES dated 13 May, 2014]
Comments of the Committee
For comments of the Committee please refer to Para No. 1.7 of
Chapter I of this Report.
Differential Minimum Support Price Region Wise
Recommendation (Para No. 2)
Although cost of cultivation of each crop widely varies from
region to region, regrettably, MSP is uniform for a single crop for the
whole country. According to the Department of Agriculture and Co-
operation (DAC), fixing different MSPs (region-wise MSP) for the
same crop may neither be practical nor desirable and would defeat
the aim of promoting cultivation of crops best suited to a region with
maximum competitive advantage. Another reason advanced against
differential MSP is that it would lead to movement of agricultural
produce to the region having highest MSP , thereby negating the very
purpose of differential MSP . The Committee feel that if the country
is to sustain self-sufficiency in production, competitive advantage
alone cannot be criterion for promotion of crops. In Committee’s view,
region-wise MSP pre-supposes enforcement of appropriate restrictions
by respective regions. The Committee, therefore, desire that steps
should be taken in a time-bound manner to fix region-wise MSP ,
initially on experimental basis and its continuation or otherwise
decided on the basis of results of the experiment.
Reply of the Government
The mandate of the Commission for Agricultural Costs and
Prices (CACP) is to recommend uniform MSP for any given crop for
the entire country. The cost of production (CoP) is one of the factors
that is taken into account while recommending MSP . The Commission
is conscious of the fact that CoP varies from State to State, region
to region, district to district, village to village and even farm to farm.
When all India weighted average cost is factored into MSP , some
of the farmers may have higher CoP than the All India weighted

27
average, while others may have lower than the all India weighted
average cost. This methodology is time tested and is being
applied for almost five decades now. The Commission is of the
considered opinion that there is no justification for introducing
region-wise MSP .
[Ministry of Agriculture (Department of Agriculture and
Cooperation), F.No. 8-3/2014-FES-ES dated 13 May, 2014]
Comments of the Committee
For comments of the Committee please refer to Para No. 1.10 of
Chapter I of this Report.
Restructuring of Composition of Commission for Agricultural Costs
and Prices
Recommendation (Para No. 6)
The Committee note that CACP has only two non-official members
representing the farming community. The Committee desire that the
composition of CACP should be broad based to include at least four non-
official members representing the farming community from all the four
regions of the country to enable them to have their say in the CACP .
Further, there should be transparency in the appointment of non-official
members of the CACP .
Reply of the Government
The CACP has a Chairman, Member (Official), two Non-Official
Members (Farmers Representatives) and a Member Secretary .
The post of Chairman is vacant since 01.03.2014 and Member
is holding the charge at present. The Chairman and Members of
CACP are appointed on the basis of recommendation of a
Committee constituted as per instructions of Department of Personnel
and Training (DOPT) duly approved by the Appointments Committee
of Cabinet (ACC).
Before, recommending the MSP to the Government the Commission
invites the views of the State Governments through a questionnaire as
well as holds meetings with the stakeholders like FCI, Department of
Consumer Affairs, Agriculture Commissioner (DAC), Indian Institute of

28
Pulses Research (UP), Central Rice Research Institute (Odisha), Directorate
of Sorghum Research, (AP), Rice Millers Association (Haryana), Indian
Oilseeds and Produce Export Promotion Council (Mumbai), Farmer’s
Association, Fertilizer Association of India, NAFED, etc. Farmers
are also invited to know their views on the price policy. CACP is
already equipped with experts from the statistical and economic services
in the field.
[Ministry of Agriculture (Department of Agriculture and
Cooperation), F.No. 8-3/2014-FES-ES dated 13 May, 2014]
Comments of the Committee
For comments of the Committee please refer to Para No. 1.16 of
Chapter I of this Report.
Announcing MSP Before Sowing Season
Recommendation (Para No. 7)
Timely announcement of MSP ahead of the sowing season i.e. by
1st June for kharif crops and by 1st November for rabi crops would
enable farmers to decide about the type and quantum of crops to cultivate
during the season. Admittedly, there had been delays in announcement
of MSP in the past though there is stated to be improvement in this
regard in recent years. Despite timely submission of reports by CACP ,
the delay reportedly takes place, due to time taken in consultation with
various Ministries at the Centre and the State Governments. The
Committee hope that considering the importance of timely announcement
of MSP to the farming community, the  Government  will ensure in
future that there is no delay whatsoever in this regard.
Reply of the Government
There is wide variation in the sowing season of various crops varies
in a vast country like India. The sowing season for kharif crops is generally
between May-August and for rabi between October-December. Sometimes
there is a delay in announcement of MSP due to time taken in with
consultation with various Ministries/Departments in the Central
Government namely Ministry of Finance, Ministry of Food, Public
Distribution and Consumer Affairs, Planning Commission, Department
of Commerce, Ministry of Textiles, etc. In addition, the views of State
Governments on the recommendations of CACP are also sought before

29
the finalization of MSPs. The MSPs are invariably announced before the
harvest season.
[Ministry of Agriculture (Department of Agriculture and
Cooperation), F.No. 8-3/2014-FES-ES dated 13 May, 2014]
Comments of the Committee
For comments of the Committee please refer to Para No. 1.19 of
Chapter I of this Report.

30
CHAPTER V
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH
FINAL REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT ARE STILL AWAITED
Correcting Weaknesses in Minimum Support Price
Recommendation (Para No. 4)
The estimates of costs of production used by the CACP suffer on
account of small sample size, outdated data and poor quality of collection.
The sample size is as small as 8,400 holdings. The CACP report is based
on outdated data due to time lag of two to three years between the time
of collection of data and finalization of report by CACP . Further, according
to a former Chairman of the CACP , the methods of data collection
and cost calculation by some State Agricultural Universities are
questionable. There is a need to broad-base the data, broad-base the
machinery and bridge the time gap to make the basis of MSP realistic.
The Committee desire that immediate action be taken to address the
aforesaid shortcomings and ensure that CACP’s exercise of fixing MSP
is meaningful.
Reply of the Government
From time to time, expert committees were constituted to revise
the methodology and system of calculation of the cost of cultivation/
production of agricultural produce, to arrive at MSPs. In May 2003,
Government had set up an Expert Committee under the Chairmanship
of Prof. Y.K. Alagh to examine the methodological issues in fixation
of MSP. On its recommendations, the premium actually paid by
farmers for crop insurance and marketing and transport charges
incurred by farmers have also been included as items of cost for
recommending MSP .
The Government has constituted a Committee under the
chairmanship of Director, National Centre for Agricultural Economics
and Policy Research in the month of April, 2013, to examine the
methodological issues in fixing Minimum Support Prices.

31
The terms of reference of the Committee are;
(1) Examination of the existing mandate of the Commission for
Agricultural Costs and Price and to suggest whether—by way
of a measure of response to the rapidly changing external
environment arising in the wake of liberalization, privatization
and globalization—there is need to reposition the Commission
in terms of its mandate and remit.
(2) Examination of the existing cost concepts for the purpose of
fixing of MSP and suggest various factors including
transportation, marketing, processing, storage etc. to
determine MSP . Besides the Committee may also analyse the
appropriateness of existing methods followed in imputing
the value (i) family labour, (ii) rental value of land, (iii) interest
of capital (iv) depreciation on fixed items such as tractors,
bullocks etc. and recommend measures for improvement so
as to make them more realistic.
(3) Examination of the existing structure of tariff, taxes, credit,
market etc. and to suggest various measures to make it most
competitive and remunerative to the farmers in the wake of
trade liberalization and globalization and also to encourage
diversified agricultural growth.
(4) To examine any other related and relevant matters that are
important for improving the system.
The Committee has been requested to submit the report as early
as possible.
[Ministry of Agriculture (Department of Agriculture and
Cooperation), F.No. 8-3/2014-FES-ES dated 13 May, 2014]
Reviewing Ramesh Chand Committee on Minimum Support Price
Recommendation (Para No. 5)
Incidentally, the Committee have been informed that a Committee
under the Chairmanship of Dr. Ramesh Chand, Director, National Centre
for Agricultural Economics and Policy Research (NCAP) has been set up
to review the methodology and mandate of CACP vis-à-vis  cost of
cultivation study. The Committee hope that the Ramesh Chand Committee

32
will examine the shortcomings in the present system of MSP calculation
and complete its tasks expeditiously under intimation to this Committee.
Reply of the Government
The Committee has already held three meetings and issues are
being examined as per its terms of reference. The Parliamentary Committee
will be informed as and when the report under reference is received.
[Ministry of Agriculture (Department of Agriculture and
Cooperation), F.No. 8-3/2014-FES-ES dated 13 May, 2014]
Resolving Cane Prices Arrears Issue
Recommendation (Para No. 12)
The Rangarajan Committee which looked into the issue of difference
in pricing of sugarcane as fixed by the CACP vis-à-vis State  Government
of Uttar Pradesh reportedly emphasized the need to rationalize the pricing
of sugarcane and that there should be a sharing of revenues/value created
in the sugarcane value chain between the farmers and the millers in a
fair and equitable manner. In pursuance of this recommendation and
having looked into the problems of the sugar industry, the  Government
is stated to have extended an interest free loan of about Rs. 6,600 cr. for
making loan cane payment and cane price arrear payment. The Committee
note that cane price arrears for the year 2012-13 was as much as
Rs. 2177 cr. in Uttar Pradesh as on 15.12.2013. The Committee hope that
the cane Commissioner would monitor the payment and ensure that
issues are resolved at the earliest.
Reply of the Government
Pursuant to the decision of Cabinet Committee on Economic Affairs
(CCEA), the recommendation of Dr. C. Rangarajan Committee regarding
rationalization of sugarcane pricing policy has been referred to the
State Governments for adoption and implementation, as considered
appropriate by them. The recommendation of Dr. Rangarajan Committee
to link the sugarcane price with the sugar price is yet to be accepted by
most of the States.
Arbitrary fixation of Cane Price over and above the Fair and
Remunerative Price of Sugarcane fixed by the Government is adversely
affecting the sugar mills financially. In view of excess opening stock and

33
good production of sugar this year, the sugar prices were subdued and
there were huge cane price arrears. To facilitate clearance of cane price
arrears of previous sugar seasons and timely settlement of cane price of
current sugar season to sugarcane farmers, the Government on 3.1.2014
has notified a Scheme for Extending Financial assistance to Sugar
Undertakings (SEFASU-2014) envisaging interest free loans worth
Rs. 6600 crore by bank as additional working capital to sugar mills. Further,
the Government on 28.2.2014 has notified another scheme allowing
incentives for marketing and promotion services for raw sugar production
targeted for export market for a quantity of 40 lakh MT during
2013-14 and 2014-15 sugar seasons. The incentive available under the
Scheme shall be utilized by the sugar mills for making payment to the
farmers. Implementation of both the scheme shall be monitored by the
Cane Commissioners of respective States. As on 31.1.2014, the cane price
arrears for the year 2012-13 in Uttar Pradesh has been reduced to Rs.
973 crore.
[Ministry of Agriculture (Department of Agriculture and
Cooperation), F.No. 8-3/2014-FES-ES dated 13 May, 2014]
NEW DELHI; HUKM DEO NARAYAN YADAV,
21 April, 2015 Chairperson,
01 Vaisakha, 1937 (Saka) Committee on Agriculture.

34
ANNEXURE
COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE
(2014-15)
MINUTES OF THE TWENTY SECOND SITTING
OF THE COMMITTEE
The Committee sat on Wednesday, the 15th April, 2015 from
1500 hrs. to 1750 hrs. in Committee Room ‘E’ (Basement), Parliament
House Annexe, New Delhi.
PRESENT
Shri Hukm Deo Narayan Yadav — Chairperson
M
EMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Md. Badaruddoza Khan
3. Dr. Tapas Mandal
4. Shri Janardhan Mishra
5. Shri Dalpat Singh Paraste
6. Shri Mukesh Rajput
7. Shri Konakalla Narayana Rao
8. Shri Satya Pal Singh
9. Shri Virendra Singh
Rajya Sabha
10. Shrimati Renuka Chowdhury
11. Sardar Sukhdev Singh Dhindsa
12. Shri Janardan Dwivedi
13. Shri Vinay Katiyar

35
14. Shri Mohd. Ali Khan
15. Shri Rajpal Singh Saini
16. Shri Ram Nath Thakur
17. Shri Shankarbhai N. Vegad
18. Shri Darshan Singh Yadav
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Shri Abhijit Kumar — Joint Secretary
2. Smt. Abha Singh Yaduvanshi — Director
3. Shri C. Vanlalruata — Deputy Secretary
2. At the outset, Chairperson welcomed the Members to the Sitting
of the Committee. Then, the Committee took up for consideration of the
Memorandum No. 6 pertaining to the draft Report on the Action Taken
by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations contained in
the 60th Report (15th Lok Sabha) of the Committee on Agriculture
(2013-14) on ‘Pricing of Agricultural Produce’ of the Ministry of
Agriculture (Department of Agriculture and Cooperation) alongwith
Action Taken Notes as received from the Ministry. After some
deliberations, the Committee approved the categorization of action taken
replies as shown in the Memoranda and adopted the draft Report without
any modification. They authorized the Chairperson to finalise and present
this Report to Parliament after getting it factually verified from the
concerned Department.
*3. *** *** *** *** ***
*4. *** *** *** *** ***
*5. *** *** *** *** ***
The Committee, then, adjourned.
* Matter not related to this Report.

36
APPENDIX
(Vide Para 4 of Introduction of the Report)
ANALYSIS OF ACTION TAKEN BY GOVERNMENT ON THE SIXTIETH
REPORT OF COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE (2013-14) ON
‘PRICING OF AGRICULTURAL PRODUCE’ OF THE
MINISTRY OF AGRICULTURE (DEPARTMENT
OF AGRICULTURE AND COOPERATION)
(i) Total number of Recommendations 15
(ii) Recommendations/Observations which have been Accepted by the
Government:
Para Nos. 3, 8, 9, 10, 11, 13, 14, 15
Total : 08
Percentage 53.33%
(iii) Recommendations/Observations which the Committee Do not desire
to pursue in view of the Government’s replies
Para No. Nil
Total : NIL
Percentage 00%
(iv) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies of the
Government have not been accepted by the Committee
Para Nos. 1, 2, 6, 7
Total : 04
Percentage 26.67%
(v) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which Final replies
of the Government are still awaited
Para Nos. 4, 5, 12
Total : 03
Percentage 20.00%

“All Parliamentary Publications including DRSC Reports are 
available on sale at the Sales Counter, Reception, Parliament House 
(Tel. Nos. 23034726, 23034495, 23034496), Agents appointed 
by Lok Sabha Secretariat and Publications Division, Ministry 
of Information and Broadcasting, CGO Complex, Lodhi Road, New 
Delhi (Tel. Nos. 24367260, 24365610) and their outlets. The said 
information is available on website ‘www.parliamentofindia.nic.in’.
The Souvenir Items with logo of Parliament are also available at Sales 
Counter, Reception, Parliament House, New Delhi. The Souvenir 
items with Parliament Museum logo are available for sale at Souvenir 
Shop (Tel. No. 23035323), Parliament Museum, Parliament Library 
Building, New Delhi. List of these items are available on the website 
mentioned above.”