FIFTEENTH REPORT
COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE
(2014-2015)
(SIXTEENTH LOK SABHA)
MINISTRY OF AGRICULTURE
(DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURAL RESEARCH AND EDUCATION)
DEMANDS FOR GRANTS
(2014-2015)
[Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/
Recommendations contained in the Second Report of
the Committee on Agriculture (2014-2015)]
Presented to Lok Sabha on 11.08.2015
Laid on the Table of Rajya Sabha on 11.08.2015
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
August, 2015/ Sravana, 1937 ( Saka)


COA No. 325
Price : R  93.00
© 2015 B Y L OK SABHA S ECRETARIAT
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct
of Business in Lok Sabha (Fifteenth Edition) and printed by
Aegean Offset Printers, New Delhi.

CONTENTS
PAGE
COMPOSITION OF THE C OMMITTEE ............................................. (iii)
INTRODUCTION ................................................................. (v)
CHAPTER I Report ....................................................... 1
CHAPTER II Observations/Recommendations which have been
accepted by the Government .......................... 17
CHAPTER III Observations/Recommendations which the Committee
do not desire to pursue in view of the Government’s
replies ....................................................... 54
CHAPTER IV Observations/Recommendations in respect of which
replies of the Government have not been accepted
by the Committee ........................................ 55
C
HAPTER V Observations/Recommendations in respect of
which final replies of the Government are still
awaited ...................................................... 61
A
PPENDIX
Minutes of the 31st Sitting of the Committee held on
06 August, 2015 ................................................... 65
ANNEXURE
Analysis of Action Taken by the Government on the
Recommendations contained in the Second Report
(Sixteenth Lok Sabha) of the Committee on Agriculture
(2014-2015) ......................................................... 67
(i)

COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE
(2014-2015)
Shri Hukm Deo Narayan Yadav —  Chairperson
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Sanganna Amarappa
3. Prof. Ravindra Vishwanath Gaikwad
4. Shri Nalin Kumar Kateel
5. Md. Badaruddoza Khan
6. Shri C. Mahendran
7. Dr. Tapas Mandal
8. Shri Janardan Mishra
9. Shri Ajay Nishad
10. Shri Dalpat Singh Paraste
11. Shri Nityanand Rai
12. Shri Mukesh Rajput
13. Shri Konakalla Narayana Rao
14. Shri C.L. Ruala
15. Shri Arjun Charan Sethi
16. Shri Satyapal Singh
17. Shri Virendra Singh
*18. Vacant
19. Shri Jai Prakash Narayan Yadav
20. Shri Dharmendra Yadav
21. Shri B.S. Yeddyurappa
Rajya Sabha
22. Shri A.W. Rabi Bernard
23. Shrimati Renuka Chowdhury
(iii)
*Vice Shri Kadiyam Srihari who ceased to be the Member of the Committee on his
resignation from Lok Sabha w.e.f. 11.06.2015 vide Notification No. 21/1/2015/T(B)
dated 15.06.2015.

(iv)
24. Sardar Sukhdev Singh Dhindsa
25. Shri Janardan Dwivedi
26. Shri Vinay Katiyar
27. Shri Mohd. Ali Khan
28. Shri Rajpal Singh Saini
29. Shri Ram Nath Thakur
30. Shri Shankarbhai N. Vegad
31. Shri Darshan Singh Yadav
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Shri Abhijit Kumar — Joint Secretary
2. Shri N.K. Pandey — Director
3. Smt. Juby Amar — Additional Director
4. Shri Sumesh Kumar — Under Secretary

(v)
INTRODUCTION
I, the Chairperson, Committee on Agriculture (2014-2015) having
been authorized by the Committee to submit the Report on their behalf,
present this Fifteenth Report on Action Taken by the Government on
the Observations/Recommendations contained in the Second Report of
the Committee on Demands for Grants (2014-15) pertaining to Ministry
of Agriculture (Department of Agricultural Research and Education).
2. The Second Report of the Committee on Agriculture (2014-2015)
on ‘Demands for Grants ’ (2014-15) pertaining to Ministry of Agriculture
(Department of Agricultural Research and Education) was presented to
Lok Sabha and laid on the Table of Rajya Sabha on 18 December, 2014.
The Action Taken Replies on the Report were received on 12 March,
2015.
3. The Report was considered and adopted by the Committee at
their Sitting held on 06 August, 2015.
4. An analysis of the Action Taken by the Government on the
Observations/Recommendations contained in the Second Report of the
Committee is given in Annexure.
   N
EW D ELHI; HUKM DEO NARAYAN YADAV,
07 August, 2015 Chairperson,
16 Sravana, 1937 (Saka) Committee on Agriculture.

CHAPTER I
REPORT
This Report of the Committee on Agriculture deals with the action
taken by the Government on the Recommendations contained in the
Second Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) of the Committee on Agriculture
(2014-2015) on Demands for Grants (2014-15) pertaining to Ministry of
Agriculture (Department of Agricultural Research and Education) which
was presented to Lok Sabha on 18.12.2014 and laid on the Table of
Rajya Sabha on the same day.
1.2 The Ministry of Agriculture (Department of Agricultural Research
and Education) have furnished Action Taken Replies in respect of all the
30 Observations/Recommendations contained in the Report. These have
been categorized as under:
(i) Observations/Recommendations that have been accepted by
the Government:
Recommendation Sl. Nos. 1, 2, 3, 5, 6, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13,
14, 17, 18, 20, 21, 22, 23, 24, 25, 27, 28, 29 and 30
(Chapter-II)
(ii) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which the
Committee do not desire to pursue in view of the
Government’s reply:
Recommendation Sl. No. —Nil—
(Chapter-III)
(iii) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which action
taken replies of the Government have not been accepted by
the Committee:
Recommendation Sl. Nos. 7, 16, 19 and 26
(Chapter-IV)
(iv) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which final
replies of the Government are still awaited:
Recommendation Sl. Nos. 4 and 15
(Chapter-V)

2
1.3 The Committee trust that utmost importance would be given
to implementation of the Observations/Recommendations accepted
by the Government. In cases, where it is not possible for the
Department to implement the Recommendations in letter and spirit
for any reason, the matter should be reported to the Committee
with reasons for non-implementation. The Committee desire that
further Action Taken Notes on the Observations/Recommendations
contained in Chapter-I and final Action Taken Replies to the
Recommendations contained in Chapter-V of this Report be furnished
to them at an early date.
1.4 The Committee will now deal with the action taken by the
Government on some of the Recommendations in the succeeding
paragraphs.
IMPLEMENTATION OF INITIATIVES ANNOUNCED FOR 12TH PLAN
Recommendation (Serial No. 4)
1.5 The Committee had recommended as under:—
“The Committee are unhappy to note that many new initiatives
such as Rural Entrepreneurship Awareness Development Yojana
(READY), farmers First, Attracting and Retaining Youth in Agriculture
(ARYA), establishment of Central Agricultural Universities at Bihar,
Bundelkhand, and Barapani initiated for implementation during
12th Plan are yet to commence nearly three years after the
commencement of the Plan. The Committee have been informed
that the pace of progress of these initiatives has been affected due
to reduced allocations to the DARE. They have been informed that
the proposal relating to some initiatives such as READY & ARYA are
pending before the Ministry of Finance and CCEA respectively. The
Committee have been assured that these proposals will be
implemented soon after getting the approvals.
Similarly, formalities for establishment of CAU Bihar and Barapani
have been initiated. The Committee deplore the slow pace of work
in implementation of new initiatives during the 12th Plan. The
Committee are of the view that preliminary work for implementation
of these schemes and the proposals for approval should have been
completed well in time. The Committee desired that requisite
formalities for launching these schemes/projects should be
completed without further loss of time and it should be ensured
that implementation is taken up during the current financial year
so that intended benefits planned under these schemes are available
in time. ”

3
1.6 The Department in their Action Taken Reply has stated as under:—
“The Rani Lakshmi Bai Central Agricultural University, Bundelkhand
has started classes for the B.Sc. (Hons.) Agriculture course from the
year 2014-15. The Memorandum of Understanding (MoU) has been
signed between Government of Bihar and Union Government to
convert Rajendra Agricultural University (RAU), Samastipur, Bihar
to Central Agricultural University (CAU).
As far as Central Agriculture University (CAU), Barapani is concerned,
two States  i.e. Nagaland and Meghalaya are to be covered under
this. This includes establishment of colleges in Meghalaya and
Nagaland. The EFC of CAU, Imphal has been approved by the
Union Government in which budget allocation for the colleges to be
established in these States have been approved in the 12th Plan.
The Government of Meghalaya has been requested for acquiring the
additional 20 acres of land, in contiguity to the 20 acres which has
already been identified for the College of Post Graduate Studies,
Umiam, under Central Agricultural University, Imphal.The preparation
of the EFC of CAU, Barapani and the draft Bill for Parliament is in
process.
The new initiative such as Farmers FIRST is a part of the KVK
Scheme and its Cabinet Note is under process. The project will be
implemented as soon as it is approved by the Government. Student
READY (Rural Entrepreneurship Awareness Development Yojana) is
part of the scheme “Strengthening and Development of Higher
Agricultural Education in India” and its cabinet note is under process.
The scheme ARYA (Attracting and Retaining Youth in Agriculture)
has been approved in the 12th plan EFC of ‘National Agricultural
Innovation Foundation ’ and the work has already started. ”
1.7 The Committee, while showing their displeasure over slow
pace of implementation of new initiative such as Rural
Entrepreneurship Awareness Development Yojana (READY), Farmers
FIRST, Attracting and Retaining Youth in Agriculture (ARYA),
establishment of Central Agricultural Universities at Bihar,
Bundelkhand, and Barapani had desired the Department to ensure
implementation of these initiatives during 2014-15 after completion
of all requisite formalities. The Department in their Action Taken
Reply apart from stating status of establishment of Central Agriculture
Universities in Bihar, Bundelkhand and Barapani have informed that
Cabinet Note for two Schemes namely Farmers FIRST and Student
READY are under process and these will be implemented after

4
approval by the Government. Regarding the ARYA Scheme, the
Committee have been informed that work for Scheme ARYA has
already been started under EFC of National Agriculture Innovation
fund. The Committee while recognizing progress made towards
implementation of new initiatives are disappointed with Programme
planning capacity of the Department as they were not able to launch
initiatives planned for 12th plan even after more than three years.
The Committee, therefore, desire the Department to bring
professionalism in Planning division and enhance co-ordination with
the State Governments so that pace of programme Planning as well
as implementation may be improved for the betterment of farming
community of the country.
REVENUE RECEIPT OF DARE/ICAR
Recommendation (Serial No. 7)
1.8 The Committee had recommended as under:—
“The Committee note that revenue generated by the institutes
under ICAR are not reflected in Revenue Receipt presented to the
Lok Sabha. They have been apprised that revenue generated from
consultancy services and training are utilized as per approval given
by the Ministry of Finance and that license fee generated by the
institutes is remitted to the ICAR as per ICAR Guidelines. The
Committee are given to understand that all revenues received by
the Government by way of taxes like Income Tax, Central Excise,
Customs and other receipts flowing to the Government in connection
with the conduct of Government business  i.e. Non-Tax Revenues
are credited into the Consolidated Fund constituted under Article
266 (1) of the Constitution of India. The Committee, therefore, find
violation of this provision of the Constitution as any money deposited
to the Consolidated Fund of India ought to have the approval of
Parliament for incurring expenditure. They desire that such revenue
generated under the administrative control of the Department should
be reflected in the budget documents including detailed Demands
for Grants. They would like DARE to clarify the issue and rectify the
irregularity, if any, in this regard. ”
1.9 The Department in their Action Taken Reply has stated as under:—
“The General Financial Rules GFR 2008(iii) states “All autonomous
organizations, new or already in existence should be encouraged to
maximize generation of internal resource and eventually attain self-

5
sufficiency ”. ICAR, though a non-profit scientific organization,
generates internal resources through the following:
1. Income from Sales of farm produce/livestock
2. Income from Services
3. Fees/Subscriptions
4. Income from Royalty, Publications etc.
The Revenue generated by ICAR is netted while submitting the
demand of funds to the Ministry of Finance and as such the Revenue
generated by ICAR is utilized by ICAR itself. The utilization of
internal resources as such is permitted by Secretary (Expenditure),
Ministry of Finance vide D.E.A Id. No. F . 2(45)-B (CDN)/2010 dated
12.09.2011. The revenue generated by ICAR are not transferred to
the Department viz., DARE and as such do not form a part of
Non-Tax revenues of DARE. ”
(Reply to Recommendation Serial No. 07)
1.10 The Committee while observing non-reflection of revenue
generated from the Institutes under ICAR in revenue receipt presented
to Lok Sabha, had opined that revenue generated under administrative
control of the Department should be reflected in Budget Documents
including detailed Demands for Grants and had desired the DARE to
clarify the issue and rectify the irregularity, if any. The Department
in their action taken reply while referring to permission by Secretary
(Expenditure), Ministry of Finance Vide D.E.A Id. No. F. 2(45)-B
(CDN)/2010 dated 12.09.2011 have stated that the revenue generated
by ICAR is netted while submitting the demand of funds to the
Ministry of Finance and as such the Revenue generated by ICAR is
utilized by ICAR itself. They have further stated that revenue
generated by ICAR are not transferred to the Department viz., DARE
and as such do not form a part of Non-Tax revenues of DARE. The
Committee are not convinced with the reply of the Department
regarding validity of approval of Ministry of Finance without approval
by the Parliament. The Committee find this practice as violation of
this provision of the Constitution as any money earned by the
Government institutes ought to be deposited to the Consolidated
Fund of India and therefore, require approval of Parliament for
expenditure. The Committee, therefore, direct the Department to
convey the serious concern of the Committee to the Ministry of
Finance and to present a note on constitutional provisions regarding
competence of the Government to allow use of commercial earnings
of Government Departments without the approval and sanction of
Parliament.

6
ACTION PLAN TO CONTROL ARSENIC CONTAMINATION OF GROUNDWATER
IN WEST BENGAL
Recommendation (Serial No. 14)
1.11 The Committee had recommended as under:—
“The Committee note that more than 3 crore people in 34,000
square km area in the State of West Bengal are prone to chronic
arsenic toxicity due to contamination of groundwater and high build
of arsenic in soil and thereby its subsequent accumulation in crops
and vegetables. They have been apprised that ICAR has come up
with some practical mitigation strategy such as sowing of low arsenic
accumulating rice varieties, use of organic manure, provision for
irrigation from deep tubewell, sowing of legume and pulses requiring
reduced irrigation etc. to control the harmful effect of arsenic
contamination. The Committee urge the Department/ICAR to take
steps for widespread dissemination of these strategies to local
population in affected areas. At the same time, there is urgent
need for taking up this issue on priority basis and granting funds for
the task as it directly affects the human and livestock health. The
Committee, therefore, recommend the ICAR to prepare an action
plan to mitigate the harmful effects of arsenic contamination in
consultation with Department of Agriculture and Cooperation,
Ministry of Health & Family Welfare, Ministry of Science & Technology,
Ministry of Human Resource Development, Ministry of Environment
& Forest and Government of West Bengal. ”
1.12 The Department in their Action Taken Reply has stated as
under:—
“The ICAR will provide the required technological backstopping to
the efforts being made by the different ministries including Ministry
of Water Resources, River Development & Ganga Rejuvenation
(WRRD&GR) and also help in the process of developing Coordinated
Action Plan in this direction. ”
1.13 keeping in view of hardship being faced by a large population
in West Bengal due to chronic arsenic toxicity, the Committee had
desired the Department to disseminate information regarding
mitigation strategy as devised by ICAR scientists among local
population and to prepare an action plan to mitigate the harmful
effects of arsenic contamination in consultation with Department of
Agriculture and Cooperation, Ministry of Health & Family Welfare,
Ministry of Science & Technology, Ministry of Human Resource

7
Development, Ministry of Environment & Forest and Government of
West Bengal. The Department in their Action Taken Reply without
enumerating steps taken in this regard have stated that they will
provide the required technological backstopping to the efforts being
made by the different ministries including Ministry of Water
Resources, River Development & Ganga Rejuvenation (WRRD&GR)
and also help in the process of developing Coordinated Action Plan
in this direction. The Committee are not convinced with the
lackadaisical approach of the Department to avoid preparation of
action plan. The Committee are of the opinion that preparation of
a well researched action plan to mitigate harmful effects of Arsenic
contamination will provide a clear roadmap to concerned Ministries,
State Governments, and other stakeholders to take effective action
to avoid hardship to local population. The Committee, therefore,
reiterate to devise an Action Plan in this regard with proactive
consultation with all stakeholders as the issue merits immediate
attention.
NATIONAL ACTION PLAN TO CONTROL THE MENACE OF PARTHENIUM
GRASS
Recommendation (Serial No. 15)
1.14 The Committee had recommended as under:—
“The Committee note that problem of unabated growth of
‘Parthenium’ in large parts of the Country is affecting availability
of fodder for cattle, thereby directly affecting the health of
livestock/cattle as also income of farmers. They note that
mechanical, chemical and biological methods are available for
management of growth of Parthenium grass. The Committee have
been apprised that Directorate of Weed Science Research (WSR) has
developed a cheap technology for mass multiplication of a bio-
agent called ‘zygogramma bicolorata ’ which helps to lower down
the impact of Parthenium and the Weed Science Research has made
efforts to spread awareness about practices to control spread of
Parthenium. They have also been informed about need of large
scale efforts on the analogy of ‘Swachh Bharat Abhiyaan’ to control
the menace of Parthenium grass. The Committee, therefore,
recommend to the Government to frame a concrete action plan to
spread awareness about the technology on a country wide scale to
control the unabated growth of Parthenium and other exotic weeds
affecting availability of fodders to the cattle. The Committee,
strongly, recommend the DARE to frame a coordinated action plan
in this regard in consultation with DAC and Ministry of Rural

8
Development under intimation to the Committee of the outcome.
The Committee also recommend that the Department should find
out feasibility of using the method of spraying the salt water on
Parthenium.
The Committee urge the Department to probe the possibility of
relating and integrating this action plan to control Parthenium and
the use of bio-agent to control on the road sides which are left
unattended with ‘Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment
Guarantee Act ’ Schemes by involving the unemployed labour in
using the technology for the same. They also emphasize that
awareness should be enhanced for proper results. ”
1.15 The Department in their Action Taken Reply has stated as
under:—
“Efforts have been made at Directorate of Weed Research, Jabalpur
(DWR) to manage Parthenium by mechanical and manual, cultural,
chemical and biological management methods. Biological control of
Parthenium through a leaf feeding bio-agent Zygogramma bicolorata
has been successful. As part of the integrated management approach,
in the waste lands and on the sides of roads and railway tracks,
replacement of Parthenium by competitive plants like Cassia tora
and C. sereicea  has been recommended.
DWR probed the feasibility of spraying salt water on Parthenium for
its control. Salt water (15-20%) kills small and succulent plants but
the mature plants escape. Two to three salt spraying will be required
in a year for complete control as Parthenium which has the ability
to grow throughout the year, and it may also result in soil salinity
problems. Therefore, instead of salt, herbicides in low dose will be
more effective to manage Parthenium under integrated approach.
DWR has been observing ‘Parthenium Awareness Week ’ involving
State Agricultural Universities (SAUs), Krishi Vigyan Kendras (KVKs),
ICAR institutes, and many NGOs, schools, colleges, etc. To facilitate
successful implementation of the programme, DWR published posters,
extension pamphlets and made video films on Parthenium and
distributed among the stakeholders in addition to publishing research
and popular articles, bulletins and books on management of
Parthenium. From 2014 onwards, DWR is appealing to all KVKs,
SAUs and ICAR institutions to make their campus Parthenium-free
by adopting regular management practices.
Apart from this, as suggested by the Committee, the department
has communicated the recommendation to create awareness about
practices to control Parthenium to the Department of Agriculture

9
and Cooperation to sensitize them on the menace of Parthenium as
well as solicited their cooperation to help bring out an action plan.
The Ministry of Rural Development (MoRD) has also been requested
for required interventions under MGNREGA. Responses from these
Government agencies are awaited. ”
1.16 The Committee had recommended the Department to frame
a co-ordinated action plan to control the menace of ‘Parthenium’ in
consultation with DAC and Ministry of Rural Development which is
affecting availability of fodder for cattle, thereby directly affecting
the health of livestock/cattle as also income of farmers. The
Committee had also recommended the Department to probe the
possibility of relating and integrating this action plan to control
Parthenium and the use of bio-agent to control on the road sides
which are left unattended with ‘Mahatma Gandhi National Rural
Employment Guarantee Act ’ Schemes by involving the unemployed
labour in using the technology for the same. The Committee had
also recommended the Department to find out feasibility of using
the method of spraying the salt water on Parthenium. The Department
in their action taken reply apart from stressing on use of herbicides
in low dose to manage Parthenium under integrated approach rather
than spray of salt water as later will cause problem of salinity have
enumerated the steps taken by Directorate of Weed Research to
enhance awareness and to make KVKs, SAUs and ICAR institutions to
make their campus Parthenium-free by adopting regular management
practices. On the issue of preparation of action plan, the Department
have stated that they are in touch with their counterparts in
Department of Agriculture and Co-operation to bring out action plan.
They are also awaiting response of Department of Rural Development
for required interventions under MGNREGA. The committee appreciate
efforts made by the Department to control the menace of Parthenium.
The Committee also desire the department to proactively pursue the
Department of Rural Development for formulating a dedicated
component to control the menace of Parthenium under MGNREGA
schemes.
AVAILABILITY OF ADVANCE PRICE FORECAST OF AGRICULTURAL
COMMODITY
Recommendation (Serial No. 16)
1.17 The Committee had recommended as under:—
“The Committee are of the opinion that availability of advance
price forecast before sowing of crops could be very beneficial to
the farmers in pre-sowing decision making and thereby enhancing

10
farmers’ income. The Committee note that ICAR is providing facility
of price forecast for twenty agricultural commodity through network
of 16 centres located throughout the country. The Committee note
the efforts of ICAR in the important area of agricultural extension.
However , the Committee are of view that there is need for bringing
more crops especially the major crops region-wise under their
purview in order to cover larger number of farmers in other parts
of the country as well. The Committee, therefore, recommend the
DARE to enhance the coverage of agricultural commodity along
with number of centres providing price forecast for the benefit of
farmers especially the small and marginal farmers in the pre-sowing
decision making. ”
1.18 The Department in their Action Taken Reply has stated as
under:—
“In order to help farmers take judicious decision to market their
farm produce ICAR ’s institute “National Institute of Agricultural
Economics and Policy Research (NIAP)” started a Network project of
Market Intelligence in June, 2013 to provide reliable and timely
price forecasts to farmers on selected agricultural commodities.
The project generates price forecasts for major agricultural
commodities in different parts of the country through the network
of following Centres:—
Sl.No. Institute Name Commodities Allotted
12 3
Lead Centre: NIAP , New Delhi
Collaborating Centres
1. ANGRAU, Hyderabad Chickpea, Groundnut, Maize, Cotton,
Chillies
2. BHU, Varanasi T omato, Potato, Mango, Maize,
Rapeseed & Mustard
3. IABM Bikaner, Rajasthan Cumin, Chickpea, Pearmillet,
Clusterbean, Corriander
4. CPRI, Shimla Potato
5. GBPUA&T , Pantnagar P otato, Fine Paddy, Tomato,
Cabbage, Vegetable Pea
6. ICARNEH, Barapani Ginger, Turmeric, Potato, Pineapple,
Tomato

11
 7. IIHR, Bangalore Onion, Tomato, Mango,
Pomegranate, Grapes
 8. IIPR, Kanpur Chickpea, Pigeonpea, Lentil, Black
Gram, Green Gram
 9. JAU, Gujarat Castor, Pigeonpea, Potato, Cotton,
Groundnut, Maize
10. JNKVV, Madhya Pradesh Soyabean, Chickpea, Maize, Mustard,
Tur
11. KAU, Thrissur Pepper, Tapioca, Coconut
12. OUAT , Bhubaneswar Coconut, Cotton, Turmeric, Maize,
Green Gram, Ginger , Groundnut
13. PDKV, Akola G reen Gram, Pigeonpea, Onion,
Maize, Soyabean
14. UAS, Bengaluru Maize, Banana, Ragi, Red Gram,
Potato
15. YSPUHF , Solan Apple, Tomato, Pea, Ginger , Maize
16. SKUAST , Shalimar Apple, Walnut, Cherry, Pear
The price forecasts are disseminated to the farmers before sowing
and during harvests so that informed and intelligent decisions can
be taken by the farmers for acreage allocation and timing of sale
of their produce. With NIAP , New Delhi, as lead Centre, the project
is implemented at 16 locations with involvement of 12 State
Agricultural Universities and 4 ICAR Institutes. Each centre is required
to develop and disseminate pre-sowing and pre-harvest price
forecasts of around five agricultural commodities selected based on
the regional importance. Due care is taken to generate the
dependable forecasts by using scientific techniques and also taking
into consideration the farmers’ and traders’ perception into account.
The price forecasts are disseminated to farmers using local
newspaper, Television, IFFCO SMS Service, Farmers fair , special
meetings with farmers, Institute Websites and display in mandis. ”
1.19 The Committee had recommended the Department to
enhance the coverage of agricultural commodity bringing more crops
along with number of centers providing advance price forecast for
the benefit of farmers as availability of advance price forecast before
sowing of crops could be very beneficial to the farmers in pre-
 12 3

12
sowing decision making and thereby enhancing farmers ’ income.
The Department in their action taken reply have submitted already
known information about ‘Network project of Market Intelligence ’
being undertaken by the National Institute of Agricultural Economics
and Policy Research (NIAP) and have not made any efforts to enhance
coverage of agricultural products and number of centers to make
information regarding price forecast to farmers in wider areas than
existing regions covered. The Committee, therefore, once again
reiterate their earlier recommendation to enhance coverage of crops
and number of centers in order to make this information available
for the benefit of large number of farmers.
FIXATION OF PRICES OF SEEDS DEVELOPED BY ICAR
Recommendation (Serial No. 19)
1.20 The Committee had recommended as under:—
“The Committee note that DARE alongwith other stakeholders is
involved in fixing prices for Breeder Seed and Sale Rate is fixed
keeping in view the production cost and considering the interest of
the farming community. They have further been informed that price
of foundation and certified seed is decided by respective seed
producing public agencies like NSC and respective State seed
corporations, private seed companies as per the prevailing market
rates and cost of production. The Committee are of view that
adequate availability of seeds of good quality at reasonable price
to farmers is of utmost significance for enhancing production and
productivity of farm produce. Further , outcome of R&D work with
public money should be available at reasonable prices to the intended
beneficiaries. They find the current practice of leaving fixation of
final prices of seed varieties to the private sector works, at times,
against the interest of the farmers. The Committee recommend
that ICAR should develop a seed bank where all varieties of seeds
are available to the farmers, that is traditional seeds, newly
researched seeds, hybrid seeds, etc. R&D for upgraded traditional
seeds with quality improvements and increased productivity should
be developed by ICAR proactively. They also recommend the DARE
to devise a policy for fixation of final reasonable prices of seed
varieties developed by ICAR at the time of transfer of technology
which are fair and within the reach of majority of small and marginal
farmers in the country. Seed varieties developed by ICAR should be
sold with such pre-conditioned appropriate clause that the farmers
receive them at reasonable price. Adequate monitoring mechanism
should be put in place for the purpose. ”

13
1.21 The Department in their Action Taken Reply has stated as
under:—
“Mandate of ICAR is to produce nucleus and breeder seed. Crop
Science Division of ICAR coordinates the breeder seed production of
field crops in the country with the cooperation of various SAUs and
crop based institutes. The breeder seed is produced on the basis of
indents received from private as well as public sector organizations
placed with DAC which in turn consolidates the indents and forward
to ICAR. The production of breeder seed is demand driven. Production
of quality seed (foundation and certified) of various crops is primarily
the responsibility of the States although ICAR institutes also produce
limited quantity of certified/Truthfully Labelled (TL) seeds as they
are mandated basically to carry out research and development
activities. However , all possibilities will be explored to utilize the
States and Central machinery including KVK to maximizing seeds/
quality planting material production. Each institute fixes the price
of seed keeping in view the prevailing market price, cost of
production and interest of farmers. ”
1.22 In order to make available quality seed to farmers at
reasonable price, the Committee had recommended the Department
to devise a policy for fixation of final reasonable prices of seed
varieties developed by ICAR at the time of transfer of technology
which are fair and within the reach of majority of small and marginal
farmers in the country as these research are funded with public
money. The Department in their action taken replies apart from
submitting already known information regarding mandate of ICAR to
produce nucleus and breeder seed as per indents received from DAC
have stated that Each institute fixes the price of seed keeping in
view the prevailing market price, cost of production and interest of
farmers. The Committee are of view that intellectual property rights
related to seeds developed by the ICAR institutes are exclusive
property of Government of India and it can put reasonable restriction/
clause on final price after taking factors of input cost incurred during
production and marketing of certified seeds. The Committee,
therefore, do not find merit in the claim of the Department that
price of seed fixed by ICAR institutes based on the prevailing market
price and cost of production are in interest of farmers as many cases
of excessive pricing of seeds have been reported in media and other
plateform. The Committee, therefore once again reiterate their
earlier recommendation to incorporate a clause about reasonable
pricing whenever ICAR institutes transfer technologies and related
information related to seeds to any public/private seed companies.

14
OPENING OF ADDITIONAL KVKs
Recommendation (Serial No. 26)
1.23 The Committee had recommended as under:—
“The Committee has been informed that there is a provision of
opening one KVK in each of the rural district of the country. However,
in larger districts composite index ranking based on three parameters
with equal weightage for ranking the districts, viz. Geographical
Area, Rural Population and Net Sown Area, one additional KVK is
sanctioned. The Committee note that ICAR has been able to establish
only 641 KVKs in the country as on date. They also note that only
45 Districts in 10 States of the country has been able to get an
additional KVKs. The Committee are of view that the provision for
setting of one KVK in each rural district of the country is insufficient
keeping in view large areas, number of farmers and diverse agro-
climatic regions of the country. The Committee are of view that in
order to disseminate information about the research, refinement of
technology/products and its demonstration to maximum numbers
of small and marginal farmers DARE should aim for establishment
of one KVK in each rural Block of the country. Only with this level
of spread, the farmers of the country would be able to receive
necessary information and agricultural input necessary for making
agriculture a productive profession with suitable return on their
investment. The Committee, therefore, recommend the DARE to
devise ways and means for establishment of one KVK in each Block
of the country. They also emphasize that Department should promote
training from successful farmers to other farmers i.e. farmer to
farmer training as well as training ‘the trainer ’ for far and wide
reach and coverage of knowledge i.e. covering and training 67 lakh
farmers.”
1.24 The Department in their Action Taken Reply has stated as
under:—
“As Agricultural Extension is the State Subject, therefore, large
scale disseminations of technologies to farmers is the responsibility
of State Governments, which are operating the main extension
machinery. However, the KVKs are supplementing and complementing
the efforts of the State Governments by taking up the role of front
line extension and providing technological back stopping to the
field extension system.
As observed by the Committee, so far the Government has approved
for sanctioning one KVK in each of the rural districts in the country
and one additional KVK in 50 selected larger districts out of which

15
45 KVKs have been sanctioned. Besides, proposal has been made
for approval of the Government for one additional KVK in such
more 55 larger districts and 5 hilly and mountainous districts in the
country during the XII Plan.
As far as setting up of KVKs in each block of the country is concerned,
it is stated that KVK System is an effective outreach arm of National
Agricultural Research System mandated to assess and demonstrate
agricultural technologies, capacity development and work as
knowledge and resource centre in the district. A number of expert
Committees have recommended that KVKs should work as a link
between research and different development departments for
fostering the technology transfer process from lab to land and work
as an umbrella for all agriculture and related schemes at district
level for technological backstopping. The KVK is perfectly located
at district level to lead, incubate local innovations and capacity
development. Setting up of KVKs at block level may lead to its
involvement in non-scientific development works. KVKs are
developing the capacity of Subject Matter Specialists/Members of
Block Technology Teams and Farmers Friends who are involved in
field extension under ATMA scheme. ”
1.25 Keeping in view the criticality of agriculture extension
services for the benefit of farmers and to make agriculture productive,
the Committee had recommended the Department to devise ways
and means for establishment of one KVK in each Block of the country.
They had also emphasized the Department to promote training from
successful farmers to other farmers i.e. farmer to farmer training as
well as training ‘the trainer’ for wider reach and coverage and training
67 lakh farmers. The Department in their Action Taken Reply has
stated that KVKs are only supplementing and complementing the
efforts of the State Governments by taking up the role of front line
extension and providing technological back stopping to the field
extension system as Agriculture being a State subject, main
responsibility of agriculture extension lies with the State
Governments. they further stated that KVK is perfectly located at
district level to lead, incubate local innovations and capacity
development and setting up of KVKs at block level may lead to its
involvement in non-scientific development works. On the issue of
farmers to farmers training, the Department submitted that KVKs
are developing the capacity of Subject Matter Specialists/Members
of Block Technology Teams and Farmers Friends who are involved in
field extension under ATMA scheme. The Committee are of view
that availability of qualitative and timely inputs on agriculture has

16
the capacity to transform the Indian agriculture apart from enhancing
income of majority of small and marginal farmers. In this regard,
KVKs are much better placed for the work of frontline agriculture
extension services due to their linkage with ICAR institutes. At the
same time, there is urgent need to increase the number of KVKs in
view of diverse agro-climatic regions and number of farmers in the
country. The Committee, therefore, once again reiterate their
recommendation regarding establishment of KVKs at the Block level.

17
CHAPTER II
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN
ACCEPTED BY THE GOVERNMENT
Recommendation (Serial No. 1)
The Committee take note that the Rule 331G of the Rules of
Procedure and Conduct of Business in Lok Sabha relating to examination
of Demands for Grants by the Departmentally Related Standing
Committees (DRSCs) was suspended by Hon ’ble Speaker , Lok Sabha to
enable the House to pass the Demands for Grants for the year 2009-10
during the Second Session of Sixteenth Lok Sabha without the same
being referred to the concerned DRSCs. The Demands were, however,
referred to the Standing Committees for examining the same after
their constitution and for presenting the Report to the House therein.
The Committee, after their constitution on 1st September, 2014 took
up examination of the Demands for Grants pertaining to the Ministry of
Agriculture for the year 2014-15. Since the Budget for the year
2014-15 has already been passed by the Parliament, the Committee
endorse the same. The Committee would however , like the Ministry to
take note of their recommendation while implementing various
programmes/schemes, etc. within the approved budget.
Reply of the Government
Noted for Compliance.
[Ministry of Agriculture O.M. No. 7(6)/2014, dated 12th March, 2015,
Department of Agricultural Research and Education]
AVAILABILITY OF FUNDS TO THE DARE
Recommendation (Serial No. 2)
The DARE/ICAR has been entrusted with the onerous responsibility
of spearheading the Research & Development in Agriculture and allied
sectors including education and extension activities. Research &
Development, agricultural innovations and diffusion of new technologies
are significant so as to meet the country ’s quest for food & nutritional
security while enhancing the income & employment. However, the
Committee note that ICAR has not been provided adequate funds as per

18
outlays approved for XII Plan. The Committee note that during the first
three years, the ICAR has been provided with only 40.5% of funds of
approved outlays of Rs. 25553 crore. The Committee are not satisfied
with the reasons that allocations to DARE has been reduced keeping in
view the total available resources in the country and demands of various
other Ministries/sectors like infrastructure for education, health,
sanitation etc. The Committee are apprised that every rupee invested
in Agriculture Sector would fetch a return of Rs. 13.5 crore. The
Committee are of the view that Research & Development for agriculture
and allied sectors should be accorded utmost priority with adequate
funds. This is necessary for development of expertise necessary for
making Indian agriculture ready to face challenges associated with
increasing population, changing trends in consumption, deteriorating
soil health, depleting resources, state of small & marginal farmers and
climate change. The Committee, therefore, urge the Ministry of Finance
and Planning Commission to enhance allocation to the Department/
ICAR matching the original outlay in the remaining years of XII plan to
meet the aforesaid challenges facing the Agriculture Sector.
Reply of the Government
The Department had forwarded this recommendation of the
Committee to the Ministry of Finance & Planning Commission (now NITI
Aayog) and requested to provide the left over amount out of the total
XII Five Year Plan allocation during the next two financial years
(2015-16 & 2016-17). Whereas the Budget Division of Department of
Economic Affairs, Ministry of Finance has stated that the Plan allocation
for the year 2015-16 will be made keeping in view the availability of
resources and other relevant factors. They further stated that the
recommendation made by the Committee would be taken into
consideration while allocating funds for the year 2015-16.
[Ministry of Agriculture O.M. No. 7(6)/2014, dated 12th March, 2015,
Department of Agricultural Research and Education]
Recommendation (Serial No. 3)
The Committee note that Agriculture in India accounts for over 14%
GDP and 12% of country ’s exports providing employment to over 50% of
the work force. The Committee find that 50% of the work force of the
country contributes only 14% in the GDP of the country. In order to
improve agricultural productivity, the Committee in their earlier reports
have time and again stressed emphatically about the need for earmarking
fund to the tune of at least 1% of agriculture GDP for R&D in agriculture.
However , the Government is yet to take effective steps in that direction.

19
The Committee are apprised that wherever there has been growth in
Agricultural Research, Agricultural Education or Agricultural Growth in
the world, that is at least 2% of their total GDP . The Committee note
that allocation during the first three years to the DARE/ICAR were only
0.59% of total allocation of Plan Budget as against approved outlay of
0.70% for XII Plan. The Committee are of the considered view that as
already stated curtailment in allocation for the R&D work in agriculture
will adversely affect the preparedness of the country to face challenges
posed by the phenomenon of climate change and may jeopardise food
security of the country. The Committee, therefore, strongly recommend
that the Department should approach the Planning Commission & Ministry
of Finance to enhance the share of DARE to at least 1% of GDP keeping
in view the significance of R&D in Agriculture Sector particularly in
relation to sustainable economic development and export earnings of
the country.
Reply of the Government
The Department had forwarded this recommendation of the
Committee to the Ministry of Finance and Planning Commission (now
NITI Aayog) for allocating at least 1% of Agriculture GDP as Plan Budget.
Whereas the Budget Division of Department of Economic Affairs, Ministry
of Finance has stated that the Plan allocation for the year 2015-16 will
be made keeping in view the availability of resources and other relevant
factors. They further stated that the recommendation made by the
Committee would be taken into consideration while allocating funds for
the year 2015-16.
[Ministry of Agriculture O.M. No. 7(6)/2014, dated 12th March, 2015,
Department of Agricultural Research and Education]
SEPARATE FUNDS FOR SCHEMES/INITIATIVES ANNOUNCED IN BUDGET
SPEECH
Recommendation (Serial No. 5)
The Committee note that no separate grants were provided to
DARE for implementation of schemes announced in Budget speech during
2012-13 and 2013-14. They also observe that Rs. 100 crore which were
provided by the Planning Commission to DARE in 2014-15 for
establishment of Fund for Climate Change were diverted to the Deptt.
of Agriculture & Co-operation and the Ministry of Environment and
Forests (MoEF) by the Ministry of Finance. The Committee have been
informed that the Ministry of Finance has again sent a clarification on
29th September , 2014 that this budget para belongs to both the Ministries

20
i.e.; MoEF and DARE. The Committee are concerned with the state of
affairs. They wonder why this confusion about demarcation has arisen.
Now that the position has been clarified by the Ministry of Finance,
there should be no delay in establishment of the fund and its fruitful
utilization. The Committee would like to be apprised of the progress
and achievement in this regard.
Reply of the Government
Ministry of Finance has recently clarified through a communication
that the fund of Rs. 100 crore has been diverted to Ministry of
Environment & Forests (MoEF); hence, further action will be taken by
MoEF .
[Ministry of Agriculture O.M. No. 7(6)/2014, dated 12th March, 2015,
Department of Agricultural Research and Education]
REVENUE RECEIPT OF DARE/ICAR
Recommendation (Serial No. 6)
The Committee note that ICAR has its own internal source of revenue
such as income from sale of farm produce/livestock, consultancy services,
training, Fee/subscriptions, royalty, publications etc. They have been
informed that ICAR has generated revenue of Rs. 50.69 crore and
Rs. 53.06 crore during 2012-13 and 2013-14 respectively. In addition to
this, revenue of Rs. 5.61 crore and Rs. 4.65 crore were generated from
consultancy services undertaken during 2012-13 and 2013-14 and
Rs. 9.64 crore generated from Business Process Development Units of
various ICAR institutes as technology license fee during 2011-12 to
2013-14. The Committee have also been informed that overall target
for revenue generation has been increased to Rs. 109.60 crore for
2014-15 vis-a-vis Rs. 53.06 crore achieved during 2013-14. They are of
the view that ICAR with its huge scientific manpower and available
knowledge base in terms of Intellectual Property Rights (IPRs) has
tremendous potential for enhanced revenue generation. They recommend
that ICAR while encouraging their scientists to create knowledge base
regarding innovative seeds varieties, agricultural implements etc. which
can cater to the domestic demand as well as for global application,
should market their products/knowledge/research in international market
so that revenue generation may be enhanced manyfolds. The Committee
desire ICAR to take steps to tap business opportunities available in
domestic and global markets.
Reply of the Government
Indian Council of Agricultural Research (ICAR) is making all out
efforts to commercialize the technologies developed by the Institutes.
Each institute under ICAR has Institute Technology Management Unit for

21
business planning and development. These units have the responsibility
for scouting the potential stakeholders for the use of developed
technologies and their licensing on mutually agreed terms and conditions
under the overall extant guidelines of the Council. The potential of
ICAR‘s huge scientific manpower and available knowledge base in terms
of intellectual property rights and revenue generation is dependent
upon the nature of IPR laws and the provisions included in these laws
and other related policies. Accordingly, the ICAR has taken steps and
developed its two guidelines for revenue generation. These are:
(i) ICAR Guidelines on Intellectual Property Management & Technology
Transfer/Commercialization, and (ii) ICAR Rules and Guidelines for
Professional Service Functions (Training, Consultancy, Contract Research
and Contract Service). Further, DARE/ICAR has established a public
limited for-profit company, namely, Agrinnovate India Ltd. for
commercialization of Technologies and services. Some of the Institutes
of the Council like IIHR and CPRI are commercializing and earning
significant revenue through sale of hybrids/varieties of our technologies
such as Micronutrients pheromones, PHT products, Engineering machines
and Bio-pesticide consultancy developed by the institutes. Several other
institutes like DRMR, Bharatpur; CRRI, Cuttack; DSR, Indore; DRR and
DSR, Hyderabad licensed their varieties/hybrids to many private seed
producing companies on the basis of fee and royalty.
The Council as per their mandates are generating revenue through
sale of farm-produce and products; training, consultancy and testing
fees; commercialization of technologies and other sources like entry
fee in aquarium etc. Various institutes initiated action to generate
revenue from, Testing, Training, Consultancy and Technology
commercialization including royalty. It is planned to utilize the pilot
plant facilities available with the institutes as well as technology transfer
to augment the resource generation. Furthermore, skilled manpower
available at various institutes are being focussed to serve the industry
and other stakeholders to increase revenue generation of the institute.
The institutes are being advised to take steps to tap business
opportunities available in domestic and global markets.
[Ministry of Agriculture O.M. No. 7(6)/2014, dated 12th March, 2015,
Department of Agricultural Research and Education]
CHALLENGES BEFORE INDIAN FARMING DUE TO CLIMATE CHANGE
Recommendation (Serial No. 8)
The Committee have been informed that predictions made by ICAR
using indigenous simulation models have shown that climate change is
likely to reduce wheat fields by 6 to 17% by 2020 (2011-2040), 13-29%

22
in 2050, (2041-2070) and 15-25% in 2080 (2071-2100). They note that
mega project National Initiative for Climate Resilient Agriculture (NICRA)
has been instituted in 2011 to enhance resilience of Indian agriculture
to climate change and climate variability through Strategic Research,
Technology Demonstration, Capacity Building and Sponsored/Competitive
Grant Projects. The Committee have been apprised that 130 model
villages have been established in climate vulnerable 130 districts under
this project and several climate resilient interventions like water
harvesting, direct seeded rice, system of rice intensification, alternate
wetting and drying, green manuring, deep placement of fertilizers and
feed supplements for livestock have been demonstrated on farmers ’
fields with a target of expanding these practices horizontally to other
districts. The Committee note that zero tillage in wheat, summer in
rice wheat system, green and brown manuring, mulching, protected
cultivation of vegetables, drip irrigation, bio-fertilizers, raised bed
planting are being promoted through capacity building interventions
and technological back stopping with demonstrations under satellite
village programme. However , the Committee have been informed that
some other activities planned to address impact of impending climate
change were affected due to reduced fund allocation and subsequent
cut at RE stage. They are of the view that R&D for development of new
crop varieties and practical strategies including introducing relevant
technology through satellite village programme are going to be corner
stone of resilience in agriculture to face challenges associated with
climate change. They are of the opinion that proactive steps taken in
this direction will help the country to lead the world in the scientific
innovations. The Committee, therefore, recommend the Government
to allocate adequate funds so that Planned R&D in the area of
preparedness for facing challenges that climate change will pose to
Indian agriculture are not hampered. They also recommend that
experiments in the 130 model districts be carried out in time and after
assessing the results of these experiments it could be extended to
other climate vulnerable districts in India. They also emphasize that in
order to manage impact of climate change and enhance farmers’ income,
relevant technology of IARI be introduced through satellite village
programme on wider scale. This would bring awareness with multiplier
effect as these villages work as light house of IARI technologies even
in the neighbouring areas. Further , every KVK may adopt a model village
within their jurisdiction, where the climate resilient technology could
be experimented.
Reply of the Government
The Department through its various centres of NICRA including multi-
disciplinary Centre for Environment Science and Climate Resilient
Agriculture (CESCRA) of IARI is already addressing issues related to

23
climate change under strategic research component to showcase climate
resilient technologies in adopted villages with a special emphasis on
rainfed and small-scale farmers.
As many as 100 KVKs have adopted a model village for demonstration
of climate resilient technologies in their respective districts. So far, 132
villages across the country have been covered by demonstrating
integrated packages of available and proven technologies for adaptation
and mitigation under climate variability. The activities will be expanded
in some more districts during XII plan.
ICAR is preparing a roadmap to face challenges that climate change
has posed to Indian agriculture through studies on climate change, its
impact on agriculture, rising temperature, damage due to extensive
precipitation and spread of viral diseases through vectors. The institutes
are focusing on developing heat tolerant varieties, use of root stocks
for mitigating flood, nature specific and nature generic breeding for
management of biotic and abiotic stress.
Further vast germplasm is being evaluated for frost resistance in
subtropical fruits and vegetables. Efforts are being initiated to integrate
agro forestry with horticulture to mitigate the impact of climate change
especially in east coast where cyclone is a threat.
[Ministry of Agriculture O.M. No. 7(6)/2014, dated 12th March, 2015,
Department of Agricultural Research and Education]
IMPLEMENTATION OF DISTRICT CONTINGENCY PLAN
Recommendation (Serial No. 9)
The Committee note that farmers are increasingly facing problems
of loss of crops and livelihood due to fluctuation in weather conditions
such as drought and heat stress caused by the factors associated with
climate change. They note that District level vulnerability atlas was
prepared by ICAR to develop and target appropriate adaptation measures
to regions that are more vulnerable and affected by climate change.
They were also apprised that District contingency plan developed by
the ICAR in coordination with the State Government were implemented
in current year and has been found very useful. The Committee are of
that view that preparation of District Contingency plan was a long
pending requirement and it will go a long way in solving problems faced
by the farmers in the country. However, the ICAR should further improve
the contingency plans on the basis of feedback received during
implementation. The Committee, therefore, recommend the DARE to
further fine-tune District Contingency Plans in keeping the difficulties/

24
suggestions during the implementation of this plan. The Committee
also recommend the Department to start awareness campaign to educate
farmers about contingency plan through print and electronic media as
well as through network of KVKs. Further, they desire that Agritech and
Agri Business firms be also involved in the process.
Reply of the Government
The Department has prepared Contingency Plans for 580 districts
vulnerable to climatic aberrations covering 25 States. Based on this,
interface meetings with different State Departments namely Karnataka,
Andhra Pradesh, Maharashtra, Gujarat, Rajasthan and Bihar were
organised to operationalize these plans. Efforts are being made to
refine these Contingency Plans based on the interactions with respective
State Agriculture Department, Department of Agriculture and Cooperation
(DAC), State Agriculture Universities (SAUs) and other stakeholders from
time to time. Uploading of contingency plan is assigned to Directorate
of Knowledge Management in Agriculture (DKMA) and is being done
regularly. As advised by the Committee, the necessary improvement
based on the feedback received from various corners will be incorporated
by ICAR-CRIDA, Hyderabad. The awareness campaign to educate farmers
will be done through social media, websites and print media. The ICAR
Institutes are also told to incorporate contingency plan in their newsletter
and other publications.
Apart from this, all the KVKs are involved in creating awareness
about contingency plan to educate farmers on improved agricultural
technologies through various extension programmes including print and
electronic media. During the current year, the KVKs organized 1.33 lakh
extension programmes through electronic and print media to have wider
coverage in the districts. These included electronic media in the form
of TV programmes, radio talks, CDs/DVDs, extension literature,
newspaper coverage, popular articles, leaflets, folders and books/
booklets.
[Ministry of Agriculture O.M. No. 7(6)/2014, dated 12th March, 2015,
Department of Agricultural Research and Education]
PREVENTION OF SOIL EROSION
Recommendation (Serial No. 10)
The Committee are aware that soil erosion due to natural reasons,
urbanisation and industrialization directly affects the crops as the fertile
upper layer of the soil is eroded. Degradation of soil especially soil

25
erosion is a major challenge being faced by the farmers and planners
in the country. They note that large part of Punjab is affected from the
problem of soil erosion. They have noted that Government of Punjab
is addressing the problem of erosion in the State through integrated
watershed management programmes. The Committee have also been
informed that State Government and Department of Land Resources,
Government of India is implementing 6 IWMP projects for 17 Micro
watershed projects in affected areas. They are of the view that there
is need to spread vital information relating to good agricultural practices
and involvement of farmers in order to reclaim the degraded land.
They are of the opinion that there is urgent need of preparation of soil
erosion map at larger scale covering entire country in order to assess
the enormity of problem and devise suitable action plan in the affected
areas. The Committee, therefore, recommend the DARE to prepare soil
erosion map of entire country at 1:250,000 scale and devise location
specific plan to control the problem of soil erosion. The KVKs should
also be instructed to spread the information about good farming practices
in the country in order to educate farmers on soil erosion and soil
degradation.
Reply of the Government
The ICAR-National Bureau of Soil Survey & Land Use Planning, Nagpur
in collaboration with ICAR-Indian Institute of Soil & Water Conservation,
Dehradun (IISWC) and ICAR-Central Arid Zone Research Institute, Jodhpur
has developed soil erosion map of entire country at 1:250,000 scale. As
per the latest estimates (NAAS, 2010) based on harmonized database,
the cultivable area affected by soil erosion is 92.39 million ha excluding
the area eroded under open forest. ICAR-IISWC also conducts regular
training courses on these aspects to educate farmers, State functionaries
and KVKs in the areas of soil degradation, soil water conservation and
watershed management.
The KVKs are providing the available expertise and technical backup
to the programmes on soil erosion and soil degradation taken up by
State Government agencies, besides taking up need based technical
interventions under their mandated activities. Moreover, as suggested
by the Committee, all the KVKs have been advised to spread the
information about good farming practices in the country in order to
educate farmers on soil erosion and soil degradation.
[Ministry of Agriculture O.M. No. 7(6)/2014, dated 12th March, 2015,
Department of Agricultural Research and Education]

26
ESTABLISHMENT OF SOIL TESTING LABS
Recommendation (Serial No. 11)
Availability of information regarding soil quality is necessary input
so that farmers are able to take decision on type of crops to be grown
and type and quantity of fertilizer to be used. The Committee note
that 390 soil testing labs have been established at Krishi Vigyan Kendra
and there is plan for establishment of 150 soil testing labs during XII
plan. They have also been apprised about problems being faced by
KVKs to analyse large volumes of soil. The Committee are of view that
existing soil testing labs and those planned for are inadequate in both
numbers & facilities to cater to the needs of farmers in large part of
the country. In keeping with the vast coverage required besides
conducting tests at regular intervals, there is need to promote private
participation for establishment of soil testing lab. The Committee,
therefore, recommend the DARE to make efforts in consultation with
Department of Agriculture and Co-operation and State Governments for
establishment of soil testing labs at Panchayat level. The Committee
also advise the Department to involve private sector in establishment
of soil testing labs & deploy local educated youths including Agro Business
and Agritech firms in order to enhance the penetration of these labs
to every nook and corner of the country.
Reply of the Government
In order to improve soil health and fertility, the Department of
Agriculture & Cooperation (DAC), Ministry of Agriculture under the
component of soil health management of National Mission for Sustainable
Agriculture (NMSA) is promoting soil test based balanced and integrated
nutrient management encompassing judicious use of chemical fertilizers
in conjunction with organic manures and biofertilizers in the country.
Assistance for establishing as well strengthening soil testing laboratories
in the country is also being provided. Recently, a National Mission on
Soil Health Card has been launched to provide soil test based fertilizer
recommendation to all the farmers in the country, involving different
stakeholders including private sector and local educated youth.
[Ministry of Agriculture O.M. No. 7(6)/2014, dated 12th March, 2015,
Department of Agricultural Research and Education]
PROMOTION OF DIGITAL SOIL TEST FERTILIZER RECOMMENDATION METER
(STFRM) DEVELOPED BY IARI
Recommendation (Serial No. 12)
The Committee are aware that unbalanced and indiscriminate use
of chemicals/plant nutrients over the years has resulted in depletion

27
soil fertility and multi nutrient deficiency especially the soil under
intensive cropping. The rampant use of fertilizers has not only affected
the soil health but also had led in the escalation in the cost of cultivation.
They feel that this is mainly due to the ignorance on the part of the
farmers about the quality of soil vis-a-vis the crop to be sown. The
Committee find that ICAR has developed a Digital Soil Test Fertilizer
Recommendation Meter (STFRM) and a programmable low cost digital
equipment that brings soil testing at farmer ’s doorsteps. They were
apprised that this equipment can quantitatively estimate 5 soil
parameters namely PH, EC, Organic Carbon Available P and Available K
and prescribe fertilizer recommended on the basis of targeted yield
approach. During study visit to IARI, Delhi, the Committee have been
informed about low cost soil testing machine developed by IARI. The
Committee are of the opinion that use of this technology is best suited
for use by small and marginal farmers through the village panchayats
for on the spot soil testing besides giving an opportunity of employment
to rural local youth. They however, find that this technological adaptation
is still at the laboratory level. The Committee recommend that the
STFR meter for soil testing based fertilizer recommendation should be
widely used through the panchayats for on the spot soil testing and the
recommendation for balanced and integrated use of fertilizer. They
however, caution the Department that Companies may escalate the
prices of these Meters at the time of large scale commercial production
and marketing of the meters to the farmers. They, therefore, recommend
that the Department should incorporate a binding clause at the time of
transfer of technology for commercial production against hike in the
price of the ‘Meters for soil testing on the spot ’.
Reply of the Government
Action has been taken to follow Soil Test based Fertilizer
Recommendations (STFR) in collaboration with crop specific All India
Coordinated Research Projects (AICRPs) and are being demonstrated
through FLDs. As recommended, the STFR Meter will be used and
popularized. Pusa STFR Meter has already been licensed to five firms.
Out of those, two firms namely M/s WS Telematics Pvt. Ltd. and
M/s Genesis AgriTech have already started its commercial production
and is available in the market. Hence, this technology is no longer in
the laboratory as indicated by the Committee. The above firms are
already selling Pusa STFR Meter to the farmers and other clients.
The concern of the Committee regarding possible price escalation
of the Pusa STFR Meter by the firms during large scale production has
already been taken care of. A MRP-related binding clause has already
been included in the technology transfer agreement, wherein the
Institute has fixed MRP of Pusa STFR Meter at Rs. 30,000/- (excluding

28
taxes). The firms cannot raise the price of the equipment without
consulting the licensing authority at the Institute. T wo other firms are
bringing STFR Meter to the market shortly. The STFR Meter is supplied
with a reagent kit for analysis of 50 soil samples. Subsequent reagent
kit for 50 samples will cost Rs. 5000/-. Thus the cost of soil analysis
for five parameters and fertilizer recommendation will be Rs. 100/- per
sample. As this equipment is a portable lab itself, it should not be
equated with usual soil testing kits offering only qualitative soil
measurements.
[Ministry of Agriculture O.M. No. 7(6)/2014, dated 12th March, 2015,
Department of Agricultural Research and Education]
DEVELOPMENT OF NUTRIENT FORTIFIED CEREALS
Recommendation (Serial No. 13)
The Committee note that as per a study made by ICAR malnutrition/
undernutrition is not only faced by the poor but also by more than 50%
of middle income and more than 30% of upper income household as
they are consuming lower than required dietary energy. They have
been informed that ICAR has developed many crop varieties of rice,
wheat, maize etc. with enhanced micro-nutrients/nutrient fortified
cereals. They have been apprised that in order to address micro-nutrient
deficiencies among rural families 510 nutritional gardens were established
in 45 adopted villages in 9 States. During the year 2013-14 demonstration,
a millet crop including barnyard millet, singer millet, proso millet and
pearl millet were laid out to sensitise the farmers. They also note that
ICAR Institutes have developed many products such as upma mix, pasta
mix, halwa mix etc. using ingredients of pearl millet, Barley, sorghum
and sawai millet. The Committee have also been apprised about
partnership with fast moving consumer companies to popularize and
encourage use of these products. They also note that DARE provides
technological support to a programme on Nutri Farms being conducted
by DAC in selection of bio-fortified food crops enriched with micro
nutrients. The Committee have been informed that an ICAR-ICMR
collaborative research project entitled “Health foods from agricultural,
livestock and aquatic produce” to generate output in terms of functional
food products and nutraceuticals to combat malnutrition and lifestyle
diseases proposed for XII plan will be initiated as soon as funds are
available. The Committee note the efforts made by ICAR to develop
nutrient fortified crop varieties and fast food varieties based on Barley,
sorghum etc. However , they are of view that the reach is too meager
and there is need for initiating a mass scale awareness campaign to
spread the benefit of these products. The Committee also recommend

29
the Department to make adequate efforts to get additional funds to
start ICAR-ICMR collaborative research project on “Health foods from
agricultural, livestock and aquatic produce ” at the earliest. They also
recommend to the Department to devise a Campaign strategy in
consultation with relevant Ministries of Central Government to publicise
the nutrient fortified crops. They desire the Ministry to establish more
Nutrition gardens and cover more States to address Micro nutrient
deficiency.
Reply of the Government
Several research programmes have been underway to address the
malnutrition through development of micronutrient rich crop varieties
and fortified food products at specific crop based Institutes of ICAR. Bio
fortification of lentil with an objective to increase iron and zinc content
and increasing protein content in cereals and pulses have been initiated.
Soybean is the richest and cheapest source of good quality protein
along with vitamins, calcium, iron and neutraceuticals such as
isoflavones. In order to promote food uses of soybean, Directorate of
Soybean Research, Indore developed genotypes containing high oleic
acid (to improve the oxidative stability), KTI free lines, null lipoxygenase
lines (to reduce off-flavour) and vegetable type soybeans, which were
the bottlenecks to promote its food uses.
The ICAR Institutes through their awareness campaign involving
exhibitions, trainings, published literature and other extension activities
are trying to popularize health benefits of nutricereals and soybean to
improve its food uses.
At present KVKs are conducting front line demonstrations on Quality
Protein Maize varieties in some parts of the country in collaboration
with Directorate of Maize Research. The KVKs are also working on
nutritional gardens to sensitize farmers and farm women on nutritional
aspects.
An ICAR-ICMR collaborative research project entitled ‘Health food
from agriculture, livestock and aquatic produce ’ has been approved in
XII Five Year Plan. A provision of Rs. 127 crore has been made for this
project. It is proposed to carry out work at 31 centres (16 lead centres
and 15 cooperating centres).
In addition, Department of Agriculture & Cooperation implemented
a pilot scheme on “Nutri-Farms” as a sub-scheme of RKVY for establishing
nutri-farms in 100 high burden malnutrition districts of 9 States namely
Assam (3), Bihar (12), Chhattisgarh (3), Jharkhand (1), Madhya Pradesh
(25), Odisha (6), Rajasthan (16), Uttar Pradesh (32) and Uttarakhand
(2). These farms are established for cultivation and promotion of micro-

30
nutrients rich cultivars of cereals and vegetable crops namely rice,
pearl millet, maize, finger millet, wheat and sweet potato and to make
Nutri-produce available to vulnerable population. However , from
2014-15 “Nutri-Farms” scheme has been subsumed with National Food
Security Mission (NFSM).
Under National Food Security Mission (NFSM), Coarse Cereals is one
of the components which is being implemented with main thrust to
increase Coarse Cereals production by 3 million tonnes by 2016-17.
NFSM-Coarse Cereals covers maize, sorghum, barley, pearl millet, finger
millet and small millets (kudos, barnyard, foxtail, proso and little millet).
It is being implemented in 264 districts (covering all districts of North-
Eastern States and Hill States of Jammu & Kashmir, Himachal Pradesh
and Uttarakhand) of 28 States with an object to increase their production
and benefit the poor with nutritious food and to overcome the
malnutrition. The proven crop production technologies developed for
Coarse Cereals by National Agricultural Research System would be made
available to the farmers through a series of planned interventions and
financial incentives. Interventions under NFSM-Coarse Cereals being
included are (i) Demonstration of improved package of practices
(ii) Distribution of certified seeds (a) HYV seeds (b) Hybrid seeds.
Five Commodity-wise Centres of Excellence (CoEs) have been
established to develop the recipe, value added nutri-rich product with
increased shelf life, as well as training of entrepreneurs for
commercialization and creation of consumption of these products. They
are operationalized at (i) Directorate of Sorghum Research (DSR),
Hyderabad for Sorghum, (ii) Chaudhary Charan Singh (CCS) Haryana
Agricultural University, Hisar for Pearl Millet, (iii) University of
Agricultural Sciences, UAS, Bangalore for Small Millets, (iv) Maharana
Pratap University of Agriculture & Technology (MPUAT), Udaipur and
(v) Sam Hiiginbottom Institute of Agriculture Technology & Sciences
(SHIATS), Allahabad for Maize. All these five CoEs are funded under
NFSM during 12th Plan  i.e. up to 2016-17. ”
[Ministry of Agriculture O.M. No. 7(6)/2014, dated 12th March, 2015,
Department of Agricultural Research and Education]
ACTION PLAN TO CONTROL ARSENIC CONTAMINATION OF GROUND WATER
IN WEST BENGAL
Recommendation (Serial No. 14)
The Committee note that more than 3 crore people in 34,000
square km area in the State of West Bengal are prone to chronic arsenic
toxicity due to contamination of ground water and high build of arsenic

31
in soil and thereby its subsequent accumulation in crops and vegetables.
They have been apprised that ICAR has come up with some practical
mitigation strategy such as sowing of low arsenic accumulating rice
varieties, use of organic manure, provision for irrigation from deep
tubewell, sowing of legume and pulses requiring reduced irrigation etc.
to control the harmful effect of arsenic contamination. The Committee
urge the Department/ICAR to take steps for widespread dissemination
of these strategies to local population in affected areas. At the same
time, there is urgent need for taking up this issue on priority basis and
granting funds for the task as it directly affects the human and livestock
health. The Committee, therefore, recommend the ICAR to prepare an
action plan to mitigate the harmful effects of arsenic contamination in
consultation with Department of Agriculture and Cooperation, Ministry
of Health & Family Welfare, Ministry of Science & Technology, Ministry
of Human Resource Development, Ministry of Environment & Forests
and Government of West Bengal.
Reply of the Government
The ICAR will provide the required technological backstopping to
the efforts being made by the different ministries including Ministry of
Water Resources, River Development & Ganga Rejuvenation (WRRD&GR)
and also help in the process of developing Coordinated Action Plan in
this direction.
[Ministry of Agriculture O.M. No. 7(6)/2014, dated 12th March, 2015,
Department of Agricultural Research and Education]
Comments of the Committee
For comments of the Committee please refer to Para No. 1.13 of
Chapter I of this Report.
PROMOTION OF TECHNOLOGY OF SEWAGE WATER TREATMENT DEVELOPED
BY ICAR
Recommendation (Serial No. 17)
The Committee are aware that the unplanned application of raw
waste waters is increasing the risk of agricultural sustainability and
consumer/environment health basically due to lack of proper treatment
facilities and awareness. They are of the view that agricultural reuse
of waste water , under fresh water scarcity, is essential in today ’s
agriculture scenario not only because it meets the water demand and
waste water disposal but also it enhances fertilizer security of the

32
resources of the poor farmers. The Committee note with satisfaction
that IARI has taken the first step in their Delhi Campus and has evolved
an innovative and eco-friendly waste water treatment facility where it
utilizes emergent wet land plants (s.a.  Typha latifolia) local media and
native micro organisms, present in natural waste waters for treating
2.2 million litres/day of sewage waters. Within one and half year of its
commencement it has been revealed the performance of the plant
w.r.t. Turbidity (99%), Nitrate (95%), Phosphate (90%), Lead (81%), Iron
(99%) and other pollutants normally present in local municipal waste
waters. They have been apprised that the technology used in this waste
water treatment system is associated with just 1% energy requirement
of the conventional system; zero chemical application, zero-sludge
generation, 50-60% reduced treatment cost and no skilled requirement.
The Committee note the multifarious advantages of the above eco-
friendly and economic initiative vis-a-vis conventional water processing
system and feel that this technology needs to be promoted extensively.
They, however , find that this initiative is in its nascent stage. The
Committee, therefore, strongly recommend that the Department/ICAR
should interact with State Governments/MCD and educate them on the
advantage on this eco-friendly, low cost waste water treatment method
of waste water disposal which can be reused in agriculture especially
where there is fresh water scarcity. The benefit of zero-sludge and
other pollutants through this process, which has become an increasing
menace in municipalities could also be highlighted to them. The
Committee urge the Department/ICAR to take up the matter with
concerned Ministries/Departments/State Governments/municipalities to
adopt this system expeditiously for their all round benefits. DARE/ICAR
should through their network and linkages with SAUs approach the
State Governments/Municipalities urgently.
Reply of the Government
IARI has developed an innovative and eco-friendly waste water
treatment technology using Typha latifolia , local media and native
micro organisms present in waste water for treating sewage water to
the capacity of 2.2 million litres per day. This innovative technology is
being popularized through print media, TV programmes, participation
in exhibitions, agricultural fairs, exposure visits of the stakeholders
etc. For further dissemination and up-scaling the technology is being
appraised to the Urban and Local Boards. Structured training programmes
are being organized for capacity building and skill development amongst
the stakeholders. Customized training modules are also developed for
Delhi Jal Board (DJB), Centre for Science and Environment (CSE) and
International Commission on Irrigation and Drainage (ICID). This falls

33
under the mandate of Ministry of Urban Development to whom the
technology details have already been communicated. The Ministry of
Urban Development issues periodic advisories to the stakeholders for
promotion of sewage water.
The following public and private sector players have evinced a lot
of interest in the replication of this technology:
1. Delhi Development Authority: For augmenting potable water
supply in Dwarka sub-city through the recharging of the
groundwater table with the treated Palam drain waters. Initial
plan is to use the proposed technology to treat 50 MLD of
Palam drain waters.
2. Central Jail, Tihar, New Delhi: For reuse of wastewater in
Central Jail.
3. National Security Guards at Manesar Garrison in Gurgaon:
For curbing water scarcity during summer seasons in the
campus.
4. Centre for Urban and Regional Excellence (an NGO):  For
developing alternate solutions for water conservation and
preparation of Ward sanitation plans for Delhi under a project:
“Swatch Delhi, Swatch Delhi ”.
5. KRIBHCO, Noida: For reuse and recycling of 25 KLD
wastewaters in their corporate office.
6. Horizon Research, Mathura Road, New Delhi: For putting
up the proposed technology in their farm.
7. Durgapur Steel Plant, Steel Authority of India Ltd.,
West Bengal: For sewage water treatment and reuse in
Durgapur Steel Plant at Durgapur, West Bengal.
8. Mapsets Engineering Services:  For stopping pollution of
Ganga River by the Varanasi city, through a MOWR funded
program on National Mission for Clean Ganga.
9. Bedmutha Industries Ltd., Maharashtra:  For developing an
effluent treatment plant at Nardana, MIDC, Dhule
(Maharashtra).
10. Re Ventures, West Bengal:  For developing a low-cost and
energy efficient wastewater treatment plant at Siliguri city
(20 lakh population) and Darjeeling town.
[Ministry of Agriculture O.M. No. 7(6)/2014, dated 12th March, 2015,
Department of Agricultural Research and Education]

34
CREATION OF SYSTEM OF NATIONAL CROP PLANNING
Recommendation (Serial No. 18)
The Committee find that the Crop Science Division have released
106 improved varieties/hybrids of different crops including 70 cereals,
15 oilseeds, 8 pulses, 3 fibre crops, 4 forage crops and 6 sugarcane
during 2013-14. The Committee are, however , concerned about the
release of these crops and its reach to the small and marginal farmers.
Further , they are also aware that small farmers are mostly not aware
of the prices for the crop till the harvest time. In the process, at times,
lots of post-harvest losses take place affecting the financial health of
these farmers. The Committee feel that the Department should guide
the small and marginal farmers about planning the crops depending on
the region, fertility of soil, congenial crop varieties and price forecasts
(depending on the market forces in the country). The Committee,
therefore, desire that the Government should make a serious effort by
carrying out a systematic and objective national crop planning along
with crop planning for small and marginal farmers.
Reply of the Government
The Council through PDFSR, Modipuram and CRIDA, Hyderabad has
developed viable and remunerative cropping systems suited to small
and marginal farmers of irrigated and rainfed regions respectively of
the country.
ICAR-National Institute for Agricultural Economics and Policy Research
(NIAP) has undertaken a network study to develop regional crop plans
for better resource use efficiency and improving natural resource
sustainability across production environments. It will compare net income
from different crops at market prices, economic prices net of subsidies
on inputs and net income based on natural resource valuation that
takes into account effect on natural resources and environment. The
study is implemented in 7 States in collaboration with State agricultural
universities which are collecting farm level data under “Comprehensive
Scheme for Estimation of Cost of Cultivation of Various Crops ”
implemented by Ministry of Agriculture, Government of India.
Crop contingency planning and advisories are issued from time-to-
time to the farmers by the Institutes to address abrupt weather
conditions as well as disease and insect-pest outbreaks in different
crops.The region-wise contingency planning of crop varieties is regularly
issued to small and marginal farmers through KVKs, Institutes website
and other mass media. Crop planning and its dissemination to small and

35
marginal farmers would be further strengthened, as suggested by the
Committee.
[Ministry of Agriculture O.M. No. 7(6)/2014, dated 12th March, 2015,
Department of Agricultural Research and Education]
DEVELOPMENT OF NEW DROUGHT RESISTANT SEED VARIETIES
Recommendation (Serial No. 20)
The Committee note that development and availability of drought
resistant seed varieties are required by farmers in large part of the
country facing problem of eratic monsoon. The Committee note that 65
varieties of drought resistant varieties of rice, wheat, Barley, sorghum,
maize, horsegram etc., were developed by Crop science division of
ICAR during the last five years. They also note that 100 promising
genotypes of wheat, rice, maize and pulses were identified for drought,
heat and flood tolerance under the National Initiative on Climate Resilient
Agriculture (NICRA). The Committee are, however, of the view that
there is need for further research work for development of new varieties
of crops with use of genotypes identified under NICRA. The Committee,
therefore, recommend the DARE to fast track the R&D work under the
NICRA so that new and better drought resistant seed varieties are made
available to the farmers in the affected areas.
Reply of the Government
Continuous R&D efforts are made to screen genotypes against various
abiotic stresses like temperature and moisture and utilize in breeding
superior varieties suitable for marginal and rainfed conditions. Drought
tolerant varieties have been already developed and recommended for
drought situations. Besides, emphasis has been laid on reducing the
duration of crops for improved adaptation in the situation of terminal
heat and drought.
[Ministry of Agriculture O.M. No. 7(6)/2014, dated 12th March, 2015,
Department of Agricultural Research and Education]
HORTICULTURE SCIENCES
Recommendation (Serial No. 21)
The Committee are aware that horticulture is a crucial component
of the agriculture which is the mainstay of the Indian economy by
virtue of India being bestowed with diverse agro-climatic zones and
regional crop variation. The Committee were apprised that with R&D

36
network across the country, horticulture is changing rapidly in terms of
production and productivity. The horticulture production is 2.68 million
tonnes during 2012-13 and it contributes approximately 30.4% of
agricultural GDP . The Committee find that Rs. 422 crore were allocated
for horticulture sector for the Twelfth Five Year Plan. However , they
are unhappy to note that only 45% (BE) i.e. only Rs. 650 crore have
been allocated during the first three years of the Twelfth Plan.
Furthermore, the allocation comes to only 20.6% (Rs. 294 crore) for the
first two years of the Twelfth Plan. The Committee note that the
growth in exports of fresh fruits and vegetables is 14% while it is 16.2%
in case of processed food and vegetables. The Committee are aware
that the growth in horticulture sector has virtually improved the economy
in several States. They are also of the view that focused attention on
horticulture with the research and development input would result in
increased production as well as exports besides bringing about economic
development not only for the States but for the nation as a whole.
They recommend to the Department to highlight the growth potential
of this sector to the Planning Commission and the Ministry of Finance
and obtain funds for future research and development of this sector.
Reply of the Government
Horticulture has great importance, both as a share in agricultural
output and in the food basket in the country. As a result, the farmers
are also responding to the market signals and gradually shifting
production-mix to meet the growing demand for horticultural
commodities and a clear shift from foodgrains towards fruits and
vegetables can be seen. It is evident from the higher horticultural
production to the tune of 268.8 million tonnes during the year
2012-13, which is expected to reach 280.7 million tonnes during the
year 2013-14.
The Planning Commission and Ministry of Finance (MoF) had already
been requested to allocate more funds for research and development
of this sector.
[Ministry of Agriculture O.M. No. 7(6)/2014, dated 12th March, 2015,
Department of Agricultural Research and Education]
AGRICULTURE ENGINEERING
AVAILABILITY OF FUNDS
Recommendation (Serial No. 22)
The Committee find that the network of AICRP help in identification
of specific regional problems. They, however , find that the budget
allocation for Agriculture Engineering Sector for the year 2014-15 is
Rs. 85 crore (BE) while the RE for the year 2013-14 was Rs. 45 crore
and for the year 2012-13 it was Rs. 52 crore. They find that allocation
earmarked for the Twelfth Plan is Rs. 1100 crore. It can be seen that

37
on an average the allocation should have been Rs. 220 crore per year,
however, even in the 3rd year , the allocation is not even 50% of the
average per year for the Twelfth Plan. In response to the concern of
the Committee about the implementation of R&D work in the institutes,
the Department apprised them that the low allocation inter-alia affected
the activities relating to promotion of mechanization for small and
marginal farmers and also the promotion of post-harvest technology,
R&D work in precision farming, consortia research farming on farm
mechanization and precision farming, front line demonstration
programmes like improved tools, equipments and technologies etc. They
note that level of farm mechanization in the country averages only
around 25% which is quite low as against 90% in the developed countries.
The Committee feel that these are the vital aspects where the AICRP
network operates and due to the lack of funds allocation to the
agricultural engineering sector , the most affected will be the small and
marginal farmers. They recommend that the dissemination of
information/knowledge relating to research, the prices and the
geo-regional synchrony should reach the small and marginal farmers in
region-wise capsules. They also recommend to the Department to impress
upon the Ministry of Finance and the Planning Commission the need for
developing the knowledge and information relating to implements/
instruments/machines being developed by ICAR for the welfare of small
and marginal farmers and seek greater funds for this sector.
Reply of the Government
The Council shares the comments of the Committee regarding
reduced availability of funds for promotion of farm mechanization and
post-harvest technology related activities. Efforts have continuously
been made and are still being made to cater to the Research and
Development requirements of implements/machinery for small and
marginal farmers in different agro-climatic regions through the network
of centres of AICRPs on (i) Farm Implements & Machinery, (ii) Renewable
Energy Sources, (iii) Utilization of Animal Energy, (iv) Ergonomics &
Safety in Agriculture, (v) Post-Harvest Technologies, and (vi) Application
of Plastics in Agriculture. Keeping in view fast tracking and enhancing
levels of farm mechanization and post-harvest & value addition, the
council has approved continuation of the above mentioned six AICRPs
as well as 5 new Consortia Research Platforms on (i) Farm Mechanization
& Precision Farming, (ii) Energy from Agriculture, (iii) Secondary
Agriculture, (iv) Health Foods, and (v) Natural Fibres in the XII Plan to
be operated through network of centres to cater to the needs of different
aspects of small and marginal farmers in the country.
[Ministry of Agriculture O.M. No. 7(6)/2014, dated 12th March, 2015,
Department of Agricultural Research and Education]

38
FIXATION OF PRICE FOR AGRICULTURAL IMPLEMENTS DEVELOPED BY
ICAR
Recommendation (Serial No. 23)
The Committee have been informed that Agricultural Engineering
division of ICAR which is entrusted with the responsibility of developing
suitable agricultural implements. According to the Department regional
specifications have developed 65 implements/instruments/machines
during last three years. The divisions have also been successful in
commercializing 79 agricultural implements/machines in the same period
thereby, generating revenue of Rs. 67.4  lakhs. They have also been
informed that technology pricing/valuation is context specific and can
vary on case-to-case basis and valuation/pricing and terms and conditions
for licensing/commercialization emerges from the ground work of
valuation, market research and business proposal development and done
under the guidance of senior experienced scientists of relevant
disciplines. The Committee are of the view that there is need to enhance
the abilities of institutes working under the division to increase the
number of product development. They emphasize that the Department
should focus on research of light weight technology and implements/
machines/instruments so that small and marginal farmers are able to
use them effectively on their small and fragmented land holdings. The
Committee, therefore recommend to the Department to enhance the
target for development of new implements/Machines/instruments. At
the same time, the Committee strongly recommend the Department to
incorporate suitable provisions in the terms and conditions as a
prerequisite for transfer of technology of the research relating to
implements/machines/instruments developed by ICAR for commercial
use so that these are available to the farmers at reasonable prices.
Reply of the Government
Over the years the Department has developed a number of
technologies/processes for commercial purposes and has also signed
license agreements with various firms. The list of various technologies/
processes developed is as under:
Sl. Technology Year Number
No. of MoAs/
LAs signed
12 3 4
1. CIAE Pedal cum Power Operated Seed 2009-10 08
Cleaner cum Grader with and without
motor

39
Grain flour separator 04
Animal drawn planter 05
Groundnut decorticator for women 04
Groundnut cum castor decorticator 03
Groundnut/sunflower decorticator with 02
feeder and separator
Manual soybean dehuller 04
Motorized soybean dehuller 04
Grain pearler 01
Manual potato peeler 03
Pedal operated potato peeler 04
Pedal operated potato slice 04
Multi-purpose grain mill 03
Soybean blanching unit 03
Soybean flaking machine 02
Cottage scale soy paneer plant 06
Paddy thresher 02
Light weight power tiller 02
Multicrop thresher 03
Paddy transplanter 02
Power tiller operated reaper 03
Self propelled reaper 05
Tractor mounted Reaper 02
Power weeder 04
Sack Holder with Grain Cleaner 02
Rotavator blade 01
Tractor drawn vegetable transplanter 01
Manual rice planter 01
Inclined plate planter 05
12 3 4

40
Pneumatic planter 03
Power Tiller Drawn Seed cum Fertilizer 03
Drill
Tractor operated Groundnut Digger 01
Hand wheel hoe 01
2. Portable Weighing Machine and systems 2010-11 01
for animals
Security systems and advanced electronic 01
systems for identification of animals
Industrial automation for agricultural use 01
Peg type puddler 02
Multi-crop plot thresher 01
3. Manually operated conoweeder—plastic 2011-12 01
moulded cones
Power operated potting machine 01
Improved manual metallic conoweeder 05
Power operated curry leaf stripper 01
Walking Type Manual 3—Row Rice Transplanter 03
(CIAE-IEP Coimbatore design)
Tractor operated turmeric harvester 02
(CIAE-IEP design)
Multipurpose tray/ISU dryer 03
Power tiller drawn auger digger 03
Animal multirow rice seeder 01
Improved bakhar 01
Animal drawn inclined plate planter 01
Power tiller operated till plant machine 01
Manual 4 row rice seeder 01
4. Rotary dibbler 2012-13 01
Grubber weeder 01
12 3 4

41
Tubular maize sheller 01
Two row seed drill 01
Two row seed cum fertilizer drill 01
Solar cocoon stiffer 01
Multi fuel cooking stove 02
Charring kiln 02
Briquetting machine 02
CIAE dynapod 02
Rotary maize sheller 01
Power tiller drawn seed drill 01
Power tiller drawn cultivator 01
Semi-Axial flow thresher 01
High capacity multi-crop thresher 01
Tractor operated two row sugarcane 01
bud-chip seedling planter
Aloe vera gel extraction unit 01
CIAE multicrop thresher 01
5. Multi-nutrient biscuit 2013-14 01
License agreement signed
Sl. Name of Firm Date Name of Details of fee
No. Technologies received
(Inclusive of
service tax)
12 3 4 5
1. M/s Bio Nutrients 11/06/2014 CIAE Soya-Butter Rs. 1,12,360/-
(India) Pvt. Limited,
M.P . Nagar, Bhopal
2. M/s TAFE, No. 861 05/05/2014 Self-Propelled Rs. 11,24,000/-
Annasalai, Hydraulic
Chennai-600 002 Multipurpose
System for Orchard
Operations
12 3 4

42
3. M/S AVM Engineering 27/04/2014 CIAE Millet Mill Rs. 1,12,360/-
Industries, TN,
Pin-636004
4. M/s TAFE, Chennai 31/07/2014 1. Inclined Plate Rs. 3,37,080/-
Planter
2. Roto Till Drill
5. M/s Valampuri 11/07/2014 CIAE Millet Mill Rs. 1,12,360/-
Industries,
Coimbatore
6. M/s Perfura CIAE Millet Mill Rs. 1,12,360/-
Technologies India
(Pvt.) Ltd.,
Coimbatore
2. Technologies/Processes developed by Agricultural Engineering
Division of ICAR
1. Animal drawn farmyard manure spreader for soybean and
wheat crop
2. Harnessing system of Single bullock operated cart
3. Tractor operated rear mounted onion harvester
4. Controller for seed/fertilizer drill and its integration with
electronic drive system
5. Equipment for sugarcane bud chip nursery raising with respect
to pro-tray filling and seeding
6. Controller for variable seed and fertilizer application
7. Power Weeder for Cassava Planted in Mounds in Sloppy Terrain
8. Tractor Mounted Cone Penetrometer
9. Pre-emergence herbicide strip-applicator
10. Package of improved implements for raised bed cultivation
11. Harvesting tools/machinery for oil palm-back pack type
12. Animal drawn garlic planter
13. Tractor drawn GPS based granular fertilizer applicator
14. Covered cultivation technology for capsicum crop
12 3 4 5

43
15. Size reduction machine for Arecanut Sheath
16. Multi millet thresher
17. Millet dehusker
18. Tractor operated cassava harvester
19. Banana pseudostem shredder
20. Mechanized pruner for high density guava orchard
21. Furrow opener for differential depth placement of fertilizer
and seed
22. Prototype model of mechanical system for sugarcane bud
chip/sett treatment for sugarcane
23. Bullock cart with yoke (NGO design)
24. Banana core juice extractor
25. Banana core slicer cum dicer
26. Ripening chamber (1 ton/batch) for banana
27. CIAE Millet Mill (Model II)
28. Briquette of Lantana biomass
29. Water scrubber for biogas
30. LPG Supplementation system to overcome sudden loading of
biomass based power plant
31. Bio-char pyrolyzer for agro residues
32. Torification unit for processing of biomass
33. Entrained gasifier for different crop residue
34. Micro-controller based single axis sun tracker for SPV panel
35. Moringa leaf stripper
36. Cashewnut roasting machine
37. Peeler for peeling of safed musli
38. Process for cleaning and dehusking of kodo-kutki
39. Technology for surface disinfestations and MAP packaging for
spinach
40. Process technology for fermented and non-fermented
beverages from tofu whey
41. Software protocol for determination of image quality of digital
radiographs of mangoes

44
42. System and approach for non-destructive quality evaluation
of mango
43. Technology for modified atmospheric packaging of guava and
tomato
44. Process for production of improved quality soymilk with
minimal beany flavour and flatulence
45. Process Technology for enzymatic refining of soybean oil
46. Technology for surface disinfestation
47. Instant soymilk powder
48. Soy based noodles
49. Okara and millet based muffins
50. Multi-nutrient extruded snacks
51. Probiotic soy-cheese spread
52. Process protocol for disinfestations of pulses in pilot scale
microwave unit
53. Basket Centrifuge
54. Ber Fruit Grader
55. Castor Depodder and Decorticator
56. CIPHET-Banana comb Cutter
57. CIPHET-Tomato Grader
58. CIPHET-Fruit collector cum grader for saving of fruits
59. Fish Processing Table cum Retail Sales Unit
60. Low cost Flour mixer unit
61. Groundnut deskinner-2010
62. Groundnut pod grader
63. Hand Tool for Easy Separation of Arils from Pomegranate
64. Indigenous meat cutter
65. Low cost fish descaling hand tool
66. Mobile iced fish storage and transport chamber
67. Poultry Processing Table and Poultry Slaughter Cone
68. Mechanical Device for Detection of Insects in stored grains
69. Small Capacity Maize Degermer for dry degerming of Maize

45
70. Sunflower Dehuller
71. Rotary maize cob sheller
72. Evaporative Cooled structure (5-7 tons)
73. Low cost technique for enhancement of shelf life of tomato
74. Minimal processing of Vegetables
75. A new process for milling of millets to get refined powder
76. Process of manufacturing mix for ready to constitute makhana
kheer
77. Processing of Aonla for manufacturing of value added products
78. Sunflower kernel based confectionary products
79. Process technology for making “Anardana Ready to mix
Chutney”
80. Value added products from meat
81. Carrot kheer mix formulation
82. Energy efficient Bengal gram Sattu making technology
83. CIPHET-Aonla Pricking machine
84. Lotus seed decorticator
85. Low Cost Tray Dryer having a Unique Design of Plenum
Chamber
86. Groundnut pod Decorticator
87. Mobile agro processing unit suggested for cleaning, grading,
destoning of foodgrains
88. Low cost poly house
89. Vendor ’s vegetable cabinet
As recommended by the Committee, BPD units of ICAR/SAUs
incorporate suitable provisions in the terms and conditions in
Memorandum of Understanding for commercialization so that machines,
implements, technologies etc. are available to the farmers at reasonable
cost.
The design of equipment/machine is transferred on non-exclusive
basis for a period of five years at a license fee decided by Institute
Technology Management Committee of the institute. Other terms and
conditions were in accordance with ICAR guidelines provided vide
“Training, Consultancy Contract Research and Contract Service in ICAR

46
System”, Rules and Guidelines, ICAR, New Delhi (March 1, 1997) and
now as per revised, “ICAR guidelines for Professional Service Functions
(Training, Consultancy Contract Research and Contract Service) ”, ICAR
New Delhi (October, 2014).
[Ministry of Agriculture, O.M. No. 7(6)/2014, dated 12th March, 2015,
Department of Agricultural Research and Education]
KRISHI VIGYAN KENDRAS (KVKs)
AVAILABILITY OF FUNDS
Recommendation (Serial No. 24)
The Committee are aware that KVKs do not have adequate staffs
and other infrastructure at their disposal to carry out activities assigned
to them. The Committee note that the task ahead of the Department
relating to equipping the KVKs in terms of trainer , resource person
infrastructure, knowledge based on location specific requirements,
paraphernalia for demonstrations/trials on crops, livestock, fisheries is
of mammoth nature. At the same time, they find that KVKs proposed
during XII Plan could not be taken up for want of approval of Cabinet.
They are also aware that the allocations made for KVKs during first
three years is Rs. 1575 crore, which is almost half of that proposed by
DARE for the purpose and has been further reduced at RE level. The
Committee are of the view that without availability of funds, which are
only 27% (approx.) of the earmarked outlays for the Scheme during
XII Plan, this significant Research work will be undone i.e. if the
knowledge is not disseminated to farmers the entire exercise will be
futile. The Committee, therefore, strongly recommend that Department
approach Ministry of Finance and Planning Commission highlighting the
importance of developing KVKs with proper infrastructure for growth of
Agriculture Sector and persuade them for higher allocations. They also
recommend to the Department to pursue the matter relating to approval
of KVK to be opened during XII Plan urgently as already about three
years of the plan period have elapsed. With this rate the Department
will not be able to achieve their targets for the plan. The Committee
also desire that Department should develop a mechanism to coordinate
with the State Governments to come forward proactively for validation
of the Research work based on practical necessities on priority basis.
Reply of the Government
As regards efforts for higher allocations to KVK scheme, the proposal
has been submitted to the Government for approval of KVK scheme
during XII Plan with higher allocation during XII Plan. The proposal also
includes creation of new infrastructure and vital facilities in more KVKs

47
including soil, water and micronutrient testing facilities; rain water
harvesting and micro irrigation; mini seed processing facilities; portable
carp hatchery; technology information units; and integrated farming
units. The approval of the Government is likely to be received soon.
As far as coordination with State Governments for validation of
research is concerned, it is stated that the KVKs coordinate with
Agricultural Technology Management Agency (ATMA) at district level
and take up the researchable issues related to validation of technological
options for their practical application in farmers’ fields. For this purpose
a district level Joint Action Plan for enhancing interface between
scientists, extension functionaries and farmers will be prepared through
a joint meeting of KVK and ATMA official under the chairmanship of the
District Collector. Further a quarterly interface meeting will be held by
all KVKs involving all line departments for implementing the Joint Action
Plan and to share new technologies for wider dissemination in the
district.
[Ministry of Agriculture, O.M. No. 7(6)/2014, dated 12th March, 2015,
Department of Agricultural Research and Education]
IMPROVEMENT IN WORKING OF KVKs
Recommendation (Serial No. 25)
The Committee note that Krishi Vigyan Kendras (KVKs) act as centre
for agriculture extension in the country. The KVKs assessed, refined and
demonstrated technology/products through 33791 on farm trials and
1.71 lakh frontline demonstrations in different farming systems in the
year 2013-14 (upto March, 2014).
The KVKs have trained 14.88 lakh farmers, trained 1.18 lakh
extension personnel, participated in 102.41 lakh extension programmes
for creating awareness on improved agricultural technology, produced
15700 tonnes of seed and provided 102.53 lakh plating material, tested
2.91 lakh soil & other samples in the year 2013-14 as against 17.38
lakh, 1.42 lakh, 170.16 lakh, 17400 tonnes, 117.46 lakh, 3.78 lakh for
the year 2012-13 respectively. The aspect covered by KVKs mobile
advisory has increased to 16.28 lakh as compared to 11.14 in the year
2012-13. The Committee feel that presence of a strong institutional
delivery mechanism for agricultural inputs is foundation for productive
and remunerative agriculture. The Committee are, however, concerned
to note that the achievements of the DARE in agriculture extension has
reduced in 2013-14 vis-a-vis last year on all the important parameters
of the scheme drastically, which is very alarming. The only area that

48
have shown sign of growth is mobile advisory. The Committee are of
the view that the Department needs to analyse and revisit the areas of
concern and ensure that the knowledge obtained from research
percolates to the fields and farmers and the trainers. The Committee
also recommend that the Department should use the vast network of
Rural Banks/Post Offices for dissemination of improved technologies
and improved varieties of seeds besides capacity building programme
of Branch Post Masters.
Reply of the Government
Though there was shortfall in some of the KVK activities during
2013-14 as compared to 2012-13, however, the achievements were
higher during 2013-14 in respect of main activities like on-farm trials
and front line demonstrations. Similarly, efforts are on to achieve the
targets during 2014-15. With regard to revisiting the areas of concern
and percolation of research knowledge to the fields and farmers, it is
stated that besides creating new infrastructure facilities and other vital
facilities, the proposal has been made for approval of the Government
for enhancing the number of staff of KVK from the existing strength of
16 to 22 by creating 04 additional posts of Subject Matter Specialists
and 02 posts of Technicians during XII Plan to extend KVKs ’ reach to
more number of farmers in the district.
As regards using the network of post offices for disseminations of
improved technologies and varieties of seeds, it is stated that already
work on this approach has been started by Indian Agricultural Research
Institute on Pilot basis in few States. Based on the success in this
approach the programme will be extended in other States from next
year.
[Ministry of Agriculture O.M. No. 7(6)/2014, dated 12th March, 2015,
Department of Agricultural Research and Education]
EXTENSION OF AICRP ON HOME SCIENCES TO ALL STATE AGRICULTURAL
UNIVERSITIES
Recommendation (Serial No. 27)
The Committee are aware that women in the country play
a significant role in agricultural and allied sector activities. The
Committee have been informed that Directorate of Research on Women
Agriculture (DRWA) including AICRP on Home Science carry out activities
on identifying gender issues, testing appropriateness of available farm
technology and programmes with women perspective, drudgery

49
reduction, empowerment of farm women, and capacity building of R&D
to address gender issues in agriculture. They also note that many
technological innovations in such activities where largely women are
involved such as development of potato picker , grain spreading tools
etc. have been developed by the DRWA and AICRP . They have also been
informed during the XII Plan period the DARE plans to extend AICRP to
three more State Agriculture Universities in Meghalaya, Tamil Nadu and
Gujarat. The Committee are of the view that much more focus on
research is required to address and facilitate women in their activities
in agriculture and development of technology and agricultural implements
which are specifically designed for reducing drudgery faced by women
engaged in agricultural activities. The Committee, therefore recommend
DARE to allocate sufficient fund for this important area of research so
as to facilitate women working in Agriculture sector. At the same time,
the DARE should also try to extend AICRP on home sciences to all State
Agricultural Universities apart from those planned in XII Plan.
Reply of the Government
The concern of the Committee has been noted and appropriate
action shall be taken up to extend the AICRP Home Science to all the
left over State Agricultural Universities after assessing the feasibility.
[Ministry of Agriculture O.M. No. 7(6)/2014, dated 12th March, 2015,
Department of Agricultural Research and Education]
ATTRACTING YOUTH FOR CAREER IN AGRICULTURE
Recommendation (Serial No. 28)
The Committee are aware that today ’s youth are unenthusiastic
about taking up agriculture as a career. The youth are moving away
from agriculture as a profession due to limited employment opportunity,
high cost of production and low returns from this sector vis-a-vis the
tertiary sector. They were, however , apprised by the representatives of
DARE that this is a misnomer and mis-perception, the truth is that an
investment of Re. 1 in agriculture sector reaps a return of Rs. 13.5. The
Committee take note of rate of return on the investment in agricultural
research. They also note that three new CAUs are being established
during the XII Plan for region specific agricultural research & education,
Agricultural research at Andhra Pradesh and Horticulture University in
Telangana etc. The Committee in this regard urge the Department to
revisit the existing agriculture education system in the country and
change the perception among youth about the remunerations from
agriculture sector. They also recommend that the initiatives taken by
the Department regarding setting up of CAUs for region specific
agricultural research, AU in Andhra Pradesh & Horticulture University at

50
Telangana, Student Rural Entrepreneurship Awareness Development
Yojana is though a welcome step, however , should see light of the day
within the stipulated time frame. They strongly recommend the
Department to make all-out effort for attracting, mentoring and retaining
youth in agriculture.
Reply of the Government
In order to attract youth for career in Agriculture, DARE/ICAR has
planned a programme ‘Student READY’ during XII Plan. The programme
shall be implemented after getting approval from the Government.
Apart from this ARYA (Attracting and Retaining Youth in Agriculture)
proposes a direct engagement of the National Agricultural Research
System with potential rural youth. It aims to operate through selected
Krishi Vigyan Kendras in the country and envisages supporting and guiding
rural youth towards income generating technologies, services and
enterprises, which are essentially required in the villages. The project
proposed to provide technical and financial support to upscale/
commercialize promising innovations that provide the required incentive
to youth to remain in villages.
[Ministry of Agriculture O.M. No. 7(6)/2014, dated 12th March, 2015,
Department of Agricultural Research and Education]
NATIONAL AGRICULTURAL INNOVATION PROJECTS (NAIP)
Recommendation (Serial No. 29)
The Committee note that National Agricultural Innovation Projects
(NAIP) is initiative of the Indian Council of Agricultural Research (ICAR)
with funding of Government of India and World Bank to broadly identify
and promote technology led innovations in agriculture sector. The project
aims to enhance multi-dimensional competence for steering-up
agricultural R&D. The Committee have been informed that 171 public-
private partnerships have been established in 203 sub-projects under
NAIP financing and with additional financing from the Global Environment
Facility (GEF) with total funding of Rs. 1518.87 crore. The Committee
have been apprised that 118 patent/intellectual property protection
application were filed and 82 technologies/products commercialized
based on the NAIP research. Further , 57 new rural industries were
piloted and over 8,371 hectares of farmers ’ agricultural land brought
under sustainable land-management practices under these projects.
While appreciating achievements under the scheme, the Committee
are of view that there is need for more of such projects where funding
could be arranged through international organizations. They emphasize
that the focus of such projects should reflect a shift toward demand
driven research. The Committee, therefore, recommend DARE to strive

51
hard to arrange more funds for R&D work in agriculture so that problem
arising due to reduced allocation to the sector could be replenished up
to some extent.
Reply of the Government
The department has already initiated the process for getting approval
for the National Agricultural Education Project (NAEP) for Rs. one
thousand crore through World Bank, which is in advance stages.
[Ministry of Agriculture O.M. No. 7(6)/2014, dated 12th March, 2015,
Department of Agricultural Research and Education]
AGRINNOVATE INDIA PRIVATE LTD.
Recommendation (Serial No. 30)
The Committee note that Agrinnovate India Private Ltd. is DARE/
ICAR owned PSU Company formed to promote R&D outcomes through
IPR protection, commercialization and forging partnership both in the
country and outside. However , the Committee note that the Company
is yet to start its function effectively. The Company has generated
revenue of Rs. 1.26 crore by licensing of tissue culture technology of
palm oil and capacity building programmes since its inception in 2011.
The company has also earned interest income of Rs. 9.06 crore from
interest income. The Committee have been informed that AIL has
initiated the establishment of a modern vaccine production plant
(capacity 100-150 million doses) in PPP mode at Bengaluru campus of
IVRI, Izatnagar in order to augment the availability of FMD vaccine. The
Company is also assisting DARE on projects related to establishment of
facilities for soil, water and tissue testing, seed production and
demonstration, and Farm Science Centres in different countries in Africa.
The Committee are of the view that there is immense possibilities exist
for the Company in the field of agriculture. The Committee recommend
that Department should facilitate AIL to start effective marketing of
technologies, seeds varieties and other R&D works of ICAR both in
Indian and global market aggressively. The AIL should strive hard to
achieve success in the field of agriculture marketing on the lines of
work done by Antrix corporation for marketing of R&D works done by
the ISRO. The Committee are of view that ICAR should involve all
Institutes to engage AIL for commercialistaion of R&D works of these
Institutes.
Reply of the Government
Agrinnovate India Limited has focused on translating potential
technological outputs of ICAR into marketable products and commercial

52
activities. In this endeavour, the Company has licensed the following
technologies:
• Tissue Culture Technology of Oil Palm developed by
Directorate of Oil Palm Research (DoPR), Pedavegi in
partnership with Biotech Consortium India Limited (BCIL)
was licensed to three more private partners, on a non-
exclusive basis. Agrinnovate through its technical partner,
DoPR is providing hand holding and training to the technical
personnel.The Department of Agriculture and Cooperation,
Government of India has also launched special programme
on Oil Palm Area Expansion (OPAE) during 2011-12.
• Diagnostics of Foot-and-mouth disease (FMD), which is a major
livestock disease of trans-boundary importance, affecting
cloven-hoofed animals has been licensed by Agrinnovate to
Arsh Biotech Pvt. Ltd. for ‘3AB3 and 3ABC Non-structural
proteins. This Enzyme-Linked Immunosorbant Assay (ELISA)
diagnostic test can Differentiate Infected from Vaccinated
Animals (DIVA) ’ with more sensitivity & specificity and is
more cost effective. The technology has been developed at
Project Directorate on Foot and Mouth Disease (PDFMD),
Mukteswar.
• Thirty One Agriculture Engineering Technologies from Indian
Institute of Horticultural Research (IIHR), Bengaluru have
also been licensed by Agrinnovate to a private firm which is
working towards their commercialization.
Agrinnovate has further compiled a list of potentially marketable
technologies developed by ICAR Institutes which includes wheat varieties
from Directorate of Wheat Research (DWR), Karnal; Bottled Sugarcane
Juice from Tamil Nadu Agricultural University (TNAU), Coimbatore;
Intermediate Moisture Chicken from Central Avian Research Institute
(CARI), Izatnagar; BT Cotton detection kits from Central Institute of
Cotton Research (CICR), Nagpur and Dip Stick Technology of Central
Potato Research Institute (CPRI), Shimla. Some of the Fisheries Research
Institutes are already in touch with Agrinnovate India Private Ltd. for
getting evaluation and commercialization of some of their Technologies.
Capitalizing on demand in the area of human resource and capacity
building in agriculture especially those in African and Asian countries,
Agrinnovate has attempted to fill this gap by conducting various capacity
building programmes. These include short term Training on Chick Vent
Sexing and Seed Quality Assurance sponsored by West Africa Agricultural

53
Productivity Programme (WAAPP) for ten Nigerian Nationals, at Central
Avian Research Institute (CARI), Izatnagar and Indian Agricultural Research
Institute (IARI), New Delhi respectively.
Three training-cum-workshops were conducted under ASEAN — India
Cooperation Fund on Conventional and Molecular Techniques for Diagnosis
of Trans-boundary Animal Diseases at High Security Animal Disease
Laboratory, Bhopal; IT Application for Agricultural Extension (e-Extension)
at National Academy of Agricultural Research Management, Hyderabad
and Organizing and implementing an effective National Seed Quality
Control System at Directorate of Seed Research, Mau. The programmes
benefitted 51 participants from ASEAN member countries including
Cambodia, Indonesia, Laos, Malaysia, Myanmar , Philippines, Singapore,
Thailand and Vietnam.
Customized training programmes, sponsored by International Centre
for Agricultural Research in Dry Areas (ICARDA) were conducted for
16 participants from Iraq on Bio-fertilizer & Bio-pesticides and Bio-
organic Fertilization at IARI, New Delhi; Insect Biological Control (Mass
rearing) of Agriculture Pests at NBAII, Bangalore; and Training on Seed
Technology and Pesticide testing at IARI, New Delhi. Also two participants
from Mongolia attended FAO sponsored training on Pesticide Testing at
IARI, New Delhi.
In addition, with the technical backstopping from Central Institute
of Agricultural Engineering (CIAE), Bhopal, Agrinnovate India facilitated
technical consultancy for preparation of feasibility report on
Establishment of Tractor Assembling Plant and Farm Equipment
Manufacturing Unit at Tanzania.
[Ministry of Agriculture O.M. No. 7(6)/2014, dated 12th March, 2015,
Department of Agricultural Research and Education]

54
CHAPTER III
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO NOT
DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE GOVERNMENT ’S REPLIES
-NIL-

55
CHAPTER IV
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF
THE GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE
REVENUE RECEIPT OF DARE/ICAR
Recommendation (Serial No. 07)
The Committee note that revenue generated by the institutes under
ICAR are not reflected in Revenue Receipt presented to the Lok Sabha.
They have been apprised that revenue generated from consultancy
services and training are utilized as per approval given by the Ministry
of Finance and that license fee generated by the institutes is remitted
to the ICAR as per ICAR Guidelines. The Committee are given to
understand that all revenues received by the Government by way of
taxes like Income Tax, Central Excise, Customs and other receipts flowing
to the Government in connection with the conduct of Government
business i.e. Non-Tax Revenues are credited into the Consolidated Fund
constituted under Article 266 (1) of the Constitution of India. The
Committee, therefore, find violation of this provision of the Constitution
as any money deposited to the Consolidated Fund of India ought to
have the approval of Parliament for incurring expenditure. They desire
that such revenue generated under the administrative control of the
Department should be reflected in the budget documents including
detailed Demands for Grants. They would like DARE to clarify the issue
and rectify the irregularity, if any, in this regard.
Reply of the Government
The General Financial Rules GFR 2008(iii) states “All autonomous
organizations, new or already in existence should be encouraged to
maximize generation of internal resource and eventually attain self-
sufficiency”. ICAR, though a non-profit scientific organization, generates
internal resources through the following:—
1. Income from Sales of farm produce/livestock
2. Income from Services
3. Fees/Subscriptions
4. Income from Royalty, Publications etc.
The Revenue generated by ICAR is netted while submitting the
demand of funds to the Ministry of Finance and as such the Revenue
generated by ICAR is utilized by ICAR itself. The utilization of internal

56
resources as such is permitted by Secretary (Expenditure), Ministry of
Finance vide D.E.A Id. No. F . 2(45)-B (CDN)/2010 dated 12.09.2011. The
revenue generated by ICAR are not transferred to the Department viz.,
DARE and as such do not form a part of Non-Tax Revenues of DARE.
[Ministry of Agriculture O.M. No. 7(6)/2014, dated 12th March, 2015,
Department of Agricultural Research and Education]
Comments of the Committee
For comments of the Committee please refer to Para No. 1.10 of
Chapter I of this Report.
AVAILABILITY OF ADVANCE PRICE FORECAST OF AGRICULTURAL COMMODITY
Recommendation (Serial No. 16)
The Committee are of the opinion that availability of advance price
forecast before sowing of crops could be very beneficial to the farmers
in pre-sowing decision making and thereby enhancing farmers ’ income.
The Committee note that ICAR is providing facility of price forecast for
twenty agricultural commodity through network of 16 centres located
throughout the country. The Committee note the efforts of ICAR in the
important area of agricultural extension. However, the Committee are
of view that there is need for bringing more crops especially the major
crops region-wise under their purview in order to cover larger number
of farmers in other parts of the country as well. The Committee,
therefore, recommend the DARE to enhance the coverage of agricultural
commodity along with number of centres providing price forecast for
the benefit of farmers especially the small and marginal farmers in the
pre-sowing decision making.
Reply of the Government
In order to help farmers take judicious decision to market their
farm produce ICAR’s institute “National Institute of Agricultural Economics
and Policy Research (NIAP) ” started a Network project of Market
Intelligence in June, 2013 to provide reliable and timely price forecasts
to farmers on selected agricultural commodities. The project generates
price forecasts for major agricultural commodities in different parts of
the country through the network of following Centres:—
Sl.No. Institute Name Commodities Allotted
12 3
Lead Centre: NIAP , New Delhi
Collaborating Centres
1. ANGRAU, Hyderabad Chickpea, Groundnut, Maize, Cotton,
Chillies

57
 2. BHU, Varanasi T omato, Potato, Mango, Maize,
Rapeseed & mustard
 3. IABM Bikaner , Rajasthan Cumin, Chickpea, Pearmillet,
Clusterbean, Coriander
 4. CPRI, Shimla Potato
 5. GBPUA&T , Pantnagar P otato, Fine Paddy, Tomato,
Cabbage, Vegetable Pea
 6. ICARNEH, Barapani Ginger, Turmeric, Potato, Pineapple,
Tomato
 7. IIHR, Bangalore Onion, Tomato, Mango,
Pomegranate, Grapes
 8. IIPR, Kanpur Chickpea, Pigeonpea, Lentil,
Blackgram, Greengram
 9. JAU, Gujarat Castor, Pigeonpea, Potato, Cotton,
Groundnut, Maize
10. JNKVV , Madhya Pradesh Soybean, Chickpea, Maize, Mustard,
Tur
11. KAU, Thrissur Pepper, Tapioca, Coconut
12. OUAT , Bhubaneswar Coconut, Cotton, Turmeric, Maize,
Greengram, Ginger , Groundnut
13. PDKV , Akola Greengram, Pigeonpea, Onion,
Maize, Soybean
14. UAS, Bengaluru Maize, Banana, Ragi, Redgram,
Potato
15. YSPUHF , Solan Apple, Tomato, Pea, Ginger , Maize
16. SKUAST , Shalimar Apple, Walnut, Cherry, Pear
The price forecasts are disseminated to the farmers before sowing
and during harvests so that informed and intelligent decisions can be
taken by the farmers for acreage allocation and timing of sale of their
produce. With NIAP , New Delhi, as lead Centre, the project is
implemented at 16 locations with involvement of 12 State Agricultural
Universities and 4 ICAR Institutes. Each centre is required to develop
and disseminate pre-sowing and pre-harvest price forecasts of around
five agricultural commodities selected based on the regional importance.
 12 3

58
Due care is taken to generate the dependable forecasts by using scientific
techniques and also taking into consideration the farmers ’ and traders’
perception into account. The price forecasts are disseminated to farmers
using local newspaper , Television, IFFCO SMS Service, Farmers fair, special
meetings with farmers, Institute Websites and display in mandis.
[Ministry of Agriculture O.M. No. 7(6)/2014, dated 12th March, 2015,
Department of Agricultural Research and Education]
Comments of the Committee
For comments of the Committee please refer to Para No. 1.19 of
Chapter I of this Report.
FIXATION OF PRICES OF SEEDS DEVELOPED BY ICAR
Recommendation (Serial No. 19)
The Committee note that DARE alongwith other stakeholders is
involved in fixing prices for Breeder Seed and Sale Rate is fixed keeping
in view the production cost and considering the interest of the farming
community. They have further been informed that price of foundation
and certified seed is decided by respective seed producing public
agencies like NSC and respective State seed corporations, private seed
companies as per the prevailing market rates and cost of production.
The Committee are of view that adequate availability of seeds of good
quality at reasonable price to farmers is of utmost significance for
enhancing production and productivity of farm produce. Further , outcome
of R&D work with public money should be available at reasonable
prices to the intended beneficiaries. They find the current practice of
leaving fixation of final prices of seed varieties to the private sector
works, at times, against the interest of the farmers. The Committee
recommend that ICAR should develop a seed bank where all varieties
of seeds are available to the farmers, that is traditional seeds, newly
researched seeds, hybrid seeds etc. R&D for upgraded traditional seeds
with quality improvements and increased productivity should be
developed by ICAR pro-actively. They also recommend the DARE to
devise a policy for fixation of final reasonable prices of seed varieties
developed by ICAR at the time of transfer of technology which are fair
and within the reach of majority of small and marginal farmers in the
country. Seed varieties developed by ICAR should be sold with such
pre-conditioned appropriate clause that the farmers receive them at
reasonable price. Adequate monitoring mechanism should be put in
place for the purpose.

59
Reply of the Government
Mandate of ICAR is to produce nucleus and breeder seed. Crop
Science Division of ICAR co-ordinates the breeder seed production of
field crops in the country with the co-operation of various SAUs and
crop based institutes. The breeder seed is produced on the basis of
indents received from private as well as public sector organizations
placed with DAC which in turn consolidates the indents and forward to
ICAR. The production of breeder seed is demand driven. Production of
quality seed (foundation and certified) of various crops is primarily the
responsibility of the States although ICAR institutes also produce limited
quantity of certified/Truthfully Labelled (TL) seeds as they are mandated
basically to carry out research and development activities. However, all
possibilities will be explored to utilize the States and Central machinery
including KVK to maximizing seeds/quality planting material production.
Each institute fixes the price of seed keeping in view the prevailing
market price, cost of production and interest of farmers.
[Ministry of Agriculture, O.M. No. 7(6)/2014, dated 12th March, 2015,
Department of Agricultural Research and Education]
Comments of the Committee
For comments of the Committee please refer to Para No. 1.22 of
Chapter I of this Report.
OPENING OF ADDITIONAL KVKs
Recommendation (Serial No. 26)
The Committee has been informed that there is a provision of
opening one KVK in each of the rural district of the country. However,
in larger districts composite index ranking based on three parameters
with equal weightage for ranking the districts,  viz. Geographical Area,
Rural Population and Net Sown Area, one additional KVK is sanctioned.
The Committee note that ICAR has been able to establish only 641 KVKs
in the country as on date. They also note that only 45 Districts in
10 States of the country has been able to get an additional KVKs. The
Committee are of view that the provision for setting of one KVK in each
rural district of the country is insufficient keeping in view large areas,
number of farmers and diverse agro-climatic regions of the country.
The Committee are of view that in order to disseminate information
about the research, refinement of technology/products and its
demonstration to maximum numbers of small and marginal farmers
DARE should aim for establishment of one KVK in each rural Block of

60
the country. Only with this level of spread, the farmers of the country
would be able to receive necessary information and agricultural input
necessary for making agriculture a productive profession with suitable
return on their investment. The Committee, therefore, recommend the
DARE to devise ways and means for establishment of one KVK in each
Block of the country. They also emphasize that Department should
promote training from successful farmers to other farmers i.e. farmer
to farmer training as well as training ‘the trainer ’ for far and wide
reach and coverage of knowledge  i.e.  covering and training 67 lakh
farmers.
Reply of the Government
As Agricultural Extension is the State Subject, therefore, large scale
disseminations of technologies to farmers is the responsibility of State
Governments, which are operating the main extension machinery.
However , the KVKs are supplementing and complementing the efforts
of the State Governments by taking up the role of front line extension
and providing technological back stopping to the field extension system.
As observed by the Committee, so far the Government has approved
for sanctioning one KVK in each of the rural districts in the country and
one additional KVK in 50 selected larger districts out of which 45 KVKs
have been sanctioned. Besides, proposal has been made for approval of
the Government for one additional KVK in such more 55 larger districts
and 5 hilly and mountainous districts in the country during the XII Plan.
As far as setting up of KVKs in each block of the country is concerned,
it is stated that KVK System is an effective outreach arm of National
Agricultural Research System mandated to assess and demonstrate
agricultural technologies, capacity development and work as knowledge
and resource centre in the district. A number of expert Committees
have recommended that KVKs should work as a link between research
and different development departments for fostering the technology
transfer process from lab to land and work as an umbrella for all
agriculture and related schemes at district level for technological
backstopping. The KVK is perfectly located at district level to lead,
incubate local innovations and capacity development. Setting up of
KVKs at block level may lead to its involvement in non-scientific
development works. KVKs are developing the capacity of Subject Matter
Specialists/members of Block Technology Teams and Farmers Friends
who are involved in field extension under ATMA scheme.
[Ministry of Agriculture O.M. No. 7(6)/2014, dated 12th March, 2015,
Department of Agricultural Research and Education]
Comments of the Committee
For comments of the Committee please refer to Para No. 1.25 of
Chapter I of this Report.

61
CHAPTER V
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH FINAL
REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT ARE STILL AWAITED
IMPLEMENTATION OF INITIATIVES ANNOUNCED FOR XII PLAN
Recommendation (Serial No. 4)
The Committee are unhappy to note that many new initiatives such
as Rural Entrepreneurship Awareness Development Yojana (READY),
farmers First, Attracting & Retaining Youth in Agriculture (ARYA),
establishment of Central Agricultural Universities at Bihar, Bundelkhand
and Barapani initiated for implementation during XII Plan are yet to
commence nearly three years after the commencement of the Plan.
The Committee have been informed that the pace of progress of these
initiatives has been affected due to reduced allocations to the DARE.
They have been informed that the proposal relating to some initiatives
such as READY & ARYA are pending before the Ministry of Finance and
CCEA respectively. The Committee have been assured that these
proposals will be implemented soon after getting the approvals. Similarly,
formalities for establishment of CAU, Bihar and Barapani have been
initiated. The Committee deplore the slow pace of work in
implementation of new initiatives during the XII Plan. The Committee
are of the view that preliminary work for implementation of these
schemes and the proposals for approval should have been completed
well in time. The Committee desired that requisite formalities for
launching these schemes/projects should be completed without further
loss of time and it should be ensured that implementation is taken up
during the current financial year so that intended benefits planned
under these schemes are available in time.
Reply of the Government
The Rani Lakshmi Bai Central Agricultural University, Bundelkhand
has started classes for the B.Sc. (Hons.) Agriculture course from the
year 2014-15. The Memorandum of Understanding (MoU) has been signed
between Government of Bihar and Union Government to convert Rajendra
Agricultural University (RAU), Samastipur , Bihar to Central Agricultural
University (CAU). As far as Central Agriculture University (CAU), Barapani
is concerned, two States i.e. Nagaland and Meghalaya are to be covered
under this. This includes establishment of colleges in Meghalaya and

62
Nagaland. The EFC of CAU, Imphal has been approved by the Union
Government in which budget allocation for the colleges to be established
in these States have been approved in the XII Plan. The Government of
Meghalaya has been requested for acquiring the additional 20 acres of
land, in contiguity to the 20 acres which has already been identified for
the College of Post Graduate Studies, Umiam, under Central Agricultural
University, Imphal.The preparation of the EFC of CAU, Barapani and the
draft Bill for Parliament is in process.
The new initiative such as Farmers FIRST is a part of the KVK
Scheme and its Cabinet Note is under process. The project will be
implemented as soon as it is approved by the Government. Student,
READY (Rural Entrepreneurship Awareness Development Yojana) is part
of the scheme “Strengthening and Development of Higher Agricultural
Education in India ” and its cabinet note is under process. The scheme
ARYA (Attracting & Retaining Youth in Agriculture) has been approved
in the XII plan EFC of ‘National Agricultural Innovation Foundation ’ and
the work has already started.
[Ministry of Agriculture O.M. No. 7(6)/2014, dated 12th March, 2015,
Department of Agricultural Research and Education]
Comments of the Committee
For comments of the Committee please refer to Para No. 1.7 of
Chapter I of this Report.
NATIONAL ACTION PLAN TO CONTROL THE MENACE OF PARTHENIUM
GRASS
Recommendation (Serial No. 15)
The Committee note that problem of unabated growth of
‘parthenium’ in large parts of the country is affecting availability of
fodder for cattle, thereby directly affecting the health of livestock/
cattle as also income of farmers. They note that mechanical, chemical
and biological methods are available for management of growth of
parthenium grass. The Committee have been apprised that Directorate
of Weed Science Research (WSR) has developed a cheap technology for
mass multiplication of a bio agent called ‘zygogramma bicolorata’ which
helps to lower down the impact of parthenium and the Weed Science
Research has made efforts to spread awareness about practices to
control spread of parthenium. They have also been informed about
need of large scale efforts on the analogy of ‘Swachya Bharat Abhiyaan’
to control the menace of parthenium grass. The Committee, therefore,

63
recommend to the Government to frame a concrete action plan to
spread awareness about the technology on a country wide scale to
control the unabated growth of parthenium and other exotic weeds
affecting availability of fodders to the cattle. The Committee, strongly,
recommend the DARE to frame a co-ordinated action plan in this regard
in consultation with DAC and Ministry of Rural Development under
intimation to the Committee of the outcome. The Committee also
recommend that the Department should find out feasibility of using the
method of spraying the salt water on parthenium.
The Committee urge the Department to probe the possibility of
relating and integrating this action plan to control parthenium and the
use of bio-agent to control on the road sides which are left unattended
with ‘Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment Guarantee Act ’
Schemes by involving the unemployed labour in using the technology
for the same. They also emphasize that awareness should be enhanced
for proper results.
Reply of the Government
Efforts have been made at Directorate of Weed Research, Jabalpur
(DWR) to manage Parthenium by mechanical and manual, cultural,
chemical and biological management methods. Biological control of
parthenium through a leaf feeding bio-agent Zygogramma bicolorata
has been successful. As part of the integrated management approach,
in the waste lands and on the sides of roads and railway tracks,
replacement of parthenium by competitive plants like Cassia tora and
C. sereicea has been recommended.
DWR probed the feasibility of spraying salt water on parthenium for
its control. Salt water (15-20%) kills small and succulent plants but the
mature plants escape. Two to three salt spraying will be required in a
year for complete control as parthenium which has the ability to grow
throughout the year, and it may also result in soil salinity problems.
Therefore, instead of salt, herbicides in low dose will be more effective
to manage parthenium under integrated approach.
DWR has been observing ‘Parthenium Awareness Week ’ involving
State Agricultural Universities (SAUs), Krishi Vigyan Kendras (KVKs),
ICAR institutes, and many NGOs, schools, colleges, etc. To facilitate
successful implementation of the programme, DWR published posters,
extension pamphlets and made video films on parthenium and distributed
among the stakeholders in addition to publishing research and popular
articles, bulletins and books on management of parthenium. From 2014
onward, DWR is appealing to all KVKs, SAUS and ICAR institutions to
make their campus parthenium-free by adopting regular management
practices.

64
Apart from this, as suggested by the Committee, the department
has communicated the recommendation to create awareness about
practices to control parthenium to the Department of Agriculture and
Cooperation to sensitize them on the menace of parthenium as well as
solicited their cooperation to help bring out an action plan. The Ministry
of Rural Development (MoRD) has also been requested for required
interventions under MGNREGA. Responses from these Government
agencies are awaited.
[Ministry of Agriculture O.M. No. 7(6)/2014, dated 12th March, 2015,
Department of Agricultural Research and Education]
Comments of the Committee
For comments of the Committee please refer to Para No. 1.16 of
Chapter I of his Report.
   N
EW D ELHI; HUKM DEO NARAYAN YADAV,
07 August, 2015 Chairperson,
16 Shravana, 1937 (Saka) Committee on Agriculture.

65
APPENDIX
COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE
(2014-15)
MINUTES OF THE THIRTY FIRST SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE
The Committee met on Thursday, the 6th August, 2015 from
1000 hrs. to 1040 hrs. in Room No. 138 (Third Floor), Chamber of the
Chairperson, Parliament House, New Delhi.
PRESENT
Shri Hukm Deo Narayan Yadav —  Chairperson
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Sanganna Amarappa
3. Prof. Ravindra Vishwanath Gaikwad
4. Shri Nalin Kumar Kateel
5. Md. Badaruddoza Khan
6. Shri C. Mahendran
7. Dr. Tapas Mandal
8. Shri Dalpat Singh Paraste
9. Shri Mukesh Rajput
10. Shri Satyapal Singh
Rajya Sabha
11. Smt. Renuka Chowdhury
12. Mohd. Ali Khan
13. Shri Darshan Singh Yadav
SECRETARIAT
1. Shri Abhijit Kumar — Joint Secretary
2. Shri N.K. Pandey — Director
3. Shri C. Vanlalruata — Deputy Secretary
4. Shri Sumesh Kumar — Under Secretary

66
2. At the outset, the Chairperson welcomed the members to the
Sitting of the Committee. The Committee, then, took up the following
draft Reports:
(i) *** *** *** ***
(ii) *** *** *** ***
(iii) Memorandum No. 9 pertaining to the Draft Action Taken
Report on recommendations/observations contained in the
2nd Report of the Committee on Agriculture (2014-15) on
‘Demands for Grants (2014-15) ’ of Ministry of Agriculture
(Department of Agricultural Research & Education); and
(iv) *** *** *** ***
3. After some deliberations, the Committee adopted the draft
Reports without any amendments and authorized the Chairperson to
finalise the Reports and present the same to Parliament.
The Committee, then, adjourned.
***Matter not related to this Report.

67
ANNEXURE
(Vide Para 4 of Introduction of the Report)
ANALYSIS OF ACTION TAKEN BY GOVERNMENT ON THE SECOND
REPORT OF COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE (16th LOK SABHA)
(i) Total number of Recommendations: 30
(ii) Recommendations/Observations  which   have  been
Accepted by the Government:
Serial Nos.: 1, 2, 3, 5, 6, 8, 9, 10, 11,  12, 13, 14,
17, 18, 20, 21, 22, 23, 24, 25, 27, 28, 29 and 30
Total 24
Percentage 80.00%
(iii) Recommendations/Observations which the Committee
Do not desire to pursue in view of the Government ’s
replies:
Serial No.: NIL
Total NIL
Percentage 0%
(iv) Recommendations/Observations in respect of  which
replies of the Government have  not  been accepted
by the Committee:
Serial Nos.: 7, 16, 19 and 26
Total 04
Percentage 13.33%
(v) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which
Final replies of the Government are still awaited:
Serial Nos.: 4 and 15
Total 02
Percentage 6.66%