55
STANDING COMMITTEE ON
AGRICULTURE
(2017-2018)
SIXTEENTH LOK SABHA
MINISTRY OF AGRICULTURE AND FARMERS WELFARE
(DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURAL RESEARCH AND EDUCATION)
ÒComprehensive Agriculture Research based on Geographical
Conditions and Impact of Climatic Changes to ensure
Food Security in the CountryÓ
[Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/
Recommendations contained in the Thirty Ninth Report
(Sixteenth Lok Sabha) of the Standing Committee on
Agriculture (2016-2017)]
FIFTY FIFTH REPORT
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
August, 2018/Shravana, 1940 ( Saka)


FIFTY FIFTH REPORT
STANDING COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE
(2017-2018)
(SIXTEENTH LOK SABHA)
MINISTRY OF AGRICULTURE AND FARMERS WELFARE
(DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURAL RESEARCH AND EDUCATION)
ÒComprehensive Agriculture Research based on Geographical
Conditions and Impact of Climatic Changes to ensure
Food Security in the CountryÓ
[Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/
Recommendations contained in the Thirty Ninth Report
(Sixteenth Lok Sabha) of the Standing Committee on
Agriculture (2016-2017)]
Presented to Lok Sabha on 03.08.2018
Laid on the Table of Rajya Sabha on 03.08.2018
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
August, 2018/Shravana, 1940 ( Saka)


COA No. 377
Price : R 249.00
' 2018 B Y L OK SABHA S ECRETARIAT
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct
of Business in Lok Sabha (Fifteenth Edition) and printed by
Jainco Art India, New Delhi-110 005.

CONTENTS
PAGE
COMPOSITION OF THE C OMMITTEE ............................................. (iii)
INTRODUCTION ................................................................. (v)
CHAPTER I Report ......................................................... 1
CHAPTER II Observations/Recommendations which have been
accepted by the Government ............................ 27
CHAPTER III Observations/Recommendations which the Committee
do not desire to pursue in view of the GovernmentÕs
replies......................................................... 118
CHAPTER IV Observations/Recommendations in respect of which
replies of the Government have not been accepted
by the Committee .......................................... 119
CHAPTER V Observations/Recommendations in respect of which
final replies of the Government are still awaited... 133
ANNEXURES
I. State-wise list of 38 mangrove sites ......................... 134
II. A list of varieties of different field crops tolerant to
abiotic stresses ................................................... 137
III. Crop-wise details of Breeder Seed indent, production
and allocation for last five years............................. 148
IV . Crop-wise details of foundation seed requirement and
production/availability for last five years .................. 152
V . All India Crop-wise availability of seeds .................... 155
VI. State-wise overall requirement and availability of
seeds................................................................ 157
VII. All India Crop-wise availability of seeds .................... 159
VIII. State-wise overall requirement and availability of
seeds for Rabi 2017 ............................................. 161
IX. All India Crop-wise availability of seeds .................... 163
X. Pattern of assistance to the farmers under Schemes .... 167
(i)

PAGE
XI. Number of varieties/Hybrids of oilseeds and Pulses
released during the last five years (2012-2016) ........... 171
XII. Varieties of Small Millets released during 2016 ........... 174
XIII. Sorghum hybrids and varieties released national level
during 2014-2016 ................................................. 176
XIV . Hybrids and Varieties of pearl millet released during
2014 to 2016 ...................................................... 178
XV . Short duration drought tolerant Cultivars of Millets ...... 179
XVI. Important indigenous MPTS suitable for agroforestry for
different regions ................................................. 180
XVII. Details of NOCs accorded by CGWA to the water
intensive industries .............................................. 183
XVIII. Action Plan proposed for 7 years in respect of
mechanization and technology division to promote the
agriculture mechanization with a view of doubling the
income of the farmers by 2022 ............................... 185
XIX. SMAM (2014-15 to 2017-18) .................................... 187
XX. Extracts of the Minutes of the 27th Sitting of the
Committee held on 31.07.2018 ............................... 180
A
PPENDIX
Analysis of Action Taken by the Government on the
Recommendations contained in the Thirty Ninth Report
(Sixteenth Lok Sabha) of the Standing Committee on
Agriculture (2016-2017) ......................................... 191
(ii)

COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE
(2017-2018)
Shri Hukmdev Narayan Yadav — Chairperson
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Sanjay Dhotre
3. Prof. Ravindra Vishwanath Gaikwad
4. Shri Sanganna Amarappa Karadi
5. Shri Nalin Kumar Kateel
6. Smt. Raksha Tai Khadase
7. Md. Badaruddoza Khan
8. Shri C. Mahendran
9. Dr. Tapas Mandal
10. Shri Janardan Mishra
11. Shri Praveen Kumar Nishad
12. Shri Devji M. Patel
13. Shri Nityanand Rai
14. Shri Mukesh Rajput
15. Shri Konakalla Narayana Rao
16. Shri C.L. Ruala
17. Shri Arjun Charan Sethi
18. Shri Virendra Singh
19. Shri Dharmendra Yadav
20. Shri Jai Prakash Narayan Yadav
#21. Vacant
Rajya Sabha
22. Sardar Sukhdev Singh Dhindsa
23. Shri Rajmani Patel
24. Shri Narayan Rane
(iii)
#Vacant due to resignation of Shri B.S. Yeddyurappa from the Membership of Lok Sabha
w.e.f. 18.05.2018 vide Bulletin Part-II Table Office (B) No. 6885 dated 19.05.2018

25. Shri Kailash Soni
26. Shri Mohd. Ali Khan
27. Shri K.K. Ragesh
28. Shri Ram Nath Thakur
29. Shri R. Vaithilingam
30. Shri Harnath Singh Yadav
31. Dr. Chandrapal Singh Yadav
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Shri D.S. Malha Ñ Joint Secretary
2. Shri Arun K. Kaushik Ñ Director
3. Shri Sumesh Kumar Ñ Under Secretary
(iv)

(v)
INTRODUCTION
I, the Chairperson, Standing Committee on Agriculture (2017-18),
having been authorized by the Committee to submit the Report on their
behalf, present this Fifty Fifth Report on action taken by the Government
on the Observations/Recommendations contained in the Thirty Ninth
Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) of the Standing Committee on Agriculture
(2016-17) on the Subject ÒComprehensive Agriculture Research based
on Geographical Conditions and Impact of Climatic Changes to ensure
Food Security in the Country Ó pertaining to the Ministry of Agriculture
and Farmers Welfare (Department of Agricultural Research and
Education).
2. The Thirty Ninth Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) of the Standing
Committee on Agriculture (2016-17) on the Subject ÒComprehensive
Agriculture Research based on Geographical Conditions and Impact of
Climatic Changes to ensure Food Security in the Country Ó pertaining to
Ministry of Agriculture and Farmers Welfare (Department of Agricultural
Research and Education) was presented to Lok Sabha on 10.08.2017 and
laid on the Table of Rajya Sabha on 09.08.2017. The Action Taken Notes
on the Report were received on 03.11.2017.
3. The Report was considered and adopted by the Committee at
their Sitting held on 31.07.2018.
4. An analysis of the action taken by the Government on the
Observations/Recommendations contained in the Thirty Ninth Report
(Sixteenth Lok Sabha) of the Committee is given in Appendix.
   N
EW D ELHI; HUKMDEV NARAYAN YADAV,
02 August, 2018 Chairperson,
11 Shravana, 1940 (Saka) Standing Committee on Agriculture.

1
CHAPTER I
REPORT
This Report of the Standing Committee on Agriculture deals with
the action taken by the Government on the recommendations contained
in the Thirty Ninth Report of the Standing Committee on Agriculture
(2016-17) on the Subject ÒComprehensive Agriculture Research based
on Geographical Conditions and Impact of Climatic Changes to Ensure
Food Security in the CountryÓ of the Ministry of Agriculture and Farmers
Welfare (Department of Agricultural Research and Education) which
was presented to Lok Sabha on 10 August, 2017 and laid on the Table
of Rajya Sabha on 09 August, 2017.
1.2 The Ministry of Agriculture and Farmers Welfare (Department of
Agricultural Research and Education) have furnished Action Taken Replies
in respect of all the 33 Observations/Recommendations contained in
the Report. These replies have been categorized as under:Ñ
(i) Observations/Recommendations that have been accepted by
the Government:
Recommendation Para Nos. 1, 3, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12,
13, 14, 15, 16, 17, 18, 19, 20, 21,22, 23, 25, 26, 28, 29, 31,
32 and 33
(Chapter II - Total 28)
(ii) Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not
desire to pursue in view of the Government Õs reply:
Recommendation Para No. NIL
(Chapter III - NIL)
(iii) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies
of the Government have not been accepted by the
Committee:
Recommendation Para Nos. 2, 4, 24, 27 and 30
(Chapter IV - Total 05)
(iv) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which final
replies of the Government are still awaited:
Recommendation Para No. NIL
(Chapter V - Total NIL )

2
1.3 The Committee trust that utmost importance would be given
to implementation of the Observations/Recommendations accepted
by the Government. In cases, where it is not possible for the
Department to implement the Recommendations in letter and spirit
for any reason, the matter should be reported to the Committee
with reasons for non-implementation. The Committee desire that
further Action Taken Note on the Observations/Recommendations
contained in Chapter-I of this Report be furnished to them at an
early date.
1.4 The Committee will now deal with the action taken by the
Government on some of the Recommendations in the succeeding
paragraphs.
A. Research on Impact of Climate Change on Indian Agriculture
Recommendation (Para No. 2)
1.5 The Committee had observed/recommended as under:Ñ
ÒThe Committee note that Fifth Assessment Report (AR5) of Inter-
Governmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) has warned about
warming of the climate system across the world. This Report clearly
brought out impact of global warming such as warming of atmosphere
and oceans, shrinking of glaciers, melting of Arctic and Antarctic
ice sheets, rise of sea level etc. The Committee have been informed
that as per AR5 report each of the last three decades has been
getting successively warmer at the EarthÕs surface than any preceding
decade since 1850. The period from 1983 to 2012 was very likely
the warmest 30-year period during the last 800 years in the Northern
Hemisphere and likely the warmest 30-year period of the last 1400
years. Over the last two decades, the Greenland and Antarctic ice
sheets have been losing mass. Glaciers have continued to shrink
almost worldwide. Northern Hemisphere spring snow cover has
continued to decrease in extent. Over the period 1901-2010, global
mean sea level rose by 0.19 (0.17 to 0.21)m. The rate of sea level
rise since the mid-19th century has been larger than the mean rate
during the previous two millennia. The Committee further note
that Centre for Climate Change Research (CCCR) under the Indian
Institute of Tropical Meteorology (IITM), Pune under Ministry of
Earth Sciences carry out scientific studies on climate change and
variability under Global and Regional Climate Change (GRCC)
programme. The Committee have been informed by the Ministry of
Earth Sciences that past observations from instruments and proxy
data suggest that there are changes in our climate system on

3
different time scales. There are some natural variations and there
are some long term trends which can be attributed to human
activities. The Committee note that Annual mean, maximum and
minimum temperatures averaged over the country as a whole showed
significant warming trend of 0.6
oC, 1 oC and 0.18 oC per hundred
years, respectively. The rate of warming trend in the annual mean
temperatures since 1980s is much sharper , 0.2 oC per decade. The
warming is mostly confined to the northern, central and eastern/
north-eastern parts of the country. Peninsular India experienced
the least warming. The Committee have been further informed that
all-India southwest monsoon rainfall does not show any long-term
trend, but it exhibits significant multi-decadal variability. There
are significant regional trends in southwest monsoon rainfall.
Monsoon rainfall in the meteorological sub-divisions of Jharkhand,
Chhattisgarh and Kerala has shown significant decreasing trends.
However , monsoon rainfall over Gangetic West Bengal, West Uttar
Pradesh, Jammu and Kashmir , Konkan and Goa, Central Maharashtra,
Rayalaseema, Coastal Andhra Pradesh and North Interior Karnataka
showed increasing trends. Further , Monsoon rainfall in the month of
July has shown decreasing trends over most parts of central India.
However , June and August rainfall has shown increasing trend over
the central and southwestern parts of the country. There is a clear
pattern of decreasing frequency of very light rain and light to
moderate rain events over most of the country and increasing
frequency of very heavy and extreme rainfall events over northern
parts of the country during the monsoon season. The Committee
also note above increasing trends in heat waves during the hot
weather season and decreasing trend in cold waves during the cold
weather season over most parts of the country. The Committee
have also been informed that more intense droughts are mainly
observed over north and northwest India.
The Committee are of view that there is a need of constantly
observing changing weather conditions associated with climate
change in order to take corrective steps to offset its negative
effect on agriculture and allied sector in the country. The Committee
also feel that there should be enhanced level of coordination
between Ministry of Earth Sciences and Department of Agricultural
Research and Education. The Committee, therefore, recommend
the Government to devise a mechanism to increase the quantum of
collaborative research and coordination between these two important
Scientific Departments associated with study of climate change.
The Committee also desire the Government to provide for adequate
funding and manpower for encouraging cutting edge research in

4
this important sector so that the agriculture and allied sector in
the Country may be salvaged from negative changes associated
with climate change. Ó
1.6 In its Action Taken reply, the Department has stated as under:Ñ
ÒAnalysis of past more than 100 years of data by the scientists of
India Meteorological Department and other institutions has found
significant changes in the rainfall pattern, extreme events etc.
Both flood and drought are part of natural climate variability and
occurrences of flood or drought in individual years do not depend
on climate change. However, as an impact of climate change, it is
being reported that the spatial variability, intensity and frequency
of extreme events like heavy rainfall have increased.
Though there was no significant change in the all India rainfall but
significant changes in rainfall pattern has been observed in smaller
spatial scales viz. meteorological sub-divisions or States. Decreasing
trend in rainfall during the month of July is observed over most
parts of central India. However , increasing trends are seen in rainfall
during June and August over the central and south western parts
of the country. Significant decreasing trend in rainfall during the
southwest monsoon season is seen over ten sub-divisions viz.
Chhattisgarh, Jharkhand, Uttarakhand, Himachal Pradesh, Arunachal
Pradesh, Nagaland, Mizoram and Tripura, sub-Himalayan West Bengal,
Kerala, east Uttar Pradesh and east Madhya Pradesh whereas eight
sub-divisions viz. Madhya Maharashtra, Saurashtra and Kutch, south
interior Karnataka, coastal Karnataka, Konkan and Goa, coastal
Andhra Pradesh, Lakshadweep and Gangetic West Bengal showed
significant increasing trends in monsoon rainfall. Annual frequencies
of very light, light to moderate and wet days have decreased in
most of the States. Frequencies of dry days have also increased
significantly during the period, 1910-2010. Significant increase of
heavy rainfall event is observed over the eight States (West Bengal,
Tripura, Manipur, Andhra Pradesh, Telangana, Karnataka, Goa and
Odisha). Significant increase in the frequency of very heavy events
over West Bengal, Tripura, Sikkim, Andhra Pradesh, Telangana,
Karnataka, Goa, Jammu & Kashmir and Odisha and extreme rainfall
events over West Bengal, Assam, Punjab, Jammu & Kashmir,
Chhattisgarh, Goa and Telangana are being reported.
The latest Inter-Governmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) report
(2014) highlights that mean surface temperature of the globe has
risen by 0.85
oC + 0.18 oC. whereas, all India mean temperature has

5
risen around 0.64oC over the last 110 years. Mean annual surface air
temperatures show a significant warming of about 0.7 oC/100 years
during the last century.
The Centre of Climate Change Research (CCCR) was launched in
2009 with the support of the Ministry of Earth Sciences, Government
of India. The CCCR is part of the Indian Institute of Tropical
Meteorology (IITM) located at Pune. The CCCR focuses on
development of new climate modeling capabilities in India and
South Asia to address issues concerning the Science of Climate
Change. Two major developments in climate modeling have taken
place at CCCR in the recent 2 years.
Development of the IITM Earth System Model (ESM): With the goal
of building an ESM appropriate for detection, attribution and
projection of changes in the South Asian monsoon, a state-of-the-
art seasonal prediction model, namely, the Climate Forecast System
(CFS) has been transformed to a climate model suitable for extended
climate simulations at the CCCR, IITM, Pune, India. IITM ESM will
be participating in the next Inter-Governmental Panel for Climate
Change (IPCC) Coupled Model Inter-comparison Project phase 6
experiments - this is a first for an Indian model.
CCCR is also leading the Coordinated Regional Downscaling
Experiment (CORDEX) activity for the South Asian region. CORDEX
is an International Programme under the World Climate Research
Program (WCRP) which aims at advancing and coordinating the
science and application of Regional Climate Downscaling through
global partnerships, in order to inform local and national climate
adaptation strategies. The regional modeling activities of CORDEX
South Asia are focused on providing reliable projections with much
greater detail (than global climate models) and more accurate
representation of localized extreme events over the South Asian
region, through
¥ Development of multi-model ensemble projections of high
resolution (50 km) regional climate change scenarios for South
Asia. The regional climate projections over South Asia are
generated by CCCR-IITM and also by various International
partner institutions.
¥ Development of an Earth System Grid (ESG) node at CCCR-
IITM for archival, management and dissemination of CORDEX
South Asia datasets.

6
¥ Evaluation of regional climate projections over South Asia
for reliable climate change information for effective
harnessing of science-based information by Vulnerability,
Impact, Adaptation (VIA) community.
¥ Development of regional capacity for assessment of regional
climate change.
As part of this activity, high-resolution simulations of 20th century
climatic variations and future climate projections (21st century)
have been developed at CCCR-IITM. These high-resolution simulations
offer new opportunities to better understand several key regional
scientific issues concerning climate change over South Asia - e.g.,
Monsoons, precipitation extremes, heat waves, droughts and floods,
changes in cyclonic weather systems, hydrological cycle etc. A
variable resolution global modeling framework, based on the
Laboratorie Dynamique Meteorologie (LMD, France) atmospheric
General Circulation Model (GCM), has been employed for this purpose
under a scientific collaboration between CCCR-IITM and LMD, aimed
towards contributing to the IPCC AR6 assessment. The high-resolution
climate projections for India (2006-2095) were released in the Sixth
National Workshop on Climate Change organized at INCOIS,
Hyderabad during 1-2 September, 2014.
IITM-ESMv1: Successful development of the first version of IITM ESM
at CCCR, IITM, Pune by transforming a seasonal prediction model
(CFSv2) into a long term climate model (Ref: Swapna et al. 2015).
This development was achieved by incorporating a new ocean model
component (MOM4p1, including ocean biogeochemistry) in CFSv2.
Major improvements in the IITM-ESM relative to CFSv2 include:
The IITM-ESMv2 would be first climate model from India to contribute
to the Coupled Model Intercomparison Project Sixth Phase (CMIP6)
for the IPCC sixth assessment report (Ar6). IITM has requested for
funding support from MoES for collaborative work with other Indian
agencies involved in the field. Additional manpower requirement
has also been projected.
Following the recommendations of the Expert Committee, it is
proposed that CCCR-IITM will collaborate with Agricultural
Researchers to investigate and address the Impacts of Climate Change
on Indian Agriculture. For this purpose, CCCR-IITM has requested
for funding support from MoES for collaborative work with other
Indian agencies involved in Agriculture and Climate research.
Additional manpower requirement will be projected for this
collaborative research. Ó

7
There is a co-ordination between Ministry of Earth Sciences and
Department of Agricultural Research and Education for weather
services. The Gramin Krishi Mausam Seva (GKMS) of IMD is rendered
twice a week in collaboration with Indian Council of Agricultural
Research (ICAR). Accordingly, district level weather forecast for
next 5-days are provided to farmers in respect of Rainfall, maximum
temperature, minimum temperature, wind speed, wind direction,
relative humidity and cloudsweekly cumulative rainfall forecast and
Crop specific advisories.
The GKMS of IMD has been successful in providing the crop specific
advisories to the farmers through different print/visual/Radio/IT
based media including short message service (SMS) and Interactive
Voice Response Service (IVRS) facilitating for appropriate field level
actions. Weather forecast based agrometeorological advisories are
also disseminated through Kisan portal launched by the Ministry of
Agriculture and Farmers Welfare and also under public private
partnership. At present, about 23.0 million farmers in the country
are receiving the SMS based advisories. Ó
1.7 The Committee observe that no significant steps have been
taken by the Government for devising a mechanism to increase the
quantum of collaborative research and coordination between two
important Scientific Departments associated with study of climate
change viz. Ministry of Earth Sciences and Department of Agricultural
Research and Education. The Committee were informed that Centre
of Climate Change Research-Indian Institute of Tropical Meteorology
(CCCR-IITM) will collaborate with Agricultural Researchers to
investigate and address the Impacts of Climate Change on Indian
Agriculture and for this purpose funding support was requested from
Ministry of Earth Sciences (MoES) for collaborative work with other
Indian agencies involved in Agriculture and Climate research. The
Committee are of view that there is urgent need for multi-sectoral
coordination and collaborative research to effectively analyze impact
of climatic changes associated with global warming on agriculture
and allied sector in the country. Collaborative research will not only
help to optimize investment on research but also help to prepare a
pool of scientist which can give a quantum leap to our country in
cutting edge research in the field of agriculture sciences and ensure
food security of country in future. The Committee, therefore, desire
the Department of Agricultural Research and Education to take steps
to plan more collaborative research with Ministry of Earth Sciences.

8
B. Burning of Crop Residue
Recommendation (Para No. 4)
1.8 The Committee had observed/recommended as under:Ñ
ÒThe Committee note that despite being banned, burning of crop
residue in agricultural fields has emerged as one of the important
challenges in recent times which is adding to already high level of
pollutants in the environment. The Committee further note that as
per assessment made by the ICAR approximately 130-140 Mt Crop
residues is being burnt annually in agriculture fields out of
679 million tonne (Mt) crop residue generated in the country which
is causing emission of 8.57 Mt of CO, 141.15 Mt of CO
2, 0.037 Mt
of SOx, 0.23 Mt of NOx, 0.12 Mt of NH 3 in the atmosphere. The
Committee have been informed that ICAR-Indian Institute of Soil
Science has developed a technique called ÒRapo-compost TechnologyÓ
for faster decomposition of biodegradable waste that is able to
convert biodegradable waste to quality compost in 30-45 days with
the help of bio-inoculum consortia (bacteria, fungi and
actinomycetes) having ligno-cellulolytic potential. The Committee
observe that shortage of agricultural labour , short interval due to
intensive agriculture being practised in some parts of the country
and mechanized farming are forcing the farmers to take extreme
step of burning the crop residue in farm field. The Committee are
of considered view that there is a need to provide adequate
extension and financial support to help them in adopting technology
for decomposition of crop residue, conservation agriculture or utilize
for making cupboard in small scale industries. The Committee,
therefore, desire the Government to take this issue on priority
basis and make policy/plan/programmes for eco-friendly utilization
of crop residue. The Committee also desire the ICAR for development
of new technology/bio-logical methods which can reduce the period
of in-situ decomposition of plant residue. Ó
1.9 In its Action Taken reply, the Department has stated as under:Ñ
ÒThe ICAR-Indian Institute of Soil Science has developed an in-situ
rapid crop residue decomposition technique using consortia of ligno-
cellulolytic microorganisms. The technology has potential to
decompose rice, wheat and sugarcane residues in 45 days. Ó
1.10 The Committee note that Indian Council of Agricultural
Research (ICAR) has not taken any step for research to develop new
technology/bio-logical methods which can reduce the period of

9
in-situ decomposition of plant residue. However, the Committee recall
that the Government has announced a new policy in budget
(2018-19) for financial assistance to the farmers and State
Government concerned for eco-friendly use of crop residue and to
stop the practice of its burning in the field. The Committee are of
view that being apex body for agriculture research in the country,
the ICAR has responsibility for providing solution to problems being
faced by the farmers in the country. There is urgent need to develop
eco-friendly methods/technologies for in-situ decomposition or other
utilization of crop residue so that farmers are not forced to burn it
in their field. The Committee, therefore once again reiterate their
earlier recommendation and desire the ICAR to take this as a challenge
so that practice of burning of crop residue in the field may be
minimized/abolished.
C. R&D on Alternative Food Sources for Future
Recommendation (Para No. 16)
1.11 The Committee had observed/recommended as under:Ñ
ÒEarth is the adobe of multitude of biological variability. The Human
society across the world including India has however selected few
crops such as wheat, rice, maize which constitutes their staple
diet. Dominance of mono-cropping and excessive reliance of selected
crops can become a burden in case of any major fluctuation in
climate due to global warming. Keeping in view these factors, it is
important to take steps to identify and develop some alternative
food sources which can withstand climatic variability and hence
can be utilized as staple diet for vast population of our country.
The Committee note that ICAR through its network programmes on
small millets (AICRP on Small Millets), future crops (AICRN on
Potential Crops), legumes (AINP on Arid Legumes) is continuously
engaged in conservation of germplasms; breeding short duration,
tolerant and climate resilient varieties; developing suitable location
specific package of practices for potential future crops; and
disseminating production and value addition technologies to the
stakeholders. The Committee have been informed that ICAR is giving
priority to small millet crops, viz. foxtail millet, kodo millet, proso
millet, little millets, and barnyard millets through All India
Coordinated Research Project on Small Millets. These crops have
potential to withstand the vagaries of climate and ensure the food
and nutritional security in future. The Committee have also been
informed that ICAR Institutes have developed and popularized several

10
ready-to-cook and ready-to-eat health foods based on coarse grains
which have been developed under the NAIP project. The ICAR is
also making efforts for developing potential crops such as
pseudocereals, food legumes/pulses, oilseeds, vegetables and fodder
crops through All India Coordinated Research Network on Potential
Crops with objectives to find out new plant resources for food,
fodder , fuel, energy and industrial uses; identify superior genotypes
for cultivation in different regions; and standardize package of
practice. ICAR through its ongoing programmes/projects/schemes
at NBPGR New Delhi, NBAGR Hisar , NBFGR Lucknow, NBAIM Mau and
other ICAR institutes is continuously participating in international
project or alliances of CGAIR, FAO, SAC to share genotypes, breed
or species for use in national crop/breed improvement programmes.
The shared materials are maintained and preserved at respective
national repositories in the country. The Committee have also been
informed that Government is promoting cultivation and value addition
in more efficient, climate resilient, short duration C4 crops viz.
maize, pearl millet, sorghum and finger millets in suitable regions.
The Committee observe that despite claim of the Government in
taking step for promoting cultivation of coarse grain, there was a
decline in cultivated area between 2004-05 and 2014-15 in sorghum
(3.5 mha), pearlmillet (1.3 mha). The Committee are of considered
view that there is need to shift from mono-cropping pattern of
agriculture to diversified agriculture in order to enhance biodiversity.
Enhanced crop biodiversity will help the country to ensure food
security in case of any unforeseen consequences of climate change.
The Committee desire the Government to actively encourage the
cultivation of coarse grain, apart from providing support to research
on coarse grains and other potential food crops for future. The
Committee, therefore, call upon the Government to make a
comprehensive plan for providing funds, seeds, and other agriculture
extension support to the farmers for encouraging farming of coarse
cereals in the country. The Committee also desire the Government
to take an awareness campaign about health benefits of coarse
grain in order to enhance its consumption in the country. The
Committee are also of view that there is need to involve farmers
especially in rainfed agriculture, hill and tribal areas so that
traditional foods being used in these areas can be properly analyzed
and beneficial germplasm can be stored for further research. There
is also need to focus on research on tuber crops which are
traditionally being cultivated and used as food source in different
parts of country. The Committee, therefore, desire the ICAR to
take necessary steps in this direction. Ó

11
1.12 In its Action Taken reply, the Department has stated as under:Ñ
ÒAICRPs on Small Millets, Sorghum and Pearl millet have been
involved in developing improved technologies for sustainable
production of these crops which were important food crops before
green revolution. These crops are highly adapted to rainfed
agriculture in their niche areas from arid high temperature regions,
semiarid plains to hilly regions. Since centuries, the millets have
provided food and nutritional security to the populations in the
disadvantaged geographical regions. These food crops are unique as
they require less water to grow, mature early and are cultivated in
low input conditions. Agronomic advantages e.g. highly adapted to
low rainfall conditions, able to withstand fairly long dry spells,
recover fast after delayed rain, make them good contingent crops.
Millets are highly resilient in adapting to different ecological
conditions; ideal crops for climate change and contingency plantings.
Being C4 plants, these are more environment friendly with high
water use efficiency and low input requirement, but equally
responsive to high input management. Besides, being farmer-friendly,
millets possess unique nutritional properties, i.e. high fiber , quality
protein and mineral composition, hence called as Ònutri-cerealsÓ
also.
The ability of millets to offer a modest yield under marginal farming
conditions, poor soil and low or no input, has made them attractive
crop option in, hill and tribal agriculture. Besides, they provide
fodder contributing to food security of livestock. Owing to their
nutritional superiority, millets are being popularized as super foods
and value addition technologies are being developed at the ICAR-
Indian Institute of Millets Research (IIMR), Hyderabad.
Measures being taken by ICAR-IIMR and respective AICRPs to
encourage the farmers for taking up cultivation of millets:Ñ
¥ Enhancing the productivity of millets through evolving new
varieties. Production technologies have been developed for
all other small millets. The productivity of finger millet,
pearl millet, sorghum and foxtail millet doubled during the
past 40 years due to efforts in the crop improvement.
Varieties with high yield potential have also been developed
in different small millets like barnyard millet, kodo millet,
little millet and proso millet at national and state levels.
List of varieties released during 2016 are given in Annexure
XII.

12
¥ Varieties/hybrids of sorghum and pearl millet released during
2014-2016 are given in Annexures XIII and XIV .
¥ Varieties suitable for different climatic conditions and superior
in different nutrients have also been developed (Annexure
XV).
¥ Popularizing the millets as nutri-cereals so that the demand
for millet based foods increases and farmers realize beneficial
value for their produce. In this regard, ICAR-IIMR has taken
up value addition technology development, dissemination of
the technologies by training entrepreneurs, media campaign
about health benefits of millets, making ready-to-cook (RTC)
and ready-to- eat (RTE) millet based foods available through
licensing of manufacturing technologies (Annexure XVI). These
tasks were taken up with government support in the form of
funding in project mode.
¥ ICAR (AICRPs and IIMR) are regularly taking up Front line
Demonstrations in farmersÕ fields to demonstrate the benefits
of latest varieties and production technologies. Farmer groups
are regularly trained in production technologies, post-harvest
processing and value addition technologies.
¥ Machinery development for post-harvest processing of millets
is underway to enable farm-gate processing that would result
in higher returns for the farmer for the produce.
Maize
Maize is another versatile crop with wide adaptability and ICAR-
Indian Institute of Maize Research, Ludhiana along with AICRP (Maize)
undertakes research programmes on various aspects related to maize
improvement. Maize is relatively drought tolerant as compared to
major fine cereals. In India maize is cultivated in 8.9 mha. While
spring and rabi maize together accounting for around 18% area
under maize is predominantly cultivated under assured irrigation,
kharif maize accounting for 82% of maize area is largely cultivated
under rainfed situation.
It contains 72% carbohydrates (starch), 10% protein and 4% fat. The
mineral content of maize (Calcium; 10 mg, Phosphorus; 348 mg,
Iron; 2.5 mg, Zinc; 2.8 mg, magnesium; 139 mg) is quite comparable
to any other cereal grain. The yellow maize contains 90 micro
grams of carotene, which plays an important role as anti-oxidant
and immunity provider. Above 62% of maize in India is consumed in

13
feed industry, while around 12% is used in starch industry. The
integration of maize in human diet directly or indirectly can play
a major role in solving the problem of malnutrition, particularly
Quality Protein Maize (QPM) which is having higher lysine (>2.4 %)
as well as tryptophan values (> 0.6%) as compared to the normal
maize. Balanced combination of amino acids in the endosperm of
QPM results in higher biological value thereby ensuring more
availability of protein to human diet and animal feeds than normal
maize.
Maize can be used in greater variety of forms than any other cereals
such as Baby corn, Sweet corn, Pop corn and normal grain. Huge
scope exists for value added products of speciality corns as well.
For example pop corn can be used as High fiber pop corn bar,
Nutritious burfi, Iron rich laddu, Protein and fiber rich chikkies,
Baby corn can be used as Candy, Murabba, Pickles, Brined baby
corns, Vinegar preserved baby corn, dehydrated baby corn and QPM
as Health mix, Poustic mixture, weaning mixture, energy mixture,
malt mix. Some of the convenience foods such as Ready-to-cook
mixes and Ready-to-eat mixes which has good market potential and
can be prepared with minimum requirement of machinery are listed
below:Ñ
¥ ReadyÑto cook Idli mix
¥ ReadyÑto cook Vada mix
¥ ReadyÑto cook Nutri mix
¥ Papad/fryumes
¥ Noodles/Vermicelli/Pasta
¥ Sweet and Spicy Pop corn
¥ Pop corn health Bar
¥ Baby corn Candies
Since the beginning of this millennium besides release of 7 field
corn cultivars through AICRP on Maize, 12 QPM hybrids in addition
to one QPM hybrid with enriched vitamin A have also been released
for cultivation. Currently number of hybrids and varieties under
various categories (popcorn: one hybrid and two varieties, baby
corn: one variety and hybrid each, sweet corn: 3 hybrids and one
variety) are available for cultivation. Towards diversification of maize
for food purpose under AICRP on Maize extensive work is being
carried out on value addition.

14
Technology development for value addition in sorghum/millets and
commercialization
A total of 30 value technologies have been developed by ICAR-IIMR,
Hyderabad for sorghum foods on a pilot scale. Commercialization of
these technologies has been done by transferring them to
entrepreneurs and food industries through MoUs. About 30 such
firms have commercialized ICAR-IIMR technologies and more than
10 businesses have crossed the break-even point. The ÒeatriteÓ
branding of millets foods have been successfully built through
campaigning, popularization and awareness programmes. Owing to
these progresses, Agri-Business Incubator and Technology Business
Incubator projects of the institute have been approved under
programmes of ministerial departments.
Description: The millet value added product technologies are
healthy, convenient Ready To Cook/Eat (RTC/E) foods. The
technologies have been developed from millets through
diversification of processing technologies (flaking, extrusion, baking,
popping, parboiling, semolina, blending of flours etc.),
standardization and routine R&D activities on product development
and studies on the enhancement of shelf life of millet foods.
Domain: of the following segments:
¥ Value added Millets Food Products
¥ Convenience food
¥ Healthy food
¥ Life style disorder management, etc.,
Impact:
¥ These technologies have aided in spreading of nutritional
awareness of millets among the consumers and have gained
a wide momentum from consumers especially the health
conscious segment.
¥ These have created lots of interest among the entrepreneurs
as they see more business opportunities in these nutritious,
convenient and healthy millet foods.
¥ Thus, resulting in the creation of demand for the millets
consumption, increasing of farmers Õ income, generating
employment and helping the beneficiary entrepreneurs/
stakeholders.

15
Various processing technologies developed at ICAR-IIMR are:
¥ Convenient/Ready-to-Eat and Ready-to-Cook millet based
products
¥ Removes drudgeries and inconvenience involved in preparation
¥ Increased nutrient digestibility through pre-processing and
diversification of processing technologies (baking, extrusion,
parboiling, milling, flaking, etc).
¥ Development of healthy and convenient RTC/E foods (30
convenient products)
¥ Nutritional Labelling of Eatrite products for highlighting the
nutritional benefits vis-a-vis over existing products.
¥ Consumers are provided convenient options even in sorghum
and millet foods.
¥ Currently Nine products are commercialized in M/s Big Bazaar
retail outlets in Hyderabad and Mumbai under Eatrite brand
developed by ICAR-IIMR, Hyderabad. (Jowar atta, Multigrain
atta, Jowar idli rawa, Jowar upma rawa, Jowar khichidi
rawa, Jowar flakes, Jowar vermicelli, Jowar pasta and Jowar
biscuits)
Coarse cereals including Millets is one of the components in National
Food Security Mission (NFSM) from 2014-15 to enhance the production
of coarse cereals. Coarse Cereals is also included under National
Food Security Act. Millets contain substantially high amount of fat,
fiber, minerals and higher protein compared to fine cereals like rice
and wheat and will also help to control malnutrition and many
kinds of diseases like obesity, diabetes etc. Under this Programme,
Department has been providing support to the farmers for
demonstrations, seed distribution and enhancing the production of
millets by providing easily accessibility to consumers & industry for
value addition of millets. In order to enhance its consumption,
awareness campaign is being initiated through social sector schemes
and through print and electronic media.
The group called tropical Òroots and tuber (R&T) Ó crops consists of
both dicots like sweet potato ( Ipomoea batatas ), cassava/tapioca
(Manihot esculenta Crantz) and monocots like yams (Dioscorea spp.)
and edible aroids like taro (Colocasia esculenta), tannia (Xanthosoma
sagittifolium) and elephant foot yam ( Amorphophalluspaeoniifolius
Dennst. Nicolson). R&T crops are the third important food crops of
mankind, after cereals and legumes and are either a staple or
subsidiary food for about one-fifth of the world population.

16
Individually, cassava, sweet potato and yam rank among the most
important food crops worldwide and in terms of annual volume of
production, cassava and sweet potato rank among the top 10 food
crops produced in developing countries.They contribute about 6%
of the world’s dietary calories, and are also an important source of
animal feed and raw materials for industrial products. Tropical
tuber crops are the source of sustenance and livelihood security of
200 million people across different states of India, mainly Kerala,
Tamil Nadu, Andhra Pradesh, Karnataka, Odisha, West Bengal, Bihar,
UP , Chhattisgarh, Gujarat, Goa, Maharashtra and north-eastern
States. The total tropical tuber crops production in our country is
about 12 million tons whose present market value is Rs. 165 billion.
The institute is recognized as the national germplasm repository of
tropical tuber crops by ICAR-Central Tuber Crop Research Institute
(CTCRI). The institute maintains 5,558 accessions as ex situ  field
gene bank and in vitro active germplasm collection. It includes
1,211 accessions of cassava, 1,124 of sweet potato, 1,110 of yams,
672 edible aroids, and 200 minor tuber crops besides 1241 collections
from Regional Centre. The institute developed and released 61 high
yielding varieties of different R&T crops. It includes 16 of cassava,
21 of sweet potato, 13 of yams, 8 taro, 2 elephant foot yam and
1 Chinese potato. The high yielding and high starch containing
cassava varieties like H165 and H226 developed by the institute
contributed in a major way for establishment of starch and sago
industries in and around Salem district of Tamil Nadu. The Institute
has recently released two sweet potato varieties, Bhu Sona rich in
B carotene (12.5-14 mg/100g) and Bhu Krishna, rich in anthocyanin
(85-80 mg/100g). Similarly, an anthocyanin rich Greater yam variety,
Sree Neelima has been developed having good culinary and nutritive
quality. Sree Athira is the first elephant foot yam hybrid in the
world, while Sree Kiran is the first hybrid taro variety released in
India.
The institute is constantly collecting germplasm of various tropical
tuber crops from different parts of the country and are being
conserved, catalogued and evaluated for their characteristics and
are used in different breeding programmes to evolve improved
tuber crops varieties with different traits. In order to carry out
research work in this line a new research project titled ÔConservation
and utilization of germplasm of tuber crops for sustaining
productionÕ.
Under the tribal sub plan, the Institute is planning to distribute
improved varieties of tropical tuber crops in Odisha (Kandhamal
and Koraput districts), Jharkand (Ranchi district) and Chhattisgarh

17
(Narayanpur district). Improved varieties of Sweet potato (Kishan
and ST-14, Colocasia (Muktakeshi), Greater yam (Orissa Elite and Da
293), Elephant foot yam (Gajendra), Yam bean (RM-1) and Cassava
(Sree Jaya, Sree Vijaya and Vellayani Hraswa) are being distributed
to farmers in those areas. Cropping system including Greater
yam+maize intercropping system (Greater yam planted at 90 x 90
cm spacing. In intra rows between two plants of greater yam three
plants of maize sown (1:3 ratio)and Sweet potato+red gram
intercropping system (3 rows of sweet potato at 60 x 20 cm spacing
and 3 rows of red gram at 60 x 20 cm spacing (3:3)) are also being
demonstrated in the tribal districts. In future, the Institute plans
programmes to popularize the improved varieties as well as other
tuber crops technologies in major tuber crops growing regions of
the country.Ó
1.13 The Committee while noting the steps taken by the various
institutes of Indian Council of Agricultural Research (ICAR) for research
on millet and Root & Tuber crops observe that Department reply is
silent on the issue of to make a comprehensive plan for providing
funds, seeds, and other agriculture extension support to the farmers
for encouraging farming of coarse cereals in the country and need
to take an awareness campaign about health benefits of coarse grain
in order to enhance its consumption in the country. The Committee
are of view that in order to popularize millet/coarse cereals farming
in the country, there is need to provide proper support to the farmers
in terms of funds, seed and agriculture extension support so that
they do not face problem in switching to present mono-cropping
pattern to multi-cropping. Further, there is need to popularize health
and nutritional benefits of coarse grains/millets among large
population so that ready market could be made available for produce
of farmers which in turn will help to provide adequate return to the
farmers and enhance their income. The Committee, therefore once
again reiterate their earlier recommendation and desire the DARE to
make plan in this regard and approach Central Government for
funding. Further, they may also approach State Government concerned
for formulation of plan to support farmers in switching over to coarse
Grain/millet farming.
D. Approach for Making Indian Agriculture Climate Resilient
Recommendation (Para No. 24)
1.14 The Committee had observed/recommended as under:Ñ
ÒThe Committee note that National Mission on Sustainable Agriculture
(NMSA) aims to make Indian agriculture more productive, sustainable,
and remunerative and climate resilient. NMSA has many objectives

18
such as conservation of natural resources through appropriate soil
and moisture conservation measures, Soil health management,
optimization of water use efficiency in agriculture, capacity building
of farmers and other stakeholders in the domain of climate change
adaptation and mitigation measures, improving productivity of
rainfed farming by mainstreaming rainfed technologies, and
establishing an effective, inter and intra Departmental/Ministerial
co-ordination for accomplishing key deliverables of National Mission
for Sustainable Agriculture under the aegis of NAPCC.
The Committee have been informed that promoting integrated
farming system covering crops, livestock & fishery, plantation and
pasture based composite farming, popularizing on-farm and
off-farm resource conservation technologies and introducing practices
that will support mitigation efforts in times of extreme climatic
events, promoting location and crop specific integrated nutrient
management practices, promoting effective management of available
water resources, enhancing water use efficiency, encouraging
improved agronomic practices for higher farm productivity, involving
knowledge institutions and professionals in developing climate change
adaptation and mitigation strategies for specific agro climatic
situations and promoting them through appropriate farming systems
are some of strategies being used to achieve objectives of NMSA.
The Committee are of opinion that our farmers who had helped in
securing food security of the country, need support in order to face
the challenges of climatic changes due to global warming. Indian
agriculture need interventions in the area of irrigation facilities,
water efficient irrigation methods, improved abiotic stress tolerant
seed varieties, cost effective and environment friendly fertilizers
and pesticides, capacity building of farmers and other stakeholders,
efficient and advanced agriculture extension services in order to
make it climatic resilient and enable it to secure food security of
the country. The Committee are of considered view that huge
investment will be need in the agriculture sector if the Government
wants to achieve objectives set under National Mission on Sustainable
Agriculture (NMSA). Since, agriculture is a State subject, the
Committee call for the need of better coordination between the
Central and the State Governments for planning and resource
mobilization for implementing schemes to achieve objectives of
NMSA. The Committee, therefore, recommend the Government to
constitute high powered committee involving representatives of
Central and State Governments, subject specialists and other
stakeholders for planning and implementation of schemes to achieve

19
objectives set under NMSA. The Committee also desire the
Government to start a dedicated fund for implementation of schemes
under NMSA so that these schemes do not suffer due to want of
funds.Ó
1.15 In its Action Taken reply, the Department has stated as under:Ñ
ÒNMSA is envisaged as one of the eight Missions outlined under
National Action Plan on Climate Change (NAPCC), NMSA aim at
promoting sustainable agriculture through climate change adaptation
measures. The major thrust is enhancing agriculture productivity
especially in rainfed areas focusing on integrated farming, soil health
management, and synergizing resource conversation. Besides, NMSA
also has a target to fulfil National and International commitments
on Sustainable Development Goals (SDG) & Intended Nationally
Determined Contribution (INDC). All the components of NMSA such
as Rainfed Agriculture, Soil Health Management, Organic Farming,
etc. have significant role in achieving SDGs & INDC. Further , NMSA
is the only scheme focusing and emphasising country Õs thrust on
climate change adaptation & mitigation in agriculture sector.
Rainfed Area Development (RAD) is one of the major component of
NMSA. RAD is to benefit the small and marginal farmers in the
country promoting Integrated Farming System (IFS).Under this
system, crops/cropping system is integrated with activities like
horticulture, livestock, fishery, agro-forestry, apiculture etc. to
enable farmers not only in maximizing farm returns for sustaining
livelihood, but also to mitigate the impacts of drought, flood or
other extreme weather events with the income opportunity from
allied activities during crop damage.
The National Advisory Committee (NAC) under the Chairmanship of
Secretary (AoC&FW) constituted with the members of line
Departments and organizations to provide overall direction and
guidance to the Mission, monitor and review its progress and
performance at National level.The NMSA is proposed for continuation
for three years i.e. from 2017-18 to 2019-20 which is co-terminus
with the remaining period of 14th Finance Commission (FFC) ending
31st March, 2020. Based on the new initiatives and requirement in
the area of sustainable agriculture development, certain
modifications have been proposed in the present proposal and some
of the ongoing schemes of similar nature are proposed for
implementation under the frame work of NMSA.
The proposed cost of the project is Rs. 12123.62 crore (Central
Share) for implementation of all the components of NMSA. Ó

20
1.16 On the recommendation of Committee regarding constitution
of high powered committee involving representatives of Central and
State Governments, subject specialists and other stakeholders for
planning and implementation of schemes to achieve objectives set
under National Mission on Sustainable Agriculture (NMSA), the
Department in their action taken reply has informed that National
Advisory Committee (NAC) under the Chairmanship of Secretary
(AoC&FW) constituted with the members of line Departments and
organizations to provide overall direction and guidance to the Mission,
monitor and review its progress and performance at National level.
The National Mission on Sustainable Agriculture (NMSA) is proposed
for continuation for three years  i.e. from 2017-18 to 2019-20. The
Committee are of view that since agriculture is a State subject,
there must be representative of State Governments for better
co-ordination and speedy implementation of the scheme under
National Mission on Sustainable Agriculture (NMSA). The Committee,
therefore once again reiterate their earlier stance and desire the
Department to include representatives of State Governments in
National Advisory Committee (NAC) constituted for the purpose of
implementation of National Mission on Sustainable Agriculture (NMSA).
On the issue of dedicated fund for implementation of schemes
under NMSA, the Department in their action taken reply has informed
that proposed cost of the project is Rs. 12123.62 crore (Central
Share) for implementation of all the components of NMSA. However,
the Department failed to furnish allocation and utilization of funds
under the NMSA schemes since its beginning. The Committee desire
the Department to furnish allocation of funds and its utilization
along with achievements of scheme to the Committee within one
month of presentation of this Report.
E. Agricultural Extension Services
Recommendation (Para No. 27)
1.17 The Committee had observed/recommended as under:Ñ
ÒThe Committee note that existence of a robust system of agriculture
extension services is critical for making Indian agriculture climate
resilient. The Committee have been informed that responsibility
for providing of extension services to farmers lies with the State
Governments. However , Central Government is facilitating the efforts
of State Governments through a network of 665 Krishi Vigyan Kendra
(KVKs), Agricultural Technology Management Agency (ATMA) and

21
Agri clinic and Agribusiness scheme. The Committee note that KVKs
are engaged in on-farm testing to identify the location specificity
of technology under various farming systems, frontline demonstration
to establish the production potential of improved agricultural
technologies on the farmersÕ fields, Capacity development of farmers
and extension personnel to update their knowledge and skills and
Providing farm advisories on varied subjects of interest to farmers.
The KVKs also provide farm inputs such as seeds, planting materials
and other technology to the farmers. The Committee note that
ATMA Scheme is under implementation in 652 districts in 29 States
and 3 UTs in the country with provision for active participation of
farmers/farmer-groups, NGOs, KVK, Panchayati Raj Institutions and
other stakeholders operating at district level and below. The
Committee have also been informed that Mass Media Support to
Agriculture ExtensionÕ scheme is being implemented to strengthen
the reach of farm information to farming community through the
wide network of Doordarshan, DD Kisan channel and All India Radio.
However , the Committee are distressed to note that funding provided
to these agriculture extension schemes are not sufficient to make
them an effective platform for the benefit of farmers. The
Committee in their previous reports on Demands for Grants have
repeatedly brought out these facts and recommended the
Government to enhance the allocations to these schemes suitably
in order to equip KVKs with all necessary infrastructure and
manpower. The Committee are of the considered view that condition
of farmers of country cannot be improved unless they are provided
information and other necessary inputs for making agriculture
remunerative. The Committee, therefore recommend the
Government to suitably enhance funding to these schemes. The
Committee are also of view that construction of a ’Krishi Bhavan’ at
Panchayat level will help to strengthen the agriculture extension
services in the country. Construction of such bhavan with adequate
infrastructure, equipments and mass media facilities with regular
visits of scientists of ICAR, subject matter specialists of KVKs,
progressive farmers etc. will help it to emerge a hub for farmers
and solve their problems related to agriculture. The Committee,
therefore, recommend the Government to take steps for construction
of ÔKisan Bhavan Õ at Panchayat level. Ó
1.18 In its Action Taken reply, the Department has stated as under:Ñ
ÒRegarding enhancing allocation of fund to KVK scheme it is to
state that enhanced provision has been made for 2017-18 to

22
2019-20, for increasing the manpower and improving infrastructure
in KVKs.
The Centrally Sponsored Scheme ÒSupport to State Extension
Programs for Extension ReformsÓ, popularly known as ATMA Scheme
was launched in May, 2005 and aims at making extension system
farmer driven and farmer accountable by way of institutional
arrangements for technology dissemination in the form of an
Agricultural Technology Management Agency (ATMA) at district level
to operationalize Extension Reforms. The detail of year-wise
budgetary position under the Scheme is given below:
(Rs. in crore)
Year B.E. R.E. Release
2005-06 45.00 45.00 43.44
2006-07 75.00 50.00 48.27
2007-08 230.00 150.00 155.81
2008-09 298.00 198.00 193.01
2009-10 298.00 188.98 178.59
2010-11 250.00 220.00 240.28
2011-12 500.00 458.60 434.02
2012-13 600.00 504.13 508.07
2013-14 550.00 505.10 480.93
2014-15 475.00 470.58 522.98
2015-16 450.00 395.35 406.69
2016-17 450.00 410.50 413.41
2017-18 650.00 - 307.17
(upto 16.10.17)
Above table reveals that public investment in Agricultural Extension
by Central Government has increased from Rs. 43.44 crore during
the year 2005-06 to Rs. 508.07 crore in 2012-13 under the Scheme.
Since modification of the Scheme in the year 2010, the increase has
been more substantial. Amount released to the States during last
3 years is nearly 100% of the Revised Estimates. Expenditure incurred
by the States during these three years has also been keeping pace
with releases by the Center.

23
ATMA Scheme provides for active involvement of research system/
research agencies at different level of implementation. State
Agricultural Universities (SAUs) and Krishi Vigyan Kendras (KVKs)
are fully involved not only in preparation of Strategic Research
Extension Plan (SREP) and State Extension Work Plans (SEWPs) but
also in implementation of various programs in the field. They are
also representing in all the bodies namely ATMA Governing Board
and ATMA Management Committee at District level, SLSC and IDWG
at State level BTT-BFAC meetings at Block level. In addition, each
KVK scientist may be made in-charge of one or more block with the
District. The KVK scientist technically advises the BTT and involve
actively in preparation of Block Action Plans, especially with regard
to research related issue/gaps and strategies.
Agricultural Technology refinement, validation and adoption segment
of cafeteria of activities including Farmers-Scientists Interactions
(FSIs), to designate expert from KVKs at District level and joint
visits by Scientists and extension workers, organization of Kisan
Goshities and R-E-F linkages are dealt by KVKs. Apart from this, a
joint circular on convergence between ATMA and KVK was issued
under the signature of DG, ICAR and the Secretary, DAC&FW. As per
the Circular , one of the activities is joint visits of Program
Coordinator, KVK and Project Director to at least 5 villages in a
district every month.
As per extant ATMA Scheme, there is no provision to fund
construction of ÔKisan Bhawan Õ at panchayat level. Ó
1.19 On the issue of need of enhancing funding under the (Krishi
Vigyan Kendra) KVK scheme, the Department in their action taken
reply has informed that public investment in Agricultural Extension
by Central Government has increased from Rs. 43.44 crore during
the year 2005-06 to Rs. 650 crore in 2018-19 (BE) under the Scheme.
However, the Committee note that allocation under the scheme
reached to Rs. 522.98 crore in 2014-15 and decreased thereafter in
each financial year. The Committee in their previous reports has
time and again emphasized the importance of agriculture extension
for enhancing agriculture productivity and increase income of farmers
and recommended the Government to enhance allocation under KVKs
scheme. The Committee are of view that present allocation of
Rs. 650 crore for KVK scheme will not be sufficient for enhancing
the scope of extension work in KVK. The Committee, therefore,
recommend the Government to enhance allocation for KVK scheme
at RE stage so that implementing agencies do not face fund crunch
to provide extension support to the farmers.

24
On the issue of recommendation of Committee regarding construction
of ÔKisan BhavanÕ at Panchayat level, the Department in their action
taken reply has informed that as per extant Agricultural Technology
Management Agency (ATMA) Scheme, there is no provision to fund
construction of ÔKisan Bhawan Õ at panchayat level. The Committee
are of view that availability of a Kisan Bhavan will help to decentralize
the efforts of Central and State Government for agriculture extension.
It will also help to spread information about agriculture schemes,
new varities of crops and agriculture technologies among farmers.
The Committee, therefore desire the Government to make provision
of Kisan Bhavan under ATMA scheme.
F. International accord on Climate Change and India Õ Commitment
Recommendation (Para No. 30)
1.20 The Committee had observed/recommended as under:Ñ
ÒThe Committee note that our country has ratified Paris Agreement
on climate change within the United Nations Framework Convention
on Climate Change (UNFCCC) dealing with greenhouse gases emissions
mitigation, adaptation and finance starting in the year 2020. The
Committee also note that Paris Agreement Õs central aim is to
strengthen the global response to the threat of climate change by
keeping a global temperature rise this century well below 2 degrees
Celsius above pre-industrial levels and to pursue efforts to limit the
temperature increase even further to 1.5 degrees Celsius. The
Committee have been informed that it is a legally binding agreement
that covers all countries, developed and developing, with the aim
to strengthen the global response to the threat of climate change,
in the context of sustainable development and efforts to eradicate
poverty. The Committee also note that Paris Agreement also mandate
to contribute funds amounting to US $ 100 Billion by 2020 by the
Developed countries along with provisions for providing appropriate
technology and capacity building support for mitigation and
adaptation efforts to be undertaken by the developing countries.
The Committee note that Paris Agreement reflects the principle of
equity and common but differentiated responsibilities and respective
capabilities. The Agreement acknowledges the development
imperatives of developing countries and recognize the developing
countriesÕ right to development and their efforts to harmonize
development with environment, while protecting the interests of
the most vulnerable. The Committee have been informed that India

25
has submitted its Intended Nationally Determined Contribution (INDC)
which is country driven initiatives for undertaking mitigation
strategies for reduction of greenhouse gases emission which aims to
reduce the emissions intensity of its GDP by 33 to 35 percent by
2030 from 2005 level. The Committee have been assured that no
INDC does not include any commitment for reduction of GHGs
emission from agriculture sector.
The Committee note that despite having no binding mitigation
obligations as per the Convention, India declared a voluntary goal
of reducing its emissions intensity of its GDP by 20-25% over 2005
levels by 2020. The Committee also note that Government of India
is implementing the National Action Plan on Climate Change (NAPCC)
which enshrines eight national missions in specific areas of Solar
Energy, Enhanced Energy Efficiency, and Sustainable Habitat, Water
Sustaining the Himalayan Ecosystem, Green India, Sustainable
Agriculture and Strategic knowledge for Climate Change. The
Committee have also been informed that voluntary measures
undertaken by the Government to promote low carbon strategies
and Renewable Energy has resulted in the decline of emission
intensity of our GDP by 12% between 2005 and 2010 which have
been recognized by the United Nations Environment Programme
(UNEP) in its Emission Gap Report 2014.
The Committee are of view that voluntary steps undertaken by the
Government for reduction of GHGs emission and to make it a low
energy economy under Paris agreement are in interest of Indian
Economy. However, the Committee are of view there is need to
provide adequate support to the Indian industry and allied sectors
in the form of technologies, professional support and tax rebate in
order to emerge as low carbon intensive sector as well as competitive
in worlds market. The Committee, therefore, recommend the
Government to constitute a dedicated cell for transfer of
technologies and other support to Indian Industry and allied sector.
The Committee also desire the Government to provide tax rebate
to industries which invest for Research & Development of green
technologies in the country. The Committee also recommend the
Government to engage diplomatically with other countries so that
developed countries fulfill their commitment for transfer of clean
technologies and dedicated funds as mandated under Paris
Agreement.Ó
1.21 In its Action Taken reply, the Department has stated as under:Ñ
ÒThe Technology Mechanism of the United Nations Framework
Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC) is for promoting innovation;
catalysing the use of technology road maps or action plans;

26
responding to developing country Party requests on matters related
to technology transfer; and facilitating joint R&D activities. The
article 10 of Paris Agreement (PA), a post 2020 instrument for
climate change action, provides for setting up of technology
framework to guide work of TM in promoting and facilitating
enhanced action in technology development and transfer.
The present negotiations are on principle and structure of Technology
Framework (TF). India has taken a stand that TF through its principles
and provisions should be an instrument to integrate and articulate
all important elements on technology development and transfer to
developing countries. It must incorporate all cardinal principles of
the Convention (Art 4) and the Paris agreement. These negotiations
are continuing under UNFCCC. Ó
1.22 The Committee had emphasised the need to engage
diplomatically with other countries so that developed countries fulfill
their commitment for transfer of clean technologies and dedicated
funds as mandated under Paris Agreement. The Department in their
action taken reply has informed the Committee that negotiations on
principle and structure of Technology Framework (TF) are continuing
under UNFCCC. India has taken a stand that TF through its principles
and provisions should be an instrument to integrate and articulate
all important elements on technology development and transfer to
developing countries. It must incorporate all cardinal principles of
the Convention (Art 4) and the Paris agreement.
However, the Committee note that the Department has not
furnished reply on recommendation of the Committee regarding
constitution of dedicated cell for transfer of technologies and other
support to Indian Industry and allied sector and need to provide tax
rebate to industries which invest for Research & Development of
green technologies in the country. The Committee are of view that
presence of a  dedicated cell for transfer of green technologies and
other support to Indian Industry and allied sector will be pivotal for
transforming Indian economy to less carbon intensive. Further, tax
rebate to private sector for investment on research for green
technologies will be useful to involve private sector in this endeavour
which is crucial for safeguarding our earth. It will also help to create
industrial base in our country which can be utilized for manufacturing
and export of eco-friendly products and technologies especially in
agriculture sector to the rest of world. The Committee, therefore,
recommend the Government to formulate policy in this regard so
that our country could emerge as leader in green technologies in
future.

27
CHAPTER II
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN
ACCEPTED BY THE GOVERNMENT
Recommendation (Para No. 1)
Climate plays a limiting role on development of bio-geographical
variability of flora and fauna including human culture and civilization.
Each society has structured its culture around historical and current
climatic conditions. Human culture is basically a by-product of locally
available resources and local climatic conditions. Human societies are
accustomed to a normal range of conditions and may be sensitive to
extremes that fall out of this range. The Committee note that various
studies across the world have provided ample evidence about climate
changes due to enhanced emission of Green House Gases such as Carbon
Dioxide, Nitrous Oxide, Methane, Hydro-Fluoro-Carbons, etc. in the
atmosphere. Anthropogenic sources such as increased fossil fuels
consumption, Industrialization, increasing Pace of Urbanization, excessive
use of Nitrogenous Fertilizers in agriculture sector, etc. has led to a
situation which is destabilizing critical environmental balance of Earth
atmospheric system and causing changes in climate/weather patterns,
such as increase in intensity of heat waves, rainfall periodicity, floods,
cyclones, melting of ice at Arctic and Antarctic regions, rise in sea
levels etc. The Committee also observe that these climatic changes
have potential to harm agriculture and allied sectors which critically
depend upon climatic conditions and thereby, posing a danger to food
security. The Committee in succeeding paragraphs have discussed the
impact of climate-changes on agriculture and allied sectors in the
country, policy of the Government towards climate change, R&D in
agriculture and allied sectors for transforming Indian agriculture into
climate smart agriculture, preparation of the Government to provide
support to the farmers of the country in adapting them to climatic
changes and in accordance with the Paris agreement on climate change.
Reply of the Government
Suitable replies are furnished for the subsequent observations and
recommendations made by the committee separately for each
recommendation/observation as sought by the committee.
[Ministry of Agriculture & Farmers Welfare (Department of
Agricultural Research and Education) F .No. NRM/11(26)/2017-AFC
(Pt.) dated 03.11.2017]

28
Greenhouse Gas Emission from Agriculture and Allied Sector
Recommendation (Para No. 3)
The Committee note that Paddy fields is major sources of Green
House Gases (GHGs) in the farm sector. The Committee have been
informed that ICAR-IARI, New Delhi and ICAR-NRRI under National
Innovations in Climate Resilient Agriculture (NICRA) projects have
quantified the GHGs emissions from paddy fields and they have analyzed
that overall methane emission from rice fields in India is about 3.5-4.7
Tegagram (Tg) per year and N
2O emission is about 0.05 Tg per year. The
Committee note that findings of research being done at these Institutes
has shown that methane emission from rice field is negligible compared
to other rice growing countries like America, China, eastern and
far-eastern Asian countries where it ranged from 20-100 Tg per year.
The Committee also note that ICAR Institutes are engaged in R&D for
regulating the release of these gases from agro-ecosystems through
judicious land-use and appropriate management practices that could
mitigate the process of climate change. The Committee have been
informed that based on study conducted at IIFSR, Modipuram for
measuring methane and nitrous oxide flux from the rice field, it was
found that Methane emission reduced by 19.2% and 9.9%, respectively
with the application of neem-coated urea and sulphur-treated urea
compared to prilled urea under conventional method of transplanting.
N
2O emission reduced by 23.7% and 11.8%, respectively in the application
of neem coated urea and sulphur-treated urea compared to prilled urea
under the conventional method of transplanting. Among the
establishment methods, direct seeded rice (dry) and direct seeded rice
(wet) methods resulted in less emission of CH
4 by the order of 27.9%
and 26.6%, respectively compared to conventional puddled transplanting.
However , the N
2O emission reduced by 1.3% and 4.6%, respectively in
direct seeded rice (dry) and direct seeded rice (wet) method of
establishments compared to conventional puddled transplanting. The
Committee have also been informed that emissions of GHGs from paddy
fields can be reduced by modifying water, nutrient and tillage
management. Conversion of rice straw into biochar and its application
in rice fields greatly decreased the GHG emission.
The Committee are of the view that reduction in emission of GHGs
from paddy field will help the country to meet its obligation under
International Accord on Climate Change. The Committee, therefore,
desire the ICAR to give adequate support to the ICAR institutes engaged
in development of appropriate methods, variety, technology and paddy
varieties which can help to reduce GHGs emission from paddy fields.

29
The Committee also desire the Government to make an inventory of
the outcome of all these research studies and transfer them to the
farmers in entire country through the network of KVKs and extension
network of respective State Governments so that they can also become
a partner in the voluntary commitment of the country to reduce share
of GHGs emission from India.
Reply of the Government
Green House Gas (GHG) Emissions from Agriculture and Allied Sectors
Under NICRA, emphasis has been placed on the development of
technologies which can reduce the greenhouse gas emissions without
compromising on yield. As part of this initiative, various ICAR institutes
such as Indian Agricultural Research Institute (IARI), New Delhi, Indian
Institute of Farming Systems Research (IIFSR), Modipuram, Indian Institute
Soil Science (IISS), Bhopal, Central Arid Zone Research Institute (CAZRI),
Jodhpur, ICAR Research Complex for NEH Region (ICAR-NEH), Umiam
are working on various themes related to the GHG emissions. Facilities
like, Eddy Covariance towers are established at IARI, New Delhi and
National Rice Research Institute (NRRI), Cuttack for continuously
monitoring the GHG emissions from the crop fields during growing season
so as to quantify precisely the extent of GHG emissions from the paddy
systems. Research facilities like Rainout shelter, Carbon dioxide
Temperature Gradient Chamber (CTGC), Free Air Carbon dioxide
Enrichment (FACE), Free Air Temperature Enrichment (FATE) etc. have
been established to understand the impact of elevated carbon dioxide
(eCO
2) and temperature and develop crop varieties that can withstand
these stresses. Practices which can further reduce the GHG emissions
such as improved systems of paddy cultivation, fertiliser management,
improved fertiliser materials, crop diversification, etc. are explored for
further reducing the GHG emissions from the paddy based systems.
Location specific, crop specific mitigation practices such as system
of rice intensification, direct seeded rice cultivation (dry and wet
methods of cultivation), soil test based fertiliser application, rational
application of nitrogen, integration of trees especially fruit trees in the
arable systems, efficient irrigation systems such as drip method and
sprinkler method of application which can reduce the energy use while
irrigating field crops, demonstration of zero tillage cultivation as an
alternate to burning crop residues in rice-wheat systems of Punjab and
Haryana where large quantities of rice residues are being burnt,
integration of green manure crops in the existing cropping systems,
promotion of green fodder crops and greater use of green fodder for

30
livestock, etc. are being demonstrated as part of the Technology
Demonstration Component of NICRA in the 121 climatically vulnerable
districts of the country through KVKs.
The proven resilient practices are being integrated in the
development programmes such as the Crop diversification in traditionally
paddy growing regions as part of the National Food Security Mission
(NFSM) wherein 1.02 lakh ha. is being diversified from paddy to other
less water consuming crops in the country during the year 2015-16.
Similarly, the paddy systems of cultivation such as System of rice
cultivation, direct seeded rice are being promoted by the development
programmes as part of the NFSM where in 1.63 lakh ha. area was
brought under these improved methods of paddy cultivation in the
country during the year 2015-16. Such kind of efforts would contribute
to reduction of GHG emissions in the country.
Extension services in the country have been revitalized making
these farmers friendly, farmer driven, farmer accountable and bottom
up planning on Agricultural Technology Management Agency (ATMA)
Model. ATMA Scheme is in implementation in 652 Districts. Farmers
capacity building and dissemination of modern agricultural technologies
etc. extension work is carried out through Training of Farmers & Extension
Functionaries, Exposure Visit of Farmers, Demonstrations, Kisan Melas,
Kisan Goshties, Farmers-Scientist Interaction (FSI), Farmers Interest
Groups (FIGs) and Farm School in different thematic areas including
climate change.
The highlights of research studies related to Greenhouse Gas Emission
from Agricultural and Allied Sector are compiled under the project
entitled, ÒNational Innovations in Climate Resilient Agriculture (NICRA)Ó
which is implemented by the ICARÑCentral Research Institute for Dryland
Agriculture (CRIDA), Hyderabad. These highlights are shared with 100
KVKs engaged in implementation of NICRA project.
The proven mitigation practices which can reduce the GHG emissions
are being demonstrated to farmers as part of the Technology
Demonstration Component (TDC) of NICRA. The TDC of NICRA is being
implemented in 121 climatically vulnerable districts of the country by
taking one or cluster of villages in each of the vulnerable districts
through KVKs.
[Ministry of Agriculture & Farmers Welfare (Department of
Agricultural Research and Education), F .No. NRM/11(26)/2017-AFC
(Pt.), dated 03.11.2017]

31
Influence on Agriculture due to Ingress of Sea water
Recommendation (Para No. 5)
The Committee note that global mean sea level rose by 0.19 (0.17
to 0.21)m over the period 1901-2010 due to warming effect of rising
GHGs in the atmosphere. Rise in sea surface due to effect of global
warming is expected to cause submergence of significant portion of
land in areas near sea in many parts of the country. The Committee
further note that comprehensive study on assessment of submergence
of agricultural land due to sea level rise in the Coastal region has not
been carried out. However, ICAR funded NICRA project indicated that
the sea levels at three stations Diamond Harbour , Garden Reach and
Haldia in Sundarbans are increasing at the rate of 4.85, 8.22 and 3.0
mm/yr. A 2007 report by UNESCO ÒCase Studies on Climate Change and
World HeritageÓ has predicted 45 cm rise in sea level likely by the end
of the 21st century due to anthropogenic activities in the Sundarbans.
A study carried out by IIT , Kharagpur revealed that during the 20th
century, 34.906 sq. km. of area along the Indian coast went under the
sea due to the rise in sea level. The Committee also note that a
significant fertile agricultural land and adjoining mangrove forests were
turned in to a vast waste land due to ingress of saline sea water due
to cyclone Aila in West Bengal during 2009, super cyclone in Orissa
during 1999 as well as Tsunami in eastern coast in 2014 leading to
reduction in agriculture productivity. The Committee have been informed
that ICAR-Central Soil Salinity Research Institute, Regional Research
Station, Canning Town, West Bengal engaged in the research and
management needs of coastal salt affected soils has developed several
technologies for enhancement of agricultural productivity under degraded
saline coastal soils and poor water qualities. The Committee are of
view that ingress of sea water into agricultural fields would lead to
devastating consequences for farmers near coastal regions as high salinity
in the soil as well as acute shortage of fresh water for agricultural uses
pose a serious problem leading to low productivity. The Committee,
therefore, recommend the ICAR to actively engage in Research on
identification of soil tolerant varieties of crops and incorporation of
these genes in higher yielding crop varieties so that agriculture
productivity in coastal areas may be maintained in coming years. The
Committee desire the Government to formulate an action plan for
enhancing locally suitable mangrove plantation near coastal areas so
that these can act as natural barriers in case of rising sea level. The
Committee also desire the Government to provide adequate agricultural
extension support to the farmers in coastal regions so that they are
provided suitable technologies, seeds and training for shift to
paddy-fishery farming.

32
Reply of the Government
In order to maintain higher agricultural productivity in coastal areas,
ICAR-CSSRI Regional Station at Canning Town (WB) has developed/
identified rice varieties suitable for coastal regions both for rabi/summer
and kharif seasons (Table 1&2).
Table 1. Improved varieties of rice for rabi/summer
Salinity Level (dS/m) Varieties
Low (< 6.0) CSR 4, Canning 7, Ratna, Khitis, Rasi, Boby, IR 7634, IR 75395.
Medium (6-8) CSR 4, Canning 7, CST 7-1, CSRC (S) 7-10-4-0-1, IET 4786
High (> 8) Bidhan 2, WGL 20471, Annada, Lalat, CSRC(S) 39-B-1-B-2, CSRC(S)
47-7-B-B-1
Table 2. Improved rice varieties of rice for kharif
Water regimes Soil salinity Varieties*
Up to 15 cm Medium to high Early: CSR4, Canning 7, IET 1444, CSRC(S)7-10-2-0
(up land) Medium: CST7-1, Jaya, CSR 1, CSR 2, CSR 3
15-30 cm Low to medium Medium: CSR 6, SR26B, Bhutnath, Sumati, Utpala, IR 16294,
(Shallow CS9-1-30, Dudheswar , CSRC(S)21-2-5-B-1-1
water) Late: NC1281, NC678, Matla, Hamilton, Najani, Jhingasail,
C300, BD50-11, C340-22-17, Gavir Saru, Gopal Bhog,
C340-22-5
30-50 cm Low to medium Medium: CSRC (S) 2-1-7, SR 26B, CSR 6, IR
(Semi-deep 16294, CS 9-1-30, Amal-Mana (CSRC(S) 7-1-4),
water) Geetanjali, SR 26B, Pankaj, Sabita, Patnai23
Late: C300, BD50-11, C340-22-17, C340-22-5, NC 1281, Matla,
Hamilton, Asfal, Gavir , Saru, NC 678
Acid saline soils (pH 4.0-5.5) Medium: Mahsuri, Canning 7, SR 26B
Flash floods CAC615, CSR6, SR26B, Swarna Sub-1, CR1009 Sub-1
Besides, ICAR - Central Coastal Agricultural Research Institute, Old
Goa has developed, two high yielding salinity tolerant rice varieties
viz., Goa dhan-1 (KS-12) and Goa dhan-2 (KS-17) for cultivation in the
coastal saline soils of Goa state. Average yield of these new varieties
are between 2.5 and 3.0 t/ha., with an increased productivity of
50-70% more compared to prevailing local varieties which are yielding
1.5Ñ2.0 t/ha. Mangrove eco-systems play a major role in protecting the
coastline against erosion and function as bio-shield against cyclones,
tsunami, high tide etc.

33
The Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate Change is
implementing a Centrally Sponsored Scheme (CSS) on conservation and
management of Mangroves and Coral Reefs in the coastal States/UTs of
India. The main objectives of scheme are to protect, sustain conserve
and augment mangroves in the country through regulatory and
promotional measures. The scheme mainly aims at restoration and
regeneration of mangroves covering nearly 3000 hectares and providing
alternate and supplementary livelihoods to the local communities. Under
the scheme, annual action plans of coastal states are supported at
60:40 central state ratio. The Government has identified 38 mangrove
sites through a National Committee for undertaking replantation and
rehabilitation of mangroves through Management Action Plan (MAPs)
under this scheme. The State-wise list of 38 mangrove sites is attached
as Annexure-I. According to Forest Survey of India (FSI) Report titled
’India State of Forest Report (2015), the mangrove cover in the country
is 4,740 km2. The table-3 below shows State/Union Territory (UT)-wise
status of the mangrove cover as estimated in the 2015 assessment and
also the change with respect to the previous assessments.
[Ministry of Agriculture & Farmers Welfare (Department of
Agricultural Research and Education), F .No. NRM/11 (26)/2017-AFC
(Pt.), dated 03.11.2017]
Pest Severity and Disease Proliferation
Recommendation (Para No. 6)
The Committee note that incidence of insect pests and proliferation
of diseases on field crops may likely to increase during future climate
change periods due to elevated CO
2 and temperature. The Committee
have been informed that insect pests will go for more amount of
consumption (compensatory feeding) due to the dilution/decline of
nutritional quality of the crop plants to meet the nutritional requirement
of the insect pests under elevated CO
2 and temp conditions. This may
lead to higher yield losses in different crops which in turn may affect
the food security. More number of generations of insect pests are
expected to occur during future climate change periods because of
increased temperatures. The Committee observe that studies have been
initiated to document Real Time Pest Dynamics (RTPD) in 5 crops (Rice,
Pigeonpea, Groundnut, Tomato and Mango) under Strategic Research
component of NICRA programme. The Committee also note that
Department of Agriculture, Cooperation and Farmers Welfare and State
Governments is implementing various schemes under plant protection
under ÒStrengthening and Modernization of Pest Management Approach

34
in India" (SMPMA). Indian Council of Agricultural Research is also evolving
and implementing climate resilient plant protection technologies through
its National Crop institutes.
The Committee are of opinion that there is a need to give boost
to deployment of cutting edge research methodologies to analyze and
predict future scenario of pest development and proliferation as well
as development of plant protection technologies and practices so that
farmers in the country could be trained in these methods to offset
decline in agricultural productivity due to change in severity of pest
attack associated with climate change. The Committee, therefore,
recommend the Government to provide adequate financial support to
the Institutes engaged in development of pest protection technologies.
The Committee also desire the Government to enhance allocations for
implementation of programmes for Pest management.
Reply of the Government
As the standing committee on agriculture observed greater incidence
of insect pests and proliferation of diseases on field crops and also
anticipates greater loss of crop productivity due to more consumption
of plant tissues by the insects owing to dilution/decline of nutritional
quality of host crops to meet the nutritional requirement of the insect
pests under elevated CO
2 and occurrence of more number of insect
generations due to their shorter life cycle under increased temperature
is quite inevitable in near future of changing climatic scenario. With
regards to the recommendation of committee for imparting financial
and structural support to carryout research on climate change to cope
with greater loss of crop yield due to more incidences of insect pests
and diseases under future climatic scenarios, the Indian Council of
Agricultural Research (ICAR) has already launched National Initiative on
Climate Resilient Agriculture (NICRA) under which several state of art
facilities of global standard such as Eddy covariance flux tower , Satellite
real data receiving system, Field and lab phonemics, Free Air CO2 and
Temperature enhancement (FACE), Open top chamber (OTC) and
Temperature gradient tunnel have been developed and established at
IARI, CRIDA, IIHR, and other research institutions of ICAR to undertake
advanced research on assessing the impacts of elevated CO
2 and
temperature on crop productivity, quality, insect pests and disease
incidence; and adaptation and mitigation strategies to climate change.
Further , simulation studies projected greater incidence of leaf blast
disease in winter rice for which research strategies needs to be
strengthen in future climatic scenarios.
[Ministry of Agriculture & Farmers Welfare (Department of
Agricultural Research and Education), F .No. NRM/11 (26)/2017-AFC
(Pt.), dated 03.11.2017]

35
Agro-Climatic Classification
Recommendation (Para No. 7)
The Committee note that the concept of Agro-Climatic Regions
(AER) and Agro-Climatic Sub Regions (AESR) categorised on the basis of
climatic conditions, local geographic parameters, landform, soils type,
soil texture, depth and mineralogy help to maximise agricultural
productivity if crop suitable to local conditions are sown by the farmers.
The Committee note that 20 AERs and 60 AESRs were identified in the
Country. However , the Committee are distressed to note that
Agro-Climatic classifications are not being strictly followed by the farmers
in cultivation of crops. Factors such as socio-economic conditions, market
prices, Government supports in the form of Minimum Support Price
(MSP) and subsidies apart from factors such as favorable climate and
soil factors, farmers Õ preferences, consumption patterns and resources
available with the farmers decide the kind of crop grown in different
locations, thereby, reducing possibility of achievements of optimal
production with minimum investment. The Committee have been
informed that the Government is giving advisory to States to educate
farmers for growing crops that are suitable to a given agro-climatic
situation so that risk is minimized and incomes are maximized. The
Committee further observe that climatic changes associated with Global
warming may necessitate refinement in concept of agro-climatic regions.
The Committee, therefore, recommend the Government to start a study
of impact of climatic changes on different of agro-climatic regions so
that new strategy may be worked out to offset negative effect associated
with climatic changes. The Committee are also of considered view that
policy of Minimum Support Price is promoting farming practices which
are not suitable to local bio-graphical and climatic conditions, thereby,
causing problems such as depletion of groundwater resources,
degradation of soil, loss of local bio-diversity, etc. Further, absence of
an alternative and economically remunerative cropping strategy is forcing
farmers to opt for prevailing water intensive cropping pattern. The
Committee, therefore, desire the Government (Department of
Agriculture, Cooperation and Farmers welfare) to initiate a study to
analyse the effect of policy of MSP on farming practices in the country
and bring suitable changes in MSP policy so that environment friendly
farming practices based on the concept of agro-ecological regions may
be promoted in the country. The Committee also desire the ICAR to
work out an alternative cropping strategy for these regions which is
economically remunerative for farmers in these regions. The Committee
would like the Department to prepare such cropping strategy within
three months of presentation of Report.

36
Reply of the Government
The Agro-Ecological Regions (AERs) map of the country published
earlier by ICAR-NBSS&LUP in 1992 has recently been revised (NBSS
Publ. 170) based on high resolution soil data and updated climatic data
as well as Length of Growing Period (LGP) information for over
450 locations. The revised Agro-Ecological Regions Atlas is an up-to-
date reliable primer for drawing up integrated land use plans for
sustained and increased ecologically sensitive, environmentally safe,
climate smart agricultural production systems. The ICAR- NBSS&LUP has
initiated a mega project on Land Resource Inventory of the country on
1:10000 scale to work out alternative and remunerative (to farmers)
cropping strategy in each of the 20 revised agro-ecological regions
based on the potentials identified for different crops.
The commission recommends Minimum Support Price (MSP) for
22 agricultural commodities besides Fair and Remunerative Price (FRP)
for Sugarcane. While recommending MSPs for these commodities besides
all India weighted costs of production, the commission considers various
other important factors such as demand and supply, price trends in the
domestic and international markets, inter-crop price parity, terms of
trade between and non-agriculture sectors, the likely impact of MSPs
on consumers and ensuring rational utilization of natural resources like
land and water.
[Ministry of Agriculture & Farmers Welfare (Department of
Agricultural Research and Education), F .No. NRM/11(26)/2017-AFC (Pt.),
dated 03.11.2017]
Impact of Climate Change on Agriculture
Recommendations (Para No. 8)
The Committee note that fifth IPCC report clearly brought out the
global and regional impacts of climate change on agriculture, water
resources, natural eco-systems and food security. The Committee have
been informed that climate change and its variability are emerging as
major challenges facing Indian agriculture. The high inter and
intra-seasonal variability in rainfall distribution, extreme temperature
and rainfall events are causing crop damages and huge losses to farmers.
The Committee note that modeling studies indicate that changing climate
will decrease yields in major crops like wheat, rice and maize. On the
other hand the impact could be neutral to positive in others like
groundnut, soyabean and chickpea. The Committee also note that
although there will be increased yields by 10-20% with increase in CO
2

37
level to 550 ppm, however , productivity of most crops is likely to
decrease marginally by 2020 but by 10-40% by 2100. The Committee
note with satisfaction that the Government of India has initiated and
supported research in agriculture sector under National Innovations in
Climate Resilient Agriculture (NICRA). However , the Committee are of
considered view that since huge population of our country is dependent
on agriculture, there is need to enhance allocations for the R&D under
NICRA so that scientist of the country can be successful in arriving
solutions to challenges posed to the agriculture and allied sectors due
to climate changes associated with global warming. The Committee,
therefore, recommend the Government to enhance allocations to the
NICRA projects.
Reply of the Government
Climate change has become an important area of concern for India
to ensure food and nutritional security for growing population. To meet
the challenges of sustaining domestic food production in the face of
changing climate and generate information on adaptation and mitigation
in agriculture to contribute to global fora like UNFCC, it is important
to have concerted research on this important subject. With this
background, ICAR launched a major project ’National Initiative on Climate
Resilient AgricultureÕ (NICRA) during XI Plan in February 2011 and now
during XII Plan it is referred as ÔNational Innovations in Climate Resilient
AgricultureÕ (NICRA). The project had an overall outlay of Rs. 35,000
Lakhs for the XI Plan, Rs. 60,000 Lakhs in XII Plan period. However , as
directed by the ICAR proposal for Rs. 17362.50 Lakhs for the period of
2017-20 under NICRA has been submitted which is about 48% of the
previous plan periods budget allocation due to budgetary constraints.
Enhanced budget allocation for the R&D under NICRA will enable the
scientist of the country to sustain the efforts initiated during the past
5 years for arriving the solutions to deal with changing climate.
Recommendations of the Committee has been noted for necessary
compliance. Accordingly, the Council/Department has requested Ministry
of Finance for allocation of enhanced funds and expedite the modalities
to increase the investment to the extent of 1% agricultural GDP in
coming financial years.
[Ministry of Agriculture & Farmers Welfare (Department of
Agricultural Research and Education), F .No. NRM/11(26)/2017-AFC (Pt.),
dated 03.11.2017]
Development of Varieties of Crops with Enhanced Abiotic Stress
Tolerance
Recommendation (Para No. 9)
Identification and development of crop varieties with enhanced
abiotic stress tolerance will be the key for making Indian agriculture

38
climate resilient . The Committee note that the ICAR through its network
of institutes and State Agriculture Universities is engaged in identification
and development of abiotic stress tolerant crop varieties under NARS
and NICRA projects. The Committee have been informed about
identification of heat tolerant gene in a Nagina-22 variety of paddy
which can be used for development of advanced heat tolerant varieties
through breeding process avoiding the need of use of expensive Genetic
Modified technology. The Committee have also been informed about
identification and development of crop varieties with advance abiotic
stress tolerance by the IARI-Pusa.
The Committee have been informed that Government is encouraging
use of location specific climate resilient crops varieties including heat/
water logging tolerating seed varieties among farmers by ensuring
availability of quality seeds of desirable varieties; developing,
demonstrating and disseminating complete package of practices to
stakeholders; seed subsidies, capacity building besides bringing
convergence among public and private agencies in seed chain. The
Committee are of view that development of new crop varieties with
higher yield potential and resistance to multiple stress (heat, drought,
flood, salinity) will be the key to maintain yield stability under the
challenges associated with climate changes in coming decades. The
Committee, therefore, desire the ICAR to give further push to their
efforts for development of crop varieties with enhanced abiotic stress
tolerance.
Reply of the Government
Development of Varieties of Crops with Enhanced Abiotic Stress
Tolerance
ICAR through crop based institutes and AICRPs has undertaken
focused programmes to develop improved varieties/hybrids with
enhanced abiotic stresses (drought, heat, salinity) tolerance in crops.
In field crops, particularly in rice, wheat, maize, sorghum, pulses,
oilseeds, etc. intensive screening of landraces, germplasm and advanced
breeding lines is a regular activity. The continued efforts resulted in
the identification of genetic stocks tolerant to abiotic stresses which
are being utilized in crop improvement programmes aimed at
development of abiotic stresses tolerant varieties. The tolerant
genotypes, thus developed, in different field crops are at different
stages of evaluation/testing. A list of varieties of different field crops
tolerant to abiotic stresses is given in Annexure-II.
[Ministry of Agriculture & Farmers Welfare (Department of
Agricultural Research and Education), F .No. NRM/11(26)/2017-AFC (Pt.),
dated 03.11.2017]

39
Availability of Seed
Recommendations (Para No. 10)
The Committee note that Indian seed programme largely adheres
to the limited generations Õ system for seed multiplication in a phased
manner. The system recognizes three generations namely breeder ,
foundation and certified seeds and provides adequate safeguards for
quality assurance in the seed multiplication chain to maintain the purity
of the variety as it flows from the breeder to the farmer. The Committee
have been informed that ICAR apart from research & development on
development of varieties/hybrids for different abiotic stresses, have
also been entrusted with responsibility for production of Breeder seed
which is being undertaken with the help of ICAR Research Institutions,
State Agricultural Universities (SAUs), National Seeds Corporation (NSC)/
State Farms Corporation of India (SFCI), State Seeds Corporation (SSCs),
Krishi Vigyan Kendras (KVKs), Sponsored breeders recognized by selected
State Seed Corporations and Non Governmental Organizations. The
responsibility for production of foundation seed has been entrusted to
the NSC, SFCI, State Seeds Corporation, State Departments of Agriculture
and private seed producers, who have the necessary infrastructure
facilities, whereas the production and distribution of quality/certified
seeds are primarily the responsibility of the State Governments. Certified
seed production is organized through State Seed Corporation,
Departmental Agricultural Farms, Cooperatives etc.
The Committee note that breeder seed production increase from
3914 quintals during 1981-82 to a level of 89266.23 quintals during
2013-14 after Launch of AICRP-NSP (Crops). During 2013-14, total
production of quality seed including all classes was 6,48,325 quintals
against the target of 4,75,179 quintals. Production comprises 94,953
quintals of breeder seed, 1,44,369 quintals of foundation seed, 1,63,465
quintals of certified seeds, 1,72,351 quintals of truthfully labelled seed
and 73,185 quintals of planting material of field crops. In addition,
155.59 lakhs planting material and 5.60 lakh tissue culture plantlets of
field crops were produced against the targets of 94.80 and 2.07 lakhs.
The Committee note that country has skewed Seed Replacement
Ratio, i.e. the percentage of area sown out of total cropped area by
using certified/quality seeds other than farm saved seed, as seed
requirement of 65% of the farmers are met using their own saved seed
or seed distributed among themselves. Amelioration of skewed SRR is
a major challenge.

40
The Committee also note that Central Sector Scheme ÔDevelopment
and Strengthening of Infrastructure Facilities for Production and
Distribution of Quality Seeds Õ is being implemented by the Department
of Agriculture, Cooperation and Farmers Welfare since 2005-06 to ensure
production and multiplication of high yielding certified/quality seeds of
all crops in sufficient quantities and make the seeds available to farmers
at affordable price. However , the Committee is distressed to note that
despite efforts being made by the Government, private sector dominates
in seed production contributing to 50-57% of total seed production of
the country. The main focus of private seed companies has been on the
high-value and low-volume seeds.
The Committee are of considered view that availability of good
quality seed at reasonable price is one of important factor for ensuring
high productivity in agriculture and to ensure remunerative prices to
the farmers. The need of timely availability of seed varieties with
enhanced abiotic stress tolerance will increase in coming decades with
more increasing uncertainty associated with climate change. The
Committee observe that Government have not been able to fulfil its
aim to ensure availability of high yielding varieties of improved seeds
to the farmers in the country which is evident by low Seed Replacement
Ratio and large share of Private companies in the market for high value
and low volume seeds in the country. The Committee desire the
Government to decentralize the process of production, procurement
and distribution of improved varieties of hybrid seeds as it will help in
lowering the prices and ensure easy access of farmers to procure these
seeds. The Committee, therefore, recommend the Government to
examine present system of seed production, procurement and distribution
in the country to analyze its shortcomings and take steps for
decentralizing the system, in order to enhance Seed Replacement Ratio
and to achieve optimum agriculture productivity in the country. The
Committee also recommend the Government to involve progressive
farmers in the process of production of hybrid seeds. The Committee
also desire the ICAR to initiate a study to identify high value and low
volume seed varieties in which private sectors are excelling and to
sponsor research & development of these seed varieties so that these
could be made available to the farmers in the country at affordable
price.
Reply of the Government
Agricultural productivity depends on various critical inputs like seed,
irrigation, soil fertility, fertilizer, nutrients management, pest and disease
management etc. Seeds play a pivotal role in increasing production and

41
productivity of various crops. Efficacy of other agricultural inputs is
significantly determined by the quality of seeds. Seeds may account for
twenty to twenty-five percent of agricultural productivity.
Seed availability
Agriculture being a State subject, the role of the State Government
is critical in the production, availability and distribution of seeds. The
Government of India supplements the efforts of the State Governments
by coordinating seed requirement and availability among the States
through Zonal Seed Review Meetings (ZSRM) held before every crop
season by a weekly video conference on inputs availability as well as
the bi-yearly national Kharif and Rabi campaign meetings. NSC, a Central
Public Sector Enterprises (CPSEs) and State Seeds Corporations (SSCs)
play an important role in production and availability of certified seeds
to the farmers. NSC also take up Test Stock Multiplication, which is an
important function in release and popularization of new varieties.
The steps taken for quality seed production includes the systematic
production of Breeder Seed, Foundation Seed and then Certified Seed
production through seed multiplication under a generation system
followed in India i.e. Breeder Seed Ñ Foundation Seed Ñ Certified
Seeds. Production of breeder seed as per the indent of Department of
Agriculture Cooperation and Farmers Welfare (DoAC&FW), Government
of India, is the mandate of ICAR. Breeder seeds of new improved
varieties is produced and provided to both public and private sector
organizations as per indents of DAC&FW for maintaining effective seed
chain through its conversion to foundation and certified seeds. Besides,
under ICAR-Seed Project, different category of seeds are also produced
to enhance the availability of quality seeds to the farmers.
BSP and Quality seed production during 2016-17
ICAR through AICRP-NSP (Crops) is guiding and coordinating breeder
seed production in field crops. During 2016-17, a total of 121988.4 q
of breeder seed was produced against the indent of 104045.7 q
(production comprises 83105.0 q against GoI indent of 67463.3 q;
25476.9 q against State indent of 24378.1 q and additional production
of 13406.5 q against ICAR Seed Project targets of 12204.3 q. ICAR also
organize quality seed production through ICAR Seed Project and a
total of 124576.4 q of foundation seed, 273681.0 q of certified seed,
98198.6 q of truthfully labeled seed and 30421.8 q of planting material
has been produced by cooperating centres during 2016-17. In addition,
239.32 lakhs planting material and 1.94 lakhs tissue culture plantlets of
field crops were also produced.

42
High value and low volume seed varieties
Generally, vegetable seeds (varieties/hybrids) are categorized as
high value and low volume seeds. ICAR institutes, IARI, New Delhi; IIHR,
Bangalore; IIVR, Varanasi; Directorate of Onion & Garlic Research, Pune
undertake research programmes to develop varieties/hybrids in their
mandated vegetable crops. These institutes along with their regional
stations also produce seeds of improved varieties.
Further , hybrid seeds is also considered as high value seed and ICAR
undertakes promotion of public sector hybrids in field crops through
production of parental lines (breeder and foundation seed) and F1
hybrid seeds (certified and labeled seed). During 2016-17, 210.9 q of
breeder , 87.9 q foundation, 1008.4 q certified and 657.2 q labeled
seeds of hybrids were produced in paddy, maize, pearlmillet, sorghum,
sunflower and castor. Progressive farmers are involved in seed production
programmes of institute like IARI and producing quality seeds in different
crops.The crop wise details of Breeder Seed indent, production and
allocation for last five years are at Annexure-III. The crop wise details
of foundation seed requirement and production/availability for last five
years are at Annexure-IV.
Seed Industry in India
Indian Seed Industry comprising of Public Sector and Private Sector.
Production of Seeds by Public Sector and Private Sector and their share
during the last five year 2013-14 to 2017-18 is as follows:Ñ
(Quantity in lakh quintals)
Year Requirement/ Production Percent
Demand
12 3 4
2013-14 335.26 Government 167.76 48.30
Private 179.55 51.70
Total 347.31
2014-15 343.56 Government 151.09 42.95
Private 200.68 57.05
Total 351.77
2015-16 337.09 Government 147.28 42.87
Private 196.24 57.13
Total 343.52

43
2016-17 353.48 Government 184.21 48.44
Private 196.07 51.56
Total 380.29
2017-18 371.37 Government 179.33 42.76
Private 240.08 57.24
Total 419.4
Availability of Certified/Quality Seeds for Kharif-2017
A requirement of 154.69 lakh quintals of certified/quality seed was
indicated by the States for Kharif-2017 in the ZSRM held in February,
2017. Against this, an all India availability of 176.26 lakh quintals of
certified/quality seed was assessed. An overall surplus of 21.57 lakh
quintals was thus available for Kharif, 2017. Overall, no shortfall of
certified/quality seeds has been reported in any major crops for Kharif,
2017. Crop-wise availability of seeds is at Annexure-V . Regional shortages
were reported by some States, which were tied up with other states/
agencies in the ZSRM held in February, 2017 through available national
surplus in respective crops and summer production in 2017. The State-
wise overall requirement and availability of seed is placed at
Annexure-VI. There was sufficient availability of certified/quality seeds
of all major Kharif crops as per requirements of the States.
Availability of Certified/Quality Seeds for Rabi-2017-18
A requirement of 216.68 lakh quintals of certified/quality seed was
indicated by the State for Rabi 2017-18. Against this, an all India
availability of 243.14 lakh quintals certified/quality seed was assessed.
An overall surplus of 26.45 lakh quintals is available for Rabi, 2017-18.
Overall no shortfall of seeds has been reported in any major crops for
Rabi, 2017-18 except on Peas, Lentil, Linseed and Potato. The shortage
in Peas and Lentil will be meet from the private sector and farm saved
seeds. The shortage in Linseed will be meet from farm saved seed. The
deficit in potato will also be meet from the States of Himachal Pradesh
and Punjab, private sector and farm saved seed. Crop-wise availability
of seeds is at Annexure-VII. Regional shortages were reported by some
States, which were tied up with other states/agencies in the ZSRM held
in August, 2017 through available national surplus in the respective
crops. The State-wise overall requirement and availability of seed is at
Annexure-VIII.
12 3 4

44
There has been significant increase the production and availability
of certified/quality seeds for Kharif and Rabi season during the last ten
years is as under:
(Quantity in lakh Quintals)
Year Kharif Rabi
Requirement Availability Surplus Requirement Availability Surplus
as indicated as indicated
by States by States
2008-09 96.04 105.53 9.49 111.24 144.81 33.57
2009-10 110.96 126.50 15.54 138.15 153.21 15.06
2010-11 123.11 141.93 18.82 167.64 179.43 11.79
2011-12 139.33 151.29 11.96 190.91 202.17 11.25
2012-13 129.64 141.80 12.16 185.54 186.77 1.24
2013-14 139.87 153.94 14.06 194.10 192.09 -2.01
2014-15 145.51 149.31 3.80 197.89 202.30 4.41
2015-16 136.54 140.76 4.22 200.56 202.77 2.21
2016-17 140.43 153.69 13.26 213.05 226.59 13.54
2017-18 154.69 176.26 21.57 216.68 243.14 26.45
Availability of hybrid seed
The hybrid seeds are mainly used in paddy, maize, sorghum, bajra,
sunflower, castor and cotton crops as well as many horticultural crops.
As reported by States the requirement of the certified/quality seeds of
hybrid for 2017-18 is 23.45 lakh qtls. against this the availability is
26.42 lakh qtls. The crops-wise details for last five years are as under:
Requirement and availability of Certified/Quality Seeds
(in quintal) of Hybrids
Crop 2013-14 2014-15 2015-16 2016-17 2017-18
R A RA RA RA RA
1 234 56 78 9 1 0 1 1
Paddy 427885 342091 151501 195041 385400 614240 192142 220936 523745 585223
Maize 937947 968202 935524 1069035 1015670 1205390 1001970 1252908 1134359 1296257

45
Jowar 79132 102823 156507 190614 177250 199810 132465 195706 165321 182247
Bajra 236193 332651 210167 248028 240940 266130 196408 249772 259317 288101
Arhar 26 26 870 923 1260 0 3630 4560
Sun-flower 49195.2 54245 28716 29656 44330 46150 61038 62593 7682 8513
Saf-flower 0 0 339 339
Castor 33917 43259 70690 84405 60450 61460 49149 57759 52304 54852
Cotton 159302 179767 179626 217636 186900 198040 183618 197268 198738 222743
Total 1923597 2023064 1733601 2035338 2112200 2591220 1816790 2236942 2345434 2642835
R : Requirement    A : Availability
Availability of Certified/Quality Seeds for 2017-18
The overall requirement of certified/quality seeds for 2017-18 is
estimated at 371.37 lakh quintals by the States. Against this, 419.4 lakh
quintals of certified/quality seeds are available. An overall surplus of
48.03 lakh quintals seed is thus available for 2017-18. Crop-wise
availability of seed is at Annexure-IX.
There has been significant increase in the production and availability
of certified/quality seed during last ten years is as under:
The progress of seed production
(Qty. in Lakh Qtls.)
  Year Kharif Rabi Total
Demand Production/ Demand Production/ Demand Production/ Surplus
Availability Availability Availability Status
   1 23456 7 8
2008-09 96.04 105.53 111.23 144.8 207.28 250.34 43.06
2009-10 110.96 126.51 138.15 153.21 249.12 279.72 30.6
2010-11 123.11 141.93 167.64 179.42 290.75 321.35 30.6
2011-12 139.33 151.29 191.07 202.33 330.4 353.62 23.21
2012-13 129.64 141.81 185.53 186.77 315.18 328.58 13.4
2013-14 139.87 153.94 195.38 193.37 335.26 347.31 12.05
1 234 56 78 9 1 0 1 1

46
2014-15 145.51 149.31 197.89 202.3 343.56 351.77 8.21
2015-16 136.54 140.76 200.56 226.59 337.09 343.52 5.43
2016-17 140.43 153.69 213.05 226.59 353.49 380.29 26.8
2017-18 154.69 176.26 216.68 243.14 371.37 419.4 48.03
The production and availability of certified/quality seed had
significantly contributed in achieving this record agricultural
production
Crop-wise Production
(Quantity in million tons)
Crop 2008-09 2009-10 2010-11 2011-12 2012-13 2013-14 2014-15 2015-16 2016-17
Rice 99.18 89.09 95.98 105.3 104.4 106.65 105.48 104.41 110.15
Wheat 80.68 80.8 86.87 94.88 92.46 95.85 86.53 92.29 98.38
Coarse 40.04 33.55 43.4 42.01 40.06 43.29 42.86 38.52 44.19
Cereals
Pulses 14.57 14.66 18.24 17.09 18.45 19.25 17.15 16.35 22.95
Total 234.47 218.1 244.49 259.29 255.36 265.04 252.02 251.57 275.77
Foodgrains
Oilseeds 27.72 24.88 32.48 30.01 31 32.75 27.51 25.25 32.1
Cotton* 222.78 240.2 330 352 340 359.02 348.05 300.05 330.92
*lakh bales.
The Government of India is providing assistance for seeds/planting
materials to States under the following Schemes:
1. National Food Security Mission (NFSM).
2. Bringing Green Revolution in Eastern India (BGREI).
3. National Mission on Oilseeds and Oilpalm (NMOOP)
4. Rashtriya Krishi Vikas Yojana (RKVY).
5. Sub-Mission on Seeds & Planting Material (SMSP) under
National Mission on Agriculture Extension and Technology
(NMAET).
   1 23456 7 8

47
6. Mission for Integration Development of Horticulture (MIDH).
7. Mega Seed Project for Producing Quality Seed and Planting
Materials (Indian Council of Agricultural Research).
The pattern of assistance to the farmers under these schemes is at
Annexure-X.
[Ministry of Agriculture & Farmers Welfare (Department of
Agricultural Research and Education), F .No. NRM/11(26)/2017-AFC (Pt.),
dated 03.11.2017]
Conservation of Indigenous Varieties of Seeds
Recommendation (Para No. 11)
The Committee note that National Bureau of Plant Genetic Resources
(NBPGR) is the national institute for conservation of seeds, all germplasm
collection, genetic stocks and varieties of different crops in the country.
The Committee have been informed that 4.14 lakh accessions are
presently conserved for long term in the National Genebank. 2.62 lakh
indigenous accessions have been collected, more than 60 thousand
accessions repatriated, 6.26 lakh accessions imported and tested for
quarantine clearance, and more than four lakh accessions have been
supplied to breeders and researchers within the country. Nearly 1.9
lakh germplasm accessions have been characterized and more than two
thousand cultivars have been DNA fingerprinted. The Committee have
also been informed that Intellectual property rights (IPRs) on genetic
resources were facilitated by registering about 1100 unique accessions
and by filing over a thousand applications with Protection of Plant
Varieties and FarmersÕ Rights (PPV&FR) Authority for varietal registration.
The Committee also note that specific set germplasm, breeding lines,
varieties are being evaluated for tolerance to abiotic stresses such as
heat, drought, water logging etc, which is being used in hybridization
for developing new cultivars under NICRA project.
The Committee are of the view that endemic crop varieties available
in our country provide the scientist an excellent opportunity to identify
traits which can be used for development of crop varieties with enhanced
abiotic stress tolerance thereby enabling farmers to adapt to the climate
changes associated with global warming. The Committee note with
satisfaction about work of cataloguing of indigenous crop varieties being
done by the NBGPR and other agricultural institution. However , the
Committee desire the ICAR to enhance awareness about gene banks so
that this knowledge can be utilized by the agriculture scientist community
across the country in order to develop region specific crop varieties
which can withstand specific climatic fluctuation associated with climate

48
change. The Committee, therefore, desire the ICAR to make efforts to
enhance access to these depository of crop seed/germplasm for wider
scientific community along with innovative farmers.
The Committee also observe that farmers use different nomenclature
for similar crops, vegetables, fruits and medicinal plants in regional
languages and dialect in regions across the Country. The Committee are
of view that inventory of such nomenclature will help in the efforts for
conservation and exploitation of bio-diversity. The Committee, therefore,
recommend the ICAR to take steps for making an inventory such
nomenclature of crops, vegetables, fruits and medicinal plants which
are being used in various languages across the regions of the country.
Reply of the Government
One of the objectives of ICAR-National Bureau of Plant Genetic
Resources, New Delhi is to conduct, research, undertake teaching and
training, develop guidelines and create public awareness on plant genetic
resources. Accordingly, the Bureau undertakes several activities to
promote the utilization of plant genetic resources and to generate
awareness about these resources as detailed below. Regular trainings/
awareness programmes are being conducted by NBPGR and its Regional
Stations (10) on Conservation and Utilization of Genetic Resources for
Scientific and farming community. Also short term training programmes
on Genebank Management Techniques are conducted by NBPGR HQ for
scientific and technical personnel to increase the awareness about
genebanks and genetic resources conserved. During 2013-14 to 2015-16,
six training programmes were organized on conservation and management
of plant genetic resources.
Organizing germplasm field days for researchers, breeders etc. for
popularization and utilization of germplasm conserved in national
genebank (NGB) at NBPGR headquarter and the Regional Stations located
in different agro-ecological zones of the country is the priority of the
institute. NBPGR, New Delhi and its regional stations organized 28
programmes (field days, biodiversity fairs, awareness generation) for
enhancing utilization of germplasm and awareness generations during
2013-14 to 2015-16. Information dissemination on trait specific
germplasm and released varieties conserved in the NGB is also being
done by NBPGR Scientists by participation in workshops of crop based
AICRPs.
Trait-specific germplasm including those registered for specific traits
and released cultivars conserved in the NGB are being regularly supplied
to indenters to enhance their utilization for development of new climate

49
resilient crop varieties. During 2015-16, a total of 12,192 samples of
different crops were supplied to national users for utilization in various
crop improvement programmes in the country based on requests received
from research workers under Material Transfer Agreement (MTA).
The ICAR has already done some work on inventory of nomenclature
as it published a book entitled ÒDictionary of economic plants in India Ó
wherein names of plants were given in English and Hindi both. The CSIR
brought out another publication entitled ÒThe useful plants of India Ó
wherein names are given in English, Punjabi, Odiya, Bengali, Tamil,
Telugu, Kannada, Malayali, Gujarati and Marathi. However , book
published by ICAR will be uploaded with local languages.
[Ministry of Agriculture & Farmers Welfare (Department of
Agricultural Research and Education), F .No. NRM/11(26)/2017-AFC (Pt.),
dated 03.11.2017]
Impact of Climate Change on Horticulture Sector
Recommendation (Para No. 12)
The Committee observe that horticulture sector is an important
source of income for farmers in the country. Horticulture is going to be
one of the sectors which will be severely affected due to unseasonal
rains and temperature variations. India, which is one of the pioneers
in horticulture sector , will bear the losses caused due to climate change
leading to loss of livelihood for millions of farmers.
The Committee also observe the ICAR while recognizing the need
have taken steps under NICRA such as development of location specific
technologies for addressing climate change issues especially the impact
of elevated temperature, CO
2 on the flowering behaviour , pollinators
and yield losses due to variable climate including flooding and heavy
rains. The Committee also note that ICAR is continuously engaged in
identifying and improving varieties of horticulture crops which have
inherent potential to withstand abiotic stress associated with the climate
change. ICAR have since achieved success in development of water
logging resistant germplasm of tomato by grafting on brinjal root stock,
development of agro-techniques to overcome alternate bearing in mango,
testing of environmentally safe protocols for induction of synchronized
flowering in rejuvenated Alphonso mango trees in the age group of
25-40 years, etc. The Committee further note that proven technologies
including varieties are disseminated among farmers/villages through
Technology Demonstration Component (TDC) of NICRA and these
technology is further being up-scaled through the support from
developmental agencies of Central and State Governments.

50
The Committee are of view that the importance of horticulture
sector in the country will further increase with increasing income and
associated Dietary changes over the time. Climatic fluctuations such as
draught, flooding, hailstrom etc. associated with global warming can
prove disastrous to farmers engaged horticulture cropping. The
Committee, therefore, recommend the ICAR to devise a long term
strategy for research in horticulture sector identifying potential regions
for horticulture crop expansion, identification of draught and abiotic
stress tolerant varities, development of new heat stress tolerant
varieties, devising improved agronomic methods, water saving irrigation
methods/technologies, training of farmers etc. so that horticulture sector
in the country can equip itself to successfully adapt to the changes
associated with global warming and keep pace with increasing demands.
Reply of the Government
Climate change impacts several horticultural crops in the country.
Flooding for 24 hours severely affects tomato during flowering stage.
Onion during bulb stage is highly sensitive to flooding, whereas warmer
temperatures shorten the duration of onion bulb development leading
to lower yields. Similarly, soil warming adversely affects several
cucurbits. Reduction in chilling temperature in the recent years in
Himachal Pradesh drastically affected apple production, and the farmers
are shifting from apple to kiwi, pomegranate and other vegetables.
More importantly, temperature and carbon dioxide are likely to alter
the biology and for aging behaviour of pollinators that play key role in
several horticulture crops. Under NICRA project, research has been
initiated at 5 ICAR Institutes viz., Indian Institute of Horticultural
Research (IIHR), Bengaluru, Indian Institute of Vegetable Research (IIVR),
Varanasi, Central Potato Research Institute (CPRI), Shimla, Central
Institute of Temperate Horticulture (CITH), Srinagar and Directorate of
Onion and Garlic Research (DOGR), Pune. High throughput screening of
germplasm using plant Phenomics, Temperature Gradient Chambers and
Rainout shelter enabled to characterises large number of germplasm
lines and identify suitable donors for breeding against drought, heat
stress and flooding in tomato, brinjal and onion. The technique for
inter-specific grafting of tomato over brinjal has been standardized and
large scale demonstrations have been taken up to withstand drought
and flooding in tomato. Environmentally safe protocol was developed
for synchronizing flowering in mango, which is induced due to changing
climate. A microbial inoculation with osmo tolerant bacterial strains
have been developed to improve yield under limited moisture stress in
tomato. Several resource conservation technologies viz., mulching, zero
tillage, reduced tillage, biochar etc. have been demonstrated in

51
climatically vulnerable districts across the country through Krishi Vigyan
Kendras (KVKs). Large-scale adoption of these climate resilient
technologies enable to adopt the changes associated with global warming
and also keep pace with increasing demand for horticulture products in
the country in the years to come.
[Ministry of Agriculture & Farmers Welfare (Department of
Agricultural Research and Education), F .No. NRM/11(26)/2017-AFC (Pt.),
dated 03.11.2017]
Impact of Climate Change on Livestock
Recommendation (Para No. 13)
The Committee note that milk production and reproductive function
of cattle and buffaloes will be adversely affected by projected
temperature rise of 2-6
oC over existing temperature during the period
2070Ñ2099. The Committee also note that studies indicated that warming
will negatively impact the productivity of indigenous cows and
productivity loss will be about 0.33 million tonnes. The Northern India
is likely to experience more negative impact of climate change on milk
production. The decline in milk production will be higher in crossbreeds
(0.63%) followed by buffaloes (0.5%) and indigenous cattle (0.4%). The
Committee have been informed that many varieties of indigenous cattle
have capabilities to endure climatic changes associated with global
warming. At the same time, some indigenous varieties of cattle such
Rathi, Gir , Dhaliwal, Tharparkar and Red Sindhi which are high yielding
and could be utilized in improvement of other indigenous varieties of
cattle. The Committee observe that ICAR through its network of livestock
based ICAR institutes such as ICAR-NDRI, Karnal, ICAR-IVRI, Izatnagar,
ICAR, NIANP , Bengaluru and others have taken research projects to
develop technologies to offset negative impact of climate change on
milk production of both cattle and buffaloes due to rise in temperature
by way of (i) development of tolerant/resistant breeds, (ii) improved
feeds and supplements and (iii) improved shelter management. The
Committee also note that Central Government programmes like National
Programme for Bovine Breeding (NPBB), National Dairy Plan (NDP),
National Livestock Mission (NLM) and Sub-Missions on Livestock
Development, Pig Development in North-Eastern Region, etc. are being
under implementation by State Department of Animal Husbandry to
improve indigenous varieties of livestock.
The Committee are of considered view that animal husbandry and
especially cattle rearing are important source of income for majority
of farmers in India. However , the Committee observe that National Plan

52
on Dairying has ignored indigenous varieties of cattle leading to over
dependence on crossbreeds varieties for milk production. They note
that indigenous varieties of cattle possess many traits such as heat
tolerance that can be very effective in future scenario projected for
climate change. They feel that these traits can be utilized for
development of improved varieties of cattle if these are crossbreed
with high milk yielding indigenous varieties such as Rathi, Gir , Dhaliwal,
Tharparkar and Red Sindhi.
The Committee, therefore, recommend the Government to start a
comprehensive plan for making inventory of all indigenous varieties of
cattle in country, identification and separation of their specific traits,
proper breeding plan for cross breeding of indigenous varieties of cattle,
vaccination, deworming etc. so that farmers of our country are equipped
with wherewithal for coping with vagaries associated with climate
changes in the country. The Committee also desire the Government to
associate organizations, dairy industries, farmers associations etc.
working in the area of cattle breed improvement in the endeavour to
improve indigenous varieties of cattle.
Reply of the Government
Under NICRA project climate change research facilities for livestock
viz., CO
2 Environmental Chambers, Thermal Imaging System, Animal
Calorimeter, Custom Designed Animal Shed etc. have been established
at ICAR-National Dairy Research Institute (NDRI), Karnal and ICAR-Indian
Veterinary Research Institute (IVRI), Izzatnagar. Biochemical,
morphological and physiological characterisation of indigenous cattle
breeds were carried out and compared with exotic breeds. The traits
identified in indigenous breed viz., heat shock proteins, air coat colour,
wooly hair etc. that impart tolerance to heat stress could be used in
future animal breeding programmes to develop breeds that can withstand
high temperature. Different feed supplements have been identified and
tested successfully to withstand heat stress in cattle. Studies on pilled
feeding in cattle showed that they help lowering stress levels and
methane emission. Custom designed shelters system and feed
supplementation with chromium propionate, mineral supplements
(Cu, Mg, Ca and Zn) both in feed and fodder significantly improved the
ability to withstand heat stress. Many of these climate resilient
technologies viz., feed supplement, shelter management, improved
breeds, silage making, de-warming etc. have been demonstrated in the
farmerÕs field through KVKs in the 121 climatically vulnerable districts
across the country. Up-scaling of these technologies through respective
State Governments would enable the livestock farmers in the country
cope with vagaries associated with climate change.

53
National Bureau of Animal Genetic Resources (NBAGR) has
characterized many recognized as well as new indigenous livestock
breeds in a systematic manner through survey in the native tracts so
as to develop their breed descriptors. The breeds/populations of cattle
characterized include Sahiwal, Hariana, Rathi, Tharparkar , Nagori,
Ponwar , Kherigarh, Kankrej, Gangatiri, Mewati, Kenkatha, Red Sindhi,
Krishna Valley, Red Kandhari, Hallikar , Malnad Gidda, Bargur, Pullikulam,
Hill cattle of Uttarakhand, Shahabandi, Purnea, Indigenous cattle of
Tripura, Mizoram and Manipur , Sanchori, Siri, Nari, Belahi, Kankan,
Ladhakhi.
Further , under Network project on Animal Genetic Resources some
of the cattle breeds were studied in collaboration with local agencies.
These breeds are Deoni, Ongole, Gir , Umblacherry, Bachaur, Dangi,
Amritmahal, Khillar, Gaolao, Surti, Gangatiri, Tho Tho, Kosali, Binjharpuri
and Purnea. The study undertaken by NBAGR, Karnal revealed that
indigenous cattle breeds/population found in different parts of the
country possess better heat tolerance and disease resistance as compared
to exotic cattle breeds and their crosses. Since productivity of indigenous
cattle is lower than exotic/crossbreed cattle, the indigenous cattle are
facing stiffer competition with exotic/crossbreed cattle. Therefore, it
is essentially needed to take up genetic improvement programme for
our indigenous cattle population which is nearly 80% of the total cattle
of India.
Work has also been initiated to study climate resilience strength of
indigenous cattle breeds. Laboratory experiments have revealed that
Sahiwal cows have superior tolerance to summer stress as shown by
hematological, cell proliferation, heat shock proteins and stress marker
data. In this process of inventorization of cattle genetic resources ICAR
collaborated with many Government and non-government agencies,
research institutions and progressive farmers.
Department of Animal Husbandry, Dairying and Fisheries is
implementing a central spotted scheme name National Livestock Mission
with sub mission on Feed and Fodder development since, 2014-15.
Under the Sub-mission, financial assistance is being provided to all
states and UTs on the components as follows:
➢ Fodder production from forest land and non-forest waste
land/range land/grass land/non arable land.
➢ Fodder seed production and/procurement and distribution
to livestock rearers.

54
➢ distribution of hand driven chaff-cutters and power driven
chaff-cutter low capacity tractor mountable fodder block
making unit, hay baling machines/reapers/forage harvestors.
➢ Establishment of silage making units, by-pass protein
production units, area specific mineral mixture/feed
pelleting/feed manufacturing units.
Amount of Rs. 100 crores has been provided to the states/UTs since
2014-15.
[Ministry of Agriculture & Farmers Welfare (Department of
Agricultural Research and Education), F .No. NRM/11(26)/2017-AFC (Pt.),
dated 03.11.2017]
Recommendation (Para No. 14)
The Committee note that rumen fermentation is the major source
of greenhouse gas emission in farm sector. The Committee have been
informed that ICAR institutes are working on various projects under
National Plan on Climate Change and NICRA project to reduce GHG
emissions from large and small ruminants and developed different forms
of complete feed, silage, fortified feed with varied levels of antioxidants,
electrolytes and osmolytes, astaxanthin, melatonin along with different
types of shelters with low cost and locally available material and herbal
supplements to reduce GHGs emission from rumen fermentation. These
Institutes have also been successful in identification of bacteriocin
producing strains of lactic acid producing bacteria, microencapsulation
of Bacteriocins, release kinetics of encapsulated Bacteriocins,
lignocellulosic biomass for improving feed utilization, biogeography of
gut microbes, novel approaches for assessing and improving nutrient
bio-availability. The Committee have been informed that Ration
balancing, use of ionophores, probiotics, plant secondary metabolites
(Saponins, tannins, terpenoids etc.), organic acids (fumarate, malate),
essential oils, defaunation etc. have been found to reduce GHG
(methane) emission to the extent of 10-15% in dairy animals. The
Committee also note that increase of GHG emissions by Indian livestock
was less (74% vs 82% over the period of 1961 to 2010) than the developing
countries and this was due to creation of awareness, demonstration of
field experiments (FLDs), encouragement provided for growing green
fodder, silage making, complete feed preparation, regulations in manure
management and waste disposal.
The Committee observe that significant achievement have been
made by the ICAR institutions for reduction of GHGs emission from

55
rumen fermentation. however , there is need to work for dissemination
of these outcomes to the farmers and dairy entrepreneurs in the country.
At the same time, there is need to give additional impetus for
identification of cattle varieties which is capacity for lower emission of
GHGs.
Reply of the Government
It has now been established that Ôration balancingÕ helps in reducing
enteric methane emissions by 10-15% per kg of milk produced. NDDB
has initiated implementation of ration balancing programme (RBP) under
the National Dairy Plan Phase-I, Under RBP , balanced feeding advisory
services would be provided at farmers doorstep to about 2.7 million
milch animals in the country. So far about 2.5 million animals belonging
to 1.9 million farmers are covered under the programme.
In our country, the average methane emission per animal is found
to be 60 kg/year, and due to RBP even if a 10% reduction in methane
emission is considered, then total methane emission reduction from
2.5 million milch animals amounts to 15,000 tonne/year ( i.e. 5,10,000
tonne CO
2-equivalent/year). In addition, due to RBP , improvement in
the daily milk yield by 0.3 kg/animal and milk fat by 0.1 units has been
observed and the average net daily income of farmers has increased by
Rs. 25/animal. Thus, ration balancing has proven to be a promising
approach for reducing environmental impacts of dairying.
ICAR-National Dairy Research Institute, Karnal assessed the following
technologies under the Technology Demonstration Component of National
Innovations in Climate Resilient Agriculture (NICRA) after their
dissemination to farmers in Manglora, Dilawra and Suhana villages in
Karnal district of Haryana during 2013-17 wherein climate sensitive
areas in livestock farming were addressed on priority basis so that
farmers will cope with climate change and maintain/enhance the farm
productivity. The details on the basis of farmers perception are given
as under:
Sl.No Name of the technology No. of Significant outputs
farmers
12 3 4
1. Effect of area specific mineral 50 0.5 litres of milk increase was sustained.
mixture on milk productivity Overall growth and health performance was
for heat stress amelioration improved and made animals to remain
resilient under climate stress.

56
2. Effect of vitamin E supplementation 20 Supplementation of vitamin E played crucial
on milk productivity under heat role for reducing the mastitis. Increase of
stress condition 0.5 litre to 1 litre milk production as it
works as antioxidant and improves the
immunity.
3. Effect of mustard oil on milk 40 Energy status of animals remains
productivity for heat stress maintained during heat stress. Maintains
management the normal milk production. Animal body
become shiny.
4. Safe dung disposal through 30 Growth of flies and insects is controlled
composting paving the way for animal comfort.
Nutrient loss is minimised and availability
of micronutrient is ensured.
The chances of spread of diseases and
insects highly reduced. It is beneficial for
both human as well as livestock.
Played crucial role in sanitation at
individual household as well as at village
level.
Created mass awareness among the fellow
villagers.
5. Improved fodder crop varietes 50 Berseem (BL-42) variety gavemore number
to address fodder scarcity of harvests and available in the fields for
5-6 months.
Less water requirement over other
traditional varieties.
The traditional variety was giving up to
3-4 cuts, berseem (BL-42) ensures 6-8 cuts
in its life duration.
6. Silage making using bag 20 Purchase of fodder during fodder shortage
from other farmers and market was
reduced. They used maize and sorghum
fodder for silage preparation. Farmers
evinced interest to adopt this method. They
mix 75-85% straw with silage. Silage
reduced fodder shortage and helped to
maintain the milk productivity in the
shortage period.
12 3 4

57
Benefits of supplementing the anti-oxidants to address heat stress in
dairy animals
1. Benefit of supplementing Astaxanthin heat stress amelioration in
dairy animals:
Supplementation of astaxanthin @ 0.25 mg/kg body weight to the
Karan Fries (Tharparkar x Holstein Frisian) bulls improved their
semen quality in terms of individual mortility by 6%, sperm
concentration by 76 millions/ml, acrosomal integrity by 3%, live
spermatozoa by 4% and total sperm output by 850 millions/ejaculate
compared to control group during heat stress.
2. Melatonin
Subcutaneous implantation of melatonin @ 18 mg/50 kg body weight
to growing and lactating buffaloes at the interval of 45 days indicated
an increase in average daily gain (Body weight) by 70 gm per day
and dry matter intake by 0.27 kg in growing buffaloes compared to
control group: The service period was reduced by 14 days and
increase the conception rate by 18 per cent.
3. Use of Astaxanthine and herbal supplements for heat stress
alleviation in female cows and buffaloes:
Experiments are under progress to study the effect of
supplementation of astaxanthine and herbal supplements on milk
production and reproduction in cows and buffaloes.
[Ministry of Agriculture & Farmers Welfare (Department of
Agricultural Research and Education), F .No. NRM/11(26)/2017-AFC (Pt.),
dated 03.11.2017]
Assessment of Food Requirement vis-a-vis Food Availability
Recommendation (Para No. 15)
South Asia has been categorized as one of the most vulnerable ones
to challenges associated with climate changes due to global warming.
Vulnerability of Indian agriculture due to vagaries associated with climate
change and low adaptation capacity of majority of Indian farmers poses
risk to food security of the country. The Committee note that population
of India is projected to be 1.65 billion by 2050 with 50% of people
residing in the urban areas. The Committee also note that total foodgrain
demand is estimated to be 291 Mt by 2025 and 377 Mt by 2050, whereas
the total production is estimated to be 292 Mt by 2025 and 385 Mt by
2050, which is 2.0% more than the demand. However , production deficits

58
are projected for other cereals, oilseeds, and pulses. The projected
deficit is 33% by 2025 and 43% by 2050 for other cereals, while 3% by
2025 and 7% by 2050 for pulses.
The Committee have been informed that it has been analyzed using
Infocrop Decision Support System that the impact of climate change on
production of wheat, paddy, kharif, maize and rain fed Sorghum can be
minimized through adaptation to climate change by sowing improved
varieties and employing improved input efficiency technologies coupled
with application of additional nitrogen.
The Committee note that Government have launched Food Security
Mission during 2007 for additional production of food grains of 25 million
tons comprising 10 million ton rice, 8 million ton wheat, 4 million ton
pulses and 3 million ton of coarse cereals by the end of 12th Five Year
Plan through area expansion and productivity enhancement in sustainable
manner in identified districts of the country; restoring soil fertility and
productivity at individual farm level; creation of employment
opportunities; and enhancing farm level economy (i.e. farm profits) to
restore confidence among farmers. The Committee further note that
the Government aims to ensure food security in the nation through
implementing National Food Security Act, 2013 by undertaking price
support operations through efficient procurement of food crops,
strengthening public distribution systems, increasing crop production
and productivity, and enhancing resilience of Indian agriculture to climate
change and climate vulnerability through strategic research and
technology demonstration. To meet the requirement of food
commodities, particularly pulses and oilseeds, trade related measures
are also undertaken by the government besides the ongoing efforts to
improve the production within the country. The Committee have also
been informed that National Mission for Sustainable Agriculture (NMSA)
was initiated with the aims to devise strategies to make Indian agriculture
more resilient to climate change. It would identify and develop new
varieties of crops and alternative cropping patterns, capable of
withstanding extremes of weather , long dry spells, flooding and variable
moisture availability. The Government is also supporting the ICAR by
funding the NICRA project with the aim of developing technologies that
help minimize the adverse impacts of climate change. The government
is also adjusting the trade policies and domestic marketing policies
keeping in view the food security.
The Committee are of view that the there will changes in
consumption patterns in coming decades due to increasing rate of
urbanization and increased income of households. Therefore, demand

59
for fruits, vegetables, dairy products, meat, poultry and fisheries will
increase at faster rate than that of food grains. Thus, there the country
will need to increase crop diversification and improve allied activities
such as dairying, fisheries and poultry farming alongwith maintaining
the current rate of growth of food grain production. The country will
be required to invest heavily in development of improved crop varieties
with enhanced abiotic stress tolerance, development of improved
varieties of fertilizers with less GHGs emission effect, better irrigation
methods, weather forecasting, training of farmers etc. The Committee,
therefore, recommend the Government to provide adequate support to
the scientist of the country engaged in climate research in agriculture
and weather forecasting sectors under programmes such NICRA and
NMSA. Further, the Committee desire the Government to provide fillip
to enhance the production of oil seeds and pulses in the country by
taking steps for area expansion, development of high yielding varieties
of pulses and oil seeds/oil palm, support to farmers etc. so that the
country do not face shortage of oil and pulses in coming decades. They
also desire the Government to provide adequate funds to Ministry of
Agriculture and Farmers Welfare and State Governments to achieve
these objectives.
Reply of the Government
In order to increase the production of oilseeds and pulses, the
Indian Council of Agricultural Research (ICAR) is engaged in basic,
strategic and applied research programmes on different oilseeds
(Groundnut, Rapeseed-mustard, Soybean, Sunflower , Sesame, Niger,
Safflower , Castor and Linseed) and pulses (Chickpea, Pigeonpea,
Mungbean, Urdbean, Lentil, Lathyrus, Rajmash, Fieldpea, Mothbean,
Horsegram and Cowpea) at five commodity based institutes and through
10 All India Coordinated Research Projects on specific oilseeds and
pulses also develops location specific high yielding varieties/hybrids
and suitable production and protection technologies for increasing
productivity and production of these two groups of crops.
The efforts of ICAR have resulted in the release of 74 varieties/
hybrids of different oilseeds and 63 varieties of different pulses during
2014-2016, given as Annexure-XI, that have fair degree of tolerance to
biotic and abiotic stresses. Early maturing varieties/hybrids of oilseeds
and pulses have also been found suitable for cultivation in newer niches
and cropping systems. Besides, the improved varieties and production
technologies are demonstrated at the farmers Õ fields by the ICAR
institutes, State Agricultural Universities (SAUs) and Krishi Vigyan Kendras

60
(KVKs) through frontline demonstrations (FLD) programme to create
awareness among the farmers about them. Further , it is submitted that
National Food Security Mission (NFSM) is being implemented across the
country through various components like NFSM-Rice (194 districts of 25
States), NFSM-Wheat (126 districts of 11 States), NFSM-Pulses (638
districts of all the 29 States) and NFSM-Coarse Cereals in 265 districts
of 28 States.
Under NFSM various interventions are being promoted to increase
the production of rice, wheat, pulses and coarse cereals through area
expansion and productivity enhancement in sustainable manner. Apart
from this restoration of soil fertility and productivity enhancement at
individual farm level and enhancing farm economy to restore confidence
amongst the farmers.
Assistance is being provided for latest crop production technologies
through cluster demonstrations, promotion of newly released varieties,
which are resistant to biotic and abiotic stresses, INM & IPM techniques,
resource conservation techniques/tools/implements, efficient water
application tools and capacity building of farmers through cropping
system based trainings to address various research issues and gaps of
potential yield and yield realized at farmers Õ field Research projects
are supported to SAUs, National and International research organizations.
For increasing pulse production, NFSM-Pulses Programme is being
implemented in 29 States in 638 districts of the country. Under this
Programme, the following initiatives have been taken:Ñ
¥ More than 60% of NFSM allocation dedicated to Pulses to
increase the production of pulses in the country through
area expansion and productivity enhancement
¥ Financial Assistance for various interventions like
demonstration of improved technologies, distribution of
quality seeds of new varieties, integrated pest management
and soil amendments, farm machinery & implements, water
saving devices and capacity building of farmers are being
provided under NFSM and RKVY to enhance the production
and productivity of pulses
¥ Under revamped NFSM since 2014-15, the pulses component
of NFSM is extended from 468 to 638 districts of 29 states
including all districts of North-Eastern states and hill states
like Himachal Pradesh, Jammu & Kashmir and Uttarakhand
¥ The cultivation of pulses as inter-crop with cereals, oilseeds,
commercial crops and on farm bunds of paddy fields is being
promoted to increase the area under pulses.

61
¥ At least 30% of the cluster demonstrations under NFSM and
BGREI are being conducted by adopting cropping system
approach to utilize the paddy fallow area for pulses
cultivation.
¥ Under NFSM, a programme of Additional area coverage for
increasing pulses production during Rabi/Summer was also
being implemented since 2012-13 to expand area and
enhancement of productivity of pulses during rabi/summer
season in major pulse growing States.
¥ SAUs/ICAR/CGIAR institutes are also involved to address
various researchable issues of pulses and demonstrations of
latest technologies for better yield realization at farmers Õ
field.
¥ From 2016-17, new initiatives like distribution of seed
minikits, subsidy on production of quality seed, creation of
seed hubs, strengthening breeder seed production programme
and cluster frontline demonstrations through KVKs have been
undertaken under NFSM.
¥ Procurement of pulses at Minimum Support Prices and increase
limit of buffer stock up to 20 lakh tonnes.
¥ Promotion of mini dal mill for primary processing for reducing
losses and value chain addition.
¥ Regular monitoring by Senior Officers, National Consultants
and Director of Crop Development Directorates of DAC & FW.
[Ministry of Agriculture & Farmers Welfare (Department of
Agricultural Research and Education), F .No. NRM/11(26)/2017-AFC (Pt.),
dated 03.11.2017]
R&D on Alternative Food Sources for Future
Recommendation (Para No. 16)
Earth is the adobe of multitude of biological variability. The human
society across the world including India has however selected few crops
such as wheat, rice, maize which constitutes their staple diet. Dominance
of mono cropping and excessive reliance of selected crops can become
a burden in case of any major fluctuation in climate due to global
warming. Keeping in view these factors, it is important to take steps
to identify and develop some alternative food sources which can
withstand climatic variability and hence can be utilized as staple diet
for vast population of our country. The Committee note that ICAR

62
through its network programmes on small millets (AICRP on Small Millets),
future crops (AICRN on Potential Crops), legumes (AINP on Arid Legumes)
is continuously engaged in conservation of germplasms; breeding short
duration, tolerant and climate resilient varieties; developing suitable
location specific package of practices for potential future crops; and
disseminating production and value addition technologies to the
stakeholders. The Committee have been informed that ICAR is giving
priority to small millet crops, viz. foxtail millet, kodo millet, proso
millet, little millets, and barnyard millets through All India Coordinated
Research Project on Small Millets. These crops have potential to
withstand the vagaries of climate and ensure the food and nutritional
security in future. The Committee have also been informed that ICAR
Institutes have developed and popularized several ready-to-cook and
ready-to-eat health foods based on coarse grains which have been
developed under the NAIP project. The ICAR is also making efforts for
developing potential crops such as pseudocereals, food legumes/pulses,
oilseeds, vegetables and fodder crops through All India Coordinated
Research Network on Potential Crops with objectives to find out new
plant resources for food, fodder , fuel, energy and industrial uses; identify
superior genotypes for cultivation in different regions; and standardize
package of practice. ICAR through its ongoing programmes/projects/
schemes at NBPGR New Delhi, NBAGR Hisar , NBFGR Lucknow, NBAIM
Mau and other ICAR institutes is continuously participating in international
project or alliances of CGAIR, FAO, SAC to share genotypes, breed or
species for use in national crop/breed improvement programmes. The
shared materials are maintained and preserved at respective national
repositories in the country. The Committee have also been informed
that Government is promoting cultivation and value addition in more
efficient, climate resilient, short duration C
4 crops viz. maize, pearl
millet, sorghum and finger millets in suitable regions.
The Committee observe that despite claim of the Government in
taking steps for promoting cultivation of coarse grain, there was a
decline in cultivated area between 2004-05 and 2014-15 in sorghum
(3.5 mha), pearlmillet (1.3 mha). The Committee are of considered
view that there is need to shift from mono cropping pattern of agriculture
to diversified agriculture in order to enhance biodiversity. Enhanced
crop biodiversity will help the country to ensure food security in case
of any unforeseen consequences of climate change. The Committee
desire the Government to actively encourage the cultivation of coarse
grain, apart from providing support to research on coarse grains and
other potential food crops for future. The Committee, therefore, call
upon the Government to make a comprehensive plan for providing

63
funds, seeds, and other agriculture extension support to the farmers
for encouraging farming of coarse cereals in the country. The Committee
also desire the Government to take an awareness campaign about health
benefits of coarse grain in order to enhance its consumption in the
country. The Committee are also of the view that there is need to
involve farmers especially in rainfed agriculture, hill and tribal areas so
that traditional foods being used in these areas can be properly analyzed
and beneficial germplasm can be stored for further research. There is
also a need to focus on research on tuber crops which are traditionally
being cultivated and used as food source in different parts of the
country. The Committee, therefore, desire the ICAR to take necessary
steps in this direction.
Reply of the Government
AICRPs on Small Millets, Sorghum and Pearl millet have been involved
in developing improved technologies for sustainable production of these
crops which were important food crops before green revolution. These
crops are highly adapted to rainfed agriculture in their niche areas
from arid high temperature regions, semi-arid plains to hilly regions.
Since centuries, the millets have provided food and nutritional security
to the populations in the disadvantaged geographical regions. These
food crops are unique as they require less water to grow, mature early
and are cultivated in low input conditions. Agronomic advantages e.g.
highly adapted to low rainfall conditions, able to withstand fairly long
dry spells, recover fast after delayed rain, make them good contingent
crops. Millets are highly resilient in adapting to different ecological
conditions; ideal crops for climate change and contingency plantings.
Being C4 plants, these are more environment friendly with high water
use efficiency and low input requirement, but equally responsive to
high input management. Besides, being farmer-friendly, millets possess
unique nutritional properties, i.e. high fiber , quality protein and mineral
composition, hence called as Ònutri-cerealsÓ also.
The ability of millets to offer a modest yield under marginal farming
conditions, poor soil and low or no input, has made them attractive
crop option in, hill and tribal agriculture. Besides, they provide fodder
contributing to food security of livestock. Owing to their nutritional
superiority, millets are being popularized as super foods and value
addition technologies are being developed at the ICAR-Indian Institute
of Millets Research (IIMR), Hyderabad.
Measures being taken by ICAR-IIMR and respective AICRPs to
encourage the farmers for taking up cultivation of millets:Ñ
¥ Enhancing the productivity of millets through evolving new
varieties. Production technologies have been developed for

64
all other small millets. The productivity of finger millet,
pearl millet, sorghum and foxtail millet doubled during the
past 40 years due to efforts in the crop improvement.
Varieties with high yield potential have also been developed
in different small millets like barnyard millet, kodo millet,
little millet and proso millet at national and State levels.
List of varieties released during 2016 are given in
Annexure-XII.
¥ Varieties/hybrids of sorghum and pearl millet released during
2014-2016 are given in Annexure-XIII and Annexure-XIV .
¥ Varieties suitable for different climatic conditions and
superior in different nutrients have also been developed
(Annexure XV).
¥ Popularizing the millets as nutri-cereals so that the demand
for millet based foods increases and farmers realize beneficial
value for their produce. In this regard, ICAR-IIMR has taken
up value addition technology development, dissemination of
the technologies by training entrepreneurs, media campaign
about health benefits of millets, making Ready-To-Cook (RTC)
and Ready-To-Eat (RTE) millet based foods available through
licensing of manufacturing technologies. These tasks were
taken up with Government support in the form of funding in
project mode.
¥ ICAR (AICRPs and IIMR) are regularly taking up Front line
Demonstrations in farmersÕ fields to demonstrate the benefits
of latest varieties and production technologies. Farmer groups
are regularly trained in production technologies, post harvest
processing and value addition technologies.
¥ Machinery development for post-harvest processing of millets
is underway to enable farm-gate processing that would result
in higher returns for the farmer for the produce.
Maize
Maize is another versatile crop with wide adaptability and ICAR-
Indian Institute of Maize Research, Ludhiana along with AICRP (Maize)
undertakes research programmes on various aspects related to maize
improvement. Maize is relatively drought tolerant as compared to major
fine cereals. In India maize is cultivated in 8.9 mha. While spring and
rabi maize together accounting for around 18% area under maize is
predominantly cultivated under assured irrigation, kharif maize
accounting for 82% of maize area is largely cultivated under rainfed
situation.

65
It contains 72% carbohydrates (starch), 10% protein and 4% fat. The
mineral content of maize (Calcium; 10 mg, Phosphorus; 348 mg, Iron;
2.5 mg, Zinc; 2.8 mg, magnesium; 139 mg) is quite comparable to any
other cereal grain. The yellow maize contains 90 micro grams of
carotene, which plays an important role as anti-oxidant and immunity
provider. Above 62% of maize in India is consumed in feed industry,
while around 12% is used in starch industry. The integration of maize
in human diet directly or indirectly can play a major role in solving the
problem of malnutrition, particularly Quality Protein Maize (QPM) which
is having higher lysine (>2.4%) as well as tryptophan values (> 0.6%) as
compared to the normal maize. Balanced combination of amino acids
in the endosperm of QPM results in higher biological value thereby
ensuring more availability of protein to human diet and animal feeds
than normal maize.
Maize can be used in greater variety of forms than any other cereals
such as Baby corn, Sweet corn, Pop corn and normal grain. Huge scope
exists for value added products of speciality corns as well. For example
pop corn can be used as High fiber pop corn bar , Nutritious burfi, Iron
rich laddu, Protein and fiber rich chikkies, Baby corn can be used as
Candy, Murabba, Pickles, Brined baby corns, Vinegar preserved baby
corn, dehydrated baby corn and QPM as Health mix, Poustic mixture,
weaning mixture, energy mixture, malt mix. Some of the convenience
foods such as Ready-To-Cook mixes and Ready-To-Eat mixes which has
good market potential and can be prepared with minimum requirement
of machinery are listed below.
¥ ReadyÑto cook Idli mix
¥ ReadyÑto cook Vada mix
¥ ReadyÑto cook Nutri mix
¥ Papad/fryumes
¥ Noodles/Vermicelli/Pasta
¥ Sweet and Spicy Pop corn
¥ Pop corn health Bar
¥ Baby corn Candies
Since the beginning of this millennium besides release of 7 field
corn cultivars through AICRP on Maize, 12 QPM hybrids in addition to
one QPM hybrid with enriched vitamin A have also been released for
cultivation. Currently number of hybrids and varieties under various
categories (popcorn: one hybrid and two varieties, baby corn: one

66
variety and hybrid each, sweet corn: 3 hybrids and one variety) are
available for cultivation. Towards diversification of maize for food
purpose under AICRP on Maize extensive work is being carried out on
value addition.
Technology development for value addition in sorghum/millets and
commercialization
A total of 30 value technologies have been developed by ICAR-IIMR,
Hyderabad for sorghum foods on a pilot scale. Commercialization of
these technologies has been done by transferring them to entrepreneurs
and food industries through MoUs. About 30 such firms have
commercialized ICAR-IIMR technologies and more than 10 businesses
have crossed the break-even point. The ÒeatriteÓ branding of millets
foods have been successfully built through campaigning, popularization
and awareness programmes. Owing to these progresses, Agri-Business
Incubator and Technology Business Incubator projects of the institute
have been approved under programmes of ministerial departments.
Description: The millet value added product technologies are
healthy, convenient Ready To Cook/Eat (RTC/E) foods. The technologies
have been developed from millets through diversification of processing
technologies (flaking, extrusion, baking, popping, parboiling, semolina,
blending of flours etc.), standardization and routine R&D activities on
product development and studies on the enhancement of shelf life of
millet foods.
Domain: of the following segments:Ñ
¥ Value added Millets Food Products
¥ Convenience food
¥ Healthy food
¥ Life style disorder management, etc.
Impact:Ñ
¥ These technologies have aided in spreading of nutritional
awareness of millets among the consumers and have gained
a wide momentum from consumers especially the health
conscious segment.
¥ These have created lots of interest among the entrepreneurs
as they see more business opportunities in these nutritious,
convenient and healthy millet foods.

67
¥ Thus, resulting in the creation of demand for the millets
consumption, increasing of farmers Õ income, generating
employment and helping the beneficiary entrepreneurs/
stakeholders.
Various processing technologies developed at ICAR-IIMR are:Ñ
¥ Convenient/Ready-to-Eat and Ready-to-Cook millet based
products.
¥ Removes drudgeries and inconvenience involved in preparation.
¥ Increased nutrient digestibility through pre-processing and
diversification of processing technologies (baking, extrusion,
parboiling, milling, flaking, etc).
¥ Development of healthy and convenient RTC/E foods
(30 convenient products).
¥ Nutritional Labelling of Eatrite products for highlighting the
nutritional benefits vis-a-vis  over existing products.
¥ Consumers are provided convenient options even in sorghum
and millet foods.
¥ Currently Nine products are commercialized in M/s. Big Bazaar
retail outlets in Hyderabad and Mumbai under Eatrite brand
developed by ICAR-IIMR, Hyderabad. (Jowar atta, Multigrain
atta, Jowar idli rawa, Jowar upma rawa, Jowar khichdi rawa,
Jowar flakes, Jowar vermicelli, Jowar pasta and Jowar
biscuits).
Coarse cereals including Millets is one of the components in National
Food Security Mission (NFSM) from 2014-15 to enhance the production
of coarse cereals. Coarse Cereals is also included under National Food
Security Act. Millets contain substantially high amount of fat, fiber,
minerals and higher protein compared to fine cereals like rice and
wheat and will also help to control malnutrition and many kinds of
diseases like obesity, diabetes etc. Under this Programme, Department
has been providing support to the farmers for demonstrations, seed
distribution and enhancing the production of millets by providing easy
accessibility to consumers & industry for value addition of millets. In
order to enhance its consumption, awareness campaign is being initiated
through social sector schemes and through print and electronic media.
The group called tropical Òroots and tuber (R&T) Ó crops consists of
both dicots like sweet potato ( Ipomoea batatas ), cassava/tapioca
(Manihot esculentaCrantz ) and monocots like yams ( Dioscorea spp .)

68
and edible aroids like taro ( Colocasia esculenta), tannia ( Xanthosoma
sagittifolium) and elephant foot yam ( Amorphophalluspaeoniifolius
Dennst. Nicolson ). R&T crops are the third important food crops of
mankind, after cereals and legumes and are either a staple or subsidiary
food for about one-fifth of the world population. Individually, cassava,
sweet potato and yam rank among the most important food crops
worldwide and in terms of annual volume of production, cassava and
sweet potato rank among the top 10 food crops produced in developing
countries.They contribute about 6% of the world Õs dietary calories, and
are also an important source of animal feed and raw materials for
industrial products. Tropical tuber crops are the source of sustenance
and livelihood security of 200 million people across different States of
India, mainly Kerala, Tamil Nadu, Andhra Pradesh, Karnataka, Odisha,
West Bengal, Bihar , UP , Chhattisgarh, Gujarat, Goa, Maharashtra and
north-eastern States. The total tropical tuber crops production in our
country is about 12 million tons whose present market value is Rs. 165
billion.
The institute is recognized as the national germplasm repository of
tropical tuber crops by ICAR-Central Tuber Crop Research Institute
(CTCRI). The institute maintains 5,558 accessions as ex situ field gene
bank and in vitro  active germplasm collection. It includes 1,211
accessions of cassava, 1,124 of sweet potato, 1,110 of yams, 672 edible
aroids, and 200 minor tuber crops besides 1241 collections from Regional
Centre. The institute developed and released 61 high yielding varieties
of different R&T crops. It includes 16 of cassava, 21 of sweet potato,
13 of yams, 8 taro, 2 elephant foot yam and 1 Chinese potato. The high
yielding and high starch containing cassava varieties like H165 and
H226 developed by the institute contributed in a major way for
establishment of starch and sago industries in and around Salem district
of Tamil Nadu. The Institute has recently released two sweet potato
varieties, Bhu Sona rich in § carotene (12.5-14 mg/100g) and Bhu Krishna,
rich in anthocyanin (85-80 mg/100g). Similarly, an anthocyanin rich
Greater yam variety, Sree Neelima has been developed having good
culinary and nutritive quality. Sree Athira is the first elephant foot yam
hybrid in the world, while Sree Kiran is the first hybrid taro variety
released in India.
The institute is constantly collecting germplasm of various tropical
tuber crops from different parts of the country and are being conserved,
catalogued and evaluated for their characteristics and are used in
different breeding programmes to evolve improved tuber crop varieties
with different traits. In order to carry out research work in this line a
new research project titled ÔConservation and utilization of germplasm
of tuber crops for sustaining production Õ.

69
Under the tribal sub-plan, the Institute is planning to distribute
improved varieties of tropical tuber crops in Odisha (Kandhamal and
Koraput districts), Jharkand (Ranchi district) and Chhattisgarh
(Narayanpur district). Improved varieties of Sweet potato (Kishan and
ST-14, Colocasia (Muktakeshi), Greater yam (Orissa Elite and Da 293),
Elephant foot yam (Gajendra), Yam bean (RM-1) and Cassava (Sree
Jaya, Sree Vijaya and Vellayani Hraswa) are being distributed to farmers
in those areas. Cropping system including Greater yam + maize
intercropping system (Greater yam planted at 90 x 90 cm spacing. In
intra rows between two plants of greater yam three plants of maize
sown (1:3 ratio)and Sweet potato + red gram intercropping system (3
rows of sweet potato at 60 x 20 cm spacing and 3 rows of red gram at
60 x 20 cm spacing (3:3)) are also being demonstrated in the tribal
districts. In future, the Institute plans programmes to popularize the
improved varieties as well as other tuber crops technologies in major
tuber crops growing regions of the country.
[Ministry of Agriculture & Farmers Welfare (Department of
Agricultural Research and Education), F .No. NRM/11(26)/2017-AFC (Pt.),
dated 03.11.2017]
Comments of the Committee
For comments of the Committee please refer to Para No. 1.13 of
Chapter I of this Report.
Agroforestry
Recommendation (Para No. 17)
The Committee note that National Agroforestry Policy (NAFP)
announced in 2014 aims at conservation of natural resources,
diversification of land use and farming systems to meet the demands
of fuel, fodder, timber , and thus promoting economic transformation of
farmers. The Committee have been informed that NAFP with objective
to protect and stabilize ecosystems and promote resilient cropping and
farming systems to minimize the risk during extreme climatic events
will complement achieving the target of increasing forest/tree cover to
promote ecological stability especially in the vulnerable regions. The
Committee also note that apart from agroforestry development and
promotion programmes of State Forest Departments, Central Government
has initiated various programmes on research & development through
ICAR- Central Agroforestry Research Institute (CAFRI) Jhansi, ICAR- All
India Coordinated Research Project on Agroforestry (AICRPAF) and Indian
Council of Forestry Research and Education (ICFRI), Dehradun. The

70
Committee have also been informed that programmes for capacity
building of farmers and other stakeholders are also being implemented.
The Committee are of the view that agroforestry programmes, if
implemented in scientific manner and proper support to the farmers,
can emerge as significant income multiplier for small and marginal
farmers of the country. However , agroforestry programmes have been
implemented in the country without taking care of requirement of
farmers, local economy and environment. These agroforestry programmes
have so far been at meeting the target of plantation without proper
support for post plantation care and resulted in the loss of majority of
saplings and huge losses to the farmers. The Committee are of considered
opinion that a meticulously-planned nationwide programme for
agroforestry based on region-wise environmental and economic factors
will go a long way to protect environment along with enhancing income
of farmers. The Committee, therefore, recommend the Government to
plan a nation-wide programme for agroforestry after consultation with
all the stakeholders including State Governments and farmers. The
Committee would like to be apprized about the steps taken in this
direction within three months of presentation of this report.
Reply of the Government
The National Agroforestry Policy, 2014 (NAF-2014) was formulated
to have trees along with the crops in the farmers Õ fields with focused
objectives viz., to encourage and expand tree plantation in
complementarities and integrated approach of farming with crops and
livestock the policy recommends for setting up of a Mission or Board to
address development of the sector in an organized manner.
As a follow up to NAF-2014, Sub-Mission of Agroforestry (SMAF) has
been launched from the year 2016-17. The scheme is being implemented
in the states those have notified liberalized transit regulations for
transport of timber. Implementation of the scheme has been started in
8 States and during 2016-17 and in 8 more States during 2017-18 after
notifying liberalized transit regulations.
[Ministry of Agriculture & Farmers Welfare (Department of
Agricultural Research and Education), F .No. NRM/11(26)/2017-AFC (Pt.),
dated 03.11.2017]
Recommendation (Para No. 18)
The Committee note that stress on exotic plants in agroforestry
programmes was one of the reasons for their failure across the country.

71
These plants despite their property for fast growth, affect local
bio-diversity and hydrology. However, the Committee in this regard
have been informed that various studies have shown that exotic species
such as Eucalyptus is more water efficient than other tree species for
the per gram biomass production. The Committee have been informed
that ICAR-CAFRI, Jhansi has identified suitable tree species for different
agro-climatic regions of the country. Further , research institutes are
also engaged in identification of tree species which is suitable for local
environment and farming system. The Committee are of view that
agroforestry programmes should be planned after proper study of local
bio-diversity, farming system and availability of market for agroforestry
products. It is also important to involve farmers and other stakeholders
in planning of agroforestry programmes. The Committee are also of
view that there should be stress on use of indigenous plant species in
agroforestry as our country has tremendous bio-diversity which, if properly
studied, can bring forth many local plant species suitable for agroforestry.
The Committee, therefore, recommend the Government to issue
advisory/notification to the State/UTs Governments for use of indigenous
plant species in agroforestry programme. The Committee also desire
the Government to focus on Research & Development for identification
of locally suitable plant species for agroforestry programmes.
Reply of the Government
The Indian Council of Forestry Research and Education (ICFRE) as it
stands today, embodies a very strong, more than century old Forest
Research, Education and Extension Foundation in the country. It is
actively engaged in developing and promoting improved varieties of
multipurpose trees that are also used extensively in agroforestry and in
combination with agricultural, horticultural and medicinal plants. ICFRE
through its institutes has also developed models for enhancing green
cover in the country with a view to achieve the twin objectives of
increasing carbon sink and increasing availability of wood. ICFREÕs efforts
have helped popularized Eucalyptus and poplar based agroforestry in
Punjab, Haryana, Western Uttar Pradesh and lower areas of Uttarakhand,
Himachal Pradesh and J&K. The organisation has also developed high
yielding clones through a systematic tree improvement program for
various species implemented in institutes of ICFRE which include
Casuarina, Eucalyptus, Poplars, Shisham, Melia, Teak, Acacia, Leucaena,
Gmelina, Mahogany, Thespesia, Ailanthus, Kadamba, Tamarind,
Calophyllum, Pongamia, Terminalia, Sandalwood, Agarwood and Bamboos.
The ICAR-CAFRI research on Multipurpose Tree Species (MPTS) suitable
for agroforestry has also focused on indigenous species distributed in

72
different parts of the country. Some of the important indigenous
MPTS suitable for agroforestry for different species are given in
Annexure-XVI.
[Ministry of Agriculture & Farmers Welfare (Department of
Agricultural Research and Education), F .No. NRM/11(26)/2017-AFC (Pt.),
dated 03.11.2017]
Water Resources Management
Recommendation (Para No. 19)
Water is one of the fundamental natural resources which is critical
for development of human society. There are increasing evidences that
climatic changes associated with global warming will affect rainfall
pattern across the globe thereby affecting availability of water in
different continents. Therefore, it becomes imperative to analyze
availability of water resources in our country and prepare an efficient
water resource management plan to effectively prepare to augment
water resources for agriculture sector to face the climatic changes
associated with global warming.
The Committee note that our country with around 18% of world
population has only 4% of the global renewable water resources. The
Committee have been informed that despite receiving 4,000 billion
billion cubic average rainfall and snowfall average, availability of water
from surface water and replenishable ground water sources in the
country is only 1,869 billion cubic metre. However , only about 60% of
this i.e. 690 billion cubic metre from surface water and 432 billion
cubic metre from ground water can be put to beneficial use because
of topographical and other constraints.
The Committee note that irrigation facilities for agriculture in the
country are far below the requirement. In this regard, the Committee
have been informed that only 65 million hectare out of the 140 million
hectare of net sown area in the country is covered under irrigation
facility leaving 75 million hectares under rainfed farming. The Committee
were also informed that even after completing all irrigation projects
and covering the potentially irrigable area, nearly 50% of the cultivated
area will continue to remain rain dependent. Ensuring availability of
adequate water in monsoon dependant rainfed agriculture area is a
daunting task which can become a serious problem if climate changes
affect intensity and timing of Monsoon rains in India.

73
The Committee in this regard have been informed that various
studies on Indian subcontinent monsoon have indicated strong sensitivity
to global warming under the projected climate change scenarios. It is
projected that the rainfall magnitude will increase over core monsoon
zone in future climate along with lengthening of the season due to late
withdrawal. On inter-annual timescales, the severity and frequency of
both Strong Monsoon (SM) and Weak Monsoon (WM) might increase in
future climate. Substantial changes in the daily variability of ISM are
also projected which are largely associated with the increase in heavy
rainfall events and decrease in number of wet days during future
monsoon. Both extreme wet and dry episodes are likely to intensify and
regionally extend in future climate with enhanced tendency of long dry
spells. The Commiitee note that projected change in rainfall pattern
will create stress to majority of small and marginal farmers dependent
on rainfed farming. The Committee are of view that there is need of
comprehensive policy for sustaining rainfed farming in the country which
can take into account of future projection for Monsoon rainfall changes.
The Committee, therefore, recommend the Government to make a
comprehensive perspective plan for sustainable development of Rainfed
farming in the country.
Reply of the Government
As per the projected climate change the crop water requirement
will be increased by 7-8% by 2060 and 13-15% by 2090. The climate
change may change the rainfall pattern not as total but its distribution.
It is also projected due to climate change heavy rainfall events will be
increased but number of wet days will be decreased in future. Therefore,
water conservation through different water conservation structures and
groundwater recharge plan needs to be developed for augmenting water
resources of the country to face the climate change associated with
global warming. More water conservation and groundwater recharge
structures need to be developed to increase the utilizable water
resources of the country from its present value i.e. 1122 BCM.
Presently only 65 million hectares out of 140 million hectare of net
sown area in the country is under irrigation and 75% area of cultivable
land is still under rainfed. Rainfed agriculture needs to be developed
to improve the productivity of ecology. The ICAR-CRIDA has developed
different technologies to improve productivity of rainfed area like crop
diversification with low water requiring crops, rainwater conservation
through dyke, tank-cum-well system, low cost amelioration technology
for rainfed acid soil, rainwater conservation through farm pond, improved
irrigation systems to improve the rainfed area of eastern India. In view

74
of the climate change and its impact on rainfall pattern, the technology
developed by the research may be incorporated in the comprehensive
policy for sustaining rainfed farming in the country to reduce stress to
small and marginal farmers of rainfed areas.
Government of India launched a programmer titled ÔPradhan Mantri
Krishi Sinchayee Yojana (PMKSY) Õ in 2015 and is committed to accord
high priority to water conservation and its management. PMKSY has
been formulated with the vision of extending the coverage of irrigation
to every farm land ÔHar Khet Ko PaniÕ and improving water use efficiency
Ômore crop per drop Õ in the focused manner with the end to end
solution on source creation, distribution, management, field application
and extension activities. PMKSY has been formulated amalgamating on
going schemes, viz., Accelerated Irrigation Benefit Programme (AIBP) of
the Ministry of Water Resources, River Development Ganga Rejuvenation
(MoWR, RD &GR), Integrated Watershed Management Programme (IWMP)
of Department of Land Resources (DoLR) and the On Farm Water
Management (OFWM) of Department of Agriculture and Co-operation,
Ministry of Agriculture and Farmers Welfare. In Rainfed areas under this
scheme the following activities are being promoted.
1. Water harvesting structures are being constructed such as
check dams, nala bund, farm pounds, percolation tanks, etc.
This stress is laid more on rainwater harvesting in-situ and
Ex-situ at field levels to reduce the runoff and soil loss.
In-situ measures include field bunding, contour bunding-
trenching, staggered trenching in areas having undulating
topography laser land levelling in Indo-Gangetic plain areas.
Ex-situ measures include Farm ponds and many state
governments have launched special programs like a million
farm ponds scheme in AP state alone besides others. The
rainwater harvested in ponds being utilized for life saving
irrigation of crops through micro-irrigation system (Sprinkler
and Rain gun).
2. Several states have adopted micro-irrigation system to
improve the water use efficiency. Drip and sprinkler systems
are provided on subsidy ranging from 50-90 percent.
3. Repair , restoration and renovation of water bodies particularly
of recycling of tanks silt has been adopted by various state
governments particularly Telangana (Mission Kakatiya),
Karnataka and Maharashtra.

75
4. Crop diversification is being promoted in areas growing water
loving crops mainly Paddy and Sugarcane so as to divert the
saved water to other rainfed crops for life saving irrigation.
[Ministry of Agriculture & Farmers Welfare (Department of
Agricultural Research and Education), F .No. NRM/11(26)/2017-AFC (Pt.),
dated 03.11.2017]
Augmentation of Water Resources in the Country
Recommendation (Para No. 20)
The Committee note that Pradhan Mantri Krishi Sinchayi Yojana
(PMKSY) has been launched by amalgamating ongoing schemes, viz.
Accelerated Irrigation Benefit Programme (AIBP) of the Ministry of Water
Resources, River Development & Ganga Rejuvenation (MoWR, RD&GR),
Integrated Watershed Management Programme (IWMP) of Department
of Land Resources (DoLR) and the On Farm Water Management (OFWM)
of Department of Agriculture and Cooperation (DAC). The aim of PMKSY
is to achieve convergence of investments in irrigation at the field level,
expand cultivable area under assured irrigation, improve on-farm water
use efficiency to reduce wastage of water , enhance the adoption of
precision irrigation and other water saving technologies (More crop per
drop), enhance recharge of aquifers and introduce sustainable water
conservation practices by exploring the feasibility of reusing treated
municipal waste water for peri-urban agriculture and attract greater
private investment in precision irrigation system. The scheme will be
implemented by Ministries of Agriculture, Water Resources and Rural
Development. The Ministry of Rural Development will undertake rain
water conservation, construction of farm pond, water harvesting
structures, small check dams, contour bunding, etc. The MoWR, RD
&GR will undertake various measures for creation of assured irrigation
source, construction of diversion canals, field channels, water diversion/
lift irrigation, including development of water distribution systems. The
Ministry of Agriculture will promote efficient water conveyance and
precision water application devices like drips, sprinklers, pivots, rain-
guns in the farm Ò(Jal Sinchan) Ó, construction of micro-irrigation
structures to supplement source creation activities, extension activities
for promotion of scientific moisture conservation and agronomic
measures.
The Committee have also been informed that PMKSY envisage
decentralized ÔState level planning and projectised executionÕ structure
that allow States to draw up their own irrigation development plans
based on District Irrigation Plan (DIP) and State Irrigation Plan (SIP). It

76
aims to act as convergence platform for all water sector activities
including drinking water & sanitation, MGNREGA, application of science
& technology, etc. through comprehensive plan. State Level Sanctioning
Committee (SLSC) chaired by the Chief Secretary of the State will be
vested with the authority to oversee its implementation and sanction
projects.The programme is being supervised and monitored at Central
level by an Inter-Ministerial National Steering Committee (NSC)
constituted under the Chairmanship of Prime Minister with Union Ministers
from concerned Ministries. A National Executive Committee (NEC)
constituted under the Chairmanship of Vice Chairman, NITI Aayog is
overseeing programme implementation, allocation of resources, inter-
ministerial coordination, monitoring & performance assessment,
addressing administrative issues, etc.
The Committee have also been informed by the Ministry of Water
Resources, River Development and Ganga Rejuvenation that they have
included various components such as Minor Irrigation scheme below
2000 Hectare, repair, renovation and restoration of water bodies,
command area development and water management, use of recycle
water and ground water schemes proposed by the State Governments
under PMKSY for development of irrigation facilities in the Country. The
Committee have been assured that State Governments have been given
full autonomy to plan schemes for irrigation facilities in their States
under PMKSY and the Government is Committed to fund the projects
as per funding pattern.
The Committee are of view that convergence of scheme as envisaged
in PMKSY will go a long way to optimize utilization of funds for irrigation
development schemes. However , the Government is required to allocate
sufficient funds to Ministries involved for execution of schemes within
stipulated time.The Committee, therefore, recommends the Government
to make adequate allocation of funds for implementation of projects
under the scheme. The State Governments should also be provided
support for adequate technical support for planning of District irrigation
plan and State irrigation plan and execution of projects under the
scheme. The Committee, therefore, recommend the Government to
constitute a technical support team to assist at the Central Level to
assist the State Government in planning and implementation of projects
under the PMKSY . The Committee also desire the Government to take
steps for demarcation of beneficiary at District and Block level. The
Committee would also like to be apprised about the steps taken in this
regard within three months of presentation of scheme.

77
Reply of the Government
DAC&FW is implementing ÔPer Drop More CropÕ component of Pradhan
Mantri Krishi Sinchayee Yojana (PMKSY) which is operational from
2015-16. Per Drop More Crop mainly focuses on water use efficiency at
farm level through precision/Micro Irrigation. Under this component
assistance is provided to farmers for installation of Drip & Sprinkler
Irrigation systems.
During 2015-16 & 2016-17 an area of 14.11 lakh ha has been covered
under Micro Irrigation against the target of 13 lakh ha. During, current
year, target of 12 lakh ha under Micro Irrigation has been set against
which so far coverage of 2.46 lakh ha has been reported by States.
To reduce the water requirement in paddy cultivation, government
is promoting water conservation techniques like Direct Seeded Rice
(DSR) through seed drills and drum seeders, System of Rice Intensification
(SRI), alternate wetting & drying method, laser land leveling and adoption
of varieties which require less water, etc. Similarly, in case of sugarcane,
farmers are given advisories for adoption of modern agronomic practices
like raised bed sowing, alternate furrow irrigation, sprinkler irrigation,
drip irrigation, mulching, etc. are advocated. Besides, diversifying
cropping pattern from water guzzling crops to pulses, oilseeds, maize
and agro-forestry are also suggested.
Ninety-Nine (99) ongoing projects under Pradhan Mantri Krishi
Sinchayee Yojana (PMKSY) Accelerated Irrigation Benefits Programme
(AIBP) having irrigation potential of 76.03 lakh ha. have been identified,
in consultation with states for completion in phases up to December,
2019. For completion of these projects in a mission mode, funding
mechanism through NABARD has been approved by the Government for
both Central as well as State share. Further , a Mission has also been
established for implementation of these 99 projects. Funds are regularly
released to States based upon the proposals received from the States
and their eligibility as per the guidelines of the schemes. Central
Assistance (CA) released during 2016-17 is as under:
➢ C A released under AIBP : Rs. 3307.86 cr.
➢ C A released under CADWM : Rs. 853.95 cr.
➢ C A released to Polavaram Project Authority : Rs. 2514 cr.
➢ State Share released through NABARD : Rs. 3334.38 cr.
In view of the above, this Ministry has already arranged requisite
funding to implement the 99 identified projects.

78
Technical support, if any required by the States is provided by
Central Water Commission (CWC). This Ministry has also prepared detailed
ÔGuidelines for planning and design of piped irrigation network Õ and
circulated to States during Jal Manthan-4 held on 28-29th July, 2017
with the suggestion to adopt Piped Distribution Network (PDN). These
guidelines shall help states in overcoming Land Acquisition problems
and savings in cost. Further , CWC is regularly monitoring these projects
and bring our short comings/remedial measures to the notice of project.
[Ministry of Agriculture & Farmers Welfare (Department of
Agricultural Research and Education), F .No. NRM/11(26)/2017-AFC (Pt.),
dated 03.11.2017]
Interlinking of Rivers
Recommendation (Para No. 21)
The Committee note that interlinking of river envisage transfer of
water from surplus to water deficit areas in the country. Inter-Linking
River Programme will help saving the people living in drought-prone
zones from hunger and people living in flood-prone areas from the
destruction caused by floods. The Committee were informed
thatimplementation of interlinking would give benefits of 25 million ha
of irrigation from surface water, 10 million ha by increased use of
ground water , raising the ultimate irrigation potential from 140 million
ha to 175 million ha and generation of 34 million KW of power apart
from other benefits. However , the Committee are distressed to know
that despite considerable lapse of time, the Government is yet to made
any significant headway towards interlinking of rivers in the country
except two projects namely Ken-Betwa Project and Pancheswar Project
wherein, understanding has been reached between the Government of
Uttar Pradesh and Madhya Pradesh and with Government of Nepal
respectively. In this regard, the Committee were informed that
constitutional provisions regarding division of Water resources restrict
power of Central Government for planning and implementation of
projects on water resources management such as interlinking of rivers.
The Committee were also informed that many State Governments have
raised objections on these projects.
The Committee are of view that projects for interlinking of river
are crucial to solve the problems of water scarcity in various parts of
country. It will also be crucial to face challenges related to water
resource management due to climatic changes associated with global
warming. The Committee are, therefore, of opinion that Government

79
should comprehensively examine environmental, socio-economic and
financial aspects related to interlinking of rivers and formulate a detailed
project for interlinking of rivers in order to effectively utilize water
resources of the country for the benefit of the masses. further , the
Committee are not convinced with government’s contention about
limitation posed on Central Government for interlinking of rivers due
to constitutional provisions. The Committee are of view that had sincere
efforts been made in consultation with the State Governments concerned,
consensus could have reached among all stakeholders for interlinking of
rivers as it being a win-win formula for all. The Committee, therefore,
recommend the Government (Ministry of Water Resources, River
Development & Ganga Rejuvenation) to initiate the process of
consultations with all stakeholders for constitution of an Empowered
Group of State Ministers on Interlinking of Rivers on the pattern of
Empowered Group of State Finance Ministers on Goods and Services
Tax. The Committee hope that constitution of such group by the Central
Government will help in examining all facets related to interlinking of
rivers and achieve the desired goal.
Reply of the Government
Under the National Perspective Plan for water resources development
through inter basin transfer of water from water surplus basins to
water-deficit basins, prepared by the then Ministry of Irrigation (now
Ministry of Water Resources, RD & GR), NWDA has identified 30 links
(16 under Peninsular Component & 14 under Himalayan Component) for
preparation of Feasibility Reports/Detailed Project Reports. The pre-
feasibility report of the all 30 links have been prepared and circulated
to the concerned State Governments by the NWDA. After survey and
investigations, Feasibility Reports of 14 links under Peninsular Component
and Feasibility Reports of 2 links (Indian portion) and draft Feasibility
Reports of 7 links (Indian portion) under Himalayan Component have
been completed.
Consensus Building process
The efforts of consensus building for preparation of the Detailed
Project Report of the Mahanadi-Godavari link, a mother link of 9 link
system viz., Mahanadi-Godavari-Krishna-Pennar-Palar-Cauvery-Vaigai-
Gundar linkage with concerned State of Odisha are under process. Also
efforts are being made with the concerned States for preparation of
DPR of MSTG link project.
The Government is pursuing the Interlinking of Rivers program in a
consultative manner. The implementation of Interlinking of Rivers (ILR)
projects involves various steps such as preparation of Pre-feasibility

80
Reports (PFRs)/Feasibility Reports (FRs) of links, negotiation and
consensus among concerned States, agreement with neighbouring
countries if link involves area lying in those countries, preparation of
DPRs of the projects, clearance from appraisal agencies which includes
clearance by Ministry of Environment & Forests and Climate Change
(MoEF & CC) and Ministry of Tribal Affairs (MoTA), technoeconomic
clearance by Advisory Committee on Irrigation, Flood control &
Multipurpose projects of MoWR, RD&GR, investment clearance,
finalisation of funding pattern, water sharing, implementation mechanism
like constitution of SPV/Board, etc., and the time required for the
completion of the project as per DPR.
The stage of implementation of a project would be reached after
its DPR is prepared with the consensus of concerned States and the
requisite statutory clearances are obtained. Thus, the implementation
of the projects will take varying periods of time. The Hon Õble Supreme
Court vide its judgment dated 27.02.2012 in the Writ Petition (Civil)
No. 512 of 2002 on ÔNetworking of Rivers Õ alongwith Writ Petition No.
668 of 2002 has directed the Union of India and particularly the Ministry
of Water Resources to constitute a Committee under the chairmanship
of Hon Õble Minister of Water Resources for the implementation of
Interlinking of Rivers Programme. In compliance, MoWR, RD and GR has
constituted a committee called Special Committee on Interlinking of
Rivers vide Gazette Notification dated 23rd September, 2014.
The Union Cabinet while approving the constitution of Special
Committee for ILR in its meeting held on 24th July, 2014 directed that
a committee comprising of experts be constituted to look into the
issues relating to inter linking of rivers. In compliance to the direction
of Union Cabinet, MoWR, RD & GR vide O.M. dated 13th April, 2015 has
constituted a Task Force for Interlinking of Rivers (TF-ILR) under the
Chairmanship of Shri B.N. Navalawala, Chief Advisor , MoWR, RD&GR.
Minister for Water and/or Irrigation with Principal Secretary from each
of the concurring States are the Members of Special Committee in
addition to the Chief Secretaries of involved States experts and social
activist. Task Force will assist the Special Committee for ILR and MoWR,
RD & GR regarding the implementation of ILR Programme.
As decided in the first meeting of Special Committee for ILR held
on 17.10.2014 at New Delhi to constitute four specific Sub-Committees;
(i) Sub-committee for comprehensive evaluation of various studies/
reports, (ii) Sub-Committee for system studies for identifications of
most appropriate alternate plan, (iii) Sub-Committee for restructuring
of National Water Development Agency, and (iv) Sub-Committee for

81
consensus building through negotiations and arriving at agreement
between concerned States. The Sub-Committee at serial no. (iv) is
already functioning as consensus group under Chairman, CWC and
members from the concerned States, other three sub-committees have
been constituted vide MoWR, RD&GR letter dated 13.02.2015.
The Special Committee is taking ahead implementation of ILR
Programme in the consultative manner.
[Ministry of Agriculture & Farmers Welfare (Department of
Agricultural Research and Education), F .No. NRM/11(26)/2017-AFC (Pt.),
dated 03.11.2017]
Rejuvenation of Traditional Water Storage System
Recommendation (Para No. 22)
Traditional water bodies such as tanks, ponds, baories etc. in various
parts of the country has served as important source not only to meet
the requirement of drinking water but also as an important source of
irrigation. These structures have also served as excellent water harvesting
mechanism maintaining ground water level. However , the Committee
are distressed to observe that majority of traditional water storage
structures have disappeared due to lack of maintenance and illegal
encroachment. In this regard, the Committee have been informed that
the Government have started a scheme for Repair, Renovation and
Restoration (RRR) of water bodies since Tenth Plan for comprehensive
improvement and restoration of water bodies thereby increasing tank
storage capacity, Ground Water Recharge, increased availability of
drinking water , improvement in agriculture/horticulture productivity,
etc. However, the Committee are distressed to note that the Government
have been able to complete repair renovation and restoration of 11640
water bodies against the target of 15,326 under the scheme.
The Committee are of opinion that traditional water bodies are
prime example of our knowledge and engineering skill of our ancestors
which enabled them to face the challenges of water shortage. Restoration
and rejuvenation of traditional water bodies can emerge as one of
bulwark of our preparedness for making Indian agriculture climate
resilient. The Committee, therefore, recommend the Government
(Ministry of Water Resources, River Development & Ganga Rejuvenation)
to enhance the target for repair , renovation and Rejuvenation of
traditional water storage structure based upon a comprehensive study
for identification of all traditional water storage structure in the country.
The Committee also desire the Government to include the rejuvenation

82
of dead stream of rivers and numerous small rivers in the country under
the scheme through construction of check dams so that water resources
of these rivers can be utilized for the benefit of farmers. The Committee
would like to be apprised of the steps taken in this regard within three
months of presentation of Report.
Reply of the Government
Works related to water resources development and management
are planned, funded, executed and maintained by the concerned state
government themselves as per their own priority and resources. In
order to supplement the efforts of State Government, Government of
India provides technical and financial assistance to State Government
to encourage sustainable development of water resources through various
schemes including Repair, Renovation and Restoration (RRR) of water
bodies etc. The information pertaining RRR of water bodies being
implemented by this Ministry is given in the following paras:
Repair, Renovation and Restoration (RRR) of water bodies is now
part of PMKSY (Har Khet Ko Pani). This scheme has multiple objectives
such as reclamation of the lost irrigation potential, improvement of
catchment area of the tanks, increase in storage capacity of water
bodies and development of tourism and cultural activities. Therefore,
it was visualized that this programme will go in a long way in enhancing
water availability in different parts of the country.
During the X Plan, the Pilot Scheme namely ÒRepair, Renovation and
Restoration (RRR) of Water Bodies directly linked to agriculture was
launched in January 2005. Under this scheme works in 1085 water
bodies were completed and an irrigation potential of 0.78 lakh ha. was
restored. Based on success of the pilot scheme, two schemes of RRR,
one with domestic support & other with external assistance were
launched. Under the scheme of external assistance, 8747 water bodies
were proposed for restoration in the states of Andhra Pradesh including
Telangana (3000), Karnataka (1224), Odisha (900) and Tamil Nadu (5763).
About 8054 water bodies have been reported to be revived under the
scheme of external support. Under the scheme of domestic support, a
total of 3341 water bodies were taken up for restoration in 12 States
out of which 2198 water bodies have been completed till date and an
irrigation potential of 1.093 lakh ha has been reported to be restored.
In XII Plan, 1345 water bodies have been included under this scheme
and an irrigation potential of 1.0187 lakh ha is planned to be revived
through the revival of these water bodies. So far , central assistance of
Rs. 264.67 crore has been released under this scheme upto 03/2017.

83
Further , convergence of Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment
Guarantee Scheme (MGNREGS) with PMKSY-HKKP has been made. Under
MGNREGS being implemented by Ministry of Rural Development,
assistance is provided for water conservation related activities including
check dams, creation of farm ponds etc. 2264 Mission Water Conservation
Blocks have been identified under it and at least 65% of Natural Resources
Management (NRM) expenditure is incurred on these blocks. Under
MGNREGS, an amount of Rs. 52,200 cr . has been spent on water related
activities (upto 31.7.2017) as per information available with this Ministry.
During XII Plan, total 1354 water bodies from 9 States, at the cost
of Rs. 1025.8723 crore with target restoration area of 112167 ha, were
approved for their inclusion under the scheme of RRR of Water Bodies.
Out of these 1354 water bodies, RRR work of 691 water bodies have
been completed with CCA restoration of more than 70000 ha. The
works of rest are under progress.
Government of India is committed to accord high priority to water
conservation and its management to this effect Pradhan Mantri Krishi
Sinchayee Yojana (PMKSY) has been formulated with the vision of
extending the coverage of irrigation ÔHar Khet ko pani Õ (HKKP) and
improving water use efficiency ÔMore crop per dropÕ in a focused manner
with end to end solution on source creation, distribution, management,
field application and extension activities. The Cabinet Committee on
Economic Affairs chaired by Hon Õble Prime Minister accorded approval
of Pradhan Mantri Krishi Sinchayee Yojana (PMKSY) in its meeting held
on 1st July, 2015.
PMKSY has been formulated amalgamating ongoing schemes viz.
Accelerated Irrigation Benefit Programme (AIBP) of the Ministry of Water
Resources, River Development & Ganga Rejuvenation (MoWR, RD & GR),
Integrated Watershed Management Programme (IWMP) of Department
of Land Resources (DoLR) and the On Farm Water Management (OFWM)
of Department of Agriculture and Cooperation (DAC). PMKSY has been
approved for implementation across the country with an outlay of
Rs. 50,000 crore in five years.
Under PMKSY , RRR of Water Bodies scheme is a part of sub-component
Har Khet Ko Pani. Under PMKSY the Cabinet has approved for an outlay
of Rs. 9050 crores for PMKSY (HKKP) component with a target to create
21.0 lakh ha of irrigation potential including 1.50 lakh ha from RRR of
water bodies scheme.
Necessary changes in policy & funding guidelines may be taken at
the appropriate level to implement the recommendation of committee

84
to enhance the target for Repair , Renovation and Rejuvenation of
traditional water storage structure based upon a comprehensive study
for identification of all traditional water storage structure in the country.
Further , the decision to include the rejuvenation of dead streams of
rivers and numerous small rivers in the country under the scheme
through construction of check dams so that water resources of these
rivers can be utilized for the benefit of farmers can also be taken at
appropriate level.
[Ministry of Agriculture & Farmers Welfare (Department of
Agricultural Research and Education), F .No. NRM/11(26)/2017-AFC (Pt.),
dated 03.11.2017]
Groundwater Resources Management
Recommendations (Para No. 23)
The Committee note that about 60% of the groundwater in the
country i.e. 432 billion cubic metre from can be put to beneficial use.
total groundwater resources over the years, due to enhanced availability
of energy sources such as electricity and petroleum, groundwater
emerged as a secure source of supply for irrigation and become one of
backbone of green revolution in the country. However , due to
indiscriminate use has led to environmental consequences such as
groundwater depletion, pollution and water quality deterioration. The
Committee have been informed that Central Ground Water Board (CGWB)
has identified 1071 blocks/talukas under over exploited category for
groundwater. They have also notified about 150 blocks/talukas as most
vulnerable areas which witness serious scarcity of water and are
vulnerable even to sustain drinking water requirement unless addressed
for groundwater recharge and its regulated use. The Committee also
note that situation of ground water exploitation in many States is more
than groundwater replenishment. Level of ground water development
in States/UTs like Punjab, Rajasthan, Delhi and Haryana are at the
level of 172%, 137%, 137%, and 133% respectively. The Committee also
note that situation in Tamil Nadu, Uttar Pradesh and Himachal Pradesh
is critical since groundwater development are at the level of 77%, 74%
and 71% respectively. The Committee also note that study on excess
groundwater exploitation conducted by ICAR has also confirmed
decreasing level of groundwater. The study have also shown sea water
intrusion in South Saurashtra coast of Gujrat due to over exploitation
of groundwater.
The Committee note that regulation of groundwater withdrawal,
artificial recharge of groundwater , rain water harvesting, proper
implementation of Watershed management programmes, Roof top water

85
harvesting in urban areas and conjunctive use of surface water with
ground water are some of the ways whereby, ground water level can
be maintained. The Committee also note that Government is
implementing schemes such as Integrated Watershed Management
Programmes (IWMP), artificial recharge project under central sector
scheme and Rooftop rainwater harvesting scheme for enhancement of
ground water level in the country. The Committee have been informed
that 8,214 watershed projects covering an area of 39.07 million hectare
have been sanctioned under Integrated Watershed Management
Programme which has now been subsumed as watershed development
component of ÔPradhan Mantri krishi Sinchayee YojanaÕ. The Committee
also note that Central Ground Water Board (CGWB) has taken steps
such as notification of Blocks for regulation of ground water development
and management, appointed Authorized Officer(s) under section 4 of
the Environment Protection Act, 1986 to oversee ground water
management, framed guidelines for ground water abstraction to accord
ÔNo Objection CertificateÕ to Industries/Infrastructure/Mining proposal,
criteria for recharge of ground water by Water Intensive Industries’,
etc. The CGWB has submitted EFC proposal for artificial recharge in
6 over exploited ground water Blocks in Andhra Pradesh, Madhya Pradesh,
Punjab, Tamil Nadu, and Uttar Pradesh. Additionally, CGWB has also
submitted plan for artificial recharge in 442 over exploited ground
water Blocks in Andhra Pradesh, Haryana, Karnataka, Maharashtra,
Punjab, Rajasthan, Tamil Nadu, Telangana and Uttar Pradesh.
The Committee are of view that Ground water , being one of the
important source of fresh water on earth, should be effectively managed.
Over exploitation of ground water above the replenishment rate not
only hampers equitable distribution of water but also causes problems
such as water pollution, intrusion of sea water, etc., thus affecting the
quality of water. Further , indiscriminate use of ground water in over-
exploited Blocks of the country by the water extensive industries put
life of residents in danger by denying them access to drinking water.
The Committee, therefore, recommend the Government (Ministry of
Water Resources, River Development and Ganga Rejuvnation and Central
Groundwater Board) to strictly implement guidelines for use of ground
water in the country and issuance of ÔNo Objection Certificate (NOC) Õ
to water intensive Industries.The Committee desire the Government to
submit a report on NOC to the industries for withdrawal of ground
water in notified area by the Authorised Officers appointed by the
CGWB and compliance of conditions attached within one month of
presentation of this report. The Committee also desire the Government
to take steps for timely completion of sanctioned watershed projects
within stipulated time period so that ground water level could be
restored in over exploited groundwater areas.

86
The Committee are also of view that farming of less water intensive
crops should be promoted in over exploited ground water Blocks in the
country in order to maintain ground water level. There is also need for
financial assistance to the farmers for farming of less water intensive
crops and adoption of advanced irrigation methods such as sprinkler or
drip irrigation. The Committee, therefore, recommend the Government
(Department of Agriculture, Cooperation & Farmers welfare) to make
efforts for awareness of farmers regarding problems associated with
indiscriminate use of groundwater for farming. The Committee also
desire the Government to formulate a plan in consultation with the
State Government concerned for providing financial assistance to farmers
in over exploited ground water blocks in the country for farming of less
water intensive crops and adoption of advanced irrigation methods
such as sprinkler or drip irrigation.
Reply of the Government
The CGWA is according NOC for the industries, infrastructure and
mining projects as per the guidelines which are being revised from time
to time. As per the guidelines in vogue, the water intensive industries
seeking NOC has got specific component of mandatory recharge measures
to be fulfilled in order to consider the proposal for issuance of NOC.
While according NOC to the water intensive industries, necessary
compliance conditions as stipulated in the guidelines is indicated for
strict compliance by the project proponents.
As regards to the NOC issued for the withdrawal of groundwater in
the notified areas to the water intensive industry, it is to mention that
in the notified areas authorized officers are according NOC for drinking
and domestic purposes only. As such, no NOCs have been accorded by
the authorized officer appointed by CGWB in the notified areas. However,
CGWA has issued NOC to the water intensive industries which were
prior to the notification. Further after introduction of NOCAP system,
the water intensive industries which are operating prior to the
notification were issued NOC as per the directives of Hon Õble NGT . The
details of NOCs accorded by CGWA to the water intensive industries are
given in Annexure-XVII.
The Pradhan Mantri Krishi Sinchayee Yojana (PMKSY) was launched
on 1st July, 2015. Per Drop More Crop (PDMC) component of the scheme
focuses on water use efficiency at farm level through precision/
micro-irrigation. Main objectives of PDMC are:
1. Increase area under micro-irrigation technologies to enhance
water use efficiency.

87
2. Increase productivity of crops and income of farmers through
precision water management.
3. Promote micro-irrigation technologies in water intensive/
consuming crops like sugarcane, banana, cotton etc. and
give adequate focus to extend coverage of field crops under
micro-irrigation technologies.
4. Make potential use of micro-irrigation systems for promoting
fertigation.
5. Promote micro-irrigation technologies in water scarce, water
stressed and critical ground water blocks/districts.
6. Establish convergence and synergy with activities of on-going
programmes and schemes, particularly with created water
source for its potential use, integration of solar energy for
pressurized irrigation etc.
7. Promote, develop and disseminate micro-irrigation technology
for agriculture and horticulture development with modern
scientific knowledge.
During 2015-16 & 2016-17 an area of 14.11 lakh ha has been covered
under Micro-Irrigation against the target of 13 lakh ha. During current
year, target of 12 lakh ha under Micro-Irrigation has been set against
which so far coverage of 2.46 lakh ha. has been report by States.
Besides above, water conservation and drought proofing activities are
also supported under PDMC to supplement watershed and MGNREGS
work. In the last 2 years 56506 structures with irrigation potential of
114230 ha. have been created. These structures not only help in life
saving irrigation and moisture conservation, but also in groundwater
recharge.
[Ministry of Agriculture & Farmers Welfare (Department of
Agricultural Research and Education), F .No. NRM/11(26)/2017-AFC (Pt.),
dated 03.11.2017]
National Innovations on Climate Resilient Agriculture (NICRA)
Recommendation (Para No. 25)
The Committee note that National Innovations on Climate Resilient
Agriculture (NICRA) initiated by ICAR as a network project since
2010-11 encompasses multi-pronged strategic research, technology
development, capacity building of stakeholders and technology
demonstrations at farmer Õs fields. The Committee have been informed

88
that NICRA has three components namely Strategic Research, Technology
Demonstration and Institutional Intervention.
The Committee note that strategic research component under NICRA
aims to evolve crop varieties tolerant to climatic stresses like floods,
droughts, frost, inundation due to cyclones and heat waves. The
Committee have been informed that 40 Research Institutes of ICAR are
conducting research under Strategic Research Component covering
various research theme areas viz., development of multiple stress
Tolerant Crop Genotypes, Natural Resource Management, Green House
Gas Emissions, Climate Resilient Horticulture, Marine, Brackish and Inland
Fisheries, Heat Tolerant Livestock, Small Ruminants and Poultry. The
Committee have also been informed that NICRA projects helped to
create infrastructure and necessary modern equipments such as high
through-put pheno-typing platforms, Free Air Temperature Elevation
(FATE), Carbon Dioxide and Temperature Gradient T unnels (CTGT), high
performance computers, automatic weather stations, growth chambers,
large glass houses, animal calorimeter, shipping vessel, flux towers and
satellite receiving station in ICAR institutes involved in NICRA projects.
The Committee note that these institutes have completed 32 out of 52
research projects sanctioned under NICRA. The Committee also note
that ICAR is making efforts to involve State Agricultural Universities/
Research Institutes in public/private sectors as 11-State Agricultural
Universities from different States of the country and 2 Research Institutes
in private sectors as a partner in NICRA projects.
The Committee note that Technology Demonstration Component
(TDC) under NICRA aims at demonstration of location specific practices
and technologies to enable farmers cope with current climatic variability.
Demonstration of available location-specific technologies related to
natural resource management, crop production, livestock and fisheries
is being taken up in the climatically vulnerable districts for enhancing
the adaptive capacity and resilience against climatic variability. The
Committee have been informed that technologies with a potential to
cope with climate variability are being demonstrated under Technology
Demonstration Component (TDC) in 121 most vulnerable districts selected
across the country through Krishi Vigyan Kendras (KVKs).
The Committee note that institutional intervention Component under
NICRA aims at creating enabling support system in the village comprising
of strengthening of existing institutions or initiating new ones (Village
Level Climate Risk Management Committees (VCRMC), establishment
and management of Custom Hiring Centers (CHCs) for farm implements,
seed bank, fodder bank, creation of commodity groups, water sharing

89
groups, community nursery and initiating collective marketing by tapping
value chains. The Committee have been informed that 100 Custom
Hiring Centres (CHCs) for farm machinery were set up under NICRA
project which are being managed by Village Climate Risk Management
Committee (VCRMC) comprising of villagers. The Committee have also
been informed that a module on use of ICT for knowledge empowerment
of the communities in terms of climate risk management is also being
planned in select KVKs for generation of locally relevant content and
its dissemination in text and voice enabled formats. The Committee
also note that 121 KVKs associated under NICRA projects have also
taken initiatives such as participatory village level seed production of
short duration, drought and flood tolerant varieties, establishment of
seed banks involving these varieties were established in the KVKs,
demonstration and of improved varieties of fodder seeds and
establishment of fodder bank in NICRA villages.
The Committee are of considered view that investment in research
and development in agriculture is pre-requisite for making Indian
agriculture climate resilient. There is urgent need for enhancing public
investment in agriculture research to make it at forefront of country’s
effort to ensure food security of country threatened by risk associate
with climatic changes. Against this background, National Innovations on
Climate Resilient Agriculture (NICRA) projects which tries to link strategic
research with technology demonstration and capacity building of farmers
and other stakeholders could help the country to emerge as pioneer
country in agriculture filed in coming decades. However , the Committee
are of opinion that there is need to enhance allocations under the
NICRA so that scientists do not face resource crunch in their pursuit to
solve problems of Indian agriculture and to make it climate resilient.
The Committee, therefore, recommend the Government to enhance
allocations for NICRA scheme in upcoming fiscals. The Committee also
desire the ICAR to analyze performance of NICRA projects to make it
more outcome oriented. Impact of institutional intervention such as
technology demonstrations, custom, hiring, seed banks, fodder banks
etc. on capacity building of farmers and enhancing agriculture
productivity should be analyzed so that these can be replicated at all
India level. The Committee like to be apprized about the outcomes of
evaluation of NICRA projects within three months of presentation of
this report.
Reply of the Government
Climate change has become an important area of concern for India
to ensure food and nutritional security for growing population. To meet

90
the challenges of sustaining domestic food production in the face of
changing climate and generate information on adaptation and mitigation
in agriculture to contribute to global fora like UNFCC, it is important
to have concerted research on this important subject. With this
background, ICAR launched a major project ÔNational Initiative on
Climate Resilient Agriculture Õ (NICRA) during XI Plan in February 2011
and now during XII Plan it is referred as ÔNational Innovations in Climate
Resilient Agriculture Õ (NICRA). The project had an overall outlay of
Rs. 35,000 Lakhs for the XI Plan, Rs. 60,000 Lakhs in XII Plan period.
However , as directed by the ICAR proposal for Rs. 17362.50 Lakhs for
the period of 2017-20 under NICRA has been submitted which is about
48% of the previous plan periods budget allocation. Enhanced budget
allocation for the R&D under NICRA will enable the scientist of the
country to sustain the efforts initiated during the past 6 years for
arriving the solutions to deal with changing climate.
At the end of the XII Five Year Plan the NICRA project has been
evaluated by third party i.e. Interco-operation Social Development India
(ICSD), Secunderabad. The firm visited several partner institutes of
NICRA, interacted with scientists, farmers and other stakeholders and
submitted a report. The executive summary of the third party evaluation
firm is as under.
To sustain agricultural production, food security of the nation, and
agriculture- dependent rural livelihoods through adaptation to climate
change on one hand, and to mitigate the Green House Gas (GHG)
emissions from agriculture and allied sectors on the other , the ICAR has
launched a major Project entitled, National Initiative on Climate Resilient
Agriculture during 2010-11under the XI Plan, which later metamorphosed
into the National Innovations in Climate Resilient Agriculture (NICRA)
under the XII Plan. The project consists of four components viz. Strategic
Research, Technology Demonstration, Capacity Building and Sponsored/
Competitive Grants.
The Central Research Institute for Dryland Agriculture (CRIDA) is
the lead Institute and the National Nodal point for NICRA which is being
implemented at large number of Research Institutes of ICAR, State
Agricultural Universities and KVKs and expanded in 151 districts. CRIDA
has designated the Inter-cooperation Social Development India (ICSD)
for conducting the Third-Party Evaluation of NICRA project being
implemented at different locations across the country, to assess the
progress made during the past six years (2011-17) in relation to the
objectives set in terms of technical, institutional and environmental
progress, both in Strategic Research and Technology Demonstration
components.

91
Evaluation of the Strategic Research Component (SRC) of NICRA has
been carried out in 10 ICAR core Institutes representing all sector-wise
Crops, Horticulture, Natural Resource Management, Fisheries and
Livestock & Poultry. Similarly, 18 KVKs representing all the 8 ATARIs also
have been evaluated.
Evaluation of Strategic Research Component addressed various
aspects of the project viz., Progress of relevant research, salient
achievements; Status of Infrastructure facilities, assessment of their
quality; Quantum of fund sanctioned and expenditure; Documentation
of research and technical findings in the form of publications; and
Identifying constrains and bottlenecks in the implementation of NICRA
project. Whereas evaluation of Technology Demonstration Component
(TDC) involved Assessing the impact and usefulness of the technology
interventions; Usefulness of capacity building and training programmes
organized and Identifying best practices for up scaling them through
other development programmes.
NICRA, over the past six years, has made considerable progress.
The most important contributions like Contingency Planning and
Vulnerability Atlas have gained visibility across Ministries in the
Government of India. Interface meetings have been conducted regularly
covering 5 States during 2014, 11 States in 2015 and 12 States during
2016. The purpose of these interface meetings was to appraise the
seasonal forecast of monsoon, their implications for the respective
States and to develop strategies to overcome the weather aberrations
and to harness the better monsoon to enhance and sustain the food
production. So far , contingency plans have been completed for 623
districts and are being updated regularly. However , it is very pertinent
to regularly update Contingency Plans and enable to implement these
Plans by providing technical backstop to DAC and respective State
Governments.
One of the major achievements so far in the NICRA project, is
development and standardization of state-of-the-art infrastructure for
climate change research such as High Throughput Plant Phenomics
facilities, Free Air Temperature Environment (FATE), Carbon dioxide
Temperature Gradient (CTGC), Eddy Covariance Towers, Automatic
Weather Stations, Satellite Data Reception System, Rainout shelter
facility, Animal Calorimeter , CO
2 Environmental Chambers, Custom
designed animal shed, Research Shipping Vessel, etc. These facilities
have been established to support strategic research aimed at
understanding how plants, livestock and fish respond to higher CO 2 and
temperature conditions. Standardized the techniques for measurement
of GHG emissions in different crop, livestock and marine ecosystems,

92
and estimates of carbon sequestration potential through major
agroforestry systems in the country. Extensive field phenotyping of
germplasm of crops (rice, wheat, maize, pigeonpea, black gram, tomato)
to multiple abiotic stresses is under progress, which will lead to
development of varieties and hybrids to cope up with climate change
and variability. Natural Resource Management Technologies such as
Biochar, Conservation Agriculture, Water footprint and emission reduction
through efficient energy management are being developed. Unique traits
for thermal tolerance in livestock, has been mapped, invented heat &
cold mixture for poultry, sheep and goat. Developed several technologies
in feed management, breed improvement and shelter management to
cope with climate change in livestock. Relationship was established
between increase in Sea Surface Temperature (SST) and catch and
spawning in major marine fish species. Simulation modeling was used
to understand the climate change and impacts at regional and national
level.
Technology Demonstration Component (TDC) of NICRA is being taken
up in 121 climatically vulnerable districts of the country to enhance the
adaptive capacity and to enable farmers cope with current climatic
variability. The location specific technologies which are developed by
the National Agricultural Research System (NARS), which can impart
resilience against climatic vulnerability, are being demonstrated by
involving Krishi Vigyan Kendras (KVKs) and Agricultural Technology
Application Research Institutes (ATARIs). The project addresses
predominant climatic vulnerabilities being witnessed in the country,
viz., drought, heat wave, cold wave, flood, cyclones, etc. The resilient
technologies were demonstrated in a participatory mode involving
farmers and the innovation of the project is keeping the communities
in the forefront by establishing innovative institutions at the village
level such as Village Level Climate Risk Management Committee (VCRMC),
seed bank, fodder bank, etc.
As a part of the technology demonstrations, more than 1000 rain
water harvesting structures (farm ponds, check dams, percolation pond,
jalkund etc.) were constructed/renovated, and 100000 m
3 additional
rainwater storage capacity was created resulting in providing
opportunities for critical irrigation for addressing midseason drought
and enhanced improvement in the cropping intensity upto 120% in
several villages. Location specific In-situ moisture conservation and
planting methods were demonstrated to improve the soil moisture
availability at the root zone and reduce the impact of dry spells. These
technologies contributed to improvement in the productivity of crops
by 1520% at several locations. A number of short duration and drought

93
escaping varieties were demonstrated in the NICRA villages resulting in
yield advantages in Soybean (22-37%), Pigeonpea (23-33%), Pearl millet
(10-21%), Paddy (5-14%), Sesame (20-28%) and Chickpea (14-39%). In
frequently flood affected regions, flood tolerant varieties of paddy
viz., Swarna sub1, MTU-1061, MTU-1140, etc. have reached large number
of farmers and replaced traditional long duration varieties. Intercropping
systems performed better than sole crops during dry spells resulted in
improving yields ranging from 10 to 35.2% in several frequently drought
affected states. Improved cultivars of fodder crops suitable for both
the kharif and rabi were demonstrated resulting in improvement in the
green fodder availability and consequently milk production in several
NICRA villages. Custom hiring centres were established for farm
implements in all the NICRA villages for ensuring timeliness of farm
operations during the limited period of moisture availability in rainfed
areas. In order to make communities understand the intricacies and the
manifestations of climate change and variability, extensive capacity
building of communities on various facets of climate change is being
taken up. Capacity building on various resilient practices/technologies,
location specific mitigation and adaptation strategies, use of farm
machinery, seed bank, fodder bank etc. are being taken up to enhance
capacities of communities for better adoption of resilient practices.
During the past six years, 10,130 Capacity Building programs have been
organized benefitting 4.1 Lakh stakeholders across the country. These
sensitization and capacity building programmes organized will augur
well for better acceptance of the outputs that emanate from NICRA.
NICRA project is contributing to several national projects i.e., INDC,
BUR, NAMAs, NMSA and also to Missions under National Action Plan on
Climate Change. Representatives from other Ministries viz., Earth
Sciences, Environment, Forest & Climate Change, Rural Development,
Water Resources, Science & Technology etc. are members of High Level
Monitoring Committee of NICRA, which is a highest decision taking body
of this project. Development of contingency plans, sensitization of
development departments about the implementation of these plans
and sharing of experiences in establishing climate resilient villages with
other developing and developed countries at the COP/MOP meeting of
UNFCCC is noteworthy and further help in scaling up of resilient practices
in India and in other developing countries as well.
Apart from the third party evaluation, evaluation of the interventions
is being taken up in the TDC of NICRA and the details are reported in
the annual reports of the project. Some of the salient aspects are given
below:

94
Custom Hiring Centers (CHCs) were established in all the NICRA
villages to meet various farm machinery needs of the communities,
such as timely sowing, intercultural operations especially in small farms
and also to support various natural resources management interventions
such as in-situ moisture conservation, mulching, residue incorporation
instead of burning, zero tillage and water saving irrigation technology
(drip, sprinkler, raingun, etc.). Farmers in the NICRA village hire this
equipment from the CHCs by paying nominal rent during the cropping
season for taking up various farm operations. Most popular implements
used in these CHCs are rotavator, power tiller , furrow irrigated raised
bed planter, happy seeder , multi crop planter , zero till drill, seed cum
fertilizer drill, drum seeder , etc.
The effect of the custom hiring centers in timeliness of farm
operations and other interventions is being assessed every year in terms
of the crop yields, resource use efficiency, cost minimisation, etc. The
impact of the equipment of CHC at some of the KVKs assessed during
the year 2015-16 is furnished below:
¥ Demonstrations of zero till drill for wheat and gram in Manjhi
village of Nawadah district were taken up in an area of
16 ha in 32 farmersÕ fields. The practice resulted in increase
in yield by 11%, 13% in wheat and gram, respectively, as
compared to farmersÕ traditional practice (42.5q/ha, 18.3q/
ha).
¥ In Bharu village of Jhunjhunu district, earlier (before the
initiation of NICRA) farmers used to harvest their crops
manually and incur Rs. 9000-11000/ha on labour cost for
harvesting of wheat and barley. With the introduction of
reaper binder under CHC in the village, there is significant
reduction in cost and grain losses.
Impact of Reaper Binder for reducing cost and grain losses at Bharu
village, Jhunjhunu, Rajasthan
Parameter Impact
Area and crop 181ha; wheat & barley
Cost savingin harvesting compared to the 60%
farmers practice
Reduction in grain losses 10-15%
In Rasidpur village of Faridkot, generally the fields are not levelled,
which directly affect the sowing, nutrient supply, irrigation, plant growth
and yield. Demonstration of laser land levelling resulted in uniform

95
application of irrigation water and increased the yield of paddy and net
returns.
Impact of Laser Land Leveller for water saving in Faridkot, Punjab
Equipment used Laser land leveller
Area and farmers 296 ha and 98 farmers
Water saving 10-15%
Paddy yield 73q/ha
Net returns (Rs. ha) 68252
In Hengbung village Senapati, during 2015-16, 96 farmers have hired
different farm equipment and implements from CHC and covered 30 ha
area. A net income of Rs. 15,000 was generated by renting seven
equipments. In Aliba village of Mokokchung, demonstration of powertiller
in 37 ha area in 42 farmer Õs field was taken up. The farmers found this
machine very useful, as it was very convenient for carrying out
agricultural operations in small plots. Apart from this, farmers reported
transplanting of paddy in time and saved 65% of coston labour.
Village level seed bank
Availability of quality seed of resilient/improved cultivars is an
important constraint in several villages of the country and seed banks
were established to provide quality seed of resilient crop varieties to
famers in NICRA villages. Seed production of short duration, drought
and flood tolerant varieties was demonstrated in several NICRA villages
in rice, wheat, soybean, mustard, chickpea, sorghum, gram, foxtail
millet and contributed to their spread in the NICRA villages. VCRMCs
facilitated seed bank activities in the NICRA village.
Short duration drought tolerant varieties produced at farmers Õ level
for seed bank in NICRA villages
State District Crop Variety Quantity No.of Area
(qt)/ farmers (ha)
produced involved
12 3 4 5 6 7
Haryana Sirsa Wheat KRL-219, KRL-210 140 5 50
Jharkhand Chatra Rice, Mustard, Anjali, Siwani, Helna 96 6 7.4
Wheat

96
Godda Paddy, Mustard, Sahbhagi, Pusa-27, 6 47 4.8
Gram JAKI-9218
Bihar Buxar Rice, Chickpea, Naveen, Sahbhagi, 16 294 138.5
Wheat, Pusa 256, HD2967,
Pigeonpea WR 544, Narendra
Arhar 2
Supaul Paddy, Wheat Prabhat, Sahbhagi 2 12 40
DBW-14
West Bengal South Paddy Sabita 3 30 4
24 Paraganas
Assam Dibrugarh Rapeseed TS-38 50 20 15
Nagaland Mon Maize HQPM-1 1 10 4
Gonda Paddy, Wheat NDR 359, K-9533 104 312 118
Uttar Pradesh Jhansi Wheat & 114.5 22 30 78
Groundnut,
Sesamum,
Urd, Moong,
Lentil Raj-
4120, Raj-
3700, HUW-
234, PBW-502,
W.H.-147,
TAG-24, TG-37,
Azad-3, Shekhar,
Pragati, Shekhar,
KLB-320 & K-75
Sonbhadra Pigeonpea NDA-1 and 2 40 78 21
Maharashtra Amravati Soybean, JS-9305, Jacki-9218 124 123 25
Chickpea
Rajasthan Barmer Mothbean, RMO-435, GM-4, 8.2 30 42
Greengram, RGC-1017
Clusterbean
Madhya Pradesh Guna Soybean, Wheat, JS 95-60, HI 1544, 2587 220 293
Gram JG-14
Satna Greengram, Samrat, JR-201, 19 103 65
Rice, Mustard, Pusa Tarak, JG-
Chickpea 14JB-1, JW-17
Barley, Wheat
12 3 4 5 6 7

97
Fodder bank in NICRA Villages
To fulfill the requirement of the green fodder in NICRA villages
during off season, drought season etc., fodder bank was established
under NICRA project with high yielding improved varieties of fodder
such as multi cut fodder (pearl millet, sorghum), maize (Yashwant
grass, MP Chari, Africantall), hybridnapier (BNH-10, CO-3, NB), lucerne
(RL-88), multi cut bajra, oat (Kent, JHO-822), sorghum (CSV-15, CSH-
24), berseem (J.H.B-146, Vardan), maize (MPC hari). These varieties
have higher nutritive value and enabled farmers to have round the year
the production of green fodder.
In Bhalot village of Kutch district, during summer 2015-16, green
fodder of 108 tons of maize and sorghum and 184 tons of dry fodder
(sorghum and wheat straw) was collected from different sources. A
total of 364 tons of fodder was supplied to the cattle during summer
2016 from fodder bank. Milk production in the village increased due to
fodder bank and farmers purchased the fodder from fodder bank. Earlier,
before 2011, there was no dairy unit for milk marketing and one private
dairy was collecting on an average 110 liter of milk daily. While, today
one milk collection center has been established by ÒSarhad (Co-operative)
DairyÓ and collecting average 340-liter milk even during summer months.
Today, four persons have started large size dairy farm of cows and
buffalo. About 140 farm families rearing 365 cattle have benefited
from this activity.
[Ministry of Agriculture & Farmers Welfare (Department of
Agricultural Research and Education), F .No. NRM/11(26)/2017-AFC (Pt.),
dated 03.11.2017]
District Agricultural Contingency Plan
Recommendation (Para No. 26)
The Committee note that ICAR-CRIDA has prepared Agricultural
Contingency Plans for 614 districts recommending location specific
climate resilient crops and varieties for use by the farmers. These
agricultural contingency plans cover situation like delay in monsoon
onset, breaks in monsoon leading to early, mid and late-season droughts,
delayed or limited release of water for irrigation, floods, unseasonal
rains and extreme weather events such as heat wave, cold wave, frost,
hailstorm, cyclone etc. The contingency plans provide information on
technological interventions to be made during weather aberrations such
as alternate crops/varieties, management practices etc. which could
be followed by farmers. The Committee have been informed that

98
ICAR-CRIDA along with other ICAR institutes regularly interact with
officials of the State Government for Crop planning based on agricultural
contingency plan. The Committee have also been informed that States
of Andhra Pradesh, Telangana, Karnataka, Maharashtra, Madhya Pradesh,
Gujarat, Rajasthan, Jharkhand, Assam, Meghalaya and West Bengal are
making use of District Agricultural Contingency Plan.
The Committee are of view that Agricultural Contingency Plans
prepared the ICAR- CRIDA are one of the important contribution which
address unmet needs of intervention required in rainfed based agriculture
prevalent in our country. There is need to mainstreaming these
agricultural contingency plans for planning and management of
agricultural operation in our country. The Committee, therefore, desire
the Government to impress upon States to utilize these Contingency
plans and disseminate information among farmers to safeguard their
crops in case of any unforeseen weather conditions. The Committee
also desire the Government to take steps for enhancing awareness
among farmers regarding District Agricultural Contingency plans.
The Committee are also of view that these contingency plan will be
also useful to face the challenges associated with climatic changes.
However , there is need for regular revision/updation of agricultural
contingency plan based on feedback obtained from their implementation
in different States. The Committee, therefore, desire the ICAR to
periodically review these contingency plans based on inputs obtained
from field and latest technological inventions. The Committee also
recommend the Government to allocate additional fund for this purpose
to the ICAR-CRIDA.
Reply of the Government
ICAR-CRIDA along with other institutes, State Agriculture Universities
and KVKs are involved in the development of District Based Agriculture
Contingency Plans. A total of 623 districts plans have been prepared so
far. In order to operationalize these contingency plans, ICAR-CRIDA
along with Department of Agriculture, Co-operation & Farmers Welfare
and State Departments of Agriculture has been conducting Interface
meetings with different State Governments separately prior to the
commencement of Kharif season to enhance the preparedness of line
departments to meet the weather aberrations. The meetings are being
attended by senior officials from department of agriculture district
level officials, State agriculture universities and ICAR institutes located
in that particular State. During these meetings the seasonal forecast
(State specified) for the Kharif season made by IMD, SASCOF (South Asia

99
Seasonal Climate Outlook Forum) etc. were shared along with expected
deficient/excess rainfall scenario, possible contingency scenarios during
the ensuring kharif season and measures to be taken are discussed and
action plans are finalised. In addition, advisories for Rabi season covering
crops to be grown in groundwater irrigated and residual moisture based
systems are issues based on kharif season rainfall.During the last
3 years, about 34 meetings are organised in various States. The States
are chosen based on the forecast of the kharif season and the possibility
for deficit or excess rainfall. List of States where meetings were
organised during 2014-2017 are given below. The district based
agriculture contingency plans are also being updated with support from
DAC. The plans are being updated in consortium mode with participation
of State agriculture/horticulture and veterinary universities, Krishi Vigyan
Kendras and ICAR institutes. As part of this effort, a permanent
agriculture contingency cell with Director (Research) or Director
(extension) as Chairman supported by multi-disciplinary team is being
established at SAUs.
No. of Interface Meetings organized with various
State Governments
Year 2014 2015 2016 2017
1 2345
Telangana - Yes Yes -
Maharashtra - Yes Yes Yes
Madhya Pradesh - Yes Yes -
Andhra Pradesh - Yes Yes Yes
Karnataka Yes Yes Yes Yes
Haryana - Yes - -
Gujarat Yes Yes Yes -
Uttar Pradesh - Yes - -
Rajasthan Yes Yes Yes Yes
Chhattisgarh - Yes - -
Jharkhand - Yes Yes -
Bihar Yes - Yes -
Assam - - Yes -

100
Meghalaya - - Yes -
West Bengal - - Yes Yes
Odisha - - - Yes
National Consultation - Yes - -
Total 4 12 12 6
1 2345
The primary responsibility of managing drought (or any other natural
disaster) is that of the State Governments. The State Government is
primarily responsible for undertaking necessary relief in the wake of
natural calamities including drought. Government of India supplements
efforts of State Government with financial assistance.
State Governments have been advised inter alia, vide D.O. dated
02.05.2017, to review the state of preparedness in districts in line with
the District Agricultural Contingency Plans to manage any weather related
contingency to meet any eventualities arising out of an aberrant monsoon
to minimize the adverse impact thereof on the agriculture sector.
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
0
2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 20172011
Year
Number 6
1212
4
000
No. of Interface Meetings organised with various
State Governments across the years

101
Video Conferences with the State Governments were held by Crop
Weather Watch Group for Drought Management (CWWGDM) under the
Chairmanship of Additional Secretary & Central Drought Relief
Commissioner on weekly basis to keep a close watch on the developments
in the agricultural sector during June-September period (Monsoon season)
so that proactive measures can be taken to tackle any drought like
situation in the country. During these video conferences States were
also asked to keep their contingency plans ready and sensitize the
entire line department about implementing of the contingency plans in
case of an eventuality of drought.
[Ministry of Agriculture & Farmers Welfare (Department of
Agricultural Research and Education), F .No. NRM/11(26)/2017-AFC (Pt.),
dated 03.11.2017]
Recommendation (Para No. 28)
The Committee are of view that there is need for a dynamic and
vibrant system of Agriculture extension services in order to face the
climatic challenges associated with global warming. Farmers of the
country need to be supported through an extensive agriculture extension
services whereby they can be provided with all necessary inputs such
as weather advisory, crop selection, technologies, expert advice etc.
However, the Committee are of opinion that present system of Agriculture
Extension Services being implemented through State Governments and
supplemented through Central Government are not in position to provide
required support to the farmers in every nook and corner of the country.
The present system of agriculture extension is deficient in their
accessibility, infrastructure facilities, subject matter specialists and
flexibility required to solve challenges of modern day agriculture facing
climatic uncertainties associated with global warming. There is also
need to make agriculture extension services in every village of the
country. The Committee are of considered opinion that there is need
for reorientation of agriculture extension system, if country intends to
make Indian agriculture climate resilient. The Committee, therefore,
recommend the Government to take steps for modernization of
agriculture extension system in the country. The Committee desire the
Government to hold consultation with all State Governments in order
to revitalize the Agriculture Extension Services in the Country. The
Committee would like to be apprised about the steps taken by the
Government within three months of presentation of this Report.
Reply of the Government
To face the climatic challenges associated with global warming,
Krishi Vigyan Kendras (KVKs) are working in 121 climatically vulnerable

102
districts of the country. These KVKs are working on climate resilient
technologies with focus on suitable crops, varieties, natural resource
management, farm mechanization and custom hiring services and also
sensitizing stakeholders on drought, flood, frost, soil related issues and
ground water depletion. Under climate resilient programmes, KVKs have
developed climate smart villages which are weather smart (weather
forecast, seeds for needs, crop diversification and agro-forestry), water
smart (direct seeded rice, precision land levelling), carbon smart (zero
tillage, residue management), nutrient smart (site specific nutrient
management and legume integration), energy smart (zero tillage, residue
management, precision water management, direct seeded rice) and
knowledge smart (ICT , capacity development for women and youth).
Besides, the KVKs are also providing advisories to farmers on various
aspects of farming including weather based crop advisories on their
mobile phones through m-Kisan Portal.
Extension Reforms in India were plot tested in 28 districts of
7 State from 1998 to 2005. This successful experiment served as a basis
to launch the Scheme ÒSupport to State Extension Programme for
Extension Reforms Ó in the year 2005-06. It was revamped, expanded
and strengthened comprehensively in the year 2010 and 2014. Coverage
of the scheme was increased in a phased manner. It is currently
operational in 652 rural districts of 29 States and 3 UTs.
Extension services in the country have been revitalized making
these farmers friendly, farmer driven, farmer accountable and bottom
up planning on ATMA Model. Farmers capacity building and dissemination
of modern agricultural technologies etc. extension work is carried out
through Training of Farmers & Extension Functionaries, Exposure Visits
of Farmers, Demonstrations, Kisan Melas, Kisan Goshties, Farmers-
Scientist Interaction (FSI), Farmers Interest Groups (FIGs) and Farm School
in different thematic areas including climate resilient technologies.
In order to make agriculture extension services in every village of
the country, following key extension reforms are being promoted under
ATMA Scheme:
➢ Encouraging multi-agency extension strategies involving
Public/Private Extension Service Providers.
➢ Ensuring an integrated, broad-based extension delivery
mechanism consistent with farming system approach with a
focus on bottom up planning process.
➢ Adopting group approach to extension in line with the
identified needs and requirements of the farmers in the

103
form of Commodity Interest Groups (CIGs) & Farmers Interest
Groups (FIGs) and consolidate them as Farmers Producer
Organizations.
➢ Facilitating convergence of farmer centric programmes in
planning, execution and implementation.
➢ Addressing gender concerns by mobilizing farm women into
groups and providing training to them.
For meeting above key reforms/objectives through strengthened
institutional arrangements, dedicated manpower following strategy has
been provided in the Scheme at various level:
(i) At Village Level: A provision to identify a progressive farmer
as Farmer Friend (FF) has been made in the Scheme @ one
FF per two villages. The Farmer Friend helps in activating
the much needed village-based bottom-up planning process
and serve as vital link between extension system and farmers
at village level.
(ii) At Block Level: The Block ATMA Cell consisting of Block
Technology Team (BTT) (A team comprising officers of
agriculture and other allied departments within the block)
and Block Farmers Advisory Committee (BFAC) (A group
exclusively consisting of selected farmers of the block)
prepares Block Action Plan (BAP) and provide necessary
extension support within the Block in its execution.
(iii) At District Level: Agricultural Technology Management Agency
(ATMA) is an autonomous institution set up at district level
to ensure delivery of extension services to farmers. ATMA
Governing Board is the apex body of ATMA which provides
overall policy direction. ATMA Management Committee is the
executive body looking after implementation of the Scheme.
District Farmers Advisory Committee (DFAC) is a body to
provide farmers Õ feedback for district level planning and
implementation. With dedicated staff provided for the ATMA,
it will continue to be the district level nodal agency
responsible for overall management of agriculture extension
system within the district, including preparation of Strategic
Research Extension Plan (SREP).
(iv) At State Level: The State Level Sanctioning Committee (SLSC)
set up under Rashtriya Krishi Vikas Yojana (RKVY) is the apex
body to approve State Extension Work Plan (SEWP). The
SLSC is supported by the Inter Departmental Working Group

104
(IDWG), which is responsible for day-to-day coordination and
management of the Scheme activities within the State. The
State Nodal Cell (SNC) ensures timely receipt of District
Agriculture Action Plans (DAAPs), formulation of SEWP duly
incorporating feedback obtained through State Farmers
Advisory Committee (SFAC) and its approval by SLSC. The
SNC then convey the approval and monitor implementation
of these work plans by States Agricultural Management &
Extension Training Institutes (SAMETIs) and ATMAs. The
SAMETIs will draw-up and execute an Annual Training Calendar
for capacity building of Extension Functionaries in the State.
Bottom-up Planning: ATMA is process oriented Scheme as per details
given below:Ñ
(1) Strategic Research Extension Plans (SREPs):  SREP is a
comprehensive document identifying research/extension
priorities for district. Keeping in mind Agro-Ecological
Situations (AES) and existing gaps in technology generation
and dissemination in all agriculture and allied sector areas/
activities, SREP is prepared for each district in coordination
with the line departments, Krishi Vigyan Kendras (KVKs),
Panchayati Raj Institutions (PRIs), Private Sector, Farmers
and other Stakeholders at the District level. SREP is a vision
document which serves the basis for formulation of Block
Action Plan (BAP) on annual basis. BAPs are then consolidated
at district level to prepare the District Agriculture Action
Plan (DAAP). DAAPs are consolidated in the form of State
Extension Work Plan (SEWP).
(2) Block Action Plan (BAP): At the Block level, Block Technology
Team (BTT) (A team comprising officers of Agriculture and
all live departments within the block) and Block Farmer
Advisory Committee (BFAC) (A group exclusively consisting of
farmers of the block) provides extension support for
preparation and execution of BAP . The BAP is prepared
annually based on the extension gaps identified in Strategic
Research Extension Plan (SREP) of the District.
(3) District Agriculture Action Plan (DAAP): District Agriculture
Action Plan (DAAP) is prepared compiling BAPs of all the
Blocks in the District in consultation with District Farmers
Advisory Committee (DFAC) and KVK experts.
(4) State Extension Work Plan (SEWP): State Extension Work
Plan is prepared by the State Nodal Cell duly consolidating

105
DAAPs of all the rural Districts in the State and feedback of
State Farmers Advisory Committee (SFAC). The
Inter-Departmental Working Group (IDWG) at State level is
responsible for day to day coordination and management of
scheme activities within the State. The SLSC setup under
RKVY is the apex body to approve SEWP .
In order to ensure greater involvement of farmers in planning and
execution of extension activities, a provision of Farmer Advisory
Committees (FACs) at State, District and Block levels comprising a group
of farmers has been kept in the Scheme Guidelines. The Department of
Agriculture, Cooperation and Farmers Welfare is trying its utmost to
strengthen ATMA Scheme in a mission mode during the period from
2017-18 to 2019-20 under Green Revolution Ñ Krishonnati Yojana.
Consultation between Government of India and State Governments
is held regularly (twice in a year) during the course of Zonal Conference
of Rabi and Kharif Seasons. The issues related to implementation of
ATMA Scheme and revitalization of agriculture extension services etc.
are thoroughly discussed in these pre-seasonal Zonal Conferences. A
day long consultative meeting-cum-workshop with State Governments
representatives is expected to be organized shortly in New Delhi to
discuss bottlenecks in the existing extension system and suggestions for
modernization of agricultural extension system in the country.
[Ministry of Agriculture & Farmers Welfare (Department of
Agricultural Research and Education), F .No. NRM/11(26)/2017-AFC (Pt.),
dated 03.11.2017]
Mechanization of Agriculture
Recommendation (Para No. 29)
The Committee observe that agriculture sector is facing problem of
shortage of labour due to diversification of economy and higher prospect
of earning in other sectors. Further, climatic fluctuation due to global
warming will require shorter duration crops and hence, there will be
need of enhanced mechanization in agriculture sector to offset problem
of shortage of labour. The Committee have been informed that overall
level of mechanization in country Õs agriculture sector is about 40-45%.
However , the Committee are distressed to note that Department did
not maintain information regarding State-wise level of mechanization.
The Committee were further informed that important agriculture
operations mechanized include seed-bed preparation (40%), seeding/
planting (29%), plant protection (34%), irrigation (37%), harvesting and
threshing (60-70% for wheat & rice and less than 5% for other crops).

106
The Committee note that Government has launched a Sub-Mission
on Agricultural Mechanization to extend the benefit of mechanization
to small and marginal farmers through establishment of custom hiring
centres. This mission also intend to create high tech hubs for high value
farm equipment and creating awareness amongst the stakeholders
through demonstration and capacity building activities. The Committee
were informed that the Government is providing subsidy ranging from
25 to 50% for establishment of these centres. The Committee also note
that 10% additional subsidy is provided to SC, ST and women/small-
marginal farmers of NEH state beneficiaries under this scheme.
The Committee were also informed that ICAR-Central Institute of
Agricultural Engineering, Bhopal is engaged in conducting basic and
applied research for development of new machines and technologies
including harvesting machines in the country. The Committee also note
that All India Coordinated Research Project (AICRP) on Farm Implements
& Machinery while working on development of cost effective harvesters
and other farm equipments in association with private manufacturers
has developed various agricultural equipments such as Multi-purpose
Self Propelled Hydraulic Platform, Tractor Mounted Fodder Harvester,
Root Crop Harvester, Tractor Operated Groundnut Digger Shaker , Tractor
Operated Coconut Harvester etc.
The Committee observe that across the world, mechanization is
considered as one of the important method to enhance farm productivity
and reduce post harvest crop losses. The Committee are also of opinion
that due to small size of farm holding and weak economic condition of
majority of small and marginal farmers in the country, there is need to
focus on research to develop efficient farm equipments which are
suitable to unique agricultural conditions of the country. Further, the
Committee are of view that increasing the level of mechanization of
Indian agriculture can be adopted as one of the way to reduce cost of
cultivation in country, and thereby enhancing the income of farmers.
The Committee are however , distressed to note that level of
mechanization in agricultural operations in the country is only 40-45%,
which is quite low as compared to agriculturally advanced country such
as USA, Brazil, China etc. The Committee, therefore, recommend the
Government (Department of Agriculture, Cooperation & Farmers Welfare)
to widen the ambit of Sub-Mission on Agricultural Mechanization to set
a definite time-frame for enhancing level of agricultural mechanization
in the country. The Committee desire the Government to adequately
enhance allocations of funds for scheme in order to establish custom
hiring centers in each Gram Panchayat.

107
The Committee also recommend the ICAR to suitably reorient AICRP-
Farm Implements & Machinery to develop cost efficient and effective
farm equipments suitable for farming practices of all agro-climatic
regions of the country. The Committee desire ICAR to develop small
farm equipments which can reduce drudgery while utilizing human
power. The Committee would like to be apprised about the steps taken
in this direction within three months of presentation of report.
Reply of the Government
The AICRP on Farm Implements & Machinery is conducting Research
& Development, Prototype Production, Feasibility Testing and Frontline
Demonstration of Farm Equipment & Machinery through 25 cooperating
centres located in different parts of the country to bridge identified
mechanization gaps for different agro-climatic regions, crops and
operations. The project is addressing issues of farm mechanization gaps
in most of the agro-climatic regions of the country where the centres
are located.
A number of manually operated, animal drawn and self-propelled
small farm equipment have been developed to reduce drudgery of
human workers. The targets and projected outcome of the Agricultural
Engineering Division including AICRP on Farm Implement and machinery
for the year 2017Ñ20 is given in Table 1.
Table 1: Targets and projected outcome for the year 2017Ñ20
Sl.No. Targets Projected outcome (2017-20)
12 3
1. Farm mechanization status in India Status and future prospects of farm
mechanization in country
2. Farm machinery package for different Package of farm machines for different
agro climatic zones of India crops under different agro-climatic zones
3. Zero tillage planter-cum-residue mulcher Wheat/maize planting under residue
under maize wheat cropping system conditions
4. Seed metering mechanism for high High speed seeding/planting
speed seeding/planting
5. Real time uniform rate spraying system Efficient utilization of plant protection
for field crops chemicals
6. Multipurpose vehicle for various Facilitation of multiple operations in
operation in vegetable crops vegetable crops

108
7. Light weight multi crop thresher for Drudgery reduction of hill farmers
Uttarakhand hills
8. Transplanter for onion seedling Mechanized transplanting of onion
9. Smart sprayers for pomegranate Efficient utilization of plant protection
young orchards chemicals
10. Drip lateral and plastic mulch layer- Mechanized planting, plastic mulch and
cum-planter for raised beds drip lateral laying in single operation
11. Automatic vegetable transplanter for Mechanized transplanting of plug
plug type seedlings seedlings
12. Intra and inter row weeder for wide Complete mechanized weeding solution
row field crops
13. Automated control system for tractor- Efficient utilization of tractor-implement
implement combination combination
14. Tractor mounted ginger planter Mechanized ginger planting with reduced
drudgery
15. Tractor front mounted cotton stalk Mechanized cotton stalk pulling with
puller reduced drudgery
16. Integrated system for harvesting and Mechanized harvesting of bunch crops
conveying of bunch crops
17. Automatic Total Mix Ration (TMR) Cost effective TMR Wagon
delivery system for cattle
18. Site specific band fertilizer applicator Efficient use of fertilizer
for cotton crop
19. Tractor operated grass seed harvester Mechanised harvesting of grass seed
20. Potato combine harvester Timely harvesting of potatoes
21. Development of portable briquetting Portable briquetting machine for paddy
machine for paddy straw straw
22. Energetics of production and post Energy inflow and outflow in production
production of major cropping system and post production of soyabean-wheat,
of Madhya Pradesh maize-gram cropping systems
23. Micro-planning and management of a Energy planning and management model
rural energy system at village level
24. Development of micro algae production Micro algae production and harvesting
and harvesting system for biofuel system
12 3

109
25. Development of subsurface drip lateral Machine for laying subsurface drip
laying machine laterals
26. Irrigation and fertigation schedules for Irrigation and fertigation schedules
cultivating tomato & capsicum in open under different growing environments
field, shadenets, polyhouses
27. Solar powered micro irrigation systems Adoption and creation awareness on
harnessing renewable energy for
operating micro irrigation system
28. Use of broad bed and furrow and Mole Identification of appropriate size of
drainage for enhancing productivity of BBF in relation to drainage and
crop sensitive to water logging in demonstration of cost effective drainage
Vertisols technology for enhanced productivity in
temporarily waterlogged Vertisols
29. Development and evaluation of real Study of the variability of soil moisture
time precision irrigation using sprinkler and its effect on wheat plants growth
system for field crops monitoring of soil moisture sensors using
sensor network
30. Development of technology and Approximately 10 technologies in form
equipment for processing, value of process plant/equipment, processes,
addition and loss prevention in products etc. would be developed
agricultural commodities
31. Micro-controller based sugarcane Micro-controller based technology for
planting technology sugarcane planting
32. Self-propelled multi-purpose tool Self-propelled multi-purpose tool carrier
carrier with provision of variable for horticultural crops
height and width
33. Harvester cum collector for cluster Harvester cum collector for cluster onion
onion
34. Vertical cup belt type vegetable V ertical cup belt type vegetable
transplanter for cell feed nursery transplanter for cell feed nursery
35. Red gram portray seeder Red gram portray seeder
36. Seed pelletizing machine Seed pelletizing machine
37. Tractor operated sorghum and pearl T ractor operated sorghum and pearl
millet ear head separator millet ear head separator
38. Tractor operated pneumatic planter Tractor operated pneumatic planter for
for chilli cultivation chilli
12 3

110
39. Package of farm machinery for seed Farm machinery package for seed spices
spices crop
40. Mechanization study and database Identification of location specific farm
development for agricultural machinery Mechanisation gaps
and manufacturers
41. Multiplication of selected research T otal 1500 prototypes will be
prototypes and their supply to other manufactured and supplied
centres for multi-location trials
42. Development of bullock drawn air mist 30-40% saving in cost of operation,
canopy sprayer Increase in field capacity and fuel saving
43. Development of bullock drawn Higher field capacity, reduced human
vegetable transplanter drudgery and 30-40% saving in time and
labour
44. Development of package of improved Improvement in productivity of crop
implements for cotton and red gram status and also the livelihood of farmers
crops
45. Development of low heat grinding Increase in annual use of animal,
machine for rotary transmission improve quality of flour and farmers will
system get more profit
46. Feasibility trials of animal drawn seed Simultaneous sowing of various crops,
drill for inter-crop Labour saving up to 50% and Higher
income to farmers
47. Draught performance of crossbred Utilization of cross bred males,
males under sustained working enhancement in annual hour use, help
conditions in hill mechanization
48. Development of yoke with harnessing Adjustable with less weight, utilization
system for pack load transport in hilly of yak for transport and profit to hill
areas using Yak and other animals farmers
49. Development of earthing-up cum inter- Labour saving up to 40% and utilization
culturing implement for sugarcane and of single animal for earthing-up cum
turmeric crop inter-culturing
50. Development of compressed air driven Increase annual use of animals,
engine operated by animal drawn reduction in maintenance cost, more
rotary gear system profit and saving in electrical
51. Development and modification of Mules will be used for pack load and
saddles for pack load as well as in cart transport, more comfort to animals
carting for equines and loading capacity of 40% will increase
12 3

111
52. Training to the farmers, village artisans Sk ill of farmers will be enhanced,
and manufacturers for entrepreneurship employment generation and availability
development of improved implements in village
53. Development of Renewable Energy About 18 technologies would be
Technologies developed under the DRET component
54. Energy Management in Agriculture Energy audit in the agro industrial sector
will be conducted and efficient energy
utilization in various agriculture and agro
based industries will be recommended
55. Demonstration of Renewable Energy 18 technologies of renewable energy
Systems systems would be demonstrated under
field conditions
56. Prototype of root wash type manual Equipment with field capacity,
rice transplanter physiological cost and overall less
discomfort
57. Research prototype of a unmanned R eduction in drudgery of coconut
coconut harvesting device (robot) harvesting
58. Package of safety gadgets/practices Safety of women workers engaged in
for women working in cashewnut cashewnut processing
processing activities
59. Package of safety gadgets/practices Safety of women workers engaged in
for workers involved in turmeric turmeric polishing and coconut coir
polishing and coconut coir industry industry
60. Dust mask for agricultural workers Mask with better dust filtration
efficiency
61. Minimizing dust problem in rice mills Reduction in dust concentration, overall
health of workers
62. Studies for wider adoption of chaff Reduction in chaff cutter accidents
cutter safety devices
63. Research prototype of Improved More comfort to operator and reduced
muffler for tractor noise level
64. Pruning equipment for apple/ Equipment to reduce drudgery
grapevine orchards
65. Farm tools and equipment for people Gadget to enable the people with
with disabilities disabilities
12 3

112
66. Light weight manually guided engine Equipment for hilly region
operated tools for hill areas
67. Gender friendly tractor operators P hysiological cost, overall discomfort and
workplace performance data on women tractor
operators
68. Improved equipment package for Equipment package for hilly areas
rice cultivation in hill agriculture
of Arunachal Pradesh and Himachal
Pradesh
69. Multi-location evaluation of low cost Acceptability of gravity ropeway in hilly
gravity based ropeways in hill areas areas and amount of material handled
for agricultural material handling
70. Package of improved agricultural P ackage of equipment for tribal
equipment for tribal farmers of Odisha agriculture of Odisha
71. Prototype Feasibility Testing of 25 equipment will be taken under
improved farm equipment for their prototype feasibility testing covering 500
adoption to bridge the identified ha and for threshing 200 h
mechanization gaps
72. Transfer of Technology activities 200 custom hiring centres to be
including HRD & Capacity Building established by entrepreneurs trained;
Programmes 1000 participants will be trained; 1500
farmers/extension officer will be trained
at KVK, CIAE; Participation in 15
agricultural exhibitions/fair of
International/National/Regional level;
Patents and copyrights applications will
be filed for about 12 technologies; 6000
prototypes will be supplied to different
stakeholders; Commercial machines will
be tested
73. Frontline demonstrations of selected Approx. 1000 ha area under different
farm implements and machinery at machines for various operations, 200 ha
farmerÕs fields to obtain feedback threshing, and 200 demonstrations of
for design refinement horticultural tools under FLD
74. Training programmes/FLD programmes Popularization of farm safety measures
for creating greater awareness about and ergonomically improved tools/
farm safety measures, ergonomically equipment.
improved equipment and women
friendly equipment.
12 3

113
The detail updated Action report of the funds released and
achievements under SMAM since 2014-15 to 2017-18 (Till 30.08.2017)
may be referred in Annexure-XVIII. The action plan to achieve the goals
upto 2022 is enclosed in Annexure-XIX.
As regard the establishment of Custom Hiring Centers and allocation
of funds under SMAM, the year-wise Progress is as under:
Year Different Type of Custom Total Total Funds
Hiring Centers (Nos) Released
CHCs FMBs Hi-tech Under SMAM
Hubs (Rs. in crores)
2014-15 663 388 16 1067 165.85
2015-16 268 218 13 499 132.57
2016-17 2716 1087 12 3815 355.27
2017-18 1251 609 06 06 419.04
Total 4898 2302 47 7247 1072.73
[Ministry of Agriculture & Farmers Welfare (Department of
Agricultural Research and Education), F .No. NRM/11(26)/2017-AFC (Pt.),
dated 03.11.2017]
Steps for Augmentation of Funds for Making India a Low Energy
Economy
Recommendation (Para No. 31)
The Committee have further been informed that National Clean
Energy Fund (NCEF) was created in 2010 by the Government for the
purpose of financing and promoting clean energy initiatives and funding
research in the area of clean energy in the country. The corpus of the
fund is built by levying a cess of INR 400 per tonne of coal produced
domestically or imported. This fund is being used for financing schemes
like installation of Solar Photo Voltaic (SPV) Lights and small capacity
lights, installation of SPV water pumping under Jawaharlal Nehru National
Solar Mission (JNNSM), projects relating to R&D to replace existing
technologies with more environment friendly ones under National Mission
on Strategic Knowledge for Climate Change (NMSKCC), Grid Interactive
and Distributive renewable power and Research Design and Development
in Renewable Energy of Ministry of New and Renewable Energy. Similarly,
National Adaptation Fund for Climate Change (NAFCC) with allocations
of Rs. 531 crores have been launched in 2015 to provide financial and

114
technical support for concrete adaptation activities to be implemented
under State Action Plan on Climate Change (SAPCC), funds for adaptation
activities in agriculture, water , health, infrastructure, forests, bio-
diversity and coastal systems etc. and to reduce the vulnerability and
associated risks. The Committee also note that Government has allocated
Rs. 100 crores to set up a National Mission on Himalayan Studies with
the objective of enhancing natural and human capital in the Himalayan
region under National Mission on Sustaining Himalayan Ecosystem
(NMSHE).
The Committee have been informed that National Mission for
Sustainable Agriculture (NMSA) has been initiated with aims to devise
strategies to make Indian agriculture more resilient to climate change.
The NMSA would identify and develop new varieties of crops and
alternative cropping patterns, capable of withstanding extremes of
weather, long dry spells, flooding and variable moisture availability.
The Committee have also been informed that climate resilient
interventions strategies have been embedded and mainstreamed into
Missions/Programmes/Schemes of Department of Agriculture & Farmers
Welfare (DAC & FW). The Government has emphasized that new credit
and insurance mechanisms are being devised to facilitate adoption of
desired practices by the Indian farmers.
The Committee are of view that there will be need for huge
investment in form of infrastructure, research, and finance support if
they aim to make Indian Agriculture climate resilient. However , the
Committee are distressed to note that allocations for climate change
programmes are too meagre to make any significant impact. The
Committee in their previous reports on demands for Grants have stressed
the need to provide adequate funds for research & Development sector
in agriculture, to provide farm inputs and for establishment of an
efficient and modern agriculture extension services to the farmers. The
Committee are of considered opinion that investment in agriculture
sector is utmost necessary to make it climate resilient. The Committee,
therefore, recommend the government to formulate a dedicated scheme
for providing support to the farmers so that they can invest in adaptation
mechanism at farm level to face challenges associated with the climatic
change. The Committee also desire the Government to enhance
allocations for research and development activities in agriculture sector
in order to develop improved varieties of seeds, environment friendly
fertilizers and pesticides.
Reply of the Government
Recommendations of the Committee has been noted for necessary
compliance. Accordingly, the Council/Department has requested Ministry

115
of Finance for allocation of enhanced funds and expedite the modalities
to increase the investment to the extent of 1% agricultural GDP in
coming financial years.
[Ministry of Agriculture & Farmers Welfare (Department of
Agricultural Research and Education), F .No. NRM/11(26)/2017-AFC (Pt.),
dated 03.11.2017]
Constitution of District Level Agriculture Vigilance Committee
Recommendation (Para No. 32)
The Committee are of the view that constitution of a specific
District level Agriculture Vigilance Committee will go a long way to
improve implementation of various schemes being implemented by the
Central Government. The Committee feel that it will be helpful to
assess ground realities and problems being faced by the small and
marginal farmers so that various schemes implemented by the
Government are reviewed, evaluated and improved/modified in order
to address the difficulties of the farmers comprehensively. The
Committee, therefore, recommend the Government to take steps for
constitution of District level Agriculture Vigilance Committee under the
Chairmanship of a senior Member of Parliament at the District Level for
review, monitoring and evaluation of all schemes related to agriculture.
The Committee should consist of Agriculture Officers from District to
Block level, KVK Functionaries and Chairman of the Advisory Committee
of ATMA. The Committee desire the Government to initiate discussion
with State Governments for constitution of District level Agriculture
Vigilance Committee.
Reply of the Government
All the approved activities of the Scheme are monitored and
evaluated at periodic intervals through a specific mechanism generated
at different levels Ñ Block, District, State & National Level Monitoring
& Evaluation (M&E) is conducted through BFAC and BTT (Block level) &
ATMA Governing Board (District level) for achieving necessary
convergence, SLSC set up in the State under RKVY approved SEWP and
carry out period monitoring the IDWG under the Chairmanship of APC/
Principal Secretary (Agriculture) may continue with the day to day
monitoring to ensure that the Extension Reforms are executed in line
with the broad policy framework. Effective M&E is ensured through
regular field visits of Inter Disciplinary Teams in project areas, reports,
interfaces, conferences etc. The Scheme also provides for concurrent
Monitoring & Evaluation (M&E). DAC&FW also organizes concurrent M&E

116
including impact evaluation as needed as part of its scheme ÒExtension
Support to Central Institutes/DoEÓ. Besides, all activities of the scheme
would continue to be reviewed on quarterly basis in meetings held at
National Level.
Further, in the Zonal Conferences for inputs for Rabi/Kharif Seasons/
Crops, the monitoring of the scheme implementation by the States/UTs
is carried out. State Nodal Officers for the scheme are appointed in this
Department for regular inspection/verification and monitoring
implementation of the scheme. As three Committees at district level
namely ATMA, governing Board, ATMA, Management Committee and
District Farmers Advisory Committee (DFAC) are already involved in
monitoring the progress, one more Committee at district level i.e.
District level Agriculture Vigilance Committee for monitoring
implementation of the ATMA Scheme seems to be not feasible.
[Ministry of Agriculture & Farmers Welfare (Department of
Agricultural Research and Education), F .No. NRM/11(26)/2017-AFC (Pt.),
dated 03.11.2017]
Re-orientation of Agricultural Education System
Recommendation (Para No. 33)
The Committee observe that Agriculture Education System as of
now, do not focus on short term courses which can be helpful to
provide agriculture foot soldiers in the country. The Committee are of
view that Short term courses of six-twelve months can be very useful
offering solution to problems faced by the farmers in every nook and
corner of the country. The Committee, therefore, recommend the
Government to start discussion with State Governments to start such
courses in the field of agriculture. The Government may explore option
of linking such short term courses with National Skill Development
Mission. Further, the Committee desire re-orientation of Agricultural
education system as per prevailing social, economic, psychological and
practical conditions of farmers of the country. The Committee also
desire that priority should be given to person of rural aptitude in
operation and management of Agricultural Universities in the country.
The Committee are also of view that there is need to bring more
practicality in agricultural education system in the country. The
Committee, desire the ICAR to incorporate provisions for mandatory
assignment to students which should be completed while staying among
farmers in villages. Students along with Professors should be assigned
time bound task for improving agricultural productivity and income of

117
farmers. Those groups achieving the task should be given financial
remuneration and awards.
Reply of the Government
Agricultural Universities including Deemed Universities under Indian
Council of Agricultural Research are already running different short
courses in agriculture and allied sciences. These short courses are offered
in certificate as well as Diploma form. Universities also conduct ICAR-
sponsored short courses. These courses are conducted for students,
farmers, entrepreneurs, officials, academicians etc.
Further , as suggested by the Committee, the Government will take
appropriate action, and will ask State Governments to start short courses
in all agricultural universities to cater the needs of the farming
community in the respective region. Necessary communication will be
made to the State Governments that the priority should be given to
persons of rural aptitude in operation and management of Agricultural
Universities.
With respect to bringing practicality in agricultural education,
Students ÔREADYÕ programme is designed for one-year duration and
introduced in UG courses. Under this programme, the students are also
earning through experiential learning component. Further , ÔRAWEÕ is
made as an essential part of student READY to interact with farmers
and understand the issues for improving agricultural productivity.
[Ministry of Agriculture & Farmers Welfare (Department of
Agricultural Research and Education), F .No. NRM/11(26)/2017-AFC (Pt.),
dated 03.11.2017]

118
CHAPTER III
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO NOT
DESIRE  TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE GOVERNMENT ÕS REPLIES
-NIL-

119
CHAPTER IV
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF
THE GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE
Recommendation (Para No. 2)
The Committee note that Fifth Assessment Report (AR5) of
Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) has warned about
warming of the climate system across the world. This Report clearly
brought out impact of global warming such as warming of atmosphere
and oceans, shrinking of glaciers, melting of Arctic and Antarctic ice
sheets, rise of sea level etc. The Committee have been informed that
as per AR5 report each of the last three decades has been getting
successively warmer at the Earth Õs surface than any preceding decade
since 1850. The period from 1983 to 2012 was very likely the warmest
30-year period during the last 800 years in the Northern Hemisphere
and likely the warmest 30-year period of the last 1400 years. Over the
last two decades, the Greenland and Antarctic ice sheets have been
losing mass. Glaciers have continued to shrink almost worldwide.
Northern Hemisphere spring snow cover has continued to decrease in
extent. Over the period 1901-2010, global mean sea level rose by 0.19
(0.17 to 0.21)m. The rate of sea level rise since the mid-19th century
has been larger than the mean rate during the previous two millennia.
The Committee further note that Centre for Climate Change Research
(CCCR) under the Indian Institute of Tropical Meteorology (IITM), Pune
under Ministry of Earth Sciences carry out scientific studies on climate
change and variability under Global and Regional Climate Change (GRCC)
programme. The Committee have been informed by the Ministry of
Earth Sciences that past observations from instruments and proxy data
suggest that there are changes in our climate system on different time
scales. There are some natural variations and there are some long term
trends which can be attributed to human activities. The Committee
note that Annual mean, maximum and minimum temperatures averaged
over the country as a whole showed significant warming trend of 0.6
oC,
1oC and 0.18 oC per hundred years, respectively. The rate of warming
trend in the annual mean temperatures since 1980s is much sharper,
0.2oC per decade. The warming is mostly confined to the northern,
central and eastern/north-eastern parts of the country. Peninsular India
experienced the least warming. The Committee have been further
informed that all-India southwest monsoon rainfall does not show any

120
long-term trend, but it exhibits significant multi-decadal variability.
There are significant regional trends in southwest monsoon rainfall.
Monsoon rainfall in the meteorological sub divisions of Jharkhand,
Chhattisgarh and Kerala has shown significant decreasing trends. However,
monsoon rainfall over Gangetic West Bengal, West Uttar Pradesh,
Jammu and Kashmir , Konkan and Goa, Central Maharashtra, Rayalaseema,
Coastal Andhra Pradesh and North Interior Karnataka showed increasing
trends. Further, Monsoon rainfall in the month of July has shown
decreasing trends over most parts of central India. However , June and
August rainfall has shown increasing trend over the central and
southwestern parts of the country. There is a clear pattern of decreasing
frequency of very light rain and light to moderate rain events over
most of the country and increasing frequency of very heavy and extreme
rainfall events over northern parts of the country during the monsoon
season. The Committee also note above increasing trends in heat waves
during the hot weather season and decreasing trend in cold waves
during the cold weather season over most parts of the country. The
Committee have also been informed that more intense droughts are
mainly observed over north and northwest India.
The Committee are of view that there is a need of constantly
observing changing weather conditions associated with climate change
in order to take corrective steps to offset its negative effect on
agriculture and allied sector in the country. The Committee also feel
that there should be enhanced level of co-ordination between Ministry
of Earth Sciences and Department of Agricultural Research and Education.
The Committee, therefore recommend the Government to devise a
mechanism to increase the quantum of collaborative research and
coordination between these two important Scientific Departments
associated with study of climate change. The Committee also desire
the Government to provide for adequate funding and manpower for
encouraging cutting edge research in this important sector so that the
agriculture and allied sector in the Country may be salvaged from
negative changes associated with climate change.
Reply of the Government
Analysis of past more than 100 years of data by the scientists of
India Meteorological Department and other institutions has found
significant changes in the rainfall pattern, extreme events etc. Both
flood and drought are part of natural climate variability and occurrences
of flood or drought in individual years do not depend on climate change.
However , as an impact of climate change, it is being reported that the
spatial variability, intensity and frequency of extreme events like heavy
rainfall have increased.

121
Though there was no significant change in the all India rainfall but
significant changes in rainfall pattern has been observed in smaller
spatial scales viz. meteorological subdivisions or states. Decreasing trend
in rainfall during the month of July is observed over most parts of
central India. However , increasing trends are seen in rainfall during
June and August over the central and south western parts of the country.
Significant decreasing trend in rainfall during the southwest monsoon
season is seen over ten subdivisions viz. Chhattisgarh, Jharkhand,
Uttarakhand, Himachal Pradesh, Arunachal Pradesh, Nagaland, Mizoram
and Tripura, sub Himalayan West Bengal, Kerala, east Uttar Pradesh and
east Madhya Pradesh whereas eight subdivisions viz. Madhya Maharashtra,
Saurashtra and Kutch, south interior Karnataka, coastal Karnataka,
Konkan and Goa, coastal Andhra Pradesh, Lakshadweep and Gangetic
West Bengal showed significant increasing trends in monsoon rainfall.
Annual frequencies of very light, light to moderate and wet days have
decreased in most of the States. Frequencies of dry days have also
increased significantly during the period, 1910-2010. Significant increase
of heavy rainfall event is observed over the eight states (West Bengal,
Tripura, Manipur , Andhra Pradesh, Telangana, Karnataka, Goa and Orissa).
Significant increase in the frequency of very heavy events over
West Bengal, Tripura, Sikkim, Andhra Pradesh, Telangana, Karnataka,
Goa, Jammu & Kashmir and Odisha; and extreme rainfall events over
West Bengal, Assam, Punjab, Jammu & Kashmir, Chhattisgarh, Goa and
Telangana are being reported.
The latest Inter-Governmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) report
(2014) highlights that mean surface temperature of the globe has risen
by 0.85
oC + 0.18 oC. whereas, all India mean temperature has risen
around 0.64 oC over the last 110 years. Mean annual surface air
temperatures show a significant warming of about 0.7oC/100 years during
the last century.
The Centre of Climate Change Research (CCCR) was launched in
2009 with the support of the Ministry of the Earth Sciences, Government
of India. The CCCR is part of the Indian Institute of Tropical Meteorology
(IITM) located at Pune. The CCCR focuses on development of new
climate modeling capabilities in India and South Asia to address issues
concerning the Science of Climate Change. Two major developments in
climate modeling have taken place at CCCR in the recent 2 years.
Development of the IITM Earth System Model (ESM): With the goal
of building an ESM appropriate for detection, attribution and projection
of changes in the South Asian monsoon, a state-of-the-art seasonal
prediction model, namely the Climate Forecast System (CFS) has been
transformed to a climate model suitable for extended climate simulations
at the CCCR, IITM, Pune, India. IITM ESM will be participating in the
next Intergovernmental Panel for Climate Change (IPCC) Coupled Model

122
Inter comparison Project phase 6 experiments Ñ this is a first for an
Indian model.
CCCR is also leading the Coordinated Regional Downscaling
Experiment (CORDEX) activity for the South Asian region. CORDEX is an
International Programme under the World Climate Research Program
(WCRP) which aims at advancing and coordinating the science and
application of Regional Climate Downscaling through global partnerships,
in order to inform local and national climate adaptation strategies. The
regional modeling activities of CORDEX South Asia are focused on
providing reliable projections with much greater detail (than global
climate models) and more accurate representation of localized extreme
events over the South Asian region, through
¥ Development of multi-model ensemble projections of high
resolution (50 km) regional climate change scenarios for
South Asia. The regional climate projections over South Asia
are generated by CCCR-IITM and also by various International
partner institutions;
¥ Development of an Earth System Grid (ESG) node at CCCR-
IITM for archival, management and dissemination of CORDEX
South Asia datasets;
¥ Evaluation of regional climate projections over South Asia
for reliable climate change information for effective
harnessing of science-based information by Vulnerability,
Impact, Adaptation (VIA) community; and
¥ Development of regional capacity for assessment of regional
climate change.
As part of this activity, high-resolution simulations of 20th century
climatic variations and future climate projections (21st century) have
been developed at CCCR-IITM. These high-resolution simulations offer
new opportunities to better understand several key regional scientific
issues concerning climate change over South Asia - e.g., Monsoons,
precipitation extremes, heat waves, droughts and floods, changes in
cyclonic weather systems, hydrological cycle etc. A variable resolution
global modeling framework, based on the Laboratorie Dynamique
Meteorologie (LMD, France) atmospheric general circulation model (GCM),
has been employed for this purpose under a scientific collaboration
between CCCR-IITM and LMD, aimed towards contributing to the IPCC
AR6 assessment. The high-resolution climate projections for India (2006-
2095) were released in the Sixth National Workshop on Climate Change
organized at INCOIS, Hyderabad during 1-2 September 2014.

123
IITM-ESMv1: Successful development of the first version of IITM ESM
at CCCR, IITM, Pune by transforming a seasonal prediction model (CFSv2)
into a long term climate model (Ref: Swapna et al. 2015). This
development was achieved by incorporating a new ocean model
component (MOM4p1, including ocean biogeochemistry) in CFSv2. Major
improvements in the IITM-ESM relative to CFSv2 include:
The IITM-ESMv2 would be first climate model from India to contribute
to the Coupled Model Intercomparison Project Sixth Phase (CMIP6) for
the IPCC sixth assessment report (Ar6). IITM has requested for funding
support from MoES for collaborative work with other Indian agencies
involved in the field. Additional manpower requirement has also been
projected.
Following the recommendations of the Expert Committee, it is
proposed that CCCR-IITM will collaborate with Agricultural Researchers
to investigate and address the Impacts of Climate Change on Indian
Agriculture. For this purpose, CCCR-IITM has requested for funding
support from MoES for collaborative work with other Indian agencies
involved in Agriculture and Climate research. Additional manpower
requirement will be projected for this collaborative research.
There is a co-ordination between Ministry of Earth Science and
Department of Agricultural Research and Education for weather services.
The Gramin Krishi Mausam Seva (GKMS) of IMD is rendered twice a week
in collaboration with Indian Council of Agricultural Research (ICAR).
Accordingly, district level weather forecast for next 5-days are provided
to farmers in respect of Rainfall, maximum temperature, minimum
temperature, wind speed, wind direction, relative humidity and
cloudsweekly cumulative rainfall forecast and Crop specific advisories.
The GKMS of IMD has been successful in providing the crop specific
advisories to the farmers through different print/visual/Radio/IT based
media including short message service (SMS) and Interactive Voice
Response Service (IVRS) facilitating for appropriate field level actions.
Weather forecast based agrometeorological advisories are also
disseminated through Kisan portal launched by the Ministry of Agriculture
and Farmers Welfare and also under public private partnership. At
present, about 23.0 million farmers in the country are receiving the
SMS based advisories.
[Ministry of Agriculture & Farmers Welfare (Department of
Agricultural Research and Education), F .No. NRM/11(26)/2017-AFC (Pt.),
dated 03.11.2017]
Comments of the Committee
For comments of the Committee please refer to Para No. 1.7 of
Chapter I of this Report.

124
Burning of Crop Residue
Recommendation (Para No. 4)
The Committee note that despite being banned, burning of crop
residue in agricultural fields has emerged as one of the important
challenges in recent times which is adding to already high level of
pollutants in the environment. The Committee further note that as per
assessment made by the ICAR approximately 130-140 Mt Crop residues
is being burnt annually in agriculture fields out of 679 million tonne
(Mt) crop residue generated in the country which is causing emission of
8.57 Mt of CO, 141.15 Mt of CO2, 0.037 Mt of SOx, 0.23 Mt of NOx, 0.12
Mt of NH3 in the atmosphere. The Committee have been informed that
ICAR-Indian Institute of Soil Science has developed a technique called
ÒRapo-compost TechnologyÓ for faster decomposition of biodegradable
waste that is able to convert biodegradable waste to quality compost
in 30-45 days with the help of bioinoculum consortia (bacteria, fungi
and actinomycetes) having ligno-cellulolytic potential. The Committee
observe that shortage of agricultural labour , short interval due to
intensive agriculture being practised in some parts of the country and
mechanized farming are forcing the farmers to take extreme step of
burning the crop residue in farm field. The Committee are of considered
view that there is a need to provide adequate extension and financial
support to help them in adopting technology for decomposition of crop
residue, conservation agriculture or utilize for making cupboard in small
scale industries. The Committee, therefore, desire the Government to
take this issue on priority basis and make policy/plan/programmes for
eco-friendly utilization of crop residue. The Committee also desire the
ICAR for development of new technology/bio-logical methods which
can reduce the period of in-situ decomposition of plant residue.
Reply of the Government
The ICAR-Indian Institute of Soil Science has developed an in-situ
rapid crop residue decomposition technique using consortia of ligno-
cellulolytic microorganisms. The technology has potential to decompose
rice, wheat and sugarcane residues in 45 days.
[Ministry of Agriculture & Farmers Welfare (Department of
Agricultural Research and Education), F .No. NRM/11(26)/2017-AFC (Pt.),
dated 03.11.2017]
Comments of the Committee
For comments of the Committee please refer to Para No. 1.10 of
Chapter I of this Report.

125
Approach for Making Indian Agriculture Climate Resilient
Recommendation (Para No. 24)
The Committee note that National Mission on Sustainable Agriculture
(NMSA) aims to make Indian agriculture more productive, sustainable,
and remunerative and climate resilient. NMSA has many objectives such
as conservation of natural resources through appropriate soil and
moisture conservation measures, Soil health management, optimization
of water use efficiency in agriculture, capacity building of farmers and
other stakeholders in the domain of climate change adaptation and
mitigation measures, improving productivity of rainfed farming by
mainstreaming rainfed technologies, and establishing an effective, inter
and intra Departmental/Ministerial co-ordination for accomplishing key
deliverables of National Mission for Sustainable Agriculture under the
aegis of NAPCC.
The Committee have been informed that promoting integrated
farming system covering crops, livestock & fishery, plantation and pasture
based composite farming, popularizing on-farm and off-farm resource
conservation technologies and introducing practices that will support
mitigation efforts in times of extreme climatic events, promoting location
and crop specific integrated nutrient management practices, promoting
effective management of available water resources, enhancing water
use efficiency, encouraging improved agronomic practices for higher
farm productivity, involving knowledge institutions and professionals in
developing climate change adaptation and mitigation strategies for
specific agro climatic situations and promoting them through appropriate
farming systems are some of strategies being used to achieve objectives
of NMSA.
The Committee are of the opinion that our farmers who had helped
in securing food security of the country, need support in order to face
the challenges of climatic changes due to global warming. Indian
agriculture need interventions in the area of irrigation facilities, water
efficient irrigation methods, improved abiotic stress tolerant seed
varieties, cost effective and environment friendly fertilizers and
pesticides, capacity building of farmers and other stakeholders, efficient
and advanced agriculture extension services in order to make it climatic
resilient and enable it to secure food security of the country. The
Committee are of considered view that huge investment will be need
in the agriculture sector if the Government wants to achieve objectives
set under National Mission on Sustainable Agriculture (NMSA). Since,
agriculture is a State subject, the Committee call for the need of

126
better co-ordination between the Central and the State Governments
for planning and resource mobilization for implementing schemes to
achieve objectives of NMSA. The Committee, therefore, recommend
the Government to constitute high powered committee involving
representatives of Central and State Governments, subject specialists
and other stakeholders for planning and implementation of schemes to
achieve objectives set under NMSA. The Committee also desire the
Government to start a dedicated fund for implementation of schemes
under NMSA so that these schemes do not suffer due to want of funds.
Reply of the Government
NMSA is envisaged as one of the eight Missions outlined under
National Action Plan on Climate Change (NAPCC), NMSA aim at promoting
sustainable agriculture through climate change adaptation measures.
The major thrust is enhancing agriculture productivity especially in
rainfed areas focusing on integrated farming, soil health management,
and synergizing resource conversation. Besides, NMSA also has a target
to fulfil National and International commitments on Sustainable
Development Goals (SDG) & Intended Nationally Determined Contribution
(INDC). All the components of NMSA such as Rainfed Agriculture, Soil
Health Management, Organic Farming, etc. have significant role in
achieving SDGs & INDC. Further , NMSA is the only scheme focusing and
emphasising countryÕs thrust on climate change adaptation & mitigation
in agriculture sector.
Rainfed Area Development (RAD) is one of the major component of
NMSA. RAD is to benefit the small and marginal farmers in the country
promoting Integrated Farming System (IFS).Under this system, crops/
cropping system is integrated with activities like horticulture, livestock,
fishery, agro-forestry, apiculture etc. to enable farmers not only in
maximizing farm returns for sustaining livelihood, but also to mitigate
the impacts of drought, flood or other extreme weather events with
the income opportunity from allied activities during crop damage.
The National Advisory Committee (NAC) under the Chairmanship of
Secretary (AoC&FW) constituted with the members of line Departments
and organizations to provide overall direction and guidance to the
Mission, monitor and review its progress and performance at National
level.The NMSA is proposed for continuation for three years i.e. from
2017-18 to 2019-20 which is co-terminus with the remaining period of
14th Finance Commission (FFC) ending 31st March, 2020. Based on the
new initiatives and requirement in the area of sustainable agriculture
development, certain modifications have been proposed in the present

127
proposal and some of the ongoing schemes of similar nature are proposed
for implementation under the frame work of NMSA.
The proposed cost of the project is Rs. 12123.62 crore (Central
Share) for implementation of all the components of NMSA.
[Ministry of Agriculture & Farmers Welfare (Department of
Agricultural Research and Education), F .No. NRM/11(26)/2017-AFC (Pt.),
dated 03.11.2017]
Comments of the Committee
For comments of the Committee please refer to Para No. 1.16 of
Chapter I of this Report.
Agricultural Extension Services
Recommendation (Para No. 27)
The Committee note that existence of a robust system of agriculture
extension services is critical for making Indian agriculture climate
resilient. The Committee have been informed that responsibility for
providing of extension services to farmers lies with the State
Governments. However , Central Government is facilitating the efforts
of State Governments through a network of 665 Krishi Vigyan Kendras
(KVKs), Agricultural Technology Management Agency (ATMA) and Agri
clinic and Agri-business scheme. The Committee note that KVKs are
engaged in on-farm testing to identify the location specificity of
technology under various farming systems, frontline demonstration to
establish the production potential of improved agricultural technologies
on the farmersÕ fields, Capacity development of farmers and extension
personnel to update their knowledge and skills and Providing farm
advisories on varied subjects of interest to farmers. The KVKs also
provide farm inputs such as seeds, planting materials and other
technology to the farmers. The Committee note that ATMA Scheme is
under implementation in 652 districts in 29 States and 3 UTs in the
country with provision for active participation of farmers/farmer-groups,
NGOs, KVK, Panchayati Raj Institutions and other stakeholders operating
at district level and below. The Committee have also been informed
that Mass Media Support to Agriculture Extension Õ scheme is being
implemented to strengthen the reach of farm information to farming
community through the wide network of Doordarshan, DD Kisan channel
and All India Radio.
However , the Committee are distressed to note that funding provided
to these agriculture extension schemes are not sufficient to make them
an effective platform for the benefit of farmers. The Committee in

128
their previous reports on Demands for Grants have repeatedly brought
out these facts and recommended the Government to enhance the
allocations to these schemes suitably in order to equip KVKs with all
necessary infrastructure and manpower. The Committee are of the
considered view that condition of farmers of country cannot be improved
unless they are provided information and other necessary inputs for
making agriculture remunerative. The Committee, therefore recommend
the Government to suitably enhance funding to these schemes. The
Committee are also of view that construction of a ÔKrishi Bhavan Õ at
Panchayat level will help to strengthen the agriculture extension services
in the country. Construction of such bhavan with adequate infrastructure,
equipments and mass media facilities with regular visits of scientists of
ICAR, subject matter specialists of KVKs, progressive farmers etc. will
help it to emerge a hub for farmers and solve their problems related
to agriculture. The Committee, therefore, recommend the Government
to take steps for construction of ÔKisan BhavanÕ at Panchayat level.
Reply of the Government
Regarding enhancing allocation of fund to KVK scheme it is to state
that enhanced provision has been made for 2017-18 to 2019-20, for
increasing the manpower and improving infrastructure in KVKs.
The Centrally Sponsored Scheme ÒSupport to State Extension
Programs for Extension ReformsÓ, popularly known as ATMA Scheme was
launched in May, 2005 and aims at making extension system farmer
driven and farmer accountable by way of institutional arrangements for
technology dissemination in the form of an Agricultural Technology
Management Agency (ATMA) at district level to operationalize Extension
Reforms. The detail of year-wise budgetary position under the Scheme
is given below:
(Rs. in crore)
Year B.E. R.E. Release
123 4
2005-06 45.00 45.00 43.44
2006-07 75.00 50.00 48.27
2007-08 230.00 150.00 155.81
2008-09 298.00 198.00 193.01
2009-10 298.00 188.98 178.59

129
2010-11 250.00 220.00 240.28
2011-12 500.00 458.60 434.02
2012-13 600.00 504.13 508.07
2013-14 550.00 505.10 480.93
2014-15 475.00 470.58 522.98
2015-16 450.00 395.35 406.69
2016-17 450.00 410.50 413.41
2017-18 650.00 - 307.17
(upto 16.10.17)
Above table reveals that public investment in Agricultural Extension
by Central Government has increased from Rs. 43.44 crore during the
year 2005-06 to Rs. 508.07 crore in 2012-13 under the Scheme. Since
modification of the Scheme in the year 2010, the increase has been
more substantial. Amount released to the States during last 3 years is
nearly 100% of the Revised Estimates. Expenditure incurred by the
States during these three years has also been keeping pace with releases
by the Center.
ATMA Scheme provides for active involvement of research system/
research agencies at different level of implementation. State Agricultural
Universities (SAUs) and Krishi Vigyan Kendra (KVKs) are fully involved
not only in preparation of Strategic Research Extension Plan (SREP) and
State Extension Work Plans (SEWPs) but also in implementation of various
programs in the field. They are also representing in all the bodies
namely ATMA Governing Board and ATMA Management Committee at
District level, SLSC and IDWG at State level BTT-BFAC meetings at Block
level. In addition, each KVK scientist may be made in-charge of one or
more block with the District. The KVK scientist technically advises the
BTT and involve actively in preparation of Block Action Plans, especially
with regard to research related issue/gaps and strategies.
Agricultural Technology refinement, validation and adoption segment
of cafeteria of activities including Farmers-Scientists Interactions (FSIs),
to designate expert from KVKs at District level and joint visits by
Scientists and extension workers, organization of Kisan Goshties and
R-E-F linkages are dealt by KVKs. Apart from this, a joint circular on
convergence between ATMA and KVK was issued under the signature of
DG, ICAR and the Secretary, DAC&FW. As per the Circular , one of the
activities is joint visits of Program Coordinator , KVK and Project Director
to at least 5 villages in a district every month.
123 4

130
As per extant ATMA Scheme, there is no provision to fund
construction of ÔKisan BhawanÕ at panchayat level.
[Ministry of Agriculture & Farmers Welfare (Department of
Agricultural Research and Education), F . No. NRM/11(26)/2017-AFC (Pt.),
dated 03.11.2017]
Comments of the Committee
For comments of the Committee please refer to Para No. 1.19 of
Chapter I of this Report.
International accord on Climate Change and India Õ Commitment
Recommendation (Para No. 30)
The Committee note that our country has ratified Paris Agreement
on climate change within the United Nations Framework Convention on
Climate Change (UNFCCC) dealing with greenhouse gases emissions
mitigation, adaptation and finance starting in the year 2020. The
Committee also note that Paris AgreementÕs central aim is to strengthen
the global response to the threat of climate change by keeping a global
temperature rise this century well below 2 degrees Celsius above pre-
industrial levels and to pursue efforts to limit the temperature increase
even further to 1.5 degrees Celsius. The Committee have been informed
that it is a legally binding agreement that covers all countries, developed
and developing, with the aim to strengthen the global response to the
threat of climate change, in the context of sustainable development
and efforts to eradicate poverty. The Committee also note that Paris
Agreement also mandate to contribute funds amounting to US $ 100
Billion by 2020 by the Developed countries along with provisions for
providing appropriate technology and capacity building support for
mitigation and adaptation efforts to be undertaken by the developing
countries.
The Committee note that Paris Agreement reflects the principle of
equity and common but differentiated responsibilities and respective
capabilities. The Agreement acknowledges the development imperatives
of developing countries and recognize the developing countries Õ right
to development and their efforts to harmonize development with
environment, while protecting the interests of the most vulnerable.
The Committee have been informed that India has submitted its Intended
Nationally Determined Contribution (INDC) which is country driven
initiatives for undertaking mitigation strategies for reduction of
greenhouse gases emission which aims to reduce the emissions intensity

131
of its GDP by 33 to 35 percent by 2030 from 2005 level. The Committee
have been assured that no INDC does not include any commitment for
reduction of GHGs emission from agriculture sector.
The Committee note that despite having no binding mitigation
obligations as per the Convention, India declared a voluntary goal of
reducing its emissions intensity of its GDP by 20-25% over 2005 levels
by 2020. The Committee also note that Government of India is
implementing the National Action Plan on Climate Change (NAPCC)
which enshrines eight national missions in specific areas of Solar Energy,
Enhanced Energy Efficiency, and Sustainable Habitat, Water Sustaining
the Himalayan Ecosystem, Green India, Sustainable Agriculture and
Strategic knowledge for Climate Change. The Committee have also
been informed that voluntary measures undertaken by the Government
to promote low carbon strategies and Renewable Energy has resulted
in the decline of emission intensity of our GDP by 12% between 2005
and 2010 which have been recognized by the United Nations Environment
Programme (UNEP) in its Emission Gap Report 2014.
The Committee are of view that voluntary steps undertaken by the
Government for reduction of GHGs emission and to make it a low
energy economy under Paris agreement are in interest of Indian Economy.
However , the Committee are of view there is need to provide adequate
support to the Indian industry and allied sectors in the form of
technologies, professional support and tax rebate in order to emerge as
low carbon intensive sector as well as competitive in worlds market.
The Committee, therefore, recommend the Government to constitute
a dedicated cell for transfer of technologies and other support to
Indian Industry and allied sector. The Committee also desire the
Government to provide tax rebate to industries which invest for Research
& Development of green technologies in the country. The Committee
also recommend the Government to engage diplomatically with other
countries so that developed countries fulfill their commitment for
transfer of clean technologies and dedicated funds as mandated under
Paris Agreement.
Reply of the Government
The Technology Mechanism of the United Nations Framework
Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC) is for promoting innovation;
catalysing the use of technology road maps or action plans; responding
to developing country Party requests on matters related to technology
transfer; and facilitating joint R&D activities.The article 10 of Paris
Agreement (PA), a post 2020 instrument for climate change action,

132
provides for setting up of technology framework to guide work of TM
in promoting and facilitating enhanced action in technology development
and transfer.
The present negotiations are on principle and structure of Technology
Framework (TF). India has taken a stand that TF through its principles
and provisions should be an instrument to integrate and articulate all
important elements on technology development and transfer to
developing countries. It must incorporate all cardinal principles of the
Convention (Art. 4) and the Paris agreement.
These negotiations are continuing under UNFCCC.
[Ministry of Agriculture & Farmers Welfare (Department of
Agricultural Research and Education), F . No. NRM/11(26)/2017-AFC (Pt.),
dated 03.11.2017]
Comments of the Committee
For comments of the Committee please refer to Para No. 1.22 of
Chapter I of this Report.

133
CHAPTER V
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH FINAL
REPLIES OF GOVERNMENT ARE STILL AWAITED
-NIL-
   N EW D ELHI; HUKMDEV NARAYAN YADAV,
02 August, 2018 Chairperson,
11 Shravana, 1940 (Saka) Standing Committee on Agriculture.

134
ANNEXURE I
LIST OF 38 MANGROVE SITES SELECTED
State/Union Territories Mangrove sites
12
West Bengal 1. Sundarbans
Odisha 2. Bhaitarkanika
3. Mahanadi
4. Subernarekha
5. Devi
6. Dharma
7. Mangrove Genetic Resources Centre
8. Chilka
Andhra Pradesh 9. Coring
10. East Godavari
11. Krishna
Tamil Nadu 12. Pichavaram
13. Muthupet
14. Rammad
15. Pulicat
16. Kazhuveli
Andaman & Nicobar 17. North Andamans
Islands 18. Nicobar
Kerala 19. Vembanad
20. Kannur (Northern Kerala)
Karnataka 21. Coondapur
22. Dakshin Kannada/Honnavar
23. Karwar
24. Manglore Forest Division

135
Goa 25. Goa
Maharashtra 26. Achra Ratnagiri
27. Devgarh
28. Veldur
29. Kundalika-Revdanda
30. Mumbra-Diva
31. Vikroli
32. Shreevardhan
33. Vaitarna
34. Vasai-Manori
35. Malvan
Gujarat 36. Gulf of Kutchh
37. Gulf of Khambhat
38. Dumas-Ubhrat
12

136
Table 3. Status of mangrove cover (in km) in India in 2015 and the change with report to previous assessments
State/UT Assessment Year
1987 1989 1991 1993 1995 1997 1999 2001 2003 2005 2009 2011 2013 2015 Change
w.r.t. 2013
Andhra Pradesh 195 405 399 378 383 383 397 333 329 354 353 352 352 367 45
G o a 03333555 1 6 1 6 1 7 2 2 2 2 2 6 4
Gujarat 127 412 397 419 689 901 103 911 916 991 1046 1058 1103 1107 4
Karnataka 0 0 0023323 3 3 3 3 3 0
Kerala 0 0 0000008 5 5 6 6 9 3
Maharashtra 440 444 113 155 155 124 108 118 158 186 186 186 186 222 36
Odisha 199 192 193 195 195 211 215 219 203 217 221 222 213 231 18
Tamil Nadu 23 47 47 21 21 21 21 23 35 36 39 39 39 47 8
West Bengal 2076 2109 2119 2119 2119 2123 2125 2081 2120 2136 2152 2155 2097 2106 9
A&N Islands 686 973 971 966 966 966 966 789 658 635 615 617 604 617 43
Daman & Diu 0 0 0000001 1 1 2 1 6 3 3 7
Puducherry 0 0 0000011 1 1 1 1 2 1
Total 4016 4255 4244 4236 4533 4737 4871 4482 4448 4581 4639 4663 4628 4740 +112

137
ANNEXURE II
VARIETIES OF FIELD CROPS TOLERANT TO ABIOTIC STRESSES
Crop/Varieties Stress/Trait Area of adoption (Zone/State)
12 3
Cereals
Rice
Sahabhagi Dhan, Vandana, Anjali, Drought Upland rice areas of Uttar Pradesh,
Satyabhama, DRR Dhan 42, Birsa tolerance Bihar , Odisha, Jharkhand and Madhya
Vikas Dhan 203, Birsa Vikas Dhan Pradesh, Tamil Nadu, Andhra Pradesh,
111, Rajendra Bhagwati, Jaldi Telangana, Chhattisgarh
Dhan 6, IR64 Drt I
ANNA(R) 4, Indira Barani Dhan-1, Drought Tamil Nadu, Chhattisgarh, Bihar, Odisha,
Sabour Shree, Kalachampa, DRR tolerance T amil Nadu, Puducherry, Kerala,
Dhan 43, ADV 8301, DRR Dhan 46, Karnataka, Gujarat, Maharashtra, Andhra
JRH-19 Pradesh, Madhya Pradesh
Jagjeevan, IGKVR-1, IGKVR-2, CR Rainfed Odisha, Gujarat, Kerala, Chhattisgarh,
Dhan 401, Poorna Bhog, CR Dhan Madhya Pradesh, Bihar, West Bengal,
404, PAC 801, CR Dhan 407, VL T amil Nadu, Andhra Pradesh, Uttar
Dhan 157, Hiranmayee, Tanmayee, P radesh, Meghalaya, Uttarakhand,
DRR Dhan 44, Chhattisgarh Zinc Haryana, Bihar , Assam, Karnataka
rice-1, BNKR 3, Somnath, VL
7620, Purna
Karjat 184, BirsaVikas Dhan-111, Rainfed uplands Maharashtra, Jharkhand, Odisha
CR Dhan 101, Dehangi, Inglongkiri,
Rongkhang
Wheat
PBW 527 Drought Punjab, Haryana, Western Uttar Pradesh,
tolerance Rajasthan
HI 1531, HI 1500, HI 8627 Drought Madhya Pradesh, Gujarat
tolerance
HD 2888, Sabour Nirjal Drought Eastern Uttar Pradesh, Bihar, West
tolerance Bengal, Jharkhand, Assam, Odisha
HPW 349, PBW 644, WH 1080, HD 3043, Drought Madhya Pradesh, Gujarat, Punjab,
PBW 396, K 9465, K 8962, MP 3288, tolerance Haryana, Western Uttar Pradesh,
HD 4672, NIAW 1415, HD 2987 Rajasthan

138
NIAW 34 High Karnataka, Parts of Maharashtra
temperature
stress tolerance
Raj 3765 High Punjab, Haryana, Western Uttar
temperature Pradesh, Rajasthan
stress tolerance
Raj 4037 High Karnataka, Parts of Maharashtra
temperature
stress tolerance
VL Gehun 907, Pusa Suketi HS 507, Rainfed Himachal Pradesh, J & K, Uttarakhand,
Netravati, WH 1080, MP 3288, Sikkim, North Eastern States,
PBW 644, PDKV Washim, HPW 349, Maharashtra, Karnataka, Haryana,
Narendra Wheat 4018, Pusa Kiran, Punjab, Uttar Pradesh, Rajasthan,
Shalimar Wheat 2, UAS 446, UAS 347, Madhya Pradesh, Chhattisgarh, Gujarat,
Central Wheat HS 562, MPO (JW) Delhi, West Bengal
1255, PBW 660, HD 3171
Maize
Buland High Northern parts of India
temperature
stress tolerance
PMH 1 High Irrigated areas of Punjab
temperature
stress tolerance
PMH 3 High Northern parts of India
temperature
stress tolerance
HM 9 High Bihar, Jharkhand, Odisha
temperature
stress tolerance
Pusa hybrid Makka 1 Drought Rajasthan, Gujarat, Madhya Pradesh
tolerance
HM 4, KMH 7148 Drought Punjab, Haryana, Uttar Pradesh,
tolerance Andhra Pradesh, Maharashtra,
Tamil Nadu, Goa, Delhi
Pusa hybrid Makka 5 Drought Whole of India
tolerance
12 3

139
DHM 121 Moisture stress Odisha, Jharkhand, Bihar , West Bengal,
tolerance Gujarat, Rajasthan, Chhattisgarh,
Madhya Pradesh
Candy, D2244, GK 3150, DRONA Drought J&K, Himachal Pradesh, Assam,
tolerance Meghalaya, Tripura, Arunachal
Pradesh, Nagaland, Manipur , Sikkim,
Punjab, Haryana, Delhi, Uttar Pradesh,
Andhra Pradesh, Tamil Nadu, Karnataka,
Maharashtra, Madhya Pradesh,
Rajasthan, Gujarat and Chhattisgarh
Gujarat Anand Yellow Maize Hy-1, Rainfed Gujarat, Telangana, Andhra Pradesh,
Karimnagar Makka Maharashtra, Karnataka, Tamil Nadu
Sorghum
CSH 19 R, CSV 18, CSV 26 Drought All rabi sorghum area
tolerance
CSH 15 R, Kinnerea, Pratap Chari Drought Maharashtra, Karnataka, Andhra Pradesh,
1080, CSV 32F , Phule Rohini, Phule tolerance T amil Nadu, Rajasthan, Madhya
Madhur, RVICSH 28 Pradesh
Phule Anuradha Terminal Maharashtra
moisture
CSH 32 Rainfed Maharashtra, Karnataka, Madhya
Pradesh, Andhra Pradesh, Gujarat
Millets
(i) Pearl Millet
HHB 67 improved, GHB 757, GHB 538, Drought All dry areas of Western Rajasthan and
GHB 719, Dhanshakti, HHB 234, tolerance Gujarat
Mandor Bajra Composite 2, HHB-226,
RHB-177, Pusa Composite 443,
HHB 223, Nandi 64
RHB 173, Mahabeej 1005 Rainfed Rajasthan, Haryana, Gujarat,
Maharashtra
(ii) Finger Millet
GPU 67, DHRS 1, PRM-2, KMr-301, Drought Millets growing dry regions Tamil Nadu,
VL Mandua 347, Indira Ragi-1, tolerance Karnataka
Dapoli safed-1, HIMA, KMR 204,
VL Mandua-352 (VL352), Phule
Nachani-1 (KOPN-235), CO 15,
KMR 340
12 3

140
(iii) Foxtail Millet
Sia 3085, SiA 3156 Drought Millets growing dry regions
tolerance
(iv) Barnyard Millet
CO(KV)2 Drought Millets growing dry regions
tolerance
(v) Kodo Millet
Indira Kodo-1, JawaharKodo 137 Drought Millets growing dry regions, Chhattisgarh
tolerance
(vi) Little Millet
Jawahar Kutki 4 Saura, Phule Ekadashi Drought and Madhya Pradesh Odisha, Chhattisgarh,
lodging tolerance Gujarat
Rainfed
(vii) Proso Millet
TNAU 164 Rainfed Andhra Pradesh, Delhi, Karnataka,
Maharashtra, Tamil Nadu, Uttarakhand
Barley
RD 2660, K603 Drought North west plains region
tolerance
PRB 502, Pusa Losar, HBL 391, Rainfed Himachal Pradesh, J & K, Uttarakhand,
UPB 1008, VL Jau 118, Pusa Sikkim, North Eastern States
Sheetal VLB 94
Pulses
Variety Trait Zone
12 3
Mungbean
Madhira Pesara 347 Drought tolerance Andhra Pradesh
MH 318 Rainfed during Haryana
spring, summer,
kharif season
IPM 410-3, IPM 205-7, SML 1115 Suitable for Rajasthan, Punjab, Haryana, Delhi,
summer season Himachal Pradesh, Uttarakhand, J&K,
Madhya Pradesh, Maharashtra, Gujarat,
Uttar Pradesh, Karnataka, Tamil Nadu,
Tripura, Manipur and Mizoram
12 3

141
Urdbean
Indira Urd Pratham Rainfed and Chhattisgarh, Karnataka, Andhra
irrigated summer Pradesh, Odisha, Tamil Nadu
MNK 1, HK 4 Rainfed as well Uttar Pradesh, Bihar , Jharkhand, West
as irrigated Bengal
conditions
LBG 787 (Tulasi) Suitable for rice- Tamil Nadu, Andhra Pradesh, Karnataka,
fallows after kharif Telangana, Andaman & Nicobar
and rabi paddy
(summer)
Chickpea
CO1, ICCV 10, Nandyala Drought tolerance Southern Zone Andhra Pradesh
Sanaga 1 (NBeG3)
Vijay, Vikas Drought tolerance Central Zone
RSG 14, RSG 888 Drought tolerance North West Plain Zone
PKV Harita Drought tolerance Maharashtra
Pant Gram 5 Rainfed/irrigated Rajasthan, Haryana, Punjab, Uttar
Pradesh, Uttarakhand, J&K (NMPZ )
Phule Vikram Rainfed Maharashtra
Lentil
Shalimar Masoor 2 Rainfed J&K
Pigeonpea
Rajeshwari Ujwala Optimum sown Gujarat, Maharashtra, Madhya Pradesh
rainfed conds. Low rainfall areas and chalka soils of
Low rainfall Telangana
Cowpea
Pant Lobia 1, Hisar Cowpea 46 Drought tolerance Uttarakhand, Haryana, Karnataka,
MFC 08-14 Rainfed Kerala, Andhra Pradesh, Tamil Nadu and
Pudducherry
Fieldpea
IPFD 10-12 Both rainfed & Madhya Pradesh, Chhattisgarh,
irrigated conds. Uttar Pradesh, Gujarat, Rajasthan
Cluster bean
HG 884, HG 2-20 Rainfed Uttar Pradesh, Madhya Pradesh,
Haryana, Gujarat, Rajasthan
12 3

142
Horse gram
VL Gahat 19, Cridalatha, Gujarat Rainfed North zone, South Zone, Gujarat,
Dantiwada Horsegram 1 Rajasthan, Uttarakhand, Jharkhand,
Uttar Pradesh and Maharashtra
Oilseeds
Rapeseed Mustard
NRCDR2, RH 0119, Pusa Mustard 26, High temperature North West Plain Zone, HR, J&K, Punjab,
Pusa Mustard 27, Pant Rai 19 tolerance Haryana, Rajasthan, Delhi, Uttar
Pradesh, Madhya Pradesh, Uttarakhand
NRCDR 601, RGN 236, RGN 229 High temperature North West Plain Zone, Punjab, Haryana,
and salinity Delhi, J&K, Rajasthan
tolerance
Raj Vijay Mustard 2, Pant Rai 20, Rainfed Delhi, Haryana, J&K, Rajasthan, Punjab,
RGN 298, PBR 378, GDM 5 Uttar Pradesh
Toria
Raj Toria 1 Drought as well as Madhya Pradesh
rainfed tolerance
Taramira
Jobner Tara, Jwala Tara Rainfed Rajasthan, Haryana, Punjab, Uttar
Pradesh, Gujarat, Delhi, Uttarakhand,
Maharashtra & Madhya Pradesh
Soybean
NRC-7, JS 71-05, JS 95-60, Pant Pod shattering All soybean growing zones Uttar Pradesh
Soybean 24 and drought & Uttarakhand
tolerance
KDS 344, Pant Soybean 21, Pant Rainfed Maharashtra, Karnataka Tamil Nadu,
Soybean 23 Telangana, Uttarakhand
Pant Soybean 23 Lodging & Uttarakhand
shattering
Groundnut
Ajiya, Girnar1, TAG-24, GG20, Drought Tolerance Central and South zone Karnataka
Kadiri 6, ICGV 91114, GKVK 5
Vijetha, JL 501, Girnar 3ICGV 00350, Rainfed Odisha, Jharkhand, West Bengal, North
HNG 123, Raj Mungfali 1, Gujarat Eastern States, Karnataka, Maharashtra,
Junagadh Groundnut 31, CO6, Gujarat Tamil Nadu & Andhra Pradesh, Gujarat,
Junagadh Gnut 22, Gujarat Junagadh Rajasthan, Uttar Pradesh, Punjab
Groundnut 17, Dharni, Gujarat
Junagadh Gnut 18, Raj Mungfali 2,
CO7, Kadiri Amaravathi, VRI 8
12 3

143
ICGV 00350, Gujarat Junagadh Rabi summer Gujarat
Groundnut 9 irrigated
Linseed
JLS 67, Mau Azad Alsi 2, Rainfed Bundelkhand part of Uttar Pradesh,
Kota Barani Alsi 3, PKV-NL-260, Madhya Pradesh, Rajasthan, Chhattisgarh,
Chhattisgarh Alsi 1, Arpita, Uma, Maharashtra, Karnataka, Odisha, Punjab,
Priyam Haryana, Himachal Pradesh
Niger
Birsa Niger 3 Drought Jharkhand, Chhattisgarh, Madhya
Pradesh, Odisha, Maharashtra,
Karnataka, Andhra Pradesh, West Bengal
JNS 30, IGPN 8004 Rainfed Madhya Pradesh, Maharashtra
Forages
Pearl Millet
Nutrifeed (PAC 981) Rainfed Punjab, Haryana, Rajasthan, Gujarat,
Madhya Pradesh, Maharashtra, Uttar
Pradesh under both irrigated and rainfed
condition in Kharif and summer season
IGPM 5-2 Low rainfall Haryana, Punjab, Rajasthan, Uttar
conditions P radesh, Bihar , Jharkhand, Odisha,
Gujarat, Maharashtra and Madhya
Pradesh
Forage Sorghum
UPC 628 Irrigated summer Uttarakhand, Himachal Pradesh, J&K,
and rainfed kharif Punjab, Haryana, Rajasthan, Uttar
Pradesh, Madhya Pradesh, Chhattisgarh,
Bihar, Jharkhand, West Bengal, Odisha,
Assam, Gujarat, Maharashtra
Bundel Lobia-4, MFC-09-1 Rainfed North Eastern region, Karnataka, Kerala,
Andhra Pradesh, Tamil Nadu and
Pondicherry
Guinea Grass Rainfed Humid/arid tropical and sub-tropical
Bundel Guinea-4 (JHGG 08-1) areas of the country
Dharwad Guinea Grass 1 (DGG-1) Rainfed condition, All India
(RSDGG-1) resistant to lodging,
Non shattering
type/drought
tolerance
12 3

144
Ricebean
Shyamalima (JCR-7-20) Drought tolerant AS
Napier X Bajra Hybrid Drought tolerant Madhya Pradesh, Maharashtra, Gujarat,
PhuleJaywant (RBN 13) Uttar Pradesh, Andhra Pradesh, Tamil
Nadu, Karnataka and Kerala under
irrigated condition
Tall Fescue Grass
EC 178182 Drought tolerant T emperate and sub-temperate grasslands
and pastures of hill zone of the country
comprising Himachal Pradesh,
Uttarakhand and J&K
Setaria grass
Palam Setaria 1 (S 18) Drought tolerant Himachal Pradesh & Uttarakhand
Commercial Crops
Variety/Hybrid Traits Zone
12 3
Cotton
LRA 5166 Tolerance to drought Central Zone
KC 3 Tolerance to drought South Zone
HD 324, CICR-1, Raj DH 7, Drought Tolerant Cotton growing areas
Jawahar Tapti, PratapKapi,
Suraj, Surabhi, Veena, AK 235
VBCH 2231, SVPR 4, Phule Anmol, Drought Tolerant Maharashtra, Gujarat, Madhya Pradesh,
GN.Cot. 25, SVPR 1 (Hy.) Odisha, Tamil Nadu, Andhra Pradesh,
Telangana, Karnataka
Nirmal 18 Rainfed/irrigated Maharashtra, Madhya Pradesh, Gujarat,
Karnataka, Andhra Pradesh, Tamil Nadu
Central Cotton NHH 250 [Hy] Rainfed Maharashtra, Madhya Pradesh, Gujarat
Jute
JBO 1 (Sudhangsu) Drought tolerance Tossa jute belt of West Bengal, Assam,
Bihar & Orissa
Arpita, Kkhyati Water logging West Bengal, Assam and Uttar Pradesh
Rithika, Shresthaa, JRO Rainfed Tossa Jute growing belt, Odisha, Assam,
2407, Ishani, Kkhyati Uttar Pradesh, West Bengal, Bihar
12 3

145
Mesta
Sneha, Shrestha, Shakti, Rainfed Mesta growing belt
Shanti, Satyen Andhra Pradesh, Odisha, Assam,
Maharashtra, Bihar & West Bengal
AMV 7 Drought
Kenaf
Bimal, Central Kenaf JBMP 2 Rainfed Mid and highland rainfed agro-
ecosystem, Mesta growing belt
Sunhemp
Prankur Rainfed agro- Sunhemp growing belt
ecosystem
Roselle
Sampurna, Central Roselle Ratna Adapted to  Mesta Rainfed agro-ecosystem
growing belt
Sugarcane
Co 94008 (Shyama), Co- 0218, Tolerant to Peninsular Zone
Co 09004 (Amitha) drought and Gujarat, Maharashtra, Karnataka,
salinity K erala, Tamil Nadu, Andhra Pradesh,
Madhya Pradesh, Chhattisgarh
Co 98014 (Karan-1), CoC(SC)24 Tolerant to drought, North  Central Zone
water-logging Tamil Nadu, Andhra Pradesh & Odisha
CoLk 94184 (Birendra) Tolerant to drought North Central Zone
and water logging with
good rationing
Co 0239, Co 0238, Co 06927, Tolerant to drought Southern and central zone
Co 0403, Co 86032
Sankeshwar 049 (Co Snk 05103), Tolerant to Andhra Pradesh, Gujarat, Maharashtra,
SNK-632, Revathi moisture stress Karnataka, Tamil Nadu, Kerala and
Madhya Pradesh
D01YANG Drought Assam
CO 0212 Drought Tamil Nadu
12 3

146
Flood/submergence Tolerant Varieties of field crops
Crop Variety Traits Area of adoption
12 3 4
CEREALS
Rice Swarna Sub-1, DRRH-3 (Hy), Lodging resistant Madhya Pradesh, Odisha, Uttar
Pusa Basmati 6, SAVA 127, Pradesh, Gujarat, Andhra Pradesh,
CR 1009 Sub 1, Kanaklata, Punjab, Haryana, Western Uttar
CR Sugandh Dhan 908, Pradesh, Uttarakhand, Assam, West
Rajendra Nilam, PAN 802 Bengal, Bihar ,. Maharashtra
(Hy.), Karjat 8, Karjat 9
Narendra Usar Dhan-2008 Resistant to Saline areas of Odisha, Andhra
lodging and Pradesh and West Bengal
shattering,
saline areas
Amara (MTU 1064), Flood/water Andhra Pradesh, Odisha, Assam,
Jayanti Dhan, CR Dhan logging/deep Uttar Pradesh, Tamil Nadu, Karnataka
505, Samba Sub-1, CR water/submergence
1009 Sub-1, Bheema/ tolerant
Dheera (MTU 1140),
CR Dhan 506
Wheat Sabour Nirjal (BRW 3723) Lodging tolerant, Bihar
shattering
Maize BH 40625 (DHM 117), BH Tolerance to Andhra Pradesh, Punjab, Haryana,
1620 (DHM 113), BH 1576 lodging Delhi and Western Uttar Pradesh
(DHM 111), PMH 4 (JH
31153)
Sorghum GJ-42 (SR-666-1), RVICSH Resistant to Gujarat
28 (Hybrid) lodging
Pearl Nandi 64 (MSH 199) Resistant to Gujarat, Rajasthan, Maharashtra,
Millet (Hybrid) (NMH 69) lodging Uttar Pradesh in summer season
Kodo Jawahar Kodo 137 Resistant to Chhattisgarh
Millet lodging
Finger VL Mandua 348, CO 15 Tolerant to Uttarakhand, Tamil Nadu
Millet lodging
Oilseeds
Indian RH 0406 Lodging tolerance J&K, Punjab, Haryana, Delhi,
Mustard Rajasthan

147
Soybean Pant Soybean 23 (PS Resistant to Uttarakhand
1523) lodging
Niger Phule Karala (IGPN 20004-1) High rainfall areas Maharashtra, Karnataka
Fibres
Jute Arpita (JBC 5), JRCM 2 Tolerant to water West Bengal, Assam, Uttar Pradesh,
(Partho), JRO 2407 lodging and Bihar , Odisha, Entire Tossa Jute
Samapti (Tossa Jute), growing States of the country
Ishani (JRC-9057)
White Jute
Forages
Forage NDFB 3 (Narendra Lodging/shattering Uttar Pradesh, Bihar, Odisha,
Bajra Chara Bajra 3) in normal and Jharkhand and West Bengal
salt affected
soil quality
Forage Punjab Sudax Chari 4, Multi-cut forage Punjab, Haryana, Uttarakhand, Uttar
Sorghum CSV 33 MF sorghum hybrid Pradesh, Gujarat, Rajasthan, Tamil
resistant to lodging Nadu, Karnataka and Maharashtra
Rice Bidhan Rice bean-3 Moderately Jharkhand, West Bengal, Odisha,
bean (KRB-19) tolerant to acid Assam, Manipur and Kerala
soils and water
logging conditions
Sugarcane Karan 6 (Co 0239), Karan Tolerant to water Punjab, Haryana, Rajasthan, Central
5 (Co 0124), CoC (SC) logging and Western UP and Uttarakhand,
24, Gujarat Sugarcane 5, Tamil Nadu, Andhra Pradesh, Odisha,
Gujarat Sugarcane 7, Gujarat
Buddhi 2003 A 255 (CoA
08323)
Sankeshwar 814 (Co Snk Tolerant to salinity, Andhra Pradesh, Gujarat,
05104) water-logging & Maharashtra, Karnataka, Tamil Nadu,
moisture stress Kerala and Madhya Pradesh
Co 9022 (Karan 12) Non-lodging Haryana, Punjab, Rajasthan,
Uttarakhand and Uttar Pradesh
12 3 4

148
ANNEXURE III
DETAILS OF BREEDER SEED INDENT , PRODUCTION AND ALLOCATION (IN QUINTALS) OF MAJOR CROPS FOR LAST FIVE YEARS
Sl.No Crop 2013-14 2014-15 2015-16 2016-17 2017-18
Indent Production Allocation Indent Production Allocation Indent Production Allocation Indent Production Allocation Indent Production Allocat ion
12 3 4 56 78 91 0 1 1 1 2 1 3 1 4 1 5 1 6 1 7
1. Wheat 21403 27502 18816 21250 22827 19162 21680 25672 18901 20366 26148 21067 23185 35086 21800
2. Barley 1037 698 640 862 1820 854 1114 1479 808 1138 1133 900 1141 1527 1119
3. Paddy 5184 11483 4655 4734 5504 3920 4316 8040 4043 4990 12136 4454 5116 8861 4580
Paddy Hyd. 16 23 12 6 88 6 7 62 6 16 3 1 3 7 2
4. Maize 64 91 56 26 19 14 16 23 9 50 43 40 45 11 7
Maize Hyd. 36 17 7 35 40 14 28 7 5 54 26 11 49 41 31
5. Millets 9 6 6 6 102 99 4 7 4
6. Jowar 69 334 59 47 251 47 52 281 55 43 95 43 41 205 55
Jowar Hyd. 6 57 6 5 9 3 9 23 8 11 13 11
7. Ragi 18 87 18 17 80 15 12 60 12 22 48 20 17 77 18
8. Bajra 11 34 10 5 17 5 11 44 6 4 18 4 5 16 6

149
9. Bajra Hyd. 4 31 4 4 18 4 5 25 4 3 16 3
10. Kodo 72 62 2 4 6 4
Cereals Total 27847 40356 24283 27000 30678 24050 27235 35667 23846 26710 39825 26672 29625 45874 27638
1. Moong 1065 726 719 930 679 646 935 1387 1248 705 618 449 744 940 665
2. Urd 762 606 566 581 533 473 426 490 402 433 217 189 437 360 270
3. Arhar 565 792 464 541 657 486 292 654 340 243 736 264 313 747 308
4. Gram 8325 10367 6391 8285 8768 5661 6707 7697 5894 7184 7737 6277 10119 11174 8906
5. Lentil 568 916 442 380 614 525 265 312 267 476 516 383 477 535 430
6. Peas 890 863 565 719 631 568 465 637 597 1409 759 688 623 777 530
7. Moth 99 63 53 98 40 40 83 55 36 59 29 23 62 66 50
8. GUAR 342 193 428 380 205 143 300 281 145 269 257 125 227 277 207
9. Lethryus 115 166 151
10. Cowpea 143 57 31 152 53 53 49 11 6 220 9 8 42 147 29
11. Rajmah 9 1 1 25 6 6 15 14 14
12. Horse Gram 10 2 2 17 22 14
Pulse Total 12767 14584 9660 12066 12178 8596 9522 11522 8905 11034 10887 8414 13190 15225 11576
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 1 01 11 2 1 3 1 4 1 5 1 61 7

150
1. Groundnut 13206 11944 9640 13777 12996 12011 11465 10561 9787 7129 9823 6413 11203 14153 11586
2. Soybean 27571 20718 15507 18417 8019 8019 15326 9009 8346 16941 8956 8922 18079 15311 12153
3. Sunflower 3 20 3 000
Sunflower Hyd. 5 15 5 2 2 9 2 11 2 2 23 2
4. Sesamum 32 41 9 31 59 26 25 33 10 25 39 15 29 28 20
5. Castor 6 7 6 6 19 6 5 13 5 3 9 1 0 0 0
Castor Hyd. 4 9 4 232
6. Niger 21 15 9 10 10 7 11 5 5 13 12 12 14 23 12
7. Rape & Must. 91 212 74 98 209 72 127 290 111 107 306 106 99 248 93
8. Safflower 29 65 6 21 328 324 28 33 21 14 65 12 11 305 10
Safflower Hyd. 14 0 0 0
9. Linseed 43 139 38 42 49 36 62 116 35 50 262 69 49 181 37
Oilseeds Total 41007 33165 25298 32403 21709 20504 27052 20062 18329 24296 19483 15553 29490 30274 23916
1. Cotton 39 93 33 27 36 22 32 57 26 22 41 17 0 0 0
Cotton Hyd. 1 14 1 24 103 26
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 1 0 1 1 1 21 31 41 51 6 1 7

151
2. Jute 11 12 10 17 19 17 16 17 16 11 12 11 7 8 7
3. Fodder 1438 1265 999 595 664 540 504 451 413 503 527 485 639 650 588
Total 1490 1384 1044 640 718 580 552 525 454 535 579 513 670 760 621
83112 89490 60285 72108 65283 53729 64360 67777 51564 62576 70774 51152 72975 92133 63751
1. POTATO 20366 20574 12588 25890 16829 12934 35100 18376 16918 36475 19330 16771 39195 18314 17156
2. VEGETABLE 138 141 107 80 179 43 99 61 36 280 258 79 159 267 138
103616 110205 72979 98078 82292 66707 99559 86213 68518 99331 90363 68002 112328 110714 81046
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 1 01 11 2 1 3 1 4 1 5 1 61 7

152
ANNEXURE IV
DETAILS OF REQUIREMENT AND AVAILABILITY OF FOUNDATION SEED
(Quanity in Quintals)
Crop 2013-14 2014-15 2015-16 2016-17 2017-18
Require- Production/ Require- Production/ Require- Production/ Require- Production/ Require- Production/
ment availability ment availability ment availability ment availability ment availability
1 23 456 7 8 9 1 0 1 1
Wheat 335337 543778 431713 560570 466442 561650 466065 1159611 424424 687295
Paddy 280551 418042 267208 416261 195238 389908 284889 416405 243892 428642
Maize 3001 6522 3006 5300 2282 2545 2168 3068 8750 9104
Jowar 1717 2707 1299 1938 1326 2538 1360 1986 4763 5647
Bajra 223 951 224 310 84 269 67 294 721 1014
Ragi 527 687 413 835 376 740 483 2432 480 720
Barley 5036 14768 8214 9151 7124 8014 9795 10044 8839 9988
Others 99 286 521 484 191 307 254 665 121 356
Total cereals 626491 987741 712598 994849 673064 965972 765082 1594505 691990 1142765

153
Gram 136221 185370 118240 119993 120837 113007 144973 123502 138323 123918
Lentil 2824 3839 6945 5922 9579 4741 7625 5724 7716 7129
Peas 4558 4831 15728 16512 47668 47530 16168 15379 15822 25130
Urd 9612 13902 10764 13956 9336 19010 7271 9503 13363 17725
Moong 6244 9650 13174 18868 6276 8524 7806 11742 5980 11449
Arhar 3627 5765 7989 12304 8047 11959 11962 14010 10068 13998
Cowpea 572 601 772 624 498 606 6121 6171 13938 543
Moth 678 1256 1030 879 670 1075 392 422 1673 2162
Guar 1152 1994 652 1201 527 1256 535 1050
Others 1267 2029 1041 419 1017 1980 1969 1783 126 77
Total pulses 165602 227243 176836 191471 204580 209632 204812 189490 207544 203180
Groundnut 188422 189838 161957 179360 151413 175054 149931 203335 149292 165984
Rape/mustard 5699 11713 3503 7071 3030 4867 2362 5085 3100 5825
Til 233 1810 313 1903 466 969 639 2611 1351 2662
Sunflower 298 434 166 328 192 236 210 236 141 151
1 2 34 5 67 891 0 1 1

154
Soybean 175232 250310 188701 168750 198560 105719 208707 106847 232020 335557
Linseed 357 718 659 828 267 354 392 600 500 650
Castor 876 1159 424 492 441 628 322 733 473 558
Safflower 247 352 414 438 213 312 465 537 274 460
Niger 50 104 71 265 60 157 64 154 91 235
Total oil  seeds 371414 456437 356207 359434 354643 288296 363092 320138 387241 512082
Cotton 628 2366 946 2088 301 284 750 1651 5844 5864
Jute/others 151 627 638 650 658 663 4050 4109 146 236
Total fibre 779 2993 959 946 4800 5760 5990 6100
Others 1481 2940 550 1153 378 620 478 1027 1173 1584
Potato 80215 65716 57589 26517 49576 29955 127470 98158 94955 88438
Grand total 1245982 1743070 1305365 1576161 1283199 1495420 1465734 2209078 1388894 1954150
1 23 456 7 8 9 1 0 1 1

155
ANNEXURE V
ALL INDIA POSITION OF REQUIREMENT AND AVAILABILITY OF
CERTIFIED/QUALITY SEEDS (IN QUINTALS) FOR KHARIF 2017
Crop Requirement Availability Surplus/Deficit Remarks
12 3 4 5
Paddy 7028080 8346745 1318665
Bajra 267817 296767 28950
Sorghum 229016 244971 15955
Maize 1222499 1289122 66624
Ragi 27792 37984 10192
Little millet 635 650 15
Italian millet 2000 3089 1089
Kodo millet 3085 3296 211
Millet 470 470 0
Banyard millet 731 584 -147
Buckwheat 20 -20
Grain amaranthus 40 4 -36
Cereals total 8782184 10223682 1441498
Arhar 329898 375936 46038
Urd 190688 274234 83546
Moong 191790 243821 52031
Cowpea 24070 24616 546
Moth bean 18570 23835 5265
Horse gram 10775 7689 -3086 Meet from Farm
Saved Seeds
Rajmash 15898 15964 66
Guar 78134 84638 6504
Pea 1900 1900 0



Meet from Farm
Saved Seeds

156
Ricebean 1180 1180 0
Pulses total 862903 1053814 190910
Groundnut 1784902 1824967 40066
Soyabean 3565251 4024653 459401
Sunflower 14789 15983 1194
Sesame 22123 24633 2510
Niger 1483 1831 348
Castor 59852 63339 3487
Oilseeds total 5448399 5955406 507006
Cotton 314208 343803 29595
Dhaincha 16164 10000 -6164 Meet from Private
Jute 38880 32944 -5936
Sunnhemp 5366 5525 159
Potato 1500 1500 0
Grand Total 15469604 17626674 2157069
12 3 4 5

157
ANNEXURE VI
ALL INDIA POSITION OF STATE-WISE REQUIREMENT AND AVAILABILITY
OF CERTIFIED/QUALITY SEEDS (IN QUINTALS) FOR KHARIF 2017
State Requirement Availability Surplus/Deficit Remarks
12 3 4 5
Andhra pradesh 1531588 1644352 112764
Arunachal pradesh 12278 12278 0
Assam 706422 706422 0
Bihar 587951 479835 -108116 Meet from NSC and
Private
Chhattisgarh 781405 1007172 225767
Goa 3535 3535 0
Gujarat 841088 902092 61004
Haryana 108365 218369 110004
Himachal Pradesh 25745 25745 0
Jammu & Kashmir 110604 110604 0
Jharkhand 365863 450971 85108
Karnataka 1135257 1281384 146127
Kerala 27743 27748 5
Madhya Pradesh 2031705 2468365 436660
Maharashtra 2613217 2776700 163483
Manipur 10710 10710 0
Meghalaya 33455 33455 0
Mizoram 13150 820 -12330 Meet from NSC
Nagaland 44298 44298 0
Odisha 751219 618267 -132952 Meet from Rabi
summer production,
NSC, HIL and Private

158
Puducherry 985 1036 51
Punjab 106975 106975 0
Rajasthan 800000 884254 84254
Sikkim 2600 540 -2060 Meet from NSC and
Farm Saved Seed
Tamil Nadu 210989 365300 154311
Telangana 842018 1249598 407580
Tripura 20555 24595 4040
Uttar Pradesh 1150930 1152057 1127
Uttarakhand 44165 53952 9787
West Bengal 554790 965245 410455
Grand Total 15469604 17626674 2157069
12 3 4 5

159
ANNEXURE VII
ALL INDIA CROP-WISE REQUIREMENT AND AVAILABILITY OF CERTIFIED/
QUALITY SEEDS (IN QUINTALS) FOR RABI 2017-18
Crop Requirement Availability Surplus/Deficit Remarks
12 3 4 5
Wheat 12126453 14977119 2850666
Paddy 1921962 2059960 137998
Barley 229755 347966 118211
Maize 223260 278751 55492
Bajra 18475 23624 5149
Sorghum 105461 107176 1715
Ragi 2103 9131 7028
Buckwheat 1100 730 -370
Kodo millet 270 140 -130
Italian millet 755 1145 390
Little millet 600 968 368
Banyard millet 50 60 10
Total cereals 14630244 17806771 3176528
Gram 1716310 1926750 210440
Moong 49346 70620 21274
Urad 83282 99503 16221
Arhar 773 5440 4667
Lentil 137004 135865 -1139
Peas 237261 234102 -3159
Rajmash 6958 5284 -1674
Khesari 19687 19600 -87
Meet from Farm
Saved Seeds






Meet from Private
and Farm Saved
Seeds.

160
Cowpea 2856 3596 740
Horse gram 8856 9241 385
Faba bean 500 500 0
Total pulses 2262833 2510500 247667
Groundnut 643621 676325 32703
Soyabean 125 125 0
Toria 13785 13006 -779 Meet from R&M
R&M 217773 242363 24590
Castor 80 80 0
Sesame 26738 26665 -73 Meet from GSSC
Linseed 7511 5016 -2495
Sunflower 5184 5124 -60
Safflower 10989 12291 1302
Total oilseeds 925806 980994 55187
Cotton 2391 2619 228
Oat 16943 16943 0
Berseem 4179 4179 0
Jute 5500 5750 250
Potato 3820846 2986683 -834163 Meet from Punjab,
HP and Private
Total 21668742 24314439 2645697
12 3 4 5
Meet from Farm
Saved Seeds




161
ANNEXURE VIII
STATE-WISE POSITION OF REQUIREMENT AND AVAILABILITY OF
CERTIFIED/QUALITY SEEDS FOR RABI 2017-18
(Quantity in Quintals)
State Name Requirement Availability Surplus/Deficit Remarks
12 3 4 5
Andhra Pradesh 707563 848566 141003
Arunachal Pradesh 3700 3700 0
Assam 354864 354864 0
Bihar 872195 1394931 522736
Chhattisgarh 143500 159045 15545
Goa 2072 2072 0
Gujarat 574068 774444 200376
Haryana 1632700 1890378 257678
Himachal Pradesh 84875 84875 0
Jammu & Kashmir 145170 145170 0
Jharkhand 129995 172211 42216
Karnataka 464786 665895 201109
Kerala 52885 53970 1085
Madhya Pradesh 2460376 2624086 163710
Maharashtra 815090 817634 2544
Manipur 16100 16100 0
Meghalaya 3680 3680 0
Mizoram 637 518 -119 Meet from NSC
Nagaland 8990 6235 -2755 Meet from NSC and
Farm Saved Seeds.
Odisha 183343 92123 -91220 Meet from NSC, HIL,
Seed Village
Programme

162
Puducherry 6392 6722 330
Punjab 1216167 1650509 434342
Rajasthan 1503604 2047827 544223
Sikkim 3660 1946 -1714 Meet from NSC and
Farm Saved Seeds.
Tamil Nadu 551294 592547 41253
Telangana 680918 689264 8346
Tripura 10475 11525 1050
Uttar Pradesh 5285200 5325956 40756
Uttarakhand 42575 249106 206531
West Bengal 3711868 3628540 -83328 Meet from, NSC, HIL,
Punjab, HP ,Seed
Village and Private
Grand Total 21668742 24314439 2645697
12 3 4 5

163
ANNEXURE IX
ALL INDIA CROP-WISE REQUIREMENT AND AVAILABILITY OF CERTIFIED/QUALITY SEEDS (IN QUINTALS) FOR 2017-18
Crop Kharif-2017 Rabi-2017 Total
Requirement Availability Status Requirement Availability Status Requirement Availability Status
12 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 1 0
Wheat 0 12126453 14977119 2850666 12126453 14977119 2850666
Paddy 7028080 8346745 1318665 1921962 2059960 137998 8950042 10406705 1456663
Bajra 267817 296767 28950 18475 23624 5149 286292 320391 34099
Maize 1222499 1289122 66624 223260 278751 55492 1445758 1567874 122116
Sorghum 229016 244971 15955 105461 107176 1715 334477 352147 17670
Ragi 27792 37984 10192 2103 9131 7028 29895 47115 17220
Barley 0 229755 347966 118211 229755 347966 118211
Little millet 635 650 15 600 968 368 1235 1618 383
Italian millet 2000 3089 1089 755 1145 390 2755 4234 1479
Kodo millet 3085 3296 211 270 140 -130 3355 3436 81
Millet 470 470 0 0 470 470 0

164
Banyard millet 731 584 -147 50 60 10 781 644 -137
Buckwheat 20 -20 1100 730 -370 1120 730 -390
Amaranthus 40 4 -36 0 40 4 -36
Others 0 0000
Cereals Total 8782184 10223682 1441498 14630244 17806771 3176528 23412428 28030454 4618026
Gram 0 1716310 1926750 210440 1716310 1926750 210440
Lentil 0 137004 135865 -1139 137004 135865 -1139
Pea 1900 1900 0 237261 234102 -3159 239161 236002 -3159
Urad 190688 274234 83546 83282 99503 16221 273970 373737 99767
Moong 191790 243821 52031 49346 70620 21274 241136 314441 73305
Arhar 329898 375936 46038 773 5440 4667 330671 381376 50705
Cowpea 24070 24616 546 2856 3596 740 26926 28212 1286
Moth bean 18570 23835 5265 0 18570 23835 5265
Horse gram 10775 7689 -3086 8856 9241 385 19631 16930 -2701
Rajmash 15898 15964 66 6958 5284 -1674 22856 21248 -1608
1 2 3 4 5 6 789 1 0

165
Guar 78134 84638 6504 0 78134 84638 6504
Khesari 0 19687 19600 -87 19687 19600 -87
Faba bean 0 500 500 0 500 500 0
Ricebean 1180 1180 0 0 1180 1180 0
Others 0 0000
Pulses Total 862903 1053814 190910 2262833 2510500 247667 3125736 3564314 438577
Groundnut 1784902 1824967 40066 643621 676325 32703 2428523 2501292 72769
R&M 0 217773 242363 24590 217773 242363 24590
Toria 0 13785 13006 -779 13785 13006 -779
Sesame 22123 24633 2510 26738 26665 -73 48861 51298 2437
Sunflower 14789 15983 1194 5184 5124 -60 19973 21107 1134
Soyabean 3565251 4024653 459401 125 125 0 3565376 4024778 459401
Linseed 0 7511 5016 -2495 7511 5016 -2495
Castor 59852 63339 3487 80 80 0 59932 63419 3487
Safflower 0 10989 12291 1302 10989 12291 1302
1 2 3 456 7 8 9 1 0

166
Niger/others 1483 1831 348 0 1483 1831 348
Oilseeds Total 5448399 5955406 507006 925806 980994 55187 6374206 6936399 562194
Cotton 314208 343803 29595 2391 2619 228 316599 346422 29823
Jute 38880 32944 -5936 5500 5750 250 44380 38694 -5686
Mesta/others 0 0000
Fibre Total 353088 376747 23660 7891 8369 478 360979 385116 24138
Oat 0 16943 16943 0 16943 16943 0
Berseem 0 4179 4179 0 4179 4179 0
Dhaincha 16164 10000 -6164 0 16164 10000 -6164
Sunnhemp 5366 5525 159 0 5366 5525 159
Potato 1500 1500 0 3820846 2986683 -834163 3822346 2988183 -834163
Grand Total 15469604 17626674 2157069 21668742 24314439 2645697 37138346 41941113 4802766
1 2 3 4 5 6 789 1 0

167
ANNEXURE X
DETAILS OF ASSISTANCE/SUBSIDY FOR SEED PRODUCTION AND
DISTRIBUTION PROVIDED UNDER VARIOUS EXISTING SCHEMES/
PROGRAMMES IMPLEMENTED BY STATES
Sl. Scheme/ Crop Scale of Assistance
No. Component
12 3 4
1. National Food Rice (a) Rs. 5000/- per quintal or 50% of seeds cost whichever
Security is less for certified hybrid rice seed distribution.
Mission (NFSM) (b) Rs. 10/- per kg. or 50% of the cost, whichever is less
for certified high yielding varieties certified seed
distribution for less than 10 years old varieties.
Wheat Rs. 10/- per kg. or 50% of the cost whichever is less for
certified high yielding varieties seed distribution for less
than 10 years old varieties.
Pulses Rs. 2500/- per quintal or 50% of cost whichever is less for
certified seeds distribution for less than 10 years old
varieties.
Coarse HYVs Rs. 1500/- per quintal or 50% of cost whichever is less
cereals- for HYVs certified seeds distribution for less than 10 years
HYVs seed old varieties.
Hybrid seed Rs. 5000/- per quintal or 50% of cost of seeds whichever is
less for Hybrid coarse cereal certified seeds distribution for
less than 10 years old varieties.
Commercial Seed production
Crops-Jute (a) Production of breeder seed @Rs. 20000/qtl.
based (b) Production of certified Seeds 50% of the cost limited
cropping to Rs. 120/- per kg for foundation seed production.
system (c) Rs. 50/- per kg for certified seed production.
Seed Village (d) Rs. 5500/qtl. for certified seed produced by State
Programme Department of Agriculture, State Agricultural
and Universities, KVKs, SSCs, NSC and SSCA.
Production
of seed in
Government
Farms

168
Commercial Assistance for breeder seed production @Rs. 40000/ha.
Crop - (Rs. 34000 for inputs and Rs. 6000 for contingency) to SAUs,
Sugarcane ICAR and Sugarcane Research Institute (SRI).
Production of tissue culture raised plantlets/seedlings
@Rs. 3.5 per seedling.
2. Bringing Green Rice and Distribution of seeds:
Revolution in Wheat (a) Rs. 5000/- per quintal or 50% of seeds cost whichever
Eastern India is less for certified hybrid rice seed distribution.
(BGREI) (b) Rs. 10/- per kg. or 50% of the cost, whichever is less
for certified high yielding varieties certified seed
distribution for less than 10 years old varieties.
Rice and Production of seeds.
Wheat The assistance for production of seeds @ Rs. 1,000 per qtl.
for HYVs of paddy and wheat and Rs. 5,000 per qtl.for
paddy hybrid for less than 10 years old varieties from the
year 2015-16. Out of this, 75% amount of subsidy is meant
for farmers and 25 % to seed producing agencies for meeting
expenditure including certification cost.
3. National Mission All oilseeds, (a) Full cost for purchase of Breeder Seed of oilseeds
on Oil Seeds and Hybrid seeds from ICAR/SAUs etc.
Oil Palm (NMOOP) Oil Palm (b) 50% of the cost with a ceiling of Rs. 25 per Kg. of
Sprouts certified seeds except sesame which are not older
Cultivation than 10 years for distribution and Rs. 5000/- per quintal
cost as for hybrids and variety of sesame not older than 15
assistance years.
for gestation (c) Full cost of Seed Minikits of high yielding varieties/
period for hybrids which are less than 10 years. (Implementing
oil palm. agency NSC/NAFED/KRIBHCO etc).
(d) 85% of cost of planting material with a ceiling of
Rs. 8000/ha. for entire land holding of farmers for oil
palm.
(e) 50% cost during gestation period for 4 years with ceiling
of Rs. 16000/per ha. for oil palm.
Assistance Rs. 1000 per quintal for all verieties/hybrids released during
for last 10 years and additional assistance of Rs. 100/quintal
production on the varieties/Hybrids released in last 5 years. 75% of
of subsidy amount is meant for farmers and 25% for seed
Foundation producing agencies for meeting expenditure towards
Seeds certification and production etc. (SDAs/NSC/NAFED/
KRIBHCO/IFFCO/HIL/IFFDC/Central Multi State Cooperatives
such as NCCF).
12 3 4

169
Assistance Rs. 1000 per quintal for all varieties/hybrids released during
for last 10 years and additional assistance of Rs. 100/- quintal
production on the varieties. Hybrids released in last 5 years, 75% of
of Certified subsidy amount is meant for farmers and 25% for seed
Seeds producing agencies for meeting expenditure towards
certification and production etc. (SDAS/NSC/NAFED/
KRIBHCO/IFFCO/HIL/IFFDC/Central Multi State Cooperatives
such as NCCF).
4. Rashtriya Krishi All Crops All activities including Seed Infrastructure:
Vikas Yojana (RKVY)
5. National Mission Seed Village a. Distribution of Seeds.
on Agricultural Programme- To upgrade the quality of farmer saved seed financial
Extension and All assistance for distribution of foundation/certified seeds @
Technology Agricultural 50% cost of the seeds for Cereals crops and 60% for oilseeds,
(NMAET)-Sub- Crops pulses, green manure and fodder crops is provided for
Mission on (60% GoI 1 acre of area per farmer for production of quality seeds.
Seeds & Planting and 40% b. Farmers Training- Assistance to train the farmers on seed
Material (SMSP) State Share) production and seed technology @ Rs. 15000/- for a group
of 50-150 farmers.
c. Seed treating/dressing drums - Financial assistance for
treating seeds @ Rs. 3500 per seed treating drum of 20Kg.
capacity and Rs. 5000 per drum of 40 Kg. capacity.
d. Storage bins.
To encourage farmers to develop storage capacity of
appropriate quality, financial assistance is provided to
farmers for purchasing Seed Storage bins. The rate of
assistance is as under:Ñ
@33% for SC/ST farmers for 10 qtls. capacity Rs. 1500
@33% for SC/ST farmers for 20 qtls. capacity Rs. 3000
@25% for General farmers for 10 qtls. capacity Rs. 1000
@25% for General farmers for 20 qtls. capacity Rs. 2000
Certified A Distribution of Seeds- financial assistance for distribution
Seed of foundation seeds @ 75% cost of the seeds of oilseeds,
Production pulses, green manure and fodder crops is provided to the
of oilseeds, farmers.
pulses, Farmers Training - Assistance to train the farmers on seed
green production and seed technology @ Rs. 15000/- for a group
manure of 50-150 farmers.
and fodder Certification Charges- 50% Seed Certification charges
crops maximum of Rs. 600/ha. or actual whichever is less for
through certification of seeds produced under the programme.
12 3 4

170
Seed Seed processing and seed storage godowns- Assistance is
Village provided to establish seed processing and prefabricated or
(60% GOI other type of seed storage godowns 150 sqm. @ Rs. 10000
and 40% per sqm. to process and store 200 MT capacity for each
State Share) seed village. Financial assistance of Rs. 7.56 lakh is available
for seed processing machinery and supporting equipments
etc.
6. Mission for Open @ Rs. 35,000/ha - For public sector 100%, for private sector
Integrated pollinated 35% in general areas and 50% in NE & Himalayan States,
Development crops T ribal Sub Plans (TSP) areas, Andaman & Nicobar &
of  Horticulture Lakshadweep Islands, limited to 5 ha. Output target of seed
(MIDH) for each crop will be fixed by the individual State.
Seed production Hybrid @ Rs. 1.50 lakh/ha- For public sector 100%.
for vegetables seeds For private sector 35% in general areas and 50% in NE &
and Spices Himalayan States, TSP areas, Andaman & Nicobar &
Lakshadweep Islands, limited to 5 ha. Output target of seed
for each crop will be fixed by the individual State for each
beneficiary, before releasing funds.
Import of planting material Rs. 100.00 lakh - 100% of
cost for State Govt./PSUs, as project based activity.
Seed Seed infrastructure (for handling, processing, packing,
infrast- storage etc. of seeds meant for use as seed material for
ructure cultivation of horticulture crops)
@Rs. 200.00 lakh- 100% of cost to public sector For private
sector , credit linked back end subsidy @ 50% of cost of
project.
12 3 4

171
ANNEXURE XI
NUMBER OF VARIETIES/HYBRIDS OF OILSEEDS AND PULSES RELEASED
DURING THE LAST FIVE YEARS (2012-2016)
Crop-groups 2014 2015 2016 Total
Oilseed crops 8 16 50 74
Pulse crops 12 8 43 63
List of varieties/hybrids of oilseeds and pulses released during
the last five years
2014 2015 2016
Oilseeds (108) Oilseeds: 08 Oilseeds: 16 Oilseeds: 50
12 3 4
1. Rapeseed- Ñ Total: 04 Total: 16
Mustard Gujarat Dantiwada Pant Rai 20; PBR-357; RGN-298; GM3
(33) Mustard-4, Albeli-1; (Gujarat Mustard 3); Pusa Double Zero
RSPN 25, GSC 7 Mustard31 (PDZ- 1); RLC 2 (IC 511615);
(GSC 101) PBR 378; Gujarat Dantiwada Mustard 5
(GDM 5) (SKM 518); Raj Vijay Mustard 1;
JK Samriddhi Gold (JKMS 2); JK Pukhraj
(JKYS 2); Bayer Mustard 5450; RLC 3;
Sushree, TL 17; BJC 1 (PC 6);
2. Groundnut Ñ Total: 03 Total: 8
(17) Gujarat Junagadh G 2-52; CO 7; GJG 19 (Gujarat Junagarh
Groundnut-18 Raj Groundnut 19) JSP 51; Central GNut Raj
Mungfali-2 (RG- 578), Mungfali 3 (RG 559-3); Phule Warna (KDG
Phule Bharati (JL 776) 128); Phule Morna (KDG 123); KCG 6;
GKVK 5;
3. Sesame (10) Ñ Total: 02 Total: 4
Smarak (OSC 560), DS-5; PKV-NT-11 (NT-11-91); Gujarat
Subhra (OSC 207) Junagadh Til 5 (GJT 5); LT 8 (Punjab Til
No. 2);
4. Soyabean Total: 06 Total: 04 Total: 05
(18) JS 20-29; NRC 86 (Ahilya 6), SL 958; MACS 1281; JS-20-69L; VL Soya
JS 20-34; KDS 344 (Phule 77 (VLS 77); VL Bhat 201 (VLB 201)
Raj Vijay Agrani), Pusa 12
Soybean (DS 12-13), DSB 21
2001-04
(RVS 20014);
MAUS-2
(Pooja);
MAUS-162;
DSb-21

172
5. Sunflower Ñ Total: 5
(9) Sunlight (NSFH 1001); PSH 996; Phule
Bhaskar (SS 0808); PSH 1962 (Hybrid);
RSFH 1887 (Hybrid)
6. Castor (5) Ñ Total: 3
Kohinoor (NBCH-66); Pragati (PCS-262);
HCH 6 (Hybrid)
7. Linseed (9) Ñ Total: 02 Total: 7
Pratap Alsi-2, Kota Barani Alsi-3; Kota Barani Alsi-4
Tiara (JRF-2) (RL 10193); PKV-NL-260 (NL-260); JLS 79
Chhattisgarh Alsi 1 (RLC133); Divya (BAU-
06-03); Arpita;
8. Niger (3) Total : 01 Total: 2
DNS 4 JNS-30; IGPN-8004
9. Safflower Total : 01 Total : 01 Ñ
(4) NARI-H-23 NARI-57
Pulses (90) Pulses: 12 Pulses: 8 Pulses: 43
10. Chickpea Total: 01 Total: 03 Total : 10
(21) JG-12 Bidisha (BG 1084), Pusa 3022 (BG); PBG7 (GL 26054); Aman
Vallabh Kabuli (CSJ-515); Nandyal Gram 119; Teej
Chana-1, Raj (GNG-2144); JGK-5; BDNGK 798; GBM 2,
Vijay Gram 202 Gujarat Junagadh Gram 6 (GJG6); JG
36 (Jawahar Gram 36);
11. Mungbean Total: 03 Total: 02 Total : 11
(20) MH 421; CO 8 MH 318; Utkarsh (KM-11-584); Yadadri
DGGV-2; Shalimar Moong-2 (WGG- 42); Sri Rama (MGG351); GBM-1;
BGS-9 (SKUAM -300) IPM 410-3 (Shikha); IPM 205-7 (Virat);
(Somnath) SML-1115; MSJ 118 (Keshwanand Mung
2); ML 2056; RMG 975 (Keshwanand Mung
1)
12. Uradbean Total: 01 Total: 01 Total: 3
(11) DBGV-5 Vallabh Urad-1 Indira Urd Pratham (RU 03-14); LBG 787
(Tulasi); PDKV Blackgold (AKU 10-1)
13. Pigeon pea Total: 02 Ñ Total: 6
(13) BRG-4 Prakash (IPA 203); Gujarat Junagadh
(BRG 10-2); Pigeonpea-1 (GJP-1); Ujwala (PRG 176);
ICPH 2671 Mannem konda Kandi (ICPH 2740);
(Hybrid) GT-102; BRG 5
12 3 4

173
14. Lentil (7) Total: 01 Total: 01 Total: 4
Raj Vijay Shalimar Masoor-2 KLB 2008-4 (Krati); KLS-09-3 (Krish);
Lentil 31 (SKUA-L9) RLG-5 (Keshwanand Masoor-1); IPL 526
(JL 31)
15. Field pea Total: 02 Total: 01 Total: 4
(9) IPFD 10-12; Shalimar Pea-1 Indira Matar 1 (REP 2009-1); Central
HFP 715 (SKUA-Inc P-8) Field pea IPFD 11-5; IPFD 6-3; RFP 4
(Keshwanand Matar 1)
16. Cowpea (4) Total: 01      Ñ Total: 2
DCS 47-1 P ant Lobia-3 (PGCP-6), Phule Vithai
(Phule CP-05040)
17. Horse gram Total: 01      Ñ Total: 3
(5) CRIDAHARSHA Pratap Kulthi-2 (AK 53); CRIDAVARDHAN
(CRHG 19) (CRHG-22); Phule Sakas (SHG 0628-4)
12 3 4

174
ANNEXURE XII
VARIETIES OF SMALL MILLETS RELEASED DURING 2016
Sl. Name of Area of adaptation Special features
No. variety
12 3 4
Finger Millet
1. VL 376 All Ragi growing areas Responsive to fertilizer and moderately
of country resistant to blast.
2. GNN-6 Gujarat Moderately resistant to leaf blast and finger
blast.
3. GN-5 Gujarat Late maturing, White colour seed,
Moderately resistant to leaf and finger
blast.
4. VL Mandua-348 Uttarakhand Suitable for organic cultivation; Resistant
to neck and finger blast; and tolerant to
lodging; light copper grains.
5. KMR 340 Karnataka White ragi variety, especially for
confectionary purpose, resistant to blast
and blight diseases, tolerant to stem borer
and aphids.
Kodo millet
1. Jawahar Kodo 137 Rainfed areas of Suitable for sole as well as inter/mixed
Madhya Pradesh cropping, responsive to NPK, resistant to
drought, lodging, and key pest shoot fly
and moderately resistant to head smut.
Barnyard Millet
1. DHBM 93-3 National Responsive to fertilizer application.
Little Millet
1. BL 6 National Recommended for upland cultivation, and
rich in zinc and calcium.
2. DHLM 36-3 National Late maturing variety.
3. Chhattisgarh Chhattisgarh It has high iron content (28.3 mg/100 g
Kutki-2 (BL-4) grain). Tolerant to major pests.

175
4. GV-2 Gujarat Clean White colour and bold seeded,
Resistant to pest and diseases.
5. Phule Sub-montane and Ghat Non-lodging.
Ekadashi Zone of Maharashtra
(KOPLM 83)
6. Jawahar Kutki 4 Rainfed areas of Suitable for sole as well as inter/mixed
(JK 4) Madhya Pradesh cropping, responsive to NPK, resistant to
drought, lodging, and key pest shoot fly
and moderately resistant to head smut .
12 3 4

176
ANNEXURE XIII
SORGHUM HYBRIDS AND VARIETIES RELEASED NATIONAL LEVEL
DURING 2014-2016
Sl. Hybrid Year of Centre Recommended Remarks
No. release for the States of
12 3 4 5 6
Hybrids
1. CSH 2014 Dev Gen Maharashtra, Kharif hybrid, 221 cm tall, White midrib
32 seeds Karnataka, MP , colour, semi erect leaves, semi compact
South Gujarat panicle, Tolerant to Charcoal rot, Ergot,
and North AP Rust, shoot fly, aphids and stem borer.
Non-lodging, & non-shattering, highly
responsive for Deep soils.
2. CSH 2014 Nuziveedu Rajasthan, UP , Kharif hybrid, 185 cm, early maturity,
33 seeds North Gujarat, well exerted compact panicle, medium
South Andhra bold grain, Non-lodging, & non-shattering
Pradesh & TN tolerant to major pests and diseases.
3. CSH 2014 Hitech Maharashtra, Kharif hybrid, 210 cm tall, medium
34 seeds Karnataka, MP , maturity, ear head - semi compact,, awn
AP , Chhattisgarh, less, long bulging panicle, board in upper
Gujarat, and part to symmetrical in shape, white
Rajasthan medium length stigma, creamy white
medium bold grain, resistant to downy
mildew, under natural conditions escapes
grainmold due to little bit more maturity
duration.
4. CSH 2014 Akola Maharashtra, Kharif hybrid, 215 cm tall, medium
35 Karnataka, MP , maturity, ear head - semi compact,
South Gujarat oblong with tapering apex; internodes
and Telangana covered by leaf sheath, dull green mid-
rib, non-lodging non-shattering,
moderately tolerant to major pests and
diseases.
Varieties
1. CSV 2014 Rahuri All forage Forage Sorghum, Goose neck tendency
30F sorghum growing of panicle observed sometimes due to
areas of India environmental fluctuations.

177
2. CSV 2014 Palem Under rainfed Kharif variety, 210-250 cm tall, juicy
31 conditions in stem, white colour mid-rib, waxy bloom,
Kharif season in semi-compact symmetric panicle, pearly
Andhra Pradesh, white seed and grey yellow endospem,
Tamil Nadu, tolerant to grain mold and resistant to
Rajasthan and anthracnose and leaf blight.
Gujarat
3. CSV 2015 ICAR-IIMR All forage sorghum Forage Sorghum.
32F growing areas of
Maharashtra,
Tamil Nadu and
Karnataka (Zone-II)
4. CSV 2016 TNAU All forage sorghum Forage Sorghum, Tall, thin stem, high
33MF growing States tillering, first cut after 62 days
(Zone-I & II) subsequent cut after 50 days, 1039 q/
ha. green fodder yield, 280 q/ha. dry
fodder yield resistant to leaf blight,
anthracnose
.
12 3 4 5 6

178
ANNEXURE XIV
HYBRIDS AND VARIETIES OF PEARL MILLET RELEASED
DURING 2014 TO 2016
Hybrids Area of adaptation Maturity group/duration and
salient features
MPMH 21 Dry part of Rajasthan, Early maturing, brown anthers, lanceolate
(MH 1777) Gujarat and Haryana compact earheads, grey brown hexagonal
grains, resistant to downy mildew, blast
and smut.
HHB 272 Dry part of Rajasthan, Early maturing, brown anthers, lanceolate
(MH 1837) Gujarat and Haryana compact earheads, grey globular grains,
resistant to blast.
86M84 Rajasthan, Gujarat, Late maturing, yellow anthers, lanceolate
(MH 1890) Haryana, Punjab, Delhi, very compact earheads, grey obovate
UP and MP bold grains resistance to downy mildew
and blast other disease.
PHB 2884 Punjab Late maturing, tall plant height,
lanceolate earsheads, grey seeds.
Proagro Tejas Rajasthan Early maturing, medium height, candle
earheads, grey seeds, resistant to downy
mildew.
86M88 Maharashtra, Karnataka, Late maturing, purple anther colours,
(MH 1816) Andhra Pradesh and compact conical earheads, grey obovate
Tamil Nadu coloured grains, resistant to downy
mildew, smut, rust and blast.
86M01 Rajasthan, Gujarat, Haryana, Medium maturing, purple anther colours,
(MH 1790) Punjab, Delhi, UP , MP , compact conical earheads with bristles,
Maharashtra, Karnataka, grey obovate coloured grains, resistant
Andhra Pradesh and to downy mildew and smut.
Tamil Nadu
NBH 5767 Maharashtra, Karnataka, Medium maturing, purple anther colours,
(MH 1785) Andhra Pradesh and medium plant height, compact lanceolate
Tamil Nadu earheads, deep grey coloured grains.
NBH 5061 Maharashtra, Karnataka, Late maturing, purple anther colours,
(MH 1812) Andhra Pradesh and medium plant height, compact lanceolate
Tamil Nadu earheads, grey coloured grains.

179
ANNEXURE XV
SHORT DURATION DROUGHT TOLERANT CULTIVARS OF MILLETS
Crop Cultivar Duration (days)
Sorghum-rabi Mauli 105-110
Sorghum-kharif CSV 17 97
Pearl millet HHB-94 70-75
Finger millet VL 347 95-100
Foxtail millet SiA 3088 70-75
Kodo millet TNAU 86 95-110
SUPERIOR VARIETIES OF MILLETS FOR IRON AND ZINC CONTENT
(MG/100 G)
Crop Iron Zinc
Pearl millet Dhanashakti (8.1) Dhanashakti (4.3)
Finger millet KMR-216 (13.3); GPU-67 (4.81); VL 347
VL 347 (7.9-8.0) (3.5-3.7)
Little millet JK-8 (34.6) OLM-203 (2.37)
Foxtail millet SiA-3088 (12.9) TNAU-59 (3.22)

180
ANNEXURE XVI
IMPORTANT INDIGENOUS MPTS SUITABLE FOR AGROFORESTRY FOR
DIFFERENT REGIONS
Scientific, English & Distribution Potential area for Uses
Common name agroforestry
12 3 4
Acacia catechu Throughout greater parts Kandi area of Punjab, Cutch and katha,
of India except in very Shivalik foothills of medicinal purposes
humid and temperate HP .
region
Acacia nilotica Indigenous to northern Canal side Platonism Carts, Agril. Implements.
[Indian Gum Arabic, Deccan including AP , in Punjab, Haryana, Gum, kutch, Katha,
Babul, Kikar] Maharashtra, Rajasthan, UP , dry part of Bihar , Fodder , 3-5MAI m
3 ha/
Gujarat Chhota Nagpur , central yr
India, Tamil Nadu
Karnataka, Chhattisgarh,
West Bengal
Ailanthus excelsa South of Gangetic region, Tamil Nadu, Karnataka, Catamarans for fishing,
[Tree of Heaven, West Bengal, Bihar , Orissa, Madhya Pradesh packing cases, sword
Ardu] Andhra Pradesh, (industrially important sheaths, matchbox
Maharashtra, Gujarat, in Gujarat and fodder, biomass yield
Rajasthan and Haryana Rajasthan) 41.8 t/ha
Albizia lebbeck Throughout India Uttar South and Central India Poles, fuelwood, fodder
Pradesh to 900 m in the
Himalaya and in the
Andaman
Albizia procera Sub Himalayan tract from Rajasthan, Punjab,        Ñ
Yamuna eastwards to Haryana and some
West Bengal, Satpura lower parts of
region Gujarat, South Himachal and J&K
India and Andaman, Assam,
low elevations in Mizoram,
Meghalaya, Nagaland,
Tripura and AP

181
Anthocephalus It is found in chota nagpur West Bengal, Arunachal Ceiling boards packing
kadamba of Bihar, Raipur and Pradesh, Tamil Nadu, cases, Veeners and
[Miracle tree, Bilaspur districts of Western Ghats in plywood. Writing
Kadamb] Madhya Pradesh, Northern South, in Central and printing paper.
circars tract of Andhra Maharashtra-Sahyadris, Fruits edible. Bark and
Pradesh and the evergreen in North Eastern part- leaves used in medicine,
forest of Karnataka; Assam, lower hills of pencil making, 19 m
3
Southwards to Trivandrum Darjeeling, Terai, Bihar , ha/yr.
in Kerala (Anon, 198) Orissa, in Singh bum
valley and also in
Andaman Islands
Azadirachta indica Through India (except J&K, UP , MP , Gujarat, Oil, Fodder, Timber,
[Indian Lilac, Neem] North-East, Coastal region) Maharashtra, AP and Medicine
Telangana
Bambusa vulgaris Throughout India Throughout India Paper and pulp, poles,
[Golden bamboo, except Arid region post, rayon
Peela bans]
Casuarina Tamil Nadu, Gujarat, 500,000 ha are planted Poles, pulp for paper
equisitifolia Uttar Pradesh, Andhra with Casuarina in the making, Charcoal, 10-20
[Casuarina, Pradesh, Orissa, Coastal States of Andhra MT/ha/yr.
Beefwood Sura, belt of Maharashtra, Pradesh, Orissa, Tamil
Chowku] Karnataka and Kerala Nadu and the Union
Territory of Puducherry
Dalbergia sissoo Sub-Himalayan tract from Jammu & Kashmir, Premium furniture
[Rosewood, Sitsal Indus to Assam and Himachal Pradesh, making and cabinetry, as
Beete] Himalayan valleys Punjab, Haryana, veneer
Rajasthan, Uttar
Pradesh, Bihar, Orissa,
West Bengal, Sikkim,
Arunachal Pradesh,
Assam, Nagaland,
Manipur, Mizoram,
Meghalaya, Tripura,
Madhya Pradesh,
Gujarat, Maharashtra,
Andhra Pradesh,
Puducherry, Tamil Nadu,
Karnataka, Telangana
and Kerala
12 3 4

182
Gmelina arborea Madhya Pradesh, West Bengal, Bihar , Food, Fodder, Fuel,
[Malay Beechwood, West Bengal, Assam, Chhattisgarh, Apiculture, Fibre, pulp,
Gamhar] Andhra Pradesh, Madhya Pradesh, timber, plywood,
Tamil Nadu, Karnataka, Gujarat, Punjab, matches and Medicine,
Kerala, Maharashtra, Haryana, Uttarakhand silkworm culture
Orissa, Assam
Grewia optiva J & K, Himachal Pradesh, Shivalik foothills of Food, Fodder, Fuel,
[Bhimal] Uttarakhand Punjab and lower Fibre
Himalayan foothills
Hardwickia binata Andhra Pradesh, Telangana, Gujarat, Rajasthan Wood, timber , bark -
[Indian Black wood, Tamil Nadu, Karnataka, fibre, Leaves, fodder
Anjan] Maharashtra, Uttar Pradesh,
Bihar, Jharkhand, Madhya
Pradesh
Melia dubia [Persian Tamil Nadu, Karnataka, Andhra Pradesh, Fruit stones are used in
Lilac, White Cedar, Kerala, Eastern Himalayan Maharashtra, Madhya making necklaces and
Malabar neem, Pradesh, Gujarat, rosaries. Wood is good
Ghora neem] Punjab for agric. implements,
furniture, plywood,
boxes, poles, tool
handles
Prosopis cineraria Arid north-western planes Drier parts of Andhra Fodder , Firewood,
[Mesquite, Khejri] of India comprises of Pradesh, Karnataka, Timber , Charcoal, Pods
Punjab, West Rajasthan, Maharashtra and consumed by human
Gujarat, Uttar Pradesh, in Tamil Nadu beings, 1-2 m 3 ha/yr.
dry parts of central India
Salix alba W. Himalayas, Kashmir, Basket and rope work,
[Indian Willow, Kullu Vally, Uttarakhand Cricket bats, MAI 8-23m 3
Bed] ha/yr.
Tectona grandis Gujarat, Rajasthan, UP , MP , Bihar, Assam, West Construction,
[Teak, Sagwan] Orissa, Andhra Pradesh, Bengal, Tripura, Railway sleepers,
Maharashtra, Karnataka, Arunachal Pradesh, Plywood, MAI 21-
Tamil Nadu, Kerala, Punjab, Nagaland, 30m 3 ha/yr.
Manipur Orissa, Goa, Estimated 44% of
Andaman teak plantation of
the world in India
Terminalia arjuna Peninsular India, Indo Jharkhand, Assam, Carts, boat building,
[Arjun] Gangetic plain, Bihar , Chhattisgarh, Uttar Tussar silk, fire wood,
Orissa, MP , Karnataka Pradesh charcoal making,
medicine and tannins
12 3 4

183
ANNEXURE XVII
WATER INTENSIVE INDUSTRIES IN NOTIFIED AREA-NOC ISSUED OFFLINE
Sl. Name of Status Purpose of Type of Location State Quantity of GW File No. Date of
No. Firm application project withdrawal m 3/day Notification
12 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 1 0
1. Abhishek E-212, Kitchlu GW Clearance in Industry Village Sanghera, Punjab 1741 1540 m
3/day Approval vide 13.08.2011
Industries Ltd. Nagar, respect of expansion Block & District (existing) & 201 letter No. 21-4
Ludhiana-141001 of cotton spinning Barnala, Punjab m3/day (proposed) (126)/NWR/
unit through existing CGWA/08 on
4 tubewells and 2.6.2008
2 proposed tubewells
2. Jheel Overseas G-1/91, Badharna, GW Clearance in Industry Village Harmada, Rajasthan 20 m 3/day Approval vide 13.08.2011
Road No. 14, VKIA respect of textile & Block Amer, letter No. 21-4
Extn., Jaipur-302013 handicrafts District Jaipur, (283)/WR/CGWA/
manufacturing unit Rajasthan 2008-1342
dt. 4.11.2008
3. M/s Dalip Village Jatauli GW Clerance in Industry Village Jatauli Haryana 33 through Approval vide 13.08.2011
Industries Halley Mandi, respect of proposed Hailey Mandi, proposed one letter No. 21-4
Block Pataudi, packaged drinking Block & Tehsil (1) tubewell (338)/NWR/CGWA/
District Gurgaon, water unit Pataudi, District 2010-154
Haryana Gurgaon, Haryana dt. 9.2.2011

184
4. M/s Dhillon Kool G.T . Road Phillaur, Ground Water Industry Village Bachowal, Punjab 550 through proposed Approval vide 27.11.2012
Drinks & District Jalandhar , clearance for Block & Tehsil one (1) tubewell letter No. 21-4
Beverages (P) Punjab proposed packaged Phillaur, District only (411)/NWR/CGWA/
Ltd. drinking water Jalandhar, Punjab 2011-396
dt. 13.4.2011
5. M/s Balaji Group Ashok Nagar , At. Industry Village Ponkh, Rajasthan 16 of groundwater Approval vide 13.08.2011
Ponkh, Taluka Tehsil Udaipurwati, through existing letter No. 21-4
Udaipurwati, District Jhunjhunu, one (1) borewell (484)/WR/CGWA/
District Rajasthan only 2011-787
Jhunjhunu-333053, dt. 17.6.2011
Rajasthan
6. M/s Sudh Ganga Maa Engineering Groundwater Industry Village Tikli, Haryana 20 of groundwater Approval vide 13.08.2011
Beverages Serivces, A-24, clearance for Block Sohna, through existing letter No. 21-4
Main Bajghera proposed District Gurgaon, one (1) tubewell (337)/NWR/CGWA/
Road, Rajendra packaged drinking Haryana only 2011-1036
Park, Gurgaon, water dt. 8.8.2011
Haryana
7. M/s SMJ Plot No. 56A, Groundwater Industry Plot No. 56A, Karnataka 26 through existing Approval vide 27.11.2012
Beverages Asia KIADB Industrial Clearance for KIADB Industrial one (1) borewell letter No. 21-4 (Applied
Ltd. Area, proposed packaged Area, Hoskotes-621 only (199)/SWR/CGWA/ before
Hoskote-562114, drinking water 14, Bangalore 2012-1305 notification)
Bangalore Rural unit Rural District, dt. 26.7.2013
District, Karnataka Karnataka
12 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 1 0

185
ANNEXURE XVIII
ACTION PLAN PROPOSED FOR 7 YEARS IN RESPECT OF
MECHANIZATION AND TECHNOLOGY DIVISION TO PROMOTE THE
AGRICULTURE MECHANIZATION WITH A VIEW OF DOUBLING THE
INCOME OF THE FARMERS BY 2022
07 Years vision 2016-17 to 2021-22
Scheme Vision and Outcome Targets
Sub Mission on 1. To increase Farm power availability from
Agricultural the existing level of 2.02 KW/ha in 2016-17
Mechanization to 2.8 KW/ha by 2022.
2. To develop Skilled Manpower in Farm
Mechanization sector.
3. To ensure the quality, durability, safety and
comfort of the farm machinery available to
the users through testing.
4. Technology diffusion and commercialization
through demonstration and entrepreneurship
development for Custom Hiring Centres.
Distribution of Farm machinery for individual
ownership.
5. To lead and coordinate to develop network
of research SAUs/ICAR/Manufacturers and
Farmers promote location-specific
technologies.
6. To promote Agriculture Mechanization in NE
and Himalayan region through a new central
sector scheme.
7. Exchange of Expertise and Technologies
under relevant national and international
agencies in achieving the above objectives.
2.5 KW/ha to be achieved by
2022.
1,48,000 trainees to be trained.
10,270 Agricultural Machineries
including, Tractor , Power Tillers
and Combine harvester are likely
to be tested.
2,80,000 nos. of Custom Hiring
Centers to be established at
village level.
19,000 field demonstration on
farmer field to be organized.
19,000 nos. of farm machinery
would be distributed under SMAM.
14 nos. of Conferences/workshops
will be organized. Coordinate to
develop network of research with
SAUs/ICAR/Manufacturers and
Farmers promote location-
specific technologies.
About 2,00,000 beneficiaries to be
benefitted. Distribution of farm
machinery for individual
ownership.

186
8. Establishment of New FMTTIs for
upgradation of training and testing capacity
As per requirements, the expertise
in the field of Human Resource
Development, testing &
manufacturing of farm
machineries will be exchanged
with developed/advanced
countries.
08 Nos.
Scheme Vision and Outcome Targets

187
ANNEXURE XIX
SMAM (2014-15 to 2017-18)
State Released Nos. No. of No. of No. of No. of Farm
(Rs. in Demon- Trainees Agricul- Custom hitech Machinery
crores) stration Trained tural Hiring hubs banks
Conducted Machinery Centres Established Established
(in Distributed Established at village
Numbers) level
1 2 34 5 678
Andhra Pradesh 101.80 600 1950 58297 275 0 220
Arunachal Pradesh 6.45 1700 2710 3004 3 0 0
Assam 6.70 0 0 305 8 2 40
Bihar 23.01 0 0 0 166 2 229
Chhattisgarh 49.19 0 0 26929 182 0 16
Gujarat 21.50 400 1174 16582 14 3 8
Haryana 47.55 0 185 16100 14 1 15
Himachal Pradesh 15.72 200 150 5235 9 0 0
Jammu & Kashmir 7.57 100 0 7057 4 0 0
Jharkhand 9.37 0 1250 0 0 0 182
Karnataka 84.03 225 75 32275 2 6 4
Kerala 8.26 504 56 935 29 0 43
Madhya Pradesh 103.05 500 310 99635 128 12 0
Maharashtra 68.36 0 0 38129 189 0 0
Manipur 6.86 4752 0 6457 7 0 7
Meghalaya 2.65 200 0 542 0 0 0
Mizoram 8.19 0 0 873 0 0 54
Nagaland 18.20 592 586 2071 21 0 34
Odisha 72.09 200 300 13178 951 0 0
Punjab 102.68 0 0 13700 1576 6 0

188
Rajasthan 29.05 200 1250 13464 45 10 10
Sikkim 3.66 640 233 1317 0 0 10
Tamil Nadu 83.40 0 0 7151 679 0 90
Telangana 27.66 1800 900 25098 49 0 0
Tripura 12.59 0 0 1507 0 0 16
Uttar Pradesh 119.68 400 1251 63219 340 0 1262
Uttarakhand 7.81 240 418 4565 32 0 29
West Bengal 25.63 1700 1475 5565 175 5 33
From Machinery 757 28022 0000
Taining  & Testing
Institute (FMTT)
Total 1072.70 14953 14273 463190 4898 47 2302
1 2 34 5 678

189
ANNEXURE XX
STANDING COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE
(2017-18)
MINUTES OF THE TWENTY SEVENTH SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE
The Committee sat on Tuesday, the 31st July, 2018 from 1500 hrs.
to 1635 hrs. in the Committee Room ÔBÕ, Ground Floor,
Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
PRESENT
Shri Hukm Deo Narayan Yadav Ñ  Chairperson
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Sanjay Dhotre
3. Prof. Ravindra Vishwanath Gaikwad
4. Shri Nalin Kumar Kateel
5. Smt. Raksha Nikhil Khadse
6. Md. Badaruddoza Khan
7. Shri C. Mahendran
8. Dr. Tapas Mandal
9. Shri Nityanand Rai
10. Shri Mukesh Rajput
11. Shri Virendra Singh
12. Shri Dharmendra Yadav
13. Shri Jai Prakash Narayan Yadav
Rajya Sabha
14. Shri Rajmani Patel
15. Shri Kailash Soni
16. Shri Harnath Singh Yadav
SECRETARIAT
1. Shri D.S. Malha Ñ Joint Secretary
2. Shri Arun K. Kaushik Ñ Director
3. Smt. Juby Amar Ñ Additional Director
4. Shri Sumesh Kumar Ñ Under Secretary

190
*2. ***** ***** ***** *****
*3. ***** ***** ***** *****
[THE WITNESSES WITHDREW]
4. Thereafter, the Committee took up for consideration the following
draft Reports:
*(i) ***** ***** ***** *****
(ii) Draft Report on the Action Taken by the Government on the
Observations/Recommendations contained in the 39th Report
(16th Lok Sabha) of the Standing Committee on Agriculture
(2016-17) on ÒComprehensive Agriculture Research based on
Geographical Conditions and Impact of Climatic Changes to
ensure Food Security in the Country Ó of the Ministry of
Agriculture and Farmers Welfare (Department of Agricultural
Research and Education).
*(iii) ***** ***** ***** *****
*(iv) ***** ***** ***** *****
*(v) ***** ***** ***** *****
*(vi) ***** ***** ***** *****
5. After some deliberations, the Committee adopted the draft
Reports at para (i), (ii), (iii), (v) and (vi) without any modifications and
Draft Report at para (iv) with minor modification and authorized the
Chairperson to finalize and present these Reports to Parliament after
factual verification of Subject report from the concerned Departments/
Ministries.
*6. ***** ***** ***** *****
The Committee then adjourned.
(A copy of the verbatim proceedings of the Sitting has been kept
separately).
*Matter not related to this Report.

191
APPENDIX
(Vide Para 4 of Introduction of the Report)
ANALYSIS OF ACTION TAKEN BY GOVERNMENT ON THE THIRTY NINTH
REPORT OF STANDING COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE (2016-17) ON THE
SUBJECT ÒCOMPREHENSIVE AGRICULTURE RESEARCH BASED ON
GEOGRAPHICAL CONDITIONS AND IMPACT OF CLIMATIC CHANGES TO
ENSURE FOOD SECURITY IN THE COUNTRY’ OF THE MINISTRY OF
AGRICULTURE AND FARMERS WELFARE (DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURAL
RESEARCH AND EDUCATION)
(i) Total number of Recommendations 33
(ii) Recommendations/Observations which have been
accepted by the Government
Para Nos. 1, 3, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15,
16, 17, 18, 19, 20, 21, 22, 23, 25, 26, 28, 29, 31,
32 and 33
Total 28
Percentage 84.84%
(iii) Recommendations/Observations which the Committee
do not desire to pursue in view of the Government Õs
replies
Para No. Nil
Total Nil
Percentage 0.00%
(iv) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which
replies of the Government have not been accepted
by the Committee
Para Nos. 2, 4, 24, 27 and 30
Total 05
Percentage 15.15%
(v) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which
Final replies of the Government are still awaited
Para No. Nil
Total NIL
Percentage 0.00%