52
STANDING COMMITTEE ON
AGRICULTURE
(2017-2018)
SIXTEENTH LOK SABHA
MINISTRY OF FOOD PROCESSING INDUSTRIES
ÒImplementation of Scheme for Integrated Cold Chain and
Value Addition InfrastructureÓ
[Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/
Recommendations contained in the Forty-fifth Report
(Sixteenth Lok Sabha) of the Standing Committee on
Agriculture (2016-2017)]
FIFTY-SECOND REPORT
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
July, 2018/Shravana, 1940 ( Saka)


FIFTY-SECOND REPORT
STANDING COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE
(2017-2018)
(SIXTEENTH LOK SABHA)
MINISTRY OF FOOD PROCESSING INDUSTRIES
ÒImplementation of Scheme for Integrated Cold Chain and
Value Addition InfrastructureÓ
[Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/
Recommendations contained in the Forty-fifth Report
(Sixteenth Lok Sabha) of the Standing Committee on
Agriculture (2016-2017)]
Presented to Lok Sabha on 25.07.2018
Laid on the Table of Rajya Sabha on 25.07.2018
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
July, 2018/Shravana, 1940 ( Saka)


COA No. 374
Price : R 39.00
' 2018 B Y L OK SABHA S ECRETARIAT
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct
of Business in Lok Sabha (Fifteenth Edition) and printed by
Anupam Art Printers, New Delhi.

CONTENTS
PAGE
COMPOSITION OF THE C OMMITTEE ............................................. (iii)
INTRODUCTION ................................................................. (v)
CHAPTER I Report......................................................... 1
CHAPTER II Observations/Recommendations which have been
accepted by the Government............................ 7
CHAPTER III Observations/Recommendations which the Committee
do not desire to pursue in view of the GovernmentÕs
replies ........................................................ 17
C
HAPTER IV Observations/Recommendations in respect of which
replies of the Government have not been accepted
by the Committee .......................................... 18
C
HAPTER V Observations/Recommendations in respect of which
final replies of the Government are still awaited ..... 22
ANNEXURE
Minutes of the 26th Sitting of the Committee held on
19.07.2018 ............................................................ 23
APPENDIX
Analysis of Action Taken by the Government on the
Recommendations contained in the Forty-fifth Report
(Sixteenth Lok Sabha) of the Standing Committee on
Agriculture (2016-2017) ............................................ 25
(i)

COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE
(2017-2018)
Shri Hukmdev Narayan Yadav — Chairperson
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Sanjay Dhotre
3. Prof. Ravindra Vishwanath Gaikwad
4. Shri Sanganna Amarappa Karadi
5. Shri Nalin Kumar Kateel
6. Smt. Raksha Tai Khadase
7. Md. Badaruddoza Khan
8. Shri C. Mahendran
9. Dr. Tapas Mandal
10. Shri Janardan Mishra
@11. Shri Praveen Kumar Nishad
12. Shri Devji M. Patel
13. Shri Nityanand Rai
14. Shri Mukesh Rajput
15. Shri Konakalla Narayana Rao
16. Shri C.L. Ruala
17. Shri Arjun Charan Sethi
18. Shri Virendra Singh
19. Shri Dharmendra Yadav
20. Shri Jai Prakash Narayan Yadav
#21. Vacant
(iii)
@ Shri Praveen Kumar Nishad, MP Lok Sabha nominated vice Shri Nephiu Rio, MP
Lok Sabha w.e.f. 27.04.2018 vide Bulletin Part II No. 6866 dated 27.04.2018.
# Vacant due to resignation of Shri B.S. Yeddyurappa from the Membership of
Lok Sabha w.e.f. 18.05.2018 vide Bulletin Part-II Table Office (B) No. 6885 dated
19.05.2018.

Rajya Sabha
22. Sardar Sukhdev Singh Dhindsa
*23. Shri Rajmani Patel
*24. Shri Narayan Rane
*25. Shri Kailash Soni
26. Shri Mohd. Ali Khan
27. Shri K.K. Ragesh
28. Shri Ram Nath Thakur
29. Shri R. Vaithilingam
*30. Shri Harnath Singh Yadav
31. Dr. Chandrapal Singh Yadav
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Shri D.S. Malha Ñ Joint Secretary
2. Shri Arun K. Kaushik Ñ Director
3. Smt. Juby Amar Ñ Additional Director
4. Shri S. Vijayaraghavan Ñ Sr. Executive Assistant
(iv)
* vice Shri Janardan Dwivedi, Shri Meghraj Jain, Shri Vinay Katiyar and Shri Shankarbhai
N. Vegad, who ceased to be the Member of the Committee on their retirement from
Rajya Sabha on 27.01.2018, 02.04.2018, 02.04.2018 and 02.04.2018 respectively.

(v)
INTRODUCTION
I, the Chairperson, Standing Committee on Agriculture (2017-18),
having been authorized by the Committee to submit the Report on
their behalf, present this Fifty-second Report on action taken by the
Government on the Observations/Recommendations contained in the
Forty-fifth Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) of the Standing Committee on
Agriculture (2016-17) on the Subject ÒImplementation of Scheme for
Integrated Cold Chain and Value Addition Infrastructure Ó pertaining to
the Ministry of Food Processing Industries.
2. The Forty-fifth Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) of the Standing
Committee on Agriculture (2016-17) on the Subject ÒImplementation
of Scheme for Integrated Cold Chain and Value Addition Infrastructure Ó
pertaining to the Ministry of Food Processing Industries was presented
to HonÕble Speaker on 30.08.2017 and presented to Lok Sabha and laid
on the Table of Rajya Sabha on 21 December, 2017. The Action Taken
Notes on the Report were received on 29.12.2017.
3. The Report was considered and adopted by the Committee at
their Sitting held on 19.07.2018.
4. An analysis of the action taken by the Government on the
Observations/Recommendations contained in the Forty-fifth Report
(Sixteenth Lok Sabha) of the Committee is given in Appendix.
   N
EW D ELHI; HUKMDEV NARAYAN YADAV,
24 July, 2018 Chairperson,
02 Shravana, 1940 (Saka) Standing Committee on Agriculture.

1
CHAPTER I
REPORT
This Report of the Standing Committee on Agriculture deals with
the action taken by the Government on the Observations/
Recommendations contained in the Forty-fifth Report (Sixteenth
Lok Sabha) of the Standing Committee on Agriculture (2016-2017) on
the subject ÔImplementation of scheme for Integrated cold chain and
value addition Infrastructure Õ pertaining to Ministry of Food Processing
Industries which was presented to Lok Sabha and laid on the Table of
Rajya Sabha on 29.12.2017.
1.2 The Ministry of Food Processing Industries have furnished Action
Taken Replies in respect of all the 8 Observations/Recommendations
contained in the Report. These replies have been categorized as under:
(i) Observations/Recommendations that have been accepted by
the Government:
Recommendation Nos. 1, 4, 5, 6, 7 and 8
Chapter-II
Total-06
(ii) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which the
Committee do not desire to pursue in view of the
GovernmentÕs reply:
Recommendation No. NIL
Chapter-III
Total-00
(iii) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which action
taken replies of the Government have not been accepted by
the Committee:
Recommendation Nos. 2 and 3
Chapter-IV
Total-02
(iv) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which final
replies of the Government are still awaited:
Recommendation No. NIL
Chapter-V
Total-00

2
1.3 The Committee trust that utmost importance would be given
to implementation of the Observations/Recommendations accepted
by the Government. In cases, where it is not possible for the
Department to implement the Recommendations in letter and spirit
for any reason, the matter should be reported to the Committee
with the reasons for non-implementation. The Committee desire
that further Action Taken Notes on the Observations/
Recommendations contained in Chapter I of this Report be furnished
to them within three months.
1.4 The Committee will now deal with the action taken by the
Government on some of the Recommendations in the succeeding
paragraphs.
A. Setting up of Farm Level Infrastructure
Recommendation (Para No. 2)
1.5 The Committee had observed/recommended as under:-
ÒThe Committee note that though the Schemes are made for the
farmers but the farmers are not the real beneficiary. Similar is the
case with the Scheme for Cold Chain and Value Addition
Infrastructure. The Scheme was launched in 2008 but even after
the lapse of nine years the benefits of the Scheme are yet to
percolate to the grassroot level particularly to the small and
marginal farmers. The Committee feel that slow pace of
implementation, faulty design and guidelines of the Scheme etc.
are some of the reasons for execution of the scheme. The Ministry
has submitted that the guidelines of the Scheme for Cold Chain
and Value Addition Infrastructure have lately been revised and the
Scheme has been made more farmer friendly. The Committee are
of the opinion that the farmers particularly small and marginal
farmers could only reap the benefit of the Scheme if the
infrastructure is set up in rural areas. The small and marginal
farmers will get immensely benefitted by farm level infrastructure
because it would reduce their cost of transportation and help
them in adding value to their produce. The Ministry has informed
that under the new Scheme SAMPADA, a component with backward
and forward linkage has been incorporated and it would facilitate
the farmers with farm level infrastructure. The Committee are
happy to note that the Farm Level Infrastructure is proposed to be
situated in the catchment area of the targeted produce and would
have at least one of the facilities of integrated pack house, cold

3
storage and/or pre-cooling units in addition to any other processing
facilities that the promoter may like to set up. They hope that
these measures will help the farmers to get the real benefits of
the scheme. The Committee recommend that in order to encourage
setting up of cold chain infrastructure in rural areas, the subsidy
provided by the Government be enhanced for the entrepreneurs/
developers who set up infrastructure in rural areas. Ó
1.6 In its reply, the Ministry has stated as under :-
ÒCurrently, the Ministry is assisting 228 cold chain projects. These
include 103 cold chain projects which have been approved in the
month of March/April, 2017. Out of 228 cold chain projects being
assisted by Ministry, 109 projects have achieved completion and
started commercial operations as on 14.11.2017. Therefore, each
phase has its own implementation schedule. Some of the cold
chain projects sanctioned by the Ministry have achieved completion
as per implementation schedule prescribed in the scheme
guidelines/approval letter. However , in majority of the cases, it is
observed that the projects have over shot the timelines by few
months to more than a year.
Some of the reasons for delay in implementation of projects is due
to change in location by the promoter to ensure viability of the
project, difficulty in obtaining various statutory approvals integral
to the commissioning of the project for example permission for
change of land use, exemption from land ceiling laws, Consent to
establish and operate units from State Pollution Control Board,
NoC from Town & Country Planning Department, sanction of
electricity and water connection, remote location [especially in
the hilly and North East Region] and sometimes financial difficulties
on the part of the promoters to implement the project.
The Ministry conducts regular review meetings with the promoters
of the project at the level of Joint Secretary/Secretary/Hon Õble
Minister , FPI to monitor the projects and to resolve the issues, if
any, arising during the course of implementation. The projects are
also reviewed in Inter Ministerial Approval Committee meetings
chaired by Hon Õble Minister , FPI. For effective resolution of issues
and speedy clearances, State Government representatives have
been included as members of the IMAC and are also invited for the
review meetings.
Further , with a view to ensure timely completion of the project a
provision of imposing penalty in terms of reducing the grant amount,

4
on case to case basis has been incorporated in the scheme guidelines
revised on 29.08.2016. A penalty of 1% of the quantum of grant
instalment has been laid down for each month Õs delay beyond the
stipulated time line subject to a maximum of 5% of the instalment
amount.
For the benefit of rural areas, the guidelines of Scheme for
Integrated Cold Chain and Value Addition Infrastructure have been
revised and now, to avail financial assistance, the applicant has to
set up farm level infrastructure as a mandatory component.
The Government has allocated a fund of Rs. 150 crore for taking
up 50 projects under the Scheme for Creation of Backward and
Forward Linkages during the period coterminous with 14th Finance
Commission i.e., upto 2019-20. The Ministry has issued an Expression
of Interest on 25.08.2017 inviting proposals from interested
entrepreneurs through online system. Last date for receipt of online
applications was 13.11.2017. Total 55 nos. of applications have
been received under the scheme for Creation of Backward and
Forward Linkages. Ó
1.7 The Committee note that though the scheme for Cold Chain
and value Addition infrastructure was launched in 2008, yet the
benefits of this scheme have not percolated to the grassroots level
particularly to the small and marginal Farmers mainly due to slow
pace of implementation, faulty design and guidelines of the schemes.
The Committee further note that the scheme has been revised
lately and has been made more farmer friendly. The Ministry has
also informed that under the new scheme SAMPADA (Scheme for
Agro-Marine Processing and Development of Agro-Processing
Clusters), a component with backward and forward linkage has been
incorporated and it would facilitate the farmers with farm level
infrastructure. As stated by the Ministry, in majority of the cases,
the projects have overshot the timeline by few months to more
than a year. The Committee, therefore, recommend that in order
to make the scheme beneficial to small and marginal farmers, the
scheme should be implemented in Rural areas so that these farmers
can reap the benefit of the scheme. The Committee once again
reiterate that in order to encourage setting up of Cold Chain
infrastructure in Rural areas, the subsidy provided by the Government
be enhanced for entrepreneurs/developers who set up Infrastructure
in Rural areas. The Committee would like to be informed of the
action taken in this regard.

5
B. Creation of Cold Storage Facilities Near Rural Areas
Recommendation (Para No. 3)
1.8 The Committee had observed/recommended as under:Ñ
ÒThe Committee note that the farmers in the country face lot of
hassles on transportation of their surplus produce to the Cold
Storages located at far off places from their farm. Lack of proper
storage facilities at the farm level result in huge losses of perishable
items. The Committee note that with a view to provide robust
backward integration and ensuring remunerative prices to the
farmers for their produce creation of Farm level infrastructure has
been made mandatory in the revised operational guidelines of the
Cold Chain Scheme issued on 29.08.2016. This Farm Level
Infrastructure would be situated in the catchment area of the
targeted produce and would have at least one of the facilities of
integrated pack house, cold storage and/or pre-cooling units in
addition to any other processing facilities that the promoter may
like to set up. The Committee appreciate this revision in the
guidelines adherence to which will surely provide far reaching
benefits to the small and marginal farmers. The Committee desire
that a status report be submitted in this regard for the projects
which have been sanctioned after the revision of the operational
guidelines.Ó
1.9 In its reply, the Ministry has stated as under :Ñ
ÒIt is hoped that scheme for Integrated Cold Chain and Value
Addition Infrastructure and Creation of Backward and Forward
Linkages identify areas measures to take the sector forward so as
to help build an efficient and robust supply chain for agricultural/
horticulture produce in the country. This will not only reduce the
post harvest losses but will also help farmers to avoid distress sale,
stabilize the prices of agriculture produce and contain food inflation
in the country.
Currently, the Ministry is assisting 228 cold chain projects. These
include 103 cold chain projects which have been sanctioned in the
month of March/April, 2017 after the revision of guidelines. Out of
these 103 total 6 projects have been cancelled due to non-
submission of compliance report/non-implementation/withdrawal
of proposals. Ó
[F .No. 6-12/2017-Parl., Dated 29.12.2017]

6
1.10 The Committee note that farm level infrastructure has
been made mandatory in the revised operational guidelines of the
Cold Chain Scheme issued on 29.8.2016 and it would be situated in
the catchment area of the targeted produce. In their Action Taken
Replies the Ministry has stated that it is assisting 228 Cold Chain
Projects and these include 103 projects sanctioned after the revised
guidelines. Out of these 103 projects 6 projects have been cancelled.
The Committee, however note that there is regional imbalance in
sanctioning of Cold Chain Projects as major chunks of projects are
in the States of Maharashtra, Uttar Pradesh, Gujarat, Punjab and
Uttarakhand. While States such as Bihar, Odisha, Telangana,
Chhattisgarh have been neglected. The Committee feel, that this
imbalance should be removed. The Ministry should publicize its
scheme of Cold Chain through print and electronic media to increase
the awareness of people, especially in these States so that more
proposals can come from them. The aim of the Government should
be to cater to the needs of small and marginal farmers all over the
country. The Committee desire the Government to conduct a survey
to find out the reasons for poor response to the scheme in these
States and take corrective measures. The Committee would like to
be informed of the action taken in this regard.

7
CHAPTER II
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN
ACCEPTED BY THE GOVERNMENT
Budgetary Allocation and Implementation of Scheme
Recommendation (Para No. 1)
The Scheme for Integrated Cold Chain and Value Addition
Infrastructure was launched with an objective to provide adequate and
efficient cold chain infrastructure right from the farm gate to the
consumer. The Scheme envisages to minimize postharvest losses, reduce
wastage, ensure value addition so that the farmers could get better
return of their produce. The Committee are happy to note that during
12th Plan period Rs. 704.14 crore were allocated for the Scheme and
the Ministry was able to expend Rs. 683.44 crore i.e. almost 97% of the
total allocation of the Scheme. The Ministry has informed that during
the current fiscal year, the total allocation for the Scheme is Rs. 180
crore. However, the Committee are constrained to note that some of
the cold chain projects sanctioned during Phase 2 (2011-12), Phase 3
(2012-13), Phase 4 (2015-16) and Phase-5 (2015-16) are still under
implementation. The slow pace of implementation of the Scheme
defeats the very purpose of the Scheme. The Ministry has informed
that the Government has approved taking up of 100 new integrated
cold chain projects in 2016-17. Presently, the Ministry is assisting 236
cold chain projects. Out of 236, 102 projects have been completed
and 134 are under implementation. The Committee are apprehensive
that with this pace of implementation, it would not be possible to
complete the projects within stipulated time frame. The Committee
also note that during 2015-16, the allocation under the Scheme was
Rs. 180 crore for the 30 sanctioned projects, whereas during the current
fiscal, the allocation is Rs. 180 crore only in respect of 103 sanctioned
projects. The Committee are unable to comprehend that how the
Ministry of Food Processing Industries will be able to implement the
projects with such a meager amount. The Committee, therefore
recommend that the Ministry should raise the issue with the Ministry
of Finance and seek additional allocation for the projects sanctioned
so that they could be completed within the timeframe. The Committee
would like to be apprised about the steps taken in this regard. They
also recommend that the implementation of the pending projects be
expedited.

8
Reply of the Government
Against allocation of Rs. 704.17 crore during 12th Plan period for
the Cold Chain Scheme, Rs. 683.44 crore have been released towards
implementation of the scheme. Status of fund utilization under Cold
Chain Scheme is as under:Ñ
(Rs. in crore)
Period Allocation Expenditure
11th Plan Period 163.72 157.08
12th Plan Period (2012-13 to 2016-17)
2012-13 81.37 81.13
2013-14 103.73 103.72
2014-15 153.36 153.36
2015-16 180.5 160.35
2016-17 185.21 184.88
Total of 12th Plan 704.17 683.44
2017-18 180.00 95.02
(as on 14.11.2017)
Government had approved taking up of 100 new integrated cold
chain projects in the FY 2016-17. The Ministry had issued revised
operational guidelines for the scheme for Integrated Cold Chain and
Value Addition Infrastructure on 29.08.2016. Based on the revised
guidelines, the Ministry had issued the Expression of Interest on
31.08.2016 inviting proposals for taking up around 100 cold chain
projects for financial assistance. Last date for receipt of proposals was
15.11.2016. The Ministry had received total 308 proposals. After scrutiny
and evaluation of all 308 proposals, the Ministry has approved 103
eligible proposals for financial assistance during March/April 2017.
Currently, the Ministry is assisting 228 cold chain projects. These
include 103 cold chain projects which have been approved in the
month of March/April, 2017. Out of 228 cold chain projects being
assisted by Ministry, 109 projects have achieved completion and started
commercial operations as on 14.11.2017. The total project cost of 228
projects is Rs. 6034.13 crore with private investment of Rs. 4216.24
crore and grant-in-aid of Rs. 1817.89 crore. State-wise status of
implementation of 228 projects is at Annexure-I.

9
Operationalization of 228 cold chain projects is expected to create
a cold chain capacity of 7.45 lakh MT of Cold Storage/Controlled
Atmosphere/Deep Freezer, 213.70 MT/Hr of Individual Quick Freeze,
107.99 lakh Litres Per Day of Milk Processing/Storage and 1297 nos. of
Reefer Vehicles.
Ministry has so far created a capacity of 4.35 lakh metric tonnes
of cold storage, 111.50 metric tonnes per hour of Individual Quick
Freezing (IQF), 48.85 lakh litres per day of Milk processing/storage and
646 reefer vans. Parliamentary Committee on Agriculture in their 38th
Report on Demands for Grants for the year 2017-18 of Ministry of Food
Processing Industries had raised the issue of budgetary allocation for
food processing sector against Central Plan Outlay and the Ministry has
conveyed the observations of the Hon Õble Committee to the Ministry
of Finance, vide D.O. letter dated 01.08.2017 from Secretary (FPI) to
Finance Secretary & Secretary (Expenditure) and requested to allocate
adequate funds for programmes of the Ministry in future.
Ministry is making all out efforts to complete all the approved
projects timely by closely and regularly monitoring the progress of the
scheme implementation.
[F .No. 6-12/2017-Parl., Dated 29.12.2017]
State-wise Distribution of Cold Chain Projects
Recommendation (Para No. 4)
The Committee note that aim of the Scheme is to provide Cold
Chain and Value Addition facilities without any break, from the farm
gate to the consumer. It will not only provide a big boost to the growth
of food processing sector in the country but also help in value addition
and ensuring better prices to farmers. However , the Committee observe
that the number of Cold Chain projects in some of the agriculturally
important States like Uttar Pradesh, Bihar, Karnataka, Madhya Pradesh
etc. are not in consonance with their contribution to agriculture sector.
The Ministry has informed that the scheme guidelines of Cold Chain do
not provide state wise allocation of cold chain projects. The Ministry
has further stated that the scheme guidelines of Integrated Cold Chain
and Value Addition Infrastructure provide that the criteria of maintaining
regional balance may be taken into account by the Ministry while
deciding the projects for sanction of grant under the scheme. However,
these criteria will be applicable only to those proposals which are
found eligible as per these guidelines. The Committee are of view that
establishment of adequate numbers of Cold Chain infrastructure in

10
these States will not only reduce the post-harvest losses but also
provide sustainable employment opportunities and economic growth in
the region. The Committee, therefore, recommend the Ministry to
focus on these States as well and take steps to encourage entrepreneurs
to apply for establishment of Cold Chain Infrastructure.
Reply of the Government
The scheme guidelines of Cold Chain do not provide State-wise
allocation of cold chain projects. The applications under the scheme
are invited through Expression of Interest (EOI) issued by the Ministry
against the pre-approved fixed number of vacancies. The proposals
have to meet certain basic eligibility criteria as per the scheme
guidelines in order to become eligible for consideration of financial
assistance. Further, the scheme provides flexibility and freedom to the
entrepreneur to set up the cold chain projects keeping in view his
business model, availability of raw material and techno-economic
viability of the project. Selection of projects is done through a two-
tier process of technical evaluation and approval by an Inter-Ministerial
Committee (IMAC) chaired by Hon Õble Minister (FPI). The approval to
the project is granted on the basis of rank secured by it in the
inter-se merit list of eligible proposals.
The scheme guidelines of Integrated Cold Chain and Value Addition
Infrastructure provide that the criteria of maintaining regional balance
may be taken into account by the Ministry while deciding the projects
for sanction of grant under the scheme. However , these criteria will
be applicable only to those proposals which are found eligible as per
these guidelines. While considering the proposals received against the
Expression of Interest issued on 31.08.2016, Inter-Ministerial Approval
Committee chaired by Hon Õble Minister , FPI has approved two eligible
cold chain proposals one each in Jammu & Kashmir and Andaman &
Nicobar Islands for financial assistance despite their being low in the
merit list.
[F .No. 6-12/2017-Parl., Dated 29.12.2017]
Integrated Cold Chain Network
Recommendation (Para No. 5)
The Committee note that post-harvest losses of agricultural produce
are of enormous magnitude in the country. In terms of CIPHET Report,
the yearly losses of major perishable agricultural produce are estimated
to be Rs. 92,651 crore. This type of colossal losses not only causes

11
national wastage but also endangers the livelihood of farmers. With a
view to setting up of backward and forward linkages in agricultural
supply chain in the Country to minimize the post-harvest losses and to
enhance the value addition in agricultural produce, the Ministry of
Food Processing Industries had launched the scheme of Cold Chain,
Value Addition and Preservation Infrastructure during the year 2008.
This was an innovative scheme having its potential to revolutionize the
rural economy, increase farm income and sustain the livelihood.
However , the Committee feel that the scheme has not progressed at
desired pace and direction. Even after 9 years of implementation of
this scheme, only 236 projects have been sanctioned till date. The
Committee, therefore, recommend creation of a countrywide integrated
cold chain infrastructure network at block level and district level. The
guidelines of the Scheme may be suitably revised. The Committee
would like to be apprised of the progress made in this regard. Also to
ensure proper implementation of the Scheme, the Committee
recommend that a Cold Chain Coordination and Monitoring Committee
at the district level be constituted. The Committee are also of the
view that the public representatives (MP/MLA) of the respective districts
may be included in the Cold Chain Coordination and Monitoring
Committee. The Committee feel that inclusion of a public representative
in such Committees will facilitate the expeditious implementation of
the Scheme. The Committee would like to be apprised of the action
taken by the Ministry in this regard.
Reply of the Government
Ministry has noted the recommendation of committee for creation
of a countrywide integrated cold chain infrastructure network at block
level and district level. Ministry has also noted recommendation of
committee that a Cold Chain Coordination and Monitoring Committee
at the district level be constituted to ensure proper implementation
of the Scheme and the Committee shall contain the public
representatives (MP/MLA) of the respective districts in the Cold Chain
Coordination and Monitoring Committee.
[F .No. 6-12/2017-Parl., Dated 29.12.2017]
Provision of Training in Value Addition Facilities
Recommendation (Para No. 6)
The Committee note that Value Addition facilities being provided
under the Scheme for Cold Chain and Value Addition Infrastructure is
an important component of the Scheme. The income and bargaining
capacity of the farmers can be raised by adding value to their produce.
Value addition to the produce makes it marketable. The Committee

12
are of view that benefits of the Scheme cannot be achieved unless
there are adequate efforts for providing requisite training to the farmers
on value addition. The Ministry has informed that the Ministry of Food
Processing Industries does not provide education and training to the
farmers for availing the benefits under the various schemes being
implemented by the Ministry. However , Department of Agriculture,
Cooperation and Farmers Welfare, Ministry of Agriculture & Farmers
Welfare under their scheme of Mission for Integrated Development of
Horticulture (MIDH) provide various types of training to farmers/Self
Help Groups (SHGs)/FPOs to enhance horticulture production,
enhancement of farmer income, improve productivity and strengthen
nutritional security. The farmers particularly small and marginal farmers
have the capacity of producing but for want of knowledge and awareness
they are deprived of reaping the benefits. The Committee therefore
recommend the Ministry to make provision under the Scheme to create
awareness and provide training to the farmers on Value addition so as
to prevent wastage and raise the value of the product.
Reply of the Government
Department of Agriculture, Cooperation and Farmers Welfare,
Ministry of Agriculture & Farmers Welfare under their scheme of Mission
for Integrated Development of Horticulture (MIDH) provide various types
of training to farmers/Self Help Groups (SHGs)/FPOs to enhance
horticulture production, enhancement of farmer income, improve
productivity and strengthen nutritional security.
Further, Individual Quick Freeze (IQF), Spiral Freezer , Blast Freezer,
Plate Freezer , Vacuum Freeze Drying, Milk Processing for packaged
milk and facilities, preparation for Paneer , Cheese, Dahi, Lassi, Butter
Milk etc., Ripening Chamber , Poultry/Meat/Fishery/Marine Processing
unit, ready to eat, ready to cook are some of the value addition
facilities which are available in the completed cold chain projects
assisted by the Ministry.
Ministry, under the Scheme of Promotional Activities organizes
seminars/workshops/exhibitions etc. to create awareness about all the
schemes of the Ministry including Cold Chain Scheme. These events are
organized in association with Apex Industry bodies and State Government
after giving wide publicity to encourage all potential beneficiaries
including farmers to participate in such events.
Ministry has also appointed two Technical Agencies to organize
farmers into FPO Õs and assist them in taking advantage of the schemes
of the Ministry.
[F .No. 6-12/2017-Parl., Dated 29.12.2017]

13
Implementation of Scheme in North-Eastern Region
Recommendation (Para No. 7)
The North Eastern region with its agro-friendly climate and agrarian
roots has the potential to be a sunrise zone for food processing. The
various subsidies and incentives extended by the Government set the
stage for making food processing a lucrative option in the area. The
Committee are aware of the fact that the processing of produce will
lead to better value addition and return to the growers. The Committee
note that the Ministry is providing higher level of subsidy in all the
schemes. The scheme provides financial assistance @ 50% of the total
cost of plant & Machinery and technical civil work for storage and
transport infrastructure for North East States, Himalayan States, ITDP
Areas & islands. For Value Addition and processing infrastructure grant-
in-aid @75% for general area and for North East States, Himalayan
States, ITDP Areas & islands respectively is envisaged and for irradiation
facilities grant-in-aid is provided @75% for North East States, Himalayan
States, ITDP Areas & Islands. Also, 10% of the budget allocation is
earmarked for assisting projects in North Eastern States. The Committee
note that under the scheme for Integrated Cold Chain and Value Addition
Infrastructure, out of 43 integrated cold chain projects in North Eastern
States, Jammu & Kashmir, Himachal Pradesh and Uttarakhand. Only 09
projects are located in North Eastern region. Out of these 09 projects
only 04, (one in Assam and one in Manipur and two in Mizoram) have
been completed. Considering the fact that most of the projects in the
region were approved during 2011-12 and that the implementation
schedule for a cold chain project is 24 months in North East States, the
Committee are unhappy to note the slow pace of implementation of
the Scheme in the NE States and recommend the Ministry to expedite
the implementation of the projects in the region.
Reply of the Government
Under the scheme for Integrated Cold Chain and Value Addition
Infrastructure, the Ministry is assisting 43 integrated cold chain projects
in North Eastern States, Jammu & Kashmir , Himachal Pradesh and
Uttarakhand. Details of integrated cold chain projects along with
facilities supported under the scheme are at Annexure-II & III
respectively. In order to promote development of cold chain
infrastructure in NE region and hilly States, higher rate of assistance
@ 50% for storage and transport infrastructure and 75% for value addition
and processing infrastructure subject to a maximum of Rs. 10 crore
per project has been envisaged. Further , 10% of the budget allocation

14
has also been earmarked for assisting the projects in North Eastern
States.
National Horticulture Board, Ministry of Agriculture, Cooperation
and Farmers Welfare has extended special package for setting up of
cold storage project in North East Region. The concessions granted by
the National Horticulture Board are as under:Ñ
(i) Cold Storage with smaller capacity of 1000 MT or above are
eligible compared to higher capacity of above 5000 MT in
other areas.
(ii) Subsidy is admissible @ 50% of the capital cost of project as
compared to 35% in case of general areas.
The Ministry has noted the unhappiness of the committee on the
slow implementation of project in NE region & assures that the projects
of North East Region are being dealt on priority basis with separate
budget allocation. Moreover , Ministry will take steps to expedite the
implementation of the projects in the region.
[F .No. 6-12/2017-Parl., Dated 29.12.2017]
Minimizing Post Harvest Losses
Recommendation (Para No. 8)
The Committee note that millions of tonnes of agricultural produce
is wasted every year, much of it due to post harvest losses of perishable
products. Coupled with distressing condition, the farmers producing
perishable items do not get remunerative prices for their produce and
unemployment abounds in the rural areas leading to poverty everywhere
in the rural areas, particularly, among agricultural labourers, small and
marginal farmers. In the recent past, instances of throwing of huge
quantities of tomatoes and potatoes have come to the notice of the
Committee. Had there been a proper system of storage of these
perishable items which could have facilitated remunerative prices for
them, the farmers would not have been compelled to throw their
agricultural produce due to non-remunerative market prices. The
Committee are of considered opinion that Food Processing Industry in
rural areas has the potential to increase the value addition, reduce
post-harvest losses, generate employment, increase farm incomes and
reduce poverty. It will boost rural economy and reduce agricultural
distress. The Committee, therefore, strongly recommend that the
Ministry of Food Processing Industry should take new initiatives to

15
foster coordinated approach towards creation and development of food
processing infrastructure and ancillary industries in areas which are
known for production of major fruits, vegetables and perishable items.
The Committee urge the Ministry to take new initiatives in the matter
and take proactive measure for attainment objectives in right earnest.
Reply of the Government
One of the main reasons for the high losses in the supply chain of
perishables is the absence of adequate and efficient cold chain
infrastructure right from the farm gate to the consumer. In a repeat
study conducted by the Central Institute of Post-Harvest Engineering
& Technology (CIPHET), Ludhiana during 2012-14 on behalf of Ministry
of Food Processing Industries on Assessment of Quantitative Harvest
and Post-Harvest Losses of Major Crops and Commodities in India,
average range of losses for food grains, oils seeds and fruits & vegetables
were found to be between 4% to 16% resulting in annual loss of
Rs. 92,651 crore. Different stages considered for assessment of losses
are harvesting, collection, threshing, grading/sorting, winnowing/
cleaning, drying, packaging, transportation, and storage depending upon
the commodity.
According to the Department of Animal Husbandry, Dairying &
Fisheries (DADF), the main reasons attributed for post-harvest losses in
fisheries are mainly due to lack of adequate cold chain facilities,
processing facilities, transport and marketing facilities in the country.
Besides, seasonal fluctuation in demand, physical damage during fishing,
improper fishing methods, open air auctioning, unhygienic handling,
lack of on—board fish hygienic handling and storage facilities etc. are
also attributed to post-harvest losses in fisheries sector.
The Ministry of Agriculture and Farmers Welfare, Department of
Animal Husbandry, Dairying and Fisheries under the Centrally sponsored
Scheme on ÔBlue Revolution: Integrated Development and Management
of Fisheries Õ provides financial assistance for creation of fish
preservation including ice plants, storage, transportation and marketing
facilities for fisheries sector.
The Ministry of Food Processing Industries is implementing various
Central Sector Schemes for prevention of post-harvest losses and
promotion and development of food processing sector in the country.
Recently, Government has approved a new Central Sector Scheme—
Pradhan Mantri Kisan Sampada Yojana (PMKSY) with an allocation of
Rs. 6,000 crore for the period 2016-20 coterminous with the

16
14th Finance Commission cycle. The objective of PMKSY is to Supplement
Agriculture, Modernize Processing and Decrease Agri-Waste. The PMKSY
is an umbrella scheme with the following components:Ñ
i. Mega Food Parks (ongoing).
ii. Integrated Cold Chain and Value Addition Infrastructure
(ongoing).
iii. Creation/Expansion of Food Processing & Preservation
Capacities (new).
iv. Infrastructure for Agro-processing Clusters (new).
v. Creation of Backward and Forward Linkages (new).
vi. Food Safety and Quality Assurance Infrastructure (ongoing).
vii. Human Resources and Institutions (ongoing).
The implementation of the scheme will result in creation of modern
infrastructure with efficient supply chain management from farm gate
to retail outlet. It will not only provide a big boost to the growth of
food processing sector in the country but also help in providing better
prices to farmers and is a big step towards doubling of farmersÕ income.
It will create huge employment opportunities especially in the rural
areas. It will also help in reducing wastage of agricultural produce,
increasing the processing level, availability of safe and convenient
processed foods at affordable price to consumers and enhancing the
export of the processed foods.
[F .No. 6-12/2017-Parl., Dated 29.12.2017]

17
CHAPTER III
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO NOT
DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE GOVERNMENT ÕS REPLIES
-NIL-

18
CHAPTER IV
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH
REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN
ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE
Recommendation (Para No. 2)
The Committee note that though the Schemes are made for the
farmers but the farmers are not the real beneficiary. Similar is the
case with the Scheme for Cold Chain and Value Addition Infrastructure.
The Scheme was launched in 2008 but even after the lapse of nine
years the benefits of the Scheme are yet to percolate to the grassroots
level particularly to the small and marginal farmers. The Committee
feel that slow pace of implementation, faulty design and guidelines of
the Scheme etc. are some of the reasons for execution of the scheme.
The Ministry has submitted that the guidelines of the Scheme for Cold
Chain and Value Addition Infrastructure have lately been revised and
the Scheme has been made more farmer friendly. The Committee are
of the opinion that the farmers particularly small and marginal farmers
could only reap the benefit of the Scheme if the infrastructure is set
up in rural areas. The small and marginal farmers will get immensely
benefited by farm level infrastructure because it would reduce their
cost of transportation and help them in adding value to their produce.
The Ministry has informed that under the new Scheme SAMPADA, a
component with backward and forward linkage has been incorporated
and it would facilitate the farmers with farm level infrastructure. The
Committee are happy to note that the Farm Level Infrastructure is
proposed to be situated in the catchment area of the targeted produce
and would have at least one of the facilities of integrated pack house,
cold storage and/or pre-cooling units in addition to any other processing
facilities that the promoter may like to set up. They hope that these
measures will help the farmers to get the real benefits of the scheme.
The Committee recommend that in order to encourage setting up of
cold chain infrastructure in rural areas, the subsidy provided by the
government be enhanced for the entrepreneurs/developers who set up
infrastructure in rural areas.
Reply of the Government
Currently, the Ministry is assisting 228 cold chain projects. These
include 103 cold chain projects which have been approved in the

19
month of March/April, 2017. Out of 228 cold chain projects being
assisted by Ministry, 109 projects have achieved completion and started
commercial operations as on 14.11.2017.
Therefore, each phase has its own implementation schedule. Some
of the cold chain projects sanctioned by the Ministry have achieved
completion as per implementation schedule prescribed in the scheme
guidelines/approval letter. However, in majority of the cases, it is
observed that the projects have over shot the timelines by few months
to more than a year.
Some of the reasons for delay in implementation of projects is due
to change in location by the promoter to ensure viability of the project,
difficulty in obtaining various statutory approvals integral to the
commissioning of the project for example permission for change of
land use, exemption from land ceiling laws, Consent to establish and
operate units from State Pollution Control Board, NOC from Town &
Country Planning Department, sanction of electricity and water
connection, remote location [especially in the hilly and North East
Region] and sometimes financial difficulties on the part of the promoters
to implement the project.
The Ministry conducts regular review meetings with the promoters
of the project at the level of Joint Secretary/Secretary/HonÕble Minister,
FPI to monitor the projects and to resolve the issues, if any, arising
during the course of implementation. The projects are also reviewed
in Inter Ministerial Approval Committee meetings chaired by Hon Õble
Minister , FPI. For effective resolution of issues and speedy clearances,
State Government representatives have been included as members of
the IMAC and are also invited for the review meetings.
Further , with a view to ensure timely completion of the project a
provision of imposing penalty in terms of reducing the grant amount,
on case to case basis has been incorporated in the scheme guidelines
revised on 29.08.2016. A penalty of 1% of the quantum of grant
installment has been laid down for each month Õs delay beyond the
stipulated time line subject to a maximum of 5% of the installment
amount.
For the benefit of rural areas, the guidelines of Scheme for
Integrated Cold Chain and Value Addition Infrastructure have been
revised and now, to avail financial assistance, the applicant has to set
up farm level infrastructure as a mandatory component.
The Government has allocated a fund of Rs. 150 crore for taking
up 50 projects under the Scheme for Creation of Backward and Forward
Linkages during the period co-terminous with 14th Finance Commission

20
i.e., upto 2019-20. The Ministry has issued an Expression of Interest on
25.08.2017 inviting proposals from interested entrepreneurs through
online system. Last date for receipt of online applications was
13.11.2017. Total 55 of applications have been received under the
scheme for Creation of Backward and Forward Linkages.
[F .No. 6-12/2017-Parl., Dated 29.12.2017]
Comments of the Committee
For comments of the Committee please refer to Para No. 1.7 of
Chapter I of this Report.
Creation of Cold Storage Facilities Near Rural Areas
Recommendation (Para No. 3)
The Committee note that the farmers in the country face lot of
hassles on transportation of their surplus produce to the Cold Storages
located at far off places from their farm. Lack of proper storage
facilities at the farm level result in huge losses of perishable items.
The Committee note that with a view to provide robust backward
integration and ensuring remunerative prices to the farmers for their
produce creation of Farm level infrastructure has been made mandatory
in the revised operational guidelines of the Cold Chain Scheme issued
on 29.08.2016. This Farm Level Infrastructure would be situated in the
catchment area of the targeted produce and would have at least one
of the facilities of integrated pack house, cold storage and/or pre-
cooling units in addition to any other processing facilities that the
promoter may like to set up. The Committee appreciate this revision
in the guidelines adherence to which will surely provide far reaching
benefits to the small and marginal farmers. The Committee desire that
a status report be submitted in this regard for the projects which have
been sanctioned after the revision of the operational guidelines.
Reply of the Government
It is hoped that scheme for Integrated Cold Chain and Value Addition
Infrastructure and Creation of Backward and Forward Linkages identify
areas measures to take the sector forward so as to help build an
efficient and robust supply chain for agricultural/horticulture produce
in the country. This will not only reduce the post harvest losses but
will also help farmers to avoid distress sale, stabilize the prices of
agriculture produce and contain food inflation in the country.

21
Currently, the Ministry is assisting 228 cold chain projects. These
include 103 cold chain projects which have been sanctioned in the
month of March/April, 2017 after the revision of guidelines. Out of
these 103 total 6 projects have been cancelled due to non-submission
of compliance report/non-implementation/withdrawal of proposals.
[F .No. 6-12/2017-Parl., Dated 29.12.2017]
Comments of the Committee
For comments of the Committee please refer to Para No. 1.10 of
Chapter I of this Report.

22
CHAPTER V
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH FINAL
REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT ARE STILL AWAITED
-NIL-
   N EW D ELHI; HUKMDEV NARAYAN YADAV,
24 July, 2018 Chairperson,
02 Shravana, 1940 (Saka) Standing Committee on Agriculture.

23
ANNEXURE
STANDING COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE
(2017-18)
MINUTES OF THE TWENTY-SIXTH SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE
The Committee sat on Thursday, the 19th July, 2018 from 1000 hrs.
to 1100 hrs. in the Chamber of the Hon Õble Chairperson, Room
No. 138, Third Floor , Parliament House, New Delhi.
PRESENT
Shri Hukmdev Narayan Yadav Ñ  Chairperson
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Sanjay Dhotre
3. Shri Nalin Kumar Kateel
4. Shri Md. Badaruddoza Khan
5. Shri C. Mahendran
6. Shri Janardan Mishra
7. Shri Devji Patel
8. Shri Mukesh Rajput
9. Shri C.L. Ruala
10. Shri Virendra Singh
11. Shri Jai Prakash Narayan Yadav
Rajya Sabha
12. Shri Kailash Soni
13. Shri Ram Nath Thakur
14. Shri Harnath Singh Yadav
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Shri D.S. Malha Ñ Joint Secretary
2. Shri Arun K. Kaushik Ñ Director
3. Shri Sumesh Kumar Ñ Under Secretary

24
2. At the outset, the Chairperson welcomed the Members to the
Sitting of the Standing Committee. Then, the Committee took up the
following draft Reports for consideration and adoption:
*(i) *** *** *** *** ***
(ii) Draft Action Taken Report on the Action Taken by the
Government on the Observations/Recommendations
contained in the Forty- Fifth Report of the Standing
Committee on Agriculture on the Subject ÒImplementation
of Scheme for Integrated Cold Chain and Value Addition
InfrastructureÓ pertaining to the Ministry of Food Processing
Industries.
3. After some deliberations, the Committee adopted the draft
Reports without any amendments and authorized the Chairperson to
finalise the Reports and present the same to Parliament.
The Committee then adjourned.
***Matter not related to this report.

25
APPENDIX
(Vide Para 4 of Introduction of the Report)
ANALYSIS OF ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE FORTY-
FIFTH REPORT OF STANDING COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE
(16TH LOK SABHA)
(i) Total number of Recommendations 8
(ii) Recommendations/Observations which have been
Accepted by the Government
Recommendation Nos. 1, 4, 5, 6, 7 and 8
Total 6
Percentage 75%
(iii) Recommendations/Observations which the Committee
do not desire to pursue in view of the Government Õs
replies
Recommendation No. NIL
Total 0
Percentage 0%
(iv) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which
replies of the Government have not been accepted
by the Committee
Recommendation Nos. 2 and 3
Total 2
Percentage 25%
(v) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which
Final replies of the Government are still awaited
Recommendation No. NIL
Total 0
Percentage 0%