TWENTY FIRST REPORT
STANDING COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE
(2015-2016)
(SIXTEENTH LOK SABHA)
MINISTRY OF AGRICULTURE AND FARMERS WELFARE
(DEPARTMENT OF ANIMAL HUSBANDRY , DAIRYING AND FISHERIES)
‘DEMANDS FOR GRANTS
(2015-2016)’
[Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/
Recommendations contained  in the Eleventh  Report
(Sixteenth Lok Sabha) of the Standing Committee
on Agriculture (2014-2015)]
Presented to Lok Sabha on 16.12.2015
Laid on the Table of Rajya Sabha on 16.12.2015
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
December, 2015/Agrahayana, 1937 ( Saka)


COA No. 331
Price : R  71.00
© 2016 B Y L OK SABHA S ECRETARIAT
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct
of Business in Lok Sabha (Fifteenth Edition) and printed by
Anupam Art Printers, New Delhi.

CONTENTS
PAGE
COMPOSITION OF THE C OMMITTEE ............................................. (iii)
INTRODUCTION ................................................................. (v)
CHAPTER I Report ....................................................... 1
CHAPTER II Observations/Recommendations which have been
accepted by the Government .......................... 20
CHAPTER III Observations/Recommendations which the Committee
do not desire to pursue in view of the Government’s
replies ....................................................... 38
CHAPTER IV Observations/Recommendations in respect of which
replies of the Government have not been accepted
by the Committee ........................................ 39
C
HAPTER V Observations/Recommendations in respect of
which final replies of the Government are still
awaited ...................................................... 42
A
NNEXURE
Minutes of the 11th Sitting of the Committee held on
10.12.2015 .......................................................... 48
APPENDIX
Analysis of Action Taken by the Government on the
Recommendations contained in the Eleventh Report
(Sixteenth Lok Sabha) of the Standing Committee on
Agriculture (2014-2015) .......................................... 50
(i)

COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE
(2015-2016)
Shri Hukm Deo Narayan Yadav —  Chairperson
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Prof. Ravindra Vishwanath Gaikwad
3. Prof. Richard Hay
4. Shri Sanganna Karadi
5. Shri Nalin Kumar Kateel
6. Md. Badaruddoza Khan
7. Shri C. Mahendran
8. Dr. Tapas Mandal
9. Shri Janardan Mishra
10. Shri Ajay Nishad
11. Shri Dalpat Singh Paraste
12. Shri Nityanand Rai
13. Shri Mukesh Rajput
14. Shri Konakalla Narayana Rao
15. Shri C.L. Ruala
16. Shri Arjun Charan Sethi
17. Shri Satyapal Singh (Sambhal)
18. Shri Virendra Singh
19. Shri Dharmendra Yadav
20. Shri Jai Prakash Narayan Yadav
21. Shri B.S. Yeddyurappa
Rajya Sabha
22. Shri A.W. Rabi Bernard
23. Shrimati Renuka Chowdhury
24. Sardar Sukhdev Singh Dhindsa
25. Shri Janardan Dwivedi
(iii)

(iv)
26. Shri Vinay Katiyar
27. Shri Mohd. Ali Khan
28. Shri Rajpal Singh Saini
29. Shri Ram Nath Thakur
30. Shri Shankarbhai N. Vegad
31. Shri Darshan Singh Yadav
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Shri U.B.S. Negi — Joint Secretary
2. Shri Arun K. Kaushik — Director
3. Shri C. Vanlalruata — Deputy Secretary

(v)
INTRODUCTION
I, the Chairperson, Standing Committee on Agriculture (2015-16),
having been authorized by the Committee to submit the Report on their
behalf, present this Twenty First Report on action taken by the
Government on the Observations/Recommendations contained in the
Eleventh Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) of the Standing Committee on
Agriculture (2014-15) on ‘Demands for Grants (2015-16) ’ pertaining to
the Ministry of Agriculture and Farmers Welfare (Department of Animal
Husbandry, Dairying and Fisheries).
2. The Eleventh Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) of the Standing
Committee on Agriculture (2014-15) on ‘Demands for Grants (2015-16) ’
of the Ministry of Agriculture and Farmers Welfare (Department of
Animal Husbandry, Dairying and Fisheries) was presented to Lok Sabha
and laid on the Table of Rajya Sabha on 27 April, 2015. The Action
Taken Notes on the Report were received on 08 August, 2015.
3. The Report was considered and adopted by the Committee at
their Sitting held on 10.12.2015.
4. An analysis of the action taken by the Government on the
Observations/Recommendations contained in the Eleventh Report
(Sixteenth Lok Sabha) of the Committee is given in Appendix.
   N
EW D ELHI; HUKM DEO NARAYAN YADAV,
14 December, 2015 Chairperson,
23 Agrahayana, 1937 (Saka) Standing Committee on Agriculture.

CHAPTER I
REPORT
This Report of the Standing Committee on Agriculture deals with
the action taken by the Government on the recommendations contained
in the Eleventh Report of the Standing Committee on Agriculture
(2014-15) on ‘Demands for Grants (2015-16)’ of the Ministry of Agriculture
(Department of Animal Husbandry, Dairying and Fisheries) which was
presented to Lok Sabha and laid on the Table of Rajya Sabha on 27 April
2015.
1.2 The Ministry of Agriculture (Department of Animal Husbandry,
Dairying and Fisheries) have furnished Action Taken Replies in respect
of all the 26 Observations/Recommendations contained in the Report.
These replies have been categorized as under:—
(i) Observations/Recommendations that have been accepted by
the Government:
Recommendation Para Nos. 1, 3, 4, 5, 10, 12, 14, 15, 16, 17,
19, 20, 21, 22, 24, 25 and 26
(Chapter II - Total 17)
(ii) Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not
desire to pursue in view of the Government’s reply:
Recommendation Para No. NIL
(Chapter III - NIL)
(iii) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which action
taken replies of the Government have not been accepted by
the Committee:
Recommendation Para Nos. 2, 7 and 9
(Chapter IV - Total 03)
(iv) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which final
replies of the Government are still awaited:
Recommendation Para Nos. 6, 8, 11, 13, 18 and 23
(Chapter V - Total 06)
1.3 The Committee trust that utmost importance would be given
to implementation of the Observations/Recommendations accepted
by the Government. In cases, where it is not possible for the

2
Department to implement the Recommendations in letter and spirit
for any reason, the matter should be reported to the Committee
with reasons for non-implementation. The Committee desire that
further Action Taken Note on the Observations/Recommendations
contained in Chapter-I and Final Action Taken Replies to the
Observations/Recommendations contained in Chapter-V of this Report
be furnished to them at an early date.
1.4 The Committee will now deal with the action taken by the
Government on some of the Recommendations in the succeeding
paragraphs.
A. Share of Department of Animal Husbandry, Dairying and Fisheries
in Central Plan
Recommendation (Para No. 2)
1.5 The Committee had observed/recommended as under:—
“Animal Husbandry, Dairying and Fisheries activities along with
agriculture continue to be an integral part of human life since the
process of civilization started. These activities have contributed to
the food basket, draught animal power and also helped in maintaining
ecological balance. These activities also play a significant role in
generating gainful employment to more than 70.5 million in the
rural sector , particularly among the landless, small and marginal
farmers and women besides providing cheap and nutritious food to
millions of people. The Committee find that farmers, marginal,
small and semi medium operational holdings area less than 4 hectare
are about 87.7% of the livestock.
However , the Committee note with concern that when the issue of
distribution of financial resources crops up, the Animal Husbandry,
Dairying and Fisheries sector gets neglected. This is evident from
the fact that the percentage share of the Department of Animal
Husbandry, Dairying and Fisheries stands at just 0.33% in the Twelfth
Plan vis-a-vis 0.38% in the Eleventh Plan. Although, the allocation
in monetary terms has increased from Rs. 8174.00 crore in the
Eleventh Plan to Rs. 14,179.00 crore in the Twelfth Plan, yet the
Committee are of the firm opinion that this too is woefully
inadequate. Keeping in view the importance of Animal Husbandry,
Dairying and Fisheries Sector in supplementing the income of our
farmers, the Committee recommend that the Government increases
the share of the Department in the Central Plan at the earliest if
it is really committed towards the development of this vital sector
of our economy. ”

3
1.6 In its Action Taken reply, the Department has stated as under:—
“Department had requested Ministry of Finance for quantitatively
enhancing the share of Department in the Plan allocation for
supplementing the efforts of States for providing the additional
means of sustenance in terms of wealth/security and employment
to the farming community mostly comprising of small and marginal
farmers residing in the rural areas.
However , the allocation for the year 2015-16 has been lowered by
about 31.41% due to higher devolution of funds to the States on
account of acceptance of the recommendations of the 14th Finance
Commission. Further , two schemes of the Department namely
National Livestock Mission and Veterinary Services and Animal Health
have been transferred to the State sector from the current year. ”
1.7 The Committee had observed that though the Animal
Husbandry, Dairying and Fisheries Sector (AHDF) plays a pivotal role
in supplementing the income of our farmers, allocation of funds was
grossly inadequate. Accordingly, the Committee had recommended
that the Government should increase the share of the Department
at the earliest if it was really committed towards the development
of this vital sector of our economy. However, the Committee regret
to note from the Action Taken Reply of the Department that the
Department has not been able to convince the Ministry of Finance
about the concern raised by the Committee with the seriousness it
deserves. As a result thereof, the AHDF Sector could not get
quantitative increase in the Plan Allocation of funds to supplement
the efforts of the States to augment the income of the farmer
community. Deprecating the present state of affairs, the Committee,
therefore, would like the Department to take up the issue vigorously
with the Ministry of Finance and impress upon them to augment the
Plan Allocation to AHDF Sector so that various activities undertaken
by Department do not suffer for want of adequate funds. The
Committee would like to be apprised of the steps taken/being taken
by the Department in this regard.
B. Allocation and Utilization of Funds
Recommendation (Para No. 6)
1.8 The Committee had observed/recommended as under:—
“While agreeing with the sentiments of this increased share of
States in terms of fund allocation so as to increase their share in

4
the funds pie, they are concerned to note that the revised
contribution of States in Centrally Sponsored Schemes has not been
arrived at. Rather, it is under discussion of a high level Committee
in the NITI Aayog. Deprecating this haste in reduction of funds even
before the quantum of State ’s contribution is finalised, the
Committee desire that the high level Committee work out all
modalities and arrive at the percentage share of States expeditiously.
In their view the Government should have completed this task well
before revising the funding pattern of CSS Schemes. The Committee
would like to be apprised of the views of the State Governments/
UTs regarding the re-allocated share of Centre versus State
Government in the funds pie as well as revised contribution of
States in Centrally Sponsored Schemes. ”
1.9 In its Action Taken reply, the Department has stated as under:—
“The recommendation of the Committee is noted. The report of the
High level Committee is still awaited from NITI Aayog. ”
1.10 The Committee had observed that the Government had
reduced the allocation of the Central Ministries/Departments on the
pretext of increasing the share of States in the Centrally Sponsored
Schemes (CSSs), although the matter to work out percentage share
of States in CSS was under discussion of a High Level Committee in
the NITI Aayog. In its Action Taken Reply, the Department has informed
the Committee that the report of the High Level Committee is still
awaited from NITI Aayog. In view of the foregoing, the Committee
would like that the Department should impress upon NITI Aayog to
expedite their report on the issue without further delay and the
progress made in this regard may also be conveyed to the Committee.
C. Utilization of Funds
Recommendation (Para No. 7)
1.11 The Committee had observed/recommended as under:—
“The Committee note that out of the RE figures of Rs. 5400.00
crore for the first three fiscals, the actual expenditure as on
02.03.2015 amounts to Rs. 4960.04 crore only, which in percentage
terms is 91.85% of the RE. They further note that the Department
have been submitting time and again that the present allocation is
inadequate. However, judging by their actual utilization of funds
which has been lower than the RE figures, the Committee recommend
that the Department firstly set its own house in order by motivating

5
the implementing agencies to furnish fresh proposals as well as
utilization certificates of past utilization on a timely basis to ensure
optimum utilization of allocated funds. Once the Department is
able to ensure this, then only they should request the Ministry of
Finance for additional funds. ”
1.12 In its Action Taken Reply, the Department has stated as under:—
“The Department is pursuing with the State Governments and
Implementing Agencies for timely submission and liquidation of
pending Utilization Certificates. ”
1.13 The Committee express their dissatisfaction with the reply
of the Department that it is pursuing with State Governments and
implementing agencies for timely submission and liquidation of
pending utilization certificate as the Department has not been able
to utilize even the Revised Estimate funds, which are lower than the
Budget Estimates, on a regular basis. The Committee are of the
considered opinion that the Department needs to adopt a proactive
approach ensuring optimum utilization of funds and timely submission
of Utilization Certificates by the State Governments/Implementing
Agencies. However, it would also be imperative for the Department
to find out the various constraints which are affecting the timely
and optimum utilization of funds by the State Governments and
Implementing Agencies. The Committee would like to be apprised of
the initiatives undertaken by the Department in this regard.
D. Results Framework Document (RFD)
Recommendation (Para No. 8)
1.14 The Committee had observed/recommended as under:—
“The Committee are well aware that Animal Husbandry, Dairying
and Fisheries being a State subject, the role of Department of
Animal Husbandry, Dairying and Fisheries generally gets restricted
to a broad policy formulation and the implementation of Schemes
lies with the implementing agencies i.e. the States and Union
Territories, who are independent constitutional entities. However,
Department of Animal Husbandry, Dairying and Fisheries cannot
just resort to passing the buck when asked to furnish reasons for
drop in composite score from a high of 95.48% in 2012-13 to 91.97%
in 2013-14. In view of the above, as also to see the Department of
Animal Husbandry, Dairying and Fisheries perform, the Committee
desire that the Department undertake a proper introspection of its

6
performance so as to address the problematic areas. They further
impress upon the Cabinet Secretariat to forward the composite
score for the Fiscals 2014-15, so that requisite remedial action can
be initiated by Department of Agriculture and Cooperation to further
fine tune the implementation of its schemes and thereby increase
their viability.”
1.15 In its Action Taken Reply, the Department has stated as under:—
“It may be mentioned that the Department of Animal Husbandry,
Dairying and Fisheries drops in composite score from a high of
95.48% in 2012-13 to 91.97% in 2013-14. There is a shortfall to
achieve targets over and above the set targets to get excellent
score of 100% in RFD due to reduction in budgetary allocation at RE
stage from Rs. 2025 crore to Rs. 1800 crore during 2013-14.
As regards the composite score for the year 2014-15, the final
achievement against the RFD targets are uploaded within a time
frame prescribed by the Cabinet Secretariat. The composite score
for the year 2014-15 has not been communicated by the Cabinet
Secretariat, till date. ”
1.16 The concept of Results Framework Document (RFD) is to
measure the performance of Ministries/Departments against the
targets set in a given financial year and based on the RFD score
awarded by the Cabinet Secretariat, Ministries/Department can take
a stock of the situation and work upon self-improvement. However,
the Committee are unhappy to note that RFD score in respect of
DAHDF for the year 2014-15 is still awaited from the Cabinet
Secretariat which according to the opinion of the Committee defeats
the very purpose of the concept of RFD as the Department does not
get a chance to undertake holistic review of the performance of
various schemes implemented by the Department. The Committee,
therefore, impress upon the Cabinet Secretariat to furnish the RFD
score within a fixed time frame without further delay. With regard
to the candid admission of the Department that there is a shortfall
in achieving targets over and above the set targets to get excellent
score of 100% in RFD due to reduction in budgetary allocation at RE
stage from Rs. 2025 crore to Rs. 1800 crore during 2013-14, the
Committee would like to be apprised of the initiatives undertaken
by the Department in this regard, so as to ensure an increase in its
RFD score in the years to come.

7
E. Outstanding Utilization Certificates
Recommendation (Para No. 9)
1.17 The Committee had observed/recommended as under:—
“In spite of repeatedly pursuing the case of liquidation of pending
UCs, the Committee are anguished to be apprised that no positive
outcome has been forthcoming. The Committee are concerned to
note that during the period 01.04.2014 to 31.12.2014 none of the
630 outstanding utilization certificates amounting to Rs. 1634.54
crore have been liquidated. The Committee express their displeasure
at this pervading morass, as it is abundantly clear that the follow-
up mechanism currently in place is unable to provide a lasting
solution to this vexed issue. The Committee, therefore, felt that
there is an urgent need to relook the extant mechanism and put in
place necessary correctives at the earliest so that States/UTs are
persuaded to adopt financial discipline and take cogent measures
to liquidate these outstandings in a time bound manner and thereby
ensure that the flow of Central funds continues unhindered. They,
therefore, recommend that Department of Animal Husbandry,
Dairying and Fisheries initiate corrective measures in this respect
in good time and apprise them of the action initiated in this regard.”
1.18 In its Action Taken Reply, the Department has stated as under:—
“The recommendation of the Committee is noted. The Department
is pursuing with the State Governments and Implementing Agencies
for timely submission and liquidation of pending Utilization
Certificates.”
1.19 The issue of non-submission of Utilization Certificate by
Implementing Agencies has been a cause of continuous and serious
concern to the Committee. This is epitomized by the fact that during
the period 01.04.2014 to 31.12.2014, none of the 630 outstanding
utilization certificates amounting to Rs. 1634.54 crore have been
liquidated. This lack of financial discipline on the part of the
Implementing Agencies adversely affect the rapid growth and
development of the Animal Husbandry, Dairying and Fisheries Sector,
as a result of which the benefits of the various schemes, implemented
by the Department do not percolate down to the intended
beneficiaries. The Committee also feel that outstanding Utilization
Certificates clearly indicate the lackadaisical approach and inaction
on the part of the Implementing Agencies as well as absence of any
institutional mechanism at the apex level to rigorously monitor timely

8
utilization of funds. The Committee, therefore, reiterate their earlier
recommendation that the Department needs to take corrective
measures at the earliest so that outstanding Utilization Certificates
amounting to Rs. 1634.34 crore are liquidated without further delay.
The Committee would like to be apprised of the concrete action
taken by the Department in this regard.
F. Food Safety and Traceability
Recommendation (Para No. 11)
1.20 The Committee had observed/recommended as under:—
“The Committee express their concern over the fact that the scheme
for animal identification and traceability system that was to be
done with the Food and Agriculture Organization (FAO) via a Technical
Cooperation Programme (TCP) has not even started till date. The
main reason attributed for this being that FAO submitted a
recommendation in October, 2012, which was not giving any workable
strategy for implementing the scheme in a pilot phase. This has
compelled the Department to approach the Food Safety and Standard
Authority of India (FSSAI) to devise a strategy for implementation
of Animal Identification and Traceability System (AI & TS) in one or
two States (Punjab/Haryana), initially covering aspects on meat
safety and later, for dairy products. Strongly deprecating this state
of affairs, the Committee hope that FSSAI would be able to deliver
the goods and would pave way for successful albeit delayed
implementation of this scheme. ”
1.21 In its Action Taken Reply, the Department has stated as under:—
“Finding that FAO recommendation in October, 2012 did not give
any workable strategy for implementing the scheme in a pilot phase,
the Food Safety and Standards Authority of India (FSSAI) was
requested to suggest a strategy for putting in place a system of
Animal Identification and Traceability Systems (AI & TS) on pilot
basis in one State (say, Punjab or Haryana). However , there was no
response from FSSAI; they were reminded thrice, the latest being
on 21st May, 2015. FSSAI has just now informed that animal
identification and live animal traceability does not fall under the
ambit of FSSAI and they have already taken a step forward by
developing a plan for traceability of animal food products i.e. meat
and milk. Matter was again taken up with FSSAI since traceability
of meat & milk would require identification of source animals for
their genetic makeup & health status. ”

9
1.22 The Committee are distressed to note that an important
issue involving FSSAI to work out a strategy for putting in place a
system of Animal Identification and Traceability System is pending
since 2012 without any significant progress and the issue is shuttling
between the Department of Animal Husbandry, Dairying and Fisheries
and the FAO/FSSAI. This also shows the escapist attitude of FSSAI as
well as of the Department of Animal Husbandry, Dairying and
Fisheries, which is strongly deprecated by the Committee. Since the
issue is pending for quite some time, the Committee urge the
Department of Animal Husbandry, Dairying and Fisheries and FSSAI
to sit together and work out the outlines and modalities to setup a
system of Animal Identification and Traceability System in the country
with clear cut demarcation with regard to the role and responsibilities
of the two Departments viz. FSSAI and the Department of AHDF. The
Committee would like to be apprised of the steps taken by the
Department on the issue and the progress made therein.
G. National Control Programme for Classical Swine Fever
Recommendation (Para No. 13)
1.23 The Committee had observed/recommended as under:—
“Noting that piggery farming is an important vocation in the North
Eastern States of the country for augmentation of income by the
people residing in these States, the Committee express satisfaction
that the Government is implementing a scheme which would insulate
the pig population of the region against the deadly Swine Fever,
which is a highly devastating disease of the pigs. However , they
express their concern on noting that this scheme is being
implemented in the States of Manipur , Meghalaya and Arunachal
Pradesh only. This leaves the pig population of the remaining NE
States, namely Assam, Mizoram, Nagaland and Tripura highly
susceptible and vulnerable to Swine Fever. Taking note of this
important factor, the Committee recommend that the
implementation of this scheme be extended to the remaining four
NE States also at the earliest. They further desire that check points
be established at the border areas to screen pigs before they enter
the NE States. ”
1.24 In its Action Taken Reply, the Department has stated as under:—
“The scheme is being implemented in whole of NE States, however,
all NE States did not send the proposals during 2014-15. Only State
Governments of Arunachal Pradesh, Manipur , Meghalaya and Tripura

10
submitted the proposals during 2014-15. Hence the funds could be
released to these four States only. During 2015-16, all the States
have been requested to send their proposals under the scheme so
that the necessary releases can be done. ”
1.25 While expressing satisfaction over the schemes being
implemented by the Government which would insulate the pig
population against the deadly swine fever, the Committee had
recommended that National Control Programme for Classical Swine
Fever Scheme, which is being implemented in the States of Manipur,
Meghalaya and Arunachal Pradesh be extended to the remaining
North-Eastern States. In its reply, the Department has stated that
the scheme is being implemented in the whole of NE States. However,
during the year 2014-15, proposals were received only from the
four States namely, Arunachal Pradesh, Manipur, Meghalaya and
Tripura. Hence, funds could be released to these four States only.
During 2015-16, all the States have been requested to send their
proposals under the scheme so that necessary releases could be
done by the Department. Taking into consideration the importance
of piggery farming in the economy of NE States, the Committee
desire that all NE States be impressed upon to actively participate
under the scheme so as to insulate their pig population from the
deadly Swine Fever disease. However, the Department is
conspicuously silent on the issue of establishing check points at the
border areas to screen pigs before they enter the NE States. The
Committee reiterate that these check points be established at the
earliest. The Committee would like to be apprised of the action
taken by the Department in this regard.
H. Establishment and Strengthening of Existing Veterinary Hospitals
and Dispensaries
Recommendation (Para No. 14)
1.26 The Committee had observed/recommended as under:—
“Inspite of the presence of 11,101 veterinary hospitals/poly clinics,
22745 veterinary dispensaries and 27050 veterinary aid centres,
stockman centres and mobile dispensaries in the country, the
Committee feel that the present infrastructure is not adequate to
take care of the sheer size of our animal wealth. This compels our
farmers to travel huge distances along with their animals in order
to gain access to primary animal health centres be it vet hospitals/
polyclinics/dispensaries. Herein too, the healthcare facilities are at
a minimal level with no option for hospitalization of the sick animal.
The Committee, therefore, strongly feel that the time has come to
augment our animals health care paraphernalia by increasing the
number of vet hospitals/polyclinics/dispensaries/mobile dispensaries

11
so as not only to bring an increase in their numbers and reach, but
also improve the quality of services they have to offer. They,
therefore exhort the Government to act upon their instant
recommendation and go for a quantum expansion of animal health
care sector at the earliest. ”
1.27 In its Action Taken Reply, the Department has stated as under:—
“Veterinary hospitals, dispensaries, polyclinics etc. are set up by
the States/Union Territory (UT) Governments depending upon the
livestock population in a particular area and availability of resources.
However , in order to address the need to set up new veterinary
hospitals/dispensaries by the States/UTs and to strengthen/equip
the existing ones, the Department started a scheme, ‘Establishment
and Strengthening of existing Veterinary Hospitals and Dispensaries
(ESVHD)’, in August, 2010 as part of Centrally Sponsored Scheme
‘Livestock Health and Disease Control (LH&DC) ’ during 11th Plan
Period. The scheme has been well accepted by the States. Scheme
envisages assistance for construction/renovation of veterinary
hospitals/dispensaries and for providing equipments for strengthening
the quality of veterinary service delivery in the States. The scheme
is continued during 12th Plan Period. For providing doorstep delivery
of veterinary services, provision for financial assistance to States
for setting up of Mobile Veterinary Clinics has also been envisaged
under the scheme. The Budgetary provision for this Scheme at
Budget Estimates (B.E.) stage is kept at Rs. 1300.00 lakhs for
Financial Year 2015-16. Moreover , States are also availing assistance
for strengthening veterinary infrastructure under other schemes
such as RKVY .”
1.28 While elaborating Establishment and Strengthening of Existing
Veterinary Hospitals and Dispensaries scheme to address the need to
set up new veterinary hospitals and dispensaries and to strengthen/
equip the existing ones, the Department has stated that the scheme
has been well accepted by the States. Further, provision for financial
assistance to States for setting up of Mobile Veterinary Clinics has
also been envisaged under the Scheme for providing doorstep delivery
of veterinary services. States are also availing assistance for
strengthening veterinary infrastructure under this scheme such as
RKVY. Notwithstanding the position stated by the Department, the
response of the Department lacks its resolve to strengthen the animal
healthcare infrastructure to render prompt and quality veterinary
service. The Committee, therefore, feel that the Department needs
to make vigorous efforts in coordination with all concerned including
States/UT Governments to augment, strengthen and improve the
animal healthcare infrastructure in the country. The Committee are
of the firm opinion that animal health infrastructure and service
delivery mechanism are too little and grossly inadequate to address

12
the various issues concerning animal healthcare in the country
effectively and comprehensively. If felt necessary, the Department
should also strive for augmenting the financial assistance to the
State for effective implementation of the schemes for the purpose.
The Committee, therefore, reiterate its earlier recommendation that
the Government should go for a quantum expansion of animal health
care sector at the earliest and also strive for improving the quality
of veterinary service being provided by the Veterinary Hospitals/
Dispensaries. The Committee would like to be apprised of the remedial
steps taken by the Department in this regard.
I. Development of Dairy Sector
Recommendation (Para No. 18)
1.29 The Committee had observed/recommended as under:—
“Dairy Sector has experienced a substantial growth over the years
owing to prudent policy intervention by the Government. This has
resulted in India being the global leader in milk producing nations,
with production of 138 million tonnes during the fiscal 2013-14.
Also, dairying has become an important secondary source of income
for women and marginal farmers. Appreciating the efforts of the
Department of Animal Husbandry, Dairying and Fisheries, the
Committee urges the Government to continually strive for the overall
development of this vital sector in terms of enhanced allocation
that would help in proper and effective implementation of Schemes
and lead to increased production of milk and its consumption in the
years to come. ”
1.30 In its Action Taken Reply, the Department has stated as under:—
“The budget allocation for dairy development schemes during
2014-15 and 2015-16 are as under:
Allocation of fund statement under NPDD, DEDS and NDP-I
scheme during 2014-15 & 2015-16
Sl. Name of 2014-15 2014-15 2015-16
No. scheme BE RE BE
1. NPDD 105.00 90.00 74.00
2. DEDS 229.99 228.18 127
3. NDPI 215.05 164.00 300
TOTAL 550.04 482.18 501.00

13
The budget allocated for dairy development schemes viz. National
Programme for Dairy Development (NPDD), Dairy Entrepreneurship
Development Scheme (DEDS) and National Dairy Plan (NDP-I) during
2014-15 was Rs. 550 crore which was reduced to Rs. 482.18 crore
at RE stage, while for year 2015-16 the budget allocation for dairy
development scheme is Rs. 501 crore Department has sent a proposal
to Ministry of Finance for:—
(i) Changing NPBBDD into State Sector Scheme as composite
scheme.
(ii) Enhancement of allocation at RE stage under NPDD, DEDS
and NDP-I scheme. ”
1.31 While noting that Dairy Sector has experienced a substantial
growth over the years, the Committee had urged the Government to
strive for overall development of this sector in terms of enhanced
allocation which would help in effective implementation of schemes.
From the action taken reply of the Department, the Committee are
anguished to note that the BE figures of Rs. 501.00 crore for the
Dairying Development Sector for the fiscal 2015-16 are lower than
the BE figures of Rs. 550.04 crore for the previous fiscal i.e.
2014-15. Even BE 2014-15 for the sector was reduced to Rs. 482.18
crore at RE stage. The Committee are of the strong opinion that the
overall growth and development of the sector will be adversely
affected unless requisite funds as demanded by the Department are
allocated for effective implementation of its various schemes.
However, the Committee further note that the Department has sent
a proposal to the Ministry of Finance for enhancement of allocation
at RE stage under NPDD, DEDS, NDP-I and changing NPBBDD into
State Sector Scheme as composite scheme. The Committee would
like the Department to pursue with Ministry of Finance relentlessly
for allocation of funds as per their demand. The Committee would
like to be apprised of the concrete steps taken/being taken by the
Department in this regard.
J. Availability of Green and Dry Fodder
Recommendation (Para No. 21)
1.32 The Committee had observed/recommended as under:—
“The Committee are aware that the most important factor for the
milch animals is the availability of green and dry fodder for these
animals. During the course of examination the Committee find that

14
there is 35% shortage of fodder in the country. Furthermore, it is
a matter of concern that there is a lack of latest data of availability
of fodder vis-a-vis demand. As the figures quoted by the Department
pertains to data furnished by NABCONS for the year 2007, the
Committee feel that without an authentic data of demand and
availability of fodder the Department will not be able to bridge the
yawning gap. Since this is a State matter , the Committee feel that
the Department should pursue the matter pro-actively with the
State Governments and implementing agencies so as to ensure that
the gap between demand and availability of fodder is bridged at
the earliest. The Committee may be kept abreast of the
developments in this regard. The Committee desire the Department
should also approach the State Governments, Ministry of Railways,
Ministry of Defence and Ministry of Urban Development to find out
ways for optimum use of the unused lands for fodder cultivation as
an alternative as the grazing areas in villages and towns are
diminishing with passage of time due to upgradation and
encroachments etc. The Committee recommend that the Department
should also approach the ICAR for enhancing the nutritive value of
green fodder and dry fodder as it is directly linked to the productivity
of the livestock. The Committee desire that the Government should
conduct field studies region-wise to study the impact of fodder
nutritional balanced food and fodder on their productivity and
metabolic profile of lactating cows and buffaloes. Based on the
study the Department can chalk out comprehensive programme to
apprise the dairy farmers about it. ”
1.33 In its Action Taken Reply, the Department has stated as under:—
1. “The matter regarding collection of data related to fodder
was taken up with Ministry of Statistics and Programme
Implementation through Animal Husbandry Statistic Division
of this Department vide letters dated 12.07.2012 and
17.07.2012 for inclusion of data regarding green fodder , dry
fodder concentrate and fodder seeds. A detailed and
exhaustive and mutually exclusive classification was also
provided. Through them the information was supplied to
Ministry of Statistics and Programme Implementation for the
use of NSS 70th round. They have now mentioned that they
have incorporated separate and additional column in the
revised schedule of Integrated Sample Survey for collecting
the data on production of green fodder only. However, they
are being requested to collect the data as was originally
envisaged. In this regard, regular meetings are held with the
Statistic Division of this Department. Therefore, it is submitted
that the Department is trying hard to institutionalize the
data collection of various types of fodder since 12.07.2012.

15
2. To increase the availability of fodder/feed Department of
Animal Husbandry, Dairying and Fisheries has launched a
National Livestock Mission (NLM) from the year 2014-15 with
one Sub-Mission of Feed and Fodder Development. Grants
are provided to the State Governments and UTs for various
components of Feed and Fodder Development. The scheme
is monitored by meetings with State Governments/UTs
officials, field visits, etc. All the components ensure that
the gap between demand and availability of fodder is bridged.
3. The Additional Director General (Animal Nutrition), ICAR has
been requested for improving the nutritive value of dry
fodder/green fodder and concentrate as it is directly linked
to the productivity of livestock. They have also been
requested to conduct field studies in various parts of country,
region-wise, to evaluate the impact of feeding nutritionally
balanced feed on improvement of productivity and metabolic
profile of lactating cows and buffaloes. Based on the outcome
of the appraisal, a comprehensive programme will be chalked
out.
4. The National Dairy Development Board (NDDB) on 7th July
2015 launched a mobile application named Pashu Poshan
which will boost dairy farmers’ financial gain by raising milk
yield and cutting feed cost. The application can suggest a
balanced diet for cows and buffaloes. It will be accessed by
registering on the INAPH portal http://inaph.Nddb.Coop. To
use this application, the farmer needs to provide complete
animal profile including breed, age, milk production, fat
content in milk aside from food items being presently fed to
the animal along with the cost in order to formulate the
balanced ration formula.
5. The matter regarding removal of encroachment has been
taken up from time to time with the State Governments and
UTs in the past from pastures/grazing lands. Letters have
been written to draw the attention of all the Chief Secretaries
to all States/UTs for intervening and to take effective recourse
to protect and also retrieve community pasture lands.
6. The Department is implementing various components for
pastures/grazing lands Development i.e. Fodder Production
from Non-Forest Wasteland/Rangeland/Grassland/Non-arable
land, Fodder Production from Forest Land under Feed and
Fodder Development submission of NLM.

16
7. Earlier a letter was written to Chairman, Railway Board
regarding allowing for growing of grass to be used as fodder
for livestock feeding along the sides of Railway tracks. They
have replied that it is not feasible due to safety of train
operations.
8. Letters have been written to Ministry of Defence and Ministry
of Urban Development regarding suggesting alternative spots/
unused lands which could be utilized for cultivating animal
fodder.”
1.34 The Committee felt that in the absence of an authentic
data on availability of fodder and its demand, it would be difficult
for the Department to bridge the yawning gap between the demand
and availability of fodder. Being well aware that availability of green
and dry fodder is paramount for milch animals, the Committee also
felt that the Department should pursue the matter proactively with
the State Governments and implementing agencies in the matter.
However, the Committee note from the Action Taken Reply of the
Department that the Department has taken up this issue with the
Ministry of Statistics and Programme Implementation and regular
meetings are held with the Statistic Division of the Department.
According to the Department, they are making efforts to
institutionalize the data collection of various types of fodder since
12 July, 2012. However, the Committee are not satisfied with the
progress made in the matter as the data related to fodder since
12.07.2012 is still to be institutionalised. The Committee, therefore,
recommend that rigorous efforts may be made by the Department in
coordination with all concerned to collect the data related to fodder
within definite time frame and be put in the public domain at the
earliest. The Committee would like to be apprised of the efforts
made by the Department in this regard.
The Committee note that the Department has approached ICAR
for enhancing the nutritive value of green/dry fodder and concentrate
as it is directly linked to the productivity of livestock and to conduct
region-wise field studies to study the impact of feed and fodder on
productivity and metabolic profile of lactating cows and buffaloes.
The Department has also approached the Ministry of Defence and
Ministry of Urban Development with a view to explore alternative
spots/unused lands for fodder cultivation. The Committee express
their satisfaction on various initiatives undertaken by the Department
in coordination with other organizations/institutions. However, the
Committee would like to be apprised of the progress made by the
Department on the various initiatives undertaken by them.

17
K. Dairy Entrepreneurship Development Scheme (DEDS)
Recommendation (Para No. 22)
1.35 The Committee had observed/recommended as under:—
“The Committee express satisfaction on being informed that
consequent to the implementation of the Dairying Entrepreneurship
Development Scheme, there has been an increase of around 123%
in overall average production per beneficiary entrepreneur, leading
to a corresponding increase in the ownership of livestock assets by
the beneficiaries of this scheme and has lowered their dependence
on borrowed money, helped in creation of new assets and generated
employment for 1.86 lakh persons at least. Considering these to be
small but significant steps in the empowerment and economic
development of the rural masses, the Committee recommend that
the Government continue to work towards incentivising this scheme
by providing institutional support to ensure that the implementation
aspects of this scheme are further fine-tuned and results in significant
increase of dairying entrepreneurs. ”
1.36 In its Action Taken Reply, the Department has stated as under:—
“The budgetary allocation for the current financial year is Rs. 127
crore against the requirement of Rs. 400 crore (31.75% of the
required fund) Department has requested M/o Finance for
enhancement of allocation at RE stage under DEDS scheme. ”
1.37 The rationale/wisdom of the Ministry of Finance in allocating
BE funds of Rs. 127.00 crore for Dairy Entrepreneurship Development
Scheme (DEDS) against the requirement of Rs. 400 crore for the
current fiscal, which works out a mere 31.75 percentage of the
required fund, is not understood by the Committee. Expressing its
anguish over the action of Ministry of Finance for non-allocation of
much needed funds to the Department for effective implementation
of DDE Scheme, the Committee would like to urge the Ministry of
Finance to allocate requisite funds as proposed by the Department
so that, an important scheme like DED Scheme does not suffer for
want of funds. The Committee would also like the Department to
pursue rigorously with Ministry of Finance and impress upon them to
allocate the funds as proposed by them. The Committee would like
to be apprised of the initiatives undertaken by the Department in
this regard.

18
L. Increased Budgetary Allocations for Fisheries Sector
Recommendation (Para No. 23)
1.38 The Committee had observed/recommended as under:—
“India occupies the second position globally. 5.69% of global share
in fish production after China with a production of 9.58 million
tonnes during the year 2013-14. However, the Committee observe
that much remains to be done especially in the inland and deep sea
fishing in order to stem the decline in marine fishery sector. For
this, the Government needs to increase the allocation to the fisheries
sector. But, the converse has been taking place in the fisheries
sector, wherein out of the XII Plan Outlay of Rs. 2483.00 crore,
the BE allocation for the first four fiscals amounts to Rs. 1670.11
crore. The BE figures were then reduced at RE stage to Rs. 996.05
crore for the first three fiscals. The variation between the Plan
Outlay and actual allocation in the first three fiscals is Rs. 1486.95
crore. Concerned to note that though the fisheries sector exported
9,83,756 tonnes valued at Rs. 30,213.00 crore during 2013-14, thus
recording an increase of 5.98% in quantity and 60.23% in rupees
over the previous year is not getting its due encouragement from
the Government, in terms of funding, the Committee recommend
that the Government go for a quantum enhancement of funds at RE
level for this year and higher allocation in future, so as to boost the
available resources for overall growth of this sector , at the earliest.”
1.39 In its Action Taken Reply, the Department has stated as under:—
“It may be mentioned that the financial allocation to the Department
were decided by the Planning Commission (now not in existence)
and Ministry of Finance depending upon the overall resources
available. Even after utilization of 97% of funds allocated under RE
during the past three years of the 12th Five Year Plan, the Ministry
of Finance has allocated an amount of Rs. 476.94 crore to the
fisheries sector for the year 2015-16. As suggested by the Committee,
higher allocation shall be proposed at RE stage. ”
1.40 While observing that the Fisheries Sector was not getting
its due encouragement in terms of funding, inspite of exhibiting
continuous growth during the course of the Twelfth Plan Period, the
Committee had recommended that Government go for a quantum
enhancement of funds at RE level. In its Action Taken Reply, the
Department has stated that even after utilization of 97% of funds
allocated under RE during the past three years of the 12th Five Year

19
Plan, the Ministry of Finance has allocated an amount of Rs. 476.94
crore to the fisheries sector for the year 2015-16. The Committee
would like to be apprised of the reasons due to which BE funds were
reduced at RE stage during the first three fiscals of the Twelfth Plan.
The Department has also stated that higher allocation shall be
proposed at RE Stage. Accordingly, the Committee would like to be
apprised of about the response of the Ministry of Finance in this
regard.

20
CHAPTER II
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN
ACCEPTED BY THE GOVERNMENT
Implementation of Committee ’s Recommendations
Recommendation (Para No. 1)
The Committee note that the Action Taken Replies regarding the
action taken by the Government on the observations/recommendations
contained in the Fifth Report of the Committee were furnished by the
Government on 24th March, 2015. They further note that the statement
of the Minister under Direction 73-A of Directions by the Speaker,
Lok Sabha is due on June, 2015. The Committee are hopeful that the
Government would have made all efforts to act upon their
recommendations contained in the Fifth Report and that the Ministers
statement under Direction 73-A of Directions by Speaker , Lok Sabha
would be made within the stipulated time.
Reply of the Government
The observations of the Committee are noted. The Department
have taken the action on recommendations/observations of the
Committee on Fifth Action Taken Report. The Ministers statement under
Direction 73-A of Directions by Speaker , Lok Sabha will be made in the
monsoon session in Lok Sabha/Rajya Sabha. In future, the Department
will ensure laying the status of implementation of the recommendations
of the report in the Lok Sabha/Rajya Sabha within the stipulated time.
[Ministry of Agriculture (Department of Animal Husbandry,
Dairying and Fisheries), Letter No. 25-5(1)/2015-AHD (Coord.),
dated 8th August, 2015]
Mismatch between Proposed and Actual Allocation
Recommendation (Para No. 3)
During the course of the examination of Demands for Grants
(2015-16) of the Department of Animal Husbandry, Dairying and Fisheries,
the Committee have observed that during the first four years of the
Twelfth Plan i.e. 2012-13,2013-14, 2014-15 and 2015-16 a huge variation
exists between amount proposed by the Department and the amount

21
allocated by the erstwhile Planning Commission/Ministry of Finance. In
the year 2012-13 against a proposal of Rs. 3497.50 crore, the allocation
was Rs.1910.00 crore (54.61%). During the year 2013-14 the Department
was allocated Rs. 2025.00 crore against the proposal of Rs. 3025.00
crore (66.94%). In 2014-15 the proposal was for Rs. 3535.00 crore, but
the allocation was Rs. 2174.00 crore (61.49%). During the current fiscal
year, against a proposal of Rs. 4527.79 crore, the allocation was a
meager Rs. 1491.14 crore (32.93%). This mismatch between the proposed
allocation and the actual allocation is a cause of concern to the
Committee and makes them ponder over the efficacy of the extant
planning process or the lack of it. The Committee are well aware that
allocations are decided on the inter-sector priorities as well as availability
of resources, yet they are of the firm view that some degree of parity
needs to exist between the proposed/actual allocation figures. They,
therefore, impress upon all the concerned agencies to come together
and discuss threadbare this issue to ensure that in the future the
variation in proposed allocation and actual allocation is narrowed down
to the extent possible.
Reply of the Government
Department agrees with the observations of the Committee.
Accordingly, the Department had requested Ministry of Finance for
increase in allocation for remaining two years of the XII Plan and at
least ensure that the full quota of allocated funds are actually provided
to the Department in the remaining annual allocations of the XII Plan
for effectively implementing the schemes of livestock and fisheries
sector for benefit of the animal rearers and fisher folk mostly comprising
of small and marginal farmers.
[Ministry of Agriculture (Department of Animal Husbandry,
Dairying and Fisheries), Letter No. 25-5(1)/2015-AHD (Coord.),
dated 8th August, 2015]
Mismatch between Proposed and Actual Allocation
Recommendation (Para No. 4)
Guided by the admission of the Department that in order for
agriculture sector to attain a growth rate of 4%, it is essential that
animal husbandry and dairying sector attain a growth rate of 6% and for
this, the Department definitely needs increased budgetary allocation.
The Committee exhort upon the agencies involved in the planning process
to wake up to this reality and ensure immediate quantum enhancement
of funds to the Animal Husbandry, Dairying and Fisheries Sector, otherwise

22
the sub-par performance of this sector would in turn impede the
performance of the agriculture sector which would have a negative
spiralling impact on our economy.
Reply of the Government
Department agrees with the recommendations of the Committee.
Finance Ministry had been requested to provide increased allocation to
Animal Husbandry, Dairying and Fisheries sector for achieving the avowed
objective of attaining a growth rate of 6% in this sector.
[Ministry of Agriculture (Department of Animal Husbandry,
Dairying and Fisheries), Letter No. 25-5(1)/2015-AHD (Coord.),
dated 8th August, 2015]
Allocation and Utilization of Funds
Recommendation (Para No. 5)
The Committee note with concern that consequent to the award of
the 14th Finance Commission the grant made to States from Central
Divisible Pool has been hiked from 32% to 42%, which has resulted in
reduction of BE for 2015-16 of Department of Animal Husbandry, Dairying
and Fisheries, which is to the tune of Rs. 1491.14 crore as compared
to Rs. 1910.00 crore, Rs. 2025.00 crore and Rs. 2174.00 crore for the
fiscals 2012-13, 2013-14 and 2014-15 respectively. Furthermore, the
allocated amount is as less as 33.93% of the funds sought by Ministry
after making considered assessment of their projects and priorities.
The Department have also submitted that with this reduced allocation
they would neither be able to achieve their targets nor be able to
substantially contribute towards the rural economy and the present
allocation is grossly inadequate and they need atleast an additional
allocation of Rs. 1.5-2 thousand crore. The Committee, therefore, desire
the Department to pursue the Ministry of Finance for more funds at RE
stage so as to implement their projects/schemes effective during the
year.
Reply of the Government
The Department agrees with the recommendation of the Committee.
The Ministry of Finance would be requested to make an additional
allocation to the tune of Rs. 1500 to Rs. 2000 crore at the RE stage for
enabling this Department to achieve the targets laid down.
[Ministry of Agriculture (Department of Animal Husbandry,
Dairying and Fisheries), Letter No. 25-5(1)/2015-AHD (Coord.),
dated 8th August, 2015]

23
Allocation to Animal Husbandry Sector
Recommendation (Para No. 10)
The Committee are aware that Animal Husbandry Sector play an
important role in the national economy and in the socio-economic
development of the country, especially, in terms of supplementing family
incomes and generating fruitful employment in rural sector. It provides
economic and social security to the landless labourers, small & marginal
farmers and women, besides providing nutritional food to them. However,
the small marginal farmers having less than four hectares of land holding
own 87.7% of the livestock. The livestock is an immense support to
these strata of our population in the context of declining agricultural
landholdings and best form of insurance against the vagaries of nature
like drought, famine and floods etc. The Committee are perturbed to
note that the Animal Husbandry Sector is not getting its due in terms
of monetary allocations and this is hampering the implementation of
various important schemes of the Department. In the first three fiscals
of the XII Plan BE allocation figures of Rs. 1063.10 crore (2012-13),
Rs. 1051.49 crore (2013-14) and Rs. 1118.57 crore (2014-15) were
curtailed at RE stage to Rs. 909.43 crore, Rs. 932.85 crore and
Rs. 960.62 crore respectively. The actual release has been to the tune
of Rs. 880.80 crore (2012-13), Rs. 916.16 crore (2013-14) and 773.00
crore (2014-15) which in percentage terms is 82.85% (2012-13), 87.12%
(2013-14) and 80.46% (2014-15) of BE respectively. This has hampered
the implementation of the vital schemes of the sector in the first three
years of the XII Plan period. The Committee, therefore, desire the
planners and policy makers to provide fair allocation to this Sector not
only as per the traditional significance of this sector , but also its
importance in the changed scenario in terms of rising incomes, change
in dietary preferences, consumption of high value food and diversion
towards animal based protein besides rising processed animal products.
The situation of hampered implementation of the Schemes of this Sector
year after year for want of funds is like strangling a very vital and
growing area of our economy. They, therefore, strongly recommend
that the yawning gap between the policy formulation and implementation
be bridged by emphatically persuading the Planning Commission and
Ministry of Finance to enhance allocation to this sector. They further
desire the Department to tone up their implementation apparatus so
that they are in a better position to absorb the allocated funds resulting
in attainment of set targets. The Committee also urge the Government
to allocate the funds to the Department uniformly over the Plan period
so that the funds are optimally utilized by the Department in their
schemes and activities.

24
Reply of the Government
Department agrees with the recommendation of the Committee.
Ministry of Finance would be requested to provide additional allocation
at RE Stage. Every effort would be made to absorb the allocated funds
so as to optimally achieve the desired targets.
[Ministry of Agriculture (Department of Animal Husbandry,
Dairying and Fisheries), Letter No. 25-5(1)/2015-AHD (Coord.),
dated 8th August, 2015]
Food Safety and Traceability
Recommendation (Para No. 12)
Grounding a note of caution, the Committee desire that before
venturing into Technical Cooperation Programme with third parties, the
Department do a detailed background work so as to avoid repeat of the
failure of the TCP with the FAO.
Reply of the Government
The recommendation of the Committee has been noted.
[Ministry of Agriculture (Department of Animal Husbandry,
Dairying and Fisheries), Letter No. 25-5(1)/2015-AHD (Coord.),
dated 8th August, 2015]
Establishment and Strengthening of Existing Veterinary Hospitals and
Dispensaries
Recommendation (Para No. 14)
Inspite of the presence of 11,101 veterinary hospitals/polyclinics,
22,745 veterinary dispensaries and 27,050 veterinary aid centres,
stockman centres and mobile dispensaries in the country, the Committee
feel that the present infrastructure is not adequate to take care of the
sheer size of our animal wealth. This compels our farmers to travel
huge distances alongwith their animals in order to gain access to primary
animals health centres be it vet hospitals/polyclinics/dispensaries. Herein
too, the healthcare facilities are at a minimal level with no option for
hospitalization of the sick animal. The Committee, therefore, strongly
feel that the time has come to augment our animals health care
paraphernalia by increasing the number of vet hospitals/polyclinics/
dispensaries/mobile dispensaries so as not only bring an increase in
their numbers and reach, but also improve the quality of services they

25
have to offer. They, therefore exhort the Government to act upon their
instant recommendation and go for a quantum expansion of animal
health care sector at the earliest.
Reply of the Government
Veterinary Hospitals, dispensaries, polyclinics etc. are set up by the
States/Union Territory (UT) Governments depending upon the livestock
population in a particular area and availability of resources. However,
in order to address the need to set up new veterinary hospitals/
dispensaries by the States/UTs and to strengthen/equip the existing
ones, the Department started a scheme, ‘Establishment and
Strengthening of existing Veterinary Hospitals & Dispensaries (ESVHD)’,in
August, 2010 as part of Centrally Sponsored Scheme ‘Livestock Health
& Disease Control (LH&DC) ’ during 11th Plan Period. The scheme has
been well accepted by the States. Scheme envisages assistance for
construction/renovation of veterinary hospitals/dispensaries and for
providing equipments for strengthening the quality of veterinary service
delivery in the States. The scheme is continued during 12th Plan Period.
For providing doorstep delivery of veterinary services, provision for
financial assistance to States for setting up of Mobile Veterinary Clinics
has also been envisaged under the scheme. The Budgetary provision for
this Scheme at Budget Estimates (B.E.) stage is kept at
Rs. 1300.00 Lakhs for Financial Year 2015-16. Moreover , States are also
availing assistance for strengthening veterinary infrastructure under
other schemes such as RKVY .
[Ministry of Agriculture (Department of Animal Husbandry,
Dairying and Fisheries), Letter No. 25-5(1)/2015-AHD (Coord.),
dated 8th August, 2015]
Comments of the Committee
For comments of the Committee please refer to Para No. 1.28 of
Chapter I of this Report.
Establishment and Strengthening of Existing Veterinary Hospitals and
Dispensaries
Recommendation (Para No. 15)
The Committee are concerned to note the glaring shortage of
veterinary doctors/para veterinarians in the country. Although the
Government is apprised of the situation and already initiated a slew of
measures like increase the number of seats in veterinary colleges,

26
setting up of new veterinary colleges. However, these measures would
atleast take about 5-10 years to fructify. The Committee is aware that
there is a requirement of approx 1,15,000 veterinarians whereas there
are only 60,000 to 70,000 available. However , the current shortage of
veterinarians of about 60,000 to 70,000 would take a minimum of
10-15 years to fill this void. As informed by the Government their
proposal of starting a model para-veterinary course of 15 months duration
has not been responded to positively by the States and thus still remains
a proposal. The way out here as submitted by the Government is to
popularize the 3 month course of Multi-purpose Artificial Technician in
Rural India (MAITRI) which would augment the para-vet staff at the
primary level. The Committee further desire that the Government work
towards attracting youth towards the veterinary sector and also ensure
that as and when the model para-vet course is implemented, the MAITRI
are also enrolled in it to enhance their education and job prospects.
Reply of the Government
In order to address the shortage of veterinarians and to attract the
youth to veterinary sector , the following steps have been taken:—
(a) In AIPVT-2015 online application have been invited for 15%
seat reserved on All India basis.
(b) 15% reservation has been given to SC/ST candidature
appearing in AIPVT exam 2015.
(c) AIPVT examination shall be conducted in Hindi and English
both bilingual language to attract more youth from remote
areas.
(d) Increase in number of annual admissions from existing 60 to
100 in veterinary colleges/institutions having requisite
infrastructure and manpower.
[Ministry of Agriculture (Department of Animal Husbandry,
Dairying and Fisheries), Letter No. 25-5(1)/2015-AHD (Coord.),
dated 8th August, 2015]
Establishment of MAITRIs under NPBBDD
Recommendation (Para No. 16)
The Ministry has informed the Committee that they have proposed
to establish 30,000 multi-purpose AI technicians in rural India under
NPBBDD Scheme during the XII Plan. According to MAITRI uniform training
module is developed by the Government of India for a three months ’

27
duration which will help them in taking up veterinarians at vaccination
agent for life insurance, ration, planning milk regarding, data entry in
national data basis, demonstration of feed management, health
management, breeding management besides this the trainees will be
agent for distribution of fodder seeds, root slips and stem slips etc. The
Committee feel that local rural youths should be involved in such
projects. While appreciating the proposal of MAITRI they recommend
that these 30,000 MAITRI should be established under NPBBDD scheme
in a time bound manner. They also suggest that the available registered
veterinary doctors and MAITRI para veterinarians could make visits on
the few surrounding villages on fixed days so that the animal owners
could benefit from their services. The Committee also recommend that
the indigenous traditional methods of diagnosis and treatment of the
animal diseases could be shared with veterinary doctors who in turn
could prescribe these alongwith their medical prescriptions.
Reply of the Government
Multipurpose AI technicians in Rural India (MAITRIs) are being
established under National Programme for Bovine Breeding and Dairy
Development to deliver quality breeding inputs at farmers ’ doorstep. In
addition to artificial insemination MAITRIs are also trained in veterinary
first aid, vaccination, castration, animal identification, data recording
in INAPH data base, milk recording and ration balancing. Provision has
been made under NPBBDD for organization of fertility camps on fixed
days in order to provide expert services to the farmers of the area.
Indigenous Technical Knowledge (ITKs) is also promoted by the
Department during organization of camps.
[Ministry of Agriculture (Department of Animal Husbandry,
Dairying and Fisheries), Letter No. 25-5(1)/2015-AHD (Coord.),
dated 8th August, 2015]
Increasing the Success Rate of Artificial Insemination
Recommendation (Para No. 17)
The Committee are aware that the major challenges faced in animal
breeding is about genetic upgradation of cattle and buffalo, conservation
of their local breeds, production and upgradation of breeding inputs,
quality control of goods and services, lack of trained human resources
and incongruent institutional and policy framework. They are most
concerned about the sordid state of affairs because the focus of the
Department remains on quantitative and not the qualitative artificial
insemination. So far as the conservation of indigenous breeds is

28
concerned the Department of Animal Husbandry, Dairying and Fisheries
has proposed establishment of two national Kamdhenu Centres as
repository germplasm of indigenous breeds in the country. The Committee
also urge the Department for making necessary efforts to conserve the
livestock of indigenous breed such as Murrah, Ongole, Punganur etc.,
which is superior in quality, resistant to diseases and can withstand
climatic aberrations. Efforts should also be made to emphasize on
genetic improvement of the indigenous varieties so that the poor and
marginal farmers who cannot afford exotic breeds get an opportunity
for their economic sustenance. The Committee, therefore, recommend
the Department to shift their focus and emphasis on increasing the
success rate of artificial insemination so as to provide some relief to
the farmers for rearing the livestock. Last but not the least, the
Committee desire that professional training and expert scientific guide
should be imparted to the technicians and inseminators about the
methods of preservation, storage and transfer of semen to the field
under the prescribed weather conditions so that the success rate of
artificial insemination is enhanced.
Reply of the Government
Looking towards the importance of indigenous breeds in national
economy following initiatives have been taken by the Department:
(a) “Rashtriya Gokul Mission ” an initiative under National
Programme for Bovine Breeding and Dairy Development has
been launched with the aim to conserve and develop
indigenous bovine breeds in a focused and scientific manner.
All indigenous breeds are covered under the scheme.
(b) National Kamdhenu Breeding Centres (NKBC) are being
established one in Andhra Pradesh and one in Madhya Pradesh.
The NKBC will not only act as repository of indigenous
germplasm but also be source of certified germplasm in the
form of bulls, semen and embryos.
(c) National Dairy Plan-I covers development and conservation
of 6 indigenous breeds of cattle (Sahiwal, Gir , Rathi, Kankrej,
Tharparkar and Hariana) and 6 breeds of buffaloes (Murrah,
Mehsani, Jaffarabadi, Nili Ravi, Pandharpuri and Banni).
In order to produce disease free high genetic merit indigenous
bulls, Department has finalized Minimum Standard Protocol and Standard
Operating Procedure for:
(a) Pedigree selection and
(b) Production of bulls for natural service.

29
Following initiatives have been taken by the Department in order
to improve Artificial Insemination delivery system and success rate of
AI:
(a) Formulation of Standard Operating Procedure (SOP) for AI
technicians;
(b) Minimum Standard Protocol (MSP) and SOP for training of AI
technicians;
(c) MSP and SOP for AI training institutes; and
(d) Uniform syllabus/training module for AI training.
Department has constituted Central Monitoring Unit (CMU) for
evaluation and accreditation of AI training institutes in the country.
Funds are being released to States for extension of AI network through
establishment of Multi Purpose AI Technicians in Rural India (MAITRIs)
and strengthening of existing Al network.
[Ministry of Agriculture (Department of Animal Husbandry,
Dairying and Fisheries), Letter No. 25-5(1)/2015-AHD (Coord.),
dated 8th August, 2015]
National Dairy Development Board
Recommendation (Para No. 19)
Availability of adequate number of disease free High Genetic Merit
(HGM) bulls of different breeds of cow and buffalo is a must for
production of high quality disease free semen doses. The Animal breeding
activities under National Dairy Development Board envisages to produce
2000 HGM bulls to meet this requirement. At present 3 cattle breeds
and 2 buffalo breeds have been selected for Progeny Testing Programme
and 4 cattle breeds and 3 buffalo breeds have been selected under
Pedigree Selection Programme. The Committee desire that the scope of
Progeny Testing and Pedigree Selection Programme should be widened
so as to bring under its umbrella more cattle and buffalo breeds so that
the pool of High Genetic Merit (HGM) bulls can be enhanced.
Reply of the Government
Apart from the 5 breeds (Gir , Kankrej, Hariana, Rathi and Tharparkar)
of cattle included under Pedigree Selection, Sahiwal breed of cattle has
also been included in Pedigree selection Project. T wo sub projects, one
submitted by Punjab Livestock Development Board (PLDB), Punjab and
another by Shree Ganganagar Milk Union, Rajasthan have been approved
for funding under NDP-1. Similarly, apart from the 3 breeds (Jaffarabadi,
Pandharpuri and Nili Ravi) of buffalo, it is planned to also include Banni
breed of buffalo in Pedigree Selection Project under NDP-1.

30
Under NDP-1 only major milch/dairy animals have been included
and the remaining 33 breeds of cattle and 7 breeds of buffalo are
covered under National Programme for Bovine Breeding (NPBB) and
Rashtirya Gokul Mission.
[Ministry of Agriculture (Department of Animal Husbandry,
Dairying and Fisheries), Letter No. 25-5(1)/2015-AHD (Coord.),
dated 8th August, 2015]
National Dairy Development Board
Recommendation (Para No. 20)
The Committee also note that at present there are 45 A&B graded
semen stations against 14 in 2004-05. Also under National Dairy
Plan-I 22 sub-project plans have been for strengthening of semen station.
Keeping into focus the vital role played by these semen stations in the
successful implementation of the Scheme, the Committee desire that
special focus be given to strengthening the existing semen station via
adequate infrastructure and adequate trained staff as well as increasing
the number of these semen stations.
Reply of the Government
Till 31 March, 2015, 22 Sub Project Plans received from 20 EIAs in
14 States have been approved for strengthening of semen stations
under NDP-1. The list of approved sub projects is attached.
DADF has formulated Minimum Standard Protocol (MSP) for semen
production and undertaking evaluation of semen station by Central
Monitoring Unit (CMU). Only ‘A’ and ‘B’ graded semen stations are
eligible for strengthening under NDP-I. Under NDP-I, about 1400 persons
have been trained under the strengthening of Semen stations till the
end of March 2015. EIAs have been advised to keep sufficient number
of qualified manpower at all semen stations being strengthened under
NDP-I and not transfer frequently.
List of sub-project plan approved for Strengthening of Semen
Stations under NDP-I till March, 2015
Sl.No. State Activity EIA Name CMU PSC Approval
Grade Date
12 3 4 5 6
1. Gujarat SSS-SAG Bidaj Sabarmati Ashram Gaushala A 12.10.2012
2. Uttar Pradesh SSC- ABC Salon Animal Breeding Research A 16.11.2012
Organisation

31
 3. Tamil Nadu SSS-DLF Ooty Tamil Nadu Livestock B 16.11.2012
Development Agency
 4. Karnataka SSS- Nandini Karnataka Milk Federation A 18.12.2012
Sperm Station
 5. Punjab Punjab SSS-Nabha Punjab Livestock Development A 18.12.2012
Board
 6. Andhra Pradesh SSS - Banavasi Andhra Pradesh Livestock B 11.02.2013
Development Agency
 7. Gujarat SSS Jagudan Mehsana Milk Union A 11.02.2013
 8. West Bengal SSS-Haringhata Paschim Banga Go-Sampad A 11.02.2013
Bikash Sanstha
 9. Karnataka SSS-CFSP&TI CFSP&TI A 11.03.2013
10. West Bengal SSS-Salboni Paschim Banga Go-Sampad A 11.03.2013
Bikash Sanstha
11. Telangana SSS-Karimnagar Telangana State Livestock A 11.03.2013
Development Agency
12. Uttarakhand SSS-Rishikesh Uttarakhand Livestock B 19.08.2013
Development Board
13. Kerala SSS-Mattupatty Kerala Livestock Development A 19.08.2013
Board
14. Kerala SSS-Dhoni Kerala Livestock Development A 19.08.2013
Board
15. Madhya Pradesh SSS-Bhadbhada MP State Livestock and B 19.08.2013
Poultry Development
Corporation
16. Gujarat SSS-Ode Amul Research and A 06.12.2013
Development Association,
Anand
17. Maharashtra SSS-BAIF BAIF Development Research A 24.01.2014
Foundation
18. Gujarat SSS-Patan Gujarat Livestock A 24.01.2014
Development Board
19. Rajasthan SSS-Bassi Rajasthan Cooperative Dairy B 25.02.2014
Federation
 1  2 3 4 5 6

32
20. Gujarat SSS-Dama Banaskantha Milk Union A 14.06.2014
21. Tamil Nadu SSS-NJF Ooty Tamil Nadu Cooperative B 19.11.2014
Milk Producers ’ Federation
Limited
22. Haryana SSS-Hissar Haryana Livestock A 09.01.2015
Development Board
[Ministry of Agriculture (Department of Animal Husbandry,
Dairying and Fisheries), Letter No. 25-5(1)/2015-AHD (Coord.),
dated 8th August, 2015]
Availability of Green and Dry Fodder
Recommendation (Para No. 21)
The Committee are aware that the most important factor for the
milch animals is the availability of green and dry fodder for these
animals. During the course of examination the Committee find that
there is 35% shortage of fodder in the country. Furthermore, it is a
matter of concern that there is a lack of latest data of availability of
fodder vis-a-vis demand. As the figures quoted by the Department
pertains to data furnished by NABCONS for the year 2007, the Committee
feel that without an authentic data of demand and availability of
fodder the Department will not be able to bridge the yawning gap.
Since this is a State matter, the Committee feel that the Department
should pursue the matter pro-actively with the State Governments and
implementing agencies so as to ensure that the gap between demand
and availability of fodder is bridged at the earliest. The Committee
may be kept abreast of the developments in this regard. The Committee
desire the Department should also approach the State Governments,
Ministry of Railways, Ministry of Defence and Ministry of Urban
Development to find out ways for optimum use of the unused lands for
fodder cultivation as an alternative as the grazing areas in villages and
towns are diminishing with passage of time due to upgradation and
encroachments etc. The Committee recommend that the Department
should also approach the ICAR for enhancing the nutritive value of
green fodder and dry fodder as it is directly linked to the productivity
of the livestock. The Committee desire that the Government should
conduct field studies region-wise to study the impact of fodder nutritional
balanced food and fodder on their productivity and metabolic profile
of lactating cows and buffaloes. Based on the study the Department
can chalk out comprehensive programme to apprise the dairy farmers
about it.
1  2 3 4 5 6

33
Reply of the Government
1. The matter regarding collection of data related to fodder
was taken up with Ministry of Statistics and PI through Animal
Husbandry Statistic Division of this Department vide letters
dated 12.07.2012 and 17.07.2012 for inclusion of data
regarding green fodder , dry fodder concentrate and fodder
seeds. A detailed and exhaustive and mutually exclusive
classification was also provided. Through them the information
was supplied to Ministry of Statistic and PI for the use of NSS
70th round. They have now mentioned that they have
incorporated separate and additional column in the revised
schedule of Integrated Sample Survey for collecting the data
on production of green fodder only. However, they are being
requested to collect the data as was originally envisaged. In
this regard, regular meetings are held with the Statistic
Division of this Department. Therefore, it is submitted that
the Department is trying hard to institutionalize the data
collection of various types of fodder since 12.07.2012.
2. To increase the availability of fodder/feed Department of
Animal Husbandry, Dairying and Fisheries has launched a
National Livestock Mission (NLM) from the year 2014-15 with
one Sub-Mission of Feed and Fodder Development. Grants
are provided to the State Governments and UTs for various
components of Feed and Fodder Development. The scheme
is monitored by meetings with State Governments/UTs
officials, field visits, etc. All the components ensure that
the gap between demand and availability of fodder is bridged.
3. The Additional Director General (Animal Nutrition), ICAR has
been requested for improving the nutritive value of dry
fodder/green fodder and concentrate as it is directly linked
to the productivity of livestock. They have also been
requested to conduct field studies in various parts of country,
region-wise, to evaluate the impact of feeding nutritionally
balanced feed on improvement of productivity and metabolic
profile of lactating cows and buffaloes. Based on the outcome
of the appraisal, a comprehensive programme will be chalked
out.
4. The National Dairy Development Board (NDDB) on 7th July
2015 launched a mobile application named Pashu Poshan
which will boost dairy farmers’ financial gain by raising milk
yield and cutting feed cost. The app can suggest a balanced
diet for cows and buffaloes. It will be accessed by registering

34
on the INAPH portal http://inaph.Nddb.Coop. To use this
application, the farmer needs to provide complete animal
profile including breed, age, milk production, fat content in
milk aside from food items being presently fed to the animal
along with the cost in order to formulate the balanced ration
formula.
5. The matter regarding removal of encroachment has been
taken up from time to time with the State Governments and
UTs in the past from pastures/grazing lands. Letters have
been written to draw the attention of all the Chief Secretaries
to all States/UTs for intervening and to take effective recourse
to protect and also retrieve community pasture lands.
6. The Department is implementing various components for
pastures/grazing lands Development i.e. Fodder Production
from Non-Forest Wasteland/Rangeland/Grassland/Non-arable
land, Fodder Production from Forest Land under Feed and
Fodder Development sub-mission of NLM.
7. Earlier a letter was written to Chairman, Railway Board
regarding allowing for growing of grass to be used as fodder
for livestock feeding along the sides of Railway tracks. They
have replied that it is not feasible due to safety of train
operations.
8. Letters have been written to Ministry of Defence and Ministry
of Urban Development regarding suggesting alternative spots/
unused lands which could be utilized for cultivating animal
fodder.
[Ministry of Agriculture (Department of Animal Husbandry,
Dairying and Fisheries), Letter No. 25-5(1)/2015-AHD (Coord.),
dated 8th August, 2015]
Comments of the Committee
For comments of the Committee please refer to Para No. 1.34 of
Chapter I of this Report.
Dairy Entrepreneurship Development Scheme (DEDS)
Recommendation (Para No. 22)
The Committee express satisfaction on being informed that
consequent to the implementation of the Dairying Entrepreneurship
Development Scheme, there has been an increase of around 123% in

35
overall average production per beneficiary entrepreneur , leading to a
corresponding increase in the ownership of livestock assets by the
beneficiaries of this scheme and has lowered their dependence on
borrowed money, helped in creation of new assets and generated
employment for 1.86 lakh persons at least. Considering these to be
small but significant steps in the empowerment and economic
development of the rural masses, the Committee recommend that the
government continue to work towards incentivising this scheme by
providing institutional support to ensure that the implementation aspects
of this scheme are further fine-tuned and results in significant increase
of dairying entrepreneurs.
Reply of the Government
The budgetary allocation for the current financial year is Rs. 127 crore
against the requirement of Rs. 400 crore (31.75% of the required fund).
Department has requested M/o Finance for enhancement of allocation
at RE stage under DEDS scheme.
[Ministry of Agriculture (Department of Animal Husbandry,
Dairying and Fisheries), Letter No. 25-5(1)/2015-AHD (Coord.),
dated 8th August, 2015]
Comments of the Committee
For comments of the Committee please refer to Para No. 1.37 of
Chapter I of this Report.
Increased Budgetary Allocations for Fisheries Sector
Recommendation (Para No. 24)
Simultaneously, the Committee desire that Department to motivate
all the implementing agencies to come forward and subscribe to the
schemes being implemented by them by sending fresh proposals and
timely furnishing utilization certificates of past allocations. This would
not only ensure optimum utilization of funds but also lead to reduction
of approved funds is confined to the bare minimum.
Reply of the Government
The Department sensitizes the State Governments and Union
Territories through notification of Schemes, State Minister ’s/Secretary
level conferences, zonal level meetings besides regular monitoring and
field visits etc. for speedy implementation of the schemes, projects
and utilization of funds by them.
[Ministry of Agriculture (Department of Animal Husbandry,
Dairying and Fisheries), Letter No. 25-5(1)/2015-AHD (Coord.),
dated 8th August, 2015]

36
Directorate of Aquatic Animal Health and Quarantine (DAAHQ)
Recommendation (Para No. 25)
The Committee note that based on the recommendation of the
National Farmers’ Commission to strengthen the Bio-Security of Livestock
and Marine Sector a new sub-component of setting-up of Aquatic Animal
Quarantine Units and Disease diagnostic labs were introduced under the
component of Animal Quarantine and Certification Services of the Central
Sector Scheme on Directorate of Animal Health in the Eleventh Plan.
They further note that with the increase in movement of aquatic animals
within the country and across the borders, the risk of transmission of
diseases which could impact both the aquatic animals as well as those
who come in contact with them and its possible impact on the
biodiversity and on the habitat is another emerging concern. Being well
aware that a casual approach to the issues of contamination and cross
contamination and species introductions can have devastating effect on
the economic activity of aquaculture and food security in general, the
Committee are of the firm opinion that the edifice DAAHQ would be a
real help in maintaining aquatic animal health and also act as a strong
quarantine body. They, therefore, recommend that this organization be
made fully operational in a quick time with adequate infrastructure,
manpower and zonal offices.
Reply of the Government
To make the Department of Aquatic Animal Health and Quarantine
(DAAHQ) functional, following steps have been taken by the Department
so far:
(a) The boundary wall of the acquired site at Padappai Village,
Chennai has been constructed. The technical design for
further construction of Aquatic Animal Quarantine Unit (AAQU)
and Disease Diagnostic Laboratory (DDL) are being developed
through a constituted Expert Committee.
(b) Matter regarding transfer of identified land at Palghar , near
Mumbai to Department of Animal Husbandry, Dairying and
Fisheries is being persistently pursued with the Government
of Maharashtra for expediting the Government resolution in
this regard.
(c) As regards the staffing of the Head Quarter Unit, one post
of Fisheries Research Investigator (Quarantine) has already
been filled up by direct recruitment through Staff Selection
Commission (SSC) and the post of Deputy Director (Aquatic
Quarantine) and Assistant Director (Aquatic Quarantine) have
been advertised for recruitment on deputation basis.

37
(d) The proposal for creation and filling up the posts at regional
units, have been initiated and after due departmental
clearances, the recruitment to these posts may be initiated.
[Ministry of Agriculture (Department of Animal Husbandry,
Dairying and Fisheries), Letter No. 25-5(1)/2015-AHD (Coord.),
dated 8th August, 2015]
Directorate of Aquatic Animal Health and Quarantine (DAAHQ)
Recommendation (Para No. 26)
While perusing the documents furnished by the Department in
context of examination of Demands for Grants (2015-16), the Committee
came across an instance wherein a variation in numerical terms was
witnessed. In their Background Material, the Department submitted
that the outlay for agriculture sector in 2015-16 has been increased to
2.01% of the total Central Plan Outlay of Rs. 5,78,302 crore; during the
course of evidence, the representative of the Department stated that
the allocation to Department of Animal Husbandry, Dairying and Fisheries
for the fiscal 2015-16 was Rs. 16,466.35 crore which in percentage
terms is 2.8% of the Central Plan Outlay of Rs. 5,78,382 crore, while
in their Post-Evidence written replies, the Department again submitted
that outlays for the entire agriculture and allied sectors for the year
was Rs. 11,675.00 crores, which is 2.01% of the total Central Plan
Outlay of Rs. 5,78,382.00 crore. The Committee strongly deprecate this
variance in figures regarding allocation to Agriculture and allied sectors
out of the Central Plan Outlay for the fiscal 2015-16 as it is reflective
of their callous attitude while furnishing any information to Parliament.
They, therefore, caution the Department that in future, extreme care
should be taken before furnishing any document to Parliament to ensure
uniformity in data on a particular topic across all documents to avoid
repeat of this incident.
Reply of the Government
The discrepancy in figures, if any, is deeply regretted. However, it
is mentioned that based on Statement 12 of Expenditure Budget Vol. I.
2015-16, Central Plan Outlay for the entire agriculture and allied sectors
for the year 2015-16 is Rs. 10,669.99 crores, which is 1.84% of the total
Central Plan Outlay of Rs. 5,78,381.67 crores, whereas allocation to
Department of Animal Husbandry, Dairying and Fisheries for the year
2015-16 is Rs. 1133.14 crores ,which is approximately 0.20% of the total
Central Plan Outlay of Rs. 5,78,381.67 crores.
[Ministry of Agriculture (Department of Animal Husbandry,
Dairying and Fisheries), Letter No. 25-5(1)/2015-AHD (Coord.),
dated 8th August, 2015]

38
CHAPTER III
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO NOT
DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE GOVERNMENT ’S REPLIES
-NIL-

39
CHAPTER IV
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF
THE GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE
Share of Department of Animal Husbandry, Dairying and Fisheries in
Central Plan
Recommendation (Para No. 2)
Animal Husbandry, Dairying and Fisheries activities alongwith
agriculture continue to be an integral part of human life since the
process of civilization Started. These activities have contributed to the
food basket, draught, animal power and also helped in maintaining
ecological balance. These activities also play a significant role in
generating gainful employment to more than 70.5 millions in the rural
sector, particularly among the landless, small and marginal farmers and
women besides providing cheap and nutritious food to millions of peoples.
The Committee find that farmers, marginal, small and semi medium
operational holdings area less than 4 hectare on about 87.7% of the
livestock. However, the Committee note with concern that when the
issue of distribution of financial resources crops up, the Animal
Husbandry, Dairying and Fisheries sector gets neglected. This is evident
from the fact that the percentage share of the Department of Animal
Husbandry, Dairying and Fisheries stands at just 0.33% in the Twelfth
Plan vis-a-vis 0.38% in the Eleventh Plan. Although, the allocation in
monetary terms has increased from Rs. 8174.00 crore in the Eleventh
Plan to Rs. 14,179.00 crore in the Twelfth Plan, yet the Committee are
of the firm opinion that this too is woefully inadequate. Keeping in
view the importance of Animal Husbandry, Dairying and Fisheries Sector
in supplementing the income of our farmers, the Committee recommend
that the Government increase the share of the Department in the
Central Plan at the earliest if it is really committed towards the
development of this vital sector of our economy.
Reply of the Government
The Department had requested Ministry of Finance for quantitatively
enhancing the share of Department in the Plan allocation for
supplementing the efforts of States for providing the additional means
of sustenance in terms of wealth/security and employment to the farming
community mostly comprising of small and marginal farmers residing in

40
the rural areas. However, the allocation for the year 2015-16 has been
lowered by about 31.41% due to higher devolution of funds to the
States on account of acceptance of the recommendations of the
14th Finance Commission. Further, two schemes of the Department
namely National Livestock Mission and Veterinary Services and Animal
Health have been transferred to the State sector from the current year.
[Ministry of Agriculture (Department of Animal Husbandry,
Dairying and Fisheries), Letter No. 25-5(1)/2015-AHD (Coord.),
dated 8th August, 2015]
Comments of the Committee
For comments of the Committee please refer to Para No. 1.7 of
Chapter I of this Report.
Utilization of Funds
Recommendation (Para No. 7)
The Committee note that out of the RE figures of Rs. 5400.00 crore
for the first three fiscals, the actual expenditure as on 02.03.2015
amounts to Rs. 4960.04 crore only, which in percentage terms is 91.85%
of the RE. They further note that the Department has time and again
submitted that the present allocation is inadequate. However, judging
by their actual utilization of funds which has been lower than the RE
figures. The Committee, therefore recommend that the Department
first set its own house in order by motivating the implementing agencies
to furnish fresh proposals as well as utilization certificates of past
utilization on a timely basis to ensure optimum utilization of allocated
funds. Once the Department is able to ensure this, then only they
should request the Ministry of Finance for additional funds.
Reply of the Government
The Department is pursuing with the State Governments and
Implementing Agencies for timely submission and liquidation of pending
Utilisation Certificates.
[Ministry of Agriculture (Department of Animal Husbandry,
Dairying and Fisheries), Letter No. 25-5(1)/2015-AHD (Coord.),
dated 8th August, 2015]
Comments of the Committee
For comments of the Committee please refer to Para No. 1.13 of
Chapter I of this Report.

41
Outstanding Utilization Certificates
Recommendation (Para No. 9)
In spite of repeatedly pursuing the case of liquidation of pending
UCs, the Committee are anguished to be apprised that no positive
outcome has been forthcoming. The Committee are concerned to note
during the period 01.04.2014 to 31.12.2014 none of the 630 outstanding
utilization certificates amounting to Rs. 1634.54 crore have been
liquidated. The Committee express their displeasure at this pervading
morass, as it is abundantly clear that the follow-up mechanism currently
in place is unable to provide a lasting solution to this vexed issue. The
Committee, therefore, feel that there is an urgent need to relook the
extant mechanism and put in place necessary correctives at the earliest
so that States/UTs are persuaded to adopt financial discipline and take
cogent measures to liquidate these outstandings in a time bound manner
and thereby ensure that the flow of Central funds continues unhindered.
They, therefore, recommend that Department of Animal Husbandry,
Dairying and Fisheries initiate corrective measures in this respect in
good time and apprise them of the action initiated in this regard.
Reply of the Government
The recommendation of the Committee is noted. The Department
is pursuing with the State Governments and Implementing Agencies for
timely submission and liquidation of pending Utilisation Certificates.
[Ministry of Agriculture (Department of Animal Husbandry,
Dairying and Fisheries), Letter No. 25-5(1)/2015-AHD (Coord.),
dated 8th August, 2015]
Comments of the Committee
For comments of the Committee please refer to Para No. 1.19 of
Chapter I of this Report.

42
CHAPTER V
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH FINAL
REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT ARE STILL AWAITED
Allocation and Utilization of Funds
Recommendation (Para No. 6)
While agreeing with the sentiments of this increased share of States
in terms of fund allocation so as to increase their share in the funds
pie, they are concerned to note that the revised contribution of States
in Centrally Sponsored Schemes has not been arrived at. Rather , it is
under discussion of a high level Committee in the NITI Ayog. Deprecating
this haste in reduction of funds even before the quantum of State ’s
contribution is finalised, the Committee desire that the high level
Committee work out all modalities and arrive at the percentage share
of States expeditiously. In their view the Government should have
completed this task well before revising the funding pattern of CSS
Schemes. The Committee would like to be apprised of the views of the
State Governments/UTs regarding the reallocated share of Centre versus
State Government in the funds pie as well as revised contribution of
States in Centrally Sponsored Schemes.
Reply of the Government
The recommendation of the Committee is noted. The report of the
High level Committee is still awaited from NITI Aayog.
[Ministry of Agriculture (Department of Animal Husbandry,
Dairying and Fisheries), Letter No. 25-5(1)/2015-AHD (Coord.),
dated 8th August, 2015]
Comments of the Committee
For comments of the Committee please refer to Para No. 1.10 of
Chapter I of this Report.
Results Framework Document (RFD)
Recommendation (Para No. 8)
The Committee are well aware that Animal Husbandry, Dairying and
Fisheries being a State subject, the role of Department of Animal
Husbandry, Dairying and Fisheries generally gets restricted to a broad

43
policy formulation and the implementation of Schemes lies with the
implementing agencies  i.e. the States and Union Territories, who are
independent constitutional entities. However, Department of Animal
Husbandry, Dairying and Fisheries cannot just resort to passing the buck
when asked to furnish reasons for drop in composite score from a high
of 95.48% in 2012-13 to 91.97% in 2013-14. In view of the above, as also
to see the Department of Animal Husbandry, Dairying and Fisheries
perform, the Committee desire that the Department undertake a proper
introspection of its performance so as to address the problematic areas.
They further impress upon the Cabinet Secretariat to forward the
composite score for the Fiscals 2014-15, so that requisite remedial
action can be initiated by Department of Agriculture and Cooperation
to further fine tune the implementation of its schemes and thereby
increase their viability.
Reply of the Government
It may be mentioned that the Department of Animal Husbandry,
Dairying and Fisheries drops in composite score from a high of 95.48%
in 2012-13 to 91.97% in 2013-14. There is a shortfall to achieve targets
over and above the set targets to get excellent score of 100% in RFD
due to reduction in budgetary allocation at RE stage from Rs. 2025 crore
to Rs.1800 crore during 2013-14.
As regard the composite score for the year 2014-15, the final
achievement against the RFD targets are uploaded within a time frame
prescribed by the Cabinet Secretariat. The composite score for the
year 2014-15 has not been communicated by the Cabinet Secretariat,
till date.
[Ministry of Agriculture (Department of Animal Husbandry,
Dairying and Fisheries), Letter No. 25-5(1)/2015-AHD (Coord.),
dated 8th August, 2015]
Comments of the Committee
For comments of the Committee please refer to Para No. 1.16 of
Chapter I of this Report.
Food Safety and Traceability
Recommendation (Para No. 11)
The Committee express their concern over the fact that the scheme
for animal identification and traceability system that was to be done
with the Food and Agriculture Organization (FAO) via a Technical

44
Cooperation Programme (TCP) has not even started till date. The main
reason attributed for this being that FAO submitted a recommendation
in October, 2012, which was not giving any workable strategy for
implementing the scheme in a pilot phase. This has compelled the
Department to approach the Food Safety and Standard Authority of
India (FSSAI) to devise a strategy for implementation of Animal
Identification and Traceability System (Al & TS) in one or two States
(Punjab/Haryana), initially covering aspects on meat safety and later,
for dairy products. Strongly deprecating this state of affairs, the
Committee hope that FSSAI would be able to deliver the goods and
would pave way for successful albeit delayed implementation of this
scheme.
Reply of the Government
The finding that FAO recommendation in October, 2012 did not give
any workable strategy for implementing the scheme in a pilot phase,
the Food Safety and Standards Authority of India (FSSAI) was requested
to suggest a strategy for putting in place a system of Animal Identification
and Traceability Systems (AI & TS) on pilot basis in one State (say,
Punjab or Haryana). However, there was no response from FSSAI; they
were reminded thrice, the latest being on 21st May, 2015. FSSAI has
just now informed that animal identification and live animal traceability
does not fall under the ambit of FSSAI and they have already taken a
step forward by developing a plan for traceability of animal food products
i.e. meat and milk. Matter has again been taken up with FSSAI since
traceability of even of meat & milk would require identification of
source animals for their genetic makeup & health status.
[Ministry of Agriculture (Department of Animal Husbandry,
Dairying and Fisheries), Letter No. 25-5(1)/2015-AHD (Coord.),
dated 8th August, 2015]
Comments of the Committee
For comments of the Committee please refer to Para No. 1.22 of
Chapter I of this Report.
National Control Programme for Classical Swine Fever
Recommendation (Para No. 13)
Noting that piggery farming is an important vocation in the North-
Eastern States of the country for augmentation of income by the people
residing in these States, the Committee express satisfaction that the
Government is implementing a scheme which would insulate the pig

45
population of the region against the deadly Swine Fever , which is a
highly devastating disease of the pigs. However, they express their
concern on noting that this scheme is being implemented in the States
of Manipur, Meghalaya and Arunachal Pradesh only. This leaves the pig
population of the remaining NE States, namely Assam, Mizoram, Nagaland
and Tripura highly susceptible and vulnerable to Swine Fever. Taking
note of this important factor, the Committee recommend that the
implementation of this scheme be extended to the remaining four NE
States also at the earliest. They further desire that check points be
established at the border areas to screen pigs before they enter the NE
States.
Reply of the Government
The scheme is being implemented in whole of NE States; however,
all NE States did not send the proposals during 2014-15. Only State
Governments of Arunachal Pradesh, Manipur, Meghalaya and Tripura
submitted the proposals during 2014-15. Hence, the funds could be
released to these four states only. During 2015-16, all the States have
been requested to send their proposals under the scheme so that the
necessary releases can be done.
[Ministry of Agriculture (Department of Animal Husbandry,
Dairying and Fisheries), Letter No. 25-5(1)/2015-AHD (Coord.),
dated 8th August, 2015]
Comments of the Committee
For comments of the Committee please refer to Para No. 1.25 of
Chapter I of this Report.
Development of Dairy Sector
Recommendation (Para No. 18)
Dairy Sector has experienced a substantial growth over the years
owing to prudent policy intervention by the government. This has resulted
in India being the global leader in milk producing nations, with production
of 138 million tonnes during the fiscal 2013-14. Also, dairying has become
an important secondary source of income for women and marginal
farmers. Appreciating the efforts of the Department of Animal Husbandry,
Dairying and Fisheries, the Committee urge the government to continually
strive for the overall development of this vital sector in terms of
enhanced allocation that would help in proper and effective
implementation of Schemes and lead to increased production of milk
and its consumption in the years to come.

46
Reply of the Government
The budget allocation for dairy development schemes during
2014-15 and 2015-16 are as under:
Allocation of funds statement under NPDD, DEDS and NDP-I
scheme during 2014-15 & 2015-16
Sl.No. Name of scheme 2014-15 2014-15 2015-16
BE RE BE
1. NPDD 105.00 90.00 74.00
2. DEDS 229.99 228.18 127
3. NDP-I 215.05 164.00 300
Total 550.04 482.18 501.00
The budget allocated for dairy development schemes viz. National
Programme for Dairy Development (NPDD), Dairy Entrepreneurship
Development Scheme (DEDS) and National Dairy Plan (NDP-I) during
2014-15 was Rs. 550 crore which was reduced to Rs. 482.18 crore at RE
stage, while for year 2015-16 the budget allocation for dairy development
scheme is Rs. 501 crore. Department has sent a proposal to Ministry of
Finance for:
(i) Changing NPBBDD into State Sector Scheme as composite
scheme.
(ii) Enhancement of allocation at RE stage under NPDD, DEDS
and NDP-I scheme.
[Ministry of Agriculture (Department of Animal Husbandry,
Dairying and Fisheries), Letter No. 25-5(1)/2015-AHD (Coord.),
dated 8th August, 2015]
Comments of the Committee
For comments of the Committee please refer to Para No. 1.31 of
Chapter I of this Report.
Increased Budgetary Allocations for Fisheries Sector
Recommendation (Para No. 23)
India occupies the second position globally 5.69% of global share in
fish production after China with a production of 9.58 million tonnes
during the year 2013-14. However , the Committee observe that much

47
remains to be done especially in the inland and deep sea fishing in
order to stem the decline in marine fishery sector. For this, the
Government needs to increase the allocation to the fisheries sector.
But, the converse has been taking place in the fisheries sector , wherein
out of the XIIth Plan Outlay of Rs. 2483.00 crore, the BE allocation for
the first four fiscals amounts to Rs. 1670.11 crore. The BE figures were
then reduced at RE stage to Rs. 996.05 crore for the first three fiscals.
The variation between the Plan Outlay and actual allocation in the first
three fiscals is Rs. 1486.95 crore. Concerned to note that though the
fisheries sector exported 9,83,756 tonnes valued at Rs. 30,213.00 crore
during 2013-14, thus recording an increased of 5.98% in quantity and
60.23% in rupees over the previous year is not getting its due
encouragement from the Government, in terms of funding, the
Committee recommend that the Government go for a quantum
enhancement of funds at RE level for this year and higher allocation in
future, so as to boost the available resources for overall growth of this
sector, at the earliest.
Reply of the Government
It may be mentioned that the financial allocation to the Department
were decided by the Planning Commission (now not in existence) and
Ministry of Finance depending upon the overall resources available.
Even after utilization of 97% of funds allocated under RE during the
past three years of the 12th Five Year Plan, the Ministry of Finance has
allocated an amount of Rs. 476.94 crore to the fisheries sector for the
year 2015-16. As suggested by the Committee higher allocation shall be
proposed at RE stage.
[Ministry of Agriculture (Department of Animal Husbandry,
Dairying and Fisheries), Letter No. 25-5(1)/2015-AHD (Coord.),
dated 8th August, 2015]
Comments of the Committee
For comments of the Committee please refer to Para No. 1.40 of
Chapter I of this Report.
   N
EW D ELHI; HUKM DEO NARAYAN YADAV,
14 December, 2015 Chairperson,
23 Agrahayana, 1937 (Saka) Standing Committee on Agriculture.

48
ANNEXURE
STANDING COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE
(2015-16)
MINUTES OF THE ELEVENTH SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE
The Committee sat on Thursday, the 10th December, 2015 from
1000 hrs. to 1050 hrs. in Chamber of the Chairperson, Standing
Committee on Agriculture, Room No. 138 (Third Floor), Parliament
House, New Delhi.
PRESENT
Shri Hukm Deo Narayan Yadav —  Chairperson
M
EMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Prof. Richard Hay
3. Shri Sanganna Karadi
4. Shri Nalin Kumar Kateel
5. Md. Badaruddoza Khan
6. Shri C. Mahendran
7. Dr. Tapas Mandal
8. Shri Janardan Mishra
9. Shri Ajay Nishad
10. Shri Mukesh Rajput
11. Shri Satyapal Singh (Sambhal)
12. Shri B.S. Yeddyurappa
Rajya Sabha
13. Shri Mohd. Ali Khan
14. Shri Rajpal Singh Saini
15. Shri Ram Nath Thakur
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Shri U.B.S. Negi — Joint Secretary
2. Shri Arun K. Kaushik — Director
3. Shri C. Vanlalruata — Deputy Secretary
4. Shri Sumesh Kumar — Under Secretary

49
2. At the outset, Chairperson welcomed the Members to the Sitting
of the Committee. Thereafter, the Committee took up for consideration
the following draft Reports:
*(i) XXX XXX XXX XXX XXX
*(ii) XXX XXX XXX XXX XXX
*(iii) XXX XXX XXX XXX XXX
*(iv) XXX XXX XXX XXX XXX
(v) Draft Report on the Action Taken by the Government on the
Observations/Recommendations contained in the 11th Report
(16th Lok Sabha) of the Standing Committee on Agriculture
(2014-15) on ‘Demands for Grants (2015-16) ’ of the Ministry
of Agriculture and Farmers Welfare (Department of Animal
Husbandry, Dairying and Fisheries).
3. After some deliberations, the Committee adopted the draft
Reports without any modification. They authorized the Chairperson to
finalize and present these Reports to Parliament after getting them
factually verified from the concerned Departments/Ministry.
*4. XXX XXX XXX XXX XXXX
The Committee then adjourned.
*Matter not related to this Report.

50
APPENDIX
(Vide Para 4 of Introduction of the Report)
ANALYSIS OF ACTION TAKEN BY TJE GOVERNMENT ON THE ELEVENTH
REPORT OF STANDING COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE (2014-15)
ON ‘DEMANDS FOR GRANTS (2015-16) ’ OF THE MINISTRY
OF AGRICULTURE (DEPARTMENT OF ANIMAL
HUSBANDRY , DAIRYING AND FISHERIES)
(i) Total number of Recommendations: 26
(ii) Recommendations/Observations  which   have  been
accepted by the Government:
Para Nos. 1, 3, 4, 5, 10, 12, 14, 15, 16, 17, 19, 20,
21, 22, 24, 25 and 26
Total 17
Percentage 65.40%
(iii) Recommendations/Observations which the Committee
do not desire to pursue in view of the Government ’s
replies:
Para No. Nil
Total NIL
Percentage 0%
(iv) Recommendations/Observations in respect of  which
replies of the Government have  not  been accepted
by the Committee:
Para Nos. 2, 7 and 9
Total 03
Percentage 11.53%

51
(v) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which
final replies of the Government are still awaited:
Para Nos. 6, 8, 11, 13, 18 and 23
Total 06
Percentage 23.07%