FIFTY-FIRST REPORT
STANDING COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE
(2017-2018)
(SIXTEENTH LOK SABHA)
MINISTRY OF AGRICULTURE AND FARMERS WELFARE
(DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE, CO-OPERATION AND FARMERS WELFARE)
ON THE SUBJECT
“VARIANCE IN COST AND QUALITY OF AGRICULTURAL TOOLS AND
IMPLEMENTS BEING PROVIDED TO THE FARMERS UNDER
RASHTRIYA KRISHI VIKAS YOJANA (RKVY) AND PROBLEMS
BEING FACED BY THE FARMERS DUE TO IMPORTED
POWER TILLERS—A REVIEW”
Presented to Lok Sabha on 03.04.2018
Laid on the Table of Rajya Sabha on 04.04.2018
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
April, 2018/Chaitra, 1940 (Saka)


COA No. 363
Price : Rs. 179.00
© 2018 B Y L OK S ABHA S ECRETARIAT
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct
of Business in Lok Sabha (Fifteenth Edition) and printed by
Jainco Art India, New Delhi-110 005.

CONTENTS
PAGE
COMPOSITION OF THE C OMMITTEE (2017-18) ............................... (iii)
INTRODUCTION ................................................................. (v)
ABBREVIATIONS................................................................. (vii)
REPORT
PART I
CHAPTER I Introduction ......................................... 1
A. Need for Farm  Mechanization .................. 1
B. Studies on Problems being faced by the
Farmers due to Imported Power Tillers ...... 2
C. Pricing of P ower Tillers .......................... 14
CHAPTER II A. Ensuring Quality of Power Tillers .............. 18
B. Farm Machinery and Testing of Power Tillers.... 27
CHAPTER III A. Financial Assistance/Subsidy being Provided
to the Farmers under Schemes for Agriculture
Mechanization ...................................... 28
B. Process of Empanelment of Manufacturer/
Importers of Power Tiller for Subsidy
Scheme............................................... 35
C
HAPTER IV Support to Domestic Power Tillers Industries ........ 39
PART II
Observations/Recommendations of the Committee ....... 47
ANNEXURES
I. The information of manufacturers-wise and State-wise
availability of dealer’s network and service centers ..... 56
II. Ministry of Agriculture cooperation & Farmers Welfare
(Department of Agriculture Cooperation & Farmers
Welfare circulars issued by the  Department ............... 58
III. Details of number and name of power tiller companies
empanelled by the DAC&FW ................................... 85
(i)

APPENDICES
I. Minutes of the 27th Sitting of the Committee (2015-16)
held on 12th July , 2016 ........................................ 114
II. Minutes of the 17th Sitting of the Committee (2016-17)
held on 05th April, 2017 ....................................... 118
III. Minutes of the 26th Sitting of the Committee (2016-17)
held on 21st August, 2017 ..................................... 122
IV. Minutes of the 3rd Sitting of the Committee (2017-18)
held on 2nd November , 2017 .................................. 125
V. Minutes of the 9th Sitting of the Committee (2017-18)
held on 17th January, 2018 .................................... 129
VI. Extract of Minutes of the 17th Sitting of the Committee
(2017-18) held on 27th March, 2018 ......................... 132
(ii)
PAGE

COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE
(2017-2018)
Shri Hukm Deo Narayan Yadav — Chairperson
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Sanjay Dhotre
3. Prof. Ravindra Vishwanath Gaikwad
4. Shri Sanganna Amarappa Karadi
5. Shri Nalin Kumar Kateel
6. Smt. Raksha Tai Khadase
7. Md. Badaruddoza Khan
8. Shri C. Mahendran
9. Dr. Tapas Mandal
10. Shri Janardan Mishra
11. Shri Devji M. Patel
12. Shri Nityanand Rai
13. Shri Mukesh Rajput
14. Vacant
@
15. Shri Konakalla Narayana Rao
16. Shri C.L. Ruala
17. Shri Arjun Charan Sethi
18. Shri Virendra Singh
19. Shri Dharmendra Yadav
20. Shri Jai Prakash Narayan Yadav
21. Shri B.S. Yeddyurappa
Rajya Sabha
22. Sardar Sukhdev Singh Dhindsa
23. Vacant^
(iii)
@Vacant due to resignation of Shri Neiphiu Rio from the Membership of Lok Sabha w.e.f.
22.02.2018 vide SG Notification dated 23.02.2018.
^Vacant due to retirement of Shri Janardan Dwivedi from the Membership of Rajya Sabha
w.e.f. 27.01.2018 vide CB-I Note dated 16.01.2018.

24. Shri Meghraj Jain
25. Shri Vinay Katiyar
26. Shri Mohd. Ali Khan
27. Shri K.K. Ragesh
28. Shri Ram Nath Thakur
29. Shri R. Vaithilingam
30. Shri Shankarbhai N. Vegad
31. Dr. Chandrapal Singh Yadav
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Shri D.S. Malha — Joint Secretary
2. Shri Arun K. Kaushik — Director
3. Shri Sumesh Kumar — Under Secretary
4. Shri S. Vijayaraghavan — Sr. Executive Assistant
(iv)

(v)
INTRODUCTION
I, the Chairperson, Standing Committee on Agriculture, having been
authorized by the Committee to submit the Report on their behalf,
present this Fifty-first Report on the Subject “Variance in Cost and
Quality of Agricultural Tools and Implements Being Provided to the
Farmers under Rashtriya Krishi Vikas Yojana (RKVY) and Problems Being
faced by the Farmers due to Imported Power Tillers — A Review ” of the
Ministry of Agriculture and Farmers Welfare (Department of Agriculture,
Co-operation and Farmers Welfare).
2. The Standing Committee on Agriculture had selected the subject
for examination during 2015-16. As the examination of the subject
could not be completed during 2015-16, the subject was again selected
for examination by the Committee during 2016-17 and 2017-18. The
Committee took evidence of the representatives of Ministry of Agriculture
and Farmers Welfare (Department of Agriculture, Co-operation and
Farmers Welfare) on the subject at their Sittings held on 12.07.2016,
05.04.2017, 21.08.2017, 02.11.2017 and 17.01.2018.
3. The Report was considered and adopted by the Committee at
their Sitting held on 27.03.2018.
4. For facility of reference, the observations/recommendations of
the Committee have been printed in bold at Part-II of the Report.
5. The Committee wish to express their thanks to representatives
of the Ministry of Agriculture and Farmers Welfare (Department of
Agriculture, Co-operation and Farmers Welfare) for furnishing requisite
information to the Committee in connection with examination of the
subject.
6. The Committee would also like to place on record their deep
sense of appreciation for the invaluable assistance rendered to them by
the officials of Lok Sabha Secretariat attached to the Committee.
   N
EW D ELHI; HUKM DEO NARAYAN YADAV ,
02 April, 2018 Chairperson,
12 Chaitra, 1940 (Saka) Standing Committee on Agriculture.

(vii)
ABBREVIATIONS
AOA Agreement on Agriculture
ARAI Automotive Research Association of India
ASCM Agreement on Subsidies and Countervailing Measures
ATMA Agriculture Technology Management Agency
BIS Bureau of Indian Standards
CBEC Central Board of Excise and Customs
CMVR Central Motor Vehicle Rules
CKD Completely Knocked Down
COP Conformity of Production
DAC&FW Department of Agriculture, Cooperation and Farmers
Welfare
DBT Direct Benefit Transfer
DCR Domestic Content Requirement
DLEC District Level Executive Committee
EC Executive Committee
FMTTIs Farm Machinery Training & Testing Institutes
FTA Free Trade Agreement
GST Goods and Services Tax
ICAR Indian Council of Agricultural Research
ICAT Centre for Automotive Technology
ICT Initial Commercial Testing
KAMCO Kerala Agro Machinery Corporation
MRP Maximum Retail Price.
MIDH Mission on Integrated Development of Horticulture
NFSM National Food Security Mission
NSC National Steering Committee
NHM National Horticulture Mission
NMOOP National Mission on Oils and Oil Palms
NMAET National Mission on Agricultural Extension and Technology
PHTM Post Harvest Technology and Management
RAU Rajendra Agricultural University, Patna

RKVY Rashtriya Krishi Vikas Yojana
SMAM Sub-mission on Agricultural Mechanization
SLEC State Level Executive Committee
SKD Semi Knocked Down
SRFMTTI Southern Region Farm Machinery Training and Testing
Institute
TRIMs Trade-Related Investment Measures
VAT Value Added Tax
WTO World Trade Organization
(viii)

1
REPORT
PART I
CHAPTER I
INTRODUCTION
A. Need for Farm Mechanization
1.1 Agriculture Mechanization is an essential input to modern
agriculture to increase the productivity and for making judicious use of
other inputs like seeds, fertilizers, chemicals & pesticides and natural
resources like water , soil nutrients etc. besides reducing the human
drudgery and cost of cultivation. Agriculture Mechanization also helps
in improving safety and comfort of the agricultural worker , improvements
in the quality and value addition of the farm produce and also enabling
the farmers to take second and subsequent crops making Indian
agriculture more attractive and profitable. It also helps the Indian
farming to become commercial instead of subsistence. There is a linear
relationship between availability of farm power and farm yield.
Therefore, there is a need to increase the availability of farm power
to cope up with increasing demand of food grains.
1.2 As per the Agriculture Census 2010-11, the average size of all
land holding is 1.15 ha which was 1.23 ha in the last Agriculture Census
of 2005-06. About 85 % of the total land holdings are in small and
marginal size groups which need special efforts for its mechanization
further growing shortage of agricultural labour and rising wage rates
are not the only reasons for the accelerated mechanization of farm
operations. Factors such as time saving, efficient input application,
transportation of farm inputs and produce, and reducing drudgery also
stimulate demand for farm machines. The development and mass
production of multi-utility mechanized devices to suit the requirements
of farmers important for the growth of mechanization in India.
1.3 Power tiller is one of the many farm mechanization inputs like
tractors used by the farmers. Power tillers are the two-wheeled version
of tractors that are targeted at farmers with small land holdings, or
those who cannot afford expensive tractors. It works best on smaller
land holdings (up to 2.5 hectares) and where the horse power
requirement is lower. Most of the power tillers are diesel operated with
a horse power ranging from 8 to 15. As power tillers use less labour per
unit of land compared to tractors and bullock carts, it is increasingly
used in very intensive cultivation of paddy, inter-cropping for horticulture
and plantations. Some of the Far East countries like Japan, China and

2
Taiwan are also encouraging the use of power tillers in small land
holdings. Power Tiller is one of the multi-utility devices which are ideal
for small and marginal farms. About 86% of the Farm holdings are small
and marginal in the country, however , the use of power tillers is confined
mainly to a handful of crops such as paddy and sugarcane and that too
mainly in the Southern and the North-Eastern States.
1.4 With additional fittings to the power tiller , it is capable of
performing operations right from primary tillage to transportation of
crops which may include ploughing, harrowing, cultivation, planking,
ridging and furrowing, sowing, fertilizer application, pumping water ,
intercultural, plant protection, harvesting, threshing and lastly the
transport operation. In short the power tiller can render all these
services for many types of crop production. Obviously, it has become
a choice for those farmers who need a mechanical source of power for
smaller farm operations.
B. STUDIES ON PROBLEMS BEING FACED BY THE FARMERS DUE TO
IMPORTED POWER TILLERS
1.5 Ensuring supply of quality power tiller at reasonable prices to
the farmers, the reform became imperative to enhance level of
agriculture mechanization thereby agriculture productivity. However,
various media reports and representatives of the farmer ’s association
given picture about sub-standard quality of power tillers project given
picture of agriculture mechanization in the country. Following the
demand of Indian Farmer’s Association, State Farmer Commission, Bihar,
Patna and others for taking proper steps to stop sale of Chinese
agriculture machines in Bihar on account of its alleged poor standard
and having no warranty and no arrangement of repair by respective
companies, the Director Agriculture, Bihar , Patna had sought guidelines
from Dean, College of Agricultural Engineering, RAU, Pusa vide letter
No. 8/KNYV-46/151/K PATNA dated 06.07.2015 on the basis of study
conducted by constituting a team of Scientists of Farm Machinery
specialization. The Government of Bihar had desired proper
recommendations of the Dean, C.A.E., Pusa as to whether Chinese
agricultural machines be got included in agricultural mechanization
scheme or not. The Expert Committee constituted by the RAU, PUSA in
their report submitted to the Government of Bihar bring out problems
being faced by the farmers due to sub-standard quality of imported
power tillers. Some of the important outcome of study of RAU, Pusa
are of follows:—
(i) Test report of power tillers issued by authorized testing agencies
The visiting scientists, while assessing the Chinese Power Tiller , did
not focus much on this aspect because it is well versed that only tested

3
power tillers by different FMTTIs are enlisted by the Government of
India. The Government Of Bihar Provides subsidy to farmers only on
purchase of those power tillers which are under list of the Government
of India. Obviously, it is the Government of India which is supposed to
look into the technical competence of machine based on the test report
before its listing. Once, the machine is in list of the Government of
India, it is supposed that the power tiller under the list complies with
necessary technical requirements for use of the farmers.
(ii) Workshop facility at dealer ’s site
During visit, the scientists did not find the well equipped workshop
facilities at any of the dealer ’s site. However, they reported that after
sale, repair and maintenance facility if provided to the machine
purchaser at door , as and when required by them.
(iii) Stock of spare parts
Few dealers entertained the scientist during inspection properly
and they reported the scientists about the stock of spare parts. Majority
of them informed that they manage the spare parts on demand. However,
none of them agreed to show the scientists the stock of spare parts
available with them.
(iv) Selling price of power tiller
All the distributors covered under study reported that power tillers
are sold at genuine Maximum Retail Price (MRP). However , majority of
dealers reported the selling price of power tillers during interview in
questionnaire sheet.
(v) Mode of service
Majority of dealers and distributors reported that they are providing
door service to farmers.
Response of distributors, dealers and farmers
1.6 Response of distributors: The facts revealed from the response
of distributors as mentioned in duly filled proforma are as follows:—
(a) All distributors reported that they have good dealer ’s network
in the State.
(b) Except distributors of SAS Motor Limited, Patna, no one
reported about price of power tiller at dealer ’s shop.

4
(c) Distributors did not clearly reported the mode that is being
adopted for undertaking after sale, repairing and maintenance
work of power tiller .
(d) Guaranty/warranty on sold power tiller was reported to be
one year.
(e) No clear price control mechanism adopted by them was
reported by any of the distributor of power tiller .
Response of dealers
1.7 The following facts revealed from the response of dealers as
mentioned in duly filled proforma:—
a. 77.8% dealers informed that they have workshop facilities
for doing repair and maintenance of power tiller .
b. 22.20% dealers only informed that they have stock of spares
of worth between Rs. 3-4 lakhs only.
c. Nominal stock of spare parts was reported by 22.20% dealers.
d. 55.6% dealers reported about having no stock of spares with
them.
e. 88.9% dealers reported that they are providing training to
farmers after they purchase power tiller .
f.  Percentage complaints in power tiller after sale was reported
in between 2 to 5 except the Bajrang Traders, Jahanabad
where total number of complaints were reported to be 40 in
number.
g. 77.8% dealers reported that they are providing door service
to the machine purchaser for repair and maintenance.
h. Price of different make/models of Chinese power tillers were
reported to be in between Rs. 1.50 to 1.70 lakhs.
Response of farmers
1.8 In total 43 sample farmers were surveyed for their response on
various parameters such as subsidy availed by them, mode of purchase,
satisfaction from machine operation, availability of spare parts, need
of repair and maintenance after purchase, cooperation of dealers,
training provided to farmers by dealers and distributors, supply of
machine operation manual as well as guaranty/warranty on sold
machines. Their response on various parameters has been calculated in
percentage, following information has been obtained:—
(a) 87.45% farmers availed benefits of subsidy programme in
purchase of power tiller while 12.55% farmers purchased

5
machines on payment of full price and without availing the
subsidy.
(b) The role of distributors and dealers was found dominating in
selection and purchase of power tiller by farmers. 68.41%
purchase was influenced by the dealers and distributors,
whereas, 31.59% farmers had selected and purchased the
Chinese power tiller by their own choice.
(c) Out of total sample volume, 80.71% farmers were not satisfied
with the performance of machine. 19.29% farmers only were
satisfied with the working of machine.
(d) 59.65% farmers reported availability of spare parts at local
level, whereas, 40.35% farmers had complaints regarding
non-availability of spare parts.
(e) Regarding post purchase need of repair and maintenance of
power tiller, in general, frequency of repair and maintenance
less than five times was reported by about 40.82% farmers
which is the normal value. 39.52% purchasers reported repair
and maintenance frequency between 5 to 10 times and more
during average purchase life of about 3 years and that appears
to be on higher side. However , 11.66% farmers reported
repair and maintenance need as minor and none, which were
the cases of machines purchased recently i.e. during the
year of survey.
(f) It revealed from survey that 91.38% purchaser were not
supported by dealers, when needed. Only 8.17% farmers
reported the cooperation of dealer on demand in post
purchase activities.
(g) Similar was the situation in respect of training provided by
dealers/distributors to farmers on post purchase operation,
repair and maintenance aspect. 91.38% farmers were not
supported with training programme and only 8.17% farmers
were provided required training.
(h) So far the availability of machine operation manual to power
tiller purchasers is concerned, 73.14% farmers reported that
they were not made available the machine operation manual.
However , 26.86% farmers were provided machine operation
manual during purchase of machine.
(i) In respect of guaranty/warranty on purchased machines,
88.41% farmers reported that they were not provided any
guaranty/warranty card on purchase of machine. Only 11.59%
farmers reported that they had been given one year ’s
warranty on purchase of power tillers by the dealers.

6
1.9 The Standing Committee on Agriculture (2015-16), realising the
importance of the issues, has selected the Subject “Variance in Cost
and Quality of Agricultural Tools and Implements Being Provided to the
Farmers under Rashtriya Krishi Vikas Yojana (RKVY) and Problems Being
Faced by the Farmers Due to Imported Power Tillers — A Review ” for
examination. When the Committee oppressed their concern about
problems being faced by the farmers due to sub-standard Chinese
Power Tillers, the Ministry of Agriculture and Farmers Welfare
(Department of Agriculture, Cooperation and Farmers Welfare) has
constituted K. Alagusundaram Committee to enquire about the issue
and submit a report thereon. The Alagusundaram Committee in the
report submitted to the DAC&FW has brought out following issues
regarding problems being faced by the farmers due to Imported Chinese
Power Tillers:—
Quality and Performance of the Indigenous and Imported Power Tillers
(i) Power tillers are tested in accordance with the procedure as
per IS 9935-2002 (Power Tiller Test Code). This standard
aims at performance evaluation of power tillers and not
much is intended on quality and durability of the product.
IS 9935-2002 does not specify any procedure and limits for
material quality testing of individual components/assemblies
except that of the rotavator blades. The same standard i.e.
IS: 9935-2002 and IS: 13539-2008 (Power Tillers —
Recommendations on Selected Performance Characteristics)
is followed for testing and evaluation of the power tillers
whether it is indigenous or imported from other countries
including China.
(ii) The manufacturer or importer themselves select the power
tiller and offer it for Initial Commercial Testing. The offered
power tiller may not be a representative sample of the
production or import lot. It could be a selective best sample.
(iii) The total duration for testing of power of power tillers is
around 110 hours. It may be difficult to assess the durability
of power tillers within 110 hours of running during the course
of testing.
(iv) T esting on durability and quality of the power tiller
components and sub-components is not carried out by the
institute.
(v) The power tiller is considered fit for supply under subsidy
programmes of the Government if it meets the evaluative
performance requirements as per IS: 13539-2008.

7
(vi) T wo major breakdowns and 5 minor defects during the entire
course of testing are allowed and such breakdowns does not
disqualify the power tiller from subsidy. In case of breakdowns
and non-conformity to evaluative performance parameters,
provision for repeat and supplementary test is available. In
case of breakdowns the power tiller is subjected to repeat
test after replacing the broken parts/assemblies. Even if it
fails during repeat test, the power tiller is subjected to
Supplementary test and the tests relevant to the broken
parts/assemblies are conducted again. These provisions in
general do not disqualify any power tiller at any stage of
testing.
(vii) Power weeders are also tested under the category of Power
Tillers (tilling type). Such power weeders thus get the benefit
of higher subsidy of power tillers below 8 BHP categories as
per the guidelines of Sub-Mission on Agricultural
Mechanization.
(viii) Many power tiller importers have not submitted power tillers
for 1st and subsequent Batch Testing and still they are
continued to be eligible for subsidy.
(ix) Most of the manufacturers specify their power tillers as non-
transport vehicle and thus get relief from conforming to the
mandatory requirements under Central Motor Vehicle Rules
(CMVR). Under CMVR, every power tiller engine also has to
meet the statutory prevailing exhaust gas emission norms.
(x) Some of the manufacturers of power tillers have been listed
as defaulters of Conformity of Production (COP) on account
of not meeting the emission requirements as per CMVR. While
updating the list of power tillers eligible for subsidy, the list
of manufacturers defaulting Conformity of Production is not
being taken into consideration.
Quality Parameters apart from the Existing Performance Parameters
(i) Making the existing tolerances and limits as specified in
IS: 9935-2002 and IS: 13539-2008 more stringent will help
avoiding entry of poor and substandard quality of power
tillers in the Indian market and thus will also protect the
interest of Indian farmers.
(ii) In the current testing methods, repeat and supplementary
tests are permitted. Power tillers that do not meet the

8
evaluative performance parameters and breakdown criteria,
are subjected to repeat tests and supplementary tests on
the same sample by replacing the defective/broken parts/
assemblies and thus the same power tiller finally qualify all
the tests. Stringent norms should be followed for repeat and
supplementary tests.
(iii) Many of the performance parameters in the IS 13539: 2008
have been made non-evaluative even though they are relevant
in performance evaluation of power tillers. Making such
parameters as evaluative will reject the entry of many poor
and sub-standard power tillers at the stage of testing itself.
(iv) Subjecting the power tillers to longer test duration will help
assessing the quality and durability of power tillers. For this
conducting the tests in simulated conditions would be helpful.
(v) The existing standards for testing of power tillers needs to
be revised and the limits and tolerances for the material of
critical components of power tillers such as sheet metal,
engine components, transmission components, bearings,
accessories etc. needs to be fixed.
Manufacturing Cost of the Indian Power Tillers
There are only two indigenous manufacturers of power tillers in the
country viz. VST Tillers Tractors Limited (VST), Bangalore (Karnataka)
& Kerala Agro Machinery Corporation (KAMCO), Athani (Kerala). As per
the data supplied by these two manufacturers, the manufacturing cost
(raw material cost) of power tiller on an average is Rs. 92,000/-.
The average selling price of their power tillers is Rs. 1,65,000/-
which includes cost towards overhead expenses such as cost
of consumables, assembly, pre-delivery inspection etc. (average
Rs. 23,500/-), VAT on basic cost (average Rs. 2400/-), cost of accessories
(average Rs. 7550/-), dealers margin (average Rs. 10,000/-), company
profit ranged from Rs. 1970/- to Rs. 5000/- and other charges such
as freight, insurance, PDI expenses, marketing expenses, finance
charges, local transportation, octroi and other levies on an average
Rs. 26,000/-.
Cost of Imported Power Tillers
As per the data collected from some of the Chinese power tiller
importers, the landed cost of Chinese power tillers in India including
the Customs duty on an average is Rs. 85900. Value addition to the
landed cost of Chinese power tillers in terms of consumables, additional

9
accessories and the spare parts on an average is Rs. 11450. The major
portion of the cost difference between landed cost and selling price is
on account of dealers margin and profit to the importer which is on an
average is Rs. 23800/- and transportation & Misc. marketing expenditure
(Average Rs. 19800/-). As per the data of Central Board of Excise and
Customs (CBEC), the Power Tillers are mainly imported under Tariff
Heads 84328020 and 84328090 which relates to Rotary Tiller and Other,
respectively as per the import tariff rates. Under these categories
small power weeders are also covered. Therefore, the cost variation
can be seen from Rs. 27,315/- to Rs. 79,447/-. As per the above said
data, the average landed cost of Standard Power Tiller varies between
Rs. 70,000 to Rs. 80,000 (Excluding the Customs Duty). The customs
duty on power tillers is @7.5%. Thus the cost including customs duty is
Rs. 75250/- to Rs. 86000/-.
Selling Price of Power Tillers in Different States
The data has also been collected from various State Governments
on the quantity and selling price of power tillers. Different States have
different selling prices of both indigenous as well as imported power
tillers. The selling price of indigenous power tillers range from
Rs. 1,40,000 to 2,15,000 and that of imported (Chinese) power tillers
range between 1,08,500 to 1,95,300. There is wide gap in the selling
price of power tillers among States. Thus there is selling price difference
of around Rs. 20,000 to Rs. 32,000 between indigenous and Chinese
power tillers in different States. Chinese power tillers are around
10-20 percent cheaper than the indigenous power tillers. The selling
price of indigenous power tillers is highest in the State of Arunachal
Pradesh followed by Meghalaya. The cost of Chinese power tillers is
also highest in the State of Arunachal Pradesh followed by Assam. The
selling price of both indigenous and imported (Chinese) power tillers in
many States is higher than the maximum retail price indicated by the
manufactures/suppliers. It may be due to the fact that the State
Government servicing agencies such as State Agro Industries Corporations
etc. may be adding their commission and Service Tax in the cost quoted
by the manufacturers.
(i) Incentives to Promote Indian Power Tiller Industries
The domestic power tiller industries are facing competition from
Chinese tillers which has a market share of 32% at present and is
growing. The liberal imports from China, uncertainties in the subsidy
and the problems associated with the administration of the schemes at
the State level, pose a constant challenge to the Indian Power Tiller

10
Industry. Increasing customs duty upto 25% from the present level of
7.5% for the imported power tillers and making regulations and internal
taxes less onerous to the domestic manufacturers to boost ‘Make in
India ’ campaign will help promoting the cause of indigenous
manufacturers. Export related incentives to the domestic power tiller
manufacturers till the same is permissible under WTO, providing
production subsidies, lowering the cost of capital and creating special
economic zones for some or all manufacturing activity in particular will
reduce the cost of doing business, increase profitability, and hence
encourage the domestic power tiller manufacturers to increase
investments. A quota need to be fixed with a numerical limit on how
much of a product can be imported into a country. This will help to
protect producers of domestic products from facing too much competition
and ultimately going out of business. Fixing import quota of imported
(Chinese) power tillers will benefit and protect the Indian Power Tiller
Industry. Looking into the production potential of the domestic power
tiller industries, the import quota for power tillers may be fixed as 10%
of the total annual market of power tillers in India. Production subsidy,
which can be made available to the producer at the point of sale itself,
will help reducing the cost of indigenous power tillers. The State
Governments have complicated procedures for distribution of subsidy.
Making system online, avoiding selection of single supplier on lowest
cost basis, elimination of mediator agencies in the supply chain, timely
release of subsidy etc. will help indigenous power tiller industry. The
MRP of a particular make and model of power tiller may be kept
uniform in all States by the Central Government. Power tillers are very
important life time asset for the small farmers to increase their farm
productivity. Besides giving subsidy, it is the responsibility of the State
to ensure that the gullible farmers are guided properly and ensure that
they are not misled to buy inferior quality goods and suffer. Such
guidance and advisories are essential so that the small and marginal
farmers will continue to have faith on the quality of product they are
buying and will continue to use power tillers. It is therefore necessary
to ensure that the origin of power tiller is clearly identifiable to the
farmers when purchase power tillers.
(ii) Permissible Procedure for Subsidy Inputs sought to be given for
Indian Power Tiller Industry
Any subsidy provision mandating preference to domestic
manufacturers would be WTO incompatible both under Article 3.1(b) of
Agreement on Subsidies and Countervailing Measures (ASCM), Article III
of General Agreement on Tariff and Trades (GATT), Article 2.1 of Trade-
Related Investment Measures (TRIMs). The Domestic Content Requirement

11
(DCR) is not allowed even under Agreement on Agriculture (AoA). On
perusal of the existing WTO jurisprudence (Analytical Index), it would
be evident that the benefit of DCR is not available even under domestic
support under AoA. In the light of above, any subsidy contingent upon
DCR, shall not be WTO compliant. Hence other ways of incentivizing
the domestic industry say through production subsidy, which can be
made available to the producer at the point of sale itself and Excise
Duty exemption on assemblies and spare parts can be thought of as an
alternative. The existing provision of the Sub-Mission on Agricultural
Mechanization without any discrimination between the imported and
the domestically manufactured power tillers, when the subsidy is
provided to the farmers on their purchase, is WTO compatible. The
imported and the domestically manufactured power tillers cannot have
differential rates of subsidy.
1.10 When asked to furnish comments on the report submitted by
the Committee constituted under the aegis of Rajendra Agricultural
University, Patna, (RAU) in July, 2015 to study the Chinese agricultural
machines and follow up action taken by the State and the Centre on
the recommendations of the said Committee in their Report submitted
in February, 2016, the Department in its written reply stated as under:
“The Study Report on Chinese Agricultural Machinery conducted by
the College of Agricultural Engineering, Rajendra Agricultural
University, Pusa (Samastipur), Bihar has been examined by the Expert
Committee on Power Tillers constituted by the Department. The
Expert Committee in their report has submitted comprehensive
recommendations covering all the recommendations contained in
the RAU report. The Department has already taken appropriate
actions on the recommendations in the Expert Committee report.
The Department further stated that on the advice of Parliamentary
Standing Committee on Agriculture in its meeting held on 5th
April, 2017, the Department has constituted a High Power Committee
under the chairmanship of Deputy Director General (Extension),
ICAR with the following Terms of References:
(i) Conduct survey in the States where maximum numbers of
power tillers are supplied under the subsidy programmes
and bring out status of indigenous and Chinese power tillers
with reference to the process of empanelling the suppliers,
selection of beneficiary, and quality of power tillers supplied,
condition of power tillers and after sales services received
by the beneficiaries etc.

12
(ii) Assessment of the sale price of the power tillers both
indigenous and imported (Chinese) in different States, reasons
for cost variation and suggesting measures for bringing out
uniform price of power tillers across the country.
(iii) Visit to various manufacturers and suppliers of Power Tillers
and assessment of manufacturing infrastructure, dealers
network and arrangements for after sales services.
(iv) Assessment of Power Tillers supplied under Subsidy
programmes as to whether these are of the same make &
model and quality as tested by the testing institutions.
(v) Random sampling of the Chinese power tillers from some of
the importers from their import lot and inspection of the
same for their quality and performance.
(vi) Assessment of the reasons for failure of the Chinese power
tillers supplied under subsidy programmes, assessment of
the losses incurred by the farmers due to such failures and
suggest if these farmers needs to be compensated. ’’
1.11 On being asked about the Poor Quality of Chinese Power Tillers
the Department in its written Reply stated as under:—
“The details of the complaints related to Chinese power tiller is
being collected from different States and accordingly the team of
expert will examine the details of the major issues and also the
finding of the Dr. K. Alagusundaram, DDG, ICAR committee report
will also be taken in to consideration and same will be intimated
to BIS for suitable modification of Standard. ”
1.12 When insisted on specifying the time limits for the
implementation of the different recommendations of the committee
report, the Department stated as under:—
“The report of the expert committee was received in this Department
in March 2017. The recommendations with regard to making CMVR
and COP compliance mandatory, Batch testing, providing warranty
on power tillers, labeling plate on power tillers, random sampling
for testing have already been implemented. The other
recommendation with regard to revision of test code, material
testing, price variation, simplifying subsidy distribution process,
increasing customs duty, imposing anti-dumping duty etc. are being
examined and pursued with the concerned department like ICAR,
BIS, Ministry of Finance etc. The action is likely to be completed
within 6 months. ”

13
1.13 When asked about the action taken by the Department
regarding faulty Power Tillers provided to farmers under RKVY Rashtriya
Krishi Vikas Yojana/SMAM (Sub-Mission on Agricultural Mechanization)
etc. The Department in its written Reply stated as under:—
(a) The details of the 43 Power tillers contained in the report
of Dr. Rajendra Prasad University have been examined at
length in DAC&FW. Accordingly, the Department of
Agriculture, Government of Bihar vide this Department’s letter
dated 29th March 2017 had been directed to take punitive
action against the suppliers and to ensure that suitable
compensation be paid to the farmers. The matter has been
pursued again vide letter dated 7th November , 2017.The
Directorate of Agriculture of Bihar vide their letter dated
24.11.2017 have only reiterated the same after examining
report of Dr. Rajendra Prasad Agricultural University.
The Directorate of Agriculture vide letter dated 8.9.2016
had issued necessary instructions to all the manufacturers/
suppliers with regard to ensuring uniformity in selling price
across all regions, repair workshop and service centres, portal
of complaint redressal, adequate availability of spare parts,
training to the farmers on operation and maintenance, affixing
lebeling plate indicating make, model, year of manufacture
etc., providing operators manual in Hindi language, warranty/
guarantee.
As such, the Government of Bihar are essentially stating that
it has no further inputs to add at this stage.
Further , the Government of Bihar has informed this Ministry
that meeting of Agricultural Machinery Manufacturers have
been organized from time to time and necessary instructions
towards the above have been given. After issuing such
instructions, their Directorate of Agriculture has not received
any complaint from the farmers from any District on Chinese
Power Tiller.
Accordingly, the information so provided by Government of
Bihar in response to our correspondence and efforts,may be
taken on record as their final report.
(b) Reports on number of Chinese power tillers supplied in the
States and the details of the condition of supplied power
tillers has been obtained from the States.
(c) The Department of Agriculture, Government of Bihar vide
this Department’s letter dated 4th November 2017 had been

14
directed to take up the survey to find power tillers and
companies involved in selling Chinese power tillers under
their logo as Indian power tiller and take appropriate action
against them under intimation to this Ministry. The report is
still awaited and shall be submitted to Hon ’ble Committee
at the earliest.
(d) The State Governments vide this Department letter dated
3rd November , 2017 have been requested to find out the
losses incurred to the farmers due to failure of power tillers
and provide suitable compensation to them. Most of the
State Governments have reported that the Power Tillers are
in good working conditions and no complaints have been
received from farmers.
C. Pricing of Power Tillers
1.14 Our country has to support food requirement of around 16.5%
of world population with only 2.4% of land area. To feed the ever
iterating farming millions, there is need to enhance food productivity
per unit of land. In this scenario, enhancing the level of agriculture
mechanization is one of the way to enhance food productivity. It has
also helped to reduce drudgery and to minimize input cost of hired man
power. Achieving optimum level of mechanization is also one of the
ways to double the income of the farmers which is covered objective
of the Central Government. However , majority of Indian farmers do
belong to small and marginal categories who could hardly afford costly
agriculture equipments/machineries. In this scenario, power tiller with
its flexibility and low cost could be ideal to enhance the level of
mechanization in the country. However , various reports on pricing of
power tillers in the country suggest steep prices being charged by the
manufacturers, importers and distributors in the country. The
K. Alagusundaram committee in their report has examined this issue
and brought out following facts:—
“As per the data collected from some of the Chinese power tiller
importers, the landed cost of Chinese power tillers in India including
the Customs duty on an average is Rs. 85900. Value addition to the
landed cost of Chinese power tillers in terms of consumables,
additional accessories and the spare parts on an average is
Rs. 11450. The major portion of the cost difference between landed
cost and selling price is on account of dealers margin and profit to
the importer which is on an average is Rs. 23800/- and transportation
& Misc. marketing expenditure (Average Rs. 19800/-). As per the
data of Central Board of Excise and Customs (CBEC), the Power

15
Tillers are mainly imported under Tariff Heads 84328020 and
84328090 which relates to Rotary Tiller and Other , respectively as
per the import tariff rates. Under these categories small power
weeders are also covered. Therefore, the cost variation can be
seen from Rs. 27,315/- to Rs. 79,447/-. As per the above said data,
the average landed cost of Standard Power Tiller varies between
Rs. 70,000 to Rs. 80,000 (Excluding the Customs Duty). The customs
duty on power tillers is @7.5%. Thus the cost including customs
duty is Rs. 75250/- to Rs. 86000/- ”
1.15 When asked to furnish details of average selling price of
indigenous and Chinese Power Tiller in various States during the last
three years, the Department submitted as under:—
Sl.No. State Average selling price of indigenous Average selling price of Chinese
Power Tiller (Rs.) make Power Tiller (Rs.)
2013-14 2014-15 2015-16 2013-14 2014-15 2015-16
1. Sikkim - - - - 86000 -
2. Tamil Nadu 147522 153296 154967 132282 138603 134223
3. Arunachal Pradesh 186744 186744 186744 No Chinese Power Tiller supplied
4. Pondicherry 138833 153833 154888 No Ch inese Power Tiller supplied
5. Maharashtra 138540 159925 161603 120680 138705 135415
6. West Bengal 161000 174000 181000 132000 156000 160000
1.16 On the above issue, the Department further submitted as
under:—
“Different States have different selling prices of both indigenous
as well as imported Power Tiller. The selling price of indigenous
Power Tiller is highest in the State of Arunachal Pradesh followed
by West Bengal which is more than the average selling price as
indicated by the indigenous manufacturers. The cost of Chinese
Power Tiller in the State of West Bengal is also higher than the
average selling price as indicated by the importers of Power Tiller.
The lowest cost of Chinese Power Tiller is indicated by the Sikkim
State. However , it has been noted that the cost is for the power
weeders and small Power Tiller below 8 BHP . ”
1.17 When asked about possibility of fixing uniform pricing of
power tiller at national level, the Department stated as under:—
“The DAC&FW does not control/regulate the prices of agricultural
machinery and equipment. The GST has now integrated all other

16
taxes into a single tax and this will bring in the uniformity in the
selling price of power tillers across all States. However , the cost of
power tillers may vary depending on size, type, horse power rating
and transportation cost etc. The manufacturers of power tillers
have been declare MRP of the power tillers and bring out
transparency in selling prices. ”
1.18 On the above issue, the Department further submitted as
under:—
“It has also been proposed to constitute a committee under the
Chairmanship of ADC (Machinery) and members of the various State
Governments (Director of Agriculture or his nominee) to review the
current cost and capping limits thereof, sale price of Agricultural
machinery in different States in respect of the Agricultural machinery
like Tractors, Power tillers, Rotavators, laser levelers, Straw reapers,
Balers, Seed drill & Planters, Rice Transplanters, Sprayers and Mist
Blowers, Power weeders, Reaper Binders and threshers.
The Terms of reference of the committee are as below:
(i) To examine the cost estimation processes of Agricultural
machinery.
(ii) To examine the reasons in large variation in cost of imported
& indigenous Power tillers.
(iii) Categorization of the Agril machinery according to its
Technical specifications.
(iv) To fix the cost of the category wise cost of machinery.
As per the term of reference of the committee at Sl. No 3, committee
will give the report on reasons for large variation in Power tillers
cost. After receiving the report, the necessary action would be
taken in the matter.
The above committee will submit their reports within 6 months
from now.”
1.19 When asked to furnish status of report of High Powered
Committee headed by Shri A.K. Singh which was constituted by the
Department for examining issues related to power tiller, the Department
submitted as under:—
“The Committee has devised the proforma for conducting the survey
and after obtaining the beneficiary data from the State Governments

17
and Industry, the KVKs have been assigned the task of conducting
survey in the States having maximum sale of power tillers. The
work involves conducting of actual field survey, collection,
compilation and analysis of data and preparation of reports. The
report is likely to be finalized by the committee by March end,
2018.”

18
CHAPTER II
A. ENSURING QUALITY OF POWER TILLERS
2.1 Availability of good quality agricultural machineries is pre-
requisite to instill confidence amongst farmers and encouraging them
to adopt modern methods of agriculture mechanization. However , due
to sale of sub-standard imported Chinese power tiller in Indian market
has caused financial loss to the farmers agriculture productivity.
K. Alagusundaram Committee in their Report submitted to the DAC&FW
has analysed this critical aspect and given several recommendations.
Some of the important recommendations are as follows:
(i) It has been noticed that the power tillers importers import
the power tillers in Semi Knocked Down (SKD) and Completely
Knocked Down (CKD) Packages. They assemble the power
tillers in India and these are offered to the institute for
testing claiming that they are manufacturer of this power
tiller and the power tiller is indigenous one. The testing
institutes before admitting the power tiller for test should
properly ensure the country of origin of power tillers. If
major assemblies such as Engine, Chassis, Transmission, Tyres
etc. are imported, then the power tiller should be considered
as imported and the name and country of origin of the
manufacturer in this case needs to be properly ascertained.
It may be insisted that the manufacturers/importers should
supply printed literature such as Operators Manual, Service
Manual and Spare Parts Catalogue to the testing institute
before the power tiller is admitted for test. The country of
origin thus can also be ascertained from the printed literature
supplied.
(ii) It has been noticed that the manufacturer or importer
themselves select the power tiller and offer it for Initial
Commercial Testing. The offered power tiller may not be a
representative sample of the production or import lot. It
could be a selective best sample. The testing institutes should
select the power tillers randomly from the production lot or
the import lot. The serial number and part Nos. of the Major
assemblies may be recorded and the major assemblies should
be properly sealed so as to protect it from tampering and
then the selected power tiller should be subjected to test.

19
(iii) It has been noticed that Power weeders are also tested
under the category of Power Tillers (tilling type). Such power
weeders thus get the benefit of higher subsidy of power
tillers below 8 BHP categories as per the guidelines of Sub-
Mission on Agricultural Mechanization. The power tillers
conforming to the following definition should only be tested
under power tiller category. Necessary changes in the
definition of power tiller as under IS 9935 should also be
made. The categories of power tillers as defined under 3.6.1-
General Purpose Type, 3.6.2- Pull Type and 3.6.3- Tilling
Type, under IS 9935 may be deleted “Power Tiller is
agricultural machinery used for soil preparation having a
single axle in which the direction of travel and its control
during field operation is performed by the operator. The
equipment may be walk behind or riding attachment type
and when coupled to a trailer, can be used for transportation
of goods. The maximum speed of the power tiller when
coupled to a trailer shall not exceed 22 kmph. The maximum
haulage capacity of the power tiller coupled to a trailer
shall not exceed 1.5 tonne. The maximum power output of
the power tiller engine shall not be less than 8 BHP ”.
(iv) Most of manufacturers specify their power tillers as non-
transport vehicle and thus gets relief from conforming to the
mandatory requirements under Central Motor Vehicle Rules
(CMVR). Under CMVR, every power tiller engine also has to
meet the statutory prevailing exhaust gas emission norms.
During Initial Commercial Test, the testing institutes should
ask the manufacturers to submit the emission compliance
certificate and during the Batch Testing, submission of the
certificate of Conformity of Production (COP) for emission
should be made mandatory.
(v) In case of breakdowns and non conformity to evaluative
performance parameters, provision for repeat and
supplementary test is available. In case of breakdowns the
power tiller is subjected to repeat test after replacing the
broken parts/assemblies. Even if it fails during repeat test,
the power tiller is subjected to Supplementary test and the
tests relevant to the broken parts/assemblies are conducted
again. These provisions in general did not disqualify any
power tiller at any stage of testing. The process of repeat
test and supplementary test should be done away with and
necessary amendments may be made in the relevant Indian
Standard in consultation with Bureau of Indian Standards.

20
(vi) The Southern Region Farm Machinery Training and Testing
Institute (SRFMTTI), Garladinne should purchase a suitable
Load Car having state of the art facility for conducting
drawbar performance test on the power tillers.
(vii) The test reports released by the institutes should clearly
specify the country of origin of major parts and assemblies
like chassis, engine, transmission, rotary etc. The cover page
of the test report should also prominently indicate the country
of origin of the power tiller.
(viii) The committee under Table 6 of this report has given
recommendation with regard to revision of limits and
tolerances for different performance parameters. These
should be examined and suitable action may be taken to
incorporate the suggested changes under IS 13539: 2008.
(ix) In order to ascertain the durability of the power tillers,
endurance testing may be conducted on power tillers under
simulated conditions for which suitable test set up may be
developed. The torture test as being done by some of the
power tiller manufacturer can also be carried by way of
developing suitable test rink. Suitable simulated vibratory
platforms can also be devolved for assessing the durability
of various parts and assemblies of power tillers. The procedure
for conducting such endurance test may be developed and
such test along with its procedure may be incorporated under
IS: 9935-2002.
(x) The Standard for the chemical composition of various critical
components of the power tiller may be developed in
association with the metallurgy experts and the limits and
tolerances may be incorporated under IS: 9935-2002. The
specification for induction hardening, quality of steel, type
and quality of bearings etc. should also be identified.
(xi) The test report may also include recommendation for the
use of power tiller on regional basis based on soil texture
and adopted farming practices to ensure its good performance
in the field.
(xii) The Batch Testing of Power Tillers should be strictly enforced
to ensure the supply of quality power tillers to the farmers.
The manufacturers/importers who have failed to get their
power tillers tested under 1st Batch Testing and Subsequent
Batch Testing should be eliminated from the list of power
tillers eligible for subsidy under Government schemes/
programmes.

21
(xiii) Under Central Motor Vehicle Rules (CMVR), every power tiller
engine has to meet the statutory prevailing exhaust gas
emission norms. However , SRFMTTI do not test the power
tillers for emission. As per the data available on the websites
of Automotive Research Association of India (ARAI), Pune
and International Centre for Automotive Technology (ICAT)
Manesar , some of the manufacturers of power tillers have
been listed as defaulters of Conformity of Production (CoP)
on account of not meeting the emission requirements as per
CMVR. While updating the list of power tillers eligible for
subsidy, such defaulters of CoP may be eliminated.
(xiv) The Department of Agriculture, Cooperation and Farmers
Welfare should advise the testing institutions under its control
to develop appropriate test facilities and procedure to assess
the durability and material quality of the power tillers. For
incorporation of such test procedure under relevant Test
Codes, necessary amendments may be made in the Test Codes
in association with Bureau of Indian Standards (BIS).
(xv) A Committee with leading researcher on power tillers from
various Agricultural Engineering Institutions may be formed
to examine the complete test procedures and to make new
recommendations and norms for effective testing and
performance evaluation of power tillers.
2.2 When asked to furnish steps being taken by the DAC&FW for
implementation of recommendation of K. Alagusundaram Committee on
strengthening quality parameters and testing procedure of power tillers,
the Department Submitted as under:—
Sl.No. Recommendation Action Taken report
12 3
(i) The power tiller should indicate make &
model, year of manufacture and country
of origin
(ii) Minimum 2 years Warranty should be
provided
I. Manufacturers started affixing labeling plate with
required details w.e.f. 25.05.2017.
II. 2 years warranty has been made mandatory
and power tiller manufacturers have started
mentioning this. The list of power tillers eligible
for subsidy has been revised on 02.06.2017 and
05.07.2017.

22
(iii) Power tiller manufacturers should have
infrastructure for after sales service and
should have adequate availability of spare
parts.
(iv) Batch Testing of Power tillers should be
done as per relevant BIS Standards.
(v) Defaulters of meeting CMVR and COP
requirement should be stopped from selling
power tillers.
(vi) To revise the relevant Test Code for
Minimum Performance Standards with more
Stringent performance Standards.
(vii) Testing of power tillers shall also be done
for durability assessment and quality of
material used.
(viii) Eliminate the Supplementary Test and
Repeat Test from the existing Test
Procedure.
(ix) To review the criteria for acceptance of
Power tillers with regards to Breakdowns
during the testing of Power tillers.
(x) Power tillers for testing should be randomly
picked up from the production/import lot
III. Only eligible power tillers meeting this
requirement have been included in the list revised
on 02.06.2017 and 05.07.2017.
IV . Batch testing strictly enforced. Now power tiller
models which are not undergone Batch Testing
have been removed from list of power tillers.
Revised list has been issued on 02.06.2017 and
05.07.2017.
V . The State Governments vide letter dated
4th November 2016, had been advised to ensure
compliance of power tiller models for Conformity
of Production (CoP) and Central Motor Vehicle
Rules (CMVR) before they are supplied under
subsidy programmes. Subsequently, the revised list
of power tillers complying with CoP/CMVR norms
has been issued on 02.06.2017 & 05.07.2017.
VI. Minimum performance standards have been
revised and made more stringent. The revised
specifications have been implemented by the
testing institution w.e.f. 24.08.2017. Bureau of
Indian Standards (BIS) has also approved the new
Standard on 25.10.2017.
VII. Chemical composition and durability test
requirements included in the Relevant BIS Standard
and the testing institute has been implementing
the same w.e.f. 24.08.2017.
VIII. Provision of Supplementary and Repeat test
is eliminated and implemented by the testing
institutions.
IX. Revised criteria have been implemented by
the testing institutions w.e.f. 24.08.2017.
X. Random selection of power tiller has been
started by the testing institutions  w.e.f.
24.08.2017.
12 3

23
2.3 When asked about Warranty/Guarantee not provided by the
manufacturers to the farmers, The Department stated as under:—
“The information is being obtained from the States. Necessary
instructions will be issued to all States for for providing warranty/
guarantee on agricultural Machinery and implements including Power
Tillers.”
2.4 When asked about non-availability of after sales service and
Spare parts for Power Tiller , the Department in its written Reply stated
as under:—
“The information is being obtained from States and accordingly
guidelines will be issued to all the States to ensure mandatory
service centre equipped with adequate spare parts at all District
and Block level with all empanelled power tiller suppliers, as the
Standing Committee recommends. ”
2.5 When asked that there is no Labelling plate on Power Tiller , the
Department on its written Reply stated as under:—
“As per BIS standard it is mandatory to have a labelling plate on
the power tiller indicating Sr. No., Make, Model and Year of
Manufacturing, Hp.etc. However the information is being obtained
from States and accordingly instructions will be issued to verify the
labelling plate for Power Tiller before it supply to the beneficiary
and availability country of origin on labelling plate. ”
2.6 When pointed out the Power Tiller brochure do not indicate
about the suitability of the same in various soil conditions, the
Department on its written Reply stated as under:—
“FMTTIs are testing the Power Tiller in dry land and wet land
conditions for 35 hours and indicating the performance of Power
Tiller in test report. As regards the testing in various soil conditions,
the same needs to be examined by the Expert Committee.
Accordingly, the expert committee will be constituted and
recommendations will be forwarded to BIS for incorporation in testing
standards.”
2.7 When asked about the feasibility of manufacturing the spare
parts of agricultural machinery in India so that the options of assembly
of agricultural machinery will be available easily, the Department on its
written Reply stated as under:—
“The matter will be discussed with the manufacturers and possibility
of this proposal explored. ”

24
2.8 When asked about any survey has been done to access average
of the Power Tiller , the Department on its written Reply stated as
under:—
“The information is being obtained from the State Governments as
well as from manufacturers. ”
2.9 When asked whether Expert Committee has been constituted
and recommendations forwarded to BIS for incorporation in testing
standards, the Department on its written Reply stated as under:—
“The recommendations of the expert committee related to the
testing and evaluation of power tillers have already been sent to
the Southern Region Farm Machinery Training & Testing Institute,
Garladinne, Anantapur (Andhra Pradesh) for examination and
compliance.
Based on the recommendation of the Expert Committee, the revision
of IS:13539- 2008 has been taken up with BIS. The BIS Committee
FAD 11 has constituted a Sub-Committee under the Chairmanship of
Shri V .N. Kale, Addl. Commissioner (M&T), DAC&FW. The
Sub-Committee based on the recommendations in the report of
Expert Committee reviewed the IS:13539-2008 and the revised
document has been sent for wide circulation for comments/
feedback. The FAD 11 Committee of BIS will discuss the amendments
in its next meeting and finalize the Standard which will be
implemented by the testing institutions. ”
2.10 On being asked the reason for delay in changing BIS standard
for power tiller and why it was not implemented, the Department in
its written Reply stated as under:—
“The standard available is already being followed by the testing
institutes. However , based on the recommendation of the Expert
committee the same is being revised to make it more stringent and
incorporate all the suggestions given by the expert committee
including amending the power tiller definition and elimination of
repeat and supplementary tests. The revised draft is forwarded to
BIS and is being followed up with BIS on regular basis. ”
2.11 On the above issue, the Department further stated as under:—
(a) It may be appreciated that batch testing of Power Tillers
entitlement to subsidy has been strictly enforced. Till
9th December , 2015, earlier 20-30% was batch tested; now

25
completely 100% are tested. Now power tiller models which
have not undergone Batch Testing have been removed from
list of power tillers entitled for subsidy. Revised list of the
tested power tiller has been issued on 02.06.2017 and
05.07.2017, it is expected that the new norms for 100%
batch testing will be enforced by the testing institutes and
all the States with close monitoring.
(b) The State Governments ( vide our letter dated 4th November
2016), had been directed to ensure compliance of power
tiller models for Conformity of Production (CoP) and Central
Motor Vehicle Rules (CMVR) before they are supplied under
subsidy programmes. Subsequently, the latest revised list of
power tillers complying with CoP/CMVR norms has been
issued on 05.07.2017. We have not received any report of
non-compliance from any State.
(c) Minimum performance standards have been revised and made
more stringent. For Example:
(i) Almost all the parameters of testing are made
compulsory evaluative.
(ii) Testing in different soil conditions incorporated.
(iii) Torture testing is incorporated.
The revised specifications have been implemented by the
testing institutions w.e.f. 24.08.2017. Bureau of Indian
Standards (BIS) has also approved the new Standard in their
meeting held on 25.10.2017.
(d) Chemical composition and durability test requirements
included in the Relevant BIS Standard and the testing institute
has been implementing the same w.e.f. 24.08.2017.
Provision of Supplementary and Repeat test is being
eliminated in the new norms of the testing and the same is
implemented by the testing institutions.
(e) The criterion for acceptance of Power tillers with regards to
Breakdowns during the testing of Power tillers has been
revised and the new criteria have been implemented by the
testing institutions w.e.f. 24.08.2017.
(f) Random selection of power tiller in initial commercial testing
(ICT) has been started by the testing institutions w.e.f.
24.08.2017 in addition to batch testing.

26
2.12 When asked to give details about the revision of test code,
material testing, price variation, simplifying subsidy, distributions
process, increasing customs duty, importing anti-dumping duty etc. the
Department stated as under:—
(a) The Testing Standard applicable for power tiller testing has
been revised based on the recommendations of Expert
Committee. The revised testing standards have been
implemented by the testing institutions w.e.f. 24.08.2017.
Bureau of Indian Standards (BIS) has also approved the new
Standard in their meeting held on 25.10.2017.
(b) The Expert Committee in its report had not given any specific
recommendation on how to control the price variation in
power tillers. Therefore, the Department has constituted
another internal committee under the Chairmanship of
Additional Commissioner (Machinery) vide order dated
21.09.2017 to examine this matter and suggest price fixation
criteria by December , 2017. A meeting with power tiller
manufacturers/importers has been held on 15.11.2017 and
the broad criteria for fixing the price of both indigenous and
imported power tillers has been decided.
(c) As desired and observed by the Hon ’ble Parliamentary
Standing Committee on Agriculture in its meeting held on
5th April 2017, in order to investigate the issues of large
variation in imported power tillers cost and reason for higher
cost of indigenous power tillers in the country, the Department
has constituted a High Powered Committee under the
chairmanship of Dr. A.K. Singh, Deputy Director General
(Extension), ICAR vide order dated 21st April 2017. The
Committee after going through all the data obtained from
the industry, is in the process of preparing the report and
would submit it in mid Dec., 2017.
(d) A proposal for increasing Customs duty on power tillers from
the present rate of 7.5% to 25% has been submitted to the
Department of Revenue, Ministry of Finance vide our letter
dated 9th November , 2017. They are seized with the issue
and the legal options open.
(e) The Expert Committee in its report had recommended that,
in case the increase in Customs Duty is not possible then
other legally feasible anti-dumping measures may be
considered. Accordingly, the Department has taken up the
issue of increasing Customs Duty on power tillers in
consultation with Ministry of Finance, in the first instance.

27
B. Farm Machinery and Testing of Power Tillers
2.13 The Farm Machinery Training & Testing Institutes (FMTTIs)
located at Budni (Madhya Pradesh), Hissar (Haryana), Garladinne (Andhra
Pradesh), and Biswanath Chariali (Assam), are imparting training to
different categories of beneficiaries like farmers, technicians, under
graduate engineers, entrepreneurs and the foreign nationals nominated
under international exchange treaty on selection, operation,
maintenance, energy conservation and management of agricultural
equipments. During the year 2015-16, 7545 persons were trained till
31st March, 2016 against the annual target of 6000 in different courses.
During 2016-17, 7801 persons were trained till 31st December , 2016
against the annual target of 6000 in different courses. To supplement
the efforts of the FMTTIs, outsourcing of the training through the
identified Institutions, ICAR Institutions, ATMA Institutions, National
Innovation Foundation, training programmes are funded as per norms
prescribed by Ministry of Skill Development and Entrepreneurship.
B

28
CHAPTER III
A. FINANCIAL ASSISTANCE/SUBSIDY BEING PROVIDED TO THE
FARMERS UNDER SCHEMES FOR AGRICULTURE MECHANIZATION
3.1 The Department of Agriculture, Cooperation & Farmers Welfare,
Mechanization and Technology Division launched Sub-Mission on
Agricultural Mechanization (SMAM) under the main Mission i.e. National
Mission on Agricultural Extension and Technology (NMAET) which is under
implementation w.e.f. 2014-15. The components of SMAM are as follows:
• Promotion and Strengthening of Agricultural Mechanization
through Training, Testing and Demonstration.
• Demonstration, Training and distribution of Post Harvest
Technology and Management (PHTM).
• Financial Assistance for Procurement of Agriculture Machinery
and Equipment: Promotes ownership of various agricultural
machinery & equipments.
• Establish Farm Machinery Banks for Custom Hiring.
• Promotion of farm mechanization in selected villages.
• Financial Assistance for promotion of Mechanized operations/
hectare carried out through custom hiring Centres.
• Promotion of farm machinery and equipment in north eastern
region.
3.2 The Department has stated that the SMAM provides a suitable
platform for converging all activities for inclusive growth of agricultural
mechanization by providing a ‘single window ’ approach for
implementation with a special focus on women farmers with the following
provisions. When asked about financial assistance being provided under
SMAM scheme, the Department stated as under:
“The financial assistance as cost subsidy to the tune of 25-40% is
being provided for the individual ownership of the farm machinery
which is also applicable for farm machinery component under RKVY ,
NFSM, NHM & NMOOP schemes for different categories of Machinery
& Equipment. The financial assistance @40% is provided for
establishment of farm machinery banks to provide the custom hiring

29
services for the benefits of small and marginal farmers. For installing
solar photovoltaic water pumping system, financial assistance of
Rs. 43200/horsepower to Rs. 63,360/horsepower is provided. To
promote the mechanization in selected villages with low level of
farm mechanization, financial assistance @80% of the project cost
for farm machinery banks is given to the group of minimum 8
farmers. Hiring assistance for various farm operations carried out
through the farm machinery banks set up under financial assistance
is also provided @50% of the cost of operation/ha. limited to
Rs. 2000 per ha. to farmers. ”
3.3 Further elaborating on the issue, the Department further stated
as under:
“State Governments have been advised to ensure 30% of allocation
under the scheme belongs to women beneficiary and also to furnish
reports separately in SMAM guidelines.
• 10% more assistance for women beneficiary to procure
Agricultural Machinery, implements and equipment including
PHT under component 2 and 3.
• In order to reduce the drudgery and increasing efficiency in
farm operations, number of agricultural implements and hand
tools suitable for farm women has been developed by
Research & Development organizations under ICAR. The list
of gender friendly equipment has been sent to all States/UTs
for popularizing them through various schemes of
Government.”
3.4 When asked about subsidy being provided to the farmers in
other schemes being implemented/financed by the Central Government,
the Department stated as under:-
“Financial Assistance in the form of subsidy at the rate of 25-40
percent under RKVY , NFSM & NHM, NMOOP is applicable as per
guidelines of SMAM to the farmers for individual ownership of
agricultural equipment including hand tools, bullock-drawn/ power-
driven implements, planting, reaping, harvesting and threshing
equipment, tractors, power-tillers and other specialized agricultural
machines.”

30
3.5 When asked to further details of subsidy being provided in
above mentioned schemes for agriculture mechanization, the Department
stated as under:—
Sl. Name of Scheme Components Coverage Area Rate/quantum of
No. Scheme under which purchase 2015-16 2016-17 subsidy
of Power Tiller
is allowed
1. Sub-Mission on Financial All States/UTs As Per SMAM norms as
Agricultural Assistance for indicated in below
mechanization P rocurement of table
(SMAM) Agriculture
Machinery and
Equipment
2. National Food Agricultural         -do-
Security Mission Mechanization
(NFSM)
3. Rashtriya Krishi Agricultural         -do-
Vikas Yojana Mechanization
(RKVY)
4. Mission for Horticulture         -do-
Integrated Mechanization
Development of
Horticulture
5. National Mission Not eligible - -          -
on Oilseeds and
Oil Palm (NMOOP)
Type of For SC, ST , small & marginal farmers, For other beneficiary
Agricultural women, and NE States beneficiary
Machinery Maximum Pattern of Maximum Pattern of
Permissible Assistance Permissible Assistance
subsidy per subsidy per
Machine/ Machine/
Equipment Equipment
Power Tiller Rs. 0.50 lakh 50% Rs. 0.40 lakh 40%
(below 8 BHP)
Power Tiller Rs. 0.75 lakh 50% Rs. 0.60 lakh 40%
(8 BHP & above)

31
3.6 When asked to furnish mechanism adopted for selection of
beneficiary farmers for subsidy under the scheme for agriculture
mechanization, the Department stated as under:—
“The respective State Governments after assessing the requirements
of the States forward their Annual Action Plan duly approved by the
State Level Executive Committee (SLEC) to DAC&FW. As per the
guidelines of SMAM the District Level Executive Committee (DLEC)
of States is responsible for carrying forward the objectives of the
SMAM for project formulation, implementation and monitoring.
However , the numbers of beneficiaries are subjected to the
availability of the funds under the scheme. ”
3.7 When asked about the eligibility criteria followed for selection
of farmers when a large number of applications are received for purchase
of a particular subsidized agricultural tool, the Department in a written
reply stated as under:—
“The SMAM is implemented through the State Governments. The
Guidelines of the SMAM provides broad criteria for selection of the
beneficiaries and it is done by the State Level Executive Committee
(SLEC). The sub allocation/reservation for any particular type of
beneficiaries is depend upon the availability of funds under SCP &
TSP components of SMAM. ”
3.8 On the query of the Committee regarding adoption of DBT for
disbursal of subsidy for purchase of power tiller and other agricultural
equipments/machineries under various schemes, the Department
submitted as under:—
“The SMAM will be on-boarded for DBT (Direct Benefit Transfer)
from 30th Sept. 2017 for which the necessary Gazette Notification
is issued and already forwarded to the State Governments. The
States like Bihar , Odisha, Andhra Pradesh, Madhya Pradesh, Kerala,
Karnataka, have implemented the online system for implementation
of the mechanization subsidy programmes. The DAC&FW is also
developing online MIS for implementing SMAM and the same will
also be extended to the States which are not having such a system.”
3.9 When pointed out by the Committee that DBT not is being
effectively implemented in the States and the farmer has to pay initially
full cost of machine and the amount of subsidy is reimbursed after the
submission of bill and inspection report, the Department stated as
under:—
“All the State governments will be advised to call the applications
for assistance online and select the beneficiary in a transparent
manner and provide the subsidy through DBT in beneficiary account
or dealer/manufacturer.”

32
3.10 When asked whether there is freedom to farmers to purchase
machinery as per their choice, The Department stated as under:—
“As per Sub Mission on Agricultural Mechanization (SMAM) guidelines
complete freedom has been given to the farmers for purchase of
equipment. However , the information is being obtained from State
Governments and necessary instructions will be issued for ensuring
complete freedom to farmers to purchase machinery as per their
choice.”
3.11 On the query of the Committee regarding freedom of farmers
to purchase agricultural equipment/machinery from any dealer and get
subsidy available under different schemes on agricultural machinery
being implemented by the DAC&FW or they have to purchase from the
empanelled dealers, the Department submitted as under:—
“The SMAM guidelines stipulates that the beneficiary will have
complete freedom for selection of agriculture machinery and
equipment as per his/her choice from the empanelled list of
manufacturer/suppliers by the State Government. ”
3.12 While elaborating on the above issue, the representative of
Department of Agriculture, Co-Operation and Farmers Welfare (DAC&FW)
submitted as under:—
“Sir , it varies from State to State. For example, I bring to your
cognizance about two States. In Maharashtra there is no price
fixed for any equipment. If you purchase the equipment from the
market then subsidy will be transferred directly in your accounts.
There are similar provisions in Uttar Pradesh also. They have not
fixed any limit. When you go to the market to purchase the
equipment of your price and the maximum subsidy or the subsidy
fixed through percentage will be transfered in your account. Take
the example of Andhra Pradesh, Telangana, Tamil Nadu or North
Eastern States they fix the prices through inviting tenders. They
demonstrate the prices to farmers and ask about the prices of
their choice as to select the item of their choice. There are such
variations can be seen as in the market and any item may cost
Rs. 60,000/- or Rs. 80,000/-. ”
3.13 Further adding on the above issue, the representative of
DAC&FW submitted as under:—
“Sir , as you have said, we have asked the State Governments many
times in this regard that they should give the option as per the
farmers choice. For Kharif and Rabi we conduct zonal conferences
and national conferences. We also arrange video conferences. In all
these occassions we have conveyed to them and we have also given

33
in writing that they should provide as per the farmers choice. Now
you have tendered your direction then we will also issue this
early.
Sir , it is not the matter of discussion. The matter that is raised is
that in some States its value or price is costly. It is costly in those
States where they fix the price after allotting the company by
inviting tenders. In such a situation farmer’s choice is not taken
care of and the farmers are forced to take the product of any
particular company. As the Committee has told us that there should
be farmers’ choice, so we have told in this regard to every State.
We will raise this issue with them once again, so that farmers’
choice should be supreme. Now a days some farmers know and
they have experience about the company that provides better
service. Thus the farmers will get more benefit after giving them
more choice. ”
3.14 When asked to furnish details of the functional service centre
of the power tillers manufacturers/importers empanelled under the
schemes being implemented by the Department, the Department
submitted as under:—
“The information of manufacturers-wise and State-wise availability
of dealer ’s network and service centers is given in Annexure-I.”
3.15 While furnshing their recommendations on need of steps
required by the State Government concerned to simplify the process of
subsidy disbursed under schemes for agriculture mechanization, the K.
Alagusundaram Committee has submited as under:—
Complicated procedures for distribution of subsidy at the State
levels should be simplified. The Government of India should insist
all the State Governments for having an online system for
identification of beneficiary and disbursal of subsidy. This will bring
transparency in the system.
Measures to be taken at the level of State Governments:
(i) Online system for identification of beneficiary and disbursal
of mechanization subsidies should be developed and
Implemented by all the States.
(ii) It has been noticed that the selling price of power tillers in
many States are higher than the maximum selling price as
indicated by the manufacturers/importers of power tillers.
This may be due to the reason that many State Governments
have appointed State Agro Industries Development
Corporations and other such State Government Agencies as

34
service providers for supply of power tillers to the farmers.
Such service providers do not provide any value added
services but in turn charge commission and service tax,
which adds to the cost of power tillers which is finally
offered to the farmers. The State Governments should
eliminate such mediator agencies from the supply chain
which will reduce the cost of power tillers that is finally
offered to the farmers.
(iii) It has been noticed that the State Governments call for
tenders for empanelling the power tillers suppliers under
the subsidy programmes and selection of supplier is done on
lowest cost basis. Sometimes this process selects a single
source of supplier and the particular make & model of power
tillers are provided to the farmers even though they may not
prefer to buy it. Such system of empanelling the suppliers
entirely on lowest cost basis may be done away with and the
selection of power tillers should be left to the choice of
farmers.
(iv) The power tiller market largely depends on the Government
subsidy. Timely release of subsidy to the suppliers needs to
be addressed appropriately at the State level.
(v) While empanelling the suppliers of power tillers, the State
Governments may put the following conditions in the tender
documents: (i) The supplier company should have its dealer
in every district and service centres with adequate workshop
facilities at least at the Taluka levels. (ii) Experience of at
least 3 years in dealing with agricultural mechanization sector.
(iii) Warranty of not less than 2 years on the models of
power tillers (iv) Availability of literature such as operator ’s
manual, service manual and spare parts catalogue.
(v) Adequate training facilities on operation and maintenance
of power tillers for purchasers. (vi) Adequate availability of
spare parts with the dealers and service centers proportionate
to the total machines being sold. (vii) Online complaint and
redressal facilities along with helpline numbers for farmers.
(vi) It should be ensured that the power tiller manufacturers
should prominently display the county of origin of power
tiller on the body of the power tiller at suitable place so
that it is clearly visible and identifiable.
(vii) The Committee of officers at the State level should ensure
the compliance of recommendations as indicated in 1.4.1 of
this report by the power tiller manufactures/importers of
power tillers though the inspection visits, verifying the records
etc.

35
B. Process of Empanelment of Manufacturer/Importers of Power
Tiller for Subsidy Scheme
3.16 When asked about the procedures adopted for granting subsidy
for agricultural machinery/equipment under different schemes being
implemented/financed by the Ministry of Agriculture and Farmers Welfare
(Department of Agriculture, Cooperation and Farmers Welfare), the
Department submitted as under:—
“State Government submits the Annual Action Plan, duly approved
by State Level Executive Committee (SLEC) of their State for
consideration, approval and release of Central Share by the DAC&FW.
Annual Action Plan of the respective States are duly considered by
the Executive Committee (EC) of Sub Mission on Agricultural
Mechanization (SMAM), Chaired by Additional Secretary, DAC&FW
and based on the availability of funds and submission of Utilization
Certificate by the State Governments for the previous releases,
Central Share is released to the State Governments. Identification
of beneficiaries and release of subsidies to the individual
beneficiaries through DBT is done by State Governments as per the
guidelines of SMAM. For subsidy on agricultural machines and
equipments under other schemes of the Department such as NFSM,
NMOOP and MIDH, the guidelines of SMAM are followed. ”
3.17 When asked about the role of DAC&FW in prescribing/including
agricultural machinery/equipment from various manufacturers/importers
from being eligible for empanelment under schemes being implemented/
financed by the Central Government, the Department submitted as
under:—
“Empanelment of manufacturers for supply of machinery under
Subsidy schemes is done by the SLEC of respective State
Governments. The DAC&FW through the 4 Farm Machinery Training
& Testing Institutes and 31 other identified test centres carry out
the testing and performance evaluation of the machines to be
supplied under subsidy schemes. ”
3.18 When asked to furnish details of companies (indigenous
manufacturers and importers) of power tillers have been empanelled
under different schemes being implemented by the Central Government
during the last seven years, the Department submitted as under:—
“DAC&FW on the basis of testing as per relevant Indian Standards
and the power tiller models meeting the Minimum Performance
Characteristics as per IS 13539 releases the list of power tillers

36
eligible for subsidy under Government schemes/programmes. The
year-wise details of number of power tiller manufacturers and model
eligible for subsidy are as under:
Year No. of Power Tiller Total No. of Power
Manufacturers eligible Tiller Models eligible
for subsidy for subsidy
2011 23 35
2012 25 41
2013 30 57
2014 30 57
2015 37 69
2016 15 30
2017 13 23
2018 14 25
The copies of the circulars issued by the Department are enclosed
at Annexure-II.”
3.19 When asked to furnish details of number and name of power
tiller companies empanelled by the Department, the Department
submitted as under:—
“Details are furnished in Annexure-III.”
3.20 On the query of the Committee about parameters on which
power tillers are empanelled under different schemes of agricultural
mechanization, the Department submitted as under:—
“The DAC&FW release the list of power tillers for subsidy under
Government schemes based on the following:
• Initial commercial/Batch Testing and compliance to the
Minimum Performance Characteristics as per IS 13539.
• The Department has made Conformity of Production (COP)
and compliance to Central Motor Vehicle Rules (CMVR)
mandatory w.e.f. 4th November , 2016. The following has
also been made mandatory and undertakings obtained from
the manufacturers/importers on 15.11.2017.
• After sale facility.
• T wo years warranty against all types of mechanical failure,
any defects etc.

37
• Pre-delivery training nearby to the beneficiary on the aspects
of operation, maintenance, servicing, minor repairs etc.
• Name plate indicating Country of Origin.
• No marketing of power tiller will be done on Indian Company
Logo (made in India) if the power tiller is imported. ”
3.21 On the query of the Committee regarding types of certificates
necessary for manufacturing/importing and sale of power tillers in the
country, the Department submitted as under:—
“The DAC&FW does not issue any certificates for sale of power
tillers in the open market in the country. However , for the purpose
of subsidy under Government Schemes, testing of power tillers as
per IS 9935 and IS 13539 is mandatory. The list of power tillers
eligible for subsidy is released by the State Governments based on
criteria stated above. ”
3.22 On the query of the Committee regarding conformity of power
tillers eligible for subsidy to the technical parameters and requisite
certification, as prescribed by the Ministry of Agriculture and Farmers
Welfare, Bureau of Indian Standards (BIS) and any other Government
agency, the Department submitted as under:—
“The power tiller models included in the list released by this
Department on 01.01.2018 confirms to all the requirements as stated
above.”
3.23 When asked to furnish details of Screening Committee for
selection of Agricultural equipment which prescribes inclusion of these
equipments in the list of subsidy, the Department submitted as under:—
“National Steering Committee (NSC) headed by the Secretary,
DAC&FW with following composition approve the operational
guidelines of SMAM which provides the list of the agriculture
machinery and rate of financial assistance available on these
machines.
Secretary DAC&FW Chairman
Addl. Secretary & Financial Advisor , DAC&FW Member
Addl. Secretary (M&T) Member
Joint Secretary (RKVY) Member
Joint Secretary (MIDH) Member
Joint Secretary (Crops) Member
Joint Secretary (M&T) & Mission Director Member Secretary
DDG (ENGG), ICAR
Agriculture & Horticulture Commissioner Expert Members
ADC (M&T), DC (M&T), Directors, FMTTIs ”

38
3.24 When asked about the procedure being adopted by the various
State Governments for empanelment of agricultural machinery/
equipment for supply to the farmers under scheme being financed from
the funds provided by the Central Government, the Department
submitted as under:—
“For the purpose of subsidy under Government schemes, testing of
agricultural machines and equipments as per relevant BIS codes is
mandatory. State Governments through their own processes based
on the quality of agricultural machines and equipment empanel the
manufacturers/suppliers for supply of equipments to the farmers
under the subsidy programmes. ”

39
CHAPTER IV
SUPPORT TO DOMESTIC POWER TILLERS INDUSTRIES
4.1 Existence of a robust domestic agriculture machineries
manufacturing industry is at most requirement for availability of reliable,
better quality agriculture machineries at reasonable prices to the
farmers. Our country has a suitable size agriculture machineries industry
for manufacturing of power tiller. However , the domestic power tiller
industries are facing stiff competition from Chinese tillers which has a
market share of 32% at present and is growing. Import of Chinese
power tillers started in India from the year 1995. In India about 45000
to 60000 Power tillers are being sold every year out of which the share
of Chinese power tillers is in the range of 25-30%. For import of power
tillers, the import duty @ 7.5% of the cost of power tillers is applicable.
The import of Chinese power tillers into India is governed by the Free
Trade Agreement (FTA). The import of power tillers has increased
competitiveness and provided multiple choice of equipments to the
farmers. However , on the other hand the lack of after sales service and
easy availability of spare parts for the Chinese power tillers adversely
affected the timelines of operations. Liberal imports from China,
uncertainties in the subsidy and the problems associated with the
administration of the schemes at the State level, pose a constant
challenge to the Indian Power Tiller Industry. In this regard,
K. Alagusundaram Committee has recommended various incentives which
could be provided to promote Indian Power tillers:—
(i) Increasing customs duty upto 25% from the present level of
7.5% for the imported power tillers and making regulations
and internal taxes less onerous to the domestic manufacturers
to boost ‘Make in India ’ campaign will help promoting the
cause of indigenous manufacturers.
(ii) Export-related incentives to the domestic power tiller
manufacturers till the same is permissible under WTO,
providing production subsidies, lowering the cost of capital
and creating special economic zones for some or all
manufacturing activity in particular will reduce the cost of
doing business, increase profitability, and hence encourage
the domestic power tiller manufacturers to increase
investments.

40
(iii) A quota need to be fixed with a numerical limit on how
much of a product can be imported into a country. This will
help to protect producers of domestic products from facing
too much competition and ultimately going out of business.
Fixing import quota of imported (Chinese) power tillers will
benefit and protect the Indian Power Tiller Industry. Looking
into the production potential of the domestic power tiller
industries, the import quota for power tillers may be fixed
as 10% of the total annual market of power tillers in India.
(iv) Production subsidy, which can be made available to the
producer at the point of sale itself, will help reducing the
cost of indigenous power tillers.
(v) The State Governments have complicated procedures for
distribution of subsidy. Making system online, avoiding
selection of single supplier on lowest cost basis, elimination
of mediator agencies in the supply chain, timely release of
subsidy etc. will help indigenous power tiller industry. The
MRP of a particular make and model of power tiller may be
kept uniform in all States by the Central Government.
4.2 On the above issue, Expert Group has further suggested about
measures to be taken at the level of Central Government:—
(i) The Domestic Companies should be provided adequate support
to make its product competitive in comparison to the
imported products through appropriate moderation of tariff
and streaming the domestic taxes by making it less onerous
to boost ‘Make in India ’ campaign. On the other hand, the
farmers’ interest must be protected as it is understood that
a number of Chinese power tillers, basically imported by
traders lack in after-sales service and there are concerns of
the availability of spare parts.
(ii) Increasing customs duty upto 25% from the present level of
7.5% and making regulations and internal taxes less onerous
to domestic manufacturers to boost ‘Make in India’ campaign
will help promoting the cause of indigenous manufacturers.
(iii) In case the increase in Customs Duty as suggested under
1.4.3.2 is not possible then the another anti-dumping measure
as under may be taken: “A quota sets a numerical limit on
how much of a product can be imported into a country. This
helps to protect producers of domestic products from facing
too much competition and ultimately going out of business.

41
It has been noticed that the local power tiller manufacturing
industries have a production potential of around 90000 power
tillers per annum. The present annual Indian power tiller
market is around 60,000 units and the share of Chinese
Power Tillers is around 32%. Looking into the production
potential of the domestic power tiller industries, the import
quota for power tillers may be fixed as 10% of the total
annual market of power tillers in India. The Department of
Agriculture, Cooperation & Farmers Welfare may take suitable
action on this in consultation with the Ministry of Finance.”
(iv) Export-related incentives need to be provided to the domestic
power tiller manufacturers. Further, providing production
subsidies, interest subsidies, lowering the cost of capital and
creating special economic zones for some or all manufacturing
activity in particular will reduce the cost of doing business,
increase profitability, and hence encourage the domestic
manufacturer to increase investments.
(v) The Ministry of Agriculture & Farmers Welfare, Department
of Agriculture, Cooperation and Farmers Welfare under its
different schemes provide financial assistance to the farmers
for purchase of power tillers. The domestic power tiller
industry can be incentivized through these funds if are made
available to the producer/industry at the point of sale itself
as production subsidy. This will also benefit the Government
as well as the users. Thus, the Government will also be able
to regulate the prices of power tillers in the country.
(vi) Commercial Banks currently extend long-term credit for
purchase of tractors and other farm machineries as per
prevalent norms (11 to 14 percent interest rates) and against
security and collateral. However , Banks usually prefer
financing equipments that either have multiple utility or
demand driven business model or organized dealer and service
network, good resale value etc. Only Tractors and Combine
Harvesters fit into this. As a result, institutional credit off
take is heavily skewed towards tractors and combine
harvesters accounting for about 75% of total. Power tillers
are multiutility devices which are ideal for small and marginal
farms, which account for nearly 86 per cent of total
landholdings. Lower rates of interest and easy availability of
credit for purchase of power tillers to these small and
marginal farmers would be helpful. The Department of
Agriculture, Cooperation and Farmers Welfare may take up

42
this issue suitably with the Department of Financial Services
for lowering the rates of interest to at least 7% and simplifying
the norms for extending institutional credit.
(vii) Export-related incentives to the domestic power tiller
manufacturers may be provided. They may be facilitated
through financial support for participation in the International
Exhibitions and Trade Shows within the country and abroad.
This will provide an opportunity to expand their production
capacity and thus the industries will contribute to the growth
of Indian economy.
(viii) Under the guise of Made in India, the importers with negligible
value addition to imported power tillers are able to outbid
the price of domestic manufacturers and awarded the export
contract for supplies made under the Foreign Aid Programmes
of Government of India. Under such supplies in aid
programmes, the indigenous manufacturers should be given
preference.
4.3 When asked about the hardships being faced by Domestic Power
Tiller industry due to imported Chinese power tillers, the representatives
of Power tiller Manufacturers Association, stated as under:-
“We were licenced to manufacture power tillers in 1966 with five
others. Totally, six of us were licenced and today only two of us are
surviving. All were promoted with Japanese Collaboration and today
we have survived because of certain measures taken by the
Government of India. The low demand in the first ten or fifteen
years was such that we were almost shutting down our industry.
The Government of India at that time, realising that mechanizing
small farms was an absolute necessity, came out with a proposal to
subsidize a portion of the product. Over the years this is what has
helped us to continue our business. In the recent past, the
Government has increased the subsidy amount and it has become
a substantial portion of the benefit that a farmer is getting. Secondly,
it has become very attractive for importers to import and supply.
Of course, the import policy which has been liberalized and it is
one of the main reasons for the increase in the number of people
importing these units. We have a total capacity of 85,000. The
total numbers we are producing together is about 35,000 to 40,000.
30,000 is the number of the volume that are being brought about
by the Chinese. We have been able to sustain out production and
manufacturing because of the quality and the spare parts that we
have been able to support the farmers. The products which are

43
being imported unfortunately do not have the same quality and
many farmers have suffered because of that. It is our intention that
we should increase volumes and especially try to reduce prices. Of
course, this would be possible only when volumes go up to substantial
numbers. With the capacity being utilized we are not able to lower
the prices any more. If the production and the volumes increase,
we are confident that we will be able to bring down suitably the
prices as well as the make sure that we are able to export our
products. In the recent past, thanks to the initiatives taken by the
Expert Committee, the tightening of the quality of testing standards
has been already put in place and this will in the long run help the
farmers to get a good product. From our side, we are confident
that we will meet the standards and requirements which the testing
standards today demand. But unfortunately we are not able to
compete with Chinese. The import duty is seven per cent presently
and it has become very easy for the importers to import and supply
at very low investment. We have struggled and over the years put
up all facilities required for manufacturing and this is what is
sustaining us today. We are confident that this will continue with
the new standards which have already been set in. Some of the
importers are marketing their products as Indian Products by
importing components of sub-assemblies like engine or transmission
or important parts. In our opinion, the sticker which we would like
to be emphasized and the Committee to recommend would be that
we should put a sticker saying it is 100 percent India. The farmer
will then be convinced what to buy. If the sticker is not there, then
it becomes very easy for some of the companies to put a product
which is not a good quality. The need of the hour would be regulate
imports in our opinion either by the import duty being raised or
having a quota restriction. This will also enable to bring out, as
I said earlier , increase in volume of production. We have struggled
with this for so many years. I have been personally involved in this
company for the last fifty years. I can assure you that we will
continue to support the Indian agriculture, especially the small
farmer , and we have started this as a challenge for us and we can
assure you that we will keep up our words. Thank you. ”
4.4 On being asked about the sale of Chinese power tillers despite
import duty, the representatives of the Power Tiller Manufacturers
Association stated as under; during the course of evidence on
17.01.2018:—
“We may be permitted to say that it is not only the case of power
tillers but also in many other products. It is very difficult to

44
with Chinese in many products as far as the prices are concerned.
But with regard to quality and durability, the power tillers which
we are manufacturing are definitely superior to them. We are still
servicing power tillers which we sold in 1980s. Definitely, such kind
of experience will not be there for farmers who are using the
Chinese power tillers. They are not made to last for decades or for
generations. It is a use and throw concept. You will surprised to
know that there is no concept of dealership where they will render
after-sales service, spares etc. In China, there is nothing like that Ó.
Whether awareness is very high like in Karnataka or in other States
or where power tiller is already existing for a long time, there the
market share is very little, but where the market is new, there
people are buying it more. For examples, there are some States
which are giving subsidy up to 70 per cent and even 90 per cent
and because of the price advantage they are able to have the
advantage with the dealer. If you want a power tiller which will last
for 15 to 20 years, the farmer will definitely go for this. But the
farmer who is not aware of it, he will buy the imported one. There
is no distinction and they will not know whether it is an imported
power tiller or an Indian power tiller because the name will be
India name, but there will be no label that it is imported. But given
a chance, the farmer will go for Indian power tiller.
Some of the States with bad experience have got an embargo and
they are not buying Chinese power tillers. But legally they are also
approved. They are also approaching the court and they are
protesting against this discrimination.
There are about 30 players who are importing power tillers ranging
from 50 per cent to 100 per cent. But all are branded as Indian
only.Ó
4.5 When asked about views of Government on types of support
that may be extended to indigenous Power Tiller manufactures over
imported ones, the representatives of DAC&FW stated as under:Ñ
ÒSir , information regarding the year of change will definitely be
furnished. But the WTO complanade presently existing who are
having more income through then local manufacturers cannot
be withheld their differentials. This very issue is also raised. I
would like to read it.  I want to mention as to what the outcome
of discussion was. It says: ÔIn the light of the above, it is
informed that any subsidy continuant upon DCR as discussed in
the last meeting of the Committee, shall not be WTO compliant.

45
compete Hence, other way of incentivising domestic industry, say,
through production subsidy, which can be made available to producer
at the point of sale, can be thought of. We can provide direct
production subsidy to our local companies for our power tillers.
But don’t purchase then in sale point because giving such direction
will be difficult. But even, then we will analyse this all together
with Ministry of Commerce as per your directions.
”
4.6 Further elaborating on the issue, the Secretary, DAC further
stated as under:—
“Sir as you have told there is a suggestion. It is observed that
chinese Power Tiller that is imported to India is done by Five
companies through which it is imported. The H.P . i.e. horsepower
is ranged between 10.2 to 16.5. Our local Power Tiller is between
8.6 to 12.4. Meanwhile in order to exclude chinese, if the limit
is fixed up to 10 H.P . then our local power tillers with get
subsidy we can do this.
”
4.7 When asked about possibilities of fixing the maximum Share/
limit of the imported Power tillers and other agricultural machinery by
10% under SMAM and other Schemes like RKVY , NFSM, MIDH etc stated
as under:—
“Presently the market share of imported power tillers is around
25-30 percent. The measures that are being taken by the DAC&FW
based on recommendation of the expert committee may further
reduce the market share of imported power tillers. In the revised
list of Power tillers recently published, most of the imported models
have been eliminated from the list of power tillers eligible for
subsidy. The Department is also pursuing for increasing Custom
duties on Power Tillers from the existing rate of 7.5% to 25% to
provide an opportunity to the Indian manufacturers to be cost
competitive with imported (Chinese) Power Tillers. ”
4.8 On the query of the Committee regarding the effects on tax
liability on manufacturing and sale of power tillers after implementation
of Goods and Services Tax in the country, the Department submitted as
under:—
“Currently, the GST on Power Tiller is @12% as against the earlier
VAT @5%. However , the Power Tiller Manufacturer Association

46
informed that they have not increased the cost of power tillers. ”
4.9 When asked about possibility of imposing provisions variations
of clauses of anti-dumping duty which may be applied to imported
Chinese power tiller companies, the Department submitted as under:—
“Directorate General of Anti-Dumping and Allied Duties under the
Ministry of Commerce and Industry ensure a level playing field to
the Domestic Industry against the adverse impact of the unfair
trade practices like dumping and actionable, subsidies from any
exporting country, by using Trade Remedial methods under relevant
framework of WTO arrangements, Customs Tariff Act & Rules and
other relevant laws and International agreement.
However , a proposal for increasing Customs Duty on power tillers
from the present rate of 7.5% to 25% has been submitted to the
Department of Revenue, Minister of Finance vide our letter dated
9th November , 2017. They are seized with the issue and the legal

47
options open. ”
PART II
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
Problems being faced by the farmers due to imported power tillers
1. Our country has limited land resources available for agriculture
operations. We have to sustain around 16.5% of world population
with only 2.4% of total land areas. Considering, ever increasing rate
of population growth, there is urgent need to enhance agriculture
productivity per unit of land available in the country. Agricultural
mechanization is one of important ways to enhance the agricultural
productivity per unit of land and thereby, increasing agriculture
production for ever increasing population. Agricultural mechanization
helps to enhance agriculture intensity by reducing manual labour
and faster preparation of field after the harvesting. Availability of
sophisticated, qualitative and suitable agriculture machineries and
implementation according to the requirements of Indian farmers,
therefore, become imperative for enhancing agricultural
mechanization in the country. Further, considering the fragmented
and small land holdings in the country, there is need to make available
small farm equipments and machineries at reasonable prices to the
farmers. In this scenario, power tiller with its small size, convenience,
less power requirements and low prices become ideal agriculture
equipment to promote agriculture mechanization in the country.
However, the Committee note that farmers of the country are facing
problems due to poor quality of imported Chinese power tillers. The
Committee observe that Government of Bihar on representation by
the farmers association, had constituted a study by the experts of
Rajendra Agriculture University (RAU) to examine the issues related
to problems being faced by the farmers due to imported Chinese
power tillers. The Study conducted by the RAU has found these
problems faced by the farmers true and  brought out many
shortcomings in quality of Chinese power tillers, lack of proper after
sale service, unavailability of spare parts of Chinese Power Tillers,
dominance of distributor and dealers in selection of types of power
tillers, lack of training to farmers etc.
Considering the gravity of problem, the Committee (2015-16)
selected the subject for examination. On the insistence of the

48
Committee, the DAC & FW has constituted an Expert Group under
the Chairmanship of K. Alagusundaram to examine the issue. Expert
Committee in their Report submitted to the Government has
examined the issue comprehensively and found many shortcomings
such as ill defined norms for checking quality of Power Tillers,
absence of norms for testing durability of power tillers, futility of
repeat and supplementary test, poor quality of imported Chinese
power tillers, lack of after sale service, high rates being charged to
the farmers, problems being faced by the domestic power tiller
industry, complicated system of subsidy scheme on agriculture
mechanization being followed by the State Government etc. The
Expert Group has given various suggestions to improve the scenario
to ensure quality of power Tillers in the country. The Committee in
succeeding paragraphs have examined the issue and given their
recommendations, which, if implemented in true spirit, can help to
ensure availability of quality Power Tillers and other agriculture
equipments at reasonable prices to the farmers in the country.
Compensation to the Farmers
2. The Committee note that the Government of Bihar, on the
representation of Farmers Association, had commissioned the study
to analyze problems being faced by the farmers due to sub standard
imported Chinese Power Tillers. The study conducted by the RAU
after field work and discussion with the distributors, dealers of Power
Tillers and farmers have narrated the problems being faced by the
farmers. However, the Committee are astonished to note that the
State Government in their communication with Central Government
is reporting that no complaints has been received from farmers
about poor quality of power tillers. The Committee are of view that
farmers need to be compensated for losses incurred to them due to
faulty power tillers and guilty importers, distributors and dealers
needs to be punished. The Committee, therefore, recommend the
DAC & FW to constitute a high powered Committee headed by an
independent expert to examine the issue of sub standard quality of
power tillers being supplied to the farmers in the country under
Centrally sponsored schemes on agriculture mechanization. Terms of
reference to such Committee must include issues such as identifying
guilty importers, distributors and dealers of power tillers and
compensation to the farmers. The Committee would like the
Department to submit steps taken in this regard within one month
of presentation of this Report.
Strengthening of quality parameters and Testing Procedure of Power
Tillers
3. Ensuring availability of quality agriculture machineries and

49
implements is pre-requisite to instill confidence amongst farmers in
order to encourage them to adopt modern methods of agriculture
mechanization. The Committee, however, are perturbed to note
that sale of sub-standard imported Chinese power tillers has caused
financial loss to the farmers. The Committee note that Expert Group
under the Chairmanship of K. Alagusundaram has examined the issue
of system of quality testing, quality parameters fixed for power
tillers and found many lacuna in the system. The Expert Group in
their Report submitted to the Government has suggested various
changes to change quality parameters and to streamline the system
of testing of power tillers. The Committee have been informed that
various suggestions such as exact branding of imported/domestic
manufactured power tillers, random sampling for examination of
quality testing, warrantee of 2 years, minimum performance standard,
batch testing, elimination of repeat and supplementary test etc.
have been changed and being implemented by the testing agencies.
The Committee have also been informed that relevant standard for
power tillers including chemical composition and durability criteria
has also been revised by the BIS.
The Committee note with satisfaction that the Government,
although late, has shown alertness to implement the changes required
for strengthening the quality parameters and streamlining the system
for testing of power tillers. The Committee hope that these changes
will be stringently adhered to and implemented by the testing
agencies so that farmers of the country can be assured about quality
of power tillers and they do not incur financial losses due to sub-
standard imported power tillers. The Committee would like the
Department to present testing reports of all the empanelled power
tillers under subsidy schemes as per new standards within one month
of presentation of this Report. Further, the Committee also desire
the Department to incorporate provisions for testing of power tillers
in different soil conditions of the country. The Committee would like
to be apprised about step taken by the Department in this regard
within three months of presentation of this Report.
4. Apart from availability of quality power tillers, facility for
after sales service and spare parts is utmost necessities for ensuring
servicing of warranty on power tillers. The Committee note that
absence of facilities for after sale service and availability of spare
parts are one of the missing link affecting farmers to adopt power
tillers at large scale. In this regard, the Committee have been assured
by the Department that they have taken steps for ensuring warranty
of 2 years and empanelment of only those manufacturers/importers

50
that have service centers. However, the Department failed to submit
details of service centers of empanelled power tillers companies
across the country. They have submitted details only about dealers
of empanelled power tillers rather than service center. The
Committee deprecate this lackadaisical approach of the Department
and desire them to physically verify service centers of empanelled
power tillers and submit them before the Committee and take steps
to remove guilty importers/manufacturers/dealers from empanelled
list. Further, the Committee desire that farmers should be provided
on site after sales service for power tillers as movement to nearby
service centers may be time consuming and costly for farmers. The
Committee would like the Department to explore this possibility
with manufacturers/importers. The Committee would like to be
apprised about steps taken by the Department in this regard.
5. The Committee note that Expert Group under the chairmanship
of K. Alagusundaram has pointed out that some of the manufacturers
have been listed as defaulters of Conformity of Production (CoP )
on account of not meeting the emission norms as per CMVR. Further,
many importers have been found to be fudging details to misrepresent
imported power tillers as Indigenously manufactured and take benefits
of ‘Make in India’ programme of Government of India. The Committee
are of view that misrepresentation of country of origin of
sub-standard power tillers not only cause losses to the farmers, is
also violation of laws related to Bureau of Indian Standard and
Consumer Protection Act. The Committee, therefore, recommend
the Government to initiate enquiry to identify such violators and
lodge criminal cases against them to bring justice to the farmers.
Such enquiry should also  include the importers which has been
included in the empanelled list prepared by the Department.
The Committee also recommend the Government to devise a
mechanism to ensure strengthening the process of authentication
and testing of power tillers and other agricultural equipments/
machineries. Such mechanism should at least include an independent
expert and farmers as representatives. The Committee also desire
the Department to take steps for making the process of testing of
agricultural equipments a transparent one. The Committee also desire
the Department to make the process of application for testing online
and upload all details on specific portal.
Pricing of Power Tillers
6. Majority of Indian farmers do belong to small and marginal

51
category who could hardly afford costly agriculture equipments and
machineries. In this scenario, power tillers with its flexibility, multi-
purpose nature and low cost could be ideal to enhance level of
agriculture mechanization in the country. However, the Committee
observe that prices of power tillers in the country are far higher
than their manufacturing or import cost. The Committee have been
informed that power tillers which are imported at Rs. 75250-86000
are being sold at the rate of Rs. 1,08,500-1,95,000 in the market.
Whereas, indigenous power tillers with much higher cost of production
are being sold in the price range of Rs. 1,40,000-2,15,000. The
Committee also note that there is wide variation in selling prices of
power tillers in the country. The Committee also note that selling
price of both indigenous and imported power tillers is higher than
the MRP indicated by the manufacturer/suppliers. The Committee
are of view that huge profit margin being earned by the imported
power tillers goes against the aims of the Government to enhance
the level of agriculture mechanization in the country. The Committee,
therefore, desire the Government to examine the issue in detail and
take steps to lower the prices of power tillers in the country. The
Department should also examine the issue with an angle of
cartelization of power tillers importers to enhance their prices. The
Department should also refer the case to Competition Commission of
India if cartelization is suspected. The Committee would like to be
apprised about steps taken by the Department within one month of
presentation of this Report. The Committee would also like the
Department to expedite submission of Report of A.K. Singh Committee
constituted for the purpose to examine the issue of uniform pricing
of power tillers across the country.
Subsidy Scheme for Agriculture Mechanization
7. The Committee note that the Government is implementing
‘Sub-mission on Agriculture Mechanization ’ in order to provide
promote agriculture mechanization to provide financial assistance to
the farmers for purchase of agricultural machineries and equipments,
establish farm machinery bank for custom hiring, training, testing
and demonstration etc. Apart from SMAM, support for agriculture
mechanization is also being provided through other schemes such as
RKVY, NFSM, NHM and NMOOP. These schemes provides for financial
assistance of 40-50% subject to ceiling of Rs. 40000-75000 to different
categories of Farmers for purchase of Power Tillers.
The Committee appreciate the Government for implementing
various schemes to enhance the level of agriculture mechanization

52
in the country. The Committee hope that financial assistance being
provided to the farmers under the schemes will go a long way to
encourage farmers to utilize efficient agriculture equipments/
machineries which will help to lower the cost of production and
thereby, enhancing the income of farmers.
The Committee note that SMAM is being implemented through
the State Governments. The respective State after assessing the
requirements of the State forward their Annual action plan duly
approved by the State level Executive Committee to DAC & FW. The
Committee were informed that DLEC of States are responsible for
project formulation, implementation and monitoring of the scheme
under guidelines of SMAM. The Committee note that SMAM envisage
Direct Benefit Transfer (DBT) for transfer of subsidy. The Committee
were informed that SMAM will be on boarded for DBT from
30 September 2017. The Department is developing online MIS for
implementing SMAM and same will be extended to the States which
are not having such system. The Committee further note that States
like Bihar, Odisha, Andhra Pradesh, Madhya Pradesh, Kerala, and
Karnataka have implemented online system for subsidy program on
agriculture mechanization.
The Committee also note that scheme guidelines of SMAM provides
for complete freedom to the farmers for purchase of agricultural
equipments. However, the Committee observe that process adopted
by the Central and State Governments for transfer of subsidy to the
farmers is contrary to the guidelines of the scheme. Under, the
present system, the DAC&FW empanel power tillers importers/
manufacturers based on necessary testing reports and forward the
list to the State Government, who in turn invite tender from the
empanelled manufacturers/importers and select lowest bidder (L1).
The farmers have to purchase the power tillers from the L1 Company
only and then subsidy is transferred to the account of Farmers. The
Committee observe that farmers do rarely have any say in the present
system to purchase agriculture equipments of their choice. Often,
the prices of Power Tillers empanelled by the State Governments
are very high. This fact has also been highlighted by the expert
group and admitted by the  representatives of DAC & FW during the
course of evidence. The Committee have been informed that only
Uttar Pradesh and Maharashtra has system in place where farmers
have choice to select equipment and dealers of their choice. The
Committee are of view that present system of subsidy transfer under
SMAM and other schemes on agriculture mechanization has not been
framed keeping in view the interest of farmers. Present system of

53
subsidy is promoting unholy nexus of importers, distributors and
dealers who in connivance with Government officials are usurping
the benefits meant for farmers by artificially increasing the prices
of imported power tillers. Sub-standard and faulty power tillers
imported at Rs. 75,250-86,000 are being sold to the farmers for
Rs. 1,08,500-1,95,300, thereby, leaving the farmers deprived of
benefits meant for them. The Committee are of firm view that
present system of subsidy transfer should be changed in the interest
of farmers. Farmers should have complete freedom to choose the
agricultural machineries of their choice from the dealer who can
provide them satisfactory after sales service. The Committee,
therefore, recommend the Government to bring suitable changes in
SMAM and other schemes on agriculture mechanization for transfer
of subsidy directly to the farmers. The role of State Government
concerned should be limited to selection of beneficiary and transfer
of subsidy to the farmers on the basis of well laid down guidelines.
The Committee, therefore, desire the Government to bring suitable
changes in the guidelines of SMAM and other schemes as suggested.
The Committee would like to be apprised about the steps taken in
this regard within one month of presentation of this Report.
8. The Committee are also of the view that keeping in view of
fragmented and small size of land holdings in the country, power
tillers of low capacity would be more suitable for encouraging farmers
to adopt power tillers in Agriculture operations.  The Committee,
therefore, recommend the Government to restrict subsidy on power
tillers below 12 hp capacity. The Committee also desire that the
Government to enhance the quantum of financial assistance for
purpose of power tiller from existing 40-50% to 50-60% of total cost
of power tillers on no maximum limit.
9. In view of the fact there is need to provide subsidy on small
tractors below 20 BHP capacity as it will be more suitable to
fragmented nature of land holding in the country. Availability of
subsidy on small capacity tractors to farmers will help to attract
educated young generation with agriculture background in rural areas
to the farming. The Committee, therefore, recommend the
Government to include tractors below 20 BHP in subsidy scheme on
the pattern of Power tillers.
Role of DAC & FW in the Process of Empanelment of Power Tillers for
Subsidy under Scheme of Agricultural Mechanization
10. The Committee note under present system of subsidy transfer

54
on agriculture mechanization, the DAC&FW through the 4 Farm
Machinery Training & Testing Institute and 31 other identified test
centers carry out the testing and performance evaluation of the
agricultural machineries. On the basis of these Reports, the DAC&FW
also prepare a list of eligible manufacturers/importers which are
empanelled for the subsidy schemes on agriculture mechanization.
These lists prepared by the Department become basis on which
State Governments select models/companies which farmers can
purchase to get subsidy. However, the Committee observe that due
diligence is not being observed by the Department for empanelment
of power tillers eligible for subsidy as expert Group has also pointed
out that many power tiller importers have not submitted power
tillers for 1st and subsequent batch testing and still they continued
to be eligible for subsidy scheme.  When the Committee instructed
the Department to submit relevant details about power tillers
empanelled during the last seven years, they have been provided
details of 2018 only. The Committee strongly deplores this attitude
of the Department and instruct them to supply all relevant documents
used for empanelment of power tillers for subsidy schemes during
the last seven years at the time of submission of Action Taken Replies.
Support to Domestic Power Tiller Manufacturing Industry
11. Existence of a robust domestic manufacturing base for
production of Agricultural equipments and machineries is utmost
requirement for availability of reliable, qualitative agricultural
machineries at reasonable prices to the farmers of the country. India
has a sizeable industry for manufacturing of agricultural equipments
including Power Tillers. The Government of India had supported
establishment of industries for manufacturing of power tillers in the
country. The Domestic power tiller industry has production capacity
of around 85000 Power Tillers per annum. However, the Committee
note that domestic power tiller industry are facing stiff competition
from power tillers being imported from China. The liberal import
policy started in 1990s is helping Chinese companies to capture
market share of power tillers in the country. Since 1995, when
import of Chinese Power Tillers started, their market share increased
to around 32% at present and is growing. Due to lower prices of
Chinese Power Tillers and non-discriminatory subsidy support being
provided by the Government, domestic power tiller industry is not
able to utilize their full production capacity. It has led to a situation
where only two domestic power tiller manufacturers remained viable
till date. The Committee are of view that Domestic Power Tiller
Industries need to be provided all possible support so that they

55
continue to remain viable and support avowed aims of  enhancing
the level of agriculture mechanization in the country. The Committee,
in this regard, have been informed that in post WTO world, no
discriminatory policy may be adopted to make imported power tillers
ineligible from domestic subsidy schemes. The Committee have also
been informed that Expert Group constituted under the Chairmanship
of K. Alagusundaram has recommended to explore possibilities for
enhancing custom duties from existing 7.5% to 25% to safeguard
domestic power tiller industry. They have also suggested for imposing
quota restriction on import of Chinese power tillers which is
permissible under WTO rules. Apart from these, lowering/abolition
of GST on power tillers, technology and production support to
domestic power tiller industries are steps which can be taken to
safeguard and encourage Indigenous production of power tillers in
the country. The Committee have been informed that the DAC&FW
has requested the Government to enhance custom duty on imported
power tillers and lowering of GST on Indigenous production of power
tillers.
The Committee are of view that unimaginative subsidy scheme
and laxity in fixing and enforcement of quality norms on imported
power tillers has encouraged scrupulous importers to take benefits
of the system and increase their share in domestic market for power
tillers. It has led to situation wherein, actual benefits of subsidy
reached to importers rather than farmers causing huge financial loss
to the farmers and domestic power tiller industry. The Committee
are of view that production support in terms of research inputs,
compensation of taxes paid, relaxation in income tax liabilities may
be extended to domestic Industry under ‘Make in India ’ program.
The Committee, therefore, recommend the Government to take steps
such as lowering of GST on Indigenous Power Tillers, enhancing custom
duties on imported power tillers to 25%, imposing quota restrictions
on import from  China to 5-10% of total demand of power tillers in
the country, support to the domestic Industries in terms of research
inputs and production support. The Committee would like the
Department to vigorously take these proposals with Government to
safeguard to support domestic power tiller industry.
   N
EW D ELHI; HUKM DEO NARAYAN YADAV ,
02 April, 2018 Chairperson,

56
ANNEXURE I
THE INFORMATION OF MANUFACTURERS-WISE AND STATE-WISE AVAILABILITY OF DEALER’S NETWORK AND SERVICE CENTRES
Sl.No. State No. of Dealers and Service Centers
KAMCO VST Bengal Indra Greaves Kranti Kubota Chirag Kirloskar Sunrise Assam George Total
Tools Marshal Corp. Sai Maijo
Ltd. (Rhino)
 1 2 3 456789 1 0 1 1 1 2 1 3 1 4 1 5
 1. Andhra Pradesh 4 16 15 0 12 3 10 0 14 0 1 0 75
 2. Arunachal Pradesh 0 2 — 1000010004
 3. Assam 4 15 27 2 10 13 1 2 30 0 14 0 118
 4. Bihar 3 15 17 17 14 8 2 5 20 4 4 2 111
 5. Chhattisgarh 2577 1 21 1 032220 5 3
 6 . G o a 0100200010004
 7. Gujarat 7 15 4 5 12 6 16 0 26 0 0 0 91
 8. Haryana 010260700000 1 6
 9. Himachal Pradesh 045323006000 2 3
10. Jammu and Kashmir 024050104000 1 6
11. Jharkhand 1 2 12 14 12 3005500 5 4
12. Karnataka 5 24 12 0 20 10 12 0 31 0 0 0 114
13. Kerala 240040105000 1 6

57
14. Madhya Pradesh 3 14 2 16 22 0 27 07030 9 4
15. Maharashtra 6 15 6 2 28 3 29 1 44 0 0 0 134
16. Manipur 1100100020005
17. Meghalaya 1102000010005
18. Mizoram 0100100010003
19. Nagaland 1100100000003
20. Odisha 5 23 36 55 18 12 9 20 49 10 11 26 274
21. Punjab 010220701000 1 3
22. Rajasthan 310240115000 1 7
23. Sikkim 0000000000000
24. Tamil Nadu 12 28 11 5 12 2 11 0 27 0 0 0 108
25. Telangana 080091602000 2 6
26. Tripura 410011012000 1 0
27. Uttar Pradesh 1905 2 1020 2 0000 5 8
28. Uttarakhand 020352104000 1 7
29. West Bengal 2 17 17 5 15 2 1 8 22 0 0 0 89
Total 67 244 175 148 279 70 154 41 332 21 35 28 1594
1 2 3 456789 1 0 1 1 1 2 1 3 1 4 1 5

58
ANNEXURE II
Copies of the Circular issued by Ministry of Agriculture
cooperation & Farmers Welfare (Department of
Agriculture, Cooperation & Farmers Welfare)
No. 13-37/200-My (I&P)
Government of India
Ministry of Agriculture & Cooperation
(Mechanization & Technology Division)
Krishi Bhawan, New Delhi
Dated 18.12.2012
To
1. The Secretary (Agriculture)
(All States/UTs)
2. Director (Agriculture)
(All States/UTs)
3. Managing Director
(All State Agro Industries Corporations)
4. Director (Agriculture Engineering)
(Government of Chhattisgarh & Madhya Pradesh)
5. Chief Engineer (Agricultural Engineering)
(Government of Assam, Tamil Nadu and West Bengal)
Subject: Revision of list of Power Tillers eligible for grant of subsidy
under Government assisted programmes and Schemes (As
on 30.11.2012)
Sir,
I am directed to invite a reference to this Department’s letter of
even number dated 30th May, 2012, vide which, the list of power tiller
delivering 8 Hourse power (BHP) and above and found eligible for grant
of subsidy under Government assisted programmes was circulated.
2. The above refereed list has since been revised and the revised
list (As on 30.11.2012) in supersession of all previous lists, is enclosed
herewith for information and necessary action. The listed Power Tillers
(41 different make and model) are available at appointed power tiller
dealer points in the country as informed by the manufacturers.
Encls: as above.
Yours faithfully,
Sd/-
(Himat Singh
Deputy Commissioner (M&T)
Tele: 011-23382922
E-mail: himat.singh@nic.in
Copy to
1. Directors, All FMT&TIs
2. Power Tiller Manufacturers concerned
3. Power Tiller Association of India

59
Department of Agriculture & Cooperation
(M&T Division)
LIST OF POWER TILLERS ELIGIBLE FOR GRANT OF SUBSIDY UNDER GOVERNMENT ASSISTED PROGRAMMES/SCHEMES
Updated: 30.11.2012
Sl.No. Model Make Max Test Te st Report CMVR CMVR FMTTI Name
Power Report Release Certificate Date
HP No. (Month/Year) No.
12 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 1 0
1. VST Shakti 130 DI VST Tillers 9.0 PT-43/736 in J uly, 2001 CMVR/PT-20/ 24.03.2008 S RFMTTI Power Tiller
Tractors Ltd., (12.2) conjunction 2007-2008
Bangalore, with PT-62/
(Karnataka) 853
2. Mitsubishi Shakti VST Tillers 6.6 PT-40/549 in July , 2001 CMVR/PT- 13.05.2008 SRFMTTI Power Tiller
CT 85 with VWH T ractors Ltd., (9.0) conjuction 04/08/2008-
120 Engine Bangalore with PT-61/852 2009
(Karnataka)
3. Texmaco Dhanwan Texmaco Ltd., 7.5 PT-63/860 Sept., 2001 CMVR/PT -16/ 03.03.2008 SRFMTTI Power Tiller
Kolkata (WB) (10.2) 2007-2008
4. Ganga Sifang, Ganga Motors, 10.0 PT -56/831 in Feb., 2002 CMVR/PT - 04.04.2008 SRFMTTI Power Tiller
GN-121-15 K olkata (WB) (13.6) conjuection 01/01/2008-
with PT-66/880 2009

60
1 2 3 4 5 678 9 1 0
5. Greaves GS 15 Greaves cotton 11.0 PT-76/995 Dec., 2004 CMVR/PT - 21.07.2008 SRFMTTI Power Tiller
DILS Ltd., Tponner i- (15.0) 14/29/2008-
Taluk (TN) 2009
6. Souza Sifang GN Souza Sifang 10.7 PT-80/1013 July , 2005 MCVR/PT- 16.06.2008 SRFMTTI Power Tiller
121-(15) Agro (14.6) 07/18/2008-
(Fitted with Engineering Pvt. 2009
Zhejiang Sifang ZS Ltd., Bangalore
1100 an Diesel (Karnataka)
Engine)
7. Siam Kubota Siam Kubota 9.0 PT -16/331 Sept., 2011 CMV R/24/419/ 22.7.2011 S RFMTTI Power Tiller
RT-14-DI-RP-80 Corporation Ltd., (12.3) 2010-11
Chennai
8. Kranti DI 1515 Indtec Elektro 11.2 PT-85/1067 Jan., 2007 CMVR/PT- 17.03.2008 SRFM TTI Power Tiller
Control, (15.2) 17/2007-
Hoshiarpur (Pb) 2008
9. Shrachi Bengal Tools 11.1 PT-84/1066 Jan., 2007 CMVR/PT- 22.05.2008 SRFMTTI Power Tiller
SF 15 DI Ltd. (Agro), (15.1) 06/10/2008-
Kolkata (WB) 2009, dated
22.05.2008

61
1 2 3 4 5 678 9 1 0
10. Kisan Sakthi Jayessar 10.8 PT -86/1071 Feb., 2007 CMVR/PT- 25.11.2008 SRFMTTI Power Tiller
DI GN 15 L Equipment Pvt. (14.7) 19/48/2008-
Ltd., Coimbatore 2009
(TN)
11. Kamco Super Kerala Agro 8.8 PT -88/1075 Feb., 2007 CMVR/PT- 19.03.2008 SRFMTTI Power Tiller
DI Machinery (12.0) 19/2007-
Corporation 2008
Ltd., Athani
(Kerala)
12. Shrachi Kubota Bengal Tools Ltd. 8.7 PT-89/1077 Mar . 2007 CMVR/PT- 23.06.2008 SRFMTTI Power Tiller
DF 12 L (Agro), Kolkata (11.8) 09/21/2008-
(WB) 2009
13. Sungn 151 DI Rogini Farm 10.5 PT-91/1085 May, 2007 CMVR/PT- 18.08.2008 SRFMTTI Power Tiller
Equipments (14.3) 16/39/2008-
Vellore (TN) 2009
14. Manam NCF-121 Southern Agro 8.5 PT -01/206 May, 2007 CMVR/PT - 17.07.2008 SRFMTTI Power Tiller
Engine Pvt. Ltd. (11.6) 13/28/2008-
Chennai (TN) 2009
15. KAVI-GN 15 L Kavi Agro Agency , 9.2 PT-92/1095 July , 2007 CMVR/PT- 09.07.2008 SRFMTTI Power Tiller
Trichi (TN) (12.5) 10/25/2008-
2009

62
1 2 345 6 7 8 91 0
16. Samrat Universal 11.5 PT-93/1103 Sept., 2007 CMVR/PT- 15.05.2008 SRFMTTI Power Tiller
GN 121 Engineers & (15.6) 05/09/2008-
Traders, Kolkata 2009
(WB)
17. KAVI-DF 15L Kavi Agro Agency , 11.0 PT-94/1109 Dec., 2007 CMVR/PT- 09.07.2008 SRFMTTI Power Tiller
Trichi (TN) (15.0) 11/26/2008-
2009
18. Kamco Kerala Agro 7.4 PT -3/225 Dec., 2007 CMVR/PT- 24.03.2008 SRFMTTI Power Tiller
KMB-200 Machinery (10.1) 21/2007-
Corporation Ltd., 2008
Athani (Kerala)
19. Soharr G Soharr India 10.7 PT -4/228 Jan., 2008 CMVR/PT- 03.03.2009 SRFMTTI Power Tiller
N-121 15-DI Agro Division, (14.6) 20/67/2008-
Shivamoga 2009
(Karnataka)
20. Shifeing Angad SAS Motors, 8.8 PT-81/1034 in Mar., 2008 CMVR/PT- 08.08.2008 SRFM TTI Power Tiller
150 PT New Delhi (12.0) conjun ction with 15/36/2008-
PT-95/1119 2009
21. Vijay VR-15L Vijay engineering 10.2 PT-05/233 May, 2008 CMVR/PT- 16.07.2008 SRFM TTI Power Tiller
& machinery (13.9) 12/27/2008-
Company 2009
Kolhapur (MH)

63
1 2 3 4 5 678 9 1 0
22. Birla Harit Birla Power 8.4 PT -6/241 July, 2008 CMVR/PT- July,  2008 SRFMTTI Power Tiller
Solutions Ltd., (11.4) 15/2007-08
Dehradun
(Uttarakhand)
23. Greaves Greaves cotton 11.0 PT-8/247 Oct., 2008 CMVR/PT- 10.04.2008 SRFM TTI Power Tiller
GS 15 DIL Ltd., Tponneri (14.9) 03/04/2008-
Taluk (TN) 2009
24. Rhind 15 DI Shri Ambica Iron 10.7 PT-7/246 Oct., 2008 CMVR/PT- 29.09.2008 SRFM TTI Power Tiller
Industry Pvt. Ltd., (14.5) 18/43/2008-
Kolkata (WB) 2009
25. Divya Shakti Chirag Corporati on 9.1 PT-09/273 Dec., 2009 ICAT/ATA 27.08.2007 S RFMTTI Power Tiller
Kolkata (WB) (12.4) (term III-PT/
2007-08/095
26. Dragon Shakti VST Tillers 11.0 PT-11/281 April, 2010 ATA Bharat 24.09.2009 SRFMTTI Power Tiller
150 DI Tractors Ltd., (14.9) (Term) Stage
Bangalore III/PT/ELT/R/
(Karnataka) 2009-2010/589
27. Greaves GS Greaves Cotton 10.1 PT-10/28 in Sept., 2010 CMVR/PT- 22.04.2009 SRFM TTI Power Tiller
Ltd., Tponneri (13.5) conjunction 23/403/2010-
Taluk (TN) with PT-12/294 2011 dated
19.05.2010

64
1 2 345 6 7 8 91 0
28. Yanmar Shakti Maharashtra 7.8 PT -14/310 Mar., 2011 CMVR Certificate not required due SRFMTTI Power Tiller
GN 121 DI Agro (10.6) to power tiller not recommended
Industry, for haulage purpose (Reference
Bangalore letter No. RT-11011/12/2005-MVL,
(Kar) dt. 24.5.2010 from Min. of Road
Transport & Highways)
29. Greaves GS 14 DLX Greaves cotton 10.1 PT-10/280 in Sept., 2010 CMVR/PT- 19.05.2010 SRFMTTI Power Tiller
(Variant) Ltd., Tponneri (13.5) c onjunction with 23/403/2010-
Taluk (TN) PT-15/316 2011
30. Mascon Mascon Tillers 13.99 PT -13/309- March, 2011 Power tiller has not got CMVR norms, SRFMTTI Power Tiller
(Model: MS-15L) and Tractors, (10.3) Confidential— Hence, it is not recommended for
Palakkad Converted into road worthiness
(Kerala) Commercial)
31. Ganga (Model: Ganga Motors 15.35 PT -19/336-ICT Oct., 2011 Power tiller has not got CMVR norms, SRFMTTI Power Tiller
GM-16) (Farm Equipment (11.3) Hence, it is not recommended for
Division), road worthiness
Kolkata
32. Ganga Power Tiller Ganga Motors 15.08 PT-20/337-ICT Oct., 2011 Power tiller has not got CMVR norms, SRFMTTI Power Tiller
(Model: Arjun- (Farm Equipment (11.1) Hence, it is not recommended for
GM-15) Division), road worthiness
Kolkata

65
1 2 3 4 5 678 9 1 0
33. Yanmar Maharashtra 11.42 PT-18/335-ICT Oct., 2011 Power tiller has not got CMVR norms, SRFMTTI Power Tiller
Shakti-121-DI Agro Industries, (8.4) Hence, it is not recommended for
Bangalore, road worthiness
(Karnataka)
34. Sunrise Sunrise 13.32 PT -17/334-ICT Oct., 2011 CMVR/Power 5.10.2010 SRFMTTI Power Tiller
(Model: International, (9.8) Tillers/25/449/
Sunrise-DI) Kolkata 2010-11
(West Bengal)
35. Bhim Ganga Motors 14.95 PT-23/347, ICT Feb., 2012 Power tiller has not got CMVR norms, SRFMTTI Power Tiller
Ganga Sifang (Farm (11.0) Hence, it is not recommended for
Equipment road worthiness
Division),
Kolkata
36. Sigma Plus M/s Sigma 11.4 PT-22/344, Jan., 2012 CMVR/PT- 15.11.2010 SRFM TTI Power Tiller
V2FM Power T iller (15.61) ICT 26/457/2919011
Private Ltd.,
Kolkata
37. Vijay Samurai M/s Southern 9.6 PT-24/352, ICT April, 2012 Power tiller has not got CMVR norms, SRFMTTI Power Tiller
PT-03 Agro Engine (13.15) Hence, it is not recommended for
Private Ltd., road worthiness
Chennai

66
1 2 345 6 7 8 91 0
38. Shrachi M/s Bengal 8.9 PT 53/813 Marh, 2000 CMVR/PT - 23.06.2008 SRFMTTI Power Tiller
SF-12 Tools Ltd. (12.1) ICT June, 2012 08/20/2008-
(Agro), Kolkata Batch Test 2009
(West Bengal) PT-25/356
39. Premier Power M/s Premier 7.8 KW PT-26/366 Sept., 2012 CMVR/PT-27/ 11.4.2011 SRFMTTI Power Tiller
Tillers Garuda 3 P ower (10.5) ICT 483/2011-2012
PT 1200 D Equipment and
Product Pvt. Ltd.
40. Greaves Power M/s Greaves 9.0 KW PT-27-367 Sept., 2012 CMVR/PT - 25.03.2010 SRFMTTI Power Tiller
Tillers Cotton Ltd. (12.1) ICT 21/358/2009-
GS 12 DLX Gummiditoondi 2010
41. Sarachi Power M/s Bengal 9.8 KW PT-29/369 ICT Oct., 2012 Power tiller has not got CMVR norms, SRFMTTI Power Tiller
Tillers Tools Ltd. (13.1) Hence, it is not recommended for
Champion (Agro), road worthiness
Kolkata (WB)

67
REGISTERED
No. 13-37/2000-My (I&P)
Government of India
Ministry of Agriculture
Department of Agriculture & Cooperation
(Mechanization & Technology Division)
Krishi Bhawan, New Delhi
Dated 22nd November , 2011
To,
1. The Secretary (Agriculture)
(All States/UTs)
2. Director (Agriculture)
(All States/UTs)
3. Managing Director
(All State Agro Industries Corporations)
4. Director (Agricultural Engineering)
(Government of Chhattisgarh & Madhya Pradesh)
5. Chief Engineer (Agricultural Engineering)
(Government of Assam, Tamil Nadu and West Bengal)
Subject: Revision of list of Power Tillers eligible for grant of subsidy
under Government assisted programmes and Schemes (As on
31.10.2011)
Sir ,
I am directed to invite a reference to this Department’s letter of
even number dated 19th April, 2011, vide which, the list of Power tiller
delivering 8 Horse power (BHP) and above and found eligible for grant
of subsidy under Government assisted programmes was circulated.
2. The above refereed list has since been revised and the revised
list (As on 31.10.2011) in supersession of all previous lists is enclosed
herewith for information and necessary action. The listed Power Tillers
(35 different make and model) are available at appointed power tiller
dealer points in the country as informed by the manufacturers.
Encls: as above.
Yours faithfully,
Sd/-
(Omkar Singh
Deputy Commissioner (M&T)
Tele: 011-23382922
E-mail: singh.omkar14@yahoo.co.in
Copy to:
1. Directors, All FMT&TIs
2. Power Tiller Manufacturers concerned
3. Power Tiller Association of India

68
Department of Agriculture & Cooperation
(M&T Division)
LIST OF POWER TILLERS ELIGIBLE FOR GRANT OF SUBSIDY UNDER GOVERNMENT ASSISTED PROGRAMMES/SCHEMES
Updated: 31.10.2011
Sl.No. Model Make Max Text Te st Report CMVR CMVR FMTTI Name
Power Report Release Certificate Date
HP No. (Month/Year) No.
1 2 345 6 7 8 9 1 0
1. Shrachi SF-12 Bengal Tools 8.9 PT-53/813, March, 2000 CMVR/PT -08/ 23.6.2008 SRFMTTI Power Tiller
Ltd. (Agro), (12.1) March, 2000 20/2008-2009
Kolkata (WB)
2. VST Shakti 130 DI VST Tillers 9.0 PT-43/736 June, July, 2001 CMVR/PT - 24.03.2008 SFRMTTI Power Tiller
Tractors (12.2) 1997 in 20/2007-
Ltd., Bangalore conjun ction with 2008
(Karnataka) PT-62/853
July, 2001
3. Mitsubishi Shakti VST Tillers 6.6 PT-40/549 Dec., J uly, 2001 CMVR/PT - 13.05.2008 SFRMTTI Power Tiller
CT 85 with VWH Tractors Ltd., (9.0) 1989 in 04/08/2008-
120 Engine Banglore conjunction with 2009
(Karnataka) PT-61/852,
July, 2001

69
1 2 345 6 7 8 9 1 0
4. Texmaco Texmaco Ltd., 7.5 PT-63/860 Sept., 2001 CMVR/PT - 03.03.2008 SFRMTTI Power Tiller
Dhanwan Kolkata (WB) (10.2) 16/2007-2008
5. Ganga Sifang, Ganga Motors, 10.0 PT -56/831 Feb., 2002 CMVR/PT - 04.04.2008 SFRMTTI Power Tiller
GN-121-15 K olkata (WB) (13.6) November , 2000 01/01/2008-
in conjunction 2009
with PT-66/880,
April, 2002
6. GREAVES GS 15 Greaves cotton 11.0 PT-76/995, Dec., 2004 CMVR/PT- 21.07.2008 SFRMTTI P ower Tiller
DIL S Ltd., Tponneri (15.0) Dec., 2004 14/29/2008-
Taluk (TN) 2009
7. Souza Sifang Souza Sifang 10.7 PT-80/1013, July, 2005 CMVR/PT- 16.06.2008 SF RMTTI Power Tiller
GN 121-(15) Agro (14.6) July, 2005 07/18/2008-
(Fitted with Engineering 2009
Zhejiang Sifang Pvt. Ltd.,
ZS 1100 and Bangalore
Diesel Engine) (Karnataka)
8. Siam Kubota Siam Kubota 9.0 PT-16/331, Sept., 2011 CMVR/24/41 9/ 22.7.2011 SFRMTTI Power Tiller
RT-14-DI-RP-80 Corporation Ltd., (12.3) Sept., 2011 2010-11
Chennai
9. Kranti DI 1515 Indtec Elektro 11.2 PT-85/1067 Jan., 2007 CMVR/PT- 17.03.2008 SF RMTTI Power Tiller
Control, (15.2) 17/2007-2008
Hoshiarpur (Pb)

70
12 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 1 0
10. Shrachi SF 15 DI Bengal Tools Ltd. 11.1 PT-84/1066, Jan., 2007 CMVR/PT -06/10/ 22.05.2008 SFRMTTI Power Tiller
(Agro), (15.1) Jan., 2007 2008-2009,
Kolkata (WB) dated 22.05.2008
11. Kisan Shakthi DI Jayessar 10.8 PT-86/1071, Feb., 2007 CMVR/PT-19/ 25.11.2008 SFRMTTI Power Tiller
GN 15 L Equipment Pvt. (14.7) Feb., 2007 48/2008-2009
Ltd., Coimbatore
(TN)
12. Kamco Super DI Kerala Agro 8.8 PT-88/1075 Feb., 2007 CMVR/PT-19/ 19.03.2008 SFRMTTI P ower Tiller
Machinery (12.0) 2007/2008
Corporation Ltd.,
Athani (Kerala)
13. Shrachi Kubota Bengal Tools 8.7 PT-89/1077, Mar., 2007 CMVR/PT -09/ 23.05.2008 SFRMTTI Power Tiller
DF 12 L Ltd. (Agro), (11.8) Mar., 2007 21/2008-2009
Kolkata (WB)
14. SUN GN 151 DI RoGINI Farm 10.5 PT-91/1085, May, 2007 CMVR/PT-16/ 18.06.2008 SFRMTTI Power Tiller
Equipments, (14.3) May, 2007 39/2008-2009
Vellore (TN)
15. Manam MCF-121 Southern Agro 8.5 PT -01/206, May, 2007 CMVR/PT-13/ 17.07.2008 SFRMTTI Power Tiller
Engine Pvt. Ltd., (11.6) May, 2007 28/2008-2009
Chennai (TN)
16. KAVI-GN 15 L Kavi Agro 9.2 PT-92/1095, July, 2007 CMVR/PT-10/ 09.07.2008 SFRMTTI P ower Tiller
Agency, Trichi (12.5) July , 2007 25/2008-2009
(TN)

71
1 2 345 6 7 8 9 1 0
17. Samrat GN 121 Universal 11.5 PT-93/1103, Sept., 2007 CMVR/PT-05/ 15.05.2008 SF RMTTI Power Tiller
Engineers & (15.6) Sept., 2007 09/2008-2009
Traders,
Kolkata (WB)
18. KAVI-DF 15 L Kavi Agro 11.0 PT-94/1109, Dec., 2007 CMVR/PT-11/ 09.07.2008 SFRMTTI P ower Tiller
Agency, Trichi (15.0) Dec., 2007 26/2008-2009
(TN)
19. Kamco KMB-200 Kerala Agro 7.4 PT-3/225, Dec., 2007 CMVR/PT -21/ 24.03.2008 SFRMTTI Power Tiller
Machinery (10.1) Dec., 2007 2007-2008
Corporation Ltd.,
Athani (Kerala)
20. Soharr GN-121 Soharr India 10.7 PT-4/228, Jan., 2008 CMVR/PT-20/ 03.03.2009 SFRMTTI Power Tiller
15-DI agro division, (14.6) Jan., 2008 67/2008-2009
Shivamoga
(Karnataka)
21. Shifeng Angad SAS Motors, 8.8 PT -81/1034, Mar., 2008 CMVR/PT-15/ 08.08.2008 SFRMTTI P ower Tiller
150 PT New Delhi (12.0) March 2006 in 36/2008-2009
conjunction with
PT-95/1119,
March, 2008

72
12 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 1 0
22. Vijay VR-15L Vijay engineering & 10.2 PT-05/233, May, 2008 CMVR/PT-12/27/ 16.07.2008 SFRMTTI P ower Tiller
Machinery (13.9) May, 2008 2008-2009
Company
Kolhapur
(Maharashtra)
23. Virla Harit Birla Power 8.4 PT- 6/241, July , 2008 CMVR/PT-15/ July, 2008 SFRMTTI Power Tiller
Solutions Ltd., (11.4) J uly, 2008 2007-2008
Dehradun
(Uttarakhand)
24. Greaves GS 15 DI L Greaves Cotton 11.0 PT-8/247 Oct., 2008 CMVR/PT-03/04/ 10.04.2008 SFRMTTI Power Tiller
Ltd., Tponneri (14.9) Oct., 2008 2008-2009
Taluk (TN)
25. Rhind 15 DI Shri Ambica Iron 10.7 PT-7/246 Oct., 2008 CMVR/PT-18/43/ 29.09.2008 SFRMTTI Power Tiller
Industry Pvt. Ltd., (14.5) Oct., 2008 2008-2009
Kolkata (WB)
26. Divya Shakti Chirag Corporation, 9.1 PT -09/273, Dec., 2009 ICAT/A TA 27.08.2007 SFRMTTI Power Tiller
Kolkata (WB) (12.4) Dec., 2009 (term III-PT/
2007-08/095
27. Dragon-Shakti Rogini Farm 11.0 PT -11/281, April, 2010 ATA (Bharat) 24.09.2009 SFRMTTI P ower Tiller
150 DI Equipments, (14.9) April, 2010 (Term) Stage
Arcot (TN) III/PT/ELT/R/
2009-2010/589

73
1 2 345 6 7 8 9 1 0
28. Greaves GS Greaves cotton 10.1 PT -10/280, Sept., 2010 CMVR/PT -23/ 22.04.2009 SFRMTTI Power Tiller
Ltd., Tponneri, (13.5) March, 2010 in 403/2010-2011
Taluk (TN) conjunction with Date 19.05.2010,
PT-12/294, ATA Bharat Term
Sept., 2010 Stage III-PT/ELTTR/
2009-10/26
29. Vynmar Shakti Maharashtra 7.8 PT-14/310, March, 2011 CMVR Certificate 24.5.2010 SFRMTTI Power Tiller
GN 121 DI Agro (10.6) March, 2011 not required due
Industry, to power tiller
Bangalore not recommended
(Karnataka) for haulage purpose
(Reference letter
No. RT/11011/12/
2005-MVL, dt.
24.5.2010 from
Ministry of Road
Transport & Highways)
30. Greaves GS 14 Greaves cotton 10.1 PT-10/280, Sept., 2010 CMVR/PT-23/403/ 22.04.2009 SFRMTTI P ower Tiller
DLX (Variant) Ltd., Tponneri (13.5) March, 2010 in 2010-2011 Dated
Taluk (TN) conjunction with 19.05.2010, ATA
PT-15/316, Bharat Term Stage-III
March, 2010 PT/ELTTR/2009-10/26

74
12 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 1 0
31. Mascon (Model: Mascon Tillers: 13.99 PT-13/309, March, 2011 Power tiller has not go t CMVR norms. SFRMTTI Power Tiller
MS-15L) and T ractors, (10.3) March, 2011- Hence, it is not recommended for
Palakkad confidential- road worthiness
(Kerala) (Converted into
Commercial)
32. Ganga Power Tiller Ganga Motors 15.35 PT-19/336, Oct., 2011 Power tiller has not go t CMVR norms. SFRMTTI Power Tiller
(Model: GM-16) (Farm (11.3) Oct., 2011-ICT Hence, it is not recommended for
Equipment road worthiness
Division),
Kolkata
33. Ganga Power Tiller Ganga Motors 15.08 PT-20/337, Oct., 2011 Power tiller has not go t CMVR norms. SFRMTTI Power Tiller
(Model: Arjun-1) (Farm (11.3) Oct., 2011-ICT Hence, it is not recommended for
GM-15) Equipment road worthiness
Division),
Kolkata
34. Yanmar Maharashtra Agro 11.42 PT -18/335, Oct., 2011 Power tiller has not go t CMVR norms. SFRMTTI Power Tiller
Shakti121-DI Industries, (8.4) Oct., 2011-ICT Hence, it is not recommended for
Bangalore road worthiness
(Karnataka)
35. Sunrise (Model: Sunrise 13.32 Pt-17/334, Oct., 2011 CMVR/Power Tillers/ 5.10.2010 SFRMTTI Power Tiller
Sunrise-DI) International, (9.8) Oct., 2011-ICT 25/449/2010-11
Kolkata
(West Bengal)

75
No. 13-10/99-My (I&P)
Government of India
Ministry of Agriculture
(Deptt. of Agriculture & Cooperation)
Krishi Bhavan, New Delhi-110 001
Dated: the 8th August, 2013
To,
1. The Secretary (Agriculture)
(All States/UTs)
2. Director (Agriculture)
(All States/UTs)
3. Managing Director
(All State Agro Industries Corporations)
4. Director (Agricultural Engineering)
(Government of MP , TN, Chhattisgarh and WB)
Subject: List of Tractors, Power Tillers and Combine Harvesters for
promotion under various Government schemes/programmes
Sir ,
I am directed to invite a reference to this Department’s letter of
even number dated 2nd May, 2012 vide which the list of tractors
delivering up to 40 HP (Ps) at the rear Power Take Off (PTO) shaft and
found eligible for subsidy was circulated. The list of power tillers was
circulated vide this Department’s letter No. 13-37/2000-My (I&P) dated
18th December , 2012 and list of combine harvesters was also circulated
vide this Department’s letter No. 7-66/2000 M&T (I&P) dated 12th May,
2012.
The above referred lists have since been revised in supersession of
all previous lists and the copy of the same is enclosed herewith for
information and necessary action.
Encl.: As above
Yours faithfully,
Sd/-
(A.N. Meshram)
Deputy Commissioner (M&T)
Telefax No. 23382922
Copy to:
1. Director , FMTTI, Budni (Madhya Pradesh), Hissar (Haryana),
Garladinne (Andhra Pradesh) and Biswanath Chariali (Assam)
2. All Tractor Manufacturers (as per list)
3. All Power Tiller Manufacturers (as per list)
4. All Combine Harvester Manuafcturers (as per list)

76
LIST OF POWER TILLERS TESTED AT THE FARM MACHINERY TRAINING & TESTING INSTITUTES
Sl.No. Model Name & Address of Manufacturer Max Horsepower Test Report No. Test Report Release
kW (Ps) (Month and Year)
12 3 4 5 6
1. VST SHAKTI 130 DI M/s VST Tillers Tractors Limited 9.0 PT-43/736 in conjunction July, 2001
P .B. No. 4801, Mahadevpura, Post (12.2) with PT-62/853
Off. White Field Road, Bangalore-560048
2. MITSUBISHI SHAKTI CT 85 M/s VST Tillers Tractors Limited 6.6 PT-40/549 in conjunction July, 2001
WITH VWH 120 ENGINE P .B. No. 4801, Mahadevpura, Post (9.0) with PT-61/852
Off. White Field Road, Bangalore-560048
3. TEXMACO DHANWAN Texmaco Limited 7.5 PT-63/860 September ,
Belgharia works, Kolkata-700056 (10.2) 2001
4. GANGA SIFANG, GN-121-15 Ganga Motors 10.0 PT-56/831 in conjunction February,
Farm Equipment Division, 23, Ganesh (13.6) with PT—66/880 2002
Chandra Avenue, Kolkata-700013
5. GREAVES GS Greaves Cotton Limited 11.0 PT-76/995 December ,
15 DIL S Agro Equipment Group, Petrol Engines (15.0) 2004
Unit, P .B. No. 892, Old Mahabalipuram
Road, Thoraipakkam, Chennai-600096

77
 6. SOUZA SIFANG GN 121-(15) Souza Sifang Agro Engineering Pvt. Ltd. 10.7 PT-80/1013 July, 2005
(FITTED WITH ZHEJIANG H.O.—91, Iconet Business Centre, (14.6)
SIFANG ZS 1100 Temple Road, Malleswaram,
AN DIESEL ENGINE) Bangalore-560 003
 7. SIAM KUBOTA RT-14-DI-RP-80 Siam K ubota Corporation Ltd., 9.0 PT-16/331 September ,
Chennai (12.3) 2011
 8. KRANTI DI 1515 Indtec Elektro Control 11.2 PT-85/1067 January,
F-15, Focal Point, P hagwara Road, (15.2) 2007
Hoshiarpur-146 001
 9. SHRACHI SF 15 DI Bengal Tools Limited (Agro Division), 11.1 PT-84/1066 January,
Todi Mansion, P-15, India Exchange (15.1) 2007
Place Extension, Kolkata-700 073
10. KISAN SAKTHI Jayessar Equipment Private Limited, 10.8 PT-86/1071 February,
DI GN 15 L 91-C, Chinnasamy Naidu Road, (14.7) 2007
New Sidhapudur , Coimbatore-641 044
11. KAMCO SUPER DI Kerala Agro Machinery Corporation Ltd., 8.8 PT-88/1075 February,
Athani, District—Ernakulam-783 585 (12.0) 2007
(Kerala)
12. SHRACHI KUBOTA DF 12 L Bengal Tools Limited (Agro Division), 8.7 PT-89/1077 March,
Todi Mansion, P-15, India Exchange (11.8) 2007
Place Extension, Kolkata-700 073
 12 3 4 5 6

78
13. SUN GN 151 DI Rogini Farm Equipments 10.5 PT-91/1085 May, 2007
No. 18, V .C. Ramalingam Street (14.3)
Arcot-632 503
14. MANAM MCF-121 Southern Agro Engine Private Limited, 8.5 PT-01/206 May, 2007
#24 A III Phase, Industrial Estate, (11.6)
Guindy, Chennai-600 032
15. KAVI—GN 15 L Kavi Agro Agency 9.2 PT-92/1095 July, 2007
11 KEMPS Town, Trichi-620 001 (TN) (12.5)
16. SAMRAT GN 121 Universal Engineers & Traders 11.5 PT -93/1103 September ,
Commerce House, 3rd Floor (15.6) 2007
Room No. 6A2, Ganesh Chandra
Avenue, Kolkata-700 013
17. KAVI-F 15 L Kavi Agro Agency 11.0 PT-94/1109 December ,
11 KEMPS Town, Trichi-620 001 (TN) (15.0) 2007
18. KAMCO KMB-200 Kerala Agro Machinery Corporation Ltd. 7.4 PT-3/225 December ,
Athani, District—Ernakulam-783 585 (10.1) 2007
(Kerala)
19. SOHARR GN-121 15-DI Soharr India Agro Division (Reg.), 10.7 PT-4/228 January,
No. 17/B, Kallur Mandli, (14.6) 2008
Industrial Estate, Shivamogga-577 202
(Karnataka State)
12 3 4 5 6

79
20. SHIFENG ANGAD 150 PT SAS Motors Limited, 8.8 PT-81/1034 in conjunction March, 2008
117/A, Sainik Farms, Defence Service (12.0) with PT-95/1119
Enclave, New Delhi-62
21. VIJAY VR-15L Vij ay Engineering & Machinery Company, 10.2 PT-05/233 May , 2008
C-1420, Laxmipuri, Kolhapur-416 002 (13.9)
22. BIRLA HARIT Birla Power Solutions Limited, 8.4 PT-6/241 July, 2008
Village Lal Tappar, P .O. Resham Majri (11.4)
Grant, Dehradun-248 140 (Uttarakhand)
23. GREAVES GS 15 DIL Greaves Cotton Limited, 11.0 PT-8/247 October ,
Agro Equipment Group, P etrol Engines (14.9) 2008
Unit, P .B. No. 892, Old Mahabalipuram
Road, Thoraipakkam, Chennai-600 096
24. RHINO 15 DI Ambica Iron Industries Pvt. Ltd., 10.7 PT-7/246 October ,
1A, Nanda Mullick Lane, (14.5) 2008
Kolkata-700 006
25. DIVYA SHAKTI Chirag Corporation, K olkata (WB) 9.1 PT-09/273 December
(12.4) 2009
26. DRAGON SHAKTI 150 DI M/s. VST Tillers Tractors Limited, 11.0 PT-11/281 April, 2010
P .B. No. 4801, Mahadevpura Post (14.9)
Off. White Field Road, Bangalore-560 048
12 3 4 5 6

80
27. GREAVES GS Greaves Cotton Limited, 10.1 PT-10/28 in conjunction September
Agro Equipment Group, Petrol Engines (13.5) with PT-12/294 2010
Unit, P .B. No. 892, Old Mahabalipuram
Road Thoraipakkam, Chennai-600 096
28. YANMAR SHAKTI Maharashtra Agro Indust ry, 7.8 PT-14/310 March 2011
GN 121 DI Bangalore (Karnataka) (10.6)
29. GREAVES GS 14 DLX Greaves Cotton Limited, 10.1 PT-10/280 in conjunction September
(VARIANT) Agro Equipment Group, Petrol Engines (13.5) with PT-15/316 2010
Unit, P .B. No. 892, Old Mahabalipuram
Road, Thoraipakkam, Chennai-600 096
30. MASCON (MODEL: MS-15L) Mascon Tillers and Tractors 13.99 PT -13/309 March 2011
Kavundathil City Centre, P alakkad City, (10.3)
Palakkad-678 014
31. GANGA (MODEL: GM-16) Ganga Motors 15.35 PT-19/336 October
Farm Equipment Division, 23, Ganesh (11.3) 2011
Chandra Avenue, Kolkata-700 013
32. GANGA Power Tiller Ganga Motors 15.08 PT-20/337 October
(MODEL: ARJUN-GM-15) Farm Equipme nt Division, 23, Ganesh (11.1) 2011
Chandra Avenue, Kolkata-700 013
33. YANMAR SHAKTI-121-DI Maharashtra Agro Industries, Bangalore 11.42 PT-18/335 October
(Karnataka) (8.4) 2011
12 3 4 5 6

81
34. SUNRISE (MODEL: SUNRISE-DI) Sunrise International, Kolkata 13.32 PT-17/334 October
(West Bengal) (9.8) 2011
35. BHIM GANGA SIFANG Ganga Motors Farm Equipment Division 14.95 PT -23/347 February
23, Ganesh Chandra Avenue, Kolkata-700 013 (11.0) 2011
36. SIGMA PLUS V2FM M/s Sigma Power Tiller Private Ltd., 11.4 PT -22/344 January
272, Marshall House, 25, Strand Road, (15.61) 2011
Kolkata (West Bengal)
37. VIJAY SAMURAI PT-03 Southern Agro Engine Private Limited, 9.6 PT-24/352 April
#24A, III Phase, Industrial Estate, (13.15) 2012
Guindy, Chennai-600 032
38. SHRACHI SF-12 Bengal Tools Limited (Agro Division), 8.9 PT -25/356 June 2012
Todi Mansion, P-15, India Exchange Place (12.1)
Extension, Kolkata-700 073
39. Premier Power Tillers Premier Power Equipment & Products 7.8 PT -26/366 September
Garuda 3 PT 1200 D Pvt. Ltd., 37/1-C, (10.5) 2012
Palladam Road, Pappampatti,
Coimbatore-641 016
40. Greaves Power Tillers Greaves C otton Limited 9.0 PT-27-367 September
GS 12 DLX Agro Equipment Group, Petrol Engines (12.1) 2012
Unit, P .B. No. 892, Old Mahabalipuram
Road, Thoraipakkam, Chennai-600 096
12 3 4 5 6

82
41. SARACHI Power Tillers Bengal T ools Limited (Agro Division) 9.8 PT-29/369 October
Champion Todi Mansion, P-15, India Exchange Place (13.1) 2012
Extension, Kolkata-700 073
42. Texmaco Dhanwan DF-12 (BT) M/s. Texmaco Limited, Belgharia Works, 7.9 PT-30/382 February
Belgharia, Kolkata-700 056 (10.7) 2013
43. Shrachi Balwan M/s. Bengal Tools Limited, 2, Jessore 13.9 PT-31/383 February
Road, Dum Dum, Kolkata (WB)-700 028 (18.9) 2013
44. ANAND GN-15L-DI M/s. AR Agro Equipments, 11.1 PT -32/391 March
D.No. FP6/289E, Kadalundi Road, (15.1) 2013
Feroke (P .O.), Kozhikkode-637 631 (Kerala)
45. Shrachi All Rounder M/s. Bengal T ools Limited, 2, Jessore 8.6 PT-3e/392 March
Road, Dum Dum, Kolkata (WB)-700 028 (11.7) 2013
46. Kranti DI 1515 DF M/s. Indtec Elektro Control, 10.1 PT-34/393 April
F-15 Focal Point, Phaghwara Road, (13.7) 2013
Hoshiarpur , Punjab-146 001
47. Kranti DI 1515 GN M/s. Indtec Elektro Control, 9.4 PT-35/394 April
F-15 Focal Point, Phaghwara Road, (12.8) 2013
Hoshiarpur , Punjab-146 001
48. Shrachi Shaktiman M/s. Bengal Tools Limited, 2, Jessore 12.1 PT-36/395 April
Road, Dum Dum, Kolkata (W.B.)-700 028 (16.5) 2013
12 3 4 5 6

83
49. Souza RT 125 DI M/s. Souza Sifang Agro Engg. Pvt. Ltd., 9.6 PT-37/396 April
402, Kailash Tower , 3rd Floor , Above food (13.1) 2013
world, Puttenehalli Road, Yelahanka,
Bangalore-560 064 (Karnataka)
50. SHB DI M/s. Sukhlall Hanumanmall Baid, 12.9 PT-38/98 May
159, Nripendra Narayan Road, P .O. & (17.5) 2013
P .S.: Coochbehar , Distt.: Coochbehar-736 101
(West Bengal)
51. Souza SZ-450 Mini Power M/s. Souza Sifang Agro Engg. Pvt. Ltd., 7.3 PT-39/399 May 2013
Tiller (Tilling Type) 402, Kailash Tower , 3rd Floor , Above food (9.9)
world, Puttenehalli Road, Yelahanka,
Bangalore-560 064 (Karnataka)
52. Kamco KMB 200 (BT) M/s. Kerala Agro Machinery Corpn. Ltd. 6.7 PT-41/403 June 2013
Athani-683 585, Ernakulam (Distt. (Kerala) (9.1)
53. Pace 14 DI M/s. Pace Agro Pvt. Ltd., 401, 4th Floor , 9.0 PT-42/404 June 2013
Rattan Esquire, 14/143, Chunni Ganj, (12.2)
Kanpur (U.P .)-208 001
54. Kalinga Shakthi M/s. Samson Agri P ower Equipments (P) 8.9 PT-43/405 June 2013
KS-125 DI Ltd., 132, Laxmisagar Chhak, Cuttack (12.1)
Road, Bhubaneswar , Odisha
12 3 4 5 6

84
55. Kalinga Shakthi M/s. Samson Agri P ower Equipments (P) 8.3 PT-44/407 July 2013
KS-120 Ltd., 132, Laxmisagar Chhak, Cuttack (11.3)
Road, Bhubaneswar , Odisha
56. Kalinga Shakthi M/s. Samson Agri P ower Equipments (P) 9.6 PT-45/408 July 2013
KS-145 Ltd., 132, Laxmisagar Chhak, Cuttack (11.3)
Road, Bhubaneswar , Odisha
57. Changzhou GN-151 M/s. Associated Agro Machineries, 3/379, 10.9 PT-46/409 July 2013
Thekkekara Building, Karimba (P .O.) (14.8)
Mannarkkad, Palakkad, Kerala-678 597
12 3 4 5 6

85
ANNEXURE III
Details of Number of name of Power Tiller Companies
empenelled by the DAC&FW
No. 13-10/99-M&T (I&P)
Government of India
Ministry of Agriculture
(Deptt. of Agriculture & Cooperation)
Krishi Bhavan, New Delhi-110 001
Dated: the 24th July, 2015
To,
1. The Secretary (Agriculture)
(All States/UTs)
2. Director (Agriculture)
(All States/UTs)
3. Managing Director
(All State Agro Industries Corporations)
4. Director (Agricultural Engineering)
(Government of MP , TN, Chhattisgarh and WB)
Subject: List of Tractors, Power Tillers and Combined Harvesters Tested
by the Farm Machinery Training & Testing Institutes
Sir,
I am directed to invite a reference to this Department’s letter of
even number dated 10th April, 2015 on the subject cited above and
to inform that the list of tractors, power tillers and combine harvesters
tested by the Farm Machinery Training & Testing Institutes have been
updated and the same is uploaded on the website at http://
farmtech.gov.in/hot.hum.
This is for your information and further necessary action in the
matter.
Yours faithfully,
Sd/-
(V .N. Kale)
Additional Commissioner (M&T),
Telefax No. 011-23387200
E-mail: kalevn2000@yahoo.co.in
Copy to: The Director FMTTI, Budni (Madhya Pradesh), Hissar (Haryana),
Garladinne (Andhra Pradesh) and Biswanath Chariali (Assam) for
information.

86
LIST OF POWER TILLERS TESTED AT THE FARM MACHINERY TRAINING & TESTING INSTITUTES
POWER TILLERS — 8 BHP AND ABOVE
Sl.No. Name & Address of Model Max. Test T est Report
Manufacturer Horsepower Report Release
Ps No. (Month and Year)
12 3 4 5 6
1. Texmaco Limited TEXMACO DHANWAN DF-12 10.7 PT-30/382 February 2013
Belgharia works, Kolkata-700056
2. Ganga Motors GANGA SIF ANG GN-121-15 13.6 PT-56/831 in Conjunction February 2012
Farm Equipment Division, 23, with PT-66/880
Ganesh Chandra Avenue,
Kolkata-700013
3. GANGA (MODEL: GM-16) 15.4 PT-19/336 October 2011
GANGA Power Tiller (MODEL : 15.1 PT-20/337 October 2011
ARJUN-GM-15)
4. GANGA SIFANG BHIM 15.0 PT-23/347 February 2012
5. GANGA SIFANG BHIM PLU S 15.0 PT-23/347 in conjunction May 2014
with PT- 59/449

87
6. Greaves Cotton Limited Farm GREAVES GS 15 DIL S 15.4 PT-63/466 September 2014
Equipment Business Petrol Engines
7. Unit F-62 & 63 SIPCOT Industrial GREAVES GS 15 DIL 14.7 PT-65/477 November 2014
Complex Gummidipoondi-601 201
8. GREAVES GS 14 DIL 13.3 PT-61/464 August 2014
9. GREAVES GS 14 DLX 15.2 PT-62/465 September 2014
10. Greaves GS 12 DLX Power Tiller 12.2 PT-27/367 September 2012
11. Souza Sifang Agro Engineering Souza Sifang GN 121(15) Fitted 14.6 PT-80/1013 July 2005
Pvt. Ltd. H.O. 91, Iconet Business with Zhejiang Sifang 251100 AN
Centre, Temple Road, Malleswaram, Diesel Engine
12. Bangalore-560 003 Souza RT 125 DI 13.1 PT-37/396 April 2013
13. SOUZA SZ-450 MINI POWER TILLER 9.9 PT -39/399 May 2013
(TILLING TYPE)
14. Souza SZ-15 Power Tiller 13.9 PT-56/440 March 2014
(Tilling Type)
15. Souza SF-15 Power Tiller (Tilling Type) 14.0 PT-57/441 March 2014
16. Siam Kubota Industry Co. Ltd. SIAM KUBOTA RT-140-DI-RP-80 12.2 PT-16/331 September 2011
(Chennai Liaison Office) Alwarpet,
Chennai-600 018 (T .N.)
12 3 4 5 6

88
17. Indtec Elektro Control F-15, Kranti DI 1515 DF 13.7 PT-34/393 April 2013
Focal Point, Phagwara Road
18. Hoshiarpur-146 001 Kranti DI 1515 GN 12.8 PT-35/394 April 2013
19. Kranti IND-180 13.5 PT-51/418 September 2013
20. Kranti IND-230 13.5 PT-52/419 September 2013
21. Bengal Tools Limited (Agro Division), SHRACHI SF-15 DI 14.7 PT-67/483 January 2015
2 Jessore Road, Dum Dum,
22. Kolkata-700 028 SHRACHI KUBOTA DF 12 L 11.8 PT-89/1077 March 2007
23. SHRACHI SF-12 12.5 PT-25/356 June 2012
24. SHRACHI Champion Power Tiller 13.3 PT-29/369 October 2012
25. SHRACHI Balwan 18.9 PT-31/383 February 2013
26. SHRACHI All Rounder 11.7 PT-33/392 March 2013
27. SHRACHI Shaktiman 16.5 PT-36/395 April 2013
28. SHRACHI Sarpanch 11.6 PT-68/484 January 2015
29. Jayessar Equipment Private Limited, KISAN SAKTHI DI GN 15 L 14.7 PT-86/1071 February 2007
91-C, Chinnasamy Naidu Road,
New Sidhapudur , Coimbatore-641 044
12 3 4 5 6

89
30. Rogini Farm Equipments No. 18, SUN GN 151 DI 14.3 PT-72/495 March 2015
V .C. Ramalingam Street
31. Arcot-632 503 SUN DF-151 DI (Tilling Type) 15.0 PT-71/494 March 2015
32. Southern Agro Engine Private MANAM MCF-121 11.6 PT-01/206 May 2007
Limited, # 24 A III Phase, Industrial
33. Estate, Guindy, Chennai-600 032 VIJAY SAMURAI PT-03 13.1 PT-24/352 April 2012
34. Kavi Agro Agency, 11 KEMPS Town, KAVI GN 15 L 14.8 PT-92/1095 July 2007
Trichi-620 001 (TN)
35. KAVI DF 15 L 15.0 PT-94/1109 December 2007
36. Universal Engineers & Traders SAMRAT GN 121 15.4 PT-93/1103 September 2007
Commerce House, 3rd Floor
Room No. 6 A2, Ganesh Chandra
Avenue, Kolkata-700 013
37. Kerala Agro Machinery Corporation KAMCO KMB-200 9.1 PT -41/403 June 2013
Ltd. Athani, District—
38. Ernakulam-783 585 (Kerala) KAMCO Super DI 12.4 PT-54/426 November 2013
39. SOHARR India Agro Division (Reg.), SOHARR GN-121 15-DI 14.6 PT 4/228 January 2008
No. 17/B, Kallur Mandli, Industrial
Estate, Shivamogga-577 202
(Karnataka State)
12 3 4 5 6

90
40. SAS Motors Limited 117/A, SHIFENG ANGAD 150 PT 12.0 PT-81/1034 in conjunction March 2008
Sainik Farms, Defence Service with PT-95/1119
Enclave, New Delhi-62
41. Vijay Engineering & Machinery VIJAY VR-15L 13.9 PT-05/233 May 2008
Company, C-1420, Laxmipuri,
Kolhapur- 416 002
42. Birla Power Solutions Limited, BIRLA HARIT 11.4 PT-6/241 July 2008
Village Lal Tappar , P .O. Resham
Majri Grant, Dehradun-248 140
(Uttarakhand)
43. Chirag Corporation 33/1, NS Road, DIVYA SHAKTI 12.4 PT -09/273 December 2009
Kolkata-700 001(WB)
44. M/s. VST Tillers Tractors Limited DRAGON SHAKTI 150 DI 15.0 PT-11/281 April 2010
P .B. No. 480, Mahadevpura Post Off.
45. White Field Road, Bangalore-560 048 Mitsubishi Shakti CT 85 8.6 PT -48/412 August 2013
[With VWH Engine]
46. VST Shakti 130DI 12.1 PT-49/413 August 2013
47. Maharashtra Agro Industry # 402, YANMAR SHAKTI GN 121 DI 10.6 PT-14/310 March 2011
4 ALPS, Doddaballapura Road,
48. Yelahanua Bangalore YANMAR SHAKTI-121-DI 11.4 PT-18/335 October 2011
(Karnataka)-560 064
12 3 4 5 6

91
49. Mascon Tillers and Tractors Macson (MODEL : MS-15L) 14.0 PT-13/309 March 2011
Kavundathil City Centre,
Palakkad City, Palakkad-678 014
50. Sunrise International, SUNRISE (MODEL: SUNRISE-DI) 13.3 PT-17/334 October 2011
24 Strand Road Kolkata-700 001
(West Bengal)
51. M/s Sigma Power Tiller Private Ltd. SIGMA PLUS V2 EM 15.5 PT-22/344 January 2012
272, Marshall House, 25, Strand
Road, Kolkata (West Bengal)
52. Premier Power Equipments & Premier Garuda 3 PT 1200 D 10.6 PT-26/366 September 2012
Products Pvt. Ltd 37/1-C, Power Tillers
Palladam Road, Pappampatti,
Coimbatore-641 016
53. M/s. AR Agro Equipments, ANAND GN-15L-DI 15.1 PT-32/391 March 2013
D.No. FP6/289E, Kadalundi Road,
Feroke (P .O.), Kozhikode-637 631
(Kerala)
54. M/s. Sukhlall Hanumanmall Baid, SHB DI 17.5 PT-38/398 May 2013
159, Nripendra Narayan Road,
P .O. & P .S.: Coochbehar , Dist.:
Coochbehar-736 101 (West Bengal)
12 3 4 5 6

92
55. M/s. Samson Agri Power KALINGA SHAKTHI KS - 125 DI 12.1 PT-43/405 June 2013
Equipments (P) Ltd., 132,
56. Laxmisagar Chhak, Cuttack Road, KALINGA SHAKTHI KS 120 11.3 PT-44/407 July 2013
Bhubaneswar , Odisha.
57. KALINGA SHAKTHI KS - 145 13.1 PT-45/408 July 2013
58. M/s. Pace Agro Pvt. Ltd., 401, PACE 14 DI 12.2 PT-42/404 June 2013
4th floor , Rattan Esquire,14/143,
Chunni Ganj, Kanpur (U.P .)-208 001
59. M/s. Associated Agro Machineries, Changzhou GN-151 14.8 PT-46/409 July 2013
3/379, Thekkekara Building,
Karimba (P .O.) Mannarkkad,
Palakkad, Kerala 678 597
60. M/s. Assam Sai Motors Pvt. Ltd., RHINO 15 DI 13.5 PT-64/467 September 2014
1/A, Nanda Mallick Lane,
61. Kolkata 700 006, West Bengal RHINO Super RH 12 DI 13.7 PT-50/417 September 2013
62. M/s. Pagariya Auto Pvt. Ltd., Pagariya 15DI 14.3 PT-53/423 October 2013
Plot No. 3, Pagariya Tower ,
Adalat Road, Aurangabad-431 001,
Maharashtra
12 3 4 5 6

93
63. M/s. Fortune Agro Impex Fortune Fortune FAI- 15 DLX 12.1 PT-96/1396/2013 August 2013
House, No. 343, 9th Block
Kengunte 1st Main Road
(Mallathalli Lake Road)
SIRM Visvesvaraya Layout,
Bangalore-560 056
64. Indra Marshal Power Pvt. Ltd. INDRA MARSHAL 14.7 PT-55/429 December 2013
13-B, Sec-A, Sanwer Road,
Industrial Area, Indore (MP)-452 015
65. BCS India Private Limited, BCS MC 740 8.1 PT -97/1444/2014 July 2014
Vill. Manngarh, P .O. Kohara,
Machiwara Road, Ludhiana,
Punjab-141 112
66. M/s. George Maijo Industries DFAMGC DF-15 DLG 13.7 PT-60/461 July 2014
Pvt. Ltd.
2B, Apex Plaza
5 Nungambakkam High Road
Chennai-600 034
67. Action Construction Equipment Ltd. ACE APT-15 13.9 PT-66/478 December 2014
Dudhola Link Road, Dudhola,
Distt. Palwal-121 102 (Haryana)
12 3 4 5 6

94
68. Kubota Agricultural Machinery India Kubota PEM 140 DI 13.2 PT-77/514 July 2015
Pvt. Ltd., No 15, Medavakkam Road,
Sholinnganallur , Chennai-600119
Tamil Nadu
69. M/s Kirloskar Oil Engines Ltd., Kirloskar KMW Mega-T 15 15.8 PT-78/516 July2 015
(KOEL) Laxmanrao Kirloskar Road,
Khadki, Pune-411003, Maharashtra
POWER TILLERS - BELOW 8 BHP
1. M/s Briggs & Stratton India Private Briggs 3PT 1000D Light Weight 7.6 PT -47/411 August 2013
Limited, 37/1C, Palladam Road, Power Tiller (Tilling type)
Pappampatti, Coimbatore,
Tamil Nadu-641 016
2. Autoprint Machinery Manufacturers Autoprint Terravate PTV 55 G 4.1 PT-70/492 March 2015
Pvt. Ltd., “Kaanchan”, # 9, North Power Tiller (Tilling type)
Huzur Road, Coimbatore-641018
(Tamil Nadu)
3. M/s. Greaves Cotton Ltd. Farm Greaves GS-8 DIL (Tilling type) 7.3 PT-74/508 June 2015
Equipment Business, Petrol Engine
Unit, F62 & 63 SIPCOT Industrial
Complex, Gummidipoondi-601201 T .N.
4. M/s. SAS Motors Ltd., Plot No. 78, Angad 45 PT (Tilling type) 4.8 PT -76/510 June 2015
Sector 3, IMT Manesar ,
Gurgaon-122050, Haryana
12 3 4 5 6

95
No. 13-10/99-M&T (I&P) Vol. II
Government of India
Ministry of Agriculture & Farmers Welfare
Department of Agriculture, Cooperation and Farmers Welfare
(Mechanization & Technology Division)
Room No. 298, Krishi Bhawan, New Delhi
Dated: 10th October , 2016
To,
The Principal Secretary (Agriculture)/Director of Agriculture (to all
States and UTs, Director of Agricultural Engineering (M.P . and T .N.,
Chhattisgarh and WB) and Managing Director (All State Agro
Industries Corporations).
Subject: List of Tractors and Power Tillers tested by Farm Machinery
Training and Testing Institutes.
Sir/Madam,
I am directed to invite a reference to this department’s letter of
even number dated 11.7.2016 on the Subject cited above and to inform
that list of tractors and Power Tiller tested by Farm Machinery Training
and Testing Institutes have been updated and the same have been
uploaded on the website at http://farmech.gov.in/LOE.htm.
2. It is further informed that there are two lists of each machinery
i.e. tractors, and Power Tillers. First List ( Annexure-A) is comprising
of the machinery which are not due for the batch testing and the same
is valid till the further orders whereas the second list ( Annexure-B) is
comprising of the machinery which are due for batch testing and the
manufacturers those who have applied for batch testing and this list
(Annexure-B) will be valid upto 31st March, 2017 only and the same
will be revised after this date based on the testing progress and
performance of these machinery. It is also clarified that Tractors and
Power Tillers which are in Annexure-B are also eligible as like
Annexure- A for Government financial assistant till its validity.
3. This is for your information further necessary action in the
matter.
Yours faithfully,
Enclosed: As above Sd/-
(V .N. Kale)
Additional Commissioner (Machinery)
Telefax: 011-23387200
E-mail: kalevn2000@yahoo.co.in
Copy to: Director , FMTTI, Budni, Hisar , Gariadine and Biswanath Chariali
for information.

96
ANNEXURE A
LIST OF POWER TILLERS TESTED AT THE FARM MACHINERY TRAINING & TESTING INSTITUTES
POWER TILLERS — 8 BHP AND ABOVE
Sl.No. Name & Address of Model Max Test Test Report
Manufacturer Horsepower Report Release
Ps No. (Month and Year)
12 3 4 5 6
1. Texmaco Limited TEXMACO DHANWAN DF-12 10.7 PT-30/382 February 2013
Belgharia Works, Kolkata-700056
2. Ganga Motors GANGA SIFANG BHIM PLUS 15.0 PT-23/347 in conjunction May 2014
Farm Equipment Division, 23, Ganesh with PT-59/449
Chandra Avenue, Kolkata 59/449
3. Greaves Cotton Limited Farm GREAVES GS 15 DILS 15.4 PT-63/466 September 2014
Equipment Business Petrol Engines
4. Unit, F-62 & 63, SIPCOT Industrial GREAVES GS 15 DIL 14.7 PT-65/477 November 2014
Complex Gummidipoondi-601201
5. GREAVES GS 14 DIL 13.3 PT-61/464 August 2014
6. GREAVES GS 14 DLX 15.2 PT-62/465 September 2014
7. Southern Agro Engine Private MANAM MCF—121 12.0 PT-83/583 January 2016
Limited, #24 A III Phase, Industrial
Estate, Guindy, Chennai-600032

97
 8. Kavi Agro Agency, 164, Kumaran Road, KAVI-GN 15L 15.1 PT-79/569 December 2015
Sangiliyandapuram, Main Road
 9. Trichi-620001 (TN) KAVI-DF 15L 14.7 PT-80/570 December 2015
10. Sunrise International, Sunrise-DI 13.2 PT-82/582 January 2016
24, Strand Road, Kolkata-700 001
(West Bengal)
11. Souza Sifang Agro Engineering Pvt. Souza SZ-15 Power Tiller (Tilling 13.9 PT-56/440 March 2014
Ltd., H.O.-91, Iconet Business T ype)
12. Centre, Temple Road, Souza SF-15 Power Tiller (Tilling 14.0 PT-57/441 March 2014
Malleswaram, Bangalore-560 003 T ype)
13. Indtec Elektro Control, Kranti IND-180 13.5 PT-51/418 September 2013
F-15, Focal Point, Phagwara Road,
14. Hoshiarpur-146 001 Kranti IND-230 13.5 PT-52/419 September 2013
15. Bengal Tools Limited (Agro Shrachi SF-15DI 14.7 PT-67/483 January 2015
Division), 2, Jessore Road, Dum
16. Dum, Kolkata-700 028 Shrachi Sarpanch 11.6 PT-68/484 January 2015
17. Sarachi Champion Power Tiller 14.5 PT-88/662 June 2016
18. Rogini Farm Equipments, Sungn 151 DI 14.3 PT-72/495 March 2015
No. 18, V .C. Ramalingam Street,
19. Arcot-632 503 SUNDF-151 DI (Tilling Type) 15.0 PT-71/494 March 2015
 12 3 4 5 6

98
20. Kerala Agro Machinery Corporation KAMCO KMB-200 9.1 PT -41/403 June 2013
Ltd., Athani, District-Ernakulam-
21. 783 585 (Kerala) KAMCO Super DI 12.4 PT-54/426 November 2013
22. M/s. VST Tillers Tractors Limited Mitsubishi Shakti CT85 [with VWH Engine] 8.6 PT -48/412 August 2013
P .B. No. 4801, Mahadevpura Post Off.,
23. White Field Road, Bangalore VST Shakti 130 DI 12.1 PT-49/413 August 2013
24. M/s. Samson Agri Power KALING SHAKTHI KS-120 11.3 PT-44/407 July 2013
Equipments (P) Ltd., 132, Laxmisagar
25. Chhak, Cuttack KALINGA SHAKTHI KS-145 13.1 PT-45/408 July 2013
26. M/s. Associated Agro Machineries, Changzhou GN-151 14.8 PT-46/409 July 2013
3/379, Thekkekara Building,
Karimba (P .O.), Mannarkkad,
Palakkad, Kerala-678 597
27. M/s. Assam Saii Motors Pvt. Ltd., RHINO 15 DI 13.5 PT-64/467 September , 2014
1/A, Nanda Mallick Lane,
28. Kolkata-700 006, West Bengal RHINO Super RH 12 DI 13.7 PT-50/417 September , 2013
29. M/s. Pagariya Auto Pvt. Ltd., Pagariya 15 DI 14.3 PT-53/423 October 2013
Plot No. 3, Pagariya Tower ,
Adalat Road, Aurangabad-431 001,
Maharashtra
12 3 4 5 6

99
30. M/s Fortune Agro Impex Fortune FAI-15 DLX 12.1 PT-96/1396/2013 August 2013
Fortune House No. 343, 9th Block,
Kengunte 1st Main Road,
(Mallathalli Lake Road)
Bangalore-560 056
Government of India, Ministry of Agriculture and Farmers Welfare, Department of Agriculture, Cooperation and Farmers Welfare, M echanisation and
Technology Division.
1 2 3 4         5 6

100
File No. 13-10/99-M&T (I&P)
Government of India
Ministry of Agriculture and Farmers Welfare
(Department of Agriculture, Cooperation and Farmers Welfare)
Krishi Bhawan, New Delhi-110 001
Dated: 5th July, 2017
To,
1. The Secretary (Agriculture)
(All States/UTs)
2. Director (Agriculture)
(All States/UTs)
3. Managing Director
(All State Agro Industries Corporations)
4. Director (Agricultural Engineering)
(Government of MP , TN, Chhattisgarh and WB)
Subject: List of Power Tillers Tested by Farm Machinery Training and
Testing Institutes.
Sir/Madam,
I am directed to invite a reference to this Department’s letter of
even number dated 2 June 2017 regarding updating the list of power
tillers tested by farm machinery training and testing institutes on the
website of this division.
The list of Power tillers has been revised in supersession of all the
previous lists by way of including only those models of power tillers
that are complying with the Comformity of Production (CoP) for mass
emission of exhaust gases and the requirements under Central Motor
Vehicles Rules (CMVR). The power tiller models that were due for
batch testing, but have not undergone batch testing so far , have also
been deleated. The revised list has been uploaded on the website at
http://farmech.gov.in/LOE.htm.
This is for your information and further necessary action in the
matter.
Yours faithfully,
Enclosed: As above Sd/-
(V .N. Kale)
Additional Commissioner (M&T)
Tele: 011-23387200
Copy to: Director , FMTTI, Budni (Madhya Pradesh), Hissar , Garladinne
(Andhra Pradesh) and Biswanath Chariali (Assam) for information.

101
LIST OF POWER TILLERS TESTED AT FARM MACHINERY TRAINING AND TESTING INSTITUTES
Sl.No. Name & Address of Model Max Test T est Report CoP CMVR
Manufacturer Horse Report Release
Power Ps No. (Month and Year)
12 3 4 5 6 7 8
1. M/s. Greaves Cotton Ltd., Greaves GS 15 DIL S 15.4 PT-63/466 September , ARAI/COP-IMP/PT CMVR/PT-14/29/
Thoraipakkam, Chennai-600096 (First Batch Test) 2014 (T rem III)/Greaves 2008-2009
(TN) Cotton-ZS 1100 dated 21/07/2008
A2N/2017-010
05.01.2017
2. Greaves GS14 DIL 13.3 PT-61/464 August, ARAI/COP-IMP/PT CMVR/PT-23/403/
(First Batch Test) 2014 (T rem III)/Greaves 2010-2011 dated
Cotton-GS 14 19.5.2010
DIL/2017-009
dated 05.01.2017
3. M/s. Greaves Cotton Ltd., Greaves Mahabali 14.0 PT -100/742 March, 2017 ARAI/CMVR/PT ICAT/CMVR/A T/1060
72, SIPCOT Industrial, GC 14 DI (Trem III)/GC Greaves Mahabali
Complex, Ranipet, (ICT) 14 DI/2017-038 GC 14 DI/M-0495
Tamil Nadu-632403 dated 15.02.2017 dated 31.03.2017
4. Greaves Bahubali 13.6 PT -104/759 May , 2017 ARAI/CMVR/PT ICAT/CMVR/A T/1059
GC 15 DI (ICT) (Trem III)/GC Greaves Bahubali
15 DI/2017-041 GC15DI/M-0496
dated 16.2.2017 dated 31.03.2017
Government of India, Ministry of Agriculture and farmers welfare, Department of Agriculture, Cooperation and farmers Welfare, M echanisation and Technology Division.

102
5. M/s. Southern Agro Engine Manam MCF-121 12.0 PT-83/583 January, 2017 COP [Bharat (Trem) CMVR/PT-13/28/
Pvt. Ltd., #24S, III Phase, (First Batch Test) Stage III]-PT/ELTR/ 2008-2009
Industrial Estate, Guindy, 2016-2017/634 dated 17.07.2008
Chennai-32 dated 1.3.2017
6. M/s. Chirag Corporation, Divya Shakti Power 12.6 PT-81/581 January, 2016 ICAT/CMVR/PT CMVR/PT-29/525/
320, Marshall House, 33/1 Tiller (Trem III)/HZS 2011-2012
N.S. Road, Kolkata, (First Batch Test) 11000 N/M-1165 dated 12/01/2012
(West Bengal)-700001 dated 27.06.2017
7. M/s. Sunrise International, Sunrise DI 13.2 PT-82/582 January, 2016 ICAT/CMVR/PT CMVR/PT-25/449/
24, Strand Road, Kolkata (First Batch Test) (Trem III)/PT 2010-2011
(West Bengal)-700 001 11000/M-1012 dated 05.10.2010
dated 20.06.2017
8. M/s. Bengal Tools Limited Shrachi SF-15DI 14.7 PT-67/483 January, 2015 ARAI/COP/PT CMVR/PT-06/10/
(Agro Div .), 2, Jessore (First Batch Test) (Trem III)/Bengal 2008-2009
Road, Dum Dum, Kolkata Tools-ZS 1100/ dated 22.05.2008
(West Bengal)-700028 2017-083
dated 1.2.2017
9. Shrachi All Rounder , 11.8 PT-94/710 November , 2016 ARAI/COP/PT CMVR/PT-32/1117/
(First Batch Test) (Trem III)/ 2017-2018
Bengal Tools-RT dated 30.05.2017
120 PLUS+/2017-
082 dated
1.2.2017
12 3 4 5 6 7 8

103
10. M/s. Kerala Agro Machinery KAMCO KMB-200 9.1 PT -41/403 June, 2013 ARA I/COP/PT CMVR/PT-21/
Corpn., Ltd., Athani-683585, (First Batch T est) (Trem III)/KAMCO 2007-2008
Ernakulam Distt. (Kerala) (Kanikode)-ER90/ 24.3.2008
2016-649
dated 30.12.2016
11. KAMCO Super DT 12.4 PT-54/426 November , 2013 ARA I/COP/PT CMVR/PT -19/
(Base model is (Trem III)/KAMCO 2007-2008
KAMCO KMB 200 DI) DI 120/2016- dated 19.3.2008
650
12. M/s. VST Tillers Tractors MITSUBISHI Shakti 8.6 PT -48/412 August, 2013 ARA I/COP/PT CMVR/PT-04/08/
Ltd., P .B. No. 4801, CT85 (with VWH (Trem III)/VST 2008-2009
Mahadevapura Post, Engine) Tiller-VWH dated 13.05.2008
Whitefield Road, Bangalore-48 (First Batch Test) 120/2017-084
dated 1.2.2017
13. VST Shakti 130 DI 12.1 PT-49/413 August, 2013 ARA I/COP/PT CMVR/PT-20/
(First Batch Test) (Trem III)/VST 2007-2008
Tiller-130 DI/ daetd 24.3.2008
2017-080
dated 30.1.2017
14. VST Shakti 1350 DI- 13.3 PT-89/705 November , 2016 ARAI/CMVR/PT MVR/PT-31/
Ultra (ICT) (Trem III)/VST 1116/2017-2018
135 DI/2017-049 dated 29.5.2017
dated 20.2.2017
Government of India Ministry of Agriculture and Farmers Welfare, Department of Agriculture Cooperation and Farmer’s Welfare, Me chanisation and Technology, Division.
12 3 4 5 6 7 8

104
15. VST Shakti 135 DI- 12.8 PT-90/706 November , 2016 ARAI/CMVR/PT CMVR/PT-34/1131/
ULTRA, S (ICT) (Trem III)/VST 2017-2018
135 DI/2017-168 dated 9.6.2017
dated 29.5.2017
16. VST Shakti 130 DI. S 12.2 PT-91/707 November , 2016 ARAI/CMVR/PT CMVR/PT-35/1132/
(ICT) (Trem III)/VST 2017-2018
130 DI/2017-167 dated 9.6.2017
dated 29.5.2017
17. VST Shakti 072 7.6 PT-92/708 November , 2016 ARAI/CMVR/PT CMVR/PT-30/1115/
(ICT) (Trem III)/VST 2017-2018
072/2017-133 dated 29.5.2017
dated 26.4.2017
18. M/s. Assam Sail Motors Pvt. Rhino 15 DI 13.5 PT-64/467 September , 2014 ICAT/COP/PT CMVR/PT-18/43/
Ltd., 1/A, Nanda Mallick (First Batch Test) (Trem III)/HZS 2008-2009
Lane, Kolkata-700 006, 11000 N/M-0458 dated 29.9.2008
West Bengal dated 29.3.2017
19. M/s. Geroge Maijo DFAMGC 13.7 PT-60/461 July, 2014 JCAT/CMVR/PT CMVR/PT-36/1138/
Industries Pvt. Ltd., DF-15 DLG (Trem III)/E HZS 2017-2018
2B, Apex Plaza, (ICT) 1105 N/M-0842 dated 16.6.2017
5 Nungambakkam High Road, dated 12.6.2017
Chennai-600 034
12 3 4 5 6 7 8

105
20. M/s. Kubota Agricultural KUBOTA PEM 140 DI 13.2 PT-77/514 July, 2015 ARAI/COP [Bharat CMVR/PT-37/1139/
Machinery India Pvt. Ltd., (ICT) (Trem) Stage III]- 2017-2018
No. 15, Madavakkam Road, PT/ELTR/2016- dated 16.6.2017
Sholinganallur, Chennai-600 119 2017/725
(TN) dated 1.4.2017
21. M/s. Kirloskar Oil Engines K irloskar KMWMEGA-T 15.8 PT-78/516 July, 2015 ARA I/COP/PT RAKN 0119
Ltd. (KOEL), Laxmanrao 15 (ICT) (Trem III)/KOEL dated 23.9.2015
Kirloskar Road, Khadki, (Kagal)- Issued by CIRT
Pune-411 003 (Maharashtra) P1000/2017-092 Pune
dated 3.2.2017
22. M/s. Indra Marshal Power Indra Marshal 14.1 PT-99/741 March, 2017 CFMTTI/EC/TA/IML CMVR/PT-33/1130/
Pvt. Ltd., 13/B, Industrial Area, (First Batch Test) 1100/26/2017 2017-2018
Sector A, Sanwer Road, dated 15.6.2017 dated 7.6.2017
Indore, Madhya Pradesh-452 015
23. Samyak Motors Pvt. Ltd., Samyak ST 960 12.2 PT -103/751 April, 2017 ICAT/CMVR/PT ICA T/CMVR/AT/80/
3/34, C, Athipalayam Main Road, (ICT) (Trem III) SE 120DI/ 227/ST960/M-1017
Coimbatore, Tamil Nadu-641 110 M0803 dated dated 20.6.2017
31 May 2017
12 3 4 5 6 7 8

106
13-10/99-M&T (I&P)
Department of Agriculture & Cooperation
(Mechanization & Technology Division)
Krishi Bhawan, New Delhi-110001
Dated : the 1st January, 2018
To,
1. The Secretary (Agriculture)
(All States and UTs)
2. Director (Agriculture)
(All States and UTs)
3. Managing Director
(All State Agro Industries Corporations)
4. Director (Agriculture Engineering)
(Government of MP , TN, Chhattisgarh and WB)
Subject: List of Power Tillers tested by Farm Machinery Training and
Testing Institutes
Sir/Madam,
I am directed to invite a reference to this Department’s letter of
even number dated 5th July, 2017 regarding updating the list of Power
Tiller tested by Farm Machinery Training and Testing Institutes on the
website of this Division.
The list of Power Tillers has been revised in supersession of all the
previous lists by way of including only those MOELS OF POWER TILLER
THAT ARE COMPLYING WITH THE Conformity of production (CoP)/TA for
mass emission of exhaust gases and the requirements under Central
Motor Vehicles Rules (CMVR). The Power Tiller models that were due for
batch testing, but have not undergone batch testing so far , have also
been deleated. The revised list has been uploaded on the website at
http://farmech.gov.in/LOE.htm.
This is for your information and further necessary action in the
matter.
Yours faithfully,
Sd/-
(V .N. Kale)
Additional Commissioner (M&T)
Tele: 011-23387200
E-mail: kalevn2000@yahoo.co.in
Copy to: Director, FMTTI, Budni, Hissar, Gariadinee and Biswanath Chariali
- for information

107
List of tested Power Tillers:
Sl. Name and Address of Model Max Horse Test Report Test Report Type Approval/COP CMVR
No. Manufacturer power Ps No. R elease
(Month and
Year)
12 3 4 5 6 7 8
1. M/s Greaves Cotton Ltd., GREAVES GS 15 DILS 15.4 PT-63/466 September , 2014 ARAI/COP-IMP/PT (Tre m III)/ CMVR/PT-14/29/2008-2009/
Thoraipakkam, Chenna i- (First Batch Test) GREAVES COTTON-25 2008-2009
600 096 (TN) 1100N A2N/2017-010 05.01.2017 dated 21.07.2008
2.         -do- GREAVES GS14 DIL 13.3 PT-61/464 A ugust, 2014 ARAI/COP-IMP/PT (T ream III)/ CMVR/PT-23/403/2010-2011
(First Batch Test) GREAVES COTTON-GS14 dated 19.05.2010
DIL/2017-009
dated 05.01.2017
3. M/s Greaves Cotton Ltd., 72, GREAVES MAHABALI GC 14.0 PT-100/742 March, 2017 ARAI/CMVR/PT (Trem III)/ ICA T/CMVR/AT/1060
SIPCOT Industrial Complex, 14 DI (ICT) GC 14DI/2017-038 GC14DI/
Ranipet, Tamil Nadu-632 403 dated 15.02.2017 M-0495 dated 31.03.2017
4.          -do- GREAVES BAHUBALI GC 15 DI 13.6 PT-104/759 May, 2017 ARAI/CMVR/PT (Trem III)/ ICA T/CMVR/AT/1059
(ICT) GC 15DI/2017-041 Greaves Bahubali GC15
dated 16.02.2017 DI/M-0496 dated 31.03.2017
5. M/s Southern Agro Engine Pvt. MANAM MCF-121 12.0 PT -83/583 January, 2016 COP (Bharat (Trem) Stage III) CMVR/PT-13/28/2008-2009
Ltd., 24A, III Phase, Industrial (First Batch Test) PT/ELTR/2016-2017/634 dated 17.07.2008
Estate, Guindy, Chennai-32 dated 01.03.2017
6. M/s Chirag Corporation, Divya Shakti Power T iller 12.6 PT-81/581 January, 2016 ICA T/CMVR/PT (Trem III)/ CMVR/P T-29/525/2011-2012
320, Marshall House, 33/1, (First Batch Test) HZS 1100 N/M-1165 dated 12.01.2012

108
N.S. Road, Kolkata-700 001, dated 27.06.2017
West Bengal (New type approval)
7. M/s Sunrise International, 24, SUNRISE DI 13.2 PT-82/582 January, 2016 ICA T/CMVR/PT (Trem III)/ CMVR/PT -25/449/2010-2011
Strand Road, Kolkata (WB)- (First Batch Test) PT1100/M-1012 dated 05/10/2010
700 001 dated 20.06.2017
(New Type approval)
8. M/s Bengal Tools Limited, SMRACHI SF-15DI 14.7 PT-67/483 January, 2015 ARAI/COP/PT (Trem III)/ CMVR/PT-06/10/2008-2009
(Agro Div .), 2, Jessore Road, (First Batch Test) Bengal Tools-25 1100/2017-083 dated 22.05.2008
Dum Dum, Kolkata (W.B.) dated 01.02.2017
700 028
9.          -do- Shrachi Ali Rounder 11.8 PT -94/710 November , 2016 ARAI/COP/PT (Trem III)/ CMVR/PT-32/1117/2017-2018
(First Batch Test) Bengal Tools-RT 120 Plus/ dated 30.05.2017
2017-082 dated 01.02.2017
10. M/s Kerala Agro Machinery KAMCO KMB-200 9.1 PT -41/403 June, 2013 ARAI/COP/PT (Trem III)/ CMVR/PT -21/2007-2008
Corpn. Ltd., Athani-683585, (First Batch Test) KAMCO (Kanjikode) ER 90/ dated 24.03.2008
Ernakulam Distt- Kerala 2016-649 dated 30.12.2016
11.           -do- KAMCO Super DI (Base Model 12.4 PT-54/426 November , 2013 ARAI/COP/PT  (Trem III)/ CMVR/PT-19/2007-2008
is KAMCO KMB 200 DI) KAMCO-DI 120/2016-650 dated 19.03.2008
(First Batch Test) dated 30.12.2016
12. M/s VST Tillers Tractors Ltd., MITSUBISHI SHAKTI CT85 8.6 PT -46/412 August, 2013 ARAI/COP/PT ( Tream III) VS T CMVR/PT-04.08.2008-2 009
P .B. No,. 4801, Mahadevapura (with VWH Engine) Tiller VWH 120/2017-084 dated 13.05.2008
Post, Whitefield Road, (First Batch Test) dated 01.02.2017
Bangalore-48
12 3 4 5 6 7 8

109
13.       -do- VST Shakti 130DI 12.1 PT-49/413 August, 2013 ARAI/COP/PT  ( T rem III) VST CMVR/PT-20/2007-2008
(First Batch T est) Tiller-130 DI/2017-080 dated 24.03.2008
dated 30.01.2017
14.       -do- VST Shakti 135 DI-ULTRA (ICT) 13.3 PT-89/705 November , 2016 ARAI/CMVR/PT ( Trem III) VST CMVR/PT-31/1116/2017-2018
Tiller-135 DI/2017-049 dated dated 29.05.2017
dated 20.02.2017
15.       -do- VST Shakti 135 DI-ULTRA S (ICT) 12.8 PT-90/706 November , 2016 ARAI/CMVR/PT ( Trem III) VST CMVR/PT-34/1131/2017-2018
Tiller-135 DI/2017-168 dated 09.06.2017
dated 29.05.2017
16.       -do- VST Shakti 130 DI S (ICT) 12.2 PT-91/707 November , 2016 ARAI/CMVR/PT ( Trem III) VST CMVR/PT-35/11132/2017-2018
Tiller-130 DI/2017-167 dated dated 09.06.2017
29.05.2017
17.       -do- VST Shakt i 072 (ICT) 7.6 PT -92/708 November , 2016 ARAI/CMVR/PT (Trem III)/VST CMVR/PT-30/1115/2017-2018
072/2017-133 dated 26.04.2017 dated 29.05.2017
18.       -do- VST Shakti 8.6 PT-105/782 August, 2017 ARAI/COP/PT (Trem III)/VST CMVR/PT-38/1163/2017-2018
VWH 120 (VARIANT) Tiller-VWH 120/2017-084 dated 01.12.2017
dated 01.02.2017
19. M/s Assam Sail Motors Pvt. Ltd., RHINO 15 DI 13.5 PT-64/467 September , 2014 ICAT/COP/PT (Trem II I) HZS CMVR/PT-18/43/2008-2009
I/A, Nanda Mallick Lane, (First Batch T est) 1100 N/M-0458 dated 29.09.2008
Kolkata-700 006, West Bengal dated 29.03.2017
12 3 4 5 6 7 8

110
20. M/s Kubota Agricultural Machinery KUBOTA PEM 140 DI (ICT) 13.2 PT-77/514 July, 2015 ARAI COP (Bharat (T rem) CMVR /PT-37/1139/2017-2018
India Pvt. Ltd., No. 15, Stage III)PT/ELTR/2016-2017/725 dated 16.06.2017
Madavakkam Road, dated 01.04.2017
Sholinganallur , Chennai-600 119 (TN)
21. M/s Kirloskar Oil Engines Ltd. Kirloskar KMWMEGA-T  15 (ICT) 15.8 PT-78/516 Ju ly , 2015 ARAI/COP/PT (Trem III) KOEL RAKN 0119 dated 23.09.2015
(KOEL), Laxmanrao Kirloskar Road, (Kagal) P1000/2017-092 dated issued by CIRT Pune
Khadki, PUNE-411 001 03.02.2017
(Maharashtra)
22. M/s Samyak Motors Pvt. Ltd., Samyak ST 960 (ICT) 12.2 PT-103/751 April, 2017 ICAT/CMVR/PT (TREM III)/ ICA T/CMVR/AT/80/227/ST
3/34, C, Athipalayam Main Road, SE120DI/MD603 dated 960/M-1017 dated
Coimbatore, Tamilnadu-641 110 31.05.2017 20.06.2017
23. M/s Indtec Electro Control, Kranti 1ND-180 12.6 PT-107/792 September , 2017 (Trem III)/PT KT-180/M-1183 ICA T/CMVR/PT/606/KRANTI-
D19B, Focal Point, Phagwara (First Batch Test) dated 05.07.2017 IND-180/M-2019 dated
Road, Hosiarpur Punjab-146001 (New Type approval) 20.06.2017
24. M/s George Maijo Industries Pvt. Ltd. DF AMGC 13.7 PT-60/461 July, 2014 ICAT/CMVR/PT (T rem III)/E CMVR /PT-36-1138/2017-2018
2B, Apex Plaza, 5 Nungambakkam DF-15 DLG HZS 1105 N/M-0842 dated dated 16.06.2017
High Road, Chennai-600 034 (ICT) 12.06.2017
The manufacture has (First Type approval)
applied for Batch Test
25. M/s Indra Marshal Power Pvt. Ltd., Indra Marshal 14.1 PT -99/741 March, 2017 CFMTTI/EC/TA/IML CMVR/PT -33/1130/2017-2018
13/B, Industrial Area, Sector-A, (First Batch Test) 1100/26/2017 dated 07.06.2017
Sanwer Road, Indore, dated 15.06.2017
Madhya Pradesh-452015 (First Type Approval)
12 3 4 5 6 7 8

111
ANNEXURE III
Information on Power Tiller’s Companies empanelled by DAC&FW w.e.f. 1.1.2018
Sl.No. Name of Company Address Whether Manufacturer/ Annual Type of Certification furnished
Importer Production/ before empanelment
Import
capacity of
Power tiller
12 3 4 5 6
1. Ms. Greaves Cotton Ltd. 72, SIPCOT Industrial Complex, Importer 2828 • Initial & Batch Commercial Testing,
Ranipet, Tamil Nadu-632 403 • Type approval/COP of engines
• CMVR Certification of Power tiller models
2. M/s. Chirag Corporation 320, Marshall House, 33/1, Importer 620 • Initial & Batch Commercial Testing,
N.S. Road, Kolkata, • Type approval/COP of engines
West Bengal-700 001 • CMVR Certification of Power tiller models
3. M/s. Sunrise International 24, Strand Road, Kolkata, Importer 132 • Initial & Batch Commercial Testing,
West Bengal-700 001 • Type approval/COP of engines
• CMVR Certification of Power tiller models
4. M/s. Indra Marshal Power 13/B, Industrial Area, Sector A, Importer 136 • Initial & Batch Commercial Testing,
Pvt. Ltd. Sanwer Road, Indore, • Type approval/COP of engines
Madhya Pradesh-452 015 • CMVR Certification of Power tiller models
5. M/s. Indtec Electro Control D-19B, Focal Point, Hosiarpur Importer 3000 • Initial & Batch Commercial Testing,
Punjab-146 001 • Type approval/COP of engines
• CMVR Certification of Power tiller models

112
6. M/s. Southern Agro Engine #24A, III Phase, Industrial Estate, Importer 400-500 • Initial & Batch Commercial Testing,
Pvt. Ltd. Guindy, Chennai-32 • Type approval/COP of engines
• CMVR Certification of Power tiller models
7. M/s. Bengal Tools Limited, 2, Jessore Road, Dum Dum, Importer 1250 • Initial & Batch Commercial Testing,
(Agro Div.) Kolkata- (W.B.)-700 028 • Type approval/COP of engines
• CMVR Certification of Power tiller models
8. M/s. Kerala Agro Machinery Athani-683585, Ernakulam Manufacturer 9984 • Initial & Batch Commercial Testing,
Corpn. Ltd. Distt. (Kerala) • Type approval/COP of engines
• CMVR Certification of Power tiller models
9. M/s. VST Tillers P .B. No. 4801, Mahadevapura Post, Manufacturer 60000 • Initial & Batch Commercial Testing,
Tractors Ltd. Whitefield Road, Bangalore-48 • Type approval/COP of engines
• CMVR Certification of Power tiller models
10. M/s. Assam Sail 1/A, Nanda Mallick Lane, Importer 600 • Initial & Batch Commercial Testing,
Motors Pvt. Ltd. Kolkata-700 006, West Bengal • Type approval/COP of engines
• CMVR Certification of Power tiller models
11. M/s. Kubota Agricultural No. 15, Madavakkam Road, Importer 400-450 • Initial & Batch Commercial Testing,
Machinery India Pvt. Ltd. Sholinganallur , Chennai-600 119 • Type approval/COP of engines
(T .N.) • CMVR Certification of Power tiller models
12. M/s. Kirloskar Oil Laxmanrao Kirloskar Road, Manufacturer 2408 • Initial & Batch Commercial Testing,
Engines Ltd. (KOEL) Khadki, Pune-411 003 • Type approval/COP of engines
(Maharashtra) • CMVR Certification of Power tiller models
12 3 4 5 6

113
13. Samyak Motors Pvt. Ltd. 3/34 C, Athipalayam Main R oad, Manufacturer 50 • Initial & Batch Commercial Testing,
Coimbatore, Tamil Nadu-641 110 • Type approval/COP of engines
• CMVR Certification of Power tiller models
14. M/s. George Maljo 2B, Apex Plaza, 5 Nungambakkam Importer 600-700 • Initial & Batch Commercial Testing,
Industries Pvt. Ltd. High Road, Chennai-600 034 • Type approval/COP of engines
• CMVR Certification of Power tiller models
12 3 4 5 6

114
12 Chaitra, 1940 (Saka) Standing Committee on Agriculture.
APPENDIX I
STANDING COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE
(2015-16)
MINUTES OF THE TWENTY SEVENTH SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE
The Committee sat on Tuesday, the 12th July, 2016 from 1100
hours to 1310 hours in Committee Room ‘E’, Parliament House Annexe,
New Delhi.
PRESENT
Shri Hukm Deo Narayan Yadav —  Chairperson
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Janardan Mishra
3. Shri Mukesh Rajput
4. Shri Ajay Nishad
5. Shri Satyapal Singh (Sambhal)
6. Smt. Raksha Nikhil Khadse
7. Md. Badaruddoza Khan
8. Dr. Tapas Mandal
9. Shri C.L. Ruala
Rajya Sabha
10. Shri Janardan Dwivedi
11. Sardar Sukhdev Singh Dhindsa
12. Shri Mohd. Ali Khan
13. Shri Ram Nath Thakur
14. Shri Vinay Katiyar
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Shri Arun K. Kaushik — Director

115
2. Shri C. Vanlalruata — Deputy Secretary
WITNESSES
MINISTRY OF AGRICULTURE & FARMERS WELFARE
(DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE, COOPERATION AND FARMERS
WELFARE)
1. Shri S.K. Pattnayak Secretary, DAC & FW, Ministry of
Agriculture and Farmers Welfare
2. Shri Jalaj Srivastava Additional Secretary, DAC & FW,
Ministry of Agriculture and Farmers
Welfare
3. Shri Ashwani Kuamr Joint Secretary, DAC&FW, Ministry
of Agriculture and Farmers’ Welfare
4. Shri K. Alagusundaram Deputy Director-General, ICAR
5. Shri K.K. Singh Assistant Director General, ICAR
6. Shri V.N. Kale Additional Commissioner,
(Machinery) Ministry of Agriculture
and Farmers Welfare
2. At the outset, the Chairperson welcomed the Members of the
Committee to the sitting convened for briefing on ‘Variance in Cost and
Quality of Agricultural Tools and Implements Being Provided to the
Farmers under Rashtriya Krishi Vikas Yojana (RKVY) and Problems Being
Faced by the Farmers Due to Imported Power Tillers — A Review ’.
Thereafter , the representatives of Ministry of Agriculture and Farmers
Welfare (Department of Agriculture, Cooperation and Farmers Welfare)
were ushered in. After welcoming the representatives of the Ministry
of Agriculture and Farmers Welfare to the sitting, the Chairperson
apprised them of the provisions of the Directions 55(1) and 58 of the
Directions by the Speaker , Lok Sabha regarding confidentiality of the
proceedings.
3. After the witnesses introduced themselves, the Chairperson
initiated the discussion which was taken forward by the representatives
of the Department and the Members of the Standing Committee.
Thereafter , the Chairperson and the Members of the Committee raised
several issues/points as briefly mentioned below and sought clarification/
information of the Department thereon:
I. Need for uniformity among States in subsidy being provided
for agricultural tools and implements;
II. Need to provide freedom of choice to the farmers while

116
procuring agricultural tools and implements;
III. Need to conduct a study on quality of material used in
indigenous tillers vis-a-vis imported tillers;
IV . Need to assess whether the farmers are actually getting the
benefits of the subsidy provided under RKVY;
V. Reasons for difference between market price of Chinese Power
Tillers and the rate at which it is provided to the farmers
through subsidy;
VI. Need to address issues pertaining to non-availability of spares
of imported Chinese Power Tillers;
VII. List of ongoing Plans/Schemes by the Ministry be made
available to the public representatives ( i.e. MPs/MLAs);
VIII. Need to identify and eliminate lacunae and drawbacks in the
Scheme for providing subsidy to the farmers;
IX. Reasons for non utilization of Central funds by the State
Governments;
X. Steps taken to prohibit middlemen and agricultural machinery
sellers from availing the benefits of subsidy meant for
farmers;
XI. Need to transfer subsidy directly to the farmers account
through Direct Benefit Transfer Scheme;
XII. Engineering Division, ICAR, to develop agricultural tools and
implements for the farmers;
XIII. Need to promote and improve design/quality of indigenous
power tillers;
XIV . Agricultural tools and implements to be manufactured based
on suitability of soil;
XV . Need to identify the brands/make of indigenous as well as
imported agricultural tools and implements to provide subsidy
under RKVY;
XVI. Steps to be taken to promote Custom Hire Centres in the
country;
XVII. Need to formulate policy to make indigenous agri-implements
cost competitive;
XVIII. Need to constitute a Committee at District level comprising
of public representatives and representatives from farming

117
community to assess the implementation of Scheme;
XIX. Emphasis to be given on durability of equipments procured
by the farmers;
XX. Need to study and adopt Odisha model of providing subsidy
to the farmers for purchase of agricultural tools and
implements;
4. The Representatives of the Department responded to most of the
queries raised by the Members. The Chairperson then thanked the
witnesses for sharing valuable information with the Committee on the
subject and directed them to send, in writing, the requisite information
in points/items, which was not readily available with them to the
Secretariat of the Committee at the earliest.
5. A copy of verbatim record of the proceedings has been kept
separately.

118
The Committee then adjourned.
APPENDIX II
STANDING COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE
(2016-17)
MINUTES OF THE SEVENTEENTH SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE
The Committee sat on Wednesday, the 05th April, 2017 from
1500 hours to 1645 hours in Committee Room ‘B’, Basement, Parliament
House Annexe, New Delhi.
PRESENT
Shri Hukm Deo Narayan Yadav —  Chairperson
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Sanganna Karadi
3. Md. Badaruddoza Khan
4. Dr. Tapas Mandal
5. Shri Janardan Mishra
6. Shri Neiphiu Rio
7. Shri Satyapal Singh (Sambhal)
Rajya Sabha
8. Shri Meghraj Jain
9. Shri Modh. Ali Khan
10. Shri Ram Nath Thakur
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Shri U.B.S. Negi — Joint Secretary
2. Shri Arun K. Kaushik — Director
3. Smt Juby Amar — Additional Director

119
4. Shri C. Vanlalruata — Deputy Secretary
WITNESSES
Ministry of Agriculture and Farmers Welfare
(Department of Agriculture, Cooperation and Farmers Welfare &
Department of Agricultural Research
and Education)
1. Dr . S.K. Pattanayak — Secretary
2. Shri Jalaj Shrivastava — Additional Secretary
3. Dr . S.K. Malhotra — Agriculture Commissioner
4. Smt. Neerja Adidam — Joint Secretary
5. Dr. B. Rajender — Joint Secretary
6. Dr . Shakil P . Ahammed — Joint Secretary
7. Shri Ashwani Kumar — Joint Secretary
8. Dr. K.K. Singh — Assistant Director General
(Farm Engg.), ICAR
2. At the outset the Chairperson welcomed the representatives of
the Ministry of Agriculture and Farmers Welfare (Department of
Agriculture, Cooperation and Farmers Welfare and the Department of
Agricultural Research and Education) to the meeting convened to have
evidence on the Subject “Variance in Cost and Quality of Agricultural
Tools and Implements Being Provided to the Farmers under Rashtriya
Krishi Vikas Yojana (RKVY) and Problems Being Faced by the Farmers
Due to Imported Power Tillers — A Review ”.
3. After the introduction, one of the representatives of the
Department made a power point presentation in connection with their
evidence on the Subject— “Variance in Cost and Quality of Agricultural
Tools and Implements Being Provided to the Farmers under Rashtriya
Krishi Vikas Yojana (RKVY) and Problems being Faced by the Farmers
due to Imported Power Tillers — A Review ” covering inter alia the
following points:—
(i) Market price and the cost-price of subsidized Chinese Power
Tillers;
(ii) Norms for the price of power tiller under the schemes of
mechanization;
(iii) Constitution of Expert Committee to study the issues relating
to indigenous and imported power tillers;

120
(iv) Recommendations of Expert Committee on power tillers; and
(v) Action taken/initiated by DAC & FW on the recommendations
of the Expert Committee.
4. Thereafter , the Chairperson initiated the discussion which was
taken forward by the representatives of the Department and the Members
of the Standing Committee. The Committee raised several issues/points
which have been briefly mentioned below and sought opinion of the
Department on the same:
(i) Comparative features of Domestic and Chinese power tillers;
(ii) Need for certification of power tiller only after it is found
suitable for all soil types;
(iii) Poor functional performance of Chinese power tillers and
piling up of large number of non-functional Chinese power
tillers in many States;
(iv) Purchase of Chinese power tillers in different States and
their working condition;
(v) Marketing of Chinese power tillers in different company name
and indigenous brand names;
(vi) Need for fixing minimum percentage of cost as subsidy for
agriculture implements/power tillers;
(vii) Compensation to farmers who incurred financial loss due to
poor functional performance of Chinese power tillers
purchased on subsidy;
(viii) Strengthening of certification process so as to prevent sale
of substandard Chinese power tillers under mechanization
schemes/RKVY;
(ix) Underutilization of RKVY funds for farm mechanization
programmes;
(x) Reasons for low cost of imported power tillers in comparison
to indigenous power tillers;
(xi) R easons for meager difference in the cost of subsidized power
tiller and the cost of power tiller sold in open market in
many States;
(xii) Steps needed to ensure that benefits under the Govt.’s subsidy
scheme reaches the targeted persons;
(xiii) Non-availability of spare parts for Chinese power tillers; and
(xiv) Need to constitute a Committee to look into the issues
relating to variance in cost of Power Tillers in different
States/UTs.

121
5. The Representatives of the Department responded to most of
the queries raised by the Members. The Chairperson then thanked the
witnesses for sharing valuable information with the Committee on the
subject and directed them to send, in writing, the requisite information
in Points/items, which was not readily available with them to the
Secretariat of the Committee at his earliest.
A copy of the verbatim proceedings of the sitting has been kept
separately.
The Committee then adjourned.

122
APPENDIX III
STANDING COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE
(2016-17)
MINUTES OF THE TWENTY SIXTH SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE
The Committee sat on Monday, the 21st August, 2017 from
1500 hours to 1635 hours in Committee Room ‘B’, Ground Floor ,
Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
PRESENT
Shri Hukm Deo Narayan Yadav —  Chairperson
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Md. Badaruddoza Khan
3. Dr. Tapas Mandal
4. Shri Devji Patel
5. Shri C.L. Ruala
6. Shri Satyapal Singh (Sambhal)
Rajya Sabha
7. Shri Sambhaji Chhatrapati
8. Shri Janardan Dwivedi
9. Shri Meghraj Jain
10. Shri Modh. Ali Khan
11. Shri Ram Nath Thakur
12. Shri Shankarbhai N. Vegad
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Shri D.S. Malha — Joint Secretary
2. Smt. Juby Amar — Additional Director
3. Shri C. Vanlalruata — Deputy Secretary

123
WITNESSES
Ministry of Agriculture and Farmers Welfare
(Department of Agriculture, Co-operation and Farmers Welfare)
1. Shri Jalaj Shrivastava — Addl. Secretary
2. Shri Paban Kumar Borthakur — Joint Secretary (Admin.)
3. Dr . B. Rajender — Joint Secretary (Crops)
4. Shri Prasanta Kumar Swain — Joint Secretary (RKVY)
5. Shri Ashwani Kumar — Joint Secretary (M&T)
Department of Agricultural Research and Education/
Indian Council of Agricultural Research
1. Dr . K. Alagusundaram — DDG (Engg.) ICAR/DARE
2. Dr . A.K. Singh — DDG (Agril. Extn.) ICAR/DARE
3. Dr. K.K. Singh — ADG (FE), ICAR/DARE
2. At the outset the Chairperson welcomed the representatives of
the Ministry of Agriculture and Farmers Welfare (Department of
Agriculture, Cooperation and Farmers Welfare) to the meeting convened
to have evidence on the Subject “Variance in Cost and Quality of
Agricultural Tools and Implements Being Provided to the Farmers under
Rashtriya Krishi Vikas Yojana (RKVY) and Problems being Faced by the
Farmers due to Imported Power Tillers — A Review ”. The Chairperson
also apprised them about the Confidentiality of the proceedings of the
Committee.
3. After introduction by the representatives of the Ministry of
Agriculture and Farmers Welfare (Department of Agriculture, Cooperation
and Farmers Welfare),the Chairperson, expressed the displeasure of
the Committee over the absence of Secretary for the Sitting and his
belated request for exemption from attending the Sitting of the
Committee.
4. The Chairperson then initiated the discussion which was taken
forward by the representatives of the Department and the Members of
the Standing Committee. The Committee raised several issues relating
to the subject and sought clarifications of the Department on the
same. The Committee inter alia  discussed the following points.
(i) Delay on the part of DAC&FW in implementing the
recommendations of the Expert Committee Report on Power
Tiller;

124
(ii) Purchase of Chinese power tillers in different States and
their working condition;
(iii) Measures to address the piling up of large number of
non-functional Chinese power tillers in many States;
(iv) Revision of BIS Standards for Power Tillers as recommended
by Expert Committee and strengthening of certification
process so as to prevent sale of substandard Chinese power
tillers under mechanization schemes of the Department;
(v) Need for testing of power tiller on different soil conditions
before certifying it as suitable for all soil types;
(vi) Imposing of quota for import of Power Tillers into the Country;
(vii) Need for motivation of States to speed up execution of
activities related to establishment of custom hiring centres
and Farm Machinery Banks under SMAM;
(viii) Need for fixing minimum percentage of cost as subsidy for
agriculture implements/power tillers;
(ix) Delay in developing BIS test code for torture and endurance
test of Power Tillers;
(x) Cost price of Power Tillers in different States and its variation
after implementation of GST;
(xi) Reasons for complicated procedure in sanctioning and grant
of subsidized agricultural mechanization equipment to
farmers;
(xii) Need for exempting Tractor and Power Tillers from toll-tax.
5. The Representatives of the Department responded to most of the
queries raised by the Members. The Chairperson then thanked the
witnesses for sharing valuable information with the Committee on the
subject and directed them to send, in writing, the requisite information
in Points/items at the earliest.
A copy of the verbatim proceedings of the sitting has been kept
separately.
The Committee then adjourned.

125
APPENDIX IV
STANDING COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE
(2017-18)
MINUTES OF THE THIRD SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE
The Committee sat on Thursday, the 02nd November , 2017 from
1100 hours to 1340 hours in Committee Room ‘D’, Parliament House
Annexe, New Delhi.
PRESENT
Shri Hukm Deo Narayan Yadav —  Chairperson
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Sanjay Dhotre
3. Smt. Raksha Khadse
4. Md. Badaruddoza Khan
5. Dr. Tapas Mandal
6. Shri Nityanand Rai
7. Shri Mukesh Rajput
8. Shri Konakalla Narayana Rao
9. Shri Neiphiu Rio
10. Shri C.L. Ruala
11. Shri Arjun Charan Sethi
12. Shri Jai Prakash Narayan Yadav
Rajya Sabha
13. Sardar Sukhdev Singh Dhindsa
14. Shri Janardan Dwivedi
15. Shri Vinay Katiyar
16. Shri Mohd. Ali Khan
17. Shri K.K. Ragesh
18. Shri Ram Nath Thakur
19. Shri R. Vaithilingam
20. Shri Shankarbhai N. Vegad
21. Dr . Chandrapal Singh Yadav

126
SECRETARIAT
1. Shri D.S. Malha — Joint Secretary
2. Shri Arun K Kaushik — Director
3. Smt. Juby Amar — Additional Director
4. Shri C. Vanlalruata — Deputy Secretary
LIST OF W ITNESSES
Ministry of Agriculture and Farmers Welfare
(Department of Agriculture, Co-operation and Farmers Welfare)
1. Dr . S.K. Pattanayak — Secretary
2. Ms. Upma Srivastava — Additional Secretary
3. Shri Ashwani Kumar — Joint Secretary (M&T)
4. Dr. Ashish Kumar Bhutani — Joint Secretary
Department of Agricultural Research and Education/
Indian Council of Agricultural Research
1. Dr . K. Alagusundaram — DDG (Engg.)
2. Dr . A.K. Singh — DDG (Agril. Extn.)
3. Dr . K.K. Singh — ADG (FE)
Ministry of Finance (Department of Financial Services)
Shri Suchindra Misra — Joint Secretary
Department of
Financial Services
National Bank for Agriculture & Rural Development (NABARD)
1. Dr . Harsh Kumar Bhanwala — Chairman, NABARD
2. Shri Asit Kumar Mohanty — Chief General Manager ,
NABARD
RESERVE BANK OF INDIA (RBI)
Smt. Nengneikim Guite — General Manager
2. At the outset the Chairperson welcomed the officers to the
meeting convened to take evidence on the Subject “Variance in Cost
and Quality of Agricultural Tools and Implements being Provided to the
Farmers under Rashtriya Krishi Vikas Yojana (RKVY) and Problems being

127
Faced by the Farmers Due to Imported Power Tillers - A Review ” and
Briefing on the Subject ‘Functioning of Agricultural Credit System in
the Country ’.
3. After the introduction, one of the representatives of the
Department made a power point presentation on the Subject. Thereafter ,
the Chairperson initiated the discussion which was taken forward by
the representatives of the Department and the Members of the Standing
Committee. The Committee raised several issues/points which have
been briefly mentioned below and sought opinion of the Department on
the same:
(i) Total number of Chinese Power Tiller provided to farmers
under the scheme and their current status  i.e.  whether in
working condition or lying defective;
(ii) Subsidy to be either in terms of percentage or cost;
(iii) Testing of Power Tillers not only be restricted to mechanical
aspect, but composition aspect to be checked as well i.e.
quality of material used;
(iv) Circumstance that lead to the sale of Chinese Power Tillers
under the Scheme;
(v) Instances of Indian Firms that have branded Chinese Power
Tillers as their own and action initiated against firms indulging
in such activity;
(vi) Reasons for no after sales service being provided for Chinese
Power Tillers;
(vii) Whether Government has ever considered providing
compensation to farmers whose Chinese Power Tillers have
become defective and non repairable;
(viii) Limiting sale of Chinese Power Tillers to 5%-8% under RKVY;
(ix) Any action plan to regulate cost of domestic Power Tillers so
that they become cost effective;
(x) GST waiver for all agri-implements including Power Tillers;
and
(xi) Benefit of subsidy should go to farmers and not the
Manufacturers.
4. Thereafter , the Committee were briefed on the Subject
‘Functioning of Agricultural Credit in the Country’ by the representatives
of DAC&FW and NABARD via a power point presentation. The Committee

128
raised several issues/points as mentioned below and sought clarification/
information there on:—
(i) Need for involvement of farmers in the decision making
process;
(ii) Simplifying enrollment procedure for Kisan Credit Cards and
make it farmer friendly by removing bureaucratic hurdles;
(iii) Reducing rate of interest on Farm Loans;
(iv) Need for scrutinizing the working of Cooperative Banks;
(v) Need for directly involving farmers for successful
implementation of schemes;
(vi) NABARD to directly disburse crop loan to farmers;
(vii) Steps to be taken to Improve/Double Farmers income;
(viii) Need to sort out the Problems of Farmers regarding loans;
and
(ix) No collateral to be insisted upon from farmers availing crop
loans from nationalized banks.
5. The Representatives of the Department responded to most of the
queries raised by the Members. The Chairperson then thanked the
witnesses for sharing valuable information with the Committee on the
subject and directed them to send, in writing, the requisite information
in points/items, which was not readily available with them to the
Secretariat of the Committee at his earliest.
A copy of the verbatim proceedings of the sitting has been kept
separately.
The Committee then adjourned.

129
APPENDIX V
STANDING COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE BRANCH
(2017-18)
MINUTES OF THE NINTH SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE
The Committee sat on Wednesday, the 17th January, 2018 from
1100 hours to 1335 hours in Committee Room ‘2’, Block-A, Extn. to
Parliament House Annexe Building, New Delhi.
PRESENT
Shri Hukm Deo Narayan Yadav —  Chairperson
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Sanjay Dhotre
3. Smt. Raksha Khadse
4. Md. Badaruddoza Khan
5. Dr. Tapas Mandal
6. Shri Janardan Mishra
7. Shri Nityanand Rai
8. Shri C.L. Ruala
9. Shri Jai Prakash Narayan Yadav
Rajya Sabha
10. Sardar Sukhdev Singh Dhindsa
11. Shri Janardan Dwivedi
12. Shri Meghraj Jain
13. Shri Mohd. Ali Khan
14. Shri K.K. Ragesh
15. Shri Ram Nath Thakur
16. Shri Shankarbhai N. Vegad
17. Dr . Chandrapal Singh Yadav

130
SECRETARIAT
1. Shri D.S. Malha — Joint Secretary
2. Smt. Juby Amar — Additional Director
LIST OF WITNESSES
Power Tiller Manufacturers ’ Association (PTMA)
1. Shri P . Suresh Babu — President, PTMA & MD, Kerala Agro
Machinery Corporation Ltd.
(KAMCO)
2. Shri V .P . Mahendra — MD, VST Tillers Tractor Ltd. (VST)
3. Shri B.C.S. Iyengar — Corporate Strategist, VST
4. Shri G. Gopakumar — Senior Manager , KAMCO
Ministry of Agriculture and Farmers Welfare (Department of
Agriculture, Co-operation and Farmers Welfare)
1. Shri Jalaj Shrivastava — Additional Secretary
2. Shri Ashwani Kumar — Joint Secretary (M&T)
3. Ms. Chhavi Jha — Joint Secretary (RKVY)
4. Shri V .N. Kale — Addl. Commissioner (Machinery)
Department of Agricultural Research and Education/
Indian Council of Agricultural Research
1. Dr . K.K. Singh — ADG (FE)
[Representatives of PTMA were called in]
2. At the outset the Chairperson welcomed the officer bearers of
Power Tiller Manufacturers’ Association (PTMA) to the meeting convened
to give their presentation on the Subject “Variance in Cost and Quality
of Agricultural Tools and Implements Being Provided to the Farmers
under Rashtriya Krishi Vikas Yojana (RKVY) and Problems Being Faced by
the Farmers Due to Imported Power Tillers - A Review ”.
3. After the introduction, one of the representatives of the PTMA
given their presentation on the Subject. Thereafter, the Chairperson
initiated the discussion which was taken forward by the Members of the
Standing Committee. The representatives of the PTMA raised several
issues/points which are briefly mentioned below:
(i) Need of proper labeling of Imported Chinese Power Tiller
vis-a-vis Indigenous power tiller;

131
(ii) Need to take strict quality approval on imported Chinese
power tiller to safeguard interest of farmers;
(iii) Need to provide safeguards to indigenous power tiller
manufacturers in order to face onslaught of cheap power
tiller being imported from China;
(iv) Need to enhance custom duty or apply stringent safeguard
mechanism such as fixing quota on Power Tillers being
imported from China; and
(v) Need to lower GST on indigenous power tiller.
4. Thereafter , the Chairperson thanked the office bearers of PTMA
for sharing valuable information with the Committee on the subject
and the officer of the PTMA then withdrew.
[The representatives of Ministry of Agriculture and Farmers Welfare
(Department of Agriculture, Cooperation and Farmers Welfare) were
ushered in]
5. The Chairperson welcomed the representatives of Ministry. After
the introduction, the Chairperson initiated the evidence which was
followed by a Power point Presentation slide presentation by the
representatives of the Department and the discussion was taken forward
by Chairperson and the Members of the Committee. The Committee
raised several issues/points as briefly mentioned below:
(i) Need to devise a low cost and durable power tiller which
can be manufactured indigenously;
(ii) P ossibility of enhancing import duty on imported power tillers;
(iii) Need to proper demonstration of country or origin of power
tiller in Bold letters;
(iv) need to lower GST on indigenously manufacturers of power
tillers;
(v) mechanism for lodging of grievances redressal by the farmers;
(vi) need to file criminal cases against defaulting importers who
sold below standard power tiller to the farmers;
6. The Representatives of the Department responded to most of the
queries raised by the Members. The Chairperson then thanked the
witnesses for sharing valuable information with the Committee on the
subject and directed them to send, in writing, the requisite information
on the points, which was not readily available with them to the
Secretariat of the Committee by 24.01.2018.
A copy of the verbatim proceedings of the sitting has been kept
separately.
The Committee then adjourned.

132
APPENDIX VI
STANDING COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE
(2017-18)
MINUTES OF THE SEVENTEENTH SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE
The Committee sat on Tuesday, the 27th March, 2018 from 1500
hrs. to 1650 hrs. in the Committee Room “D”, Ground Floor, Parliament
House Annexe, New Delhi.
PRESENT
Shri Hukm Deo Narayan Yadav —  Chairperson
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Sanganna Amarappa Karadi
3. Smt. Raksha Tai Khadase
4. Md. Badaruddoza Khan
5. Shri C. Mahendran
6. Dr. Tapas Mandal
7. Shri Janardan Mishra
8. Shri Devji M. Patel
9. Shri C.L. Ruala
10. Shri Arjun Charan Sethi
Rajya Sabha
11. Shri Meghraj Jain
12. Shri Mohd. Ali Khan
13. Shri Ram Nath Thakur
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Shri D.S. Malha — Joint Secretary
2. Shri Arun K. Kaushik — Director
3. Smt. Juby Amar — Additional Director
4. Shri Sumesh Kumar — Under Secretary

133
WITNESSES
National Bank for Agriculture & Rural Development (NABARD)
1. Dr . Harsh Kumar Bhanwala — Chairman, NABARD
2. Shri L.L. Raval — General Manager
3. Shri Rajiv — General Manager
State Bank of India (SBI)
1. Shri Adikesavan S. — Chief General Manager , Agri
Business Unit
2. Shri Moyya Krishna Rao — (Dy. General Manager), Agri
Business Unit
Punjab National Bank (PNB)
1. Shri K.V . Brahmaji Rao — Executive Director
2. Dr . B.M. Padha — General Manager
3. Shri Naresh Garg — Chief Manager
2. At the outset, the Committee took up the Draft Report on the
Subject “Variance in Cost and Quality of Agricultural Tools and
Implements Being Provided to the Farmers under Rashtriya Krishi Vikas
Yojana (RKVY) and Problems Being faced by the Farmers Due to Imported
Power Tillers - A Review ” pertaining to the Ministry of Agriculture and
Farmers Welfare (Department of Agriculture, Cooperation and Farmers
Welfare). After some deliberations, the Committee adopted the draft
Report with minor modifications and authorized the Chairperson to
finalize and present these Reports to Parliament.
*3. XXXX XXXX XXXX XXXX
The Committee then adjourned.
(A copy of the verbatim proceedings of the Sitting has been kept
separately).
*Matter not related to this report.