COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE
(2015-2016)
SIXTEENTH LOK SABHA
MINISTRY OF FOOD PROCESSING INDUSTRIES
‘DEMANDS FOR GRANTS (2015-16)’
[Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations contained in the
Eighth Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) of the Standing Committee on Agriculture (2014-2015)]
EIGHTEENTH REPORT
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
December 2015/Agrahayana, 1937 (Saka)
18


EIGHTEENTH REPORT
STANDING COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE
(2015-2016)
(SIXTEENTH LOK SABHA)
MINISTRY OF FOOD PROCESSING INDUSTRIES
‘DEMANDS FOR GRANTS (2015-16)’
[Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations
contained in the Eighth Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) of the Standing
Committee on Agriculture (2014-2015)]
Presented to Lok Sabha on 16.12.2015
Laid on the Table of Rajya Sabha on 16.12.2015
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
December 2015/Agrahayana, 1937 (Saka)

C.O.A. No. 328
Price : Rs. 103.00
© 2016 B Y L OK S ABHA S ECRETARIAT
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of
Business in Lok Sabha (Fifteenth Edition) and Printed by National Printers,
New Delhi-110 028.

(i)
CONTENTS
PAGE
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE ............................................................. (iii)
INTRODUCTION ........................................................................................... (v)
CHAPTER I Report ............................................................................... 1
CHAPTER II Observations/Recommendations which have been
accepted by the Government ........................................ 27
CHAPTER III Observations/Recommendations which the
Committee do not desire to pursue in view of the
Government’s replies ..................................................... 52
CHAPTER IV Observations/Recommendations in respect of which
replies of the Government have not been accepted
by the Committee ........................................................... 58
C
HAPTER V Observations/Recommendations in respect of which
final replies of the Government are still awaited ...... 64
ANNEXURE
I. DO letter from Secretary, Ministry of Food Processing
Industries for enhancement of funds for the
Ministry ........................................................................... 65
II. Status of financial progress of the 21 Mega Food Parks
accorded Final Approval (as on 26.05.2015) .............. 67
III. OM from Secretary, Ministry of Food Processing
Industries regarding Consolidated Scheme
Guidelines and Revised Guidelines ............................ 70
IV . Status of 110 Sanctioned posts in NIFTEM ................ 72
V . Extract of Minutes of the 11th Sitting of the
Committee held on 10.12.2015 ..................................... 74
A
PPENDIX
Analysis of Action Taken by the Government on the
Recommendations contained in the Eighth Report
(Sixteenth Lok Sabha) of the Standing Committee on
Agriculture (2014-15) .................................................... 76

(iii)
COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON
AGRICULTURE (2015-16)
Shri Hukm Deo Narayan Yadav — Chairperson
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Prof. Ravindra Vishwanath Gaikwad
3. Prof. Richard Hay
4. Shri Sanganna Karadi
5. Shri Nalin Kumar Kateel
6. Md. Badaruddoza Khan
7. Shri C. Mahendran
8. Dr. Tapas Mandal
9. Shri Janardan Mishra
10. Shri Ajay Nishad
11. Shri Dalpat Singh Paraste
12. Shri Nityanand Rai
13. Shri Mukesh Rajput
14. Shri Konakalla Narayana Rao
15. Shri C.L. Ruala
16. Shri Arjun Charan Sethi
17. Shri Satyapal Singh (Sambhal)
18. Shri Virendra Singh
19. Shri Dharmendra Yadav
20. Shri Jai Prakash Narayan Yadav
21. Shri B.S. Yeddyurappa

(iv)
Rajya Sabha
22. Shri A.W. Rabi Bernard
23. Shrimati Renuka Chowdhury
24. Sardar Sukhdev Singh Dhindsa
25. Shri Janardan Dwivedi
26. Shri Vinay Katiyar
27. Shri Mohd. Ali Khan
28. Shri Rajpal Singh Saini
29. Shri Ram Nath Thakur
30. Shri Shankarbhai N. Vegad
31. Shri Darshan Singh Yadav
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Shri U.B.S. Negi — Joint Secretary
2. Shri Arun K. Kaushik — Director
3. Smt. Juby Amar — Additional Director
4. Shri Sumesh Kumar — Under Secretary

(v)
INTRODUCTION
I, the Chairperson, Standing Committee on Agriculture (2015-16),
having been authorized by the Committee to submit the Report on their
behalf, present this Eighteenth Report on action taken by the Government
on the Observations/Recommendations contained in the Eighth Report
(Sixteenth Lok Sabha) of the Standing Committee on Agriculture (2014-
15) on ‘Demands For Grants (2015-16)’ pertaining to the Ministry of Food
Processing Industries.
2. The Eighth Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) of the Standing
Committee on Agriculture (2014-15) on ‘Demands For Grants (2015-16)’
of the Ministry of Food Processing Industries was presented to Lok Sabha
and laid on the Table of Rajya Sabha on 24 April, 2015. The Action Taken
Notes on the Report were received on 16 June, 2015.
3. The Report was considered and adopted by the Committee at
their Sitting held on 10.12.2015.
4. An analysis of the action taken by the Government on the
Observations/Recommendations contained in the Eighth Report (Sixteenth
Lok Sabha) of the Committee is given in Appendix.
N
EW DELHI; HUKM DEO NARAYAN YADAV,
14 December, 2015 Chairperson,
23 Agrahayana, 1937 (Saka) Standing Committee on Agriculture.

CHAPTER I
REPORT
This Report of the Committee on Agriculture deals with the action
taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations
contained in the Eighth Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) of the Committee
on Agriculture (2014-15) on “Demands for Grants (2015-16)” pertaining
to Ministry of Food Processing Industries which was presented to
Lok Sabha and laid on the Table of Rajya Sabha on 24.04.2015.
1.2 The Ministry of Food Processing Industries have furnished
Action Taken Replies in respect of all the 17 Observations/
Recommendations contained in the Report. These replies have been
categorized as under:—
(i) Observations/Recommendations that have been accepted by
the Government:
Recommendation Nos. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14
and 15
Chapter- II
Total : 14
(ii) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which the
Committee do not desire to pursue in view of the
Government’s reply:
Recommendation Nos. 16 and 17
Chapter- III
Total : 02
(iii) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which action
taken replies of the Government have not been accepted by
the Committee:
Recommendation No. 6
Chapter- IV
Total : 01

2
(iv) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which final
replies of the Government are still awaited:
Recommendation No. -Nil-
Chapter- V
Total : 0
1.3 The Committee trust that utmost importance would be given
to implementation of the Observations/Recommendations accepted by
the Government. In cases, where it is not possible for the Department
to implement the Recommendations in letter and spirit for any reason,
the matter should be reported to the Committee with reasons for non-
implementation. The Committee desire that further Action Taken Notes
on the Observations/Recommendations contained in Chapter-I of this
Report be furnished to them at an early date.
1.4 The Committee will now deal with the action taken by the
Government on some of the Recommendations in the succeeding
paragraphs.
A. Outstanding Utilization Certificate (UCs)
Recommendation (Serial No. 5)
1.5 The Committee had observed/recommended as under:—
“The Committee are disappointed to note that 1911 Utilization
Certificates amounting to Rs. 343.69 crore at the end of February,
2015 are yet to be liquidated. They further observe that this huge
pendency is reflective of bad accounting and financial
mismanagement practiced by the State Governments/Implementing
Agencies. The Committee recommend to the Ministry to impress
upon the State Governments/implementing agencies to initiate
corrective measures and submit the UCs at the earliest as in absence
of the same, they are the ones who have to bear the consequences.
The Committee desire that the Government should tackle the
pendency of UCs on a war-footing and impress upon all the
implementing agencies to clear their backlog within a stipulated
time.”
1.6 In its reply, the Ministry has stated as under:—
“Release of grants and receipt of Utilization Certificates (UCs) in
lieu thereof is a continuous process. 103 number of UCs amounting
to Rs. 37.11 crore were settled during the month of March, 2015

3
which resulted in bringing down the number of outstanding UCs
to 1808 amounting to Rs. 306.58 crore as on 31.03.2015. This pending
position is for UCs upto 2012-13.
UCs for the year 2013-14 have also become due w.e.f. 01.04.2015.
As on 01.04.2015, 2011 UCs amounting to Rs. 445.14 crore are
pending for settlement. The Ministry is making every effort for
liquidating these outstanding Utilization Certificates and the status
is being regularly reviewed. Divisions dealing with Plan Schemes
are being regularly reminded to make efforts with the implementing
Agencies/State Governments for early settlement of these
outstanding UCs.”
1.7 The Committee note that out of 1911 Utilization Certificates
(UCs) amounting Rs. 343.69 crore which were to be liquidated at the
end of February, 2015, only 103 UCs amounting to Rs. 37.11 crore were
settled till March, 2015. However, 1808 number of outstanding UCs
amounting Rs. 445.14 crore upto 2012-13 still remain unsettled. Further
Utilization Certificates for the year 2013-14 have also become due for
settlement taking the figure to 2011 amounting to Rs. 445.14 crore. This
is not a very satisfactory position and the pendency of large number
of Utilization Certificates is a matter of great concern for the Committee
as the same come in the way for releasing of funds to the States/
Implementing Agencies and which naturally affect the effective
implementation of the schemes/activities of the Government. The
Committee, therefore, desire the Ministry to make all out efforts to
liquidate the Utilization Certificates at the earliest. The Committee
would like to be apprised of the initiatives undertaken by the Ministry
in this regard and in getting adequate budget allocation from the
Ministry of Finance.
B. Gender Budgeting
Recommendation (Serial No. 6)
1.8 The Committee had observed/recommended as under:—
“The Committee are aware that the origin of food processing lies
in the culinary tradition of our Nation and carried forward by the
women folk since ages. Women are traditionally engaged in food
processing activities like making pickles, papad, nuggat, aam papad
etc. The Committee note that a Gender Budget Cell under the
Chairmanship of a Joint Secretary is in place in the Ministry for
inducting and effecting a change in the Ministry’s policies and
programs in a way that could tackle gender imbalances, promote

4
gender equality and development and could ensure that public
resources through the Ministry’s budget are allocated and managed
accordingly. However, they are not satisfied with the progress of
the Cell as well as the attitude of the Government towards this
issue. The Committee are apprised that there is no specific allocation
of funds for gender related expenditure in the plan schemes of the
Ministry. The benefit accruing from the schemes of the Ministry
has not been quantified. The Committee, considering the importance
of encouragement of Women entrepreneurs/stakeholders, strongly
recommend to release specific funds for gender related expenditure
in these schemes. The Committee also recommend the Gender
Budget Cell to participate more actively in raising the gender specific
issues and needs and also to sensitize the Ministry on a greater
level so that the purpose for which they have been created is
resolved in a satisfactory manner. The Ministry should also assess
the benefits accruing to women through these schemes, quantify
and assemble related data. The Committee emphasize that the
Ministry should utilize the traditional technology and knowledge
and the acumen of the women folk for processing the food products
through various means of processing.
The Committee are also apprised that a survey-cum-study has been
conducted by Centre for Market Research and Social Development,
New Delhi for suggesting an Integrated Gender Action Plan
pertaining to Food Processing Sector including the required
standards and parameters on the basis of which units can be certified
as compliant with these requirements as also process of certification
and accreditation of the units which comply with these standards.
The study report makes suggestions on various relevant issues such
as policy of the Ministry, monitoring system to assess gender
mainstreaming efforts, Gender Audit of the policies of the
Government, steps to encourage the women Self Help Groups to
start their food processing units, points of convergence with the
existing schemes of other Ministries/Departments and Gender
Budgeting etc. The Committee find Ministry has offered a very
cold response to the recommendations put-forth by the Study-
Report. The Committee recommend that there are some burning
issues which should be taken up by the Ministry more seriously
than by passing the buck to other Ministries/Departments. The
recommendations like working environment, Gender-Audit,
demand for specific funds, encouraging women entrepreneurs by

5
incentivizing them financially as well as socially (like award
presentations) are very important issues and may be taken up more
seriously by the Ministry and also better collaborations should be
catered with other Ministries/Departments to work on these issues
in a more positive manner. The Committee also recommend the
implementing agencies to ensure that private players must abide
by the guidelines regarding gender specific issues and implement
them in true manner so that interest of women workers/
entrepreneurs/stakeholders must be secured.”
1.9 The Ministry in its Action Taken Reply has stated as under:—
“The Ministry has taken a note of the concern of the Committee.
In this context, it is submitted that though the schemes of the
Ministry are project-oriented and not specific to State/Area/
Community/Caste and Gender, there is substantial women
participation in manufacturing of food products and beverages. As
per the latest Annual Survey of Industries 2012-13, a total of
2.59 lakh women workers were directly employed in registered
food processing units in the country. As regards women employment
in unregistered food processing units, it was estimated that a total
of 11.86 lakh women workers were engaged in the year 2010-11
as per the information released in the National Sample Survey
Office (NSSO) 67th Round (July , 2010-June, 2011).
The overall scenario of women employment in food processing
sector is as under:—
Women employment in Food Processing Sector*: Registered and
Unregistered units
Sector Number of Total Employ- (%) Share of
Women ment—Food Women
Processing Sector
Registered 2.59 lakh 9.14 lakh 28.3
(2012-13)
Unregistered 11.86 lakh 47.9 lakh 24.8
(2010-11)
*Includes manufacturing of food products and beverages.
As regards the plan schemes of the Ministry i.e. Mega Food Parks
Scheme and Cold Chain Scheme, the Ministry has approved
40 Mega Food Park projects (Final Approval—21 projects and In-
principle Approval—19 projects), out of which there are 10 female

6
promoters in 6 projects. The details of the female promoters in the
6 projects are as under:—
Sl. Name of Food Park No. of Name of Female
No. Female Promoters
Promo-
ters
Accorded Final Approval
1. M/s Satara Mega Food 1 (1) Smt. Vaishali Hanmant Rao
Park Pvt. Ltd. Gaikwad
2. M/s Godavari Mega 2 (1) Smt. Ch. Vyjayanthi
Aqua Park Pvt. Ltd. (2) Smt. T. Subrahmanyamma
3. M/s Sikaria Mega Food 3 (1) Surabhi Agriculture SHG
Park Pvt. Ltd. (2) Sw apna Agriculture SHG
(3) Rashmi SHG
Accorded In-principle
Approval
4. M/s Zoram Mega Food 2 (1) Smt. Zonunsiami
Park Pvt. Ltd. (2) Smt. Doris Zothansanji
Chhangte
5. M/s Jain Agro Trading 1 (1) Ms. Sara H. Shafiq
Pvt. Ltd.
6. M/s Raaga Mayuri 1 (1) Mrs. V . Mani Reddy
Agrovet Pvt. Ltd.
Total 10
In the cold chain scheme, 138 cold chain projects are under
implementation, out of which there are 60 women promoters in
39 Cold Chain projects.
The number of the female Project Investigators in the R&D
programmes sanctioned by the Ministry are as under:—
Female Project Total Project Percentage (%)
Investigators  Investigators
No. Amount No. Amount No. Amount
of of GIA of of GIA of of GIA
PI sanctioned PI sanctioned PI sanctioned
(Rs. in lakh) (Rs. in lakh)
Ongoing 18 972.03 120 4010.31 15.% 24.24%
Projects
Completed 16 538.41 70 2441.57 22.86% 22.05%
Projects
34* 1510.44 190* 6451.88 17.89% 23.41%
*Some of the Project Investigators have more than one project and they have been
counted separately for each project.

7
As regards the two academic-cum-research institutes namely,
National Institute of Food Technology and Entrepreneurship
Management (NIFTEM) and Indian Institute of Crop
Processing Technology (IICPT) under the administrative
control of Ministry of Food Processing Industries, the
details regarding the number of students passed out and
studying in various courses; number of female trainees
participated in the training programmes; number of female
beneficiaries covered under the Village Adoption Programme
being conducted by NIFTEM and number of female project
investigations in R&D programmes of IICPT by the Ministry are
as under:—
NIFTEM
Number of the female students Passed Out:
passed out and studying in M.Tech. (2012-14) – 33
various courses being conducted
by the NIFTEM. Studying:
B.Tech. 2012-16 Batch – 50
B.Tech. 2013-17 Batch – 55
B.Tech. 2014-18 Batch – 24
M.Tech. 2013-15 Batch – 33
M.Tech. 2014-16 Batch – 37
Ph.D. 2013 – 00
Ph.D. 2014 – 05
Number of the female trainees 1192
who have participated in the
training programme conducted by
NIFTEM.
Number of female beneficiaries 615
covered under the Village Adoption
Programme being conducted by
NIFTEM.
IICPT
Number of female students passed out and studying in various
courses being conducted by IICPT
• Presently studying: 26 (in M.Tech. + Ph.D. Programmes) and
71 (in B.Tech. Programme)
• Passed out: 65

8
B.Tech. M.Tech. M.Tech. Ph.D.
(FPE) (FST)
PASSED OUT
2009-10 13 5
2010-11 14 6 2
2011-12 13 4 2
2012-13 6
PRESENT
2012-13 23 3
2013-14 25 4 6 1
2014-15 25 3 6 3
Number of female trainees who have participated in the training
programmes conducted by IICPT
• 1518 (during the year 2014-15)
• 799 (2012-13), 760 (2013-14) and 1148 (2014-15)
Number of female project investigators in the R&D programmes
of IICPT sanctioned by the Ministry:—
• 3 Project Investigators and 2 Co-Project Investigators (during
the period from 2011-12 till date)
The Human Resource Development (HRD) component of the
Centrally Sponsored Scheme National Mission on Food Processing
(NMFP) which was being implemented through the State/UT
Governments, aimed at skill upgradation in the food processing
sector by imparting training under the Entrepreneurship
Development Programme and Food Processing Training Centre
components having not less than 35% of the trainees from SC/ST/
women candidates. However, the Centrally Sponsored Scheme of
NMFP has been delinked from Central Government support
from the financial year 2015-16. State Governments may
decide to continue with the Mission out of their increased resources
resulting from the recommendations of the 14th Finance
Commission.”

9
1.10 In its Action Taken Reply, the Ministry has elaborated the
overall scenario of women employment in food processing sector, the
number of female promoters in Mega Food Park projects, the number
of students passed out and studying in various courses, the number
of female trainees participated in the training programmes and the
number of female beneficiaries covered under the Village Adoption
Programme and the number of female project investigators in R&D
programmes, conducted by NIFTEM or IICPT. However the Ministry
is silent on the recommendation of the Committee for release of specific
funds for gender related expenditure. The Ministry is also silent on
the follow-up action taken by them on the suggestions made by Center
for Market Research and Social Development, New Delhi on the
basis of their survey-cum-study. The Ministry has also not
responded to the recommendation of the Committee that
Implementing Agencies are to ensure that private players abide
by the guidelines regarding gender specific issues. The Ministry
is expected to respond to the recommendations of the Committee
with all seriousness and alacrity it deserves. The Committee,
therefore, deplore the lackadaisical attitude of the Ministry
in this regard and desire that follow-up action may be taken on the
suggestions given by Center for Market Research and Social
Development, New Delhi. The Committee also desire the Ministry to
explore option for release of specific funds for encouraging women
entrepreneurs in food processing sector. The Committee would like to
be apprised of the initiatives undertaken and the progress made in
this regard.
C. Delay in Mega Food Parks
Recommendation (Serial No. 9)
1.11 The Committee had recommended as under:—
“The Committee note that Mega Food Parks Scheme envisages a
well defined agriculture/horticulture processing zone containing
State of the art processing facilities with supporting infrastructure
and well established supply chain. The idea behind the scheme is
to bring together farmers processors and retailers and link
agricultural production to the market so as to ensure maximisation
of value addition, minimisation of wastages and improving farmers’
income. The Committee find that out of Rs. 1714 crore, allocation
for the XIIth plan only is Rs. 241.10 crore i.e just 14% has been

10
utilized during the first three years of the plan period. Further, the
Committee note that Government had approved setting up of 42
Mega Food Parks during 11th and 12th plan in four phases,
however, the Ministry have approved 40 projects. Out of
these 21 projects have been accorded final approval, 4 projects
have been accorded in-principle approval and 15 projects have
been cancelled/withdrawn. Out of 21 finally approved projects,
4 are partially operational and 4 projects are in advanced
stages of implementation, 2 of which are likely to be
completed during 2014-15 and 2 in the year 2015-16. The
Committee are aghast to note that as many as 15 projects have
been cancelled whereas only 4 are partially operational till
date. The Committee are concerned to note the tardy progress
in construction of Mega Food Parks. The plea of the Ministry
that being big and complex projects, these have a long
gestation period, hence, it is not possible for these projects to
keep their pace of implementation in conformity with the
prescribed timelines, is not acceptable to the Committee.
Such justification only highlights the lack of vision in the
Ministry. The Committee note that the Ministry have made
certain modification in the existing scheme for facilitating
speedy and better project implementation viz. MFPs projects
be implemented owned and operated by an SPV , time schedule
for completion and operationalisation of project being increased
to 30 months and release of grant instalments being linked
with specific milestones. The Committee while taking
cognizance of the steps being taken by the Ministry , in
consultation with the stakeholder for facilitating speedier and
better operated project implementation, are of the view that
much more remains to be done. They recommend the
Ministry to carefully monitor and follow-up the time schedules
for completion of the projects and link release of installments
with specific milestones, workout a single window clearance
system for expediting the projects. The Committee also insist
the Ministry to regularly interact with the stakeholders to
address the impediments in progress of the project
implementation. The Committee emphasize that appropriate
penalties be imposed on erring parties in completion of the project,
as scheduled. In the event of SPV withdrawing from executing the
projects or unable to meet the guidelines, the proper penalty
prescribed by the Ministry including return of amount of

11
grant-in-aid and accrued interest should be imposed to make up
for the loss of time.”
1.12 The Ministry in its Action Taken Reply has stated as
under:—
“One more Mega Food Park i.e.NE Mega Food Park at Nalbari,
Assam has become operational on 28.05.2015. Now, out of 21 (twenty
one) finally approved projects, 5 (five) projects are operational.
3 (three) more projects are in advance stages of implementation,
which are likely to become operational during 2015-16. 2 (two)
more projects are expected to become operational in the year 2015-16.
To fill up the vacancies caused due to seventeen (17) cancelled
Mega Food Parks, the Ministry had issued the Expression of Interest
(EOI) notice on 10.02.2014. In response, the Ministry received
(72) seventy two proposals fit to be appraised. Out of these,
17 projects have been selected against the existing 17 vacancies of
Mega Food Parks based on merit through a three-tier scrutiny of
proposals by Program Management Agency (PMA), Technical
Committee (TC) and Inter-Ministerial Approval Committee (IMAC).
A total 21 projects have been found eligible and remaining 51 were
considered ineligible in IMAC meeting held on 16.03.2015. The
successful 17 projects have been announced in a Press Conference
by the Hon’ble Minister on 24.03.2015. The Ministry has issued
“In-principle Approval” letters to 15 Mega Food Park projects on
31.03.2015. The remaining 2 Mega Food Park projects were also
under consideration for according “In-principle Approval.”
However, in the meantime, the Hon’ble High Court of Delhi has
restrained the Ministry on 30.04.2015 to issue In-principle approval
to these two projects.
The Ministry is monitoring the progress of implementation of each
of the Mega Food Park individually and adherence to the prescribed
time schedules for completion of the projects.
Release of instalments has been linked with specific milestones in
the revised Scheme Guidelines issued on 10.02.2014.
The Ministry is impressing upon the State Governments to
implement the single window clearance system for Mega Food
Park projects to expedite the implementation of the projects.

12
To address the impediments in progress of the project
implementation and to make the incentives and fiscal benefits
available to the implementing agencies and the food processing
units in the Park so as to accelerate the pace of implementation,
the Ministry is regularly interacting with the promoters of the SPVs
and other stakeholders e.g. concerned officials of State Governments
as well as Central Government. Imposition of appropriate penalties
on erring parties for delays in completion of the project is under
active consideration of the Ministry. Necessary steps are being taken
by the Ministry for recovery of the prescribed penalty including
grant-in-aid with interest in the event of SPV withdrawing
from executing the projects or unable to meet the Scheme
Guidelines. The security money of Rs. 10.00 Lakh is also forfeited
in case of cancellation of the project or withdrawal from the project
by SPV .”
1.13 While noting with concern the tardy progress in construction
of Mega Food Parks, the Committee had recommended that the Ministry
should carefully monitor and follow up the time schedules for
completion of the projects like release of installments with specific
milestones and workout a single window clearance system for
expediting the projects. The Committee had also insisted that the
Ministry should also regularly interact with the stakeholders to address
the impediments in the progress of implementation of the projects.
The Committee had also emphasized that appropriate penalties be
imposed on erring parties in completion of projects, as scheduled. In
its Action Taken Reply, the Ministry has elaborated various measures
undertaken by them to address the impediments in the progress of the
implementation of Mega Food Park projects and their completion within
the prescribed time schedules. While appreciating the various initiatives
undertaken by the Ministry to accelerate the pace of implementation
of Mega Food Parks, the fact remains that out of 21 finally approved
projects, only 5 are operational. This only reflect the slow pace
of progress of implementation of Mega Food Parks Projects and
the various measures undertaken by the Ministry do not seem to
be enough to expedite the implementation of the projects. In this
context, it has been informed by the Ministry that State Governments
have been impressed upon to implement the single window clearance
system for the purpose. In view of the foregoing, the Committee would
like the Ministry to pursue the matter vigorously with
State Governments to set up single window system for implementation
of the projects at the earliest. The Committee would like to be apprised
of the initiatives undertaken by the Ministry in this regard.

13
D. Evaluation Study of Mega Food Parks
Recommendation (Serial No. 12)
1.14 The Committee had observed/recommended as under:—
“The Committee understand that Mega Food Parks Scheme was
launched with a lot of fanfare and a hype was created publicizing
that each MFP will cater to 30-35 Food Parks units, generate
5000 direct and 30,000 indirect employment when fully functional
besides bringing about an investment to Rs. 75-100 crore in common
facilities and another Rs. 225-250 crore in processing and ancillary
units. The Committee find that the Ministry has assigned a study
to M/s Indian Council for Research on International Economic
Relations (ICRIER) in August, 2014 for mid-term evaluation of
impact of the scheme. The Committee find that even after 8 months
of the constitution of this study , the Report is yet to be submitted.
The Committee emphasize that this evaluation study should assess
the impact/benefits, coverage, farmers who have invested in these
projects and reach of the scheme on socio-economic parameters.
The Committee recommend that a mechanism should be developed
for obtaining the feedback from the beneficiaries/stakeholders
involved in operationalisation of MFPs. Such feedback and the
findings of the aforesaid study should be incorporated in guidelines
for future projects. The Committee also desire that further efforts
should be made by the Ministry to publicise widely the available
facilities, the incentives and the benefits to the farmers and various
other stakeholders through this scheme.”
1.15 The Ministry in its Action Taken Reply has stated as
under:—
“The timelines for completion of the study was 4 months. The
timeline has expired on 12.12.2014. The draft study report could
be submitted by ICRIER on 15.04.2015. The study report has been
examined by the Ministry and its comments have been forwarded
to ICRIER for necessary incorporations in the report on 08.05.2015.
The finalization of the report is being expedited.
Suitable steps would be taken by the Ministry for further
streamlining the process of implementation on the basis of the
feedbacks, findings and suggestions/recommendations of the
evaluation report to be submitted by M/s Indian Council for

14
Research on International Economic Relations (ICRIER),
New Delhi.
In addition to the initial Terms of Reference of the Study, the ICRIER
has been asked to incorporate the following information also in the
study report:—
i. Mechanism for obtaining feedback from the beneficiaries
especially farmers.
ii. Assessment of impact/benefits, coverage and reach of the
scheme on socio-economic parameters.
iii. Determination of the numbers of farmers who have invested
in Mega Food park projects and the extent to which it has
brought about prosperity to local farmers.
iv . Creation of employment to local youths in agro based
avenues.
To widely publicize the benefits, incentives and facilities available
to the farmers and other stakeholders under the Scheme as well
as to attract investment, Conferences/Investment Summits are being
organized by the Ministry in different parts of the country in
association with national level Industry Associations/Chambers of
Commerce.
1.16 The Committee note from the Action Taken Reply of the
Ministry that the draft study report of M/s ICRIER on mid-term
evaluation of impact of Mega Food Park Scheme could be submitted
by them on 15.04.2015. After its examination by the Ministry, its
comments have been forwarded to M/s ICRIER for necessary
incorporations in the report on 08.05.2015. In addition to the initial
terms of reference of the study, M/s ICRIER has also been asked to
incorporate additional information in the study report on the issues
like mechanism for obtaining feedback from the beneficiaries,
assessment of the scheme on socio-economic parameters, determination
of the number of farmers who have invested in Mega Food Park projects
and the prosperity brought about to local farmers and creation of
employment to local youths. The Committee are of the view that
timeline for completion of any study sponsored by the Ministry should
be adhered to as it is very vital for planning, assessment and

15
reformulation of schemes for smooth and effective implementation of
the schemes and to avoid time and cost overruns in implementation.
The Committee, therefore, recommend the Ministry to ensure timely
finalization of study sponsored by them and ask M/s ICRIER to furnish
their feedback, findings and suggestions/recommendations in this
matter without further delay to enable the Ministry to further
streamlining the process of implementation of the scheme. The
Committee would like to be apprised of the progress made in this
regard.
E. Increasing the Capacity of Cold Chains
Recommendation (Serial No. 13)
1.17 The Committee had observed/recommended as under:—
“The Committee observe that to encourage setting up of cold chain
facilities in the country, Ministry is operating a Plan Scheme to
provide financial assistance to project proposals received for
integrated cold chain infrastructure development from public/
private organisations. The scheme envisages financial assistance in
the form of grant-in-aid @ 50% of the total cost of plant and
machinery and technical civil works in general areas and 75% for
North Eastern Region and difficult areas subject to a maximum of
Rs. 10.00 crore. The initiatives are aimed at filling the gaps in the
long and fragmented supply chain, strengthening of cold chain
infrastructure with infrastructural facilities like sorting, grading,
packaging and processing of horticultural produce including organic
produce, marine, dairy, poultry, etc.
The Committee observe that the Committee constituted by the
Planning Commission under the Chairmanship of Dr. Saumitra
Chaudhuri, Member Planning Commission in the year 2012 on
encouraging investments in supply chains including provision for
Cold Chain for more efficient distribution of farm produce citing
the study conducted by National Spot Exchange Limited (NSEL)
in 2010, has indicated requirement of 61 million metric tonnes of
cold storage capacity against the available capacity of 24 million
tonnes. Thus, there was a gap of about 37 million tonnes of cold
storage capacity in 2010. The Committee note that a capacity of
about 8 million tonnes has been added thereafter through different

16
programmes of the Government. The present cold storage capacity
is estimated at around 32 million tonnes and therefore the present
gap is estimated at about 29 million tonnes. The Committee are
of the view that with increasing agricultural production in the
country and with the increasing need to arrest post harvest losses,
there is an urgent need to fill in the yawning gap between actual
and required capacity of Cold storage in the country which is
increasing by the day. The Committee are aware that the Cold
Storage facilities now available are mainly for single commodity
like Potato, Grapes, Pomegranate, Orange, Apples etc. leading to
under-utilisation of the capacity. The Committee, therefore,
recommend that the Ministry make all out efforts to facilitate and
provide integrated, complete cold chain and enhance preservation
infrastructure facilities to maintain continuity from the farm gate
to the end consumers/retail outlets. They also recommend that
efforts should be made to enhance small sized cold storage facilities
not only to increase the capacity but also to promote more
participation from small and medium level farmers. They further
desire that the Cold Storage Projects could cater for multiple
products so as to operate on optimum capacity.
The Committee find that the Government had approved 138 Cold
Chain Projects in 4 phases during 11th and 12th plan period of
which the Ministry had sanctioned 121 projects. Out of these
9 Cold Storage projects were cancelled due to unwillingness and
non-commitment evinced by the promoters in timely implementing
the projects. Out of the remaining 112 projects, 50 projects have
become commercially operational, 28 projects have achieved 25%
progress, 25 projects have achieved 75% progress and remaining
are under various stages of implementation. Besides, upscaling of
the schemes has been approved during the 12th plan by taking up
75 new Cold Chain Projects as per financial assistance pattern of
11th plan. The Committee feel that the completion status of the
projects is not satisfactory and have incurred time overrun. The
Committee note with some satisfaction that during the 12th plan
period some initiatives have been taken by the Ministry to expedite
and simplify the implementation of the Cold Chain Scheme viz.
setting up of integrated Cold Chains by individuals/groups of
entrepreneur interested in supply chain management, organisation/
Government/PSUs/Joint Ventures/NGOs/Co-operatives/SHGs/

17
Private Companies and corporations, merging non-horticulture
projects with the component of National Mission on Food
Processing, while horticulture projects would be implemented
through National Horticulture Board, increasing timeline of project
implementation and reconstituting the Technical Committee and
Inter Ministerial Approval Committee (IMAC) which is chaired by
Hon’ble Minister (FPI). The Committee however opine that much
is still required to be done at the implementation stage of the
projects. They also recommend the Ministry to pursue the State
Governments/Agencies to have a single window clearance for the
projects after getting due clearance from reconstituted high-powered
Program Management Agency, Technical Committee and Inter-
Ministerial approval Committee so as to expedite the
implementation. The Committee may be kept abreast of the
mechanism developed for coordination between the Centre-State
agencies for expeditious clearance of the projects and also about
the status of implementation of the projects. The Committee would
also like to be apprised of the status of additional allocation sought
by the Ministry for the scheme to meet the requirement of projects
under implementation. Last but not the least, the Committee
emphasise the Ministry to be vigilant and strengthen the monitoring
mechanism to avoid delay in execution of the projects.
The Committee note that there is a lacuna in backward-forward
linkage for the Cold Chains Projects. Also, there is a huge
requirement of infrastructure for linking up the farms with the
retail markets. They desire the Ministry to assess the option of
contract farming to overcome the long and fragmented supply chain,
whereby the companies be incentivised to create direct farm linkages
to source appropirate quality, quantity and varieties of inputs. The
Committee therefore recommend that in order to assure the
backward-forward linkage, private players must be promoted by
facilitating fiscal and financial concessions and easing the
requirements to do business.”
1.18 The Ministry in its Action Taken Reply has stated
as under:—
“So far, the Government has approved 138 cold chain projects in
four phases during the 11th and 12th Plan Period. Against 138
approved slots for cold chain projects, the Ministry had sanctioned

18
121 projects. Subsequently, the Ministry cancelled 13 cold chain
projects due to unwillingness and non-commitment evinced by the
promoters in timely implementing the projects. Out of the remaining
108 projects, 52 have already achieved completion and commenced
commercial operation. Remaining 56 projects are in various stages
of implementation. Most of the projects are making satisfactory
progress. However, due to non-availability of funds, the Ministry
has not been able to release grant-in-aid in time to some of the
projects which has resulted in delay in the progress of the projects.
Ministry had sought an additional allocation of Rs. 100 crore during
2014-15 to meet the committed liabilities. However, the same was
not acceded to by the Government.
Further, to fill up the vacant slots created by cancellation/non-
sanction of the cold chain projects, the Ministry had floated an
Expression of Interest on 02.12.2013. After following due procedure
of appraisal and scrutiny, 30 cold chain projects have been approved
by the Ministry. Thus at present the Ministry is assisting total 138
cold chain projects [108 already under implementation/achieved
completion plus 30 newly approved].
To accelerate the availability of cold storage and to improve the
efficiency of Cold Chain Management, Prime Minister’s Office had
set up a Task Force under the Chairmanship of Secretary , Ministry
of Food Processing Industries. The Task Force, inter alia , has
recommended that (i) Government should aim at creating additional
capacity of 7.5 million tonnes over the next five years. Out of this,
Department of Agriculture and Cooperation can take up 5 million
tonnes under MIDH (2.5 million tonnes each by NHM and NHB)
and Ministry of Food Processing Industries can take up 2.5 million
tonnes, (ii) evolving an effective system of single window clearance
to ensure timely completion of cold chain projects, and
(iii) exempting certain processes undertaken on agriculture
commodities from the purview of service tax for services such as
pre-conditioning (e.g. washing, waxing, de-sapping), pre-cooling,
ripening, waxing, retail packaging and labelling, climate controlled
storage and transportation which do not alter the essential
characteristics of agricultural produce.
In pursuance of recommendations of Task Force, the Ministry has
submitted an EFC memorandum to Department of Expenditure for

19
upscaling the scheme of Cold Chain, Value Addition and
Preservation Infrastructure for taking up additional 500 cold chain
projects with financial outlay of Rs. 4000 crore and making the
scheme open ended. Department of Expenditure has returned the
EFC memo with the remarks that in view of restructuring of the
budget line for CSS, the proposal may be reviewed. Accordingly,
the EFC proposal would be re-submitted after taking into account
delinking of Centrally Sponsored Scheme of National Mission on
Food Processing of the Ministry.
The Government has also announced many fiscal incentives to
promote food processing and cold chain services. Excise Duty on
food processing and packaging machinery has been reduced from
10% to 6% in Budget 2014-15. Refrigeration machinery and parts
used for installation of cold storage, cold room or refrigerated
vehicle are exempt from excise duty. Services related to Cold Chain
like pre-conditioning, pre-cooling, ripening, waxing, retail packing,
labelling of fruits and vegetables which do not change or alter the
essential characteristics of the said fruits and vegetables have been
exempted from service tax in Budget 2015-16. In the latest guidelines
issued by Reserve Bank of India on 23rd April 2015, agro-processing
and cold chain have been classified under Agriculture activities for
priority sector lending by banks.
The scheme of Cold Chain, Value Addition and Preservation
Infrastructure of the Ministry does not place any restriction on the
promoters/private investors to build to create cold storage and
preservation infrastructure facilities of any particular capacity and
they are free to decide the capacity of cold chain infrastructure to
be created by them keeping in view the techno-economic viability
of the project. Further, the cold chain and preservation infrastructure
facilities being created under the cold chain scheme of the Ministry
cater to multiple products. In majority of the cold chain projects
assisted by the Ministry, the promoters are resorting to direct
linkages with the farmers which benefit the farmers and also ensures
quality product to the consumers.”
1.19 The Committee observe from the Action Taken Reply of the
Ministry that the Task Force constituted to accelerate availability of
cold storage and to improve the efficiency of Cold Chain Management
had inter-alia  recommended for creating additional capacity of

20
7.5 million tonnes over the next five years, out of this, the Ministry
of Food Processing Industries can take up 2.5 million tonnes, evolving
an effective single window system clearance to ensure timely
completion of cold chain projects and exempting certain processes on
agricultural commodities for the purview of service tax for services
which do not alter the essential characteristics of agricultural produce.
However, in pursuance of the recommendations of the Task Force EFC
memorandum submitted by the Ministry to Department of Expenditure
for taking up additional 500 cold chain projects with financial outlay
of Rs. 4000 crore and making the scheme open ended was returned by
the Department of Expenditure with the remarks that in view of
restructuring of the budget line for CSS, the proposal may be reviewed.
According to the Ministry, proposal would be re-submitted after taking
into account delinking of Centrally Sponsored Scheme of National
Mission on Food Processing of the Ministry. The Committee are of the
view that creation of additional cold storage capacity is of utmost
necessity for increasing shelf life of agricultural produce which would
ultimately benefit the farmers as well as consumers. The Committee,
therefore, desire the Ministry to expedite the submission of revised
EFC memorandum to the Department of Expenditure for taking up
additional 500 cold chain projects. The Committee are also anguished
to note that due to non-availability of funds, the Ministry has not been
able to release grant-in-aid in time to some of the cold chain projects
which has resulted in delay in the progress of the projects. While the
Ministry had sought an additional allocation of Rs. 100 crore during
2014-15 to meet the committed liabilities, the same has not been acceded
to by the Government. The Committee feel that it is imperative for
the Ministry of Finance to provide adequate funds to the MoFPI so
that various projects/schemes undertaken by MoFPI do not suffer for
want of funds. The Committee would like the Ministry to take up the
issue vigorously with Ministry of Finance. The Committee would like
to be apprised of the progress made on the issues as discussed above.
F. NIFTEM and Village Adoption Programme
Recommendation (Serial No. 14)
1.20 The Committee had recommended as under:—
“NIFTEM is envisaged as an international centre of excellence which
is offering high quality education research and management

21
programmes specific to disseminating knowledge to the food sector,
providing referral advice on food standards and business incubation
facility. Village Adoption is a unique programme conceptualised
by NIFTEM for its students, with a view to sensitise and educate
them on the problems and practices of the farmers at the grass root
level while training and demonstrating simple processing techniques
to farmers/villages making it two way learning process. They were
apprised that seven rounds of Village Adoption Programme has
been completed by NIFTEM students covering 39 villages in 19
States, 100 programmes including training and expert lectures,
awareness camps have been organised, 120 interested entrepreneurs
have been identified. Further, students along with their mentor
have taken Product Development Training Programmes
demonstrating preparation of jams, jellies, pickles, mango panna,
fruit based beverages besides cataloguing of traditional knowledge
including preparation booklets on 130 traditional food recipes and
booklets on traditional food preservation practices. The Committee
while being satisfied about the programme are of the opinion that
this exchange will help in retaining the age old good and effective
prevalent practices, while modernising the not so useful ways of
value additions. It would lead to developing innovative and new
methods of preservation processing and value addition to the crop/
produce. The Committee recommend that during this mutual
interaction the traditional know-how should be so upgraded/
modified by NIFTEM so as to develop technology or methods of
Food Processing which are in accordance with the economic and
intellectual capacity of the farmers. The students vide this
programme should make deliberate efforts to simplify the
specialised know-how for generalised use by small and marginal
farmers and NIFTEM should hold brainstorming workshop session
in their Institute and incorporate in their curriculum. Such
programmes should be advertised and propagated by the Institute
so that the SAUs/ICAR also emulate and pursue such exercises in
the courses within their ambit.
The Committee note that out of 110 posts which have been
sanctioned for creation (55-faculty posts and 55-non faculty posts)
only 72 posts (41-faculty posts and 31-non faculty posts) have been
filled till date. So, there exist vacancies of 38 posts (14 in faculty
and 24 in non-faculty). The Committee further recommend the

22
Institution to fill up the vacancies at the earliest so that the desired
goals may well be achieved. The Committee recommend that
NIFTEM should publicise these posts, along with the perks and
pay packages for these faculty post widely in print and visual media
so as to get highly educated and expert faculty for this Institution
of global standard, as a centre of excellence. The Committee also
recommend that the Institution must also emphasize on training
more and more farmers with an idea that these trained farmers
may be utilised as ‘Kisan Prashikshakas’ for training the other
farmers on a large scale so that it may be helpful in dealing
with technical issues relating to agriculture in a more efficient
manner.”
1.21 The Ministry in its Action Taken Reply has stated
as under:—
“Village adoption is a unique program conceptualized and being
implemented by NIFTEM for its students since 2012, with a view
to sensitizing and educating them of the problems and practices
of the farmers at the grass root level.
Under this programme, B. Tech. (Food Technology and
Management) and M. Tech. students are divided into groups of 10
to 12 students and each group adopts a village anywhere in India
and nurses it during the entire programme of study.
The Groups stay for 10 to 12 days each time in those villages during
a semester. It is a symbiotic process leading to exchange of
knowledge. While villagers gain scientific and technical knowledge
through students who promote future possibilities of food
processing among them, students obtain firsthand experience of
Indian rural scenario and understand traditional processing
technologies adopted by the villagers.
As per recommendations of the committee, NIFTEM is exploring
the traditional know-how of the recipes, under its Make In India
initiative. The objective is to discover the science of these traditional
Indian foods, characterise them and develop machinery for
manufacturing these traditional foods.

23
NIFTEM also undertakes brainstorming workshops/seminars/
symposia/conferences on the various issues pertaining to food
industry from time to time.
NIFTEM would be approaching various SAUs/ICAR institutes
and KVKs for undertaking programmes similar to VAP for
greater outreach of the in-house Technologies and inclusive
development.
NIFTEM has also organised skill development training for the
farmers/prospective entrepreneurs for promoting food processing,
value addition, and entrepreneurship development in food
processing sector. NIFTEM will continue to carry out the skill
development programmes.
With regard to the filling of the vacant posts in the Institute, NIFTEM
has informed that concerted efforts are being made to fill up the
remaining vacant posts by giving wide publicity in print and visual
media. The updated status of 110 posts sanctioned by Government
is at Annexure-IV .
Number of posts created in NIFTEM is 110, out of which NIFTEM
has filled 71 posts and 39 posts are vacant.”
1.22 The Committee had recommended that traditional know-
how should be upgraded/modified by NIFTEM which are in accordance
with the economic and intellectual capacity of the farmers. In Action
Taken Reply, the Ministry has stated that NIFTEM is exploring the
traditional know-how of the recipes under its Make in India initiative.
The objective is to discover the science of these traditional Indian
foods, characterise them and develop machinery for manufacturing these
traditional foods. The Committee have also been informed that NIFTEM
would be approaching various SAUs/ICAR institutes and KVKs for
undertaking programmes similar to V AP for greater outreach of the in-
house Technologies and inclusive development. With regard to the
filling up of the vacant posts in the Institutes, it has been informed
that concerted efforts are being to fill up the vacant posts by giving
wide publicity in print and visual media. While taking cognizance of
the efforts being made by the NIFTEM, the Committee would like to
be apprised of the progress made by them as a result of their efforts.

24
G. Training and Skill Gap
Recommendation (Serial No. 15)
1.23 The Committee had recommended as under:—
“The Committee find that budgetary allocation for strengthening
of the Institutions in Food Processing Industry for the year
2015-16 is Rs. 75 crore. The Committee feel that the initiatives are
being taken through Institutes like NIFTEM, IICPT, IGPB and
NMPPB, yet much remains to be done for enhancing and upgrading
the skills and implementation of schemes for Skill Development.
They are of the opinion that this sector is demand oriented, vibrant
and depends on the changing nature of Indian consumer, who is
now more informed in terms of food hygiene, taste and nutritive
value. The consumer are now ready to try newer and processed
foods. It creates a lot of scope wherein the youth could be well
trained w.r.t. these areas professionally . The Committee desire that
within the given premises Ministry should probe the possibility for
immediate adoption of ITIs by FPI in various clusters of the Country
to upgrade the lower end skills and the youth could be directly
employed with attractive pay packages. Further, they also emphasize
that FPI Sector should partner with few food technology/processing
Institutes and certain courses could be added (B. Tech. in Food
Technology) in IITs also on pilot basis for upgradation of higher
end skills.”
1.24 The Ministry in its Action Taken Reply has stated
as under:—
“NIFTEM has been running B. Tech. (Food Technology and
Management) Course since 2012-13 with student strength of
180 students per batch.
Total 90 students are admitted in M.Tech. programme of NIFTEM
every year. NIFTEM is offering five streams of Post Graduate
Programmes with two years regular M.Tech. degree which are as
under:—
1. M.Tech. in Food Technology and Management (FTM)

25
2. M.Tech. in Food Process Engineering and Management
(FPEM)
3. M.Tech. in Food Plant Operations and Management (FPOM)
4. M.Tech. in Food Safety and Quality Management (FSQM)
5. M.Tech. in Food Supply Chain Management (FSCM)
Total 20 students are admitted in Ph.D. programme of NIFTEM.
NIFTEM is offering Ph.D. programme in all the above Post Graduate
streams.
The Indian Institute of Crop Processing Technology began offering
formal degree courses at Bachelor’s/Master’s Level and Doctoral
levels in Food Process Engineering (FPE) from 2009-10 academic
year. In B. Tech. Program, 40 students are admitted every year,
20 students are admitted in M.Tech. and 5 are admitted in Ph.D.
programme.
For involvement of ITIs in various clusters for promoting food
processing and value addition, the matter is being taken up with
the Ministry of Skill Development and Entrepreneurship.
As regards adding B.Tech. course in Food Technology in IITs, the
matter is being taken up with the Ministry of HRD. Already, IIT
Kharagpur has a programme on Agriculture and Food Engineering.
National Meat and Poultry Processing Board (NMPPB) is in the
process of winding up and is not undertaking any new activity.
There is no continuation of Indian Grape Processing Board (IGPB)
in 12th Plan as on date.”
1.25 In its Action Taken Reply, the Ministry has informed the
Committee that for involvement of ITIs in various clusters for promoting
food processing and value addition, the matter is being taken up with
the Ministry of Skill Development and Entrepreneurship. Further, the
Ministry of Human Resource Development is also being approached
for adding B.Tech. course in Food Technology in IITs. The Committee
have also been informed that IIT Kharagpur has a programme on

26
Agriculture and Food Engineering. While appreciating the efforts being
made by the Ministry of Food Processing Industries, the Committee
desire the Ministry to pursue the matter vigorously with all concerned
to its logical conclusion. The Committee would like to be apprised of
the progress made on the initiatives undertaken by them.

27
CHAPTER II
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS THAT HAVE BEEN
ACCEPTED BY THE GOVERNMENT
A. Implementation of the Committee’s Recommendations
Recommendation (Serial No. 1)
The Committee note that Action Taken Replies on action taken by
the Government on Observations/Recommendations contained in the
Fourth Report of the Committee on Agriculture on Demands for Grants
(2014-15) of Ministry of Food Processing Industries have been furnished
to the Committee by the Ministry on 18 March, 2015 i.e. within the
stipulated three months. They further note that the Statement of the
Minister under Direction 73-A of Direction by the Speaker, Lok Sabha
to be made by the Minister of Food Processing Industries on the status
of implementation of various Recommendations made by the Committee
in their Fourth Report would be due on 18 June, 2015.
Reply of the Government
On the observation of the Committee that the statement of the
Minister under Direction 73-A of Direction by the Speaker, Lok Sabha
to be laid by the Minister of Food Processing Industries on the status
of implementation of various recommendations made by the Committee
in their Fourth Report would be due on 18.06.2015, it is submitted that
the Hon’ble Minister of State for Food Processing Industries made a
statement in Lok Sabha on 06.05.2015 and in Rajya Sabha on 08.05.2015
i.e. before the due date of 18th June, 2015.
[Ministry of Food Processing Industries (Letter No.6-02/2015-
Parl. dated 16.06.2015)]
B. Allocation of Funds
Recommendation (Serial No. 2)
The Committee find that India is one of the World’s largest producer
as well as consumer of food products. They are aware that while increased

28
productivity is an essential component of a vibrant agricultural sector,
improved post-harvest handling and processing is equally essential to
ensure value addition, reductions in wastage and quality products reach
the market. A strong and dynamic food processing sector plays a vital
role in diversification and commercialization of agriculture, enhances
shelf life, ensures value addition to the agricultural produce, generates
employments, enhances income of farmers and creates markets for export
of agro foods. Food processing helps the farmers to get better returns,
higher yields and lowers the risk of perishability . The growth of FP sector
will make significant contribution to the Indian Economy not only in
economic terms but also in meeting the objectives of ‘inclusive growth’
and ‘food security’.
The Committee observe that Food Processing Sector has emerged
as an important segment of the Indian Economy in terms of its contribution
to GDP , employment and investment. The sector constitutes as much as
9% and 11% of GDP in Manufacturing and Agriculture sector respectively.
During the last 5 years ending 2012-13, Food Processing Industries sector
has been growing at an Annual Average Growth Rate (AAGR) of around
8.4% as compared to around 3.3% in Agriculture and 6.6% in
Manufacturing.
The Committee are, however, concerned to note that the budgetary
allocations made over the last few years are not in tune with the potential
of this sector in driving the rural economy, in bringing about synergy
between the consumer, industry and agriculture. Budgetary allocations
were reduced during the year 2012-13 and also in 2014-15. The allocations
this year is just Rs. 487 crore i.e it has been lowered to 6.3% of the
previous year allocation and is only 33.10% of the allocation sought
(Rs. 1471.03 crore) by the Ministry for the year 2015.16. Further, this
allocation is even less than the actual expenditure of the year 2014-15
i.e. Rs. 537.6 crore.
The Committee observe that this industry being at a nascent stage
requires hand holding in terms of obtaining adequate funds to perform
and grow. The attitude of the Planning Commission and Ministry of
Finance regarding provision of funds reflects non-priority to the sector.
Considering the contribution of this sector to the economy of our Country
and its potential, this is indeed a matter of concern. The Committee
strongly recommend that the matter be taken up with the Ministry of
Finance and they be impressed about the vitality and potential of this
Sector in terms of economic growth, employment capacity and food
security, so that not only the funds are increased at RE stage but adequate
funds are provided from next financial year onwards.

29
Reply of the Government
The Ministry has requested the Ministry of Finance for augmenting
the provision referring the recommendations of the Committee on
Agriculture vide DO letter dated 08/06/2015 from Secretary (FPI). A copy
of the same is at Annexure-I.
[Ministry of Food Processing Industries (Letter No.6-02/2015-
Parl. dated 16.06.2015)]
C. FDI
Recommendation (Serial No. 3)
The Committee are aware that Indian Food Processing Sector is
among the largest sectors in terms of production, consumption, export
and growth prospects. They note that Government is giving some fiscal
incentives for promoting investment. This sector has been growing at an
AAGR of around 8.4% vis-à-vis about 3.3% growth in Agriculture and
6.6% in Manufacturing Sectors during the last five years ending
2014-15. With various measures taken by the Government to encourage
FDI in this sector, the FDI is constantly increasing since 2011-12. During
the year 2013-14 it touched Rs. 25,106 crore. The Committee find that
FDI is permissible for all food products upto 100% on automatic route
except for items reserved for Micro and Small Enterprises (MSEs) in
which case FDI is permissible under automatic route upto 24% of the
capital only. The FDI has however been only Rs. 2571.96 crore in
2014-15. The Committee appreciate the efforts of the Government in this
regard, especially at a time when this sector is in dire need of funds for
investment and budgetary allocation are insufficient to meet the
requirement of this upcoming sector. The Committee are however
apprehensive about FDI in the Sector in 2014-15. The Committee feel that
by promoting FDI including facilitating approvals for licenses would be
beneficial as this would create infrastructure and capital in the sector.
The Committee recommend that the Department should identify the
potential areas where FDI would be beneficial in the Sector (keeping in
mind the appropriate safeguards required for protecting our MSEs)
regularly review the incentives required and the extent to which automatic
FDI could be permissible. They emphasize that these vital parameters
should be regularly communicated to the Ministry of Finance for
appropriately incorporating it in FDI policy of the country so that trend
of increasing FDI in this sector continues.

30
Reply of the Government
The year-wise FDI inflow for last three years in Food Processing
Sector are as follows:—
Sl. Year FDI in Rs. crore FDI in US $ Million
No.
1. 2012-13 2193.65 401.46
2. 2013-14 25106.77 3892.89
3. 2014-15 2844.67 465.47
(upto Feb. 2015)
Sectors like Mega Food Park, Cold Chain, fruits and vegetables
processing, dairy industries and breakfast cereals are certain areas where
investment as well as technology is required for development of these
sectors. Ministry is taking up the matter with Ministry of Finance for
fiscal incentives for development of this sector. Government has reduced
excise duty on certain food processing machinery and packing machinery
from 10% to 6% in budget 2014-15. Reserve Bank of India has announced
revised priority sector lending guidelines on 23.04.2015. As per revised
guidelines, Food and Agro processing units and construction of storage
facilities including cold storage units/cold storage chains designed to
store agriculture produce/products have been included under agriculture
activities for priority sector lending. This will facilitate flow of more
credit to MSE units in food processing.
[Ministry of Food Processing Industries (Letter No.6-02/2015-
Parl. dated 16.06.2015)]
D. Spill Over Liabilities
Recommendation (Serial No. 4)
The Committee observe that during the XIIth plan, Ministry is
liquidating the committed liabilities of the 11th plan proposals received
in the Ministry upto 31.03.2015 w.r.t. two schemes i.e. Scheme for
Technology Upgradation and Scheme for Human Resource Development.
They were apprised that CCEA had approved the total committed liability
amounting to Rs. 740.00 crore for 3168 proposals under the scheme for
Technology upgradation and liabilities amounting to Rs. 35.61 crore for
832 proposals under the scheme for Human Resource Development (all
three components). The Committee are also apprised that, out of these
liabilities, a total of Rs. 257. 75 crore under the scheme for Technology
Upgradation and a total of Rs. 13.51 crore under the scheme for Human

31
Resource Development (all three components) are yet to be liquidated
as on 31.03.2015. While taking into account the fact that, the Committee
had also recommended for the speedy disposal of these liabilities in their
4th Report on Demands for Grants (2014-15) for Ministry of Food
Processing Industries and the liabilities are yet to be disbursed completely,
the Committee strongly recommend that these liabilities be taken up on
a priority basis and must be liquidated in the XIIth plan period itself.
The Committee advise the Government not to carry forward these
liabilities in the next plan period.
As the liabilities are on the higher side i.e. Rs. 257.75 crore for the
scheme of Technology Upgradation plus Rs. 13.51 crore for the scheme
of Human Resource Development (all three components) total of
Rs. 271.26 crore, the Committee also recommend the Ministry to persuade
the Ministry of Finance to grant more funds at RE stage to the Ministry
of Food Processing Industries, so that these liabilities may be liquidated
in the current plan itself.
Reply of the Government
The Ministry has requested the Ministry of Finance for augmenting
the provision referring the recommendations of the Committee on
Agriculture vide DO letter dated 08/06/2015 from Secretary (FPI). A copy
of the same is at Annexure-I.
[Ministry of Food Processing Industries (Letter No.6-02/2015-
Parl. dated 16.06.2015)]
E. Outstanding Utilization Certificate (UCs)
Recommendation (Serial No. 5)
The Committee are disappointed to note that 1911 Utilization
Certificates amounting to Rs. 343.69 crore at the end of February, 2015
are yet to be liquidated. They further observe that this huge pendency
is reflective of bad accounting and financial mismanagement practiced
by the State Governments/Implementing Agencies. The Committee
recommend to the Ministry to impress upon the State Governments/
implementing agencies to initiate corrective measures and submitt the
UC’s at the earliest as in absence of the same, they are the ones who have
to bear the consequences. The Committee desire that the Government
should tackle the pendency of UCs on a war-footing and impress upon
all the implementing agencies to clear their backlog within a stipulated
time.

32
Reply of the Government
Release of Grants and receipt of Utilization Certificates (UCs) in
lieu thereof is a continuous process. 103 number of UCs amounting to
Rs. 37.11 crore were settled during the month of March, 2015 which
resulted in bringing down the number of UCs to 1808 amounting to
Rs. 306.58 crore as on 31-03-2015. This pending position is for UCs up
to 2012-13.
UCs for the year 2013-14 have also become due w.e.f. 01-04-2015.
As on 01-04-2015, 2011 UCs amounting to Rs. 445.14 crore are pending
for settlement. The Ministry is making every effort for liquidating these
outstanding Utilization Certificates and the status is being regularly
reviewed. Divisions dealing with Plan Schemes are being regularly
reminded to make efforts with the Implementing Agencies/State
Governments for early settlement of these outstanding UCs.
[Ministry of Food Processing Industries (Letter No.6-02/2015-
Parl. dated 16.06.2015)]
Comments of the Committee
For comments of the Committee please refer to Para No. 1.7 of
Chapter I of this Report.
F. Schemes in FPI Sector
Recommendation (Serial No. 7)
The Committee note that to facilitate and exploit the potential of
Food Processing Sector, the Government has brought about certain reforms
through a network of schemes. The Committee are however, concerned
to note that due to reduced budgetary allocation for the year 2015-16,
the allocation for most of the schemes have been reduced and are
inadequate to achieve the targets. Under scheme for technological
upgradation/establishment/modernisation of Food Processing Industries
2014-15 (BE) was Rs. 160 crore, actual expenditure Rs. 142.63 crore whereas
2015-16 (BE) is only Rs. 100 crore. Similarly for scheme for Quality
Assurance, Codex Standards, R&D and other promotional activities,
allocation for the year 2015-16 has been reduced to Rs. 30 crore from
Rs. 36 crore in the year 2014-15 (BE). The Ministry are infact so hard
pressed that the targets for most of the schemes have to be downsized.
In case of scheme of strengthening of Institutions BE for 2015-16 has been
reduced from Rs. 75 crore (2014-15) to Rs. 16.00 crore only. The amount
is not even enough to meet the salary requirements of NIFTEM. In such

33
a scenario the Committee are apprehensive about achieving the target
and completion of agenda in their schemes. The Committee, therefore,
desire the Ministry to convey the displeasure regarding meagre allocation
of funds to the Ministry of Finance. The Ministry of Food Processing
Industries should pursue the matter by emphatically stating the
significance of the activities covered by these schemes for obtaining more
funds. Further, the Committee recommend that the Ministry make proper
utilisation of the allocated funds so that there is no pruning of funds at
RE stage.
Reply of the Government
The Ministry has requested the Ministry of Finance for augmenting
the provision referring the recommendations of the Committee on
Agriculture vide DO letter dated 08/06/2015 from Secretary (FPI). A copy
of the same is at Annexure-I.
[Ministry of Food Processing Industries (Letter No.6-02/2015-
Parl. dated 16.06.2015)]
G. Budgetary Allocations for Scheme for Infrastructure Development
Recommendation (Serial No. 8)
The Committee note that total allocation of Rs. 329.00 crore has
been made for the financial year 2015-16 to the Infrastructure Development
Scheme which has three components, Mega Food Parks, Cold Chain and
Abattoirs. In previous years the allocation under this scheme was used
to be clearly reflected amongst its components separately, however, the
same has not been specified this year. But, it has not been done this year.
The Ministry have also failed to give a satisfactory reasons for the change
in practice. The Committee are of the view that Rs. 329 crore allocated
for this scheme be suitably divided amongst its three components viz.
Mega Food Parks, Cold Chains and Abattoirs so that the physical targets
set for each of these components are specifically achieved. The Committee
recommend that there should be rational allocation of funds among various
programs under the Infrastructure Development Scheme so that the goals
of the individual schemes could be met specifically vis-à-vis the targets
besides ensuring clear assessment of the scheme components.
Reply of the Government
Total allocation of Rs. 329.00 crore made for the financial year
2015-16 to the Infrastructure Development Scheme has been distributed
among the three components of Mega Food Parks, Cold Chain and

34
Abattoirs keeping in view the likely requirement of funds of each of the
components. Out of Rs. 329.00 crore, Rs. 120.00 crore has been allocated
to Mega Food Park Scheme, Rs. 181.00 crore to Cold Chain, Value Addition
and Preservation Infrastructure and Rs. 28.00 crore to Modernization of
Abattoirs.
Utilization of funds under the Scheme of Mega Food Park during
the last three years and the current year has been as under:—
(Rs. in crore)
Year B.E. R.E. Expenditure
2012-13 86.00 93.20 93.11
2013-14 116.00 110.25 94.11
2014-15 120.00 63.94 63.88
2015-16 120.00 - 20.00
(till date)
Allocation of funds among various programs under the
Infrastructure Development Scheme has been done and the details are
as under:—
(Rs. in crore)
Sl. Head of Exp. Name of Scheme for
No. Infrastructure Development
Cold Chain, Mega Food Moderni-
Value Park zation of
Addition Abattoirs
and
Preservation
Infrastructure
1. Grant-in-aid- General 156.72 103.60 22.28
2. Grant-in-aid- North East 21.78 15.20 4.72
3. Other Administrative Expenses 0.15 0.10 0.10
4. Advertisement and Publicity 0.10 0.10 0.10
5. Professional Services 2.25 1.00 0.80
Total 181.00 120.00 28.00
The allocation of funds in B.E. for the current year has been made
on the basis of the likely requirement of funds keeping in view the
progress/status of implementation of the approved projects as well as the
past experience of expenditure incurred under the Scheme in the last few
years. Out of the 21 Mega Food Park projects currently under Final

35
approval, most of the projects are progressing in the way that most likely,
they would be able to claim one or more installment of the grant approved.
If their progress goes in the way expected, there may be a requirement
of additional funds during the current financial year under the Scheme.
The details of the financial progress of the 21 Mega Food Parks accorded
Final Approval currently is at Annexure-II.
[Ministry of Food Processing Industries (Letter No.6-02/2015-
Parl. dated 16.06.2015)]
H. Mega Food Parks
Recommendation (Serial No. 9)
The Committee note that Mega Food Parks Scheme envisages a
well defined agriculture/horticulture processing zone containing State of
the art processing facilities with supporting infrastructure and well
established supply chain. The idea behind the scheme is to bring together
farmers processors and retailers and link agricultural production to the
market so as to ensure maximisation of value addition, minimisation of
wastages and improving farmers’ income. The Committee find that out
of Rs. 1714 crore, allocation for the XIIth plan only Rs. 241.10 crore i.e
just 14% has been utilized during the first three years of the plan period.
Further, the Committee note that Government had approved setting up
of 42 Mega Food Parks during 11th and 12th plan in four phases, however,
the Ministry have approved 40 projects. Out of these 21 projects have
been accorded final approval, 4 projects have been accorded in-principle
approval and 15 projects have been cancelled/withdrawn. Out of 21 finally
approved projects, 4 are partially operational and 4 projects are in
advanced stages of implementation, 2 of which are likely to be completed
during 2014-15 and 2 in the year 2015-16. The Committee are aghast to
note that as many as 15 projects have been cancelled whereas only 4 are
partially operational till date. The Committee are concerned to note the
tardy progress in construction of Mega Food Parks. The plea of the
Ministry that being big and complex projects, these have a long gestation
period, hence, it is not possible for these projects to keep their pace of
implementation in conformity with the prescribed timelines, is not
acceptable to the Committee. Such justification only highlights the lack
of vision in the Ministry. The Committee note that the Ministry have
made certain modification in the existing scheme for facilitating speedy
and better project implementation viz. MFPs projects be implemented
owned and operated by an SPV , time schedule for completion and

36
operationalisation of project being increased to 30 months and release
of grant installments being linked with specific milestones. The Committee
while taking cognizance of the steps being taken by the Ministry , in
consultation with the stakeholder for facilitating speedier and better
operated project implementation, are of the view that much more remains
to be done. They recommend the Ministry to carefully monitor and follow
up the time schedules for completion of the projects and link release of
installments with specific milestones, workout a single window clearance
system for expediting the projects. The Committee also insist the Ministry
to regularly interact with the stakeholders to address the impediments
in progress of the project implementation. The Committee emphasize
that appropriate penalties be imposed on erring parties in completion
of the project, as scheduled. In the event of SPV withdrawing from
executing the projects or unable to meet the guidelines , the proper penalty
prescribed by the Ministry including return of amount of grant-in-aid
and accrued interest should be imposed to make up for the loss of time.
Reply of the Government
One more Mega Food Park i.e.NE Mega Food Park at Nalbari, Assam
has become operational on 28.05.2015. Now, out of 21 (twenty one) finally
approved projects, 5 (five) projects are operational. 3 (three) more projects
are in advance stages of implementation, which are likely to become
operational during 2015-16. 2 (two) more projects are expected to become
operational in the year 2015-16.
To fill up the vacancies caused due to seventeen (17) cancelled
Mega Food Parks, the Ministry had issued the Expression of Interest
(EoI) notice on 10.02.2014. In response, the Ministry received seventy two
(72) proposals fit to be appraised. Out of these, 17 projects have been
selected against the existing 17 vacancies of Mega Food Parks based on
merit through a three-tier scrutiny of proposals by Program Management
Agency (PMA), Technical Committee (TC) and Inter-Ministerial Approval
Committee (IMAC). A total 21 projects have been found eligible and
remaining 51 were considered ineligible in IMAC meeting held on
16.03.2015. The successful 17 projects have been announced in a Press
Conference by the Hon’ble Minister on 24.03.2015. The Ministry has issued
“In-principle Approval” letters to 15 Mega Food Park projects on
31.03.2015. The remaining 2 Mega Food Park projects were also under
consideration for according “In-principle Approval.” However, in the
meantime, the Hon’ble High Court of Delhi has restrained the Ministry
on 30.04.2015 to issue In-principle approval to these two projects.

37
The Ministry is monitoring the progress of implementation of each
of the Mega Food Park individually and adherence to the prescribed time
schedules for completion of the projects.
Release of installments has been linked with specific milestones in
the revised Scheme Guidelines issued on 10.02.2014.
The Ministry is impressing upon the State Governments to
implement the single window clearance system for Mega Food Park
projects to expedite the implementation of the projects.
To address the impediments in progress of the project
implementation and to make the incentives and fiscal benefits available
to the implementing agencies and the food processing units in the Park
so as to accelerate the pace of implementation, the Ministry is regularly
interacting with the promoters of the SPVs and other stakeholders e.g.
concerned officials of State Governments as well as Central Government.
Imposition of appropriate penalties on erring parties for delays in
completion of the project is under active consideration of the Ministry.
Necessary steps are being taken by the Ministry for recovery of the
prescribed penalty including grant-in-aid with interest in the event of
SPV withdrawing from executing the projects or unable to meet the
Scheme Guidelines. The security money of Rs. 10.00 Lakh is also forfeited
in case of cancellation of the project or withdrawal from the project by
SPV .
[Ministry of Food Processing Industries (Letter No.6-02/2015-
Parl. dated 16.06.2015)]
Comments of the Committee
For comments of the Committee please refer to Para No. 1.13 of
Chapter I of this Report.
I. Delay in Mega Food Parks
Recommendation (Serial No. 10)
The Committee have noted that the allocations during 2015-16 (BE)
has been made on a much higher side as compared to 2012-13 (BE),
2013-14 (BE), 2014-15 (BE). The Committee find that allocation is based
on likely requirement of funds, basically for releasing installment of grant-
in-aid to the Mega Food Parks and payment to the (four) Project

38
Management Agencies. Presently 25 Mega Food Park projects are under
implementation. They were apprised that out of these, 21 projects have
been accorded final approval. Out of these 21 projects, 6 projects have
been accorded final approval during the current financial year and are
likely to come up for release of 1st and 2nd installment in the financial
year 2015-16. Further Ministry is sanctioning 17 more projects and is in
the process of according Final approval to the remaining 4 projects.
Demand for release of Grant will be therefore, higher in the financial year
2015-16 and that is why higher allocation has been projected. This also
includes requirement of funds for advertisement, conferences/seminars/
workshops and miscellaneous expenditure etc.
The Committee have also noted that 15 projects have been
cancelled due to non-compliance of the procedures. The Committee
feel that the inprinciple approvals, final approvals and approval for
release of funds consumes a lot of time and involves, many a times,
delay in sanction. This not only leads to cost and time escalation but
also leads to non-consideration of other viable proposals. The
Committee are of the opinion that a prompt and proper assessment and
single window clearance would positively contribute to expediting in
commissioning and commencement of the project. The Committee,
therefore recommend that the Ministry should work towards developing
such procedures which would not delay the progress of the projects.
Further, they also desire that for maintaining transparency in case of
disbanding the projects due to non-compliance of procedures, the same
should be clearly specified, so that the proposers are clear about the
violations in future also.
Reply of the Government
Smooth and timely implementation of Mega Food Parks is being
ensured by the Ministry by providing all possible support to these projects
including interaction with various concerned Departments/Agencies of
the State Governments at all levels to remove the bottlenecks in
implementation of projects, making suitable amendments in the scheme
and its guidelines and pursuing with concerned State Governments and
other Central Government Ministries/Departments to extend special fiscal
and other benefits to these projects to attract investment as well as by
strict monitoring of progress of the existing and newly approved projects.
Ministry will also taking suitable strict action against the SPVs including,
imposition of penalty and cancellation of the projects which are not able
to show the required pace of implementation.

39
Apart from handholding, Ministry is carefully monitoring the
implementation of each MFP project individually and is making prompt
and proper assessment at every stage of implementation right from the
proposals stage to the stage of completion. To expedite the implementation
of the projects, the Ministry is impressing upon the State Governments
to implement the single window clearance system for Mega Food Park
projects.
To make the promoters of the Mega Food Park projects aware of
consequence of non-compliance of the prescribed procedures and for
maintaining transparency, these consequences are made known to the
applicants by holding Pre-bid meetings. Although some of such
consequences/provisions have been made part of the Memorandum of
Agreement (MoA) entered into by the SPV and the Ministry, other are
contained in Para 5.6.3, 9.3 (revised on 10.09.2014 vide O.M. no.21-MFPI/
11-Mega FP , copy at Annexure-III) and 10.2 of the Scheme Guidelines,
the Scheme Guidelines have been made part of Expression of Interest
(EoI) notice so that the proposers are clear about the violations and
consequences thereof.
[Ministry of Food Processing Industries (Letter No.6-02/2015-
Parl. dated 16.06.2015)]
J. Special Fund
Recommendation (Serial No. 11)
The Committee appreciate that a Special Fund of Rs. 2000 crore
has been set up in NABARD to provide credit at affordable rates to boost
food processing sector. This will address the inadequate infrastructure
facilities in Food Processing Sector and allow easy access to credit. Under
this fund, loan is extended to individual entrepreneurs, cooperatives,
farmers producers organizations, corporates joint venture, SPV and entities
promoted by the Government for setting up, modernization, expansion
of food processing units and development of infrastructure in designated
food parks.
The Committee hope that this Special Fund will provide the much
needed boost to this sector. The Committee desire that the Ministry
properly prioritise the projects under Mega Food Parks and scrupulously
monitor the utilisation of this Fund. In case the funds remain unutilised,
it may be extended to fund projects under Cold Chain and Abattoir
Schemes as these projects are also lagging due to resource-crunch.

40
Reply of the Government
Special Fund of Rs. 2000 crore has been setup by the Central
Government in NABARD to make available affordable credit to Designated
Mega Food Parks/Food Parks/Industrial areas as well as agro-processing
units in such Parks. Any Entrepreneur, Cooperative, SPV , Joint Venture,
State Government etc. may avail loan at concessional rate of interest from
this fund for establishing Mega Food Parks/Food Parks/Industrial areas
notified by the Ministry as Designated Food Parks as well as food
processing units in such Designated Food Parks. Food Processing Fund
2015-16 – Operational Guidelines have also recently been notified. A list
of Designated Mega Food Parks/Food Parks/Industrial areas has already
been notified by this Ministry on 20.11.2014 and steps are being taken
to notify the second list of Designated Mega Food Parks/Food Parks/
Industrial areas based on the information made available to the Ministry
by the State Governments which is likely to be issued very soon. The
Ministry has noted the suggestion of the Hon’ble Committee and would
monitor the utilization of the Fund scrupulously. Prioritization of the
projects for credit/loan would however be made by NABARD, the Nodal
Agency.
Ministry has notified a list of 99 designated food parks. These
designated food parks and units in these designated food parks can access
loan from the Special Fund. Ministry of Finance has agreed to continue
this fund during 2015-16 and RBI has been requested to issue necessary
instructions in this regard.
[Ministry of Food Processing Industries (Letter No.6-02/2015-
Parl. dated 16.06.2015)]
K. Evaluation Study of Mega Food Parks
Recommendation (Serial No. 12)
The Committee understand that Mega Food Parks Scheme was
launched with a lot of fanfare and a hype was created publicizing that
each MFP will cater to 30-35 Food Parks units, generate 5000 direct and
30,000 indirect employment when fully functional besides bringing about
an investment to Rs. 75-100 Crore in common facilities and another
Rs. 225-250 Crore in processing and ancillary units. The Committee find
that the Ministry has assigned a study to M/s. Indian Council for Research
on International Economic Relations (ICRIER) in August, 2014 for mid-
term evaluation of impact of the scheme. The Committee find that even

41
after 8 months of the constitution of this study, the Report is yet to be
submitted. The Committee emphasize that this evaluation study should
assess the impact/benefits, coverage, farmers who have invested in these
projects and reach of the scheme on socio-economic parameters. The
Committee recommend that a mechanism should be developed for
obtaining the feedback from the beneficiaries/stakeholders involved in
operationalisation of MFPs. Such feedback and the findings of the aforesaid
study should be incorporated in guidelines for future projects. The
Committee also desire that further efforts should be made by the Ministry
to publicise widely the available facilities, the incentives and the benefits
to the farmers and various other stakeholders through this scheme.
Reply of the Government
The timeline for completion of the study was 4 months. The timeline
has expired on 12.12.2014. The draft study report could be submitted by
ICRIER on 15.04.2014. The study report has been examined by the Ministry
and its comments have been forwarded to ICRIER for necessary
incorporations in the report on 08.05.2015. The report is being expedited
on priority.
Suitable steps would be taken by the Ministry for further
streamlining the process of implementation on the basis of the feedbacks,
findings and suggestions/recommendations of the study awarded to
M/s. Indian Council for Research on International Economic Relations
(ICRIER), New Delhi (ICRIER).
In addition to the initial Terms of Reference of the Study, the ICRIER
has been asked to incorporate the following information also in the study
report:—
i. Mechanism for obtaining feedback from the beneficiaries
especially farmers.
ii. Assessment of impact/benefits, coverage and reach of the
scheme on socio-economic parameters.
iii. Determination of the numbers of farmers who have invested
in Mega Food Park projects and the extent to which it has
brought about prosperity to local farmers.
iv . Creation of employment to local youth in agro based
avenues.

42
To widely publicize the benefits, incentives and facilities
available to the farmers and other stakeholders under the Scheme
as well as to attract investment, Conferences/Investment Summits are
being organized by the Ministry in different parts of the Country
associating the National level Industry Associations/Chambers of
Commerce.
[Ministry of Food Processing Industries (Letter No.6-02/2015-
Parl. dated 16.06.2015)]
Comments of the Committee
For comments of the Committee please refer to Para No. 1.16 of
Chapter I of this Report.
L. Increasing the Capacity of Cold Chains
Recommendation (Serial No. 13)
The Committee observe that to encourage setting up of cold
chain facilities in the country, Ministry is operating a Plan Scheme
to provide financial assistance to project proposals received for
integrated cold chain infrastructure development from public/private
organisations. The scheme envisages financial assistance in the
form of grant-in-aid @ 50% of the total cost of plant and machinery
and technical civil works in general areas and 75% for North
Eastern Region and difficult areas subject to a maximum of
Rs. 10.00 crore. The initiatives are aimed at filling the gaps in the long
and fragmented supply chain, strengthening of cold chain infrastructure
with infrastructural facilities like sorting, grading, packaging and
processing of horticultural produce including organic produce, marine,
dairy, poultry , etc.
The Committee observe that the Committee constituted by the
Planning Commission under the Chairmanship of Dr. Saumitra Chaudhuri,
Member Planning Commission in the year 2012 on encouraging
investments in supply chains including provision for Cold Chain for
more efficient distribution of farm produce citing the study conducted
by National Spot Exchange Limited (NSEL) in 2010, has indicated
requirement of 61 million metric tonnes of cold storage capacity against
the available capacity of 24 million tonnes. Thus, there was a gap of about
37 million tonnes of cold storage capacity in 2010. The Committee note
that a capacity of about 8 million tonnes has been added thereafter through

43
different programmes of the Government. The present cold storage
capacity is estimated at around 32 million tonnes and therefore the present
gap is estimated at about 29 million tonnes. The Committee are of the
view that with increasing agricultural production in the country and
with the increasing need to arrest post harvest losses, there is an urgent
need to fill in the yawning gap between actual and required capacity of
Cold storage in the country which is increasing by the day. The
Committee are aware that the Cold Storage facilities now available
are mainly for single commodity like Potato, Grapes, Pomegranate,
Orange, Apples etc. leading to under-utilisation of the capacity. The
Committee, therefore, recommend that the Ministry make all out efforts
to facilitate and provide integrated, complete cold chain and enhance
preservation infrastructure facilities to maintain continuity from the farm
gate to the end consumers/retail outlets. They also recommend that efforts
should be made to enhance small sized cold storage facilities not only
to increase the capacity but also to promote more participation from
small and medium level farmers. They further desire that the Cold Storage
Projects could cater for multiple products so as to operate on optimum
capacity.
The Committee find that the Government had approved 138 Cold
Chain Projects in 4 phases during 11th and 12th plan period of which
the Ministry had sanctioned 121 projects. Out of these 9 Cold Storage
projects were cancelled due to unwillingness and non-commitment
evinced by the promoters in timely implementing the projects. Out of
the remaining 112 projects, 50 projects have become commercially
operational, 28 projects have achieved 25% progress, 25 projects have
achieved 75% progress and remaining are under various stages of
implementation. Besides, upscaling of the schemes has been approved
during the 12th plan by taking up 75 new Cold Chain Projects as per
financial assistance pattern of 11th plan. The Committee feel that the
completion status of the projects is not satisfactory and have incurred
time overrun. The Committee note with some satisfaction that during the
12th plan period some initiatives have been taken by the Ministry to
expedite and simplify the implementation of the Cold Chain Scheme viz.
setting up of integrated Cold Chains by individuals/groups of entrepreneur
interested in supply chain management, organisation/Government/PSUs/
Joint Ventures/NGOs/Co-operatives/SHGs/Private Companies and
corporations, merging non-horticulture projects with the component of
National Mission on Food Processing, while horticulture projects would
be implemented through National Horticulture Board, increasing timeline

44
of project implementation and reconstituting the Technical Committee
and Inter Ministerial Approval Committee (IMAC) which is chaired by
Hon’ble Minister (FPI). The Committee however opine that much is still
required to be done at the implementation stage of the projects. They
also recommend the Ministry to pursue the State Governments/Agencies
to have a single window clearance for the projects after getting due
clearance from reconstituted high-powered Program Management Agency,
Technical Committee and Inter-Ministerial approval Committee so as to
expedite the implementation. The Committee may be kept abreast of the
mechanism developed for coordination between the Centre-State agencies
for expeditious clearance of the projects and also about the status of
implementation of the projects. The Committee would also like to be
apprised of the status of additional allocation sought by the Ministry for
the scheme to meet the requirement of projects under implementation.
Last but not the least, the Committee emphasise the Ministry to be vigilant
and strengthen the monitoring mechanism to avoid delay in execution
of the projects.
The Committee note that there is a lacuna in backward-forward
linkage for the Cold Chains Projects. Also, there is a huge
requirement of infrastructure for linking up the farms with the
retail markets. They desire the Ministry to assess the option of
contract farming to overcome the long and fragmented supply
chain, whereby the companies be incentivised to create direct farm
linkages to source appropirate quality, quantity and varieties of
inputs. The Committee therefore recommend that in order to assure the
backward-forward linkage, private players must be promoted by
facilitating fiscal and financial concessions and easing the requirements
to do business.
Reply of the Government
So far, the Government has approved 138 cold chain projects in
four phases during the 11th and 12th Plan Period. Against 138 approved
slots for cold chain projects the Ministry had sanctioned 121 projects.
Subsequently the Ministry cancelled 13 cold chain projects due to
unwillingness and non-commitment evinced by the promoters in timely
implementing the projects, leaving 108 cold chain projects assisted by the
Ministry. Of these 52 have already achieved completion and commenced
commercial operation. Remaining 56 projects are in various stages of
implementation. Most of the projects are displaying satisfactory progress.
However, due to non-availability of funds the Ministry has not been able

45
to release grant-in-aid in time to some of the projects which has resulted
in delay in the progress of the projects. Ministry had sought an additional
allocation of Rs. 100 crore during 2014-15 to meet the committed liabilities.
However, the same was note acceded to by the Government.
Further, to fill up the vacant slots created by cancellation/non-
sanction of the cold chain projects, the Ministry had floated an Expression
of Interest on 02.12.2013. After following due procedure of appraisal and
scrutiny 30 cold chain projects have been approved by the Ministry. Thus
at present the Ministry is assisting total 138 cold chain projects [108
already under implementation/achieved completion and 30 newly
approved].
To accelerate the availability of cold storage and to improve the
efficiency of Cold Chain Management, Prime Minister’s Office had set
up a Task Force under the Chairmanship of Secretary , Ministry of Food
Processing Industries. The Task Force inter alia,  has recommended that
(i) Government should aim at creating additional capacity of 7.5 million
tonnes over next five years. Out of this, Department of Agriculture and
Cooperation can take up 5 million tonnes under MIDH (2.5 million tonnes
each by NHM and NHB) and Ministry of Food Processing Industries can
take up 2.5 million tonnes, (ii) evolving an effective system of single
window clearance to ensure timely completion of cold chain projects, and
(iii) exempting certain processes undertaken on agriculture commodities
from the purview of service tax for services such as pre-conditioning (e.g.
washing, waxing, de-sapping), pre-cooling, ripening, waxing, retail
packaging and labelling, climate controlled storage and transportation
which do not alter the essential characteristics of agricultural produce.
In pursuance of recommendations of Task Force the Ministry has
submitted an EFC memorandum to Department of Expenditure for
upscaling the scheme of Cold Chain, Value Addition and Preservation
Infrastructure for taking up additional 500 cold chain projects with
financial outlay of Rs. 4000 crore and making the scheme open ended.
Department of Expenditure has returned the EFC memo with the remarks
that in view of restructuring of the budget line for CSS, the proposal may
be reviewed. Accordingly, the EFC proposal would be re-submitted after
taking into account delinking of Centrally Sponsored Scheme of National
Mission on Food Processing of the Ministry.
The Government has also announced many fiscal incentives to
promote food processing and cold chain services. Excise Duty on food

46
processing and packaging machinery has been reduced from 10% to 6%
in Budget 2014-15. Refrigeration machinery and parts used for installation
of cold storage, cold room or refrigerated vehicle are exempt from excise
duty . Services related to Cold Chain like pre-conditioning, pre-cooling,
ripening, waxing, retail packing, labelling of fruits and vegetables which
do not change or alter the essential characteristics of the said fruits and
vegetables have been exempted from service tax in Budget 2015-16. In
the latest guidelines issued by Reserve Bank of India on 23rd April 2015,
agro-processing and cold chain have been classified under Agriculture
activities for priority sector lending by banks.
The scheme of Cold Chain, Value Addition and Preservation
Infrastructure of the Ministry does not place any restriction on the
promoters/private investors to build to create cold storage and
preservation infrastructure facilities of any particular capacity and
they are free to decide the capacity of cold chain infrastructure
to be created by them keeping in view the techno economic
viability of the project. Further, the cold chain and preservation
infrastructure facilities being created under the cold chain scheme of the
Ministry cater to multiple products. In majority of the cold chain projects
assisted by the Ministry the promoters are resorting to direct linkage
with the farmers which benefits the farmers and also ensures quality
product to the consumers.
[Ministry of Food Processing Industries (Letter No.6-02/2015-
Parl. dated 16.06.2015)]
Comments of the Committee
For comments of the Committee please refer to Para No. 1.19 of
Chapter I of this Report.
M. NIFTEM and Village Adoption Programme
Recommendation (Serial No. 14)
NIFTEM is envisaged as an international centre of excellence which
is offering high quality education research and management programmes
specific to disseminating knowledge to the food sector, providing referral
advice on food standards and business incubation facility. Village Adoption
is a unique programme conceptualised by NIFTEM for its students, with
a view to sensitise and educate them on the problems and practices of
the farmers at the grass root level while training and demonstrating simple

47
processing techniques to farmers/villages making it two way learning
process. They were apprised that seven rounds of Village Adoption
Programme has been completed by NIFTEM students covering 39 villages
in 19 States, 100 programmes including training and expert lectures,
awareness camps have been organised, 120 interested entrepreneurs have
been identified. Further, students along with their mentor have taken
Product Development Training Programmes demonstrating preparation
of jams, jellies, pickles, mango panna, fruit based beverages besides
cataloguing of traditional knowledge including preparation booklets on
130 traditional food recipes and booklets on traditional food preservation
practices. The Committee while being satisfied about the programme are
of the opinion that this exchange will help in retaining the age old good
and effective prevalent practices, while modernising the not so useful
ways of value additions. It would lead to developing innovative and new
methods of preservation processing and value addition to the
crop/produce. The Committee recommend that during this
mutual interaction the traditional know how should be so
upgraded/modified by NIFTEM so as to develop technology or
methods of Food Processing which are in accordance with
the economic and intellectual capacity of the farmers. The students
vide this programme should make deliberate efforts to simplify
the specialised know how for generalised use by small and marginal
farmers and NIFTEM should hold brainstorming workshop session in
their Institute and incorporate in their curriculum. Such programmes
should be advertised and propagated by the Institute so that the SAUs/
ICAR also emulate and pursue such exercises in the courses within their
ambit.
The Committee note that out of 110 posts which have been
sanctioned for creation (55 faculty posts and 55 non-faculty posts) only
72 posts (41 faculty posts and 31 non-faculty posts) have been filled till
date. So, there exist vacancies of 38 posts (14 in faculty and 24 in non-
faculty). The Committee further recommend the Institution to fill up the
vacancies at the earliest so that the desired goals may well be achieved.
The Committee recommend that NIFTEM should publicise these posts,
along with the perks and pay packages for these faculty post widely in
print and visual media so as to get highly educated and expert faculty
for this Institution of global standard, as a centre of excellence. The
Committee also recommend that the Institution must also emphasize on
training more and more farmers with an idea that these trained
farmers may be utilised as ‘Kisan Prashikshakas’ for training the
other farmers on a large scale so that it may be helpful in dealing

48
with technical issues relating to agriculture in a more efficient
manner.
Reply of the Government
Village adoption is a unique program conceptualized and being
implemented by NIFTEM for its students since 2012, with a view to
sensitize and educate them of the problems and practices of the farmers
at the grass root level.
Under this programme, B. Tech (Food Technology and Management)
and M. Tech students are divided into groups of 10 to 12 students and
each group adopts a village anywhere in India and nurses it during the
entire programme of study .
The Groups stay for 10 to 12 days each time in every the
village in semester. It is a symbiotic process leading to exchange of
knowledge. While villagers gain scientific and technical knowledge
through students who promote future possibilities of food processing
among them, students obtain first hand experience of Indian rural scenario
and understand traditional processing technologies adopted by the
villagers.
As per recommendations of the committee, NIFTEM is exploring
the traditional know how of the recipes, under its Make In India initiative.
The objective is to discover the science of these traditional Indian foods,
characterise them and develop machinery for manufacturing these
traditional foods.
NIFTEM also undertakes brainstorming workshops/seminars/
symposia/conferences on the various issues pertaining to food industry
time to time.
NIFTEM would be approaching various SAUs/ICAR
institutes and KVKs for undertaking programmes similar to
VAP for greater outreach of the in-house technologies and inclusive
development.
NIFTEM has also organised skill development training for
the farmers/prospective entrepreneurs for promoting food processing,
value addition, and entrepreneurship development in food processing
sector. NIFTEM will continue to carry out the skill development
programmes.

49
With regard to the filling of the vacant posts in the Institute,
NIFTEM has informed that concerted efforts are being made to fill up
the remaining vacant posts by giving vide publicity in print and visual
media. The updated status of 110 posts sanctioned by Government is as
under:
Number of post created in NIFTEM is 110, out of which NIFTEM
has filled 71 posts and 39 posts are vacant. NIFTEM is continuously
giving advertisements in Employment News/leading Newspapers to fill-
up the vacant 39 posts.
Comments of the Committee
For comments of the Committee please refer to Para No. 1.22 of
Chapter I of his Report.
[Ministry of Food Processing Industries (Letter No.6-02/2015-
Parl. dated 16.06.2015)]
N. Training and Skill Gap
Recommendation (Serial No. 15)
The Committee find that budgetary allocation for strengthening of
the Institutions in Food Processing Industry for the year 2015-16 is
Rs. 75 crore. The Committee feel that the initiatives are being
taken through Institutes like NIFTEM, IICPT, IGPB and NMPPB,
yet much remains to be done for enhancing and upgrading the skills
and implementation of schemes for Skill Development. They are
of the opinion that this sector is demand oriented, vibrant and depends
on the changing nature of Indian consumer, who is now more informed
in terms of food hygiene, taste and nutritive value. The consumer are
now ready to try newer and processed foods. It creates a lot of scope
wherein the youth could be well trained w.r.t. these areas professionally.
The Committee desire that within the given premises Ministry should
probe the possibility for immediate adoption of ITIs by FPI in various
clusters of the country to upgrade the lower end skills and the youth
could be directly employed with attractive pay packages. Further, they
also emphasize that FPI Sector should partner with few food technology/
processing Institutes and certain courses could be added in (B.Tech in
Food Technology) in IITs also on pilot basis for upgradation of higher
end skills.

50
Reply of the Government
NIFTEM has been running B.Tech (Food Technology and
Management) Course since 2012-13 with student strength of 180 students
per batch.
Total 90 students are admitted in M.Tech programme of
NIFTEM every year. NIFTEM is offering five streams of Post
Graduate Programmes with two years regular M.Tech degree which are
as under:—
1. M.Tech. in Food Technology and Management (FTM).
2. M.Tech. in Food Process Engineering and Management
(FPEM).
3. M.Tech. in Food Plant Operations and Management
(FPOM).
4. M.Tech. in Food Safety and Quality Management
(FSQM).
5. M.Tech. in Food Supply Chain Management (FSCM).
Total 20 students are admitted in Ph.D. programme of
NIFTEM. NIFTEM is offering Ph.D programme in all the above Post
Graduate streams. The status of sanctioned posts in NIFTEM is at
Annexure-IV .
The Indian Institute of Crop Processing Technology began
offering formal degree courses at Bachelor’s/Master’s Level and
Doctoral levels in Food Process Engineering (FPE) from 2009-10
academic year. In B.Tech Program, 40 students are admitted every
year, 20 students are admitted in M.Tech. and 5 are admitted in Ph.D
program.
For involvement of ITIs in various clusters for promoting food
processing and value addition the matter is being taken up with the
Ministry of Skill Development and Entrepreneurship.
As regard adding B.Tech course in Food Technology in IITs, the
matter is being taken up with the Ministry of HRD. Already, IIT, Kharagpur
has a programme on Agriculture and Food Engineering.

51
National Meat and Poultry Processing Board (NMPPB) is in the
process of winding up and is not undertaking any new activity. There
is no continuation of Indian Grape Processing Board (IGPB) in 12th Plan
as on date.
[Ministry of Food Processing Industries (Letter No.6-02/2015-
Parl. dated 16.06.2015)]
Comments of the Committee
For comments of the Committee please refer to Para No. 1.25 of
Chapter I of his Report.

52
CHAPTER III
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE
DO NOT DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE
GOVERNMENT’S REPLY
A. National Meat and Poultry Processing Board
Recommendation (Serial No. 16)
NMPPB was constituted and registered in 2009 under Societies
Registration Act, 1860 with an objective to foster the sustainable
development of Meat and Poultry Board Processing Sector. The Committee
note that the Board was to be an industry driven body, with provision
of funding by the Government for first three years i.e. upto 2012-13. After
this, the Board was supposed to generate its own revenue for sustainability.
However, despite numerous efforts the Board could not attain self-reliance
through its own earnings and continued to require financial assistance
from the Government. The Committee are apprised that Government is
unwilling of greater intervention due to its policies and have decided
to wind up the Board. Keeping in view the importance of hygiene in this
industry and that the industry is largely in unorganized sector, the
Committee recommend that Government must focus on organizing this
sector by continuing the function of the Board with its own support. The
Committee also recommends the Government that private players should
be encouraged to invest in this sector on a larger scale by enticing them
through various concessionary means until proper support is generated
from the private sector. They recommend the Government to withhold
the winding up of the Board and grant hand holding attempt for atleast
5 years once again so that the required hygienic conditions of the meat
products available in market may be established on the lines of Food
Safety and Standard Act, which in turn would assure good health of
non-vegitarian population. The Committee emphasize that the need to
create awareness about maintaining and modernisation of abattoirs and
production of safe and hygienic meat and meat products including poultry
products should be undertaken on war-footing by the Ministry including
training the butchers through outreach programmes.

53
Reply of the Government
NMPPB was set up as an autonomous body under Ministry of
Food Processing Industries (MoFPI) to address the issues related to
production of hygienic, safe and wholesome meat/meat products. CCEA
had approved the proposal for establishment of NMPPB in its meeting
held on 26.12.2008. The establishment of NMPPB was notified in the
Gazette of India through Notification No. 127 and S.O. 208 (E) dated
20th January, 2009. The Board was registered as a society under the
Societies Registration Act, 1860 on 26.03.2009.
A draft Cabinet Note on continuation of National Meat and Poultry
Processing Board (NMPPB) during 12th Plan was circulated to the
concerned Ministries on 07.03.2014. Department of Expenditure, Ministry
of Finance informed that it is unable to support the proposal mainly for
the reason that Government of India can not go on funding such
organisation indefinitely especially when the mandate is to attain
self-sufficiency within 3-4 years.
A meeting of stakeholders was held on 24.07.2014 and it was
observed that the Board can not do much more than creating awareness
and educating the consumer and the other stakeholders. In such a situation,
it is quite clear that the Board cannot achieve self-sufficiency within
3 to 4 years. Thereafter the draft Cabinet Note issued on 07.03.2014 was
withdrawn on 07.08.2014.
Subsequently, an Order dated 25.11.2014 was issued communicating
the decision of the Government to wind up NMPPB and NMPPB was
directed to initiate the winding up process immediately. The
21st Managing Committee meeting of NMPPB was held on 26.11.2014 and
the Managing Committee resolved to wind up NMPPB besides making
a reference to the competent authority of Government of National Capital
Territory of Delhi to obtain the consent of the State Government to
dissolve/wind up the Board/Society. GNCT Delhi have, vide their letter
16.04.2015 accorded their consent for dissolution of the society “National
Meat and Poultry Processing Board” under Section 13 of the Societies
Registration Act, 1860. Further action is being taken by NMPPB to hold
another meeting of the Managing Committee to proceed further in the
matter.
It is submitted that one of the main reasons for winding up NMPPB
is the fact that it has not been possible to interest the private players to

54
contribute to the functioning of the Board. If the private sector had been
involved actively in the affairs of the Board, the issue of continuing
Government support to the Board would not have arisen. The Ministry
is not in a position to entice the private players through any concessionary
means to generate proper support from the private sector. As regards
creating awareness about maintaining and modernisation of abattoirs and
production of safe and hygienic meat and meat products including poultry
product be undertaken by the Ministry including training the butchers
through outreach programmes, it is submitted that as already pointed
out, efforts will be made to address the objectives of the Board through
the other plan schemes of the Ministry .
[Ministry of Food Processing Industries (Letter No.6-02/2015-
Parl. dated 16.06.2015)]
B. National Mission on Food Processing
Recommendation (Serial No. 17)
The Committee observe that the Ministry had launched National
Mission on Food Processing as Centrally Sponsored Scheme during
2012-13 for implementation through States/UTs. The basic objective of
NMFP was decentralization of implementation of Ministry’s scheme with
substantial participation of State/UT Governments. Government had
approved continuation of NMFP during the remainder of 12th Plan
(2013-17). Accordingly new guidelines were issued on 23.07.2013 for
implementation of the Scheme by State/UT Governments, also Rs. 1250
were allocated for the plan period.
The Schemes implemented under NMFP incorporated Scheme for
Technology Up-gradation/Establishment/Modernisation of Food
Processing Industries; Scheme for Cold Chain, Value Addition and
Preservation Infrastructure for Non-Horticultural Products; Scheme for
setting up/modernisation/expansion of abattoirs (implemented w.e.f.
2014-15); Scheme for Human Resource Development (HRD) [Creation of
Infrastructure facilities for running Degree/Diploma/Certificate Courses
in Food Processing Technology, Entrepreneurship Development Program
(EDP), Food Processing Training Centre (FPTC), Training at recognized
Institutes and sensitization cum awareness programme]; Scheme for
Promotional Activities [Organizing Seminar/Workshops, Conducting
Studies/Surveys, Support to Exhibitions/Fairs, Advertisement and
Publicity]; Scheme for Creating Primary Processing Centers/Collection
Centers in Rural Areas; Modernisation of Meat Shops; Reefer Vehicles;
Old Food Parks.

55
However, the Committee find that the Government in the Union
Budget (2015-16) have now delinked the scheme of NMFP for support
from Central Government. Further, the State Governments may (or may
not) decide to continue the scheme out of their increased resources
resulting from recommendations of the 14th Finance Commission. Since
the States have been given freedom to continue NMFP , they will also
formulate the monitoring mechanism at their level.
The Committee notes that NMFP was started by the Ministry on
a mission mode. The Committee further note that on one hand, the
Government underlines the slow response and non-provision of utility
certificates by the States as a major cause behind the slow progress of
these schemes, whereas on the other hand, the Government transfers one
of its major schemes (NMFP) entirely to the State Governments.
The Committee are apprehensive with the current situation where
all the responsibility with regard to implementation of NMFP has been
assigned to the States. Considering the fact that in many States separate
departments for food processing does not even exists, the fate of NMFP
is doubtful. Also, while explaining the impediments in implementation
of various schemes, the Ministry has cited lack of interest of State
Governments resulting in delay in getting various approvals and
clearances. In such a scenario, the Committee are not happy that NMFP
has been delinked and transferred to the States. The Committee would
desire to be apprised about the consultations made by the Ministry with
the State Governments and their comments thereon regarding delinking
of NMFP and its further implementation by the latter.
The Committee express deep concern over the frequent changes
made in the scheme of the Government covering very vital areas of the
Food Processing Sector, which has not only economic but also social,
food security and employment implications. The Committee opines that
sudden changes in structure of the schemes leads to lack of clarity add
to chaos and thwarts the development process. These schemes already
have long gestation period and whenever States or other implementing
agencies come to a platform where from these schemes may be launched
in the perceived manner, these sudden changes causes a standstill to the
programs. The Committee desire that any change in the ongoing schemes
should be made steadily and not abruptly and frequently altered. The
Committee desire that the anguish of Committee in this may also be
conveyed to Ministry of Finance. The Committee would like to apprised
of the impact of this change (in structure of the scheme) and the extent

56
to which the objectives for which these schemes would be fulfilled. The
Committee recommends that there should be a consolidated policy on
Food Processing, there shall also be a coherency and Coordination between
the Centre and State in formulating and implementing the schemes.
The Committee find that Food Processing Sector is governed by
Statutes rather than a single comprehensive policy on Food Processing.
They are of the opinion that National Food Processing Policy incorporating
tax breaks, legislative, administrative and promotional measures. The
Committee also recommend that there shall be pre-hand discussions with
Niti Aayog so that proper funds are allocated to run the schemes efficiently
and effectively towards the objective for which they were initially
conceived.
The Committee therefore recommend that Government should
develop an appropriate, cohesive, uniform and congenial long term policy
wherein the scheme once floated should continue for atleast 5 years so
that the objectives of the scheme are achieved and the stakeholders have
the clarity to operate.
The Committee desire that a stable and comprehensive policy be
brought out as this will ensure private sector investment in infrastructure
development, increased farm productivity and upgradation of quality
leading to further impetus to food processing sector. Besides, such a
policy would ensure institutional strengthening, capacity building across
value chains and promote innovation in general and technological
innovation in particular.
Reply of the Government
Ministry of Food Processing Industries (MoFPI) had made no
consultations with the State Governments before de-linking of NMFP
from central government support. However, MoFPI vide letter dated
27.03.2015 had informed the State Governments that no GoI funds would
be released for implementation of NMFP from FY 2015-16 and onwards
in view of the de-linking of NMFP from financial support from
Government of India (GoI). The State Governments may decide to
continue (or not) NMFP scheme out of their increased resources resulting
from recommendations of the 14th Finance Commission. State
Governments had also been requested to ensure release of funds to all
the ongoing projects approved by SLEC including the committed liabilities
from increased resources.

57
With regard to consolidated food policy on food processing, it is
mentioned that at present there is no National Food Processing Policy
framed by MoFPI. However, few States have their separate food processing
policy incorporating tax breaks, legislative, administrative and promotional
measures. In some states, food processing policy is the part of Industrial
Policy.
[Ministry of Food Processing Industries (Letter No.6-02/2015-
Parl. dated 16.06.2015)]

58
CHAPTER IV
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH
REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT
BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE
Gender Budgeting
Recommendation (Serial No. 6)
The Committee are aware that the origin of food processing
lies in the culinary tradition of our Nation and carried forward by
the women folk since ages. Women are traditionally engaged
in food processing activities like making pickles, papad, nuggat, aam
papad etc. The Committee note that a Gender Budget Cell under the
Chairmanship of a Joint Secretary is in place in the Ministry for inducting
and effecting a change in the Ministry’s policies and programs in a way
that could tackle gender imbalances, promote gender equality and
development and could ensure that public resources through the
Ministry’s budget are allocated and managed accordingly. However,
they are not satisfied with the progress of the Cell as well as the
attitude of the Government towards this issue. The Committee are
apprised that there is no specific allocation of funds for gender
related expenditure in the plan schemes of the Ministry. The
benefit accruing from the schemes of the Ministry has not been
quantified. The Committee, considering the importance of encouragement
of Women entrepreneurs/stakeholders, strongly recommend to release
specific funds for gender related expenditure in these schemes. The
Committee also recommend the Gender Budget Cell to participate more
actively in raising the gender specific issues and needs and also to sensitize
the Ministry on a greater level so that the purpose for which they have
been created is resolved in a satisfactory manner. The Ministry should
also assess the benefits accruing to women through these schemes, quantify
and assemble related data. The Committee emphasize that the Ministry
should utilize the traditional technology and knowledge and the acumen
of the women folk for processing the food products through various
means of processing.

59
The Committee are also apprised that a survey-cum-study has been
conducted by Centre for Market Research and Social Development,
New Delhi for suggesting an Integrated Gender Action Plan pertaining
to Food Processing Sector including the required standards and parameters
on the basis of which units can be certified as compliant with these
requirements as also process of certification and accreditation of the units
which comply with these standards. The study report makes suggestions
on various relevant issues such as policy of the Ministry, monitoring
system to assess gender mainstreaming efforts, Gender Audit of the
policies of the Government, steps to encourage the women Self Help
Groups to start their food processing units, points of convergence with
the existing schemes of other Ministries/Departments and Gender
Budgeting etc. The Committee find Ministry has offered a very cold
response to the recommendations put-forth by the Study-Report. The
Committee recommend that there are some burning issues which should
be taken up by the Ministry more seriously than by passing the buck
to other Ministries/Departments. The recommendations like working
environment, Gender-Audit, demand for specific funds, encouraging
women entrepreneurs by incentivizing them financially as well as socially
(like award presentations) are very important issues and may be taken
up more seriously by the Ministry and also better collaborations should
be catered with other Ministries/Departments to work on these issues in
a more positive manner. The Committee also recommend the
implementing agencies to ensure that private players must abide by the
guidelines regarding gender specific issues and implement them in true
manner so that interest of women workers/entrepreneurs/stakeholders
must be secured.
Reply of the Government
The Ministry has taken a note of the concern of the Committee.
In this context, it is submitted that though the schemes of the Ministry
are project- oriented and not specific to State/Area/Community/Caste and
Gender, there is substantial women participation in manufacturing of
food products and beverages. As per the latest Annual Survey of Industries
2012-13, a total of 2.59 lakh women workers were directly employed in
registered food processing units in the country. As regards women
employment in unregistered food processing units, it was estimated that
a total of 11.86 lakh women workers were engaged in the year 2010-11
as per the information released in the National Sample Survey Office
(NSSO) 67th Round (July, 2010-June, 2011).

60
The overall scenario of women employment in food processing
sector is as under:—
Women employment in Food Processing Sector*: Registered and
Unregistered units
Sector Number of Total (%) Share
Women Employment— of W omen
Food
Processing
Sector
Registered (2012-13) 2.59 lakh 9.14 lakh 28.3
Unregistered (2010-11) 11.86 lakh 47.9 lakh 24.8
*Includes manufacturing of food products and beverages.
As regards the plan schemes of the Ministry i.e. Mega Food Parks
Scheme and Cold Chain Scheme, the Ministry has approved 40 Mega
Food Park projects (Final Approval-21 projects and In-principle Approval-
19 projects), out of which there are 10 female promoters in 6 projects.
The details of the female promoters in the 6 projects are as under:—
Sl. Name of Food Park No. of Name of Female Promoters
No. Female
Promoters
Accorded Final Approval
1. M/s Satara Mega Food Park 1 Smt. Vaishali Hanmant
Pvt. Ltd. Rao Gaikwad
2. M/s Godavari Mega Aqua 2 (1) Smt. Ch. Vyjayanthi
Park Pvt. Ltd. (2) Smt. T. Subrahmanyamma
3. M/s Sikaria Mega Food 3 (1) Surabhi Agriculture SHG
Park Pvt. Ltd. (2) Sw apna Agriculture SHG
(3) Rashmi SHG
Accorded In-principle Approval
4. M/s Zoram Mega Food Park 2 (1) Smt. Zonunsiami
Pvt. Ltd. (2) Smt. Doris Zothansanji
Chhangte
5. M/s Jain Agro Trading 1 Ms. Sara H Shafiq
Pvt. Ltd.
6. M/s Raaga Mayuri Agrovet 1 Mrs. V . Mani Reddy
Pvt. Ltd.
Total 10
In the cold chain scheme, 138 cold chain projects are under
implementation, out of which there are 60 women promoters in 39 Cold
Chain projects.

61
The number of the female Project Investigators in the R&D
programmes sanctioned by the Ministry are as under:—
Female Project Total Project Percentage (%)
Investigators Investigators
No. of PI Amount No. of PI Amount No. of PI Amount
of GIA of GIA of GIA
sanctioned sanctioned sanctioned
(Rs. in lakh) (Rs. in lakh)
Ongoing 18 972.03 120 4010.31 15.% 24.24%
Projects
Completed 16 538.41 70 2441.57 22.86% 22.05%
Projects
34 * 1510.44 190 * 6451.88 17.89% 23.41%
*Some of the Project Investigators have more than one project and they have been counted
separately for each project.
As regards the two academic-cum-research institutes namely,
National Institute of Food Technology and Entrepreneurship Management
(NIFTEM) and Indian Institute of Crop Processing Technology (IICPT)
under the administrative control of Ministry of Food Processing Industries,
the details regarding the number of students passed out and studying
in various courses; number of female trainees participated in the training
programmes; number of female beneficiaries covered under the Village
Adoption Programme being conducted by NIFTEM and number of female
project investigations in R&D programmes of IICPT by the Ministry are
as under:—
NIFTEM
Number  of  the  female  students Passed Out:
passed out and studying in various M.Tech. (2012-14) – 33
courses  being  conducted  by  the Studying:
NIFTEM. B.Tech. 2012-16 Batch – 50
B.Tech. 2013-17 Batch – 55
B.Tech. 2014-18 Batch – 24
M.Tech. 2013-15 Batch – 33
M.Tech. 2014-16 Batch – 37
Ph.D. 2013 – 00
Ph.D. 2014 – 05
Number of the female trainees who 1192
have  participated  in  the training
programme conducted by NIFTEM.
Number  of  female  beneficiaries 615
covered under the Village Adoption
Programme  being  conducted  by
NIFTEM.

62
IICPT
Number of female students passed out and studying in various
courses being conducted by IICPT
• Presently studying: 26 (in M.Tech. + Ph.D. Programmes) and
71 (in B.Tech. Programme)
• Passed out: 65
B.Tech. M.Tech. M.Tech. Ph.D.
(FPE) (FST)
PASSED OUT
2009-10 13 5
2010-11 14 6 2
2011-12 13 4 2
2012-13 6
PRESENT
2012-13 23 3
2013-14 25 4 6 1
2014-15 25 3 6 3
Number of female trainees who have participated in the training
programmes conducted by IICPT
• 1518 (during the year 2014-15)
• 799 (2012-13), 760 (2013-14) and 1148 (2014-15)
Number of female project investigators in the R&D programmes
of IICPT sanctioned by the Ministry:—
• 3 Project Investigators and 2 Co-Project Investigators (during
the period from 2011-12 till date)
The Human Resource Development (HRD) component of the
Centrally Sponsored Scheme National Mission on Food Processing
(NMFP) which was being implemented through the State/UT
Governments, aimed at skill up-gradation in the food processing sector
by imparting training under the Entrepreneurship Development
Programme and Food Processing Training Centre components having
not less than 35% of the trainees from SC/ST/women candidates. However,
the Centrally Sponsored Scheme of NMFP has been delinked from Central

63
Government support from the financial year 2015-16. State Governments
may decide to continue with the Mission out of their increased resources
resulting from the recommendations of the 14th Finance Commission.
[Ministry of Food Processing Industries (Letter No.6-02/2015-
Parl. dated 16.06.2015)]
Comments of the Committee
For comments of the Committee please refer to Para No. 1.10 of
Chapter I of this Report.

64
CHAPTER V
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH
FINAL REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT ARE STILL AWAITED
-Nil-
NEW DELHI; HUKM DEO NARAYAN YADAV,
14 December, 2015 Chairperson,
23 Agrahayana, 1937 (Saka) Standing Committee on Agriculture.

65
ANNEXURE I
Government of India
Ministry of Food Processing Industries
Panchsheel Bhawan, August Kranti Marg
New Delhi-110049
DO No. P-11013/01/2015-PC June 8, 2015
Dear Shri Watal,
The Hon’ble Parliamentary Committee on Agriculture in the Eighth
Report on Demands for Grants (2015-16) have expressed their concerns
over reduced budgetary allocations to this Ministry and strongly
recommended that potential of Food Processing sector in terms of
economic growth, employment capacity and food security be duly
considered while allocating the BE/RE to this Ministry.
2. The food processing sector is playing a vital role not only in
reducing wastage, ensuring better returns to the farmers and promoting
employment but also addressing critical issues of food security and food
inflation. This sector has recorded an average annual growth rate (AAGR)
of around 8.4% during the five years ending 2012-13. Employment in
registered food processing units has been growing at AAGR of 2.41%
during 2008-09 to 2012-13.
3. The planning Commission had allocated a plan outlay of
Rs. 5990 crore for 12th Five Year Plan but year wise status of actual
budget allocation is as under:—
(Rs. in crore)
Year BE RE Utilisation % of utilisation
2012-13 660.00 660.00 655.88 99.38
2013-14 708.00 550.00 527.64 95.93
2014-15 770,00 600 00 579.49 96.63
2015-16 487.00

66
This allocation is grossly inadequate for the ongoing Schemes of
the Ministry.
4. In view of the recommendations made by Hon’ble Parliamentary
Committee on Agriculture, I would request you to substantially augment
the provision in the budget for the ongoing schemes of the Ministry at
RE stage.
Yours sincerely ,
(Ranglal Jamuda)
Shri R.P . Watal
Secretary,
Ministry of Finance,
Department of Expenditure,
North Block, New Delhi

67
ANNEXURE II
Status of the financial progress of the 21 Mega Food Parks accorded Final Approval (as on 26.05.2015)
(Rs. in Crore)
Sl. Project NameState Project CostDate of Date of Amount of Amount of Actual
No. In-principle Finalgrant grant expen-
Approval Approval approved released diture
1 2 3 45678 9
1. Srini Food Park Pvt. Ltd., Andhra Pradesh 121.1016.12.2008 27.03.2009 50.00 45.00 122.68
Chittoor
2. Godavari Mega Aqua Park Andhra Pradesh122.60 21.09.2012 16.12.2013 50.00 0.00 7.73
Pvt. Ltd., West Godavari
3. North East Mega Food ParkAssam 75.98 16.12.2008 27.03.2009 50.00 40.00 49.95
Ltd., Nalbari
4. Pristine Logistics and Bihar 127.6021.09.2012 06.08.2014 50.00 5.00 8.43
Infraprojects Pvt. Ltd.,
Khagaria
5. Indus Best Mega Food Park Chhattisgarh 124.5006.09.2012 04.06.2014 50.00 0.00 2.88
Pvt. Ltd., Raipur
6. Raipur Mega Food Park Ltd., Chhattisgarh 126.1221.09.2012 04.06.2014 50.00 0.00 7.51
Bemetara
7. Gujarat Agro InfrastructureGujarat 117.8721.09.2012 22.05.2014 50.00 05.00 16.64
Mega Food Park Pvt. Ltd.,
Surat

68
8. Cremica Food Park Pvt. Ltd. Himachal Pradesh99.70 21.09.2012 06.08.2014 50.00 5.00 10.49
(earlier known as Poliyan Mega
Food Park Pvt. Ltd.), Una
9. RFK Greens Food Park Pvt. Jammu and 79.43 21.09.2012 19.02.2014 50.00 0.00 7.28
Ltd., Pulwama Kashmir
10. Jharkhand Mega Food Park Jharkhand114.74 16.12.2008 27.03.2009 50.00 30.00 74.80
Pvt. Ltd., Ranchi
11. Integrated Food Park Pvt. Karnataka144.33 03.08.2010 27.03.2011 50.00 45.00 156.34
Ltd., Tumkur
12. Indus Mega Food Park Madhya Pradesh 127.7010.10.2011 27.08.2012 50.00 45.00 97.17
Pvt. Ltd., Khargoan
13. Paithan Mega Food Park Ltd.,Maharashtra 124.56 01.04.2011 08.03.2013 50.00 5.00 26.01
Aurangabad
14. Satara Mega Food Park Maharashtra 139.33 21.09.2012 06.08.2014 50.00 0.00 32.70
Pvt. Ltd., Satara
15. MITS Mega Food Park Ltd., Odisha 80.17 29.04.2011 16.04.2012 50.00 15.00 19.14
Rayagada
16. International Mega FoodPunjab 130.3803.08.2010 25.05.2011 50.00 45.00 120.19
Park Ltd., Fazilka
17. Greentech Mega Food Park Rajasthan113.57 21.09.2012 19.02.2014 50.00 5.00 9.75
Pvt. Ltd., Ajmer
18. Sikaria Mega Food Park Tripura 87.45 29.04.2011 30.11.2011 50.00 20.79 29.27
Pvt. Ltd., West Tripura
1 2 3 45678 9

19. Patanjali Food and Herbal Uttarakhand95.08 16.12.2008 27.03.2009 50.00 45.00 95.33
Park Pvt. Ltd., Haridwar
20. Himalayan Food Park Pvt. Uttarakhand 99.9621.09.2012 23.01.2014 50.00 5.00 19.76
Ltd., Udam Singh Nagar
21. Jangipur Bengal Mega Food West Bengal 132.7116.12.2008 16.03.2010 50.00 45.00 125.68
Park Ltd., Murshidabad
1 2 3 45678 9
69

70
ANNEXURE III
F. No. 21-MFPI/11-Mega Food Park
Government of India
Ministry of Food Processing Industries
Panchsheel Bhawan, August Kranti Marg,
New Delhi-110019
Dated: 10.09.2014
OFFICE MEMORANDUM
I am directed to inform that the para 9.3 of Consolidated Scheme
Guidelines w.e.f.  01.10.2012 and Revised Scheme Guidelines w.e.f.
10.02.2014 has been modified as under:—
Existing Para 9.3 of Consolidated Scheme Guidelines w.e.f. 01.10.2012
and Revised Scheme Guidelines w.e.f. 10.02.2014:—
“In the event of an SPV withdrawing from executing a project
before utilizing the Government assistance, the SPV should immediately
return the Government assistance together with the interest accrued
thereon, in accordance with provision laid under GFR 19 of Government
of India.”
This provision will be applicable for Mega Food Park projects finally
approved by the Ministry in Phase 1 and 2.
Modified Para 9.3 of Consolidated Scheme Guidelines w.e.f. 01.10.2012
and Revised Scheme Guidelines w.e.f. 10.02.2014:—
“In the event of SPV withdrawing from executing the Project, SPV
shall return the amount of grants-in-aid released by MoFPI together with
the interest accrued thereon, within a period of not more than 60 days
of acceptance of its withdrawal by MoFPI. The accrued interest shall be

71
calculated at the SBI Benchmark Prime Lending Rate prevalent at the
time or 10% per annum (as per general terms and conditions of grants-
in-aid laid down in General Financial Rules-2009, Government of India),
whichever is higher. In the event of failure of the SPV in refunding the
grant amount along with interest within period specified, a penalty may
be imposed by the Ministry.”
This provision will be applicable for Mega Food Park projects finally
approved by the Ministry in Phase 3 and onwards.
Sanjay Kumar Singh,
Under Secrettary,
Government of India.

72
ANNEXURE IV
STATUS OF 110 SANCTIONED POSTS IN NIFTEM
Details of Posts created, filled and to be filled (03.06.2015)
Sl. Post Name Pay Scale Post Incum- Posts
No. Created bents in to be
Position filled
1 2 3 456
1. Director 75000/- (Fixed) + 1 1 0
5000 Spl. Allowance
2. Professor 37400-67400+AGP 10000 6 5 1
3. Associate 37400-67000+AGP 9000 17 8 9
Professor
4. Assistant 15600-39100+AGP 6000 32 28 4
Professor
5. Registrar* 37400-67000+GP 10000 1 1 0
6. Private Secretary 9300-34800+Grade Pay of 1 0 1
Rs. 4600
7. Personal 9300-34800+Grade Pay of 2 0 2
Assistant Rs. 4200
8. Executive 9300-34800+Grade Pay of 2 2 0
Assistant Rs. 4200
9. Assistant** 9300-34800+Grade Pay of 9 4 5
Rs. 4200
10. Peon PB 1+1800 2 0 2
11. Lab Incharge 9300-34800+Grade Pay of 8 4 4
Rs. 4200
12. Lab Technician PB 1+2800 9 4 5
13. Deputy Librarian 15600-39100+7600 (A.G.P .) 1 1 0
14. Assistant 15600–39100+GP 2 2 0
Librarian of Rs. 5400
15. Sr. Library 9300-34800+Grade Pay of 2 2 0
Information Rs. 4200
Asstt.
16. Assistant 15600-39100+Grade Pay 3 3 0
Registrar of Rs. 5400

73
17. Network 9300-34800+Grade Pay of 1 1 0
Administrator Rs. 4200
18. System 9300-34800+Grade Pay 1 1 0
Administrator of Rs. 4200
19. Deputy 15600-39100+Grade Pay 1 1 0
Controller of Rs. 7600
(Finance and
accounts)
20. Accounts Officer 9300-34800+AGP 4800 1 1 0
21. Accountant 9300-34800+Grade Pay of 2 2 0
Rs. 4200
22. Cashier PB 2+4200 1 1 0
23. Junior Engineer 9300-34800+Grade Pay of 2 2 0
Rs. 4200
24. Deputy General PB 3+7600 1 1 0
Manager
25. Assistant PB 3+5400 1 0 1
General
Manager
26. Controller of 37400-67000+AGP 1 0 1
Examination of 10000
Total 110 75 35
Note: * 01 Registrar is likely to join.
** 05 Assistants are likely to join.
Above details also include following contractual appointments: Professor-02,
Assistant Professor-04 and Dy . General Manager-01.
For Teaching posts: Rolling vacancy notice for faculty positions advertised and
interviews will be conducted by the end of June, 2015.
For Non-teaching posts: Vacancy notice advertised for the posts of CoE, Lab
Incharge, Lab Technician, PS and PA. Screening is under process and interview
will be conducted by the end of July , 2015.
Eligibility criteria for the posts of DGM and AGM are to be reviewed and thereafter
vacancy notice will be advertised.
1 2 3 456

74
ANNEXURE V
STANDING COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE
(2015-16)
MINUTES OF THE ELEVENTH SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE
The Committee sat on Thursday, the 10th December, 2015 from
1000 hrs. to 1050 hrs. in Chamber of the Chairperson, Committee on
Agriculture, Room No. 138 (Third Floor), Parliament House, New Delhi.
PRESENT
Shri Hukm Deo Narayan Yadav — Chairperson
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Prof. Richard Hay
3. Shri Sanganna Karadi
4. Shri Nalin Kumar Kateel
5. Md. Badaruddoza Khan
6. Shri C. Mahendran
7. Dr. Tapas Mandal
8. Shri Janardan Mishra
9. Shri Ajay Nishad
10. Shri Mukesh Rajput
11. Shri Satyapal Singh (Sambhal)
12. Shri B.S. Yeddyurappa
Rajya Sabha
13. Shri Mohd. Ali Khan
14. Shri Rajpal Singh Saini
15. Shri Ram Nath Thakur

75
SECRETARIAT
1. Shri U.B.S. Negi — Joint Secretary
2. Shri Arun K. Kaushik — Director
3. Shri C. Vanlalruata — Deputy Secretary
4. Shri Sumesh Kumar — Under Secretary
2. At the outset, Chairperson welcomed the Members to the Sitting
of the Committee. Thereafter, the Committee took up for consideration
the following draft Reports:—
*(i) *** *** *** *** ***
(ii) Draft Report on the Action Taken by the Government on the
Observations/Recommendations contained in the 8th Report
(16th Lok Sabha) of the Committee on Agriculture (2014-15)
on ‘Demands for Grants (2015-16)’ of the Ministry of Food
Processing Industries.
*(iii) *** *** *** *** ***
*(iv) *** *** *** *** ***
*(v) *** *** *** *** ***
3. After some deliberations, the Committee adopted the draft
Reports without any modification. They authorized the Chairperson to
finalize and present these Reports to Parliament after getting them factually
verified from the concerned Departments/Ministry.
*4. *** *** *** *** ***
* Matter not related to this Report.

76
APPENDIX
(Vide Para 4 of Introduction of the Report)
ANALYSIS OF ACTION TAKEN BY GOVERNMENT ON THE
EIGHTH REPORT OF COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE
(16TH LOK SABHA)
(i) Total number of Recommendations: 17
(ii) Observ ations/Recommendations which have been Accepted by the
Government:
Recommendation Nos. 1, 2, 3, 4 5, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14
and 15
Total : 14
Percentage : 82.35%
(iii) Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not desire
to pursue in view of the Government’s reply:
Recommendation Nos. 16 and 17
Total : 2
Percentage : 11.76%
(iv) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies of the
Government have not been accepted by the Committee:
Recommendation No. 6
Total : 1
Percentage : 5.88%
(v) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which final replies of
the Government are still awaited:
Recommendation No. -Nil-
Total : 0
Percentage : 0%

“All Parliamentary Publications including DRSC Reports are 
available on sale at the Sales Counter, Reception, Parliament House 
(Tel. Nos. 23034726, 23034495, 23034496), Agents appointed 
by Lok Sabha Secretariat and Publications Division, Ministry 
of Information and Broadcasting, CGO Complex, Lodhi Road, New 
Delhi (Tel. Nos. 24367260, 24365610) and their outlets. The said 
information is available on website ‘www.parliamentofindia.nic.in’.
The Souvenir Items with logo of Parliament are also available at Sales 
Counter, Reception, Parliament House, New Delhi. The Souvenir 
items with Parliament Museum logo are available for sale at Souvenir 
Shop (Tel. No. 23035323), Parliament Museum, Parliament Library 
Building, New Delhi. List of these items are available on the website 
mentioned above.”