THIRTY THIRD REPORT
STANDING COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE
(2016-2017)
(SIXTEENTH LOK SABHA)
MINISTRY OF AGRICULTURE AND FARMERS WELFARE
(DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE, COOPERATION AND
FARMERS WELFARE)
ÔDEMANDS FOR GRANTS
(2016-2017)Õ
[Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations
contained  in the Twenty Fifth  Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) of the
Standing Committee on Agriculture (2015-2016)]
Presented to Lok Sabha on 15.12.2016
Laid on the Table of Rajya Sabha on 15.12.2016
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
December, 2016/Agrahayana, 1938 ( Saka)


COA No. 353
Price : R 83.00
' 2017 B Y L OK SABHA S ECRETARIAT
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct
of Business in Lok Sabha (Fifteenth Edition) and printed by
Jainco Art India, New Delhi-110 005.

CONTENTS
PAGE
COMPOSITION OF THE C OMMITTEE ............................................. (iii)
INTRODUCTION ................................................................. (v)
CHAPTER I Report ....................................................... 1
CHAPTER II Observations/Recommendations which have been
accepted by the Government .......................... 13
CHAPTER III Observations/Recommendations which the Committee
do not desire to pursue in view of the GovernmentÕs
replies ....................................................... 38
CHAPTER IV Observations/Recommendations in respect of which
replies of the Government have not been accepted
by the Committee ........................................ 39
CHAPTER V Observations/Recommendations in respect of
which final replies of the Government are still
awaited ...................................................... 45
ANNEXURES
I. Brief on Central Sector Scheme ÒEstablishment of Agri-
clinics and Agri-Business Centres (ACABC) Ó ................ 47
II. List of ATMA Governing Body and Management
Committee......................................................... 49
III. Indicative List of Agri-Ventures under ACABC Scheme ... 54
IV . Minutes of the 7th Sitting of the Committee held on
09.12.2016 ......................................................... 58
APPENDIX
Analysis of Action Taken by the Government on the
Recommendations contained in the T wenty Fifth Report
(Sixteenth Lok Sabha) of the Standing Committee on
Agriculture (2015-2016) ......................................... 60
(i)

COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE
(2016-2017)
Shri Hukm Deo Narayan Yadav — Chairperson
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Prof. Ravindra Vishwanath Gaikwad
3. Shri Sanganna Karadi
4. Shri Nalin Kumar Kateel
5. Smt. Raksha Khadse
6. Md. Badaruddoza Khan
7. Shri C. Mahendran
8. Dr. Tapas Mandal
9. Shri Janardan Mishra
10. Shri Devji Patel
11. Shri Nityanand Rai
12. Shri Mukesh Rajput
13. Shri Neiphiu Rio
14. Shri Konakalla Narayana Rao
15. Shri C.L. Ruala
16. Shri Arjun Charan Sethi
17. Shri Satyapal Singh (Sambhal)
18. Shri Virendra Singh
19. Shri Dharmendra Yadav
20. Shri Jai Prakash Narayan Yadav
21. Shri B.S. Yeddyurappa
Rajya Sabha
22. Shri Sambhaji Shahu Chhatrapati
23. Sardar Sukhdev Singh Dhindsa
24. Shri Janardan Dwivedi
25. Shri Meghraj Jain
(iii)

26. Shri Vinay Katiyar
27. Shri Mohd. Ali Khan
28. Shri Ram Nath Thakur
29. Shri R. Vaithilingam
30. Shri Shankarbhai N. Vegad
31. Shri Darshan Singh Yadav
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Shri U.B.S. Negi Ñ Joint Secretary
2. Shri Arun K. Kaushik Ñ Director
3. Shri C. Vanlalruata Ñ Deputy Secretary
(iv)

(v)
INTRODUCTION
I, the Chairperson, Standing Committee on Agriculture (2016-17),
having been authorized by the Committee to submit the Report on
their behalf, present this Thirty Third Report on action taken by the
Government on the Observations/Recommendations contained in the
Twenty Fifth Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) of the Standing Committee
on Agriculture (2015-16) on ÔDemands for Grants (2016-17) Õ pertaining
to the Ministry of Agriculture and Farmers Welfare (Department of
Agriculture, Cooperation and Farmers Welfare).
2. The Twenty Fifth Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) of the Standing
Committee on Agriculture (2015-16) on ÔDemands for Grants (2016-17) Õ
of the Ministry of Agriculture and Farmers Welfare (Department of
Agriculture, Cooperation and Farmers Welfare) was presented to
Lok Sabha and laid on the Table of Rajya Sabha on 02 May, 2016. The
Action Taken Notes on the Report were received on 08 August, 2016.
3. The Report was considered and adopted by the Committee at
their Sitting held on 09.12.2016.
4. An analysis of the action taken by the Government on the
Observations/Recommendations contained in the T wenty Fifth Report
(Sixteenth Lok Sabha) of the Committee is given in Appendix.
   N
EW D ELHI; HUKM DEO NARAYAN YADAV,
09 December, 2016 Chairperson,
19 Agrahayana, 1938 (Saka) Standing Committee on Agriculture

1
CHAPTER I
REPORT
This Report of the Standing Committee on Agriculture deals with
the action taken by the Government on the recommendations contained
in the Twenty Fifth Report of the Standing Committee on Agriculture
(2015-16) on ÔDemands for Grants (2016-17) Õ of the Ministry of
Agriculture and Farmers Welfare (Department of Agriculture,
Cooperation and Farmers Welfare) which was presented to Lok Sabha
and laid on the Table of Rajya Sabha on 02 May, 2016.
2. The Ministry of Agriculture and Farmers Welfare (Department of
Agriculture, Cooperation and Farmers Welfare) have furnished Action
Taken Replies in respect of all the 27 Observations/Recommendations
contained in the Report. These replies have been categorized as under:Ñ
(i) Observations/Recommendations that have been accepted by
the Government:
Recommendation Para Nos. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 9, 10, 11, 12,
14, 16, 17, 21, 23, 24, 25, 26 and 27
(Chapter II - Total 19)
(ii) Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not
desire to pursue in view of the Government Õs reply:
Recommendation Para No. NIL
(Chapter III - NIL)
(iii) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which action
taken replies of the Government have not been accepted by
the Committee:
Recommendation Para Nos. 7, 8, 18, 19, 20 and 22
(Chapter IV - Total 06)
(iv) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which final
replies of the Government are still awaited:
Recommendation Para Nos. 13, 15
(Chapter V - Total 02)
3. The Committee trust that utmost importance would be given
to implementation of the Observations/Recommendations accepted

2
by the Government. In cases, where it is not possible for the
Department to implement the Recommendations in letter and spirit
for any reason, the matter should be reported to the Committee
with reasons for non-implementation. The Committee desire that
further Action Taken Note on the Observations/Recommendations
contained in Chapter-I and Final Action Taken Replies to the
Observations/Recommendations contained in Chapter-V of this Report
be furnished to them at an early date.
4. The Committee will now deal with the action taken by the
Government on some of the Recommendations in the succeeding
paragraphs.
A. ATTRACTING RURAL YOUTH TOWARDS AGRICULTURE
Recommendation (Para No. 4)
5. The Committee had observed/recommended as under:Ñ
ÒApart from increasing the financial allocation to the Agriculture
Sector, the Committee are also of the firm conviction that the
vocation of Agriculture needs to be a remunerative one like any
other vocation. A sense of pride needs to be infused if this vital
sector of the economy is to attract youth especially, the rural
educated youth. These youth need to be given institutional training
to develop their entrepreneurship skills in the field of agriculture
apart from providing institutional finance at easy terms to kick
start their ventures. The Committee hope that as result of
involvement of youth in agriculture, the core sector of our economy
could become sustainable and viable. The Committee would like to
be apprised of the initiatives undertaken by the Department in this
regard.Ó
6. In its Action Taken reply, the Department has stated as under:Ñ
ÒEducated Youth in Agriculture and allied sectors are encouraged
to develop Entrepreneurship skills in the field of agriculture. Ministry
of Agriculture and Farmers Welfare, Government of India is
implementing a scheme of ÒAgri-Clinics & Agri-Business Centres
(ACABC) SchemeÓ in which 2 months institutional training (MANAGE
through selected Nodal Training Institute (NTI) across India) and
financial assistance (Back Ended Subsidy) through NABARD to
Nationalized and Rural Cooperative Banks are being provided. In
the same way, one programme, namely, Attracting and Retaining
Youth in Agriculture (ARYA) is being implemented by ICAR and
scheme for Skill Training for Rural Youth (STRY) is being implemented
by DAC&FW involving rural youth in agriculture (ANNEXURE-1).Ó

3
7. The Committee were of the view that Youth especially rural
educated youth need to be given institutional training to develop
their entrepreneurship skills in the field of agriculture and provide
them institutional finance at easy terms to kickstart their ventures.
On perusal of the Action Taken Reply, the Committee express their
satisfaction that educated youth in Agriculture and Allied Sectors
are encouraged to develop entrepreneurship skills in the field of
agriculture through ÒAgri-Clinics and Agri-business Centres scheme Ó
in which, two months training through selected Nodal Training
Institute across India and financial assistance through Nationalized
and Rural Cooperative Banks are being provided. Further, ICAR is
implementing a programme i.e. Attracting and Retaining Youth in
Agriculture (ARYA) and scheme for Skill Training for Rural Youth
(STRY) being implemented by DAC&FW involving rural youth in
agriculture. However, being aware of the stark reality that educated
rural youth do not consider agriculture to be a viable career option,
the Committee are of the firm opinion that concerted and
coordinated efforts need to be put in by the Government in order
to reverse the current trend. On their part, the Government should
publicise these schemes vigorously so that awareness is created
amongst the rural educated youth to take up agriculture as their
vocation. The Committee, therefore, reiterate their recommendation
that the Department should make continuous and vigorous efforts
for attracting rural educated youth to the field of agriculture. The
Committee would like to be apprised of the details of steps taken
alongwith the progress achieved in this regard.
B. SLOW PACED UTILIZATION OF FUNDS
Recommendation (Para No. 7)
8. The Committee had observed/recommended as under:Ñ
ÒNotwithstanding the argument put forth by the Department that
their utilization of funds has been around 99.23%, 98.53%, 98.26%
and 96% (provisional) of RE during the fiscals 2012-13; 2013-14;
2014-15 and 2015-16, the facts remain that the funds allocated to
them have been drastically cut down with reference to funds
actually required as reflected in BE as per their plan of action. The
Department cannot rest satisfied based on high percentage of
utilization of RE funds, as contrary to the fact their plan of action
has been affected due to drastic cut in the approved plan outlay.
Thus, by relying on RE figures, the Ministry is trying to put a lid
over the slow pace of utilization of funds during the first two

4
quarters of a fiscal year which results in Ministry of Finance resorting
to reducing the allocation at RE Stage. If BE figures are taken into
consideration, then percentage of actual utilizations dips to 87.74%;
86.63%; 86.02% and 82.71% (provisional) for the fiscals under
consideration. The Committee are of the firm opinion that the
later figure is more accurate as it reflects the true picture. On the
flip side if credence is to be given only to actual utilization figures
vis-a-vis RE figures, this will ultimately prove detrimental to the
overall growth and development of agri-sector due to slow-pace of
utilization of funds with reference to BE. The Committee therefore,
recommend that the Ministry should take a holistic view in the
matter and efforts should be made for optimum utilization of
funds in the first two quarters under various schemes implemented
by them. In this regard the Department should impress upon the
implementing agencies i.e. States/UTs to expedite the pace of
utilization of funds so as to demand more funds from the Ministry
of Finance. Ó
9. In its Action Taken reply, the Department has stated as under:Ñ
ÒThe Department internally reviews the pace of utilization of funds
on a weekly basis in Senior Officers meetings. Apart from this, the
Department has been taking up the issue of expediting fund
utilization with State Governments and implementing agencies on
a regular basis in meetings as well as through letters. The
Department is covered under the Monthly Expenditure Plan (MEP)
of Ministry of Finance where amount of funds that can be released
in a particular quarter is fixed. The Department has been strictly
adhering to the MEP . It may, however , be mentioned that release
of funds by the department depends on timely release of matching
share by the State Governments and submission of utilization
certificates.Ó
10. While noting that the funds allocated to the Department has
been drastically cut down with reference to the funds actually
required as reflective in BE as per their plan of action, the Committee
recommended that the Ministry should strive for optimum utilization
of funds in the first two quarters and impress upon all implementing
agencies to expedite the pace of utilization funds. In its Action
Taken Reply, the Department has stated that the pace of utilization
of funds is being resisted internally on weekly basis and takes up
the issue of expediting funds utilization with all implementing
agencies on a regular basis. The Department has also been strictly
adhering to Monthly Expenditure Plan (MEP) which fixes quarterly

5
release of funds. According to the Department, the release of funds
by them depends upon timely release of matching share and
submission of utilization certificates by implementing agencies. The
Committee are not convinced with the evasive reply of the
Department as they are trying to pass the buck to the implementing
agencies. Needless to say, the plan of action of the Department may
have been adversely affected due to drastic reduction of funds at
RE stage by the Ministry of Finance. The Department being the
nodal agency should make efforts to address this problem rather
than being content with high utilization of RE funds. The Committee,
therefore, reiterate their recommendation that the Department
should impress upon all implementing agencies to expedite the pace
of utilization of funds in the first two quarters of a fiscal year
alongwith UCs of past allocation, so as to enable them to demand
more funds from Ministry of Finance at RE stage. The Committee
would like to be apprised of the initiative undertaken by the
Department in this regard.
C. OUTSTANDING UTILIZATION CERTIFICATES
Recommendation (Para No. 8)
11. The Committee had observed/recommended as under:Ñ
ÒThe issue of liquidation of Outstanding Utilization Certificates has
been raised time and again by the Committee in their earlier
Reports. The Committee have been apprised that inspite of the
efforts of Department of Agriculture, Cooperation and Farmers
Welfare (DAC&FW), as on 31 March, 2016, 414 Utilization Certificates
are still pending, amounting to Rs. 726.95 crore. While appreciating
the efforts put in by the Department with regard to liquidation of
Outstanding Utilization Certificates, the Committee feel that the
entire issue needs to be relooked afresh, so that corrective measures
may be taken to address the issue comprehensively. The Committee,
therefore, desire that the Department should take up the matter
proactively with all State Governments/Implementing Agencies
ensuring a lasting solution to this perennial problem. The Committee
would like to be apprised of the initiative undertaken by the
Department in this regard. Ó
12. In its Action Taken reply, the Department has stated as under:Ñ
ÒAs on 25.07.2016, 743 UCs for an amount of Rs. 1853.87 Crores
only are outstanding for funds released up to 31.3.2015. The
Department and Principal Accounts Office is monitoring status of
outstanding Utilization Certificates rigorously and no funds are
being released without submission of the Utilization Certificates. Ó

6
13. While appreciating the efforts made by the Department
with regard to liquidation of outstanding Utilization Certificates,
the Committee felt that the entire issue needs to be relooked afresh
and desired that the Department should take up the matter
proactively with all State Governments/Implementing Agencies for
ensuring a lasting solution to this permanent problem. As on
31.03.2016, 414 utilization certificates amounting Rs. 726.95 crore
were pending. However, the Committee are anguished to note that
since then, the situation has deteriorated further, as is clear from
the Action Taken reply of the Department that the number of pending
Utilization Certificates as on 25.07.2016 has risen to 743 UCs
amounting to Rs. 1853.87 crore for funds released up to 31.03.2015.
This lack of financial discipline on the part of the Implementing
Agencies adversely impacts the growth and development of the
Agriculture Sector, as a result of which the benefits of the various
schemes, implemented by the Department do not percolate down
to the intended beneficiaries. The Committee feel that the increased
number of outstanding Utilization Certificates clearly indicate
absence of any institutional mechanism at the apex level to rigorously
monitor timely and optimum utilization of funds. Deeply concerned
at this alarming state of affairs, the Committee reiterate their
recommendation that the Department needs to look into the issue
afresh and take corrective measures at the earliest so that all
outstanding Utilization Certificates are liquidated without further
delay. The Committee would like to be apprised of the concrete
action taken by the Department in this regard.
D. INTEGRATED SCHEME ON AGRICULTURAL MARKETING (ISAM)
Recommendation (Para No. 15)
14. The Committee had observed/recommended as under:Ñ
ÒThe Committee were informed that funds meant for general
category for construction of Rural Godowns under the sub-scheme
of Agricultural Marketing Infrastructure (AMI) during the year
2014-15 has exhausted. In the year , 2015-16, out of the RE of
Rs. 675.86 crore for AMI schemes, funds for the general category
were fully exhausted with the release of Rs. 493.81 crore. The BE
for the whole of ISAM for the current fiscal is only Rs. 787.90
crore, out of which AMI is one of the five sub-schemes. Further the
total liability as on date stands at Rs. 1250.27 crore. This comprises
of Rs. 317.52 crore pipeline liability and Rs. 932.75 crore committed
liablity. This total liability is mostly for the general category. Also,

7
the limited allocations for AMI in 2016-17 will be restricted to
65.2% for the general category. Totally dissatisfied at this sordid
state of affairs, the Committee recommend that allocation of funds
be enhanced at RE stage during the fiscal for ISAM, so that the
Department is in a position to honour its total liability of
Rs. 1250.27 crore at the earliest. Ó
15. In its Action Taken Reply, the Department has started as under:Ñ
ÒDemand for additional funds at RE stage is placed around August-
September of each year. Accordingly, demand for additional funds
under the sub-scheme of Agricultural Marketing Infrastructure (AMI)
will be sought to honour the liability .Ó
16. The Committee were concerned to note that shortage of
funds for Agricultural Marketing Infrastructure, a sub-scheme of
ISAM, had resulted in creating a liability of Rs. 1250.27 crore. This
liability comprises of Rs. 317.52 crore pipeline liability and
committed liability of Rs. 932.75 crore. Being of the firm opinion
that shortage of funds had a negative impact on AMI, the Committee
had recommended that allocation of funds be enhanced at RE stage
during 2016-17 so as to enable the Department to be in a position
to honour its liability of Rs. 1250.27 crore. In response, the
Department has informed that demands for additional funds at RE
stage is placed around August-September of each year. Accordingly,
demand for additional funds under the sub-scheme of Agricultural
Marketing Infrastructure (AMI) will be sought to honour the liability.
As the funds at RE stage might have been allocated for AMI by the
Ministry of Finance by the time, the Committee would like to be
apprised of the same at the earliest.
E. RASHTRIYA KRISHI VIKAS YOJANA (RKVY)
Recommendation (Para No. 18)
17. The Committee had observed/recommended as under:Ñ
ÒThe Committee have been informed that from April, 2016, the
MinistryÕs online monitoring mechanism would be functional which
would ensure uploading of up to date figures at the touch of a
button and thereby providing the much needed dynamism to the
monitoring mechanism. It has further been stated that Central
Teams under a Joint Secretary conduct field visits every two months.
However , the Committee are anguished to note that the visit of
the Central teams are confined to the State Capital level only.

8
However , the Committee is of the opinion that these visits should
invariably be done at the district level so as to get the situation
prevalent at the ground level. The Committee would like the
Department to act accordingly. Ó
18. In its Action Taken Reply, the Department has stated as under:Ñ
ÒThe issue of non finalization of State Agriculture Plan (SAP)/
District Agriculture Plan (DAP) by various State Governments were
taken up by the Department with the State Government in various
meetings held with officials of State Governments. All the defaulting
State Governments have been informed that during 2016-17, the
2nd instalment of 50% of funds allocated to the State under the
scheme would not be released if they failed to finalize DAP/SAP . Ó
19. The Committee were of the opinion that visits of Central
Teams under a Joint Secretary for monitoring the progress of
implementation of Rashtriya Krishi Vikas Yojana should not be
confined to the State Capitals but these visits should invariably be
done at the district level so as to get the situation prevalent at the
ground level. However, the Committee are anguished to note from
the Action Taken Reply that the Department is conspicuously silent
on this aspects. Taking a rather serious view of this oversight on
part of the Department, the Committee desire that the Department
should exercise extreme caution before furnishing their action taken
reply to the Committee Õs recommendation so as to ensure that such
instances are never repeated again. Nevertheless, the Committee
would like the Department to respond to their recommendation
that bi-monthly field visits of Central Teams should take place at
the district level as well and the initiatives undertaken by the
Department in this regard.
F . RASHTRIYA KRISHI VIKAS YOJANA (RKVY)
Recommendation (Para No. 19)
20. The Committee had observed/recommended as under:Ñ
ÒThe Committee express their concern to note that out of the
29 States, only 8 States have prepared their State Agriculture Plan
(SAP) and out of the 652 Districts, District Agriculture Plan (DAP)
for only 194 District have been prepared as on date despite the
fact that preparation of DAP and SAP is mandatory and has been
mentioned in the revised guidelines of the scheme for the
12th Plan. This sordid state of affairs is reflective of the lackadaisical

9
approach of all concerned and pervading morass in the system as
a result of which the entire agriculture sector has to suffer. Strongly
deprecating this fact, the Committee urge the Department to get
the message conveyed to all State/UTs for strict compliance with
the mandatory provision to prepare SAP/DAP without any further
loss of time. The Committee would like to be apprised of the
action taken by the Department in this regard. Ó
21. In its Action Taken Reply, the Department has stated as under:Ñ
ÒThe issue of non finalization of State Agriculture Plan (SAP)/
District Agriculture Plan (DAP) by various State Governments were
taken up by the Department with the State Government in various
meetings held with officials of State Governments. All the defaulting
State Governments have been informed that during 2016-17, the
2nd instalment of 50% of funds allocated to the State under the
scheme would not be released if they failed to finalize DAP/SAP . Ó
22. While deprecating the fact that in spite of the revised
guidelines of RKVY for the 12th Plan which made preparation of
State Agriculture Plan (SAP) and District Agriculture Plan (DAP) by
States mandatory, only 8 States out of 29 had prepared their SAP
and only 194 districts out of 652 have prepared their DAP. The
Committee had, therefore, urged the Department to impress upon
all States for strict compliance of these guidelines. In its action
taken reply, the Department has merely stated that this issue was
taken up by them with the States in various meetings with officials
of State Governments. Further, all the defaulting State Governments
have been informed that during 2016-17, the 2nd instalment of 50%
of funds allocated to the State under the scheme would not be
released if they failed to finalize DAP/SAP. However, this reply of
the Department is incomplete as it neither provides details of the
States that have complied with the mandatory provision of
preparation of DAP/SAP nor provides details of States that have not
been able to comply alongwith the reasons for the same. The
Committee, therefore, desire that detailed information on this aspect
be furnished to them at the earliest. The Committee would also like
the Department to continue to motivate the defaulting States to
finalize their DAP/SAP without further loss of time.
G. RASHTRIYA KRISHI VIKAS YOJANA (RKVY)
Recommendation (Para No. 20)
23. The Committee had observed/recommended as under:Ñ
ÒAnother significant issue under RKVY which has captured the
attention of the Committee is the differential pricing of agriculture

10
implements under RKVY scheme. This has lead to a peculiar situation
wherein particular agri-implement is available at different prices
in different States. Further , in spite of the subsidy being provided
to the farmers, they end up paying more than the market price of
the implement. Further , it has come to the notice of the Committee
that implements of a particular brand are being forced upon
farmers. Strongly condemning this state of affairs, wherein one
vulnerable farmers are being exploited by unscrupulous agents
whose sole intention is to make a quick buck, the Committee
impress upon the Ministry to look into this matter at the earliest
and in tandem with the States to ensure uniform pricing of agri-
implements under RKVY in the entire country. The Committee
further desires that the subsidy being granted on agriculture
implements be provided directly to the farmers who will then
exercise their freedom of choice based upon their need. Ó
24. In its Action Taken Reply, the Department has stated as under:Ñ
Ò1. The Government of India, Ministry of Agriculture and Farmers
Welfare does not regulate/control the prices of agricultural
equipments and machines. However , the respective State
Governments empanel suppliers for supply of agricultural
machines and equipments alongwith their cost under subsidy
schemes/programmes through their process of tendering.
2. The guidelines of Sub-Mission on Agricultural Mechanization
(SMAM) stipulates that the State Level Executive Committee
(SLEC) will be responsible to enlist manufacturers/suppliers
who have tested their products either from Farm Machinery
Training & Testing Institutes or any identified institute by
DAC&FW and fix the cost of agricultural machinery and
equipment on the basis of quality inspection and field
performance evaluation for supply under various components
of SMAM. However , complete freedom to beneficiary will be
available for selection of agricultural machinery and
equipment as per his/her choice.
3. Instructions have been issued to all the State Governments
for compliance and necessary action in the matter vide
letter of even number dated 23rd May, 2016. Ó
25. While noting with deep concern that agri-implements were
priced differently across the country, the subsidized implements
were costlier than the market price, and implements of a particular
brand were being forced upon farmers, the Committee had

11
recommended the Department to look into this matter urgently and
impress upon all State to ensure uniform pricing of agri-implements
under RKVY in the entire country. The Committee had also desired
the Department to transfer subsidy being granted for purchase of
agri-implements directly to the farmers. According the Department
they do not regulate/control the prices of agricultural equipment
and machines but it is the respective State Governments who
empanel suppliers for supply of agri-implements alongwith their
cost under subsidy schemes through the process of tendering.
Further, the Department has also stated that the beneficiary has
the ultimate choice of freedom for selection of agricultural machinery
and equipment as per his choice. However, the Committee are not
convinced with the Action Taken Reply of the Government. It is a
fact that a number of such instances are being reported frequently
wherein vulnerable farmers are being exploited by unscrupulous
agents. The Committee, therefore, impress upon the Government
to adopt a pro-active approach in this matter and should coordinate
with all States to look into this issue with the alacrity it deserves
so that farmers are not exploited by the unscrupulous agents by
keeping uniform pricing of agri-implements pan India under RKVY.
The Committee also note that the Department is silent on the issue
of transfer of subsidy direct to the farmers. The Committee would
like the response of the Government in this regard. The Committee
would also like to be apprised of the response of the State
Governments to the Ministry Õs letter of even number dated 23rd
May, 2016 on the issue.
H. SUPPORT TO STATE EXTENSION PROGRAMMES
Recommendation (Para No. 22)
26. The Committee had observed/recommended as under:Ñ
ÒThe rather candid reply of the Department that the present
mechanism for routing Central funds through State Treasuries and
increasing State matching share from 10% to 40% have contributed
the reduction of allocation at RE stage. In fact, State Government
of Maharashtra has requested that the scheme guidelines may be
reviewed making provision for implementing the scheme under
reduced funding pattern. However , the Committee are of the view
that as the revised funding of Central Sector Schemes cannot be
revised immediately, it would be but necessary for the Department
to take this matter at the highest level with all Implementing
States to ensure that they come up with their matching share of

12
40% under ATMA without fail at the earliest. The Committee also
desire that the matter of routing ATMA funds directly to the
Implementing Agencies rather than routing the same through State
Treasury be looked into at the earliest by the agency concerned.
The Committee feel that both these issues need to be tackled with
the alacrity they deserve. The Committee would like to be apprised
of the initiatives undertaken by the Department in this regard. Ó
27. In its Action Taken Reply, the Department has stated as under:Ñ
ÒThis Department has been regularly taking up this issue with the
State Governments to ensure timely release of 40% State Matching
Share. State specific letters have been issued at various levels for
addressing the key issues including release of State matching for
getting 2nd instalment of funds released in time. As regard transfer
of funds to the State Treasuries, this Department has written letters
to Senior State level officers including Finance Secretaries for their
intervention in the matter and to issue suitable directions to the
State Treasuries to facilitate timely release of funds pertaining to
ATMA Scheme so that season based and time bound extension
activities are not hampered and salaries to the deployed manpower
are paid in time. Ó
28. Guided by the candid admission of the Department that the
present mechanism for routing Central funds through State Treasuries
and increasing State matching share from 10% to 40% have
contributed to reduction of allocation at RE stage, the Committee
were of the view that the Department should impress upon
implementing States at the highest level to come up with their
matching share of 40% under ATMA at the earliest. Further, the
Committee had also desired that the matter of routing ATMA funds
directly to implementing agencies instead of State Treasury need to
be looked into. In its Action Taken Reply, the Department has
responded that they are regularly taking up this issue with the
State Governments to ensure timely release of their matching share
of 40%. However, the Committee are anguished to note that their
reply is silent on the issue of routing of ATMA funds directly to the
implementing and not through State Treasury as is in vogue presently.
The Committee, therefore, reiterate their recommendation that
matter of routing ATMA funds directly to the implementing agencies
rather than State Treasury be taken up with the State Governments
with all seriousness and alacrity is deserves. The Committee would
like to be apprised of the initiatives undertaken by the Department
on the issue and the progress achieved therein.

13
CHAPTER II
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN
ACCEPTED BY THE GOVERNMENT
IMPLEMENTATION OF THE COMMITTEE ÕS RECOMMENDATIONS
Recommendation (Para No. 1)
The Committee note that the Action Taken Replies regarding the
action taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations
contained in the Ninth Report of the Committee were furnished by the
Government within the stipulated three months. The Committee further
note that in pursuance of Direction 73-A of Directions by the Speaker,
Lok Sabha, the Minister concerned is required to make a Statement on
the status of implementation of Observations/Recommendations
contained in the Original Reports of the Committee within six months
of their presentation to the Parliament. However , the Statement under
Direction 73-A in the context of Ninth Report of the Committee within
the stipulated time. The Committee take strong exception to the failure
of the Ministry time and again to adhere to stipulations laid down in
Direction 73-A in respect of statements to be made by the Minister
concerned. They expect that there will not be a repeat of such lapses
in future. The analysis of the action taken by the Government reveals
that 65.5% Recommendations have been implemented. 17.25%
Recommendations have not been implemented and 17.25% of
Recommendations are in various stages of implementation. The
Committee desire the Government to take conclusive action in respect
of the fourteen Recommendations commented upon in their Ninth Action
Taken Report and furnish further action taken notes to the Committee
expeditiously.
Reply of the Government
The recommendation of the Hon Õble Committee is noted for
compliance.
[Ministry of Agriculture & Farmers Welfare (Department of
Agriculture, Cooperation and Farmers Welfare), No. 6-5/2016-B&A,
dated 08.08.2016]
NON-FURNISHING OF ANNUAL REPORT 2015-16
Recommendation (Para No. 2)
The Annual Report of any Ministry/Department is an important
document in context of examination of Demands for Grants of a Ministry

14
document as it gives an indepth look into the working of a Ministry/
Department in a given financial year. In the instant case, the Committee
express their deep anguish over the fact that during the course of
examination of Demands for Grants 2016-17 of Department of
Agriculture, Cooperation and Farmers Welfare, copies of the Annual
Report 2015-16 were not made available to them. During the course
of oral evidence too, when this matter was raised by the Committee,
it did not elicit any response from the Department. Taking a serious
note of this serious lapse on part of the Department, the Committee
advise the Department to adopt a cautious approach and timely furnish
all budget related documents and also ensure that such instances are
not repeated in future. The Committee would also like to be apprised
of the reasons for non-furnishing of Annual Report 2015-16.
Reply of the Government
On account of some issue relating to finalization of the contract
for printing, the publication of the Report was delayed. The
inconvenience caused due to delay in submission of Annual Report is
regretted. Henceforth, it would be ensured that such delays are avoided
and copies of Annual Report are submitted in time for examination of
the Grants by the Standing Committee on Agriculture.
[Ministry of Agriculture & Farmers Welfare (Department of
Agriculture, Cooperation and Farmers Welfare), No. 6-5/2016-B&A,
dated 08.08.2016]
VIABILITY OF AGRICULTURE
Recommendation (Para No. 3)
The Committee are well aware of the fact that agriculture plays
a vital role in our nation Õs economy. As per the 2011 census figures
about 54.6% of our populace is engaged in agriculture and allied
activities and it contributes 17.4% to the country Õs Gross Value Added.
However , the Committee are constrained to observe that things are
not satisfactory in this vital component of the economy and we still
far away from achieving the goal of food and nutritional security for
the poor people of the Country. The condition of farmers, especially
the small and marginal farmers is very pitiable. Due to ever rising cost
of agricultural inputs like seed, fertilizers, pesticides etc., along with
the vagaries of climate change coupled with a myriad of other problems
like increasing land fragmentation, depleting soil health, lowering of
water table, lack of easy access to institutional credit and not getting
the best price for their produce, the agriculture sector is no longer a

15
viable vocation. Deeply perturbed and concerned at this alarming state
of affairs, the Committee impress upon the Government to take a
stock of the situation in a holistic manner and work in real earnest to
bringing a turnaround of the agriculture sector and ensuring that ever
toiling farmers of the country are adequately paid in return for their
produce. The Committee would like to be apprised of the initiatives
undertaken by the Department in this regard.
Reply of the Government
As Agriculture is a state subject, it is for the State Governments
to take appropriate measures for its overall development in the State.
Government of India only supplements the efforts made by the State
Governments development the sector through appropriate policy
measures and budgetary support. The Department has launched a
number of new schemes recently in this regard that would go a long
way in giving a boost to the growth of the sector. Some of these
schemes are as under:
(i) Soil Health Card (SHC) scheme by which the farmers can
identify the major and minor nutrients present in their soils
so as to ensure judicious use of fertilisers. This would
significantly reduced the cost of farming. Balanced use of
fertilisers would enhance soil productivity and thus ensure
higher returns to the farmers.
(ii) Neem Coated Urea is being promoted to regulate urea use,
enhance its availability to the crop and reduce cost of
fertilizer application. The entire quantity of domestically
manufactured urea is now neem coated. From the current
year ( i.e. 2016), the urea that is imported would also be
neem coated.
(iii) P aramparagat Krishi Vikas Yojana (PKVY) is being implemented
to promote organic farming in the country. Adoption of organic
farming will improve soil health by improving organic matter
content of the soil and enable the farmer to get premium
prices for his organic produce.
(iv) The Pradhan Mantri Krishi Sinchai Yojana (PMKSY) is being
implemented to expand cultivated area with assured
irrigation, reduce wastage of water and improve water use
efficiency.
(v) In addition, the Government is implementing several Centrally
Sponsored Schemes viz. National Food Security Mission (NFSM);

16
Mission for Integrated Development of Horticulture (MIDH);
National Mission on Oilseeds & Oil Palm (NMOOP); National
Mission for Sustainable Agriculture (NMSA); National Mission
on Agricultural Extension & Technology (NMAET); Unified
National Agricultural Markets (NAM); and Rashtriya Krishi Vikas
Yojana (RKVY).
(vi) A new crop Insurance scheme, namely, Pradhan Mantri Fasal
Bima Yojana (PMFBY) is being implemented from Kharif 2016
season. The Scheme has addressed the shortcomings in the
earlier National Crop Insurance Programme (NCIP) scheme
and is available to the farmers at very low rates of premium.
This scheme would provide insurance cover for all stages of
the crop cycle including post-harvest risks in specified
instances.
(vii) The Government provides interest subvention @ 3% on short-
term crop loans upto Rs. 3.00 lakh. Presently, loan is available
to farmers at interest rate of 7% per annum, which gets
reduced to 4% on prompt repayment. Further , under Interest
Subvention Scheme 2015-16, in order to provide relief to
the farmers on occurrence of natural calamities, the interest
subvention of 2% shall continue to be available to banks for
the first year on the restructured amount. The benchmark
for initiating relief measures by banks has also been reduced
to 33% crop loss in line with the National Disaster
Management Framework.
Further the Government undertakes procurement of wheat and
paddy under its ÔMSP operationsÕ. In addition, Government implements
Market Intervention Scheme (MIS) for procurement of agricultural and
horticultural commodities not covered under the Minimum Price Support
Scheme(MPS) on the request of State/UT Government. The MIS is
implemented to protect the growers of these commodities from making
distress sale in the event of bumper crop when the prices tend to fall
below the economic level/cost of production. Losses, if any, incurred
by the procuring agencies are shared by the Central Government and
the concerned State Government on 50:50 basis (75:25 in case of
North-Eastern States). Profit, if any, earned by the procuring agencies
is retained by them.
[Ministry of Agriculture & Farmers Welfare (Department of
Agriculture, Cooperation and Farmers Welfare), No. 6-5/2016-B&A,
dated 08.08.2016]

17
ATTRACTING RURAL YOUTH TOWARDS AGRICULTURE
Recommendation (Para No. 4)
Apart from increasing the financial allocation to the Agriculture
Sector , the Committee are also of the firm conviction that the vocation
of Agriculture needs to be a remunerative one like any other vocation.
A sense of pride needs to be infused if this vital sector of the economy
is to attract youth especially, the rural educated youth. These youth
need to be given institutional training to develop their entrepreneurship
skills in the field of agriculture apart from providing institutional finance
at easy terms to kick start their ventures. The Committee hope that
as result of involvement of youth in agriculture, the core sector of our
economy could become sustainable and viable. The Committee would
like to be apprised of the initiatives undertaken by the Department in
this regard.
Reply of the Government
Educated Youth in Agriculture & allied sectors are encouraged to
develop Entrepreneurship skills in the field of agriculture. Ministry of
Agriculture & Farmers Welfare, Government of India is implementing
a scheme of ÒAgri-Clinics & Agri-Business Centres (ACABC) Scheme Ó in
which 2 months institutional training (MANAGE through selected Nodal
Training Institute (NTI) across India) and financial assistance (Back
Ended Subsidy) through NABARD to Nationalized and Rural Cooperative
Banks are being provided. In the same way, one programme, namely,
Attracting and Retaining Youth in Agriculture (ARYA) is being
implemented by ICAR and scheme for Skill Training for Rural Youth
(STRY) is being implemented by DAC&FW involving rural youth in
agriculture (ANNEXURE-1).
[Ministry of Agriculture & Farmers Welfare (Department of
Agriculture, Cooperation and Farmers Welfare), No. 6-5/2016-B&A,
dated 08.08.2016]
Comments of the Committee
For comments of the Committee please refer to Para No. 7 of
Chapter I of this Report.
SHARE OF AGRICULTURE AND ALLIED SECTOR IN CENTRAL PLAN
Recommendation (Para No. 5)
The augmentation of share of Agriculture and Allied Sector in the
Central Plan is one which has been espoused by the Committee time
and again. From the figures furnished by the Department, the Committee

18
note that the share of DAC&FW in the Tenth, Eleventh and Twelfth
Five Year Plans is Rs. 13,200 crore, Rs. 66577 crore and
Rs. 71,500/- crore respectively. In percentage terms this works out to
1.48%, 3.09% and 1.65% respectively. Thus, the share of the Department
in the Central Plan in the 12th Plan has declined with respect to
11th Plan. However , in its explanation, the Department submitted that
the allocation approved for 12th Plan is Rs. 1,34,746.00 crore and not
Rs. 71,500.00 crore. Also, the percentage share of the Department
with respect to the total Central Plan is actually 3.11% and not 1.65%.
While expressing their satisfaction over this increase in plan allocation,
the Committee are of the opinion that this increase is just incremental
and falls way short of what the agriculture sector actually needs.
Further , the Committee are also aware that inspite of this increase,
the share of agriculture and allied sectors is way less than those of
other Departments of the social sector . While accepting this fact, the
Secretary of the Department submitted before the Committee that
they would be requesting the Ministry of Finance for increased
allocation. Taking into focus the plight of our farmers and being well
aware that the country has miles to go before it can achieve the goal
of Food and Nutritional Security for all, the Committee urge the Ministry
of Finance to increase the share of the Department in Central Plan so
that various schemes undertaken by them do not suffer for want of
funds. The Committee would like the Department to take initiative to
impress upon the Ministry of Finance to allocate funds to them as per
their requirement at RE stage.
Reply of the Government
(a) Para (5) and (6) pertain to the issue of adequacy of budgetary
allocations and alignment of resources approved by Planning
Commission for a particular sector with actual allocation by
Budget Division. The total plan outlay for plan period is
subject to the availability of resources and fiscal space at
the time of actual allocation of resources to Ministries/
Departments. Apart from these two overriding factors, the
allocation is decided in detailed consultation with line
Ministries/Departments as per their actual requirement and
capacity to spend in a particular fiscal. Due care is taken to
ensure that the releases made by the Government to
implementing agencies are actually spent on the ground with
minimum possible time lag.
(b) Many new initiatives such as Pradhan Mantri Fasal Bima
Yojana, Pradhan Mantri Krishi Sinchai Yojana, Soil health card,
organic farming in NE, Paramparagat Krishi Yojana etc. have

19
been taken in past two years which have been getting priority
and sufficient resources in the budget. Besides, the imposition
of Krishi Kalyan Cess is further expected to mobilize resources
for improvement of agriculture sector.
The mismatch between approved outlays by Planning
Commission and actual allocation is due to reasons as
explained above. Besides, GoI has been giving very high
priority to the agriculture and allied sector and providing
sufficient resources for the overall improvement and growth
of the sector.
[Ministry of Agriculture & Farmers Welfare (Department of
Agriculture, Cooperation and Farmers Welfare), No. 6-5/2016-B&A,
dated 08.08.2016]
MISMATCH BETWEEN APPROVED OUTLAY AND ACTUAL ALLOCATION
Recommendation (Para No. 6)
The approved plan outlay of the Department for the 12th Plan
Period is Rs. 134746.00 crore. However, it has been observed by the
Committee that BE for all the five fiscals amounts to only Rs. 101172.35
crore, which means a reduction of Rs. 33573.65 crore during the period.
Not only this, the RE for the four fiscals amounts to Rs. 71897.32
crore. Going by the precedent, the Committee are very sure that even
in the current fiscal the BE of Rs. 20400.00 crore would be pruned at
RE stage. What raises the apprehension of the Committee is rather
standard reply of the Department that Revised Estimates, vis-a-vis the
Budget Estimates are decided by the Ministry of Finance based on it Õs
internal assessment of the fund requirements of the Department keeping
in view the overall macro-economic situation of the country. The
Committee do not buy this argument at all as they view it as the
mockery of planning process and the failure of the Department to
convince the Ministry of Finance to allocate funds as per their plan.
Irrespective of the approved outlay, the BE would be significantly
lower than the approved outlay and again the actual allocation i.e. RE
would be lower than the BE. Due to a considerable variation in the
figures of approved outlay, BE & RE, the Committee feel that this issue
needs to be looked into afresh. The Committee, therefore, exhort
upon the Ministry of Finance to arrive at a formula wherein there is
a semblance between approved outlay, BE and RE figures so as to make
this exercise rational, realistic and meaningful for effective
implementation of the various schemes undertaken by the Department.
The Committee would also like the Department to take up this issue
with the Ministry of Finance.

20
Reply of the Government
(a) Para (5) and (6) pertain to the issue of adequacy of budgetary
allocations and alignment of resources approved by Planning
Commission for a particular sector with actual allocation by
Budget Division. The total plan outlay for plan period is
subject to the availability of resources and fiscal space at
the time of actual allocation of resources to Ministries/
Departments. Apart from these two overriding factors, the
allocation is decided in detailed consultation with line
Ministries/Departments as per their actual requirement and
capacity to spend in a particular fiscal. Due care is taken to
ensure that the releases made by the Government to
implementing agencies are actually spent on the ground with
minimum possible time lag.
(b) Many new initiatives such as Pradhan Mantri Fasal Bima
Yojana, Pradhan Mantri Krishi Sinchai Yojana, Soil health card,
organic farming in NE, Paramparagat Krishi Yojana etc. have
been taken in past two years which have been getting priority
and sufficient resources in the budget. Besides, the imposition
of Krishi Kalyan Cess is further expected to mobilize resources
for improvement of agriculture sector.
The mismatch between approved outlays by Planning
Commission and actual allocation is due to reasons as
explained above. Besides, GoI has been giving very high
priority to the agriculture and allied sector and providing
sufficient resources for the overall improvement and growth
of the sector.
[Ministry of Agriculture & Farmers Welfare (Department of
Agriculture, Cooperation and Farmers Welfare), No. 6-5/2016-B&A,
dated 08.08.2016]
UNDER UTILIZATION OF FUNDS EARMARKED FOR NORTH EASTERN STATES
Recommendation (Para No. 9)
The continuous vicious cycle of under-utilization of funds earmarked
for the North Eastern Region has been a regular cause of concern for
the Committee. Needless to say, the under utilization of funds has had
a negative impact on the overall growth and development of agriculture
sector in North Eastern States. The Committee, therefore, desire that

21
the issue needs to be looked into comprehensively in consultation with
all involved in the process and expedite optimum utilization of funds
earmarked for North-East States. In this regard, the Department of
Agriculture, Cooperation and Farmers Welfare may seek the view points
of the North-Eastern Region through the representatives of the people,
discuss it threadbare with them and then come up with a mutually
agreeable mechanism which would ensure optimum utilization of funds
meant for the North-Eastern Region for schemes being implemented by
them. The Committee would like to be informed of the progress made
in this regard.
Reply of the Government
Agriculture being a State subject, It is for the State Governments
in the North-East to take appropriate measures for development of
agriculture in their States. However , taking note of the agricultural
strengths specific to the North-Eastern Region, Government of India
has initiated a scheme of ÒOrganic Value Chain Development for North-
Eastern RegionÓ from 2015-16 whereby development of organic farming
in the region would be supported in a substantial manner. Apart from
this, a Horticulture Mission for North Eastern and Himalayan (HMNEH)
States is under implementation as part of the Umbrella Mission for
Integrated Development of Horticulture (MIDH). It is believed that
implementing schemes that cater to specific requirement of NER would
ensure better acceptance by the beneficiaries, and hence, better fund
utilization. Apart from this, the matter is being taken up regularly by
the Department with NER States in various review meetings held from
time to time to expedite fund utilization.
[Ministry of Agriculture & Farmers Welfare (Department of
Agriculture, Cooperation and Farmers Welfare), No. 6-5/2016-B&A,
dated 08.08.2016]
PRADHAN MANTRI KRISHI SINCHAI YOJANA (PMKSY)
Recommendation (Para No. 10)
Being well aware of the fact that major part of our agriculture is
rain fed, the Committee view the scheme of PMKSY as a step in the
right direction for enabling our agriculture to break free from the
shackles of overdependence on monsoon for providing water to the
crops. The involvement of three agencies viz. Ministry of Water
Resources, River Development and Ganga Rejuvenation for Accelerated
Irrigation Benefit Programme; Department of Land Resources for
Integrated Watershed Management Programme and Department of
Agriculture, Cooperation and Farmers Welfare for On Farm Water

22
Management gives it a holistic look as it more or less encompasses all
the areas of irrigation. The Committee would stress upon increased
cooperation amongst the three agencies so as to ensure the smooth
working and viability of this scheme. DAC&FW, being the nodal agency
for PMKSY , has its task cut out as not only does it have to ensure the
smooth implementation of its responsibility On Farm Water Management,
but also needs to act as a facilitator and coordinator with the other
two Departments. The Committee hope that as a result of concerted
and coordinated efforts by the participating agencies including the
DAC&FW, the avowed objectives of the scheme to provide Water Security
to agriculture sector would be achieved. The Committee would like to
be apprised of the progress made under the scheme.
Reply of the Government
To improve the implementation of PMKSY and to ensure better
co-ordination and convergence, It was decided that the PMKSY is to be
implemented in Mission Mode approach. The Mission will be steered by
Ministry of Water Resources with Addl./Special Secretary of Ministry of
Water Resources as Mission Director and Joint Secretaries of Department
of Land Resources & Department of Agriculture Cooperation & Farmers
Welfare as Addl. Mission Director responsible for implementation of
their respective components and functioning of the Mission. As per
decision, the overall coordination of project implementation under
PMKSY including monitoring has been entrusted to M/o Water Resources,
RD & GR and NITI Aayog. To this effect a Cabinet Note has been
circulated by MoWR. Details of strategies for effective implementation
of the PMKSY can only be conveyed only after the structure of the
Mission is approved by the Cabinet.
However , as per the existing guidelines of PMKSY , at National level
ÔNational Steering CommitteeÕ under the Chairmanship of HonÕble Prime
Minister and ÔNational Executive Committee Õ under the Chairmanship
of Vice Chairman, NITI Aayog have been constituted to ensure effective
coordination/convergence of programme components.
[Ministry of Agriculture & Farmers Welfare (Department of
Agriculture, Cooperation and Farmers Welfare), No. 6-5/2016-B&A,
dated 08.08.2016]
PRADHAN MANTRI KRISHI SINCHAI YOJANA (PMKSY)
Recommendation (Para No. 11)
So far as the ambit of DAC&FW under PMKSY is concerned, the
Committee desire that the Department should work in real earnest in
ensuring Per Drop More Crop component of the programme resulting in

23
efficiency and optimum utilization of available water resources. This
would also ensure that water storage and water conservation/
management activities would finally be able to provide support to the
farmers in the eventuality of a weak/lean monsoon and mitigate the
adverse impact of drought/drought like situation on agriculture to a
great extent. The Committee expect that the Department will take all
measures involving proper implementation of the scheme and the
effective monitoring and adherence to the timelines. The Committee
would also like to be apprised of the time period by which the
Government hopes to provide water to all fields in the country.
Reply of the Government
The component of Per Drop More Crop mostly aims at efficient use
of water at farm level. DAC&FW has been assigned the responsibility
of implementation of this component. During 2015-16 area of 5.60 lakh
ha. has been covered under Precision Irrigation and it is targeted to
cover 8.00 lakh ha. in 2016-17. A dedicated MIS system to monitor the
programme is in place.
[Ministry of Agriculture & Farmers Welfare (Department of
Agriculture, Cooperation and Farmers Welfare), No. 6-5/2016-B&A,
dated 08.08.2016]
PRADHAN MANTRI KRISHI SINCHAI YOJANA (PMKSY)
Recommendation (Para No. 12)
The Committee take note of the fact that the programme
architecture of PMKSY envisages a Ôdecentralized State Level Planning
and Projectised Execution Õ Structure that will allow States to draw up
their own irrigation development plans based on District Irrigation
Plans (DIPs) and State Irrigation Plans (SIPs) prioritising the immediate
needs of a State. Further, 148 draft DIPs have been prepared and are
in the process of approval by State Level Sanctioning Committees. It
was also stated that the Government is expecting that DIPs for all
districts would be ready by September , 2016. Being of the firm conviction
that formulation and approval of DIPs/SIPs are the bedrock of the
PMKSY , the Committee recommend that the Department should impress
upon all States/UTs the necessity and importance of formulating and
approving their DIPs/SIPs by the stipulated timeline. The Department
should provide all necessary support to the States/UTs in this regard
to ensure compliance of the deadline. The Committee would like to be
apprised of the progress made in this regard.

24
Reply of the Government
For preparation of DIPs, 6 national training programmes were
arranged in which 153 officers have been trained. States were also
supported for organising State Level Workshops for DIP preparation.
Funds have been provided to the States for preparation of DIPs for all
the districts.
Against the target of preparation of 100 DIPs in the 2015-16,
235 DIPs have been prepared by 31.03.2016 and many states are in the
process of finalizing the DIPs in the current fiscal.
[Ministry of Agriculture & Farmers Welfare (Department of
Agriculture, Cooperation and Farmers Welfare), No. 6-5/2016-B&A,
dated 08.08.2016]
PRADHAN MANTRI FASAL BIMA YOJANA (PMFBY)
Recommendation (Para No. 14)
The Committee express their satisfaction on being informed that
in order to make crop insurance simple and cheaper for farmers and
to provide them with better insurance services, a Central Sector scheme
of PMFBY has been approved by the Government, replacing the erstwhile
schemes of National Agriculture Insurance Scheme (NAIS) and Modified
National Insurance Scheme (MNAIS). PMFBY is a marked improvement
over the earlier schemes as it provides comprehensive risk coverage
from pre-sowing to post-harvest losses. Unit area has been reduced to
Village/Village Panchayat Level. Also for localised risks like hailstorm,
landslide and inundation, claims will be settled on individual farm
basis, etc. While the Committee would like to wait and watch before
passing any comments on PMFBY , they feel that the farmers need to
be explained the benefits of PMFBY in vernacular language repeatedly,
before they are totally convinced that by subscribing to PMFBY they
would actually safeguarding their crops from damage due to vagaries
of nature. In this regard, the Committee desire that vigorous publicity
and awareness campaign about the benefits of the scheme may be
made amongst farmers in print and media in their vernacular language.
The Committee recommend that Agriclinics and Agri-business Centres
be roped in for generating awareness on PMFBY .
Reply of the Government
To enhance the coverage of farmers/areas and to popularize the
PMFBY , Government is undertaking a comprehensive publicity and
awareness programme to educate the farmers about the benefit of

25
crop insurance schemes. Capacity building and training programmes
for other stakeholders are also being organized. The salient activities
under awareness campaign, involve the publicity of features & benefits
of the scheme through advertisements in leading National/Local News
Papers in vernacular language, telecast through audio-visual media,
distribution of pamphlets in vernacular language, participation in
agriculture fairs/mela/gosti and organization of workshops/trainings
and SMS through Kisan Portal etc. State Governments/UTs are also
being regularly persuaded to increase the coverage including notifying
more crops under crop Insurance schemes. Recently, one day seminar/
kisan fair especially on the PMFBY has been organized at various Krishi
Vigyan Kendras (KVKs) from 30th March, 2016 throughout the country.
The pamphlet containing main features and FAQ in vernacular languages
has also been distributed in different Kisan Sammelans/fares. Publicity
through print & electronic media including TV & Radio are also been
done. Comprehensive media policy has been prepared for using various
channels including Agri-clinics and Agri-business Centers for creation
of awareness about the benefits of the scheme.
[Ministry of Agriculture & Farmers Welfare (Department of
Agriculture, Cooperation and Farmers Welfare), No. 6-5/2016-B&A,
dated 08.08.2016]
INTEGRATED SCHEME ON AGRICULTURAL MARKETING (ISAM)
Recommendation (Para No. 16)
The Committee concur with the submission of the Department that
for marketing infrastructure the scheme will have to be rationalised so
as to ensure that subsidy is not cornered by a few States/Projects.
Also it should be explored whether allocations should be made to
States based on their existing capacity or need to work out on the
basis of their foodgrains and oilseeds marketing surplus. Lastly, subsidy
ceiling limits may have to be restricted upto smaller capacities and
amounts so as to ensure that small/marginal farmers may get maximum
benefit and subsidy is available for more number of projects. The
Committee, therefore, desire that the Department may act upon their
suggestions at the earliest.
Reply of the Government
Suggestions of the Committee have been noted for compliance.
The integrated Scheme on Agricultural Marketing (ISAM) [of which
Agricultural Marketing Infrastructure (AMI) is a sub-scheme] was
approved for 12th Plan period 2012-17. If the scheme is to be continued

26
further and funds are made available, the scheme guidelines would be
revised and suggestions of the Committee be suitably incorporated in
the revised guidelines.
[Ministry of Agriculture & Farmers Welfare (Department of
Agriculture, Cooperation and Farmers Welfare), No. 6-5/2016-B&A,
dated 08.08.2016]
RASHTRIYA KRISHI VIKAS YOJANA (RKVY)
Recommendation (Para No. 17)
Rashtriya Krishi Vikas Yojana, the flagship scheme of the Ministry
has ensured increase in allocation to agriculture and allied sectors by
States from Rs. 8770.16 crore (4.88% of total States Plan Expenditure)
in 2006-07 to Rs. 38768.47 crore (8.36% of total State Plan Expenditure)
during 2013-14. RKVY during course of its implementation has triggered
substantial additional investment in agriculture by the States. It has
also emerged as one of the principal instrument in financing
development of agriculture and allied sector in the country. However,
the Committee note with concern that the bug of under-utilization of
allocated funds by States/UTs has not spared this flagship scheme
either. The Department has explained that they always insist on
furnishing of UCs along with the progress report at the time of release
of funds. Utilization of funds released under RKVY is done by the
prerogative of State Government. Further , late utilization of funds by
some States may be attributed to weather related factors. Completion
of infrastructural projects takes longer time in comparison to other
projects due to which States have unspent balances. While agreeing
with the views of the Department, the Committee feel that the
Department, being the nodal agency can not absolve themselves on
the issue. The under-utilization of funds reflects the point that the
mechanism in place to monitor the scheme is not effective and needs
to be strengthened and made active. The Committee, therefore, impress
upon the Department that the existing mechanism to monitor the
scheme may be made pro-active, so as to ensure optimum utilization
of funds by the State Governments/Implementing Agencies.
Reply of the Government
It has been made mandatory for the State to enter the progress of
implementation of the scheme in the web-based monitoring system
developed by DAC&FW. The progress of implementation has been
reviewed by the Department. The issue of under utilization of funds
and the need for effective implementation RKVY scheme has been

27
taken up with the officials of the State Governments during desk
review meetings held by the Department every year to review the
progress of implementation in the States. Department has also time
and again impressed upon all the States in Desk Review Meetings and
also through various communications the need for timely utilization of
fund to avail 2nd instalment.
[Ministry of Agriculture & Farmers Welfare (Department of
Agriculture, Cooperation and Farmers Welfare), No. 6-5/2016-B&A,
dated 08.08.2016]
SUPPORT TO STATE EXTENSION PROGRAMMES
Recommendation (Para No. 21)
The Committee are distressed to note that BE for the scheme has
been pruned at RE Stage during the first four fiscals and actual
expenditure is lower than the RE. The reasons for the same have been
attributed to the fact that majority of the States/UTs have not submitted
their approved State Extension Work Plan (SEWP) in time. Hence, the
pace of expenditure during the first and second quarter of a financial
year is slow. Also, States furnish their demands for grants at the fag
end of a financial year. Notwithstanding the argument put forth by the
Department, the Committee express their dissatisfaction with the
financial performance of the Department under the scheme. Keeping
in view the pivotal nature of the scheme, the Committee recommend
that bottlenecks which impede the effective implementation of the
scheme be addressed at the earliest. The Department being the nodal
agency should play pro-active role and motivate the Implementing
Agencies to ensure optimum utilization of central funds.
Reply of the Government
In order to motivate the Implementing Agencies to enhance their
active participation in implementation of the ATMA Scheme and ensure
optimum utilization of Central fund/share, regular written
communications are sent to the States/UTs at various levels to complete
all essentialities for release of funds and submit their approved State
Extension Work Plans (SEWPs) well in advance in addition to improving
their pace of expenditure. Besides, a regular in-depth State-wise review
of implementation of the Scheme is undertaken during the Zonal Input
Conferences held twice every year for Rabi & Kharif season. Apart
from this, regular day-to-day follow-up with States is also being done
through e-mails, Video Conferences etc. For ensuring effective
implementation of the Schemes in the real field situation, support for

28
procurement of IT related equipment i.e. Pico-Projector and
Hand-Held Devices for use of field level functions has also been provided
to the States/UTs.
[Ministry of Agriculture & Farmers Welfare (Department of
Agriculture, Cooperation and Farmers Welfare), No. 6-5/2016-B&A,
dated 08.08.2016]
SUPPORT TO STATE EXTENSION PROGRAMMES
Recommendation (Para No. 23)
On the aspect of under-achievement of physical targets under the
scheme, the Committee were informed that this was due to higher
targets kept by the States in their SEWPs, whereas achievement is
based on actual availability of funds and implementation during a
financial year. Taking a cue from the MinistryÕs admission, the Committee
desire that the Ministry take up the issue with the States bringing the
targets fixed at a realistic level guided by the achievements of the
previous year as well as the availability of funds.
Reply of the Government
As per the Scheme Guidelines, State are encouraged to prepare
their Action Plans for a large shelf of projects/activities to be able to
get more funds in case some other States default on this count. As
such, better performing States have been encouraged to seek higher
revised allocations against approved activities in respect of Work Plans
submitted by them.
During 2015-16, some States have got about 150% more funds than
their original allocation. However during 2016-17, while sharing GoI
comments with States on their draft State Extension Work Plans,
State Governments are being requested to restrict their SEWP only up
to 150% more than their State Õs tentative allocation (GoI + State) so
that targets are kept near to realistic.
[Ministry of Agriculture & Farmers Welfare (Department of
Agriculture, Cooperation and Farmers Welfare), No. 6-5/2016-B&A,
dated 08.08.2016]
SUPPORT TO STATE EXTENSION PROGRAMMES
Recommendation (Para No. 24)
The Committee note that Agricultural Technology Management
Agency (ATMA) is a purportedly farmer-driven institutionalized
arrangement at district level for dissemination of farm technology and

29
knowledge and which aims at making extension system farmer driven
and farmer accountable. Taking into consideration the pivotal nature
of this scheme that aims for empowering the farmer, the Committee
desire that ATMA work in such a way that the benefits of agriculture
technology in terms of good practices/new developments in scientific
approach percolate down to the farmers for implementation along
with their traditional knowledge and practice. This can only be ensured
if the extension services are able to deliver their mandate. Further,
Government should ensure adequate funding and impress upon optimum
utilization of allocated funds, so as to make this extension system
farmer centric and farmer accountable. The Department should impress
upon States to conduct periodic training of farmers, who would then
act as farmer trainers to train more farmers. On field training of
farmers assumes significance importance as in the Committee Õs
considered view ÔSeeing is Believing Õ and a farmer is easily able to
assimilate the knowledge gained via live demonstration and then
replicate the same on his field. The Committee, therefore, desire that
on field training of farmers may be organized regularly and frequently
in all parts of the country.
Reply of the Government
The Government has been trying to strengthen extension system in
the country by empowering the ATMA institution by way of providing
committed extension functionaries at all levels, especially block level
where the No. of Assistant Technology Managers (ATMs) have been
enhanced to an average of 3 per block, so that effective and timely
dissemination of information to the farmers can be ensured. Out of
total eligibility of 27664 posts at all levels under the Scheme, States
have reported deployment of over 13772 manpower. Regular efforts
and follow-up is being made to impress upon States to fill up all their
vacant posts.
For accelerating the pace of implementation of ATMA Scheme in
the field, funds have been released to State Governments in
October , 2015 to procure Pico-Projectors and Hand-Held Devices. The
process for procurement of these IT equipment is in advance stage in
majority of the States.
The on field training of farmers under the Scheme is ensured
through Demonstrations organized at Farmers Fields and Farm Schools
which are run by progressive farmers. A total of 2,42,109 Demonstrations
and 10838 Farm Schools have been organized during 2015-16.
[Ministry of Agriculture & Farmers Welfare (Department of
Agriculture, Cooperation and Farmers Welfare), No. 6-5/2016-B&A,
dated 08.08.2016]

30
SUPPORT TO STATE EXTENSION PROGRAMMES
Recommendation (Para No. 25)
The Committee also desire that meetings of ATMA Core Committee
i.e. Governing Board, Block Technology Team, Block Farmer Advisory
Committee, District Farmer Advisory Committee and State Farmer
Advisory Committee be held regularly as per norms and people Õs
representatives may also be made a party to these sittings and be
informed of the same well in advance, so as to ensure their participation
in these meetings.
Reply of the Government
This Department has been regularly requesting the State
Governments to convene meeting of ATMA Core Committees as per
norms laid down in the Guidelines during the course of all Review
Meetings. Besides, this information also forms a part of the Reporting
Format of Monthly/Annual Progress Report, Tour Report of Visiting
Officers and now the Extension Reforms Monitoring System (ERMS)Ña
Portal for online submission of Reports.
Further , as per ATMA Guidelines, farmers are not only represented
on Farmer Advisory Committees set up at Block, District and State
level but their participation is also essentially ensured in all other
Core Committees viz. Inter-Departmental working Group (IDWG); ATMA
Governing Board and ATMA Management Committee (Annexure-II).
[Ministry of Agriculture & Farmers Welfare (Department of
Agriculture, Cooperation and Farmers Welfare), No. 6-5/2016-B&A,
dated 08.08.2016]
AGRI-CLINICS AND AGRI BUSINESS CENTRES BY AGRICULTURE GRADUATES
(ACABCs)
Recommendation (Para No. 26)
Noting that the scheme aims to provide extension and also to
promote selfemployment in agriculture sector by way of setting up of
agri-ventures, the Committee opine that the Government work towards
actively involving agri-graduates in extension related activities like
soil-testing and also involve them in educating farmers on Pradhan
Mantri Fasal Bima Yojana and then ensuring farmers subscribe to this
scheme. The Committee would like to be apprised of the action taken
by the Department in this regard.

31
Reply of the Government
Apart from providing the Extension services by Agri-preneurs, under
the scheme the Agri-preneurs are dealing with 32 different service
areas. Soil Testing and Crop Insurance areas are already covered (Details
are given in Annexure-III). However , emphasis will be given to attract
more agri-preneurs in the field of soil testing and educating farmers
on Pradhan Mantri Fasal Bima Yojana.
[Ministry of Agriculture & Farmers Welfare (Department of
Agriculture, Cooperation and Farmers Welfare), No. 6-5/2016-B&A,
dated 08.08.2016]
SUB-MISSION ON SEED AND PLANTING MATERIAL
Recommendation (Para No. 27)
The Committee emphasize the importance played by quality seed
as a vital agricultural input. To take care of this, the SMSP proposes
to intervene to cover the entire gamut of seed chain from nucleus
seed to supply to farmers for sowing and also to major stakeholders
in the seed chains. This fact has gained credence as is evident in the
14 components of the submission. Keeping this aside, what concerns
the Committee are the cases of spurious seeds and pesticides being
sold by unscrupulous agents. These people have a simple trick policy
of making a fast buck, whilst spelling economic disaster for the farmer
who uses their products. Being well aware of the turmoil caused to the
farmers by these unscrupulous agents, the Committee recommend that
swift and strict action be initiated against those indulging in this
malpractice. Further, the Department should seek exemplary punishment
for these racketeers so that they are deterred before venturing into
sale of spurious seeds and pesticides. The Committee further desire
that the details of these agents/firms may be furnished along with the
action initiated against them at the earliest.
Reply of the Government
Agriculture is State Subject and Government of India supplements
the efforts of the State Governments by providing technical and financial
assistance for the seed related activities through various crop
development schemes/programmes. National Food Security Mission
(NFSM), Bringing Green Revolution in Eastern India (BGREI), National
Mission on Oilseeds and Oil-Palm (NMOOP), Rashtriya Krishi Vikas Yojana
(RKVY), Mission on Integrated Development of Horticulture (MIDH),

32
Submission on Seeds and Planting Material (SMSP), etc., which are
implemented through State Governments. Quality seeds are provided
to various State Governments at affordable prices through these schemes
for their distribution to farmers by implementing agencies viz. State
Seeds Certificiation Agencies, State Seeds Corporations, State
Agricultural Universities, etc.
Seed Division is implementing Submission for Seed and Planting
Material (SMSP) under National Mission on Agricultural Extension and
Technology (NMAET) w.e.f. 01.04.2014 on all India basis through State/
UT Departments of Agriculture, State Seed Corporations, State Seed
Certification Agencies, State Agricultural Universities, Krishi Vigyan
Kendras, National Seeds Corporation, etc. The main objective of the
Submission is to develop/strengthen seed sector and to enhance
production and multiplication of high yielding certified/quality seeds
of all agricultural crops and making it available to the farmers at
affordable prices and also place an effective system for protection of
plant varieties, rights of farmers and plant breeders to encourage
development of new varieties of plants.
The seed quality regime in the country is governed by the Seeds
Act, 1966, the Seed Rules, 1968 made there under and the Seeds
(Control) Order , 1983. In addition to these legal instruments, various
guidelines and policy parameters have been laid down in the National
Seeds Policy, 2002. There is greater emphasis on seed quality assurance
particularly to safeguard the interest of the farmers. In addition,
significant changes have occurred in the country Õs socio-economic
conditions. The economy has been substantially liberalised and the
private sector is playing an increasing role in various spheres including
agriculture. These ongoing changes require upgradation of seed
production, quality and regulatory standards. Therefore, a need has
arisen for updating the seed quality regulatory regime by enacting a
new legislation.
This Department has proposed Seeds Bill 2004 with the objective
to regulate the quality of seeds and planting materials of all agricultural,
horticultural and plantation crops to ensure availability of true to type
seeds for Indian farmers; curb the sale of spurious and poor quality
seeds; protect the rights of farmers, increase private participation in
seed production; distribution and seed testing; liberalize imports of
seeds and planting materials, etc., which is pending in Rajya Sabha
since 2004.
Further , Seed Inspectors are appointed by the States under Seed
Act, 1966 as seed law enforcement is vested with the State Government.

33
Details of State-wise Seed Law Enforcement actions for the last three
years viz. 2013-14, 2014-15 and 2015-16 are enclosed [Appendix (A-D)].
[Ministry of Agriculture & Farmers Welfare (Department of
Agriculture, Cooperation and Farmers Welfare), No. 6-5/2016-B&A,
dated 08.08.2016]
APPENDIX A
PROGRESS REPORT OF SEED LAW ENFORCEMENT FOR THE YEAR
2013-14
Sl.No. State Total No. No. of No. of No. of No. of No. of No. of No. of
of samples cases in cases cases cases cases cases
samples found which stop filed decided pending where
drawn sub- warning sale in the by Court in Court seed
standard issued order Court of Law of Law forfeited
issued of Law fine/
imprison-
ment
awarded
1 2 3 4 567 8 9 1 0
1. Andhra Pradesh 7204 133 133 215 133 Nil 133 6
2. Assam Nil Nil Nil Nil Nil Nil Nil Nil
3. Bihar 11874 109 22 1 0 0 0 0
4. Chhattisgarh 1981 344 344 344 0 0 0 0
5. Delhi 139 ÑÑÑÑ Ñ 1 2 Ñ
6. Gujarat 5949 140 37 140 81 2 79 0
7. Haryana 3673 53 30 Ñ 20 Ñ 20 Ñ
8. Himachal Pradesh 398 ÑÑÑÑ Ñ Ñ Ñ
9. Jammu & Kashmir 734 18 Ñ 18 18 16* Ñ Ñ
10. Jharkhand 3199 47 10 0 0 0 0 0
11. Karnataka 9284 61 14 22 25 10 0 0
12. Kerala Nil Nil Nil Nil Nil Nil Nil Nil
13. Madhya Pradesh 2845 517 Ñ 528 0 0 0 0
14. Maharashtra 20681 894 592 1293 311 3 63 33
15. Odisha 2392 543 25 Ñ Ñ Ñ Ñ Ñ
16. Punjab 4785 188 0 12 0 0 0 0

34
17. Puducherry 224 38 1 0 0 0 0 0
18. Rajasthan 4104 215 Ñ 19 91 Ñ 91 0
19. Tamil Nadu 61002 2531 1595 2042 366 264 102 0
20. Telangana 6788 170 163 143 170 18 152 6
21. Tripura 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0
22. Uttar Pradesh 3126 79 15 2 2 0 0 0
23. Uttarakhand 263 1 1 0 0 0 0 0
24. West Bengal 2357 339 120 130 0 0 0 0
*Fine collected Rs. 7900/-.
[Ministry of Agriculture & Farmers Welfare (Department of
Agriculture, Cooperation and Farmers Welfare), No. 6-5/2016-B&A,
dated 08.08.2016]
APPENDIX B
PROGRESS REPORT OF SEED LAW ENFORCEMENT FOR THE YEAR
2014-15
Sl.No. State Total No. No. of No. of No. of No. of No. of No. of No. of
of samples cases in cases cases cases cases cases
samples found which stop filed decided pending where
drawn sub- warning sale in the by Court in Court seed
standard issued order Court of Law of Law forfeited
issued of Law fine/
imprison-
ment
awarded
1 2 3 4 567 8 9 1 0
1. Andhra Pradesh 7535 269 269 115 269 Nil 269 4
2. Assam Nil Nil Nil Nil Nil Nil Nil Nil
3. Bihar 14683 53 19 0 1 0 1 0
4. Chhattisgarh 2182 369 369 369 0 0 0 0
5. Delhi 164 4 3 4 4 1 15 Ñ
6. Gujarat 5517 113 23 113 70 3 67 0
7. Haryana 4256 32 10 Ñ 22 Ñ 22 Ñ
1 2 3 4 567 8 9 1 0

35
 8. Himachal Pradesh 234 ÑÑÑÑ Ñ Ñ Ñ
 9. Jammu & Kashmir 736 4 Ñ 4 4 4* Ñ 0
10. Jharkhand 1025 13 3 0 0 0 0 0
11. Karnataka 7050 121 0 0 0 0 0 0
12. Kerala Nil Nil Nil Nil Nil Nil Nil Nil
13. Madhya Pradesh 2741 549 348 547 8 0 0 0
14. Maharashtra 20541 2205 472 1411 1296 25 610 172
15. Odisha 1325 296 16 Ñ Ñ Ñ Ñ Ñ
16. Puducherry 154 44 3 0 0 0 0 0
17. Punjab 4614 544 0 31 8 0 8 0
18. Rajasthan 5136 314 - 13 47 Ñ 47 4
19. Tamil Nadu 58022 2642 2159 1334 270 212 58 0
20. Telangana 7310 133 139 117 137 7 129 4
21. Tripura 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0
22. Uttar Pradesh 4179 67 25 10 5 0 3 0
23. Uttarakhand 262 4 4 0 0 0 0 0
24. West Bengal 28600 2272 187 144 0 0 0 0
*Fine collected Rs. 1750/-.
[Ministry of Agriculture & Farmers Welfare (Department of
Agriculture, Cooperation and Farmers Welfare), No. 6-5/2016-B&A,
dated 08.08.2016]
APPENDIX C
PROGRESS REPORT OF SEED LAW ENFORCEMENT FOR THE YEAR
2015-16
Sl.No. State Total No. No. of No. of No. of No. of No. of No. of No. of
of samples cases in cases cases cases cases cases
samples found which stop filed decided pending where
drawn sub- warning sale in the by Court in Court seed
standard issued order Court of Law of Law forfeited
issued of Law fine/
imprison-
ment
awarded
1 2 3 4 567 8 9 1 0
1. Andhra Pradesh 22274 537 537 350 450 0 450 15
2. Assam Nil Nil Nil Nil Nil Nil Nil Nil
  1 2 3 4 567 8 9 1 0

36
3. Bihar 14991 225 103 33 4 0 4 0
4. Chhattisgarh 2263 190 190 190 0 0 0 0
5. Delhi 82 8 6 7 5 7 13 Ñ
6. Gujarat 4092 113 4 72 18 0 18 0
7. Haryana 3778 122 13 Ñ 13 Ñ 13 Ñ
8. Himachal Pradesh 290 ÑÑÑÑ Ñ Ñ Ñ
9. Jammu & Kashmir 779 12 Ñ 11 11 8* Ñ Ñ
10. Jharkhand 1117 48 5 0 0 0 0 0
11. Karnataka 7368 70 236 0 56 1 24 0
12. Kerala Nil Nil Nil Nil Nil Nil Nil Nil
13. Madhya Pradesh 3610 362 222 360 1 0 1 0
14. Maharashtra 17430 375 168 1300 25 5 59 15
15. Odisha 1824 343 18 Ñ Ñ Ñ Ñ Ñ
16. Puducherry 212 32 3 0 0 0 0 0
17. Punjab 4180 535 0 7 11 0 11 0
18. Rajasthan 3404 95 Ñ 17 8 Ñ 8 0
19. Tamil Nadu 61285 2665 2311 1513 403 311 92 0
20. Telangana 7283 157 148 140 177 10 158 9
21. Tripura 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0
22. Uttar Pradesh 4502 65 23 15 7 0 8 0
23. Uttarakhand 347 24 23 1 0 0 0 0
24. West Bengal 15488 1986 158 248 0 0 0 0
*Fine collected Rs. 3600/-.
[Ministry of Agriculture & Farmers Welfare (Department of
Agriculture, Cooperation and Farmers Welfare), No. 6-5/2016-B&A,
dated 08.08.2016]
  1 2 3 4 567 8 9 1 0

37
APPENDIX D
STATEMENT SHOWING PROGRESS REPORT OF SEED LAW ENFORCEMENT FOR THE STATE OF JAMMU & KASHMIR FOR
LAST 3 YEARS
Sl.No. Year No. of Total No. of No. of samples No. of No. of No. of No. of cases No. of No. of cases
Licences samples found cases in Cases in cases decided by cases where seed
issued drawn substandard which which stop filed in the court of Law pending in forfeited
warning sale court of fine/ court of
issued orders Law imprisonment Law
issued awarded
1. 2013-14 300 1176 18 NA 18 19 16 # 01 Nil
2. 2014-15 330 895 07 22 13 07 07* 03 Nil
3. 2015-16 397 946 20 26 14 16 16** 04 Nil
#Recovered Rs. 7900/- as fine.
*Recovered Rs. 3050/- as fine.
**Recovered Rs. 5500/-as fine.
[Ministry of Agriculture & Farmers Welfare (Department of Agriculture, Cooperation and Farmers Welfare),
No. 6-5/2016-B&A, dated 08.08.2016]

38
CHAPTER III
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO NOT
DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE GOVERNMENT ÕS REPLIES
-NIL-

39
CHAPTER IV
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF
THE GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE
SLOW PACED UTILIZATION OF FUNDS
Recommendation (Para No. 7)
Notwithstanding the argument put forth by the Department that
their utilization of funds has been around 99.23%, 98.53%, 98.26% and
96% (provisional) of RE during the fiscals 2012-13; 2013-14; 2014-15
and 2015-16, the facts remain that the funds allocated to them have
been drastically cut down with reference to funds actually required as
reflected in BE as per their plan of action. The Department cannot rest
satisfied based on high percentage of utilization of RE funds, as contrary
to the fact their plan of action has been affected due to drastic cut
in the approved plan outlay. Thus, by relying on RE figures, the Ministry
is trying to put a lid over the slow pace of utilization of funds during
the first two quarters of a fiscal year which results in Ministry of
Finance resorting to reducing the allocation at RE Stage. If BE figures
are taken into consideration, then percentage of actual utilizations
dips to 87.74%; 86.63%; 86.02% and 82.71% (provisional) for the fiscals
under consideration. The Committee are of the firm opinion that the
later figure is more accurate as it reflects the true picture. On the flip
side if credence is to be given only to actual utilization figures
vis-a-vis RE figures, this will ultimately prove detrimental to the overall
growth and development of agri-sector due to slow-pace of utilization
of funds with reference to BE. The Committee therefore, recommend
that the Ministry should take a holistic view in the matter and efforts
should be made for optimum utilization of funds in the first two
quarters under various schemes implemented by them. In this regard
the Department should impress upon the implementing agencies i.e.
States/UTs to expedite the pace of utilization of funds so as to demand
more funds from the Ministry of Finance.
Reply of the Government
The Department internally reviews the pace of utilization of funds
on a weekly basis in Senior Officers meetings. Apart from this, the
Department has been taking up the issue of expediting fund utilization
with State Governments and implementing agencies on a regular basis

40
in meetings as well as through letters. The Department is covered
under the Monthly Expenditure Plan (MEP) of Ministry of Finance where
amount of funds that can be released in a particular quarter is fixed.
The Department has been strictly adhering to the MEP .
It may, however , be mentioned that release of funds by the
department depends on timely release of matching share by the State
Governments and submission of utilization certificates.
[Ministry of Agriculture & Farmers Welfare (Department of
Agriculture, Cooperation and Farmers Welfare), No. 6-5/2016-B&A,
dated 08.08.2016]
Comments of the Committee
For comments of the Committee please refer to Para No. 10 of
Chapter I of this Report.
OUTSTANDING UTILIZATION CERTIFICATES
Recommendation (Para No. 8)
The issue of liquidation of Outstanding Utilization Certificates has
been raised time and again by the Committee in their earlier Reports.
The Committee have been apprised that inspite of the efforts of
Department of Agriculture, Cooperation and Farmers Welfare (DAC&FW),
as on 31 March, 2016, 414 Utilization Certificates are still pending,
amounting to Rs. 726.95 crore. While appreciating the efforts put in
by the Department with regard to liquidation of Outstanding Utilization
Certificates, the Committee feel that the entire issue needs to be
relooked afresh, so that corrective measures may be taken to address
the issue comprehensively. The Committee, therefore, desire that the
Department should take up the matter proactively with all State
Governments/Implementing Agencies ensuring a lasting solution to this
perennial problem. The Committee would like to be apprised of the
initiative undertaken by the Department in this regard.
Reply of the Government
As on 25.07.2016, 743 UCs for an amount of Rs. 1853.87 crore only
are outstanding for funds released up to 31.3.2015. The Department
and Principal Accounts Office is monitoring status of outstanding
Utilization Certificates rigorously and no funds are being released
without submission of the Utilization Certificates.
[Ministry of Agriculture & Farmers Welfare (Department of
Agriculture, Cooperation and Farmers Welfare), No. 6-5/2016-B&A,
dated 08.08.2016]

41
Comments of the Committee
For comments of the Committee please refer to Para No. 13 of
Chapter I of this Report.
RASHTRIYA KRISHI VIKAS YOJANA (RKVY)
Recommendation (Para No. 18)
The Committee have been informed that from April, 2016, the
MinistryÕs online monitoring mechanism would be functional which would
ensure uploading of up to date figures at the touch of a button and
thereby providing the much needed dynamism to the monitoring
mechanism. It has further been stated that Central Teams under a
Joint Secretary conduct field visits every two months. However , the
Committee are anguished to note that the visit of the Central teams
are confined to the State Capital level only. However, the Committee
is of the opinion that these visits should invariably be done at the
district level so as to get the situation prevalent at the ground level.
The Committee would like the Department to act accordingly.
Reply of the Government
The issue of non finalization of State Agriculture Plan (SAP)/District
Agriculture Plan (DAP) by various State Governments were taken up by
the Department with the State Government in various meetings held
with officials of State Governments. All the defaulting State
Governments have been informed that during 2016-17, the 2nd
instalment of 50% of funds allocated to the State under the scheme
would not be released if they failed to finalize DAP/SAP .
[Ministry of Agriculture & Farmers Welfare (Department of
Agriculture, Cooperation and Farmers Welfare), No. 6-5/2016-B&A,
dated 08.08.2016]
Comments of the Committee
For comments of the Committee please refer to Para No. 19 of
Chapter I of this Report.
RASHTRIYA KRISHI VIKAS YOJANA (RKVY)
Recommendation (Para No. 19)
The Committee express their concern to note that out of the 29
States, only 8 States have prepared their State Agriculture Plan (SAP)

42
and out of the 652 Districts, District Agriculture Plan (DAP) for only
194 District have been prepared as on date despite the fact that
preparation of DAP and SAP is mandatory and has been mentioned in
the revised guidelines of the scheme for the 12th Plan. This sordid
State of affairs is reflective of the lackadaisical approach of all
concerned and pervading morass in the system as a result of which the
entire agriculture sector has to suffer. Strongly deprecating this fact,
the Committee urge the Department to get the message conveyed to
all State/UTs for strict compliance with the mandatory provision to
prepare SAP/DAP without any further loss of time. The Committee
would like to be apprised of the action taken by the Department in
this regard.
Reply of the Government
The issue of non finalization of State Agriculture Plan (SAP)/District
Agriculture Plan (DAP) by various State Governments were taken up by
the Department with the State Government in various meetings held
with officials of State Governments. All the defaulting State
Governments have been informed that during 2016-17, the 2nd
instalment of 50% of funds allocated to the State under the scheme
would not be released if they failed to finalize DAP/SAP .
[Ministry of Agriculture & Farmers Welfare (Department of
Agriculture, Cooperation and Farmers Welfare), No. 6-5/2016-B&A,
dated 08.08.2016]
Comments of the Committee
For comments of the Committee please refer to Para No. 22 of
Chapter I of this Report.
RASHTRIYA KRISHI VIKAS YOJANA (RKVY)
Recommendation (Para No. 20)
Another significant issue under RKVY which has captured the
attention of the Committee is the differential pricing of agriculture
implements under RKVY scheme. This has lead to a peculiar situation
wherein particular agri-implement is available at different prices in
different States. Further, in spite of the subsidy being provided to the
farmers, they end up paying more than the market price of the
implement. Further, it has come to the notice of the Committee that
implements of a particular brand are being forced upon farmers. Strongly
condemning this state of affairs, wherein one vulnerable farmers are

43
being exploited by unscrupulous agents whose sole intention is to
make a quick buck, the Committee impress upon the Ministry to look
into this matter at the earliest and in tandem with the States to
ensure uniform pricing of agri-implements under RKVY in the entire
country. The Committee further desires that the subsidy being granted
on agriculture implements be provided directly to the farmers who will
then exercise their freedom of choice based upon their need.
Reply of the Government
1. The Government of India, Ministry of Agriculture & Farmers
Welfare does not regulate/control the prices of agricultural equipments
and machines. However , the respective State Governments empanel
suppliers for supply of agricultural machines and equipments alongwith
their cost under subsidy schemes/programmes through their process of
tendering.
2. The guidelines of Sub-Mission on Agricultural Mechanization
(SMAM) stipulates that the State Level Executive Committee (SLEC)
will be responsible to enlist manufacturers/suppliers who have tested
their products either from Farm Machinery Training & Testing Institutes
or any identified institute by DAC&FW and fix the cost of agricultural
machinery and equipment on the basis of quality inspection and field
performance evaluation for supply under various components of SMAM.
However, complete freedom to beneficiary will be available for selection
of agricultural machinery and equipment as per his/her choice.
3. Instructions have been issued to all the State Governments for
compliance and necessary action in the matter vide letter of even
number dated 23rd May 2016.
[Ministry of Agriculture & Farmers Welfare (Department of
Agriculture, Cooperation and Farmers Welfare), No. 6-5/2016-B&A
dated 08.08.2016],
Comments of the Committee
For comments of the Committee please refer to Para No. 25 of
Chapter I of this Report.
SUPPORT TO STATE EXTENSION PROGRAMMES
Recommendation (Para No. 22)
The rather candid reply of the Department that the present
mechanism for routing Central funds through State Treasuries and
increasing State matching share from 10% to 40% have contributed the

44
reduction of allocation at RE stage. In fact, State Government of
Maharashtra has requested that the scheme guidelines may be reviewed
making provision for implementing the scheme under reduced funding
pattern. However , the Committee are of the view that as the revised
funding of Central Sector Schemes cannot be revised immediately, it
would be but necessary for the Department to take this matter at the
highest level with all Implementing States to ensure that they come
up with their matching share of 40% under ATMA without fail at the
earliest. The Committee also desire that the matter of routing ATMA
funds directly to the Implementing Agencies rather than routing the
same through State Treasury be looked into at the earliest by the
agency concerned. The Committee feel that both these issues need to
be tackled with the alacrity they deserve. The Committee would like
to be apprised of the initiatives undertaken by the Department in this
regard.
Reply of the Government
This Department has been regularly taking up this issue with the
State Governments to ensure timely release of 40% State Matching
Share. State specific letters have been issued at various levels for
addressing the key issues including release of State matching for getting
2nd installment of funds released in time. As regard transfer of funds
to the State Treasuries, this Department has written letters to Senior
State level officers including Finance Secretaries for their intervention
in the matter and to issue suitable directions to the State Treasuries
to facilitate timely release of funds pertaining to ATMA Scheme so that
season based and time bound extension activities are not hampered
and salaries to the deployed manpower are paid in time.
[Ministry of Agriculture & Farmers Welfare (Department of
Agriculture, Cooperation and Farmers Welfare), No. 6-5/2016-B&A,
dated 08.08.2016]
Comments of the Committee
For comments of the Committee please refer to Para No. 28 of
Chapter I of this Report.

45
CHAPTER V
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH FINAL
REPLIES OF GOVERNMENT ARE STILL AWAITED
PRADHAN MANTRI KRISHI SINCHAI YOJANA (PMKSY)
Recommendation (Para No. 13)
The Committee further note that a Committee under the
Chairmanship of Shri Brij Mohan Agarwal, HonÕble Minister , Chhattishgarh
has been constituted by MOWR, RD&GR to finalise the list of project
under AIBP that can be completed by March, 2017 and 2019-20. This
Committee is likely to submit its report shortly. The Committee desire
that the details of this report be furnished to them after its submission.
Reply of the Government
This Committee is constituted by Ministry of Water Resources. As
and when the report of this committee is shared by Ministry of Water
Resources with this Department, the same would be apprised to the
Standing Committee on Agriculture.
[Ministry of Agriculture & Farmers Welfare (Department of
Agriculture, Cooperation and Farmers Welfare), No. 6-5/2016-B&A,
dated 08.08.2016]
INTEGRATED SCHEME ON AGRICULTURAL MARKETING (ISAM)
Recommendation (Para No. 15)
The Committee were informed that funds meant for general
category for construction of Rural Godowns under the sub-scheme of
Agricultural Marketing Infrastructure (AMI) during the year 2014-15 has
exhausted. In the year, 2015- 16, out of the RE of Rs. 675.86 crore for
AMI schemes, funds for the general category were fully exhausted with
the release of Rs. 493.81 crore. The BE for the whole of ISAM for the
current fiscal is only Rs. 787.90 crore, out of which AMI is one of the
five sub-schemes. Further the total liability as on date stands at
Rs. 1250.27 crore. This comprises of Rs. 317.52 crore pipeline liability
and Rs. 932.75 crore committed liablity. This total liability is mostly
for the general category. Also, the limited allocations for AMI in
2016-17 will be restricted to 65.2% for the general category. Totally

46
dissatisfied at this sordid state of affairs, the Committee recommend
that allocation of funds be enhanced at RE stage during the fiscal for
ISAM, so that the Department is in a position to honour its total
liability of Rs. 1250.27 crore at the earliest.
Reply of the Government
 Demand for additional funds at RE stage is placed around August-
September of each year. Accordingly, demand for additional funds
under the sub-scheme of Agricultural Marketing Infrastructure (AMI)
will be sought to honour the liability .
[Ministry of Agriculture & Farmers Welfare (Department of
Agriculture, Cooperation and Farmers Welfare), No. 6-5/2016-B&A,
dated 08.08.2016]
Comments of the Committee
For comments of the Committee please refer to Para No. 16 of
Chapter I of this Report.
   N
EW D ELHI; HUKM DEO NARAYAN YADAV,
29 November, 2016 Chairperson,
08 Agrahayana, 1938 (Saka) Standing Committee on Agriculture.

47
ANNEXURE I
BRIEF ON CENTRAL SECTOR SCHEME, ÒESTABLISHMENT OF AGRI-
CLINICS AND AGRI-BUSINESS CENTRES (ACABC) Ó
A Central Sector Scheme, ÒEstablishment of Agri-Clinics and Agri-
Business Centres (ACABC) Ó has been under implementation since April,
2002 to supplement the efforts of public extension, support agricultural
development and create gainful self-employment opportunities to
unemployed youths with qualification in agriculture and allied sectors.
The scheme promotes involvement of agri-preneurs trained under
the ACABC scheme in providing advisory and extension services to the
farmers in agriculture and allied areas. The agri-preneurs trained under
ACABC scheme are actively involved in providing advisory and extension
services to the farmers on various technologies including soil, health,
cropping practices, plant protection, post harvest technology etc.
The National Institute of Agricultural Extension Management
(MANAGE) is the implementing agency for Training Component and
National Bank for Agriculture and Rural Development (NABARD) is the
implementing agency for Subsidy Component of ACABC scheme.
Under ACABC scheme, the training is imparted to unemployed
candidates who possess degree/diploma in agriculture and allied
subjects, intermediate in agriculture and science graduates with PG in
agri related courses through selected Nodal Training Institutes (NTIs)
in various parts of the country. The NTIs also provide hand-holding to
the trained candidates for establishment of agri-ventures in agriculture
and allied areas and facilitates in providing loan assistance from banks
and subsidy support from NABARD.
There is a provision of credit linked back-ended upfront composite
subsidy on the bank loan availed by trained candidates under the
Scheme. The subsidy is 44% in respect of women, SC/ST and all
categories of candidates from North-Eastern and Hill States and 36% in
respect of other categories. The subsidy is admissible for loans upto
Rs. 20 lakh in case of individual and Rs. 100 lakh in case of Group
Projects (for ventures set up by a group of 5 trained candidates).
During the current year 69 candidates were trained and 236 have
established their ventures. Since inception of the scheme, 47884

48
candidates have been trained and 20684 agri-ventures have been
established in the country till 30.04.2016. These ventures are acting
as active supplementary institutions for Government Extension
mechanism in the States.
Details of the scheme may be seen at website www.agriclinics.net

49
ANNEXURE II
ATMA GOVERNING BOARD (GB)
The ATMA Governing Board (GB) is a policy making body which
provides guidance, reviews & steers the progress and functioning of
the ATMA.
Composition
 1. District Magistrate/Collector Chairman
 2. Chief Executive Officer (CEO), Chief Development Officer (CDO) Vice-Chairman
District Head of Agriculture Department Deputy Chairman
 3. Representative of Zila Panchayat/Zila Parishad Member
 4. Joint Director/Deputy Director (Agri.) Member
 5. Joint Director/Deputy Director (Hort.) Member
 6. Joint Director/Deputy Director (Animal Husbandry/Fishery/Sericulture) Member (one of
them as per local
priorities)
 7. A representative from Zonal Research Station (ZRS) Member
 8. Programme Coordinator , Krishi Vigyan Kendra Member
 9. One Farmer representative (nominated from DFAC) Member
10. One Livestock Producer (nominated from DFAC) Member
11. One Horticulture Farmer (nominated from DFAC) Member
12. Representative of Women Food Security Group Member
13. Representative of FIG/CIG Member
14. One SC/ST farmer representative (nominated from DFAC) Member
15. A representative of NGO Member
16. Lead Bank Officer of the District Member
17. A representative of District Industrial Center Member
18. Representative of Agriculture Marketing Board Member
19. Representative of input supplying Association Member
20. A representative of trained input dealers who is also providing Member
extension services

50
21. One Fisheries/Sericulture representative Member
22. A DRDA Representative Member
23. Project Director ATMA Member Secretary-
cum-Treasurer
(Ex-officio)
Note:
(i) States may identify any other officer, not below the rank of CEO, Zila Parishad/Chief
Development Officer/Additional District Collector for 1 & 2 above, under intimation to DAC.
(ii) States may also co-opt. additional members, if required.
(iii) All farmer representatives are to be nominated by the District Farmers Advisory Committee
by consensus or by majority.
Appointment/Nomination/Term of Members:
Non-official members of GB will be appointed for a period of
2 years by APC on the recommendation of the Chairman of GB.
Some initial appointments would be staggered to ensure that about
two-thirds of the members would carry on for an additional year on
the GB.
Thirty per cent of the farmer representatives on the GB would be
reserved for women farmers to ensure that their interests are fully
represented.
Key function of ATMA Governing Board
The key functions of ATMA Governing Board would be to:
1. Review and approve Strategic Research and Extension Plan
(SREP) and annual action plans that are prepared and
submitted by the participating units.
2. Receive and review annual reports presented by the
participating units, providing feedback and direction to them
as needed, for various research and extension activities being
carried out within the district.
3. Receive and allocate project funds to carry out priority
research, extension and related activities within the district.
4. Foster the organization and development of Farmers Õ Interest
Groups (FIGs) and Farmer Organizations (FOs) within the
district.
5. Facilitate greater involvement of private sector and firms
and organizations in providing inputs, technical support, agro-
processing and marketing services to farmers.

51
6. Encourage agriculture lending institutions to increase the
availability of capital to resource poor and marginal farmers,
especially SC, ST and women farmers.
7. Encourage each line department, plus the KVK and ZRS, to
establish farmer advisory committees to provide feecback
and input for their respective Research-Extension Programmes.
8. Enter into contracts and agreements as appropriate to
promote and support agricultural development activities
within the district.
9. Identify other sources of financial support that would help
in ensuring the financial sustainability of the ATMA and its
participating units.
10. Converge human and financial resources available for
extension under different schemes and programmes of DAC.
11. Establish revolving funds/accounts for each participating unit,
and encourage each unit to make available technical services,
such as artificial insemination or soil testing, on a cost
recovery basis moving towards full cost recovery in a phased
manner.
12. Arrange for the periodic audit of ATMA Õs financial accounts.
13. Adopt and amend the rules and by-laws for the ATMA.
14. Hold meetings of ATMA GB every quarter or frequently.
15. Any other functions that support effective functioning of
ATMA in the district.
ATMA MANAGEMENT COMMITTEE (MC)
The Management Committee would be responsible for planning and
execution of day-to-day activities of ATMA.
Composition
1. District Head of Department, Agriculture Chairman
2. Project Director of Agriculture Technology Management Agency Co-Chairman
3. District Head of Department, Horticulture Member
4. District Head of Department, Animal Husbandry Member
5. District Head of Department, Fisheries Member
6. District Head of Department, Sericulture Member

52
 7. Head, Krishi Vigyan Kendra Member
 8. Head, Zonal Research Station Member
 9. Project Officer , District Rural Development Agency Member
10. One representative of Farmers Õ Organization promoted by an NGO Member
11. Representative of NGO, if any, involved in agricultural extension Member
12. District level NABARD Officer Member
13. Lead Bank Officer Member
14. A representative of trained input dealers who is also providing Member
extension services
15. Two progressive farmers (one of whom should be a woman) Member
(nominated from DFAC)
16. Two Deputy Project Directors (of which one will be nominated Member Secretary
as Member Secretary)
Note:
(i) States may also consider co-opting additional members, if required.
(ii) All farmer representatives are to be nominated by the District Farmers Advisory Committee
by consensus or by majority.
Key functions of Management Committee (MC)
1. Carry out periodic Participatory Rural Appraisal (PRA) to
identify the problems and constraints faced by different socio-
economic groups and farmers within the district.
2. Prepare an integrated, Strategic Research and Extension Plan
(SREP) for the district that would specify short and medium
term adaptive research as well as technology validation and
refinement and extension priorities for the district.
3. Prepare annual District Agriculture Action Plans in consultation
with DFAC which would be submitted to the ATMA Governing
Board for review, possible modification and approval.
4. Maintain appropriate project accounts for audit purposes.
5. Coordinate the execution of these annual action plans through
participant line departments, ZRSs, KVKs, NGOs, FIGs/FOs
and allied institutions, including private sector firms.
6. Establish coordinating mechanisms at the Block level, such
as Farm Information & Advisory Centres (FIACs) that would

53
integrate extension and technology transfer activities at the
block and village levels.
7. Provide periodic performance reports as required by DAC to
the Governing Board outlining the various targets and
achievements.
8. Provide secretariat to Governing Board and initiate action on
policy direction, investment decisions and other guidance
received from the Governing Board.
9. ATMA Management Committee shall meet once in a month
to review the progress in various blocks and submit the
report to State Nodal Cell/DAC.

54
ANNEXURE III
INDICATIVE LIST OF AGRI-VENTURES UNDER ACABC SCHEME
¥ Extension consultancy services.
¥ Soil and water quality cum inputs testing laboratories.
¥ Crop protection services, including pest surveillance,
diagnostic and control services (with culture rooms,
autoclaves, microscopes, ELISA Kits etc. for detection of
plant pathogens including viruses, fungi, bacteria,
nematodes, and insect pests).
¥ Micro-propagation including plant tissue culture labs and
hardening units.
¥ Production, maintenance and custom hiring of agricultural
implements and machinery including micro irrigation systems.
¥ Seed production and processing units.
¥ Vermiculture units.
¥ Production of bio-fertilizers, bio-pesticides & other bio-control
agents.
¥ Apiaries (bee-keeping) and honey & bee products Õ processing
units.
¥ Agricultural insurance services.
¥ Agri-tourism.
¥ Agri-journalism Ñ film production, farm publications and
exhibitions.
¥ Poultry and fishery hatcheries.
¥ Livestock health cover , veterinary dispensaries & services
including frozen semen banks and liquid nitrogen supply and
artificial insemination.
¥ Information technology kiosks.
¥ Feed production, marketing and testing units.
¥ Value addition centres.
¥ Cool chain including cold storage units.

55
¥ Post harvest management centres for sorting, grading,
standardization, storage and packaging.
¥ Metallic and non-metallic storage structures.
¥ Horticulture clinic, nursery, landscaping, floriculture.
¥ Sericulture.
¥ Vegetable production and marketing.
¥ Retail marketing outlets for processed agri-products.
¥ Production and marketing of farm inputs & outputs.
¥ Contract farming.
¥ Crop production and demonstration.
¥ Mushroom production.
¥ Production, processing and marketing of medicinal and
aromatic plants.
¥ Production units like dairy, poultry, piggery, fisheries, sheep
rearing, goat rearing, emu rearing, rabbit rearing etc.
Note: The above activities are indicative in nature. Any other activity
in agriculture, horticulture, sericulture, animal husbandry, fisheries,
allied sectors or combination of two or more of the above activities
selected by the candidates, which generate income to the agri preneur
and render extension services to the farmers will also be eligible under
the Scheme.

56
AGRI-CLINICS AND AGRI-BUSINESS CENTRES (AC&ABC) ACTIVITY-WISE
OF AGRI-VENTURES (from 01.04.2002 to 30.04.2016)
Sl.No. Name of the Agri-Venture Activity-wise No. of
Agri-Ventures
12 3
1. Agri-clinics 3,119
2. Agri-clinics and agri-business centres 6,765
3. Agro-Eco Tourism 10
4. Animal Feed Unit 47
5. Bio-Fertilizer Production and Marketing 102
6. Contract Farming 58
7. Cultivation of Medicinal Plants 112
8. Direct Mkt. 168
9. Farm Machinery Unit 712
10. Fisheries Development 349
11. Floriculture 107
12. Horticulture Clinic 170
13. Landscaping+Nursery 113
14. Nursery 500
15. Organic Production/Food Chain 88
16. Pesticide Production and Marketing 40
17. Value Addition 272
18. Fishery clinic 15
19. Seed Processing and Marketing 333
20. Soil Testing Laboratory 102
21. Tissue Culture Unit 28
22. Vegetable Production and Marketing 239
23. Vermicomposting/Organic manure 495

57
24. Veterinary Clinics 874
25. Crop Production 197
26. Dairy/Poultry/Piggery/Goatery 5338
27. Rural Godown 48
28. Production & Marketing of Bio-Control Agents 18
29. Agriculture Journalism 16
30. Sericulture 49
31. Mushroom Cultivation 99
32. Apiary 101
Total 20,684
12 3

58
ANNEXURE IV
STANDING COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE
(2016-17)
MINUTES OF THE SEVENTH SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE
The Committee sat on Friday, the 09th December, 2016 from
1000 hrs. to 1050 hrs. in the Chamber of the Hon Õble Chairperson,
Standing Committee on Agriculture, Room No. 138 (Third Floor),
Parliament House, New Delhi.
PRESENT
Shri Hukm Deo Narayan Yadav Ñ  Chairperson
M
EMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Prof. Ravindra Vishwanath Gaikwad
3. Shri Sanganna Karadi
4. Shri Nalin Kumar Kateel
5. Md. Badaruddoza Khan
6. Shri Janardan Mishra
7. Shri Devji Patel
8. Shri C.L. Ruala
9. Shri Satyapal Singh (Sambhal)
Rajya Sabha
10. Shri Sambhaji Shahu Chhatrapati
11. Shri Meghraj Jain
12. Shri Mohd. Ali Khan
13. Shri Ram Nath Thakur
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Shri U.B.S. Negi Ñ Joint Secretary
2. Shri Arun K. Kaushik Ñ Director
3. Smt. Juby Amar Ñ Additional Director
4. Shri C. Vanlalruata Ñ Deputy Secretary
5. Shri Sumesh Kumar Ñ Under Secretary

59
2. At the outset, Chairperson welcomed the Members to the Sitting
of the Committee. Thereafter , the Committee took up for consideration
the following draft Reports:
*(i) **** **** **** ****
*(ii) **** **** **** ****
(iii) Draft Report on the Action Taken by the Government on the
Observations/Recommendations contained in the 25th Report
(16th Lok Sabha) of the Standing Committee on Agriculture
(2015-16) on ÔDemands for Grants (2016-17) Õ of the Ministry
of Agriculture and Farmers Welfare (Department of
Agriculture, Cooperation and Farmers Welfare).
*(iv) **** **** **** ****
3. After some deliberations, the Committee adopted the draft
Reports without any modifications and authorized the Chairperson to
finalize and present these Reports to Parliament after getting them
factually verified from the concerned Departments/Ministries.
The Committee then adjourned.
*Matter not related to this Report.

60
APPENDIX
(Vide Para 4 of Introduction of the Report)
ANALYSIS OF ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE TWENTY
FIFTH REPORT OF STANDING COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE (2015-16)
ON ÔDEMANDS FOR GRANTS (2016-17) Õ OF THE MINISTRY OF
AGRICULTURE AND FARMERS WELFARE (DEPARTMENT OF
AGRICULTURE, COOPERATION AND FARMERS WELFARE)
(i) Total number of Recommendations: 27
(ii) Observations/Recommendations  which   have  been
accepted by the Government:
Para Nos. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 9, 10, 11, 12, 14, 16, 17,
21, 23, 24, 25, 26 and 27
Total 19
Percentage 70.37%
(iii) Observations/Recommendations which the Committee
do not desire to pursue in view of the Government Õs
replies:
Para No. Nil
Total NIL
Percentage 0%
(iv) Observations/Recommendations in respect of  which
replies of the Government have  not  been accepted
by the Committee:
Para Nos. 7, 8, 18, 19, 20 and 22
Total 06
Percentage 22.22%
(v) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which
final replies of the Government are still awaited:
Para No. 13 and 15
Total 02
Percentage 7.41%