SIXTH REPORT
COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE
(2014-2015)
(SIXTEENTH LOK SABHA)
MINISTRY OF AGRICULTURE
(DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURAL RESEARCH AND EDUCATION)
NATIONAL AGRICULTURAL RESEARCH SYSTEM—
AN EVALUATION
[Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations
contained in the Fifty-Eighth Report Fifteenth Lok Sabha)
of the Committee on Agriculture (2013-2014)]
Presented to Lok Sabha on 17.03.2015
Laid on the Table of Rajya Sabha on 17.03.2015
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
March, 2015/Phalguna, 1936 ( Saka)


COA No. 330
Price : R  70.00
© 2015 B Y L OK SABHA S ECRETARIAT
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct
of Business in Lok Sabha (Fifteenth Edition) and printed by
Anupam Art Printers, New Delhi.

CONTENTS
PAGE
COMPOSITION OF THE C OMMITTEE ............................................. (iii)
INTRODUCTION ................................................................. (v)
CHAPTER I Report ....................................................... 1
CHAPTER II Observations/Recommendations which have been
accepted by the Government .......................... 20
CHAPTER III Observations/Recommendations which the
Committee do not desire to pursue in view of the
Government’s replies ..................................... 48
CHAPTER IV Observations/Recommendations in respect of which
replies of the Government have not been accepted
by the Committee ........................................ 49
C
HAPTER V Observations/Recommendations in respect of which
final replies of the Government are still awaited ... 58
APPENDIX
Minutes of the 18th Sitting of the Committee held on
4th March, 2015 ................................................ 60
ANNEXURES
I. Breeder Seeds Indent and Production of different Crops
during 2007-08 to 2012-13 ................................... 62
II. Analysis of Action Taken by the Government on the
Recommendations contained in the Fifty-Eighth Report
(Fifteenth Lok Sabha) of the Committee on Agriculture
(2013-2014) ...................................................... 63
(i)

COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE
(2014-2015)
Shri Hukm Deo Narayan Yadav —  Chairperson
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Sanganna Amarappa
3. Prof. Ravindra Vishwanath Gaikwad
4. Shri Nalin Kumar Kateel
5. Md. Badaruddoza Khan
6. Shri C. Mahendran
7. Dr. Tapas Mandal
8. Shri Janardan Mishra
9. Shri Ajay Nishad
10. Shri Dalpat Singh Paraste
11. Shri Nityanand Rai
12. Shri Mukesh Rajput
13. Shri Konakalla Narayana Rao
14. Shri C.L. Ruala
15. Shri Arjun Charan Sethi
16. Shri Satyapal Singh
17. Shri Virendra Singh
18. Shri Kadiyam Srihari
19. Shri Jai Prakash Narayan Yadav
20. Shri Dharmendra Yadav
21. Shri B.S. Yeddyurappa
Rajya Sabha
22. Shri A.W. Rabi Bernard
23. Shrimati Renuka Chowdhury
24. Sardar Sukhdev Singh Dhindsa
25. Shri Janardan Dwivedi
(iii)

(iv)
26. Shri Vinay Katiyar
27. Shri Mohd. Ali Khan
28. Shri Rajpal Singh Saini
29. Shri Ram Nath Thakur
30. Shri Shankarbhai N. Vegad
31. Shri Darshan Singh Yadav
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Shri Abhijit Kumar — Joint Secretary
2. Smt. Abha Singh Yaduvanshi — Director
3. Shri Sumesh Kumar — Under Secretary

(v)
INTRODUCTION
I, the Chairperson, Committee on Agriculture (2014-2015) having
been authorized by the Committee to submit the Report on their
behalf, present this Sixth Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) on Action Taken
by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations contained
in the Fifty Eighth Report (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) of the Committee on
‘National Agricultural Research System — An Evaluation ’ pertaining to
Ministry of Agriculture (Department of Agricultural Research and
Education).
2. The Fifty Eighth Report (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) of the Committee
on Agriculture (2013-2014) on ‘National Agricultural Research System—
An Evaluation ’ pertaining to Ministry of Agriculture (Department of
Agricultural Research and Education) was presented to Lok Sabha on
18.02.2014 and laid on the Table of Rajya Sabha on 19.02.2014. The
Action Taken Replies on the Report were received on 15 May, 2014.
3. The Report was considered and adopted by the Committee at
their Sitting held on 04 March, 2015.
4. An analysis of the Action Taken by the Government on the
Observations/Recommendations contained in the Fifty-eighth Report
(Fifteenth Lok Sabha) of the Committee is given in Annexure-II.
5. The Committee would like to place on record their deep sense
of appreciation for the invaluable assistance rendered to them by the
officials of Lok Sabha Secretariat attached to the Committee.
   N
EW D ELHI; HUKM DEO NARAYAN YADAV,
13 March, 2015 Chairperson,
22 Phalguna, 1936 (Saka) Committee on Agriculture.

CHAPTER I
REPORT
This Report of the Committee on Agriculture deals with the action
taken by the Government on the recommendations contained in the
Fifty-eighth Report (15th Lok Sabha) of the Committee on Agriculture
(2013-14) on “National Agricultural Research System — An Evaluation ”
of the Ministry of Agriculture (Department of Agricultural Research and
Education) which was presented to Lok Sabha on 18 February, 2014
and laid on the Table of Rajya Sabha on 19 February, 2014.
1.2 The Ministry of Agriculture (Department of Agricultural Research
and Education) have furnished Action Taken Replies in respect of all
the 38 Observations/Recommendations contained in the Report. These
have been categorized as under:—
(i) Observations/Recommendations that have been accepted by
the Government:
Recommendation Nos. 01, 02, 03, 04, 05, 06, 09, 11, 12, 13,
17, 19, 20, 21, 22, 23, 24, 25, 26, 27, 28, 29, 30, 33, 35,
37 and 38
Total-27
Chapter-II
(ii) Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not
desire to pursue in view of the Government ’s reply:
Recommendation No. NIL
Total-NIL
Chapter-III
(iii) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which action
taken replies of the Government have not been accepted by
the Committee:
Recommendation Nos. 07, 08, 10, 14, 15, 16, 18, 32 and 34
Total-09
Chapter-IV
(iv) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which final
replies of the Government are still awaited:
Recommendation Nos. 31 and 36
Total-02
Chapter-V

2
1.3 The Committee trust that utmost importance would be given
to implementation of the Observations/Recommendations accepted
by the Government. In cases, where it is not possible for the
Department to implement the Recommendations in letter and spirit
for any reason, the matter should be reported to the Committee
with reasons for non-implementation. The Committee desire that
further Action Taken Notes on the Committee’s comments contained
in Chapter-I and final action taken replies in respect of
recommendations for which interim reply have been furnished as
brought out in Chapter V of this Report, be furnished to them at an
early date.
1.4 The Committee will now deal with the action taken by the
Government on some of the Recommendations in the succeeding
paragraphs.
AICRP/NETWORK PROJECTS
Recommendation (Serial No. 3)
1.5 The Committee had recommended as under:—
“The Committee desire that the Project co-ordinator and his team
should regularly incorporate the ideas and solutions in
implementation of these projects from the AICRP exchanges. They
also urge the Ministry that in case of failure to adhere to the time
schedules for the completion of these projects, the reasons be
analysed and the responsibility be fixed so as to avoid time and
cost escalations. ”
1.6 The Department in their Action Taken reply have stated as
under:—
“The Project co-ordinators shall undertake continuous monitoring
to ensure adherence to the time schedule for completion of the
projects. The research work at the AICRP Centres is reviewed by
the Project Co-ordinators and only after satisfactory  performance,
the grant is released. The allocated budget during the plan period
does not normally exceed. ”
1.7 The Committee, while recognizing the importance of AIRCP/
Network projects had desired to analyze reasons in case of failure
to adhere to the time schedules for the completion of these projects
and fixing responsibility so as to avoid time and cost escalations. In
their reply, the Department inter-alia have merely stated that grants

3
are released only after satisfactory performance of AICRP centres
as reviewed by project co-ordinators. The Department have also
stated that allocated budget during the plan period does not normally
exceed. However, the Department is silent on the issue of fixing
responsibility for failure to adhere the timeline for completion of
projects. The Committee, therefore, once again reiterate their earlier
recommendation to fix responsibility to avoid time and cost escalation
in case of failure.
STRENGTHENING OF ICAR
Recommendation (Serial No. 4)
1.8 The Committee had recommended as under:—
“A large number of State Agriculture Universities, State supported
Institutes, Central Universities, National Institutes, National Bureaux,
Projects, NRC, AICRP , AINP and KVKs are functioning under the
guidance of DARE/ICAR in various parts of the country to meet the
demand of Agriculture and allied sectors. It is the Research and
Technology development by DARE/ICAR which has enabled an
increase of 4 times in production of foodgrains, 6 times horticultural
crops, 9 times fish, 6 times eggs since 1950-51. However , there is
still a lot of scope to strengthen the NARS to meet new challenges
and that there is a need to compare ourselves with some of countries
which are moving much faster than us like China, Brazil, Malaysia
etc. The Committee, therefore, emphasize that instead of being
complacent about their achievements the Government should
strengthen the ICAR network to meet the new challenges regarding
food security. The Committee recommend the DARE to study in
depth the methods/technologies adopted by some of the progressing
aforesaid countries in this field and adapt them to our given
conditions so as to augment the production and productivity in
agricultural sector besides improving the economic conditions of
farming community of the country. The Committee also urge the
Ministry of Agriculture to lay more emphasis and focus on the
agriculture research in the 12th Five Year Plan and provide adequate
financial support to meet the much required research work. ”
1.9 The Department in their Action Taken reply has stated as
under:—
“In order to augment production & productivity in Agriculture Sector,
besides improving the economic condition of the farming community
in India, efforts shall be made during XII Plan on focused areas of

4
Agricultural Research. Keeping the priorities in view, EFC/SFC are
being processed to provide financial support to the Research work
to meet the new challenges. The efforts shall be made to study
the technological advances made in some of the countries for
augmenting the productivity. Based upon the study and after
identification of such studies and other reasons for productivity
differential between India and other countries, necessary measures
shall be taken to incorporate the scientific advances made in some
of the countries for attaining the desired level of productivity. ”
1.10 The Committee while recognizing the efforts of DARE/ICAR
to enhance the agricultural production in the country had
recommended the Government to strengthen NARS to meet new
challenges and study agricultural methods/technologies adopted by
some countries which are moving faster than us like China, Brazil,
Malaysia etc. and adapt them according to our conditions in order
to augment agricultural production and productivity in our country.
The department in their reply have assured the Committee that
efforts shall be made to study the technological advances made in
some of the countries for augmenting the productivity and necessary
measures shall be taken to incorporate the scientific advances made
in these countries for attaining the desired level of productivity.
However, the Committee note that no concrete plan has been
proposed by the Government even after nearly three years of XIIth
Plan in order to achieve these aims as the Department are still
processing EFC/SFC and yet to get financial sanction to support
research works to meet the new challenges. The Committee would
like the Department to spell out the measures/plan in clear terms
to achieve the desired level of productivity and not give vague
replies.
INVESTMENT IN AGRICULTURE SECTOR
Recommendations (Serial Nos. 07 & 08)
1.11 The Committee had recommended as under:—
“The Committee find that during the XIth Plan Period only
Rs. 10,325.76 crore was allocated to DARE vis-à-vis demand for
Rs. 31,672 cr. The utilization of funds by the Government was only
Rs. 9,800 cr. The agricultural growth rate at the end of XIth Plan
was only 3.3% vis-à-vis target of 4% and the stated reason was that
total low public investment in agriculture in R&D sector in the
form of infrastructure irrigation water conservation and land etc.

5
Further , the other reason was R&D expenditure was only 0.5% of
agricultural GDP . The Committee urge the Ministry to learn their
lessons and ensure that the allocated amount is utilized fully and
the expenditure on research should be enhanced at least 1% of the
agriculture GDP in the XIIth Plan. They also emphasize that the
Department should focus on not only planning but actually enhancing
investment in research infrastructure, irrigation water conservation
and land etc.
The Ministry have apprised the Committee that additional
investment of one rupee in research generated more than rupee
one on an average in major crops, and the highest marginal product
was achieved in ‘Arhar’ where additional investment of rupee one
generated additional output worth Rs. 12.82. They have also
informed the Committee that a recent study covering two decades
indicate 42-46% internal rate of return in public investment in
agricultural research and education. All these studies prove high
pay-off from public sector R&D investments. Research and
technology driven output growth has also led to the decline in real
cost of production in the range of 1.0—2.31% per annum during the
past three decades in case of cereals. This has helped in keeping
the prices of cereals low and benefitting consumers and producers.
In view of the above, the Committee feel that the importance and
significance of agricultural R&D in the development process cannot
be underestimated. They desire that the investment in agricultural
R&D should be enhanced so as to obtain higher returns, besides
reducing the import dependency and adding to the export capacity
of the country. The Committee desire that the Department should
prepare an action plan to attract investment in agriculture research
in the country. They should also approach the Ministry of Finance
to provide monetary and fiscal incentives for the same. Further,
DARE should take concrete steps to publicize the return from
investment in Agriculture sector. ”
1.12 The Department in their Action Taken reply has stated as
under:—
“The National Centre for Agricultural Economics & Policy Research
(NCAP) undertakes studies from time to time on public-private
investment and their compositions. Fresh study will be taken on
these aspects by the NCAP soon.
(Reply to Recommendation Serial No. 07)

6
The estimates quoted in the report are from the study already
done by the NCAP . Concrete steps shall be taken to publicize the
return from investment in agriculture sector. ”
(Reply to Recommendation Serial No. 08)
1.13 The Committee in their report while noticing low level of
agricultural growth rate during 11th Plan due to low allocations and
actual utilization of funds for agricultural research had recommended
the Department to work towards enhancement of allocations for
agricultural research up to 1% of agricultural GDP and to ensure full
utilization of allocated funds. The Committee had also recommended
the Department to prepare action plan for attracting investment in
agricultural research. The Department in their action taken replies
have vaguely stated that NCAP will soon undertake a fresh study on
public private partnership in agricultural research and that concrete
steps would be under taken to publicize the return on investment
in agriculture sector. However, the Department have chosen to
remain silent on committing on additional allocation for research
purpose. The Department is also silent on important aspect of
preparation of a concrete action plan for attracting investment in
agricultural research. The Committee while reiterating their earlier
recommendation would like to be apprised of steps taken by the
Department towards preparation of action plan without any delay
as also work towards enhancing the allocation and for investment
in agricultural research sector. The Department may also give a
target date for making a fresh study on Public Private Partnership
in agricultural research.
POLICY FRAMEWORK FOR R&D IN AGRICULTURE AND ALLIED AREAS
Recommendation (Serial No. 10)
1.14 The Committee had recommended as under:—
“The Committee note that ICAR have been consciously developing
farmer friendly technologies and assuring quality higher education.
They are satisfied that the Council in consultation with all the
stake holders have prepared the first ever policy framework for
R&D in agriculture and allied areas. While appreciating the work
of ICAR in bringing out a clear cut policy in order to support the
farmers, the Committee urge the Ministry to ensure implementation
and execution of the policy so as to play a vital role in agricultural
research and education besides dissemination of information and
technologies to the farmers at the ground level. They also emphasize

7
that this R&D policy articulated by ICAR should be appropriately
integrated and synchronized with the National R&D System and
Science and Technology Innovation Policy 2013. They further desire
that the contents and the benefits flowing from this policy to the
farmers should be publicized and awareness be created among the
farmers through KVKs and other on-field agencies. ”
1.15 The Department in their Action Taken reply has stated as
under:—
“The studies on impact Assessment of various technologies has
been initiated. The network of Krishi Vigyan Kendras (KVKs) are
organizing large number of awareness creating programmes among
farmers with focus on improved agricultural technologies, practices
and programmes and policies of the Government. ”
1.16 The Committee had while noting the efforts of ICAR for
preparation of policy framework for R&D in agriculture and allied
areas had recommended the Department to ensure implementation
and execution of the policy and also emphasized that this R&D
policy articulated by ICAR should be appropriately integrated and
synchronized with the National R&D System and Science and
Technology Innovation Policy 2013. The Department in their replies
have stated that programmes are being organised by KVKs to create
awareness among farmers about improved technologies. They have
also stated that studies on impact Assessment of various technologies
has been initiated. However, the Department chose to remain silent
on efforts made by them to ensure implementation of this policy
and its integration with National R&D System and Science and
Technology Innovation Policy 2013. The Committee while deploring
this casual approach of the Department on such a vital
recommendation would like swift action in this regard in order to
reach intended benefits in agricultural research and education.
SEEDS
Recommendations (Serial Nos. 14 & 15)
1.17 The Committee had recommended as under:—
“The Committee note that 257 crop varieties including 26 varieties
of wheat, 33 varieties of paddy, 33 varieties of maize, 32 pulses
crop, 25 pearl millet and 52 varieties of oilseeds crops have been

8
released during 2007-10 by the Crop Science Division. During the
year 2011, 98,481 quintal of breeder seeds were produced. The
Committee find that the States do not have adequate seed plan as
a result of which the poor farmers are compelled to produce from
farmer saved seeds or are compelled to buy seeds from the open
market at exorbitant rates, where multi-national companies have
taken over the whole market. They emphasise that a comprehensive
and authentic database of seeds production and distribution in
India by Public and Private sector has to be developed so that all
stakeholders/farmers have enough information. Further, the
Government should have adequate control over the prices of the
seeds and not leave it on the whims of private companies to
charge exorbitant prices for seeds.
The Committee are of the opinion that the Department and the
ICAR should pursue the States to prepare long term seed plan for
their States on the basis of farmers ’ economic status, agro-climate
conditions, desire to adopt quality seeds, State crop calendar or
any other contingent situation. In order to ensure availability of
quality seeds in right quantity and at right time to the farmers,
they urge the Government to take all necessary steps to prepare
seed plans for 5 years in consultation with the respective State
Governments. Further the Committee desire the Department to
enhance the seed production and upgrade the infrastructure for
breeder seed production in accordance with the projection made
by National Seed Plan. The services of KVKs should be used to
showcase quality seed production programme to the farmers/seed
growers and their self help groups to meet the domestic demand
and avoid any hardship being faced by farmers in the country in
this regard. ”
1.18 The Department in their Action Taken reply has stated as
under:—
“The entire breeder seed is being produced as per the indent of
DAC and supplied by the ICAR to different public and private seed
producing agencies for further multiplication as foundation and
certified seed. The details of quality seed production by public
and private sector and their contributions have been provided in
Table given below. The uniform breeder seed price is fixed by the
ICAR in consultation with the DAC taking into account the cost of
cultivation of respective crops. However , the price of certified
seed is fixed by the respective seed producing agencies.

9
Quality seed production by public and private sector and their
contributions:—
Year Certified/ Quantity Share of Quantity Share of
Quality seed of seed public of seed private
production/ produced sector produced sector
availability by public (%) by private (%)
(million sector Sector
tonnes) (million (million
tonnes) tonnes)
2003-04 1.32 0.70 52.5 0.63 47.5
2004-05 1.41 0.77 55.0 0.63 45.0
2005-06 1.48 0.79 53.2 0.69 46.8
2006-07 1.94 1.15 59.0 0.80 41.0
2007-08 1.94 1.12 57.4 0.83 42.6
2008-09 2.50 1.51 60.2 1.0 39.8
2009-10 2.80 1.71 61.1 1.09 38.9
2010-11 3.22 1.66 51.6 1.56 48.4
2011-12 3.54 1.81 51.1 1.73 48.9
2012-13 3.29 1.61 49.1 1.67 50.9
(Reply to Recommendation Serial No. 14)
The Indian Council of Agricultural Research (ICAR) has ensured to
provide quality breeder seed to the public as well as private
organizations as per their indents collated and forwarded by the
Department of Agriculture & Cooperation (DAC). During the last
five years, the production of breeder seed is always higher than
the indented quantity (Annexure-I). As regards utilization of services
of KVKs for showcasing quality seed production programmes to the
farmers/seed growers and their self help groups to meet the
domestic demand and avoid any hardship is concerned, it is informed
that the KVKs are already undertaking the job of production of
quality seeds and planting materials. During the year 2013-14,
KVKs have produced 1.57 lakh quintal seeds of improved varieties
and hybrids of cereals, oilseeds, pulses, commercial crops,
vegetables, flowers, fruits, spices, fodder , forest species, medicinal
plants and fibre crops and these were provided to 2.61 lakh farmers.
A total of 167.19 lakh quality planting materials of elite species of

10
commercial crops, vegetables, fruits, ornamental medicinal and
aromatic crops, plantation crops, spices, tuber crops, fodder and
forest species were produced and provided to 2.35 lakh farmers. ”
(Reply to Recommendation Serial No. 15)
1.19 Keeping in view of scarcity of seed in the States and
exorbitant price of seeds sold by Multinational companies, the
Committee had recommended the Department to enhance seed
production in accordance with projection made by National Seed
plan. Further, they had opined that Department should make
attempts to control prices of seeds sold by private companies along
with preparation of comprehensive database of seed production and
distribution by public and private sectors in the country. The
Committee had also opined that the Department and the ICAR should
pursue the States to prepare long term seed plan for their States
on the basis of farmers ’ economic status, agro-climate conditions,
desire to adopt quality seeds, State crop calendar or any other
contingent situation. The Department besides informing that
production of breeder seed is done by ICAR as per indent of DAC,
have stated that price of uniform breeder seed is fixed by the ICAR
in consultation with the DAC taking into account the cost of
cultivation of respective crops whereas, the price of certified seed
is fixed by the respective seed producing agencies. The Committee
note that the Department have not clarified and specified the extent
to which seed production in the Country has been enhanced/proposed
to be enhanced as well as mechanism to monitor prices of seed sold
by private companies. The Department have also not specified their
role in pursuing States for preparation of long term seed plan. The
Committee while reiterating their earlier recommendations/
observations would like the Department to urgently address the
concern of the Committee on the above stated issues in consultation
with DAC. The Committee would like to be apprised of the action
taken by the Department.
SOIL TESTING
Recommendation (Serial No. 21)
1.20 The Committee had recommended as under:—
“The Committee observe that at certain places there is over use
of fertilizer/use of banned fertilizers by the farmers like in Punjab
and Andhra Pradesh. They feel that due to ignorance the farmers
not only harm their produce but also add to their production costs

11
besides leaving the soil devoid of nutrient. At time, it also leads
to various dangerous disease transmitted through use of banned
fertilizers. The Committee, therefore, recommend that volunteers
be deputed to inform the farmer of the right quantity and right
quality of fertilizers to be used by them on their soil. ”
1.21 The Department in their Action Taken reply has stated as
under:—
“The ICAR through different centres of the All India Coordinated
Research Project on Soil Test Crop Response has developed fertilizer
prescription equations for different crops grown in various States.
The information is available on the Soil Test Crop Response (STCR)
website (http://www.stcr.gov.in) and can be used by the soil testing
laboratories for on-line fertilizer recommendation. Farmers and
other end-users can get STCR based fertilizer recommendations for
different crops by feeding the soil test values for a desired targeted
yield.”
1.22 The Committee note that ICAR has developed fertilizer
prescription equations for different crops grown in various states.
However, the Committee are surprised that despite making provisions
for availability of Soil Test Crop Response (STCR) on website, the
Department has not made any attempt to educate farmers about
these facilities through dedicated volunteers. Just uploading the
information on the website does not serve the purpose for which it
was intended. The Committee would like the Department to initiate
a special drive to educate farmers about use of soil specific fertilisers
of right quality and in right quantity in order reduce harmful impact
on soil health.
WATER MANAGEMENT TECHNOLOGY
Recommendation (Serial No. 22)
1.23 The Committee had recommended as under:—
“ICAR Institutes and State Agriculture Universities are implementing
a scheme on scaling up of Water Productivity in Agriculture for
Livelihoods through teaching cum demonstration, training of trainees
and farmers across the country. There are 32 centres across the
country providing training to farmers to create awareness on water
use efficiency and increase water productivity in agriculture. The
technologies for improving water use efficiency have been developed
under 25 centres of AICRP on water management and 9 centres on

12
ground water utilization. The Committee emphasize that with the
kind of spread of agriculture in India the present awareness centres
for providing training to farmers on water use efficiency and increase
of water productivity in agriculture as also the centres of AICRP on
water management and water utilization are too limited and
requires much more vigorous awareness campaign on water
management, water conservation (through the developed technology
and optimum utilization of water in agriculture). Further a large
quantity of our rain water remains unutilized by the Agriculture
and Allied sectors in the Country. The Committee, therefore,
recommended the Department to examine the optimum utilization
of water, bringing about more centres training farmers and make
vigorous efforts to create awareness in this regard. They also
emphasise that the Government should prioritize on promoting
developing of water harvesting structures in the Indian farming
system and also probe the manner in which these productive work
can be covered under the MNREGA by deploying persons for fruitful
employment for the purpose of building rain water harvesting. ”
1.24 The Department in their Action Taken reply has stated as
under:—
“Scaling up of Water Productivity in Agriculture for Livelihoods
through Teaching cum Demonstration, Training of Trainers and
Farmers” is a Central Scheme implemented during the XI plan
period since February, 2008 from the interest accrued on a corpus
fund of Rs. 96 crore. Under the scheme, trainings of Trainers and
Farmers were conducted in 32 centres across the country to create
awareness among the farmers on water use efficiency, water
conservation, rainwater harvesting and different aspects of water
management.
As the scheme was for the XI Plan only, the efforts were made in
the XII Plan to continue for its implementation to create awareness
on generated technologies related to water management, water
conservation and optimum utilization of water in agriculture. The
draft EFC for the same has been submitted.
During the XI Plan, AICRP on Water Management (25 centres),
AICRP on Ground Water Utilization (9 centres) have generated
location specific water management technologies which were also
transferred through state functionaries for the larger benefit of
farming community. During the XII Plan period, it is proposed to
merge the above two schemes and initiate an AICRP on Irrigation

13
Water Management in all the centres. The proposed scheme would
develop and upscale location specific on-farm water management
strategies and technologies in the area of surface water ,
groundwater and waste water. The developed technologies will be
implemented by line departments of the states involving various
schemes of the Government of India like, MGNREGA, RKVY , NFSM
etc.”
1.25 The Committee are unhappy to know that the Department
is yet to get financial clearance for implementation of scheme of
‘Scaling up of Water Productivity in Agriculture for Livelihoods
through Teaching cum Demonstration, Training of Trainers and
Farmers’ during XII Plan even though three years of the plan have
almost elapsed for trainings of trainers and farmers across the country
to create awareness on water use efficiency, water conservation,
rainwater harvesting and different aspects of water management.
This shows lack of planning, apathy, non-prioritizing of an important
issue of water management in agriculture and allied sector by the
Government especially in the scenario of monsoon dependency of
Indian agriculture and complication arising due to climate change.
The Committee would like the Department to show requisite urgency
to start the scheme under intimation to the Committee.
AGRICULTURE EXTENSION
Recommendation (Serial No. 29)
1.26 The Committee had recommended as under:—
“The Committee are aware that Agriculture in India is complex,
diverse and risk prone with 123 million cultivators. Predominantly
small and marginal farmers across 638,596 villages in 131 agro-
climatic zones subjected to vagaries of monsoon, changing climate
conditions, regional variations in terms of natural resources, regional
imbalances, isolated and difficult areas, other socio-economic
factors and multi-agency extension system. They find that despite
the research having been done in diverse areas relating to
agriculture in the laboratories, it do not get transferred timely to
the ground level fields. Even they are transferred, their adoption
by farmers is not at the optimal level. The agencies responsible for
the transmission of research/research information like KVKs, Zonal
Project Directorates, Directorate of Extension Education of SAUs
ATMA, etc. are functioning in isolation. During 1950s and 1960s
when there were not so many agencies for dissemination of
information relating to research work, the research activities were

14
easily transferred to farmers and were promptly adopted by the
farmers. The Committee, therefore, desire that there is an urgent
need to review the functioning of the agencies responsible for
transmission of information, knowledge and research activities to
the farmers, so that the gap in delivery of research results from
lab to land and acceptance of the same by the farming community
can be addressed in the country. They also desire that the
Government should set up a Coordination Committee represented
by various agencies at appropriate level for dissemination of
research information. This coordination Committee comprising of
KVKs, ATMA, SAUs, Zonal Project Directorates, Department of
Agriculture Cooperation, Department of Water Resources,
Department of Post Harvest Management, should meet frequently
at regular intervals so that research work/techniques/ information
are easily and promptly transfer/disseminated to the farmers, who
can adapt and implement the same and improve their economic
condition along with the agricultural produce. ”
1.27 The Department in their Action Taken reply has stated as
under:—
“At Zonal level, there are eight Zonal Project Directorates (ZPDs),
each covering 70 to 100 KVKs. These ZPDs are regularly reviewing
and monitoring KVKs and coordinating their activities with other
research and development agencies including State Agricultural
Universities (SAUs), ICAR Institutes, ATMA and field offices of various
departments of Government of India and State Governments.
Directorates of Extension Education of Agricultural Universities are
mandated to provide technological backstopping to KVKs and other
field extension agencies. At district level there is provision for
coordination of KVKs with ATMA and other line departments. Such
coordination through Scientific Advisory Committee (SAC) of KVKs
and Management Committee of ATMAs provide an effective
mechanism for monitoring and review of their programmes. For
regional level coordination, the ICAR has already constituted 8
Regional Committees (RCs) in the country. The bi-annual meetings
of RCs are held wherein the senior officers of all development
departments of State Governments, SAUs and ICAR in the region
participate to discuss the research and development issues. At
national level, there is a coordination mechanism in place for
holding twice in a year (before the start of Kharif and Rabi seasons)
interface between ICAR and other Departments of the Ministry of
Agriculture. The senior officers of related Ministries are also invited
to participate in these interfaces. ”

15
1.28 The Committee while emphasizing importance of
coordination between various agencies in order to ensure
transmission of information related to research done in agriculture
sector had recommended the Department to set up a coordination
Committee represented by various agencies at appropriate level for
dissemination of research information. The Department in their
Action Taken reply had mentioned about existing coordination
mechanism at Zonal, District, Regional and National level. The
Committee recall that their recommendation was based on
observation of the fact that there is inconsistency and time lag in
coordination between different agencies responsible for transmission
of information being acquired in agricultural research. The Committee
while reiterating their recommendation desire the Department to
review existing mechanism for coordination and take suitable
corrective measures at ground level so as to remove the incoherence
and delay in transmission.
KRISHI VIGYAN KENDRAS
Recommendation (Serial No. 32)
1.29 The Committee had recommended as under:—
“The Committee are aware that KVKs is an important agency
responsible for transmission of research/research information. In
crops and livestock, 328 technological interventions were refined
under different thematic areas in 395 locations. Besides, five
women-specific income-generating technologies were also refined
in eight locations. As many as 73,175 frontline demonstrations
were undertaken on cereals, millets, oilseeds, pulses and other
important crops; 4,710 on improved tools and farm implements;
14,390 on livestock; and 5,991 on other enterprises including
genderspecific technologies under the National Initiative on Climate
Resilient Agriculture (NICRA); 26,218 demonstration were also
carried out. However , the Committee find that out of 634 KVKs in
the country, the Department has been able to provide Administrative
buildings to 554 KVKs, Trainees hostel to 490 KVKs, Staff Quarters
to 442 KVKs, demonstration units to 394 KVKs and soil and water
testing facilities to 389 KVKs only. The deficiencies in operations
of KVKs is also a matter of concern. The Committee are concerned
that in view of inadequate infrastructure and unavailability of
project co-ordinator , the KVKs will not be able to contribute towards
providing extension services or transmit research and research
information to the farmers. The Committee, therefore, emphasis

16
that the infrastructure such as Administrative buildings staff
quarters, demonstration units and soil and water testing facilities
etc. be built up expeditiously with a prescribed time limit. It may
also be ensured that project coordinators and other administrative
staff are deputed by providing incentives to them. ”
1.30 The Department in their Action Taken reply has stated as
under:—
“Provisions have been made for creation of the required
infrastructure in more number of KVKs during the XII Plan for due
approval.”
1.31 The Committee while observing inadequate infrastructure
and unavailability of project co-ordinator in many KVKs had
emphasised for expeditious provision of necessary infrastructure
such as administrative buildings, staff quarter, demonstration and
soil testing water facility alongwith deputation of project co-ordinator
and other administrative staff. The Department in their Action Taken
Reply has informed the Committee that provisions have been made
for creation of required infrastructure in more number of KVKs
during the XII Plan for due approval. However, the Department have
casually stated that provisions have been made without specifying
the plan/proposal for building adequate infrastructure in KVKs. They
have also remained silent on the issue of posting of project co-
ordinators and other administrative staff at KVKs. The Committee
are astonished to know that financial approval for creating necessary
infrastructure to KVKs are yet to be sanctioned even after almost
three years of XII Plan and that provisions itself will not lead to
implementation of the proposal. The Committee deplore this casual
approach of the Department towards important work of agriculture
extension which forms interface between R&D outcomes of ICAR
Institute and farmers of the Country. The Committee while reiterating
their earlier recommendation desire the Department to provide
necessary infrastructure to KVKs and to work for posting of required
project co-ordinators and other administrative staff to KVKs in time
bound manner.
Recommendation (Serial No. 34)
1.32 The Committee had recommended as under:—
“The Committee find that in order to create awareness among
farmers and other stakeholders KVKs organize large number of
extension programmes like Field Days, Exhibitions, Kisan Melas,

17
Kisan Goshthis, Film shows, group meetings and discussions,
workshops, lectures and use of mass media for wider dissemination
of farming technologies. However , the Committee note that out of
630 KVKs only a few out of them are working properly and the
functioning of the other KVKs is just satisfactory and much remains
to be done. During the 11th Plan the Department has allocated
Rs. 237.42 crores to meet the expenditure incurred by the State
owned KVKs/KVKs functioning under NGOs. The Committee desire
that ICAR should fix the responsibility for non-performing KVKs
functioning under their administrative control to improve their
performance so as the objective for which the KVKs have been set
up is achieved. They further urge the Department to make
assessment of the KVKs activities and performance on regular basis
at the same time necessary feedback should be obtain for the
KVKs regarding the requirement of the farmers so that necessary
changes, if any, can be made in the on-going programmes and
research work for the benefit of the farmers. The Committee
desire that the Government should ensure that all KVKs both private
and State supported KVKs should provide all mandated activities
including extending professional advice, information/knowledge to
contain ill-effects of weather conditions. The Committee also advice
the Department to enhance allocations for KVKs so that more and
more State supported KVKs function without any personal or vested
interest rather they have holistic approach of dissemination of
information and farm knowledge/technology adaptation to farmers.”
1.33 The Department in their Action Taken reply has stated as
under:—
“The observations of the Committee regarding improving the overall
functioning and following holistic approach in conducting all
mandated activities by KVKs for the benefit of farmers have been
brought to the notice of the Host organizations of the KVKs. The
activities of KVKs are regularly reviewed and monitored. As regards
assessing the performance of KVK activities, it is stated that it is
being done by holding the Scientific Advisory Committee (SAC)
meetings, Zonal Review Workshops and field visits by senior officers.
The feedback of farmers is also regularly obtained on KVK
programmes by inviting farmers to SAC meetings as farmers are
member of SAC. Besides, the farmers are encouraged to take active
part in all the KVK programmes and activities and seeking their
feedback is part of the programming process. ”
1.34 The Committee note that host organizations of KVKs have
been informed about observations regarding need for improvement
of overall functioning and following holistic approach in conducting

18
all mandated activities for the benefit of farmers. The Committee
were also informed about steps taken by the Department for
assessment of activities of KVKs and to incorporate suggestion of
farmers to bring necessary changes in functioning of KVKs. However,
the Department have not bothered to respond to the issue of fixing
responsibility for non-performing KVKs and need to enhance
allocation under the head in order to strengthen and support more
number of State owned KVKs. The Committee, therefore, while
reiterating their earlier recommendation would like the Department
to take effective steps to improve functioning and to enhance
allocations for KVKs for supporting more number of KVKs. They
would also like to be apprised about fixing of responsibility in
non-performing KVKs.
AGRICULTURAL UNIVERSITIES
Recommendation (Serial No. 37)
1.35 The Committee had recommended as under:—
“The Committee find that the diploma education holders have
increased from 1040 in 1992 to about 6,500 in 2010. However, the
region-wise supply is skewed. They feel that new courses for rural
youth, to handle day to day jobs at grass root level is required for
farm practices small and veterinary services, routine testing services
and various other rural occupations, agro processing, marketing
etc. The Department have estimated that capacity building effort
need to plan for developing para staff stock of about 17.6 lakh by
2020 in ideal case and it is desirable to have institutions with
capacity development of 1.7 lakh para professional per year. The
Committee, therefore, recommend that multi skilled development
programmers/para-agriculture (like it is, polytechnics and
paramedics) be dovetailed like Government ’s skill Development
Mission or an integrated course can be started through existing
institutional systems. They also emphasize expansion of such diploma
courses in all the States of the country to meet the growing demand
for such workforce. ”
1.36 The Department in their Action Taken Reply has stated as
under:—
“A letter is being sent to all Vice-Chancellors of the SAUs to
encourage and initiate need based diploma courses for skill
development in the various constituent Polytechnices/Institutions. ”

19
1.37 Realizing the need of new courses for agriculture and allied
sector viz. farm practices small and veterinary services, routine
testing services and various other rural occupations, agro processing,
marketing in all parts of the Country, the Committee had
recommended the Department to take steps to start multi
skilled development programmers/para-agriculture (like it is,
polytechnics and paramedics) dovetailing with Government ’s skill
Development Mission or an integrated course through existing
institutional systems. They also emphasized for expansion of such
diploma courses in all the States of the country to meet the growing
demand for such workforce. The Department in their Action Taken
Reply has stated that letter is being sent to all Vice-Chancellors of
the SAUs to encourage and initiate need based diploma courses for
skill development in the various constituent Polytechnics/Institutions.
While noting the steps taken by the Department, the Committee
would hope that the Department pursue the matter to the logical
conclusion and keep a tab on the courses being run or proposed to
be run for skill development. The Committee while reiterating their
earlier recommendation also desire that multi-skilled development
Programmes/Para-agriculture be dovetailed promptly and the
Government’s Skill Development Mission or integrated courses can
be started through existing institutional systems at the earliest under
intimation to the Committee.

20
CHAPTER II
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN
ACCEPTED BY THE GOVERNMENT
States Representation In Regional Committees
Recommendation (Serial No. 01)
The Committee note that the Governing Body of ICAR has constituted
eight Regional Committees for eight different Agro-ecological regions
of the country to analyze, discuss in depth and make recommendations
on the location specific problems of Agriculture, Animal Husbandry,
Fisheries and Forestry peculiar to the Region. These Committees meet
once in two years. The Committee found that the meeting of the
regional committees are too few and far between and the representation
of the State Government officials is not adequate. This leads to
inadequate inclusiveness and the view of the State Government
representing their location specific difficulties is not clearly brought
out. The Committee, therefore, desire that the Government should
hold the meetings of these Committees annually instead biennally and
that too adequately represented by State representatives. They also
desire that the Department should encourage State participation and
incentivise the officials of the States to participate in the meetings of
Regional Committees by offering workable solutions to their regional
agro-problems including coordination with concerned agencies, if
required.
Reply of the Government
The Regional Committee meetings are held biennially and
mid-term review meetings in each region are organized annually. The
Secretary Agriculture, Government of India has written letter for
adequate representation of State Government officials in these
meetings. In addition, State specific interactions are also organized to
offer workable solution to their regional agro-problems. The interface
meetings between ICAR and DOAC are also conducted every year before
the start of Kharif and Rabi seasons in order to get the feedback and
update about latest technological developments. However, Member
Secretaries and Nodal Officers of each Regional Committee have been
informed for taking necessary action.
[Vide Ministry of Agriculture, Department of Agricultural Research
and Education O.M. No. 7(6)/2013, dated 15th May, 2014]

21
AICRP/Network Projects
Recommendation (Serial No. 02)
AICRP/Network Projects are constituted to mobilise available
scientific resources to find effective solutions for the national problems
of agricultural production. These are developed as multi-disciplinary
and problem oriented projects on multi-location testing of new material/
production system. These projects also provide opportunities for
scientists working on similar problems in other institutions to come
together discuss, exchange their ideas, information, material and
solutions to similar problems for mutual benefits. They also provide
them with facilities for multi-location testing of improved technologies
by various sub-systems in different agro-climate regions. AICRPs/NP
are generally sanctioned for a period of 5 years and are headed by a
full time Project Coordinator with a Coordinating Unit to assist him.
Presently, there are about 61 projects in the country. The project
coordinator and his unit is thereby, wholly responsible for timely
completion and commissioning of the project(s). The Committee are of
the opinion that since the projects constitute an effective national
grid of coordinated experiments by integrating different institutions
and disciplines, it is vital that regular interactions take place and the
projects be completed within the stipulated time-frame so that the
objectives of each of such projects are achieved.
Reply of the Government
The annual meetings of AICRPs/NP are held regularly to review the
progress and develop technical programme for the ensuing year. In
addition, monitoring teams also visit different institutions during the
crop season for interaction and verification about conduct of trials.
The AICRP/NP are approved for the plan period and accordingly the
budget provisions are made. The QRT team is constituted to review
the research work in the project and only after satisfactory
performance, and accomplishments of targets, the project is continued.
All the AICRP programmes have also been reviewed by the DG (ICAR)
during the 11th plan. In the 12th plan it shall be ensured that regular
interaction takes place and objectives are accomplished in a definite
time frame.
[Vide Ministry of Agriculture, Department of Agricultural Research
and Education O.M. No. 7(6)/2013, dated 15th May, 2014]
Recommendation (Serial No. 03)
The Committee desire that the Project coordinator and his team
should regularly incorporate the ideas and solutions in implementation
of these projects from the AICRP exchanges. They also urge the Ministry

22
that in case of failure to adhere to the time schedules for the completion
of these projects, the reasons be analysed and the responsibility be
fixed so as to avoid time and cost escalations.
Reply of the Government
The Project Co-ordinators shall undertake continuous monitoring
to ensure adherence to the time schedule for completion of the projects.
The research work at the AICRP Centres is reviewed by the Project
Co-ordinators and only after satisfactory performance, the grant is
released. The allocated budget during the plan period does not normally
exceed.
[Vide Ministry of Agriculture, Department of Agricultural Research
and Education O.M. No. 7(6)/2013, dated 15th May, 2014]
Comments of the Committee
For comments of the Committee please refer to Para No. 1.7 of
Chapter–I of this Report.
Strengthening of ICAR
Recommendation (Serial No. 04)
A large number of State Agriculture Universities, State Supported
Institutes, Central Universities, National Institutes, National Bureaux,
Projects, NRC, AICRP , AINP and KVKs are functioning under the guidance
of DARE/ICAR in various parts of the country to meet the demand of
Agriculture and allied sectors. It is the Research and Technology
development by DARE/ICAR which has enabled an increase of 4 times
in production of foodgrains, 6 times horticultural crops, 9 times fish,
6 times eggs since 1950-51. However , there is still a lot of scope to
strengthen the NARS to meet new challenges and that there is a need
to compare ourselves with some of countries which are moving much
faster than us like China, Brazil, Malaysia etc. The Committee,
therefore, emphasize that instead of being complacent about their
achievements, the Government should strengthen the ICAR network to
meet the new challenges regarding food security. The Committee
recommend the DARE to study in-depth the methods/technologies
adopted by some of the progressing aforesaid countries in this field
and adapt them to our given conditions so as to augment the production
and productivity in agricultural sector besides improving the economic
conditions of farming community of the country. The Committee also
urge the Ministry of Agriculture to lay more emphasis and focus on the
agriculture research in the 12th Five Year Plan and provide adequate
financial support to meet the much required research work.

23
Reply of the Government
In order to augment production and productivity in Agriculture
Sector , besides improving the economic condition of the farming
community in India, efforts shall be made during 12th Plan on focused
areas of Agricultural Research. Keeping the priorities in view, EFC/SFC
are being processed to provide financial support to the Research work
to meet the new challenges. The efforts shall be made to study the
technological advances made in some of the countries for augmenting
the productivity. Based upon the study and after identification of such
studies and other reasons for productivity differential between India
and other countries, necessary measures shall be taken to incorporate
the scientific advances made in some of the Countries for attaining the
desired level of productivity.
[Vide Ministry of Agriculture, Department of Agricultural Research
and Education O.M. No. 7(6)/2013, dated 15th May, 2014]
Comments of the Committee
For comments of the Committee please refer to Para No. 1.10 of
Chapter–I of this Report.
Recommendation (Serial No. 05)
The Committee have been apprised that prioritization monitoring
and evaluation cells are there in Agricultural Institutes. Further ICAR
co-ordinates, facilitates and support research work in Agriculture but
do not play the role of regulator. They informed the Committee that
ICAR have accreditation to obtain development grant. Since, Agriculture
is a State subject and therefore, the problems of co-ordination and
overlapping of research comes up, the Deputy Chairman,
Planning Commission has written to Chief Secretaries for adoption of
model Act which is said to solve issues with respect to the governance,
Institutional mechanisms involvement. The Committee desire that the
Department should pursue the adoption of the model Act with the
State Governments and the Committee may be apprised of the same.
Reply of the Government
ICAR had sent a copy of revised “ICAR Model Act for Agricultural
Universities (Revised 2009) ” to Chief Secretaries of all the
State Governments with request to implementing the Act in their
concerned States. In recent past, Chief Secretaries of all the State
Governments have been intimated again urging upon them for

24
implementation of the Model Act. Till date, many universities have
apprised the Council with their inputs/modifications/suggestions etc.
Recently on 6th March, 2014, Hon ’ble Agriculture Minister has also
written letter to Chief Ministers of eighteen States for implementing
the ICAR Model Act.
[Vide Ministry of Agriculture, Department of Agricultural Research
and Education O.M. No. 7(6)/2013, dated 15th May, 2014]
XII Plan Allocations
Recommendation (Serial No. 06)
The Committee find that the funds sought by the Department for
the entire 12th Plan was Rs. 57,887.21 crores. However, the Planning
Commission has made an allocation of Rs. 25,553 crores for the entire
12th Plan. In the first year Rs. 3,220 crores was allocated (BE). However,
against this only Rs. 2520 crore were provided at RE stage (9.81% of
the revised allocation for 12th Plan). For the second year of the
12th Plan Rs. 3415 crore has been allocated (13.36% of the allocation
for 12th Plan). While formulating the 12th Plan the Ministry have
apprised the Committee that various programmes and research agendas
in each sector have been formulated and detailed discussions have
been held for formulating flagship programmes, addressing major
concerns in sub-sectors and commodities. The Ministry have also sought
higher allocation of resources for revitalizing of NARS in general and
SAUS in particular including strengthening of regional capabilities of
regional research stations, modernization of research infrastructure,
augmentation of operational funds and restructure the faculty under
various programmes. The Committee are concerned to note that in the
first place the Planning Commission has allocated less than 50% of the
funds sought by this Department. The Ministry have stated that since
the funds have been allocated for the first two years of the 12th Five
Year Plan there will be no adverse effect on carrying out the technical
activities. However, the Committee would like to bring out the fact
that only 23.22% (9.81% in the first year and 13.36% in the second year
of the 12th Five Year Plan) of the total has been allocated for the first
two years of the 12th Five Year Plan. They, therefore, urge the
Department to request the Planning Commission for grant of more
funds i.e. at least 1% of GDP and to grant these funds evenly over the
years so as to achieve the stated targets of XII Plan relating to ambitious
schemes on conservation of agriculture, nutrient management, organic
farming, resource conservation technologies, water management, higher
agriculture education, post harvest operations etc. The Committee,
therefore, desire the Department to re-visit their priorities, re-work
their programmes and research agenda and inform the Committee in
this regard.

25
Reply of the Government
The Planning Commission has been requested for reconsideration
of the comments of the committee during 12th Plan emphasizing time
and again for allocation of 1% of Agriculture Gross Domestic
Product(GDP) on Agriculture research, which should be exclusively for
the centre.
Further, the Department is revisiting its priorities in the Expenditure
Finance Committee (EFC)/Standing Finance Committee (SFC) meetings
being held. In these meetings Ministry of Finance, Planning Commission
and other Departments are represented. EFC/SFC clearance for CRP on
Agri-biodiversity Management, Genomics and Molecular Breeding,
Nanotechnology, Conservation Agriculture, Health Foods, Farm
Mechanization etc. and new initiatives like National Agricultural
Education Project, Farmers First, Student READY , ARYA are being
finalized. It is expected that the Department will get the necessary
clearances at the earliest for early start of these projects.
[Vide Ministry of Agriculture, Department of Agricultural Research
and Education O.M. No. 7(6)/2013, dated 15th May, 2014]
Investment in Agriculture Sector
Recommendation (Serial No. 09)
The Committee feel that there is an urgent need to promote
investment in agricultural sector by the private players other than the
farmers, especially in the post-harvest infrastructure and facilities
besides the machinery, processing and value chain related products.
They emphasise that the investment in agriculture sector should be
made in partnership with private sector and implement the National
Agricultural Innovation Project (NAIP) model with proper monitoring
mechanisms. They also urge the Department to expedite the proposal(s)
of Public-Private-Partnership in agricultural research and education
and apprise the Committee of the same.
Reply of the Government
The Intellectual Property & Technology Management (IP&TM) unit
is already in process of internalizing the dimensions of intellectual
property rights and technology commercialization. By now, there are
over 1950 IPR applications filed from 67 ICAR institutes. Also, over
1000 partnership agreements with more than 560 agencies have been
recorded in the IP&TM Unit. Through the National Agricultural Innovation

26
Project (NAIP) partnership was forged with 91 private partners and
NGO’s in various subjects.This was quite beneficial and smooth. The
Council is making further efforts in this direction through Agrinnovate
India Ltd.
[Vide Ministry of Agriculture, Department of Agricultural Research
and Education O.M. No. 7(6)/2013, dated 15th May, 2014]
Recommendation (Serial No. 11)
The Committee are aware that 50 years back the Agriculture
Education System was mainly based on Land Grant System. So far, the
emphasis has been on crops and food security, however , now there has
been a change and priority has to be given to the development of
livestock, fisheries and horticulture etc. also. The Committee feel that
the resource allocation to these sectors should be proportionate to
their contribution to National GDP . These are important components to
improve the economic conditions of farming community. They also
desire that concrete steps be taken during the 12th Plan to give Research
priorities to sectors like livestock, fisheries and horticulture, which
hold promising areas of growth in future and enhance the non-farm
incomes of the farmers.
Reply of the Government
The proposal of the XII plan envisions the judiciously integrating
conventional plant breeding, molecular biology, bioinformatics, genetic
engineering, human resource and infrastructural development, Farm
Mechanization, Energy in Agriculture, Secondary Agriculture, Health
Foods and Natural Fibres through the Consortia Research Platform
(CRP). These CRPs have been conceived keeping in mind the evolving
scenario of agriculture in the country and to address them with
appropriate research and development interventions.
[Vide Ministry of Agriculture, Department of Agricultural Research
and Education O.M. No. 7(6)/2013, dated 15th May, 2014]
Public-Private Partnership
Recommendation (Serial No. 12)
The Committee find that so far the Public-Private Partnership,
National Agricultural Research system has mainly been used as a vehicle
to enhance technology validation and transfer/commercialization
through MoUs/ MoAs/NTA/Agreement/Licensing/Consultancy Contracts

27
etc. They also find that in research there have been initiatives mainly
in the areas of farm implements, machinery processing and value
addition. They note that partnership with private sector has seen a
new approach for growth in ICAR. It is based on the principles of joint
IPR ownership and pre-decided licensing rights. The Ministry informed
the Committee that about 385 technologies/know-how have been
transferred/commercialized through more than 900 partnerships
developed with external agencies. In 203 sub-projects of various
components of National Agricultural Innovation Project (World Bank
Supported) there are 212 private sector organizations including NGOs
participating in 6 consortia. The Committee were also informed that
a Cabinet Note on “In-Principal approval of the Public-Private Partnership
in Agricultural Research and Education ” has already been initiated to
provide the much needed stronger foundation to meet these
requirements. While appreciating the efforts of ICAR in involving private
partnerships through various modes they feel that the role of these
partnerships is limited and commercialization/transfer/technology
validation only. The Committee feel that the potential to obtain
systematic impact could be much higher in new approaches of consortia
and partnership rather than traditional approach of undertaking R&D
separately by public sector system. This approach will widen the focus
from research and technological innovation to building a value chain
around the innovation spectrum. The Committee however , would like
to emphasize on keeping close watch, the efficacy of management and
monitoring the role of the private partners.
Reply of the Government
The issue of efficacy of management and monitoring the role of
private partners has also been appreciated by DARE/ICAR. A public
limited for-profit Company  viz.  the Agrinnovate India Limited (AgIn)
has already been launched to consider these dimensions. The Company
has begun its operations in a small way, and as it expands its operations,
this critical dimension will also be taken up.
[Vide Ministry of Agriculture, Department of Agricultural Research
and Education O.M. No. 7(6)/2013, dated 15th May, 2014]
Crop Sciences
Recommendation (Serial No. 13)
The Committee were informed that focus of the Department has
been skewed to the extent that most of the scientists and budget of
ICAR have gone to crop sector especially in rice and wheat crops.

28
Further , out of 18 crops 75% have registered a decline in their factor
productivity. There are 6000 scientists and there are 97 institutes.
However , these institutes are commodity based research institutes.
The Committee urge the Department to develop these commodity
based research institutes into more comprehensive and super-speciality
research institutes so as to optimize use of scientific manpower and
the resources available with ICAR.
Reply of the Government
While research thrust has been given to rice and wheat crop, being
staple food crops of the country, adequate emphasis has also been
given to research on oilseeds, pulses, small millets, sugarcane and
other fibre crops. The commodity based research institutes are being
provided adequate funding in the XII Plan for developing them in a
comprehensive manner with adequate infrastructure to undertake
research in frontier areas. The Council has taken steps towards rational
utilization of available scientific manpower so that cutting edge research
shall bring desired results. Special programmes like science-led consortia
research platforms have been initiated in the XII Plan for development
of hybrids, molecular breeding, bio-fortification, agro-biodiversity and
genomics to ensure enhancement in productivity in crops and also
nutritional security.
[Vide Ministry of Agriculture, Department of Agricultural Research
and Education O.M. No. 7(6)/2013, dated 15th May, 2014]
Horticulture
Recommendation (Serial No. 17)
Horticulture sector which includes fruits, vegetables, spices,
ornamental crops, medicines and aromatic plants and plantation crops
has been providing livelihood to 30-40% of the population and
contributing more than 30% to the GDP of agriculture that too by
utilizing only 11% area in the country. The area of cultivation and
production in this sector has increased 24.28% and 40.71% respectively
during 2011-12 as compared to previous plan period ending in 2005-06.
They find that there has been a significant increase of 152.6% in
flower production over the year 2005-06. The targets for production of
horticultural produce in the annual growth has been 345 million tonnes
computed at 6.7% volume-wise and in value terms the growth to be
achieved is 9.5%.

29
Reply of the Government
The research efforts have been channelized for achieving high
yield and production at 6.7% growth rate by the end the XII Five Year
Plan.
[Vide Ministry of Agriculture, Department of Agricultural Research
and Education O.M. No. 7(6)/2013, dated 15th May, 2014]
Soil Mapping
Recommendation (Serial No. 19)
The Committee appreciate that the Department has completed the
GIS based district-wise soil fertility maps of 20 States. Tehsil-wise soil
fertility maps of Punjab, Haryana, Himachal Pradesh, Maharashtra,
Rajasthan, Gujarat, Chhattisgarh, Odisha, Andhra Pradesh, Tamil Nadu
and Karnataka are also available. The online fertilizer recommendation
systems have been completed for 13 States. However , a large number
of farm area of the country are yet to be taken up for soil mapping
by the Department. The Committee, therefore, recommend the
Department to prepare an action plan under which GIS based district/
Tehsil-wise soil fertility mapping, online fertilizer recommendation
system, GPS based geo-reference soil fertility maps, soil degradation
maps and soil erosion maps etc. be completed on a fast pace in the
country. This time-bound action plan will help the Department to
achieve the goal of systematic agriculture growth of the country.
Awareness about soil fertility mapping, the soil degradation and erosion
mapping may be provided to the farmers at the earliest so that they
may plan their crops accordingly. The Committee urge the Government
to ensure that farmers have easy access to this information.
Reply of the Government
The Council through the Indian Institute of Soil Science, Bhopal has
taken initiatives for generating GIS based soil fertility maps for major,
secondary and micronutrients in different districts funded by Department
of Agriculture and Cooperation (DAC), New Delhi. In the first phase,
GIS based soil fertility maps for 170 districts have been generated and
uploaded on the website of IISS, Bhopal for public access. The proposal
for second phase has been submitted to the DAC for consideration.
These geo-referenced maps can be useful in monitoring soil fertility,
fertilizer recommendations for balanced nutrient application in various
parts of the country. The ICAR also imparts training, organises Field
Level Demonstrations (FLDs) etc. to educate farmers on all these
aspects.

30
Similarly, the ICAR through the National Bureau of Soil Survey and
Land Use Planning (NBSS&LUP), Nagpur conducted scientific soil survey
from time to time for assessing the extent and nature of soil erosion
and land degradation across the country. The extent of land degradation
reported was 187.7 and 146.8 million ha during 1994 and 2004,
respectively and more recently (2010) over 120 million ha. based on
the harmonized database comprising of 82.6 million ha. under water
erosion, 12.0 million ha. under wind erosion, 24.7 million ha. under
chemical degradation and 1.0 million ha. under physical degradation.
The Central Soil and Water Conservation Research and Training Institute,
Dehradun has developed several location specific soil and water
conservation measures to tackle soil erosion which are being
implemented through different integrated watershed management
programmes run by various agencies to prevent soil degradation. The
institute organizes regular training courses for field functionaries and
farmers to control soil erosion. Similarly, the Central Arid Zone Research
Institute (CAZRI), Jodhpur has developed sand dune stabilization and
shelterbelt plantation technologies to check wind erosion. The council
has also developed cost effective amelioration technology, i.e., liming
@ 2-4 q/ha. in furrow along with integrated nutrient management to
raise the productivity of acid soils regions. Similarly, reclamation
technology and resistant cultivays have been developed for rehabilitation
of salt affected soils. Several agro-forestry systems have also been
developed for rehabilitation of degraded lands.
[Vide Ministry of Agriculture, Department of Agricultural Research
and Education O.M. No. 7(6)/2013, dated 15th May, 2014]
Soil Testing
Recommendation (Serial No. 20)
The Committee observe that sustainable use of natural resources,
enhancement of ecosystem service like reduction in green house gases
and building resilience to climate change are essential for sustainable
agricultural growth in the country. The component of soil on which the
plants are grown, the nutrients and also soil and plant healthcare are
necessary for efficient production system. The Committee find that
the laboratories engaged for testing soil in the country are not
functioning appropriately and the farmers even after covering a large
distance do not get the soil testing results timely. The timely delivery,
extension and awareness system for the farmers is very important. The
Committee, therefore, desire the Department to fix responsibility and
accountability of existing laboratories to provide information/results

31
regarding the soil health status and information of crop compatibility
region-wise to farmers in a time bound manner. They further urge that
for prompt delivery of results before sowing time it is important to set
up soil testing laboratory in each Development Block and also have
Mobile Testing Van facility. They expect the Government to develop
more soil testing laboratories for easy access by the farmers. They
recommend that farmers should also be educated of the major cropping
systems of the country to promote balanced fertilization and the method
of collection of soil. They emphasize that at the time of testing the
information about the crop for which testing is required should enquired
from the farmers.
Reply of the Government
The Government through the National Project on Management of
Soil Health and Fertility (NPMSHF) is establishing and/or strengthening
soil testing laboratories in different districts to ensure balanced
fertilization in the country. The project is being implemented by the
DAC. Soil health cards have also been distributed to farmers to keep
record on status of soil health. The ICAR also provides soil & water
testing facilities in 389 KVKs in the country.
[Vide Ministry of Agriculture, Department of Agricultural Research
and Education O.M. No. 7(6)/2013, dated 15th May, 2014]
Recommendation (Serial No. 21)
The Committee observe that at certain places there is over use of
fertilizer/use of banned fertilizers by the farmers like in Punjab and
Andhra Pradesh. They feel that due to ignorance the farmers not only
harm their produce but also add to their production costs besides
leaving the soil devoid of nutrient. At time, it also leads to various
dangerous disease transmitted through use of banned fertilizers. The
Committee, therefore, recommend that volunteers be deputed to inform
the farmer of the right quantity and right quality of fertilizers to be
used by them on their soil.
Reply of the Government
The ICAR through different centres of the All India Coordinated
Research Project on Soil Test Crop Response has developed fertilizer
prescription equations for different crops grown in various States. The
information is available on the Soil Test Crop Response (STCR) website
(http://www.stcr.gov.in) and can be used by the soil testing laboratories
for on-line fertilizer recommendation. Farmers and other end-users

32
can get STCR based fertilizer recommendations for different crops by
feeding the soil test values for a desired targeted yield.
[Vide Ministry of Agriculture, Department of Agricultural Research
and Education O.M. No. 7(6)/2013, dated 15th May, 2014]
Comments of the Committee
For comments of the Committee please refer to Para No. 1.22 of
Chapter I of this Report.
Water Management Technology
Recommendation (Serial No. 22)
ICAR Institutes and State Agriculture Universities are implementing
a scheme on scaling up of Water Productivity in Agriculture for
Livelihoods through teaching cum demonstration, training of trainees
and farmers across the country. There are 32 centres across the country
providing training to farmers to create awareness on water use efficiency
and increase water productivity in agriculture. The technologies for
improving water use efficiency have been developed under 25 centres
of AICRP on water management and 9 centres on ground water
utilization. The Committee emphasize that with the kind of spread of
agriculture in India the present awareness centres for providing training
to farmers on water use efficiency and increase of water productivity
in agriculture as also the centres of AICRP on water management and
water utilization are too limited and requires much more vigorous
awareness campaign on water management, water conservation (through
the developed technology and optimum utilization of water in
agriculture). Further a large quantity of our rain water remains
unutilized by the Agriculture and Allied sectors in the country. The
Committee, therefore, recommended the Department to examine the
optimum utilization of water , bringing about more centres training
farmers and make vigorous efforts to create awareness in this regard.
They also emphasis that the Government should prioritize on promoting
developing of water harvesting structures in the Indian farming system
and also probe the manner in which these productive work can be
covered under the MGNREGA by deploying persons for fruitful
employment for the purpose of building rain water harvesting.
Reply of the Government
“Scaling up of Water Productivity in Agriculture for Livelihoods
through Teaching-cum-Demonstration, Training of Trainers and Farmers”
is a Central Scheme implemented during the XI Plan period since

33
February, 2008 from the interest accrued on a corpus fund of Rs. 96
crore. Under the scheme, trainings of Trainers and Farmers were
conducted in 32 centres across the country to create awareness among
the farmers on water use efficiency, water conservation, rainwater
harvesting and different aspects of water management.
As the scheme was for the XI Plan only, the efforts were made in
the XII Plan to continue for its implementation to create awareness on
generated technologies related to water management, water
conservation and optimum utilization of water in agriculture. The draft
EFC for the same has been submitted.
During the XI Plan, AICRP on Water Management (25 centres),
AICRP on Ground Water Utilization (9 centres) have generated location
specific water management technologies which were also transferred
through State functionaries for the larger benefit of farming community.
During the XII Plan period, it is proposed to merge the above two
schemes and initiate an AICRP on Irrigation Water Management in all
the centres. The proposed scheme would develop and upscale location
specific on-farm water management strategies and technologies in the
area of surface water, groundwater and waste water. The developed
technologies will be implemented by line departments of the States
involving various schemes of the Government of India like, MGNREGA,
RKVY , NFSM etc.
[Vide Ministry of Agriculture, Department of Agricultural Research
and Education O.M. No. 7(6)/2013, dated 15th May, 2014]
Comments of the Committee
For comments of the Committee please refer to Para No. 1.25 of
Chapter I of this Report.
Farm Mechanisation
Recommendation (Serial No. 23)
The Committee find that improvement in farm practices by using
novel agricultural implements/machineries are pre-requisite for
improving agricultural output, an alternate to increasing labour costs
and enhancing productivity. Farm mechanization can be fruitfully used
by farmers with large land holdings thereby utilizing economies of
scales. However, for small land holding farmers machineries and
implements may not be suitable option. In India large proportion of
farming is done by small and marginal farmers possessing small and

34
fragmented land holdings and the farm mechanization is expensive and
inaccessible. The Committee urge the Department to call for research
in developing low cost, light weight, multi-purpose farm equipments
and tools for the benefit of small and marginal farmers or farmers with
fragmented land holdings. The Committee also recommend that
Department should probe the possibility of promoting youth to combine
(bankable) stock of machines and rent out through custom made hiring
system and allow small land holders to utilize mechanization for
enhancing their productivity and reduce cost of cultivation.
Reply of the Government
A large number of low cost and light weight farm equipment and
tools operated by manual and animal power have been developed for
small and marginal farmers and farmers with fragmented land holdings.
The research is undergoing in developing and refining low cost, light
weight, multipurpose and gender friendly farm equipments and tools.
The present trend is for development of high capacity and energy
efficient machines to be used on Custom Hiring Mode to reduce the
cost of cultivation. In the custom hiring centers established in the
country, these machines are being used by small and marginal farmers
as the charges are affordable to them. The Government is giving a
major thrust to farm mechanization through its various schemes.
A dedicated Sub-Mission on Agricultural Mechanization has been initiated
in the Twelfth Plan, which includes custom-hiring facilities for
agricultural machinery as one of its major components. Its focus is on
increasing the reach of farm mechanization to small and marginal
farmers and to the regions where availability of farm power is low.
[Vide Ministry of Agriculture, Department of Agricultural Research
and Education O.M. No. 7(6)/2013, dated 15th May, 2014]
Organic Farming
Recommendation (Serial No. 24)
The Committee are aware of the benefits of organic produce in
terms of health and nutrition. They note that a natural project on
Organic Farming is working on the multi-disciplinary, multi-location
and multi-cropping system. To address the scientific issues of integrated
crop including livestock, fish production system to offer scope for
larger adoption of organic farming on-farm centres have started in the
country. Research institutes have been established to address the issue
related to management of natural resources. The Committee note that
the Department is taking certain steps to encourage the organic farming

35
in the country. The Committee recommend that there is a need to
further spread and encourage the adoption of organic farming and
bring more farmers/farmers ’ groups under organic farming, research
for production of organic products and proper organic management so
as to enhance the quantity and quality of the produce and bring down
their prices besides putting aside the toxic effects of the harmful
chemicals/in-organic fertilizers. They also urge the Government to
pursue State Agricultural Universities through ICAR to develop courses
on organic farming and its promotion and development. The Committee
desire the Department to formulate policy to strengthen National Project
on Promotion of Organic Farming in the country. The Committee urge
the Department to create awareness among the farmers to adopt
practices of using organic insecticides/pesticides such as panchgavya
(organic growth promoter) and technology where in waste of the
bio-gas plant become liquid instead of solid which can easily spread in
the farm.
Reply of the Government
The Ministry of Agriculture, Department of Agriculture and
Co-operation (DAC), New Delhi through National Project on Organic
Farming (NPOF) is promoting organic farming in the country. The
Government through National Project on Management of Soil Health
and Fertility (NPMSHF) and National Project on Organic Farming (NPOF)
is promoting use of composts/manures/bio-fertilizers manufacturing
units in the country. Farmers are being educated on this aspect through
training and demonstrations. The project is being further strengthened
during the XII Plan.
The ICAR, during the X Plan, initiated a Network Project on Organic
Farming (NPOF) with lead centre at the Project Directorate for Farming
Systems Research (PDFSR), Modipuram. The objective is to develop
package of practices of different crops and cropping systems under
organic farming in different agro-ecological regions of the country.
Presently, the project is running at 13 Co-operating centres including
SAUs, spread over 12 States. Oraganic farming package of practices for
14 crops namely basmati rice, rainfed wheat, maize, redgram, chickpea,
soybean, groundnut, mustard, Isabgol, black pepper, ginger , tomato,
cabbage and cauliflower have been developed and uploaded in the
PDFSR website.
To encourage adoption of organic farming among farmers, DAC is
taking steps through the NCOF and National Horticultural Mission. Their
efforts may be appreciably supplemented by the NARS through adaptive
research in farmers ’ participatory mode, provided additional funds are
made available under Network Project on Organic Farming of ICAR.

36
The IV Dean ’s Committee, in its reports submitted in the year
2008, has recommended the introduction of a course on Organic
Agriculture under Bachelor Degree Programmes in Agriculture and
Horticulture. Some of the State Agricultural Universities have already
introduced this course in the course curricula. The Universities will
again be sensitized to introduce it uniformly all over the country.
Further , the V Dean’s Committee which has already been constituted
will also take up the recommendation of the Parliamentary Standing
Committee.
[Vide Ministry of Agriculture, Department of Agricultural Research
and Education O.M. No. 7(6)/2013, dated 15th May, 2014]
Live stock/Animal Genetic and Animal Products Research Management
Recommendation (Serial No. 25)
The Committee are aware that this sector supplement family income
and generate gainful employment in rural parts of the country. ICAR
coordinates and monitors research activities covering all major species
of livestock and poultry from its Research Institutes and Regional
Centres. Livestock is an integrated component of agricultural activities
particularly when food preferences has been changed in the society,
the demand of various animal products has increased in the country
and to meet the increasing demand there is a need to improve the
performance of livestock sector. The Committee therefore, recommend
that the Department has to develop innovative and alternative livestock
research system in various fields such as dairy production, processing
and value addition, genetically improved conservation of indigenous
cattle and buffalo for higher milk production, establishment of open
nucleus herds for improved indigenous breeds in their native tract in
their genomics and mechanization of equipment for indigenous dairy
products for small scale sector so as to meet the future challenges to
ensure food and income security particularly of the small and marginal
farmers.
Reply of the Government
The various programs have been initiated to address livelihood
security of small and marginal farmers focussing on innovative and
novel livestock research systems in various fields of dairy production,
processing and related areas viz. development of state-of-art dairy
production systems using better housing and fertility management
practices, improved feeding strategies and improved health management
practices. In this process, genetic improvement of milch animals is

37
envisaged to be carried out through application of molecular
technologies. Value addition of dairy products will be undertaken
through development of products with neutrceutical and functional
properties, process upgradation, mechanized manufacturing and novel
packaging systems.
[Vide Ministry of Agriculture, Department of Agricultural Research
and Education O.M. No. 7(6)/2013, dated 15th May, 2014]
Recommendation (Serial No. 26)
The Committee were apprised that the Ministry have progressed to
a certain extent relating to animal genetic resource such as whole
genome mapping of Indian water buffalo was carried out and assembly
with more than 90 GB DNA sequence data generated. 6 new breeds
viz. four cattle breeds and two of buffalo breed were registered.
Phenotypic characterization and evaluation of hill cattle as well as
Bundelkhandi goat and goat of Uttarakhand was completed so also for
Spiti donkey. Genotypic characterization of Indian horse breeds and
phylogenetic tree were prepared. The microsatellite genotyping of 50
individuals in each of the Bikaneri, Jaisalmeri, Kachchhi and Mewari
breed was carried out and phylogenetic tree constructed. The
Committee however , feel that much of the research is still required for
genetic improvement and conservation of indigenous cattle and buffalo
as also for the establishment of open nucleus herds for improved
indigenous breeds in their native tracts. The Committee desire that
the Department should focus on development of climate resilient housing
and shelter for improved dairy production and improving buffalo
productivity by assisting re-productivity and biotechnological tools.
The Committee would like the Ministry to especially develop and
maintain databank on the diseases related to the animals and also
initiate research work on diagnostic kits for various animal related
diseases. They would also like the Ministry to invest into onland
quarantine stations for such animals suffering from contagious diseases.
The Committee urge the Department to regularly monitor the diagnostic
regional centres and make available the diagnostic equipments to these
centres/network units besides ensuring the quality of the supply from
the manufacturing companies. The main focus of research in respect
of animal health should be in developing landscape genetic of indigenous
disease, disease forecasting models and economic impact analysis
relating to disease control strategies.
The Committee recommend that ICAR should promote research for
the post-harvest management and value addition also wherein the
animal products are processed and utilized to an optimum level.

38
Research for value addition of animal products and development of
cold storage chain for biological product, safe transportation and safer
food products from livestock and poultry should be the focus areas of
the Department in the XII Five Year Plan.
Reply of the Government
The Animal Science Division is continuing its efforts to conserve
and genetically improve indigenous breeds of cattle and buffaloes
through conservation and breed improvement programs in XII Five Year
Plan under AICRP/Network mode. The efforts will be made to establish
nucleus herds of various breeds of cattle and buffaloes in their native
tract. The council has initiated a research program viz. NICRA (National
Initiative on Climate Resilient Agriculture) for different livestock breeds
which includes shelter management. The work on development of Animal
Disease Databank has been initiated along with development of
diagnostics and vaccines for economically important diseases of livestock
and poultry through network and coordinated research programs.
Further, value addition to dairy products through application of emerging
technologies process upgradation, neutraceutical enrichment and
mechanized manufacturing and noble packaging system will also be
developed through research investigations in the XII Plan.
[Vide Ministry of Agriculture, Department of Agricultural Research
and Education O.M. No. 7(6)/2013, dated 15th May, 2014]
Biotic Stress Management Research
Recommendation (Serial No. 27)
Biotic stress has been highly challenging for the agriculture in the
country. The Committee appreciate the successful achievements of the
ICAR in management of such challenges. The losses caused to crops by
various pests like pod borer 10-90%, pod fly 70-80%, wilt/root rot
complex 20-25%, sterility mosaic 20-40% are still causing a hurdle in
the farming in the country. The Committee desire the Department to
complete the issues like conducting national survey for mapping of
different pests, establishment of modified light and pheromone trap
network in key pulse growing areas, harmonize seed production system
with bio-fertilizer in pulses and bio-pesticide application in a time
bound manner to meet the challenge of biotic stress by the farming
community in the country.
Reply of the Government
Regular surveys are conducted by ICAR for mapping pest prevalence
and their management for sustainable pulse production in the country.
Awareness-cum-Surveillance programme for management of major pests

39
of soybean-cotton based cropping system in 271 talukas comprising
30,000 villages in 29 districts of Maharashtra covering 2.5 million ha.
of soybean, 3.9 million ha. of cotton, 1.3 million ha. of chickpea and
1.3 million ha. of Pigeonpea has been undertaken.
The Light Trap has been commercialized to serve as an important
component of the Integrated Pest Management (IPM) in pulse and
paddy crops. Bio-pesticide is the major component in all the IPM
modules under validation in vegetables, fruits, oilseeds and pulse crop.
Protocols for mass multiplication of bio control agents and bio-pesticides
have been developed at ICAR Institutes.
[Vide Ministry of Agriculture, Department of Agricultural Research
and Education O.M. No. 7(6)/2013, dated 15th May, 2014]
Recommendation (Serial No. 28)
The Committee find that the National Institute for Abiotic Stress
Management has started functioning partially and will implement
important research programmes in a thematic mode namely Drought
Stress Management, Atmosphere Stress management, Adaphic Stress
Management and Policy Research Support Management. The Institute
will also focus on strategic human research development for long term
tackling of different stresses in the frontier areas with participation of
wide network of India and International Institutes. The Institute was
to function fully by the end of 11th Plan/beginning of 12th Plan.
Similarly, the Indian Institutes of Agricultural Biotechnology, Ranchi
and National Institute of Biotic Stress Management, Raipur are also
upcoming institutes with frontier research in various basic aspects
using modern scientific tools in various national laboratories. These
are frontier research institutes and likely to develop repository of
information in their respective areas. The Committee would desire to
be apprised of the status of completion in each of these two
management Institutes as also achievements of the time schedules.
The Committee would also like to know whether the proposal of
affiliating these laboratories to the Institute of Biotech Stress
Management have been undertaken so as to encourage high and post
graduate degrees, post doctoral and extra moral programmes.
Reply of the Government
In addition to the National Institute for Abiotic Stress Management
(NIASM) which is already established at Baramati, Pune in Maharashtra,
two other Institutes viz., Indian Institute of Agricultural Biotechnology
(IIAB) at Ranchi and National Institute of Biotic Stress Management

40
(NIBSM) at Raipur are being established with outlay of Rs. 287.50 and
Rs. 121.10 crores, respectively for the XII Plan. Following acquisition
of lands, the process of creation of infrastructure for laboratories and
administrative offices have been initiated. The Scientists, technical
and administrative staff required at this initial phase of establishment
have been placed in both the Institutes. Efforts are undertaken for
recruitment of Director and other approved posts. Indian Institute of
Agricultural Biotechnology (IIAB) and National Institute of Biotic Stress
Management (NIBSM) proposes to be affiliated to Indian Agricultural
Research Institute (IARI) for encouraging students to obtain Post
Graduate degree in Agricultural Biotechnology till such time these
institutes acquire deemed-to-be university status.
[Vide Ministry of Agriculture, Department of Agricultural Research
and Education O.M. No. 7(6)/2013, dated 15th May, 2014]
Agriculture Extension
Recommendation (Serial No. 29)
The Committee are aware that Agriculture in India is complex,
diverse and risk prone with 123 million cultivators. Predominantly small
and marginal farmers across 638,596 villages in 131 agro-climatic zones
subjected to vagaries of monsoon, changing climate conditions, regional
variations in terms of natural resources, regional imbalances, isolated
and difficult areas, other socio-economic factors and multi-agency
extension system. They find that despite the research having been
done in diverse areas relating to agriculture in the laboratories, it do
not get transferred timely to the ground level fields. Even they are
transferred, their adoption by farmers is not at the optimal level. The
agencies responsible for the transmission of research/research
information like KVKs, Zonal Project Directorates, Directorate of
Extension Education of SAUs ATMA etc. are functioning in isolation.
During 1950s and 1960s when there were not so many agencies for
dissemination of information relating to research work, the research
activities were easily transferred to farmers and were promptly adopted
by the farmers. The Committee, therefore, desire that there is an
urgent need to review the functioning of the agencies responsible for
transmission of information, knowledge and research activities to the
farmers, so that the gap in delivery of research results from lab to
land and acceptance of the same by the farming community can be
addressed in the country. They also desire that the Government should
set up a Coordination Committee represented by various agencies at
appropriate level for dissemination of research information. This

41
coordination Committee comprising of KVKs, ATMA, SAUs, Zonal Project
Directorates, Department of Agriculture Cooperation, Department of
Water Resources, Department of Post Harvest Management, should meet
frequently at regular intervals so that research work/techniques/
information are easily and promptly transfer/disseminated to the
farmers, who can adapt and implement the same and improve their
economic condition along with the agricultural produce.
Reply of the Government
At Zonal level, there are eight Zonal Project Directorates (ZPDs),
each covering 70 to 100 KVKs. These ZPDs are regularly reviewing and
monitoring KVKs and coordinating their activities with other research
and development agencies including State Agricultural Universities
(SAUs), ICAR Institutes, ATMA and field offices of various departments
of Government of India and State Governments. Directorates of
Extension Education of Agricultural Universities are mandated to provide
technological backstopping to KVKs and other field extension agencies.
At district level there is provision for coordination of KVKs with ATMA
and other line departments. Such coordination through Scientific
Advisory Committee (SAC) of KVKs and Management Committee of
ATMAs provide an effective mechanism for monitoring and review of
their programmes. For regional level coordination, the ICAR has already
constituted 8 Regional Committees (RCs) in the country. The bi-annual
meetings of RCs are held wherein the senior officers of all development
departments of State Governments, SAUs and ICAR in the region
participate to discuss the research and development issues. At national
level, there is a coordination mechanism in place for holding twice in
a year (before the start of Kharif and Rabi seasons) interface between
ICAR and other Departments of the Ministry of Agriculture. The senior
officers of related Ministries are also invited to participate in these
interfaces.
[Vide Ministry of Agriculture, Department of Agricultural Research
and Education O.M. No. 7(6)/2013, dated 15th May, 2014]
Comments of the Committee
For comments of the Committee please refer to Para No. 1.28 of
Chapter I of this Report.
KVKs
Recommendation (Serial No. 30)
In our country there are about 80% small and marginal farmers. For
the survival of such farmers we have to explore the possibility to
increase their on-farm and non-farm income. To improve the economic

42
condition of the small farmers there is a need to explore avenues to
generate non-farm income besides the subsistence level farm incomes
of the farmers. The Committee, therefore, recommend the Department
to research and disseminate information on the non-farming activities
like processing, post-harvest technology etc. that can be included in
the mandate of KVKs which will not only increase the economic
conditions of the farmers but also strengthen the functioning of KVKs
in the country.
Reply of the Government
As suggested by the Committee, the KVKs have been advised to
take up activities on agro-processing and post harvest technology to
promote secondary agriculture in their respective districts. In order to
give more focus on non-farming activities like agro-processing and post
harvest technology during XIIth Plan, provision has been made for
creation of minimal processing facilities in selected KVKs.
[Vide Ministry of Agriculture, Department of Agricultural Research
and Education O.M. No. 7(6)/2013, dated 15th May, 2014]
Recommendation (Serial No. 33)
The Committee are aware that ICAR has created a network of
634 KVKs to assess refined and demonstrate new technologies and
products developed by National Agricultural Research System. The KVKs
play the role of intermediary institutions to finetune the research
conducted under controlled conditions before the farmers adopt the
same. The entire process is carried out in participatory mode involving
the farmers with the objective of developing location specific technology
models. The Committee find that there is acute shortage and exorbitant
prices of recommended agro inputs affecting the technology transfer
and applications very difficult. They also find that it is a long drawn
process for the KVKs to upscale the assessed refined technology which
are  found fit for adoption by farmers on large scale. The Committee
also find that in the changing agricultural scenario the marketing support
to farmers for primary processing storage, grading, packing,
conservation, transportation is equally important for successful
technology transfer adoption and benefits to the farmers at large.
The Committee desire that ICAR should focus on the area of research
so as to reduce the prices of such technology transfer including inputs
and the applications. The Committee also recommend that the
Department/ICAR should strengthen marketing intelligence, EDP and
consultation through EDP , packaging project report preparation,

43
consultancy industry and enterprise relations and partnerships. They
should also focus on establishing local market network on prices and
establishment of value chain demonstration units.
Reply of the Government
As suggested by the Committee, the KVKs have been advised to
conduct Entrepreneurship Development Programmes for farmers in
collaboration with other stakeholders in their respective districts. The
efforts will also be explored for establishment of local market network
on prices and value chain demonstration units in selected districts.
Necessary provision in this regard has been made in the Cabinet note
of the KVK Scheme and the same will be taken up after its approval.
[Vide Ministry of Agriculture, Department of Agricultural Research
and Education O.M. No. 7(6)/2013, dated 15th May, 2014]
Agricultural Universities
Recommendation (Serial No. 35)
Indian agriculture system has a network of 55 State Agricultural
Universities. One Central Agricultural University, five Deemed-to-be-
Universities Status and four Central Universities with agricultural faculty.
The Agricultural Universities impart education in 11 major disciplines
at undergraduate and about 95 subjects at postgraduate level. The
State Agricultural Universities are established through the legislative
Act of the respective States. These universities function under the
administrative control of respective State Governments with major
financial support. The Secretary, DARE submitted before the Committee
that more than 50% of the budget of DARE/ICAR is granted to the State
Agricultural Universities. During 2007-08 to 2011-12 the ICAR has
provided a sum of Rs. 2033.36 crore to the State Agricultural
Universities. The Ministry have informed the Committee that the pace,
quality of technology generation and human capacity building in most
of the SAUs have decline due to inadequate State Funding, depleted
faculty strength, inadequate faculty development programmers, lack
of modern infrastructure for education and research, during the
evidence, the Secretary, DARE confessed before the Committee that
there is shortage of faculty and that invariably 35% to 40% vacancies
exists and the State Governments many a times are not allowing to fill
up these vacancies. The Committee desire that the Department should
focus on the standard of agricultural education to be improved by
ensuring that the vacant academic posts in the State Agricultural
Universities are filled up promptly. The Committee recommend the

44
Department to ensure that all the vacancies are fulfilled in consultation
with State Governments in these SAUs before the release of any financial
support to them so that the pace, quality of technology generation
and human capacity building is attained at the desired level in these
SAUs. They also advice the Government to probe the possibility of
mobility of researchers and teachers between the universities and
emphasize that the institutes if feasible, provide proper incentives to
the researchers/teachers for such arrangements. They desire to be
kept abreast of the status and the outcome of the decision taken to
conduct NET Examinations twice in a year so that SAUs have adequately
qualified and competent applicants for various teaching positions.
Reply of the Government
To improve the position of vacant positions in the State Agricultural
Universities, necessary communication to the Chief Secretaries of all
State Governments, requesting them to initiate necessary action to fill
up all the vacant positions in agricultural universities have been sent.
Further , to encourage the mobility of researchers and teachers
between universities and to address faculty shortage in cutting edge
areas, ICAR proposes to initiate programmes like Adjunct Faculty,
Emeritus Professors, Teaching Associates etc. during the XII Plan under
the proposed new National Agricultural Education Project, provision
for the mobility of teachers between the universities and the institutes
shall be made.
As regards the NET Examination, it has now been decided to conduct
NET Examination twice in a year. Accordingly, the ASRB conducted the
NET Examination twice in the year 2013.
[Vide Ministry of Agriculture, Department of Agricultural Research
and Education O.M. No. 7(6)/2013, dated 15th May, 2014]
Recommendation (Serial No. 37)
The Committee find that the diploma education holders have
increased from 1040 in 1992 to about 6,500 in 2010. However the
region wise supply is skewed. They feel that new courses for rural
youth, to handle day to day jobs at grass root level is required for
farm practices small and veterinary services, routine testing services
and various other rural occupations, agro processing, marketing etc.
The Department have estimated that capacity building effort need to
plan for developing para staff stock of about 17.6 lakh by 2020 in ideal
case and it is desirable to have institutions with capacity development

45
of 1.7 lakh para professional per year. The Committee, therefore,
recommend that multi-skilled development programmers/para-
agriculture (like it is, polytechnics and paramedics) be dovetailed like
Government’s skill Development Mission or an integrated course can be
started through existing institutional systems. They also emphasize
expansion of such diploma courses in all the States of the country to
meet the growing demand for such workforce.
Reply of the Government
A letter is being sent to all Vice-Chancellors of the SAUs to
encourage and initiate need based diploma courses for skill development
in the various constituent Poly Techniques/Institutions.
[Vide Ministry of Agriculture, Department of Agricultural Research
and Education O.M. No. 7(6)/2013, dated 15th May, 2014]
Comments of the Committee
For comments of the Committee please refer to Para No. 1.37 of
Chapter I of this Report.
Recommendation (Serial No. 38)
The Committee find that the casual labourers were earlier engaged
by ICAR Institutes as per guidelines issued by the Government of India
from time to time. The Committee have been informed that
subsequently as per DoPT guidelines dated 10.09.1993 all eligible
workers working in ICAR were given temporary status and those who
fulfilled the eligibility criteria were also considered for regularization
against regular vacancies vide the aforesaid guidelines. SAUs engage
labourers as per labour Laws of the respective State Governments.
KVKs are functioning under ICAR Institutes and SAUs and some NGOs
are governed by Rules and Regulations prescribed by Central/State
Governments. The Committee were also informed that casual labourers
with and temporary status engaged in ICAR are governed by service
conditions, wages and remunerations as prescribed by the Government
of India from time to time through separate and specific orders. The
Ministry have informed the Committee that information regarding
remuneration paid for the last five years is not readily available at
ICAR Headquarters. They have further informed that Institutes of ICAR
have outsourced various labour intensive services as per the Government
of India guidelines on contract labourers issued from time to time. The
Committee are surprised that ICAR does not have readily available
information regarding agricultural labourers for their farm fields in

46
various Institutes, universities and KVKs at their Headquarters. They
feel that if the basic information is not available with the ICAR
Headquarters how does the ICAR monitor that the wages are being
paid to such labourers or that the minimum wages/remuneration are
being paid to them as per DoPT guidelines, State Labour Laws or
Contract Labour Regulation Act. They fail to understand as to how the
Ministry ensures that the Rules and Regulations governing the contract
labourers are not violated. The Committee urge the Government to
ensure that the ICAR should develop database regarding the contract
labourers and their service conditions relating to wages and
remunerations which is not only authentic but also readily available
for necessary monitoring. The Committee strongly recommend that
the laws governing the casual labourers/contract labourers engaged by
the ICAR Institutes should be strictly enforced so that Minimum Wages
are paid to such labourers. The Committee also urge that ICAR should
ensure regularization of such casual labourers working directly under
them who fulfill the eligibility criteria against regular vacancies as and
when they arise.
Reply of the Government
(i) Casual labourers in ICAR farms were earlier engaged by the
ICAR Institutes, as per guidelines issued by the Government of India
from time to time. Subsequently, as per DoP&T ’s guidelines vide O.M.
No. 5106/2/90-Estt.(C) dated 10.09.1993, all the eligible casual
labourers working in ICAR Institutes were given Temporary Status.  Casual
Labour (Temp. Status) in ICAR are governed by the service conditions
strictly as per the Government of India ’s (DoP&T) instructions issued
from time to time, Wages and remunerations paid to the labourers
deployed on ICAR farms for the last 5 years are detailed in the
Table 2 below:
 Year No. of Prevailing Minimum Wages Actual wages
Labourers  paid (Rs. in
Lakhs)
2008-09 4512 As per minimum wages act 20447.5
2009-10 4857 As per minimum wages act 10459.8
2010-11 4953 As per minimum wages act 11679.5
2011-12 4551 As per minimum wages act 14262.8
2012-13 4986 As per minimum wages act 15630.00

47
(ii) All concerned have been instructed that the laws governing
casual labourers/contract labourers engaged are enforced strictly so
that labourers are paid minimum wages. Instructions have also been
issued to all concerned in ICAR for regularization of those casual
labourers with temporary status who fulfill the eligibility criteria against
regular vacancies as and when they arise, in the light of Government
of India ’s (DoP&T ’s) guidelines issued from time to time.
[Vide Ministry of Agriculture, Department of Agricultural Research
and Education O.M. No. 7(6)/2013, dated 15th May, 2014]

48
CHAPTER III
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO NOT
DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE GOVERNMENT ’S REPLIES
-NIL-

49
CHAPTER IV
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF
THE GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE
Investment in Agriculture Sector
Recommendation (Serial No. 07)
The Committee find that during the XI Plan Period only
Rs. 10,325.76 crore was allocated to DARE vis-à-vis demand for
Rs. 31,672 cr. The utilization of funds by the Government was only
Rs. 9,800 cr. The agricultural growth rate at the end of XI Plan was
only 3.3% vis-à-vis target of 4% and the stated reason was that total
low public investment in agriculture in R&D sector in the form of
infrastructure irrigation water conservation and land etc. Further , the
other reason was R&D expenditure was only 0.5% of agricultural GDP .
The Committee urge the Ministry to learn their lessons and ensure that
the allocated amount is utilized fully and the expenditure on research
should be enhanced at least 1% of the agriculture GDP in the XII Plan.
They also emphasize that the Department should focus on not only
planning but actually enhancing investment in research infrastructure,
irrigation water conservation and land etc.
Reply of the Government
The National Centre for Agricultural Economics & Policy Research
(NCAP) undertakes studies from time to time on public-private
investment and their compositions. Fresh study will be taken on these
aspects by the NCAP soon.
[Vide Ministry of Agriculture, Department of Agricultural Research
and Education O.M. No. 7(6)/2013, dated 15th May, 2014]
Comments of the Committee
For comments of the Committee please refer to Para No. 1.13 of
Chapter I of this Report.
Recommendation (Serial No. 08)
The Ministry have apprised the Committee that additional
investment of one rupee in research generated more than rupee one
on an average in major crops, and the highest marginal product was

50
achieved in ‘Arhar’ where additional investment of rupee one generated
additional output worth Rs. 12.82. They have also informed the
Committee that a recent study covering two decades indicate 42-46%
internal rate of return in public investment in agricultural research
and education. All these studies prove high pay-off from public sector
R&D investments. Research and technology driven output growth has
also led to the decline in real cost of production in the range of
1.0-2.31% per annum during the past three decades in case of cereals.
This has helped in keeping the prices of cereals low and benefitting
consumers and producers. In view of the above, the Committee feel
that the importance and significance of agricultural R&D in the
development process cannot be underestimated. They desire that the
investment in agricultural R&D should be enhanced so as to obtain
higher returns, besides reducing the import dependency and adding to
the export capacity of the country. The Committee desire that the
Department should prepare an action plan to attract investment in
agriculture research in the country. They should also approach the
Ministry of Finance to provide monetary and fiscal incentives for the
same. Further , DARE should take concrete steps to publicize the return
from investment in Agriculture sector.
Reply of the Government
The estimates quoted in the report are from the study already
done by the NCAP . Concrete steps shall be taken to publicize the
return from investment in agriculture sector.
[Vide Ministry of Agriculture, Department of Agricultural Research
and Education O.M. No. 7(6)/2013, dated 15th May, 2014]
Comments of the Committee
For comments of the Committee please refer to Para No. 1.13 of
Chapter I of this Report.
Recommendation (Serial No. 10)
The Committee note that ICAR have been consciously developing
farmer friendly technologies and assuring quality higher education.
They are satisfied that the Council in consultation with all the
stakeholders have prepared the first ever policy framework for R&D in
agriculture and allied areas. While appreciating the work of ICAR in
bringing out a clear cut policy in order to support the farmers, the
Committee urge the Ministry to ensure implementation and execution
of the policy so as to play a vital role in agricultural research and

51
education besides dissemination of information and technologies to
the farmers at the ground level. They also emphasize that this R&D
policy articulated by ICAR should be appropriately integrated and
synchronized with the National R&D System and Science and Technology
Innovation Policy 2013. They further desire that the contents and the
benefits flowing from this policy to the farmers should be publicized
and awareness be created among the farmers through KVKs and other
on-field agencies.
Reply of the Government
The studies on impact Assessment of various technologies has been
initiated. The network of Krishi Vigyan Kendras (KVKs) are organizing
large number of awareness creating programmes among farmers with
focus on improved agricultural technologies, practices and programmes
and policies of the Government.
[Vide Ministry of Agriculture, Department of Agricultural Research
and Education O.M. No. 7(6)/2013, dated 15th May, 2014]
Comments of the Committee
For comments of the Committee please refer to Para No. 1.16 of
Chapter I of this Report.
Seeds
Recommendation (Serial No. 14)
The Committee note that 257 crop varieties including 26 varieties
of wheat, 33 varieties of paddy, 33 varieties of maize, 32 pulses crop,
25 pearl millet and 52 varieties of oilseeds crops have been released
during 2007-10 by the Crop Science Division. During the year 2011,
98,481 quintal of breeder seeds were produced. The Committee find
that the States do not have adequate seed plan as a result of which
the poor farmers are compelled to produce from farmer saved seeds
or are compelled to buy seeds from the open market at exorbitant
rates, where multi-national companies have taken over the whole
market. They emphasise that a comprehensive and authentic database
of seeds production and distribution in India by Public and Private
sector has to be developed so that all stakeholders/farmers have enough
information. Further , the Government should have adequate control
over the prices of the seeds and not leave it on the whims of private
companies to charge exorbitant prices for seeds.

52
Reply of the Government
The entire breeder seed is being produced as per the indent of DAC
and supplied by the ICAR to different public and private seed producing
agencies for further multiplication as foundation and certified seed.
The details of quality seed production by public and private sector and
their contributions have been provided in Table 1. The uniform breeder
seed price is fixed by the ICAR in consultation with the DAC taking into
account the cost of cultivation of respective crops. However , the price
of certified seed is fixed by the respective seed producing agencies.
Table 1. Quality seed production by public and private sector
and their contributions
Year Certified/ Quantity Share of Quantity Share of
Quality seed of seed public of seed private
production/ produced sector produced sector
availability by public (%) by private (%)
(million sector Sector
tonnes) (million (million
tonnes) tonnes)
2003-04 1.32 0.70 52.5 0.63 47.5
2004-05 1.41 0.77 55.0 0.63 45.0
2005-06 1.48 0.79 53.2 0.69 46.8
2006-07 1.94 1.15 59.0 0.80 41.0
2007-08 1.94 1.12 57.4 0.83 42.6
2008-09 2.50 1.51 60.2 1.0 39.8
2009-10 2.80 1.71 61.1 1.09 38.9
2010-11 3.22 1.66 51.6 1.56 48.4
2011-12 3.54 1.81 51.1 1.73 48.9
2012-13 3.29 1.61 49.1 1.67 50.9
[Vide Ministry of Agriculture, Department of Agricultural Research
and Education O.M. No. 7(6)/2013, dated 15th May, 2014]
Comments of the Committee
For comments of the Committee please refer to Para No. 1.19 of
Chapter I of this Report.

53
Recommendation (Serial No. 15)
The Committee are of the opinion that the Department and the
ICAR should pursue the States to prepare long term seed plan for their
States on the basis of farmers’ economic status, agro-climate conditions,
desire to adopt quality seeds, State crop calendar or any other
contingent situation. In order to ensure availability of quality seeds in
right quantity and at right time to the farmers, they urge the
Government to take all necessary steps to prepare seed plans for
5 years in consultation with the respective State Governments. Further
the Committee desire the Department to enhance the seed production
and upgrade the infrastructure for breeder seed production in
accordance with the projection made by National Seed Plan. The
services of KVKs should be used to showcase quality seed production
programme to the farmers/seed growers and their self help groups to
meet the domestic demand and avoid any hardship being faced by
farmers in the country in this regard.
Reply of the Government
The Indian Council of Agricultural Research (ICAR) has ensured to
provide quality breeder seed to the public as well as private
organizations as per their indents collated and forwarded by the
Department of Agriculture & Cooperation (DAC). During the last five
years, the production of breeder seed is always higher than the indented
quantity (Annexure-I). As regards utilization of services of KVKs for
showcasing quality seed production programmes to the farmers/seed
growers and their self help groups to meet the domestic demand and
avoid any hardship is concerned, it is informed that the KVKs are
already undertaking the job of production of quality seeds and planting
materials. During the year 2013-14, KVKs have produced 1.57 lakh
quintal seeds of improved varieties and hybrids of cereals, oilseeds,
pulses, commercial crops, vegetables, flowers, fruits, spices, fodder,
forest species, medicinal plants and fibre crops and these were provided
to 2.61 lakh farmers. A total of 167.19 lakh quality planting materials
of elite species of commercial crops, vegetables, fruits, ornamental
medicinal and aromatic crops, plantation crops, spices, tuber crops,
fodder and forest species were produced and provided to 2.35 lakh
farmers.
[Vide Ministry of Agriculture, Department of Agricultural Research
and Education O.M. No. 7(6)/2013, dated 15th May, 2014]
Comments of the Committee
For comments of the Committee please refer to Para No. 1.19 of
Chapter I of this Report.

54
Recommendation (Serial No. 16)
The Committee feel that the Department have to make available
quality seeds and high breeder varieties/high bred planting material
having good genetic potential at affordable price across the country to
the farmers so that they are able to yield maximum harvest under the
given agro-climatic conditions. The release of crop varieties and the
breeder seed production has not been able to meet the domestic
demand of quality seeds in the country. The Committee urge the
Ministry to encourage research and development to adopt new
technologies for the development of the quality seeds varieties/high
bred planting materials. They desire that the technology should be
appropriate enough to enable large scale production of planting
materials/varieties/highbred with genetic potential in the shortest
possible time and maintain uniformity of quality across the production
line. They should be able to address the productivity, stress, tolerance,
pest and disease tolerance by use of technology for higher productivity.
The Committee would, however , like the Ministry to ensure adoption
of appropriate measures for safety and safeguards of such seeds. They
desire that adequate research and development and incubation time
for the pests/diseases liable to be incorporated in these crops be
tested in labs before marketing it on full scale to the farmers for
operations on fields. The Department should ensure and pursue all the
States/UTs to maintain high quality of seeds being sold to the farmers.
The implementation of the provisions of the Seeds Act by the States
has to be ensured especially regarding seed certification and distribution
of certified seeds. The seed certification agencies and Seed Inspectors
who are the implementing agencies for provisions of quality seeds of
Seeds Act have to be more vigilant to check the sale of spurious seeds
in the market. The Committee strongly recommend that in case of
non-germination of seeds the farmers should be duly compensated for
the loss of their crop. The Committee recommend that a proper
monitoring mechanism regarding the seed certification and distribution
should be put in place in order to ensure quality compliance. They also
emphasise that with the increase in demand for supply of quality
planting material accreditation of nurseries be expedited.
Reply of the Government
During 2013, 106 high yielding varieties (HYVs) of various crops
(Cereals: 70; Oilseeds: 15; Pulses: 08; Fibre crops: 03; Forage crops:
04 and Sugar crops: 06) were released & crop based research institutes
gave adequate emphasis to develop HYVs having resistance/tolerance
to biotic/abiotic stresses as well as better nutritional quality. It is also

55
submitted that enough quantity of breeder seed as per demand of the
DAC has also been provided during the last five years. The quality of
breeder seed is being ensured through rigorous monitoring of nucleus
and breeder seed plots by team of experts constituted by ICAR, besides
a statutory monitoring team involving the representatives from the
National Seed Corporation (NSC) and state seed certification agencies.
The quality of certified seeds is ensured by the National Seed
Corporation and respective seed certification agencies by enforcing
minimum seed standards through proper monitoring and inspection of
seed production plots.
[Vide Ministry of Agriculture, Department of Agricultural Research
and Education O.M. No. 7(6)/2013, dated 15th May, 2014]
Horticulture
Recommendation (Serial No. 18)
They, however, feel that with the increasing population, declining
land and water and increasing pressure on biotic and abiotic stresses
in the climate change, effective conversion of natural resources it is
only important to focus on enhanced production in this sector. In view
of the above they desire the Department to make an upward revision
in the production targets. Further they desire that more investment/
Allocation may be made for research and development in this sector
so as to improve post harvest technologies, to contain post harvest
losses, extend shelf life, packaging, storage and standardization of
processes etc. They would also urge the Government to provide enough
financial/fiscal incentives to the farmer community for meeting the
enhanced targets. They would also desire that the Department should
ensure for full utilization of funds available at their disposal and
strengthen the implementation of their ongoing schemes on ground.
Reply of the Government
In order to achieve high production for meeting the increasing
demand of rising population under the impact of climate change and
decreasing natural resources, the research focus has been on
development of abiotic and biotic stress resistant varieties. The efforts
are being made by the Ministry of Food Processing industries for
reduction of losses and post harvest management.
[Vide Ministry of Agriculture, Department of Agricultural Research
and Education O.M. No. 7(6)/2013, dated 15th May, 2014]

56
KVKs
Recommendation (Serial No. 32)
The Committee are aware that KVKs is an important agency
responsible for transmission of research/research information. In crops
and livestock, 328 technological interventions were refined under
different thematic areas in 395 locations. Besides, five women-specific
income-generating technologies were also refined in eight locations.
As many as 73,175 frontline demonstrations were undertaken on cereals,
millets, oilseeds, pulses, and other important crops; 4,710 on improved
tools and farm implements; 14,390 on livestock; and 5,991 on other
enterprises including genderspecific technologies under the National
Initiative on Climate Resilient Agriculture (NICRA), 26, 218 demonstration
were also carried out. However, the Committee find that out of 634
KVKs in the country, the Department has been able to provide
Administrative buildings to 554 KVKs, Trainees hostel to 490 KVKs,
Staff Quarters to 442 KVKs, demonstration units to 394 KVKs and soil
and water testing facilities to 389 KVKs only. The deficiencies in
operations of KVKs is also a matter of concern. The Committee are
concerned that in view of inadequate infrastructure and unavailability
of project co-ordinator, the KVKs will not be able to contribute towards
providing extension services or transmit research and research
information to the farmers. The Committee, therefore, emphasis that
the infrastructure such as Administrative buildings staff quarters,
demonstration units and soil and water testing facilities etc. be built
up expeditiously with a prescribed time. It may also be ensured that
project co-ordinators and other administrative staff are deputed by
providing incentives to them.
Reply of the Government
Provisions have been made for creation of the required
infrastructure in more number of KVKs during the XII Plan for due
approval.
[Vide Ministry of Agriculture, Department of Agricultural Research
and Education O.M. No. 7(6)/2013, dated 15th May, 2014]
Comments of the Committee
For comments of the Committee please refer to Para No. 1.31 of
Chapter I of this Report.
Recommendation (Serial No. 34)
The Committee find that in order to create awareness among
farmers and other stakeholders KVKs organize large number of extension
programmes like Field Days, Exhibitions, Kisan Melas, Kisan Gosthis,

57
Film shows, group meetings and discussions, workshops, lectures, and
use of mass media for wider dissemination of farming technologies.
However , the Committee note that out of 630 KVKs only a few out of
them are working properly and the functioning of the other KVKs is
just satisfactory and much remains to be done. During the 11th Plan
the Department has allocated Rs. 237.42 crores to meet the expenditure
incurred by the State owned KVKs/KVKs functioning under NGOs. The
Committee desire that ICAR should fix the responsibility for non-
performing KVKs functioning under their administrative control to
improve their performance so as the objective for which the KVKs
have been set up is achieved. They further urge the Department to
make assessment of the KVKs activities and performance on regular
basis at the same time necessary feedback should be obtain for the
KVKs regarding the requirement of the farmers so that necessary
changes, if any, can be made in the on-going programmes and research
work for the benefit of the farmers. The Committee desire that the
Government should ensure that all KVKs both private and State
supported KVKs should provide all mandated activities including
extending professional advice, information/knowledge to contain ill-
effects of weather conditions. The Committee also advice the
Department to enhance allocations for KVKs so that more and more
State supported KVKs function without any personal or vested interest
rather they have holistic approach of dissemination of information and
farm knowledge/technology adaptation to farmers.
Reply of the Government
The observations of the Committee regarding improving the overall
functioning and following holistic approach in conducting all mandated
activities by KVKs for the benefit of farmers have been brought to the
notice of the Host organizations of the KVKs. The activities of KVKs are
regularly reviewed and monitored. As regards assessing the performance
of KVKs activities, it is stated that it is being done by holding the
Scientific Advisory Committee (SAC) meetings, Zonal Review Workshops
and field visits by senior officers. The feedback of farmers is also
regularly obtained on KVK programmes by inviting farmers to SAC
meetings as farmers are member of SAC. Besides, the farmers are
encouraged to take active part in all the KVK programmes and activities
and seeking their feedback is part of the programming process.
[Vide Ministry of Agriculture, Department of Agricultural Research
and Education O.M. No. 7(6)/2013, dated 15th May, 2014]
Comments of the Committee
For comments of the Committee please refer to Para No. 1.34 of
Chapter I of this Report.

58
CHAPTER V
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH FINAL
REPLIES TO THE GOVERNMENT ARE STILL AWAITED
KVKs
Recommendation (Serial No. 31)
The Committee note that one of the main causes of delay in
making provision for infrastructure is that the entire expenditure of
KVKs is booked under Plan head. They feel that much of the time is
lost in bureaucratic redtapism in making provision/allocating the money
for the expenditure of KVKs as it comes from the Plan head. The
Committee, therefore, desire that Department should persuade the
Ministry of Finance for funding KVKs from the non-plan allocation for
expeditious availability of the funds and also granting flexibility at the
same time.
Reply of the Government
The ICAR has already approached the Ministry of Finance (MoF) for
funding KVKs from non-plan allocation and the matter is being pursued
further.
[Vide Ministry of Agriculture, Department of Agricultural Research
and Education O.M. No. 7(6)/2013, dated 15th May, 2014]
Agricultural Universities
Recommendation (Serial No. 36)
The Committee in their earlier Report No. 44 (15th Lok Sabha) had
agreed that Central Agricultural Universities should be established only
after ascertaining their need and viability and keeping in view the
availability of human resource, both in scientific and technical streams.
However , they were apprehensive that there could be a possibility of
some comparatively more backward regions besides Bundelkhand seeking
Central Agricultural Universities resulting in proliferation of CAUs in
various backward regions and there could be a resultant burden on
exchequer. They were also concerned so as not to render such
institutions as white elephant. While reiterating their earlier
recommendation, the Committee strongly recommended that before

59
contemplating any future venture about setting up of CAU Government
should come up with a well considered and well laid out policies on
CAUs before the Parliament expeditiously.
Reply of the Government
The ICAR with the approval of Hon ’ble Agriculture Minister,
constituted the committee on 20th May, 2013 to provide the “the
detailed guidelines for establishment of Central Agricultural University
in the country”. The Committee has already held meetings/interactions
and the draft report is being finalized. The well laid out policies on
CAUs shall be available for the appraisal of the Parliament.
[Vide Ministry of Agriculture, Department of Agricultural Research
and Education O.M. No. 7(6)/2013, dated 15th May, 2014]
   N
EW D ELHI; HUKM DEO NARAYAN YADAV,
13 March, 2015 Chairperson,
22 Phalguna, 1936 (Saka) Committee on Agriculture.

60
APPENDIX
COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE
(2014-15)
MINUTES OF THE EIGHTEENTH SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE
The Committee sat on Wednesday, the 4th March, 2015 from
1430 hrs. to 1500 hrs. in Chamber of the Chairperson, Committee on
Agriculture, Room No. 138 (Third Floor), Parliament House, New Delhi.
PRESENT
Shri Hukm Deo Narayan Yadav— Chairperson
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Prof. Ravindra Vishwanath Gaikwad
3. Shri Nalin Kumar Kateel
4. Md. Badaruddoza Khan
5. Dr. Tapas Mandal
6. Shri Janardan Mishra
7. Shri Ajay Nishad
8. Shri Dalpat Singh Paraste
9. Shri Nityanand Rai
10. Shri Mukesh Rajput
11. Shri C.L. Ruala
12. Shri Satyapal Singh
13. Shri Jai Prakash Narayan Yadav
Rajya Sabha
14. Shrimati Renuka Chowdhury
15. Shri Janardan Dwivedi
16. Shri Mohd. Ali Khan
17. Shri Ram Nath Thakur
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Shri Abhijit Kumar — Joint Secretary
2. Smt. Abha Singh Yaduvanshi — Director
3. Shri C. Vanlalruata — Deputy Secretary

61
2. At the outset, the Chairperson welcomed the Members to the
Sitting of the Committee. Then, the Committee took up for consideration
the following:
(i) Memorandum No. 4 pertaining to the draft Report on the
Action Taken by  the Government on the Observations/
Recommendations contained in the  58th Report (15th Lok
Sabha) of the Committee on Agriculture (2013-14) on
‘National Agricultural Research System — An Evaluation ’ of
the Ministry of  Agriculture (Department of Agricultural
Research and Education); and
*(ii) xxx xxx xxx xxx xxx xxx xxx xxx xxx xxx xxx
xxx xxx xxx xxx xxx xxx xxx xxx xxx xxx xxx
3. After some deliberations, the Committee approved the
categorization of action taken replies as shown in the Memoranda and
adopted the draft Reports without any modification. They authorized
the Chairperson to present these Reports to Parliament after getting
them factually verified from the concerned Departments.
The Committee then adjourned.
*Matter not related to this Report.

62
ANNEXURE I
BREEDER SEEDS INDENT & PRODUCTION OF DIFFERENT CROPS DURING 2007-08 T
O 2012-13
(Production in Quintals)
CROPS 2007-08 2008-09 2009-10 2010-11 2011-12 2012-13 Total
Indent Prodn. Indent Prodn. Indent Prodn. Indent Prodn. Indent Prodn. Indent Prodn. Indent Prodn.
Wheat 21461 26204 23349 28983 32330 35049 29692 38469 28860 35745 20542 27502 156234 191952Paddy 2491 3923 3028 4333 3880 5387 4604 6095 5772 6828 5267 11455 25042 38021Sorghum 22 98 40 375 55 221 36 167 113 158 115 375 381 1394Maize 100 146 131 246 179 243 178 232 211 173 99 109 898 1149Barley 1811 2317 2081 3078 2496 3053 1778 2900 1842 1906 1029 698 11037 13952Pearl millet 16 40 17 36 8 8 10 28 15 32 17 67 83 211Small millet 3 32 4 18 5 24 22 42 18 47 37 109 89 272Total Cereal Crops 25903 32759
28650 37068 38954 43985 36294 47814 36831 44889 27106 40315 193738 246830
Total Oilseed Crops 22577 26037
26660 21852 34685 29417 33937 34015 41404 41446 38051 33235 197314 186002
Total Pulse Crops 9948 11234 12268 13585 11700
13155 12944 15360 14303 16656 14153 14430 75316 84420
Total Forage Crops 931 1402 1543 1544 882
1145 627 1039 1627 1708 1832 1336 7442 8174
Total Fibre Crops 172 190 55 115 42 110 52 71 55 85 51 121 427 692Total 59530 71623 69176 74162 86264 87812 83880 98419 94220 104784 81193 89437 474237 526118

63
ANNEXURE II
(Vide Para 4 of Introduction of the Report)
ANALYSIS OF ACTION TAKEN BY GOVERNMENT ON THE FIFTY EIGHTH
REPORT ON NATIONAL AGRICULTURAL RESEARCH SYSTEM — AN
EVALUATION OF COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE
(FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA)
(i) Total number of Recommendations 38
(ii) Recommendations/Observations which have been
accepted by the Government
Serial Nos. 01, 02, 03, 04, 05, 06, 09, 11, 12, 13,
17, 19, 20, 21, 22, 23, 24, 25, 26, 27, 28, 29, 30,
33, 35, 37, 38
Total : 27
Percentage : 71.05%
(iii) Recommendations/Observations which the Committee
do not desire to pursue in view of the Government ’s
replies
Serial No. -NIL-
Total : 00
Percentage : 0%
(iv) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which
replies of the Government have not been accepted
by the Committee
Serial No. 07, 08, 10, 14, 15, 16, 18, 32, 34
Total : 09
Percentage : 23.68%
(v) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which
final replies of the Government are still awaited
Serial Nos. 31, 36
Total : 02
Percentage : 5.26%