STANDING COMMITTEE
ON AGRICULTURE
(2018-2019)
SIXTEENTH LOK SABHA
MINISTRY OF AGRICULTURE AND
FARMERS WELFARE
(DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURAL
RESEARCH AND EDUCATION)
["National Dairy Research Institute, Karnal - A
Performance Review"]
64
SIXTY-FOURTH REPORT
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
January, 2019/Pausha, 1940 (Saka)
lR;eso t;rs


SIXTY-FOURTH REPORT
STANDING COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE
(2018-19)
(SIXTEENTH LOK SABHA)
MINISTRY OF AGRICULTURE AND
FARMERS WELFARE
(DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURAL
RESEARCH AND EDUCATION)
["National Dairy Research Institute, Karnal - A
Performance Review"]
Presented to Lok Sabha on  07.01.2019
Laid on the Table of Rajya Sabha on  07.01.2019
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
January, 2019/Pausha, 1940 (Saka)
lR;eso t;rs


COA No. 394
Price : Rs. 148.00
© 2019 B Y LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of Business
in Lok Sabha (Fifteenth Edition) and printed by M/s. Akashdeep,
New Delhi-110 002.

CONTENTS
PAGE
(i)
COMPOSITION  OF THE C OMMITTEE  (2017-18).................................... (iii)
COMPOSITION  OF THE C OMMITTEE  (2018-19).................................... (v)
INTRODUCTION .............................................................................. ( viii)
REPORT
PART-I
CHAPTER I Introduction .......................................................... 1
(i) National   Dairy   Research  Institute — An
Overview ....................................................... 1
(ii) Allocation of Funds........................................ 8
(iii) Utilisation and Surrender of Funds.................. 9
(iv) Revenue Generation........................................ 9
CHAPTER II Research and Allied Activities................................. 12
(i) Cloning T echnology ........................................ 15
(ii) Semen-Sexing in NDRI.................................. 21
(iii) Research Scenario in India.............................. 22
(iv) Genetic Improvement of Indigenous Breeds..... 24
(v) Descript and Non-descript Cattle..................... 24
(vi) T echnology Transfer and Dissemination of
Information.................................................... 26
(vii) Milk Adulteration Test Kits developed by NDRI
Forage Research............................................ 27
(viii) Forage Research............................................ 29
(ix) Research Cooperation and Collaboration.......... 31

CHAPTER III Training and Extension Programmes........................ 35
CHAPTER IV Infrastructure and Human Resource......................... 47
CHAPTER V Planning for the Future ........................................... 51
(i) Vision Document............................................. 53
PART II
OBSERV ATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS ......................................... 56
ANNEXURES
 I. Details of commercialized technologies alongwith
revenue earned by the Institute................................ 63
II. Details of milk adulteration test kits developed by the
Institute. ................................................................. 78
III. Details  of  the  total  implemented projects of inter-
institutional/collaborative  projects including international
and national collaborative projects............................. 81
IV . Details of training programme organized by NDRI.... 96
APPENDICES
I. Minutes of the 5th Sitting of the Standing Committee
on Agriculture (2017-18) held on 27.11.2017............ 100
II. Minutes of the 7th Sitting of the Standing Committee
on Agriculture (2018-19) held on 26.11.2018............ 103
III. Extract of the Minutes of the  10th  Sitting  of  the
Standing  Committee  on  Agriculture (2018-19) held
on 04.01.2019 ......................................................... 106
(ii)

(iii)
COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON
AGRICULTURE (2017-18)
Shri Hukmdev Narayan Yadav — Chairperson
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Sanjay Dhotre
3. Prof. Ravindra Vishwanath Gaikwad
4. Shri Sanganna Amarappa Karadi
5. Shri Nalin Kumar Kateel
6. Smt. Raksha Tai Khadse
7. Md. Badaruddoza Khan
8. Shri C. Mahendran
9. Dr. Tapas Mandal
10. Shri Janardan Mishra
@11. Shri Praveen Kumar Nishad
12. Shri Devji M. Patel
13. Shri Nityanand Rai
14. Shri Mukesh Rajput
15. Shri Konakalla Narayana Rao
16. Shri C.L. Ruala
17. Shri Arjun Charan Sethi
18. Shri Virendra Singh
19. Shri Dharmendra Yadav
20. Shri Jai Prakash Narayan Yadav
#21. Vacant
@ Shri Praveen Kumar Nishad, MP, Lok Sabha nominated vice Shri Nephiu Rio, MP,
Lok Sabha w.e.f. 27.04.2018 vide Bulletin Part II, No. 6866, dated 27.04.2018.
# Vacant due to resignation of Shri B.S. Yeddyurappa from the Membership of Lok Sabha
w.e.f. 18.05.2018 vide Bulletin Part-II, Table Office (B) No. 6885, dated 19.05.2018.

Rajya Sabha
22. Sardar Sukhdev Singh Dhindsa
*23. Shri Rajmani Patel
*24. Shri Narayan Rane
*25. Shri Kailash Soni
26. Shri Mohd. Ali Khan
27. Shri K.K. Ragesh
28. Shri Ram Nath Thakur
29. Shri R. Vaithilingam
*30. Shri Harnath Singh Yadav
31. Dr. Chandrapal Singh Yadav
(iv)
* vice Shri Janardan Dwivedi, Shri Meghraj Jain, Shri Vinay Katiyar and Shri Shankarbhai
N. V egad, who ceased to be the Member of the Committee on their retirement from
Rajya Sabha on 27.01.2018, 02.04.2018, 02.04.2018 and 02.04.2018 respectively.

COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON
AGRICULTURE (2018-19)
Shri Hukmdev Narayan Yadav — Chairperson
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Bodhsingh Bhagat
3. Shri Sanjay Dhotre
4. Prof. Ravindra Vishwanath Gaikwad
5. Shri Sanganna Amarappa Karadi
6. Shri Nalin Kumar Kateel
7. Smt. Raksha Tai Khadse
8. Md. Badaruddoza Khan
9. Shri C. Mahendran
10. Dr. Tapas Mandal
11. Shri Janardan Mishra
12. Shri Praveen Kumar Nishad
13. Shri Devji M. Patel
14. Shri Mukesh Rajput
15. Shri Konakalla Narayana Rao
16. Shri C.L. Ruala
17. Shri Arjun Charan Sethi
18. Shri Virendra Singh
19. Shri Dharmendra Yadav
20. Shri Jai Prakash Narayan Yadav
21. Vacant
(v)

Rajya Sabha
22. Sardar Sukhdev Singh Dhindsa
23. Shri Rajmani Patel
24. Shri Narayan Rane
25. Shri Kailash Soni
26. Shri Mohd. Ali Khan
27. Shri K.K. Ragesh
28. Shri Ram Nath Thakur
29. Shri R. Vaithilingam
30. Shri Harnath Singh Yadav
31. Dr. Chandrapal Singh Yadav
S
ECRETARIA T
1. Shri V .K. Tripathi — Joint Secretary
2. Shri Arun K. Kaushik — Director
3. Smt. Juby Amar — Additional Director
4. Shri Nirantar Kumar Singh — Sr. Executive Assistant
(vi)

ABBREVIATIONS
A TMA - Agricultural Technology Management Agency
AICRP - All India Coordinated Research Project
A A U - Anand Agricultural University
BPD - Business Planning and Development
CLA - Conjugated Linoleic Acid
CIAE - Central Institute of Agricutural Engineering
DWR - Directorate of Weed Research
DRDA - District Rural Development Agency
DBT - Department of Bio-Technology
DST - Department of Science & Technology
DAHDF - Department of Animal Husbandry, Dairying
& Fisheries
GAU - Gujarat Agricultural University
ILRI - International Livestock Research Institute
IVF - In-vitro Fertilization
KF - Karan Fries
K V K - Krishi Vigyan Kendra
NDRI - National Dairy Research Institute, Karnal
NAIP - National Agricultural Innovation
NASF - National Agricultural Science Fund
NDRI-SRS - National Dairy Research Institute-Southern
Regional Station
NDRI-ERS - National Dairy Reseach Institute-Eastern
Regional Station
NGO - Non Governmental Organization
SCNT - Somatic Cell Nuclear Transfer
SERB - Science and Engineering Research Board
TSP - Tribal Sub-plan
(vii)

(viii)
INTRODUCTION
I, the Chairperson, Standing Committee on Agriculture (2018-2019)
having been authorized by the Committee to submit the Report on their
behalf, present this Sixty—Fourth Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) on the
Subject "National Dairy Research Institute, Karnal - A Performance Review"
pertaining to the Ministry of Agriculture and Farmers Welfare (Department
of Agricultural Research and Education).
2. The Standing Committee on Agriculture had selected the subject
for examination during 2017-18. As the examination of the subject could
not be completed during 2017-18, the subject was again selected for
examination by the Committee during 2018-19, evidence of the representatives
of Ministry of Agriculture and Farmers Welfare (Department of Agricultural
Research and Education) was held on 26.11.2018. The Report was
considered and adopted by the Committee at their Sitting held on 04.01.2019.
3. For facility of reference, the observations/recommendations of
the Committee have been printed in bold at Part-II of the Report.
4. The Committee wish to express their thanks to representatives
of the Ministry of Agriculture and Farmers Welfare (Department of
Agricultural Research and Education) for furnishing requisite information to
the Committee in connection with examination of the subject.
5. The Committee would also like to place on record their deep
sense of appreciation for the invaluable assistance rendered to them by the
officials of Lok Sabha Secretariat attached to the Committee.
  N
EW D ELHI; HUKMDEV NARAYAN YADA V,
04 January, 2019 Chairperson,
14 Pausha, 1940 (Saka) Standing Committee on Agriculture.

REPORT
PART I
CHAPTER I
INTRODUCTION
(i) National Dairy Research Institute—An Overview
1.1 National Dairy Research Institute is the premier organization that
provides Research and Development support for dairy development
programmes of the nation. Over the years, it has gained prominence as the
front ranking research organization on global basis. The Institute works in
close liaison with various National and International developmental agencies.
Scientific achievements, development of human resources at multi-tier level
and infusion of science in various sectors of the dairy industry have been
the hallmarks of the Institute. The Institute catalyses close interaction among
scientists, students, farmers and dairy industry for orchestrating dairy
development process in a harmonious manner. Information generated at the
Institute and services offered have contributed to the growth of Dairy
Industry on the whole and wellbeing of millions of milk producers and
consumers of milk and milk products. Realizing the challenging need of
globalized dairy trade, the Institute is continuously working to develop its
R&D and HRD programmes to better serve the nation in terms of food
security, employment generation and poverty alleviation. The Institute provides
high quality education in the field of dairying, which has no parallel in Asia.
1.2 National Dairy Research Institute metamorphosed from erstwhile
Imperial Institute for Animal Husbandry & Dairying, which was established
at Bangalore in 1923 primarily as a centre for imparting Dairy Education.
In 1955, the Institute Headquarters was shifted to Karnal and the first
formal Dairy Technology course was started in India at NDRI in 1957.
With a view to consolidate the impressive infrastructure already developed
at Bangalore, the unit was reorganized to serve as the Southern Regional
Station of the Institute. The Institute, with its two regional stations, Bangalore
in south and Kalyani in Eastern India, conducts research in the areas of
dairy production, processing and management and provides high quality
education in the field of dairying, which has no parallel in Asia. The Southern
1

2
and the Eastern Regional Stations continue to provide region specific R&D
support for dairy development in relation to the agro-climatic conditions
that exist in those areas. In 1966, the Institute's management was weaned
away from the Ministry of Agriculture and brought under the wings of the
Indian Council of Agricultural Research with a view to provide greater
operational autonomy in research management functions. It is noteworthy
that NDRI is not only an important contributor of manpower in dairying
required in State Agricultural Universities (SAUs) but also plays an important
role in enhancing the teaching capabilities of the faculty from SAUs. In
1989, status of Deemed University was conferred to the Institute for
further strengthening the academic programmes for human resource
development.
Vision
1.3 Ensure availability of quality milk and milk products at affordable
cost, livelihood security to the producer and profitability to the dairy sector
through adoption of appropriate technologies and human resource
development.
Mission
1.4 Provide R&D support for generation and dissemination of
knowledge towards improved national milch herd for milk production
enhancement, greater productivity of dairy industry and management aspects
of the dairy profession leading to the social, economic and environmental
benefits to the Nation as well as contribute towards manpower development
programmes.
The mandate of the Institute is as follows:–
a. Conducting research in the areas of Dairy Production, Processing
and Marketing.
b. Demand driven 'Human Resource Development' to meet the
requirements of Dairy Industry & R&D Institutions.
c. Dissemination of innovative dairy production and processing
technologies for socio-economic transformations.
1.5 When asked about the extent to which the institute has been
able to achieve the mandate the Department in a written reply submitted as
under:—
"NDRI is committed to ensure availability of quality milk and milk
products at affordable cost, livelihood security to the producer and

3
profitability to the dairy sector through adoption of appropriate
technologies. NDRI provides R&D support towards generation and
dissemination of knowledge towards improved national milch herd for
milk production enhancement, greater productivity of dairy industry
and management aspects of the dairy profession leading to the social,
economic and environmental benefits to the Nation as well as contribute
towards manpower development programmes.
i. Uniqueness of the Institute (how it is different from other
institutes with regard to the issue of duplication of research
programmes):
a. ICAR-NDRI is the only institute in Asia which conducts
research for development of technologies cutting across
three areas of dairy science under one roof; production,
processing and management.
b. It offers four tier academic programmes for creating human
resource for the Indian dairy industry and R&D institution.
c. Over more than 9 decades of its existence, it has provided
human resource and leadership to all dairy institutions in
the country.
d. The cross-bred developed at the institute in the seventies
has been responsible for catalysing white revolution in the
country.
e. Today the institute ranks among the top dairy research
institute of the world.
ii. Most significant contribution (Since establishment) for the benefit
of dairy farmers, entrepreneurs and industry:
(i) Developed the synthetic population of Karan Fries (KF)
cattle, a crossbred of Holstein Friesian and Tharparkar
cattle, through inter-se mating of the population. Benefits
provided to farmers and dairy developments agencies from
this population of KF till date are:
a. Disseminated 8,22,527 doses of frozen semen and
5,21,579 doses of liquid semen of KF bulls
(1991-2016).

4
b. Distribution of 1233 KF bulls (1974-2013).
c. Produced 11,346 KF crossbred calves at farmers
doorstep (2007/08-2016/17).
(ii) Developed best Murrah herd and produced elite Murrah
buffalo bulls. Benefits provided to farmers and dairy
development agencies from this elite Murrah Herd till date
are:
a. Disseminated 6,32,879 doses of frozen semen and
2,30,300 doses of liquid semen of Murrah bulls
(1991-2016).
b. Distribution of 823 Murrah bulls (1972-2013).
c. Produced 11,936 Murrah calves at farmers doorstep
(2007/08-2016/17).
iii. Developed rapid tests to assess the quality and safety of milk
and milk products:
a. V arious tests, methods and kits to detect adulterants (glucose,
maltodextrin, urea, hydrogen peroxides, formalin, sucrose,
vegetable oils, animal body fats, neutralizers and melamine
etc. and contaminants (pesticides, aflatoxins, antibiotics
residues and pathogens and other microbial contaminations)
in milk and milk products were developed by the ICAR-
NDRI since inception.
b. Most of the tests are recommended and being used by the
regulatory authorities (FSSAI, BIS) to ascertain the quality
and safety of milk and milk products in the country.
c. Tests are being used to ensure the quality and safety of
milk and milk products by the reputed dairy processing
industries in the country (handling 100 lakh litres milk per
day) to whom the technologies of these tests have been
licensed.
iv. Technologies for value addition of milk transferred to industry
and entrepreneurs:
a. Technologies of various indigenous milk products, innovative
dairy foods, health foods, probiotic dairy cultures such as

5
low cholesterol ghee, Arujna herbal ghee, smoothies, whey
based health beverages; composite dairy products, misti
doi, low fat shrikhand and other cultured dairy products
have been developed and transferred to dairy industry and
dairy professionals/entrepreneurs.
b. Several innovative ready-to-reconstitute formulations for the
manufacture of khoa, gulabjamun, rasogolla, kulfi, rasmalai,
basundi, kheer, dalia, gase-gase payasam, paneer-curry and
Cheese-poorie are available for adoption at industrial scale.
c. During last five years 73 technologies were developed and
79 technologies were commercialized. These technologies
were transferred to 51 different commercial houses and
194.80 Lakhs of revenue was generated.
d. During the period 26 Patents were filed and 13 Patents
granted for processes/methods/kits developed.
v. Equipment designed for both small scale dairy operations and
mechanized production:
Some of the equipment suitable for adoption by the Indian
dairy industry are continuous paneer, ghee, khoa and
rasogolla-making machines.
vi. Technologies for animal nutrition:
Area specific mineral mixture and anionic mixture, complete
feed block etc have been developed to augment milk
production at farmer levels. These technologies have been
commercialized to industrial houses engaged in animal feed
manufacturing.
vii. Contribution in the frontier area of Science and technology:
ICAR-NDRI has contributed in the following area of
biotechnology and nanotechnology with a view to enhance
animal productivity, food safety. A large number of research
papers in high impact journals have been published in recent
years:
(a) World's first and second cloned buffalo calves were
produced using economical "Handmade Cloning

6
Technique. This has paved the way for multiplication
of high yielding milch animals for sustainable growth
of farming community and dairy sector.
(b) Incorporation of bioactive components using
nanotechnology for development of new generation
health foods.
(c) Development of biomarkers to detect pregnancy,
estrous cycle and reproductive health status of milch
animals.
(d) Development of new generation analytical tools to
ascertain the quality of milk e.g. development of
aptamer based sensors for detection of aflatoxin/
antibiotic/melamine/heavy metals in milk and milk
products.
(e) Validation of health benefits of functional foods using
animal models.
viii. Human resource development:
a. ICAR-NDRI offers courses in 16 disciplines pertaining to
dairy production, processing and management and providing
Human resource to cater to the need of Dairy Industry and
R&D Institutions. Since inception, under academic
programme, 1537 B.Tech Dairy technology, 2970 Masters
and 1447 PhD students received degree and 139 students
received diploma certificates.
b. In the last five years, a total number of 18 Centre for
Advance Faculty Training (CAFT) programmes in Dairy
Processing and Animal Genetics and Breeding were organized
for the faculty from ICAR institutes and SAUs.
c. More than 500 other training programmes organized by
various divisions and sections for dairy professionals and
farmers.
ix. Skill development:
a. In the last five years, Business Planning Development (BPD)
Unit of ICAR-NDRI has organized 93 training programmes

7
and trained 2095 participants, out of which 142 startups
have already established the commercially viable enterprise
creating direct or indirect employment for unemployed youth
and 38 incubatees also graduated from the BPD Unit.
b. Apart from this, in the last five years 9160 farmers and
6855 rural women benefitted under other training
programmes organized at the Institute.
x. Impact of Outreach Programs and Extension activities of the
Institute:
The impact of planned intervention in the adopted villages was
calculated by making the comparison between current data and
the baseline data on various productive and reproductive
parameters to delineate the improvement in performance of dairy
animals.
a. It was observed that there was decreased trend in age at
first calving of Indigenous cow (17.55%), Buffaloes (7.02%)
and Crossbred cow (4.16%).
b. The average daily milk yield had shown an increasing trend
with highest increase in Indigenous cattle (45.45%) followed
by Crossbred cattle (27.20%). The average productivity of
Indigenous cow, CB cow and buffalo was 6.56, 10.66 and
8.01 litre/day in the adopted villages of NDRI.
c. It was observed that there was decreased trend in Inter-
calving period which ranged from 8.80 to 22.26% among
dairy animals.
xi. Quality input supplied by Institute (Seed, Semen, planting material
etc. during last five years):
a. In the last five years, ICAR-NDRI disseminated superior
male germplasm for genetic improvement programme of
cattle and buffaloes. During the period, NDRI produced
7,23,190 frozen semen doses of Sahiwal, Tharparkar, KF,

8
KS, Gir and Murrah bulls and disseminated 2,06,072 ml
doses liquid semen of Sahiwal, KF, Tharparkar and Murrah
bulls to local farmers and also disseminated/supplied 4,07,357
doses frozen semen of Sahiwal, Tharparkar, KF, KS, Gir
and Murrah bulls to farmers and various dairy development
organizations/institutes/gaushalas of 13 States viz., Haryana,
Punjab, Uttarakhand, Delhi, U.P , Rajasthan, Bihar,
Chhattisgarh, Himachal Pradesh, Madhya Pradesh, Assam,
Nagaland and West Bengal.
b. In the last five years, 87800 plant material (different fodder
crops mainly Hybrid Napier Grass (variety - CO 4), Guinea
Grass (variety-Hamil) and Paragrass were distributed to
farmers, villagers and other government organizations/
institutes."
(ii) Allocation of Funds
1.6 On being asked regarding financial allocations and expenditure
(under Scheme and Non-Scheme head) to the ICAR-NDRI during last five
fiscal years, the Department has submitted as under:—
(Rs. in crore)
Sl. Years Budget Estimate Revise Estimate Ex penditure
No. Scheme Non Scheme Non Scheme Non
(Plan) Scheme (Plan) Scheme (Plan) Scheme
(Non- (Non- (Non-
Plan) Plan) Plan)
1. 2013-14 15.09 130.12 15.22 129.22 15.18 128.93
2. 2014-15 19.25 130.08 14.00 146.47 13.95 143.23
3. 2015-16 10.10 132.90 11.10 157.66 11.06 157.34
4. 2016-17 10.87 158.70 8.05 161.97 7.94 159.75
5. 2017-18 195.69 215.96 215.74
(Grants)

9
1.7. On being queried about the enhancement/reduction in allocation of
funds during the current fiscal as compared to previous year, the Department
submitted as under:—
(Rs. in lakhs)
Sl. Funds Funds Enhancements. Reasons
No. allocations allocations
for F.Y. for F.Y .
2017-18 2018-19
1. 21596.40 22293.40 697.00 Due to normal
(3.2%) price escalation.
(iii) Utilisation and Surrender of Funds
1.8 During the course of examination when asked about the funds
surrendered and the percentage utilization as against budgetary allocations
and reasons for surrender during last three years, the reply submitted is as
under:–
"NDRI has not surrendered any funds during the last three years.
The detail percentage (%) of funds utilization scheme-wise is as
under:
(Rs. in crore)
Sl. Years Plan/ Non Plan % of Exp. % of
No. Scheme under Exp.
Funds Funds Expendi- Expendi- Plan under
Received Received ture ture Scheme Non-Plan
Scheme
1. 2015-16 11.10 157.66 11.06 157.34 99.63% 99.79%
2. 2016-17 8.05 161.97 7.94 159.75 98.63% 98.63%
3. 2017-18
(Grants) 215.96 215.74 99.90%

10
(iv) Revenue Generation
1.9 When asked about the sources of revenue for the Institute other
than grants by the Government of India during last five years, the Department
has submitted as given below:—
"The sources of revenue for the Institute other than grants by the
Government of India is as under:—
(Rs. in lakhs)
Sl. No. Revenue Head 2013-14 2014-15 2015-16 2016-17 2017-18
1. Income from 377.43 456.96 516.47 542.68 484.64
sales/Services
2. Income from Fees/ 72.50 66.78 89.12 69.89 69.71
Subscriptions
3. Income from royalty/ 1 1.19 3.09 8.40 2.51 0.71
Publications
Grand Total 461.12 526.83 613.99 615.08 555.06
No expenditure since 2013-14 has been made by Institute from the
revenue receipts. All the revenue generations have been remitted to the
ICAR Head-Quarter in the respective years.
1.10 During the course of evidence when asked about the reasons
for decrease in income from royalty/Publications, the representatives
explained:-
We  get royalty from only 1 or 2 techniques. Whichever technology
got transferred in previous years, that was through cash payment. The
company has to share the sales figures in respect of royalty. Usually
companies don’t share its sales details with us as to how much
business they have done with our technology. It is because of this that
technbology is not being provided on the basis of royalty and
companies make a one time lumpsome payment.
1.11 NDRI further clarified in a written reply as follows:—
"As far as the variation in revenue generated through royalty and sale
of Institute's publications is concerned, it is clarified that Rs. 4.20
lakhs has been received as royalty from already commercialized
technology to a firm during 2013-14 and the royalty for subsequent

11
years has not been received from the said firm. The balance amount
in each respective years as reported in table given below:
(Rs. in lakhs)
Y ear Income from Sale of Sale of Xerox T otal
Royalty/ Information Tender Charges
Publications bulletin
2013-14 4.20 3.36 2.83 0.80 11.19
2014-15 Nil 1.84 0.75 0.50 3.09
2015-16 Nil 5.74 2.00 0.66 8.40
2016-17 Nil Nil 2.00 0.51 2.51
2017-18 Nil Nil Nil 0.71 0.71
Note: During the Year 2013-14, 2014-15 & 2015-16 the revenue realized is more because
of sale of information bulletin as per table shown above. Thereafter the information
bulletin was not sold because the process of admission was made online. Moreover
2016-17 onwards e-Tendering was also started in the Institute, as a result revenue
towards sale of tender documents was also not realized during 2016-17. Hence,
Revenue realized during 2016-17 & 2017-18 is less than the revenue realized in
previous years.
1.12 When asked about the targets and achievements of revenue
generation of ICAR-NDRI, Karnal during the last five years and target fixed
for 2018-19, the Department has submitted as under-
(Rs. in lakhs)
Sl. No. Y ear Revenue Target Revenue Generation
1. 2013-14 395.70 464.11
2. 2014-15 955.20 850.63
3. 2015-16 1 101.52 957.12
4. 2016-17 1374.14 1147.14
5. 2017-18 Not Fixed 960.46
The Revenue Generation targets for ICAR-NDRI, Karnal set for the
FY- 2018-19 is Rs. 666.07 lakhs only.

12
CHAPTER II
RESEARCH AND ALLIED ACTIVITIES
2.1 The National Dairy Research Institute as the premier Dairy
Research Institution undertakes research, teaching and extension activities
towards dairy development in the country. Being the National Institute, it
conducts basic and applied research with the objective to enhance animal
productivity and also to develop cost effective technologies for the benefit
of the farmers of the country. Further, the Institute provides high quality
manpower to meet the human resource requirements for the overall dairy
development in the country. Realizing the challenging need of globalized
dairy trade, the Institute is continuously working to develop its R&D and
HRD programmes to better serve the nation in terms of food security,
employment generation and poverty alleviation.
2.2 While enumerating major achievements of ICAR-NDRI during
the last five years, the representatives submitted as under:—
"The Major Achievements of the institute during the last five years
are—
(i) The production of cloned buffalo calves from seminal plasma-
derived somatic cells; and from dead progeny-tested buffalo bull;
from wild buffalo (Bubalus arnee) through inter-species cloning;
from somatic cell of urine; from an elite adult Murrah buffalo
(KARAN-KIRTI: highest milk producer in the history of the
Institute) and calves from 'Garima-II' (a cloned buffalo, which
had been produced by Hand-guided cloning using embryonic
stem cells as donor cells) through normal reproduction.
(ii) The major achievements under genetics improvement of milch
animals programme include: production of proven cattle and
buffalo bulls under progeny testing programme to cater to the
demand of male germplasm; multi-trait animal models developed
for selection and genetic evaluation of KF Cattle and Murrah
buffaloes for higher fertility and milk production.

13
(iii) Significant progress was made in the development of methods/
kits to ascertain the quality of milk and milk products which
includes a method for detection of detergent in milk; analytical
process for detection of antibiotic residues in milk using spore
as biosensor; Two stage enzyme based assay for detection of
L. monocytogenes in milk; Paper strip based tests/assays for the
detection of Maltodextrin, Hydrogen peroxide, Glucose,
neutralizers, added Urea, Sucrose, salt and pesticide residues in
milk and milk products; A kit for the detection of vegetable oil/
fats in ghee and DNA based method for differentiation of cow
& buffalo butter/ghee, cow, buffalo, sheep, goat and camel milk
and A
1/A2 milk. An intelligent oxygen sensor was developed and
evaluated on modified atmosphere packaged mozzarella cheese.
(iv) The Institute developed various new dairy food products which
include shelf stable nutritionally rich smoothies, Kheer Mohan
from cow and buffalo milk; High protein iron-fortified bajara
biscuit, whey Jaljeera drink, Nutrimix, Bajra Lassi, Low-Calorie
and fiber fortified Misti Dahi.  Manufacturing protocols were
developed for several products such as chocolate steamed dahi,
milk protein concentrates, milk protein enriched pearl millet malt
based complementary food, double-emulsion- based functional
mayonnaise enriched with bitter-gourd extract, smoothie enriched
with amla bio-actives.
(v) The Institute also developed various equipment and machines
for machanised production of dairy products like microprocessor
based automated pneumatic paneer hoop-cum-pressing unit was
developed for mechanized production of paneer and cheeses, a
continuous mechanized system was developed for the commercial
production of rabri, continuous kheer manufacturing equipment
suitable for medium scale processor was developed and a low
cost can washer system was developed for efficient cleaning of
cans with minimum amount of water which could reduce effluent
generation at milk collection centres.
(vi) A number of starter cultures for the fermented dairy products
have also been developed which include: Bioprocess for Direct
Vat Set Misti Dahi Culture; Exopolysacchrides producing lactic

14
culture for preparation of low fat lassi; Sugar tolerating lactic
culture for preparation of Misti Doi; indigenous probiotic strains
of Lactobacillus fermentum and Lactobacillus plantarum. A
commercially feasible encapsulation system was developed for
probiotic organisms suitable for ambient storage in tropical (Indian)
climatic conditions.
(vii) For the benefit of different stakeholder's a Web-enabled Interactive
Information Delivery System to provide information regarding
scientific dairy farming practices, one bilingual Multimedia on
the production procedure of six traditional dairy products viz.
Paneer , Ghee, Khoa, Gulab Jamun, Dahi, and Lassi and Two
mobile Apps on environment friendly dairy farming practices for
improving productivity were developed.
(viii) As a part of capacity building initiatives, during the last five
years, Business Planning Development Unit of ICAR-NDRI has
organized 125 training programmes and trained 2095 participants,
out of which 142 startups have already established the
commercially viable enterprise creating direct or indirect
employment for unemployed youth and 38 incubatees also
graduated from the BPD Unit.
(ix) A total number of 18 CAFT programmes in Dairy Processing
and Animal Genetics and Breeding organized for the faculty from
ICAR institutes and SAUs and more than 500 other training
programmes organized by various divisions and sections for dairy
professionals and farmers.
(x) From 2012-2018, under academic programme, 210 B.Tech Dairy
Technology, 787 Masters and 421 PhD. students received degree.
(xi) During 2012-2018, 1698 research papers published in peered
review journals (37 research papers cited 20 times or more;
Books/Technical Bulletin/Training Manuals and Compendium: 82).
(xii) During 2012-2018, Technology generation and commercialization:
Total Technologies developed: 73; Technology/Product
commercialized: 65; Number of purchasing firms: 51; Revenues
earned: 194.80 lakhs; 26 Patents filed; 13 Patents granted for
processes/methods/kits developed."

15
(i) Cloning Technology
2.3 When asked to furnish a detailed note on research work done
by NDRI related to semen sexing technology and benefits of the cloning
technology, the Department in its written reply submitted as follows:—
"The cloning work at ICAR-NDRI, Karnal has been carried out under
following research projects:
Sl. No. Title Duration Funding Total
Agency expenditure/
sanctioned
budget
(Rs. in
lakhs)
1. Value chain on zona-free 5 years NAIP 1090.62
cloned embryos for (9.2.2009 to (ICAR)
quality animal production 31.3.2014)
from elite buffaloes and
Pashmina goats
2. Cloning of wild buffalo 1 year Govt. of 86.7
in Udanti-Sitanadi of (1.4.15 to Chhattisgarh
Chhattisgarh 30.4.16)
3. Optimization of 3 years DBT 68.757
procedures for (17.11.14 to
improving cloning 16.11.17)
efficiency in buffalo
4. Production of multiple 4 years NASF 264.29
copies of elite buffalo (1.4.18 to (ICAR)
bulls using animal 31.3.22)
cloning technology
5. Global transcriptome and 3 years DST- 46.78
miRNA analysis for (22.3.18 to SERB
deciphering reasons for 21.3.21)
low cloning efficiency
in buffalo

16
NDRI has standardized the simple and effective Hand-guided cloning
technique in buffalo (Shah et al., 2008 Cloning and Stem Cells 10:435).
It involves removal of the zona pellucida of an in vitro matured
oocyte, enucleation with the help of a hand-held microblade, fusion
of two enucleated demicytoplasts with a donor cell and activation to
form reconstructed embryos. These are then cultured in vitro for
7-8 days to enable them to develop to the blastocyst stage at which
these are transferred to recipient animals for obtaining progeny or
cryopreserved for future use. We used this technique to produce the
world's first buffalo calf (Shah et al., 2009 Theriogenology 71:1215).
Hand-guided cloning offers several advantages over the the conventional
micromanipulator-based SCNT. It is faster, simpler and more efficient
than the conventional SCNT and it does not require expensive
micromanipulators and skilled manpower to operate them. Following
initial success in producing embryos through Hand-guided cloning,
we used several approaches for improving the blastocyst rate and
quality. These include use of (i) epigenetic modifiers for treatment of
donor cells or reconstructed embryos or both, (ii) developmentally
competent oocytes selected after staining them with a dye, brilliant
cresyl blue, (iii) low oxygen concentration for in vitro culture and (iv)
reconstructed embryos that cleave early. Compared to a blastocyst
rate of around 15% obtained through IVF, we have been consistently
obtaining a blastocyst rate of over 40% through Hand-guided cloning
on a long-term basis.
Among the biological factors that affect cloning efficiency, the donor
cell type is perhaps the most important one. We have evaluated several
types of somatic cells as donor cells in our search for a donor cell
type which offers a very high blastocyst rate and quality and high
offspring rate, We have successfully produced cloned buffalo embryos
using donor cells such as fetal, new-born and adult skin fibroblasts,
milk and blood-derived cells and trophoblast cells. However, the ultimate
success of the cloning technology is the ability of cloned embryos to
result in birth of a live offspring. We have successfully produced live
offspring from cloned embryos produced using several donor cell
types such as fetal cells (Shah et al., 2009 Theriogenology 71:1215),
embryonic stem cells (George et al., 2011 Cell Reprogram 13:263),
adult cells (Jyotsana et al., 2015 Cell Reprogram 17:393), and seminal

17
plasma (Selokar et al., 2014 PLoS ONE 9(3):e90755) and urine-derived
cells (Madheshiya et al., 2015 Cell Reprogram 17:160). Among these,
the calves produced using seminal plasma and urine-derived cells
were the first cloned offspring born in any species using these donor
cells. The feasibility of using Hand-guided cloning for multiplication
of elite females was demonstrated by us by producing 'Lalima' and
'Apurva', clones of an elite Murrah buffalo (MU-5345) at NDRI
Livestock Research Centre. Whereas skin cells were used as donor
cells for producing 'Lalima', we used urine-derived somatic cells
for producing 'Apurva'. The most recent addition to the family of
cloned animals is 'Swarupa', a clone of 'Karan Kirti', which has the
distinction of being the highest milk producer buffalo in the history
of the Institute.
'Lalima' and 'Apurva', clones of a high milk-yielding buffalo at NDRI,
Karnal produced using skin- and urine-derived donor cells, respectively.
'Swarupa', a clone of 'Karan-Kirti', the highest milk producing
animal in NDRI's history.


18
Another milestone was the demonstration of the reproductive normalcy
of cloned animals of both male and female sex. Garima-II, a cloned
buffalo produced using embryonic stem cells as donor cells gave birth
to two female calves 'Mahima' in 2013 and 'Karishma' in 2014 following
artificial insemination.
Mahima with her mother Garima-II Karishma, the second progeny of
Mahima.
The reproductive normalcy of 'Shresth', a male produced from frozen-
thawed cloned buffalo embryo was demonstrated by production of a
female calf 'Shrestha' following use of its semen for artificial
insemination. 'Shresth' is a grown up bull now and is currently being
used for semen donation at NDRI, Karnal.
'Shresth', a male produced from frozen-thawed cloned buffalo
embryo is currently being used for semen donation.
Bringing the dead back to life has always been a fascinating issue.
Unlike wild animals, for which getting viable genetic material is a


19
major hurdle in resurrecting them, genetic material may be available
in the form of cryopreserved semen in case of farm animals. We
successfully restored a progeny-tested bull which had died many
years before. For this, somatic cells were isolated from frozen-thawed
semen of the bull, which had been cryopreserved for over 10 years.
These cells were successfully established in culture, propagated and
used as donor cells for producing a live calf named 'Rajat', which is
now over 2 years old and is in good health. This has tremendous
economic implications because each such bull produced could be
expected to generate over Rs. 4 crore in its lifetime when used for
semen donation. The birth of 'Rajat' has shown that if such bulls
could be produced on a large scale, the dream of establishing 'Bull
mother farms of progeny-tested bulls' could be realized.
The unprecedented decline of biodiversity worldwide is urging scientists
to collect and store biological material from seriously threatened animals
as well as from elite farm animals so that such animals could be
conserved, restored and multiplied in future. Recent successes in
SCNT have opened new opportunities to resurrect endangered
mammalian species. The ability of non-viable cells to act as nucleus
donors and to be reprogrammed offers a remarkable opportunity to
collect and preserve tissues from dead animals for future use in
cloning. We have recently demonstrated that blastocyst stage cloned
embryos can be successfully produced from non-viable cells and
from somatic cells obtained from ear tissue collected from dead
buffaloes and preserved in mustard oil for 48h at room temperature.
This can pave the way for restoration of dead farm or wild animals
Mu-4393, a progeny-tested bull,
which had died many years before
Rajat, a clone of Mu-4393

20
by Hand-guided cloning (Duah et al. 2016 In Vitro Cell Dev Biol Anim.
2016 Jul 15 issue).
We have also used the cloning technology for ex-situ conservation
i.e., by removing part of the population from their natural habitat and
placing it in a new location, which may be a wild area or within the
care of humans. Chhattisgarh's State animal, known locally as 'Ban
Bhainsa' (wild buffalo) is in the Red List of International Union for
Conservation of Nature (IUCN) and is also a Schedule-I animal under
the Wildlife Protection Act, 1972. We successfully applied inter-species
SCNT (iSCNT) for production of a cloned wild buffalo female named
'Deepasha' from a wild buffalo named 'Asha', the only wild-buffalo in
Chhattisgarh in semi-captivity. iSCNT involves the transfer of a somatic
nucleus from one species into the enucleated oocytes of a different
species, This has demonstrated that SCNT has the potential to be an
integral part of wildlife conservation programs also."
Cloned blastocysts produced from non-viable cells
'Asha', the wild buffalo 'Deepasha', a clone of 'Asha'

21
(ii) Semen-Sexing in NDRI
2.4 During last few years, farmers from developed States of India
had been looking for a supply of sexed semen in cattle, mainly for producing
significantly more number of female calves rather than the normal ratio of
50:50. Farmers from Punjab could obtain little supplies of sexed semen by
imports from the USA through their farmer-association. Simultaneously,
farmers could access the sexed semen in the gray market in India. But no
systematic records have been maintained, and thus the percent conceptions,
as well as percent female-calves-born, are not documented.
World Scenario:
2.5 This is an extremely challenging field of research, especially for
a research team from India. The problem-solving in this area of research
(being an extremely novel and non-treaded area of research) demands a
highly conducive environment for research, which is generally lacking in
the developing world. This is evidenced by the fact that there is only one
technology developed by a team "X-Y Inc., USA" and no other team in the
whole world has been able to develop an alternative technology since last
15-years. And this is in spite of the fact that this existing technology of
X-Y Inc., USA is a poor and inefficient utilize(r) of the available sperm in
the ejaculates of the worthy bulls. In addition to abnormally high wastage
of sperm, it has another major drawback of the drastically reduced
conception rate in cows.
The X-Y Inc., USA has been very active in conserving their patent
rights so that they can earn as many dollars as they can. Their business
model dictated that they ensured that they don't provide/sell any raw material
for research by selling both kinds of sorted sperm from the same bull. The
company is extremely strict for supply/sale to research institutes. They sell
only the X-chromosome carrying sperm for dairy breeds and destroy the
Y-chromosome carrying sperm. On the same lines, they sell Y-chromosome
carrying sperm for beef breeds and destroy the X-chromosome carrying
sperm.
In spite of many adversities, we are of the opinion that there must be
at least one hundred laboratories world over, who are doing research for
developing alternative technology for semen sexing and/or control of sex-
ratio at birth in cattle. As a matter of fact, the firm(s) selling semen for

22
breeding either dairy breeds or beef breeds will always wish that they were
able to produce semen which leads to the conception of desired sex. Cost-
benefit ratio for this kind of research is high, as one can earn a lot of
money by selling sexed-semen.
Progress in Sexed Semen Research:
2.6 ICAR upon seeing the interest of the farmers decided to initiate
research efforts in the area of control of sex-ratio in cattle during the year
2014. It announced its intentions of the take off of research effort but
could provide only token- funds during the financial year 2014-15. During
the financial year 2015-16, the regular funding was provided for the research
programme titled "Semen Sexing in Cattle". This research project has been
awarded under ICAR's XIIth Plan Scheme of Incentivizing Research on
Agriculture (upto March 2017) and now extended for three years from
April 2017- 2020.
(iii) Research Scenario in India
2.7 Research efforts at NDRI, Karnal and AAU, Anand have been
initiated a few years back and can be classified into these categories:—
a. Establishment of sex-ratio at birth using non-sexed semen:
Sex-ratio using non-sexed semen: The records of NDRI,
Karnal farm have been analyzed for the cattle bulls used during
last ten years. As we have a regular emphasis on the progeny
testing programme in most breeds of cows, we could get a
limited number of AI's per bull. Overall data irrespective of
breeds revealed that the percent of female calves born varied
from bull-to-bull. Amongst Sahiwal, Karan-Fries and Karan-Swiss
breed percent, female calves born were 25.0 to 57.8; 27.5 to
67.5 and 40.0 to 61.5 respectively.
b. Establishment of the ratio of live X-chromosome &
Y-chromosome carrying sperm:
Efforts are in full swing to be able to establish a foolproof
method to be able to analyze a large number of samples of
sperm for percent live X-chromosome & Y-chromosome carrying
sperm. The work is being attempted at NDRI, Karnal as well

23
as at GAU, Anand. The only available technique is patented. The
XY Inc., USA has standardized a method to be able to analyze
X & Y-chromosome carrying sperm fairly accurately and quickly.
The technique cannot be used for our research because the
patenting regime does not allow us to be able to acquire the
hardware & software involved. As there are practically no
research papers available in the literature, which provide clues
for differences in the X-chromosome carrying and Y -chromosome
carrying sperm, the job in hand is little too challenging? Our
team is on it and will try our best for solving this problem by
alternative methods.
The project aims to achieve the above objectives by following
3 specific approaches:
(i) Sperm surface proteins associated with X and Y-bearing
spermatozoa;
(ii) Identification of X and Y-bearing potential aptamers;
(iii) Potential of Microfluidics technique as a tool for semen
sexing.
c. Reducing the sperm doses with acceptable fertility:
(i) The methodology is under development for reducing the sperm
doses in the straws to a minimum level of acceptable fertility
from current 20 million sperm from a high fertile bull.
Reducing sperm dose from 20 Million to 8 million doses per
straw is now successful from high fertile bull without
compromising the in vitro fertility of sperm after freezing. Work
in progress to reduce up to 5 million sperm per dose after
dilution of the semen. Strategies of packaging standards for
5 million sperm has been developed without compromising
freezing quality.
(ii) Selection of indigenous cattle buffalo and crossbred bull at an
early age for high fertility.
Selection of high fertility bull after semen donation is standardized
through in vitro functional test with very high accuracy.

24
Methods for testing bull at very young age in progress with
molecular based technique.
(iv) Genetic Improvement of Indigenous Breeds
2.8 On being queried regarding efforts made by the Institute for
conservation and genetic improvement of the indigenous varieties during
last five years and research programme being carried out by NDRI on
Gangatiri, Sahiwal and Gir cows, the Department submitted as under:—
"ICAR-NDRI is pursing research programmes on conservation and
genetic improvement of milch animals through identification and
dissemination of superior germplasm of cattle viz., Sahiwal, Gir and
Tharparkar under the programme:
a. Genetic diversity and evaluation of Gir and Tharparkar Cattle.
b. AICRP Project on Cattle-Sahiwal cattle-Germplasm Unit (NDRI,
Karnal).
Quality germplasm of elite animals (Tharparkar, Sahiwal, Gir) is being
multiplied and supplied to the farmers and development agencies for
improving the milk production potential of livestock throughout the
country.
During last one and half decades of Deoni rearing at the NDRI-SRS.
The institute has provided support to farmers by providing better
germplasm through AI and distribution of animals through Goshalas,
Government and University Farms as well as Semen stations and
NGOs."
(v) Descript and Non-descript Cattle
2.9. When asked to furnish a detailed note on differentiation between
Descript, Non-descript, Pure Breed, Graded Breed and Draft Breeds of
indigenous cattle and steps undertaken by NDRI for identification and
cross breeding of non-descript cattle, the Department has submitted as
follows:—
"Out of the total cattle population of the country, if a group of cattle
in a location is having phenotypic/morphological similarities then the
production and reproduction traits are studied in such population.

25
These are defined as Descriptive breeds. Based on the production
parameters as well as draught ability descriptive breeds are classified
in to Milch breed (above 1500 kg milk production per lactation), dual
purpose breed (1000-1500 kg. milk per lactation and also used for
draught purpose like ploughing, carting and other agricultural
operations), and draught / draft breeds (primarily used for draft purpose
and milk yield is less than 1000 kg per lactation). At present there are
42 pure indigenous cattle breeds (descriptive) registered by the ICAR/
DAHDF.
When a pure descript breed is used to upgrade the local cattle
population, the progeny are described as graded population of that
breed (breed used in genetic upgradation). At present 40.7% of the
indigenous cattle population in the country has been characterized as
descriptive breeds and ICAR-NBAGR, Karnal has been assigned the
responsibility to characterize existing non-descript population through
research and survey for unique attributes / morphology, and can be
registered as descriptive breed, if found to be distinct and uniform
characteristics. This is a continuous process till the existing cattle
populations are classified in to descriptive breeds.
NDRI has not done any work related cross breeding of non-descript
cattle. However, under AICRP on Cattle breeding, ICAR-NDRI was
involved in crossbreeding program wherein two strains of cattle were
evolved namely, Karan Fries and Karan Swiss using local cattle breeds
Tharparkar and Sahiwal, respectively."
2.10 On being enquired about study conducted by NDRI regarding
production of milk and other health benefits of milk of indigenous breeds
of cattle in the Country, the Department submitted as follows:–
"Following three projects on health benefits of milk of indigenous
breeds of cattle are in Progress:
• Protein profiling of milk from native indigenous breeds (cow
and buffalo) in relation to their bioactive potential.
• Breed specific immunomodulatory and anti-inflammatory effect
of milk in experimental rat model is under process.
• Elucidation of physico-chemical quality and nutraceutical
properties of select indigenous cattle milk and ghee.

26
2.11 On the query regarding the cost of production of one litre of
milk produced by crossbred and native breeds, the representatives submitted
as follows:—
"The cost of milk production varies across regions, animals and the
seasons. The cost also differs based on feeding practices (stall feeding
or grazing). Nevertheless, on the basis of some studies conducted at
NDRI, following may be stated:—
(i) For the year 2017-18, the average cost of milk production from
a crossbred cow was about Rs 25.08 per litre which varied
from Rs 18.36 per litre in Odisha to Rs 27.66 per litre in
Jharkhand.
(ii) Similarly, for the Indigenous breeds/Local cow, the average cost
of milk production was Rs 29.48 per litre which varied from
Rs. 26.05 per litre in Odisha to Rs 33.50 per litre in Haryana.
(vi) T echnology transfer and Dissemination of Information
2.12 When asked about the number of products/processes developed
by the ICAR-NDRI, Karnal commercialized and revenue so earned by the
Institute during the last five years, the Department stated as follows:–
"NDRI commercialized 79 numbers of dairy products, processes
developed by the Institute during the last five years. The details of
commercialized technologies alongwith revenue earned by the Institute
are given at Annexure-I."
2.13 Further, the Committee also enquired about the procedure for
dissemination of new research technologies to the farmers, entrepreneurs
and industry and any impact assessment study been conducted by ICAR-
NDRI, Karnal for adoption of these technologies, the Department it its
reply submitted as follows:—
"For the new technology developed at the Institute, following procedure
is adopted to transfer it to Industries:
The inventor/scientist who has developed the new technology contacts
the Institute Technology Management Unit (ITMU) and discloses the
features of the technology in Technology Disclosure Form (TDF)

27
along with validation data (if any).The Inventor/Scientist is invited to
present his/her technology as an agenda before the Institute Technology
Management Committee (ITMC). ITMC is chaired by Director of the
Institute and has internal members and one external member. After
due deliberation in the committee, the technology is included in the
NDRI list of technologies and then put on NDRI website for wide
publicity. In the ITMC meeting the price is also finalized. Inventor is
also asked to prepare promotional literature. Technology is also
demonstrated during NDRI-Industry Meet to the prospective buyer.
The interested buyer of the technology approaches the ITMU and
technology is licensed to the buyer on commercial basis after signing
of License agreement. This is followed by transfer of know-how and
training.
From September 2018, all the NDRI technologies are licensed by
Agroinnovate India Ltd. New Delhi.
For the new technology developed at the Institute, following procedure
is adopted to transfer it to the Farmers:
The technologies and package of practices in the institute after its
validation at field level, demonstrated to farmers through institute
extension activities like Farmers Farm School, Dairy Education at
Farmers Doors, Kisan Sangoshthies, Dairy Mela, Exhibitions and
training conducted by the Institute for the Farmers.These technologies
also disseminated through KVK, Farmer First Project, AICRP on Cattle
and Network projects on Buffalo.
The Institute is regularly carrying out impact assessment studies for
ex-post and ex-ante evaluation of various technologies, programs and
institutional arrangements. Presently, a ICAR-Network project is ongoing
for Value Chain analysis of Dairy Start-ups supported by TBI/BPD
unit of NDRI. The project will also bring about the impact of
technologies disseminated by NDRI to the dairy entrepreneurs engaged
in both, production and processing of milk."
(vii) Milk Adulteration Test Kits developed by NDRI
2.14. When asked about steps undertaken by the Institute towards
development and commercialization of small and user-friendly milk

28
adulteration test kits, the Department stated as under:—
"NDRI is working proactively for developing various analytical
techniques and simpler methodology for the detection of adulteration
in milk and milk products. Over the last few years, NDRI has made
significant contribution in the development of rapid tests for detection
of common adulterants in milk.
i. A kit developed in the Division of Dairy Chemistry for the
detection of various adulterants in milk is in high demand among
dairy professionals and public analysts across the country. The
kit contains reagents for detection of 12 adulterants in milk viz.,
neutralizers, urea, pond water, starch, sugar, glucose,
maltodextrin, salt, formalin, ammonium compounds, hydrogen
peroxide, hydrogenated vegetable oil, etc.
ii. Seven different paper based strip methods have been developed
for the rapid detection of neutralizers, urea, glucose, hydrogen
peroxide, maltodextrin and sucrose in milk using the concept of
dry chemistry. These strip based method involves dipping the
strip in milk sample followed by visualization of colour. The
colour of the strip changes in the presence of adulterant (Patent
application No. 3472/DEL/2013; 2097/DEL/2014; 201811030055/
2018). The strip based tests have been validated at third party
laboratory as well under filed conditions. The sensitivity of the
strips has been established and limit of detection of the developed
strip in milk was 0.03% for neutralizers; 0.08% for urea (total
urea); 0.04% for glucose; 0.001% for H
2O2, 0.15% for
maltodextrin, 0.1% for sucrose and 0.2% for salt. The developed
strips were easy to use and require just one step wherein either
they are dipped in milk sample or a drop of milk sample is
applied to the prepared strip followed by visualization of change
in colour. In all cases, sensitivity of the prepared strips was
found better than the existing wet chemistry based tests. The
shelf-life of strips is 8 months at room temperature for neutralizer,
4 months at refrigeration temperature for urea, 2 months for
hydrogen peroxide, glucose, maltodextrin and sucrose. The
technology of strip based tests has been transferred to twenty
five leading dairy industries of the country and entrepreneurs.''

29
2.15. Moreover, when the Committee wanted to know the cost of
adulteration test kits, the Department informed:–
The details of rates of Milk adulteration test kits developed by the
Institute are given as Annexure-II.
(viii) Forage Research
2.16 When asked to furnish a detailed note on forage research
undertaken by NDRI during the last five years, the Department submitted
reply as follows:–
"During the period of preceding five years, the outcome of the forage
research undertaken in the institute are summarized below:–
i. Sowing at 21st October to 10th November window is ideal time
for dual purpose barley for production of higher green fodder
as well as grain yield.
ii. The optimum green fodder yield was obtained while harvesting
crop at 65 days.
iii. Standardized Proper Plant Density and Fertility Levels of Fodder
Maize to Achieve Good Tonnage with Better Quality- Plant density
(60 kg/ha seed rate) and fertility level (125% RDF i.e 150 kg.
N and 75 kg. P
2O5 per ha) should be used for obtaining maximum
green fodder yield of good quality.
iv. Optimized Dose, Time and Method of Zinc Application in Fodder
Maize for Higher Productivity and Quality. The highest green
fodder yield, dry matter yield and zinc concentration of maize
was obtained with soil application ZnSO
4 at 20 kg./ha followed
by 10 kg./ha ZnSO 4 + 0.5% foliar spray at 30 days and 0.5%
foliar sprays at 30 and 45 days. Suitable QPM and Forage
Cultivars Identified for Getting Maize Fodder during Winter Lean
Period– Sowing of fodder/QPM maize up to 5th September can
be done as there was no significant reduction in the fodder
yield. African Tall gave maximum yield with no significant
differences between the J-1006, HQPM-1 and HQPM-4 cultivars.
v. Among eight varieties; MP Chari, PC-615-local check, CSV
30F, CSV20, CSV 27, CSV 21F, UPMC 503, CSV 15 Highest

30
green fodder yield and protein percentage were obtained from
the variety UPMC 503.
vi. Out of four Nutrient Management (Control, 150:80:40; 100:60:30;
50:40:20 N:P:K kg./ha) 150N: 80P: 40K gave maximum green
fodder yield.
vii. Among the nitrogen levels increasing nitrogen levels up to 100%
with Azotobactor gave significant higher baby corn as well as
fodder yield.
viii. The highest economic return was found in Zero tillage followed
by RB and lowest in conventional tillage.
ix. The green fodder yield and net returns were obtained highest in
100% Rye Grass + 25% berseem followed by 75% berseem +
25% rye grass. The protein percentage was highest in 75%
berseem + 25% rye grass.
x. Climate resilience of 3 popularly used perennial grasses viz.,
Hybrid Napier, Guinea and Para and, seasonal grasses viz., Maize
and Jowar were evaluated for dry matter yield (DMY) and
macro nutrients with relation to soil fertility and weather forcing
parameters. Hybrid Napier DMY (Coefficient of variation
12-18%) and nutritive value is more resilient for heat index in
comparison to Para and Guinea (CV 25-30%) and Hybrid Napier
is recommended in light of climate resilience and fodder demand
in the country.
xi. Backyard Azolla production method have been standardized and
several on farm as well as off farm training & demonstrations
have been conducted. The detailed comparative chemical
composition and in vitro parameters of Azolla microphylla have
been evaluated. A series of in vivo feeding trials have been
conducted on effect of supplementation of Azolla microphylla in
Jersey crossbred calves, heifers, lactating animals and Black
Bengal goats on intake, digestibility of nutrients, production
performance, blood parameters and economics of feeding.
xii. Tree leaves from different region of the North-east were collected
and analsed for their nutritive value. Baggar (Berberis aristata)

31
and Ngek sing (Symplocos crataegoides) tree leaves from
Arunachal Pradesh, Parari (Schefflera wallichiana) and Sohiong
(Prunus nepalensis) tree leaves from Meghalaya and Glyricidia
(Glyricidia maculata) and Politamother (Erythrina variegata) tree
leaves from Tripura were the best tree fodder for feeding to the
livestock among the tested tree leaves."
(ix) Research Co-operation and Collaboration
2.17 During the course of examination, when the Committee enquired
about policy of ICAR in general and ICAR-NDRI in particular for Research
Cooperation and Coordination with National and International Research
Institutes, State Governments and Industrial sector, the Department
submitted:–
"The ICAR-NDRI follows the policies laid by ICAR in this regard.
The scientist of the institute are encouraged to compete for such
grants in the thrust area of the institute:
i. For National Cooperation and Coordination each project is
critically evaluated at divisional level of the concerned scientist
and at Joint Director (Research) Level before forwarding to the
funding agency.
ii. For International Cooperation and Coordination, proposals after
critical evaluation at the institute level are submitted to the DARE
for approval through respective SMD.
iii. For industrial sector Cooperation and Coordination, the project
proposals are evaluated as per council Guidelines (IPTM cell of
ICAR)."
2.18 Moreover, when asked to provide details of National and
International Linkages by ICAR-NDRI, the department stated:–
"A total of 87 inter-institutional/collaborative projects including
10 international and 77 national collaborative projects were implemented.
The details are given as Annexure-III."
2.19 In a reply submitted regarding steps undertaken by ICAR-NDRI,
Karnal for securing collaboration with the industries for research and

32
development and funds generated from such collaboration, the Department
submitted as under–
"ICAR-NDRI, Karnal actively works with industry in terms of research
and development on payment basis. As per the guidelines formulated
by ICAR, New Delhi, the contract research projects were funded by
the collaborating agency/industry and required research work was
carried out by concern project team of NDRI, Karnal. The brief
compiled information has been presented herewith:
Y ear No. of Contract research Amount generated
projects
2014-15 3 12,86,359
2015-16 5 45,15,726
2016-17 3 32,84,364
2017-18 3 22,43,675
2018-19 1 11,91,210
Total 15 1,19,51,334
List of Contract-Consultancy Projects for the Last Five Years
Sl. No. Title Year
1. Effects of calcium propionate, mycotoxin binder and 2015
CLA on milk yield, its composition and nutrient
digestibility in Murrah buffalo.
2. Assessment of Sugargraze crop silage in terms of 2015
quality and nutritive value.
3. Effects of calcium propionate, mycotoxin binder and 2015
CLA on milk yield, its composition and nutrient
digestibility in Murrah buffalo.
4. Effect of supplementation of KARYOLACTTM on the 2016
milk yield and fat content in crossbred cows.
5. Capacity building for project team and farm based 2016
advisory services in the area of improved dairy.

33
Sl. No. Title Year
farming practices in Ludhiana & Moga district of
Punjab: An Action Research.
6. Impact of Dairy ba sed livelihood Programme in 2016
Rajasthan funded under Mahila Kisan Shashaktikaran
Pariyojana.
7. Efficacy of post milking teat dip on milk somatic 2016
cell count and incidence of mastitis in dairy cattle.
8. Evaluation and Selection of corn hybrids for feed 2016
nutritional quality.
9. Feeding study on silage performance for digestibility , 2016
milk yield an compositions.
10. Development of can washer sui table for smal l/medium 2016
chilling centre.
11. Development of oat fortified juices. 2017
12. Training programme on milk and milk products 2017
processing for value addition.
13. Effect of supplementation of graded levels of sodium 2017
sesqui-carbonate on productive performance of
lactating animals.
14. Evaluation of Chymax-M based Paneer Analogue 2017
Preparation and its shelf-life Study.
15. Influence of different sources of zinc supplementation 2018
on its bioavailability in lactating cattle.
16. To evaluate Nutrifeed, Makhan Grass,  BMR  Rocket, 2018
Mega sweet, Jumbo gold and  sugargraze  as  green
fodder for yield, insect infestation on crop, palatability,
productive and  reproductive  performance  of  dairy
animals over a range  of  production environments in
Karnal (Haryanas).

34
Sl. No. Title Year
17. Comparative evaluation of De Potash Vinasses and 2018
cane sugar molasses as cattle feed pellet binder and
its effect on performance in lactating cows.
18. Evaluation of orafti® GR and orafti ftx for partial 2018
fat replacement in dahi (curd) and lassi for texture,
mouthfeel and shelf stability.
19. Evaluation of Two Rice Based Distillery By-products 2016-
Feeding on Growth and Lactation Performance in 2017
Crossbred Cattle.
20. Evaluation of the effect of the Keenam Mech fiber 2016-
system on the lactation performance of crossbred 2017
cattle.

35
CHAPTER III
TRAINING AND EXTENSION PROGRAMMES
3.1 Regarding initiatives undertaken by NDRI to identify and solve
the problems faced by the farmers in dairy sector and help the farmers
through training, outreach programmes, the Department stated that:–
"Field visits are organized by scientists and Staff of Extension Division
and KVK to identify problem being faced by farmers in dairying and
thereafter off campus training programmes are organized in the villages
of Karnal district. Field days, melas and farmers scientist interfaces
are also organized to identify the problems faced by farmers in dairy
and to solve them. Farmers and entrepreneurs can also join any of the
training programmes being organized by KVK to get solution to the
problems being faced by them in dairy sector. ICAR-NDRI is
implementing the 'Mera Gaon Mera Gourav' programme in more than
150 villages. All the scientists are actively involved in implementation
of this programme."
3.2 When asked to furnish details of allocation of funds, expenditure
and utilization on extension programmes by the Institute during the last five
years, the Department submitted that:–
"No. Specific funds are allotted by ICAR for dairy extension
Programme, but the requirement are being met out of the institute
funds allocated under different heads. However, the fund allocated
under publicity head are received and utilized in conducting Dairy
Melas, workshops, farmer-scientists interface, exhibitions and
publication of extension litreture.
Required details are as under:–
Amount (in Rs.)
Sl. Year ICAR-NDRI, Karnal (including SRS of B'lore)
No. Total Alloc. Total Exp.
1   2 3 4
1. 2013-14 690000 681576
2. 2014-15 1007000 926727

36
1   2 3 4
3. 2015-16 303000 251426
4. 2016-17 720000 602947
5. 2017-18 1200000 1 152570
Total 3920000 3615246
3.3 On being asked regarding steps undertaken by the Institute for
skill development of farmers and entrepreneurs engaged in dairy industry
and furnish details of training programmes (both long term and short term)
organized by the ICAR-NDRI, Karnal during the last five years, the
Department submitted as follows:–
"The different departments/ Sections of the Institute organized trainings
for skill development of farmers and entrepreneurs engaged in dairy
industry.
BPD Unit of NDRI, Karnal has been working on the skill development
of rural youth and farmers through the training programmes organized
at Karnal, Bengaluru, Kalyani, Lalukheri (UP) and Piprakothi (Bihar)
through Unnat Bharat Abhiyan and other modes. NDRI also provides
training to the farmers through ATMA depending on the requirement.
The BPD Unit provides trainings for short-terms ranging from 6-10
days. However, farmers producers' organization and self-help group
are trained for more than 2 months or even more time if new products
are to be launched. The brief data on Unnat Bharat Abhiyan trainings
have been given below:
Y ear No. of trainings No. of participants
2014-15 1 10
2015-16 2 30
2016-17 1 25
2017-18 1 30
2018-19 - -
Total 5 95

37
Apart from the Unnat Bharat Abhiyan training, we also provide trainings
to the farmers at Piprakothi, Motihari, Bihar centre since 2017. We
have provided 10 such trainings till date to 393 rural youth and
farmers in the field of dairy farming, dairy processing and allied
disciplines. The farmers are selected based on first-come-first-serve.
KVK organizes short term training programmes and exposure visits of
farmers and entrepreneurs for skill development in dairy sector. The
following on campus training programmes organized by KVK in dairying
during the last five years are given below:
Trainings 2013-14 2014-15 2015-16 2016-17 2017-18
Milk Processing 11 6687
(4-5 days)
Scientific Dairy 75 53 65 30 30
Farming (3-5 days)
Exposure visits 45 55 87 97 157
(1-3 days)
The details of training programme organized by NDRI are given at
Annexure-IV ."
3.4 Further when asked regarding criteria for selection of farmers
for long-term and short-term training programmes conducted by the Institute
or its centres, the department stated as follows:–
"For selection of trainees for long term training programme on 'Artificial
Insemination and Veterinary first aid' the following criteria has been
followed:
i. The trainee must be educated at-least up to Secondary level.
ii. The trainees must be nominated by Milk Cooperative Union,
Government Institution, KVK, State Government etc.
For selection of trainees for short term training programme on 'Scientific
Dairy Farming' and 'Scientific Goat Farming' the following criteria
has been followed:
i. The trainee must be literate to comprehend the subject matter.

38
ii. The farmers should be interested to take training.
iii. Any farmer either by self application or by nomination through
Milk Cooperative Union, Government Institution, KVK, State
Government etc. are selected for training.
For selection of trainees for short term training programme on 'Scientific
Dairy Farming for Tribal Unemployed Youth' and 'Scientific Goat
Farming for Tribal Unemployed Youth' the following criteria has been
followed:
i. The trainee must be literate to comprehend the subject matter.
ii. The trainee should belong to Scheduled Tribe Community.
iii. The t ribal farmers should be interested to take training.
iv. Any Tribal farmer either by self application or by nomination
through Milk Cooperative Union, Government Institution, KVK,
State Government, NGO etc. are selected for training.
For selection of trainees for EDP training programme on 'Commercial
Dairy Farming' and 'Dairy processing' the following criteria have been
followed:
The trainee must be educated at-least up to Secondary level,
Also nominees are recommended by the respective State
Government based on the need of coordinating agency.
3.5 During the course of examination when queried about steps
undertaken by the institute to strengthen the outreach programmes and
how outreach programmes would help in augmenting farmers income, the
Department in its reply submitted as follows:–
(i) "Under different Projects, the following outreach programmes
are implemented:
a. Development of "on farm" test kits for rapid detection of
antibiotics, pesticides and pathogenic bacteria in milk
ICAR-NDRI has developed novel technologies for rapid
detection of pesticides, antibiotics and pathogenic bacteria
in milk. These kits are available at ICAR-NDRI, Karnal and

39
being used under field conditions for initial screening of
these contaminants in the country by various stakeholders
including farmers. Many of the entrepreneurs are using
strip based pesticide kit developed under ICAR funded
NAE project for assessing the products to be organic in
nature and in turn is improving the economic status of the
end users including the farmers. Further, NDRI is supplying
strip based test for antibiotic residues developed under
ICAR funded Outreach project, to various stakeholders in
dairy supply chain and is helping in rapid detection of
antibiotics which in turn is helping in mitigating the uses
of antibiotic under field and preventing the development of
antimicrobial resistance in food pathogens and hence
contributing in ensuring the health of human beings (work
carried out under ICAR-ILRI, Project). Further, these kits
are also being used by the different NABL accredited labs
for regulatory compliance of pesticide/antibiotic residues in
milk which again ensure the public health by providing
safe milk to the end users. Using these kits, ICAR-NDRI,
Karnal has generated scientific data on antibiotic/pesticide
presence in milk and other commodities. This data is helping
the regulatory agencies in setting the National Standards
for regulatory compliance of milk for these contaminants
and hence helping in providing the quality and safe food to
the consumers. The kits developed for detection of pathogen
(Listeria monocytogenes, E. coli and Enterococci) is helping
the dairy farms in conducting risk assessment of disease
of dairy animals in India. The rapid kits for pesticide,
antibiotic and pathogens have been demonstrated to farmers
in a very simple manner by distributing leaflets in local
language through Dairy Mela, publication in National Hindi
newspaper, radio talk, and other extension activities like
Mera Gaon Mera Gaurav and group discussion with
farmers, Veterinary officers and NGOs etc.
b. ICAR-NDRI, through all the three research stations has
adopted villages where the artificial insemination service,
supply of mineral mixture for improving the reproduction

40
of dairy animals, veterinary services, advisory services on
scientific management and breeding of dairy animals,
training of farmers are carried out regularly.
c. The KVKs of ICAR-NDRI are actively participating in
upliftment of small dairy and contributing significantly
towards the doubling of the farmers' income.
d. Under Tribal Sub-Plan (TSP), support has been provided
to the farmers in the form of superior live animals, feed
supplements and area specific modern animal husbandry
practices.
A new KVK was initiated on 19/1/17 at ERS campus for
Nadia distt. (addl.). A total of 17 training courses are
conducted as on-campus training round the year whereas
19 courses are conducted as off-campus training through
out the year. A total of 1128 trainee Days have been covered.
The Institute has established two outreach centres
(Lalukheri, UP and Motihari, Bihar) for strengthening the
outreach programme of the Institute. Besides this, we are
running following programme in the vicinity of the Institute:
a. Farmers Farm School.
b. Dairy Education at Farmers Door.
c. Mera Gaon Mera Gaurav.
d. Fertility and veterinary aid camps.
e. Women empowerment programme.
f. Farmers FIRST programme.
g. NDRI Messaging service portal.
3.6 When the Committee desired to know the number of villages
adopted by NDRI during last five years, the Department submitted as
under:–
(i) "Sixty four villages are under the extension programme of the
institute.

41
As per the requirement of the specific programme more number
of villages can be adopted.
(ii) More than 150 villages are adopted under MGMG Programme.
(iii) KVK is working in whole of Karnal district for demonstration
and organizing its activities."
3.7 In this connection when further asked whether any study has
been conducted by the Institute to assess the impact of dairy extension
programmes in the adopted villages, the Department in its reply stated as
given below:–
"Yes, ICAR-NDRI has conducted impact studies in the adopted villages
and the major findings were:
(i) The productive and reproductive parameters of dairy animals
have improved as compared to non-adopted villages due to the
NDRI interventions.
(ii) The animal morbidity and calf mortality has decreased as
compared to non-adopted villages.
(iii) There was significant difference in knowledge (73.095 vs 67.041)
and adoption (69.50 vs 64.67) of IDFP between adopted villages
and non-adopted villages, respectively."
3.8 During the course of evidence, when the Committee also wanted
to know about the number of farmers visited NDRI during last three years
(2015-16 to 2017-18) and how many farmers were trained through ATMA,
the representatives submitted as given below:–
"A total number of 19997 farmers visited NDRI during last three
years. KVK of the Institute trained 42 farmers through ATMA during
the last three years."
3.9 During the course of examination when asked to furnish a note
on contribution of the Institute towards improved dairy farming practices
in the country and whether any study on impact of improved dairy farming
practices on the farmers has been conducted during last five years, the
Department in its reply submitted as under:–
"The main extension programme of the institute such as Dairy Mela
and demonstrations, field days, Research-Extension-Industry-Farmer

42
Interface, etc. are being organized by the division to provide an
opportunity for the convergence of all stakeholders working together
for dairy development. Institute also organizes technology transfer
programme, infertility and veterinary aid camps, Kisan Sanghosthi and
field workshops at the adopted villages regularly. These activities
strengthen the linkages with end users, helps in understanding the
problems of farmers and better dissemination of technologies as well
as easy availability of feedback from the farmers.
The following technologies developed by the Institute have been assessed
and are being transferred to the farmers:—
i. 'Kalmin' mineral mixture (Dairy Extension Division, KVK, Animal
Nutrition)
ii. Complete feed preparation (Dairy Extension Division, KVK,
Animal Nutrition)
iii. Balance rationing (Dairy Extension Division, KVK, Animal
Nutrition)
iv. Urea molasses mineral block making by hand operated machine.
v. Feeding of bypass protein or mustard oil (Dairy Extension
Division)
vi. Fodder crop (Bajra napier grass) (Dairy Extension Division,
KVK)
vii. Long duration Berseem variety (BL42) (Dairy Extension Division,
KVK)
viii. Chaff cutter with safety lock (Blade Guard, Flywheel Lock,
Warning Roller)
ix. Azolla production as animal feed (ERS of NDRI)
x. Silage making in bags (KVK, Animal Nutrition)
xi. Artificial insemination in goats (KVK)
xii. California Mastitis Kit (KVK)
xiii. Introducing milking stool (KVK)

43
xiv. Serrated Sickle with comfortable handle (CIAE, Bhopal tool)
xv. Head load manager (KVK)
xvi. Dung scraper (KVK)
xvii. Straw Hoe (KVK)
xviii. Animal washing brush (KVK)
xix. Paddy variety: Pusa 2511 (Field trial of IARI Variety)
xx. Paddy variety: Pusa 1121 (Field trial of IARI Variety)
xxi. Paddy variety: Pusa 1509 (Field trial of IARI Variety)
xxii. Wheat variety: HD-2967 (Field trial of DWR Variety)
xxiii. Wheat variety: HD-3086 (Field trial of DWR Variety)
xxiv. Tomato variety: Pusa Rohini (Field trial of IARI Variety)
xxv. Zero tillage: for conservation of resources
xxvi. Happy Seeder for wheat sowing for conservation (Krishi
Vigyan Kendra)
xxvii.Direct Seeded Rice for conservation of resource.
xxviii. Control of Ecto and Endo parasites for animal health management.
xxix. Induced breeding for fish seed production.
xxx. Use of aerators in fish ponds to maintain oxygen level.
xxxi. Use of oxalic acid to control mites in bee hives.
xxxii.Use of bio-fertilizers for sustainable crop production.
Yes, we have conducted impact studies in the adopted villages and the
major findings were:
(i) The productive and reproductive parameters of dairy animals
have improved as compared to non-adopted villages due to the
NDRI interventions.
(ii) The animal morbidity and calf mortality has decreased as
compared to non-adopted villages.

44
(iii) About 77 per cent farmers were satisfied with extension services
in comparison to 52 per cent farmers of non-adopted villages.
(iv) There was significant difference in knowledge (73.095 vs 67.041)
and adoption (69.50 vs 64.67) of IDFP between adopted villages
and non-adopted villages, respectively.
3.10. On the query regarding steps undertaken by NDRI towards
empowerment of rural women, tribals and other disadvantaged classes of
society through improved dairy practices, the Department in its reply stated
as under:–
"Women Empowerment Lab was established in Dairy Extension
Division in 2013 for capacity building of different Self Help Groups
of NDRI, DRDA and NGOs. This Lab was established with the
objective to create awareness and impart skill in the field of dairy
processing and fruit and vegetable preservation and also mobilize
these groups to take up vocation in these areas. Regular women
empowerment trainings and campaigns through this Women
Empowerment Laboratory were organized to create awareness among
rural farm women. One hundred eighty six (186) women empowerment
trainings and campaigns were organized with the objective to create
awareness in the field of dairying impart skill in these areas so that
farm women could generate more income from dairying and maintain
healthy atmosphere in their respective family. By these programmes,
two thousand eight hundred twenty five (2825) farm women were
trained and benefited of these programme within reporting period.
For development of Tribal population following camps have been
organized in the tribal areas:–
Sl. No.  Date Place
1. 29.03.14 Ajodhya Hills, Purulia Health & Vaccination Camp.
2. 08.08.14 Dakshin Bijoynagar (Adibashipara) Animal Health Camp.
3. 09.09.14 Ajodhya Hills, Purulia Health & Vaccination Camp.
4. 17.11.14 Totopara-Alipurduar-Jalpaiguri Vaccination Camp.
5. 18.11.14 Uttarballaguri-Madarighat-Binpur-Jalpaiguri Vaccination
Camp.

45
Sl. No.  Date Place
 6. 05.12.14 Satyanarayanpur Bali-II Vaccination & Deworming Camp.
 7. 06.12.14 Adibashipara Bijoynagar Balli-II Vaccination & Deworming
Camp-cum-Scientist Farmers Interaction.
 8. 04.02.15 Ajodhya Hills, Chatni Purulia Vaccination & Deworming
Camp.
 9. 29.08.15 Ghoshaldanga, Birbhum Anoestrous & Vaccination &
Deworming Camp.
10. 16.10.15 Ajodhya Hills, Purulia Vaccination & Deworming Camp.
11. 12.01.16 Adibashipara Bijoynagar Balli-II Anoestrous & Vaccination
& Deworming Camp.
12. 13.01.16 Adibashipara Bali-II Vaccination & Deworming Camp.
13. 13.01.16 Ballalguri Animal Health & Vaccination Camp.
14. 28.01.16 Shirshi Jhargram Veterinary Health & Vaccination Camp.
15. 01.03.16 Ajodhya Hills, Purulia Veterinary Health & Vaccination
Camp.
16. 08.06.16 Ghoshaldanga, Birbhum.
17. 02.09.16 Ajodhya Hills, Majhidi Village Primary School Ground.
18. 08.11.16 Binpur-II Block, Harda, G .P . West Midnapur Animal Health/
Vaccination Camp.
19. 24.01.17 Bamankhali, Block- Sagar Farmer's Awareness Programme
& Health Camp.
20. 28.01.17 Ghoshal Danga Krishi- Cum-Dairy Mela & Technology
Demonstration.
21. 09.02.17 Shirshi Veterinary Health Camp & Vaccination Camp.
22. 22.09.17 Lahata, Luvpur, Birbhum Anoestrous Deworming Camp.
23. 23.09.17 Ghoshaldanga Deworming & Fodder Demonstration
Camp.

46
Sl. No.  Date Place
24. 16.10.17 Ghoshaldanga, Birbhum. Veterinary Health & Vaccination
Camp.
25. 20.12.17 Shirshi, Binpur-2. Jhargram. Shirshi Farmer's Club
Vaccination & Deworming, Anoestrous Camp.
26. 10.07.18 Sarengasuli, Health Camp.
27. 24.07.18 Bolpur Manab Jamin South Jambuni, Bolpur, Birbhum,
Pin.-731 204 Health & Vaccination Camp.
28. 09.08.18 Ajodhya Hills , Purulia Animal Health & Vaccination Camp.
29. 17.08.18 Manashadip, Adibashipara, Gangasagar Animal Health &
Vaccination Camp.
30. 10.10.18 Farmer's Scientist Interaction & input Distribution Camp
at Lummyhri Meghalaya.
KVK is also regularly organizing on and off campus training
programmes on value addition of fruits, vegetables and milk for rural
women. Rural women are also given demonstrations on nutrition,
gardening apart from stitching and tailoring.

47
CHAPTER IV
INFRASTRUCTURE AND HUMAN RESOURCE
4.1 During the course of evidence, the representatives of the
Department while elaborating about NDRI, Karnal submitted as under:–
"We have been participating in matters related to education for the last
96 years. We provide human resource for the country and we have
given around more than 6000 students to various institutions of the
country during previous years. All the leading dairy industries in the
country, as on date, have our students in leadership position. We
provide cluster of students to all 75 dairy universities. We also have
capacity building programmes. We help the industry, train university
teachers and train farmers. We have developed a technolgy in the last
9-10 years which we call Technology Business Incubation in which
we organise two trainings continuously in each month."
4.2 On being asked whether NDRI is able to cater to the needs of
research and dissemination of outcome of research in dairy sector for the
country and whether ICAR has any proposal for expansion of NDRI or
establishment of new institute/centres in dairy sector, the representatives
submitted as given below:–
"NDRI is able to cater to the needs of research and dissemination of
outcomes of the research in dairy sector for the country through
trainings, campaigns, Kisan Sangoshthies, dairy field demonstrations
etc. For dissemination of farmer's friendly technologies, NDRI has
established Dairy Vikas Kendra at KVK, Piprakothi, East Champaran
(Bihar) in the premises of Dr. Rajendra Prasad Central Agriculture
University, Pusa. The Centre was inauguratd by the Hon'ble Union
Minister for Agriculture and Farmers Welfare, Sh. Radha Mohan Singh
Ji on 10th July, 2016, NDRI has also started a Model Dairy Centre
of Laluhkeri in Muzaffarnagar, Uttar Pradesh under the project
approved by ICAR, New Delhi vide letter No. 2-2/02-ASR-III dated
25.09.2002. The basic facilities have been created for empowering
youth and women involved in dairy sector. At present ICAR-NDRI
does not have any proposal for the new centre."

48
4.3 When asked regarding steps undertaken by ICAR/NDRI to
strengthen the regional centers of the institute, the Department stated as
follows:–
"Regional Stations of NDRI are endowed with necessary infrastructure
in terms of qualified staff, farmland, dairy herd, laboratories, library,
hostel facilities etc. The adequate funds provisions are kept for smooth
function of the centres in SFC of the Institute. The problems faced
by the centres are immediately addressed by the Institute on priority.
The Southern Regional Station, Bengaluru has good laboratory and
infrastructural facilities for carrying out research work on animal
genetics and breeding, dairy animal production and reproduction,
screening of microbes, chemical and microbiological analyses of dairy
products, testing of dairy equipments, manufacturing of various dairy
products, etc. The research, training and transfer of technology
programmes at the station are carried out through different sections.
To cater the needs of the students, the library is stocked with books,
journals, theses and reprints. Hostel and guest house facilities are also
existed at the campus for students and visitors.
The course work for Ph.D. (Dairy Engg.), M.Tech (Dairy Engg.),
M.Tech (DT), and Diploma (DT) are being conducted at the Station.
The students in the disciplines of Dairy Technology, Dairy Chemistry,
Dairy Engineering, Animal Genetics & Breeding, Animal Nutrition,
Livestock Production & Management, Agricultural Economics and
Agricultural Extension Education are being guided for their Doctoral
and Masters' dissertation work.
Short term Training Programmes are being imparted in Dairy
Processing, Quality Assurance, Dairy Production and Extension for
the students, dairy farmers/entrepreneurs and personnel from
Co-operative Federations and Private Organisations. Besides, In-plant
training and In-lab training are provided to the UG and PG students
of other Colleges/Universities. PG students of other Universities are
also guided to carry out their Project Work.
The Eastern Regional Station, Kalyani is engaged to identify the major
constraints of dairy production in eastern and north eastern India and
to offer solutions through research and extension activities to these

49
problems. The research work undertaken at this centre is mainly
strategic and applied in nature and the thrust of research is to improve
the socio-economic condition of dairy farmers of this region. The
Eastern Campus has infrastructure facilities like Research Laboratories,
Cattle Herd, Fodder Farm, Library, Computer Section, Academic Cell,
Hostels and Guest House, Estate Section etc.
Keeping in view the enormous demand for milk in the eastern region,
low milk production potential of the native stock, shortage of feed
and fodder resources and diversified agro-climatic and socio-economic
conditions; this research station has a great role to play in the field
of dairy development in this region. The station is also carrying out
the extension activities under the Tribal Sub Plan (TSP) and North
Eastern Hill Region programmes for uplifting the socio economic
conditions of the tribal farmers."
4.4 During the course of evidence, the Committee also wanted to
know about the steps undertaken by the Institute for strengthening the
infrastructure facilities required for providing trainings on various aspects
of dairying at Eastern Campus of NDRI, Kalyani, the representatives stated
as given below:—
"The Eastern Campus of NDRI, Kalyani has good infrastructure
facilities required for providing trainings on various aspects of dairying.
The eastern campus provides trainings on Artificial Insemination and
Veterinary First Aids/Scientific Dairy Farming/Scientific Goat Farming
Scientific Poultry Farming/Fodder Production, Clean Milk Production
for improving the socio-economic condition of dairy farmers of eastern
part of the country. Besides this, Eastern Campus organizes
vaccinations cum deworming camps and scientists-farmers' interaction
sessions, awareness cum vaccination programme on foot and mouth
disease, dissemination of information through SMS portal and training
programmes in tribal villages under Tribal Sub Plan and North Eastern
Hill Programmes."
4.5 On being enquired about adequate scientific, technical and
administrative manpower in the Institute and steps taken for filling up of

existing vacancies and skill enhancement of existing scientists, the Department
submitted as given below:–
"NDRI has adequate sanctioned strength of Scientific, Technical and
Administrative manpower. The details of manpower of the Institute
are given below:
Sl. Class of Sanctioned In V acant Remarks
No. post posts position
1. Scientist 195 159 36 These posts are filled by the
ICAR/ASRB, New Delhi.
2. Technical 359 175 184 These posts are filled by the
ICAR/ASRB, New Delhi.
3. Administrative 165 124 41 These posts are filled by the
ICAR/ASRB, New Delhi.
Total 719 458 261
• The request for filling up of existing vacant positions has been
submitted to the Council for further necessary action.
• The scientists of the Institute have been deputed for availing
advance trainings at international and national laboratories for
skill enhancement.
4.6 Further, during the evidence when asked about hampering of
research work due to vacant posts of scientists, the representative replied
that:–
The 36 vacant posts shown of scientists mostly belong to senior
positions. They pertain to the level of Chief Scientists and senior
scientist. It has been advertised before as well. These vacancies have
been filled due to non-availability of suitable candidates. We had
submitted that it should be converted into entry level positions. The
ICAR is taking this into its cognizance. As far as technical staff are
concerned, its recruitment process has been completed vide entrance
examination in the year 2016-17.  I think around 70 posts in it will be
filled in few weeks. Its process is almost complete. During the process
we have always tried that work do not get suffered because of this.
We are managing our work with the young professionals and contractual
persons who have been appointed. The ICAR has completed the
processes and the vacancies will be filled up to some extent.
50

CHAPTER V
PLANNING FOR THE FUTURE
5.1 On being asked regarding preparation of Perspective and short
term plan for Research & Development as suggested by the NITI Aayog,
the Department submitted as follows:–
"ICAR- NDRI has prepared perspective and short term plan for
Research & Development as suggested by the NITI Aayog during the
formulation of EFC/SFC of the Institute for the period (2017-2020).
The details of these research programmes are given below:–
(i) Genetic Improvement of Milch Animals through Identification
and Dissemination of Superior Germplasm by Application of
Emerging Reproductive and Molecular Technologies.
(ii) De velopment of State-of-the-art Dairy Production Systems
using better Housing and Fertility Management Practices.
(iii) Raising Productivity of Dairy Animals through Improved
Feeding Strategies, Efficient Nutrient Utilization and Use of
Non-conventional Feed Resources.
(iv) Research on Nutraceuticals from Milk, Functional Foods with
Prebiotics, Probiotics, Micronutrients, and Other Bioactive
Compounds for Improved Human Health.
(v) Value Addition to Dairy Products through Application of
Emerging Technologies, Modeling Approaches, Process
Upgradation, Biotechnological Interventions, Neutraceutical
Enrichment, Mechanized Manufacturing & Novel Packaging
Systems.
(vi) Clean Milk Production with a Focus on Emerging Health
Concerns and Development of New Generation Tools for
Ensuring Quality Control through Application of Newer
Chemical and Biotechnological Concepts.
51

(vii) Promoting Dairy Enterprise through Transfer of Technologies,
Improved Farm Financing, Supply Chain Management, and
Better Market Access.
(viii) Improvement of Bovines of the Southern Region for Productive
and Reproductive Performance through Precision Management.
(ix) Strategic and Applied Research for Improvement of Production,
Management and Economic Aspects of Dairying and
Dissemination of High Quality Cattle Germplasm to the Farmers
in Eastern India.
(x) Upliftment of Socio-Economic Condition of Tribal People
through Integrated Livestock Farming in North Eastern Hill
Region/Eastern Part of India (TSP Programme).
(xi) Improving the Livelihood through Dairy Farming in North
Eastern Region of India (NEH) Programme."
5.2. Further, when asked whether any assessment of funds has been
made to achieve target set for the future—the representatives submitted as
under-
Approximate Year-wise Budget Requirements Proposed for NDRI and
its Regional Stations for the Period (2020-21 to 2024-25)
(Rs. in Lakhs)
Sl. Head 2020-21 2021-22 2022-23 2023-24 2024-25 T otal
No.
12 3 4 5 6 7 8
1. Grants for 1333.14 1536.14 1769.14 2040.14 2351.14 9029.70
Creation
of Capital
Assets
(CAPITAL)
2. Grant-In-Aid 00 00 00 00 00 00
Salary
(REVENUE)
3. Grant-In-Aid 3012.19 3465.19 3986.19 4586.19 5276.19 20325.95
General
(REVENUE)
52

12 3 4 5 6 7 8
Total 4345.33 5001.33 5755.33 6626.33 7627.33 29355.65
(Capital +
Revenue)
A . NEH
(a) Capital 4.97 5.97 6.97 7.97 9.97 35.85
(b) Revenue 45.68 52.68 60.68 70.68 81.68 311.40
Sub-Total 50.65 58.65 67.65 78.65 91.65 347.25
B. TSP
(a) Capital 0.50 0.50 0.50 0.50 0.50 2.50
(b) Revenue 3.64 4.64 5.64 6.64 7.64 28.20
Sub-Total 4.14 5.14 6.14 7.14 8.14 30.70
Grand Total 4400.12 5065.12 5829.12 6712.12 7727.12 29733.6
including
TSP &
NEH
Vision Document
5.3 When queried about preparedness of the Institute for Centenary
Celebration, the Department submitted as given below:–
"NDRI has already set the targets for the next six years to be achieved
for improving the lot of the dairy farmers and dairy sector. NDRI is
a prestigious institute catering to the research and Human Resource
needs of the dairy sector of the country. The demand for milk is
increasing day by day. Therefore, milk production has to be increased
to meet out the demand of the nation in coming years. The population
pressure and emerging global opportunities further necessitate that the
efforts for enhancing animal productivity and milk processing. To
address these issues the following goals have been set up and will be
completed before centenary celebrations:
(i) Genetic improvement of dairy animals through genomic
selection strategies, faster multiplications of germplasm, semen
sexing and strengthening of Institute's bull mother farm.
53

(ii) T echnologies for economic production of nutrient-balanced
ration for dairy animals to address the issue of feed and
fodder scarcity.
(iii) Development of new generation methods to assess quality and
safety of milk and milk products.
(iv) Development and validation of health promoting dairy foods to
address nutritional and health security issues.
(v) Linking rural youth, women and other target groups to markets
through skill and entrepreneurship development programmes.
(vi) Strengthening outreach programmes for doubling farmers'
income.
(vii) Strengthening HRD programme at the Institute with greater
focus on quality and employability together with establishment
of stronger international linkages.
(viii) Upliftment of socio-economic condition of tribal people through
integrated livestock farming in north eastern hill region/eastern
part of India (TSP programme).
(ix) Improving the livelihood through dairy farming in north eastern
region of India (NEH programme).
(x) The outcomes of these targets in terms of achievements would
be documented in different regional languages. The technologies
developed during this period would be extended to the dairy
stakeholders through outreach programmes and effective
extension activities of the Institute.
Apart from this following different activities will be organized during
the centenary Year (2022-23):–
(i) Documentation of 100 achievements of ICAR-NDRI (fulfilling
Nation's Dairy Dream since 1923).
(ii) Plant a Centennial Herbal Garden (Herbs used for animals).
(iii) Series of Centennial lectures in the field of dairy science and
technologies by inviting renowned experts from different
countries.
54

(iv) Articles in Newspaper regarding achievements of ICAR-NDRI.
(v) Interviews of former employees/students about their memories
regarding ICAR-NDRI (Videography).
(vi) Inviting renowned Alumni to share their experiences with
students and scientists.
(vii) Organization of series of Farmer-Scientist interaction meetings.
(viii) Renovation of Heritage Centenary building at NDRI-SRS."
55

PART II
OBSERV ATIONS/RECOMMENDA TIONS
Financial Performance
1. The Committee note that ICAR-NDRI is the only institute in
the country which conducts research for development of technologies
cutting across three areas of dairy science under one roof—production,
processing and management. It offers four tier academic programmes
for creating human resource for the Indian dairy industry and
R & D institution. The Institute ranks among the top dairy research
Institute of the world in the dairy sector. The Committee are satisfied
to note that the Institute has been able to expend almost 99% of the
total funds allocated during the last five fiscal years. The Committee
also note that during the last 3 fiscal years i.e. from 2013-14 to
2016-17, the actual revenue generated from internal resources was
Rs. 3419 lakhs only as against the target of Rs. 3826.56 lakhs. Though
no target for revenue generation was fixed for the Institute during
the year 2017-18, the total revenue generated during the year was
Rs. 960.46 lakhs. The Committee are unhappy to note that the target
for revenue generation for the F.Y.- 2018-19 has been fixed to
Rs. 666.07 lakhs only. The Committee desire the Department to
make pragmatic assessment of the efficacy and potential of the
Institute while fixing the targets for the Institute.
Semen Sexing
2. The Committee observe that with the increasing demand of
milk in the country, the preference of farmers have shifted from
having male calves to females. However, till date no research has
been done in the area of semen sexing, which could help in producing
significantly more number of female calves rather than the normal
ratio of 50:50. The Department informed that there is only one
technology developed by a team "X-Y Inc., USA" and no other team
in the world has been able to develop an alternative technology since
56

the last 15 years. ICAR upon seeing the interest of the farmers
decided to initiate research efforts in the area of control of sex-ratio
in cattle during the year 2014. It announced its intentions of the
takeoff of research effort but could provide only token-funds during
the financial year 2014-15. During the financial year 2015-16, the
regular funding was provided for the research programme titled
"Semen Sexing in Cattle". This research project had been awarded
under ICAR's XIIth Plan Scheme of Incentivizing Research on
Agriculture (up to March 2017) and now extended for three years
from April 2017-2020. The Committee feel that semen sexing technique
will definitely help in increasing the income of farmers and would
immensely contribute to the growth of the dairy industry. However,
the Committee feel that this technique can only be successful if it is
cost effective and easily available.
The Committee also note that research efforts at NDRI, Karnal
and AAU, Anand have only been initiated a few years back and initially
funding for research on semen sexing was not regular. The Committee
express their concern on such type of affairs and desire the
Department to ensure that such significant research projects do not
suffer for want of funds. They recommend the Department to take
up the whole issue in a serious manner and give it the priority it
deserves.
Research on Indigenous Breeds of Cattle
3. The Committee note that ICAR-NDRI is pursuing research
programmes on conservation and genetic improvement of milch animals
through identification and dissemination of superior germplasm of
cattle viz., Sahiwal, Gir and Tharparkar under the programmes  viz.
Genetic diversity and evaluation of Gir and Tharparkar Cattle and
AICRP Project on Cattle-Sahiwal cattle-Germplasm Unit (NDRI,
Karnal). Quality germplasm of elite animals (Tharparkar, Sahiwal,
Gir) is being multiplied and supplied to the farmers and development
agencies for improving the milk production potential of livestock
throughout the country. NDRI is also supplying semen of milch breeds
of cattle viz., Sahiwal and Tharparkar to the farmers for genetic
improvement of the local animals. The Department also informed the
Committee that at present 40.7% of the indigenous cattle population
57

in the country has been characterized as descriptive breeds and ICAR-
NBAGR, Karnal has been assigned the responsibility to characterize
existing non-descript population through research and survey for
unique attributes/morphology, and can be registered as descriptive
breed, if found to be distinct and uniform characteristics. The
Committee desire that research work be initiated on Gangatiri &
Hariana breeds and on rare breed like "Sursan" buffalo and many
others. The Committee are of the considered view that concerted
efforts are required to identify local breeds of the Cattle belonging
to different regions of the country and recommend that genetical
improvement of local breeds be made in coordination with State
Governments/SAUs and other ICAR Institutes.
Technology Transfer and Dissemination of Information
4. The Committee note that NDRI commercialized 79 numbers
of dairy products, processes developed by the Institute during the last
five years and earned revenue to the tune of Rs. 194.80 lakhs
(excluding GST). Further, regarding procedure followed by the Institute
for dissemination of new research technologies to the farmers,
entrepreneurs and industry, the Department informed that for the
new technology developed at the Institute the inventor/scientist who
has developed the new technology contacts the Institute Technology
Management Unit (ITMU) and discloses the features of the technology
in Technology Disclosure Form (TDF) along with validation data
(if any). The Inventor/Scientist is invited to present his/her technology
as an agenda before the Institute Technology Management Committee
(ITMC). ITMC is chaired by Director of the Institute and has internal
members and one external member. After due deliberation in the
committee, the technology is included in the NDRI list of technologies
and then put on NDRI website for wide publicity. In the ITMC meeting
the price is also finalized. Inventor is also asked to prepare promotional
literature. From September 2018, all the NDRI technologies are
licensed by Agroinnovate India Ltd., New Delhi.
The technologies and package of practices developed in the
Institute and after its validation at field level, demonstrated to farmers
through institute extension activities like Farmers Farm School, Dairy
Education at Farmers Doors, Kisan Sangoshthies, Dairy Mela,
58

Exhibitions and training conducted by the Institute for the Farmers.
These technologies are also disseminated through KVK, Farmer First
Project, AICRP on Cattle and Network projects on Buffalo. The
Committee acknowledge the contribution of NDRI towards
improvement of dairy sector in the country and appreciate the efforts
made by NDRI for development of technology for dairy industry and
farmers as well.
Training and Extension Programmes
5. The Committee note that NDRI has been conducting research
in the areas of Dairy Production, Processing and Marketing since its
inception and the success of research outcome depends upon adoption
of technology by the farmers. The different Departments/ Sections of
the Institute organize trainings for skill development of farmers and
entrepreneurs engaged in dairy industry. The Committee have been
informed that BPD Unit of NDRI, Karnal has been working on the
skill development of rural youth and farmers through the training
programmes organized at Karnal, Bengaluru, Kalyani, Lalukheri (UP)
and Piprakothi (Bihar) through Unnat Bharat Abhiyan and other modes.
NDRI also provides training to the farmers through ATMA depending
on the requirement. The main extension programme of the institute
such as Dairy Mela and demonstrations, field days, Research-Extension-
Industry-Farmer Interface, etc. are being organized to provide an
opportunity for the convergence of all stakeholders working together
for dairy development. Institute also organizes technology transfer
programme, infertility and veterinary aid camps, Kisan Sanghosthi
and field workshops at the adopted villages regularly. These activities
strengthen the linkages with end users, helps in understanding the
problems of farmers and better dissemination of technologies as well
as easy availability of feedback from the farmers. KVKs of ICAR-
NDRI organizes short term training programmes and exposure visits
of farmers and entrepreneurs for skill development in dairy sector.
It has also been informed that a total number of 19997 farmers
visited NDRI during last three years and KVK of the Institute trained
42 farmers through ATMA during the last three years. The Committee
are however constrained to note that the emphasis in training
programmes of KVK has shifted from 'Scientific Dairy Farming' to
59

'Exposure Visits'. This is evident from the figures provided by the
Department. In the year 2013-14, 75 programmes were organized for
Scientific Dairy Farming which gradually reduced over the years and
has come down to 30 in 2017-18, whereas during the same period
'Exposure Visits' have increased from 45 to 157. The Committee
observe that instead of 'Exposure Visits' NDRI should conduct more
'Scientific Dairy Farming Programmes' so that farmers area able to
reap the benefits of research done by the Institute.
The Committee are also constrained to note that no specific
funds are allotted by ICAR for dairy extension programme, but the
requirement are being met out of the Institute funds allocated under
different heads. As informed by the Department, the fund allocated
under publicity head are received and utilized in conducting Dairy
Melas, workshops, farmer-scientists interface, exhibitions and
publication of extension literature. The Committee strongly
recommend the Department to provide separate allocation for training
and extension programmes conducted by the Institute. The Committee
recommend that the training programmes conducted by the Institute
be given proper publicity and popularized through various media at
all India level so that farmers from all over the country could be
benefitted.
Village Adoption Programme
6. The Committee observe that ICAR-NDRI, through all the
three research stations has adopted villages where the artificial
insemination service, supply of mineral mixture for improving the
reproduction of dairy animals, veterinary services, advisory services
on scientific management and breeding of dairy animals, training of
farmers are carried out regularly. ICAR-NDRI is implementing the
'Mera Gaon Mera Gourav' programme in more than 150 villages. All
the scientists are actively involved in implementation of this
programme. The Committee are of the view that steps should be
undertaken by the Institute to strengthen the outreach programmes
so as to augment farmers' income. The Committee recommend that
considering the length and width of the country, the coverage of
Village Adoption Programmes be expanded and more and more villages
be adopted by the Institute and its centers. The Committee are also
60

of the view that the Department should endeavour to make
co-ordination with the State Governments so that the technology
developed by the Institute reach the farmers.
Empowerment of women, tribals and other disadvantaged classes
7. The Committee note that NDRI is working towards
empowerment of rural women, tribals and other disadvantaged Sections
of the society. The Committee have been informed that Women
Empowerment Lab was established in Dairy Extension Division in
2013 for capacity building of different Self Help Groups of NDRI,
DRDA and NGOs. This Lab was established with the objective to
create awareness and impart skill in the field of dairy processing and
fruit and vegetable preservation and also mobilize these groups to
take up vocation in these areas. Regular women empowerment
trainings and campaigns through this Women Empowerment
Laboratory were organized to create awareness among rural farm
women. One hundred eighty six (186) women empowerment trainings
and campaigns were organized with the objective to create awareness
in the field of dairying to impart skill in these areas so that farm
women could generate more income from dairying and maintain
healthy atmosphere in their respective family. By these programme,
two thousand eight hundred twenty five (2825) farm women were
trained and benefitted of these programme within reporting period.
KVK is also regularly organizing on and off campus training
programmes on value addition of fruits, vegetables and milk for rural
women. Rural women are also given demonstrations on nutrition,
gardening apart from stitching and tailoring. Moreover, training camps
have been organized in the tribal areas for the development of Tribal
population. Under tribal sub-plan (TSP), support has been provided to
the farmers in the form of superior live animals, feed supplements
and area specific modern animal husbandry practices. While
appreciating the efforts of NDRI for upliftment of the disadvantaged
sections of the society, the Committee recommend that some training
programmes both on and off campus be designed and organised
exclusively for women and other disadvantaged groups of society,
focussing on their specific requirements.
61

Vacancies at NDRI, Karnal
8. The Committee observe that out of 719 total sanctioned posts
of different cadres in the Institute, 261 i.e around 36% are vacant.
During the course of evidence, the Department informed that most
of 36 vacant posts of Scientists are of senior position i.e Principal
Scientist and Senior Scientist. The posts of scientists had been
advertised but due to non-availability of suitable candidates, the same
couldn't be filled. The Institute has requested ICAR to convert these
posts into entry level post and it is under consideration. As far as the
technical posts are concerned, the recruitment process is in progress
and 70 out of the 184 vacant posts would be filled up in few weeks.
Considering the fact that Human Resources is the backbone of any
organization, the Committee are not happy with the current scenario.
The Committee, therefore, recommend the Department to take
necessary action for filling the vacancies at the earliest and inform
the Committee accordingly. The Committee note that the Institute is
presently being headed by an Acting Director instead of a full fledged
Director. The Committee advise the Department to make permanent
appointment for the post of Director at the earliest.
  N
EW D ELHI; HUKMDEV NARAYAN YADA V,
04 January, 2019 Chairperson,
14 Pausha, 1940 (Saka) Standing Committee on Agriculture.
62

ANNEXURE-I
Details of technologies commercialized and revenue
earned by the Institute
(i) Technologies Commercialized from April 2013-March 2014
Sl. Name of Date on Licence fee Purchaser
No. technology which MOU (excluding
signed service
tax) Rs.
12 34 5
1. Iron fortified biscuits 05-07-2013 Rs. 0.55 Shree Shivani Agro
Lakhs Indore, M.P .
2. Mineral mixture 15-07-2013 Rs. 0.25 Shree Jee
(Cation & Anion) Lakhs Supplements
Jaipur, Rajasthan
3. Mineral mixture 15-07-2013 Rs. 0.25 Kamdhenu Feeds
(Cation & Anion) Lakhs Sahranpur, U.P.
4. Mineral mixture 02-12-2013 Rs. 1.00 Shakti Livestock
(Cation & Anion) Lakhs Feeds (P) Ltd,
Meerut, U.P .
5. Detection of 05-07-2013 Rs. 3.50
Enterococci in Lakhs Nuegen
Milk (Patented) Diagnostics (p)
Ltd., Hyderabad,
6. Detection of L. 05-07-2013 Rs. 7.50 Andhra Pradesh
monocytogenes in Lakhs
Milk (Patented)
7. High protein Iron 08-01-2014 Rs. 0.75 Sarvotham Care
fortified Bajra Lakhs Ltd, Secunderabad,
Biscuits Andhra Pradesh
8. High protein Iron 08-01-2014 Rs. 0.75 Mrs.SantoshYadav,
fortified Bajra Biscuits Lakhs Karnal, Haryana
9. Bajra Lassi 08-01-2014 Rs. 1.00 Misthi Farmer
Lakhs Producers Co.
Ltd, Karnal,
Haryana
63

12 34 5
10. New colour based test 19-03-2014 Rs. 6.00 Rajasthan
for rapid detection of Lakhs Co-operative Dairy
detergent in milk Federation Ltd.,
(Patented) Rajasthan
Total Amount (Rs): 21.55 lakh excluding service tax
Total Technologies Commercialized = 10
(ii) T echnologies Commercialized from April 2014- March 2015
Sl. Name of Date on Licence fee Purchaser
No. technology which MOU (excluding
signed service
tax) Rs.
12 34 5
1. New colour based test 13/01/2015 6,00,000 Havmor lcecream
for rapid detection of Ltd., Ahmedabad,
detergent in milk Gujarat
(Patented)
2. Strip based test for 10/12/2014 1,00,000
Detection of
Neutralizers in Milk
3. Strip based test for 10/12/2014 1,00,000
Detection of Added
Urea in Milk(Patented)
4. Strip based test for 10/12/2014 1,00,000
Detection of Hydrogen
Peroxide in Milk
5. Strip based test for 10/12/2014 1,00,000
Detection of Glucose
in Milk
6. Strip based test for 10/12/2014 1,50,000
Detection of
Maltodextrin in Milk
(Patented)
64
Mother Dairy
Fruit & Vegetable
Private Limited

12 34 5
7. Strip based test for 11/12/2014 1,00,000
Detection of
Neutralizers in Milk
8. Strip based test for 11/12/2014 1,00,000
Detection of Added
Urea in Milk
(Patented)
9. Strip based test for 11/12/2014 1,00,000
Detection of
Hydrogen Peroxide
in Milk
10. Strip based test for 11/12/2014 1,00,000
Detection of Glucose
in Milk
11. Strip based test for 11/12/2014 1,50,000
Detection of
Maltodextrin in
Milk (Patented)
12. A PCR based 01/12/2014 4,00,000
method for
differentiating A1
and A2 milk
(Patented)
13. A PCR based 01/12/2014 6,00,000
method for
differentiating Cow
and Buffalo milk
14. Sugar tolerating 10/11/2014 1,60,000 Na maste India
lactic culture for Foods Pvt.
preparation of Misti
Doi
65
Rajasthan
electronics and
Instruments
Limited
A2 Milk Research
Corporation

12 34 5
15. An indigenous 30/09/2014 10,00,000
probiotic strain of
Lactobacillus
fergmentum
16. High protein Iron 01/08/2014 10,00,000
fortified Bajra
Biscuits
17. Whey based Medium 05-02-2015 Rs.6.0
for Lactic acid Lakh
Bacteria
18. Bioprocess for Direct 05-02-2015 Rs.7.0
Vat Set (DVS) Misti Lakh
Dahi Culture
19. EPS producing culture 05-02-2015 Rs.1.00
for preparation of low- lakh
fat dahi
Total Amount (Rs): 62.60 lakh excluding service tax
Total Technologies Commercialized = 19
(iii) T echnologies Commercialized from April 2015-March 2016
Sl. Name of the Date of Cost of the Address of
No. Technology purchase  Technology Firm
(INR)
12 34 5
1. Whey Jaljeera Drink 19-05-2015 1,00,000
2. Misti Doi with fast 19-05-2015 1,60,000
acidifying high sugar
tolerating lactic
culture
66
Sarvotham Care
Ltd.
Absource
Biologics (P) Ltd.,
Pune
Abis Dairy Farm
Indamara village
Pendri Post,
Rajnandgaon

12 34 5
3. Improved Texture 19-0 5-2015 1,50,000 Chhattisgarh
Dahi Pin- 491441
4. Bajra Lassi 19-05-2015 1,50,000
5. Strip based test for 09-06-2 015 1,50,000 M/s M.Bhandari
Detection of Chem Pvt. Ltd.
Maltodextrin in Milk C-2, BlueHeaven,
(Patented) opp Meghalaya
Flats, Naranpura,
Ahmedabad
Pin: 380014
6. A process for 15-07-2015 6,00,000 V aishal Patliputra
preparation of low Dugdh Utpadak
cholesterol Ghee Sahkari Sangh
(Patented) Ltd. Feeder
Balancing Dairy
Complex, Phulwari-
sharif, Patna-
801505
7. Strip based test 21-08-2015 1,50,000
for Detection of
Maltodextrin in
Milk (Patented)
8. Misti Doi with fast 12-09-2015 1,60,000 G.P. T iwari
acidifying high sugar General Manager
tolerating lactic (Operations) C.P.
culture Milk and Food
products Pvt. Ltd.
Lucknow (UP)
9. Strip based test for 16-09-2 015 1,50,000 The Manager
Detection of (QA), Havmor
Maltodextrin in Milk Icecream Ltd. 2nd
(Patented) floor, Kashmira
Chamber B/H
67

1     2     3    4      5
Popular House,
Navrangpura,
Ahmedabad:
380009, Gujarat.
10. Nutrimix 17-09-2015 1,50,000 V ijay Singh
Managing Director
IRA Foods Pvt. Ltd
Corporate Office:-
307 Sec 29, Kuru-
kshetra, Haryana
11. Technology of Kheer 28-10-2015 1,80,000 Ramesh Chandra
Mohan Production Garg Krishna
from Buffalo Milk Chilling Center,
Wazirpur, Gangapur
city Dist: Sawai
Madhopur,
Rajasthan- 322001
12. Misti Doi with fast 7-12-2015 1,60,000 ITC LIMITED
acidifying high sugar No.18, Banaswadi
tolerating lactic Main Road,
culture Maruthiseva Nagar
Bangalore-560005
(India)
Total Amount (Rs): 22.60 lakh excluding service tax
Total Technologies Commercialized = 12
68

(iv) Technologies Commercialized from April 2016-March 2017
Sl. Name of the Inventor Cost of the Date of Address of Firm
No. Technology Technology purchase
(INR)
12 3 4 5 6
1. A process for preparation Darshan Lal, V ivek Sharma, 6,00,000+87,000 06- 04-2016 Sunrise Milkfoods
of low cholesterol Ghee Raman Seth, Manoj Kumar (14.50% ST)= LLP, NewDelhi
(Patented) and Amit Kumar Dairy 6,87,000/-
Chemistry
2. Arjuna Herbal Ghee Rajani Kant, G.R.Patil, R.R.B. 1,50,000 +21,750 23- 05-2016 Hero Herbal Ghee
(Patented) Singh and A.A. Patel Dairy ST (14.50%)= & Dairy Research
Technology 1,71,750/- Products,
Saharanpur
3. A process for preparation Darshan Lal, Vivek Sharma, 6,00,000+90,000 07-06-2016 Sr i Vijaya Visakha
of low cholesterol Ghee Raman Seth, Manoj Kumar ST (15.00%)= Milk Producer's
(Patented) and Amit Kumar Dairy 6,90,000/- Company Limited
Chemistry -V isakha Dairy,
Visakhapatnam
69

12 3 4 5 6
4. Exopolysaccha rides producing Pradip V . Behare,S.K. Tomar 1,00,000 +15,000 08- 06-2016 Renuka Milk and
lactic cultures for preparation and Surajit Mandal Dairy ST(15.00%) = Dairy Product,
of low-fat lassi Microbiology 1,15,000/- Indore
5. Spore Based kit for Naresh Kumar, A. Khan, 3,00,000 +45,000 17-12-2016 Hatsun Agro
detection of Antibiotic S. Arora , Raghu H. V ., M. ST (15.00%)= Product Ltd.
Residues in milk at Dairy Balhara, P. K. Sharma and 3,45,000/- Chennai
farm (Patented) S. Shaikh Dairy Microbiology
6. Paper Strip assay for Naresh Kumar, N. Tehri, 5,00,000 +75,000 17-12-2016
Rapid detection of Pesticide R. Gopaul, P . K. Sharma, ST (15.00%) =
Residues (Patented) Kumar, Morab S. and Raghu 5,75,000/-
H. V . Dairy Microbiology
7. Fast Acidifying Yoghurt Surajit Mandal, S.K. Tomar, 3,00,000+45,000 30-12-2017 GOLIANA. 553,
Culture for Greek Style Pradip V . Behare, Jyoti, ST (15.00%) = Udyog Vihar,
Yoghurt Ravi S. Wankhede Dairy 3,45,000/- Phase-V, Gurgaon-
Microbiology 122016
8. Strip based test for Rajan Sharma, Y .S. Rajput, 1,50,000 +22,500 13-02-2017 DELMOS
Detection of Maltodextrin Bimlesh Mann and Panchal ST (15.00%) = RESEARCH
in Milk (Patented) Bhavesh kumar R. Dairy 1,72,500/- PRIVATE
Chemistry LIMITED. House
70

No.-5210/29,Street
No.-12, Surat
Nagar, Gurgaon-
122001
9 Anionic mineral mixture for Hrjit Kaur and Veena Mani 2,50,000 +37,500 29-03-2017 SUMMER INDIA,
prepartum dairy animals Animal Nutrition ST(15.00%) = E-5228/A,Sector-
2,87,500/- 11, Rajajipuram ,
Lucknow-17
Total Amount (Rs): 29.50 lakh excluding service tax
Total Technologies Commercialized = 09
(v) Technologies Commercialized from April 2017-March 2018
Sl. Name of the Inventors Date of Name of the Firm to Revenue
No. Technology Signing of which Technology Received*
MoU was transferred (Rs.)
12 3 4 5 6
1. Sugar tolerating lactic Surajit Mandal, S.K. Tomar 12.04.2017 NIF Private Limited, 75,000
culture for preparation and Pradip V . Behare Kanpur
of Misti Doi Misti Doi
Culture-15 freeze dried
ampoules
71

12 3 4 5 6
2. Whey Jaljeera drink Ashish Kumar Singh, Sudhir 04.05.2017 J.R. Agritech Pvt. Ltd. 2,00,000
Singh & G .R. Patil Aligarh, U.P .
3. Whey Mango drink Ashish Kumar Singh, Sudhir 04.05.2017 J. R. Agritech Pvt. 1,00,000
Singh & G .R. Patil Ltd., Aligarh, U.P .
4. DNA based method for Sachinandan De, Sushil 05.06.2017 IDMC Ltd., L ucknow. 6,00,000
differentiation of cow, Kumar and Devika Goutam
buffalo, sheep, goat and
camel milk
5. Sugar tolerating lactic Surajit Mandal, S.K. Tomar 04.07.2017 NIF Private Limited, 75,000
culture for preparation of and Pradip V. Kanpur.
Misti Doi (Misti Doi Behare
Culture-15 freeze dried
ampoules)
6. Arjuna Herbal Ghee Rajani Kant, G.R. Patil, R.R.B. 23.08.2017 Punjab & Sindh Dairy 1,50,000
(Patented) Singh & A.A. Patel Products Pvt. Ltd.,
Mumbai.
7. Bajra Lassi Ashish Kumar Singh, Sudhir 26.09.2017 Aadhar Udyog, Delhi. 1,50,000
Tomar, S. K. Kanawjia &
Yogesh Khetra
72

8. Milk Protein Enriched Latha Sabikhi, Ashish Kumar 26.09.2017 Aadhar Udyog, Delhi. 1,50,000
Iron Fortified Bajra Singh, Devang Jani, Gayatri
Biscuit & Sumit Arora
9. Detection of buffalo milk Archana Varma 29.11.2017 Mother Dairy Fruit & 4,00,000
in cow milk using Hansa Vegetable Pvt. Ltd.,
test serum Delhi.
10. Strip based test for Rajan Sharma, Y .S. Rajput, 14.11.2017 The Punjab State 1,50,000
detection of maltodextrin Bimlesh Mann & Panchal Cooperative Milk
in milk (Patented) Bhavesh Kumar Producers' Federation
Ltd., Chandigarh.
11. Sugar tolerating lactic Surajit Mandal, S.K. Tomar 08.12.2017 NIF Private Limited, 75,000
culture for preparation and Pradip V . Behare Kanpur.
of Misti Doi (Misti Doi
Culture-15 freeze dried
ampoules)
12. Preparation of whey Ashish Kumar Singh, Sudhir 15.02.2018 T amil Nadu 1,00,000
mango drink Singh & G.R. Patil Co-operative Milk
Producers Federation
Ltd., Chennai.
73

12 3 4 5 6
13. Misti Doi with Fast Surajit Mandal, S.K. Tomar 28.02.2018 Schreiber Dynamix 1,60,000
Acidifying High Sugar and Pradip V . Behare Dairies Pvt. Ltd.,
tolerating Lactic Cultures Pune.
14. Strip based test for Rajan Sharma, Priyae Brath 14.03.2018 Delmos Research 2,50,000
Detection of Neutralizers Gautam, Y .S. Rajput & Private Limited,
in Milk Bimlesh Mann Haryana.
15. Strip based test for Rajan Sharma, Y.S. Rajput, 14.03.2018 Delmos Research 1,50,000
Detection of Hydrogen Bimlesh Mann & Panchal Private Limited,
Peroxide in Milk Bhavesh Kumar R. Haryana.
Total = 28,30,000 + 18% GST
Total Technologies Commercialized = 15
(vi) Technologies Commercialized from April 2018-Oct., 2018
Sl. No. Name of the Technology Sale Price of Date Name of the firm
Technology*
(Rs.)
12 3 4 5
1. "Sugar tolerating lactic culture for Rs 1.00 Lakh+ 20.04.2018 NIF Private Limited, Village-
preparation of Misti Doi (Misti Doi 18% GST Baharampur, Tehsil Bilhaur,
Culture-20 freeze dried ampoules) Kanpur, (U.P.)
74

2. Strip based detection of neutralizers 1.50 Lakh + 28.04.2018 M /s. Harsh Infracon Private
in milk 18% GST Limited, Amreli, Gujrat.
3. Strip based test for detection of 2.25 Lakh + 28.04.2018
maltodextrin in milk (Patented) 18%GST
4. Strip based test for detection of 1.50 Lakh + 28.04.2018
urea in milk (Patented) 18% GST
5. New colour based test for rapid 7.50 Lakh + 28.04.2018
detection of detergent in milk 18% GST
(Patented)
6. Arjuna Herbal Ghee (Patented) Rs. 2.50 Lakh+ 15.05.2018 M/s. Ssvas Vittles Company,
18% GST Near Mota Bus Stand, Hari Om
Sweets, Amreli - 365601, Gujrat.
7. A new rapid test for detection of Rs. 6.00 Lakh + 17.07.2018
detergent in milk (Patented) 18% GST
8. A new strip based test for detection Rs. 1.50 Lakh 17.07.2018
of neutralizers in Milk 18% GST
9. A new strip based test for detection Rs. 1.50 Lakh + 17.07.2018 M/s. The Punjab State
of urea in milk (Patented) 18% GST Cooperative Milk Producers'
Federation  Ltd.,
Chandigarh-160022
75

12 3 4 5
10. Strip based test for detection of Rs. 1.00 Lakh+ 17.07.2018
hydrogen peroxide in milk 18% GST
11. Strip based test for detection of Rs. 1.50 Lakh+ 17.07.2018
glucose in milk 18% GST
12. A new strip based test for detection Rs. 1.50 Lakh+ 17.07.2018
of sucrose in milk 18% GST
13. "Sugar tolerating lactic culture for Rs. 1.00 Lakh+ 01.08.2018 NIF Private Limited, Village-
preparation of Misti Doi" (Misti Doi 18% GST Baharampur, Tehsil Bilhaur,
Culture-20 freeze dried ampoules) Kanpur (UP).
14. "Anionic mineral mixture for reducing Rs. 2.50 lakhs+ 19.09.2018 W est Bengal Chemical Industries
post-partum problems in cattle and 18% GST through Limited, Kolkata.
buffaloes" Agrinnovate
Total Revenue = 30.25 Lakhs + 18 % GST
Total No. Technologies Commercialized = 14
76

Revenue earned by NDRI during last 5 years
Sl. No. Year Revenue earned (Rs. in lakh)
1. 2013-14 21.55 lakh excluding service tax
2. 2014-15 62.60 lakh excluding service tax
3. 2015-16 22.60 lakh excluding service tax
4. 2016-17 29.50 lakh excluding service tax
5. 2017-18 28.30 lakhs excluding GST
6. 2018-till date 30.25 lakhs excluding GST
Total Revenue= 194.80 excluding GST
77

ANNEXURE II
Rates of Milk Adulteration Test Kits Developed at NDRI
Sl. Name of the Inventors Sales price Cost of
No. technology testing for
1 sample
of milk
12 3 4 5
1. A New Rapid Test For Rajan Sharma, Y.S. Rajput Rs. 6.00 lakhs + Taxes (18.0%) with Rs. 1.50
Detection of Detergent in and Amit Kumar Barui 2% royalty for 10 years non-exclusive
Milk terms. Rs. 7.50 lakhs + Taxes (18.0%)
without royalty for 10 years non-
exclusive terms.
2. A New Strip Based Test Rajan Sharma, Priyae Brath Rs. 1.50 lakhs + Taxes (18.0%) with Rs. 0.50
For Detection of Gautam, Y .S. Rajput and 2% royalty for 10 years non-exclusive
Neutralizers in Milk Bimlesh Mann terms or Rs. 2.50 lakhs + Taxes
(18.0%) without royalty for 10 years
non-exclusive terms.
3. A New Strip Based Test Rajan Sharma, Priyae Brath Rs. 1.50 lakhs + Taxes (18.0%) with Rs. 2.00
78

For Detection of Urea Gautam, Y .S. Rajput and 2% royalty for 10 years non-exclusive
in Milk Bimlesh Mann terms or Rs. 2.50 lakhs + Taxes
(18.0%) without royalty for 10 years
non-exclusive terms.
4. Strip Based Test For Rajan Sharma, Y .S. Rajput, Rs. 1.50 lakhs + Taxes (18.0%) with Rs. 3.00
Detection of Glucose Bimlesh Mann and Panchal 2% royalty for 10 years non-exclusive
in Milk Bhavesh Kumar R. terms or Rs. 2.50 lakhs + Taxes
(18.0%) without royalty for 10 years
non-exclusive terms.
5. Strip Based Test For Rajan Sharma, Y .S. Rajput, Rs. 1.50 lakh + Taxes (18.0%) with Rs. 2.00
Detection of Hydrogen Bimlesh Mann and Panchal 2% royalty for 10 years non-exclusive
Per-oxide in Milk Bhavesh Kumar R. terms or Rs. 2.25 lakhs + Taxes
(18.0%) without royalty for 10 years
non-exclusive terms.
6. Strip Based Test For Rajan Sharma, Y .S. Rajput, Rs. 2.25 lakhs + Taxes (18.0%) with Rs. 5.00
Detection of Bimlesh Mann and Panchal 2% royalty for 10 years non-exclusive
Maltodextrinin Milk Bhavesh Kumar R. terms. Rs. 3.00 lakhs + Taxes (18.0%)
without royalty for 10 years non-
exclusive terms.
79

12 3 4 5
7. A Strip based Test for Rajan Sharma, Priyae Brath Rs. 1.50 lakhs + Taxes (18.0%) with Rs. 5.00
Detection of Sucrose Gautam, Y .S. Rajput and 2% royalty for 10 years non-exclusive
in Milk Bimlesh Mann terms or Rs. 2.50 lakhs + Taxes
(18.0%) without royalty for 10 years
non-exclusive terms.
8. A Strip for Detection of Rajan Sharma, Rs. 1.50 lakhs + GST (with 2% Rs. 0.50
Sodium Chloride in Milk Y .S. Rajput and Bimlesh royalty) for 10 years non-exclusive
Mann term or Rs. 2.25 lakhs + GST
(without royalty) for 10 years non-
exclusive terms.
80

ANNEXURE III
International Collaborative Projects
Sl. No. Title of the Project Name of PI Funding Agency Duration
1. Development of resilient probiotic R. K. Malik/ S. K. DST (Indo-New Zealand) 2013-2016
foods designed for the Indian Market Tomar
conditions.
2. Development and application of lactic S. K. Tomar BBSRC Funded joint India 2014-2017
acid bacteria as designer products. -UK collaboration project.
3. Validating procedures for the Sunita Grover International Project 2014-2017
measurement of heat resistant (South Africa, Brazil and
spoilage and pathogenic bacteria India Collaboration)
in milk, to provide a scientific
and technical basis for future
developments in the management
of food safety in South Africa,
India and Brazil.
4. AFEX- A technology for addressing A.K.Tyagi USA and India (Bill & Oct. 2016-
seasonality and access to quality Melinda Gates Foundation, Dec. 2016
cattle feed in India. USA)
81

Sl. No. Title of the Project Name of PI Funding Agency Duration
5. Characterization of Nanostructure of Bimlesh Mann Australia-India Council 2015-2016
buffalo Milk. Grant (AIC)
6. Phylogenetic study of ruminal bacteria A.K.Tyagi DST (Indo-Ireland) 2013-2015
and its potential for CLA production
and gene expression pattern of linoleic
acid isomerase and reductase with
different dietary supplementary
supplementation and its subsequent
utilization as probiotics for animals.
7. Understanding role of Micro RNA Dheer Singh DST -DAAD 201 1-2014
(mRNA) mediated gene regulation
during folliculogenesis and lutinization:
a comparative study in buffalo and
cow.
8. Regulation of the Gonadotrophin- Mohan Mandal Indo-Egyptian 2017-2018
ovarian Axix by Kisspeptin-KISSI/R Collaboration
System in Cattle and buffaloes.
9. Understanding enzymatic activities in Yogesh Khetra Indo-Denmark 2017-2018
concentrated milk system.
82

10. Assessment of antimicrobial residues Naresh Kumar ICAR/ILRI 2017-2019
and resistance in dairy animals in
India.
National Collaborative Projects
1. Improvement   in  fertilizability  of M. S. Chauhan DBT 2012-14
cryopreserved  buffalo  bull semen
by minimizing cryo capacitation and
apoptosis like changes (Collaboration
with GADVASU, Ludhiana).
2. Network project on buffalo Avtar Singh ICAR 2012-17
Improvement-Field Unit
(CIRB Hisar-125001).
3. Network programme on veterinary A.K. Puniya ICAR 2010-15
type culture (VTCC)-Rumen
Microbes.
4. Network programme on veterinary A.K.Tyagi ICAR 2015-17
type culture (VTCC) -rumen
microbes.
83

Sl. No. Title of the Project Name of PI Funding Agency Duration
5. Network project on buffalo R. S. Gandhi ICAR 2007-17
Improvement–Field Unit (CIRB
Hisar-125001) Network project.
6. Scheme on Dairy Microbes under R. K. Malik ICAR 2010-13
Network Mode (Network Project).
7. Standardization of seed rate of Magan Singh ICAR 2016-18
berseem with rye grass under
mixed cropping system (AICRP-
IGFRI, Jhansi).
8. Elucidating the physiological and T. K. Datta NAIP 2008-14
genomic regulation process of
follicular development, oocyte
maturation and embryogenesis
in buffalo.
9. Characterization and differentiation of M. S. Chauhan NAIP 2008-14
embryonic, adult and spermatogonial
stem cells in cattle and buffaloes.
84

10. Analysis of mammary gland A. K. Mohanty NAIP 2008-14
transcriptome and proteome during
lactation and involution in indigenous
cattle and buffalo for identification of
probable mammary biomarkers.
11. Genetic basis of inferior sperm quality S. De NAIP 2009-14
and fertility of crossbred bulls.
12. Development potency of parthenogenetic D. Malakar NAIP 2009-14
goat embryos.
13. Value chain on zone free cloned S. K. Singla NAIP 2009-14
embryos for quality animal production
from elite buffaloes and pashmina goats.
14. Development of wireless sensor T. K. Mohanty NAIP 2008-13
network for animal management.
15. Rumen microbial diversity in domesticated S. K. Sirohi NAIP 2008-13
and wild ruminants and impact of additives
on methanogenesis and utilization of poor
quality fibrous feeds.
85

Sl. No. Title of the Project Name of PI Funding Agency Duration
16. Development of e-courses for B. Tech. V .K. Gupta NAIP 2009-14
17. Novel Approaches for the production of A. K. Singh NAIP 2009-14
nutraceuticles from milk and Indian herbs
for potential use in functional dairy foods.
18. A value chain on composite dairy foods A. K. Singh NAIP 2009-14
with enhanced health attributes by ICAR.
19. Development of biosensors and micro- N. K. Goel NAIP 2008-14
techniques for analysis of pesticide
residues aflatoxin, heavy metals and
bacterial contamination in milk.
20. Detection and mitigation of dairy Y . S. Rajput NAIP 2009-14
pathogens and detection of adulterants
using chemical biology.
21. Strengthening statistical computing R. Malhotra NAIP 2010-14
for NARS.
22. Characterization and differentiation of M.S.Chauhan NAIP 2008-14
embryonic and spermatogonial stem
cells in cattle and buffaloes.
86

23. Micro-encapsulation of Bacteriocins R. K. Malik NFBSFARA 201 1-14
for their controlled release.
24. Investigations on high pressure induced A. K. Singh NFBSFARA 201 1-13
effect on quality characteristics of
buffalo milk under National Fund for
basic strategic and frontier application
research in agriculture.
25. Deciphering the mechanism of aberrant T. K. Datta NFBSFARA 2010-15
maternal recognition of pregnancy events
in sheep and buffalo under heat and
nutritional stress.
26. Early detection of pregnancy in cow and A.K. Mohanty NFBSFARA 2012-15
buffalo by pregnancy associated proteins
(PAPs).
27. Infertility in crossbred bulls: Search for A.Kumaresan NFBSFARA 2012-16
spermatogenic cell markers for early
prediction on fertility.
28. Development of transgenic goat for M. S. Chauhan NFBSFARA 2012-16
production of human lactoferrin.
87

S;. No. Title of the Project Name of PI Funding Agency Duration
29. Countering Gastrointestinal Tract J.K. Kaushik NFBSFARA 2012-15
pathogens by Adhesion-Promoting
Probiotic Surface Proteins.
30. Luteinizing hormone based sensor for Dheer Singh NFBSFARA 2013- 16
estrus detection in buffaloes.
31. Enhancing development competence of K. Dutta NFBSFARA 2013-16
oocytes for better in vitro fertilizing
ability.
32. Development of parthenogenetic goat M. K. Singh NFBSFARA 2013-17
from embryonic stem cells.
33. Whey to Biofuel: Bioethanol Production Shilpa Viz NFBSFARA 2013-14
by stress tolerant and metabolically
engineered yeast from whey.
34. Lactation stress associated postpartum Suneel Kumar Onteru NFBSFARA 2015-18
anestrus SNP array in buffaloes.
35. Elucidating the mechanism of pashmina J.K.Kaushik NASF 2015-18
fibre development: An OMICS approach.
88

36. Leukemia inhibitory factor: pluripotency Sudarshan Kumar NASF 2015-18
in buffalo stem cell.
37. Delineating Beta Casein Variants in A.K.Mohanty NASF 2015-18
Indian Cows and Potential Health
Implications of A1A2 Milk.
38. Elucidating the physiological and T. K. Datta NAIP 2008-14
genomic regulation process of
follicular development, oocyte
maturation and embryogenesis
in buffalo.
39. Agrowaste Utilization: Separation of Rajan Sharma DST 2014-17
nutraceutic 
β-cryptoxanthin from (Co-PI at NDRI)
kinnow peels and its conversion to
aqueous dispersible nanoemulsions
for value addition of foods.
40. Role of probiotic lactobacilli in Rajiv Kapila DBT 2016-2019
modulation of intestinal epithelium
mediated barrier functions and
immune signals.
89

Sl. No. Title of the Project Name of PI Funding Agency Duration
41. Preparation, characterization and Sumit Arora DBT 2016-2019
application of Vitamin A & D loaded
milk protein nano-complexes.
42. Technological change in dairy farming B. S. Meena ICAR 2016-2017
and its effect on rural employment in
Trans-Gangetic Plains Region—ICAR.
43. Validation and standardization of the GC Vivek Sharma FSSAI 2016-2018
analysis method given in ISO 17678:
2010 for determination of milk fat purity
in bovine milk other than cow's milk.
44. Capacity building of resource for farmers Gopal Sankhala ICAR 2016-2018
in paddy-wheat cum dairy production
system through Farmer First Programme.
45. Cell wall components of probiotic Sunita Grover ICMR 2017-2019
lactobacilli as therapeutics for
amelioration of inflammatory gut
diseases.
90

46. Conservation of indigenous pig of Assam M. K. Singh DBT 2017-2019
through Handmade Cloning technique.
47. Synthetic endometrium: A novel model to Rubina K. Baithalu NASF 2017-2019
study early embryonic development and
uterine health in ruminants.
48. Whey protein-iron complexes: Preparation, Kamal Gandhi DST 2017-2019
characterization and application in biscuits,
milk and dahi.
49. Bile responsive proteo-transcriptomics Pradip Vishnu Behare SERB-DST 2017-2019
investigation of native probiotic strain
lactobacillus helveticus MTCC 5463.
50. Proteo-Genomic approach to Elucidate K. P. Ramesha DAHVS 2017-2020
Productive and Reproductive Performance
of Malnad Gidda, Deoni, and Hallikar
Breeds of Cattle.
51. Development of phytopharmaceutical A.K. Dang DBT 2017-2019
product for bovine mastitis.
52. Network project on buffalo Improvement- A. K. Gupta ICAR 2017-2020
Field Unit. (CIRB Hisar-125001)
91

Sl. No. Title of the Project Name of PI Funding Agency Duration
53. Network project on buffalo Improvement- A.K.Chakravarty Network 2017-2020
Institute herd. (CIRB Hisar-125001)
54. Monitoring of drug residues and other N. K. Goel ICAR 2017-2020
environmental pollutants-outreach project
of ICAR.
55. Indigenous breed program. (Sahiwal Cattle) Anupma Mukherjee ICAR 2017-2020
56. National innovations in climate resilient Anjali Aggarwal CRIDA (ICAR) 2017-2020
Agriculture.
57. Upliftment of socio-economic condition T. K. Dutta ICAR 2017-2020
of tribal people through integrated
livestock farming in north eastern hill
region/eastern part of India -ICAR.
58. Incentivizing Research in Agriculture T.K.Mohanty ICAR 2017-2020
Project-V Semen sexing in cattle
(Component A)
59. Conservation of indigenous pig of Assam Manoj K. Singh DBT 2017-2020
through Handmade Cloning technique.
92

60. Genetic variability of milk protein and its S. De NASF 2017-2020
characterization by proteomic approach
in Indian goats.
61. Identification and characterization of Vedamuthy G. V . DST 2017-2019
peptidic antagonist to the recombinant
cysteine synthase protein of Haemonchus
Contortus.
62. Synthesis, characterization and effect A.K.Mohanty NASF 2017-2020
of graged levels of nano-selenium
supplementation on the performance
of broiler chicken.
63. Proteo-genomic approach to elucidate K. P. Ramesha DAHVS, Karnataka 2017-2021
productive and reproductive performance
of Malnad Gidda, Deoni and Hallikar
Breeds of Cattle.
64. Incentivizing Research in Agriculture- A.K.Mohanty ICAR 2017-2020
Project-V-Semen Sexing in Cattle.
(Component 'B')
65. Synthetic Endometrium: A novel model Rubina K. Baithalu NASF 2017-2019
to study early embryonic development
and uterine health in ruminants.
93

Sl. No. Title of the Project Name of PI Funding Agency Duration
66. Manipulation of rumen microbes using A.K. Tyagi DBT 2017-2020
medicinal plants extract to enhance the
nutraceautical value of milk as a
functional food.
67. Utilization of crude glycerol obtained in B.Srinivas ICAR-NDRI &KSCST, 2017-2019
biodiesel production as an alternate to IISc, Bengaluru
glycogenic feed supplement for dairy
cows.
68. Whey protein-iron complexes: Preparation, Kamal Gandhi DST 2017-2019
characterization and application in biscuits,
milk and dahi.
69. Bile responsive proteo-transcriptomics P.V. Behare SERB 2017-2020
investigation of native probiotic strain
lactobacillus helveticus MTCC 5463.
70. National Facility on Bioactive peptides B.Surendra Nath DST 2017-2019
from Milk.
71. Resveratrol and catechins-loaded B.Surendra Nath NASF 2017-2020
niosomes and nanoparticles as
94

delivery vehicles for fortification
of milk products.
72. Development of phytopharmaceutical A.K. Dang DBT 2017-2019
product for bovine mastitis.
73. Improving the livelihood through dairy T. K. Dutta ICAR 2017-2020
farming in North Eastern region of
India.
74. Improving livelihood of Rural Women K.Ponnusamy DST 2017-2019
through dairy based secondary
Agriculture.
75. Technological change in dairy farming B. S. Meena ICAR 2017-2019
and its effect on rural employment in
Trans-Gangetic Plains Region-ICAR.
76. Development of edible antimicrobial Diwas Pradhan DST 2017-2020
packaging films for traditional dairy
sweetmeats using metabolites of
lactic and bacteria.
77. Tissue-specific mitochondrial biogenesis, Sadeesh E M DST 2017-2020
transcriptomics and proteomics studies
in buffalo.
95

ANNEXURE IV
The Details of training programme organized by NDRI
Date Training Name T otal Days
Participants
12 3 4
15.01.13 to 30.01.13 Scientific Dairy Farming  5 Nos. 16
19.08.13 to 02.09.13 Scientific Dairy Farming 18 Nos. 14
03.03.14 to 04.03.14 Scientific Dairy Farming 23 Nos. 2
06.03.14 to 07.03.14 Scientific Dairy Farming 17 Nos. 2
12.03.14 to 13.03.14 Scientific Dairy Farming 21 Nos. 2
14.03.14 to 15.03.14 Scientific Dairy Farming 22 Nos. 2
19.03.14 to 20.03.14 Scientific Dairy Farming 19 Nos. 2
21.03.14 to 22.03.14 Scientific Dairy Farming 21 Nos. 2
28.03.14 to 29.03.14 Scientific Dairy Farming 15 Nos. 2
24.07.14 to 25.07.14 Scientific Dairy Farming 18 Nos. 2
13.10.14 to 22.10.14 Scientific Dairy Farming 13 Nos. 10
19.11.14 to 20.11.14 Scientific Dairy Farming 17 Nos. 2
21.11.14 to 22.11.14 Scientific Dairy Farming 18 Nos. 2
28.11.14 to 29.11.14 Scientific Dairy Farming 23 Nos. 2
19.01.15 to 28.01.15 Scientific Dairy Farming 10 Nos. 10
23.02.15 to 01.03.15 Scientific Goat Rearing 21 Nos. 7
Practice
16.03.15 to 17.03.15 Scientific Dairy Farming 26 Nos. 2
18.03.15 to 19.03.15 Scientific Dairy Farming 17 Nos. 2
20.03.15 to 21.03.15 Scientific Dairy Farming 12 Nos. 2
23.03.15 to 24.03.15 Scientific Dairy Farming 23 Nos. 2
96

12 3 4
25.03.15 to 26.03.15 Scientific Dairy Farming 17 Nos. 2
27.03.15 to 28.03.15 Scientific Dairy Farming 33 Nos. 2
04.06.15 to 05.06.15 Scientific Dairy Farming 18 Nos. 2
10.06.15 to 11.06.15 Scientific Dairy Farming 17 Nos. 2
17.06.15 to 18.06.15 Scientific Dairy Farming 20 Nos. 2
12.08.15 to 14.08.15 Artificial Insemination & 26 Nos. 3
Scientific Goat Rearing
Practice
13.12.15 Improved Dairy Farming 25 Nos. 1
Practice
19.07.16 to 28.07.16 Scientific Dairy Farming 08 Nos. 10
22.08.16 to 24.08.16 Scientific Goat Rearing 15 Nos. 3
Practice & Artificial
Insemination
26.04.17 to 06.05.17 Scientific Dairy Farming 11 Nos. 11
14.11.17 to 18.11.17 Scientific Goat Farming 13 Nos. 5
16.01.18 to 25.01.18 Scientific Dairy Farming 14 Nos. 10
Skill development training programme (Artificial Insemination and
Veterinary First Aid)
14.06.13 to 28.06.13 Refresher Course on 9 Nos. 15
Artificial Insemination &
Veterinary First Aid
11.11.13 to 25.11.13 Refresher Course on 7 Nos. 15
Artificial Insemination &
Veterinary First Aid
03.06.14 to 14.07.14 Artificial Insemination & 11 Nos. 42
Veterinary First Aid
13.04.15 to 25.05.15 Artificial Insemination & 14 Nos. 43
Veterinary First Aid
97

12 3 4
19.01.16 to 19.02.16 Artificial Insemination & 18 Nos. 32
Veterinary First Aid
31.01.17 to 03.03.17 Artificial Insemination & 13 Nos. 32
Veterinary First Aid
18.07.17 to 18.08.17 Artificial Insemination & 13 Nos. 32
Veterinary First Aid
27.03.18 to 27.04.18 Artificial Insemination & 17 Nos. 32
Veterinary First Aid
05.06.18 to 06.07.18 Artificial Insemination & 13 Nos. 32
Veterinary First Aid
Training programme provided under TSP
05.12.13 to 13.12.13 Scientific Dairy Farming 15 Nos. 9
12.03.14 to 14.03.14 Clean Milk Production 20 Nos. 3
24.03.14 to 31.03.14 Scientific Dairy Farming 14 Nos. 8
28.07.15 to 06.08.15 Improved Dairy Farming 21 Nos. 10
16.12.15 to 23.12.15 Improved Dairy Farming 16 Nos. 8
14.03.16 to 19.03.16 Scientific Dairy Farming 17 Nos. 6
14.06.16 to 18.06.16 Scientific Dairy Farming 06 Nos. 5
07.12.16 to 09.12.16 Scientific Dairy Farming 12 Nos. 3
20.12.16 to 22.12.16 Scientific Dairy Farming 12 Nos. 3
05.09.17 to 07.09.17 Scientific Dairy Farming 15 Nos. 3
11.09.18 to 13.09.18 Scientific Goat Farming 20 Nos. 3
18.09.18 to 20.09.18 Scientific Dairy Farming 18 Nos. 3
25.09.18 to 27.09.18 Scientific Dairy Farming 22 Nos. 3
98

Training programme provided under NEH
12 3 4
02.03.16 to 05.03.16 Scientific Dairy Farming 13 Nos. 4
for selected Farmer's of
Umlyngka Dairy co-
operative society,
Meghalaya
11.09.17 to 14.09.17 Scientific Dairy Farming 16 Nos. 4
Practice for farmers of
Tripura
99

APPENDIX I
STANDING COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE
(2017-18)
MINUTES OF THE FIFTH SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE
The Committee sat on Thursday, the 27th November, 2017 from 1100
hours to 1240 hours in Committee Room 'E', Basement, Parliament House
Annexe, New Delhi.
PRESENT
Shri Janardan Dwivedi — Chairperson
M
EMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Md. Badaruddoza Khan
3. Dr. Tapas Mandal
4. Shri Janardan Mishra
5. Shri Nityanand Rai
6. Shri C.L. Ruala
7. Shri Virendra Singh
8. Shri Jai Prakash Narayan Yadav
Rajya Sabha
9. Sardar Sukhdev Singh Dhindsa
10. Shri Meghraj Jain
11. Shri Vinay Katiyar
12. Shri Mohd. Ali Khan
13. Shri K.K. Ragesh
14. Shri Ram Nath Thakur
15. Shri Shankarbhai N. Vegad
100

SECRETARIA T
1. Shri D.S. Malha — Joint Secretary
2. Shri Arun K. Kaushik — Director
3. Ms. Juby Amar — Additional Director
4. Shri C. Vanlalruata — Deputy Secretary
WITNESSES
Ministry of Agriculture & Farmers Welfare
(Department of Agricultural Research and Education)
1. Dr. Trilochan Mohapatra Secretary (DARE), DG (ICAR)
2. Dr. Joykrushna Jena Deputy Director General (AS)/Acting
3. Dr. Ashok Kumar Assistant Director General (AH),
ICAR
4. Dr. B.S. Prakash Assistant Director General (ANP),
ICAR
5. Dr. R.R.B. Singh Director (Acting), National Dairy
Research Institute (NDRI)
6. Dr. Bimlesh Mann Joint Director (Research), NDRI
2. At the outset the Joint Secretary informed the Committee that due
to some exigencies, Hon'ble Chairperson would not be able to attend the
sitting today. Then, under Rule 258(3) of the Rules of Procedure and
conduct of Business in Lok Sabha, the Members present, after some
deliberations, chose Shri Janardan Dwivedi to act as a Chairperson.
3. The Hon'ble Chairperson thanked the Members and welcomed
them to the Sitting of the Committee. The Chairperson stated that the
meeting has been called to have a briefing on the Subject 'National Dairy
Research Institute, Karnal - A Performance Review' with the representatives
of the Ministry of Agriculture and Farmers Welfare (Department of
Agricultural Research and Education).
4. After the introduction, one of the representatives of the Department
made a power point presentation and briefed the Committee on the Subject.
Thereafter, the Chairperson initiated the discussion which was taken forward
101

by the representatives of the Department and the Members of the Standing
Committee. The Committee raised several issues/points:
(i) Need to prepare a century vision on the occasion of completion
of 100 years of NDRI;
(ii) Need to identify the problems being faced by the farmers in
dairy sector and increase participation in the training programmes
of the institute;
(iii) Short term courses for dairy entrepreneurs be popularized and
duly advertised;
(iv) Need to focus on the regions having less production of milk;
(v) Adequate funding be made available for the research projects;
(vi) Need to make and popularize user friendly small kits for testing
the adulteration;
(vii) Need to strengthen the regional stations of the institute;
(viii) The funds available for NE region and Tribal Sub-Plan be properly
utilized;
(ix) Need to improve genetic merit local breeds of cattle so that their
capacity of producing milk is increased and quality is also
maintained;
(x) Literature for dairy farmers be published by institute in all
languages.
5. The Representatives of the Department responded to most of the
queries raised by the Members. The Chairperson then thanked the witnesses
for sharing valuable information with the Committee on the subject and
directed them to send, in writing, the requisite information in points/items,
which was not readily available with them to the Secretariat of the Committee
at his earliest.
A copy of the verbatim proceedings of the sitting has been kept
separately.
The Committee then adjourned.
102

APPENDIX II
STANDING COMMITTEE ON AGRICUL TURE
(2018-19)
MINUTES OF THE SEVENTH SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE
The Committee sat on Monday, the 26th November, 2018 from 1100
hours to 1325 hours in Committee Room No. 2, Extension to Parliament
House Annexe Building (Block-A), New Delhi.
PRESENT
Shri Hukmdev Narayan Yadav — Chairperson
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Prof. Ravindra Vishwanath Gaikwad
3. Md. Badarudozza Khan
4. Dr. Tapas Mandal
5. Shri Mukesh Rajput
6. Shri Virendra Singh
7. Shri Jai Prakash Narayan Yadav
Rajya Sabha
8. Sardar Sukhdev Singh Dhindsa
9. Shri K. K. Ragesh
10. Shri Ram Nath Thakur
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Smt. Juby Amar — Additional Director
2. Shri Sumesh Kumar — Under Secretary
103

WITNESSES
Ministry of Agriculture and Farmers Welfare
(Department of Agricultural Research and Education)
1. Dr. Ashok Kumar ADG (AH)
2. Dr. R.S. Gandhi ADG (AP&B)
National Dairy Research Institute, Karnal
1. Dr. R.R.B. Singh Director (Acting)
2. At the outset, the Chairperson welcomed the members and the
representatives of the Ministry of Agriculture and Farmers Welfare
(Department of Agricultural Research & Education) to the Sitting of the
Committee. The Committee, then, took up the subject 'National Dairy
Research Institute, Karnal- A Performance Review' for discussion with the
representatives of Ministry of Agriculture and Farmers Welfare (Department
of Agricultural Research & Education).
3. After the introduction, the Chairperson initiated the discussion
which was carried forward by the representatives of the Department. The
Committee raised several issues/points as briefly mentioned below and
sought clarification/information from the Department:
I. Need to make test kits developed for adulteration in milk more
cost effective, user friendly and easily available;
II. Sustained efforts be made for improvement of indigenous breeds
of cattle;
III. Need to encourage farmers trained by the Institute to become
entrepreneurs/self employed in dairy sector;
IV . Need to coordinate with State Governments and other agencies
so that technology developed by the Institute reach the farmers;
V . Efforts be made by the institute to conduct outreach programmes
through KVKs, ATMA in different parts of the country;
VI. Need to carry out research on development of indigenous, less
known breeds of cow namely Vechur found in South India;
104

VII. Need to make efforts to increase production of milk for
enhancement of farmers income;
VIII. Need to identify, indigenous breeds of cattle and make efforts
for their improvement;
IX. Need to conduct study on sustainability of local breeds of cattle
in other geographical areas;
X. Efforts be made to preserve and develop local buffalo breeds
found mainly in eastern Uttar Pradesh and Bihar; and
XI. Need to expedite the recruitment process for filling various
vacant posts in the institute.
4. The Representatives of the Ministry/Department responded to
most of the queries raised by the Members. The Chairperson then thanked
the witnesses for sharing valuable information with the Committee on the
subject and directed them to send, in writing, the requisite information in
points/items, which was not readily available with them, to the Committee
Secretariat.
5. The Committee also decided to undertake on the spot study visit
to Jaipur, Ahmedabad, Mumbai and Pune in the Month of January, 2019.
The Committee then adjourned.
(A copy of the verbatim proceedings of the Sitting
has been kept separately.)
105

APPENDIX III
STANDING COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE
(2018-19)
MINUTES OF THE TENTH SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE
The Committee sat on Friday, the 04th January, 2019 from 1000 hrs.
to 1050 hrs. in the Chamber of the Hon'ble Chairperson, Standing Committee
on Agriculture, Room No. 138 (Third Floor), Parliament House,
New Delhi.
PRESENT
Shri Hukmdev Narayan Yadav — Chairperson
M
EMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Sanjay Dhotre
3. Shri Sanganna Karadi
4. Shri Nalin Kumar Kateel
5. Smt. Raksha Nikhil Khadse
6. Dr. Tapas Mandal
7. Shri Janardan Mishra
8. Shri Mukesh Rajput
9. Shri C.L. Ruala
Rajya Sabha
10. Shri Rajmani Patel
11. Shri Kailash Soni
12. Shri Mohd. Ali Khan
13. Shri Ram Nath Thakur
14. Dr. Chandrapal Singh Yadav
106

SECRETARIA T
1. Shri Arun K. Kaushik — Director
2. Shri Sumesh Kumar — Deputy Secretary
2. At the outset, Chairperson welcomed the Members to the Sitting
of the Committee. Thereafter, the Committee took up for consideration the
followings draft Reports:
(i) Draft Report on the Subject "National Dairy Research Institute,
Karnal - A Performance Review" of the Ministry of Agriculture
and Farmers Welfare (Department of Agricultural Research and
Education).
(ii) *** ***    ***
3. After some deliberations, the Committee adopted the draft Reports
without any modifications and authorized the Chairperson to finalize and
present these Reports to Parliament.
The Committee then adjourned.
*** Matter not related to this Report.
107

"All Parliamentary Publications including DRSC Reports are
available on sale at the Sales Counter, Reception, Parliament House
(T el. Nos. 23034726, 23034495, 23034496), Agents appointed
by Lok Sabha Secretariat and Publications Division, Ministry
of Information and Broadcasting, CGO Complex, Lodhi Road,
New Delhi (T el. Nos. 24367260, 24365610) and their outlets. The
said information is available on website
‘www.parliamentofindia.nic.in’.
The Souvenir items with logo of Parliament are also available
at Sales Counter, Reception, Parliament House, New Delhi.
The Souvenir items with Parliament Museum logo are available
for sale at Souvenir Shop (T el. No. 23035323), Parliament
Museum, Parliament Library Building, New Delhi. List of these
items are available on the website mentioned above."