SIXTIETH REPORT
STANDING COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE
(2017-2018)
(SIXTEENTH LOK SABHA)
MINISTRY OF FOOD PROCESSING INDUSTRIES
‘DEMANDS FOR GRANTS
(2018-2019)’
[Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/
Recommendations contained in the Fiftieth Report
(Sixteenth Lok Sabha) of the Standing Committee
on Agriculture (2017-2018)]
Presented to Lok Sabha on 09.08.2018
Laid on the Table of Rajya Sabha on 09.08.2018
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
August, 2018/ Shravana, 1940 ( Saka)


COA No. 382
Price : ` 59.00
© 2018 B Y L OK S ABHA S ECRETARIAT
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct
of Business in Lok Sabha (Fifteenth Edition) and printed by
Anupam Art Printers, New Delhi.

CONTENTS
PAGE
COMPOSITION OF THE C OMMITTEE ............................................ (iii)
INTRODUCTION ................................................................. (v)
CHAPTER I Report ........................................................ 1
CHAPTER II Observations/Recommendations which have been
accepted by the Government ........................... 19
CHAPTER III Observations/Recommendations which the Committee
do not desire to pursue in view of the Government’s
replies ........................................................ 34
C
HAPTER IV Observations/Recommendations in respect of which
replies of the Government have not been accepted
by the Committee ......................................... 35
C
HAPTER V Observations/Recommendations in respect of which
final replies of the Government are still awaited ... 36
APPENDICES
I. Extracts of Minutes of Sitting of the Committee held on
07.08.2018 ......................................................... 38
II. Analysis of Action Taken by the Government on the
Recommendations contained in the Fiftieth Report
(Sixteenth Lok Sabha) of the Standing Committee on
Agriculture (2017-2018) ......................................... 40
(i)

COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE
(2017-2018)
Shri Hukmdev Narayan Yadav — Chairperson
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Sanjay Dhotre
3. Prof. Ravindra Vishwanath Gaikwad
4. Shri Sanganna Amarappa Karadi
5. Shri Nalin Kumar Kateel
6. Smt. Raksha Tai Khadase
7. Md. Badaruddoza Khan
8. Shri C. Mahendran
9. Dr. Tapas Mandal
10. Shri Janardan Mishra
@11. Shri Praveen Kumar Nishad
12. Shri Devji M. Patel
13. Shri Nityanand Rai
14. Shri Mukesh Rajput
15. Shri Konakalla Narayana Rao
16. Shri C.L. Ruala
17. Shri Arjun Charan Sethi
18. Shri Virendra Singh
19. Shri Dharmendra Yadav
20. Shri Jai Prakash Narayan Yadav
#21. Vacant
(iii)
@ Shri Praveen Kumar Nishad, MP , Lok Sabha nominated vice Shri Nephiu Rio, MP , Lok Sabha
w.e.f. 27.04.2018 vide Bulletin Part II No. 6866 dated 27.04.2018.
# Vacant due to resignation of Shri B.S. Yeddyurappa from the Membership of Lok Sabha
w.e.f. 18.05.2018 vide Bulletin Part-II Table Office (B) No. 6885 dated 19.05.2018.

Rajya Sabha
22. Sardar Sukhdev Singh Dhindsa
*23. Shri Rajmani Patel
*24. Shri Narayan Rane
*25. Shri Kailash Soni
26. Shri Mohd. Ali Khan
27. Shri K.K. Ragesh
28. Shri Ram Nath Thakur
29. Shri R. Vaithilingam
*30. Shri Harnath Singh Yadav
31. Dr. Chandrapal Singh Yadav
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Shri D.S. Malha — Joint Secretary
2. Shri Arun K. Kaushik — Director
3. Shri S. Vijayaraghavan — Sr. Committee Assistant
(iv)
* vice Shri Janardan Dwivedi, Shri Meghraj Jain, Shri Vinay Katiyar and Shri Shankarbhai
N. Vegad, who ceased to be the Member of the Committee on their retirement from
Rajya Sabha on 27.01.2018, 02.04.2018, 02.04.2018 and 02.04.2018 respectively.

(v)
INTRODUCTION
I, the Chairperson, Standing Committee on Agriculture (2017-18),
having been authorized by the Committee to submit the Report on
their behalf, present this Sixtieth Report on action taken by the
Government on the Observations/Recommendations contained in the
Fiftieth Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) of the Standing Committee on
Agriculture (2017-18) on ‘Demands For Grants (2018-19)’ pertaining to
the Ministry of Food Processing Industries.
2. The Fiftieth Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) of the Standing
Committee on Agriculture (2017-18) on ‘Demands For Grants (2018-19)’
of the Ministry of Food Processing Industries was presented to
Lok Sabha and laid on the Table of Rajya Sabha on 06.03.2018 The
Action Taken Notes on the Report were received on 24.07.2018.
3. The Report was considered and adopted by the Committee at
their sitting held on 07.08.2018.
4. An analysis of the action taken by the Government on the
Observations/Recommendations contained in the Fiftieth Report
(Sixteenth Lok Sabha) of the Committee is given in Appendix.
   N
EW D ELHI; HUKMDEV NARAYAN YADAV ,
06 August, 2018 Chairperson,
15 Shravana, 1940 (Saka) Standing Committee on Agriculture.

1
CHAPTER I
REPORT
This Report of the Standing Committee on Agriculture deals with
the action taken by the Government on the Observations/
Recommendations contained in the Fiftieth Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha)
of the Standing Committee on Agriculture (2017-2018) on “Demands
for Grants (2018-19)’’ pertaining to the Ministry of Food Processing
Industries which was presented to Lok Sabha and laid on the Table of
Rajya Sabha on 06.03.2018.
1.2 The Ministry of Food Processing Industries have furnished Action
Taken Replies in respect of all the 7 Observations/Recommendations
contained in the Report. These replies have been categorized as under:
(i) Observations/Recommendations that have been accepted by
the Government:
Recommendation Nos. 1, 2, 3, 5, 6 and 7
Chapter-II
Total-6
(ii) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which the
Committee do not desire to pursue in view of the
Government’s reply:
Recommendation No. NIL
Chapter-III
Total-0
(iii) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which action
taken replies of the Government have not been accepted by
the Committee:
Recommendation No. NIL
Chapter-IV
Total-0
(iv) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which final
replies of the Government are still awaited:
Recommendation No. 4
Chapter-V
Total- 01

2
1.3 The Committee trust that utmost importance would be given
to implementation of the Observations/Recommendations accepted
by the Government. In cases, where it is not possible for the Ministry
to implement the Recommendations in letter and spirit for any
reason, the matter should be reported to the Committee with the
reasons for non-implementation. The Committee desire that further
Action Taken Notes on the Observations/Recommendations contained
in Chapter-I and final replies in respect of recommendation contained
in Chapter-V of this Report be furnished to them at an early date.
1.4 The Committee will now deal with the action taken by the
Government on some of the Recommendations in the succeeding
paragraphs.
A. Make in India in Food Processing Industries Sector
Recommendation (Para No. 2)
1.5 The Committee had observed/recommended as under:—
“The Committee note that the agricultural production in India has
consistently recorded higher output. India ranks no. 1 in the
production of Milk, Ghee, Pulses, Ginger , Bananas, Guavas, Papayas
and Mangoes. Further, India ranks no. 2 in the world in the
production of Rice, Wheat and several other vegetables & fruits.
Abundant supply of raw materials, increase in demand for food
products and incentives offered by the Government has impacted
food processing sector positively. The food processing sector has
been on average growing at a faster rate than agriculture sector.
During the period 2012-13 to 2015-16, Food Processing Industries
sector grew at an Average Annual Growth Rate (AAGR) of around
2.88 per cent as compared to around 1.88 per cent in Agriculture
and 6.61 per cent in Manufacturing at 2011-12 Prices. Food
Processing Sector has also emerged as an important segment of
the Indian economy in terms of its contribution to GDP , employment
and investment. It is seen that food products industry, compared
to other industries has the largest number of factories and engages
largest number of employees as well. The Committee further note
that Food processing sector has been identified as one of the
priority sector under “MAKE IN INDIA” an initiative of the
Government. With a view to attract investment to this sector ,
Ministry of Food Processing Industry has been implementing schemes
for development of infrastructure for promoting food processing
industries. Mega Food Parks with common utility like road,

3
electricity, water supply, sewage facility and common processing
facility like pulping, packaging, cold storage, dry storage and
logistics are being promoted in areas with strong agricultural
resource base. These parks provide fully developed plots and factory
sheds to entrepreneurs on long term lease basis where they can
set up food processing units in “plug & play model all these can
be achieved if the Major challenges faced by Food Processing
Industries’ like lack of primary processing storage and distribution
facilities, procurement, dependent on Agricultural Produce Market
Committee (APMC), Markets, inadequate link between production
and processing, Lack of product development and innovation,
inadequate focus on quality and safety standards are sorted out.
The Committee, desire the Ministry of Food Processing Industries
should implement all the schemes coming under Make in India with
alacrity in order to promote the vision of Hon’ble Prime Minister
to give priority to this sector under Make in India scheme. The
Committee would like to be informed of the action taken in this
regard.”
1.6 In its Action taken reply, the Ministry has stated as under:—
“The Government has taken the following initiatives for holistic
development of food processing sector:
I. Infrastructure Development:
A new Central Sector Scheme— PRADHAN MANTRI KISAN SAMPADA
YOJANA (PMKSY) was approved on 3rd May, 2017 with an allocation
of Rs.6,000 crore for leveraging investment of Rs. 31400 crore,
handling of 334 lakh MT agro-produce valuing Rs. 1,04,125 crore
which would benefit 20 lakh farmers and generate 5,30,500 direct/
indirect employment in the country. PMKSY is a big step towards
doubling of farmers income, providing better prices to farmers,
creating huge employment opportunities especially in the rural
areas. It provides a comprehensive package for creation of modern
infrastructure with efficient supply chain management from farm
gate to retail outlet. It helps in reducing wastage of agricultural
produce, increasing the processing level, enhancing the export of
the processed foods, enabling availability of hygienic and nutritious
food.
Mega Food Park Scheme: 12 Mega Food Parks have been made
operational as on today benefiting 25,875 farmers and generating
19182 direct employment and 640176 indirect employment and

4
creating preservation and processing capacity of 17.15 lakh MT per
annum.
Integrated Cold Chain and Value Addition Infrastructure:  122
projects under cold chain scheme have been completed benefitting
2,05,000 farmers, preserving 13,58,208 MT of agro-produce,
processing 27,64,870 MT of agro-produce of value Rs. 6,912 crore.
These have created capacity of 44.85 LLPD of milk processing,
4.53 lakh MT of cold storage, IQF of 103.55 MT/HR and 706 Reefer
Trucks.
II. World Food India 2017: First time, a global investment summit
“World Food India 2017” was organized by Ministry of Food
Processing Industries from 3-5 November , 2017, attracted
participation of around 75,000 visitors, 800 global and domestic
exhibitors from 61 countries, 60 global CEOs and 27 States of
India. 36 conferences, State and Country sessions and plenaries
were organized over the three days. 8000 online and offline B2B
meetings were held. Denmark, Germany and Japan participated as
Partner Countries and Italy and Netherlands participated as Focus
Countries.
MoUs for investment worth around US$13.56 billion were signed
between the industry and MoFPI. The major investment
commitments were from France, Germany, Netherlands, UAE, USA,
etc. The sub sectors where MoUs were signed included fruits and
vegetables, packaged foods and confectionary, retail and e-
commerce, cold chain and ware-housing, etc. Investment of 15
Billion USD are in various stages of grounding.
III. FDI in Food Processing Sector:
• Permitting 100% FDI through automatic route in
manufacturing of food products and 100 % FDI under
Government approval route for trading, including through
e-commerce, in respect of food products produced and/or
manufactured in India.
• FDI proposals in food retail worth US$ 705 million have been
approved.
• Overall FDI inflow as green field investment of US$ 2654
million during FY 2014-2018 against US$ 1736 million during
2010-11 to 2013-14.

5
IV. Priority Sector Lending: Food and agro-based processing unit
and cold chain infrastructure have been classified under agriculture
activities for Priority Sector Lending (PSL) as per the revised RBI
Guidelines issued on 23.04.2015.
V. Special Fund: In Budget 2014-15, a special fund of Rs. 2,000 Cr
has been set up in NABARD to provide affordable credit in designated
Food Parks & food processing units to be set up in these parks.
VI. Financial Institution in Food Processing Sector : Government
in the Union Budget 2018-19 has announced to promote
establishment of “Specialized Agro Processing Financial Institutions”
in the food processing sector for creating the enabling environment
for easy credit flow for the growth of the food processing sector
and to meet the increasing credit requirement of the fast-growing
food processing sector in the country. Such financial institutions
promoted under the proposed scheme may act as “Accelerators”
and “Mentors” for the promoters of food processing projects, who
often find it hard to bridge the distance to organized lending.
These Specialized agro-processing financial institutions may focus
on exclusive development of the food processing sector with
following main functions:
• Finance/refinance sectorial needs
• Risk Participation/mitigation
• Structured/customized product solutions
• Knowledge assimilation and dissemination in the financial
sector
• Capacity building of existing Banks and financial institutions
• Designing and running acceleration programme for
entrepreneurs
• Policy advocacy and schematic design for the Governments
VII. Operation Greens: Government in the Union Budget 2018-19
has announced launching of “Operation Greens” on the lines of
“Operation Flood” to promote Farmer Producers Organizations
(FPOs), agri-logistics, processing facilities and professional
management with an allocation of Rs. 500 crores to address the
seasonal and regional production and price fluctuation in these
commodities and to stabilize price in the interest of both farmers
and consumers. Consultation with stakeholders have been held
involving Central/State Government officials, Industry associations,

6
research institutes, other concerned agencies and FPOs. Based on
the inputs from the various stakeholders, the modalities of
‘Operation Greens’ are being worked out by the Ministry.”
1.7 The Committee note that Food Processing Industries has
been identified as one of the priority sector under ‘Make in India’.
The Committee further note that the Ministry of Food Processing
Industries is implementing various schemes for development of
Infrastructure for the promotion of Food Processing Industries. The
Committee had desired that the Ministry of Food Processing Industries
should implement all schemes coming under ‘Make in India’ with
alacrity in order to promote the vision of Hon’ble Prime Minister to
give priority to this sector under ‘Make in India’ scheme. The Ministry
in its Action Taken Replies has stated that, A new Central Sector
Scheme PRADHAN MANTRI KISAN SAMPADA YOJANA (PMKSY) was
approved on 03rd May,2017 (PMKSY) is a big step towards doubling
of farmers income, providing better prices to farmers creating huge
employment opportunities especially in the rural areas. It provides
a comprehensive package for creation of modern infrastructure with
efficient supply chain management from farm gate to retail outlet
also the Committee note that 12 Mega Food Parks have been made
operational as on today, 122 projects under cold chain scheme have
been completed, A global investment summit “World Food India
2017” was organized by Ministry of Food Processing Industries from
3-5 November,2017 , the Union Budget 2018-19 has announced
launching of “Operation Greens” on the lines of “Operation Flood”
to promote Farmer Producers Organizations (FPOs) Consultation with
stakeholders have been held involving Central/State Government
officials, Industry associations, research institutes, other concerned
agencies and FPOs. Based on the inputs from the various
stakeholders, the modalities of “Operation Greens” are being worked
out by the Ministry. The Committee are unhappy to note that till
now only 12 Mega Food Parks have been made operational and only
122 projects under cold chain scheme have been completed. The
Committee therefore once again reiterate its recommendation that
the Ministry should implement all the schemes like Mega Food Parks
and integrated cold chain and value addition Infrastructure in all
parts of the Country and in remote corner of the villages and also
launch the projects Operation Greens without any further delay as
it will not only promote Farmer Producers Organizations (FPOs) and
also will enable in the Doubling of Farmers’ Income. The Committee
would like be informed of the action taken in this regard.

7
B. Utilisation of Funds
Recommendation (Para No. 4)
1.8 The Committee had observed/recommended as under:—
“The Committee are happy to note that an amount of Rs. 1400
crore has been allocated to the Ministry for the year 2018-19.This
is a huge increase in amount as compared to previous year
2017-18 which was Rs. 715 crore.
However , the Committee are unhappy to note that out of the total
allocated funds of Rs. 63.38 crore for North East states, the actual
allocation up to 31.10.17 was Rs. 21.01 crore only. This lower
utilization of funds is stated to be non-availability of good projects
on large scale. The Committee desire that efforts should be made
for proper utilization of funds in North East States and the reason
to be found out for non-availability of projects in this region. The
Ministry should take the opinion of expert and send a fact-finding
Committee in North East, to find out solutions to the problem. The
Committee recommend that the Ministry should identify the areas
in North East States about the availability of various products and
exploit the potential there.”
1.9 The Ministry in its Action Taken Reply has stated as under:—
“In this connection, a meeting was held on 7th May, 2018 at
10:00 AM under the Chairmanship of Secretary (FPI) with
representative of Ministry of DONER. It was decided in the meeting
that MoDONER and MoFPI will convene a meeting of entrepreneurs,
State Government representatives, State Industry Associations etc.
of North Eastern States to discuss issues being considered as
constraints in utilisation of funds under various schemes of the
Ministry and to find out the way to increase proposals from the
region. Accordingly, a meeting of the stakeholders was held in
Guwahati on 11.07.2018 which was chaired by Secretary, DONER
and Secretary, FPI. Mainly the issues relating to low response to
various schemes of the MoFPI in NE Region were discussed in the
meeting. A number of good suggestions were made in the meeting
to attract investment in the food processing sector. These
suggestions are being examined at various levels for following
action. MoFPI is considering modification in its scheme for the NE
Region based on these suggestions.”

8
1.10 The Committee had observed that there is lower utilization
of funds in the North Eastern States and this is due to non-availability
of Good Projects on large scale. The Committee desired that efforts
should be made for proper utilization of funds in North East States
and the reason for non-availability of projects in this region. The
Committee had recommended that the Ministry should identify the
areas in North East States about the availability of various products
and exploit the potential there.
The Ministry of Food Processing Industries in its Action taken
replies have stated that, a meeting Mainly the issues relating to low
response to various schemes of the MoFPI in NE Region were
discussed in the meeting on 11.07.2018. A number of good
suggestions were made in the meeting to attract investment in the
food processing sector. These suggestions are being examined at
various levels for following action. MoFPI is considering modification
in its scheme for the NE Region based on these suggestions.
The Committee are of the firm view that there is great need for
proper development of North Eastern States. They strongly desire
that suggestions given at the meeting held on 11.07.2018 be
examined without any further delay and wherever modifications
are required they may be modified at the earliest. The Committee
feel that this will not only help in the prevention of post Harvest
losses in NE Region but also help in generating Employment
opportunities in the region. The Committees would like to be
informed of the action taken in this regard.
C. Mega Food Parks
Recommendation (Para No. 5)
1.11 The Committee had observed/recommended as under:—
“The schemes of Mega Food Parks was envisaged in the year 2008.
The Mega Food Parks aims at providing modern infrastructure
facilities for food processing along the value chain from farms to
market. The scheme functions on hub and spoke model which
includes creation of infrastructure for primary processing and storage
farm gate at Primary Processing Centre (PPC), Collection Centre
(CC) and common facilities and enabling infrastructure at Centre
Processing Centre. The Government has so far provided 42 Mega
Food Parks out of these 38 projects have been accorded final
approval and in principal approval has been issued to 4 projects.
9 Projects are presently in operation. 6 Mega Food Projects are at

9
advance stage of implementation and are likely to be made
functional in current financial year. 12 more Mega Food Projects
will be made operational in 2018-19 and the remaining in 2019-20.
During The Finance year 2017-18 (as on 31.12.2017), the Ministry
has released grant-in-aid of Rs. 242.23 crores to the ongoing Mega
Food Projects. The Committee have been informed that the Ministry
has invited expression of interest against vacant source of Mega
Food Parks in uncovered Stated i.e. Arunachal Pradesh, Goa, Manipur ,
Meghalaya, Sikkim and Uttar Pradesh, out of 10 proposals received,
in principle approval to 3 proposals have been given. In their
earlier reports on Demands for Grants relating to Ministry, the
Committee have time and again recommended for expeditious
implementation of Mega Food Parks. However they are concerned
to note that the pace of implementation of Mega Food Parks is
very slow. With the inclusion of Mega Food Parks scheme under the
scheme of Pradhan Mantri Kisan Sampadha Yojana, the Committee
hope that these projects will now be implemented at the desired
pace. The Committee recommended to the Ministry to take concrete
steps for early implementation of these projects. They will like to
be apprised of the actions taken in this regards from time to
time.”
1.12 The Ministry in its Action Taken Reply has stated as under:—
“The scheme of Mega Food Parks was envisaged in the year 2008.
The Mega Food Parks aims at providing modern infrastructure
facilities for food processing along the value chain from farm to
market. The scheme functions on hub and spoke model, which
includes creation of infrastructure for primary processing and near
storage the farm gate at Primary Processing Centre (PPC), Collection
Centre (CC) and common facilities and enabling infrastructure at
Central Processing Centre. The Government has so far provided 42
Mega Food Parks out of these 38 projects have been accorded final
approval and in-principle approval has been issued to 4 projects.
10 Projects are presently in operation. 5 Mega Food Parks projects
are at advance stage of implementation and are likely to be made
functional in next 2-3 months. 12 more Mega Food Park projects
will be made operational in 2018-19 and the remaining in 2019-20.
Presently, there is no vacancy available under the Mega Food Park
Scheme. While sanctioning a new Mega Food Park project against
cancellation/withdrawn, due attention is given for selection of the
location of the Mega Food Park.
During the Finance year 2017-18 (as on 16.03.2018), Ministry has
released grant in aid of Rs. 291.37 crores to the ongoing Mega
Food Park projects.

10
Ministry is taking a number of steps to expedite implementation of
the projects as per the timeline. Ministry carefully monitors
implementation of each MFP project individually and makes prompt
& proper assessment at every stage of the project implementation.
Quarterly review of the projects is taken by Secretary, FPI and
Hon’ble Ministry, FPI.
Besides continuous monitoring, the following steps have been taken
by the Ministry for timely implementation of MFP projects:
i. Review and modification in the scheme guidelines from time
to time based on inputs received from various channels/
stakeholders.
ii. Ministry takes up issues with various concerned Departments/
Agencies of the State Governments to expedite statutory
clearances and to remove the bottlenecks in implementation
of projects.
iii. State Governments and Ministry of Finance were pursued to
announce fiscal incentives to the Mega Food Park projects.
iv. Issues were taken up with the Banks/FIs to expedite sanction
of term loan to the project.
v. A fund of Rs. 2000 crore has been created with NABARD to
provide affordable credit to Mega Food Parks and
entrepreneurs setting up units therein.
vi. Infrastructure project status accorded to Mega Food Parks.
vii. Priority Sector Lending (PSL) status accorded to Food
processing projects up to Rs. 100 crore per borrower.
viii. For promotion of investment in Mega Food Parks, awareness
is created through various modes of publicity like,
advertisement in newspapers, Radio and Doordarshan,
participation in domestic and international exhibitions etc.
and organizing seminars/workshops.
ix. District Level Coordination Committees have been constituted
to resolve local issues.
x. Provision has been made in the revised scheme guidelines
for imposing penalty in case of non-adherence to stipulated
timeline for completion of project.
xi. A new Central Sector Scheme for “Creation/Expansion of
Food Processing & Preservation Capacities” under PRADHAN
MANTRI KISAN SAMPADA YOJANA has been approved by the

11
Government Under , one of the scheme “Creation/Expansion
of Food Processing & Preservation Capacities”, financial
assistance is provided to entrepreneurs to set up food
processing units in the Mega Food Parks. Till date 37 units
have been approved in Mega Food Parks under this Scheme.
xii. Ministry vide letter dated 15.12.2017 has requested Finance
Ministry that all Food Parks/Agro processing clusters be
treated at par with State Government Industrial Development
Corporations or Undertakings for applicability of GST on
one-time upfront payment of lease premium on allotment
of developed plots inside the Mega Food Park.”
1.13 The Committee were constrained to note that the scheme
of Mega Food Parks which was envisaged in the year 2008 is being
implemented at a very slow pace. They had hoped that with the
inclusion of Mega Food Parks scheme under the scheme of Pradhan
Mantri Kisan Sampada Yojana (PMKSY) the projects will now be
implemented at the desired pace.
The Ministry in its Action Taken reply have stated that the
Government has so far approved 42 Mega Food Parks out of these
38 Projects have been accorded final approval and in-principle
approval has been issued to 4 projects and 10 projects and presently
in operation 5 Mega Food Parks projects are at advance stage of
implementation and all Mega Food Parks will be made operational in
2019-20 The Ministry is taking various steps to implement Mega
Food Parks Projects. The Committee are unhappy to note that inspite
of being one of the flagship programmes of the Ministry the envisaged
Mega Food Parks have failed to come up even after a period of
10 years.
The Committee, therefore recommend that the Ministry should
make sincere efforts to implement the Scheme. They would like to
be informed of the action taken in this regard.
D. Cold Chain Projects
Recommendation (Para No. 6)
1.14 The Committee had observed/recommended as under:—
“The Committee note that despite the large scale agricultural
production in India, food security issues are major concerns for
policy makers in the country. A nation-wide study on quantitative

12
assessment of harvest and post-harvest losses for 46 agricultural
produces in 106 randomly selected districts was carried out by
Central Institute of Post-Harvest Engineering & Technology (CIPHET),
Ludhiana. The aforesaid study considers the quantitative loss as
the material rendered “unfit for human consumption”. The different
stages considered for assessment of losses are harvesting, collection,
thrashing, grading/sorting, winnowing/cleaning, drying, packaging,
transportation and storage depending upon the commodity and
one of the main reasons for the high losses in the supply chain of
perishables is the absence of adequate and efficient cold chain
infrastructure right from the farm gate to the consumer. In a
repeat study conducted by the Central Institute of Post-Harvest
Engineering & Technology (CIPHET), Ludhiana during 2012-14 on
behalf of Ministry of Food Processing Industries on Assessment of
Quantitative Harvest and Post-Harvest Losses of Major Crops and
Commodities in India, average range of losses for foodgrains, oils
seeds and fruits & vegetables were found to be between 4% to 16%
resulting in annual loss of 92,651 crore at price index of 2014. The
Committee note that a Committee under the Chairmanship of
Dr. Sumitra Chaudhuri, Member , Planning Commission constituted
in year 2012 on encouraging investments in supply chains including
provision for cold chain for more efficient farm distribution. Further
the Committee note that to accelerate the availability of cold
storage and to improve the efficiency of Cold Chain Management,
a Task Force set up by the PMO in 2014 under the Chairmanship
of Secretary, FPI noted that a capacity of about 8 Million Tonnes
has been created since NSEL assessment and thus the gap may be
around 29 million Tonnes and inter alia,  recommended that
Government should aim at creating additional capacity of 7.5 million
tonnes over the next five years for which around Rs. 6100 crore
would be required. Out of this, Department of Agriculture &
Cooperation can take up 5 million tonnes under MIDH (2.5 million
tonnes each by NHM and NHB) and MoFPI can take up 2.5 million
tonnes. The Committee desire the Ministry to expedite the
implementation of the suggestions given by Dr . Sumitra Chaudhuri
Committee and also the task force set up by the PMO in 2014
under the Chairmanship of Secretary, Food Processing Industries.
The Committee recommend that (i) in addition to large scale cold
chain projects, cold storage plants at small scale, such as village
co-operative at the district village level and try to cover all the
remote part of village so that the objective of arresting Post
Harvest Losses of agriculture and horticulture produce can be
achieved (ii) a fresh nation-wide study in qualitative adjustment of

13
Harvest and Post-Harvest losses for maximum agricultural produces
be conducted. The Committee would like to be informed of the
action taken in this regard.”
1.15 The Ministry in its Action Taken Reply has stated as under:—
“Ministry of Food Processing Industries is implementing a central
sector Scheme for Integrated Cold Chain and Value Addition
Infrastructure in order to arrest post-harvest losses of horticulture
& non-horticulture produce and to provide remunerative prices to
farmers. Under the scheme creation of farm level infrastructure
has been made mandatory which will give more thrust to facilities
for collection and storage of agriculture/horticulture produce at
farm level to cover farmers of the remote areas so that post-
harvest losses of agriculture and horticulture produce can be
arrested. The promoters are also setting up smaller cold storage
and pack house facility at village/farm level which is beneficial for
the farmers. The scheme for Integrated Cold Chain and Value
Addition Infrastructure is demand driven and entrepreneurs are
free to apply for upgradation and modernization of their existing
integrated cold chain facilities under the Scheme.”
1.16 The Committee had noted that food security issues are
major concerns for policy makers in the country. A nationwide
study on Harvest and Post Harvest losses found that one of the main
reason for the high losses in the supply chain of perishables is the
absence of adequate and efficient cold chain infrastructure right
from the farm gate to the consumers, annual loss of Rs. 92,651
crore was estimated for the year 2014.
The Ministry in its Action taken reply have stated that Ministry
of Food Processing Industries is implementing a Central Sector
Scheme for Integrated Cold Chain and Value Addition Infrastructure
in order to arrest Post-Harvest losses of horticulture & non-
horticulture produce and to provide remunerative prices to farmers.
Under the scheme creation of farm level infrastructure has been
made mandatory which will give more thrust to facilities for
collection and storage of agriculture/horticulture produce at farm
level to cover farmers of the remote areas so that Post-Harvest
losses of agriculture and horticulture produce can be arrested.
The Committee desire that the implementation of the suggestions
given by Dr. Sumitra Chaudhuri Committee should be expedited.
The Committee feel that the need of the hour is to prevent Harvest

14
and Post-Harvest losses by establishing efficient cold chain
management in remote and rural areas so that farmers can reap the
benefit of their produce. The Committee would like to be informed
of the action taken in this regard.
E. Pradhan Mantri Kisan Sampada Yojana
Recommendation (Para No. 7)
1.17 The Committee had observed/recommended as under:—
“The Committee are glad to note that Pradhan Mantri Kisan Sampada
Yojana (PMKSY) has been approved with an allocation of Rs. 6,000
Crore for the period 2016-20 coterminous with the 14th Finance
Commission cycle. It will not only provide a big boost to the
growth of the food processing sector in the country but also help
in providing better prices to farmers and is a big step towards
doubling farmers income, creating employment opportunities
especially in the rural areas, reducing wastage of agricultural
produce, increasing the processing level and enhancing the export
of the processed foods. The PMKSY will attend to the requirement
of the entire value chain from farm gate to retail outlet and
human resources development through various schemes incorporated
into it. This will lead to holistic development of the food processing
sector in the country. The Pradhan Mantri Kisan Sampada Yojana is
an umbrella scheme of seven schemes namely: Scheme for Mega
Food Park, Scheme for Integrated Cold Chain and Value Addition
Infrastructure, Scheme for Creation/Expansion of Food Processing
& Preservation Capacities, Scheme for Infrastructure for Agro-
processing Clusters, Scheme for Creation of Backward and Forward
Linkage, Scheme for Food Safety and Quality Assurance
infrastructure and Scheme for Human Resources and Institutions.
The Committee feel that various schemes under PMKSY will prove
to be a milestone for the holistic development of Food Processing
Industries.
The Committee desire that keeping in view the role of Food
Processing Industries in terms of its contribution in reduction of
wastage, farm produce wastages and ensuring higher returns to
farmers, the Ministry of Food Processing Industries should make all
out efforts to implement the PMKSY with the avowed objective of
doubling farmers income by 2022, generation of employment,
increase in export earning, addressing critical issues of food security,
and provide wholesome nutritious food to the masses be achieved.”

15
1.18 The Ministry in its Action Taken Reply has stated as under:-
“The Government of India is making all out efforts to implement
PMKSY for achieving desired objectives. The budget allocation for
the schemes of the Ministry has been doubled in 2018-19 to
Rs. 1400.00 crore from Rs. 725.00 crore in 2017-18 for effective
implementation of various Schemes. The status of implementation
of Schemes under PMKSY is given below:
Mega Food Parks Scheme
> Ministry has accorded approval to 42 Mega Food Parks (MFPs)
in the country for creation of modern infrastructure facilities
for food processing with a cluster-based approach. These 42
MFPs are expected to create total facilities to process
approximately 42 lakh MT of agri-horti produce in the country
amounting to Rs. 10,500 crores of produces. These parks
are expected to generate direct and indirect employment
to about 2.10 lakh persons and would benefit to about
10.50 lakh farmers.
> 12 MFPs have become operational so far in the State of
Uttarakhand (Haridwar and Udham Singh Nagar), Andhra
Pradesh (Chittoor), Karnataka (Tumkur), Punjab (Fazilka),
Assam (Nalbari), Jharkhand (Ranchi), Madhya Pradesh
(Khargone), West Bengal (Murshidabad), Odisha (Rayagada),
Maharashtra (Satara) and Rajasthan (Ajmer).
> Another 15 MFPs are targeted for operationalization in the
current financial year in the State of Maharashtra
(Aurangabad), Gujarat (Surat), Tripura (Sikaria), Mizoram
(Aizwal), Andhra Pradesh (West Godavari), Telangana
(Nizamabad), Himachal Pradesh (Una), Chhattisgarh (Raipur),
Haryana (Sonipat), Madhya Pradesh (Dewas), Punjab
(Ludhiana), Odisha (Khurda), Bihar (Khargaria), Jammu &
Kashmir (Pulwama) and Kerala (Palakkad).
Integrated Cold Chain and Value Addition Infrastructure scheme
> Integrated Cold Chain and Value Addition Infrastructure
scheme is being implemented with the objective of arresting
Post-Harvest losses of horticulture & non-horticulture produce
and providing remunerative price to farmers for their
produce.
> Ministry of Food Processing Industries (MoFPI) has so far
sanctioned 238 cold chain projects for financial assistance.

16
Out of which 122 projects have achieved completion and
started commercial production.
> Another 50 Cold Chain projects will be assisted during 2018-
19 for which fresh EoI has been issued on 10.03.2018 with
the closing date 30.04.2018.
> Each Cold Chain project helps in creating direct employment
for about 100 persons and indirect employment for about
500 persons. Each Cold Chain project links about 500 farmers
in the fruits & vegetables sector and 5000 farmers in dairy/
fishery/marine sector.
Infrastructure for Agro-Processing Clusters Scheme
> The Scheme for Creation of Infrastructure for Agro-Processing
Clusters would incentivize the setting up of 100 agro-
processing clusters in the country.
> Till date, eight (8) Agro-Processing Clusters located at Nagpur,
Amravati, Nashik, Nanded, Kolhapur and Osmanabad in State
of Maharashtra, Karnal (Haryana) and Kanpur Dehat (UP)
have been approved.
> Fresh EoI issued on 22.12.2017 with closing date 30.06.2018.
Creation of Backward and Forward Linkages Scheme
> With the objective of providing effective and seamless
backward and forward integration for processed food industry,
the Ministry has launched the new scheme for Creation of
Backward and Forward Linkages. The Scheme will enable
linking of farmers to processors and the market thereby
ensuring remunerative prices for their produce.
> 31 proposals are currently under final approval by the
Ministry. Fresh EoI has been issued on 07.03.2018 with closing
date 30.04.2018.
Creation/Expansion of Food Processing and Preservation
Capacities Scheme
> The main objective of the Scheme is for promotion of
processing/preservation of agro food products and
modernization/capacity enhancement of food processing
units which will help in increasing the level of processing,
value addition thereby reduction of wastage.

17
> 52 new projects have been approved with estimated capacity
creation of about 2,500 MT per day. Fresh EoI issued on
29.12.2017 with closing date 15.06.2018.
Scheme of Setting up/Upgradation of Food Testing Laboratory
Ministry of Food Processing Industries, under the Scheme for Quality
Assurance, provides financial assistance in the form of grant-in-aid
for Setting up/Upgradation of Food Testing Laboratories so as to
ensure compliance of domestic and international standards on food
in case of domestic manufacture, imports as well as exports, to
establish a surveillance system for monitoring the quality and
composition of food and to analyse the samples received from
processing industry and other stakeholders.
Under the Scheme, Central/State Government organizations/
Government universities (including deemed universities) and all
other implementing agencies/private sector organizations are
eligible for grant-in-aid as per the revised scheme guidelines w.e.f.
01.01.2017.
Proposals approved during the 12th Plan period (i.e up to 31.03.2016)
are being dealt with by the Indian Council of Agricultural Research
(ICAR) under the Ministry of Agriculture & Farmers Welfare,
Department of Agricultural Research & Education (DARE) as per the
earlier agreement for implementation of the scheme. It has since
been decided to implement the Scheme by the Ministry on its own
and the proposals received under the revised guidelines
(w.e.f.01.01.2017) are being dealt by the Ministry.
Benefits of the Scheme:
(i) Network of laboratories will help in carrying out various
tests required to support the Food Safety regulatory
activities.
(ii) Help the food processing industry in regard to quality control
measures, technical guidance, awareness creation, etc.
(iii) Ensures the availability of safe and wholesome food products
to the consumers.
Under the Scheme, Ministry of Food Processing Industries has so
far sanctioned 111 Food Testing Laboratories for financial assistance.
Out of which 74 Food Testing Laboratories have been achieved
completion.”

18
1.19 The Committee had noted that Pradhan Mantri Kisan
Sampada Yojana (PMKSY) has been approved with an allocation of
Rs. 6000 crore for the period 2016-20. The Scheme is an umbrella
scheme of seven schemes. The Committee had desired that Ministry
of Food Processing Industries should make all out efforts to
implement the PMKSY. The Ministry in its Action taken replies stated
that the Government is making all out efforts to implement PMKSY
for achieving desired objectives and the Status is 42 Mega Food
Parks has been accorded approval. Regarding Integrated Cold Chain
and value addition Infrastructure scheme so far sanctioned 238 cold
chain projects for financial assistance out of which 122 projects
have achieved completion and started commercial production
regarding Infrastructure for Agro-Processing cluster scheme would
incentivize the setting up of 100 agro processing clusters in the
country. Fresh EoI issued on 22.12.2017 with closing date
30.06.2018. Regarding Creation of Backward and Forward linkages
scheme 31 proposals are currently under final approval by the
Ministry. Fresh EOI has been issued on 7.03.2018 with closing date
30.04.2018. Regarding Creation/Expansion of Food Processing and
Preservation Capacities Scheme 52 new projects have been approved
with estimated capacity creation of about 2,500 MT per day, Fresh
EOI issued on 29.12.2017 with closing date 15.06.2018. Regarding
Scheme of Setting up/upgradation of Food Testing Laboratory
111 Food Testing Laboratories for financial assistance. Out of which
74 food Testing Laboratories have been achieved completion. The
Committee, therefore, reiterate its recommendation that the Ministry
should implement the PMKSY with all sincerity as it will facilitate
to a great extent in doubling of the Farmer’s Income by 2022,
generation of employment, increase in export of earning and address
critical issues of Food Security and provide wholesome, nutritious
food to the masses. The Committee would like to be informed of
the action taken in this regard.

19
CHAPTER II
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS THAT HAVE BEEN
ACCEPTED BY THE GOVERNMENT
Implementation of Policies of MOFPI
Recommendation (Para No. 1)
The Committee noted that the Food Processing has tremendous
potential for enabling the farmer to add value to their produce both
in terms of quantity and quality to meet the requirements and standards
of the market at all stages of value chain, processing and retailing.
Considerable investments are required in rural infrastructure and in
components of the supply chain by way of grading and packing centers.
The Committee also note that the major issue of the country is to
ensure remunerative prices to the farmers for their produce. If the
surplus production of cereals, fruits, vegetables, milk, fish, meat and
poultry, etc. are processed and marketed both inside and outside the
country, there will be greater opportunities for adding to the income
of farmers and employment and creating market for export of agro
foods.
The Committee feel that it requires policies and plans for
improvements of food processing infrastructure including up-gradation
of technology, enforcement of quality standards and promoting
investment in food processing. Food Processing adds value, enhances
shelf-life and reduces wastage. The Committee, therefore, recommend
that the Ministry should implement its policies both long and short
terms strategies in a time bound manner and also provide requisite
infrastructure facilities to entrepreneurs who are setting up food
processing units and act as catalyst for bringing in greater investment
into this sector by guiding and helping the industry and also incentives
be given to industries being set up in rural areas are establishment of
processing units in rural areas. The Committee feel that it will not
only achieve the avowed objective of doubling the farmers income,
also reduce harvest and post-harvest losses of major agricultural
produces and add income to national exchequer. The Committee would
like to be informed of the action taken by the Ministry in this regard.
Reply of the Government
The Pradhan Mantri Kisan Sampada Yojana (PMKSY) is a big step
towards doubling of farmers income, providing better prices to farmers,

20
creating huge employment opportunities especially in rural areas. It
provides a comprehensive package for creation of modern infrastructure
with efficient supply chain management from farm gate to retail outlet.
It helps in reducing wastage of agriculture produce, increasing the
processing level, enhancing the export of the processed foods, enabling
availability of hygienic and nutritious food.
The Government has also announced the following in Budget 2018-19
for giving a fillip to the Food Processing sector :
(i) Allocation of Ministry of Food Processing has been doubled
from Rs. 715 crore in RE 2017-18 to Rs. 1400 crore in BE
2018-19.
(ii) Government will promote establishment of specialized agro-
processing financial institutions in food processing sector.
(iii) Government proposes to launch an ‘‘Operation Greens’’ on
the lines of ‘‘Operation Flood’’. ‘‘Operation Greens’’ shall
promote Farmer Producers Organizations (FPOs), agri-
logistics, processing facilities and professional management.
Allocation of Rs. 500 crore has been made for this purpose.
Make in India in Food Processing Industries Setor
Recommendation (Para No. 2)
The Committee note that the agricultural production in India has
consistently recorded higher output. India ranks no. 1 in the production
of Milk, Ghee, Pulses, Ginger , Bananas, Guavas, Papayas and Mangoes.
Further , India ranks no.2 in the world in the production of Rice, Wheat
and several other vegetables & fruits. Abundant supply of raw materials,
increase in demand for food products and incentives offered by the
Government has impacted food processing sector positively. The food
processing sector has been on average growing at a faster rate than
agriculture sector During the period 2012-13 to 2015-16, Food Processing
Industries sector grew at an Average Annual Growth Rate (AAGR) of
around 2.88 per cent as compared to around 1.88 per cent in Agriculture
and 6.61 per cent in Manufacturing at 2011-12 Prices. Food Processing
Sector has also emerged as an important segment of the Indian economy
in terms of its contribution to GDP , employment and investment. It is
seen that food products industry, compared to other industries has the
largest number of factories and engages largest number of employees
as well. The Committee further note that Food processing sector has
been identified as one of the priority sector under “MAKE IN INDIA”
an initiative of the Government. With a view to attract investment to

21
this sector , Ministry of Food Processing Industry has been implementing
schemes for development of infrastructure for promoting food processing
industries. Mega Food Parks with common utility like road, electricity,
water supply, sewage facility and common processing facility like
pulping, packaging, cold storage, dry storage and logistics are being
promoted in areas with strong agricultural resource base. These parks
provide fully developed plots and factory sheds to entrepreneurs on
long term lease basis where they can set up food processing units in
‘plug & play model all these can be achieved if the Major challenges
faced by Food Processing Industries’ like lack of primary processing
storage and distribution facilities, procurement, dependent on
Agricultural Produce Market Committee (APMC), Markets, inadequate
link between production and processing, Lack of product development
and innovation, inadequate focus on quality and safety standards are
sorted out.
The Committee, desire the Ministry of Food Processing Industries
should implement all the schemes coming under Make in India with
alacrity in order to promote the vision of Hon’ble Prime Minister to
give priority to this sector under Make in India scheme. The Committee
would like to be informed of the action taken in this regard.
Reply of the Government
The Government has taken the following initiatives for holistic
development of food processing sector:
I. Infrastructure Development:
A new Central Sector Scheme—PRADHAN MANTRI KISAN SAMPADA
YOJANA (PMKSY) was approved on 3rd May, 2017 with an allocation of
Rs. 6,000 crore for leveraging investment of Rs. 31400 crore, handling
of 334 lakh MT agro-produce valuing Rs. 1,04,125 crore which would
benefit 20 lakh farmers and generate 5,30,500 direct/indirect
employment in the country. PMKSY is a big step towards doubling of
farmers income, providing better prices to farmers, creating huge
employment opportunities especially in the rural areas. It provides a
comprehensive package for creation of modern infrastructure with
efficient supply chain management from farm gate to retail outlet. It
helps in reducing wastage of agricultural produce, increasing the
processing level, enhancing the export of the processed foods, enabling
availability of hygienic and nutritious food.
Mega Food Park Scheme: 12 Mega Food Parks have been made
operational as on today benefiting 25,875 farmers and generating

22
19182 direct employment and 640176 indirect employment and creating
preservation and processing capacity of 17.15 lakh MT per annum.
Integrated Cold Chain and Value Addition Infrastructure: 122 projects
under cold chain scheme have been completed benefitting 2,05,000
farmers, preserving 13,58,208 MT of agro-produce, processing 27,64,870
MT of agro-produce of value Rs. 6,912 crore. These have created
capacity of 44.85 LLPD of milk processing, 4.53 lakh MT of cold storage,
IQF of 103.55 MT/HR and 706 Reefer Trucks.
II. World Food India 2017: First time, a global investment summit
“World Food India 2017” was organized by Ministry of Food Processing
Industries from 3-5 November , 2017, attracted participation of around
75,000 visitors, 800 global and domestic exhibitors from 61 countries,
60 global CEOs and 27 States of India. 36 conferences, State and
Country sessions and plenaries were organized over the three days.
8000 online and offline B2B meetings were held. Denmark, Germany
and Japan participated as Partner Countries and Italy and Netherlands
participated as Focus Countries.
MoUs for investment worth around US$13.56 billion were signed
between the industry and MoFPI. The major investment commitments
were from France, Germany, Netherlands, UAE, USA, etc. The sub
sectors where MoUs were signed included fruits and vegetables,
packaged foods and confectionary, retail and e-commerce, cold chain
and ware-housing, etc. Investment of 15 Billion USD are in various
stages of grounding.
III. FDI in F ood Processing Sector:
• Permitting 100% FDI through automatic route in
manufacturing of food products and 100% FDI under
Government approval route for trading, including through
e-commerce, in respect of food products produced and/or
manufactured in India.
• FDI proposals in food retail worth US$ 705 million have been
approved.
• Overall FDI inflow as green field investment of US$ 2654
million during FY 2014-2018 against US$ 1736 million during
2010-11 to 2013-14.
IV. Priority Sector Lending: Food and agro-based processing unit
and cold chain infrastructure have been classified under agriculture
activities for Priority Sector Lending (PSL) as per the revised RBI
Guidelines issued on 23.04.2015.

23
V. Special Fund: In Budget 2014-15, a special fund of Rs. 2,000 Cr.
has been set up in NABARD to provide affordable credit in designated
Food Parks & food processing units to be set up in these parks.
VI. Financial Institution in Food Processing Sector: Government in
the Union Budget 2018-19 has announced to promote establishment of
“Specialized Agro Processing Financial Institutions” in the food processing
sector for creating the enabling environment for easy credit flow for
the growth of the food processing sector and to meet the increasing
credit requirement of the fast-growing food processing sector in the
country. Such financial institutions promoted under the proposed scheme
may act as “Accelerators” and “Mentors” for the promoters of food
processing projects, who often find it hard to bridge the distance to
organized lending. These Specialized agro-processing financial
institutions may focus on exclusive development of the food processing
sector with following main functions:
• Finance/refinance sectorial needs
• Risk Participation/mitigation
• Structured/customized product solutions
• Knowledge assimilation and dissemination in the financial
sector
• Capacity building of existing Banks and financial institutions
• Designing and running acceleration programme for
entrepreneurs
• Policy advocacy and schematic design for the Governments
VII. Operation Greens: Government in the Union Budget 2018-19
has announced launching of “Operation Greens” on the lines of
“Operation Flood” to promote Farmer Producers Organizations (FPOs),
agri-logistics, processing facilities and professional management with
an allocation of Rs. 500 crores to address the seasonal and regional
production and price fluctuation in these commodities and to stabilize
price in the interest of both farmers and consumers. Consultation with
stakeholders have been held involving Central/State Government
officials, Industry associations, research institutes, other concerned
agencies and FPOs. Based on the inputs from the various stakeholders,
the modalities of “Operation Greens” are being worked out by the
Ministry.
Comments of the Committee
For comments of the Committee please refer to Para No. 1.7 of
Chapter-I of this Report.
[F .No. 6-08/2018-Parl. Dated 24.07.2018]

24
Contribution of Food Processing Sector
Recommendation (Para No. 3)
The Committee observe that a well-developed food processing
sector with higher level of processing helps in the reduction of wastage,
improves value addition, promotes crop diversification, ensures better
return to the farmers, promotes employment as well as increases
export earnings. This sector is also capable of addressing critical issues
of food security, food inflation and providing wholesome, nutritious
food to the masses. Food Processing Sector has also emerged as an
important segment of the Indian economy in terms of its contribution
to GDP , employment and investment. The sector constitutes as much
as 8.71 per cent and 10.04 per cent of GVA in Manufacturing and
Agriculture sector respectively in 2015-16 at 2011-12 prices. This sector
is highly labour intensive per unit of capital. Despite low capital
intensity, the output of food products is not compromised as it is
second largest among all industries. The Food processing Industry
engages largest number of persons as compared to other industries
while generating almost as high the output level as in other industries.
The number of persons employed per Rs.1 crore of investment is 9.24
for the entire food processing industry. The percentage of GVA in these
sub-sectors thus needs to be increased so that the bulk of the persons
employed in the food processing industries earn higher remuneration
as well. The Committee therefore recommend that boost should be
given to this industry by bringing in greater investment and creating
market for exports and creating a conducive environment for healthy
growth of Food Processing Industries by inducting latest technologies
in the Food Processing sector.
Reply of the Government
MoFPI has taken up following issues with Ministry of Commerce &
Industry in different occasion to boost food exports from India:
a. In case of Authorization for import of Tea, minimum value
addition under Advance Authorization is mandated at 50%.
The limit may be raised to 100% for protecting the domestic
Tea industry.
b. The EPCG license holder is required to fulfill 50% of the
export obligation in the 1st 4 years. However , Agriculture
sector does not need to comply the said provision. In this
regard “Agriculture” may be redefined as “Agriculture &
Food Processing” so that Food Processing Sector could also
avail the said benefit.

25
c. Domestic manufacturers of food processing machineries may
also be allowed to import capital goods at 0% concessional
customs duty with an export obligations period of 12 years
based on the certificate issued by Ministry of Food Processing
Industries as sponsoring authority. This is presently allowed
for Ministry of Agriculture.
d. Export of Milk & Milk products and export of Meat & Meat
products fall under the ineligible categories of MEIS. These
sectors may also be made eligible under MEIS to benefit the
food processing industries.
e. Currently, services incidental to Agriculture are entitled for
3% duty credit scrips. In this regard “Agriculture” may be
redefined as “Agriculture & Food Processing” so that
consultancy and other business services related to Food
Processing Industries could also avail the said benefit.
f. EPCG benefit for second-hand food processing machineries
not less than 5 years old and domestic non-availability is
also there.
g. To increase duty-free scrips on agricultural exports under
MEIS from existing 5% to 7%.
Exports of processed food products require issuance of health
certificate by Export Inspection Agency (EIA). For this, exporters need
to submit sample in EIA approved lab, which is tested by the respective
lab and on the basis of the test result EIA issue Health Certificate. For
issuance of health certificate, EIA charges 0.46% of FOB Value of
Invoice/Exports from exporters. Economic Division suggested that the
Government fixes EIA fee as Rs. 100/certificate instead of 0.46% of
FOB Value of Invoice/Exports.
Mega Food Parks
Recommendation (Para No. 5)
The schemes of Mega Food Parks was envisaged in the year 2008.
The Mega Food Parks aims at providing modern infrastructure facilities
for food processing along the value chain from farms to market. The
scheme functions on hub and spoke model which includes creation of
infrastructure for primary processing and storage farm gate at Primary
Processing Centre (PPC), Collection Centre (CC) and common facilities
and enabling infrastructure at Central Processing Centre. The
Government has so far provided 42 Mega Food Parks out of these 38
projects have been accorded final approval and in principle approval

26
has been issued to 4 projects. 9 Projects are presently in operation.
6 Mega Food Projects are at advance stage of implementation and are
likely to be made functional in current financial year. 12 more Mega
Food Projects will be made operational in 2018-19 and the remaining
in 2019-20. During The Finance year 2017-18 (as on 31.12.2017) , the
Ministry has released grant-in-aid of Rs. 242.23 crores to the ongoing
Mega Food Projects. The Committee have been informed that the
Ministry has invited expression of interest against vacant source of
Mega Food Parks in uncovered States i.e. Arunachal Pradesh, Goa,
Manipur , Meghalaya, Sikkim and Uttar Pradesh, out of 10 proposals
received, in principle approval to 3 proposals have been given. In their
earlier reports on Demands for Grants relating to Ministry, the
Committee have time and again recommended for expeditious
implementation of Mega Food Parks. However they are concerned to
note that the pace of implementation of Mega Food Parks is very slow.
With the inclusion of Mega Food Parks scheme under the scheme of
Pradhan Mantri Kisan Sampadha Yojana, the Committee hope that these
projects will now be implemented at the desired pace. The Committee
recommended to the Ministry to take concrete steps for early
implementation of these projects. They will like to be apprised of the
actions taken in this regard from time to time.
Reply of the Government
The scheme of Mega Food Parks was envisaged in the year 2008.
The Mega Food Parks aims at providing modern infrastructure facilities
for food processing along the value chain from farm to market. The
scheme functions on hub and spoke model, which includes creation of
infrastructure for primary processing and near storage the farm gate
at Primary Processing Centre (PPC), Collection Centre (CC) and common
facilities and enabling infrastructure at Central Processing Centre. The
Government has so far provided 42 Mega Food Parks out of these
38 projects have been accorded final approval and in-principle approval
has been issued to 4 projects. 10 Projects are presently in operation.
5 Mega Food Parks projects are at advance stage of implementation
and are likely to be made functional in next 2-3 months. 12 more Mega
Food Park projects will be made operational in 2018-19 and the
remaining in 2019-20. Presently, there is no vacancy available under
the Mega Food Park Scheme. While sanctioning a new Mega Food Park
project against cancellation/withdrawn, due attention is given for
selection of the location of the Mega Food Park.
During the Financial year 2017-18 (as on 16.03.2018), Ministry has
released grant in aid of Rs. 291.37 crores to the ongoing Mega Food
Park projects.

27
Ministry is taking a number of steps to expedite implementation of
the projects as per the timeline. Ministry carefully monitors
implementation of each MFP project individually and makes prompt &
proper assessment at every stage of the project implementation.
Quarterly review of the projects is taken by Secretary, FPI and Hon’ble
Ministry, FPI.
Besides continuous monitoring, the following steps have been taken
by the Ministry for timely implementation of MFP projects:
i. Review and modification in the scheme guidelines from time
to time based on inputs received from various channels/
stakeholders.
ii. Ministry takes up issues with various concerned Departments/
Agencies of the State Governments to expedite statutory
clearances and to remove the bottlenecks in implementation
of projects.
iii. State Governments and Ministry of Finance were pursued to
announce fiscal incentives to the Mega Food Park projects.
iv. Issues were taken up with the Banks/FIs to expedite sanction
of term loan to the project.
v. A fund of Rs. 2000 crore has been created with NABARD to
provide affordable credit to Mega Food Parks and
entrepreneurs setting up units therein.
vi. Infrastructure project status accorded to Mega Food Parks.
vii. Priority Sector Lending (PSL) status accorded to Food
processing projects up to Rs.100 crore per borrower.
viii. For promotion of investment in Mega Food Parks, awareness
is created through various modes of publicity like,
advertisement in newspapers, Radio and Doordarshan,
participation in domestic and international exhibitions etc.
and organizing seminars/workshops.
ix. District Level Coordination Committees have been constituted
to resolve local issues.
x. Provision has been made in the revised scheme guidelines
for imposing penalty in case of non-adherence to stipulated
timeline for completion of project.
xi. A new Central Sector Scheme for “Creation/Expansion of
Food Processing & Preservation Capacities” under PRADHAN
MANTRI KISAN SAMPADA YOJANA has been approved by the

28
Govt. Under, one of the scheme “Creation/Expansion of
Food Processing & Preservation Capacities”, financial
assistance is provided to entrepreneurs to set up food
processing units in the Mega Food Parks. Till date 37 units
have been approved in Mega Food Parks under this Scheme.
xii. Ministry  vide letter dated 15.12.2017 has requested Finance
Ministry that all Food Parks/Agro processing clusters be
treated at par with State Government Industrial Development
Corporations or Undertakings for applicability of GST on
one-time upfront payment of lease premium on allotment
of developed plots inside the Mega Food Park.
Comments of the Committee
For comments of the Committee please refer to Para No.1.13 of
Chapter-I of this Report.
[F .No. 6-08/2018-Parl. Dated 24.07.2018]
Cold Chain Projects
Recommendation (Para No. 6)
The Committee note that despite the large scale agricultural
production in India, food security issues are major concerns for policy
makers in the country. A nation-wide study on quantitative assessment
of harvest and post-harvest losses for 46 agricultural produces in
106 randomly selected districts was carried out by Central Institute of
Post-Harvest Engineering & Technology (CIPHET), Ludhiana. The aforesaid
study considers the quantitative loss as the material rendered “unfit
for human consumption”. The different stages considered for assessment
of losses are harvesting, collection, thrashing, grading/sorting,
winnowing/cleaning, drying, packaging, transportation, and storage
depending upon the commodity and one of the main reasons for the
high losses in the supply chain of perishables is the absence of adequate
and efficient cold chain infrastructure right from the farm gate to the
consumer. In a repeat study conducted by the Central Institute of
Post-Harvest Engineering & Technology (CIPHET), Ludhiana during 2012-
14 on behalf of Ministry of Food Processing Industries on Assessment
of Quantitative Harvest and Post-Harvest Losses of Major Crops and
Commodities in India, average range of losses for food grains, oils
seeds and fruits & vegetables were found to be between 4% to 16%
resulting in annual loss of 92,651 crore at price index of 2014. The
Committee note that a Committee under the Chairmanship of

29
Dr. Sumitra Chaudhuri Member, Planning Commission constituted in
year 2012 on encouraging investments in supply chains including
provision for cold chain for more efficient farm distribution. Further
the Committee note that to accelerate the availability of cold storage
and to improve the efficiency of Cold Chain Management, a Task Force
set up by the PMO in 2014 under the Chairmanship of Secretary, FPI
noted that a capacity of about 8 Million Tonnes has been created since
NSEL assessment and thus the gap may be around 29 million Tonnes
and inter alia, recommended that Government should aim at creating
additional capacity of 7.5 million tonnes over the next five years for
which around ` 6100 crore would be required. Out of this, Department
of Agriculture & Cooperation can take up 5 million tonnes under MIDH
(2.5 million tonnes each by NHM and NHB) and MoFPI can take up
2.5 million tonnes. The Committee desire the Ministry to expedite the
implementation of the suggestions given by Dr. Sumitra Chaudhuri
Committee and also the task force set up by the PMO in 2014 under
the Chairmanship of Secretary, Food Processing Industries.
The Committee recommend that (i) in addition to large scale cold
chain projects, cold storage plants at small scale, such as village co-
operative at the district village level and try to cover all the Remote
part of village so that the objective of arresting Post Harvest Losses
of agriculture and horticulture produce can be achieved (ii) a fresh
nation-wide study in qualitative adjustment of Harvest and post-harvest
losses for maximum agricultural produces be conducted. The Committee
would like to be informed of the action taken in this regard.
Reply of the Government
Ministry of Food Processing Industries is implementing a central
sector Scheme for Integrated Cold Chain and Value Addition
Infrastructure in order to arrest post-harvest losses of horticulture &
non-horticulture produce and to provide remunerative prices to farmers.
Under the scheme creation of farm level infrastructure has been made
mandatory which will give more thrust to facilities for collection and
storage of agriculture/horticulture produce at farm level to cover
farmers of the remote areas so that post-harvest losses of agriculture
and horticulture produce can be arrested. The promoters are also
setting up smaller cold storage and pack house facility at village/farm
level which is beneficial for the farmers. The scheme for Integrated
Cold Chain and Value Addition Infrastructure is demand driven and
entrepreneurs are free to apply for upgradation and modernization of
their existing integrated cold chain facilities under the Scheme.

30
Comments of the Committee
For comments of the Committee please refer to Para No.1.16 of
Chapter-I of this Report.
[F .No. 6-08/2018-Parl. Dated 24.07.2018]
Pradhan Mantri Kisan Sampada Yojana
Recommendation (Para No. 7)
The Committee are glad to note that Pradhan Mantri Kisan Sampada
Yojana (PMKSY) has been approved with an allocation of Rs. 6,000
crore for the period 2016-20 coterminous with the 14th Finance
Commission cycle. It will not only provide a big boost to the growth
of the food processing sector in the country but also help in providing
better prices to farmers and is a big step towards doubling farmers
income, creating employment opportunities especially in the rural areas,
reducing wastage of agricultural produce, increasing the processing
level and enhancing the export of the processed foods. The PMKSY will
attend to the requirement of the entire value chain from farm gate
to retail outlet and human resources development through various
schemes incorporated into it. This will lead to holistic development of
the food processing sector in the country. The Pradhan Mantri Kisan
Sampada Yojana is an umbrella scheme of seven schemes namely,
Scheme for Mega Food Park, Scheme for Integrated Cold Chain and
Value Addition Infrastructure, Scheme for Creation/Expansion of Food
Processing & Preservation Capacities, Scheme for Infrastructure for
Agro-processing Clusters, Scheme for Creation of Backward and Forward
Linkage, Scheme for Food Safety and Quality Assurance Infrastructure
and Scheme for Human Resources and Institutions. The Committee feel
that various schemes under PMKSY will prove to be a milestone for the
holistic development of Food Processing Industries.
The Committee desire that keeping in view the role of Food
Processing Industries in terms of its contribution in reduction of wastage
farm produce wastages and ensuring higher returns to farmers, the
Ministry of Food Processing Industries should make all out efforts to
implement the PMKSY with the avowed objective of doubling farmers
income by 2022, generation of employment, increase in export earning,
addressing critical issues of food security, and provide wholesome
nutritious food to the masses be achieved.
Reply of the Government
The Government of India is making all out efforts to implement
PMKSY for achieving desired objectives. The budget allocation for the
schemes of the Ministry has been doubled in 2018-19 to Rs. 1400.00

31
crore from Rs. 725.00 crore in 2017-18 for effective implementation
of various Schemes. The status of implementation of Schemes under
PMKSY is given below:
Mega Food Parks Scheme
> Ministry has accorded approval to 42 Mega Food Parks (MFPs)
in the country for creation of modern infrastructure facilities
for food processing with a cluster-based approach. These 42
MFPs are expected to create total facilities to process
approximately 42 lakh MT of agri-horti produce in the country
amounting to Rs. 10,500 crore of produces. These parks are
expected to generate direct and indirect employment to
about 2.10 lakh persons and would benefit to about 10.50
lakh farmers.
> 12 MFPs have become operational so far in the State of
Uttarakhand (Haridwar and Udham Singh Nagar), Andhra
Pradesh (Chittoor), Karnataka (Tumkur), Punjab (Fazilka),
Assam (Nalbari), Jharkhand (Ranchi), Madhya Pradesh
(Khargone), West Bengal (Murshidabad), Odisha (Rayagada),
Maharashtra (Satara) and Rajasthan (Ajmer).
> Another 15 MFPs are targeted for operationalization in the
current financial year in the State of Maharashtra
(Aurangabad), Gujarat (Surat), Tripura (Sikaria), Mizoram
(Aizwal), Andhra Pradesh (West Godavari), Telangana
(Nizamabad), Himachal Pradesh (Una), Chhattisgarh (Raipur),
Haryana (Sonipat), Madhya Pradesh (Dewas), Punjab
(Ludhiana), Odisha (Khurda), Bihar (Khagaria), Jammu &
Kashmir (Pulwama) and Kerala (Palakkad).
Integrated Cold Chain and Value Addition Infrastructure Scheme
> Integrated Cold Chain and Value Addition Infrastructure
scheme is being implemented with the objective of arresting
post-harvest losses of horticulture & non-horticulture produce
and providing remunerative price to farmers for their
produce.
> Ministry of Food Processing Industries (MOFPI) has so far
sanctioned 238 cold chain projects for financial assistance.
Out of which 122 projects have achieved completion and
started commercial production.
> Another 50 Cold Chain projects will be assisted during 2018-
19 for which fresh EoI has been issued on 10.03.2018 with
the closing date 30.04.2018.

32
> Each Cold Chain project helps in creating direct employment
for about 100 persons and indirect employment for about
500 persons. Each cold chain project links about 500 farmers
in the fruits & vegetable sector and 5000 farmers in dairy/
fishery/marine sector.
Infrastructure for Agro-Processing Clusters Scheme
> The Scheme for Creation of Infrastructure for Agro-Processing
Clusters would incentivize the setting up of 100 agro
processing clusters in the country.
> Till date, eight (8) Agro-Processing Clusters located at Nagpur,
Amravati, Nashik, Nanded, Kolhapur and Osmanabad in State
of Maharashtra, Karnal (Haryana) and Kanpur Dehat (UP)
have been approved.
> Fresh EoI issued on 22.12.2017 with closing date 30.06.2018.
Creation of Backward and Forward Linkages Scheme
> With the objective of providing effective and seamless
backward and forward integration for processed food industry,
the Ministry has launched the new scheme for Creation of
Backward and Forward Linkages. The Scheme will enable
linking of farmers to processors and the market thereby
ensuring remunerative prices for their produce.
> 31 proposals are currently under final approval by the
Ministry. Fresh EOI has been issued on 07.03.2018 with closing
date 30.04.2018.
Creation/Expansion of Food Processing and Preservation Capacities
Scheme
> The main objective of the Scheme is for promotion of
processing/preservation of agro food products and
modernization/capacity enhancement of food processing
units which will help in increasing the level of processing,
value addition thereby reduction of wastage.
> 52 new projects have been approved with estimated capacity
creation of about 2,500 MT per day. Fresh EoI issued on
29.12.2017 with closing date 15.06.2018.
Scheme of Setting up/upgradation of Food Testing Laboratory
Ministry of Food Processing Industries, under the Scheme for Quality
Assurance, provides financial assistance in the form of grant-in-aid for

33
Setting up/Upgradation of Food Testing Laboratories so as to ensure
compliance of domestic and international standards on food in case of
domestic manufacture, imports as well as exports, to establish a
surveillance system for monitoring the quality and composition of food
and to analyse the samples received from processing industry and
other stakeholders.
Under the Scheme, Central/State Government organizations/
Government universities (including deemed universities) and all other
implementing agencies/private sector organizations are eligible for
grant-in-aid as per the revised scheme guidelines w.e.f. 01.01.2017.
Proposals approved during the 12th Plan period ( i.e. up to
31.03.2016) are being dealt with by the Indian Council of Agricultural
Research (ICAR) under the Ministry of Agriculture & Farmers Welfare,
Department of Agricultural Research & Education (DARE) as per the
earlier agreement for implementation of the scheme. It has since been
decided to implement the Scheme by the Ministry on its own and the
proposals received under the revised guidelines (w.e.f.01.01.2017) are
being dealt by the Ministry.
Benefits of the Scheme:
(i) Network of laboratories will help in carrying out various
tests required to support the Food Safety regulatory
activities.
(ii) Help the food processing industry in regard to quality control
measures, technical guidance, awareness creation, etc.
(iii) Ensures the availability of safe and wholesome food products
to the consumers.
Under the Scheme, Ministry of Food Processing Industries has so
far sanctioned 111 Food Testing Laboratories for financial assistance.
Out of which 74 Food Testing Laboratories have been achieved
completion.
Comments of the Committee
For comments of the Committee please refer to Para No.1.16 of
Chapter-I of this Report.
[F .No. 6-08/2018-Parl. Dated 24.07.2018]

34
CHAPTER III
OBSERVATION/RECOMMENDATION WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO NOT
DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE GOVERNMENT’S ACTION
TAKEN REPLY
-NIL-

35
CHAPTER IV
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH ACTION
TAKEN REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN
ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE
-NIL-

36
CHAPTER V
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH FINAL
REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT ARE STILL AWAITED
Utilisation of Funds
Recommendation (Para No. 4)
The Committee are happy to note that an amount of Rs. 1400
crore has been allocated to the Ministry for the year 2018-19. This is
a huge increase in amount as compared to previous year 2017-18
which was Rs. 715 crore.
However , the Committee are unhappy to note that out of the total
allocated funds of Rs. 63.38 crore for North East States, the actual
allocation up to 31.10.17 was Rs. 21.01 crore only. This lower utilization
of funds is stated to be non-availability of good projects on large
scale. The Committee desire that efforts should be made for proper
utilization of funds in North East States and the reason to be found
out for non-availability of projects in this region. The Ministry should
take the opinion of expert and send a fact-finding Committee in North
East, to find out solutions to the problem. The Committee recommend
that the Ministry should identify the areas in North East States about
the availability of various products and exploit the potential there.
Reply of the Government
In this connection, a meeting was held on 7th May, 2018 at
10:00 AM under the Chairmanship of Secretary (FPI) with representative
of Ministry of DONER. It was decided in the meeting that MoDONER
and MoFPI will convene a meeting of entrepreneurs, State Government
representatives, State Industry Associations etc. of North Eastern States
to discuss issues being considered as constraints in utilisation of funds
under various schemes of the Ministry and to find out the way to
increase proposals from the region. Accordingly, a meeting of the
stakeholders was held in Guwahati on 11.07.2018 which was chaired by
Secretary, DONER and Secretary, FPI. Mainly the issues relating to low
response to various schemes of the MoFPI in NE Region were discussed
in the meeting. A number of good suggestions were made in the
meeting to attract investment in the food processing sector. These
suggestions are being examined at various levels for following action.

37
MoFPI is considering modification in its scheme for the NE Region
based on these suggestions.
Comments of the Committee
For comments of the Committee please refer to Para No. 1.10 of
Chapter-I of this Report.
[F .No. 6-08/2018-Parl. Dated 24.07.2018]
   N EW D ELHI; HUKMDEV NARAYAN YADAV ,
06 August, 2018 Chairperson,
15 Shravana, 1940 (Saka) Standing Committee on Agriculture.

38
APPENDIX I
STANDING COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE
(2017-18)
MINUTES OF THE TWENTY EIGHTH SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE
The Committee sat on Tuesday, the 07th August, 2018 from
1000 hrs. to 1050 hrs. in the Chamber of the Hon’ble Chairperson,
Standing Committee on Agriculture, Room No. 138, Third Floor ,
Parliament House, New Delhi.
PRESENT
Shri Hukmdev Narayan Yadav — Chairperson
M
EMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Prof. Ravindra Vishwanath Gaikwad
3. Shri Nalin Kumar Kateel
4. Smt. Raksha Nikhil Khadse
5. Md. Badaruddoza Khan
6. Shri Janardan Mishra
7. Shri Devji M. Patel
8. Shri Mukesh Rajput
9. Shri C.L. Ruala
Rajya Sabha
10. Shri Kailash Soni
11. Shri Ram Nath Thakur
12. Dr . Chandrapal Singh Yadav
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Shri Arun K. Kaushik — Director
2. Shri Sumesh Kumar — Under Secretary

39
2. At the outset, Hon’ble Chairperson welcomed the Members to
the Valedictory Sitting of the Committee. Thereafter, the Committee
took up for consideration the following draft Reports:
(i) Draft Report on the Action Taken by the Government on the
Observations/Recommendations contained in the 49th Report
(16th Lok Sabha) of the Standing Committee on Agriculture
(2017-18) on ‘Demands for Grants (2018-19)’ of the Ministry
of Agriculture and farmers Welfare (Department of Animal
Husbandry, Dairying and Fisheries); and
(ii) Draft Report on the Action Taken by the Government on the
Observations/Recommendations contained in the 50th Report
(16th Lok Sabha) of the Standing Committee on Agriculture
(2017-18) on ‘Demands for Grants (2018-19)’ of the Ministry
of Food Processing Industries.
3. After some deliberations, the Committee adopted the draft
Reports without any modifications and authorized the Chairperson to
finalize and present these Reports to Parliament.
The Committee then adjourned.

40
APPENDIX II
(Vide Para 4 of Introduction of the Report)
ANALYSIS OF ACTION TAKEN BY GOVERNMENT ON THE FIFTIETH
REPORT OF STANDING COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE
(16th LOK SABHA)
(i) Total number of Recommendations: 07
(ii) Recommendations/Observations which have been
Accepted by the Government:
Recommendation Nos. 1, 2, 3, 5, 6 and 7
Total 06
Percentage 85.7%
(iii) Recommendations/Observations which the Committee
do not desire to pursue in view of the Government’s
replies:
Recommendation No. NIL
Total 0
Percentage 00.00%
(iv) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which
replies of the Government have not been accepted
by the Committee:
Recommendation No. NIL
Total 0
Percentage 00.00%
(v) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which
Final replies of the Government are still awaited:
Recommendation No. 4
Total 1
Percentage 14.2%