STANDING COMMITTEE ON
AGRICULTURE
(2015-2016)
SIXTEENTH LOK SABHA
MINISTRY OF AGRICULTURE AND
FARMERS WELFARE
(DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURAL RESEARCH
AND EDUCATION)
[Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations
contained in the Tenth Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) of the
Standing Committee on Agriculture (2014-2015) ]
20
TWENTIETH REPORT
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
December, 2015/Agrahayana, 1937 (Saka)
lR;eso t;rs


TWENTIETH REPORT
STANDING COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE
(2015-2016)
(SIXTEENTH LOK SABHA)
MINISTRY OF AGRICULTURE AND
FARMERS WELFARE
(DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURAL RESEARCH
AND EDUCATION)
‘DEMANDS FOR GRANTS (2015-16)’
[Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/
Recommendations contained in the Tenth Report (Sixteenth
Lok Sabha) of the Standing Committee on
Agriculture (2014-2015)]
Presented to Lok Sabha on 16.12.2015
Laid on the table of Rajya Sabha on 16.12.2015
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
December, 2015/Agrahayana, 1937 (Saka)
lR;eso t;rs


COA No. 330
Price : Rs. 89.00
© 2016 B Y LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of Business
in Lok Sabha (Fifteenth Edition) and printed by M/s. Akashdeep Printers,
20-Ansari Road, Daryaganj, New Delhi-110 002.

CONTENTS
PAGE
(i)
COMPOSITION  OF THE C OMMITTEE ..................................................... (iii)
INTRODUCTION .............................................................................. (v)
CHAPTER I Report.................................................................. 1
CHAPTER II Observations/Recommendations  which  have
been accepted by the Government............................ 20
CHAPTER  III Observations/Recommendations  which  the
Committee do not desire to pursue in view of
the Government's replies......................................... 42
CHAPTER IV Observations/Recommendations in respect of
which replies of the Government have not been
accepted by the Committee...................................... 46
CHAPTER V Observations/Recommendations in respect of
which final replies of the Government are still
awaited................................................................. 49
A
NNEXURE
I. List  of ongoing Cases and Action Taken in respect of
ICAR HQRS and Institutes during 2014-15............................. 52
II. OM guidelines regarding pay revision of employees
of  Quasi-Government  Organizations, Autonomous
Organizations and  Statutory Bodies, etc. set up by
and funded/controlled by the Central Government.................... 58
III. Extract of Minutes of the 11th
 Sitting of the Committee held
on 10.12.2015..................................................................... 61

(ii)
APPENDIX
PAGE
Analysis of Action Taken by the Government on the
Observations/Recommendations contained  in   the
Tenth  Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha)  of  the  Standing
Committee  on Agriculture (2014-2015)............................... 63

COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON
AGRICULTURE (2015-2016)
PRESENT
Shri Hukm Deo Narayan Yadav   —  Chairperson
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Prof. Ravindra Vishwanath Gaikwad
3. Prof. Richard Hay
4. Shri Sanganna Karadi
5. Shri Nalin Kumar Kateel
6. Md. Badaruddoza Khan
7. Shri C. Mahendran
8. Dr. Tapas Mandal
9. Shri Janardan Mishra
10. Shri Ajay Nishad
11. Shri Dalpat Singh Paraste
12. Shri Nityanand Rai
13. Shri Mukesh Rajput
14. Shri Konakalla Narayana Rao
15. Shri C.L. Ruala
16. Shri Arjun Charan Sethi
17. Shri Satyapal Singh (Sambhal)
18. Shri Virendra Singh
19. Shri Dharmendra Yadav
20. Shri Jai Prakash Narayan Yadav
21. Shri B. S. Yeddyurappa
Rajya Sabha
22. Shri A.W. Rabi Bernard
23. Shrimati Renuka Chowdhury
24. Sardar Sukhdev Singh Dhindsa
(iii)

(iv)
25. Shri Janardan Dwivedi
26. Shri Vinay Katiyar
27. Shri Mohd. Ali Khan
28. Shri Rajpal Singh Saini
29. Shri Ram Nath Thakur
30. Shri Shankarbhai N. Vegad
31. Shri Darshan Singh Yadav
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Shri U.B.S. Negi — Joint Secretary
2. Shri Arun K. Kaushik — Director
3. Shri Sumesh Kumar — Under Secretary

INTRODUCTION
I, the Chairperson, Standing Committee on Agriculture (2015-16), having
been authorized by the Committee to submit the Report on their behalf, present
this Twentieth Report on action taken by the Government on the Observations/
Recommendations contained in the Tenth Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) of
the Standing Committee on Agriculture (2014-15) on 'Demands For Grants
(2015-16)' pertaining to the Ministry of Agriculture and Farmers Welfare
(Department of Agricultural Research and Education).
2. The Tenth Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) of the Standing Committee
on Agriculture (2014-15) on 'Demands for Grants (2015-16)' of Ministry of
Agriculture and Farmers Welfare (Department of Agricultural Research and
Education) was presented to Lok Sabha and laid on the Table of Rajya Sabha
on 27 April, 2015. The Action Taken Notes on the Report were received on
13 July, 2015.
3. The Report was considered and adopted by the Committee at their
Sitting held on 10.12.2015.
4. An analysis of the action taken by the Government on the
Observations/Recommendations contained in the Tenth Report (Sixteenth
Lok Sabha) of the Committee is given in Appendix.
     N
EW DELHI; HUKM DEO NARAYAN YADA V ,
14 December, 2015 Chairperson,
23 Agrahayana, 1937 (Saka) Standing Committee on Agriculture.
(v)

CHAPTER I
REPORT
This Report of the Committee on Agriculture deals with the action taken
by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations contained in the
Tenth Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) of the Committee on Agriculture
(2014-15) on 'Demands for Grants' (2015-16) pertaining to the Ministry of
Agriculture (Department of Agricultural Research and Education) which was
presented to Lok Sabha and laid on the Table of Rajya Sabha on 27.04.2015.
1.2 The Ministry of Agriculture (Department of Agricultural Research
& Education) have furnished Action Taken Replies in respect of all the 23
Observations/Recommendations contained in the Report. These replies have
been categorized as under:
(i) Observations/Recommendations that have been accepted by the
Government:
Recommendation Nos. 1, 2, 3, 4, 6, 7, 8, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 17, 20,
21, 22 and 23
Total 18
Chapter - II
(ii) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which the Committee do
not desire to pursue in view of the Government's reply:
Recommendation No. 5
Total 01
Chapter - III
(iii) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which action taken replies
of the Government have not been accepted by the Committee:
Recommendation Nos. 9 and 16
Total 02
Chapter - IV
(iv) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which final replies of the
Government are still awaited:
Recommendation Nos. 18 and 19
Total 02
Chapter - V

2
1.3 The Committee trust that utmost importance would be given
to implementation of the Observations/Recommendations accepted by
the Government. In cases, where it is not possible for the Department
to implement the Recommendations in letter and spirit, the matter
should be reported to the Committee with reasons for
non-implementation. The Committee desire that further Action Taken
Notes on the Observations/Recommendations contained in Chapter-I
and final Action Taken Replies to the Recommendations contained in
Chapter-V of this Report be furnished to them at an early date.
1.4 The Committee will now deal with the action taken by the
Government on some of the Recommendations in the succeeding paragraphs.
A. FINANCIAL IRREGULARITIES
Recommendation (Serial No. 4)
1.5  The Committee had observed/recommended as under: ----
"The Committee noted that adequate supervision and availability of up
to date information is sine qua non for effective utilisation of available
resources and to ensure that pilferage of money does not take place.
However, the Committee were informed that the DARE did not have
details of cases of financial irregularities reported in the institutes of
ICAR. The Committee do not find logic in assertion of the DARE that
compilation of details will take time as more than 100 institutes under
ICAR are scattered throughout the length and breadth of the country.
Availability of information regarding every aspect of financial management
is a pre-requisite for effective monitoring system. The Committee had,
therefore, recommended the Department to incorporate necessary
changes in Information Management System for reporting every case
of financial irregularity in the institutes of ICAR on real time basis. At
the same time, the Committee desired the Department to make available
details of financial irregularities and action taken thereon within three
months of presentation of this report."
1.6 The Department in the Action Taken Reply has stated as under:- - -
"As per ICAR Rules & Bye-laws, disciplinary authority in respect of
officials up to the level of Group-B is Director of the Institute. Therefore,
financial irregularity noted, if any, is investigated/decided at institute

3
level only. Vigilance Division of the ICAR deals with vigilance/disciplinary
cases of Group A level officers whose disciplinary/appellate authority is
Secretary/DG/President, ICAR. However, Vigilance Division has obtained
information relating to cases of financial irregularities reported in the
institutes of ICAR during the year 2014-15, and compiled statement
showing ongoing cases of financial irregularities being processed in
Vigilance Division including cases where penalty has been imposed during
2014-15 is enclosed (Annexure-I).
Further, in respect of Vigilance/Disciplinary cases at ICAR Hqrs. for
which Disciplinary Authority is Secretary/DG/President of ICAR and all
the cases are recorded in a software named VOICE (Vigilance Online
Integrated Complaint & Enquiry). It generates statement on real time
basis of each case of financial irregularity. This software can monitor
the progress of each case resulting in expeditious finalization of Vigilance/
Disciplinary cases."
1.7 Showing displeasure over unavailability of information
regarding financial irregularities with the Department, the Committee
had recommended the Department to incorporate necessary changes
in Information Management System for reporting every case of financial
irregularity in the institutes of ICAR on real time basis. The Department
in its Action Taken Reply has furnished a statement showing ongoing
cases of financial irregularities being processed in Vigilance Division
including cases where penalty has been imposed during 2014-15. The
Department has also informed that they are maintaining records of all
vigilance/disciplinary cases for which Disciplinary Authority is Secretary/
DG/President of ICAR in a software named VOICE (Vigilance Online
Integrated Complaint & Enquiry) which generates statement on real
time basis of each case of financial irregularity. This software can monitor
the progress of each case resulting in expeditious finalization of
Vigilance/Disciplinary cases. The Committee appreciate the use of
Information technology for the compilation of information related to
vigilance cases in ICAR. However, the Committee are of view that the
same software can be employed for maintenance of all other vigilance
cases in respect of officials up to the level of Group-B for which
disciplinary authority is Director of the institute as it will help the
Department to keep a tab on cases of financial irregularity and take

4
corrective steps in a time bound manner. The Committee, therefore,
recommend that VOICE software may also be utilised to maintain the
records of vigilance cases of Group 'B' Officials ensuring disposal of all
vigilance/disciplinary cases in a time bound manner. The Committee
would like to be apprised of the initiatives undertaken by the Department
in this regard.
B. HORTICULTURE SCIENCE
Recommendation (Serial No. 9)
1.8 The Committee had observed/recommended as under: ----
"The Committee found that Indian Institute of Horticulture Research
(IIHR), Bengaluru had developed many post harvest technologies such
as Reverse Osmosis i.e. Osmotic Dehydration Technologies for fruits
and vegetables, for enhancing longevity of raw fruits and vegetables,
Crushed Tomato Technology, Dry flower technology, technology Ready
to Serve Beverages for Amla, Mango & Pineapple etc. The Committee
were of the view that such technologies provide immense potential for
commercialization and enhancement of income of farmers. The
Committee had noted that the IIHR has earned revenue of Rs 11.58 lakh
as one time up front license fee from licensing of Post-Harvest
Technologies to 14 private organizations. However, the Committee
observed that most of these private firms were situated in southern and
western parts of the country. The IIHR is yet to tap the market available
in other parts of the country where huge potential for commercialization
of these technologies exist. The Committee also observed that the
Institution is yet to transfer these technologies to farmers or Krishi Vigyan
Kendras (KVKs) despite their willingness for licensing some of these
technologies at much lower price than to other private licensees. The
Committee were of the considered opinion that proper marketing of
post harvest technologies are not only important from the point of revenue
generation but also for providing alternate avenues to farmers of the
country so that they can get remunerative pricing for their products.
The Committee, therefore recommended the DARE to take effective
steps for proper marketing of these technologies and organize organic
melas, exhibitions and fairs so as to tap potential market of the entire

5
country besides reducing post harvest losses. The Committee also liked
the DARE to provide adequate incentives and training to farmers so that
they can be encouraged to start agri-ventures and develop agri-business
on their own based on these technologies."
1.9 The Department in its Action Taken Reply has stated as under:-
"Due to logistic and other limitations, some of the important technologies
developed at ICAR-IIHR could not be effectively transferred to far off
places in the country. But efforts will be intensified to transfer these
potential technologies to end users through Zonal Project Directors of
the Council, State Agricultural Universities and Krishi Vigyan Kendras
(KVKs)."
1.10 Keeping in view the potential for commercialization and
enhancement of income of farmers through post harvest technologies
developed by IIHR, the Committee had recommended the DARE to
take effective steps for proper marketing of these technologies and
organize organic melas, exhibitions and fairs so as to tap potential market
of the entire country besides reducing post harvest losses. The Committee
had also desired the DARE to provide adequate incentives and training
to farmers so that they can be encouraged to start agri-ventures and
develop agri-business on their own based on these technologies. Though
the Department in its Action Taken Reply has assured the Committee
that efforts will be intensified to transfer these potential technologies
to end users through Zonal Project Directors of the Council, State
Agricultural Universities and Krishi Vigyan Kendras (KVKs), it has
failed to put up any concrete plan to achieve these aims. The Committee
also observe that Department is silent on the issue of provision of
providing incentive and training to the farmers which are necessary for
encouraging them to develop agri-business based on these technologies.
The Committee are of view that unless there is some concrete plan for
proper utilization of research, findings, there are little chances in
improvement of economic conditions of farmers in the country. The
Committee, therefore, desire the Department to prepare a concrete
plan for effective marketing of post harvest technologies developed by
the IIHR and to educate, train and incentivize farmers to start
agri-business units based on these technologies.

6
C. LAND RESOURCE INVENTORY
Recommendation (Serial No. 12)
1.11 The Committee had observed/recommended as under: ----
"The Committee had noted that National Bureau of Soil Survey and
Land Use Planning (ICAR), Nagpur has undertaken a country level
project on "Land resource Inventory on 1:10,000 scale for agricultural
land use planning using geo-spatial techniques" in collaboration with
NRSC, ISRO. The Committee were informed that preparation of the
inventory will help to enhance agricultural productivity per unit area
through efficient utilization of land resources besides other interventions.
They had noted that project will be undertaken in phased manner by
ICAR-NBSSFLUP in the first phase, 60 blocks each representing
60 agro-ecological sub-regions of the country covering approximately
3.3 Mha area in four years duration will be covered. However, the
Committee were not apprised of any details regarding timelines for
coverage of all blocks of the country. The Committee had also noted
that allocations of Rs. 3.15 crore were made available for implementation
of the project during 2014-16. The Committee were of view that
preparation of land resource inventory of entire country will be a great
tool in the hand of planners for optimizing agricultural output and ensuring
food security for the future generations of the country. The Committee,
therefore, desired the Department to submit a detailed plan for coverage
of entire country under the project and that adequate finances be made
available to the project in the future. At the same time, the DARE should
ensure timely completion of first phase of the Project under intimation
to the Committee."
1.12 The Department in its Action Taken Reply has stated as under: ----
"In the first phase (2014-18), the NBSSLUP is developing land resource
inventory of 60 blocks each representing an Agro-Ecological Sub-Region
(AESR) of the country. These will serve as a model for 60 AESRs of the
country. In order to generate such information for whole country, it will
be appropriate to take up such huge activities in collaboration with State
Governments involving concerned State organizations, meeting out the
cost and utilizing State resources (infrastructural facilities including
manpower). Accordingly, MoUs have been signed with States like

7
Karnataka, Telangana, Gujarat and Meghalaya. Efforts are being made
with other State Governments as well."
1.13 Keeping in view the utility of proposed Land resource
Inventory on 1:10,000 scale for agricultural land use planning using
geo-spatial techniques by the National Bureau of Soil Survey and Land
Use Planning (ICAR), Nagpur in collaboration with NRSC and ISRO,
the Committee had desired the Department to submit a detailed plan
for coverage of entire country under the project, to make adequate
finances available to the project in the future and to ensure timely
completion of first phase of the Project. The Department in its Action
Taken Reply apart from stating coverage of 60 Blocks each representing
an Agro-Ecological Sub-Region (AESR) of the country during 2014-18
have informed the Committee that help of State Governments is
required to meet the cost and utilizing State resources such as
infrastructural facilities including manpower in order to generate such
information for whole country. Accordingly, MoUs have been signed
with States like Karnataka, Telangana, Gujarat and Meghalaya and
efforts are being made with other State Governments as well. The
Committee appreciate the efforts of DARE to involve State Governments
in this ambitious project which will go a long way to generate information
on Land inventories which is foundation for formulating a sound plan
for the development of the country. The Committee desire the
Department to complete first phase of Land Resource inventory within
the time- - - frame of 2014-18 besides, encouraging remaining States to
involve them for preparation of land resource inventory for the entire
country.
D. ANIMAL SCIENCE
Recommendation (Serial No. 13)
1.14 The Committee had observed/recommended as under: ----
"Livestock is the economic security of the farmers and their management
plays a vital role in this agrarian country. The Committee had noted that
there are 19 Animal Research Institutes, 2 Deemed Universities,
8 National/Central Research Institutes, 1 National Bureau, 1 Project
Directorate and 6 National Research Centre to improve productivity,
production and reproductive efficiency in livestock and poultry. The

8
Committee further noted that only Rs. 955 crore i.e. 61.89% (BE) of
allocations were made for the first four year(s) as against on earmarked
outlays of Rs. 1543.00 crore for XII Plan under the head of Animal
Science. Funds have been further reduced at RE stage. The Committee
also noted that drastic reduction of Rs. 70 crore i.e. about 30.40% at
RE stage were made during 2014-15 from Rs. 230 crore to Rs.160
crore. The Committee were astonished to note that allocation to Central
Institute for Research on Cattle, Meerut, have been reduced from Rs. 5
crore to Rs. 1.5 crore at RE stage pending decision to develop the campus
of CIRC at Karnal or at Meerut. Similarly, allocations to Central Avian
Research Institute, Izzatnagar, have been reduced from Rs. 9 crore
(BE) to Rs. 3 crore at RE stage as funds allocated under capital head
were reduced from Rs. 4.60 crore to Rs. 0.45 crores. The Committee
were of view that management and improvement of livestock is one of
thrust area of Agriculture in the Country and in their earlier reports too,
the Committee have time and again emphasized for higher allocation as
well as proper utilisation of funds under this head so that priority research
of this division do not suffer. The Committee were also unhappy about
the indecisiveness of the DARE to decide on the issue of determining
the location of research institute. The Committee desired the DARE to
make proper assessment based on objective criteria and expedite decision
with respect to developing campus of CIRC at Karnal or Meerut, so that
scientists are able to focus on research rather than mundane issues.
While dealing with perennial problem of reduced BE allocations to the
Department thereby afflicting the planning process, the Committee desired
the DARE to enhance the allocations of the division at RE stage so that
research programmes plan for XII plan are completed timely and do not
suffer for want of funds."
1.15 The Department in its Action Taken Reply has stated as under:-
"Reduction in fund allocation for Animal Science Division at RE stage
was necessitated due to overall reduction in allocation to the department
at RE/BE stages.Accordingly, fund allocation to CIRC, Meerut as well
as CARI, Izzatnagar was also reduced under the Capital Head. Further,
this unproportionate cut in the capital head was reasonable as the works
to be undertaken by these two institutions were new and were approved
only in the second half of 2014-15. Besides, the ongoing works of other
schemes were to be given priority for completion.

9
As regards development of campus of CIRC in the XII Plan, 100 acres
of land has been allocated at Karnal within NDRI premises. However, in
order to strengthen the already established component of the Institute at
Meerut, efforts are being made by the ICAR for additional allocation of
75 acres of land for 99 years on lease from Military Dairy Farm Authorities
(Ministry of Defence) as well as extension of existing lease of allocated
land from 30 to 99 years. If 75 acres of land is allocated by Military
Dairy Farm, Meerut, it will be used to develop indigenous cattle breed
livestock farm and its associated research and development activities
for their improvement and conservation."
1.16 The Committee are distressed to note that despite their
recommendation regarding enhancement of allocation to Animal Science
Division keeping in view of importance of research on livestock for the
benefit of farmers, the Department has not taken any steps to enhance
the allocations of the Division so that research programmes of Animal
Science division for XII plan are completed timely and do not suffer for
want of funds. On the issue of development of campus of CIRC in the
XII Plan, the Department has stated that 100 acres of land has been
allocated at Karnal within NDRI premises. Further, according to the
Department efforts are being made for additional allocation of 75 acres
of land for 99 years on lease from Military Dairy Farm Authorities
(Ministry of Defence) as well as extension of existing lease of allocated
land from 30 to 99 years which will be used to develop indigenous cattle
breed livestock farm and its associated research and development
activities for their improvement and conservation. However, the
Department has not furnished any information regarding allocation of
specific funds for the development of CIRC campus. The Committee
are of the view that there is imperative need to expedite the process of
development of campus of CIRC. Further, specific funds also needs to
be allocated for the purpose so that project does not suffer for want of
funds. The Committee, therefore, recommend the Department to take
effective steps for time-bound completion of campus at NDRI,
Karnal. The Committee also reiterate their earlier recommendation
regarding enhancement of allocations to Animal Science Division
ensuring timely completion of research programmes undertaken during
XII plan.

10
E. KRISHI VIGYAN KENDRA
Recommendation (Serial No. 16)
1.17 The Committee had observed/ recommended as under: ----
"The Committee had noted that KVKs were not being provided necessary
infrastructure and manpower for achieving the aim of extension services
for farmers of the country. The Committee were apprised that
performance of the KVKs was not up to the mark due to lack of manpower
and lack of funds due to budget cut. The Committee had noted that as
many as 2402 posts out of 10272 scientific (Programme Coordinators
and Subject Matter Specialists), technical and administrative and other
posts are vacant in KVKs as on 31.03.2015. The Committee were
informed that budget cut in operational contingency has also affected
the activities of KVKs. Each KVK is provided modest infrastructure
depending upon the need and availability of funds for the purpose. So
far ICAR has provided Administrative building to 563 KVKs, Farmers
Hostel in 513 KVKs, Demonstration units in 493 KVKs and Soil Water
Testing Labs. in 389 KVKs. During XII Plan, the KVKs are proposed to
be provided different types of infrastructure like office buildings, farmer's
hostel, staff quarters, demonstration units and other additional facilities
in selected KVKs. These additional facilities include soil and water testing
labs., rain water harvesting facility, minimal processing facility, mini
seed processing facility, carp hatcheries, integrated farming system units,
solar panels, technology information units, micro-nutrient analysis facility
and 25 KV A genset. Besides, the KVKs are also proposed to be provided
need based office equipments and audio-visual aids, laboratory
equipments and different types of farm equipments and machinery. The
provisions have been recommended by the EFC of the KVK scheme for
the XII Plan and the proposals are under consideration of the Cabinet.
Further, the Department could not provide funds for construction of
farmers hostels, facilities for promoting farm mechanisation, facilities
for food processing, etc. due to reduced allocations during current plan.
The Committee had, therefore, desired the Government to enhance the
fund allocations to KVKs so that they can be equipped with all necessary
infrastructure and manpower and be up to date. The Committee had
also desired the Department to revisit the fund allocation, utilisation &
strength monitoring mechanisation as well, so far as KVKs are concerned.

11
They also recommended that Department should ensure that KVKs
including private sector KVKs provide the mandated activities to the
farmers without any exception."
1.18 The Department in its Action Taken Reply has stated as under: ----
"Efforts are being made for making higher allocations to scheme of
KVKs. The allocation has been enhanced from Rs.533.60 crore at
RE stage in 2014-15 to Rs. 644.85 crore at BE stage in 2015-16. As
suggested, the monitoring mechanism will also be strengthened by
deploying more scientific manpower in the Zonal Project Directorates
(ZPDs) and increasing the number of ZPDs from 8 to 11 after the approval
of the Government."
1.19 Showing their displeasure over failure of the Department to
make available adequate funds to KVKs so that they can be provided
adequate manpower and necessary infrastructure such as office
buildings, farmer's hostel, staff quarters, demonstration units, soil and
water testing labs., rain water harvesting facility, minimal processing
facility, mini seed processing facility, carp hatcheries, integrated farming
system units, solar panels, technology information units, micro-nutrient
analysis facility and 25 KV A genset in selected KVKs, the Committee
had recommended the Department to enhance the fund allocations to
KVKs so that they can be equipped with all necessary infrastructure
and manpower and be up to date. The Department in its Action Taken
Reply apart from informing about enhancement of allocation to the
scheme of KVKs from Rs.533.60 crore at RE stage in 2014-15 to
Rs. 644.85 crore at BE stage in 2015-16, has also stated that the
monitoring mechanism will also be strengthened by deploying more
scientific manpower in the Zonal Project Directorates (ZPDs) and
increasing the number of ZPDs from 8 to 11 after the approval of the
Government. However, the Department is silent on the efforts being
made with regard to consultation with the State Governments for filling
existing vacancies in KVKs. The Committee are of view that adequate
attention is not being given to the scheme of KVKs which is evident
from failure of government to provide funds as recommended by the
EFC of the KVK Scheme for the XII Plan. The Committee feel that
timely availability of funds is benchmark for balanced planning and so
adhocism in fund allocation may defeat the very purpose of the Scheme.

12
The Committee, therefore, reiterate their earlier recommendation to
provide adequate funds for the scheme of KVKs so that they can be
equipped with necessary infrastructure and manpower and provide timely
and effective advice and other assistance to the farmers of the country.
The Committee also direct the Department to hold consultation with
State Governments concerned to fill up vacancies available in KVKs.
F. KRISHI VIGYAN KENDRAS OPERATING IN TRIBAL AND HILLY
REGIONS OF THE COUNTRY
Recommendation (Serial No. 17)
1.20 The Committee had observed/ recommended as under: ----
"The Committee noted that 152 Krishi Vigyan Kendras are functioning
in tribal and hilly regions of the country. These KVKs have provided
training to 7, 25,458 farmers and extension personnel, conducted 99187
on-farm trials and demonstrations, produced 7855.75 tonnes seeds,
4245397.17 lakh of planting material and distributed 483613.68 lakh
Live stock strains and fingerlings during the period 2012-15. The
Committee also noted that Fisheries Science Division has provided training
to 5520 farmers since 2012 and Natural Resource Management Division
have been provided training on good farming practices to over 35,000
farmers since 2012. Apart from these training was also provided to the
farmers by institutes of other division of ICAR. The Committee while
noting with satisfaction the efforts made by the KVKs and ICAR institutes
operating in hill and tribal regions of the country, desired the Department
to make extra efforts to provide training on secondary agriculture such
as dairying, food processing, etc. so that income of farmers in these
regions can be enhanced. The Committee also desired the Department
to provide adequate funds to the KVKs operating in hill and tribal regions
of the country so that they do not face problem of infrastructure and
manpower while carrying out the work of agriculture extension."
1.21 The Department in its Action Taken Reply has stated as under: ----
"The recommendation is noted for compliance and as suggested by the
Committee, the KVKs have been asked to conduct more training
programmes on secondary agriculture such as dairying, food processing
and value addition etc. in the tribal and hilly areas of the country."

13
1.22 The Committee note with satisfaction that the Department
had instructed KVKs to provide additional training to farmers in tribal
and hilly areas on secondary agriculture such as dairying, food processing
and value addition etc. However, the Department had not provided any
information regarding steps taken to enhance allocations to these KVKs.
The Committee desire the Department to suitably enhance allocations
to KVKs operating in Tribal and Hilly areas of the country under their
intimation. The Committee also desire the Department to furnish a
report on training provided by the KVKs to farmers within a month of
presentation of this report.
G . SEPARATE FUNDS FOR IMPLEMENTATION OF INITIATIVES FOR
XII PLAN
Recommendation (Serial No. 18)
1.23 The Committee had observed/ recommended as under: ----
"The Committee had noted that many initiatives planned for
implementation such as Attracting and Retaining Youth in Agriculture
(ARYA), Rural Entrepreneurship Awareness Development Yojana
(READY), Farmers FIRST, Agriculture and Technology Forecast Centre
were yet to commence even after three years after the commencement
of the Plan. The Committee were apprised that these schemes are under
the process of getting approval of the Government. Similarly, projects
envisaged under Extra Mural Funds are still in the process of seeking
approval of the Government. The Committee have also been informed
that sixteen Consortia Research projects have been sanctioned at a total
XII Plan outlay of Rs. 1651.80 crore as part of EFC's of different schemes
and are likely to start as per approved programme during the year
2015-16 and onwards. The Committee also noted that Indian Agriculture
e-Extension Research Institute (IAeRI) Scheme has not yet been
conceptualized by the DARE due to reduced funding. The Committee
had strongly felt that implementation of these Schemes have already
been delayed inordinately. They had, therefore, desired the Department
to give their best to ensure that all formalities pertaining to these initiatives
are completed with utmost promptitude and their implementation
commences within specific time-frame. At the same time, the Committee
desired the Department to make available additional funds in ongoing

14
fiscal so that benefits as planned from these schemes can be reaped
during the current plan itself."
1.24 The Department in its Action Taken Reply has stated as under: ----
"The new activities of XII plan viz., Students READY and Agriculture
Technology Forecast Centre are at different stages of seeking approval
of the Government. The Department has ensured that all formalities
pertaining these activities are completed and awaiting approval from the
Government. The activity namely "Farmers FIRST" is under the process
of implementation. Some of Consortia Research Projects (CRPs), as
part of EFC's of different schemes are being implemented and remaining
will be taken up after getting adequate funding at RE Stage 2015-16.
As far as ARYA is concerned, this scheme has been sanctioned in
December, 2014. This programme is conceptualized for mentoring/
handholding rural youth in villages by providing technical and financial
support to upscale/commercialize promising technologies and grass root
innovations. An amount of Rs. 100 crore is approved in XII Plan for
this activity.
Further, regarding Indian Agricultural e-Extension Research Institute
(IAeRI), the department has again requested NITI Aayog to expedite
the matter for communicating "in principle" approval".
1.25 While showing their concern over failure of DARE to start
initiatives planned for implementation such as Attracting and Retaining
Youth in Agriculture (ARYA), Rural Entrepreneurship Awareness
Development Yojana (READY), Farmers FIRST, Agriculture and
Technology Forecast Centre, even after three years after the
commencement of the XII Plan, the Committee had desired the
Department to ensure that all formalities pertaining to these initiatives
are completed with utmost promptitude and their implementation
commences within a specific time ----frame. The Committee had also
desired the Department to make available additional funds in ongoing
fiscal so that benefits as planned from these schemes can be reaped
during the current plan itself. However, the Committee note that the
Department is yet to get necessary approval and additional fund for
implementation of these initiatives which is evident from Action Taken
Reply furnished by the Department. The Committee are at loss to

15
understand the reasons for delay in providing necessary clearances and
funds for implementation of programmes which may prove very
beneficial for attracting young generation towards making career and
starting a trend of entrepreneurship in the field of agriculture. The
need of having innovative ideas and exploitation of young talent in
order to improve farming output and condition of vast majority of Indian
farmers must be realized by the Government. The Committee,
therefore, desire the Department to vigorously pursue the matter with
all concerned and ensure that necessary sanction and funds are made
available for implementation of these schemes.
H. ESTABLISHMENT OF CENTRAL AGRICULTURAL
UNIVERSITIES
Recommendation (Serial No. 19)
1.26 The Committee had observed/ recommended as under: ----
"The Committee had noted that process for establishment of Central
Agricultural Universities at Bihar, Barapani (Meghalaya and Nagaland)
are under process whereas, Rani Lakshmi Bai Central Agricultural
University, Jhansi (Bundelkhand) was created as an institution of national
importance in March, 2014 only. The Committee were concerned with
the tardy progress in the establishment of Central Agricultural Universities
in Bihar and Barapani as envisaged in the XIIth plan. The Committee
had also noted that formalities for establishment of Agriculture University
in Andhra Pradesh and Horticulture University in Telangana have been
started. However, the Committee had not been provided timelines for
commissioning of each of these Universities. The Committee were of
view that a scheduled timeline for establishment of these universities
will go a long way for timely commissioning of these universities,
establishment of which has already been delayed. The Committee,
therefore, recommended the Department to formulate timelines in
consultation with concerned State Governments so that requisite funds
be made available by the Ministry of Finance accordingly."
1.27 The Department in its Action Taken Reply has stated as under: ----
"The department is in the process of finalizing EFC for Rajendra-Central
Agricultural University (CAU), Pusa, Bihar and for CAU-Barapani the
Government of Meghalaya is still to allot the requisite land. For

16
establishment of agricultural university in Andhra Pradesh and
horticultural University in Telangana, the process has already been initiated
and to that effect an amount of Rs. 10.00 crore has been released to
each University during Financial Year 2014-15 and an amount of
Rs. 75.00 crore has been earmarked for each University as BE for the
Financial Year 2015-16,and the same amount will be released as soon as
AUC is received for the earlier released amount. DARE is making all
round efforts to complete these projects at the earliest possible time in
the line of suggestion of the Committee on Agriculture. The Department
is pursuing the matter with the concerned State Governments to
formulate timelines for the establishment of these universities."
1.28 The Committee are unhappy to note about delay in finalisation
of EFC for Rajendra-Central Agricultural University(CAU), Pusa, Bihar.
The Committee are of view that there is a need to expedite decision
making process so that necessary financial approval for the
establishment of CAU, Pusa (Bihar) could be taken at the earliest. The
Committee also desire the Department to impress upon States to
complete formalities such as land acquisition, furnishing of utilization
certificate etc. so that a suitable timeline for establishment of Central
Agricultural Universities may be arrived without any further delay.
I. VACANCY OF SCIENTIFIC/ TECHNICAL/ ADMINISTRATIVE
POSTS IN INSTITUTES OF ICAR
Recommendation (Serial No. 22)
1.29 The Comm ittee had observed/recommended as under:-
The Committee had expressed concern to note that as on date positions
of 1570 scientific, 1374 technical and 964 posts of administrative grade
were vacant in various institutes of ICAR, which were effecting the
functioning of ICAR institutions adversely. The Committee also noted
that recruitment process of 551 posts of scientists, 380 posts of
administrative officers etc. were under process of filling up. Further the
Committee noted that 16 out of 100 institutes did not have regular
Directors. The Committee had deprecated the lackadaisical attitude of
the Government and impressed upon the Government to expedite the
process of selection and filling up the existing vacant posts at the earliest,

17
so that the research and development activities in the Agriculture Sector
are not adversely affected.
1.30 The Department in its Action Taken Reply has stated as under: ----
"The observations of the Committee have been noted for compliance
and implementation."
1.31 The Committee are not happy with the reply of the
Government. Neither the steps taken so far for filling up the existing
vacancies nor the present status of filling up vacancies have been spelt
out by the Government. The Committee deplore this casual approach
of the Government to the recommendations of the Committee and
desire that the Department should take the recommendations of the
Committee in right spirit. The Committee reiterate that the process of
selection and filling up the existing posts should be expedited and the
action taken by the Government in this regard may be apprised to
them.
J. INCENTIVE  SCHEMES  FOR  SCIENTISTS
Recommendation (Serial No.23)
1.32 The Committee had observed/ recommended as under: ----
Availability of lucrative career opportunity and presence of a well defined
incentive scheme are necessary for attracting the best talent for
agricultural research institutes and motivate Scientists working in ICAR
institutes. The Committee had noted that the Council has adopted the
pay package and the Career Advancement Scheme (CAS) of the University
Grants Commission (UGC) for attracting and retaining the best available
scientific talent which has in-built flexibility in the CAS for upward
movement, subject to fulfillment of certain criteria, irrespective of
occurrence of vacancies. Recently the Council has also revised the
scheme of ICAR Awards to further motivate and incentivize to bring out
the best from the scientific cadre. All special allowances of the GoI
have been made applicable for the scientists serving in remote and difficult
areas. Special weightage is also accorded for lateral selections of
scientists who have served in remote and backward areas. However,
the Committee were concerned to note that no scientist has been rewarded

18
under the scheme of incentivizing research with rewards which was
started in 2014-15 for incentivizing scientist for undertaking research in
defined areas. The Committee felt that if the best available talent is to be
attracted towards the ICAR institutions, proper and time bound
implementation of this scheme is necessary. The motivation which the
proper implementation of this scheme will provide to Scientists will also
help in enhancing the research outcome(s) of ICAR institutes. The
Committee, therefore, desired the ICAR to implement this scheme in
true spirit at the earliest.
1.33 The Department in its Action Taken Reply has stated as under: ----
"The Indian Council of Agricultural Research has put in place several
incentives for attracting best talent for agricultural research besides
motivating the Scientists working in agricultural institutes by way of
adopting UGC pay package and Career Advancement Scheme Special
allowances are provided for the scientists working in remote and difficult
areas. The scheme of Incentivizing the scientists for undertaking research
in cutting edge areas for solving challenging problems such as C3-C4
intermediate pathway and functionality of C4 genes in rice, newer genetic
modification for improving biological nitrogen fixation in cereals,
molecular genetic analysis of stress resistance in wheat, chickpea and
mustard, increasing rice yield under low light intensity, semen sexing in
cattle are being pursued. All these projects are aimed at enhancing the
deployment of scientific manpower in cutting edge areas besides acting
as an incentive to pursue emerging newer trends in agricultural science
research. The envisaged technical and research contingency support
shall act as an incentive for pursuit of advanced research besides
encouraging the scientist for appropriate output in the emerging area."
1.34 From the Action Taken Reply, the Committee observe that
the Department has not furnished any information on steps taken by
the Department to encourage scientist to avail benefits available in the
scheme incentivizing scientist for undertaking research in defined areas.
The Committee are anguished to note the callous attitude of the
Department on the issue and disapprove apathy shown by the Department
on important scheme meant for encouraging ambitious research
initiatives for solving riddles of agriculture science which could be proved

19
very beneficial for shaping future agriculture. The Committee,
therefore, desire the Department to take effective steps to invite
proposals for research under this scheme. The Committee also desire
the Department to furnish a note on steps taken and proposals received
from scientists/ Institutions for research under the scheme within a
month of presentation of Report.

20
CHAPTER  II
OBSERV ATIONS/ RECOMMENDATIONS THAT HA VE BEEN
ACCEPTED BY THE GOVERNMENT
IMPLEMENTATION OF COMMITTEE'S RECOMMENDATIONS
Recommendation (Serial No. 1)
The Committee note that the Action Taken Replies regarding the action
taken by the Government on the observations/recommendations contained in
the Second Report of the Committee were furnished by the Government on
12 March, 2015. They further note that the Statement of the Minister under
Direction 73-A of Directions by the Speaker, Lok Sabha is due on June, 2015.
The Committee are hopeful that the Government would have made all efforts
to act upon their recommendations contained in the Second Report and that
the Ministers Statement under Direction 73-A of Directions by Speaker,
Lok Sabha would be made within the stipulated time.
Reply of the Government
The department has already complied with this recommendation.
[Ministry of Agriculture O.M No.7 (3)/2015, dated 13th July, 2015,
Department of Agricultural Research and Education]
ALLOCATION OF FUNDS
Recommendation (Serial No. 2)
The Committee note that the allocations to the DARE under Plan head
has been reduced to Rs. 3691 crore (BE) for 2015-16 vis-a-vis Rs. 3715
crore (BE) for the year 2014-15. The Committee further note that the
Government has made drastic reduction of 32.73 per cent of allocations to
the DARE at RE stage during 2014-15. The Committee were informed that
this drastic cut in the allocation of the Department in the RE (2014-15) was
apparently due to the overall cut effected by the Ministry of Finance,
Government of India, in the plan allocation of DARE/ICAR.

21
The Committee were also informed that major programmes/activities
falling within the mandate of each Subject Matter Division were not impacted
by the cut due to sustained efforts and some strategic planning. However,
DARE/ICAR had to assign priorities to the ongoing research programmes
and allocate adequate funds from the available budget of the department for
this purpose in order to accomplish the research targets set for the year. The
Committee are disappointed to note that in spite of their recommendation in
their Second Report on DFG 2014-15 to the Government, to enhance the
budget of DARE substantially, so as to enable them to develop expertise
necessary for making Indian agriculture ready to face challenges associated
with increasing population, changing trends in consumption, deteriorating
soil health, depleting resources, state of small & marginal farmers and climate
change, the Government's move is bereft of logic of higher allocations at BE
stage, if it has to be mandatorily reduced at RE stage defying the very basis of
financial planning process which require consistency and sustained efforts.
The Committee are of view that such drastic cut is definitely going to affect
several of their research activities/schemes/plans which are critical to the
growth and well being of agriculture sector in the Country. The Committee,
therefore, recommend that the Government should substantially enhance the
allocations for the Department in the ongoing fiscal at RE stage so that the
ICAR institutes could carry out R&D activities as planned for the year
2015-16 and XII Plan as well.
Reply of the Government
The department has already conveyed the above concern/
recommendation of the Committee to the Ministry of Finance for getting
enhanced allocation at RE 2015-16.
[Ministry of Agriculture O.M No.7 (3)/2015, dated 13th July, 2015,
Department of Agricultural Research and Education]
Recommendation (Serial No. 3)
The Committee note that agricultural research, education and extension,
because of their significant contribution to growth of agriculture sector,
economy, food and nutrition security of the Country, are of critical importance
for an agrarian economy like ours. They, therefore, are of the considered
opinion that keeping in view the national interest including the food security
and employment to the growing population, DARE is provided with sufficient

22
funds, so that these activities are carried out unhindered. With this concern
uppermost in their mind, the Committee have been recommending in their
successive Reports to the Government to enhance allocation for these activities
in the agriculture sector. However, the Committee note that only Rs. 14041
crore i.e 54.95% have been allocated during first four fiscal as against
earmarked outlays of Rs. 25553.00 crore for XII Plan. The Committee had
observed that these allocations (BE) have been drastically reduced at RE stage
in first three financial years as allocations to the Department in first three
financial years (RE) put together is only 29.82% of earmarked outlays of
XII Plan. They had further been informed that first four years' allocations as
percentage of XII Plan earmarked outlay at BE level of scientific Ministries/
Departments and related ones ranges between 39.31% to 58.44% except that
of Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food and Public Distribution which is
comparatively higher at 84.37%. The Committee find that the total of RE
allocations for the first three years of XII Plan and BE allocation for the
fourth year of the plan put together is only 44.26% of the XII Plan allocation.
The Committee are highly doubtful that the Department would be able to
absorb the remaining 55.74% during the last year of the Plan. The Committee
are of view that unimaginative drastic cut is going to adversely affect several
of their significant and vital research activities, Research Infrastructure
Phenomics facility, Phytotron etc. and schemes which were planned for
implementation during XII Plan such as Attracting and Retaining Youth in
Agriculture (ARYA), Rural Entrepreneurship Awareness Development Yojana
(READY), Farmers FIRST, Agriculture and Technology Forecast Centre and
Indian Agriculture e-Extension Research Institute (IAeRI). The Committee
strongly deprecate this sordid state of affairs which is endemic of the
shortcomings plaguing the prevalent system of planning in the Country
wherein, the very purpose of planning goes haywire. It is improper to impose
a certain percentage deduction at RE level across board. They, therefore,
recommend that the Government should enhance the allocation for the
Department substantially in the ongoing Fiscal and last fiscal of XII Plan, so
that the funds left for the terminal year are evenly matched and the Department
get much needed funds for research and developmental activity.
Reply of the Government
The department has already conveyed the above concern/
recommendation of the Committee to the Ministry of Finance for getting

23
enhanced allocation at RE 2015-16 and balance fund of XII Plan to be allocated
during the last financial year (2016-17) of XII Plan.
[Ministry of Agriculture O.M No.7 (3)/2015, dated 13th July, 2015,
Department of Agricultural Research and Education]
FINANCIAL IRREGULARITIES
Recommendation (Serial No. 4)
Adequate supervision and availability of up to date information is
sin qua non for effective utilisation of available resources and to ensure that
pilferage of money does not take place. However, the Committee were
informed that the DARE do not have details of cases of financial irregularities
reported in the institutes of ICAR. The Committee do not find logic in assertion
of the DARE that compilation of details will take time as more than 100
institutes under ICAR are scattered throughout the length and breadth of the
country. The Committee view that in an era of information technology where
any information can be obtained by click of a mouse, the Department have
not yet made provisions for compilation of necessary information related to
financial management. Availability of information regarding every aspect of
financial management is a pre-requisite for effective monitoring system. The
Committee, therefore, recommend the Department to incorporate necessary
changes in Information Management System for reporting every case of
financial irregularity in the institutes of ICAR on real time basis. At the same
time, the Committee desire the Department to make available details of financial
irregularities and action taken thereon within three months of presentation of
this report.
Reply of the Government
As per ICAR Rules & Bye-laws, disciplinary authority in respect of
officials upto the level of Group-B is Director of the institute. Therefore,
financial irregularity noted, if any, is investigated/decided at institute level
only. Vigilance Division of the ICAR deals with vigilance/disciplinary cases of
GroupA level officers whose disciplinary/appellate authority is Secretary/DG/
President, ICAR. However, Vigilance Division has obtained information relating
to cases of financial irregularities reported in the institutes of ICAR during the
year 2014-15, and compiled statement showing ongoing cases of financial
irregularities being processed in Vigilance Division including cases where
penalty has been imposed during 2014-15 is enclosed (Annexure I).

24
Further, in respect of Vigilance/Disciplinary cases at ICAR Hqrs. for
which Disciplinary Authority is Secretary/DG/President of ICAR and all the
cases are recorded in a software named VOICE (Vigilance Online Integrated
Complaint & Enquiry). It generates statement on real time basis of each case
of financial irregularity. This software can monitor the progress of each case
resulting in expeditious finalization of Vigilance / Disciplinary cases.
[Ministry of Agriculture O.M No.7(3)/2015, dated 13th July, 2015,
Department of Agricultural Research and Education]
Comments of the Committee
For comments of the Committee please refer to Para No. 1.7 of
Chapter I of this Report.
CROP SCIENCE INFOCROP---- WEB BASED DECISION SUPPORT
SYSTEM
Recommendation (Serial No. 6)
The Committee note that INFOCROP ---- a web based decision support
system was developed as a generic crop growth model that can simulate the
effects of weather, soil, agronomic managements (planting, nitrogen, residue
and irrigation), and major pests on crop growth and yield of crops such as
rice, wheat, maize, sorghum, millets, soybean, mustard, groundnut, cotton
and pigeon pea. The Committee were informed that this model was used for
identifying location specific suitable sowing time, variety and management
for some of the test sites in Mewat and Dhar districts with significant success.
The ICAR-IARI is also initiating development of models for grape (under
National Fund Project), green gram, sugarcane and onion. The Committee
are of view that these web based decision support systems will prove very
beneficial for Planners, administrators and most importantly farmers of the
country who are facing the vagaries of nature such as fluctuating weather,
pest attack, poor soil quality etc. The Decision Support System (DSS) will
support effective crop planning and also undertake corrective measures if
something goes wrong. The Committee, therefore, desire the Department to
refine the system with required field trials. They also emphasize that the
Department should undertake continuous updation for identifying adaptation
niche areas, quantifying the adaptation gain, vulnerable regions, identification
location specifics sowing time and important crops should be brought under

25
the ambit of DSS. The efforts should also be made to disseminate information
derived from the system among farmers on wider scale through print/visual
media so that they all can benefit from it.
Reply of the Government
The ICAR-IARI has developed the INFOCROP-WEB  based decision
support system as a generic crop growth model. The model can help in
simulating the effects of various parameters influencing crop growth and
yield. The model has to be evaluated taking into account various location
specific issues and as suggested by the Committee, it will be refined with
required field validation in the coming years. Efforts shall also be made to
disseminate the information through KVKs/Institutes after the role of variables
are evaluated for their specific impact on crop growth and yield.
[Ministry of Agriculture O.M No.7(3)/2015, dated 13th July, 2015,
Department of Agricultural Research and Education]
DEVELOPMENT OF SEEDS VARIETIES WITH INBUILT RESISTANCE
AGAINST INSECTS AND PESTS
Recommendation (Serial No. 7)
The Committee find that emphasis in ICAR is on development of trait-
specific high yield varieties and hybrids in the crop improvement programmes
to hasten the cherished goal of enhanced crop productivity and thereby food
and nutritional security. The Committee note that ICAR institutes are also
constantly working on development of crop varieties with inbuilt resistance
capacity against and tolerance to harmful insects or pests by incorporating
genes from wild varieties. They also note that research work on development
of seed varieties with coating which will have disease resistant capacity along
with necessary nutrients is being undertaken at ICAR institutes utilizing nano
technique. The Committee are of the view that overdependence on chemical
fertilizers and pesticides for enhancing agricultural production is turning into
menace which pose enormous threat to human health apart from polluting
water and soil system. The Committee desire that research on these pivotal
aspect by giving utmost priority and adequate funding for such useful
proposition should be undertaken.
Reply of the Government
Varietal development programme of crop based institutes of ICAR aims
at developing nutrient use efficient varieties as well as multiple biotic stress

26
(diseases, pests) and abiotic stress (salinity, high temperature, drought,
submergence) resistant varieties to reduce chemical, fertilizer and pesticide
use and will be funded adequately.
[Ministry of Agriculture O.M No.7(3)/2015, dated 13th July, 2015,
Department of Agricultural Research and Education]
MAINTENANCE AND PRESERV ATION OF TRADITIONAL
VARIETIES OF CROPS
Recommendation (Serial No. 8)
The Committee are aware that the traditional varieties of crops possessed
quality traits such as taste, nutritive and resistant to insects, pests and diseases.
Further, the farmers through the traditional varieties in almost all crops including
cereals, oil seeds and pulses contain properties of self pollinating seeds for
the crops and such seeds can be used for next few years, whereas the present
hybrid quality does not produce seeds for even next year. Hybrid seeds can
be grown only once to realise the yield advantage. Every year the farmers
have to purchase seeds before sowing season. The Committee find that the
Department is preserving the traditional varieties as farmers' varieties with
Protection of Plant Varieties and Farmers' Rights Authority (PPV & FRA). It
is also deposited in the National Gene Bank at NBPGR. The Committee has
been apprised that the traditional varieties are being utilised in breeding
programme for development of newer varieties as per their quality traits. The
Department, while explaining the matter informed the Committee that 160
varieties and hybrids of pulses, oil seeds, cereals etc. have been developed by
ICAR in current year. They also referred to wheat HD 2967, which had
survived hailstorm and rainfall recently due to short heights, large pod and
production of 5-6 tonnes. Further, virus indexed planting material that is
screened for disease resistant for Horticulture Sector such as pomegranate
has also been developed. In view of the above, the Committee recommend
that traditional varieties from all over the Country should be conserved and
kept from becoming extinct for their quality traits such as taste, self-producing
seeds present therein at any cost by the Department. Furthermore, though
certain steps have been taken through research & breeding programme with
respect to insect-pest disease resistant, self-pollination, climatic adaptation,
high yielding varieties, taste and nutritive value, the Department should prioritize
focused research in these areas on a wider scale and support with
commensurate allocation of funds and motivation to scientists.

27
Reply of the Government
All possible efforts are being made to collect, characterize, conserve
and utilize the native germplasm resources in mandate crops like fruits,
vegetables, flowers, spices, plantation crops, medicinal and aromatic plants,
tuber crops and potato and mushrooms etc. through ongoing Genetic Resource
Management and Crop Improvement projects of the Institutes and All India
Coordinated Research Projects.
In this endeavour, presently National Bureau of Plant Genetic Resources
(ICAR-NBPGR) maintains 30,093 traditional varieties of different crops
comprising 28873 cereals, 732 pulses, 148 oilseeds, 51 fibres, 3 forage crops,
281 horticultural crops and 5 other crops and its focus is to pursue this
activity vigorously.
[Ministry of Agriculture, O.M No.7 (3)/2015, dated 13th July, 2015,
Department of Agricultural Research and Education]
HORTICULTURE SCIENCE
Recommendation (Serial No.10)
The Committee are aware that in the present scenario horticulture has
started playing a very vital role in not only providing livelihood options food
security as also nutritional security. However, the Committee are also aware
that the horticulture sector has great scope for expansion and has vast potential
for enhancing production, productivity, value added products which lies
untapped. The Committee feel that in order to meet the steeply growing demand
of horticulture produce with export potential and the technical manpower on
the subject, it is essential to rope in the already existing institutes with facilities
such as Indian Institute of Horticulture Research (IIHR) in collaboration with
ICAR to address the related problems. The Committee during their study visit
observed that Institute like IIHR have adequate research inputs, infrastructure
and experienced scientific manpower which could be appropriately utilized
for the requirements of the growing horticulture sector. The Committee feel
that in order to develop centre of excellence in horticulture and for human
resource development and to integrate all horticulture based institutes in the
country for providing quality education and addressing various problems and
situations it will be useful to grant Deemed to be university status to ICAR-
IIHR. This attempt of the Department will also strengthen terms of trade,
develop international linkages related to horticulture education and Public-

28
Private Partnership (PPP). The Committee, therefore, suggest that ICAR-
IIHR be considered for Deemed-to-be University mainly with the purpose of
strengthening basic strategic and research in horticulture and associated
sciences encompassing various agro-ecologic regions in the country and to
develop it as centre of excellence in horticulture sector.
Reply of the Government
The Department is extremely thankful to the Committee for suggesting
to upgrade the ICAR-Indian Institute of Horticultural Research as a Deemed
University on Horticulture. The Indian Institute of Horticultural Research,
Bengaluru is completing 50 years by September, 2017. The Department will
strive that the Hon'ble Prime Minister of India launches a National Horticultural
University at ICAR-IIHR, Bengaluru on the occasion of Golden Jubilee
celebrations of its establishment in September, 2017. The Department will
initiate appropriate action in this regard.
[Ministry of Agriculture, O.M No.7 (3)/2015, dated 13th July, 2015,
Department of Agricultural Research and Education]
NATURAL RESOURCE MANAGEMENT
Recommendation (Serial No. 11)
The Committee note that due to the scaling down of the allocation of
ICAR from the proposed Rs. 8648 crore to Rs. 3691 crore for Annual Plan
2015-16 has resulted in down-sizing of the allocations of Natural Resource
Management Division to Rs. 370 crore. They also note that drastic reduction
of Rs. 90 crore i.e. about 19.14% at RE stage were made during 2014-15 due
to which the division had to prioritise research and the limited funds allocated
were diverted to critical areas needing focused attention for accomplishing
the targets. The Committee also observe that due to non-clearance of SFCs/
EFCs, the progress of expenditure was comparatively low mainly during
early part of the financial year (2014-15). However, the Division was able to
utilise 85.09 percentage of RE allocations till 15 March, 2015 after clearance
of EFCs/SFCs. The Committee are not at all convinced that on one hand the
Department seeks more funds but on the other hand funds are not utilised due
to non-clearance of SFCs/EFCs. The Committee are dissatisfied by the way
finances of the institutes are being managed as critical researches are being
delayed due to delay in clearance of SFCs/EFCs. The Committee, therefore,

29
desire the DARE to streamline the process of clearance of SFCs/EFCs so that
these can be accomplished within timeframe without affecting research work.
Reply of the Government
All the SFCs/EFCs of all the on-going schemes of NRM division have
already been cleared and are being implemented as per approved programmes.
One new scheme named as National Research Centre on Integrated Farming
Systems, Motihari has been circulated to appraisal agencies for comments
and expeditious steps are being taken to get it approved from appropriate
authority.
[Ministry of Agriculture, O.M No.7 (3)/2015, dated 13th July, 2015,
Department of Agricultural Research and Education]
LAND RESOURCE INVENTORY
Recommendation (Serial No.12)
The Committee note that National Bureau of Soil Survey and Land Use
Planning (NBSSLUP), Nagpur has undertaken a country level project on "Land
Resource Inventory on 1:10,000 scale for agricultural land use planning using
geo-spatial techniques" in collaboration with NRSC, ISRO. The Committee
were informed that preparation of the inventory will help to enhance agricultural
productivity per unit area through efficient utilization of land resources besides
other interventions. They note that project will be undertaken in phased manner
by ICAR-NBSSLUP in the first phase, 60 blocks each representing 60 agro-
ecological sub-regions of the country covering approximately 3.3 Mha area
in four years duration will be covered. However, the Committee were not
apprised of any details regarding timelines for coverage of all blocks of the
country. The Committee also note that allocations of Rs. 3.15 crore were
made available for implementation of the project during 2014-16. The Committee
are of view that preparation of Land Resource Inventory of entire country
will be a great tool in the hand of planners for optimizing agricultural output
and ensuring food security for the future generations of the country. The
Committee, therefore, desire the Department to submit a detailed plan for
coverage of entire country under the project and that adequate finances be
made available to the project in the future. At the same time, DARE should
ensure timely completion of first phase of the Project under intimation to the
Committee.

30
Reply of the Government
In the first phase (2014-2018), the NBSSLUP is developing land resource
inventory of 60 blocks each representing an Agro-Ecological Sub-Region
(AESR) of the country. These will serve as a model for 60 AESRs of the
country. In order to generate such information for whole country, it will be
appropriate to take up such huge activities in collaboration with State
Governments involving concerned State organizations, meeting out the cost
and utilizing State resources (infrastructural facilities including manpower).
Accordingly, MoUs have been signed with States like Karnataka, Telangana,
Gujarat and Meghalaya. Efforts are being made with other State governments
as well.
[Ministry of Agriculture O.M No.7 (3)/2015, dated 13th July, 2015,
Department of Agricultural Research and Education]
Comments of the Committee
For comments of the Committee please refer to Para No. 1.13 of
Chapter I of this Report.
ANIMAL SCIENCE
Recommendation (Serial No. 13)
Livestock is the economic security of the farmers and their management
plays a vital role in this agrarian country. There are 19 animal research institutes,
2 deemed universities, 8 National/Central Research Institutes, 1 National
Bureau, 1 Project Directorate and 6 National Research Centre to improve
productivity, production and reproductive efficiency in livestock and poultry.
The Committee note that only Rs. 955 crore i.e. 61.89% (BE) of allocations
were made for the first four year(s) as against an earmarked outlay of
Rs. 1543.00 crore for XII Plan under the head of Animal Science. Funds
have been further reduced at RE stage. The Committee also note that drastic
reduction of Rs. 70 crore i.e. about 30.40% at RE stage were made during
2014-15 from Rs. 230 crore to Rs.160 crore The Committee are astonished
to note that allocation to Central Institute for Research on Cattle, Meerut,
have been reduced from Rs. 5 crore to Rs. 1.5 crore at RE stage pending
decision to develop the campus of CIRC at Karnal or at Meerut. Similarly,
allocations to Central Avian Research Institute, Izzatnagar, have been reduced
from Rs. 9 crore (BE) to Rs. 3 crore at RE stage as funds allocated under

31
capital head were reduced from Rs. 4.60 crores to Rs. 0.45 crores. The
Committee are of the view that management and improvement of livestock is
one of the thrust areas of Agriculture in the country and in their earlier reports
too Committee have time and again emphasized for higher allocation as well
as proper utilisation of funds under this head so that priority research of this
division do not suffer. The Committee are also unhappy about the indecisiveness
of DARE to decide on the issue of determining the location of research institute.
The Committee desire the DARE to make proper assessment based on objective
criteria and expedite decision with respect to developing campus of CIRC at
Karnal or Meerut, so that scientists are able to focus on research rather than
mundane issues. While dealing with perennial problem of reduced BE
allocations to the Department thereby afflicting the planning process, the
Committee desire the DARE to enhance the allocations of the division at RE
stage so that research programmes plan for XII Plan are completed timely
and do not suffer for want of funds.
Reply of the Government
Reduction in fund allocation for Animal Science Division at RE stage
was necessitated due to overall reduction in allocation to the department at
RE/BE stages. Accordingly, fund allocation to CIRC, Meerut as well as CVRI,
Izzatnagar was also reduced under the Capital Head. Further, this
un-proportionate cut in the capital head was reasonable as the works to be
undertaken by these two institutions were new and were approved only in the
second half of 2014-15. Besides, the on-going works of other schemes were
to be given priority for completion.
As regards development of campus of CIRC in the XII Plan, 100 acres
of land has been allocated at Karnal within NDRI premises. However, in
order to strengthen the already established component of the Institute at Meerut,
efforts are being made by the ICAR for additional allocation of 75 acres of
land for 99 years on lease from Military Dairy Farm Authorities (Ministry of
Defence) as well as extension of existing lease of allocated land from 30 to 99
years. If 75 acres of land is allocated by Military Dairy Farm, Meerut, it will
be used to develop indigenous cattle breed livestock farm and its associated
research and development activities for their improvement and conservation.
[Ministry of Agriculture, O.M. No.7 (3)/2015, dated 13th July, 2015,
Department of Agricultural Research and Education]

32
Comments of the Committee
For comments of the Committee please refer to Para No. 1.16 of
Chapter I of this Report.
IMPROVEMENT OF TRADITIONAL VARIETIES OF LIVESTOCK
Recommendation (Serial No. 14)
India is home to largest number of cattle in the world. There are many
varieties of cattle which are disease resistant, drought resistant and can survive
on minimum diet. However, milk production from most of Indian varieties is
less barring few exceptions such as Murrah, Gir Kankrej, Sahiwal etc. The
Committee note that ICAR is running a network project on buffalo
improvement at Central Institute for Research on Buffaloes (CIRB), Hisar
under which production and dissemination of superior Murrah germplasm is
done for the benefit of farmers. The Committee also note that Gir, Kankrej
and Sahiwal breeds are also being conserved and improved under AICRP
coordinated by Central Institute for Research on Cattle (CIRC) involving
various stakeholders (Universities, State Livestock Farms and Gaushalas).
The Committee are of the view that improvement of traditional varieties of
livestock is very important as these varieties can provide farmers an option to
enhance the animal products for example milk production at low cost as
maintenance of traditional livestock is easy as compared to breeds based on
imported varieties. The Committee, therefore, desire the Department to start
a dedicated programme for identification, registration, conservation and
improvement of traditional varieties of livestock throughout the country. The
Committee while appreciating the efforts of the Department for standardizing
cloning technology would recommend that priority research of the institutes/
universities/bureau/research directorate and centres involved should be fully
supported with commensurate funding.
Reply of the Government
In the line of the Committee's recommendation that efforts should be
made for overall development, improvement and conservation of indigenous
breeds throughout the country, the Department of Animal Husbandry, Dairying
& Fisheries is the nodal Department to address these issues. Accordingly,
schemes such as National Dairy Plan, National Project for Bovine Breeding,
National Project for Dairy Development and the recently launched Gokul

33
Mission are being implemented throughout the country by that Department
through different State implementing agencies.
Besides this, DARE / ICAR also through its institutions such as NBAGR,
Karnal (for identification, characterization and registration of new indigenous
population of livestock and poultry) is also undertaking in-situ and ex-situ
conservation in collaboration with State Animal Husbandry Department/SAUs/
NGOs. Further, institutions CIRB, Hisar and CIRC, Meerut through their
institutional as well as Network/AICRP mode projects are undertaking
improvement and conservation of important breeds of both cattle and buffalo
and also providing requisite technical input such as quality semen, nutritional
and health related interventions, etc. to different stakeholders. The National
Dairy Research Institute at Karnal too is addressing this area by developing
different technologies both for production and propagation of quality
germplasm as well as value addition of milk, using traditional methods as well
as for commercial processing. The developed technologies are being actively
taken by interested stakeholders including State Governments, milk unions,
cooperatives and other private agencies/farmers.
[Ministry of Agriculture, O.M. No.7 (3)/2015, dated 13th July, 2015,
Department of Agricultural Research and Education]
PROMOTION OF NEW COLOUR BASED TEST FOR RAPID
DETECTION OF DETERGENT IN MILK
Recommendation (Serial No. 15)
The Committee note that the ICAR has developed a new colour based
test for rapid detection of detergent in milk. The Committee also note that
technology for the test was transferred to Rajasthan Cooperative Dairy
Federation Ltd., Mother Dairy, Delhi and Havmore Icecream Ltd., Ahmedabad.
They find that Mother Dairy, Delhi has agreed (in the MoU) to bring the test
to market. This test is not recommended for house hold purpose due to the
involvement of hazardous chemicals. The Committee, however, finds that
officials from Dairy co-operatives industries, entrepreneurs at large are regularly
invited at NDRI Industry Meet (held every year) where this technology is
demonstrated and explained. This technology is also listed on NDRI website.
The Committee are of view that availability of cheap and easy to use test will
help immensely to stop the menace of adulterated milk (especially with detergent
etc.) available in the market. The Committee, therefore, desire the DARE to

34
make efforts to publicise and popularise the test extensively so that it can be
made available to every milk co-operative. They, however, advise the
Department to ensure the safety of the test by the users and also prescribe the
dos & don’ts of the test.
Reply of the Government
The recommendation is noted for compliance. The National Dairy
Research Institute, Karnal has been advised to take suitable action on this
recommendation of the Committee.
[Ministry of Agriculture, O.M. No.7 (3)/2015, dated 13th July, 2015,
Department of Agricultural Research and Education]
KRISHI VIGYAN KENDRAS OPERATING IN TRIBAL AND HILLY
REGIONS OF THE COUNTRY
Recommendation (Serial No. 17)
The Committee note that 152 Krishi Vigyan Kendras are functioning in
tribal and hilly regions of the country. These KVKs have provided training to
7, 25,458 farmers and extension personnel, conducted 99187 on farm trials
and demonstration, produced 7855.75 tonnes Seed, 4245397.17 lakh of planting
material and distributed 483613.68 lakh Live-stock strains and fingerlings
during the period 2012-15. The Committee also note that Fisheries Science
Division has provided training to 5520 farmers since 2012 and Natural Resource
Management Division have been provided training on good farming practices
to over 35,000 farmers since 2012. Apart from these training was also provided
to the farmers by institutes of other division of ICAR. The Committee while
noting with satisfaction the efforts made by the KVKs and ICAR institutes
operating in tribal and hilly  regions of the country, desire the Department to
make extra efforts to provide training on secondary agriculture such as dairying,
food processing etc. so that income of farmers in these regions can be
enhanced. The Committee also desire the Department to provide adequate
funds to the KVKs operating in hilly and tribal regions of the country so that
they do not face problems of infrastructure and manpower while carrying
out the work of agriculture extension.
Reply of the Government
The recommendation is noted for compliance and as suggested by the
Committee, the KVKs have been asked to conduct more training programs on

35
secondary agriculture such as dairying, food processing and value addition
etc. in the tribal and hilly areas of the country.
[Ministry of Agriculture, O.M No.7 (3)/2015, dated 13th July, 2015,
Department of Agricultural Research and Education]
Comments of the Committee
For comments of the Committee please refer to Para No. 1.22 of
Chapter I of this Report.
PARAMPRAGAT KRISHI VIKAS YOJANA
Recommendation (Serial No. 20)
The Committee note that 'Paramparagat Krishi Vikas Yojana' has been
announced by the Government during Budget (2015-16) for promotion of
Organic Research and Development wherein, Grants-in-Aid will be provided
to ICAR/SAUs/Other research institutions/State Government agencies with
research facilities for development of organic package of practices specific
to State and cropping on specific proposal basis. Further, setting up of a
separate Organic Agriculture Research and Teaching Department for
popularization of organic agriculture under State Agricultural Universities is
also planned under the scheme. The Committee were informed that under
this scheme, farmers will be organized in a cluster of fifty or more for
encouraging them to adopt organic farming and their 50 acres of land will be
brought under Organic Farming. The Participatory Guarantee Scheme (PGS)
is being introduced under the scheme for empowering the farmers' clusters
to certify their produce and access to the organic market. The Committee
also note that State Government has to ensure that priority is given to small
and marginal farmers and rain-fed areas of the State while finalising the
proposals. They had also been informed that Rs. 300 crore has been allocated
for implementation of scheme. While noting the efforts made by the
Government for launching the scheme which will go a long way for
encouragement of organic farming and to support small and marginal farmers
who are unable to invest in organic farming, the Committee desire the DARE
to pursue ICAR institutions to bring out proposals under the scheme and
forge partnership with local farmers for developing organic farming rapidly
in the country. They also desire that the Department should research, innovate
and modernise the traditional technology and techniques and bring out light
weight implements so that the small and marginal farmers are benefitted from
it. These innovations should be publicized and popularized through KVKs.

36
Reply of the Government
Promotion of Organic Farming is included as a component of on-going
National Mission for Sustainable Agriculture (NMSA). Accordingly, the
Department of Agriculture and Cooperation has prepared a road map of the
Paramparagat Krishi Vikas Yojana.
As per this road map, farmers are encouraged to make cluster through
trainings and goshthies and financial assistance will be given to farmers from
seeds to harvesting and bringing the organic produce to market. The main
characteristic feature of this scheme is that the organic products would be
certified by farmers' groups themselves. Thus there will be no expenditure
liability on the farmers for certification. In addition, every farmer will be
given Rs. 20,000 per acre upto three years for adoption of organic farming.
In order to implement the Paramparagat Krishi Vikas Yojana (PKVY) in the
year 2015-16, an amount of Rs. 300 crore has been allocated. While finalising
the proposals, State Government has to ensure that priority is given to the
following criteria:----
(a) Small and marginal farmers to be encouraged.
(b) Rain-fed areas of the State to be taken.
(c) Crops with low fertilizer demand are to be considered in first year.
(d) Areas of the State where farmers are practicing traditional
agriculture.
ICAR is promoting research and development on organic farming through
ICAR-Indian Institute of Farming Systems Research (ICAR-IIFSR),
Modipuram and a Network Project on Organic Farming (NPOF) operating
since 2004 with 13 cooperating centres covering 12 States. So far, package
of practices for 18 crops and cropping systems have been developed. Seven
new centres have been added to cover the niche areas and these centres are
functional from 2015-16. The institute and centres are involved in promotion
of organic agriculture through capacity building of stakeholders under different
schemes such as Tribal Sub-Plan mainly focusing on small and marginal
farmers.
With regard to creation of separate organic agriculture research and
teaching department, it is stated that already three State Agricultural Universities

37
(SAUs) viz.,  Choudhary Sarwan Kumar Himachal Pradesh Krishi
Vishwavidyalaya (CSKHPKVV), Palampur, UAS-Dharwad and Tamil Nadu
Agricultural University (TNAU), Coimbatore are having the separate
departments for carrying out the research on organic farming and sustainable
agriculture. The remaining SAUs working under NPOF scheme will also be
encouraged to submit the suitable proposal to Paramparagat Krishi Vikas Yojana
(PKVY) for establishing the separate department for organic farming research
and teaching.
Several light weight and low cost hand tools, implements and machines
have been developed by the institutes and the centres of AICRPs located at
different State Agricultural Universities for the benefit of small and marginal
farmers. These technologies are demonstrated, publicized and popularized to
the farmers through on-farm trials, front line demonstrations, exhibitions and
kisanmelas.  In addition, the institutes also undertake capacity building
programmes on its technologies for the farmers, manufacturers, processors,
entrepreneurs, farm women, rural youth and extension personnel of State
developmental agencies, etc.
Besides, a number of the KVKs are already focusing their programmes
and activities on various aspects of organic farming including production of
on-site agri-inputs like compost vermi-compost, bio-fertilizer, and bio-agents
along with promotion of organic farming practices.
[Ministry of Agriculture, O.M No.7 (3)/2015, dated 13th July, 2015,
Department of Agricultural Research and Education]
KRISHI CHANNEL
Recommendation (Serial No. 21)
The Committee note that 'Krishi Channel' for broadcasting programmes
related to Agriculture channel is likely to be launched in April, 2015 by the
Ministry of Information and Broadcasting shortly as 'DD Kisan'. The Committee
also note that DARE/ICAR has been given responsibilities for making available
a database of resource persons group on core agricultural subjects and topics
by drawing experts from ICAR Institutes and Subject Matter Divisions. The
Secretary (DARE) during the evidence submitted that they have suggested to
prepare programmes based on interview with 10 successful farmers of all
districts of the country. This will benefit the farmers of the country immensely

38
and it will provide healthy competition among the farming fraternity. The
Committee are of the view that launch of dedicated Channel for broadcasting
programmes on agriculture is need of the hour as it will help farmers to
update their knowledge base, resolve queries related to agriculture, get weather
information on real time basis and take adequate measures to safeguard crops
in case of any eventualities and weather aberrations. The Channel may also
become an important platform for promotion of research outcome of ICAR
institutes thus enhancing scope for Lab to land initiatives. It can also help
Planners and administrators to implement and improve upon District
Contingency Plan in case of drought or flood or any other natural calamities.
The Committee, therefore, desire the Department to make adequate informative
programmes showcasing their research findings and crop varieties so that
farmers of entire country can derive benefits. The Committee also desire the
DARE to encourage their scientists to actively take part in programmes of
Krishi Channel.
Reply of the Government
The 24 hours Kisan Channel "DD Kisan" has been launched on 26th of
May, 2015 by Hon'ble Prime Minister of India at Vigyan Bhawan. The
"DD Kisan" is being looked after by Ministry of Information & Broadcasting/
Prasar Bharati. Ministry of Agriculture is an important contributor of inputs
for the stakeholders who view DD Kisan Channel as far as providing/creation
of contents of the hard core Agricultural programmes is concerned.
At DAC level a Coordinator with Kisan Channel has been nominated
under the supervision of Addl. Commissioner (Extn.). Every division of DAC
has been requested to nominate a suitable contact person or nodal officer
with topics to be covered during first three months immediately to hand over
to Prasar Bharati.
Further, in order to disseminate the research output of ICAR Institutes
and Agricultural Universities, the DD Kisan channel will be provided the
technical contents. For this purpose, the scientists of all R&D organizations
in agriculture will technically contribute and give scientific advice through
studio and farm based TV programmes. For this purpose, a nation-wide pool
of experts is helping in the development of agricultural programmes for
DD Kisan Channel.The programmes /contents shall include production as
well as post-harvest management and value addition of farm produce. The

39
success stories of technologies/ farmers are likely to be covered extensively.
Apart from interactive sessions with subject matter experts on various aspects
of agriculture, video films will be made for telecast on this Channel.
[Ministry of Agriculture, O.M No.7 (3)/2015, dated 13th July, 2015,
Department of Agricultural Research and Education]
VACANCY OF SCIENTIFIC/ TECHNICAL/ ADMINISTRATIVE POSTS
IN INSTITUTES OF ICAR
Recommendation (Serial No. 22)
The Committee are concerned to note that as on date positions of 1570
scientific, 1374 technical and 964 posts of administrative grade are vacant in
various ICAR Institutes. Needless to deduce these vacancies would definitely
be affecting the functioning of ICAR Institutions adversely. They, therefore,
wonder how the Government expects the Council to deliver without even
their personnel requirements being met. The Committee note that recruitment
process for the 551 posts of scientists is at various stages of requisition by
the Agricultural Scientists' Recruitment Board (ASRB). The Committee also
note that 380 positions comprising of Administrative Officers, Assistant
Directors, Assistants, LDC etc. are likely to be got filled up before December,
2015 for posts in Administrative category wherein recruitment is centralized
through the ASRB. The Committee noted that 16 out of 100 Institutes do not
have regular Directors as on date and that 6-8 months are required for
advertising the posts as per procedure for selection. The Committee were
informed that the process for selection begin 6 months before the personnel
who are retiring but do face problems in starting the process for the personnel
who resign from job or other eventualities abruptly. The representative also
mentioned that it is not possible for any system to have 100% strength. While
appreciating the formalities, the Committee are not at all convinced that 24.24%
in scientific posts, 18.28% in technical posts and 19.78 % in administrative
grades are lying vacant due to resignation or abrupt contingencies. They also
do not appreciate that premier Institutions like IARI is without head (Director)
for more than 6 months. The Committee fail to understand how such a premier
Institution is functioning in absence of direction from top most personnel.
The Committee deprecate this lackadaisical attitude of Department and desire
that they should attend this grave situation with alarcity and leave no stone
unturned to seek best of the expert for high end skills and low end skills at the

40
earliest. The Committee exhort upon the Government to expedite the process
of selection and fill up the existing vacant posts at the earliest so that the
research and development activities in the agriculture sector are not adversely
affected.
Reply of the Government
The observations of the Committee have been noted for compliance and
implementation.
[Ministry of Agriculture, O.M No.7 (3)/2015, dated 13th July, 2015,
Department of Agricultural Research and Education]
Comments of the Committee
For comments of the Committee please refer to Para No. 1.31 of
Chapter I of this Report.
INCENTIVE SCHEMES FOR SCIENTISTS
Recommendation (Serial No. 23)
Availability of lucrative career opportunity and presence of a well defined
incentive scheme are necessary for attracting the best talent for agricultural
research institutes and motivate scientists working in ICAR institutes. The
Committee note that the Council has adopted the pay package and the Career
Advancement Scheme (CAS) of the University Grants Commission (UGC)
for attracting and retaining the best available scientific talent which has in-
built flexibility in the CAS for upward movement, subject to fulfillment of
certain criteria, irrespective of occurrence of vacancies. Recently the Council
has also revised the scheme of ICAR Awards to further motivate and incentivize
to bring out the best from the scientific cadre. All special allowances of the
GoI have been made applicable for the scientists serving in remote and difficult
areas. Special weightage is also accorded for lateral selections of scientists
who have served in remote and backward areas. However, the Committee are
concerned to note that no scientist has been rewarded under the scheme of
incentivizing research with rewards which was started in 2014-15 for
incentivizing scientist for undertaking research in defined areas. The Committee
feel that if the best available talent is to be attracted towards the ICAR
institutions, proper and time bound implementation of this scheme is necessary.
The motivation which the proper implementation of this scheme will provide

41
to scientists will also help in enhancing the research outcome(s) of ICAR
institutes. The Committee, therefore, desire the ICAR to implement this scheme
in true spirit at the earliest.
Reply of the Government
The Indian Council of Agricultural Research has put in place several
incentives for attracting best talent for agricultural research besides motivating
the scientists working in agricultural institutes by way of adopting UGC pay
package and Career Advancement Scheme special allowances are provided
for the scientists working in remote and difficult areas. The scheme of
incentivising the scientists for undertaking research in cutting edge areas for
solving challenging problems such as C3-C4 intermediate pathway and
functionality of C4 genes in rice, newer genetic modification for improving
biological nitrogen fixation in cereals, molecular genetic analysis of stress
resistance in wheat, chickpea and mustard, increasing rice yield under low
light intensity, semen sexing in cattle are being pursued. All these projects are
aimed at enhancing the deployment of scientific manpower in cutting edge
areas besides acting as an incentive to pursue emerging newer trends in
agricultural science research. The envisaged technical and research
contingency support shall act as an incentive for pursuit of advanced research
besides encouraging the scientist for appropriate output in the emerging area.
[Ministry of Agriculture, O.M No.7(3)/2015, dated 13th July, 2015,
Department of Agricultural Research and Education]
Comments of the Committee
For comments of the Committee please refer to Para No. 1.34 of
Chapter I of this Report.

42
CHAPTER III
OBSERV ATIONS/ RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH THE
COMMITTEE DO NOT DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW
OF THE GOVERNMENT'S REPLIES
REVENUE RECEIPT
Recommendation (Serial No. 5)
The Committee in their Second Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) has
observed that revenue generated from the Institutes under ICAR are not
reflected in revenue receipt presented to Lok Sabha. The Committee had
further opined that revenue generated under administrative control of the
Department should be reflected in Budget Documents including detailed
Demands for Grants. They had desired the DARE to clarify the issue and
rectify the irregularity, if any. In this regard, the Committee were informed
that the revenue generated by ICAR is netted while submitting the demand of
funds to the Ministry of Finance and as such the Revenue generated by ICAR
is utilized by ICAR itself and utilization of internal resources as such is
permitted by Secretary (Expenditure), Ministry of Finance. The Committee
were informed that revenue generated by ICAR is not transferred to the
Department viz., DARE and as such do not form a part of Non-Tax revenues
of DARE. On perusal of approval of Ministry of Finance, the Committee note
that the Ministry of Finance had suggested the DARE to utilise money generated
from internal resources every year with the approval of their Finance
Committee/Governing Council without any approval of the Government. The
Committee also note that ICAR has netted approximately Rs. 368.35 crore
while submitting Demands for Grants during the period of 2012-2015. The
Committee are not convinced with the reply of the Department regarding
validity of approval of Ministry of Finance without approval by the Parliament.
The Committee find this practice as violation of this provision of the Constitution
as any money earned by the Government institutes ought to be deposited to
the Consolidated Fund of India and therefore, require approval of Parliament
for expenditure. The Committee, therefore, direct the Department to convey
the serious concern of the Committee to the Ministry of Finance and to present
a note on constitutional provisions regarding competence of the Government

43
to allow use of commercial earnings of Government Departments without
the approval and sanction of Parliament.
Reply of the Government
The Indian Council of Agricultural Research is an autonomous organisation
fully funded by the Government. The Revised Rules of the ICAR adopted at
the Annual General Meeting of the ICAR Society held at New Delhi on
18th January, 1975 were duly approved by the Government vide File No.
1-1/75-Reogn. (DARE).
The Rule 74 of Rules and Bye-laws of ICAR states :----
The funds of the Society shall consist of the following:----
(1) Income from Cess realised under the Agricultural Produce Cess
Act, 1970 (Act. No. XXVII of 1940).
(2) Lumpsum and recurring grants made by the Government of India.
(3) Income from Investments.
(4) Income from Other sources.
As prescribed by the above Rule, the ICAR had been utilising its own
Income besides the Government Grants received through Department of
Agriculture Research and Education (DARE). However, it is pertinent to
mention here that the Accounts of ICAR, audited by the Comptroller and
Auditor General of India, every year contain elaborate details of all such Income
and expenditure incurred out of Government Grant and that incurred out of
other sources (Internal Resources of ICAR).
The Audited Annual Accounts of ICAR are duly laid in the Parliament,
every year.
The following provisions contained in the General Financial Rules, 2005
may kindly be seen:----
Rule 208 (iii) ---- All autonomous organisations, new or already in existence
should be encouraged to maximise generation of Internal resources and
eventually attain self-sufficiency.
Rule 208 (iv)  ---- Instead of giving recurring grants, where ever possible,
the Ministry or Department may consider creating a Corpus Fund, the
returns of investment of which, along with their Internally generated

44
resources should enable the autonomous organisation to meet its Revenue
expenditure.
Rule 209 (6) (xiv) ---- The grant sanctioning authorities should not only
take into account the Internally generated resources while regulating the
award of Grants but should consider laying down targets for Internal
Resources generation by the grantee institutions or organisations every
financial year, particularly where grants are given on a recurring basis year
after year.
In view of the above Rules of the GFR and the fact that the ICAR
submits its demand of Grants-in-Aid only after netting the Income from Internal
Resources, it is submitted that the system in place at ICAR do not violate any
of the existing provision laid down by the Government.
The demand of funds received from the units of ICAR is consolidated
Scheme-wise/division-wise/discipline-wise viz. Crop Science, Horticultural
Sciences etc. and the Division-wise Internal resources anticipated to be
generated during a given year are netted from the consolidated requirement.
The net demand is thereafter submitted to the Ministry of Finance for allocation
of funds. The relevant information in this respect during past three years is as
under:----
(Rs. in crore)
Sl.       Year                                   ICAR- Non Plan
No. Actual Revenue Actual Revised Expenditure**
demand by Receipts Demand Estimates
the Units of reported submitted finally
ICAR to be to the approved
generated Ministry
during the of Finance
year by after netting
the Units  the Internal
Resources
1. 2012-13 2280.76 95.47 2185.29 2090.90 2172.92
2. 2013-14 2511.07 122.95 2388.12 2270.00 2362.47
3. 2014-15 2761.27 149.93 2611.34 2373.36 2616.21*
** The excess expenditure over and above the Government Grant approved has been met
     from the Internal Resources of ICAR.
*   Provisional
In this regard, it may be relevant here to add that while implementing

45
Sixth Central Pay Commission (Sixth CPC) for autonomous organisations,
the Government had issued clear instructions that 10% of the budgetary support
required to meet the additional expenditure due to implementation of Sixth
CPC is required to be met through Internal Resource Generation of
the autonomous organisation. The copy of relevant OM is enclosed as
Annexure-II.
It may also be stated here that ICAR is an autonomous organisation
under DARE and is not a subordinate/attached office of DARE. Therefore,
the units of ICAR cannot be termed as Government Institutions and as such
the money earned by them do not form Non-Tax Revenues for DARE. The
organisations similar to ICAR viz. CSIR also utilises the Internal Resources
generated by its laboratories.
[Ministry of Agriculture, O.M No.7 (3)/2015, dated 13th July, 2015,
Department of Agricultural Research and Education]

46
CHAPTER IV
OBSERV ATIONS/ RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF
WHICH REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT HA VE NOT
BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE
HORTICULTURE SCIENCE
Recommendation (Serial No. 9)
The Committee find that Indian Institute of Horticulture Research (IIHR),
Bengaluru had developed many post harvest technologies such as Reverse
Osmosis i.e. Osmotic Dehydration Technologies for fruits and vegetables,
for enhancing longevity of raw fruits and vegetables, Crushed Tomato
Technology, Dry flower technology, technology Ready to Serve Beverages
for Amla, Mango & Pineapple etc. The Committee are of the view that such
technologies provide immense potential for commercialization and
enhancement of income of farmers. The Committee note that the IIHR has
earned revenue of Rs 11.58 Lakh as one time up front license fee from licensing
of Post-Harvest Technologies to 14 private organizations. However, the
Committee observe that most of these private firms were situated in southern
and western parts of the country. The IIHR is yet to tap the market available
in other parts of the country where huge potential for commercialization of
these technologies exist. The Committee also observe that the Institution is
yet to transfer these technologies to farmers or Krishi Vigyan Kendras (KVKs)
despite their willingness for licensing some of these technologies at much
lower price than to other private licensees. The Committee are of the considered
opinion that proper marketing of post harvest technologies are not only
important from the point of revenue generation but also for providing alternate
avenues to farmers of the country so that they can get remunerative pricing
for their products. The Committee, therefore recommend the DARE to take
effective steps for proper marketing of these technologies and organise organic
Melas, exhibitions and fairs so as to tap potential market of the entire country
besides reducing post harvest losses. The Committee would also like the
DARE to provide adequate incentives and training to farmers so that they can
be encouraged to start agri-ventures and develop agri-business on their own
based on these technologies.

47
Reply of the Government
Due to logistic and other limitations, some of the important technologies
developed at ICAR-IIHR could not be effectively transferred to far off places
in the country. But efforts will be intensified to transfer these potential
technologies to end users through Zonal Project Directors of the Council,
State Agricultural Universities and Krishi Vigyan Kendras (KVKs).
[Ministry of Agriculture, O.M No.7 (3)/2015, dated 13th July, 2015,
Department of Agricultural Research and Education]
Comments of the Committee
For comments of the Committee please refer to Para No. 1.10 of
Chapter I of this Report.
KRISHI VIGYAN KENDRA
Recommendation (Serial No. 16)
Krishi Vigyan Kendra is important mechanism for dissemination of
knowledge and information to the farmers and is a pivotal agricultural extension
component. Existence of a robust system of KVKs is very much necessary
for transfer of knowledge from lab to land. However, the Committee note
that KVKs are not being provided necessary infrastructure and manpower for
achieving the aim of extension of services for farmers of the country. The
Committee was apprised that performance of the KVKs was not up to the
mark due to lack of manpower and lack of funds due to budget cut. The
Committee note that as many as 2402 posts out of 10272 scientific (Programme
Coordinators and Subject Matter Specialists), technical and administrative
and other posts are vacant in KVKs as on 31.03.2015. The Committee were
informed that budget cut in operational contingency has also affected the
activities of KVKs. Each KVK is provided modest infrastructure depending
upon the need and availability of funds for the purpose. So far ICAR has
provided Administrative building to 563 KVKs, Farmers Hostel in 513 KVKs,
Demonstration units in 493 KVKs and Soil Water Testing Labs in 389 KVKs.
During XII Plan, the KVKs are proposed to be provided different types of
infrastructure like office buildings, farmer's hostel, staff quarters,
demonstration units and other additional facilities in selected KVKs. These
additional facilities include soil and water testing labs, rain water harvesting
facility, minimal processing facility, mini seed processing facility, carp

48
hatcheries, integrated farming system units, solar panels, technology
information units, micro-nutrient analysis facility and 25 KV A genset. Besides,
the KVKs are also proposed to be provided need based office equipments and
audio-visual aids, laboratory equipments and different types of farm equipments
and machinery. The provisions have been recommended by the EFC of the
KVK scheme for the XII Plan and the proposals are under consideration of
the Cabinet. Further, the Department could not provide funds for construction
of farmers hostels, facilities for promoting farm mechanisation, facilities for
food processing etc. due to reduced allocations during current plan. The
Committee in their earlier reports have time and again emphasized on the
importance of KVKs in the scheme for agricultural extension. The Government
must understand that we cannot hope to improve the wellbeing of farmers
unless they are provided information relating to latest research in techniques,
seeds, methods, implements and other necessary inputs for making agriculture
remunerative. The Committee, therefore, desire the Government to enhance
the fund allocations to KVKs so that they can be equipped with all necessary
infrastructure and manpower and be uptodate. The Committee desire the
Department to revisit the fund allocation, utilisation & strength monitoring
mechanisation as well, so far as KVKs are concerned. The DARE should also
make efforts in consultation with the State Governments for filling vacancies
available in KVKs. They also recommend that Department should ensure that
KVKs including private sector KVKs provide the mandated activities to the
farmers without any exception.
Reply of the Government
Efforts are being made for making higher allocations to scheme of KVKs.
The allocation has been enhanced from Rs.533.60 crore at RE stage in 2014-
15 to Rs. 644.85 crore at BE stage in 2015-16. As suggested, the monitoring
mechanism will also be strengthened by deploying more scientific manpower
in the Zonal Project Directorates (ZPDs) and increasing the number of ZPDs
from 8 to 11 after the approval of the Government.
[Ministry of Agriculture, O.M No.7 (3)/2015, dated 13th July, 2015,
Department of Agricultural Research and Education]
Comments of the Committee
For comments of the Committee please refer to Para No. 1.19 of
Chapter I of this Report.

49
CHAPTER  V
OBSERV ATIONS/ RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH
FINAL REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT ARE STILL AWAITED
SEPARATE FUNDS FOR IMPLEMENTATION OF INITIATIVES FOR
XII PLAN
Recommendation (Serial No. 18)
The Committee note that many initiatives planned for implementation
such as Attracting and Retaining Youth in Agriculture (ARYA), Rural
Entrepreneurship Awareness Development Yojana (READY), Farmers FIRST,
Agriculture and Technology Forecast Centre are yet to commence even after
three years after the commencement of the Plan. The Committee were apprised
that these schemes are under the process of getting approval of the
Government. Similarly, projects envisaged under Extra Mutual Funds are still
in the process of seeking approval of the Government. The Committee have
also been informed that sixteen Consortia Research projects have been
sanctioned at a total XII Plan outlay of Rs. 1651.80 crore as part of EFC's of
different schemes and are likely to start as per approved programme during
the year 2015-16 and onwards. The Committee also note that Indian Agriculture
e-Extension Research Institute (IAeRI) Scheme has not yet been conceptualized
by the DARE due to reduced funding. The Committee recall that in their
second report (16th Lok Sabha) had deplored the slow pace of work in
implementation of new initiatives during the XII Plan and desired the
Department to complete requisite formalities for launching these schemes/
projects during 2014-15 so that intended benefits planned under these schemes
are made available in time. However, the DARE have not been provided adequate
funds to start these innovative projects which has immense potential to upscale
farmer-scientist interaction and to make agriculture education attractive for
new generation. The Committee strongly feel that implementation of these
Schemes have already been delayed inordinately. They, therefore, desire the
Department to give their best to ensure that all formalities pertaining to these
initiatives are completed with utmost promptitude and their implementation

50
commences within specific time frame. At the same time, the Committee
desire the Department to make available additional funds in ongoing fiscal so
that benefits as planned from these schemes can be reaped during the current
plan itself.
Reply of the Government
The new activities of XII plan viz., Students READY and Agriculture
Technology Forecast Centre are at different stages of seeking approval of the
Government. The Department has ensured that all formalities pertaining to
these activities are completed and awaiting approval from the Government.
The activity namely "Farmers FIRST" is under the process of implementation.
Some of Consortia Research Projects (CRPs), as part of EFC's of different
schemes are being implemented and remaining will be taken up after getting
adequate funding at RE Stage 2015-16.
As far as ARYA is concerned, this scheme has been sanctioned in
December, 2014. This programme is conceptualized for mentoring/handholding
rural youth in villages by providing technical and financial support to upscale/
commercialize promising technologies and grass root innovations. An amount
of Rs. 100 crore is approved in XII Plan for this activity.
Further, regarding Indian Agricultural e-Extension Research Institute
(IAeRI), the Department has again requested NITI Aayog to expedite the
matter for communicating "in principle" approval.
[Ministry of Agriculture, O.M No.7 (3)/2015, dated 13th July, 2015,
Department of Agricultural Research and Education]
Comments of the Committee
For comments of the Committee please refer to Para No. 1.25 of
Chapter I of this Report.
Recommendation (Serial No.19)
The Committee note that process for establishment of Central Agricultural
Universities at Bihar, Barapani (Meghalaya and Nagaland) are under process
whereas, Rani Lakshmi Bai Central Agricultural University, Jhansi (Bundelkhand)
was created as an institution of national importance in March, 2014 only. The
Committee are concerned with the tardy progress in the establishment of
Central Agricultural Universities in Bihar and Barapani as envisaged in the XII

51
plan. The Committee also note that formalities for establishment of Agriculture
University in Andhra Pradesh and Horticulture University in Telangana have
been started. However, the Committee had not been provided timelines for
commissioning of each of these Universities. The Committee are of the view
that a scheduled timeline for establishment of these universities will go a long
way for timely commissioning of these universities, establishment of which
has already been delayed. The Committee, therefore, recommend the
Department to formulate timelines in consultation with concerned State
Governments so that requisite funds be made available by the Ministry of
Finance accordingly.
Reply of the Government
The Department is in the process of finalizing EFC for Rajendra- Central
Agricultural University(CAU), Pusa, Bihar and for CAU-Barapani the
Government of Meghalaya is still to allot the requisite land. For establishment
of agricultural university in Andhra Pradesh and horticultural University in
Telangana, the process has already been initiated and to that effect an amount
of Rs. 10.00 crore has been released to each University during Financial Year
2014-15 and an amount of Rs. 75.00 crore has been earmarked for each
University as BE for the Financial Year 2015-16 and the same amount will be
released as soon as AUC is received for the earlier released amount. DARE is
making all round efforts to complete these projects at the earliest possible
time in the line of suggestion of the Committee on Agriculture. The Department
is pursuing the matter with the concerned State Governments to formulate
timelines for the establishment of these universities.
[Ministry of Agriculture, O.M No.7 (3)/2015, dated 13th July, 2015,
Department of Agricultural Research and Education]
Comments of the Committee
For comments of the Committee please refer to Para No. 1.28 of
Chapter I of this Report.
     N
EW DELHI; HUKM DEO NARAYAN YADA V ,
14 December, 2015 Chairperson,
23 Agrahayana, 1937 (Saka) Standing Committee on Agriculture.

52
ANNEXURE I
LIST OF ONGOING CASES & ACTION TAKEN IN RESPECT OF ICAR HQRS.
AND INSTITUTES DURING 2014-15
(Vide Para 1.6 of Chapter I of Report)
Sl. Name of the Name of the Nature of irregularities Status of the disciplinary /
No. Institute(s) Charged Officer committed criminal proceedings
1          2              3                   4                  5
1. CIRG , Makhdoom Dr. S.V . Singh, Principal Scientist Irregularities in purchases of Inquiry Officer (IO) &
Dr. B. Rai, Principal Scientist Bio-safety Cabinet at CIRG Presenting Officer (PO)
Dr. Puneet Kumar, Principal Scientist appointed. Inquiry in
Dr. D.K. Sharma, Principal Scientist progress.
Shri S.L.V . Prasad, Sr. AO
2. IVRI, Izzatnagar Dr. M. C. Sharma, Ex-Director Irregularities in various IO & PO appointed. Inquiry
Purchase/works at IVRI, in progress.
Izzatnagar.
3. IVRI, Izzatnagar Dr. (Mrs.) Rupasi Tiwari, Sr. Scientist Irregularity in purchase of IO & PO appointed. Inquiry
Shri Triveni Dutt, Jt. Director Learning Management in progress.
Dr. S. S. Rawat, CTO Information System Software.
Irregularity in procurement of
books

53
4. IVRI, Izzatnagar Shri Rajiv Kumar, O.C. Engg. Irregularity in splitting the IO & PO appointed. Inquiry in
Shri Rajiv Gupta, Technical Officer (Civil) works to avoid Open Tender progress.
Dr. Rakesh Pandey, Incharge, Farm Section and Vetting by Director (Works),
Dr. Putan Singh, Coordinator Irregularities in the Contract
given for harvesting of green
fodder.
5. IIVR, Varanasi Dr. D. Dutta Principal Scientist Irregularities in purchases/ IO & PO appointed. Inquiry in
works at IIVR, Varanasi progress.
6. IVRI, Izzatnagar Dr. Deepak Sharma, Principal Scientist Irregularity in purchase of IO & PO appointed. Inquiry in
Dr. Ranvir Singh, Sr. Scientist C hemicals progress.
Shri Yashpal Singh, Scientist (SS) Irregularity in Purchase of
Human Resource Management
System Software.
7. NRC on Orchid, Dr. L. C. Day, Principal Scientist Fraudulent claim IO & PO appointed. Inquiry in
Sikkim progress.
8. NBAGR, Karnal. Dr . R.K. Viz, Principal Scientist Irregularities in upgradation IO & PO appointed. Inquiry in
of DNA Sequencer. progress.
9. NRC on Mithun, Dr . Kobukhate, T-7-8 Misconduct and discrepancies IO & PO appointed. Inquiry in
Nagaland Shri Dipal, Meiti, Assistant in sale of milk coupons progress.

54
1          2              3                   4                  5
10. ICAR Res., Barapani Shri K. C. Joshi, Chief A.O. Irregularities in appointment IO & PO appointed. Inquiry in
of Caretaker in the Hostel and progress.
financial irregularities in
maintaining the hostel at
Asiad Village Complex,
New Delhi
11. KVK, CPCRI, Dr. Manoj Kumar, T.S., Programme Irregularities in purchase of Penalty of Reduction to a
Kasargod Co ordinator vehicle lower stage in the time scale of
pay for a period of one year
without cumulative effect and
without adversely affecting his
pension imposed.
12. CISH, Lucknow Dr. Anil Verma, Scientist (SG) Irregularities in installation of Penalty of Reduction to a
Shri Ramendra Tiwari, Sr.T.O. Drip Irrigation System lower stage by one stage for a
Sh. Ravi Bhadra, AFAO period of one year without
cumulative effect imposed.
13. NBAGR, Karnal Dr. B. K. Joshi, Ex-Director Irregularities in upgradation Penalty of Five Percent cut in
of DNA Sequencer pension for a period of six
months imposed.
14. IVRI, Izzatnagar Dr. Om Singh, Sr. Scientist Misuse of Government Vehicle Penalty of Reduction to a
while on LTC lower stage in the time scale of
pay by two stages for a period
of two years with cumulative
effect imposed.

55
15. IGFRI, Jhansi Dr . A.K. Pandey, T.O. Unauthorized cutting of trees In its 2nd stage advice, CVC
Dr.  K. A.  Singh, Pr.  Scientist has advised for imposition of
Dr. M.S. Sharma, T.O. Major penalty on Dr.  K.A.
Singh and drop charges
against  Dr.A.K. Pandey and
Dr. M.S. Sharma. Matter under
consideration.
16. DSR, Hyderabad Dr. J.V . Patil, Director Financial irregularities in Charge Sheet served. IO & PO
Sh.W.S. Bhatt, A.O. purchase of furniture, to be appointed.
renovation of sabhagar
and renovation of guest
house
17. CRIDA, Dr. S.R. Yadav,  A.D. (OL) Fraudulent claim of TA and LTC Penalty of Reduction to a
Hyderabad lower stage by one stage for
two years with cumulative
effect imposed.
18. CRIJAF, Shri H.K. Sammadar, F&AO Irregularity in splitting of work Copy of CVCs 2nd stage
Barrackpore (now retd.) advice, findings of IO sent to
Shri D. Moitra, CAO charged officers for their
submissions for imposition of
major penalty. Reply received
are examined.

56
1          2              3                   4                  5
19. PDFSR, Shri Anil Aggarwal, F&AO Irregularities in fixing of Penalty of Censure imposed
Modipuram (Now Retd.) vitrified tiles, pu rchase of on Shri H.S. Chauhan. Penalty
Shri  H.S. Chauhan, A.O.  (Now Retd.) vertical blinds, purchase of of reduction to lower stage
Dr. B. Gangwar, Director furniture etc. imposed on Shri Anil
Aggarwal.
IO & PO appointed in case of
Dr. B. Gangwar.
20. NBAIM, Dr. Alok Srivastava, Sr. Scientist Financial irregularity in IP & PO appointed. Inquiry in
Modipuram purchase of equipments progress.
21. NBPGR, Ms. Sunita Sharma, DS Irregularity in award of IO & PO appointed. Inquiry in
New Delhi Shri R.P. Chamola, F&AO security contract progress.
Shri R.P. Mathur, T.O.
22. CIAE, Bhopal Shri R.C. Meena, SAO Allegation of misuse of IO & PO appointed. Inquiry in
official power and non- progress.
settlement of LTC advance
23. NBSSLUP, Nagpur Dr. Arun Chaturvedi, Prin. Sc. V arious financial irregularities Reply to the Charge Sheet
Dr. T.N. Hazare, Prin. Sc. under examination.
24. DSR, Mau Dr . A.B. Mandal, Director Financial irregularities in award Penalty of reduction to one
Dr. A.K. Sinha, Sr. Scientist of contract lower stage in the time scale of
Shri Suresh Chand, AF&AO (Now retd.) pay for a period of one year
imposed on Dr. Mandal and
Dr. Sinha. Further penalty of
reduction to one lower stage
of pay till 29.11.2014 without
adversely affecting his

57
pension imposed on
Shri  Suresh Chand.
25. NCIPM, Dr. O.M. Bambawale, Director (Retd.) Irregularities in purchase of In its 2nd stage advice, CVC
New Delhi Dr. O.P. Sharma, Prin. Sc. HaNPV has advised to impose major
Dr. Someshwar Bhagat, Sr. Sc penalty on Dr. Bambawale
Shri S.P. Singh, T.O.  and Dr. O.P. Sharma and
drop charges against
Dr. Someshwar Bhagat and
Shri S.P. Singh. Matter under
examination.
26. CSWCR&TI, Dr. A.K. Tiwari, Head Irregular felling of trees causing Reply to charge sheet under
Chandigarh Shri R.S. Nain, Farm Manager revenue loss examination in consultation
Shri Basu Deo, T.O. with CVC.
Shri S.K. Chauhan, T.O.
27. NBPGR, New Delhi Shri Suresh Kumar, CAO T ampering in note portion Penalty of reduction to a lower
thereby causing loss to the stage by one stage in the time
institute scale of pay for a period of one
 year imposed.
28. IISR, Lucknow Shri Rajiv Lal, SAO Negligence of violating the Penalty of Censure imposed
provisions of clause of on Shri Rajiv Lal.
agreement with a firm causing
financial loss to the Council
IO - Inquiry officer
PO - Presenting officer

58
ANNEXURE II
(Vide Chapter  III of Report)
No. 7/23/2008-E-III (A)
Government of India
Ministry of Finance
Department of Expenditure
New Delhi, dated the 30th September, 2008
OFFICE MEMORANDUM
Sub.: Pay revision of employees of Quasi-Government Organizations,
Autonomous Organizations and Statutory Bodies, etc. set up by
and funded/controlled by the Central Government — Guidelines
regarding.
Orders have been issued by the Government to implement the revised
pay structure for the Central Government employees on the basis of the
recommendations of the Sixth Central Pay Commission as accepted by the
Government. It has now been decided that these orders may be extended to
the employees of Autonomous Organizations etc. whose pattern of emolument
structure i.e. pay scales and allowances (in particular the Dearness Allowance,
the House Rent Allowance and City Compensatory Allowance ) are identical
to those of the Central Government employees. This is further subject to the
stipulation that conditions of service of employees of those organizations,
especially those relating to hours of work, payment of OTA etc., would also
be exactly similar to those in Government Departments. There is no objection
to the Autonomous Organizations etc. adopting the Central Civil Services
(Revised Pay) Rules, 2008. It is however, clarified that the revised pay structure
as incorporated in Section I and II of Part A of the First Schedule to the Rules
ibid alone may be adopted, it is further added that the revised pay structure
would be admissible to those employees who opt for the same in accordance
with the extant Rules. Likewise, deductions on account of Provident Fund or
Contributory Provident Fund, as the case may be, will have to be made on,
the basis of the revised pay w.e.f. the date the employee opts to elect the
revised pay structure.

59
2. In case of those categories of employees whose pattern of
emoluments structure i.e. pay scales and allowances and conditions of service
are not similar to those of the Central Government employees, a separate
'Group of Officers' in respect of each of the Autonomous Bodies may be
constituted in the respective Ministry/Department. The Financial Adviser of
the respective Ministry/ Department will represent the Ministry of Finance on
this Group. The Group would examine the proposals for revision of pay
scales etc. taking into account the views, if any, expressed by the staff
representatives of the concerned organizations. It would be necessary to
ensure that the final package of benefits proposed to be extended to the
employees of these Autonomous Organizations etc. is not more beneficial
than admissible to the corresponding categories of the Central Government
employees. The final package recommended by the 'Group of Officers' will
require the concurrence of the Ministry of Finance or the Department of
Personnel & Training, as the case may be.
3. The mode of payment of arrears of pay shall be laid down in Rule
14 of the Central Civil Services (Revised Pay) Rules, 2008 for the Central
Government employees.
4. The adoption of revised pay structure based on these orders by
Autonomous Organizations, etc., both where the pattern of emoluments
structure is identical to the Central Government and where emoluments
structure is not similar, will be subject to the following conditions as far as
budgetary support for additional expenditure is concerned :----
(a) 80% of the additionality will be met by the Central Government;
(b) 10% of the additionality will be met by the Autonomous
Organizations etc. through additional generation of revenue; and
(c) Balance 10% of the additionality will be managed by the
Autonomous Organizations etc. through savings.
4.1 In the case of Autonomous Organizations, etc. which have no
source of generating revenue, 90% of the additional expenditure will be met
by the Central Government.

60
5. If the additional expenditure cannot be met in accordance with the
funding pattern mentioned in paragraph 4 and 4.1 above, each request for
funds in excess of the amount worked out as per this formula will be examined
on merits by the administrative Ministry and sent to this Department for
consideration.
Sd/-
(Madhulika P. Sukul)
Joint Secretary (Per.)
To
All Ministries/Departments of the Government of India
All Financial Advisers (By name)

61
ANNEXURE III
STANDING COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE
(2015-16)
MINUTES OF THE ELEVENTH SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE
The Committee sat on Thursday, the 10th December, 2015 from 1000
hrs. to 1050 hrs. in Chamber of the Chairperson, Standing Committee on
Agriculture, Room No. 138 (Third Floor), Parliament House, New Delhi.
PRESENT
Shri Hukm Deo Narayan Yadav — Chairperson
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Prof. Richard Hay
3. Shri Sanganna Karadi
4. Shri Nalin Kumar Kateel
5. Md. Badaruddoza Khan
6. Shri C. Mahendran
7. Dr. Tapas Mandal
8. Shri Janardan Mishra
9. Shri Ajay Nishad
10. Shri Mukesh Rajput
11. Shri Satyapal Singh (Sambhal)
12. Shri B.S. Yeddyurappa
Rajya Sabha
13. Shri Mohd. Ali Khan
14. Shri Rajpal Singh Saini
15. Shri Ram Nath Thakur

SECRETARIAT
1. Shri U.B.S. Negi — Joint Secretary
2. Shri Arun K. Kaushik — Director
3. Shri C. Vanlalruata — Deputy Secretary
4. Shri Sumesh Kumar — Under Secretary
2. At the outset, Chairperson welcomed the Members to the Sitting of the
Committee. Thereafter, the Committee took up for consideration the following
draft Reports:
*(i) **** **** **** **** ****
*(ii) **** **** **** **** ****
*(iii) **** **** **** **** ****
(iv) Draft Report on the Action Taken by the Government on the
Observations/Recommendations contained in the 10th Report (16th Lok Sabha)
of the Committee on Agriculture (2014-15) on 'Demands for Grants
(2015-16)' of the Ministry of Agriculture and Farmers Welfare (Department
of Agricultural Research and Education).
*(v) **** **** **** **** ****
3. After some deliberations, the Committee adopted the draft Reports
without any modification. They authorized the Chairperson to finalize and
present these Reports to Parliament after getting them factually verified from
the concerned Departments/Ministry.
*4.  **** **** **** **** ****
62
*Matter not related to this Report.

APPENDIX
(Vide Para 4 of Introduction of the Report)
ANALYSIS OF ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON
OBSERV ATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS CONTAINED IN THE TENTH
REPORT (16TH LOK SABHA) OF STANDING COMMITTEE ON
AGRICULTURE (2014-15)
(i) Total number of Recommendations 23
(ii) Recommendations/Observations which have been
accepted by the Government:
Serial Nos. 1, 2, 3, 4, 6, 7, 8, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 17,
20, 21, 22 and 23
Total 18
Percentage 78.26%
(iii) Recommendations/Observations which the Committee do
not desire to pursue in view of the Government's replies:
Serial No. 5
Total 01
Percentage 4.34%
(iv) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which
replies of the Government have not been accepted by the
Committee:
Serial Nos. 9 and 16
Total 02
Percentage 8.68%
(v) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which
final replies of the Government are still awaited:
Serial Nos. 18 and 19
Total 02
Percentage 8.68%
63

“All Parliamentary Publications including DRSC Reports are
available on sale at the Sales Counter, Reception, Parliament House
(Tel. Nos. 23034726, 23034495, 23034496), Agents appointed
by Lok Sabha Secretariat and Publications Division, Ministry
of Information and Broadcasting, CGO Complex, Lodhi Road,
New Delhi (Tel. Nos. 24367260, 24365610) and their outlets. The said
information is available on website ‘www.parliamentofindia.nic.in’.
The Souvenir items with logo of Parliament are also available
at Sales Counter, Reception, Parliament House, New Delhi.
The Souvenir items with Parliament Museum logo are available for
sale at Souvenir Shop (Tel. No. 23035323), Parliament Museum,
Parliament Library Building, New Delhi. List of these items are
available on the website mentioned above.”