FORTY-THIRD REPORT
STANDING COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE
(2016-2017)
(SIXTEENTH LOK SABHA)
MINISTRY OF AGRICULTURE AND FARMERS WELFARE
(DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURAL RESEARCH AND EDUCATION)
ÔDEMANDS FOR GRANTS
(2017-2018)Õ
[Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations
contained  in the Thirty-Sixth Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha)
of the Standing Committee on Agriculture (2016-2017)]
Presented to HonÕble Speaker on 30.08.2017
Presented to Lok Sabha on .....................
Laid on the Table of Rajya Sabha on .........
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
August, 2017/Bhadrapada, 1939 ( Saka)


COA No. 363
Price : R 75.00
' 2017 B Y L OK SABHA S ECRETARIAT
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct
of Business in Lok Sabha (Fifteenth Edition) and printed by
Aegean Offset Printers, New Delhi.

CONTENTS
PAGE
COMPOSITION OF THE C OMMITTEE ............................................. (iii)
INTRODUCTION ................................................................. (v)
CHAPTER I Report......................................................... 1
CHAPTER II Observations/Recommendations which have been
accepted by the Government............................ 23
CHAPTER III Observations/Recommendations which the Committee
do not desire to pursue in view of the GovernmentÕs
replies ........................................................ 41
C
HAPTER IV Observations/Recommendations in respect of which
replies of the Government have not been accepted
by the Committee .......................................... 42
C
HAPTER V Observations/Recommendations in respect of which
final replies of the Government are still awaited... 43
ANNEXURE
Minutes of the 27th Sitting of the Committee held on
28.08.2017 ......................................................... 51
APPENDIX
Analysis of Action Taken by the Government on the
Recommendations contained in the Thirty-Sixth Report
(Sixteenth Lok Sabha) of the Standing Committee on
Agriculture (2016-2017) ......................................... 53
(i)

COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE
(2016-2017)
Shri Hukm Deo Narayan Yadav — Chairperson
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Prof. Ravindra Vishwanath Gaikwad
3. Shri Sanganna Karadi
4. Shri Nalin Kumar Kateel
5. Smt. Raksha Khadse
6. Md. Badaruddoza Khan
7. Shri C. Mahendran
8. Dr. Tapas Mandal
9. Shri Janardan Mishra
10. Shri Devji Patel
11. Shri Nityanand Rai
12. Shri Mukesh Rajput
13. Shri Neiphiu Rio
14. Shri Konakalla Narayana Rao
15. Shri C.L. Ruala
16. Shri Arjun Charan Sethi
17. Shri Satyapal Singh (Sambhal)
18. Shri Virendra Singh
19. Shri Dharmendra Yadav
20. Shri Jai Prakash Narayan Yadav
21. Shri B.S. Yeddyurappa
Rajya Sabha
22. Shri Sambhaji Chhatrapati
23. Sardar Sukhdev Singh Dhindsa
24. Shri Janardan Dwivedi
25. Shri Meghraj Jain
(iii)

26. Shri Vinay Katiyar
27. Shri Mohd. Ali Khan
28. Shri Ram Nath Thakur
29. Shri R. Vaithilingam
30. Shri Shankarbhai N. Vegad
31. Shri Darshan Singh Yadav
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Shri D.S. Malha Ñ Joint Secretary
2. Shri Arun K. Kaushik Ñ Director
3. Smt. Juby Amar Ñ Additional Director
4. Shri Sumesh Kumar Ñ Under Secretary
(iv)

(v)
INTRODUCTION
I, the Chairperson, Standing Committee on Agriculture (2016-17),
having been authorized by the Committee to submit the Report on
their behalf, present this Forty-third Report on action taken by the
Government on the Observations/Recommendations contained in the
Thirty-sixth Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) of the Standing Committee
on Agriculture (2016-17) on ÔDemands for Grants (2017-18) Õ pertaining
to the Ministry of Agriculture and Farmers Welfare (Department of
Agricultural Research and Education).
2. The Thirty-sixth Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) of the Standing
Committee on Agriculture (2016-17) on ÔDemands for Grants (2017-18) Õ
pertaining to the Ministry of Agriculture and Farmers Welfare
(Department of Agricultural Research and Education) was presented to
Lok Sabha and laid on the Table of Rajya Sabha on 10 March, 2017. The
Action Taken Notes on the Report were received on 06 June, 2017.
3. The Report was considered and adopted by the Committee at
their Sitting held on 28.08.2017.
4. An analysis of the action taken by the Government on the
Observations/Recommendations contained in the Thirty-sixth Report
(Sixteenth Lok Sabha) of the Committee is given in Appendix.
   N
EW D ELHI; HUKM DEO NARAYAN YADAV,
28 August, 2017 Chairperson,
06 Bhadrapada, 1939 (Saka) Standing Committee on Agriculture.

1
CHAPTER I
REPORT
This Report of the Committee on Agriculture deals with the action
taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations
contained in the Thirty-sixth (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) of the Standing
Committee on Agriculture (2016-17) on ÔDemands for GrantsÕ (2017-18)
pertaining to the Ministry of Agriculture (Department of Agricultural
Research and Education) which was presented to Lok Sabha and laid
on the Table of Rajya Sabha on 10.03.2017.
1.2 The Ministry of Agriculture (Department of Agricultural Research
& Education) have furnished Action Taken Replies in respect of all the
13 Observations/Recommendations contained in the Report. These
replies have been categorized as under:Ñ
(i) Observations/Recommendations that have been accepted by
the Government:
Recommendation Nos. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 10, 11 and 13
Total 10
Chapter-II
(ii) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which the
Committee do not desire to pursue in view of the
GovernmentÕs reply:
Recommendation No. NIL
Total 00
Chapter-III
(iii) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which action
taken replies of the Government have not been accepted by
the Committee:
Recommendation No. NIL
Total 00
Chapter-IV
(iv) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which final
replies of the Government are still awaited:
Recommendation Nos. 8, 9 and 12
Total 03
Chapter-V

2
1.3 The Committee trust that utmost importance would be given
to implementation of the Observations/Recommendations accepted
by the  Government. In cases, where it is not possible for the
Department to implement the Recommendations in letter and spirit,
the matter should be reported to the Committee with reasons for
non-implementation. The Committee desire that further Action Taken
Notes on the Observations/Recommendations contained in Chapter-I
and final Action Taken Replies to the Recommendations contained
in Chapter-V of this Report be furnished to them at an early date.
1.4 The Committee will now deal with the action taken by the
Government on some of the Recommendations in the succeeding
paragraphs.
A. Need for Optimum Utilization of Funds
Recommendation (Serial No. 2)
1.5 The Committee had observed/recommended as under:Ñ
ÒThe Committee note that only 69.43% (BE) funds were allocated
to the DARE/ICAR as against earmarked outlays of Rs. 25553.00
crore during XII plan. The BE allocations were further drastically
reduced at RE stage and DARE/ICAR got only 53.95% of earmarked
outlays during entire XII plan. The Committee also observe that
the Department failed to fully utilize funds under plan head during
2015-16 as only Rs. 2735.32 crore were utilized as against RE
allocations of Rs. 3000 crore. The same trend has been observed
during entire XII plan as the Department utilized only Rs. 10992.31
crore i.e. 79.73% as against RE allocations of Rs. 13786.58 crore
under plan head till December , 2016. The Committee are not
convinced with the reasons put forward by the Government such
as involvement of several agencies, time consuming codal
formalities/procedures, seeking the preliminary estimates, tendering
of proposals for equipment, vetting by Director works, concurrence/
interventions of the Internal Finance, approval of the competent
authority and finally placement of orders for procurements/going
ahead with constructions, failure of supplying firms/construction
agencies to supply the articles/initiation of constructions on time,
review of proposal due to reduction of allocations at RE stage etc.
accounted for failure of Department to fully utilize allocated funds.
The Committee note with concern that same reasons are cited
year after year to justify the failure of the Ministry to fully utilize
the allocated funds. The Committee desire the Ministry to review
the entire system and look into the constraints or causes for under-
utilization of funds during the previous years and make concerted
and coordinated efforts to make full use of allocated funds. Ó

3
1.6 The Department in its Action Taken Reply has stated as under:Ñ
ÒRecommendation of the Committee has been noted for necessary
compliance. The entire system of funds flow from Department to
its different centres and utilisation has been reviewed in view of
merger of Plan and Non-Plan funds. The concerted and coordinated
efforts will be made for efficient and maximum utilisation of
allocated funds. Ó
1.7 The Committee while showing concern over failure of the
Department to fully utilize allocated funds had recommended the
Government to review the entire system and look into the constraints
or causes for under-utilization of funds during the previous years
and make concerted and coordinated efforts to make full use of
allocated funds. The Department in their action taken reply, without
providing details of review, has stated that entire system of fund
flow from Department to its different centres and utilisation has
been reviewed in view of merger of Plan and Non-Plan funds and
assured the Committee about concerted and coordinated efforts for
efficient and maximum utilisation of allocated funds. The Department
deprecate the callous attitude of Department on the important issue
of financial management which causes delay in financial approval,
thereby, hampering the scientific projects. The Committee,
therefore, desire the Department to furnish details of review
undertaken by the Department for identification of constraints for
under-utilization of funds during the previous years. The Committee
also desire the Department to furnish steps being undertaken for
enhancing the fund utilization in various institutes under ICAR.
B. Horticulture Science Division
Recommendation (Serial No. 7)
1.8 The Committee had observed/recommended as under:Ñ
ÒThe Committee note that Horticulture Science Division under ICAR
coordinates and monitors the research programmes in the country
with the network of 12 Research Institutes, 06 National Research
Centres, 05 Project Directorates, 10 All India Coordinated Research
Projects and 02 Network Research Projects for technological
development in enhancing the horticulture crop productivity through
science led growth in the sector. The Committee were informed
that the Division have notified 115 varieties of horticultural crops
during the period of 2014-16. Further , 52 varieties of vegetable
and spices were also notified during the last five years. However,

4
the Committee are constrained to note that only Rs. 778.35 crore
i.e. 54.74% out of earmarked outlays of Rs. 1422 crore for the XII
plan was allocated to the division at RE stage. Nevertheless, for
2017-18, the combined allocations of Rs. 602.65 crore have been
made to the Division which is 13.95% higher than the combined
allocations i.e. Rs. 528.27 crore made at RE stage during 2016-17.
In its explanation, the Department informed that funds are allocated
to different division on the basis of overall allocations received by
the DARE/ICAR from the M/o Finance at BE and RE stage. Every
year, the M/o Finance had reduced the allocation of DARE/ICAR.
This has resulted in proportionate reduction to various Divisions at
RE stage, which is the prime reason for significant cut in the
allocation of Horticulture Science Division for the entire 12th plan
period. The Committee are of the opinion that a significant cut in
the plan allocation adversely affect the smooth and effective
implementation of the various activities/programmes and
achievements of planned targets. The Committee, therefore,
recommend that the Department may pursue the matter with
M/o Finance for allocation of adequate funds at RE stage so as to
ensure that various activities/programmes of the Division do not
suffer for want of funds.
The Committee also note that India imports a lot of agricultural
and allied products from other countries. The total agricultural
and allied products imports of the country has increased from
Rs. 70165 crore during 2011-12 to Rs. 139934 crore during 2015-16.
As a result, the share of agriculture import in total import in the
country has increased from 2.99% in 2011-12 to 5.63% during
2015-16. The Committee further observe that vegetable oils, pulses,
fresh fruits, cashew, spices and sugar are some of the major
agricultural commodities in terms of value which were imported in
the country during the said period. The Committee recall that
ICAR has started major research efforts to develop improved
varieties of pulses to increase their production in the country. The
Committee were also informed that ICAR has initiated work to
develop local varieties of exotic vegetables and fruits such as cape
gooseberry, peppeno, rambuttan, dragon fruits, mangosteen, sweet
carambola, durian, pulasan, jackfruit, broccoli, Chinese cabbage,
lettuce and English cucumber. However , the Committee are surprised
to know that ICAR has not taken steps for research on development
of local 79 varieties of olive, almond, walnut etc. The ICAR has
also failed to develop improved varieties of oil seeds which can
bring revolution in oil seed production in the country. The
Committee are of considered opinion that demands for agriculture

5
products in the country is bound to change significantly with
changing dietary pattern associated with rising income and impact
of globalization, necessitating import and thereby, causing strain
on foreign exchange. The Committee are of the view that there is
need for enhancing production of agriculture products which are
currently being imported. The Committee, therefore, recommend
that a detailed study to find ways to enhance production of these
agriculture produce in different agro-climatic zones and subzones
in the country be conducted. The Committee also recommend the
ICAR to start a special research project for development of local
varieties of dry fruits, spices, olive etc. which are currently being
imported in the country. The Committee also recommend the
Government to allocate additional funds to the ICAR for this purpose.
The Committee would like to be apprised of the initiatives
undertaken by the Department in this regard. Ó
1.9 The Department in its Action Taken Reply has stated as under:Ñ
ÒRecommendation of the Committee has been noted for necessary
compliance. Accordingly, the Department has requested to the
Ministry of Finance for allocation of enhanced funds during RE
stage for the current financial year. On the availability of enhanced
funds from Ministry of Finance, department shall allocate adequate
funds to the division at RE stage in the current fiscal so that all
activities/programmes undertaken by them may run smoothly and
effectively to achieve the planned physical and financial targets.
ICAR has initiated work to develop local varieties of exotic
vegetables and fruits such as cape gooseberry, peppeno, rambuttan,
dragon fruit, mangosteen, sweet carambola, durian, pulasan,
jackfruit, broccoli, Chinese cabbage, lettuce and English cucumber.
The details are given below:
Under-utilized fruits: Superior germplasm of dragon fruit
(Hylocerusspp.), rambuttan ( Nepheliumlappaceum ), mangosteen
(Garciniamangostana), sweet carambola ( Averrhoacarambola) and
edible cactus ( Opuntiaficus-indica ) have been successfully
introduced. Further evaluation and validation of their performance
will pave way for cultivation of non-conventional and exotic crops
in the islands. 200 accessions of rambuttan, 10 accessions of
carambola, 5 accessions of durian, 2 accessions of Pulassan, 13
accessions of mangosteen and 60 accessions of jackfruit have been
collected and evaluated. After rigorous trials on under-utilized
fruits two varieties of rambuttan have been released for commercial
cultivations. Several elite lines are in the process of release and
registration.

6
Two improved varieties of jackfruit have been identified and their
faster multiplication through soft wood grafting have been
standardized. Several products of underutilized fruits such as osmo-
dehydrated products of jackfruit, RTS beverages have been
developed.
Organized several field days, seminars, field visits, farmers meetings
to popularize cultivation of underutilized fruits in the humid tropical
regions of Karnataka, Kerala, Tamil Nadu, Goa and Andhra Pradesh
during the last one decade. More than 1000 acres have been brought
under rambutan orchards and the area under mangosteen, dragon
fruit and other has increased several folds during this period. Since,
most of the orchards of underutilized fruits are still to start fruiting
and it is expected that the import of these fruits will reduce as the
country orchards attain full production stage.
The fruits of pepino or sweet cucumber  are yet to get popularity
among the farmers of the region.
Research on  local varieties of Olive, Walnut and Almonds  have
been initiated Ñ for Walnut, 20 high yielding varieties have been
identified and 10 walnut varieties suitable for temperate region of
Jammu & Kashmir have been released. Registration has been applied
through PPV&FRA for protection of five walnut varieties. Research
on Almond is focussed for development of technologies such as
rejuvenation of old and senile orchards, pollination management
for higher productivity, in-situ moisture conservation for enhanced
Water Use Efficiency (WUE) and productivity, High Density Plantation
(HDP) on clonal rootstocks for improved productivity and quality
development. On Olive: a total of eighteen olive genotypes have
been imported from Egypt, UC-DAVIS, California and Ramban (J&K),
preliminary trials have been performed for fruit yield and oil
content, results are encouraging under temperate climate. The
preliminary research on floral biology, cross compatibility and
maturity indices is also initiated to develop complete package of
technologies in olive.
Cape Gooseberry: Development of package of practices for growing
Cape gooseberry under temperate conditions of Jammu and Kashmir
is in process, varieties are being evaluated for their suitability and
further exploitation. Post-harvest management and value addition
through product diversification like cape gooseberry fruit bar , jam,
jelly etc. have been done.

7
High Value Leafy Vegetables:  Research on production technology
for raising high value leafy vegetables like parsley, lettuce, celery,
kale and Chinese cabbage have been taken up. Seed production for
commercialization, Post-harvest management for quality retention,
packaging, value addition and anti-oxidant potential of kale is
being carried out.
Import of spices: India imports of spices such as Black pepper,
Cardamom (Small & large), ginger , turmeric, clove, nutmeg, mace,
Cassia is mainly for value addition by the industry as they can
source for the cheapest produce from other producing countries.
However , area under clove and cinnamon are low in India and
these are imported to meet the domestic demand.
Measures for minimizing import of spices: Research are being
taken at the ICARÑIndian Institute of Spices Research & the AICRP
on Spices through its Centers located across the country to increase
the productivity of spices by popularization of new high yielding,
high quality and disease tolerant varieties of spices. Conserving
soil and water resources and developing micro irrigation facilities
for spice crops which are otherwise grown as rain fed crops, will
increase the productivity under changing climatic scenario. Further,
exploiting the potential of increasing spices production by expanding
the crops to non-traditional areas like North Eastern States etc.
and popularisation of Good Agricultural Practices (GAPs) in spices
for sustainability and production of clean and safe produce for
market requirement are some other measures to improve production
and minimize imports. Besides, India has the largest diversity in
major spices and popularising the high quality, disease/pest resistant
spice varieties will increase the intrinsic quality of Indian spices.
Import of cashew: India is importing (> 9 lakh tons) cashew raw
nuts due to shortage of raw nut availability in the country. India
also exports, approximately 45% of imported cashew raw nuts after
processing in the form of cashew kernels. During 2014-15, India
imported 9.39 lakh MT raw cashew nuts of which 2.35 lakh MT
kernels were obtained and 1.18 lakh MT kernels were exported.
ICAR-Directorate of Cashew Research, Puttur is carrying out research
for the development of technologies to improve raw nut production.
The production and productivity is in increasing trend over the
years.
Vegetable oil: ICAR-Indian Institute of Oil Palm Research is taking
steps to improve vegetable oil situation through oil palm as Oil
palm is the highest edible oil yielding perennial crop. The fresh

8
fruit bunch yields obtained by progressive farmers of Andhra Pradesh
and Karnataka, under optimum technologies is between 20 and 25
tons per ha per annum with. 4-5 tons of oil per ha per annum from
fourth year onwards. The maximum yield of 30-35 tons FFB/ha
during the seventh year was also recorded in many plantations. A
record yield of 53.2 tons FFB/ha per annum has been recorded by
a farmer in Karnataka.
A total of 128 Oil palm germplasm have been collected from
different countries with wide variability for different characteristics.
High yielding cross combinations have been identified and mother
palms for production of new hybrids planted in seed gardens. The
development of drought tolerant, dwarf and compact palms cultivars
is in progress. Protocol for in vitro regeneration of oil palm using
explants from mature palms has been developed and has entered
into the commercialization phase.
Established four seed gardens in Karnataka and Andhra Pradesh
each with production potential of one million sprouts per annum
for planting an area of 5,000 ha per annum. Thus, over the period
of productive phase of 20 years, the planting materials could be
utilized for planting one lakh ha, thus resulting in 10 lakh tons of
additional production in terms of fresh fruit bunch yield per annum.
The additional yield from the new hybrids would enable the State
Governments also to step up the Area Expansion Programme for oil
palm as per the expectations of NITI Aayog. The technology of oil
palm tissue culture has been commercialized through AgrInnovate
India Limited to four Entrepreneurs.
Underutilized/exotic vegetables Broccoli, Chinese cabbage and
Lettuce: Production module for Chinese cabbage and lettuce through
use of organic amendments has been standardized. Variability in
carotenes, Vitamin C, E and phenolics were estimated in different
cultivars of Broccoli, Chinese cabbage  and Brussels sprouts . In-
broccoli, the maximum yield of 137.72 q/ha has been obtained. Ó
1.10 While observing increase in import of agricultural products
especially vegetable oils, pulses, fresh fruits, cashew, spices in the
country during recent years, the Committee had recommended the
ICAR to take a detailed study to find ways to enhance production
of these agriculture produce in different agro-climatic zones and
sub-zones in the country. The Committee had also recommend the
ICAR to start a special research project for development of local
varieties of dry fruits, spices, olive etc. which are currently being

9
imported in the country. The Department in their Action Taken
Replies, apart from providing details of research being undertaken
for development of local varieties of underutilized fruits, Olive,
Walnut, Almond, Oil Palm, exotic vegetables Broccoli, Chinese
cabbage, Lettuce and spices has also stated that cashew nut and
some spices such as Black pepper, Cardamom (Small & large), Ginger,
Turmeric, Clove, Nutmeg, Mace, Cassia are being imported in the
country for value addition and further export. The Committee,
however, do not find any response of Department about ways to
enhance production of these agriculture produce in different agro-
climatic zones and sub-zones in the country. The Department is also
silent on the issue of providing additional funds for these research
projects. The Committee while appreciating efforts of ICAR for
initiating these studies, are of opinion that there is need to study
the pattern of import of agricultural produce in the country as it
provides insight about changing consumption pattern of consumers.
The Committee are also of view that there is need to identify new
areas where these exotic fruits, vegetables, Olives, Walnut, Almonds
etc. can be grown. The Committee, therefore, reiterate their earlier
recommendation for dovetailing adequate efforts and funds on
development of local varieties of above mentioned fruits, vegetables
etc. and desire the ICAR to sponsor a study to analyze pattern of
import of agriculture produce in the country and identify new areas
where cultivation of these crops may be promoted. The Committee
would like to be apprised about steps taken in this regard within
three months of presentation of this Report.
C. Natural Resources Management Division
Recommendation (Serial No. 8)
1.11 The Committee had observed/recommended as under:Ñ
ÒThe Committee note that Natural Research Management (NRA)
Division of ICAR is engaged in developing location-specific, cost
effective and eco-friendly technologies for conservation and
management of natural resources through the network of
12 Research Institutes, 01 Bureau, 01 National Research Centre,
01 Project Directorate, 10 All India Coordinated Research Projects
and 02 Network Research Projects in the country. The Committee
observe that only Rs. 1339.5 crore i.e. 61.34% of earmarked outlays
for the XII plan were allocated to the Division at RE stage. The
Committee also note that the combined allocations of Rs. 732.17
crore have been made to the Division for 2017-18 as against

10
Rs. 890.96 crore as proposed by the Department during 2017-18.
Needless to say, the drastic cut in the plan allocation has its
adverse impact on various activities/research projects undertaken
by the NRM division. The Committee, therefore, recommend that
plan allocation made to the Division may be reviewed at RE stage
and the matter may be taken up with the M/o Finance at RE stage
for allocation of adequate funds at RE stage so as to ensure effective
and efficient implementation of its various activities/research
programmes.
The Committee note that NRM Division is engaged in research
programmes in the field of organic farming. The Committee note
that 5.71 million hectare area including 1.49 million hectare and
4.22 million hectare forest and wild area for collection of minor
forest produces is under organic certification in the country. The
Committee were informed that ICAR is developing technologies
and low cost manure under Network Project on Organic Farming to
reduce the cost of production of crops. The Committee were also
informed that conversion period of shift from chemical fertilizer
based to organic farming ranges between 2-4 years in high intensive
areas depending on the soils and 0-2 years in hilly and rain fed
areas for different crops. However , research done by the ICAR
shows that addition of more legumes in the systems (intercropping
and 2 legume crops in a year) and addition of low nutrient requiring
crops in the rotation are helpful in reducing the conversion period.
The Committee further note that ICAR is working for establishment
of separate institute for organic farming. However, the Committee
are distressed to note that ICAR or any other Government agencies
have not undertaken any study to assess the market for organic
agricultural products in domestic and international market.
The Committee appreciate the efforts made by the ICAR for research
on organic farming. Nevertheless, the Committee are of the view
that organic farming is one of the areas where farmers of our
country are at advantage due to their traditional knowledge and
limited use of fertilizer. Better marketing of organic agriculture
products can be useful in achieving the aim of doubling the income
of farmers in the country. However, there is need to provide a
fillip to traditional knowledge of farmers through infusion of
technology, provision of cost effective green manure and reduction
of conversion time. The Committee, therefore, recommend the
Department to gear their scientific prowess to start a new era of
farming based on sustainable use of natural resources. The

11
Committee also desire the Department to constitute a specific cell
in every ICAR institute and KVK for organic farming wherein,
consultation services and accesses to developed technologies, green
manure, plant materials, agronomic methods may be provided to
the farmers at a reasonable cost. The Committee appreciate the
efforts made by the ICAR for research on organic farming. The
Committee also expect the Department to expedite the process of
submission of EFC for establishment of an independent Institute
for organic farming so that it can be operationalized within minimum
possible time. Further , the Committee also desire that ICAR or any
other agencies would also be entrusted to conduct a study to
assess the market for organic agricultural products in domestic and
international market so as to enable them, to plan organic farming
in the Country so as to meet the demand of domestic and
international market. The Committee would like to be apprised of
the initiatives undertaken by them in this regard. Ó
1.12 The Department in its Action Taken Reply has stated as under:Ñ
ÒRecommendation of the Committee has been noted for necessary
compliance. Accordingly, the Department has requested to the
Ministry of Finance for allocation of enhanced funds during RE
stage for the current financial year. On the availability of enhanced
funds from Ministry of Finance department shall allocate adequate
funds to the division at RE stage in the current fiscal so that all
activities/programmes undertaken by them may run smoothly and
effectively to achieve the planned physical and financial targets.
Organic farming has been studied in different contexts by the
scientists. The analysis primarily related to economics of organic
farming and the potential benefits to the farmers. The issues of
market potential at national & international level and value chain
analysis of the produce of organic farming in the North-East is
under consideration by the Department as a part of large
collaborative projects on value chain analysis.
Further , KVKs impart training to the farmers in various agricultural
activities including organic farming to update their knowledge and
skills. Farmers are provided training on production of bio-pesticides,
bio-agents, and organic manures through vermi composting, green
manuring, etc. The KVKs are providing advisories to farmers free
of cost on various aspects of organic farming.
During 2016-17, the KVKs conducted 650 trials and 3239
demonstrations in farmers Õ fields with technological interventions

12
organic farming. The KVKs also provided training to 60743 farmers
and 6671 extension personnel by conducting 2473 courses on organic
farming technologies. Besides, 6575.67 quintal seeds, 20.39 lakh
planting materials, 260.05 quintal bio agents, 343.50 quintals bio-
pesticides and 7292.11 quintal bio-fertilizers were produced and
provide to farmers engaged in organic farming. Ó
1.13 The Committee while observing potential of Organic farming
in enhancing the income of farmers had recommended the
Department to constitute a specific cell in every ICAR institute and
KVK for organic farming wherein, consultation services and accesses
to developed technologies, green manure, plant materials, agronomic
methods may be provided to the farmers at a reasonable cost. The
Committee also recommended the Department to expedite the
process of submission of EFC for establishment of an independent
Institute for organic farming so that it can be operationalized within
minimum possible time. The Department in their Action Taken reply
has stated about works being done by the Krishi Vigyan Kendra
(KVKs) in the field of organic farming. The Committee are anguished
to note that the Department is silent on the issue of early submission
of EFC for establishment of an Institute for organic farming. The
Committee are of view that constitution of specific cell on Organic
farming in every ICAR institute and independent Institute for organic
farming will go a long way to promote research on development of
advanced methods of organic farming. It will also help in provision
of extension services for organic farming to the farmers and other
stakeholders. The Committee, therefore, while reiterating their
earlier recommendation, desire the Department to take steps for
constitution of specific cell on organic farming in ICAR institute.
The Committee also desire the Department to expedite the process
for establishment of independent Institute for organic farming.
D. Animal Science Division
Recommendation (Serial No. 9)
1.14 The Committee had observed/recommended as under:Ñ
ÒThe Committee note that Animal Science Division of ICAR
coordinates and monitors research programmes for sustainable
enhancement of productivity and improvement in health status of
livestock and poultry in the country through its 10 Research
Institutes, 01 Bureau, 06 National Research Centres, 02 Project
Directorates, 07 All India Coordinated Research Projects and 08
Network Research Project. The Committee observe that only

13
Rs. 970.98 crore  i.e.  62.93% of earmarked outlays of Rs.1543.00
crore for the XII plan were allocated to the Division at RE stage.
The Committee also note that combined allocations of Rs. 885.77
crore have been made to the Division against Rs. 1001.35 crore as
proposed by the Department during 2017-18. The Committee are
of the opinion that adequate funds need to be provided to the
division so that activities/research/programmes undertaken by the
Division are not hindered for want of adequate funds. The
Committee, therefore, recommend that the allocation of funds to
the Division may be reviewed at RE stage and the matter may be
pursued with M/o Finance in this regard.
The Committee note that Animal Science Division is involved in
research on development and production of vaccine for various
diseases of animal. The Committee were informed that ICAR
institutes are engaged in development of gene deleted IBR vaccine,
which will be DIVA capable, DIVA enabled mutant Brucella vaccine
strain, JohneÕs disease vaccine, 3A and 3B epitope deletion mutant
of FMDV to explore marker vaccine potential, infectious cDNA clone
for a serotype Asia 1 and O FMD virus and many other vaccines.
The Committee further observe that production of animal vaccine
is woefully short of requirement in the country. The Committee
were informed that vaccine production of Foot and Mouth disease
vaccine, swine fever vaccine, PPR Vaccine, Sheep pox vaccine is
only 400 million doses/year , 0.7 million doses/year, 160 million
doses/year and 31 million doses/year respectively which is quite
low as against requirement of 1022 million doses/year , 10 million
doses/year, 200 million doses/year and 65 million doses/year
respectively. The Committee are of the view that there is an
urgent need for adequate facility and availability of animal vaccine
in the country to fully utilize potential of milk, meat and wool
from cattle and other animals which are largest in numbers in
entire world. The Committee desire the ICAR to take a detailed
study on the ways by which production of animal vaccine may be
enhanced to make the country self reliant. The Committee also
desire the ICAR to devote adequate resources and man power for
development of animal vaccines in which the country lacks necessary
technology.Ó
1.15 The Department in its Action Taken Reply has stated as under:Ñ
ÒRecommendation of the Committee has been noted for necessary
compliance. Accordingly, the Department has requested to the
Ministry of Finance for allocation of enhanced funds during

14
RE stage for the current financial year. On the availability of
enhanced funds from Ministry of Finance, Department shall allocate
adequate funds to the division at RE stage in the current fiscal so
that all activities/programmes undertaken by them may run
smoothly and effectively to achieve the planned physical and
financial targets.
The Animal Science Division has initiated a Consortia Platform on
Vaccines and Diagnostics during 2015-16 with a view to make a
detailed study on the ways by which production of animal vaccine
may be enhanced to make the country self-reliant and the
Department is trying its best to get enhanced funds from the
Ministry of Finance. Ó
1.16 While observing the need to enhance production and
development of animal vaccines in the country, the Committee had
desired the ICAR to take a detailed study on the ways by which
production of animal vaccine may be enhanced to make the country
self-reliant. The Committee had also recommended the ICAR to
devote adequate resources and manpower for development of animal
vaccines in which the country lacks necessary technology. The
Department in their Action Taken Reply have submitted  that Animal
Science Division has initiated a Consortia Platform on Vaccines and
Diagnostics during 2015-16 with a view to make a detailed study on
the ways by which production of animal vaccine may be enhanced
to make the country self-reliant. However, the Department is silent
on the issue of steps taken by the ICAR to dovetail resources for
research on development of animal vaccines in which the country
lacks necessary technology. The Committee would like the ICAR to
instruct the Animal Science Division to complete the said study at
the earliest and forward the outcome to the Ministry concerned for
necessary action. The Committee also desire the Department to
take effective steps for research on development of animal vaccines
in which country lacks the technology. The Committee would like to
be apprised about the steps taken in this direction within three
months of presentation of this Report.
E. Agricultural Engineering Division
Recommendation (Serial No. 11)
1.17 The Committee had observed/recommended as under:Ñ
ÒThe Committee note that Agricultural Engineering Division through
its 05 Research Institutes, 06 All India Coordinated Research Projects
and 02 Network Research Projects mandated to plan, coordinate,

15
and monitor R&D programmes and serve as an information repository
in Agricultural Engineering to make Indian agriculture profitable,
sustainable and globally competitive enterprise through engineering
interventions. The Committee observe that only Rs. 332.00 crore
i.e. 30.18% of earmarked outlays of Rs. 1100.00 crore for the XII
plan were allocated to the division at RE stage. The Committee
also note that combined allocations of Rs. 213.54 crore were made
to the Division for 2017-18 against an amount of Rs. 255.91 crore
as proposed by the Division during 2017-18. While appreciating the
efforts of the Division to ensure that activities/programmes of high
priority do not suffer due to reduced allocations during the various
years of the 12th Plan, the Committee are of the view that non-
availability of funds as proposed by the Department adversely impact
the various activities undertaken by the Division. The Committee,
therefore, recommend that the Department may taken up the
matter with Ministry of Finance and urge them to allocate funds
as per their demand.
The Committee note that Agricultural Engineering Division is involved
in development and demonstration of technologies related to
mechanization of production and post-production agriculture using
conventional and non-conventional energy sources and includes
mechanization of irrigation and drainage activities; post-harvest
and value addition of agricultural products and 86 by-products.
The Committee were informed that Institutes under the Division
have developed locally suitable thirteen technologies related to
seeding, planting, plant protection, harvesting, threshing etc. The
Committee were also informed that 239 technologies/farm
equipments/machines have been developed by the different
institutes during the XII plan. The Committee also note that
Institutes under the division were able to commercialize 118 these
thirteen technologies related to seeding, planting, plant protection,
harvesting, threshing etc. Besides, technologies and protocols
pertaining to post harvest loss reduction and value addition,
renewable energy for agriculture and irrigation have also been
developed and were able to generate revenue of Rs. 3.15 crore
during XII Plan. However, the Committee are surprised to know
that the ICAR does not maintain information regarding import of
agricultural machinery and tools in the country. The Committee
observe that farming practice of the country is witnessing a gradual
shift to the mechanization due to shortage of farm labour,
necessitating availability of efficient and cost effective farm
equipments and machineries. The Committee also observe that
farmers of the country require small and efficient farm equipment

16
due to small and fragmented size of land holdings. The Committee
are of the considered view that easy availability of advanced, cost
effective and small farm machineries suitable for small and
fragmented land holdings will radically transform agriculture by
cutting expenses and thereby enhancing income of the farmers in
the country. The Committee, therefore, recommend the Department
to analyze the availability and use of agriculture machineries in
technologically advanced countries and trend of import of these
machineries in the country. The Committee also recommend the
ICAR to start a dedicated mission for development of advanced
agriculture machineries keeping in view the requirement of farmers
in the country. Ó
1.18 The Department in its Action Taken Reply has stated as under:Ñ
ÒRecommendation of the Committee has been noted for necessary
compliance. Accordingly, the Department has requested to the
Ministry of Finance for allocation of enhanced funds during RE
stage for the current and coming financial years. On the availability
of enhanced funds from Ministry of Finance, the Department shall
allocate adequate funds to the Agricultural Engineering Division at
RE stage in the current and coming fiscal to carryout envisaged
Agriculture Machinery development programs.
In the technologically advanced countries, due to large farm
holdings, large size machinery is used at farms. Whereas in India,
small to medium size farm equipment are used for mechanization.
Most of these implements are manufactured in India. However,
some sophisticated components of these equipment are imported
for its manufacturing such as laser transmitter and receiver of
laser land leveller , hydraulics motors etc. A consortia Research
Platform on Farm Mechanization & Precision Farming was initiated
in 2015-16 for development of precision machinery. Ó
1.19 The Committee while recognizing the need for enhancing
the level of mechanization in agriculture according to fragmented
land holding pattern in large part of the country, had recommended
the Department to analyze the availability and use of agriculture
machineries in technologically advanced countries and trend of
import of these machineries in the country and start a dedicated
mission for development of advanced agriculture machineries keeping
in view the requirement of farmers in the country. The Department
in their Action Taken Reply has submitted that most of small and
medium size farm equipments barring some sophisticated components

17
such as laser transmitter and receiver of laser land leveller, hydraulics
motors etc. are being manufactured in India. The Department have
also submitted that a consortia Research Platform on Farm
Mechanization & Precision Farming was initiated in 2015-16 for
development of precision machinery. The Committee are of view
that farm mechanization will be key to enhancing agricultural
productivity, to face the challenges of global warming and reduced
availability of farm labour in coming decades. Therefore, it becomes
imperative that advanced, efficient and effective farm implements/
machineries are developed indigenously and made available to the
farmers. Further, complete indigenisation will help to reduce cost
of these farm machineries apart from saving precious foreign
currency. The Committee, therefore, reiterate their earlier
recommendation and desire the ICAR to take the project of
development of advanced farm machineries at priority. The
Committee would like to be informed about steps taken in this
regard.
F. Agriculture Extension
Recommendation (Serial No. 12)
1.20 The Committee had observed/recommended as under:Ñ
ÒThe Committee note that ICAR has established a network of 665
Krishi Vigyan Kendras (KVKs) in the country aiming at technology
assessment and demonstration for its application and capacity
development. Provision of extension services to farmers in the
country is done by the main extension system operated by State
Governments. The Department of Agriculture, Cooperation and
Farmers Welfare has provided support to States for setting up of
Agricultural Technology Management Agency (ATMA) aiming at
making extension system farmer driven and farmer accountable by
way of new institutional arrangements for technology dissemination
at district level. ATMA Scheme is under implementation in 652
districts in 29 States and 3 UTs in the country with provision for
active participation of farmers/farmer-groups, NGOs, KVKs,
Panchayati Raj Institutions and other stakeholders operating at
district level and below. However , the Committee note that
allocations for KVKs are not sufficient enough to provide them all
necessary infrastructure and manpower. Only Rs. 2998.36 crore
were allocated for KVKs scheme at RE stage which works out
76.88% of the approved outlays of Rs. 3900 crore for the XII plan.
The Committee also note that allocations of Rs. 867.60 crore for

18
KVKs scheme during 2017-18 is not sufficient to meet obligations
under the scheme and Department will need additional requirement
of Rs. 200.00 crore during current fiscal. The Committee in their
previous reports had time and again emphasized for allocation of
adequate resources for implementation of KVKs scheme to
strengthen the system of agriculture extension in the country. The
Committee are of the considered view that KVKs due to their
linkage with vast network of ICAR institute can be effectively
leveraged for dissemination of information about crop varieties
and hybrids, technologies, machineries, dairy management practices
etc. among farmers in the country and to create a group of
progressive farmers who can act as trainers for downward
dissemination of these knowledge. The Committee, therefore, urge
the M/o Finance to allocate additional funds as required by the
ICAR for the KVKs scheme at RE stage.
The Committee note that KVK scheme is wholly funded by the
Government of India. The Committee were informed that ICAR did
not explore the possibilities for accessing the funds available under
Corporate Social Responsibility (CSR) of Public/Private companies
registered in the country for providing necessary infrastructure
and equipment to the KVKs scheme. The Committee are of the
view that funds available under Corporate Social Responsibility
with Public/Private companies as mandated by the recently
amended Company Act can be effectively utilized for provision of
necessary infrastructure, equipments and other facilities in KVKs.
The Committee, therefore, recommend the ICAR to make a proposal
for tapping the CSR funds for KVKs scheme and approach various
Public/Private companies either directly or through their
representative bodies such as FICCI, ASSOCHAM etc. after obtaining
necessary approval. The Committee would like to be apprised of
the initiatives undertaken by the Department/ICAR in this regard.
The Committee note that various initiatives under KVK scheme
have been undertaken such as Mera Gaon Mera Gaurav (MGMG) and
Farmer FIRST Programme (FFP) and Attracting and Retaining Youth
in Agriculture (ARYA) during 12th plan. The Farmer FIRST Programme
(FFP) aims at increased farmers—scientist interface for enriching
knowledge and integrating technology for field application and
Mera Gaon Mera Gaurav (MGMG) aims to encourage agriculture
scientists to adopt villages and give suitable advice to the farmers
on technical and other related aspects in a time frame through
personal visits or on telephone. While appreciating these initiatives
of ICAR, the Committee are of the view that current system of

19
agriculture extension support system needs to be reoriented
according to the needs of the farmers keeping in view their socio-
economic conditions and the mental ability to understand and
adapt the new technologies and practice for sustained growth in
agriculture sector. The Committee, therefore, recommend that the
existing system of agriculture extension services in the entire
country may be reviewed and reoriented and to make it more
effective and accessible to the farmers in the country in coordination
and consultation with all stakeholders including State Governments
to elicit their views. The Committee would like to be apprised of
the initiatives undertaken by the Department/ICAR in this regard.
Since 2015-16, Attracting and Retaining Youth in Agriculture (ARYA)
is being implemented in 25 States through KVKs with an objective
to attract and empower the youth in rural areas to take up various
agriculture and allied enterprises for sustainable income and gainful
employment in selected districts. The Committee were also informed
that one district from each State with technical partners from
ICAR Institutes and Agricultural Universities for taking up
entrepreneurial activities through skill development of rural youth.
However , the Committee note that meager allocation of Rs. 2
crore and Rs. 7 crore were made during 2015-16 and 2016-17
respectively. The Committee are of the view that farming sector
as a whole is unable to attract the young talent, thereby, affecting
income of the farmers in entire country primarily due to lack of
entrepreneurship in the field of agriculture. The Committee observe
that several private companies have successfully combined the
agriculture extension services and agriculture marketing in various
parts of the country. The Committee desire the ICAR to study the
system of these companies and other such initiatives taken in the
private sectors either in the country or abroad and analyze as to
in what ways these can be utilized for attracting youth for
entrepreneurial startups in the field of agriculture. The Committee
also desire the ICAR to take steps for enhancing awareness among
farming community and youth in rural areas for taking benefits
under ÔStartup India Õ Initiatives of the Government of India in the
field of agriculture. The Committee also recommend the
Government to enhance allocations to the ARYA scheme to widen
its reach among rural youth in the entire country. Ó
1.21 The Department in its Action Taken Reply has stated as under:Ñ
ÒRecommendations of the Committee have been noted for
compliance. Accordingly, the Department has requested to the
Ministry of Finance for allocation of enhanced funds during

20
RE stage for the current and coming financial years. On the
availability of enhanced funds from Ministry of Finance, the
Department shall allocate adequate funds to the Agricultural
Extension Division at RE stage in the current and coming fiscal to
carryout envisaged Agriculture Extension Programs and for further
strengthening of the current farmers development related activity
and establishment of new KVKs.
Apart from regular budget, KVKs were provided with additional
fund of Rs. 16.00 crore for conducting Frontline Demonstrations
(FLDs) on oilseed crops; Rs. 25.31 crore for conducting FLDs on
pulse crops; Rs. 8.00 crore for purchase of 930 mini soil testing
kits; Rs. 3.22 crore for organizing Skill training programmes for
farmers/rural youth; and Rs. 1.50 crore for establishment of
demonstration units on Integrated farming systems during 2016-17.
The ARYA scheme is being widened by including 75 more districts
of the country under the scheme. During 2016-17, 100 KVKs
conducted 200 courses of 200 hours each for development of skills
in rural youth. During 2017-18, 250 KVKs, 60 SAUs and 50 ICAR
Institutes will organize 820 such courses.
Review and reorientation of extension services is being carried out
in the Country. Department of Agriculture, Cooperation and FarmersÕ
Welfare (DAC&FW) is providing funds to States under the scheme
ÔSupport to State Extension Programmes for Extension Reforms Õ
which aims at making extension system farmer driven and farmer
accountable by way of new institutional arrangements for technology
dissemination in the form of an Agricultural Technology Management
Agency (ATMA) at district level to operationalize the extension
reforms. The DAC&FW has also provided fund for KVK activities
like FLDs on Pulses and Oilseeds, Pulses Seed Hubs, IFS
Demonstration Units, Skill development training and Mini Soil Testing
Kits. Besides, all stakeholders like ICAR Institutes, State Agricultural
Universities, KVKs, and other institutes of DAC&FW and Department
of Animal Husbandry, Dairying and Fisheries are providing farm
advisories through Farmers Õ Portal.
So far, no public/private company has come forward for providing
Corporate Social Responsibility (CSR) funds to Krishi Vigyan Kendras.Ó
1.22 The Committee while recognizing the need of review of
agriculture extension support system according to socio-economic
conditions and mental ability of farmers of the country to understand
and adapt the new technologies and practices, had recommended

21
for review of existing system of agriculture extension in coordination
and consultation with all stakeholders including State Governments.
The Department in their Action Taken Reply have submitted that
review and reorientation of extension services is being carried out
in the Country and Department of Agriculture, Cooperation and
FarmersÕ Welfare (DAC&FW) is providing funds to States under the
scheme ÒSupport to State Extension Programmes for Extension
ReformsÓ which aims at making extension system farmer driven and
farmer accountable by way of new institutional arrangements for
technology dissemination in the form of an Agricultural Technology
Management Agency (ATMA) at District level to operationalize the
extension reforms. The Committee also desired the ICAR to take
steps for enhancing awareness among farming community and youth
in rural areas for taking benefits under ÔStart-up IndiaÕ Initiatives of
the Government of India in the field of agriculture. The Committee
find that Department is silent on the recommendation of the
Committee regarding analyzing models of private companies which
successfully combined the agriculture extension services and
agriculture marketing in order to utilize it for attracting youth for
entrepreneurial start-ups in the field of agriculture. The Committee
are anguished to note that department have not given attention to
spirit of recommendation regarding need of making agriculture
extension services available to the farmers in every nook and corner
in the country. In this regard, the Committee have been informed
about expansion of ARYA scheme in 75 more Districts of the Country
and courses of skill development for rural youth conducted by KVKs.
The Committee are anguished to note about cavalier approach of
the Department regarding recommendation of the Committee. The
Committee, while reiterating their earlier recommendation, desire
the Department to initiate study to analyze models of private
company and ways by which these can be utilized for restructuring
of Agriculture Extension Services and starting a trend of agro-
entrepreneurship among rural youths/farmers in the country. The
Committee would like to be apprised about outcome of study within
three months of presentation of this Report.
On the issue of exploring the possibility for tapping the funds
available under Corporate Social Responsibility (CSR) of public/private
companies registered in the Country for providing necessary
infrastructure and equipment to the KVKs scheme, the Department
have informed that no public/private company has come forward
for providing Corporate Social Responsibility (CSR) funds to Krishi
Vigyan Kendras (KVKs). In this regard, the Committee desire the
ICAR to take proactive step to approach private companies, FICCI,

22
ASSOCHAM etc. for tapping funds available under Corporate Social
Responsibility for improvement of infrastructure and equipments in
KVKs. The Committee would like to be apprised about steps taken
in this direction within three months of presentation of this Report.

23
CHAPTER II
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN
ACCEPTED BY THE GOVERNMENT
Need for Optimum Utilization of Funds
Recommendation (Para No. 1)
The Committee note that the Government has done away with the
distinction between Plan and Non-Plan funds and adopted the system
of presenting a combined budget of each head as per revised structure
w.e.f. 2017-18. The Committee were informed that annual Accounts of
ICAR are being prepared strictly as per the guidelines of C&AG for
autonomous bodies. The Revenue and Capital expenditure are distinctly
depicted in the Accounts. According to the Department, introduction
of new system of presentation of budget will bring higher efficiency
and optimal utilization of allocated funds due to reduced codal
formalities. The Committee express their sense of satisfaction about
the current changes in process of budgeting by doing away with
distinction between Plan and Non-Plan funds and advancing the date
for presentation of budget. The Committee hope that these changes
will simplify the process of accounting and expenditure control
mechanism, reduction of codal formalities etc. thereby optimizing the
utilization of allocated funds. Parliamentary approval to Demands for
Grants before the start of next fiscal and availability of funds at the
beginning of financial year will also help the Department for timely
planning and execution of research. The Committee hope that DARE/
ICAR will strengthen their system to take maximum benefits out of
these changes and fully utilize allocated funds. The Committee also
desire the Department to take an overview of existing procedure for
approval of funds for projects, tendering process and procurement
system and undertake necessary changes in order to minimize the time
gap between approval and execution of Projects/Research.
Reply of the Government
Subsequent to merger of Plan and Non-Plan funds, ICAR has allocated
funds after extensive exercise of ascertaining the need and priority
areas under various schemes in which the funds are being drawn from
the Government and hence, working towards achieving the target of
optimum utilization of funds through simplified process of accounting

24
and expenditure control mechanism, etc. Further, in so far as taking
overview of existing procedures for approval of funds for projects,
tendering process and procurement system are concerned, it is
submitted that ICAR follows the EFC/SFC processes for approval and
appraisal of the schemes, strictly as per Government Rules & extant
Guidelines and also follows General Financial Rules as amended from
time to time.
[Ministry of Agriculture & Farmers Welfare O.M No. 7 (5)/2017,
dated 06th June, 2017, Department of Agricultural
Research and Education]
Need for Optimum Utilization of Funds
Recommendation (Para No. 2)
The Committee note that only 69.43% (BE) funds were allocated to
the DARE/ICAR as against earmarked outlays of Rs. 25553.00 crore
during XII plan. The BE allocations were further drastically reduced at
RE stage and DARE/ICAR got only 53.95% of earmarked outlays during
entire XII plan. The Committee also observe that the Department
failed to fully utilize funds under plan head during 2015-16 as
only Rs. 2735.32 crore were utilized as against RE allocations of
Rs. 3000 crore. The same trend has been observed during entire
XII plan as the Department utilized only Rs. 10992.31 crore i.e. 79.73%
as against RE allocations of Rs. 13786.58 crore under plan head till
December , 2016. The Committee are not convinced with the reasons
put forward by the Government such as involvement of several agencies,
time consuming codal formalities/procedures, seeking the preliminary
estimates, tendering of proposals for equipment, vetting by Director
works, concurrence/interventions of the Internal Finance, approval of
the competent authority and finally placement of orders for
procurements/ going ahead with constructions, failure of supplying
firms/construction agencies to supply the articles/initiation of
constructions on time, review of proposal due to reduction of allocations
at RE stage etc. accounted for failure of Department to fully utilize
allocated funds. The Committee note with concern that same reasons
are cited year after year to justify the failure of the Ministry to fully
utilize the allocated funds. The Committee desire the Ministry to review
the entire system and look into the constraints or causes for under-
utilization of funds during the previous years and make concerted and
coordinated efforts to make full use of allocated funds.
Reply of the Government
Recommendation of the Committee has been noted for necessary
compliance. The entire system of funds flow from Department to its

25
different centres and utilisation has been reviewed in view of merger
of Plan and Non-Plan funds. The concerted and coordinated efforts
will be made for efficient and maximum utilisation of allocated funds.
[Ministry of Agriculture & Farmers Welfare O.M No. 7 (5)/2017,
dated 06th June, 2017, Department of Agricultural
Research and Education]
Comments of the Committee
For comments of the Committee please refer to Para No. 1.7 of
Chapter I of this Report.
Need for Adequate Allocation of Funds for Research Work
Recommendation (Para No. 3)
The Committee note that a sum of Rs. 6800.00 crore has been
allocated to the Department as against proposal of Rs. 7665.48 crore
for the financial year 2017-18. The Committee observe that allocation
during current fiscal are only 9.01 % higher than combined RE allocations
to the Department during 2016-17. The Committee also observe that
major amount of funds available to the DARE/ICAR are utilized for
payment of salary. The Committee were informed that around 14 per
cent of the total R&D expenditure of the Union Government is on
agricultural research and education, and more than half of ICAR budget
is spent on SAUs, KVKs and AICRPs. The representative of DARE/ICAR
submitted during the sitting that Rs. 4200 crore out of allocations of
Rs. 6800 crore during 2017-18 will be utilized under the head of salary/
pension and Department has been left only with limited funds for
research after payment of salary/pension, KVKs and education. The
Committee are of view that there is need for huge investment in the
agricultural research and education sector and extension services if
the Government wants to achieve the aim of doubling the income of
farmers in the country by 2022. However, the Committee are distressed
to note that there is stagnation in the allocations to these sectors as
over a period of time the share of annual allocation to the DARE/ICARs
with respect to corresponding Agricultural GDP (at current prices) is
oscillating between 0.3 to 0.4%. The Committee in their earlier reports
had stressed on allocations of around 1% of agricultural GDP to the
DARE/ICAR in order to transform the agriculture research sector. The
Committee, therefore, reiterate their earlier recommendation and urge
the Government to enhance allocations to the DARE/ICAR during current
fiscal and future so that various research projects/related programmes
undertaken by the Department do not suffer for want of funds and
target of 4% annual growth in agriculture sector could be accomplished
without any constraints.

26
Reply of the Government
Recommendation of the Committee has been noted for necessary
compliance. Accordingly, the Department has requested Ministry of
Finance for allocation of enhanced funds to DARE/ICAR during RE stage
for the current financial year and expedite the modalities to increase
the investment to the extent of 1% of agricultural GDP in forthcoming
financial years also so that the contribution of agricultural research in
achieving 4% annual growth in agriculture sector could be accomplished
without financial constraints.
[Ministry of Agriculture & Farmers Welfare O.M No. 7 (5)/2017,
dated 06th June, 2017, Department of Agricultural
Research and Education]
Financial Irregularities
Recommendation (Para No. 4)
The Committee note that 5 cases of financial irregularities were
reported in the Institutes of ICAR to the DARE during 2015-16 and
2016-17. The Committee further note that ICAR has initiated necessary
proceedings under relevant conduct rules in all cases. The Committee
were informed that ICAR has strengthened the internal audit system
and they regularly interact with authorities in various ICAR institutes
to prevent irregularities. The Committee hope that the strict vigil will
be maintained by ICAR in future and desire that the Department should
make provisions for time bound completion of inquiry.
Reply of the Government
Recommendation of the Committee has been noted for necessary
compliance.
[Ministry of Agriculture & Farmers Welfare O.M No. 7 (5)/2017,
dated 06th June, 2017, Department of Agricultural
Research and Education]
Generation of Internal Revenue
Recommendation (Para No. 5)
The Committee note that the Institutes of ICAR generate significant
revenue from copyrights, sale of seeds/planting materials/vaccines,
consultancy/training services etc. The Committee were informed that

27
ICAR institutes utilized revenue of Rs. 733.66 crore during 2012-16.
The Committee are of view that there is need of enhancing internal
revenue generation from ICAR Institutes. There is huge market for
hybrid seeds, crop varieties, agricultural machineries, vaccines, dairy
formulations etc. developed by the ICAR institutes within the country
and abroad which are yet to be explored. The Committee, therefore,
recommend the Department to take steps for availability of all ICAR
products and services on a single platform and make it accessible and
cost effective in order to maximize revenue from intellectual properties
available with vast network of ICAR Institutes. The Committee desire
the Department to make it mandatory to channelize services of all
ICAR institutes through a single platform. The Committee also expect
from the Department to take steps to make Agrinnovate more vibrant
and market savvy.
Reply of the Government
Recommendation of the Committee has been noted for necessary
compliance. The Intellectual Property and Technology Management unit
of the ICAR is having the inventories of all technologies/products/
process and other intellectual properties of the Department and putting
concerted efforts for commercialisation. The hybrid seeds, crop
varieties, agricultural machineries, vaccines, dairy formulations and
other technologies developed by the ICAR institutes are being assessed
and demonstrated for their application and capacity development
through a vast network of Krishi Vigyan Kendras of the country. The
seeds, planting materials and other technology inputs produced by
ICAR institutes as well as Krishi Vigyan Kendras are made available to
farmers on a nominal price without any profit motive for enhancement
of productivity and farmers Õ welfare.
ICAR Institutes are generating revenue through the sale of products/
seeds/technology/consultancies etc. as per target provided by the
Department keeping in view the capacity of the institute. Institutes
will be further advised to enhance their internal revenue by exploring
saleable technological inputs, etc.
Agrinnovate is gearing to be more vibrant and market savvy by
standardizing its processes and procedures so that technology and
services of ICAR are available to the market in a very efficient and
transparent manner. Agrinnovate has also been working with various
ICAR Institutes to generate revenues. It endeavours to improve the
internal processes by benchmarking these processes against the best in
the Industry. It has started collaborating with other organizations

28
(Government and Private) in the sector along with apex industry bodies
such as FICCI, CII, ASSOCHAM etc. to increase revenues through
technology transfer , capacity building, collaborative research etc .
[Ministry of Agriculture & Farmers Welfare O.M No. 7 (5)/2017,
dated 06th June, 2017, Department of Agricultural
Research and Education]
Crop Science Division
Recommendation (Para No. 6)
The Committee note that Crop Science Division is engaged in the
development of improved crop varieties/hybrids, cost effective
production and environment friendly crop protection technologies to
enhance crop productions and ensure food and nutritional security in
the Country through a network of 17 Research Institutes, 03 Bureaux,
02 National Research Centres, 04 Project Directorates, 22 All India
Coordinated Research Projects and 11 Network Research Projects. The
Committee were informed that the 265 field crop varieties and hybrids
out of 698 varieties released during XII Plan have been commercialized
till date and currently are under seed chain. The Committee were
further informed that awareness campaign are conducted among farmers
about new crop varieties and hybrids through nationwide Front Line
Demonstrations (FLDs), on and off farm trainings, skill development
program by the ICAR institutes, State Agricultural Universities (SAUs)
and Krishi Vigyan Kendras (KVKs). However , the Committee regret to
note only Rs. 2512.75 crore were allocated at BE stage as against
earmarked outlays of Rs. 4141.31 crore for XII plan under the head
Crop Science which works out only 60.97%. This amount was further
reduced to Rs. 2099.66 crore at RE stage. However , the Committee are
distressed to note that the Division could utilize only Rs. 1938.49 crore
till December 2016. The budget estimates to the Division during
2017-18 is only Rs. 1486.58 crore as against Rs. 1639.10 crore proposed
by the Division.
According to the Department, the division has made efforts to
ensure that activities/programmes of high priority do not suffer due to
reduced allocations during the various years of 12th plan period. The
Department has also made more efforts to achieve the set physical
targets and set its priorities according to the available funds. While
appreciating the efforts of the Division, the Committee are of the
opinion that drastic cut in plan allocation of funds to the extent of 39%
as against the earmarked outlays of Rs. 4141.39 crore for 12th plan
would bound to affect adversely the implementation of various

29
activities/programmes of the Division. The Committee, therefore, desire
the Department to impress upon the Ministry of Finance for adequate
allocations of funds as proposed by them to the division at RE stage
in the current fiscal so that all activities/programmes undertaken by
them may run smoothly and effectively with a view to achieve the
planned physical and financial targets. The Committee would like to
be apprised of the initiatives undertaken by the Department in this
regard. The Committee also desire that a mechanism may be put in
place in ICAR to monitor activities/programmes of the Division so as
to ensure timely and optimum utilization of allocated funds for this
purpose.
Reply of the Government
Recommendation of the Committee has been noted for necessary
compliance. Accordingly, the Department has requested to the Ministry
of Finance for allocation of enhanced funds during RE stage for the
current financial year. Subsequently on the availability of enhanced
funds from Ministry of Finance at RE stage in the current fiscal, the
Department shall allocate adequate funds to the division so that all
activities/programmes undertaken by them may run smoothly and
effectively to achieve the planned physical and financial targets.
ICAR has devised the process of monthly monitoring of the progress
of the Divisions to ensure optimum utilisation of allocated funds. The
activities and programmes of the Divisions are being monitored/
reviewed at EFC/ SFC stages also, and the activities and programmes
of the ICAR institutes are being monitored by Institute Research
Committee (every six month) and by Research Advisory Committee on
yearly basis.
[Ministry of Agriculture & Farmers Welfare O.M No. 7 (5)/2017,
dated 06th June, 2017, Department of Agricultural
Research and Education]
Horticulture Science Division
Recommendation (Para No. 07)
The Committee note that Horticulture Science Division under ICAR
coordinates and monitors the research programs in the country with
the network of 12 Research Institutes, 06 National Research Centres,
05 Project Directorates, 10 All India Coordinated Research Projects and
02 Network Research Projects for technological development in
enhancing the horticulture crop productivity through science led growth

30
in the sector. The Committee were informed that the Division have
notified 115 varieties of horticultural crops during the period of 2014-
16. Further, 52 varieties of vegetable and spices were also notified
during the last five years. However, the Committee are constrained to
note that only Rs. 778.35 crore i.e. 54.74% out of earmarked outlays
of Rs. 1422 crore for the XII plan was allocated to the division at RE
stage. Nevertheless, for 2017-18, the combined allocations of Rs. 602.65
crore have been made to the Division which is 13.95% higher than the
combined allocations i.e. Rs. 528.27 crore made at RE stage during
2016-17. In its explanation, the Department informed that funds are
allocated to different division on the basis of overall allocations received
by the DARE/ICAR from the M/o Finance at BE and RE stage. Every
year, the M/o Finance had reduced the allocation of DARE/ICAR. This
has resulted in 78 proportionate reduction to various Divisions at RE
state, which is the prime reason for significant cut in the allocation
of Horticulture Science Division for the entire 12th plan period. The
Committee are of the opinion that a significant cut in the plan allocation
adversely affect the smooth and effective implementation of the various
activities/programmes and achievements of planned targets. The
Committee, therefore, recommend that the Department may pursue
the matter with M/o Finance for allocation of adequate funds at RE
stage so as to ensure that various activities/programmes of the Division
do not suffer for want of funds.
The Committee also note that India imports a lot of agricultural
and allied products from other countries. The total agricultural and
allied products imports of the Country has increased from Rs. 70165
crore during 2011-12 to Rs. 139934 crore during 2015-16. As a result,
the share of agriculture import in total import in the country has
increased from 2.99% in 2011-12 to 5.63% during 2015-16. The
Committee further observe that vegetable oils, pulses, fresh fruits,
cashew, spices and sugar are some of the major agricultural commodities
in terms of value which were imported in the country during the said
period. The Committee recall that ICAR has started major research
efforts to develop improved varieties of pulses to increase their
production in the country. The Committee were also informed that
ICAR has initiated work to develop local varieties of exotic vegetables
and fruits such as cape gooseberry, peppeno, rambuttan, dragon fruits,
mangosteen, sweet carambola, durian, pulasan, jackfruit, broccoli,
Chinese cabbage, lettuce and English cucumber. However , the
Committee are surprised to know that ICAR has not taken steps for
research on development of local 79 varieties of olive, almond, walnut
etc. The ICAR has also failed to develop improved varieties of oil seeds
which can bring revolution in oil seed production in the Country. The

31
Committee are of considered opinion that demands for agriculture
products in the country is bound to change significantly with changing
dietary pattern associated with rising income and impact of
globalization, necessitating import and thereby, causing strain on foreign
exchange. The Committee are of the view that there is need for
enhancing production of agriculture products which are currently being
imported. The Committee, therefore, recommend that a detailed study
to find ways to enhance production of these agriculture produce in
different agro-climatic zones and subzones in the country be conducted.
The Committee also recommend the ICAR to start a special research
project for development of local varieties of dry fruits, spices, olive
etc. which are currently being imported in the country. The Committee
also recommend the Government to allocate additional funds to the
ICAR for this purpose. The Committee would like to be apprised of the
initiatives undertaken by the Department in this regard.
Reply of the Government
Recommendation of the Committee has been noted for necessary
compliance.Accordingly, the Department has requested to the Ministry
of Finance for allocation of enhanced funds during RE stage for the
current financial year. On the availability of enhanced funds from
Ministry of Finance, department shall allocate adequate funds to the
division at RE stage in the current fiscal so that all activities/
programmes undertaken by them may run smoothly and effectively to
achieve the planned physical and financial targets.
ICAR has initiated work to develop local varieties of exotic
vegetables and fruits such as cape gooseberry, peppeno, rambuttan,
dragon fruits, mangosteen, sweet carambola, durian, pulasan, jackfruit,
broccoli, Chinese cabbage, lettuce and English cucumber. The details
are given below:
Under-utilized fruits: Superior germplasm of dragon fruit
(Hylocerusspp. ), rambutan ( Nepheliumlappaceum ), mangosteen
(Garciniamangostana), sweet carambola ( Averrhoacarambola) and
edible cactus ( Opuntiaficus-indica ) have been successfully
introduced, further evaluation and validation of their performance
will pave way for cultivation of non-conventional and exotic crops
in the islands.
200 accessions of rambutan, 10 accessions of carambola, 5
accessions of durian, 2 accessions of Pulassan, 13 accessions of
mangosteen and 60 accessions of jackfruit have been collected
and evaluated. After rigourous trials on under-utilized fruits two

32
varieties of rambutan have been released for commercial
cultivations. Several elite lines are in the process of release and
registration.
Two improved varieties of jackfruit have been identified and their
faster multiplication through soft wood grafting have been
standardized.Several products of underutilized fruits such as osmo-
dehydrated products of jackfruit, RTS beverages have been
developed.
Organized several field days, seminars, field visits, farmers meetings
to popularize cultivation of underutilized fruits in the humid tropical
regions of Karnataka, Kerala, Tamil Nadu, Goa and Andhra Pradesh
during the last one decade. More than 1000 acres have been brought
under rambutan orchards and the area under mangosteen, dragon
fruit and other has increased several folds during this period. Since,
most of the orchards of underutilized fruits are still to start fruiting
and it is expected that the import of these fruits will reduce as the
country orchards attain full production stage.
The fruits of pepino or sweet cucumber  are yet to get popularity
among the farmers of the region.
Research on Local varieties of Olive, walnut and almonds  have
been initiated - for Walnut,  20 high yielding varieties have been
identified and 10 walnut varieties suitable for temperate region of
Jammu & Kashmir have been released. Registration has been applied
through PPV&FRA for protection of five walnut varieties. Research
on Almond is focussed for development of technologies such as
rejuvenation of old and senile orchards, pollination management
for higher productivity, in-situ moisture conservation for enhanced
Water Use Efficiency (WUE) and productivity, High Density Plantation
(HDP) on clonal rootstocks for improved productivity and quality
development. On Olive: a total of eighteen olive genotypes have
been imported from Egypt, UC-DAVIS, California and Ramban (J&K),
preliminary trials have been performed for fruit yield and oil
content, results are encouraging under temperate climate. The
preliminary research on floral biology, cross compatibility and
maturity indices is also initiated to develop complete package of
technologies in olive.
Cape Gooseberry: Development of package of practices for growing
Cape gooseberry under temperate conditions of Jammu and Kashmir
is in process, varieties are being evaluated for their suitability and
further exploitation. Post-harvest management and value addition

33
through product diversification like cape gooseberry fruit bar , jam,
jelly etc. have been done.
High Value Leafy Vegetables:  Research on production technology
for raising high value leafy vegetables like parsley, lettuce, celery,
kale and Chinese cabbage have been taken up. Seed production for
commercialization, Post-harvest management for quality retention,
packaging, value addition and anti-oxidant potential of kale is
being carried out.
Import of spices: India imports of spices such as Black pepper,
Cardamom (Small & large), ginger , turmeric, clove, nutmeg, mace,
Cassia is mainly for value addition by the industry as they can
source for the cheapest produce from other producing countries.
However , area under clove and cinnamon are low in India and
these are imported to meet the domestic demand.
Measures for minimizing import of spices:Research are being taken
at the ICAR-Indian Institute of Spices Research & the AICRP on
Spices through its Centers located across the country to increase
the productivity of spices by popularization of new high yielding,
high quality and disease tolerant varieties of spices. Conserving
soil and water resources and developing micro irrigation facilities
for spice crops which are otherwise grown as rain fed crops, will
increase the productivity under changing climatic scenario. Further,
exploiting the potential of increasing spices production by expanding
the crops to non-traditional areas like North Eastern States etc.
and popularisation of Good Agricultural Practices (GAPs) in spices
for sustainability and production of clean and safe produce for
market requirement are some other measures to improve production
and minimize imports. Besides, India has the largest diversity in
major spices and popularising the high quality, disease/pest resistant
spice varieties will increase the intrinsic quality of Indian spices.
Import of cashew: India is importing (> 9 lakh tones) cashew raw
nuts due to shortage of raw nut availability in the country. India
also exports, approximately 45% of imported cashew raw nuts after
processing in the form of cashew kernels. During 2014-15, India
imported 9.39 lakh MT raw cashew nuts of which 2.35 lakh MT
kernels were obtained and 1.18 lakh MT kernels were exported.
ICAR-Directorate of Cashew Research, Puttur is carrying out research
for the development of technologies to improve raw nut production.
The production and productivity is in increasing trend over the
years.

34
Vegetable oil: ICAR-Indian Institute of Oil Palm Research is taking
steps to improve vegetable oil situation through oil palm as Oil
palm is the highest edible oil yielding perennial crop. The fresh
fruit bunch yields obtained by progressive farmers of Andhra Pradesh
and Karnataka, under optimum technologies is between 20 and 25
tonnes per ha per annum with 4-5 tonnes of oil per ha per annum
from fourth year onwards. The maximum yield of 30-35 tonnes
FFB/ha during the seventh year was also recorded in many
plantations. A record yield of 53.2 tonnes FFB/ha per annum has
been recorded by a farmer in Karnataka.
A total of 128 Oil palm germplasm have been collected from
different countries with wide variability for different characteristics.
High yielding cross combinations have been identified and mother
palms for production of new hybrids planted in seed gardens. The
development of drought tolerant, dwarf and compact palms cultivars
is in progress. Protocol for in vitro regeneration of oil palm using
explants from mature palms has been developed and has entered
into the commercialization phase.
Established four seed gardens in Karnataka and Andhra Pradesh
each with production potential of one million sprouts per annum
for planting an area of 5,000 ha per annum. Thus, over the period
of productive phase of 20 years, the planting materials could be
utilized for planting one lakh ha, thus resulting in 10 lakh tonnes
of additional production in terms of fresh fruit bunch yield per
annum. The additional yield from the new hybrids would enable
the State Governments also to step up the Area Expansion
Programme for oil palm as per the expectations of NITI Aayog.The
technology of oil palm tissue culture has been commercialized
through AgrInnovate India Limited to four Entrepreneurs.
Underutilized/exotic vegetablesÑBroccoli, Chinese cabbage and
Lettuce: Production module for Chinese cabbage and lettuce through
use of organic amendments have been standardized.Variability in
carotenes, Vitamin C, E and phenolics were estimated in different
cultivars of Broccoli, Chinese cabbage  and Brussels sprouts . In
broccoli, the maximum yield 137.72 q/ha has been obtained.
[Ministry of Agriculture & Farmers Welfare O.M No. 7 (5)/2017,
dated 06th June, 2017, Department of Agricultural
Research and Education]
Comments of the Committee
For comments of the Committee please refer to Para No. 1.10 of
Chapter-I of this Report.

35
Fisheries Science Division
Recommendation (Para No. 10)
The Committee note that Fisheries Science Division under ICAR is
undertaking research and academic programmes in fisheries and
aquaculture sector in the country through the network of 06 Research
Institutes, 01 Bureau, 01 Project Directorate. However, the Committee
note that Division were allocated only 48.98% (RE) of the plan of
earmarked outlays of Rs. 735.00 crore for XII Plan. The Committee
were informed that the overall reduction in the Plan outlay of the
ICAR/DARE by Ministry of Finance led to a proportionate cut in the
budget of the Fisheries Science Division. However , the Committee were
assured that funds made available to the Division at RE stage were
judiciously distributed among the on-going Plan Schemes depending on
their priorities, to ensure that the on-going research priorities are
addressed smoothly and efficiently. The Committee further note that
combined allocations to the division during 2017-18 is only Rs. 446.69
which is 12.48% higher than allocations available to the division at RE
stage during 2016-17. The Committee are of view that apart from
providing important and cheap source of protein for vast majority of
our countrymen, fishery sector is one of the largest Sector for
employment generation in the country. There is need for large
investment in research and development in the sector so that scientist
can solve problems being faced by the fisherman in the country. The
Committee, therefore, recommend the Government to enhance
allocations to the Division at RE stage during current and coming fiscal
to bolster the sector in the country.
Reply of the Government
Recommendation of the Committee has been noted for necessary
compliance.Accordingly, the Department has requested to the Ministry
of Finance for allocation of enhanced funds during RE stage for the
current and coming financial years. On the availability of enhanced
funds from Ministry of Finance Department shall allocate adequate
funds to the division at RE stage in the current and coming fiscal to
bolster the Fisheries research and development in the country.
[Ministry of Agriculture & Farmers Welfare O.M No. 7 (5)/2017,
dated 06th June, 2017, Department of Agricultural
Research and Education]
Agricultural Engineering Division
Recommendation (Para No. 11)
The Committee note that Agricultural Engineering Division through
its 05 Research Institutes, 06 All India Coordinated Research Projects
and 02 Network Research Projects mandated to plan, coordinate, and

36
monitor R&D programmes and serve as an information repository in
Agricultural Engineering to make Indian agriculture profitable,
sustainable and globally competitive enterprise through engineering
interventions. The Committee observe that only Rs. 332.00 crore i.e.
30.18 % of earmarked outlays of Rs. 1100.00 crore for the XII plan
were allocated to the division at RE stage. The Committee also note
that combined allocations of Rs. 213.54 crore were made to the Division
for 2017-18 against an amount of Rs. 255.91 crore as proposed by the
Division during 2017-18. While appreciating the efforts of the Division
to ensure that activities/programmes of high priority do not suffer due
to reduced allocations during the various years of the 12th Plan, the
Committee are of the view that non-availability of funds as proposed
by the Department adversely impact the various activities undertaken
by the Division. The Committee, therefore, recommend that the
Department may taken up the matter with Ministry of Finance and
urge them to allocate funds as per their demand.
The Committee note that Agricultural Engineering Division is involved
in development and demonstration of technologies related to
mechanization of production and post-production agriculture using
conventional and nonconventional energy sources and includes
mechanization of irrigation and drainage activities; post-harvest and
value addition of agricultural products and 86 by products. The
Committee were informed that Institutes under the Division have
developed locally suitable thirteen technologies related to seeding,
planting, plant protection, harvesting, threshing etc. The Committee
were also informed that 239 technologies/farm equipments/machine
have been developed by the different institutes during the XII plan.
The Committee also note that Institutes under the division were able
to commercialize 118 these thirteen technologies related to seeding,
planting, plant protection, harvesting, threshing etc. Besides,
technologies and protocols pertaining to post harvest loss reduction
and value addition, renewable energy for agriculture and irrigation
have also been developed and were able to generate revenue of
Rs. 3.15 crore during XII Plan. However , the Committee are surprised
to know that the ICAR does not maintain information regarding import
of agricultural machineries and tools in the country. The Committee
observe that farming practice of the country is witnessing a gradual
shift to the mechanization due to shortage of farm labour , necessitating
availability of efficient and cost effective farm equipments and
machineries. The Committee also observe that farmers of the country
require small and efficient farm equipment due to small and fragmented
size of land holdings. The Committee are of the considered view that
easy availability of advanced, cost effective and small farm machineries

37
suitable for small and fragmented land holdings will radically transform
agriculture by cutting expenses and thereby enhancing income of the
farmers in the country. The Committee, therefore, recommend the
Department to analyze the availability and use of agriculture
machineries in technologically advanced countries and trend of import
of these 87 machineries in the country. The Committee also recommend
the ICAR to start a dedicated mission for development of advanced
agriculture machineries keeping in view the requirement of farmers in
the country.
Reply of the Government
Recommendation of the Committee has been noted for necessary
compliance.Accordingly, the Department has requested to the Ministry
of Finance for allocation of enhanced funds during RE stage for the
current and coming financial years. On the availability of enhanced
funds from Ministry of Finance, the Department shall allocate adequate
funds to the Agricultural Engineering Division at RE stage in the current
and coming fiscal to carryout envisaged Agriculture Machinery
development programmes.
In the technologically advanced countries, due to large farm
holdings, large size machinery is used at farms. Whereas in India,
small to medium size farm equipment are used for mechanization.
Most of these implements are manufactured in India. However , some
sophisticated components of these equipment are imported for its
manufacturing such as laser transmitter and receiver of laser land
leveller, hydraulics motors etc. A consortia Research Platform on Farm
Mechanization & Precision Farming was initiated in 2015-16 for
development of precision machinery.
[Ministry of Agriculture & Farmers Welfare O.M No. 7 (5)/2017,
dated 06th June, 2017, Department of Agricultural
Research and Education]
Comments of the Committee
For comments of the Committee please refer to Para No. 1.19 of
Chapter-I of this Report.
Agricultural Education Division
Recommendation (Para No. 13)
The Committee note that Agricultural Education Division strives for
maintaining and upgrading quality, relevance and strengthening of higher
agricultural education through 02 Research Institutes and 1 All India

38
Coordinated 91 Research Projects in partnership with 73 Agricultural
Universities (AUs) comprising of State Agricultural Universities (SAUs),
ICAR Deemed-to-beUniversities (ICAR DUs), Central Agricultural
University (CAU) and Central Universities (CUs) with Agriculture Faculty
by providing support for student and faculty amenities and for holistic
development of students. The Committee NOTE that only Rs. 2421.40
crore i.e. 60.53% of earmarked outlays of Rs. 4000 crore for the
XII plan were allocated to the division at RE stage. The Committee also
note that combined allocations of Rs. 805.95 crore (Rs. 736.71 for
Agriculture Education and Rs. 69.24 crore for ESM) were 49 made to
the Division against an amount of Rs. 828.25 crore as proposed during
2017-18. The Committee were informed during oral evidence that ICAR
will face limitation of funds in current financial year as no separate
provision of funds has been made for IARI, Jharkhand and Assam. The
Committee are of the considered view that investment in agriculture
education sector may yield rich dividends in terms of generation of
skilled manpower and may encourage research and innovations in the
field of agriculture which may, in turn, induce faster improvement in
socio-economic conditions of poor and marginal farmers of the Country.
The Committee, therefore, urge the Ministry of Finance to suitably
enhance the allocation to the Department so that they do not face
financial constraints in providing resources to the agriculture education
institutes in the country including for establishment of new agricultural
universities and research initiatives in the Country.
The Committee note that National Agricultural Education
Accreditation Board (NAEAB) under ICAR is empowered to grant
accreditation Agricultural Institutes/Universities in the country. The
Committee were also informed that ICAR also has a system of Institute
Research Committee (IRC) for periodic evaluation (half yearly and
yearly basis) of Professors/Research scientists in agriculture institutes
in the country. Research Advisory Committee (RAC) of each institute
which reviews progress of research and provides advice on the direction
and types of scientific aspects and methods/processes of research.
The research programme of the institutes are subjected to quinquennial
review through eminent experts in respective fields of science. However,
the Committee are surprised to know that none of Agriculture
Universities/Research Institutes in the country has secured position in
global ranking. The Committee are of view that there is need of
comparative analysis of agriculture education system of the country
with other successful countries in the field and take corrective steps
to improve the academic and research performance of agricultural
institute in the country so that they can secure high global ranking.
The Committee desire the ICAR to identify agriculture institutes in the

39
country which have potential to compete at the global level and to
provide necessary support to them in the form of necessary funds and
infrastructure.
The Committee note that ICAR has made significant changes in the
course curriculum for agriculture to include learning on traditional
agriculture and rural agriculture economy. The Committee also note
that experiential learning in the farmers field has also been included
in the course curriculum under Rural Entrepreneurship Awareness
Development Progrmamme (READY) for final year students. The
Committee are of the view that there is lack of professional help to
93 the farmers in the country due to limitation of traditional agriculture
extension system and inclusion of course content on rural agriculture
economy, traditional methods of farming and experiential learning in
the village with farmers will help to create an informed pool of students
who may create a revolution with their entrepreneurial and innovative
research projects. The Committee, therefore, appreciate these steps
of ICAR for making agriculture education beneficial for the country.
The Committee also desire the ICAR to explore possibilities for designing
short term certificate courses/vocational courses after class 10/12
standard which can help to create a pool of agriculture foot soldiers
in the country who may in turn provide professional support to the
farmers in guiding them to increase their production and productivity
of crops efficiently and effectively.
Reply of the Government
Recommendation of the Committee has been noted for necessary
compliance.Accordingly, Secretary, DARE and Director General, ICAR
has requested to the Ministry of Finance for allocation of enhanced
funds during RE stage for the current and coming financial years. On
the availability of enhanced funds from Ministry of Finance, the
Department shall allocate adequate funds to the Agriculture Education
Division at RE stage in the current and coming fiscal.
To inculcate competitiveness among the Agricultural Universities,
ICAR has initiated Ranking Framework at national level from 2016-17
for different SAUs/DUs/CAUs etc. A proforma/score card to evaluate
the universities for ranking has been designed by the National Academy
of Agricultural Sciences which is to be done annually based on the
performance of the Universities in the areas of teaching, research and
extension during the preceding five years. The proforma has already
been sent to the Vice Chancellors of all Agricultural Universities to
provide information for ranking. However , majority of universities are

40
facing problems like shortage of staff, lack of technology enabled
learning tools and industry-academic platform etc. ICAR is also
committed to have international ranking for SAUs etc.
ICAR has also planned to introduce one-year certificate course for
the Agriculture Input dealers and 3 yearsÕ diploma course in Agriculture,
Horticulture & Agriculture Engineering to create a pool of agriculture
professionals to guide and support the farmers in efficient and effective
use of agriculture inputs to enhance the production and productivity
of different Agriculture and Horticulture crops.
[Ministry of Agriculture & Farmers Welfare O.M No. 7 (5)/2017,
dated 06th June, 2017, Department of Agricultural
Research and Education]

41
CHAPTER III
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO NOT
DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE GOVERNMENT ÕS REPLIES
-NIL-

42
CHAPTER IV
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF
THE GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE
-NIL-

43
CHAPTER V
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH FINAL
REPLIES OF GOVERNMENT ARE STILL AWAITED
Natural Resources Management Division
Recommendation (Para No. 8)
The Committee note that Natural Research Management (NRA)
Division of ICAR is engaged in developing location-specific, cost effective
and eco-friendly technologies for conservation and management of
natural resources through the network of 12 Research Institutes, 01
Bureau, 01 National Research Centre, 01 Project Directorate, 10 All
India Coordinated Research Projects and 02 Network Research Projects
in the country. The Committee observe that only Rs. 1339.5 80 crore
i.e. 61.34 % of earmarked outlays for the XII plan were allocated to
the Division at RE stage. The Committee also note that the combined
allocations of Rs. 732.17 crore have been made to the Division for
2017-18 as against Rs. 890.96 crore as proposed by the Department
during 2017-18. Needless to say, the drastic cut in the plan allocation
has its adverse impact on various activities/research projects undertaken
by the NRM division. The Committee, therefore, recommend that plan
allocation made to the Division may be reviewed at RE stage and the
matter may be taken up with the M/o Finance at RE stage for allocation
of adequate funds at RE stage so as to ensure effective and efficient
implementation of its various activities/research programmes.
The Committee note that NRM Division is engaged in research
programmes in the field of organic farming. The Committee note that
5.71million Hectare area including 1.49 million Hectare and 4.22 million
hectare forest and wild area for collection of minor forest produces is
under organic certification in the country. The Committee were informed
that ICAR is developing technologies and low cost manure under Network
Project on Organic Farming to reduce the cost of production of crops.
The Committee were also informed that conversion period of shift
from chemical fertilizer based to organic farming ranges between
2-4 years in high intensive areas depending on the soils and 0-2 years
in hilly and rain fed areas for different crops. However , research done
by the ICAR shows that addition of more legumes in the systems
(intercropping and 2 legume crops in a year) and addition of low
nutrient requiring crops in the rotation are helpful in reducing the

44
conversion period. The Committee further note that ICAR is working
for establishment of separate institute for organic farming. However,
the Committee are distressed to note that ICAR or any other Government
agencies have not undertaken any study to assess the market for
organic agricultural products in domestic and international market.
The Committee appreciate the efforts made by the ICAR for research
on organic farming. Nevertheless, the Committee are of the view that
organic farming is one of the areas where farmers of our country are
at advantage due to their traditional knowledge and limited use of
fertilizer. Better marketing of organic agriculture products can be useful
in achieving the aim of doubling the income of farmers in the country.
However , there is need to provide a fillip to traditional knowledge of
farmers through infusion of technology, provision of cost effective
green manure and reduction of conversion time. The Committee,
therefore, recommend the Department to gear their scientific prowess
to start a new era of farming based on sustainable use of natural
resources. The Committee also desire the Department to constitute a
specific cell in every ICAR institute and KVK for organic farming wherein,
consultation services and accesses to developed technologies, green
manure, plant materials, agronomic methods may be provided to the
farmers at a reasonable cost. The Committee appreciate the efforts
made by the ICAR for research on organic farming. The Committee
also expect the Department to expedite the process of submission of
EFC for establishment of an independent Institute for organic farming
so that it can be operationalized within minimum possible time. Further,
the Committee also desire that ICAR or any other agencies would also
be entrusted to conduct a study to assess the market for organic
agricultural products in domestic and international market so as to
enable them, to plan organic farming in the Country so as to meet the
demand of domestic and international market. The Committee would
like to be apprised of the initiatives undertaken by them in this regard.
Reply of the Government
Recommendation of the Committee has been noted for necessary
compliance.Accordingly, the Department has requested to the Ministry
of Finance for allocation of enhanced funds during RE stage for the
current financial year. On the availability of enhanced funds from
Ministry of Finance department shall allocate adequate funds to the
division at RE stage in the current fiscal so that all activities/
programmes undertaken by them may run smoothly and effectively to
achieve the planned physical and financial targets.

45
Organic farming has been studied in different contexts by the
scientists. The analysis primarily related to economics of organic farming
and the potential benefits to the farmers. The issues of market potential
at national & international level and value chain analysis of the produce
of organic farming in the North-East is under consideration by the
Department as a part of large collaborative projects on value chain
analysis.
Further , KVKs impart training to the farmers in various agricultural
activities including organic farming to update their knowledge and
skills. Farmers are provided training on production of bio-pesticides,
bio-agents, and organic manures through vermicomposting, green
manuring, etc. The KVKs are providing advisories to farmers free of
cost on various aspects of organic farming.
During 2016-17, the KVKs conducted 650 trials and 3239
demonstrations in farmers Õ fields with technological interventions
organic farming. The KVKs also provided training to 60743 farmers and
6671 extension personnel by conducting 2473 courses on organic farming
technologies. Besides, 6575.67 quintal seeds, 20.39 lakh planting
materials, 260.05 quintal bio agents, 343.50 quintals bio-pesticides
and 7292.11 quintal bio-fertilizers were produced and provide to farmers
engaged in organic farming.
[Ministry of Agriculture & Farmers Welfare O.M No. 7 (5)/2017,
dated 06th June, 2017, Department of Agricultural
Research and Education]
Comments of the Committee
For comments of the Committee please refer to Para No. 1.13 of
Chapter-I of this Report.
Animal Science Division
Recommendation (Para No. 9)
The Committee note that Animal Science Division of ICAR
coordinates and monitors research programmes for sustainable
enhancement of productivity and improvement in health status of
livestock and poultry in the country through its 10 Research Institutes,
01 Bureau, 06 National Research Centres, 02 Project Directorates, 07
All India Coordinated Research Projects and 08 Network Research
Project. The Committee observe that only Rs. 970.98 crore i.e. 62.93
% of earmarked outlays of Rs. 1543.00 crore for the XII plan were

46
allocated to the Division at RE stage. The Committee also note that
combined allocations of Rs. 885.77 crore have been made to the Division
against Rs. 1001.35 crore as proposed by the Department during
2017-18. The Committee are of the opinion that adequate funds need
to be provided to the division so that activities/research/programmes
undertaken by the Division are not hindered for want of adequate
funds. The Committee, therefore, recommend that the allocation of
funds to the Division may be reviewed at RE stage and the matter may
be pursued with M/o Finance in this regard.
The Committee note that Animal Science Division is involved in
research on development and production of vaccine for various diseases
of animal. The Committee were informed that ICAR institutes are
engaged in development of gene deleted IBR vaccine, which will be
DIVA capable, DIVA enabled mutant Brucella vaccine strain, Johne Õs
disease vaccine, 3A and 3B epitope deletion mutant of FMDV to explore
marker vaccine potential, infectious cDNA clone for a serotype Asia 1
and O FMD virus and many other vaccines. The Committee further
observe that production of animal vaccine is woefully short of
requirement in the country. The Committee were informed that vaccine
production of Foot and Mouth disease vaccine, swine fever vaccine,
PPR Vaccine, Sheep pox vaccine is only 400 million doses/year,
0.7 million doses/year , 160 million doses/year and 31 million doses/
year respectively which is quite low as against requirement of 1022
million doses/year , 10 million doses/year, 200 million doses/year and
65 million doses/year respectively. The Committee are of the view
that there is an urgent need for adequate facility and availability of
animal vaccine in the country to fully utilize potential of milk, meat
and wool from cattle and other animals which are largest in numbers
in entire world. The Committee desire the ICAR to take a detailed
study on the ways by which production of animal vaccine may be
enhanced to make the country self reliant. The Committee also desire
the ICAR to devote adequate resources and man power for development
of animal vaccines in which the country lacks necessary technology.
Reply of the Government
Recommendation of the Committee has been noted for necessary
compliance.Accordingly, the Department has requested to the Ministry
of Finance for allocation of enhanced funds during RE stage for the
current financial year. On the availability of enhanced funds from
Ministry of Finance department shall allocate adequate funds to the
division at RE stage in the current fiscal so that all activities/
programmes undertaken by them may run smoothly and effectively to
achieve the planned physical and financial targets.

47
The Animal Science Division has initiated a Consortia Platform on
Vaccines and Diagnostics during 2015-16 with a view to make a detailed
study on the ways by which production of animal vaccine may be
enhanced to make the country selfreliant and the department is trying
its best to get enhanced funds from the Ministry of Finance.
[Ministry of Agriculture & Farmers Welfare O.M No. 7 (5)/2017,
dated 06th June, 2017, Department of Agricultural
Research and Education]
Comments of the Committee
For comments of the Committee please refer to Para No. 1.16 of
Chapter-I of this Report.
Agriculture Extension
Recommendation (Para No. 12)
The Committee note that ICAR has established a network of 665
Krishi Vigyan Kendra (KVKs) in the country aiming at technology
assessment and demonstration for its application and capacity
development. Provision of extension services to farmers in the Country
is done by the main extension system operated by State Governments.
The Department of Agriculture, Cooperation and Farmers Welfare has
provided support to States for setting up of Agricultural Technology
Management Agency (ATMA) aiming at making extension system farmer
driven and farmer accountable by way of new institutional arrangements
for technology dissemination at district level. ATMA Scheme is under
implementation in 652 districts in 29 States and 3 UTs in the country
with provision for active participation of farmers/farmer-groups, NGOs,
KVK, Panchayati Raj Institutions and other stakeholders operating at
district level and below. However, the Committee note that allocations
for KVKs are not sufficient enough to provide them all necessary
infrastructure and manpower. Only Rs. 2998.36 crore were allocated
for KVKs scheme at RE stage which works out 76.88% of the approved
outlays of Rs.3900 crore for the XII plan. The Committee also note that
allocations of Rs. 867.60 crore for KVKs scheme during 2017-18 is not
sufficient to meet obligations under the scheme and Department will
need additional requirement of Rs. 200.00 crore during current fiscal.
The Committee in their previous reports had time and again emphasized
for allocation of adequate resources for implementation of KVKs scheme
to strengthen the system of agriculture extension in the country. The
Committee are of the considered view that KVKs due to their linkage
with vast network of ICAR institute can be effectively leveraged for

48
dissemination of information about crop varieties and hybrids,
technologies, machineries, dairy management practices etc. among
farmers in the country and to create a group of progressive farmers
who can act as trainers for downward dissemination of these knowledge.
The Committee, therefore, urge the M/o Finance to allocate additional
funds as required by the ICAR for the KVKs scheme at RE stage.
The Committee note that KVK scheme is wholly funded by the
Government of India. The Committee were informed that ICAR did not
explore the possibilities for accessing the funds available under
Corporate Social Responsibility (CSR) of public/private companies
registered in the Country funds for providing necessary infrastructure
and equipment to the KVKs scheme. The Committee are of the view
that funds available under Corporate Social Responsibility with public/
private companies as mandated by the recently amended Company Act
can be effectively utilized for provision of necessary infrastructure,
equipments and other facilities in KVKs. The Committee, therefore,
recommend the ICAR to make a proposal for tapping the CSR funds for
KVKs scheme and approach various Public/private companies either
directly or through their representative bodies such as FICCI, ASSOCHAM
etc. after obtaining necessary approval. The Committee would like to
be apprised of the initiatives undertaken by the Department/ICAR in
this regard.
The Committee note that various initiatives under KVK scheme
have been undertaken such as Mera Gaon Mera Gaurav (MGMG) and
Farmer FIRST Programme (FFP) and Attracting and Retaining Youth in
Agriculture (ARYA) during 12th Plan. The Farmer FIRST Programme
(FFP) aims at increased farmers Ñ scientist interface for enriching
knowledge and integrating technology for field application and Mera
Gaon Mera Gaurav (MGMG) aims to encourage agriculture scientists to
adopt villages and give suitable advice to the farmers on technical and
other related aspects in a timeframe through personal visits or on
telephone. While appreciating these initiatives of ICAR, the Committee
are of the view that that current system of agriculture extension
support system needs to be reoriented according to the needs of the
farmers keeping in view their socio-economic conditions and the mental
ability to understand and adapt the new technologies and practice for
sustained growth in agriculture sector. The Committee, therefore,
recommend that the existing system of agriculture extension services
in the entire country may be reviewed and reoriented and to make it
more effective and accessible to the farmers in the Country in
coordination and consultation with all stakeholders including State
Governments to elicit their views. The Committee would like to be

49
apprised of the initiatives undertaken by the Department/ICAR in this
regard.
Since 2015-16, Attracting and Retaining Youth in Agriculture (ARYA)
is being implemented in 25 States through KVKs with an objective to
attract and empower the youth in rural areas to take up various
agriculture and allied enterprises for sustainable income and gainful
employment in selected districts. The Committee were also informed
that one district from each State with technical partners from ICAR
Institutes and Agricultural Universities for taking up entrepreneurial
activities through skill development of rural youth. However , the
Committee note that meager allocation of Rs. 2 crore and Rs. 7 crore
were made during 2015-16 and 2016-17 respectively. The Committee
are of the view that farming sector as a whole is unable to attract the
young talent, thereby, affecting income of the farmers in entire country
primarily due to lack of entrepreneurship in the field of agriculture.
The Committee observe that several private companies have successfully
combined the agriculture extension services and agriculture marketing
in various parts of the country. The Committee desire the ICAR to
study the system of these companies and other such initiatives taken
in the private sectors either in the country or abroad and analyze as
to in what ways these can be utilized for attracting youth for
entrepreneurial startups in the field of agriculture. The Committee
also desire the ICAR to take steps for enhancing awareness among
farming community and youth in rural areas for taking benefits under
ÔStartup India Õ Initiatives of the Government of India in the field of
agriculture. The Committee also recommend the Government to enhance
allocations to the ARYA scheme to widen its reach among rural youth
in the entire Country.
Reply of the Government
Recommendations of the Committee have been noted for
compliance. Accordingly, the Department has requested to the Ministry
of Finance for allocation of enhanced funds during RE stage for the
current and coming financial years. On the availability of enhanced
funds from Ministry of Finance, the Department shall allocate adequate
funds to the Agricultural Extension Division at RE stage in the current
and coming fiscal to carryout envisaged Agriculture Extension Programs
and for further strengthening of the current farmers development
related activity and establishment of new KVKs.
Apart from regular budget, KVKs were provided with additional
fund of Rs. 16.0 crore for conducting Frontline Demonstrations (FLDs)
on oilseed crops; Rs. 25.31 crore for conducting FLDs on pulse crops;
Rs. 8.00 crore for purchase of 930 mini soil testing kits; Rs. 3.22 crore

50
for organizing Skill training programmes for farmers/rural youth; and
Rs. 1.50 crore for establishment of demonstration units on Integrated
farming systems during 2016-17.
The ARYA scheme is being widened by including 75 more districts
of the country under the scheme. During 2016-17, 100 KVKs conducted
200 courses of 200 hours each for development of skills in rural youth.
During 2017-18, 250 KVKs, 60 SAUs and 50 ICAR Institutes will organize
820 such courses.
Review and reorientation of extension services is being carried out
in the Country. Department of Agriculture, Cooperation and Farmers Õ
Welfare (DAC&FW) is providing funds to States under the scheme
ÒSupport to State Extension Programmes for Extension Reforms Ó which
aims at making extension system farmer driven and farmer accountable
by way of new institutional arrangements for technology dissemination
in the form of an Agricultural Technology Management Agency (ATMA)
at district level to operationalize the extension reforms. The DAC&FW
has also provided fund for KVK activities like FLDs on Pulses and
Oilseeds, Pulses Seed Hubs, IFS Demonstration Units, Skill development
training and Mini Soil Testing Kits. Besides, all stakeholders like ICAR
Institutes, State Agricultural Universities, KVKs, and other institutes of
DAC&FW and Department of Animal Husbandry, Dairying and Fisheries
are providing farm advisories through FarmersÕ Portal. So far , no public/
private company has come forward for providing Corporate Social
Responsibility (CSR) funds to Krishi Vigyan Kendras.
[Ministry of Agriculture & Farmers Welfare O.M No. 7(5)/2017,
dated 06th June, 2017, Department of Agricultural
Research and Education]
Comments of the Committee
For comments of the Committee please refer to Para No. 1.22 of
Chapter-I of this Report.
   N
EW D ELHI; HUKM DEO NARAYAN YADAV,
28 August, 2017 Chairperson,
06 Bhadrapada, 1939 (Saka) Standing Committee on Agriculture.

51
ANNEXURE
STANDING COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE (2016-17)
MINUTES OF THE TWENTY SEVENTH SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE
The Committee sat on Monday, the 28th August, 2017 from 1500 hrs.
to 1530 hrs. in the Room No. 53, Parliament House, New Delhi.
PRESENT
Shri Hukm Deo Narayan Yadav Ñ  Chairperson
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Md. Badaruddoza Khan
3. Dr. Tapas Mandal
4. Shri Janardan Mishra
5. Shri Nityanand Rai
6. Shri Mukesh Rajput
7. Shri C.L. Ruala
8. Shri Satyapal Singh (Sambhal)
9. Shri Jai Prakash Narayan Yadav
Rajya Sabha
10. Shri Sambhaji Chhatrapati
11. Sardar Sukhdev Singh Dhindsa
12. Shri Janardan Dwivedi
13. Shri Vinay Katiyar
14. Shri Mohd. Ali Khan
15. Shri Ram Nath Thakur
SECRETARIAT
1. Shri D.S. Malha Ñ Joint Secretary
2. Shri Arun K. Kaushik Ñ Director
3. Smt. Juby Amar Ñ Additional Director
4. Shri C. Vanlalruata Ñ Deputy Secretary
5. Shri Sumesh Kumar Ñ Under Secretary

52
2. At the outset, Hon Õble Chairperson welcomed the Members to
the Valedictory Sitting of the Committee. Thereafter, the Committee
took up the following draft Reports for consideration:
(i) Draft Report on Action Taken by the Government on the
Observations/Recommendations Contained in the Thirty Sixth
Report of the Standing Committee on Agriculture on ÔDemands
for Grants (2017-18)Õ pertaining to the Ministry of Agriculture
and Farmers Welfare (Department of Agricultural Research
and Education).
*(ii) ***** ***** ***** *****
*(iii) ***** ***** ***** *****
3. After some deliberations, the Committee adopted the draft
Reports without any modifications and authorized the Chairperson to
finalize these reports. Since the House is not in Session, the Committee
decided to present the Reports to Hon Õble Speaker under Direction 71A
of The Direction by the Speaker, Lok Sabha.
*4. ***** ***** ***** *****
The Committee then adjourned.
*Matter not related to this Report.

53
APPENDIX
ANALYSIS OF ACTION TAKEN BY GOVERNMENT ON THE THIRTY SIXTH
REPORT (16th LOK SABHA) OF STANDING COMMITTEE ON
AGRICULTURE (2016-17)
(Vide Para 4 of Introduction of the Report)
(i) Total number of Recommendations: 13
(ii) Recommendations/Observations which have been
Accepted by the Government:
Para Nos.: 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 10, 11 & 13
Total 10
Percentage 76.92%
(iii) Recommendations/Observations which the Committee
Do not desire to pursue in view of the Government Õs
replies:
Para No.: NIL
Total 00
Percentage 0.00%
(iv) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which
replies of the Government have not been accepted
by the Committee:
Para No.: NIL
Total 00
Percentage 0.00%
(v) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which
Final replies of the Government are still awaited:
Para Nos.: 8, 9 and 12
Total 03
Percentage 23.07%