FIFTY-SEVENTH REPORT
STANDING COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE
(2017-2018)
(SIXTEENTH LOK SABHA)
MINISTRY OF AGRICULTURE AND FARMERS WELFARE
(DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE, COOPERATION AND
FARMERS WELFARE)
“Variance in Cost and Quality of Agricultural Tools and Implements
Being Provided to the Farmers Under Rashtriya Krishi Vikas
Yojana (RKVY) and Problems Being Faced by the Farmers
Due to Imported  Power Tillers — A Review”
[Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations
contained in the Fifty First Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) of the
Standing Committee on Agriculture (2017-2018)]
Presented to Lok Sabha on 03.08.2018
Laid on the Table of Rajya Sabha on 03.08.2018
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
August, 2018/ Shravana, 1940 ( Saka)


COA No. 379
Price : ` 148.00
© 2018 B Y L OK S ABHA S ECRETARIAT
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct
of Business in Lok Sabha (Fifteenth Edition) and printed by
Anupam Art Printers, New Delhi.

CONTENTS
PAGE
COMPOSITION OF THE C OMMITTEE ............................................ (iii)
INTRODUCTION ................................................................. (v)
CHAPTER I Report ........................................................ 1
CHAPTER II Observations/Recommendations which have been
accepted by the Government ........................... 16
CHAPTER III Observations/Recommendations which the Committee
do not desire to pursue in view of the Government’s
replies ........................................................ 20
CHAPTER IV Observations/Recommendations in respect of which
replies of the Government have not been accepted
by the Committee ......................................... 21
CHAPTER V Observations/Recommendations in respect of which
final replies of the Government are still awaited ... 29
ANNEXURES
I&II. Copy of the D.O. letter No. 9-1/2009-M&T(I&P) dated
09.03.2018 and 14.05.2018 .................................... 33
III. Copy of the letter No. 13-2/2014, dated 11.05.2018 to
the authorities concerned of the States for its strict
compliance ........................................................ 42
IV. Copy of the instruction for testing of power tillers as per
revised standard was issued vide letter No. 11-3/2004-
M&T (I&P), dated 24.08.2017 ................................. 46
V. Copy of the State Governments vide this Department’s
letter No. 9-1/2009-M&T (I&P) dated 4.11.2017
to identify such importers and take action against
them ................................................................ 48
VI. Copy of the Proceedings of one day workshop of all
4 FMTTIs and 32 approved test Centers at SAUs/ICAR
institutes and a State Agricultural Departments was
organized on 01.02.2018 all the issue and mechanism
were discussed of authentication and testing of
different Agricultural machinery including power
tillers ............................................................... 49
(i)

PAGE
VII. Copy of the criteria which is unanimously agreed/
recommended by the manufacturers & importers of
Power tillers ...................................................... 57
VIII. Copy of the last minutes of meeting held on 21.05.2018
is also attached at .............................................. 58
IX. Copy of the DO Letter No. 13-2/2014 dated 10.05.2018.... 61
X. Copies of the Office Orders regarding enlistment of
power tillers for subsidy during the last 7 years ........ 62
XI. Copy of the DO letter No. 9-1/2009-M&T (I&P) dated
9th November , 2017 ............................................. 99
XII. Copy of the letter No. 13-12/2014-M&T (I&P) dated
24th May, 2018 ................................................... 101
XIII. Copy of the letter dated 14-8/2016-M&T (I&P) dated
11th July, 2017 ................................................... 103
A
PPENDICES
I. Extracts of the Minutes of the 27th Sitting of the
Committee held on 31.07.2018 ............................... 108
II. Analysis of Action Taken by the Government on the
Recommendations contained in the Fifty First Report
(Sixteenth Lok Sabha) of the Standing Committee on
Agriculture (2017-2018) ......................................... 110
(ii)

COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE
(2017-2018)
Shri Hukm Dev Narayan Yadav — Chairperson
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Sanjay Dhotre
3. Prof. Ravindra Vishwanath Gaikwad
4. Shri Sanganna Amarappa Karadi
5. Shri Nalin Kumar Kateel
6. Smt. Raksha Tai Khadase
7. Md. Badaruddoza Khan
8. Shri C. Mahendran
9. Dr. Tapas Mandal
10. Shri Janardan Mishra
@11. Shri Praveen Kumar Nishad
12. Shri Devji M. Patel
13. Shri Nityanand Rai
14. Shri Mukesh Rajput
15. Shri Konakalla Narayana Rao
16. Shri C.L. Ruala
17. Shri Arjun Charan Sethi
18. Shri Virendra Singh
19. Shri Dharmendra Yadav
20. Shri Jai Prakash Narayan Yadav
#21. Vacant
(iii)
@ Shri Praveen Kumar Nishad, MP Lok Sabha nominated vice Shri Nephiu Rio, MP Lok Sabha
w.e.f. 27.04.2018 vide Bulletin Part II No. 6866 dated 27.04.2018
# Vacant due to resignation of Shri B.S. Yeddyurappa from the Membership of Lok Sabha
w.e.f. 18.05.2018 vide Bulletin Part-II Table Office (B) No. 6885 dated 19.05.2018

Rajya Sabha
22. Sardar Sukhdev Singh Dhindsa
*23. Shri Rajmani Patel
*24. Shri Narayan Rane
*25. Shri Kailash Soni
26. Shri Mohd. Ali Khan
27. Shri K.K. Ragesh
28. Shri Ram Nath Thakur
29. Shri R. Vaithilingam
*30. Shri Harnath Singh Yadav
31. Dr. Chandrapal Singh Yadav
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Shri D.S. Malha — Joint Secretary
2. Shri Arun K. Kaushik — Director
3. Shri Sumesh Kumar — Under Secretary
4. Shri S. Vijayaraghavan — Sr. Executive Assistant
(iv)
* vice Shri Janardan Dwivedi, Shri Meghraj Jain, Shri Vinay Katiyar and Shri Shankarbhai
N. Vegad, who ceased to be the Member of the Committee on their retirement from
Rajya Sabha on 27.01.2018, 02.04.2018, 02.04.2018 and 02.04.2018 respectively.

(v)
INTRODUCTION
I, the Chairperson, Standing Committee on Agriculture (2017-18),
having been authorized by the Committee to submit the Report on
their behalf, present this Fifty Seventh Report on action taken by the
Government on the Observations/Recommendations contained in the
Fifty First Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) of the Standing Committee on
Agriculture (2016-17) on the Subject “Variance in Cost and Quality of
Agricultural Tools and Implements Being Provided to the Farmers Under
Rashtriya Krishi Vikas Yojana (RKVY) and Problems Being Faced by the
Farmers Due to Imported Power Tillers — A Review ” pertaining to the
Ministry of Agriculture and Farmers Welfare (Department of Agriculture,
Cooperation and Farmers Welfare).
2. The Fifty First Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) of the Standing
Committee on Agriculture (2017-18) on the Subject “Variance in Cost
and Quality of Agricultural Tools and Implements Being Provided to the
Farmers Under Rashtriya Krishi Vikas Yojana (RKVY) and Problems Being
Faced by the Farmers Due to Imported Power Tillers — A Review ”
pertaining to Ministry of Agriculture and Farmers Welfare (Department
of Agriculture, Cooperation and Farmers Welfare) was presented to
Lok Sabha on 03.04.2018 and laid on the Table of Rajya Sabha on
04.04.2018. The Action Taken Notes on the Report were received on
19.06.2018. The Committee took briefing of the representatives of the
Ministry of Agriculture and Farmers’ Welfare (Department of Agriculture,
Cooperation and Farmers’ Welfare) on action taken by the Government
on Observations/Recommendations contained in the Report on
31.07.2018.
3. The Report was considered and adopted by the Committee at
their Sitting held on 31.07.2018.
4. An analysis of the action taken by the Government on the
Observations/Recommendations contained in the Fifty First Report
(Sixteenth Lok Sabha) of the Committee is given in Appendix.
   N
EW D ELHI; HUKM DEV NARAYAN YADAV ,
02 August, 2018 Chairperson,
11 Shravana, 1940 (Saka) Standing Committee on Agriculture.

1
CHAPTER I
REPORT
This Report of the Committee on Agriculture deals with the action
taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations
contained in the Fifty-first Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) of the Standing
Committee on Agriculture (2017-2018) on “Variance In Cost and Quality
of Agricultural Tools and Implements Being Provided to the Farmers
Under Rashtriya Krishi Vikas Yojana (RKVY) and Problems Being Faced
By The Farmers Due To Imported Power Tillers — A Review ” pertaining
to Ministry of Agriculture (Department of Agriculture, Cooperation and
Farmers Welfare) which was presented to Lok Sabha on 03.04.2018 and
laid on the Table of Rajya Sabha on 04.04.2018.
1.2 The Ministry of Agriculture and Farmers Welfare (Department
of Agriculture, Cooperation and Farmers Welfare) have furnished Action
Taken Replies in respect of all the 11 Observations/Recommendations
contained in the Report. These replies have been categorized as under:—
(i) Observations/Recommendations that have been accepted by
the Government:
Recommendation Nos. 1, 3 and 10
Total 03
Chapter-II
(ii) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which the
Committee do not desire to pursue in view of the
Government’s reply:
Recommendation No. 8
Total 01
Chapter-III
(iii) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which action
taken replies of the Government have not been accepted by
the Committee:
Recommendation Nos. 4, 5, 6, 7 and 9
Total 05
Chapter-IV

2
(iv) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which final
replies of the Government are still awaited:
Recommendation Nos. 2 and 11
Total 02
Chapter-V
1.3 The Committee trust that utmost importance would be given
to implementation of the Observations/Recommendations accepted
by the Government. In cases, where it is not possible for the
Department to implement the Recommendations in letter and spirit,
the matter should be reported to the Committee with reasons for
non-implementation. The Committee desire that further Action
Taken Notes on the Observations/Recommendations contained in
Chapter-I and final Action Taken Replies to the Recommendations
contained in Chapter-V of this Report be furnished to them at an
early date.
1.4 The Committee will now deal with the action taken by the
Government on some of the Recommendations in the succeeding
paragraphs.
A. Compensation to the Farmers
Recommendation No. 2
1.5 The Committee had observed/recommended as under:—
“The Committee note that the Government of Bihar, on the
representation of Farmers Association, had commissioned the study
to analyze problems being faced by the farmers due to sub-standard
imported Chinese Power Tillers. The study conducted by the RAU
after field work and discussion with the distributors, dealers of
Power Tillers and farmers have narrated the problems being faced
by the farmers. However , the Committee are astonished to note
that the State Government in their communication with Central
Government is reporting that no complaints has been received
from farmers about poor quality of power tillers. The Committee
are of view that farmers need to be compensated for losses incurred
to them due to faulty power tillers and guilty importers, distributors
and dealers needs to be punished. The Committee, therefore,
recommends the DAC&FW to constitute a high powered Committee
headed by an independent expert to examine the issue of
sub-standard quality of power tillers being supplied to the farmers
in the Country under centrally sponsored schemes on agriculture

3
mechanization. Terms of reference to such Committee must include
issues such as identifying guilty importers, distributors and dealers
of power tillers and compensation to the farmers. The Committee
would like the Department to submit steps taken in this regard
within one month of presentation of this Report. ”
1.6 The Department of Agriculture, Cooperation and Farmers Welfare
in the Action Taken Reply has stated as under:—
“The Department has conducted a quick survey in the States of
Bihar , Odisha and Assam to assess the working condition of the
power tillers supplied under subsidy programmes.
In response to the report on the quick survey, the Government of
Bihar, and Assam, vide this Department’s D.O. letter No. 9-1/2009-
M&T(I&P) dated 09.03.2018 and 14.05.2018 respectively (Copy
enclosed at Annexure-I & Annexure-II) have been asked to take
necessary action for the repair of the Power Tillers lying defunct
due to frequent break downs and non-availability of the spare
parts and service centers in nearby markets.
No complaint observed in Odisha State.
Based on the recommendations of the committees, constituted for
quick survey in Odisha, Assam and Bihar States, the detailed
recommendation on the measures to be taken by State Governments
and Power tillers manufacturers/importers prior to empanelment
of the Power tillers for subsidy has been circulated vide letter No.
13-2/2014, dated 11.05.2018 to the authorities concerned of the
States for its strict compliance. The copy of the letter with
Recommendations of the Committee is enclosed at Annexure-III. ”
1.7 The Department of Agriculture, Cooperation and Farmers Welfare
in their briefing on 31.07.2018, before the Committee has submitted
as under:—
(i) In the State of Assam 6 Power Tillers were found
unserviceable out of which 3 power tillers have been repaired
and action is under progress for the remaining 3 power
tillers.
(ii) In the State of Bihar 26 Power Tillers were found defective.
The State Government has been requested to undertake the
repairs. Till now 8 power tillers have been repaired and
others will be repaired within a weeks time.

4
1.8 The Committee while showing their concern over problem
being faced by the farmers due to poor quality of power tillers
supplied to them under various centrally sponsored schemes had
opined that farmers need to be compensated for losses incurred to
them due to faulty power tillers and guilty importers, distributors
and dealers needs to be punished and recommended the DAC&FW
to constitute a high powered Committee headed by an independent
expert to examine the issue of sub-standard quality of power tillers
being supplied to the farmers in the Country under Centrally
sponsored schemes on agriculture mechanization for Identifying guilty
importers, distributors and dealers of power tillers and compensation
to the farmers. The Department in their Action Taken Replies has
submitted about quick survey conducted in the States of Bihar,
Odisha and Assam to assess the working condition of the power
tillers supplied under subsidy programmes. The Committee were
also informed that in response to the report on the quick survey,
the Government of Bihar and Assam have been asked to take
necessary action for the repair of the Power Tillers lying defunct
due to frequent break downs and non-availability of the spare parts
and service centers in nearby markets. The Department in their
briefing before the Committee on 31.07.2018 has informed that in
the State of Assam 6 Power Tillers were found unserviceable out of
which 3 power tillers have been repaired and action is under progress
for the remaining 3 power tillers and in the State of Bihar,
26 Power Tillers were found defective. The State Government has
been requested to undertake the repairs. Till now 8 power tillers
have been repaired and other will be repaired within a week time.
The Committee find that Governments of Bihar and Assam are yet
to act against guilty supplier and provide compensation to the
Farmers. The Committee would like the Department to pursue the
matter with State Governments concerned and take the matter to
the final conclusion including provision of compensation to the
farmers. The Committee also desire the Department to furnish model
and company of power tiller found defective, name and contact
details of farmers owning these power tillers to the Committee.
B.
Recommendation No. 4
1.9 The Committee had observed/recommended as under:—
“Apart from availability of quality power tillers, facility for after
sales service and spare parts is utmost necessities for ensuring
servicing of warranty on power tillers. The committee note that

5
absence of facilitates for after sale service and availability of
spare parts are one of the missing link affecting farmers to adopt
power tillers at large scale. In this regard, the Committee have
been assured by the Department that they have taken steps for
ensuring warranty of 2 years. And empanelment of only those
manufacturers/importers that have service centers. However , the
Department failed to submit details of service centers of empanelled
power tillers companies across the country. They have submitted
details only about dealers of empanelled power tillers rather than
service centers. The Committee deprecate this lackadaisical
approach of the Department and desire them to physically verify
service centers of empanelled power tillers and submit them before
the Committee and take steps to remove guilty importers/
manufacturers/dealers from empanelled list. Further , the Committee
desire that farmers should be provided one site after sale service
for power tillers as movement to nearby service centers may be
time consuming and costly for farmers. The Committee would like
the Department to explore this possibility with manufacturers/
importers. The Committee would like to be apprised about steps
taken by the Department in this regard. ”
1.10 The Department of Agriculture, Cooperation and Farmers
Welfare in the Action Taken Reply has stated as under:—
“While preparing the Central list of eligible Power Tillers for
Government assistance programme latest CoP and CMVR certificates
are verified.
The State Governments vide this Department’s letter No 9-1/2009-
M&T (I&P) dated 4.11.2017 followed by another letter on 12.12.2017
have also been requested to identify such importers and take
action against them. None of the State Government reported
violation. The copy of the letters are attached at Annexure.
The Committee under the Chairmanship of Asstt. Director General
has been constituted and visited to the manufacturing plant of
Graves Cotton Ltd. at Ranipet (TN) and Kirloskar Oil Engines Ltd.,
Pune and observed that both the manufactures are importing few
parts from China in unfinished condition with their own design and
drawing and machined and finished in India. There is no any
irregularity observed to the committee. As regards to violation of
laws related to Bureau of Indian Standard and Consumer Protection
Act, the matter has been taken up with BIS and they are enquiring
in the matter through their appropriate department. ”

6
1.11 While showing their concern over absence of facilities for
after sale service and availability of spare parts for power tillers
had desired the Department to physically verify service centers of
empanelled power tillers and take steps to remove guilty importers/
manufacturers/dealers from empanelled list. Further, the Committee
had also desired the Department to explore possibilities of providing
on-site after sale service for power tillers. The Committee note
that Department in their Action Taken Replies has submitted
information which is irrelevant and does not concern to the said
recommendation. The Committee deprecate the lackadaisical
approach of the Department and hope that concerned officials should
exercise caution before submitting facts before the Committee.
Further, the Committee once again reiterate their earlier
recommendation and desire the Department to physically verify
service centers of empanelled power tillers and take steps to remove
guilty importers/manufacturers/dealers from empanelled list and
explore possibilities of providing on-site after sale service for power
tillers. The Committee would like to be apprised about steps taken
in this direction within one month of presentation of this Report.
C.
Recommendation No. 5
1.12 The Committee had observed/recommended as under:—
“The Committee note that Expert Group under the chairmanship of
K. Alagusundaram has pointed out that some of the manufacturers
have been listed as defaulters of Conformity of Production (CoP)
on account of not meeting the emission norms as per CMVR. Further,
many importers have been found to be fudging details to
misrepresent imported power tillers as Indigenously manufactured
and take benefits of “Make in India ” program of Government of
India. The Committee are of view that misrepresentation of country
of origin of sub-standard power tillers not only cause losses to the
farmers, is also violation of laws related to Bureau of Indian Standard
and Consumer Protection Act. The Committee, therefore,
recommend the Government to initiate enquiry to identify such
violators and lodge criminal cases against them to bring justice to
the farmers. Such enquiry should also include the importers which
has been included in the empanelled list prepared by the
Department.
The Committee also recommend the Government to devise a
mechanism to ensure strengthening the process of authentication

7
and testing of power tillers and other agricultural equipments/
machineries. Such mechanism should at least include an independent
expert and farmers as representatives. The committee also desire
the Department to take steps for making the process of testing of
agricultural equipments a transparent one. The Committee also
desire the Department to make the process of application for
testing online and upload all details on specific portal. ”
1.13 The Department of Agriculture, Cooperation and Farmers
Welfare in the Action Taken Reply has stated as under:—
“A one day workshop of all 4 FMTTIs and 32 approved test Centers
at SAUs/ICAR institutes and a State Agricultural Departments was
organized on 01.02.2018 all the issue and mechanism were discussed
of authentication and testing of different Agricultural machinery
including power tillers. A copy of the proceedings is enclosed at
Annexure VII.
In the next workshop, scheduled in August/September 2018, the
progressive farmers, will also be invited for participation in that
workshop.”
1.14 While observing findings of Expert Group under the
chairmanship of K. Alagusundaram such as manufacturers listed as
defaulters of Conformity of Production (COP) on account of not
meeting the emission norms as per Central Motor Vehicle Rules
(CMVR), importers fudging details to misrepresent imported power
tillers as Indigenously manufactured and take benefits of “Make in
India ” program of Government of India, the Committee had
recommended the Government to initiate enquiry to identify such
violators and lodge criminal cases against them to bring justice to
the farmers. Further, the Committee also recommended the
Government to devise a mechanism with representation to
independent expert and farmers to ensure strengthening the process
of authentication and testing of power tillers and other agricultural
equipments/machineries. The committee also desired the Department
to take steps to make the process of application for testing online
and upload all details on specific portal.
The Department in their Action Taken Reply has submitted about
one day workshop of all 4 FMTIs and 32 approved test centres at
State Agriculture Universities (SAUs)/Indian Council of Agricultural
Research (ICAR) institutes and State Agricultural Department in which
issues of mechanism of authentication and testing of different
agricultural machinery including power tillers were discussed. The

8
Committee were also informed that progressive farmers will also be
invited for participation in next workshop scheduled in August/
September, 2018.
The Committee are perturbed to note that the Department is
silent on the issue of initiating enquiry against manufacturers listed
as defaulters of Conformity of Production (COP) on account of not
meeting the emission norms as per Central Motor Vehicle Rules and
importers who were found fudging details to misrepresent imported
power tillers as Indigenously manufactured and take benefits of
“Make in India ” program of Government of India. The Committee
are of view that action against guilty manufacturers and Importers
of Power Tillers whose illegal action has caused loss to public
exchequer and farmers is very necessary to instill confidence among
public and farmers that anybody found abusing the system will not
be spared from the law of the land. The Committee, therefore,
while reiterating their earlier recommendation desire the Department
to initiate enquiry against manufacturers listed as defaulters of
conformity of production (COP) on account of not meeting the
emission norms as per Central Motor Vehicle Rules and importers
who were found fudging details to misrepresent imported power
tillers as Indigenously manufactured and take benefits of “Make in
India” program of Government of India. Further, the Committee also
recommended the Government to complete the fromalities and
consultation for devising a mechanism for strengthening the process
of authentication and testing of power tillers and other agricultural
equipments/machineries and to make the process of application for
testing online and upload all details on specific portal within three
months of presentation of this Report.
D. Pricing of Power Tillers
Recommendation No. 06
1.15 The Committee had observed/recommended as under:—
“Majority of Indian farmers do belong to small and marginal category
who could hardly afford costly agriculture equipments and
machineries. In this scenario, power tillers with its flexibility, multi-
purpose nature and low cost could be ideal to enhance level of
agriculture mechanization in the country. However , the Committee
observe that prices of power tillers in the country are far higher
than their manufacturing or import cost. The Committee have
been informed that power tillers which are imported at Rs. 75250-

9
86000 are being sold at the rate of Rs. 1,08,500-1,95,000 in the
market. Whereas, indigenous power tillers with much higher cost
of production are being sold in the price range of Rs. 1,40,000-
2,15000. The Committee also note that there is wide variation in
selling prices of power tillers in the country. The Committee also
note that selling price of both indigenous and imported power
tillers is higher than the MRP indicated by the manufacturer/
suppliers. The Committee are of view that huge profit margin
being earned by the imported power tillers goes against the aims
of the Government to enhance the level of agriculture
mechanization in the country. The Committee, therefore, desire
the Government to examine the issue in details and take steps to
lower the prices of power tillers in the country. The Department
should also examine the issue with an angle of cartelization of
power tillers importers to enhance their prices. The Department
should also refer the case to Competition Commission of India if
cartelization is suspected. The Committee would like to be apprised
about steps taken by the Department within one Month of
presentation of this Report. The Committee would also like the
Department to expedite submission of Report of A.K. Singh
Committee constituted for the purpose to examine the issue of
uniform pricing of power tillers across the country. ”
1.16 The Department of Agriculture, Cooperation and Farmers
Welfare in the Action Taken Reply has stated as under:—
“The fixation of price of power tillers was initiated by this
Department. The issue has been discussed with the manufacturers
in the last three meetings convened on 31.01.2018, 08.05.2018 &
21.05.2018. After the detailed discussions with Power tiller
manufacturers the criteria to fix the Maximum sale price across
the different States of the country in respect of imported and
indigenous Power tillers, one such criteria which is unanimously
agreed/recommended by the manufacturers & importers of Power
tillers, is enclosed as Annexure which is duly signed by the
authorities concerned from the different Power tiller manufacturers
& importers. The copy of the last minutes of meeting held on
21.05.2018 is also attached at Annexure.
The Department has examined the matter of cartelization of Power
tillers importers and no instances of cartelization have been noticed.
Dr A.K. Singh has been requested vide DO Letter No. 13-2/2014
dated 10.05.2018 to submit the report of the committee within

10
two weeks from the date of issue of the letter. Report is awaited.
The copy of the letter is at Annexure-X. The report will be submitted
after the same is received from the Committee. ”
1.17 While showing their concern over high prices of power
tillers in the country are far higher than their manufacturing or
import cost, the Committee had opined that huge profit margin
being earned by the imported power tillers goes against the aims of
the Government to enhance the level of agriculture mechanization
in the country and desired the Government to examine the issue in
details and take steps to lower the prices of power tillers in the
country. The Committee had also desired the Department to refer
the case to Competition Commission of India if cartelization is
suspected. The Department in their Action Taken Reply has submitted
about steps being taken by the Department for fixation of price of
power tillers. The Committee have been informed about criteria to
fix the Maximum sale price across the different States of the country
in respect of imported and indigenous Power tillers which was
unanimously agreed/recommended by the manufacturers & importers
of Power tillers in the country. The Committee were further informed
that matter of cartelization of Power tillers importers has been
examined by the Department and no instances of cartelization have
been noticed. However, the Department failed to furnish any
document in this regard.
The Committee are of view that Department has not taken note
of recommendation of the Committee for taking steps to lower the
prices of power tillers in the country, in their haste to fix the
maximum retail price. The Committee observe that criteria for
fixing MRP of power tillers agreed upon by the domestic
manufactures/importers are more than their existing price in the
market. The Committee are of view that Department is acting
contrary to the spirit of their recommendation regarding need to
take steps for lowering the prices of power tiller. Further, act of
the Department to rule out cartelization of manufacturers/importers
of power tiller without proper scrutiny shows lethargy on their part
towards recommendations contained in the Committee Reports. The
Committee, therefore, desire the Department to shun the process
of fixing of MRP of Power Tillers and examine the entire process of
price discovery of power tillers in Indian Market, steps required to
lower the prices   and cartelization of manufacturers/importers by
an expert Committee within three months of presentation of this
Report.

11
E. Subsidy Scheme for Agriculture Mechanization
Recommendation No. 7
1.18 The Committee had observed/recommended as under:—
“The Committee note that the Government is implementing sub
mission on Agriculture Mechanization in order to provide and
promote agriculture mechanization to provide financial assistance
to the farmers for purchase of agricultural machineries and
equipments, establish farm machinery bank for custom hiring,
training, testing and demonstration etc. Apart from SMAM, support
for agriculture mechanization is also being provided through other
schemes such as RKVY , NFSM, NHM and NMOOP . These schemes
provides for financial assistance of 40%, 50% subject to ceiling of
Rs. 40000-75000 to different categories of Farmers for purchase of
Power Tillers. The Committee appreciates the Government for
implementing various schemes to enhance the level of agriculture
mechanization in the country. The Committee hope that financial
assistance being provided to the farmers under the schemes will
go long way to encourage farmers to utilize efficient agriculture
equipments/machineries which will help to lower the cost of
production and thereby, enhancing the income of farmers. The
Committee note that SMAM is being implemented through the
State Governments. The respective State after assessing the
requirements of the State forward their Annual action plan duly
approved by the State level Executive Committee to DAC&FW. The
Committee were informed that DLEC of States are responsible for
project formulation, implementation and monitoring of the scheme
under guidelines of SMAM. The Committee note that SMAM envisage
Direct Benefit Transfer (DBT) for transfer of subsidy. The Committee
were informed that SMAM will be on boarded for DBT from
30 September 2017. The Department is developing online MIS for
implementing SMAM and same will be extended to the States which
are not having such system. The Committee further note that
States like Bihar , Odisha, Andhra Pradesh, Madhya Pradesh, Kerala,
and Karnataka have implemented online system for subsidy program
on agriculture mechanization. The Committee also note that scheme
guidelines of SMAM provides for complete freedom to the farmers
for purchase of agricultural equipments. However , the Committee
observe that process adopted by the Central and State Governments
for transfer of subsidy to the farmers is contrary to the guidelines
of the scheme. Under , the present system, the DAC&FW empanel
power tillers importers/manufacturers based on necessary testing

12
reports and forward the list to the State Government, who in turn
invite tender from the empanelled manufacturers/importers and
select lowest bidder (L1). The farmers have to purchase the power
tillers from the L1 Company only and then subsidy is transferred
to the account of Farmers. The Committee observe that farmers
do rarely have any say in the present system to purchase agriculture
equipments of their choice. Often, the prices of Power Tillers
empanelled by the State Governments are very high. This fact has
also been highlighted by the expert group and admitted by the
representatives of DAC&FW during the course of evidence. The
Committee have been informed that only Uttar Pradesh and
Maharashtra has system in place where farmers have choice to
select equipment and dealers of their choice. The Committee are
of view that present system of subsidy transfer under SMAM and
other schemes on agriculture mechanization has not been framed
keeping in view of interest of farmers. Present system of subsidy
is promoting unholy nexus of importers, distributors and dealers
who in connivance with Government officials are usurping the
benefits meant for farmers by artificially increasing the prices of
imported power tillers. Sub-standard and faulty power tillers
imported at Rs. 75,250-86,000 are being sold to the farmers for
Rs. 1,08,500-1,95,300, thereby, leaving the farmers deprived of
benefits meant for them. The Committee are of firm view that
present system of subsidy transfer should be changed in the interest
of farmers. Farmers should have complete freedom to choose the
agricultural machineries of their choice from the dealer who can
provide them satisfactory after sales service. The Committee,
therefore, recommend the Government to bring suitable changes
in SMAM and other schemes on agriculture mechanization for transfer
of subsidy directly to the farmers. The role of State Government
concerned should be limited to selection of beneficiary and transfer
of subsidy to the farmers on the basis of well laid down guidelines.
The Committee, therefore, desire the Government to bring suitable
changes in the guidelines of SMAM and other schemes as suggested.
The Committee would like to be apprised about the steps taken in
this regard with one Month of presentation of this report. ”
1.19 The Department of Agriculture, Cooperation and Farmers
Welfare in the Action Taken Reply has stated as under:—
“The Department has already developed online software for
implementation and monitoring of the SMAM activities. This will
limit the role of State Governments on selection and manipulation
of beneficiary and will ensure freedom of the beneficiary to select

13
any make and model of the machine as per his choice and
requirements. The application software is being extended to all
the State Governments. The workshops for hands on training on
the application software has been already organized on
4-5 December , 2017 in Chandigarh for the concerned officers State
Agriculture Departments Agricultural machinery manufacturers,
progressive farmers of northern States such as Punjab, Haryana,
Himachal Pradesh and Jammu & Kashmir and on 23-24, January,
2018 in Coimbatore for the Southern States such as Tamil Nadu,
Andhra Pradesh, Telangana, Kerala and Karnataka. Similar workshops
will also be organized shortly for the other States.
The DAC&FW, vide their letter No 9-1/2017-M&T (I&P), dated
11th May 2018 (Annexure-III) has directed the authority concerned
of the States to adhere to the guidelines of SMAM under P
ara 11.2.1 which ensures the transparent and fair empanelment
processes of the manufacturers and provides the freedom to the
farmers to select the machinery and equipments as per their choice.
Apart from the above the State authority concerned is also
requested for:—
• To ensure, the empanelled manufacturers must have
sufficient infrastructure to provide the after sale services
at reasonable cost in a time bound manner .
• The application software as designed & developed by this
division through NIC, on boarded on web portal https://
agrimachinery.nic.in shall be utilized for providing the subsidy
amount to farmers through DBT . ”
1.20 While observing lacuna in the process of transfer of subsidy
to the farmers under Sub-mission on Agricultural Mechanization
(SMAM) scheme which were contrary to the guidelines, the
Committee had opined that present system of subsidy transfer under
SMAM and other schemes on agriculture mechanization has not
been framed keeping in view of interest of farmers and recommended
the Government to bring suitable changes in SMAM and other schemes
on agriculture mechanization for transfer of subsidy directly to the
farmers. The Committee desired to limit the role of State Government
concerned only in selection of beneficiary and transfer of subsidy
to the farmers on the basis of well laid down guidelines.
The Department in their Action Taken Reply has submitted about
already known fact about online software for implementation and
monitoring of the SMAM activities which is to be used for online

14
transfer of subsidy. The Committee were also informed about
workshops being organized for hands on training for the concerned
officers State Agriculture Departments Agricultural machinery
manufacturers and progressive farmers of States. The Department
has also submitted about correspondence of DAC&FW with States to
adhere to the guidelines of SMAM under Para 11.2.1 which ensures
the transparent and fair empanelment processes of the manufacturers
and provides the freedom to the farmers to select the machinery
and equipments as per their choice and their request for ensuring
presence of sufficient infrastructure with empanelled manufacturers
to provide the aftersale services at reasonable cost in a time bound
manner.
The Committee note that Department has not submitted about
steps taken by them to bring changes in the system of empanelment
and selection of L1 Bidder for supply of agricultural machineries/
equipments under the SMAM scheme. The Committee are of view
that present system for empanelment and selection of L1 Bidder for
supply of agricultural machineries/equipments is faulty and against
the interest of farmers. Keeping in view of this, the Committee had
recommended to bring suitable changes in SMAM and other schemes
on agriculture mechanization for transfer of subsidy directly to the
farmers and limiting the role of State Government concerned only
in selection of beneficiary and transfer of subsidy to the farmers.
The Committee, therefore, once again reiterate their earlier
recommendation and desire the Government to bring suitable changes
in guidelines to do away the system of inviting bid for distribution
of agricultural equipments and selection of L1 bidder under SMAM
scheme. The role of Central and State Government should be
restricted to ensuring presence of supplier of qualitative machineries
and aftersales service. The Committee further desire the Department
to ensure Direct benefits Transfer under the scheme in all States/
UTs. The Committee would like to be apprised about steps taken in
this direction within one month of presentation of this Report.
F. Subsidy on small tractors below 20 BHP capacity
Recommendation No. 9
1.21 The Committee had observed/recommended as under:—
“In view of the fact there is need to provide subsidy on small
tractors below 20 BHP capacity as it will be more suitable to
fragmented nature of land holding in the Country. Availability of
subsidy on small capacity tractors to farmers will help to attract

15
educated young generation with agriculture background in rural
areas to the farming. The Committee, therefore, recommend the
Government to include tractors below 20 BHP in subsidy scheme on
the pattern of Power tillers. ”
1.22 The Department of Agriculture, Cooperation and Farmers
Welfare in the Action Taken Reply has stated as under:—
“More power may be required in heavy and black cotton soils,
hence, restriction of HP up to 12 of Power tillers, may leads to
complications. Moreover , 70% of power tillers are sold in the range
of 12-14 HP only. ”
1.23 The Department of Agriculture, Cooperation and Farmers
Welfare in their briefing before the Committee has submitted as under:—
“The tractors below 20 BHP are already eligible for subsidy under
the schemes of the Department. ”
1.24 The Committee are astonished to note the casual attitude
of the Department in submitting Action Taken Reply on the
recommendation regarding need to include tractors below 20 BHP
in subsidy scheme on the pattern of Power tillers. The Department
in their action Taken Reply has submitted their response on Power
Tiller rather than small Tractor below 20 BHP. However, the
Department in their submission before the Committee on 31.07.2018
has informed that tractors below 20 BHP are already eligible for
subsidy under the schemes of the Department. The Committee
deprecate this lackadaisical attitude of the Department and hope
such mistake would not be repeated in future.

16
CHAPTER II
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS THAT HAVE BEEN
ACCEPTED BY THE GOVERNMENT
Problems being Faced by the Farmers due to Imported Power Tillers
Recommendation No. 1
Our country has limited land resources available for agriculture
operations. We have to sustain around 16.5% of world population with
only 2.4% of total land areas. Considering, ever increasing rate of
population growth, there is urgent need to enhance agriculture
productivity per unit of land and thereby, increasing agriculture
production for even increasing population. Agricultural mechanization
helps to enhance agriculture intensity by reducing manual labour and
faster preparation of field after the harvesting. Availability of
sophisticated, qualitative and suitable agriculture machineries and
implementation according to the requirements of Indian farmers,
therefore, become imperative for enhancing agricultural mechanization
in the country. Further , considering the fragmented and small land
holdings in the country, there is need to make available small farm
equipments and machineries at reasonable prices to the farmers. In
this scenario, power tiller with its small size, convenience, less power
requirements and low prices become ideal agriculture equipment to
promote agriculture mechanization in the country. However, the
Committee note that farmers of the country are facing problems due
to poor quality of imported Chinese power tillers. The Committee
observe that Government of Bihar on representation by the farmers
association, had constituted a study by the experts of Rajendra
Agriculture University (RAU) to examine the issues related to problems
being faced by the farmers due to imported Chinese power tillers. The
Study conducted by the RAU has found these problems faced by the
farmers true and brought out many shortcomings in quality of Chinese
power tillers, lack of proper aftersale service, unavailability of spare
parts of Chinese Power Tillers, dominance of distributor and dealers in
selection of types of power tillers, lack of training to farmers etc.
Considering the gravity of problem, the Committee (2015-16) selected
the subject for examination. On insistence of the Committee, the
DAC&FW has constituted an Expert Group under the Chairmanship of
K. Alagusundaram to examine the issue. Expert committee in their
Report submitted to the Government has examined the issue

17
comprehensively and found many shortcomings such as ill defined norms
for checking quality of Power Tillers, absence of norms for testing
durability of power tillers, futility of repeat and supplementary test,
poor quality of imported Chinese power tillers, lack of aftersale service,
high rates being charged to the farmers, problems being faced by the
domestic power tiller industry, complicated system of subsidy scheme
on agriculture mechanization being followed by the State Government
etc. The expert Group has given various suggestions to improve the
scenario to ensure quality of power Tillers in the country. The Committee
in succeeding paragraphs have examined the issue and given their
recommendations, which, if implemented in true spirit, can help to
ensure availability of quality Power Tillers and other agriculture
equipments at reasonable prices to the farmers in the country.
Reply of the Government
There is no specific recommendation in the above Para of the
Committee. The Para is about the background note wherein problems
& issues of the farmers related to imported power tillers and details
of past meetings of the Parliamentary Standing Committee on Agriculture
is only summarized. There is no specific comments to offer.
[Ministry of Agriculture and Farmers Welfare (Department of
Agriculture, Cooperation and Farmers Welfare) O.M. No. 9-1/2009-
M&T (I & P) No. II dated 19.06.2018]
Strengthening of Quality Parameters and Testing Procedure of Power
Tillers
Recommendation No. 3
Ensuring availability of quality agriculture machineries and
implements is pre-requisite to instill confidence amongst farmers in
order to encourage them to adopt modern methods of agriculture
mechanization. The Committee, however , are perturbed to note that
sale of sub-standard imported Chinese power tillers has caused financial
loss to the farmers. The Committee note that expert group under the
Chairmanship of K. Alagusundaram has examined the issue of system
of quality testing quality parameters fixed for power tillers and found
many lacuna in the system. The expert group in their report submitted
to the Government has suggested various changes to change quality
parameters and to streamline the system of testing of power tillers.
The Committee have been informed that various suggestions such as
exact branding of imported/domestic manufactured power tillers,

18
random sampling for examination of quality testing, warranty of
2 years, minimum performance standard, batch testing, elimination of
repeat and supplementary test etc. have been changed and being
implemented by the testing agencies. The Committee have also been
informed that relevant standard for power tillers including chemical
composition and durability criteria has also been revised by the BIS.
The Committee note with satisfaction that the Government,
although late, has shown alertness to implement the changes required
for strengthening the quality parameters and streamlining the system
for testing of power tillers. The Committee hopes that these changes
will be stringently adhered to and implemented by the testing agencies
so that farmers of the country can be assured about quality of power
tillers and they do not incur financial losses due to sub-standard
imported power tillers. The Committee would like the Department to
present testing reports of all the empanelled power tillers under subsidy
schemes as per new standards within one month of presentation of
this Report.
Further , the Committee also desires the Department to incorporate
provisions for testing of power tillers in different soil conditions of the
country. The Committee would like to be apprised about steps taken
by the Department in this regard within three months of presentation
of this Report.
Reply of the Government
The instruction for testing of power tillers as per revised standard
was issued vide letter No. 11-3/2004-M&T (I&P), dated 24.08.2017.
(Copy is enclosed at Annexure-IV) and the testing as per new standards
has been started by the Southern Region Farm Machinery Training &
Testing Institute, Garladinne.
Taking into consideration of testing capacity of SRFMTTI, Anantapur ,
testing of all the power tillers in the empanelled list would take some
time. However , the test report No. PT-108/855, April 2018 in respect
of KIRLOSKAR KMW-MEGA T-12 LW Power tiller model is released as per
revised test standards is enclosed at Annexure-V for the reference of
the Committee.
Testing of power tillers in different soil conditions has already
been started and the test results are being included in the test reports.
[Ministry of Agriculture and Farmers Welfare (Department of
Agriculture, Cooperation and Farmers Welfare) O.M. No. 9-1/2009-
M&T (I & P) No. II dated 19.06.2018]

19
Role of DAC&FW in the Process of Empanelment of Power Tillers for
Subsidy under Scheme of Agricultural Mechanization
Recommendation No. 10
The Committee note under present system of subsidy transfer on
agriculture mechanization, the DAC&FW through the 4 Farm Machinery
Training and Testing Institute and 31 other indentified test centers
carry out the testing and performance evaluation of the agricultural
machineries. On the basis of these reports, the DAC&FW also prepare
a list of eligible manufacturers/Importers which are empanelled for
the subsidy schemes on agriculture mechanization. These lists prepared
by the Department become basis on which State Governments select
models/companies which farmers can purchase to get subsidy. However,
the Committee observe that due diligence is not being observed by the
Department for empanelment of power tillers eligible for subsidy as
expert group has also pointed out that many power tillers importers
have not submitted power tillers for 1st and subsequent batch testing
and still they continued to be eligible for subsidy scheme. When the
Committee instructed to the Department to submit relevant details
about power tillers empanelled during the last seven years, they have
been provided details of 2018 only. The Committee strongly deplores
this attitude of the Department and instruct them to supply all relevant
documents used for empanelment of power tillers for subsidy schemes
during the last seven years at the time of submission of action taken
replies.
Reply of the Government
The office orders regarding enlistment of power tillers for subsidy
during the last 7 years have already been submitted to the committee
along with the reply submitted for Review meeting of the Parliamentary
Standing Committee held on 17.01.2018. However , the copies of the
Office Orders are again enclosed herewith as Annexure XI for ready
reference.
[Ministry of Agriculture and Farmers Welfare (Department of
Agriculture, Cooperation and Farmers Welfare) O.M. No. 9-1/2009-
M&T (I & P) No. II dated 19.06.2018]

20
CHAPTER III
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO NOT
DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE GOVERNMENT ’S REPLIES
Recommendation No. 8
The Committee are also of view that keeping in view of fragmented
and small size of land holdings in the country, power tillers of low
capacity would be more suitable for encouraging farmers to adopt
power tillers in Agriculture operations. The Committee, therefore,
recommend the Government to restrict subsidy on power tillers below
12 HP capacity. The Committee also desire that the Government to
enhance the quantum of financial assistance for purpose of power
tiller from existing 40-50% to 50-60% of total cost of power tillers on
no maximum limit.
Reply of the Government
More power may be required in heavy and black cotton soils,
hence, restriction of HP up to 12 of Power tillers, may leads to
complications. Moreover , 70% of power tillers are sold in the range of
12-14 HP only.
The financial assistance is restricted percentage-wise and also on
fixed rate basis (maximum capping limit), to check & control
enhancement of price exuberantly for preparation of purchase bill at
dealers/traders end.
[Ministry of Agriculture and Farmers Welfare (Department of
Agriculture, Cooperation and Farmers Welfare) O.M. No. 9-1/2009-
M&T (I & P) No. II dated 19.06.2018]

21
CHAPTER IV
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF
THE GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE
Recommendation No. 4
Apart from availability of quality power tillers, facility for after
sales service and spare parts is utmost necessities for ensuring servicing
of warranty on power tillers. The Committee note that absence of
facilities for after sales service and availability of spare parts are one
of the missing link affecting farmers to adopt power tillers at large
scale. In this regard, the Committee have been assured by the
Department that they have taken steps for ensuring warranty of
2 years. And empanelment of only those manufacturers/importers that
have service centers. However , the Department failed to submit details
of service centers of empanelled power tillers companies across the
country. They have submitted details only about dealers of empanelled
power tillers rather than service centers. The Committee deprecate
this lackadaisical approach of the Department and desire them to
physically verify service centers of empanelled power tillers and submit
them before the Committee and take steps to remove guilty importers/
manufacturers/dealers from empanelled list. Further , the Committee
desire that farmers should be provided one site after sales service for
power tillers as movement to nearby service centers may be time
consuming and costly for farmers. The Committee would like the
Department to explore this possibility with manufacturers/importers.
The Committee would like to be apprised about steps taken by the
Department in this regard.
Reply of the Government
While preparing the Central list of eligible Power Tillers for
Government assistance programme latest COP and CMVR certificates
are verified.
The State Governments vide this Department ’s letter No. 9-1/
2009-M&T (I&P) dated 4.11.2017 followed by another letter on
12.12.2017 have also been requested to identify such importers and
take action against them. None of the State Government reported
violation. The copy of the letters are attached at Annexure VI.

22
The Committee under the Chairmanship of Asstt. Director General
has been constituted and visited to the manufacturing plant of Graves
Cotton Ltd. at Ranipet (TN) and Kirloskar Oil Engines Ltd., Pune and
observed that both the manufacturers are importing few parts from
China in unfinished condition with their own design and drawing and
machined and finished in India. There is no any irregularity observed
to the Committee. As regards to violation of laws related to Bureau
of Indian Standard and Consumer Protection Act, the matter has been
taken up with BIS and they are enquiring in the matter through their
appropriate department.
Comments of the Committee
For comments of the Committee please refer to Para No. 1.10 of
Chapter I of this Report.
[Ministry of Agriculture and Farmers Welfare (Department of
Agriculture, Cooperation and Farmers Welfare) O.M. No. 9-1/2009-
M&T (I & P) No. II dated 19.06.2018]
Recommendation No. 5
The Committee note that Expert Group under the Chairmanship of
K. Alagusundaram has pointed out that some of the manufacturers
have been listed as defaulters of Conformity of Production (CoP) on
account of not meeting the emission norms as per CMVR. Further ,
many importers have been found to be fudging details to misrepresent
imported power tillers as Indigenously manufactured and take benefits
of “Make in India ” programme of Government of India. The Committee
are of view that misrepresentation of country of origin of sub-standard
power tillers not only cause losses to the farmers, is also violation of
laws related to Bureau of Indian Standard and Consumer Protection
Act. The Committee, therefore, recommend the Government to initiate
enquiry to identify such violators and lodge criminal cases against
them to bring justice to the farmers. Such enquiry should also include
the importers which has been included in the empanelled list prepared
by the Department.
The Committee also recommend the Government to devise a
mechanism to ensure strengthening the process of authentication and
testing of power tillers and other agricultural equipments/machineries.
Such mechanism should at least include an independent expert and
farmers as representatives. The Committee also desire the Department
to take steps for making the process of testing of agricultural
equipments a transparent one. The Committee also desire the

23
Department to make the process of application for testing online and
upload all details on specific portal.
Reply of the Government
A one day workshop of all 4 FMTTIs and 32 approved test Centers
at SAUs/ICAR institutes and a State Agricultural Departments was
organized on 01.02.2018 all the issue and mechanism were discussed
of authentication and testing of different Agricultural machinery
including power tillers. A copy of the proceedings is enclosed at
Annexure VII.
In the next workshop, scheduled in August/September , 2018, the
progressive farmers, will also be invited for participation in that
workshop.
Comments of the Committee
For comments of the Committee please refer to Para No. 1.13 of
Chapter I of this Report.
[Ministry of Agriculture and Farmers Welfare (Department of
Agriculture, Cooperation and Farmers Welfare) O.M. No. 9-1/2009-
M&T (I & P) No. II dated 19.06.2018]
Pricing of Power Tillers
Recommendation No. 6
Majority of Indian farmers do belong to small and marginal category
who could hardly afford costly agriculture equipments and machineries.
In this scenario, power tillers with its flexibility, multi-purpose nature
and low cost could be ideal to enhance level of agriculture
mechanization in the country. However , the Committee observe that
prices of power tillers in the country are far higher than their
manufacturing or import cost. The Committee have been informed
that power tillers which are imported at Rs. 75,250-86,000 are being
sold at the rate of Rs. 1,08,500-1,95,000 in the market. Whereas,
indigenous power tillers with much higher cost of production are being
sold in the price range of Rs. 1,40,000-2,15,000. The Committee also
note that there is wide variation in selling prices of power tillers in
the country. The Committee also note that selling price of both
indigenous and imported power tillers is higher than the MRP indicated
by the manufacturers/suppliers. The Committee are of view that huge
profit margin being earned by the imported power tillers goes against

24
the aims of the Government to enhance the level of agriculture
mechanization in the country. The Committee, therefore, desire the
Government to examine the issue in details and take steps to lower
the prices of power tillers in the country. The Department should also
examine the issue with an angle of cartelization of power tillers
importers to enhance their prices. The Department should also refer
the case to Competition Commission of India if cartelization is
suspected. The Committee would like to be apprised about steps taken
by the Department within one month of presentation of this Report.
The Committee would also like the Department to expedite submission
of Report of A.K. Singh Committee constituted for the purpose to
examine the issue of uniform pricing of power tillers across the country.
Reply of the Government
The fixation of price of power tillers was initiated by this
Department. The issue has been discussed with the manufacturers in
the last three meetings convened on 31.01.2018, 08.05.2018 &
21.05.2018. After the detail discussions with Power tiller manufacturers
the criteria to fix the Maximum sale price across the different States
of the country in respect of imported and indigenous Power tillers, one
such criteria which is unanimously agreed/recommended by the
manufacturers & importers of Power tillers, is enclosed as Annexure-
VIII which is duly signed by the authorities concerned from the different
Power tiller manufacturers & importers. The copy of the last minutes
of meeting held on 21.05.2018 is also attached at Annexure-IX.
The Department has examined the matter of cartelization of Power
tillers importers and no instances of cartelization have been noticed.
Dr. A.K. Singh has been requested vide DO Letter No. 13-2/2014
dated 10.05.2018 to submit the report of the Committee within two
weeks from the date of issue of the letter. Report is awaited. The copy
of the letter is at Annexure-X. The report will be submitted after the
same is received from the Committee.
Comments of the Committee
For comments of the Committee please refer to Para No. 1.16 of
Chapter I of this Report.
[Ministry of Agriculture and Farmers Welfare (Department of
Agriculture, Cooperation and Farmers Welfare) O.M. No. 9-1/2009-
M&T (I & P) No. II dated 19.06.2018]

25
Subsidy Scheme for Agriculture Mechanization
Recommendation No. 7
The Committee note that the Government is implementing
submission on Agriculture Mechanization in order to provide promote
agriculture mechanization to provide financial assistance to the farmers
for purchase of agricultural machineries and equipments, establish
farm machinery bank for custom hiring, training, testing and
demonstration etc. Apart from SMAM, support for agriculture
mechanization is also being provided through other schemes such as
RKVY , NFSM, NHM and NMOOP . These schemes provides for financial
assistance of 40%-50% subject to ceiling of Rs. 40,000-75,000 to different
categories of Farmers for purchase of Power Tillers. The Committee
appreciates the Government for implementing various schemes to
enhance the level of agriculture mechanization in the country. The
Committee hope that financial assistance being provided to the farmers
under the schemes will go long way to encourage farmers to utilize
efficient agriculture equipments/machineries which will help to lower
the cost of production and thereby, enhancing the income of farmers.
The Committee note that SMAM is being implemented through the
State Governments. The respective State after assessing the
requirements of the State forward their Annual action plan duly approved
by the State level Executive Committee to DAC&FW. The Committee
were informed that DLEC of States are responsible for project
formulation, implementation and monitoring of the scheme under
guidelines of SMAM. The Committee note that SMAM envisage Direct
Benefit Transfer (DBT) for transfer of subsidy. The Committee were
informed that SMAM will be on board for DBT from 30 September,
2017. The Department is developing online MIS for implementing SMAM
and same will be extended to the States which are not having such
system. The Committee further note that States like Bihar , Odisha,
Andhra Pradesh, Madhya Pradesh, Kerala, and Karnataka have
implemented online system for subsidy program on agriculture
mechanization. The Committee also note that scheme guidelines of
SMAM provides for complete freedom to the farmers for purchase of
agricultural equipments. However , the Committee observe that process
adopted by the Central and State Government for transfer of subsidy
to the farmers is contrary to the guidelines of the scheme. Under , the
present system, the DAC&FW empanel power tillers importers/
manufacturers based on necessary testing reports and forward the list
to the State Government, who in turn invite tender from the empanelled
manufacturers/importers and select lowest bidder (L1). The farmers
have to purchase the power tillers from the L1 Company only and then

26
subsidy is transferred to the account of Farmers. The Committee observe
that farmers do rarely have any say in the present system to purchase
agriculture equipments of their choice. Often, the prices of Power
Tillers empanelled by the State Governments are very high. This fact
has also been highlighted by the expert group and admitted by the
representatives of DAC&FW during the course of evidence. The
Committee have been informed that only Uttar Pradesh and Maharashtra
has system in place where farmers have choice to select equipment
and dealers of their choice. The Committee are of the view that
present system of subsidy transfer under SMAM and other schemes on
agriculture mechanization has not been framed keeping in view of
interest of farmers. Present system of subsidy is promoting unholy
nexus of importers, distributors and dealers who in connivance with
Government officials are usurping the benefits meant for farmers by
artificially increasing the prices of imported power tillers. Sub-standard
and faulty power tillers imported at Rs. 75,250-86,000 are being sold
to the farmers for Rs. 1,08,500-1,95,300, thereby, leaving the farmers
deprived of benefits meant for them. The Committee are of firm view
that present system of subsidy transfer should be changed in the
interest of farmers. Farmers should have complete freedom to choose
the agricultural machineries of their choice from the dealer who can
provide them satisfactory after sales service. The Committee, therefore,
recommend the Government to bring suitable changes in SMAM and
other schemes on agriculture mechanization for transfer of subsidy
directly to the farmers. The role of State Government concerned should
be limited to selection of beneficiary and transfer of subsidy to the
farmers on the basis of well laid down guidelines. The Committee,
therefore, desire the Government to bring suitable changes in the
guidelines of SMAM and other schemes as suggested. The Committee
would like to be apprised about the steps taken in this regard with one
Month of presentation of this report.
Reply of the Government
The Department has already developed online software for
implementation and monitoring of the SMAM activities. This will limit
the role of State Governments on selection and manipulation of
beneficiary and will ensure freedom of the beneficiary to select any
make and model of the machine as per his choice and requirements.
The application software is being extended to all the State Governments.
The workshops for hands on training on the application software has
been already organized on 4-5 December , 2017 in Chandigarh for the
concerned officers, State Agriculture Departments Agricultural machinery
manufacturers, progressive farmers of northern States such as Punjab,

27
Haryana, Himachal Pradesh and Jammu & Kashmir and on 23-24, January,
2018 in Coimbatore for the Southern States such as Tamil Nadu,
Andhra Pradesh, Telangana, Kerala and Karnataka. Similar workshops
will also be organized shortly for the other States.
The DAC&FW, vide their letter No. 9-1/2017-M&T (I&P), dated
11th May, 2018 (Annexure-III) has directed the authority concerned of
the States to Adhere to the guidelines of SMAM under Para 11.2.1
which ensures the transparent and fair empanelment processes of the
manufacturers and provides the freedom to the farmers to select the
machinery and equipments as per their choice. Apart from the above
the State authority concerned is also requested for:—
* To ensure, the empanelled manufacturers must have
sufficient infrastructure to provide the after sale services
at reasonable cost in a time bound manner .
* The application software as designed & developed by this
division though NIC, on boarded on web portal https://
agrimachinery.nic.in shall be utilized for providing the subsidy
amount to farmers through DBT .
Comments of the Committee
For comments of the Committee please refer to Para No. 1.19 of
Chapter I of this Report.
[Ministry of Agriculture and Farmers Welfare (Department of
Agriculture, Cooperation and Farmers Welfare) O.M. No. 9-1/2009-
M&T (I & P) No. II dated 19.06.2018]
Recommendation No. 9
In view of the fact there is need to provide subsidy on small
tractors below 20 BHP capacity as it will be more suitable to fragmented
nature of land holding in the Country. Availability of subsidy on small
capacity tractors to farmers will be helpful to attract educated young
generation with agriculture background in rural areas to the farming.
The Committee, therefore, recommend the Government to include
tractors below 20 BHP in subsidy scheme on the pattern of Power
tillers.
Reply of the Government
More power may be required in heavy and black cotton soils,
hence, restriction of HP up to 12 of Power tillers, may lead to

28
complications. Moreover , 70% of power tillers are sold in the range of
12-14 HP only.
Comments of the Committee
For comments of the Committee please refer to Para No. 1.22 of
Chapter I of this Report.
[Ministry of Agriculture and Farmers Welfare (Department of
Agriculture, Cooperation and Farmers Welfare) O.M. No. 9-1/2009-
M&T (I & P) No. II dated 19.06.2018]

29
CHAPTER V
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH FINAL
REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT ARE STILL AWAITED
Compensation to the Farmers
Recommendation No. 2
The Committee note that the Government of Bihar , on the
representation of Farmers Association, had commissioned the study to
analyze problems being faced by the farmers due to sub-standard
imported Chinese Power Tillers. The study conducted by the RAU after
field work and discussion with the distributors, dealers of Power Tillers
and farmers have narrated the problems being faced by the farmers.
However , the Committee are astonished to note that the State
Government in their communication with Central Government is
reporting that no complaints has been received from farmers about
poor quality of power tillers. The Committee are of view that farmers
need to be compensated for losses incurred to them due to faulty
power tillers and guilty importers, distributors and dealers needs to be
punished. The Committee, therefore, recommends the DAC&FW to
constitute a high powered Committee headed by an independent expert
to examine the issue of substandard quality of power tillers being
supplied to the farmers in the country under Centrally sponsored
schemes on agriculture mechanization. Terms of reference to such
Committee must include issues such as identifying guilty importers,
distributors and dealers of power tillers and compensation to the
farmers. The Committee would like the Department to submit steps
taken in this regard within one month of presentation of this Report.
Reply of the Government
The Department has conducted a quick survey in the States of
Bihar , Odisha and Assam to assess the working condition of the power
tillers supplied under subsidy programmes.
In response to the report on the quick survey, the Government of
Bihar , and Assam, vide this Department ’s D.O. letter No. 9-1/2009-
M&T(I&P) dated 09.05.2018 and 14.05.2018 respectively (Copy enclosed
at Annexure-I & Annexure-II) have been asked to take necessary action
for the repair of the Power Tillers lying defunct due to frequent break
downs and non-availability of the Spare parts and service centers in
nearby markets.

30
No complaint observed in Odisha State.
Based on the recommendations of the committees, constituted for
quick survey in Odisha, Assam and Bihar States, the detailed
recommendation on the measures to be taken by State Governments
and Power tillers manufacturers/importers prior to empanelment of
the Power tillers for subsidy has been circulated vide letter No. 13- 2/
2014, dated 11.05.2018 to the authorities concerned of the States for
its strict compliance. The copy of the letter with Recommendations of
the committee is enclosed at Annexure-III.
Comments of the Committee
For comments of the Committee please refer to Para No. 1.7 of
Chapter I of this Report.
[Ministry of Agriculture and Farmers Welfare (Department of
Agriculture, Cooperation and Farmers Welfare) O.M. No. 9-1/2009-
M&T (I & P) No. II dated 19.06.2018]
Support to Domestic Power Tiller Manufacturing Industry
Recommendation No. 11
Existence of a robust domestic manufacturing base for production
of Agricultural equipments and machineries is utmost requirement for
availability of reliable, qualitative agricultural machineries at reasonable
prices to the farmers of the country. India has sizeable industry for
manufacturing of Agricultural equipments including Power Tillers. The
Government of India had supported establishment of industries for
manufacturing of power tillers in the country. The Domestic power
tiller industry has production capacity of around 85000 Power Tillers
per annum. However , the Committee note that domestic power tiller
industry are facing stiff competition from power tillers being imported
from China. The liberal import policy started in 1990s is helping Chinese
companies to capture market share of power tillers in the country.
Since 1995, when import of Chinese Power Tillers started, their market
share increased to around 32% at present and is growing. Due to lower
prices of Chinese Power Tillers and non-discriminatory subsidy support
being provided by the Government, domestic power tiller industry is
not able to utilize their full production capacity. It has led to a
situation where only two domestic power tiller manufacturers remained
viable till date. The Committee are of view that Domestic Power Tiller
Industries need to be provided all possible support so that they continue
to remain viable and support avowed aims of enhancing the level of

31
agriculture mechanization in the country. The Committee, in this regard,
have been informed that in post WTO world, no discriminatory policy
may be adopted to make imported power tillers ineligible from domestic
subsidy schemes. The Committee have also been informed that Expert
Group constituted under the Chairmanship of K. Alagusundaram has
recommended to explore possibilities for enhancing custom duties from
existing 7.5% to 25% to safeguard domestic power tiller industry. They
have also suggested for imposing quota restriction on import of Chinese
power tillers which is permissible under WTO rules. Apart from these,
lowering/abolition of GST on power tillers, technology and production
support to domestic power tiller industries are steps which can be
taken to safeguard and encourage Indigenous production of power
tillers in the country. The Committee have been informed that the
DAC&FW has requested the Government to enhance custom duty on
imported power tillers and lowering of GST on Indigenous production
of power tillers. The Committee are of view that unimaginative subsidy
scheme and laxity in fixing and enforcement of quality norms on
imported power tillers has encouraged scrupulous importers to take
benefits of the system and increase their share in domestic market for
power tillers. It has led to situation wherein, actual benefits of subsidy
reached to importers rather than farmers causing huge financial loss
to the farmers and domestic power tiller industry. The Committee are
of view that production support in terms of research inputs,
compensation of taxes paid, relaxation in income tax liabilities may be
extended to domestic Industry under “Make in India ” program. The
Committee, therefore, recommend the Government to take steps such
as lowering of GST on Indigenous Power Tillers, enhancing custom
duties on imported power tillers to 25% imposing quota restrictions on
import from China to 5-10% of total demand of power tillers in the
country, support to the domestic Industries in terms of research inputs
and production support. The Committee would like the Department to
vigorously take these proposals with Government to safeguard to support
domestic power tiller industry.
Reply of the Government
The proposal for enhancing custom duties from existing 7.5% to
25% to safeguard domestic power tiller industry has already been
submitted to the Department of Revenue, Ministry of Finance vide this
Department’s DO letter No. 9-1/2009-M&T (I&P) dated 9th November ,
2017 (Annexure-XII). The Secretary, Department of Revenue vide this
Department’s letter No. 13-12/2014-M&T (I&P) dated 24th May, 2018
(Annexure-XIII) has been requested to examine the matters regarding
increasing custom duty from 7.5% to 25% and also for fixing the import

32
quota to 10% of the total sale volume of the power tillers. The report
of the Committee has also been forwarded to the Department of
Revenue. The Department of expenditure is seized with the matter.
The proposal for reducing the rates of GST on the agricultural
machines and equipments has already been submitted to the Ministry
of Finance vide this Department ’s D.O. letter dated 14-8/2016-M&T
(I&P) dated 11th July, 2017 and again taken up with the Ministry of
Finance during the budget session 2018. The matter has been pursued
again based on the recommendation of the Committee. The copy of
the DO letter is at Annexure XIV .
[Ministry of Agriculture and Farmers Welfare (Department of
Agriculture, Cooperation and Farmers Welfare) O.M. No. 9-1/2009-
M&T (I & P) No. II dated 19.06.2018]
   N
EW D ELHI; HUKM DEV NARAYAN YADAV ,
02 August, 2018 Chairperson,
11 Shravana, 1940 (Saka) Standing Committee on Agriculture.

33
ANNEXURE I
Shri Ashwani Kumar
Joint Secretary
Government of India
Ministry of Agriculture and
Farmers Welfare
Department of Agriculture,
Cooperation and Farmers
Welfare
Krishi Bhawan,
New Delhi-110001
Telefax: 23385931
E-mail: ashwani.hub@nic.in
Jh v'ouh oqQekj
la;qDr lfpo
Hkkjr ljdkj
o`Qf"k ,oa fdlku dY;k.k ea=kky;
o`Qf"k] lgdkfjrk ,oa fdlku dY;k.k foHkkx
o`Qf"k Hkou] ubZ fnYyh&110001
Dear Sir,
A Quick Survey on the Power Tillers supplied under the Subsidy
programmes in the States of Assam was conducted on 20-25 February,
2018 by the Committee constituted vide office Order No. 9-1/2009-
M&T (I&P), dated 30th January, 2018 of DAC&FW, Ministry of Agriculture
and Farmers Welfare.
2. The Committee had conducted a Quick survey in four Districts
namely Sonitpur , Hojai, Nagaon and Karbi Anglong districts of Assam.
A total 164 power tillers were surveyed in four Districts.
3. Out of the 154 Power tillers Surveyed, 6 were in “Non-Working
Condition”. I am forwarding herewith the list of the details of the
beneficiaries whose Power tillers are lying in non-working conditions,
and need to be repaired on Priority.
4. Therefore, it is requested that you may kindly direct the
appropriate authorities concerned to repair power tillers in non-
functioning conditions through their manufacturers or Dealers or
Suppliers to put them in operation. Kindly, accord the priority to this
matter, and Action taken report may be furnished to this Ministry
before 30th of March, 2018.
D.O. 9-1/2009-M&T (I&P) Dated the 9th March, 2018

34
5. The further recommendations of the Ministry & Actions to be
taken in the matter will be communicated shortly.
With regards
Sd/-
(Ashwani Kumar)
To,
Shri K.K. Mittal
Additional Chief Secretary and Agriculture
Production Commissioner (APC)
Government of Assam
Dispur , Guwahati, Assam.

35
ANNEXURE I
LIST OF POWER TILLERS, WHICH ARE NOT WORKING
Sl. Name and Make & Date of Name Working If not Identification
No. Address Model of Purchase of th e Condition working Plate on
of the the Supplier then since Power Tillers
Farmers Power when and & its Details
Tiller its reason and Pattern
12 34 5 6 7 8
1. Bikram Teron/ Greaves 2012-13 EE(A) Not Sound in Eng. No.
Shyam son Teron 15-DI Diphu Working engine. A4D5O783PT
village- repairing of
Rongkamitir , crank done CH. No. -
Lumbajan Karbi A4D5O783 PT
Anglong
2. George Ronghang T exmo 2012-13 EE(A) Not Gear Box Eng. No.
Village Eragaon TKP-115 Diphu Working completely RT/120-
Since 2 damaged,
years no spare CH No.
back parts 123960
available
in local
market in
Guwahati
also
(Pinion)
3. Bichtira Rava Sarachi 2012-13 EE(A) Not Problem in Eng. No.
Village-Lmgyong, Sifang Diphu Working Gear Box 12102512
Langsompai FS-15 since 2 Engine CH No.
months Case 1/12/O1724
4. Hemani Haure Greaves Sept. EE(A) Not Major Eng. No.
Village-Lanki GS-15 2013/ Diphu Working engine A3H622125
Hamse, DILS 2014-15 repaired CH No.
Howrahghat 3 times. A3164409 PT
Gearbox,
Chain
Drive

36
5. Lt. Bora Singhe Sarachi 2014-15 EE(A) Not Engine not Eng. No.
Engti Sifang Diphu Working Started, 1551228
Village-Lomni Chain
Hamse, Broken CH No.
Howrahghat C/15/253120
6. Prabin Changma, Kamco 2012-13 EE(A) Not 4 months Eng. No.
Parakhowa Karbi Diphu Working due to 2913030847
Anglong clutch
Problem, CH No.
4 times in 3213031096
one year
12 34 5 6 7 8

37
Annexure
Recommendations of the Committee on quick field survey of power
tillers conditions:—
(i) MEASURES TO BE TAKEN BY STATE GOVERNMENT
(a) While empanelling the supplier of the Power Tillers from
the list provided by the Department of Agriculture,
Cooperation & Farmers Welfare it must be ensured that at
the district level the Dealer/Sub-Deater is available with all
the stock of the spare parts, service station, and sufficient
manpower for the service, mobile service van and training
arrangements. If no such facility is available in the particular
District with Dealer , the manufacturer should not be allowed
to sell the Power Tiller in that District.
(b) The manufacturer must have the full-fledged infrastructure
facilities to impart the long duration training programme at
least at Zone level so as to-cater-the-need of entire State
such as Training hall of capacity 20 trainees, all literature
in local language, charts, trained instructors, cut models,
safety charts, tools, etc.
(c) No manufacturer should be empanelled unless and until fulfils
the (a) and (b) above criteria.
(d) State Government may conduct intensive awareness for
popularizing the schemes on Mechanization.
(e) Proper awareness campaign on advantage about proper
storage of Power Tiller needs to be taken up.
(f) Needs to take adequate and intensive specific training
programmes and awareness campaign on operation, repair ,
Safety, maintenance of Power Tillers in Government Training
Institutes.
(g) It must be ensured that the country of origin is mentioned
on the labeling plate of Power Tiller. No manufacturer should
be empanelled unless and until fulfills this criteria.
(h) It must be ensured that “Not for road use ” as per CMVR
guidelines must be displayed on the Power Tiller. No
manufacturer should be empanelled unless and until fulfills
this criteria.

38
(i) Subsidy shouId be provided to only those beneficiary who
submits the certificate about completion of pre-delivery
training of 3 days duration at dealer on all the controls,
safety precautions, proper operation, day to day
maintenance, proper storage etc. of power tiller.
(j) A regular time to time field survey must be carried out by
State Government on the condition of Power Tillers and the
report in this regard must be submitted to DAC&FW.
(k) An online grievance mechanism along with its redressal
mechanism in time bound matter must be developed by
State Government.
(ii) MEASURES TO BE TAKEN BY POWER TILLER MANUFACTURER/
IMPORTER:
(a) At the district level the Dealer/Sub-Dealer must have ail
the stock of the spare parts, service station, and sufficient
manpower for the service, mobile service van and training
arrangements.
(b) At sub-dealer level all the stock of the spare parts, service
station, and sufficient manpower for the service must be
available.
(c) The manufacturer must have the full-fledged infrastructure
facilities to impart the long duration training programme at
least at Zone level so as to cater the need of entire State.
Such as Training hall of capacity 20 trainees, all literature
in local language, charts, trained instructors, cut models,
safety charts, tools, etc. The Training duration must be of
at least 2 weeks imparting the aspects on minor repair ,
maintenance, operation, various attachments etc. A
certificate in this regard must be provided to the trainee.
A proper record in this regards must be maintained by dealer
which can be verified by State agriculture Department time
to time.
(d) It must be ensured that the country of origin is mentioned
on the labeling plate of Power Tiller.
(e) It must be ensured that “Not for road use ” as per CMVR
guidelines must be displayed on the Power Tiller.
(f) Before delivery of power tiller , a training of at least three
days duration on all the controls, safety precautions, proper
operation, day to day maintenance, and proper storage must

39
be given at dealer level. A certificate in this regard must be
provided to the trainee. A proper record in this regards
must be maintained by dealer which can be verified by
State Agriculture Department time to time.

40
ANNEXURE II
Shri Ashwani Kumar
Joint Secretary
Government of India
Ministry of Agriculture and
Farmers Welfare
Department of Agriculture,
Cooperation and Farmers
Welfare
Krishi Bhawan,
New Delhi-110001
Telefax: 23385931
E-mail: ashwani.hub@nic.in
Jh v'ouh oqQekj
la;qDr lfpo
Hkkjr ljdkj
o`Qf"k ,oa fdlku dY;k.k ea=kky;
o`Qf"k] lgdkfjrk ,oa fdlku dY;k.k foHkkx
o`Qf"k Hkou] ubZ fnYyh&110001
D.O. 9-1/2009-M&T (I&P) Dated the 14th May, 2018
Dear Shri Sudhirji,
I may like to bring to your notice that a quick Survey on Power
tillers was conducted in the Bihar by the committee constituted at the
level of DAC&FW, Ministry of Agriculture & Farmers Welfare, in three
Districts, Madhubani, Nalanda and Darbhanga Districts of the States on
the direction of the Parliamentary Standing Committee on Agriculture.
As per the report of the committee, some of the Power tillers,
which are mostly imported power tillers, were lying defunct from
3 months and above due to frequent break downs, non-availability of
after sale service due to lack of dealers & service centers in nearby
markets, lack of technical knowhow of the farmers and lack of
mechanism to address the farmers ’ Grievances & Problems.
The list of such Power tillers were provided to your office with a
request to direct the authority concerned of the States/Districts to
get it repaired and put such power tillers in operations immediately.
The compliance report in this matter is still awaited (Copy enclosed).
Based on the quick Survey conducted by the Committee, the
recommendations of committee are enclosed which must be followed
by State Government and by Power tillers manufacturers/importers
during the processes of empanelment of manufacturers/importers.

41
It is further requested to direct the authorities concerned of the
State, to survey the conditions of the imported power tillers in the
remaining Villages/Blocks/Districts also, and may take the necessary
action against the power tiller manufacturers whose power tillers are
lying defunct due to frequent problems or frequent break downs in
power tillers, lack of after sale service, etc. at the level of dealers/
manufacturers to support & address the problems of the farmers on
Priority level.
With Regards
Sd/-
(Ashwani Kumar)
To,
Shri Sudhir Kumar
Principal Secretary,
Department of Agriculture, Government of Bihar
Vikas Bhawan, Bailey Road
Patna (Bihar)

42
ANNEXURE III
File No. 13-2/2014-M&T (I&P)
Government of India
Ministry of Agriculture & Farmers Welfare
Department of Agriculture, Cooperation & Farmers Welfare
(Mechanization and Technology Division)
Krishi Bhawan, New Delhi
Dated the 11th May, 2018
To,
All Principal Secretaries/Agricultural Production Commissioners/
Director of Agriculture/Director of Agriculture Engineering of all the
State Agriculture Departments
Sir/Madam
Subject: Problems being faced by the Farmers due to imported Power
tillers - Reg.
I may like to bring to your notice that the Parliamentary Standing
Committee on Agriculture has tabled their report on the Subject
“Variance in Cost and Quality of Agricultural Tools and Implements
being Provided Under Rashtriya Krishi Vikas Yojana (RKVY) and Problems
being faced by the Farmers due to imported Power tillers ” in April,
2018 and this Ministry has to submit the action Taken Report on the
Recommendation & Observations of the committee within a month
time.
As per the report some of the observations on lapses in
implementation of Scheme by the implementing Agencies/State
Governments have been made by the committee. The brief of such of
lapses are as summarized below:
(i) Some of the States are not following SMAM guidelines in
letter and spirit specially to provide complete freedom to
the farmers/beneficiaries for selection of Power tillers and
other Agricultural machinery and equipments as per their
choice as per SMAM clause 11.2.1.(v) “Complete freedom to
beneficiary will be available for selection of agricultural
machinery and equipment as per his/her choice ”. The States

43
follow the tender processes and empanel the manufacturers
quoted the L-1 rates and the farmers have to purchase the
Power tiller & other Agriculture machinery from those firms
only for availing the subsidy. Thus farmers do not have any
other choice in selection of the machinery & equipments.
(ii) The poor after sale service of such empanelled dealers and
the current system of Subsidy transfer is also matter of
concern which needs to be looked into.
Therefore, it is requested, that you may kindly direct the officers
concerned of the State Agricultural Departments to take necessary
action as corrective/preventive measures to avoid such lapses.
• Adhere to the well defined guidelines provided under Para
11.2.1.(v) of SMAM guidelines for empanelment of the
manufacturers to provide complete freedom to the farmers/
beneficiaries for selection of Power tillers and other
Agricultural machinery and equipments as per their choice.
• Kindly ensure, the empanelled manufacturers must have
sufficient infrastructure to provide the after sale service in
a time bound manner and service centers must be located
in entire State and have easy access to beneficiary. The
manufacturer which does not have such facility these
manufacturers should not be empanelled in your State in
spite they are figured in central subsidy list. Recommendation
of the Committee on quick field survey of Power tillers
conditions is enclosed which must be followed in letter and
spirit.
• The application software as designed & developed by this
division through NIC, on boarded on web portal https://
agrimachinery.nic.in shall be utilized for providing the subsidy
amount to farmers through DBT .
The officers concerned of the State Agriculture Department may
also be directed to furnish the Action Taken Report/compliance report
to this Division within three weeks from the date of issue of this
letter.
Yours faithfully,
Sd/-
(V .N. Kale)
Additional Commissioner (Machinery)
Kalevn2000@yahoo.co.in
Telefax: 011-23387200

44
ANNEXURE
Recommendations of the Committee on quick field survey of power
tillers conditions:
(i) Measures to be taken by State Government:
(a) While empanelling the supplier of the Power Tillers from
the list provided by the Department of Agriculture,
Cooperation & Farmers Welfare it must be ensured that at
the district level the Dealer/Sub-Dealer is available with all
the stock of the spare parts, service station, and sufficient
manpower for the service, mobile service van and training
arrangements. If no such facility is available at in the
particular District with Dealer , the manufacturer should not
be allowed to sell the Power Tiller in that District.
(b) The manufacturer must have the full-fledged infrastructure
facilities to impart the long duration training programme at
least at Zone level so as to cater the need of entire state.
Such as Training hall of capacity 20 trainees, all literature
in local language, charts, trained instructors, cut models,
safety charts, tools, etc.
(c) No manufacturer should be empanelled unless and until
fulfills the (a) and (b) above criteria.
(d) State Government may conduct intensive awareness for
popularizing the schemes on Mechanization.
(e) Proper awareness campaign on advantage about proper
storage of Power Tiller needs to be taken up.
(f) Needs to take adequate and intensive specific training
programmes and awareness campaign on operation, repair ,
Safety, maintenance of Power Tillers in Government Training
Institutes.
(g) It must be ensured that the country of origin is mentioned
on the labeling plate of Power Tiller. No manufacturer should
be empanelled unless and until fulfills this criteria.
(h) It must be ensured that “Not for road use” as per CMVR
guidelines must be displayed on the Power Tiller. No
manufacturer should be empanelled unless and until fulfills
this criteria.

45
(i) Subsidy should be provided to only those beneficiary who
submits the certificate about completion of pre-delivery
training of 3 days duration at dealer on all the controls,
safety precautions, proper operation, day to day
maintenance, proper storage etc. of power tiller.
(j) A regular time to time field survey must be carried out by
State Government on the condition of Power Tillers and the
report in this regard must be submitted to DAC&FW.
(k) An online grievance mechanism along with its redressal
mechanism in time bound matter must be developed by
State Government.
(ii) Measures to be taken by Power Tiller manufacturer/importer:
(a) At the district level the Dealer/Sub-Dealer must have all
the stock of the spare parts, service station, and sufficient
manpower for the service, mobile service van and training
arrangements.
(b) At sub-dealer level all the stock of the spare parts, service
station, and sufficient manpower for the service must be
available.
(c) The manufacturer must have the full-fledged infrastructure
facilities to impart the long duration training programme at
least at Zone level so as to cater the need for entire state.
Such as Training hall of capacity 20 trainees, all literature
in local language, charts, trained instructors, cut models,
safety charts, tools, etc. The Training duration must be of
at least 2 weeks imparting the aspects on minor repair ,
maintenance, operation, various attachments etc. A
certificate in this regard must be provided to the trainee.
A proper record in this regards must be maintained by dealer
which can be verified by State agriculture Department time
to time.
(d) It must be ensured that the country of origin is mentioned
on the labeling plate of Power Tiller.
(e) It must be ensured that “Not for road use” as per CMVR
guidelines must be displayed on the Power Tiller.
(f) Before delivery of power tiller , a training of at least three
days duration on all the controls, safety precautions, proper
operation, day to day maintenance, and proper storage must
be given at dealer level. A certificate in this regard must be
provided to the trainee. A proper record in this regards
must be maintained by dealer which can be verified by
State agriculture Department time to time.

46
ANNEXURE IV
Subject: Draft Test Code of IS-13539 Power Tillers-Recommendations
Selected Performance Characteristics—reg.
From: kalevn2000@yahoo.co.in
To: fad11@bis.gov.in; fad@bis.org.in; pawan.k@bis.gov.in; fmti-
mp@nic.in; fmti-sr@nic.in; iyengar@vsttillers.com; fmti-
nr@nic.in; ner-fmtti@nic.in; sathyamurthy@vsttillers.com
Cc: anmeshram2000@yahoo.com; choprapk1961@yahoo.co.in;
pkverma00@gmail.com; cr.ohi@nic.in
Date: Tuesday, 29 August, 2017, 7:09:19 PM IST
F.No. 11-3/2004-M&T (I&P)
Government of India
Ministry of Agriculture and Farmers Welfare
Department of Agriculture, Cooperation and Farmers Welfare
(Mechanization & Technology Division)
Dated: 24th August 2017)
Subject: Draft Test Code of IS-13539 Power Tillers-Recommendations
Selected Performance Characteristics—reg.
Reference to your e-mail dated 5th April, 2017 on the subject as
mentioned above and I am to forward herewith the Revised Draft of
the test code IS 13539 2008 Power Tillers-Recommendations Selected
performance Characteristics after discussion and review of the
comments with the committee members of the panel constituted during
the meeting of Committee of FAD-11 of BIS on 3rd October , 2016.
Necessary amendments as per the inputs received from members of
the panel and officers of M&T Division have been incorporated in the
draft Test Code of IS-13539. You are requested kindly take up the
matter for the notificaton of the test code on priority.
This is issued with the approval of competent authority of this
Department.
Sd/-
(V .N. Kale)
Additional Commissioner (Machinery)

47
Enclosures: As above
To,
ER. Pawan Kumar
Scientist B & Member Secretary FAD-11
Food and Agriculture Department, BIS
Manak Bhawan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg,
New Delhi-110002
Copy to
Director (Budni/Hisar/Anantpur/Assam):
Implement the above draft test code IS-13539-2008 at FMTTIs with
immediate effect till its final notification by BIS.
Sd/-
V.N. KALE
Additional Commissioner (Machinery)
Mechanisation & Technology Division
Deptt. of Agriculture, Cooperation & Farmers Welfare,
Ministry of Agriculture and Farmers Welfare
Government of India
Krishi Bhavan, Room No. 298, New Delhi-110001
Phone: 011-23387200

48
ANNEXURE V
File No. 9-1/2009-M&T (I&P)
Government of India
Ministry of Agriculture & Farmers Welfare
Department of Agriculture, Cooperation & Farmers Welfare
(Mechanization and Technology Division)
Room No. 573, Krishi Bhawan, New Delhi
Dated: 4th November , 2017
To,
The Principal Secretary,
All State Government & UTs
(As per list)
Sub.: Variance in Cost and Quality of Agricultural Tools and
Implements being provided to the farmers under Rashtriya
Krishi Vikas Yojana (RKVY) and Problems being Faced by Farmers
due to Imported Power Tillers — A Review—reg.
Sir,
I am directed to inform that the Parliamentary Standing Committee
on Agriculture has taken up the above subject for examination during
its meeting on 2nd November 2017. The committee raised number of
issues with regard to cost & quality of imported power tillers. It has
also been pointed out that some companies sell Chinese power tillers
under their logo as Indian power tiller which is not acceptable.
2. Accordingly, it is requested that the State Department of
Agriculture may take up the survey to find power tillers and companies
involved in such practices and take appropriate action against them
under the intimation to this Ministry.
3. An action taken report in the matter may kindly be communicated
to this Department within 30 days from the issue of this letter.
Yours faithfully,
Sd/-
(A.N. Meshram)
Dy Commissioner (M&T)
Tel: 23382922

49
ANNEXURE VI
No. 13-1/2017-M&T (I&P)
Proceedings of One Day Workshop of the Approved Test Centres
held on 1st February, 2018
A one day Workshop under the Chairmanship of Shri Ashwani Kumar ,
Joint Secretary (M&T) was held on 1.2.2018 at NASC Complex, PUSA,
New Delhi. The Agenda of the workshop were as below:—
• To review the progress of the approved centres.
• To assess the future requirements for testing of farm
machinery.
• To review the action taken reports on the actionable points
of the earlier meetings.
• To address the various issues and problems of the test
centres.
• To invite the suggestions for the improvement of the quality
to ensure quality of the agricultural machinery supplied
under the various Government schemes.
• To determine the validity of the test reports.
2. At the outset, Shri V .N. Kale, ADC (Machinery) welcomed the
participants and briefed the agenda. The list of the participants is
enclosed at annexure-I. The JS(M&T) in his opening remarks, he
highlighted the following points:—
Out of the 32 approved Test centres, by DAC&FW at SAUs & ICAR
institutes, about 4 centres have yet to take off and the authorities
concerned are directed to give the reasons for the same.
Non uniformity in the formats of the test reports of the approved
test centres have been noticed which needs to be regularized in
consultation with the testing authorities of their nodal FMTTIs.
Irregularities in submission of monthly progress report and uploading
of progress report of the test centres on the websites that need to
regularized and all the monthly and periodical progress reports along
with the copy of the test reports may be forwarded to his Ministry

50
before the 5th day of every month which is essential to ensure
transparency in testing protocols, assessment of pendency and need
for future requirements.
The test centres needs to develop “in house ” test facility for
material testing. If such testing facilities are out sourced, it must be
either from a Government Agency or test lab duly approved/accredited
by NABL/BIS etc.
Quality Specification of critical components like Rotavator Blades,
rotor shaft diameter and gear box of Agricultural machinery call for
revision of its relevant Standards, at par with the standards followed
at international level. The “upper limits ” of the critical performance
parameter may be taken in the relevant codes to ensure the quality
of the indigenous farm machineries.
He advised to all the testing authorities of FMTTIs and approved
test to take up the formulation of test codes, of the farm machinery
for which the test codes are not available. These test codes may be
shared with all Stakeholders before submitting the technical committee
of this Ministry and forwarding the final draft to BIS.
To review the list of the Testing instruments for test centres at par
with the international technologies to update the testing infrastructural
facilities at test centres.
Prior approval of the Ministry is necessary for any change in location
or name of the test centre is mandatory.
The number of Machineries tested by the Test centres must
commensurate with the infrastructural test facilities specifically in
terms of trained/Skilled manpower available at the test centres to
avoid any doubt of element in following testing protocols.
Any funds released to the test centres or States by DAC&FW may
be utilized within 2 years including the revalidation of the unspent
balance in next successive year in which the fund was released.
Testing Authorities of test centres in SAUs and ICAR are advised to
develop low cost & high quality Agricultural Machinery for the local
farmers which are being imported and authority from FMTTIs may also
be involved in such projects. Initially 1 or 2 such imported implements
which are high value & popular in their region may be identified for
their R&D work.

51
He also invited the suggestions from all the participants from the
test Centres and State Government to check the import of the low
quality farm machinery in India.
It was advised to organize at least one or two workshop every year
for smooth functioning and monitoring of the test Centres.
3. After the opening remarks of the Chairman, Shri V .N. Kale,
Additional Commissioner (Machinery) gave a Power Point Presentation
highlighting the action taken reports on the various issues,
recommendations of the earlier workshops and the progress of the
various Committees, constituted during the last workshop.
4. Thereafter , authorities concerned of the various test centres
were invited presentation to give the details of the year-wise progress
with the various issues related to their test Centres. The latest updated
Status of the test centres is summarized and may be referred at
Annexure-II.
Different issues of the Test centres addressed during the workshop
are as below:—
Sl.No. Issues Comments of M&T Division
12 3
1. Shri G.K. Pidiha, Jt. Director (Engg) from
Chhattisgarh, requested for recognition of
their test centre for Processing Machinery
& P .P . equipments.
Also, he informed that the Dangerous
Machinery Act is not applicable in
Chhattisgarh State and the Agricultural
Machinery Covered under the Acts are not
accepted from the manufacturer of
Chhattisgarh in State of Madhya Pradesh
where, Dangerous Machinery Act is
applicable. He requested the Ministry to
look into the matter.
2. Dr. T .D. Mehta, Asstt. Prof. Test Engineer ,
CAET , Junagadh, has informed that they
have developed the facility for Boom
Sprayers and PHT equipments and sought
the approval to test the same.
Detailed Proposal may be forwarded to the
Ministry.
Advised to submit a self content proposal this
would be examined by this Ministry to resolve
the issue quickly.
A fresh Proposal may be forwarded to this
Ministry.

52
12 3
3. Dr . S.N. Yadav , Prof. & Testing Incharge,
CAEPHT , Gangtok, informed that they have
developed the testing facilities but
application for testing from any of the
manufacturer is still awaited.
4. Dr. S.M. Mathur, Prof. & I/C test Centre,
CTAE Udaipur sought an approval to test PP
equipments for which the facilities have
already been developed and the proposal
was submitted to this Ministry last year
2016-17.
5. Testing Centres Authorities, from SAUs
requested to include activities of the testing
as a part of professional work/academic
works of the University for assessment &
review of their annual work/assessment
reports.
6. Dr. T . Senthil Kumar , Principal Scientist and
Head Test RTC-CIAE Bhopal, Coimbatore,
requested an approval of their test Centre
for Processing machinery for which a project
proposal has already been submitted to this
Ministry.
7. Representatives from test Centres sought a
clarification on GST applicable on Test fee.
8. Er. Mukesh Jain, Assistant Prof. & test
engineer , CAET , HAU Hisar  requested, to
review annual increase of testing fee by
15% due to which testing fees of small low
cost machinery & equipments have
increased substantially, even 2 to 3 times
of the cost of the equipment. He also
requested for issue of approval for their
lab for Plant Protection equipments.
Director, NERFMTTI, Biswanath Chariali, may look
into the issue and the manufacturers in NE States
may be informed about the Test Centre and its
facilities.
The fresh Proposal may be forwarded to this
Ministry.
During, the last workshop, a Committee was
constituted under the Chairmanship of Dr. Indra
Mani, Principal Scientist & Head, Deptt. Of Agri.
Engg, IARI to look into the matter. However ,
Dr. Indramani informed that he did not receive
any communication in this regard and requested
a fresh copy of the letter issued and assured a
quick response in the matter.
It was also advised a D.O. letter in this regard,
at the level DAC&FW may also be issued to the
Vice Chancellors of the respective SAUs.
Proposal will be examined and action will be
taken in due course of time.
Notification No. 12/2017-Central Tax rate, dated
28th June, 2017 as amended up to 14th
November , 2017, of Ministry of Finance,
Government of India is provided to the Centres.
The Testing fee is independent to the cost of
equipments. It is worked, out on the basis of
recurring & non recurring expenditures involved
in testing processes as per the test code of the
equipment.
As regard the approval of their Plant Protection
Test lab, a fresh proposal may be submitted to
this Ministry.

53
12 3
9. Er. Alok Das, Test Engineer, SLTC, Orissa,
pointed out that “Testing Charges” of some
of the Processing equipments for which
applications have been received at their
test centres, are not given in SMAM
Guidelines.
10. Shri T . Murgeson, Supdt. Engineer ,
Directorate of Agri. Engineering, T .N. and
Dr . D. Asokan, Prof & Head, Agril Engineering
College, TNAU Trichy, requested to recognize
their Centre for PHT equipments.
11. Shri Vipin Laddha, Agri. Eng. FIMTT , SKRK
University, Bikaner has sought an approval
for their plant protection equipments.
Advised to work out the details of the test fee
of such processing machinery and forward the
same with a self content proposal for the
approval of this Ministry.
Requested to submit the proposal in this regard.
Requested to submit the proposal in the matter .
5. After the long deliberations and discussions the following
recommendations were made:—
(a) Monthly and periodical reports of the testing activities will
be submitted on regular basis on every first day of the
month through email which will be followed by hard, copy
of the same and uploading the same on their websites. The
link of the web-site will be shared by test centre to DAC&FW.
(b) The validity of the test report in respect of agricultural
machinery except tractor , power tillers and combine
harvester would be for five years w.e.f. 1.04.2018. All the
machinery tested prior to April 2013, will have to go under
retesting if their model is continuing without Change in
specification. The grace period of one year will be provided
for retesting of the machinery from the date of expiry of
the validity. The same will come in force after the approval
of the competent authority and will be communicated in
the due course of time.
(c) The test codes of the machineries would be prepared by the
Testing Authorities of the Testing Centres mentioned against
the Test Codes. The Test draft test codes will be reviewed
& examined by the regional Technical committees that would
be constituted under the Chairmanships of the Directors of
the respective FMTTIs and the draft approved by these

54
committee would be forwarded to the DAC&FW for vetting
and forwarding the same to the BIS after the approval of
the competent authority.
Sl.No. Test Centres Codes of the Machinery
12 3
1. Director, NRFMTTI, Hisar Balers
2. College of Agricultural Engineering and Hey Rakes
Technology, Punjab Agricultural University, Rice Straw chopper
Ludhiana (Punjab). Stubble sever/Shredder
and Multure.
3. CAET , CCSHAU, Hisar M.P .S. of Threshers
4. Director SRFMTTI, Anantapur Post Hole Digger
Brush Cutter
5. CIAE, Bhopal Vegetable Transplanter
Raised bed planter
Plastic mulching machine
6. Central Institute of Post harvest Engineering Seed Cleaner cum grader
and Technology (CIPHET), PAU campus Grain cleaner cum drier
Ludhiana (Punjab). Forage Harvester
7. IIT-Kharaghpur P addy par Boiling
machine
8. Tamil Nadu Agricultural University, Coimbatore Turmeric Boiler
(Tamil Nadu)/CAET , Trichy Millet Mill
Turmeric Polisher
9. Farm Machinery Testing Center, ICAR-Central Vegetable Washer
Institute of Agricultural Engineering, Regional
Center. Sugarcane Breeding Institute-
Coimbatore
10. Farm Machinery Testing Centre, Kerala Ridge Plastering
Agricultural University Kelappaji College Equipment
of Agricultural Engineering & Technology Tree Climber
Tavanur, Malappuram Automatic Nursery
Raising Machine
Minimum performance
Standard of the above
machine

55
11. College of Technology and Agricultural Engineering, Fertilizer Broadcaster
Maharana Pratap, University of Agriculture and Seed dressing drum
Technology, Udaipur (Rajasthan). Earthing up machine
Bund former
12. College of Agricultural Engineering and Technology, Motor Operated hold on
Dr. Balasaheb Sawant Konkan Krishi Vidyapeeth, type Paddy Thresher
DAPOLI. Maharashtra Dapoli Motor Operated hold on
type Paddy Thresher-cum
winnower Dehusker
13. College of Agricultural Engineering and Technology, Solar drier
Orissa University of Agriculture and Technology, Evaporative low energy
Bhubaneswar (Orissa) cooling System
Fruit Vegetable Grader
Pre-germinated Seeder
drier
14. Director, CFMTTI, Budni Stip till Drill
15. Dr. A.S. College of Agricultural Engineering Groundnut Digger
Mahatma Phule Krishi Vidyapeeth, Rahuri, Onion Digger
Distt. Ahmednagar , Maharashtra (MPKV) Rotavator Blade
Tractor operated Intra
and inter-row weeder
16. College of Technology Gobind Ballabh Pant Sub Soiler
University of Agriculture and Technology,
Pantnagar (Uttaranchal)
17. Farm Implements and Machinery Testing & Onion seeder cum
Training Centre, Central Workshop, Swami Planter
Keshwanand Rajasthan Agricultural University, Manure Spreader
Bikaner (Rajasthan)
18. College of Agricultural Engineering and Post Root wash type Rice
Harvest Technology, (CAEPHT), Gangtok Transplanters
19. College of Agricultural Engineering & Technology, Rotary Power harrow
Junagarh Agricultural University, Junagarh
(Gujarat)
20. Division of Agricultural Engineering, Indian Feed Block Machine
Agricultural Research Institute, New Delhi-12.
21. Prof. Jayashankar Telengana State Agricultural Groundnut Planter
University (PJTSAU), FMTC, Hyderabad Herbicide Applicator
12 3

56
(d) All the test centres will formulate the test codes as above
and forward the same to respective FMTTIs. In the 2nd
week of April, 2018, the Directors, FMTTIs will call the
meetings of the Committee to finalize the first draft and
approved draft to be forwarded before the end of 3rd week
of April, 2018 to DAC&FW.
(e) Selection of Test Sample through the Random sampling will
be mandatory for all test centres. Cost of the to and fro
charges of the staff going for random sampling has to be
borne by the respective manufacturer.
(f) All the test codes will include the Minimum performance
Standards to determine the quality of the machinery.
(g) The next workshop will be organized by the State level
Agriculture Implement Testing Centre, Agriculture
Department, Government of Chhattisgarh, at Raipur in the
month of August-September , 2018.
(h) For development of infrastructure for testing of fractional
horsepower engine, a proposal may be obtained from
interested testing centres for consideration.
Meeting ended with vote of thanks to the Chair.

57
ANNEXURE VII
To whom it may Concern
We, the manufacturers of power tillers Manufacturers/Importers
of the power tillers unanimously agreed during the meeting held on
21.05.2018 under the Chairmanship of Shri Ashwani Kumar,
Joint Secretary to fix the post of the power tillers imported and
indigenous models for participating under the Government Subsidy
programmes as per the details given below:—
1. Imported power tillers= Actual landed cost (Billing/imported
Cost) + Rs. 40000 overhead expenses (dealers & manufacturers margin
+ two years warranty + custom Clearance Expenses + Marketing Expenses
+ Service Charges + 3 days Training Programme to the farmers at
dealers/manufacturers etc.) + Actual Accessories Charges not exceeding
Rs. 10000 (Cage wheel/lugged Wheel + Float + Seat) + 12% GST +
Transportation Charges.
2. Indigenous power Tillers =  Production Cost Rs. 160000 per Unit
(material Cost + manufacturing Overhead + Administrative Cost +
marketing Expenses + Dealers & Company Margin + R&D Expenses etc.)
+ GST + Transportation + Accessories as per the Actual Cost but not
exceeding Rs. 10000 (Cage wheel/lugged Wheel + Float + Seat).

58
ANNEXURE VIII
Minutes of the meeting held on 21.05.2018 at 2 P.M. to 5 P.M. in
Conference Hall, Room No. 142 , DAC&FW, Krishi Bhavan with Power
tillers manufacturers to discuss the various Recommendation on the
Power tillers given in the report of the Parliamentary Standing
Committee on Agriculture
A meeting was convened under the Chairmanship of Shri Ashwani Kumar,
JS(M&T) on 21st May, 2018 at 2.00 P .M. in Room No. 142, Ministry of
Agriculture and Farmers Welfare, Krishi Bhawan, New Delhi. The agenda
points of the meeting were as below:—
(i) To discuss the proposal for uniform prices of imported,
indigenous power tillers to be submitted by Shri B. Iyengar ,
Secretary, PTMA and his team.
(ii) Review of service centers of each manufacturer/importer .
(iii) Definition to classify indigenous and imported power tillers.
(iv) To resolve grievances of manufacturers with State
Governments.
(v) Other issues with the permission of the Chairperson.
2. At the outset of the meeting Shri Ashwani Kumar, JS(M&T)
welcomed the participants and briefed about the background of the
meeting and the relevant issues of the Power Tillers. Out of the
14 Power tillers manufacturers; whose test reports for Power tillers
models are enlisted and eligible to participate in Government Schemes,
only M/S Indtec Electro Control, Hoshiarpur did not have their
representation in the meeting. List of the participants is at
Annexure I.
3. Taking into consideration the recommendations of the last two
meetings, on 15.11.2017 and 08.05.2018 and the discussion on proposals
received from PTMA, the Power Tiller Manufacturers and importers
were unanimously agreed the criteria for fixation of uniform maximum
retail price of the imported and indigenous power tillers across the
different States of the country as per the details given below:—
• Imported power tillers = Actual landed cost (Billing/imported
Cost) + Rs. 40000 overhead expenses (dealers &
manufacturers margin + two years warranty + custom

59
Clearance Expenses + Marketing Expenses + Service Charges
+ 3 days Training Programme to the farmers at dealers/
manufacturers etc.) + Actual Accessories Charges not
exceeding Rs. 10,000 (Cage wheel/lugged Wheel + Float +
Seat) + 12% GST + Transportation Charges.
• Indigenous power Tillers =  Production Cost Rs. 160000 per
Unit (material Cost + manufacturing Overhead +
Administrative Cost + marketing Expenses + Dealers &
Company Margin + R & D Expenses etc.) + GST +
Transportation + Accessories as per the Actual Cost but not
exceeding Rs. 10000 (Cage wheel/lugged Wheel + Float +
Seat).
A copy of the agreed criteria as above, duly signed by the
representatives authority concerned of Power Tiller manufacturers/
Importers is at Annexure-II.
4. Final remarks of the Chairman:
(a) As regards, details of the service centers and dealers
network, except M/s Southern Agro Engineer Pvt. Ltd.,
Chennai, Samyak Motors Pvt. Ltd., Coimbatore and M/s Indtec
Electro Control, Hoshiarpur , all other Power tillers
manufacturers & importers have provided the details of
their dealers/service centre networks. Representatives from
M/s Southern Agro Engineer Pvt. Ltd. Chennai and Samyak
Motors Pvt. Ltd., Coimbatore, have been advised to expedite
their information of their dealers/service centre details
within 2 days. Further , it was also directed to make telephone
call to the authority concerned of M/S Indtec Electro Control,
Hoshiarpur (Pb), to take the details and to give his consent
in writing on price fixation criteria agreed by the
manufacturers and importers of Power Tillers, and to furnish
the information in the desired format with regards to their
dealers network, failing which the name of the firm will be
deleted from the list of the test reports, eligible for subsidy.
(b) It was also advised to Manufacturers that the Power Tiller
models which are due for batch test in 2018, the test sample
must be submitted atleast six months in advance at SRFMTTI,
Anantapur so as to ensure, the batch test of their models
are completed in due course of time. The Power Tiller models
for whom the batch test is due within three months, may
submit their test sample within 15 days without any further

60
delay failing which their name of the firm will be deleted
from the list of the tested power tillers, eligible for financial
assistance on their power tillers under the different
Government Schemes.
(c) The copy of the agreed criteria for fixation of MRP in
different States may be circulated to the all authorities
concerned of the respective State Governments for their
information and compliance.
Meeting ended with thanks to the Chair .

61
ANNEXURE IX
Shri Ashwani Kumar
Joint Secretary
Government of India
Ministry of Agriculture and
Farmers Welfare,
Department of Agriculture,
Cooperation and Farmers
Welfare
Krishi Bhawan,
New Delhi-110 001
Jh v'ouh oqQekj
la;qDr lfpo
Hkkjr ljdkj
o`Qf"k ,oa fdlku dY;k.k ea=kky;
o`Qf"k] lgdkfjrk ,oa fdlku dY;k.k foHkkx
o`Qf"k Hkou] ubZ fnYyh&110 001
D.O. No. 13-2/2014-M&T (I&P) Dated: 10.5.2018
Dear Dr . Singh,
The Department of Agriculture and Cooperation has constituted an
High Powered Committee under your Chairmanship to look into the
various issues of Power Tillers vide order No. 13-2/2014-M&T , dated
21st April, 2018.
The Parliamentary Standing Committee on Agriculture has tabled
their report on the Subject “Variance in Cost and Quality of Agricultural
Tools and Implements being Provided Under Rashtriya Krishi Vikas Yojana
(RKVY) and Problems being faced by the Farmers due to imported
Power tillers” in April 2018 and this Ministry has to submit the action
Taken Report on the Recommendations & Observations of the Committee
within a month time.
Therefore, you may kindly accord priority to the matter and prepare
the detailed report of the Committee with recommendations and
requested to submit to this Ministry within two weeks from the date
of issue of this letter.
With regards, Yours sincerely,
Sd/-
(Ashwani Kumar)
Dr. A.K. Singh
Deputy Director General (Extension)
ICAR, Krishi Anusandhan Bhawan-II-Pusa
New Delhi-110 012

62
ANNEXURE X
No. 13-37/200-My (I&P)
Government of India
Ministry of Agriculture & Cooperation
(Mechanization & Technology Division)
Krishi Bhawan, New Delhi
Dated 18.12.2012
1. The Secretary (Agriculture)
(All States/UTs)
2. Director (Agriculture)
(All States/UTs)
3. Managing Director
(All State Agro Industries Corporations)
4. Director (Agricultural Engineering)
Government of Chhattisgarh & Madhya Pradesh
5. Chief Engineer (Agricultural Engineering)
Government of Assam, Tamil Nadu and West Bengal
Subject: Revision of list of-Power Tillers eligible for grant of subsidy
under Government assisted programmes and Schemes
(As on 30.11.2012)
Sir,
I am directed to invite a reference to this Department’s letter of
even number dated 30th May, 2012, vide which the list of power tiller
delivering 8 Horse power (BHP) and above and found eligible for grant
of subsidy under Government assisted programmes was circulated.
2. The above referred list has since been revised and the revised
list (As on 30.11.2012) in supersession of all previous lists, is enclosed
herewith for information and necessary action. The listed Power Tillers
(41 different make and model) are available at appointed power tiller
dealer points in the country, as informed by the manufacturers.
Encls: as above.
Yours faithfully,
Sd/-
(Himat Singh)
Deputy Commissioner (M&T)
Tel: 011-23382922
E-mail: himat.singh@nic.in

63
Copy to:
1. Directors, All FMT&TIs.
2. Power Tiller Manufacturers concerned.
3. Power Tiller Association of India.

64
Department of Agriculture & Cooperation
(M&T Division)
LIST OF POWER TILLERS ELIGIBLE FOR GRANT OF SUBSIDY UNDER
GOVERNMENT ASSISTED PROGRAMMES/SCHEMES
Updated: 30.11.2012
Sl. Model Make Max T est Test CMVR CMVR FMTTI Name
No. Power Report Report Certificate Date
HP No. Release No.
(Month/
Year)
1 2 345 6 7 8 9 1 0
1. VST Shakti VST Tillers 9.0 PT-43/736 in July, CMVR/PT- 24.03.2008 SRFMTTI Power
130 DI Tractors  Ltd. (12.2) conjunction 2001 20/2007- Tiller
Bangalore with PT-62/ 2008
(Karnataka) 853
2. Mitsubishi VST T illers 6.6 PT-40/549 in July, CMVR/PT- 13.05.2008 SRFMTTI Power
Shakti CT 85 Tractors Ltd. (9.0) conjunction 2001 04/08/2008- Tiller
with VWH 120 Bangalore with PT-61/ 2009
Engine (Karnataka) 852
3. Texmaco Texmaco 7.5 PT -63/860 September , CMVR/PT- 03.03.2008 SRFMTTI Power
Dhanwan Ltd., Kolkata (10.2) 2001 16/2007- Tiller
(WB) 2008
4. Ganga Ganga 10.0 PT -56/831 in February, CMVR/PT- 04.04.2008 SRFMTTI Power
Sifang, Motors, (13.6) conjunction 2002 01/01/2008- Tiller
GN 121-(15) Kolkata with PT-66/ 2009
(WB) 880
5. Greaves Greaves 11.0 PT -76/995 Dec., CMVR/PT- 21.07.2008 SRFMTTI Power
GS-15 DIL 5 cotton Ltd., (15.0) 2004 14/29/2008- Tiller
Tponneri- 2009
Taluk (TN)
6. Souza Sifang Souza Sifang 10.7 PT -80/1013 July, CMVR/PT- 16.06.2008 SRFMTTI Power
GN 121-(15) Agro (14.6) 2005 07/18/2008- Tiller
(Fitted with Engineering Pvt. 2009
Zheiyang Ltd. Bangalore
Sifang ZS (Karnataka)
1100 an Diesel
Engine)
7. Siam Kubota Siam Kubota 9.0 PT -16/331 September , CMVR/24/ 22.7.2011 SRFMTTI Power
RT-14-DI-RP- Corporation (12.3) 2011 419/2010- Tiller
80 Ltd., Chennai 2011

65
8. Kranti Indtec Elektro 11.2 PT -85/1067 January, CMVR/PT- 17.03.2008 SRFMTTI Power
DI 1515 Control, (15.2) 2007 17/2007- Tiller
Hoshiarpur (Pb) 2008
9. Shrachi Bengal Tools 11.1 PT -84/1066 January, CMVR/PT- 22.05.2008 SRFMTTI Power
SF 15 DI Ltd. (Agro) (15.1) 2007 06/10/2008- Tiller
Kolkata (WB) 2009, dated
22.05.2008
10. Kisan Sakthi Jayessar 10.8 PT -86/1071 February, CMVR/PT- 25.11.2008 SRFMTTI Power
DI GN 15 L Equipment Pvt. (14.7) 2007 19/48/2008- Tiller
Ltd., Coimba- 2009
tore (TN)
11. Kamco Super Kerala Agro 8.8 PT -88/1075 February, CMVR/PT- 19.03.2008 SRFMTTI Power
DI Machinery (12.0) 2007 19/2007- Tiller
corporation 2008
Ltd. Athani
(Kerala)
12. Shrachi Bengal Tools 8.7 PT -89/1077 March, CMVR/PT- 23.06.2008 SRFMTTI Power
Kubota Ltd. (Agro), (11.8) 2007 09/21/2008- Tiller
DF 12L Kolkata (WB) 2009
13. SUAGN R ogini Farm 10.5 PT -91/1085 May, CMVR/PT- 18.08.2008 SRFMTTI Power
151 DI Equipments (14.3) 2007 16/39/2008- Tiller
Vellore (TN) 2009
14. MANAM Southern Agro 8.5 PT -01/206 May, CMVR/PT- 17.07.2008 SRFMTTI Power
MCF-121 engine Pvt. Ltd., (11.6) 2007 13/28/2008- Tiller
Chennai (TN) 2009
15. KAVI- Kavi agro 9.2 PT -92/1095 July, CMVR/PT- 09.07.2008 SRFMTTI Power
GN 15 L agency, Trichi (12.5) 2007 10/25/2008- Tiller
(TN) 2009
16. SAMRAT Universal 11.5 PT -93/1103 Sept., CMVR/PT- 15.05.2008 SRFMTTI Power
GN 121 Engineers & (15.6) 2007 05/09/2008- Tiller
Traders, 2009
Kolkata (WB)
17. KAVI-DF 15 L Kavi agro 11.0 PT -94/1109 Dec-2007 CMVR/PT- 09.07.2008 SRFMTTI Power
agency, Trichi (15.0) 11/26/2008- Tiller
(TN) 2009
18. KAMCO KM Kerala Agro 7.4 PT -3/225 Dec-2007 CMVR/PT- 24.03.2008 SRFMTTI Power
B-200 Machinery (10.1) 21/2007-2008 Tiller
corporation
Ltd. Athani
(Kerala)
19. SOHARR G Soharr India 10.7 PT-4/228 Jan-2008 CMVR/PT- 03.03.2009 SRFMTTI Power
N-121 15-DI agro division, (14.6) 20/67/2008- Tiller
Shivamoga 2009
(Karnataka)
1 2 345 6 7 8 9 1 0

66
20. SHIFENG SAS Motors, 8.3 PT-81/1034 Mar-2008 CMVR/PT- 08.08.2008 SRFMTTI Power
ANGAD New Delhi (12.0) in conjun- 15/36/2008- Tiller
150 PT ction with 2009
PT-95/1119
21. Vijay VR-15L V ijay 10.2 PT-05/233 May-2008 CMVR/PT- 16.07.2008 SRFMTTI Power
engineering & (13.9) 12/27/2008- Tiller
machinery 2009
Company
Kolhapur (MH)
22. BIRLA HARIT Birla Power 8.4 PT -6/241 July-2008 CMVR/PT- July-2008 SRFMTTI Power
Solutions Ltd., (11.4) 15/ 2007-08 Tiller
Dehradun
(Uttarakhand)
23. GREAVES Greaves cotton 11.0 PT-8/247 Oct-2008 CMVR/PT- 10.04.2008 SRFMTTI Power
GS 15 OIL Ltd., Tponneri (14.9) 03/04/2008- Tiller
Taluk (TN) 2009
24. RHINO 15 DI Shri Ambica 10.7 PT-7/246 Oct-2008 CMVR/PT- 29.09.2008 SRFMTTI Power
Iron Industry (14.5) 18/43/2008- Tiller
Pvt. Ltd. 2009
Kolkata (WB)
25. DIVYA SHAKTI Chirag 9.1 PT -09/273 Dec-2009 ICAT/ATA 27.08.2007 SRFMTTI Power
Corporations (12.4) (term III- T iller
Kolkata (WB) PT/2007-
08/095
26. DRAGON VST T illers 11.0 PT-11/281 Apr-2010 ATA Bharat 24.09.2009 SRFMTTI Power
SHAKTI T ractors Ltd., (14.9) (T erm) Stage Tiller
150 DI Banglore III/PT/ELT/R/
(Karnataka) 2009/2010/
589
27. GREAVES GS Greaves cotton 10.1 PT-10/28 Sep-2010 CMVR/PT- 22.04.2009 SRFMTTI Power
Ltd. Tponneri (13.5) in conjun- 23/403/2010- Tiller
Taluk (TN) ction with 2011 Date
PT-12/294 19.05.2010
28. YANMAR Maharashtra 7.8 PT-14/310 Mar-2011 CMVR Certificate not SRFMTTI Power
SHAKTI Agro (10.6) required due to power T iller
GN 121 DI Industry, tiller not recommended
Banglore for haulage purpose
(KAR) (R eference letter - No.
RT-11011/12/2005-MVL,
dt. 24.5.2010 from
Min. of Road Transport &
Highways)
29. GREAVES Greaves cotton 10.1 PT-10/280 Sep-2010 CMVR/PT- 19.05.2010 SRFMTTI Power
GS 14 DLX Ltd., Tponneri (13.5) in conjun- 23/403/2010- Tiller
(VARIANT) T aluk (TN) ction with 2011
PT-15/316
1 2 345 6 7 8 9 1 0

67
30. MASCON Mascon Tillers 13.99 PT-13/309 March, P ower tiller has not got SRFMTTI Power
(MODEL : and Tractors, (10.3) Confidential- 2011 CMVR norms, Hence, it T iller
MS-15L) Palakkad Converted is not recommended for
(Kerala) into road worthiness
Commercial)
31. GANGA Ganga Motors 15.35 PT-19/336- October, P ower tiller has not got SRFMTTI Power
(MODEL (Farm (11.3) ICT 2011 CMVR norms, Hence, it T iller
GM-16) Equipment is not recommended for
Division), road worthiness
Kolkata
32. GANGA Power Ganga Motors 15.08 PT-20/337- October, P ower tiller has not got SRFMTTI Power
Tiller (Farm (11.1) ICT 2011 CMVR norms, Hence, it T iller
(MODEL : Equipment is not recommended for
ARJUN- Division), road worthiness
GM-15) K olkata
33. YANMAR Maharashtra 11.42 PT -18/335- October, P ower tiller has not got SRFMTTI Power
SHAKTI- Agro Industries, (8.4) ICT 2011 CMVR norms, Hence, it T iller
121-DI Bangalore is not recommended for
(Karnataka) road worthiness
34. SUNRISE Sunrise 13.32 PT -17/334- October, CMVR/POWER 5.10.2010 SRFMTTI Power
(MODEL: International, (9.8) ICT 2011 TILLE RS/25/ T iller
SUNRISE-DI) K olkata 449/2010-11
(West Bengal)
35. BHIM Ganga Motors 14.95 PT-23/347- Feb. 2012 Power tiller has not got SRFMTTI Power
GANGA (Farm (1-1.0) ICT CMVR norms, Hence, it is T iller
SIFANG Equipment not recommended for
Division), road Worthiness
Kolkata
36. SIGMA M/s Sigma 11.4 PT-22/344- January, CMVR/PT - 15.11.2010 SRFMTTI Power
PLUS V2FM Power Tiller (15.61) ICT 2012 26/457/ Tiller
Private Ltd., 2919011
Kolkata
37. VIJAY M/s Southern 9.6 PT-24/352- April, P ower tiller has not got SRFMTTI Power
SAMURAI Agro Engine (13.15) ICT 2012 CMVR norms, Hence, it is T iller
PT-03 Private Ltd., not recommended for
Chennai road worthiness
38. SHRACHI M/s Bengal 8.9 PT 53/813- March, CMVR/PT- 23.06.2008 SRFMTTI Power
SF-12 T ools Ltd. (12-1) ICT Batch 2000 08/20/2008- Tiller
(Agro), Kolkata Test PT- June, 2009
(WB) 25/356 2012
39. Premier Power M/S Premier 7.8 KW PT -26/366 September , CMVR/PT - 11.4.2011 SRFMTTI Power
Tillers Garuda Power (10.5) ICT 2012 27/483/2011- Tiller
3 PT1200D Equipment 2012
and Product
Pvt. Ltd.
40. Greaves Power M/s Greaves 9.0 KW PT-27-367 September, CMVR/PT- 25.03.2010 SRFMTTI Power
Tillers Cotton Ltd. (12.1) ICT 2012 21/358/2009- Tiller
GS 12 DLX Gummiditoondi 2010
1 2 345 6 7 8 9 1 0

68
41. SARACHI M/S Bengal 9.8 KW PT -29/369 October, P ower tiller has not got SRFMTTI Power
Power Tillers Tools Ltd. (13.1) ICT 2012 CMVR norms, Hence, it is T iller
Champion (Agro), not recommended for
Kolkata (WB) road worthiness
1 2 345 6 7 8 9 1 0

69
REGISTERED
No. 13-37/2000-My (I&P)
Government of India
Ministry, of Agriculture
Department of Agriculture & Cooperation
(Mechanization & Technology Division)
Krishi Bhawan, New Delhi
Dated: 22nd November , 2011.
To,
1. The Secretary (Agriculture)
(All States/UTs)
2. Director (Agriculture)
(All States/UTs)
3. Managing Director
(All State Agro Industries Corporations)
4. Director (Agricultural Engineering)
(Government of Chhattisgarh & Madhya Pradesh)
5. Chief Engineer (Agricultural Engineering)
(Government of Assam, Tamil Nadu and West Bengal)
Subject: Revision of list of Power tillers eligible for grant of subsidy
under Government assisted programmes and schemes (As
on 31.10.2011)
Sir,
I am directed to invite a reference to this Department’s letter of
even number , dated 19th April, 2011, vide which, the list of Power
tiller delivering 8 Horse power (BHP) and above and found eligible for
grant of subsidy under Government assisted programmes was circulated.
2. The above referred list has since been revised and the revised
list (As on 31.10.2011) in supersession of all previous lists is enclosed
herewith for information and necessary action. The listed Power tillers
(35 different make and model) are available at appointed power tiller
dealer points in the country, as informed by the manufacturers.
Enel: As stated above.

70
Yours faithfully,
Sd/-
(Omkar Singh)
Deputy Commissioner (M&T)
Tel: 011-23382922
E-mail: singh.omkar14@yahoo.co.in
Copy to:
(1) Directors, All FMT&TIs
(2) Power Tiller Manufacturers concerned.
(3) Power Tiller Association of India.

71
Department of Agriculture & Cooperation
(M&T Division)
LIST OF POWER TILLERS ELIGIBLE FOR GRANT OF SUBSIDY UNDER
GOVERNMENT ASSISTED PROGRAMMES/SCHEMES
Updated 31.10.2011
Sl. Model Make Max T est Test CMVR CMVR FMTTI Name
No. Power Report Report Certificate Date
HP No. Release No.
(Month/
Year)
1 2 345 6 7 8 9 1 0
1. SHRACHI Bengal Tools 8.9 PT -53/813, March, CMVR/PT -08/ 23.06.2008 SRFMTTI Power
SF-12 Ltd. (Agro), (12.1) March, 2000 20/2008-2009 Tiller
Kolkata (WB) 2000
2. VST SHAKTI VST Tillers 9.0 PT -43/736 July, CMVR/PT-20/ 24.03.2008 SRFMTTI Power
130 Dl Tractors Ltd., (12.2) June, 2001 2007-2008 Tiller
Banglore 1997 in
(Karnataka) conjunction
with PT-62/
853 July,
2001
3. MITSUBISHI VST T illers 6.6 PT -40/549 July, CMVR/PT-04/ 13.05.2008 SRFMTTI Power
SHAKTI CT Tractors Ltd. (9.0) Dec. 1989 in 2001 08/2008-2009 T iller
85 WITH Banglore conjunction
VWH 120 (Karnataka) with PT-61/
ENGINE 852, July,
2001
4. Texmaco Texmaco 7.5 PT -63/860 September , CMVR/PT- 03.03.2008 SRFMTTI Power
Dhanwan Ltd., Kolkata (10.2) 2001 16/2007- Tiller
(WB) 2008
5. GANGA Ganga Motors, 10.0 PT-56/831, Feb., CMVR/PT-01/ 04.04.2008 SRFMTTI Power
SIFANG, K olkata (WB) (13.6) November , 2002 01/2008-2009 Tiller
GN-121-15 2000 in
conjunction
with PT-66/
880, April,
2002
6. GREAVES GS Greaves Cotton 11.0 PT-76/995, Dec. CMVR/PT-14/ 21.07.2008 SRFMTTI Power
15 DILS Ltd., Tponneri (15.0) December , 2004 29/2008-2009 Tiller
Taluk (TN) 2004
7. SOUZA SIFANG Souza Sifang, 10.7 PT-80/1013, July , CMVR/PT -07/ 16.06.2008 SRFMTTI Power
GN 121-(15) Agro (14.6) July, 2005 2005 18/2008-2009 Tiller
(FITTED WITH Engineering
ZHEJIANG Pvt. Ltd.,
SIFANG ZS Bangalore
1100 (Karnataka)
AN DIESEL
ENGINE)

72
 8. SIAM K UBOTA Siam K ubota 9.0 PT -16/331, September, CMVR/24/ 22.7.2011 SRFMTTI Power
RT-14-DI-RP-80Corporation (12.3) September , 2011 419/2010-11 Tiller
Ltd., Chennai 2011
 9. KRANTI Indtec Elektro 11.2 PT -85/1067 January, CMVR/PT-17/ 17.03.2008 SRFMTTI Power
DI 1515 Control, (15.2) 2007 2007-2008 Tiller
Hoshiarpur (Pb)
10. SHRACHI Bengal Tools 11.1 PT-84/1066, January , CMVR/PT -06/ 22.05.2008 SRFMTTI Power
SF 15 DI Ltd. (Agro), (15.1) January, 2007 10/2008/20 09 Tiller
Kolkata (WB) 2007 dated
22.05.2008
11. KISAN Jayessar 10.8 PT-86/1071, February , CMVR/PT -19/ 25.11.2008 SRFMTTI Power
SAKTHI Equipment (14.7) February, 2007 48/2008-2009 Tiller
Dl GN 15 L Pvt. Ltd., 2007
Coimbatore (TN)
12. KAMCO K erala Agro 8.8 PT- 88/1075 February, CMVR/PT -19/ 19.03.2008 SRFMTTI Power
SUPER DI Machinery (12.0) 2007 2007-2008 Tiller
Corporation
Ltd., Athani
(Kerala)
13. SHRACHI Bengal Tools 8.7 PT -89/1077, March, CMVR/PT -09/ 23.06.2008 SRFMTTI Power
KUBOTA Ltd. (Agro), (11.8) March, 2007 21/2008-2009 Tiller
DF 12 L Kolkata (WB) 2007
14. SUN GN RoGINI Farm 10.5 PT-91/1085, May , CMVR/PT -16/ 18.08.2008 SRFMTTI Power
151 Dl Equipments, (14.3) May , 2007 39/2008-09 Tiller
Vellore (TN) 2007
15. MANAM Southern Agro 8.5 PT -01/206, May, 2007 CMVR/PT-13/ 17.07.2008 SRFMTTI Power
MCF-121 Engine Pvt. Ltd., (11.6) May, 2007 28/2008-2009 Tiller
Chennai (TN)
16. KAVI-GN 15 L Kavi Agro 9.2 PT -92/1095, July, 2007 CMVR/PT-10/ 09.07.2008 SRFMTTI Power
Agency, Trichi (12.5) July, 2007 25/ 2008-09 Tiller
(TN)
17. SAMRAT Universal 11.5 PT-93/1103, September, CMVR/PT-05/ 15.05.2008 SRFMTTI Power
GN 121 Engineers & (15.6) September , 2007 09/2008-09 Tiller
Traders, 2007
Kolkata (WB)
18. KAVI—DF 15 L Kavi Agro 11.0 PT-94/1109, December, CMVR/PT -11/ 09.07.2008 SRFMTTI Power
Agency, Trichi (15.0) December , 2007 26/2008-09 Tiller
(TN) 2007
19. KAMCO K erala Agro 7.4 PT-3/225, December, CMVR/PT -21/ 24.03.2008 SRFMTTI Power
KMB-200 Machinery (10.1) December , 2007 2007-2008 Tiller
Corporation 2007
Ltd., Athani
(Kerala)
20. S0HARR Soharr India 10.7 PT-4/228 January , CMVR/PT -20/ 03.03.2009 SRFMTTI Power
GN-121 15-DI Agro Division, (14.6) January, 2008 67/2008-2009 Tiller
Shivamoga 2008
(Karnataka)
 1 2 345 6 7 8 9 1 0

73
21. Shifeng angad SAS Motors, 8.8 PT -81/1034, March, CMVR/PT -15/ 08.08.2008 SRFMTTI Power
150 PT New Delhi (12.0)  March 2006 2008 36/2008-09 Tiller
in conjun-
ction with
PT-95/1119,
March, 2008
22. VIJAY VR-15L V ijay 10.2 PT-05/233, May, 2008 CMVR/PT-12/ 16.07.2008 SRFMTTI Power
Engineering & (13.9) May, 2008 27/ 2008-09 Tiller
Machinery
Company,
Kolhapur
(Maharashtra)
23. BIRLA HARIT Birla Power 8.4 PT-6/241, July, 2008 CMVR/PT-15/ July , 2008 SRFMTTI Power
Soultions Ltd., (11.4) July, 2008 2007-08 Tiller
Dehradun
(Uttarakhand)
24. GREAVES Greaves Cotton 11.0 PT-8/247 October , CMVR/PT -03/ 10.04.2008 SRFMTTI Power
GS 15 DIL Ltd., Tponneri (14.9) October , 2008 04/2008-2009 Tiller
Taluk (TN) 2008
25. RHINO 15 Dl Shri Ambica 10.7 PT-7/246 October , CMVR/PT -18/ 29.09.2008 SRFMTTI Power
Iron Industry (14.5) October , 2008 43/2008-09 Tiller
Pvt. Ltd., 2008
Kolakata (WB)
26. DIVYA SHAKTI Chirag 9.1 PT-09/273, Dec. 2009 ICAT/ATA 27.08.2007 SRFMTTI Power
Corporation, (12.4) Dec. 2009 (term  III) T iller
Kolkata (WB) PT/2007-08/095
27. DRAGON R ogini Farm 11.0 PT-11/281, Apr. 2010 ATA Bharat 24.09.2009 SRFMTTI Power
SHAKTI Equipments, (14.9) Apr. 2010 (Term) Stage T iller
150 DI Arcot (TN) III/PT/ELT/R/
2009/2010/
589
28. GREAVES GS Greaves Cotton 10.1 PT-10/280 Sep. 2010 CMVR/PT- 22.04.2009 SRFMTTI Power
Ltd., Tponneri (13.5) Mar. 2010 23/403/2010- Tiller
Taluk (TN) in conjun- 2011 Date
ction with 19.05.2010,
PT-12/294 ATA Bharat
Sep. 2010 Term Stage III-
PT/ELTTR/2009-
10/26
29. YANMAR Maharashtra 7.8 PT-14/310, Mar. 2011 CMVR Certificate 24.05.2010 SRFMTTI Power
SHAKTI Agro (10.6) Mar. 2011 not required due T iller
GN 121 DI Industry, to power tiller
Banglore not recommended
(KAR) for haulage
purpose
(Reference letter-
No. RT-11011/12/
2005-MVL,
dt. 24.5.2010
from Min. of Road
Transport &
Highways)
1 2 345 6 7 8 9 1 0

74
30. GREAVES Greaves Cotton 10.1 PT-10/280 Sep. 2011 CMVR/PT-23/ 22.04.2009 SRFMTTI Power
GS 14 DLX Ltd., Tponneri (13.5) March, 2010 403/2010-2011 T iller
(VARIANT) T aluk (TN) in conjun- Date 19.05.2010,
ction with ATA Bharat Term
PT-15/316 Stage III-P .T ./
March, 2010 EL TTR/2009-
10/16
31. MASCON Mascon Tillers 13.99 PT-13/309 March, P ower tiller has SRFMTTI Power
(MODEL : and Tractors, (10.3) March, 2011 2011 not got  CMVR T iller
MS-15L) P alakkad Confidential- norms, Hence,
(Kerala) Converted it is not
into recommended
Commercial for road
worthiness
32. GANGA Ganga Motors 15.35 PT-19/336- October, P ower tiller has SRFMTTI Power
Power (Farm (11.3) Oct., 2011- 2011 not got  CMVR T iller
Tiller Equipment ICT norms, Hence,
(MODEL Division), it is not
GM-16) K olkata recommended
for road
worthiness
33. GANGA Power Ganga Motors 15.08 PT-20/337- October, P ower tiller has SRFMTTI Power
Tiller (Farm (11.1) Oct., 2011- 2011 not got CMVR T iller
(MODEL : Equipment ICT norms, Hence,
ARJUN- Division), it is not
GM-15) K olkata recommended
for road
worthiness
34. YANMAR Maharashtra 11.42 PT -18/335- October, P ower tiller has SRFMTTI Power
SHAKTI- Agro Industries, (8.4) Oct., 2011- 2011 not got CMVR T iller
121-DI Bangalore ICT norms, Hence,
(Karnataka) it is not
recommended
for road
worthiness
35. SUNRISE Sunrise 13.32 PT -17/334- October, CMVR/POWER 5.10.2010 SRFMTTI Power
(MODEL: International, (9.8) Oct., 2011- 2011 TILLERS/25/ Tiller
SUNRISE-DI)) K olkata ICT 449/2010-11
(West Bengal)
1 2 345 6 7 8 9 1 0

75
No. 13-10/99-My(I&P)
Government of India
Ministry of Agriculture
(Deptt. of Agriculture & Cooperation)
Krishi Bhavan, New Delhi-110001
Dated the 8th August, 2013
To,
1. The Secretary (Agriculture)
(All States/UTs)
2. Director (Agriculture)
(All States/UTs)
3. Managing Director
(All State Agro Industries Corporations)
4. Director (Agricultural Engineering)
(Government of MP , TN, Chhattisgarh and WB)
Subject: List of Tractors, Power Tillers and Combine Harvesters for
promotion under various Government schemes/programmes
Sir,
I am directed to invite a reference to this Department’s letter of
even number dated 2nd May, 2012 vide which the list of tractors
delivering up to 40 HP (Ps) at the rear Power Take Off (PTO) shaft and
found eligible for subsidy was circulated. The list of power tillers was
circulated vide this Department’s letter No. 13-37/2000-My (I&P) dated
18th December , 2012 and list of combine harvesters was also circulated
vide this Department’s letter No. 7-66/2000 M&T (I&P) dated 12 May,
2012.
The above referred lists have since been revised in supersession of
all previous lists and the copy of the same is enclosed herewith for
information and necessary action.
Encl.: As above.
Yours faithfully
Sd-/
(A.N. MESHRAM)
Deputy Commissioner (M&T)
Telefax No. 23382922

76
Copy to:
1. Director , FMTTI, Budni (Madhya Pradesh), Hissar (Haryana),
Garladinne (Andhra Pradesh) and Biswanath Chariali (Assam)
2. All Tractor Manufacturers (as per list)
3. All Power Tiller Manufacturers (as per list)
4. All Combine Harvester Manufacturers (as per list)

77
LIST OF POWER TILLERS TESTED AT THE FARM MACHINERY
TRAINING & TESTING INSTITUTES
Sl.No. Model Name & Address of Max T est Report Test Report
Manufacturer Horsepower No. R ef. (Month
 kW (Ps) and Year)
 12 3 4 5 6
 1. VST Shakti 130 DI M/s. VST Tillers Tractors Limited 9.0 PT-43/736 in conjunction July
P .B. No. 4801, Mahadevpura Post (12.2) with PT-62/853
Off. White Field Road,
Bangalore-560048
 2. Mitsubishi Shakti M/s. VST T illers Tractors Limited 6.6 PT-40/549 in conjunction July
CT 85 with VWH P .B. No. 4801, Mahadevpura Post (9.0) with PT-61/852
120 Engine Off. White Field Road,
Bangalore-560048
 3. Texmaco Dhanwan T exmaco Limited 7.5 PT -63/860 September
Belgharia works, Kolkata-700056 (10.2)
 4. Ganga Sifang, Ganga Motors 10.0 PT -56/831 in conjunction February
GN-121-15 Farm Equipment Division, 23, (13.6) with PT-66/880
Ganesh Chandra Avenue,
Kolkata-700013
 5. Greaves GS Greaves Cotton Limited 11.0 PT -76/995 December
15 DILS Agro Equipment Group, Petrol (15.00)
Engines Unit, P .B. No. 892, Old
Mahabalipuram Road, Thoraipakkam,
Chennai-600096
 6. Souza Sifang GN 121- Souza Sifang Agro Engineering Pvt.Ltd. 10.7 PT-80/1013 July
(15) (Fitted with H.O.-91,  Iconet Business Centre, (14.6)
Zhejiang Sifang ZS Temple Road, Malleswaram,
1100 an Diesel Bangalore-560003
Engine)
 7. Siam Kubota RT-14- Siam Kubota Corporation Ltd. 9.0 PT -16/331 September
DI-RP-80 Chennai (12.3)
 8. Kranti DI 1515 Indtec Elektro Control 11.2 PT-85/1067 January
F-15, Focal Point, Phagwara Road (15.2)
Hoshiarpur-146001
 9. Shrachi SF 15 DI Bengal Tools Limited (Agro Division), 11.1 PT-84/1066 January
Todi Mansion, P-15, India Exchange (15.1)
Place Extension, Kolkata-700073
10. Kisan Sakthi DI Jayessar Equipment Private Limited 10.8 PT-86/1071 February
15 L 91-C, Chinnasamy Naidu Road, (14.7)
New Sidhapudur , Coimbatore-641044

78
11. KAMCO SUPER DI Kerala Agro Machinery Corporation 8.8 PT -88/1075 February
Ltd. Athani, District- (12.0)
Ernakulam-783585 (Kerala)
12. SURACHI KUBOTA Bengal Tools Limited (Agro Division), 8.7 PT -89/1077 March
DF 12 L Todi Mansion, P-15, India Exchange (11.8)
Place Extension, Kolkata-700073
13. SUN GN 151 DI Rogini Farm Equipments 10.5 PT-91/1 085 May
No. 18, V .C. Ramalingam Street (14.3)
Arcot-632503
14. MANAM MCF-121 Southern Agro Engine Private 8.5 PT -01/206 May
Limited, #24 A III Phase, (11.6)
Industrial Estate, Guindy ,
Chennai-600032
15. KAVI-GN 15L Kavi Agro Agency 9.2 PT -92/1095 July
11 KEMPS Town, Trichi-620001 (TN) (12.5)
16. SAMRAT GN 121 Universal Engineers & Traders 11.5 PT-93/1 103 September
Commerce House, 3rd Floor (15.6)
Room No. 6 A2, Ganesh Chandra
Avenue, Kolkata-700013
17. KAVI-DF 15 L Kavi Agro Agency 11.0 PT -94/1109 December
11 KEMPS Town, Trichi- 620001 (TN) (15.0)
18. KAMCO KMB-200 Kerala Agro Machinery Corporation 7.4 PT -3/225 December
Ltd. Athani, District - (10.1)
Ernakulam-783585 (Kerala)
19. SOHARR GN-121 SOHARR India Agro Division (Reg.), 10.7 PT-4/228 January
15-DI No. 17/B, Kallur Mandli, (14.6)
Industrial Estate,
Shivamogga-577202
(Karnataka State)
20. SHIFENG ANGAD SAS Motors Limited 8.8 PT-81/1034 in March
150 PT 117/A, Sainik Farms, Defence (12.0) conjunction with
Service Enclave, New Delhi-62 PT-95/1119
21. VIJAY VR-15L Vijay Engineering & Machinery 10.2 PT -05/233 March
Company, C-1420, Laxmipuri, (13.9)
Kolhapur-416002
22. BIRLA HARIT Birla Power Solutions Limited, 8.4 PT -6/261 July
Village Lal Tappar, P .O. Resham (11.4)
Majri Grant, Dehradun-248140
(Uttarakhand)
23. GREAVES GS 15 DIL Greaves Cotton Limited Agro 11.0 PT-8/247 October
Equipment Group, Petrol Engines (14.9)
Unit, P .B. No. 892, Old
Mahabalipuram Road Thoraipakkam,
Chennai-600 096
12 3 4 5 6

79
24. RHINO 15 DI Ambica Iron Industries Pvt. Ltd. 10.7 PT-7/246 October
1A, Nanda Mullick Lane (14.5)
Kolkata-700006
25. Divya Shakti Chirag Corporation Kolkata (WB) 9.1 PT -09/273 December
(12.4)
26. Dragon Shakti 150 DI M/s. VST Tillers Tractors Limited 11.0 PT-11/281 April
P .B. No. 4801, Mahadevpura Post (14.9)
Off. White Field Road,
Bangalore-560048
27. Greaves GS Greaves Cotton Limited 10.1 PT -10/28 in conjunction September
Agro Equipment Group, Petrol (13.5) with PT-12/294
Engines Unit, P .B. No. 892, Old
Mahabalipuram Road Thoraipakkam,
Chennai-600096
28. Yanmar Shakti Maharashtra Agro Industry 7.8 PT -14/310 March
GN 121 DI Bangalore (Karnataka) (10.6)
29. Greaves GS 14 DLX Greaves Cotton Limited 10.1 PT -10/280 in conjunction September
(Variant) Agro Equipment Group, Petrol (13.5) with PT-15/316
Engines Unit, P .B. No. 892, Old
Mahabalipuram Road Thoraipakkam,
Chennai-600096
30. MASCON (MODEL: Mascon Tillers and Tractors 13.99 PT -13/309 March
MS-15L) Kavundathil City Centre, Palakkad (10.3) 2011
City , Palakkad-678014
31. GANGA (MODEL: Ganga Motors 15.35 PT -19/336 October
GM-16) Farm Equipment Division, 23, (11.3) 2011
Chandra Avenue, Kolkata-700013
32. GANGA Power Tiller Ganga Motors 15.08 PT -20/337 October
(MODEL: ARJUN- Farm Equipment Division, 23, (11.1) 2011
GM-15) Ganesh Chandra Avenue,
Kolkata-700013
33. YANMAR SHAKTI- Maharashtra Agro Industries, 11.42 PT -18/335 October
121-DI Bangalore (Karnataka) (8.4) 2011
34. SUNRISE (MODEL: Sunrise International, Kolkata 13.32 PT -17/334 October
SUNRISE-DI) (W est Bengal) (9.8) 2011
35. BHIM GANGA SIFANG Ganga Motors 14.95 PT-23/347 February
Farm Equipment Division, 23, (11.0) 2012
Ganesh Chandra Avenue,
Kolkata-700013
36. SIGMA PLUS V2FM M/s Sigma Power Tiller Private Ltd. 11.4 PT-22/344 January
272, Marshall House, 25, Strand (15.61) 2012
Road, Kolkata (West Bengal)
37. VIJAY SAMURAI Southern Agro Engine Private 9.6 PT -24/352 April
PT-03 Limited, #24A III Phase, Industrial (13.15) 2012
Estate, Guindy, Chennai-600032
12 3 4 5 6

80
38. SHRACHI SF-12 Bengal T ools Limited (Agro Division), 8.9 PT -25/356 June
Todi Mansion, P-15, India Exchange (12.1) 2012
Place Extension, Kolkata-700073
39. Premier Power Tillers Premier Power Equipments & 7.8 PT -26/366 September
Garuda 3 PT 1200 D Products Pvt. Ltd. (10.5) 2012
37/1-C, Palladam Road, Pappampatti,
Coimbatore-641016
40. Greaves Power Tillers Greaves Cotton Limited 9.0 PT -27/367 September
GS 12 DLX Agro Equipment Group, Petrol (12.1) 2012
Engines Unit, P .B. No. 892,
Old Mahabalipuram Road,
Thoraipakkam, Chennai-600096
41. SARACHI Power Tillers Bengal Tools Limited (Agro Division), 9.8 PT -29/369 October
Champion T odi Mansion, P-15, India Exchange (13.1) 2012
Place Extension, Kolkata-700073
42. Texmaco Dhanwan M/s. T exmaco Limited, Belgharia 7.9 PT -30/382 February
DF-12 (BT) Works, Belgharia, Kolkata-700056 (10.7) 2012
43. Shrachi Balwan M/s. Bengal Tools Limited, 2, 13.9 PT-31/383 February
Jessore Road, Dum Dum, Kolkata (18.9) 2012
(West Bengal)-700028
44. ANAND GN-15L-DI M/s. AR Agro Equipments, 11.1 PT -32/391 March
D.No. FP6/289E, Kadalundi Road, (15.1) 2012
Feroke (P .O.), Kozhikode-637631
(Kerala)
45. SHRACHI All Rounder M/s. Bengal Tools Limited, 2, 8.6 PT -33/392 March
Jessore Road, Dum Dum, Kolkata (11.7) 2012
(West Bengal)-700028
46. Kranti DI 1515 DF M/s. Indtec Elektro Control, 10.1 PT-34/393 April
F-15 Focal Point, Phaghwara Road, (13.7) 2012
Hoshiarpur, Punjab-146001
47. Kranti DI 1515 GN M/s. Indtec Elektro Control, 9.4 PT -35/394 April
F-15 Focal Point, Phaghwara Road, (12.8) 2012
Hoshiarpur, Punjab-146001
48. Shrachi Shaktiman M/s. Bengal Tools Limited, 2, 12.1 PT-36/395 April
Jessore Road, Dum Dum, Kolkata (16.5) 2012
(West Bengal)-700028
49. Souza RT 125 DI M/s. Souza Sifang Agro Engg. Pvt.Ltd., 9.6 PT -37/396 April
402, Kailash Tower , 3rd Floor , Above (13.1) 2012
Food World, Puttenehalli Road,
Yelahanka, Bangalore-560064
(Karnataka)
50. SHB DI M/s. Sukhlall Hanumanmall Baid, 12.9 PT-38/398 May
159, Nripendra Narayan Road, (17.5) 2012
P .O. & P .S.: Coochbehar , Distt.:
Coochbehar-736101 (West Bengal)
12 3 4 5 6

81
51. SOUZA SZ-450 MINI M/s. Souza Sifang Agro Engg. Pvt.Ltd., 7.3 PT -39/399 May
POWER TILLER 402, Kailash Tower , 3rd Floor , Above (9.9) 2012
(TILLLING TYPE) Food World, Puttenehalli Road,
Yelahanka, Bangalore-560064
(Karnataka)
52. KAMCO KMB 200 (BT) M/s. Kerala Agro Machinery Corpn. 6.7 PT -41/403 June
Ltd., Athani-683585, Ernakulam (9.1) 2012
Distt. (Kerala)
53. PACE 14 DI M/s. Pace Agro Pvt. Ltd., 401, 9.0 PT -42/404 June
4th Floor , Rattan Esquire, 14/143, (12.2) 2012
Chunni Ganj, Kanpur (U.P .)-208001
54. KALINGA SHAKTHI M/s. Samson Agri Power Equipments 8.9 PT -43/405 June
KS-125 DI (P) Ltd., 132, Laxmisagar Chhak, (12.1) 2012
Cuttack Road, Bhubaneswar , Odisha
55. KALINGA SHAKTHI M/s. Samson Agri Power Equipments 8.3 PT -44/407 July
KS-120 (P) Ltd., 132, Laxmisagar Chhak, (11.3) 2012
Cuttack Road, Bhubaneswar , Odisha
56. KALINGA SHAKTHI M/s. Samson Agri Power Equipments 9.6 PT -45/408 July
KS-145 (P) Ltd., 132, Laxmisagar Chhak, (13.1) 2012
Cuttack Road, Bhubaneswar , Odisha
57. Changzhou GN-151 M/s. Associated Agro Machineries, 10.9 PT-46/409 July
3/379, Thekkekara Building, (14.8) 2012
Karimba (P .O.) Mannarkkad, Palakkad,
Kerala-678597
12 3 4 5 6

82
No. 13-10/99-M&T (I&P)
Government of India
Ministry of Agriculture
(Deptt. of Agriculture & Cooperation)
Krishi Bhavan, New Delhi-110001
Dated  the 24th July 2015
To,
1. The Secretary (Agriculture)
(All States/UTs)
2. Director (Agriculture)
(All States/UTs)
3. Managing Director
(All State Agro Industries Corporations)
4. Director (Agricultural Engineering)
(Government of MP , TN, Chhattisgarh and WB)
Subject: List of Tractors, Power Tillers and Combine Harvesters Tested
by the Farm Machinery Training & Testing Institutes
Sir,
I am directed to invite a reference to this Department’s letter of
even number dated 10th April, 2015 on the subject cited above and
to inform that the list of tractors, power tillers and Combine harvesters
tested by the Farm Machinery Training & Testing institutes have been
updated and the same is uploaded on the website at http://
farmech.gov.in
This is for your information and further necessary action in the
matter.
Yours faithfully
Sd/-
(V .N. Kale)
Additional Commissioner M&T
Telefax: 011-23387200
E-mail: kalevn2000@yahoo.co.in
Copy to: The Director, FMTTI, Budni (Madhya Pradesh), Hissar (Haryana),
Garladinne (Andhra Pradesh) and Biswanath Chariali (Assam) for
information.

83
LIST OF POWER TILLERS TESTED AT THE FARM MACHINERY TRAINING
& TESTING INSTITUTES
POWER TILLERS - 8 BHP AND ABOVE
Sl. Name & Address Model Max Test T est Report
No. of Manufacturer Horsepower Report R elease
PS No. (Month and Year)
12 3 4 5 6
1. Texmaco Limited TEXMACO DHANWAN DF-12 10.7 PT-30/382 February 2013
Belgharia Works,
Kolkata-700056
2. Ganga Motors GANGA SIFANG GN-121-15 13.6 PT -56/831 in February 2012
Farm Equipment Division, Conjunction with
23, Ganesh Chandra PT -66/880
Avenue, Kolkata-700013
3. GANGA (MODEL: GM-16) 15.4 PT-19/336 October 2011
GANGA Power Tiller 15.1 PT-20/337 October 2011
(MODEL ARJUN-GM-15)
4. GANGA SIFANG BHIM 15.0 PT-23/347 February 2012
5. GANGA SIFANG BHIM PLUS 15.0 PT -23/347 in May 2014
conjunction with
PT-59/449
6. Greaves Cotton Limited GREAVES GS 15 DIL S 15.4 PT 63/466 September 2014
Farm Equipment Business
Petrol Engines Unit
F-62 & 63
SIPCOT Industrial Complex
Gummidipoondi-601201
7. GREAVES GS 15 DIL 14.7 PT-65/477 November 2014
8. GREAVES GS 14 DIL 13.3 PT-61/464 August 2014
9. GREAVES GS 14 DLX 15.2 PT-62/465 September 2014
10. Greaves GS 12 DLX Power Tiller 12.2 PT-27/367 September 2012
11. Souza Sifang Agro Souza Sifang GN 121 (15) Fitted 14.6 PT -80/1013 July 2005
Engineering Pvt. Ltd. with Zhejiang Sifang 251100 AN
H.O.-91. Iconet Business Diesel Engine
Centre, Temple Road
Malleswaram,
Bangalore-560003
12. Souza RT 125 DI 13.1 PT-37/396 April 2013
13. SOUZA SZ-450 MINI POWER 9.9 PT -39/399 May 2013
TILLER (TILLING TYPE)

84
14. Souza SZ-15 Power Tiller 13.9 PT-56/440 March 2014
(Trilling Type)
15. Souza SZ-15 Power Tiller 14.0 PT-57/441 March 2014
(Tilling Type)
16. Siam Kubota Industry SIAM KUBOTA RT-140-DI-RP-80 12.2 PT-16/331 September 2011
Co. Ltd. (Chennai Liaison
Office) Alwarpet,
Chennai-600018 (T .N.)
17. Indtec Elektro Control Kranti DI 1515 DF 13.7 PT-34/393 April 2013
F-15, Focal Point,
Phagwara Road,
Hoshiarpur-146 001
18. Kranti DI 1515 GN 12.8 PT-35/394 April 2013
19. Kranti IND-180 13.5 PT-51/418 September 2013
20. Kranti IND-230 13.5 PT-52/419 September 2013
21. Bengal Tools Limited (Agro Shrachi SF-15 DI 14.7 PT-67/483 January 2015
Division), 2 Jessore Road,
Dum Dum, Kolkata-700028
22. Shrachi Kubota DF 12 L 11.8 PT -89/1077 March 2007
23. Shrachi SF-12 12.5 PT-25/356 June 2012
24. Shrachi Champion Power Tiller 13.3 PT-29/369 October 2012
25. Shrachi Balwan 18.9 PT-31/383 February 2013
26. Shrachi All Rounder 11.7 PT-33/392 March 2013
27. Shrachi Shaktiman 16.5 PT-36/395 April 2013
28. Shrachi Sarpanch 11.6 PT-68/484 January 2015
29. Jayessar Equipment Private K isan Sakthi DI GN 15 L 14.7 PT -86/1071 February 2007
Limited, 91-C, Chinnasamy
Naidu Road, New Sidhapudur,
Coimbatore-641044
30. Rogini Farm Equipments SUN GN 151 DI 14.3 PT-72/495 March 2015
No. 18, V.C. Ramalingam
Street, Arcot-632503
31. SUN DF-151 DI (Tilling Type) 15.0 PT-71/494 March 2015
32. Southern Agro Engine Private MANAM MCF-121 11.6 PT-01/206 May 2007
Limited, # 24 A III Phase,
Industrial Estate, Guindy,
Chennai-600032
33. VIJAY SAMURAI PT-03 13.1 PT-24/352 April 2012
34. Kavi Agro Agency KA VI-GN 15 L 14.8 PT -92/1095 July 2007
11 KEMPS Town,
Trichi-620001 (TN)
12 3 4 5 6

85
35. KAVI -DF 15 L 15.0 PT -94/1109 December 2007
36. Universal Engineers& Traders SAMRAT GN-121 15.4 PT -93/1103 September 2007
Commerce House, 3r Floor
Room No. 6 A2, Ganesh
Chandra Avenue,
Kolkata-700013
37. Kerala Agro Machinery KAMCO KMB-200 9.1 PT -41/403 June 2013
Corporation Ltd. Athani,
District-Ernakulam-783585
(Kerala)
38. KAMCO Super DI 12.4 PT-54/426 November 2013
39. SOHARR India Agro Division SOHARR GN-121 15-DI 14.6 PT-4/228 January 2008
(Reg.), No. 17/B, Kallur
Mandli, Industrial Estate,
Shivamogga-577202
(Karnataka State)
40. SAS Motors Limited SHIFENG ANGAD 150 PT 12.0 PT -81/1034 in March 2008
117/A, Sainik Farms, conjunction with
Defence Service Enclave, PT- 95/1119
New Delhi-62
41. Vijay Engineering & VIJAY VR-15L 13.9 PT-05/233 May 2008
Machinery Company, C-1420,
Laxmipuri, Kolhapur-416002
42. Birla Power Solutions Birla Harit 11.4 PT-6/241 July 2008
Limited, Village Lal Tappar ,
P .O. Resham Majrai Grant,
Dehradun-248140
(Uttarakhand)
43. Chirag Corporation DIVYA SHAKTI 12.4 PT-09/273 December 2009
33/1, NS Road,
Kolkata-700001 (WB)
44. M/s. VST Tillers Tractors DRAGON SHAKTI 150 DI 15.0 PT-11/281 April 2010
Limited, P .B. No. 4801,
Mahadevpura Post Off.
White Field Road,
Bangalore-560048
45. Mitsubishi Shakti CT 85 8.6 PT -48/412 August 2013
[With VWH Engine]
46. VST Shakti 130 DI 12.1 PT-49/413 August 2013
47. Maharashtra Agro Industry Y ANMAR SHAKTI GN 1121 DI 10.6 PT-14/310 March 2011
# 402, 4 ALPS,
Doddaballapura Road,
Yelahanua Bangalore
(Karnataka)-560 064
12 3 4 5 6

86
48. YANMAR SHAKTI-121-DI 11.4 PT-18/3.35 October 2011
49. Mascon Tillers and Tractors Macson (MODEL : MS-15L) 14.0 PT-13/309 March 2011
Kavundathil City Centre,
Palakkad City,
Palakkad-678014
50. Sunrise International, SUNRISE (MODEL: SUNRISE-DI) 13.3 PT-17/334 October 2011
24 Strand Road,
Kolkata-700001
(West Bengal)
51. M/s Sigma Power Tiller SIGMA PLUS V2 EM 15.5 PT-22/344 January 2012
Private Ltd. 272, Marshall
House, 25, Strand Road,
Kolkata (West Bengal)
52. Premier Power Equipments Premier Garuda 3 PT 10.6 PT-26/366 September 2012
& Products Pvt. Ltd. 1200 D Power Tillers
37/1-C, Palladam Road,
Pappampatti,
Coimbatore-641 016
53. M/s. AR Agro Equipments, ANAND GN-15L-DI 15.1 PT-32/391 March 2013
D.No. FP6/289E, Kadalundi
Road, Feroke (P .O.),
Kozhikkode-637631 (Kerala)
54. M/s. Sukhlall Hanumanmall SHB DI 17.5 PT-38/398 May 2013
Baid, 159, Nripendra
Narayan Road, P .O. &
P .S.:, Coochbehar , Distt.:
Coochbehar-736 101
(West Bengal)
55. M/s. Samson Agri Power Kalinga Shakthi K-125 DI 12.1 PT-43/405 June 2013
Equipments (P) Ltd.,
132, Laxmisagar Chhak,
Cuttack Road, Bhubaneswar ,
Odisha
56. Kalinga Shakthi KS-120 11.3 PT-44/407 July 2013
57. Kalinga Shakthi KS-145 13.1 PT-45/408 July 2013
58. M/s Pace Agro Pvt. Ltd., Pace 14 DI 12.2 PT-42/404 June 2013
401,4th floor , Rattan
Esquire, 14/143,
Chunni Ganj,
Kanpur (U.P .)-208001
59. M/s. Associated Agro Changzhou GN-151 14.8 PT-46/409 July 2013
Machineries, 3/379,
Thekkekara Building,
Karimba (P .O.) Mannarkkad,
Palakkad, Kerala-678597
12 3 4 5 6

87
60. M/s. Assam Sai Motors RHINO 15 DI 13.5 PT-64/467 September 2014
Pvt. Ltd., 1/A, Nanda
Mallick Lane,
Kolkata-700 006,
West Bengal
61. RHINO Super RH 12 DI 13.7 PT-50/417 September 2013
62. M/s. Pagariya Auto Pagariya 15 DI 14.3 PT-53/423 October 2013
Pvt. Ltd., Plot No. 3,
Pagariya Tower ,
Adalat Road,
Aurangabad-431001,
Maharashtra
63. M/s Fortune Agro Impex Fortune FAI-15 DLX 12.1 PT -96/1396/2013 August 2013
Fortune House, No. 343,
9th Block Kengunte
1st Main Road
(Mallathalli Lake Road)
SIRM Visvesvaraya Layout,
Bangalore-560056
64. Indra Marshal Power Indra Marshal 14.7 PT-55/429 December 2013
Pvt. Ltd. 13-B, Sec-A,
Sanwer Road, Industrial
Area, Indore (MP)- 452015
65. BCS India Private Limited, BCS MC 740 8.1 PT -97/1444/2014 July, 2014
Vill. Manngarh, P .O. Kohara,
Machiwara Road, Ludhiana
Punjab-141112
66. M/s George Maijo Industries DFAMGC DF-15 DLG 13.7 PT-60/461 July 2014
Pvt. Ltd., 2B, Apex Plaza
5 Nungambakkam High Road
Chennai-600034
67. Action Construction ACE APT-15 13.9 PT-66/478 December 2014
Equipment Ltd. Dudhola
Link Road Dudhola,
Distt.-Palwal-121102
(Haryana)
68. Kubota Agricultural K ubota PEM 140 DI 13.2 PT-77/514 July 2015
Machinery India Pvt. Ltd.
No. 15, Medavakkam
Road Sholinnganallur ,
Chennai-600119
Tamil Nadu
69. M/s Kirloskar Oil Engines Kirloskar KMW Mega-T 15 15.8 PT-78/516 July 2015
Ltd., (KOEL) Laxmanrao
Kirloskar Road Khadki
Pune-411003, Maharashtra
12 3 4 5 6

88
POWER TILLERS - BELOW 8 BHP
1. M/s. Briggs & Stratton Briggs 3PT 1000D Light Weight 7.6 PT -47/411 August 2013
India Private Limited, Power Tiller (Tilling Type)
37/1C, Palladam Road,
Pappampatti, Coimbatore,
Tamil Nadu-641016
2. Autoprint Machinery Autoprint Terravate PTV 55 G 4.1 PT -70/492 March 2015
Manufacturers Pvt. Ltd. Power Tiller (Tilling Type)
“Kaanchan”, #9, North
Huzur Road,
Coimbatore-641018
(Tamil Nadu)
3. M/s Greaves Cotton Ltd. Greaves GS-8 DIL 7.3 PT -74/508 June 2015
Farm Equipment Business, (T illing Type)
Petrol Engine Unit,
F62 & 63 SIPCOT Industrial
Complex,
Gummidipoondi-601201
Tamil Nadu
4. M/s SAS Motors Ltd., Angad 45 PT (Tilling Type) 4.8 PT -76/510 June 2015
Plot No. 78 , Sector 3,
IMT Manesar , Gurgaon-122050
Haryana
LIST OF POWER TILLERS TESTED AT THE FARM MACHINERY
TRAINING & TESTING INSTITUTES

89
No. 13-10/99-M&T (I&-P) Vo. II
Government of India
Ministry of Agriculture & Farmers Welfare
Department of Agriculture, Cooperation and Farmers Welfare
(Mechanization & Technology Division)
Room No. 298, Krishi Bhawan, New Delhi
Dated: 10th October , 2016
The Principal Secretary (Agriculture)/Director of Agriculture (too all
States and UTs, Director of Agricultural Engineering (M.P. and T.N.,
Chhattisgarh and West Bengal) and Managing Director (All State Agro
Industries Corporations)
Subject: List of Tractors and Power Tillers tested by Farm Machinery
Training and Testing Institutes
Sir/Madam,
I am directed to invite a reference to this department’s letter of
even number dated 11.07.2016 on the Subject cited above and to
inform that list of tractors and Power Tiller tested by Farm Machinery
Training and Testing Institutes have been updated and the same have
been uploaded on the website at http://farmech.gov.in/LOE.htm.
2. It is further informed that there are two lists of each machinery
i.e. tractors, and Power Tillers. First list (Annexure-A) is comprising of
the machinery which are not due for the batch testing and the same
is valid till the further orders whereas the second list (Annexure-B) is
comprising of the machinery which are due for batch testing and the
manufacturers those who have applied for batch testing and this list
(Annexure-B) will be valid upto 31st March 2017 only and the same will
be revised after this date based on the testing progress and performance
of these machinery. It is also clarified that Tractors and Power Tillers
which are in Annexure-B are also eligible as like Annexure-A for
Government financial assistant till its validity.

90
3. This is for your information and further necessary action in the
matter.
Yours faithfull,
Enclosed : As above
Sd/-
(V .N. Kale)
Additional Commissioner (Machinery)
Telefax: 011-23387200
E-mail: kalevn2000@yahoo.co.in
Copy to: Director , FMTTI, Budni, Hissar , Gariadine and Biswanath Chariali-
for information.

91
LIST OF POWER TILLER TESTED AT THE FARM MACHINERY
TRAINING & TESTING INSTITUTES
POWER TILLERS - 8 BHP AND ABOVE
Sl. Name & Address Model Max Test T est Report
No. of Manufacturer Horsepower Report R elease
PS No. (Month and Year)
 12 3 4 5 6
 1. Teixma co. Limited TEXMACO DHANWAN DF-12 10.7 PT-30/382 February 2013
Belgharia Works,
Kolkata-700 056
 2. Ganga Motors Ganga Sifang Bhim Plus 15.0 PT -23/347 in May 2014
Farm Equipment Division, Conjunction with
23, Ganesh Chandra PT -59/449
Avenue, Kolkata-700 013
 3. Greaves Cotton Limited Greaves GS 15 DILS 15.4 PT-63/466 September 2014
Farm Equipment Business
Petrol Engines Unit F-62&63,
SIPCOT Industrial Complex
Gummidipoondi-601 201
 4. Greaves GS 15 DIL 14.7 PT-65/477 November 2014
 5. Greaves GS 14 DIL 13.3 PT-61/464 August 2014
 6. Greaves GS 14 DLX 15.2 PT-62/465 September 2014
 7. Southern Agro Engine Manam MCF-121 12.0 PT-83/583 January 2014
Private Limited, #24A III,
Phase, Industrial Estate,
Guindy, Chennai-600 032
 8. Kavi Agro Agency , 164, KA VI-GN 15L 15.1 PT-79/569 December 2014
Kumaran Road,
Sangiliyandapuram, Main
Road Trichi-620 001 (TN)
 9. KAVI-DF 15L 14.7 PT-80/570 December 2014
10. Sunrise International Sunrise-DI 13.2 PT -82/582 January 2014
24, Strand Road
Kolkata-700 001
(West Bengal)
11. Souza Sifang Agro Souza SZ-15 Power Tiller 13.9 PT-56/440 March 2014
Engineering Pvt. Ltd., (T illing Type)
H.O.-91, Iconet Business
Centre, Temple Road,
Malleswaram,
Bangalore-560 003

92
12. Souza Sifang Agro Souza SF-15 Power Tiller 14.0 PT-57/441 March 2014
Engineering Pvt. Ltd., (T illing Type)
H.O.-91, Iconet Business
Centre, Temple Road,
Malleswaram,
Bangalore-560 003
13. Indtec Elektro Control Kranti IND-180 13.5 PT-51/418 September 2014
F-15, Focal Point,
Phagwara Road,
Hoshiarpur-146 001
14. Kranti IND-230 13.5 PT-52/419 September 2014
15. Bengal Tools Limited Shrachi SF-15DI 14.7 PT-67/483 January 2015
(Agro Division), 2 Jessore
Road, Dum Dum,
Kolkata-700 028
16. Shrachi Sarpanch 11.6 PT-68/484 January 2015
17. SARACHI Champion Power Tiller 14.5 PT-88/662 June 2016
18. Rogini Farm Equipments Sungn 151 DI 14.3 PT-72/495 March 2015
No. 18, V.C. Ramalingam
Street, Arcot-632 503
19. SUNDF-151DI (T illing Type) 15.0 PT-71/494 March 2015
20. Kerala Agro Machinery KAMCO KMB-200 9.1 PT -41/403 June 2013
Corporation Ltd., Athani,
District-Ernakulum-783 585
(Kerala)
21. KAMCO Super DI 12.4 PT-54/426 November 2013
22. M/s. VST Tillers Tractors Mitsubishi Shakti CT 85 8.6 PT -48/412 August 2013
Limited P .B. No. 4801, [With VWH Engine]
Mahadevpura Post Off.
White Field Road, Bangalore
23. VST Shakti 130DI 12.1 PT-49/413 August 2013
24. M/s. Samson Agri Power Kaling Shakthi KS-120 11.3 PT-44/407 July 2013
Equipments (P) Ltd., 132,
Laxmisagar Chhak, Cuttack
25. Kalinga Shakthi KS-145 13.1 PT-45/408 July 2013
26. M/s. Associated Agro Changzhou GN-151 14.8 PT-46/409 July 2013
Machineries, 3/379,
Thekkekara Building,
Karimba (P .O.) Mannarkkad,
Palakkad, Kerala-678 597
27. M/s. Assam Sai Motors RHINO 15 DI 13.5 PT-64/467 September 2014
Pvt. Ltd., 1/A, Nanda
Mallick Lane,
Kolkata-700 006
West Bengal
12 3 4 5 6

93
28. M/s. Assam Sai Motors RHINO Super RH 12DI 13.7 PT-50/417 September 2013
Pvt. Ltd., 1/A, Nanda
Mallick Lane,
Kolkata-700 006
West Bengal
29. M/s. Pagariya Auto Pvt. Ltd. Pagariya 15 DI 14.3 PT-53/423 October 2013
Plot No. 3, Pagariya Tower ,
Adalat Road,
Aurangabad-431 001,
Maharashtra
30. M/s. Fortune Agro Impex Fortune FAI-15 DLX 12.1 PT -96/1396/2013 August 2013
Fortune House No. 343,
9th Block Kengunte
1st Main Road
(Mallathalli Lake Road,
Bangalore-560 056
12 3 4 5 6

94
File No. 13-10/99-M&T (I&P)
Government of India
Ministry of Agriculture and Farmers Welfare
(Department of Agriculture, Cooperation and Farmers Welfare)
Krishi Bhawan, New Delhi-110 001
Dated the 5th July, 2017
To,
1. The Secretary (Agriculture)
(All States/UTs)
2. Director (Agriculture)
(All States/UTs)
3. Managing Director
(All State Agro Industries Corporations)
4. Director (Agricultural Engineering)
(Government of MP , TN, Chhattisgarh and WB)
Subject: List of Power Tillers Tested by Farm Machinery Training and
Testing Institutes
Sir/Madam
I am directed to invite a reference to this Department’s letter of
even number dated 2 June, 2017 regarding updating the list of power
tiller tested by farm machinery training and testing institutes on the
website of this division.
The list of Power tillers has been revised in supersession of all the
previous lists by way of including only those MOELS OF POWER TILLERS
THAT ARE COMPLYING WITH THE Comformity of production (CoP) for
mass emission of exhaust gases and the requirements under Central
Motor Vehicles Rules (CMVR). The power tiller models that were due
for batch testing, but have not undergone batch testing so far , have
also been deleated. The revised list has been uploaded on the website
at http://farmech.gov.in/LOE.htm
This is for your information and further necessary action in the
matter.
Yours faithfully
Sd/-
(V .N. Kale)
Additional Commissioner (M&T)
Telefax No.: 011-23387200

95
Copy to: The Director, FMTTI, Budni (Madhya Pradesh), Hissar (Haryana),
Garladinne (Andhra Pradesh) and Biswanath Chariali (Assam) for
information.

96
Information on Power Tiller’s Companies empanelled by DAC&FW w.e.f. 1.1.2018
Sl. Name of Address Whether Annual Type  of Certification furnished
No. Company Manufacturer/ Production/Import before employment
Importer Capacity of
Power Tiller
12 3 4 5 6
1. Ms. Greaves Cotton 72, SIPCOT Industrial Complex Importer 2828 • I nitial & Batch Commercial Testing
Ltd. Ranipet, Tamil Nadu-632 403 • Type approval/COP of engines
• CMVR Certification of Power tiller models
2. M/s. Chirag Corporation 320, Marshall House, 33/1 , Importer 620 • Initial & Batch Commercial Testing
N.S. Road, Kolkata-700 001, • Type approval/COP of engines
West Bengal • CMVR Certification of Power tiller models
3. M/s. Sunrise International 24, Strand R oad, Kolkata Importer 132 • Initial & Batch Commercial Testing
(WB)-700 001 • Type approval/COP of engines
• CMVR Certification of Power tiller models
4. M/s. Indra Marshal 13/B, Industrial Area, Sector A, Importer 136 • Initial & Batch Commercial Testing
Power Pvt. Ltd. Sanwer Road, Indore, • Type approval/COP of engines
Madhya Pradesh-452 015 • CMVR Certification of Power tiller models
5. M/s. Indtec Electro D-19B, Focal Point, Hosiarpur Importer 3000 • I nitial & Batch Commercial Testing
Control Punjab-146 001 • Type approval/COP of engines
• CMVR Certification of Power tiller models

97
 6. M/s. Southern Agro #24A, III Phase, Industrial Importer 400-500 • I nitial & Batch Commercial Testing
Engine Pvt. Ltd. Estate, Guindy, Chennai-32 • Type approval/COP of engines
• CMVR Certification of Power tiller models
 7. M/s. Bengal Tools 2, Jessore Road, Dum Dum, Importer 1250 • I nitial & Batch Commercial Testing
Limited, (Agro Div.) Kolkata (WB)-700028 • Type approval/COP of engines
• CMVR Certification of Power tiller models
 8. M/s. Kerala Agro Athani-683585, Ernakulam Manufacturer 9984 • I nitial & Batch Commercial Testing
Machinery Corpn. Ltd. Distt. (Kerala) • Type approval/COP of engines
• CMVR Certification of Power tiller models
 9. M/s. VST Tillers P .B. No. 4801, Mahadevapura Manufacturer 60000 • I nitial & Batch Commercial Testing
Tractors Ltd. Post, White field Road, • Type approval/COP of engines
Bangalore-48 • CMVR Certification of Power tiller models
10. M/s. Assam Saii 1/A, Nanda Mallick Lane, Importer 600 • I nitial & Batch Commercial Testing
Motors Pvt. Ltd. Kolkata-700006, West Bengal • Type approval/COP of engines
• CMVR Certification of Power tiller models
11. M/s. Kubota Agricultural No. 15, Madavakkam R oad, Importer 400-500 • I nitial & Batch Commercial Testing
Machinery India Sholinganallur, Chennai-600119 • Type approval/COP of engines
Pvt. Ltd. (Tamil Nadu) • CMVR Certification of Power tiller models
12. M/s. Kirloskar Oil Laxmanrao Kirloskar Road, Manufacturer 2408 • I nitial & Batch Commercial Testing
Engines Ltd. (KOEL) Khadki, Pune-411003 • Type approval/COP of engines
(Maharashtra) • CMVR Certification of Power tiller models

98
12 3 4 5 6
13. Samyak Motors Pvt. Ltd. 3/34C, Athipalayam Main Road, Manufacturer 50 • Initi al & Batch Commercial Testing
Coimbatore, Tamil Nadu-641110 • Type approval/COP of engines
• CMVR Certification of Power tiller models
14. M/s. George Maijo 2B, Apex Plaza, 5 Nungambakkam Importer 600-700 • I nitial & Batch Commercial Testing
Industries Pvt. Ltd. High Road, Chennai-600034 • Type approval/COP of engines
• CMVR Certification of Power tiller models

99
ANNEXURE XI
Shri Ashwani Kumar
Joint Secretary
Government of India
Ministry of Agriculture and
Farmers Welfare
Department of Agriculture,
Cooperation and Farmers
Welfare
Krishi Bhawan,
New Delhi-110001
Jh v'ouh oqQekj
la;qDr lfpo
Hkkjr ljdkj
o`Qf"k ,oa fdlku dY;k.k ea=kky;
o`Qf"k] lgdkfjrk ,oa fdlku dY;k.k foHkkx
o`Qf"k Hkou] ubZ fnYyh&110001
D.O. No. 9-1/2009-M&T (I&P) 9th November , 2017
Dear Shri Udaiji,
I would like to inform you that the Parliamentary Standing
Committee on Agriculture in its meeting held on 2nd November 2017
has taken up the subject “Variance in Cost and Quality of Agricultural
Tools and implements being provided to the farmers under Rashtriya
Krishi Vikas Yojana (RKVY) and Problems being faced by Farmers due
to imported Power Tiller ” for discussion. During the meeting the issue
of low cost substandard quality imported (Chinese) power tillers has
been raised.
It has been pointed out that the Indian Power Tiller Companies are
facing a stiff challenge on account of large imports from China which
now accounts for about 30 per cent of the total Industry sales. The
Expert Committee constituted by this Department to look into these
issues, in its report recommended that increasing customs duty upto
25% from the present level of 7.5% for the imported power tillers and
making regulations and internal taxes less onerous to the domestic
manufacturers to boost ‘Make in India’ campaign will help promoting
the cause of indigenous manufacturers.
Therefore, I would be grateful to you if you would kindly examine
the issue of increasing the Customs duty on power tillers from the
existing rate of 7.5% to 25% and initiate suitable action in this regard.
Yours sincerely
Sd/-
(Ashwani Kumar)

100
Shri Udai Singh Kumawat
Joint Secretary (TRU)
Department of Revenue
Ministry of Finance
North Block, New Delhi

101
ANNEXURE XII
Hkkjr ljdkj
o`Qf"k ,oa fdlku dY;k.k ea=kky;
o`Qf"k] lgdkfjrk ,oa fdlku
dY;k.k foHkkx
Government of India
Ministry of Agriculture and
Farmers Welfare
Department of Agriculture,
Cooperation and Farmers
Welfare
S.K. PATTANAYAK
SECRETARY
D.O. No. 13-2/2014-M&T (I&P) 24th May, 2018
Dear Shri Adhia,
I would like to inform you that the Parliamentary Standing
Committee on Agriculture, in its Fifty First Report, recommended for
taking steps such as lowering of GST on Indigenous Power Tillers,
enhancing custom duties on imported power tillers to 25% and imposing
quota restrictions on import from China to 5-10% of total demand of
power tillers in the country.
The Committee inter alia recommended that the Department should
vigorously take these proposals with Government to safeguard to support
domestic power tiller industry. A copy of the Report is enclosed for
your reference.
A proposal for increasing Customs Duty on power tillers from the
existing rate of 7.5% to 25% was earlier submitted to the Department
of Revenue vide this Department’s D.O. letter No. 9-1/2009-M&T (I&P)
dated 9th November 2017 (copy enclosed).
The power Tillers in the country are mainly imported from China
under the Tariff Head 84328020-Rotary Tiller and 84328090-Other (Parts),
which accounts for about 30 per cent of the total industry sales. The
domestic powr tillers industries are facing stiff competition on account
of this cheaper import from China.

102
I would be grateful if you would kindly look into the matter and
initiate suitable action towards increasing the Customs duty on power
tillers from the existing rate of 7.5% to 25% and imposing quota
restrictions on import of power tillers from China to the level of 10%
of total demand of power tillers in the country, which presently is at
around 60,000 power tillers per annum.
With kind regards,
Yours sincerely,
Sd/-
(S.K. Pattanayak)
Encl. as above:
Shri Hasmukh Adhia
Secretary
Department of Revenue
Ministry of Finance
North Block, New Delhi

103
ANNEXURE XIII
o`Qf"k ,oa fdlku dY;k.k ea=kky;
Hkkjr ljdkj
Ministry of Agriculture and
Farmers Welfare
Government of India
jk/k eksgu flag
RADHA MOHAN SINGH
D.O. No. 1615/AM
D.O. No. 14-8/2016-M&T (I&P) 11th July, 2017
Dear Shri Arun Jaitely Jee,
I would like to convey that this Ministry has received numbers of
representations from manufactures of tractors, combine harvester,
power tillers and agricultural machinery regarding anomalies in GST
rates Slabs with respect to existing tax rates applicable to their products.
Subsequently, a meeting with the Tractor and other Agriculture
machinery manufacturers was called by this Department to discuss
their issues related with implementation of GST . After the discussion
and examination, of their representations their anomalies are tabulated
in Annexure-I. Further , they also drew attention on the following specific
issues:
(a) At present, there is no Excise Duty and also no VAT on Farm
Machinery and implements in most of the States. Under GST
most of the Tractors operated Agriculture Machinery, Combine
Harvester , Agriculture Trailer etc. are covered in 12% tax
slab. The farmers would be compelled to increase the prices
that will put an extra financial burden on farmers.
(b) The Manufacturers Association expressed a major concern
over their products lying with the dealers and manufacture’s
depot on the transition date, for which Input Tax. On
material, components, spare parts have already been paid
by the manufacturers and the same is embedded in the
selling price of the their Agricultural machinery machines
and equipments. As per GST transition rules, such input
duty on pending stocks is not covered in Input Tax Credit
(ITC), and GST on these stock will cause additional burden
on farmers.

104
(c) The manufacturers requested to consider the same GST rate
at par with the existing tax as applicable to the spare parts
and components exclusively designed and fitted to their
agriculture machineries, through they may have the same
nomenclatures that are being used in other industries.
Therefore, it is requested that the issues as above raised by the
manufacturers of tractors, combine harvesters, power tillers and
agricultural machinery, may kindly be examined and reviewed keeping
in view the fact that Agricultural mechanization is imperative to increase
the growing demand of the foodgrains as well as the farmers income,
and any additional imposition of tax will act as stumbling block in farm
mechanization.
With Regards,
Yours sincerely
Sd/-
(Radha Mohan Singh)
Shri Arun Jaitley,
Finance Minister
Government of India,
Room No. 134, North Block,
New Delhi-110 001

105
ANNEXURE
List of Agricultural Items requested for review in GST Slabs by
the Tractors and Agricultural machinery manufacturer
Sl. Agricultural HSN Code Existing Tax Rate GST R emark
No. Machinery/ Input Output P roposed Rate/Slab
Components in GST Requested
in GST
12 3 4 5 6 7 8
1. Agricultural and 84244100/8 Nil Nil Not clear Nil Proposed at
Horticultural 4248200 *28% par with
Sprayers and existing rate
other appliances
and parts
2. Brush Cutter/ 84678990 12.5% Nil 18% 12% P roposed at
power weeder par with
existing rate
3. Mist Blower 8424/8414 12.5% 5% 28% 5% Its used for
crop
protection in
the category
of Sprayers
4. Tractor input 8708 12.5% 5% 28% 18% P roposed at
components & par with
parts/Attachments/ existing rate
Accessories like
front end loaders,
back hoes etc.
5. High pressure 84243008/ 12.5% 5.5% 28% 18% P roposed at
Cleaner 84248990 par with
existing rate
6. Parts of Fixed 8409 6% 5% 28% 12% The rates
speed Agricultural already in
diesel engine reduced slab
of 12%

106
 7. Constant Speed, 8407 & 8408 12% 5% 12% 12% (At proposed at
Petrol engine, par with par with
Petrol Statrt and Constant Constant
Kerosene run or Speed Speed diesel
Petrol Start Diesel diesel engines for
run engines for engines) Agriculture
Agriculture purpose purpose
 8. Engine component 8409,8483, 28% 28% 12% (At par with
Parts of fixed 8484 rate slab
speed diesel engines applicable
to Constant
Speed diesel
engines for
Agriculture
Purpose
 9. Agricultural 8483 12% 5% 28% 12% For Specially
Transmission designed
Shaft and
developed
for Agril
Machines
only
10. Agricultural 8484 12% 5% 28% 12% For
Gas ket and Specially
Similar Joints designed
and
developed
for Agril
Machines
only
11. Agricultural 8501 12% 5% 28% 12% Extensively
Electric used in Agri
Generators for irrigation
by farmers
12. Goods not 8413 12% 5% 28% 12% For
specified Specially
elsewhere designed
and
developed
for Agril
Machines
only
 12 3 4 56 7 8

107
13. Agricultural 8502 12% 5% 18% 12% Used for
Electric submersible
Generators set pumps
14. Parts suitable to 8503 12% 5% 18% 12% Used for
use solely are submersible
principally with pumps
machine of
8502
15. Combine 8433 Nil 6.05% 12% 5% High value
Harvester items and
extensively
used by
farmers only
16. Parts suitable 8433900 Nil 6.05% 12% 5% Specially
to use sol ely ar e designed
principally with and
Combine Harvester developed
Engines, Transmission, for Combine
Hydraulics, Tyres and harvesters
Tubes, clutches, and can not
pullies, Shafts, be used else
couplings, crank where.
shaft, Straw
walkers etc.
17. Tractor operated 8432,8433 Nil Nil 12% Nil P roposed at
Agricultural par with
machines and existing rate
parts thereof and to be
used by
farmers only
18. Four wheel non- 8716/2020 Nil Nil 28% 12% T wo wheel
tipping tipping
Agricultural trailer trailer
already
categorized
under 8716
is already
existing at
12% GST
12 3 4 5 6 7 8

108
APPENDIX I
STANDING COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE
(2017-18)
MINUTES OF THE TWENTY SEVENTH SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE
The Committee sat on Tuesday, the 31st July, 2018 from 1500 hrs.
to 1635 hrs. in the Committee Room “B”, Ground Floor, Parliament
House Annexe, New Delhi.
PRESENT
Shri Hukm Dev Narayan Yadav — Chairperson
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Sanjay Dhotre
3. Prof. Ravindra Vishwanath Gaikwad
4. Shri Nalin Kumar Kateel
5. Smt. Raksha Nikhil Khadse
6. Md. Badaruddoza Khan
7. Shri C. Mahendran
8. Dr. Tapas Mandal
9. Shri Nityanand Rai
10. Shri Mukesh Rajput
11. Shri Virendra Singh
12. Shri Dharmendra Yadav
13. Shri Jai Prakash Narayan Yadav
Rajya Sabha
14. Shri Rajmani Patel
15. Shri Kailash Soni
16. Shri Harnath Singh Yadav
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Shri D.S. Malha — Joint Secretary
2. Shri Arun K. Kaushik — Director
3. Smt. Juby Amar — Additional Director
4. Shri Sumesh Kumar — Under Secretary

109
*2. ***** ***** ***** *****
*3. ***** ***** ***** *****
[The Witnesses Withdrew]
4. Thereafter , the Committee took up for consideration the following
draft Reports:
*(i) ***** ***** ***** *****
*(ii) ***** ***** ***** *****
*(iii) ***** ***** ***** *****
(iv) Draft Report on the Action Taken by the Government on the
Observations/Recommendations contained in the 51st Report
(16th Lok Sabha) of the Standing Committee on Agriculture
(2017-18) on the Subject “Variance in Cost and Quality of
Agricultural Tools and Implements Being Provided to the
Farmers under Rashtriya Krishi Vikas Yojana (RKVY) and
Problems Being Faced by the Farmers Due to Imported Power
Tillers — A Review” of the Ministry of Agriculture and Farmers
Welfare (Department of Agriculture, Cooperation and Farmers
Welfare).
*(v) ***** ***** ***** *****
*(vi) ***** ***** ***** *****
5. After some deliberations, the Committee adopted the draft
Reports at para (i), (ii), (iii), (v) and (vi) without any modifications and
Draft Report at para (iv) with minor modification and authorized the
Chairperson to finalize and present these Reports to Parliament after
factual verification of Subject report from the concerned Departments/
Ministries.
*6. ***** ***** ***** *****
(A copy of the verbatim proceedings of the Sitting has been kept
separately).
The Committee then adjourned.
*Matter not related to this Report.

110
APPENDIX II
(Vide Para 4 of Introduction of the Report)
ANAL YSIS OF ACTION TAKEN BY GOVERNMENT ON THE FIFTY FIRST
REPORT (16th LOK SABHA) OF STANDING COMMITTEE ON
AGRICULTURE (2017-18)
(i) Total number of Recommendations: 11
(ii) Recommendations/Observations which have been
accepted by the Government:
Para Nos. 1, 3 and 10
Total 03
Percentage 27.28%
(iii) Recommendations/Observations which the Committee
do not desire to pursue in view of the Government ’s
replies:
Para No. 8
Total 01
Percentage 09.09%
(iv) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which
replies of the Government have not been accepted
by the Committee:
Para Nos. 4, 5, 6, 7 & 9
Total 05
Percentage 45.45%
(v) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which
Final replies of the Government are still awaited:
Para Nos. 2 and 11
Total 02
Percentage 18.18%