FIFTY-THIRD REPORT
STANDING COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE
(2017-2018)
( SIXTEENTH LOK SABHA )
MINISTRY OF AGRICULTURE AND
FARMERS WELFARE
(DEPARTMENT OF ANIMAL HUSBANDRY,
DAIRYING AND FISHERIES)
“SCHEME ON DEVELOPMENT OF INLAND
FISHERIES AND AQUACULTURE –
AN ANALYSIS”
Presented to Lok Sabha on                25.07.2018
Laid on the Table of Rajya Sabha on 25.07.2018
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
July, 2018/Shravana, 1940 (Saka)

C.O.A. No. 375
Price : ` 119.00
© 2018 BY LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of
Business in Lok Sabha (Fifteenth Edition) and Printed by National Printers,
New Delhi-110 028.

(i)
CONTENTS
PAGE
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE (2016-17).............................................. (v)
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE (2017-18)..............................................(vii)
INTRODUCTION..............................................................................................(ix)
REPORT
PART I
CHAPTER I Introduction...................................................................... 1
(i) Thrust Areas............................................................... 3
(ii)Funding Pattern under Blue Revolution............... 8
C
HAPTER II Inland Fisheries Sector Pre and Post Blue Revolution..... 11
A. Financial and Physical Targets and Achievements
of the Fisheries Sector during the Last Four Fiscal
Years of the Twelfth Plan (upto 2015-16).............. 11
(i) Outlay and Expenditure of funds for the
Fisheries Sector (before Blue Revolution).... 11
(ii)Physical Targets and Achievements............. 12
B. Financial Targets and Achievements and Physical
Targets of the Fisheries Sector under Blue
Revolution During 2016-17..................................... 13
(i) Financial allocation and Expenditure.......... 13
(ii)Physical Targets and their current status..... 15
C. Issue of Pending Utilization Certificates.............. 18
C
HAPTERIII Schematic analysis of the component ‘development
of Inland fisheries and aquaculture’ of Blue
Revolution.......................................................................... 19
A. Status and Analysis................................................... 19

B. Activities Covered under the Component
‘Development of Inland Fisheries and
Aquaculture’ of the Scheme on Blue Revolution.... 20
• Construction / Renovation of ponds............ 21
• Establishment of Hatcheries and Fish feed
Mills and their quality standards.................. 22
• Re-circulatory Aquaculture System (RAS)
and Running Water Fishing........................... 23
• Training and Skill Development of Fish
Farmers.............................................................. 26
• Assessment and harnessing of resource
potential and sustainable practices in
fishing................................................................ 29
• Development of Wetlands and Beels and
utilizing river water......................................... 31
• Leasing out of water bodies and steps
taken to promote aquaculture....................... 33
• Innovation in inland fisheries, research
collaboration and integration........................ 35
• Measures to promote adoption of inland
fisheries and aquaculture practices among
fishermen........................................................... 37
• Role of Fish Cooperatives in inland
fisheries.............................................................. 38
• Fish production and productivity................ 39
• Harnessing true potential of the Inland
Fisheries Sector................................................. 40
P
ART II
Recommendations/Observations.................................... 42
ANNEXURES
I. State/UT-wise Details of the beneficiaries under
the component of Development of Inland Fisheries
and Aquaculture............................................................... 53
II. Area covered under freshwater aquaculture............... 55
P
AGE
(ii)

(iii)
III. State/UT-wise details of funds released and utilized
during the FY 2016-17 under Blue Revolution
Scheme............................................................................... 57
IV. Details on State wise post-harvest fisheries
infrastructure facilities provided during 2016-17...... 59
V. Details on the State-wise hatcheries available upto
2016-17 in the country..................................................... 61
VI. Number of Trainees proposed under Skill
Development Plan for FY 2017-18................................. 63
VII. State/UT-wise Potential resources Identified under
Blue Revolution for FY 2017-18..................................... 65
VIII. Database of Fisheries Cooperatives in India............... 68
A
PPENDICES
I. Minutes of the 9th Sitting of the Standing Committee
on Agriculture (2016-17) held on 09.01.2017............... 71
II. Minutes of the 23rd Sitting of the Standing Committee
on Agriculture (2016-17) held on 30.06.2017............... 77
III.Extract of the Minutes of the 26th Sitting of the
Standing Committee on Agriculture (2017-18) held
on 19.07.2018..................................................................... 83
P
AGE

COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON
AGRICULTURE (2016-17)
Shri Hukmdev Narayan Yadav — Chairperson
M EMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Prof. Ravindra Vishwanath Gaikwad
3. Shri Sanganna Karadi
4. Shri Nalin Kumar Kateel
5. Smt. Raksha Khadse
6. Md. Badaruddoza Khan
7. Shri C. Mahendran
8. Dr. Tapas Mandal
9. Shri Janardan Mishra
10. Shri Devji Patel
11. Shri Nityanand Rai
12. Shri Mukesh Rajput
13. Shri Neiphiu Rio
14. Shri Konakalla Narayana Rao
15. Shri C.L. Ruala
16. Shri Arjun Charan Sethi
17. Shri Satyapal Singh (Sambhal)
18. Shri Virendra Singh
19. Shri Dharmendra Yadav
20. Shri Jai Prakash Narayan Yadav
21. Shri B.S. Yeddyurappa
(v)

Rajya Sabha
22. Shri Sambhaji Chhatrapati
23. Sardar Sukhdev Singh Dhindsa
24. Shri Janardan Dwivedi
25. Shri Meghraj Jain
26. Shri Vinay Katiyar
27. Shri Mohd. Ali Khan
28. Shri Ram Nath Thakur
29. Shri R. Vaithilingam
30. Shri Shankarbhai N. Vegad
31. Shri Darshan Singh Yadav
(vi)

(vii)
COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON
AGRICULTURE (2017-18)
Shri Hukmdev Narayan Yadav — Chairperson
M EMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Sanjay Dhotre
3. Prof. Ravindra Vishwanath Gaikwad
4. Shri Sanganna Amarappa Karadi
5. Shri Nalin Kumar Kateel
6. Smt. Raksha Tai Khadase
7. Md. Badaruddoza Khan
8. Shri C. Mahendran
9. Dr. Tapas Mandal
10. Shri Janardan Mishra
@11. Shri Praveen Kumar Nishad
12. Shri Devji M. Patel
13. Shri Nityanand Rai
14. Shri Mukesh Rajput
15. Shri Konakalla Narayana Rao
16. Shri C.L. Ruala
17. Shri Arjun Charan Sethi
18. Shri Virendra Singh
19. Shri Dharmendra Yadav
@ Shri Praveen Kumar Nishad, MP Lok Sabha nominated vice Shri Nephiu Rio, MP
Lok Sabha w.e.f. 27.04.2018 vide Bulletin Part II No. 6866 dated 27.04.2018.

(viii)
20. Shri Jai Prakash Narayan Yadav
#21. Vacant
Rajya Sabha
22. Sardar Sukhdev Singh Dhindsa
*23. Shri Rajmani Patel
*24. Shri Narayan Rane
*25. Shri Kailash Soni
26. Shri Mohd. Ali Khan
27. Shri K.K. Ragesh
28. Shri Ram Nath Thakur
29. Shri R. Vaithilingam
*30. Shri Harnath Singh Yadav
31. Dr. Chandrapal Singh Yadav
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Shri D.S. Malha —Joint Secretary
2. Shri Arun K. Kaushik —Director
3. Smt. Juby Amar —Additional Director
4. Ms. Divya Rai —Executive Assistant
# Vacant due to resignation of Shri B.S. Yeddyurappa from the Membership of Lok Sabha
w.e.f. 18.05.2018 v i d e Bulletin Part-II Table Office(B) No. 6885 dated 19.05.2018.
* Vice Shri Janardan Dwivedi, Shri Meghraj Jain, Shri Vinay Katiyar and Shri Shankarbhai
N. Vegad, who ceased to be the Member of the Committee on their retirement from,
Rajya Sabha on 27.01.2018, 02.04.2018, 02.04.2018 and 02.04.2018 respectively.

(ix)
INTRODUCTION
I, the Chairperson, Standing Committee on Agriculture (2017-2018)
having been authorized by the Committee to submit the Report on their
behalf, present this Fifty-third Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) on the subject
“Scheme on Development of Inland Fisheries and Aquaculture — An
Analysis” pertaining to the Ministry of Agriculture and Farmers Welfare
(Department of Animal Husbandry, Dairying and Fisheries).
2. The Committee took evidence of the representatives of Ministry
of Agriculture and Farmers Welfare (Department of Animal Husbandry,
Dairying and Fisheries) on the subject at their Sittings held on 09.01.2017
and on 30.06.2017.
3. The Report was considered and adopted by the Committee at
their Sitting held on 19.07.2018.
4. For facility of reference, the observations/recommendations of
the Committee have been printed in bold at Part-II of the Report.
5. The Committee wish to express their thanks to representatives
of the Ministry of Agriculture and Farmers Welfare (Department of Animal
Husbandry, Dairying and Fisheries) for furnishing requisite information
to the Committee in connection with examination of the subject.
6. The Committee would also like to place on record their deep
sense of appreciation for the invaluable assistance rendered to them by
the officials of Lok Sabha Secretariat attached to the Committee.
N
EW DELHI; HUKMDEV NARAYAN YADAV,
24 July, 2018 Chairperson,
02 Shravana, 1940 (Saka) Standing Committee on Agriculture.

REPORT
PART I
CHAPTER I
INTRODUCTION
Introductory
1.1 The Fisheries sector has been recognized as a powerful income
and employment generator. It also stimulates growth of a number of
subsidiary industries. At the same time, it is an occupation which provides
livelihood for a large section of economically backward population of the
country. More than 1.4 crore people in the country depend on fisheries
and aquaculture for their livelihood. Indian fisheries are an important
component of global fisheries, it being the second largest producer of fish
in the world and second in inland fish production, next only to China.
Fisheries sector occupies an important place in socio-economic
development of the country.
1.2 Fisheries and Aquaculture are included in the State list, however,
the Union Government supplements the efforts of the States/Union
Territories (UTs) for development of the sector. Inland sector is by and
large, fully in the domain of the State Governments while marine fisheries
is a shared responsibility between the Central and coastal State Governments.
1.3 Fish production in India increased from 7.5 lakh metric tonnes
in 1950-51 to 107.95 lakh metric tonnes in 2015-16. There has been a
steady growth in inland fisheries sector at the rate of about seven per
cent per annum in the period 2012-13 to 2015-16. The inland fisheries
resource potential in the country includes reservoirs 35 lakh ha, ponds
and tanks 23.6 lakh ha, brackish water 12.4 lakh ha rivers and canals
19 lakh km.
1.4 The historical scenario of Indian fisheries reveals a paradigm
shift from marine dominated fisheries to a scenario where inland fisheries
has emerged as a major contributor to the overall fish production in the
country. Within inland fisheries, there is a shift from capture fisheries
to aquaculture during the last two and a half decades. Freshwater
aquaculture with a share of 34 per cent in inland fisheries in mid-1980s

2
has increased to about 80 per cent in recent years. It has emerged as a
major fish producing system in India as a result of initiatives taken by
the Government. Fish Farmers Development Agencies (FFDA) were set
up in various districts for delivering a package of technologies, practices,
training and extension and for providing financial assistance to the
beneficiaries. So far, about 0.65 million ha of water area has been brought
under fish farming covering 1.1 million beneficiaries. Currently the average
annual yield is around 3.0 tonnes/ha. At the same time training has been
imparted to about 0.8 million fishers.
1.5 Although, inland fisheries have grown in absolute terms, the
rate of growth in terms of its potential is not yet achieved. The vast
inland resources include a network of rivers, canals, estuaries, floodplain
lakes and the ponds and tanks located in different geographical regions.
It comprises 0.19 million ha of rivers and canals, 1.2 million ha floodplain
lakes, 2.36 million ha of ponds and tanks and 3.15 million ha of reservoirs.
1.6 The manmade reservoir resources cover more than 3.0 million
ha water spread area and are mostly distributed in varied climatic
environment congenial for fish growth. The average fish production
potential was estimated at 250 kg./ha of reservoirs and about 350 kg./ha
for wetlands. While reservoirs and freshwater aquaculture would be the
two main pillars of growth, other resources such as upland water bodies,
floodplain lakes and wetlands, irrigation canals, saline and waterlogged
areas also need to be gradually mainstreamed to start contributing to the
production. Another major activity in aquaculture sector is the cage/pen
culture in open waters, which has picked up very well in recent years.
It offers vast potential for inland aquaculture in the country. The
production potential from sustainable cage culture for table fish
production is about 50 kg./m
3 with enormous possibility for further
expansion and intensification.
1.7 The freshwater fish farming is lacking in quality inputs in terms
of seed, feed, health management and marketing support. Programs aimed
at production and distribution of quality seed and feed for aquaculture
and also culture-based-capture fisheries; husbandry of farmed species
and availability of quality water are essential to optimize production and
productivity from inland fisheries and aquaculture in the country.
1.8 The cold water resources are distributed mainly in the form of
upland streams, rivers, lakes and reservoirs that are located at medium
to high altitudes of Himalayan corridor such as Jammu and Kashmir,
Himachal Pradesh, Uttarakhand, Sikkim, West Bengal and all North-
Eastern States. The Himalayan region has around 8,243 km. long streams
and rivers, 20, 500 ha natural lakes, 50,000 ha of reservoirs and 2500 ha

3
brackish water lakes. These water bodies inhabit diverse kind of fish
fauna of 258 cold water fish species. At present, the total fish production
from upland areas constitute about 3% of inland fish production of India
which is a very small share to the overall production. Commercial farming
of high value cold water species like exotic rainbow trout has been taken
up successfully and estimable progress has been made. Jammu and
Kashmir, Himachal Pradesh and Sikkim are the leading States in trout
farming.
1.9 Brackish water estuaries or river mouth is another set of water
bodies having the peculiarity of fluctuating salinity due to tidal effects
which have huge potential for both fish and shell fish culture. Valuable
fish like sea bass, pearl spot and shrimp could be cultured in large
quantities. India has 1.24 million ha of brackish water area spread over
all maritime States / Union Territories (UTs), but hardly 15 % of brackish
water areas are developed for commercial farming. Shrimps, oysters,
mussels, crabs, lobsters, sea bass, groupers, mullets, milk fish, cobia, silver
pompano, pearl spot, ornamental fishes and sea weeds are being farmed
to some extent. The Coastal Aquaculture Authority (CAA) is regulating
these activities in saline and brackish water systems within 2 kms. from
the High Tide Line for sustainable development of coastal aquaculture
sector.
1.10 In case of shrimp (L. vannamei) quality seed resources are an
essential element of production. Hatchery and seed production techniques
have so far been standardized for few commercial shrimps, crabs and
fin fishes. Demonstration of feasibility of inland saline aquaculture in the
State of Haryana and Punjab has opened up scope for bringing these
resources under economic use which hitherto remained unfit for any
other agricultural activity.
1.11 Ornamental fish farming, although a non-food activity also
has a promising future and is likely to contribute to the overall growth
of fisheries sector in the coming years in terms of foreign exchange
earnings and additional livelihood opportunities both in the urban and
rural areas.
(i) Thrust Areas
1.12 It has been observed that inland fishery today is dominated
mainly by the freshwater fishery. In order to enhance production, there
is a need for diversification of fish production in other areas like integrated
fish farming, cold water fisheries, riverine fisheries, capture fisheries,
brackish water fisheries etc. The recent measures therefore have targeted
Intensive Aquaculture in ponds and tanks through integrated fish farming,

4
carp poly-culture, freshwater prawn culture, running water fish culture
and development of riverine fisheries.
1.13 As informed by the Department of Animal Husbandry,
Dairying and Fisheries, expansion of area under aquaculture has to become
an important option to boost fish production. In this context, derelict
water bodies could be immensely useful and could be an important
resource to boost fish production for meeting the future fish demands
of the country. Coastal Orissa for instance, is endowed with large areas
of unutilized water bodies like derelict canals and drains. Similarly,
Brahmaputra basin of Assam has enormous beels lying idle. There are
about 1.3 million hectares of beels and other derelict water bodies in the
country. Bringing these water bodies into the ambit of fisheries will boost
fish production tremendously and hence expansion of fisheries in these
water bodies is one of the focus areas of the Department for increasing
fish production.
1.14 Reservoirs, which are largely untapped in India, have great
potential for development of fisheries. Reservoir Fisheries Development
is therefore a thrust area of the Department. By promoting technologies
like cage culture, the productivity of the reservoirs can be enhanced
manifold. Due to large initial investment, this technology has so far not
been successfully implemented in India.
1.15 The Government recognizes the need for availability of quality
seed and feed for sustained growth in inland fish production in the long
run. As per an estimate, the total fish seed required for optimal stocking
in the existing ponds, new ponds and reservoirs is about 60,000 million
fry. As against this, the seed production in 2015-16 was about
40,540 million fry. Thus there is a gap of about 19,460 million fry. Setting
up of brood banks and hatcheries across the country, is therefore a priority
area for the Department.
1.16 Responsible aquaculture and prevention and management of
aquatic diseases, organic farming and induced breeding are some of the
other challenges to be addressed in this sector for improving productivity.
1.17 The scheme on Development of Inland Fisheries and
Aquaculture was started during 1973-74 as a Centrally Sponsored Scheme
with the following objectives:—
• Enhancement of inland fish production and fish productivity.
• Popularization of modern fish farming.
• Creation of employment opportunities through fisheries.

5
• Diversifying aqua culture practices.
• Providing assistance to fish farmers engaged in aquaculture.
• Provide training to fish farmers of Fish Farmers’ Development
Agencies (FFDAs) and Brackish water Fish Farmers
Development Agency (BFDA).
1.18 The structure and components of the scheme were as under:—
(i) Development of Freshwater Aquaculture.
(ii) Development of Brackish-water Aquaculture.
(iii)Coldwater Fisher ies and Aquaculture.
(iv) Development of Waterlogged Areas.
(v) Productive Utilization of Inland Saline/Alkaline soils for Aqua
culture.
(vi)Integrated Development of Inland Capture Resources
(reservoirs/rivers etc.). and
(vii) Innovative Projects.
1.19 Financial assistance in form of subsidy on developmental
activities was shared on 75:25 basis by the Government of India and the
State Government. The eligible subsidy was 20% for general category and
25% for SC/ST category including NE States.
1.20 Now, the Ministry of Agriculture and Farmers Welfare,
Department of Animal Husbandry, Dairying and Fisheries has restructured
the scheme by merging all the ongoing schemes under an umbrella of
Blue Revolution. The restructured scheme provides focused development
and management of fisheries, covering inland fisheries, aquaculture,
marine fisheries including deep sea fishing, mariculture and all activities
undertaken by the National Fisheries Development Board (NFDB). The
restructured Centrally Planned Scheme with Central Sector components
on Blue Revolution: Integrated Development and Management of
Fisheries, formulated at a total Central outlay of Rs. 3000 crore for five
years, has the following components:—
(a) National Fisheries Development Board (NFDB) and its
activities.

6
(b) Development of Inland Fisheries and Aquaculture.
(c) Development of Marine Fisheries, Infrastructure and Post-
Harvest Operations.
(d) Strengthening of Database and Geographical Information
System of the Fisheries Sector.
(e) Institutional Arrangement for Fisheries Sector.
(f) Monitoring, Control and Surveillance (MCS) and other need-
based Interventions.
(g) National Scheme of Welfare of Fishers.
1.21 The main objectives of the Blue Revolution include:—
(i) To increase the overall fish production in a sustainable
manner for economic prosperity from the available water
resources;
(ii) To introduce new technologies in the sector for responsible
and sustainable utilization of resources in an eco-friendly
manner;
(iii) To ensure food and nutritional security;
(iv) To generate employment and export earnings; and
(v) To ensure inclusive development and empower fishers and
aquaculture farmers.
1.22 Focus areas for strategy implementation under inland fisheries
and aquaculture as part of the Blue Revolution are as follows:—
• freshwater aquaculture
• brackish water aquaculture
• cold water fisheries aquaculture
• saline/alkaline soils aquaculture
• wetlands aquaculture
• inland capture resources (reservoirs/rivers etc.)
• innovative projects

7
1.23 Interventions for optimal resource utilization and sustainable
intensification of the overall fish production are as mentioned below:—
• Availability of quality fish seed for stocking in all types of
water bodies and development of Brood-Stock Multiplication
Centers for ensuring availability of quality brood stock for
fish seed production in the existing and new hatcheries;
• Availability of quality formulated fish feed to promote feed
based aquaculture;
• Adoption of better management practices in reservoirs, tanks
and ponds through stocking of stunted and advanced
fingerlings and post stocking production process;
• Utilizing beels/wetlands by stocking of fingerlings and
supplementary feeding for increased fish production;
• Observance of ban period in reservoirs to allow auto stocking;
• Scaling up of farming of new fish varieties introduced for
aquaculture diversification for production of high value table
fish;
• Adoption of new technology in cage culture in reservoirs for
sustainable intensified fish production;
• Adoption of pen culture for rearing fish seed to fingerling
size in wetlands and reservoirs;
• Adoption of new technology of Re-circulatory Aquaculture
System (RAS) for sustainable intensification of aquaculture;
• Skill development and capacity building in better management
practices, seed certification, health management and disease
surveillance;
• Training of fishermen and farmers in new technologies,
sustainable intensification of fish productivity inland sectors;
and
• Extending the reach of beneficiaries in welfare oriented
schemes.

8
1.24 The Department of Animal Husbandry, Dairying and Fisheries
has come up with a five point strategy for effective implementation under
Blue Revolution. This strategy focuses on — productivity enhancement,
infrastructure, modernization/new technologies, capacity building and
welfare measures.
1.25 The Department has prepared a detailed Integrated National
Fisheries Action Plan - 2016 (NFAP) for achieving 15.00 million tonnes
over all fish production by 2019-20. It aims at enhancing fish production
and productivity and to achieve the concept of Blue Revolution. The
approach was initiated considering the various fisheries resources available
in the country like ponds and tanks, wetlands, brackish water, cold water,
lakes and reservoirs, rivers and canals and the marine sector. All States
and UTs have been asked to prepare State Action Plan for 5 years in line
with NFAP for achieving Blue Revolution in their States / UTs. The Blue
Revolution aims at production and distribution of quality seed and feed
for aquaculture and also for culture-based-capture fisheries; husbandry
of farmed species and availability of quality water are essential to optimize
production and productivity from inland fisheries and aquaculture in the
country.
(ii)Funding Pattern under Blue Revolution
1.26 Broad funding pattern for the new activities under the marine
and inland fisheries development projects under the scheme are as
below:—
(a) 50% of the project/unit cost for General States, leaving the
rest to State agencies/organizations, corporations, federations,
boards, Fishers cooperatives, private entrepreneurs, individual
beneficiaries, as the State may decide.
(b) 80% of the project/unit cost for North-Eastern/Hilly States
(Jammu and Kashmir, Uttarakhand and Himachal Pradesh),
leaving the remaining 20% to State agencies/Organizations,
Cooperatives, individual beneficiaries etc, as the State may
decide.
(c) In the case of UTs, the central funding is also limited to
50% share. The balance funding will be from the UT concerned
or such percentage to be borne by the beneficiary as UT may
decide. 100% funding will be done for projects directly
implemented by the Government of India through its
institutes/organizations and Union Territories.
(d) In the projects to be implemented by the UT Government
directly as a governmental project (not to a private beneficiary

9
project), the central funding will be full 100%. Similarly, in
case of funding for central institutes and projects implemented
by the centre directly, 100% funding will be done from the
Centre.
1.27 On being asked about the State-wise and UT-wise details of
projects receiving 100% funding and directly being implemented by the
Government of India under Blue Revolution, the Department in its written
reply submitted as under:—
“The components/ sub-components receiving 100% funding by the
Government of India under the Blue Revolution Scheme are:
(i) National Fisheries Development Board (NFDB).
(ii) Strengthening of Database and Geographical Information
System of the Fisheries Sector.
(iii)Assistance to Fisheries Institutes.
(iv) Monitoring, Control and Surveillance (MCS) and other need-
based Interventions.
(v) Training, Skill Development and Capacity Building on
fisheries activities.
Besides, 100% funding assistance is provided under Blue Revolution
for the projects directly implemented by the Government of India
through its institutes/ organizations and Union Territories.
Details of State-wise plan fund released with 100% funding during
2016-17 are as under:—
Details of funds released to States/UTs, Institutes and
other Agencies for Implementation of components
under 100% funding
(In lakhs)
Sl.N. States/UTs/ Components Funds
Agencies released
12 3 4
1. Chhattisgarh Database 20.14
2. Maharashtra Database 26.71
3. Mizoram Database 32.26
4. CMFRI Database 25.00

10
5. NFDB Blue Revolution, Training and3239.03
Capacity Building
6. Fisheries Assistance to Fisheries 165.44
Institutes Institute
7. Others -do-   2.79
Total 3511.37
*No funds released under MCS sub-component.”
1.28 The Department in its written replies furnished the details of
State/UT-wise beneficiaries under the component of Development of
Inland Fisheries and Aquaculture.
The details of beneficiaries under this component of Blue
Revolution, during the years 2014-15, 2015-16 and 2016-17 are given in
Annexure-I.
12 3 4

11
CHAPTER II
INLAND FISHERIES SECTOR PRE AND
POST BLUE REVOLUTION
A. Financial and Physical Targets and Achievements of the fisheries
sector during the last four fiscal years of the Twelfth Plan (up
to 2015-16):
(i) Outlay and Expenditure of funds for the Fisheries Sector (before
Blue Revolution):
(Rs. in crore)
Year 2012-13 2013-14 2014-15 2015-16Total
Total Inland Total Inland Total Inland Total Inland (w.r.t.
Inland)
BE 340.70 40.00 371.50 40.00 480.96 50.00 476.95 36.65 Total
Inland BE
166.65
RE 312.14 32.65 332.35 33.00 351.56 27.50 455.86 36.65 Total
Inland RE
129.80
Actual 298.33 31.41 318.13 31.04 353.3626 .32 36 2.04 34.30 Total
Expendi- Inland
ture Expendi-
ture
123.07
2.1 On being asked about the reasons behind the actual expenditure
for the last four fiscals being only 94.81% of the RE for the same period,
the Department in its written reply furnished that:—
“The main reason for less expenditure during the Financial Years
2012-13 to 2015-16 compared to RE was due to non-receipt of self-
contained proposals from the State/ UT Governments on time and
delay in submission of Utilization Certificates (UCs), physical and
financial progress reports. Despite these delays, all efforts were
made to utilize the allocated amount of funds and thus Division
could attain an expenditure of 94.81% of the RE.”

12
2.2 When asked if such a reduction in expenditure had hampered
implementation of this scheme in the Twelfth Plan period, the Department
in its written reply furnished that:—
“No, it has not hampered the implementation of fishery
development schemes of the Department in the Twelfth Plan Period
as the fisheries development schemes were also implemented by
the States / UTs availing assistance from other sources of funding
in convergence with RKVY, NMPS etc in addition to the Central
and State Plan allocations.”
(ii) Physical Targets and Achievements
Year 2012-13 2013-14 2014-15 2015-16
Targeted area to be brought under23,000 24,500 24,000 24,000
aquaculture (Ha)
Area brought under aquaculture (Ha)23,000 17,837 12,927 12,107
Number of beneficiaries 59,167 69,694 36,403 25,781
2.3 On being asked about the exact figure of the area covered under
fresh water aquaculture, the Department submitted that since inception,
the total area covered under freshwater aquaculture up to 2015-16
amounted to 8,97,097 ha.
2.4 State-wise details of the area brought under Freshwater
Aquaculture is given in Annexure-II.
2.5 On being asked about the reasons behind the failure of the
Department to bring the targeted area under aquaculture during the years
2013-14, 2014-15 and 2015-16, the Department in its written reply Stated
that:—
“The reason for bringing less area under aquaculture during the
years 2013-14, 2014-15 and 2015-16 was mainly due to non-receipt
of self-contained proposals from the State/UT Governments on time.
The budgetary cut at RE stage can also be attributed for lower
achievement. Moreover, States/UTs started diversifying the funds
for establishment of fishery infrastructure facilities in order to handle
the fish produced.”
2.6 The Department in its written replies also apprised the
Committee that during the financial year 2016-17, an area of 2336 ha has
been brought under aquaculture against the target of 1980 ha.
2.7 On being asked about the reasons behind a constant decline
in the number of beneficiaries in the fiscals 2014-15 and 2015-16 as

13
compared to 2013-14, the Department informed that this was mainly due
to non-receipt of proposals from the State/UT Governments and the
budgetary cut to the Department at the RE stage.
B. Financial targets and achievements and physical targets of the
fisheries sector under Blue Revolution during 2016-17:
(i) Financial allocation and Expenditure:
2.8 The restructured Centrally Planned Scheme with Central Sector
components on Blue Revolution: Integrated Development and
Management of Fisheries was formulated with a total Central outlay of
Rs. 3000 crore for five years. The details of allocation and expenditure
of this Central outlay is given in the following table:—
(Rs. in crore)
Blue 2015-17 2015-17 Release % of 2017-18
Revolution Expenditure Actual 2015-17 Expenditure BE
(2015-20) Finance Allocation Finance
Committee Committee
(EFC) (EFC)
Allocation Allocation
3000 1014.95 880.11 860.72 86.71 400.73
2.9 On being asked to furnish details of BE, RE and Actual
Expenditure figures for the last fiscal of the Twelfth Plan, the Department
in its written reply submitted as under:—
“All the sub-schemes / components of the fisheries sector including
the Development of Inland Fisheries and Aquaculture have now
been subsumed under the Umbrella Scheme of Blue Revolution
from the Financial Year 2016-17. Therefore, there is no separate
allocation for Inland Fisheries and Aquaculture component under
the Blue Revolution Scheme. The total BE, RE and actual expenditure
under Blue Revolution Scheme during the Financial Year 2016-17
are Rs. 450.00 crore, Rs. 424.25 crore and Rs. 424.11 crore
respectively. Out of Rs. 424.11 crore released during the Financial
Year 2016-17, Rs. 324.00 crore have been released for the Inland
Fisheries Sector.”
2.10 The Department in its written reply informed the Committee
that under the Blue Revolution Scheme, out of the amount of Rs. 424.11
crore released to various States/ UTs, an amount of Rs. 384.05 crore has
been released to States/UTs for implementation of Blue Revolution Scheme
of which, Rs. 94.06 crore was utilized by the States/UTs as on mid-June,

14
2017 and the balance amount of Rs. 40.06 crore was released to Institutes
and other organizations.
2.11 The States/UT-wise break-up of the funds released and
utilization of the amount during the year 2016-17 under Blue Revolution
scheme is given at Annexure-III.
2.12 When asked about the basis for allocation of funds to different
components under the Blue Revolution and measures being adopted to
increase allocation to inland fisheries and aquaculture sector which is in
dire need of funds for development, the Department in its post evidence
replies apprised the Committee as follows:—
“Considering the various fisheries resources available in the country
like ponds and tanks, wetlands, brackish-water, cold water, lakes
and reservoirs, rivers and canals and the marine sector, funds are
being allocated for the development of these sectors.
The Department has prepared a detailed Integrated National
Fisheries Action Plan-2016 (INFAP) for achieving 15.00 million
metric tonne over all fish production by 2019-20. The INFAP aims
at enhancing fish production and productivity towards achieving
the Blue Revolution.
The Blue Revolution aims at production and distribution of quality
seed and feed for aquaculture and also culture-based-capture
fisheries. Though inland fisheries sub-sector is posting a steady
growth, many of the accessible resources are still untapped.
Moreover, the present fish productivity (2.9 MT/ha) of freshwater
aquaculture is far below the potential, which can be doubled with
the right inputs, resulting in ample scope for vertical as well as
horizontal enhancement. Accordingly, thrust has been given for the
enhancement of productivity through application of technology,
creation of Fish Fingerling Production Infrastructure, Establishment
of Fish Feed Mills, Establishment of High Density Culture
Enterprises and Post-Harvest Infrastructure for reduction of spoilage
of harvested fish.
The fund released for different States/UTs is demand based on first
come, first served basis but before the release, proposals are
scrutinized to ensure better utilisation of limited financial allocation.
In the FY 2016-17, around 76% of total release under Blue Revolution
have been released for the development of Inland Fisheries Sector
alone.”

15
2.13 When asked about the mechanism being adopted by the
Department to ensure that the remaining 50% of funds in general category
States and 20% funds in North eastern and Hilly States reach the intended
beneficiaries on time and if there is any grievance redressal mechanism
to address the problems faced by the beneficiaries due to delayed funding
or non-funding by the State agencies or corporations etc., the Department
in its written reply informed that:—
“As per the approved guidelines of Blue Revolution, the remaining
50% funds in general category States and 20% of funds in North
Eastern and Hilly States have to be met by the respective State
Governments through the State Plan allocation of the respective
States or by the beneficiaries. The beneficiaries are identified by
the respective State Governments and it is the responsibility of the
States/UTs to ensure the sanction and release of State’s share
(wherever applicable), which is being monitored periodically by
the Department.”
2.14 During the evidence the Committee noted that not sufficient
proposals were received from beneficiaries for taking up schemes under
the Blue Revolution. When queried about the ways in which Blue
Revolution would be implemented when sufficient proposals are not
received from beneficiaries and when the pond fish farmers are not taking
interest in pisciculture, the Department in a written reply submitted as
under:—
“All the components and sub-components of Blue Revolution
Scheme are being implemented through the Department of Fisheries
of the respective State/UT Governments. The beneficiaries are also
identified by the State Government. Hence, the State/UT
Governments have to take a pro-active role in identifying the
beneficiary, submission of sufficient proposals to DADF based on
the resources available for effective implementation of the Blue
Revolution Scheme.”
(ii)Physical Targets and their current status
2.15 The Department, during the evidence, informed the Committee
about various targets regarding Inland Fisheries. These include the
following:—
• development of post-harvest fisheries infrastructure;
• increasing fish production in inland and marine sector;

16
• augmenting brood stock for fish production and setting up
of Brood Stock Multiplication Centres (BMCs);
• adoption of new technology in cage culture; adoption of
advanced technologies for fish production — example
Re-circulatory Aquaculture (RAS);
• training of fishermen and promotion of skill development
and capacity building etc.
2.16 The Department in its written replies to questions asked by
the Committee, apprised them of the present status of each of these
physical targets as is discussed further in the chapter.
2.17 When asked about the steps being taken by the Department
for development of post harvest facilities in coastal States and UTs, the
Department in its written reply informed as under:—
“The Department, under the component of Development of
Infrastructure and Post Harvest Operations of the Blue Revolution
Scheme provides assistance to the States/UTs for establishment of
fishing harbours and fish landing centres, new ice plants/cold
storages, renovation of existing ice plants/cold storages, setting up
of retail units/mobile fish markets, procurement of insulated/
refrigerated fish transport vehicles etc.”
2.18 State-wise details of post-harvest fisheries infrastructure
provided during 2016-17 are presented in Annexure- IV.
2.19 On being asked about the steps being taken by the Department
to augment production from aquaculture and both inland and marine
sources of fisheries, the Department in its reply informed that:—
“For increase of inland aquaculture production, priority has been
accorded for seed production through Mission Fingerling,
establishment of fish hatcheries, Wetland development, cage culture
in reservoirs, Re-circulatory Aquaculture System (RAS), Ornamental
Fisheries, Brackish/Saline water and Development of cold water
fisheries in mission mode. Integrated National Action Plan for
fisheries has been developed. Based on the availability of resources,
fisheries development activities were identified and States/UTs
were requested for submission of Detailed Project Report (DPR) for
consideration of funding assistance.
On the marine sector, Mariculture including open sea cage culture
are the possible options through which production from marine

17
sector may be enhanced, which has been conceptualized under
Blue Revolution. Understanding the problems of coastal fishery
resources, the Department has introduced a new sub-component
of ‘Assistance for Deep Sea Fishing Vessel’ under the Blue Revolution
Scheme in which 50% subsidy assistance to the extent of Rs. 40
lakh per deep sea fishing vessel is provided to the fishermen through
the respective State Governments as a means of diversification of
fishing.”
2.20 The Department has also informed that it is focussing on filling
up the critical gaps between existing production as against the potential
for ensuring increased fish production from pond aquaculture (from
present level of 2.9 MT to 3.7 MT/ha), reservoirs (from present level of
93.7K to 245.2 kg/ha), wetlands/beels fisheries (from present level of
50.165 kg to 307.93 kg/ha).
2.21 When asked to provide State-wise details of the location of
Brood Stock Multiplication Centres and about ways through which the
Department plan to ensure availability of brood stock for fish seed
production to the hatcheries, the Department in its written reply, apprised
the Committee as under:—
“One Shrimp Brood Stock Multiplication Centre (BMC) for
Littopenaeus vannamei is already established and two more BMCs
are under establishment in Andhra Pradesh for production of adult
brood stock for supply of Brood stock to shrimp hatcheries for
promoting shrimp aquaculture sector. It is also proposed to consider
three more BMCs considering the number of shrimp hatcheries
and their seed production capacity, area under coastal aquaculture,
sources of qualified overseas suppliers of SPF seed etc.
As far as freshwater fisheries is concerned, a central facility of
National Fresh Water Fish Brood Bank (NFFBB) is established at
Odisha wherein genetically improved fish brooder seeds of about
3 varieties of fish species are produced and supplied to the State
Fisheries Departments for further establishment of fish brood banks
at State level and to ensure availability of brood stock and supply
to all fish hatcheries for quality fish seed production.”
2.22 The physical targets on technology in cage culture,
Re-circulatory Aquaculture System (RAS) and training and skill
development in fishermen have been discussed along with the status of
the sub-components of ‘Development of Inland Fisheries and Aquaculture’,
in the following chapter.

18
C. Issue of Pending Utilization Certificates
2.23 On being asked about ways in which the Department ensures
timely utilization of UCs by States and UTs and if it withholds funds
or assistance meant for States or UTs in case the previously pending UCs
have not been utilized, the Department in its written reply, apprised the
Committee as under:—
“Submission of physical and financial progress reports including
Utilization Certificates are mandatory for release of funds to the
States. Further release of funds to the States/UTs are considered
only after utilization of funds released earlier and submission of
utilization certificates and physical and financial progress reports.”
2.24 When asked about the reasons behind pending UCs from the
States/UTs amounting to Rs. 289.90 crore as on 31st March, 2017, the
Department in its written reply informed that:—
“Many States/UTs have submitted the proposals during the last
quarter of the Financial Year 2016-17 and accordingly, funds have
been released to them. This has led to delay in utilizing the released
fund by the States/UTs. However, through regular review meetings,
video conferencing and follow up letters, States/UTs have been
requested to utilize the amount released for the purpose for which
it was released and to submit the UC immediately.”
2.25 When asked about the steps being taken by the Department
to tackle the problem of pending utilization certificates with the States
and UTs, the Department in its written reply stated as under:—
“Regarding the pending utilization certificates with the States and
UTs, the Department regularly conducts monthly review meetings
at the level of Secretary(ADF); monthly Video Conferencing at the
level of Joint Secretary, and follow up with the States through letters.
Besides, Regional Review Meetings are also being conducted in
different regions with the States/UTs to ensure effective
implementation of scheme and specifically for utilization of funds
and timely submission of utilization certificates and physical and
financial progress reports.”

19
CHAPTER III
SCHEMATIC ANALYSIS OF THE COMPONENT ‘DEVELOPMENT
OF INLAND FISHERIES AND AQUACULTURE’
OF BLUE REVOLUTION
A. Status and Analysis
3.1 The Committee have been informed that at 107.61 lakh tonnes
(2015-16), India ranks 2nd globally in fish production with as many as
1.5 crore fishers/farmers and small entrepreneurs engaged in the profession
of fishing. The total fish production has increased from
7.5 lakh tonnes in 1950-51 (29.1% of which comes from inland fishing)
to 107.61 lakh tonnes in 2015-16, of which inland fisheries contributes
to 66.5% of the fish production. Fish production also ensures food and
nutritional security in the country by way of being a rich protein
source.
3.2 The Twelfth Plan saw higher growth in fish production from
inland fishing as compared to that of marine production, as shown in
the table below:—
Year Inland Marine % Inland Inland Total
Production Production Production Growth (%) Growth (%)
(LT) (LT) share
1950-51 2.18 5.34 29.00 - -
1980-81 8.87 15.55 36.20 - -
2012-13 57.19 33.21 63.26 8.03 4.32
2013-14 61.36 34.43 64.05 7.29 5.96
2014-15 66.91 35.99 66.55 7.04 4.89
2015-16 71.62 35.99 66.55 7.04 4.89
2016-17 (P) 78.68 37.39 67.89 9.86 7.00
CAGR 8.00 5.65
(Compound
Annual
Growth
Rate)

20
3.3 The fish production target under Blue Revolution is kept at
150 lakh metric tonnes by the end of the year 2019-20.
B. Activities covered under the component ‘development of inland
fisheries and aquaculture’ of the scheme on Blue Revolution
3.4 The component on Development of Inland Fisheries and
Aquaculture mainly focusses on increasing fish productivity from the
existing aquaculture farms and water bodies besides aquaculture area
expansion and species diversification.
3.5 The activities covered under this component are:—
i. Construction of new ponds
ii. Renovation of existing ponds
a. Renovation of Mahatma Gandhi National Rural
Employment Guarantee Act (MNREGA) ponds
b. Rejuvenation of urban/semi urban/rural lakes tanks for
culture
iii. Input cost for freshwater fish culture and brackish water fish/
shrimp culture
iv. Establishment of fish seed hatcheries
v. Establishment of freshwater/brackish water prawn hatcheries
vi. Solar power support system for aquaculture
vii.Cold water fisheries and aquaculture
a. Construction of permanent farming units and raceways
b. Running cold water fish culture in earthen units
viii. Development of water logged areas
a. Development of waterlogged areas
b. Input cost
ix. Productive utilization of Inland Saline/Alkaline waters for
aquaculture
a. Construction of new ponds
b. Input cost

21
x. Inland capture fisheries (village ponds and tanks)
a. Fish seed rearing units
b. Input cost
c. Craft and gears
d. Construction of landing centres
e. Riverine Fisheries Conservation
xi. Integrated development of reservoirs
a. Need based activities from a broader perspective to
make self-resilient unit
xii. Establishment of feed mills
xiii.Installation of cages/pens in reservoirs and other open water
bodies.
xiv. Re-circulatory Aquaculture System (Low cost)
xv. Stocking of fingerlings in Beels/Wetlands
xvi. Creation of portal for advisory services to farmers on mobile
and internet
xvii. Training and skill development of fish farmers and other
stakeholders.
• Construction/Renovation of ponds
3.6 Under this activity, smaller water bodies in the form of tanks
and ponds with a water spread area of up to 5ha are aimed for semi-
intensive to intensive freshwater aquaculture.
3.7 When asked whether any evaluation has been to assess the
actual number of ponds where fish cultivation is possible, the Department
in its written reply submitted as under:—
“No evaluation has been made so far to assess the actual number
of ponds where fish cultivation is possible. The States will be
requested to undertake such an assessment.”

22
3.8 In response to the Committee’s suggestion that the Department
focus on scientific digging of ponds under MNREGA, the Secretary
responded as under:—
“....The Department of Animal Husbandry, Dairying and Fisheries
along with the Department of Rural Development has furnished
directives to all the States on this issue. Parameters regarding
number of ponds to be dug under MNREGA, scientific parameters
for digging and scientific fish farming practices in those ponds
have all been ascertained under those directives.”
3.9 On being asked about the funding provided to fish farmers
regarding digging up of ponds, the Secretary (DAHDF), in a briefing
held on 9th January, 2017 apprised the Committee as under:—
“....the Department offers a subsidy of 50% under Blue Revolution,
for the said purpose. The remaining 50% is either provided by the
States or spent by the farmers themselves, as decided by the
respective State Government.”
• Establishment of Hatcheries and Fish feed Mills and their quality
standards
3.10 On being asked about the State-wise details of hatcheries
available to fish farmers throughout the country and about the ways in
which the Department assists fishermen in establishing hatcheries for
Indian major carps and prawns etc., the Department in its written reply
stated as under:—
“The Scheme of Blue Revolution comprises the following
components for establishment of hatcheries of Indian major carps
and prawns:
• Establishment of fish seed hatchery for Indian major carps
and other specific cultivable finfish.
• Establishment of freshwater/brackish-water prawn hatcheries.
In addition, a specific activity namely ‘Mission Fingerling
Programme’ has been initiated under which 20 potential States have
been identified for establishment of fish/prawn hatchery and seed
rearing up to fingerling Stage.”
3.11 Details on the State-wise hatcheries available up to 2016-17
in the country are given in Annexure-V.

23
3.12 On being asked about the viability of establishing feed mills/
plants for inland fisheries and aquaculture practices in non-fishing areas
of the country and about the ways in which the Department is working
towards establishing small scale and medium sized feed mills/plants in
the fishing areas of different States and UTs, the Department in its written
reply submitted as under:—
“Fish feed is one of the critical inputs for sustainable aquaculture.
Fish production and productivity of diversified and high value fish
species can be enhanced through feed based aquaculture practices.
Besides, cage culture and pen culture are also being practiced in
large open water bodies like reservoirs and wetlands including
beels and chaurs which requires large quantities of feed. Considering
the importance of fish feed in sustainable aquaculture, the
Department provides financial assistance to the States/beneficiaries
for the establishment of small feed mills with capacity of 1 to
5 quintals per day and large formulated pellet feed plant with a
capacity of 6 to 10 per hour under the Blue Revolution Scheme.
All the States/UTs are requested to submit proposals for
establishment of feed mills based on the requirement of the feed
mill units in the States/UTs and assistance are released to the States/
UTs accordingly.”
3.13 On being asked about the steps taken by the Department to
maintain quality standards for fish seeds, fish feed and fish varieties and
about the details of measures taken to implement certification initiatives
on fish and fish products, the Department in its post evidence replies
submitted to the Committee that:—
“Each State/UT adopts the measure for maintenance of the seed
and feed quality. DADF supports such provisions through providing
help to States/UTs such as good quality seed, improvement in
culturable strains of fish. This Department regulates the entry of
exotics under certain rules and regulations applicable presently.”
• Re-circulatory Aquaculture System (RAS) and Running Water
Fishing
3.14 On being asked about Re-circulatory Aquaculture System (RAS)
and ways in which it will help intensify aquaculture sustainably, the
Department in its written reply informed that:—
“Re-circulatory Aquaculture System is an indoor tank-based
technology driven culture base system in which fishes are grown
at high density under controlled environmental conditions.

24
Re-circulating system filter and clean the water for recycling back
through fish culture tanks and a filtering (bio-filter) system is
necessary to purify the water and to remove or detoxify harmful
waste products.
Advantages of RAS are : (a) high output of fish from minimal area,
(b) very low water requirements as compared to pond aquaculture
system or raceways, (c) reduced land needs due to the high stocking
density, (d) reduction in wastewater effluent volume and is
environment friendly, (e) increased bio-security and ease in treating
disease outbreaks if any and, (f) ability to closely monitor and
control environmental conditions to maximize production
efficiency.”
3.15 On being asked about fish farming in running water, the
Secretary, during the evidence meeting held on 30th June, 2017 apprised
the Committee as under:—
“...fish production has been very low in running water bodies
around towns and cities due to various developmental projects
such as hydro-power projects, like in case of Himachal Pradesh.
These have disrupted the habitats of fishes and hence the fish
production in running water has gone down. Fish production taking
place in running water bodies around towns is affected due to
excessive pollution of water bodies around those areas. The
Department is, however, trying to make running water suitable for
fishing in areas where there are vast stretches of the same.”
3.16 When asked about the steps being taken by the Department
to encourage traditional fishermen to take to practices such as pond
aquaculture with scientific techniques and about the details of the share
of catch obtained from aquaculture in the area of inland fisheries and
aquaculture, the Department in its written reply submitted as under:—
“Steps taken by the Department to encourage traditional fishermen
to take up pond aquaculture with scientific techniques are:
(i) Training and exposure on scientific culture techniques,
(ii)Supply of high quality seed and fish feed,
(iii)Assistance in improvements of ponds to enhance productivity,
(iv) Assistance in rearing and culture of high value diversified
fish species,

25
(v) Productive utilization of wetland waterlogged areas and
inland saline/alkaline waters for aquaculture through pen
culture,
(vi) Assistance for procurement of disease control kits,
(vii)Encouragement of low cost Re-circulatory Aquaculture
System,
(viii) Renovation of MNREGA ponds for fish culture etc.
It is estimated that about 80% of the share of Inland fish catch is
obtained from Aquaculture activities.”
3.17 When asked about the State-wise details of steps taken by the
Department to promote aquaculture practice with a special focus on the
NE States, the Department in its written reply stated that:—
“In order to promote aquaculture activities in North Eastern States,
financial assistance to the extent of 80% of the project/unit cost is
provided to all North-Eastern States. Considering the potentiality
of North Eastern States assistance was provided for the
implementation of various aquaculture activities like construction
of new ponds and tanks, renovation of existing ponds and tanks,
construction of feed mills, establishment of fish seed hatcheries
and seed rearing units, construction of race-ways, development of
waterlogged areas, installation of cages and pens, input cost for
aquaculture, establishment of retail outlets and assistance for
training and capacity building. State-wise funds released to North
Eastern States during the year 2016-17 for various fisheries activities
are given below:—
(Rs. in lakh)
Sl.No. State Amount Central Amount
Sanctioned Share Released
1. Assam 2051.81 1641.45 1641.45
2. Mizoram 1191.37 959.50959.50
3. Meghalaya 1212.02 1003.17 1003.17
4. Tripura 1085.00 867.88 867.88
5. Sikkim 598.95 479.16 379.16
6. Nagaland 1025.00 820.00 600.60

26
• Training and Skill Development of Fish Farmers
3.18 On being asked whether any special training programme for
imparting training to traditional fishermen in new technologies, skill
development and capacity building had been undertaken by the
Department and to provide State-wise details thereof, the Department
informed that a total of 13,973 farmers/fishers had been trained in Financial
Year 2017-18. The Department in its written reply also stated that:—
“The Department conducts training and skill development
programmes on various fisheries developmental activities of fish
culture, capture and post-harvest processing to traditional fishermen
in association with NFDB. The beneficiaries for the training were
identified by the respective State Governments. The State-wise
details of trainings conducted during 2016-17 and the number of
beneficiaries of the training programmes are as under:—
Sl.No. States/UTs No. of Beneficiaries
1. Andhra Pradesh 3500
2. Assam 20
3. Goa 200
4. Gujarat 500
5. Haryana 200
6. Jammu and Kashmir 20
7. Jharkhand 2000
8. Karnataka 910
9. Kerala 440
10. Madhya Pradesh 530
11. Manipur 300
12. Meghalaya 2924
13. Punjab 100
14. Tamil Nadu 90
15. Telangana 1009
16. Uttarakhand 350
17. West Bengal 880
Total 13973
In addition, the traditional marine fishers are being trained for
operation of deep sea long lining and onboard post-harvest handling

27
of tuna and allied species in order to diversify the fishing activities
from the near shore to deep sea.”
3.19 Regarding transfer of technology, the representative of the
Department, during evidence, apprised the Committee as under:—
“...providing training for transfer of technology has been especially
emphasized in rural areas. The Department aims at having a
working plan to put this idea to practice. Valuable feedback received
from Hon’ble Members on this particular subject will be
incorporated within the plan so that the fish farmers as well as the
nation are benefitted with this.”
3.20 During the course of evidence, on being asked about the
reasons behind non-inclusion of fishermen from the State of Mizoram in
the training programmes undertaken by the Department to train people
in fishing and other skills, the representative of the Department responded
as under:—
“The Mizoram State had not submitted any proposal for availing
assistance for imparting training programme under the training/
capacity building component of Blue Revolution Scheme during
the year 2016-17. However, as per the Annual Action Plan for Skill
Development for 2017-18, programme for training100 trainees have
been proposed.”
3.21 During the course of evidence, on being enquired about the
details of training programmes being conducted to train fish farmers in
the use of modern and scientific technology in fish cultivation, the
representative of the Department informed:—
“Training programmes are being imparted to all stakeholders
including the farmers and fishers on use of modern and scientific
technology in aquaculture activities involving the respective State
Government, ICAR Fisheries Research Institutes, Krishi Vigyan
Kendras (KVKs) etc.”
3.22 When asked about the reasons for non-integration of
indigenous/traditional technology of fish cultivation in the Blue Revolution
Scheme, the Department in its written reply submitted as under:—
“The principle and knowledge on the indigenous and traditional
technology of fish cultivation was taken care of appropriately
wherever feasible and applicable while formulating the Blue
Revolution Scheme.”

28
3.23 On being asked about the details and future plans of the
Department regarding schemes or programmes to provide training to
fishermen and farmers in new technologies and to promote skill
development and capacity building in better management practices among
them, the Department in its written reply stated as under:—
“Yes. The Department of Animal Husbandry, Dairying and Fisheries
has included a sub-component under the Blue Revolution scheme
namely ‘Training, Skill Development and Capacity Building to fish
farmers and other stake-holders in all fisheries related activities
both inland and marine fisheries’ with 100% funding assistance.
The beneficiaries for the training are identified by the respective
State Government. In addition, this Department has prepared the
Annual Action Plan for Skill Development in Fisheries Sector for
the Financial Year 2017-18 for providing skill development/training
to about 25,000 stakeholders including hatchery owners, fingerling
producers, farmers/fishers, processing workers and retailers in the
States and UTs. The Action Plan will be operationalized by the
National Fisheries Development Board (NFDB) in partnership with
the respective State/UT Governments.”
3.24 State/UT-wise and Category-wise tentative number of trainees
proposed under Skill Development Plan for FY 2017-18 are given in
Annexure-VI.
3.25 On being queried about providing training certificates to fisher
folk after training them in modern and scientific fishing methods, the
Secretary, during the evidence held on 30th June, 2017, informed the
Committee as under:—
“..the Department is working in this direction. Agriculture Skill
Council of India, which has innovated a course of fish farming,
comes under the Ministry of Skill Development. The Council also
provides traditional knowledge regarding fishing, which is
accounted for and for which trainees are provided certificates. The
Department has collaborated with the Agriculture Skill Council of
India and formulated a programme for training fishermen in modern
and scientific methods of fish farming and also to disburse
traditional knowledge of the same.”
3.26 On being asked about capacity building training to fish farmers,
the Secretary informed as under:—
“..according to a figure, NFDB has, in the last 10 years helped
around 2.15 lakh fish farmers raise their capacity and the
Department is also focusing further on capacity building.”

29
3.27 When asked about the details of measures adopted to improve
extension services being provided to fisher communities, the Department
in its post evidence replies apprised the Committee a follows:—
“The Department of Animal Husbandry, Dairying and Fisheries
has included a sub-component under the Blue Revolution scheme
namely ‘Training, Skill Development and Capacity Building to fish
farmers and other stake-holders in all fisheries related activities
both inland and marine fisheries’ with 100% funding assistance.
The beneficiaries for the training are identified by the respective
State Government. In addition, this Department has prepared the
Annual Action Plan for Skill Development in Fisheries Sector for
the Financial Year 2017-18 for providing skill development/training
to about 25,000 stakeholders including hatchery owners, fingerling
producers, farmers/fishers, processing workers and retailers in the
States and UTs. The Action Plan will be operationalized by the
National Fisheries Development Board (NFDB) in partnership with
the respective State/UT Governments.”
• Assessment and harnessing of resource potential and sustainable
practices in fishing
3.28 When asked about ways in which the Department plans to
utilize the data obtained from mapping of water bodies to assess resource
potential and its sustainable harnessing and about the steps being taken
to cater to the rising need for practicing sustainable fish farming in the
country, the Department in its written reply informed that:—
“The Department has a scheme entitled “Strengthening of Database
and Geographical Information System of the Fisheries Sector in
which mapping of water bodies of inland resources are captured.
The Central Inland Fisheries Research Institute (CIFRI), Barrackpore
is the nodal organization for collection of data base for inland
fisheries resources and mapping of inland water bodies. Thrust
areas like Mission Fingerling, establishment of fish hatcheries,
Wetland development, cage culture in reservoirs, Re-circulatory
Aquaculture System (RAS), Brackish/Saline water and Development
of cold water fisheries have been initiated in mission mode to
enhance production and productivity through aquaculture from
these mapped water bodies/fisheries resources during the ensuing
years through the active participation of all the stakeholders and
this would lead to sustainable fish farming in the existing water
bodies.”

30
3.29 When asked about the details of steps being taken by the
Department to harness the potential of reservoirs in inland fisheries and
aquaculture practices, the Department in its written reply stated that:—
“Considering the scope of the reservoir fisheries resources, the
Department has formulated a component of an Integrated
development of reservoirs under the Blue Revolution Scheme. Under
this, provisions are made for integration of various in-situ fisheries
activities like establishment of hatcheries and seed rearing units in
reservoirs, stocking of fish seeds, cage culture, setting up of feed
mills, strengthening of bunds, de-silting, de-weeding, setting up of
landing centers, cold storages, ice plants, fish transportation facilities
etc.”
3.30 When queried about the technologies being introduced or
planned to be introduced by the Department for promoting responsible
and sustainable utilization of resources in fisheries sector, the Department
in its written reply submitted as under:—
“Technologies introduced for promotion of responsible and
sustainable utilization of resources in fisheries sector are scientific
and intensified aquaculture practices, introduction of diversified
high yielding varieties, modern hatcheries, Re-circulatory
aquaculture system (RAS), Integrated approach for reservoir
fisheries development, In-situ rearing of fish seed for stocking in
Inland water bodies, Cage Culture in reservoirs, Pen Culture in
beels and wetlands, raising of cold water species in race-ways,
ornamental fisheries, shrimp farming in coastal areas, mariculture
including open sea cage culture etc.”
3.31 The details of State/UT-wise potential resources identified
under Blue Revolution for Financial Year 2017-18 are given in
Annexure-VII.
3.32 When asked about the steps being taken to promote adoption
of new technology in cage culture in reservoirs for sustainable and
intensified fish production, the Department in its written reply submitted
that:—
“Cage aquaculture offers new opportunity for optimizing fish
production from reservoirs and lakes through vertical expansion.
To boost the production of fish through cage culture in reservoirs
and large open water bodies in mission mode under Blue Revolution
Scheme, 14 potential States have been identified namely
Andhra Pradesh, Bihar, Chhattisgarh, Gujarat, Jharkhand, Karnataka,

31
Kerala, Madhya Pradesh, Maharashtra, Odisha, Rajasthan, Tamil Nadu,
Uttarakhand and Uttar Pradesh. A target for installation of cages
in a phased manner has been earmarked for a period of four years,
i.e. 2016-17 to 2019-20. This would further lead to additional fish
production and fulfil the gap to achieve the additional fish
production of 5 million tonnes by the end of 2020. It is proposed
to take up cage culture activity on priority basis with the active
participation of States.”
3.33 On being asked about the details of steps being taken to ensure
sustainable fishing practices in the country and if the Department plans
to undertake awareness programmes to raise awareness and concerns in
this regard among the fishermen, the Department in its written reply
submitted as under:—
“The Department organizes awareness programme, skill
development programme, regional level workshops, open houses,
exposure visits etc. in order to ensure sustainable fishing practices
through sub-ordinate offices and NFDB in coordination with State
Governments. Other steps followed to ensure sustainable fishing
practices are: Issue of order on uniform ban on fishing, guidelines
on bio-security and environmental hazards, diversification of fishing
practices, promotion of deep sea fishing etc.”
3.34 During the course of evidence, on being queried about steps
taken to prevent the use of formalin and other chemicals for preservation
of fish catch, the Department submitted that:—
“The States are being advised to take appropriate action for
preventing the use of formalin and other harmful chemicals after
fish catch. State/UT Governments are also advised to create
awareness to prevent the use of formalin.”
• Development of Wetlands and Beels and utilizing river water
3.35 On being enquired about initiating steps in the direction of
development of wetlands and water logged areas in the country and
about the details of schemes, if any, formulated in this regard, the
Department in its written reply informed that:—
“The Department has initiated an Action Plan for Wetland
Development in 7 identified States namely Assam, Arunachal Pradesh,
Bihar, Uttar Pradesh, West Bengal, Manipur and Meghalaya

32
based on their high potential areas for development of wet lands
and water logged areas. All identified States have been advised to
submit proposals under the Wetland Development Action Plan.
During the Financial Year 2016-17, a waterlogged area of 245 ha
has been developed with a central assistance of Rs. 427.95 lakhs
and 2125 beels/wetlands were assisted for stocking of fish fingerlings
with a central assistance of Rs. 63.5 lakhs.”
3.36 During the course of evidence, on being asked about the
initiatives being taken in West Bengal and Bihar for development of beels,
the Department submitted that:—
“The DADF has included a sub-component namely Development
of Wetland and waterlogged areas under the component of
Development of Inland Fisheries and Aquaculture in the Scheme
of “Blue Revolution”. Under this sub-component, financial assistance
are extended for development of wet-lands like beels, chaurs, mauns
etc. mainly for construction of pens and small cages for undertaking
sustainable aquaculture. Financial assistance is also provided for
procurement of critical inputs for finfish culture which includes
cost of fish/prawn seed, feed, manure, disease prevention measures,
transportation charges etc. For development of wetland in Bihar,
Central Inland Fisheries Research Institute (CIFRI), ICAR,
Barrackpore, West Bengal has been supported to develop four
wetlands during the FY 2017-18 and West Bengal and Assam have
been advised to take up wetland development projects as priority
items.”
3.37 When asked about the ways in which the Department ensures
efficient utilization of funds being provided as assistance for development
of wetlands and water logged areas, the Department in its written reply
furnished that:—
“The officers of the DADF and NFDB along with the officers of
the Department of Fisheries of the respective States periodically
visit the project sites to ascertain the status, progress and monitoring
of implementation of approved projects both physically and
financially for which funds were released and also to ensure efficient
utilization of funds. In addition, regular review meetings and video
conferencing are also arranged with the States/UTs to ascertain the
progress of implementation of sanctioned projects under the
scheme.”

33
3.38 On being asked about the rehabilitation of wetlands, the
Secretary, during the briefing meeting on 9th January, 2017, informed as
under:—
“...the Department has to work on various waterlogged areas such
as beels in West Bengal etc. As stated earlier, the Department has
laid special focus on the development of wetlands, which has never
been done earlier.”
3.39 When asked about the reasons for non-inclusion of wetlands/
water logged areas under the scheme of ‘Blue Revolution’ despite such
areas have a huge potential of serving as fishing grounds and being
available in plenty in the coastal and other such areas of the country and
also if the Department is taking any steps to include such areas under
the scheme, so as to increase fishing avenues in the country, the
Department in its written reply submitted as under:—
“Sub-components like Development of Wetland and waterlogged
areas have already been included under the component of
Development of Inland Fisheries and Aquaculture in the Scheme
of “Blue Revolution”. Under this sub-component, financial
assistances are extended for development of wet lands like beels,
chaurs, mauns etc. mainly for construction of pens and small cages
for undertaking sustainable aquaculture. Financial assistance is also
provided for input cost for finfish culture which includes cost of
fish/prawn seed, feed, manure, disease prevention measures,
transportation charges etc.”
3.40 During the course of evidence, on being questioned about the
kind of projects that can be implemented for utilizing river water coming
from Gujarat to Rajasthan, the Department informed that:—
“Fisheries activities like ranching of fish seed and culture of fish
in small cages/pens in suitable places wherever the water flow is
ideal can be taken up in rivers.”
• Leasing out of water bodies and steps taken to promote aquaculture
3.41 On being enquired about guidelines for management of
resources and leasing out of reservoirs in the States and about measures
adopted to ensure fair practices while leasing out reservoirs to fishing
cooperatives etc., the Department in its post evidence replies informed
as under:—
“Inland Fisheries falls in the States/UT List. Therefore, rules and
regulations regarding Inland Fisheries are framed by respective

34
State/UT Governments which vary from State/UT to State/UT.
However, the DAHDF issues advisories as and when needed for
guidance and better management of Inland Fisheries Sector.”
3.42 When asked about methods used by the Department to lease
out water bodies to individual fishermen and fishing cooperatives; ways
in which the Department carries out assessment of water spread areas
and the grounds on which lease value is fixed, the Department in its post
evidence replies submitted that:—
“Each State/UT follow their own mechanism of leasing of water
bodies, and the lease value differs from State to State. This
Department funds States/UTs and other agencies to carry out
assessment of existing water bodies which covers the collection
and creation of database pertaining to various categories of water
bodies including the water spread area.”
3.43 On being asked about the measures adopted/being adopted
by the Department to ensure proper implementation of leasing policy
concerning allocation of water bodies to different institutions for fishing
and maintenance, the Department in its post evidence replies informed
that:—
“The subject is related to State/UT Government and the onus for
maintenance of water body lies with the owner of that entity. This
Department however funds the construction/renovation/
rehabilitation of water bodies to make them suitable for fish culture
on approved unit costs under Blue Revolution.”
3.44 When asked about the grounds on which Panchayats lease out
smaller water bodies such as tanks and ponds and if there are mechanisms
or policies which the Panchayats must adhere to while leasing out smaller
water bodies, the Department in its post evidence replies submitted that:—
“The subject is related to State/UT Government. Each State/UT adopt
their own policies in this regard.”
3.45 On being enquired about the steps being taken to curb pilferage
caused due to involvement of middlemen in the process of leasing out
water bodies to the fishermen community, the Department in the post
evidence replies apprised the Committee that:—
“Leasing policy of water bodies is within the purview of States/
UTs. States/UTs formulate their own rules and regulations in the
light of interest of the fishermen community and other prevailing
conditions.”

35
3.46 On being asked about the challenges being faced by the
Department in providing the fisher communities access to water bodies
and the measures being adopted by the Department to overcome such
challenges, the Department in its post evidence replies submitted as
under:—
“Each State/UT follows their own policy regarding the leasing and
utilization of water bodies. This Department advises the States/UTs
to adopt better options which can be helpful in production
enhancement and the benefits of the farmers.”
3.47 When asked about the steps being taken by the Department
to propel State Governments to promote fishery development in smaller
water bodies that come under the direct control of Panchayats, the
Department in its post evidence replies stated that:—
“This Department has entered into a Memorandum of
Understanding (MoU) with the Rural Development for convergence
of MGNREGA ponds for optimum utilization of the water bodies
for production enhancement. The States/UTs have been advised to
formulate Action Plan for these ponds created under MGNREGA
for fish culture/rearing of fingerlings.”
3.48 When asked about the measures adopted/being adopted by
the Department to promote aquaculture practices in the smaller water
bodies within the States, the Department in its post evidence reply
informed as under:—
“The smaller water bodies having sufficient water for fish culture
are included for the development of fisheries in all States/UTs. The
States/UTs are regularly advised to use these water bodies through
adoption of aquaculture.”
• Innovation in inland fisheries, research collaboration and
integration
3.49 When asked about the progress made by the Department in
working on the components of coldwater fisheries and aquaculture, saline/
alkaline soils for aquaculture, wetlands, integrated development of inland
capture resources (reservoirs/rivers etc.) and other innovative projects,
which are controlled by the Fish Farmers Development Agency (FFDAs
and BFDAs) and about State-wise details of innovative projects undertaken

36
or proposed to be undertaken in this regard, the Department in its written
reply submitted as under:—
“Under the component of Development of Inland fisheries and
aquaculture of Blue Revolution scheme, the progress made by the
Department on the components of cold water fisheries and
aquaculture, saline/alkaline soil aquaculture, wetland, Integrated
development of Reservoir during 2016-17 are given below:—
Sl. No. Activity Progress
1. Construction of Trout Raceways (No) 415
2. Construction of running water fish culture 155
units (No)
3. Construction of Ponds in Saline/alkaline 292
soil (Ha)
4. Development of waterlogged area (Ha) 245
5. Integrated Development of Reservoir (No)  28
The Department has provided assistance for undertaking two
fisheries activities under the innovative projects. They are
(i) establishment of one community hatchery unit for Rainbow Trout
in Sikkim and (ii) procurement of 20 units of de-boning machines
in Punjab. Other innovative activities proposed for which assistance
will be provided under the Blue Revolution Scheme are fisheries
management and conservation, induction of new technology in
fishing and allied activities including onboard handling of fish,
diversification of species for aquaculture, new technologies in
mariculture, fish culture, RAS, cage/pen culture including auto feed
technology, energy efficient operation of post harvest infrastructure
facilities such as FHs/FLCs etc, fisheries waste management,
improvement in hygienic conditions of the post-harvest
infrastructure facilities including deboning machine, post-harvest
processing and value added products, promotional activities etc.”
3.50 On being enquired about the lack of coordination between the
Department and ICAR regarding research on fishing in various sources
such as brackish water, freshwater etc., the representative of the
Department, during evidence, apprised the Standing Committee as
under:—
“...the Department is striving towards this. The Department shall
work with a sharper focus with the knowledge provided by the
ICAR.”

37
3.51 During the course of a briefing meeting on 9th January, 2017,
on being asked about incorporating traditional wisdom and techniques
within modern and scientific methods of fishing, the representative of
the Department submitted as under:—
“..the Department will pay special attention to this and work on
mechanizing traditional techniques. Secondly, as the Committee
has stated, work will be done on having ICAR collate and use its
research work with traditional techniques.”
• Measures to promote adoption of inland fisheries and aquaculture
practices among fishermen
3.52 When asked to provide State-wise details of inland fisheries
and aquaculture practices and the steps being taken by the Department
to ensure that State Governments come up with promotional measures
for helping adopt inland fisheries and aquaculture practices, the
Department in its post evidence replies informed as under:—
“This Department has formulated a National Integrated Fisheries
Action Plan (NIFAP) with a view to double the fish production,
wherein pond aquaculture, cage culture and reservoirs, wetland
development and re-circulatory aquaculture system have been
identified as major aquaculture practices. Accordingly, priority areas
have been identified for each State/UT.”
3.53 On being asked about the steps taken to promote organized
fish farming at the grass root level, mechanism to ascertain proper
post harvesting and processing facilities to the fishermen and also the
steps being taken to provide deserving prices to fisher communities in
lieu of their sale, the Department in its post evidence replies informed
that:—
“The Department (DADF) has prepared an Action Plan for the
development of Inland Fisheries. The thrust areas have been
identified and focused attention is paid to fill the critical gaps on
priority basis. Department is promoting development of exclusive
fish markets and fish transportation facilities to ensure optimum
price of the harvested fisheries resources.”
3.54 When asked about the details of steps being taken by the
Department to ensure that the fishermen community are allowed an easy
access to quality seed, technology and credit etc. and whether the

38
Department has any mechanism to ascertain this, the Department in its
post evidence replies submitted that:—
“To ensure supply of quality fish seeds, National Freshwater Fish
Brood Bank (NFFBB) has been established by National Fisheries
Development Board (NFDB) at Bhubaneswar, Odisha. The latest
technologies in aquaculture are transferred to the farmers by Central
Institute of Freshwater Aquaculture (CIFA), Central Institute of
Brackish water Aquaculture (CIBA) and other training Institutes
under capacity building programmes. The State/UT Fisheries
Department’s promote development of fisheries through the
beneficiary oriented schemes and facilitates credit, subsidies and
Skill Development etc.”
• Role of Fish Cooperatives in inland fisheries
3.55 When asked for State-wise details of any assessment of fishing
cooperatives made by the Government, the Department in its post evidence
replies stated that:—
“The database of the fisheries cooperatives in the country up to
2014 has been collected by the National Federation of Fishermen’s
Cooperatives Ltd. (FISHCOPFED). It is informed that there are a
total of 18,550 fishers cooperatives functioning in the country.”
3.56 State-wise details of fisheries cooperatives is given at
Annexure-VIII.
3.57 When asked about the steps taken to involve fishing
cooperatives in harnessing the potential of rainfed fisheries sector, the
Department in its post evidence replies furnished as under:—
“The rainfed water bodies are usually natural ponds, irrigation
reservoirs and wetlands. All these 3 categories of water bodies are
covered in the Blue Revolution Scheme to harness their potentials.”
3.58 On being asked about the measures adopted to ensure that
the fishing cooperatives perform their functions of leasing out water
bodies, providing credit facilities, inputs etc. properly; mechanisms to
ensure that these cooperatives function optimally and to hold them
accountable for the work allocated to them, the Department in its post
evidence replies informed as follows:—
“The Department is supporting the Fisheries Cooperatives under
the Blue Revolution Scheme through the States/UTs Governments

39
to utilize their potential for development of fisheries. Fisheries
Department of each State/UT is responsible for registration,
monitoring and support for functioning of the cooperatives. Besides,
a national federation namely National Federation of Fishermen’s
Cooperatives Ltd. (FISHCOPFED) is also functioning for overall
guidance of the State, District and primary level cooperatives to
bring them in the main stream of fisheries development activities.”
• Fish production and productivity
3.59 On being asked about the projects being implemented for
increasing fish productivity, the Department in its written replies submitted
as under:—
“The main objective of the implementation of the Central Plan
Scheme on Blue Revolution is the enhancement of Fish Production
and Productivity both in Inland and Marine Sector. The following
sub-components/activities are being implemented by the DADF for
increasing the fish productivity:
• Construction/renovation of ponds/tanks for culture of finfish
and shell fish,
• Providing input cost for aquaculture of finfish and shell fish,
• Establishment of fish seed hatcheries, nurseries and rearing
units,
• Construction of raceways for trouts,
• Development of waterlogged areas including beels,
• Establishment of fish feed mills,
• Installation of cages and pens in reservoirs and open water
bodies,
• Establishment of Re-circulatory Aquaculture System (RAS),
• Stocking of fish fingerlings in wetlands,
• Integrated development of reservoirs,
• Mariculture activities including open sea cage culture,
• Operation of Deep Sea Fishing Vessels,
• Imparting Training, Skill Development and Capacity Building
to the Stakeholders on various fisheries activities.”

40
3.60 When asked about ways in which fish production has gone
up irrespective of low expenditure, the Department in a written reply
informed the Committee as under:—
“Fisheries is a State Subject. Hence, in addition to the Financial
assistance released by the Centre, respective State/UT Governments
also provide State Plan allocations for implementation of fisheries
development activities depending upon the resources available in
their States. Besides, funds received from RKVY are being used for
development of fisheries sector. Large numbers of private
entrepreneurs are also involved in large scale commercial production
of fish in some States, which is also one of the major reasons for
enhancement of fish production. The production level of fish has
also increased due to adoption of advanced technologies like cage
culture in reservoirs, pen culture in wetlands, RAS, culture of
diversified fish species, use of quality fish seeds, better management
practices etc.”
3.61 On being asked about the measure being adopted by the
Department to ensure that the gap between the potential and actual yields
of rainfed water bodies is reduced and the present low productivity
levels enhanced, the Department in its post evidence replies furnished
as below:—
“Productivity enhancement is one of the major thrust areas under
Blue Revolution. Department is promoting feed based aquaculture
for productivity enhancement in the existing water bodies through
stocking of advanced fingerlings and creation of other necessary
infrastructure.”
• Harnessing true potential of the Inland Fisheries Sector
3.62 When asked about measures being adopted by the Department
to ensure that the fisheries sector, which contributes a great deal to the
GDP and to the food basket, is developed in a way so as to contribute
to its maximum capacity and steps taken to ascertain that the livelihood
of millions of poor fishermen in the country is secured, the Department
in its post evidence replies submitted as under:—
“The Department has prepared a detailed National Fisheries Action
Plan-2020(NFAP) for development of fisheries, for the next 5 years
with an aim of enhancing fish production and productivity towards
Blue Revolution in fisheries. The approach was initiated considering
the various fisheries resources available in the Country like ponds
and tanks, wetlands, brackish water, cold water, lakes and reservoirs,

41
rivers and canals and the marine sector. All States and UTs have
been advised to prepare their State Action Plan for 5 years in line
with NFAP for achieving Blue Revolution in their States/UTs. The
detailed National Action Plan include Mission Cage culture, Mission
Brackish water/Saline Aquaculture, Mission fingerling, Mission
Ornamental fisheries, Fisheries and Aquaculture development
Fund(FIDF), Cold Chain and Infrastructure development, Fisheries
entrepreneurship development programme etc.”
3.63 On being enquired about the presence and details of any special
policy on Inland Fisheries within the Government and if not, the reasons
behind absence of the same, the Department in its post evidence replies
submitted to the Committee that:—
“At present there is no National Policy for the development of
Inland Fisheries. However, the Department has realized the need
for such a policy and taken initiative for formulating an Inland
Fishery policy in the near future.”

42
PART II
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS
Development of inland fisheries and aquaculture
1. The Committee note that the scheme on Development of Inland
Fisheries and Aquaculture was started with the objectives of enhancing
inland fish production and productivity, popularizing modern fish
farming, creating employment opportunities, diversifying aquaculture
practices and training fish farmers through specialized agencies etc.
However, most of these objectives are yet to be achieved, as a majority
of our fishermen are still to learn the use of modern and scientific fish
farming techniques. Despite being the second largest fish producing
nation with a production of 107.61 lakh tonnes (2015-16) and as many
1.5 crore fishers/farmers and small entrepreneurs engaged in fishing,
the actual potential of our inland fisheries sector has still not been
realized. The historical scenario of Indian fisheries reveals a paradigm
shift from marine dominated to inland fisheries, wherein the latter has
emerged as a major contributor to the overall fish production in the
country. Moreover, with the current lack of technology and technical
know-how in the deep sea fishing sector, inland fisheries sector remains
the only area which can contribute significantly to overall fish
production, if exploited with a systematic and sustainable approach.
Inland fisheries sector requires laser sharp focus and attention as its
potential has still not been completely harnessed.
The Committee note that although inland fisheries have grown
in absolute terms, the rate of growth in terms of its potential is yet
to reach the desired level.
Furthermore, it has been observed that inland fishery is
dominated mainly by freshwater fishery, thus necessitating the need
for diversification of fish production with practices such as intensive
aquaculture in different water bodies. The Committee feel that the
Reservoir Fisheries Development as a thrust area of the Department
needs to be taken further so as to enhance the productivity of reservoirs.
There is a need to provide quality inputs in terms of seed, feed, health
management and marketing support to areas of freshwater fish farming,
cold water fishing, coastal aquaculture and brackish water fishing, as

43
also on ornamental fish farming which holds immense potential in
terms of providing foreign exchange earnings and additional livelihood
opportunities. The Committee also observe that commercial shrimp
farming in inland saline water bodies is another area that the
Department needs to lay emphasis on. Therefore, the Department need
to follow the approach of democratic decentralization and allow States
the freedom to take up the scheme on Development of Inland Fisheries
and Aquaculture at the basic level while also ensuring transparency
and accountability of the States and UTs. The Committee, therefore,
recommend that the Department make full fledged attempts in the
aforesaid areas and come up with a mechanism to sustainably harness
the actual potential of the inland fisheries sector. The Committee would
like to be apprised of the steps taken by the Department in this direction.
Merger of the Centrally Sponsored Schemes (CSS) under Blue Revolution
2. The Committee appreciate the vision of the Department in
creating an enabling environment for integrated and holistic
development of the fisheries sector with the merger of the earlier
centrally sponsored schemes under the umbrella of Blue Revolution.
This holds a special relevance for the sector of inland fisheries and
aquaculture, for its true potential still remains unexplored. Besides
calling for optimal resource utilization and sustainable intensification
of fish production, this also requires consistent efforts for filling critical
gaps between the existing production and actual potential of the inland
fisheries and aquaculture sector, while also ensuring that this merger
provides for an equal participation and involvement of all stakeholders,
right from the basic to the top-most level. The Committee, while
sounding a word of caution, would like the Department to ensure that
the ideas and plans laid out under this merger are well implemented
and do not meet the same fate as the scheme on Development of Inland
Fisheries and Aquaculture, which, since its inception in 1973-74 was
mired with under achievement of targets due to tardy implementation.
This resulted in our inland fisheries sector witnessing a stunted growth
and development even after a lapse of four decades. Keeping in view
the existent ground situation and the aims and ideals of the Blue
Revolution, the Committee strongly recommend that the Department
not just come up with a foolproof mechanism to ensure participation
and involvement of individual States/UTs and stakeholders in
harnessing the actual potential of inland fisheries and aquaculture,
but also lay due emphasis on the aspect of implementation, so as to
enhance fish production and productivity of the fisheries in general
and of the inland fisheries and aquaculture in particular. The Committee
would like to be apprised of the progress made by the Department
in this regard.

44
Funding pattern of the scheme under Blue Revolution
3. The Committee note that the funding pattern of the scheme
after its subsumption under Blue Revolution is divided between the
Centre and States in the ratio 80:20 for North East and Hill States and
50:50 in the case of other States and UTs. While central funding is
taken care of by the Centre, balance funding is done by the State/UT
concerned or borne by the beneficiary, as may be the discretion of the
respective State/UT. The Committee feel that the States need to come
up with their matching share of funds allocated for the said schemes
well in time, as this will allow timely release of central funds for the
same. There needs to be a mechanism to ensure that the intended
funds reach deserving beneficiaries on time and that beneficiaries
identified under the scheme are able to reap benefits well within the
intended timeframe and do not suffer for want of State funds. The
Committee therefore, recommend that the Department impress upon
the States/UTs to come up with their matching share of funds under
this scheme, so as to allow the beneficiaries/State machinery an
unhindered access to central funds for the growth and development
of inland fisheries in their respective States.
4. Of the approved central outlay of Rs. 3000 crores allocated to
the Centrally Sponsored Schemes (CSS) under Blue Revolution for 5
years, the approved outlay for the year 2017-18 was Rs. 598 crore. The
Committee are, however, concerned to note that out of this approved
outlay, only Rs. 400.73 crore has actually been allocated to the Centrally
Sponsored Schemes under Blue Revolution for the year 2017-18. The
Committee are of the considered opinion that this is too meagre an
amount, given the fact that only a portion of this would be allocated
to the component of Development of Inland Fisheries and Aquaculture,
which itself has numerous sub-components to be funded. Keeping in
view the pivotal nature of this component, the Committee recommend
that the Department take up the matter with the Ministry of Finance
at the highest level since Blue Revolution, being a flagship scheme of
the Department should not be starved of funds and allocations for the
scheme should be made in accordance with the funds earmarked for
it. The Committee would like to be apprised about the steps taken by
the Department in this direction.
Physical targets and achievements
5. While lauding the achievement of the Department in bringing
an area of 2336 hectare under aquaculture, against a target of 1980
hectares, the Committee also note that during the period from
2013-14 to 2015-16 the Department failed to bring the targeted area

45
under aquaculture, the reason for which has been attributed to non-
receipt of timely proposals from States and UTs and budgetary cut at
RE stage, along with diversification of funds by them for purposes
other than that of aquaculture. Moreover, a constant decline in the
number of beneficiaries in 2014-15 and 2015-16 as compared to 2013-
14 has also been associated with non-receipt of proposals from States
and UTs. Not being satisfied with this stereotypical reply of the
Department, the Committee recommend that stringent measures be
adopted to ensure that States and UTs furnish self-contained proposals
to the Department in a timely manner and also that execution of schemes
and achievements of set targets are not delayed due to such reasons
in future. The Committee also recommend that the Department lay
special emphasis on the implementation aspect of the schemes and
programmes formulated under the Blue Revolution and strive to achieve
the set physical targets.
6. Taking note of the efforts made by the Department in
augmenting production from aquaculture through programs such as
Mission Fingerling and development of cage culture and cold water
fisheries, the Committee also observe that focus has been laid on
mariculture and coastal fishery resources through various programs
conceptualized under the Blue Revolution. Moreover, the setting up
of a National Fresh Water Fish Brood Bank (NFFBB) to aid Brood Stock
Multiplication and provide genetically improved seeds is also a
welcome step in the direction of ensuring availability of quality seeds
to fish farmers. The Committee desire that the Department ensures
that steps taken to augment fish production actually see the light of
the day and achieve desired results. They further urge the Department
to ascertain that schemes to provide training to fish farmers, those
aimed at promoting skill development and capacity building and other
welfare oriented schemes reach the desired beneficiaries in a timely
manner.
Issue of pending utilization certificates
7. The Committee are unhappy to note that the Department has,
time and again failed to effectively tackle the issue of pending
utilization certificates with the States and UTs. The Committee express
strong displeasure over the fact that utilization certificates amounting
to Rs. 289.90 crore have been pending as on 31st March, 2017. Needless
to say, under-utilization of funds leads to the vicious cycle of lower
allocations in subsequent years and concomitantly leads to downsizing
of targets. The Committee, therefore, feel that the extant mechanism
in place needs to be re-looked into and necessary corrective measures
need to be undertaken for liquidation of outstanding UCs in a time

46
bound manner ensuring unhindered release of Central funds for
effective implementation of schemes, besides also ascertaining that
the funds being provided to the States and UTs are being utilized for
the same purpose for which they are provided. The Committee,
therefore, recommend that corrective measures may be undertaken to
address this vexed issue at the earliest. The Committee would like to
be apprised of the action initiated in this regard.
Establishment of hatcheries and fish feed mills and their quality standards
8. While observing the steps taken by the Department, such as
‘Mission Fingerling Programme’, for establishing hatcheries and feed
mills throughout the country, the Committee also note with concern
that when asked about the viability of such feed mills in non-fishing
areas of the country, the Department has yet again provided a hackneyed
reply stating that it has requested States/UTs to submit proposals for
the same. The Department has failed to apprise the Committee about
the viability of establishing feed mills in non-fishing areas and
repercussions of the same. Deprecating such an attitude of the
Department, the Committee recommend that the Department, while
providing replies to questions raised by the Committee, furnish the
desired information about the issues raised by them. The Committee
further recommend that the Department undertake adequate measures
to come up with and to effectively implement certification initiatives
regarding fish and fish products, both under the import and export
category. The Committee would like to be apprised of the steps taken
by the Department in this regard.
Re-circulatory Aquaculture System (RAS) and running water fishing
9. While taking note of the fact that about 80% of the share of
inland fish catch is obtained from aquaculture activities, the Committee
appreciate the schemes of the Department in encouraging traditional
fish farmers to take up aquaculture activities with scientific techniques.
Further, the assistance provided to fishers in establishing hatcheries
and promoting aquaculture practices with a special focus on North
East States, are welcome steps in the direction of creating an enabling
environment for fish farmers to take up scientific fish farming in
aquaculture. The Committee also welcome the efforts of the Department
regarding the idea of Re-circulatory Aquaculture System (RAS) and
feel that it is a scientific and sustainable method of fish farming and
if implemented properly, has the potential to increase fish production
exponentially. The Committee, therefore, recommend that the
Department come up with a working mechanism to encourage fish
farmers to take up RAS practices and also ensure easy availability of

47
required funds and infrastructure to fish farmers taking up such
practices. Besides, while taking note of the issues cropping up while
practicing fish farming in running water around towns and cities, the
Committee also recommend that the Department take adequate
measures to make running water suitable for fishing in areas where
there are vast stretches of the same.
Training and skill development
10. The Committee have been informed that the National
Fisheries Development Board (NFDB) conducts training and skill
development programmes to train traditional fishermen in fisheries
developmental activities such as fish culture, capture, post-harvest
processing etc., beneficiaries for which are identified by respective
State Governments. The Annual Action Plan for skill development in
fisheries sector as operationalized by the NFDB calls for skilling various
stakeholders in numerous scientific fishing practices. While
appreciating the efforts of the Department on this front, the Committee
feel that the Department needs to bring about inclusiveness in
implementing such programmes, laying special emphasis on the North
Eastern States and other hilly areas as non-percolation of knowledge
and skill development programmes renders these areas backward and
under-developed. The Committee, therefore, recommend that the
Department pay special attention to include fishermen and other
stakeholders in these areas while conducting skill development
programmes and workshops, so as to bring them at par with fishermen
of other areas. The Committee also recommend that the Department
work towards imparting special training to progressive fishermen and
enable them to act as Master Trainers who, in turn, will train fishers
in order to have a better reception and retention of the skills and
techniques provided to these fishers during training. The Committee
may be apprised of the steps taken by the Department in this regard.
Assessment and harnessing of resource potential and sustainable practices in
fishing
11. While appreciating the efforts of the Department in mapping
of water bodies through schemes such as ‘Strengthening of Database
and Geographical Information System (GIS) of the Fisheries Sector’,
the Committee also take note of the idea of integrated development
of reservoirs through integration of various in-situ fishing activities. The
Committee have also been informed about practices such as cage culture
being promoted to help fishers adopt new technology in inland fishing.

48
The Committee recommend that the Department come up with adequate
measures to put these ideas to practice so as to increase the production
from the inland fisheries sector. The Committee would like to be
informed about the steps being taken in this direction.
12. The Committee are aggrieved over the issue of indiscriminate
use of resources and unsustainable farming practices leading to
environmental damage and loss of indigenous fish breeds. The
Committee are also unhappy with the fact that despite the scheme on
Development of Inland Fisheries and Aquaculture being in place for
more than four decades, the Department has failed to undertake any
evaluation to assess the actual number of ponds where fish cultivation
is possible. The Committee, therefore, recommend that the Department
undertake an assessment of the number of water bodies available for
fish cultivation, besides ensuring that resources are utilized sustainably
and the rehabilitation of wetlands is taken up with a mission mode
approach.
Development of wetlands and beels and utilizing river water
13. The Committee express concern over the fact that though the
Department is providing financial assistance for the development of
wetlands like beels, chaurs etc. for undertaking sustainable aquaculture,
yet it has not undertaken any evaluation to assess the actual number
of ponds, wetlands, water logged areas and other water bodies in the
country, where fish cultivation is possible. Being of the firm opinion
that an assessment of the available water resources with the potential
for fish harvesting is an absolute necessity as it not only helps formulate
better and State/UT-specific policies regarding harnessing the potential
of local water bodies, but will also help in deriving accurate estimates
regarding future production. The Committee strongly urge the
Department to undertake an evaluation to assess the actual number
of water bodies with fishing potential within each State and UT.
Furthermore, the Department has provided information about an Action
Plan for Wetland Development in 7 States of Assam, Arunachal Pradesh,
Bihar, Uttar Pradesh, West Bengal, Manipur and Meghalaya based on
their high potential areas for wetland development and water logged
area development. The Committee, therefore, desire that such action
plans be prepared for other States as well, so that water bodies can
be utilised optimally and their potential explored fully. The Committee
further recommend the Department that during exploration of the true
potential of water bodies and wetlands for inland fisheries, the natural
habitat of other species dwelling within the wetlands and water bodies
should not be lost sight of.

49
Leasing out of water bodies and steps taken to promote aquaculture
14. The Committee note that the Department has formulated a
National Integrated Fisheries Action Plan (NIFAP) to double fish
production and encouraging States and UTs to come up with
promotional measures for helping adopt inland fisheries and
aquaculture practices. However, while noting that the policies regarding
leasing and utilization of water bodies fall under the States, the
Committee are desirous to know about the State-specific challenges
faced by individual States and UTs in leasing out water bodies. Besides,
the Committee are dissatisfied with the fact that the Department
provided no concrete reply to the Committee on being queried about
the availability of credit facilities to fish farmers. The Committee
recommend that the Department pursue the cause of fisheries being
treated at par with the agriculture with the Government at the highest
level so as to provide the fish farmers an easier access to institutional
credit.
15. While appreciating the efforts of the Department regarding
entering an MoU with the Rural Development for convergence of
MGNREGA for pond utilization and production enhancement, the
Committee also desire the Department to ensure that smaller water
bodies are not neglected and that individual States take adequate
measures to use these through adoption of aquaculture, besides also
ensuring that fishers are paid deserving prices for their catch. They
further recommend that the Department take up with the States
individually, the issue of policy formulation by States regarding leasing
out of water bodies by the Panchayats. The Committee would like to
be apprised of the steps taken by the Department in this direction.
Innovation in inland fisheries, research collaboration and integration
16. While noting the initiatives undertaken by the Department
for innovation in inland fisheries through initiatives such as farming
of Rainbow Trout in Sikkim and procurement of de-boning machines
in Punjab, the Committee also observe that ideas related to allied
activities, fish management and conservation as well as diversification
of species have also been proposed. The Committee while appreciating
the efforts of the Department in encouraging innovation in the inland
fisheries sector, are however, concerned to note that there still exists
a gap in coordination between the Department and the Indian Council
of Agricultural Research (ICAR) regarding research on fishing in various
sources like brackish water, freshwater, cold water etc. Besides, the
Committee also feel that much work needs to be done in the area
regarding fusion of traditional knowledge and wisdom with the modern

50
and scientific techniques of fishing. The Committee, therefore,
recommend that the Department ensure involvement of all stakeholders
in the process of encouraging innovation in inland fisheries, besides
also taking concrete action to integrate traditional ideas with present
day methodology of modern and scientific fish farming along with
motivating fish farmers to adopt innovation.
Role of fish cooperatives in inland fisheries
17. The Committee note that as per the database maintained by
the National Federation of Fishermen’s Cooperatives Ltd.
(FISHCOPFED) up to 2014 there are a total of 18,550 fish cooperatives
functioning in the country. These fish cooperatives are guided and
supported by the States/UTs which are responsible for their registration,
monitoring and functioning support while the FISHCOPFED provides
overall guidance to State, District and primary level cooperatives to
utilize their potential for development of fisheries. The Committee,
however, are disappointed to note that when specifically asked about
the measures adopted by the Department to ensure that the fishing
cooperatives perform their functions of leasing out water bodies,
providing credit facilities, inputs etc. properly; the mechanisms put in
place to ensure that these cooperatives function optimally and to hold
them accountable for the work allocated to them, the Department failed
to provide any concrete reply. Besides, the Department also failed to
apprise the Committee of any mechanism to ensure that the States/UTs
ascertain better management practices of inland fisheries within their
territories as also following fair practices while leasing out water bodies
and reservoirs to fishing cooperatives within the State. The Committee,
therefore, recommend the Department to direct the States and UTs to
come up with a mechanism to measure the performance of the fish
cooperatives and to ensure their accountability. Despising the fact that
no set procedure is followed while leasing out water bodies and
reservoirs to cooperatives, the Committee recommend that the
Department direct the States and UTs to formulate proper guidelines
for leasing out and maintenance of State resources to the fish
cooperatives. The Committee would like to be apprised of the steps
taken by the Department in this direction.
18. The Committee, while taking note of the fact that inland
fisheries is a State subject, feel that the Department must, besides
issuing advisories and guidelines to States regarding rules and
regulations for inland fisheries, must also have in place a mechanism
to ensure transparency in the process of leasing out water bodies by
States to fishing cooperatives. The Committee, therefore, strongly
recommend that the Department come up with clear cut measures to

51
guard the interests of the fish cooperatives working towards developing
inland fisheries and making it a profitable enterprise. The Committee
also recommend that the Department encourage States and UTs to
formulate policies to support and enhance the role of fishing
cooperatives and to attract and involve youth and entrepreneurs in
making inland fisheries a profitable enterprise. The Committee would
like to be apprised of the steps taken by the Department in this direction.
Fish production and productivity
19. The Committee are aware that various components under the
umbrella of Blue Revolution are being implemented to augment fish
production and productivity, however, advanced technologies like cage
culture, culture of diversified fish species, Re-circulatory Aquaculture
Systems (RAS) better management practices etc. are yet to percolate
down to the basic level. The Committee are of the opinion that these
technologies, unless made affordable and accessible to the traditional
fisherman may not yield desired results in term of increasing fish
production. The ideal of having a National Fisheries Action Plan (NFAP)
and State/UT specific action plans has the potential of dramatically
magnifying fish production and multiplying the productivity of the
inland fisheries sector, provided this is implemented with the
involvement of individual States, UTs and various other stakeholders.
The Committee are also concerned to note that issues such as non-
availability or restricted availability of quality fish seed and feed for
aquaculture; non-proliferation of scientific techniques such as
aquaculture, culture-based capture fisheries; sub-optional resource
utilization, as is the case with ponds, reservoirs, wetlands beels etc.,
non-observance of ban period in reservoirs to allow auto stocking;
unsustainable intensification of fish production and poor management
practices are some of the serious impediments that the Department
needs to tackle before the inland fisheries sector can be made
sustainably productive. These obstacles are preventing in tapping the
true potential of the inland fisheries and thus need to be intercepted
with utmost caution. The Committee, therefore, recommend that the
Department take into consideration these issues while formulating plans
and program for augmenting fish productivity and productivity of the
inland fisheries and aquaculture sector. The Committee would like to
be apprised of the steps taken by the Department in this direction.
Harnessing true potential of the inland fisheries sector
20. While appreciating the effort of the Department in
formulating a National Fisheries Action Plan - 2020 (NFAP) to harness
the potential of various fisheries resources such as ponds and tanks,

52
wetlands, brackish and fresh water, cold water, marine sector, lakes
and reservoirs, rivers and canals etc., the Committee are concerned to
note that the Department has remained mute on the prospect of ensuring
State Action Plan, on the lines of NFAP, specific to each State and UT.
The Committee urge the Department to not just stop at issuing
advisories to States and UTs, rather ensure that uniformity is maintained
in such endeavours with each State and UT coming up with a need
based model. Moreover, such action plans not only lead the way forward
in terms of developing the particular sector but also provide scope for
increasing entrepreneurial activities in the said sector. This is a way
of ensuring that entrepreneurs willing to indulge in the inland fisheries
and aquaculture sector are not deterred by policy paralysis or lack of
infrastructure and opportunities, rather are encouraged to take up
entrepreneurial ventures in this sector with the State providing a
mechanism to facilitate the same. The Committee, therefore, while
strongly advocating for the cause of State and UT specific development
of inland fisheries and aquaculture sector, urge the Department to put
in place a mechanism to ensure that individual States and UTs come
up with State and UT specific Fisheries Action Plans for harnessing
the true potential of the fisheries sector. The Committee also strongly
recommend that the Department formulate a National Inland Fishery
Policy for the development and upkeep of the Inland Fisheries Sector
in the country.
21. The Committee are aggrieved to note that fish farming as an
activity has no coverage under any insurance provided by the
Government and neither is there any exclusive scheme or policy to
provide relief to fish farmers during natural calamities. Moreover,
despite contributing a great deal to the GDP and to the food basket,
the fisheries sector is not treated at par with agriculture. The Committee
strongly desire that the Department take up this issue at the highest
level and put in place a mechanism, commensurate with the needs of
the fisher community, to provide an insurance cover to fish farming
as an activity and an insurance risk cover to fish farmers against natural
calamities such as tsunamis, cyclones etc., to provide adequate
opportunities for training and extension services to the fishermen as
also to improve the condition of the facilities already being given out
to the fishermen and their families. The Committee would like to be
apprised of the steps taken by the Department in this direction.
N
EW DELHI; HUKMDEV NARAYAN YADAV,
24 July, 2018 Chairperson,
02 Shravana, 1940 (Saka) Standing Committee on Agriculture.

53
ANNEXURE I
State/UT-wise Details of the beneficiaries under the component of
Development of Inland Fisheries and Aquaculture
S.No. Name of State/UT 2014-15 2015-16 2016-17 Total
1 2 3456
1. Andhra Pradesh 637 637
2. Assam 416 416
3. Bihar 12601260
4. Chhattisgarh 78806563 224 14667
5. Goa 86 86
6. Gujarat 24 24
7. Haryana 2480197 2677
8. Himachal Pradesh 44 157 201
9. Jammu and Kashmir 192 192
10. Jharkhand 2822 2822
11. Karnataka 177 177
12. Kerala 216 216
13. Madhya Pradesh 1963 2142 457 4562
14. Maharashtra 286 286
15. Manipur 13964 288016844
16. Meghalaya 99 99
17. Mizoram 2605 1015 142 3762
18. Nagaland 185 557 52 794
19. Odisha 2982 707 3689
20. Puducherry 11 11
21. Punjab 13 13
22. Rajasthan 180180
23. Sikkim 151 151
24. Tamil Nadu 177 177
25. Telangana 846 846
26. Tripura 1169 1169

54
27. Uttar Pradesh 6459 9598 57 16114
28. Uttarakhand 195 195
29. West Bengal 867 333 1200
30. Anadaman & Nicobar 25 25
Islands
Total 36403 25781 11308 73492
1 2 3456

55
ANNEXURE II
Area covered under freshwater aquaculture
Sl. No. State/UT Total area covered (ha)
upto 2015-16
12 3
1. Andhra Pradesh 4405
2. Arunachal Pradesh 2418
3. Assam 5404
4. Bihar 25786
5. Chhattisgarh 20805
6. Goa 400
7. Gujarat 81971
8. Haryana 26603
9. Himachal Pradesh 1011
10. Jammu and Kashmir 9223
11. Jharkhand 9548
12. Karnataka 62225
13. Kerala 35458
14. Madhya Pradesh 99400
15. Maharashtra 36602
16. Manipur 7306
17. Meghalaya 798
18. Mizoram 7613
19. Nagaland 9999
20. Odisha 46407
21. Puducherry 1043
22. Punjab 51303
23. Rajasthan 12313
24. Sikkim 300
25. Tamil Nadu 21816
26. Tripura 13311

56
27. Uttar Pradesh 170105
28. Uttarakhand 425
29. West Bengal 133099
Total 897097
12 3

57
ANNEXURE III
State/UT-wise details of funds released and utilized during the
FY 2016-17 under Blue Revolution Scheme
(Rs. in crore)
S.No. States / UTs Funds Funds UCs
released utilized/UCs Pending
received
1 2 345
1. Andaman and Nicobar 0.54 0.00 0.54
2. Andhra Pradesh 18.97 7.61 11.36
3. Arunachal Pradesh 0.00 0.00 0.00
4. Assam 16.41 0.00 16.41
5. Bihar 19.48 0.00 19.48
6. Chhattisgarh 13.47 11.57 1.90
7. Daman and Diu 0.00 0.00 0.00
8. Goa 10.00 0.00 10.00
9. Gujarat 3.87 0.00 3.87
10. Haryana 11.22 6.19 5.03
11. Himachal Pradesh 10.82 10.82 0.00
12. Jammu and Kashmir 11.11 4.06 7.05
13. Jharkhand 23.00 0.00 23.00
14. Karnataka 28.71 19.03 9.67
15. Kerala 12.98 0.00 12.98
16. Lakshadweep 0.00 0.00 0.00
17. Madhya Pradesh 14.00 10.40 3.61
18. Maharashtra 20.52 0.00 20.52
19. Manipur 0.00 0.00 0.00
20. Meghalaya 10.03 0.00 10.03
21. Mizoram 13.77 0.00 13.77
22. Nagaland 9.66 4.105.56
23. NCT Delhi 0.00 0.00 0.00
24. Odisha 25.94 3.05 22.89

58
25. Puducherry 10.00 2.61 7.39
26. Punjab 9.99 3.65 6.34
27. Rajasthan 2.62 0.00 2.62
28. Sikkim 3.79 0.03 3.76
29. Tamil Nadu 24.93 5.00 19.93
30. Telangana 14.65 0.00 14.65
31. Tripura 8.68 5.94 2.74
32. Uttar Pradesh 17.61 0.00 17.61
33. Uttarakhand 9.55 0.00 9.55
34. West Bengal 7.74 0.00 7.74
Total BR 384.05 94.06 289.90
1 2 345

59
ANNEXURE IV
Details on State-wise post-harvest fisheries infrastructure facilities provided during 2016-17
S.No. State/Component New Modern- Ice Cold Ice Renova- Refrige- Auto Motor- Bicycle Establi- Setting
fishing ization/ plants storage plantstion of rated  ricks- cycles with shment up of
harbors/ Upgra- (New) cum existing and haws withice box of mobile/
fish dation cold ice insul-ice box retail/retail
landing of storage plants ated whole fish
centers existing trucks salefishoutlet
FHoutlet (Kiosk)
1 2 34567891 0 1 1 1 2 1 3 1 4
1. Andhra Pradesh 60 10 1 50
2. Chhattisgarh 3 0 38 166 800 20
3 . G o a 1 3 3 1 92 02 0 5
4. Jammu and Kashmir 25 0 201016
5. Jharkhand 1 0
6. Karnataka 78 120 9 150 3 3
7. Kerala 0 0 50
8. Madhya Pradesh 2 0 14 20

60
1 2 34567891 0 1 1 1 2 1 3 1 4
9. Maharashtra 2 1 1 0 4
10. Meghalaya 0 5
11. Odisha0 50 500 0
12. Punjab02 0 2 5
13. Rajasthan 0 1
14. Tamil Nadu 1 0 2
15. Telangana 0 2
16. Tripura05 1 0
17. Uttar Pradesh 0 6 56 84 1
18. Uttarakhand 1
19. West Bengal 3 100 0
Total 4 1 69 4 103 120 42 185 2022 884 129 83

61
ANNEXURE V
Details on the State-wise hatcheries available up to
2016-17 in the country
S. No. State Existing Number of Hatcheries
 1 2 3
1. Andhra Pradesh 268
2. Arunachal Pradesh 8
3. Assam 407
4. Bihar 152
5. Chhattisgarh 73
6. Goa 1
7. Gujarat 24
8. Haryana 15
9. Himachal Pradesh 9
10. Jammu and Kashmir 9
11. Jharkhand 120
12. Karnataka 28
13. Kerala 15
14. Madhya Pradesh 71
15. Maharashtra 49
16. Manipur 11
17. Meghalaya 8
18. Mizoram 12
19. Nagaland 8
20. Odisha 124
21. Punjab 33
22. Rajasthan 12
23. Sikkim 6
24. Telangana 19
25. Tamil Nadu 82
26. Tripura 34

62
27. Uttar Pradesh 235
28. Uttarakhand 7
29. West Bengal 458
Total 2298
12 3

63
ANNEXURE VI
Number of Trainees proposed under Skill Development Plan for FY 2017-18
S.No. States/UTs Ponds Wet Lands Brackish/Saline Reservoirs Total
Water
1 2 34567
1. Andhra Pradesh 2600 0 500 1100 4200
2. Arunachal Pradesh 50 50 0 0 100
3. Assam 450 150 0 0 600
4. Bihar 500 100 0 50 650
5. Chhattisgarh 400 0 0 200 600
6. Goa 50 0 50 0 100
7. Gujarat 150 0 200 700 1050
8. Haryana 100 0 100 0 200
9. Himachal Pradesh 50 0 0 150 200
10. Jammu and Kashmir 100 0 0 0 100
11. Jharkhand 300 0 0 250 550

64
12. Karnataka 1500 0 50 1400 2950
13. Kerala 50 0 300 100 450
14. Madhya Pradesh 350 0 0 9001250
15. Maharashtra 400 0 200 700 1300
16. Manipur 50 50 0 0 100
17. Meghalaya 50 50 0 50 150
18. Mizoram 50 0 0 50 100
19. Nagaland 50 0 0 0 50
20. Odisha 500 0 1000 500 2000
21. Punjab100 0 50 0 150
22. Rajasthan 150 0 450 400 1000
23. Telangana 1150 0 0 1000 2150
24. Tamil Nadu 300 0 150 9501400
25. Tripura 150 0 0 50 200
26. Uttarakhand 50 0 0 50 100
27. Uttar Pradesh 700 100 0 3501150
28. West Bengal1450 100 550 50 2150
Total 11800 600 3600 9000 25000
1 2 34567

65
ANNEXURE VII
State/UT-wise Potential Resources Identified under Blue Revolution for FY 2017-18
S.No. State/UT Inland Sector Ornamental
Brackish/ Cage RAS MissionCold Water Mariculture Infrastruc-Fisheries
SalinewaterCulture Fingerling ture
1 2 34567891 0
1. Andaman and Nicobar 
Islands
2. Andhra Pradesh  
3. Goa  
4. Gujarat  
5. Karnataka  
6. Kerala  
7. Maharashtra 
8. Odisha  
9. Puducherry 
10. Tamil Nadu 

66
11. West Bengal 
12. Daman and Diu
13. Lakshadweep
14. Assam 
15. Bihar 
16. Chhattisgarh
17. Haryana 
18. Himachal Pradesh
19. Jharkhand
20. Madhya Pradesh
21. Telangana
22. Uttar Pradesh
23. Delhi
24. Jammu and Kashmir
25. Meghalaya
26. Mizoram
27. Nagaland
28. Punjab
29. Rajasthan
1 2 34567891 0

67
30. Sikkim
31. Tripura
32. Uttarakhand 
33. Arunachal Pradesh
34. Manipur
1 2 34567891 0

68
ANNEXURE VIII
Database of Fisheries Cooperatives in India
S.No. Name of State No. of State No. of No. of No. of Inland Marine Total
Fedn. Regional DFCS PFCS Membership
Fedn.
1 2 3456789
1. Andhra Pradesh 1 13 2289 1858 431 2,58,411
2. Telangana 1 10 3933 3933 0 2,52,202
3. Assam 1 272 272 43,845
4. Bihar 2 510 510 4,10,007
5. Chhattisgarh 1 3 765 765 0 26,154
6. Gujarat 1 2 263 57 206 26,045
7. Goa20 8 12 1,503
8. Himachal Pradesh 45 45 0 5,837
9. Jammu and Kashmir 1 1 18
10. Jharkhand 1 384 384 0 22,853

69
11. Karnataka 1 2 418 319 99 2,04,689
12. Kerala 1 386 156 230 3,48,466
13. Maharashtra 1 2 36 3315 2961 354 3,32,636
14. Madhya Pradesh 1 1 596 596 025,493
15. Manipur 1 3 240 240 0 18,433
16. Meghalaya18 18 0 611
17. Mizoram 1 47 47 0 1,656
18. Nagaland267 267 0 9,234
19. Odisha 1 1 2 657 317 340 1,38,143
20. Punjab1 1 1 0 18
21. Puducherry 1 1 64 12 52 58,525
22. Rajasthan 1 34 34 0 4,130
23. Sikkim8 8 0 230
24. Tamil Nadu 1 111353 360 993 6,01,620
25. Tripura 1 142 142 0 22,967
26. Uttar Pradesh 1 191011 1011 0 54,521
27. Uttarakhand 13 13 0 634
28. West Bengal 1 201433 1191 242 92,759
29. Arunachal Pradesh 11 11 0 230
1 2 3456789

70
30. Andaman and Nicobar Islands 1 41 0 41 1,361
31. Daman and Diu 7 0 73,176
32. Lakshadweep 0 0 0 6 6 0 2910
33. Haryana 1 0 0 0 11
Total 21 3 126 18,550 15543 3007 29,69,328
1 2 3456789

71
APPENDIX I
STANDING COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE
(2016-17)
MINUTES OF THE 9TH SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE
The Committee sat on Monday, the 09th January, 2017 from
1100 hours to 1310 hours in Committee Room ‘139’, Parliament House
Annexe, New Delhi.
PRESENT
Shri Hukmdev Narayan Yadav—Chairperson
M EMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Prof. Ravindra Vishwanath Gaikwad
3. Smt. Raksha Nikhil Khadse
4. Md. Badaruddoza Khan
5. Dr. Tapas Mandal
6. Shri Janardan Mishra
7. Shri Devji Mansingram Patel
8. Shri Mukesh Rajput
9. Shri C.L. Ruala
10. Shri Satyapal Singh (Sambhal)
11. Shri Virendra Singh
12. Shri Jai Prakash Narayan Yadav
Rajya Sabha
13. Shri Sambhaji Shahu Chhatrapati
14. Shri Janardan Dwivedi

72
15. Shri Vinay Katiyar
16. Shri Mohd. Ali Khan
17. Shri Ram Nath Thakur
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Shri U.B.S. Negi —Joint Secretary
2. Shri C. Vanlalruata —Deputy Secretary
WITNESSES
Ministry of Agriculture and Farmers Welfare
(Department of Animal Husbandry, Dairying and Fisheries)
1. Shri Devendra Chaudhry Secretary (ADF)
2. Shri Aditya Kumar Joshi JS (Fisheries)
3. Shri P.R. MeshramDirector (Fy-Stats)
4. Dr. Paul Pandian Fisheries Development
Commissioner
5. Shri Shankar Laxman Joint Commissioner
(Fisheries)
National Fisheries Development Board
1. Shri Utpal Kumar Sar Executive Director
2. At the outset, the Chairperson welcomed the members to the
sitting of the Committee. The Committee, then, took up the subject
‘Scheme on Development of Inland Fisheries and Aquaculture — An
Analysis’, with the representatives of the Department of Animal
Husbandry, Dairying and Fisheries.
3. After the introduction, the Chairperson initiated the discussion
which was followed by a slide presentation by the representatives of the
Department and the discussion was taken forward by them and the
Members of the Standing Committee. The Committee raised several issues/
points as briefly mentioned below and sought opinions and views on
various issues:—
(1) While contribution of the Department of Animal Husbandry,
Dairying and Fisheries (DAHDF) to the Agriculture sector is
30%, financial allocation to the Department is only about 10%
of which a meagre 10% goes to Inland Fisheries and
Aquaculture.

73
(2) Sharing ratio between the Centre and the States be 60:40 for
the funds provided to Inland Fisheries Scheme as is being
followed for other Centrally Sponsored Schemes.
(3) Details of funds allocated to Inland Fisheries in terms of Plan
v/s Non-Plan be provided.
(4) Fishing to be treated as an agricultural activity.
(5) To ensure participation of fishermen in planning as well as
implementation of schemes.
(6) To study traditional methods of fish rearing and incorporate
those in present day planning and practices.
(7) To analyze and put in place a definite mechanism to ascertain
proper utilization of funds obtained for Inland Fisheries and
the participation and benefit of stakeholders.
(8) To conduct a survey of farmers, their needs and expectations
regarding schemes and to encourage their participation in
the same.
(9) Degeneration of local ponds due to excessive growth of wild
plants and filling up with piling of sediments, hence rendering
the ponds non-conducive for fishing and fish culture.
(10) To perform physical verification of ponds, other water bodies
etc. and to have a dedicated body for regular verification of
the same.
(11) Scientific and modern technologies be adopted with
traditional practices in fishing and fish rearing.
(12) Data and facts available with the Department in the sector
of Inland Fisheries and Aquaculture be used in order to make
planning more realistic, systematic and effective.
(13) Storage facilities for fishes be augmented and storage
infrastructure be improved.
(14) To ensure that benefits of the welfare schemes of fisheries
reach and percolate down to the grass-root level.
(15) Traditional knowledge on fishing and allied activity be
compiled and used in combination with modern technology
to enhance benefits to the fisheries sector.

74
(16) A ‘Disease Diagnostic Center’ be set up to take note of diseases
in fishes and of diseases occurring due to fish consumption.
(17) To keep vigilance on the pattern of expenditure of funds in
Inland Fisheries and Aquaculture, the extent of
implementation and coverage of its schemes and the benefits
occurring out of the same.
(18) Quality of traditional breeds of fish be improved.
(19) To refrain from excessive import of fish as it destroys the
prospects of native fishes.
(20) To have in place a designated agency to keep a check on fish
import which may lead to loss of local breeds of fish.
(21) To obtain information on a regular basis, the details of funds
allocated to individual States and whether it reaches the grass-
root level.
(22) To ascertain causes of non-utilization of funds at the State
level and put in place plans to outline methods for fund
expenditure.
(23) Despite India having a vast coastline, there is meagre fish
production and minimal export of only about 3% from
fisheries sector.
(24) To cater to the huge demand of fishes by optimally utilizing
the true potential of inland fisheries and aquaculture by
providing training and technical support to fish rearing
farmers.
(25) To provide the much needed boost to cage farming, paid
farming and other such practices and to work towards
developing these as sustainable and profitable practices,
especially in places where it is currently practiced, such as
Maharashtra etc.
(26) To put in place plans to harness the untapped potential of
wetlands, which on being infested with weeds, leave no scope
for fishing and fish culture.
(27) To provide training to traditional farmers practicing fish
catching and rearing and to help them to adapt to modern
fishing techniques and aquaculture practices.

75
(28) To work towards capacity building of farmers in the field of
fishing and aquaculture by putting in place adequate
mechanism and policies for the same.
(29) To develop fisheries on the lines of milk cooperatives and
provide those indulged in fishing, cage farming, aquaculture
etc. with the necessary training.
(30) To keep in mind suitability and sustainability of fish farming
while introducing this in ponds constructed under
MGNREGA.
(31) Issue of timely release of funds to States and UTs and details
of fund allocation and utilization up to District level.
(32) To address the issue of under utilization of Central funds by
States and non-furnishing of Utilization Certificates (UCs).
(33) To increase subsidy to small and marginal farmers in fishing
sector and to introduce special measures to support the same.
(34) To utilize traditional knowledge and practices in fishing,
modernize these and to use them to the advantage of the
fisheries sector.
(35) To collaborate with fisheries institutes and help benefits of
research reach farmers and fishermen by bringing research
from lab to land.
(36) To increase tie-ups with ICAR institutes working in fisheries
sector so that latest developments of research can be passed
on to the fishermen.
(37) To focus on implementation of research findings of ICAR
and other institutes.
(38) To work towards building adequate cold storage facilities in
the fisheries sector.
(39) To focus on creation and building of capacity and optimum
utilization of the existing capabilities in fisheries through
providing training to fishermen and farmers.
(40) Rejuvenation of existing potential in fisheries and to update
and upgrade existing ponds, lakes etc., clear it of weeds,
sedimentation and to enable fish production there.

76
(41) People’s Representatives should be aware of schemes, their
beneficiaries as well as bottlenecks that exist in scheme
implementation.
(42) Increasing participation of all stakeholders in all agriculture
schemes of Department of Agriculture, Cooperation and
Farmers Welfare (DAC&FW) and Department of Animal
Husbandry, Dairying and Fisheries (DAHDF).
The witnesses then withdrew.
4. Thereafter, the Committee, after a short deliberation decided to
undertake study visits to Ooty, Mysuru, Coorg and Mangalore during
April, 2017 and to Srinagar, Jammu and Amritsar in the month of May/
June, 2017.
5. A copy of verbatim proceedings has been kept for record.
The Committee then adjourned.

77
APPENDIX II
STANDING COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE
(2016-17)
MINUTES OF THE 23RD SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE
The Committee sat on Friday, the 30th June, 2017 from 1500 hours
to 1650 hours in Committee Room ‘139’, Parliament House Annexe,
New Delhi.
PRESENT
Shri Hukmdev Narayan Yadav—Chairperson
M EMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Prof. Ravindra Vishwanath Gaikwad
3. Shri Sanganna Amarappa Karadi
4. Shri Nalin Kumar Kateel
5. Md. Badaruddoza Khan
6. Dr. Tapas Mandal
7. Shri Janardan Mishra
8. Shri Devji Mansingram Patel
9. Shri Nityanand Rai
10. Shri Mukesh Rajput
11. Shri Konakalla Narayana Rao
12. Shri C.L. Ruala
13. Shri Satyapal Singh (Sambhal)
14. Shri Jai Prakash Narayan Yadav
15. Shri B.S. Yeddyurappa

78
Rajya Sabha
16. Shri Janardan Dwivedi
17. Shri Meghraj Jain
18. Shri Vinay Katiyar
19. Shri Mohd. Ali Khan
20. Shri Ram Nath Thakur
21. Shri Shankarbhai N. Vegad
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Shri D.S. Malha —Joint Secretary
2. Shri C. Vanlalruata —Deputy Secretary
WITNESSES
Ministry of Agriculture and Farmers Welfare
(Department of Animal Husbandry, Dairying and Fisheries)
1. Shri Devendra Chaudhry Secretary (ADF)
2. Shri Kumar Sanjay Krishna AS and FA
3. Shri Aditya Kumar Joshi JS (Fisheries)
4. Dr. Paul Pandian Fisheries Development
Commissioner
5. Shri Shankar Laxman Joint Commissioner
(Fisheries)
6. Dr. Salim Sultan Senior Consultant
(Fisheries)
National Fisheries Development Board (NFDB)
1. Shri Utpal Kumar Sar Executive Director
2. Shri B.K. Chand Executive Director
Central Inland Fisheries Research Institute (CIFRI)
1. Dr. B.K. Behera Principal Scientist, ICAR-
CIFRI
Central Institute of Freshwater Aquaculture (CIFA)
1. Dr. Jitendra Kumar Sundaray Director (Acting)

79
2. At the outset, the Chairperson welcomed the members to the
Sitting of the Committee. The Committee, then, took up the subject
‘Scheme on Development of Inland Fisheries and Aquaculture — An
Analysis’, with the representatives of the Department of Animal
Husbandry, Dairying and Fisheries.
3. After the introduction, the Chairperson initiated the discussion
which was followed by a slide presentation by the representatives of the
Department and the discussion was taken forward by them and the
Members of the Standing Committee. The Committee raised several issues/
points as briefly mentioned below and sought opinions and views on
various issues:—
(1) To discourage the usage of formalin and other such chemicals
as preservatives in fisheries sector as these pose a huge hazard
to human health.
(2) To cater to the increasing consumption demand for tiger
prawns and shrimps in the fisheries sector.
(3) Reasons behind reduced expenditure during the fiscals
2012-13 to 2015-16.
(4) To tackle effectively, the issue of non-submission of pending
UCs by States and UTs.
(5) To provide State-wise details of training programmes for
fishermen undertaken by the DAHDF and reasons for no
such training being conducted in the State of Mizoram.
(6) To provide details of areas where Re-circulating Aquaculture
System is being practiced and steps being taken to promote
such practices in other parts of the country.
(7) Steps being taken to increase the spread of Blue Revolution
to all parts of the country, bottlenecks encountered in it
effective implementation and steps taken to deal with the
same.
(8) Issues in areas such as West Bengal, where usage of inland
water bodies such as Beels, etc. is not being promoted by the
Government.
(9) To establish fish cooperatives to promote fishing and cage
farming in beels, rivers etc.
(10) To resolve the issue of dumping waste into beels which affects
fishing.

80
(11) To work towards improving the techniques used for fish
farming in reservoirs etc. in order to match the quality of
catch obtained from running water.
(12) Precautions being taken to prevent contamination of fishes
and fish culture.
(13) Budgetary Allocation on the basis of past expenses and status
of implementation of schemes.
(14) Keeping ground realities in mind while making budgetary
allocations.
(15) Targeted areas under aquaculture and actual area brought
under aquaculture show mismatch wherein the latter has
continuously declined and to know the reasons for the same.
(16) The need to take up seriously the existing mismatch between
funds demanded and funds released as well as the causes
behind non-utilization of UCs by States and UTs.
(17) To have consensus-based formulation and implementation of
schemes between Centre and States.
(18)Lack of visible results on the ground owing to lack of
development and meagre expenditure on the fisheries sector.
(19) To find out reasons behind increase in production of fisheries
sector despite limited expenditure.
(20) To ascertain causes of mismatch in figures regarding State-
wise details of development of post harvest facilities in coastal
States and UTs.
(21) To maintain a record of personal ponds along with State-
owned water bodies so as to obtain an accurate figure of
actual fish production from both sources.
(22) To formulate schemes and provide for funds for timely
removal of weeds and cleaning of ponds, reservoirs and other
water bodies so as to harness the true fishing potential of
these water bodies.
(23) Promoting traditional practices of integrated agriculture which
involve farming along with animal husbandry, fishing, poultry
rearing etc.

81
(24) To work towards incorporating the idea of traditional farming
practices and integrated agriculture practices while
formulating schemes.
(25) The need to segregate traditional fishermen from commercial
fishing so as to help the schemes percolate down to the needy
fishermen at the grass root level.
(26) Taking cue from the idea of traditional ponds acting as
reservoirs for flood waters which in turn prevent flooding
of fields and villages and also provide water for irrigation
during dry season.
(27) To be mindful of traditional knowledge and wisdom while
formulating schemes so as to delve more on the practical
aspects while working on schemes, rather than having an
armchair approach.
(28) The issue of unscientific digging and non-maintenance of
ponds being dug under MGNREGA.
(29) To work towards roping in Grameen Vikas bodies while
planning ponds and other related schemes.
(30) To specify the meaning of ‘transfer of technology’ and to
cater to the idea of ‘Revolution’ which pertains to
transformation, dedication etc. which is however, clearly
invisible in the endeavours of the Department under Blue
Revolution.
(31) The need to pay attention towards helping traditional and
small fishermen develop their fishing equipments such as
fishing nets etc.
(32) To develop and work on traditional technologies of fishing
being used since time immemorial in India.
(33) The need to lay emphasis on having modern equipments and
techniques reach poor fishermen practicing traditional fish
farming.
(34) To set up training centers for fishermen and their families
under PM Kaushal Vikas Yojana and to coordinate with the
ICAR to train fishermen in remote areas.
(35) To focus on need-based approach such as providing training
in vernacular languages to fishermen, while planning training
programmes.

82
(36) The need to bring out innovative ideas to help the fruits of
development reach poor fishermen and their families.
(37) To have diversification in schemes with respect to areas
involved in fishing activities such as water bodies (ponds,
wetlands, reservoirs etc.), aquaculture, fishermen training,
human resource potential of fisheries sector, fish farming,
development and insurance of fishermen and their families,
fish feed and hatcheries, harvesting agricultural wastage and
excessive agricultural produce as fish feed and various other
things.
(38) The necessity to develop a need-based approach with respect
to fisheries sector, keeping in mind ground realities in order
to have schemes which are suitable for Indian fishermen and
typically suited to their traditional fishing techniques.
(39) To cater to the rising demand of fish produced in marshes
which are not only of a huge variety but are also widely
appreciated by fish eaters for their taste as well as nutritional
value.
4. A copy of verbatim proceedings has been kept for record.
The Committee then adjourned.

83
APPENDIX III
STANDING COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE
(2017-18)
MINUTES OF THE TWENTY-SIXTH SITTING
OF THE COMMITTEE
The Committee sat on Thursday, the 19th July, 2018 from 1000 hrs.
to 1100 hrs. in the Chamber of the Hon’ble Chairperson, Room No. 138,
Third Floor, Parliament House, New Delhi.
PRESENT
Shri Hukmdev Narayan Yadav—Chairperson
M
EMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Sanjay Dhotre
3. Shri Nalin Kumar Kateel
4. Shri Md. Badaruddoza Khan
5. Shri C. Mahendran
6. Shri Janardan Mishra
7. Shri Devji Patel
8. Shri Mukesh Rajput
9. Shri C.L. Ruala
10. Shri Virendra Singh
11. Shri Jai Prakash Narayan Yadav
Rajya Sabha
12. Shri Kailash Soni
13. Shri Ram Nath Thakur
14. Shri Harnath Singh Yadav

84
SECRETARIAT
1. Shri D.S. Malha —Joint Secretary
2. Shri Arun K. Kaushik —Director
3. Shri Sumesh Kumar —Under Secretary
2. At the outset, the Chairperson welcomed the Members to the
Sitting of the Standing Committee. Then, the Committee took up the
following draft Reports for consideration and adoption:—
(i) Draft Report on the Subject “Scheme on Development of
Inland Fisheries and Aquaculture — An Analysis” pertaining
to the Ministry of Agriculture and Farmers Welfare
(Department of Animal Husbandry, Dairying and Fisheries).
*(ii)  *** *** *** *** ***
3. After some deliberations, the Committee adopted the draft
Reports without any amendments and authorized the Chairperson to
finalise the Reports and present the same to Parliament.
* Matter not related to this Report.