FIRST REPORT
COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE
(2014-2015)
(SIXTEENTH LOK SABHA)
MINISTRY OF FOOD PROCESSING INDUSTRIES
“NATIONAL INSTITUTE OF FOOD TECHNOLOGY ,
ENTREPRENEURSHIP AND MANAGEMENT (NIFTEM) ”
[Action taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations
contained in the Fifty Seventh Report of the Committee on Agriculture
(2013-14)]
Presented to Lok Sabha on 18.12.2014
Laid on the Table of Rajya Sabha on 18.12.2014
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
December, 2014/Agrahayana, 1936 ( Saka)


CAO No. 305
Price : R  41.00
© 2015 B Y L OK SABHA S ECRETARIAT
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct
of Business in Lok Sabha (Fifteenth Edition) and printed by
Anupam Art Printers, New Delhi.

CONTENTS
PAGE
COMPOSITION OF THE C OMMITTEE .............................................. (iii)
INTRODUCTION ................................................................. (v)
CHAPTER I Report ..................................................... 1
CHAPTER II Observations/Recommendations which have been
accepted by the Government ........................ 12
CHAPTER III Observations/Recommendations which the
Committee do not desire to pursue in view of
the Government’s replies ............................. 21
CHAPTER IV Observations/Recommendations in respect of
which replies of the Government have not been
accepted by the Committee ......................... 22
C
HAPTER V Observations/Recommendations in respect of
which final replies of the Government are still
awaited ................................................... 31
A
PPENDIX
Minutes of the Ninth Sitting of the Committee
held on 26 November , 2014 .......................... 32
ANNEXURE
Analysis of Action Taken by the Government on
the Recommendations contained in the Fifty-
seventh Report (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) of the
Committee on Agriculture (2013-14) ............... 34
(i)

COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE
(2014-2015)
Shri Hukm Deo Narayan Yadav —  Chairperson
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Sanganna Amarappa
3. Prof. Ravindra Vishwanath Gaikwad
4. Shri Nalin Kumar Kateel
5. Md. Badaruddoza Khan
6. Shri C. Mahendran
7. Dr. Tapas Mandal
8. Shri Janardan Mishra
9. Shri Ajay Nishad
10. Shri Dalpat Singh Paraste
11. Shri Nityanand Rai
12. Shri Mukesh Rajput
13. Shri Konakalla Narayana Rao
14. Shri C.L. Ruala
15. Shri Arjun Charan Sethi
16. Shri Satyapal Singh
17. Shri Virendra Singh
18. Shri Kadiyam Srihari
19. Shri Jai Prakash Narayan Yadav
20. Shri Dharmendra Yadav
21. Shri B.S. Yeddyurappa
Rajya Sabha
22. Shri A.W. Rabi Bernard
23. Shrimati Renuka Chowdhury
24. Sardar Sukhdev Singh Dhindsa
25. Shri Janardan Dwivedi
(iii)

(iv)
26. Shri Vinay Katiyar
27. Shri Mohd. Ali Khan
28. Shri Rajpal Singh Saini
29. Shri Ram Nath Thakur
30. Shri Shankarbhai N. Vegad
31. Shri Darshan Singh Yadav
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Shri A. Louis Martin — Additional Secretary
2. Smt. Abha Singh Yaduvanshi — Director
3. Smt. Juby Amar — Deputy Secretary
4. Shri Kundan Lal — Executive Assistant

(v)
INTRODUCTION
I, the Chairperson, Committee on Agriculture having been authorized
by the Committee to submit the Report on their behalf, present this
First Report on action taken by the Government on the Observations/
Recommendations contained in the Fifty-seventh Report of the
Committee on Agriculture (2013-14) on “National Institute of Food
Technology, Entrepreneurship and Management (NIFTEM) ”.
2. The Fifty-seventh Report was presented to Lok Sabha and laid
on the Table of Rajya Sabha on 11 February, 2014. The Action Taken
Replies on the Report were received on 7 April, 2014.
3. The Report was considered and adopted by the Committee at
their Sitting held on 26 November , 2014.
4. An analysis of the action taken by the Government on the
Observations/Recommendations contained in the Fifty-seventh Report
(15th Lok Sabha) of the Committee is at Annexure.
   N
EW D ELHI; HUKM DEO NARAYAN YADAV,
26 November, 2014 Chairperson,
02 Agrahayana, 1936 (Saka) Committee on Agriculture.

CHAPTER I
REPORT
This Report of the Committee on Agriculture deals with the action
taken by the Government on the Recommendations contained in the
Fifty-seventh Report (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) of the Committee on
Agriculture (2013-2014) on “National Institute of Food Technology,
Entrepreneurship and Management (NIFTEM) ” pertaining to the Ministry
of Food Processing Industries which was presented to Lok Sabha and
laid on the Table of Rajya Sabha on 11 February, 2014.
1.2 The Ministry of Food Processing Industries have furnished Action
Taken Replies on 7 April, 2014 in respect of all the 11 Observations/
Recommendations contained in the Report. These have been categorized
as under:
(i) Observations/Recommendations that have been accepted by
the Government: Recommendation Para Nos. 2, 6, 8, 9, 10
and 11
(Chapter II)
(ii) Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not
desire to pursue in view of the Government ’s reply:
Recommendation Para No. 7
(Chapter III)
(iii) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which action
taken replies of the Government have not been accepted by
the Committee:
Recommendation Para Nos. 1, 3, 4 and 5
(Chapter IV)
(iv) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which final
replies of the Government are still awaited:
Recommendation - NIL
(Chapter V)
1.3 The Committee note that the Government have not
responded to some of the pointed queries raised by the Committee

2
in the original report as discussed in the subsequent paragraphs.
The Committee view the callousness of the Government seriously
and would expect proper and satisfactory response to the
Committee’s comments contained in Chapter-I of this Report.
1.4 The Committee will now deal with the action taken by the
Government on some of the Recommendations in the succeeding
paragraphs.
Absence of response to the observations
Recommendation (Para No. 1)
1.5 The Committee ’s examination of National Institute of Food
Technology, Entrepreneurship and Management (NIFTEM) had revealed
that the proposal to set up NIFTEM was approved by the Expenditure
Finance Committee (EFC) despite serious reservations by the Department
of Expenditure, Planning Commission, Ministry of Health and Ministry
of HRD on the grounds of duplication of functions, economic un-viability,
longer lead time, lack of clarity regarding courses, difficulty in attracting
world class faculty and that there was no case for creating a new
institution, as evident from the minutes of EFC meetings held on
16.12.2005 and 24.03.2006. The Committee had felt that there was no
strong case for creation of a new institution at a huge cost when the
Institute of Crop Processing Technology (IICPT) at Thanjavur, which is
under MoFPI was conducting graduate and post-graduate courses on
food technology. In the Committee ’s view, the objectives of setting up
of the NIFTEM could have easily been achieved at a fraction of the
cost of NIFTEM and within shortest time, by suitable upgradation of
the IICPT . Alternatively, the same could have been achieved by
introduction of relevant courses and facilities in the IITs which are
located in most of the states with requisite infrastructure and eminent
faculty.
1.6 The Government in their Action Taken reply have stated that
Quantum increase in the level of processing and value addition of
primary agriculture produce is of critical importance for enhancing
farmers’ income, generating employment and reducing wastages, and
to accomplish overall growth of the national economy. It is equally
important to ensure cost and quality competitiveness of processed
food so as to access global markets where price realization is higher
and India has a comparative advantage. Moreover , setting food standards
and reliable testing protocols has become a matter of serious public
concern. It was therefore considered necessary to develop food scientists
and technologists who can do R&D in frontier areas, set food standards

3
and develop protocols for testing, and also develop entrepreneurs who
undergo courses and training programmes having proper mix of inputs
on food science, technology, management, entrepreneurship and
business incubation.
1.7 The Institute of Applied Manpower Research (IAMR) in its report
(2004) had recommended creation of a National Institute of Technology
and Management for taking care of human resource development needs
of the Food Processing Industry and building effective partnerships
among various stakeholders. Integrated strategy for the promotion of
agri-business under Prime Minister ’s thrust areas envisaged setting up
of such an institution. Therefore, a new organization was required to
be set up, with structure and systems aligned with its objectives to be
the apex institution in food research and education in the country.
1.8 The Finance Minister, in his Budget Speech on 28.02.2006
announced the intention of Government to set up a National Institute
of Food Technology, Entrepreneurship and Management (NIFTEM) as an
international centre of excellence which will work synergistically with
industry and other institutions within India and abroad.
1.9 A feasibility study was done in August 2004 by Rabo India
Finance Ltd. which had established the need for an apex institute
named National Institute of Food Technology, Entrepreneurship and
Management (NIFTEM).
1.10 The feasibility study had made an evaluation of the existing
institutions for upgradation like National Dairy Research Institute (NDRI),
Central Food Technological Research Institute (CFTRI) & Defence Food
Research Laboratory (DFRL). NDRI was ruled out for comparison due to
their limited sectoral focus. The main objective of DFRL at Mysore is
to cater to the needs of the defence personnel. The Feasibility Report
had observed that CFTRI is catering to the R&D needs of Food Processing
Industries, but is focused on basic level research & training of local
importance and is moreover located at Mysore in Southern India. The
study found that CFTRI focuses primarily on applied research in Food
Technology and lacked the comprehensive research focus in the food
science arena.
1.11 Because of the above considerations, these Institutions were
not considered as a substitute of NIFTEM in the feasibility Report
prepared by Rabo India Finance Ltd.
1.12 After a detailed gap analysis, Rabo India Finance Ltd. noted
that there is a clear need for an apex R&D institute in food and
beverage sector.

4
1.13 Further , there was no institute in northern India to cater to
the needs of its unique requirements. Indian Institute of Crop Processing
Technology (IICPT) formerly known as Paddy Processing Research Centre
(PPRC) had mainly sectoral focus on foodgrains.
1.14 The Committee had pointed out the serious reservations
expressed by the Department of Expenditure, Planning Commission,
Ministry of Health and Ministry of Human Resources Development in
the Expenditure Finance Committee meetings on the proposal to
set up NIFTEM . No response has been given by the Government to
these observations. The reply is silent on the need for setting up
NIFTEM when the purpose could have been achieved at a fraction
of the cost within shortest time by introduction of relevant courses
and facilities in the IITs which are located in most of the States with
requisite infrastructure and eminent faculty. The Committee do not
expect the Government to take the Committee ’s observations
causally. The Committee, would await detailed explanation on each
of the observations made by them.
Unjustified engagement of the Consultant
Recommendation (Para No. 3)
1.15 Though it was aimed to set up a world class institution, the
Committee had observed that no global competitive bid was invited
from consultants having relevant experience. Initially, M/s Educational
Consultants India Limited was engaged for preparation of a feasibility
report (FR) and Detailed Project Report (DPR). The report was not
found acceptable. Then the Ministry of Food Processing Industries
(MoFPI) invited bids from six short-listed consultants and finally engaged
M/s Rabo India Finance Pvt. Limited in November, 2003 at a cost of
over Rs. 40 lakhs. It was observed from the information furnished by
MoFPI that Rabo India never had any experience in preparation of
FR/DPR of any educational institution. It was no surprise that when
the Rabo DPR was reviewed by Cornell. Sathguru Foundation for
Development (CSF), it found that several essential facilities required
for NIFTEM to excel in research and knowledge generation were not
conceived in the DPR. The Committee would await an explanation as
to how such a consultant was engaged for setting up an Institute
touted to be an International Centre of Eminence.
1.16 The Government in their Action Taken reply have stated that
a proposal was initially received from Government of U.P . for setting
up of Institute of Food Technology in December , 2000 along with a
Project Report. The proposal was examined in the Ministry and it was

5
found that the U.P . Government’s Project Report is only indicative of
the need for the Institute and is required to be revised to make it
objective oriented, comprehensive and complete. Moreover , it was felt
that the State Government may not be in a position to set up an apex
institute in the area of food technology and management and to meet
the recurring and future developmental expenditure. Hence the Ministry
of Food Processing Industries considered it appropriate to set up a
National Institute of Food Technology Entrepreneurship and Management.
An Executive Committee consisting of following Officers was constituted
to facilitate preparation of a comprehensive action plan for setting up
the proposed Institute and to ensure speedy implementation and
monitoring of the Project.
1. Shri A.N.P . Sinha, JS, MFPI-Chairman.
2. Secretary, Horticulture and Food Processing Department,
Government of U.P .
3. Shri G. Venkatramani, Director (Finance), MFPI.
4. Shri S.G. Raoot, Joint Advisor , Planning Commission.
5. Director , (Plan Finance), Department of Expenditure, Ministry
of Finance.
6. Shri K.N. Biswas, Director , Ministry of HRD.
7. Shri R.C. Sachdeva, Deputy Secretary, MFPI.
1.17 Initially the work for preparation of Feasibility Report and
Detailed Project Report was assigned to M/s. Educational Consultants
India Ltd. Their report was however not found feasible by the Executive
Committee. The Committee therefore recommended that consultants
of global repute may be assigned the work. Based on this, the Ministry
invited technical and financial bids from the six Consultants which
were earlier shortlisted by the Ministry for preparation of Mega Study-
cum-Vision Document for the Ministry. Out of the 6 Consultants, only
three Consultants had responded to the Ministry ’s letter seeking bids
including M/s. Rabo India Finance Pvt. Ltd.
1.18 The Executive Committee after taking presentation from the
above three Consultancy firms, shortlisted M/s. Rabo India Finance
Pvt. Ltd. in its meeting held on 11.11.2003, at a cost of Rs. 40.70 lakh
plus applicable service tax. M/s. Rabo India Finance Pvt. Ltd. in their
Technical bid had indicated their following credentials:—
1. An institution dedicated to Food and Agribusiness.
2. Strong repository of knowledge of various sectors in Food
and Agribusiness.

6
3. Significant experience in the Food Supply Chain from Farm
to Consumer.
4. International Resources involved in Food and Agribusiness
research.
5. Team of highly qualified and experienced Food and
Agribusiness Professionals.
6. Experience of working with Government and Industry Bodies.
7. Deep knowledge and experience of developing public private
partnership models for infrastructure projects in India.
8. Agency was assigned the work for preparation of a Mega
Study of Vision Document by the Ministry.
1.19 Past performance for similar Project Consultancy Services as
provided in the Technical bid submitted by M/s. Rabo India Finance
Ltd. are indicated below:—
1. NDDB — Feasibility study for setting up modern marketing
systems for fruits and vegetables in India.
2. Gujarat State Government — Strategic Plan for food and
agriculture for Gujarat.
3. DCM Shriram Consolidated Ltd. — Strategies to develop and
supply chain for food and agriculture products.
4. MARK FED, Punjab — Strategies for growth in processed
vegetable sector.
5. Mother Dairy — Corporate Strategy.
6. Leading Sugar Company — Business and financial restructuring.
7. Leading Tea Company — Restructuring and sourcing
international alliances.
8. Heineken International — Entry Strategy for India.
9. Dynamix Dairy Industries Ltd. — Strategic advisory for growth
plan and sourcing potential alliances.
10. Leading Starch Cooperative — Strategic Advisory services
(market analysis) with report to its entry plan in India.
11. IFFCO — Advisory on Business diversification areas.
12. ISAGRO S.P .A. — Advisory RPGLS in the sale of its agrochemical
business.
13. WHYTE MACKAY — Advisory in the sale of 51% of Whyte and
Mackay India Ltd. to BACARDI.

7
14. Leading Marine Product Company.Identification of market
opportunity and develop a comprehensive business strategy.
15. Amalgamated Bean Coffee Trading Company. Sole strategies
and financial advisory to Amalgamated Bean Coffee Trading
Co. (ABC) for raising capital for its growth plan.
16. East Asiatic Company — Entry Strategy upto India and
acquisition of “Protenix” and “Dumex” from Pfizer Ltd.
17. Leading Brazilian Company — Strategic Advisory (market
analysis) on current status and future potential for fuel
ethanol in India.
1.20 In view of above position, it was resolved that Rabo India
Finance Ltd. had considerable experience of preparation of Feasibility
Reports/DPRs and they were engaged as Consultants.
1.21 The explanation given by the Ministry of Food Processing
Industries has not addressed the issue raised by the Committee
about engagement of an inexperienced consultant. None of the
project consultancy services of M/s. Rabo India Finance Ltd. cited
by the Ministry of Food Processing Industries related to preparation
of feasibility report of any educational institution. The past
experience of the consultant related to the marketing or financial
restructuring. It is clear that the Government has no explanation to
offer regarding a deal which had no justification.
Damages for Breach of Contract by Cornell Sathguru Foundation for
Development (CSF)
Recommendation (Para No. 4)
1.22 An agreement was signed in January 2008 with Cornell Sathguru
Foundation for Development (CSF) for five years with staggered payment
of Rs.3.925 cr. (spread over three years) for having knowledge sharing
partnership with the College of Agriculture and Life Sciences (CALS) at
Cornell University. Cornell was stated to be the foremost among IVY
League Universities and a global leader in agriculture and food research
and education with unmatchable brand value. The agreement was,
however, terminated in January, 2010. MoFPI came up with two
conflicting versions as reasons for termination. In a written submission
it was stated that the Cornell disassociated itself from the project
midway on the grounds of funding uncertainty and non-availability of
faculty in NIFTEM. During the oral deposition before the Committee,
it was, however , stated that Cornell could not design the course

8
curriculum and their suggestions were not relatable to Indian conditions.
The Committee had desired to know that what exactly were the reasons
for termination of contract with Cornell and what action was taken to
claim damages for breach of contract if any, by CSF .
1.23 The Government in their Action Taken reply have stated that
the knowledge sharing partnership agreement was signed with College
of Agriculture and Life Sciences (CALS), Cornell University operating in
India through Cornell Sathguru Foundation (CSF) for Development,
Hyderabad on 08.01.2008 covering the following key task areas (scope
of work):—
1. Strategic inputs for design of teaching and research facilities
including support facilities such as the Library/Laboratories
and e-learning centre.
2. Guidance for design of under-graduate courses and also
procedure for selection.
3. Faculty capacity building and exchange.
4. Development of a strategic framework for nurturing research
within NIFTEM.
5. Development of Institutional Policy, Intellectual Property and
Technology Transfer Policy and Development of a strategic
plan for Technology Transfer and enterprise development.
6. Developing strategic plan and course design for a Training
centre for continuing education.
7. Development of detailed plan for food enterprise incubator/
and interface with industry.
8. Assistance in faculty selection.
CSF did not provide the following essential documents/services:—
1. Basic parameter for equipment for Central Bio-Process
facilities, Incubator and Labs.
2. Appropriate learning tools and help devise experiential
learning modules for best exposure to students.
3. Development of intellectual property and technology transfer
policy and development of a strategic plan for technology
transfer and enterprise development.
4. Identification of training needs of entrepreneurs and design
of training course.

9
5. Design of food enterprise incubator.
6. Approaches on forming research consortiums and strategic
focus in forging international partnerships in research
management.
1.24 The College of Agriculture and Life Sciences, Ithaca, USA
addressed a letter to Secretary, MoFPI on 28.01.2010 expressing their
inability to provide any more assistance beyond what had been provided,
on account of funding uncertainty and absence of faculty in NIFTEM.
As submitted in reply to Para 2 above, there was a delay of about
2 years in obtaining the approval for revision of cost estimates from
the CCEA due to procedural formalities and comments received from
various Government Departments which were required to be addressed
suitably before obtaining approval of CCEA. There had also been delay
in creation of posts and appointment of faculty due to the legal status
of NIFTEM as a Company registered under Section 25 of the Companies
Act. Creation of posts and recruitment of faculty could only be made
after the Cabinet had approved registration of NIFTEM as an autonomous
body under the Societies Registration Act.
1.25 In view of above position and the fact that College of
Agriculture and Life Sciences, Cornell University (operating in India
through Cornell Sathguru Foundation) had disassociated itself from the
project midway on grounds of funding uncertainty and non-availability
of faculty, it was considered appropriate to discontinue the agreement
signed with CSF with no further financial liability on NIFTEM.
1.26 The Committee in their earlier recommendation had,
inter-alia, desired to know as to what action was taken to claim
damages for breach of contact, if any, from Cornell Sathguru
Foundation (CSF) for Development. The Government in their action
taken reply have chosen to remain silent on this issue. The
Committee, wish to be informed as to what action was taken to
claim damages for breach of contract, if any, by CSF.
Fixing responsibility for mishandling of the Project
Recommendation (Para No. 5)
1.27 Strangely, NIFTEM was initially incorporated (in August, 2007),
as a “not-for-profit” company under Section 25 of the Companies Act
despite the fact that it was not a commercial entity but an educational
institution. It was realized only later that the institute in the form of
a company would be ineligible to get the status of “deemed university”

10
from the UGC for running its academic courses. It was only in August
2010, NIFTEM was registered as a society and it took another two years
for it to get the status of “deemed to be university ”. Consequently,
creation of posts and appointment of faculties and staff got delayed
which reportedly led to termination of agreement by the knowledge
partner. The Institute became operational only in 2012-13 instead of
the initial plan of commencement in 2010-11. Surely, such inept handling
of establishing an educational institution cannot be expected from any
quarter. The Committee desired to know who was responsible for this
mishandling and what action was taken in the matter.
1.28 The Government in their Action Taken reply have stated that
the DPR prepared by M/s. Rabo India Finance Ltd. suggested both the
options for registering NIFTEM either under section 25 of the Companies
Act or under Societies Act. M/s. Rabo India Finance Ltd. had however,
recommended that NIFTEM be constituted as a Section 25 company as
it provides certainty to the legal status, which is critical in terms of
collaboration with leading global institutes, and provides more
accountability and transparency in terms of financial reporting. The
draft EFC Note and the CCEA Note, inter alia, providing for registration
of NIFTEM under section 25 of the Companies Act were circulated to
Ministry of HRD who in turn obtained comments of UGC and AICTE. The
Ministry of HRD while supporting the proposal for setting up of NIFTEM
as a Company registered under Sec 25 of the Companies Act, 1956
commented as under:—
(a) It has to be set up either as a Central University or apply for
Deemed to be University status.
(b) No overlapping with the role of AICTE for determining the
norms and standards in the area of engineering and
technology.
(c) Obtaining AICTE approval of the courses and intake of the
programme.
1.29 In view of above position, at no point of time did it transpire
that the legal status of the Institute as Section 25 Company registered
under Companies Act would make it ineligible to get Deemed to be
University status from UGC.
1.30 The creation of posts was approved by the Government only
after the Institute was registered as an autonomous organization under
Societies Registration Act on 19.05.2010. The Institute submitted
application for grant of Deemed to be University on 20.05.2010 to
Ministry of Human Resource Development & UGC. Ministry of Human

11
Resource Development issued the notification for granting Deemed to
be University status under De Novo category on 08.05.2012.
1.31 Although commensurate infrastructure was established and
minimum faculty was recruited to commence 1st academic session
from 2011-12, it could not offer the courses due to non-availability of
Deemed University status which was essential for admission of students
in 2011-12. The UGC has also categorically advised the Institute not to
admit students till the Deemed to be University status is conferred by
Central Government through a Gazette Notification, which was conferred
on 08.05.2012. Hence the delay in commencement of academic activities
was due to delay in getting the legal authority for the same.
1.32 The information given in the reply is no different from the
details already given and taken note of by the Committee in their
original report. There is no denying the fact that the matter has
been mishandled at different stages. The Committee wonder why
the Ministry of Food Processing Industries is hesitant to fix
responsibility in this regard. The Committee reiterate their earlier
recommendation.

12
CHAPTER II
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN
ACCEPTED BY THE GOVERNMENT
Recommendation (Para No. 2)
The setting up of NIFTEM at an initially estimated cost of Rs. 245
crore was approved in August, 2006 with scheduled completion in
2009-10. The Committee observe that the project suffered phenomenal
cost escalation and time over run. The cost of the project as well as
execution time were almost doubled. The cost of the project shot up
from Rs. 245 crore to Rs. 480 crore and the project which was originally
anticipated to be completed in 2009-10 is now expected to be completed
only by June, 2014, three and half years after the initial schedule of
completion. Increase in the cost of the project is attributed to increase
in area of construction (from 40,588 s.m. to 98,539 s.m.) and addition
of facilities not provided in the detail project report (DPR) such as
development services, continuing education center , water treatment
plan, solar panel system, amphitheater etc. It is obvious that the
initial planning and DPR were awfully inadequate. Besides, the form of
organistion of the Institute was misconceived. The knowledge sharing
partner disassociated itself midway. The Committee do not expect
such amateurish handling of a project relating to an institute which
was projected to be a global centre of excellence.
Reply of the Government
It was originally projected that the Institute would commence
limited activities in 2006-07 in hired building. Infrastructure was
expected to be completed in 2009-10 and the Institute was to become
fully operational from 2010-11.
As per directions of CCEA, a detailed roadmap of phased expansion
of the Institute was to be finalized by 31.03.2007. The delay in setting
up the institute can be attributed to following reasons:—
• A decision on phased expansion of the Institute was incumbent
upon certain important factors like possession of required
area of land, selection of construction agency and architect,
finalization of concept and design of the building/campus,
obtaining block estimates of construction of building and
availability of budgetary resources to implement such a plan.

13
• Entire land for NIFTEM was acquired from Haryana State
Industrial and Infrastructure Development Corporation
(HSIIDC) on 10.08.2007.
• A decision on selecting NBCC to work as project implementing
agency for establishment of NIFTEM was taken by the Ministry
on 19.07.2007. In this regard a MoU in this regard was signed
with them on 31.10.2007.
• College of Agricultural & Life Sciences, Cornell University
which was operating in India through Cornell Sathguru
Foundation, Hyderabad was selected as technical collaborator
of NIFTEM on approval by Project Approval Committee (PAC)
in its meeting held on 22.08.2007. An agreement was signed
with them on 08.01.2008.
• Secretary, MoFPI on an invitation from Cornell University had
visited various Universities in USA from 23rd September, 2007
to 3rd October , 2007. In his tour report dated 09.10.2007 to
MOS (I/C), FPI, Secretary suggested that the structure of
NIFTEM as provided in the Rabo ’s Detailed Project Report
(DPR) and functional requirements need to be reviewed
immediately with a view to ensure that they are in line with
the best international practices. It was also suggested that
the architect should visit USA and understand the
architectural practices adopted and the facilities
provided.These suggestions were accepted by the MOS (I/C)
FPI on 10.10.2007 and he ordered that the experience gained
by the Secretary should be fully utilized in framing our MoU
with NBCC and Cornell University.
• Accordingly, on invitation of Cornell University in November
2007, a team consisting of representatives of NBCC, Stup
Consultants and MFPI visited Cornell University and University
of California, Davis during December 1-7, 2007.
• Based on the inputs gathered by the team and those provided
by the Cornell University to NBCC and their Architect,
presentations were made before Secretary, MoFPI and senior
officers of the Ministry on 04.01.2008 and 15.01.2008 to
finalize the concept and design of NIFTEM Campus.
• The concept and design was accepted by the Ministry on
29.01.2008.
• Even though the consultation process with Cornell University
was on since August 2007 and NBCC and its Architect were
actively involved in the discussion to develop the concept

14
and design of NIFTEM Campus, formal MoUs were signed on
31.10.2007 and 08.01.2008 with NBCC and Cornell Sathguru
Foundation for Development respectively.
• On the basis of approved concept and design, Block Cost
Estimates were submitted by NBCC for construction work on
26.03.2008, where the cost of civil construction was estimated
to be Rs. 310.74 crore.
• Since the CCEA had approved cost of construction at
Rs. 75.10 crore, the proposal to start 1st phase of civil
construction activities of institutional buildings at an
estimated cost of Rs. 99.29 crore was approved by the
Ministry. However , a condition was imposed that the approved
cost for civil work of Rs. 75.10 crores should not be exceeded
till such time as approval of Competent Authority on Revised
Cost Estimates (RCE) is obtained.
In view of the position explained above, the time frame for finalizing
the phased expansion of the Institute by 31.03.2007 could not be
adhered to. The block cost estimates on the basis of concept and
design after acquiring the land could be finalized only on 26.03.2008.
In other words, there was a delay of one year in identifying the
phasing of expansion activities for NIFTEM.
The cost estimates were revised due to escalation in cost vis-a-vis
the cost indicated in the DPR, additions of facilities not envisaged in
the DPR and increase in area of construction due to increased intake
of students, etc. The work for completion of infrastructure could not
be completed by 2009-10 since there had been delay of almost two
years from July, 2009 to April, 2011 in getting the Revised Cost Estimates
(RCE) approved. The RCE were approved by CCEA on 28.04.2011.
However, 12000 sqm. area of Institutional Buildings consisting of
Administrative Block, Seminar Block, Academic Block and Library Block
was completed by 2010-11 with a view to commence 1st academic
session in 2011-12.
There has also been delay in creation of posts due to legal status
of the Institute as Company registered under Companies Act, 1956.
When the proposal was sent to Department of Expenditure for creation
of 61 posts they had advised the Ministry to approach Department of
Public Enterprises since NIFTEM is registered as Company and is thus
a Public Sector Enterprise. The matter was taken up with Department
of Public Enterprises. That Department advised the Institute to first
get the Institute classified under appropriate schedule. The Institute,

15
being new, it could have been classified under Schedule “D” or at the
most under Schedule “C” of the classification of Public Sector
Undertakings. This classification would not enable NIFTEM to accomplish
its mandate as a centre of global excellence.
In the meantime, the Ministry of HRD also advised that the Institute
with legal status as Company is not eligible to get Deemed to be
University status or recognition of technical courses from UGC and
AICTE respectively as per the provisions of UGC Act/AICTE Act. Hence,
the Ministry placed the matter before the Union Cabinet and obtained
its approval on 23.04.2010 to:
(i) Register NIFTEM as an autonomous organization registered
under Societies Registration Act, 1860.
(ii) Transfer all assets and liabilities of the Company to newly
created Society.
(iii) Wind up the Company under Companies Act.
In pursuance of Cabinet approval, the Ministry registered NIFTEM
under Societies Registration Act, 1860 on 19.05.2010 and the Institute
submitted the application to UGC on 20.05.2010 for grant of Deemed
University status under De Novo category. The Ministry of HRD declared
NIFTEM as Deemed to be University under De Novo category on
08.05.2012.
After NIFTEM was registered as an autonomous organization under
Societies Act on 19.05.2010, the proposal for creation of 61 posts was
submitted to Ministry of Finance (Department of Expenditure). The
Ministry of Finance approved creation of 46 posts in July, 2010.
Thereafter Recruitment Rules were formulated and advertisement for
recruitment released in Newspapers on 28.08.2010.
Although commensurate infrastructure was established and minimum
faculty was recruited to commence 1st academic session from
2011-12, it could not commence the courses due to non-availability of
Deemed University status which was essential for admission of students
in 2011-12. The UGC had also categorically advised the Institute not
to admit students till the Deemed to be University status is conferred
by Central Government through a Gazette Notification, which was
conferred on 08.05.2012. Hence the delay in commencement of
academic activities was due to delay in getting the legal authority for
the same.
[Ministry of Food Processing Industries, F . No. 6-09/2013-Parl.,
Dated 07th April, 2014]

16
Recommendation (Para No. 6)
In a presentation made to EFC on 16.12.2005, NIFTEM was projected
to earn an Internal Rate of Return (IRR) of 9.75 per cent for a 15 year
period and NIFTEM becoming self-sustainable from the 6th year. The
recurring expenditure when fully operational was projected to be around
Rs. 25 crore per annum. It was stated that the institution would start
earning revenue from the 3rd year of inception. The funds generated
from the 3rd to 5th year shall be able to sustain it from 6th to 10th
year after which it shall be on a fully sustaining basis. It has, however,
been pleaded now before the Committee that unless there is substantial
financial support from the government, neither can NIFTEM support in-
house academic and research work to the desired level nor can it
make best of the faculty/non-faculty recruitment. NIFTEM has sought
non-plan support of around Rs. 132 cr. for the three year period from
2014-15 to 2016-17 to meet the deficit between revenue income and
revenue expenditure. It is indeed distressing that Cabinet Committee
on Economic Affairs was presented with a fait accompli.
Reply of the Government
The projections of revenue generation placed before EFC on
16.12.2005 were based on the projections made in the original DPR
prepared in August 2005. Thereafter in order to accomplish the mandate
of the Institute as approved by the Government, the functional
requirements of NIFTEM were reviewed with following additional focus
areas, which were not conceived in the Rabo Report:
• Focus on comprehensive spectrum of food science and food
technology such as food chemistry, food molecular biology,
food nutrition, food process engineering and food laws as
distinct research disciplines with requisite research labs for
each of the core disciplines of food science and technology.
• Creation of comprehensive incubators for Grains, Fruits and
Vegetables, Meat products and Dairy products in order to
validate technologies developed by NIFTEM researchers and
transfer such technology to small and medium enterprises.
• Creation of tenancy area within the Incubator , wherein
enterprises can incubate their research projects and work in
tandem with NIFTEM faculty for product research.
• Creation of Bio-resource centre, Sensory facility, culinary
kitchen and other essential research facilities that is essential
to deliver advanced courses in food science and food
technology.

17
• Creation of a continuing education centre with state-of-the-
art equipment that can help to re-skill industry professionals
and scientists in modern food science and food process
technologies.
• State-of-the art symposium and auditorium facility that is
essential for a centre of excellence to conduct symposia
and workshops.
In view of addition of focus areas, as mentioned above, the core
infrastructure had to be revised at the time of submission of Revised
Cost Estimates. Further , due to increase in student intake from 430 to
950 and increase in cost of manpower & materials, the projected
revenue expenditure of around Rs. 25 crore per annum when fully
operational in the original DPR, has increased substantially. In BE
2013-14, Government budgetary support for Revenue Expenditure of
NIFTEM was estimated at Rs. 15 crore. However , in the RE 2013-14 the
total Revenue Expenditure estimated by NIFTEM was Rs. 30.77 crore
and after adjustment of income generated by the institute, Government
budgetary support has been Rs. 21 crore. As per estimate of NIFTEM
(yet to be approved by Finance Committee), the revenue expenditure
of NIFTEM for 2015-16 ( i.e. after 3 years of inception) will be
Rs. 58 crore and after adjustment of income of Rs. 12 crore, the
budgetary support from the Government is estimated at Rs. 46 crore.
Since there is a deficit in revenue income over revenue expenditure,
it is necessary to seek funding support from the Government so that
the institute can function smoothly.
Similar Non-Plan support is being provided by the Government to
Central Universities, IITs, NITs etc. Details of grant-in-aid provided by
the Government to IITs and NITs in BE 2013-14 is as under:
(Rs. in crore)
         Institute Budget Estimates 2013-14
Plan Non-Plan Total
Indian Institutes of Technology (IITs) 1720.50 1450.09 3170.59
National Institutes of Technology (NITs) 705.25 809.08 1514.33
Thus, the IITs and NITs are almost fully funded by Government of
India.
[Ministry of Food Processing Industries, F . No. 6-09/2013-Parl.,
Dated 07th April, 2014]

18
Recommendation (Para No. 8)
Sadly, an institution, projected to be an international centre of
excellence, has begun its academic functioning with a bureaucrat as
its Vice-Chancellor. Without casting doubt on the capabilities of the
present incumbent to steer NIFTEM to global heights, the Committee
would stress that, as a general rule, NIFTEM should be headed by a
professional/academician specialized in the field with proven credentials
as in the case of IITs/IIMs. There is no dearth of such persons in the
country. The Committee urge that there should be no bureaucrat as
Vice-Chancellor in NIFTEM, in future.
Reply of the Government
Regarding the observations of the Committee, it may be mentioned
here that the Vice Chancellor , NIFTEM has been appointed by following
due procedure. Applications for the post of Director, NIFTEM were
invited by NIFTEM. 47 applications were received in response to the
advertisement and out of these, 45 applicants met the basic eligibility
criteria of age. The Ministry of Food Processing Industries with the
approval of Department of Personnel & Training (DOP&T) had constituted
a Search cum Selection Committee (SCSC). The SCSC in its meeting
held on 17.06.2011 had shortlisted 10 candidates for discussions/personal
interview for final selection. The SCSC after considering all aspects of
the candidates recommended the following panel of candidates in the
order of merit for selection to the post of Director, NIFTEM as under:
1. Shri Ajit Kumar , Joint Secretary, Ministry of Food Processing
Industries.
2. Dr. B.S. Bisht, Vice-Chancellor , G.B.Pant Agricultural University.
3. Dr. Satish Kulkarni, Head, NDRI (SRS Bangalore).
Based on the panel recommended by the SCSC, a proposal was sent
to DOP&T for approval of Appointments Committee of the Cabinet
(ACC) for appointment of Shri Ajit Kumar to the post of Director,
NIFTEM. DOP&T vide their OM No. 9/34/2011-EO(SM.II) dated 31.01.2012
had conveyed the approval of ACC for appointment of Sh. Ajit Kumar,
IAS (BH: 80) to the post of Director.
It is agreed that in future, Vice Chancellor of NIFTEM will be
appointed from academia and she/he will be someone who fulfils the
eligibility criteria laid down by University Grants Commission/Ministry
of Human Resource Development.
[Ministry of Food Processing Industries, F . No. 6-09/2013-Parl.,
Dated 07th April, 2014]

19
Recommendation (Para No. 9)
The Institute is reportedly facing great difficulty in getting higher
level teaching staff due to unmatched salary package available in
private sector. Thus, the apprehensions expressed in this regard in the
EFC meeting on 16.12.2005 turned out to be prophetic. It has been
stated that in order to attract suitable faculty, incentives such as
professional development facilities, research projects, participation in
conferences, training programme, etc. are extended. Out of 45 posts
of faculty already created, only 29 have been filled up. It has been
stated that in order to meet the requirement of teaching, guest faculties
have been arranged from Academia and Industry. The Committee would
suggest that NIFTEM should emulate IITs and follow their methods and
incentives to attract the best faculty.
Reply of the Government
Out of 45 sanctioned posts, 36 faculty (including on contract) are
in position at present. Advertisement for filling up of reserved posts
was released. The candidates who have applied for the posts were
interviewed; some candidates were selected and issued offers of
appointment. Following faculty posts are vacant at present:
Professor : 3 posts
Associate Professor : 6 posts
Assistant Professor : Nil
[Ministry of Food Processing Industries, F . No. 6-09/2013-Parl.,
Dated 07th April, 2014]
Recommendation (Para No. 10)
The Committee have been informed that NIFTEM has signed MoUs
with Wageningen University (Netherland) in 2011, Kansas State University
(USA) in 2012 and University of Nebraska Lincholn (USA) in 2013 on
mutual cooperation in the field of faculty/students exchange
programme, research etc. and that the first batch of 18 students led
by three faculty members was sent to these universities in 2013. The
Committee desire that maximum benefit should be derived from such
collaborations in the field of research, training, development of
academic programmes, etc. and it should be ensured that NIFTEM
achieves its objective of becoming a global center of excellence.
Reply of the Government
The recommendations of the Committee have been noted.
[Ministry of Food Processing Industries, F . No. 6-09/2013-Parl.,
Dated 07th April, 2014]

20
Recommendation (Para No. 11)
The Committee are glad to know that since its inception in
2012-13, NIFTEM has taken a number of initiatives such as village
adoption programme for the students and short term training
programmes benefitting 580 participants for skill development. NIFTEM
has also set up a research development council consisting about
50 members drawn from industry and academia such as from Indian
Council of Agriculture Research, Central Food Technological Research
Institute, Central Institute of Post Harvest Engineering & Technology,
Defence Food Research Laboratory, Defence Research and Development
Organisation and IIT , Kharagpur. A number of research and training
centers have also been set up to cater to the needs of the industry.
The Committee hope that all these initiatives will yield desired results
in meeting the projected skilled manpower requirement of 3.5 million
by the year 2022.
Reply of the Government
The recommendations of the Committee have been noted.
[Ministry of Food Processing Industries, F . No. 6-09/2013-Parl.,
Dated 07th April, 2014]

21
CHAPTER III
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO NOT
DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE GOVERNMENT ’S REPLIES
Recommendation (Para No. 7)
The Committee have been informed that there are plans to expand
IICPT and NIFTEM with networks of branches/distance learning. Ideally,
IICPT and NIFTEM should have statutory basis with sufficient autonomy
for their academic and professional functioning on the lines of IITs.
The Committee desire that action should be taken in this regard and
legislation introduced in Parliament at the earliest.
Reply of the Government
The Draft NIFTEM Bill for declaring National Institute of Food
Technology Entrepreneurship and Management (NIFTEM) as “Institutes
of National Importance ” through an Act of Parliament was prepared in
the year 2013 on the lines of Institutes of Technology Act that governs
IITs. The proposed Bill covers IICPT , Thanjavur also, which may be
re-designated as NIFTEM. The objective is to provide for functional
autonomy to the institute to design and develop courses and undertake
research activities. On the draft proposal D/o Expenditure has intimated
that NIFTEM at Haryana has only recently been inaugurated
(7th November , 2012) and its courses are yet to be fully operational.
In fact, the first batch is yet to be graduate. Similarly, till now two
batches have graduated from IICPT . D/o Expenditure has therefore felt
that it is too early to declare these institutes as Institute of National
Importance at this stage.
[Ministry of Food Processing Industries, F . No. 6-09/2013-Parl.,
Dated 07th April, 2014 & F .No. 1-98/2013-NIFTEM (Vol.II),
dated 04th December , 2014]

22
CHAPTER IV
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF
THE GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE
Recommendation (Para No. 1)
The Committee ’s examination of National Institute of Food
Technology, Entrepreneurship and Management (NIFTEM) reveals that
the proposal to set up NIFTEM was approved by the Expenditure Finance
Committee (EFC) despite serious reservations by the Department of
Expenditure, Planning Commission, Ministry of Health and Ministry of
HRD on the grounds of duplication of functions, economic un-viability,
longer lead time, lack of clarity regarding courses, difficulty in attracting
world class faculty and that there was no case for creating a new
institution, as evident from the minutes of EFC meetings held on
16.12.2005 and 24.03.2006. The Committee feel that there was no
strong case for creation of a new institution at a huge cost when the
Institute of Crop Processing Technology (IICPT) at Thanjavur, which is
under MoFPI was conducting graduate and post-graduate courses on
food technology. In the Committee ’s view, the objectives of setting up
of the NIFTEM could have easily been achieved at a fraction of the
cost of NIFTEM and within shortest time, by suitable upgradation of
the IICPT . Alternatively, the same could have been achieved by
introduction of relevant courses and facilities in the IITs which are
located in most of the States with requisite infrastructure and eminent
faculty.
Reply of the Government
Quantum increase in the level of processing and value addition of
primary agriculture produce is of critical importance for enhancing
farmers’ income, generating employment and reducing wastages, and
to accomplish overall growth of the national economy. It is equally
important to ensure cost and quality competitiveness of processed
food so as to access global markets where price realization is higher
and India has a comparative advantage. Moreover , setting food standards
and reliable testing protocols has become a matter of serious public
concern. It was therefore considered necessary to develop food scientists
and technologists who can do R&D in frontier areas, set food standards
and develop protocols for testing, and also develop entrepreneurs who
undergo courses and training programmes having proper mix of inputs
on food science, technology, management, entrepreneurship and
business incubation.

23
The Institute of Applied Manpower Research (IAMR) in its report
(2004) had recommended creation of a National Institute of Technology
and Management for taking care of human resource development needs
of the Food Processing Industry and building effective partnerships
among various stakeholders. Integrated strategy for the promotion of
agri-business under Prime Minister ’s thrust areas envisaged setting up
of such an institution. Therefore, a new organization was required to
be set up, with structure and systems aligned with its objectives to be
the apex institution in food research and education in the country.
The Finance Minister , in his Budget Speech on 28.02.2006 announced
the intention of Government to set up a National Institute of Food
Technology, Entrepreneurship and Management (NIFTEM) as an
international centre of excellence which will work synergistically with
industry and other institutions within India and abroad.
A feasibility study was done in August 2004 by Rabo India Finance
Ltd. which had established the need for an apex institute named
National Institute of Food Technology, Entrepreneurship and Management
(NIFTEM).
The feasibility study had made an evaluation of the existing
institutions for upgradation like National Dairy Research Institute (NDRI),
Central Food Technological Research Institute (CFTRI) & Defence Food
Research Laboratory (DFRL). NDRI was ruled out for comparison due to
their limited sectoral focus. The main objective of DFRL at Mysore is
to cater to the needs of the defence personnel. The Feasibility Report
had observed that CFTRI is catering to the R&D needs of Food Processing
Industries, but is focused on basic level research & training of local
importance and is moreover located at Mysore in Southern India. The
study found that CFTRI focuses primarily on applied research in Food
Technology and lacked the comprehensive research focus in the food
science arena.
Because of the above considerations, these Institutions were not
considered as a substitute of NIFTEM in the feasibility Report prepared
by Rabo India Finance Ltd.
After a detailed gap analysis, Rabo India Finance Ltd. noted that
there is a clear need for an apex R&D institute in food and beverage
sector.
Further , there was no institute in northern India to cater to the
needs of its unique requirements. Indian Institute of Crop Processing
Technology (IICPT) formerly known as Paddy Processing Research Centre
(PPRC) had mainly sectoral focus on foodgrains.
[Ministry of Food Processing Industries, F . No. 6-09/2013-Parl.,
Dated 07th April, 2014]

24
Comments of the Committee
For comments of the Committee please refer to Para No. 1.14 of
Chapter-1 of this Report.
Recommendation (Para No. 3)
Though it was aimed to set up a world class institution, the
Committee observe that no global competitive bid was invited from
consultants having relevant experience. Initially, M/s Educational
Consultants India Limited was engaged for preparation of a feasibility
report (FR) and detailed project report (DPR). The report was not
found acceptable. Then the Ministry of Food Processing Industries
(MoFPI) invited bids from six short-listed consultants and finally engaged
M/s Rabo India Finance Pvt. Limited in November, 2003 at a cost of
over Rs. 40 lakhs. It is observed from the information furnished by
MoFPI that Rabo India never had any experience in preparation of FR/
DPR of any educational institution. It is no surprise that when the Rabo
DPR was reviewed by Cornell Sathguru Foundation for Development
(CSF), it found that several essential facilities required for NIFTEM to
excel in research and knowledge generation were not conceived in the
DPR. The Committee would await an explanation as to how such a
consultant was engaged for setting up an Institute touted to be an
International Centre of Eminence.
Reply of the Government
A proposal was initially received from Government of U.P . for
setting up of Institute of Food Technology in December, 2000 along
with a Project Report. The proposal was examined in the Ministry and
it was found that the U.P . Government’s Project Report is only indicative
of the need for the Institute and is required to be revised to make it
objective oriented, comprehensive and complete. Moreover , it was felt
that the State Government may not be in a position to set up an apex
institute in the area of food technology and management and to meet
the recurring and future developmental expenditure. Hence the Ministry
of Food Processing Industries considered it appropriate to set up a
National Institute of Food Technology Entrepreneurship and Management.
An Executive Committee consisting of following Officers was constituted
to facilitate preparation of a comprehensive action plan for setting up
the proposed Institute and to ensure speedy implementation and
monitoring of the Project.
1. Shri A.N.P . Sinha, JS, MFPI — Chairman.
2. Secretary, Horticulture and Food Processing Department,
Government of U.P .

25
3. Shri G. Venkatramani, Director (Finance), MFPI.
4. Shri S G. Raoot, Joint Advisor , Planning Commission.
5. Director , (Plan Finance), Department of Expenditure, Ministry
of Finance.
6. Shri K.N. Biswas, Director , Ministry of HRD.
7. Shri R.C. Sachdeva, Deputy Secretary, MFPI.
Initially the work for preparation of Feasibility Report and Detailed
Project Report was assigned to M/s. Educational Consultants India Ltd.
Their report was, however , not found feasible by the Executive
Committee. The Committee, therefore, recommended that consultants
of global repute may be assigned the work. Based on this, the Ministry
invited technical and financial bids from the six Consultants which
were earlier shortlisted by the Ministry for preparation of Mega Study-
cum-Vision Document for the Ministry. Out of the 6 Consultants, only
three Consultants had responded to the Ministry ’s letter seeking bids
including M/s. Rabo India Finance Pvt. Ltd.
The Executive Committee after taking presentation from the above
three Consultancy firms, shortlisted M/s. Rabo India Finance Pvt. Ltd.
in its meeting held on 11.11.2003, at a cost of Rs. 40.70 lakh plus
applicable service tax. M/s. Rabo India Finance Pvt. Ltd. in their
Technical bid had indicated their following credentials:—
1. An institution dedicated to Food and Agribusiness.
2. Strong repository of knowledge of various sectors in Food
and Agribusiness.
3. Significant experience in the Food Supply Chain from Farm
to Consumer.
4. International Resources involved in Food and Agribusiness
research.
5. Team of highly qualified and experienced Food and
Agribusiness Professionals.
6. Experience of working with Government and Industry Bodies.
7. Deep knowledge and experience of developing public private
partnership models for infrastructure projects in India.
8. Agency was assigned the work for preparation of a Mega
Study of Vision Document by the Ministry.

26
Past performance for similar Project Consultancy Services as
provided in the Technical bid submitted by M/s. Rabo India Finance
Pvt. Ltd. are indicated below:
1. NDDB — Feasibility study for setting up modern marketing
systems for fruits and vegetables in India.
2. Gujarat State Government — Strategic Plan for food and
agriculture for Gujarat.
3. DCM Shriram Consolidated Ltd. — Strategies to develop and
supply chain for food and agriculture products.
4. MARK FED, Punjab — Strategies for growth in processed
vegetable sector.
5. Mother Dairy — Corporate Strategy
6. Leading Sugar Company — Business and financial restructuring.
7. Leading Tea Company — Restructuring and sourcing
international alliances.
8. Heineken International — Entry Strategy for India.
9. Dynamix Dairy Industries Ltd. — Strategic advisory for growth
plan and sourcing potential alliances.
10. Leading Starch Cooperative — Strategic Advisory services
(market analysis) with report to its entry plan in India.
11. IFFCO — Advisory on Business diversification areas.
12. ISAGRO S.P .A. — Advisory RPGLS in the sale of its agrochemical
business.
13. WHYTE MACKAY — Advisory in the sale of 51% of Whyte and
Mackay India Ltd. to BACARDI.
14. Leading Marine Product Company — Identification of market
opportunity and develop a comprehensive business strategy.
15. Amalgamated Bean Coffee Trading Company — Sole strategies
and financial advisory to Amalgamated Bean Coffee Trading
Co. (ABC) for raising capital for its growth plan.
16. East Asiatic Company — Entry Strategy upto India and
acquisition of “Protenix” and “Dumex” from Pfizer Ltd.
17. Leading Brazilian Company — Strategic Advisory (market
analysis) on current status and future potential for fuel
ethanol in India.

27
In view of above position, it was resolved that Rabo India Finance
Ltd. had considerable experience of preparation of Feasibility Reports/
DPRs and they were engaged as Consultants.
[Ministry of Food Processing Industries, F . No. 6-09/2013-Parl.,
Dated 07th April, 2014]
Comments of the Committee
For comments of the Committee please refer to Para No. 1.21 of
Chapter-1 of this Report.
Recommendation (Para No. 4)
An agreement was signed in January, 2008 with Cornell Sathguru
Foundation for Development (CSF) for five years with staggered payment
of Rs. 3.925 crore (spread over three years) for having knowledge
sharing partnership with the College of Agriculture and Life Sciences
(CALS) at Cornell University. Cornell is stated to be the foremost among
IVY League Universities and a global leader in agriculture and food
research and education with unmatchable brand value. The agreement
was, however, terminated in January, 2010. MoFPI came up with two
conflicting versions as reasons for termination. In a written submission
it was stated that the Cornell disassociated itself from the project
midway on the grounds of funding uncertainty and non-availability of
faculty in NIFTEM. During the oral deposition before the Committee,
it was, however , stated that Cornell could not design the course
curriculum and their suggestions were not relatable to Indian conditions.
The Committee would like to know what exactly were the reasons for
termination of contract with Cornell and what action was taken to
claim damages for breach of contract if any, by CSF .
Reply of the Government
The knowledge sharing partnership agreement was signed with
College of Agriculture and Life Sciences (CALS), Cornell University
operating in India through Cornell Sathguru Foundation (CSF) for
Development, Hyderabad on 08.01.2008 covering the following key
task areas (scope of work):—
1. Strategic inputs for design of teaching and research facilities
including support facilities such as the Library/Laboratories
and e-learning centre.
2. Guidance for design of under-graduate courses and also
procedure for selection.

28
3. Faculty capacity building and exchange.
4. Development of a strategic framework for nurturing research
within NIFTEM.
5. Development of Institutional Policy, Intellectual Property and
Technology Transfer Policy and Development of a strategic
plan for Technology Transfer and enterprise development.
6. Developing strategic plan and course design for a Training
centre for continuing education.
7. Development of detailed plan for food enterprise incubator/
and interface with industry.
8. Assistance in faculty selection.
CSF did not provide the following essential documents/services:
1. Basic parameter for equipment for Central Bio-Process facilities,
Incubator and Labs.
2. Appropriate learning tools and help devise experiential
learning modules for best exposure to students.
3. Development of intellectual property and technology transfer
policy and development of a strategic plan for technology
transfer and enterprise development.
4. Identification of training needs of entrepreneurs and design
of training course.
5. Design of food enterprise incubator.
6. Approaches on forming research consortiums and strategic
focus in forging international partnerships in research
management.
The College of Agriculture and Life Sciences, Ithaca, USA addressed
a letter to Secretary, MoFPI on 28.01.2010 expressing their inability to
provide any more assistance beyond what had been provided, on account
of funding uncertainty and absence of faculty in NIFTEM. As submitted
in reply to Para 2 above, there was a delay of about 2 years in
obtaining the approval for revision of cost estimates from the CCEA
due to procedural formalities and comments received from various
Government Departments which were required to be addressed suitably
before obtaining approval of CCEA. There had also been delay in creation
of posts and appointment of faculty due to the legal status of NIFTEM
as a Company registered under Section 25 of the Companies Act.
Creation of posts and recruitment of faculty could only be made after

29
the Cabinet had approved registration of NIFTEM as an autonomous
body under the Societies Registration Act.
In view of above position and the fact that College of Agriculture
and Life Sciences, Cornell University (operating in India through Cornell
Sathguru Foundation) had disassociated itself from the project midway
on grounds of funding uncertainty and non-availability of faculty, it
was considered appropriate to discontinue the agreement signed with
CSF with no further financial liability on NIFTEM.
[Ministry of Food Processing Industries, F . No. 6-09/2013-Parl.,
Dated 07th April, 2014]
Comments of the Committee
For comments of the Committee please refer to Para No. 1.26 of
Chapter-1 of this Report.
Recommendation (Para No. 5)
Strangely, NIFTEM was initially incorporated (in August, 2007), as
a “not-for-profit” company under Section 25 of the Companies Act
despite the fact that it is not a commercial entity but an educational
institution. It was realized only later that the institute in the form of
a company would be ineligible to get the status of “deemed university”
from the UGC for running its academic courses. It was only in August,
2010, NIFTEM was registered as a society and it took another two years
for it to get the status of “deemed to be university ”. Consequently,
creation of posts and appointment of faculties and staff got delayed
which reportedly led to termination of agreement by the knowledge
partner. The Institute became operational only in 2012-13 instead of
the initial plan of commencement in 2010-11. Surely, such inept handling
of establishing an educational institution cannot be expected from any
quarter. The Committee would like to know who was responsible for
this mishandling and what action was taken in the matter.
Reply of the Government
The DPR prepared by M/s Rabo India Finance Ltd. suggested both
the options for registering NIFTEM either under Section 25 of the
Companies Act or under Societies Act. M/s. Rabo India Finance Ltd.
had however, recommended that NIFTEM be constituted as a Section
25 company as it provides certainty to the legal status, which is critical
in terms of collaboration with leading global institutes, and provides
more accountability and transparency in terms of financial reporting.

30
The draft EFC Note and the CCEA Note, inter alia , providing for
registration of NIFTEM under Section 25 of the Companies Act were
circulated to Ministry of HRD who in turn obtained comments of UGC
and AICTE. The Ministry of HRD while supporting the proposal for
setting up of NIFTEM as a Company registered under Section 25 of the
Companies Act, 1956 commented as under:
(a) It has to be set up either as a Central University or apply for
Deemed to be University status.
(b) No overlapping with the role of AICTE for determining the
norms and standards in the area of engineering and
technology.
(c) Obtaining AICTE approval of the courses and intake of the
programme.
In view of above position, at no point of time did it transpire that
the legal status of the Institute as Section 25 Company registered
under Companies Act would make it ineligible to get Deemed to be
University status from UGC.
The creation of posts was approved by the Government only after
the Institute was registered as an autonomous organization under
Societies Registration Act on 19.05.2010. The Institute submitted
application for Grant of Deemed to be University on 20.05.2010 to
Ministry of Human Resource Development & UGC. Ministry of Human
Resource Development issued the notification for granting Deemed to
be University status under De Novo category on 08.05.2012.
Although commensurate infrastructure was established and minimum
faculty was recruited to commence 1st academic session from
2011-12, it could not offer the courses due to non-availability of Deemed
University status which was essential for admission of students in
2011-12. The UGC has also categorically advised the Institute not to
admit students till the Deemed to be University status is conferred by
Central Government through a Gazette Notification, which was conferred
on 08.05.2012. Hence the delay in commencement of academic activities
was due to delay in getting the legal authority for the same.
[Ministry of Food Processing Industries, F . No. 6-09/2013-Parl.,
Dated 07th April, 2014]
Comments of the Committee
For comments of the Committee please refer to Para No. 1.32 of
Chapter-1 of this Report.

31
CHAPTER V
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH FINAL
REPLIES TO THE GOVERNMENT ARE STILL AWAITED
-NIL-
   N EW D ELHI; HUKM DEO NARAYAN YADAV,
26 November, 2014 Chairperson,
02 Agrahayana, 1936 (Saka) Committee on Agriculture.

32
APPENDIX
COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE (2014-15)
MINUTES OF THE NINTH SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE
The Committee sat on Thursday, the 26th November, 2014 from
1500 hrs. to 1630 hrs. in Committee Room ‘C’ Parliament House Annexe,
New Delhi.
PRESENT
Shri Hukm Deo Narayan Yadav —  Chairperson
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Prof. Ravindra Vishwanath Gaikwad
3. Shri Nalin Kumar Kateel
4. Md. Badaruddoza Khan
5. Shri C. Mahendran
6. Shri Dalpat Singh Paraste
7. Shri Nityanand Rai
8. Shri C.L. Ruala
9. Shri Virendra Singh
10. Shri B.S. Yeddyurappa
Rajya Sabha
11. Shri Janardan Dwivedi
12. Shri Mohd. Ali Khan
13. Shri Ram Nath Thakur
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Smt. Abha Singh Yaduvanshi — Director
2. Smt. Juby Amar — Deputy Secretary
3. Shri C. Vanlalruata — Deputy Secretary
2. At the outset the Chairman welcomed the members to the
Sitting of the Committee. The Committee, then, took up the draft
Report on the Action Taken by the Government on Observations/

33
Recommendations contained in the Fifty-Seventh Report on “National
Institute of Food Technology, Entrepreneurship and Management
(NIFTEM)”. After some deliberations, the Committee adopted the draft
Report without any modification and authorized the Chairman to finalise
the same on the basis of factual verification from the concerned
Department and present the same to Parliament.
*3. *** *** *** *** ***
*4. *** *** *** *** ***
*5. *** *** *** *** ***
The Committee then adjourned.
*Matter not related to this Report

34
ANNEXURE
(Vide Para 4 of Introduction of the Report)
ANALYSIS OF ACTION TAKEN BY GOVERNMENT ON THE
FIFTY- SEVENTH REPORT ON NIFTEM OF COMMITTEE
ON AGRICULTURE (FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA)
(i) Total number of Recommendations: 11
(ii) Recommendations/Observations which have been
Accepted by the Government:
Para Nos. 2, 6, 8, 9, 10 and 11
Total : 06
Percentage 54.54%
(iii) Recommendations/Observations which the Committee
Do not desire to pursue in view of the Government ’s
replies:
Para No. 7
Total : 01
Percentage 9.09%
(iv) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which
replies of the Government have not been accepted
by the Committee:
Para Nos. 1, 3, 4 and 5
Total : 04
Percentage 36.37%
(v) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which
Final replies of the Government are still awaited:
                      -NIL-
Total : NIL
Percentage 0%