TWENTY SEVENTH REPORT
STANDING COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE
(2015-2016)
(SIXTEENTH LOK SABHA)
MINISTRY OF FOOD PROCESSING INDUSTRIES
‘MEGA FOOD PARKS ’
[Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/
Recommendations contained  in the Sixteenth  Report
(Sixteenth Lok Sabha) of the Standing Committee
on Agriculture (2014-2015)]
Presented to Lok Sabha on 11.08.2016
Laid on the Table of Rajya Sabha on 11.08.2016
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
August, 2016/Shravana, 1938 ( Saka)


COA No. 343
Price : R  49.00
© 2016 B Y L OK SABHA S ECRETARIAT
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct
of Business in Lok Sabha (Fifteenth Edition) and printed by
Anupam Art Printers, New Delhi.

CONTENTS
PAGE
COMPOSITION OF THE C OMMITTEE ............................................. (iii)
INTRODUCTION ................................................................. (v)
CHAPTER I Report ....................................................... 1
CHAPTER II Observations/Recommendations which have been
accepted by the Government .......................... 12
CHAPTER III Observations/Recommendations which the Committee
do not desire to pursue in view of the Government’s
replies ....................................................... 21
CHAPTER IV Observations/Recommendations in respect of which
replies of the Government have not been accepted
by the Committee ........................................ 23
C
HAPTER V Observations/Recommendations in respect of
which final replies of the Government are still
awaited ...................................................... 29
A
NNEXURE
Minutes of the 29th Sitting of the Committee held on
08.08.2016 .......................................................... 30
APPENDIX
Analysis of Action Taken by the Government on the
Observations/Recommendations contained in the Sixteenth
Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) of the Standing Committee
on Agriculture (2014-2015) ...................................... 32
(i)

COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE
(2015-2016)
Shri Hukm Deo Narayan Yadav — Chairperson
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Prof. Ravindra Vishwanath Gaikwad
3. Shri Sanganna Karadi
4. Shri Nalin Kumar Kateel
*5. Smt. Raksha Nikhil Khadse
6. Md. Badaruddoza Khan
7. Shri C. Mahendran
8. Dr. Tapas Mandal
9. Shri Janardan Mishra
10. Shri Ajay Nishad
$11. Vacant
12. Shri Nityanand Rai
13. Shri Mukesh Rajput
14. Shri Konakalla Narayana Rao
15. Shri C.L. Ruala
16. Shri Arjun Charan Sethi
17. Shri Satyapal Singh (Sambhal)
18. Shri Virendra Singh
19. Shri Dharmendra Yadav
20. Shri Jai Prakash Narayan Yadav
21. Shri B.S. Yeddyurappa
Rajya Sabha
^22. Vacant
23. Shrimati Renuka Chowdhury
* Smt. Raksha Nikhil Khadse, MP , Lok Sabha, nominated to the Committee w.e.f.
13.04.2016 vice Prof. Richard Hay who ceased to be the Member of the Committee
w.e.f. 13.04.2016.
$ Vacant due to sad demise of Shri Dalpat Singh Paraste w.e.f. 01.06.2016.
^ Vacant due to retirement of Shri A.W. Rabi Bernard from the Membership of
Rajya Sabha w.e.f. 29.06.2016 vide CB-I Note dated 28.06.2016.
(iii)

#24. Sardar Sukhdev Singh Dhindsa
25. Shri Janardan Dwivedi
@26. Shri Meghraj Jain
27. Shri Vinay Katiyar
28. Shri Mohd. Ali Khan
29. Shri Ram Nath Thakur
30. Shri Shankarbhai N. Vegad
31. Shri Darshan Singh Yadav
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Shri U.B.S. Negi — Joint Secretary
2. Shri Arun K. Kaushik — Director
3. Shri Nirantar Kumar Singh — Senior Executive Assistant
# Sardar Sukhdev Singh Dhindsa, MP , Rajya Sabha, nominated to the Committee w.e.f.
23.05.2016 vide Lok Sabha Bulletin—Part II, No.3581 dated 23.05.2016.
@ Shri Meghraj Jain, MP , Rajya Sabha, nominated to the Committee w.e.f. 28.07.2016
vide Rajya Sabha Bulletin—Part II, dated 28.07.2016.
Shri Rajpal Singh Saini from the Membership of Rajya Sabha w.e.f. 04.07.2016 vide
CB-I Note dated 28.06.2016.
(iv)

(v)
INTRODUCTION
I, the Chairperson, Standing Committee on Agriculture (2015-16),
having been authorized by the Committee to submit the Report on
their behalf, present this Twenty Seventh Report on action taken by
the Government on the Observations/Recommendations contained in
the Sixteenth Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) of the Standing Committee
on Agriculture (2014-15) on the Subject ‘Mega Food Parks ’ pertaining
to the Ministry of Food Processing Industries.
2. The Sixteenth Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) of the Standing
Committee on Agriculture (2014-15) on the Subject ‘Mega Food Parks ’
of the Ministry of Food Processing Industries was presented to
Lok Sabha and laid on the Table of Rajya Sabha on 11 August, 2015.
The Action Taken Notes on the Report were received on 10 November,
2015.
3. The Report was considered and adopted by the Committee at
their Sitting held on 08.08.2016.
4. An analysis of the action taken by the Government on the
Observations/Recommendations contained in the Sixteenth Report
(Sixteenth Lok Sabha) of the Committee is given in Appendix.
   N
EW D ELHI; HUKM DEO NARAYAN YADAV,
09 August, 2016 Chairperson,
18 Shravana, 1938 (Saka) Standing Committee on Agriculture.

1
CHAPTER I
REPORT
This Report of the Standing Committee on Agriculture deals with
the action taken by the Government on the Observations/
Recommendations contained in the Sixteenth Report (Sixteenth
Lok Sabha) of the Standing Committee on Agriculture (2014-2015) on
“Mega Food Parks ” pertaining to Ministry of Food Processing Industries
which was presented to Lok Sabha and laid on the Table of
Rajya Sabha on 11.08.2015.
1.2 The Ministry of Food Processing Industries have furnished Action
Taken Replies in respect of all the 10 Observations/Recommendations
contained in the Report. These replies have been categorized as under:
(i) Observations/Recommendations that have been accepted by
the Government:
Recommendation Nos. 1, 2, 6, 8, 9 and 10
Chapter II
Total-06
(ii) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which the
Committee do not desire to pursue in view of the
Government’s reply:
Recommendation No. 5
Chapter III
Total-01
(iii) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which action
taken replies of the Government have not been accepted by
the Committee:
Recommendation Nos. 3, 4 and 7
Chapter IV
Total-03
(iv) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which final
replies of the Government are still awaited:
Recommendation No. NIL
Chapter V
Total-NIL

2
1.3 The Committee trust that utmost importance would be given
to implementation of the Observations/Recommendations accepted
by the Government. In cases, where it is not possible for the Ministry
to implement the Recommendations in letter and spirit for any
reason, the matter should be reported to the Committee with reasons
for non-implementation. The Committee desire that further Action
Taken Notes on the Observations/Recommendations contained in
Chapter-I of this Report be furnished to them at an early date.
1.4 The Committee will now deal with the action taken by the
Government on some of the Recommendations in the succeeding
paragraphs.
A. INCENTIVES TO THE FARMERS
Recommendation (Serial No. 3)
1.5 The Committee had observed/recommended as under:—
“The Committee note that ‘Mega Food Park Scheme’ was introduced
to cater to the need of proper preservation and conservation of
agro-products with a view to ensure multi-dimensional agricultural
infrastructure development. The Scheme envisages a well defined
agri/horticultural processing zone containing state-of-the art
processing facilities with support infrastructure and well established
Supply chain aims to create a modern food processing infrastructure
for the small and medium processing units which otherwise have
not been able to develop due to capital intensive nature of food
processing equipment. It intends to facilitate establishment of an
integrated value chain, with food processing at the core and
supported by requisite forward and backward linkages. The broader
idea behind the scheme is to bring farmers, processors and retailers
together and link agriculture production to the market so as to
ensure maximization of value addition, minimization of wastages
and improving farmers ’ income. The concept of ‘Mega Food Park
Scheme’ envisages a cluster approach based on hub and spoke
Model comprising of farm promixate facilities such as collection
Centres, Primary Processing Centres (PPC) and a Central Processing
Centres (CPC). The Committee appreciate the scheme for its farmers
centric approach. However , it is observed that the beneficiaries of
the scheme are not the farmers to the intended degrees. It is the
industrialists and other entrepreneurs who are benefited the most
by the various incentives available under the scheme. It is not sure
whether the produce of the farmers for these industries are taken
on prescribed rates uniformly. The Committee, therefore,

3
recommend that some mechanism should be evolved to ensure
that the produce of the farmers are taken by the processing
industries at the prescribed prices and the incentives of the scheme
should also be passed on to the farmers or some percentage of the
profits should be earmarked to the farmers whose produce were
taken by the processing industries. ”
1.6 In its Action Taken Reply, the Ministry has stated as under:—
“The end objective of the scheme of Mega Food Parks is to minimize
the wastage of agricultural produce, particularly perishables, by
increasing levels of value addition. The grant is provided by the
Ministry to the SPV for the purpose of creating food processing
infrastructure for utilization by the food processing units set up in
the Park for storage and value addition of the agricultural produce.
Farmers are benefited by the scheme either directly or indirectly.
Farmers are one of the direct beneficiaries if they are part of the
SPV, which implement, own and operate the projects. Indirectly,
value addition and reduction in wastage of agricultural produce
results in increase of the farmer ’s income. The processing units,
which have been setup in these Parks, are procuring agricultural
produce as raw material for processing. The sourcing of raw material
from the farmers, including small and marginal farmers, is helping
them in getting better prices for their produce. They may also
avail sorting, grading and storage facilities for their produce. These
projects are helping in reducing wastages of perishable commodities
in the catchment area.
An impact assessment of scheme, recently conducted by Indian
Council for Research on International Economic Relations (ICRIER),
New Delhi, revealed that the promoters of functional Mega Food
Parks are providing training to the farmers in modern techniques
of agriculture production, establishing backward linkage for raw
material and providing better price of their produce. Such initiative
would certainly result in better return to the farmers.
The Scheme is private sector driven and the projects are based on
the sound commercial decision of the investor based on economic
viability. The Government is only providing financial assistance
partly to make them viable so that adequate investment may be
attracted in this area to enhance the level of food processing in
the country. It is impractical to expect from private investor to
earmark certain percentage of the profit for the farmers. However,

4
it is expected that with a large number of food processing units
being set up in the Parks, there will be increased demand of the
agricultural produce in the catchment areas as raw material which
will benefit farmers. ”
1.7 The Committee are not satisfied with the reply of the
Government. Though the Scheme is private sector driven and the
projects are based on the sound commercial decision of the investor
based on economic viability. The fact remains that Government is
providing financial assistance to make them viable and the same
cannot be ignored by the private entrepreneurs. It is but natural to
expect from private entrepreneurs to pass on certain percentage of
their profits for the benefits and welfare of the farmers. The
processing units, which have been setup or being set up under Mega
Food Parks Scheme depends upon agricultural produce as raw
material for their processing units. While the sourcing of raw material
from the farmers, including small and marginal farmers, helps the
entrepreneurs in fetching handsome profits, there is no mechanism
to ensure that the farmers are getting reasonable prices for their
produce. The Committee are of the opinion that the Scheme should
be farmers centric and the entrepreneurs should not be allowed to
make undue profit at the cost of farmers. One of the objectives of
the scheme is to increase the income of the farmers and the same
cannot be achieved unless farmers are given reasonable price for
their produce and incentives to augment their produce. The
Committee, therefore, feel that raw material procured by the
entrepreneurs at the Mega Food Parks ’ Collection Centers should be
monitored on regular basis. The Committee, therefore, reiterate
that a mechanism should be put in place to ensure that the produce
of the farmers are procured by the processing industries at the
profitable prices and the incentives or certain percentage of the
profit of the industrialists or entrepreneurs scheme are also be
passed on for the benefits and welfare of the farmers.
Recommendation (Serial No. 4)
1.8 The Committee had observed/recommended as under:—
“The Committee note that the purpose of Mega Food Parks Scheme
is to have access to the agricultural and other farm related produces
to minimize their wastage, ensuring value addition and also bringing
farmers of the area into its fold by making available a platform to
them wherein they can get good returns of their produces. However,

5
it can be observed that the objective for which this scheme is
launched is yet to be achieved and the desired benefits are not
accruing to the category of beneficiaries whom they were intended
to. The cumbersome procedural delays, involvement of multiple
agencies and requirement of huge finances make the entire process
unattractive to farmers, primarily for whom the scheme has
launched. The focus of the scheme has been diverted from farmers
to entrepreneurs and resultantly farmers have been reduced to
mere suppliers of their produces without any bargaining capacity.
The Committee believe that this is not the objective of the scheme
wherein, the farmers are not given the level playing field. It would
be prudent for the scheme and beneficial for the farmers if local
farmers are given the due priority in the scheme of things. For the
purpose, the scheme can be modified/re-launched on local basis.
It can be microcosm of the Mega Food Parks Scheme involving the
farmers of specific areas with the provision of generation of funds
in a self-help manner. The grants as deemed appropriate can also
be given as are available to the Mega Scheme. The farmers can be
given initial training in the processing of their produces. Local
markets or purchase arrangements for such produces of the farmers
can be made by the suitable indulgence. This will go a long way
in making the farmers self-reliant with regard to their produces
and its returns. It will also provide an opportunity for experimenting
the innovative methods into their farming. The Committee,
therefore, recommend that a proper strategy be devised to enlist
the farmers for forging into local self-help groups or cooperatives
for the purpose of using their produce into processing sector by
themselves, thus minimizing the possibility of better returns of
their efforts while simultaneously minimizing the risk of their
exploitation.”
1.9 In its Action Taken Reply, the Ministry has stated as under:—
“Objectives of the scheme are likely to be achieved with the
completion of all the Mega Food Parks. As on date, 5 Mega Food
Parks have been operationalized. Many processing units have been
set up in these Parks which are utilizing the agricultural produce
as their raw materials and thereby generating employment and
enhancing the farmers’ income in their respective catchment areas.
An impact assessment of the Scheme has recently been conducted
by the Ministry through an independent institute i.e. Indian Council
for Research on International Economic Relations (ICRIER), New
Delhi and their findings indicate that there has been a significant
impact in catchment area of the operational Mega food Parks in
general and farmers in particular.

6
Though, the increase in farmers income is one of the intended out-
come of the scheme of Mega Food Parks, the basic objective and
focus of the scheme is to minimize wastage of the agricultural
produce. This value addition and reduction in wastage of agricultural
produce will result in increase of the farmer ’s income. As brought
out earlier , the farmers, individually or in groups, may also take
part in Mega Food Park as one of the shareholders of the SPV
implementing the project. Under the Mega Food Parks Scheme,
individual farmer , farmers/producer group, cooperative societies
are eligible to participate in the projects. However, Mega Food
Parks projects are infrastructural project with long gestation period
and require sizeable investment as equity and term loan from
banks. The farmers with reasonable surplus income can only
participate in the projects and that too at small level. The Ministry
has been encouraging participation of farmers in the projects but
without much success. The running of these projects also requires
high management skill and adequate working capital. The Indian
farmers being mostly small and marginal, do not have enough
surplus income for investment in such a venture. However , in some
of the projects under implementation, farmers are part of SPV
either in individual capacity or as self-help groups.
The Ministry is endeavoring to promote strong backward linkage of
the food processing units with farmers to take advantage of these
emerging food processing clusters. Small Farmers Agri-Business
Consortium (SFAC) under the Ministry of Agriculture and Farmers
Welfare is also organizing farmers producers groups to enhance
their bargaining power with the market forces.
The Ministry will take up the matter with the concerned Ministries
of the Government of India like, Ministry of Agriculture and Farmers
Welfare, Ministry of Rural Development, Ministry of Tribal Affairs
and State Governments for devising a proper strategy to enlist the
farmers for forging into local SHG or Cooperatives and empower
them in better bargaining of the prices of their raw material and
their enhanced participation in the Mega Food Parks. ”
1.10 The Committee note that a Study conducted by the Ministry
on impact assessment of the Scheme through an independent
institute i.e. Indian Council for Research on International Economic
Relations (ICRIER), New Delhi indicates that there has been a
significant impact in catchment area of the operational Mega food
Parks in general and farmers in particular. However, the Committee
are peturbed by the submission of the Ministry that the farmers

7
with reasonable surplus income can only participate in the projects
and that too at small level. The farming community in the country
consist mostly of small and marginal farmers and if the majority of
the farmers are excluded, the benefits of the Scheme will not help
in raising their income. The Committee are of the view that the
Scheme should be farmers friendly, participatory and inclusive so
that the benefits of the Scheme could percolate to the lowest level.
Keeping this in view, the Committee had recommended that a proper
strategy be devised to enlist the farmers for forging into local self-
help groups or cooperatives for the purpose of using their produce
into processing sector by themselves. The Committee are not satisfied
with the reply of the Ministry and recommend the Ministry to take
concrete action in this direction. The Committee would like to be
apprised of the steps taken by the Ministry in this regard .
C. SLOW PACE OF IMPLEMENTATION
Recommendation (Serial No. 7)
1.11 The Committee had observed/recommended as under:—
“The Committee note that the scheme of Mega Food Park (MFP)
was conceived to provide a mechanism for bringing together
farmers, processors, retailers, linking agricultural production to
the market, so as ensure maximum value addition, minimize
wastage, increase farmers ’ income and create employment
opportunities. However , the Committee note that the Ministry have
so far approved setting up of 40 Mega Food Parks in various States
of the country. Out of 40 projects approved by the Ministry so far,
21 projects have been accorded final approval and 19 projects
have been accorded in-principle approval. The Committee have
also been informed that out of 21 projects which were accorded
final approval 5 projects are partially operational and 2 projects
will be operational during 2015-16 and 14 projects are expected to
be operational in 2016-17. The Committee further note that out of
the 19 projects accorded In-Principal approval, 15 projects have
been given approval only on 31.03.2015 and Ministry was restrained
to issue In-principal approval to the remaining two projects by the
Hon’ble High Court of Delhi on 30.04.2015. The Committee are
disappointed to note very slow progress in implementation of Mega
Food Parks Scheme launched in the year 2008. After lapse of seven
years, only five Mega food parks, as against 40 sanctioned, have
been partially operational. The Committee are not convinced with
the assertion of the Government that reasons such as delay in

8
acquisition of at least 50 acres of contiguous land, complex and
time taking procedures of obtaining various types of statutory
clearances from the State Government Departments/Agencies,
inability of Public Sector Undertakings to take a lead role in
execution of the project even in the situation of crisis, lack of
cohesiveness amongst the promoters and difficulties/delays in
obtaining term loan sanction from Banks are responsible for delay
and poor physical performance. The Committee are of view that
the proactive steps taken by the Ministry in consultation with State
Government may reduce time lags caused such as problems related
to statutory clearance, land acquisition etc. The Committee,
therefore, recommend the Department to convince State
Governments to establish single window clearance for Mega Food
Park scheme so as to enable statutory clearance by the
Departments/Agencies concerned. The Committee also recommend
the Department to speed up the process of decision taking at the
Ministry level to expedite clearance for submitted proposals. ”
1.12 In its Action Taken Reply, the Ministry has stated as under:—
“Ministry has been taking up the matter of reduction in time lags
caused due to delay in grant of statutory clearances, acquisition
of land etc. with the concerned State Governments from time to
time to facilitate the speedy implementation of the Mega Food
Park projects.
Ministry has also been impressing upon the State Governments to
institute a single window clearance system for Mega Food Parks.
Some of the State Governments have taken initiative in this regard
but desired results in actual sense are yet to be achieved. The
Ministry will continue to pursue this matter with the State
Governments vigorously. Ministry has also requested the State
Governments to constitute a Co-ordination Committee under the
chairmanship of District Collector at the District level, where Mega
Food Parks are situated, for speedy settlement of the issues which
may arise during the project implementation. A similar Coordination
Committee has also been requested at the State level. The State
Government are being associated with the process of the selection
of the project by the Ministry. The concerned States are represented
in the meeting of Technical Committee and Inter-Ministerial Approval
Committee constituted under the scheme for selection of projects.
Selection of the Mega Food Park projects is made by observing a
thorough and transparent procedure. Proposals for setting up Mega
Food Parks are received against Expression of Interest (EoI) widely

9
published through print and electronic media and pre-bid meetings
etc. Appraisal of the proposals received, is made through a stringent
three-tier structure consisting of Program Management Agency,
Technical Committee and Inter-Ministerial Approval Committee. For
redressal of the grievances of the applicants whose proposals have
been found in-eligible, a Committee of Independent Monitors (CIM),
with retired officers of the level of Secretary, Government of India
as members, has been constituted. The applicants making the
representation to the CIM, are also provided opportunity to be
heard in person before making the recommendation on this
representation. It has been the endeavour of the Ministry to
complete the process of selection of the projects in the shortest
possible time in a transparent manner. ”
1.13 The Committee had recommended the Ministry to convince
the State Governments to establish single window clearance for
Mega Food Park scheme so as to enable statutory clearance by the
Departments/agencies concerned. The Committee note that despite
being one of the flagship programmes of the Ministry, the Mega Food
Park Scheme has failed to achieve target even after lapse of eight
years. The steps taken by the Ministry to eliminate the impediments
do not seem to be enough for speedy implementation of the
programme. The Committee note that out of 40 Mega Food Parks
approved, only 5 parks are partially operational. Such dismal
performance would certainly defeat the idea and concept behind
the Programme. The Committee emphasize that a Single Window
Clearing System should be introduced in consultation with the State
Governments and other stakeholders to expedite the progress of
implementation of the projects. The Ministry needs to objectively
identify obstacles impeding the programme and take necessary
measures to remove them. On the basis of experiences garnered
during implementation and feedback received from States and other
stakeholders, the Ministry should modify the guidelines and bring
out changes that would give due momemtum to the implementation
of the Scheme. The Committee would like to be apprised of the
initiatives undertaken by the Ministry and the progress made in the
matter.
D. PROVISION FOR TRAINING
Recommendation (Serial No. 09)
1.14 The Committee had observed/recommended as under:—
“The Committee note that apart from ensuring value addition of
agricultural commodities including poultry, meat, dairy, fisheries
etc., the Mega Food Park scheme was also expected to provide

10
employment opportunities for the local people including small and
marginal farmers and landless labourers. The Committee are of
view that this objective cannot be achieved unless there are
adequate efforts for providing requisite training to local people.
The Committee note that there is provision in the scheme for
creation of training Centre in Non-Core Infrastructure component
for capacity building and skill development and promoters of Mega
Food Parks are also providing training to the farmers in modern
techniques of agriculture production and establishing backward
linkages for raw material. However, the Committee have not been
provided any details regarding training such as nature, number of
training institutes established and number of peoples trained so
far by operational Mega Food Park operators. The Committee,
therefore, desire the Department to furnish details of training
being provided to the local population within a month of
presentation of Report. The Committee also recommend the
Department to make provision for proper training for Food Processing
Sectors under National Skill Mission so that qualified manpower
may be made available to the all operational and planned Mega
Food Parks. ’’
1.15 In its Action Taken Reply, the Ministry has stated as under:—
“The Sector Skill Council for Food Processing (FICSI) is working on
identification of job roles and competencies required for each job
role so as to develop National Occupational Standards (NOS) for
different sectors of food processing. The scope of this work is to
determine what skills are required in different parts of our country
with respect to food processing activities being undertaken. It will
include generic and domain specific skills in all the major sectors
of food processing domain viz.; Fruits and Vegetables; Food Grain
Milling (including Oilseeds); Dairy Products; Meat and Poultry; Fish
& Sea Food; Bread and Bakery; Beverages etc.
FICSI has developed 38 qualification packs in food processing
industry. Based on NOS developed by FICSI, NIFTEM is developing
course content and training module including multi-media content
in various languages to meet the training needs of different job
roles across identified sectors. The skill development program has
been launched in 30 training centres across 11 States in the Bakery
Sector on 04.09.2015. Skill development in other food processing
sectors will also start soon. A target of skilling 50,000 persons in
a year and 2.5 lakh persons in the next 5 years, in food processing
sector , has been fixed. Efforts will be made to utilize the training
infrastructure of Mega Food Park projects also for this purpose. ”

11
1.16 The Committee had recommended that a provision may be
made for proper training for Food Processing Sector under National
Skill Mission so that qualified manpower be made available to the
operational and planned Mega Food Parks. The Committee had also
desired to furnish details of training being provided to the local
population. In its response, the Department has stated that the
Sector Skills Council for Food Processing (FICSI) is working on
identification of job roles and competencies required for each job
roles so as to develop National Occupational Standards (NOS) for
different sectors of food processing. Based on NOS developed by
FICSI, NIFTEM is developing course contents and training module
including multi-media contents in various languages. While skill
development programme has been launched in Bakery sector, skill
development in the food processing sector will also be launched
soon. The Committee are of the view that employment opportunities
specially for local people cannot be created unless they are trained/
skilled to meet the requirement of the industry. It is, therefore,
absolutely essential that vigorous efforts be made to train local
people including landless labourers, small and marginal farmers.
While appreciating the initiatives undertaken by the Ministry, the
Committee desire that FICSI may be impressed upon to expedite
their efforts to develop NOS. NIFTEM should also be asked to
coordinate with FICSI and industry to develop course content and
training module so that target fixed by the Government to train and
skill 2.5 lakhs persons in the next five years could be achieved by
the Government. The Committee would like to be apprised of the
action under taken and the achievements made in terms of the
number of persons skilled/trained etc. so far.

12
CHAPTER II
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN
ACCEPTED BY THE GOVERNMENT
A. Support to Food Processing Industry
Recommendation (Serial No. 1)
The Committee are aware that our country has been endowed with
diverse agroclimatic resources. We have achieved self-sufficiency in
production of the agricultural commodities. Over the years, agricultural
production has consistently recorded higher output. India rank number
one in the production of milk, pulses, ginger , bananas, guavas, mangoes
and papayas, whereas, in the production of rice, wheat, vegetables
and horticultural products, we are at second position in the world. At
the same time, India has also distinction of being big loser of our
agricultural and other produces in post-harvest system. Indian farming
community incur losses equal to Rs. 92,600 crore every year. The main
reason for losses has been assigned to the low level of processing of
the agricultural commodities. The Committee have been informed that
level of food processing in India is only 6% (2.2% of Fruits and Vegetables,
8% of Marine products, 6% for Poultry and 20% for Buffalo Meat) as
compared to more than 70% in countries like USA, China, Malaysia,
Philippines, etc. Huge amount of wastage in agriculture and allied
sectors in India not only reduces availability of food to ever increasing
population, but also reduces farmers ’ income to the significant level
contributing to vicious circle of poverty of majority of small and marginal
farmers. In the wake of the above, it becomes imperative that effective
steps are taken to encourage food processing industries. Although, this
sector is picking up, but not at the desired pace for various reasons.
The Committee, therefore, strongly recommend that food Processing
Industry should be given the utmost thrust so that not only the wastage
is minimized, but also farmers are ensured better returns of their
crops.
Reply of the Government
For promotion and development of food processing sector in the
country, this Ministry is implementing various Central Sector Schemes,
namely (1) Scheme for Infrastructure Development for Food Processing
having components of Mega Food Park, Integrated Cold Chain, Value

13
Addition & Preservation Infrastructure and Modernization of Abattoirs
(2) Scheme of Technology Upgradation/Establishment/Modernization
of Food Processing Industries (spill-over liabilities) (3) Scheme for Quality
Assurance, Codex Standards, Research & Development and Other
Promotional Activities (4) Scheme for Human Resource Development
(spill-over liabilities) and (5) Scheme of Strengthening of Institutions.
2. During the 12th Five Year Plan, this Ministry also launched a
Centrally Sponsored Scheme of ‘National Mission on Food Processing ’
(NMFP) for implementation through the State Governments/Union
Territories. The scheme was having the components of (i) Technology
Upgradation/Setting up/Modernization of Food Processing Units
(ii) Cold Chain, Value Addition and Preservation Infrastructure for
Non-Horticulture Products (iii) Modernisation of Abattoirs (iv) Human
Resource Development (v) Promotional Activities (vi) Creating Primary
Processing Centres/Collection Centres in Rural Areas (vii) Modernisation
of Meat Shops and (viii) Reefer Vehicles. However , NMFP has been
delinked from Central Government support w.e.f. 1.4.2015. State
Governments may decide to continue with the Mission out of their
increased resources resulting from the recommendations of the
14th Finance Commission.
3. A special fund of Rs. 2000 crore has been set up in NABARD by
the Central Government to make available affordable credit to
designated Food Parks and agro processing units in the designated
Food Parks. Any entrepreneur, cooperative, SPV , joint venture, State
Government, etc. may avail loan at concessional rate of interest from
this fund for establishing food parks and food processing units in the
designated Food Parks. The Ministry has notified a consolidated list of
146 designated Food Parks on 02.09.2015.
4. An Investors’ Portal has been developed by the Ministry with the
intention to disseminate information on the State-specific resource
potential, policy support and fiscal incentives offered to investors in
food processing sector. The investors, both domestic & foreign, can
also seek guidance on specific issues by using information disseminated
on the portal. Investors can access and avail these services through
Investors’ Portal (http://foodprocessingindia.co.in) or through Ministry’s
website ( http://mofpi.nic.in).
5. Excise duty on food processing and packaging machinery was
reduced from 10% to 6% in 2014-15 and services of pre-conditioning,
pre-cooling, ripening, waxing, retail packing, labeling of fruits &
vegetables have been exempted from Service Tax in 2015-16.

14
6. Recently, Reserve Bank of India vide their circular dated
23.04.2015 has classified loan to food & agro-based processing units
and Cold Chain under agriculture activities for Priority Sector Lending
(PSL) subject to aggregate sanction limit of Rs. 100 crore per borrower.
It will facilitate greater flow of credit to entrepreneurs for setting up
of food processing units and attract investment in the sector.
7. With a view to helping the investors and prospective
entrepreneurs to identify the raw material base in different parts of
the country, the Food Maps have been uploaded on the website of the
Ministry.
8. The Ministry is working with the industry to streamline and
standardize skill development training through the Sector Skill Council
for food processing which has been set up in FICCI. The Sector Skill
Council for food processing i.e. Food Industry Capacity & Skill Initiatives
(FICSI) is working on identification of job roles and competencies
required for each job role so as to develop National Occupational
Standards (NOS) for different sectors of food processing. It will include
generic and domain specific skills and will include all the major sectors
of food processing domain viz.: Fruits and Vegetables, Food Grain Milling
(including Oilseeds), Dairy Products, Meat and Poultry, Fish & Sea Food,
Bread and Bakery and Beverages. As on date, FICSI has developed
38 draft Qualification Packs (QPs) for food processing industry. Based
on NOS and QPs developed by FICSI, course content and training modules
including multi-media content in various languages to meet the training
needs of different functions across identified sectors is being developed
through National Institute of Food Technology Entrepreneurship and
Management (NIFTEM), a deemed university under the Ministry. Skill
development programme has been launched through Sector Skill Council
(FICSI) in 30 Centres across 11 States of the country on 4th September,
2015 and intends to train 50,000 persons during next one year.
[Ministry of Food Processing Industries Letter No. 6-03/2015-Parl.,
dated 05.11.2015]
Recommendation (Serial No. 2)
The Committee note that a developed food processing sector can
help in wastage reduction, value addition, crop diversification, better
returns to farmers, employment generation and increase in exports. It
is also capable of addressing critical issues of food security, food
inflation and providing wholesome and nutritious food to the masses.
In last few years, the sector has grown faster than agriculture and has
emerged as an important segment of the Indian economy in terms of
its contribution to GDP , employment and investment. However , GDP
FPI as a share of GDP in agriculture seems static during last five years
leading to an average of 11%. Similarly, GDP as a share in manufacturing
also remained lacklustre during the same period with an average of 9%.

15
This sector is an employment intensive segment constituting about 13%
of the employment generated in all registered factory sector. The
total number of persons engaged in the registered food processing
sector is 16.89 lakh with an average annual growth of about 2.41%.
Unregistered food processing sector supports employment to 47.9 lakh
workers in the country. This is being a sunrise sector will contribute
immensely in GDP growth and employment generation in future.
However , programmes to increase the output of Indian agriculture
without corresponding investment in processing facilities may lead a
mismatch resulting in rural distress and decline in farmers ’ income.
The single most important step for improving the bargaining capacity
of the farmer is to add value to his produce. This can be achieved only
by producing as per the requirements and standards of the market.
The Committee, therefore, recommend that efforts should be made to
enable the farmers to raise their crops as per the needs of the market
for which flow of market information, technology and inputs to the
farmers should be ensured.
Reply of the Government
Farmers would be enabled to raise their crops as per the needs of
the market, through the food processing units set up in the Mega Food
Parks and units which come up following the expansion of cold chain
infrastructure in the country. As the processing units directly market
processed food, they have the first hand information on the market
requirements, which may be passed on to the farmers who in turn may
produce the processable varieties of a particular crop.
The processing units may also take up contract farming and
disseminate information on the latest technology and inputs to the
farmers for raising the required crops. Many of the States in the
country have amended their APMC Acts to allow contract farming and
the regulations for governing the practice of contract farming have
also been notified by many States. The process of disseminating
information on market access, technology and inputs to the farmers is
being encouraged by the Ministry through its two major infrastructure
development schemes namely Mega Food Park and Cold Chain, Value
Addition and Preservation Infrastructure. These schemes of the Ministry
promote backward integration through setting up Primary Processing
Centres, Collection Centres and Minimal Processing Centres. The
backward integration will help in ensuring direct contact between the
farmers and the processers facilitating smooth flow of market
information, technology and input to the farmers. The Ministry is making
efforts to promote more and more backward linkages for benefit of
farmers.
[Ministry of Food Processing Industries Letter No. 6-03/2015-Parl.,
dated 05.11.2015]

16
C. ADEQUATE ALLOCATION FOR MEGA FOOD PARK SCHEME
Recommendation (Serial No. 6)
The Committee note that total budgetary allocations for Mega
Food Park Scheme during the first four fiscals is only Rs. 442 crore
which is only 25.78 percent of the approved outlay as against total
plan outlay of Rs. 1714.00 crore for XII plan. The Committee also
observe that the Ministry have constantly failed to even utilize available
resources during both XI and XII plans. The Ministry have been able to
utilize only Rs. 217.25 crore as against allocation of Rs. 239.00 crore
(RE) during Eleventh Plan period. Similarly, total actual expenditure
during first three fiscal of XII plan was only Rs. 251 crore as against
allocation of Rs. 267.3 crore (RE). The Committee note with a great
sense of disappointment that the story of the yesteryears has been
repeated by the Planners and the Government in the matter of allocation
of funds to the Ministry during XII Plan so far. The Committee are of
view that adequate allocation for implementation of the scheme will
go a long way towards creation of world class facilities for food
processing industries in the country hereby utilizing optimum potential
of agriculture and allied sectors available in the country. At the same
time, it will also help the Government in poverty eradication measures.
Existence of a vibrant Food Processing industry will also serve the
purpose of earning foreign revenue. The Committee, therefore,
recommend that allocations to the Ministry be enhanced substantially
at the RE stage in the ongoing and next Fiscal so that more number
of Mega Food Parks could be established in coming years.
Reply of the Government
Ministry has taken various steps to improve utilization of the annual
plan allocation. The progress of the projects under various schemes of
the Ministry is being monitored very closely on regular basis. The
recommendation of the Committee has been conveyed to Department
of Expenditure in the Ministry of Finance for enhancing the allocation
to the Ministry at RE stage as well as the annual allocation for the next
year. Ministry is also preparing proposals to expand its programmes for
promotion of food processing sector in the country so that level of
processing may be increased and wastage of agriculture produce may
be reduced in the country.
[Ministry of Food Processing Industries Letter No.6-03/2015-Parl.,
dated 05.11.2015]

17
D. ENCOURAGEMENT OF ESTABLISHMENT OF MEGA FOOD PARKS IN
AGRICULTURALLY IMPORTANT STATES
Recommendation (Serial No. 8)
The Committee note that one of the stated aim of Mega Food Park
Scheme was to create modern infrastructure in the country in order to
bring together farmers, processors and retailers and link agricultural
production to the market so as to ensure maximization of value addition,
minimization of wastages and improving farmers ’ income. However,
the Committee observe that not a single mega food park has been
approved or established in many States such as Uttar Pradesh,
Meghalaya, Nagaland, Sikkim, Arunachal Pradesh, out of approved 40
projects under Mega Food Park scheme. Further , number of approved
projects in many agriculturally important States such as Bihar , Odisha,
West Bengal, Jharkhand, Haryana, Punjab etc. are very low as compared
to potential for establishment of Food Processing Industries. The
Committee are of view that establishment of adequate numbers of
Mega Food Parks in these States will not only reduce agricultural wastage
but also provide sustainable employment opportunity to the local
population thereby reducing poverty level and migration load on major
cities of the country. The Committee, therefore, recommend the Ministry
to focus on these States and take steps to encourage entrepreneurs
from these States to apply for establishment of Mega Food Parks. The
Committee also recommend the Ministry to make provision for providing
free consultancy services to local entrepreneurs for preparation of
detailed project reports.
Reply of the Government
The applications for setting up of Mega Food Parks are invited
through the Expression of Interest (EoI) in accordance with the scheme
guidelines. The EoI Notice is published in the leading news-papers and
uploaded on the Ministry ’s website for the purpose of giving adequate
publicity. The State Governments are also informed about the EoI
invited by the Ministry. The Ministry also organizes prebid meetings
before the last date of submission of the proposal. These efforts are
made by the Ministry to give wide publicity to the EoI notice so that
enough proposals are received from all the States.
This has been the endeavour of the Ministry to set up Mega Food
Parks in as many States as possible. However, it has not been possible
to sanction projects in all the States as the Ministry has been allotted

18
only 42 number of Mega Food Parks to be sanctioned till date in
phased manner. The details of projects sanctioned are as under:—
Phase–I — 10 Projects (September, 2008)
Phase–II — 05 Projects (November , 2010)
Phase–III — 15 Projects (October, 2011)
Phase–IV — 12 Projects (August, 2013)
With this small number of projects in each phase, it was not
possible to cover all the States with sufficient number of Mega Food
Park projects. The number of EoI proposals received is around 12
against one project. In view of the limited number of projects, the
only option with the Ministry was to select the better proposals from
all the applications received in a phase. Further, no proposal was
received from many of the States and hence no projects could be
sanctioned in these States.
Ministry is taking necessary steps to create awareness about the
Mega Food Parks among the entrepreneurs/industry, farmers as well as
the general public through various modes of publicity like, advertisement
in newspapers, through Radio and Doordarshan, participation in domestic
and international exhibitions etc. Ministry also keeps organizing
seminars/workshops for promotion of investment in Mega Food Parks.
Two (2) such workshops were organized during 2014-15 and one (1)
such workshop has been organized so far during 2015-16.
[Ministry of Food Processing Industries Letter No.6-03/2015-Parl.,
dated 05.11.2015]
E. PROVISION FOR TRAINING
Recommendation (Serial No. 9)
The Committee note that apart from ensuring value addition of
agricultural commodities including poultry, meat, dairy, fisheries etc.,
the Mega Food Park scheme was also expected to provide employment
opportunities for the local people including small and marginal farmers
and landless labourers. The Committee are of view that this objective
cannot be achieved unless there are adequate efforts for providing
requisite training to local people. The Committee note that there is
provision in the scheme for creation of training Centre in Non-Core
Infrastructure component for capacity building and skill development
and promoters of Mega Food Parks are also providing training to the
farmers in modern techniques of agriculture production and establishing
backward linkages for raw material. However , the Committee have not
been provided any details regarding training such as nature, number
of training institutes established and number of peoples trained so far

19
by operational Mega Food Park operators. The Committee, therefore,
desire the Department to furnish details of training being provided to
the local population within a month of presentation of Report. The
Committee also recommend the Department to make provision for
proper training for Food Processing Sectors under National Skill Mission
so that qualified manpower may be made available to the all operational
and planned Mega Food Parks.
Reply of the Government
The Sector Skill Council for Food Processing (FICSI) is working on
identification of job roles and competencies required for each job role
so as to develop National Occupational Standards (NOS) for different
sectors of food processing. The scope of this work is to determine
what skills are required in different parts of our country with respect
to food processing activities being undertaken. It will include generic
and domain specific skills in all the major sectors of food processing
domain viz.; Fruits and Vegetables; Food Grain Milling (including
Oilseeds); Dairy Products; Meat and Poultry; Fish & Sea Food; Bread
and Bakery; Beverages etc.
FICSI has developed 38 qualification packs in food processing
industry. Based on NOS developed by FICSI, NIFTEM is developing course
content and training module including multi-media content in various
languages to meet the training needs of different job roles across
identified sectors. The skill development programme has been launched
in 30 training centres across 11 States in the Bakery Sector on
04.09.2015. Skill development in other food processing sectors will
also start soon. A target of skilling 50,000 persons in a year and
2.5 lakh persons in the next 5 years, in food processing sector , has
been fixed. Efforts will be made to utilize the training infrastructure
of Mega Food Park projects also for this purpose.
[Ministry of Food Processing Industries Letter No.6-03/2015-Parl.,
dated 05.11.2015]
Comments of the Committee
For comments of the Committee please refer to Para No. 1.16 of
Chapter I of this Report.
F. COORDINATION AND MONITORING MECHANISM
Recommendation (Serial No. 10)
The Committee note that the guidelines for ‘Mega Food Park
Scheme’ were issued on 24.08.2008. These were subsequently revised
in the year 2009, 2011 and 2012. Based on the experience on

20
implementation, these have been modified as and when required and
the consolidated revised Mega Food Parks Scheme guidelines have been
uploaded on the website of the Ministry. Despite guidelines being broad-
based, the progress of the project implementation are not at the
desired pace and these have been further modified in the year 2014.
The last modifications revolve around implementation of the scheme
by an SPV wherein Anchor Investor in the SPV with majority stake will
be required to set up at least one food processing unit in the park with
an investment of not less than Rs. 10 crore. The time schedule for
completion and operationalisation of the Project has also been increased
to 30 months beginning from the date of the release of first instalment
and the release of the grant instalment is linked with specific milestone.
The Committee note that there have been a series of additions/
alterations/modifications in the guidelines of Mega Food Park Scheme.
In spite of all these efforts, the Scheme is yet to deliver the desired
results not to say about the pace of the result. This raises serious
issues about the efficacy and practicality of the scheme. The
involvement of multiple agencies and stages with varied and diverse
linkages tend to result in the delay, but it cannot be allowed to be an
inordinate one. Some policy intervention will have to be made to
ensure that unreasonable delay in the process of implementation is
done away with. Avenues should be explored to fix the time limit and
also a single window approach for this purpose. Committee, therefore,
strongly recommend that for making the Scheme a reality covering the
wide range of intended beneficiaries, the scheme requires a revisit so
as to formulate the appropriate and sector friendly guidelines keeping
in view the interest of all the stakeholders and all the logistical
requirements.
Reply of the Government
Based on the experience of implementation, the Scheme Guidelines
have been modified from time to time to ensure speedy implementation
of the projects. These modifications are also based on stakeholders
feedbacks received through various consultations/interactions. The
structure of the SPV has been further simplified and State entities
have also been allowed to implement Mega Food Park projects. The
guidelines of the scheme have been further modified recently by
incorporating the provisions for levy of penalty on the SPV in case of
delay in the implementation of project beyond stipulated timelines.
The Ministry will continue to endeavour to facilitate speedier
implementation of the Mega Food Park projects and simplify the
procedure to improve performance of the Scheme.
[Ministry of Food Processing Industries Letter No.6-01/2014-Parl.,
dated 18.03.2015]

21
CHAPTER III
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO NOT
DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE GOVERNMENT ’S REPLIES
Recommendation (Serial No. 5)
Indian Society especially farmers possess diverse knowledge
regarding food quality and it is imperative that their knowledge be
utilized for enhancing income potential for them. It has been observed
by the Committee that stress in Mega Food Park Scheme has so far
been on establishment of modern infrastructure facilities. The Ministry
have not made any efforts for encouraging farmers or entrepreneurs
to establish food processing industry based upon utilization of local
agricultural produce and traditional knowledge about food. The
Committee, therefore recommend the Ministry to take steps in this
direction and devise ways to establish food processing industries based
on local raw materials and traditional knowledge.
Reply of the Government
The concept of Mega Food Parks Scheme envisages a cluster based
approach based on hub and spoke Model comprising of farm proximate
facilities such as Collection Centres, Primary Processing Centres (PPCs)
and a Central Processing Centres (CPCs). The common facilities are
used by Food Processing Units set up in the CPC. It is expected that
on an average each Mega Food Park will have around 30 to 35 food
processing units. The Mega Food Parks also have provision for Standard
Design Factory Shed (SDF) having plug and play facility. The SDF facility
is best suited to micro and small entrepreneurs willing to upscale their
business using traditional knowledge of food processing. The Ministry
was also implementing the Scheme of Technology Upgradation/
Modernization/Setting up of new Food Processing Units as one of the
components of National Mission on Food Processing (NMFP). Under this
Scheme, the entrepreneur including farmer were eligible to avail
financial assistance to set up their Food Processing Units. However , the
NMFP has been delinked from the Central Support w.e.f. April, 2015
and presently there is no scheme with the Ministry to promote food
processing units by the entrepreneur including farmer. The Government
has created a special fund of Rs. 2000 crore with NABARD to provide
affordable credit to the entrepreneur to set up food processing units
in the designated food parks. Ministry has designated 146 Food Parks

22
for this purpose in various States. Ministry is also holding seminars/
workshops in various parts of the country to create awareness for
increasing investment in food processing sector. Under a separate
scheme, R&D initiatives are being funded to develop product and process
for mass production of traditional food products being made on locally
available raw material.
[Ministry of Food Processing Industries Letter No. 6-01/2014-Parl.,
dated 18.03.2015]

23
CHAPTER IV
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF
THE GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE
A. INCENTIVES TO THE FARMERS
Recommendation (Serial No. 3)
The Committee note that ‘Mega Food Park Scheme’ was introduced
to cater to the need of proper preservation and conservation of agro-
products with a view to ensure multi-dimensional agricultural
infrastructure development. The Scheme envisages a well defined agri/
horticultural processing zone containing state-of-the art processing
facilities with support infrastructure and well established Supply chain
aims to create a modern food processing infrastructure for the small
and medium processing units which otherwise have not been able to
develop due to capital intensive nature of food processing equipment.
It intends to facilitate establishment of an integrated value chain,
with food processing at the core and supported by requisite forward
and backward linkages. The broader idea behind the scheme is to
bring farmers, processors and retailers together and link agriculture
production to the market so as to ensure maximization of value addition,
minimization of wastages and improving farmers ’ income. The concept
of ‘Mega Food Park Scheme’ envisages a cluster approach based on hub
and spoke Model comprising of farm promixate facilities such as
collection Centres, Primary Processing Centres (PPCs) and a Central
Processing Centres (CPCs). The Committee appreciate the scheme for
its farmers centric approach. However, it is observed that the
beneficiaries of the scheme are not the farmers to the intended degrees.
It is the industrialists and other entrepreneurs who are benefited the
most by the various incentives available under the scheme. It is not
sure whether the produce of the farmers for these industries are taken
on prescribed rates uniformly. The Committee, therefore, recommend
that some mechanism should be evolved to ensure that the produce of
the farmers are taken by the processing industries at the prescribed
prices and the incentives of the scheme should also be passed on to
the farmers or some percentage of the profits should be earmarked to
the farmers whose produce were taken by the processing industries.
Reply of the Government
The end objective of the scheme of Mega Food Parks is to minimize
the wastage of agricultural produce, particularly perishables, by

24
increasing levels of value addition. The grant is provided by the Ministry
to the SPV for the purpose of creating food processing infrastructure
for utilization by the food processing units set up in the Park for
storage and value addition of the agricultural produce.
Farmers are benefited by the scheme either directly or indirectly.
Farmers are one of the direct beneficiaries if they are part of the SPV,
which implement, own and operate the projects. Indirectly, value
addition and reduction in wastage of agricultural produce results in
increase of the farmers ’ income. The processing units, which have
been setup in these parks, are procuring agricultural produce as raw
material for processing. The sourcing of raw material from the farmers,
including small and marginal farmers, is helping them in getting better
prices for their produce. They may also avail sorting, grading and
storage facilities for their produce. These projects are helping in
reducing wastages of perishable commodities in the catchment area.
An impact assessment of scheme, recently conducted by Indian
Council for Research on International Economic Relations (ICRIER),
New Delhi, revealed that the promoters of functional Mega Food Parks
are providing training to the farmers in modern techniques of agriculture
production, establishing backward linkage for raw material and providing
better price of their produce. Such initiative would certainly result in
better return to the farmers.
The Scheme is private sector driven and the projects are based on
the sound commercial decision of the investor based on economic
viability. The Government is only providing financial assistance partly
to make them viable so that adequate investment may be attracted in
this area to enhance the level of food processing in the country. It is
impractical to expect from private investor to earmark certain
percentage of the profit for the farmers. However, it is expected that
with a large number of food processing units being set up in the Parks,
there will be increased demand of the agricultural produce in the
catchment areas as raw material which will benefit farmers.
[Ministry of Food Processing Industries Letter No. 6-01/2014-Parl.,
dated 18.03.2015]
Comments of the Committee
For comments of the Committee please refer to Para No. 1.7 of
Chapter I of this Report.

25
Recommendation (Serial No. 4)
The Committee note that the purpose of Mega Food Parks Scheme
is to have access to the agricultural and other farm related produces
to minimize their wastage, ensuring value addition and also bringing
farmers of the area into its fold by making available a platform to
them wherein they can get good returns of their produces. However,
it can be observed that the objective for which this scheme is launched
is yet to be achieved and the desired benefits are not accruing to the
category of beneficiaries whom they were intended to. The cumbersome
procedural delays, involvement of multiple agencies and requirement
of huge finances make the entire process unattractive to farmers,
primarily for whom the scheme has launched. The focus of the scheme
has been diverted from farmers to entrepreneurs and resultantly farmers
have been reduced to mere suppliers of their produces without any
bargaining capacity. The Committee believe that this is not the objective
of the scheme wherein, the farmers are not given the level playing
field. It would be prudent for the scheme and beneficial for the farmers
if local farmers are given the due priority in the scheme of things. For
the purpose, the scheme can be modified/re-launched on local basis.
It can be microcosm of the Mega Food Parks Scheme involving the
farmers of specific areas with the provision of generation of funds in
a self-help manner. The grants as deemed appropriate can also be
given as are available to the Mega Scheme. The farmers can be given
initial training in the processing of their produces. Local markets or
purchase arrangements for such produces of the farmers can be made
by the suitable indulgence. This will go a long way in making the
farmers self-reliant with regard to their produces and its returns. It
will also provide an opportunity for experimenting the innovative
methods into their farming. The Committee, therefore, recommend
that a proper strategy be devised to enlist the farmers for forging into
local self-help groups or cooperatives for the purpose of using their
produce into processing sector by themselves, thus minimizing the
possibility of better returns of their efforts while simultaneously
minimizing the risk of their exploitation.
Reply of the Government
Objectives of the scheme are likely to be achieved with the
completion of all the Mega Food Parks. As on date, 5 Mega Food Parks
have been operationalized. Many processing units have been set up in
these Parks which are utilizing the agricultural produce as their raw
materials and thereby generating employment and enhancing the
farmers ’ income in their respective catchment areas. An impact

26
assessment of the Scheme has recently been conducted by the Ministry
through an independent institute  i.e.  Indian Council for Research on
International Economic Relations (ICRIER), New Delhi and their findings
indicate that there has been a significant impact in catchment area of
the operational Mega Food Parks in general and farmers in particular.
Though, the increase in farmers income is one of the intended out-
come of the scheme of Mega Food Parks, the basic objective and focus
of the scheme is to minimize wastage of the agricultural produce. This
value addition and reduction in wastage of agricultural produce will
result in increase of the farmer ’s income. As brought out earlier, the
farmers, individually or in groups, may also take part in Mega Food
Park as one of the shareholders of the SPV implementing the project.
Under the Mega Food Park Scheme, individual farmer , farmers/producer
group, cooperative societies are eligible to participate in the projects.
However , Mega Food Parks projects are infrastructural project with
long gestation period and require sizeable investment as equity and
term loan from banks. The farmers with reasonable surplus income can
only participate in the projects and that too at small level. The Ministry
has been encouraging participation of farmers in the projects but
without much success. The running of these projects also requires high
management skill and adequate working capital. The Indian farmers
being mostly small and marginal, do not have enough surplus income
for investment in such a venture. However, in some of the projects
under implementation, farmers are part of SPV either in individual
capacity or as self-help groups.
The Ministry is endeavoring to promote strong backward linkage of
the food processing units with farmers to take advantage of these
emerging food processing clusters. Small Farmers Agri-Business
Consortium (SFAC) under the Ministry of Agriculture and Farmers Welfare
is also organizing farmers producers groups to enhance their bargaining
power with the market forces.
The Ministry will take up the matter with the concerned Ministries
of the Government of India like, Ministry of Agriculture and Farmers
Welfare, Ministry of Rural Development, Ministry of Tribal Affairs and
State Governments for devising a proper strategy to enlist the farmers
for forging into local SHG or Cooperatives and empower them in better
bargaining of the prices of their raw material and their enhanced
participation in the Mega Food Parks.
[Ministry of Food Processing Industries Letter No. 6-03/2015-Parl.,
dated 05.11.2015]

27
Comments of the Committee
For comments of the Committee please refer to Para No. 1.10 of
Chapter I of this Report.
B. SLOW PACE OF IMPLEMENTATION OF SCHEME
Recommendation (Serial No. 7)
The Committee note that the scheme of Mega Food Park (MFP) was
conceived to provide a mechanism for bringing together farmers,
processors, retailers, linking agricultural production to the market, so
as ensure maximum value addition, minimize wastage, increase farmers’
income and create employment opportunities. However , the Committee
note that the Ministry have so far approved setting up of 40 Mega Food
Parks in various States of the country. Out of 40 projects approved by
the Ministry so far, 21 projects have been accorded final approval and
19 projects have been accorded in-principle approval. The Committee
have also been informed that out of 21 projects which were accorded
final approval 5 projects are partially operational and 2 projects will
be operational during 2015-16 and 14 projects are expected to be
operational in 2016-17. The Committee further note that out of the 19
projects accorded In-Principal approval, 15 projects have been given
approval only on 31.03.2015 and Ministry was restrained to issue
In-principal approval to the remaining two projects by the Hon ’ble
High Court of Delhi on 30.04.2015. The Committee are disappointed to
note very slow progress in implementation of Mega Food Parks Scheme
launched in the year 2008. After lapse of seven years, only five Mega
Food Parks, as against 40 sanctioned, have been partially operational.
The Committee are not convinced with the assertion of the Government
that reasons such as delay in acquisition of at least 50 acres of
contiguous land, complex and time taking procedures of obtaining
various types of statutory clearances from the State Government
Departments/Agencies, inability of Public Sector Undertakings to take
a lead role in execution of the project even in the situation of crisis,
lack of cohesiveness amongst the promoters and difficulties/delays in
obtaining term loan sanction from Banks are responsible for delay and
poor physical performance. The Committee are of view that the
proactive steps taken by the Ministry in consultation with State
Government may reduce time lags caused such as problems related to
statutory clearance, land acquisition etc. The Committee, therefore,
recommend the Department to convince State Governments to establish
single window clearance for Mega Food Park scheme so as to enable
statutory clearance by the Departments/Agencies concerned. The
Committee also recommend the Department to speed up the process
of decision taking at the Ministry level to expedite clearance for
submitted proposals.

28
Reply of the Government
Ministry has been taking up the matter of reduction in time lags
caused due to delay in grant of statutory clearances, acquisition of
land etc. with the concerned State Governments from time to time to
facilitate the speedy implementation of the Mega Food Park projects.
Ministry has also been impressing upon the State Governments to
institute a single window clearance system for Mega Food Parks. Some
of the State Governments have taken initiative in this regard but
desired results in actual sense are yet to be achieved. The Ministry will
continue to pursue this matter with the State Governments vigorously.
Ministry has also requested the State Governments to constitute a
Co-ordination Committee under the chairmanship of District Collector
at the District level, where Mega Food Parks are situated, for speedy
settlement of the issues which may arise during the project
implementation. A similar Coordination Committee has also been
requested at the State level. The State Government are being associated
with the process of the selection of the project by the Ministry. The
concerned States are represented in the meeting of Technical Committee
and Inter-Ministerial Approval Committee constituted under the scheme
for selection of projects.
Selection of the Mega Food Park projects is made by observing a
thorough and transparent procedure. Proposals for setting up Mega
Food Parks are received against Expression of Interest (EoI) widely
published through print and electronic media and pre-bid meetings
etc. Appraisal of the proposals received, is made through a stringent
three-tier structure consisting of Programme Management Agency,
Technical Committee and Inter-Ministerial Approval Committee. For
redressal of the grievances of the applicants whose proposals have
been found in-eligible, a Committee of Independent Monitors (CIM),
with retired officers of the level of Secretary, Government of India as
members, has been constituted. The applicants making the
representation to the CIM, are also provided opportunity to be heard
in person before making the recommendation on this representation.
It has been the endeavour of the Ministry to complete the process of
selection of the projects in the shortest possible time in a transparent
manner.
[Ministry of Food Processing Industries Letter No. 6-03/2015-Parl.,
dated 05.11.2015]
Comments of the Committee
For comments of the Committee please refer to Para No. 1.13 of
Chapter I of this Report.

29
CHAPTER V
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH FINAL
REPLIES OF GOVERNMENT ARE STILL AWAITED
-NIL-
   N EW D ELHI; HUKM DEO NARAYAN YADAV,
09 August, 2016 Chairperson,
18 Shravana, 1938 (Saka) Standing Committee on Agriculture.

30
ANNEXURE
STANDING COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE
(2015-16)
MINUTES OF THE TWENTY NINTH SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE
The Committee sat on Monday, the 08th August, 2016 from
1000 hrs. to 1100 hrs. in Room No. ‘138’, Chairperson ’s Chamber,
Parliament House, New Delhi.
PRESENT
Shri Hukm Deo Narayan Yadav —  Chairperson
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Sanganna Karadi
3. Shri Nalin Kumar Kateel
4. Smt. Raksha Nikhil Khadse
5. Shri C. Mahendran
6. Shri Janardan Mishra
7. Shri Ajay Nishad
8. Shri Mukesh Rajput
9. Shri Konakalla Narayana Rao
10. Shri Satyapal Singh (Sambhal)
11. Shri Virendra Singh
Rajya Sabha
12. Shrimati Renuka Chowdhury
13. Shri Janardan Dwivedi
14. Shri Meghraj Jain
15. Shri Mohd. Ali Khan
16. Shri Ram Nath Thakur
17. Shri Shankarbhai N. Vegad

31
SECRETARIAT
1. Shri U.B.S. Negi — Joint Secretary
2. Shri Arun K. Kaushik — Director
3. Smt. Juby Amar — Additional Director
4. Shri C. Vanlalruata — Deputy Secretary
5. Shri Sumesh Kumar — Under Secretary
2. At the outset, the Chairperson welcomed the members to the
Sitting of the Committee. The Committee, then, took up the following
draft Reports for consideration:—
(i) Twenty Seventh Report on the Action Taken by the
Government on the Observations/Recommendations contained
in the Sixteenth Report on the Subject “Mega Food Parks” of
the Ministry of Food Processing Industries;
*(ii) **** **** **** **** **** ;
*(iii) **** **** **** **** **** ;
*(iv) **** **** **** **** **** ;
3. After some deliberations, the Committee adopted the draft
Reports without any modification and authorized the Chairperson to
finalise the Reports on the basis of factual verification from the
concerned Ministry/Department and present the same to Parliament.
The Committee then adjourned.
*Matter not related to this Report.

32
APPENDIX
(Vide Para 4 of Introduction of the Report)
ANALYSIS OF ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE OBSERVATIONS/
RECOMMENDATIONS CONTAINED IN THE SIXTEENTH REPORT
(16th LOK SABHA) OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE
ON AGRICULTURE (2014-15)
(i) Total number of Recommendations 10
(ii) Recommendations/Observations which have been
Accepted by the Government:
Recommendation Nos. 1, 2, 6, 8, 9 and 10
Total 06
Percentage 60%
(iii) Recommendations/Observations which the Committee
do not desire to pursue in view of the Government ’s
replies:
Recommendation No. 5
Total 01
Percentage 10%
(iv) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which
replies of the Government have not been accepted
by the Committee:
Recommendation Nos. 3, 4 and 7
Total 03
Percentage 30.00%
(v) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which
Final replies of the Government are still awaited:
         N I L
Total NIL
Percentage NIL