54
STANDING COMMITTEE ON
AGRICULTURE
(2017-2018)
SIXTEENTH LOK SABHA
MINISTRY OF AGRICULTURE AND FARMERS WELFARE
(DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURAL RESEARCH AND EDUCATION)
ÒImpact of Chemical Fertilizers and Pesticides on Agriculture and
Allied Sectors in the CountryÓ
[Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/
Recommendations contained in the Twenty Ninth Report
(Sixteenth Lok Sabha) of the Standing Committee on
Agriculture (2015-2016)]
FIFTY FOURTH REPORT
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
August, 2018/Shravana, 1940 ( Saka)


FIFTY FOURTH REPORT
STANDING COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE
(2017-2018)
(SIXTEENTH LOK SABHA)
MINISTRY OF AGRICULTURE AND FARMERS WELFARE
(DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURAL RESEARCH AND EDUCATION)
ÒImpact of Chemical Fertilizers and Pesticides on Agriculture and
Allied Sectors in the CountryÓ
[Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/
Recommendations contained in the Twenty Ninth Report
(Sixteenth Lok Sabha) of the Standing Committee on
Agriculture (2015-2016)]
Presented to Lok Sabha on 03.08.2018
Laid on the Table of Rajya Sabha on 03.08.2018
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
August, 2018/Shravana, 1940 ( Saka)


COA No. 376
Price : R 104.00
' 2018 B Y L OK SABHA S ECRETARIAT
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct
of Business in Lok Sabha (Fifteenth Edition) and printed by
Aegean Offset Printers, New Delhi.

CONTENTS
PAGE
COMPOSITION OF THE C OMMITTEE ............................................. (iii)
INTRODUCTION ................................................................. (v)
CHAPTER I Report ......................................................... 1
CHAPTER II Observations/Recommendations which have been
accepted by the Government ............................ 19
CHAPTER III Observations/Recommendations which the Committee
do not desire to pursue in view of the GovernmentÕs
replies......................................................... 51
CHAPTER IV Observations/Recommendations in respect of which
replies of the Government have not been accepted
by the Committee .......................................... 52
CHAPTER V Observations/Recommendations in respect of which
final replies of the Government are still awaited... 59
ANNEXURES
I. State-wise Bio-fertilizer production units and their
capacity ............................................................ 62
II. State-wise details of different bio-fertilizers produced/
available (lakh MT) in different States during last three
years ................................................................ 64
III. Promoting use of Organic/bio-fertilizer ..................... 66
IV . Minutes of 371st Meeting of Registration Committee .... 68
V . Extracts of the Minutes of the 25th Sitting of the
Committee held on 03.08.2017 ............................... 71
VI. Extracts of the Minutes of the 27th Sitting of the
Committee held on 31.07.2018 ............................... 74
APPENDIX
Analysis of Action Taken by the Government on the
Recommendations contained in the Twenty Ninth Report
(Sixteenth Lok Sabha) of the Standing Committee on
Agriculture (2015-2016) ......................................... 76
(i)

COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE
(2017-2018)
Shri Hukmdev Narayan Yadav — Chairperson
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Sanjay Dhotre
3. Prof. Ravindra Vishwanath Gaikwad
4. Shri Sanganna Amarappa Karadi
5. Shri Nalin Kumar Kateel
6. Smt. Raksha Tai Khadase
7. Md. Badaruddoza Khan
8. Shri C. Mahendran
9. Dr. Tapas Mandal
10. Shri Janardan Mishra
11. Shri Praveen Kumar Nishad
12. Shri Devji M. Patel
13. Shri Nityanand Rai
14. Shri Mukesh Rajput
15. Shri Konakalla Narayana Rao
16. Shri C.L. Ruala
17. Shri Arjun Charan Sethi
18. Shri Virendra Singh
19. Shri Dharmendra Yadav
20. Shri Jai Prakash Narayan Yadav
#21. Vacant
Rajya Sabha
22. Sardar Sukhdev Singh Dhindsa
23. Shri Rajmani Patel
24. Shri Narayan Rane
(iii)
#Vacant due to resignation of Shri B.S. Yeddyurappa from the Membership of Lok Sabha
w.e.f. 18.05.2018 vide Bulletin Part-II Table Office (B) No. 6885 dated 19.05.2018.

25. Shri Kailash Soni
26. Shri Mohd. Ali Khan
27. Shri K.K. Ragesh
28. Shri Ram Nath Thakur
29. Shri R. Vaithilingam
30. Shri Harnath Singh Yadav
31. Dr. Chandrapal Singh Yadav
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Shri D.S. Malha Ñ Joint Secretary
2. Shri Arun K. Kaushik Ñ Director
3. Shri Sumesh Kumar Ñ Under Secretary
(iv)

(v)
INTRODUCTION
I, the Chairperson, Standing Committee on Agriculture (2017-18),
having been authorized by the Committee to submit the Report on their
behalf, present this Fifty Fourth Report on action taken by the
Government on the Observations/Recommendations contained in the
Twenty Ninth Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) of the Standing Committee
on Agriculture (2015-16) on the Subject ÒImpact of Chemical Fertilizers
and Pesticides on Agriculture and Allied Sectors in the CountryÓ pertaining
to the Ministry of Agriculture and Farmers Welfare (Department of
Agricultural Research and Education).
2. The Twenty Ninth Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) of the Standing
Committee on Agriculture (2015-16) on the Subject ÒImpact of Chemical
Fertilizers and Pesticides on Agriculture and Allied Sectors in the CountryÓ
pertaining to Ministry of Agriculture and Farmers Welfare (Department
of Agricultural Research and Education) was presented to Lok Sabha
and laid on the Table of Rajya Sabha on 11.08.2016. The Action Taken
Notes on the Report were received on 08.03.2017. The Committee took
the evidence of the representatives of the Ministry of Agriculture and
Farmers Welfare (Department of Agriculture, Cooperation and Farmers
Welfare and Department of Agricultural Research and Education) and
Ministry of Chemicals and Fertilizers (Department of Chemicals and
Petrochemicals and Department of Fertilizers) on the observations/
recommendations contained in the Report.
3. The Report was considered and adopted by the Committee at
their Sitting held on 31.07.2018.
4. An analysis of the action taken by the Government on the
Observations/Recommendations contained in the Twenty Ninth Report
(Sixteenth Lok Sabha) of the Committee is given in Appendix.
   N
EW D ELHI; HUKMDEV NARAYAN YADAV,
03 August, 2018 Chairperson,
11 Shravana, 1940 (Saka) Standing Committee on Agriculture.

1
CHAPTER I
REPORT
This Report of the Committee on Agriculture deals with the action
taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations
contained in the T wenty-Ninth Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) of the
Committee on Agriculture (2015-2016) on Impact of Chemical Fertilizers
and Pesticides on Agriculture and Allied Sectors in the Country pertaining
to Ministry of Agriculture (Department of Agricultural Research and
Education) which was presented to Lok Sabha and laid on the Table of
Rajya Sabha on 11.08.2016.
1.2 The Ministry of Agriculture and Farmers Welfare (Department of
Agricultural Research & Education) have furnished Action Taken Replies
in respect of all the 15 Observations/Recommendations contained in
the Report. These replies have been categorized as under:
(i) Observations/Recommendations that have been accepted by
the Government:
Recommendation Serial Nos. 1, 2, 3, 4, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13
and 15
Total 11
Chapter-II
(ii) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which the
Committee do not desire to pursue in view of the
GovernmentÕs reply:
Recommendation Serial No. NIL
Total 00
Chapter-III
(iii) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which action
taken replies of the Government have not been accepted by
the Committee:
Recommendation Serial Nos. 5, 7 and 14
Total 03
Chapter-IV
(iv) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which final
replies of the Government are still awaited:
Recommendation Serial No. 6
Total 01
Chapter-V

2
1.3 The Committee trust that utmost importance would be given
to implementation of the Observations/Recommendations accepted
by the Government. In cases, where it is not possible for the
Department to implement the Recommendations in letter and spirit,
the matter should be reported to the Committee with reasons for
non-implementation. The Committee desire that further Action Taken
Notes on the Observations/Recommendations contained in
Chapter-I and final Action Taken Replies to the Recommendations
contained in Chapter-V of this Report be furnished to them at an
early date.
1.4 The Committee will now deal with the action taken by the
Government on some of the Recommendations in the succeeding
paragraphs.
A. Decline In Agricultural Growth
Recommendation (Serial No. 2)
1.5 The Committee had observed/recommended as under:Ñ
ÒThe Committee note that the country will require to enhance the
foodgrains production to the level of 300 MT by 2025 to feed its
teeming millions. However , the Committee are distressed to note
that the pace of agricultural growth rate is slowly decreasing. The
Committee observe that decadal rate of growth of agriculture since
beginning of green revolution has decreased significantly from a
high of 8.37% during 1960-70 to a low of 1.44% during 1990-2000.
The rate of agriculture growth has been 2.61% during 2000-2010.
The Committee further observe that rate of agriculture growth in
important States like Punjab, Haryana, Uttar Pradesh, Madhya
Pradesh, Gujarat, Bihar and Maharashtra has decreased significantly
during the last decade. The Committee also note that country
failed to achieve the agriculture growth rate of 4% which was set
during 12th Plan. The Committee are of the view that strategy of
over-reliance on chemical fertilizers adopted during green revolution
period needs reorientation keeping in view of stagnant agricultural
growth in important States.The Committee, therefore, recommend
the Department to analyze the strategy of agricultural growth in
country and prepare a detailed plan to reinvigorate the sector in
the country.Ó
1.6 The Department of Agricultural Research and Education in the
Action Taken Reply has stated as under:Ñ
ÒThe issue on agricultural growth in country involved wider
consultation with various departments and hence, it is deliberated
through various Working Groups constituted to formulize appropriate
strategies.Ó

3
1.7 The Department of Agriculture, Cooperation and Farmers Welfare
in the Action Taken Reply has stated as under:Ñ
ÒJudicious use of fertilizers by farmers based on soil test based
recommendations has been encouraged under the scheme of Soil
Health Management in the Country.
A scheme on organic farming has been implemented in the Country
since 2015-16 to reduce over dependence on chemical fertilizers
and promote natural farming. Ó
1.8 While showing their concern over declining rate of agricultural
growth in the Country, the Committee had opined that strategy of
over-reliance on chemical fertilizers adopted during green revolution
period needs reorientation keeping in view of stagnant agricultural
growth in important States and recommended the Department to
analyze the strategy of agricultural growth in country and prepare
a detailed plan to reinvigorate the sector in the country. The
Department of Agricultural Research and Education (DARE) in their
Action Taken Reply has submitted that issue on agricultural growth
in country involved wider consultation with various departments and
hence, it is deliberated through various Working Groups constituted
to formulize appropriate strategies. Whereas Department of
Agriculture, Cooperation and Farmers Welfare (DAC&FW) has informed
about promotion of judicious use of fertilizers by farmers based on
soil test under the scheme of Soil Health Management in the Country
and implementation of organic farming in the Country since
2015-16 to reduce over dependence on chemical fertilizers and
promote natural farming. The Committee are of view that piecemeal
efforts will not help to promote organic farming or reduce dependency
on chemical fertilizers for achieving the required foodgrains to feed
the ever increasing population of the Country in future. The
Committee are of view that there is need for comprehensive review
of strategy for agriculture growth in the country and to promote
balanced growth of agriculture based on judicious use of chemical
fertilizers as well as organic manure. There is need to formulate
region specific strategy to reduce dependency on chemical fertilizers.
Further, there is need to provide technical and financial assistance
to the farmers in order to promote organic farming. The Committee,
therefore, once again reiterate their earlier recommendation and
desire the Government to analyze the strategy of agricultural growth
in country and prepare a detailed plan to reinvigorate the sector in
the country.

4
B. Integrated Nutrient Management
Recommendation (Serial No. 5)
1.9 The Committee had observed/recommended as under:Ñ
ÒThe Committee note that Integrated Nutrient Management (INM)
adopted from Tenth Plan envisages conjunctive use of chemical
fertilizers including secondary and micronutrient, organic manure,
composts/vermin-compost, bio-fertilizers and green manures. ICAR
has generated GIS based soil fertility maps, nutrient management
packages, developed strains of Nitrogen fixer for production of
quality biofertilizers, standardized technologies for preparation of
urban/rural compost, green manuring and crop residue recycling
which can be effectively utilized by the farmers of the country to
improve soil health and augment agricultural production and
productivity. ICAR has also developed conservation technologies like
fertigation, zero tillage, bed planting, laser land levelling and leaf
colour chart to save costly fertilizers. According to ICAR, workshops
and training programmes are being organized to educate farmers
on these aspects. However , the Committee are concerned to note
that objectives as outlined in Integrated Nutrient Management could
not be achieved by the Government which is amply exemplified by
imbalanced use of fertilizers in terms of NPK, incidents of soil
degradation in green revolution area like Haryana and Punjab and
extreme lack of micronutrient in majority of Indian soils. The
Committee also note that lack of effective extension services to
the farmers as brought out in previous reports of the Committee is
a limiting factor to achieve the aims of Integrated Nutrient
Management. The Committee are of the view that unless a robust
agriculture extension system is established in the country with special
emphasis on training of farmers about good agricultural practices,
provision of essential agricultural inputs and dissemination of
technologies, bio-fertilizers etc. developed by agricultural
institutions, it would be difficult to secure our environment without
jeopardizing agricultural productivity. The Committee, therefore,
recommend the Government to plan an effective agricultural
extension services in the entire country. The Committee also desire
that the Government may initiate discussion on the issue with all
State Governments, agricultural research institutions, NGOs active
in the field of agriculture and experts at National and International
level so that steps may be taken to achieve the objective of
Integrated Nutrient Management well before environmental
degradation reached at a point of no return. Ó

5
1.10 The Department of Agricultural Research and Education in the
Action Taken Reply has stated as under:Ñ
ÒThe Government under the component of soil health management
of National Mission on Sustainable Agriculture (NMSA) is promoting
soil test based balanced and integrated nutrient management in
the country through setting up/strengthening of soil testing
laboratories, establishment of bio†fertilizer and compost unit, use
of micronutrients, trainings and demonstrations. Under the Soil
Health Management Scheme, Trainings for farmers & field
demonstrations on judicious use of fertilizers are conducted.
Awareness campaign through Print and visual media are carried
out. Media plan to publicise Soil Health Card has been finalized.
Krishi Vigyan KendraÕs are also being equipped with soil testing kit
developed by Indian Institute of Soil Science, Bhopal to ensure soil
test based balanced and integrated nutrient management. Ó
1.11 The Department of Agriculture, Cooperation and Farmers
Welfare in the Action Taken Reply has stated as under:Ñ
ÒThe Government is promoting soil test based balanced and
integrated nutrient management in the Country under the component
of soil health management of National Mission on Sustainable
Agriculture (NMSA). Farmers have been provided recommendations
on balanced nutrient use based on soil fertility results of the fields.
Training to farmers, demonstrations on judicious use of fertilizers
are also part of the scheme. Widespread awareness campaign through
print band visual media has been done. Ó
1.12 While showing their concern over imbalanced use of
fertilizers in terms of NPK (Nitrogen, Phosphorous, Potash), incidents
of soil degradation in green revolution area like Haryana and Punjab
and extreme lack of micronutrient in majority of Indian soils despite
implementation of Integrated Nutrient Management scheme, the
Committee had stressed on the need of a robust Agriculture Extension
System with special emphasis on training of farmers about good
agricultural practices, provision of essential agricultural inputs and
dissemination of technologies, bio-fertilizers etc. developed by
agricultural institutions. The Committee had, recommended the
Government to plan an effective agricultural extension services in
the entire country in consultation with State Governments,
agricultural research institutions, NGOs active in the field of
agriculture and experts at National and International level so that
steps may be taken to achieve the objective of Integrated Nutrient
Management well before environmental degradation reached at a
point of no return.

6
The (Department of Agricultural Research and Education) DARE
and Department of Agriculture, Cooperation and Farmers Welfare
(DAC&FW) in their Action Taken Reply has submitted that soil health
management component of National Mission on Sustainable Agriculture
(NMSA) is promoting soil test based balanced and integrated nutrient
management in the country through setting up/strengthening of soil
testing laboratories, establishment of bio-fertilizer and compost unit,
use of micronutrients, trainings and demonstrations. The Committee
were also informed about Trainings for farmers & field demonstrations
on judicious use of fertilizers being conducted under the Soil Health
Management Scheme. However, the reply is silent on the issue of
revamp of Agricultural Extension Services in the country which is
necessary to achieve the aims of Integrated Nutrient Management
scheme. The Committee are of view that aims of any scheme cannot
be achieved unless requisite infrastructure and technical support is
provided to the farmers. The Government cannot hope to achieve
the aims of INM scheme and promote balanced use of fertilizer in
the absence of robust Agriculture Extension Support System. The
Committee, therefore, once again reiterate their earlier
recommendation and urge the Government to take steps to overhaul
existing agriculture extension system for the benefit of farmers and
safeguard natural resources.
C. Fertilizer Subsidy Policy
Recommendation (Serial No. 6)
1.13 The Committee had observed/recommended as under:Ñ
ÒThe Committee note that the Government has been regulating
sale, pricing and quality of fertilizers in the country to ensure
adequate and timely availability of fertilizers at affordable price to
farmers for maximizing agricultural production in the country and
to ensure food security for the people. The difference in concession
rate/import price and net market realization is given as subsidy by
the Government to the farmers through fertilizer industry. The
subsidy regime started in the country during 1977 as Retention
Price Scheme. Subsequently, Concession Scheme for P&K Fertilizers
was introduced w.e.f. 01 April, 2008. Under the Concession Scheme,
MRP of P&K fertilizer was fixed by the Government and the difference
in the delivered price of fertilizers at the farm gate and MRP was
compensated by the Government as subsidy to the Manufacturing
Industries. This scheme was continued upto 31.03.2010. However,
to overcome the deficiency of Concession Scheme, the Government

7
introduced Nutrient based Subsidy (NBS) policy for N,P&K fertilizers
w.e.f. 01.04.2010. The Committee note that under NBS policy a
fixed subsidy, decided annually, is provided on each subsidized P&K
fertilizers depending upon its nutrient content such as N, P , K and
Sulphur. Under NBS, additional subsidy is provided for fertilizers
fortified with Zinc and Boron. Single Super Phosphate (SSP) has also
been included under scheme. NBS policy was expected to promote
innovation and broaden the basket of fertilizers and enable fertilizer
use as per soil and crop requirements. However , exclusion of Urea
from NBS and decontrol of price of P & K fertilizers has led to
imbalanced application of nitrogen vis-a-vis phosphotic and potassic
fertilizers in country. These facts have been accepted by the
representatives of the Department of Fertilizer during the evidence.
The Committee have also observed that present policy of fertilizer
subsidy also exclude liquid fertilizers, bio-fertilizers, farm organic
manure etc. which are considered more effective and environment
friendly to restore soil fertility and enhancement of agricultural
productivity. It has also been argued by the Department of
Agriculture, Cooperation & Farmers Welfare that usage of fertilizers
should be left to the discretion of the farmers by direct transfer of
fertilizer subsidy to the farmers. The representative of Department
of fertilizers had also suggested to provide fertilizers to the farmers
as per soil health card. The Committee are of view that the present
NBS policy has failed to rationalize fertilizer subsidy and has led to
imbalanced use of fertilizers due to high prices of Phosphatic and
Potassic fertilizers and low price of Urea. While appreciating the
recent reduction in the prices of phophestic and potassic fertilizers
by the Central Government, the Committee are of the view that
there is a need of fertilizer subsidy regime which can promote
environment friendly fertilizers like bio-fertilizers, organic farm
manure or liquid fertilizer which are more effective than granules.
The Committee, therefore, recommend that existing fertilizer subsidy
policy may be revised and the revised policy which is more
appropriate for Indian conditions and favour sustainable growth of
agriculture sector may be formulated. Further , there is a need to
encourage the organic farming considering its long term benefits.
The ways of encouraging the organic farming should also be explored
while revising the existing Fertilizer Subsidy Policy. Ó
1.14 The Department of Agricultural Research and Education in the
Action Taken Reply has stated as under:Ñ
ÒAs per Department of Fertilizers, Ministry of Chemicals & Fertilizers,
the issue on fertilizer subsidy policy involved wider consultation
and hence, will be examined separately. Ó

8
1.15 The Department of Agriculture, Cooperation and Farmers
Welfare in the Action Taken Reply has stated as under:Ñ
ÒGovernment is promoting organic farming across the country through
various schemes viz. National Mission for Sustainable Agriculture
(NMSA), Paramparagat Krishi Vikas Yojana (PKVY), Rashtriya Krishi
Vikas Yojana (RKVY) and Mission for Integrated Development of
Horticulture (MIDH), Network Project on Organic Farming under
ICAR etc.
The Department has also been focusing on creating awareness and
educating the farmers about organic farming practices in the areas
where clusters are formed.
The Department is also providing back ended subsidy through NABARD
for setting up of Bio-fertilizer production units which is 25% of the
cost, subject to maximum limit of Rs. 40 lakhs. During 2013-14 to
2015-16, 39 units have been sanctioned. Besides, subsidy is being
provided to farmers under PKVY scheme for purchase of bio-fertilizers
@ Rs. 500/acre. Under PKVY Scheme, Rs. 18.02 crore have been
released for 7208 clusters in different States for practicing organic
farming.Ó
1.16 While observing adverse consequences of NBS scheme for
fertilizers, the Committee had opined about need of fertilizer subsidy
regime which can promote environment friendly fertilizers like bio-
fertilizers, organic farm manure or liquid fertilizer which are more
effective than granules and recommended the Government to revise
existing fertilizer subsidy policy more appropriate for Indian conditions
and which favour sustainable growth of agriculture sector. The DARE
in their Action Taken reply has stated that as per Department of
Fertilizers, Ministry of Chemical & Fertilizers, the issue on fertilizer
subsidy policy involved wider consultation and hence, will be
examined separately. Whereas, DAC&FW has submitted about schemes
such as National Mission for Sustainable Agriculture (NMSA),
Paramparagat Krishi Vikas Yojana (PKVY), Rashtriya Krishi Vikas Yojana
(RKVY) and Mission for Integrated Development of Horticulture (MIDH),
Network Project on Organic Farming under ICAR which is being
implemented to promote organic farming across the country. The
Committee were also informed back ended subsidy being provided
through NABARD for setting up of Bio-fertilizer production units and
subsidy being provided to farmers under PKVY scheme for purchase
of bio-fertilizers @ Rs. 500/acre.

9
The Committee existing Nutrient Based Subsidy Scheme has
resulted in to imbalanced use of fertilizer which is against the interest
of farmers and environmental sustainability. There is urgent need to
take steps to overhaul existing policy for fertilizer subsidy and make
provision for environment friendly fertilizers like bio-fertilizers,
organic farm manure or liquid fertilizer. The Committee, therefore,
once again reiterate their earlier recommendation and urge the
Government to review the existing policy for fertilizer subsidy for
the betterment of Indian Agriculture.
D. Constitution of Regulatory Authority for Fertilizer Sector
Recommendation (Serial No. 7)
1.17 The Committee had observed/recommended as under:Ñ
ÒAvailability of good quality fertilizers is one of the major
responsibility of Central and State Governments by which they can
help the farmers of the country to enhance their production and
income. However , sometimes production and sale of inferior quality
of fertilizers in the market badly affect agricultural production,
which in turn affect already burdened farmers. Therefore, robust
registration process of fertilizers and regular check are ways to
ensure that only qualitative fertilizers are produced and sold in the
market. The Committee note that Central Government has
constituted a Central Fertilizer Committee (CFC) under Fertilizer
Control Order (FCO), 1957 for analysis and recommendation of new
fertilizer for inclusion in the FCO. CFC constituted a technical
group consisting of a Chairman from ICAR and other members/
scientists/experts from the field of agriculture. The Committee
also note that before inclusion of any new fertilizer in the FCO, this
technical group examines the agronomic aspects, specifications and
field trials reports of new fertilizer. Agronomic field trials are
required to be conducted by the Company in minimum two cropping
seasons under the aegis of a State Agricultural University or any
other Institutes of ICAR. Recommendation for inclusion of new
fertilizer in FCO is done by CFC only on the basis of further
examination of technical group report/recommendations. The
Committee are of the view that present system of certification of
new fertilizer is cumbersome, time consuming and bureaucratic.
Further , field trials of new fertilizer without involvement of technical
group or CFC leaves scope for manipulation of results of field trials.
Thus, there is a need to streamline the existing process and
constitution of a Fertilizer Development and Regulating Authority

10
will help to streamline the process, certification of fertilizers,
continuous quality check, imposing penalty for sub-standard and
spurious quality of fertilizers, promoting innovations in fertilizer
sector and fixation of pricing of fertilizers etc. The Committee,
therefore, recommend the Government to take required steps for
Constitution of a regulatory authority for fertilizer sector. Ó
1.18 The Department of Agricultural Research and Education in the
Action Taken Reply has stated as under:Ñ
ÒIn order to simplify the procedure of inclusion of new fertilizers
in Fertiliser Control Order (FCO), the Ministry has constituted a
committee under the chairmanship of Joint Secretary (INM) to
examine the issue. The Committee examined and deliberated on
the issue and suggested following procedural changes:
(1) Online disposal of application;
(2) Fixing a time limit for recommendation of Technical
Committee on new grades.
The Ministry will implement these recommendations very soon.
As regard to constitution of a regulatory authority, it is submitted
that fertilizer has been declared as an Essential Commodity by the
Central Government under Section 2 (a) (xi) of the Essential
Commodities Act, 1955. In exercise of the power conferred under
section 3 (i) of above Act, the Government of India have promulgated
the Fertilizer Control Order (FCO), 1957 which was subsequently
revised as Fertiliser Control Order , 1985 with the objective of
regulating sale, price and quality of fertilizers at a fair price. In
exercise of the power under clause 37 of FCO, the Government of
India vide notification SO No. 258 (E) dated 10th Feburary, 2016
constituted the Central Fertiliser Committee under the chairmanship
of Additional Secretary (INM) and 10 other members to advice Central
Government on the following issues:
¥ Inclusion of a new fertiliser , under this order;
¥ Specifications of various fertilizers;
¥ Grades/formulation of physical/granulated mixtures of
fertilizers that can be allowed to be prepared in a State;
¥ Requirements of laboratory facilities in a manufacturing unit,
including a unit manufacturing physical/granulated mixtures
of fertilizers;
¥ Method of drawl and analysis of samples.

11
Central Fertilizer Committee advises Central Government on above
technical related aspects of fertilizers, on basis of which, the new
grades are notified from time to time. Ó
1.19 The Department of Agriculture, Cooperation and Farmers
Welfare in the Action Taken Reply has stated as under:Ñ
(i) ÒIn regard to streamlining of procedure of inclusion of new
fertilizer in FCO, 1985, this Ministry has referred the matter
to a committee constituted under the chairmanship of Joint
Secretary (INM) to examine the simplification of procedure
for notification/incorporation of new fertilizers under
Fertilizer Control Order (FCO), 1985. The Committee
examined and deliberated on the issue and recommended a
simplified procedure that will reduce the time limit by
2-3 months. These recommendations areÑ (i) online disposal
of application; and (ii) fixing a time limit for recommendation
of Technical Committee on new grades. These
recommendations were accepted by the Central Fertilizer
Committee (CFC) in its 51st meeting. It was also suggested
that a meeting of Technical Committee may be convened
every month to discuss the issues relating to inclusion of
new fertilizer and its recommendations to be placed before
CFC, within 15 days.
(ii) As regards constitution of a regulatory authority, it is
submitted that fertilizer has been declared as an Essential
Commodity by the Central Government under Section 2(a)
(xi) of the Essential Commodities Act, 1955. In exercise of
the power conferred under section 3(i) of above act, the
Government of India have promulgated the FCO, 1957 which
was subsequently revised as FCO, 1985 with the objective of
regulating sale, price and quality of fertilizers at a fair price.
In exercise of the power under clause 38 of FCO, the
Government of India vide notification SO No. 258 (E) dated
10th February, 2016 constituted the CFC under the
chairmanship of Additional Secretary (INM) and 10 other
members to advice Central Government on the issues relating
to fertilizers. Ó
1.20 While observing lacuna in the process of system of
certification of new fertilizer, the Committee had recommended the
Government to take steps for constitution of a Fertilizer Development
and Regulating Authority in order to streamline the process of

12
certification of fertilizers, continuous quality check, imposing penalty
for sub standard and spurious quality of fertilizers, promoting
innovations in fertilizer sector and fixation of pricing of fertilizers
etc. The Committee note that committee constituted under the
chairmanship of Joint Secretary (INM) to examine the issue to simplify
the procedure of inclusion of new fertilizers in Fertilizer Control
Order (FCO) has suggested for Online disposal of application and
Fixing a time limit for recommendation of Technical Committee on
new grades. The Department has informed that DAC&FW will
implement these recommendations very soon. The Government has
not submitted their view on the issue of constitution of a Fertilizer
Development and Regulating Authority for effective regulation of
Fertilizer sector in the Country. The Committee are of view that
current system of constitution of Central Fertilizer Committee is ad
hoc mechanism which do not have continuity, expertise and necessary
manpower to effectively regulate the complex issues related to
Fertilizer sector. This situation is being exploited by the unscrupulous
elements for their benefit which ultimately affect interest of farmers.
This system is also hampering innovation in the field of fertilizer
sector. The Committee, therefore, once again reiterate their
recommendation and urge the Government to take steps for
constitution of Fertilizer Development and Regulating Authority at
the earliest. The Committee would like the Department to be apprised
about steps taken in this regard within three months of presentation
of Report.
E. Scientific use of Pesticides
Recommendation (Serial No. 13)
1.21 The Committee had observed/recommended as under:Ñ
ÒThe Committee are concerned to note that problems associated
with unscientific and excessive use of pesticides have not been
addressed properly by the Government of India and State
Governments which is evident by rising cases of occupational
exposure and associated diseases such as cancer among local farmers
in Punjab and other places in the country. Besides creating awareness
and training of farmers for scientific use of pesticides in agriculture,
the Committee feel the need of distribution of protective gears and
pesticide sprinklers to the farmers to prevent them from unwanted
exposure of pesticides. The Committee are of considered view that
it is imperative that the use of pesticides in agriculture and other
sectors is supervised scientifically. The Committee are also of the

13
view that economic gains should not be achieved at the cost of
public health and the environment. The Committee, therefore,
recommend that a comprehensive action plan may be prepared by
the Government ensuring environment sustainable manufacturing,
import, sale and use of pesticides in agriculture as well as other
sectors including availability of safety gears to farmers and workers.
The Committee desire the Government to prepare action plan in
consultation with all stakeholders such as State governments,
Agricultural Universities/Institutions, Chemical Pesticides
Manufactures/Importers, Traders, Farmers along with Experts/NGOs
active in the field of agricultural management. The Committee also
desire the Government to allocate specific funds for implementation
of action plan for the purpose. The Committee would like to be
apprised of the steps taken by the Government in this regard. The
Committee also desired the Government to explore options to provide
license for sale of pesticides to the persons holding degree/diploma/
certificates in Agriculture Sciences. Ó
1.22 The Department of Agricultural Research and Education in the
Action Taken Reply has stated as under:Ñ
ÒThe Pesticide Management Bill, pending in parliament serves to
oversee various issues and concerns associated with regulation and
use of pesticides in Agriculture. Central Insecticide Board and
MoA&FW periodically reviews issues concerning labeling of pesticides
and classify them with colour code depending upon their toxicity
and hazardous nature. DAC and CIBRC recently rationalized the
label leaflet guidelines defining the language, font size, inclusion
of precautions with pictorial depictions for easy and safe handling
of pesticides. The committee on review of 66 pesticides recently
has also recommended distribution of protective gears and container
safety instructions. DAC, MoA&FW recently has also issued gazette
notification specifying the minimum qualification as a mandatory
requirement for issue of license for sale of pesticides. Ó
1.23 The Department of Agriculture, Cooperation and Farmers
Welfare in the Action Taken Reply has stated as under:Ñ
ÒPesticides are regulated in India through Insecticides Act, 1968.
The experience in administering the Insecticides Act, 1968 over the
last four decades has exposed certain gaps which spurred the need
to propose a new law. Pesticide Management Bill (PMB) which is in
discussion since 2008 and before, between this Ministry and Ministry
of Law and Justice resulted in substantive changes to the original

14
Bill as was introduced in the Parliament (Rajya Sabha). It was
suggested by the Legislative Department, Ministry of Law and Justice
that instead of moving official amendments to rectify the changes
and to add more than 90 enactments for repeal by way of lengthy
amendments, it would be preferable, to withdraw ÔThe Pesticide
Management Bill, 2008 Õ and a new Bill namely, ÔThe Pesticide
Management Bill, 2017 Õ incorporating all the official amendments
as on date be introduced in the Parliament. The Pesticide
Management Bill, 2017 serve to oversee various issues and concerns
associated with regulation and use of pesticides in Agriculture.
Central Insecticide Board and MoA&FW periodically reviews issues
concerning labeling of pesticides and classify them with colour
code depending upon their toxicity and hazardous nature. DAC&FW
and CIBRC recently rationalized the label leaflet guidelines defining
the language, font size, inclusion of precautions with pictorial
depictions for easy and safe handling of pesticides. The Committee
on review of 55 pesticides recently has also recommended
distribution of protective gears and container safety instructions.
DAC&FW recently has also issues gazette notification specifying the
minimum qualification as a mandatory requirement for issue of
license for sale of pesticides. Ó
1.24 While showing their concern over rising cases of occupational
exposure and associated diseases such as cancer among farmers due
to unscientific and excessive use of pesticides, the Committee had
recommended the Government to prepare a comprehensive action
plan to ensure environment sustainable manufacturing, import, sale
and use of pesticides in agriculture as well as other sectors including
availability of safety gears to farmers and workers. The Committee
also desired the Government to explore options to provide license
for sale of pesticides to the persons holding degree/diploma/
certificates in Agriculture Sciences.
The DARE in their Action Taken Reply has submitted about
Pesticide Management Bill, 2008, pending in parliament serves to
oversee various issues and concerns associated with regulation and
use of pesticides in Agriculture. Whereas, DAC&FW has stated that
a new Bill namely, ÔThe Pesticide Management Bill, 2017Õ to oversee
various issues and concerns associated with regulation and use of
pesticides in Agriculture will be introduced in Parliament to improvise
upon lacuna of Insecticides Act, 1968. The Department have also
informed that Central Insecticide Board and MoA&FW periodically
reviews issues concerning labeling of pesticides and classify them
with colour code depending upon their toxicity and hazardous nature

15
and rationalization of label leaflet guidelines defining the language,
font size, inclusion of precautions with pictorial depictions for easy
and safe handling of pesticides. The committee on review of pesticides
recently has also recommended distribution of protective gears and
container safety instructions. The Committee also note that DAC
&FW recently has also issued gazette notification specifying the
minimum qualification as a mandatory requirement for issue of license
for sale of pesticides.
The Committee are of view that there is urgent need to present
Pesticide Management Bill in Parliament to overcome lacuna of
outdated Insecticide Act, 1968. However, the Committee note with
concern that despite assurance, the Government has failed to
introduce the Bill in the Parliament. The Committee take a serious
view in this regard and hope that the much needed bill will be
introduced in Parliament without further delay.
F. Constitution of Pesticides Development and Regulation Authority
Recommendation (Serial No. 14)
1.25 The Committee had observed/recommended as under:Ñ
ÒThe Committee note that Insecticides Acts, 1968 and Insecticides
rules, 1971 framed thereunder regulate import, manufacture, sale,
transport, distribution and use of insecticides with a view to prevent
risk to human beings or animals, and matter connected therewith.
Central Insecticide Board is constituted under the Act to advise the
Central and State Governments on 105 technical matters arising out
of administration of this Act and to carry out other functions assigned
to the Board by or under this Act. The Committee also note that
Registration Committee constituted under the Act is assigned
responsibility for registration of pesticides after scrutinizing formula,
verifying claims of efficacy and safety to human beings and animals,
specifying the precautions against poisoning and any other functions.
Registration Committee are empowered to refuse registration of
any pesticides if issues pertaining to safety have not been
satisfactorily adhered to. The Central Insecticide Board is empowered
to ban manufacturing, import or sale of pesticides if concerns are
raised about danger to public health and safety or any adverse
report are received about toxic effect of any pesticides. However,
the Committee are perturbed to note that there is no provision for
periodic scientific evaluation of pesticides used in the country and
Central Insecticide Board doesn Õt carry out any research/study on
its own and its advice to Government is based on national and

16
international literature/information available. Further , action for
ban of particular pesticides is taken only after receipt of general
information on ban or restriction of particular pesticides in other
countries. Ban on pesticides is based on the recommendation of the
Expert Committee constituted for the purpose. The Committee are
of view that present system of registration of pesticides is not
robust and hardly take care of manipulation of systemic deficiency.
Further , absence of ongoing mechanism for periodic evaluation of
efficacy and toxicity of pesticides is posing danger to environment
in general and public health in particular. The Committee are of
view that there is need to streamline the regulatory mechanism for
manufacturing, import and sale of pesticides in the country. The
Committee, therefore, recommend the Government to take steps
for constitution of Pesticides Development and Regulation Authority
after Parliamentary approval for regulation of pesticide sector in
the country. The Committee desire the Government to start
discussion with all stakeholders for Constitution of such authority
in a time bound manner. Ó
1.26 The Department of Agricultural Research and Education in the
Action Taken Reply has stated as under:Ñ
ÒCommittee constituted during 2014 to review 66 pesticides
recommended Government of India to introduce a practice of
periodic review of pesticides for their efficacy, resistance, non-
target effects and toxicity.
For effective regulation of pesticide sector in the country and to
address various issues and concerns regarding inconsistencies in use
of pesticides in Agriculture, Pesticides Management Bill, was
introduced in the Rajya Sabha on October 21, 2008. The Bill standing
in the parliament for approval seeks to regulate the manufacture,
quality, import, export and sale of pesticides to control pests,
ensure availability of quality pesticides and minimize contamination
of agricultural commodities with pesticide residue. The Bill
recommends imposition of penalties for offences such as use of
pesticides in contravention of the law and sale of misbranded or
sub-standard pesticides. Ó
1.27 The Department of Agriculture, Cooperation and Farmers
Welfare in the Action Taken Reply has stated as under:Ñ
ÒThe Registration Committee (RC) constituted under Section 5 of
the Insecticides Act, 1968 registers pesticides after considering its
efficacy and safety to human beings, animals and environment. In

17
addition, technical reviews are carried out from time to time to
assess the safety of pesticides for their continued use. The
Committee constituted during 2014 to review 66 pesticides
recommended Government of India to introduce a practice of
periodic review of pesticides for their efficacy, resistance, non-
target effects and toxicity.
For effective regulation of pesticide sector in the country and to
address various issues and concerns regarding inconsistencies in use
of pesticides in Agriculture, Pesticides Management Bill, was
introduced in the Rajya Sabha on October 21, 2008. The Bill is in
discussion with Ministry of Law and Justice since 2008 and before,
resulted in substantive changes to the original Bill as was introduced
in the Parliament (Rajya Sabha). It was suggested by the Legislative
Department, Ministry of Law and Justice that instead of moving
official amendments to rectify the changes and to add more than
enactments for repeal by way of lengthy amendments, it would be
preferable, to withdraw ÔThe Pesticide Management Bill, 2008 Õ and
a new Bill namely, ÔThe Pesticides Management Bill, 2017 Õ
incorporating all the official amendments as on date be introduced
in the Parliament. The Pesticides Management Bill, 2017 seeks to
regulate the manufacture, quality, import, export and sale of
pesticides to control pests, ensure availability of quality pesticides
and minimize contamination of agricultural commodities with
pesticide residue. The Bill recommends imposition of penalties for
offences such as use of pesticides in contravention of the law and
sale of misbranded or sub-standard pesticides. Ó
1.28 The Committee note that Insecticides Acts,1968 and
Insecticides rules, 1971 framed thereunder regulate import,
manufacture, sale, transport, distribution and use of insecticides
with a view to prevent risk to human beings or animals, and matter
connected therewith. Central Insecticide Board is constituted under
the Act to advise the Central and State Governments on technical
matters arising out of administration of this Act and to carry out
other functions assigned to the Board by or under this Act. The
Committee also note that Registration Committee constituted under
the Act is assigned responsibility for registration of pesticides after
scrutinizing formula, verifying claims of efficacy and safety to human
beings and animals, specifying the precautions against poisoning and
any other functions. Registration Committee are empowered to refuse
registration of any pesticides if issues pertaining to safety have not
been satisfactorily adhered to. The Central Insecticide Board is
empowered to ban manufacturing, import or sale of pesticides if

18
concerns are raised about danger to public health and safety or any
adverse report are received about toxic effect of any pesticide.
However, the Committee are perturbed to note that there is no
provision for periodic scientific evaluation of pesticides used in the
country and Central Insecticide Board doesnÕt carry out any research/
study on its own and its advice to Government is based on national
and international literature/ information available. Further, action
for ban of particular pesticides is taken only after receipt of general
information on ban or restriction of particular pesticides in other
countries. Ban on pesticides is based on the recommendation of the
Expert Committee constituted for the purpose. The Committee are
of view that present system of registration of pesticides is not robust
and hardly take care of manipulation of systemic deficiency. Further,
absence of ongoing mechanism for periodic evaluation of efficacy
and toxicity of pesticides is posing danger to environment in general
and public health in 106 particular. The Committee are of view that
there is need to streamline the regulatory mechanism for
manufacturing, import and sale of pesticides in the country. The
Committee, therefore, recommend the Government to take steps
for constitution of Pesticides Development and Regulation Authority
after Parliamentary approval for regulation of pesticide sector in the
country. The Committee desire the Government to start discussion
with all stakeholders for Constitution of such authority in a time
bound manner.

19
CHAPTER II
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN
ACCEPTED BY THE GOVERNMENT
Recommendation (Serial No. 1)
The Committee note that Green Revolution has been a boon to
solve crisis of foodgrains which our country was facing at the time of
independence. Strategy of high yielding seeds-fertilizer-irrigation has
paid rich dividend and farmers of our country were able to enhance
foodgrain production from 83 mt in 1960-61 to around 253 mt in
2014-15. Now, our country is not only sufficient in production of foodgrain
to meet food requirements of the country but also able to contribute
towards foreign earning. However , the Committee observe that this
achievement in the field of agriculture has also affected the environment
and brought many negative impacts associated with use of chemical
fertilizers and pesticides on agriculture and allied sectors in the country.
The Committee are of the view that there is need to examine pros and
cons of strategy of use of chemical fertilizers and pesticides to enhance
food production in order to incorporate suitable changes to conserve
our natural resources and minimize adverse effects on agriculture &
allied sectors without jeopardizing agricultural growth. The Committee
have analyzed different aspects associated with the issue in succeeding
paragraphs.
Reply of the Government
Department of Agricultural Research and Education
Replies furnished in succeeding paragraphs.
Department of Agriculture, Cooperation and Farmers Welfare
There is no scientific evidence that balanced and judicious use of
fertilizers cause rise of deadly diseases in the Country. However,
imbalanced use of chemical fertilizers coupled with low addition of
organic matter over years may cause multinutrient deficiencies. It is
the endeavour of this Ministry to promote the balanced use of fertilizers
in conjunction with bio-fertilizers/organic fertilizers/manure.
[Ministry of Agriculture and Farmers Welfare (Department of
Agricultural Research and Education) O.M. No. NRM/1/11/2016-
SWDF dated 08.03.2017 & 26.07.2017]
[Ministry of Agriculture and Farmers Welfare (Department of
Agriculture, Cooperation and Farmers Welfare) O.M. No. 3-15/2016-
Fert. Law dated 01.08.2017]

20
DECLINE IN AGRICULTURAL GROWTH
Recommendation (Serial No. 2)
The Committee note that the country will require to enhance the
foodgrains production to the level of 300 mt by 2025 to feed its teeming
millions. However, the Committee are distressed to note that the pace
of agricultural growth rate is slowly decreasing. The Committee observe
that decadal rate of growth of agriculture since beginning of green
revolution has decreased significantly from a high of 8.37% during
1960-70 to a low of 1.44% during 1990-2000. The rate of agriculture
growth has been 2.61% during 2000-2010. The Committee further observe
that rate of agriculture growth in important States like Punjab, Haryana,
Uttar Pradesh, Madhya Pradesh, Gujarat, Bihar and Maharashtra has
decreased significantly during the last decade. The Committee also
note that country failed to achieve the agriculture growth rate of 4%
which was set during 12th plan. The Committee are of the view that
strategy of over-reliance on chemical fertilizers adopted during green
revolution period needs reorientation keeping in view of stagnant
agricultural growth in important States. The Committee, therefore,
recommend the Department to analyze the strategy of agricultural
growth in country and prepare a detailed plan to reinvigorate the
sector in the country
Reply of the Government
Department of Agricultural Research and Education
The issue on agricultural growth in country involved wider
consultation with various departments and hence, it is deliberated
through various Working Groups constituted to formulize appropriate
strategies.
Department of Agriculture, Cooperation and Farmers Welfare
Judicious use of fertilizers by farmers based on soil test based
recommendations has been encouraged under the scheme of Soil Health
Management in the Country.
A scheme on organic farming has been implemented in the Country
since 2015-16 to reduce over dependence on chemical fertilizers and
promote natural farming.
Comments of the Committee
For comments of the Committee please refer to Para No. 1.8 of
Chapter I of this Report.

21
[Ministry of Agriculture and Farmers Welfare (Department of
Agricultural Research and Education) O.M. No. NRM/1/11/2016-
SWDF dated 08.03.2017 & 26.07.2017]
[Ministry of Agriculture and Farmers Welfare (Department of
Agriculture, Cooperation and Farmers Welfare) O.M. No. 3-15/2016-
Fert. Law dated 01.08.2017]
DEGRADATION AND EROSION OF SOIL FERTILITY
Recommendation (Serial No. 3)
Plants require nutrients for their growth. These nutrients such as
nitrogen, phosphorus, potassium, calcium, magnesium, sulphur , copper,
iron etc. are derived by plants from soil. Traditionally, farmers used
farm yard manure or animal manure to augment declining soil
productivity. However , strategy of green revolution involved use of non-
renewable inputs of phosphorus, potash and nitrates as chemical
fertilizers to meet nutrient deficit of soil. Application or use of chemical
fertilizers in agriculture should be based upon scientific assessment of
soil nutrient status. However, the Committee note that use of fertilizers
in India was hardly based upon scientific analysis of soil due to near
absence of soil testing facilities, low awareness and over reliance on
Urea due to fertilizer subsidy policy. Imbalanced and inadequate nutrient
use coupled with neglect of organic manure has caused multinutrient
deficiency in Indian soil. The Committee note that out of total 525
Districts in the country, about 292 Districts account for 85 percentage
of total fertilizer consumption. The Committee have further been
informed that nutrient deficiency in country level are of the order of
89, 80, 50, 41, 49, 33, 13, 12, 5 and 3% for nitrogen, phosphorus,
potassium, sulphur , zinc, boron, molybdenum, iron ,manganese and
copper respectively. The continuous use of high analysis fertilizer has
made sulphur a limiting nutrient in many soils in the country. The
limiting nutrients do not allow the full expression of other nutrients,
thereby, lowering the fertilizer response and crop productivity. The
Committee have also been informed that Indian agriculture is operating
with a negative balance of plant nutrient in soil. The fertility status of
Indian soils has been declining fast under intensive agriculture as nutrient
application is not able to keep pace with their removal by crops and
soil are showing signs of fatigue especially in Indo Gangetic plain. The
inadequate and imbalanced nutrient use coupled with neglect of organic
manure has caused multi nutrient deficiency in soil in many areas over
the years. The Committee note that many study on impact of green
revolution in India has found that excessive use of fertilizers and

22
pesticides had led to degradation and erosion of soil fertility, built up
of toxic nutrients in soil, loss of micronutrient, loss of soil microorganisms
among other desirable and undesirable effects. The micro nutrient
deficiency in Indian soil due to excessive use of nitrogen fertilizers and
inadequate use of micronutrient fertilizer has its impact on nutritional
status of crop grown in it which are devoid of essential micronutrient
necessary for human health. The studies have shown that micronutrient
deficiency in crop is causing deficiency of micronutrient such as zinc,
iron, copper etc. among Indian population leading to many diseases and
growth impairment in human and animals. Use of nitrogenous fertilizers
in agriculture is also causing eutrophication of water bodies causing
deterioration of water quality. The Committee also note that fertilizer
being used in agriculture is also source of Nitrous oxide which is a
potent green house gas. However , the Committee are perturbed to note
that the Government has not bothered to conduct any comprehensive
study/analysis on adverse impact of use of fertilizers and pesticides on
soil fertility including on surrounding environment and heath of the
masses. The Committee, therefore, reccommend that a comprehensive
study on impact of chemical fertilizers and pesticides on agriculture
and allied sectors in the country may be undertaken by the Government
so that curative steps may be planned to address its negative impact
and fresh strategy may be formulated for rapid agriculture growth in
the country
Reply of the Government
Department of Agricultural Research and Education
The Government has launched National Mission on Soil Health Card
to ensure soil test based site specific balanced and integrated nutrient
management in the country. An impact analysis on this scheme on
production, productivity and soil health are being carried out by the
Institute for Social and Economic Change, Bangalore.
Department of Agriculture, Cooperation and Farmers Welfare
No comment received.
[Ministry of Agriculture and Farmers Welfare (Department of
Agricultural Research and Education) O.M. No. NRM/1/11/2016-
SWDF dated 08.03.2017 & 26.07.2017]
[Ministry of Agriculture and Farmers Welfare (Department of
Agriculture, Cooperation and Farmers Welfare) O.M. No. 3-15/2016-
Fert. Law dated 01.08.2017]

23
BALANCED USE OF FERTILIZERS
Recommendation (Serial No. 4)
The Committee note that chemical fertilizers have played an
important role in increasing food grain production in country. Use of
chemical fertilizers is one of the costliest inputs which has became a
necessity in Indian agriculture Sector without which it would be difficult
to feed ever increasing population of the country. The use of chemical
fertilizer in the country have increased from less than 1 million tons of
total nutrients in mid sixties to 25.6 millions tonnes in 2014-15. The
country will require around 45 MT of nutrients to achieve the food grain
production of 300 MT by 2025 to feed its increasing population. However,
majority of 45 MT nutrients has to be supplied through chemical
fertilizers as only 6-8 MT nutrients can be supplied through existing
organic sources. The Committee also note that the pattern of use of
fertilizer in the country is not even. About 292 districts accounts for
consumption of 85 percentage of fertilizer in the country. Further,
thereÕs imbalance in fertilizer use in terms of NPK as it is evidenced by
their wider consumption ratio of 6.7:2.4:1 in the country as against
their desirable ratio of 4:2:1. The situation is more grim in agriculturally
important States like Punjab and Haryana where NPK use ratio is as
high as 31.4:8.0:1 and 27.7:6.1:1 respectively. According to the Secretary
of Department of Agriculture, Cooperation and Farmers Welfare, skewed
subsidy policy in favour of urea and high prices of other fertilizers are
the real culprit behind the imbalanced use of fertilizers in the country.
Even the pattern of use of fertilizer varies widely among different
crops. Fertilizer use in potato, sugarcane, cotton, wheat and paddy are
among highest at the level of 347.2, 239.3, 192.6, 176.7 and 165.2 kg/
hectare respectively. Even among these crops, there is excessive use of
nitrogenous fertilizer. The Committee also observe that thereÕs excessive
use of urea in country. During 2014-15, 306 million tonnes Urea was
used out of total 485 million tonnes fertilizer consumption in country.
The Committee are of the view that there is an urgent need to take
steps to rationalise over usage of chemical fertilizers in country in
order to restore fertilty of soil and to check negative effects associated
with it. The Committee, therefore, reccommend that a strategy may
be worked out to promote the balanced use of fertilizers in the country.
It is also imperative that the farmers are educated on this aspect and
therefore, the Committee also recommend that a massive awareness
campaign may be launched by the Government to educate farmers
regarding balanced and judicious use of fertilizers in the country.

24
Reply of the Government
Department of Agricultural Research and Education
Imbalanced use of fertilizers is due to high price of P&K fertilizer
as compared to that of Urea. On the main reasons for increase in price
of P&K fertilizers is reduction in subsidy over a period of time. The
second most contributor to price rise of P&K fertilizers is devaluation
of Indian rupee against US$, as much of the raw materials are imported.
One of the ways to reduce MRP of P&K fertilizers could be increase in
subsidy rates to bring the P&K fertilizers in parity with Urea prices so
as to address the issue of balanced fertilization of soil.
The Government under the component of soil health management
of National Mission on Sustainable Agriculture (NMSA) is promoting soil
test based balanced and integrated nutrient management in the country
through setting up/strengthening of soil testing laboratories,
establishment of bio-fertilizer and compost unit, use of micronutrients,
trainings and demonstrations. Under the Soil Health Management Scheme,
Trainings for farmers & field demonstrations on judicious use of fertilizers
are conducted. Awareness campaign through Print and visual media are
carried out. Media plan to publicise Soil Health Card has been finalized.
Department of Agriculture, Cooperation and Farmers Welfare
Soil Health Card Scheme has been implemented across the country,
with focus on providing appropriate recommendations regarding use of
fertilizers as per crop and site. Since the scheme has picked up
momentum it is expected that the usage of chemical fertilizers will
come down drastically in the coming years. Farmers are being given
training for judicious use of fertilizers and field demonstrations are
being organized by the Indian Council of Agricultural Research on this
aspect. Awareness campaign are also carried out through print and
visual media.
[Ministry of Agriculture and Farmers Welfare (Department of
Agricultural Research and Education) O.M. No. NRM/1/11/2016-
SWDF dated 08.03.2017 & 26.07.2017]
[Ministry of Agriculture and Farmers Welfare (Department of
Agriculture, Cooperation and Farmers Welfare) O.M. No. 3-15/2016-
Fert. Law dated 01.08.2017]
INCENTIVES FOR USAGE OF BIO-FERTILIZERS
Recommendation (Serial No. 8)
The Committee note that bio-fertilizers do not contain any chemicals
which are harmful to the living soil and are extremely advantageous in
enriching soil fertility. Bio-fertilizers such as Rhizobium, Azotobactor,

25
Blue Green Algae etc. are eco-friendly organic agro inputs. Bio-fertilizers
fulfil plant requirements by supplying organic nutrients through micro
organism and their byproducts. During 2014-15, 80696.45 MT carrier
based and 4054.56 KL liquid based bio-fertilizers were used in the
country. The Committee also observe that use of bio-fertilizers is more
in western and southern parts of country, whereas, eastern and northern
States are lagging behind in use of bio-fertilizers. The Government is
providing financial assistance @ 25% of total financial outlays 96 subject
to ceiling of Rs. 40 lakhs to individuals and private agencies for
biofertlizers units. Financial assistance is also being provided to the
State Governments/Government agencies to set up input production
unit and biofertilizer/bio pesticide units and bio-fertilizer and organic
fertilizer quality control laboratories under Pradhan Mantri Krishi Vikash
Yojna and National Mission for Sustainable Agriculture. The Committee
note that 50 bio-fertilizer units have been established under the scheme
with production capacity of 12563 tons as on March, 2014. However,
the Committee are distressed to note that there is no provision to
provide any kind of direct incentives/subsidy on bio-fertilizers to the
farmers to promote its widespread use in country. The Committee are
of considered view that there is an urgent need to devise policy to
promote use of green alternatives such as bio-fertilizers in order to
minimize harmful impact of chemical fertilizers on environment and
human health. The Committee, therefore, recommend that the
Government may explore possibilities to provide direct incentives to
the farmers for use of bio-fertilizers across the country. The Committee
also desire that a strategy may be worked out to encourage entrepreneurs
for establishment of units for production of bio-fertilizers in States in
northern, eastern and North-eastern parts of the country. The Committee
would like to be apprised of the initiatives undertaken by the
Government.
Reply of the Government
Department of Agricultural Research and Education
The Department of Fertilizers is in the process of implementing
DBT for transfer of fertilizer subsidy. In this regard, the Department has
identified 16 districts as pilot project in the country to implement DBT .
After successful completion of the pilot projects, the DBT in fertilizer
subsidy will be extended to the whole country. Market Development
Assistance being provided for marketing of city compost will also be
brought under the DBT .
Government is promoting bio-fertilizers across the country through
various schemes of Naitonal Mission for Sustainable Agriculture (NMSA)/
Paramparagat Krishi Vikas Yojana (PKVY), Rashtriya Krishi Vikas Yojana

26
(RKVY), National Mission on Oilseeds & Oil Palm (NMOOP), National
Food Security Mission (NFSM) and Indian Council of Agricultural Research
(ICAR).
Department of Agriculture, Cooperation and Farmers Welfare
Government is providing financial assistance for use of bio-fertilizer
through various schemes/programmes viz.: National Mission for
Sustainable Agriculture (NMSA)/Paramparagat Krishi Vikas Yojana (PKVY),
Rashtriya Krishi Vikas Yojana (RKVY), Mission for Integrated Development
of Horticulture (MIDH), National Mission on Oilseeds & Oil Palm (NMCOOP)
and Network Project on Organic Farming of Indian Council of Agricultural
Research (ICAR). The details of Bio-fertilizer production units operating
in various States along with their installed capacity and the actual
production during last three years are at Annexure-I & II respectively.
[Ministry of Agriculture and Farmers Welfare (Department of
Agricultural Research and Education) O.M. No. NRM/1/11/2016-
SWDF dated 08.03.2017 & 26.07.2017]
[Ministry of Agriculture and Farmers Welfare (Department of
Agriculture, Cooperation and Farmers Welfare) O.M. No. 3-15/2016-
Fert. Law dated 01.08.2017]
PROMOTION OF ORGANIC FARMING
Recommendation (Serial No. 9)
The Committee note that 7.23 lakh hectare land in the country,
excluding the wild harvest, is certified area under organic farming. The
Committee also note that there exist a large export market for organic
food products in international market and if given proper guidance and
incentives, the farmers are well placed to exploit the opportunity and
help the country to earn foreign exchange. APEDA under the Department
of Commerce functions as the Secretariat to the National Programme
on Organic Production (NPOP), which defines the regulatory mechanism
for export of organic produce. NPOP has earned equivalence with
European Union and Switzerland and now any produce certified by
Indian agencies can be exported to these countries without the
requirement of recertification. The Government is providing financial
assistance to private agencies/individuals along with State Governments/
Government agencies for setting up of bio-fertilizer production units.
The Government has also launch Paramparagat Krishi Vikash Yojana
(PKVY) under National Mission on Sustainable Agriculture (NMSA) through
which assistance is being provided for organic farming. Under PKVY , the

27
Government plans to develop 10000 cluster with a cluster size of
50 acres so as to increase certified area by 5 lakh hectares in next
3 years and to develop potential market for organic products. The
Committee are of considered view that promotion of organic farming
is urgently required to safeguard surrounding environment and health
of human beings and animals from usage of chemical fertilizers and
pesticides. For this, it is imperative that the farmers of the country are
given direct financial support along with technical 98 expertise and
supervision to switch to organic farming on a large scale. The Committee,
therefore, recommend that the Government should make concerted
and coordinated efforts in coordination with State Governments and
other Stake holders to augment coverage area and production of organic
farming in the country and for this purpose they may be provided
suitable incentive in terms of financial assistance and technical expertise.
Further , the Committee also desire that extension services may also be
strengthened in order to provide guidance/assistance to the farmers
during transition phase to organic farming.
Reply of the Government
Department of Agricultural Research and Education
The Government is promoting organic farming under the Schemes
Paramparagat Krishi Vikas Yojana (PKVY), ÒMission Organic Value Chain
Development for North Eastern Region Ó (MOVCDNER) which is
implemented through State Governments.
Under PKVY scheme, the assistance is provided to the farmers for
cluster formation, mobilization of farmers, PGS certification and quality
control, residue analysis of samples in NABL, conversion of land to
organic farming, establishment of production units (Pachagavya)/
Beejamruth/Jeevamruth), green manuring/biological nitrogen harvest
planting, botanical abstracts production units, liquid bio- fertilizers
(Nitrogen/fixing/Phosphate Solubilizing/Potassium mobilizing bio-
fertilizers), liquid biopesticides (Trichodermaviridae, Pseudomonas,
fluorescens, Matarhizium, beaviouriebassiana, Pacelomyces, verticillium),
phosphate rich organic manure (PROM), establishment of vermi-compost
unit, supply of improved agricultural implements, transportation of
organic products, packing, labeling and branding of organic products
etc. Under this scheme, an area of 2 lakh ha will be covered under
organic farming from 2015-16 to 2017-18.
Realizing the potential and benefits of organic farming particularly
in areas like hilly, tribal and also in rainfed areas where utilization of
chemical fertilizers and pesticides is relatively lower, the Government

28
of India is promoting organic farming in country through the dedicated
schemes of Paramparagat Krishi Vikas Yojana (PKVY) and Mission Organic
Value Chain Development for North Eastern Region (MOVCDNER) under
National Mission for Sustainable Agriculture (NMSA). Some other schemes
of Government of India are also supporting organic farming viz., National
Mission on Oilseeds and Oil Palm (NMOOP), National Food Security Mission
(NFSM), Mission for Integrated Development of Horticulture (MIDH) and
ICAR network project on organic farming.
Under MOVCDNER Central Sector scheme, the assistance is provided
for cluster development, on/off farm input production, supply of seeds/
planting materials, setting up of functional infrastructure, establishment
of integrated processing unit, refrigerated transportation, pre-cooling/
cold stores chamber, branding labeling and packaging, hiring of space,
hand holdings, organic certification through third party, mobilization of
farmers/processors etc. Under this scheme, an area of 0.50 lakh ha will
be covered under organic farming in North Eastern Region of the country
during next three years.
Awareness Programmes by DAC&FW
The Department has been focusing on creating awareness and
educating the farmers about organic farming practices in the areas
where clusters are formed, under PKVY . The scheme guidelines provide
a sum of Rs. 80,000 per cluster to undertake mobilization of farmers
through exposure visits and training. The National Centre of Organic
Farming (NCOF), Ghaziabad, a unit under the department undertakes
various extension and publicity activities like exhibitions, radio talks,
TV programmes, distribution of literature on organic inputs/organic
farming etc. to educate the farmers. NCOF is also publishing biannually
Bio-Fertilizer Newsletter as well as quarterly Organic Farming Newsletter.
In addition, various books on production and use of bio-fertilizers have
been published in various languages for distribution to the farming
community. Radio jingles on organic agriculture are broadcasted on
4 different FM Radio Stations including Delhi, Bangalore, Nagpur and
Lucknow.
NCOF organizes 30 days certificate course on organic farming for
skill development in organic agriculture sector for youth. It also conducts
10 days Refresher course for analysts under Fertilizer Control Order
(FCO); 5 Days Trainers Training & 2 Days training for field functionaries
and extension staff of the State Government.
NCOF has also been organizing Farmers Õ Training and Field
Demonstration (FTFD) programmes on organic farming since 2015-16 in
various villages adopted by the Hon Õble Members of Parliament under

29
ÒSansad Aadarsh Gram Yojana Ó (SAGY), through its Regional Centres of
Organic Farming (RCOFs). It has completed 300 no. of FTFD in 2015-16
and has scheduled 297 no. in the year 2016-17.
Department of Agriculture, Cooperation and Farmers Welfare
Government is promoting organic farming across the Country through
various schemes viz. National Mission for Sustainable Agriculture (NMSA),
Paramparagat Krishi Vikas Yojana (PKVY), Rashtriya Krishi Vikas Yojana
(RKVY) and Mission for Integrated Development of Horticulture (MIDH),
Network Project on Organic Farming under ICAR etc. The pattern of
assistance to State Governments through various schemes for promoting
use of organic/bio-fertilizer is given at Annexure-III.
The Department has also been focusing on creating awareness and
educating the farmers about organic farming practices in the areas
where clusters are formed:
(a) The provision of Rs. 80,000 per cluster financial assistance
allocated for Rs. 10,000 clusters under PKVY scheme for the
mobilization of farmers through different training & exposure
visits.
(b) Similarly, under MOVDNER scheme the financial assistance of
Rs. 8 crore is allocated for North Eastern Region to create
awareness and publicity through lead agencies.
(c) The National Centre of Organic Farming (NCOF), Ghaziabad,
a subordinate office of DAC&FC undertakes various extension
and publicity activities like exhibitions, radio talks, TV
programmes, distribution of literature on organic inputs/
organic farming etc. to educate the farmers. NCOF is also
publishing biannual Newsletter ÒBiofertilizersÓ as well as
quarterly Newsletter called Organic Farming. In addition,
various books on production and use of bio-fertilizers have
been published in various languages for distribution to the
farming community. Radio jingles on organic agriculture are
broadcasted on 4 different FM Radio Stations including Delhi,
Bangalore, Nagpur and Lucknow. NCOF organizes 30 days
certificate course on organic farming for skill development
in organic agriculture sector for youth. It also conducts 10
days Refresher course for analysts under Fertilizer Control
Order (FCO); 5 Days Trainers Training & 2 Days training for
field functionaries and extension staff of the State
Government. NCOF has also been organizing FarmersÕ Training

30
and Field Demonstrations (FTFD) programmes on organic
farming since 2015-16 in various villages adopted by the
HonÕble Members of Parliament under ÒSansad Aadharsh Gram
YojanaÓ (SAGY), through its Regional Centres on Organic
Farming (RCOFs). It has completed 300 no. of FTFD in
2015-16 and has targeted 298 no. in the year 2016-17.
[Ministry of Agriculture and Farmers Welfare (Department of
Agricultural Research and Education) O.M. No. NRM/1/11/2016-
SWDF dated 08.03.2017 & 26.07.2017]
[Ministry of Agriculture and Farmers Welfare (Department of
Agriculture, Cooperation and Farmers Welfare) O.M. No. 3-15/2016-
Fert. Law dated 01.08.2017]
EFFECTS OF EXCESSIVE/UNSCIENTIFIC USE OF PESTICIDES
Recommendation (Serial No. 10)
The Committee note that the chemical fertilizers and Pesticides
changed the face of agriculture in country by enhancing agricultural
production and productivity and making India self reliant in foodgrains.
Usage of pesticides has been an integral part of green revolution strategy
which not only enhanced foodgrain production by reducing losses from
weeds, diseases and insects/pests but also helped in improving quality
of crops/vegetables/fruits. However , the Committee also note that
pesticides have several drawbacks such as potential toxicity to human
and other species. Excessive/unscientific use of pesticides has caused
tremendous harm to the environment as well as affected human
population indirectly. Pesticides causes various deteriorating health
hazards in animals as well as human beings. Pesticides such as
organochlorine, pyrethroids can cause cancer along with other
neurological and endocrine system disorders. According to Stockholm
convention on Persistent organic pollutants, 9 out of 12 most dangerous
and persistent organic chemicals are organo-chlorine pesticides. The
Committee also note the havoc caused to the local population due to
unscientific use of endosulphan in Kerala. Increasing incidents of cancer
are being reported among local population in Punjab where pesticides
use in agriculture is among the highest in the country. The Committee
also note about report of Centre for Science and Environment in Punjab
wherein, they established presence of multiple pesticides in blood
samples of residents in 4 villages in Bhatinda and Ropar districts.
However , according to the Department of Health Research, the study
didnÕt attempt to correlate the presence of pesticides to any observed

31
health effects. The Committee also take note of studies by Department
of Health Research wherein, effects of pesticides are being analyzed
among exposed population in the country. However, lack of funds is one
of the constraints to take up a comprehensive research on impact of
pesticides and fertilizers on human health. The Committee note that
25 institutions in Country are monitoring pesticides level in food samples
across the country under ÔMonitoring of Pesticides Residues at National
level (MPRNL)Õ programme of Ministry of Agriculture wherein, samples
of vegetables, fruits, pulses, spices, wheat, rice, fish etc. are collected
and analysed for possible presence of pesticides level. The Committee
also note that FSSAI have set standards for maximum 100 pesticides
residues in food products and department of DAC & FW, FSSAI and State
Governments are responsible for ensuring compliance to these standards.
The Committee note with concern that unscientific and excessive use
of pesticides in agriculture and other sectors in the country pose a real
threat to the environment and the health of human population as well.
Since pesticides are mostly non-biodegradable and persist in environment,
there is possibility of entry of pesticides in to human blood through the
process of bio-magnification through food chain. The Committee are
therefore of the view that there is an imperative need for promoting
scientific use of pesticides in agriculture sector in our country. The
Committee, therefore, recommend that rigorious efforts in coordination
with all concerned may be made to create awareness amongst farmers
for scientific use of pesticides for increaing production and productivity
of their food grains. All State Governments may also be impressed upon
to strictly monitor pesticides level in food samples as per the Standards
set up by FSSAI on regular basis. The Committee also recommend that
the Government should also impress upon the Ministry of Finance to
provide adequate funds to the Department of Health Research for
undertaking comprehensive reseach on impact of pesticides on human
health. The Committee would like to be apprised of the initiatives
undertaken by the Department in this regard.
Reply of the Government
Department of Agricultural Research and Education
1. Farmers awareness and Scientific use of pesticides
a. In order to enhance the production and productivity of crops
by protecting them from the ravages of pests and to create
awareness amongst farmers and farming community, the
Government of India, Ministry of Agriculture, Department of
Agriculture & Co-Operation (DAC) has launched a scheme

32
ÒStrengthening and Modernization of Pest Management
Approach in IndiaÓ since 1991-92 by adopting Integrated Pest
Management (IPM) as cardinal principle and main plank of
plant protection strategy in overall crop production and
protection programme. Under the ambit of IPM programme,
the Government of India has established 35 Central IPM
Centres in 28 States and one UT .
b. These Central IPM centers are working with the objectives
to maximize crop production with minimum input costs;
Minimize environmental pollution in soil, water and air due
to pesticides; Minimize occupational health hazards due to
chemical pesticides; Conserve ecosystem and maintain
ecological equilibrium; Judicious use of chemical pesticides
for reducing pesticide residues; Popularizing IPM in farming
community by imparting training to Agriculture/Horticulture
Extension Officers and Farmers at Grass Root Level by
organizing Farmers Field Schools/2 days HRD/Five days HRD
programmes and 30 days duration Season Long Training
Programme. Basic aim of these programmes is to train the
farmers on the latest IPM technology and also to create
awareness about the judicious use of pesticides on their
crops so that the crop can be grown with minimum use of
pesticides. IPM package of practices for 87 crops has been
developed in collaboration with NCIPM and NIPHM and
uploaded on Farmers portal and Directorate Õs website for
farmers use. Also ÔGrow Safe Food Campaign Õ has been
launched by placing hoardings and banners at prominent
public places to create awareness among public and farmers
as well.
2. Monitoring Pesticides Residues in Food and Environmental Samples
ICAR has sponsored an all India Network Project on Pesticide Residues
(AINP-PR) with 16 Centres across the country. These Centers are
responsible for conducting GAP trials based on which MRLs are fixed for
each registered pesticides on host crops by the FSSAI. The Department
of Agriculture & Cooperation (DAC), Government of India has sponsored
a network of 25 Pesticide Residue analysis laboratories functioning under
Central Sector Scheme ÒMonitoring of Pesticide Residues at National
LevelÓ implemented through the AINP . The scheme MPRNL covers
monitoring of Pesticides residue in food commodities and environmental
samples (soil and water), since 2005-06 with the participation of 25
laboratories under Indian Council of Agriculture Research, Ministry of
Agriculture, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Ministry of

33
Environment and Forests, Council of Scientific and Industrial Research,
Ministry of Chemical and Fertilizer , Ministry of Commerce and State
Agricultural Universities across the country.
The well-equipped laboratories with state-of-the-art facilities and
accredited by National Accreditation Board for Testing and Calibration
of Laboratories (NABL) are regularly participating in the Inter laboratory
Comparison (ILC) at national level and Proficiency Testing (PT) at
international level to ensure generation of internationally acceptable
quality data on pesticide residue.
During 2012-16, a total of 76,005 samples of food commodities
including vegetables, fruits, cereals, pulses, spices, curry leaves, milk,
egg, fish/marine, meat, tea from Agriculture Produce Marketing
Committee (APMC) markets, local markets, farm gate, organic outlets,
CIPMC and Public Distribution Systems (PDS) and surface water from
intensive agricultural fields from various parts of the country were
analysed for the possible presence of pesticide residues. Based on the
analysis 1,882 samples (2.5%) were detected with pesticides above
FSSAI MRLÕs. The data generated under the scheme includes the status
of pesticide load in various food commodities as well as usage of
recommended/non-recommended pesticides by the farmers.
This data is shared with state agricultural departments for necessary
corrective action. It was observed that the residues of pesticides without
label claim and MRL were frequently detected in vegetables. To overcome
the non-judicious use of pesticides by the farmers, the AINP on Pesticide
Residues initiated multi-location supervised field trials for the fixation
of MRL and approval of label claim. Since 2013, out of 833 GAP trials,
a total of 600 trials have been completed. The data generated will be
submitted to Codex for fixation of MRL and will also utilized by CIB &
RC for the fixation of MRL, safe waiting period and approval of label
claim.
Department of Agriculture, Cooperation and  Farmers Welfare
1. Farmers awareness and Scientific use of pesticides
a. In order to enhance the production and productivity of crops
by protecting them from the ravages of pests and to create
awareness amongst farmers and farming community, the
Government of India, Ministry of Agriculture, Department of
Agriculture & Co-Operation (DAC) has launched a scheme
ÒStrengthening and Modernization of Pest Management
Approach in IndiaÓ since 1991-92 by adopting Integrated Pest

34
Management (IPM) as cardinal principle and main plank of
plant protection strategy in overall crop production and
protection programme. Under the ambit of IPM programme,
the Government of India has established 35 Central IPM
Centres in 28 States and one UT .
b. These Central IPM centers are working with the objectives
to maximize crop production with minimum input costs;
Minimize environmental pollution in soil, water and air due
to pesticides; Minimize occupational health hazards due to
chemical pesticides; Conserve ecosystem and maintain
ecological equilibrium; Judicious use of chemical pesticides
for reducing pesticide residues; Popularizing IPM in farming
community by imparting training to Agriculture/Horticulture
Extension Officers and Farmers at Grass Root Level by
organizing Farmers Field Schools/2 days HRD/Five days HRD
programmes and 30 days duration Season Long Training
Programme. Basic aim of these programmes is to train the
farmers on the latest IPM technology and also to create
awareness about the judicious use of pesticides on their
crops so that the crop can be grown with minimum use of
pesticides. IPM package of practices for 87 crops has been
developed in collaboration with NCIPM and NIPHM and
uploaded on Farmers portal and Directorate Õs website for
farmers use. Also ÔGrow Safe Food Campaign Õ has been
launched by placing hoardings and banners at prominent
public places to create awareness among public and farmers
as well. In the last three years (2014-15 to 2016-17), a total
of 1991 FFSs have been organized imparting training to 53,730
farmers on IPM approval to pest management. In addition,
a total of 326 two day HRD and 50 five day HRD programmes
have been organized imparting training to 15,040 Nos. of
AEOs/NGOs/Lead Farmers/Private Entrepreneurs etc. in the
last three years. Between 2014-15 to 2016-17, a total of 12
SLTPs have been conducted imparting training to 480 Master
Trainers.
2. Monitoring Pesticides Residues in Food and Environmental Samples
ICAR has sponsored an all India Network Project on Pesticide Residues
(AINP-PR) with 16 Centres across the country. These Centers are
responsible for conducting GAP trials based on which MRLs are fixed for
each registered pesticides on host crops by the FSSAI. The Department
of Agriculture & Cooperation (DAC), Government of India has sponsored
a network of 25 Pesticide Residue analysis laboratories functioning under
Central Sector Scheme ÒMonitoring of Pesticide Residues at National
LevelÓ implemented through the AINP . The scheme MPRNL covers
monitoring of Pesticides residue in food commodities and environmental

35
samples (soil and water), since 2005-06 with the  participation of 25
laboratories under Indian Council of Agriculture Research, Ministry of
Agriculture, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Ministry of
Environment and Forest, Council of Scientific and Industrial Research,
Ministry of Chemical and Fertilizer , Ministry of Commerce and State
Agricultural Universities across the country.
The well-equipped laboratories with state-of-the-art facilities and
accredited by National Accreditation Board for Testing and Calibration
of Laboratories (NABL) are regularly participating in the Inter laboratory
Comparison (ILC) at national level and Proficiency Testing (PT) at
international level to ensure generation of internationally acceptable
quality data on pesticide residue.
During 2012-16, a total of 76,005 samples of food commodities
including vegetables, fruits, cereals, pulses, spices, curry leaves, milk,
egg, fish/marine, meat, tea from Agriculture Produce Marketing
Committee (APMC) markets, local markets, farm gate, organic outlets,
CIPMC and Public Distribution Systems (PDS) and surface water from
intensive agricultural fields from various parts of the country were
analysed for the possible presence of pesticide residues. Based on the
analysis 1,882 samples (2.5%) were detected with pesticides above
FSSAI MRLÕs. The data generated under the scheme includes the status
of pesticide load in various food commodities as well as usage of
recommended/non-recommended pesticides by the farmers.
This data is shared with state agricultural departments for necessary
corrective action. It was observed that the residues of pesticides without
label claim and MRL were frequently detected in vegetables. To overcome
the non-judicious use of pesticides by the famers, the AINP on Pesticide
Residues initiated multi-location supervised field trials for the fixation
of MRL and approval of label claim. During 2012-18, a total of 943 GAP
trials were planned on various pesticide-crop combinations (triazophos,
acephate, chlorpyrifos, quinalphos, ethion, carbendazim, profenophos,
cypermethrin, methyl parathion, bifenthrin, imidacloprid, cyhalothrin-I
and spiromesifen on cabbage, cauliflower , okra, tomato, brinjal,
capsicum, green chilli, curry leaf, bitter gourd, cucumber and green
tea), out of which 723 trials have been completed. The data generated
is being submitted to Codex for fixation of MRL and will also utilized
by CIB & RC for approval of label claim and FSSAI for the fixation of
MRL.
[Ministry of Agriculture and Farmers Welfare (Department of
Agricultural Research and Education) O.M. No. NRM/1/11/2016-
SWDF dated 08.03.2017 & 26.07.2017]
[Ministry of Agriculture and Farmers Welfare (Department of
Agriculture, Cooperation and Farmers Welfare) O.M. No. 3-15/2016-
Fert. Law dated 01.08.2017]

36
INTEGRATED PEST MANAGEMENT
Recommendation (Serial No. 11)
The Committee note that the Government has adopted Integrated
Pest Management (IPM) as cardinal principle and main plan of plant
protection in the overall crop production programme since 1985. IPM
lays emphasis on Pest Management through a combination of agronomic,
chemical and biological methods. IPM ensure the safe and judicious use
of pesticides in agriculture. Timely sowing, use of tolerant and resistant
plant varieties, transgenic pest resistant crops, bio-control agents and
need based application of chemical pesticides are basic tools of IPM
tool box. The Committee also note that Government is implementing
various schemes namely Strengthening & Modernization of Pest
Management Approach (SMPMA) in the country, Strengthening &
Modernization of Plant Quarantine Facilities (SMPQF) in India and
Monitoring of Pesticides Residues at National Level (MPRNL) to achieve
objectives outlined in IPM. The Committee have also been informed
that National Research Centre for Integrated Pest Management (NRCIPM)
is validating IPM technologies in various crops and developed location
specific forecasting models of some crops under NICRA project and ICT
based e-pest surveillance system. Besides, National Institute of Plant
Health Management (NIPHM) assists the States and Government of India
in increasing the efficiency of the existing pest and disease surveillance
and control system, certification and accreditation system through a
core role as a training and adaptive research centre in the field of
extension and policy development related to plant protection. The
Government of India has established 31 Central IPM Centres (CPIMCs)
in 29 States and 1 UT . These CIPMCs do take 102 activities like training
for farmers, training for State extension officials, conducting farmers
field schools etc. However, the Committee are distressed to note that
no specific allocations have been made for achieving the objectives of
IPM and budget allocated for Central IPM centres is used for IPM work.
The Committee, therefore, recommend that adequate funds may be
allocated for IPM for achieving its objectives without any financial
constraints. The Committee would like the Department to impress upon
the Ministry of Finance for the purpose.
Reply of the Government
Department of Agricultural Research and Education
To promote judicious use of chemical pesticides, Government of
India, Ministry of Agriculture, Department of Agriculture & Co-Operation
(DAC) has launched a scheme ÒStrengthening and Modernization of Pest

37
Management Approach in India Ó since 1991-92 by adopting Integrated
Pest Management (IPM) as cardinal principle and main plank of plant
protection strategy in overall crop production and protection programme.
Under the ambit of IPM programme, the Government of India has
established 35 Central IPM Centres in 28 States and one UT . IPM centres
are working with the objectives to maximize crop production with
minimum input costs; minimize environmental pollution in soil, water
and air due to pesticides; minimize occupational health hazards due to
chemical pesticides; conserve ecosystem and maintain ecological
equilibrium; Judicious use of chemical pesticides for reducing pesticide
residues; popularize IPM among farming community by imparting training
to Agriculture/Horticulture Extension Officers and Farmers at Grass
Root Level by organizing Farmers Field Schools/2 days HRD/ Five days
HRD programmes and 30 days duration Season Long Training Programme.
Basic aim of these programmes is to train the farmers on the latest IPM
technology and also to create awareness about the judicious use of
pesticides on their crops so that the crop can be grown with minimum
use of pesticides. Also ÔGrow Safe Food Campaign Õ has been launched
by placing hoardings and banners at prominent public places to create
awareness among public and farmers as well.
Government implemented various schemes namely ICAR-National
Research Centre for Integrated Pest Management (NCIPM) and All India
Coordinated Projects for Biological Control for promoting bio-control of
crop pests and diseases for developing and validating Bio-intensive IPM
technologies in various crops. Government had approved Rs. 5335 lac
for ICAR-NCIPM and Rs. 2100 lac under the sub-scheme AICRP-BC for
the XII Five Year Plan (2012-17). About 19.99 lakh ha area has been
brought under Bio-intensive Integrated Pest Management (BIPM). The
Centre has developed location specific pest forecasting models of crops
through ICT based e-pest surveillance system. IPM package of practices
for 87 crops has been developed in collaboration with NCIPM and NIPHM
and uploaded on Farmers portal and Directorate Õs website for farmers
use.
Other schemes include Crop Pest Surveillance and Advisory Project
(CROPSAP) and Horticultural Crop Pest Surveillance and Advisory Project
(HORTSAP) under National Food Security Mission (NFSM) and National
Horticultural Missions (NHM), respectively; Strengthening & Modernization
of Pest Management Approach in the country (SMPMA); Strengthening &
Modernization of Plant Quarantine Facilities in India (SMPQF), Monitoring
of Pesticides Residues at National Level (MPRNL) and All India Coordinated
Research Project (AICRP) to monitor pesticide residues in food items
and for developing Good Agricultural Practices, to achieve objectives of

38
need-based and judicious use of pesticides, principles outlined under
IPM. Central level monitoring of supply of inputs, pests/diseases and
related aspects, through the mechanism of ÔCrop and Weather Watch
GroupÕ is contributing to achieve objectives at national level through
the Department of Agriculture & Cooperation and Farmers Welfare.
ICAR-National Bureau of Agriculturally Important Insect Resources
(NBAIR) has created several success stories by controlling serious pests
(e.g. papaya mealy bug, sugarcane wooly aphid, etc.) through
deployment of bio-control agents and thereby minimizing application of
chemical pesticides. ICAR-National Bureau of Agriculturally Important
Microbes (NBAIM) carries out research on replenishing soil with micro-
organisms, which make crops healthier and less prone to pests and
disease attacks.
Two recently established Institutes, ICARÑNational Institute for Biotic
Stress Management (NIBSM), Raipur and ICARÑNational Institute for
Abiotic Stress Management (NIASM), Pune have initiated efforts in the
direction to reduce dependence on chemical pesticides. DAC-National
Institute of Plant Health Management (NIPHM) assists the States and
Government of India in increasing the efficiency of the existing pest
and disease surveillance and control system, certification and
accreditation system through trainings/HRD and adaptive research Centre
in the field of extension and policy development related to plant
protection and use of pesticides.
Department of Agriculture, Cooperation and Farmers Welfare
To promote judicious use of chemical pesticides, Govt. of India,
Ministry of Agriculture, Department of Agriculture & Co-Operation (DAC)
has launched a scheme ÒStrengthening and Modernization of Pest
Management Approach in India Ó since 1991-92 by adopting Integrated
Pest Management (IPM) as cardinal principle and main plank of plant
protection strategy in overall crop production and protection programme.
Under the ambit of IPM programme, the Government of India has
established 35 Central IPM Centres in 28 States and one UT . IPM centers
are working with the objectives to maximize crop production with
minimum input costs; minimize environmental pollution in soil, water
and air due to pesticides; minimize occupational health hazards due to
chemical pesticides; conserve ecosystem and maintain ecological
equilibrium; Judicious use of chemical pesticides for reducing pesticide
residues; popularize IPM among farming community by imparting training
to Agriculture/Horticulture Extension Officers and Farmers at Grass
Root Level by organizing Farmers Field Schools/2 days HRD/Five days

39
HRD programmes and 30 days duration Season Long Training Programme.
Basic aim of these programmes is to train the farmers on the latest IPM
technology and also to create awareness about the judicious use of
pesticides on their crops so that the crop can be grown with minimum
use of pesticides. Also ÔGrow Safe Food Campaign Õ has been launched
by placing hoardings and banners at prominent public places to create
awareness among public and farmers as well. In the last three years an
amount of Rs. 9.71 crore have been incurred on organizing FFSs, two
days HRD, five days HRD programmes and SLTPs. A provision of
Rs. 37.25 crore for organizing 2772 FFSs, 564 two days HRD, 100 five
days HRD programmes and 19 SLTPs has been made in the proposed EFC
for 2017-18 to 2019-20.
[Ministry of Agriculture and Farmers Welfare (Department of
Agricultural Research and Education) O.M. No. NRM/1/11/2016-
SWDF dated 08.03.2017 & 26.07.2017]
[Ministry of Agriculture and Farmers Welfare (Department of
Agriculture, Cooperation and Farmers Welfare) O.M. No. 3-15/2016-
Fert. Law dated 01.08.2017]
REGULATION OF IMPORT AND USE OF PESTICIDES
Recommendation (Serial No. 12)
The Committee note that 57353 MT (technical grade) pesticides
were used in country during 2014-15 (provisional). However , the
Committee also observe that use of pesticides in the country is not
even in different States. There is widespread use of pesticides in States
like Uttar Pradesh, Maharashtra, Punjab, Haryana, Andhra Pradesh and
West Bengal which were pioneer States during green revolution. Further,
the Committee also observe that 77376 MT (technical grade) pesticides
worth Rs. 5122.09 crore were imported in country during 2013-14. The
Committee are also perturbed to note that there is variation in use of
pesticides in the country and import figures and the Department of
Chemical and Petrochemical have received complaints about the same
by local manufacturers that multinational companies are importing
formulation rather than chemical grade and pushing these in local
markets. The Committee also note that DDT is still being used in
agriculture in some States despite its ban in the Country. This only goes
to show that there is no effective regulatory mechanism to ensure
manufacturing, import and sale of pesticides in country in terms of the
provisions of Insecticides Act, 1968. The Committee, therefore,
recommend that the existing regulatory mechanism may be strengthened
in consultation with State Governments concerned to check the acts

40
which are contrary to the provisions of Insecticides Act, 1968. The
Committee also recommend that an enquiry may also be conducted to
find out inconsistency between import and use of pesticides in the
country along with diversion of DDT for agriculture use and legal action
may be taken against companies which are indulged in such illegal acts.
Reply of the Government
Department of Agricultural Research and Education
India is one of the most dynamic generic pesticide manufactures in
the world with approximately 60 technical grade pesticides being
manufactured indigenously by around 125 producers consisting of large
and medium scale enterprises (including 10 MNCs) and more than
500 pesticide formulators spread over the country.
Government has recently initiated several measures to promote
ÒMake in India Ó directives.  Registration committee of CIBRC in its
371st meeting held on 16.12.2016 has recommended cancellation of
import certificates for technical grade chemicals/formulation import
for companies who already possess registration certificates for
manufacture of technical grade chemicals in the country. Similarly
companies intending to manufacture pesticides in India will be given
adequate relaxation/exemption in terms of data requirements for
registration once the chemical equivalence with the imported technical
grade pesticide is established (Please also see Annexure-IV). All these
steps are made to encourage indigenous manufacture and sale and
discourage import of pesticides.
RC in its 373rd meeting 27.1.2017 recommended that henceforth
every company has to provide monthly turnover of pesticides including
technical imported, used for manufacture of formulations, balance stock,
sold in the market etc. These practices would serve to remove
inconsistencies between import and actual use in agriculture removing
possibilities of diversion for illegal use.
To streamline the regulatory mechanism for manufacturing, import
and sale of pesticides in the country and to curb the menace of spurious
pesticides, several steps have been taken which are as under:Ñ
1. Drawal of samples by notified Insecticide Inspectors under
the Act from the manufacturing premises, distributions/sale
points and their analysis in the State Pesticides Testing
Laboratories (SPTLs) to monitor the quality of pesticides by
State authorities.

41
2. Launching of prosecutions against the manufacturers/
suppliers of pesticides which are found substandard.
3. Periodical review during the Zonal Conferences on inputs
and National Conferences on Agriculture for Kharif and Rabi
campaigns to further strengthen the Quality Control
arrangements.
4. Training of Insecticide Analysts and Insecticide Inspectors to
upgrade their knowledge and skills in the analysis of
pesticides and enforcement of the various provisions of the
Insecticides Act, 1968 and the Rules framed thereunder,
respectively.
5. Education of farmers for correct and judicious use of good
quality insecticides under the overall ambit of eco-friendly
Integrated Pest Management (IPM) approach.
6. States have been advised to constitute special flying squads
comprising of senior officers of the department to draw
samples for quality monitoring. During every crop season to
curb this menace of spurious products, mostly by unscrupulous
manufacturers targeted purposeful sampling is advised.
7. States/UTs have been advised to fully utilize the analysis
capacity of their SPTLs.
8. From time to time, the state functionaries have been guided
to handle the cases of misbranded insecticides carefully and
the launching of prosecutions against defaulters should not
be delayed.
9. States have been advised that their Insecticide Inspectors
should draw samples uniformly covering all manufacturers
rather than selecting a few reputed manufacturers.
10. States/UTs have been advised to update their laboratory
facilities in SPTLs. The Central Government has been giving
grants-in-aid for the purpose.
11. T wenty Five States and One UT have set up 68 pesticides
Testing Laboratories (PTLs) with an annual capacity of
analyzing over 73507 samples for monitoring the quality status
of pesticides.
12. The Central Government has also set up a Central Insecticides
Laboratory as a National Referral laboratory under
Section 16 of Insecticides Act, 1968. Besides, two Regional
Pesticides Testing Laboratories have also been set up at

42
Chandigarh and Kanpur to supplement the resources of the
States/UTs in the analysis of pesticides. The Central
Government has also set up a task force in the Department
of Agriculture & Cooperation with a view to curb the menace
of spurious pesticides.
Department of Agriculture, Cooperation and Farmers Welfare
India is one of the most dynamic generic pesticide manufactures in
the world with approximately 60 technical grade pesticides being
manufactured indigenously by around 125 producers consisting of large
and medium scale enterprises (including 10 MNCs) and more than
500 pesticide formulators spread over the country.
Government has recently initiated several measures to promote
ÒMake in India Ó directives. Registration committee of CIBRC in its
371st meeting held on 16.12.2016 has recommended cancellation of
import certificates for technical grade chemicals/formulation import
for companies who already possess registration certificates for
manufacture of technical grade chemicals in the country. Similarly
companies intending to manufacture pesticides in India will be given
adequate relaxation/exemption in terms of data requirements for
registration once the chemical equivalence with the imported technical
grade pesticide is established (Please also see Annexure-I). All these
steps are made to encourage indigenous manufacture and sale and
discourage import of pesticides.
RC in its 373rd meeting 27.1.2017 recommended that henceforth
every company has to provide monthly turnover of pesticides including
technical imported, used for manufacture of formulations, balance stock,
sold in the market etc. These practices would serve to remove
inconsistencies between import and actual use in agriculture removing
possibilities of diversion for illegal use.
The DAC&FW has issued following direction to the CIB&RC with a
view to rationalize the import of pesticides in the Country.
1. Import of pesticides shall be permitted on submission of
three years authentic import data by the holder of the
registration.
2. The import of pesticides shall be reduced by 25% of the
average of three years of import.

43
To streamline the regulatory mechanism for manufacturing, import
and sale of pesticides in the country and to curb the menace of spurious
pesticides, several steps have been taken which are as under:Ñ
1. Drawal of samples by notified Insecticide Inspectors under
the Act from the manufacturing premises, distributions/sale
points and their analysis in the State Pesticides Testing
Laboratories (SPTLs) to monitor the quality of pesticides by
State authorities.
2. Launching of prosecutions against the manufacturers/suppliers
of pesticides which are found substandard.
3. Periodical review during the Zonal Conferences on inputs
and National Conferences on Agriculture for Kharif and Rabi
campaigns to further strengthen the Quality Control
arrangements.
4. Training of Insecticide Analysts and Insecticide Inspectors to
upgrade their knowledge and skills in the analysis of
pesticides and enforcement of the various provisions of the
Insecticides Act, 1968 and the Rules framed thereunder,
respectively.
5. Education of farmers for correct and judicious use of good
quality insecticides under the overall ambit of eco-friendly
Integrated Pest Management (IPM) approach.
6. States have been advised to constitute special flying squads
comprising of senior officers of the department to draw
samples for quality monitoring. During every crop season to
curb this menace of spurious products, mostly by unscrupulous
manufacturers targeted purposeful sampling is advised.
7. States/UTs have been advised to fully utilize the analysis
capacity of their SPTLs.
8. From time to time, the State functionaries have been guided
to handle the cases of misbranded insecticides carefully and
the launching of prosecutions against defaulters should not
be delayed.
9. States have been advised that their Insecticide Inspectors
should draw samples uniformly covering all manufacturers
rather than selecting a few reputed manufacturers.
10. States/UTs have been advised to update their laboratory
facilities in SPTLs. The Central Government has been giving
grants-in-aid for the purpose.

44
11. T wenty Five States and One UT have set up 68 Pesticides
Testing Laboratories (PTLs) with an annual capacity of
analyzing over 73507 samples for monitoring the quality status
of pesticides.
12. The Central Government has also set up a Central Insecticides
Laboratory as a National Referral laboratory under Section
16 of Insecticides Act, 1968. Besides, two Regional Pesticides
Testing Laboratories have also been set up at Chandigarh
and Kanpur to supplement the resources of the States/UTs
in the analysis of pesticides. The Central Government has
also set up a task force in the Department of Agriculture &
Cooperation with a view to curb the menace of spurious
pesticides. With a view to assist the State in quality
monitoring, establishment of two new RPTLs is proposed in
the EFC for 2017-18 to 2019-20.
13. National Pesticides Reference Repository (NPRR) has been
established for developing standardizing and providing
Certified Reference Material (CRM)/reference standards to
pesticides testing laboratories across the country for bringing
uniformity in use of such standards, thereby bringing more
accuracy and efficiency in monitoring quality of pesticides.
14. National Pesticides Investigation Laboratory (NPIL) has been
established for investigations on lacing of bio-pesticides with
chemical pesticides, investigations on pesticides imported
illegally, method development & validation for newly
introduced pesticide molecules and randomly verifying the
test results of the analysts of all pesticides testing
laboratories.
[Ministry of Agriculture and Farmers Welfare (Department of
Agricultural Research and Education) O.M. No. NRM/1/11/2016-
SWDF dated 08.03.2017 & 26.07.2017]
[Ministry of Agriculture and Farmers Welfare (Department of
Agriculture, Cooperation and Farmers Welfare) O.M. No. 3-15/2016-
Fert. Law dated 01.08.2017]
SCIENTIFIC USE OF PESTICIDES
Recommendation (Serial No. 13)
The Committee are concerned to note that problems associated
with unscientific and excessive use of pesticides have not been addressed
properly by the Government of India and State Governments which is

45
evident by rising cases of occupational exposure and associated diseases
such as cancer among local farmers in Punjab and other places in the
country. Besides creating awareness and training of farmers for scientific
use of pesticides in agriculture, the Committee feel the need of
distribution of protective gears and pesticide sprinklers to the farmers
to prevent them from unwanted exposure of pesticides. The Committee
are of considered view that it is imperative that the use of pesticides
in agriculture and other sectors is supervised scientifically. The
Committee are also of the view that economic 104 gains should not be
achieved at the cost of public health and the environment. The
Committee, therefore, recommend that a comprehensive action plan
may be prepared by the Government ensuring environment sustainable
manufacturing, import, sale and use of pesticides in agriculture as well
as other sectors including availability of safety gears to farmers and
workers. The Committee desire the Government to prepare action plan
in consultation with all stakeholders such as State Governments,
Agricultural Universities/Institutions, Chemical Pesticides Manufactures/
Importers, Traders, Farmers along with Experts/NGOs active in the field
of agricultural management. The Committee also desire the Government
to allocate specific funds for implementation of action plan for the
purpose. The Committee would like to be apprised of the steps taken
by the Government in this regard. The Committee also desired the
Government to explore options to provide license for sale of pesticides
to the persons holding degree/diploma/certificates in Agriculture
Sciences.
Reply of the Government
Department of Agricultural Research and Education
The Pesticide Management Bill, pending in parliament serves to
oversee various issues and concerns associated with regulation and use
of pesticides in Agriculture. Central Insecticide Board and MoA&FW
periodically reviews issues concerning labeling of pesticides and classify
them with colour code depending upon their toxicity and hazardous
nature. DAC and CIBRC recently rationalized the label leaflet guidelines
defining the language, font size, inclusion of precautions with pictorial
depictions for easy and safe handling of pesticides. The Committee on
review of 66 pesticides recently has also recommended distribution of
protective gears and container safety instructions. DAC, MoA&FW recently
has also issued gazette notification specifying the minimum qualification
as a mandatory requirement for issue of license for sale of pesticides.

46
Department of Agriculture, Cooperation and Farmers Welfare
Pesticides are regulated in India through Insecticides Act, 1968.
The experience in administering the Insecticides Act, 1968 over the last
four decades has exposed certain gaps which spurred the need to
propose a new law. Pesticide Management Bill (PMB) which is in discussion
since 2008 and before, between this Ministry and Ministry of Law and
Justice resulted in substantive changes to the original Bill as was
introduced in the Parliament (Rajya Sabha). It was suggested by the
Legislative Department, Ministry of Law and Justice that instead of
moving official amendments to rectify the changes and to add more
than 90 enactments for repeal by way of lengthy amendments, it would
be preferable, to withdraw ÔThe Pesticide Management Bill, 2008 Õ and
a new Bill namely, ÔThe Pesticide Management Bill, 2017 Õ incorporating
all the official amendments as on date be introduced in the Parliament.
The Pesticide Management Bill, 2017 serve to oversee various issues
and concerns associated with regulation and use of pesticides in
Agriculture. Central Insecticide Board and MoA&FW periodically reviews
issues concerning labeling of pesticides and classify them with colour
code depending upon their toxicity and hazardous nature. DAC&FW and
CIBRC recently rationalized the label leaflet guidelines defining the
language, font size, inclusion of precautions with pictorial depictions
for easy and safe handling of pesticides. The Committee on review of
55 pesticides recently has also recommended distribution of protective
gears and container safety instructions. DAC&FW recently has also issues
gazette notification specifying the minimum qualification as a mandatory
requirement for issue of license for sale of pesticides.
[Ministry of Agriculture and Farmers Welfare (Department of
Agricultural Research and Education) O.M. No. NRM/1/11/2016-
SWDF dated 08.03.2017 & 26.07.2017]
[Ministry of Agriculture and Farmers Welfare (Department of
Agriculture, Cooperation and Farmers Welfare) O.M. No. 3-15/2016-
Fert. Law dated 01.08.2017]
Comments of the Committee
For comments of the Committee please refer to Para No. 1.24 of
Chapter-I of this Report.
INSECTICIDES ACT, 1968
Recommendation (Serial No. 15)
The Committee were briefed by the Department of Chemical and
Petrochemical that while production of pesticides lies with them, the

47
usage of pesticides is administered by the Ministry of Agriculture. So
there is conflict of interest, in the admissiblility of the provisions of the
Act of 1968. It was argued that as the Department of Chemical and
Petrochemicals is responsible for production of pesticides in the country,
administration of Insecticide Act should naturally be done by them. The
Committee are of view that there is an urgent need for review of
Insecticide Act, 1968 as the sector needs better regulatory framework
in order to safeguard environment and public health. There is also a
need for enhanced supervision and coordination between Central and
State Governments for regulation of pesticides sector at ground level.
The Committee, therefore recommend the Government to take steps
for revision of Insecticides Act, 1968 in consultation with all stakeholders
including farmers organizations, experts and NGOs/research institutions
107 active in agricultural field. The Committee also desire the
Government to submit a report in this regard at the action taken stage.
Reply of the Government
Department of Agricultural Research and Education
The Insecticides Act, 1968 and Rules framed there under not only
regulate usage, but also regulate import, manufacturing, sale and
distribution of Insecticides. Central Insecticides Board and Registration
Committee (CIB & RC) constituted under sections 4 and 5, respectively
of the aforesaid Act, 1968 approve inclusion of a chemical or biological
moiety in the schedule of Insecticides and its registration after
scrutinizing their formulae and verifying claims made by the
manufacturer and importer. A manufacturer can only start the
production, once he has been issued certificate of registration from CIB
& RC and license for manufacturing from the concerned State
Government. The manufacturing facilities for production of pesticides
are verified by the State Government before issuing manufacturing
license to the concerned firm/person. Further , officials from Food Safety
and Standards Authority of India (FSSAI), under Union Health and Family
Welfare Ministry, are responsible for checking the Maximum Residual
Level (MRL) of pesticides in food crops at the end level. The third
agency, under Union Ministry of Commerce and Industry, sets the
guidelines and standards for production of pesticides in the country.
With the objectives to further improve Insecticides Act, 1968,
Pesticides Management Bill was introduced in the Rajya Sabha on
October 21, 2008. The Bill seeks to regulate the manufacture, quality,
import, export and sale of pesticides to control pests, ensure availability
of quality pesticides and minimize contamination of agricultural

48
commodities with pesticide residue. Under the new regulation the Central
Government shall constitute a Central Pesticides Board to advise the
Central and State Governments on matters related to the law such as
(a) prevention of risk to human beings, animals and environment during
the manufacture, sale and transport of pesticides; (b) monitoring
performance of registered pesticides; and (c) review of the safety of
pesticides. The Central Government shall establish a Registration
Committee to (a) register pesticides after scrutinizing their formulae
and verifying claims made with regard to its efficacy and safety;
(b) specify requirements of necessary infrastructure; and (c) specify
protocols and good manufacturing practices for manufacture of
pesticides. The officers shall (a) maintain a register of persons engaged
in manufacture or sale of pesticides; (b) provide information to the
State Government on performance of registered pesticides; and
(c) provide information to the State Government on infrastructure
facilities of manufacturers.
The Central Government had established 02 Regional Pesticide Testing
Laboratories and, a referral laboratory for regulating quality of
pesticides. Central Insecticides Laboratory has been renamed as Central
Pesticides Laboratory in the Pesticide Management Bill, 2008. The Bill
prohibits the manufacture, import and export of misbranded, spurious
or sub-standard pesticides and any pesticide that contravenes the law.
The Central or State Governments may appoint pesticide analysts and
pesticide inspectors, latter shall have the power to enter and search a
premise if he has reason to believe that a violation of the law has taken
place; to take registers and records maintained by the manufacturer;
to stop the distribution, sale or use of pesticide with the permission of
the Executive Magistrate; and to take samples of any pesticides and
send it for analysis by a pesticide analyst within 48 hours.
The Bill lists a number of penalties for offences such as use of
pesticide in contravention of the law and sale of misbranded or
sub-standard pesticide.
Department of Agriculture, Cooperation and Farmers Welfare
The Insecticides Act, 1968 and Rules framed there under not only
regulate usage, but also regulate import, manufacturing, sale and
distribution of Insecticides. Central Insecticides Board and Registration
Committee (CIB & RC) constituted under sections 4 and 5, respectively
of the aforesaid Act, 1968 approve inclusion of a chemical or biological
moiety in the schedule of Insecticides and its registration after
scrutinizing their formulae and verifying claims made by the

49
manufacturer and importer. A manufacturer can only start the
production, once he has been issued certificate of registration from CIB
& RC and license for manufacturing from the concerned State
Government. The manufacturing facilities for production of pesticides
are verified by the State Government before issuing manufacturing
license to the concerned firm/person. Further , officials from Food Safety
and Standards Authority of India (FSSAI), under Union Health and Family
Welfare Ministry, are responsible for checking the Maximum Residual
Level (MRL) of pesticides in food crops at the end level. The third
agency, under Union Ministry of Commerce and Industry, sets the
guidelines and standards for production of pesticides in the country.
With the objectives to further improve Insecticides Act, 1968,
Pesticides Management Bill was introduced in the Rajya Sabha on
October 21, 2008. The Bill seeks to regulate the manufacture, quality,
import, export and sale of pesticides to control pests, ensure availability
of quality pesticides and minimize contamination of agricultural
commodities with pesticide residue. Under the new regulation the Central
Government shall constitute a Central Pesticides Board to advise the
Central and State Governments on matters related to the law such as
(a) prevention of risk to human beings, animals and environment during
the manufacture, sale and transport of pesticides; (b) monitoring
performance of registered pesticides; and (c) review of the safety of
pesticides. The Central Government shall establish a Registration
Committee to (a) register pesticides after scrutinizing their formulae
and verifying claims made with regard to its efficacy and safety;
(b) specify requirements of necessary infrastructure; and (c) specify
protocols and good manufacturing practices for manufacture of
pesticides. The officers shall (a) maintain a register of persons engaged
in manufacture or sale of pesticides; (b) provide information to the
State Government on performance of registered pesticides; and
(c) provide information to the State Government on infrastructure
facilities of manufacturers. The Bill is in discussion with Ministry of Law
and Justice since 2008 and before, resulted in substantive changes to
the original Bill as was introduced in the Parliament (Rajya Sabha). It
was suggested by the Legislative Department, Ministry of Law and Justice
that instead of moving official amendments to rectify the changes and
to add more than 90 enactments for repeal by way of lengthy
amendments, it would be preferable to, to withdraw ÔThe Pesticide
Management Bill, 2008 Õ and a new Bill namely, ÔThe Pesticides
Management Bill 2017 Õ incorporating all the official amendments as on
date be introduced in the Parliament.
The Central Government had established 02 Regional Pesticide Testing
Laboratories and a referral laboratory for regulating quality of pesticides.
Central Insecticides Laboratory has been renamed as Central Pesticides

50
Laboratory in the Pesticide Management Bill, 2008. The Bill prohibits
the manufacture, import and export of misbranded, spurious or
sub-standard pesticides and any pesticide that contravenes the law.
The Central or State Governments may appoint pesticide analysts and
pesticide inspectors, latter shall have the power to enter and search a
premise if he has reason to believe that a violation of the law has taken
place; to take registers and records maintained by the manufacturer;
to stop the distribution, sale or use of pesticide with the permission of
the Executive Magistrate; and to take samples of any pesticides and
send it for analysis by a pesticide analyst within 48 hours. In addition,
with a view to assist the State in quality monitoring, establishment of
two new RPTLs is proposed in the EFC for 2017-18 to 2019-20.
The Bill lists a number of penalties for offences such as use of
pesticide in contravention of the law and sale of misbranded or
sub-standard pesticide.
[Ministry of Agriculture and Farmers Welfare (Department of
Agricultural Research and Education) O.M. No. NRM/1/11/2016-
SWDF dated 08.03.2017 & 26.07.2017]
[Ministry of Agriculture and Farmers Welfare (Department of
Agriculture, Cooperation and Farmers Welfare) O.M. No. 3-15/2016-
Fert. Law dated 01.08.2017]

51
CHAPTER III
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO NOT
DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE GOVERNMENT ÕS REPLIES
-NIL-

52
CHAPTER IV
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF
THE GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE
INTEGRATED NUTRIENT MANAGEMENT
Recommendation (Serial No. 5)
The Committee note that Integrated Nutrient Management (INM)
adopted from Tenth Plan envisages conjunctive use of chemical fertilizers
including secondary and micro-nutrient, organic manure, composts/
vermin-compost, bio-fertilizers and green manures. ICAR has generated
GIS based soil fertility maps, nutrient management packages, developed
strains of Nitrogen fixer for production of quality bio-fertilizers,
standardized technologies for preparation of urban/rural compost, green
manuring and crop residue recycling which can be effectively utilized
by the farmers of the country to improve soil health and augment
agricultural production and productivity. ICAR has also 91 developed
conservation technologies like fertigation, zero tillage, bed planting,
laser land levelling and leaf colour chart to save costly fertilizers.
According to ICAR, workshops and training programs are being organized
to educate farmers on these aspects. However , the Committee are
concerned to note that objectives as outlined in Integrated Nutrient
Management could not be achieved by the Government which is amply
exemplified by imbalanced use of fertilizers in terms of NPK, incidents
of soil degradation in green revolution area like Haryana and Punjab
and extreme lack of micro-nutrient in majority of Indian soils. The
Committee also note that lack of effective extension services to the
farmers as brought out in previous reports of the Committee is a limiting
factor to achieve the aims of Integrated Nutrient Management. The
Committee are of the view that unless a robust agriculture extension
system is established in the country with special emphasis on training
of farmers about good agricultural practices, provision of essential
agricultural inputs and dissemination of technologies, bio-fertilizers etc.
developed by agricultural institutions, it would be difficult to secure
our environment without jeopardizing agricultural productivity. The
Committee, therefore, recommend the Government to plan an effective
agricultural extension services in the entire country. The Committee
also desire that the Government may initiate discussion on the issue
with all State Governments, agricultural research institutions, NGOs
active in the field of agriculture and experts at National and International

53
level so that steps may be taken to achieve the objective of Integrated
Nutrient Management well before 92 environmental degradation reached
at a point of no return.
Reply of the Government
Department of Agricultural Research and Education
The Government under the component of soil health management
of National Mission on Sustainable Agriculture (NMSA) is promoting soil
test based balanced and integrated nutrient management in the country
through setting up/strengthening of soil testing laboratories,
establishment of bio-fertilizer and compost unit, use of micro-nutrients,
trainings and demonstrations. Under the Soil Health Management Scheme,
Trainings for farmers & field demonstrations on judicious use of fertilizers
are conducted. Awareness campaign through Print and visual media are
carried out. Media plan to publicise Soil Health Card has been finalized.
Krishi Vigyan KendraÕs are also being equipped with soil testing kit
developed by Indian Institute of Soil Science, Bhopal to ensure soil test
based balanced and integrated nutrient management.
Department of Agriculture, Cooperation and Farmers Welfare
The Government is promoting soil test based balanced and integrated
nutrient management in the Country under the component of soil health
management of National Mission on Sustainable Agriculture (NMSA).
Farmers have been provided recommendations on balanced nutrient
use based on soil fertility results of the fields. Training to farmers,
demonstrations on judicious use of fertilizers are also part of the scheme.
Widespread awareness campaign through print band visual media has
been done.
Comments of the Committee
For comments of the Committee please refer to Para No. 1.12 of
Chapter-I of this Report.
[Ministry of Agriculture and Farmers Welfare (Department of
Agricultural Research and Education) O.M. No. NRM/1/11/2016-
SWDF dated 08.03.2017 & 26.07.2017]
[Ministry of Agriculture and Farmers Welfare (Department of
Agriculture, Cooperation and Farmers Welfare) O.M. No. 3-15/2016-
Fert. Law dated 01.08.2017]

54
CONSTITUTION OF REGULATORY AUTHORITY FOR FERTILIZER SECTOR
Recommendation (Serial No. 7)
Availability of good quality fertilizers is one of the major
responsibility of Central and State Governments by which they can help
the farmers of the country to enhance their production and income.
However, sometimes production and sale of inferior quality of fertilizers
in the market badly affect agricultural production, which in turn affect
already burdened farmers. Therefore, robust registration process of
fertilizers and regular check are ways to ensure that only qualitative
fertilizers are produced and sold in the market. The Committee note
that Central Government has constituted a Central Fertilizer Committee
(CFC) under Fertilizer Control Order (FCO), 1957 for analysis and
recommendation of new fertilizer for inclusion in the FCO. CFC
constituted a technical group consisting of a Chairman from ICAR and
other members/scientists/experts from the field of agriculture. The
Committee also note that before inclusion of any new fertilizer in the
FCO, this technical group examines the agronomic aspects, specifications
and field trials reports of new fertilizer. Agronomic field trials are
required to be conducted by the Company in minimum two cropping
seasons under the aegis of a State Agricultural University or any other
Institutes of ICAR. Recommendation for inclusion of new fertilizer in
FCO is done by CFC only on the basis of further examination of technical
group report/recommendations. The Committee are of the view that
present system of certification of new fertilizer is cumbersome, time
consuming and bureaucratic. Further , field trials of new fertilizer without
involvement of technical group or CFC leaves scope for manipulation of
results of field trials. Thus, there is a need to streamline the existing
process and constitution of a Fertilizer Development and Regulating
Authority will help to streamline the process, certification of fertilizers,
continuous quality check, imposing penalty for sub-standard and spurious
quality of fertilizers, promoting innovations in fertilizer sector and
fixation of pricing of fertilizers etc. The Committee, therefore,
recommend the Government to take required steps for Constitution of
a regulatory authority for fertilizer sector.
Reply of the Government
Department of Agricultural Research and Education
In order to simplify the procedure of inclusion of new fertilizers in
Fertilizer Control Order (FCO), the Ministry has constituted a committee
under the chairmanship of Joint Secretary (INM) to examine the issue.

55
The Committee examined and deliberated on the issue and suggested
following procedural changes.
(1) Online disposal of application;
(2) Fixing a timelimit for recommendation of Technical Committee
on new grades.
The Ministry will implement these recommendations very soon.
As regard to constitution of a regulatory authority, it is submitted
that fertilizer has been declared as an Essential Commodity by the
Central Government under Section 2(a)(xi) of the Essential Commodities
Act, 1955. In exercise of the power conferred under section 3(i) of
above Act, the Government of India have promulgated the Fertilizer
(Control) Order (FCO), 1957 which was subsequently revised as Fertilizer
(Control) Order , 1985 with the objective of regulating sale, price and
quality of fertilizers at a fair price.
In exercise of the power under clause 37 of FCO, the Government
of India vide notification SO No. 258(E) dated 10th Feburary, 2016
constituted the Central Fertilizer Committee under the chairmanship of
Additional Secretary(INM) and 10 other members to advice Central
Government on the following issues:
¥ Inclusion of a new fertilizer , under this order;
¥ Specifications of various fertilizers;
¥ Grades/formulation of physical/granulated mixtures of
fertilizers that can be allowed to be prepared in a State;
¥ Requirements of laboratory facilities in a manufacturing unit,
including a unit manufacturing physical/granulated mixtures
of fertilizers;
¥ Method of drawl and analysis of samples.
Central Fertilizer Committee advises Central Government on above
technical related aspects of fertilizers, on basis of which, the new
grades are notified from time to time.
Department of Agriculture, Cooperation and Farmers Welfare
(i) In regard to streamlining of procedure of inclusion of new
fertilizer in FCO, 1985, this Ministry has referred the matter
to a committee constituted under the chairmanship of Joint
Secretary (INM) to examine the simplification of procedure
for notification/incorporation of new fertilizers under
Fertilizer (Control) Order (FCO), 1985. The Committee
examined and deliberated on the issue and recommended a

56
simplified procedure that will reduce the timelimit by 2-3
months. These recommendations areÑ (i) online disposal of
application; and (ii) fixing a timelimit for recommendation
of Technical Committee on new grades. These
recommendations were accepted by the Central Fertilizer
Committee (CFC) in its 51st meeting. It was also suggested
that a meeting of Technical Committee may be convened
every month to discuss the issues relating to inclusion of
new fertilizer and its recommendations to be placed before
CFC, within 15 days.
(ii) As regards constitution of a regulatory authority, it is
submitted that fertilizer has been declared as an Essential
Commodity by the Central Government under Section 2(a)(xi)
of the Essential Commodities Act, 1955. In exercise of the
power conferred under section 3(i) of above act, the
Government of India have promulgated the FCO, 1957 which
was subsequently revised as FCO, 1985 with the objective of
regulating sale, price and quality of fertilizers at a fair price.
In exercise of the power under clause 38 of FCO, the Government
of India vide notification SO No. 258(E) dated 10th February, 2016
constituted the CFC under the chairmanship of Additional Secretary
(INM) and 10 other members to advice Central Government on the
issues relating to fertilizers.
Comments of the Committee
For comments of the Committee please refer to Para No. 1.20 of
Chapter-I of this Report.
[Ministry of Agriculture and Farmers Welfare (Department of
Agricultural Research and Education) O.M. No. NRM/1/11/2016-
SWDF dated 08.03.2017 & 26.07.2017]
[Ministry of Agriculture and Farmers Welfare (Department of
Agriculture, Cooperation and Farmers Welfare) O.M. No. 3-15/2016-
Fert. Law dated 01.08.2017]
CONSTITUTION OF PESTICIDES DEVELOPMENT AND REGULATION
AUTHORITY
Recommendation (Serial No. 14)
The Committee note that Insecticides Acts,1968 and Insecticides
rules, 1971 framed thereunder regulate import, manufacture, sale,
transport, distribution and use of insecticides with a view to prevent
risk to human beings or animals, and matter connected therewith.
Central Insecticide Board is constituted under the Act to advise the
Central and State Governments on 105 technical matters arising out of

57
administration of this Act and to carry out other functions assigned to
the Board by or under this Act. The Committee also note that Registration
Committee constituted under the Act is assigned responsibility for
registration of pesticides after scrutinizing formula, verifying claims of
efficacy and safety to human beings and animals, specifying the
precautions against poisoning and any other functions. Registration
Committee are empowered to refuse registration of any pesticides if
issues pertaining to safety have not been satisfactorily adhered to. The
Central Insecticide Board is empowered to ban manufacturing, import
or sale of pesticides if concerns are raised about danger to public
health and safety or any adverse report are received about toxic effect
of any pesticides. However, the Committee are perturbed to note that
there is no provision for periodic scientific evaluation of pesticides
used in the country and Central Insecticide Board doesn Õt carry out any
research/study on its own and its advice to Government is based on
national and international literature/information available. Further,
action for ban of particular pesticides is taken only after receipt of
general information on ban or restriction of particular pesticides in
other countries. Ban on pesticides is based on the recommendation of
the Expert Committee constituted for the purpose. The Committee are
of view that present system of registration of pesticides is not robust
and hardly take care of manipulation of systemic deficiency. Further,
absence of ongoing mechanism for periodic evaluation of efficacy and
toxicity of pesticides is posing danger to environment in general and
public health in particular. The Committee are of view that there is
need to streamline the regulatory mechanism for manufacturing, import
and sale of pesticides in the country. The Committee, therefore,
recommend the Government to take steps for constitution of Pesticides
Development and Regulation Authority after Parliamentary approval for
regulation of pesticide sector in the country. The Committee desire the
Government to start discussion with all stakeholders for Constitution of
such authority in a time bound manner.
Reply of the Government
Department of Agricultural Research and Education
Committee constituted during 2014 to review 66 pesticides
recommended Government of India to introduce a practice of periodic
review of pesticides for their efficacy, resistance, non-target effects
and toxicity.
For effective regulation of pesticide sector in the country and to
address various issues and concerns regarding inconsistencies in use of
pesticides in Agriculture, Pesticides Management Bill, was introduced in
the Rajya Sabha on October 21, 2008. The Bill standing in the Parliament
for approval seeks to regulate the manufacture, quality, import, export

58
and sale of pesticides to control pests, ensure availability of quality
pesticides and minimize contamination of agricultural commodities with
pesticides residue. The Bill recommends imposition of penalties for
offences such as use of pesticides in contravention of the law and sale
of misbranded or sub-standard pesticides.
Department of Agriculture, Cooperation and Farmers Welfare
The Registration Committee (RC) constituted under Section 5 of the
Insecticides Act, 1968 registers pesticides after considering its efficacy
and safety to human beings, animals and environment. In addition,
technical reviews are carried out from time to time to assess the safety
of pesticides for their continued use. The Committee constituted during
2014 to review 66 pesticides recommended Government of India to
introduce a practice of periodic review of pesticides for their efficacy,
resistance, non-target effects and toxicity.
For effective regulation of pesticides sector in the country and to
address various issues and concerns regarding inconsistencies in use of
pesticides in Agriculture, Pesticides Management Bill, was introduced in
the Rajya Sabha on October 21, 2008. The Bill is in discussion with
Ministry of Law and Justice since 2008 and before, resulted in substantive
changes to the original Bill as was introduced in the Parliament
(Rajya Sabha). It was suggested by the Legislative Department, Ministry
of Law and Justice that instead of moving official amendments to
rectify the changes and to add more than 90 enactments for repeal by
way of lengthy amendments, it would be preferable, to withdraw ÔThe
Pesticides Management Bill, 2008Õ and a new Bill namely, ÔThe Pesticides
Management Bill, 2017Õ incorporating all the official amendments as on
date be introduced in the Parliament. The Pesticides Management Bill,
2017 seeks to regulate the manufacture, quality, import, export and
sale of pesticides to control pests, ensure availability of quality pesticides
and minimize contamination of agricultural commodities with pesticides
residue. The Bill recommends imposition of penalties for offences such
as use of pesticides in contravention of the law and sale of misbranded
or sub-standard pesticides.
Comments of the Committee
For comments of the Committee please refer to Para No. 1.28 of
Chapter-I of this Report.
[Ministry of Agriculture and Farmers Welfare (Department of
Agricultural Research and Education) O.M. No. NRM/1/11/2016-
SWDF dated 08.03.2017 & 26.07.2017]
[Ministry of Agriculture and Farmers Welfare (Department of
Agriculture, Cooperation and Farmers Welfare) O.M. No. 3-15/2016-
Fert. Law dated 01.08.2017]

59
CHAPTER V
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH FINAL
REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT ARE STILL AWAITED
FERTILIZER SUBSIDY POLICY
Recommendation (Serial No. 6)
The Committee note that the Government has been regulating sale,
pricing and quality of fertilizers in the country to ensure adequate and
timely availability of fertilizers at affordable price to farmers for
maximizing agricultural production in the country and to ensure food
security for the people. The difference in concession rate/import price
and net market realization is given as subsidy by the Government to
the farmers through fertilizer industry. The subsidy regime started in
the country during 1977 as Retention Price Scheme. Subsequently,
Concession Scheme for P&K Fertilizers was introduced w.e.f. 01 April,
2008. Under the Concession Scheme, MRP of P&K fertilizer was fixed by
the Government and the difference in the delivered price of fertilizers
at the farm gate and MRP was compensated by the Government as
subsidy to the Manufacturing Industries. This scheme was continued
upto 31.03.2010. However , to overcome the deficiency of Concession
Scheme, the Government introduced Nutrient Based Subsidy (NBS) policy
for N, P & K fertilizers  w.e.f. 01.04.2010. The Committee note that
under NBS policy a fixed subsidy, decided annually, is provided on each
subsidized P&K fertilizers depending upon its nutrient content such as
N, P , K and Sulphur. Under NBS, additional subsidy is provided for
fertilizers fortified with Zinc and Boron. Single Super Phosphate (SSP)
has also been included under scheme. NBS policy was expected to
promote innovation and broaden the basket of fertilizers and enable
fertilizer use as per soil and crop requirements. However , exclusion of
Urea from NBS and decontrol of price of P & K fertilizers has led to
imbalanced application of nitrogen vis-a-vis phosphotic and potassic
fertilizers in the country. These facts have been accepted by the
representatives of the Department of Fertilizer during the evidence.
The Committee have also observed that present policy of fertilizer
subsidy also exclude liquid fertilizers, bio-fertilizers, farm organic manure
etc. which are considered more effective and environment friendly to
restore soil fertility and enhancement of agricultural productivity. It
has also been argued by the Department of Agriculture, Cooperation &
Farmers Welfare that usage of fertilizers should be left to the discretion

60
of the farmers by direct transfer of fertilizer subsidy to the farmers.
The representative of Department of fertilizer had also suggested to
provide fertilizers to the farmers as per soil health card. The Committee
are of view that the present NBS policy has failed to rationalize fertilizer
subsidy and has led to imbalanced use of fertilizers due to high prices
of Phosphatic and Potassic fertilizers and low price of Urea. While
appreciating the recent reduction in the prices of phosphatic and potassic
fertilizers by the Central Government, the Committee are of the view
that there is a need of fertilizer subsidy regime which can promote
environment friendly fertilizers like bio-fertilizers, organic farm manure
or liquid fertilizer which are more effective than granules. The
Committee, therefore, recommend that existing fertilizer subsidy policy
may be revised and the revised policy which is more appropriate for
Indian conditions and favour sustainable growth of agriculture sector
may be formulated. Further, there is a need to encourage the organic
farming considering its long term benefits. The ways of encouraging the
organic farming should also be explored while revising the existing
Fertilizer Subsidy Policy.
Reply of the Government
Department of Agricultural Research and Education
As per Department of Fertilizers, Ministry of Chemicals & Fertilizers,
the issue on fertilizer subsidy policy involved wider consultation and
hence, will be examined separately.
Department of Agriculture, Cooperation and Farmers Welfare
Government is promoting organic farming across the country through
various schemes viz. National Mission for Sustainable Agriculture (NMSA),
Paramparagat Krishi Vikas Yojana (PKVY), Rashtriya Krishi Vikas Yojana
(RKVY) and Mission for Integrated Development of Horticulture (MIDH),
Network Project on Organic Farming under ICAR etc.
The Department has also been focusing on creating awareness and
educating the farmers about organic farming practices in the areas
where clusters are formed.
The Department is also providing back ended subsidy through NABARD
for setting up of Bio-fertilizer production units which is 25% of the cost,
subject to maximum limit of Rs. 40 lakhs. During 2013-14 to 2015-16,
39 units have been sanctioned. Besides, subsidy is being provided to
farmers under PKVY scheme for purchase of bio-fertilizers @ Rs. 500/
acre. Under PKVY Scheme, Rs. 18.02 crore have been released for 7208
clusters in different States for practicing organic farming.

61
Comments of the Committee
For comments of the Committee please refer to Para No. 1.16 of
Chapter-I of this Report.
[Ministry of Agriculture and Farmers Welfare (Department of
Agricultural Research and Education) O.M. No. NRM/1/11/2016-
SWDF dated 08.03.2017 & 26.07.2017]
[Ministry of Agriculture and Farmers Welfare (Department of
Agriculture, Cooperation and Farmers Welfare) O.M. No. 3-15/2016-
Fert. Law dated 01.08.2017]
   N EW D ELHI; HUKMDEV NARAYAN YADAV,
03 August, 2018 Chairperson,
11 Shravana, 1940 (Saka) Standing Committee on Agriculture.

62
ANNEXURE I
STATE-WISE BIO-FERTILIZER PRODUCTION UNITS AND THEIR CAPACITY
Sl. Name of State No. of Capacity No. of Capacity
No. Units Carrier units Liquid
based (Liquid based
(MT) based) (KL)
12 3 4 5 6
1. A & N Islands 0 0 0 0
2. Andhra Pradesh 16 3650 6 650
3. Daman & Diu 0 0 0 0
4. Karnataka 44 52878 21 855
5. Kerala 23 8695 9 86.5
6. Lakshadweep 0 0 0 0
7. Puducherry 3 2075 2 200
8. Tamil Nadu 105 57875.31 15 2125
9. Chhattisgarh 6 1015 2 555
10. Gujarat 11 4670 11 6575
11. Goa 1 1000 0 0
12. Madhya Pradesh 36 14750 6 255
13. Maharashtra 86 15840 10 866
14. Rajasthan 1 1000 0 0
15. D & N Haveli 0 0 0 0
16. Delhi 1 1000 0 0
17. Chandigarh 0 0 0 0
18. Haryana 3 1220 3 130
19. H.P . 2 250 1 450
20. Jammu & Kashmir 1 0.8 0 0
21. Punjab 8 3620 8 255

63
22. Uttar Pradesh 34 3159 5 1400
23. Uttarakhand 5 6458 3 380
24. Bihar 1 150 0 0
25. Jharkhand 2 10 0 0
26. Odisha 9 4100 2 90
27. West Bengal 17 16385 3 50
28. Arunachal Pradesh 1 100 0 0
29. Assam 4 2200 1 1400
30. Manipur 0 0 0 0
31. Meghalaya 0 0 0 0
32. Mizoram 1 75 0 0
33. Nagaland 1 150 0 0
34. Sikkim 1 150 0 0
35. Tripura 1 3000 0 0
Total 424 205476.1 108 16322.5
12 3 4 5 6

64
ANNEXURE II
STATE-WISE DETAILS OF DIFFERENT BIO-FERTILIZERS PRODUCED/
AVAILABLE (LAKH MT) IN DIFFERENT STATES DURING LAST
THREE YEARS
Sl.No. State 2013-14 2014-15 2015-16
Carrier based Carrier Liquid Carrier Liquid
1 2 34 56 7
South Zone
1. A & N Islands 0 0.0000 0.0000 0 0
2. Andhra Pradesh 2714.22 2668.8000 274.8560 3062.6 317.811
3. Daman & Diu 0 0.0000 0.0000 0 0
4. Karnataka 9907.337 16462.6200 23.0561 23042.91 488.142
5. Kerala 3520.66 4916.9700 10.5096 4926.045 56.5751
6. Lakshadweep 0 0.0000 0.0000 0 0
7. Puducherry 516.98 560.9500 1.4976 283.641 4.088
8. Tamil Nadu 14104.83 15373.2900 11.3017 23721.2104 861.9535
Total 30764.027 39982.6300 321.2210 55036.41 1728.57
West Zone
1. Chhattisgarh 712.07 1024.680 9.620 954.371 9.38
2. Gujarat 6411.434 3667.929 2800.500 3963.42 2873.317
3. Goa 66.26 802.520 0.000 820.52 0
4. Madhya Pradesh 4824.194 2637.990 119.216 2741.30775 131.033
5. Maharashtra 6218.607 14847.397 324.767 7825.142 389.665
6. Rajasthan 1315 599.898 0.000 680 0
7. D & N Haveli 0 0.000 0.000 0 0
Total 19547.565 23580.414 3254.103 16984.76 3403.395
North Zone
1. Delhi 396 104.500 0.000 106.2 0

65
2. Chandigarh 0 0.000 0.000 0 0
3. Haryana 1146.483 872.955 46.489 1097.457 58.032
4. H.P . 26.147 0.768 33.070 2.712 190.05
5. Jammu & Kashmir 45.26 0.000 0.000 0 0
6. Punjab 2124.852 6305.453 74.278 2197.197 149.581
7. Uttar Pradesh 2682.221 4099.068 98.036 3053.115 223.34
8. Uttarakhand 5493.851 2129.952 208.034 3549.39 428.22
Total 11914.814 13512.696 459.907 10006.07 1049.223
East Zone
1. Bihar 52.4 64.90 0.00 97 0
2. Jharkhand 14.2 9.08 0.00 9.172 0
3. Odisha 1097.61 1074.46 4.70 467.634 13.701
4. West Bengal 1682.7076 2061.83 14.63 2826.27 23.537
Total 2846.9176 3210.27 19.33 3400.076 37.238
North East Zone
1. Arunachal Pradesh 59 59 0 3062.6 317.811
2. Assam 149 88.000 0.000 1315 22.5
3. Manipur 0 0.000 0.000 0 0
4. Meghalaya 0 0.000 0.000 0 0
5. Mizoram 4 3.600 0.000 4.2 0
6. Nagaland 7.45 7.450 0.000 8.81 0
7. Sikkim 10.1 12.400 0.000 12.91 0
8. Tripura 225 240.000 0.000 1143.07 0
Total 454.55 410.450 0.000 5546.59 340.311
Grand Total 65527.87 80696.4559 4054.56371 88029.3041 6240.926
Source: Compiled by NCOF (Data Provided by Production Units/State Government/RCOFs).
1 2 34 56 7

66
ANNEXURE III
PROMOTING USE OF ORGANIC/BIO-FERTILIZER
A. National Mission of Sustainable Agriculture (NMSA)ÑOrganic &
INM Component of Soil Health Management (SHM):
(i) Setting up of State of art liquid/carrier based Bio-fertilizer/
Bio-pesticide units, 100% Assistance to State Government/
Government Agencies upto a maximum limit of Rs. 160.00
lakh/unit and 25% of total financial outlay or limited to
Rs. 40 lakh/unit whichever is less for individuals/private
agencies through NABARD as backended capital investment
subsidy scheme of 200 Total Per Annum (TPA) production
capacity.
(ii) Setting up of Bio-fertilizer and Organic fertilizer testing
Quality Control Laboratory (BOQCL) or Strengthening of
existing Laboratory under FCO, assistance upto maximum
limit of Rs.85 lakh for new laboratory and upto a maximum
limit of Rs.45 lakh for strengthening of existing infrastructure
to State Government Laboratory under Agriculture or
Horticulture Department.
(iii) Promotion of Organic Inputs on farmer Õs field (Manure, Vermi-
compost, Bio-Fertilizers Liquid /solid, Waste compost, Herbal
extracts etc.), 50% of cost subject to a limit of Rs.5000/-per
ha. and Rs.10,000 per beneficiary.
(iv) Setting up of mechanized Fruit/Vegetable market waste/
Agro waste compost production unit 100% financial assistance
to State Government/Government Agencies upto a maximum
limit of Rs. 190.00 lakh per unit and 33% of project cost or
maximum limit to Rs. 63 lakh per unit whichever is less for
individuals/private agencies through NABARD as capital
investment for establishment of agro/vegetable waste
compost production units of 3000 Total Per Annum (TPA)
production.
(v) Paramparagat Krishi Vikas Yojana (PKVY): The scheme is
implemented by the State Governments on a cluster basis of
20 hectare each. The farmer within the cluster is given
following financial assistance for Integrated Manure
Management.
(a) Liquid Bio-fertilizer consortia (Nitrogen fixing/Phosphate
Solubilizing/potassium mobilizing bio-fertilizer)
@Rs. 500/acre x 50 of Rs. 25000 per cluster in first
year.

67
(b) Liquid Biopesticides (Trichoderma viridae, Pseudomonas
fluorescens, Matarhizium, Beaviourie bassiana,
Pacelomyces, verticillium) Rs. 500/ acre x 50 of
Rs. 25000 per cluster in second year.
The detail guidelines are uploaded in web site
www.agricoop.gov.in
B. Mission for Integrated Development of Horticulture (MIDH):
1. Adoption of Organic Farming Ñ50% of cost limited to
Rs. 10000/ha. for a maximum area of 4 ha. per beneficiary,
spread over a period of 3 years involving assistance of
Rs. 4000/- in first year and Rs. 3000/- each in second &
third year. The programme to be linked with certification.
2. Organic CertificationÑ Rs. 5 lakh for a cluster of 50 ha.
which will include Rs. 1.50 lakh in first year , Rs. 1.50 lakh
in second year and Rs. 2.00 lakh in third year.
3. Vermi compost Units/organic input production Ñ50% of cost
conforming to the size of the unit of 30 ÕX8ÕX2.5Õ dimension
of permanent structure to be administered on pro-rata basis.
For HDPE Vermibed, 50% of cost conforming to the size of
96 cft (12 ÕX4ÕX2Õ) and IS 15907:2010 to be administered on
pro-rata basis (Rs. 100,000/ unit for permanent structure
and Rs. 16,000/unit for HDPE Vermibed).
C. National Mission on Oilseeds and Oil Palm (NMOOP): Financial
assistance is being provided for different type of components
including bio-fertilisers, Supply of Rhizobium culture/Phosphate
Solubilising Bacteria (PSB)/Zinc Solubilising Bacteria (ZSB)/
Azatobacter/Mycorrhiza and vermi compost.
D. National Food Security Mission (NFSM): Under NFSM, financial
assistance is provided for promotion of Bio-Fertilizer (Rhizobium/
PSB) @50% of the cost limited to Rs.300 per ha.
E. Rashtriya Krishi Vikas Yojana (RKVY): Organic Farming projects
are considered by respective State Level Sanctioning Committee.
F. Indian Council of Agricultural Research (ICAR): The Indian Council
of Agricultural Research (ICAR), Pusa under Network project on Soil
Biodiversity- Bio-fertilizer has developed improved and efficient
strains of bio-fertilizer specific to different crops and soil types.
Liquid Bio-fertilizer technology with higher shelf life has also been
developed. The ICAR also imparts training, organizes Front Line
Demonstrations (FLDs) to educate farmers on all these aspects.

68
ANNEXURE IV
MINUTES OF 371ST MEETING OF REGISTRATION COMMITTEE (RC) HELD
ON 16.12.2016 AT 10.30 A.M. IN COMMITTEE ROOM NO. 1 GROUND
FLOOR, ICAR, KRISHI BHAWAN, NEW DELHI
Sl.No. Issues Decision of Registration Committee
12 3
1. To reduce Import, Pe sticides play an important role in increasing of Crop
guidelines shall be production. It is observed that during this decade import of
made stringent. pesticides have increased many folds impacting indigenous
manufacturing of pesticides. It is also observed that some of
the countries are trying to dump inferior quality pesticides in
Indian market. The Government of India is pushing ÒMake in
IndiaÓ programme to achieve self-reliance and a major thrust
has been given to Research and Development and production
of high quality Agrochemicals. The Committee considered the
situation alarming and decided to redefine the guidelines for
import. The following decision were taken:
a. Where the molecule is registered under Indigenous
manufacturing category, No Certificate of Registration for
such molecules for import shall be granted in any category/
section, henceforth.
b. All the applications under scrutiny or completed or put up
to RC for decision shall be governed under above decision
at ÒaÓ.
c. In view of the above decision TI v/s TIM guidelines stands
withdrawn, henceforth. No certificate shall be issued under
this category.
d. No Certificate shall be issued henceforth u/s 9(4) Technical
Import/Formulation Import, if that molecule/formulation
is registered under TIM or FIM.
e. It was time again felt that some of the data/information
relaxed in case of TI like details of Process of manufacturing
of Technical/Formulation, Copy of Certificate of
Registration, other authentic documents containing detailed
Chemical Composition of the product shall be included in
the requirement list, henceforth.

69
f. Five batch samples in case of T echnical Import/Formulation
Import without Registering Technical have to be drawn
from the commercial plant as per FAO guidelines for PRV
purposes. All the expenditure on this Item Arrangements
System shall be borne by the applicant. A detail proposal
may be submitted to DAC&FW for in-principal approval
and implementation of this provision.
2. Those companies It was decided that henceforth no certificate shall be issued
possessing manufacturing to any company for import, if the applicant possess the
Certificate for Indigenous Certificate of Registration of that product under Indigenous
manufacturing of that Manufacturing. Applicant of TI category has to submit an
pesticides shall not be affidavit that he does not possess the CR of that product in
permitted for import TIM category. All such CR issued shall be stand cancelled and
category registration. respective States Government may be requested for cancelling
manufacturing/sell license of those products.
3. To improve local The existing guidelines relevant to grant of registration
manufacturing facilities for Indigenous Manufacture of pesticides under various
and guidelines shall be categories have to be simplified. The Committee decided as
relaxed in favour of under:
local manufacturers. a. The following studies-Acute oral (Mice), Acute inhalation
(Rat), Primary skin irritation, Irritation to mucous
membrane in case of TIM category u/s 9(3) shall not be
required, henceforth except in case of first registrant of
the molecule.
b. Ames test (First tier) shall replace all toxicology data
requirement in case of TIM category u/s 9(4).
c. All the studies non-adhering to GLP principles conducted
by GLP accredited laboratory shall be accepted henceforth
for all categories of applications of Indigenous category.
d. Toxicology studies conducted by Non-GLP laboratories shall
also be accepted for two years from the date of approval
these minutes to encourage indigenous manufacturing and
ease out in the process of registration of TIM/FIM category.
4. Imports permits It is observed that some of Source of import registered long
(Certificate of Registration) back ceased to existence as on date, but some of the registrants
does not containing are continuously importing pesticides from such sources as no
validity period shall verification has been carried out. Therefore, it was decided
need to be notified and that all Certificate of Registrations, which does not bear validity
shall be examined again. of duration shall stand cancelled. All such Certificate of
12 3

70
Registration is required to get verified their source of
registration and its validity status from the Sectt. of CIB&RC.
DAC&FW shall be requested to issue a Gazette Notification for
cancelling all such Certificates. It was also further decided
that all the respective States Govt./UT may also requested to
cancel the manufacturing/repacking license of such products/
registrants immediately. After in principle approval of DAC&FW
for above, the procedural aspects may be devised by the Sectt.
of CIB&RC and put up to RC.
5. Matters relating to It was decided that this matter may be put up in to next RC
chemical equivalence with complete facts.
shall be compared with
9(3) registrant only.
12 3

71
ANNEXURE V
STANDING COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE
(2016-17)
EXTRACTS OF THE MINUTES OF THE TWENTY-FIFTH
SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE
The Committee sat on Thursday, the 03rd August, 2017 from
1500 hrs. to 1700 hrs. in Committee Room No. 1 (Block-A), Extension
to Parliament House Annexe Building, New Delhi.
PRESENT
Shri Hukmdev Narayan Yadav Ñ  Chairperson
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Prof. Ravindra Vishwanath Gaikwad
3. Shri Nalin Kumar Kateel
4. Smt. Raksha Tai Khadse
5. Md. Badaruddoza Khan
6. Shri Janardan Mishra
7. Shri Neiphiu Rio
8. Shri B.S. Yeddyurappa
Rajya Sabha
9. Shri Sambhaji Chhatrapati
10. Shri Janardan Dwivedi
11. Shri Mohd. Ali Khan
12. Shri Ram Nath Thakur
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Shri D.S. Malha Ñ Joint Secretary
2. Shri Arun K. Kaushik Ñ Director
3. Smt. Juby Amar Ñ Additional Director
4. Shri C. Vanlalruata Ñ Deputy Secretary
5. Shri Sumesh Kumar Ñ Under Secretary

72
LIST OF WITNESSES
MINISTRY OF AGRICULTURE AND FARMERS WELFARE
(DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURAL RESEARCH AND EDUCATION)
1. Dr. Trilochan Mohapatra Secretary (DARE) & DG (ICAR)
2. Dr. K. Alagusundaram Deputy Director General (NRM),
ICAR
3. Dr. S.K. Chaudhari Assistant Director General (SWM),
ICAR
4. Dr. P .K. Chakrabarty Assistant Director General (PP&B),
ICAR
5. Dr. P .P . Biswas Principal Scientist (Soils), ICAR
6. Dr. Krishan K. Sharma Principal Scientist, IAR, New Delhi
7. Shri B.S. Phogat Additional Plant Protection Advisor
8. Shri D.D.K. Sharma Secretary, Central Board of
Insecticides & Registration
Committee
MINISTRY OF AGRICULTURE AND FARMERS WELFARE
(DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE, COOPERATION AND FARMERS WELFARE)
1. Shri Shobhana K. Pattanayak Secretary
2. Shri Ashwani Kumar Joint Secretary
MINISTRY OF CHEMICALS & FERTILIZERS
(DEPARTMENT OF CHEMICALS & PETROCHEMICALS)
1. Shri Rajeev Kapoor Secretary (Department of
Chemicals & Petrochemicals)
2. Shri Samir Kumar Biswas Joint Secretary (Chemicals)
3. Dr. Jitendra Kumar Director (IPFT)
4. Shri S.P . Mohanty Chairman & Managing Director
(HIL)
MINISTRY OF CHEMICALS & FERTILIZERS
(DEPARTMENT OF FERTILIZERS)
Shri Dharam Pal Addl. Secretary
*2. *** *** *** *** ***
*(i) *** *** *** *** ***
*(ii) *** *** *** *** ***
*(iii) *** *** *** *** ***
*(iv) *** *** *** *** ***

73
*3. *** *** *** *** ***
[WITNESSES WERE USHERED IN]
4. Thereafter, the Chairperson welcomed the Representatives of
the Ministry of Agriculture and Farmers Welfare (Department of
Agriculture, Cooperation and Farmers Welfare and Department of
Agricultural Research and Education) and Ministry of Chemicals and
Fertilizers (Department of Chemicals and Petro-chemicals and
Department of Fertilizers) to the meeting and apprised them of the
Directions regarding confidentiality of the Sitting.
5. After the introduction, Members of the Committee sought views
on issue such as need to streamline the process of registration of new
fertilizer and replacement of Central Fertilizer Committee by Fertilizer
Regulatory Authority, provision for grievances redressal of farmers in
case of supply of spurious and sub-standard pesticides and need of
constitution of Pesticides Regulatory Authority. The representatives of
the Ministries responded to most of the queries raised by the Committee
and presented their views and action taken by the respective Ministries
on the observations/recommendations contained in 29th Report of the
Committee on the Subject ÒImpact of Chemical Fertilizers and Pesticides
on Agriculture and Allied Sectors in the Country Ó.
6. The Chairperson then thanked the witnesses for sharing valuable
information with the Committee and directed them to send, in writing,
the requisite information on the points or items, which was not readily
available with them to the Secretariat by 10 August, 2017.
A verbatim record of the proceedings has been kept separately.
The Committee then adjourned.
*Matter not related to this report.

74
ANNEXURE VI
STANDING COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE
(2017-18)
EXTRACTS OF THE MINUTES OF THE TWENTY-SEVENTH
SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE
The Committee sat on Tuesday, the 31st July, 2018 from 1500 hrs.
to 1635 hrs. in the Committee Room ÒBÓ, Ground Floor, Parliament
House Annexe, New Delhi.
PRESENT
Shri Hukmdev Narayan Yadav Ñ  Chairperson
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Sanjay Dhotre
3. Prof. Ravindra Vishwanath Gaikwad
4. Shri Nalin Kumar Kateel
5. Smt. Raksha Tai Khadse
6. Md. Badaruddoza Khan
7. Shri C. Mahendran
8. Dr. Tapas Mandal
9. Shri Nityanand Rai
10. Shri Mukesh Rajput
11. Shri Virendra Singh
12. Shri Dharmendra Yadav
13. Shri Jai Prakash Narayan Yadav
Rajya Sabha
14. Shri Rajmani Patel
15. Shri Kailash Soni
16. Shri Harnath Singh Yadav
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Shri D.S. Malha Ñ Joint Secretary
2. Shri Arun K. Kaushik Ñ Director
3. Smt. Juby Amar Ñ Additional Director
4. Shri Sumesh Kumar Ñ Under Secretary

75
*2. ***** ***** ***** *****
*3. ***** ***** ***** *****
[THE WITNESSES WITHDREW]
4. Thereafter, the Committee took up for consideration the following
draft Reports:
(i) Draft Report on the Action Taken by the Government on the
Observations/Recommendations contained in the 29th Report
(16th Lok Sabha) of the Standing Committee on Agriculture
(2015-16) on ÒImpact of Chemical Fertilizers and Pesticides
on Agriculture and Allied Sectors in the Country Ó of the
Ministry of Agriculture and Farmers Welfare (Department of
Agricultural Research and Education).
*(ii) ***** ***** ***** *****
*(iii) ***** ***** ***** *****
*(iv) ***** ***** ***** *****
*(v) ***** ***** ***** *****
*(vi) ***** ***** ***** *****
5. After some deliberations, the Committee adopted the draft
Reports at para (i), (ii), (iii), (v) and (vi) without any modifications and
Draft Report at para (iv) with minor modification and authorized the
Chairperson to finalize and present these Reports to Parliament after
factual verification of Subject report from the concerned Departments/
Ministries.
*6. ***** ***** ***** *****
The Committee then adjourned.
(A copy of the verbatim proceedings of the Sitting has been kept
separately).
*Matter not related to this Report.

76
APPENDIX
ANALYSIS OF  ACTION TAKEN  BY  THE GOVERNMENT  ON THE
RECOMMENDATIONS CONTAINED IN THE TWENTY-NINTH REPORT
(16th LOK SABHA) OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON
AGRICULTURE (2015-16)
(Vide Para 4 of Introduction of the Report)
(i) Total number of Recommendations: 15
(ii) Recommendations/Observations which have been
Accepted by the Government:
Serial Nos.: 1, 2, 3, 4, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13 and 15
Total 11
Percentage 73.33%
(iii) Recommendations/Observations which the Committee
do not desire to pursue in view of the Government Õs
replies:
Serial No.: NIL
Total 00
Percentage 0.00%
(iv) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which
replies of the Government have not been accepted
by the Committee:
Serial Nos.: 5, 7 and 14
Total 03
Percentage 20.00%
(v) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which
Final replies of the Government are still awaited:
Serial No.: 6
Total 01
Percentage 6.66%