65
STANDING COMMITTEE ON
AGRICULTURE
(2018-2019)
SIXTEENTH LOK SABHA
MINISTRY OF AGRICULTURE AND FARMERS WELFARE
(DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURAL RESEARCH AND EDUCATION)
“ICAR-CENTRAL TUBER CROPS RESEARCH INSTITUTE—
A PERFORMANCE REVIEW”
[Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations
contained in the Fifty-eighth Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) of the
Standing Committee on Agriculture (2017-2018)]
SIXTY-FIFTH REPORT
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
January, 2019/Pausha, 1940 (Saka)


SIXTY-FIFTH REPORT
STANDING COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE
(2018-2019)
(SIXTEENTH LOK SABHA)
MINISTRY OF AGRICULTURE AND FARMERS WELFARE
(DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURAL RESEARCH AND EDUCATION)
“ICAR-CENTRAL TUBER CROPS RESEARCH INSTITUTE—
A PERFORMANCE REVIEW”
[Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations
contained in the Fifty-eighth Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) of the
Standing Committee on Agriculture (2017-2018)]
Presented to Lok Sabha on 07.01.2019
Laid on the Table of Rajya Sabha on 07.01.2019
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
January, 2019/Pausha, 1940 (Saka)


COA No. 395
Price : ` 53.00
© 2019 B Y L OK S ABHA S ECRETARIAT
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct
of Business in Lok Sabha (Fifteenth Edition) and printed by
Aegean Offset Printer , New Delhi.

CONTENTS
PAGE
COMPOSITION OF THE C OMMITTEE ............................................ (iii)
INTRODUCTION ................................................................. (v)
CHAPTER I Report ........................................................ 1
CHAPTER II Observations/Recommendations that have been
accepted by the Government ........................... 10
CHAPTER III Observations/Recommendations which the Committee
do not desire to pursue in view of the Government’s
replies ........................................................ 26
C
HAPTER IV Observations/Recommendations in respect of which
replies of the Government have not been accepted
by the Committee ......................................... 27
C
HAPTER V Observations/Recommendations in respect of which
final replies of the Government are still awaited ... 30
ANNEXURE
Extracts of the Minutes of the 10th Sitting of the
Committee held on 04.01.2019 ............................... 33
APPENDIX
Analysis of Action Taken by the Government on the
Recommendations contained in the Fifty-Eighth Report
(Sixteenth Lok Sabha) of the Standing Committee on
Agriculture (2017-2018) ......................................... 35
(i)

COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE
(2018-2019)
Shri Hukmdev Narayan Yadav — Chairperson
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Bodhsingh Bhagat
3. Shri Sanjay Dhotre
4. Prof. Ravindra Vishwanath Gaikwad
5. Shri Sanganna Amarappa Karadi
6. Shri Nalin Kumar Kateel
7. Smt. Raksha Tai Khadase
8. Md. Badaruddoza Khan
9. Shri C. Mahendran
10. Dr. Tapas Mandal
11. Shri Janardan Mishra
12. Shri Praveen Kumar Nishad
13. Shri Devji M. Patel
14. Shri Mukesh Rajput
15. Shri Konakalla Narayana Rao
16. Shri C.L. Ruala
17. Shri Arjun Charan Sethi
18. Shri Virendra Singh
19. Shri Dharmendra Yadav
20. Shri Jai Prakash Narayan Yadav
21. Vacant
Rajya Sabha
22. Sardar Sukhdev Singh Dhindsa
23. Shri Rajmani Patel
24. Shri Narayan Rane
25. Shri Kailash Soni
26. Shri Mohd. Ali Khan
(iii)

27. Shri K.K. Ragesh
28. Shri Ram Nath Thakur
29. Shri R. Vaithilingam
30. Shri Harnath Singh Yadav
31. Dr. Chandrapal Singh Yadav
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Shri V .K. Tripathi — Joint Secretary
2. Shri Arun K. Kaushik — Director
3. Shri Sumesh Kumar — Deputy Secretary
(iv)

(v)
INTRODUCTION
I, the Chairperson, Standing Committee on Agriculture (2018-19),
having been authorized by the Committee to submit the Report on
their behalf, present this Sixty-fifth Report on action taken by the
Government on the Observations/Recommendations contained in the
Fifty-eighth Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) of the Standing Committee
on Agriculture (2017-18) on the Subject “ICAR—Central Tuber Crops
Research Institute—A Performance Review” pertaining to the Ministry
of Agriculture and Farmers Welfare (Department of Agricultural Research
and Education).
2. The Fifty-eighth Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) of the Standing
Committee on Agriculture (2017-18) on the Subject “ICAR—Central
Tuber Crops Research Institute- A Performance Review” pertaining to
Ministry of Agriculture and Farmers Welfare (Department of Agricultural
Research and Education) was presented to Lok Sabha and laid on the
Table of Rajya Sabha on 03.08.2018. The Action Taken Notes on the
Report were received on 14.11.2018.
3. The Report was considered and adopted by the Committee at
their sitting held on 04.01.2019.
4. An analysis of the action taken by the Government on the
Observations/Recommendations contained in the Fifty-eighth Report
(Sixteenth Lok Sabha) of the Committee is given in Appendix.
   N
EW D ELHI; HUKMDEV NARAYAN YADAV ,
04 January, 2019 Chairperson,
14 Pausha, 1940 (Saka) Standing Committee on Agriculture.

1
CHAPTER I
REPORT
This Report of the Standing Committee on Agriculture deals with
the action taken by the Government on the Observations/
Recommendations contained in the Fifty-eighth Report (Sixteenth
Lok Sabha) of the Standing Committee on Agriculture (2017-2018) on
‘ICAR-Central Tuber Crops Research Institute—A Performance Review’
pertaining to Ministry of Agriculture and Farmers Welfare (Department
of Agricultural Research and Education) which was presented to
Lok Sabha and laid on the Table of Rajya Sabha on 03.08.2018.
1.2 The Ministry of Agriculture and Farmers Welfare (Department
of Agricultural Research & Education) have furnished Action Taken
Replies in respect of all the 17 Observations/Recommendations
contained in the Report. These replies have been categorized as under:
(i) Observations/Recommendations that have been accepted by
the Government:
Recommendation Nos. 1, 2, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 10, 11, 14, 15, 16
and 17
Total 13
Chapter-II
(ii) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which the
Committee do not desire to pursue in view of the
Government’s reply:
Recommendation No. NIL
Total 00
Chapter-III
(iii) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which action
taken replies of the Government have not been accepted by
the Committee:
Recommendation Nos. 12 and 13
Total 02
Chapter-IV
(iv) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which final
replies of the Government are still awaited:
Recommendation Nos. 3 and 9
Total 02
Chapter-V

2
1.3 The Committee trust that utmost importance would be
given to implementation of the Observations/Recommendations
accepted by the Government. In cases, where it is not possible for
the Department to implement the Recommendations in letter and
spirit, the matter should be reported to the Committee with reasons
for non-implementation. The Committee desire that further Action
Taken Notes on the Observations/Recommendations contained in
Chapter-I and final Action Taken Replies to the Recommendations
contained in Chapter-V of this Report be furnished to them at an
early date.
1.4 The Committee will now deal with the action taken by the
Government on some of the Recommendations in the succeeding
paragraphs.
FINANCIAL PERFORMANCE
(Recommendation No. 3)
1.5 The Committee had observed/recommended as under:-
“The Committee note that the institute has been provided
Rs. 97.01 Crore at RE stage as against Rs. 105.78 crore provisioned
at Budget estimates during XII plan. The Committee also note that
there was decline in allocations under plan head to the Institute
over the years as allocations under this head progressively
decreased from a high of Rs. 7.0 crore during 2012-13 to Rs. 5.26
crore during 2016-17. Allocations under Plan head to the institute
during XII plan period were further reduced from Rs. 29.36 crore
at BE stage to Rs. 22.82 crore at RE stage. Further , the Institute
was provided Rs. 22.45 crore during the 2017-18.
The Committee also note that despite success of Institute to
overachieve target for internal revenue generation (Rs. 3.36 crore
against the target of Rs. 2.34 crore) during XII plan, these were
not more than 1.75 to 4.11% of total Expenditure that clearly
indicate that target were set too low. The Committee are of view
that ICAR-CTCRI being only institute in the world dedicated for
research on Tuber crops in the world, has tremendous responsibility
to provide leadership in cutting age research in their field of
expertise. The Committee are also of the considered view that
Root and tuber crops has potential to provide solution for shortfall
in food production due to climatic changes associated with the
global warming. These crops have potential to emerge as an
alternative to staple food in future. Therefore, the Institute will

3
require investment in capital head such as establishment of
laboratories, procurement of latest scientific equipments etc. to
achieve excellence in their endeavor. The Committee, therefore,
recommend the Government to enhance allocations under capital
head to the Institute in upcoming fiscals. The Committee also
desire the ICAR to analyze revenue generation potential of Institute
and enhance the target so that investment on  R&D could be
monetized for the benefit of the country.”
1.6 The Department of Agricultural Research and Education in the
Action Taken Reply has stated as under:—
“The Institute is putting concerted efforts to enhance revenue
generation through sale of farm produce, technology
commercialization, consultancies, training fees (national and
international), collaborative projects, students programme and other
services. New R&D initiative has been taken up with reference to
‘Wealth from Waste’ like biogas from cassava leaf waste etc.
Provision for infrastructure and latest equipments will be made in
the new plan budget after the current plan period (2017-2020) is
over.”
1.7 While observing low revenue target being set by the CTCRI,
the Committee desired the ICAR to analyze revenue generation
potential of Institute and enhance the target so that investment on
R&D could be monetized for the benefit of the Country. The
Department in their Action Taken Reply has stated that the Institute
is putting concerted efforts to enhance revenue generation through
sale of farm produce, technology commercialization, consultancies,
training fees (national and international), collaborative projects,
students programme and other services. New R&D initiative has
been taken up with reference to ‘Wealth from Waste’ like biogas
from cassava leaf waste etc. The Committee feel that the reply of
the Department is evasive as no concrete plan for enhancing the
revenue has been elaborated. The Committee are of view that
huge market opportunity exist for the research outcome and
products being brought out by the Institute like CTCRI which is the
only specialized Institute in the world for niche research on Root
and Tuber crop and there is need to adopt a professional approach
to enhance the revenue potential on investment being made in
Research Institute in the Country. The Committee, therefore, desire
the Department to sponsor a study to assess the revenue generation
potential of agriculture research institutes in general and of CTCRI
in particular.

4
INDUSTRIES BASED ON ROOT AND TUBER CROPS
(Recommendation No. 9)
1.8 The Committee had observed/recommended as under:—
“The Committee note that Root & Tuber crop apart from direct
human consumption, can be used as raw material for food processing
Industries such as Savory snacks, Baked products, Pasta and noodles
and Functional foods. Root & Tuber crops are also main raw material
for Starch based industries. The Committee further note that about
40% of the total production of Cassava, sweet potato, elephant
foot yam, taro and arrowroot is processed before its use in different
parts of the country. However , the Committee note that level of
processing of Root & Tuber crops in the Country varies from 90%
in Tamil Nadu to 40% in States like Bihar.
The Committee were informed that ICAR—CTCRI proactively
cooperate with Industries based on Root & Tuber Crops and had
developed many products such as Tuber crops based fried snack
foods, Improved technology for fried cassava chips, Extruded snack
foods from cassava and rice flour, Cassava papad, Gluten free
bread, Cold water miscible starch from cassava and biopesticides.
The Committee were informed that the Institute has also developed
many technologies and machineries such as hand operated, pedal
operated and motorized Cassava chipping machines, Mobile starch
extraction plant, Mobile starch extraction plant, Industrial rasper
for extraction of starch, Centrifugal granulator for cassava-based
feed, Cassava harvester , Cassava peeling knife and Pilot plant for
liquid adhesive which are very helpful for the Industries based on
Root & Tuber Crops. The Committee also note that ICAR-CTCRI has
developed good manufacturing practices for Savory snacks, Baked
products, Industrial products, Pasta and noodles, functional foods
and Starch graft co-polymers which may be very useful to
standardizing manufacturing practices and maintaining hygiene in
food processing Industries based on Root and tuber crops in the
country.
The Committee are of view that there is huge potential for food
products and snacks based on Root and Tuber Crops as these are
healthy and rich in nutrition. However , there is need to make
consumer aware of health benefits of Root & Tuber crops. Further ,
there is need to develop snacks and other products based upon
dietary and taste preferences of consumers in various parts of the
Country. The Committee, therefore, recommend the Institute to

5
take a survey for analyzing dietary and taste preferences of
consumers in various parts of Country. This survey may become the
basis of further research on preparation of region specific snacks
and other products based on Root & Tuber crops. Further , the
Institute should also explore the possibility of a joint campaign
involving industry and Central and State Government for enhancing
awareness about health benefits of Root & Tuber crops in the
Country. The Committee would like to be apprized about steps
taken in this regard within three months of presentation of this
Report.”
1.9 The Department of Agricultural Research and Education in the
Action Taken Reply has stated as under:—
“It is planned to outsource the survey for analyzing dietary and
taste preferences of consumers in various parts of the country.
Research programme to develop region specific products based on
Root & Tuber Crops will also be taken up. Joint campaigns involving
Central and State Government for enhancing awareness about health
benefits of Root & Tuber Crops are being initiated and to be
intensified in a systematic way.”
1.10 While recognizing the need to develop snacks and other
products based upon dietary and taste preferences of consumers in
various parts of the Country, the Committee had recommended the
Institute to take a survey for analyzing dietary and taste preferences
of consumers in various parts of Country and conduct further
research on preparation of region specific snacks and other products
based on Root & Tuber crops based on the result of survey. Further,
the Committee had also recommended the Department to explore
the possibility of a joint campaign involving industry and Central
and State Government for enhancing awareness about health
benefits of Root & Tuber crops in the Country. The Department in
their Action Taken Reply has stated about plan for outsourcing the
survey for analyzing dietary and taste preferences of consumers in
various parts of the country. The Committee were also informed
that Joint campaigns involving Central and State Government for
enhancing awareness about health benefits of Root & Tuber Crops
are being initiated and to be intensified in a systematic way.
However, the Department failed to furnish any concrete plan either
for conducting survey for analyzing dietary and taste preferences
of consumers in various parts of Country or for organizing joint
campaign involving industry and Central and State Government for
enhancing awareness about health benefits of Root & Tuber crops.

6
The Department also failed to furnish any budgetary allocation for
these purpose during the current financial years. The Committee,
therefore, desire the Department to furnish details of proposed
survey and campaign being planned to enhance awareness about
health benefits of Root & Tuber crops to them within one month
of presentation of this Report. The Committee also desire the
Department to make adequate financial allocation for these purpose
in the next financial year.
RESEARCH COOPERATION AND COLLABORATION
(Recommendation No. 12)
1.11 The Committee had observed/recommended as under:—
“Research Cooperation and Collaboration is becoming one of the
most significant features of scientific and technological activities
in the 21st century. This era is being characterized as Big Science,
in which the scale and comprehensiveness of research projects
have increased, thereby, increasing the resource dependencies
between scientists. Collaboration among scientists of various
research institutes help in minimizing fund requirement, avoiding
duplication of research efforts and enhancing research output. The
Committee note that the ICAR-CTCRI collaborates with various
State Agricultural Universities (SAUs), State Departments of
Agriculture, Horticulture, Tribal Development etc. and related
Industries in developing, validating and scaling up the technologies
developed. At International level, the Institute has collaboration
with CGIAR institutes such as CIAT , California, CIP , Lima and IITA
besides organizations such as CIRAD, France, USDA, NRI, UK, ETH,
Switzerland etc. The Committee were informed that the Institute
has collaborated with ICAR-CPRI, Shimla and IIRS, Dept. of Space,
Government of India, Dehradun for Fertilizer best management
practices by Site specific nutrient management, Climate smart
agriculture practices for tropical tuber crops and Cassava area
estimation using remote sensing.
The Committee appreciate the steps being taken by the Institute
for promoting collaborative research with other Institutes of national
and international prominence. However , the Committee observe
that Institute has not taken any steps for collaborative research
with other research agency for up scaling of technology for bio-
degradable plastic and bio-ethanol Cassava. Keeping in view of
paucity of funding for advanced research work and need of
specialized knowledge, the Committee are of view that there is

7
need enhance collaborative research work for optimization of
resources and research outcome. The Committee find that ICAR-
CTCRI has not taken steps to enhance collaboration with other
National institute such as CFTRI which has expertise in the field of
food processing technologies or with Central Institute of Plastics
Engineering & Technology (CIPET) which has expertise in plastic
engineering or with Indian Institute of Petroleum which has expertise
in Petroleum products. The Committee, therefore recommend the
ICAR-CTCRI to explore possibilities for collaborative research work
with these institutes in order to take projects of bio-degradable
plastic, Bio-ethanol Cassava and food processing technologies and
make them industry worthy. The Committee also desire the
Department of Agricultural Research and Education to prepare clear
guidelines for collaborative research work with other National and
International Research Institutes before approving research proposal
in order to avoid duplication of efforts and optimizing fund
utilization.”
1.12 The Department of Agricultural Research and Education in
the Action Taken Reply has stated as under:—
“The Institute has already developed PLA-modified starch-based
bioplastics in collaboration with CIPET , Kochi. The Institute is
exploring the possibilities for further collaborative research with
CFTRI, CIPET , IIP etc. to take research projects on biodegradable
plastics, bioethanol from cassava and food processing technologies
to assess commercial feasibility.”
1.13 The Committee note that the Department in their Action
Taken Reply has submitted about steps already taken by them to
develop PLA-modified starch-based bioplastics in collaboration with
CIPET, Kochi and their intention about exploring the possibilities
for further collaborative research with CFTRI, CIPET, IIP etc. to
take research projects on biodegradable plastics, bioethanol from
cassava and food processing technologies to assess commercial
feasibility. However, the Department has failed to furnish any
response on recommendation of the Committee on preparation of
clear guidelines for collaborative research work with other National
and International Research Institutes before approving research
proposal in order to avoid duplication of efforts and optimizing
fund utilization. The Committee are of the view that there is need
of comprehensive planning in order to promote the culture of
collaborative research with other agriculture research institutes
and other research Institutes which has expertise in aspects related

8
to research on agriculture and a clear guidelines to promote such
cooperation and collaboration will not only save resources but will
also enhance the quantum and quality of research outcome. The
Committee, therefore, once again reiterate their earlier
recommendation for preparation of clear guidelines for collaborative
research work with other National and International Research
Institutes in the country and abroad.
RESEARCH STUDENTS AT ICAR-CTCRI
(Recommendation No. 13)
1.14 The Committee had observed/recommended as under:-
“The Committee note that ICAR—Central Tuber Crops Research
Institute is a recognized centre by the University of Kerala, Kannur
University, MG University, MS University and Utkal University for
undertaking Doctoral programme. Several of the Scientists of ICAR-
CTCRI have been recognized as Research Guides by these
universities. ICAR-CTCRI also imparts 1-2 months hands-on training
especially in the fields of bio-technology and microbiology to
Undergraduate and Postgraduate students leading to submission of
dissertation as a part of course curriculum. The Committee were
informed that 96 students of M.Sc. were enrolled in institute during
2012-2017, whereas, 25 students and 5 students were enrolled for
Ph.D programme and Post-Doctoral studies respectively during the
same period.
The Committee observe that despite being only Institute in the
world conducting research exclusively on Tropical Tuber Crops, the
institute has failed to attract adequate students from foreign
countries as only one student from Kenya underwent three months
research programme at the Institute during 2014-15. The Committee
also observe that none of doctoral or post doctoral students enrolled
at institute were able to develop crop hybrid or receive patent for
significant research outcome during the last five years. The
Committee are of considered view that apart from research, an
Institute should also aim to train adequate numbers of students
and impart them research orientation in order to make available
qualified and trained manpower for Industries. Further , availability
of a talented and diversified pool of students are pre-requisite for
enhancing the quality of research outcome. The Committee,
therefore, desire the Institute to make effort for enhancing the
numbers of research students at ICAR-CTCRI and its research station
at Bhuvneshwar. The Committee recommend the Department of

9
Agricultural research and Education to explore the possibility for
research fellowship at ICAR-CTCRI to students in order to attract
talented students from the country and abroad.”
1.15 The Department of Agricultural Research and Education in
the Action Taken Reply has stated as under:—
“The Institute is taking all efforts to attract students from reputed
Indian and foreign universities and we have received more
applications for different fellowships by foreign students such as
CV Raman Fellowship for African Students. Scientists are encouraged
to invite more students from India also. The Institute is providing
trainings to school, graduate and post-graduate students regularly
in order to make available qualified and trained manpower for
Industries.”
1.16 While observing the need of attracting talented students
from the country and other parts of the world, the Committee had
recommended the Department to make effort for enhancing the
numbers of research students at ICAR-CTCRI and its research station
at Bhuvneshwar and explore the possibility for research fellowship
at ICAR-CTCRI to students in order to attract talents students from
the Country and abroad. The Department in their action taken
Reply has stated about steps being taken by the Institutes to attract
students from reputed Indian and foreign universities. However,
the Committee note that Department has not furnished any response
on exploring the possibility for research fellowship at ICAR-CTCRI
to students in order to attract talented students from the Country
and abroad, as recommended by the Committee. The Committee
deplore the callous attitude of the Department in submitting
response on observations/recommendations of the Committee and
hope that such lapse will not be repeated in future. The Committee
further desire the Department to initiate action to explore possibility
for research fellowship at ICAR-CTCRI to students in order to attract
talented students from the Country and abroad. The Committee
would like to be apprised about action taken in this regard within
one month of presentation of this Report.

10
CHAPTER II
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS THAT HAVE BEEN
ACCEPTED BY THE GOVERNMENT
(Recommendation No. 1)
Human community during their course of evolution and spread
across the world had shown ingenuity while choosing sources of
nutritional food. Traditionally, root and tuber crops had been one of
the most important sources for food and nutritional security for
communities across the world. These crops with the capacity to survive
in adverse climatic conditions and minimum resource input requirement
are rich source of dietary energy such as carbohydrates. These crops
also use to add to agricultural diversity to farming system making
enhancing resilience in case of adverse climatic conditions. However,
with advent of modern agriculture system which promote high input
intensive cultivation of limited number of high yielding crop species,
a decline was observed in crop diversity in agricultural systems across
the world, relegating Root and Tuber crops as marginalized crops. The
Committee are of view that Root and Tuber Crops with their inherent
potential to withstand adverse climatic change, may emerge as
important plank to ensure food and nutritional capacity in the country
in coming decades when challenges of climatic changes associated
with global warming will become more severe. The Committee in
successive paragraphs have analyzed the performance and preparedness
of ICARCentral Tuber Crops Research Institute (ICAR-CTCRI) which is
the only research organization in the World dedicated solely to the
research on tropical tuber crops.
Reply of the Government
The ICAR-CTCRI is grateful to honorable Chairman and Members
for their invaluable recommendations towards overall development of
root and tuber crops.
[Ministry of Agriculture and Farmers Welfare (Department of
Agricultural Research and Education) O.M No. 12(27)/2016-HS-II
dated 08.11.2018]
(Recommendation No. 2)
The Committee note that ICAR—Central Tuber Crops Research
Institute (ICAR-CTCRI) was established in 1963 at Thiruvanathapuram

11
with a vision for study on Root and tuber crops for ensuring better
health, wealth generation and inclusive growth. The Institute is working
with a mission to integrate root and tuber crops as a sustainable
farming system component to ensure food and nutritional security of
the Nation and livelihood improvement of rural population. The
Committee have been informed that Institute has mandate for basic,
strategic and applied research on genetic resource management, crop
improvement, sustainable production and utilization of tropical tuber
crops. It is also responsible for coordinating research and validation
of technologies through AICRP on tuber crops. The Committee also
note that ICAR-CTCRI has a regional station at Bhubaneswar and
coordinating AICRPon Root and Tuber crops. The Committee were
informed that Institute is able to test the efficacy of new crop varieties
of Root and Tuber Crops and technologies in other parts of the Country
through 12 All Indian Coordinated Research Projects in various parts
of the country.
Reply of the Government
The institute is carrying out R&D programme as per the mandate,
satisfying the mission of integrating root and tuber crops as a
sustainable farming system component to ensure food, nutrition and
livelihood security as well as to foster its vision towards tuber crops
based inclusive growth.
[Ministry of Agriculture and Farmers Welfare (Department of
Agricultural Research and Education) O.M No. 12(27)/2016-HS-II
dated 08.11.2018]
DEVELOPMENT AND RELEASE OF NEW VARIETIES OF ROOT AND TUBER
CROPS
(Recommendation No. 4)
The Committee note that ICAR-CTCRI has developed sixty high
yielding varieties of different R&T crops including 16 of cassava, 18
of sweet-potato, 14 of yams, 9 of taro, 2 of elephant foot-yam and
1 of Chinese potato during the last five years. It has also developed
three triploid varieties— Sree Harsa, Sree Athulya, and Sree Apoorva
with high dry matter and extractable starch content were for starch
industry. The Committee also note the Institute was also able to
develop first Cassava Mosaic Disease (CMD) resistant variety Sree
Padmanabha and short duration cassava varieties  viz.  Sree Jaya and
Sree Vijaya ideal for cultivation in rice fallows of Kerala. The Committee
were also informed that high yielding and high starch containing cassava

12
varieties viz. H165 and H226 contributed in a big way in the
establishment of starch and sago industries in and around Salem district
of Tamil Nadu. The Committee also note that the Institute has been
able to earn a revenue of Rs. 48.00 lakhs from commercialization of
11 varieties of Root and Tuber crops/hybrids released by the ICAR-
CTCRI during XII plan.
The Committee also note that ICAR-CTCRI has a system in place
at ICAR-CTCRI to monitor performance and productivity of new Root
and Tuber crops/hybrids released by the institutes. All new hybrids
developed are tested for their performance in Initial Evaluation Trial
(IET), Multi Location Trial (MLT) and Uniform Regional Trial (URT) in
various selected locations under AICRP (Tuber Crops). All released
varieties are also tested in Institute farm as well as through progressive
farmers for their performance. The Committee were also informed
that ICAR-CTCRI and its Regional Centre at Bhubaneswar collaborate
with different State Governments and take up projects to popularize
the newly released varieties of root and tuber crops. The Institute has
taken up programmes under Tribal Sub-Plan to popularize these varieties
in north eastern States of India.
The Committee further note that the Institute has standardized
production technology for quality planting material of Cassava, Sweet
Potato, Elephant Foot Yam and other tuber crops. Mini-sett technology
for tuber crops was developed at the Institute is very popular among
farming community. Management practices for intercropping cassava
with coconut, arrowroot with coconut, yams with maize, and yams
and edible aroids with coconut, banana and rubber have been
standardized. Precision nutrient management technologies such as
drip fertigation for cassava and elephant foot-yam and drip irrigation
for elephant foot- yam have been developed. Soil fertility management
practices for all these crops were substantially improved with the
development of soil- test based fertilizer recommendations as well as
Site Specific Nutrient Management (SSNM) practices developed using
calibrated QUEFTS model. The model-based approach resulted in
development of nutrient recommendation zonation maps as well as
customized fertilizers for cassava, elephant foot-yam, sweet-potato
and yams. The Committee also note that the Institute has developed
a methodology for climate change impact assessment of cassava,
sweet-potato, elephant foot-yam and yams using ECOCROP model and
the model was calibrated for these crops for Indian conditions using
geoinformatics tools.
The Committee appreciate the work being done by the ICAR-
CTCRI for the development of high yielding varieties of Root & Tuber
Crops. However , the Committee are of view that there is large scope

13
for expansion of farming of R & T Crops in other parts of country
especially in eastern States. The Committee, therefore, desire the
Institute to proactively work with State Government to identify
potential areas which are suitable for farming of Root & Tuber Crops
and take steps to educate farmers about high yielding varieties and
improved production techniques for farming of Root & Tuber Crops.
The Committee also desire the Institute to take a project for
identification of varieties of fruits and tuber crops being grown in
various parts of the Country and document their properties and
traditional uses by the local communities.
Reply of the Government
The Institute already got approved two RKVY projects to popularize
improved varieties in tribal dominated districts. The required
documentation on traditional uses will be taken care of under these
projects and other Institute programme in addition to our regular
activities. The importance of improved varieties are being exposed
through regular conduct of exhibitions, frontline demonstrations, on-
farm programme, MGMG as well as farmer-researcher interface
programme across the country. Those ongoing activities will be
intensified further as suggested.
[Ministry of Agriculture and Farmers Welfare (Department of
Agricultural Research and Education) O.M No. 12(27)/2016-HS-II
dated 08.11.2018]
RESEARCH ON MEDICINAL AND NUTRITIONAL ASPECT OF ROOT &
TUBER CROPS
(Recommendation No. 5)
The Committee observe that Root and Tuber Crops, apart from
being used as a staple food, were traditionally being used for treatment
of various diseases/ailments in various parts of the Country. However,
the Committee feel that ICAR-CTCRI is yet to take any project for
research on nutritional and medicinal aspects of Root and Tuber Crops.
The Committee, therefore, recommend the Institute to take steps for
promotion of research on nutritional and medicinal aspects of Root
and Tuber Crops being grown in various parts of the country. The
Committee also desire that the Institute to take a project for
compilation of traditional uses of Root and Tuber Crops in the country.
The Committee would like to be apprised of the steps taken in this
regard within three months of the presentation of the Report.

14
Reply of the Government
The Institute has extensively worked on nutritional profile of
tropical tuber crops, however , the medicinal properties were not given
extensive thrust. Since our sister institute namely Directorate of
Medicinal and Aromatic Plants (DMAP), Anand has been mandated to
study the medicinal aspects of all the agricultural crops. However
nutritional and medicinal aspects of Root & Tuber Crops has been
studied partially under externally aided and institute programme. As
per the recommendation, the Institute can take up a programme with
special emphasis on medicinal and nutritional values in collaboration
with appropriate Institutions. A documentation entitled, ‘Traditional
Tuber Crops Food of North East India’ has already been made. Further
updation of documentation will be taken up.
[Ministry of Agriculture and Farmers Welfare (Department of
Agricultural Research and Education) O.M No. 12(27)/2016-HS-II
dated 08.11.2018]
ENHANCEMENT IN PRODUCTION OF ROOT AND TUBER CROPS
(Recommendation No. 6)
The Committee note that there was annual production of 4095000
tons Cassava and 1638000 tons sweet potato were produced in the
Country during 2016-17. The Committee were informed that Tamil
Nadu, Kerala and Andhra Pradesh were major producer of Cassava
whereas Odisha, West Bengal, Chhattisgarh and Uttar Pradesh were
major producer of the sweet potato in the Country. The Committee
are of view that in order to exploit the opportunity for market for
Starch and other produce based on Root and Tuber Crops in the
International Market, the country needs to enhance production of
Root and Tuber Crops in the other parts of the Country. The Committee
are view that there is significant scope for enhancement in the area
of production in Root and Tuber Crops in non-traditional States,
however , there will be need for handholding of farmers in order to
encourage them for cultivation of Root and Tuber Crops. The
Committee, therefore, desire that the Institute take steps for
identification of areas suitable for cultivation of Root and Tuber Crops
in non-traditional States in the Country and make an assessment of
support, which will be required by the farmers for the shift to
cultivation of Root and Tuber Crops. The Committee would like to be
apprised of the steps taken in this regard within three months of the
presentation of the Report.

15
Reply of the Government
Expansion of area under tropical root & tuber crops in non-
traditional States/areas [Karnataka (Bengaluru rural, Dharwad,
Belgaum)], Tamil Nadu (Thanjavur , Tiruvarur , Nagapattinam),
Maharashtra (Beed, Pune), Punjab (Jalandhar), Gujarat (Valsad, Dang,
Tapi), Uttar Pradesh (Bundelkhand region) and Goa are being initiated
involving SAUs, Krishi Vigyan Kendras, Department of Agriculture,
progressive farmers and other stakeholders. Projected area increase
per year will be 2-5% under root and tuber crops in these non-traditional
areas.
Frontline extension programmes viz., Frontline demonstrations of
improved varieties of root and tuber crops, farming/cropping systems,
Integrated nutrient, pest and disease management, post harvest
processing and value addition; training programmes, entrepreneurship
development programmes, seminars, farm advisory visits, exhibition,
extension publications etc. are being organized and to be intensified
in collaboration with stakeholders of identified areas.
The NEH programme of ICAR-CTCRI also aims at increasing the
area under root and tuber crops in north-eastern States of India to
enhance the food, nutritional security and livelihood of people in
North-Eastern Regions viz., Manipur , Meghalaya, Nagaland and Tripura.
Production of quality planting materials by farmers’ participatory
approach meets the demands of farmers for cultivating root and tuber
crops for maximizing the productivity and profitability. Besides,
innovative market-led extension model ‘Village Incubation Centre’
which was created for post harvest processing and value addition of
tuber crops in Riha village, Ukhrul district of Manipur in 2016 is being
upsclaed in 2018 in other parts of NE region.
Feasibility studies with respect to introduction of root and tuber
crops in non-traditional States will be done using field surveys, focus
group discussions, PRA exercises and by multidisciplinary team for
assessing the requirement of farmers for the shift to cultivation of
root and tuber crops and their commercial ventures.
[Ministry of Agriculture and Farmers Welfare (Department of
Agricultural Research and Education) O.M No. 12(27)/2016-HS-II
dated 08.11.2018]
(Recommendation No. 7)
The Committee note that ICAR-CTCRI is focusing on research for
development of organic farming methods for Root & Tuber Crops. The
Committee were informed that research work conducted for the past

16
12 years helped develop organic farming technology for cassava, yams,
elephant foot-yam and taro. The Institute were able to develop a
learning system using Artificial Neural Networks (ANN) to predict
performance of elephant foot-yam organic production system under
various agroclimates. The institute has observed increase in yield by
10-20% with organic management. The tuber quality improved with
higher dry matter, starch, crude protein, K, Ca and Mg contents. The
anti-nutritional factors, oxalate content in elephant foot-yam and
cyanogenic glucoside content in cassava lowered by 21 and 12.4%,
respectively. Due to organic farming in elephant foot-yam, cost-benefit
analysis indicated net profit 28% higher with additional income of
Rs. 47,716/ha. The Committee also note that the Institute has
developed organic farming technology for cassava, yams, elephant
foot-yam and taro. The Institute was also successful in developing
nutrient rich organic manure through composting of cassava starch
factory solid waste (thippi) and synthesis of Zeolite materials from fly
ash with high cation exchange capacity for enhanced soil nutrient
retention.
The Committee appreciate the work of Institute on research on
organic methods for cultivation of Root & Tuber Crops. However , the
Committee would like the Institute to disseminate the organic farming
methods and technology among farmers in order to safeguard natural
resources from harmful effects of chemical fertilizers and pesticides.
The Committee would like to be apprised about steps taken in this
direction within three months of presentation of this Report.
Reply of the Government
The Institute is regularly conducting farmers fair both, on and off
campus, and participating in all agro-fest across the country with
special emphasis on promotion of organic farming and root and tuber
crops technologies. Regular FLDs, on-farm demonstration and
entrepreneurship development programme will be intensified. In this
context, Institute has collaborated with Coconut Development Board
(CDB) and ICAR-Indian Institute of Farming Systems Research (ICAR-
IIFSR) for large scale dissemination of organic farming and Integrated
Farming System (IFS) technologies.
[Ministry of Agriculture and Farmers Welfare (Department of
Agricultural Research and Education) O.M No. 12(27)/2016-HS-II
dated 08.11.2018)]

17
DISEASE AFFECTING PRODUCTION AND ROOT AND TUBER CROPS
(Recommendation No. 8)
The Committee note that Root & Tuber Crops being vegetatively
propagated are highly susceptible to disease proliferation due to easy
transmission of biotic causal agents and this leads to serious problems.
The important disease among Root & Tuber crops are mosaic disease,
tuber-rot, mite, whitefly and mealy bug in cassava, weevil in sweet
potato, anthracnose and mosaic in yam, leaf blight in taro, collar rot
and mosaic in elephant foot yam and storage pests. The Committee
were further informed that Cassava Mosaic Disease (CMD) caused by
the Indian Cassava Mosaic Virus (ICMV) or the Sri Lankan Cassava
Mosaic Virus (SLCMV) is a very serious disease that limits its yield. It
occurs in more severe form in Tamil Nadu and also in Kerala, and
causes yield losses ranging from 20to 50% or even up to 80%. The main
reason for the spread of the disease is due to the indiscriminate and
repeated use of the infected planting material and by the rapid spread
through whiteflies.
The Committee also note that ICAR-CTCRI has been able to develop
Sree Padmanabha, Muktakeshi Bhu Kripa and Sree Swathy varieties
which are resistant against Cassava mosaic disease, Taro leaf blight
disease and Anthracnose disease in yam respectively. The Committee
were informed that the Institute has plan for development of Eco-
friendly strategy for management of insect-pests in tuber crops and
development and refinement of integrated disease management and
forecasting system for improved tuber crops production. Various bio-
control agents were also developed to control many of the pests and
diseases of Root and Tuber crops.
The Committee also note that the Institute has standardized a
Diagnostic techniques for important viral and fungal diseases —cassava
mosaic disease, cassava tuberrot, sweet- potato feathery mottle, sweet-
potato leaf curl, dasheen mosaic in elephant foot-yam and taro, yam
mild mottle virus, yam badna virus, anthracnose in yam, taro leaf -
blight and collar-rot in elephant foot-yam. Dipsticks were developed
manually based on DsMV specific IgG-gold conjugate. The Committee
were informed that test was found highly sensitive and was capable
of detecting virus with very low titre. Further , the Committee also
note that the Institute were able to sequence full genome of cassava
mosaic viruses (ICMV , SLCMV), sweet-potato leaf-curl virus and dasheen
mosaic virus and Transgenic plants resistant to cassava mosaic virus
have been developed using Rep gene of Indian cassava mosaic virus.

18
The Committee appreciate the success of the Institute in developing
pest resistant varieties of Root & Tuber crops, development of
diagnostic kits and development of Transgenic plants resistant to
cassava mosaic virus. The Committee are of view that susceptibility
of Root & Tuber crop farming towards disease is major stumbling
block in achieving the aim to enhance production and productivity of
Root & Tuber crops in the Country. Further, climatic changes associated
with global warming may led to proliferation of new kinds of pest
affecting Root & Tuber crops. The Committee, therefore, desire the
Institute to focus their attention for development of disease resistant
varieties of Root & Tuber crops which can withstand climatic changes
associated with global warming.
The Committee are also of view that there is need to replace
existing varieties of Root & Tuber Crops which are susceptible to
disease and make available saplings of disease free varieties among
farmers. The Committee, therefore, desire the Institute to make plan
for this and collaborate with State Governments concerned and Central
Government for availability of funds for distribution of sapling among
farmers and other necessary extension services.
Reply of the Government
Highest priority is given for identifying resistant genotypes of
cassava, yam, taro and elephant foot yam for cassava mosaic disease,
yam anthracnose, taro leaf blight and collar rot respectively. Disease
free planting materials of cassava and elephant foot yam are being
given top priority for multiplication and distribution to the needy
ones. Efforts are being taken to monitor the emergence of new
pathogens as well as dynamics of pathogen in relation to climate
change. The following five research programmes are taken up to
address the problems of pests and diseases in root and tuber crops:
• Development and refinement of integrated disease
management and forecasting system for improved tuber crop
production
• Flagship Project: Cassava mosaic disease-variability,
diagnostic, vector relation and management
• Integrated crop, water and nutrient management for
improving productivity of tropical tuber crops. Activity 1:
Production of disease free planting materials in tropical
tuber crops
• Conservation and utilization of germplasm of tuber crops
for sustaining production

19
• Genetic improvement of tuber crops through conventional
breeding and molecular approaches
In order to produce and distribute quality planting materials, the
Institute has taken up two RKVY projects and another project ‘Tuber
Crops Development Scheme’ and it is envisaged to supply quality
planting materials to non-traditional and new areas.
[Ministry of Agriculture and Farmers Welfare (Department of
Agricultural Research and Education) O.M No. 12(27)/2016-HS-II
dated 08.11.2018)]
USE OF ROOT AND TUBER CROPS AS ANIMAL FEED
(Recommendation No. 10)
The Committee note that Root and Tuber Crops are being used as
Animal Feed especially for Piggery in other Countries. However , the
Committee surprised to note that the ICAR-CTCRI has not taken steps
for research on development of animal feed from Root and Tuber
Crops. The Committee, therefore, desire the Institute to start a
research project for exploring the possibilities for development of
animal feed based on Root and Tuber Crops being grown in the country.
Reply of the Government
The Institute has already done studies on cassava-based silage and
cattle/poultry feed. Piggery is an important enterprise in north-eastern
region of our country. Research projects on Root & Tuber Crops for
animal feeds will be taken up in collaboration with ICAR-NEH.
[Ministry of Agriculture and Farmers Welfare (Department of
Agricultural Research and Education) O.M No. 12(27)/2016-HS-II
dated 08.11.2018)]
GREEN TECHNOLOGIES FROM CASSAVA STARCH
(Recommendation No. 11)
The Committee note that the institute has developed and patented
a technology for manufacturing starch-based biodegradable plastic
from Cassava. The starch incorporated plastic films (up to 25-40%)
possess adequate mechanical strength and flexibility and can be
processed just like normal plastics, i.e., heatsealed, printed, coloured
etc. The granules and finished products can be stored almost like
synthetic plastics and biodegradable under soil burial conditions. The

20
Committee were informed that this technology can be easily adopted
by the existing plastic manufactures using conventional machines.
The Institute has prepared Poly (lactic acid)-cassava starch composite
based moulded articles by injection moulding and blow films methods.
These can be used as disposable articles for various purposes. Further,
a semi-synthetic cassava (tapioca) starch-based superabsorbent polymer
has been developed which is effective in soil moisture retention and
can be used as a soil additive, especially under controlled conditions
such as in green houses for plant nurseries, ornamental and medicinal
plants for saving irrigation water.
The Committee also note that the CTCRI has developed an improved
technology for bioethanol production from cassava starch using novel
enzymes, derived from genetically engineered microorganisms. The
process is time saving and less energy consuming, and can yield 680
litre ethanol from 1 tonne of dry chips/flour of Cassava. However, the
Committee are distressed to note that the Institute is yet to
commercialize these technologies. The Committee were informed that
lack of sufficient budget is preventing the Institute to scale up the
project and make it viable for commercial production. The Committee
are of view that there is huge market for eco-friendly products which
can be alternative for non-biodegradable plastic and Institute should
have proactively scouted for partners in Private sector which could
have invested in project for scaling up this important technology.
Further, there must be enough Government support for scaling up of
technologies in the important area of eco-friendly products. The
Committee, therefore, recommend the institute to take steps for
search of partners in private sector for projects of scaling up of
technologies for bio-degradable plastic and bio-ethanol from cassava.
The Committee also recommend the Government to make available
sufficient funds for these important projects, if Institute fails to find
Private investment. The Committee would like to be apprised about
steps taken in this direction within three months of presentation of
this Report.
Reply of the Government
Efforts are underway for licensing of bench scale production of
‘bioethanol from cassava’ and for further development of commercial
scale production. Conclave and Entrepreneurship development
programme were organized for joint collaboration in those areas with
government and private entrepreneurs.
[Ministry of Agriculture and Farmers Welfare (Department of
Agricultural Research and Education) O.M No. 12(27)/2016-HS-II
dated 08.11.2018]

21
PERFORMANCE ANALYSIS OF ICAR-CENTRAL TUBER CROP RESEARCH
INSTITUTE
(Recommendation No. 14)
The Committee note that ICAR has a policy for evaluation of
performance of scientist at various research Institutes under ICAR and
scientists are required to submit their Annual Performance Appraisal
Report on 15 March every year which gives scope for evaluation of all
research work done by the scientist. Scientists are also required to
submit their research performance online in Half Yearly Progress
Monitoring (HYPM) website at 6 months intervals which is evaluated
by the concerned HOD as well as Director. The Committee have been
informed that ICAR-CTCRI were able to develop 42 technologies and
got 2 patents and 3 copyrights during Twelfth Plan (2012-17). The
Committee also note that 52 scientists of the Institute have published
265 publication during Twelfth Plan. The Committee note that ICAR
and ASRB has fixed norms for each category of scientist to be eligible
for promotion and specific number of publications in International/
National journals is made mandatory. The Committee were informed
that there were 51 publications by the Scientists of Institute in
International/National Journals of which 17 were in journals with
NAAS rating above 6.0 during 2015-16. The Committee also note that
13 scientists has supervised 13 students for PhD and 4 Scientists
supervised 4 students for Post Doctoral research at ICAR-CTCRI.
The Committee note that none of scientists of ICAR-CTCRI have
contributed for public policy formulation in agriculture sector in general
and Root and tuber crop in particular. The Committee also observe
that individual performance of scientists varies widely. The Committee
note that only 4 scientists of the institute were able to file/Obtain
8 patents, whereas, 9 scientists of the institute were able to bring 18
contract research and 32 scientists of the institute were able to
develop 217 technologies. Considering the performance of scientists
of ICAR-CTCRI, the Committee are of view that there is need to
enhance capacity of scientists who are not able to perform according
to the norms set by the ICAR. The Committee, therefore, recommend
the Department to analyze the reasons for varying performance of
scientists and take steps for corrective action including training in
order to enhance research outcome of the Institute. Further , the
Committee also desire the Department to recognize the better
performers and provide them suitable incentives in order to enhance
their morale. The Committee would like the Department to complete
the performance analysis of scientist at ICAR-CTCRI within three months

22
of presentation of Report and take corrective action under intimation
to the Committee.
Reply of the Government
Performance analysis of all the scientists are being done on a
regular basis to improve the individual and overall performance of the
Institute as per different yardsticks in APAR and HYPM reports. Very
clear instructions have been given to all the scientists to increase
their performance.
[Ministry of Agriculture and Farmers Welfare (Department of
Agricultural Research and Education) O.M No. 12(27)/2016-HS-II
dated 08.11.2018]
INFRASTRUCTURE AT ICAR-CTCRI
(Recommendation No. 15)
The Committee note that the Institute has state-of-the-art
laboratories for DNA Sequencing, Molecular Marker Study, Tissue Culture,
Bioinformatics, Soil Fertility and Plant Nutrition, Soil Physics,
Geoinformatics, Transgenics, Virus Diagnostics, Biopesticides, Food
Processing and Starch Biochemistry. The laboratories are equipped
with genetic analyser, gel documentation system, real time quantitative
PCR, ELISA reader, thermal cycler (PCR), cryostat, graphite furnace
AAS, leaf area meter , chlorophyll fluorescence meter , automated soil
CO
2 flux system, automatic N digestion and distillation system,
electroantennogram, HPLC, HPTLC, GLC, Fibre Analyser , Image Analyser,
Tintometer, Refractometer, Food Extruder , Food Texture Analyser , DSC,
Rheometer, FTIR, Rapid Viscoanalyser, Diode Array Spectrophotometer,
FT-NIR Spectrometer and automatic weather station. The Committee
were also informed that the Institute has established a full-fledged
Local Area Network and a VPN connectivity is established for Global
Access to the servers. Agricultural Knowledge Management Unit (AKMU)
was established with 17 workstations with centralized facilities for
printing, scanning etc. The Unit became one of the nodal points of
National Knowledge Network of India (NKN) for effective sharing of
scientific resources. The Institute has a modern library with more
than 18,000 volumes, and current subscription of 42 journals besides
re-prints and e-prints on tuber crops.
The Committee also observe that the Institute has requirement
for advanced research equipments such as Agrobotics and Computer
Simulation Laboratory, Ploidy Analyser , Oxygen Diffusion Rate Meter

23
and accessories, Profile moisture meter , TDR based with accessories
and Erdas Imagine & Arc GIS licenses which is essential for research
works. The Committee are of view that necessary infrastructure and
research equipments forms the basis of a robust research system.
However , efforts should be made to explore possibilities to share
research equipments with Institute located in nearby Districts. The
Committee desire the Institute to explore possibilities for sharing of
research equipments with other Institutes. Further , the Committee
recommend the Department to make necessary financial allocation to
the ICAR-CTCRI for provision of above mentioned research equipments
if Institute is not able to access these equipments in other Research
Institutes.
Reply of the Government
The Institute has got many sophisticated equipments in various
fields of research. In order to share the research equipments with
other Institutes, we have prepared a list of all available equipments.
Those were posted in the DKMA web portal and also the information
has been uploaded in Institute website.
[Ministry of Agriculture and Farmers Welfare (Department of
Agricultural Research and Education) O.M No. 12(27)/2016-HS-II
dated 08.11.2018]
USE OF CHEMICAL FERTILIZERS AND PESTICIDES FOR CULTIVATION
OF ROOT AND TUBER CROPS
(Recommendation No. 16)
Integrated Pest and Nutrient Management is cardinal principle for
safe and judicious use of pesticides and fertilizer in agriculture. The
Committee note that ICAR-CTCRI has developed site specific nutrient
management (SSNM) technology using computer programmes to
calculate the exact quantity of fertilizers required for getting a
particular yield for all major growing regions of the country. Fertilizer
calculation charts, decision support system and mobile app were
developed to help the farmers to calculate the quantity of different
fertilizers. The Committee also note that ICAR-CTCRI collect soil
samples from Root and Tuber Crops farmers and analyze samples and
prepares Soil Health Card. Further , Institute has also developed
Integrated Pest and Disease Management strategy for all important
pests and diseases such as cassava mosaic disease, tuber rot of cassava,
sweet potato weevil, collar rot of elephant foot yam etc. The
Committee note that the Institute has trained 2653 farmers from
2012-2018 about Integrated pest and disease management of tropical
tuber crops.

24
The Committee also note that the Institute has developed bio-
pesticide and biofumigant from cassava leaf and tuber rind. viz. Menma,
Nanma and Shreya. The formulation Menma is very effective against
borer pests like pseudostems weevil and rhizome weevil in banana,
red palm weevil in coconut etc. Sucking pests such as mealy bug,
thrips, scale insects, mites etc. Nanma is very useful in horticultural
crops. Waxy coating around mealy-bug gives protection from insecticide
application but Shreya can dissolve mealy substance and kill it.
Biofumigants isolated from cassava leaves are effective against stored
product pests. Large scale field trial covering over one lakh banana
plants in different districts of Kerala under the RKVY project has
established the efficacy of the bioformulation against pseudostem
and rhizome weevils in banana.
The Committee appreciate the ICAR-CTCRI for success achieved in
the field of Integrated Pest and Nutrient Management. However , the
Committee desire the Institute to disseminate methods of site specific
nutrient management (SSNM) technology and bio-pesticide and
biofumigant from cassava among the farmers cultivating Root & Tuber
crops in other parts of country so that use of chemical fertilizer and
pesticides can be further minimized. The Committee also desire the
Institute to explore the market opportunities in other States so that
return on investment on research could be optimized.
Reply of the Government
The Institute has developed customized fertilizers for different
tuber crops based on SSNM technology and frontline demonstrations
(FLD) have been planned in farmers’ fields across the country with
the support of KVKs and State Agricultural Universities. The Institute
also developed five crop-based micronutrient formulations and were
sold to a private company, M/S Linga Chemicals, Madurai and they
have brought out all these five products to market. Biopesticide
formulations also were sold to eight KVKs across Kerala state. Trainings,
demonstrations and exhibitions are also arranged to popularize the
SSNM technology and biopesticide and biofumigant. The Institute also
has taken up a RKVY project to popularize the biopesticide and
biofumigant.
[Ministry of Agriculture and Farmers Welfare (Department of
Agricultural Research and Education) O.M No. 12(27)/2016-HS-II
dated 08.11.2018]

25
PLANNING FOR THE FUTURE
(Recommendation No. 17)
The Committee note that Cassava mosaic disease – variability,
diagnostics, vector relation and management and Development of
cassava starch based novel products and functional foods from other
tuber crops are flagship project of ICAR-CTCRI which it intend to
focus in future. Apart from these, the Institute has identified other
priority areas of research such as Conservation and utilization of
germplasm of tuber crops for sustaining production, Genetic
improvement of tuber crops through conventional breeding and
molecular approaches; Integrated crop, water and nutrient management
for improving productivity of tropical tuber crops; Studies on the
impact of climate change and devising mitigation strategies for
sustaining productivity of tuber crops; Development and refinement
of integrated disease management and forecasting system for improved
tuber crops production; Improving knowledge and skill of stakeholders
for sustainable production of tuber crops etc. as thrust areas in future.
The Committee is also note that ICAR-CTCRI has made projection
for fund to the tune of Rs. 8.09 crore for the period of 2017-20 to
achieve the target set for the future. The Committee, therefore,
recommend the Department to make available requisite funds in coming
fiscal to the Institute to achieve its aims.
Reply of the Government
The Institute has taken up research projects on all the above
mentioned thrust areas in Institute/Externally funded projects.
[Ministry of Agriculture and Farmers Welfare (Department of
Agricultural Research and Education) O.M No. 12(27)/2016-HS-II
dated 08.11.2018)]

26
CHAPTER III
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO NOT
DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE GOVERNMENT’S REPLIES
-NIL-

27
CHAPTER IV
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES
OF THE GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE
COMMITTEE
RESEARCH COOPERATION AND COLLABORATION
(Recommendation No. 12)
Research Cooperation and Collaboration is becoming one of the
most significant features of scientific and technological activities in
the 21st century. This era is being characterized as Big Science, in
which the scale and comprehensiveness of research projects have
increased, thereby, increasing the resource dependencies between
scientists. Collaboration among scientists of various research institutes
help in minimizing fund requirement, avoiding duplication of research
efforts and enhancing research output. The Committee note that the
ICAR-CTCRI collaborates with various State Agricultural Universities
(SAUs), State Departments of Agriculture, Horticulture, Tribal
Development etc. and related Industries in developing, validating and
scaling up the technologies developed. At International level, the
Institute has collaboration with CGIAR institutes such as CIAT , California,
CIP , Lima and IITA besides organizations such as CIRAD, France, USDA,
NRI, UK, ETH, Switzerland etc. The Committee were informed that
the Institute has collaborated with ICAR-CPRI, Shimla and IIRS, Deptt.
of Space, Government of India, Dehradun for Fertilizer best
management practices by Site specific nutrient management, Climate
smart agriculture practices for tropical tuber crops and Cassava area
estimation using remote sensing.
The Committee appreciate the steps being taken by the Institute
for promoting collaborative research with other Institutes of national
and international prominence. However , the Committee observe that
Institute has not taken any steps for collaborative research with other
research agency for up scaling of technology for bio-degradable plastic
and bio-ethanol Cassava. Keeping in view of paucity of funding for
advanced research work and need of specialized knowledge, the
Committee are of view that there is need enhance collaborative
research work for optimization of resources and research outcome.
The Committee find that ICARCTCRI has not taken steps to enhance
collaboration with other National institute such as CFTRI which has

28
expertise in the field of food processing technologies or with Central
Institute of Plastics Engineering & Technology (CIPET) which has
expertise in plastic engineering or with Indian Institute of Petroleum
which has expertise in Petroleum products. The Committee, therefore
recommend the ICAR-CTCRI to explore possibilities for collaborative
research work with these institutes in order to take projects of bio-
degradable plastic, Bio-ethanol Cassava and food processing
technologies and make them industry worthy. The Committee also
desire the Department of Agricultural Research and education to
prepare clear guidelines for collaborative research work with other
National and International Research Institutes before approving research
proposal in order to avoid duplication of efforts and optimizing fund
utilization.
Reply of the Government
The Institute has already developed PLA-modified starch-based
bioplastics in collaboration with CIPET , Kochi. The Institute is exploring
the possibilities for further collaborative research with CFTRI, CIPET ,
IIP etc. to take research projects on biodegradable plastics, bioethanol
from cassava and food processing technologies to assess commercial
feasibility.
[Ministry of Agriculture and Farmers Welfare (Department of
Agricultural Research and Education) O.M No. 12(27)/2016-HS-II
dated 08.11.2018]
Comments of the Committee
For comments of the Committee please refer to Para No. 1.13 of
Chapter I of this Report.
RESEARCH STUDENTS AT ICAR-CTCRI
(Recommendation No. 13)
The Committee note that ICAR-Central Tuber Crops Research
Institute is a recognized centre by the University of Kerala, Kannur
University, MG University, MS University and Utkal University for
undertaking Doctoral programme. Several of the Scientists of ICAR-
CTCRI have been recognized as Research Guides by these universities.
ICAR-CTCRI also imparts 1-2 months hands-on training especially in
the fields of bio-technology and microbiology to Undergraduate and
Postgraduate students leading to submission of dissertation as a part
of course curriculum. The Committee were informed that 96 students

29
of M.Sc. were enrolled in institute during 2012-2017, whereas,
25 students and 5 students were enrolled for Ph.D programme and
Post-Doctoral studies respectively during the same period.
The Committee observe that despite being only Institute in the
world conducting research exclusively on Tropical Tuber Crops, the
institute has failed to attract adequate students from foreign countries
as only one student from Kenya underwent three months research
programme at the Institute during 2014-15. The Committee also observe
that none of doctoral or post doctoral students enrolled at institute
were able to develop crop hybrid or receive patent for significant
research outcome during the last five years. The Committee are of
considered view that apart from research, an Institute should also
aim to train adequate numbers of students and impart them research
orientation in order to make available qualified and trained manpower
for Industries. Further , availability of a talented and diversified pool
of students are prerequisite for enhancing the quality of research
outcome. The Committee, therefore, desire the Institute to make
effort for enhancing the numbers of research students at ICAR-CTCRI
and its research station at Bhuvneshwar. The Committee recommend
the Department of Agricultural research and Education to explore the
possibility for research fellowship at ICAR-CTCRI to students in order
to attract talents students from the Country and abroad.
Reply of the Government
The Institute is taking all efforts to attract students from reputed
Indian and foreign universities and we have received more applications
for different fellowships by foreign students such as CV Raman
Fellowship for African Students. Scientists are encouraged to invite
more students from India also. The Institute is providing trainings to
school, graduate and post-graduate students regularly in order to
make available qualified and trained manpower for Industries.
[Ministry of Agriculture and Farmers Welfare (Department of
Agricultural Research and Education) O.M No. 12(27)/2016-HS-II
dated 08.11.2018]
Comments of the Committee
For comments of the Committee please refer to Para No. 1.16 of
Chapter I of this Report.

30
CHAPTER V
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH FINAL
REPLIES OF GOVERNMENT ARE STILL AWAITED
FINANCIAL PERFORMANCE
(Recommendation No. 3)
The Committee note that the institute has been provided
Rs. 97.01 crore at RE stage as against Rs. 105.78 crore provisioned at
Budget estimates during XII plan. The Committee also note that there
was decline in allocations under plan head to the Institute over the
years as allocations under this head progressively decreased from a
high of Rs. 7.0 crore during 2012-13 to Rs. 5.26 crore during 2016-17.
Allocations under Plan head to the institute during XII plan period
were further reduced from Rs. 29.36 crore at BE stage to Rs. 22.82
crore at RE stage. Further , the Institute was provided Rs. 22.45 crore
during the 2017-18.
The Committee also note that despite success of Institute to
overachieve target for internal revenue generation (Rs. 3.36 crore
against the target of Rs. 2.34 crore) during XII Plan, these were not
more than 1.75 to 4.11% of total Expenditure that clearly indicate
that target were set too low. The Committee are of view that ICAR-
CTCRI being only institute in the world dedicated for research on
Tuber crops in the world, has tremendous responsibility to provide
leadership in cutting age research in their field of expertise. The
Committee are also of the considered view that Root and tuber crops
has potential to provide solution for shortfall in food production due
to climatic changes associated with the global warming. These crops
have potential to emerge as an alternative to staple food in future.
Therefore, the Institute will require investment in capital head such
as establishment of laboratories, procurement of latest scientific
equipments etc. to achieve excellence in their endeavor. The
Committee, therefore, recommend the Government to enhance
allocations under capital head to the Institute in upcoming fiscals.
The Committee also desire the ICAR to analyze revenue generation
potential of Institute and enhance the target so that investment on
R & D could be monetized for the benefit of the country.

31
Reply of the Government
The Institute is putting concerted efforts to enhance revenue
generation through sale of farm produce, technology commercialization,
consultancies, training fees (national and international), collaborative
projects, students programme and other services. New R&D initiative
has been taken up with reference to ‘Wealth from Waste’ like biogas
from cassava leaf waste etc. Provision for infrastructure and latest
equipments will be made in the new plan budget after the current
plan period (2017-2020) is over.
[Ministry of Agriculture and Farmers Welfare (Department of
Agricultural Research and Education) O.M No. 12(27)/2016-HS-II
dated 08.11.2018]
 Comments of the Committee
For comments of the Committee please refer to Para No. 1.7 of
Chapter I of this Report.
INDUSTRIES BASED ON ROOT AND TUBER CROPS
(Recommendation No. 9)
The Committee note that Root & Tuber crop apart from direct
human consumption, can be used as raw material for food processing
Industries such as Savory snacks, Baked products, Pasta and noodles
and Functional foods. Root & Tuber crops are also main raw material
for Starch based industries. The Committee further note that about
40% of the total production of Cassava, sweet potato, elephant foot
yam, taro and arrowroot is processed before its use in different parts
of the country. However , the Committee note that level of processing
of Root & Tuber crops in the Country varies from 90% in Tamil Nadu
to 40% in States like Bihar.
The Committee were informed that ICAR-CTCRI proactively
cooperate with Industries based on Root & Tuber Crops and had
developed many products such as Tuber crops based fried snack foods,
Improved technology for fried cassava chips, Extruded snack foods
from cassava and rice flour , Cassava papad, Gluten free bread, Cold
water miscible starch from cassava and bio-pesticides. The Committee
were informed that the Institute has also developed many technologies
and machineries such as hand operated, pedal operated and motorized
Cassava chipping machines, Mobile starch extraction plant, Industrial
rasper for extraction of starch, Centrifugal granulator for cassava-
based feed, Cassava harvester , Cassava peeling knife and Pilot plant
for liquid adhesive which are very helpful for the Industries based on
Root & Tuber Crops. The Committee also note that ICAR-CTCRI has

32
developed good manufacturing practices for Savory snacks, Baked
products, Industrial products, Pasta and noodles, functional foods and
Starch graft co-polymers which may be very useful to standardizing
manufacturing practices and maintaining hygiene in food processing
Industries based on Root and tuber crops in the country.
The Committee are of view that there is huge potential for Food
products and snacks based on Root and Tuber Crops as these are
healthy and rich in nutrition. However , there is need to make consumer
aware of health benefits of Root & Tuber crops. Further, there is need
to develop snacks and other products based upon dietary and taste
preferences of consumers in various parts of the Country. The
Committee, therefore, recommend the Institute to take a survey for
analyzing dietary and taste preferences of consumers in various parts
of Country. This survey may become the basis of further research on
preparation of region specific snacks and other products based on
Root & Tuber crops. Further, the Institute should also explore the
possibility of a joint campaign involving industry and Central and
State Government for enhancing awareness about health benefits of
Root & Tuber crops in the Country. The Committee would like to be
apprized about steps taken in this regard within three months of
presentation of this Report.
Reply of the Government
It is planned to outsource the survey for analyzing dietary and
taste preferences of consumers in various parts of the country. Research
programme to develop region specific products based on Root & Tuber
Crops will also be taken up. Joint campaigns involving Central and
State Government for enhancing awareness 39 about health benefits
of Root & Tuber Crops are being initiated and to be intensified in a
systematic way.
[Ministry of Agriculture and Farmers Welfare (Department of
Agricultural Research and Education) O.M No. 12(27)/2016-HS-II
dated 08.11.2018]
Comments of the Committee
For comments of the Committee please refer to Para No. 1.10 of
Chapter I of this Report.
   N
EW D ELHI; HUKMDEV NARAYAN YADAV ,
04 January, 2019 Chairperson,
14 Pausha, 1940 (Saka) Standing Committee on Agriculture.

33
ANNEXURE
STANDING COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE
(2018-19)
MINUTES OF THE TENTH SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE
The Committee sat on Friday, the 04th January, 2019 from
1000 hrs. to 1050 hrs. in the Chamber of the Hon’ble Chairperson,
Standing Committee on Agriculture, Room No. 138 (Third Floor),
Parliament House, New Delhi.
PRESENT
Shri Hukmdev Narayan Yadav — Chairperson
M
EMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Sanjay Dhotre
3. Shri Sanganna Karadi
4. Shri Nalin Kumar Kateel
5. Smt. Raksha Khadse
6. Dr. Tapas Mandal
7. Shri Janardan Mishra
8. Shri Mukesh Rajput
9. Shri C.L. Ruala
Rajya Sabha
10. Shri Rajmani Patel
11. Shri Kailash Soni
12. Shri Mohd. Ali Khan
13. Shri Ram Nath Thakur
14. Dr. Chandrapal Singh Yadav
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Shri Arun K. Kaushik — Director
2. Shri Sumesh Kumar — Deputy Secretary

34
2. At the outset, the Chairperson welcomed the Members to the
Sitting of the Committee. Thereafter, the Committee took up for
consideration the following draft Reports:
*(i) XXXX XXXX XXXX XXXX XXXX
(ii) Draft Report on the Action Taken by the Government on
the Observations/Recommendations contained in the 58th
Report (16th Lok Sabha) of the Standing Committee on
Agriculture (2017-18) on the Subject “ICAR-Central Tuber
Crops Research Institute—A Performance Review” of the
Ministry of Agriculture and Farmers Welfare (Department of
Agricultural Research and Education).
3. After some deliberations, the Committee adopted the draft
Reports without any modifications and authorized the Chairperson to
finalize and present these Reports to Parliament.
The Committee then adjourned.
*Matter not related to this Report.

35
APPENDIX
(Vide Para 4 of Introduction of the Report)
ANALYSIS OF ACTION TAKEN BY GOVERNMENT ON THE FIFTY-EIGHTH
REPORT (16th LOK SABHA) OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON
AGRICULTURE (2017-18)
(i) Total number of Recommendations 17
(ii) Recommendations/Observations which have been
accepted by the Government
Rec. Nos. 1, 2, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 10, 11, 14, 15,
16 and 17
Total 13
Percentage 76.47%
(iii) Recommendations/Observations    which     the
Committee do not desire to pursue  in  view of
the Government’s replies
Rec. No. NIL
Total 00
Percentage 0.00%
(iv) Recommendations/Observations   in  respect  of
which replies of the Government have  not been
accepted by the Committee
Rec. Nos. 12 and 13
Total 02
Percentage 11.76%
(v) Recommendations/Observations  in  respect  of
which Final replies of the Government are  still
awaited
Rec. Nos. 3 and 9
Total 02
Percentage 11.76%