FOURTEENTH REPORT
COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE
(2014-2015)
(SIXTEENTH LOK SABHA)
MINISTRY OF AGRICULTURE
(DEPARTMENT OF ANIMAL HUSBANDRY ,
DAIRYING AND FISHERIES)
‘DEMANDS FOR GRANTS
(2014-2015)’
[Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/
Recommendations contained in the Fifth Report (Sixteenth
Lok Sabha) of the Committee on Agriculture (2014-2015)]
Presented to Lok Sabha on 11.08.2015
Laid  in  Rajya  Sabha  on 11.08.2015
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
August, 2015/Shravana, 1937 ( Saka)


COA No. 324
Price : R  61.00
© 2015 B Y L OK SABHA S ECRETARIAT
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct
of Business in Lok Sabha (Fifteenth Edition) and printed by
Aegean Offset Printers, New Delhi.

CONTENTS
PAGE
COMPOSITION OF THE C OMMITTEE ............................................. (iii)
INTRODUCTION ................................................................. (v)
CHAPTER I Report ....................................................... 1
CHAPTER II Observations/Recommendations which have been
accepted by the Government .......................... 15
CHAPTER III Observations/Recommendations which the Committee
do not desire to pursue in view of the Government’s
replies ....................................................... 37
CHAPTER IV Observations/Recommendations in respect of which
replies of the Government have not been accepted
by the Committee ........................................ 38
C
HAPTER V Observations/Recommendations in respect of
which final replies of the Government are still
awaited ...................................................... 48
A
NNEXURE
Minutes of the 31st Sitting of the Committee
held on 06.08.2015 ....................................... 52
APPENDIX
Analysis of Action Taken by the Government on the
Recommendations contained in the Fifth Report
(Sixteenth Lok Sabha) of the Committee on
Agriculture (2014-2015) .................................. 54
(i)

COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE
(2014-2015)
Shri Hukm Deo Narayan Yadav —  Chairperson
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Sanganna Amarappa
3. Prof. Ravindra Vishwanath Gaikwad
4. Shri Nalin Kumar Kateel
5. Md. Badaruddoza Khan
6. Shri C. Mahendran
7. Dr. Tapas Mandal
8. Shri Janardan Mishra
9. Shri Ajay Nishad
10. Shri Dalpat Singh Paraste
11. Shri Nityanand Rai
12. Shri Mukesh Rajput
13. Shri Konakalla Narayana Rao
14. Shri C.L. Ruala
15. Shri Arjun Charan Sethi
16. Shri Satyapal Singh
17. Shri Virendra Singh
*18. Vacant
19. Shri Jai Prakash Narayan Yadav
20. Shri Dharmendra Yadav
21. Shri B.S. Yeddyurappa
Rajya Sabha
22. Shri A.W. Rabi Bernard
23. Shrimati Renuka Chowdhury
(iii)
*Vice Shri Kadiyam Srihari who ceased to be the Member of the Committee on his
resignation from Lok Sabha w.e.f. 11 June 2015 vide notification No. 21/1/2015/T(B)
dated 15.06.2015.

(iv)
24. Sardar Sukhdev Singh Dhindsa
25. Shri Janardan Dwivedi
26. Shri Vinay Katiyar
27. Shri Mohd. Ali Khan
28. Shri Rajpal Singh Saini
29. Shri Ram Nath Thakur
30. Shri Shankarbhai N. Vegad
31. Shri Darshan Singh Yadav
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Shri Abhijit Kumar — Joint Secretary
2. Shri N.K. Pandey — Director
3. Shri C. Vanlalruata — Deputy Secretary

(v)
INTRODUCTION
I, the Chairperson, Committee on Agriculture (2014-15), having
been authorized by the Committee to submit the Report on their
behalf, present this Fourteenth Report on action taken by the
Government on the Observations/Recommendations contained in the
Fifth Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) of the Committee on Agriculture
(2014-15) on ‘Demands For Grants (2014-15) ’ pertaining to the Ministry
of Agriculture (Department of Animal Husbandry, Dairying and Fisheries).
2. The Fifth Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) of the Committee on
Agriculture (2014-15) on ‘Demands For Grants (2014-15)’ of the Ministry
of Agriculture (Department of Animal Husbandry, Dairying and Fisheries)
was presented to Lok Sabha and laid on the Table of Rajya Sabha on
22 December, 2014. The Action Taken Notes on the Report were received
on 20 March, 2015.
3. The Report was considered and adopted by the Committee at
their Sitting held on 06th August, 2015.
4. An analysis of the action taken by the Government on the
Observations/Recommendations contained in the Fifth Report (Sixteenth
Lok Sabha) of the Committee is given in Appendix.
   N
EW D ELHI; HUKM DEO NARAYAN YADAV,
06 August, 2015 Chairperson,
15 Shravana, 1937 (Saka) Committee on Agriculture.

CHAPTER I
REPORT
This Report of the Committee on Agriculture deals with the action
taken by the Government on the recommendations contained in the
Fifth Report of the Committee on Agriculture (2014-15) on ‘Demands
for Grants (2014-15) ’ of the Ministry of Agriculture (Department of
Animal Husbandry, Dairying and Fisheries) which was presented to
Lok Sabha and laid on the Table of Rajya Sabha on 22 December , 2014
respectively.
1.2 The Ministry of Agriculture (Department of Animal Husbandry,
Dairying and Fisheries) have furnished Action Taken Replies in respect
of all the 32 Observations/Recommendations contained in the Report.
These have been categorized as under:—
(i) Observations/Recommendations that have been accepted by
the Government:
Recommendation Para Nos. 1, 2, 5, 6, 11, 12, 14, 16, 17, 18,
19, 20, 22, 23, 24, 25, 27, 28, 29 and 30
(Chapter II - Total 20)
(ii) Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not
desire to pursue in view of the Government ’s replies:
Recommendation Para No. NIL
(Chapter III - NIL)
(iii) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which action
taken replies of the Government have not been accepted by
the Committee:
Recommendation Para Nos. 3, 4, 7, 10, 21, 26, 31 and 32
(Chapter IV - Total 08)
(iv) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which final
replies of the Government are still awaited:
Recommendation Para Nos. 8, 9, 13 and 15
(Chapter V - Total 04)
1.3 The Committee trust that utmost importance would be given
to implementation of the Observations/Recommendations accepted
by the Government. In cases, where it is not possible for the

2
Department to implement the Recommendations in letter and spirit
for any reason, the matter should be reported to the Committee
with reasons for non-implementation. The Committee desire that
further Action Taken Note on the Observations/Recommendations
contained in Chapter-I and Final Action Taken Replies to the
Recommendations contained in Chapter-V of this Report be furnished
to them within at an early date.
1.4 The Committee will now deal with the action taken by the
Government on some of the Recommendations in the succeeding
paragraphs.
Budgetary Allocations
Recommendation (Para Nos. 3 & 4)
1.5 During the course of examination of Demands for Grants of the
Department for the 12th Plan period, the Committee observed that
there was a wide variance in the amount initially approved, that is,
Rs. 14179 crore and the Budgeted allocation for the first three fiscals
by the Planning Commission which was Rs. 6109 crore, thus leaving a
gap of about Rs. 8070 crore. The Budget Estimate was further reduced
at RE stage in 2012-13, 2013-14 and BE for the year 2014-15 which
added up to Rs. 5348 crore. This realignment of figures by the Planning
Commission and the Ministry of Finance (Department of Expenditure)
bewilders the Committee. This being so as the Planning Commission
after having undertaken a detailed exercise would have earmarked the
funds for the Department at the start of the 12th Plan. In spite of
numerous recommendations made by the Committee for granting the
Department their full Plan allocation, that too an equitable amount in
proportion each year over the span of the Plan period as allocated by
the Planning Commission/Ministry of Finance and to help them carry
out their mandate successfully, no positive outcome has been witnessed.
Keeping the importance of this sector in view of providing to the
economically vulnerable farming community, the Committee desire the
Government to have a fresh perspective on this aspect during the
12th Plan and to ensure that full quota of allocated funds are actually
provided to the Department in the remaining annual allocations of the
12th Plan.
1.6 The Committee note with regret that in spite of repeated
recommendations that Plan allocation of the Department of Animal
Husbandry, Dairying and Fisheries be increased so as to increase its
share in comparison to the other two Departments of the Agriculture
sector viz. Department of Agriculture and Cooperation and Department

3
of Agricultural Research and Education, have not yielded any results
and still the share of the Department remains much lower compared
to its sister Departments. The Committee do not buy the argument of
the Department that compared to the 11th Plan expenditure of
Rs. 4870.54 crore, the allocation for the Department in the 12th Plan
has been increased to Rs. 14179.00 crore as it pales in comparison to
the allocation for Department of Agriculture and Cooperation and
Department of Agricultural Research and Education in actual and
percentage terms for the current Plan period. The Department of
Animal Husbandry, Dairying and Fisheries have also stated that the
approved allocation for the 12th Plan of Rs. 14179.00 crore is
inadequate. Irrespective of the fact that though Department of Animal
Husbandry, Dairying and Fisheries is the youngest constituent to share
the Plan allocation, it need not be the least, as is evident currently.
The Committee empathize with the Department on this issue and once
again urge the Government to quantitatively enhance the share of
Department of Animal Husbandry, Dairying and Fisheries in the Plan
allocation as this sector provides additional means of sustenance in
terms of wealth/security and employment to the farming community
mostly comprising of small and marginal farmers residing in the rural
areas.
1.7 In their Action Taken Note, the Department have stated that
the Department agrees with the observations of the Committee.
Accordingly, the Department had requested Ministry of Finance and
Planning Commission for increase in allocation for remaining two years
of the 12th Plan and at least ensure the full quota of allocated funds
are actually provided to the Department in the remaining annual
allocations of the 12th Plan for the effectively implementing schemes
of livestock and fisheries sector for benefit of the animal rearers and
fisherfolk mostly comprising of small and marginal farmers. However,
keeping in mind the recommendations of 14th Finance Commission,
Ministry of Finance has allocated an amount Rs. 1491.14 crore for the
year 2015-16, which is lower than 31.41% of allocation made for the
year 2015-16.
1.8 The Committee are not satisfied with the reply of the
Government, as the issue of mismatch between proposed demand
and actual allocation has not been addressed to. The mere agreement
of the Department with the suggestion of the Committee will not
bear any fruit in this regard, as no substantive reasons have been
assigned for concurring with the view of the Committee and also for
the reduced budgetary allocations to the Department and as to
whether it would impact the implementation of the schemes and

4
targets set under the schemes have also not been intimated. The
Committee would also like to know as to what extent planning has
suffered due to lesser allocation, whether any reasons have been
assigned for reduction in the allocation and has the Government
chalked out some alternative methods to ensure that planning process
does not suffer from lesser allocation of funds. They, therefore,
reiterate their earlier recommendation that all agencies involved in
the planning process arrive at a model which helps in bringing
parity between the proposed/approved outlay and actual allocation,
thereby making the planning process rational, realistic and
meaningful.
Funds Surrendered
Recommendation (Para No. 7)
1.9 The Committee note that due to certain constraints beyond
their control like delay in approval of schemes, non-approval of scheme/
components of scheme by competent authority, less/no demand from
implementing agencies, etc. due to which Department of Animal
Husbandry, Dairying and Fisheries surrendered Rs. 174.00 crore and
Rs.378.66 crore during the years 2012-13 and 2013-14. The total
surrender of funds amounts to Rs. 553.26 crore. Concerned at this
alarming state of affairs they impress upon Department of Animal
Husbandry, Dairying and Fisheries to take up these vital issues such as
expeditious clearance and approval of the Schemes and timely demand
from implementing agencies at the highest level with the concerned
parties so that a timely and lasting solution is found for this nagging
and perennial problem which hampers the functioning of the various
schemes of the Animal Husbandry, Dairying and Fisheries Sector.
1.10 In their Action Taken Note, the Government stated that the
Department has actually proposed allocation to the tune of Rs. 3497.50
crore for 2012-13 and Rs. 3025.00 crore for 2013-14, against which,
Planning Commission has allocated an outlay of Rs. 1910.00 crore and
Rs. 2025.00 crore for 2012-13 and 2013-14 respectively at BE stage.
The Department of Expenditure, Ministry of Finance has curtailed down
the outlays further to Rs. 1800.00 crore for both the years though the
Department has made request for much more funds. The Department
is continuously taking up the matter with the concerned Ministries for
expeditious clearance of schemes/programmes implemented by the
Department so as to fully utilise the funds provided under different
schemes being implemented by the Department. All the schemes, except
National Fisheries Development Board, have been approved by
competent authority for its implementation during 12th Plan.

5
1.11 While the Committee empathize with the Department on
the issue of mismatch between proposed allocation and actual
allocation during the first two years of the Twelfth Five Year Plan,
they have also noted that the utilization of funds by the Department
has not been upto the mark. This is evident from the fact that
during the years 2012-13 and 2013-14 the BE figures of Rs. 1910.00
crore and Rs. 2025.00 crore have been revised downward at
RE stage to Rs. 1800.00 crore for both the years. This slow paced
utilization of funds has been the primary reasons for mismatch
between the demand and actual allocation. Taking into consideration
the pivotal role of Animal Husbandry, Dairying and Fisheries sector
in supplementing the income of our agriculturists, they desire that
DAHDF impress upon all implementing agencies to furnish timely
their utilization certificates of past allocations and fresh proposals
so as to ensure a smooth flow of funds across all quarters of a
financial year. Once this is ensured, mismatch between demand and
allocation would be greatly reduced and request for enhanced
allocation would receive an affirmative nod from the MoF in the
future.
Allocation to Animal Husbandry Sector
Recommendation (Para No. 10)
1.12 The Committee are aware that Animal Husbandry Sector play
an important role in the national economy and in the socio-economic
development of the country, especially, in terms of supplementing
family incomes and generating fruitful employment in rural sector. It
provides economic and social security to the landless labourers, small
and marginal farmers and women, besides providing nutritional food to
them. However, the small/marginal farmers having less than four
hectares of land holding own 87.7% of the livestock. The livestock is
of immense support to these strata of our population in the context
of declining agricultural landholdings and best form of insurance against
the vagaries of nature like drought, famine and floods etc. The
Committee are perturbed to note that the Animal Husbandry Sector is
not getting its due in terms of monetary allocations and this is hampering
the implementation of various important schemes of the Department.
In the first two Fiscals of the 12th Plan, BE allocation figures of
Rs. 1063.10 crore (2012-13) and Rs. 1051.49 crore (2013-14) were
curtailed at RE stage to Rs. 909.43 crore and Rs. 932.85 crore
respectively. The actual release has been to the tune of Rs. 880.80
crore (2012-13) and Rs. 916.16 crore (2013-14) which in percentage
terms is 82.85% (2012-13) and 87.12% (2013-14) of BE respectively.

6
This has hampered the implementation of the vital schemes of the
sector in the first two years of the 12th Plan period. The Committee,
therefore, desire the planners and policy makers to provide fair
allocation to this sector not only as per the traditional significance of
this sector, but also its importance in the changed scenario in terms
of rising incomes, change in dietary preferences, consumption of high
value food and diversion towards animal based protein besides rising
processed animal products. The situation of hampered implementation
of the Schemes of this sector year after year for want of funds is like
strangling a very vital and growing area of our economy. They, therefore,
strongly recommend that the yawning gap between the policy
formulation and implementation be bridged by emphatically persuading
the Planning Commission and Ministry of Finance to enhance allocation
to this sector. They further desire the Department to tone up their
implementation apparatus so that they are in a better position to
absorb the allocated funds resulting in attainment of set targets. The
Committee also urge the Government to allocate the funds to the
Department uniformly over the Plan period so that the funds are
optimally utilized by the Department in their schemes and activities.
1.13 The Government in their Action Taken Note stated that the
allocation of funds to the Animal Husbandry Sector are decreased due
to higher allocation of funds for the schemes like Dairy Entrepreneurship
Development Scheme, due to committed liabilities and National Dairy
Plan Phase-I, which is world bank assisted programme and overall less
allocation to the Department. Department agrees with the observations
of the Committee and requested Ministry of Finance and Planning
Commission for enhancement of funds for the Department so as to
allocate more funds for Animal Husbandry Sector. Despite the repeated
requests made by the Department to Ministry of Finance and Planning
Commission, the funds actually provided to the Department has not
been improved and Department of Expenditure, Ministry of Finance
has allocated only Rs.1800.00 crore for three consecutive years of the
12th Plan at RE stages. The Department has once again requested
Ministry of Finance and Planning Commission for enhancement of outlay
of the Department in the light of observations/recommendations made
by the Parliamentary Standing Committee on Agriculture in its
5th Report. However , Ministry of Finance has allocated an amount of
Rs. 1491.14 crore only for 2015-16 against the proposed outlay of
Rs. 4527.79 crore, due to financial constraints on account of
14th Finance Commission ’s recommendations.
1.14 From the reply of the Department, the Committee ascertain
that the allocation for Animal Husbandry Sector has been decreased
due to higher allocation of funds for schemes like Dairying

7
Entrepreneurship Development Scheme, Committed Liabilities,
National Dairy Plan, Phase-I and Financial constraints on account of
the recommendations of the Fourteenth Finance Commission. It is
incomprehensible and defies logic that higher allocation for schemes
of the Dairy Sector has been resorted to by the Ministry of Finance
(MOF) at the cost of the Animal Husbandry Sector. This
re-appropriation of funds resorted to by the MoF shows the extant
Planning Policy of the Government in a very poor light and also
leads to the conclusion that schemes of the Dairy Sector are
considered to be priority over schemes of the Animal Husbandry
Sector. Strongly deprecating this action on part of the MoF, the
Committee reiterate for enhancement of allocated funds and to
refrain from their act of enhancing allocation for a particular scheme
at the cost of another scheme.
Institutional Arrangement for Creating Awareness
Recommendation (Para No. 20)
1.15 The Committee find that in consonance with the significance
and support of the livestock to the small and marginal farmers in
terms of economic, social and food security besides providing
employment avenues, the Department of Animal Husbandry, Dairying
and Fisheries is implementing very useful schemes in diverse fields in
this sector. However , the Committee are also aware that the farmers
who are the ultimate/beneficiaries are ignorant of these useful schemes
of the Department leading to non-accomplishment of the objectives of
these schemes. The Committee find that in this sector, there is no
institutional mechanism, like ATMAs/KVKs in Department of Agriculture
and Cooperation, Department of Agricultural Research and Education
to disseminate information and create awareness about the knowledge
in research, technology, mechanization and schemes of the Government.
In view of this, the well intentioned schemes of the Department of
Animal Husbandry, Dairying and Fisheries does not reach the
beneficiaries. The Committee also do not appreciate the dependence
of Department of Animal Husbandry, Dairying and Fisheries and tendency
to pass the buck to the institutional set up of DAC/DARE so far as
creating awareness is concerned. The Committee, therefore, strongly
recommend that DAHDF , on the analogy of DAC/DARE should bring out
immediately a clear cut mechanism/institutional arrangement for
creating awareness about the research work, modern ways of using the
animal products and synergic use of the modern and traditional good
practices on a wide scale so as to cover beneficiaries at every block/
panchayat level. This systemic effort will definitely educate the farmers

8
on hygiene, health and upkeep of healthy livestock as per the grants/
aids/facilities provided by the Government and give higher returns
from the animal products.
1.16 The Department in their Action Taken Note stated that ATMAs
and KVKs are for the entire Agriculture Ministry including Animal
Husbandry, Dairying and Fisheries. However , Department of Animal
Husbandry, Dairying and Fisheries have been launched, National
Livestock Mission (NLM) operationalized on 21.5.2014. Under NLM, there
is a Sub-Mission on Skill Development, Technology Transfer and
Extension. The Sub-Mission includes all the activities related to livestock
extension, capacity building and training.
1.17 The Committee express their satisfaction on being apprised
that the National Livestock Mission (NLM), has been operationalised
on 21st May, 2014, which includes a submission on Skill Development,
Technology Transfer and Education, which would cater to all activities
related to livestock extension, capacity building and learning. They
are pretty sanguine that if properly implemented the NLM would go
a long way in creating awareness amongst farmers about the
developments taking place in the animal husbandry sector and bring
about synergy between modern technology and traditional good
practises. Details of various activities conducted under sub-mission
on skill development, technology transfer and education, till date
may be forwarded to the Committee. Lastly they also desire that
functional synergy be brought about in the three constituent
departments of the Ministry of Agriculture i.e. DAC, DARE and DAHDF
so that they increase cooperation between each other via ATMA/
KVK/NLM in the years to come.
Development of Dairy Sector
Recommendation (Para No. 21)
1.18 Dairy Sector has experienced a substantial growth over the
years owing to prudent policy intervention by the Government. This
has resulted in India being the global leader in milk producing nations,
with production of 138 million tonnes during the fiscal 2013-14. Also,
dairying has become an important secondary source of income for
women and marginal farmers. Lauding the efforts of the Department
of Animal Husbandry, Dairying and Fisheries, the Committee urge the
Government to continually strive for the overall development of this
vital section in terms of enhanced allocation that would help in proper
and effective implementation of Schemes which would lead to increased
production of milk, year after year.

9
1.19 The Department in their Action Taken Note stated that based
on the committed financial liabilities under approved projects under
Dairy development scheme of the Department, Department have been
proposing budgetary estimates accordingly. The financial allocation
proposed and allocation received for the Dairy Development is as under:—
Name of P roposed 12th 2012-13 2013-14 2014-15 2015-16
the scheme 12th Plan
Plan Outlay Proposed Proposed Proposed Proposed
outlay BE BE BE BE BE BE BE BE
NPBB & DD 2500 600 500.00 100.00 100.00 85.00 125.00 105.00 145.00 74.00
DEDS 2500 1400 500.00 150.00 600.00 300.00 350.00 229.99 400.00 127.00
NDP-I 1742.24 1756 130.00 123.00 260.00 180.00 327.27 215.05 496.00 300.00
Total 6742.24 3756 1130.00 373.00 960.00 565.00 802.27 550.04 1041.00 501.00
Name of the NPBB & DEDS NDP-I Total
scheme DD
Proposed 2500 2500 1742 6742.2
12th Plan
outlay
12th Plan 600 1400 1756 3756
outlay
2012-13 Proposed BE 500 500 130 1130
BE 100 150 123 373
2013-14 Proposed BE 100 600 260 960
BE 85 300 180 565
2014-15 Proposed BE 125 350 327.3 802.27
BE 105 230 215.1 550.04
2015-16 Proposed  BE 145 400 496 1041
BE 74 127 300 501
It may be observed from the details of budgetary allocation during
last three years that budgetary support is inadequate. Under BE
2015-16, an amount of Rs. 501 crore has been tentatively allocated
against proposed allocation of Rs. 1041 crore.

10
1.20 The rather candid admission of the Department that
budgetary allocation during the last three years is inadequate as
against demand of Rs. 6742.24 crore, the approved outlay was only
Rs. 3756.00 crore, thus leading to a gap of Rs. 2986.20 crore, really
is a cause of serious concern to the Committee. What further
anguishes the Committee is that the erstwhile Planning Commission
and the Ministry of Finance have allocated a BE of Rs.1989.04 crore
out of the approved outlay of Rs. 3756.00 crore. Thus, leaving an
amount of Rs. 1766.96 crore for the last fiscal of the Twelfth Five
Year Plan, i.e. 2016-17, which going by past record, the Committee
are sure would not be allocated. This mismatch between the
approved outlay and actual allocation for the Dairy Sector, that has
experienced a substantial growth over the years, really perturbs
the Committee, as it makes a mockery of the extant planning process.
The Committee impress upon the Department to convey their concern
on this issue to the Ministry of Finance and reiterate that the
Government quickly evolve a mechanism that would ensure that
approved allocation and actual allocation of funds have limited
mismatch to the extent possible.
Increased Budgetary Allocations for Fisheries Sector
Recommendation (Para No. 26)
1.21 India occupies the second position globally in fish production
after China with a production of 9.04 million tonnes (provisional) during
the year 2012-13. However, the Committee observe that much remains
to be done especially in the inland and deep sea fishing in order to
stem the decline in marine fishery sector. For this, the Government
needs to increase the allocation to the fisheries sector. But, the converse
has been taking place in the fisheries sector, wherein out of the
12th Plan Outlay of Rs. 2483.00 crore, the BE allocation for the first
three fiscals amounts to Rs. 1193.16 crore. The BE figures were then
reduced at RE stage to Rs. 644.49 crore for the first two fiscals. The
variation between the Plan Outlay and actual allocation in the first
two fiscals is Rs. 1838.51 crore. Concerned to note that though the
fisheries sector exported 9,28,215 tonnes valued at Rs. 18,856.26 crore
during 2012-13, which has increased almost three times from 2009-10
value of exports, is not getting its due encouragement from the
Government, in terms of funding, the Committee recommend that the
Government go for a quantum enhancement of funds, so as to boost
the available resources for overall growth of this sector , at the earliest.

11
1.22 In their Action Taken Note the Government stated that details
of funds allocated for fisheries from the overall allocation made to the
Department during the past three financial years the 12th Plan are as
below:—
Year Allocation to the Allocation of Percentage
Department Fisheries Division of (5) in
relation
BE RE BE RE to (3)
2012-13 1900 1800 340.70 312.14 17.34%
2013-14 2025 1800 371.50 332.35 18.46%
2014-15 2174 1800 480.96 351.56 19.53%
Total 6099 5400 1193.16 996.05 18.44%
It is mentioned that financial allocation to the Department is
decided by the Planning Commission and Ministry of Finance depending
upon the overall resources available. It may be seen from the above
table that the Department while distributing the allocated amount to
various sectors such as animal husbandry, dairying and fisheries,
considers fisheries as one of the priority sectors. The fisheries sector
share 18.44% of the budgetary allocation made to the Department.
1.23 Notwithstanding the argument put forth by the Department
that financial allocation is decided by the Planning Commission and
Ministry of Finance depending upon the overall resources available
and on its part Department of Animal Husbandry, Dairying and
Fisheries (DAHDF) have annually increased the percentage allocation
to fisheries sector from 17.34% in 2012-13 to 19.53% in 2014-15,
the Committee are of the firm opinion that this amount is meagre,
considering the vast potential of this sector. Also noting the fact
that though India occupies the record position in global fish
production with 5.68%, yet we are way behind China and need a lot
of catching up efforts. The Committee feel that in order to tap its
vast and presently unharnessed potential, this sector is in need of
desperate infusion of funds. They, therefore, reiterate that the
department must take up the issue of enhanced fund allocation
with the Ministry of Finance repeatedly at the highest level, till it
is successful in this endeavour.
Issuance of Biometric Identity Cards to Marine Fishermen
Recommendation (Para No. 31)
1.24 The Committee laud Department of Animal Husbandry, Dairying
and Fisheries for having come up with the Central Sector Scheme on

12
Issuance of Biometric Cards to marine Fishermen from 11th December ,
2009. The primary reason that marine fishermen sometimes stray into
foreign waters inadvertently due to lack of proper demarcation of
marine boundaries. This has resulted in our fishermen being captured
after having strayed into foreign waters. It creates diplomacy issues
besides marine fishermen languishing in their jails. Further the
Committee noted that out of the identified 18,12,011 marine fishermen,
11,21,814 cards have been issued till January, 2014. Keeping in view
the sensitive nature of the task and also the safety and well being of
our marine fishermen and its ramifications on our National Security,
the Committee desire that all identified marine fishermen be issued
biometric identity cards in a time-bound manner. The Committee may
be kept abreast of the progress and the timeline in this regard.
1.25 The Department in their Action Taken Note stated that Out
of 19,60,488 fishermen identified by the State Government for issuance
of biometric ID cards, data collection in respect of all the fishermen
have been completed. Out of these, capturing of biometric details in
respect of 15,15,597 fishermen have been completed till 12th January,
2015. As on 12th January, 2015, the consortium of Central Public
Sector Undertakings has produced a total of 12,35,804 ID cards and
dispatched 12,30,323 cards to the States/UTs for distribution to the
fishermen. At the request of the Department, the CPSUs have completed
an average three rounds of Biometric capturing camps in all the States
and UTs. Due to very poor response of fishermen in the 2nd and 3rd
rounds of camps, biometric details in respect of about 4.45 lakh
fishermen have not yet been captured by the CPSUs. The Department
in consultation with the Coastal State Governments, UTs and consortium
of CPSUs has been making efforts to complete issuance of ID cards to
the identified fishermen.
1.26 The Committee are concerned to note that even after a
lapse of almost six years, out of the identified 19,60,488 marine
fishermen biometric identity cards have been produced for 12,35,804
fishermen and 12,30,323 despatched to States/UTs for distribution
to fishermen, as on 12th January, 2015. This still leaves a gap of
7,24,684 fishermen whose biometric identity cards are yet to be
completed. What further concerns the Committee is the admittance
of the fact that due to very poor response of fishermen in the
2nd and 3rd round of camps, biometric details in respect of about
4.45 lakhs fishermen have not yet been captured by CPSUs. Alarmed
at this state of affairs, the Committee are of the strong view that
the Government address this vital issue at the earliest and with the

13
alacrity it deserves keeping in view its ramifications. They, further,
reiterate that the exercise of issuing biometric identify cards to
marine fishermen be completed on a war footing and the Committee
be apprised of the latest developments herein.
Expansion of Marine Fisheries Census
Recommendation (Para No. 32)
1.27 The Committee note that during the 11th Five Year Plan
Government had approved a revised scheme for strengthening the data
base and geographical information system for the fisheries sector. They
find that census of marine fisheries is conducted every 5 years and the
previous one was conducted in 2010. While they are satisfied with this
initiative of mapping water bodies. However , they find this effort is
too meagre and far between as presently it has been carried out only
in 22 districts in three States. They insist that certain additional
parameters including data on water bodies and resources therein have
to be included in this kind of census and should be extended to more
districts for instilling country wide GIS base fishery management system
in order to analyse the development of fisheries.
1.28 The Government in their Action Taken Note stated that during
Eleventh Five Year Plan, mapping of water bodies has been successfully
attempted in all districts of West Bengal. During 12th Five Year Plan,
mapping of water bodies has been undertaken in three more States
namely Chhattisgarh, U.P . and Bihar with additional parameters like
depth contours, fishery potential. The Scheme aims to cover all the
States/UTs in a phased manner.
1.29 The Committee note that the response of the Government
on mapping water bodies with a view to extension of data based
and Geographical Information Centre for fishery sector has been
lukewarm. So far, only limited number of districts have been covered
under the schemes despite of the fact that the revised scheme was
approved in the 11th Five Year Plan. Regarding inclusion of additional
parameters in marine fisheries census, nothing has been said. The
Committee view that these are important ingredients for
development of fisheries in the country. Also, whether the mapping
of water bodies in the States of Chhattisgarh, Uttar Pradesh and
Bihar with additional parameters like depth centre, fishery potential
will come within the parameters of marine fishery is still to be
established. The Committee welcome the idea of mapping of water
bodies in other states but the relative priority of importance should
also be an active factor in undertaking such an exercise. The

14
Committee, therefore, reiterate that the identification/mapping of
water bodies for development of marine fishery should be done in
the country in a scientific and time-bound manner to ensure that
it facilitates the GIS based fishery management throughout the
country.

15
CHAPTER II
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN
ACCEPTED BY THE GOVERNMENT
Taking note of Recommendations of the Committee while
implementing various Programmes/Schemes
Recommendation (Para No. 1)
The Committee take note that the Rule 331G of the Rules of
Procedure and Conduct of Business in Lok Sabha relating to examination
of Demands for Grants by the Departmentally Related Standing
Committees (DRSCs) was suspended by Hon ’ble Speaker, Lok Sabha to
enable the House to pass the Demands for Grants for the year
2014-15 during the Second Session of Sixteenth Lok Sabha without the
same being referred to the concerned DRSCs. The Demands were,
however, referred to the Standing Committees for examining the same
after their constitution and for presenting the Report to the House
therein. The Committee, after their constitution on 1st September,
2014 took up examination of the Demands for Grants pertaining to the
Ministry of Agriculture for the year 2014-15. Since the Budget for the
year 2014-15 has already been passed by the Parliament, the Committee
endorse the same. The Committee would however , like the Ministry to
take note of their recommendations while implementing various
programmes/schemes, etc. within the approved budget.
Reply of the Government
The observations of the committee are noted for guidance.
[Ministry of Agriculture (Department of Animal Husbandry,
Dairying and Fisheries), L.No. 25-5(1)/2014-AHD (Coord.),
dated 20th March, 2015]
Implementation of Committee ’s Recommendations
Recommendation (Para No. 2)
The Committee note that the Action Taken Replies regarding the
action taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations
contained in the Forty-eighth Report of the Committee were furnished
by the Government within the stipulated three months and the

16
Statement of the Minister under Direction 73-A was made before the
stipulated six months period. An analysis of the action taken by the
Government reveals that 95% recommendations have been implemented
and 5% of recommendations are in various stages of implementation.
While the Committee hope and trust that the scheduled time line,
prescribed for submission of Action Taken Statement, under Direction
73-A would be adhered to in future, without fail, at the same time,
they urge the Government to take conclusive action in respect of
recommendations commented upon in their Fifty-fourth Action Taken
Report.
Reply of the Government
The observations of the committee are noted. Action has been
taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations of
the Committee contained in Fifty-fourth Action Taken Report and the
Further Action Taken Notes on the Observations/Recommendations of
the Committee contained in Chapter-I and final replies in respect of
recommendations included in Chapter-V of the 54th Report of Committee
on Agriculture (2013-14) on the action taken by the Government on
the Forty-eighth Report on Demands for Grants (2013-14) of the Ministry
of Agriculture was submitted to the Lok Sabha Secretariat on 10.03.2014.
[Ministry of Agriculture (Department of Animal Husbandry,
Dairying and Fisheries), L.No.25-5(1)/2014-AHD (Coord.),
dated 20th March, 2015]
Inter-sectoral Allocations
Recommendation (Para No. 5)
The Committee note that Agriculture/Animal Husbandry, Livestock
and Fisheries is a State Subject and to develop this sector cooperation
of States is essential as all the Schemes of the Centre are to be
implemented by States for conclusive results. The Committee, therefore,
impress upon the Department to get their own house in order and
address the issues immediately due to which States/UTs are not coming
up to avail Central Funds. All these bottlenecks should be thrashed
threadbare during the course of free and frank discussion wherein both
parties put forth their views candidly and then arrive at a common
ground. They are of the strong belief that if both Central and State
Governments are truly interested in invigorating Animal Husbandry,
Dairying and Fisheries Sector they would strive to work towards
convergence of ideas which in the present scenario seems to be
bordering on the divergence. The Committee are pretty sanguine that

17
if the States/UTs are taken up as equal partners, then they would be
motivated to avail Central Funds in increased quantities thereby
furnishing fresh proposals as well as utilization certificates well in
time thus taking care of unspent balances. This would also ensure
unhindered flow of funds, so that the last in the chain  i.e.  the
beneficiary is benefitted in the true sense. This will further lead to
increased allocation, optimum utilization of allocated funds and
ultimately spur this sector towards the growth it presently craves for.
They desire to be apprised of the concrete steps taken in this direction.
Reply of the Government
The observations of the Committee are noted for guidance. The
Department has taken the steps for allowing flexibility to the States
for addressing the State specific issues through the Centrally Sponsored
Schemes of the Department after its restructuring for 12th Five Year
Plan, so that States can come up with the proposal with emphasis on
State Specific needs. These schemes are being implemented by the
Department from the financial year 2014-15.
Department is hopeful that the restructured schemes will take
care of the most of the issues of the States for the development of
animal husbandry, dairying and fisheries sectors and States will thrive
for availing the Central funds.
In most of the Centrally Sponsored Schemes, the central funds are
being provided in the ratio of 75:25 between Centre and State. However,
due to fewer allocations for the Department during 2015-16, the
Department is of the view of increasing State share, so that the total
outlay (Centre and State) will be maintained under the schemes
implemented by the Department.
Department is also monitoring the progress of implementation of
Schemes in the States in terms of submission of proposals and utilisation
Certificates for earlier releases and issues of the States are addressed
through State Visits by the Senior Officers of the Department. Hon ’ble
Ministers are also conducting review meeting with the States for
addressing the issues of the States for successful implementation of
the schemes of the Department and thereby development of these
critical sectors of the economy. The position of unspent balance under
the schemes implemented by the Department is continuously monitored.
Department is of the view that with the measures taken by the
Department, States will proactive in availing central funds for the

18
benefit of the farmers engaged in the animal husbandry, dairying and
fisheries sectors in the country.
[Ministry of Agriculture (Department of Animal Husbandry,
Dairying and Fisheries), L.No.25-5(1)/2014-AHD (Coord.),
dated 20th March, 2015]
Under Utilisation of Funds
Recommendation (Para No. 6)
The Committee note that another area of concern for the
Department is under utilization of allocated funds. The actual allocation
(RE) for the first two fiscals is Rs. 3600 crore, out of which only
Rs. 3485.68 crore has been utilized. This has been attributed to delay
in submission of project proposals and utilization certificates by the
States/Implementing Agencies. Strongly deprecating this lackadaisical
attitude on the part of the implementing agencies, the Committee
desire that Department of Animal Husbandry, Dairying and Fisheries
impress upon the implementing agencies the need to timely furnish
project proposals as well as utilization certificates of part allocation.
This would ensure a smooth flow of funds throughout the year. Further,
they impress upon the Department to issue unambiguous instructions
at the highest level to all State Governments pointing out how the
unspent balances, ultimately lead to the curtailing of their future
funding and also to desist them from venturing into parking the funds
allocated by the Department for other purposes. They therefore desire
that effective steps be taken to ensure optimum utilization of allocated
funds.
Reply of the Government
The Department is continuously monitoring the position of unspent
balances under different schemes implemented by the Department.
Department through senior Officers Meeting is also monitoring the
expenditure under various schemes of the Department on weekly basis.
[Ministry of Agriculture (Department of Animal Husbandry,
Dairying and Fisheries), L.No.25-5(1)/2014-AHD (Coord.),
dated 20th March, 2015]
Peste Des Petits Ruminants Control Programme (PPR-CP)
Recommendation (Para No. 11)
The Committee note that Peste Des Petits Ruminants Control
Programme (PPR-CP) was started in 2010 on 100% Central assistance
basis to vaccinate susceptible sheep and goats against the viral disease

19
Pests Des Petits Ruminants (PPR). Initially, it was to be implemented
in the States/UTs of Kerala, Tamil Nadu, Karnataka, Andhra Pradesh,
Maharashtra, Goa, Lakshadweep, Daman & Diu, Dadra & Nagar Haveli,
Andaman and Nicobar Islands and Puducherry. From the Fiscal 2013-14,
it was proposed to be expanded to the remaining States/UTs, while the
utilization of funds was slow-paced in the Fiscal 2012-13, the physical
performance was 100% i.e. 38 million sheep/goats vaccinated against
the target of 38 million. However , during the last Fiscal i.e. 2013-14,
there was under utilization of allocated funds and under-achievement
in the physical performance too. Against a target of 38 million
vaccinations only 26 million vaccinations were achieved. This has been
attributed to the fact that the revised scheme was finally cleared on
27 February, 2014. The Committee express their serious concern over
the fact that this vicious cycle of delay in granting clearance to a
scheme by various agencies negatively impacts the implementation of
schemes as is evident in the instant case. Further taking note of the
fact that sheep and goat rearing is primarily done by the small and
marginal farmer in order to supplement their meagre income, the
delay in finalization of this scheme leaves this flock of sheep/goats
vulnerable to PPR. They, therefore, impress upon all concerned agencies
to ensure that the process of granting approvals to a scheme/
modifications in a scheme be speedily cleared and concrete mechanism
be arrived at to ensure that existing schemes that are being modified
are insulated against bureaucratic delays so that their implementation
is not hampered and the beneficiaries do not suffer on this account as
well.
Reply of the Government
The recommendations of the Committee are noted. However , during
2014-15, out of the RE of Rs. 10 crore under PPR-CP , funds to the tune
of Rs. 9.20 crore have been released to the States like Bihar , Himachal
Pradesh, Karnataka, Maharashtra, Punjab, Uttarakhand, West Bengal
and Nagaland for implementation of PPR control programme.
[Ministry of Agriculture (Department of Animal Husbandry,
Dairying and Fisheries), L.No.25-5(1)/2014-AHD (Coord.),
dated 20th March, 2015]
Indigenous Breeds
Recommendation (Para No. 12)
The Committee find that small and marginal farmers  i.e. whose
operational holdings are less than 4 hectares own about 87.7% of the
livestock for supplementing their meager income besides providing

20
cheap and nutritious food to millions of people. Due to their economic
vulnerability, small and marginal farmers prefer to own indigenous
breed of cattle inspite of their low milk production and their suitability
for draught animal power. Further, they are able to withstand the
harsh nature of our climate and require minimal upkeep and
maintenance cost. Out of the 199 million cattle in the country, 166
million are indigenous. However, the Committee are concerned to note
that 80% of indigenous cattle are non-descript and only 20% are
recognized by National Bureau of Genetic Resources (NBAGR).
Department of Animal Husbandry, Dairying and Fisheries are also not
clear on whether cattle and buffalo resource of the country comprises
of 37 indigenous breeds of cattle and 13 breeds of buffaloes or 24
indigenous breeds of cattle and 13 breeds of buffaloes. While the
documents furnished to the Committee refer to the former figure, the
figure referred to by the Secretary, Department of Animal Husbandry,
Dairying and Fisheries points to the latter figure. The Committee are
unhappy that not only the registered categories of indigenous breed of
cattle and buffaloes is low in either case but also the Department are
not clear themselves about it. Strongly, deprecating this confusion
over the number of indigenous breed of cattle and buffaloes recognized
by National Bureau of Genetic Resources, the Committee recommend
that the Department clear this confusion at the earliest.
Reply of the Government
At present there are 39 breeds of cattle and 13 breeds of buffaloes
registered by NBAGR including 2 breed of cattle Gangatiri from UP and
Belahi from Haryana registered by the institute during January, 2015.
[Ministry of Agriculture (Department of Animal Husbandry,
Dairying and Fisheries), L.No. 25-5(1)/2014-AHD (Coord.),
dated 20th March, 2015]
Increase the Success Rate of Artificial Insemination
Recommendation (Para No. 14)
The Committee are aware that major difficulties faced by the
animal breeding and dairy sectors at ground level are genetic
upgradation of cattle/buffalo, conservation of local breeds, production
and distribution of breeding inputs, lack of trained human resources
and incongruent institutional and policy framework. They are concerned
with the sordid state of affairs wherein the focus of the Department
is on increasing the number of Artificial Insemination without concern
to its success rate. The Committee note that the Government is

21
implementing a plethora of schemes aimed at development and
conservation of indigenous breeds in a focused and scientific manner.
In this direction, Department of Animal Husbandry, Dairying and Fisheries
has also proposed establishment of two National Kamdhenu Centres as
repository of germplasm of indigenous breeds in the country. While
noting the Department ’s initiative, the Committee recommend that
efforts are also required to conserve indigenous livestock breeds which
are superior in quality, resistant to diseases, able to withstand the
vagaries of the local climate, such as Murrah, Ongole and Punganur
etc. Further , efforts should also be fully made to use the best quality
indigenous breeds, bulls etc. that are already acclimatized with the
local conditions for upgrading the indigenous breeds and go for cross
breeding in selected cases. With emphasis on genetical improvement
of the indigenous varieties, the poor strata for farmers, who cannot
afford the exotic breeds will also get an opportunity to sustain their
livelihood with somewhat better breeds of livestock. The Committee
also desire that focused attention needs to be given to Artificial
Insemination qualitatively and proper scientific training to the
technicians on field, so as to improve the rather low success rate of
conception in cattle that are artificially inseminated. Lastly, professional
training should be imparted to the technicians and inseminators
regarding the methods of preservation, storage and transfer of semen
to the field under expert scientific guides, so as to increase the success
rate of the artificial insemination and provide relief to the farmers in
terms of effort, time and money.
Reply of the Government
Looking towards the importance of indigenous breeds in national
economy following initiatives has been taken by the Department:
(a) “Rashtriya Gokul Mission ” an initiative under National
Programme for Bovine Breeding and Dairy Development has
been launched with the aim to conserve and develop
indigenous bovine breeds in a focused and scientific manner.
All indigenous breeds are covered under the scheme.
(b) National Kamdhenu Breeding Centres (NKBC) are being
established one in Andhra Pradesh and one in Madhya Pradesh.
The NKBC will not only act as repository of indigenous
germplasm, but will also be source of certified germplasm in
the form of bulls, semen and embryos.
(c) National Dairy Plan covers development and conservation
of 6 indigenous breeds of cattle (Sahiwal, Gir , Rathi, Kankrej,

22
Tharparkar and Hariana) and 6 breeds of buffaloes (Murrah,
Mehsani, Jaffarabadi, Nili Ravi, Pandharpuri and Banni).
In order to produce disease free high genetic merit bulls of
indigenous bulls, Department has finalized Minimum Standard Protocol
and Standard Operating Procedure for:
(a) Pedigree selection; and
(b) Production of bulls for natural service.
Following initiatives has been taken by the Department in order to
improve Artificial Insemination delivery system and success rate of AI:
(a) Formulation of Standard Operating Procedure (SOP) for AI
technicians;
(b) Minimum Standard Protocol (MSP) and SOP for training of AI
technicians;
(c) MSP and SOP for AI training institutes; and
(d) Uniform syllabus/training module for AI training.
Department has constituted Central Monitoring Unit (CMU) for
evaluation and accreditation of AI training institutes in the country.
Funds are being released to States for extension of AI network through
establishment of Multi Purpose AI Technicians in Rural India (MAITRIs)
and strengthening of existing AI network.
[Ministry of Agriculture (Department of Animal Husbandry,
Dairying and Fisheries), L.No.25-5(1)/2014-AHD (Coord.),
dated 20th March, 2015]
Deficiency in availability of Animal Fodder vis-a-vis demand
Recommendation (Para No. 16)
The Committee note that there are a multitude of reasons leading
to the huge shortfall in availability of fodder and Department of Animal
Husbandry, Dairying and Fisheries is implementing two schemes, to
overcome the shortage of fodder. These are: (i) Central Fodder
Development Organization, and (ii) Feed and Fodder Development
Scheme. Being aware of the ground position, the Committee desire
that the Central Government ensure active participation of the
State Governments and all the implementing agencies so as to ensure
that the gap between demand and availability of fodder is bridged at
the earliest.

23
Reply of the Government
Department of Animal Husbandry, Dairying and Fisheries has
launched a National Livestock Mission (NLM) from the year 2014-15
with one Sub-Mission of Feed and Fodder Development. Grants are
provided to the State Governments and UTs for various components of
Feed and Fodder Development. The scheme is monitored by meetings
with State Governments/UTs officials, field visits, etc. All the
components will ensure that the gap between demand and availability
of fodder is bridged.
[Ministry of Agriculture (Department of Animal Husbandry,
Dairying and Fisheries), L.No.25-5(1)/2014-AHD (Coord.),
dated 20th March, 2015]
Nutritive Value of Fodder
Recommendation (Para No. 17)
Being in agreement with the submission of the Ministry that nutritive
value of feed and fodder has a significant bearing on productivity of
livestock, the Committee urge Department of Animal Husbandry, Dairying
and Fisheries to pay special attention to this vital aspect and seek the
help of Indian Council for Agricultural Research (ICAR) in improving the
nutritive value of dry fodder/green fodder and concentrate as it is
directly linked to the productivity of livestock. The Committee desire
that the Government conduct field studies in various parts, region-
wise, to evaluate the impact of feeding nutritionally balanced feed
and fodder, improve the productivity and metabolic profile of lactating
cows and buffaloes and based on the outcome of the appraisal, chalk
out a comprehensive programme to apprise the dairy farmer about the
advantages of feeding nutritionally balanced feed to animals in order
to increase their productivity. Further focussed attention should also
be paid for making it cost effective, so that the small and marginal
farmers are also able to get the most nutritive fodder for their livestock
at an affordable price. The availability of such nutritive fodder to
small and marginal farmers at reasonable prices should be ensured.
Reply of the Government
A letter has been written to Additional Director General (Animal
Nutrition), ICAR for improving the nutritive value of dry fodder/green
fodder and concentrate as it is directly linked to the productivity of
livestock. They have also been requested to conduct field studies in
various parts of country, region-wise, to evaluate the impact of feeding

24
nutritionally balanced feed on improvement of productivity and
metabolic profile of lactating cows and buffaloes. Based on the outcome
of the appraisal, a comprehensive programme will be chalked out.
[Ministry of Agriculture (Department of Animal Husbandry,
Dairying and Fisheries), L.No. 25-5(1)/2014-AHD (Coord.),
dated 20th March, 2015]
Increasing area under Fodder Cultivation
Recommendation (Para No. 18)
One reason attributed for the shortfall in availability of fodder in
the country is that the area under fodder cultivation is only about 4%
of the cropping area and the same has remained static for the last four
decades. The Committee are also aware that with passage of time
grazing areas in villages are diminishing due to degradation or
encroachment and Department of Animal Husbandry, Dairying and
Fisheries in constantly deliberating this issue with the concerned States/
UTs. Taking into consideration the gravity of the situation, the
Committee exhort upon the Department of Animal Husbandry, Dairying
and Fisheries to take up the issue of encroachment of rural pastures/
grazing land at the highest level so as to rid them of encroachment at
the earliest. Once this task has been accomplished these pastures can
be utilized for cultivating animal fodder. Further the Department should
pursue, the State Governments/Ministry of Railways and Ministry of
Defence, Ministry of Urban Development and suggest alternative spots/
unused lands which could be utilised for cultivating animal fodder.
They also desire that alternative grasses/nutritive fodder should be
grown in the areas where Parthaneium (weed) is growing at a rapid
speed and reducing the cultivable area, thereby reducing space for
growing fodder.
Reply of the Government
1. The matter has been taken up with the State Governments and
UTs in the past for removal of encroachment from time to time from
pastures/grazing lands. Letters have been written to draw the attention
of all the Chief Secretaries to all States/UTs for intervening and to
take effective recourse to protect and also retrieve community pasture
lands. The Department is also intimating them the concern of Committee
on Agriculture (16th Lok Sabha) about the removal of encroachment.
They have also been requested to grow alternative grasses/nutritive
fodder in the areas where Parthaneium (weed) which is growing at a
rapid speed and reducing the cultivable area, thereby reducing space
for growing fodder (by clearing it).

25
2. The Department is implementing various components for
pastures/grazing lands Development i.e. Fodder Production from Non-
Forest Wasteland/Rangeland/Grassland/Non-arable land, Fodder
Production from Forest Land under Feed and Fodder Development sub-
mission of NLM.
3. Earlier a letter was written to Chairman, Railway Board regarding
allowing for growing of grass to be used as fodder for livestock feeding
along the sides of railway tracks. They have replied that it is not
feasible due to safety of train operations.
4. Letters have been written to Ministry of Defence and Ministry
of Urban Development regarding suggesting alternative spots/unused
lands which could be utilized for cultivating animal fodder.
[Ministry of Agriculture (Department of Animal Husbandry,
Dairying and Fisheries), L.No. 25-5(1)/2014-AHD (Coord.),
dated 20th March, 2015]
Increasing area under Fodder Cultivation
Recommendation (Para No. 19)
The Committee were informed that one of the reasons for shortage
of fodder has been popularity of dwarf varieties of crop. They, however,
pointed out that this foresight was expected of the scientists at the
time of research on the dwarf varieties of crops. Further, Department
of Animal Husbandry, Dairying and Fisheries have admitted that ‘Hybrid
Napier’ is emerging as a rather popular fodder choice amongst farmers.
The Committee were also apprised that a Sub-Mission on Feed and
Fodder has been set up under which 8 stations exist where good
quality seeds for fodder are produced. These seeds are then distributed
free of cost or grant basis to the States, who are requested to multiply
the same and distribute to the farmers. The Committee, however,
advice the Department that the researchers/scientists, while bringing
out new varieties of crops should keep a vigilant eye on the side
effects of the new varieties such as diseases in humans and livestocks,
availability of fodder , besides the nutritive value of their remnants.
The Committee recommend that new varieties of fodder be researched
so as to provide nutritive feed to the cattle and livestock. They urge
the Department to propogate the use of ‘Hybrid Napier ’ extensively.
Further , they also emphasize that more stations for producing good
quality seeds under the submission on feed and fertilizers be opened
to distribute the seeds for fodder to the States so that the coverage
of such seeds is spread far and wide. The Department should ensure
that such seeds for feed and fodder are available in abundance to the
farmers for their livestock.

26
Reply of the Government
This Department has intimated to ICAR regarding the concern of
Committee on Agriculture (16th Lok Sabha) about the issue in
consideration.
As has already been replied, Hybrid Napier is being promoted
extensively by the Department both through Sub-Mission on Feed and
Fodder Development under NLM and through 8 Regional Fodder Stations.
The 8 Regional Fodder Stations are producing foundation/certified
seeds. Foundation seeds are further given to State Governments for
multiplication. The programme is financed under Sub-Mission on Feed
and Fodder Development under NLM.
[Ministry of Agriculture (Department of Animal Husbandry,
Dairying and Fisheries), L.No. 25-5(1)/2014-AHD (Coord.),
dated 20th March, 2015]
Institutional Arrangement for Creating Awareness
Recommendation (Para No. 20)
The Committee find that in consonance with the significance and
support of the livestock to the small and marginal farmers in terms of
economic, social and food security besides providing employment
avenues, the Department of Animal Husbandry, Dairying and Fisheries
is implementing very useful schemes in diverse fields in this sector.
However , the Committee are also aware that the farmers who are the
ultimate/beneficiaries are ignorant of these useful schemes of the
Department leading to non-accomplishment of the objectives of these
schemes. The Committee find that in this sector , there is no institutional
mechanism, like ATMAs/KVKs in Department of Agriculture and
Cooperation, Department of Agricultural Research and Education to
disseminate information and create awareness about the knowledge in
research, technology, mechanization and schemes of the Government.
In view of this, the well intentioned schemes of the Department of
Animal Husbandry, Dairying and Fisheries does not reach the
beneficiaries. The Committee also do not appreciate the dependence
of Department of Animal Husbandry, Dairying and Fisheries and tendency
to pass the buck to the institutional set up of DAC/DARE so far as
creating awareness is concerned. The Committee, therefore, strongly
recommend that DAHDF , on the anology of DAC/DARE should bring out
immediately a clear cut mechanism/institutional arrangement for
creating awareness about the research work, modern ways of using the

27
animal products and synergic use of the modern and traditional good
practices on a wide scale so as to cover beneficiaries at every block/
panchayat level. This systemic effort will definitely educate the farmers
on hygiene, health and upkeep of healthy livestock as per the grants/
aids/facilities provided by the Government and give higher returns
from the animal products.
Reply of the Government
ATMAs & KVKs are for the entire Agriculture Ministry including
Animal Husbandry, Dairying and Fisheries. However, Department of
Animal Husbandry, Dairying & Fisheries have been launched National
Livestock Mission (NLM) operationalized on 21.5.2014. Under NLM, there
is a Sub-Mission on Skill Development, Technology Transfer and
Extension. The Sub-Mission includes all the activities related to livestock
extension, capacity building and training.
[Ministry of Agriculture (Department of Animal Husbandry,
Dairying and Fisheries), L.No.25-5(1)/2014-AHD (Coord.),
dated 20th March, 2015]
Comments of the Committee
For comments of the Committee please refer to Para No. 1.17 of
Chapter-I of this Report.
Development of Dairy Sector
Recommendation (Para No. 22)
The Committee also desire Department of Animal Husbandry,
Dairying and Fisheries to fine tune their Schemes based on their
consultations with the States/implementing agencies and addressing
the issues which rake up during the implementation of these schemes,
so as to ensure their active participation in optimum utilization of
allocated funds and achievement of targets.
Reply of the Government
During 12th Five Year Plan, this Department has restructured dairy
development schemes namely National Programme for Bovine Breeding
and Dairy Development (NPBB&DD) and Dairy Entrepreneurship
Development Scheme (DEDS) after consultation with various stake
holding agencies including State Governments. For this purpose,
recommendations of evaluating agencies have also been taken into

28
account. Thereafter, the above schemes have been recommended by
Expenditure Finance Committee to Cabinet Committee on Economic
Affairs (CCEA) for their approval. This Department has launched these
two schemes after obtaining approval of CCEA.
[Ministry of Agriculture (Department of Animal Husbandry,
Dairying and Fisheries), L.No.25-5(1)/2014-AHD (Coord.),
dated 20th March, 2015]
Decline in Milk Procured by Delhi Milk Scheme (DMS)
Recommendation (Para No. 23)
The Committee are concerned to note that the quantity of milk
procured by Delhi Milk Scheme in the Fiscal 2013-14 i.e. 485.32 lakh kgs
is way lower than the figure of 792.05 lakh kgs for the year 2010-11.
The categorical reply of Department of Animal Husbandry, Dairying
and Fisheries that average daily demand of milk marketed by Delhi
Milk Scheme as on date is 2.60 lakh litres/day and availability is a per
demand flummoxes the Committee as they have been informed that
the average procurement in a day is 1.33 lakh kgs. Taking exception
to this slip-up on the part of Department of Animal Husbandry, Dairying
and Fisheries, the Committee recommend that utmost care be taken
before furnishing any data to the Committee so as to avoid confusion
by means of conflicting data as has happened case. They expect that
such oversight will not be repeated in the future.
Reply of the Government
The Recommendation of the Committee is noted for future
compliance. As regards the reason for decline in milk procured during
2013-14, it is stated that the milk procurement policy of DMS was
earlier linked and at par with the rate declared by Mother Dairy, Delhi.
The milk procurement rates communicated by Mother Dairy were not
the actual prices paid to milk supplier by Mother Dairy.
[Ministry of Agriculture (Department of Animal Husbandry,
Dairying and Fisheries), L.No. 25-5(1)/2014-AHD (Coord.),
dated 20th March, 2015]
Revival of Delhi Milk Scheme
Recommendation (Para No. 24)
The numerous reasons attributed to decline in milk procurement
by Delhi Milk Scheme is a cause of concern to the Committee, as this
has had a detrimental effect on the operations and profitability of

29
Delhi Milk Scheme. What perturbs the Committee is that till date the
Government have not been able to address this issue and this had
negatively impacted the viability of Delhi Milk Scheme as an entity. If
there is to be a turnaround in the fortunes of Delhi Milk Scheme, the
Committee desire that the issue of procurement of milk from various
sources be resolved at the earliest. Once this is resolved then Delhi
Milk Scheme can concentrate on increasing its operations, achieve
break even and then work towards profitability. The steps taken in this
regard may be communicated to the Committee at the earliest. The
Department should seriously consider to resolve the nagging issues in
the mater so that Delhi Milk Scheme competes with Mother Dairy
effectively.
Reply of the Government
The Department had reviewed the milk procurement policy of DMS
and delinked it from Mother Dairy in December , 2013. Now DMS is
empowered to decide milk purchase price at its own level for
procurement of milk as per daily requirement with minimum dependence
on use of commodities like Skimmed Milk Powder and White Butter etc.
Since then, DMS is able to procure milk from the State Dairy Federations
and other sources as per its requirement. It is evident from the fact
that DMS has been able to procure 2.32 lakh kgs of milk on an average
per day during the year 2014-15 (upto Dec., 2014) as compared to
1.2 lakh kgs per day during same period in the year 2013-14.
[Ministry of Agriculture (Department of Animal Husbandry,
Dairying and Fisheries), L.No.25-5(1)/2014-AHD (Coord.),
dated 20th March, 2015]
Functional Autonomy to Delhi Milk Scheme
Recommendation (Para No. 25)
Taking cue from the Ministry ’s candid admittance that in order to
run Delhi Milk Scheme efficiently as a commercial entity and to make
it financially viable, it needs to be provided autonomy, to enable it to
take strategic decisions on commercial lines, they recommend that the
Ministry put their statement into motion at the earliest so as the
ensure that Delhi Milk Scheme is provided functional autonomy, so as
to ensure that it is restored as a flourishing, viable and profit making
entity like Mother Dairy and others. The Committee desire to be apprised
of the steps taken by the Department towards providing functional
autonomy to Delhi Milk Scheme at the earliest.

30
Reply of the Government
As regards the issue of providing functional autonomy to DMS, the
Department has delinked the pricing policy of DMS for procurement of
milk from Mother Dairy and empowered DMS to decide the milk purchase
price at its own level following due procedure. Further General Manager,
DMS is authorized to take all commercial decisions following laid down
procedures keeping in view of the economy measures in overall interest
of DMS and to convert into a financially viable entity.
[Ministry of Agriculture (Department of Animal Husbandry,
Dairying and Fisheries), L.No. 25-5(1)/2014-AHD (Coord.),
dated 20th March, 2015]
Increased Budgetary Allocations for Fisheries Sector
Recommendation (Para No. 27)
Simultaneously, the Committee desire that Department of Animal
Husbandry, Dairying and Fisheries to motivate all the implementing
agencies to come forward and subscribe to the schemes being
implemented by them by sending fresh proposals and timely furnishing
utilization certificates of past allocations. This would not only ensure
optimum utilization of funds but also lead to reduction of approved
funds is confined to the bare minimum.
Reply of the Government
The Department sensitize the State Governments and Union
Territories through notification of Schemes, State Minister ’s/Secretary
level conferences, zonal level meetings besides regular monitoring by
the Department including field visits etc. for speedy implementation
of the projects and utilization of funds to them.
[Ministry of Agriculture (Department of Animal Husbandry,
Dairying and Fisheries), L.No.25-5(1)/2014-AHD (Coord.),
dated 20th March, 2015]
Development of Fisheries Sector
Recommendation (Para No. 28)
If India is to reach the pinnacle in fish production and increase its
share of exports, the Governments needs to go in for major
infrastructure enhancement in the realm of pre and post harvest
operations. The Committee stress that the Department should focus on

31
development of basic infrastructure and facilities including
comprehensive policy for exploiting freshwater/brackish water/deep
sea resources, adequate number of certified fish seeds; proper disease
control protocol, fish feed, modernized boats/nets especially for deep
sea fishing, deep sea fishing trawlers, upgrading of existing fish
harbours/fish landing centres comparable to international standards;
augmenting the number of fish landing centres, modernized and hygienic
domestic markets; adequate number of cold chains along coastal areas
with irradiation centres; processing centres in close proximity to major
fish producing areas. The Department should also ensure that there is
synergy between traditional methods and modern scientific techniques
and comprehensive professional training in this regard be imparted
under the guidance of experts and through extension activities. For
this the Government needs to really up the ante in terms of financial
resources and long term planning. If these issues are taken care of the
Committee are pretty sanguine that the day is not far when India
would be at the pinnacle of fish production and its exports after
having satisfied its domestic demand.
Reply of the Government
Development of infrastructure facilities for fisheries sector especially
fishing harbours, fish landing centres and cold chain has been considered
as one of the thrust areas. The Department under the Centrally
Sponsored Scheme on Development of Marine Fisheries, Infrastructure
and Post Harvest Operations provides financial assistance to the Coastal
State Governments and UTs for development of fishing harbours and
fish landing centres including modernization/renovation of the existing
one. During 11th plan period, about 70-75% of the annual budgetary
allocation under this scheme has been utilized for creation of
infrastructure facilities in the fishing harbours and fish landing centres.
Since inception of the scheme in 1964, 7 major fishing harbours,
82 minor fishing harbours and 209 fish landing centres have been taken
up for construction. Out of these, 7 major fishing harbours, 51 minor
fishing harbours and 180 fish landing centres have been completed/
commissioned.
Financial assistance is also provided under the CSS for development
of post harvest/cold chain infrastructure facilities such as ice plants,
cold storages, fish transport and marketing infrastructure facilities.
During the 12th Five Year Plan (till 12th February, 2015), a total of
34 projects comprising (i) 16 ice plants of 520 tonne ice plant capacity

32
and 22 tonne cold storage capacity, and (ii) 31 insulated trucks of 6
tonne each capacity and 2 insulated trucks 3 tonne each were taken
up under the CSS.
Besides, National Fisheries Development Board (NFDB) also provides
assistance for implementation of production oriented and fisheries
infrastructure schemes with an aim of enhancing fish production and
productivity and for improving the fishery infrastructure facilities in
the country. So far , NFDB has supported 143 whole sale fish markets;
72 retails fish markets; 12,150 mobile fish markets; 50 retail outlets;
22 fishing harbours; 47 fish landing centres; net mending factory;
4 fish feed mills; processing/cold storage; Tuna processing centre;
disease diagnostic laboratories etc.
[Ministry of Agriculture (Department of Animal Husbandry,
Dairying and Fisheries), L.No. 25-5(1)/2014-AHD (Coord.),
dated 20th March, 2015]
Challenges of Fisheries Sector
Recommendation (Para No. 29)
The Committee find that fisheries started as a purely traditional
activity in early 1950s and has now transformed into significant
commercial enterprise contributing to the employment generation,
food nutritional security and foreign exchange earnings to a significant
extent. Aquaculture is in practice both in fresh and brackish water.
This sector produces about 94.25 lakh tonnes of fishes comprising
57.20 lakh tonnes from inland sector and 33.2 lakh tonnes from marine
sector. Fish Sector contributes 1% to the overall GDP and 4.6% of
agricultural GDP . Further, the mariculture or sea farming and ornamental
fish farming are opening up new avenues for contributing to the overall
growth of fisheries sector. They, however , find that the challenges
faced by the fisheries sector are related to inadequate availability of
Specific Pathogen free shrimp seeds in aquaculture (which is hampering
the production potential of the brackish water sector), inadequate
staff for monitoring and surveillance for disease control and reluctance
of insurance companies to cover shrimp crop due to high risk of crop
losses. They find that the coastal regions, occupies prime position with
regard to fish and prawn production in terms of both the quality and
value. They also find that the quality or fish/prawn seeds is getting
deteriorated due to factors like inbreeding leading to lesser growth of
fish. The Committee are of the view that the active involvement and
coordinated efforts of Marine Product Export Development Authority,
Central Institute of Brackish Water Aquaculture, Coastal Aquaculture

33
Authority, ICAR and other central fisheries Institutes is required to
address the aforesaid issues. The Committee recommend that the
Department should involve these institutes/authorities to co-ordinate
the pressed up issues together and iron out the difficulties in order to
enhance the quality and value of production of fishes/prawns. Further,
they desire that the Department should make concerted efforts to
develop improved strains of captive brood bank to improve the quality
and quantity of fish/prawn. They should also make available SPF shrimp
seeds to the fish farmers and facilitate them to exploit the full
production potential of brackish water sector. The Government should
also work towards speedy resolving the issue of encroachment of water
bodies so that these could be utilized integrated farming of fish and
crops. The Committee emphasize that monitoring mechanism in this
regard is may be put in place so as to regularly regulate and direct the
activities in fisheries sector towards improvement.
Reply of the Government
(1) Inadequate availability of Specific Pathogen Free (SPF) shrimp
seeds in aquaculture: Currently the Specific Pathogen Free (SPF) seed
of L. vannamei is produced by the Coastal Aquaculture Authority (CAA)
registered and approved hatcheries by using imported SPF broodstock
from the recognized overseas facilities shortlisted by the Coastal
Aquaculture Authority (CAA) as per the guidelines issued for this purpose.
Guidelines have also been issued under CAA Act for seed production
and culture of SPF P . monodon . Moreover, a set of guidelines for
establishment and operation of SPF shrimp Broodstock Multiplication
Centre (BMC) have also been developed by the Department. The same
are being considered to be issued through an executive order of the
Department.
(2) Inadequate staff for monitoring and surveillance for disease
control: In view of shortage of staff at the Ministry level and poor
response from the States on the aspects of disease monitoring and
management, a National Surveillance Programme on Aquatic Animal
Diseases has been initiated by the Department in the selected States.
The programme is funded through National Fisheries Development Board
(NFDB) and being coordinated by National Bureau of Fish Genetic
Resources (NBFGR), Lucknow. This programme involves participation of
a number of various agencies including ICAR Fisheries Institutes, State
Agriculture Universities/Colleges of Fisheries and the Marine Products
Export Development Authority (MPEDA) etc.
(3) Quality of fish/prawn seed is deteriorated due to factors like
inbreeding: It is a fact that poor management in seed production and
use of pond reared broodstock lead to increased disease risk, reduced

34
growth rate, etc. on account of in-breeding. Surveys conducted by
Indian Council of Agricultural Research (ICAR) in different States indicate
that presently, it is reported only in freshwater fishes and prawns.
In order to provide quality seed for fish/shrimp/prawn culture,
following steps have been taken:
(i) Genetically improved rohu ‘Jayanti’ disseminated to different
States including Andhra Pradesh for quality improvement of
hatchery stocks.
(ii) Quality seed of Silver Pompano is being supplied to selected
coastal pond farmers of Andhra Pradesh.
(iii) Quality seed of Golden Mahseer and Rainbow Trout is being
supplied to the farmers and the State Government Fisheries
Departments.
(iv) Importation of SPF Litopenaeus vannamei with proper
biosecurity measures and strict implementation of guidelines
on its seed production by approved hatcheries have ensured
supply of quality seed to the farmers in coastal States
including Andhra Pradesh.
(v) Quality seed material of cultivable carp species are being
provided to the fish farmers and the State Government
Fisheries Departments by several centres of the ICAR Mega
Seed Projects over the years.
There are other measures which have also been taken for
development of improved strains of captive broodstock. These include:
(i) National Freshwater Fish Brood Bank (NFFBB) has been set
up through National Fisheries Development Board (NFDB) at
Bhubaneswar to ensure availability of quality broodstock to
hatcheries for production of good quality seed.
(ii) A National Marine fin fish Brood Bank has been established
by ICAR to improve the captive brood stock of Cobia and
Silver Pompano.
(iii) Hungarian strains of common carp and scale carp have been
imported and their brood stocks are being maintained for
seed production and grow out culture. The seed of the
improved variety of Hungarian common carp was distributed
for field demonstration in farmers ’ ponds in Uttarakhand,
Himachal Pradesh, Arunachal Pradesh and Sikkim.

35
Introduction of Specific Pathogen Free (SPF) brood stock through
proper biosecurity measures for seed production and culture of quality
shrimp has been taken up to solve this problem.
[Ministry of Agriculture (Department of Animal Husbandry,
Dairying and Fisheries), L.No. 25-5(1)/2014-AHD (Coord.),
dated 20th March, 2015]
National Scheme for Welfare of Fishermen
Recommendation (Para No. 30)
The Committee are of the considered opinion that the Government
needs to do a lot more for the welfare of the fishermen who are
engaged in an occupation fraught with risks. Encouraged by the financial
as well as physical performance of the Scheme during the Fiscal year
2013-14, they urge the Government to give this sector its due in terms
of enhanced monetary support so as to mitigate the risks encountered
by fishermen and thereby contribute towards enhancement of their
overall well being. They further desire to be informed of the progress
made in this direction.
Reply of the Government
The Department of Animal Husbandry, Dairying and Fisheries,
Ministry of Agriculture has been giving more emphasis on the welfare
of fishermen since past plan periods. The Department under the Central
Sector National Scheme of Welfare of Fishermen provides financial
assistance for creation of basic amenities such as housing, drinking
water and community halls for fishermen. Besides, the scheme also
envisages insurance coverage to fishermen engaged actively in fishing,
relief to fishermen during lean fishing season and training to fishermen.
The cost involved is shared equally between Central and State
Governments. In case of Union Territories, the Central Government
bear the entire cost. In case of North-Eastern States, the cost shared
on 75:25 basis. The scheme has been approved during the 12th Plan
with the following four components:
The Department has enhanced financial assistance during the
12th Plan period. The component-wise enhanced financial assistance
and their achievements during financial year 2014-15 are presented
below:
(i) Development of Model Fishermen Villages : Financial
assistance under various amenities have been enhanced such
as (a) construction of low cost fishermen houses from
Rs. 50,000/- to Rs. 75,000/- per dwelling, (b) construction

36
of community hall/common facility from Rs. 1,75,000/- to
Rs. 2 lakh and (c) cost of installation of tubewell/drinking
water facility from Rs. 30,000/- to Rs. 40,000/- (Rs. 45,000/-
for NER). During 2014-15 (up to 31.12.2014), a total of
2,959 fishermen houses along with other amenities were
approved for construction at a total financial assistance of
Rs. 921.80 lakh.
(ii) Group Accident Insurance for active fishermen: The
insurance coverage has been enhanced such as (a) from
Rs. 1 lakh to Rs. 2 lakh in the case of accidental death and
(b) from Rs. 50,000/- to Rs. 1 lakh in case of partial
permanent disability. During financial year 2014-15 (up to
31.12.2014), a total of 45,63,350 fishermen are insured under
the scheme.
(iii) Saving-cum-Relief : The relief amount during the three
months fishing ban period has been increased from
Rs. 600/- per month to Rs. 900/- each is contributed by
fishermen, Central Government and the State Government
totalling to Rs. 2,700/- during the period of 9 months and is
distributed to the fishermen during three months fishing ban
period. A total of 4,18,754 fishermen are covered during
2014-15 (up to 31.12.2014).
(iv) Training and Extension: Assistance is provided for organizing
of training, seminar and workshops for fishermen on various
fishery related activities. The assistance also covers travel
requirement, training manual, resources person fees etc.
During 2014-15 (up to 31.12.2014), proposals to impart
training to a total of 5,240 fishermen have been approved.
[Ministry of Agriculture (Department of Animal Husbandry,
Dairying and Fisheries), L.No. 25-5(1)/2014-AHD (Coord.),
dated 20th March, 2015]

37
CHAPTER III
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO NOT
DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE GOVERNMENT ’S REPLIES
-NIL-

38
CHAPTER IV
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF
THE GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE
Budgetary Allocations
Recommendation (Para No. 3)
During the course of examination of Demands for Grants of the
Department for the 12th Plan period the Committee observed that
there was a wide variance in the amount initially approved, that is,
Rs. 14179 crore and the Budgeted allocation for the first three fiscals
by the Planning Commission which was Rs. 6109 crore, thus leaving a
gap of about Rs. 8070 crore. The Budget Estimate was further reduced
at RE stage in 2012-13, 2013-14 and BE for the year 2014-15 which
added up to Rs. 5348 crore. This realignment of figures by the Planning
Commission and the Ministry of Finance (Department of Expenditure)
bewilders the Committee. This being so as the Planning Commission
after having undertaken a detailed exercise would have earmarked the
funds for the Department at the start of the 12th Plan. In spite of
numerous recommendations made by the Committee for granting the
Department their full Plan allocation, that too an equitable amount in
proportion each year over the span of the Plan period as allocated by
the Planning Commission/Ministry of Finance and to help them carry
out their mandate successfully, no positive outcome has been witnessed.
Keeping the importance of this sector in view of providing to the
economically vulnerable farming community, the Committee desire the
Government to have a fresh perspective on this aspect during the
12th Plan and to ensure that full quota of allocated funds are actually
provided to the Department in the remaining annual allocations of the
12th Plan.
Reply of the Government
Department agrees with the observations of the committee.
Accordingly, the Department had requested Ministry of Finance and
Planning Commission for increase in allocation for remaining two years
of the 12th Plan and at least ensure the full quota of allocated funds
are actually provided to the Department in the remaining annual
allocations of the 12th Plan for the effectively implementing schemes
of livestock and fisheries sector for benefit of the animal rearers and
fisherfolk mostly comprising of small and marginal farmers.

39
However , keeping in mind the recommendations of 14th Finance
Commission, Ministry of Finance has allocated an amount Rs.1491.14
crore for the year 2015-16, which is lower than 31.41% of allocation
made for the year 2015-16.
[Ministry of Agriculture (Department of Animal Husbandry,
Dairying and Fisheries), L.No. 25-5(1)/2014-AHD (Coord.),
dated 20th March, 2015]
Comments of the Committee
For comments of the Committee please refer to Para No. 1.8 of
Chapter-I of this Report.
Inter-sectoral Allocations
Recommendation (Para No. 4)
The Committee note with regret that in spite of repeated
recommendations that Plan allocation of the Department of Animal
Husbandry, Dairying and Fisheries be increased so as to increase its
share in comparison to the other two Departments of the Agriculture
sector viz. Department of Agriculture and Cooperation and Department
of Agricultural Research and Education, have not yielded any results
and still the share of the Department remains much lower compared
to its sister Departments. The Committee do not buy the argument of
the Department that compared to the 11th Plan expenditure of
Rs. 4870.54 crore, the allocation for the Department in the 12th Plan
has been increased to Rs. 14179.00 crore as it pales in comparison to
the allocation for Department of Agriculture and Cooperation and
Department of Agricultural Research and Education in actual and
percentage terms for the current Plan period. The Department of
Animal Husbandry, Dairying and Fisheries have also stated that the
approved allocation for the 12th Plan of Rs. 14179.00 crore is
inadequate. Irrespective of the fact that though Department of Animal
Husbandry, Dairying and Fisheries is the youngest constituent to share
the Plan allocation it need not be the least, as is evident currently.
The Committee empathize with the Department on this issue and once
again urge the Government to quantitatively enhance the share of
Department of Animal Husbandry, Dairying and Fisheries in the Plan
allocation as this sector provides additional means of sustenance in
terms of wealth/security and employment to the farming community
mostly comprising of small and marginal farmers residing in the rural
areas.

40
Reply of the Government
Department has requested Ministry of Finance and Planning
Commission for quantitatively enhance the share of Department in the
Plan allocation for supplementing the efforts of States for providing
the additional means of sustenance in terms of wealth/security and
employment to the farming community mostly comprising of small and
marginal farmers residing in the rural areas. However, the allocation
for the year 2015-16 has been lowered by about 31.41% due to financial
constraints on account of 14th Finance Commission’s recommendations.
[Ministry of Agriculture (Department of Animal Husbandry,
Dairying and Fisheries), L.No.25-5(1)/2014-AHD (Coord.),
dated 20th March, 2015]
Comments of the Committee
For comments of the Committee please refer to Para No. 1.8 of
Chapter-I of this Report.
Fund Surrendered
Recommendation (Para No. 7)
The Committee note that due to certain constraints beyond their
control like delay in approval of schemes, non-approval of scheme/
components of scheme by competent authority, less/no demand from
implementing agencies, etc. due to which Department of Animal
Husbandry, Dairying and Fisheries surrendered Rs. 174.00 crore and
Rs. 378.66 crore during the years 2012-13 and 2013-14. The total
surrender of funds amounts to Rs. 553.26 crore. Concerned at this
alarming state of affairs they impress upon Department of Animal
Husbandry, Dairying and Fisheries to take up these vital issues such as
expeditious clearance and approval of the Schemes and timely demand
from implementing agencies at the highest level with the concerned
parties so that a timely and lasting solution is found for this nagging
and perennial problem which hampers the functioning of the various
schemes of the Animal Husbandry, Dairying and Fisheries Sector.
Reply of the Government
Department has actually proposed allocation to the tune of
Rs. 3497.50 crore for 2012-13 and Rs. 3025.00 crore for 2013-14,
against which, Planning Commission has allocated an outlay of
Rs. 1910.00 crore and Rs. 2025.00 crore for 2012-13 and 2013-14

41
respectively at BE stage. The Department of Expenditure, Ministry of
Finance has curtailed down the outlays further to Rs. 1800.00 crore for
both the years though the Department has made request for much
more funds.
The Department is continuously taking up the matter with the
concerned Ministries for expeditious clearance of schemes/programmes
implemented by the Department so as to fully utilise the funds provided
under different schemes being implemented by the Department. All
the schemes, except National Fisheries Development Board, have been
approved by competent authority for its implementation during
12th Plan.
[Ministry of Agriculture (Department of Animal Husbandry,
Dairying and Fisheries), L.No. 25-5(1)/2014-AHD (Coord.),
dated 20th March, 2015]
Comments of the Committee
For comments of the Committee please refer to Para No. 1.11 of
Chapter-I of this Report.
Allocation to Animal Husbandry Sector
Recommendation (Para No. 10)
The Committee are aware that Animal Husbandry Sector play an
important role in the national economy and in the socio-economic
development of the country, especially, in terms of supplementing
family incomes and generating fruitful employment in rural sector. It
provides economic and social security to the landless labourers, small/
marginal farmers and women, besides providing nutritional food to
them. However, the small marginal farmers having less than four
hectares of land holding own 87.7% of the livestock. The livestock is
of immense support to these strata of our population in the context
of declining agricultural landholdings and best form of insurance against
the vagaries of nature like drought, famine and floods etc. The
Committee are perturbed to note that the Animal Husbandry Sector is
not getting its due in terms of monetary allocations and this is hampering
the implementation of various important schemes of the Department.
In the first two Fiscals of the 12th Plan BE allocation figures of
Rs. 1063.10 crore (2012-13) and Rs. 1051.49 crore (2013-14) were
curtailed at RE stage to Rs. 909.43 crore and Rs. 932.85 crore
respectively. The actual release has been to the tune of Rs. 880.80
crore (2012-13) and Rs. 916.16 crore (2013-14) which in percentage

42
terms is 82.85% (2012-13) and 87.12% (2013-14) of BE respectively. This
has hampered the implementation of the vital schemes of the sector
in the first two years of the 12th Plan period. The Committee, therefore,
desire the planners and policy makers to provide fair allocation to this
Sector not only as per the traditional significance of this sector, but
also its importance in the changed scenario in terms of rising incomes,
change in dietary preferences, consumption of high value food and
diversion towards animal based protein besides rising processed animal
products. The situation of hampered implementation of the Schemes
of this Sector year after year for want of funds is like strangling a very
vital and growing area of our economy. They, therefore, strongly
recommend that the yawning gap between the policy formulation and
implementation be bridged by emphatically persuading the Planning
Commission and Ministry of Finance to enhance allocation to this sector.
They further desire the Department to tone up their implementation
apparatus so that they are in a better position to absorb the allocated
funds resulting in attainment of set targets. The Committee also urge
the Government to allocate the funds to the Department uniformly
over the Plan period so that the funds are optimally utilized by the
Department in their schemes and activities.
Reply of the Government
The allocation of funds to the Animal Husbandry Sector are
decreased due to higher allocation of funds for the schemes like Dairy
Entrepreneurship Development Scheme, due to committed liabilities
and National Dairy Plan Phase-I, which is World Bank assisted programme
and overall less allocation to the Department.
Department agrees with the observations of the Committee and
requested Ministry of Finance and Planning Commission for enhancement
of funds for the Department so as to allocate more funds for Animal
Husbandry Sector. Despite the repeated requests made by the
Department to Ministry of Finance and Planning Commission, the funds
actually provided to the Department has not been improved and
Department of Expenditure, Ministry of Finance has allocated only
Rs.1800.00 crore for three consecutive years of the 12th Plan at RE
stages. The Department has once again requested Ministry of Finance
and Planning Commission for enhancement of outlay of the Department
in the light of observations/recommendations made by the Parliamentary
Standing Committee on Agriculture in its 5th Report.
However, Ministry of Finance has allocated an amount of Rs. 1491.14
crore only for 2015-16 against the proposed outlay of Rs. 4527.79

43
crore, due to financial constraints on account of 14th Finance
Commission’s recommendations.
[Ministry of Agriculture (Department of Animal Husbandry,
Dairying and Fisheries), L.No. 25-5(1)/2014-AHD (Coord.),
dated 20th March, 2015]
Comments of the Committee
For comments of the Committee please refer to Para No. 1.14 of
Chapter-I of this Report.
Development of Dairy Sector
Recommendation (Para No. 21)
Dairy Sector has experienced a substantial growth over the years
owing to prudent policy intervention by the Government. This has
resulted in India being the global leader in milk producing nations,
with production of 138 million tonnes during the fiscal 2013-14. Also,
dairying has become an important secondary source of income for
women and marginal farmers. Lauding the efforts of the Department
of Animal Husbandry, Dairying and Fisheries. The Committee urge the
Government to continually strive for the overall development of this
vital section in terms of enhanced allocation that would help in proper
and effective implementation of Schemes which would lead to increased
production of milk year after year.
Reply of the Government
Based on the committed financial liabilities under approved projects
under Dairy development scheme of the Department, Department have
been proposing budgetary estimates accordingly. The financial allocation
proposed and allocation received for the Dairy Development is as under:—
Name of P roposed 12th 2012-13 2013-14 2014-15 2015-16
the scheme 12th Plan
Plan Outlay Proposed Proposed Proposed Proposed
outlay BE BE BE BE BE BE BE BE
NPBB & DD 2500 600 500.00 100.00 100.00 85.00 125.00 105.00 145.00 74.00
DEDS 2500 1400 500.00 150.00 600.00 300.00 350.00 229.99 400.00 127.00
NDP-I 1742.24 1756 130.00 123.00 260.00 180.00 327.27 215.05 496.00 300.00
Total 6742.24 3756 1130.00 373.00 960.00 565.00 802.27 550.04 1041.00 501.00

44
Name of the NPBB & DEDS NDP-I Total
scheme DD
Proposed 2500 2500 1742 6742.2
12th Plan
outlay
Proposed 600 1400 1756 3756
12th Plan
outlay
2012-13 Proposed BE 500 500 130 1130
BE 100 150 123 373
2013-14 Proposed BE 100 600 260 960
BE 85 300 180 565
2014-15 Proposed BE 125 350 327.3 802.27
BE 105 230 215.1 550.04
2015-16 Proposed  BE 145 400 496 1041
BE 74 127 300 501
It may be observed from the details of budgetary allocation during
last three years that budgetary support is inadequate. Under BE
2015-16, an amount of Rs. 501 crore has been tentatively allocated
against proposed allocation of Rs. 1041 crore.
[Ministry of Agriculture (Department of Animal Husbandry,
Dairying and Fisheries), L.No. 25-5(1)/2014-AHD (Coord.),
dated 20th March, 2015]
Comments of the Committee
For comments of the Committee please refer to Para No. 1.20 of
Chapter-I of this Report.
Increased Budgetary Allocations for Fisheries Sector
Recommendation (Para No. 26)
India occupies the second position globally in fish production after
China with a production of 9.04 million tonnes (provisional) during the
year 2012-13. However , the Committee observe that a much remains
to be done especially in the inland and deep sea fishing in order to
stem the decline in marine fishery sector. For this, the Government

45
needs to increase the allocation to the fisheries sector. But, the converse
has been taking place in the fisheries sector, wherein out of the
12th Plan Outlay of Rs. 2483.00 crore, the BE allocation for the first
three fiscals amounts to Rs. 1193.16 crore. The BE figures were then
reduced at RE stage to Rs. 644.49 crore for the first two fiscals. The
variation between the Plan Outlay and actual allocation in the first
two fiscals is Rs. 1838.51 crore. Concerned to note that though the
fisheries sector exported 9,28,215 tonnes valued at Rs. 18,856.26 crore
during 2012-13, which has increased almost three times from 2009-10
value of exports, is not getting its due encouragement from the
Government, in terms of funding, the Committee recommend that the
Government go for a quantum enhancement of funds, so as to boost
the available resources for overall growth of this sector , at the earliest.
Reply of the Government
Details of funds allocated for fisheries from the overall allocation
made to the Department during the past three financial years, the
12th Plan are as below:—
Year Allocation to the Allocation of Percentage
Department Fisheries Division of (5) in
relation
BE RE BE RE to (3)
2012-13 1900 1800 340.70 312.14 17.34%
2013-14 2025 1800 371.50 332.35 18.46%
2014-15 2174 1800 480.96 351.56 19.53%
Total 6099 5400 1193.16 996.05 18.44%
It is mentioned that financial allocation to the Department is
decided by the Planning Commission and Ministry of Finance depending
upon the overall resources available. It may be seen from the above
table that the Department while distributing the allocated amount to
various sectors such as animal husbandry, dairying and fisheries,
considers fisheries as one of the priority sectors. The fisheries sector
share 18.44% of the budgetary allocation made to the Department.
[Ministry of Agriculture (Department of Animal Husbandry,
Dairying and Fisheries), L.No. 25-5(1)/2014-AHD (Coord.),
dated 20th March, 2015]
Comments of the Committee
For comments of the Committee please refer to Para No. 1.23 of
Chapter-I of this Report.

46
Issuance of Biometric Identity Cards to Marine Fishermen
Recommendation (Para No. 31)
The Committee laud Department of Animal Husbandry, Dairying
and Fisheries for having come up with the Central Sector Scheme on
Issuance of Biometric Cards to marine Fishermen from 11th December,
2009. The primary reason that marine fishermen sometimes stray into
foreign waters inadvertently due to lack of proper demarcation of
marine boundaries. This has resulted in our fishermen being captured
after having strayed into foreign waters. It creates diplomacy issues
besides marine fishermen languishing in their jails. Further the
Committee noted that out of the identified 18,12,011 marine fishermen,
11,21,814 cards have been issued till January, 2014. Keeping in view
the sensitive nature of the task and also the safety and well being of
our marine fishermen and its ramifications on our National Security,
the Committee desire that all identified marine fishermen be issued
biometric identity cards in a time bound manner. The Committee may
be kept abreast of the progress and the timeline in this regard.
Reply of the Government
(i) Out of 19,60,488 fishermen identified by the State
Government for issuance of biometric ID cards, data collection
in respect all the fishermen have been completed. Out of
these, capturing of biometric details in respect of 15,15,597
fishermen have been completed till 12th January, 2015. As
on 12th January, 2015, the consortium of Central Public
Sector Undertakings has produced a total of 12,35,804 ID
cards and dispatched 12,30,323 cards to the States/UTs for
distribution to the fishermen.
(ii) At the request of the Department, the CPSUs have completed
an average three rounds of Biometric capturing camps in all
the States and UTs. Due to very poor response of fishermen
in the 2nd & 3rd rounds of camps, biometric details in
respect of about 4.45 lakh fishers have not yet been captured
by the CPSUs. The Department in consultation with the
Coastal State Governments, UTs and consortium of CPSUs
has been making efforts to complete issuance of ID cards to
the identified fishers.
[Ministry of Agriculture (Department of Animal Husbandry,
Dairying and Fisheries), L.No. 25-5(1)/2014-AHD (Coord.),
dated 20th March, 2015]

47
Comments of the Committee
For comments of the Committee please refer to Para No. 1.26 of
Chapter-I of this Report.
Expansion of Marine Fisheries Census
Recommendation (Para No. 32)
The Committee note that during the 11th Five Year Plan Government
had approved a revised scheme for strengthening the data base and
geographical information system for the fisheries sector. They find
that census of marine fisheries is conducted every 5 years and the
previous one was conducted in 2010. While they are satisfied with this
initiative of mapping water bodies. However , they find this effort is
too meagre and far between as presently it has been carried out only
in 22 districts in three States. They insist that certain additional
parameters including data on water bodies and resources therein have
to be included in this kind of census and should be extended to more
districts for instilling country wide GIS base fishery management system
in order to analyse the development of fisheries.
Reply of the Government
During Eleventh Five Year Plan, mapping of water bodies has been
successfully attempted in all districts of West Bengal. During 12th Five
Year Plan, mapping of water bodies has been undertaken in three more
States namely Chhattisgarh, U.P . and Bihar with additional parameters
like depth contours, fishery potential. The Scheme aims to cover all
the States/UTs in a phased manner.
[Ministry of Agriculture (Department of Animal Husbandry,
Dairying and Fisheries), L.No. 25-5(1)/2014-AHD (Coord.),
dated 20th March, 2015]
Comments of the Committee
For comments of the Committee please refer to Para No. 1.29 of
Chapter-I of this Report.

48
CHAPTER V
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH FINAL
REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT ARE STILL AWAITED
Financial Irregularities
Recommendation (Para No. 8)
A singular case of financial irregularity pertaining to the Financial
Year 2005-06 in the erstwhile Centrally Sponsored Scheme of Intensive
Dairy Development Programme (IDDP Phase I), approved at a cost of
Rs. 1260.76 lakh during 1994-95, for which an amount of Rs. 909.51
lakh was released to Government of Assam till 2004-05. The State
Government in the year 2005 had reported an embezzlement at their
level for the remaining amount of Rs. 276.44 lakh as utilization
certificates for an amount orf Rs. 613.79 lakh was furnished and an
amount of Rs. 19.28 lakh is lying unspent. The Committee note that
Department of Animal Husbandry, Dairying and Fisheries have not
received the outcome of the CID enquiry ordered by the State
Government even after a lapse of almost nine years. The Committee
while expressing their bewilderment over this sordid state of affairs
recommend that the Central Government persuade the State
Government to bring this matter to its logical conclusion at the earliest.
They also recommend that responsibility be fixed, amount be recovered
and those responsible be penalized. They further desire that effective
monitoring mechanisms be put in place to ensure that such instances
are not repeated.
Reply of the Government
Department, vide its letters dated 28.5.2008 and 11.11.2008 had
taken up the matter with the State Government of Assam on more
than one occasion since May, 2008, requesting for early settlement of
embezzlement of fund and refund to Government of India. On the
directions of the Parliamentary Committee on Agriculture given in its
Fifth Report, Department, vide its last letter dated 31.12.2014, has
once again requested State government of Assam to expedite necessary
action to fix responsibilities, penalize the guilty, recover the money
and refund the fund to Government of India.
As regard effective monitoring mechanisms, Department has put in
place a monitoring mechanism for effective implementation of dairy
development projects approved under IDDP . The guidelines of the

49
scheme provides for constitution of Technical Monitoring Committee
(TMC) under the Chairmanship of Principal Secretary (AH) with the
representative of Government of India and line departments of the
State Government under the projects approved for implementation.
TMC meetings are convened periodically. Now IDDP has been subsumed
in the new scheme “National Programme for Bovine Breeding and Dairy
Development (NPBB&DD) ” under which, following provision has been
made for improving the monitoring of the project.
Participating State/Implementing agencies will submit Quarterly
Progress Report (QPR) Annual Report, Audit Report along with Utilisation
Certificate. The funds released under the project will be subject to AG
Audit of concerned State Government.
Technical Management Committee under the Chairmanship of
Secretary in charge of dairy development of the State, shall be
constituted with membership from the Departments of Planning,
Finance, Veterinary, dairy development, State Dairy federation/District
Milk Union, Project Director of DRDA of the respective State
Government. There shall be one member from DADF , GoI representing
the scheme in TMC. Minimum of five members from the above shall
constitute the quorum of TMC. TMC shall be organized after every six
months (September and March) to review progress of technical, physical
and financial parameters and remove bottlenecks quickly.
Annual Workshop for Monitoring: Audit Report shall be discussed in
Annual Workshop involving participating agencies and experts.
[Ministry of Agriculture (Department of Animal Husbandry,
Dairying and Fisheries), L.No. 25-5(1)/2014-AHD (Coord.),
dated 20th March, 2015]
Results Framework Document (RFD)
Recommendation (Para No. 9)
While applauding Department of Animal Husbandry, Dairying and
Fisheries for their high composite score during the Fiscal 2012-13
i.e. 95.48 in comparison to 80.27% for the year 2011-12, the Committee
desire that the Department be informed of its composite Results
Framework Document (RFD) score for the year 2013-14 at the earliest
as it would help in introspection of its performance and work upon
shortcomings, so as to increase the viability of all Schemes being
implemented by them and at the same time motivate the concerned
on achievements.

50
Reply of the Government
Cabinet Secretariat has not informed the Final Composite Result
Framework Document (RFD) Score for the year 2013-14. However, the
provisional performance evaluation report downloaded from the website
of RFMS, Cabinet Secretariat, as per which, the composite Result
Framework Document (RFD) S core is 91.97% for the year 2013-14 for
this Department.
[Ministry of Agriculture (Department of Animal Husbandry,
Dairying and Fisheries), L.No. 25-5(1)/2014-AHD (Coord.),
dated 20th March, 2015]
Indigenous Breeds
Recommendation (Para No. 13)
Alarmed to be informed that 80% of the indigenous cattle are non-
descript, as they have not been recognized by National Bureau of
Animal Genetic Resources (NBAGR) and strongly deprecating this state
of affairs, the Committee exhort upon Department of Animal Husbandry,
Dairying and Fisheries to take up this issue with NBAGR with the
alacrity it deserves to ensure that the remaining 80% of indigenous
cattle that are non-descript are included in the list of breeds recognized
by NBAGR after a thorough study before the end of the 12th Plan
period. They would also like to be apprised of the reasons given by
NBAGR for classifying 80% of indigenous cattle as non-descript.
Reply of the Government
National Bureau of Animal Genetic Resources (NBAGR) has classified
20% of the bovine population and remaining 80% bovine population is
yet to be classified. NBAGR is making efforts to classify remaining
bovine population. In order to make States aware about the process of
breed registration, Department has organised workshop on “Breed
Registration Process ” at Karnal on 28.01.2015. During the meeting,
States were requested to apply for breed registration for classification
of remaining unclassified bovine population.
[Ministry of Agriculture (Department of Animal Husbandry,
Dairying and Fisheries), L.No. 25-5(1)/2014-AHD (Coord.),
dated 20th March, 2015]
Deficiency in availability of Animal Fodder vis-à-vis Demand
Recommendation (Para No. 15)
During the course of their examination of Demands for Grants
2014-15 of Department of Animal Husbandry, Dairying and Fisheries,
the Committee note that there is acute shortage of green and dry

51
fodder in the country. The Committee were apprised that while the
demand for dry green, fodder and concentrate is 416 MT , 222 MT and
53 MT , the supply for these is only 253 MT , 143 MT and 23 MT
respectively. This clearly reflects a huge gap of 40%, 36% and 57% in
dry and green fodder and concentrate respectively. The Secretary,
Department of Animal Husbandry, Dairying and Fisheries himself
admitted that there is 35% shortage of fodder. What perturbs the
Committee is the lack of latest data on availability of fodder vis-à-vis
demand and the admission of the same by the Ministry. The figures
quoted by the Department pertains to data furnished by NABCONS for
the year 2007. The Committee are of the opinion that if the figures
are not available with the Ministry, there would be no focus on taking
steps for bridging the gap between demand and supply. They deplore
this callous and casual approach of the Department. Apalled at this
sordid state of affairs the Committee recommend that firstly, authentic
data on demand/availability of fodder be collected by the Department
at the earliest. Once, this crucial data is available, only then can the
Department further work upon bridging the gap between demand and
availability. The progress achieved in this regard be communicated to
the Committee at the earliest. They would also like to be apprised of
the commissioning of the comparative study to clearly reflect
comparison of the fodder production with grain crops.
Reply of the Government
The matter was taken up with Ministry of Statistic and Programme
Implementation through Animal Husbandry Statistic Division of this
Department vide letters dated 12.07.2012 and 17.07.2012 to include
collection of data regarding green fodder , dry fodder concentrate and
fodder seeds. A detailed and exhaustive and mutually exclusive
classification was also provided. Through them the information was
supplied to Ministry of Statistic and PI for the use of NSS 70th round.
They have now mentioned that they have incorporated separate and
additional column in the revised schedule of Integrated Sample Survey
for collecting the data on production of green fodder only. However,
they are being requested to collect the data as was originally envisaged.
Therefore, it is submitted that the Department is trying hard to
institutionalize the data collection of various types of fodder since
12.07.2012.
[Ministry of Agriculture (Department of Animal Husbandry,
Dairying and Fisheries), L.No. 25-5(1)/2014-AHD (Coord.),
dated 20th March, 2015]
   N
EW D ELHI; HUKM DEO NARAYAN YADAV,
06 August, 2015 Chairperson,
15 Shravana, 1937 (Saka) Committee on Agriculture.

52
ANNEXURE
COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE
(2014-15)
MINUTES OF THE THIRTY FIRST SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE
The Committee met on Thursday, the 6th August, 2015 from
1000 hrs. to 1040 hrs. in Room No. 138 (Third Floor), Chamber of the
Chairperson, Parliament House, New Delhi.
PRESENT
Shri Hukm Deo Narayan Yadav —  Chairperson
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Sanganna Amarappa
3. Prof. Ravindra Vishwanath Gaikwad
4. Shri Nalin Kumar Kateel
5. Md. Badaruddoza Khan
6. Shri C. Mahendran
7. Dr. Tapas Mandal
8. Shri Dalpat Singh Paraste
9. Shri Mukesh Rajput
10. Shri Satyapal Singh
Rajya Sabha
11. Smt. Renuka Chowdhury
12. Mohd. Ali Khan
13. Shri Darshan Singh Yadav
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Shri Abhijit Kumar — Joint Secretary
2. Shri N.K. Pandey — Director
3. Shri C. Vanlalruata — Deputy Secretary
4. Shri Sumesh Kumar — Under Secretary

53
2. At the outset the Chairperson welcomed the members to the
Sitting of the Committee. The Committee, then, took up the following
draft Reports:
*(i) *** *** *** ***
(ii) Memorandum No. 8 pertaining to the Draft Action Taken
Report on recommendations/observations contained in the
5th Report of the Committee on Agriculture (2014-15) on
‘Demands for Grants (2014- 15) ’ of Ministry of Agriculture
(Department of Animal Husbandry, Dairying and Fisheries).
*(iii) *** *** *** ***
*(iv) *** *** *** ***
3. After some deliberations, the Committee adopted the draft
Reports without any amendments and authorized the Chairperson to
finalise the Reports and present the same to Parliament.
The Committee then adjourned .
*Matter not related to this Report.

54
APPENDIX
(Vide Para 4 of Introduction of the Report)
ANALYSIS OF ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE
RECOMMENDATIONS CONTAINED IN THE FIFTH REPORT
(SIXTEENTH LOK SABHA) OF THE COMMITTEE ON
AGRICULTURE (2014-15)
(i) Total number of Recommendations: 32
(ii) Recommendations/Observations which have been
Accepted by the Government:
Para Nos. 1, 2, 5, 6, 11, 12, 14, 16, 17, 18, 19, 20,
22, 23, 24, 25, 27, 28, 29 and 30
Total 20
Percentage 62.50%
(iii) Recommendations/Observations which the Committee
Do not desire to pursue in view of the Government ’s
replies:
Para No. Nil
Total NIL
Percentage 0%
(iv) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which
replies of the Government have not been accepted
by the Committee:
Para Nos. 3, 4, 7, 10, 21, 26, 31 and 32
Total 08
Percentage 25.00%
(v) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which
final replies of the Government are still awaited:
Para Nos. 8, 9, 13 and 15
Total 04
Percentage 12.50%