STANDING COMMITTEE ON
AGRICULTURE
(2017-2018)
SIXTEENTH LOK SABHA
MINISTRY OF FOOD PROCESSING
INDUSTRIES
[Demands for Grants (2018-2019)]
50
FIFTIETH REPORT
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
March, 2018/Phalguna, 1939 (Saka)
lR;eso t;rs


FIFTIETH REPORT
STANDING COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE
(2017-2018)
(SIXTEENTH LOK SABHA)
MINISTRY OF FOOD PROCESSING
INDUSTRIES
[Demands for Grants (2018-2019)]
Presented to Lok Sabha on 06.03.2018
Laid on the Table of Rajya Sabha on 06.03.2018
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
March, 2018/Phalguna, 1939 (Saka)
lR;eso t;rs


COA No. 318
Price : Rs. 68.00
© 2018 B Y LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of
Business in Lok Sabha (Fifteenth Edition) and printed by M/s. India Offset
New Delhi-110 064.

CONTENTS
PAGE NO.
(i)
COMPOSITION  OF THE C OMMITTEE  2017-18 ....................................... (iii)
INTRODUCTION .............................................................................. (v)
REPORT
PART I
CHAPTER I Introductory ............................................................. 1
CHAPTER  II General Status of Food Processing Sector................. 4
CHAPTER III Plan Schemes for Food Processing Sector................ 10
(i) Demands for Grants for the year 2018-19....... 10
(ii) Central Sector Schemes/Projects...................... 13
(iii) Scheme for Mega Food Park Scheme.............. 15
(iv) Scheme for Integrated Cold Chain and Value
Addition Infrastructure.................................... 20
(v) Losses in Supply Chain of Agri-Produce.......... 23
(vi) Cold Chain Projects........................................ 24
(vii) Scheme for Creation of Backward and Forward
Linkages......................................................... 28
(viii) Developmental Heads....................................... 32
PART II
Observations and Recommendations.................................... 36
APPENDICES
I. Minutes of the 11th Sitting of the Committee held on
22nd February, 2018................................................ 43
II. Minutes of the 15th Sitting of the Committee held on
05th February, 2018................................................. 46

(iii)
COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE
ON AGRICULTURE (2017-2018)
Shri Hukmdev Narayan Yadav — Chairperson
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Sanjay Dhotre
3. Prof. Ravindra Vishwanath Gaikwad
4. Shri Sanganna Amarappa Karadi
5. Shri Nalin Kumar Kateel
6. Smt. Raksha Tai Khadase
7. Md. Badaruddoza Khan
8. Shri C. Mahendran
9. Dr. Tapas Mandal
10. Shri Janardan Mishra
11. Shri Devji M. Patel
12. Shri Nityanand Rai
13. Shri Mukesh Rajput
@14. Vacant
15. Shri Konakalla Narayana Rao
16. Shri C.L. Ruala
17. Shri Arjun Charan Sethi
18. Shri Virendra Singh
19. Shri Dharmendra Yadav
20. Shri Jai Prakash Narayan Yadav
21. Shri B. S. Yeddyurappa
@ Vacant due to resignation of Shri Neiphiu Rio from the Membership of Lok Sabha w.e.f.
  22.02.2018 vide  SG Notification dated 23.02.2018.

Rajya Sabha
22. Sardar Sukhdev Singh Dhindsa
^23. V acant
24. Shri Meghraj Jain
25. Shri Vinay Katiyar
26. Shri Mohd. Ali Khan
27. Shri K.K. Ragesh
28. Shri Ram Nath Thakur
29. Shri R. Vaithilingam
30. Shri Shankarbhai N. Vegad
31. Dr. Chandrapal Singh Yadav
S
ECRETARIA T
1. Shri D.S.Malha — Joint Secretary
2. Shri Arun K. Kaushik — Director
3. Shri S.Vijayaraghavan — Senior Executive Assistant
^ Vacant due to retirement of Shri Janardan Dwivedi from the Membership of Rajya Sabha
w.e.f.  27.01.2018 vide  CB-I Note dated 16.01.2018.
(iv)

(v)
INTRODUCTION
I, the Chairperson, Standing Committee on Agriculture, having been
authorized by the Committee to submit the Report on their behalf, present
this Fiftieth Report on the Demands for Grants (2018-2019) of the Ministry
of Food Processing Industries.
2. The Committee under Rule 331E(1)(a) of the Rules of Procedure
considered the Demands for Grants (2018-19) of the Ministry of Food
Processing Industries which were laid on the Table of the House on
09 February, 2018. The Committee took evidence of the representatives of
the Ministry of Food Processing Industries at their sitting held on
22nd February, 2018. The Report was considered and adopted by the
Committee at their sitting held on 05 March, 2018.
3. For facility of reference and convenience, the Observations/
Recommendations of the Committee have been printed in bold letters in
Part-II of the Report.
4. The Committee wish to express their thanks to the officers of
the Ministry of Food Processing Industries for appearing before the
Committee and furnishing the information that they desired in connection
with the examination of Demands for Grants of the Ministry.
5. The Committee would also like to place on record their deep
sense of appreciation for the invaluable assistance rendered to them by the
officials of Lok Sabha Secretariat attached to the Committee.
 N
EW D ELHI; HUKM DEV NARAYAN Y ADA V ,
05 March, 2018 Chairperson,
16 Phalguna, 1939 (Saka) Standing Committee on Agriculture.

REPORT
PART I
CHAPTER  I
INTRODUCTORY
1.1 A strong and dynamic food processing sector plays a significant
role in diversification of agricultural activities, improving value-addition
opportunities and creating surplus for export of agro-food products. This
requires policies and plans for improvement of food processing infrastructure
including up-gradation of technology, enforcement of quality standards and
promoting investment in food processing. Food Processing adds value,
enhances shelf-life and reduces wastage. It provides remunerative prices to
the farmers, generates employment opportunities and provides convenience
to consumers. Food Processing has tremendous potential for enabling the
farmer to add value to their produce both in terms of quantity and quality
to meet the requirements and standards of the market at all stages of value
chain, processing and retailing. Considerable investments are required in
rural infrastructure and in components of the supply chain by way of
grading and packing centres, controlled atmosphere facilities, reefer vans,
cold storage for perishable cargo at port/airport/ railway stations, a chain
of testing laboratories to meet international quality standards, etc., which
are not likely to come from private sources. Significant public investments
would, therefore, be required to create suitable infrastructural facilities to
develop a sustainable supply chain linking farmers to processing centres.
The Ministry of Food Processing Industries has been supporting a range
of initiatives for the growth of food processing industry.
1.2 The Ministry of Food Processing Industries was set up in July,
1988 to give an impetus for development of food processing sector in the
country. Subsequently, vide notification No.DOC.CD-442/1999 dated
15.10.1999 this Ministry was made a Department and brought under the
Ministry of Agriculture. It was again notified as the Ministry of Food
Processing Industries vide Cabinet Secretariat's Note No.1/22/1/2001-
Cab(1) dated 06.09.2001.
1

2
1.3 As Per Allocation of Business Rules:  The subjects allocated
to the Ministry under Government of India (Allocation of Business) Rules,
1961 are as under:—
1. Industries relating to :
(a) Processing and Refrigeration of certain agricultural products
(milk powder, infant milk food, malted milk food, condensed
milk, ghee and other dairy products), poultry and eggs,
meat and meat products;
(b) Processing of fish (including canning and freezing);
(c) Establishment and servicing of development council for
fish processing industry;
(d) Technical assistance and advice to fish processing industry;
(e) Fruit and vegetable processing industry (including freezing
and dehydration); and
(f) Food grains milling industry.
2. Planning, development and control of, and assistance to,
industries relating to bread, oil seeds, meals (edible), breakfast
foods, biscuits, confectionery (including cocoa processing and
chocolate making), malt extract, protein isolate, high protein
food, weaning food and extruded food products (including other
ready to eat foods).
3. Specialized packaging for food processing industry.
4. Beer including non-alcoholic beer.
5. Alcoholic drinks from non-molasses base.
6. Aerated water and soft drinks.
The Ministry of Food Processing Industries is concerned with
formulation and implementation of the policies for the food processing
industries within the overall national priorities and objectives. A major issue
facing the country is to ensure remunerative prices to the farmers for their
produce. If the surplus production of cereals, fruits, vegetables, milk, fish,
meat and poultry, etc., are processed and marketed both inside and outside

3
the country, there will be greater opportunities for adding to the income of
farmers and employment. A strong and dynamic food processing sector
plays a vital role in diversification and commercialisation of agriculture,
enhancing shelf life, ensuring value addition to agricultural produce, generation
of employment, enhancing income of farmers and creating markets for
export of agro foods. The Ministry acts as a catalyst for bringing in greater
investment into this sector, guiding and helping the industry and creating
a conducive environment for healthy growth of the food processing industry.
The Ministry aims at:—
• Creating the critical infrastructure to fill the gaps in the supply
chain from farm to consumer;
• Value addition of agricultural produce;
• Minimizing wastage at all stages in the food processing chain by
the development of infrastructure for storage, transportation
and processing of agro-produce;
• Induction of modern technology in the food processing industries;
• Encouraging R&D in food processing for product and process
development; and
• Providing policy support, promotional initiative and facilities to
promote value added produce for domestic consumption and
also exports.

4
CHAPTER II
GENERAL STATUS OF FOOD PROCESSING SECTOR
2.1 A well-developed food processing sector with higher level of
processing helps in the reduction of wastage, improves value addition,
promotes crop diversification, ensures better return to the farmers, promotes
employment as well as increases export earnings. This sector is also capable
of addressing critical issues of food security, food inflation and providing
wholesome, nutritious food to the masses.
2.2 Over the years agricultural production in India has consistently
recorded higher output. India ranks no. 1 in the world in the production
of Milk, Ghee, Pulses, Ginger, Bananas, Guavas, Papayas and Mangoes.
Further, India ranks no. 2 in the world in the production of Rice, Wheat
and several other vegetables & fruits. Abundant supply of raw materials,
increase in demand for food products and incentives offered by the
Government has impacted food processing sector positively. The food
processing sector has been on an average growing at a faster rate than
agriculture sector (from 2011-12 to 2015-16). During the last 4 years
ending 2015-16, Food Processing Industries sector has been growing at an
Average Annual Growth Rate (AAGR) of around 2.88 per cent as compared
to around 1.88 per cent in Agriculture and 6.61 per cent in Manufacturing
at 2011-12 Prices. Food Processing Sector has also emerged as an important
segment of the Indian economy in terms of its contribution to GDP,
employment and investment. The sector constitutes as much as 8.71 per
cent and 10.04 per cent of GV A in Manufacturing and Agriculture sector
respectively in 2015-16 at 2011-12 prices.
2.3 It is seen that food products industry, compared to other
industries has the largest number of factories and engages largest number
of employees as well. Since with respect to fixed capital the food products
industry does not figure in top five, it shows that this sector is highly
labour intensive per unit of capital. Despite low capital intensity, the output
of food products is not compromised as it is second largest among all
industries. Thus every unit of capital invested in food products industry
employs largest number of persons as compared to other industries while
generating almost as high the output level as in other industries.

5
In 2014-15, it constituted 12.77 per cent of employment generated in all
Registered Factory sector.
Unregistered food processing sector supports employment to 47.9
lakh workers as per the NSSO 67th Round, 2010-11 and constitutes 13.72%
of employment in the unregistered manufacturing sector.
The number of persons employed per Rs.1 crore of investment is
9.24 for the entire food processing industry. Employment generation is
higher than the average in Fish at 18.30, Grain Mill products at 14.59 and
Meat sub-sector at 13.01. However, these very sub-sectors show low
levels of GV A as well. The percentage of GVA in these sub-sectors thus
needs to be increased so that the bulk of the persons employed in the food
processing industries earn higher remuneration as well. Bakery product
sub-sector can set the benchmark where employment generation is as high
as 19.30 persons per Rs. 1 crore of investment but GV A% is also high
enough at 26.95%. Sub-sectors with higher employee per unit of investment
but low level of GVA require their man-power to be trained to increase
productivity which together with technological infusion would increase
value addition.
2.4 As per latest Annual Survey Industries: 2014-15, the total number
of factories in the registered food processing sector in the country was
38,603. As per Annual Survey Industries: 2014-15 among the industry,
highest number of registered factories are located in 'Andhra Pradesh',
which accounts for about 15.11% of the total registered factories in FPI
sector industries followed by 'Tamil Nadu' (13.34%) and 'Telangana'
(10.28%), Maharashtra (7.81%) and Punjab (7.36%). State/UT-wise Number
of Registered/Un-incorporated Food Processing Units in India is given
below:–
State/UT-wise No. of Registered & Un-incorporated Food
Processing Units in India
Sl. Name of the Number of Registered Number of
No. States/UTs Units as per Annual Un-incorporated
Survey of Industries Enterprises
2014-15 manufacturing
Food and Beverages
as per 67th round
Survey of NSSO,
2010-11
12 3 4
1. Andaman and Nicobar 6 845
Islands

6
12 3 4
2. Andhra Pradesh 5833 210997
3. Arunachal Pradesh 28 383
4. Assam 1317 61068
5. Bihar 838 124690
6. Chandigarh (U.T.) 19 118
7. Chhattisgarh 1141 19815
8. Dadra and Nagar Haveli 6 120
9. Daman and Diu 43 181
10. Delhi 165 14210
11. Goa 88 1046
12. Gujarat 2001 94729
13. Haryana 881 29785
14. Himachal Pradesh 166 21990
15. Jammu and Kashmir 162 23340
16. Jharkhand 219 123220
17. Ka rnataka 2084 95792
18. Kerala 1525 64223
19. Lakshadweep 0 178
20. Madhya Pradesh 816 102973
21. Maharashtra 3014 222441
22. Manipur 23 1800
23. Meghalaya 19 6857
24. Mizoram 0 1398
25. Nagaland 20 1380
26. Odisha 969 126567

7
12 3 4
27. Puducherry 65 1308
28. Punjab 2840 48970
29. Rajasthan 857 98935
30. Sikkim 18 49
31. Tamil Nadu 5149 146547
32. Telangana 3967 0
33. Tripura 75 29328
34. Uttar Pradesh 2055 349951
35. Uttarakhand 386 20185
36. West Bengal 1808 195773
Total 38603 2241192
2.5 According to the Ministry, the major challenges facing the sector
are illustrated below:
These constraints are sought to be addressed under the schemes being
implemented by the Ministry, as indicated in subsequent chapters.
With regard to the Growth Potential of Food Processing Industries,
the Ministry as stated as under:—
"Programmes to increase the output of Indian agriculture without
corresponding investments in processing facilities is likely to lead to
a mismatch resulting in rural distress and decline in farmers' income.

8
The most important step for improving the bargaining capacity of
the farmer is to add value to his produce. This will come about if
farmers are able to produce according to the requirements and
standards demanded by the market. Food processors and the retailers
can provide the necessary demand for the agricultural produce and
facilitate the flow of market information, technology and inputs to
the farmer so that he can tailor his output to the needs of the market.
In the process the farmers will be able to raise their own level of
income and employment. The consumer is also likely to benefit as
there will be an increase in the supply of food products with a longer
shelf life.
It is essential to build sustainable supply chains, which will link the
farmer to the processing and marketing centres seamlessly. In the
absence of on-farm cooling and grading arrangements and slow
development of cold chain infrastructure, the farmer is compelled to
sell his produce to the 'Adathiya (Broker)' without waiting for a
better price. If the farmer is enabled to grade and store his produce
close to farm, the farmer will be empowered to demand and obtain
a better price from the processors and also add value to his produce.
Considerable investments are required in rural infrastructure and
components of the supply chain by way of grading and packing
centres, controlled atmosphere, storage facilities, reefer vans, testing
laboratories, etc., which may not come from private sources at this
stage of the development of the food processing industry. It is
therefore essential that public investment is significantly increased to
fund these components of rural infrastructure to enable private
enterprise to take up the remaining components of the supply chain
which can be undertaken commercially. This is borne out by the
experience of developed countries where the State has stepped in to
build rural infrastructure in a big way. Carefully calibrated subsidies,
exploring innovative strategies, empowering rural producers &
consumers through better awareness and support to entrepreneurs in
terms of technology and training are some of the ways in which this
Ministry has catalyzed growth in this sector."

9
With regard to the initiatives taken under 'Make in India Programme'
the Ministry has stated as under:—
"Food processing sector has been identified as one of the priority
sector under "MAKE IN INDIA" an initiative of Hon'ble Prime Minister
of India. With a view to attract investment to this sector, Ministry
of Food Processing Industry has been implementing schemes for
development of infrastructure for promoting food processing
industries. Mega Food Parks with common utility like road, electricity,
water supply, sewage facility and common processing facility like
pulping, packaging, cold storage, dry storage and logistics are being
promoted in areas with strong agricultural resource base. These
parks provide fully developed plots and factory sheds to entrepreneurs
on long term lease basis where they can set up food processing units
in "plug & play model".
Government has also declared investment in Food Parks covered
under the Harmonized List of Infrastructure Sub-sectors (HLIS)"
vide Government of India Notification dated 13th October 2014.
Following this notification, it is expected that Mega Food Parks
assisted by the Ministry will be able to access to infrastructure
lending on easier terms.
In the context of "MAKE IN INDIA" campaign, the Ministry has
been disseminating information to potential investors to attract
investment to the sector through a dedicated "Investors Portal" in
which a range of information like resource base, availability of land,
State specific policies, fiscal incentives are shared with the potential
investors. The Ministry is also collaborating with Invest India to help
the investors in terms of locating joint venture partners, extending
hand holding services, expedite regulatory approvals and provide
investors after care services. The investor can also put their query
in the Investors portal which is promptly attended to by the Ministry
for guiding the investors.
Ministry is also organizing Road shows to attract FDI including FDI
in retail and promote Make in India Initiative."

10
CHAPTER III
PLAN SCHEMES FOR FOOD PROCESSING SECTOR
(I)  DEMANDS FOR GRANTS FOR THE YEAR 2018-19
Demand No. 41
3.1 (A) Budgetary Allocations for Revenue and Capital Head for
the year 2017-18 and 2018-19
(Rs. in crore)
Major BE 2017-18 RE 2017-18 BE 2018-19
Head Revenue Capital T otal Revenue Capital T otal Revenue Capital T otal
800 - 800 715.18 - 715.18 1400 - 1400
When asked how the Ministry propose to utilize the increased of
Rs 1400.00 crore for BE 2018-19, the Ministry in its written reply stated
as under:—
"The Ministry will utilize the increased amount of budget for releasing
funds for implementation of the projects already sanctioned under
the ongoing schemes and new projects to be sanctioned under the
ongoing schemes as well as under the new schemes. In addition, the
Government has made announcements for new schemes in the budget
2018-19 like 'Operation Greens to promote FPOs, agro logistics,
processing facilities and professional management with a sum of
Rs.500 crore, for the promotion of value chain for Tomato, Onion
and Potato for the benefit of Producers and Consumers' and 'to
promote establishment of specialized agro-processing financial
institutions in this sector' and also for 'Setting up the State of the Art
Testing facility in all the Mega Food Parks to promote agri-exports'.
The increased BE will be utilized for implementation of all these
projects."

11
During the course of evidence, the Secretary of Ministry of Food
Processing Industries stated as under:—
(Rs. in crore)
BE 2017-18 RE 2017-18 BE 2018-19
Revenue Capital T otal Revenue Capital T otal Revenue Capital Total
72.50 - 72.50 63.38 - 63.38 131.30 - 131.30
When asked how the Department propose to utilize the increased
amount of Rs.131.30 crore and what was the actual expenditure during
2017-18 till 31.12.2017, the Ministry in its written reply stated as under:—
"An amount equal to 10% of the BE for Scheme(s) is allocated for
North Eastern States as per the policy of the Central Government.
Accordingly, in BE 2017-18,10% of Scheme allocation of Rs.633.84
crore, i.e. Rs. 63.38 crore was allocated for North East. Similarly,
in BE 2018-19, Rs. 131.30 crore has been allocated for North eastern
States which is 10% of Scheme Allocation of Rs. 1313.08 crore.
The Ministry is making concerted efforts to utilize this amount for
I would like to thank Hon'ble Members, as food processing sector
has been provided due importance in the current budget on their
recommendations. Sir, we project your all the recommendations at various
levels very seriously. Hon'ble Members had suggested developing Mini
Mega Food Prank, so we have brought a new scheme of agro Processing
Cluster as it is very difficult to find large areas in the small and hilly States.
Therefore, we have included a new scheme of Agro Processing Cluster
Mini Mega Food Prank, for which 10 acres of land is required.
One of the Hon'ble members had suggested in several meetings that
reefer boats should be included in transort. Reefer boats have been included
in out cold chain scheme for providing financial assistance. This has been
the concern of Hon'ble members that farmers should get benefits of food
processing. We have made it mandatory in the cold chain scheme that the
person who takes the benefit of the scheme, has to develop infrastructure
for primary processing at farm gate, cold storage and reefer transport. As
suggested by the Commitee, we have been taken up the matter with NITI
Aayog and the Ministry of Finance to increase the budget for agriculture.
Out budget has been doubled for the current year and I think, the suggestions
from the Committee have contributed a lot in this regard.
Provisions for North Eastern States

12
implementing the ongoing projects under the Schemes of Mega Food
Parks, Integrated Cold Chain and Abattoirs, and fresh proposals
which are likely to be received under the new Scheme for Creation/
Expansion of Food Processing & Preservation Capacities. The Ministry
continues to undertake awareness programme in the North-East
Region for various schemes of the Ministry in every State of the
North East region. The un-utilized amount from the share of N-E
States, if any, will get transferred to 'Non-Lapsable Central Pool of
Resources' (NLCPR) which will be utilized by the Ministry of
Development of North East Region (DONER) for sanctioning projects
in North-East Region.
As on date, the actual expenditure against allocation for North-East,
is Rs. 21.01 crore."
The Secretary, Ministry of Food Processing Industries during evidence
stated as under:—
Sir, we keep two things in our mind. Firstly, the projects which are
being implemented under various schemes, have completion period of two
to three years because these are infrastructure projects which require a lot
of contruction. With respect to ongoing project requirement of funds as per
progress of the work. Secondly, in case of cancellation of a project due
to any reason, we decide whether the project is required to be undertaken
again. we also project requirement of funds for new projects which are to
be undetaken under new schemes. The non-scheme institutions under the
Ministry also get grant from the Ministry for salary and maintenance. Thus,
after doing analysis of each scheme, we decide how much fund is required
in the coming year and according to that we project our demands. Our
utilization has been over 96% and during one or two years it has been
99 per cent. There was an issue for availability of funds for the projects
on which we could have spent more funds 99 per cent of the cases related
to lapses of funds belong to allocation for the North-East because we were
not getting good projects of such a large scale from there. We have made
a lot of efforts and we are conducting two-three awareness campaign each
year in every State, so now we are getting proposals.

13
(II)  CENTRAL SECTOR SCHEMES/PROJECTS
(i) National Mission on Food Processing Industries Scheme for
Agro-Marine Processing and Development of Agro-Processing Clustres
(SAMPDA)
(Rs. in crore)
BE 2017-18 RE 2017-18 BE 2018-19
Revenue Capital T otal Revenue Capital T otal Revenue Capital Total
725 - 725 633.84 - 633.84 - - -
When asked to give reasons for not allocating of funds in
BE 2018-19 for this scheme, the Ministry in its written reply stated as
under:—
"In the DDG for 2016-17 and 2017-18, the nomenclature of the
Scheme being implemented by the Ministry has been shown as,
National Mission on Food Processing (SAMPDA). During 2017-18,
Government has approved a new Central Sector Scheme —
'SAMPADA' on 3rd May 2017 which was later re-named as Pradhan
Mantri Kisan Sampada Yojana (PMKSY). It is an umbrella scheme
incorporating ongoing schemes of the Ministry like Mega Food Parks,
Integrated Cold Chain and Value Addition Infrastructure, Food Safety
and Quality Assurance Infrastructure and also new schemes like
infrastructure for Agro-Processing Clusters, Creation of Backward
and Forward Linkages and Creation/Expansion of Food Processing
& Preservation capacities. Accordingly, BE for all the schemes has
been provided for under the PMKSY in the DDG 2018-19. Therefore,
there is no need for BE allocation under the National Mission on
Food Processing (SAMPDA) in the DDG 2018-19."
(ii) Pradhan Mantri Kisan Sampada Yojana (Rs. in crore)
BE 2017-18 RE 2017-18 BE 2018-19
Revenue Capital T otal Revenue Capital T otal Revenue Capital Total
- - - - - - 1313.08 - 1313.08
Pradhan Mantri Kisan Sampada Yojana has been approved with an
allocation of Rs. 6,000 crore for the period 2016-20 co-terminous with the

14
14th Finance Commission cycle. It will not only provide a big boost to the
growth of food processing sector in the country but also help in providing
better prices to farmers and is a big step towards doubling of farmers'
income, creating employment opportunities especially in the rural areas,
reducing wastage of agricultural produce, increasing the processing level
and enhancing the export of the processed foods. The PMKSY will attend
to the requirement of the entire value chain from farm gate to retail outlet
and human resources development through various schemes incorporated
into it. This will lead to holistic development of the food processing sector
in the country.
During the course of evidence, the Secretary of Ministry of Food
Processing Industries stated as under:
The Pradhan Mantri Kisan Sampada Yojana is an umbrella scheme
with the following schemes:
(i) Scheme for Mega Food Parks;
(ii) Scheme for Integrated Cold Chain and Value Addition
Infrastructure;
(iii) Scheme for Creation/Expansion of Food Processing &
Preservation Capacities;
(iv) Scheme for Infrastructure for Agro-Processing Clusters;
(v) Scheme for Creation of Backward and Forward Linkages;
Sir, all these schemes are part of a main umbrella programme named
Pradhan Mantri Krishi Sampada Yojana.
Shri Jagdeesh Prashad Meena : Sir, we have made efforts to
address all the requirements food processing from farm gate to retail outlet
under the umbrella scheme. On one hand, we are providing incentive to
create infrastructure and primary facility required at farm gate through
backward and forward linkages as well as financial assistance is being
provided to create modern infrastructure,  supply chain, processing and
retail end infrastructure on the other. The scheme has been launched to
address all the requirements of food processing from farm gate to reatail
end. Therefore, all these components have been included under the umbrella
scheme.

15
(vi) Scheme for Food Safety and Quality Assurance Infrastructure;
and
(vii) Scheme for Human Resources and Institutions.
The details of the Schemes are given in the succeeding paras:
(III)  SCHEME FOR MEGA FOOD PARK SCHEME
Objectives of the Scheme: The objectives of the scheme are as
follows:—
i. To provide modern infrastructure for food processing units in
the country.
ii. To ensure value addition of agricultural produce including dairy,
fisheries etc.
iii. To establish a sustainable raw material supply chain for each
cluster.
iv. To facilitate induction of the latest technology.
v. To address the need of small and micro food processing
enterprises by providing plug & play facilities.
vi. To provide an institutional mechanism for producers, processors,
and retailers to work together to build the supply chain.
The Mega Food Park Scheme aims at providing modern infrastructure
facilities for food processing along the value chain from farm to market.
The Scheme functions on a Hub and spoke model. It includes creation of
infrastructure for primary processing and storage near the farm gate at
Primary Processing Centers (PPCs), Collection Centres (CCs) and common
facilities and enabling infrastructure at Central Processing Centre. The food
processing units, under the scheme, would be located at Central Processing
Centre (CPC) with need based common infrastructure required for
processing, packaging, environmental protection systems, quality control
labs, trade facilitation centres, etc.
(ii) The scheme provides for a capital grant @ 50 per cent of the
eligible project cost in general areas and @ 75 per cent of the
eligible project cost in difficult and hilly areas i.e. North East

16
Region including Sikkim, J&K, Himachal Pradesh, Uttarakhand
and ITDP notified areas of the States subject to a maximum of
Rs.50 crore per project. The Time schedule for completion and
successful operationalization of project is 30 months from the
date of issue of final approval letter. The eligible project cost is
defined as total project cost but excluding cost of land,
pre-operative expenses and margin money for working capital.
(iii) The responsibility of execution, ownership and management of
the Mega Food Park would vest with a Special Purpose Vehicle
(SPV) registered under the Companies Act. State Government/
State Government entities/ Cooperatives applying for the project
under the Scheme will not be required to form a separate SPV .
Central Government agencies becoming shareholders in the SPV
can only hold up to 26 percent of equity in the SPV . However,
there will be no such restriction on State Government/State
Government entities/its co-operatives.
(iv) The Government has so far approved 42 Mega Food Parks. Out
of these, 38 projects have been accorded Final approval and the
In-principle approval has been issued to 4 projects. The nine
projects are presently operational. Six Mega Food Park projects
at Satara & Aurangabad (Maharashtra), Agartala (Tripura), Ajmer
(Rajasthan), Udham Singh Nagar (Uttarakhand) and Surat
(Gujarat) are at advanced stages of implementation. These
projects are likely to be made functional in current Financial
Year. 12 more Mega Food Park projects will be made operational
in 2018-19 and the remaining in 2019-20.
When asked how many Mega Food Parks have been setup till date
and the status of remaining Mega Food Parks, the Ministry in its written
reply stated as under:
"Under the Scheme of Mega Food Park, the Government has so far
approved 42 Mega Food Parks. Out of these, 38 projects have been
accorded Final approval and the In-principle approval has been issued
to 4 projects. The following nine projects are presently operational:
i. Srini Food Park, Chittoor, Andhra Pradesh
ii. Patanjali Food and Herbal Park, Haridwar, Uttarakhand

17
iii. Integrated Food Park, Tumkur, Karnataka
iv. International Mega Food Park, Fazilka, Punjab
v. North East Mega Food Park, Nalbari, Assam
vi. Indus Mega Food Park, Khargone, Madhya Pradesh
vii. Jharkhand Mega Food Park, Ranchi, Jharkhand
viii. Jangipur Bengal Mega Food Park, Murshidabad, West Bengal
ix. MITS Mega Food Park Pvt. Ltd., Rayagada, Odisha
Six Mega Food Park projects at Satara & Aurangabad (Maharashtra),
Agartala (Tripura), Ajmer (Rajasthan), Udham Singh Nagar (Uttarakhand)
and Surat (Gujarat) are at advanced stages of implementation. These projects
are likely to be made functional in current Financial Year. 12 more Mega
Food Park projects will be made operational in 2018-19 and the remaining
in 2019-20.
i. The Ministry invited Request for Proposal (RFP) proposals on
10.04.2017 for "Evaluation of the Impact of the Scheme for
Mega Food Park of Food Processing Industries". Last date for
submission of the proposals was 08.05.2017. In response to the
above, the Ministry received proposals from only six agencies
viz., M/s KPMG Advisory Services Pvt. Ltd., M/s. Ernst and
Young LPP, M/s C.S. Datamation Research Pvt. Ltd., M/s. Yes
Bank Ltd., M/s Global Agri System Pvt. Ltd. and M/s. KITCO
Ltd. Out of 6 agencies, M/s C.S. Datamation Research Pvt. Ltd.
has been selected for conducting the study after following an
elaborate and transparent procedure as per the Scheme guidelines.
ii. A Special Fund of Rs. 2,000 crore has been setup in NABARD
by the Central Government to make available affordable credit
to designated food parks and agro-processing units in the
designated Food Parks. Any Entrepreneur, Cooperative, SPV,
Joint Venture, State Government etc. may avail loan at
concessional rate of interest from this fund for establishing
food parks and food processing units in the Designated Food
Parks. NABARD has already notified operational Guidelines of
the Fund. Based on the information received from State

18
Governments, Designated Food Parks have been notified. The
consolidated list of 175 Designated Food Parks notified by the
Ministry on 31.05.2017 is available on Ministry's website.
NABARD has sanctioned a term loan of Rs.482.69 Cr to 11
Mega Food Park projects, Rs. 16.07 Cr to 1 Designated Food
Park (Other than MFP) and Rs.36.80 Cr to 2 Individual
Processing Units in Designated Food Park as on 06.12.2017.
Also, NABARD has disbursed an amount of Rs.194.83 Cr to 11
Mega Food Park projects and Rs.36.80 Cr to 2 Individual
Processing Units.
Pattern of Financial Assistance
Financial assistance is provided for grant-in-aid @ 50% of project
cost excluding cost of land in general areas and @ 75% in NER and
difficult areas, subject to a maximum of Rs. 50.00 crore for setting up of
a Mega Food Park.
Current status of Implementation
During the financial year 2017-18 (as on 31.12.2017), Ministry has
released grant-in-aid of Rs. 242.23 crore to the ongoing Mega Food Park
projects. Status of implementation of the 42 projects is at Annexure-I. Nine
Mega Food Park projects at Haridwar (Uttarakhand), Chittoor
(Andhra Pradesh), Tumkur (Karnataka), Fazilka (Punjab), Nalbari (Assam),
Khargone (Madhya Pradesh), Ranchi (Jharkhand), Murshidabad (West Bengal)
and Rayagada (Odisha) have become operational. About 50 units are
functioning in these parks providing employment to more than 18602 people
directly. In addition, approximately 4 lakhs peoples are getting employment
through franchises, dealership/distributorship etc. Six more mega food parks
projects are likely to be completed by the end of the current financial year.
Ministry has invited Expression of Interest (EoI) on 02.08.2017
against vacant slot of Mega Food Park for setting up MFP in uncovered
States i.e. Arunachal Pradesh, Goa, Manipur, Meghalaya, Sikkim and Uttar
Pradesh with last date for submission of proposal on 18.09.2017.
In response to EoI, total 10 proposals have been received from 4 States
(Arunachal Pradesh, Meghalaya, Manipur & Uttar Pradesh). Out of which
3 proposals have been given 'in-principle' approval on 21.12.2017 against
available vacancies.

19
Modification of the Mega Food Park Scheme guidelines
The detailed guidelines for the scheme were issued on 24.08.2008
and subsequently revised on 19.12.2009, 17.11.2011, 01.10.2012, 10.02.2014
and 21.07.2016. Based on the experience of implementation, modifications
in the Scheme guidelines have been carried out from time to time. The
Scheme guidelines of Mega Food Parks have been uploaded on the Ministry's
website www.mofpi.nic.in for information of all concerned.
Co-ordination Mechanism
i. With a view to have more effective coordination with the State
Governments, the State Governments have been requested to
nominate an officer as Ministry nominee Director in the Board
of those SPVs.
ii. PMA also co-ordinates with the SPV for facilitating smooth
implementation of the project and monitoring the progress closely
and periodically.
iii. Ministry co-ordinates with State Govt. authorities to facilitate
various statutory clearance and acquisition of land by SPV.
iv. A District level Mega Food Park Co-ordination Committee under
the Chairmanship of the District Collector has been constituted
for each Mega Food Park to ensure smooth progress in
implementation of the projects.
On being asked about any cost overrun as a result of delays, the
Ministry stated as under:
"The Ministry of Food Processing Industries has robust mechanism
in place to monitor and ensure timely completion of the projects
sanctioned under various schemes. The scheme-wise expenditure of
each scheme is reviewed weekly by the Secretary, FPI in weekly
meeting of senior officers dealing with the schemes. The progress
of the flagship schemes is also reviewed periodically by the
Hon'ble Minister, FPI. The Inter-Ministerial Approval Committee for
various schemes also reviews progress of the on-going projects
from time to time. The Ministry has engaged reputed professional
agencies as Programme Management Agencies for its major schemes
to help in closely monitoring each of the projects. These PMAs and
senior officers of the Ministry are regularly monitoring the progress
of each project by undertaking field visits and obtaining monthly

20
progress reports from the implementing agencies. The Ministry of
Finance has also fixed quarterly expenditure targets. The Ministry is
successfully meeting all these targets. As such, the issues relating to
cost overrun are being duly taken care of as per the guidelines of
various schemes of the Ministry. For delay in implementation of the
project, penalty is imposed on the SPV/ Promoter and the projects
which fail to show the required pace of implementation are also
cancelled. The cost overrun due to delay in implementation is borne
by the SPV . However, in no case, the quantum of financial assistance
is increased to make up the increase in cost."
During the course of evidence, the Secretary of Ministry of Food
Processing Industries stated as under:—
Sir, there was budget of Rs. 715 crore for there schemes and the
budget of the entire ministry was Rs. 800 crore. Now it has been
enhanced to Rs. 1400 crore. There is need of such financial institutions
which could focus on the food processing sector. Today, food
processing sector has emerged as a mayor industry. But, when a
proposal for loan is submitted to the bank, it could not give due
weightage to this sector. Bank treat us as reasonal industry. They
think that if we purchase more produce, it would perish. Therefore,
they are reluctant in granting loan or fix higher rate of interest for
the loan. A fund of Rs. 2000 crore has been set up under NABARD.
In addition to it, the ministry is of the view that if we promote such
institutions which grant loans exclusively to the food processing
sector, more money could be given to this sector. Keeping in view
the above fact and also to promote the food processing sector a
proposal was made in the budget for granting loan to the food
processing sector through non-banking financial institutions. The
hon. Prime Minister and Finance Minister approved the proposal and
an announcement was made in the budget. We have been discussing
with the stakeholders. We will prepare a draft and seek approval for
it. Thereafter, we will launch the scheme. The problem of funding
in the food processing sector would be solved up to a geat extent.
(IV) SCHEME FOR INTEGRATED COLD CHAIN AND VALUE
ADDITION INFRASTRUCTURE
(a) Objective of the Scheme: To arrest post-harvest losses of
horticulture & non-horticulture produce by providing financial

21
assistance in setting up integrated cold chain, preservation and
value addition infrastructure facilities without any break from
the farm gate to the consumer. To encourage setting up of
backward and Forward linkages in the agricultural supply chain
of the country.
Salient Features of the Scheme
• Scheme provides for integrated and complete cold chain facilities
without any break from the farm gate to the consumer. Stand-
alone facilities, except irradiation facility will not be considered
for assistance.
• Both horticultural and non-horticultural produce are eligible for
support under this scheme.
(i) To encourage setting up of cold chain facilities in the
country, Ministry is implementing the Scheme of integrated
cold chain and value addition infrastructure to provide
financial assistance to project proposals received for cold
chain infrastructure development. The scheme envisages
financial assistance in the form of grant-in-aid subjected to
maximum of Rs. 10.00 Crore per project. The intervention
is aimed at filling the gaps in the supply chain, strengthening
of cold chain infrastructure with infrastructural facilities
like sorting, grading, packaging and processing of
horticultural produce including organic produce, marine,
dairy, poultry, etc. Integrated Cold Chain and Value Addition
Infrastructure projects can be set up by Partnership/
Proprietorship firms/ Companies, Corporations,
Cooperatives, Self Help Groups (SHGs), Farmer Producer
Organisations, NGOs, Central/ State PSUs etc.
(ii) The scheme has the following components:
(a) Farm Level Infrastructure, which may include
processing centre, situated in the catchment area of
the targeted produce.
(b) Distribution hub — This shall have a modern multi-
product, multi-temperature cold storage.

22
(c) Refrigerated vans/ refrigerated trucks/ insulated vans/
mobile insulated tankers.
(d) Irradiation facility.
(iii) Pattern of Assistance:
(a) For storage infrastructure including Pack House and
Pre-cooling unit, ripening chamber and transport
infrastructure, grant-in-aid @ 35% for General Areas
and @ 50% for North East States, Himalayan States,
ITDP Areas & Islands, of the total cost of plant &
machinery and technical civil works will be provided.
(b) For value addition and processing infrastructure
including frozen storage/ deep freezers associated
and integral to the processing, grant-in-aid @ 50%
for General Areas and @ 75% for North East States,
Himalayan States, ITDP Areas & Islands, will be
provided.
(c) For irradiation facilities grant-in-aid will be provided
@ 50% for General Areas and @ 75% for North
East States, Himalayan States, ITDP Areas & Islands.
(iv) Maximum grant-in-aid would be Rs. 10.00 Crore per project
(v) To avail financial assistance under this scheme, the applicant
will have to set up Farm Level Infrastructure as mentioned
at (a) above and any one or both of the components from
(b) and (c) above.
(vi) Considering the functional nature of the facility, irradiation
component will be treated as a standalone facility for the
purpose of availing grant under the scheme.
(vii) Currently, the Ministry is assisting 232 Cold Chain projects.
These include 103 Cold Chain projects which have been
sanctioned in the month of March / April, 2017. Out of
232 Cold Chain projects being assisted by Ministry,
113 projects have achieved completion and started
commercial operations. The total project cost of

23
232 projects is Rs. 6086.58 crore with private investment
of Rs. 4311.23 crore and grant-in-aid of Rs. 1775.35 crore.
Operationalization of 232 cold chain projects is expected to create a
cold chain capacity of 7.38 lakh MT of Cold Storage / Controlled
Atmosphere/ Deep Freezer, 210.75 MT/Hr of Individual Quick Freeze,
106.99 lakh Litres Per Day of Milk Processing/Storage and 1369 nos. of
Reefer Vehicles.
Ministry has so far created a capacity of 4.24 lakh metric tonnes of
cold storage, 94.90 metric tonnes per hour of Individual Quick Freezing
(IQF), 42.85 lakh litres per day of Milk processing/ storage and 636 reefer
vans.
(V) LOSSES IN SUPPLY CHAIN OF AGRI-PRODUCE
Despite the production of large scale agriculture in India, food inflation
and food security issues are major concerns for policy makers in the
country as they affect the basic need for the citizens i.e. to have sufficient,
healthy and affordable food. A nation-wide study on quantitative assessment
of harvest and post-harvest losses for 46 agricultural produces in 106
randomly selected districts was carried out by Central Institute of Post-
Harvest Engineering & Technology (CIPHET), Ludhiana. The aforesaid
study considers the quantitative loss as the material rendered "unfit for
human consumption". The different stages considered for assessment of
losses are harvesting, collection, thrashing, grading /sorting, winnowing /
cleaning, drying, packaging, transportation, and storage depending upon the
commodity.
The report of the study was released in 2010. The study has estimated
that harvest and post-harvest losses of major agricultural produces at national
level was of the order of Rs. 44,143 crore per annum at 2009 wholesale
prices.
A repeat Study by CIPHET, Ludhiana on the extent of harvest and
post-harvest losses of major agricultural produces was conducted in 2015
covering 45 agricultural crops of 107 districts.
The Report on the repeat study was submitted in March 2015. The
study has estimated that annual value of harvest and post-harvest losses of
major agricultural produces at national level was at Rs. 92,651 crore
calculated using production data of 2012-13 at 2014 wholesale prices.

24
In the case of cereals, majority of losses occur at farm level during
harvesting, collection and threshing. Storage losses are only 0.75 - 1.21
per cent. In the case of fruits also, there are high losses in farm level
operations.
It may be seen that most of the wastage is happening in fruits and
vegetables. With adequate processing facilities, much of this wastage can
be reduced thus providing remunerative price to the producer as well as
ensuring greater supply to the consumer.
(VI) COLD CHAIN PROJECTS
On being asked about the estimated loss being incurred by the States
in the absence of desired level of capacity in the Cold Chain Projects, the
Ministry informed the Committee in a written reply as under:—
"One of the main reasons for the high losses in the supply chain of
perishables is the absence of adequate and efficient cold chain
infrastructure right from the farm gate to the consumer. In a repeat
study conducted by the Central Institute of Post-Harvest Engineering
& Technology (CIPHET), Ludhiana during 2012-14 on behalf of
Ministry of Food Processing Industries on Assessment of Quantitative
Harvest and Post-Harvest Losses of Major Crops and Commodities
in India, average range of losses for food grains, oils seeds and
fruits & vegetables were found to be between 4% to 16% resulting
in annual loss of 92,651crore at price index of 2014. Different
stages considered for assessment of losses are harvesting, collection,
threshing, grading/sorting, winnowing/cleaning, drying, packaging,
transportation, and storage depending upon the commodity.
Study on State-wise losses exclusively on account of shortage of
Cold Chain Projects has not been conducted so far."
When the Committee desired to know as to whether the Ministry is
having any proposal or scheme for launching cold chain projects in the
States where there facilities are not available the Ministry stated as under:—
"The scheme guidelines of Cold Chain do not provide State-wise
allocation of cold chain projects. The applications under the scheme
are invited through Expression of Interest (EoI) issued by the Ministry
against the approved number of vacancies. The proposals have to

25
meet certain basic eligibility criteria as per the scheme guidelines in
order to become eligible for consideration of financial assistance.
Further, the scheme provides flexibility and freedom to the
entrepreneur to set up the cold chain projects keeping in view his
business model, availability of raw material and techno-economic
viability of the project. Selection of projects is done through a two-
tier process of technical evaluation by Technical Committee and
approval by an Inter-Ministerial Committee (IMAC) chaired by Hon'ble
Minister (FPI). The approval to the project is granted on the basis
of rank secured by it in the inter-se merit list of eligible proposals.
The scheme guidelines of Integrated Cold Chain and Value Addition
Infrastructure provide that the criteria of maintaining regional balance
may be taken into account by the Ministry while deciding the projects
for sanction of grant under the scheme. However, these criteria will
be applicable only to those proposals which are found eligible as per
these guidelines. Inter-Ministerial Approval Committee chaired by
Hon'ble Minister, FPI consider the proposals for financial assistance
from the States where these facilities are not available despite being
low in the merit list."
When asked as to how many Cold Chains will be needed in the
country for post-harvest management preservation and prevent huge wastage
at each supply chain the Ministry informed the Committee as under:
"A Committee under the Chairmanship of Dr. Saumitra Chaudhuri,
Member, Planning Commission was constituted in year 2012 on
encouraging investments in supply chains including provision for
cold chain for more efficient distribution of farm produce. This
committee also took into account the gap in cold storage capacity
assessed by NSEL at 37 Million Tonnes in the year 2010 and
recommended adequate resources for strengthening the agricultural
produce supply chain.
To accelerate the availability of cold storage and to improve the
efficiency of Cold Chain Management, a Task Force set up by the
PMO in 2014 under the Chairmanship of Secretary, FPI noted that
a capacity of about 8 Million Tonnes has been created since NSEL
assessment and thus the gap may be around 29 Million Tonnes and

26
inter alia, recommended that Government should aim at creating
additional capacity of 7.5 million tonnes over the next five years for
which around Rs. 6100 crore would be required. Out of this,
Department of Agriculture & Cooperation can take up 5 million
tonnes under MIDH (2.5 million tonnes each by NHM and NHB) and
MoFPI can take up 2.5 million tonnes.
National Centre for Cold Chain Development (NCCD) under
Department of Agriculture, Cooperation and Farmers Welfare, Ministry
of Agriculture & Farmers Welfare had commissioned a study in the
year 2015 on "All India Cold Chain Infrastructure Capacity
(Assessment of Status & Gap)" conducted by NABARD Consultancy
Services Pvt. Ltd. (NABCONS). As per the gap study, the cold chain
requirement in the country stands at 35 million tonnes of cold storage
vis-a vis available capacity of 32 million tonnes. The study has made
the following gap analysis of cold chain infrastructure:
Type of Infrastructure Infrastructure All India Gap
Infrastructure Requirement created (A-B)
(A) (B)
Pack-house 70,080 nos. 249 nos. 69,831 nos.
Cold Storage (Bulk) 34,164,411 MT 31,823,700 MT 32,76,962 MT
Cold Storage (Hub) 9,36,251 MT
Reefer Vehicles 61826 nos. 9000 nos. 52826 nos.
Ripening Chamber 9131 nos. 812 nos. 8319 nos.
However, the study was primarily based on requirement of fruits &
vegetables and has excluded the requirement for milk, meat, marine
and processed products. Hence it is seen that whichever study is
relied upon, the fact remains that there is a considerable requirement
of cold chain infrastructure in the country."
On being asked as to how many Cold Chain Units/Centres are
established in Rural Areas and Percentage of farmers benefited by these
units (both big, small and marginal farmers) the Ministry informed the
Committee in a written reply as under:
"Currently, the Ministry is assisting 238 cold chain projects in the
country. These include 108 cold chain projects which have been

27
approved during the Financial Year 2017-18. Out of 238 cold chain
projects being assisted by Ministry, 113 projects have achieved
completion and started commercial operations as on 19.02.2018.
Each Cold Chain project helps in creating direct employment for
about 100 persons and indirect employment for about 500 persons.
Each cold chain project links about 500 farmers in the F&V sector
and 5000 farmers in dairy/fishery/marine sector."
(VII) (A) Scheme for Creation/Expansion of Food Processing and
  Preservation Capacities: (a new Scheme under Pradhan
  Mantri Kisan Sampada Yojana)
(a) Objectives of the scheme are as under:
(i) Creation/ expansion and / or modernization of processing/
preservation capacities which will help in increasing the
level of processing, value addition and thereby reduction
of wastage.
(ii) The setting up of new units and modernization/ expansion
of existing unit will be covered under the scheme. The
processing units undertake a wide range of processing
activities depending on the processing sectors which results
in value addition and/or enhancing shelf life of the
processed products.
(b) Pattern of Assistance: The scheme envisages financial assistance
to food processing units in the form of grant-in-aid @ 35% of
the cost of Plant & machinery and technical civil works, subject
to a maximum of Rs. 5.00 crore in general areas; and @ 50%
of the cost of Plant & machinery and technical civil works,
subject to a maximum of Rs. 5.00 crore in North East States
and difficult areas.
(c) Implementing Agencies: Scheme will be implemented through
organizations such as Central & State PSUs/Joint Ventures /
Farmer Producers Organizations (FPOs)/ NGOs / Cooperatives/
SHG's / Public and Pvt. Companies/limited liability Partnerships,
corporate entity/ proprietorship firms/ Partnership firms engaged
or propose to engage in creation/ expansion/ modernization of
food processing and preservation capacities.

28
(d) It is a new scheme. It will be implemented with an allocation
of Rs. 1290 crore to take up 400 new projects with total
allocation of Rs. 1141 crore and to meet the committed liabilities
of earlier Technology Upgradation Scheme of Rs.149 crore.
The grants-in-aid will be credit linked but not back ended.
(VIII)(B) Scheme for Technology Upgradation/ Establishment/
Modernization of Food Processing Industries (Spill-over
liabilities of 11th Plan)
Ministry has been implementing the Scheme of Technology Up
gradation/ Establishment/ Modernization of Food Processing Industries since
9th Plan aimed at (i) Creation of new processing capacity and up-gradation
of existing processing capabilities and (ii) Modernization of Food Processing
Sector: (a) Perishable: Milk, Fruit & Vegetables, Meat, Poultry, Fishery,
Wine, consumer and other bakery products; (b) Non-perishable: Grain
milling (cereal, oil seeds, rice milling, flour milling, pulse).
The scheme envisaged grant-in-aid upto 25% of the cost of Plant &
Machinery and Technical Civil Works subject to maximum of Rs. 50.00
lakhs in general areas and 33.33% up to a maximum of Rs. 75.00 lakhs
in difficult areas.
At the beginning of 12th Plan, there was a committed liability of
Rs.740.00 crore for 3168 cases. This Scheme was subsumed in Centrally
Sponsored Scheme (CSS) - National Mission on Food Processing (NMFP)
during 12th Plan for implementation through State/ UT Governments w.e.f.
01.04.2012. However, the CSS - NMFP has been delinked from Central
support from 2015-16 (except for UTs upto 31.03.2016). During the 12th
Plan (2012-17), the Ministry continued liquidating the 11th Plan spill over
liabilities of the scheme.
(IX) SCHEME FOR CREATION OF BACKWARD AND FORWARD
LINKAGES
(a new Scheme approved under Pradhan Mantri Kisan Sampada
Yojana) :
(a) Objective:
The objective of the scheme is to provide effective and seamless
backward and forward integration for processed food industry

29
by plugging the gaps in supply chain in terms of availability of
raw material and linkages with the market. The scheme will
enable linking of farmers to processors and the market thereby
ensuring remunerative prices for their produce.
(b) Salient features of the scheme: The Scheme is applicable to
both perishable horticulture and non-horticulture produce such
as: fruits, vegetables, dairy products and fish etc.
(c) Components of the Backward Linkage Scheme:
(i) Integrated Pack-house(s) (with mechanized sorting &
grading line/ packing line/ waxing line/ tagging cold rooms/
cold storage, etc.)
(ii) Milk Chilling Centre(s)/ Bulk Milk Cooler(s)
(iii) Pre-Cooling Unit (s)/ Chillers
(iv) Reefer Boats
(v) Machinery & equipment for minimal processing and/ or
value addition such as cutting, dicing, slicing, picking,
drying, pulping, canning, waxing, etc.
(vi) Machinery & equipment for packing/ packaging.
Components of the Forward Linkage Scheme:
(i) Retail chain of outlets to be set up by processors and/ or
organizations with farm level infrastructure under
component at (a) above for perishable food products.
These would have facilities such as frozen storage/ deep
freezers/ refrigerated display cabinets/ cold room/ chillers/
packing/ packaging, etc.
(ii) Distribution centre associated with the retail chain of outlets
as above with facilities like cold room/ cold storage/ ripening
chamber.
(d) Implementing Agencies:  All implementing agencies/
organizations such as Govt. / PSUs / Joint Ventures / NGOs /
Cooperatives / SHGs / FPOs / Private Sector / individuals etc.
will be eligible for financial assistance under the scheme.

30
(e) Pattern of Assistance:  The maximum admissible grant for
each project would be 35% of eligible project cost in general
areas and 50% of eligible project cost North East States and
difficult areas subject to max. of Rs. 5.00 crore. The grant will
be provided only in respect of technical civil work and eligible
plant & machinery.
It is a new scheme. It is proposed to assist 50 projects with an
allocation of Rs. 150 crore. The grants-in-aid will be credit linked but not
back ended.
Promotional Activities:
Food Processing Sector is a sunrise sector in the country and has
huge potential for enhancing processing levels of perishable products, thereby
scope for more employment. Therefore, Ministry aims at the development
of the processed food sector, creating awareness, attracting investment
etc. disseminating information regarding food processing industries, various
schemes thereof, familiarizing the existing and prospective entrepreneurs
with modern techniques of production and packaging, prevention of wastage
& value addition, development of market & new products and popularization
of processed products etc. through its promotional activities scheme. The
Ministry provides assistance to Apex Industry Bodies like Confederation of
Indian Industries(CII), Federation of Indian Chambers of Commerce &
Industry (FICCI), Associated Chambers of Commerce &
Industry(ASSOCHAM), PHD chamber of commerce and Industry and All
India Food Processors Association(AIFPA), Central Government,
Autonomous Bodies and Public sector Undertakings for organizing
workshops, seminars, exhibitions, fairs etc. and also if Ministry organizes
itself or its institutes NIFTEM/IICPT etc. Studies, surveys, feasibility reports
etc. are essential to monitor, review, assess and when required make necessary
changes in various schemes plans/ vision for Ministry as well as allied
sectors.
Financial assistance is provided to the agencies up to 50% of the
cost subject to a maximum of Rs. 4 lakh for organizing seminars/ workshops.
When the Ministry sponsors or commissions such events, the above financial
ceiling is not applicable.

31
The quantum of assistance for organizing Fair/ Exhibition depends
on the merits of proposal. Sponsoring/ Co-sponsoring of the event organized
by other organizations are done by the Ministry provided at least 50%
coverage is given to processed food sector.
(i) Under the Scheme for Promotional Activities, financial assistance
is provided for organizing All India level Seminars/ Workshops/
Fair/ Exhibitions/ International Seminars, Exhibitions, Fairs
spearheaded by Apex Industry Associations and Autonomous
Bodies/ Public Sector Undertakings of Government of India.
The Ministry also participates in National/ International,
Exhibitions/ Fairs with the objective of dissemination of
information regarding food processing industries, familiarizing
the entrepreneurs with modern techniques of production and
popularization of products.
(ii) The financial assistance is provided to the agencies upto 50%
of the cost subject to a maximum of Rs. 4.00 lakhs for
organizing seminar/ workshops and conducting studies/ surveys
etc. Assistance of 25% of the actual rent for the space taken by
the Government / Government organizations in fairs/ exhibitions
abroad is also provided subject to maximum of Rs. 20 lakhs in
a year. When the Ministry sponsors such events, the above
financial ceiling will not be applicable.
On being asked about how the Ministry propose to utilize the huge
increased amount, the Ministry in its written reply stated as under:—
"The Ministry will utilize the increased amount of budget for releasing
funds for implementation of the projects already sanctioned under
the ongoing schemes and new projects to be sanctioned under the
ongoing schemes as well as under the new schemes. In addition, the
Government has made announcements for new schemes in the budget
2018-19 like "Operation Greens' to promote FPOs, agro logistics,
processing facilities and professional management with a sum of
Rs. 500 crore, for the promotion of value chain for Tomato, Onion
and Potato for the benefit of Producers and Consumers and "to
promote establishment of specialized agro-processing financial
institutions in this sector" and also for "Setting up the State of the

32
Art Testing facility in all the Mega Food Parks to promote agri-
exports". The increased BE will be utilized for implementation of all
these projects".
(X) DEVELOPMENTAL HEADS
(i) Food storage and warehousing
(Rs. in crore)
BE 2017-18 RE 2017-18 BE 2018-19
Revenue Capital T otal Revenue Capital T otal Revenue Capital Total
702.70 - 702.70 627.20 - 627.20 1243.14 - 1243.14
When asked how the Ministry propose to utilize the increased amount
Rs. 1243.14 crore, the Ministry in its written reply stated as under:—
"The Ministry will utilize the increased amount of budget for releasing
funds for implementation of the projects already sanctioned under
the ongoing schemes and new projects to be sanctioned under the
ongoing schemes as well as under the new schemes. In addition, the
Government has made announcements for new schemes in the budget
2018-19 like 'Operation Greens' to promote FPOs, agro logistics,
processing facilities and professional management with a sum of
Rs.500 crore, for the promotion of value chain for Tomato, Onion
and Potato for the benefit of Producers and Consumers' and 'to
promote establishment of specialized agro-processing financial
institutions in this sector' and also for 'Setting up the State of the Art
Testing facility in all the Mega Food Parks to promote agri-exports'.
The increased BE will be utilized for implementation of all these
projects."
When asked how the Ministry will establish specialized agro-
processing financial institutions to promote Food Processing Industries, the
Ministry in its written reply stated as under:
"The Ministry is holding consultation with stakeholders for eliciting
views for working out a framework for a new scheme to promote
establishment of specialized agro-processing financial institution in
Food Processing sector. The scheme will be launched after following

33
due process of inter-Ministerial consultation and approval of the
competent authority. Ministry proposes to contribute equity to certain
extent to promote such institutions."
When asked regarding plan to deal with the impediments in the
implementation of various schemes of the Ministry, the Ministry stated as
under:
"During the last three years, the Ministry has been able to utilize
more than 95.90% of its total allocation made available at RE stage.
The shortfall has been mainly due to non-receipt of sufficient proposals
from North-East region. In case of projects in general areas, the
Ministry is in a position to utilize even additional allocation, if provided,
under various Schemes. The utilisation during last three years has
been as follows:
(Rs. in crore)
Sl. No. Y ear B E RE Actual % to RE
Expenditure
1. 2014-15 770.00 600.00 579.73 96.62%
2. 2015-16 487.00 487.00 467.03 95.90%
3. 2016-17 600.00 688.56 677.16 98.34%
However, there are a number of constraints which are acting as
impediments in timely implementation of projects under various
Schemes. The infrastructure projects like Mega Food Parks and
Cold Chain have been delayed mainly due to the time consumed in
acquiring required land with change of land use and obtaining required
term loan from banks/financial institutions. The various statutory
clearances required from State Governments like environmental
clearance, town and country planning approvals, use of ground water,
power supply etc. have also affected timely implementation of
projects. There is a lack of effective single window system at the
State level and obtaining approvals from multiple agencies is a long
drawn and time consuming process. Financial constraints of local
bodies have delayed implementation of abattoir projects.
Ministry has been making constant endeavor from time to time for
addressing these issues to remove these impediments by suitably

34
modifying the guidelines of the Schemes in consultation with the
stakeholders, involving State Governments in the process of selection
of the projects by including them in the Technical Committee and
Inter-Ministerial Approval Committee, making available affordable
credit through NABARD, including food processing in primary sector
lending, fiscal concessions on importing equipment, reduction of
excise duties and benefits under Income Tax Act etc. The State
Governments are also being impressed upon to put in place an effective
single window clearance system for one-point clearance of all the
approvals.
Ministry is also holding regular consultations at the level of Group
of Secretaries as well as with individual Ministries for amending
labour laws to declare food processing as seasonal activity, for
placing of food processing industries as White Category in the
categorization for environmental clearances."
When asked whether 'Operation Green' be launched for the promotion
of value chain for Tomato, Onion and Potato for the benefit of Producers
and Consumers, the Ministry in its written reply stated as under:—
"As a follow up to the Budget announcement 2018-19, the Ministry
of Food Processing Industries is holding consultation with stakeholders
for eliciting their views for the proposed scheme of Operation Greens.
First such consultation with all the stakeholders, namely Industry
Association, PMAs, bankers including NABARD, CFTRI, DAC&FW,
ICAR-CIPHET, ICAR-ITVR, ICAR-HQ, NAFED, APEDA, NCDC
and IIFPT has been held on 05.02.2018. Further, a consultation
meeting with all stakeholders, especially major producing State
Governments and concerned Farmers Producers Organization (FPOs)
was also held under the Chairpersonship of Hon'ble Minister, FPI on
20.02.2018. A scheme on 'Operation Greens' will be prepared after
consultation with all the stakeholders."
During the course of evidence, the Secretary of Ministry of Food
Processing Industries stated as under:—
Sir, the price of potato, tomato and onion affects common man.
There is a peculiar problem related to these commodities, when there is a
bumper production in one State meanwhile we find scarcity in the other.

35
On one hand, sometimes the prices are so high and on the other hand, the
farmers are not able to sell them in the market due to bumber production
and they are forced to destroy their crops. After due consideration the
Government came to the conclusion if a focused programme is launched
for these commodities only and the farmers are roped in the whole process
ranging from production to selling in the market, this particular problem
can be addressed upto a great extent. In view of the above, Operation
Green with an initial allocation of Rs. 500 crore has been announced in the
budget. We have consulted two-three stakeholders. We want suggestions
from Hon'ble members on how to involve more and more farmers in the
process along with the points on which we need to focus in order to enable
regional distribution so that it could result in regional distribution; for this
purpose processing and storage infrastructure could be created in the areas
having higher production and the needs of the consumers acould be met
by supplying the same in the areas having scarcity.
Sir, Hon'ble members have been insisting that the outcome of R&D
should reach the people and we are making sincere efforts in this regard.
A platform called NIFTEM has been created after merger of our in-house
R&D with IARC's R&D which can be accessed by any entrepreneur in
order to get the information about the technology. We have also developed
an incubation centre at IIAT and NIFTEM where an entrepreneur can
undertake experiment and market-test to know about response of the public
before setting up the industrial unit and launching its products. Thereafter,
if he thinks that his products are likely to get good response, he can go
ahead with his plans to launch the same.

36
PART II
OBSERV ATIONS AND RECOMMENDATIONS
1. IMPLEMENTATION OF POLICIES OF MFPI
The Committee note that the Food Processing has tremendous
potential for enabling the farmer to add value to their produce both
in terms of quantity and quality to meet the requirements and
standards of the market at all stages of value chain, processing and
retailing, considerable investments are required in rural infrastructure
and in components of the supply chain by way of grading and packing
centres. The Committee also note that the major issue of the country
is to ensure remunerative prices to the farmers for their produce. If
the surplus production of cereals, fruits, vegetables, milk, fish, meat
and poultry, etc., are processed and marketed both inside and outside
the country, there will be greater opportunities for adding to the
income of farmers and employment and creating markets for export
of agro foods.
The Committee feel that it requires policies and plans for
improvement of food processing infrastructure including up-gradation
of technology, enforcement of quality standards and promoting
investment in food processing. Food Processing adds value, enhances
shelf-life and reduces wastage. The Committee, therefore, recommend
that the Ministry should implement its policies both long and short
term strategies in a time bound manner and also provide requisite
infrastructure facilities to entrepreneurs who are setting up food
processing units and act as catalyst for bringing in greater investment
into this sector by guiding and helping the industry and also incentives
be given to industries being set up in rural areas are establishment
of processing units in rural areas. The Committee feel that it will not
only achieve the avowed objective of doubling the farmers income,
also reduce harvest and post-harvest losses of major agricultural
produces and add income to national exchequer.

37
The Committee would like to be informed of the action taken
by the Ministry in this regard.
2. MAKE IN INDIA IN FOOD PROCESSING INDUSTRIES
SECTOR
The Committee note that the agricultural production in India
has consistently recorded higher output. India ranks no. 1 in the
world in the production of Milk, Ghee, Pulses, Ginger, Bananas, Guavas,
Papayas and Mangoes. Further, India ranks no. 2 in the world in the
production of Rice, Wheat and several other vegetables & fruits.
Abundant supply of raw materials, increase in demand for food products
and incentives offered by the Government has impacted food processing
sector positively. The food processing sector has been on average
growing at a faster rate than agriculture sector. During the period
2012-13 to 2015-16, Food Processing Industries sector grew at an
Average Annual Growth Rate (AAGR) of around 2.88 per cent as
compared to around 1.88 per cent in Agriculture and 6.61 per cent in
Manufacturing at 2011-12 Prices. Food Processing Sector has also
emerged as an important segment of the Indian economy in terms of
its contribution to GDP, employment and investment. It is seen that
food products industry, compared to other industries has the largest
number of factories and engages largest number of employees as
well. The Committee further note that Food processing sector has
been identified as one of the priority sector under "MAKE IN INDIA"
an initiative of the Government. With a view to attract investment
to this sector, Ministry of Food Processing Industry has been
implementing schemes for development of infrastructure for promoting
food processing industries. Mega Food Parks with common utility like
road, electricity, water supply, sewage facility and common processing
facility like pulping, packaging, cold storage, dry storage and logistics
are being promoted in areas with strong agricultural resource base.
These parks provide fully developed plots and factory sheds to
entrepreneurs on long term lease basis where they can set up food
processing units in "plug & play" model all these can be achieved if
the Major challenges faced by Food Processing Industries, like lack
of primary processing storage and distribution facilities, procurement,
dependent on Agricultural Produce Market Committee (APMC),

38
Markets, inadequate link between production and processing, Lack of
product development and innovation, inadequate focus on quality and
safety standards are sorted out.
The Committee, desire the Ministry of Food Processing
Industries should implement all the schemes Coming under Make in
India with alacrity in order to promote the vision of Hon'ble Prime
Minister to give priority to this sector under Make in India scheme.
The Committee would like to be informed of the action taken in this
regard.
3. CONTRIBUTION OF FOOD PROCESSING SECTOR
The Committee observe that a well-developed food processing
sector with higher level of processing helps in the reduction of wastage,
improves value addition, promotes crop diversification, ensures better
return to the farmers, promotes employment as well as increases
export earnings. This sector is also capable of addressing critical
issues of food security, food inflation and providing wholesome,
nutritious food to the masses. Food Processing Sector has also emerged
as an important segment of the Indian economy in terms of its
contribution to GDP, employment and investment. The sector
constitutes as much as 8.71 per cent and 10.04 per cent of GV A in
Manufacturing and Agriculture sector respectively in 2015-16 at
2011-12 prices. This sector is highly labour intensive per unit of
capital. Despite low capital intensity, the output of food products is
not compromised as it is second largest among all industries. The
Food processing Industry engages largest number of persons as
compared to other industries while generating almost as high the
output level as in other industries. The number of persons employed
per Rs. 1 crore of investment is 9.24 for the entire food processing
industry. The percentage of GV A in these sub-sectors thus needs to
be increased so that the bulk of the persons employed in the food
processing industries earn higher remuneration as well. The Committee
therefore recommend that boost should be given to this industry by
bringing in greater investment and creating market for exports and
creating a conducive environment for healthy growth of Food
Processing Industries by inducting latest technologies in the Food
Processing sector.

39
4. UTILISATION OF FUNDS
The Committee are happy to note that an amount of Rs.1400
crore has been allocated to the Ministry for the year 2018-19. This is
a huge increase in amount as compared to previous year 2017-18
which was Rs. 715 crore.
However, the Committee are unhappy to note that out of the
total allocated fund of Rs.63.38 crore for North East States, the actual
allocation up to 31.10.17 was Rs. 21.01 crore only. This lower utilization
of funds is stated to be non-availability of good projects on large scale
the Committee desire that efforts should be made for proper utilization
of funds in North East States and the reasons to be found out for
non-availability of projects in this region. The Ministry should take
the opinion of expert and send a fact finding Committee in North-
East, to find out solutions to the Problem. The Committee recommend
that the Ministry should identify the areas in North East States about
the availability of various products and exploit the potential there.
5.  MEGA FOOD PARKS
The schemes of Mega Food Parks was envisaged in the year
2008. The Mega Food Parks aims at providing modern infrastructure
facilities for food processing along the value chain from farms to
market. The scheme functions on hub and spoke model which includes
creation of infrastructure for primary processing and storage farm
gate at Primary Processing Centre (PPC), Collection Centre (CC)
and common facilities and enabling infrastructure at Central
Processing Centre. The Government has so far provided 42 Mega
Food Parks out of these 38 projects have been accorded final approval
and in principle approval has been issued to 4 projects. 9 Projects are
presently in operation. 6 Mega Food Projects are at advance stage of
implementation and are likely to be made functional in current
financial year. 12 more Mega Food Projects will be made operational
in 2018-19 and the remaining in 2019-20. During the Financial year
2017-18 (as on 31.12.2017), the Ministry has released grant in aid of
Rs. 242.23 crores to the ongoing Mega Food Projects. The Committee
have been informed that the Ministry has invited expression of interest
against vacant source of Mega Food Parks in uncovered Stated i.e.

40
Arunachal Pradesh, Goa, Manipur, Meghalaya, Sikkim and
Uttar Pradesh. Out of 10 proposals received, in principle approval to
3 proposals have been given. In their earlier reports on Demands for
Grants relating to Ministry, the Committee have time and again
recommended for expeditious implementation of Mega Food Parks.
However they are concerned to note that the pace of implementation
of Mega Food Parks is very slow. With the inclusion of Mega Food
Parks scheme under the scheme of Pradhan Mantri Kisan Sampada
Yojana, the Committee hope that these projects will now be
implemented at the desired pace. The Committee recommended to
the Ministry to take concrete steps for early implementation of these
projects. They will like to be apprised of the actions taken in this
regard from time to time.
6. COLD CHAIN PROJECTS
The Committee note that despite the large scale agricultural
production in India, food security issues are major concerns for policy
makers in the country. A nation-wide study on quantitative assessment
of harvest and post-harvest losses for 46 agricultural produces in 106
randomly selected districts was carried out by Central Institute of
Post-Harvest Engineering & Technology (CIPHET), Ludhiana. The
aforesaid study considers the quantitative loss as the material rendered
"unfit for human consumption". The different stages considered for
assessment of losses are harvesting, collection, thrashing, grading /
sorting, winnowing/cleaning, drying, packaging, transportation, and
storage depending upon the commodity and one of the main reasons
for the high losses in the supply chain of perishables is the absence
of adequate and efficient cold chain infrastructure right from the
farm gate to the consumer. In a repeat study conducted by the Central
Institute of Post-Harvest Engineering & Technology (CIPHET),
Ludhiana during 2012-14 on behalf of Ministry of Food Processing
Industries on Assessment of Quantitative Harvest and Post-Harvest
Losses of Major Crops and Commodities in India, average range of
losses for food grains, oils seeds and fruits & vegetables were found
to be between 4% to 16% resulting in annual loss of 92,651crore at
price index of 2014. The Committee note that a Committee under the
Chairmanship of Dr. Sumitra Chaudhuri Member, Planning

41
Commission constituted in year 2012 on encouraging investments in
supply chains including provision for cold chain for more efficient
farm distribution. Further the Committee note that to accelerate the
availability of cold storage and to improve the efficiency of Cold
Chain Management, a Task Force set up by the PMO in 2014 under
the Chairmanship of Secretary, FPI noted that a capacity of about 8
Million Tonnes has been created since NSEL assessment and thus the
gap may be around 29 million Tonnes and inter alia,  recommended
that government should aim at creating additional capacity of
7.5 million tonnes over the next five years for which around
````` 6100 crore would be required. Out of this, Department of Agriculture
& Cooperation can take up 5 million tonnes under MIDH (2.5 million
tonnes each by NHM and NHB) and MoFPI can take up 2.5 million
tonnes. The Committee desire the Ministry to expedite the
implementation of the suggestions given by Dr. Sumitra Chaudhuri
Committee and also the task force set up by the PMO in 2014 under
the Chairmanship of secretary Food Processing Industries.
The Committee recommend that (i) in addition to large scale
cold chain projects, cold storage plants at small scale, such as village
co-operative at the district village level and try to cover all the Remote
part of village so that the objective of arresting Post Harvest Losses
of agriculture and horticulture produce can be achieved (ii) a fresh
nation- wide study in qualitative adjustment of Harvest and post
harvest losses for maximum agricultural produces be conducted. The
Committee would like to be informed of the action taken in this
regard.
7. PRADHAN MANTRI KISAN SAMPADA YOJANA
The Committee are glad to note that Pradhan Mantri Kisan
Sampada Yojana (PMKSY) has been approved with an allocation of
Rs. 6,000 Crore for the period 2016-20 coterminous with the 14th
Finance Commission cycle. It will not only provide a big boost to the
growth of food processing sector in the country but also help in
providing better prices to farmers and is a big step towards doubling
of farmers' income, creating employment opportunities especially in
the rural areas, reducing wastage of agricultural produce, increasing
the processing level and enhancing the export of the processed foods.

42
The PMKSY will attend to the requirement of the entire value chain
from farm gate to retail outlet and human resources development
through various schemes incorporated into it. This will lead to holistic
development of the food processing sector in the country. The Pradhan
Mantri Kisan Sampada Yojana is an umbrella scheme of seven schemes
namely; Scheme for Mega Food Parks, Scheme for Integrated Cold
Chain and Value Addition Infrastructure, Scheme for Creation/
Expansion of Food Processing & Preservation Capacities, Scheme for
Infrastructure for Agro-processing Clusters, Scheme for Creation of
Backward and Forward Linkages, Scheme for Food Safety and Quality
Assurance Infrastructure and Scheme for Human Resources and
Institutions. The Committee feel that various schemes under PMKSY
will prove to be a milestone for the holistic development of Food
Processing Industries,
The Committee desire that keeping in view the role of Food
Processing Industries in terms of its contribution in reduction of
wastage farm produce wastages and ensuring higher returns to
farmers, the Ministry of Food Processing Industries should make all
out efforts to implement the PMKSY with the avowed objective of
Doubling Farmers income by 2022, generation of employment, increase
in export earnings, addressing critical issues of food security, and
provide wholesome nutritious food to the masses be achieved.
 N
EW D ELHI; HUKM DEV NARAYAN YADA V ,
05 March, 2018 Chairperson,
16 Phalguna, 1939 (Saka) Standing Committee on Agriculture.

43
APPENDIX I
STANDING COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE
(2017-18)
MINUTES OF THE ELEVENTH SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE
The Committee sat on Thursday, the 22nd February, 2018 from
1000 hours to 1230 hours in Room No. 62, Parliament House, New Delhi.
PRESENT
Shri Hukmdev Narayan Yadav — Chairperson
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Sanjay Dhotre
3. Dr. Tapas Mandal
4. Shri Janardan Mishra
5. Shri Nityanand Rai
6. Shri Mukesh Rajput
7. Shri C.L. Ruala
Rajya Sabha
8. Sardar Sukhdev Singh Dhindsa
9. Shri Meghraj Jain
10. Shri Vinay Katiyar
11. Shri Shankarbhai N. Vegad
12. Dr. Chandrapal Singh Yadav
S
ECRETARIA T
1. Shri D.S. Malha — Joint Secretary
2. Shri Arun K. Kaushik — Director
3. Smt. Juby Amar — Additional Director

44
LIST OF W ITNESSES
Ministry of Food Processing Industries
1. Shri Jagdish Prasad Meena Secretary (FPI)
2. Shri Dharmendra Singh Gangwar Additional Secretary
3. Smt. Gargi Kaul JS&FA, FPI
4. Shri Parag Gupta Joint Secretary
5. Shri Ashok Kumar Joint Secretary
6. Dr. Bijaya Kumar Behera Economic Adviser
National Institute of Food Technology Entrepreneurship
and Management
Dr. Chindi Vasudevappa Vice Chancellor, NIFTEM
2. At the outset, the Chairperson welcomed the Members of the
Committee to the Sitting convened for Oral Evidence of the representatives
of Ministry of Food Processing Industries in connection with the examination
of the Demands for Grants (2018-19). Thereafter, the representatives of
Ministry of Food Processing Industries were ushered in. After welcoming
the representatives of the Ministry to the Sitting, the Chairperson apprised
them of the provisions of the Directions 58 of the Directions by the
Speaker, Lok Sabha regarding confidentiality of the proceedings.
3. After the witnesses introduced themselves, one of the
representatives of the Department made a power point presentation and
briefed the Committee about the Ministry. The Chairperson and the Members
of the Committee raised several issues/points as briefly mentioned below
and sought clarification/information from the Ministry thereon:
(i) The reasons for non-utilization of total funds allocated;
(ii) Need for setting up of small units of Food Processing Industries
as it requires less investment and benefit small farmers (Small
is beautiful);
(iii) Need to concentrate on source of processing of food units as
it is found that processed foods are causing health hazards to
people;

45
(iv) Need to make it mandatory that Food Processing Industries
should procure material from the farmers from the local farmers
as it is found that private players take initially farmers produce
and later on refuse to take its produce;
(v) Need for finding solutions/reasons impending the progress of
work of setting up of Food Parks in North-Eastern Region;
(vi) Need to encourage farmers to set up Food Processing Industries
by giving proper training to farmers and remaining all the impact;
(vii) Need for setting up of cold storage in remote corners of rural
areas;
(viii) Farmers should at least get Minimum Support Price (MSP) for
their produce;
(ix) Need for benefits of awareness of the schemes promoted by
Ministry of Food Processing Industries by giving wide publicity;
(x) Need to enlighten farmers about the project based on Food
Processing Industries.
4. The Representatives of the Ministry responded to most of the
queries raised by the Members. The Chairperson then thanked the witnesses
for sharing valuable information with the Committee on the subject and
directed them to furnish the requisite information on the points/items,
which were not readily available with them to the Secretariat of the
Committee at the earliest.
5. The Committee desired to add one more subject to the selection
of subjects 'Doubling of Farmers Income by 2022'.
*6. *** *** ***
The Committee then adjourned.
(A copy of the verbatim proceedings of the Sitting has been kept
separately)
***Not related to this subject.

46
APPENDIX II
STANDING COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE
(2017-18)
MINUTES OF THE FIFTEENTH SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE
The Committee sat on Monday, the 05th February, 2018 from
1000 hrs. to 1100 hrs. in the Chamber of the Hon'ble Chairperson, Standing
Committee on Agriculture, Room No. 138 (Third Floor), Parliament House,
New Delhi.
PRESENT
Shri Hukm Dev Narayan Yadav — Chairperson
M
EMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Smt. Raksha Khadse
3. Dr. Tapas Mandal
4. Shri Janardan Mishra
5. Shri Mukesh Rajput
6. Shri Konakalla Narayana Rao
7. Shri C.L. Ruala
Rajya Sabha
8. Shri Mohd. Ali Khan
9. Shri Ram Nath Thakur
10. Shri Shankarbhai N.V egad
S
ECRETARIA T
1. Shri D.S. Malha — Joint Secretary
2. Shri Arun K. Kaushik — Director
3. Smt. Juby Amar — Additional Director
4. Shri Sumesh Kumar — Under Secretary

47
2. At the outset, the Chairperson welcomed the Members to the
Sitting of the Committee. Thereafter, the Committee took up for consideration
the following draft Reports:—
*(i) XXX XXX XXX
*(ii) XXX XXX XXX
*(iii)XXX XXX XXX
(iv) Draft Report on Demands for Grants (2018-19) pertaining to
the Ministry of Food Processing Industries.
3. After some deliberations, the Committee adopted the draft
Reports without any modifications and authorized the Chairperson to finalize
and present these Reports to Parliament.
The Committee then adjourned.
*** Matter not related to this Report.

"All Parliamentary Publications including DRSC Reports are
available on sale at the Sales Counter, Reception, Parliament
House (Tel. Nos. 23034726, 23034495, 23034496), Agents
appointed by Lok Sabha Secretariat and Publications Division,
Ministry of Information and Broadcasting, CGO Complex, Lodhi
Road, New Delhi (Tel. Nos. 24367260, 24365610) and their outlets.
The said information is available on website
‘www.parliamentofindia.nic.in’.
The Souvenir items with logo of Parliament are also available
at Sales Counter, Reception, Parliament House, New Delhi.
The Souvenir items with Parliament Museum logo are available
for sale at Souvenir Shop (Tel. No. 23035323), Parliament
Museum, Parliament Library Building, New Delhi. List of these
items are available on the website mentioned above."