FORTY-FIRST REPORT
STANDING COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE
(2016-2017)
( SIXTEENTH LOK SABHA )
MINISTRY OF AGRICULTURE AND FARMERS
WELFARE
(DEPARTMENT OF ANIMAL HUSBANDRY,
DAIRYING AND FISHERIES)
“Steps taken to Bridge the Gap Between the Demand and Availability of
Fodder through Sub-Mission on Fodder and Feed Development”
[Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations
contained in the Thirty-Fourth Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) of the
Standing Committee on Agriculture (2016-2017)]
Presented to Lok Sabha on 10.08.2017
Laid on the Table of Rajya Sabha on 10.08.2017
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
August, 2017/Shravana, 1939 (Saka)

C.O.A. No. 361
Price : Rs. 84.00
© 2018 B Y L OK S ABHA S ECRETARIAT
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of
Business in Lok Sabha (Fifteenth Edition) and Printed by National Printers,
New Delhi-110 028.

(i)
CONTENTS
PAGE
COMPOSITION OF THE C OMMITTEE (2016 - 17) .......................................... (iii)
INTRODUCTION .............................................................................................. (v)
CHAPTER I Report ................................................................................. 1
CHAPTER II Observations/Recommendations which have been
accepted by the Government ......................................... 22
CHAPTER III Observations/Recommendations which the
Committee do not desire to pursue in view of the
Government’s replies ....................................................... 49
C
HAPTER IV Observations/Recommendations in respect of which
replies of the Government have not been accepted
by the Committee ............................................................. 50
C
HAPTER V Observations/Recommendations in respect of which
final replies of the Government are still awaited ...... 54
ANNEXURE
Minutes of the 25th Sitting of the Committee held on
 03.08.2017 ......................................................................... 57
APPENDIX
Analysis of the action taken by the Government on
the Recommendations contained in the Thirty-Fourth
report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) of the Standing Committee
on Agriculture (2016-17) ................................................. 60

(iii)
COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON
AGRICULTURE (2016-17)
Shri Hukm Deo Narayan Yadav — Chairperson
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Prof. Ravindra Vishwanath Gaikwad
3. Shri Sanganna Karadi
4. Shri Nalin Kumar Kateel
5. Smt. Raksha Khadse
6. Md. Badaruddoza Khan
7. Shri C. Mahendran
8. Dr. Tapas Mandal
9. Shri Janardan Mishra
10. Shri Devji Patel
11. Shri Nityanand Rai
12. Shri Mukesh Rajput
13. Shri Neiphiu Rio
14. Shri Konakalla Narayana Rao
15. Shri C.L. Ruala
16. Shri Arjun Charan Sethi
17. Shri Satyapal Singh (Sambhal)
18. Shri Virendra Singh
19. Shri Dharmendra Yadav
20. Shri Jai Prakash Narayan Yadav
21. Shri B. S. Yeddyurappa

(iv)
Rajya Sabha
22. Shri Sambhaji Chhatrapati
23. Sardar Sukhdev Singh Dhindsa
24. Shri Janardan Dwivedi
25. Shri Meghraj Jain
26. Shri Vinay Katiyar
27. Shri Mohd. Ali Khan
28. Shri Ram Nath Thakur
29. Shri R. Vaithilingam
30. Shri Shankarbhai N. Vegad
31. Shri Darshan Singh Yadav
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Shri D. S. Malha — Joint Secretary
2. Shri Arun K. Kaushik — Director
3. Shri C. Vanlalruata — Deputy Secretary
4. Ms. Divya Rai — Executive Assistant

(v)
INTRODUCTION
I, the Chairperson, Standing Committee on Agriculture (2016-17),
having been authorized by the Committee to submit the Report on their
behalf, present this Forty-First Report on action taken by the Government
on the Observations/Recommendations contained in the Thirty-Fourth
Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) of the Standing Committee on Agriculture
(2016-17) on the Subject “Steps taken to Bridge the Gap between the
Demand and Availability of Fodder through Sub-Mission on Fodder and
Feed Development” pertaining to the Ministry of Agriculture and Farmers
Welfare (Department of Animal Husbandry, Dairying and Fisheries).
2. The Thirty-Fourth Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) of the Standing
Committee on Agriculture (2016-17) on the Subject “Steps taken to Bridge
the Gap between the Demand and Availability of Fodder through
Sub-Mission on Fodder and Feed Development” pertaining to the Ministry
of Agriculture and Farmers Welfare (Department of Agriculture,
Cooperation and Farmers Welfare) was presented to Lok Sabha and laid
on the Table of Rajya Sabha on 15 December, 2016. The Action Taken
Notes on the Report were received on 14 March, 2017.
3. The Report was considered and adopted by the Committee at
their Sitting held on 03.08.2017.
4. An analysis of the action taken by the Government on the
Observations/Recommendations contained in the Thirty-Fourth Report
(Sixteenth Lok Sabha) of the Committee is given in Appendix.
N
EW DELHI; HUKM DEO NARAYAN YADAV,
7th August, 2017 Chairperson,
16th Shravana, 1939 (Saka) Standing Committee on Agriculture.

CHAPTER I
REPORT
This Report of the Committee on Agriculture deals with the action
taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations
contained in the Thirty-Fourth Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) of the
Standing Committee on Agriculture (2016-17) on the Subject ‘Steps Taken
to Bridge the Gap Between the Demand and Availability of Fodder through
Sub-Mission on Fodder and Feed Development’ pertaining to Ministry
of Agriculture (Department of Animal Husbandry, Dairying and Fisheries)
which was presented to Lok Sabha and laid on the Table of Rajya Sabha
on 15.12.2016.
1.2 The Ministry of Agriculture and Farmers Welfare (Department
of Animal Husbandry, Dairying and Fisheries) have furnished Action
Taken Replies in respect of all the 14 Observations/Recommendations
contained in the Report. These replies have been categorized as under:—
(i) Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted
by the Government:
Recommendation Nos.: 1, 2, 3, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12 and 13
Total 10
Chapter-II
(ii) Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not
desire to pursue in view of the Government’s replies:
Recommendation No.: NIL
Total 00
Chapter-III
(iii) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies
of the Government have not been accepted by the Committee:
Recommendation Nos.: 5 and 14
Total 02
Chapter-IV

2
(iv) Observ ations/Recommendations in respect of which final
replies of the Government are still awaited:
Recommendation Nos.: 4 and 6
Total 02
Chapter-V
1.3 The Committee trust that utmost importance would be given
to implementation of the Observations/Recommendations accepted by
the Government. In cases, where it is not possible for the Department
to implement the Recommendations in letter and spirit, the matter
should be reported to the Committee with reasons for
non-implementation. The Committee desire that further Action Taken
Notes on the Observations/Recommendations contained in Chapter-I
and final Action Taken Replies to the Recommendations contained in
Chapter-V of this Report be furnished to them at an early date.
1.4 The Committee will now deal with the action taken by the
Government on some of the Recommendations in the succeeding
paragraphs.
A. Need for Increasing Availability of Feed and Fodder
Recommendation (Sl. No. 1)
1.5 The Committee had observed/recommended as under:—
“The Committee note that availability of adequate quality of feed
and fodder for livestock is essential for improving livestock
productivity. However, the Committee are constrained to note that
there is substantial shortage of feed and fodder in the country. As
per the estimates of National Institute of Animal Nutrition and
Physiology (NIANP), the deficit in the requirement and availability
of Dry Fodder, Green Fodder and Concentrates during 2015 was
to the extent of 21 MT, 26 MT and 34 MT which will increase
further to 23 MT, 40 MT and 38 MT respectively by the year 2025.
This shortage is due to increasing pressure on land for growing
foodgrains, oil seeds and pulses and inadequate attention being
given to the production of fodder crops. Further, on account of
diversified use of agricultural residues, the grazing lands are
gradually diminishing. The area under fodder cultivation is also
limited. Majority of the grazing lands have either been degraded
or encroached upon restricting their availability for livestock grazing.
The area under fodder cultivation is only about 4% of the cropping

3
area, and it has remained static for a long period of time. According
to the Department, owing to the importance of food crops and
other cash crops, it is very unlikely that the area under fodder
cultivation would increase substantially. While the availability of
feed and fodder has improved in the last decade, the Committee
note that still a lot is required to be done to bridge the gap between
the demand and availability of fodder in the country, particularly
during the lean periods and crisis situations. Needless to say,
livestock is a major source of livelihood for a majority of the rural
population in the country. The contribution of livestock to the
household income of the farmers cannot be ignored. It generate
sustainable livelihood for small and marginal farmers in the country.
Thus, livestock is an important and integral part of Indian
agriculture and rural economy. However, livestock husbandry
cannot be sustained without addressing the development of feed
and fodder resources. It is, therefore, imperative that forage
production and its quality may be augmented to improve
productivity of livestock. In this context, the Committee note that
the Government has launched `Sub-Mission on Fodder and Feed
Development, under the National Stock Mission from 2014-15 to
comprehensively address the feed and fodder issue. The
Government has also issued advisory on measures to be taken for
increasing availability of fodder to mitigate the effect of natural
calamities. However, the Committee feel that the Department being
the nodal agency need to make concerted and coordinated efforts
ensuring that the shortage of feed and fodder in the country is
addressed effectively and comprehensively. The Committee,
therefore, would like the Department to take up the issue with all
its seriousness and coordinate with all stakeholders on the issue.
The Committee would also like to be apprised of the initiatives
undertaken by the Government in this regard and the progress
made therein.”
1.6 The Department in the Action Taken Reply has stated as
under:—
“1. The Department of Animal Husbandry, Dairying and Fisheries
has launched National Livestock Mission in 2014-15 with a
Sub-Mission on Feed and Fodder Development. The financial
assistance is being provided to the States and UTs for feed and
fodder development under the following components:
i. Fodder Production from Non-forest wasteland/rangeland/
grassland/non-arable land;
ii. Fodder production from Forest land;

4
iii. Fodder Seed Procurement/Production and Distribution;
iv. Introduction of Hand Driven Chaff-Cutter;
v. Introduction of Power Driven Chaff-Cutter;
vi. Distribution of low capacity, tractor mountable Fodder Block
Making units, hay bailing machines/reapers/forage harvesters;
vii. Establishment of silage making Units;
viii. Establishment of by-pass protein production units;
ix. Establishment of Area Specific Mineral Mixture/Feed
Pelleting/Feed Manufacturing Unit;
x. Establishment/modernization of Feed Testing Laboratories.
Funds released under the Sub-Mission Feed and Fodder
Development of National Livestock Mission:
(Rs in crore)
Year Funds Released
2014-15 47.68
2015-16 16.85
2016-17 34.15
till 6.3.2017
2. The Department of Agriculture Co-operation and Farmers
Welfare under National Food Security Mission (NFSM) Programme
several components are being implemented for production of Rice,
Wheat, Pulses and Course Cereals. Farmers are encouraged to grow
newly released varieties of the crops for higher production and
productivity, which in turn i ncreases the availability of fodder to
cattle and other ruminants. This is achieved by cluster
demonstration, seed distribution of newly released varieties. The
activities under the component cultivation of coarse grains and
dual purpose crops is taken under the National Food Security
Mission (NFSM). The State Governments, for coarse grains and
dual purpose crops approach the Department of Agriculture
Co-operation and Farmers Welfare with their project proposals.
The following activities are under this component:
i. Seed production under contract farming with buy back
arrangement with the State Government/seed supplying
agency;

5
ii. Buy back of the seed by the State Government/seed supplying
agencies;
iii. Distribution of the seeds to the farmers free of cost or at
subsidized rates;
iv. Support for land levelling, irrigation, etc.
3. Additional Fodder Development Programme— a sub-scheme of
Rashtriya Krishi Vikas Yojana(RKVY) is also in operation since
2014-15 and is continuing at present. Funds is being released to
the States/UTs during the period of drought for fodder development
and thereby livestock sustainability.
4. Rashtriya Krishi Vikas Yojana(RKVY) is also in operation in the
Department of Agriculture Co-operation and Farmers Welfare. The
scheme also supports seed production and other fodder
development programme as proposed by the States. These are also
supported by the Department of Animal Husbandry, Dairying and
Fisheries.
5. Further States have their own fodder production programme.
Both for normal time and during natural calamities like drought,
flood, hailstorm etc.”
1.7 While noting unavailability of adequate quality of feed and
fodder for livestock, the Committee recommended that the Department,
being the nodal agency in this regard, needs to make concrete efforts
in ensuring that such a shortage of feed and fodder is addressed
accordingly and that livestock rearing is made sustainable as it
contributes to the household income of farmers. The Department, in
its Action Taken Reply has informed that it is promoting cultivation
of coarse grains and dual purpose crops under the National Food
Security Mission (NFSM) and undertaking seed production and other
activities under this component. The Committee were also apprised
about States having their own fodder production programme for both
normal times and natural calamities. The Committee are of the
considered opinion that the Department identify various constraints
in the way of ensuring availability of adequate and improved quality
of feed and fodder for the livestock, as well as work towards effective
and timely implementation of the Sub-Mission on Fodder and Feed
Development. The Committee would like to be informed about State
specific fodder production programmes during normal times as well
as during natural calamities and also about the reasons behind decrease

6
in the amount of funds released under the Sub-Mission during the
year 2015-16. The Committee would also like to be apprised of further
initiatives undertaken by the Department in this regard.
B. Allocation of Funds
Recommendation (Sl. No. 2)
1.8 The Committee had observed/recommended as under:—
“The Committee note that States have been given liberty to choose
the development of any or all the four Sub-Missions under the
National Livestock Mission (NLM) with a restriction of availability
of budget with the Department. The tentative budget outlay to
each State/UT is conveyed in the month of April each year so that
they can formulate the plans best suited to their State/UT. Afterword,
the plan is received in the Department and processed for release
of budget to the State/UT. The Committee are of the opinion that
the practice of tentative allocation of funds to States should be
done away with and instead need based funds as per the
requirement of the States be allocated by the Department. However,
the Committee are anguished to note that funds being allocated
to the Sub-Missions under NLM in the States were woefully
inadequate during the years 2014-15 and 2015-16. This has resulted
in meagre allocation to the Sub-Missions in 2014-15, with the
situation worsening in the year 2015-16 when no separate allocations
to the Sub-Missions could be made due to very less funds and the
budget of 2015-16 was used to meet liabilities of the previous year.
Also, funds released under the Sub-Mission on Fodder and Feed
Development in the years 2014-15 and 2015-16 are 47.63 crores and
16.86 crores, respectively. Needless to say, insufficient funds have
severely hampered the implementation of physical and financial
targets of the Sub-Mission on Fodder and Feed Development. The
Department has also accepted the fact that the implementation of
the Sub-Mission has been hampered by the less allocation of funds
as against the approved outlay. According to the Department, owing
to very low allocations of funds for NLM, overall impact of the
schemes of Sub-Mission could not be ascertained from the States/
UTs as the States/UTs could not be given sufficient funds or no
funds at all for implementation. In the absence of such study, the
Committee feel that the Department would not get the opportunity
to undertake corrective interventions to reorient its schemes/
Sub-Missions for the benefit of intended beneficiaries. Deprecating
this sordid state of affairs, the Committee, therefore, recommend
that the Department should take up this issue with the Ministry

7
of Finance and impress upon them to provide adequate funds so
that schemes/Sub-Missions of the National Livestock Mission,
particularly the Sub-Mission on Fodder and Feed Development, do
not suffer for want of funds.
During the course of evidence, the Secretary of the Department
informed the Committee that a National Perspective Plan is being
formulated which would also be circulated to the States asking
them to furnish integrated Plan so that funds could be allocated
accordingly within the limited resources of the Central Government.
The Committee, therefore, recommend that the formulation of
National Perspective Plan as proposed by the Government be
expedited in consultation with all States/UTs so that funds could
be allocated to them as per their demand for effective
implementation of schemes/Sub-Missions undertaken by them. The
Committee would like to be apprised of the actions taken and
progress made by the Department in this regard.”
1.9 The Department in its Action Taken Reply has stated as under:—
“Department of Economic Affairs, Budget Division Ministry of
Finance has mentioned that the allocation for National Livestock
Mission is being progressively increased as under:
(Rs in crore)
BE BE RE BE
2015-16 2016-17  2016-17  2017-18
National Livestock Mission 106.37 292.00 250.00 310.00
Further, the overall allocation in respect of Department of Animal
Husbandry Dairying and Fisheries has also increased as under:
(Rs in crore)
BE 2015-16 BE 2016-17 RE 2016-17 BE 2017-18
1585.43 1881.51 1994.00 2371.00
Department is pursuing for additional allocation of funds with
Ministry of Finance. Hon’ble Agriculture Minister has written to
Hon’ble Union Finance Minister.
1. Regarding National Perspective Plan as a strategy department
has prioritised development of Gochar and waste lands for
augmenting fodder availability in the country. For this the
State Governments have been requested to develop Gochar

8
lands by taking assistance under Sub Mission on Feed and
Fodder Development of National Livestock Mission. This year
(2016-17) five States viz Chhattisgarh, Odisha, Jharkhand,
Rajasthan and Gujarat have been given financial assistance
for development of the Gochar land. Further the success model
of Gochar land development in Dharmaj village in Anand
District of Gujarat has been sent to all States for replication.
2. Department is coordinating with other departments like
Department of Agriculture, Cooperation and Farmers Welfare,
Department of Agricultural Research and Education, Ministry
of Panchayati Raj, Ministry of Environment and Forests and
Climate Change, Ministry of Rural Development to synergize
there activities for enhancing fodder production.
3. Department of Agriculture, Cooperation and Farmers Welfare
has brought out the National Agroforestry Policy in 2014 to
promote Agroforestry in the country. To take forward the
recommendation of National Agroforestry Policy a
Sub-Mission on Agroforestry(SMAF) under the ambit of
National Mission for Sustainable Agriculture (NMSA) has
been made operational from 2016-17. Different Agroforestry
models includes sustainable Agri-silvicultural systems, Silvi-
pastoral systems, Agro-silvi-pastoral system etc. are supported
under the programme. SMAF will be expanded the coverage
under tree plantation in arable land suitable to specific agro
ecological, Culturable wasteland and land use condition that
provide livelihood, environmental and bio-diversity
protection and additional income sources for farmers. SMAF
includes both traditional and modern land-use systems where
trees are managed along with crops and/or animal production
systems in a farming system approach. Perennial tree species
useful for fodder production and which are liberalized under
transit regulations for transport of timber may also be
promoted under the SMAF.
4. Ministry of Rural Development—  As per the para 2.5.2.1 of
the annual Master Circular issued by the Ministry, Pasture
development is a permissible work as mentioned under
category A,(vi) Pasture Development; perennial grasses like
Stylo etc. and under Category B, (iv), Pasture Development
perennial grasses like Stylo, Vetiver etc. In the category of

9
Drought proofing works of MGNREGA, under Grassland
Development and Silvipasture. As on 20th Jan. 2017, a total
of 2043 number of works relating to Grassland
development and silvipasture are completed and 1205 works
on going in 25 States/UTs. A State-wise detail is given in
Annexure-I.”
1.10 The Committee, while noting that the practice of tentative
allocation of funds to States is creating more hurdles than facilitating
proper allocation and expenditure on different components of National
Livestock Mission, recommended that the Department take up the issue
with the Ministry of Finance and impress upon them to provide
adequate funds so that the schemes/Sub-Missions of the National
Livestock Mission, particularly the Sub-Mission on Fodder and Feed
Development, do not suffer for want of funds. Further, on being
informed about a National Perspective Plan being formulated, the
Committee recommended that the formulation of such a Plan as
proposed by the Government be expedited in consultation with all
States/UTs so that funds could be allocated to them as per their demand
for effective implementation of schemes/Sub-Missions undertaken by
them. The Department in its Action Taken Reply, informed the
Committee that it is pursuing for additional allocation of funds with
the Ministry of Finance. The Department also stated that under the
National Perspective Plan, it has prioritised development of Gochar
and wastelands for augmenting fodder availability in the country and
that it also coordinating with other departments and ministries to
synergize their activities for fodder production. Moreover, the
Committee had earlier recommended that the Department assess the
overall impact of insufficient allocation of funds on the schemes under
the Sub-Mission on Feed and Fodder Development being implemented
in the States and UTs, as, in the absence of such a study, the Department
would not get the opportunity to undertake corrective interventions to
reorient its schemes/Sub-Missions for the benefit of intended
beneficiaries. The Committee feel that more needs to be done on this
front and therefore, reiterate their earlier recommendation that the
Department should take up this issue with the Ministry of Finance
and impress upon them to provide adequate funds so that schemes/
Sub-Missions of the National Livestock Mission, particularly the
Sub- Mission on Fodder and Feed Development, do not suffer for want
of funds. The Committee would like to be apprised of actions taken
and progress made by the Department in this regard.

10
C. Optimum Utilisation of Land Resources for Fodder Development
Recommendation (Sl. No. 3)
1.11 The Committee had observed/recommended as under:—
“The Committee note that the number of livestock is growing
rapidly but the grazing lands are gradually diminishing due to
pressure on land for agricultural and non-agricultural uses.
According to the Department, the need of the time is to adopt the
practice of land use with multiple crops in a sustainable manner.
Adopting Silvi-pastoral and Horti-pastoral models suitable to the
area can help in substantially enhancing the availability of forage
for the livestock. About 29 million ha area in the country falls
under the category of open forests with less than 0.4 canopy density
which can be developed with fodder trees. This huge land resource
can be utilized for growing fodder, mostly as an under-storey on
the partially shaded ground without affecting standing trees. Similar
development is also possible in the area under horticulture orchards.
While the forest department can undertake Silvi-pastoral plantations
through the Joint Forest Management Committees, the Horti-
pastoral activities can be initiated by incentivizing the farmers who
are owners of the orchards. While the Department has issued
advisory to the States in this regard, the Committee would like the
Department to pursue its advisory and coordinate with all stake
holders including State Governments to utilize huge land resources
which fall under the category of open forests and area under
horticulture orchards for growing fodder. Barren land or non-forest
wasteland or non-arable land across the country should also be
utilized for multi-perennial fodder crops for which adequate
incentives should be given to the farmers. In this context, the
Committee strongly feel that the unutilised land of Railways and
Defence should also be utilised for cultivation of fodder crops. It
was pointed out by the Committee that during British regime,
unutilized land along both sides of the railway lines were being
used either for grazing or for production of fodder. According to
the Department, the matter was taken up at the highest level and
after lot of deliberations over the issue, it was decided that the
unutilised land of Railways and Defence could not be utilised for
development of fodder. Nevertheless, the Committee still feel that
the issue needs to be re-looked in to by all the stakeholders as a
large chunk of Railways and Defence land is being encroached

11
upon by unscrupulous elements. The Committee would like to
apprised of the action taken by the Department in this regard.”
1.12 The Department in its Action Taken Reply has stated as
under:—
1. Department of Agriculture,Cooperation and Farmers Welfare
has brought out the National Agroforestry Policy in 2014 to
promote Agroforestry in the country. To take forward the
recommendation of National Agroforestry Policy a
Sub-Mission on Agroforestry(SMAF) under the ambit of
National Mission for Sustainable Agriculture (NMSA) has
been made operational from 2016-17. Different Agroforestry
models includes sustainable Agri-silvicultural systems, Silvi-
pastoral systems, Agro-silvi-pastoral system etc. are supported
under the programme. SMAF will be expanded, the coverage
under tree plantation in arable land suitable to specific agro
ecological, Culturable wasteland and land use condition that
provide livelihood, environmental and bio-diversity
protection and additional income sources for farmers. SMAF
includes both traditional and modern land-use systems where
trees are managed along with crops and/or animal production
systems in a farming system approach. Perennial tree species
useful for fodder production and which are liberalized under
transit regulations for transport of timber may also be
promoted under the SMAF.
2. In the State like Punjab establishment of commercial dairy
farms with high producing cattle and buffaloes has resulting
in higher demand for green fodder consequently resulting
in dairy farmers taking up large scale cultivation of fodder
maize crop either on their own land or on leased land.
3. Regarding utilization of railway land— railway tracks are
normally laid on an elevated bank with very little space left
beyond the shoulder of the ballast. Vegetations on these
narrow strips of land is not encouraged as it attracts cattle
and other livestock for grazing, who cross the track from one
side to the other and get run-over by trains and on many
occasions are reasons for derailments/damage to the under-
gear or locomotives.
4. Gochar land Development— the State Governments have been
requested to develop Gochar lands by taking assistance under
Sub-Mission on Feed and Fodder Development of National

12
Livestock Mission. This year (2016-17) five States viz
Chhattisgarh, Odisha, Jharkhand, Rajasthan and Gujarat have
been given financial assistance for development of the Gochar
land. Further the success model of Gochar land development
in Dharmaj village in Anand District of Gujarat has been sent
to all States for replication.
5. The Ministry of Panchayati Raj has been requested to identify
the Gochar land for developing and to rope in the Panchayats
in the process. It has been mentioned that MGNREGA funds
may also be dovetailed as labour component.
6. Eight Regional Fodder Stations situated in different agro
climatic zones of the country are doing extension work related
to dissemination of knowledge related to all aspects of fodder
production, utilization, storage, seed production etc.
7. Non-traditional fodder like azolla cultivation is being
promoted, which takes very little space for cultivation at the
same time gives large quantity of quality fodder.
8. Fodder cultivation activities along with feed production
activities proposed by State/UTs under RKVY are supported
by the department.
9. All the proposals of import of quality varieties of fodder
seeds in country are supported by the department.
10. Proper post harvest utilisation of fodder is being promoted
under Sub-Mission on Feed and Fodder Development of
National Livestock Mission so that there is no wastage. As
per report nearly 30% fodder is saved by chaffed fodder
feeding habits. Silage making, bailing and fodder block
making are supported as storage devices so the fodder is
available during lean periods.
11. As many manufactures are producing feed in the market. To
ensure quality feed available department is supporting for
establishment of feed testing laboratories.
12. Developed grassland in Bihar: IGFRI, Jhansi with support of
Deptt. of Forest, Government of Bihar: Developed 2 ha area
in hilly degraded Forest of Gaya district in 2013. Established
Guinea grass (Panicum maximum), Dinanath grass
(Pennisetum pedicllatum), Hybrid Napier and Stylosanthes
hamata.

13
13. An area of 5 ha. of natural/barren/degraded pastureland has
been developed as model grassland in IGFRI, Jhansi. The
productivity of developed model grassland increased from
11t/ha green forage (palatable and non-palatable) in natural
to 29 t/ha (only palatable grasses and legumes) within one
year of interventions. In the developed model grassland
grazing experiment of small ruminants has been initiated and
initial data showed that the forage availability period
increased in model grassland (July-Dec.)in comparison to
natural grassland (July-Oct).
14. Western Regional Research Station (WRRS,) Avikanagar-Soda
village, Rajasthan: Model grassland has been developed on
common property resources on 70 ha in village Soda, Tonk
(Rajasthan) with collaboration of Jal Grahan Samiti, Soda and
Indian Institute of Rural Development (NGO). Grassland was
established with improved planting materials of Anjan grass,
Dhaman grass, Dinanath grass, Stylosanthes hamata and
fodder trees Subabul, Ardu and Neem.
15. The Jal Grahan Samiti, Chainpura get motivated after visiting
grassland development activities at Soda village. About 20
ha land was provided by farmers and it was protected by
digging of trench with financial support of IIRD. During kharif
2015 plantation of free saplings was done and Anjan/dhaman
grass was seeded in inter-spaced area.
16. Orchha, Tikamgarh, M.P . has developed in grassland in
25 ha. Area in Lotna block, Forest Sanctuary orchha in 2015.
17. At ten selected goushala established during 2014 and grass
is being used under cut and carry system. At three locations,
grass seed was also collected and it was used for sowing
larger area. It was also endured to purchase the grass seed
under participatory seed production programme. The other
stakeholders of nearby area will be exposed/trained for
grassland development and seed production as well.”
1.13 The Committee while noting the rapid increase in the
number of livestock and diminishing area of grazing lands had
recommended the Department to take up multiple cropping in land
use adopting silvi-pastoral and horti-pastoral activities etc. The
Department in its Action Taken Reply has informed about the National
Agro-forestry Policy to promote agro-forestry in the country. It has also

14
informed about taking up non-traditional fodder like azolla cultivation
which takes little space for cultivation and gives large quantity of
quality fodder. While the Department has issued advisory to the States
in this regard, the Committee would like the Department to pursue
its advisory and coordinate with all stakeholders including State
Governments to utilize huge land resources which fall under the
category of open forests and area under horticulture orchards for
growing fodder. Moreover, the Committee, in their recommendation,
felt the need to involve unused land under the Railways and Defence
for utilization for development of fodder. The Committee, therefore,
reiterate their earlier recommendation and urge the Department to take
up the issue of optimum utilization of land resources for fodder
development with all seriousness and would like to be apprised of the
progress made by the Department on various fronts and actions taken,
in this regard.
D. Funding of the Components of Sub-Mission on Feed and Fodder
Development
Recommendation (Sl. No. 5)
1.14 The Committee had observed/recommended as under:—
“The Committee note that the Department has taken necessary steps
to increase fodder production in various parts of the country by
providing financial assistance to the States/UTs under Centrally
sponsored National Livestock Mission with a Sub-Mission on Feed
and Fodder Development. The Committee also note that from
28th Oct., 2015, the funding of the components has been changed
to the sharing ratio of 60:40 between the Centre and the States for
those schemes for which the Central share is higher. However, for
those scheme for which the Central share is 60% or lower the same
will continue as per the existing Guidelines. Further, for the eight
North-Eastern and three Himalayan States this ratio of sharing
between Central and State will be 90:10. It is clarified that in these
eight North Eastern States and three Himalayan States for those
schemes for which the Central Share was 90% or lower the same
will continue as per the existing Guidelines. Similarly for Union
territories, the Centrally Sponsored Schemes will be funded 100
per cent by the Central Government except for those schemes for
which the Central share was lower than 100%, the same will continue
as per the existing Guidelines. During the evidence, the Secretary

15
of the Department informed the Committee that subsidy is granted
on manual as well as on power driven chaff cutters. While 75%
subsidy is being granted on manual driven chaff cutter, the same
is 50% on power driven chaff cutter. There is no doubt that power
driven chaff cu tter has given the farmers the convenience to chop
fodder for livestock with ease and has also saved their time and
the labour involved in the process, particularly those women fold
who are involved therein. The time saved by using power driven
chaff cutter could be utilised by them for their other activities.
However, the Committee still feel that there are certain things in
the processing of chopping of fodder which could not be done
without the help of manpower. The Committee, therefore,
recommend that power driven chaff cutter may also be given
subsidy to the extent of 75% as being given on manual driven chaff
cutter as also assured by the Secretary of the Department on the
issue.”
1.15 The Department in its Action Taken Reply has stated as
under:—
“The department has launched National Livestock Mission in
2014-15 with a Sub-Mission on Feed and Fodder Development. The
financial assistance is being provided to the States and UTs for feed
and fodder development under the following components:—
1) Fodder Production from Non-forest wasteland/rangeland/
grassland/non-arable land;
2) Fodder production from Forest land;
3) Fodder Seed Procurement/Production and Distribution;
4) Introduction of Hand Driven Chaff-Cutter;
5) Introduction of Power Driven Chaff-Cutter;
6) Distribution of low capacity, tractor mountable Fodder Block
Making units, hay bailing machines/reapers/forage harvesters;
7) Establishment of silage making Units;
8) Establishment of by-pass protein production units;
9) Establishment of Area Specific Mineral Mixture/Feed
Pelleting/Feed Manufacturing Unit;
10) Establishment/modernization of Feed Testing Laboratories.

16
Funds released under the Sub-Mission Feed and Fodder
Development of National Livestock Mission:
(Rs in crore)
Year Funds allocated Funds Released
2014-15 111.00 47.68
2015-16 121.00 16.85
2016-17 137.00 34.15
(till 6.3.2017)
The subsidy on power driven chaff cutter is being shared between
Centre and State Governments in the ratio 50:50 due to limited
availability of funds at the Centre.”
1.16 The Committee while noting that the Department had taken
necessary steps to increase fodder production by providing financial
assistance to the States/UTs under the National Livestock Mission, had
recommended that the Department work towards reducing manpower
in the process of chopping fodder, besides the current subsidies being
given to power driven as well as manual chaff cutters. The Department
in its Action Taken Reply has informed that financial assistance is
being provided to States and UTs for feed and fodder development
under various components and that subsidy on power driven chaff
cutters is being shared between Centre and State Governments in the
ratio 50:50 due to limited availability of funds at the Centre. The
Committee are, however, concerned to note that no concrete action has
been taken by the Department in this direction. The Committee,
therefore, reiterate their earlier recommendation that the Department
give subsidy to the extent of 75% on power driven chaff cutters as
being given on manual driven chaff cutters and that the Department
also look into reducing the dependence on manual labour for chopping
of fodder.
E. Additional Fodder Develoment Programme
Recommendation (Sl. No. 13)
1.17 The Committee had observed/recommended as under:—
“The Committee note that the Additional Fodder Development
Programme (AFDP), a sub-scheme of Rashtriya Krishi Vikas Yojana
(RKVY), aims at mitigating the adverse impact of drought on fodder
production by providing financial and technical assistance to farmers

17
undertaking fodder cultivation. The Committee are, however,
displeased with the fact that the Department has not succeeded in
encouraging State to purchase high yielding variety fodder seeds
from the Regional Fodder Stations (RFS) that have been set up in
different agro-climatic zones. The Committee, therefore, recommend
that the Department persuade States to purchase high yielding
variety fodder seeds from the Regional Fodder Stations and to
adhere to the advisory issued to the States and UTs from time to
time so that AFDP can perform successfully while using land
resources optimally, adopting suitable crop combinations, improving
grasslands/wastelands, conserving and utilizing crop residue and
strengthening extension activities etc. Furthermore, the role of
private sector in equipment, financing and commercial feed and
fodder production needs to be assessed and harnessed to aid AFDP
and other such programmes aimed at fulfilling the need for fodder
and providing equipment to farmers and livestock owners
undertaking fodder cropping. The Committee also note that as per
the prevailing AFDP G uidelines, farmers in the drought affected
districts/blocks are provided assistance at the rate of Rs. 3200/- per
hectare as per cost norms for a maximum area of 2 ha per beneficiary
for taking up additional production of fodder in these districts/
blocks. The Committee feel that assistance of Rs. 3200/- per hectare
does not seem to be adequate and therefore, desire that said
assistance needs to be raised suitably. In this context, the Committee
would like to know the number of farmers who have been given
such financial assistance and the benefits accrued as a result therefor
since inception of the programme. The Committee also urge the
Department to raise awareness about the convergence of fodder
schemes with MGNREGA Scheme, so that the Department can fulfil
twin objectives of attaining self sufficiency in fodder as well as
generating gainful employment opportunities for the rural masses.
Furthermore, the Department also needs to formulate a action plan
to make fodder cropping a profitable enterprise. The Committee
would like to be apprised of the actions initiated by the Government
in this direction.”
1.18 The Department in its Action Taken Reply has stated as
under:—
1. “DAC and FW has launched an Additional Fodder
Development Programme (AFDP) as a sub-scheme of
Rashtriya Krishi Vikas Yojana(RKVY) across the country to
accelerate fodder production, its availability throughout the
year and mitigating adverse impact of drought on livestock
particularly in drought affected districts/blocks. Under this

18
programme kits of high yielding fodder varieties are
distributed amongst farmers for fodder production through
respective State Governments. Seeds of fodder are procured
by State Governments from established Seed Companies as
per their policy and priority. However in line of
recommendations and also to encourage State for purchase
of high yielding variety fodder seeds from the Regional
Fodder Stations (RFS), State Governments are advised to give
top priority in procuring seeds of various fodder crops
developed by Regional Fodder Stations(RFS). KVKs also may
be involves by Department of Animal Husbandry, Dairying
and Fisheries (DAHD&F) for front line demonstration for
HYV of fodder seeds development by RFS so that demand
for seeds of RFS is met by farmers themselves. AFDP
programme is primarily implemented by State’s Animal
Husbandry Department, therefore, DAHD&F may also advise
State Departments suitably.
2. Private sectors has also developed many varieties of high
yielding fodder crops which may also be promoted keeping
in view its nutritional value and ensuring supply of quality
fodder to meet the demand of livestock sector. In so far as
providing equipment to farmers and livestock owners are
concerned, DAC&FW is already providing subsidy to farmers
for purchasing farm equipments including chaff-cutter etc.
under Sub-Mission of Agriculture Mechanization (SMAM).
3. Since inception of the AFDP 5605768 Nos. of farmers have
been benefitted and financial assistance of Rs.632.66 crore
have been provided up 16.02.2017. State-wise details is given
in Annexure-II.
4. Ministry of Rural Development—  As per the para 2.5.2.1 of
the annual Master Circular issued by the Ministry, Pasture
development is a permissible work as mentioned under
Category A, (vi) Pasture Development; perennial grasses like
stylo etc. and under Category B, (iv) Pasture Development
perennial grasses like stylo, vetiver etc. In the category of
Drought proofing works of MGNREGA, under Grass and
Development and Silvipasture. As on 20th Jan., 2017, a total
of 2043 number of works relating to Grassland development
and silvipasture are competed and 1205 works ongoing in
25 States/UTs. A State-wise details is given in Annexure-I.”

19
1.19 While taking note of the objectives of the Additional Fodder
Development Programme (AFDP), the Committee had expressed their
displeasure at the failure of the Department in encouraging States to
purchase high yielding variety fodder seeds from the Regional Fodder
Stations (RFS) that have been set up in different agro-climatic zones.
The Department in its Action Taken Reply informed the Committee
that the AFDP Programme is primarily implemented by the State’s
Animal Husbandry Department, therefore the DAHDF may advise State
Departments suitably. It also stated that many varieties of high yielding
fodder crops had been developed by private sectors which could be
promoted, in order to meet the demand of quality fodder in the livestock
sector. The Committee, however, feel that more needs to be done to
achieve the twin objective of attaining self sufficiency in fodder as
well as generating gainful employment opportunities for the rural
masses. The Committee, therefore, reiterate their earlier
recommendation that the Department needs to formulate an action
plan to make fodder cropping a profitable enterprise and also focus
on bridging the gap between demand and supply of availability of
fodder in the country. The Committee would like to be apprised of
the actions initiated by the Department in this regard.
F. Gender Perspective in Animal Husbandry
Recommendation (Sl. No. 14)
1.20 The Committee had observed/recommended as under:—
“The Committee note that the National Agriculture Policy
formulated in 2000 accorded high priority to recognition and
mainstreaming of women’s role in agriculture and highlighting
incorporation of ‘Gender Issues’ in the agriculture development
agenda. The Committee also note that within the overall mandate,
goals and objectives, the DAHDF places special emphasis on women
participation and contribution in the Animal Husbandry, Dairying
and Fisheries Sector. While appreciating the emphasis of the
Department, the Committee urge them to take this forward by
creating more opportunities for women in the Sector and involving
more number of women in the workforce by way of MGNREGA
component of construction works under the Sub-Mission, by training
women into silage making, providing higher subsidies for women
using chaff cutters, both power and hand driven, by aiding
formation of women self help groups which are able to take up
entrepreneurial activities in the field of cattle rearing, fodder storage,

20
milk cooperatives etc. Taking forward the work of Krishi Vigyan
Kendra (KVKs) in training women in activities like fodder
management, wasteland development etc. and helping them form
Self Help Groups (SHGs), the Department may very well emulate
the success of cooperatives in the field of feed and fodder
development which will not only have a positive impact on the
livestock but also foster dairy development in the long run. The
Committee, therefore, recommend that the Department may work
out plans drawing more and more women folk into the Animal
Husbandry, Dairying and Fisheries sector and set an example of
opening up gainful and profitable employment opportunities and
bringing about gender balance in the workforce in the agriculture
sector, particularly in the sector of Animal Husbandry, Dairying
and Fisheries. The Committee would like to apprised of the
initiatives taken by the Government in this regard.”
1.21 The Department in its Action Taken Reply has stated as
under:—
“ At least 16.2% of the funds are released for SC beneficiaries
including women by the department. Further, it is ensured that by
the respective State Governments, where sanctions have been made
under the Special Component Plan for SCs (SCPSC), the funds
should be used only for the SC beneficiaries. However, State
Governments may also strive, as far as possible, to cover physically
8%, 30% and 3% Scheduled Tribe, Women and physically
challenged/differently-abled persons/farmers/beneficiaries,
respectively from the General component until specific budget heads
are created.”
1.22 The Committee are concerned to note that the Department
has failed to take adequate measures in the direction of incorporating
gender perspective in animal husbandry so as to make it an empowering
enterprise for the women folk as well. Moreover, the Department in
its Action Taken Reply, is silent over the issue of including women
from all sections of the society to participate in economic activities in
the sector of animal husbandry and has informed that sanctions have
been made only for SC beneficiaries under the Special Component
Plan. The Committee, however, are of the view that such benefits need
to be provided to all women across sections and caste barriers and
States must be mandated to put in place a mechanism to ensure this.
The Committee, therefore, reiterate their earlier recommendation that
the Department modify the current funding pattern to extend the Special

21
Component Plan, which currently includes only SC beneficiaries, to
all women beneficiaries and that the State Governments be mandated
to put in place a mechanism to ensure that provisions for such funds
to encourage the weaker sections of the society to participate in animal
husbandry, dairying and fisheries activities are made and implemented
effectively. The Committee would like to be apprised of the initiatives
taken by the Department in this regard.

22
CHAPTER II
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN
ACCEPTED BY THE GOVERNMENT
Need for Increasing Availability of Feed and Fodder
Recommendation (Sl. No. 1)
The Committee note that availability of adequate quality of feed
and fodder for livestock is essential for improving livestock productivity.
However, the Committee are constrained to note that there is substantial
shortage of feed and fodder in the country. As per the estimates of National
Institute of Animal Nutrition and Physiology (NIANP), the deficit in the
requirement and availability of Dry Fodder, Green Fodder and
Concentrates during 2015 was to the extent of 21 MT, 26 MT and 34 MT
which will increase further to 23 MT, 40 MT and 38 MT respectively by
the year 2025. This shortage is due to increasing pressure on land for
growing foodgrains, oil seeds and pulses and inadequate attention being
given to the production of fodder crops. Further, on account of diversified
use of agricultural residues, the grazing lands are gradually diminishing.
The area under fodder cultivation is also limited. Majority of the grazing
lands have either been degraded or encroached upon restricting their
availability for livestock grazing. The area under fodder cultivation is
only about 4% of the cropping area, and it has remained static for a long
period of time. According to the Department, owing to the importance
of food crops and other cash crops, it is very unlikely that the area under
fodder cultivation would increase substantially. While the availability of
feed and fodder has improved in the last decade, the Committee note
that still a lot is required to be done to bridge the gap between the
demand and availability of fodder in the country, particularly during the
lean periods and crisis situations. Needless to say, livestock is a major
source of livelihood for a majority of the rural population in the country.
The contribution of livestock to the household income of the farmers
cannot be ignored. It generate sustainable livelihood for small and
marginal farmers in the country. Thus, livestock is an important and
integral part of Indian agriculture and rural economy. However, livestock
husbandry cannot be sustained without addressing the development of

23
feed and fodder resources. It is, therefore, imperative that forage
production and its quality may be augmented to improve productivity
of livestock. In this context, the Committee note that the Government has
launched `Sub Mission on Fodder and Feed Development´ under the
National Stock Mission from 2014-15 to comprehensively address the
feed and fodder issue. The Government has also issued advisory on
measures to be taken for increasing availability of fodder to mitigate the
effect of natural calamities. However, the Committee feel that the
Department being the nodal agency need to make concerted and
coordinated efforts ensuring that the shortage of feed and fodder in the
country is addressed effectively and comprehensively. The Committee,
therefore, would like the Department to take up the issue with all its
seriousness and coordinate with all stakeholders on the issue. The
Committee would also like to be apprised of the initiatives undertaken
by the Government in this regard and the progress made therein.
Reply of the Government
The Department of Animal Husbandry, Dairying and Fisheries has
launched National Livestock Mission in 2014-15 with a Sub-Mission on
Feed and Fodder Development. The financial assistance is being provided
to the States and UTs for feed and fodder development under the following
components:
i. Fodder Production from Non-forest wasteland/rangeland/
grassland/non-arable land;
ii. Fodder production from Forest land;
iii. Fodder Seed Procurement/Production and Distribution;
iv. Introduction of Hand Driven Chaff-Cutter;
v. Introduction of Power Driven Chaff-Cutter;
vi. Distribution of low capacity, tractor mountable Fodder Block
Making units, hay bailing machines/reapers/forage harvesters;
vii. Establishment of silage making Units;
viii. Establishment of by-pass protein production units;
ix. Establishment of Area Specific Mineral Mixture/Feed
Pelleting/Feed Manufacturing Unit; and
x. Establishment/modernization of Feed Testing Laboratories.

24
Funds released under the Sub— Mission Feed and Fodder
Development of National Livestock Mission:
(Rs. in crore)
Year Funds Released
2014-15 47.68
2015-16 16.85
2016-17 till 6.3.2017 34.15
The Department of Agriculture Co-operation and Farmers Welfare
under National Food Security Mission (NFSM) Programme several
components are being implemented for production of Rice, Wheat, Pulses
and Course Cereals. Farmers are encouraged to grow newly released
varieties of the crops for higher production and productivity, which in
turn increases the availability of fodder to cattle and other ruminants.
This is achieved by cluster demonstration, seed distribution of newly
released varieties. The activities under the component cultivation of coarse
grains and dual purpose crops is taken under the National Food Security
Mission (NFSM). The State Governments, for coarse grains and dual
purpose crops approach the Department of Agriculture Co-operation and
Farmers Welfare with their project proposals. The following activities are
under this component:
i. Seed production under contract farming with buy back
arrangement with the State Government/seed supplying
agency.
ii. Buy back of the seed by the State Government/seed supplying
agencies.
iii. Distribution of the seeds to the farmers free of cost or at
subsidized rates.
iv. Support for land levelling, irrigation, etc.
Additional Fodder Development Programme— a sub-scheme of
Rashtriya Krishi Vikas Yojana (RKVY) is also in operation since 2014-15
and is continuing at present. Funds is being released to the States/UTs
during the period of drought for fodder development and thereby
livestock sustainability.
Rashtriya Krishi Vikas Yojana (RKVY) is also in operation in the
Department of Agriculture Co-operation and Farmers Welfare. The scheme
also supports seed production and other fodder development programme

25
as proposed by the States. These are also supported by the Department
of Animal Husbandry, Dairying and Fisheries.
Further States have their own fodder production programme. Both
for normal time and during natural calamities like drought, flood,
hailstorm etc.
[Ministry of Agriculture and Farmers Welfare
(Department of Animal Husbandry, Dairying and Fisheries)
F. No. 2-16/2016-AHT/FF dt. 14th March 2017]
Comments of the Committee
For comments of the Committee please refer to Para No. 1.7 of
Chapter-I of this Report.
Allocation of Funds
Recommendation (Sl. No. 2)
The Committee note that States have been given liberty to choose
the development of any or all the four Sub-Missions under the National
Livestock Mission (NLM) with a restriction of availability of budget with
the Department. The tentative budget outlay to each State/UT is conveyed
in the month of April each year so that they can formulate the plans best
suited to their State/UT. Afterword, the plan is received in the Department
and processed for release of budget to the State/UT. The Committee are
of the opinion that the practice of tentative allocation of funds to States
should be done away with and instead need based funds as per the
requirement of the States be allocated by the Department. However, the
Committee are anguished to note that funds being allocated to the Sub-
Missions under NLM in the States w ere woefully inadequate during the
years 2014-15 and 2015-16. This has resulted in meager allocation to the Sub
Missions in 2014-15, with the situation worsening in the year 2015-16 when
no separate allocations to the Sub-Missions could be made due to very less funds
and the budget of 2015-16 was used to meet liabilities of the previous year.
Also, funds released under the Sub-Mission on Fodder and Feed
Development in the years 2014-15 and 2015-16 are 47.63 crores and 16.86
crores, respectively. Needless to say, insufficient funds have severely
hampered the implementation of physical and financial targets of the
Sub-Mission on Fodder and Feed Development. The Department has also
accepted the fact that the implementation of the Sub-Mission has been
hampered by the less allocation of funds as against the approved outlay.
According to the Department, owing to very low allocations of funds for
NLM, overall impact of the schemes of Sub-Mission could not be

26
ascertained from the States/UTs as the States/UTs could not given sufficient
funds or no funds at all for implementation. In the absence of such study,
the Committee feel that the Department would not get the opportunity
to undertake corrective interventions to reorient its schemes/Sub-Missions
for the benefit of intended beneficiaries. Deprecating this sordid state of
affairs, the Committee, therefore, recommend that the Department should
take up this issue with the Ministry of Finance and impress upon them
to provide adequate funds so that schemes/Sub-Missions of the National
Livestock Mission, particularly the Sub-Mission on Fodder and Feed
Development, do not suffer for want of funds.
During the course of evidence, the Secretary of the Department
informed the Committee that a National Perspective Plan is being
formulated which would also be circulated to the States asking them to
furnish integrated plan so that funds could be allocated accordingly within
the limited resources of the Central Government. The Committee,
therefore, recommend that the formu lation of National Perspective Plan
as proposed by the Government be expedited in consultation with all
States/UTs so that funds could be allocated to them as per their demand
for effective implementation of schemes/Sub-Missions undertaken by them.
The Committee would like to be apprised of the actions taken and progress
made by the Department in this regard.
Reply of the Government
Department of Economic Affairs, Budget Division Ministry of
Finance has mentioned that the allocation for National Livestock Mission
is being progressively increased as under:—
(Rs. in crore)
BE BE RE BE
2015-16 2016-17  2016-17  2017-18
National Livestock Mission 106.37 292.00 250.00 310.00
Further, the overall allocation in respect of Department of Animal
Husbandry Dairying and Fisheries has also increased as under:
(Rs in crore)
BE 2015-16 BE 2016-17 RE 2016-17 BE 2017-18
1585.43 1881.51 1994.00 2371.00
Department is pursuing for additional allocation of funds with
Ministry of Finance. Hon’ble Agriculture Minister has written to Hon’ble
Union Finance Minister.

27
Regarding National Perspective Plan as a strategy department has
prioritised development of Gochar and waste lands for augmenting fodder
availability in the country. For this the State Governments have been
requested to develop Gochar lands by taking assistance under Sub-Mission
on Feed and Fodder Development of National Livestock Mission. This
year (2016-17) five States viz. Chhattisgarh, Odisha, Jharkhand, Rajasthan
and Gujarat have been given financial assistance for development of the
Gochar land. Further the success model of Gochar land development in
Dharmaj village in Anand District of Gujarat has been sent to all States
for replication.
Department is coordinating with other departments like Department
of Agriculture, Cooperation and Farmers Welfare, Department of
Agricultural Research and Education, Ministry of Panchayati Raj, Ministry
of Environment and Forests and Climate Change, Ministry of Rural
Development to synergize their activities for enhancing fodder production.
Department of Agriculture, Cooperation and Farmers Welfare has
brought out the National Agroforestry Policy in 2014 to promote
Agroforestry in the country. To take forward the recommendation of
National Agroforestry Policy a Sub-Mission on Agroforestry (SMAF) under
the ambit of National Mission for Sustainable Agriculture (NMSA) has
been made operational from 2016-17. Different Agroforestry models
includes sustainable Agri-silvicultural systems, Silvi-pastoral systems,
Agro-silvi-pastoral system etc. are supported under the programme. SMAF
will be expanded the coverage under tree plantation in arable land suitable
to specific agro ecological, Culturable wasteland and land use condition
that provide livelihood, environmental and bio-diversity protection and
additional income sources for farmers. SMAF includes both traditional
and modern land-use systems where trees are managed along with crops
and/or animal production systems in a farming system approach. Perennial
tree species useful for fodder production and which are liberalized under
transit regulations for transport of timber may also be promoted under
the SMAF.
Ministry of Rural Development— As per the para 2.5.2.1 of the
annual Master Circular issued by the Ministry, Pasture development is
a permissible work as mentioned under category A,(vi) Pasture
Development; perennial grasses like Stylo etc. And under
Category B, (iv), Paature Development perennial grasses like Stylo, Vetiver
etc. In the category of Drought proofing works of MGNREGA, under
Grassland Development and Silvipasture. As on 20th Jan. 2017, a total

28
of 2043 number of works relating to Grassland development and
silvipasture are competed and 1205 works on going in 25 States/UTs. A
State-wise detail is given in Annexure-I.
[Ministry of Agriculture and Farmers Welfare
(Department of Animal Husbandry, Dairying and Fisheries)
F. No. 2-16/2016-AHT/FF dt. 14th March 2017]
Comments of the Committee
For comments of the Committee please refer to Para No. 1.10 of
Chapter-I of this Report.
Optimum utilisation of Land Resources for Fodder Development
Recommendation (Sl. No. 3)
The Committee note that the number of livestock is growing rapidly
but the grazing lands are gradually diminishing due to pressure on land
for agricultural and non-agricultural uses. According to the Department,
the need of the time is to adopt the practice of land use with multiple
crops in a sustainable manner. Adopting Silvi-pastoral and Horti-pastoral
models suitable to the area can help in substantially enhancing the
availability of forage for the livestock. About 29 million ha area in the
country falls under the category of open forests with less than 0.4 canopy
density which can be developed with fodder trees. This huge land resource
can be utilized for growing fodder, mostly as an under-storey on the
partially shaded ground without affecting standing trees. Similar
development is also possible in the area under horticulture orchards.
While the forest department can undertake Silvi-pastoral plantations
through the Joint Forest Management Committees, the Horti-pastoral
activities can be initiated by incentivizing the farmers who are owners
of the orchards. While the Department has issued advisory to the States
in this regard, the Committee would like the Department to pursue its
advisory and coordinate with all stakeholders including State
Governments to utilize huge land resources which fall under the category
of open forests and area under horticulture orchards for growing fodder.
Barren land or non-forest wasteland or non-arable land across the country
should also be utilized for multi-perennial fodder crops for which
adequate incentives should be given to the farmers. In this context, the
Committee strongly feel that the unutilised land of Railways and Defence
should also be utilised for cultivation of fodder crops. It was pointed out
by the Committee that during British regime, unutilized land along both

29
sides of the railway lines were being used either for grazing or for
production of fodder. According to the Department, the matter was taken
up at the highest level and after lot of deliberations over the issue, it was
decided that the unutilised land of Railways and Defence could not be
utilised for development of fodder. Nevertheless, the Committee still feel
that the issue needs to be re-looked in to by all the stakeholders as a
large chunk of Railways and Defence land is being encroached upon by
unscrupulous elements. The Committee would like to apprised of the
action taken by the Department in this regard.
Reply of the Government
1. Department of Agriculture, Cooperation and Farmers Welfare
has brought out the National Agroforestry Policy in 2014 to
promote Agroforestry in the country. To take forward the
recommendation of National Agroforestry Policy a Sub-
Mission on Agroforestry (SMAF) under the ambit of National
Mission for Sustainable Agriculture (NMSA) has been made
operational from 2016-17. Different Agroforestry models
includes sustainable Agri-silvicultural systems, Silvi-pastoral
systems, Agro-silvi-pastoral system etc. are supported under
the programme. SMAF will be expanded the coverage under
tree plantation in arable land suitable to specific agro
ecological, Culturable wasteland and land use condition that
provide livelihood, environmental and bio-diversity
protection and additional income sources for farmers. SMAF
includes both traditional and modern land-use systems where
trees are managed along with crops and/or animal production
systems in a farming system approach. Perennial tree species
useful for fodder production and which are liberalized under
transit regulations for transport of timber may also be
promoted under the SMAF.
2. In the State like Punjab establishment of commercial dairy
farms with high producing cattle and buffaloes has resulting
in higher demand for green fodder consequently resulting
in dairy farmers taking up large scale cultivation of fodder
maize crop either on their own land or on leased land.
3. Regarding utilization of railway land—railway tracks are
normally laid on an elevated bank with very little space left

30
beyond the shoulder of the ballast. Vegetations on these
narrow strips of land is not encouraged as it attracts cattle
and other livestock for grazing, who cross the track from one
side to the other and get run-over by trains and on many
occasions are reasons for derailments/damage to the under-
gear or locomotives.
4. Gochar land Development— the State Governments have been
requested to develop Gochar lands by taking assistance under
Sub-Mission on Feed and Fodder Development of National
Livestock Mission. This year (2016-17) five States viz.
Chhattisgarh, Odisha, Jharkhand, Rajasthan and Gujarat have
been given financial assistance for development of the Gochar
land. Further the success model of Gochar land development
in Dharmaj village in Anand District of Gujarat has been sent
to all States for replication.
5. The Ministry of Panchayati Raj has been requested to identify
the Gochar land for developing and to rope in the Panchayats
in the process. It has been mentioned that MGNREGA funds
may also be dovetailed as labour component.
6. Eight Regional Fodder Stations situated in different agro
climatic zones of the country are doing extension work related
to dissemination of knowledge related to all aspects of fodder
production, utilization, storage, seed production etc.
7. Non-traditional fodder like azolla cultivation is being
promoted, which takes very little space for cultivation at the
same time gives large quantity of quality fodder.
8. Fodder cultivation activities along with feed production
activities proposed by States/UTs under RKVY are supported
by the department.
9. All the proposals of import of quality varieties of fodder
seeds in country are supported by the department.
10. Proper post harvest utilisation of fodder is being promoted
under Sub-Mission on Feed and Fodder Development of
National Livestock Mission so that there is no wastage. As
per report nearly 30% fodder is saved by chaffed fodder
feeding habits. Silage making, bailing and fodder block

31
making are supported as storage devices so, the fodder is
available during lean periods.
11. As many manufactures are producing feed in the market. To
ensure quality feed available department is supporting for
establishment of feed testing laboratories.
12. Developed grassland in Bihar: IGFRI, Jhansi with support of
Deptt. of Forest, Government of Bihar: Developed 2 ha. area
in hilly degraded Forest of Gaya district in 2013. Established
Guinea grass (Panicum maximum), Dinanath grass
(Pennisetum pedicllatum), Hybrid Napier and Stylosanthes
hamata.
13. An area of 5 ha. of natural/barren/degraded pastureland has
been developed as model grassland in IGFRI, Jhansi. The
productivity of developed model grassland increased from
11 t/ha. green forage (palatable and non-palatable) in natural
to 29 t/ha. (only palatable grasses and legumes within one
year of interventions). In the developed model grassland
grazing experiment of small ruminants has been initiated and
initial data showed that the forage availability period
increased in model grassland (July-Dec.)in comparison to
natural grassland (July-Oct).
14. Western Regional Research Station (WRRS,) Avikanagar-Soda
village, Rajasthan: Model grassland has been developed on
common property resources on 70 ha. in village Soda, Tonk
(Rajasthan) with collaboration of Jal Grahan Samiti, Soda and
Indian Institute of Rural Development (NGO). Grassland was
established with improved planting materials of Anjan grass,
Dhaman grass, Dinanath grass, Stylosanthes hamata and
fodder trees Subabul, Ardu and Neem.
15. The Jal Grahan Samiti, Chainpura get motivated after visiting
grassland development activities at Soda village. About
20 ha. land was provided by farmers and it was protected
by digging of trench with financial support of IIRD. During
kharif 2015 plantation of free saplings was done and Anjan/
dhaman grass was seeded in inter-spaced area.
16. Orchha, Tikamgarh, M.P . has developed in grassland in
25 ha. area in Lotna block, Forest Sanctuary Orchha in 2015.

32
17. At ten selected goushala established during 2014 and grass
is being used under cut and carry system. At three locations,
grass seed was also collected and it was used for sowing
larger area. It was also endured to purchase the grass seed
under participatory seed production programme. The other
stakeholders of nearby area will be exposed/trained for
grassland development and seed production as well.”
[Ministry of Agriculture and Farmers Welfare
(Department of Animal Husbandry, Dairying and Fisheries)
F. No. 2-16/2016-AHT/FF dt. 14th March 2017]
Comments of the Committee
For comments of the Committee please refer to Para No. 1.13 of
Chapter-I of this Report.
Fruits and Vegetables Wastes as Livestock Feed
Recommendation (Sl. No. 7)
A significant percentage of fruits and vegetables like apple, tomato,
potato, pineapple, carrots etc. go as waste due to non-availability of market.
Further, processing of fruits and vegetables and its packing, distribution
and consumption also generate a huge quantity of fruit and vegetable
wastes. The huge quantity of fruit and vegetable wastes can be effectively
utilized as livestock feed, without effecting the palatability, nutrient
utilization, health or performance of livestock. The effective and efficient
utilization of fruit and vegetable wastes will reduce the cost of animal
feeding thereby increasing farmers’ profits and help in waste management
and reduction of environmental pollution. For this purpose, suitable
methods need to be adopted to conserve such resources so that these can
be fed to the livestock throughout the year or specifically during the lean
period of green fodder production. It was informed to the Committee
that excess vegetable and fruits wastes like apple, tomato, potato,
pineapple, carrots etc. are used as feed resources in many places. The
processing techniques/models are also available to convert or preserve
them as good feed resources. In view of the foregoing, the Committee,
therefore, recommend that conversion of fruit and vegetable wastes as
an alternate of fodder resources may be vigorously promoted by the
Department in coordination with all stakeholders including State
Governments. The Committee also recommend that awareness may also
be created amongst the farmers and those involved in the processing of

33
fruits and vegetables. Further, technologies involved for producing quality
forage from fruit and vegetable wastes may also be demystified to them.
Reply of the Government
(1) Excess vegetables and fruits wastes like apple, tomato, potato,
pineapple, carrots etc. are used as feed resources in many
places. The processing techniques/models are also available
to convert or preserve them as good feed resources.
(2) Indian Council of Agriculture Research—National Institute
of Animal Nutrition and Physiology, Bengaluru developed
‘Pineapple fruit residue storage based total mixed ration for
livestock feeding’ and promoting the technology.
(3) Area specific mineral mixtures for the State of Karnataka
developed by ICAR-NIANP Bangaluru. Another technology
‘Feed asset software for least cost ration computation based
on available food ingredients’ can be used to enhance the
nutritive value of fodder. These technologies are available
and can be further promoted at large scale. Feed additives
(like bacterial culture, organic acids, calcium carbonate,
fibrolytic enzymes, chelating minerals, amino acids, urea,
molasses etc.) are also available in the market to improve the
nutritive value of green/dry forages.
[Ministry of Agriculture and Farmers Welfare
(Department of Animal Husbandry, Dairying and Fisheries)
F.No. 2-16/2016-AHT/FF dt. 14th March, 2017]
Development of High Yielding Forage—Rich Food Crops
Recommendation (Sl. No. 8)
The Committee note that major high yielding fodder varieties of
seeds developed by ICAR are being used by the States/UTs regularly. It
is also ensured that the funds provided by the Department under the
component “Fodder Seed Procurement, Production and Distribution” are
utilized by the States/UTs for growing major high yielding fodder varieties.
Private companies are also growing and importing fodder seeds and
selling in the market. In this context, the Committee pointed out that
earlier our crops used to be long, one part of which gave foodgrain and
the remaining three parts was used as fodder for the livestock. But during
the era of Green Revolution, deliberate attempts were made by plant

34
breeders and agro-scientists to release dwarf varieties of crops which
although gave high yields and made us self-dependent in production of
grain, the same seriously affected fodder production in the country. The
Committee regret to note that the agro-scientists ignored this aspect
conveniently without addressing the problem. While it was essential to
develop seeds for dwarf varieties of crops for making the country self-
dependent in the matter of food, at the same time, it was also essential
for the agro-scientists to think comprehensively and in an integrated
manner for development of varieties of crops which would have given
high quality of fodder and yield for livestock without any reduction in
production of foodgrain. The Committee, therefore, recommend that agro-
scientists may be encouraged to develop varieties of food crops having
high forage value without affecting yield of foodgrain and their efforts
in this regard may also be supplemented with adequate funding. Further,
vigorous efforts may also be made for creating awareness amongst the
farmers for selection of new varieties of forage-rich food crops replacing
the old varieties.
Reply of the Government
1. The development of dual purpose varieties which can yield
enough green fodder and sufficient amount of grain is in
progress in case of Maize, Sorghum, Oats and Pearl Millet
etc. Dual purpose wheat variety VL616 and VL829 are
developed that can be harvested at 50-55 days and later for
grain at maturity without significant yield loss. HD-2969, a
very popular wheat variety produce good amount of quality
straw also.
2. The opportunity for area expansion under fodder crops seems
to be very remote. Hence, preference is being given to grow
dual purpose crops (Maize, Sorghum, Bajra, Oat, Barley etc.)
in the existing cropping systems to get substantial quantity
of forage along with main products (grains). Similarly
vegetable crops like turnip, carrot, pea, cowpea, gaur,
cauliflower etc. and commercial crops like sugarcane are also
used.
3. Further following promotional activities are also taken up:—
I. Developed grassland in Bihar: IGFRI, Jhansi with
support of Deptt. of Forest, Government of Bihar:

35
Developed 2 ha. area in hilly degraded Forest of Gaya
district in 2013. Established Guinea grass (Panicum
maximum), Dinanath grass (Pennisetum pedicllatum),
Hybrid Napier and Stylosanthes hamata.
II. An area of 5 ha. of natural/barren/degraded pastureland
has been developed as model grassland in IGFRI, Jhansi.
The productivity of developed model grassland
increased from 11t/ha. green forage (palatable and non-
palatable) in natural to 29 t/ha. (only palatable grasses
and legumes within one year of interventions. In the
developed model grassland grazing experiment of small
ruminants has been initiated and initial data showed
that the forage availability period increased in model
grassland (July-Dec.) in comparison to natural grassland
(July-Oct.).
III. Western Regional Research Station (WRRS,) Avikanagar-
Soda village, Rajasthan: Model grassland has been
developed on common property resources on 70 ha. in
village Soda, Tonk (Rajasthan) with collaboration of Jal
Grahan Samiti, Soda and Indian Institute of Rural
Development (NGO). Grassland was established with
improved planting materials of Anjan grass, Dhaman
grass, Dinanath grass, Stylosanthes hamata and fodder
threes Subabul, Ardu and Neem.
IV. The Jal Grahan Samiti, Chainpura get motivated after
visiting grassland development activities at Soda
village. About 20 ha land was provided by farmers and
it was protected by digging of trench with financial
support of IIRD. During kharif 2015 plantation of free
saplings was done and Anjan/dhaman grass was seeded
in inter-spaced area.
V. Orchha, Tikamgarh, M.P . has developed in grassland
in 25 ha. Area in Lotna block, Forest Sanctuary orchha
in 2015.
VI. At ten selected goushala established during 2014 and
grass is being used under cut and carry system. At
three locations, grass seed was also collected and it
was used for sowing larger area. It was also endured
to purchase the grass seed under participatory seed
production programme. The other stakeholders of

36
nearby area will be exposed/trained for grassland
development and seed production as well.
[Ministry of Agriculture and Farmers Welfare
(Department of Animal Husbandry, Dairying and Fisheries)
F. No. 2-16/2016-AHT/FF dt. 14th March 2017]
Wastelands for Forage Cultivation
Recommendation (Sl. No. 9)
The Committee note that wasteland like waterlogged areas, saline
soils, sodic soils etc. can also be utilized for cultivation of fodder varieties
suitable for such areas. The Committee also note that the Department is
implementing the component of grassland development in non-forest
wasteland, rangeland, grassland, non-arable land and forest land under
NLM with 75% Central grant. States can avail benefit under the scheme.
Besides, other marginal lands like roadside land, canal side land, land
along the railway tracks, etc., may also be utilized for forage cultivation.
The forest department can also undertake Silvi-pastoral plantations in
degraded forest areas through the Joint Forest Management Committees
for use of the communities. Considering the limitations of traditionally
cultivated fodder crops, the Committee are of the view that it is imperative
to introduce non-traditional fodder crops which can be grown on
wastelands. Fast growing shrubs and trees need to be grown which can
be lopped regularly as fodder. Fodder shrubs, trees and grasses which
are suitable for wastelands and tolerant to drought and harsh soil
conditions and resistant to pests and diseases need to be developed. The
Committee feel that development of these lands for forage production
may not only ensure enhanced supply of forage but also help in conserving
the natural resources and recharging ground water, while improving the
bio-diversity. The Committee, therefore, recommend that a holistic plan
may be formulated for development of wasteland for its utilization for
cultivation of fodder varieties in coordination with all stakeholders
including States. The Committee would like to be apprised of the initiatives
undertaken by the Department in this regard.
Reply of the Government
1. Department of Agriculture, Cooperation and Farmers Welfare
has brought out the National Agroforestry Policy in 2014 to
promote Agroforestry in the country. To take forward the
recommendation of National Agroforestry Policy a

37
Sub-Mission on Agroforestry(SMAF) under the ambit of
National Mission for Sustainable Agriculture (NMSA) has
been made operational from 2016-17. Different Agroforestry
models includes sustainable Agri-silvicultural systems, Silvi-
pastoral systems, Agro-silvi-pastoral system etc. are supported
under the programme. SMAF will be expanded the coverage
under tree plantation in arable land suitable to specific agro
ecological, Culturable wasteland and land use condition that
provide livelihood, environmental and bio-diversity
protection and additional income sources for farmers. SMAF
includes both traditional and modern land-use systems where
trees are managed along with crops and/or animal production
systems in a farming system approach. Perennial tree species
useful for fodder production and which are liberalized under
transit regulations for transport of timber may also be
promoted under the SMAF.
2. In the State like Punjab establishment of commercial dairy
farms with high producing cattle and buffaloes has resulting
in higher demand for green fodder consequently resulting
in dairy farmers taking up large scale cultivation of fodder
maize crop either on their own land or on leased land.
3. Regarding utilization of railway land— railway tracks are
normally laid on an elevated bank with very little space left
beyond the shoulder of the ballast. Vegetations on these
narrow strips of land is not encouraged as it attracts cattle
and other livestock for grazing, who cross the track from one
side to the other and get run-over by trains and on many
occasions are reasons for derailments/damage to the under-
gear or locomotives.
4. Gochar land Development- The State Governments have been
requested to develop Gochar lands by taking assistance under
Sub Mission on Feed and Fodder Development of National
Livestock Mission. This year (2016-17) five States viz.
Chhattisgarh, Odisha, Jharkhand, Rajasthan and Gujarat have
been given financial assiatance for development of the Gochar
land. Further the success model of Gochar land development
in Dharmaj village in Anand District of Gujarat has been sent
to all States for replication.
5. The ministry of Panchayati Raj has been requested to identify
the Gochar land for developing and to rope in the Panchayats

38
in the process. It has been mentioned that MGNERGA funds
may also be dovetailed as labour component.
6. Eight Regional Fodder Stations situated in different agro
climatic zones of the country are doing extention work related
to dissemination of knowledge related to all aspects of fodder
production, utilization, storage, seed production etc.
7. Non-traditional fodder like Azolla cultivation is being
promoted, which takes very little space for cultivation at the
same time gives lage quantity of quality fodder.
8. Fodder cultivation activities along with feed production
activities proposed by States/UTs under RKVY are supported
by the department.
9. All the proposals of import of all varieties of fodder seeds
in country are supported by the department.
10. Proper post harvest utilisation of fodder is being promoted
under Sub-Mission on Feed and Fodder Development of
National Livestock Mission so that there is no wastage. As
per report nearly 30% fodder is saved by chaffed fodder
feeding habits. Sailage making, bailing and fodder block
making are supported as storage devices so the fodder is
available during lean periods.
11. As many manufactures are producing feed in the market. To
ensure quality feed available department is supporting for
establishment of feed testing laboratories.
[Ministry of Agriculture and Farmers Welfare
(Department of Animal Husbandry, Dairying and Fisheries)
F. No. 2-16/2016-AHT/FF dt. 14th March 2017]
Enhancing Nutritive Value of Fodder
Recommendation (Sl. No. 10)
The Committee note that as the land area under fodder cultivation
remaining static for the last few decades, there is an urgent need to work
on enhancing the nutritive value of fodder as it has a significant bearing
on the productivity of the livestock. Straws and cellulosic waste such as
residues of cereals like paddy, sorghum, pearl millet, maize etc. which
have poor nutritive value, can be enriched by treating with urea. The
Department may seek the expertise of the National Institute of Animal

39
Nutrition and Physiology (NIANP), Bengaluru in this regard. Production
of straw-based feed pellets and focused nutrition for milch animals and
their off-springs are also some of the steps that need to be adopted. There
is also the need to ensure nutrition security in our livestock population
as these contribute immensely to the food basket of the country and to
identify feed and fodder that may cause harm to animals, when consumed
in the long run. The Committee would like to be apprised of the initiatives
taken by the Government in this regard.
Reply of the Government
1. Area specific mineral mixtures for the State of Karnataka
developed by ICAR-NIANP Bangaluru. Another technology
‘Feed asset software for least cost ration computation based
on available food ingredients‘ can be used to enhance the
nutritive value of fodder. These technologies are available
and can be further promoted at large scale. Feed additives
(like bacterial culture, organic acids, calcium carbonate,
fibrolytic enzymes, chelating minerals, amino acids, urea,
molasses etc.) are also available in the market to improve the
nutritive value of green/dry forages.
2. The vegetables and fruits wastes like apple, tomato, potato,
pineapple, carrots etc. are used as feed resources in many
places. The processing techniques/models are also available
to convert or preserve them as good feed resources.
3. ICAR-NIANP Bengaluru developed ‘pineapple fruit residue
storage based total mixed ration for livestock feeding’ and
promoting the technology.
[Ministry of Agriculture and Farmers Welfare
(Department of Animal Husbandry, Dairying and Fisheries)
F. No. 2-16/2016-AHT/FF dt. 14th March 2017]
Dissemination of Forage-Based Research Information
Recommendation (Sl. No. 11)
The Committee note that a significant research has been carried out
by ICAR Institutes like Indian Grassland Fodder Research Institute (IGFRI),
National Institute of Animal Nutrition and Physiology (NIANP) etc. to
identify suitable forage crops, breed new varieties for large scale
production of fodder. However, it is a matter of concern that even then
there is significant gap between the demand and supply of fodder in the

40
country and production of forage has not picked up on a massive scale
to meet the demand of the farmers in times of need particularly during
natural calamities. This calls for an in-depth study to understand and
address the problem. The Committee are of the view that there is a wide
communication gap between the forage development programme and
the livestock extension department of the States. There is no coordination
between ICAR and Animal Husbandry department of the State. As a
result, there is no free flow of information from either side. Agro-scientists
need to interact with farmers to apprise their needs and develop suitable
technologies and systems which can benefit them. It is imperative that
there is regular interaction between ICAR/Department and stakeholders
including the States. The Committee, therefore, feel that a well established
communication network would help the agro-scientists to understand
the problem of the farmers of particular regions/areas and they in turn
can offer suitable interventions. For this purpose, research units could
be set up to promote on-farm studies and tests of technologies under
field conditions. Research studies also need to be carried out in association
with farmers’ organizations, State Agriculture and Animal Husbandry
Departments, Krishi Vigyan Kendras. Further, Kisan Melas and seminars
need to be organised on regular basis for dissemination of information
and technologies to the intended beneficiaries. The Committee, therefore,
recommend that a mechanism may be put in place to establish a vibrant
communication between Agro-scientists and the farmers to address the
problems confronting them. The Committee would like to be apprised
of the steps taken by the Department in this direction.
Reply of the Government
1. The Ministry of Panchayati Raj has been requested to identify
the Gochar land for developing and to rope in the Panchayats
in the process. It has been mentioned that MNREGA funds
may also be dovetailed as labour component.
2. Eight Regional Fodder Stations situated in different agro-
climatic zones of the country are doing extension work related
to dissemination of knowledge related to all aspects of fodder
production, utilization, storage, seed production etc.
Parameters 2014-15 2015-16 2016-17
till 28.2.2017
Fodder Demonstrations (Nos.) 10607 9685 10618
Trainings (Nos.) 186 200 147
Farmers Fair (Nos.) 188 196 140

41
3. Further following promotional activities are also taken
up:—
I. Developed grassland in Bihar: IGFRI, Jhansi with
support of Deptt. of Forest, Government of Bihar:
Developed 2 ha. area in hilly degraded forest of Gaya
district in 2013. Established Guinea grass (Panicum
maximum), Dinanath grass (Pennisetum pedicllatum),
Hybrid Napier and Stylosanthes hamata.
II. An area of 5 ha. of natural/barren/degraded pasture-
land has been developed as model grassland in IGFRI,
Jhansi. The productivity of developed model grassland
increased from 11t/ha green forage (palatable and
non-palatable) in natural to 29 t/ha (only palatable
grasses and legumes) within one year of interventions.
In the developed model grassland grazing experiment
of small ruminants has been initiated and initial data
showed that the forage availability period increased in
model grassland (July-Dec.) in comparison to natural
grassland (July-Oct.).
III. Western Regional Research Station (WRRS,) Avikanagar-
Soda village, Rajasthan: Model grassland has been
developed on common property resources on 70 ha. in
village Soda, Tonk (Rajasthan) with collaboration of Jal
Grahan Samiti, Soda and Indian Institute of Rural
Development (NGO). Grassland was established with
improved planting materials of Anjan grass, Dhaman
grass, Dinanath grass, Stylosanthes hamata and fodder
threes Subabul, Ardu and Neem.
IV. The Jal Grahan Samiti, Chainpura get motivated after
visiting grassland development activities at Soda
village. About 20 ha. land was provided by farmers
and it was protected by digging of trench with financial
support of IIRD. During kharif 2015 plantation of free
saplings was done and Anjan/Dhaman grass was seeded
in inter-spaced area.
V. Orchha, Tikamgarh, M.P . has developed in grassland
in 25 ha. area in Lotna block, Forest Sanctuary, Orchha
in 2015.

42
VI. At ten selected goushala established during 2014 and
grass is being used under cut and carry system. At
three locations, grass seed was also collected and it
was used for sowing larger area. It was also endured
to purchase the grass seed under participatory seed
production programme. The other stakeholders of
nearby area will be exposed/trained for grassland
development and seed production as well.
4. Krishi Vigyan Kendras (KVKs) have taken up demonstrations
on farmers field since 2014-15. The demonstrations are being
carried out in a mission mode through 100 KVKs under
8 ATARIs across the country. The programme is being
conducted with three distinct modules namely forage
production from cultivated lands, forage production from
non-cultivated lands and fodder conservation and utilization.
During 2014-15 and 2015-16, total 2316 demonstrations were
carried out at farmers field which included 1428 on cultivated
fodders, 503 on horti-pasture/silvi-pastures and
385 demonstrations on fodder conservation and utilization.
During the year 2016-17, so far 364 demonstrations have been
carried out on cultivated fodders.
[Ministry of Agriculture and Farmers Welfare
(Department of Animal Husbandry, Dairying and Fisheries)
F. No. 2-16/2016-AHT/FF dt. 14th March 2017]
Fodder and Pasture Management
Recommendation (Sl. No. 12)
Grazing lands and pastures play an important role in the livestock
economy of the country and the State. However, the Committee are
anguished to witness the collapse of traditional agro-forestry practices
and invasion of pastures and grazing lands by invasive species. Such
instances have only added to the woes of the livestock owners and
burdened the already limited fodder resources. Grazing lands are
gradually diminishing due to pressure on land for agricultural and
non-agricultural uses. Most of the grazing lands have either been degraded
or encroached upon restricting its availability for grazing for livestock.
The number of livestock is also growing rapidly in the country. Gradual
collapse of traditional agro-forestry practices, sub-par performance of
major fodder resources such as grasslands, wastelands, common fallows

43
etc. and invasion of pastures and grazing lands by invasive alien plant
species as well encroachment of pastures and their diversification for
building purposes has only worsened the fodder situation of the country.
The Committee feel that it is the need of the hour to conserve and preserve
grasslands in the country. However, the absence of a nodal agency to
coordinate and steer grassland and fodder development programmes
within the country has led to lack of channelized efforts in this direction.
The Committee, therefore, recommend that a holistic plan may be
formulated in coordination with States for conservation and preservation
of grassland for pasture in the country. The Committee would also
like to be apprised of the initiatives taken by the Government in this
direction.
Reply of the Government
1. Department of Agriculture, Cooperation and Farmers Welfare
has brought out the National Agro-forestry Policy in 2014 to
promote Agro-forestry in the country. To take forward the
recommendation of National Agro-forestry Policy a
Sub-Mission on Agro-forestry (SMAF) under the ambit of
National Mission for Sustainable Agriculture (NMSA) has
been made operational from 2016-17. Different Agro-forestry
models includes sustainable Agri-silvicultural systems, Silvi-
pastoral systems, Agro-silvi-pastoral system etc. are supported
under the programme. SMAF will be expanded the coverage
under tree plantation in arable land suitable to specific
agro-ecological, culturable wasteland and land use condition
that provide livelihood, environmental and bio-diversity
protection and additional income sources for farmers. SMAF
includes both traditional and modern land-use systems where
trees are managed along with crops and/or animal production
systems in a farming system approach. Perennial tree species
useful for fodder production and which are liberalized under
transit regulations for transport of timber may also be
promoted under the SMAF.
2. In the State like Punjab establishment of commercial dairy
farms with high producing cattle and buffaloes has resulting
in higher demand for green fodder consequently resulting
in dairy farmers taking up large scale cultivation of fodder
maize crop either on their own land or on leased land.

44
3. Regarding utilization of railway land— railway tracks are
normally laid on an elevated bank with very little space left
beyond the shoulder of the ballast. Vegetations on these
narrow strips of land is not encouraged as it attracts cattle
and other livestock for grazing, who cross the track from one
side to the other and get run-over by trains and on many
occasions are reasons for derailments/damage to the under-
gear or locomotives.
4. Gochar land Development— The State Governments have
been requested to develop Gochar lands by taking assistance
under Sub Mission on Feed and Fodder Development of
National Livestock Mission. This year (2016-17) five States
viz. Chhattisgarh, Odisha, Jharkhand, Rajasthan and Gujarat
have been given financial assistance for development of the
Gochar land. Further, the success model of Gochar land
development in Dharmaj village in Anand District of Gujarat
has been sent to all States for replication.
5. The Ministry of Panchayati Raj has been requested to identify
the Gochar land for developing and to rope in the Panchayats
in the process. It has been mentioned that MNREGA funds
may also be dovetailed as labour component.
6. Ministry of Rural Development—  As per the para 2.5.2.1 of
the Annual Master Circular issued by the Ministry, Pasture
development is a permissible work as mentioned under
category A,(vi) Pasture Development, perennial grasses like
stylo etc. And under Category B, (iv) Pasture Development
perennial grasses like stylo, vetiver etc. In the category of
Drought proofing works of MGNREGA, under Grass and
Development and Silvipasture. As on 20th Jan. 2017, a total
of 2043 number of works relating to Grassland
development and silvipasture are completed and 1205 works
ongoing in 25 States/UTs. A State-wise details is given in
Annexure-I.
7. Eight Regional Fodder Stations situated in different agro-
climatic zones of the country are doing extension work related
to dissemination of knowledge related to all aspects of fodder
production, utilization, storage, seed production etc.

45
8. Non-traditional fodder like azolla cultivation is being
promoted, which takes very little space for cultivation at the
same time gives large quantity of quality fodder.
9. Fodder cultivation activities along with feed production
activities proposed by State/UTs under RKVY are supported
by the department.
10. All the proposals of import of all varieties of fodder seeds
in country are supported by the department.
11. Proper post-harvest utilisation of fodder is being promoted
under Sub-Mission on Feed and Fodder Development of
National Livestock Mission so that there is no wastage. As
per report nearly 30% fodder is saved by chaffed fodder
feeding habits. Silage making, bailing and fodder block
making are supported as storage devices so the fodder is
available during lean periods.
12. As many manufacturers are producing feed in the market.
To ensure quality feed available department is supporting
for establishment of feed testing laboratories.
13. Development of grassland in Bihar— IGFRI, Jhansi with
support of Deptt. of Forest, Government of Bihar Developed
2 ha. area in hilly degraded forest of Gaya district in 2013.
Established Guinea grass (Panicum maximum), Dinanath grass
(Pennisetum pedicllatum), Hybrid Napier and Stylosanthes
hamata.
14. An area of 5 ha. of natural/barren/degraded pastureland has
been developed as model grassland in IGFRI, Jhansi. The
productivity of developed model grassland increased from
11t/ha. green forage (palatable and non-palatable) in natural
to 29 t/ha. (only palatable grasses and legumes) within one
year of interventions. In the developed model grassland
grazing experiment of small ruminants has been initiated and
initial data showed that the forage availability period
increased in model grassland (July-Dec.) in comparison to
natural grassland (July-Oct).
[Ministry of Agriculture and Farmers Welfare
(Department of Animal Husbandry, Dairying and Fisheries)
F. No. 2-16/2016-AHT/FF dt. 14th March 2017]

46
Additional Fodder Development Programme
Recommendation (Sl. No. 13)
The Committee note that the Additional Fodder Development
Programme (AFDP), a sub-scheme of Rashtriya Krishi Vikas Yojana
(RKVY), aims at mitigating the adverse impact of drought on fodder
production by providing financial and technical assistance to farmers
undertaking fodder cultivation. The Committee are, however, displeased
with the fact that the Department has not succeeded in encouraging State
to purchase high yielding variety fodder seeds from the Regional Fodder
Stations (RFS) that have been set up in different agro-climatic zones. The
Committee, therefore, recommend that the Department persuade States
to purchase high yielding variety fodder seeds from the Regional Fodder
Stations and to adhere to the advisory issued to the States and UTs from
time to time so that AFDP can perform successfully while using land
resources optimally, adopting suitable crop combinations, improving
grasslands/wastelands, conserving and utilizing crop residue and
strengthening extension activities etc. Furthermore, the role of private
sector in equipment, financing and commercial feed and fodder production
needs to be assessed and harnessed to aid AFDP and other such
programmes aimed at fulfilling the need for fodder and providing
equipment to farmers and livestock owners undertaking fodder cropping.
The Committee also note that as per the prevailing AFDP Guidelines,
farmers in the drought affected districts/blocks are provided assistance
at the rate of Rs. 3200/- per hectare as per cost norms for a maximum
area of 2 ha. per beneficiary for taking up additional production of fodder
in these districts/blocks. The Committee feel that assistance of Rs. 3200/
- per hectare does not seem to be adequate and therefore, desire that said
assistance needs to be raised suitably. In this context, the Committee
would like to know the number of farmers who have been given such
financial assistance and the benefits accrued as a result therefor since
inception of the programme. The Committee also urge the Department
to raise awareness about the convergence of fodder schemes with
MGNREGA Scheme, so that the Department can fulfill twin objectives
of attaining self sufficiency in fodder as well as generating gainful
employment opportunities for the rural masses. Furthermore, the
Department also needs to formulate a action plan to make fodder cropping
a profitable enterprise. The Committee would like to be apprised of the
actions initiated by the Government in this direction.
Reply of the Government
1. DAC and FW has launched an Additional fodder
Development Programme (AFDP) as a sub-Scheme of

47
Rashtriya Krishi Vikas Yojana (RKVY) across the country to
accelerate fodder production, its availability throughout the
year and mitigating adverse impact of drought on livestock
particularly in drought affected districts/blocks. Under this
programme kits of high yielding fodder varieties are
distributed amongst farmers for fodder production through
respective State Governments. Seeds of fodder are procured
by State Governments from established Seed Companies as
per their policy and priority. However, in line of
recommendations and also to encourage State for purchase
of high yielding variety fodder seeds from the Regional
Fodder Stations (RFS), State Governments are advised to give
top priority in procuring seeds of various fodder crops
developed by Regional Fodder Stations (RFS). KVKs also may
be involved by Department of Animal Husbandry, Dairying
and Fisheries (DAHD&F) for front line demonstration for
HYV of fodder seeds development by RFS so that demand
for seeds of RFS is met by farmers themselves. AFDP
programme is primarily implemented by State’s Animal
Husbandry Department, therefore, DAHD&F may also advise
State Departments suitably.
2. Private sectors has also developed many varieties of high
yielding fodder crops which may also be promoted keeping
in view its nutritional value and ensuring supply of quality
fodder to meet the demand of livestock sector. In so far as
providing equipment to farmers and livestock owners are
concerned, DAC&FW is already providing subsidy to farmers
for purchasing farm equipments including chaff-cutter etc.
under Sub-Mission of Agriculture Mechanization (SMAM).
3. Since inception of the AFDP 5605768 Nos. of farmers have
been benefitted and financial assistance of Rs. 632.66 crores
have been provided upto 16.02.2017. State-wise details is given
in Annexure-II.
4. Ministry of Rural Development—  As per the para 2.5.2.1 of
the annual Master Circular issued by the Ministry, Pasture
development is a permissible work as mentioned under
category A,(vi) Pasture Development, perennial grasses like
stylo etc. And under Category B, (iv) Pasture Development
perennial grasses like stylo, vetiver etc. In the category of

48
Drought proofing works of MGNREGA, under Grass and
Development and Silvi-pasture. As on 20th January 2017, a
total of 2043 number of works relating to Grassland
development and silvi-pasture are competed and 1205 works
ongoing in 25 States/UTs. A State-wise details is given in
Annexure-I.
[Ministry of Agriculture and Farmers Welfare
(Department of Animal Husbandry, Dairying and Fisheries)
F. No. 2-16/2016-AHT/FF dt. 14th March 2017]
Comments of the Committee
For comments of the Committee please refer to Para No. 1.19 of
Chapter-I of this Report.

49
CHAPTER III
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE
DO NOT DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE
GOVERNMENT’S REPLIES
- Nil -

50
CHAPTER IV
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH
REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN
ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE
Funding of the Components of Sub-Mission on Feed and Fodder
Development
Recommendation (Sl. No. 5)
The Committee note that the Department has taken necessary steps
to increase fodder production in various parts of the country by providing
financial assistance to the States/UTs under Centrally sponsored National
Livestock Mission with a Sub-Mission on Feed and Fodder Development.
The Committee also note that from 28th Oct 2015, the funding of the
components has been changed to the sharing ratio of 60:40 between the
Centre and the States for those schemes for which the Central share is
higher. However, for those scheme for which the Central share is 60%
or lower the same will continue as per the existing Guidelines. Further,
for the eight North-Eastern and three Himalayan States this ratio of sharing
between Central and State will be 90:10. It is clarified that in these eight
North Eastern States and three Himalayan States for those schemes for
which the Central Share was 90% or lower the same will continue as per
the existing Guidelines. Similarly for Union territories, the Centrally
Sponsored Schemes will be funded 100 per cent by the Central
Government except for those schemes for which the Central share was
lower than 100%, the same will continue as per the existing Guidelines.
During the evidence, the Secretary of the Department informed the
Committee that subsidy is granted on manual as well as on power driven
chaff cutters. While 75% subsidy is being granted on manual driven chaff
cutter, the same is 50% on power driven chaff cutter. There is no doubt
that power driven chaff cutter has given the farmers the convenience to
chop fodder for livestock with ease and has also saved their time and
the labour involved in the process, particularly those women fold who
are involved therein. The time saved by using power driven chaff cutter
could be utilised by them for their other activities. However, the
Committee still feel that there are certain things in the processing of

51
chopping of fodder which could not be done without the help of
manpower. The Committee, therefore, recommend that power driven chaff
cutter may also be given subsidy to the extent of 75% as being given on
manual driven chaff cutter as also assured by the Secretary of the
Department on the issue.
Reply of the Government
The department has launched National Livestock Mission in
2014-15 with a Sub-Mission on Feed and Fodder Development. The
financial assistance is being provided to the States and UTs for feed and
fodder development under the following components:
1) Fodder Production from Non-forest wasteland/rangeland/
grassland/non-arable land;
2) Fodder production from Forest land;
3) Fodder Seed Procurement/Production and Distribution;
4) Introduction of Hand Driven Chaff-Cutter;
5) Introduction of Power Driven Chaff-Cutter;
6) Distribution of low capacity, tractor mountable Fodder Block
Making units, hay bailing machines/reapers/forage harvesters;
7) Establishment of silage making Units;
8) Establishment of by-pass protein production units;
9) Establishment of Area Specific Mineral Mixture/Feed
Pelleting/Feed Manufacturing Unit;
10) Establishment/modernization of Feed Testing Laboratories.
Funds released under the Sub Mission-Feed and Fodder
Development of National Livestock Mission
(Rs. in crore)
Year Funds allocated Funds Released
2014&15 111.00 47.68
2015&16 121.00 16.85
2016&17 137.00 34.15
(till 6.3.2017)

52
The subsidy on power driven chaff cutter is being shared between
Centre and State Government in the ratio 50:50 due to limited availability
of funds at the Centre.
[Ministry of Agriculture and Farmers Welfare
(Department of Animal Husbandry, Dairying and Fisheries)
F. No. 2-16/2016-AHT/FF dt. 14th March 2017]
Comments of the Committee
For comments of the Committee please refer to Para No. 1.16 of
Chapter-I of this Report.
Gender Perspective in Animal Husbandry
Recommendation (Sl. No. 14)
The Committee note that the National Agriculture Policy formulated
in 2000 accorded high priority to recognition and mainstreaming of
women’s role in agriculture and highlighting incorporation of ‘Gender
Issues’ in the agriculture development agenda. The Committee also note
that within the overall mandate, goals and objectives, the DAHDF places
special emphasis on women participation and contribution in the Animal
Husbandry, Dairying and Fisheries Sector. While appreciating the emphasis
of the Department, the Committee urge them to take this forward by
creating more opportunities for women in the Sector and involving more
number of women in the workforce by way of MGNREGA component
of construction works under the Sub-Mission, by training women into
silage making, providing higher subsidies for women using chaff cutters,
both power and hand driven, by aiding formation of women self help
groups which are able to take up entrepreneurial activities in the field
of cattle rearing, fodder storage, milk cooperatives etc. Taking forward
the work of Krishi Vigyan Kendra (KVKs) in training women in activities
like fodder management, wasteland development etc. and helping them
form Self Help Groups (SHGs), the Department may very well emulate
the success of cooperatives in the field of feed and fodder development
which will not only have a positive impact on the livestock but also foster
dairy development in the long run. The Committee, therefore, recommend
that the Department may work out plans drawing more and more women
folk into the Animal Husbandry, Dairying and Fisheries sector and set
an example of opening up gainful and profitable employment
opportunities and bringing about gender balance in the workforce in the
agriculture sector, particularly in the sector of Animal Husbandry, Dairying
and Fisheries. The Committee would like to apprised of the initiatives
taken by the Government in this regard.

53
Reply of the Government
At least 16.2% of the funds are released for SC beneficiaries
including women by the department. Further, it is ensured that by the
respective State Governments, where sanctions have been made under
the Special Component Plan for SCs (SCPSC), the funds should be used
only for the SC beneficiaries. However, State Governments may also strive,
as far as possible, to cover physically 8%, 30% and 3% Scheduled Tribe,
Women and physically challenged/differently-abled persons/farmers/
beneficiaries, respectively from the General component until specific
budget heads are created
[Ministry of Agriculture and Farmers Welfare
(Department of Animal Husbandry, Dairying and Fisheries)
F. No. 2-16/2016-AHT/FF dt. 14th March 2017]
Comments of the Committee
For comments of the Committee please refer to Para No. 1.22 of
Chapter-I of this Report.

54
CHAPTER V
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH
FINAL REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT ARE STILL AWAITED
Utilisation of Allotted Funds by the States
Recommendation (Sl. No. 4)
According to the Department, monthly review meetings with
Principal Secretary, Animal Husbandry of the States/UTs are held by the
Secretary (ADF) in which apart from other issues, utilization of funds
and proper implementation of schemes remain the main agenda point.
Besides matters are followed by writing DO letters, through video
conferences and making phone calls. During the course of evidence also,
the Secretary of the Department informed the Committee that the
Department holds review meetings with the States/UTs regularly, in order
to ensure proper and optimum utilization of allocated funds. It was also
informed to the Committee during the course of evidence that utilization
certificates worth Rs. 490 crores remain outstanding and an unspent
balance of Rs. 810 crores remain with the States and therefore, a special
meeting on this issue has been called by the Department. While expressing
its anguish over the issue of outstanding Utilisation Certificates (UCs)
and unspent balance with the States, the Committee pointed out that this
issue was raised by them several times in the past. However, the
Committee regret to note that the Department does not appear to bother
to find out the constraints which hampers utilization of funds by the
States. The Committee also feel that there is no effective mechanism in
place to coordinate with the States at district or block level and to monitor
the pace of utilization of funds by the States at the ground level. In this
context, the Committee also feel that one of the reasons for non-utilisation
of funds may be formulation of Plan or Mission or Sub-Mission by the
Central Government without consulting the State Governments as a result
of which the States are reluctant to cooperate with the Centre for timely
utilisation of funds for the purpose. The Committee, therefore, recommend
that the Department may find out the constraints which hamper timely
utilization of funds and submission of UCs therefor by the States. The
Committee also recommend that a mechanism may be put in place in
coordination with State Governments to monitor the pace of utilization

55
of funds at the ground level. The Committee would like to be apprised
of the action taken by the Department in this regard.
Reply of the Government
1. Regular meetings are being held by Secretary (ADF) with
State Principle Secretaries Animal Husbandry. Since May 2016
till February eight meetings have been held by the Secretary
on the issue of proper and timely utilization of funds.
2. Regular Video Conferencing is held with States twice or thrice
every month on the issue of timely and proper utilization.
3. Field visits are also being made to test check the work
execution relates to funds released to States/UTs.
4. Almost all the States have furnished their previous years
Utilization Certificates and department has releases funds of
their approved programmes during 2016-17.
[Ministry of Agriculture and Farmers Welfare
(Department of Animal Husbandry, Dairying and Fisheries)
F. No. 2-16/2016-AHT/FF dt. 14th March 2017]
Utilisation of Crop Residues
Recommendation (Sl. No. 6)
The Committee note that the crop residues are being wasted either
by diverting it for industrial use or by burning agricultural refuge in the
fields itself causing environmental pollution. One of the reasons for such
wastage is attributed to the fact that the farmers have very little time
available between two crops. Further, non-availability of labour or high
cost of labour, lack of space, hazards of fire and damage caused by rains
are other factors which influence farmers to dispose off their crop residues/
agricultural wastes as early as possible and they have no interest to process
and store the crop residues till completion of sowing of their next crop.
The Committee feel that to avoid such practices, it would be necessary
that crop residues and agricultural wastes are promoted as animal feed
by improving its nutritional value and its palatability through available
techniques like treatment of straw with urea and molasses along with
silage. Issue of advisory by the Department to the States on the issue is
not enough unless opportunities related to production and efficient use
of crop residues/by-products is addressed by the Department in
coordination with the State Governments for improving the forage

56
resources in the country. The Department being the nodal agency can not
ignore its responsibility on the issue. The Committee, therefore,
recommend that wastage of crop residues/agricultural wastes by way of
burning and diverting its uses for industrial purposes may be checked
on priority basis and the same may be converted and stored as forage
for its supply to the regions/areas having scarcity of fodder. The Committee
would like to be apprised of the initiatives undertaken by the Department
in this regard.
Reply of the Government
1. Advisories are issued to States/UTs by the Department from
time to time to take step to discourage burning of straws and
Crop residue Management through Bailing, fodder block
making, Chaffing, Urea Treatment and Total Mixed Ration
(TMR), Hay and silage making. The department also provides
funds under NLM for Bailing, fodder block making, Chaffing,
Urea Treatment and Total Mixed Ration (TMR), Hay and
silage making.
2. Regional Fodder Stations situated in different agro climatic
zones of the country are doing extension work related to
dissemination of knowledge related to all aspects of fodder
production, utilization, storage, seed production etc.
3. Fodder cultivation activities along with feed production
activities proposed by States/UTs under RKVY are supported
by the department.
4. Proper post harvest utilisation of fodder is being promoted
under Sub-Mission on Feed and Fodder Development of
National Livestock Mission so that there is no wastage. As
per report nearly 30% fodder is saved by chaffed fodder
feeding habits. Silage making, bailing and fodder block
making are supported as storage devices so the fodder is
available during lean periods.
[Ministry of Agriculture and Farmers Welfare
(Department of Animal Husbandry, Dairying and Fisheries)
F. No. 2-16/2016-AHT/FF dt. 14th March 2017]
N
EW DELHI; HUKM DEO NARAYAN YADAV,
7th August, 2017 Chairperson,
16th Shravana, 1939 (Saka) Standing Committee on Agriculture.

57
ANNEXURE
STANDING COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE
(2016-17)
MINUTES OF THE TWENTY-FIFTH SITTING
OF THE COMMITTEE
The Committee sat on Thursday, the 03rd August, 2017 from
1500 hrs. to 1700 hrs. in Committee Room No. 1 (Block-A), Extension
to Parliament House Annexe Building, New Delhi.
PRESENT
Shri Hukm Deo Narayan Yadav — Chairperson
M
EMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Prof. Ravindra Vishwanath Gaikwad
3. Shri Nalin Kumar Kateel
4. Smt. Raksha Khadse
5. Md. Badaruddoza Khan
6. Shri Janardan Mishra
7. Shri Neiphiu Rio
8. Shri B. S. Yeddyurappa
Rajya Sabha
9. Shri Sambhaji Chhatrapati
10. Shri Janardan Dwivedi
11. Shri Mohd. Ali Khan
12. Shri Ram Nath Thakur

58
SECRETARIAT
1. Shri D.S. Malha — Joint Secretary
2. Shri Arun K. Kaushik — Director
3. Smt. Juby Amar — Additional Director
4. Shri C. Vanlalruata — Deputy Secretary
5. Shri Sumesh Kumar — Under Secretary
WITNESSES
Ministry of Agriculture and Farmers Welfare
(Department of Agricultural Research and Education)
1. Dr. Trilochan Mohapatra Secretary (DARE) and
DG (ICAR)
2. Dr. K. Alagusundaram Deputy Director General
(NRM), ICAR
3. Dr. S.K. Chaudhari Assistant Director General
(SWM), ICAR
4. Dr. P .K. Chakrabarty Assistant Director General
(PP&B), ICAR
5. Dr. P .P. Biswas Principal Scientist (Soils),
ICAR
6. Dr. Krishan K. Sharma Principal Scientist, IAR,
New Delhi
7. Shri B.S. Phogat Additional Plant Protection
Advisor
8. Shri D.D.K. Sharma Secretary, Central Board of
Insecticides and Registration
Committee
Ministry of Agriculture and Farmers Welfare
(Department of Agriculture, Cooperation and Farmers Welfare)
1. Shri Shobhana Pattanayak Secretary
2. Shri Ashwani Kumar Joint Secretary
Ministry of Chemicals and Fertilizers
(Department of Chemicals and Petrochemicals)
1. Shri Rajeev Kapoor Secretary (Department of
Chemicals and Petrochemicals)

59
2. Shri Samir Kumar Biswas Joint Secretary (Chemicals)
3. Dr. Jitendra Kumar Director (IPFT)
4. Shri S.P. Mohanty Chairman and Managing
Director (HIL)
Ministry of Chemicals and Fertilizers
(Department of Fertilizers)
1. Shri Dharam Pal Addl. Secretary
2. At the outset, the Chairperson welcomed the Members to the
Sitting of the Standing Committee. Then, the Committee took up the
following draft Reports for consideration and adoption:—
*(i) *** *** *** *** ***
*(ii) *** *** *** *** ***
(iii) Draft Report on the Action Taken by the Government on the
Observations/Recommendations contained in the Thirty-
Fourth Report of the Standing Committee on Agriculture on
the Subject “Steps Taken to Bridge the Gap Between the
Demand and Availability of Fodder Through Sub-Mission on
Fodder and Feed Development” pertaining to the Ministry
of Agriculture and Farmers Welfare (Department of Animal
Husbandry, Dairying and Fisheries) (English Version);
*(iv) *** *** *** *** ***
3. After some deliberations, the Committee adopted the draft
Reports without any amendments and authorized the Chairperson to
finalize the Reports and present the same to Parliament.
[WITNESSES WERE USHERED IN]
*4. *** *** *** *** ***
*5. *** *** *** *** ***
*6. *** *** *** *** ***
A verbatim record of the proceedings has been kept separately.
The Committee then adjourned.
*Matter not related to this Report.

60
APPENDIX
(Vide Para 4 of Introduction of the Report)
ANALYSIS OF THE ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT
ON THE RECOMMENDATIONS CONTAINED IN THE THIRTY-
FOURTH REPORT (16TH LOK SABHA) OF  THE STANDING
COMMITTEE ON AGRI CULTURE (2016-17)
(i) Total number of Recommendations: 14
(ii) Observations/Recommendations which have been a ccepted by the
Government:
Sl. Nos.:  1, 2, 3, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12 and 13
Total : 10
Percentage : 71.42%
(iii) Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not desire
to pursue in view of the Government’s replies:
Sl. No.: NIL
Total : 00
Percentage : 00%
(iv) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies of the
Government have not been accepted by the Committee:
Sl. Nos.: 5 and 14
Total : 02
Percentage : 14.28%
(v) Observations/Recomm endations in respect of which final replies of
the Government are still awaited:
Sl. Nos.: 4 and 6
Total : 02
Percentage : 14.28%