FORTY SIXTH REPORT
STANDING COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE
(2017-2018)
( SIXTEENTH LOK SABHA )
MINISTRY OF FOOD PROCESSING INDUSTRIES
‘DEMANDS FOR GRANTS (2017-18)’
[Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations
contained in the Thirty Eighth Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) of the
Standing Committee on Agriculture (2016-2017)]
Presented to Lok Sabha on 29.12.2017
Laid on the Table of Rajya Sabha on 29.12.2017
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
December, 2017/Pausha, 1939  (Saka)

C.O.A. No. 358
Price : Rs. 59.00
© 2017 BY LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of
Business in Lok Sabha (Fifteenth Edition) and Printed by National Printers,
New Delhi-110 028.

(i)
CONTENTS
P AGES
C OMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE...............................................................(iii)
INTRODUCTION.............................................................................................. (v)
C HAPTER I Report................................................................................. 1
C HAPTER II Observations/Recommendations which have been
accepted by the Government......................................... 15
C HAPTER III Observations/Recommendations which the
Committee do not desire to pursue in view of the
Government’s replies....................................................... 30
C
HAPTER IV Observations/Recommendations in respect of which
replies of the Government have not been accepted
by the Committee............................................................. 31
C
HAPTER V Observations/Recommendations in respect of which
final replies of the Government are still awaited ...... 37
A PPENDICES
I. Minutes of Sitting of the Committee............................ 38
II. Analysis of the action taken by the Government on
the recommendations contained in the Thirty-eighth
report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) of the Standing Committee
onAgriculture (2016-17).................................................. 40

(iii)
COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON
AGRICULTURE (2017-18)
Shri Hukm Deo Narayan Yadav — Chairperson
M EMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Sanjay Dhotre
3. Prof. Ravindra Vishwanath Gaikwad
4. Shri Sanganna Amarappa Karadi
5. Shri Nalin Kumar Kateel
6. Smt. Raksha Tai Khadse
7. Md. Badaruddoza Khan
8. Shri C. Mahendran
9. Dr. Tapas Mandal
10. Shri Janardan Mishra
11. Shri Devji M. Patel
12. Shri Nityanand Rai
13. Shri Mukesh Rajput
14. Shri Neiphiu Rio
15. Shri Konakalla Narayana Rao
16. Shri C.L. Ruala
17. Shri Arjun Charan Sethi
18. Shri Virendra Singh
19. Shri Dharmendra Yadav
20. Shri Jai Prakash Narayan Yadav
21. Shri B.S. Yeddyurappa

(iv)
Rajya Sabha
22. Sardar Sukhdev Singh Dhindsa
23. Shri Janardan Dwivedi
24. Shri Meghraj Jain
25. Shri Vinay Katiyar
26. Mohd. Ali Khan
27. Shri K.K. Ragesh
28. Shri Ram Nath Thakur
29. Shri R. Vaithilingam
30. Shri Shankarbhai N. Vegad
31. Dr. Chandrapal Singh Yadav
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Shri D.S. Malha —Joint Secretary
2. Shri Arun K. Kaushik —Director
3. Shri C. Vanlalruata —Deputy Secretary
4. Shri S. Vijayaraghavan —Sr. Committee Assistant

(v)
INTRODUCTION
I, the Chairperson, Standing Committee on Agriculture (2017-18),
having been authorized by the Committee to submit the Report on their
behalf, present this Forty-Sixth Report on action taken by the Government
on the Observations/Recommendations contained in the Thirty Eighth
Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) of the Standing Committee on Agriculture
(2016-17) on ‘Demands For Grants (2017-18)’ pertaining to the Ministry
of Food Processing Industries.
2. The Thirty-Eighth Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) of the Standing
Committee on Agriculture (2016-17) on ‘Demands For Grants (2017-18)’
of the Ministry of Food Processing Industries was presented to Lok Sabha
and laid on the Table of Rajya Sabha on 20.03.2017. The Action Taken
Notes on the Report were received on 28.11.2017.
3. The Report was considered and adopted by the Committee at
their Sitting held on 27.12.2017.
4. An analysis of the action taken by the Government on the
Observations/Recommendations contained in the Thirty-Eighth Report
(Sixteenth Lok Sabha) of the Committee is given in Appendix.
N EW DELHI; HUKM DEO NARAYAN YADAV,
27 December, 2017 Chairperson,
06 Pausha, 1939 (Saka) Standing Committee on Agriculture.

CHAPTER I
REPORT
This Report of the Standing Committee on Agriculture deals with
the action taken by the Government on the Observations/
Recommendations contained in the Thirty-Eighth Report (Sixteenth Lok
Sabha) of the Standing Committee on Agriculture (2016-2017) on
“Demands for Grants (2017-18)” pertaining to Ministry of Food Processing
Industries which was presented to Lok Sabha and laid on the Table of
Rajya Sabha on 20.03.2017.
1.2 The Ministry of Food Processing Industries have furnished
Action Taken Replies in respect of all the 10 Observations/
Recommendations contained in the Report. These replies have been
categorized as under:
(i) Observations/Recommendations that have been accepted by
the Government:
Recommendation Nos. 3, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9 and 10
Chapter-II
Total-07
(ii)Observations/Recommendations in respect of which the
Committee do not desire to pursue in view of the
Government’s reply:
NIL
Chapter-III
Total-00
(iii)Observations/Recommendations in respect of which action
taken replies of the Government have not been accepted by
the Committee:
Recommendation Nos. 1, 2 and 4
Chapter- IV
Total-03

2
(iv) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which final
replies of the Government are still awaited:
Nil
Chapter-V
Total-00
1.3 The Committee trust that utmost importance would be given
to implementation of the Observations/Recommendations accepted by
the Government. In cases, where it is not possible for the Department
to implement the Recommendations in letter and spirit for any reason,
the matter should be reported to the Committee with the reasons for
non-implementation. The Committee desire that further Action Taken
Notes on the Observations/Recommendations contained in Chapter-I
of this Report be furnished to them at an early date.
1.4 The Committee will now deal with the action taken by the
Government on some of the Recommendations in the succeeding
paragraphs.
A. Share of Ministry of Food Processing Industries in Central Plan
Outlay
Recommendation (Para No. 1)
1.5 The Committee had observed/recommended as under:—
“The Committee note that the Food Processing Sector has emerged
as an important segment of the Indian economy in terms of its
contribution to GDP, employment and investment. During 2015-16,
the sector constituted as much as 8.80 and 8.39 per cent of GVA
in Manufacturing and Agriculture sector respectively. The
contribution of FPI Sector to GVA in the economy was 1.46% in
2015-16. A well-developed food processing sector with higher level
of processing helps in the reduction of wastage, improve value
addition, promote crop diversification, ensure higher yields, better
return to the farmers and lowers the risk of perishability, promote
employment as well as increases export earnings. The sector is also
capable of addressing critical issues of food security, food inflation
and providing wholesome nutritious food to the masses. The growth
of Food Processing sector will make significant contribution to the
Indian Economy not only in economic terms but also in meeting
the objectives of ‘inclusive growth’ and ‘food security’. The
Committee note that the share of the Ministry of Food Processing
Industries is Rs. 600 crore, in the total central plan outlay of

3
Rs. 948148.84 crore for 2016-17, which in percentage terms works
out merely 0.06% of the total central plan outlay. During 2015-16
also, the percentage of budgetary allocation was also 0.06%. This
is less than the proportion of budgetary allocation of 0.09% during
2013-14 and 2014-15 and 0.08% during 2012-13. Keeping in view
the importance of food processing sector in the Indian economy,
the Committee urge the Ministry of Finance to increase the share
of the Ministry of Food Processing Industries adequately in the
Central Plan so that various activities/projects undertaken by the
Ministry do not suffer for want of funds.”
1.6 In its reply, the Ministry has stated as under:—
“Ministry’s BE for the year 2017-18 is Rs. 800 crore (Rs. 725 crore
for Schemes and Rs. 75 crore for Non-scheme expenditure) an
increase of 9.74% over last year’s RE. However, this allocation is
also not adequate to support the growing need to expand
programmes to cover all segments of the food processing sector
and upscale on going programmes. The Ministry has conveyed the
observations of the Hon’ble Committee to the Ministry of Finance,
vide D.O. letter dated 01.08.2017 from Secretary (FPI) to Finance
Secretary and Secretary (Expenditure) and requested to allocate
adequate funds for programmes of the Ministry in future.”
1.7 The Committee having noted that the percentage share of the
Ministry of Food Processing Industries in the total central plan outlay
was witnessing a decline in percentage from 0.09% during the year
2013-14 to 0.06% in the fiscal 2016-17 had recommended the Ministry
of Finance to increase the share of the Ministry of Food Processing
Industries adequately in the Central plan so that various activities/
projects undertaken by the Ministry do not suffer for want of funds.
The Ministry, while categorically admitting that the allocation of funds
i.e. BE of Rs. 800 crore was not adequate to support the growing need
to expand programmes to cover all segments of the food processing
sector and upscale ongoing programmes, have not furnished any details
of pursuing this issue with the Ministry of Finance (Department of
Expenditure). It has merely been stated that the observations of the
Hon’ble Committee have been conveyed to the Ministry of Finance,
with the request to allocate adequate funds to the Ministry in future.
Strongly deprecating this lackadaisical attitude of the Ministry, the
Committee desire to deal with this issue with the alacrity it deserve.
They, therefore reiterate their earlier recommendation that Ministry of
Food Processing Industries strongly take up case for increased share
of Ministry of Food Processing Industries in the Central Plan Outlay
with the Ministry of Finance at the highest level, so as to ensure that

the implementation of scheme is not hampered for want of adequate
funds. The Committee further desire to be apprised of the progress
made in this regard.
B. Annual Plan allocations and under utilisation of funds
Recommendation (Para No. 2)
1.8 The Committee had observed/recommended as under:—
“The Committee note that the Ministry sought an allocation of
Rs. 14604 crore in its 12th Plan proposal. However, the Planning
Commission has allocated a plan outlay of Rs. 5990 crore only for
12th plan. Out of the approved outlay of Rs. 5990 crore, total
budgetary allocation for the 12th Plan is only Rs. 3225 crores which
in percentage terms comes to merely 53% of the approved outlay
of Rs. 5990 crores. The Committee were informed that, the Ministry
submitted its projected requirement of annual allocation for every
year during the Twelfth Plan based on its assessment and
requirement of on-going and new activities under various schemes.
According to the Ministry, annual allocation to them has been made
by the Finance Ministry based on overall resource availability and
national priorities. The Committee also note that during 2012-13,
against an allocation of Rs. 660 crore at BE/RE stage, the actual
expenditure was Rs. 655.88 crore. During 2013-14, BE was Rs. 708
crore which was drastically reduced to Rs. 550 crore at RE stage
but the actual expenditure was on Rs. 527.96 crore. Against BE of
Rs. 770 crore for 2014-15, was reduced to Rs. 600 crore at RE stage,
out of which only Rs. 579.73 could be expended.
For 2015-16, BE/RE was Rs. 487 crore, out of which, actual
expenditure was Rs. 467.03 crore. For 2016-17, although the plan
allocation has been increased from Rs. 600 crore to Rs. 688.56 crore
but the actual expenditure is only Rs. 463.60 crore up to 20.01.2017.
For 2017-18, the allocation is Rs. 800 crore. The Committee, therefore,
are concerned to note the under-utilisation of plan funds allotted
to the Ministry and recommend that corrective steps may be taken
to identify the constraints which affect the effective implementation
of various activities/projects undertaken by the Ministry and
consequently under-utilisation of funds. The Committee expect the
Ministry to fully utilize Rs. 800 crore allocated for the year
2017-18 for which advance action plan should be prepared keeping
in view its aims and objectives and the targets fixed for the year.
A mechanism should also be put in place for regular monitoring
of its activities/programmes for time bound achievement of physical

5
and financial targets set under activities/programmes of the Ministry.
The Committee would also like the Ministry to urge the Ministry
of Finance to allocate funds as per their requirement at RE stage.
The Committee would like to be apprised of the initiatives
undertaken by the Ministry in this regard.”
1.9 In its reply, the Ministry has stated as under:—
“Ministry’s BE for the year 2017-18 is Rs. 800 crore (Rs. 725 crore
for Schemes and Rs. 75 crore for Non-scheme expenditure) an
increase of 9.74% over last year’s RE. However, this allocation is
also not adequate to support the growing need to expand
programmes to cover all segments of the food processing sector
and upscale on going programmes. The Ministry has conveyed the
observations of the Hon’ble Committee to the Ministry of Finance,
vide D.O. letter dated 01.08.2017 from Secretary (FPI) to Finance
Secretary and Secretary (Expenditure) and requested to allocate
adequate funds for programmes of the Ministry in future.”
1.10 Concerned to note that during the course of the Twelfth
Plan period, i.e. 2012-2017, there was under utilization of plan funds,
the Committee had recommended that corrective steps may be taken
to identify the constraints affecting the effective implementation of
various activities/Projects undertaken by the Ministry. They had further
desired that a mechanism be put in place for regular monitoring of
its activities/programmes for time bound achievement of physical and
financial targets set. The Ministry have itself accepted that the present
increased allocation was inadequate and they have conveyed to Ministry
of Finance for adequate allocation of funds. However, the Committee
are unhappy to note that the reply is silent on the aspect of under-
utilization of funds and the urgent need for a monitoring mechanism.
While agreeing with the Ministry that the present allocation was
inadequate, the Committee, are surprised to observe that even this low
allocation was being under-utilized and were of the considered view
that the Ministry needs to put its house in order to ensure optimum
utilization of allocated funds. Therefore, the Committee desire the
Ministry to impress upon all implementing agencies to do the needful
in this regard. The Committee are sanguine that if the monitoring and
implementation aspect is genuinely worked upon by all concerned,
there would be a definite turnaround in the fortunes of Food Processing
Industries sector. They, therefore, reiterate their earlier recommendation
that a mechanism for regular monitoring of its activities/programmes
be put in place at the earliest.

6
C. Restructuring of schemes
Recommendation (Para No. 3)
1.11 The Committee had observed/recommended as under:—
“The Committee note that during 12th Plan, the various schemes
of MoFPI were restructured by merging the ongoing schemes of
Technology Upgradation/Establishment/Modernization of Food
Processing Industries; Cold Chain, Value Addition and Preservation
Infrastructure for non-horticultural produce; Human Resource
Development and Promotional Activities and new Schemes for
creating Primary Processing Centres/Collection Centres in Rural
Areas; Modernization of Meat Shops and Reefer Vehicles under the
Centrally Sponsored Scheme of National Mission on Food
Processing (NMFP). In addition, some other Central Sector Schemes
were also implemented by the Ministry; namely (i) Scheme for
Mega Food Parks, (ii) Scheme for Cold Chain, Value Addition and
Preservation Infrastructure Scheme, (iii) Scheme for setting up/
modernization of Abattoirs, (iv) Scheme for Quality Assurance, R&D
and Promotional Activities. However, the Committee note that
Centrally Sponsored Scheme (CSS), National Mission on Food
Processing (NMFP) launched by the Ministry during 12th plan was
delinked from the Central Government support w.e.f. 01.04.2015
except for UTs (up to 31.03.2016). Consequently, all the schemes
of the Mission stand discontinued.
Now, the Committee note that the Ministry of Food Processing
Industries has proposed to re-structure the ongoing schemes of the
Ministry and introduce new schemes to promote holistic growth
of the sector and fill up gaps in the supply chain by proposing an
umbrella Scheme for Agro-Marine Processing and Development of
Agro-Processing Clusters (SAMPADA). SAMPADA is proposed to
be implemented with an allocation of Rs. 6,000 crore for the period
of 2016-20 coterminous with the 14th Finance Commission cycle
by merging ongoing schemes of Mega Food Parks; Integrated Cold
Chain and Value Addition Infrastructure; Modernization/Setting
up of Abattoirs; Food Safety and Quality Assurance Infrastructure;
Human Resources and Institutions and new schemes for
Infrastructure for Agro-processing Clusters; Creation of Backward
and Forward Linkages and Creation/Expansion of Food Processing
and Preservation Capacities. According to the Ministry, SAMPADA
Mission will provide all the segments of food processing from
infrastructure to forward linkage at the front end of the supply
chain and will provide a big thrust to the growth of this sector.

7
The Committee, however, note that while Expenditure Finance
Committee (EFC) in their meeting held on 09.02.2016 has already
recommended the New Schemes under SAMPADA, the proposal
for seeking approval of the competent authority is under process.
As stated by the Ministry, approval of the competent authority for
the SAMPADA scheme is expected during the current year and the
Ministry plan to implement all on-going and new schemes under
SAMPADA during 2017-18. The Committee are unhappy with the
slow pace of progress in getting approval from the competent
authority for SAMPADA scheme even after approval of EFC in
09.02.2016. The Committee, therefore, recommend that the Ministry
should take proactive steps to expedite the process of approval of
the SAMPADA Scheme ensuring its implementation during this
year itself. The Committee would like to be apprised of the progress
made in this regard.”
1.12 In its reply, the Ministry has stated as under:—
“Cabinet Committee on Economic Affairs (CCEA) has approved on
3rd May 2017 the proposal for re-structuring the schemes of the
Ministry of Food Processing Industries under new Central Sector
Scheme Pradhan Mantri Kisan Sampada Yojana (PMKSY) with an
allocation of Rs. 6,000 crore for the period 2016-20 coterminous
with the 14th Finance Commission cycle. The following schemes
form part of the PMKSY:—
(i) Mega Food Parks (ongoing)
(ii) Integrated Cold Chain and Value Addition Infrastructure (on-
going)
(iii) Creation/Expansion of Food Processing and Preservation
Capacities (new)
(iv) Infrastructure for Agro-processing Clusters (new)
(v) Creation of Backward and Forward Linkages (new)
(vi) Food Safety and Quality Assurance Infrastructure (ongoing)
(vii) Human Resources and Institutions (ongoing)
The guidelines of all the new Schemes have already been notified
and actions have been initiated to implement the Schemes.”

8
1.13 The Committee note that the Ministry of Food Processing
Industries has proposed to re-structure the ongoing schemes of the
Ministry and introduce new schemes to promote holistic growth of the
sector and fill up gaps in the supply chain by proposing an umbrella
Scheme for Agro-Marine Processing and Development of Agro-
Processing Clusters (SAMPADA). SAMPADA is proposed to be
implemented with an allocation of Rs. 6,000 crore for the period of
2016-20. The Ministry in its Action Taken Reply has stated that Cabinet
Committee on Economic Affairs (CCEA) has approved on 3rd May
2017 the proposal for re-structuring the schemes of the Ministry of
Food Processing Industries under new Central Sector Scheme– Pradhan
Mantri Kisan Sampada Yojana (PMKSY) with an allocation of Rs. 6,000
crore. The new Schemes have been notified and actions initiated to
implement scheme. The Committee, therefore, desire the Ministry to
expedite the implementation of all the schemes in a time bound manner
so that the objective of doubling the farmers income and reduction in
post harvest losses is achieved at the earliest. The Committee would
like to be informed of the action taken in this regard.
D. Mega Food Parks
Recommendation (Para No. 4)
1.14 The Committee had observed/recommended as under:—
“The Committee note that the Mega Food Park Scheme aims at
providing infrastructure facilities for food processing along the value
chain from farm to market. Under the Scheme 42 Mega Food Parks
were approved by the Government to be set up in the country. Out
of these only 8 Mega Food Parks have been made operational so
far. According to the Ministry, some of the reasons for delay in
implementation of MFP projects, are difficulty in getting the term
loan for banks/NABARD by the promoters, delay in statutory
clearance from the State Government/Agencies, non-availability of
any special incentive for setting up food processing unit in MFPs,
unwillingness of the co-promoter in contributing their share of
equity timely etc. The Committee note with concern that even after
a lapse of almost 9 years since 2008 when the Scheme was launched,
only eight MFPs have been made operational. The Committee also
note that the detailed guidelines for the scheme were issued on
24.08.2008 and based on the experiences of implementation,
modifications in the scheme guidelines have been carried out from
time to time. The Committee note that the BE for the year

9
2016-17 was increased from Rs. 222.30 crore to Rs. 311.34 crore but
the Committee regret to note that only Rs. 199.47 crore was actually
expended under the scheme.
The Committee are of the view that delay in the implementation
of a Scheme and under-utilisation of funds defeats the very purpose
of the Scheme. The Committee, therefore, recommend that concerted
efforts in coordination with all stakeholders including State
Governments be made to address the constraints which hinders
smooth progress in the implementation of the projects. The
Committee also desire that the guidelines of the schemes for MFPs
be revisited and amended from time to time on the basis of feedback
and consultation with stakeholders for smooth and expeditious
implementation of MFPs projects.
The Committee also note that a district level Mega Food Park
Coordination Committee under the chairmanship of the District
Collector has been constituted for each Mega Food Park to ensure
smooth progress in implementation of the projects. However, there
is no public representative (MP/MLA) nominated in the Mega Food
Park Coordination Committee at the district level. The Committee
feel that inclusion of a public representative in such Committees
will facilitate the expeditious implementation of Mega Food Parks.
The Committee, therefore, recommend that the public
representatives (MP/MLA) of the respective districts may be
included in the Mega Food Park Coordination Committee. The
Committee would like to be apprised of the action taken by the
Ministry in this regard.”
1.15 The Ministry in its Action Taken Reply has stated as under:—
“Presently, 9 Mega Food Parks have been made operational out of
42 Mega Food Parks approval by the Government. With regard to
utilization of funds under Mega Food Park Scheme during FY
2016-17, it is to mention that Ministry had incurred an expenditure
of Rs. 300.08 crore against RE of Rs. 300.15 crore which is almost
99.97% utilization of funds. Further, Ministry has been holding
meetings with the State Governments and also SPVs/Implementing
Agencies (IAs) regularly to review the progress of implementation
of the Mega Food Parks. Also, there is a provision for Nominee
Director from the State Government on the Board of Director of
the SPV to ensure effective coordination, convergence and synergy
in implementation of the project with the State Government.

10
(ii)The guidelines of the Mega Food Park Scheme are revisited
and amended from time to time on the basis of feedback and
consultation with stakeholders for smooth and expeditious
implementation of MFPs projects. Recently, the Mega Food
Park guidelines have been amended and notified on
21.07.2016.
(iii) The Ministry has set up a district level Mega Food Park
Coordination Committee in 2010. The composition of this
Committee is as under:
Sl. No. Name of the organization/designated officer Members
1. District Collector Chairman
2. District Programme Coordinator, MGNREGAMember
3. PD, DRDA Member
4. District Agriculture Officer Member
5. District Horticulture Officer Member
6. District Development Manager, NABARD Member
7. Lead District Manager Member
8. District Animal Husbandry Officer Member
9. Dairy Development Officer Member
10. General Manager, DIC Member
11. Representative of Commercial Tax Member
Department
12. Representative of District Electricity Member
Department
13. PD, ATMA Member
14. Two representatives of Industry AssociationsMember
(to be nominated by the MFPCC)
15. Two representatives of Farmers’ AssociationsMember
(to be nominated by the MFPCC)
16. Stakeholder of SPV Member
17. CEO of SPV of Mega Food Park Member
Secretary and
Convener
The Coordination Committee has been set up to resolve local issues
which may arise during the implementation of the project. Therefore,
the officers of the concerned departments are the member of the
committee. Decision regarding inclusion of local MLA and MP in
the Committee is under consideration.”

11
1.16 Under the Mega Food Park Scheme 42 Mega Food Parks
were approved by the Government to be set up in the country. Out
of these only 9 Mega Food Parks have been made operational so far.
The Committee are of the view that delay in the implementation of
a Scheme and under-utilisation of funds defeats the very purpose of
the Scheme. The Committee also note that a district level Mega Food
Park Co-ordination Committee under the chairmanship of the District
Collector has been constituted for each Mega Food Park to ensure
smooth progress in implementation of the projects. However, there is
no public representative (MP/MLA) nominated in the Mega Food Park
Coordination Committee at the district level. The Ministry have stated
that the decision regarding inclusion of local MLA and MP in the
Committee is under consideration. The Committee are perturbed to
note that inspite of their repeated recommendations regarding
expeditious commissioning of Mega Food Parks, only 9 Mega Food
Parks have been set up till date since 2008. The Committee deplore
the lackadaisical attitude of the Ministry in not achieving the objective
of setting up 42 Mega Food Parks in the Country. The Committee,
therefore once again reiterate that the Ministry should implement the
scheme of establishing Food parks on a war footing basis and all the
logistics to be cleared and the Mega Food Parks be implemented without
any further delay. The Committee, would like to be apprised of the
progress made in this regard.
E. Scheme for cold chain and value addition infrastructure
Recommendation (Para No. 5)
1.17 The Committee had recommended as under:—
“India has made significant achievement in production of various
agricultural crops and allied products. However, the post-harvest
management, preservation, transportation and value addition are
not adequate in the Indian farm sector. This results in huge wastage
at each stage of the supply chain due to lack of cold storage and
infrastructure facilities in the country, the surplus production of
perishable items like potato, tomato, onions etc. get wasted which
results in huge loss to the farmers. To minimize the harvest and
post-harvest losses, the Ministry launched the scheme of cold chain,
value addition and preservation infrastructure in 2008 with an
objective to provide integrated cold chain, value addition, and
preservation infrastructure facilities without any break from the

12
farm gate to the consumer. The scheme envisages grant-in-aid @
50% for General Areas and 75% for North- Eastern States, Himalayan
States, ITDP Areas and Islands is provided for value addition and
processing infrastructure including frozen storage/deep frozen
assistor and integral to the processing. For storage infrastructure,
grant-in-aid @ 35% for General Areas and @ 50% for North-Eastern
States, Himalayan States, ITDP Areas and Islands, of the total cost
of plant and machinery and technical civil work is provided.
However, maximum grant-in-aid is Rs. 10 crore for project and
difficult areas subject to maximum of Rs. 10.00 Crore per Project.
The Committee note that the Government has given approval to
sanction 138 projects under the scheme. Out of 138 projects, 96
have been completed and started commercial production, 3 projects
have been cancelled due to non-implementation by the promoters
and remaining 39 projects are in advanced stage of implementation.
The on-going 39 projects would achieve completion during
2017-18. The Ministry had also issued an Expression of Interest
(EoI) on 31.08.2016 inviting proposals for taking up around 100
new cold chain projects for financial assistance. Appraisal/evaluation
of proposals received against the EoI is in the final stages and
approval letters to around 100 cold chain projects are expected to
be issued in the present fiscal year. The Committee were informed
that the budgetary allocation under BE 2016-17 is Rs. 158.23 crore.
Of this, Rs. 141.14 crore allocated to General Areas has already
been utilized by 23.01.2017, towards implementation of the Scheme.
During the fiscal 2017-18, Rs. 180.00 crores have been allocated
under BE for this Scheme.
The Committee note that during 2016-17, no new projects were
taken up and the grants were released for the ongoing 30 projects
taken up during 2015-16. Keeping in view the importance of Cold
Chain facilities in the country to check harvest and post-harvest
losses, the Committee hope that all the projects under
implementation may be completed during 2017-18 without any
delay. The slow pace of implementation of Scheme not only increases
the project cost but deprives the farmers from reaping the benefits
of the Scheme. The Committee, therefore, recommend that the
impediments in the implementation of the scheme be identified
and removed ensuring expeditious creation of post-harvest
management infrastructure and robust supply chain linking the
farm gate to the consumer to check cumulative wastage of

13
horticulture and non-horticulture produce. The Committee also
recommend that a meachanism for low cost storage and preservation
facility be developed to increase shelf life of such perishable items
like potato, tomato etc. so as to benefit the small farmers. The
Committee also desire that proposals received against EoI on
31.08.2016 for 100 new cold chain projects may be finalised,
expeditiously. The Committee would like to be apprised of the
progress made in this regard.”
1.18 The Ministry in its Action Taken Reply has stated as under:—
“At present 102 Cold Chain projects have achieved completion and
commenced commercial operation.In order to ensure timely
implementation of the projects, a monitoring mechanism is already
in place. The Ministry conducts regular review meetings with the
promoters of the projects at the level of Joint Secretary/Secretary/
Hon’ble Minister, FPI to monitor the progress in the implementation
of the project and to resolve the issues, if any, arising during the
course of implementation. The projects are also reviewed in Inter
Ministerial Approval Committee meetings chaired by Hon’ble
Minister, FPI. For effective resolution of issues and speedy
clearances, State Government representatives have been included
in the IMAC since February 2015 and are also invited for the review
meetings.
Against the EoI issued on 31.08.2016, total 308 proposals were
received. These proposals have been appraised/evaluated as per
provisions of revised operational guidelines issued on 29.08.2016.
The Ministry has accorded approval to 103 eligible Cold Chain
projects on 27.03.2017 for financial assistance against the EoI dated
30.08.2016.”
1.19 The Committee note that the Ministry had launched the
scheme of Cold Chain, value addition and preservation infrastructure
in 2008 and the Government has given approval to sanction of 138
projects under the scheme. The Ministry in their Action Taken Replies
has stated that at present 102 Cold Chain projects have achieved
completion and commenced commercial operation and a total of 308
proposals were received from Expression of Interest (EoI) issued on
31.08.2016 and the Ministry has accorded approval to 103 eligible cold
chain projects on 27.03.2017, for financial assistance against the EoI.
The Committee, therefore, desire that the Ministry should finalise the

14
remaining proposals received v i d e EoI dated 31.08.2016 expeditiously
as this will help the Country to better cope up with post harvest loss
management, preservation of perishable items like potato, tomato, onion
etc. The Committee further desire that a mechanism for low cost storage
and preservation facility be introduced to increase the shelf life of
perishable items. The Committee would like to be apprised of the
progress made in this regard.

15
CHAPTER II
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS THAT HAVE
BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE GOVERNMENT
Restructuring of Schemes
Recommendation (Para No. 3)
The Committee note that during 12th Plan, the various schemes of
MoFPI were restructured by merging the ongoing schemes of Technology
Upgradation/Establishment/Modernization of Food Processing Industries;
Cold Chain, Value Addition and Preservation Infrastructure for non-
horticultural produce; Human Resource Development and Promotional
Activities and new Schemes for Creating Primary Processing Centres/
Collection Centres in Rural Areas; Modernization of Meat Shops and
Reefer Vehicles under the Centrally Sponsored Scheme of National Mission
on Food Processing (NMFP). In addition, some other Central Sector
Schemes were also implemented by the Ministry; namely (i) Scheme for
Mega Food Parks, (ii) Scheme for Cold Chain, Value Addition and
Preservation Infrastructure Scheme, (iii) Scheme for setting up/
modernization of Abattoirs, (iv) Scheme for Quality Assurance, R&D and
Promotional Activities. However, the Committee note that Centrally
Sponsored Scheme (CSS) National Mission on Food Processing (NMFP)
launched by the Ministry during 12th plan was delinked from the Central
Government support w.e.f. 01.04.2015 except for UTs (upto 31.03.2016).
Consequently, all the schemes of the Mission stand discontinued.
Now, the Committee note that the Ministry of Food Processing
Industries has proposed to re-structure the ongoing schemes of the
Ministry and introduce new schemes to promote holistic growth of the
sector and fill up gaps in the supply chain by proposing an umbrella
Scheme for Agro-Marine Processing and Development of Agro-Processing
Clusters (SAMPADA). SAMPADA is proposed to be implemented with
an allocation of Rs. 6,000 crore for the period of 2016-20 coterminous
with the 14th Finance Commission cycle by merging ongoing schemes
of Mega Food Parks; Integrated Cold Chain and Value Addition
Infrastructure; Modernization/Setting up of Abattoirs; Food Safety and
Quality Assurance Infrastructure; Human Resources and Institutions and
new schemes for Infrastructure for Agro-processing Clusters; Creation of

16
Backward and Forward Linkages and Creation/Expansion of Food
Processing and Preservation Capacities. According to the Ministry,
SAMPADA Mission will provide all the segments of food processing
from infrastructure to forward linkage at the front end of the supply
chain and will provide a big thrust to the growth of this sector.
The Committee, however, note that while Expenditure Finance
Committee (EFC) in their meeting held on 09.02.2016 has already
recommended the New Schemes under SAMPADA, the proposal for
seeking approval of the competent authority is under process. As stated
by the Ministry, approval of the competent authority for the SAMPADA
scheme is expected during the current year and the Ministry plan to
implement all on-going and new schemes under SAMPADA during 2017-18.
The Committee are unhappy with the slow pace of progress in getting
approval from the competent authority for SAMPADA scheme even after
approval of EFC in 09.02.2016. The Committee, therefore, recommend
that the Ministry should take proactive steps to expedite the process of
approval of the SAMPADA Scheme ensuring its implementation during
this year itself. The Committee would like to be apprised of the progress
made in this regard.
Reply of the Government
Cabinet Committee on Economic Affairs (CCEA) has approved on
3rd May 2017 the proposal for re-structuring the schemes of the Ministry
of Food Processing Industries under new Central Sector Scheme –
Pradhan Mantri Kisan Sampada Yojana (PMKSY) with an allocation of
Rs. 6,000 crore for the period 2016-20 coterminous with the 14th
Finance Commission cycle. The following schemes form part of the
PMKSY:—
(i) Mega Food Parks (ongoing)
(ii) Integrated Cold Chain and Value Addition Infrastructure (on-
going)
(iii) Creation/Expansion of Food Processing and Preservation
Capacities (new)
(iv) Infrastructure for Agro-processing Clusters (new)
(v) Creation of Backward and Forward Linkages (new)
(vi) Food Safety and Quality Assurance Infrastructure (ongoing)
(vii) Human Resources and Institutions (ongoing)

17
The guidelines of all the new Schemes have already been notified
and actions have been initiated to implement the Schemes.
[Ministry of Food Processing Industries (Letter No. 6-04/2017
Dated 28.11.2017)]
Comments of the Committee
For comments of the Committee please refer to Para No. 1.13 of
Chapter I of this Report.
Scheme for cold chain and value addition infrastructure
Recommendation (Para No. 5)
India has made significant achievement in production of various
agricultural crops and allied products. However, the post-harvest
management, preservation, transportation and value addition are not
adequate in the Indian farm sector. This results in huge wastage at each
stage of the supply chain due to lack of cold storage and infrastructure
facilities in the country, the surplus production of perishable items like
potato, tomato, onions etc. get wasted which results in huge loss to the
farmers. To minimize the harvest and post-harvest losses, the Ministry
launched the scheme of cold chain, value addition and preservation
infrastructure in 2008 with an objective to provide integrated cold chain,
value addition, and preservation infrastructure facilities without any break
from the farm gate to the consumer. The scheme envisages grant-in-aid
@ 50% for General Areas and 75% for North- Eastern States, Himalayan
States, ITDP Areas and Islands is provided for value addition and
processing infrastructure including frozen storage/deep frozen assistor
and integral to the processing. For storage infrastructure, grant-in-aid @
35% for General Areas and @ 50% for North-Eastern States, Himalayan
States, ITDP Areas and Islands, of the total cost of plant and machinery
and technical civil work is provided. However, maximum grant-in-aid
is Rs. 10 crore for project and difficult areas subject to maximum of
Rs. 10.00 Crore per Project. The Committee note that the Government has
given approval to sanction 138 projects under the scheme. Out of
138 projects, 96 have been completed and started commercial production,
3 projects have been cancelled due to non-implementation by the promoters
and remaining 39 projects are in advanced stage of implementation. The
on-going 39 projects would achieve completion during 2017-18. The
Ministry had also issued an Expression of Interest (EoI) on 31.08.2016
inviting proposals for taking up around 100 new cold chain projects for
financial assistance. Appraisal/evaluation of proposals received against
the EoI is in the final stages and approval letters to around 100 cold

18
chain projects are expected to be issued in the present fiscal year. The
Committee were informed that the budgetary allocation under BE 2016-
17 is Rs. 158.23 crore. Of this, Rs. 141.14 crore allocated to General Areas
has already been utilized by 23.01.2017, towards implementation of the
Scheme. During the fiscal 2017-18, Rs. 180.00 crores have been allocated
under BE for this Scheme.
The Committee note that during 2016-17, no new projects were
taken up and the grants were released for the on going 30 projects taken
up during 2015-16. Keeping in view the importance of Cold Chain facilities
in the country to check harvest and post-harvest losses, the Committee
hope that all the projects under implementation may be completed during
2017-18 without any delay. The slow pace of implementation of Scheme
not only increases the project cost but deprives the farmers from reaping
the benefits of the Scheme. The Committee, therefore, recommend that
the impediments in the implementation of the scheme be identified and
removed ensuring expeditious creation of post-harvest management
infrastructure and robust supply chain linking the farm gate to the
consumer to check cumulative wastage of horticulture and non-
horticulture produce. The Committee also recommend that a meachanism
for low cost storage and preservation facility be developed to increase
shelf life of such perishable items like potato, tomato etc. so as to benefit
the small farmers. The Committee also desire that proposals received
against EoI on 31.08.2016 for 100 new cold chain projects may be finalised,
expeditiously. The Committee would like to be apprised of the progress
made in this regard.
Reply of the Government
At present 102 Cold Chain projects have achieved completion and
commenced commercial operation.In order to ensure timely
implementation of the projects, a monitoring mechanism is already in
place. The Ministry conducts regular review meetings with the promoters
of the projects at the level of Joint Secretary/Secretary/Hon’ble Minister,
FPI to monitor the progress in the implementation of the project and to
resolve the issues, if any, arising during the course of implementation.
The projects are also reviewed in Inter Ministerial Approval Committee
meetings chaired by Hon’ble Minister, FPI. For effective resolution of
issues and speedy clearances, State Government representatives have been
included in the IMAC since February 2015 and are also invited for the
review meetings.
Against the EoI issued on 31.08.2016, total 308 proposals were
received. These proposals have been appraised/evaluated as per provisions

19
of revised operational guidelines issued on 29.08.2016. The Ministry has
accorded approval to 103 eligible Cold Chain projects on 27.03.2017 for
financial assistance against the EoI dated 30.08.2016.
[Ministry of Food Processing Industries (Letter No. 6-04/2017
Dated 28.11.2017)]
Comments of the Committee
For comments of the Committee please refer to Para No. 1.19 of
Chapter I of this Report.
Use of Renewable/Alternate source of Energy for Cold Chain Projects
Recommendation (Para No. 6)
The Committee note that the guidelines of the Scheme has been
revised as per recommendations made by NABCONS in a study on impact
of the scheme for Cold Chain Value Addition and Preservation
Infrastructure. As per revised operational guidelines of the scheme for
Integrated Cold Chain and Value Addition Infrastructure issued on
29.08.2016, the Ministry has adopted the cost norms of Mission for
Integrated Development of Horticulture (MIDH) issued by Department
of Agriculture, Cooperation and Farmers Welfare where ever available.
For facilities not covered under MIDH guidelines, cost norms as
determined by the Ministry will be followed. In the evaluation criteria
of cold chain proposals, as per revised scheme guidelines weight age has
been given to projects proposing to use renewable/alternate energy source
(either fully or partially) to power cold chain project. The Committee
desire that the steps may be taken to encourage entrepreneurs to use
renewable/alternate source of energy for cold chain projects.
Reply of the Government
Most of the 103 new integrated cold chain projects approved for
financial assistance envisage use of solar energy/renewable energy to
power their facility (either fully or partially). As per the revised scheme
guidelines issued on 29.08.2016, assistance for use of renewable energy
will also be provided to such projects as per the cost norms of Mission
for Integrated of Development Horticulture.
[Ministry of Food Processing Industries (Letter No. 6-04/2017
Dated 28.11.2017)]

20
Scheme for Quality Assurance
Recommendation (Para No. 7)
The Committee note that the objective of the one of the component
namely setting up/Upgradation of Quality Control/Food Testing
Laboratories under the Scheme for Quality Assurance is to analyse the
samples received from processing industries and other stakeholders, to
reduce the time for analysis of samples and to ensure compliance of
domestic/international standards on food in case of exports as well as
imports and to establish a surveillance system for monitoring the quality
and composition of food. Eligible Organisations are Central/State
Government organizations/Government Universities (including deemed
Universities) and private sector organizations/Universities (including
deemed Universities in private sector). During 12th plan allocation of
funds of Rs. 160 crore was raised to Rs. 169.99 crore at RE stage, out
of which only Rs. 152.69 crore could be expended as on 20.02.2017. For
2017-18, only Rs. 20 crore has been allocated under the scheme. The
Committee also note that 62 food testing labs were approved for financial
assistance under the scheme during 12th plan but only 36 projects could
be completed up to 15.02.2017. The Committee desire that the Ministry
should strive to ensure that the more funds made available to them are
fully utilised and all the projects undertaken by them under the scheme
are completed without any delay.
The other component of the scheme aims at to motivate the food
processing industries for adoption of food safety and quality assurance
mechanisms. The Committee were informed that Central/State
Government and their organizations/Government universities (including
deemed universities) are eligible for grant - in - aid of entire cost of the
laboratory equipment. In addition, they are also eligible for 25% of the
cost of technical civil works to house the equipment and furniture and
fixtures associated with the equipment for general areas and 33% of the
cost for difficult areas.
The Committee were informed that Indian Council of Agricultural
Research (ICAR) under the Ministry of Agriculture and Farmers Welfare,
Department of Agricultural Research and Education (DARE) was entrusted
the Food Testing Laboratory (FTL) Scheme during the 12th Plan with
effect from 01.04.2012. It has since been decided to implement the
Scheme by the Ministry on its own. The guidelines to this effect are
under revision.

21
The food processing sector is a sunrise sector and there are many
apprehensions about processed foods in the minds of the people. The
Committee feel that the quality of the processed foods be regularly
monitored and standards set by the International organisations should
be adhered to. Though the Ministry has decided to implement the Food
Testing Laboratory (FTL) Scheme on its own but it has yet to devise the
guidelines for the Scheme. Since the matter is related to health and overall
acceptance of processed foods, the Committee recommend the Ministry
to revise the guidelines on priority basis.
Reply of the Government
During the 12th Plan period, an expenditure of Rs. 162.69 crore has
been incurred against the RE allocation of Rs. 169.99 crore which is 95.70%
and the expenditure annually has been 98.21%, 99.07%, 91.86%, 91.92%
and 99.79% for the years 2012-13, 2013-14, 2014-15, 2015-16 and
2016-17 respectively. The lesser expenditure during 2014-15 and 2015-16
because of the lack of eligible proposals and claims from the North-East
States for which 10% of the total allocation is earmarked.
Out of the total 102 projects financially assisted by the Ministry
as on 31.03.2017, 63 projects (including 25 projects during earlier plan
period and 38 projects during 12th Plan) have been completed under this
Scheme and 39 projects are under various stages of implementation. The
pace of completion of the projects has increased during the 12th Plan
period because of the vigorous follow up action taken by the Ministry
regularly through letter/mail/telephonically as well by conducting
periodical review meetings. The implementation schedule of the Setting
up/Upgradation of Food Testing Laboratories is 18 months from the date
of approval of the project (as per the 11th Plan scheme guidelines) and
24 months from the date of release of 1st installment of grant-in-aid
(as per the 12th Plan scheme guidelines).
Accreditation of the Food Testing Laboratories is done by National
Accreditation Board for Testing and Calibration Laboratories (NABL), an
autonomous body under Department of Science and Technology with the
objective to provide a means of third party certification of the competence
of laboratories to perform specific type (s) of testing i.e formal recognition
of competent laboratories so that customers can find reliable testing and
calibration services depending on their need. This also enhances the
reliability of the test reports for the international customers. The Food
Testing Laboratories assisted by the Ministry are encouraged to obtain
the NABL accreditation so that the test reports are accepted by all.

22
Following the decision to implement the Scheme by the Ministry
on its own, the Scheme guidelines have since been revised as on
01.01.2017 and uploaded on the Ministry’s website at www.mofpi.nic.in.
[Ministry of Food Processing Industries (Letter No.6-04/2017
Dated 28.11.2017)]
National Institute of Food Technology Entrepreneurship and
Management (NIFTEM)
Recommendation (Para No. 8)
NIFTEM has been set up by the Ministry as a Centre of Excellence
in the field of Food Sciences and Food Technology. NIFTEM is mandated
to offer high quality educational, research and management programme
specific to the food industry, disseminating knowledge to the food sector,
providing referral advice on food standards and business incubation
facility. NIFTEM has taken a number of new initiatives to fulfill its mandate
as centre of excellence for food processing and sector promoting
organisation under Village Adoption Programme (VAP), a unique
programme conceptualised by NIFTEM through which students are
sensitized and educated on the problems and practices of the farmers
at the grass root level. 11 visits have been conducted across the country
from October, 2012 to November, 2016 in 18 States, 40 villages by 34 VAP
teams. During these visits, around 500 traditional recipes have been
collected and catalogued. Out of these 500 recipes, 13 have been chosen
for commercial process technology development under Make in India
programme. The Committee appreciate that recognizing the efforts of
Village Adoption Programme, NIFTEM was conferred upon with
Agriculture Leadership Award for the year 2015 in the area of promoting
rural entrepreneurship in rural sector. The Committee recommend that
the visit of VAP teams be increased so that more and more villages in
every State of the country are covered under this programme.
The Committee are informed that a Research Development Council
consisting of about 65 members drawn from industry and academia has
been set up to chalk out the future Research Agenda of NIFTEM. Experts
from Indian Council of Agricultural Research (ICAR), Central Food
Technological Research Institute (CFTRI), Central Institute of Post-Harvest
Engineering and Technology (CIPHET), Defence Food Research Laboratory
(DFRL), Defence Research and Development Organization (DRDO), IIT
Kharagpur, IIT Delhi, Harcourt Butler Technological Institute (HBTI),
Kanpur and IIM, Lucknow have been included in the Council. Under
“Make in India Project” NIFTEM proposes to establish National Centre
for Indian Traditional Foods at NIFTEM campus to conduct study on

23
Indian traditional foods to promote globalization of these foods and
capture the world food market. The Committee recommend that in
addition to intiatives undertaken by the Institute, the endeavour be made
to explore new avenues for promotion and development of food
processing sector in the country. The Committee recommend that Regional
Centres of the institute be opened in various parts of the country so as
to increase the outreach of the institute and more and more farmers get
benefitted.
Reply of the Government
Village Adoption is a unique program conceptualized by NIFTEM
for its students, with a view to sensitize and educate them of the problems
and practices of the farmers at the grass root level. The aim is to help
the Indian Food Processing sector accomplish its objective of all-inclusive
growth and facilitate the process of integrating the underprivileged
sections of our population with the main stream economy. It is a credit
course of their curriculum, wherein they have to visit once in each
semester.
Following efforts have been undertaken by institute:
1. Scientific inputs for product development process of pickles,
jams, chutneys, candies, squash, preserves etc. were also
demonstrated by students and mentors during training
sessions.
2. Some basic scientific models of solar dryers, butter churners
were also demonstrated by students to the villagers during
the interaction and training programmes.
3. Following traditional recipes have been taken up by NIFTEM
for scientific and technical inputs for protocol establishment
and process standardization under NIFTEM’s effort to support
“Make in India” initiative:
Sl. No. Traditional Product Sl. No Traditional Product
1. Sattu fortified 7. Kebabs
2. Kajukatli 8. Prawn Curry
3. Khakhra 9. Chila
4. PuranPoli 10. Gustava
5. Khandvi 11. Vada
6. Boondi Ladoo 12. Khaja

24
Recently NIFTEM’s Village Adoption Programme also got associated
with prestigious Rashtrapati Bhavan’s initiative on Smart Model Village
Pilot Project where NIFTEM supported the activities to initiate
entrepreneurship in food processing sector in Five adopted villages of
Haryana in Gurugram (4 locations) and Mewat (01 location).
Following activities have been accomplished in the villages to
support the farmers in technical know-how and new product development:
Sl. No. Activity InNumbers
1. Food Processing promotional Initiatives—
Number of lectures arranged on:
Promoting Post-harvest Management and Food 208
Processing/Value addition
Entrepreneurship Development 134
2. Number of training programmes on product/process 156
development organized/conducted in village
(Jam/pickle/chutney/biscuit/cake/paneer/khawa
3. Detail project reports on ventures in food processing 138
sector prepared and shared with budding
entrepreneurs in the village
4. Market surveys conducted 113
5. Number of Visits for farmers to industry and 72
institutions
The Institute has limited manpower and resources. Each VAP team
is mentored by faculty members. The Institute has noted the observations
of the Committee. As soon as new faculty joins, more villages would be
covered under the programme for implementation to benefit farmers.
However, Institutes are constraint to open new Centre due to the limited
manpower and financial resources. Institutes have been asked to meet
significant part of their expenditure by generating their own resources.
The adequate Government support to open more Centres in the country
is not available to the institutes.
[Ministry of Food Processing Industries (Letter No. 6-04/2017
Dated 28.11.2017)]
Indian Institute of Food Processing Technology (IIFPT) (Formerly known
as IICPT)
Recommendation (Para No. 9)
The Indian Institute of Food Processing Technology (IIFPT), formerly
known as Paddy Processing Research Center (PPRC) is a pioneer Research

25
and Development and academic institute. The institute conducts research
for identifying technologies for processing, preserving, value addition,
by-product utilization through bio-processing, process and product
development and food safety and quality. The institute is also engaged
in HRD, analytical, extension, teaching and training services. The institute
has signed MoU with several international and national universities and
institutes for joint research programs, exchange of knowledge, scientists
and students.
The Committee were informed that IICPT has one regional center
in Guwahati to cater to the needs of the stakeholders in the north-eastern
region of the country. The Regional Centre at Guwahati was established
on 20th July, 2010 with major objective for developing small-scale
entrepreneurship and skilled workgroup in the food processing sector
of the North-East region of India. The regional center provides skill
development trainings, consultancy and equipment renting services and
business incubation services. Since April 2015, the regional center has
conducted 28 training programmes for 109 beneficiaries, 2 student
internship projects, 3 consultancy and has provided 18 incubation services
for the North-East region. The Committee appreciate the commendable
efforts made by the institute particularly in the North-east region of the
country.
The Committee were informed that the Ministry has upgraded
‘Indian Institute of Crop Processing Technology’ (IICPT), Thanjavur,
Tamil Nadu to a National level institute in 2008. Since its upgradation in 2008,
IICPT has handled 4 international collaborative projects, 25 external funded
and 8 industry sponsored projects. The institute has 15 on-going external
funded projects. Research has been focused on developing end-to-end
solutions for the complete value chain of major crops of the storm-prone
area/Cauvery delta zone. Apart from this, 227 external student projects
and over 60 undergraduate and 50 postgraduate research projects were
completed in the institute. From these research works, IICPT has
standardized 35 processes, developed 34 on-farm gadgets, with which
over 1835 beneficiaries have been identified. It was also informed to the
Committee that after elaborate discussion with farmers and other
stakeholders, IICPT proposed to establish a small onion processing-cum-
incubation centre at Perambalur District, Tamil Nadu to double the farmers
income. Apart from this, based on curriculum, B.Tech.students undergo
2 weeks Rural Agro Industrial Programme (RAIP). Students stay in
selected village, conduct survey and collect information on food habits,
awareness on ready food, package foods, etc, harvest and post-harvest

26
losses in the farmer’s holding, collection of information on various crop
processing equipment used, collection of information on various food
processing industries located in and around the village, assessment of
suitability of establishing food processing industries based on the crops
cultivated in the village. The Committee are satisfied with the
accomplishments of the Institute and trust that the Institute will continue
to do research work and other activities to cater the needs of stakeholders
and in the interest of the farmers.
Reply of the Government
IIFPT is happy to note the Committee’s observations/
recommendations on Indian Institute of Food Processing Technology
(IIFPT) particularly in the N.E. region and other research related activities
to cater the need of stakeholders and in the interest of farmers.
[Ministry of Food Processing Industries (Letter No.6-04/2017,
Dated 28.11.2017)]
Development of North Eastern Region
Recommendation (Para No. 10)
The Committee note that as per Government policy, a minimum
of 10% of the Plan outlay is to be utilized for the projects in the North-
Eastern States including Sikkim. The Ministry is expected to utilize this
amount against the ongoing projects under the Schemes of Mega Food
Parks, Cold Chain and Abattoirs and the projects which are likely to be
received under the new Scheme for Creation/Expansion of Food Processing
and Preservation Capacities. The Ministry informed that during 2015-16,
out of total plan allocation of Rs. 487.00 crore, an amount of Rs. 48.00
crore was allocated for North East. However, the actual utilisation against
this allocation has been only Rs. 30.91 crore. During 2016-17, out of total
RE allocation of Rs. 688.56 crore for Schemes, the allocation for North
east region is Rs. 68.86 crore. However, the actual utilisation against
allocation for North-East, is Rs. 13.01 crore (as on 20.01.2017). According
to the Ministry, the main reason for low utilisation of the allocation for
North-East is non-availability of quality proposals under various schemes
of the Ministry. However, the Ministry is making concerted efforts to
increase utilisation of the allocation for North-East region. The Committee
express their displeasure over dismal performance of the Ministry in
utilization of funds meant for the North-East region which adversely
affect the overall growth and development of the region. The Committee,

27
therefore, strongly recommend the Ministry should find out the constraints
which hinder optimum utilisation of funds meant for North-East and
make efforts in coordination with all concerned to yield better results.
Sustained awareness programmes like seminars/workshops etc. should
also be organised on regular basis in the rural as well as urban areas to
create awareness and promote food processing in the region. The
Committee desire to be apprised of the steps taken by the Ministry for
optimum and timely utilisation of funds and development of food
processing infrastructure in the region.
Reply of the Government
For giving impetus to the development of food processing
industry in NER, the Ministry is providing higher level of subsidy in all
the schemes. Financial assistance for following projects has been provided:—
(i) Ministry has sanctioned 4 Mega Food Parks (MFP) in NER
one each at Nalbari (Assam), Aizawl (Mizoram), Agartala
(Tripura) and Dimapur (Nagaland). The MFP in Assam is
already operational. The Mega Food Parks at Agartala
(Tripura) and Aizawl (Mizoram) are in various stages of
implementation.
(ii) 5 Cold Chain Projects — two in Guwahati, Assam, one in
Senapati , Manipur and two in Mizoram have been assisted
by this Ministry. Out of these, 4 projects at Guwahati(1),
Senapati (1) and Aizawal (2), have become operational.
(iii)There are 8 abattoir projects in NER, one each in Arunachal
Pradesh and Mizoram, three in Nagaland and three in
Sikkim. These projects are under various stages of
implementation.
(iv) 7 Food Testing Labs, three in Assam (one in Tezpur and two
in Guwahati), one each in Manipur (Nambol), Nagaland
(Kohima), Sikkim (Gangtok) and Tripura (Agartala) have been
assisted to create infrastructure for food safety and quality
testing.
(v) Indian Institute of Food Processing Technology (IIFPT)
Thanjavur, Tamil Nadu has a regional centre at Guwahati
with a Food Processing Training Centre-cum-Incubation
Centre, training class rooms, trainees’ hostel. Training
programmes are organized by the centre benefiting farmers,
SHG members and educated youth.

28
2. Ministry has released more than 81.70% of the funds earmarked
for North Eastern Region during the 12th Five Year Plan. Year-wise release
is given in the following table:—
(Rs. in crore)
Year BERE E xpenditure
2012-13 66.00 66.00 64.98
2013-14 70.80 55.00 37.63
2014-15 77.00 60.00 42.48
2015-16 48.00 48.00 31.91
2016-17 60.00 68.86 66.34
Total 321.80 297.86 243.34
3. The Ministry is making concerted efforts to increase utilization
of the allocation for North-East. A number of awareness events like
seminars/workshops are organized every year in the North-East region.
A list of events assisted by the Ministry during 2016-17 is as follows:—
Sl. No. Events/Seminar/Exhibition
12
1. Organizing 1st Manipur Industrial Expo during 4-10 April, 2016 with
the theme of “Make in India/North East/Manipur for employment
generation” on the sidelines, the North East ASEAN Business Summit
(NEBS) from 7-9 April, 2016 at Imphal, Manipur.
2. Organized by ASSOCHAM Conferences on Linking Prospective Food
Entrepreneurs with Government Schemes and Markets on 12.08.2016
at Dimapur.
3. Organized by ICC— a Conference on “North East and East India
Food Pro” a conclave focusing on R&D, FDI along with Technology
up-gradation and Better infrastructure from 1st week of November,
2016 at Imphal, Manipur.
4. Organized by ICC— Two Conferences on “North East and East India
Food Pro” a conclave focusing on R&D, FDI along with Technology
up-gradation and Better infrastructure on 22.11.2016— Aizwal and on
15.11.2016— Kohima and on 20.01.2017—Agartala.
5. Organized by NERAMAC— “North East Green Summit, 2016 from
1st to 5th November, 2016 at Tura, Meghalaya.
6. Organized by IIP— National Workshop on “Packaging of Fresh and
Processed Foods” on 25.11.2016 at Guwahati.
7. Organized by ASSOCHAM Conferences on Linking Prospective Food
Entrepreneurs with Government Schemes and Markets on 12.11.2016
at Imphal.

29
8. Organized by ASSOCHAM Conferences on Linking Prospective
Food Entrepreneurs with Government Schemes and Markets on
16.12.2016 at Shillong.
9. Organized by ASSOCHAM Conferences on Linking Prospective
Food Entrepreneurs with Government Schemes and Markets on
19.01.2017 at Jorhat.
10. Organized by IIP— National Workshop on “Packaging of Fresh
and Processed Foods” on 11.01.2017 at Agartala.
[Ministry of Food Processing Industries (Letter No.6-04/2017,
Dated 28.11.2017)]
12

30
CHAPTER III
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE
DO NOT DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE
GOVERNMENT’S ACTION TAKEN REPLY
- Nil -

31
CHAPTER IV
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH
ACTION TAKEN REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT HAVE
NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE
Share of Ministry of Food Processing Industries in Central Plan
Outlay
Recommendation (Para No. 1)
The Committee note that the Food Processing Sector has emerged
as an important segment of the Indian economy in terms of its contribution
to GDP, employment and investment. During 2015-16, the sector
constituted as much as 8.80 and 8.39 per cent of GVA in Manufacturing
and Agriculture sector respectively. The contribution of FPI Sector to
GVA in the economy was 1.46% in 2015-16. A well-developed food
processing sector with higher level of processing helps in the reduction
of wastage, improve value addition, promote crop diversification, ensure
higher yields, better return to the farmers and lowers the risk of
perishability, promote employment as well as increases export earnings.
The sector is also capable of addressing critical issues of food security,
food inflation and providing wholesome nutritious food to the masses.
The growth of Food Processing sector will make significant contribution
to the Indian Economy not only in economic terms but also in meeting
the objectives of ‘inclusive growth’ and ‘food security’. The Committee
note that the share of the Ministry of Food Processing Industries is
Rs. 600 crore, in the total central plan outlay of Rs. 948148.84 crore for
2016-17, which in percentage terms works out merely 0.06% of the total central
plan outlay. During 2015-16 also, the percentage of budgetary allocation
was also 0.06%. This is less than the proportion of budgetary allocation
of 0.09% during 2013-14 and 2014-15 and 0.08% during 2012-13. Keeping
in view the importance of food processing sector in the Indian economy,
the Committee urge the Ministry of Finance to increase the share of the
Ministry of Food Processing Industries adequately in the Central Plan
so that various activities/projects undertaken by the Ministry do not suffer
for want of funds.

32
Reply of the Government
Ministry’s BE for the year 2017-18 is Rs. 800 crore (Rs. 725 crore
for Schemes and Rs. 75 crore for Non-scheme expenditure) an increase
of 9.74% over last year’s RE. However, this allocation is also not adequate
to support the growing need to expand programmes to cover all segments
of the food processing sector and upscale ongoing programmes. The
Ministry has conveyed the observations of the Hon’ble Committee to the
Ministry of Finance, vide D.O. letter dated 01.08.2017 from Secretary (FPI)
to Finance Secretary and Secretary (Expenditure) and requested to allocate
adequate funds for programmes of the Ministry in future.
[Ministry of Food Processing Industries (Letter No. 6-04/2017
Dated 28.11.2017)]
Comments of the Committee
For comments of the Committee please refer to Para No. 1.7 of
Chapter I of this Report.
Annual Plan Allocations
Recommendation (Para No. 2)
The Committee note that the Ministry sought an allocation of
Rs. 14604 crore in its 12th Plan proposal. However, the Planning
Commission has allocated a plan outlay of Rs. 5990 crore only for
12th plan. Out of the approved outlay of Rs. 5990 crore, total budgetary
allocation for the 12th Plan is only Rs. 3225 crore which in percentage
terms comes to merely 53% of the approved outlay of Rs. 5990 crore.
The Committee were informed that the Ministry submitted its projected
requirement of annual allocation for every year during the Twelfth Plan
based on its assessment and requirement of ongoing and new activities
under various schemes. According to the Ministry, annual allocation to
them has been made by the Finance Ministry based on overall resource
availability and national priorities. The Committee also note that during
2012-13, against an allocation of Rs. 660 crore at BE/RE stage, the actual
expenditure was Rs. 655.88 crore. During 2013-14, BE was Rs. 708 crore
which was drastically reduced to Rs. 550 crore at RE stage but the actual
expenditure was Rs. 527.96 crore. Against BE of Rs. 770 crore for
2014-15, was reduced to Rs. 600 crore at RE stage, out of which only
Rs. 579.73 crore could be expended.
For 2015-16, BE/RE was Rs. 487 crore, out of which, actual
expenditure was Rs. 467.03 crore. For 2016-17, although the plan allocation

33
has been increased from Rs. 600 crore to Rs. 688.56 crore but the actual
expenditure is only Rs. 463.60 crore up to 20.01.2017. For 2017-18, the
allocation is Rs. 800 crore. The Committee, therefore, are concerned to
note the under-utilisation of plan funds allotted to the Ministry and
recommend that corrective steps may be taken to identify the constraints
which affect the effective implementation of various activities/projects
undertaken by the Ministry and consequently under-utilisation of funds.
The Committee expect the Ministry to fully utilize Rs. 800 crore allocated
for the year 2017-18 for which advance action plan should be prepared
keeping in view its aims and objectives and the targets fixed for the year.
A mechanism should also be put in place for regular monitoring of its
activities/programmes for time bound achievement of physical and
financial targets set under activities/programmes of the Ministry. The
Committee would also like the Ministry to urge the Ministry of Finance
to allocate funds as per their requirement at RE stage. The Committee
would like to be apprised of the initiatives undertaken by the Ministry
in this regard.
Reply of the Government
Ministry’s BE for the year 2017-18 is Rs. 800 crore (Rs. 725 crore
for Schemes and Rs. 75 crore for Non-scheme expenditure) an increase
of 9.74% over last year’s RE. However, this allocation is also not adequate
to support the growing need to expand programmes to cover all segments
of the food processing sector and upscale ongoing programmes. The
Ministry has conveyed the observations of the Hon’ble Committee to the
Ministry of Finance, vide D.O. letter dated 01.08.2017 from Secretary (FPI)
to Finance Secretary and Secretary (Expenditure) and requested to allocate
adequate funds for programmes of the Ministry in future.
[Ministry of Food Processing Industries (Letter No. 6-04/2017
Dated 28.11.2017)]
Comments of the Committee
For comments of the Committee please refer to Para No. 1.10 of
Chapter I of this Report.
Mega Food Parks
Recommendation (Para No. 4)
The Committee note that the Mega Food Park Scheme aims at
providing infrastructure facilities for food processing along the value
chain from farm to market. Under the Scheme 42 Mega Food Parks were

34
approved by the Government to be set up in the country. Out of these
only 8 Mega Food Parks have been made operational so far. According
to the Ministry, some of the reasons for delay in implementation of MFP
projects, are difficulty in getting the term loan for banks/NABARD by
the promoters, delay in statutory clearance from the State Government/
Agencies, non-availability of any special incentive for setting up food
processing unit in MFPs, unwillingness of the co-promoter in contributing
their share of equity timely etc. The Committee note with concern that
even after a lapse of almost 9 years since 2008 when the Scheme was
launched, only eight MFPs have been made operational. The Committee
also note that the detailed guidelines for the scheme were issued on
24.08.2008 and based on the experiences of implementation, modifications
in the scheme guidelines have been carried out from time to time. The
Committee note that the BE for the year 2016-17 was increased from
Rs. 222.30 crore to Rs. 311.34 crore but the Committee regret to note that
only Rs. 199.47 crore was actually expended under the scheme.
The Committee are of the view that delay in the implementation
of a Scheme and under-utilisation of funds defeats the very purpose of
the Scheme. The Committee, therefore, recommend that concerted efforts
in coordination with all stakeholders including State Governments be
made to address the constraints which hinders smooth progress in the
implementation of the projects. The Committee also desire that the
guidelines of the schemes for MFPs be revisited and amended from time
to time on the basis of feedback and consultation with stakeholders for
smooth and expeditious implementation of MFPs projects.
The Committee also note that a district level Mega Food Park
Coordination Committee under the chairmanship of the District Collector
has been constituted for each Mega Food Park to ensure smooth progress
in implementation of the projects. However, there is no public
representative (MP/MLA) nominated in the Mega Food Park Coordination
Committee at the district level. The Committee feel that inclusion of a
public representative in such Committees will facilitate the expeditious
implementation of Mega Food Parks. The Committee, therefore,
recommend that the public representatives (MP/MLA) of the respective
districts may be included in the Mega Food Park Coordination Committee.
The Committee would like to be apprised of the action taken by the
Ministry in this regard.
Reply of the Government
(i) Presently, 9 Mega Food Parks have been made operational
out of 42 Mega Food Parks approved by the Government.
With regard to utilization of funds under Mega Food Park

35
Scheme during FY 2016-17, it is to mention that Ministry had
incurred an expenditure of Rs. 300.08 crore against RE of
Rs. 300.15 crore which is almost 99.97% utilization of funds.
Further, Ministry has been holding meetings with the State
Governments and also SPVs/Implementing Agencies (IAs)
regularly to review the progress of implementation of the
Mega Food Parks. Also, there is a provision for Nominee
Director from the State Government on the Board of Director
of the SPV to ensure effective coordination, convergence and
synergy in implementation of the project with the State
Government.
(ii)The guidelines of the Mega Food Park Scheme are revisited
and amended from time to time on the basis of feedback and
consultation with stakeholders for smooth and expeditious
implementation of MFPs projects. Recently, the Mega Food
Park guidelines have been amended and notified on
21.07.2016.
(iii)The Ministry has set up a district level Mega Food Park Co-
ordination Committee in 2010. The composition of this
Committee is as under:
Sl. No. Name of the organization/designated officer Members
 1 2 3
1. District Collector Chairman
2. District Programme Coordinator, MGNREGAMember
3. PD, DRDA Member
4. District Agriculture Officer Member
5. District Horticulture Officer Member
6. District Development Manager, NABARD Member
7. Lead District Manager Member
8. District Animal Husbandry Officer Member
9. Dairy Development Officer Member
10. General Manager, DIC Member
11. Representative of Commercial Tax Member
Department
12. Representative of District Electricity Member
Department
13. PD, ATMA Member

36
14. Two representatives of Industry AssociationsMember
(to be nominated by the MFPCC)
15. Two representatives of Farmers’ AssociationsMember
(to be nominated by the MFPCC)
16. Stakeholder of SPV Member
17. CEO of SPV of Mega Food Park Member
Secretary and
Convener
The Coordination Committee has been set up to resolve local issues
which may arise during the implementation of the project. Therefore, the
officers of the concerned departments are the member of the Committee.
Decision regarding inclusion of local MLA and MP in the Committee is
under consideration.
[Ministry of Food Processing Industries (Letter No. 6-04/2017
Dated 28.11.2017)]
Comments of the Committee
For comments of the Committee please refer to Para No. 1.16 of
Chapter I of this Report.
12 3

37
CHAPTER V
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH
FINAL REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT ARE STILL AWAITED
- Nil -
N EW DELHI; HUKM DEO NARAYAN YADAV,
27 December, 2017 Chairperson,
06 Pausha, 1939 (Saka) Standing Committee on Agriculture.

38
APPENDIX I
STANDING COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE (2017-18)
MINUTES OF THE EIGHTH SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE
The Committee sat on Wednesday, the 27th December, 2017 from
1000 hours to 1110 hours in Chamber of the Chairperson, Room No. 138
(Third Floor), Parliament House, New Delhi.
PRESENT
Shri Hukm Deo Narayan Yadav — Chairperson
M
EMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Sanjay Dhotre
3. Prof. Ravindra Vishwanath Gaikwad
4. Shri Sanganna Amarappa Karadi
5. Shri Nalin Kumar Kateel
6. Shri C. Mahendran
7. Dr. Tapas Mandal
8. Shri Mukesh Rajput
9. Shri C.L. Ruala
Rajya Sabha
10. Shri Meghraj Jain
11. Shri Mohd. Ali Khan
12. Shri Ram Nath Thakur
13. Dr. Chandrapal Singh Yadav

39
SECRETARIAT
1. Shri D.S. Malha —Joint Secretary
2. Smt. Juby Amar —Additional Director
3. Shri Sumesh Kumar —Under Secretary
2. At the outset, the Chairperson welcomed the Members to the
Sitting of the Committee. Thereafter, the Committee took up for
consideration the Draft Report on the Action Taken by the Government
on the Observations/Recommendations contained in the 38th Report (16th
Lok Sabha) of the Standing Committee on Agriculture (2017-18) on
‘Demands for Grants (2017-18)’ of the Ministry of Food Processing
Industries.
3. After some deliberations, the Committee adopted the draft Report
without any modifications and authorized the Chairperson to finalize
and present this Report to Parliament after getting it factually verified
from the concerned Ministry.
*4. *** *** *** *** ***
The Committee then adjourned.
*Matter not related to this Report.

40
APPENDIX II
(Vide Para 4 of Introduction of the Report)
ANALYSIS OF ACTION TAKEN BY GOVERNMENT ON THE
THIRTY EIGHTH REPORT OF STANDING COMMITTEE
ON AGRICULTURE (16TH LOK SABHA)
(i) Total number of Recommendations 10
(ii)Recommendations/Observations which have been accepted by the
Government
Recommendation Nos.: 3, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9 and 10
Total : 7
Percentage : 70%
(iii)Recommendations/Observations which the Committee do not desire
to pursue in view of the Government’s replies
Recommendation No.: NIL
Total : 0
Percentage : 0%
(iv) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies of the
Government have not been accepted by the Committee
Recommendation Nos.: 1, 2 and 4
Total : 3
Percentage : 30%
(v) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which Final replies
of the Government are still awaited
Recommendation No.: NIL
Total : 0
Percentage : 0%