THIRTY-NINTH REPORT
STANDING COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE
(2016-2017)
(SIXTEENTH LOK SABHA)
MINISTRY OF AGRICULTURE AND FARMERS WELFARE
(DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURAL RESEARCH AND EDUCATION)
“Comprehensive Agriculture Research based on Geographical
Conditions and Impact of Climatic Changes to ensure
Food Security in the Country ”
Presented to Lok Sabha on 10.08.2017
Laid on the Table of Rajya Sabha on 09.08.2017
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
August, 2017/ Shravana, 1939 ( Saka)


COA No. 359
Price : ` 318.00
© 2017 B Y L OK S ABHA S ECRETARIAT
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct
of Business in Lok Sabha (Fifteenth Edition) and printed by
Anupam Art Printers, New Delhi.

CONTENTS
PAGE
COMPOSITION OF THE C OMMITTEE (2016-17) ............................... (v)
INTRODUCTION ................................................................. (vii)
ABBREVIATIONS................................................................. (ix)
REPORT
PART I
CHAPTER I Introduction ................................................. 1
i. Climatic Change Model .............................. 3
ii. Greenhouse Gas Emmission from Agriculture and
Allied Sectors .......................................... 10
iii. Burning of Crop Residue ............................ 12
iv. Influence on Agriculture due to Ingress of Sea
Water .................................................... 13
v. Pest Severity and Disease Proliferation ......... 16
CHAPTER II Agro-Climatic Classification .............................. 18
CHAPTER III Impact of Climate Change on Agriculture ........... 23
i. Development of Varieties of Crops with Enhanced
Abiotic Stress T olerance ............................ 26
ii. Availability of Seed .................................. 29
iii. Conservation of Indigenous Varieties of Seeds .. 36
iv. Impact of Climate Change on Horticulture .... 37
v. Effects on Livestock ................................. 39
vi. Rumen fermentation as a source of greenhouse
gas emission ........................................... 42
CHAPTER IV Assessment of Food Requirement vis-a-vis Food
Availability ................................................... 47
i. R&D on Alternative Food Sources for Future .. 55
ii. Farming and Consumption of Coarse Grains ... 58
iii. Land Resource Inventory ............................ 59
CHAPTER V Natural R esource Management .......................... 62
i. Soil Health Management ............................ 63
(i)

PAGE
ii. Agro-forestry ........................................... 68
iii. Water Resource Management ...................... 76
iv . Augmentation of Water Resources in the
Country ................................................. 81
v. Support to Farmers for Adoption of Improved
Irrigation Methods ...... .............................. 89
vi. Interlinking of Rivers ................................ 91
vii. R ejuvenation of Traditional Water Storage
System .................................................. 96
viii. Ground W ater Resources Management ........... 98
CHAPTER VI Approach for Making Indian Agriculture Climate
Resilient ...................................................... 107
i. National Innovations on Climate Resilient
Agriculture (NICRA) .................................. 110
ii. Infrastructure and Research facilities creation
under NICRA ........................................... 114
iii. Technology Demonstration Component (TDC) .. 117
(a) Natural Resource Management (NRM) ...... 118
(b) Crop P roduction ................................. 118
(c) Livestock and Fisheries ........................ 118
(d) Institutional Interventions .................... 118
iv . Institutional Intervention under NICRA
Project .................................................. 120
v. District Agricultural Contingency Plan ........... 125
vi. District Vulnerability Atlas ......................... 127
vii. Agriculture Extension Services .................... 128
viii. Mechanisation of Agriculture ...................... 133
CHAPTER VII International Accord on Climate Change ............. 138
i. Paris Agreement on Climate Change ............. 138
ii. India’s Commitment for Green House Gases
(GHGs) emission reduction ......................... 142
PART II
Observations/Recommendations of the Committee ..... 150
ANNEXURES
I. Statement indicating drought affected districts during
last 5 years ....................................................... 189
(ii)

PAGE
II. Information related to flood affected districts available
from NRSC (Bhuvan) ............................................ 193
III. Field Crop varieties Developed to Adopt to climate
change & have minimum Impact of adverse
conditions ......................................................... 195
IV. High yielding varieties that can withstand severe change
in weather pattern including deficient rainfall/drought
and varieties suitable for biotic and abiotic stresses .. 202
V . Memoranda Received from Experts/Organisations/
Stakeholders in Connection with examination of Subject
“Comprehensive Agricultural Research Based on
Geographical Conditions and Impact of Climate Change
to ensure Food Security in the Country ” .................. 210
A
PPENDICES
I. Extract of Minutes of the 6th Sitting of the Standing
Committee on Agriculture (2015-16) held on
19.10.2015 ........................................................ 214
II. Extract of Minutes of the 8th Sitting of the Standing
Committee on Agriculture (2015-16) held on
06.11.2015 ........................................................ 218
III. Extract of Minutes of the 20th Sitting of the Standing
Committee on Agriculture (2015-16) held on
08.04.2016 ........................................................ 222
IV. Extract of Minutes of the 21st Sitting of the Standing
Committee on Agriculture (2015-16) held on
21.04.2016 ........................................................ 225
V. Extract of Minutes of the 31st Sitting of the Standing
Committee on Agriculture (2015-16) held on
31.08.2016 ........................................................ 228
VI. Extract of Minutes of the 3rd Sitting of the Standing
Committee on Agriculture (2016-17) held on
05.10.2016 ........................................................ 231
VII. Extract of Minutes of the 5th Sitting of the Standing
Committee on Agriculture (2016-17) held on
28.10.2016 ........................................................ 233
VIII. Extract of Minutes of the 25th Sitting of the Standing
Committee on Agriculture (2016-17) held on
03.08.2017 ........................................................ 237
(iii)

COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE
(2016-2017)
Shri Hukm Deo Narayan Yadav — Chairperson
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Prof. Ravindra Vishwanath Gaikwad
3. Shri Sanganna Karadi
4. Shri Nalin Kumar Kateel
5. Smt. Raksha Khadse
6. Md. Badaruddoza Khan
7. Shri C. Mahendran
8. Dr. Tapas Mandal
9. Shri Janardan Mishra
10. Shri Devji Patel
11. Shri Nityanand Rai
12. Shri Mukesh Rajput
13. Shri Neiphiu Rio
14. Shri Konakalla Narayana Rao
15. Shri C.L. Ruala
16. Shri Arjun Charan Sethi
17. Shri Satyapal Singh (Sambhal)
18. Shri Virendra Singh
19. Shri Dharmendra Yadav
20. Shri Jai Prakash Narayan Yadav
21. Shri B.S. Yeddyurappa
Rajya Sabha
22. Shri Sambhaji Chhatrapati
23. Sardar Sukhdev Singh Dhindsa
24. Shri Janardan Dwivedi
25. Shri Meghraj Jain
26. Shri Vinay Katiyar
(v)

27. Shri Mohd. Ali Khan
28. Shri Ram Nath Thakur
29. Shri R. Vaithilingam
30. Shri Shankarbhai N. Vegad
31. Shri Darshan Singh Yadav
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Shri D.S. Malha — Joint Secretary
2. Shri Arun K. Kaushik — Director
3. Smt. Juby Amar — Additional Director
4. Shri Sumesh Kumar — Under Secretary
(vi)

(vii)
INTRODUCTION
I, the Chairperson, Standing Committee on Agriculture (2016-2017)
having been authorized by the Committee to submit the Report on
their behalf, present this Thirty Ninth Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) on
the subject “Comprehensive Agriculture Research based on Geographical
Conditions and Impact of Climatic Changes to ensure Food Security in
the Country ” pertaining to the Ministry of Agriculture and Farmers
Welfare (Department of Agricultural Research and Education).
2. The Committee took briefing of the representatives of Ministry
of Agriculture and Farmers Welfare (Department of Agricultural Research
and Education), Ministry of Water Resources, River Development and
Ganga Rejuvenation on the subject at their Sittings held on 19.10.2015
and 06.11.2015 respectively. The Committee held seven sittings in
connection with the examination of the subject and received
memoranda from individuals/experts/organizations.
3. The Committee also took evidence of the representatives of the
following Ministries/Departments/Organizations during examination of
the subject:—
I. Indian Agricultural Research Institute, Pusa, New Delhi, ICAR
Research Complex for NEH Region, Bara Pani, Meghalaya
and ICAR Research Complex for Eastern Region, Patna on
08.04.2016.
II. Watershed Organization Trust (WOTR), Pune, BAIF
Development Research Foundation, New Delhi, Dr . Anil K.
Singh, Vice-Chancellor , Rajmata Vijayrajescindia Krishi
Vishwavidhalaya, Gwalior and Director of ICAR—Central
Research Institute for Dryland Agriculture on 08.04.2016.
III. Department of Agricultural Research and Education,
Department of Agriculture, Cooperation and Farmers Welfare
and Crop Care Federation of India on 31.08.2016.
IV . Department of Agricultural Research and Education on
05.10.2016.
V . Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate Change and
Ministry of Earth Sciences on 28.10.2016.
4. The Committee wish to express their thanks to representatives
of the Ministry of Agriculture and Farmers Welfare (Department of
Agricultural Research and Education and Department of Agriculture,

(viii)
Cooperation and Farmers Welfare), Ministry of Water Resources, River
Development and Ganga Rejuvenation, Ministry of Environment, Forest
and Climate Change, Ministry of Earth Sciences for furnishing requisite
information to the Committee in connection with examination of the
subject. The Committee also express their gratitude to the
Organisations/Individuals for enabling the committee to understand
various dimensions of the subject through their submission of
45 Memoranda and deposition before the Committee.
5. The Committee would also like to place on record their
appreciation for the invaluable assistance rendered to them by the
officials of Lok Sabha Secretariat attached to the Committee.
6. The Report was considered and adopted by the Committee at
their Sitting held on 03.08.2017.
7. For facility of reference, the observations/recommendations of
the Committee have been printed in bold at Part-II of the Report.
   N
EW D ELHI; HUKM DEO NARAYAN YADAV ,
07 August, 2017 Chairperson,
16 Shravana, 1939 (Saka) Committee on Agriculture.

ABBREVIATIONS
AAS Agro-met Advisory Services
AAY Antyodaya Anna Yojana
ACABC Agri-Clinic and Agri-Business Centres
ADSR Aerobic Direct Seeding Rice
AERs Agro Ecological Regions
AFPs Aagroforestry Products
AIBP Accelerated Irrigation Benefit Programme
AICRP All India Coordinated Research Projects
AICRPAM All India Coordinated Research Project on Agro-
Meteorology
AICRPDA All India Coordinated Research Project for Dryland
Agriculture
AICRPs All India Coordinated Research Projects
ATMA Agricultural Technology Management Agency
AWS Automatic Weather Stations
BMPs Best Management Practices
CADWM Command Area Development & Water Management
CCA Culturable Command Area
CCARI Central Coastal Agriculture Research Institute
CCCR Centre for Climate Change Research
CFTR Continuous Flooded Transplanting Rice
CGWB Central Ground Water Board
CHCs Custom Hiring Centers
CIRG Central Institute for Research on Goats
CITH Central Institute of Temperate Horticulture
CPRI Central Power Research Institute
CRIDA Central Research Institute for Dryland Agriculture
CSIR Council of Scientific and Industrial Research
CSSRI Central Soil Salinity Research Institute
CSTVT Coastal Saline Tolerant Variety Trial
CSWRI Central Sheep and Wool Research Institute
(ix)

CWC Central Warehousing Corporation
DDP Desert Development Programme
DIP District Irrigation Plan
DoLR Department of Land Resources
DPR Detailed Project Report
DTM Digital Terrain Model
FATE Free Air Temperature Elevation
FFA Free Fatty Acid
FLDs Front Line Demonstrations
FR Farmers Rights
FYM Farm Yard Manure
GCM General Circulation Model
GHG Green House Gase
GHGs Green House Gases
GIS Geographic Information System
GPx Glutathione Peroxidase
GR Ganga Rejuvenation
GRCC Global and Regional Climate Change
GWP Global Wanning Potential
GWRE Ground Water Resource Estimation
HI Harvest Index
HSP Henoch-Schonlein Purpura
IPCC Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change
IARI Indian Agricultural Research Institute
IASRI Indian Agricultural Statistical Research Institute
ICAR Indian Council of Agricultural Research
ICDS Integrated Child Development Services
ICT Information and Communication Technology
IIHR Indian Institute of Horticulture Research
IIPR Indian Institute of Pulses Research
IIRR Indian Institute of Rice Research
IISWC Indian institute of Soil and Water Conservation
IITM Indian Institute of Tropical Meteorology
IIVR Indian Institute of Vegetable Research
(x)

IIWM International Institute of Waste Management
ILR Interlinking of River
IMD India Meteorological Department
INDC Intended Nationally Determined Contribution
IPCC Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change
IPRs Intellectual Property Rights
ISBIG Incentivization Scheme for Bridging Irrigation Gap
ISM Indian Subcontinent Monsoon
IVRI Indian Veterinary Research Institute
IWMP Integrated Watershed Management Programme
JNNSM Jawaharlal Nehru National Solar Mission
KBK Koraput, Balangir and Kalahandi
KVKs Krishi Vigyan Kendras
LCC Leaf Colour Chart
LRI Land Resource Inventory
MA Modified Atmosphere
MC1R Melanocortin 1 Receptor
MGNREGA Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment Guarantee
Act
MGNREGS Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment Guarantee
Scheme
MIDH Mission for Integrated Development of Horticulture
MITF Melanogenesis Associated Transcription Factor
MNRE Ministry of New and Renewable Energy
MoWR Ministry of W ater Resources
MSP Minimum Support Price
NABARD National Bank for Agriculture and Rural Development
NAFP National Agroforestry Policy
NAP National Afforestation Programme
NAPCC National Action Plan on Climate Change
MARS National Agricultural Research System
NBAIM National Bureau of Agriculturally Important
Microorganisms
NBFGR National Bureau of Fish Genetic Resources
NBPGR National Bureau of Plant Genetic Resources
NBSS&LUP National Bureau of Soil Survey and Land Use Planning
NCEF National Clean Energy Fund
(xi)

NDP National Dairy Plan
NDRI National Dairy Research Institute
NEC National Executive Committee
NEFA North-East Frontier Agency
NFSM National Food Security Mission
NIANP National Institute of Animal Nutrition and Physiology
NICRA National Innovations on Climate Resilient Agriculture
NLM National Livestock Mission
NMOOP National Mission on Oilseeds & Oil Palm
NMSA National Mission on Sustainable Agriculture
NMSHE National Mission on Sustaining Himalayan Ecosystem
NMSKCC National Mission on Strategic Knowledge for Climate
Change
NOC No Objection Certificate
NPBB National P rogram for Bovine Breeding
NPCC National Projects Construction Corporation
NRCPB National Research Centre on Plant Biotechnology
NREGS National Rural Employment Guarantee Scheme
NRM Natural Resource Management
NRRI National Rice Research Institute
NRSC National Remote Sensing Centre
NSC National Seeds Corporation
NWDA National Water Development Agency
NWDPRA National Watershed Development Project for Rainfed
Areas
NWM National Water Mission
OFWM On Farm Water Management
PBMCs P eripheral Blood Mononuclear Cell
PMCCC Prime Minister’s Council on Climate Change
PMEL Pacific Marine Environmental Laboratory
PUKSY Pradhan Mantri Krishi Sinchayee Yojana
PPV Protection of Plant Varieties
PPV&FR Protection of Plant Varieties and Farmers’ Rights
QTLs Quantitative Trait Locus
RADAS R eclamation and Development of Alkali & Add Soils
RCM Regional Climate Model
RCTs Resource Conservation Technologies
(xii)

RD River Development
REDD R educing Emissions from Deforestation and Forest
Degradation
RFI Residual Feed Intake
RRR Repair, Renovation and Restoration
RTPD Real Time Pest Dynamics
RVP&FPR River Valley Project and Flood Prone River
SAPCC State Action Plan on Climate Change
SAUs State Agricultural Universities
SFCI State Farms Corporation of India
SIP State Irrigation Plan
SLSC State Level Sanctioning Committee
SHI Strong Monsoon
SMPMA Strengthening and Modernization of Pest Management
Approach in India
SMS Short Message Service
SNPs Single-Nucleotide Polymorphism
SPV Solar Photovoltaic
SRI System of Rice Intensification
SSCs State Seeds Corporation
STBN Salinity Tolerant Breeding Network
STRASA Stress Tolerant Rice for Africa and South Asia
TDC Technology Demonstration Component
TLR3 Toll-Like-Receptor 3
TPDS Targeted Public Distribution System
TYRP1 Tyrosinase Related Protein 1
UNEP United Nations Environment Programme
UNESCO United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural
Organization
UNFCCC United Nations Framework Convention on Climate
Change
UTRs Universal Technical Resource Services
VCRMC Village Level Climate Risk Management Committees
WDC Watershed Development Component
WM Weak Monsoon
YVMV Y ellow Vein Mosaic Virus
(xiii)

1
CHAPTER I
INTRODUCTION
1.1 Climate have pre-eminent role in the evolution of Human
species and shaping of various human civilization across the world.
Racial classification of human species reveals impact of climate on
body morphology and growth pattern as these are patterned on climate
zones. Similarly, Impact of climate can also be seen on kinds of flora
and fauna of distinct geographical area. Each Geographical area can
easily be identified by the unique combinations of varieties of species
of trees, crops, animals, birds etc. Historically, these restrictions of
climate on availability of fauna and flora have also shaped the
emergence and develpment of human culture and civilization.
1.2 Every society have structured their culture around historical
and current climate conditions. Human culture is basically a byproduct
of locally available resources and local climate. Human societies are
accustomed to a normal range of climatic conditions and may be
sensitive to extremes that fall outside of this range. Climate change
could affect our society through impacts on a number of different
social, cultural, and natural resources. Various studies have shown that
average global temperature has enhanced due to increase in average
global CO
2 level in Post industrialization era. Anthropogenic sources of
pollutants have led to a situation which has potential to destablize
critical climatic balance of atmospheric system of our planet Earth.
Any major deviation of current climatic pattern may have disastrous
consequences for human culture and civilization. Climate change and
its variability are emerging as major challenges facing agriculture across
the globe which can have consequences for food security for global
community.
1.3 Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) in their
Fifth Assessment Report (AR5) has stated that warming of the climate
system is unequivocal. IPCC in this report has stated that since the
1950s, many of the observed changes are unprecedented over decades
to milennia. The atmosphere and ocean have warmed, the amounts of
snow and ice have diminished, and sea level has risen.The AR5 report
suggests that each of the last three decades has been successively
warmer at the Earth’s surface than any preceding decade since 1850.
The period from 1983 to 2012 was very likely the warmest 30-year
period of the last 800 years in the Northern Hemisphere and likely the

2
warmest 30-year period of the last 1400 years. Over the last two
decades, the Greenland and Antarctic ice sheets have been losing
mass. Glaciers have continued to shrink almost worldwide. Northern
Hemisphere spring snow cover has continued to decrease in extent.
Over the period 1901-2010, global mean sea level rose by 0.19
(0.17 to 0.21) metre. The rate of sea level rise since the mid-19th
century has been larger than the mean rate during the previous two
millennia. The fifth IPCC report clearly brought out the global and
regional impacts of climate change on agriculture, water resources,
natural eco-systems and food security. When asked to furnish summary
of global and regional impacts of climate change on agriculture, water
resources, natural eco-systems and food security as brought out in
above mentioned IPCC Report, the Department in their submission
before the Committee have stated as under:—
“Crop yields and changes in productivity due to climate change
will vary considerably across regions and among localities, thus
changing the patterns of production. Productivity is projected to
increase in some areas and decrease in other areas especially in
the tropics and subtropics. Similar assessments indicate that yields
of some crops in tropical locations would decrease generally with
even minimal increases in temperature, because such crops are
near their maximum temperature tolerance and where dryland/
rainfed agriculture predominates. There will also be a large decrease
in rainfall and tropical crop yields would be even more adversely
affected. With autonomous agronomic adaptation, crop yields in
the tropics tend to be less adversely affected by climate change
than without adaptation, but they still tend to remain below levels
estimated with current climate.Climate change is projected to
reduce renewable surface water and groundwater resources
significantly in most dry subtropical regions (robust evidence, high
agreement). This will intensify competition for water among
agriculture, ecosystems, settlements, industry, and energy
production, affecting regional water, energy, and food security
(limited evidence, medium to high agreement). In contrast, water
resources are projected to increase at high latitudes. Proportional
changes are typically one to three times greater for runoff than
for precipitation. The effects on water resources and irrigation
requirements of changes in vegetation due to increasing GHG
concentrations and climate change remain uncertain. Impacts from
recent climate-related extremes such as heat waves, droughts,
floods, cyclones and wildfires reveal significant vulnerability and
exposure of some ecosystems and many human systems to current
climate variability. Impacts of such climate-related extremes include

3
alteration of ecosystems, disruption of food production and water
supply, damage to infrastructure and settlements, morbidity and
mortality and consequences for mental health and human well-
being. For countries at all levels of development, these impacts
are consistent with a significant lack of preparedness for current
climate variability in some sectors. ”
1.4 The Department while further elaborating about regional impact
as mentioned in fifth IPCC report with specific reference to tropical
Asia have submitted as under:—
“Agriculture: For India, the prediction is that the stress on staple
wheat crop would increase negatively affecting the overall food
security of the continent. Post 2030, the overall food production
will decrease but certain regions could also see a small rise in food
production.
Soils: The regional impact of Climate Change will have adverse
effect on soil processes and properties important for restoring soil
fertility and productivity. Increase in temperature will reduce the
soil carbon storage due to increased decomposition of soil organic
matter by carbon dioxide emission and ultimately leading to low
water holding and nutrient supplying capacity.
Water resources: Runoff and groundwater recharge are both likely
to decline dramatically in these areas. Where rainfall volume
increases and becomes more intense (Indian monsoon, humid
tropics), a greater proportion of runoff will occur as flood flow
that should be captured in dams or groundwater for recycling.
Climate projections developed for India for the 2050s indicate an
increase in the average temperature by 2-4°C during that period,
an overall decrease in rainy days by more than 15 days in Western
and Central India and an increase by 5-10 days near foothills of
Himalayas and North-East India... ”
I. Climate Change Models
1.5 Modelling studies indicate that changing climate will decrease
yields in major crops like wheat, rice maize, on the other hand the
impacts could be neutral to positive in others like groundnut, soyabean
and chickpea. When asked about the ways modelling studies on climate
change predicted changes in average global temperature and its
consequences on global climate and weather pattern, the Department
have stated as under:—
“...Modelling studies indicated warming of atmosphere and ocean,
accelerated melting of snow and ice and rise in sea level. Each of
the last three decades has successively been warmer at the surface

4
than the preceding decade since 1850. The period from 1983 to
2012 was likely to be the warmest 30-year period of the last 1400
years in the Northern Hemisphere. The globally averaged combined
land and ocean surface temperature data as calculated by a linear
trend show a warming of 0.85 [0.65 to 1.06] °C over the period
1880 to 2012.
At regional scale, the mean surface temperatures have increased
by 0.3-0.8°C over past 100 years but there is no definite trend for
precipitation in the region. However , South West monsoon in India
has shown definite changes in the period during 1961-1990 in
comparison with either 1901-1930 or 1931-1960, although no
consistent long-term trend is detectable. No identifiable changes
in the number (frequency) or intensity of tropical cyclones or
depressions have been observed in the northern Indian Ocean
cyclone region (Bay of Bengal and Arabian Sea) over the past 100
years. An increase is predicted in annual mean maximum and
minimum surface air temperatures of 0.7°C and 1.0°C over the
land regions in the decade of the 2040s with respect to the 1980s.
This warming would be less pronounced during the monsoon season
than in the winter months. A significant decrease in the winter
diurnal temperature range is also projected. Moreover , projected
warming of the land region of the Indian subcontinent is likely to
be relatively lower in magnitude than that of the adjoining ocean
resulting in a decline in the land-sea thermal contrast which is the
primary factor responsible for the onset of summer monsoon
circulation...”
1.6 On the query of the Committee regarding study done by the
ICAR or Indian Meteorological Department or any other Indian agencies
on impact of global warming on Climate and weather pattern in India,
the Department have stated as under:—
“...ICAR is not conducting research on the impact of global warming
on climate change and weather pattern, but its research focus is
on the impact of climate change in the agriculture including animal
husbandry, fisheries and poultry. Other institutes such as IMD and
CSIR are conducting basic climate change research... ”
1.7 The Department have further stated that Ministry of Earth
Sciences carry out scientific studies on climate change and variability
under Global and Regional Climate Change (GRCC) programme. Under
GRCC programme, the Ministry of Earth Sciences has established a
dedicated Centre for Climate Change Research (CCCR) under the Indian

5
Institute of Tropical Meteorology (IITM), Pune. Although, monsoon rainfall
varies on different spatial and temporal scales, but some recent studies
hint at an increasing frequency and intensity of extreme in rainfall
during the past 40-50 years.Moreover, the report of the Inter-
Governmental Panel on Climate Change and our country’s own
assessment using regional climate models indicate that the extreme
rainfall events are likely to be more frequent in the later part of the
21st century in the world including India. As regards other extreme
weather phenomena, there are many other reasons for their occurrence
which cannot always be related to climate change.
1.8 When asked about research being done on climate change in
the country, the Ministry of Earth Sciences has stated as under:—
“...Past observations from instruments and proxy data suggest that
there are changes in our climate system on different time scales.
There are some natural variations and there are some long term
trends which can be attributed to  human activities. Analysis of
past instrumental data suggests the following facts:
1. The all-India southwest monsoon rainfall does not show any
long-term trend, but it exhibits significant multi-decadal
variability.
2. However , there are significant regional trends in southwest
monsoon rainfall. Monsoon rainfall in the meteorological
sub divisions of Jharkhand, Chhattisgarh and Kerala has shown
significant decreasing trends. However , monsoon rainfall over
Gangetic West Bengal, West Uttar Pradesh, Jammu and
Kashmir , Konkan and Goa, Madhya Pradesh, Maharashtra,
Rayalaseema, Coastal Andhra Pradesh and North Interior
Karnataka showed increasing trends.
3. Monsoon rainfall in the month of July has shown decreasing
trends over most parts of central India. However , June and
August rainfall has shown increasing trend over the central
and southwestern parts of the country.
4. Annual mean, maximum and minimum temperatures averaged
over the country as a whole showed significant warming
trend of 0.60
oC, 1.0 oC and 0.18 oC per hundred years
respectively. The rate of warming trend in the annual mean
temperatures since 1980s is much sharper , 0.2oC per decade.
5. On the seasonal scale, the highest increasing trend is
observed in the post-monsoon and winter seasons. Monsoon
season shows the lowest increasing trend.

6
6. The warming is mostly confined to the northern, central
and eastern/north-eastern parts of the country. Peninsular
India experienced the least warming.
7. Frequency of very light rain and light to moderate rain
events during the monsoon season has decreased over most
of the country.
8. However , frequency of very heavy and extreme rainfall events
over northern parts of the country has increased significantly.
9. During the period, 1901-2010, heavy rainfall events (rainfall
exceeding 15 cm in 24 hours) over northern parts of the
country show an increasing trend of about 6% per decade.
10. Significant increasing (decreasing) trends in heat waves (cold
waves) are observed during the hot (cold) weather season
over most parts of the country.
11. The all-India droughts are observed almost once in five
years. More intense droughts are mainly observed over north
and northwest India. ”
1.9 On the above issue, representative of the Ministry of Earth
Sciences has stated as under:—
“Sir , one of the mandates of our Ministry is to study the climate
change issues. So, we have data in respect of climate change for
last 100 years. We have done a detailed analysis on climate change.
We have very clear evidence of change in climate in our country.
In respect of rainfall, the Monsoon season is the main season when
we get 70 to 90 per cent rainfall annually. But for last few years,
the monsoon rain is increasing at some places like Gangetic West
Bengal, West Uttar Pradesh, Jammu & Kashmir , Konkan and Goa,
Central Maharashtra, Rayalaseema, Coastal Andhra Pradesh and
north Karnataka. These are the places where increasing trend of
rainfall has been observed. At some places like Jharkhand,
Chhattisgarh, Kerala a decreasing trend of rainfall has been observed
during last 50 to 60 years. But on all India average, there is not
much change. Monsoon is a very stable and robust system. Every
year we get a good amount of rainfall. Year to year there are some
variations. But there is no long term trend. If we see it sub-
division wise, as I told earlier , there has been observed some
changes. In some areas there has been an increasing trend in
rainfall whereas in some other regions there are decreasing trends
of rainfall. The second thing that has been analysed is that there
has been decrease in rainfall in the month of July. But there has
been increase in rains in June as well as August. So, there is a
temporary change in rainfall. The agriculture people should note

7
down these changes so that agricultural practices could be changed
accordingly. In respect of rainfall, I would mention one thing that
characteristic of rainfall is changing. There is a decrease in light
and moderate rainfall. Frequency of heavy rainfall is increasing.
These are the observed facts, which we have found out while
doing research on 100 years’ of data.
If you ask as to what will happen in future, in next 20 or 30 years,
I would say that we have done some experiments. We have certain
climate models which we have developed in our institute at Pune.
Using that model we try to predict what will happen into the
future climate. After 30 or 40 years, two things are very certain
to happen. Heating frequency will increase more than what we are
experiencing now. Then, frequency of heavy rainfall and associated
flood will increase. But number of rainy days will decrease. Of all
122 days, we will not get rain on all days. Only on few days we
will get rain. The days when we get 2.5 ml of rain are called rainy
days. So, the rainy days will decrease. There would be only 30 to
40 days in a season. There will be small increase in the Monsoon
rainfall. So, these are the future expectations from the model. ”
1.10 Further elabotrating on the above issue, the representative
has further stated as under:—
“In respect of temperature, there has been a lot of change. The
whole India is warming. There has been increase in warming in all
parts of the country. The data in respect of warming shows that
there has been an increase of 0.6 degree for last 100 years. At
some places it has increased more than two degree and at some
other places the increase in warming is less than one degree. But
all India average is 0.6 degree. Trend of increase in global warming
is similar to that of our country. So, it is of the same magnitude.
Warming is more in northern, central, eastern and north-eastern
parts of the country than south Peninsula India. Increase in heat
wave has been observed in the whole country, especially in the
northern parts like Rajasthan, Punjab, Delhi, Madhya Pradesh and
in some parts of Uttar Pradesh and Andhra Pradesh. This year also
we have experienced a lot of heat waves. ”
1.11 When asked about kind of changes in climatic/weather pattern
observed in India in recent years, the Department of Agricultural
Research and Education have furnished following details:—
“...Summary of the observed long term changes in climatic/weather
pattern observed by IITM, Pune and ICAR (AICRPAM)so far include:—
(a) Mean annual surface air temperatures show a significant
warming of about 0.70 C/100 years during the last century.

8
(b) Heavy rain events (>10 cm/day) over central India are
increasing while weak and moderate events (1-5cm/day)
are decreasing at about the same rate over the past 50
years.
(c) No significant long-term trends are reported in the
frequencies of large-scale droughts or floods in the summer
monsoon season.
(d) The average seasonal rainfall over India has shown decline
in the last five decades especially after 1970. However , the
trend was statistically non-significant. Furtherover core
monsoon zone, the contribution from increasing heavy rain
events is offset by decreasing moderate events and hence
in the long term, the change is not appreciable. However ,
the south-west monsoon rainfall over the country has
decreased by nearly 4.7% during the period 1965-2006 as
compared to the earlier period (1931-1964).
(e) The total frequency of cyclonic storms that form over the
Bay of Bengal has remained almost constant.
(f) Analysis of past tide gauge records for the Indian coastline
regions gives an estimate of sea level rise of 1.30 mm/year.
(g) Studies on hailstorm frequency indicated that more than 61
per cent of the districts have experienced at least one hail
event in the 38-year period. Highest frequency is noticed
over districts in the northern Vidarbha region of Maharashtra
adjoining to Madhya Pradesh.
(h) The highest frequency of hailstorms exceeding 30 events
was noticed in only three districts of India-Nagpur district
of Maharashtra (40), Shimla district of Himachal Pradesh
(35) and the Kamrup district of Assam (32). The frequency
ranged between 25-30 in Akola and Amravati district of
Maharashtra. The severity of the damage they cause to the
agriculture sector depends on the timing of the episodes
and size of hailstorms... ”
1.12 When asked to furnish details of districts affected by drought
and floods in India during the last five years, the Department have
stated as under:—
“The nodal agency at central level to notify/compile details of
drought affected districts in India is Drought Cell under the Ministry
of Agriculture. Based on information received from Drought Cell

9
under the Ministry of Agriculture, the statement indicating drought
affected districts during last 5 years is given at Annexure-I. Further,
information related to flood affected districts is not compiled in
CWC at present. However the information available from NRSC
(Bhuvan) is enclosed at Annexure–II.
Flood affected areas and damages in India (1953 to 2004)
Sl. Item Unit Average Years Maximum
No. During Damage
(1953-2004) (Y ear)
 1. Area Affected Million Hectare 7.63 1978 17.50
 2. Population affected Million 32.92 1978 70.45
 3. Human Lives Lost No 1597 1977 11316
 4. Cattle Lost In thousands 94 1979 618
 5. Cropped Area Affected Million Hectare 3.56 1988 10.15
 6. Value of Damage Crops Rs. Crore 708.57 2000 4246.6
 7. Houses Damaged Th.No. 1235.61 1978 3508
 8. Value of Damage Houses Rs. Crore 251.05 1995 1307.9
 9. Value of Damage Public Rs. Crore 813.69 2001 5604
Utilities
10. Value of Total Damage to Rs. Crore 1817.07 2000 8864
Houses, Crops and Public
Utilities
Source: Central Water Commission (FMP Directorate)
1.13 When asked about efforts being made by the Government to
improvise system of flood warning in the country, the representative
of Ministry of Earth Sciences have submitted as under:—
“...Sir, we are also developing more flood-warning systems so that
we can help the Central Water Commission to issue the relevant
warnings with regard to how the flood will move, etc. Accordingly,
we can give information to the Central Water Commission so that
they can warn and help people. We are helping them in doing this.
Last year we had a severe drought. It has been noticed that
drought happens in every five years. Though we are not able to
predict as to when next drought will occur , it has been noted that
it happens once in five years. So, these changes have been observed

10
in climate change in our country. Temperature is increasing in
most of the parts. With an increase in temperature, heat waves
are also increasing. There is a change in pattern of rainfall, as
I have already mentioned... ”
II. Greenhouse Gas Emmission from Agriculture and Allied Sector
1.14 Paddy fields and Rumen fermentation are major sources of
Green House Gases (GHGs) in farm sector. On the query of the
Committee about study made by the ICAR to assess the quantum of
greenhouse gases emission from paddy fields and rumen fermentation
in India, the Department have stated as under:—
“...ICAR has conducted studies to assess the quantum of GHGs
emission from paddy fields and rumen fermentation. The inventories
have also been submitted to Ministry of Environment Forest and
Climate Change, Government of India for preparation of National
Communications of the country for submissions to the United Nations
Framework Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC). Studies showed
average methane emission of 40-70 kg/ha from rainfed rice field
and 100-180 kg/ha from irrigated rice fields. The nitrous oxide
(N
2O) emission having high Global Warming Potential (GWP) ranged
0.6-0.9 kg/ha under lowland irrigated conditions. In contrast, rice
fields were found beneficial for CO 2 sequestration. The average
quantum of CO 2 absorption in rice field ranged from 0.59-0.91
tonnes carbon per season per hectare. In total, 3.5-4.7 Tegagram
(Tg) methane and 0.05 Tg N 2O emission per year from rice fields
was estimated from India. It is important to note, the methane
emission from rice fields in India is negligible in comparison to
other rice growing countries like America, China, eastern and far-
eastern Asian countries where it ranged from 20-100 Tg per year.
Livestock constitutes an integral component of Indian agriculture
sector and also a major source of GHGs emissions. The studies
pertaining to quantification of methane emissions through rumen
fermentation are being conducted at CIRG Makhdoom, CSWRI
Avikanagar and DPR Hyderabad. The quantitative data being
generated on GHG’s under different management practices and
environments would help in a great way to work out the strategies
to reduce the emission and to enhance the input use efficiency
and productivity. However , studies conducted by Chhabra et al.
(2012) estimated total methane emission including enteric
fermentation and manure management of livestock is 11.75 Tg/
year out of which almost 91% is due to enteric fermentation. Dairy

11
buffalo and indigenous dairy cattle together contribute 60 % of the
methane emissions. The total nitrous oxide emission from Indian
livestock for the year 2003 is estimated at 1.42 Gg/year with
86.1% contribution from poultry... ”
1.15 When asked about ways by which GHGs emission can be
reduced/minimized from paddy fields and rumen fermentation, the
Department have stated as under:—
“...The emissions of GHGs from paddy fields can be reduced by
modifying water , nutrient and tillage management. Climate resilient
technologies to reduce GHG emission from rice fields include direct-
seeded rice, intermittent irrigation, modified SRI, use of nitrification
inhibitors and sulphate containing fertilizer , demand-driven nitrogen
application, Leaf Colour Chart (LCC) based application of fertilizer
and growing of short duration rice cultivars etc. For example,
studies showed that under conventional method of transplanting,
substitution of prilled urea with sulphur coated urea reduced the
methane emission by 9.9% and N
2O emission by 11.8%, while
substitution with neem coated urea reduced methane emission by
19.2% and N 2O emission by 23.7%. Similarly, in comparison to
conventional puddled rice, adoption of direct seeded rice (dry)
practices could reduce methane emission by 27.9% and N
2O emission
by 1.3%, while adoption of direct seeded rice (wet) could reduce
methane emission by 26.6% and N
2O emission by 4.6%. Further ,
adoption of Aerobic Direct Seeding Rice (ADSR) reduced the flux of
CH4 to 0.07 to 1.8 mg m -2 h -1 in comparison to 0.77 to 4.8 mg
m-2 h -1 in Continuous Flooded Transplanting Rice (CFTR). Besides,
conversion of rice straw into biochar and its application in rice
fields could also significantly decreased the GHG emission.
Based on the studies conducted on reductions of emissions in
ruminants, it has been found that the reduction in the emissions
can be made by adopting the (i) high productive breeds, (ii)
minimizing the use of agro-industrial by-products, (iii) use of high
density feed, (iv) use of certain natural methane inhibitors
containing feeds, (v) adoption of good management practices in
livestock, (vi) proper manure management, etc. Still studies are in
progress to generate more options for mitigating methane emission
from ruminants.
The cluster analysis of greenhouse gas emissions in relation to
farm income showed that majority of farms had high emission but
low income while some farms had high income and low emissions.
Efforts are being made to identify and promote technologies and
farm practices that result in high income and low emissions... ”

12
1.16 When asked about development of any varieties of rice which
can minimize emission of GHGs, the Department have stated as under:—
“...Studies showed that methane flux significantly varies with
different rice cultivars. In one study conducted at ICAR-IARI,
seasonal emission was maximum for Pusa 933 and minimum for
Pusa 169 with intermediate values decreasing in the order of Pusa
1019, Pusa Basmati, Pusa 834 and Pusa 677. Pusa Basmati 1509. In
general, a short duration rice variety has the potential to reduce
GHG emission. Similarly, ICAR-NRRI Cuttack grouped rice varieties
into low (CR-674-1, Ratna, Annada), medium (IR-36, IR-50,
Annapurna, Swarnaprabha) and high (Rasi, R-745-1, Sarasa) methane
emitters. Among the rice varieties released by NRRI, the methane
emission was highest in Varshadhan (4.19 µg m
-2h-1) and was the
lowest in Annada (0.46 µg m -2h-1). Among the lowland cultivars
methane emission was greater in Varshadhan followed by Durga,
Gayatri, Ranidhan, CR 1014, Pooja, Swarna, Swarnaprabha, Lalat,
and Naveen, whereas among upland cultivars methane emission
was greater in CR Dhan 201 followed by CR Dhan 204,
Sahabhagidhan, Kalinga 1, CR-143-2-2 and Annada... ”
III. Burning of Crop Residue
1.17 Burning of crop residue in agricultural field has emerged as
one of the important challenge in recent times which is adding to
already heavy level of pollutants in the environment. These practices
are also banned in several States. When asked about assessment made
by the ICAR on burning of crop residue in fields, the Department have
stated as under:—
“...ICAR has made assessment of crop residue which is burnt in the
fields. Crop residues generated in India are around 679 million
tonne (Mt) out of which 226 Mt residues are available in surplus.
The nutrient potential (N, P
2O5, K 2O) of these crop residues is
about 5.6 Mt. But, instead of using it as potential source of plant
nutrients, a large portion of the residues (approximately 130-140
Mt) is burnt annually in field. Rice straw contributed 40% of the
total residue burnt followed by wheat straw (22%) and sugarcane
trash (20%). Burning of crop residues emitted 8.57 Mt of CO
2,
141.15 Mt of CO 2, 0.037 Mt of SOx, 0.23 Mt of NOx, 0.12 Mt of
NH3...”
1.18 When asked about technique/method developed by the ICAR
whereby crop residue can be converted into useful farm manure in
shortest possible time, the Department have stated as under:—
“...ICAR-Indian Institute of Soil Science has developed a technique
called “Rapo-compost Technology ” for faster decomposition of

13
bio-degradable waste. This technology converts biodegradable waste
to quality compost in 30-45 days with the help of bio-inoculum
consortia (bacteria, fungi and actinomycetes) having ligno-
cellulolytic potential. In-situ decomposition technique is also doing
in farmers field... ”
1.19 When asked to explain alternative uses of crop residue, the
Department have stated as under:—
“...Crop residues are used as cattle feed, for making cupboard in
small scale industries. However, the residues can be used in
conservation agriculture (as mulching, retention, incorporation, no
tillage).  In-situ  decomposition of crop residues is the best
alternative. This eco-friendly practice will enhance crop productivity
and also improve soil physical, chemical and biological health. In
addition, technologies are also available to use the crop residues
effectively for the production of mushroom and lingo-cellulose
ethanol...”
IV. Influence on Agriculture due to Ingress of Sea Water
1.20 Rise in sea surface due to effect of global warming is expected
to cause depletion of significant portion of land in areas near sea in
many parts of the country. When asked about assessment made by the
Government on quantum of agriculture land which may be submerged
under sea water due to rising sea surface due to impact of global
warming in future, the Department have stated as under:—
“...Though comprehensive study on assessment of agricultural land
which may be however , submerged due to sea level rise in the
Coastal region has not been carried out, study of long term tide
gauge data under ICAR funded NICRA project indicated that the
sea levels at three stations Diamond Harbour , Garden Reach and
Haldia in Sundarbans are increasing at the rate of 4.85, 8.22 and
3.0 mm/yr. A 2007 report by UNESCO “Case Studies on Climate
Change and World Heritage ” has predicted 45 cm rise in sea level
likely by the end of the 21st century due to anthropogenic activities
in the Sundarbans. In Indian Sundarbans, out of total 3500 km. of
embankment, 800 km. is vulnerable to breach during high intensity
weather events leading to sea water intrusion. Already, Lohachara
Island and New Moore Island/South Talpatti Island have disappeared
under the sea, and Ghoramara Island in the Sundarbans is half
submerged. A work carried out by IIT , Kharagpur (Current Science,
vol. 104, no. 5, 10 March 2013) revealed that during the 20th
century 34.906 sq. km. of area along the Indian coast went under
the sea due to the rise in sea level... ”

14
1.21 On the query of the Committee regarding impact on agriculture
productivity in coastal areas due to submergence of land or ingress of
sea water in river , the Department have stated as under:—
“...In the coastal region, many of the agricultural lands are flat in
topography and lie below the sea or river bed levels resulting in
perennial drainage problem in this region. The high salinity in the
soil as well as acute shortage of fresh water for agricultural uses
pose serious problem leading to low productivity. Ingress of sea
water into agricultural fields would lead to devastating
consequences. For example, thousands of hectares of fertile
agricultural land and adjoining mangrove forests were turned in to
a vast wasteland due to ingress of saline sea water during cyclone
Aila in West Bengal (2009), super cyclone in Orissa (1999), and
Tsunami in eastern coast (2014). Due to ingression of sea water
during 2009-11, the total food production in North and South 24
Pargana districts of West Bengal reduced by 11% amounting to 363
thousand tonnes of total foodgrain... ”
1.22 When asked to furnish solution envisaged for safeguarding
agriculture near coastal areas due to submergence of land or ingress
of sea water in river , the Department have stated as under:—
“...ICAR institutes especially Central Coastal Agriculture Research
Institute (CCARI) Goa and Central Soil Salinity Research Institute
(CSSRI), Regional Research Station, Canning Town West Bengal have
developed several technologies for enhancement of agricultural
productivity (agriculture + fisheries) under degraded (saline) coastal
soils and poor water qualities (saline) conditions. Some of the
technologies recommended for safeguarding agriculture in the
coastal areas from submergence or ingress of sea water:
• Protective embankments with one way sluice gate to prevent
sea water entry and at the same time allow the inland
excess water to drain to the sea. The embankments should
be protected against the erosive action of sea waves by
planting suitable shelter trees or grasses.
• The surface drainage system of the area may be developed/
renovated to drain out the standing saline water through
sluice gate.
• Placing pumping stations in vulnerable areas to pump out
standing saline water from the low-lying area/ditches when
the natural drains fails to drain out the water.

15
• Growing salt tolerant and water logging resistant crop
varieties.
• Wherever possible paddy-cum-fish culture may be adopted.
For paddy-cum-fish culture the rice field should be linked
with contiguous pond/ditch/channels.
• If the river embankment fails to prevent entry of tidal
water into the fields, brackish water fish cultivation in the
area can be done on community basis or individually by
protecting the land area with nylon net or suitable bamboo
structure.
• Salt tolerant grass such as Para grass, Coix (Job’s tears) etc.
may be grown on unutilized land like opposite of river side
which may be used as fodder for cattle.
• Providing alternative livelihood options through promotion
of duckery, piggery, mushroom cultivation, nursery raising
for trees and fish seed.
• As part of the disaster management strategy construction
of rural godown for seed storage is utmost important.
Strategies might be, to produce seeds of salt resistant and
high yielding rice varieties through community participation
or promotion of seed village concept by active engagement
of government machinery.
Adoption of land shaping techniques developed by ICAR-
CSSRI, RRS, Canning Town, West Bengal such as farm pond,
deep furrow and high ridge, shallow furrow and medium
ridge and paddy-cum-fish cultivation to alleviate the issues
of water logging and increased salinity of soil in coastal
areas which are predicted to be further aggravated due to
sea level rise following climate change/global warming... ”
1.23 When asked about approach of ICAR for research for
development of varieties of crops which can be grown in saline water ,
the Department have stated as under:—
“ICAR is taking an active role in development of crop varieties that
are tolerant to high soil salinity. Crop improvement programmes
involving various stakeholders are being taken upto identify salt
tolerant varieties. The following activities are being taken up at
ICAR-CSSRI, RRS, Canning Town.
• Augmentation and maintenance of salt tolerant germplasms
of rice for resistance breeding.

16
• Evaluation of rice varieties/germplasm under ICAR-IRRI
collaborative project-Stress tolerant rice for Africa and South
Asia (STRASA).
• Evaluation of rice varieties/germplasm under Coastal Saline
Tolerant Variety Trial (CSTVT) and Salinity Tolerant Breeding
Network (STBN).
• Evaluation of jute varieties/germplasm under saline
conditions Evaluation of barley lines for coastal salinity under
ICAR-All India Coordinated Wheat and Barley Improvement
Project.”
V. Pest Severity and Disease Proliferation
1.24 Climate changes associated with global warming are expected
to affect types of pest and intensity of pest attack on crops. It is also
expected to affect disease proliferation among crops. When asked
about changes in types and intensity of pest attack expected to affect
crops in the country due to changes associated with global warming,
the Department have stated as under:—
“Variation in temperature, precipitation, humidity, wind speed and
CO
2 level besides frequent extreme weather events are major
factors that influence the incidence of pests and diseases in a
crop. Eelevated CO 2 and temperature due to climate change and
global warming is likely to increase the incidence of insect pests
and proliferation of diseases on field crops. Due to global warming
nutritional quality of the crop plants is expected to decline, and
thus the insect pests are expected to go for higher compensatory
feeding to meet the nutritional requirement. This may lead to
higher yield losses in different crops which in turn may affect the
food security. Further , more number of generations of insect pests
are expected to occur during future climate change periods because
of increased temperatures. ”
1.25 On the above issue, the Indian Agricultural research Institute,
Pusa has submitted as under:—
• “...There may be alteration of agricultural insects and
diseases because of more pathogen and vector development,
rapid pathogen transmission and increased host susceptibility.
• There will be extension of geographical range, changes in
population growth rates relative abundance and effectiveness
of pest.

17
• It is projected that there will be changes in pathogen/
insect-pest x host x environment interactions, and loss of
resistance in cultivars containing temperature-sensitive
genes.
• Emergence of new pest problems may take place with
increased risk of invasion by migrant pest... ”
1.26 When asked about study to assess impact on agriculture
production in country due to changes in types and intensity of pest
attacks and disease proliferation in crops due to climate changes in
future, the Department have stated as under:—
“...Under NICRA, ICAR has initiated studies to quantify the Real
Time Pest Dynamics (RTPD) in 5 crops (Rice, Pigeon pea, Groundnut,
Tomato and Mango). The major objective is to study crop-insect
pests/pathogen relationships under changing climate at the field
level besides develop pest forecast systems. Presently 25 centres
from 11 States representing 12 agro ecological regions of the country
are studying on real time pest dynamics (RTPD). Further , several
studies on quantification of impacts of eCO
2 and temperature on
insect pests and diseases are in pipeline and prediction of pest
scenarios during future climate change periods is being attempted...”
1.27 On being asked about plan of the Government to offset impact
of pest attack and disease proliferation on Indian agriculture, the
Department have stated as under:—
“...Department of Agriculture, Cooperation and Farmers Welfare
(DAC&FW) is implementing various schemes on plant protection
under “Strengthening and Modernization of Pest Management
Approach in India ” (SMPMA). In addition, ICAR through its National
Crop institutes spearheads research to evolve and implement climate
resilient plant protection technologies. State Department of
Agriculture across States are implementing IPM at various levels
ranging from digital (ICT based) monitoring real time pest status
across crops and issue of pest management advisories (SMS) on
area-basis to farmers and supply of critical inputs under extremes
of pest events... ”

18
CHAPTER II
AGRO-CLIMATIC CLASSIFICATION
2.1 Concept of agro-ecological regionalization helps to address
concerns pertaining to agricultural production in the Country. The
regionalization in terms of agro-ecological regions and agro-ecological
sub-regions (in particular) has helped to delineate geographical
conditions suitable for particular genotype so that optimum production
potential of the genotype is achieved. On the query of the Committee
about number of agro-climatic zones and sub-zones in the country as
per classification done by ICAR, the Department have stated as under:—
“...The delineation of Agro Ecological Regions (AERs) was an important
step as it took into accounts climatic conditions, LGP , landform
and soils. Twenty AERs were identified (NBSS & LUP , 1992). The
Agro Ecological Sub Regions (AESRs) is a further refinement of AERs
through addition of parameters to delineate LGP and Bio-climate
with details of soil texture, depth and mineralogy. In all, 60 AESRs
were identified by ICAR–NBSS–LUP (1999)... ”
2.2 When asked to furnish details of crops grown in different agro-
climatic zones and sub-zones of India, the Department have submitted
following details:—
“...Major rainfed crops grown under different agro-climatic zones
Agro-climatic zone (Domain districts)                     Major rainfed crops
Kharif Rabi
         1 2 3
North Bank Plain Zone of Assam Rice, maize, blackgram, jute T oria
(Dhemaji, Lakhimpur, Sonitpur and
Darrang)
Western Plateau Zone of Jharkhand Rice, maize, pigeonpea, Chickpea, wheat
(Palamu, Garhwa, Latehar, Chatra, blackgram
Lohardaga, Gumla and Simdega)
Eastern Plain Zone of Uttar Pradesh Rice, pigeonpea Maize, chickpea,
(Faizabad, Gonda, Ambedkarnagar , mustard
Barabanki, Basti, Sultanpur and Jaunpur

19
Bastar Plateau Zone of Chhattisgarh Rice, little millet, fingermillet,  Chickpea, mustard
(Bastar , Narayanpur, Kondagaon, Bijapur , maize, pigeonpea, niger,
Sukmaand part of Kanker (excluding greengram, blackgram,
Charama, Narharpur &Kanker Blocks) horsegram, sesame
North East Ghat Zone of Odisha Rice, maize, fingermillet, Mustard,
(Kandhamal, Ganjam, Gajapati, Boudh greengram, blackgram, greengram,
part of district and Rayagada) pigeonpea horsegram
Eastern Plain and Vindhyan Zone of Rice, maize, pearlmillet, Chickpea,
Uttar Pradesh (Varanasi, Chandauli, greengram, pigeonpea, linseed, lentil,
Mirzapur and Sonbhadra) sesame mustard
Northern Dry Zone of Karnataka Greengram, pearlmillet, Sorghum, chickpea
(Vijayapur, Bagalkote, Davangere, pigeonpea, sunflower
Gadag, Koppal, Bellary, parts of
Raichur (Lingsuguru and
Sindhanurutaluks), Belagavi
(Athani, Gokak, Raibag, Ramadurg,
Savadatti taluks) and Dharwad
(Navalagund taluk)
Scarcity Zone of Maharashtra Pearlmillet, pigeonpea, Chickpea,
(Solapur, Ahmednager, eastern part sunflower, sorghum sunflower
of Satara, Sangli, Kolhapur, Pune,
Osmanabad, Beed, Aurangabad,
Dhule, Jalgaon and Nandurbar)
Southern Zone of Rajasthan Maize, sorghum, soybean, Chickpea,
(Bhilwara, Chittaurgarh, Rajsamand, groundnut, blackgram, mustard, taramira
Sirohi, Dungarpur, parts of Udaipur , greengram, clusterbean,
Banswara and Ajmer) sesame
Kandi region of Punjab (Roopnagar, Maize, blackgram, greengram, Wheat, raya,
Hoshiarpur, Nawan Shehar and sesame t aramira, lentil,
Gurdaspur) chickpea
Low Altitude Subtropical Zone of Maize, pearlmillet, greengram, Wheat, mustard/
Jammu and Kashmir (Parts of blackgram, sesame gobhisarson,
Jammu, Kathua and Udhampur) chickpea, barley,
lentil
South-West Semi-Arid Zone of Uttar Pearlmillet, sesame, clusterbean, Mustard, chickpea,
Pradesh (Agra, Mathura, Mainpuri, greengram, backgram, pigeonpea Barley, lentil,
Aligarh, Hathras and Etah) wheat
         1 2            3

20
South-Western Dry Zone of Haryana P earlmillet, clusterbean, Mustard, chickpea
(Sirsa, Fatehabad, Hisar, Bhiwani, greengram
Mahendergarh, Rewari, Jhajjar and
Gurgaon)
Northern Gujarat Zone of Gujarat Pearlmillet, castor , -
(Sabarkantha, Gandhinagar , Ahmedabad, clusterbean, greengram,
Banaskantha, Mehsana and part of cowpea
Patan)
Eastern and Southern Dry Zone of Fingermillet, maize, Sorghum, maize,
Karnataka [Mysore, Chitradurga, Tumkur , pigeonpea, horsegram, sunflower
Kolar, Ramanagara,Bengaluru (Rural and cowpea, groundnut,
Urban) and Mandya] sunflower, sesame, castor
North Saurashtra Zone of Gujarat Groundnut, cotton, castor, -
(Jamnagar and major part of Amreli, Sesame, pearlmillet,
Bhavnagar, Rajkot and Surendranagar) greengram, blackgram
Scarce Rainfall Zone (Rayalasema) of Gro undnut, castor , pigeonpea, Groundnut,
Andhra Pradesh(Anantapuram and sunflower chickpea,
Kurnool) sunflower
Malwa Plateau of Madhya Pradesh Soybean, maize, sorghum Chickpea, wheat,
(Mandsaur , Ratlam, Ujjain, Rajgarh, mustard
Shajapur , Indore, Dewas, part of Dhar
(Badnawar and Sardarpur tehsils),
Jhabua (Petalawad Tehsil) and Sehore
(Aasta tehsil)
Keymore Plateau and Satpura Hill Rice, soybean, pigeonpea, Wheat, chickpea,
Zone of Madhya Pradesh (Satna, Blackgram, sesame Lentil
Sidhi, Rewa, Panna, north-eastern
parts of Katni, Jabalpur and Seoni)
Western Vidarbha Zone in Maharashtra Cotton, soybean, pigeonpea, Sorghum, chickpea
(Akola, Washim, Buldana, Yavatmal, greengram
Amravati, Wardha and part of
Nagpur)
Southern Zone of Tamil Nadu - Cotton, maize,
(Thoothukudi, Tirunelveli, Madhurai sorghum,
and Virudhnagar) blackgram,
Greengram,
pearlmillet
Central Maharashtra Zone of Soybean, cotton, sorghum, Greengram,
Maharashtra (Parbhani, Hingoli, pigeonpea, blackgram chickpea, sorghum
Nanded, Beed, Latur, Osmanabad,
Aurangabad and Jalna)
         1 2            3

21
2.3 On the query of the Committee regarding use of agro-climatic
classifications for cultivation of crops in India, the Department have
stated as under:—
“...Agro-climatic classifications are not strictly followed by the
farmers in cultivation of crops. However , the crops are grown in
different AERs mainly depend on favourable climate and soil factors,
farmers’ preferences, consumption patterns and resources available
with the farmers. Besides these factors, socio economic conditions,
market prices, Government supports in the form of MSPs and
subsidies also decide the kind of crop grown in different locations...”
2.4 When asked about steps being taken by the Government of
India to promote agriculture based on agro-climatic classification, the
Department have stated as under:—
“...The Government is giving advisory to states to educate farmers
for growing crops that are suitable to a given agro-climatic situation
so that risk is minimized and incomes are maximized... ”
2.5 On issue of impact of climate change on cultivation of crops
as per agro- ecological region, the representative of JAU, Gwalior has
stated as under:—
¶eè; izns'k esa ,xzks DykbesfVd osQ nks tksu gSa] ysfdu geus iwjs jkT; dks
11 ,xzks DykbesfVd tksu esa ckaVk gqvk gS vkSj fglkc ls gj tksu osQ fy,
vyx&vyx VsDuksykWth fodflr dj jgs gSaA geus fiNys rhl lky osQ ekSle
dks ,uykbt fd;k gS vkSj geus yksdy osjh,'ku dks DokyhiQkbZ djus dh dksf'k'k
dh gSA gekjs ;gka ekyok iBkj gS tgka yxHkx 0-04 fMxzh izfro"kZ rkieku c<+
jgk gS] ysfdu ;gka fefuee VsEijspj ?kV jgk gSA bl rjg ls bl rjg ls gekjs
;gka dgha&dgha fefuee VsDijspj c<+ jgk gS] dgha ?kV jgk gS vkSj dgha leku
gSA geus fiNys nl lky dk MsVk ,uykbt fd;k gS] ftlls ;g irk pyrk
gS fd blesa rhozrk vk;h gSA VsEijspj vc c<+ jgk gSA ge fiNys rhl lky
osQ VsEijspj osQ fglkc ls LVsªVth cuk jgs gSa fd fdl tksu esa fdruk VsEijspj
vxys nl&chl lky esa c<+sxk D;ksafd yksdy osjh,'ku cgqr T;knk gSA blh rjg
ls geus o"kkZ dk ns[kk gSA eè; izns'k osQ vfèkdrj ftyksa esa ;g ns[kk x;k gS
fd o"kkZ c<+ jgh gSA jsuh Mst dk tks ,d ØkbVhfj;k gksrk gS dgk tkrk gS
fd vkxs o"kkZ T;knk gksxh] ysfdu de fnuksa esa gksxhA eryc baVsfUlVh c<+ tk;sxh
rks ju vkWiQ T;knk gksxk] ÝyM~l T;knk gksaxh] MªkbZ LiSYl gksaxsA ysfdu oqQN fgLlksa
esa geus ns[kk fd ;gka ij uEcj vkWiQ jsuh Mst Hkh c<+ jgs gSa] tks fd tujy
vkWCtosZ'ku ls iQoZQ gSA rhljk geus ;g vkCtoZ fd;k gS fd ftls eSfDlee ihd
jsu iQky dgrs gSa] og vxLr esa gksrh Fkh] vc og èkhjs&èkhjs tqykbZ esa f'kÝV

22
gks jgh gS rks vc tks gekjh lksbax vkWiQ ØkIl gS] ge viuh tks iztkfr fodflr
dj jgs gSa] vc gesa ml fglkc ls djuh iM+xh vkSj vc gesa mldh cqokbZ tYnh
djuh iM+sxhA ;s pht geus DokafViQkbZ dh gS] gj ,d tksu dk vyx&vyx
gS vkSj blosQ fglkc ls ge yksx vc viuh VSDuksykWth fodflr dj jgs gSaA¸

23
CHAPTER III
IMPACT OF CLIMATE CHANGE ON AGRICULTURE
3.1 Climate change and global warming are issues that impact all
sectors of human life. Agriculture is particularly vulnerable to climate
change. Climate change and its variability are emerging as major
challenges facing Indian agriculture. The high inter and intra-seasonal
variability in rainfall distribution, extreme temperature and rainfall
events are causing crop damages and huge losses to farmers. The fifth
IPCC report clearly brought out the global and regional impacts of
climate change on agriculture, water resources, natural eco-systems
and food security. Among the several highly populated regions of the
world, South Asia is categorized as one of the most vulnerable. Countries
like India are more vulnerable due to huge population dependent on
agriculture, excessive pressure on natural resources and poor coping
mechanisms.
3.2 Key impacts of climate changes include changes in productivity,
in terms of quantity and quality of crops; changing trends in agricultural
practices like changes in water use and inputs such as fertilizers,
insecticides and herbicides; environmental effects, particularly in
relation to the frequency and intensity of soil drainage (leading to
nitrogen leaching), soil erosion and reduction of crop diversity. The
main direct impact of climate change include effect on crop duration,
reproduction, pollination and fertilization processes. The indirect effects
operate through changes in water availability and water demand due
to inadequate or excess rainfall and warming effects on pest and
disease proliferation.
3.3 Modelling studies indicate that changing climate will decrease
yields in major crops like wheat, rice maize, on the other hand the
impacts could be neutral to positive in others like groundnut, soyabean
and chickpea. The important impacts on Indian agriculture are described
below:
¾ Increase in CO
2 to 550 ppm increases yields of rice, wheat,
legumes and oilseeds by 10-20%.
¾ A 1°C increase in temperature may reduce yields of wheat,
soyabean, mustard, groundnut and potato by 3-7%.
¾ Productivity of most crops likely to decrease marginally by
2020 but by 10-40% by 2100.

24
¾ Significant impacts on food quality—basmati rice, wheat,
etc.
¾ Possibly some improvements in yields of chickpea, rabi maize,
sorghum and millets; and coconut in west coast.
¾ Less loss in potato, mustard and vegetables in North-Western
India due to reduced frost damage.
¾ Climate change may increase production of potato in Punjab,
Haryana and western and central UP by 3.46 to 7.11% during
2030s, but in rest of India, particularly West Bengal and
southern plateau region, potato production may decline by
4-16%.
3.4 When asked about kind of shifts in agricultural activities has
been observed in the country due to change in climatic pattern or
weather fluctuation, the Department have stated as under:—
“...The important crops in which there was a decline in cultivated
area between 2004-05 and 2014-15 were sorghum (3.5 mha),
pearlmillet (1.3 mha) and groundnut (1.2 mha). On the other hand,
sown area increased in soyabean, wheat and cotton (more than
4 mha). The other crops which gained area during the period were
chickpea (2.3 mha), maize (1.9 mha) and rice (1.7 mha). Examination
of area dynamics hint that besides climate change, government
policies, technology development, irrigation potential created and
market demand are the key drivers for shift in agricultural activity.
Nutrient use through fertilizers has increased substantially during
the last decade. Consumption of fertilizer nutrients viz., nitrogen,
phosphorous and potassium together increased from 17 to 25 mtons.
There was about 10 mha rise in net irrigated area (between
2002-03 and 2012-13). Net irrigated area as a % net sown area also
rose from 40 to 46. The increase in gross irrigated area is about
15 mha... ”
3.5 While elaborating on the need of R & D on climate change and
preparedness of ICAR, the representative of DARE stated as under:—
¶gekjk izFke iz;kl tyok;q ifjorZu dks le>us dk gS vkSj bl ifjorZu dh
otg ls iQlyksa ij D;k vlj iM+ jgk gS] i'kqvksa osQ mQij D;k izHkko iM+ jgk
gS] eNyh ij D;k izHkko iM+ jgk gS] bls le>us dk gSA vxj blh rjg ls
rkieku esa ifjorZu gksrk jgsxk rks HkfOk"; esa bldk D;k vlj iM+sxk] bls Hkh
le>us dh t:jr gSA gekjs iz;kl ls vHkh ge rd ftruk mRiknu dj ik jgs
gSa] D;k mruk Hkfo"; esa Hkh gksxk] ;g Hkh gekjs 'kksèk dk ,d fo"k; gSA gekjs

25
ikl fofHkUu iQlyksa rFkk i'kqvksa osQ ckjs esa bl fo"k; esa dkiQh rF; miyCèk gSA
nwljh fn'kk ;g gS fd bls è;ku esa j[krs gq, gekjh VsDuksyksth D;k gksuh pkfg,]
rkfd blosQ vlj dks de fd;k tk losQA ge bl vlj dks iwjh rjg ls [kRe
rks ugha dj ldrs gSa ysafdu blosQ vlj dks oSQls de fd;k tk,] ;g t:j
fd;k tk ldrk gS rkfd [kk| lqj{kk vkSj LokLF; dks ge Bhd j[k losaQA¸
3.6 When the Committee asked to furnish details about fluctuation
in production of Wheat, Rice and other important crops grown in the
country during the last ten years, the Department have submitted as
under:—
“...There has been a significant fluctuation in production in
important crops grown in the country during last 10 years (between
2005-06 and 2014-15). Rice production (89 mt) had a big dip in
drought year 2009-10. Wheat, rapeseed & mustard and chickpea
production suffered an adverse impact in 2014-15 (89, 6.3 and
7.2 mt, respectively). Production of Pearl millet was affected badly
in 2009-10 (6.5 mt) and 2012-13 (7.3 mt). Maize production was
robust enough except in year 2009-10 (16.7 mt). Groundnut
production experienced lot of fluctuations throughout the period.
Soyabean production witnessed a declining trend from 2012-13... ”
3.7 On the query of the Committee regarding assessment of loss
suffered by the farmers due to destruction of agriculture produce
caused by abrupt weather pattern such as drought, flood, hailstorm,
cyclones etc., the Department have stated as under:—
“...National Institute of Disaster Management under the Ministry of
Home Affairs, Government of India is publishing the “India Disaster
Report” every year based on all the disasters happened in India and
also tabulating the losses accumulated to Agriculture and allied
sectors besides Human causalities and infrastructure. The ICAR-
Indian Agricultural Statistical Research Institute (IASRI) also compiled
the information on disasters and crop losses. Some major disaster
in India since 2011 are appended. ”
Year-wise damage caused due to floods, cyclonic storms, landslides
etc. during last ten years in India
Year Live Lost Cattle Lost Houses Cropped areas
Human (in No.) Damaged affected
(in No.) (in No.) (in Lakh
hectares)
12 3 4 5
2001-02 834 21,269 3,46,878 18.72
2002-03 898 3,729 4,62,700 21.00

26
2003-04 1,992 25,393 6,82,209 31.98
2004-05 1,995 12,389 16,03,300 32.53
2005-06 2,698 1,10,997 21,20,012 35.52
2006-07 2,402 4,55,619 19,34,680 70.87
2007-08 3,764 1,19,218 35,27,041 85.13
2008-09 3,405 53,833 16,46,905 35.56
2009-10 1,677 1,28,452 13,59,726 47.13
2010-11 2,310 48,778 13,38,619 46.25
Source: Ministry of Home Affairs (MHA)
i. Development of Varieties of Crops with Enhanced Abiotic Stress
Tolerance
3.8 When asked about efforts being taken by the Government of
India to promote research and development in agriculture universities
for development of varieties of crops which can withstand climatic
fluctuation, the Department have stated as under:—
“...Developing abiotic stress tolerant crop varieties is the major
breeding objectives of all crop improvement programmes of NARS
(ICAR and SAUs). However , the efforts got further momentum with
the launch of NICRA especially for climate change driven abiotic
stresses viz. drought, heat, high temperature, salinity, water logging.
Over past five years, considerable efforts have been made towards
development of varieties/hybrids for different abiotic stresses by
ICAR institutes and SAUs. Few varieties for submergence and hybrids
for high nitrogen efficiency have been released for
commercialization...”
3.9 While elaborating about efforts being taken to development of
varieties/hybrids for different abiotic stresses, the IARI has submitted
as under:—
“...The field and Horticulture Crop Improvement groups of institute
are engaged in research on genetic improvement of field crops
viz., wheat, rice, pearl millet, maize [cereals], chickpea, pigeon
pea, munghean, lentil [pulses], mustard, soyabean [oil seeds]
tomato, palak, radish, turnip, bottle gourd, bitter gourd, cucumber
12 3 4 5

27
and cowpea. Both conventional and modern tools/techniques are
routinely used for breeding genotypes suitable for specific agro-
climatic conditions and for tolerance to heat, drought and water
logging. The improved genotypes are evaluated in multi-locations
over years, and promising entries are identified and released for
cultivation. During last 15 years (2001-2015), a total 92-varieties
of various mandate field crops and a number of vegetable have
been released and notified for different agro- climatic conditions
of the country which are in seed chain and performing excellently
in their areas of recommendation. The details are enclosed in
Annexure-III:
• These also include Identification of suitable cauliflower
varieties. Hybrids viz., DC-76 and DCH-1076, dc-309 and
DCH-1001 for summer production in hills at 4 different
elevations in hills, namely Katrain, solan, Bajaura and Almora
and promising selection of sarda melon (DHM-159) that can
be successfully grown under net house in north Indian plans
having yield potential of 5-5.5 q in 100 m2 area of net
house.
• Besides this, the Institute screened large number of
germplasm and identified Nerica L44 and N22 as noval sources
of heat tolerance in rice, which is being used in breeding
program. In a effort to generate recombinant inbred line
and for mapping population for mapping QTLs governing
heat tolerance, different crosses were made with heat
tolerant genotypes namely L44 and N22, which are in F4
generation.
• Market assisted backcross breeding was carried out using
molecular marker linked to the QTL governing drought
tolerance into Pusa Basmati 1 and in Pusa 44 and 41 (under
Pusa Basmati 1 background), 36 (under Pusa 44 background).
Desirable progenies have been identified in BC3F2 generation
and BC3F3 families have been frown at off-season nursery
at IARI’s regional station at Aduthurai for further selection.
• Standardized physiological trait-based phenotyping protocol
for screening for heat and drought tolerance in wheat was
also developed. Introgression of QTL’s for physiological traits
for imparting drought and heat tolerance in the background
of popular wheat varieties are in progress.
• Thermo-stable enzymes of key biosynthetic pathways from
wheat, which can maintain the metabolic processes of the

28
plants even under high temperature were identified. Also
identified and validate heat-responsive microsatellite
markers, which can be utilized for screening large germplasm
of wheat for the development of climate smart crop.
• Maize genotypes tolerant to low and high temperature
tolerance were identified and Maize genotypes in each of
the tolerant and susceptible group are further being advanced
for more detailed analysis.
• T wo wild species i.e., L. peruvianumand L. pimpinellifoium
crossable to cultivated tomato have been identified for
temperature stress tolerance. Among cultivated genotypes
(Pusa sadabahar and TH-348) and hybrids (DTH-9 AND DTH
10) were identified for heat stress tolerance.
• The institute also developed Yellow Mosaic Virus (YVMV)
free okra varieties viz., DOV 66 and DOV-12 that 100% free
from YVMV up to 90 days after sowing and recorded average
yield of 18.5 t/ha and 17.8 t/ha, respectively, Hybrid DOH-
1 that recorded 19.1 t/ha yield and was associated with
just 1% YVMV incidence was also developed.
• The institute has also identified five mango hybrids, H-1-11,
H-8-11, H-1-5, H-13-4 and H-11-2 having over 200g fruit
weight, red peel colour and acceptable quality and has
initiated rootstock breeding for dwarfness and salinity
tolerance.
• In lime, clone ALC-2 having summer fruiting with desired
fruit weight was identified and in citrus, rootstock
improvement has been initiated to mitigate soil salinity and
biotic stresses under changing climatic conditions.
• In grape, 5-extra-early (last week of May) maturing hybrids
with higher TSS (20-22 degree Brix) have been identified.
• In papaya, 2 advance gynodioecious lines (P-7-15, P-7-9),
having desired fruit weight and field tolerance to papaya
ring spot virus have been developed.
• In Kinnow, hatti Khatti rootstock showing meritorious
characteristics for its commercial cultivation in semi-arid
regions, lemon for cultivation under environmental stress
and sour orange in drought prone areas have also been
developed.
Pomegranate varieties viz.; Ichakdana, Ganesh, Kandhari
Hansi, Kandhari Kabuli, Jodhpur Red, P-23, P-26 with
capability to perform well under changing climate of Shimla,
were also developed... ”

29
3.10 On the above issue, the representative of DARE has stated as
under:—
¶egksn;] tSlk ekuuh; lnL;ksa us crk;k Early maturing varieties ,yhZ
eSP;q¯jx osjkbVht tks fdLesa tYnh id tkrh gSa] gj iQly esa ,slh fdLeksa dk
fodkl djus dk dke tkjh gS rkfd tyok;q ifjorZu dk tks izHkko gS] tSls
xsgwa esa vxj dksbZ fdLe tYnh id tk,xh og blosQ vlj ls cp tk,xhA egksn;]
rkieku c<+us dh ckr Hkh dgh xbZ gSA rkieku c<+us ij oSQls jksd yxkbZ tk,]
;g vyx fo"k; gSA nslh fdLe dks ge <aw<dj yk,axs fd fdlesa lgu'khyrk
gSA mÙkj izns'k esa ukfxuk ,d txg gS vkSj ogha nslh fdLe dh èkku ukfxuk&22
gSA mldh T;knk rkieku lgu djus dh {kerk gS] tks gesa <wa<us ij feyk gS
vkSj blesa ikuh Hkh de yxrk gSA mlesa ,d thu geus <wa<k gS] ftls vxj
nwljh fdLe esa czh¯Mx osQ rgr Mky fn;k tk, rks dksbZ th,e VsDuksykWth dh
t:jr ugha gS] cl vxj czh¯Mx osQ rgr Mky fn;k tk, vkSj gejk mldk iz;kl
Hkh gS rks mldh nwljh fdLe esa Hkh de ikuh yxsxkA og T;knk rkieku ij
Hkh gesa iQly ns ldrk gSA blh rjg ls ljlksa dh fdLe esa Hkh gS] tks czklhdk
osQjkukVk fdLe gSA¸
3.11 On the query of the Committee regarding kinds of support are
being provided by the Government of India to encourage use of heat/
water logging tolerating seed varieties among farmers, the Department
have stated as under:—
“...The Government is encouraging use of location specific climate
resilient crops varieties including heat/water logging tolerating
seed varieties among farmers by ensuring availability of quality
seeds of desirable varieties; developing, demonstrating and
disseminating complete package of practices to stakeholders; seed
subsidies, capacity building besides bringing convergence among
public and private agencies in seed chain. The seeds are also
popularised through KisanMela, KisanGosthies and mass media.
Further , Innovative farmers can also be trained and given financial
support to produce seeds at their own farms. Further, other
innovative approaches such as village seed bank by involving self-
help groups/farmers are being adopted. Still some more
comprehensive programme efforts are required to be initiated by
the Government to meet the challenges of supplying quality seeds
of heat and water logging tolerating varities... ”
ii. Availability of Seed
3.12 Availability of good quality seed at reasonable price is one of
important factor for ensuring high productivity in agriculture and to
ensure remunerative prices to the farmers. Climatic changes associated
with global warming will necessiate development of seed varieties
which can withstand climatic fluctuation. In our country, ICAR through

30
its network of institute has been able to develop good quality seeds
for farmers of the country. However , there is need to plan for massive
investment and thrust for taking steps for R & D for development of
varieties of seeds which will required by the farmers in coming decades.
When asked about success achieved by the ICAR in development of
short duration, heat resistant, salinity resistant, and draught resisting
varieties of seeds which will be able to withstand climatic fluctuations
considered to be associated with the climate changes due to global
warming, the DARE has stated as under:—
“...Indian Council of Agricultural Research (ICAR) undertakes
comprehensive assessment of crops and traits required in different
agro-ecological zones on a regular basis as part of the ongoing
programmes of the Crop Institutes and All India Coordinated Research
Projects on different crops. The important traits for undertaking
research include blast, blight resistance and drought tolerance in
rice, rusts resistance and heat tolerance in wheat, stem borer
resistance and drought tolerance in maize, wilt and pod borer
resistance in pulses, yellow mosaic virus, pod shattering and drought
tolerance in oilseeds. National Agricultural Research System
comprising ICAR, central agricultural universities and SAUs are taking
adequate steps in development of high yielding varieties suitable
for biotic and abiotic stresses including deficient rainfall/drought.
Short duration varieties have also been released to escape or
overcome the vagaries of weather condition. The research efforts
for breeding climate resilient varieties was further strengthened at
some core ICAR institutes (IARI New Delhi, NRCPB New Delhi, IIHR
Bengaluru, CRIDA Hyderabad, IIVR Varanasi, NRRI Cuttack, IIRR
Hyderabad, IIPR Kanpur) under National Innovations in Climate
Resilient Agriculture (NICRA). Over the past few years considerable
efforts have been made towards development of varieties/hybrids
for different abiotic stresses by these institutes. Many more such
varieties and hybrids are under different stages of development.
The high yielding varieties that can withstand severe change in
weather pattern including deficient rainfall/drought and varieties
suitable for biotic and abiotic stresses are attached in
Annexure IV...”
3.13 On the query of the Committee about steps being taken by
the ICAR for making available seeds developed by them for commercial
exploitation, the DARE has stated as under:—
“Realizing the importance of seed, ICAR mounted serious efforts
to streamline country’s seed programme by launching AICRP-NSP
(Crops) in 1979-80 aimed at production of basic seed with a separate
project coordinating unit dedicated exclusively for nucleus and
breeder seed production and to carry out seed technological
research. This was elevated to Directorate paving the way for

31
establishment of Directorate of Seed Research (DSR) in 2004
envisioning the referred mandate. Another milestone project in
quality seed production was ‘ICAR Seed Project — Seed Production
in Agricultural Crops and Fisheries ’ launched in 2005 aiming at
provision of infrastructural facilities in seed domain under National
Agricultural Research System (NARS) throughout the country. Since
inception, DSR strived towards achieving excellence, which is clearly
manifested in the form of surge in quality seed production and
enhancement in the horizons of seed technological research. ICAR
seed Project, lead to infrastructure establishment in seed domain
under NARS. DSR generated valuable information and contributed
significantly to seed technological research.
Launching of AICRP-NSP (Crops) was a phenomenal milestone in
Indian seed sector which has led to sea change, as witnessed by
increase from a meagre breeder seed production of 3914 quintals
during 1981–82 to a level of 89266.23 quintals during 2013-14,
which has surpassed the indents received both from DAC as well
as State Governments. The breeder seed availability has improved
the quantity/quality of seeds in subsequent generations in the
seed multiplication chain which has resulted in increasing seed
replacement of different crops. Ample scope exists to augment
agricultural production in almost all crops in near future simply by
capitalizing the benefits of quality seeds. During 2013-14, total
production of quality seed including all classes was 648325 quintals
against the target of 475179 quintals. Production comprises 94953
quintals of breeder seed, 144369 quintals of foundation seed, 163465
quintals of certified seeds, 172351 quintals of truthfully labelled
seed and 73185 quintals of planting material of field crops. In
addition, 155.59 lakhs planting material and 5.60 lakh tissue culture
plantlets of field crops were produced against the targets of 94.80
and 2.07 lakhs. Similar results for 2014-15 are presented in following
table:
(in qtl.)
Sl.No. P articulars In University/Institute P articipatory Seed T otal
Production
Target Production Target Production Target Production
1. Breeder seed 70812.41 96703.66 1217.75 1278.47 72030.16 97982.13
2. Foundation seed 60796.01 86571.32 33288.50 89051.07 94084.51 175622.39
3. Certified seed 27481.00 44432.01 86748.00 84033.27 114229.00 128465.28
4. TFL seed 54732.93 66251.60 48739.00 73754.66 103471.93 140006.26
5. Planting material 15360.00 34176.30 - - 15360.00 34176.30
Total 229182.3 328134.88 169993.25 248117.47 399175.60 576252.35
Source: IISR Mau

32
3.14 On the query of the Committee regarding average time taken
by the ICAR for development of new seed varieties and their availability
in market for farmers, the DARE has stated as under:—
“...The average time taken to develop new varieties depends upon
the breeding objectives, breeding methods, availability of desired
source, number of genes governing desired character and complexity
of gene transfer. In general development of new seed variety of
annual crops takes 5 to 15 years. It may be still longer for perennial
crops. Further , depending upon the nature of the crop, the seeds
of identified/notified news varieties take 3-5 years to become
commercially available to the farmers... ”
3.15 When asked about Government agencies responsible for making
quality seeds available to the farmers in the country, the DARE has
stated as under:—
“...The Indian seed programme largely adheres to the limited
generations’ system for seed multiplication in a phased manner.
The system recognizes three generations namely breeder , foundation
and certified seeds and provides adequate safeguards for quality
assurance in the seed multiplication chain to maintain the purity
of the variety as it flows from the breeder to the farmer.
Breeder Seed  is the progeny of nucleus seed of a variety and is
produced by the originating breeder or by a sponsored breeder.
Breeder seed production is the mandate of the Indian Council of
Agricultural Research (ICAR) and is being undertaken with the help
of ICAR Research Institutions, All India Coordinated Research Project
of different crops, State Agricultural Universities (SAUs), Sponsored
breeders recognized by selected State Seed Corporations, and
Non-Governmental Organizations. ICAR also promotes sponsored
breeder seed production programme through the National Seeds
Corporation (NSC)/State Farms Corporation of India (SFCI), State
Seeds Corporation (SSCs), Krishi Vigyan Kendras (KVKs) etc. The
indents from various seeds producing agencies are collected by the
State Departments of Agriculture and submitted to the Department
of Agriculture and Cooperation (DAC), Ministry of Agriculture,
Government of India, which is turn compiles the whole information
crop-wise and sends it to the Project Coordinator/Project Director
of the respective crops in ICAR for final allocation of production
responsibility to different SAUs/ICAR institutions.
Foundation Seed is the progeny of breeder seed and is required
to be produced from breeder seed or from foundation seed which

33
can be clearly traced to breeder seed. The responsibility for
production of foundation seed has been entrusted to the NSC,
SFCI, State Seeds Corporation, State Departments of Agriculture
and private seed producers, who have the necessary infrastructure
facilities. Foundation seed is required to meet the standards of
seed certification prescribed in the Indian Minimum Seeds
Certification Standards, both at the field and laboratory testing.
Certified Seed  is the progeny of foundation seed and must meet
the standards of seed certification prescribed in the Indian Minimum
Seeds Certification Standards, 1988. In case of self pollinated crops,
certified seeds can also be produced from certified seeds provided
it does not go beyond three generations from foundation seed
stage-I.
The production and distribution of quality/certified seeds is primarily
the responsibility of the State Governments. Certified seed
production is organized through State Seed Corporation,
Departmental Agricultural Farms, and Cooperatives etc. The
distribution of seeds is undertaken through a number of channels
i.e. departmental outlets at block and village level, cooperatives,
outlets of seed corporations, private dealers etc. The efforts of
the State Governments are being supplemented by NSC and SFCI
which produce varieties of national importance... ”
3.16 When asked about planning in place for adequate production
and availability of quality seeds to face climatic fluctuation in future,
the DARE has stated as under:—
“...The Department of Agriculture, Cooperation and Farmers Welfare
is implementing a Central Sector Scheme as ‘Development and
Strengthening of Infrastructure Facilities for Production and
Distribution of Quality Seeds ’ since 2005-06 for the whole country.
The objective of the ongoing scheme is to ensure production and
multiplication of high yielding certified/quality seeds of all crops
in sufficient quantities and make the seeds available to farmers,
including those in remote areas, not easily accessible by rail/road
on time and at affordable price. The requirement of certified/
quality seeds is assessed by State Governments on the basis of the
area sown under different crop varieties, area covered by hybrid
and self-pollinated varieties as well as the seed replacement rate
achieved. The availability of seed is ascertained by the State
Departments of Agriculture on the basis of the production of seed
in Government farms and production of seeds by State Seeds

34
Corporations and other agencies. The Government of India
periodically assesses the requirement and availability of seeds
through detailed interaction with State Governments and seed
producing agencies in the bi-annual Zonal Seed Review Meetings
and the National Kharif and Rabi Conferences. DAC&FW facilitates
tie-up arrangements with seed producing agencies to ensure that
the requirement of seeds is met to the maximum extent possible.
Besides, under the national seed project ICAR-Indian Institute Seed
Research, MAU is coordinating the quality seed production of
different crops through various ICAR institutes/SAUs based on the
target fixed by DAC & FW, Ministry of Agriculture & Farmers Welfares
(Government of India)... ”
3.17 When asked about average requirement of seeds in the country
as of now, the DARE has stated as under:—
“...The seed requirement of farmers is mainly met by farm saved
seed, i.e. still 65% of the farmers are using their own saved seed
or seed distributed among them. Making the quality seed available
at right time is greater challenge rather than production  per se .
Seed, being the principal input in determining productivity, seed
replacement should be given utmost priority. Amelioration of skewed
SRR, i.e. the percentage of area sown out of total cropped area
by using certified/quality seeds other than farm saved seed is the
major challenge. Even though there is slight improvement recently,
still a long way ahead in making the quality seed available at
farmers’ doorsteps and for achieving 100% SRR, which will herald
the era of quality seed driven growth in agriculture sector ... ”
Seed Replacement Rate in different crops and its variation across
States
Crop National Highest SRR (%) Lowest SRR (%)
Average
SRR (%)
12 3 4
Paddy 37.5 82.0 Andhra Pradesh 9.0 Uttarakhand
Wheat 32.6 42.0 Maharashtra 11.0 Jammu & Kashmir
Maize 54.1 100.0 Karnataka 5.0 Odisha
Jowar 25.9 65.0 Andhra Pradesh 11.0 T amil Nadu
Bajra 61.4 100.0 Gujarat 29.0 Karnataka

35
Bengal gram 18.4 78.0 Andhra Pradesh 4.0 Rajasthan
Black gram 29.2 77.0 Haryana 3.0 Chhattisgarh
Green gram 26.7 94.0 Uttar Pradesh 1.0 Odisha
Red gram 17.5 55.0 Andhra Pradesh 2.0 Odisha
Groundnut 24.5 50.0 Andhra Pradesh 0.5 Madhya Pradesh
Mustard 63.6 78.0 Rajasthan 13.0 Odisha
Soybean 35.9 100.0 Andhra Pradesh 11.0 Rajasthan
Sunflower 61.2 100.0 Andhra Pradesh 8.0 Madhya Pradesh
Cotton 10.4 100.0 Andhra Pradesh 2.0 Odisha
Source: Directorate of Economics & Statistics, MoA&FW, GoI {2012},
Quality seed requirement of major crops in the country
(Assuming 100% SRR)
Crops Gross Seed Certified SMR Foundation Breeder
cultivated Rate seed seed requir. seed
area (kg./ha) require (000 tonnes) requirement
(m ha.) (000 (tonnes)
tonnes)
Rice 45.6 50 2280.0 100 22.8 228.0
Wheat 27.2 125 3400.0 20 170.0 8500.0
Sorghum 7.7 15 115.5 160 0.7 4.5
Pearl millet 8.7 5 43.5 200 0.2 1.1
Maize 8.0 20 160.0 80 2.0 25.0
Pigeon pea 3.4 15 51.0 100 0.5 5.1
Chickpea 8.2 80 656.0 10 65.6 6560.0
Groundnut 6.2 100 620.0 8 9.7 1210.9
R&M 6.3 5 31.5 200 0.2 0.8
Soybean 8.9 75 667.5 16 41.7 2607.4
Sunflower 1.9 10 19.0 50 0.4 7.6
Cotton 9.5 12 114.0 50 2.3 45.6
Jute 0.8 5 4.0 100 0.04 0.4
Total 142.4 8162.0 316.1 19196.4
12 3 4

36
3.18 On the query of the Committee regarding share of public as
well as private sector in the market for seed in the country, the DARE
has stated as under:—
“...The private sector has started to play a significant role in the
seed industry over the last few years. However , the main focus of
private seed companies has been on the high value low volume
seeds. Market for low value high volume seeds, seeds of cereals,
pulses and oilseeds is still dominated by the public sector seed
corporations. Private sector companies have a significant place
mainly in the case of maize, sunflower , cotton and vegetable seeds.
The overall contribution of private sector seed companies in total
seed production of the country is presently 50-57%... ”
iii. Conservation of Indigenous Varieties of Seeds
3.19 Our country is bestowed with rich bio-diversity. The flora of
India is one of the richest in the world due to the wide range of
climate, topology and habitat in the country. There are estimated to
be over 16,000 species of flowering plants in India, which constitute
some 6-7 per cent of the total plant species in the world. India is
home to more than 45,000 species of plants, including a variety of
endemics. Further , India being one of the earliest civilization in the
world has also contributed to cultivation of various varieties of crops
and majority of these are which are still being preserved by the
farmers in different parts of the country. When asked about the policy
of the Government to conserve indigenous varieties of seeds in the
country, the DARE has stated as under:—
“...National Bureau of Plant Genetic Resources (NBPGR), New Delhi
is the national institute for conservation of seeds, all germplasm
collection, genetic stocks and varieties of different crops in the
country. Apart from NBPGR various ICAR institutes as well as SAUs
are also maintaining an active collection of indigenous varieties,
germplasm, elite breeding materials and utilization for developing
improve varieties of respective crops, especially the crop based
institute of Crop Science Division... ”
3.20 On the query of the Committee regarding policy of the
Government to identity unique characteristics of indigenous seeds and
germplasm available in the country in order to utilize these traits for
development of new seeds which can withstand climatic fluctuations,
the DARE has stated as under:—
“...In order to identify suitable donors, germplasm collection at
NBPGR are being evaluated and characterized for different traits
time to time under different project. Up till now, about 2.62 lakh

37
indigenous accessions have been collected, more than 60 thousand
accessions repatriated, 6.26 lakh accessions imported and tested
for quarantine clearance, and more than four lakh accessions have
been supplied to breeders and researchers within the country.
Nearly 1.9 lakh germplasm accessions have been characterized and
more than two thousand cultivars have been DNA fingerprinted.
Total of 4.14 lakh accessions are presently conserved for long term
in the National Genebank. Intellectual Property Rights (IPRs) on
genetic resources were facilitated by registering about 1100 unique
accessions and by filing over a thousand applications with Protection
of Plant Varieties and Farmers’ Rights (PPV&FR) Authority for varietal
registration. Further , the entire wheat collection of >20000 wheat
accessions conserved at NBPGR was screened at multi-location for
identifying donors for various traits including biotic and abiotic
stresses under a flagship project. Similar efforts are going on
evaluation of pulses. Under NICRA project specific set germplasm,
breeding lines, varieties are being evaluated for tolerance to abiotic
stresses such as heat, drought, water logging etc., which is being
used in hybridization for developing new cultivars... ”
3.21 When asked about policy/programmes of the Central and
State Governments for creation of seed banks at Village or Panchayat
level in entire country, the DARE has stated as under:—
“...In order to ensure that seeds are available to the farmers at
the time of natural calamities like floods, droughts, etc., a need
was felt to establish a Seed Bank to maintain stocks of foundation
and certified seeds of different crops/varieties which can be utilized
for such contingent requirements. Under this component, crop-
wise targets of seeds are fixed for each participating organization
for maintenance in the Seed Bank every year. Further , Under the
national seed project quality seed are being produced under village
seed bank programme and are distributed to farmers for
cultivation...”
iv. Impact of Climate Change on Horticulture
3.22 Horticulture is going to be one of the sector which will be
severely affected due changes relating to flowering and pollination
and yield losses caused by unseasonal rains and temperature variations.
India is one of the pioneer in horticulture sector , will have to bear the
losses caused due to climate change leading to loss of livelihood for
scores of farmers. When asked about efforts being taken by the
Government of India for research and development on horticulture

38
sector due to impact of elevated temperature, CO 2 on the flowering
behaviour , pollinators and yield losses due to variable climate including
flooding due to heavy rains, the Department have stated as under:—
“...Research and dissemination of technologies for various stresses
on horticultural crops is already embedded and mainstreamed into
ongoing mandate and efforts of various horticulture related ICAR
institutes and AICRP centres spread across different SAUs. However,
the efforts were further strengthened and streamlined under NICRA
to develop location specific technologies for addressing climate
change issues especiallyimpact of elevated temperature, CO
2 on
the flowering behaviour , pollinators and yield losses due to variable
climate including flooding and heavy rains. The proven technologies
including varieties are disseminated among farmers/villages through
Technology Demonstration Component (TDC) of NICRA. The
technology is further up-scaled through the support from
developmental agencies of Central and State Governments... ”
3.23 On the query of the Committtee regarding efforts being taken
by the Government of India to identify and improve varieties of
horticulture crops which has inherent potential to withstand abiotic
stress associated with the climate change, the Department have stated
as under:—
“...The ICAR through its network of horticultural institutes and
network of All India Coordinated Research Projects is continuously
engaged to identify and improve varieties of horticulture crops
which has inherent potential to withstand abiotic stress associated
with the climate change. Breeding objectives include varieties for
various agro-climatic conditions, earliness, off-season and historical
biotic stresses viz. moisture, high temperature, frost, heat waves
etc. Efforts were also made under National Innovations in Climate
Resilient Agriculture (NICRA) on new emerging climate change
related stresses on horticultural crops. Under the programme, many
ICAR institutes such as ICAR-IIHR Bangalore, ICAR-IIVR Varanasi,
ICAR–CITH Srinagar , ICAR-CPRI Shimla, ICAR-DOGR Pune etc. are
actively working on different crops. Recently, a water logging
resistant germplasm of tomato has been developed by grafting on
brinjal root stock. This technique of grafting tomato scion over
brinjal root stock has been tested in different farmers’ fields for
water logging conditions. Efforts are under way to scale up this
technique through various Government agencies. Agro-techniques
have been developed to overcome alternate bearing in mango.
Environmentally safe protocols were developed and tested
successfully for induction of synchronized flowering in rejuvenated
Alphonso mango trees in the age group of 25-40 yrs... ”

39
v. Effects on Livestock
3.24 The Department in their background note have stated that a
temperature rise of 1.0 or 1.2 oC with minor change in precipitation
during March-August for India will marginally affect milk production.
Both milk production and reproductive function of cattle and buffaloes
will be adversely affected by projected temperature rise of 2-6
oC over
existing temperature during the period 2070-2099. The partitioning of
milk production impact indicated that high producing crossbred cows
and buffaloes will be affected more, accounting 0.4 million and
0.89 million respective annual decline by 2020. When asked about
impact observed on milk production in the country during the last ten
years, the Department have stated as under:—
“...Some of the studies in India indicated that warming will
negatively impact the productivity of indigenous cows and
productivity loss will be about 0.33 million tons. The Northern
India is likely to experience more negative impact of climate change
on milk production. The decline in milk production will be higher
in crossbreds (0.63%) followed by buffaloes (0.5%) and indigenous
cattle (0.4%).Time to time, Government has launched several
programmes in the past to improve the productivity of milk
production. These programmes include improvement of breeds,
vaccination and veterinary measures, better fodder production etc.
Under National Innovations in Climate Resilient Agriculture (NICRA)
project, several livestock based ICAR institutes such as ICAR-NDRI,
Karnal, ICAR-IVRI, Izathnagar , ICAR, NIANP , Bengaluru and others
have taken research projects to develop technologies to offset
negative impact of climate change on milk production of both
cattle and buffaloes due to rise in temperature by way of
(i) development of tolerant/resistant breeds, (ii) improved feeds
and supplements, (iii) improved shelter management etc. It is
expected that several technologies could emerge from these studies
to address the problems... ”
3.25 On the query of the Committee about steps being taken by
the Government to improve indigenous varieties of cattle in order to
enhance their heat tolerance and milk production capacities, the
Department have stated as under:—
“...The GoI programmes like National Program for Bovine Breeding
(NPBB), National Dairy Plan (NDP), National Livestock Mission (NLM)
and Sub-Missions on Livestock Development, Pig Development in
North-Eastern Region etc., are being under implementation by State

40
Department of Animal husbandry to improve indigenous varieties
of livestock. Though, the researches on improvement of breeds of
cattle for higher milk production have started since long. State
Governments have started very effective programmes of
improvement breeds in cattle through artificial insemination. A
significant impact has been seen on improvement of breeds and
their milk yielding capacity. Specifically, from the view point of
climate change, more focussed research studies pertaining to
improvement of indigenous varieties of cattle in order to enhance
their heat tolerance and milk production capacities have been
initiated under National Innovations in Climate Resilient Agriculture
(NICRA) project at Institutes such as ICAR-NDRI, Karnal and ICAR-
IVRI, Izathnagar. Once the technology is emerged from these studies,
Government has to take active role in supporting and financing the
dissemination of these technologies to the farmers through animal
husbandry departments... ”
3.26 While elaboraing on the above issue, the representative of
DARE has stated as under:—
¶ykboLVkWd esa ns'kh uLy dh xk;ksa ;k i'kqvksa esa tyok;q ifjorZu osQ izfr cM+k
fjfyft,al gS] fjftLVsal gS] tyok;q ifjorZu dks cgqr yacs le; rd tokc ns
ldrh gSA tks ckgj ls i'kq vk, gSa ;k Økl czhM gS og DykbesaV psat dks cgqr
T;knk lgu ugha dj ldrs gSaA ns'kh xk; esa lqèkkj dh vko';drk gS* ysfdu
bldh mRikndrk cgqr de gS] nwèk dk mRiknu de gS] nwèk dh mRikndrk dks
fdl rjg c<+k;k tk,] bls lkFk gh ns'kh uLy dh xk;ksa easa mu ftUl dks [kkst
fy;k tk, ftldk mi;ksx ge uLy lqèkkj osQ fy, dj ldrs gS] uLy lqèkkj
dk;ZØe tyok;q ifjorZu osQ fy, cgqr vPNk i;kZ; lkfcr gksxk mlosQ mQij
vkbZlhvkj utj j[ks gq, gS vkSj vkbZlhvkj ml fn'kk esa izxfr dj jgh gSA blh
rjg fiQ'kjht] iksYVªh osQ {ks=kksa esa pkgs ejkbu fiQ'kjht gks ;k izsQ'k okWVj fiQ'kjht
gks bu lkjs {ks=kksa esa vuqlaèkku py jgs gSaA fuxjk uke dh ,d ;kstuk gS ftlosQ
ekè;e ls vuqlaèkku fd;k tkrk gS vkSj bldks lIyhessaV djus osQ fy, us'kuy
fe'ku (,u,e,l) osQ ekè;e ls Hkh bls MsoyiesaV dke esa yxk;k tkrk gSA¸
3.27 While submitting view on need to encourage improvement of
indigenous varities of cattles, the representative of BAIF has stated as
under:—
¶-------ØkWl czh¯Mx yEcs le; ls py jgk gSA esjs [;ky ls ml ij czsd yxkus
dh t:jr gS] mls lkbafVfiQd os esa pykus dh t:jr gSA geus ns[kk gS fd
gj dksbZ ,XtkWfVd czhM dks ckj&ckj djrk gS ftlls fdlku osQ ikl tks tkuoj
iSnk gq, gSa] muesa fofHkUu rjg dh chekfj;ka vkSj buiQfVZfyVh dh izkWCye vkbZ

41
gqbZ gSA mls pSd djus osQ fy, geus nks rjg dh i¼fr viukbZ gSA tSls >kj[kaM]
vksfM'kk vkSj cqansy[kaM osQ fy, geus nslh xk; ij T;knk dke fd;k gSA mlesa
Hkh geus ns[kk gS fd Hkkjr o"kZ esa ikap czhM cgqr vPNh gSa —jkBh] xhj] lkghoky]
Fkkjikjdj vkSj jSM flaèkh ;s ,slh xk; gSa ftuesa cgqr vPNk nwèk nsus dk iksVSaf'k;y
gSA blesa vHkh Hkh oqQN tkuoj feyrs gSa ftudk vxj ge czh¯Mx LVkWd mi;ksx
djsa rks vxys 25&30 lkyksa esa O;kid rkSj ij fdlkuksa osQ ikl ys tk ldrs
gSaA ,fj;k LiSlhfiQd czhM~l ij è;ku nsus dh ckr gSA tSls cqansy[kaM vkSj MStVZ
,fj;k esa ckM+esj vkSj tSlyesj ,fj;k esa Fkkjikjdj czhM cgqr vPNh py jgh
gSa ck;iQ ,d ,slh laLFkk gS ftlus [kkldj nslh xk;ksa osQ fy, vyx ls lheu
LVs'ku dh LFkkiuk dh gSa bl lky geus 22 yk[k Mks”k izQh”k fd, gSa vkSj muesa
ls 10 yk[k osQ djhc vius dk;ZØe esa iz;ksx fd, gSa ftlls rhu yk[k osQ
djhc nslh xk; osQ cPps Hkh iSnk gq, gSaA nwljk] tks ozQkl czhM gks jgs gSa] mls
fjolZ ozQkWl djuk gS rkfd tc xHkkZèkku djsaxs rks vPNs lkaM ls djsaxsA mlls
ml DykbesV esa ,sMkWIVsfcfyVh vPNh gksrh gSA vxj ge 62 izfr'kr osQ vanj
,XtkWfVd CyM j[krs gSa rks os tkuoj fiQj Hkh vPNs pyrs gSa] nwljs gesa izkWCye
nsus yxrs gSaA ,sls dk;ks± ij ge lkbafVfiQd os esa czh¯Mx Iyku rS;kj djosQ bEIyhesaV
djrs gSaA¸
3.28 While elaborating further on the above issue, the representative
of BAIF has stated as under:—
¶blh rjg cqansy[kaM esa Fkkjikjdj czhM vPNh py jgh gSA bldk Hkh ge ogka
izpyu dj jgs gSaA gesa vius czhM dks Msoyi djuk cgqr t:jh gS ftlosQ mQij
fjlpZ osQ ckjs esa viuk IokbaV crkmaQxkA ozQkWl czhM dks okil czhM djrs&djrs
fjolZ czhM djrs gq, gks losQ rks nks&pkj ijlsaV gh ,sDtkWfVd jgs ckdh lkjk
bafMftul gks tk,A ,sls osQl esa feYd izksMD'ku cuk jgrk gSA blosQ fy, gesa
LVªsVth cukuh iM+assxh vkSj fjlpZ osQ dke Hkh djus iM+saxsA ,uMhvkjvkbZ vkSj
vkbZchvkjbZ tSls baLVhV~;wV osQ lkFk feydj gesa bl ij è;ku nsus dh vko';drk
gSA gekjs ns'k esa xksV vkSj f'ki osQ mQij baLVhV~;w'ku esa blosQ mQij dke ugha
gqvk gSA vxj vki xouZesaV vkWiQ bafM;k dh Ldhe ns[ksaxs rks vkidks irk py
tk,xk] bèkj nks&pkj lky ls oqQN dke gksus yxs gSa ysfdu igys blosQ mQij
T;knk LdhEl ugha FkhA xksV dks felvaMjLVwM ,fuey cuk fn;k x;k gS] geus
mls fcuk ckr osQ dg fn;k gS fd ;g lkjs isM+ dks [kjkc djrh gS] iQkWjsLV
okys rks blosQ vxsaLV gh gks x, gSaA blesa rhu&pkj phtksa dh vko';drk gS]
blosQ fy, ,d izksij czh¯Mx IykWu rS;kj gksuk pkfg,A lcls cM+k fdlku dks
?kkVk eksjVSfyVh ij gksrk gSA blosQ mQij oSDlhus'ku ugha gks jgk gSa bldk ekl
Lrj ij oSDlhus'ku gksuk pkfg, rkfd eksjVSfyVh #d losQA bZ&o²ex gks losQ]
ftlls xzksFk c<+ losQA vxj ge rhu&pkj phtsa djrs gSa rks esjs [;ky ls
blls fdlkuksa dks Mcy bude gks ldrh gSA bldks Hkh fuxysV ugha djuk
pfg,A¸

42
3.29 On the query of the Committee regarding strategy being
envisaged by the Government to offset negative impact of climate
change on milk production of both cattle and buffaloes due to rise in
temperature during 2040—2069 and 2070—2099, the Department have
stated as under:—
“.....Government will have to play important role in upscaling of
these technologies by way of launching different programmes and
providing financial support.Through the Technology Demonstrations
through KVKs is providing timely adversaries on endemic diseases
and their control through mass vaccination, low cost sheltering,
fodder production with improved cultivars, supplementation of
mineral and vitamin mixtures etc., for improved management of
animal health. Proven technologies like supplementation of
probiotics, feeding complete feed, protein supplementation etc.,
are being demonstrated to decrease GHG emissions and improve
the digestibility and nutrient use efficiency in livestock.... ”
vi. Rumen Fermentation as a Source of Greenhouse Gas Emission
3.30 Rumen fermentation is the major source of greenhouse gas
emission (60%) in farm sector. Heat stress due to high temperatures
also affects milk production and reproduction in livestock. Thus the
efforts were made to identify unique traits in indigenous livestock
breeds which make them resilient to climate change and utilize this
information in selection and promotion of adapted breeds in different
agro-climatic regions depending on the projected change in climate.
Feed manipulation, supplements and improved shelter can reduced
GHG emissions and prevent loss in milk production from large and
small ruminants. When asked about achievement of ICAR to devise
Feed manipulation, supplements and improved shelter to reduce GHG
emissions from large and small ruminants, the Department have stated
as under:—
“...Identification of bacteriocin producing strains of lactic acid
producing bacteria, microencapsulation of Bacteriocins, release
kinetics of encapsulated Bacteriocins, lignocellulosic biomass for
improving feed utilization, biogeography of gut microbes, novel
approaches for assessing and improving nutrient bio-availability,
supplementation of fortified (with varied levels of antioxidants,
electrolytes and osmolytes) feed, astaxanthin, melatonin, different
forms of complete feed, silage and herbal supplements to reduce
etc. along with different types of shelters with low cost and locally
available material were developed at various institutes like NIANP ,

43
NDRI, CIRG, CSWRI under NPCC and NICRA project to reduce GHG
emissions from large and small ruminants. Further , the increase of
GHG emissions by Indian livestock was less (74% vs 82% over the
period of 1961 to 2010) than the developing countries and this was
due to creation of awareness, demonstration of field experiments
(FLDs), encouragement provided for growing green fodder , silage
making, complete feed preparation, regulations in manure
management and waste disposal... ”
3.31 On the above issue, the representative of Ministry of
Environment, Forest and Climate Change have stated as under:—
¶nwljk i{k tyok;q vkSj o`Qf"k osQ ckjs esa ;g gS] o`Qf"k ls tqM+k gqvk ,d cM+k
leqnk; i'kqvksa dk gS] pwafd tyok;q ifjorZu dk ewy dkj.k dkcZu dkUlUVªs'ku
gS] tks xzhu gkml xSlksa ls c<+rk gS] rks mlesa tkuus dh ckr ;g gS fd xzhu
gkml xSlksa dk ,d cM+k mRltZu i'kqvksa osQ ekè;e ls gksrk gSA ge fo'o osQ
mu cM+s ns'kksa esa vkrs gSa] tgka ij i'kqvksa dh la[;k lcls T;knk gS] blfy,
gekjs ykboLVkd dk tks xzhu gkml xSl mRltZu gSa] og Hkh dkiQh T;knk gSA
gesa bl ckr dh Hkh ¯prk jgrh gS fd tks gekjk ykboLVkWd lsDVj gS] mlesa
ge rjg osQ laj{k.k vkSj larqyu dh O;oLFkk jgs fd vkxs gekjs fy, dksbZ ¯prk
u cus] pwafd xzhu gkml xSl oaQlaVªs'ku c<+us ls gekjh mRikndrk ij vlj iM+
ldrk gS] nwèk dh mRikndrk ij] i'kqvksa osQ LokLF; ij mldk vlj iM+ ldrk
gSA o`Qf"k foHkkx dks blosQ ckjs esa iwjh tkudkjh gSA blosQ ckjs esa dbZ Ldhesa
gSa] tks os pyk jgs gSaA¸
3.32 On the query of the Committee regarding identification of
unique traits in indigenous livestock breeds which make them resilient
to climate change, the Department have stated as under:—
“...Especially the trait like melanin secretion has been identified
in some indigenous cattle for resilience. Increase in the expression
of Melanogenesis pathway (MC1R, MITF , PMEL & TYRP1) genes and
heat shock proteins (Hsp 70.1, Hsp 70.2 &Hsp 70.8) after heat
stress has been observed in Bosindicus cattle. Further , a decrease
in the expression of pro-apoptotic genes (BAX & BID) and increase
in expression of anti-apoptotic (BCLxI) gene after heat stress was
observed. An increase in the melanin concentration with increase
in the expression of heat shock proteins by the melanocytes provides
protection to the cell under heat stress. Melanin secreted by
melanocytes seems to be acting as antioxidant and providing
protection to the skin of Bosindicus cattle under heat stress.... ”

44
3.33 When asked about steps being undertaken to incorporate
these traits in high milk yielding cattle varieties available in the country,
the Department have stated as under:—
“...The studies being conducted were on few selected breeds at
segregated locations; hence further in-depth studies on different
breeds of animals are required to incorporate these resilient traits
in high milk yielding cattle... ”
3.34 When asked about success achieved by the ICAR to devise
feed manipulation, supplements and improved shelter to reduce GHG
emissions from large and small ruminants, the Department have stated
as under:—
“Ration balancing, use of ionophores, probiotics, plant secondary
metabolites (Saponins, tannins, terpenoids etc.), organic acids
(fumarate, malate), essential oils, defaunation etc. have been
found to reduce GHG (methane) emission to the extent of 10-15%
in dairy animals. Animals selected based on Residual Feed Intake
(RFI) also produce lower methane by 10% and feeding silage is also
advantageous to reduce methane by 8-11%.
ICAR-National Institute of Animal Nutrition and Physiology, Bangalore
using latest livestock population, primary data on methane
production potential, feeding practices and seasonal variability of
feed resources in different agro-ecological regions has already
developed the State-wise enteric methane emission database for
the Karnataka, Kerala, Tamil Nadu, Andhra Pradesh, Bihar,
Chandigarh, Chhattisgarh, Gujarat, Haryana, Himachal Pradesh,
Jammu & Kashmir , Jharkhand, Madhya Pradesh, Maharashtra, Delhi,
Punjab, Rajasthan, Uttar Pradesh and Uttarakhand states.
Development of State-wise enteric methane emission database for
the north-east States of the country is in progress and will be
accomplished very shortly.
GHG Amelioration:
• Studies conducted in sheep at National Institute of Animal
Nutrition and Physiology, Bangalore demonstrated that
20-26% enteric methane reduction can be achieved by using
tanniferous tropical tree leaves of Ficusbenghalensis
(Banyan), Artocarpusheterophyllus (Jack fruit) and
Azadirachtaindica (Neem) at 10% level of concentrate or
2.5% of the basal diet (patent filed).
• Another study in cattle at the institute established tamarind
seed husk (Tamarindusindica) as enteric methane ameliorating

45
agent which reduced the emission by 17% on the inclusion
at 5.0% level in straw based diet (patent filed). Silkworm
pupae oil, an un-explored source also revealed 15-20%
reduction in methane production at selected levels in the
in vitro studies carried out at the institute (patent filed).
The in vivo evaluation of silkworm pupae oil in cattle and
sheep as methane ameliorating agent is in progress.
• The institute has identified the prominent methane producing
methanogen archaea in cattle & buffaloes using molecular
approaches and exploring the possibilities of developing
methane inhibition vaccine using these prominent
methanogen as antigens. ”
3.35 On the query of the Committee regarding unique traits
identified in indigenous livestock breeds which make them resilient to
climate change, the Department have submitted following details:—
i. “Cattle: An attempt was made to undertake comparative
evaluation of Sahiwal cows ( Bos indicus), Karan Fries cows
(Cross-bred), Holstein Friesian cows (Exotic cattle) and
Murrah buffaloes ( BubalusBubalis ) towards heat stress
tolerance. The serum level of three major chaperons (HSP70,
HSP90 and HSP27) was relatively higher in Holstein Friesian
and Karan Fries cows. Similarly, the transcriptional pattern
of HSP27, HSP40, HSP60, HSP70 and HSP90 mRNA was
relatively high in PBMCs of Holstein Friesian cows during
peak summer. On the other hand, HSP transcripts in Sahiwal
cows showed minimum change in expression with change in
season. The data provides evidence that Sahiwal cows have
better cellular tolerance than exotic, crossbred cows to
summer stress and warrant further research in this area.
Further , comparative genome wide transcriptome analysis
of PBMCs showed difference in transcriptome signature of
cattle types and buffaloes in response to summer stress.
The analysis revealed several heat responsive genes and
pathways impacted to summer stress. Such study will be
helpful in providing scientific basis that our indigenous cattle
breeds have superior tolerance to heat stress and would be
better in combating climatic change. Additionally, the genes
related to heat stress and adaptations are being characterized
in Indian native cattle to find out variations in the coding
as well as regulatory region. The data on these genes will
serve as Bosindicus or bubaline specific SNPs resource that

46
can be utilized in future for association studies. The observed
sequence variations or INDELs in UTRs or CDS of heat
responsive genes might have vital role to play in differential
heat stress response in cattle and buffaloes.
ii. Goats: Unique traits identified in indigenous goats that makes
them resilient to climate change are:
a. Adaptive Trait Markers:
• Genetic Markers : Heat Shock Protein 70 (HSP70) and
HSP90.
• Physiological Markers : Respiration rate & Rectal
Temperature.
• Endocrine Markers: HSP70, Cortisol, Tri-iodo-thyronine
(T3), Thyroxine (T4).
• Blood Biochemical Markers : Haemoglobin, Packed Cell
Volume, Free fatty Acid (FFA), Non-Esterified Fatty Acid
(NEFA), Super Oxide Dismutase (SOD) and Glutathione
Peroxidase (GPx).
b. Immunological Trait Markers: Toll-Like-Receptor 3 (TLR3),
TLR6 and TLR8.
c. Productive Trait Markers: Growth hormone (GH), Growth
hormone Receptor (GHR) and Leptin genes. ”
3.36 On the query of the Committee regarding steps being
undertaken to incorporate these traits in high milk yielding cattle
varieties available in the country, the Department have stated as
under:—
“Efforts are being made to identify more such variations to correlate
them with phenomic data (in relation to thermotolerance traits) in
diverse Indian native livestock species. ”

47
CHAPTER IV
ASSESSMENT OF FOOD REQUIREMENT VIS-À-VIS FOOD AVAILABILITY
4.1 Vulnerability of Indian agriculture due to vagaries associated
with climate change and low adaptation capacity of majority of Indian
farmers poses risk to food security of the country. Therefore, Planned
adaptation is essential to increase the resilience of agricultural
production to climate change. There is need to assess the enormity of
problem and take steps which can put us in a position to face challenges
to ensure food security of the Country. On the query of the Committee
regarding projection for requirement of foodgrains, pulses, oil seeds,
milk, meat, poultry products etc. keeping in view of future population
growth in the country, the Department have stated as under:—
“...The exploding population, expanding urbanization and rising
incomes have raised a wide range of important issues linked to
national food-security, including dietary preferences (higher demand
for livestock products), consumption of more processed foods and
crowding out of peri-urban agriculture which plays a significant
role in the supply of perishable commodities (FAO, 2012). By 2030,
ICAR-National Institute of Agricultural Economics and Policy Research
has projected food demand of 345 million tonnes (mt), almost 30%
higher than in 2011. Demand is projected to be around be 205 mt,
for fruits, 261 mt for vegetables, 261 mt for milk, 39 mt for
animal products (meat, eggs and fish), 36 mt sugar , and 28 mt
edible-oils. Overall, the demand for these products by 2030 is
estimated to be 2-3 times more than that in 2011.
Further , the population of India is projected to be 1.65 billion by
2050 with 50% people residing in the urban areas. It is projected
that by 2050, the calorie consumption will reach 3000 kcal/cap
and the share of animal-based calories will rise from the current
level of 8% to 16%. This will increase the demand for foodgrains.
In many ways, the Indian diets may slowly come closer to the diets
in developed countries, necessitating production or import of food
commodities (functional and special foods), consumed previously
only in Western societies. Further , urban population being more
vulnerable to increase in food prices and price spikes, it may
adversely affect the food security scenario. Food wastages and
losses also constitute an important driver of food demand. The
estimates though vary, the wastages and losses of perishable

48
commodities (fruits, vegetables, fish, meat and milk) can be put
on average in 15-25 per cent range, while loss of non-perishable
commodities may be anywhere between 5-15 per cent and this
puts a considerable pressure on natural resources. By 2050, these
losses are expected to be reduced significantly due to better use
of technology and establishment of value chains.
Food safety is an integral part of food security, because unsafe
food has significant economic costs in terms of health problems as
well as cross border trade, which is hampered by inconsistent/poor
food safety standards. The latent demand for food safety among
urban India is set to grow with urbanization and will also increase
acceptability in the export market. There are various projections
of increase in demand for food commodities in India. According to
one scenario (Kumar , 2015), at 7 per cent growth rate in national
GDP , though the demand for foodgrains will only grow by about
50 per cent, the rise in demands for fruits, vegetables and animal
products will be more spectacular , the range being 100-300 per
cent (Fig. 1). Achieving such a high productivity will entail increase
in total factor productivity (TFP). One-third of TFP must contribute
to the agricultural growth. The food production density (kcal/
km2/day) requirement in most parts of India will increase from
50,000-100,000 in 2005 to 100,000-500,000 by 2050, requiring a
rise in foodgrain productivity from 25000/kcal/ha/day to about
46000 kcal/ha/day (Chaumet et al., 2009)... ”
Fig. 1 Demand for various food commodities (FD) in 2010 and projections to 2050
at GDP growth scenarios of 7, 8.75 and 5.25 per cent.
450
400
350
300
250
200
150
100
50
0
Commodity demand. Mt
WheatRice Pulses
FoodgrainsVegetables
Fruits Milk
70
60
50
40
30
20
10
0
FD 2010
FD 2050 at 7 per cent GDP
FD 2050 at 8.75 per cent CGDP
FD 2050 at 5.25 per cent CGDP
Edible
Oils
Sugar Fish Meat Eggs
4.2 When asked about projection of agriculture and allied sector
production in the country while adjusting effect of climatic changes
in coming decades, the Department have stated as under:—
“...The regional impact of climate change, adaptation and
vulnerability of irrigated wheat (rabi crop), and irrigated and rainfed

49
rice (in Kharif season), maize and sorghum was assessed using the
InfoCrop models. Climate change is projected to reduce the timely
sown irrigated wheat production by about 6% in 2020 scenario from
existing values. When late and very late sown wheat also is taken
into consideration, the impacts are projected to be about 18% in
2020, 23% in 2050 and 25% in 2080 scenarios, if no adaptation
measures are followed. However adaptation to climate change by
sowing improved varieties and employing improved input efficiency
technologies coupled with application of additional nitrogen can
not only offset the negative impacts, but can also improve the net
yields by about 10% in 2020. However , in 2050 scenario, such
adaptation measures marginally improve yields while in 2080
scenario the wheat yields are projected to be vulnerable by about
6% in spite of above adaptation strategy, thus making it necessary
to develop input use efficiency technologies and ‘region specific
adverse-climate tolerant varieties. ”
On an aggregated scale, the irrigated rice yields are projected to
reduce by 4% in 2020, 7% in 2050 and by 10% in 2080 scenarios.
On the other hand, rainfed rice yields in India are likely to be
reduced by 6% in 2020 scenario, but in 2050 and 2080 scenarios
they are projected to decrease only marginally (<2.5%). Irrigated
rice in north-west India, comprising of Haryana and Punjab is
projected to lose more (6-8%) than in other parts of the country
(<5%) in 2020 scenario. Yield loss will be more in 2050 scenario in
north-west India (15-17%) while some parts of central India
(Maharashtra and Madhya Pradesh) also are projected to face >5%
of yield loss. Adopting improved varieties with improved input
efficiency and providing 25% of additional nitrogen can not only
offset the climate change impacts but also can improve the
production by 6-17% in irrigated conditions and by about 20 to 35%
in rainfed condition in future climate scenarios.
Simulation analysis was also carried out on the impact of climate
change on sorghum and maize crops in India. Irrigated kharif maize
is projected to reduce yields by up to 18% in 2050 and about 23%
in 2080 scenarios. Adaptation strategies such as improved and
tolerant variety managed under improved input efficiency with
additional nitrogen fertilizer can enhance the irrigated maize net
production by about 21% in 2020, 10% in 2050 and 4% in 2080
scenarios. Rainfed sorghum yields, on all India scale, are projected
to marginally (2.5%) decline in 2020 scenario while it is projected
to decline by about 8% in 2050 scenario. Adaptation to climate
change can not only offset the negative impacts but also can
improve the yields by about 8% in 2020 scenario.

50
Global climate change may increase production of potato in Punjab,
Haryana and western and central UP by 3.46 to 7.11%, but potato
production may decline by 4-16% over rest of India particularly
West Bengal and southern plateau region. It is primarily the mean
minimum temperature during tuber growing period which affects
potato yield. The increase in temperature due to climate change
may decrease Harvest Index (HI) in large parts of Maharashtra,
parts of Karnataka and Andhra Pradesh. Even though, in the
traditional potato growing belt in the Indo Gangetic plains, the HI
may remain more or less the same but pockets of high HI likely to
diminish. Analysis on the stress degree hours in winter potato
growing regions showed that under the baseline scenario, most of
the Indo-Gangetic plains region experienced 1000 to 5000 degree
hours of stress due to a combination of both maximum and minimum
temperatures. However , under climate change scenario (A1F1) the
temperature stress increased further and the area with severe
stress (9000 to 13000 degree hours) is projected to increase
significantly in large parts of Maharashtra, Jharkhand, Odisha and
Gujarat. Similarly, pockets with extreme stress (>13000 degree
hours) are projected to increase.
The simulation results indicated that on an average, future climate
would have a positive impact on productivity of rainfed soyabean
in the country. Increase in soyabean yield in the range of 8-13%
under different future climate scenarios (2030 and 2080) is
projected. In case of groundnut, except in the climate scenario of
A1B 2080, which showed a decline of 5% in yield, rest of the
scenarios showed 4-7% increase in rainfed yields as compared to
the baseline. The maximum positive impact of future climate was
observed on chickpea, which showed an average increase in
productivity ranging from 23 to 54%. However , a large spatial
variability for magnitude of change in the productivity is projected.
The simulated rainfed yields of soyabean and groundnut showed a
strong positive association with crop season rainfall while that of
chickpea yields were significantly associated with crop season
temperature.
Simulation studies using Info Crop-Coconut model indicated positive
effect of climate change on coconut yields in west coast and parts
of Tamil Nadu and Karnataka and negative effects on nut yield in
east coast of India. However , in the event of reduced availability
of irrigation, the beneficial impacts will be less or negative impacts
will be more. On all India basis, results indicate that climate
change positively impacts coconut production in the range of 4.3%

51
in A1B 2030, 1.9 in A1B 2080, 6.8% in A2 2080 scenarios of PRECIS
from existing production levels. The magnitude of impacts (positive
or negative) is higher in analysis based on GCM scenarios, than in
analysis based on RCM scenarios. Adaptation to climate change can
increase the yields by 13-19% in different scenarios thereby
increasing the overall production by about 20%.
The field experiments indicated that the short-duration terminal-
or early- heat tolerant wheat varieties can significantly reduce the
adverse effects of heat stress on wheat. Crop diversification can
not only reduces the climatic risks but also improves the farm
income. Rice cultivars such as Swarna-sub are suitable for water
logging conditions. In north-eastern region, short duration rice
varieties like VivekDhan 82 was found suitable for late transplanting
up to mid-August. In-situ soil moisture conservation, zero tillage
with mulching, crop residue management reduces the risk of crop
failure especially during dry season. Field experiments aimed at
identifying genetic resources for tolerance to line EC 538828 for
possessing high yield potential (3000 kg/ha) and tolerance to
multiple abiotic stresses such drought, high temperature and low
solar radiation. In onion, planting in raised beds can reduce the
damage due to heavy rainfall events. In plantation crops such as
coconut, soil moisture conservation methods such as mulching in
palm basins, drip irrigation, coir pith burial in basin/trenches are
found not only to improve the water use efficiency but also to
protect the palms from droughts/prolonged dry spells. ”
4.3 On the above issue, the CRIDA has submitted as under:—
“...The projected domestic demand for different crop groups shows
that rice and wheat may be surplus whereas other cereals will be
in acute shortage. Out of 59 million tonnes shortfall, most of the
produce will constitute maize which would go for animal/poultry
feed. Also, the deficit would be primarily for oilseeds, fruits,
vegetables and pulses. Hence, the challenge would be to enhance
productivity levels of these crops by promoting breeding programs
and dryland horticulture. Further , as rice and wheat are going to
be surplus, we need to follow a two-pronged strategy i.e. to increase
their productivity by bridging the yield gaps and thus shifting some
of the area under these crops to other cereals and vegetables
through integrated farming systems approach which will optimize
the use of natural resources. Currently, there is an imbalance
between natural resources endowment and cropping patterns in
the country. It is an irony that areas with less rainfall are net

52
exporters of agricultural produce to areas with sufficient rainfall
and untapped groundwater potential. A study on water footprint
analysis and the trade of agricultural commodities especially for
rice and wheat indicates that eastern India is a net importer from
North India. The projected changes in crop yields (%) at maximum
changes in temperature and rainfall by 2035, 2065 and 2100 are
presented as below:—
Projected changes in crop yields (%) at maximum changes in
temperature and rainfall by 2035, 2065 and 2100*
Crop 2035 2065 2100
Rainy season
Rice -7.1 -11.5 -15.4
Maize -1.2 -3.7 -4.2
Sorghum -3.3 -5.3 -7.1
Pigeonpea -10.1 -17.7 -23.3
Groundnut -5.6 -8.6 -11.8
Winter season
Wheat -8.3 -15.4 -22.0
Barley -2.5 -4.7 -6.8
Chickpea -10.0 -18.6 -26.2
Rapeseed-mustard 0.3 0.7 0.5
*Maximum changes in temperature and rainfall are 1.3 %and 7% by 2035, 2.5 and 26% by
2065 and 3.5 and 27% by 2100, respectively (Source: Adapted from Birthal et al., 2014)”.
4.4 On the query of the Committee regarding preparedness of the
country to meet the future requirement of food in the country, the
Department have stated as under:—
“...The fulfilment of future requirement of food in the country can
be assessed by examining the gap between projected demand and
supply under specified scenarios. The existing literature suggests
that under the normal rainfall situation, food supply shall be
sufficient to meet the food demand in the next 20 to 30 years.
Although few food commodities like pulses and oilseeds may face
deficit in next few years due to supply-side constraints. The total
foodgrain demand is estimated to be 291 Mt by 2025 and 377 Mt
by 2050, whereas the total production is estimated to be 292 Mt

53
by 2025 and 385 Mt by 2050, which is 2.0% more than the demand.
However , production deficits are projected for other cereals,
oilseeds, and pulses. The projected deficit is 33% by 2025 and 43%
by 2050 for other cereals, while 3% by 2025 and 7% by 2050 for
pulses. The rainfed crop yields are expected to increase to 1.8 t/
ha in 2030 and 2.0 t/ha in 2050. The irrigated cereal yields are
projected to increase from 3.5 to 4.6 t/ha during the same period.
The cereal production in India is thus projected to increase by
0.9% per year between 1999–2001 and 2050, and is expected to
exceed the demand by 2050 even if the projected growth is about
0.9% per year... ”
4.5 When asked about policy/vision/planning of Government to
ensure food security in the country in coming decades, the Department
have stated as under:—
“...Food Security is the ability to assure timely, reliable and
nutritionally adequate supply of food to total population on a long
term basis. And, food availability is a necessary condition for food
security. India is more or less self sufficient in cereals but deficit
in pulses and oilseeds. Due to changes in consumption patterns,
demand for fruits, vegetables, dairy, meat, poultry, and fisheries
has been increasing. There is need to increase crop diversification
and improve allied activities. However , access to food is still a big
challenge for many people in the country. India’s poor population
amounts to more than 300 million people, with almost 30 percent
of India’s rural population living in poverty. The access to food can
be increased through employment due to growth in labour intensive
sectors and/or through social protection programmes. The
malnutrition problem is much broader than that of access to food.
The South Asian Enigma (levels of malnutrition in Asia are higher
than in Africa) is well known. India has malnutrition levels almost
the levels double those of many countries in Africa. This problem
needs a multi-disciplinary approach covering diet diversification
including micronutrients, women’s empowerment, education, health,
safe drinking water , sanitation, and hygiene. India has government
programmes such as TPDS including AAY , nutrition programmes like
mid-day meals, and ICDS to improve food and nutrition security.
NREGS and self employment programmes can also increase access
to food and nutrition.
Therefore, Indian Government has always accorded high priority to
ensure food security for its citizens and launched a Food Security
Mission during 2007. The mission aims to increase production of

54
rice, wheat and pulses through area expansion and productivity
enhancement in sustainable manner in identified districts of the
country; restoring soil fertility and productivity at individual farm
level; creation of employment opportunities; and enhancing farm
level economy ( i.e. farm profits) to restore confidence among
farmers. Accordingly, new targets of additional production of food
grains of 25 million tons food grains comprising 10 million tons
rice, 8 million tons wheat, 4 million tons pulses and 3 million tons
of coarse cereals was set by the end of 12th Five Year Plan.
Further , in coming decades the government aims to ensure food
security in the nation through implementing National Food Security
Act 2013 by undertaking price support operations through efficient
procurement of food crops, strengthening public distributions
systems, increasing crop production and productivity, and enhancing
resilience of Indian agriculture to climate change and climate
vulnerability through strategic research and technology
demonstration. To meet the requirement of food commodities,
particularly pulses and oilseeds, trade related measures are also
undertaken by the government besides the ongoing efforts to
improve the production within the country. All these programmes
aim at increasing the production of food grains in the country. The
government is supporting the ICAR by funding the NICRA project
with the aim of developing technologies that help minimize the
adverse impacts of climate change. The government is also adjusting
the trade policies and domestic marketing policies keeping in view
the food security. All these efforts should continue in future while
taking into consideration emerging issues that have a bearing on
food security..”
4.6 On the query of the Committee regarding consideration of
effect of climatic changes associated with global warming has been
taken in to account while planning of Government to ensure food
security in the country in coming decades, the Department have stated
as under:—
“...Recognising that climate change is a global challenge,
government is implementing National Action Plan for Climate Change
(NAPCC) to identify measures and steps to advance India’s
development and climate change related objectives of adoption
and mitigation. In addition, for ensuring food security in the country,
National Mission for Sustainable Agriculture (NMSA) was initiated
with the aims to devise strategies to make Indian agriculture more
resilient to climate change. It would identify and develop new
varieties of crops and alternative cropping patterns, capable of

55
withstanding extremes of weather , long dry spells, flooding and
variable moisture availability. Besides, climate resilient interventions
have been embedded and mainstreamed into Missions/Programmes/
Schemes of Department of Agriculture & Farmers Welfare (DAC &
FW). The emphasis is also being given on integration and
convergence of integrate traditional knowledge, information
technology, geospatial technologies and biotechnology. New credit
and insurance mechanisms are being devised to facilitate adoption
of desired practices... ”
i. R&D on Alternative Food Sources for Future
4.7 Climatic fluctuation is considered to affect production of major
food crops such as Wheat and paddy which are staple diet for majority
of Indian population. Keeping in view of these factors, it is important
to take steps to identify and develop some alternative food sources
which can withstand climatic variability and hence can be utilized as
staple diet of vast population of our country. Coarse grains such Millets,
Jackfruit, tuber crops are some of the agriculture produce which are
considered to be future crops which being rich in nutritional values
and essential minerals can also withstand climatic fluctuation associated
with global warming. When asked about policy in place to identify
crops of future which can withstand climatic fluctuation associated
with global warming and can help to ensure food security in the
country, the Department have stated as under:—
“...Presently, rice and wheat are the major staple food for the
large masses of the country and are important component of
Government’s food basket to ensure national food security. However
with changing climate, production of rice and wheat is projected
to reduce in many parts of the country and may also become
unsustainable traditional regions. It may disturb the food security
of the nation. Further , the increasing population, depleting
agricultural land, deteriorating environment, water shortage and
demand for quality food are going to be the vital issues in coming
decades, and it is important to timely diversify agricultural activities
to meet these challenges. Government is fully aware of the status
and thus promoting cultivation and value addition in more efficient,
climate resilient, short duration C
4 crops viz. maize, pearl millet,
sorghum and finger millets in suitable regions. In addition, ICAR
through its network programmes on small millets (AICRP on Small
Millets), future crops (AICRN on Potential Crops), legumes (AINP on
Arid Legumes) is continuously engaged in conservation of
germplasms; breeding short duration, tolerant and climate resilient
varieties; developing suitable location specific package of practices
for potential future crops; and disseminating production and value
addition technologies to the stakeholders.

56
In addition, secondary agriculture is going to play a pivotal role in
changing agricultural scenario for the supply of the health food
besides the food security. And mushroom fits very well in this
category. Our country can emerge as a major player in mushroom
production utilizing available abundant agricultural residues. India
produces around 700 million tonnes crop residues, a good proportion
of that can profitably be utilized for mushroom cultivation.
Currently, we are using only 0.03% of these residues for producing
around 1.2 lakh tonnes of mushrooms. Further , mushroom being an
indoor crop, utilizes vertical space and requires only 25-30 litre
water for production of one kg mushroom, thus offering a solution
to shrinking agricultural land and water. The modern technologies
like bioinformatics, proteomics, functional genomics, etc., will
help us in cataloguing, understanding and exploiting our genetic
resources...”
4.8 On the query of the Committee about efforts being made by
the ICAR to identified crops or food source which can emerge as
wonder crops of future, the Department have stated as under:—
“...ICAR is continuously working on conservation of bio-resources
including land races and wild species of potential source of food
and nutrition under emerging changes in population, lifestyle, food
habits and climate; identifying suitable genotypes for cultivation
in different regions; and standardize package of practice. Thus,
ICAR is giving priorities to small millet crops viz. foxtail millet,
kodo millet, proso millet, little millets, and barnyard millets through
All India Coordinated Research Project on Small Millets. These
crops have potential to withstand the vagaries of climate and
ensure the food and nutritional security in future. Further , the
council is also putting efforts on other minor but potential crops
through All India Coordinated Research Network on Potential Crops
with objectives to find out new plant resources for food, fodder ,
fuel, energy and industrial uses; identify superior genotypes for
cultivation in different regions; and standardize package of practice.
The important crops includes pseudocereals viz. Grain amaranth
(Amaranthus spp.), Buckwheat ( Fagopyrum spp.), Chenopodium
(Chenopodium spp.), Job’s tear (Coix lacryma-jobi); food legumes/
pulses viz. Rice bean ( Vigna umbellata ), Adzuki bean ( Vigna
angularis), Faba bean ( Vicia faba ), winged bean ( Psophocarpus
tetragonolobus); oilseeds viz. Perilla ( Perilla frutescens), Paradise
tree ( Simarouba glauca ); vegetables viz. Kankoda ( Momordica
dioica), winged bean ( Psophocarpus tetragonolobus); fodder crops
viz. Amaranth (Amaranthus spp.), Salt bush ( Atriplex spp.), fodder

57
tree species; and energy and industrial plants viz.  Jojoba
(Simmondsia chinensis), Guayule (Parthenium argentatum), Jatropha
(Jatropha curcas ), Tumba ( Citrullus colocynthis ), Paradise Tree
(Siimarouba glauca ) and Perilla ( Perilla frutescens ).
Mushroom cultivation recycles agro-residues, much of which is
otherwise burnt in the field. With rapid urbanization and increased
production of agro-residues along with increased food production,
there will be a need to radically change the way we look at
agriculture. High-tech agriculture including mechanized mushroom
cultivation under controlled conditions is going to gain importance
in coming decades. Mushroom production in the world has increased
rapidly in the last few decades and the trend is likely to pickup
in our country as well.
From aquaculture perspective, air breathing fishes are useful
resource under changing climate. In this direction, NBFGR has
undertaken work on bio-prospecting of genes and alleles for abiotic
stress tolerance in Clarias mangur and air breathing fish.
Furthermore, ICAR is putting sincere efforts for in situ and ex situ
conservation, characterization and evaluation of non-descriptive
bovine population of the country as a future source for food and
nutritional security of the country besides ongoing breed
improvement and management programme. ”
4.9 On the query of the Committee about participation of ICAR in
international project or alliance which is engaged in identifying and
popularizing alternative crops of future, the Department have stated
as under:—
“..ICAR through its ongoing programmes/projects/schemes at NBPGR
New Delhi, NBAGR Hisar , NBFGR Lucknow, NBAIM Mau and other
ICAR institutes is continuously participating in international project
or alliances of CGAIR, FAO, SAC to share genotypes, breed or
species for use in national crop/breed improvement programmes.
The shared materials are maintained and preserved at respective
national repositories in the country.
Furthermore, in order to provide the best planting materials
available in the world to the Indian farmer and to increase
productivity, farm incomes and export earnings, New Policy on Seed
Development, 1988 has been formulated. Import of seeds and planting
materials are governed by New Policy on Seed Development, 1988.

58
The provisions regarding import of seeds and planting material
are:
• import of seeds/tubers/bulbs/cuttings/saplings of vegetables,
flowers and fruits is allowed without a licence in accordance
with import permit granted under Plant Quarantine Order ,
2003 (PQ Order).
• Import of seeds, planting materials and living plants by
ICAR, etc. is allowed without a licence in accordance with
conditions specified by the Ministry of Agriculture & Farmers
Welfare, Government of India.
• Import of seeds/tubers of potato, garlic, fennel, coriander ,
cumin, etc. is allowed in accordance with import permit
granted under PQ Order , 2003 and amendments made their
under.
• Import of seeds of rye, barley, oat, maize, millet, jowar,
bajra, ragi, other cereals, soybean, groundnut, linseed,
palmnut, cotton, castor , sesamum, mustard, safflower , clover,
jojoba, etc. is allowed without licence subject to the New
Policy on Seed Development, 1988 and in accordance with
import permit granted under PQ Order , 2003. A small quantity
of seeds sought to be imported would be given to ICAR, or
farms accredited by ICAR, for trial and evaluation for one
crop season. On receipt of applications for commercial
import, DAC would consider the trial/evaluation report on
the performance of the seed and their resistance to seed/
soil borne diseases. All importers have to make available a
small specified quantity of the imported seeds to the ICAR
at cost price for testing/accession to the gene bank of
NBPGR.
• The Department of Agriculture and Cooperation has revised
the New Policy on Seed Development 1988 on 27.6.2011 to
allow import of specified quantity of seeds of wheat and
paddy initially for trial and evaluation purpose. Based on
the results of trial for one crop season, the company may
be allowed to import seeds of wheat and paddy for a period
not exceeding two years subject to the conditions stipulated
in the revised New Policy of Seed Development 1988.. ”
ii. Farming and Consumption of Coarse Grains
4.10 When asked about policy to encourage farming and consumption
of Coarse grains and other underutilized crops in the country, the
Department have stated as under:—
“..There exists a vast untapped potential of coarse grains,
underutilized crops to meet food, fodder , fibre and fuel requirement

59
of increasing population under changing needs and climate and
support the National Food Security Mission in future. The potential
available in different agroclimatic zones for the various small millets
based cropping systems makes it evident that there is still large
potential available in presently recommended technology, and could
be bridged through the appropriate development strategies.
Technological dissemination and development strategies should focus
on specific technology package for different farming situations,
and intensive extension education on the package. Rainfed farming
production technologies, particularly water management and usage,
greater coverage under improved cultivars, efficient water use,
integrated nutrient and pest management and good crop husbandry
can result in a rapid progress in small millets productivity, provided
appropriate guidelines are formulated and implemented for
comprehensive development of these crops in harmony with other
components of cropping systems. Therefore, AICRP on Small Millets,
AICRN on Potential Crops, AINP on Arid Legumes, AICRP on Farming
System are continuously engaged in identification of suitable crop
varieties, cropping systems, farming technologies and post harvest
management.
In addition, ICAR popularising several ready-to-cook and ready-to-
eat health foods based on coarse grains which have been developed
under the NAIP project. The technology for manufacturing them
has either been passed on to prospective enterprises for commercial
production or is available for that purpose. Multi-grain chapattis
made of a mixture of sorghum, wheat and soybean flours is one
example. A bakery unit has already started producing such chapattis
for sale in the market. The flour mixture is also modifiable to
include bajra, ragi, maize or barley for greater health benefits.. ”
iii. Land Resource Inventory
4.11 The knowledge on land recourses is prerequisite to mitigate
the effect of climate change on sustainable development basis.
knowledge of site specific land resource data within each agro-ecological
sub-regions is required to generate situation specific recommendation.
ICAR project on land resource inventory on 1:10000 scale is very helpful
to provide site specific information needed for farm/village level
planning. The project is currently being undertaken 60 blocks each
representing agro-ecological sub-region of the Country. The Department
of Agricultural Research and Education in the submission before the
Committee has stated that they need collaboration with State
Government for funds, manpower and other infrastructure, if they

60
have plan to generate land resource inventory of whole Country. In
this regard, the DARE has also signed MoUs with States like Gujarat,
Karnataka, Meghalaya and Telangana. When asked about utility of land
resource inventory for mitigating the effect of climate change on
sustainable development basis in the country, the Department have
stated as under:—
“...Land Resource Inventory (LRI) on 1:10000 scale involves
systematic survey of soils and collection of other collateral data
needed for scientific land use planning in GIS environment. The
detailed database generated at farm level will be the basis of
prioritizing, initiating and executing any land-based developmental
activities. In LRI, high resolution remote sensing data, Digital
Elevation Model (DEM) and Digital Terrain Model (DTM) using
Geographic Information System (GIS) provides new dimensions to
the soil survey programme. DEM is capable of providing very precise
and quantified information on degree, length and curvature of
slope which are much needed information for execution of soil
conservation programme, irrigation planning and precision
agriculture. Data on degree, length and curvature of slope together
with contours and drainage lines are very important to quantify
the water harvesting potential under rainfed agriculture. The
database will help to develop situation specific recommendations
consisting of right land use and best combination of agro-techniques
for a well-defined set of soil and site characteristics. The recent
study suggests that a well-developed LUP is capable to address the
issues related to climate change like arresting land degradation,
increasing carbon sequestration, reducing CO
2 emission and finally
ensuring food security.... ”
4.12 When asked about the status of the project on Land Resource
Inventory as on date, the Department have submitted following details:—
“As of today, the following LRI blocks have been completed by
preparing base and soil maps
Region Number of blocks completed*
Southern 17
Western 5
Central 3
Eastern 17
Northern 6
North-East 6
Total 54
*With the generation of soil and thematic maps ”

61
4.13 On the query of the Committee regarding MoU signed with
State Governments for funds, manpower and other infrastructure under
the project apart from Gujarat, Karnataka, Meghalaya and Telangana,
the Department have stated as under:—
“...Apart from Gujarat, Karnataka, Meghalaya and Telangana States,
Government of Goa has signed MoU with ICAR-NBSS&LUP and involves
in the LRI programme of the State as the funding agency... ”
4.14 On the query of the Committee regarding details of financial,
infrastructure and manpower support required by the ICAR for successful
completion of project, the Department have stated as under:—
“...The details of financial, infrastructure and manpower support
required by the ICAR for successful completion of project is given
below:
i. Financial requirement:
Sl.No. Description of the items Cost ( ` in lakhs)
1. Laboratory/field equipment and lab facilities 3004.50
2. Geographical Information System 1286.25
3. Contingencies for Field Work 38000.80
4. Others 15725.00
5. Development of Geo-portal on soils 5050.00
Total – (A) 49341.55
Unforeseen expenses @ 5% of the cost (B) 2467.08
Total (A + B) 51808.63
ii. Infrastructure requirement:
Laboratory and field equipment, Remote sensing equipment and
satellite datasets, GIS software, Computers for soil geoportal
development.
iii. Manpower:
Category Requirement
Scientist 25
Technical 33
Administrative 21
Supporting 27
*Besides the above strength, 56 (YP1 + YP2) contractual workers are required to
complete the LRI project. ”

62
CHAPTER V
NATURAL RESOURCE MANAGEMENT
5.1 Land is a vital natural resource, both for the survival and
prosperity of humanity and maintenance of all terrestrial ecosystems.
The limits of land resources are finite whereas human demands on
them are ever increasing. Fertile land in rural areas becomes scarcer
due to population growth, pollution, erosion and desertification, effects
of climate change, urbanization, etc. The increasing demands put
pressure on land resources leading to decline in crop production and
degradation in land quality. Arresting land degradation, mitigating and
adapting to climate change, protecting biodiversity, that aim at ensuring
food security are just a few of the many challenges developing countries
are currently facing. Land use planning is one of the tools that can
help to meet them as it focuses on negotiating future land and resource
uses by stakeholders. The sustainable food production is further
constrained by ill effects of projected climate change. In 2050, it is
estimated that maximum and minimum temperature will go up by
2.40ºC and 4.0ºC, respectively. Southern peninsula, northwest India
and the southern parts of Punjab, Haryana and Bihar will be the
severely affected due to the rise of minimum temperature. Apart from
this, large shift in monsoon months, reduction in number of rainy days,
increase in rain intensity and high frequency of cyclone would further
aggravate the problems of agrarians. Management of soil, water and
biodiversity have scope both in adaptation and mitigation. Natural
resources management strategy to cope with the climate change
includes (i) Building soil carbon and enhancing water holding capacity
to enhance resilience of soil towards climate variability, (ii) assessing
the potential of resource conservation technologies (RCTs), water
harvesting, water saving irrigation methods, flood control, improved
drainage, etc. in adaptation and mitigation; and (iii) enhancing carbon
sequestration by quantifying and promoting agro forestry on degraded
lands.When asked about the views of the Government of India for
devising Natural resources management strategy to cope with the
climate changes in the country on above-mentioned sectors, the
Department have stated as under:—
i. “Under NICRA (National Innovations on Climate Resilient
Agriculture) project ICAR-IISWC is carrying out studies to
address basin level hydrological and sediment flux using
hydrological models. Assessing the effect of climate change
on water regime, sediment dynamics, and water quality in
some regional sub-basins representing different agro-
ecological regions of the country is being done. Subsequently

63
a climate change vulnerability of various sub-basins
(operational size watersheds) will be done with adaptation
strategies and Best Management Practices (BMPs) pertinent
to soil and water conservation technologies in those
operational size watersheds to overcome the adverse impact
of climate change on runoff, soil loss and to evolve and
strengthen design criteria of soil water conservation
structures to cope with contingent climatic extremes.
ii. Research project mode to establish erosion productivity
relationship to address the dynamics of soil carbon change
due to land use change in present and contingent climate
change scenario and to evaluate resilience of various
restorative management practices towards offsetting future
changing climate.
i. Soil Health Management
5.2 Water holding capacity of the soil determines the capability of
soil to supply water to plants. If the soil water holding capacity is low,
the ability of the soil to supply necessary water to plant is limited
even in high rainfall areas.When asked about the Impact of global
warming on soil heath, the DARE has submitted as under:—
“...Many soil properties such as organic C, N mineralisation, soil
respiration, microbial biodiversity and biomass are sensitive to
temperature and moisture conditions. Global warming and reduced
availability of water is expected to increase the rate of
decomposition of soil organic carbon and thereby resulting loss of
carbon to atmosphere. Gradually, the loss of soil organic carbon
may eventually reduce nutrient and moisture holding capacity of
soil, degrade physical and structural stability, hamper water and
air movement in soil and ultimately soil quality... ”
5.3 On the query of the Committee regarding any study by the
ICAR to assess impact of increasing temperature on soil health in the
country, the DARE has submitted as under:—
“...Studies were conducted at ICAR-IISS Bhopal to assess the impact
of environmental parameters (temperature and moisture content)
on Methane (CH
4) and CO 2 emission. Farm yard manure (FYM)
exhibited maximum CH4 oxidation at 35°C, while CO 2 emission was
maximum at 25°C in macro-aggregates, 35°C in micro-aggregates
and 45°C in mineral associates. The soil Carbon mineralisation rate
was significantly influenced by temperature besides source and
type of the substrate applied on the soil. In addition, the modelling
studies revealed that the soil carbon sequestration rate is the

64
function of rainfall, temperature, soil carbon content, soil texture,
net primary productivity and C:N ratio of residue... ”
5.4 On the query of the Committee regarding any study to assess
the status of organic carbon content and water holding capacity of soil
in different parts of the country, the DARE has submitted as under:—
“...ICAR through its institutes is regularly assessing the status of
organic carbon content and water holding capacity of soils in
different parts of the country. AICRP on Long Term Fertility
Experiments through its network of centres across the country
regularly assess the status of organic carbon content and water
holding capacity of the soils. In addition, ICAR-NBSS&LUP Nagpur
has already generated the soil resource inventory of the country
at 1:1 million scale and of different States at 1:250000 scale under
its project on Soil Resource Mapping. The soil resource inventory
includes soil organic carbon status and water holding capacity for
dominant and sub-dominant soils of each mapping unit. The
information is well documented in “Soil Resource Mapping Reports
of various States for prospective land use planning ” by ICAR-
NBSS&LUP Nagpur. Further, NBSS&LUP is presently engaged to survey
different parts of the country at 1:10000 scale to generate detailed
soil inventories under ongoing project, land Resource Inventory for
Agricultural Land use and development of National Portal on Soil.The
soil depth adjusted water holding capacity at district level is shown
below:—
Copyright 2013 CRIDA (ICAR)©
AWHC (MM)
INDIA
Available Water Holding
Capacity of Soil
km

65
5.5 When asked the reasons for deterioration of quality of soil in
the country and ways for its improvement, the DARE has submitted as
under:—
“...Soil quality is the function of land physiography, type of parent
material, weather conditions, land use and land cover status,
anthropogenic agricultural practices in an agro-ecosystem. There
is very delicate balance among various attributes of soil quality
and any deviation from optimum leads to deterioration in soil
quality. For example, adoption of non-sustainable cropping system,
imbalanced use of fertilizers, and faulty agricultural practices may
leads to soil degradation, soil erosion, salinity, water logging etc.
However , a systematic technological intervention could leads to
improvement of soil quality. Some of the options includes:
• Soil conservation to reduce erosion, maintaining soil organic
matter , and enhance water and nutrient bioavailability.
• Cultivation of crop species, genotypes and cropping systems
that make optimal use of soil resources for food production
while conserving soil fertility.
• Employing conservation agricultural practices  i.e. no-tillage,
reduced or minimum tillage with residues retained at the
surface as surface cover .
• Employing various morphological ( e.g. altered root: shoot
ratio), physiological (e.g. improved nutrient uptake efficiency
of root) and biochemical ( e.g.  secretion of nutrient
solubilizing and mobilizing rhizo-chemicals) adjustments in
crop rhizosphere.
• Integrated application of fertilisers, organic manures and
bio-fertilisers to different crops and cropping systems in
agriculture.
• Besides being a measure of climate change mitigation, carbon
sequestration is also important for improving organic carbon
status and hence quality of soil in a long term. Thus it
improves soil health... ”
5.6 On the query of the Committee regarding efforts being taken
by the Government for soil health management to enhance resilience
of soil towards climate variability in India, the Department have stated
as under:—
“...With a view to conserve top soil and to prevent soil erosion,
Government of India, Ministry of Agriculture is implementing various
watershed programmes, namely; National Watershed Development

66
Project for Rainfed Areas (NWDPRA), Soil Conservation in the
Catchments of River Valley Project and Flood Prone River (RVP&FPR)
and Reclamation and Development of Alkali & Acid Soils (RADAS)
across the country. Ministry of Rural Development is also
implementing Integrated Watershed Management Programme (IWMP)
for restoring ecological balance by harnessing, conserving and
developing degraded lands in the country. The soil and water
conservation works including the construction of check dams are
undertaken under various Centrally Sponsored Schemes such as
National Afforestation Programme (NAP), Mahatma Gandhi National
Rural Employment Guarantee Scheme (MGNREGS), Integrated
Watershed Management Programme (IWMP). IWMP has now been
subsumed under Pradhan Mantri Krishi Sinchayee Yojana (PMKSY)
and PMKSY (Watershed Development) aims effective management
of runoff water and improved soil & moisture conservation activities
such as ridge area treatment, drainage line treatment, rain water
harvesting, in-situ moisture conservation and other allied activities
on watershed basis. The Government is implementing location
specific Bio-engineering technologies including water harvesting as
well as increase in-situ water storage measures developed by Central
Soil and Water Conservation Research and Training Institute,
Dehradun through different integrated watershed management
programmes run by various agencies. The institute also organized
regular training courses for field functionaries and farmers in this
regard. With aim to reduce siltation in the reservoirs, various Soil
& Water Conservation activities are being implemented under
catchment area treatment measures for direct draining areas which
is in built programme of irrigation projects... ”
5.7 On the issue of soil health, the representative of DARE has
stated as under:—
¶----vktdy Lokby gsYFk dh cgqr ppkZ gSA Lokby gsYFk osQfedy gsYFk ugha
gSA bldh rhu rjg dh gsYFk gksrh gSA ,d osQfedy gsYFk] tks ge Lokby
iQfVZfyVh cksyrs gSa] nwljk fiQftdy gsYFk] fiQftdy dksM LVªDpj] okVj fjVsa'ku
gS vkSj rhljk tks usxysDVsM gS] ck;ksykftdy gsYFkA ;g oaQIyhVyh usxysDVsM gSA
vki ns[krs gSa fd vktdy osQpqvk ugha feyrk gSA 
This is an indicator as
to how your biological health of the soil has been degraded.  ;g
ck;ksykftdy gsYFk rHkh lqèkjsxh tc vki Lokby esa vkxsZfud eSU;ksj MkysaxsA
èkhes&èkhes vkxZsfud eSU;ksj dks Mkyuk rks cgqr usxfyftcy gks x;kA ge lc yksx
osQfedy iQfVZykbtj gh Mkyrs gSaA blosQ mQij è;ku cgqr t:jh gSA 
The soil
should be physically and biologically fit so that  mlosQ mQij tks vki

67
iQfVZykbtj nsrs gSa] og fiQj ys ldrk gSA vxj fiQftdyh ohd gS] rks vkiosQ
lkeus fdruk Hkh [kkuk j[k nks] vki ugha ys ik,axsA vxj ck;ksykWftdy gsYFk
Bhd gksxh rks DykbesV psat dk baiSDV Hkh buosQ mQij de iM+sxkA---¸
5.8 Further elaborating on above issue, the representative of DARE
has stated as under:—
¶----xaxk&;equk osQ eSnkuh bykosQ] osQUnzh; Hkkjr o"kZ osQ bykosQ ftlesa ,fjM]
lseh&,fjM jhtUl gSa] gekjk iSfuulqyj bafM;k ftlesa nf{k.k Hkkjr osQ jkT; vkrs
gSa] mu lHkh Hkw&Hkkxksa ij fHkUu&fHkUu rjhosQ ls tyok;q ifjorZu dk izHkko iM+rk
tk jgk gSA bldk igyk izHkko feV~Vh osQ LokLF; ij n`f"Vxkspj gksrk gSA xaxk&;equk
osQ eSnkuh bykdksa esa tgka èkku vkSj xsgwa dh [ksrh dbZ lkyksa ls dh tk jgh
gS] rkieku o`f¼ osQ dkj.k mRikndrk ij izHkko iM+ jgk gS] ysfdu ftl rsth
ls vkWxsZfud dkcZu dk ykWl gks jgk gS] og cgqr fpUrk dk fo"k; gSA feV~Vh
esa vkWxsZfud dkcZu dk Lrj dkiQh uhps pyk x;k gSA feV~Vh osQ vanj vkxsZfud
dkcZu ,d ,slk inkFkZ gS tks tyok;q ifjorZu ls feV~Vh dk cpko vkSj bl lkjh
flfoykbts'ku dk cpko dj ldrk gS vkSj djrk gSA ysfdu le; osQ pyrs
ge tks izSfDVlst bLrseky djrs gSa] vfèkd [kkn dk bLrseky djrs gSa] vaèkkèkqaèk
ikuh dk bLrseky djrs gSa] mlosQ pyrs vkxsZfud dkcZu dk tks {kj.k gks jgk
gS] mlosQ dkj.k feV~Vh osQ rhuksa LokLF;
—jklk;fud] HkkSfrd vkSj tSfod LokLF;—
ij bldk cqjk izHkko iM+ jgk gSA mlosQ fy, vkbZlh,vkj us dbZ rduhdksa dk
fodkl fd;k gS ftlesa Mk;jSDV lh¯Mx vkWiQ jkbl] jSflM~;w fjVSa'ku] dUtosZ'ku
,xzhdYpj] ftldh ekiZQr feV~Vh esa okfil vkxsZfud dkcZu dks ,sM djus dh
ckr dgh tkrh gSA----¸
5.9 When asked to explain problem of soil degradation and efforts
being taken by the Government for restoring soil health, the
representative of DARE has stated as under:—
¶----Hkkjr o"kZ esa yxHkx 141 fefy;u gsDVs;j tehu gS ftlesa lkWYV viSQDVsM]
lSfyfuVh vkSj lksfMflVh feykdj 7 fefy;u gsDVs;j gSA ml 7 fefy;u gsDVs;j
tehu ij Hkkjr ljdkj us fiNys rhl lkyksa esa tks jhDyses'ku osQ izksxzke pyk,
gSa] ftile VsDuksykWth ls cgqr lkjh tehu] yxHkx lk<+s rhu fefy;u gsDVs;j
tehu vkSj Mªsust dk izksfotu djosQ geus lqèkkjh gSA bl lq/kj osQ nkSjku ftile
feykus ls lksfM;e lYisQV uke dk tks jlk;u rS;kj gqvk] og tehu osQ uhps
pyk x;kA tc mldh yh¯px uhps gqbZ] yo.k uhps x, rHkh mQij dh tehu
Bhd gqbZA mQij dh tehu Bhd gks xbZ] ysfdu le; osQ pyrs geus oqQN ,slh
ikWfyflt viukb± tgka fctyh eqÝr dj nh rks uhps ls ikuh mBkuk 'kq: dj

68
fn;kA og lksfM;e lYisQV okyk ikuh fiQj ls tehu osQ mQij vk jgk gSA vPNh
tehu Fkh mlesa lksfM;e lYisQV osQ ikuh ls bfjxs'ku djus ls og fiQj ls {kjh;
gks tkrh gSA ;g eqík cgqr [kqydj lkeus vk jgk gS tks tyok;q ifjorZu osQ
dkj.k gksrk gSA ge vkSj xgjs tkrs gSa vkSj lkany okys ikuh dks mQij ys vkrs
gSaA [ksrh osQ {ks=k esa ,sls ikuh vkSj feV~Vh dk jhDyses'ku egRoiw.kZ ckr gSA mlosQ
fy, ,u,e,l, osQ ekè;e ls ljdkj dh ;kstuk gSA blosQ vykok geus vuqlaèkku
osQ fy, fudjke dh tks ;kstuk pykbZ gS mlosQ ekiZQr Hkh dkiQh vuqlaèkku dj
jgs gSaA blosQ fy, gekjs laLFkku MSfMosQVsM gSa vkSj dke dj jgs gSaA
gekjs fcgkj dk oqQN Hkkx] if'pe caxky vkSj iwjs bZLVuZ dksLV vkSj FkksM+k&cgqr
oSLVuZ dksLV esa ,flM lkW;Yl dh tehu gekjs ns'k esa yxHkx 20 fefy;u gsDVs;j
gSA ml 20 fefy;u gsDVs;j esa tks vEyh; e`nk,a gSa] muesa ls lkekU; vEyh;
e`nk,a vPNk mRiknu nsrh gSa] ysfdu tgka ih,p lk<+s ikap ls uhps gS] lk<s+ pkj
vkSj lk<s+ ikap osQ chp ih,p dh mRikndrk ij vfèkd vEyh;rk osQ dkj.k
izHkko iM+rk gSA nqHkkZX; ls mu {ks=kksa esa o"kkZ vlkef;d gksus yxh gSA ;g rc
gksrh gS tc gkbMªkstu vk;u dk dUlsaVªs'ku eSfDlee gksrk gS vkSj vxj ml le;
cjlkr gks xbZ rks og ,flfMVh dks vkSj c<+krk gSA ogka dk oSQfY'k;e] eSfXuf'k;e
ckgj pyk tkrk gS] vk;ju] ,sY;qfefu;e vkSj gkbMªkstu bdV~Bk gksus osQ dkj.k
ogka ,flfMVh vkSj c<+rh gSA tgka iwohZ {ks=kksa esa iqjkus le; esa gesa èkku dh yxHkx
,d ls Ms<+ Vu izksMfDVfoVh feyrh Fkh] ogka og ?kVdj de gks xbZ gS] gkykafd
geus tks ubZ oSjk;Vht cukbZ gSa] muosQ dkj.k izksMfDVfoVh FkksM+h vkxs c<+ xbZ
gSA vxj ge iqjkuh oSjk;Vh ysa] rks vHkh mudh mRikndrk de gks jgh gSA ;g
Hkh tyok;q ifjorZu osQ dkj.k gks jgk gSA dbZ Hkkx gSa tgka leqnz ls ikuh dk
fjlko vPNs ikuh osQ vanj gks jgk gSA tc {kkjh; ty dk fjlko vPNs ikuh
osQ vanj gksrk gS rks vPNk ikuh Hkh {kkjh; gks tkrk gSA ml ikuh dh mi;ksfxrk]
mRikndrk mruh ugha jg ikrh ftruh gksuh pkfg,A ;g Hkh tyok;q ifjorZu osQ
dkj.k gks jgk gSA----¸
ii. Agro-Forestry
5.10 Agro-Forestry is considered one of the major methods which
can help to mitigate effect of Green House Gases (GHGs) and reduce
effect of global warming. When asked to explain Policy of Government
on promotion of agro-forestry in the country, the Department have
stated as under:—
“...Agro-forestry is significantly contributing in conservation of
natural resources, diversification of landuse and farming systems

69
to meet the demands of fuel, fodder , timber , and thus promoting
economic transformation of farmers. Land being a limited resource,
farm area cannot be expanded, but efficiency of farm could
realistically be improved by integrating tree growing as agro-forestry.
Moreover , planting trees outside the forest in the form of agro-
forestry/farm-forestry is only the answer to meet the goal as
required by the National Forest Policy of increasing vegetation
cover to 33% from the present level of 24.01% (FSI, 2013). Thus,
the Government of India pronounced National Agro-forestry Policy
during 2014 with the following objectives:
• Encourage and expand tree plantation in complementarity
and integrated manner with crops and livestock to improve
productivity, employment, income and livelihoods of rural
households, especially the small holder farmers.
• Protect and stabilize ecosystems and promote resilient
cropping and farming systems to minimize the risk during
extreme climatic events.
• Meet the raw material requirements of wood based industries
and reduce import of wood and wood products to save
foreign exchange.
• Supplement the availability of Agro-Forestry Products (AFPs)
such as the fuel—wood, fodder , non-timber forest produce
and small timber of the rural and tribal populations, thereby
reducing the pressure on existing forests.
• Complement achieving the target of increasing forest/tree
cover to promote ecological stability especially in the
vulnerable regions.
• Develop capacity and strengthen research in agro-forestry
and create a massive people’s movement for achieving these
objectives and to minimize pressure on existing forests.. ”
5.11 On the above issue, the representative of Ministry of
Environment, Forest and Climate Change have stated as under:—
¶----tSlk fd vkius dgk gS] o`Qf"k okfudh vuqlaèkku bl ns'k esa yxHkx rhl
lkyksa ls py jgk gSA blesa tks fujarj ifjorZu gks jgs gSa] mudk Hkh lk{; fy;k
tkrk gS vkSj fujarj ;g iz;kl fd;k tk jgk gS fd ns'k esa o`Qf"k okfudh dks
dSls c<+k;k tk,\ Hkkjr ljdkj us o"kZ 2014 esa ,d o`Qf"k okfudh uhfr ?kksf"kr
dh Fkh] tks fd fo'o dh igyh o`Qf"k okfudh uhfr gSA blesa ;g ns[kk x;k
gS fd vxj ge o`Qf"k osQ lkFk&lkFk isM+kasa dk lekos'k djsa rks tks tyok;q ifjorZu

70
;k oSf'od rkieku esa o`f¼ gS] mldk lkeuk dj ldrs gSaA fdlku dh vk;
nqxquh djus dk tks y{; gS] mlesa Hkh vxj ge ozQkWi Mk;oflZfiQosQ'ku osQ eísutj
o`Qf"k okfudh viukrs gSa rks fdlku dks ykHk gksrk gSA bl fo"k; esa tks Hkh leL;k
vk jgh Fkh] o`Qf"k okfudh uhfr vkus osQ ckn bldk iz;kl fd;k tk jgk gS
fd ftruh Hkh leL;k,a gSa] mUgsa nwj fd;k tk,A mlosQ fy, jkT; ljdkj osQ
tks ou foHkkx gSa] mlosQ lkFk feydj ,sls o`{k yxk, tk,a] ftlls fdlkuksa dh
vkenuh c<+ losQ vkSj mldh vkenuh Hkh c<+ losQA lkFk gh lkFk] feV~Vh dh
mRikndrk esa Hkh o`f¼ gksA blosQ fy, ,sls ikSèks tks Hkwfe dks u=ktu iznku djrs
gSa] mudk p;u fd;k x;k gSA iwjs ns'k osQ fy, yxHkx 35 ,sls ekWMy rS;kj
fd, x, gSa tks ogka dh tyok;q osQ vuq:i gSa vkSj ftuls fdlku viuh vk;
Hkh c<+k ldrk gS vkSj lkFk gh lkFk viuh vU; vko';drkvksa dh Hkh iwfrZ
dj ldrk gSA bl fo"k; esa fujarj vuqlaèkku py jgs gSaA ,d osQUnzh; o`Qf"k okfudh
vuqlaèkku laLFkku >kalh esasa dk;Zjr gSA blosQ vykok] iwjs ns'k esa blosQ 37 osQUnz
gSaA pwafd gj LFkku dh o`Qf"k okfudh vyx&vyx gS] blfy, ogka osQ vuq:i
vuqlaèkku djus osQ fy, dk;Z fd;k tk jgk gSA----¸
5.12 Further on the above issue, the representative of Ministry of
Environment, Forest and Climate Change have stated as under:—
¶----;wosQfyIVl osQ ckjs esa rjg&rjg osQ er gSA ,slh ckr Hkh gS fd ;g okVj
Vscy fMIyhV djrk gS] ftldh otg ls ¯prk jgrh gSA gekjh fefuLVªh gj LVsV
dks ;g ,Mokbtjh nsrh gS fd vki yksdy baMhftul isM+&ikSèkksa dks yxk;saA nwljh
ckr gS fd vxj ge ukWnZu vesfjdk ;k osLVuZ ;wjksi osQ isM+ dks vius vaxqfy;ksa
ij fxu ldrs gSa] ysfdu gekjs ;gka ,d gtkj ls T;knk Lislht gSaA 
We have
more than over 1000 species of trees; whereas if we see Western
Europe or Northern America, you can count.  ogka T;knk ls T;knk vksd]
ikbUl and temperate flora gksaxsA So, our flora is embarrassingly rich. ”
5.13 When asked to furnish details of the programmes being
implemented by the Government on agro-forestry and assistance being
provided to the farmers in the country, the Department have stated
as under:—
“...The various programmes implemented by Government on
agroforestry are:
• The agro-forestry R & D through ICAR - Central Agro-forestry
Research Institute, Jhansi and ICAR - All India Coordinated
Research Project on Agro-forestry.
• Agro-forestry programme of Indian Council of Forestry
Research and Education, Dehradun.

71
• Through various programmes of State Forest Departments.
• Assistance provided to the farmers for technical guidance
on the subject through capacity building programmes and
with the implementation of National Agro-forestry Policy
and Sub-Mission on Agroforestry under National Mission on
Sustainable Agriculture through DAC and FW.. ”
5.14 On the query of the Committee regarding plants which are
suitable for different agro-climatic conditions, the Department have
stated as under:—
“...ICAR—Central Agro-forestry Research Institute, Jhansi and ICAR—
All India Coordinated Research Project on Agro-forestry has identified
suitable tree species for different agro-climatic conditions of the
country.
(1) Western Himalayan region:  Grewiaoptiva, Ulmuswallichiana,
Morus alba , Salix, Robinapseudoacacia and Poplar;
(2) Eastern Himalayan region : Acacia auriculiformis,
Alnusnepalensis, Bamboos , and Gmelinaarborea;
(3) Indo-gangetic region: Populus, Eucalyptus, Dalbergiasissoo,
Meliaazedrach;
(4) Arid and semi arid regions:  Dalbergiasissoo, Acacia nilotica,
Ailanthus excelsa, Prosopis cineraria,Leucaenaleucocephala
and Azadirachtaindica;
(5) Western India: Acacia nilotica, Prosopis cineraria and
Zizyphus, Ailanthus and Azadirachtaindica;
(6) Southern Region:  Tectonagrandis , Meiladubia,
Tamarindusindica, and cashew nuts;
(7) Humid and sub humid regions:  Albiziaspp., Gmelinaarborea,
Gliricidia, Acacia auriculiformis, Acacia mangium;
(8) Coastal and island region : Artocarpus , Azadirachtaindica,
Casuarina equisetifolia, Grevillea robusta and bamboos.
In addition twenty species have been identified at national level
for agroforestry programmes. The identified species are Populus
spp., Eucalyptus spp., Tectonagrandis, Prosopis spp., Bamboo spp.,
Acacia spp., Gmelina spp., Grewia spp., Melia spp., Ailanthus spp.,
Dalbergiasissoo, Casuarina spp., Leucaenaleucocephala,
Azadirachtaindica, Jatropha carcus, Anthocephalus spp., Albizia spp.,
Terminalia spp., Salix spp. and Hardwickia spp.. ”

72
5.15 On being asked about assessment of effect of eucalyptus and
other exotic plantation on local climate and soil health which was
prevalent during early stage of agroforestry drive, the Department
have stated as under:—
“...Several studies conducted on water use efficiency of eucalyptus
suggest that eucalyptus is more water efficient than other tree
species for the per gram biomass production. Some of the research
findings based on studies conducted in different parts of the country
are mentioned below:
• Several studies capture some of the concerns of eucalypts
that make them more productive and water use efficient.
The findings of the research taken up by Calder et al 1997,
in Karnataka under dry tropical climate, at one site, the
water use of a young E. tereticornis plantation was found
to be no different from that of an indigenous dry deciduous
forest. At two other sites, the annual water use of the
eucalyptus plantation and the indigenous forest was found
to be equal to the rainfall. At yet another site, with deeper
soil, water use of the eucalyptus plantation was greater
than the rainfall, i.e. 3,400 mm used against 2,100 mm
received in the 3 years period of study. During these
3 years, rainfall was less than normal and yet at none of
the sites was there any evidence of abstraction from the
water table. The source of the extra water is unknown. One
hypothesis is that, if roots penetrate successively deeper
layers, water ‘mined’ would account for it.The efficiency of
water use of E. tereticornis as against that of species of
other genera including fast growing species such as
Albiziafalcataria, Meliaazadarach and Acacia auriculiformis
has been proven (Tiwari, D.N.). While the earlier findings
were that E. tereticornis used 0.48 mm-0.55 mm of water
to produce one gram of dry matter under unrestricted supply
of water , in rainfed conditions in Dehra Dun (India) only
0.122 mm of water was used, reconfirming its capacity to
cut down water consumption under moisture stress. It has
been found that the maximum consumption of water by
E. tereticornis, in the Dehra Dun climate is during the rains
(60%), followed by winter (26%) with the least during summer
(14%), showing that the species adjusts its water use to the
availability of water.
• In India, Tiwari and Mathur (1993) reported that experiments
were conducted to compare water requirements and biomass

73
production of selected tree species. The species studied
included Pongamiapinnata (slow growing), Syzgiumcuminnii
(Mzambarau) with moderate growth and Eucalyptus hybrid
(fast growing), among others. The results concluded that:
* Eucalyptus hybrid consumed more water on per litre
basis, but produced more biomass per unit volume of
water.
* Pongamiapinnata consumed the least water but
produced least biomass per unit volume of water .
* Eucalyptus hybrid was the most efficient water user
compared to the other species studied.
• In another study in Central India where large-scale plantations
of Eucalyptus tereticornis had been established, the level
of water in wells declined until the plantations were 6 to
8 years (when trees have their maximum rate of growth)
and thereafter , reverted to the earlier level. Similarly,
adverse effects on hydrological cycle were not observed in
older plantations of E. globulus. Cromer et al.  (1993) on
comparing the response of E. grandis under irrigation and
fertility treatment found that the trees reacted favourably
to additional fertility more than water . After three years,
fertilizer treatment had significantly and substantially
increased growth in mean height and basal area, but there
was no response to irrigation and no interaction between
fertilizer and irrigation.
• Studies at FRI, Dehradun by Gurumurti and Rawat, hold that
the overall use of water by eucalyptus is limited to the
total rainfall regime of the area.
• The Overseas Development Administration of the UK
supported a study to understand the impact of fast growing
species on the environment by comparing water use in
plantations of eucalyptus, indigenous forest and annual
agricultural crop (Calder , 1994). The main findings of the
study were:
¾ In the dry zone, the water use of young Eucalyptus
plantation was no greater than that of indigenous dry
deciduous forest;
¾ The annual water use of Eucalyptus and indigenous
forest was equal to annual rainfall;

74
¾ The annual water use of either indigenous or plantation
forests was higher than that of agricultural crops; and
¾ There was no evidence of water abstraction from the
water table by all species.
The general observations from these studies is that the effect of
planted trees on ground water depends on the species, climatic
conditions and type of soil.. ”
5.16 On the above issue, the representative of DARE have stated
as under:—
¶lHkkifr egksn;] vkiosQ iz'u lkef;d gSa vkSj tks vkius crk;k gS ml fn'kk
esa igys ls dke gks jgk gSa o`Qf"k okfudh esa gekjk ewyr% igys rks ;g gS fd
mlosQ fy, dkSu ls o`{k gSa\ lHkh o`{k ge blesa ugha yxkrs gSaA blesa è;ku ;g
fn;k tkrk gS fd o`{k rsth ls c<+s vkSj mldh Nk;k T;knk cM+h u gks vkSj
rhljk mlosQ vU; ykHk Hkh gksaA tSls vxj Nk;k okyk gks] rks mldh ifÙk;ka ge
pkjs osQ dke esa ykrs gSa] bl rjg dk vuqlaèkku Hkh fd;k tk jgk gSA o`Qf"k
tyok;q osQ vuqowQy gh o`{kksa dk p;u fd;k tk jgk gSA blhfy, eSaus dgk Fkk
fd 37 osQUnzksa esa ogka dh tyok;q osQ vuq:i gh og vuqlaèkku gks] rks ,sls {ks=kksa
esa bl rjg osQ o`{kksa dk p;u fd;k tk jgk gS] tks ogka dh ijEijkxr o`Qf"k
gS] mlesa leL;k u gksA o`{kksa osQ p;u osQ lkFk&lkFk ;g Hkh gksrk gS fd mlosQ
lkFk dkSu&lh iQlysa 'kq: esa ykuk gSA izk;% nks&rhu lky rd tc rd N=k
ugha c<+rk gS rks dksbZ leL;k ugha gksrh gSA tSls&tSls o`{k dh ok;q c<+rh gS]
rks mldk N=k cM+k gksrk gS rks iQlyksa dk p;u Hkh ge yksx mlh osQ vuq:i
ifjofrZr djrs gSaA blosQ lkFk gh vuqlaèkku esa ge ;s lkjh phtsa ns[krs gSa fd
mldh tM+ksa dk oSQls ge] tSlk vkius Lo;a dgk gS fd ftldh tM+sa de ls
de uhps rd tk,] ftlls tks U;wfVª;aV mldk gS] og oaQiVh'ku u gksA bl fo"k;
esa Hkh vuqlaèkku py jgs gSaA tSlk eSaus crk;k gS fd tks ;s 35 ekWMy dh ckr
dh Fkh] buesa bu phtksa dks j[kk tk jgk gSA tSlk fd tks gekjs 'kq"d okys {ks=k
gSa] tSls [kstjh osQ fOk"k; esa gS] vki yksx rks vPNh rjg ls fHkK gS] tSls [kstjh
ij igys ls gh dkiQh vuqlaèkku gks jgk gS vkSj mldks vkxs c<+k;k tk jgk gSA
mlh rjg ls vU; tkfr;ksa osQ gSa tks ,sls {ks=kksa osQ fy, mi;qDr ik, x, gSaA¸
5.17 Further elaborating on the above issue, the representative of
Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate Change have further stated
as under:—
¶ou fodkl esa ;k ou laj{k.k esa tks izkstsDV cuk;s tkrs gSa] ftlesa ;wosQfyIVl
;k fdlh Hkh rjg dh iztkfr dk iz;ksx gksrk gS] og jkT; ljdkjsa vius Lrj
ij fu.kZ; djrh gSa] ge budks enn eqgS;k djkrs gSa vkSj izkstsDV osQ rgr mUgsa

75
liksVZ djrs gSa] ysfdu oSKkfud :i ls fuf'pr gS fd bl ij vyx&vyx er
gSa vkSj HkkSxksfyd dkj.kksa ls dkSu&lh iztkfr mi;ksxh gS ;k mfpr gS] bldk fu.kZ;
ogka osQ yksdy Lrj osQ vfèkdkjh djrs gSaA¸
5.18 Further elaborating on the above issue, the representative of
Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate Change have further stated
as under:—
¶;wosQfyIVl osQ ckjs esa vkius iwNk FkkA ;g gekjk usfVo ugha gS] ;g vkLVªsfy;k
ls vk;k gSA vkLVªsfy;k esa bldh 500 osQ vkl&ikl iztkfr;ka gSaA 40&50 lky
igys bls tc yk;k x;k Fkk] ml le; iQk;joqM dh deh FkhA ml ifjizs{;
esa bls yk;k x;kA 500 iztkfr;kasa ls fliZQ nks dks pquk x;k vkSj os nks iztkfr;ka
oqQN gn rd oSLVuZ ?kkV esa lDlsliqQy jghaA os nks iztkfr;ka ;wosQfyIVl
VSfjVhdkfuZl vkSj ;wosQfyIVl oSQeyMksysafll FkhA vejoaQVd osQ fy, ;wosQfyIVl
ugha cfYd lky o`{k gh mfpr gS D;kasafd lky o`{k ogka igys ls FkkA ccwy
Hkh ,d usfVo gS ysfdu tks lqckcqy tks vk;k] Ykwlhukywdksflo vk;k] mls lkmFk
vesfjdk ls yk;k x;k fd tYnh ls ,d lky esa gh iwjk o`{k cu tk,xk vkSj
iQk;joqM ns nsxkA blfy, bu o`{kksa dks yk;k x;k ysfdu vc oSKkfudksa }kjk le>k
x;k fd ;s Bhd ugha gSA ;wosQfyIVl vkLVsªfy;k osQ fy, Bhd FkkA eSa mnkgj.k
nsuk pkgrk gwa fd ogka tks Hkkyw dksykcSj gSa mUgsa [kkus osQ fy, ,d fdyks
;wosQfyIVl pkfg,A ;g IykaV ,fuey osQ fy, FkkA ;wosQfyIVl ugha gksxk] rks mudk
Hkkyw ej tk,xk] ysfdu gekjs ;gka ,slk oqQN ugha gSA ubZ cSYV esa ;wosQfyIVl
dh dksbZ Hkh ,Mokbtjh fefuLVªh us b';q ugha dh gSA¸
5.19 When attention of the Ministry of Environment, Forest and
Climate Change invited to the need of issue of advisory to State
Governments for use of locally suitable species in the programme of
agro-forestry, the representatives have submitted as under:—
¶egksn;] vkidh ¯prk tk;t gSA eq[; eqík ekuuh; lnL;ksa us ;g mBk;k gS
fd o`{kksaa dh lgh iztkfr;ksa dk iz;ksx jkT;ksa esa gksuk pkfg,A bl ckr dks geus
uksV dj fy;k gSA bl ckjs eas 'kksèk rks gksrk gSA tSlk bUgksaus crk;k fd bafM;u
dkmaafly vkWiQ iQkjsLV fjlpZ ,tqosQ'ku tks gekjk lcls cM+k laLFkku nsgjknwu esa
gS] bl ckjs esa fujarj 'kksèk djrk jgrk gS vkSj jkT; ljdkjksa ls bldk rkyesy
gSA os bl ckjs esa Vªs¯ux vkSj fLdYl nsrs jgrs gSA ysfdu blesa dgha dksbZ deh
gksxh] rks ea=kky; dh rjiQ ls bl ij fopkj djosQ rRdky jkT;ksa dks tks Hkh
funsZ'k nsuk gksxk] og nsaxsA ;g ,d xaHkhj fo"k; gS] ge dksf'k'k djasxs fd bl
ij funsZ'k tkjh fd;k tk, vkSj tks Hkh ;qfDr&lEer vkSj 'kksèk&lEer gksxk] oSlk
funsZ'k jkT;ksa dks fn;k tk,xkA¸

76
iii. Water Resource Management
5.20 Water being fundamental for development of life on Earth is
scare natural resources. India with around 18% of world population has
only 4% of World’s renewable water resources. As per the latest
assessment out of the total precipitation, including snowfall, of around
4000 billion cubic metre in the country, the availability from surface
water and replenishable ground water is put at 1869 billion cubic
metre. Because of topographical and other constraints, about 60% of
this i.e.  690 billion cubic metre from surface water and 432 billion
cubic metre from ground water , can be put to beneficial use.There are
further limits on utilizable quantities of water owing to uneven
distribution over time and space. In addition, there are challenges of
frequent floods and droughts in one or the other part of the country.
With a growing population and rising needs of a fast developing nation
as well as the given indications of the impact of climate change,
availability of utilizable water will be under further strain in future
with the possibility of deepening water conflicts among different user
groups. Against this background, it become imperative the country to
analyze preparedness to augment water resources to face the climatic
changes associated with global warming.
5.21 Irrigation is a vital component of agricultural production. Our
country is at advantageous position in respect of water resources.
However, these water resources are not evenly distributed and
development of irrigation facility are restricted in relatively small
areas. agriculture in our country is mainly dependant on moonsoon
rainfall. Increasing global average temparature and resultant climate
change will have two consequences for water availability for agriculture
sector. Firstly, rainfall may become irratic and secondly, there will be
higher loss of water due to evapo-transpiration. Out of the 140 million
hectares of net sown area in the country, 65 million ha is irrigated,
leaving 75 million ha under rainfed farming. Even after completing all
irrigation projects and covering the potentially irrigable area, nearly
50% of the cultivated area will continue to remain rain dependent.
Therefore, improving the productivity of rainfed agriculture is critical
to achieving the objectives of growth, equity and sustainability as well
as ensuring food security of the country along with stabilizing
productivity levels in irrigated agriculture. In India, semi-arid tracts
are more extensive covering about 57 m ha. Arid climate is prevalent
in about 15 m ha and dry sub-humid regions occupy about 25 m ha in
the eastern parts of the country. Thus, dryland agriculture is more
predominant in the States of Rajasthan (arid), Maharashtra,
Madhya Pradesh, Gujarat, Karnataka and Tamil Nadu (semi-arid). Within

77
the irrigated area, the area irrigated through tube wells is about 29.7
m ha and canal irrigated area is 15.7 m ha and area irrigated through
tanks, other wells and other sources is about 19.7 m ha. The area
irrigated through other sources, tanks and other than tube wells is
more than the canal irrigated area by about 4 m ha and the investments
on these sources are made through individual farmers and Government
sources under various schemes such as IWMP , MGNREGA, etc.
Description Area (‘000 ha)
Net sown area 140823
Net irrigated area 65151
Net rainfed area 75672
Area irrigated by canals 15761
Area irrigated by tubewells 29661
Area irrigated by other wells and othersources 19728
5.22 Rainfed agriculture has been high on the agenda of the
Government of India considering that a larger part of cultivated area
in the country does not have access to irrigation and is dependent on
the rainfall for crop and livestock production. Major challenge of rainfed
agriculture in the decades to come will be sustaining the livelihoods
of the small and marginal farmers who will still depend on agriculture
despite increased climate variability and shrinking land holdings. Failure
to address this challenge will lead to substantial shift of rural youth
to service sector resulting in huge manpower shortage in farming. The
growing preference for commercial crops even in less endowed areas
will put further pressure on land and water resources and enhances
the risk. The challenge therefore lies in balancing the land use and
cropping pattern as per the resource capability and shifting markets.
Some of the challenges like retaining area under the nutritious cereals
can be converted into opportunities with by spreading awareness on
the health benefits of these crops. Against this background, it is
important that there is well placed plan for managemnet of water
resources in the country in order to face challanges associated with
climate change. Water is most critical input for Agriculture. Ensuring
availability of adequate water in monsoon dependant Indian agriculture
is a daunting task which can become a serious problem if climate
changes affect intensity and timing of Monsoon rains in India.
5.23 On the issue of impact of climate changes on water availability
in the country, the Department of Water Resources have stated that

78
relatively very large temporal and spatial variation in rainfall and
consequently in the river flow and ground water aquifers is an important
feature of the water resources in India. Although the impact of climate
change on water resources has not been accurately quantified, various
studies indicate that the likely impact of climate change on water
resources could contribute to further intensification of the extreme
events. Further , the features of water resources – both the availability
and the quality may also be considerably affected by the changes in
the land use in the form of urbanization, industrialization and changes
in the forest cover. Realizing that the various processes which influence
the hydrologic cycle are of dynamic nature, precise quantification of
the impact specifically due to climate change may not be a simple
task and it would be necessary to make suitable assumption at the
initial stages and undertake detailed simulation studies with more and
more data as they become available with time. However , the likely
impact of climate change on water resources could be in the form of:
i. Decline in the glaciers and the snowfields in the Himalayas;
ii. Increased drought like situations due to overall decrease in
the number of rainy days in many parts of the country;
iii. Increased flood events due to overall increase in the rainy
day intensity;
iv. Effect on groundwater quality in alluvial aquifers due to
increased flood and drought events;
v . Influence on groundwater recharge due to changes in
precipitation and evapotranspiration;
vi. Increased saline intrusion of coastal and island aquifers due
to rising sea levels.
From the above, it is apparent that in the context of likely impact
of climate change on water resources, the most vulnerable areas in
India would include (a) drought prone areas, (b) flood prone areas, (c)
the coastal regions, (d) the region with deficient rainfall, (e) areas
with over-exploited, critical and semi-critical stage of ground water
development, (f) water quality affected areas, and (g) snow-fed river
basins. For achieving the objectives of the National Water Mission,
long-term sustained efforts both in terms of time bound completion of
identified activities and ensuring the implementation of identified
policies and enactment of necessary legislation through persuasion at
different levels with the State Governments have been envisaged.

79
5.24 When asked about study by the ICAR on water availability for
agriculture in future due to impact of climate changes, the Department
have stated as under:—
“...A pilot study was conducted on the impact of climate change
on the water availability of different places in the erstwhile
Andhra Pradesh. Thornthwaite and Mather (1955) water balance
was computed for the climate change scenarios projected for the
years 2020 and 2050 at 21 selected places and compared with
baseline year 1990. From the output, the water surplus values
were considered and the per cent deviation for the years 2020 and
2050 from the baseline year 1990 were tabulated. Following
observation have been noticed in pilot study:—
• There is no water surplus available in the stations located
in the south Telangana, Rayalaseema and in some coastal
stations.
• Stations located in the northern Telangana, Krishna, West
and East Godavari districts showed water surplus in the
baseline year and subsequently decreased in the projected
years.
• The reason for declining in the water surplus after baseline
year could be attributed to increase in the demand (PET)
during these years due to the increase in temperature and
variability in the rainfall.
Sl. Station Name Water Surplus Water Surplus (% Deviation
No. (mm) from baseline year 1990)
1990 2020 2050
12 3 4 5
1. Ananthapur 0 No Change No Change
2. Mahabubnagar 0 No Change No Change
3. Kurnool 0 No Change No Change
4. Arogyavaram 0 No Change No Change
5. Bapatla 0 No Change No Change
6. Cuddapah 0 No Change No Change
7. Nandyal 0 No Change No Change
8. Tirupathi 0 No Change No Change

80
 9. Machilipatnam 0 No Change No Change
10. Nalgonda 0 No Change No Change
11. Medak 211.9 -6.3 -14.6
12. Karimnagar 158.2 -6.8 -10.2
13. Adilabad 217.3 -9.0 -15.4
14. Nizamabad 228.4 -5.2 -13.2
15. Narsapur 98.6 -13.6 -41.0
16. Kalingapatnam 74.1 -14.2 -42.9
17. Khammam 30.3 -41.9 -97.0
18. Visakhapatnam 21.2 -49.1 -100.0
19. Vijayawada 10.4 -100.0 -100.0
20. Amaravathi 24.8 -45.6 -100.0
5.25 On the query of the Committee regarding ways by which
Climate change will affect monsoon cycle in Indian subcontinent, the
Department have stated as under:—
• “The study conducted by IITM suggested a likely strong
sensitivity of Indian Subcontinent Monsoon (ISM) to global
warming under the projected climate change scenarios.
• It is projected that the rainfall magnitude will increase over
core monsoon zone in future climate along with lengthening
of the season due to late withdrawal. On inter-annual
timescales, the severity and frequency of both strong
monsoon (SM) and weak monsoon (WM) might increase in
future climate.
• Substantial changes in the daily variability of ISM are also
projected which are largely associated with the increase in
heavy rainfall events and decrease in number of wet days
during future monsoon.
• Both extreme wet and dry episodes are likely to intensify
and regionally extend in future climate with enhanced
tendency of long dry spells. ”
 12 3 4 5

81
5.26 When asked to explain impact of Climate change on Monsoon
rainfall in the country, the representative of Ministry of Earth Sciences
has stated as under:—
“Regarding post-Monsoon rain, that is, October to December rain
as well as winter rain, there has also been a lot of change. In both
seasons, we are getting more rainfalls. There are many categories
of rainfall like light, moderate and heavy rain. The frequency of
light rain is reducing and heavy rain is increasing. This is a big
difference which has been observed. But overall rainfall seems to
be the same. Some change has been found in respect of onset
Monsoon also. In Northern parts of India on-set Monsoon comes a
little later. Similarly, the withdrawal is also a bit later . So, there
is a small shift in the Monsoon pattern. Monsoon does not come
in June as it usually used to. ”
5.27 When asked to explain Impact of climate change on rainfall
days, the Representative of Ministry of Earth Sciences have stated as
under:—
¶vkus okys 2050 rd ;g VªsaM ik;k x;k gS based on simulations of
present day model. vkbZihlhlh dh ;g fjiksVZ 2014 esa vkbZ gSA vxyh fjiksVZ
2021 esa vk;sxhA vHkh rd osQ tks csLV lkbal gSa] cSLV lkbal osQ vuqlkj vxys
ipkl lky rd uEcj vkWiQ jsuh Mst de gksaxsA ;|fi lhtuy DokaVe ?kV ugha
jgk gS] ysfdu T;knk ckfj'k de fnuksa esa gks jgh gSA mldh otg ls okVj eSustesaV
b';wt] okVj LVksjst oSQisflVh] lisZQl okVj eSustesaV] yksdy VSaDl] ehfM;e VSaDl]
ekbuj VSaDl] bfjxs'ku VSaDl dk okVj eSustesaV flLVe esa cnyko ykus osQ i{k
esa gSaA¸
iv. Augmentation of Water Resources in the Country
5.28 When asked about efforts being taken by the Government of
India to augment water resources and scientific management of water
resources available in the country, the Department have stated as
under:—
“....Several steps for augmentation, conservation and efficient
management to ensure sustainability of water resources are
undertaken by the respective State Governments. In order to
supplement the efforts of the State Governments, Government of
India provides technical and financial assistance to State
Governments to encourage sustainable development and efficient
management of water resources through various schemes and

82
programmes such as Accelerated Irrigation Benefits Programme
(AIBP); and scheme for Repair , Renovation and Restoration (RRR) of
water bodies etc. The Government of India has also launched
National Water Mission with main objective as “conservation of
water , minimizing wastage and ensuring its more equitable
distribution both across and within States through integrated water
resources development and management. ”
5.29 While outlining objectives of National water Mission, the
Ministry of Water Resources, River Development and Ganga Rejuvenation
has stated as under:—
“…Main objective of the National Water Mission (NWM) is
“conservation of water , minimizing wastage and ensuring its more
equitable distribution both across and within States through
integrated water resources development and management ”. The
five identified goals of the Mission are:—
(a) Comprehensive water data base in public domain and
assessment of impact of climate change on water resource;
(b) Promotion of citizen and state action for water conservation,
augmentation and preservation;
(c) Focused attention to vulnerable areas including over-
exploited areas;
(d) Increasing water use efficiency by 20%; and
(e) Promotion of basin level integrated water resources
management.”
5.30 The Department have further stated that various strategies
for achieving the goals have been identified which lead to integrated
planning for sustainable development and efficient management with
active participation of the stakeholders after identifying and evaluating
the development scenario and management practices towards better
acceptability on the basis of assessment of the impacts of climate
change on water resources based on reliable data and information.
5.31 On the issue of availability of water resources in the country
and planning of the Government for its effective utilization, the
representative of Ministry of Water Resources, River Development and
Ganga Rejuvenation has stated as under:—
¶tks O;kid rS;kjh gqbZ Fkh] ml O;kid rS;kjh esa tc ge yksxksa us okVj fjlkslsZt
vlSlesaV fMiQjsUV csfluokbt fd;k rks ;g vk;k fd pkj gtkj fcfy;u D;wfcd
ehVj izflfiVs'ku gekjk iwjk o"kkZdky vkSj ukFkZ&bZLV vkSj lkmFk&oSLVuZ ekulwu osQ

83
Fkzw izkIr gksrk gSA mlesa ls yxHkx 50 izfr'kr 1869 fcfy;u D;wfcd ehVj ikuh
fMiQjsUV ufn;ksa ls cgdj vkrk gS vkSj ge mlesa ls osQoy 1120 ;wt dj ldrs
gSaA mls è;ku esa j[krs gq, geus vYVhesV bfjxs'ku iksVsaf'ky ftlesa ge iwjh ¯lpkbZ
lqfoèkk iznku dj ldrs gSa] og 142 fefy;u gSDVs;j FkkA 142 fefy;u gsDVs;j
esa ls ckdh jsuiSQM gks x;k] 182 fefy;u gsDVs;j VksVy gS] 182 fefy;u gsDVs;j
esa ls 142 fefy;u gsDVs;j ge bfjxs'ku ls dj ldrs gSa] 118 dj fy;k gS
rks cpk gqvk tks 24 fefy;u gsDVs;j vkSj baVj¯y¯dx ls 35 fefy;u gsDVs;j
,DLVªk vkSj gks tk;sxk] mlosQ fglkc ls ,d ckj lEiw.kZ ;kstuk cukbZ xbZ FkhA¸
5.32 When asked to furnish details of programmes/schemes being
undertaken or being envisaged to solve the problem of water crisis in
future, the Department have stated as under:—
“...The NMSA has four major programme components e.g. ‘Rainfed
Area Development ’, ‘Soil Health Management ’, ‘On Farm Water
Management’ and ‘Climate Change and Sustainable Agriculture
Modeling and Networking ’. Through the OFWM programme, the
Government is converging and upscaling efforts to ensure adequate
water availability for agriculture in coming decades.
i. On Farm Water Management (OFWM) will primarily focus on
enhancing water use efficiency by promoting on-farm water
management technologies and equipment. This not only focus
on application efficiency but in conjunction with RAD
component, also will emphasize on effective harvesting &
management of rainwater. Assistance is being extended for
adopting water conservation technologies, efficient delivery
and distribution systems etc. Emphasis is also being given to
manage and equitably distribute the resources of commons
by involving the water users associations, etc. To conserve
water on farm itself, farm ponds are being dug using
MGNREGA funds and earth moving machinery when manual
digging under MGNREGA is not feasible.
Planning & Implementation:
a. OFWM will focus on enhancing water use efficiency by
promoting appropriate technological interventions like
drip & sprinkler technologies, efficient water application
& distribution system, secondary storage and drainage
development.
b. The unit cost of drip irrigation system varies with
respect to plant spacing and location of the water
source. The normative cost has been laid down for

84
11 various Micro Irrigation systems for the purpose of
calculating financial assistance. Twenty-five (25) percent
higher cost, over & above the normative cost for all
the systems has been fixed for North Eastern &
Himalayan States for the purpose of calculating financial
assistance.
c. Location and crop specific technologically appropriate
irrigation systems will be propagated ensuring least
cost burden to the farmers/beneficiaries;
d. It will be ensured that atleast 25% of the micro irrigation
fund allocated to the State is used for crop sector.
e. Support to each farm family under OFWM component
will be restricted to a farm size of 5 Ha. However ,
beneficiaries who have already availed the benefit of
central support for micro irrigation cannot avail further
assistance for the same land for the next 10 years;
f. Support for creating secondary storage at tail end of
canal system to store water when available in abundance
(rainy season) or from perennial sources like streams
for use during dry periods through effective on-farm
water management; Support for drainage development
through surface/sub-surface/bio-drainage system;
g. Training on appropriate water management
technologies, judicious use of water and agronomic &
land development measures for effective water
management;
h. Implementing Agency at the District level should follow
uniform procedures and assure transparency in selecting
beneficiaries and releasing assistance expeditiously. PRIs
need to be consulted in selection of beneficiaries.
i. The water resources developed through watershed
development programmes/MGNREGA in the
demonstration area should invariably be linked with
the activities of OFWM component for its potential
use. Project areas under National Food Security Mission
(NFSM), National Mission on Oilseed & Oil Palm (NMOOP),
Mission for Integrated Development of Horticulture
(MIDH), National Livestock Mission (NLM) may also take
the advantage of this component for improving water
use efficiency, if this component has not been utilized
from the parent scheme.

85
ii. Prime Minister Krishi Sinchayi Yojana (PMKSY):-For ensuring
adequate water availability. Prime Minister Krishi Sinchayi
Yojana (PMKSY) has been launched to achieve convergence
of investments in irrigation at the field level, expand
cultivable area under assured irrigation, improve on-farm
water use efficiency to reduce wastage of water , enhance
the adoption of precision-irrigation and other water saving
technologies (More crop per drop), enhance recharge of
aquifers and introduce sustainable water conservation
practices by exploring the feasibility of reusing treated
municipal waste water for peri-urban agriculture and attract
greater private investment in precision irrigation system.
PMKSY has been conceived amalgamating ongoing schemes viz.
Accelerated Irrigation Benefit Programme (AIBP) of the Ministry of
Water Resources, River Development & Ganga Rejuvenation (MoW
R, RD&GR), Integrated Watershed Management Programme (IWMP)
of Department of Land Resources (DoLR) and the On Farm Water
Management (OFWM) of Department of Agriculture and Cooperation
(DAC). The scheme will be implemented by Ministries of Agriculture,
Water Resources and Rural Development. Ministry of Rural
Development is to mainly undertake rain water conservation,
construction of farm pond, water harvesting structures, small check
dams and contour bunding etc. The MoWR, RD & GR, is to undertake
various measures for creation of assured irrigation source,
construction of diversion canals, field channels, water diversion/
lift irrigation, including development of water distribution systems.
Ministry of Agriculture will promote efficient water conveyance
and precision water application devices like drips, sprinklers, pivots,
rain-guns in the farm “(Jal Sinchan)”, construction of micro-irrigation
structures to supplement source creation activities, extension
activities for promotion of scientific moisture conservation and
agronomic measures. Programme architecture of PMKSY will be to
adopt a ‘decentralized State level planning and projectised
execution’ structure that will allow States to draw up their own
irrigation development plans based on District Irrigation Plan (DIP)
and State Irrigation Plan (SIP). It will be operative as convergence
platform for all water sector activities including drinking water &
sanitation, MGNREGA, application of science & technology etc.
through comprehensive plan. State Level Sanctioning Committee
(SLSC) chaired by the Chief Secretary of the State will be vested
with the authority to oversee its implementation and sanction
projects.

86
The programme will be supervised and monitored by an Inter-
Ministerial National Steering Committee (NSC) will be constituted
under the Chairmanship of Prime Minister with Union Ministers
from concerned Ministries. A National Executive Committee (NEC)
will be constituted under the Chairmanship of Vice Chairman, NITI
Aayog to oversee programme implementation, allocation of
resources, inter-ministerial coordination, monitoring & performance
assessment, addressing administrative issues etc.
5.33 The DARE has further stated as under:
“Apart from implementation of above scheme, following initiatives
have been/proposed to be taken:—
(a) Completion of incomplete irrigation projects under Mission
Mode: The Ministry has prioritized 99 irrigation projects for
completion in mission mode including CADWM works within
a period of 3-4 years. The financing of these projects are
being arranged through borrowing funds from NABARD.
(b) Enhancing irrigation efficiency: A new Incentivization Scheme
for Bridging Irrigation Gap (ISBIG) is proposed to be
implemented for balance implementation of CADWM works
in outstanding projects other than prioritized irrigation
projects to improve the irrigation efficiency and covering
more area under irrigation. Under this scheme there is also
a component for re-use of waste water for enhancing the
irrigation area.
(c) New Irrigation Projects and Inter-Linking of Rivers: Adequate
water availability for irrigation can be ensured by taking up
new water storage projects, and by taking up inter-linking
of rivers. ”
5.34 On the issue of implementation of PMKSY , the rep resentatives
of Ministry of Water Resources, River Development and Ganga
Rejuvenation has submitted as under:—
¶jk"Vªh; ty fe'ku o`Qf"k ls lacafèkr dk;Z ugha djrk gSA bldk ,d y{; gS
fd tyok;q ifjorZu osQ dkj.k ty lalkèku esa tks ifjorZu gks jgs gSa] mu ij
è;ku fn;k tk,A buesa ls ,d bafM;u us'kuy desVh vkWu DykbesV psat gS] ftlosQ
vanj gekjs oqQN 20 estj fjoj csflu gSaA fgeky;u fjoj csflu vkSj isfuulqyj
fjoj csflu gSaA buesa ls vkB fjoj csflu esa geus ,d bfuf'k,fVo fy;k gS]
ftuesa tyok;q ifjorZu dh otg ls D;k&D;k ifjorZu gksaxs] mlosQ fy,
;w,uvkbZihlhlh us ,d Xykscy ekWMy tks fodflr fd;k gSA mls MkmuLosQy djosQ

87
mls fjoj csflu osQ ifjizs{; esa ,Xtkfeu fd;k tk,xk rFkk mldh LVMh dh
tk,xhA gekjs ns'k esa ftrus vkbZvkbZVht gSa] vkSj lkmFk esa tks] bafM;u baLVhP;wV
vkWiQ lkbal gSa] os bldh LVMh djsaxsA os lc blosQ ,DliV~lZ gSaA bl rjg ls
vkB fjoj csflu dk fu.kZ; gks x;k gSA bu fjoj csflu esa tyok;q ifjorZu osQ
ifjizs{; esa tks LVMh dh tk,xh] esjs [;ky ls mldh tkudkjh rhu&pkj lkyksa
esa miyCèk gksxhA ml tkudkjh ls ;g Hkh Kku feysxk fd ty lalkèku osQ ifjorZu
ls [ksrh esa fdl rjg dk ifjorZu vk,xkA blosQ vykok] u;h ljdkj cuus osQ
mijkar rqjar gh twu esa izèkkuea=kh th dk ,d fjO;w feyk] ftlesa mudk ;g mís';
Fkk fd gj ,d [ksr dks ¯lpkbZ dk ikuh feyuk pkfg,A mlosQ vanj ih,eosQ,lokbZ
izksxzke cuk;k x;kA ty lalkèku ea=kky; us gh blosQ fy, twu] 2014 esa ,d
izstsaVs'ku fn;kA fiQj o"kZ 2014 esa tks ctV cuk] mlls igys rhu cSBosaQ gqb± vkSj
mlosQ ckn o`Qf"k ea=kky;] ty lalkèku] unh fodkl vkSj xaxk laj{k.k ea=kky;
vkSj xzkeh.k fodkl ea=kky; osQ ySaM fjlkslZ foHkkx dks bldk dk;ZHkkj fn;k x;kA
bu rhu ea=kky;ksa dks ;g ftEesnkjh nh x;h gSA tSls ty lalkèku ea=kky; estj
bjhxs'ku] ehfM;e bjhxs'ku vkSj deku ,fj;k MsoyiesaV osQ rgr bls ns[ksa fd
lcdks ty fey jgk gS ;k ughaA o`Qf"k ea=kky; ekbØks bjhxs'ku vkSj okVj'ksM
eSustesaV dks ns[kasa vkSj blh rjg ySaM fjlkslsZt foHkkx dks bldk dk;ZHkkj fn;k
x;k gSA bu rhuksa ea=kky;ksa esa ty lalkèku ea=kky; us viuk dk;ZHkkj cgqr rsth
ls laHkkyk gSA¸
5.35 Further elaborating on the issue, the representatives of Ministry
of Water Resources, River Development and Ganga Rejuvenation has
stated as under:—
¶egksn;] ty lalkèku] unh fodkl vkSj xaxk laj{k.k ea=kky; dks izèkkuea=kh o`Qf"k
¯lpkbZ ;kstuk osQ fy, nks enksa osQ fy, dk;Z djus dh vuqefr feyh gSA igyk
gS estj ehfM;e izkstsDV~l] tks ,vkbZchih osQ varxZr igys ls py jgs Fks] mUgsa
iwjk djus dh ftEesnkjh nh x;h gSA nwljk ih,eosQ,lokbZ gj [ksr dks ikuh gSA
ih,eosQ,lokbZ&gj [ksr dks ikuh osQ varxZr geus ikap ;k Ng dEiksusaV~l dks ge
yksxksa us lfEefyr fd;k gSA igyk gS ljisQl ekbuj bjhxs'ku LdheA tks ¯lpkbZ
;kstuk 2000 gsDVs;j ls de dh gSa] muosQ foÙk iks"k.k dk tks Hkh izfr'kr fu;e
osQ vuqlkj osQUnz ljdkj osQ varxZr gksxk] og osQUnz ljdkj djsxhA nwljk gS] fjis;j]
fjuksos'ku ,.M jsLVksjs'ku vkWiQ okVj ckWMh”kA mlosQ fy, ftyk ¯lpkbZ ;kstuk esa
lekfgr gksdj tks ;kstuk,a vk,axh] mudk foÙk iks"k.k ge djsaxsA rhljk gS] dekaM
,fj;k MsoyiesaV ,.M okVj eSustesaVA ns'k esa yxHkx bl le; fØ;sVsM bjhxs'ku
iksVsaf'k;y vkSj ;wVhykbTM bjhxs'ku iksVsaf'k,y esa 24 fefy;u gsDVs;j dk xSi gSA
gekjs ikl ;kstuk vk;ksx dh tks fiQxlZ gSa] mlesa gekjh 142 fefy;u gsDVs;j
tks vYVhesV ¯lfpr {kerk gS] mlesa 118 fefy;u gsDVs;j l`ftr gks pqdk gS]
ftlesa ls ekpZ] 2013 osQ vkadM+ksa osQ fglkc ls osQoy 88 fefy;u gsDVs;j dk
mi;ksx gks ik jgk gSA bl rjg ;g tks 24 fefy;u gsDVs;j dk xSi gS] mldks
izkFkfedrk osQ vkèkkj ij dekaM ,fj;k MsoyiesaV okVj eSustesaV esa izèkkuea=kh o`Qf"k

88
¯lpkbZ ;kstuk esa gj [ksr dks ikuh osQ dEiksusaV esa izkFkfedrk esa j[kk gSA fjlkbdYM
okVj lhost VªhVesaV IykaV ls tks ikuh VªhVesaV osQ ckn fudysxk] mls laHkor%
fdlh utnhdh ¯lpkbZ ugj usVooZQ rd igqapk fn;k tk,A ftl le; ¯lpkbZ dh
lqfoèkk dh t:jr ugha gS] ml le; ij ml ikuh dks u”knhdh okVj ckWMh”k
eas Mky fn;k tk,A pkSFkk Hkwfexr ty osQ lacaèk easa gSA ge yksx vc rd Hkwfexr
ty dk foÙk iks"k.k ugha djrs FksA Hkwfexr ty dks Hkh blesa Lkekfgr dj fn;k
x;k gSA blosQ vykok] jkT; ljdkjksa dks Hkh iw.kZ :i ls ;g vfèkdkj fn;k fd
vxj muosQ fopkj ls fdlh [kkl fdlku dks ikuh igaqpkuk gS ;k dksbZ ubZ i¼fr
ls dke djuk gS] rks og ubZ i¼fr Hkh ftyk ¯lpkbZ ;kstuk esa 'kkfey dj
ysaA tc ftyk ¯lpkbZ ;kstuk vkSj jkT; ¯lpkbZ ;kstuk vuqeksfnr gks dj vk tk,xh
rks ty lalkèku ea=kky; dks tks foÙk iks"k.k djuk gS] og mls miyCèk djk,xkA
bl rjhosQ ls blesa geus tyok;qq ifjorZu dk è;ku j[krs gq, blesa tks Hkh rjhosQ
gks ldrs Fks vkSj ftl rjhosQ ls Hkh ¯lpkbZ dh lqfoèkk mRiUu dh tk ldrh
gS mls djus osQ fy, geus iwjk vuqikr cuk fn;k gS vkSj mlesa jkT; ljdkjksa
dks Hkh iw.kZ Lok;Ùkrk ns nh gSA¸
5.36 Further elaborating on the PMKSY scheme, the representative
of Ministry of Water Resources, River Development and Ganga
Rejuvenation has stated as under:—
¶ekbuj bfjxs'ku nks gtkj gsDVs;j ls de dh gSA ;g cgqr ikiqyj Ldhe gS
vkSj blls rqjar fdlkuksa dks iQk;nk gksrk gS] D;ksafd estj vkSj ehfM;e bfjxs'ku
izkstsDV~l esa nl ls ckjg lky yxrs gSa vkSj ;s ifj;kstuk,a rhu lky esa iwjh
gks tkrh gSa rks budk fdlkuksa dks cgqr vPNk ykHk fey jgk gSA
nwljh ckr ;g gS fd xzkmaM okVj osQ fy, gekjs ikl vc rd dksbZ Ldhe ugha
FkhA xzkmaM okVj osQ fy, geus LVsV~l dks dj fn;k gSA rhljk fjis;j] fjuksos'ku]
fjLVksjs'ku vkWiQ okVj ckMht esa tks vki yksxksa dh ¯prk Fkh] ge yksxksa us ty
eaFku fd;k] mleasa jkT;ksa osQ izfrfufèk vk,] mUgksausa crk;k vkSj tks vkius dgk
fd NksVh&NksVh ufn;ka lw[k xbZ gSa] NksVh okVj ckMht lw[k xbZ gSa rks geus iwjh
Ldhe jhosEi dj nh gSA ;g ekuuh; ea=kh th osQ ikl vizwoy osQ fy, j[kh
gqbZ gSA tks Hkh DyLVj vkWiQ Ldhe feydj nks gtkj gsDVsvj rd bfjxs'ku izksokbM
dj nsaxh] mu lc LdhEl dks ge blesa 'kkfey dj yasxs] pkgs os bfjZLiSfDVo
okVj okMht gksa] pSd MSEl gksa] ufn;ka gksa ;k ukys gksa] mu lcdks bl Ldhe
osQ fy, ykxw dj fn;k gSA¸
5.37 While explaining availability of funds for implementation of
PMKSY , the representative of Ministry of Water Resources, River
Development and Ganga Rejuvenation has stated as under:—
¶orZeku easa gesa ih,eosQ,lok; esa VksVy 50]000 djksM+ #i;s vkoafVr fd, x,
gSa] ftuesa ls 20]000 djksM+ #i;s vxys ikap o"kks± osQ fy, ty lalkèku ea=kky;

89
dks fn, x, gSaA ty lalkèku ea=kky; dh dfeVsM yk;fcYVh yxHkx 92]000
djksM+ #i;s Fkh] tks vku&xksbax izkstsDV~l dks dIyhV djus osQ fy, FkhA gekjs
ikl 297 estj vkSj ehfM;e izkstsDV~l Fks] ftuesa ls gesa 143 izkstsDV~l jkT;
ljdkj dh enn ls iwjs dj fn, FksA bu c`gn vkSj eè;e Js.kh dh ifj;kstukvksa
dks iwjk djus esa gekjh Hkwfedk ,slh Fkh fd jkT; ljdkjksa us cgqr lkjh ifj;kstuk,a
,d lkFk pkyw dj nh Fkh] ysfdu mudks iwjk ugha dj ik jgh FkhaA os ifj;kstuk,a
,MokaLM LVst vkWiQ oaQLVªD'ku esa igaqp x;h Fkha] ysfdu /u osQ vHkko esa iwjh
ugha gks ik jgh FkhA blfy, o"kZ 1996&97 esa ,DlsyjsVsM bfjxs'ku csfufiQV Ldhe
'kq: dh x;h ftlls jkT;ksa dks igys yksu fn;k x;k vkSj ckn esa o"kZ 2004
esa mls vuqnku esa dUoVZ dj fn;k x;k] blfy, ge vuqnku nsdj mu ifj;kstukvksa
dks iwjk dj losQA ;g xoZ dh ckr gS fd 143 ifj;kstuk,a lHkh leL;kvksa osQ
ckotwn iwjk gks ldhaA ckdh 146 vkWu&xksbax ifj;kstuk,a gSaA¸
5.38 The representative of Ministry of Water Resources, River
Development and Ganga Rejuvenation has also stated about flexibility
provided to the State Governments in the scheme as under:—
¶Lofoosd ls jkT; ljdkj fdlh Hkh [ksr dks ikuh igqapkus osQ fy, ;kstuk cuk;sxh]
ge iaQM djsaxs] mlosQ rgr og doj gks tk;sxhA dgha ij fdlh Hkh Ldhe esa
fdrus Hkh NksVs [ksr dks ikuh nsus dk iz;kl gksxk] og bl ;kstuk esa 'kkfey
gks tk;sxkA ,d Dykt tks geus j[kh fd jkT; ljdkj Lofoosd ls tks Hkh
ifj;kstuk cukuk pkgrh gSA¸
v. Support to Farmers for Adoption of Improved Irrigation Methods
5.39 On the query of the Committee regarding support being given
to the farmers in India for adopting precision irrigation such as drip/
sprinkler irrigation method etc., the Department have stated as under:—
“...The rain-fed agro-ecologies cover about 55 per cent of the net
cultivated area of India and is widely distributed in the country.
Rain-fed agriculture is always vulnerable due to vagaries of monsoon.
Change in weather pattern, long dry spells, deficit rainfall, change
in onset and withdrawal of monsoon has always affected adversely
the agriculture production and put the farmers who are mainly
small and marginal category into risk in farming. Provision of water
as live saving irrigation and adoption of integrated farming systems
including agro-forestry are among the most effective adaptability
measure to minimise this risk. With the objective to provide water
security to agriculture sector , Pradhan Mantri Krishi Sinchayee Yojana
has been launched with the motto of ‘Har Khet Ko Paani ’.

90
PMKSY aims at providing end-to end solutions in irrigation supply
chain, viz. water sources, distribution network and farm level
applications. PMKSY not only focuses on creating sources for assured
irrigation, but also creating protective irrigation by harnessing rain
water at micro level through ‘Jal Sanchay’ and ‘Jal Sinchan’. It
also focuses on water conservation and ground water recharge.
Micro irrigation will be popularised to ensure ‘Per drop-More crop’.
Programme architecture of PMKSY adopts a ‘decentralized State
level planning and projectised execution’ structure that will allow
States to draw up their own irrigation development plans based on
District Irrigation Plans and State Irrigation Plans prioritising the
immediate needs of the State. Ministry of Water Resources, River
Development & Ganga Renuvenation, Deptt. of Land Resources and
Deptt. of Agriculture Cooperation & Farmers Welfare are jointly
implementing the programme with the responsibility to implement
specific components of the programme.
Deptt. of Agriculture, Cooperation & Farmers Welfare has been
assigned as implementing department for the component of ‘Per
Drop More Crop ’ of the programme which is mostly to address
water use efficiency at farm level. During 2015-16, Rs. 1000.28
crore were released to the States for installation of micro irrigation
systems in the farmers’ fields and as per information made available
by them, about 5.72 lakh hectare has been covered under drip and
sprinkler systems. Besides promoting precision irrigation and better
on-farm water management practices to optimise the use of
available water resources, this component also supports gap filling
interventions like micro level water storage or water conservation/
management activities as ‘Other Interventions’ to complement and
supplement the works undertaken through various national/state
level programmes for drought proofing.
It has also been observed that 219 districts in the country have
been frequently affected by drought in the recent past. These
areas are witnessing regular agrarian crisis and the farmers are in
the state of distressed condition, requiring special attention and
support for a durable & sustainable solution. These areas have
been considered for special treatment under this sub-component
to improve the condition of underground water , to improve soil
moisture regime and to create micro-water storages for protective
irrigation during longer dry spells. In the notified blocks, funds
have been given to the States for supplementing material component
of selected MGNREGS projects on water harvesting/conservation.
Department of Agriculture and Cooperation released Rs. 433.9 crores

91
for these activities. As per available reports about 17000 water
harvesting structures have been created with nearly 25000 hectare
of irrigation potential (life saving irrigation). From 2016-17 any
supplementary interventions for drought proofing and water
conservation works beyond the permissible limit are being supported
under this intervention, based on district/State irrigation plan.
For the year 2016-17, Rs. 1500 crore for micro irrigation and
Rs. 840 crore for other interventions respectively have been
allocated under Per Drop More Crop component of PMKSY .
Considering the drought situation in the 13 States, Rs. 849 crore
was released as first instalment for micro irrigation and Rs. 398.90
crore for other interventions in advance during May, 2016 to tackle
the drought situation... ”
vi. Interlinking of Rivers
5.40 Interlinking of rivers envisages transfer water from surplus to
water deficit areas in the country. Inter-Linking River Program will
help saving the people living in drought- prone zones from hunger and
people living in flood-prone areas from the destruction caused by
floods. The idea of linking rivers had been proposed by Sir Arthur
Cotton more than a century ago. Dr. K.L. Rao, the Minister of Power
and Irrigation in the Cabinet of Smt. Indira Gandhi, revived this proposal
in 1972. The then-Ministry of Irrigation (now the Ministry of Water
Resources) conceived a plan for National Perspectives for Water
Development in August 1980. This paved the way for the establishment
of National Water Development Agency (NWDA) in 1982 to work out
basin-wise surpluses and deficits and explore possibilities of storage,
links and transfers. It has identified 30 river links, which would connect
every major river in the Indian mainland. NWDA has also prepared a
feasibility report on six of these. The Supreme Court has also asked
the Government of India to complete all planning required to launch
the project by 2006 and these projects of inter-basin transfers be
completed in the next 10 years or so. However , the Government is yet
to start work on projects for interlinking of rivers. On the query of the
Committee regarding policy/views of Government of India for
interlinking of rivers in the country, the Department have stated as
under:—
“...Interlinking of River (ILR) Programme has been taken up on high
priority. The Government is pursuing the Interlinking of River
program in a consultative manner. Its implementation is dependent
upon the consensus and co-operation of the concerned States and

92
upon obtaining various mandatory clearances from Ministry/
Departments of Central and State Governments including statutory
clearances. The policy of Government of India for interlinking of
rivers is to pursue the projects with consensus and cooperation of
the States. In Himalayan Component, the proposed storages and
the initial reaches of some of the water transfer links are falling
in neighbouring countries of Nepal and Bhutan. To carry out surveys
& investigations, their permission is essential. National Water
Development Authority could not conduct the studies and
investigations in the territory of Nepal and Bhutan to establish the
feasibility of the links involving international dimensions... ”
5.41 When asked about ways by which interlinking of rivers in the
country will be able to solve availability of water for agriculture purpose,
the DARE have stated as under:—
“...Interlinking of Rivers schemes envisages construction of as many
optimal storages as possible on these streams and interlinking
them to make available appreciable quantum of water to solve
availability of water for agriculture purpose as well as water supply
to the needed areas. As per the National Perspective Plan, the
implementation of interlinking would give benefits of 25 million ha
of irrigation from surface water , 10 million ha by increased use of
ground water, raising the ultimate irrigation potential from
140 million ha to 175 million ha and generation of 34 million KW
of power apart from other benefits.
5.42 On the above issue, the representative of Ministry of Water
Resources and Ganga Rejuvination has stated as under:—
¶ufn;ka ,d LVSaM&,yksu flLVe ugha gSa] og ,d iwjk fjoj csflu gksrk gSA ty
lalkèku ea=kky; us [kkst dh gS fd ftrus fjoj csflUl gSa] muesa baVhxzsVsM okVj
fjlkslZ MsoyiesaV fd;k tk,A gekjs tks 20 estj fjoj csflUl gSa] muesa ufn;ksa
dks ty] okVj ckWMht dk ty] vaMjxzkm.M okVj ,oa ,DohiQlZ vkfn lHkh osQ
fjlkslsZl dks ,d lkFk baVhxzsVsM os esa fd;k tk,xkA blfy, ,slh ckr ugha gS
fd vxj ufn;ksa osQ ty dks baVj¯y¯dx osQ ekè;e ls nwljh ufn;ksa esa Mk;oVZ
fd;k tk, rks mlls vksojvky buok;juesaV~l fMlVcsal gksxkA tc ikuh mudh
oSQfjbax oSQisflVh ls c<+rk gS rHkh og ufn;ksa ls fMlpktZ gksrk gSA¸
5.43 Further elaborating on the above issue, the representative of
Ministry of Water Resources and Ganga Rejuvenation has stated as
under:—
¶gekjs ns'k esa ekWulwu osQ le; esa gh FkksM+h vPNh ckjf'k gksrh gSA ukeZyh blosQ
fy, ,d baVj¯y¯dx vkWiQ fjoj Iyku cuk FkkA ;g Iyku o"kZ 1982 ls gh gSA

93
o"kZ 2003&04 esa Jh oktis;h th dh ljdkj esa ,d baVj¯y¯dx vkWiQ fjolZ
dk Iyku cuk FkkA og ,d cgqr gh cM+s eqís osQ lkFk cuk FkkA mlesa 16 fgeky;u
fjolZ vkSj 14 issfuulqyk fjolZ dks ¯yd djus dk Iyku FkkA ;g cgqr gh vPNk
Iyku FkkA ysfdu ml Iyku dks iwjh rjg ls fM&jsy djus dh dksf'k'k dh x;hA
muesa vfèkdka'kr% ,uthvkst baoksYM FksA lqizhe dksMZ us Hkh mlesa igy dh Fkh
fd ljdkj dks ;g djuk t:jh gSA ysfdu mlosQ ckotwn u Hkkjr ljdkj dj
ik;h vkSj u gh oqQN vqvkA mldk esu jhtu ;gh Fkk fd ty lalkèku dk
tks oaQLVhV;w'kuy izksohtu gS] mlosQ vanj Hkkjr ljdkj dks ikoj ugha gS D;ksaafd
Hkh ¯yDl fy;s x;s mleasa oaQluZ LVsV~l ls Hkh dkiQh vkWCtsD'kal gq,A ,d rjg
ls mls vHkh fiQj fjokbo fd;k x;k gSA vHkh nks izkstsDVl 'kq: fd;s x;s gSa
mueasa ls ,d iaps'oj izkstsDV gS] ftldh tkudkjh Jh iznhi oqQekj th nsaxsA mlesa
usiky osQ lkFk vaMjLVSa¯Mx vk;k gS] nwljk osQu&csork izkstsDV gS] ftlesa ;w-ih-
vkSj ,e-ih- xouZesaV osQ lkFk ;g ckr dkiQh vkxs c<+ x;h gSa bu nksuksa izkstsDV~l
esa dke gks jgk gS blosQ vykok t:jh gS fd bZLVuZ fjolZ] tSls czÞeiq=k esa 600
fcfy;u D;qfcd ikuh gSA ns'k esa VksVy miyCèk ikuh 1800 fcfy;u D;qfcd
gSA mlesa ,d frgkbZ ikuh osQoy czÞeiq=k unh esa gSA baVj¯y¯dx vkWiQ fjolZ ls
vxj czÞeiq=k unh osQ ikuh dks osLV vkSj lkmQFk easa Mk;oVZ dj ik,a] tks fd
cgqr gn rd ikWflcy gS] rks ns'k esa th dh leL;k dks cgqr gn rd oaQVªksy
fd;k tk ldrk gSA blesa Hkh u osQoy Hkkjr ljdkj dks bEikoj djus dh t:jr
gS] D;kasafd bldk ikoj cgqr de gS] D;ksafd blesa jkT; ljdkjksa osQ dks&vkWijs'ku
dh Hkh t:jr gSA ;fn ,slk ugha gks ik;k] rks ge yksx ,sls gh ppkZ djrs jgsaxs
vkSj ;g leL;k cuh jgsxhA bldk funku ugha gks ik,xkA ;s cgqr gh egRoiw.kZ
igyw gSaA okVj iksayq'ku ,d cgqr gh egRoiw.kZ eqík gS D;ksafd gekjs ty osQ cgqr
gh fyfeVsM fjlkslZ gSaA vHkh ge osQoy 700 fcfy;u D;qfcd ehVj ikuh dk
gh lap;u dj ik;s gSaA vyx&vyx tyk'k;ksa] fjtjok;lZ vkSj ckdh lzksrksa ls
1300 fcfy;u D;qfcd ehVj ikuh leqnz esa tk jgk gSA ;fn bls ge cpkuk pkgrs
gSa] rks bldk mik; baVj¯y¯dx vkWiQ fjolZ gS vkSj nwljk mik; gS okVj fjlkslsZt
eSustesaVA¸
5.44 When asked about environmental consequences of Interlinking
of rivers in the country, the Department have stated as under:—
“...The Interlinking of Rivers (ILR) projects are environmental
friendly. The adequate provision of water for environmental and
ecological needs in the downstream of the proposed diversion
structure is being kept while estimating the quantum of water for
diversion. The environmental and ecological aspects of the project
are duly examined and addressed in the Detailed Project Report
(DPR) of each link. The ILR projects are green projects and are like
any other water resources projects. ”

94
5.45 On the query of the Committee regarding arrangements of
finance for projects on interlinking of rivers in the Country, the
Department have stated as under:—
“...From the trends available about the availability of funds in the
financial sector and the future projection of GDP and the savings
rate it would clearly appear that sufficient domestic resources can
be available for funding the programme. However , since these
savings are entirely in terms of household savings and in the private
sector , appropriate instruments have to be designed to channelize
these funds into the programme. This can be through a combination
of private participation, appropriate public-private partnership and
pure public funding as was done for funding the roads programme...”
5.46 While explaining problems in implentation of interlinking of
rivers due to constitutional provisons regarding water , the
representatives of Ministry of Water Resources and Ganga Rejuvenation
has stated as under:—
¶egksn;] lfefr dh rjiQ ls cgqr cgqewY; lq>ko vk, gSa vkSj gesa [kq'kh gS
fd ekuuh; lnL; ikuh ls lacafèkr leL;k ij cgqr tkx:d gSaA ekuuh; lnL;ksa
dks gekjs ns'k esa ikuh osQ dkaLVhV~;w'kuy izksfotu dh tkudkjh gksuk cgqr t:jh
gS D;ksafd cgqr ls b';q bl lacaèk esa mBrs gSaA ty jkT; dk fo"k; gSA bldk
eryc gS fd ty osQ ckjs esa dksbZ Hkh Iyk¯ux eSustesaV jkT; ljdkj }kjk dh
tk,xhA jkT; ljdkj dh igyh ftEesnkjh gS fd ikuh ls lacafèkr fo"k;ksa esa Iyk¯ux
djsA ysfdu Hkkjr ljdkj ml Iyk¯ux esa enn djus dks tkx:d jgrh gSA
dkWLVhV~'kuy izksfotUl osQ eqrkfcd gh Hkkjr ljdkj oqQN dj ldrh gSA ,d
nwljk igyw dkaLVhV~;w'ku esa baVj LVsV fMLI;wV dks ysdj gSA baVj LVsV okVj fMLI;wV
esa lqizhe dksVZ dks fMckj fd;k x;k gSA ,MgkWd fVªC;wuYl gh  bl fMLI;waV dks
fjtkYo dj ldrs gSaA vHkh rd 'kq: ls vkB fVªC;wuYl dke dj jgs gSa] ftlesa
rhu fVªC;wuYl us vius funsZ'k fn, gSa ftudk ikyu gks jgk gS ysfdu ,slk Hkh
nl&ckjg lky osQ ckn gqvk gSA baVj&LVsV fMLI;wV dk b';w fjtkYo djuk cgqr
gh eqf'dy gS vkSj bl otg ls o`Q".kk] dkosjh] xksnkojh vkfn ufn;ksa osQ lacaèk
esa fnDdr vkrh gSA blls mu ufn;ksa osQ eSustesaV esa Hkh fnDdr vkrh gSA blfy,
ekuuh; lnL;x.k bl igyw ij xaHkhjrk ls lkspsa fd ty dk vHkh tks
dkaLVhV;w'kuy LVsVl gS] D;ksafd ikoj lSDVj gS] ftlesa bysDVªhflVh dkaozsQV lCtsDV
gS] mlesa C;wjks vkWiQ ,uthZ ,fiQf'k,alh cudj ikoj lsDVj esa dkiQh lqèkkj vk;k
gSA ml rjg dk lq>ko vxj Hkkjr ljdkj pkgs fd okVj fjlkslsZl lsDVj esa
gksA¸

95
5.47 When asked to furnish constitutional provisions regarding water,
the Ministry of Water Resources, River Development and Ganga
Rejuvenation have stated as under:—
“The constitutional provisions in respect of allocation of
responsibilities between the State and Centre fall into three
categories: The Union List (List-I), the State List (List-II) and the
Concurrent List (List-III). Article 246 of the Constitution deals with
subject matter of laws to be made by the Parliament and by
Legislature of the States. As most of the rivers in the country are
inter-State, the regulation and development of waters of these
rivers, is a source of inter-State differences and disputes. In the
Constitution, water is a matter included in Entry 17 of List-II i.e.
State List provides that “Water that is to say, water supplies,
irrigation and canals, drainage and embankments, water storage
and water power subject to the provisions of Entry 56 of List-I ”.
Whereas, Entry 56 of Union List provides for regulation and
development of inter-State rivers and river valleys to the extent
to which such regulation and development under the control of
the Union is declared by Parliament by law to be expedient in the
public interest. ”
The Department have also stated that Article 262 of the Constitution
deals with adjudication of water disputes. The provisions in this
regard are:
Article 262(1)
Parliament may, by law, provide for the adjudication of any dispute
or complaint withrespect to the use, distribution or control of the
waters of, or in, any inter-State river or river valley.
Article 262(2)
Notwithstanding anything in this Constitution, Parliament may, by
law, provide that neither the Supreme Court nor any other court
shall exercise jurisdiction in respect of any such dispute or complaint
as is referred to in clause (1).
5.48 On the issue of interlinking of rivers in the country,
Shri K. Nithianandan in his written memoranda submitted before the
Committee has stated as under:—
“Rivers is our great sub-continent should be linked on a war footing
so that more cultivable area will come under irrigation. Aim should

96
be to eliminate completely dry land farming. It is sad to see
enorinous rain and flood water rainy season goes waste and flows
into sea. At the same time there is sever drought in other parts
of the country. People struggle even to get drinking water. ”
vii. Rejuvenation of Traditional Water Storage System
5.49 When asked about steps being taken to survey and improvement
of traditional Water storage system such as tanks, ponds, Baories etc.
in the Country, the Department have stated as under:—
“..GoI is implementing the Scheme for Repair, Renovation and
Restoration (RRR) of water bodies which has multiple objectives
like Comprehensive improvement and restoration of water bodies
thereby increasing tank storage capacity, Ground Water Recharge,
Increased availability of drinking water , Improvement in agriculture/
horticulture productivity, Improvement of catchment areas of tank
commands, Environmental benefits through improved water use
efficiency; Promotion of conjunctive use of surface and ground
water, Community participation and self-supporting system for
sustainable management for each water body, Capacity Building of
communities in better water management, Development of tourism,
cultural activities etc. This is a continuing scheme since X Plan and
is presently being implemented during XII Plan also.Steps taken by
Ministry of Water Resources, River Development and Ganga
Rejuvenation for Restoration, Renovation and Rehabilitation (RRR)
of Water Bodies are as follows:—
i. Pilot scheme on RRR of water bodies: During X Five Year
Plan, a pilot scheme for repair , renovation and restoration
of water bodies as a State Sector Scheme was launched by
the Government of India. The pilot scheme envisaged a Plan
Outlay of Rs. 300 crores to be shared by Centre and State
in the ratio of 3:1. The objective of the pilot scheme on
water bodies was to restore and augment storage capacities
of water bodies and to recover and extend their lost irrigation
potential. The central share of Rs. 197.30 crore was released
up to March, 2008 under the pilot scheme for taking up
1098 water bodies in 26 districts of 15 states. The work was
completed in 1085 water bodies.
ii. Scheme of RRR of water bodies with domestic support during
XI Plan: The Government of India approved the scheme of
Repair , Renovation & Restoration (RRR) of water bodies with
domestic support during the year 2009 at a Central outlay

97
of Rs. 1250 crore for implementation as a State Sector
Scheme during XI Plan period. The scheme provided for the
comprehensive improvement of water bodies, catchment
area treatment, command area development and capacity
building of stakeholders. Central assistance of 90% of the
cost of the project of Special Category States, KBK
(undivided) districts of Odisha and projects located in
drought-prone, tribal and naxal affected areas and Projects
benefiting other areas of Non- Special Category States are
eligible for 25% Central Assistance. 3341 water bodies costing
Rs. 1309.16 crore with an aim to restore 1,83,102 ha. of
irrigable area have been taken up during this plan and the
works of 2501 water bodies have been completed and a
Central Assistance (CA) of Rs. 917.259 crore has been released
so far . An irrigation potential of 1,45,468 ha. has so far
been restored. The works of remaining 800 water bodies are
under progress.
iii. Scheme of RRR of water bodies with external assistance
during XI Plan: The Government of India (GoI) during the
year 2008 approved a scheme on Repair , Renovation and
Restoration of water bodies with external assistance. Under
the scheme, GoI took 25% of the World Bank loan and passed
it to the State Government as Central Assistance and 75%
of the loan was transferred to the State Government on
back to back basis to meet the State share. The Appraisal
and implementation process were coordinated by Department
of Economic Affairs, Ministry of Finance and World Bank.
10887 water bodies in four states namely Odisha, Karnataka,
Andhra Pradesh and Tamil Nadu at an estimated cost of
Rs. 3672.42 crore were proposed to be covered. As per the
latest progress, the works of 8054 water bodies have been
completed. There is a potential restoration of around 8.48
lakh ha.
iv. Scheme for Repair , Renovation and Restoration of Water
Bodies during XII Plan: The Scheme for Repair , Renovation
and Restoration (RRR) of Water Bodies during the XII Plan
has been approved by Cabinet Committee on Economics
Affairs in its meeting held on 20.09.2013 and the new
Guidelines were circulated to all the State Governments.
Under the scheme, about 10,000 water bodies having a
Culturable Command Area (CCA) of 6.235 lakh hectare at a
cost of Rs. 10,000 crore would be covered. Out of 10,000
water bodies, 9,000 water bodies will be in rural areas and

98
balance 1,000 water bodies will be in urban areas. Out of
Rs. 10,000 crore, Central Share is Rs. 6235 crore.The Central
Assistance(CA) will be in the form of grant which will be
90% of project cost in case of Special Category States
(North-Eastern States including Sikkim, Himachal Pradesh,
Jammu & Kashmir , Uttarakhand and undivided Koraput,
Bolangir and Kalahandi (KBK districts of Odisha) as well as
projects lying in Desert Development Programme (DDP),
drought prone area/tribal area/Naxal affected area and
Central Assistance of 25% of project cost in case of Non-
Special Category States/areas.During 2014-15, a total of
1057 water bodies costing Rs. 830.666 crore from 8 States
(Odisha 760, Uttar Pradesh 8, Meghalaya 9, Uttarakhand 5,
Madhya Pradesh 134, Tamil Nadu 105, Rajasthan 32 and
Manipur 4) were included and a CA of Rs. 103.48 crore was
released. An amount of Rs. 27.00 crore was also released
during 2014-15 for water bodies of Odisha State which were
approved during XI Plan.Similarly, during 2015-16, a total of
297 water bodies costing Rs. 195.21 crore from 3 States
(Uttar Pradesh 66, Tamil Nadu 49, Telangana 182) were
included under the Scheme. A Central Assistance (CA) of
Rs. 103.48 crore was released for the water bodies of Odisha,
Madhya Pradesh, Meghalaya & Manipur which were approved
/included during 2014-15. Further , a Central Assistance (CA)
of Rs. 161.19 crore was released for the water bodies of
Odisha, Uttar Pradesh, Rajasthan, Tamil Nadu and Telangana
which were approved/included during 2015-16. ”
viii. Ground Water Resources Management
5.50 Over the years, due to enhanced availability of energy sources
such as electricity and petroleum, ground water has emerged as a
secure source of supply for irrigation and become one of backbone of
green revolution in the country. However , due to indiscriminate use
has led to environmental consequences such as ground water depletion,
pollution and water quality deterioration. It has raised concerns to
agrarian economies as millions of rural livelihoods now depend upon
ground water irrigation. Central Ground Water Board (CGWB) has
identified 1071 blocks/talukas under over exploited category, which
need immediate special attention for water conservation and ground
water recharge. They have also notified about 150 blocks/talukas as
most vulnerable areas suggesting regulated and cautious use of ground
water. These blocks witness serious scarcity of water and are vulnerable
even to sustain drinking water requirement unless addressed for ground

99
water recharge and its regulated use. When asked about the status of
groundwater availability in the country, the Department have submitted
following details:—
Sl.No. State Annual Net Annual Stage of
replenishable annual ground- ground-
ground- ground- water water
water water draft develop-
resource availability (bcm) ment
(bcm)   (bcm)  (%)
1 2 3456
1. Andhra Pradesh 35.89 32.57 14.51 45
2. Arunachal pradesh 4.51 4.06 0.003 0.08
3. Assam 28.52 25.79 3.49 14
4. Bihar 29.34 26.86 11.95 44
5. Chhattisgarh 12.42 11.63 4.05 35
6. Delhi 0.31 0.29 0.39 137
7. Goa 0.24 0.145 0.04 28
8. Gujarat 18.57 17.59 11.86 67
9. Haryana 10.78 9.79 13.05 133
10. Himachal Pradesh 0.56 0.53 0.38 71
11. Jammu & Kashmir 4.25 3.83 0.81 21
12. Jharkhand 6.31 5.76 1.86 32
13. Karnataka 17.03 14.81 9.41 64
14. Kerala 6.69 6.07 2.84 47
15. Madhya Pradesh 9.41 64 18.83 57
16. Maharashtra 2.84 47 17.18 53
17. Manipur 0.44 0.40 0.004 1.02
18. Meghalaya 1.78 1.60 0.0017 0.08
19. Mizoram 0.03 0.027 0.001 3.52
20. Nagaland 0.62 0.55 0.03 6.13
21. Odisha 18.83 57 4.73 28
22. Punjab 17.18 53 34.88 172

100
23. Rajasthan 4.73 28 14.84 137
24. Sikkim — 0.044 0.011 26
25. Tamil Nadu 34.88 172 14.93 77
26. Tripura 2.587 2.358 0.163 7
27. Uttar Pradesh 77.19 71.66 52.78 74
28. Uttarakhand 2.04 2.00 1.13 57
29. West Bengal 29.25 26.58 10.69 40
Total 432.11 397.60 244.85 62
(Source: CGWB, 2011)
5.51 On the query of the Committee regardig ICAR study on effect
of excess groundwater exploitation on Indian agriculture sector and
environmental health, the Department have submitted as under:—
“A study at Ludhiana AICRP centre on groundwater utilization under
ICAR-IIWM showed that the groundwater level is decreasing over
the years in State of Punjab. With declining water table, farmers
are deepening existing bore wells and shifting from cheaper surface
mounted centrifugal pumps to expensive submersible pumps. This
is increasing the cost of pumping in the agriculture sector . It is
found that the quality of groundwater deteriorates with excess
groundwater exploitation due to accelerated diffusion of
contaminants from industrial and urban effluents to the
groundwater. A study at Junagarh AICRP center showed that due to
overexploitation of groundwater , there is seawater intrusion in
South Saurashtra coast of Gujarat State. ”
5.52 When asked to explain ways for augmentation of groundwater
level in the country, the Department have submitted as under:—
“The groundwater level in the country can be maintained in the
following ways:
(a) Proper implementation of watershed management
programmes.
(b) Rainwater harvesting by creating farm ponds, percolation
tanks and check dams.
1 2 3456

101
(c) Regulation of groundwater withdrawal so that it does not
exceed the natural groundwater recharge.
(d) Pricing of groundwater and abolition of free energy.
(e) Artificial recharge of groundwater .
(f) Rooftop rainwater harvesting in urban areas.
(g) Conjunctive use of surface water and groundwater. ”
5.53 When asked about the policy of Government regarding
exploitation of groundwater, the Department have submitted as under:—
“..The National water policy enunciates the following guidelines
for groundwater:
(a) There should be periodic assessment of the groundwater
potential taking into consideration quality of the water
available and economic viability.
(b) Exploitation of groundwater resources should be so regulated
as not to exceed the recharge possibilities, as also to ensure
social equity. Groundwater recharge projects should be
developed and implemented for augmenting the available
supplies.
(c) Integrated and coordinated development of surface water
and groundwater and their conjunctive use should be
envisaged right from the project planning stage.
(d) Overexploitation of groundwater should be avoided near
the coast to prevent ingress of seawater into fresh water
supplies..”
5.54 When asked to furnish details of programmes for augmentation
of groundwater level in the Country, the Department have submitted
as under:—
“..The programmes for promoting enhancement of groundwater
level in the Country are as follows:
(a) Integrated Watershed Management Programmes (IWMP).
(b) Demonstrative artificial recharge project under central sector
scheme.
(c) Rooftop rainwater harvesting scheme.. ”
5.55 When the Committee enquired about efforts by the
Government for encouraging rainwater harvesting capacity in the
country, the Department have stated as under:—
“..The Department of Land Resources, Ministry of Rural Development
had been implementing an area development programme i.e.

102
Integrated Watershed Management Programme (IWMP)  w.e.f.
26.02.2009, for development of rain-fed/degraded areas. The major
activities taken up under IWMP inter-alia  include ridge area
treatment, drainage line treatment, soil and moisture conservation,
rain water harvesting, nursery raising, afforestation, horticulture,
pasture development, livelihoods for asset less persons. In
2015-16, the IWMP has been amalgamated as the Watershed
Development Component of the “Pradhan Mantri Krishi Sinchayee
Yojana (WDC-PMKSY)..”
As on 30.09.2016, a total of 8214 watershed projects have been
sanctioned covering an area of 39.07 million ha and an amount of
Rs. 13403.08 crore released as Central assistance for all the States
of the country except Goa under aforesaid scheme. The funding
pattern under WDC-PMKSY is 60:40 between Centre and State
Government except in the States of North Eastern Region and Hill
States where the funding pattern between Centre and State
Government is 90:10. As per the Common Guidelines for Watershed
Development Projects-2008 (Revised Edition-2011), the period for
completing WDC-PMKSY projects is between 4-7 years. These
projects are at various stages of implementation.
During 12th Plan as per the directions of Ministry/NITI Ayog, CGWB
has prepared and submitted an EFC proposal for Artificial Recharge
in Six Over Exploited ground water blocks (OE Blocks) in Six States
namely Andhra Pradesh, Madhya Pradesh, Punjab, Tamil Nadu,
Telangana & Uttar Pradesh amounting to Rs. 82.26 crores on
28.04.2016 which has been revised and re- submitted on 29.09.2016
for amounting Rs. 94.0 crore. CGWB has also prepared Artificial
Recharge Plans for 442 OE Blocks out of 500 Over exploited blocks
in the states of Andhra Pradesh, Haryana, Karnataka, Maharashtra,
Punjab, Rajasthan, Tamil Nadu, Telangana and Uttar Pradesh in the
country. Based on these AR plans, following Artificial Recharge
proposals have been submitted to the Ministry on 24.06.2016. CGWB
has prepared a conceptual document ‘Master plan for artificial
recharge to groundwater in India, 2013 ’ which provides State/UT-
wise information about area specific artificial recharge techniques
to augment the groundwater resources based on the availability of
source water and capability of subsurface formations to
accommodate it. Copies of the Master Plan have been circulated
to all Hon’ble MPs along with DO letter from Hon’ble Minister for
WR, RD & GR for its implementation in their respective
constituencies. Copies were also given to respective state
government for its implementation. This Master Plan has been
placed on the website of Central Ground Water Board.. ”

103
5.56 When asked to spell policy of Government of India for
controlling exploitation of ground water resources by the water bottling
companies and other industries, the Department have stated as under:—
“..Central Groundwater Authority which is responsible for regulation
and control of GW development and management in the country
and it has undertaken following steps:—
(i) Notification of the blocks/talukas/mandals/areas for
regulation of ground water development and management:
• CGWA has notified 162 blocks/talukas/mandals/areas
in the country for regulation of abstraction of ground-
water in the country.
• In notified areas abstraction of groundwater is not
permissible for any purpose other than drinking-water.
• The District Administrative Head(s)/Municipal Head(s)
have been appointed as ‘Authorized Officer(s) ’ under
Section 4 of the Environment (Protection) Act, 1986 to
oversee ‘all issues pertaining to granting of NOC’s for
ground water withdrawal, checking violations, sealing
of ground water abstraction structure, launching of
prosecution against offenders, attending of complaints
are to be addressed by the Authorized Officers ’.
(ii) Regulation of ground water in non-notified areas—Issuance
of No Objection Certificate (NOC) for groundwater withdrawal:
CGWA has framed ‘Guidelines/Criteria for Evaluation of
Proposals/Requests for Groundwater Abstraction ’ to accord
NOC for industries/infrastructure/mining projects which are
existing, new or under expansion in non-notified areas.
(iii) Directions/Advisory by CGWA:
CGWA has issued suitable directions to all the Chief
Secretaries of States/Administrators of Union Territories and
various organizations for regulation and management of
ground water resources.
(iv) Adoption of Model Bill:
Ministry of Water Resources, River Development and Ganga
Rejuvenation has been pursuing the matter regarding
enactment of law on groundwater with all States/UTs. The
Model Bill was initially circulated in 1970 which has been
re-circulated in 1992, 1996 and 2005 to the States/Union
Territories to enable them to enact suitable legislation for
regulation and control of groundwater development on the

104
lines of Model Bill. So far, 15 States/UTs have already enacted
and implemented the legislation in this regard. 16 other
States/UTs are in the process of enactment of legislation.
(v) Criteria for Recharge to Groundwater by the Industries using
Groundwater as Raw Material and other Water Intensive
Industries:
Industries using groundwater as raw material/water intensive
industries like packaged drinking water, mineral water
industries, distilleries, breweries, soft drink manufacturing
industries, textiles, paper & pulp, etc. shall not be granted
NOC for groundwater withdrawal from Over-Exploited areas.
In Safe, Semi-Critical & Critical areas NOC is mandatory for
groundwater withdrawal by these industries. However,
groundwater withdrawal will be limited as follows:
Category Groundwater Withdrawal Limit
Safe W ithdrawal limited to 200% of groundwater
recharge.
Semi-Critical W ithdrawal limited to 100% of groundwater
recharge.
Critical W ithdrawal limited to 50% of groundwater
recharge.
Over-Exploited No permission for ground water withdrawal by
Industries.
(vi) Criteria for Recharge to groundwater by the Industries/
Infrastructure/Mining Projects
Category* Mandatory Recycle/Reuse (for Withdrawal permitted
various purposes except (% of proposed recharge)
recharge to groundwater)
12 3
Safe Major and Medium Industries to NOC is required for groundwater
recycle and reuse at least 40% withdrawal subject to adoption of
of the waste water artificial recharge to groundwater.
Semi-critical Major and Medium Industries to Withdrawal may be permitted subject
recycle and reuse at least 50% to undertaking of groundwater
of the waste water recharge** measures. The withdrawal
should not exceed 200% of the
recharged quantity.

105
Critical Major and Medium industries Withdrawal may be permitted subject
should fully recycle and reuse to undertaking of groundwater
the waste water recharge** measures. The withdrawal
should not exceed 100% of the
recharged quantity.
Over-exploited All Industries to fully recycle Withdrawal may be permitted subject
and reuse the waste water to undertaking of groundwater
recharge** measures. The withdrawal
should not exceed 50% of the
recharged quantity.
* The guidelines will follow the category of blocks as on Ground Water Resource Estimation
(GWRE) 2011 till further revision.
** The recharge should be implemented within the premises and/ or same watershed/
assessment unit. Detail project proposal shall be submitted along with the application
for NOC. ”
5.57 On the issue of augmentation of underground water resources
in the country, the Sri Sidhartha Welfare Trust has submitted as under:—
¾ “The underground water is depleting fast in dry zones due
many factors which is causing the dehydration of the soils
and death and disappearance of many lower order species
of flora and fauna in addition to stress on farming being
aggravated by GW & CC. The efforts of the Governments
through watershed models of cultivation and treatments
are not yielding the required results. It has to be made
compulsory at least in the holdings more that 2 ha in raid
fed areas including in forest areas. An extent of 5% of the
holding should be reserved for trees planting and a farm
pond to a capacity of at least 250 to 500 mts to impound
the runoff and recharge the underground water with tree
planting around it without fail; and it is not difficult to do
it by using machineries. The Government can finance for it
as it helps in many ways the State.
¾ The bore wells are dug indiscriminately and failed bore
wells are left to nature without making use for recharging
the underground water table by the farmers. There should
be authority to monitor bore wells; to permit digging of
bore wells and take the failed bore wells to the account of
the Government; and use it for recharging the underground
water table-The failed bore wells, failed open wells and
12 3

106
abandoned Kalyanis-stepped open wells of the South Inda
are left to nature except Tamil Nadu which has a programme
to use them for recharging under ground water. The
Government should have a scheme to create a channel
intercepting the waste runoff water from the field-farm
land to the failed well and allow it to pass through a chute
fitted with a mess suitable to locality to filter the floating
wastes carried by the runoff to make it suitable for
infiltration in to the ground during rains. Tamil Nadu model
needs to be followed. ”
5.58 On the above issue, S. Krishnamoorthi in his representation
to the Committee submitted as under:—
¾ “Lakes and Ponds are to be deepened so that more water
can be stored. Thereby excess Rain Water reaching the ocean
can be averted and the underground water level will increase.
It will enable us to utilize the reserved water during waterless
summer season for irrigation and drinking purpose.
¾ All areas of River , Lakes, Ponds and Water Canals in the
nation may be re-surveyed and recorded so that future
encroachment by the unsocial elements can be averted. ”

107
CHAPTER VI
APPROACH FOR MAKING INDIAN AGRICULTURE CLIMATE RESILIENT
6.1 The need for a climate resilient approach to agriculture is
critical for India where more than 80 percent agriculturists are small-
holder farmers. The department of agricultural Education and research
have informed that Climate change impacts on agriculture are being
witnessed all over the world, but countries like India are more
vulnerable in view of the huge population dependent on agriculture,
excessive pressure on natural resources and poor coping mechanisms.
The warming trend in India over the past 100 years has indicated an
increase of 0.60°C. The projected impacts are likely to further
aggravate field fluctuations of many crops thus impacting food security.
6.2 There are already evidences of negative impacts on yield of
wheat and paddy in parts of India due to increased temperature,
water stress and reduction in number of rainy days. Significant negative
impacts have been projected with medium-term (2010-2039) climate
change, eg. yield reduction by 4.5 to 9%, depending on the magnitude
and distribution of warming. Since agriculture makes up roughly 15%
of India’s GDP , a 4.5 to 9.0% negative impact on production implies
cost of climate change to be roughly at 1.5% of GDP per year. Enhancing
agricultural productivity, therefore, is critical for ensuring food and
nutritional security for all, particularly the resource poor , small and
marginal farmers who would be affected most. In the absence of
planned adaptation, the consequences of long-term climate change
could be severe on the livelihood security of the poor. On the query
of the Committee regarding strategy of the Government to make
strategy to make Indian Agriculture climate resilient, the Department
have stated as under:—
“..Based on the scientific data and information obtained from
several national and international agencies, it has now been
understood that climate change is imminent. The ill effects of
climate change are likely be seen in terms of frequent droughts,
floods, hailstorms, cold and hot waves associated with extreme
events imposing new challenges for successful husbandry of crops,
horticulture, livestock, poultry, fisheries etc. Thus, ICAR initiated
a National Network Project on Climate Change (2004-13) to assess
the vulnerability of Indian agriculture to climate change over
medium term (2010-2039) and identify possible adaptation options

108
towards climate resilient agriculture. As a result, the council
brought new paradigm of multidimensional approach to agricultural
research with emphasis on environment, health, nutrition, and
livelihood security besides productivity. Accordingly, a network of
ICAR research institute are actively engaged in harnessing the
power of science and innovations for food security, food safety,
farmers prosperity and enhance natural resource base;
disseminating the innovations through network of KVKs; and
technical backstopping to developmental agencies under changing
climate scenario.
Further, the Government through ICAR has also initiated network
project, National Innovations on Climate Resilient Agriculture
(NICRA) during 2010-11. It encompasses multi-pronged strategic
research, technology development, capacity building of
stakeholders and technology demonstrations at farmer’s fields.
The strategic research aims mainly to evolve crop varieties tolerant
to climatic stresses like floods, droughts, frost, inundation due to
cyclones and heat waves. Technology Demonstration Component
(TDC) under NICRA aims at demonstration of location specific
practices and technologies to enable farmers cope with current
climatic variability. Demonstration of available location-specific
technologies related to natural resource management, crop
production, livestock and fisheries is being taken up in the
climatically vulnerable districts for enhancing the adaptive capacity
and resilience against climatic variability. TDC is being implemented
in a farmer participatory mode in 151 vulnerable districts of the
country...”
6.3 When asked about any assessment by ICAR regarding
advantages/disadvantages of Indian Agriculture sector vis-à-vis global
climate changes, the Department have stated as under:—
“..In recent years climate change and its variability are emerging
as major challenges to Indian Agriculture. The projections of global
climate change include altered average temperatures, rainfall,
and increased extreme events (e.g. heat and cold waves, flooding),
enhanced atmospheric carbon dioxide and ground-level ozone
concentrations and rise in sea level leading to inundation of coastal
areas etc. in recent past it is more evident, as one or the other
part in the country is affected by droughts, excessive rains, floods,
cyclones, frost, heat wave and other climatic events. The IPCC
reports clearly outlined the global and regional impacts of projected
climate change on agriculture, water resources, natural ecosystems

109
and food security. Although, climate change impacts are being
witnessed world over , the countries in which larger population is
dependent on agriculture, such as India, are more vulnerable. The
risks are likely to be experienced more by small and marginal
farmers of rainfed and other risk prone regions with poor coping
mechanisms.
The Department have further stated that climate change studies
pertaining to India show enough evidence of rising mean
temperature during post-1970 period. Greater warming of 0.21ºC
per 10 years during post-1970 period as compared to 0.51ºC per
100 years during past century has been reported. Besides, country
experienced 15 deficit and 6 excess monsoon years in post-1960
period in comparison to only 27 deficit and 20 excess monsoon
years during 1871—2014. These climate change pattern has already
begun affecting Indian agriculture sector adversely by enhanced
abiotic and biotic stresses to crops and livestock. The studies
under NICRA estimated around 81.3 million ha area in arid, semi-
arid and dry sub-humid regions vulnerable to extreme weather
events.
Various studies indicated overall reduction in productivity by 4-6%
in rice, 6% in wheat, 18% in maize, 2.5% in sorghum, 2% in mustard
and 2.5% in potato besides significant regional variability (Naresh
Kumar etal., 2012). The crop yields are projected to be more
vulnerable in Central and East India for wheat; Punjab, Haryana
and Rajasthan for irrigated rice; Maharashtra, Odisha, Chhattisgarh
and Assam for rainfed rice; Central India for mustard; and Punjab,
Bihar, Jharkhand, Uttar Pradesh and West Bengal for potato. In
total, agriculture makes up roughly 16% of India’s GDP , an averaged
4.5-9.0% negative impacts on production implies a cost of climate
change to be up to 1.5% of annual GDP . However , the study
demonstrated that appropriate climate resilient interventions could
greatly negate the impact of climate change.
Further, the analysis of recent weather data in Himachal Pradesh
indicated that the maximum temperature is showing an increasing
trend during November to April. Increase in the temperature limited
the fulfilment of chilling requirement for apple production. The
chill units hours showed decreasing trends upto 2400 meter above
mean sea level (m amsl) (Kullu and Kinnaur districts). On the
other hand increasing trends of chill units at 2700 m amsl suggested
that area is becoming suitable for apple cultivation in higher
altitude. This is partially attributed for shift of apple belt upwards

110
from 1250 m amsl to 2500 m amsl and increasing area of apple
in higher elevations. The new areas of apple cultivation have
appeared in Lahaul and Spiti and upper reaches of Kinnaur district
of Himachal Pradesh. While the apple productivity in lower
elevations was impacted by increase in temperature, it also created
opportunity for cultivation of other crops. Increase in temperature
in higher elevations created opportunity for cultivation of apple
and other fruits and vegetable crops. Increase in temperature did
not show any significant impact on the productivity of other
temperature fruits like peach, plum and pear. The tea crop in
mid-hill regions also showed a decrease in yield with increase in
temperature and decreasing trends of rainfall. Crop phenology
revealed hastening of crop maturity in mid hill regions due to
increase in temperature during crop seasons.. ”
i. National Innovations on Climate Resilient Agriculture (NICRA)
6.4 National Mission on Sustainable Agriculture (NMSA) has been
formulated to make Indian agriculture more productive, sustainable,
and remunerative and climate resilient. Enhancing the resilience of
Indian Agriculture covering crops, livestock and fisheries to climatic
variability and climate change through development and application
of improved production and risk management technologies;
demonstrating site specific technology packages on farmers’ fields for
adapting to current climate risks; and capacity building of scientists
and other stakeholders in climate resilient agricultural research and
its application are the major objectives. The strategic research is
being conducted at 40 ICAR Institutes in a network mode covering
crops, horticulture, livestock, natural resource management and
fisheries sectors. Activities like promotion of integrated farming system,
integrated nutrient management, integrated pest management, water
use efficiencies, management of rice cultivation practices like System
of Rice Intensification (SRI), Directed Seeded Rice (DSR) etc.,
conservation agriculture, livestock management, climate resilient
varietal improvement, crop diversification etc. are taken up as
sustainable agricultural practices.When asked to furnish objectives as
enshrined in National Mission on Sustainable Agriculture (NMSA), the
Department have stated as under:—
“...The NMSA drives its mandate from Sustainable Agriculture Mission
which was one of the eight Missions outlined under National Action
Plan on Climate Change (NAPCC). The Mission document was
approved in principle by the Prime Minister’s Council on Climate
Change (PMCCC) on 23.09.2010 to promote sustainable agriculture

111
through improved soil and water conservation, efficient water
use, better soil health management and developing rainfed areas.
The Mission have following objectives for the XII Plan:
¾ To make agriculture more productive, sustainable,
remunerative and climate resilient by promoting location
specific Integrated/Composite Farming Systems;
¾ To conserve natural resources through appropriate soil and
moisture conservation measures;
¾ To adopt comprehensive soil health management practices
based on soil fertility maps, soil test based application of
macro & micro nutrients, judicious use of fertilizers etc.;
¾ To optimize utilization of water resources through efficient
water management to expand coverage for achieving ‘more
crop per drop’;
¾ To develop capacity of farmers & stakeholders in conjunction
with other ongoing Missions e.g.  National Mission on
Agriculture Extension & Technology, National Food Security
Mission, National Initiative for Climate Resilient Agriculture
(NICRA) etc., in the domain of climate change adaptation
and mitigation measures;
¾ To pilot models in select blocks for improving productivity
of rainfed farming by mainstreaming rainfed technologies
refined through NICRA and by leveraging resources from
other Schemes/Missions like Mahatma Gandhi National Rural
Employment Guarantee Scheme (MGNREGS), Integrated
Watershed Management Programme (IWMP), RKVY etc.; and
¾ To establish an effective, inter and intra Departmental/
Ministerial co-ordination for accomplishing key deliverables
of National Mission for Sustainable Agriculture under the
aegis of NAPCC.. ”
6.5 When asked about steps being taken by the Government of
India to achieve the objectives of NMSA, the Department have stated
as under:—
“....The NMSA has set following multi-pronged strategy to achieve
the objectives as under:
¾ Promoting integrated farming system covering crops,
livestock & fishery, plantation and pasture based composite
farming for enhancing livelihood opportunities, ensuring food
security and minimizing risks from crop failure through
supplementary/residual production systems;

112
¾ Popularizing resource conservation technologies (both on-
farm and off-farm) and introducing practices that will support
mitigation efforts in times of extreme climatic events or
disasters like prolonged dry spells, floods etc.;
¾ Promoting effective management of available water resources
and enhancing water use efficiency through application of
technologies coupled with demand and supply side
management solutions;
¾ Encouraging improved agronomic practices for higher farm
productivity, improved soil treatment, increased water
holding capacity, judicious use of chemicals/energy and
enhanced soil carbon storage;
¾ Creating database on soil resources through land use survey,
soil profile study and soil analysis on GIS platform to facilitate
adoption of location and soil specific crop management
practices & optimize fertilizer use;
¾ Promoting location and crop specific integrated nutrient
management practices for improving soil health, enhancing
crop productivity and maintaining quality of land and water
resources;
¾ Involving knowledge institutions and professionals in
developing climate change adaptation and mitigation
strategies for specific agro climatic situations and promoting
them through appropriate farming systems;
¾ Pragmatic interventions as per land capability and conducive
to climatic parameters in select blocks as pilots for ensuring
integrated development through dissemination and adoption
of rainfed technologies with greater reach in disadvantaged
areas & location specific planning by way of coordination,
convergence and leveraging investments from other Schemes/
Missions like MGNREGS, IWMP , RKVY , National Food Security
Mission (NFSM), Mission for Integrated Development of
Horticulture (MIDH), National Mission for Agricultural
Extension & Technology (NMAE&T) etc. A consortium approach
may be evolved with various stakeholders including
knowledge partners like State Agricultural Universities (SAUs),
Krishi Vigyan Kendras (KVKs), Indian Council of Agricultural
Research (ICAR) Centres, professional organisations etc. by
the State Government to provide single window service/
knowledge provider system for the benefit of farming
community;

113
¾ State Government may engage reputed NGOs for
implementation of cluster/village development plan in case
of limited govt. infrastructure is available in that area
through a transparent system of selection and defined process
of supervision and monitoring through a line department;
¾ Strong technical monitoring and feedback systems on climate
change mitigation and adaptation issues to the National
Advisory Council for regular updates on technical feasibility
of various components and their effectiveness in bringing
about the climate resilience. The experts of central
institutes and state agricultural universities would be part
of such technical monitoring/feedback. The capacity building
of the implementing agencies would be steered by
MANAGE..”
6.6 When asked to furnish number of research projects undertaken
in various research institutes under NICRA project since its inception,
the Department have stated as under:—
“...About 40 Research Institutes of ICAR are conducting research
under Strategic Research Component covering various research
theme areas viz., development of multiple stress Tolerant Crop
Genotypes, Natural Resource Management, Green House Gas
Emissions, Climate Resilient Horticulture, Marine, Brackish and inland
Fisheries, Heat tolerant Livestock, Small Ruminants and Poultry.
The institutes continue their research efforts till March 31st, 2017.
About 12 Research projects were funded and concluded under
Sponsored Research Component of NICRA and about 6 Research
projects are continuing till March 31st, 2017. Similarly, about 20
research projects were funded and concluded under Competitive
Grant Component and about 14 research projects continue till
March 31st, 2017.. ”
6.7 On the query of the Committee regarding policy of Government
to involve State Agricultural Universities/research Institutes in private
sectors under NICRA projects, the Department have stated as under:—
“..The nation-wide NICRA network programme has included
11-State Agricultural Universities from different States of the
country and 2-Research Institutes in private sectors as a partner
of the programme... ”
6.8 When asked to furnish details of financial allocations and
expenditure under the NICRA projects since its inception, the

114
Department have stated as under:—
“..The year-wise details of financial allocations and expenditure
under NICRA project is given here under:—
Year                            Rs. in Lakhs
Sanctioned Expenditure
2010-11 19997.80 5860.864
2011-12 11505.59 17226.1
2012-13 7500.00 6638.446
2013-14 7000.00 6360.282
2014-15 6500.00 5315.22
2015-16 9500.00 6344.554
2016-17 11000.00 **
Total 73003.39 47745.466**
**An amount of Rs. 5500.00 lakh received from Council and released to centres and
expenditure details will be known by 31 March, 2017.
ii. Infrastructure and Research Facilities Creation under NICRA
6.9 In order to support strategic research on crops, livestock,
fisheries and modelling, facilities/equipments like high through-put
phenotyping platforms, free air temperature elevation (FATE), carbon
dioxide and temperature gradient tunnels (CTGC), high performance
computers, automatic weather stations, growth chambers, large glass
houses, animal calorimeter, shipping vessel, flux towers and satellite
receiving station were commissioned at different Institutions.When
asked to furnish Institute-wise details of infrastructure and research
facilities created under NICRA project since its inception, the
Department have stated as under:—
“...The list of Institute-wise details of infrastructure and research
facilities created under NICRA project since its inception is as
under:
ICAR Institute Major Equipment/Facility established
12
CIAE, Bhopal TOC Analyzer , Precision vegetable seeder
CIBA, Chennai Aquaculture laboratory, Greenhouse gases measuring unit Agilent
& 78908, Multiparameter water quality analyser , CHN analyser

115
CMFRI, Kochi Fishery Biology laboratory
IARI, New Delhi Plant Phenomic Facility, Eddy Covariance Sensor Flux Tower ,
Photo Synthesis Chlorophyll Fluorescence System, Refrigerated
Centrifuge, Gas Chromatography with all accessories, FATE along
with CO
2‚ Rings, PCR Tetrad with accessories, Pressure Chamber
Equipment, Plant Canopy Analyser , Time Domain Reflectometer
(TDR), Infrared Thermal Imaging System, Protein Separation
System, Satellite Data Reception System
IIHR, Bangalore Plant Phenomics Facility, Free Air Temperature Enrichment (FATE)
facility, CO
2 & Temperature Gradient Chamber (CTGC) facility,
Environment controlled chamber facility, Photosynthesis system
with chlorophyll florescence Portable Gas Exchange Florescence
System, Root image scanning system, Line Quantum, Sensor with
accessories, UV visible Spectrophotometer
NDRI, Karnal Livestock Waste Disposal System, Custom Designed and
Fabricated Animal Shed in cattle yard, Heating Air Conditioning
Ventilation and cooling system in Psychometric Chamber, Gel
Documentation System, Multi gas Analyzer System, Physiological
Function Monitor , Real Time PCR Machine
CAZRI, Jodhpur Rainout shelter , CHNS Analyzer , Gas Chromatograph, Leaf area
meter , Stereozoom microscope, IRGA
CIRG, Makhdoom 2D Electrophoresis, Micro. Litre–spectrophotometer
CPRI, Shimla Microsoft/relational database SQL SvrEnt co mng. system
CSWRI, Avikanagar Automatic weather station
IISS, Bhopal Soil Penetrometer , Gas Chromatography
DOGR, Pune Automated Rainout Shelter facility
IIWBR, Karnal Automated Rainout Shelter facility
CRIDA, Hyderabad ST -100Na/K/Cl Electrolyte Analyzer, Automatic Biochemistry
Analyzer-ichem-168, Micros 60 Automatic Haematology Analyzer ,
In vitro Gas Production system with wireless RF sensors, In vitro
digestion DAISY Incubator , CO
2 growth chamber , CO 2 and
temperature gradient chambers (CTGC), Plant Phenomics Facility,
Free Air Temperature Enrichment (FATE) facility, Free Air CO
2
Enrichment (FACE) Facility, Root image scanning system, Gas
chromatograph (GC), N Distillation set, SCADA, Automatic
weather station, Video conferencing system, Net Radiometer ,
Infrared thermometer
12

116
NIASM, Baramati Plant Phenomics facility, Green house facility
NRCPB, New Delhi Nano drop, Real time PCR, 80°C Deep Freezer , Photosynthesis
System, Environmental shaker
IIWM, Bhubaneswar Bowen Ratio Tower (Open path eddy covariance based carbon
dioxide measuring system), Automatic Weather Station
CRRI, Cuttack Eddy covariance system
NEH Region, Free air temperature enrichment facility (FATE), CO
2 and
Barapani temperature Gradient Chamber (CTGC), Walk in plant growth
chamber (small), Environment Controlled Chamber facility (6),
Network of automatic Weather Stations with modem, Rain Out
shelter facility , Biochar-1000 with automatic temperature, O
2
and pressure controlled Biochar making system, Protein
separation system and characterization facility, Controlled
environment laboratory shakers, Photosynthesis system with
chlorophyll fluorescence, Time domain reflectrometry, TOC
analyzer , Lysimeter with electronic sensors, GC and accessories/
Methane and CO
2 analyzer , Soil respiration unit, Root image
scanning system, Psychrometer , Cold rooms, Atomic absorption
spectrophotometer with graphite furnace, Ultra low deep
freezers, Radio telemetry with physiological data recording,
Ultra sound with colour Dapple & Cardiac probe, Phase Contrast
microscopes with stereo zoom and fluorescence attachment
DPR, Hyderabad Environment control house, UV spectrophotometer , Growth
chamber
CICR, Nagpur Open top chamber
6.10 On the query of the Committee regarding assessment of
research facilities, infrastructure, manpower requirement that required
to promote research under NICRA project, the Department have stated
as under:—
“..The major infrastructure required for climate change research
have been made in some of the core ICAR institutes representing
different sectors viz., Crop Sciences, Horticultural Sciences,
Fisheries, Livestock, Poultry and Natural Resource Management.
However , some of the facilities require maintenance and servicing
by the authorized service providers. Additionally, substantial amount
of contingency is required for maintenance and up-keeping of
these facilities and equipment. Additional contractual help in the
12

117
form of Research Associates, Senior Research Fellows and Skilled
helpers have been provided during the past five years to carry out
the mandated research under NICRA at 40 ICAR research institutes
(220 RAs + 515 SRFs) and 121 KVKs (260 SRFs) across the country.
In order to carry out the research activities which were initiated
during XII Plan period need to be supported by such manpower for
few more years. The proposal for expanding the Technology
Demonstration Component (TDC) to few more villages require
additional manpower (1 SRF for each KVK, 2 SRF for each ATARI)
and contingency grants (Rs. 10.00 Lakhs per year) and NRC
(Rs. 8.00 Lakhs per year) for establishing custom hiring centres at
each KVK... ”
6.11 When asked about assessment of funds that will be required
to fund research projects under NICRA Projects, the Department have
stated as under:—
“...The project was initiated during 2011 with 21 research institutes
and expanded to 40 institutes, 121 KVKs, 23 AICRPDA and
25 AICRPAM villages. Majority of the infrastructure required to
carry out research has been established in these institutes and
demonstration of climate resilient technologies in 160 villages
representing the most vulnerable districts is under progress. It is
important to continue the research activities in some of the
institutes after assessing the performance through a third party
evaluation. And also it is proposed to expand the technology
demonstration to several other vulnerable districts. The capacity
building on climate change technologies and research also need to
be continued. The Department has submitted following details
regarding assessment of fund for NICRA projects for next three
fiscal:—
2017-2018 2018-2019 2019-2020
1300.00 1500.00 1730.00
iii. Technology Demonstration Component (TDC)
6.12 The Department in their background note have stated that
the technologies with a potential to cope with climate variability are
being demonstrated under Technology Demonstration Component (TDC)
in 121 most vulnerable districts selected across the country through
Krishi Vigyan Kendras (KVKs). When asked to furnish module-wise details
of demonstrations under TDC under NICRA projects since its inception,
the Department have stated as under:—

118
“..In TDC, the interventions being taken up can be broadly divided
in to four groups:
(a) Natural Resource Management (NRM)
NRM interventions consist of site specific rainwater harvesting
structures in drought affected areas; recycling of harvested
water through supplemental irrigation to alleviate moisture
stress during midseason dry spells; improved drainage in
flood-prone areas; conservation tillage; artificial groundwater
recharge and water saving micro-irrigation methods etc.
(b) Crop production
Under the crop production, demonstrations consist of
practices and technologies aimed at ensuring stability and
resilience to crop production as a strategy for addressing
climatic variability. Demonstrations included drought and
flood tolerant varieties, community nurseries for delayed
monsoon, water saving paddy cultivation methods (SRI,
aerobic, direct seeding), green manuring, nitrogen
management, advancement of planting dates of rabi crops
in areas with terminal heat stress, frost management in
horticulture through fumigation, popularization of location-
specific & risk-reducing inter-cropping systems with high
sustainable yield index. In-situ  moisture conservation
practices through ridge and furrow and raised bed planting
in soybean, cotton, maize, pigeonpea, short duration pulses,
vegetables, wheat, mustard, sugarcane, potato and
vegetables were also taken up.
(c) Livestock and Fisheries
Under the livestock & fishery module, demonstration of
fodder production especially under drought/flood situations,
improved shelter for reducing heat stress in livestock, siloge
making methods for storage of green fodder and feeding
during the dry season, breed selection and stocking ratios
for fish production in farm ponds and monitoring of water
quality in aquaculture and Integrated farming system models
in diverse agro ecosystems.
(d) Institutional interventions
Under the institutional interventions, enabling support system
in the village comprising of strengthening of existing
institutions or initiating new ones [Village Level Climate
Risk Management Committees (VCRMC)], establishment and

119
management of Custom Hiring Centres (CHCs) for farm
implements, seed bank, fodder bank, creation of commodity
groups, water sharing groups, community nursery, initiating
collective marketing by tapping value chains are some of
the interventions taken up in NICRA villages. ”
6.13 When asked about criteria for selection of Districts for under
Technology Demonstration Component (TDC) under the project, the
Department have stated as under:—
“Project sites for the climatic vulnerabilities have been selected
using the following criteria:
1. Drought proneness based on 30 years’ rainfall data (Source:
IMD)
2. Cyclone proneness based on frequency as recorded by IMD/
State Disaster Management agencies.
3. Flood proneness based on IMD data and NDMA maps.
4. Vulnerability to heat wave and cold wave based on IMD grid
data on temperatures.
5. Actual incidence of floods and droughts as recorded by
ICAR-CRIDA-AICRPAM centres.
Based on the above criteria, 121 districts involving 28 States and
1 union territory across the country have been selected. The
vulnerability assessment for all the districts of the country was
also considered in finalizing the districts for the technology
demonstrations. As ICAR-KVKs are in direct contact with the farmers
at the district level and has the technical expertise, they were
involved for demonstrating the resilient technologies to climate
change. Further, selection of vulnerable districts and KVKs have
been made considering their strengths i.e. the availability of subject
matter specialists, better understanding about the crop weather
situations in the surrounding villages and better network with the
line departments within the selected districts. Villages were
selected in consultation with research organizations located in
the selected district and the line departments... ”
6.14 On the query of the Committee regarding impact assessment
by the ICAR on agricultural productivity in Districts selected for
Technology Demonstration Component (TDC) to assess its impact, the
Department have stated as under:—
“...The impact of the climate resilient interventions is being taken
up as part of the TDC of NICRA and is continuously monitored with
the developed questionnaires designed for the same purpose... ”

120
6.15 When asked about targets set for target and achievement of
training of farmers under NICRA projects since its inception the
Department have stated as under:—
“...Trainings were organized on various aspects aiming at enhancing
the adaptive capacity of the communities and skill upgradation.
The number of trainings organized were 816, 1157, 927, 1016 and
1042. The number of participants was 18873, 25493, 24153, 31979
and 32219 during 2011, 2012, 2013, 2014 and 2015, respectively in
100 KVKs. About 526 programmes were conducted involving 7581
participants by the new 21 KVKs. Various aspects related to natural
resource management, efficient cultivars and cropping systems,
livestock and fisheries, nutrient management, resource conservation
technology, farm implements and machineries, livestock, feed and
fodder management, nursery raising, vermicompost and kitchen
gardening for enhancing nutritional security, etc. were covered as
part of the training for farmers in NICRA villages... ”
6.16 On the query of the Committee regarding policy of the
Government to involve progressive farmers in research projects being
undertaken under NICRA projects, the Department have stated as
under:—
“...The progressive farmers are being involved in the technology
demonstration component of NICRA. As part of the TDC,
demonstrations are being conducted in 121 climatically vulnerable
districts of the country on various aspects... ”
iv. Institutional Intervention under NICRA Project
6.17 The Department in their background note have further stated
that as part of institutional interventions under NICRA project,
100 Custom Hiring Centers (CHCs) for farm machinery were set up with
about 30 different types of farm implements to improve the timeliness
of operations during the limited window periods of moisture availability
in rainfed areas and to promote small farm mechanization for adoption
of climate resilient practices. A novel Village Climate Risk Management
Committee (VCRMC) comprising of villagers was constituted in each of
the 100 villages to manage the custom hiring of implements as a paid
service operated through a bank account. About 20 such CHCs were
studied in detail for their functioning by a joint committee of experts.
Over 700 demonstrations with farm implements were carried out to
demonstrate appropriate climate resilient practices such as drum
seeding of rice, planting on broad bed furrow/furrow irrigated raised
bed, crop residue recycling and zero tillage in wheat and summer

121
pulses. The revenue generated from these centres can serve the needs
of capacity building of farmers on using the farm machinery and
undertake repair when needed. This fund can act as sustainability
fund. These participatory demonstrations are quite successful and
have attracted the attention of development departments in several
States and triggered the horizontal up-scaling. Other institutional
interventions include establishment of seed bank, fodder bank,
commodity groups and introduction of climate literacy through setting
up of village level automatic weather station. Further , in the XII Plan,
a module on use of ICT for knowledge empowerment of the
communities in terms of climate risk management will be taken up in
select KVKs which have good tele-connectivity with generation of
locally relevant content and its dissemination in text and voice enabled
formats. A module on studying the impact of climate variability on
women is also proposed to be taken up. When asked to furnish criteria
for setting Custom Hiring Centres for farm machinery under NICRA
project during XI and XII Plan, the Department have stated as under:—
“..Custom Hiring Centres (CHCs) for farm implements were
established in all the 100 NICRA villages during XI Plan. During
XII Plan 21 new KVKs were added and custom hiring centres were
established in all the new KVKs also. Criteria for setting of CHCs
followed to implement TD component of NICRA involved identifying
climatically most vulnerable districts of the country and one
representative village for each of the 121 vulnerable districts based
on long term data of climate for implementing appropriate
adaptation and mitigation strategies and for enhancing the adaptive
capacity of the communities against the climatic vulnerabilities.
The focus of the programme was not only to demonstrate the
climate resilient agriculture technologies but also to institutionalize
mechanisms at the village level for continued adoption of such
practices in sustainable manner in the years to come. One
representative village or a cluster of villages from each of the
121 identified vulnerable districts was selected for this purpose by
respective Krishi Vigyan Kendra (KVK) in the district. A Village
Climate Risk Management Committee was constituted to manage
the custom hiring centre at the village. The rates for hiring the
machines/implements were decided by the committee itself
depending upon the socio-economic condition and cropping intensity
of the village. Every farmer in the village can hire the machines
from these centres. The modalities have been decided by the
committee members and amended from time to time as per the
local situation and needs. This committee also uses the revenue
generated for repair and maintenance of the implements and
remaining amount goes into revolving fund... ”

122
6.18 When asked to furnish details of institutional intervention
such as seed bank, fodder bank, commodity groups which were
envisaged under NICRA projects, the Department have stated as under:-
“...Participatory village level seed production of short duration,
drought and flood tolerant varieties were demonstrated in all the
NICRA villages with the support of KVKs in rice, soyabean, groundnut,
greengram, finger millet, foxtail millet, pigeon pea, etc. and seed
bank involving these varieties were established in the KVKs.
Availability of suitable varieties of fodder seed for various
contingency situations is a serious constraint for implementation
of contingency plans in districts experiencing deficit rainfall. Breeder
seed/foundation seed was sourced from research farms for
multiplication in farmer’s fields and the quality seed so produced
was mostly used in the village and nearby villages. Farmer to
farmer sale as truthful seed was the means of spread. During
2014-15, total 18,964 quintal seeds of paddy, soyabean, foxtail
millet, cluster bean, wheat, chickpea, and rapeseed & mustard
were produced at farmer level in the village. Fodder based
interventions were takenup in all the NICRA villages and fodder
bank was established. Short and medium duration fodder varieties
were demonstrated in 276 ha. covering 762 farmers during the
year 2014-15. Effective linkages were developed with State animal
husbandry department and State veterinary universities for
implementation of successful seed production plan well in
advance...”
6.19 When asked to furnish State-wise details of CHCs, seed bank,
fodder bank, Commodity groups established so far under the Project,
the Department have stated that Village level seed and fodder banks
were established in 121 NICRA villages. The Department have also
furnished following State-wise details of CHCs, seed banks and fodder
banks established under NICRA :—
Sl.No. State No. of KVKs KVK
12 3 4
Zone I
1. Haryana 2 Sirsa, Yamunanagar
2. Himachal Pradesh 4 Chamba, Hamirpur , Kullu, Kinnaur
3. Jammu & Kashmir 3 Kathua, Pulwama, Bandipora
4. Punjab 5 Bathinda, Fatehgarh Sahib, Faridkot, Ropar

123
Zone II
5. A & N Island 1 Port Blair
6. Bihar 7 Aurangabad, Buxar, Jehanabad, Nawadah,
Saran, Supaul, Banka
7. Jharkhand 6 Chatra, East Singhbhum, Gumla, Koderma,
Palamau, Godda
8. West Bengal 3 Coochbehar , Malda, South 24 Paragana
Zone III
9. ArunachalPradesh 3 T irap, West Kameng, West Siang
10. Assam 5 Cachar , Dibrugarh, Dhubri, Sonitpur , Karbi-
Anglong
11. Manipur 3 Imphal East, Senapati, Ukhrul
12. Meghalaya 3 Umaim, W est Garo Hills, Jaintia Hills
13. Mizoram 2 Lunglei, Serchhip
14. Nagaland 4 Dimapur , Mokokchung, Phek, Mon
15. Sikkim 1 East Sikkim
16. Tripura 2 W est Tripura, Dhalai
Zone IV
17. Uttar Pradesh 13 Bahraich, Bhagpat, Chitrakoot, Gorakhpur ,
Gonda, Hamirpur , Jhansi, Kushinagar ,
Maharajganj, Muzaffarnagar , Sonbhadra,
Kaushambi, Pratapgarh
18. Uttarakhand 2 T ehri Gharwal, Uttarkashi
Zone V
19. Andhra Pradesh 5 Anantapur , Kurnool, Srikakulam,
West Godavari, Chittoor
20. Maharashtra 8 Amravati, Aurangabad, Ahmednagar ,
Baramati, Buldana, Nandurbar, Ratnagiri,
Jalna
21. Telangana 2 Khammam, Nalgonda
Zone VI
22. Gujarat 5 V alsad, Rajkot, Kutch, Banaskantha, Amreli
23. Rajasthan 5 Jhunjhunu, Bharatpur , Jodhpur , Kota, Barmer
12 3 4

124
Zone VII
24. Chhattisgarh 3 Raipur , Bilaspur , Dantewada
25. Madhya Pradesh 9 Satna, Guna, Morena, Datia, Tikamgarh,
Chhatarpur , Balaghat, Ratlam, Jhabua
26. Odisha 5 K endrapara, Jharsuguda, Sonepur , Ganjam,
Kalahandi
Zone VIII
27. Karnataka 6 T umkur , K olar , Davangere, Belgaum, Gadag,
Kalburgi(Gulbarga)
28. Kerala Alleppey
29. Tamil Nadu 4 Namakkal, Thiruvarur, Ramanatha puram,
Villupuram
6.20 On the query of the Committee regarding financial assistance
being provided to the Farmers for setting of CHCs under NICRA project,
the Department have stated as under:—
“..During the XI plan, Rs. 6.25 lakhs per unit was funded to the
100 NICRA KVKs and and Rs. 7.0 lakhs were provided to new
21 KVKs for establishment of custom hiring centre during XII plan.
In addition to the above, Rs. 4.50 lakhs per KVK were provided
during 2015-16 for further strengthening of the CHCs... ”
6.21 When asked about the plan of Government for establishment
of CHCs at Block/Panchayat level in entire country, the Department
have stated as under:—
“...There is no such plan pending with the Government to establish
CHC at Block/Panchyat level in entire country... ”
6.22 When asked to furnish a summary on plan for introduction of
climate literacy through setting up of village level automatic weather
station, the Department have stated as under:—
“...Through the NICRA project, ICAR has identified 100 most
vulnerable districts to climate change in the country. All India
Coordinated Research Project on Agro meteorology has taken the
lead role in establishing automatic weather stations (AWS) in the
above mentioned highly vulnerable districts for collecting the half-
12 3 4

125
hourly real time observations, quality checking and analyzing these
data for monitoring droughts, floods, cold and heat waves. AWS
data is one of the major inputs in preparing the Agro-met Advisory
Services (AAS) and the same is disseminated to farmers of AICRPAM-
NICRA adopted villages at each centre twice in a week...”
v. District Agricultural Contingency Plan
6.23 ICAR-CRIDA has developed Agricultural Contingency Plans for
614 districts recommending location specific climate resilient crops
and varieties for use by the farmers. These agricultural contingency
plans cover delay in monsoon onset; breaks in monsoon leading to
early, mid and late-season droughts; delayed or limited release of
water for irrigation; floods; unseasonal rains and extreme weather
events such as heat wave, cold wave, frost, hailstorm, cyclone etc.
On the query of the Committee regarding use of Agricultural
Contingency Plan by the States, the Department have submitted as
under:—
“..States of Andhra Pradesh, Telangana, Karnataka, Maharashtra,
Madhya Pradesh, Gujarat, Rajasthan, Jharkhand, Assam, Meghalaya,
West Bengal, etc., are making use of contingency plans as it is
evident from the discussions during the Interface meetings held
by ICAR-CRIDA with Deptt. of Agriculture of various States before
the commencement of kharif season every year... ”
6.24 When asked about assistance being provided by the ICAR to
State Governments for implementation of District Contingency Plan,
the Department have submitted as under:—
“....ICAR through its network of research institutes and ATARIs
(erstwhile Zonal Project Directorates) and State agriculture
universities conduct pre-season interface meetings in different
States (mostly at State capitals or university/ICAR institutes located
in the State) with participation of relevant stakeholders covering
higher officials of Deptt. of Agriculture and district level
functionaries, State seed corporations and higher officials from
other sectors. During these meetings forecast made by IMD and
international agencies are provided for that particular State and
crop planning for ensuing kharif season is discussed and steps to
be implemented in case of weather aberrations is discussed. Further
based on the kharif season information and water availability in
reservoirs, plan for rabi is made and sent out to various stakeholders
informing about the crop(s) to be recommended for cultivation in
rabi season. The ICAR institutes also participate in mid-season

126
review meetings of State Governments and provide advisories on
steps to be taken up in case of deficit monsoon scenarios,
non-availability/supply of water in reservoirs. In addition the ICAR
officials also attend the meetings organised by MoA & FW and
provided the necessary information sought by the Ministry. ICAR-
CRIDA is making efforts to monitor dry spells and wet spells based
on sub-district daily rainfall in selected States and provided the
information to State Governments with advisories... ”
6.25 On the query of the Committee regarding revision of
contingency plan on the basis of feedback obtained from its
implementation in different States, the Department have submitted
as under:—
“..The process of revision/ updation of available contingency plans
is under progress. The MoA& FW has sponsored a project to update
the available contingency plans in the next three years.. ”
6.26 On the query of the Committee about ways by which individual
farmers can utilize Contingency plan, the Department have submitted
as under:—
“...The contingency plans provide information on technological
interventions to be made during weather aberrations such as
alternate crops/varieties, management practices etc. which could
be followed by farmers. These plans are made available on the
web sites of MoA& FW, ICAR and CRIDA and could be downloaded
by all stakeholders. Further, the State Governments, State
agriculture universities make them available on their websites
and are providing a summary of interventions for specific situations
through pamphlets, leaflets in local languages... ”
6.27 On the query of the Committee regarding coordination of
CRIDA with agricultural universities and Krishi Vigyan Kendras (KVKs)
and Agricultural Technology and Marketing Agency (ATMA) for
implementation of Agricultural Contingency Plan, the representative
of CRIDA has stated as under:—
¶ØhMk dh rjiQ ls ge yksx vPNh dksf'k'k dj jgs gSa] vkus okyh 25 rkjh[k
dks ge yksx rsyaxkuk osQ iwjs 10 ftyksa esa vkSj vxys fnu ge vkUèkz izns'k esa
vxys] iwjs 10 ftyksa ls vkfiQf'k;Yl vk jgs gSa vkSj ¯izfliy lSozsQVjh] ,xzhdYpj
Hkh vk jgs gSa] izksMD'ku dfe'uj] ,xzhdYpj ;wfuoflZVh okbl pkalyj vkdj vxj
lw[kk ukseZy LVst esa gS rks D;k gS] vxj lw[kk gS rks D;k djuk pkfg,]
26 rkjh[k ge yksxksa us iQkbuykbt fd;k gS] iwjk fnu ge yksx ppkZ djsaxs] ,D'ku

127
Iyku rS;kj djsaxs] mlosQ vuqlkj os LVsV ysoy ij lsalhVkbts'ku gks jgk gS] cht
fdl rjiQ ls nsaxs] vxj bl ftys esa cht ugha gS rks fofnu fn LVsV bl ftys
ls bl ftys rd cht oSQls ys tk;saA  vxj lks;kchu uksnZuZ rsyaxkuk eas cht
de gS] vxj eè; izns'k ls dgka rd cht ysdj vk ldrs gSaA ml rjg dh
;kstuk dks dk;Z:i esa ys tkus osQ fy, 26 rkjh[k dks geus rsyaxkuk esa eh¯Vx
j[kh gSA bl rjg dh vxj uSDLV eaFk lkr rkjh[k dks vkaèkz izns'k esa] egkjk"Vª
esa 13 dks j[kh gS] egkjk"Vª esa Hkh fiNys lky iwjs ftyksa dk ge yksxksa us ,D'ku
Iyku cuk;k rks ozQhMk osQ fy, dkiQh xzkm.M ysoy gS] 150 ftyksa esa ge yksx
lkFk&lkFk feydj ;g dke dj jgs gSaA esjs [;ky ls vkSj Hkh FkksM+k Ldksi gS
rks mls ge LVsªanu djsaxsA¸
vi. District Vulnerability Atlas
6.28 CRIDA has prepared an atlas on Vulnerability of Indian
Agriculture to Climate Change. When asked to furnish a brief of atlas
on Vulnerability of Indian Agriculture to Climate Change, the
Department have submitted as under:—
“...Assessing vulnerability to climate change and variability is an
important first step in evolving appropriate adaptation strategies
to changing climate. Such an analysis also helps in targeting
adaptation investments to regions that are more vulnerable.
According to IPCC, vulnerability is “the degree to which a system
is susceptible to, or unable to cope with, adverse effects of
climate change, including climate variability and extremes.
Vulnerability is a function of the character , magnitude, and rate
of climate variation to which a system is exposed, its sensitivity,
and its adaptive capacity ”. This definition is adopted for this
study.
Vulnerability is assessed using the indicator method. Based on
review of literature and causal relationship with the three
components of vulnerability, a number of relevant indicator
variables were chosen, and a database for 572 districts (having
rural area) in India was developed. To represent sensitivity, the
variables included are net sown area, cyclone proneness, drought
intensity, flood proneness, ground water exploitation, population
density etc. which determines the level of sensitivity of the district
to changing climate. In order to capture the degree of change in
climate in terms of change in drought occurrence, incidence of
dry spells, change in annual rainfall, heat wave, cold wave, etc.
to which a district is exposed, climate projections of the PRECIS
model for A1B scenario for the period 2021-2050 were considered.

128
The changes in different climatic parameters were computed
relative to the baseline 1961-1990 of the same model. Variables
considered to represent adaptive capacity include rural poverty,
literacy, work force engaged in agriculture, consumption of
fertilizer nutrients, net irrigated area, ground water availability,
etc. which determine the adaptation behaviour of the districts
with respect to climate change. Districts with higher adaptive
capacity are assumed to adapt better to changing climate. The
data on these indicators were normalized based on the nature of
relationship. They were then combined into three indices for
sensitivity, exposure and adaptive capacity and later averaged
with weights given by the experts to obtain the relative
vulnerability index. Based on the index, all the districts were
divided into five categories. It can be observed that districts with
higher levels of vulnerability are located in the western and
peninsular India. It is also observed that the highly fertile Indo-
Gangetic plains are relatively more sensitive, but less vulnerable
because of higher adaptive capacity and lower exposure... ”
6.29 On being asked about basis of classification of Districts in to
different categories on vulnerability index of Indian agriculture, the
Department have submitted as under:—
“...A vulnerability index was computed using the data on 38
indicators grouped into sensitivity, exposure and adaptive capacity.
The districts were ranked based on the index. These rankings
were used to classify the districts in to different categories of
vulnerability...”
6.30 On the query of the Committee regarding categories in which
Districts are classified on the basis of vulnerability index of Indian
agriculture, the Department have submitted as under:—
“...Using the rankings based on the vulnerability index, all the
districts were divided in to five categories—very high, high,
medium, low and very low — of vulnerability with equal number
of districts in each category... ”
vii. Agriculture Extension Services
6.31 Existence of robust system of agriculture extension services
is very much necessary for dissemination of knowledge and information
to the farmers. Timely availability of advice for solving problems
faced by the farmers, provision of improved varieties of seeds and
agriculture implements by agriculture extension centres are prerequisite

129
for enhancing crop productivity and income of majority of Indian
farmers.On the query of the Committee regarding details of schemes
for agricultural extension services being implemented by the
Government of India and respective State Governments in the Country,
the Department have stated as under:—
“...The main extension system for providing agricultural extension
services to farmers is operated by State Governments through
State extension agencies. The Government of India is implementing
following schemes to facilitate the efforts of State Governments:—
i. Krishi Vigyan Kendra Scheme: The Indian Council of
Agricultural Research (ICAR) has established a network of
665 Krishi Vigyan Kendras (KVKs) in the country aiming at
technology assessment and demonstration for its application
and capacity development.The activities undertaken by the
KVKs for the benefit of farmers include On-farm testing to
identify the location specificity of technology under various
farming systems; Frontline demonstration to establish the
production potential of improved agricultural technologies
on the farmers fields; Capacity development of farmers and
extension personnel to update their knowledge and skills;
Providing farm advisories on varied subjects of interest to
farmers. The KVKs also create awareness on improved
agricultural technology among the farmers through a number
of extension activities. Besides, the seeds, planting materials
and other technology inputs produced by the KVKs are also
made available to the farmers.
ii. Agricultural Technology Management Agency: Agricultural
Technology Management Agency (ATMA) Scheme being
implemented by Department of Agriculture, Cooperation and
Farmers Welfare aims at making extension system farmer
driven and farmer accountable by way of new institutional
arrangements for technology dissemination at district level.
ATMA has provision for active participation of farmers/
farmer-groups, NGOs, KVKs, Panchayati Raj Institutions and
other stakeholders operating at district level and below. At
present, the Scheme is under implementation in 652 districts
in 29 States and 3 UTs in the country.
iii. Mass Media Support to Agriculture Extension: Since Tenth
plan a Central Sector Scheme on ‘Mass Media Support to
Agriculture Extension ’ is being implemented to strengthen
the reach of farm information to farming community by

130
using electronic media i.e. the wide network of Doordarshan
and All India Radio. Besides the Government has also launched
the DD Kisan channel on Doordarshan for speedy
dissemination of technologies to the farmers.
iv . Agri-Clinic and Agri-Business Centres by Agriculture
Graduates: The Agri-Clinic and Agri-Business Centres by
Agriculture Graduates (ACABC) scheme is under
implementation for creating gainful self-employment
opportunities to unemployed agricultural graduates,
agricultural diploma holders and intermediate passed
students and science graduates with post-graduation in
agriculture related courses supporting agriculture
development and supplementing the efforts of public
extension services for the farmers in the country... ”
6.32 When asked to furnish numbers and details of infrastructure
and manpower available in each Krishi Vigyan Kendras (KVKs) are
operating in the country, the Department have stated as under:—
“...In total, 665 KVKs are operating in India. Each KVK is provided
with modest infrastructural facilities and required manpower for
the purpose. There is a sanctioned strength of 16 staff in each KVK
including Head and six Subject Matter Specialists (SMS). In addition
to these facilities, farmers are being provided with additional
facilities like farmers Hostel in 513 KVKs, demonstration units in
493 KVKs, soil & water testing labs in 389 KVKs and soil testing kits
in 400 KVKs... ”
6.33 On the query of the Committee regarding steps being taken
by the Government to provide adequate manpower to the KVKs, the
Department have stated as under:—
“...The Government has approved for increasing the staff strength
of a KVK from 16 to 22 during XII plan including 4 posts of SMSs
and 2 posts of farm technicians... ”
6.34 When asked to furnish details of services/facilities/training
provided to the farmers in the country through KVKs during the last
five years, the Department have stated as under:—
“...During the last five years, the KVKs have undertaken 1.51 lakh
on farm trials with the participation of farmers to identify the
location specificity of agricultural technologies and best practices
in their farming systems; conducted 5.89 lakh Frontline

131
demonstrations (FLDs) on various crops to establish the production
potential of improved agricultural technologies on the farmers
fields; imparted trainings to 61.03 lakh farmers for improving their
knowledge and skills on various aspects of farming. In addition,
the KVKs created awareness on improved agricultural technology
among the farmers through a large number of extension activities
benefitting more than 6.47 crore participants. As much as
1.17 lakh quintals seeds of improved varieties of different cropsand
9.99 crore quality good planting materials of various crops and
plant species and 5.23 crore livestock strains and finger lings
produced by the KVKs have been made available to the farmers.
During the last five years, the KVKs have 16.18 lakh samples of
soil, water , plant and manures and provided advisories to the farmers
to solve their problems. Besides, the KVKs provided Mobile agro
advisories on different aspects of agriculture including advisories
on plant protection, weather conditions and market information
etc. to 281.07 lakh farmers... ”
6.35 When asked about the views of the Government to strengthen
the agriculture extension services in country so that they are able to
provide adequate support to the farmers in view of emerging and
future challenges associated with climate change, the Department
have stated as under:—
“...With an aim at enhancing resilience of Indian agriculture to
climate change and climate vulnerability, the ICAR is already
implementing a network project namely National Innovation in
Climate Resilient Agriculture (NICRA). The technology demonstration
component of the NICRA project is being implemented in 121
climatically vulnerable districts through KVKs. During the current
year , about 1.0 lakh farmers are being covered for demonstrating
proven technologies under four modules namely Natural Resource
Management; Crop Production; Livestock and fisheries; and
Institutional Innovation. The farmers of selected cluster of villages
in each of 121 districts are also being provided different farm
machineries and implements on custom hiring basis for timely
sowing, intercultural operations and harvesting of different crops
by setting up of Custom Hiring Centres. Besides, the farmers are
also provided advisories on contingent crop planning as per prevailing
weather conditions during the crop seasons... ”
6.36 The Department have also submitted about following new
initiatives by KVKs:—
i. “...Celebration of Soil health Day: In order to create
awareness on the importance of soil in sustaining agricultural
production as many as 609KVKs contributed significantly in

132
collecting and analysing soil samples and distribution of
2.09 lakhs soil health cards to farmers on the occasion of
World Soil Day on 5th December , 2015. For strengthening
soil testing facilities at KVKs, soil testing kits have been
provided to 400 KVKs.
ii. Kharif and Rabi Kisan Sammelan: Pre-Kharif kisan sammelan
were organized by 373 KVKs with the participation of Hon’ble
Members of Parliament and local public representatives.
KVKs organized film shows, provided extension literature
related to agricultural technologies, displayed exhibits,
posters, photographs, digital prints, display boards, sample
trays, etc. for dissemination of information developed by
ICAR Institutes/SAUs and refined and tested by the KVKs to
the farmers and other stakeholders. During the Pre-Kharif
kisan sammelan 1.55 lakh farmers participated. Similarly,
Pre-Rabi Campaign was conducted as 374 KVKs.”
6.37 While stressing the need for public-private partnership in the
field of agriculture extension services, representative of BAIF Research
Foundation has stated as under:—
¶gekjs [ksrh djus osQ rjhosQ vkSj i'kqikyu djus osQ rjhosQ esa Hkh dkiQh cnyko
vk x, gSa] tks gekjk ,xzhdYpj vkSj oSVfjujh dk ,DlVsa'ku flLVe gS] og cgqr
iqjkus rjhosQ ls py jgk gSA bls fjO;w djus dh vko';drk gSA vxj eSa ,uhey
gLcsaMjh lsDVj dh ckr d:a] ftlesa esjk T;knk ,Dlihfj,al gS] rks vki ns[ksasxs
fd tks Hkh oSVfjujh fMLisaljh ;k iksLVsM MkWDVlZ gSa] os lHkh fMfLVªDV] jhtuy
gSMDokVZlZ ;k eSDlhee CykWd ySoy ij jgrs gSA dksbZ Hkh baVhfj;j esa tkus dks
rS;kj ugha gSA¸
6.38 On the above issue, representative of Ministry of Earth
Sciences has stated as under:—
¶ge xzkeh.k o`Qf"k ekSle lsok osQ uke ij pyk jgs gSaA og pkj fnu dh tks
baiQkesZ'ku nsrs Fks] jsuiSQM ,xzhdYpj vkSj bfjxsfVM ,xzhdYpj fM¯LVd'ku ugha ykrs
Fks] 60 ijlSUV ,xzhdYpj bfjxsfVM ,xzhdYpj iYlst] vkW;yLkhM~l vkSj lhfj;Yl
dk gksrk gSA blfy, mu yksxksa dk oSnj baiQkesZ'ku psat vkWiQ lksbax iSVuZ ,aM
fMys bu ekulwu vjkboy] mldh otg ls fM¯LVd'ku ykus dh izfØ;k geus
'kq: dj nh gSA vxys ekulwu rd gj ftys esa ,xzhdYpj lfoZl osQ fy, tks
oSnj baiQkesZ'ku nsaxs] mlesa fM¯LVD'ku yk;saxs] jsuiSQM ,xzhdYpj fjysfVM baiQkesZ'ku]
lksbax osQ ckn fdlku nl fnu esa vxyh ckfj'k ,DliSDV djrk gS vkSj gj Øki
15 fnu osQ ckn vxyh ckfj'k ,DliSDV djrk gSA ozQki oSQysaMj osQ vuqlkj ml

133
Mst osQ nkSjku ckfj'k gksus dh laHkkouk gS ;k ugha] vxj gksxh rks ge crk nsaxs
vkSj vxj ugha gksxh rks lIyhesUVjh bfjxs'ku] ekbØks bfjxs'ku osQ fy, vjsatesaV~l
djus osQ fy, ge ,Mokbl nsasxsA 
Wherever State Governments can
organise supplementary irrigation or micro irrigation, they can
take one irrigation like that so that uSDLV Vkbe rd ckfj'k vk tk;sxh
vkSj ozQkWi lokZbo dj tk;sxhA jkT; ljdkjksa esa oqQN oaQVhatsUlh ,D'kal fMfLVªDV
ysoy esa vkxsZukbt djus osQ fy, mldk busc¯yx eSosQfuTe ge oSnj ,aM DykbesV
lfoZl osQ Fkwz izksokbM djus dh ps"Vk dj jgs gSaA ;g ge pkj&ikap fnu dk
vkxs osQ fy, crk jgs gSaA gekjh tks DykbesV lfoZl gS] geus crk;k fd DykbesV
ekWMy iq.ks dk gekjk baLVhV;wV pyk jgk gSa og ,d eghus igys osQ fglkc ls
crkrk gS] ,d eghuk igys twu esa dgka ckfj'k gksxh] fdruh ckfj'k gksxh vkSj
tqykbZ esa fdruh ckfj'k gksxh ge jhtUl ugha crk ik;saxs] oaQVªh ,t , gksy ekulwu
ls ftruh ckfj'k vkus dh laHkkouk gS] og ckfj'k fdl fjoj csflUl esa gksus
okyh gS] mlls fdruk ikuh miyCèk gksxk] pkgs ,xzhdYpj vkWijs'ku osQ fy, gks]
okVj fjlkslZ eSustesaV osQ fy, gks] gSYFk bEiSDV tSls ghV oso vkSj dksYM oso
osQ fy, vizSy okyk vkmViqV ge ;wt djsasxsA ¯oVj okyk ge dksYM oso vkSj
Luks LiSYl osQ ckjs esa ukFkZ bafM;k esa nsus osQ fy, ;wt djsaxsA ge bl rjg dh
dLVekbt baiQkesZ'ku ,xzhdYpj osQ fy, tujsV djus dh ps"Vk dj jgs gSaA ;g
lfoZl vkbZlh,vkj osQ Fkzw fcYM dh gqbZ gSA gj ,d o`Qf"k foKku osQUnz esa gekjh
;wfuV [kqysxhA 2019 rd gj o`Qf"k foKku osQUnz esa gekjs ekSle foHkkx dh iaQMsM
;wfuV gksxhA ogka osQ ckdh ,DliV~lZ osQ lkFk cSBdj ml fMfLVªDV dh tks oSnj
csLM ,xzks ,Mokbtjh gS] ozQki LisflfiQd dk tks cuuk gS] og cusxkA bruh ubZ
pht geus Iyku dh gSa] vkbZlh,vkj osQ lkFk vkus okys fnuksa esa mudk baLVhV;wV
ozsQMk lSaVªy fjlpZ baLVhV;wV iQkWj MªkbZ ,aM ,xzhdYpj ySaM] gSnjkckn esa gS] mu
yksxksa us fMfLVªDV ysoy osQ oaQVhatsUlh IykUl cuk;s gq, gSa] fMfLVªDV ySoy ij
Øki oSQysUMj flLVe gS] gekjh lfoZl muosQ Øki oSQysUMj vkSj oaQVhatsUlh ,D'kal
dks ¯yd djsaxh] ¯yd djosQ vkyjsMh ,evks;w lkbu gks x;kA vkWYk fMfLVªDV
lSaVlZ esa o`Qf"k foKku osQUnz esa gekjs ;wfuV~l Hkh lSV vi gksaxsA¸
viii. Mechanization of Agriculture
6.39 Due to diversification of economy and higher prospect of
earning in other sectors, there is problem of shortage of labour in
agriculture sector. Apart from this, it is said that climatic fluctuation
due to global warming will require shorter duration crops and hence
there will be need of enhanced mechanization in agriculture sector to
offset problem of shortage of labour. Further , we will also need to
reduce post harvest losses significantly in order to ensure food security
in country to face challenges associated with climate change. When
asked to furnish level of mechanization in agriculture sector in the

134
country, the Department stated as under:—
“Availability of adequate farm power is very crucial for timely
farm operations to increase production and productivity besides
minimizing losses. With the increase in intensity of cropping the
turnaround time is drastically reduced and it is not possible to
harvest and thresh the standing crop, on one hand, and prepare
seed bed and do timely sowing operations of subsequent crop, on
the other hand, in the limited time available, unless adequate
farm power is available. DAC&FW funded study indicated increase
in total farm power availability from 0.25 kW/ha in 1951 (animate
power contributing 97.4%, mechanical sources 2.1% and electrical
0.5%) to 1.35 kW/ha in 2001 (animate sources 18%, mechanical
sources 55% and electrical sources 27%) and 1.50 kW/ha in 2010.
Further , the availability of draught animals is gradually reducing,
thus shortfalls will have to be met mostly through electro-
mechanical power sources.
Presently, the overall level of mechanization in country’s agriculture
sector is about 40-45 %. The important agriculture operations
mechanised include seed-bed preparation (40%), seeding/planting
(29%), plant protection (34%), irrigation (37%), harvesting and
threshing (60-70% for wheat & rice and <5% for other crops). State-
wise level of mechanization is not available at present. However ,
one research project has been recently initiated by ICAR-CIAE,
Bhopal in collaboration with AICRPs on Farm Implements and
Machinery and Utilization of Animal Energy to generate such
database.”
6.40 When asked about policy of the Government to enhance
level of mechanization in agriculture in country, the Department stated
as under:—
“The Government of India has launched a Sub-Mission on Agricultural
Mechanization to extend the benefit of mechanization to small
and marginal farmers through establishment of custom hiring
centres. This mission also intends to create high tech hubs for high
value farm equipment and creating awareness amongst the
stakeholders through demonstration and capacity building activities.
For establishment of these centres, the Government is providing
subsidy. The level of subsidy ranges from 25 to 50%. Moreover, 10%
additional subsidy is provided to SC, ST and women/small-marginal
farmers of NEH state beneficiaries.

135
CIAE Bhopal has been working on research and development of
new agricultural machines & technologies for mechanization of
agriculture. In order to provide quality equipment to farmers, the
equipment manufactured by different manufacturers are being
tested at various testing centres located at ICAR institutes and
State Agricultural Universities. The AICRP on Farm Implements &
Machinery is putting a lot of emphasis on Research & Development,
prototype feasibility testing and frontline demonstration of improved
farm equipment and machinery to bridge mechanization gaps in
different parts of the country through 25 centres of the project.
No direct financial support is provided to farmers in the project. ”
6.41 When asked to furnish details of research & development in
the sector and programmes and financial support being provided to
the farmers in the country to enhance level of mechanization in
agriculture sector, the Department stated as under:—
“CIAE Bhopal is engaged in conducting basic and applied research
for development of new machines and technologies including
harvesting machines in the country. The developed machines are
evaluated at different locations throughout the country under
multi-location trials to judge its efficacy under different agro-
climatic conditions. Suggestions and modifications suggested by
the evaluating institutes are further incorporated in the machine
to make it more effective before final release of the machines for
manufacturing by the manufacturers. Further , the AICRP on Farm
Implements & Machinery is working on development of cost
effective harvesters and other farm equipments in association
with private manufacturers. Some of the equipments developed
under the project are Multi-purpose Self Propelled Hydraulic
Platform, Tractor Mounted Fodder Harvester , Root Crop Harvester,
Tractor Operated Groundnut Digger Shaker , Tractor Operated
Coconut Harvester etc. ”
6.42 When asked to furnish steps being taken by the Government
to reduce post harvest crop losses in farm sector, the Department
stated as under:—
“In the post production system, the agricultural commodities
undergo series of post-harvest unit operations such as: collection,
cleaning, sorting/grading, decortications/shelling, drying, milling,
packing, transportation, storage and value addition before reaching
the consumer. At all these stages incremental losses occur to the
produce. The total post-harvest losses to agricultural commodities

136
are estimated to be from 6 to 18% (Nanda et al., 2012). Protecting
the agricultural commodities from losses in the post-harvest system
will result in an additional availability of 6 to 18% foods for
consumption.To reduce post-harvest losses in farm sector , the
institutes of the division have not only conducted scientific
estimates of post-harvest losses of selected commodities but also
developed technology for low-cost safe storage of pulses especially
in rural areas. Besides this storage structures like coal tar drum
bins, Hapur bins, metallic bins, etc. and bio fumigants have been
propagated. Institutes have also worked on portable evaporative
cooling structures and handling devices for fruits and to prevent
thermal as well as mechanical shocks leading to losses. Technologies
on disinfestation of pulses using chemical free techniques as well
as prototypes based on the thermal disinfestation technology have
been developed. Packaging/storage of high moisture content
commodities under modified atmosphere (MA) is known to reduce
losses. Technology for MA packaging has been developed for selected
fruits and vegetables (guava, mango, tomato & capsicum). The
technology for large scale handling of perishables under MA is
being pursued. Adoption/evaluation of sensor flexible hermetic
storage system of grains to reduce post-harvest losses at storage
level is also being pursued. ”
6.43 On the issue of need of mechanization of Farming in the
Country, Sri Sidhartha Welfare Trust in written submission before the
Committee have submitted as under:—
¾ “Modern cultivation should be initiated with full
encouragement for mechanization by pooling of lands through
farming societies or family groups or corporate bodies to
take up mechanized and modern farming in blocks of 25,50,75
and 100 hectares as one unit for prospecting farming.
Rotational farming should be made attractive by educating
the farmers with loan facilities from Banks/Co-operative
banks. Each pooled block should be taught to take up-farming
of food grains, sugar cane, fruits, dairying, sheep/goatery,
pisiculture, piggery, poultry and tree corps with all facilities
of roads, fencing, wells, farm house etc. and machineries.-
depending on market trends with sharing of burdens and
profits on company basis with registered contracts.
¾ The Agricultural Department needs to gear up for
modernization of agriculture. It should employ more field
staff with field training and basic qualification of Xth or
XIIth Standard with certificate course or a Diploma in

137
Agriculture, who can stay in Village Panchayath Hqs and will
have the survey number details of all farmers of each village
attached to a Panchayath and prepare annual plan for each
year for each village for the corps to be grown depending
on the fertility condition of the soils- as per laboratory
tests, rainfall or irrigation facility and advise the farmer on
the crops to be grown and methods of cultivation, pest
control and writing of records on crop grown in each holding
etc. The present system of keeping a Agri-Doctor in each
Hobli Hqrs is not serving the purpose. There is no actual
guidance for the farmers in the field level. eg: Karnataka
State.”
6.44 On the above issue, Shri K. Nithianandan in his written
memoranda submitted before the Committee has stated as under:—
“Post-Harvest Technolgoy: Our Indian farmers in the midst of many
constraints to produce enough food grains for our entire population.
Not only we are self-sufficient in the food front but also we have
a marinal export surplus of wheat, rice (Basmati), sugar , mangoes,
spices, fruit and vegetables, Nearly 30% of the agricultural produces
harvested is lost due to inadequate storage facilities. So enough
godowns and warehouse facilites should be made available in the
proximity of villages. ”

138
CHAPTER VII
INTERNATIONAL ACCORD ON CLIMATE CHANGE
7.1 The Paris Agreement is an agreement within the United Nations
Framework Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC) dealing with
greenhouse gases emissions mitigation, adaptation and finance starting
in the year 2020. The language of the agreement was negotiated by
representatives of 195 countries at the 21st Conference of the Parties
of the UNFCCC in Paris and adopted by consensus on 12 December
2015. It was opened for signature on 22 April 2016 (Earth Day) at a
ceremony in New York. As of November 2016, 193 UNFCCC members
have signed the treaty, 113 of which have ratified it. After the European
Union ratified the agreement in October 2016, there were enough
countries that had ratified the agreement that produce enough of the
world's greenhouse gases for the agreement to enter into force. The
agreement went into effect on 4 November 2016. The Paris Agreement's
central aim is to strengthen the global response to the threat of
climate change by keeping a global temperature rise this century well
below 2 degrees Celsius above pre-industrial levels and to pursue efforts
to limit the temperature increase even further to 1.5 degrees Celsius
Additionally, the agreement aims to strengthen the ability of countries
to deal with the impacts of climate change. To reach these ambitious
goals, appropriate financial flows, a new technology framework and an
enhanced capacity building framework will be put in place, thus
supporting action by developing countries and the most vulnerable
countries, in line with their own national objectives. The Agreement
also provides for enhanced transparency of action and support through
a more robust transparency framework.
i. Paris Agreement on Climate Change
7.2 The Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate Change has
stated that Paris Agreement on climate change was adopted on
12 December 2015. It is a legally binding agreement that covers all
countries, developed and developing, with the aim to strengthen the
global response to the threat of climate change, in the context of
sustainable development and efforts to eradicate poverty. The salient
features of the Paris Agreement are us under:—
(a) The Paris Agreement acknowledges the development
imperatives of developing countries. The Agreement

139
recognizes the developing countries’ right to development
and their efforts to harmonize development with
environment, while protecting the interests of the most
vulnerable.
(b) The Paris Agreement recognizes the importance of sustainable
lifestyles and sustainable patterns of consumption with
developed countries taking the lead, and notes the
importance of ‘climate justice’ in its preamble.
(c) The Agreement seeks to enhance the ‘implementation of
the Convention’ whilst reflecting the principles of equity
and common but differentiated responsibilities and respective
capabilities, in the light of different national circumstances.
(d) The objective of the Agreement further ensures that it is
not mitigation-centric and includes other important elements
such as adaptation, loss and damage, finance, technology,
capacity building and transparency of action and support.
(e) Parties’ contributions under the Paris Agreement are defined
as ‘Nationally Determined Contributions’ (NDCs), and a top-
down approach of undertaking mitigation ambition has been
avoided. The NDCs are country driven and comprehensive.
(f) Agreement maintains differentiation in mitigation actions
of developed and developing countries.
(g) The Agreement recognizes that the timeframe for peaking
will be longer for developing countries.
(h) The Agreement mandates developed countries to provide
financial resources to developing countries. Other parties
may also contribute, but on a purely voluntary basis.
(i) The accompanying decision to the Paris Agreement also lays
down that US Dollars 100 billion mobilization of funds per
year by developed countries will be scaled up after 2020
and before 2025 talking into account the needs and priorities
of developing countries.
(j) The Agreement has evolved a new technology framework.
This framework notes the importance of fully realizing
technology development and transfer in order to improve
resilience to climate change and to reduce greenhouse gas
emissions. The framework also strives to support
collaborative approaches to research and development, and
facilitating access to technology, in particular for early stages
of the technology cycle, to developing country Parties.

140
(k) A global goal has been established to increase the adaptive
capacity, strengthening resilience and reducing vulnerability
to climate change, Adaptation has also been accorded equal
importance as ‘mitigation’ as demanded by developing
countries.
(l) In addition to adaptation, the Paris Agreement includes the
concept of ‘Loss & Damage’ and recognizes the importance
of averting, minimizing and addressing loss and damage
associated with the adverse effects of climate change and
extreme weather events, and identifies various areas of
cooperation and support.
(m) A global stock take, covering all elements, will take place
every five years to assess the progress in addressing climate
change.
(n) Implementation of REDD+ (Reducing Emissions from
Deforestation and Forest Degradation) mechanism has been
anchored in the Paris Agreement.
(o) A new market mechanism to provide opportunities for
voluntary cooperation in the implementation of the NDCs
has been agreed.
(p) An enhances system for transparency has been agreed to.
This will cover not only mitigation and adaptation actions,
but also the support provided by developed countries.
(q) A separate Capacity Building Initiative for transparency to
help developing countries has been agreed to in order to
build institutional and technical capacity.
(r) A new institutional arrangement viz. Paris Committee on
Capacity Building is a part of the Agreement. It is established
for enhancing capacity building activities in developing
countries under the Agreement, Developed countries are to
provide financial support for capacity building to developing
countries.
(s) Pre 2020 actions are also part of the decisions. The developed
country parties are urged to scale up their level of financial
support with a complete road map to achieve the goal of
jointly providing US $ 100 Billion by 2020 for mitigation and
adaptation by significantly increasing adaptation finance from
current levels and to further provide appropriate technology
and capacity building support in pursuant to paragraph 3
and 4 of the Warsaw decisions.

141
7.3 While Explaining the role of the Ministry of Environment,
forest and climate change for promoting research and development
on climate changes, the representative has stated as under:—
¶egksn;] eSa blosQ ckjs esa crkuk pkgwaxk fd tks VsEizSpj jkbt gks jgk gS] mls
fefVxsV djus osQ fy,] de djus osQ fy, ;k eSust djus osQ fy, gekjk jk"Vªh;
Lrj ij tks iz;kl gks ldrk gS] mlosQ ckjs esa ge ea=kky;ksa dks lykg nsrs gSaA
gekjs ea=kky; dk dke fliZQ lykg nsuk gh gSA pwafd vHkh dksbZ dkuwuh O;oLFkk
ugha gS] rks tSls ou foHkkx dk eq[; eqík ouksa dk laj{k.k gh gS] ogh gekjs
ea=kky; dk dke gSA blfy, bl ckr ij geus roTtq fn;k gS fd tyok;q ifjorZu
esa dkiQh cM+k jksy ouksa dk gSA mlosQ ckjs esa gekjs jhfr esa gSA o`Qf"k osQ ckjs
esa tks uhfr;ka gSa] geus mlosQ ckjs esa mudks lykg nh gSA mlosQ vuq:i uhfr;ksa
esa tks cnyko gksuk pkfg,] mlosQ fy, o`Qf"k ea=kky; dks uhfr;ka cukuh gS vkSj
izksxzkEl bEiyhesaV djus gSaA tks lkbfUVfiQd fjlpZ ge DykbesV past osQ ckjs esa
djrs gSa] vFkZO;oLFkk vkSj lekt osQ fofHkUu i{kksa ij mldk tks vlj iM+rk gS]
mldk ge vè;;u djrs gSa vkSj ml vè;;u osQ vkyksd esaa tks uhfr;ka viukuh
pkfg,a] vyx&vyx foHkkxksa dks muosQ ckjs esa ge lykg nsrs gSaA gekjk iz;kl
;g jgk gS fd gekjk 'kksèk bl rjg ls gks fd ckdh ea=kky;ksa osQ ftrus lkbfUVfiQd
baLVhV;w'kal gSa] tSls lkbal ,aM VsDuksykWth fMikVZesaV gS] ,xzhdYpj gS] lh,lvkbZvkj
dh yscksjsVjht gSa vkSj tks vU; vdknfed laLFkk,a gSa] mlosQ lkFk feydj ge
;g fjlpZ djsa vkSj ,d izk:i izLrqr djsaA eSa lcls igys vkidks ;g tkudkjh
nsuk pkgwaxk fd o`Qf"k lacafèkr tyok;q ifjorZu osQ ckjs esa gekjs foHkkx dk fjlpZ
dkiQh fnuksa ls py jgk gS vkSj ge bldh tkudkjh Hkkjro"kZ esa] Hkkjr ljdkj
dks vkSj oSf'od lekt dks Hkh vius ,d MkWD;wesaV osQ :i esa izLrqr djrs gSaA
mls ge us'kuy dE;wfuosQ'ku dgrs gSaA ;g us'kuy dE;wfuosQ'ku igyh ckj geus
o"kZ 2004 esa fn;k FkkA mlesa ge vFkZO;oLFkk osQ lHkh i{kksa dk vkadyu djrs
gSa vkSj o`Qf"k mldk ,d eq[; eqík gSA mlesa o`Qf"k] m|ksx] vkS|ksfxd izkslst]
osLV ou vkfn bl rjg osQ dbZ vU; {ks=k gSa] ftuesa tyok;q ifjorZu ls tks
izHkko gks jgs gSa] mldk vkadyu fd;k tkrk gSA bl vkadyu dk tks ewy vlsLesaV
gS] ;g ml MkWD;wesaV esa ge izLrqr djrs gSaA o"kZ 2004 osQ vkèkkj ij geus tks
us'kuy dE;wfuosQ'ku izLrqr fd;k Fkk] mlesa o`Qf"k ij izHkkoksa dh Hkh geus ppkZ
dh gSA nwljh ckj o"kZ 2012 esa geus nwljk us'kuy dE;wfuosQ'ku izLrqr fd;k
gS] ftlesa lekt osQ lHkh vaxksa dk] ftlesa o``Qf"k Hkh 'kkfey gS] mldk fooj.k
geus fn;k gSA blosQ chp esa geus ,d vkSj MkWD;wesaV izLrqr fd;k Fkk] tks iQksj
ckbZ iQksj vlsLesaV osQ uke ls tkuk tkrk gS eryc pkj lsDVlZ dk pkj jhtUl
esa vè;;u geus fd;k Fkk vkSj o`Qf"k mldk ,d izeq[k vax gSA ;g vè;;u
ge dj jgs gSa] ge djrs jgs gSa vkSj vkxs Hkh ;g flyflyk pyrk jgsxkA tgka
rd o`Qf"k osQ oSKkfud i{k dh ckr gS vkSj tyok;q osQ lacaèk osQ :i esa mldk

142
fofHkUu fo"k;ksa ij tks izHkko gS] eSa ckn esa vius lkFkh ts-vkj- HkV~V lkgc ls
vuqjksèk d:axk fd os blosQ ckjs easa lfefr dks voxr djk;saA ;g ekuk tkrk
gS fd tyok;q ifjorZu osQ Ok`Qf"k ij ewy :i ls nks&rhu rjg ls vlj iM+rs
gSaA igyk rks ;g gS fd ty lzksr ij mldk izHkko gksrk gSA tks MªkmV visQfDVM
,fj;kt gSa] vxj DykbesV psat dh bUVsfUlVh c<+rh gS rks MªkmV visQfDVM ,fj;kt
esa o`Qf"k dh mRikndrk ?kVrh gSA vxj oaQMh'kal ukWeZy jgsa] ikuh dh O;oLFkk
lgh gks] fdlku osQ ikl lkjs lalkèku miyCèk gksa] oSlh vOkLFkk esa vxj DykbesV
pasat gksrk gS] DykbesV psat D;ksafd xzhu gkml xSlksa osQ dkUlUVªs'ku ls c<+rk gS
rks ml gkyr esa mlosQ vlj esa cnyko vk ldrk gSA dksbZ t:jh ugha gS fd
;g cnyko udkjkRed gh gks] ;g cnyko ldkjkRed Hkh gks ldrk gSA gekjs
ns'k esa pwafd rkiØe T;knk gksrk gS vkSj ns'k osQ T;knk fgLls ty dh deh
ls izHkkfor gSa] tSls djhc 450 ftyksa esa ns'k osQ djhc 60 ijlsaV ftysa ,sls
gSa tgka ij ty dh ftruh vko';drk gS] mlls de ty ogka miyCèk gSA oSls
ftyksa eaasa ;g fuf'pr gS fd tyok;q ifjorZu ls mudh mRikndrk ?kVsxhA mRikndrk
?kVus osQ ckjs esa dbZ izdkj dh o`Qf"k dh tks ikSèk gS ;k o`Qf"k osQ tks :i gSa]
vyx&vyx ozQkWIl ij mldk vyx&vyx vlj gSA xsgwa gS] pkoy gS] lsc dh
iQly gS] iQyksa] lfCt;ksa dh iQly gS] rkieku c<+us ls mudh mRikndrk ?kVrh
rks vo'; gS] ysfdu mldk jsat ?kVrk c<+rk jgrk gS] tks ogka dh yksdy oaQMh'kal
gSa] muosQ vkèkkj ij vHkh rd dk vuqeku ;g gS fd gekjh o`Qf"k dh Tkks
mRikndrk gS] ml ij vHkh vksojvkWy dksbZ vlj udkjkRed :i ls ugha iM+k
gSA fpUrk dk fo"k; ;g gS fd tgka&tgka ty lzksr de gSa] ogka ij vxj ge
ldkjkRed dne ugha mBk;asaxs rks bl mRikndrk esa fuf'pr :i ls ckèkk iM+sxh
vkSj vkxs ladV iSnk gksus dh laHkkouk gSA
tc ge o`Qf"k vkSj tyok;q osQ lacaèk osQ ckjs esa ckr djrs gSa rks larqyu dk
eqík gekjs fy, lcls cM+k gksrk gS] D;kasafd ge oqQN Hkh ugha djuk pkgrs gSaA
'kksèk osQ tks ifj.kke gekjs lkeus vk jgs gSa] mlosQ vkyksd esa ge tks Hkh uhfr;ka
cuk,a og ,slh cusa fd u mlls gekjs fdlku ij dksbZ pksV iM+s vkSj u gh
gekjs lekt dh mRikndrk vkSj iwQM flD;ksfjVh ij dksbZ izfrowQy vlj iM+sA geus
bl ckr dks è;ku esa j[krs gq, viuh tks tyok;q ifjorZu osQ lacaèk esa uhfr;ka
cukbZ gSa] mlesa bl ckr dk è;ku j[kk gS fd o`Qf"k osQ ckjs esa ge dksbZ ,slk
LisflfiQd dfeVesaV baVjus'kuy dE;qfuVh osQ lkFk u dj nsa fd gesa vius xzhu
gkml xSl mRltZu dks ?kVkuk iM+ tk,A¸
ii. India’s Commitment for Green House Gases (GHGs) Emission
Reduction
7.4 When asked to submit details of India’s commitment for GHGs
emission under Paris accord, the Ministry of Environment, Forest and

143
Climate Change has stated that India has submitted its Intended
Nationally Determined Contribution (INDC) on the day of Gandhi
Jayanti, i.e. 2nd October, in the year 2015. Its approach has been
anchored in the vision of equity inspired by Mahatma Gandhi’s famous
exhortation; “Earth has enough resources to meet people’s needs, but
will never have enough to satisfy people’s greed” and formulated
under the leadership and guidance of our Hon’ble Prime Minister Shri
Narendra Modi. The INDC is fair and ambitious, considering the fact
that it will make efforts to work towards a low carbon emission
pathway, while simultaneously endeavoring to meet all the
developmental challenges that the country faces today. Government
of India is implementing the National Action Plan on Climate Change
(NAPCC) which enshrines eight national missions representing
multipronged, long term and integrated strategies for achieving key
goals in the context of climate change. It includes specific areas of
Solar Energy, Enhanced Energy Efficiency, and Sustainable Habitat,
Water Sustaining the Himalayan Ecosystem, Green India, Sustainable
Agriculture and Strategic knowledge for Climate Change anchored by
various Ministries. India has adopted several ambitious measures like
thrust on renewable energy, promotion of clean energy, enhancing
energy efficiency, developing climate resilient urban centres and
sustainable green transportation network are some of the measures
for achieving this goal. In order to address the growing problem of
Climate Change, India declared a voluntary goal of reducing its
emissions intensity of its GDP by 20-25%, over 2005 levels, by 2020,
despite having no binding mitigation obligations as per the Convention.
A slew of policy measures to promote low carbon strategies and
Renewable Energy has resulted in the decline of emission intensity of
our GDP by 12% between 2005 and 2010. The United Nations
Environment Programme (UNEP) in its Emission Gap Report 2014 has
recognized India as one of the Countries on course to achieving its
voluntary goal.
7.5 The Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate Change has
also staed that besides targeted plans under NAPCC, a range of actions
has also been introduced to address adaptation, including plans at the
sub national level, India has also implemented a series of schemes
which strengthen adaptive capacities of the vulnerable communities
Expenditure on human capabilities and livelihoods viz. poverty
alleviation, health improvement and disease control and risk
management, constitutes more that 80% of the total expenditure on
adaptation in India. On the Side-lines of COP-21, India launched the
International Solar Alliance jointly with Government of France. This is
an alliance of 121 solar resource rich countries lying fully or partially

144
between the tropic of Cancer and tropic of Capricorn. It provides a
common platform where global community including bilateral and
multilateral organizations, corporates industry, and stakeholders can
make a positive contribution to the common goals of increasing utilizing
of solar energy in meeting energy needs of ISA member countries in
a safe, convenient, affordable, equitable and sustainable manner.
7.6 The 8 goals put forth by India in its INDC are as under:—
(1) To put forward and further propagate a healthy and
sustainable way of living based on traditions and values of
conservation and moderation.
(2) To adopt a climate friendly and cleaner path that the one
followed hitherto by others at corresponding level of
economic development.
(3) To reduce the emissions intensity of its GDP by 33 to 35
percent by 2030 from 2005 level.
(4) To achieve about 40 percent cumulative electric power
installed capacity from non-fossil fuel based energy resources
by 2030 with the help of transfer of technology and low
cost international finance including from Green Climate Fund
(GCF).
(5) To create an additional carbon sink of 2.5 to 3 billion tonnes
of CO2 equivalent through additional forest and tree cover
by 2030.
(6) To better adapt to climate change by enhancing investments
in development programmes in sectors vulnerable to climate
change, particularly agriculture, water resources, Himalayan
region, coastal regions, health and disaster management.
(7) To mobilize domestic and new & additional funds from
developed countries to implement the above mitigation and
adaptation actions in view of the resource required and the
resources gap.
(8) To build capacities create domestic framework and
international architecture for quick diffusion of cutting edge
climate technology in India and for joint collaborative R&D
for such future technologies.
7.7 When asked about efforts being made by the Government to
address the challenges associated with climate change, the Ministry
of Environment, Forest and Climate Change has stated that India has

145
taken a number of initiatives as a step to address the climate change
issue, which includes:—
(i) Increase in Coal Cess: The National Clean Energy Fund (NCEF)
was created in 2010 for the purpose of financing and
promoting clean energy initiatives and funding research in
the area of clean energy in the country. The corpus of the
fund is built by levying a cess of INR 50 (Subsequently
increased to INR 400 in 2016) per tonne of coal produced
domestically or imported. NCEF is financing innovative
schemes like Jawaharlal Nehru National Solar Mission
(JNNSM)’s installation of solar photovoltaic (SPV) Lights and
small capacity lights, installation of SPV water pumping as
well as other mission projects under the National Action
Plan on Climate Change (NAPCC) and projects relating to
R&D to replace existing technologies with more environment
friendly ones under National Mission on Strategic Knowledge
for Climate Change (NMSKCC). The scope of NCEF has also
been enlarged to cover other eligible projects of the Ministry
of New and Renewable Energy (MNRE), which are being
implemented under the flagship programmes of “Grid
Interactive and Distributive renewable power” and “ Research
Design, Development in Renewable Energy”.
(ii) Launch of National Adaptation Fund for Climate Change
(NAFCC): The NAFCC was created in 2015 with the objective
to provide financial and technical support for concrete
adaptation activities to be implemented under State Action
Plan on Climate Change (SAPCC), funds for adaptation
activities in agriculture, water , health, infrastructure, forests,
bio-diversity and coastal systems etc, to reduce the
vulnerability and associated risks.
(iii) National Adaptation Fund on Climate Change (NAFCC) has
been established with a budget provision of Rs. 350 crores
for the year 2015-16 and 2016-17, with an estimated
requirement of Rs. 181.5 crores for financial year 2017-18.
The objective of the fund is to assist States and Union
Territories to undertake projects and actions for adaptation
to climate change.
(iv) Up scaling of our ambitions for installation of Solar power
capacity from 20,000 megawatt to 1,00,000 mega watt by
2022.
(v) Allocation of Rs. 100 crore to set up a National Mission on
Himalayan Studies with the objective of enhancing natural
and human capital in the Himalayan region The Scheme will

146
also serve to complement and supplement the National
Mission on Sustaining Himalayan Ecosystem (NMSHE) anchored
by the Department of Science & Technology under National
Action Plan on Climate change (NAPCC).
(vi) Development of “one hundred Smart Cities” with integrated
appropriate and mitigation measures to reduce basic service
deficits and significantly reduce vulnerability and exposure
to the impacts of climate change in urban areas.
(vii) Launch of National Air quality Index on 17th October 2014.
7.8 While explaining about fund allocation for addressing issues
related with climate change, the representative of Ministry of
Environment, Forest and Climate Change has stated as under:—
¶fiNys nks lkyksa ls geus jk"Vªh; Lrj ij ,d iaQM fozQ,V fd;k gS] ftldk
uke us'kuy ,MkWIVs'ku iaQM gSA bl iaQM osQ ekè;e ls ge jkT; ljdkjksa dks
enn iznku djrs gSa] rkfd fofHkUu {ks=kksa esa tyok;q ifjorZu ls gksus okys tks
izfrowQy vlj gSa] muls fuiVus osQ fy, jkT; ljdkjsa vyx&vyx {ks=kksa esa dk;Z
dj losaQA djhc vHkh rd blesa 230 djksM+ dk izkoèkku gekjs ctV esa gks pqdk
gS vkSj bl ij djhc 180 djksM+ [kpZ dj pqosQ gSaA jkT; ljdkjksa us bl us'kuy
,MkWIVs'ku dk iQk;nk mBk;k gS vkSj o`Qf"k osQ lkFk&lkFk vU; {ks=kksa esa Hkh bl
iaQM dk mi;ksx djosQ vPNk dke dj jgs gSaA vkxs Hkh ge bl iaQM dks c<+kus
dh iwjh ps"Vk djsaxsA gesa foÙk ea=kky; us vk'oklu fn;k gS fd vxj vko';drk
gks rks bl foÙkh; vkcaVu esa vkSj Hkh c<+ksÙkjh dh tk ldrh gSA ljdkj osQ ikl
,d us'kuy Dyhu ,uthZ iaQM gS] tks dksy lsl ls cuk gqvk gS dksy ij tks
lsl yxk;k tkrk gS] mlls djhc rhu&pkj gtkj djksM+ #i;s dh vkenuh ljdkj
dks gksrh gS vkSj mlesa tks iaQM tek gS] og oqQN rks Dyhu ,uthZ lsDVj esa
bLrseky gksrk gS vkSj gesa ;g Hkh vk'oklu gS fd mlosQ oqQN iaQM dk bLrseky
ge ,MkWIVs'ku ;kuh] o`Qf"k lacafèkr dk;ZØeksa osQ fy, Hkh bLrseky dj ldrs gSaA¸
7.9 When asked about use of funds available under National
Adaptation Fund for R & D of agriculture sector , the representative
of Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate Change has stated as
under:—
¶egksn;] o`Qf"k ij ftruk [kpZ gS] pkgs og tyok;q ls lacafèkr gks ;k vU; fdlh
dkj.k osQ fy, gks] mls o`Qf"k ea=kky; vius ctV ls djrh gSA mudh tks dbZ
LdhEl ,oa izksxzkEl py jgs gSa tks fdlkuksa dh enn djrs gSaA gekjs ea=kky;
esa tks izksxzke gS] og ,MkIVs'ku iQ.M osQ :i esa gSA bl iQ.M dks ge jkT;

147
ljdkjksa dks eqgS;k djkrs gSa rkfd os vius jkT; esa ,sls {ks=kksa dk p;u djsa ;k
,sls izksxzkEl dk p;u djsa ftuosQ ekè;e ls fdlkuksa ;k vU; fdlh oxZ dks
ykHk igqapk losQ vkSj tyok;q ifjorZu ls cpko gks losQA blesa fliZQ fdlku
gh ugha gSa] vU; oxZ Hkh vk ldrs gSa] dksbZ 'kgjh fodkl dh leL;k Hkh blesa
gks ldrh gS] osV yS.M~l osQ fiztosZ'ku dk eqík gks ldrk gS] dksbZ fjlpZ izkstsDV
Hkh gks ldrk gSA bl rjg osQ dbZ fjlpZ izkstsDV~l gesa ,MkIVs'ku iQ.M esa ge
yksxksa us liksVZ fd, gSaA¸
7.10 While explaning benefits of India’s emission reduction
commitment on economy and agriculture sector , the Ministry of
Environment, Forest and Climate Change has stated that:—
“...Over the year , the carbon intensity of the Indian economy has
decreased, in large part, due to the adoption of new and innovative
technologies which address climate mitigation and climate
adaptation. The development, adoption and dissemination of these
technologies have been an ongoing process which has led to,
inter-alia, increased energy efficiency and an increasing share of
renewable in the electricity grid. This has been facilitated by
several bilateral and multilateral collaborative efforts both in the
public and private sector.
At the same time, climate friendly technologies, adapted and
deployed in India are also being utilized in other countries,
particularly in developing countries, through bilateral cooperation.
This development and transfer of technologies, both into the Indian
market and from India into other markets, will continue to sustain
future decreases in the carbon intercity of the Indian economy and
increases in the share of renewable in the electricity-mix.
India declared its INDC keeping in view its development agenda,
particularly the eradication of poverty coupled with its commitment
to following the low carbon path to progress and being sanguine
about the unencumbered availability of clean technologies and
financial resource from around the world. India’s goal is to reduce
overall emission intensity and improve energy efficiency of its
economy over time and at the same time protecting the vulnerable
sectors of economy and segments of our society. India’s INDC takes
into account its commitment to conservation of nature as well as
the imperatives of meeting the competing demand of resources
for addressing the challenges of poverty eradication, food security
and nutrition, universal access to education and health, gender

148
equality and women empowerment, water and sanitation, energy,
employment sustainable urbanization and new human settlements
and the means of implementation for enhanced action for achieving
among others, the sustainable development goals for its 1.2 billion
people. India has clarified that its INDCs do not bind it to any
sector specific mitigation obligation or action, including in
agriculture sector...”
7.11 On the above issue, the representative of the Ministry of
Environment, Forest and climate change has submitted as under:—
¶ekuuh; ps;jeSu egksn; vkSj desVh osQ ekuuh; lnL;x.k] vHkh tks gekjk isfjl
le>kSrk gqvk gS] mlesa fodkl'khy ns'kksa osQ fgrksa dh iwjh j{kk dh xbZ gS vkSj
;g le>kSrk gesa o"kZ 2020 osQ ckn dk;kZfUor djuk gSA bldk bEIyhesaVs'ku o"kZ
2020 osQ ckn gksuk gSA o"kZ 2020 rd gekjh ,d baVjus'kuy okWysaVªh dfeVesaV
gS] og ,eh'ku baVsaflVh dks 20 ls 25 izfr'kr rd] o"kZ 2005 osQ ySoy osQ
oaQisjhtu esa fjM;wl djus dh gSA o"kZ 2005 esa tks gekjh ,eh'ku baVsaflVh vkWiQ
Mhthih Fkh] mlesa gesa 20 ls 25 izfr'kr deh o"kZ 2020 rd ykuh gSA geus
tks fiNys lky viuk ewY;kadu ;w,u,iQ fVªiy lh dks lfCeV fd;k gS] tks gekjh
baVjus'kuy ckWMh gS vkSj ogka ij ge yksxksa us ;g ik;k fd o"kZ 2005 ls o"kZ
2010 rd geus 12 izfr'kr dh fjMD'ku ,pho dj yh gSA bl izdkj tks gekjk
20 ls 25 izfr'kr rd dk VkjxsV gS] mls ge yksx ,pho djsaxs vkSj blesa tks
izeq[k Hkwfedk gS] og ikWoj lsDVj dh gS] buthZ ,iQhf'k,alh fjMD'ku dh gS]
tks C;wjks vkWiQ buthZ ,iQhf'k,alh buhf'kfVOl ys jgh gS mldh gS] oqQN VªkaliksVZ
lsDVj dh gS vkSj vcZu MSoyiesaV esa tks ikWfylht gSa] mudh oaQVªhC;w'ku blesa
gSA lj] isfjl le>kSrs esa] ge yksxksa us tks VkjxsV fy, gSa] muosQ ckjs esaa gekjs
Lis'ky lsozsQVªh egksn; us crk;k fd gekjs oqQN VkjxsV~l gSa] ysfdu ;s lkjs VkjxsV~l
,sls gSa] tks gekjh ,fXatfLVx ikWfylht] ,fDt¯LVx izksxzkEl osQ Fkzw ge o"kZ 2020
osQ ckn dk;kZfUor djus okys gSaA blesa geus fdlh ,d iVhZoqQyj lsDVj esa ,slh
dksbZ ckè;rk ugha j[kh gSA bl izdkj o`Qf"k {ks=k esa Hkh gekjh dksbZ ckè;rk ugha
gS] ysfdu vxj oqQN ubZ rduhd] oqQN u,] bEiwzoesaV~l tSls fd lksyj iEIl]
tSls DykbesV fjftYksaV VsDukWyksth] ;s lc] tks gekjs lkbafVLV~l yk jgs gSa] mudk
iz;ksx ge dj jgs gSa vkSj muls ;fn oqQN iQk;nk tyok;q ifjorZu osQ {ks=k esa
gksrk gS] rks mldh oSQyoqQys'ku ge djrs gSaA vr% vksojvkWy o`Qf"k {ks=k esa gekjk
baVjus'kuy dfeVesaV oqQN ugha gSA ge yksx vius ns'k dh uhfr;ksa osQ vuqlkj
tks djuk pkgrs gSa] dj ldrs gS vkSj tks&tks dkaaVªhC;w'ku] tks us'kuyh fMVfeZUM
dkaVªhC;w'ku] tks isfjl le>kSrs osQ varxZr] vUrjkZ"Vªh; iVy ij j[kk gS] mls ,pho
djus osQ fy, tks ,D'ku&Iyku gksuk gS] og ge cuk jgs gSa vkSj ,d o"kZ osQ
Hkhrj ge bls izLrqr djsaxsA¸

149
7.12 Further elaborating on the above issue, the representative of
the Ministry of Environment, Forest and climate change has submitted
as under:—
¶vkidks Kkr gksxk fd o"kZ 2015 esa] fiNys lky isfjl lafèk gqbZA mlesa geus
Hkkjro"kZ dh rjiQ ls viuk ,d dfeVesaV fd;k gS fd ge viuh vFkZO;oLFkk
esa] vius lekt osQ fodkl esa] xzhu gkml xSl ,eh'kal dks bl rjg ls eSust
djsaxs fd gekjh vFkZO;oLFkk dh thMhih rks c<+s vk; rks c<+s] ysfdu lkFk&lkFk
,eh'ku ?kVsA bldks ge ,eh'kal baVsflVh osQ uke ls crkrs gSaA gekjh ,eh'kal
baVsflVh rks ?kVs ysfdu mldk vFkZ ;g gS fd ,eh'ku rks ?kVsxk] ysfdu thMhih
c<+sxhA ;g thMhih vkSj ,eh'ku osQ chp rknkRE; LFkkfir djus dk gekjk iz;kl
gSA blfy, geus fdlh Hkh [kkl lsDVj osQ ckjs esa dksbZ dfeVesaV ugha fy;k
gSA blesa o`Qf"k Hkh 'kkfey gSA o`Qf"k vkSj blls lacafèkr ftrus Hkh {ks=k gSa] mlosQ
ckjs esa xzhu gkml xSlst dks fyfeV djus dk dksbZ dfeVesaaV geus ugha fy;k
gSA bldk edln ;g gS fd ge tks Hkh djsa vius ns'k osQ vanj] fofHkUu lsDVlZ
esa tks ,eh'kal gks jgs gSa] mlesa ?kVko&c<+ko tks Hkh djuk gS] og ge jk"Vªh;
Lrj ij djsaxs] jk"Vªh; uhfr;ksa osQ varxZr djsasxsA vxj dgha leL;k vk jgh gS
rks ml leL;k dk funku ge nwljs lsDVj esa mRltZu ?kVkdj dj ldrs gSaA bl
rjg ls larqyu LFkkfir djsaxs] rkfd ,eh'ku baVsflVh ?kVs] ge viuh baVjus'kuy
dfeVesaV dks iwjh djsa] ysfdu fdlh Hkh lsDVj osQ tks LVsd gksYMlZ gSa] mu ij
dksbZ izfrowQy vlj u iM+s] ,slk gekjk iz;kl jgk gSA¸
7.13 On being asked about preparedness of the country to meet
the obligations of climate accord, the Ministry of Environment, Forest
and Climate Change has stated as under:—
“...For the implementation of India’s INDC and achieve its goals,
an Implementation committee and six Sub-committees, dealing
with specific issues, have been constituted involving key Ministries
and Departments. The first consultation meeting of the INDC
Implementation committee has already been held and those of the
sub-committees are being held. The sub-committees are working
on the elaborate their respective INDC goals and identify specific
policies and actions aimed at achieving them they are also working
on the indicate the outlays and technology needed from domestic
or international sources at various stages to achieve the goals... ”

150
PART II
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
1. Climate plays a limiting role on development of bio-
geographical variability of flora and fauna including human culture
and civilization. Each society has structured its culture around
historical and current climatic conditions. Human culture is basically
a by-product of locally available resources and local climatic
conditions. Human societies are accustomed to a normal range of
conditions and may be sensitive to extremes that fall out of this
range. The Committee note that various studies across the world
have provided ample evidence about climate changes due to
enhanced emission of Green House Gases such as Carbon Dioxide,
Nitrous Oxide, Methane, Hydro-Fluoro-Carbons, etc. in the
atmosphere. Anthropogenic sources  such as increased fossil fuels
consumption, Industrialization, increasing Pace of Urbanization,
excessive use of Nitrogenous Fertilize rs in agriculture sector, etc.
has led to a situation which is destabilizing critical environmental
balance of Earth atmospheric system and causing changes in climate/
weather patterns, such as increase in intensity of heat waves,
rainfall periodicity, floods, cyclones, melting of ice at Arctic and
Antarctic regions, rise in sea levels etc. The Committee also observe
that these climatic changes have potential to harm agriculture and
allied sectors which critically  depend upon climatic conditions and
thereby, posing a danger to food security. The Committee in
succeeding paragraphs have discussed the impact of climate-changes
on agriculture and allied sectors in the country, policy of the
Government towards climate change,  R&D in agriculture and allied
sectors for transforming Indian agriculture into climate smart
agriculture, preparation of the Government to provide support to
the farmers of the country in adapting them to climatic changes
and in accordance with th e Paris agreement on climate change.
2. The Committee note that Fifth Assessment Report (AR5) of
Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) has warned about
warming of the climate system across th e world. This Report clearly
brought out impact of global warming such as warming of atmosphere
and oceans, shrinking of glaciers, melting of Arctic and Antarctic
ice sheets, rise of sea level etc. The Committee have been informed
that as per AR5 report each of the last three decades has been

151
getting successively warmer at the Earth’s surface than any
preceding decade since 1850. The peri od from 1983 to 2012 was
very likely the warmest 30-year period during the last 800 years
in the Northern Hemisphere and likely the warmest 30-year period
of the last 1400 years. Over the last two decades, the Greenland
and Antarctic ice sheets have been losing mass. Glaciers have
continued to shrink almost worldwide. Northern Hemisphere spring
snow cover has continued to decrease in extent. Over the period
1901-2010, global mean sea level rose by 0.19 (0.17 to 0.21)m.
The rate of sea level rise since the mid-19th century has been
larger than the mean rate during the previous two millennia. The
Committee further note that Centre for Climate Change Research
(CCCR) under the Indian Institute of Tropical Meteorology (IITM),
Pune under Ministry of Earth Sciences carry out scientific studies
on climate change and variability under Global and Regional Climate
Change (GRCC) programme. The Committee have been informed by
the Ministry of Earth Sciences that past observations from
instruments and proxy data suggest  that there are changes in our
climate system on different time scales. There are some natural
variations and there are some long term trends which can be
attributed to human activities. The Committee note that Annual
mean, maximum and minimum temperatures averaged over the
country as a whole showed significant warming trend of 0.6
oC, 1oC
and 0.18 oC per hundred years, respectively. The rate of warming
trend in the annual mean temperatures since 1980s is much sharper,
0.2
oC per decade. The warming is mostly confined to the northern,
central and eastern/north-eas tern parts of the country. Peninsular
India experienced the least warming. The Committee have been
further informed that all-India southwest monsoon rainfall does not
show any long-term trend, but it  exhibits significant multi-decadal
variability. There are significant  regional trends in southwest
monsoon rainfall. Monsoon rainfall in the meteorological sub divisions
of Jharkhand, Chhattisgarh and Kerala has shown significant
decreasing trends. However, monsoon rainfall over Gangetic West
Bengal, West Uttar Pradesh, Jammu and Kashmir, Konkan and Goa,
Central Maharashtra, Rayalaseema, Coastal Andhra Pradesh and North
Interior Karnataka showed increasing trends. Further, Monsoon
rainfall in the month of July has shown decreasing trends over
most parts of central India. However, June and August rainfall has
shown increasing trend over the central and southwestern parts of
the country. There is a clear pa ttern of decreasing frequency of
very light rain and light to moder ate rain events over most of the
country and increasing frequency of very heavy and extreme rainfall
events over northern parts of the country during the monsoon

152
season. The Committee also note  above increasing trends in heat
waves during the hot weather season and decreasing trend in cold
waves during the cold weather season over most parts  of the
country. The Committee have also been informed that more intense
droughts are mainly observed over north and northwest India.
The Committee are of view that there is a need of constantly
observing changing weather conditions associated with climate
change in order to take corrective steps to offset its negative
effect on agriculture and allied sector in the country. The Committee
also feel that there should be enhanced level of co-ordination
between Ministry of Earth Sciences and Department of Agricultural
Research and Education. The Committee, therefore recommend
the Government to devise a mechanism to increase the quantum
of collaborative research and coordination between these two
important Scientific Departments associated with study of climate
change. The Committee also desire the Government to provide for
adequate funding and manpower for encouraging cutting edge
research in this important sector  so that the agriculture and allied
sector in the Country may be salvaged from negative changes
associated with climate change.
Greenhouse Gas emmission from Agriculture and allied Sector
3. The Committee note that Paddy fields are major sources of
Green House Gases (GHGs) in the farm sector. The Committee have
been informed that ICAR-IARI, New Delhi and ICAR-NRRI under
National Innovations in Climate Resilient Agriculture (NICRA) projects
have quantified the GHGs emissions from paddy fields and they
have analyzed that overall methane emission from rice fields in
India is about 3.5-4.7 Tegagram (Tg) per year and N
2O emission is
about 0.05 Tg per year. The Committee note that findings of
research being done at these Institutes has shown that methane
emission from rice field is negligible compared to other rice growing
countries like America, China, eastern and far-eastern Asian
countries where it ranged from 20-100 Tg per year. The Committee
also note that ICAR Institutes are engaged in R&D for regulating the
release of these gases from agro-ecosystems through judicious land-
use and appropriate management practice s that could mitigate the
process of climate change. The Co mmittee have been informed
that based on study conducted at IIFSR, Modipuram for measuring
methane and nitrous oxide flux from the rice field, it was found
that Methane emission reduced by 19.2% and 9.9%, respectively
with the application of neem-coated urea and sulphur-treated urea

153
compared to prilled urea under conventional method of
transplanting. N 2O emission reduced by  23.7% and 11.8%,
respectively in the application of neem coated urea and  sulphur-
treated urea compared to prilled urea under the conventional
method of transplanting. Among the establishment methods, direct
seeded rice (dry) and direct seeded  rice (wet) methods resulted in
less emission of CH
4 by the order of  27.9% and 26.6%, respectively
compared to conventional puddled transplanting.  However, the N2O
emission reduced by 1.3% and 4.6%, respectively in direct seeded
rice (dry) and direct seeded rice (wet) method of establishments
compared to conventional puddled transplanting. The Committee
have also been informed that emissions of GHGs from paddy fields
can be reduced by modifying water, nutrient and tillage
management. Conversion of rice straw into biochar and its
application in rice fields greatly decreased the GHG emission.
The Committee are of the view that reduction in emission of
GHGs from paddy field will help the country to meet its obligation
under International Accord on Climate Change. The Committee,
therefore, desire the ICAR to give adequate support to the ICAR
institutes engaged in development of ap propriate methods, variety,
technology and paddy varieties which can help to reduce GHGs
emission from paddy fields. The Committee also desire the
Government to make an inventory of the outcome of all these
research studies and transfer th em to the farmers in entire country
through the network of KVKs and extension network of respective
State Governments so that they can also become a partner in the
voluntary commitment of the country to reduce share of GHGs
emission from India.
Burning of Crop Residue
4. The Committee note that despite being banned, burning of
crop residue in agricultural fields has emerged as one of the
important challenges in recent times which is adding to already
high level of pollutants in the environment. The Committee further
note that as per asses sment made by the ICAR approximately
130-140 Mt Crop residues is being burnt annually in agriculture
fields out of 679 million tonne (Mt) crop residue generated in the
country which is causing emission of 8.57 Mt of CO, 141.15 Mt of
CO
2, 0.037 Mt of SOx, 0.23 Mt of NOx, 0.12  Mt of NH 3 in the
atmosphere. The Committee have been informed that ICAR—Indian
Institute of Soil Science has developed a technique called “Rapo-
compost Technology ” for faster decomposition of biodegradable

154
waste that is able to convert biodegradable waste to quality compost
in 30-45 days with the help of bio-inoculum consortia (bacteria,
fungi and actinomycetes) having ligno-cellulolytic potential. The
Committee observe that shortage of agricultural labour, short
interval due to intensive agriculture being practised in some parts
of the country and mechanized farming are forcing the farmers to
take extreme step of burning the crop residue in farm field. The
Committee are of considered view that  there is a need to provide
adequate extension and financial support to help them in adopting
technology for decomposition of crop residue, conservation
agriculture or utilize for making cupboard in small scale industries.
The Committee, therefore, desire the Government to take this
issue on priority basis and make policy/plan/programmes for eco-
friendly utilization of crop residue. The Committee also desire the
ICAR for development of new te chnology/bio-logical methods which
can reduce the period of in-situ decomposition of plant residue.
Influence on Agriculture due to ingress of sea water
5. The Committee note that global mean sea level rose by 0.19
(0.17 to 0.21)m over the period 1901-2010 due to warming effect
of rising GHGs in the atmosphere. Rise in sea surface due to effect
of global warming is ex pected to cause submergence of significant
portion of land in areas near sea in many parts of the country. The
Committee further note th at comprehensive study on assessment
of submergence of agricultural land due to sea level rise in the
Coastal region has not been carried out. However, ICAR funded
NICRA project indicated that the sea levels at three stations Diamond
Harbour, Garden Reach and Haldia in Sundarbans are increasing at
the rate of 4.85, 8.22 and 3.0 mm/yr. A  2007 report by UNESCO
“Case Studies on Climate Change and World Heritage ” has predicted
45 cm rise in sea level likely by the end of the 21st century due
to anthropogenic activities in the Sundarbans. A study carried out by
IIT, Kharagpur revealed that during the 20th century, 34.906 sq. km
of area along the Indian coast went under the sea due to the rise
in sea level. The Committee al so note that a significant fertile
agricultural land and adjoining mangrove forests were turned into
a vast waste land due to ingress  of saline sea water due to cyclone
Aila in West Bengal during 2009, super cyclone in Orissa during
1999 as well as Tsunami in eastern coast in 2014 leading to reduction
in agriculture productivity. The Committee have been informed
that ICAR—Central Soil Salinity Research Institute, Regional Research
Station, Canning Town, West Bengal engaged in the research and
management needs of coastal salt affected soils has developed

155
several technologies for enhancement of agricultural productivity
under degraded saline coastal soils and poor water qualities . The
Committee are of view that ingre ss of sea water into agricultural
fields would lead to devastating consequences for farmers near
coastal regions as high salinity in the soil as well as acute shortage
of fresh water for agricultural uses pose a serious problem leading
to low productivity. The Committee, therefore, recommend the
ICAR to actively engage in Research on identification of soil tolerant
varieties of crops and incorporation of these genes in higher yielding
crop varieties so that agriculture prod uctivity in coastal areas may
maintained in coming years. The Committee desire the Government
to formulate an action plan fo r enhancing locally suitable mangrove
plantation near coastal areas so that these can act as natural barriers
in case of rising sea level. The Committee also desire the
Government to provide adequate agricultural extension support to
the farmers in coastal regions so that they are provided suitable
technologies, seeds and training for shift  to paddy- fishery farming.
Pest Severity and Disease Proliferation
6. The Committee note that incidence of insect pests and
proliferation of diseases on field crops may likely to increase during
future climate change periods due to elevated CO
2 and temperature.
The Committee have been informed that insect pests will go for
more amount of consumption (compensatory feeding) due to the
dilution/decline of nutritional quality of the crop plants to meet
the nutritional requirement of the insect pests under elevated CO 2
and temperature conditions. This may lead to higher yield losses in
different crops which in turn may affect the food security. More
number of generations of insect  pests are expected to occur during
future climate change periods be cause of increased temperatures.
The Committee observe that studies have been initiated to document
Real Time Pest Dynamics (RTPD) in 5 crops (Rice, Pigeonpea,
Groundnut, Tomato and Mango) under Strategic Research component
of NICRA programme. The Committee also note that Department of
Agriculture, Cooperation and Farmers Welfare and State
Governments is implementing various schemes under plant
protection under “Strengthening and Modernization of Pest
Management Approach in India ” (SMPMA). Indian Council of
Agricultural Research is also evol ving and implementing climate
resilient plant protection technologies through its National Crop
institutes. The Committee are of opinion that there is a need to
give boost to deployment of cutting edge research methodologies
to analyze and predict future  scenario of pest development and

156
proliferation as well as development of plant protection technologies
and practices so that farmers in the country could be trained in
these methods to offset decline in agricultural productivity due to
change in severity of pest attack associated with climate change.
The Committee, therefore, recommend the Government to provide
adequate financial support to the Institutes engaged in development
of pest protection technologies. The Committee also desire the
Government to enhance allocations for implementation of
programmes for Pest management.
Agro-climatic Classification
7. The Committee note that the concept of Agro-Climatic Regions
(ACR) and Agro-Climatic Sub-Regions (ACSR) categorised on the basis
of climatic conditions, local geographic parameters, landform, soils
type, soil texture, depth and mineralogy help to maximise
agricultural productivity if crop  suitable to local conditions are
sown by the farmers. The Committee note that 20 ACRs and 60
ACSRs were identified in the Country. However, the Committee are
distressed to note that Agro-climatic classifications are not being
strictly followed by the farmers in cultivation of crops. Factors
such as socio economic conditions, market prices, Government
supports in the form of Minimum support Price (MSP) and subsidies
apart from factors such as favourable climate and soil factors,
farmers’ preferences, consumption patterns and resources available
with the farmers decide the kind of crop grown in different
locations, thereby, reducing possibility of achievements of optimal
production with minimum investment. The Committee have been
informed that the Government is giving advisory to States to educate
farmers for growing crops that are suitable to a given agro-climatic
situation so that risk is minimized and incomes are maximized. The
Committee further observe that  climatic changes associated with
Global warming may necessitate refine ment in concept of agro-
climatic regions. The Committee therefore, recommend the
Government to start a study on impact of climatic changes on
different agro-climatic regions so that new strategy may be worked
out to offset negative effect associa ted with climatic changes. The
Committee are also of considered view that policy of Minimum
Support Price is promoting farming practices which are not suitable
to local bio-graphical  and climatic conditions, thereby, causing
problems such as depletion of ground water resources, degradation
of soil, loss of local bio-divers ity, etc. Further, absence of an
alternative and economically remunerati ve cropping strategy is
forcing farmers to opt for prevailing water intensive cropping

157
pattern. The Committee, therefore, desire the Government
(Department of Agriculture, Cooperation and Farmers welfare) to
initiate a study to analyze the effect of policy of MSP on farming
practices in the country and bring suitable changes in MSP policy
so that environment friendly farming practices based on the concept
of agro-ecological regions may be promoted in the country. The
Committee also desire the ICAR to work out an alternative cropping
strategy for these regions which is economically remunerative for
farmers in these regions. The Committee would like the Department
to prepare such cropping strategy within three months of
presentation of Report.
Impact of Climate Change on Agriculture
8. The Committee note that fifth IPCC report clearly brought
out the global and regional impacts of climate change on agriculture,
water resources, natural eco-systems and food security. The
Committee have been informed that climate change and its
variability are emerging as major challenges facing Indian agriculture.
The high inter and intra-seasonal variability in rainfall distribution,
extreme temperature and rainfall events are causing crop damages
and huge losses to farmers. The Committee note that modeling
studies indicate that changing climate will decrease yields in major
crops like wheat, rice and maize. On the other hand the impact
could be neutral to positive in others like groundnut, soyabean and
chickpea. The Committee also note that although there will be
increased yields of rice, wheat, legumes and oilseeds by 10-20%
with increase in CO
2 level to 550 ppm, however, productivity of
most crops is likely to decrease marginally by 2020 but by 10-40%
by 2100. The Committee note with satisfaction that the Government
of India has initiated and supported research in agriculture sector
under National Innovations in Climate Resilient Agriculture (NICRA).
However, the Committee are of considered view that since huge
population of our country is dependent on agriculture, there is
need to enhance allocations for the R&D under NICRA so that
scientist of the country can be successful in arriving solutions to
challenges posed to the agriculture and allied sectors due to climate
changes associated with global warming. The Committee, therefore,
recommend the Government to enhance allocations to the NICRA
projects.
Development of Varieties of Crops with Enhanced Abiotic Stress
Tolerance
9. Identification and development of crop varieties with
enhanced abiotic stress tolerance will be the key for making Indian
agriculture climate resilient. The Comm ittee note that the ICAR

158
through its network of institutes and State Agriculture Universities
is engaged in identification and de velopment of abiotic stress
tolerant crop varieties under NARS and NICRA projects. The
Committee have been informed about identification of heat tolerant
gene in a Nagina-22 variety of paddy which can be used for
development of advanced heat tolerant varieties through breeding
process avoiding the need of use of expensive Genetic Modified
technology. The Committee have also been informed about
identification and development of crop varieties with advance
abiotic stress tolerance by the IARI-Pusa.
The Committee have been informed that Government is
encouraging use of location specific c limate resilient crops varieties
including heat/water logging tolerating seed varieties among farmers
by ensuring availability of quality  seeds of desirable varieties;
developing, demonstrating and disseminating complete package of
practices to stakeholders; seed  subsidies, capacity building besides
bringing convergence among public and private agencies in seed
chain. The Committee are of vi ew that development of new crop
varieties with higher yield potential and resistance to multiple
stress (heat, drought, flood, salinity) will be the key to maintain
yield stability under the challenge s associated with climate changes
in coming decades. The Committee, therefore, desire the ICAR to
give further push to their effo rts for development of crop varieties
with enhanced abiotic stress tolerance.
Availability of Seed
10. The Committee note that Indian seed programme largely
adheres to the limited generations’ system for seed multiplication
in a phased manner. The system recognizes three generations namely
breeder, foundation and certified seeds and provides adequate
safeguards for quality assurance in the seed multiplication chain to
maintain the purity of the variety as it flows from the breeder to
the farmer. The Committee have been informed that ICAR apart
from research & development on de velopment of varieties/hybrids
for different abiotic stresses, have also been entrusted with
responsibility for production of Breeder seed which is being
undertaken with the help of ICAR Research Institutions, State
Agricultural Universities (SAUs), National Seeds Corporation (NSC)/
State Farms Corporation of India (SFCI), State Seeds Corporation
(SSCs), Krishi Vigyan Kendras (KVKs), Sponsored breeders recognized
by selected State Seed Corpor ations, and Non-Governmental
Organizations. The responsibility for production of foundation seed

159
has been entrusted to the NSC, SFCI, State Seeds Corporation,
State Departments of Agriculture and private seed producers, who
have the necessary infrastructure facilities, whereas the production
and distribution of quality/certified seeds are primarily the
responsibility of the State Governments. Certified seed production
is organized through State Seed Corporation, Departmental
Agricultural Farms, Cooperatives etc.
The Committee note that breeder seed production increase
from 3914 quintals during 1981 –82 to a level of 89266.23 quintals
during 2013-14 after Launch of  AICRP-NSP (Crops). During
2013-14, total production of quality seed including all classes was
6,48,325 quintals against the target of 4,75,179 quintals. Production
comprises 94,953 quintals of breeder seed, 1,44,369 quintals of
foundation seed, 1,63,465 quintals of certified seeds, 1,72,351
quintals of truthfully labelled seed and 73,185 quintals of planting
material of field crops. In addit ion, 155.59 lakhs planting material
and 5.60 lakh tissue culture plantlets of field crops were produced
against the targets of 94.80 and 2.07 lakhs.
The Committee note that country has skewed Seed Replacement
Ratio, i.e. the percentage of area sown out of total cropped area
by using certified/quality seeds other than farm saved seed, as
seed requirement of 65% of the farmers are met using their own
saved seed or seed distribu ted among themselves. Amelioration of
skewed SRR is a major challenge.
The Committee also note that Central Sector Scheme
‘Development and Strengthening of Infr astructure Facilities for
Production and Distribution of Quali ty Seeds’ is being implemented
by the Department of Agricultu re, Cooperation and Farmers Welfare
since 2005-06 to ensure production and multiplication of high
yielding certified/quality seeds of all crops in sufficient quantities
and make the seeds available to farmers at affordable price.
However, the Committee is distressed to note that despite efforts
being made by the Government, private sector dominates in seed
production contributing to 50- 57% of total seed production of the
country. The main focus of private seed companies has been on the
high-value and low-volume seeds.
The Committee are of considered vi ew that availability of good
quality seed at reasonable price is one of important factor for
ensuring high productivity in agriculture and to ensure remunerative
prices to the farmers. The need of timely availability of seed

160
varieties with enhanced abiotic stress tolerance will increase in
coming decades with more increasing uncertainty associated with
climate change. The Committee obser ve that Government have not
been able to fulfil its aim to ensure availability of high yielding
varieties of improved seeds to the farmers in the country which is
evident by low Seed Replacement  Ratio and large share of Private
companies in the market for high value and low volume seeds in
the country. The Committee desire the Government to decentralize
the process of production, procurement and distribution of improved
varieties of hybrid seeds as it wi ll help in lowering the prices and
ensure easy access of farmers to procure these seeds. The
Committee, therefore, recommend the Government to examine
present system of seed productio n, procurement and distribution
in the country to analyze its shortcomings and take steps for
decentralizing the system, in order to enhance Seed Replacement
Ratio and to achieve optimum agriculture productivity in the
country. The Committee also recommend the Government to involve
progressive farmers in the process of production of hybrid seeds.
The Committee also desire the ICAR to initiate a study to identify
high value and low volume seed varieties in whi ch private sectors
are excelling and to sponsor research and development of these
seed varieties so that these could be made available to the farmers
in the country at affordable price.
Conservation of indigenous varieties of seeds
11. The Committee note that National Bureau of Plant Genetic
Resources (NBPGR) is the national institute for conservation of
seeds, all germplasm collection, genetic stocks and varieties of
different crops in the country. Th e Committee have been informed
that 4.14 lakh accessions are presently conserved for long term in
the National Genebank. 2.62 lakh indigenous accessions have been
collected, more than 60 thousand accessions repatriated, 6.26 lakh
accessions imported and tested for quarantine clearance, and more
than four lakh accessions have been supplied to breeders and
researchers within the country. Nearly 1.9 lakh germplasm accessions
have been characterized and more than two thousand cultivars
have been DNA fingerprinted. The Committee have also been
informed that Intellectual Property Rights (IPRs) on genetic resources
were facilitated by registering about 1100 unique accessions and
by filing over a thousand applications with Protection of Plant
Varieties and Farmers’ Rights (PPV&FR) Authority for varietal
registration. The Committee also note that specific set germplasm,
breeding lines, varieties are being evaluated for tolerance to abiotic

161
stresses such as heat, drought, water logging etc., which is being
used in hybridization for developing new cultivars under NICRA
project.
The Committee are of the vi ew that endemic crop varieties
available in our country provide the scientist an excellent
opportunity to identify traits w hich can be used for development
of crop varieties with enhanced abiotic stress tolerance thereby
enabling farmers to adapt to the climate changes associated with
global warming. The Committee no te with satisfaction about work
of cataloguing of indigenous crop vari eties being done by the NBGPR
and other agricultural institution. Ho wever, the Committee desire
the ICAR to enhance awareness about genebanks so that this
knowledge can be utilized by  the agriculture scientist community
across the country in order to develop region specific crop varieties
which can withstand specific cl imatic fluctuation associated with
climate change. The Committee, therefore, desire the ICAR to make
efforts to enhance access to these depository of crop seed/
germplasm for wider scientific community along with innovative
farmers.
The Committee also observe that farmers use different
nomenclature for similar crops,  vegetables, fru its and medicinal
plants in regional languages and dialect in regions across the Country.
The Committee are of view that inventory of such nomenclature
will help in the efforts for conservation and exploitation of
bio-diversity. The Committee, therefore, recommend the ICAR to
take steps for making an inventory such nomenclature of crops,
vegetables, fruits and medicin al plants which are being used in
various languages across the regions of the country.
Impact of Climate Change on Horticulture Sector
12. The Committee observe that horticulture sector is an
important source of income for farmers in the country. Horticulture
is going to be one of the sectors  which will be severely affected
due to unseasonal rains and temperature va riations. India, which is
one of the pioneers in horticul ture sector, will bear the losses
caused due to climate change leading to loss of livelihood for
millions of farmers.
The Committee also observe the ICAR while recognising the
need have taken steps under NICR A such as development of location
specific technologies for addressing climate change issues especially
the impact of elevated temperature, CO
2 on the flowering behaviour,

162
pollinators and yield losses due to variable climate including flooding
and heavy rains. The Committee also note that ICAR is continuously
engaged in identifying and improving v arieties of horticulture crops
which have inherent potential to withstand abiotic stress associated
with the climate change. ICAR have since achieved success in
development of water logging re sistant germplasm of tomato by
grafting on brinjal root stock, development of agro-techniques to
overcome alternate bearing in mango, testing of environmentally
safe protocols for induction of synchronized flowering in rejuvenated
Alphonso mango trees in the age group of  25-40 yrs, etc. The
Committee further note that proven technologies including varieties
are disseminated among farmers/villa ges through Technology
Demonstration Component (TDC) of  NICRA and these technology is
further being up-scaled throu gh the support from developmental
agencies of Central and State Governments.
The Committee are of view th at the importance of horticulture
sector in the country will fu rther increase with increasing income
and associated Dietary changes over  the time. Climatic fluctuations
such as draught, flodding, hailstrom etc. associated with global
warming can prove disastrous to farmers engaged horticulture
cropping. The Committee, therefore, recommend the ICAR to devise
a long term strategy for research in horticulture sector identifying
potential regions for horticulture crop expansion, identification of
draught and abiotic stress tolerant varities, development of new
heat stress tolerant varieties, devising improved agronomic methods,
water saving irrigation methods/technologies, training of farmers
etc. so that horticulture sector  in the country can equip itself to
successfully adapt to the changes ass ociated with global warming
and keep pace with increasing demands.
Impact of Climate Change on Livestock
13. The Committee note that milk production and reproductive
function of cattle and buffaloes wi ll be adversely affected by
projected temperature rise of 2-6
oC over existing temperature during
the period 2070-2099. The Committee  also note that studies
indicated that warming will negatively impact the productivity of
indigenous cows and productivity loss will be about 0.33 million
tons. The Northern India is li kely to experi ence more negative
impact of climate change on milk prod uction. The decline in milk
production will be higher in crossbreeds (0.63%) followed by
buffaloes (0.5%) and indigenous cattle (0.4%). The Committee have
been informed that many varieties of indigenous cattle have

163
capabilities to endure climatic changes associated with global
warming. At the same time, some indigenous varieties of cattle
such as Rathi, Gir, Dhaliwal, Tharparkar and Red Sindhi which are
high yielding and could be utilized in improvement of other
indigenous varieties of cattle. The Committee observe that ICAR
through its network of livestock based ICAR institutes such as ICAR-
NDRI, Karnal, ICAR-IVRI, Izathnagar, ICAR, NIANP, Bengaluru and
others have taken research proj ects to develop technologies to
offset negative impact of climate change on milk production of
both cattle and buffaloes due to rise in temperature by way of
(i) development of tolerant/resistant breeds, (ii) improved feeds
and supplements and (iii) improved shelter management. The
Committee also note that Central Government programmes like
National Programme for Bovine Breeding (NPBB), National Dairy
Plan (NDP), National Livestock Mission (NLM) and Sub-Missions on
Livestock Development, Pig Development in North-Eastern Region,
etc. are being under implementation by State Department of Animal
Husbandry to improve indigenous varieties of livestock.
The Committee are of considered view that animal husbandry
and especially cattle rearing are important source of income for
majority of farmers in India. However,  the Committee observe that
National Plan on Dairying has ignored indigenous varieties of cattle
leading to over dependence on crossbreed varieties for milk
production. They note that indigenous varieties of cattle possess
many traits such as heat tolerance that can be very effective in
future scenario projected for clim ate change. They feel that these
traits can be utilized for development of improved varieties of
cattle if these are crossbred with high milk yielding indigenous
varieties such as Rathi, Gir, Dhaliwal, Tharparkar and Red Sindhi.
The Committee, therefore, recommend the Government to start a
comprehensive plan for making inventory of all indigenous varieties
of cattle in country, identification and separation of their specific
traits, proper breeding plan for cross breeding of indigenous varieties
of cattle, vaccination, deworming etc. so that farmers of our country
are equipped with wherewithal for coping with vagaries associated
with climate changes in the country. The Committee also desire
the Government to associate organizations, dairy industries, farmers
associations etc. working in the area of cattle breed improvement
in the endeavor to improve indigeno us varieties of cattle.
14. The Committee note that  rumen fermentation is the major
source of greenhouse gas emission in farm sector. The Committee
have been informed that ICAR institutes are working on various

164
projects under National Plan on Climate Change and NICRA project
to reduce GHG emissions from  large and small ruminants and
developed different forms of complete  feed, silage, fortified feed
with varied levels of antioxidants, electrolytes and osmolytes,
astaxanthin, melatonin along with di fferent types of shelters with
low cost and locally available material and herbal supplements to
reduce GHGs emission from rumen fermentation. These Institutes
have also been successful in identification of bacteriocin producing
strains of lactic acid producing bacteria, microencapsulation of
Bacteriocins, release kinetics of encapsulated Bacteriocins,
lignocellulosic biomass for improving feed utilization, biogeography
of gut microbes, novel approaches for assessing and improving
nutrient bio-availability. The Commi ttee have been informed that
Ration balancing, use of ionophores,  probiotics, plant secondary
metabolites (Saponins, tannins, terpenoids etc.), organic acids
(fumarate, malate), essential oils, defaunation etc. have been found
to reduce GHG (methane) emission to the extent of 10-15% in dairy
animals. The Committee also note that increase of GHG emissions
by Indian livestock was less (74% vs. 82% over the period of 1961
to 2010) than the developing  countries and this was due to creation
of awareness, demonstration of field experiments (FLDs),
encouragement provided for growing green fodder, silage making,
complete feed preparation, regulations in manure management and
waste disposal.
The Committee observe that significant achievement have been
made by the ICAR institutions for reduction of GHGs emission from
rumen fermentation. However, there is need to work for
dissemination of these outcomes to the farmers and dairy
entrepreneurs in the country. At the same time, there is need to
give additional impetus for ident ification of cattle varieties which
is capacity for lower emission of GHGs.
Assessment of Food Requirement vis-à-vis Food Availability
15. South Asia has been categorized as one of the most
vulnerable ones to challenges associated with climate changes due
to global warming. Vulnerability of Indian agriculture due to vagaries
associated with climate change and low adaptation capacity of
majority of Indian farmers poses risk to food security of the country.
The Committee note that popu lation of India is projected to be
1.65 billion by 2050 with 50% of people residing in the urban
areas. The Committee also note that total foodgrain demand is
estimated to be 291 MT by 2025 and 377  MT by 2050, whereas the

165
total production is estimated to be 292 Mt by 2025 and  385 Mt by
2050, which is 2.0% more than the demand. However, production
deficits are projected for other cereals, oilseeds, and pulses. The
projected deficit is 33% by 2025 and 43% by 2050 for other cereals,
while 3% by 2025 and 7% by  2050 for pulses.
The Committee have been informed that it has been analyzed
using Infocrop Decision Support System that the impact of climate
change on production of wheat, paddy, kharif, maize and rain fed
Sorghum can be minimized through adaptation to climate change
by sowing improved varieties and employing improved input
efficiency technologies coupled with application of additional
nitrogen.
The Committee note that Government have launched Food
Security Mission during 2007 for additional production of food grains
of 25 million tons comprising 10 million ton rice, 8 million ton
wheat, 4 million ton pulses and 3 million ton of coarse cereals by
the end of 12th Five Year Plan through area expansion and
productivity enhancement in sustainable manner in identified
districts of the country; restoring soil fertility and productivity at
individual farm level; creation of employment opportunities; and
enhancing farm level economy ( i.e. farm profits) to restore
confidence among farmers. The Committee further note that the
Government aims to ensure food security in the nation through
implementing National Food Security Act, 2013 by undertaking price
support operations through efficient procurement of food crops,
strengthening public distribution systems, increasing crop production
and productivity, and enhancing resilience of Indian agriculture to
climate change and climate vulnerabili ty through strategic research
and technology demonstration. To meet the requirement of food
commodities, particularly pulses and oilseeds, trade related measures
are also undertaken by the government besides the ongoing efforts
to improve the production within the country. The Committee have
also been informed that National Mission for Sustainable Agriculture
(NMSA) was initiated with the aims to devise strategies to make
Indian agriculture more resilient to climate change. It would identify
and develop new varieties of crops and alternative cropping patterns,
capable of withstanding extremes of weather, long dry spells,
flooding and variable  moisture availability. The Government is also
supporting the ICAR by funding the NICRA project with the aim of
developing technologies that help mi nimize the adverse impacts of
climate change. The government is also adjusting the trade policies
and domestic marketing policies keeping in view the food security.

166
The Committee are of view that there will be changes in
consumption patterns in  coming decades due to increasing rate of
urbanization and increased income of households. Therefore,
demand for fruits, veget ables, dairy products, meat, poultry and
fisheries will increase at faster rate than that of food grains. Thus,
there the country will need to  increase crop diversification and
improve allied activities such as dairying, fisheries and poultry
farming alongwith maintaining the current rate of growth of food
grain production. The country will be required to invest heavily in
development of improved crop varieties with enhanced abiotic stress
tolerance, development of improved varieties of fertilizers with
less GHGs emission  effect, better irrigation methods, weather
forecasting, training of farmers etc. The Committee, therefore,
recommend the Government to provide adequate support to the
scientists of the country engaged in climate research in agriculture
and weather forecasting sectors under programmes such NICRA and
NMSA. Further, the Committee desire the Government to provide
fillip to enhance the production of oil seeds and pulses in the
country by taking steps for area expansion, development of high
yielding varieties of pulses and oil seeds/oil palm, support to farmers
etc. so that the country do no t face shortage of oil and pulses in
coming decades. They also desire the Government to provide
adequate funds to Ministry of Agriculture and Farmers Welfare and
State Governments to achieve these objectives.
R&D on Alternative Food Sources for Future
16. Earth is the adobe of multitude of biological variability. The
Human society across the world including India has however selected
few crops such as wheat, rice, maize which constitutes their staple
diet. Dominance of mono cropping and excessive reliance on
selected crops can become a burden in case of any major fluctuation
in climate due to global warming. Keeping in view these factors,
it is important to take steps to identify and develop some alternative
food sources which can withstand climatic variability and hence
can be utilized as staple diet for vast population of our country.
The Committee note that ICAR through its network programmes on
small millets (AICRP on Small Millets), future crops (AICRN on
Potential Crops), legumes (AINP on Arid Legumes) is continuously
engaged in conservation of germplasms; breeding short duration,
tolerant and climate resilient va rieties; developing suitable location
specific package of practices fo r potential future crops; and
disseminating production and value addition technologies to the
stakeholders. The Committee have been informed that ICAR is giving

167
priority to small millet crops, viz. foxtail millet, kodo millet, proso
millet, little millets, and barnyard millets through All India
Coordinated Research Project on Small  Millets. These crops have
potential to withstand the vagaries of climate and ensure the food
and nutritional security in future. The Committee have also been
informed that ICAR Institutes have developed and popularized several
ready-to-cook and ready-to-eat health foods based on coarse grains
which have been developed under the NAIP project. The ICAR is
also making efforts for de veloping potential crops such as
pseudocereals, food legumes/pulses, oilseeds, vegetables and fodder
crops through All India Coordinated Research Network on Potential
Crops with objectives to find  out new plant resources for food,
fodder, fuel, energy and industrial uses; identify superior genotypes
for cultivation in di fferent regions; and standardize package of
practice. ICAR through its ongoing programmes/projects/schemes
at NBPGR New Delhi, NBAGR Hisar, NBFGR Lucknow, NBAIM Mau and
other ICAR institutes is continuously participating in international
project or alliances of CGAIR, FAO, SAC to share genotypes, breed
or species for use in national crop/breed improvement programmes.
The shared materials are maintained and preserved at respective
national repositories in the country. The Committee have also been
informed that Government is promoting cultivation and value
addition in more efficient, climate resilient, short duration C4
crops viz. maize, pearl millet, sorghum and finger millets in suitable
regions.
The Committee observe that despite claim of the Government
in taking step for promoting cultiv ation of coarse grain, there was
a decline in cultivated area be tween 2004-05 and 2014-15 in
sorghum (3.5 mha), pearlmillet (1 .3 mha). The Committee are of
considered view that there is need to shift from mono cropping
pattern of agriculture to diversified agriculture in order to enhance
biodiversity. Enhanced crop biodiversity will help the country to
ensure food security in case of any unforeseen consequences of
climate change. The Committee desire  the Government to actively
encourage the cultivation of coarse grain, apart from  providing
support to research on coarse grains  and other potential food crops
for future. The Committee, therefore, call upon the Government
to make a comprehensive plan for providing funds, seeds, and
other agriculture extension support to the farmers for encouraging
farming of coarse cereals in the country. The Committee also desire
the Government to take an awareness campaign about health
benefits of coarse grain in order to enhance its consumption in the
country. The Committee are also of view that there is need to

168
involve farmers especially in rainfed  agriculture, hill and tribal
areas so that traditional foods being used in these areas can be
properly analyzed and beneficial germplasm can be stored for further
research. There is also need to focus on research on tuber crops
which are traditionally being cultivated and used as food source in
different parts of country. The Committee, therefore, desire the
ICAR to take necessary steps in this direction.
Agroforestry
17. The Committee note that National Agroforestry Policy (NAFP)
announced in  2014 aims at conservation of natural resources,
diversification of land use and farming systems to meet the demands
of fuel, fodder, timber, and thus promoting economic transformation
of farmers. The Committee have been informed that NAFP with
objective to protect and stabilize ecosystems and promote resilient
cropping and farming systems to minimize the risk during extreme
climatic events will complement achieving the target of increasing
forest/tree cover to promote ecological stability especially in the
vulnerable regions. The Committee also note that apart from
agroforestry development and promotion programmes of State Forest
Departments, Central Government has initiated various programmes
on research & development through ICAR-Central Agroforestry
Research Institute (CAFRI) Jhansi, ICAR-All India Coordinated
Research Project on Agroforestry (AICRPAF) and Indian Council of
Forestry Research and Education (ICFRI), Dehradun. The Committee
have also been informed that programmes for capacity building of
farmers and other stakeholders are also being implemented.
The Committee are of the view that agroforestry programmes,
if implemented in scientific manner and proper support to the
farmers, can emerge as significant income multiplier for small and
marginal farmers of the country. However, agroforestry programmes
have been implemented in the country without taking care of
requirement of farmers, local economy and environment. These
agroforestry programmes have so far been at meeting the target of
plantation without proper support for post plantation care and
resulted in the loss of majority of saplings and huge losses to the
farmers. The Committee are of considered opinion that a
meticulously-planned nationwide programme for agroforestry based
on region-wise environmental and economic factors will go a long
way to protect environment along with enhancing income of
farmers. The Committee, therefore, recommend the Government
to plan a nation-wide programme for agroforestry after consultation
with all the stakeholders including  State Governments and farmers.
The Committee would like to be apprized about the steps taken in
this direction within three months of presentation of this report.

169
18. The Committee note that stress on exotic plants in
agroforestry programmes was one of the reasons for their failure
across the country. These plants des pite their property for fast
growth, affect local biodiversity and hydrology. However, the
Committee in this regard have been informed that various studies
have shown that exotic species such as Eucalyptus is more water
efficient than other tree species for the per gram biomass
production. The Committee have been informed that ICAR-CAFRI,
Jhansi has identified suitable tree species for different agro-climatic
regions of the country. Further, research institutes are also engaged
in identification of tree species which is suitable for local
environment and farming system. The Committee are of view that
agroforestry programmes should be planned after proper study of
local bio- diversity, farming system and availability of market for
agroforestry products. It is also important to involve farmers and
other stakeholders in planning  of agroforestry programmes. The
Committee are also of view that  there should be stress on use of
indigenous plant species in agroforestry as our country has
tremendous biodiversity which, if properly studied, can bring forth
many local plant species suitable for agroforestry. The Committee,
therefore, recommend the Government to issue advisory/notification
to the States/UTs Governments for use of indigenous plant species
in agroforestry programme. The Committee also desire the
Government to focus on Research & Development for identification
of locally suitable plant species for agroforestry programmes.
Water Resources Management
19. Water is one of the fundamental natural resources which is
critical for development of human society. There are increasing
evidences that climatic changes associated with global warming
will affect rainfall pattern across the globe thereby affecting
availability of wat er in different cont inents. Therefore, it becomes
imperative to analyze availability of water resources in our country
and prepare an efficient water resource management plan to
effectively preparedness to augment water resources for agriculture
sector to face the climatic changes associated with global warming.
The Committee note that our country with around 18% of world
population has only 4% of the global renewable water resources.
The Committee have been in formed that despite receiving 4,000
billion average rainfall and snowfall average, availability of water
from surface water and replenish able ground water sources in the
country is only 1,869 billion cubic metre. However, only about 60%

170
of this i.e. 690 billion cubic metre from  surface water and 432
billion cubic metre from ground water can be put to beneficial use
because of topographical and other constraints.
The Committee note that irrigation facilities for agriculture in
the country are far below th e requirement. In this regard, the
Committee have been informed that  only 65 million hectare out of
the 140 million hectare of net sown area in the country is covered
under irrigation facility leaving 75 million hectares under rainfed
farming. The Committee were also informed that Even after
completing all irrigation projects and covering the potentially
irrigable area, nearly 50% of the cultivated area will continue to
remain rain dependent. Ensuring availability of adequate water in
monsoon dependant Rainfed agriculture  area is a daunting task
which can become a serious prob lem if climate changes affect
intensity and timing of Monsoon rains in India.
The Committee in this regard have been informed that various
studies on Indian subcontinent monsoon have indicated strong
sensitivity to global w arming under the projected climate change
scenarios. It is projected that the rainfall magnitude will increase
over core monsoon zone in future climate along with lengthening
of the season due to late withdrawal. On inter-annual timescales,
the severity and frequency of both strong monsoon (SM) and weak
monsoon (WM) might increase in fu ture climate. Substantial changes
in the daily variability of ISM are  also projected which are largely
associated with the increase in heavy rainfall events and decrease
in number of wet days during future monsoon. Both extreme wet
and dry episodes are likely to intensify and regionally extend in
future climate with enhanced tendency of long dry spells. The
Commiitee note that projected change in rainfall pattern will create
stress to majority of small and marginal farmers dependent on
Rainfed farming. The Committee are of view that there is need of
comprehensive policy for sustaining rainfed farming in the country
which can take into account of future projection for Monsoon
rainfall changes. The Committee, therefore, recommend the
Government to make a  comprehensive perspective plan for
sustainable development of Rainfed farming in the country.
Augmentation of Water Resources in the Country
20. The Committee note that Prime Minister Krishi Sinchayi
Yojana (PMKSY) has been launched by amalgamating ongoing
schemes, viz. Accelerated Irrigation Benefit Programme (AIBP) of

171
the Ministry of Water Resources, River Development & Ganga
Rejuvenation (MoWR, RD&GR), Integrated Watershed Management
Programme (IWMP) of Department of Land Resources (DoLR) and
the On Farm Water Management (OFWM) of Department of
Agriculture and Cooperation (DAC). The ai m of PMKSY is to achieve
convergence of investments in irrigation at the field level, expand
cultivable area under assured irrigation, improve on-farm water
use efficiency to reduce wastage of water, enhance the adoption
of precision irrigation and other water saving technologies (More
crop per drop), enhance recharge of aquifers and introduce
sustainable water conservation practices by exploring the feasibility
of reusing treated municipal waste water for peri-urban agriculture
and attract greater private investment in precision irrigation system.
The scheme will be implemented by Ministries of Agriculture, Water
Resources and Rural Development. The Ministry of Rural
Development will undertake rain water conservation, construction
of farm pond, water harvestin g structures, small check dams,
contour bunding, etc. The MoWR, RD  & GR will undertake various
measures for creation of assure d irrigation source, construction of
diversion canals, field channels, water diversion/lift irrigation,
including development of water distribution systems. The Ministry
of Agriculture will promote efficient water conveyance and precision
water application devices like drips, sprinklers, pivots, rain-guns in
the farm “(Jal Sinchan)”, construction of micro-irrigation structures
to supplement source creation activities , extension activities for
promotion of scientific moisture conservation and agronomic
measures.
The Committee have also been informed that PMKSY envisage
decentralized ‘State level planning and projectised execution ’
structure that allow States to draw up their own irrigation
development plans based on District Irrigation Plan (DIP) and State
Irrigation Plan (SIP). It aims to act as convergence platform for all
water sector activities including drinking water & sanitation,
MGNREGA, application of science  & technology, etc. through
comprehensive plan. State Level Sanctioning Committee (SLSC)
chaired by the Chief Secretary of th e State will be vested with the
authority to oversee its implementatio n and sanction projects.The
programme is being supervised and monitored at Central level by
an Inter-Ministerial National Steering Committee (NSC) constituted
under the Chairmanship of Prime Minister with Union Ministers
from concerned Ministries. A National Executive Committee (NEC)
constituted under the Chairmanship of Vice Chairman, NITI Aayog
is overseeing programme implementation, allocation of resources,

172
inter-ministerial coordination, monitoring & performance
assessment, addressing administrative issues, etc.
The Committee have also been informed by the Ministry of
Water Resources, River Development and Ganga Rejuvenation that
they have included various components such as Minor Irrigation
scheme below  2000 Hectare, repair, renovation and restoration of
water bodies, command area development and water management,
use of recycled water and ground water schemes proposed by the
State Governments under PMKSY for development of irrigation
facilities in the country. The Committee have been assured that
State Governments have been given full autonomy to plan schemes
for irrigation facilities in their States under PMKSY and the
Government is committed to fund the projects as per funding
pattern.
The Committee are of view that convergence of scheme as
envisaged in PMKSY will go a long way to optimize utilization of
funds for irrigation development schemes. However, the Government
is required to allocate sufficient funds to Ministries involved for
execution of schemes within stipulated time. The Committee,
therefore, recommends the Government to make adequate allocation
of funds for implementation of projects under the scheme. The
State Governments should also be provided support for adequate
technical support for planning of District irrigation plan and State
irrigation plan and execution of projects under the scheme. The
Committee, therefore, recommend the Government to constitute
a technical support team to assist at the Central Level to assist the
State Government in planning and implementation of projects under
the PMKSY. The Committee also desire the Government to take
steps for demarcation of beneficiary at District and Block level.
The Committee would also like to be apprised about the steps
taken in this regard within three months of presentation of scheme.
Interlinking of Rivers
21. The Committee note that interlinking of rivers envisage
transfer of water from surplus to water deficit areas in the country.
Inter-Linking River Programme will help saving the people living in
drought-prone zones from hunger and people living in flood-prone
areas from the destruction caused by floods. The Committee were
informed that implementation of interlinking would give benefits
of 25 million ha of irrigation from surface water, 10 million ha by

173
increased use of ground water, raising the ultimate irrigation
potential from 140 million ha to 175 million ha and generation of
34 million KW of power apart from other benefits. However, the
Committee are distressed to know that despite considerable lapse
of time, the Government is yet to make any significant headway
towards interlinking of rivers in the country except two projects
namely Ken-Betwa Project and Pancheswar Project wherein,
understanding has been reached between the Government of Uttar
Pradesh and Madhya Pradesh and with Government of Nepal
respectively. In this regard, the Committee were informed that
constitutional provisions regarding division of Water resources
restrict power of Central Government for planning and
implementation of projects on water resources management such
as interlinking of rivers. The Committee were also informed that
many State Governments have raised objections on these projects.
The Committee are of the view that projects for interlinking of
river are crucial to solve the problems of water scarcity in various
parts of country. It will also be crucial to face challenges related
to water resource management due to climatic changes associated
with global warming. The Committee are, therefore, of the opinion
that Government should comprehensively examine environmental,
socio-economic and financial aspects related to interlinking of rivers
and formulate a detailed project for interlinking of rivers in order
to effectively utilize water resources of the country for the benefit
of the masses. further, the Committee are not convinced with
government’s contention about limitation posed on Central
Government for interlinking of rivers due to constitutional
provisions. The Committee are of view that had sincere efforts
been made in consultation with the State Governments concerned,
consensus could have reached among all stakeholders for interlinking
of rivers as it being a win-win formula for all. The Committee,
therefore, recommend the Government (Ministry of Water
Resources, River Development & Ganga Rejuvenation) to initiate
the process of consultations with all stakeholders for constitution
of an Empowered Group of State Ministers on Interlinking of Rivers
on the pattern of Empowered Group of State Finance Ministers on
Goods and Services Tax. The Committee hope that constitution of
such group by the Central Government will help in examining all
facets related to interlinking of rivers and achieve the desired
goal.
Rejuvenation of Traditional Water Storage System
22. Traditional water bodies such as tanks, ponds, baories etc.
in various parts of the country has served as important source not
only to meet the requirement of drinking water but also as an

174
important source of irrigation. These  structures have also served
as excellent water harvesting me chanism maintaining ground water
level. However, the Committee are distressed to observe that
majority of traditional water stor age structures have disappeared
due to lack of maintenance and illegal encroachment. In this regard,
the Committee have been informed that the Government have
started a scheme for Repair, Renovation and Restoration (RRR) of
water bodies since Tenth Plan for comprehensive improvement and
restoration of water bodies thereby increasing tank storage capacity,
Ground Water Recharge, increased availability of drinking water,
improvement in agriculture/horticulture productivity, etc. However,
the Committee are distressed to note that the Government
have been able to complete repair renovation and restoration of
11640 water bodies against the target of 15,326 under the scheme.
The Committee are of the opinion  that traditional water bodies
are prime example of our know ledge and engineering skill of our
ancestors which enabled them to face the challenges of water
shortage. Restoration and rejuvenation of traditional water bodies
can emerge as one of bulwark of our preparedness for making
Indian agriculture climate resili ent. The Committee, therefore,
recommend the Government (Ministry of Water Resources, River
Development & Ganga Rejuvenation) to enhance the target for
repair, renovation and Rejuvenation  of traditional water storage
structure based upon a compr ehensive study for identification of
all traditional water storage structure in the country. The Committee
also desire the Gov ernment to include the rejuvenation of dead
stream of rivers and numerous small  rivers in the country under
the scheme through construction of check dams so that water
resources of these rivers can be utilized for the benefit of farmers.
The Committee would like to be apprised of the steps taken in this
regard within three months of presentation of Report.
Ground Water Resources Management
23. The Committee note that about 60% of the ground water
resources in the country i.e. 432 billion cubic meter can be put to
beneficial use. Over the years, due to enhanced availability of
energy sources such as electricity and petroleum, groundwater
emerged as a secure source of supply for irrigation and become
one of backbone of green revolution in the country. However, due
to indiscriminate use has led to environmental consequences such
as groundwater depletion, pollution and water quality deterioration.
The Committee have been informed that Central Ground Water

175
Board (CGWB) has identified 1071 blocks/talukas under over
exploited category for ground water. They have also notified about
150 blocks/talukas as most vulnerable areas which witness serious
scarcity of water and are vulnerable even to sustain drinking water
requirement unless addressed for ground water recharge and its
regulated use. The Committee also note that situation of ground
water exploitation in many States is more than ground water
replenishment. Level of ground water development in States/UTs
like Punjab, Rajasthan, Delhi and Haryana are at the level of 172%,
137%, 137%, and 133% respectively. The Committee also note that
situation in Tamil Nadu, Uttar Pradesh and Himachal Pradesh is
critical since ground water development are at the level of 77%,
74% and 71% respectively. The Committee also note that study on
excess ground water exploitation conducted by ICAR has also
confirmed decreasing level of ground water. The study have also
shown sea water intrusion in South Saurashtra coast of Gujarat due
to over exploitation of ground water.
The Committee note that regulation of ground water withdrawal,
artificial recharge of ground water, rain water harvesting, proper
implementation of Watershed management programmes, Roof top
water harvesting in urban areas and conjunctive use of surface
water with ground water are some of the ways whereby, ground
water level can be maintained. The Committee also note that
Government is implementing schemes such as Integrated Watershed
Management Programmes (IWMP), artificial recharge project under
central sector scheme and Rooftop rainwater harvesting scheme
for enhancement of ground water level in the country. The
Committee have been informed that 8,214 watershed projects
covering an area of 39.07 million hectare have been sanctioned
under Integrated Watershed Management Programme which has now
been subsumed as watershed development component of ‘Pradhan
Mantri krishi Sinchayee Yojana’. The Committee also note that
Central Ground Water Board (CGWB) has taken steps such as
notification of Blocks for regulation of ground water development
and management, appointed Authorized Officer(s) under section 4
of the Environment Protection Act, 1986 to oversee ground water
management, framed guidelines for ground water abstraction to
accord ‘No Objection Certificate’ to Industries/Infrastructure/Mining
proposal, criteria for recharge of ground water by Water Intensive
Industries’, etc. The CGWB has submitted EFC proposal for artificial
recharge in 6 over exploited ground water Blocks in Andhra Pradesh,
Madhya Pradesh, Punjab, Tamil Nadu and Uttar Pradesh. Additionally,

176
CGWB has also submitted plan for artificial recharge in 442  over
exploited ground water Blocks in Andhra Pradesh, Haryana,
Karnataka, Maharashtra, Punjab, Rajasthan, Tamil Nadu, Telangana
and Uttar Pradesh.
The Committee are of the view that Ground water, being one
of the important source of fresh water on earth, should be
effectively managed. Over exploitation of ground water above the
replenishment rate not only hampers equitable distribution of water
but also causes problems such as water pollution, intrusion of sea
water, etc., thus affecting the quality of water. Further,
indiscriminate use of ground water in over-exploited blocks of the
country by the water extensive industries put life of residents in
danger by denying them access to drinking water. The Committee,
therefore, recommend the Government (Ministry of Water
Resources, River Development and Ganga Rejuvenation and Central
Ground Water Board) to strictly implement guidelines for use of
ground water in the country and issuance of ‘No Objection
Certificate (NOC) ’ to water intensive Industries. The Committee
desire the Government to submit a report on NOC to the industries
for withdrawal of ground water in notified area by the Authorised
Officers appointed by the CGWB and compliance of conditions
attached within one month of presentation of this report. The
Committee also desire the Government to take steps for timely
completion of sanctioned watershed projects within stipulated time
period so that ground water level could be restored in over exploited
ground water areas.
The Committee are also of the view that farming of less water
intensive crops should be promoted in over exploited ground water
blocks in the country in order to maintain ground water level.
There is also need for financial assistance to the farmers for for
farming of less water intensive crops and adoption of advanced
irrigation methods such as sprinkler or drip irrigation. The
Committee, therefore, recommend the Government (Department
of Agriculture, Cooperation & Farmers Welfare) to make efforts for
awareness of farmers regarding problems associated with
indiscriminate use of ground water for farming. The Committee
also desire the Government to formulate a plan in consultation
with the State Government concerned for providing financial
assistance to farmers in over exploited ground water blocks in the
country for farming of less water intensive crops and adoption of
advanced irrigation methods such as sprinkler or drip irrigation.

177
Approach for Making Indian Agriculture Climate Resilient
24. The Committee note that National Mission on Sustainable
Agriculture (NMSA) aims to make Indian agriculture more productive,
sustainable and remunerative and climate resilient. NMSA has many
objectives such as conservation of natural resources through
appropriate soil and moisture conservation measures, Soil health
management, optimization of water use efficiency in agriculture,
capacity building of farmers and other stakeholders in the domain
of climate change adaptation and mitigation measures, improving
productivity of rainfed farming by mainstreaming rainfed
technologies, and establishing an effective, inter and intra
Departmental/Ministerial co-ordination for accomplishing key
deliverables of National Mission for Sustainable Agriculture under
the aegis of NAPCC.
The Committee have been informed that promoting integrated
farming system covering crops, livestock & fishery, plantation and
pasture based composite farming, popularizing on-farm and
off-farm resource conservation technologies and introducing
practices that will support mitigation efforts in times of extreme
climatic events, promoting location and crop specific integrated
nutrient management practices, promoting effective management
of available water resources, enhancing water use efficiency,
encouraging improved agronomic practices for higher farm
productivity, involving knowledge institutions and professionals in
developing climate change adaptation and mitigation strategies for
specific agro climatic situations and promoting them through
appropriate farming systems are some of strategies being used to
achieve objectives of NMSA.
The Committee are of the opinion that our farmers who had
helped in securing food security of the country, need support in
order to face the challenges of climatic changes due to global
warming. Indian agriculture need interventions in the area of
irrigation facilities, water efficient irrigation methods, improved
abiotic stress tolerant seed varieties, cost effective and environment
friendly fertilizers and pesticides, capacity building of farmers and
other stakeholders, efficient and advanced agriculture extension
services in order to make it climatic resilient and enable it to
secure food security of the country. The Committee are of
considered view that huge investment will be required in the
agriculture sector if the Government wants to achieve objectives
set under National Mission on Sustainable Agriculture (NMSA). Since,
agriculture is a State subject, the Committee call for the need of

178
better co-ordination between the Central and the State Governments
for planning and resource mobilization for implementing schemes
to achieve objectives of NMSA. The Committee, therefore,
recommend the Government to constitute high powered committee
involving representatives of Central and State Governments, subject
specialists and other stakeholders for planning and implementation
of schemes to achieve objectives set under NMSA. The Committee
also desire the Government to start a dedicated fund for
implementation of schemes under NMSA so that these schemes do
not suffer due to want of funds.
National Innovations on Climate Resilient Agriculture (NICRA)
25. The Committee note that National Innovations on Climate
Resilient Agriculture (NICRA) initiated by ICAR as a network project
since 2010-11 encompasses multi-pronged strategic research,
technology development, capacity building of stakeholders and
technology demonstrations at farmers’ fields. The Committee have
been informed that NICRA has three components namely Strategic
Research, Technology Demonstration and Institutional Intervention.
The Committee note that strategic research component under
NICRA aims to evolve crop varieties tolerant to climatic stresses
like floods, droughts, frost, inundation due to cyclones and heat
waves. The Committee have been informed that 40 Research
Institutes of ICAR are conducting research under Strategic Research
Component covering various research theme areas viz., development
of Multiple Stress Tolerant Crop Genotypes, Natural Resource
Management, Green House Gas Emissions, Climate Resilient
Horticulture, Marine, Brackish and Inland Fisheries, Heat tolerant
Livestock, Small Ruminants and Poultry. The Committee have also
been informed that NICRA projects helped to create infrastructure
and necessary modern equipments such as high through-put pheno-
typing platforms, Free Air Temperature Elevation (FATE), Carbon
dioxide and Temperature Gradient Tunnels (CTGC), high performance
computers, automatic weather stations, growth chambers, large
glass houses, animal calorimeter, shipping vessel, flux towers and
satellite receiving station in ICAR institutes involved in NICRA
projects. The Committee note that these institutes have completed
32 out of 52 research projects sanctioned under NICRA. The
Committee also note that ICAR is making efforts to involve State
Agricultural Universities/Research Institutes in public/private sectors
as 11-State Agricultural Universities from different States of the
country and 2 Research Institutes in private sectors as a partner in
NICRA projects.

179
The Committee note that Technology Demonstration Component
(TDC) under NICRA aims at demonstration of location specific
practices and technologies to enable farmers cope with current
climatic variability. Dem onstration of avail able location-specific
technologies related to natural resource management, crop
production, livestock and fisheries is being taken up in the
climatically vulnerable districts for enhancing the adaptive capacity
and resilience against climatic variability. The Committee have been
informed that technologies with a poten tial to cope with climate
variability are being demonstr ated under Technology Demonstration
Component (TDC) in 121 most vulnerable districts selected across
the country through Krishi Vigyan Kendras (KVKs).
The Committee note that institutional intervention Component
under NICRA aims at creating enabling sup port system in the village
comprising of strengthening of existing institutions or initiating
new ones (Village Level Climate  Risk Management Committees
(VCRMC)), establishment and management of Custom Hiring Centers
(CHCs) for farm implements, seed bank, fodder bank, creation of
commodity groups, water sharing groups, community nursery and
initiating collective marketing by tapping value chains. The
Committee have been informed that 100 custom hiring centers
(CHCs) for farm machine ry were setup under NICRA project which
are being managed by Village Level Climate Risk Management
Committee (VCRMC) comprising of villagers. The Committee have
also been informed that a module on use of ICT for knowledge
empowerment of the communities in terms of climate risk
management is also being planned in select KVKs for generation of
locally relevant content and its dissemination in text and voice
enabled formats. The Committee also note that 121 KVKs associated
under NICRA projects have also taken initiatives such as participatory
village level seed production of short duration, drought and flood
tolerant varieties, establishment of seed banks involving these
varieties were established in th e KVKs, demonstration and of
improved varieties of fodder seed s and establishment of fodder
bank in NICRA villages.
The Committee are of considered view that investment in
research and development in agriculture is pre-requisite for making
Indian agriculture climate resilient. There is urgent need for
enhancing public investment in agriculture research to make it at
forefront of country’s effort to ensure food security of country
threatened by risk associated with climatic changes. Against this
background, National Innovations on Climate Resilient Agriculture

180
(NICRA) projects which tries to link strategic research with
technology demonstration and capacity building of farmers and
other stakeholders could help th e country to emerge as pioneer
country in agriculture field in coming decades. However, the
Committee are of opinion that there is need to enhance allocations
under the NICRA so that scientists  do not face resource crunch in
their pursuit to solve problems of Indian agriculture and to make
it climate resilient. The Committee, therefore, recommend the
Government to enhance allocations for NICRA scheme in upcoming
fiscals. The Committee also desire the ICAR to analyze performance
of NICRA projects to make it more outcome oriented. Impact of
institutional intervention such as  technology demonstrations custom
hiring, seed banks, fodder banks etc. on capacity building of farmers
and enhancing agriculture productivity  should be analyzed so that
these can be replicated at all India level. The Committee like to be
apprised about the outcomes of evaluation of  NICRA projects within
three months of presentation of this report.
District Agricultural Contingency Plan
26. The Committee note that ICAR-CRIDA has prepared
Agricultural Contingency Plans for 614 districts recommending
location specific climate resilient crops and varieties for use by the
farmers. These agricultural contingency plans cover situation like
delay in monsoon onset, brea ks in monsoon leading to early, mid
and late-season droughts, delayed  or limited release of water for
irrigation, floods, unseasonal rains and extreme weather events
such as heat wave, cold wave, fro st, hailstorm, cyclone etc. The
contingency plans provide information on technological interventions
to be made during weather aberr ations such as alternate crops/
varieties, management practices etc.  which could be followed by
farmers. The Committee have been informed that ICAR-CRIDA along
with other ICAR institutes regular ly interact with officials of the
State Government for Crop planning based on agricultural
contingency plan. The Committee have also been informed that
States of Andhra Pradesh, Telangana, Karnataka, Maharashtra, Madhya
Pradesh, Gujarat, Rajasthan, Jharkhand, Assam, Meghalaya and West
Bengal are making use of District Agricultural Contingency Plan.
The Committee are of view that Agricultural Contingency Plans
prepared by the ICAR-CRIDA are one of the important contribution
which address unmet needs of in tervention required in rainfed
based agriculture prevalent in our country. There is need to
mainstreaming these agricultural con tingency plans for planning

181
and management of agricultural operation in our country. The
Committee, therefore, desire the Government to impress upon States
to utilize these Contingency plans and disseminate information
among farmers to safeguard their crops in case of any unforeseen
weather conditions. The Committee also desire the Government to
take steps for enhancing awareness among farmers regarding District
Agricultural Contingency plans.
The Committee are also of view that these contingency plan
will be also useful to face the challenges associated with climatic
changes. However, there is need for regular revision/updation of
agricultural contingency plan based on feedback obtained from their
implementation in different States. The Committee, therefore,
desire the ICAR to periodically review these contingency plans
based on inputs obtained from field and latest technological
inventions. The Committee also recommend the Government to
allocate additional fund for this purpose to the ICAR-CRIDA.
Agricultural Extension Services
27. The Committee note that existence of a robust system of
agriculture extension services is critical for making Indian agriculture
climate resilient. The Committee have been informed that
responsibility for providing of extension services to farmers lies
with the State Governments. However, Central Government is
facilitating the efforts of State Governments through a network of
665 Krishi Vigyan Kendras (KVKs), Agricultural Technology
Management Agency (ATMA) and Agri-clinic and Agri-business scheme.
The Committee note that KVKs are engaged in on-farm testing to
identify the location specificity of technology under various farming
systems, frontline demonstration to establish the production
potential of improved agricultural technologies on the farmers fields,
Capacity development of farmers and extension personnel to update
their knowledge and skills and Providing farm advisories on varied
subjects of interest to farmers. The KVKs also provide farm inputs
such as seeds, planting materials and other technology to the
farmers. The Committee note that ATMA Scheme is under
implementation in 652 districts in 29 States and 3 UTs in the
country with provision for active participation of farmers/farmer-
groups, NGOs, KVK, Panchayati Raj Institutions and other
stakeholders operating at district level and below. The Committee
have also been informed that Mass Media Support to Agriculture
Extension scheme is being implemented to strengthen the reach of
farm information to farming community through the wide network
of Doordarshan, DD Kisan channel and All India Radio.

182
However, the Committee are distressed to note that funding
provided to these agriculture ext ension schemes are not sufficient
to make them an effective platfor m for the benefit of farmers. The
Committee in their previous reports on Demands for Grants have
repeatedly brought out these facts and recommended the
Government to enhance the allo cations to these schemes suitably
in order to equip KVKs with all necessary infrastructure and
manpower. The Committee are of the considered view that condition
of farmers of country cannot be i mproved unless they are provided
information and other necessary inputs for making agriculture
remunerative. The Committee, therefore, recommend the
Government to suitably enhance fund ing to these schemes. The
Committee are also of view that construction of a ‘Krishi Bhavan ’
at Panchayat level will help  to strengthen the agriculture extension
services in the country. Constr uction of such bhavan with adequate
infrastructure, equipments and mass  media facilities with regular
visits of scientists of ICAR, subject matter specialists of KVKs,
progressive farmers etc. will help it to emerge a hub for farmers
and solve their problems related to agriculture. The Committee,
therefore, recommend the Government to take steps for
construction of ‘Kisan Bhavan ’ at Panchayat level.
28. The Committee are of view that there is need for a dynamic
and vibrant system of Agriculture extension services in order to
face the climatic challenges associated with global warming. Farmers
of the country need to be  supported thro ugh an extensive
agriculture extension services whereby they can be provided with
all necessary inputs such as weather advisory, crop selection,
technologies, expert advice etc. Ho wever, the Committee are of
opinion that present system of Agriculture Extension Services being
implemented through State Governments and supplemented through
Central Government are not in position to provide required support
to the farmers in every nook and corner of the country. The present
system of agriculture extension is deficient in their accessibility,
infrastructure facilities, subject matter specialists and flexibility
required to solve challenges of  modern day agriculture facing
climatic uncertainties associated with global warming. There is
also need to make agriculture extension services in every village
of the country. The Committee are of considered opinion that
there is need for reorientation of agriculture extension system, if
country intends to make Indian agriculture climate resilient. The
Committee, therefore, recommend the Government to take steps
for modernization of agriculture e xtension system in the country.
The Committee desire the Government to hold consultation with

183
all State Governments in order to revitalize the Agriculture Extension
Services in the country. The Committee would like to be apprised
about the steps taken by the Go vernment within three months of
presentation of this Report.
Mechanization of Agriculture
29. The Committee observe  that agriculture sector is facing
problem of shortage of labour due to diversification of economy
and higher prospect of earning in other sectors. Further, climatic
fluctuation due to global warming will require shorter duration
crops and hence, there will be need of enhanced mechanization in
agriculture sector to offset pro blem of shortage of labour. The
Committee have been informed that overall level of mechanization
in country’s agriculture sector is  about 40-45%. However, the
Committee are distressed to no te that Department did not maintain
information regarding State-wise level of mechanization. The
Committee were further inf ormed that important agriculture
operations mechanized include seed-bed preparation (40%), seeding/
planting (29%), plant protection (34%), irrigation (37%), harvesting
and threshing (60-70% for wheat & rice and less than 5% for other
crops).
The Committee note that Government has launched a Sub-
Mission on Agricultural Mechanization to extend the benefit of
mechanization to small and marginal farmers through establishment
of custom hiring centres. This mission also intend to create high
tech hubs for high value farm  equipment and creating awareness
amongst the stakeholders through demonstration and capacity
building activities. The Committee were informed that the
Government is providing subsidy ranging from 25 to 50% for
establishment of these centres. The Committee also note that 10%
additional subsidy is provided to SC, ST and women/small-marginal
farmers of NEH State beneficiaries under this scheme.
The Committee were also informed that ICAR-Central Institute
of Agricultural Engineering, Bhopal is engaged in conducting basic
and applied research for development of new machines and
technologies including harvesting machines in the country. The
Committee also note that All India Coordinated Research Project
(AICRP) on Farm Implements & Machinery while working on
development of cost effective harvesters and other farm equipments
in association with private manu facturers has developed various
agricultural equipments such as Multi-purpose Self Propelled

184
Hydraulic Platform, Tractor Mounted Fodder Harvester, Root Crop
Harvester, Tractor Operated Gro undnut Digger Shaker, Tractor
Operated Coconut Harvester etc.
The Committee observe that across the world, mechanization
is considered as one of the important method to enhance farm
productivity and reduce post harvest crop losses. The Committee
are also of opinion that due to small size of farm holding and weak
economic condition of majority of small and marginal farmers in
the country, there is need to focus on research to develop efficient
farm equipments which are suitable to unique agricultural conditions
of the country. Further, the Committee are of view that increasing
the level of mechanization of Indian  agriculture can be adopted as
one of the way to reduce cost of cultivation in country, and thereby
enhancing the income of farmers. The Committee are however,
distressed to note that level of mechanization in agricultural
operations in the country is only 40-45%, which is quite low as
compared to agriculturally advanced country such as USA, Brazil,
China etc. The Committee, therefore, recommend the Government
(Department of Agriculture, Cooperation & Farmers Welfare) to
widen the ambit of Sub-Miss ion on Agricultural Mechanization to
set a definite time frame for enhancing level of agricultural
mechanization in the country. The Committee desire the
Government to adequately enhance allocations of funds for scheme
in order to establish custom hiring centres in each Gram Panchayat.
The Committee also recommend the ICAR to suitably reorient
AICRP-Farm Implements & Machinery to develop cost efficient and
effective farm equipments suitable for farming practices of all agro-
climatic regions of the country. The Committee desire ICAR to
develop small farm equipments which can reduce drudgery while
utilizing human power. The Committee would like to be apprised
about the steps taken in this direction within three months of
presentation of report.
International Accord on Climate Change and India’s Commitment
30. The Committee note that our country has ratified Paris
Agreement on climate change within the United Nations Framework
Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC) dealing with greenhouse
gases emissions mitigation, adaptation and finance starting in the
year 2020. The Committee also note that Paris Agreement’s central
aim is to strengthen the global response to the threat of climate
change by keeping a global temperature rise this century well below

185
2 degrees Celsius above pre-industrial  levels and to pursue efforts
to limit the temperature increase even further to 1.5 degree Celsius.
The Committee have been informed that it is a legally binding
agreement that covers all countries, developed and developing,
with the aim to strengthen the global response to the threat of
climate change, in the context of sustainable development and
efforts to eradicate poverty. The Committee also note that Paris
Agreement also mandate to contribute funds amounting to US $
100 Billion by 2020 by the Developed countries along with provisions
for providing appropriate technology and capacity building support
for mitigation and adaptation efforts to be undertaken by the
developing countries.
The Committee note that Paris Agreement reflects the principle
of equity and common but differentiated responsibilities and
respective capabilities. The Agreement acknowledges the
development imperatives of developing countries and recognize
the developing countries’ right to development and their efforts to
harmonize development with environment, while protecting the
interests of the most vulnerable. The Committee have been informed
that India has submitted its Intended Nationally Determined
Contribution (INDC) which is country driven initiatives for
undertaking mitigation strategies for reduction of greenhouse gases
emission which aims to reduce the emissions intensity of its GDP
by 33 to 35 percent by 2030 from 2005 level. The Committee have
been assured that no INDC does not include any commitment for
reduction of GHGs emission from agriculture sector.
The Committee note that despite having no binding mitigation
obligations as per the Convention, India declared a voluntary goal
of reducing its emissions intensity of its GDP by 20-25% over 2005
levels by 2020. The Committee also note that Government of India
is implementing the National Action Plan on Climate Change (NAPCC)
which enshrines eight national missions in specific areas of Solar
Energy, Enhanced Energy Efficiency, and Sustainable Habitat, Water
Sustaining the Himalayan Ecosystem, Green India, Sustainable
Agriculture and Strategic knowledge for Climate Change. The
Committee have also been informed that voluntary measures
undertaken by the Government to promote low carbon strategies
and Renewable Energy has resulted in the decline of emission
intensity of our GDP by 12% between 2005 and 2010 which have
been recognized by the United Nations Environment Programme
(UNEP) in its Emission Gap Report 2014.

186
The Committee are of view that voluntary steps undertaken by
the Government for reduction of GHGs emission and to make it a
low energy economy under Paris Agreement are in interest of Indian
Economy. However, the Committee are of view there is need to
provide adequate support to the Indian industry and allied sectors
in the form of technologies, professional support and tax rebate in
order to emerge as low carbon intensive sector as well as
competitive in worlds market. The Committee, therefore,
recommend the Government to constitute a dedicated cell for
transfer of technologies and other support to Indian Industry and
allied sector. The Committee also desire the Government to provide
tax rebate to industries which invest for Research & Development
of green technologies in the country. The Committee also
recommend the Government to engage diplomatically with other
countries so that developed countries fulfil their commitment for
transfer of clean technologies and dedicated funds as mandated
under Paris Agreement.
Steps for Augmentation of Funds for Making India a low Energy
Economy
31. The Committee have further been informed that National
Clean Energy Fund (NCEF) was created in 2010 by the Government
for the purpose of financing and promoting clean energy initiatives
and funding research in the area of clean energy in the country.
The corpus of the fund is built by levying a cess of INR 400 per
tonne of coal produced domestically or imported. This fund is being
used for financing schemes like installation of solar photovoltaic
(SPV) Lights and small capacity lights, installation of SPV water
pumping under Jawaharlal Nehru National Solar Mission (JNNSM),
projects relating to R&D to replace existing technologies with more
environment friendly ones under National Mission on Strategic
Knowledge for Climate Change (NMSKCC), Grid Interactive and
Distributive renewable power and Research Design and Development
in Renewable Energy of Ministry of New and Renewable Energy.
Similarly, National Adaptation Fund for Climate Change (NAFCC)
with allocations of Rs. 531 crore has been launched in 2015 to
provide financial and technical support for concrete adaptation
activities to be implemented under State Action Plan on Climate
Change (SAPCC), funds for adaptation activities in agriculture, water,
health, infrastructure, forests, bio-diversity and coastal systems
etc. and to reduce the vulnerability and associated risks. The
Committee also note that Government has allocated Rs. 100 crore
to set up a National Mission on Himalayan Studies with the objective
of enhancing natural and human capital in the Himalayan region
under National Mission on Sustai ning Himalayan Ecosystem (NMSHE).

187
The Committee have been inf ormed that National Mission for
Sustainable Agriculture (NMSA) has been initiated with aims to devise
strategies to make Indian agriculture more resilient to climate
change. The NMSA would identify and develop new varieties of
crops and alternative cropping patterns, capable of withstanding
extremes of weather, long dry spells, flooding and variable moisture
availability. The Committee have al so been informed that climate
resilient interventions strategies have been embedded and
mainstreamed into Missions/Progr ammes/Schemes of Department of
Agriculture & Farmers Welfare (DAC & FW). The Government has
emphasized that new credit and insurance mechanisms are being
devised to facilitate adoption of desired practices by the Indian
farmers.
The Committee are of view that there will be need for huge
investment in form of infrastructure, research, and finance support
if they aim to make Indian Agriculture climate resilient. However,
the Committee are distressed to note that allocations for climate
change programmes are too meager to make any significant impact.
The Committee in their previous reports on Demands for Grants
have stressed the need to provide adequate funds for Research &
Development sector in agriculture, to provide farm inputs and for
establishment of an efficient and modern agriculture extension
services to the farmers. The Committee are of considered opinion
that investment in agricultur e sector is utmost necessary to make
it climate resilient. The Committee, therefore,  recommend the
Government to formulate a dedicated schemes for providing support
to the farmers so that they can invest in adaptation mechanism at
farm level to face challenges associated with the climatic change.
The Committee also desire th e Government to enhance allocations
for research and development activities in agriculture sector in
order to develop impr oved varieties of se eds, environment friendly
fertilizers and pesticides.
Constitution of District Level Agriculture Vigilance Committee
32. The Committee are of the view that constitution of a specific
District level Agriculture  Vigilance Committee will go a long way to
improve implementation of various schemes being implemented by
the Central Government. The Committee feel that it will be helpful
to assess ground realities and prob lems being faced by the small
and marginal farmers so that various schemes implemented by the
Government are reviewed, evaluated and improved/modified in
order to address the difficult ies of the farmers comprehensively.

188
The Committee, therefore, recommend the Government to take
steps for constitution of District level Agriculture Vigilance
Committee under the Chairmanship of a senior Member of Parliament
at the District Level for review, monitoring and evaluation of all
schemes related to agriculture. The Committee should consist of
Agriculture Officers from District to Block level, KVK Functionaries
and Chairman of the Advisory Committee of ATMA. The Committee
desire the Government to initiate discussion with State Governments
for constitution of District level Agriculture Vigilance Committee.
Reorientation of Agricultural Education System
33. The Committee observe that Agriculture Education System
as of now, do not focus on short term courses which can be helpful
to provide agriculture foot soldiers in the country. The Committee
are of view that short term cours es of six-twelfth months can be
very useful offering solution to problems faced by the farmers in
every nook and corner of the country. The Committee, therefore,
recommend the Government to start discussion with State
Governments to start such courses in the field of agriculture. The
Government may explore option of linking such short term courses
with National Skill Development Mission. Further, the Committee
desire reorientation of Agricultural education system as per
prevailing social, economic, psy chological and practical conditions
of farmers of the country. The Commit tee also desire that priority
should be given to person of rural aptitude in operation and
management of Agricultural Universities in the country.
The Committee are also of view  that there is need to bring
more practicality in agricultural education system in the country.
The Committee, desire the ICAR to incorporate provisions for
mandatory assignment to students  which should be completed while
staying among farmers in villages. Students along with Professors
should be assigned time bound task for improving agricultural
productivity and income of farmers. Those groups achieving the
task should be given financial remuneration and awards.
   N
EW D ELHI; HUKM DEO NARAYAN YADAV ,
07 August, 2017 Chairperson,
16 Shravana, 1939 (Saka) Committee on Agriculture.

189
ANNEXURE I
DISTRICT-WISE DROUGHTS DURING 2010-16
(DETAILS DECLARED BY STATES)
Year State Districts
12 3
2010 Bihar Araria, Arwal, Aurangabad, Banka, Begusarai, Bhagalpur ,
Bhojpur , Buxar , Darbhanga, Gaya, Gopalganj, Jamui,
Jehanabad, Kaimur , Katihar, Khagaria, Kishanganj,
Lakhisarai, Madhepura, Madhubani, Munger , Muzaffarpur ,
Nalanda, Nawadha, Paschim Champaran, Patna, Purba
Champaran, Purnea, Rohtas, Saharsa, Samastipur , Saran,
Shekhpura, Sheohar , Sitamarhi, Siwan, Supaul, Vaishali
Jharkhand Bokaro, Chatra, Deoghar , Dhanbad, Dumka, East
Singhbhum, Garhwa, Giridih, Godda, Gumla, Hazaribagh,
Jamtara, Khunti, Kodarma, Latehar , Lohardaga, Pakur,
Palamu, Ramgarh, Ranchi, Sahibganj, Seraikela, Simdega,
West Singhbhum
Odisha Anugul, Balangir , Balasore, Bargarh, Baudh, Bhadrak,
Debagarh, Dhenkanal, Jajapur, Jharsuguda, Kedrapara,
Keonjhar , Mayurbhanj, Puri, Sambalpur , Sundargarh
West Bengal Bankura, Birbhum, Hooghly, Maldah, Murshidabad, Nadia,
North 24-parganas, Paschim Medinipur , Purba Medinipur ,
Purulia, South 24-parganas
2011 Andhra Pradesh Anantpur , Chittoor , Cuddepah, East Godavari, Guntur ,
Krishna, Kurnool, Nellore, Prakasam, Srikakulam,
Visakhapatnam,Vizianagarm, West Godavari
Karnataka Bagalkot, Bangalore Rural, Belgaum, Bellary, Bidar , Bijapur ,
Chamarajanagar , Chikkaballapur , Chikmagalur , Chitradurga
Davanagere, Dharwad, Gadag, Gulbarga, Hassan, Haveri,
Kolar, Koppal, Mandya, Mysore, Raichur , Ramanagara,
Tumkur , Yadagiri
Maharashtra Ahmednagar , Amravati, Buldana, Dhule, Gadchiroli,
Gondiya, Latur , Nagpur , Nandurbar , Nasik, Osmanabad,
Pune, Sangli, Satara, Solapur

190
2012 Andhra Pradesh Anantpur , Chittoor , Guntur , Kurnool, Nellore, Prakasam
Gujarat Ahmedabad, Amreli, Anand, Banas Kantha, Bharuch,
Bhavnagar, Gandhinagar , Jamnagar , Junagadh, Kheda,
Mahesana, Patan, Porbandar , Rajkot, Surendranagar ,
Vadodara
Karnataka Bagalkot, Bangalore, Bangalore Rural, Belgaum, Bellary,
Bidar , Bijapur , Chamarajanagar , Chikkaballapur ,
Chikmagalur , Chitradurga, Davanagere, Dharwad, Gadag,
Gulbarga, Hassan Haveri, Kolar , Koppal, Mandya, Mysore,
Raichur , Ramanagara, Shimoga, Tumkur , Yadagiri
Kerala Alappuzha, Ernakulam, Idukki, Kannur , Kasargod, Kollam,
Kottayam, Kozhikode, Malappuram, Palakkad,
Pathanamthitta, Thrissur , Trivandrum, Wayanad
Maharashtra Ahmednagar , Aurangabad, Beed, Buldana, Dhule, Hingoli,
Jalgaon, Jalna, Latur , Nanded, Nasik, Osmanabad,
Parbhani, Pune, Sangli, Satara, Solapur
Rajasthan Ajmer , Banswara, Barmer , Bikaner , Churu, Jaisalmer ,
Jhunjhunu, Jodhpur , Nagaur , Pali, Rajsamand, Sikar
T amil Nadu Ariyalur, Coimbatore, Cuddalore, Dharmapuri, Dindigul,
Erode, Kancheepuram, Kanniya Kumari, Karur , Krishnagiri,
Madurai, Nagapattinam, Namakkal, Perambalur ,
Pudukkottai, Ramanathapuram, Salem, Sivaganga,
Thanjavur, The Nilgiris Theni, Thiruvallur , Thiruvarur ,
Thoothukudi, Tiruchirappalli, Tirunelveli, Tirupur ,
Tiruvannamalai, Vellore, Villuppuram, Virudhunagar
2013 Andhra Pradesh Anantpur , Chittoor , Vizianagarm
Bihar Aurangabad, Begusarai, Bhagalpur, Bhojpur , Buxar ,
Darbhanga, Gaya, Gopalganj, Jamui, Jehanabad, Kaimur ,
Katihar, Khagaria, Lakhisarai, Madhepura, Madhubani,
Munger, Muzaffarpur , Nalanda, Nawadha, Paschim
Champaran, Patna, Purba Champaran, Purnea, Saharsa,
Samastipur , Saran, Shekhpura, Sheohar , Sitamarhi, Siwan,
Supaul, Vaishali
Karnataka Bagalkot Bangalore, Belgaum, Bellary, Bijapur ,
Hamarajanagar , Chikkaballapur, Chitradurga, Davanagere,
Dharwad, Gadag, Gulbarga, Hassan, Haveri, Kolar, Koppal,
Mandya, Mysore, Ramanagara, Tumkur , Uttarakannada,
Yadagiri
12 3

191
Rajasthan Ajmer , Alwar , Banswara, Baran, Barmer , Bharatpur ,
Bhilwara, Bikaner , Bundi, Chittaurgarh, Churu, Dausa,
Dungarpur , Ganganagar , Hanumangarh, Jaipur , Jaisalmer ,
Jhalawar , Jhunjhunu, Jodhpur , Karauli, Kota, Nagaur , Pali
Pratapgarh, Sawai Madhopur , Sikar , Sirohi, Tonk
2014 Andhra Pradesh Anantpur , Chittoor , Guntur , Kurnool, Nellore, Prakasam
Haryana Ambala, Bhiwani, Faridabad, Fatehabad, Gurgaon, Hissar ,
Jhajjar , Jind, Kaithal, Karnal, Kurkshetra, Mahendragarh,
Mewat, Palwal, Panchkula, Panipat, Rewari, Rohtak, Sirsa,
Sonepat, Yamuna Nagar
Karnataka Bangalore, Bangalore Rural, Bidar, Chikkaballapur ,
Gulbarga, Hassan, Kolar , Ramanagara, Tumkur
Maharashtra Ahmednagar , Akola, Amravati, Aurangabad, Beed,
Bhandara, Buldana, Chandrapur , Dhule, Gadchiroli,
Gondiya, Hingoli, Jalgaon, Jalna, Latur , Nagpur, Nanded,
Nandurbar, Nasik, Osmanabad, Parbhani, Pune, Satara,
Wardha, Washim, Yevatmal
Uttar Pradesh Agra, Aligarh, Amethi (Shahu Ji Maharaj), Auraiya,
Azamgarh, Badaun, Banda, Bareilly, Bulandshahr,
Chitrakoot, Deoria, Etah, Etawah, Faizabad, Farrukhabad,
Fatehpur , Firozabad, Gautam Buddha Nagar , Ghaziabad,
Hamirpur, Hapur (Panchsheel Nagar), Hardoi, Jalaun,
Jaunpur , Jhansi, Kannauj, Kanpur City, Kanpur Dehat, Kaus,
Hambi, Kushinagar, Maharajganj, Mahoba, Mainpuri,
Mathura, Mau, Meerut, Muzaffarnagar , Pilibhit, Rampur ,
Saharanpur , Shamli (Prabudh Nager), Sonbhadra, Unnao
2015 Arunachal Pradesh East Kameng, Tawang
Nagaland Mokokchung, Phek
Mizoram K olasib, Lunglei
Bihar Bhojpur , Purnia, Sitamarhi
Uttar Pradesh Ambedkar Nagar , Barabanki, Deoria, Faizabad,
Farrukhabad, Fatehpur , Gorakhpur , Kannauj, Kanpur Nagar ,
Kanpur Dehat, Kaushambi, Kushinagar , Lucknow,
Maharajganj, Mau, Rae Bareli, Sultanpur , Unnao, Agra,
Auraiya, Etah, Hamirpur , Jalaun, Jhansi, Lalitpur , Mahoba,
Mainpuri, Pilibhit, Rampur , Pithoragarh
12 3

192
Haryana Fatehabad, Kaithal, Kurukshetra, Mahendragarh, Panchkula,
Rohtak
Punjab Firozpur , Jalandhar , Mansa
Himachal Pradesh Lahul & Spiti
Daman and Diu Daman
Maharashtra K olhapur , Parbhani
Andhra Pradesh Medak
2016 Arunachal Pradesh East kameng, Tawang, West kameng
Meghalaya Jaintia Hills, South Garo Hills, West Khasi Hills
Uttar Pradesh Farrukhabad, Kannauj, Kanpur Dehat, Kushinagar ,
Ghaziabad, Mainpuri
Haryana Ambala, Kurukshetra, Panchkula, Panipat, Rohtak, Sonipat
Delhi (UT) North East Delhi
Punjab Fatehgarh Sahib, Firozpur , Patiala
Himachal Pradesh Chamba, Kinnaur , Lahul & Spiti
Karnataka Chamarajanagar
Kerala W ayanad
Source: 1. Department of Agriculture from different States.
2. India Meteorological Department.
12 3

193
ANNEXURE II
DISTRICT-WISE FLOODS DURING 2010–2016
Year State Districts
12 3
2010 Punjab P atiala, Sangrur
Haryana Kaithal, Fatehabad
2011 Assam Lakhimpur , Marigaon, Golaghat, Golpara
Bihar East Champaran, Muzaffarpur , Sitamarhi, Madhubani,
Darbhanga, Samastipur , Khagaria, Katihar , Banka, Munger ,
Madhepura, Patna, Lakhisarai, Shekhpura, Nalanda,
Bhojpur , Chhapra, Buxar
West Bengal Murshidabad, Birbhum, Bardhaman, Paschim Medinipur ,
North 24 Paraganas, Malda
Odisha Bhadra, Dhenkanal, Cuttack, Puri, Kendrapara
2012 Assam Lakhimpur , Dibrugarh, Sonitpur , Marigaon, Darrang,
Kamrup, Golpara, Bongaigaon, Dhubri, Karimganj, Dhemaji
Bihar East Champaran, Darbhanga, Muzaffarpur , Samastipur ,
Saharsa, Madhepura, Patna, Bhojpur , Sitamarhi
Andhra Pradesh Guntur , Prakasam, East Godavari, Nellore
Tamil Nadu Thiruvarur , Kadalore
2013 Andhra Pradesh Prakasam, Guntur
Telangana Khammam
Assam Dhemaji, Dibrugarh, Sibsagar, Jorhat, Golaghat, Lakhimpur ,
Sonitpur , Nagaon, Marigaon, Kamrup, Darrang, Bongaigaon,
Dhubri, Karimganj
Bihar Araria, Katihar , Purnia, Munger, Khagaria, Shekpura,
Begusarai, Darbhanga, Muzaffarpur, Madhubani, East
Champaran, Siwan, Buxar , Bhojpur , Chatra, Banka, Munger ,
Lakhisarai, Shekhpura, Patna, Seohar
Delhi North East Delhi, North West Delhi
Gujarat Bharuch

194
Maharashtra Chandrapur
Uttarakhand Haridwar , Rudraprayag
Uttar Pradesh Muzaffarnagar , Meerut, Sitapur , Bahraich, Siddharthnagar ,
Sant Kabir Nagar , Gorakhpur , Kaushambi, Varanasi,
Ghazipur , Ballia
West Bengal Dakshin Dinajpur , Paschim Medinipur
2014 Andhra Pradesh Vizianagaram, Visakhapatnam
Assam Lakhimpur , Dibrugarh, Sonitpur , Marigaon, Darrang,
Kamrup, Golpara, Bongaigaon, Dhubri, Karimganj, Dhemaji,
Karbi Anglong
Bihar P atna, Nalanda, Shekhpura, Munger, Begusarai, Madhepura,
Khagaria, Darbhanga, Sitamarhi, Chhapra, Saharsa, Siwan
Uttar Pradesh Ballia, Ambedkarnagar ,Gorakhpur , Siddharthanagar ,
Balrampur , Bahraich, Shravasti, Gonda, Sitapur , Barabanki
Odisha Baleswar, Bhadrak, Kendrapara, Jaypur, Cuttack, Puri,
Khordha, Jagatsinghpur
Jammu & Kashmir Pulwama, Badagaon, Baramulla
2015 Andhra Pradesh Nellore, Chittoor , Prakasam
Assam Lakhimpur , Dibrugarh, Sonitpur , Marigaon, Darrang,
Kamrup, Golpara, Bongaigaon, Dhubri, Karimganj, Dhemaji
Bihar East Champaran, Muzaffarpur , Darbhanga, Begusarai,
Khagaria
Gujarat Gandhinagar , Surendranagar , Amreli
West Bengal Birbhum, Hugli, Paschim Medinipur , North 24 Paraganas
Odisha Bhadrak
Jammu & Kashmir Baramulla, Sapore, Badgaon, Pulwama
Manipur Thoubal
Tamil Nadu Thiruvallur , Kanchipuram,Chennai, Kadalore, Thirunelveli,
Virudhunagar
Madhya Pradesh Sehore
District information has been collected from the Maps provided by NRSC under Bhuvan (http:// bhuvan-
noeda.nrsc.gov .in/disaster/disaster/disaster.php#). This information may kindly be cross confirmed with
State Government agencies for any practical purpose.
12 3

195
ANNEXURE III
TABLE 1: FIELD CROP VARIETIES DEVELOPED TO ADAPT TO CLIMATE
CHANGE AND HAVE MINIMUM IMPACT OF ADVERSE CONDITIONS
Sl.No. Name of variety/ Year of Special attribute
hybrid release
12 3 4
Wheat Kundan 1985 Rainfed conditions
HD 2402 1986 Late sown conditions (Terminal heat
tolerance)
Amar (HW 2004) 1996 Late sown conditions (Terminal heat
tolerance)
Ganga (HD 2643) 1997 T erminal heat tolerance
Aditya (HD 2781) 1997 Rainfed conditions (Drought tolerant)
HS 240 1989 Drought tolerant
HS 277 1992 Heat and drought tolerant
HS 295 1992 Heat and drought tolerant
Shresth (HD 2687) 2001 Lodging tolerance
HS 365 1998 Drought tolerant
VSM (HD 2733) 2001 Early maturity
Kaushambi (HW 2045) 2002 T erminal heat tolerance
Poorva (HD 2824) 2004 Plasticity to delayed sowings making
it suitable for rice-wheat cropping
system (Terminal heat tolerance)
Urja (HD 2864) 2004 Late sown irrigated conditions
(Terminal heat tolerance)
Pusa Gold (WR 544) 2005 P ossesses genes for thermo
tolerance, suitable for very late sown
conditions (Terminal heat tolerance)
Pusa Wheat 107 2006 Rainfed conditions (Drought tolerant)
(HD 2888)
Pusa Tripti 2006 Late sown conditions (Terminal heat
(HD 2833) tolerance)

196
Pusa Wheat 111 2007 Late sown conditions (Terminal heat
(HD 2932) tolerance)
HS 375 2003 Drought tolerant
HS 420 2003 Drought tolerant
HS 490 2009 Drought tolerant
HD 2987 (Pusa Bahar) 2010 T olerant to moisture stress
HD 2985 (Pusa Basant) 2010 T olerant to terminal high
temperature stress
HD 3043 2011 R estricted irrigated conditions
(drought tolerant)
HD 3059 (Pusa Pacheti) 2012 For late sown conditions, has
tolerance to high temperature
HD 3090 (Pusa Amulya) 2013 For late sown conditions, has
tolerance to high temperature
HD 3118 (Pusa Vatsala) 2014 For late to very late conditions of
NE plains. Tolerant to high
temperature
HDCSW 18 2015 It is resistant to high temperature
at seedling stage. It escapes high
temperature at maturity due to early
seeding
HS 542 (Pusa Kiran) 2015 Rainfed conditions
Rice PNR 381 1993 Suitable for both direct seeding and
transplanting
Pusa 834 1996 T olerant to Zinc deficiency and
sodicity
Pusa 677 1997 T olerant to shattering and moisture
stress
Jaldi Dhan-13 2006 Drought prone areas
PNR-546 2006 Rainfed areas
Pearl Millet Pusa Bajra 266 1996 Tolerant to drought and moisture
stress
Pusa Bajra 334 1999 Tolerant to drought and moisture
Stress, resistant to lodging and
shattering
12 3 4

197
12 3 4
Hybrid Pusa 415 1999 T olerance to moisture stress
Hybrid Pusa 605 1999 T olerance to moisture stress
Composite Pusa 383 2001 R esistant to lodging and shattering,
tolerant to low moisture stress
Pusa composite 443 2008 Highly drought tolerant
Pusa Composite 612 2009 T olerance to moisture stress
Pusa Composite 701 2015 Pusa composite 701 is a dual purpose
(Identified) pearl millet variety identified for
release in the rainfed conditions of
Zone A comprising States of
Rajasthan, Haryana, Gujarat,
Punjab, Uttar Pradesh, Madhya
Pradesh and Delhi. It is high yielding,
early maturing, downy mildew and
blast resistant lines.
Maize PEHM-1 1997 Suitable for both rainfed and
irrigated conditions
PEHM-2 1998 T olerant to moisture stress
PEHM-3 2000 T olerant to high temperature and
lodging
AH 421 (PEHM 5) 2004 Better adaptability and flexibility
giving reasonable good yield under
water logged conditions
Pusa Composite-3 2005 T olerant to moisture stress and
lodging
Pusa Composite-4 2005 T olerant to moisutre stress and
lodging
Chickpea Pusa 256 1985 Highly tolerant to drought,
moderately tolerant to cold and heat
Ajay (Pusa 408) 1985 T olerant to drought
Atul (Pusa 413) 1985 T olerant to drought
Girnar (Pusa 417) 1985 T olerant to drought
Pusa 372 (Desi) 1993 Rainfed conditions (Drought tolerant)
Pusa 362 (Desi) 1995 Highly tolerant to drought, cold and
heat

198
12 3 4
BGD 72 (Desi) 1995 Rainfed conditions (Drought tolerant)
Pusa 391 1996 T olerant to drought, heat and cold
Pusa Chamatkar 2000 Rainfed conditions (Drought tolerant)
(BG 1053) (Kabuli)
Pusa 1088 (Kabuli) 2005 Rainfed (Drought tolerant) and
irrigated conditions
Pusa 1103 (Desi) 2005 Late sown condition (High
temperature tolerant)
Pusa 1105 (Kabuli) 2005 Highly tolerant to drought
Pusa 1108 (Kabuli) 2006 Late sown and rainfed (Drought
tolerant conditions)
Pusa 547 (Desi) 2006 Late sown irrigated conditions
(Terminal heat tolerance)
BGD 128 (Kabuli) 2007 Irrigated and late sown conditions
(Terminal heat tolerance)
Pusa 2024 (Kabuli) 2008 Irrigated and late sown (T erminal
heat tolerance) conditions
Pusa green 112 2013 Highly tolerant to drought and wilt
Pusa 3022 2014 Kabuli extra large seeded for North
West Plain Zone, including UP ,
Rajasthan, Punjab and Haryana
Pea Pusa Prabhat 2001 Irrigated and rainfed (Drought
(DDR 23) tolerant) situations
Pusa Panna (DDR 27) 2001 Irrigated and rainfed (Drought
tolerant) situations
DDR 55 (Pusa Mukta) 2005 Irrigated and rainfed (Drought
tolerant) situations
Lentil Pusa Vaibhav (L 4147) 1997 Irrigated and rainfed (Drought
tolerant) situations
Shivalik (L 4076) 1995 Irrigated and rainfed (Drought
tolerant) situations
Pusa Lentil 5 (L 4594) 2006 Irrigated and rainfed (Drought
tolerant) situations

199
12 3 4
Mungbean Pusa 06-72 2010 Cold tolerant and tolerant to acidic
soils of hill region
Pusa 9531 2001 T olerant to high temperature
Pigeonpea Pusa 991 2005 Rainfed and salinity
Mustard Pusa Bold 1985 All situations (Irrigated, rainfed, late
sown, problematic soils)
Pusa Bahar 1997 Suitable for rainfed conditions
Pusa Agrani (SEI-2) 1998 T olerant to high temperature at
germination and maturity
Pusa Jagannath 1999 T imely as well as late sown
(VSL-5) conditions
Pusa Mahak (JD-6) 2006 T olerant to high temperature at
germination and maturity
Pusa Vijay (NPJ-93) 2008 Tolerance to high temperature at
seedling stage. Also tolerant to
salinity
Pusa Tarak (EI-13) 2009 Short duration variety having
tolerance to high temperature at
seedling stage
Pusa Mustard 25 2010 Short duration variety having
(NPJ-112) tolerance to high temperature at
seedling stage
Pusa Mustard 26 2010 T olerant to high temperature at
(NPJ-113) seedling stage
Pusa Mustard 27 2010 T olerant to high temperature at
(EI-17) seedling stage
Pusa Mustard 28 2011 T olerant to high temperature at
(NPJ-124) seedling stage
Karan rai Pusa Swarnim (IGC-01) 2003 Irrigated and rainfed conditions
Pusa Aditya (NPC-9) 2006 T imely sown rainfed conditions,
suitable for marginal lands
Cotton PSS-2 (Arvinda) 2007 Suitable for hot and humid conditions
in Rabi & Kharif.

200
TABLE 2: VARIETY/F 1 HYBRIDS RESISTANT/TOLERANT TO BIOTIC AND
ABIOTIC STRESSES FOR ADAPTATION TO CLIMATE CHANGE
Crop Variety/Hybrid Special feature
12 3
Cauliflower Pusa Meghna High temperature tolerant, suitable for July-
Pusa Ashwini October growing period in North Indian plains
Pusa Kartiki
Pusa Kartik
Sankar (F
1)
Pusa Shukti, Tolerant to downy mildew and black rot. Suitable
Pusa Paushja, for October to December growing period in North
Pusa Hybrid-2 Indian plains
Carrot Pusa Vrishti High temperature and high humidity tolerant,
suitable for August-November growing period in
North Indian plains
Tomato Pusa Sheetal Cold set variety, sets fruit at temperature as
low as 6-10ºC
Pusa Sadabahar Both hot and cold set, sets fruit at temperature
as low as 5-6ºC and as high as 35ºC
Pusa Hybrid-1 Hot set hybrid, sets fruit at temperature as high
as 35ºC
Cherry Tomato Pusa Cherry A verage fruit yield 22 kg./plant with yield
Tomato-1 potential of 4-5 tonnes/1000 m
2. The fruits get
ready for first harvest in about 70-75 days and
crop lasts for about 9-10 months in greenhouse.
Fruits contain 5.4 mg/100 g FW lycopene, 20.7
mg/100g FW ascorbic acid, 0.43 acidity and
10.4º B TSS.
Palak Pusa Harit Suitable for high temperature regimes, being slow
bolter 6-7 cuttings can be taken. It is also
suitable for saline conditions
Pusa Bharti Suitable for saline conditions, produces very
succulent leaves with 4-5 cuttings
Radish Pusa Chetki High temperature tolerant, suitable for April-
August sowing under North Indian conditions

201
12 3
Turnip Pusa Sweti T olerant to hoth and humid conditions. Suitable
for August sowing in North Indian Plains
Bottle gourd Pusa Santushti Tolerant to low temperature conditions. Suitable
for late planting in Kharif season
Bitter gourd Pusa Rasdar First extra early (41-45 days for first fruit
harvest) improved variety of bitter gourd suitable
for cultivation in protected condition. Average
yield of 4.54 q under 100 sqm insect-proof net
house and 4.07 q under 100 sqm polyhouse
Cucumber Pusa Seedless First extra early (40-45 days for first fruit
Cucumber-6 harvest) improved indigenous variety of
parthenocarpic gynoecious cucumber suitable for
cultivation in protected condition. Average fruit
length, width & weight are 14.24 cm, 3.45 cm
& 105g, respectively. Average fruit yield is 126
t/ha (1260 kg./100 m
2) during winter season (off-
season, November-March)
Cowpea Pusa Sukomal Drought and Mung bean yellow mosaic virus
tolerant

202
ANNEXURE IV
THE HIGH  YIELDING  VARIETIES  THAT CAN  WITHSTAND  SEVERE
CHANGE IN WEATHER PATTERN INCLUDING DEFICIENT RAINFALL/
DROUGHT AND VARIETIES SUITABLE FOR BIOTIC AND ABIOTIC
STRESSES
Food Crops
Varieties T raits Zone/State
12 3
Rice
Hybrid 6129 R esistant to Blast, brown spot Irrigated areas of Punjab &
and brown plant hopper Tamil Nadu
Improved Samba Mahsuri R esistant to bacterial blight Irrigated/shallow lowlands of
Andhra Pradesh, Chhattisgarh,
Jharkhand, Odisha, Bihar ,
Gujarat, Maharashtra
Improved Pusa Basmati 1 Resistant to blast Basmati-growing areas of Delhi,
Punjab, Jammu and Kashmir ,
Uttarakhand
Sahabhagi Dhan, V andana, Drought tolerance Upland rice areas
Anjali, Satyabhama, DRR
Dhan 42, Birsa Vikas Dhan
203, Birsa Vikas Dhan 111,
Rajendra Bhagwati,
Jaldi Dhan 6, IR64 Drt I
CSR 27, CSR 30, CSR Salinity stress tolerance Inland Saline areas
36, Narendar Ushar ,
Shankar Dhan 3, Lunishri
CR Dhan 402, CR Dhan 403 Salinity stress tolerance Coastal areas
Swarna Sub1, Savitri Sub1, Submergence tolerance (can Flood prone shallow lands areas
CR Dan 401 and Chakaakhi sustain flood and flash
flood upto 7-12 days)
CR Dhan 500, Varshadhan, Waterlogging condition upto Flood prone shallow lands areas
Hanseswari, CR Dhan 505, 75–100 cm
Jayantidhan, Jalamani
and Durga

203
CR Dhan 201 Moderately resistant to leaf Chhattisgarh & Bihar under
blast, sheath rot, stem borer , aerobic condition
leaf folder , whorl maggot and
rice thrips
CR Dhan 202 Moderately resistant to stem Jharkhand and Odisha under
borer , leaf folder , whorl aerobic condition
maggot and rice thrips
CR Dhan 407 Moderate resistance to BLB, Odisha and West Bengal under
Leaf Blast rainfed shallow lowlands
CR Dhan 505 Moderately resistant to leaf Odisha and Assam under deep
blast, sheath rot, sheath water condition
blight & rice tungro virus
Pusa Basmati 1509 Improved short duration W estern Uttar Pradesh and Delhi
basmati under irrigated transplanted
condition
Wheat
PBW550 R esistant to yellow rust Punjab, Haryana, West Uttar
Pradesh (except Jhansi division)
VL 892 Medium fertility and restricted Hills of Himachal Pradesh and
irrigation condition Uttarakhand
H1 1544 High fertility and irrigated Madhya Pradesh, Rajasthan
conditions (K ota and Udaipur divisions) and
Gujarat
PBW 527 Drought tolerance North W est Plains
HI 1531, HI 1500, HI 8627 Drought tolerance Central Zone
HD 2888 Drought tolerance Eastern India
HPW 349, PBW 644, WH Drought tolerance Northern and Central Wheat
1080, HD 3043, PBW 396, growing areas
K 9465, K 8962, MP 3288,
HD 4672, NIAW 1415,
HD 2987
NIAW 34 High temperature stress Peninsular zone late sown
tolerance conditions
Raj 3765 High temperature stress North Western Plain for late
tolerance sown conditions
12 3

204
12 3
Raj 4037 High temperature stress P eninsular India for normal sown
tolerance conditions
KRL 14, KRL 19, KRL 210, Salinity stress tolerance Inland saline areas
KRL 213
HD 2967 Rusts resistance North Western Plain Zone and
North Eastern Plain Zone
Narendra Wheat 4018 Resistant to brown rust and Uttar Pradesh
leaf blight
Maize
QPM Hybrid HQPM 7 Quality protein single-cross Andhra Pradesh, Karnataka,
hybrids Tamil Nadu and Maharashtra
QPM Vivek 9 Early maturing and quality Jammu and Kashmir , Himachal
protein P radesh, Uttarakhand, Andhra
Pradesh
Buland High temperature stress Northern parts of India
tolerance
PMH 1 High temperature stress Irrigated areas of Punjab
tolerance
PMH 3 High temperature stress Northern parts of India
tolerance
HM 9 High temperature stress Bihar, Jharkhand, Odisha
tolerance
Pusa hybrid Makka 1 Drought tolerance Rajasthan, Gujarat,
Madhya Pradesh
HM 4 Drought tolerance Punjab, Haryana, Uttar Pradesh,
Andhra Pradesh, Maharashtra,
Tamil Nadu and Goa
Pusa hybrid Makka 5 Drought tolerance Whole of India
DHM 121 (BH 41009) Medium maturity, yellow, Odisha, Bihar , Jharkhand, West
semi-dent and tolerant to Bengal, Gujarat, Rajasthan,
moisturestress conditions Chhattisgarh and Madhya
Pradesh in kharif season
HM-5, Seed Tech-2324, Deep water/submergence/ Maize growing areas
HM-10, PMH-2 water logging tolerance

205
Sorghum
CSH 25 Dual purpose and tolerant Maharashtra, Andhra Pradesh,
to grain mold diseases Madhya Pradesh, Karnataka and
Gujarat
CSH 19 R, CSV 18 Drought tolerance All rabi sorghum area
CSH 15 R Drought tolerance Maharashtra, Karnataka,
Andhra Pradesh and Tamil Nadu
Millets
(i) Pearl Millet Drought tolerance All dry areas of W estern
HHB 67 improved, GH B757, Rajasthan and Gujarat
GHB 538, GHB 719,
Dhanshakti, HHB 234,
Mandor Bajra Composite 2,
HHB-226, RHB-177, Pusa
Composite 443
(ii) Finger Millet Drought tolerance Millets growing dry regions
GPU 67, DHRS 1, PRM-2,
KMr-301, VL Mandua 347,
Indira Ragi-1, Dapoli safed-1,
HIMA, KMR 204, VL
Mandua-352 (VL352), Phule
Nachani-1 (KOPN-235)
(iii) Foxtail Millet Drought tolerance Millets growing dry regions
Sia 3085, SiA 3156
(iv) Barnyard Millet Drought tolerance Millets growing dry regions
CO(KV)2
(v) Kodo Millet Drought tolerance Millets growing dry regions
Indira Kodo-1
Barley
RD 2660, K603 Drought tolerance North W est Plains region
Pulses
Variety Trait Zone
Chickpea
Karnal Chana T olerance to salinity North West Plain Zone
CO1, ICCV 10 Drought tolerance Southern Zone
12 3

206
Vijay, Vikas Drought tolerance Central Zone
RSG 14 , RSG 888 Drought tolerance North W est Plain Zone
PKV Kabuli 4, IPCK2004-29, Extra large seeded Kabuli Central Zone
Phule G 0517
MNK 1 Extra large seeded Kabuli South Zone
JG 6, JG 14 R esistance to wilt Central Zone
DCP 92-3 Lodging tolerance Central Zone
GNG 16 Lodging tolerance North West Plain Zone
Pigeonpea
BSMR 736, BSMR 175, Asha W ilt/Sterility mosaic disease Central Zone
tolerance
NDA 1, MAL 13 Wilt/Sterility mosaic disease North East Plain Zone
tolerance
Pusa 992, PA 291, PAU881 Short duration suitable for North West Plain Zone
multiple cropping
Mungbean
HUM 1 Yellow mosaic virus tolerance Central and Southern Zone
CO6 Yellow mosaic virus tolerance South Zone
IPM 02-3 Yellow mosaic virus tolerance North East Plain Zone
Samrat, IPM 2-3, Meha, Early maturing suitable for North West Plain Zone and North
SML 668 spring/summer East Plain Zone
IPM2-14, TM96-2, LGG460, R esistant to powdery mildew South Zone
LGG 410 suitable for rabi/spring
Urdbean
WBU 109, Pant U31, Short duration suitable for North East Plain Zone
Azad Urd 1 multiple cropping
IPU-02-43, LBG 625, R esistant to powdery mildew South Zone
Vamban 4, WBG 26 suitable for rabi/spring
Lentil
HUL57, KLS218, PL8 Resistance to rust North East Plain Zone
DPL 62, PL 6, PL7, IPL Large seeded Central Zone and North Western
406, IPL 315, IPL 316 Plain Zone
12 3

207
Oilseeds
Variety Trait Zone
Castor
DCH 519 Resistance to wilt and leaf All castor growing zones
hoppers
GC 3 Resistant to wilt Gujarat
Jwala T olerance to salinity and All castor growing zones
resistance to wilt
Rapeseed Mustard
NRCDR2 High temperature tolerance North West Plain Zone
LET-18, Pusa Mustard 21, Low erucic acid North West Plain Zone
Pusa Mustard 24, RLC1
NRCDR 601 High temperature and salinity North West Plain Zone
tolerance
VL toria 3 Tolerance to cold North Hill Zone
Soybean
JS97-52 R esistance to Yellow mosaic Central Zone and North Eastern
virus and collar rot Zone
NRC7 Pod shattering resistance All soybean growing Zones
SL 668, JS 97-52 Yellow mosaic resistance All soybean growing Zones
NRC-7, JS 71-05 Pod shattering and drought All soybean growing Zones
tolerance
NARI 38, SSF 658 Resistant to wilt All castor growing Zones
JS 97-52, JS 20-38 and Suitable for water logging Soybean growing Zones
PK 472 condition.
NRC 7, JS 95-60 Drought tolerance Soybean growing Zones
Groundnut
Ajiya, Girnar1, TAG-24, Drought Tolerance Central and South Zone
GG20, Kadiri 6, ICGV
91114
Girnar 2, Kadiri 9, Kadiri, Short duration suitable for South Zone
Haritandhra, Greeshma rabi/spring
12 3

208
12 3
Commercial Crops
Variety/Hybrid Traits Zone
Cotton
HD 324 Tolerance to Fusarium wilt North Zone
and Leaf curl virus
Hybrid Kalyan T olerant to Cotton Leaf curl North Zone
virus
G.Cot.Hy 12 T olerant to aphids and jassids Central Zone
LRA 5166 Tolerance to drought Central Zone
KC 3 Tolerance to drought South Zone
Kanchana, L - 604 Resistance to whitefly South Zone
MCU 5 VT , Surabhi Resistance to verticillium wilt South Zone
Suraj Long staple with jassid South and Central Zone irrigated
tolerance conditions
HD 324, CICR-1, Raj DH 7, Drought Tolerant Cotton growing areas
Jawahar Tapti, Pratap Kapi,
Suraj, Surabhi, Veena,
AK 235
Sugarcane
Co 94008 (Shyama) T olerant to drought and Peninsular Zone
salinity
Co 2001-3 (Sulabh) Moderately resistant to red Peninsular Zone
rot, smut and wilt
Co 98014 (Karan-1) Tolerant to drought, water- North West Zone
logging
CoS 96268 (Mithas) Moderately resistant to red North West Zone
rot and good ratooner
CoSe 6436 (Jalpari) Tolerant to water-logging North Central Zone
and good ratooner
Co 0233 (Kosi) Moderately resistant to red North Central Zone
rot and smut
CoC 01061 Moderately resistant to red rot. East Cost Zone

209
12 3
CoLk 94184 (Birendra) T olerant to drought and water North Central Zone
logging with good rationing
Co 0118 High sucrose content and Punjab, Haryana, Rajasthan,
resistant to red rot, wilt and Central and Western Uttar
smut, tolerant to water logging Pradesh and Uttarakhand
Co 0239, Co 0238, Tolerant to drought Southern and Central Zone
Co 06927, Co 0403,
Co 86032
Jute
JRO 204 (Suren), Early sowing suitability with Tossa jute belt
JBO-2003-H (IRA) fine fibre quality
JRC-532 (Sashi) V ery fine fibre fineness white White jute belt
jute
JRC 80 (Mitali) P remature flowering resistance White jute belt
JBO 1 (Sudhangsu) Drought tolerance T ossa jute belt of West Bengal,
Assam, Bihar & Orissa
S19, Tarun, JRO 7835, Suitable for water logging Jute growing belts
JRO 524, JRO 878, condition.
JRC 321, JRC 7447,
JRC 532, JRC 517,
Bidhan Pat-1

210
ANNEXURE V
MEMORANDA RECEIVED FROM EXPERTS/ORGANISATIONS/STAKEHOLDERS
IN CONNECTION WITH EXAMINATION OF SUBJECT “COMPREHENSIVE
AGRICULTURAL RESEARCH BASED ON GEOGRAPHICAL CONDITIONS
AND IMPACT OF CLIMATE CHANGE TO ENSURE FOOD
SECURITY IN THE COUNTRY ”
Sl.No. Name of Individual/Organisation/Institution
12
1. Dr. Ajit Kumar , I.A.S. (Retd.), Vice-Chancelor
NIFTEM, Kundli-131028, Distt. Sonepat (Haryana), Ministry of
Food Processing Industries, Government of India
(Letter-30.12.2015)
2. Dr. Govind Gujar , DBT Visiting Research Professor , Institute of
Advanced Study in Science and Technology (Iasst), Vigyan Path,
Paschim Boragaon, Garchuk, Guwahati-781035: Assam, India
(Letter-25.12.2015)
3. Shri Rajesh Dutta Baruah, Secretary ‘The Green Globe’ Nalbari,
Assam
(Letter-29.12.2015)
4. Shri B.M.T . Rajeev, IFS (Retd.), Sri Siddhartha Welfare Trust (R)
Benavara, Amruthur Hobli, Kunigal Tq-572111
(Letter-18.11.2015)
5. Prof. R.K. Sharma, President, Durga Sewa Sadan, 101, Sushila
Vihar-1, Bhur , Bulandshahr-203001 (U.P .) India
(Letter-05.01.2016)
6. Shri Balwinder Singh, Convener , National Youth Project, Unit
Malout-152107 (Distt. Sri Muktsar Sahib) Punjab
(Letter-10.12.2015)
7. Shri K. Nithianandan, B-1, Kudil Anbalaya Apartment, Kailasa
Nagar , East Cost Road, Puducherry-605008
(Letter-30.11.2015)
8. Shri K.C. Pawar, Farmer, Vill. & P .O. Meruth, U.P .
(Letter-16.11.2015)
9. Shri Rajender Sinhal, K.S. 312, Agarsain Market, Bawana Road,
Narela, Delhi-110040
(Letter-17.11.2015)

211
10. Shri Prafulla Kumar Mandal, Mandal Bhavan, Vill. & P .O. Abash,
Distt.-West Midnapur , West Bengal-721112
(Letter-9.11.2015)
11. Shri Ramnaresh Verma, Vill.-Ganeshpur, P .O. Udholi, Distt.
Barabanki-225412, U.P .
(Letter-26.11.2015)
12. Director (Academics and Research), Kerala Veterinary & Animal
Science University, Pookode, Lakkidi P .O. Wayanad-673576, Kerala
(Letter-25.11.2015)
13. Dr. Marcella, D’Souza, Executive Director (WOTR) 2nd Floor ,
“The Forum ” S.No. 63/b, Padmavati Corner, Pune-Satara Road,
Pune-411009, Maharashtra
(Letter-27.11.2015)
14. Shri Madhavrao Gaikwad, Marathpara, Dhamtri, Distt. Dhamtri,
Chhattisgarh
(Letter-21.12.2015)
15. Shri Ashwani Kumar M. Pandya, Taluka, Borud, Distt. Anand-
388550, Gujarat
(Letter-2.1.2016)
16. Shri Pawan Kumar Goyal, Kotli Road, Maur-Mandi-151509
(Bhatinda) Punjab
(Letter-2.1.2016)
17. “Yuva Kranti Sangh” Vill. Raital, P .O. Kasibadra, Distt. Mahasmund-
493444, Chhattisgarh
(Letter-31.12.2015)
18. Shri Jagmal Singh Bhati, Vill. Lakhasar , P .O. Rasla, Distt. Jaisalmer
Rajasthan
(Letter-28.12.2015)
19. Shri S. Krishnamoorthi, Retd. Inspector CISF and President Farmers
Association, Thurinjikuppam, Athuvambadi P .O. Thiruvannamalai
Distt. Tamil Nadu
(Letter-31.12.2015)
20. Shri Rajatkanti Chakarboty, Hailakandi, Assam
(Letter-16.12.2015)
21. Shri Rajvinder Pal Singh Rana, V.P .O. Mandiani, Vill.-Mullanpur,
Distt. Ludhiana-141101, Punjab
(Letter-24.12.2015)
12

212
12
22. Shri Rizwan Ali Khan, C/o Shop No. 1, IBES, Baba Stationery
Shop Dhaka Chowk, Kingsway Camp, Delhi-110009
(Letter-26.12.2015)
23. Shri Kunwar Singh, Member, FCI, 5/709, Behind BJP Office,
Dhekha, Riva, Madhya Pradesh
(Letter-14.12.2015)
24. Shri K.S. Dhanraj, 949 Block No. 49, Pocket 5&7, Meera Bagh,
Delhi-110087
(Letter-12.12.2015)
25. Shri S. Gunasekhran, Flat No. S2, Second Floor , Patel Road
Perambur, Chennai-600011, Tamil Nadu
(Letter-29.11.2015)
26. Shri C. Nandakumar Reddy, #8, Shabarinagar, 2nd Beside L&T
Compound, Behind Dasappa House, Bytaryanapura, Bangalore-
560092
(Letter-18.11.2015)
27. Shri Tushar Kanti Koner, Leat-Manik Chandra Koner, Vill+P .O. Ratra,
Distt.-Bankura, West Bengal-722201
(Letter-12.11.2015)
28. Shri N. Sudhakar , Ex-IAF&HAL, 15/A, 1st Floor , ‘Masha-Allah”
8th Cross, 5th Main, Vinayak Nagar , ASN Palya Extension Hal
Post, Vimanapura, Bangalore-560017, Karnataka
(Letter-11.11.2015)
29. Shri Nihil Kumar Katwar , B-1/260, Sector-34, Noida
(Letter-12.12.2015)
30. Dr. Ajoy Kumar Ghosh, 1/1, Dharmatala Road, P .O. & P .S. Kasba,
Kolkata-700042
(Letter-12.12.2015)
31. Shri Ch. Rangrao, Deepanjalinagar , Vishakapatnam-531020
(Letter-16.12.2015)
32. Shri Goarav Girish Surpatne, Gandhi Nagar , Banosa, Taluka Dyapur,
Distt. Amrawati-444803, Maharashtra
(Letter-18.12.2105)
33. Shri Harikesh N. Bhatt (Retd. RFO), Street No. 1, Sanjay Park,
Opp.-Sarvodaya Society, Surendranagar-363001, Gujarat
(Letter-2.1.2016)

213
12
34. Shri Rahul Goswami, AF2 Ferry Cross Place, Beti M Bardez
Goa-403101
(Letter-20.11.2015)
35. Shri Pitamber Kohli, P-110, Pitam Pura, Delhi-110034
(E-mail-30.12.2015)
36. Shri Hardev Singh Ghanaur , V . & P .O. Ghanaur Khurd,
Via Dhuri-148024, District Sangrur-Punjab
(E-mail-30.12.2015)
37. Shri Himanshu Sekhar Sahoo, National Innovation Foundation
Awardee, LIMCA Book Recorder , Members SSMI (Swadeshi Science
Movement of India), Budharaja, Sambalpur
(E-mail-30.12.2015)
38. Shri Divakar Upadhyay, A-145, Kamalkunj Society, Near Manikrupa
School, I.O.C. Road, Chand Kheda, Ahmedabad-382424
(E-mail-29.12.2015)
39. Shri Naveen Chandravashi, Raipur , Chhattisgarh
(E-mail)
40. Shri Sudhir Kumar Saxena, Durg (Chhattisgarh)
(E-mail)
41. Shri Vijayan, 19, 1st, Chennai-88, Tamil Nadu
(E-mail)
42. Shri S.D. Ugamchand, Ex. MLA & Ex. Chairman, Tamil Nadu
Water Supply and Drainage Board No. 6, Meenakshiamman Koil
Street, Madurantakam-603306, Tamil Nadu
(E-mail)
43. Shri Rajesh Yadav, Jaunpur , U.P .
(E-mail)
44. Padma Raghavan
(E-mail)
45. Dr. S.N. Jha, FISAE, FNAAS, FIE, FNADSI, FJSPS, Japan ICAR's Rafi
Ahmed Kidwai Awardee Project Coordinator , All India Coordinated
Research Project on Post-harvest Engineering & Technology,
Central Institute of Post-Harvest Engineering & Technology
(CIPHET), Ludhiana-141004, India
(E-mail)

214
APPENDIX I
COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE
(2015-16)
MINUTES OF THE SIXTH SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE
The Committee sat on Monday, the 19th October, 2015 from
1500 hours to 1715 hours in Committee Room ‘E’, Parliament House
Annexe, New Delhi.
PRESENT
Shri Hukm Deo Narayan Yadav — Chairperson
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Md. Badaruddoza Khan
3. Dr. Tapas Mandal
4. Shri Dalpat Singh Paraste
5. Shri Arjun Charan Sethi
6. Shri Satyapal Singh (Sambhal)
7. Shri Virendra Singh
8. Shri Jay Prakash Narayan Yadav
Rajya Sabha
9. Shri A.W. Rabi Bernard
10. Shri Janardan Dwivedi
11. Shri Vinay Katiyar
12. Shri Rajpal Singh Saini
13. Shri Ram Nath Thakur
14. Shri Shankarbhai N. Vegad
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Shri U.B.S. Negi — Joint Secretary
2. Smt. Juby Amar — Additional Director
3. Shri Sumesh Kumar — Under Secretary

215
WITNESSES
MINISTRY OF AGRICULTURE & FARMERS WELFARE
(DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURAL RESEARCH AND EDUCATION
1. Dr. S. Ayyappan — Secretary (DARE) & DG (ICAR)
2. Dr. A.K. Sikka — Dy. Director General (NRM)
3. Dr. J.S. Sandhu — D y. Director General (Crop Science)
4. Dr. N.K. Krishna Kumar — Dy. Director General (Horticulture)
5. Dr. A.K. Singh — Dy. Director General (Extension)
6. Dr. Narendra Singh — Dy. Director General (Education)
Rathore
7. Dr. K. Alagusundaram — Dy. Director General (Engg.)
8. Dr. K.M.L. Pathak — Dy. Director General (NRM)
9. Dr. S.K. Choudhari — Assistant Director General (SW&M)
10. Dr. B.S. Prakash — Assistant Director General
11. Dr. A.K. Vashisht — ADG (PIM)
CENTRAL RESEARCH INSTITUTE FOR DRYLAND AGRICULTURE (CRIDA)
1. Dr. Ch. Srinivasa Rao — Director
INDIAN INSTITUTE OF FARMING SYSTEM RESEARCH (IIFSR)
1. Dr. J.P. Singh — Director
INDIAN AGRICULTURAL RESEARCH INSTITUTE (IARI)
1. Dr. Himanshu Pathak — Principal Scientist
2. At the outset, the Chairperson welcomed the Members of the
Committee to the sitting convened for briefing on the Subject
“Comprehensive Agriculture Research based on Geographical Conditions
and Impact of Climatic Changes to ensure Food Security in the Country”.
Thereafter, the representatives of Ministry of Agriculture and Farmers
Welfare (Department of Agricultural Research and Education) were
ushered in. After welcoming the representatives of the Ministry of
Agriculture and Farmers Welfare to the sitting, the Chairperson apprised
them of the provisions of the Directions 55 (1) and 58 of the Directions
by the Speaker , Lok Sabha regarding confidentiality of the proceedings.
3. After the witnesses introduced themselves, one of the
representatives of Department made a power point presentation and

216
briefed the Committee on the subject. Thereafter, the Chairperson
and the Members of the Committee raised several issues/points as
briefly mentioned below and sought clarification/information of the
Department thereon:
(i) Impact of climate change on rain, fertility of soil etc. and
the measures undertaken to address them.
(ii) Ignorance of farmers about scientific research in the field
of agriculture.
(iii) Comprehensive training of farmers and extension of scientific
research.
(iv) Need to give instructions to State Governments to impart
intensive training to the farmers.
(v) Dissemination of information to the farmers aware about
the adverse impact of climate change on production of
certain crops or possible increase in production of other
crops.
(vi) Scientific evaluation of impact of rise in temperature of sea
and river water on fish breeding, migration and harvests.
(vii) Impact of rise in temperature on milk production and
remedial measures undertaken to address the issue.
(viii) Need to establish strong mechanism for dissemination of
information for prioritization, initiation and extension of
land based development programmes.
(ix) Need to study the problems being faced by the poor small
and marginal farmers and scientific measures to address
their problems.
(x) Need to develop infrastructure of Krishi Vigyan Kendra and
strengthen its manpower for dissemination of information
to the farmers.
(xi) Need to undertake research to develop seeds which could
withstand climatic stresses/Shortcomings.
(xii) Selection of crops in accordance with climate change to
maintain crop production.
(xiii) Measures to be undertaken to control impact of insects/
pests due to climate change.
(xiv) Need for management of water and conservation and
renovation and revival of dead water resources/bodies.

217
(xv) Development of ways to augment production of fishery in
less water and demonstration of technology and its extension
to the farmers.
(xvi) Management of food security keeping in view climate change.
(xvii) Farmers be trained in traditional treatment of livestock.
(xviii) Need for creation of water reservoirs on river banks.
(xix) Need for development of scientific thinking to save crops
from wild animals.
(xx) Need for development of network for production of high
quality seeds.
(xxi) Formation of Scheme for farmers for production of milk.
(xxii) Training of farmers for production of fodder.
(xxiii) Need to produce crops like Madua, Kodo, Sanwa, Tangun.
(xxiv) Need to do research to produce crops as per the climate
change.
(xxv) Dissemination of information to farmers through KVK at
Block level to maintain production.
(xxvi) Extension of drip procedure to augment production of crops
with less water.
(xxvii) Adoption of climate resilient agriculture.
(xxviii) Inadequacy of ICAR institutes in the country.
(xxix) Very little research undertaken on harvesting of water .
(xxx) Need for research and development of Kand-Mool as an
optional food.
(xxxi) Encouragement of farmers to undertake production of pulses.
(xxxii) Availability of insecticides/pesticides to check damage of
pulses from insects/pests.
(xxxiii) Need for development of varieties of pulses which may
give crops in shorter time.
4. The Representatives of the Department responded to most of
the queries raised by the members. The Chairperson thanked the
witnesses for sharing valuable information with the Committee on the
subject and directed them to furnish the requisite information in
writing on the points/items, which was not readily available with
them to the Secretariat of the Committee at the earliest.
5. A copy of verbatim proceedings of the sitting has been kept
separately.
The Committee, then adjourned.

218
APPENDIX II
COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE
(2015-16)
MINUTES OF THE EIGHTH SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE
The Committee sat on Monday, the 06th November, 2015 from
1500 hours to 1700 hours in Committee Room ‘E’, Parliament House
Annexe, New Delhi.
PRESENT
Shri Hukm Deo Narayan Yadav — Chairperson
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Prof. Richard Hay
3. Md. Badaruddoza Khan
4. Shri Ajay Nishad
5. Shri Dalpat Singh Paraste
6. Shri Nityanand Rai
7. Shri Mukesh Rajput
8. Shri C.L. Ruala
9. Shri Virendra Singh
Rajya Sabha
10. Shri A.W. Rabi Bernard
11. Smt. Renuka Chowdhury
12. Shri Janardan Dwivedi
13. Shri Vinay Katiyar
14. Shri Mohd. Ali Khan
15. Shri Rajpal Singh Saini
16. Shri Ram Nath Thakur
17. Shri Darshan Singh Yadav

219
SECRETARIAT
1. Shri U.B.S. Negi — Joint Secretary
2. Shri Arun K. Kaushik — Director
3. Shri Sumesh Kumar — Under Secretary
WITNESSES
MINISTRY OF WATER RESOURCES, RIVER DEVELOPMENT AND GANGA
REJUVENATION
1. Shri Nikhilesh Jha — Mission Director , National Water Mission
2. Shri Pradeep Kumar — Commissioner (SP)
2. At the outset, the Chairperson welcomed the Members of the
Committee to the Sitting convened for briefing on the Subject
“Comprehensive Agriculture Research based on Geographical Conditions
and Impact of Climatic Changes to ensure Food Security in the Country”.
Thereafter, the representatives of Ministry of Water Resources, River
Development and Ganga Rejuvenation were ushered in. After welcoming
the representatives of the Ministry to the Sitting, the Chairperson
apprised them of the provisions of the Directions 55 (1) and 58 of the
Directions by the Speaker , Lok Sabha regarding confidentiality of the
proceedings.
3. After the witnesses introduced themselves, the Mission Director,
National Water Mission one of the representatives briefed the
Committee on the subject. Thereafter, the Chairperson and the
Members of the Committee raised several issues/points as briefly
mentioned below and sought clarification/information of the
Department thereon:—
I. Steps being taken by the Government to face the challenges
of fluctuation in availability of water for agriculture as
predicted by various climate change models;
II. Steps being taken to survey the numbers and condition of
traditional sources of water bodies;
III. Need to undertake survey on dead streams of river across
the country and steps being taken to rejuvenate these dead
streams so that these can be converted into water resources;
IV. Steps being taken to survey traditional resources of water
which are illegally encroached and steps being taken for
their rejuvenation;

220
V . Need to promote construction of small check dams on
seasonal rivers;
VI. Steps being taken to solve problem of water logging caused
due to construction of large irrigation canal;
VII. Need to augment water availability for agriculture;
VIII. Need to promote drip/sprinkler irrigation among small and
marginal farmers;
IX. Need of time bound and planned completion of works of
large irrigation schemes;
X. Need of meticulous planning for construction of dams/
irrigation schemes based on physical verification at ground
situation;
XI. Steps being taken for scientific management of water
resources available in Country;
XII. Schemes pending before the Government regarding running
of State motor tube wells and channels;
XIII. Steps being taken to augment water sources of Sambhal
Lok Sabha Constituency so that farmers can be provided
water for agriculture;
XIV . Steps being taken to provide water in hilly areas;
XV . Steps being taken for arranging of irrigation facility to
farmers displaced due to construction of dams on Narmada
and Son in Madhya Pradesh;
XVI. Steps being taken for rejuvenation of Bhagirathi river in
West Bengal;
XVII. Steps being taken for dredging of Gandak river in Bihar;
XVIII. Steps being taken for resolving water disputes among States;
XIX. Need to encourage rain water harvesting;
XX. Need to suggest State for ban on ground water extraction
in Krishna river basin due to drought;
XXI. Need to control exploitation of ground water resources by
the water bottling companies;
XXII. Need to frame vision documents for management of water
resources in the country;
XXIII. Progress made on project for interlinking of rivers in the
country;

221
XXIV . Need of detailed scientific study on the issue of local
geological balances vis-à-vis river interlinking project;
XXV . Need to promote coordination between Central and
State Government for water management;
XXVI. Impact of flooding and water logging on soil fertility; and
XXVII. Status of Barrage on Kosi River.
4. The Representatives of the Department responded to most of
the queries raised by the Members. The Chairperson thanked the
witnesses for sharing valuable information with the Committee on the
subject and directed them to furnish the requisite information on the
points/items, which was not readily available with them to the
Secretariat of the Committee at the earliest.
5. A copy of the verbatim proceedings of the sitting has been kept
separately.
The Committee then adjourned.

222
APPENDIX III
STANDING COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE
(2016-17)
MINUTES OF THE TWENTIETH SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE
The Committee sat on Friday, the 8th April, 2016 from 1500 hours
to 1700 hours in Room No. “62”, Parliament House, New Delhi.
PRESENT
Shri Hukm Deo Narayan Yadav — Chairperson
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Prof. Ravindra Vishwanath
3. Dr. Tapas Mandal
4. Shri Janardan Mishra
5. Shri Ajay Nishad
6. Shri Dalpat Singh Paraste
7. Shri Nityanand Rai
8. Shri Mukesh Rajput
9. Shri C.L. Ruala
10. Shri Satyapal Singh (Sambhal)
11. Shri Virendra Singh
12. Shri Dharmendra Yadav
13. Shri Jai Prakash Narayan Yadav
14. Shri B.S. Yeddyurappa
Rajya Sabha
15. Shri A.W. Rabi Bernard
16. Shrimati Renuka Chowdhury
17. Sardar Sukhdev Singh Dhindsa
18. Shri Janardan Dwivedi
19. Mohd. Ali Khan
20. Shri Rajpal Singh Saini
21. Shri Ram Nath Thakur
22. Shri Shankarbhai N. Vegad
23. Shri Darshan Singh Yadav

223
SECRETARIAT
1. Shri U.B.S. Negi — Joint Secretary
2. Shri Arun K. Kaushik — Director
3. Shri Sumesh Kumar — Under Secretary
LIST OF W ITNESSES
1. Dr. Trilocan Mohapatra Secretary (DARE) & DG (ICAR)
2. Dr. S.K. Chaudhary ADG (NRM)
3. Dr. Ravinder Kaur Project Director
4. Dr. S.V . Ngachan ICAR Research Complex for NEH
Region
5. Dr. B.P . Bhatt ICAR Research Complex for Eastern
Region
2. At the outset, the Chairperson welcomed the members to the
Sitting of the Committee. The Chairperson stated that the meeting
has been called to have a evidence on the subject “Comprehensive
Agriculture Research based on Geographical Conditions and Impact of
Climatic Changes to ensure Food Security in the Country ” with the
representatives of the Ministry of Agriculture and Farmers Welfare
(Department of Agricultural Research and Education).
3. After the introduction, the Chairperson initiated the discussion
which was taken forward by the representatives of the Department
and the Members of the Standing Committee. The Committee raised
several issues such as achievements of Indian Agricultural Research
Institute, Pusa, ICAR-NEHR, Barapani and ICAR-Eastern Region, Patna
on R&D being taken to make the Indian Agriculture climate resilient;
steps being taken to estimate requirement of food grains, vegetable,
Meat and Poultry in the country in next 50 years; need of research for
development of heat resistant varieties of crops; need to enhance
production of seeds of heat resistant varieties of crops; need of seed
multiplication farm at Block level; need of mechanization of Indian
Agriculture; need to provide financial support to farmer for adopting
drip/sprinkler irrigation system; need of R&D on development of hybrid
of indigenous varieties of crops; need of R&D on improvement of
indigenous breeds of crops; need to promote cultivation of coarse
cereals; need to promote research on development of farming system
suitable for North-Eastern parts of the country; need of R&D to develop
short duration varieties of crops; need of R&D to develop alternatives
for green manure for animal fodder; need to promote water harvesting

224
system in rural areas for agriculture; need to revive traditional water
harvesting system etc. The Representatives of the Department
responded to most of the queries raised by the members.
4. The Chairperson then thanked the witnesses for sharing valuable
information with the Committee and directed them to send, in writing,
the requisite information on the points or items, which was not readily
available with them to the Secretariat at the earliest.
5. A copy of the verbatim proceedings of the sitting has been kept
separately.
The Committee then adjourned.

225
APPENDIX IV
STANDING COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE
(2016-17)
MINUTES OF THE TWENTY FIRST SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE
The Committee sat on Thursday, the 21st April, 2016 from
1100 hours to 1310 hours in Room “B”, Parliament House Annexe,
New Delhi.
PRESENT
Shri Hukm Deo Narayan Yadav — Chairperson
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Dr. Tapas Mandal
3. Shri Janardan Mishra
4. Shri Ajay Nishad
5. Shri Nityanand Rai
6. Shri Mukesh Rajput
7. Shri C.L. Ruala
8. Shri Satyapal Singh (Sambhal)
9. Shri Jai Prakash Narayan Yadav
Rajya Sabha
10. Shri Janardan Dwivedi
11. Mohd. Ali Khan
12. Shri Rajpal Singh Saini
13. Shri Ram Nath Thakur
14. Shri Darshan Singh Yadav
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Shri U.B.S. Negi — Joint Secretary
2. Shri Arun K. Kaushik — Director
3. Smt. Juby Amar — Additional Director
4. Shri Sumesh Kumar — Under Secretary

226
LIST OF W ITNESSES
1. Dr. Anil K. Singh Vice Chancellor, Rajmata Vijayaraje
Scindia Krishi Vishwa Vidyalaya,
Gwalior
2. Dr. Ch. Srinivasa Rao Director , ICAR-Central Research
Institute for Dryland Agriculture,
Hyderabad
3. Mr. Crispino Lobo Managing Trustee, WOTR
4. Shri G.G Sohani Vice President, BAIF Development
Research Foundation
2. At the outset, the Chairperson welcomed the members to the
sitting of the Committee convened for evidence of representatives of
Ministry of Agriculture and Farmers Welfare (Department of Agricultural
Research and Education) on the subject “Comprehensive Agriculture
Research based on Geographical Conditions and Impact of Climatic
Changes to ensure Food Security in the Country ”.
3. After the introduction, the Chairperson initiated the discussion
which was taken forward by the representatives of the Department
and the Members of the Standing Committee. The Committee raised
several issues such as, works done by the Rajmata Vijayaraje Scindia
Krishi Vishwa Vidyalaya, Gwalior, ICAR—Central Research Institute For
Dryland Agriculture, Watershed Organization Trust (WOTR) and BAIF
Development Research Foundation on the issue of impact of climatic
changes on Indian Agriculture and its impact on food security of the
country; R&D work on development of heat resilient varieties of seed
as per pattern of rising temperature; need of R&D to serve problems
of small and marginal farmers; need to develop cost efficient and
effective irrigation equipments; steps being taken for dissemination
of research outcome of such crop varieties, agriculture equipments
etc. among farming community; steps being taken to develop ways
for maintenance of ponds; Efforts being made by CRIDA (Central
Research Institute for Dryland Agriculture) for coordination with State
Agricultural Universities, KVKs (Krishi Vigyan Kendras) and ATMA
(Agricultural Technology Management Agency) for dissemination of
information about research outcome of the Institute. The
Representatives of the Rajmata Vijayaraje Scindia Krishi Vishwa
Vidyalaya and ICAR- Central Research Institute For Dryland Agriculture
responded to most of the queries raised by the members.
4. Thereafter, representatives of WOTR made a PowerPoint
presentation on the works being done by them in the field of

227
agriculture. Later on, representatives of BAIF made a Power Point
presentation on the Works being done by them in the field of agriculture
and conservation of indigenous breed of cattles. They have also
emphasized need to control indiscriminate cross breeding of indigenous
breed of cattles with exotic breeds of cattle; Need to conserve and
improve indigenous varities of cattle etc.
5. The Chairperson then thanked the witnesses for sharing valuable
information with the Committee and directed them to send, in writing,
the requisite information on the points or items, which was not readily
available with them to the Secretariat at the earliest.
6. A copy of the verbatim proceedings of the sitting has been kept
separately.
The Committee then adjourned.

228
APPENDIX V
STANDING COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE
(2016-17)
MINUTES OF THE THIRTY FIRST SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE
The Committee sat on Wednesday, the 31st August, 2016 from
1100 hours to 1400 hours in Room No. “62”,Parliament House,
New Delhi.
PRESENT
Shri Hukm Deo Narayan Yadav — Chairperson
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Prof. Ravindra Vishwanath
3. Shri Janardan Mishra
4. Shri Mukesh Rajput
5. Shri Konakalla Narayana Rao
6. Shri C.L. Ruala
7. Shri Satyapal Singh (Sambhal)
Rajya Sabha
8. Shri Janardan Dwivedi
9. Shri Meghraj Jain
10. Shri Vinay Katiyar
11. Mohd. Ali Khan
12. Shri Ram Nath Thakur
13. Shri Shankarbhai N. Vegad
14. Shri Darshan Singh Yadav
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Shri U.B.S. Negi — Joint Secretary
2. Shri Arun K. Kaushik — Director
3. Shri Sumesh Kumar — Under Secretary

229
LIST OF W ITNESSES
1. Shri Jalaj Shrivastava Additional Secretary
2. Shri R.B. Sinha Joint Secretary
3. Dr. K. Alagusundaram Deputy Director General (NRM), ICAR
4. Dr. S. Bhaskar Assistant Director General (AAF&CC),
ICAR
5. Dr. Ch. Srinivasa Rao Director , Central Research Institute for
Dryland Agriculture, Hyderabad
CROP CARE FEDERATION OF INDIA
1. Shri Rajju Shroff Chairman, CCFI
2. Shri S. Ganesan Advisor, (Public and Policy Affairs)
CCFI
3. Shri P .S. Rawat VP , CCFI
4. Smt. Nirmala Pathrawal Head, CCFI
2. At the outset, the Chairperson welcomed the members to the
Sitting of the Committee convened for evidence of representatives of
Ministry of Agriculture and Farmers Welfare (Department of Agricultural
Research and Education) and Crop Care Federation of India on the
subject “Comprehensive Agriculture Research based on Geographical
Conditions and Impact of Climatic Changes to ensure Food Security in
the Country ”.
3. After the introduction, one of the representatives of Crop Care
Federation of India has briefed the Committee on importance of
domestic pesticides sector to the Indian Agriculture. They have
emphasized on issues such as absence of proper research on impact
of pesticides on health, fallacious propaganda about harmful impact
of use of pesticides in Agriculture in the country, absence of level
playing field to Indian farmers in Agriculture Export due to phyto-
sanitary and pesticides residue restrictions imposed by importing
countries, absence of adequate facilities for testing of pesticides
residue in agriculture products being imported in the country, need of
public-private partnership for training of farmers; need of branding
and marketing of Indian Agriculture Produce in the export market,
etc.
4. Thereafter, the members of the Committee raised some queries
such as steps being taken by the Government to develop capacity
building of farmers and other stakeholders to face the challenges

230
associated with the climatic changes; steps being taken by the ICAR
to provide research support to the pesticide sector in the country;
use of DDT in agriculture sector; steps being taken to educate farmers
on balance use of pesticides in agriculture farms; steps being taken
to ban sale of spurious/inferior quality pesticides in the market, etc.
The Representatives of the Department responded to most of the
queries raised by the members.
5. The Chairperson then thanked the witnesses for sharing valuable
information with the Committee and directed them to send, in writing,
the requisite information on the points or items, which was not readily
available with them to the Secretariat at the earliest.
6. A copy of the verbatim proceedings of the sitting has been kept
separately.
The Committee then adjourned.

231
APPENDIX VI
STANDING COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE
(2016-17)
MINUTES OF THE THIRD SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE
The Committee sat on Wednesday, the 05th October, 2016 from
1500 hours to 1710 hours in Committee Room “E”, Parliament House
Annexe, New Delhi.
PRESENT
Shri Hukm Deo Narayan Yadav — Chairperson
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Prof. Ravindra Vishwanath
3. Md. Badaruddoza Khan
4. Shri C. Mahendran
5. Shri Janardan Mishra
6. Shri Mukesh Rajput
7. Shri Neiphiu Rio
8. Shri C.L. Ruala
9. Shri Satyapal Singh (Sambhal)
10. Shri Virendra Singh
11. Shri Jai Prakash Narayan Yadav
Rajya Sabha
12. Shri A.W. Rabi Bernard
13. Shrimati Renuka Chowdhury
14. Shri Sambhaji Chhatrapati
15. Sardar Sukhdev Singh Dhindsa
16. Shri Janardan Dwivedi
17. Shri Vinay Katiyar
18. Mohd. Ali Khan

232
SECRETARIAT
1. Shri U.B.S. Negi — Joint Secretary
2. Shri Arun K. Kaushik — Director
3. Shri Sumesh Kumar — Under Secretary
LIST OF W ITNESSES
1. Dr. Trilochan Mohapatra Secretary (DARE) & DG (ICAR)
2. Dr. K. Alagusundaram Deputy Director General
(NRM), ICAR
3. Dr. S. Bhaskar Assistant Director General
(AAF&CC), ICAR
2. At the outset, the Chairperson welcomed the members to the
Sitting of the Committee convened for evidence of representatives of
Ministry of Agriculture and Farmers Welfare (Department of Agricultural
Research and Education) on the subject “Comprehensive Agriculture
Research based on Geographical Conditions and Impact of Climatic
Changes to ensure Food Security in the Country ”.
3. After the introduction, the Chairperson initiated the discussion
which was taken forward by the representatives of the Department
and the Members of the Standing Committee. The Committee raised
several issues such as, need to prepare plan on Agro-forestry according
to local environment and farming practices, stress on plantation of
indigenous tree species in Agro-Forestry Programme; steps being taken
to improve soil health so that it can witnessed climatic changes;
Steps taken for R&D to safeguard crops from hailstorm; need to focus
on North-East India for enforcing agriculture production; need to start
short term certificate courses in Agriculture, need to enhanced
coverage of weather advised; need of research on improvement of
indigenous breeds of cattle; need to promote organic farming in
country; need to enhance target for training of farmers to make
Indian agriculture climatic resilient; need to R&D on alternative use
of crop residue; etc. The Representatives of the Department responded
to most of the queries raised by the members.
4. The Chairperson then thanked the witnesses for sharing valuable
information with the Committee and directed them to send, in writing,
the requisite information on the points or items, which was not readily
available with them to the Secretariat at the earliest.
5. A copy of the verbatim proceedings of the sitting has been kept
separately.
The Committee then adjourned.

233
APPENDIX VII
STANDING COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE
(2016-17)
MINUTES OF THE FIFTH SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE
The Committee sat on Friday, the 28th October, 2016 from
1100 hours to 1315 hours in Committee Room ‘B’, Ground Floor ,
Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
PRESENT
Shri Hukm Deo Narayan Yadav — Chairperson
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Sanganna Karadi
3. Md. Badaruddoza Khan
4. Shri Janardan Mishra
5. Shri Nityanand Rai
6. Shri Mukesh Rajput
7. Shri C.L. Ruala
8. Shri Satyapal Singh (Sambhal)
9. Shri Jai Prakash Narayan Yadav
10. Shri B.S. Yeddyurappa
Rajya Sabha
11. Shri Sambhaji Shahu Chhatrapati
12. Shri Janardan Dwivedi
13. Shri Meghraj Jain
14. Shri Vinay Katiyar
15. Mohd. Ali Khan
16. Shri Ram Nath Thakur
17. Shri Shankarbhai N. Vegad

234
SECRETARIAT
1. Shri Arun K. Kaushik — Director
2. Smt. Juby Amar — Additional Director
LIST OF W ITNESSES
MINISTRY OF ENVIRONMENT , FOREST AND CLIMATE CHANGE
1. Shri R.R. Rashmi Special Secretary
2. Shri Ravi Shankar Prasad Joint Secretary
3. Dr. J.R. Bhatt Advisor
MINISTRY OF EARTH SCIENCES
1. Dr. M. Rajeevan Secretary
2. Dr. K.J. Ramesh DG,IMD
3. Shri Anand S. Khati Joint Secretary
4. Dr. Gopal Raman Iyengar Advisor
2. At the outset the Chairperson welcomed the members to the
Sitting of the Committee. The Chairperson stated that the meeting
has been called to have an evidence on the Subject ‘Comprehensive
Agriculture Research based on Geographical Conditions and Impact of
Climatic Changes to ensure Food Security in the Country ’ with the
representatives of the Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate
Change
3. After the introduction, one of the representatives of the
Departments briefed the Committee on the Subject. Thereafter , the
Chairperson initiated the discussion which was taken forward by the
representatives of the Department and the Members of the Standing
Committee. The Committee raised several issues/points which have
been briefly mentioned below and sought opinion of the Department
on the same:
I. Need to study the changes in climatic pattern to mitigate
the damage to the crops;
II. Need to find solutions for depleting water resources due to
climatic changes;
III. Need to quantify the profit or loss occurred to the farmers
due to climatic change;
IV. Effort to be made to preserve wet lands and bring about
changes in the pattern cultivation in wet lands;

235
V . Steps to be taken to minimize the effects of rising
temperature of Earth;
VI. Need to increase funds and resources of Ministry of
Environment and Forest so that the Ministry could carry out
the work related to climate change more effectively;
VII. Need to have a coordinated research between Ministry of
Agriculture & Farmers Welfare and Ministry of Environment
and Forest and Climate change;
VIII. Need to issue an advisory to the States regarding plantation
of trees like Sababool, Eucalyptus etc;
IX. Need to build consensus on national level after discussion
with representatives of States and species of trees to be
implanted;
X. Need to devise means to eradicate Sababool trees from the
Country.
4. The Representatives of the Department responded to most of
the queries raised by the Members. The Chairperson then thanked the
witnesses for sharing valuable information with the Committee on the
subject and directed them to send, in writing, the requisite information
in points/items, which was not readily available with them to the
Secretariat of the Committee at his earliest.
MINISTRY OF EARTH SCIENCES
1. After discussion with the representatives of the Ministry of
Environment, Forest and Climate Change, the representatives of the
Ministry of Earth Sciences were ushered in. The Chairperson stated
that the meeting has been called to have a Evidence on the Subject
‘Comprehensive Agriculture Research based on Geographical Conditions
and Impact of Climatic Changes to ensure Food Security in the Country ’
with the representatives of the Ministry of Earth Sciences.
2. After the introduction, one of the representatives of the
Departments briefed the Committee on the Subject. Thereafter , the
Chairperson initiated the discussion which was taken forward by the
representatives of the Department and the Members of the Standing
Committee. The Committee raised several issues/points which have
been briefly mentioned below and sought opinion of the Department
on the same:
(i) Steps taken to mitigate the effects of climate change and
research carried out to control the rising temperature of
earth;

236
(ii) Need to expand the system of Weather forecast so that the
farmers could get information;
(iii) Need to identify the plants, trees and their species that
could resist climate change;
(iv) Need to coordinate with Ministry of Environment Forest and
Climate change to conduct research on bio diversity due to
climate change.
(v) Need to coordinate with States to institute a fund for
Green House and Ply House farm.
3. The Representatives of the Department responded to most of
the queries raised by the Members. The Chairperson then thanked the
witnesses for sharing valuable information with the Committee on the
subject and directed them to send, in writing, the requisite information
in points/items, which was not readily available with them to the
Secretariat of the Committee at his earliest.
A copy of the verbatim proceedings of the sitting
has been kept separately.
The Committee then adjourned.

237
APPENDIX VIII
STANDING COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE
(2016-17)
MINUTES OF THE TWENTY FIFTH SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE
The Committee sat on Thursday, the 03rd August, 2017 from
1500 hrs. to 1700 hrs. in Committee Room No. 1 (Block-A), Extension
to Parliament House Annexe Building, New Delhi.
PRESENT
Shri Hukm Deo Narayan Yadav — Chairperson
M
EMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Prof. Ravindra Vishwanath Gaikwad
3. Shri Nalin Kumar Kateel
4. Smt. Raksha Khadse
5. Md. Badaruddoza Khan
6. Shri Janardan Mishra
7. Shri Neiphiu Rio
8. Shri B.S. Yeddyurappa
Rajya Sabha
9. Shri Sambhaji Chhatrapati
10. Shri Janardan Dwivedi
11. Mohd. Ali Khan
12. Shri Ram Nath Thakur
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Shri D.S. Malha — Joint Secretary
2. Shri Arun K. Kaushik — Director
3. Smt. Juby Amar — Additional Director
4. Shri C. Vanlalruata — Deputy Secretary
5. Shri Sumesh Kumar — Under Secretary

238
LIST OF W ITNESSES
MINISTRY OF AGRICULTURE AND FARMERS WELFARE
(DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURAL RESEARCH AND EDUCATION)
1. Dr. Trilochan Mohapatra Secretary (DARE) &DG (ICAR)
2. Dr. K. Alagusundaram Deputy Director General (NRM),
ICAR
3. Dr. S.K. Chaudhari Assistant Director General (SWM),
ICAR
4. Dr. P .K. Chakrabarty Assistant Director General (PP&B),
ICAR
5. Dr. P .P . Biswas Principal Scientist (Soils), ICAR
6. Dr. Krishan K. Sharma Principal Scientist, IAR, New Delhi
7. Shri B.S. Phogat Additional Plant Protection
Advisor
8. Shri D.D.K. Sharma Secretary, Central Board of
Insecticides & Registration
Committee
MINISTRY OF AGRICULTURE AND FARMERS WELFARE
(DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE, COOPERATION AND FARMERS WELFARE)
1. Shri Shobhana Pattanayak Secretary
2. Shri Ashwani Kumar Joint Secretary
MINISTRY OF CHEMICALS & FERTILIZERS
(DEPARTMENT OF CHEMICALS & PETROCHEMICALS)
1. Shri Rajeev Kapoor Secretary (Department of
Chemicals & Petrochemicals)
2. Shri Samir Kumar Biswas Joint Secretary (Chemicals)
3. Dr. Jitendra Kumar Director (IPFT)
4. Shri S.P . Mohanty Chairman & Managing Director
(HIL)
MINISTRY OF CHEMICALS & FERTILIZERS
(DEPARTMENT OF FERTILIZERS)
1. Shri Dharam Pal Addl. Secretary

239
2. At the outset, the Chairperson welcomed the Members to the
Sitting of the Standing Committee. Then, the Committee took up the
following draft Reports for consideration and adoption:
(i) Draft Report on the Subject “Comprehensive Agriculture
Research based on Geographical Conditions and Impact of
Climatic Changes to ensure Food Security in the Country”
pertaining to the Ministry of Agriculture and Farmers Welfare
(Department of Agricultural Research and Education) (English
Version);
*(ii) XXX XXX XXX XXX XXX XXX
*(iii) XXX XXX XXX XXX XXX XXX
*(iv) XXX XXX XXX XXX XXX XXX
3. After some deliberations, the Committee adopted the draft
Reports without any amendments and authorized the Chairperson to
finalise the Reports and present the same to Parliament.
[Witnesses were ushered in]
*4. XXX XXX XXX XXX XXX XXX
*5. XXX XXX XXX XXX XXX XXX
*6. XXX XXX XXX XXX XXX XXX
A verbatim record of the proceedings has been kept separately.
The Committee then adjourned.
*Matter not related to this report.