FORTY-FOURTH REPORT
STANDING COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE
(2016-2017)
(SIXTEENTH LOK SABHA)
MINISTRY OF AGRICULTURE AND FARMERS WELFARE
(DEPARTMENT OF ANIMAL HUSBANDRY , DAIRYING AND FISHERIES)
ÔDEMANDS FOR GRANTS
(2017-2018)Õ
[Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations
contained  in the Thirty-Seventh  Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha)
of the Standing Committee on Agriculture (2016-17)]
Presented to HonÕble Speaker on 30.08.2017
Presented to Lok Sabha on .....................
Laid on the Table of Rajya Sabha on .........
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
August, 2017/Bhadrapada, 1939 ( Saka)


COA No. 364
Price : R 51.00
' 2017 B Y L OK SABHA S ECRETARIAT
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct
of Business in Lok Sabha (Fifteenth Edition) and printed by
Anupam Art Printers, New Delhi.

CONTENTS
PAGE
COMPOSITION OF THE C OMMITTEE ............................................. (iii)
INTRODUCTION ................................................................. (v)
CHAPTER I Report......................................................... 1
CHAPTER II Observations/Recommendations which have been
accepted by the Government............................ 11
CHAPTER III Observations/Recommendations which the Committee
do not desire to pursue in view of the GovernmentÕs
replies ........................................................ 19
C
HAPTER IV Observations/Recommendations in respect of which
replies of the Government have not been accepted
by the Committee .......................................... 20
C
HAPTER V Observations/Recommendations in respect of which
final replies of the Government are still awaited... 30
ANNEXURE
Minutes of the 27th Sitting of the Committee held on
28.08.2017 ......................................................... 32
APPENDIX
Analysis of Action Taken by the Government on the
Recommendations contained in the Thirty-Seventh Report
(Sixteenth Lok Sabha) of the Standing Committee on
Agriculture (2016-17) ............................................ 34
(i)

COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE
(2016-2017)
Shri Hukm Deo Narayan Yadav — Chairperson
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Prof. Ravindra Vishwanath Gaikwad
3. Shri Sanganna Karadi
4. Shri Nalin Kumar Kateel
5. Smt. Raksha Khadse
6. Md. Badaruddoza Khan
7. Shri C. Mahendran
8. Dr. Tapas Mandal
9. Shri Janardan Mishra
10. Shri Devji Patel
11. Shri Nityanand Rai
12. Shri Mukesh Rajput
13. Shri Neiphiu Rio
14. Shri Konakalla Narayana Rao
15. Shri C.L. Ruala
16. Shri Arjun Charan Sethi
17. Shri Satyapal Singh (Sambhal)
18. Shri Virendra Singh
19. Shri Dharmendra Yadav
20. Shri Jai Prakash Narayan Yadav
21. Shri B.S. Yeddyurappa
Rajya Sabha
22. Shri Sambhaji Chhatrapati
23. Sardar Sukhdev Singh Dhindsa
24. Shri Janardan Dwivedi
25. Shri Meghraj Jain
(iii)

26. Shri Vinay Katiyar
27. Shri Mohd. Ali Khan
28. Shri Ram Nath Thakur
29. Shri R. Vaithilingam
30. Shri Shankarbhai N. Vegad
31. Shri Darshan Singh Yadav
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Shri D.S. Malha Ñ Joint Secretary
2. Shri Arun K. Kaushik Ñ Director
3. Shri C. Vanlalruata Ñ Deputy Secretary
4. Ms. Divya Rai Ñ Executive Assistant
(iv)

(v)
INTRODUCTION
I, the Chairperson, Standing Committee on Agriculture (2016-17),
having been authorized by the Committee to submit the Report on
their behalf, present this Forty Fourth Report on action taken by the
Government on the Observations/Recommendations contained in the
Thirty Seventh Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) of the Standing Committee
on Agriculture (2016-17) on ÔDemands for Grants (2017-18) Õ pertaining
to the Ministry of Agriculture and Farmers Welfare (Department of
Animal Husbandry, Dairying and Fisheries).
2. The Thirty Seventh Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) of the Standing
Committee on Agriculture (2016-17) on ÔDemands for Grants (2017-18) Õ
pertaining to the Ministry of Agriculture and Farmers Welfare
(Department of Animal Husbandry, Dairying and Fisheries) was presented
to Lok Sabha and laid on the Table of Rajya Sabha on 10 March, 2017.
The Action Taken Notes on the Report were received on 21 July, 2017.
3. The Report was considered and adopted by the Committee at
their Sitting held on 28.08.2017.
4. An analysis of the action taken by the Government on the
Observations/Recommendations contained in the Thirty Seventh Report
(Sixteenth Lok Sabha) of the Committee is given in Appendix.
   N
EW D ELHI; HUKM DEO NARAYAN YADAV,
28 August, 2017 Chairperson,
06 Bhadrapada, 1939 (Saka) Standing Committee on Agriculture.

1
CHAPTER I
REPORT
This Report of the Committee on Agriculture deals with the action
taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations
contained in the Thirty-seventh Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) of the
Standing Committee on Agriculture (2016-17) on ÔDemands for Grants
(2017-18) Õ of the Ministry of Agriculture (Department of Animal
Husbandry, Dairying and Fisheries) which was presented to Lok Sabha
and laid on the Table of Rajya Sabha on 10.03.2017.
1.2 The Ministry of Agriculture and Farmers Welfare (Department
of Animal Husbandry, Dairying and Fisheries) have furnished Action
Taken Replies in respect of all the 13 Observations/Recommendations
contained in the Report. These replies have been categorized as under:
(i) Observations/Recommendations that have been accepted by
the Government:
Recommendation Para Nos. 1, 2, 4, 7, 8 and 9
Total 06
Chapter-II
(ii) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which the
Committee do not desire to pursue in view of the
GovernmentÕs reply:
Recommendation Para No. NIL
Total 00
Chapter-III
(iii) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which action
taken replies of the Government have not been accepted by
the Committee:
Recommendation Para Nos. 3, 5, 10, 11, 12 and 13
Total 06
Chapter-IV
(iv) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which final
replies of the Government are still awaited:
Recommendation Para No. 6
Total 01
Chapter-V

2
1.3 The Committee trust that utmost importance would be given
to implementation of the Observations/Recommendations accepted
by the Government. In cases, where it is not possible for the
Department to implement the Recommendations in letter and spirit,
the matter should be reported to the Committee with reasons for
non-implementation. The Committee desire that further Action Taken
Notes on the Observations/ Recommendations contained in Chapter-I
and final Action Taken Replies to the Recommendations contained
in Chapter-V of this Report be furnished to them at an early date.
1.4 The Committee will now deal with the action taken by the
Government on some of the Recommendations in the succeeding
paragraphs.
A. Share of the Department of Animal Husbandry, Dairying and
Fisheries in Central Plan
Recommendation (Para No. 1)
1.5 The Committee had observed/recommended as under:Ñ
ÒAnimal Husbandry, Dairying and Fisheries activities along with
agriculture continue to be an integral part of human life ever since
the process of civilization. These activities have contributed to the
food basket, draught animal power , helped in maintaining ecological
balance and have also played a significant role in generating gainful
employment in the rural sector, particularly among the landless,
small and marginal farmers and women, besides providing cheap
and nutritious food to millions of peoples. According to estimates
of the Central Statistics Office (CSO), the value of output from the
livestock sector at current prices was about Rs. 5,91,691 crore
during 2015-16 which is about 28.5% of the value of output from
agricultural and allied sector. At constant prices the value of
9 output from livestock is about 29% of the value of the output
from total agriculture and allied sector. Moreover , India continues
to be the largest producer of milk in the world. Milk production
during 2014-15 and 2015-16 is 146.3 million tonnes and 155.5 million
tonnes respectively showing an annual growth of 6.27%. The per
capita availability of milk is around 337 grams per day in 2015-16.
Furthermore, meat production in the beginning of Twelfth Plan
(2012-13) was 5.95 million tonnes which has been further increased
to 7.0 million tonnes in 2015-16. Besides being the second largest
producer of fish, India is also the second largest producer of fresh
water fish in the world. Fish production has increased from
41.57 lakh tonnes (24.47 lakh tonnes for marine and 17.10 lakh

3
tonnes for inland fisheries) in 1991-92 to 107.90 lakh tonnes (35.8
lakh tonnes for marine and 72.10 lakh tonnes for inland fisheries)
in 2015-16 (provisional). During the first two quarters of 2016-17
the fish production is estimated at 5.03 million tonnes (P). With all
this and much more coming as a contribution to the National Gross
Domestic Product from the Animal Husbandry, Dairying and Fisheries
division of the Agriculture sector , it is agonizing to note that the
Department is still struggling with the issue of meagre allocations.
This is evident from the fact that the share of the Department in
the Central Plan Outlay during 10th, 11th and 12th plans was
merely 0.28%, 0.38% and 0.33% respectively. Further , the total
allocation made to the Department in the BE stage of the five
fiscals of the Twelfth Plan is Rs. 9200.14 crore, which is a mere
64.88% of the approved 12th Plan Outlay of Rs. 14179 crore of the
Department. The Committee were apprised of the fact that
prioritization of different sectors and trend of expenditure during
previous years form the basis of allocation of funds. The Committee
are unhappy to note that despite consistent requests from the
Department, the Ministry of Finance has not provided higher
allocation of resources. The Committee are of the view that the
Department of the Animal Husbandry, Dairying and Fisheries should
be allocated funds in the Central Plan keeping in view the
contributions made by this particular sector to employment
generation, the food basket and the National GDP of the country.
The Committee, therefore, urge the Ministry of Finance to increase
the share of the Department in the Central Plan so that various
programmes undertaken by them do not suffer for want of funds.
The Committee desire that the Department should pursue the matter
with the Ministry of Finance vigorously. The Committee would like
to be apprised of the initiatives undertaken by the Department in
this regard. Ó
1.6 In its Action Taken reply, the Department has stated as under:
ÒThe observations of the Committee are noted for strict compliance.
Department has been continuously pursuing with Ministry of Finance
the matter for enhanced allocation of funds for the schemes. The
Department has also put stress on the supplementing the efforts
by States for providing the additional means of sustenance in terms
of wealth/security and employment to the farming community
mostly comprising of small and marginal farmers residing in the
rural areas. It is worth mentionable that allocation for financial
year 2017-18 for the schemes of Department has been increased
by 17.8% over the allocation for financial year 2016-17. Ó

4
1.7 While noting the issue of meagre allocation of funds to the
Department of Animal Husbandry, Dairying and Fisheries, the
Committee had recommended the Department to pursue the matter
with the Ministry of Finance and also urged the Ministry of Finance
to increase the share of the Department in the Central Plan so that
various programmes undertaken by it do not suffer for want of
funds. The Department, in its Action Taken Reply, has informed that
it has continuously been pursuing with the Ministry of Finance for
enhanced allocation of funds for the Schemes and also that the
allocation for financial year 2017-18 has been increased by 17.8%
over the previous year. The Committee, however, are of the
considered opinion that the Department need to ensure that its
share in the Central Plan is adequately increased so that the Schemes
and Programmes under the Department are implemented to the
fullest extent and that the allocations made to the Department
match the contribution of the agriculture sector to the GDP. The
Committee, therefore, urge the Department to take adequate steps
in this direction and would also like to be apprised of the same by
the Department.
B. Shortage of Veterinary Doctors and Medicines
Recommendation (Para No. 5)
1.8 The Committee had observed/recommended as under:
ÒThe Committee note with concern that there is an acute shortage
of veterinary doctors and medicine for treatment of sick livestock/
poultry particularly in the rural areas of the country. As a result,
a large number of sick animals die without treatment or medicine
and the farmers, particularly poor , small and marginal farmers
have to suffer huge loss in terms of their livelihood. This issue has
also been raised by the Committee in the past but no corrective
efforts have been made by the Department to address the issue.
The Committee feel that the present animal healthcare
infrastructure is grossly inadequate to take care of the vast
population of the livestock/poultry in the country. Veterinary doctors
or medicines are not available in the nearby animal healthcare
centres to treat the sick animals and therefore, farmers are
compelled to travel long distances for treatment of their animals.
During the course of evidence, the Secretary of the Department
was candid enough to accept the fact that there is shortage of
veterinary doctors and medicines. This is particularly due to shortage
of funds for the purpose. However , the Secretary informed the
Committee that a plan has been conceptualised wherein AI-
Technicians would be given six months course on treatment of
animals.

5
The Committee are of the opinion that the Department must work
towards integrating traditional medicinal knowledge/practice with
modern training. The Committee were also informed, during the
course of evidence, about the constitution of a Cell namely
ÔAyurvedic Medicine in Veterinary Medicine Õ by the Department
which is still in its initial stages. The Committee commend this
effort of the Department and desire that this work be taken further
to allow proliferation of traditional medicinal practice values into
modern day veterinary sciences and that the AI technicians
undergoing short term training courses also be made aware in this
regard so as to allow this practice to reach the interiors of all rural
areas. The Committee, therefore, recommend that immediate action
plan may be formulated to address the shortage of veterinary
doctors and medicines for treatment of sick animals. Ministry of
Finance may also be urged to provide adequate funds for the
purpose. The Committee would like to be apprised of the action
taken by the Department in this direction. Ó
1.9 The Department in its Action Taken Reply has stated as under:
ÒVeterinary Services are being provided by respective State
Government including deployment of veterinary manpower.
To meet the shortage of trained veterinary manpower , the Veterinary
Council of India has initiated various actions and the following
achievements have been made by Veterinary Council of India during
the last two years:
(a) Number of recognized colleges increased to 45 from 36 from
September 2014 onward.
(b) Total number of annual veterinary graduates increased to
3398 from 2160.
(c) Increased seats in 17 veterinary colleges to 1334 from 914
on the basis of infrastructure and facilities available in the
colleges.
(d) Online application facility for All India Pre-Veterinary Test
(AIPVT) for 15% seats at All India level in veterinary colleges
has been started for students of rural & remote areas.
(e) Reservation for SC/ST student against 15% seat for AIPVT
2015 has been started for students for rural and remote
areas.
(f) AIPVT has been conducted in Hindi and English both from
2015 onward.

6
(g) Admissions to B.V .Sc & A.H. courses have been allowed in
six more Veterinary Colleges in addition to 46 colleges which
will add more trained veterinary manpower.
Further , the Minimum Standards of Veterinary Education has been
amended to increase the seats to 80 admissions instead of earlier
60 admissions. The Central Government has framed Veterinary
Council of India (Procedure for recognition and de-recognition of
Veterinary Qualification and Veterinary Colleges) Rules, 2017 for
streamlining the recognition of new colleges. States have also been
requested to fill up the vacancies.
Under Rashtriya Gokul Mission National Programme for Bovine
Breeding 4,600 multipurpose AI technicians in Rural India (MAITRIs)
have been established up to March 2017. Ó
1.10 The Committee while taking note of an acute shortage of
veterinary doctors and medicines, had recommended that the
Department formulate an action plan to address this issue. The
Department in its Action Taken Reply furnished that the Veterinary
Council of India has taken a series of measures to meet the shortage
of trained veterinary manpower and for recognition of new veterinary
colleges. Though the Committee note with satisfaction, the steps
taken by Government in this direction, the fact is that more is
required to be done for animal healthcare infrastructure in the
country. The Committee, therefore reiterate their earlier
recommendation that the Department must make concerted efforts
to address the issue of shortage of veterinary doctors, along with
pursuing the Ministry of Finance to provide adequate funds for the
purpose. The Committee would also like to be apprised of the
initiatives undertaken by the Department in this regard.
C. Development of Inland Fisheries and Aquaculture
Recommendation (Para No. 11)
1.11 The Committee had observed/recommended as under:
ÒThe Committee note that the Development of Inland Fisheries and
Aquaculture scheme being implemented under different components
through the State Governments/UTs covers all the inland fishery
resources available in the country in the form of fresh water,
brackish water , cold water, water logged areas, saline/alkaline
soils for aquaculture and capture fisheries including reservoirs.
Within inland fisheries there is a shift from capture fisheries to

7
aquaculture during the last two and a half decade. Freshwater
aquaculture with a share of 34 percent in inland fisheries in mid-
1980s has increased to about 80 percent in recent years. Fish
Farmers Development Agencies (FFDA) were set up in various
districts for delivering a package of technologies, practices, training
and extension and for providing financial assistance to the
beneficiaries. So far , about 0.65 million ha of water area have
been brought under fish farming covering 1.1 million beneficiaries.
The Committee are appreciative of the initiatives taken by the
Government which have helped inland fisheries emerge as a major
fish producing system in India. However, the full potential of inland
fishery resources in the country largely remains untapped. In order
to boost the fish production in the country, it is but imperative
that the area of aquaculture in the country be expanded. The
Committee strongly feel that fisheries in India is a very important
economic activity. A large section of the people in the country are
dependent on fishery related activities for their livelihood. It not
only meets the domestic needs of the people but also earns precious
foreign exchange for the country from fish and fisheries products.
The Committee, therefore, recommend that all inland derelict
water bodies, reservoirs, canals, drains, ponds, tanks etc. may be
brought within the ambit of fishery related activities for sustained
growth and development of the inland fisheries sector in the country
without affecting the biodiversity of the area.
The Committee note that during each of the year of the 12th Plan
the target of bringing area under aquaculture hovers around
0.24 lakh ha. However , during the years 2014-15 and 2015-16,
against the target of 0.24 lakh ha., only 0.1 lakh ha. and 0.13 lakh
ha. respectively could be brought under aquaculture under the
scheme. According to the Department, the reasons for non-
achievement of physical targets of bringing more area under
aquaculture, are stated to be the non-receipt of proposals from
the State Governments and also due to budgetary cut at the RE
stage. Keeping in view the importance of fisheries sector , it is
imperative that States may be impressed upon to send proposals
to expand their area of aquaculture for the benefit of fishing
community of the States. The Committee are also unhappy to note
that the Fisheries Sector is not getting adequate encouragement
from the government in terms of funding. The Committee,
therefore, urge the Ministry of Finance to allocate funds at the RE
stage as demanded by the Department so that the development of
inland fisheries and aquaculture does not suffer for want of funds.
The Committee are also concerned to note that there are huge

8
losses of indigenous breeds of fishes due to reasons such as drying
up of local or inland water bodies, percolation of harmful chemicals
in the water bodies by ways of using chemical fertilizers and
pesticides in farming etc. The Committee therefore desire that
corrective measures may be undertaken in coordination with all
concerned to check such losses on priority basis. The Committee
would like to be apprised of initiatives undertaken by the
Department in this regard. Ó
1.12 The Department in its Action Taken Reply has stated as under:
ÒForeseeing its high potential, the HonÕble Prime Minister has called
for Òa revolutionÓ in the fisheries sector and has named it as ÒBlue
Revolution Ó. The Blue Revolution, with its multi-dimensional
activities, focuses mainly on increasing fisheries production and
productivity from aquaculture and fisheries resources in the country.
Under the restructured Scheme on Blue Revolution: Integrated
Development and Management of Fisheries, Development of Inland
Fisheries and Aquaculture is included as a major component for
increase inland fish production by exploring the unutilized inland
water resources (such as inland derelict water bodies, reservoir,
ponds, tanks etc.) with stocking of quality seed. The major activities
covered under this component are:
I. Ponds AquacultureÑconstruction of new ponds and renovation
of existing pools,
II. Establishment of hatcheries for Indian major carps and
prawns/shrimp,
III. Development of fisheries in cold-water ,
IV . Wetland-Productive utilization of wetland waterlogged areas
and inland saline/alkaline waters for aquaculture,
V . Reservoir FisheriesÑIntegrated development of reservoirs,
VI. Establishment of small scale and medium size feed mills/
plants
VII. Encouragement of low cost Re-circulatory Aquaculture System,
VIII. Rejuvenation of urban/semi-urban/rural lakes/tanks for fish
culture,
IX. Renovation of MNREGA ponds for fish culture etc.
Besides the above focused activity under Development of Inland
Fisheries and Aquaculture, State-wise priority areas were identified
for development of inland fisheries in the concerned State based

9
on the water resources available in the State. All States/UTs were
requested to include all these identified priority activities in the
Detailed Project Report (DPR) of Blue Revolution Scheme and in
the proposals under RKVY . Further, States are being requested for
stocking of fingerlings under the Mission Fingerlings Programme in
the identified water bodies such as wetland, reservoir , running
water, ponds, tanks including ponds created under MNREGA etc.
under Blue Revolution Guideline, for conservation and awareness
of fisheries resources, financial support is extended for preservation
in indigenous breeds of fishes in riverine water bodies. Ó
1.13 While noting the shortfall of the Department in achieving
the physical and financial targets of inland fisheries and aquaculture,
the Committee had recommended the Department to work out
modalities towards bringing about a sustained growth and
development in the inland fisheries sector. The Department, in its
Action Taken Reply, informed that major activities focused on
increasing fish production and productivity from aquaculture were
being undertaken and State-wise priority areas were identified for
development of inland fisheries in the concerned States based on
water resources available. The Committee, however, are concerned
to note that no concrete steps have been taken by the Department
to prevent huge losses of indigenous breeds of fishes and drying up
of inland water bodies etc. The Committee, therefore, reiterate
their earlier recommendation and urge the Department to take up
adequate measures in coordination with concerned stakeholders
and work towards sustained growth and development of the inland
fisheries and aquaculture without affecting the biodiversity of the
area. The Committee would also like to be apprised of the initiatives
undertaken by the Department in this regard.
D. Special Package for Rehabilitation of Bereaved Families of the
Farmers Committing Suicides
Recommendation (Para No. 13)
1.14 The Committee had observed/recommended as under:Ñ
ÒThe Committee note that a special package for livestock and
fisheries sector for 31 suicide-prone districts of A.P ., Maharashtra,
Karnataka and Kerala, was to be implemented over a period of
3 years from 2006-07. However , the Government of India approved
a rehabilitation package on 20.11.2008. As per Cabinet approval,
the total outlay of Idukki Package is Rs. 91.15 crore and the

10
implementation period was up to 30.11.2013. The above package
was being implemented along with Special Livestock Sector and
Fisheries Package for the suicide-prone districts of the aforesaid
States which already ended on 30.09.2011. However , the Committee
are anguished to note that the special package to suicide-prone
districts of the States was discontinued without any alternate
package as spate of farmer suicides continues unabated in many
parts of the country which brings out the state of distress amongst
the farmers.
The Committee, therefore, recommend that the Government should
formulate a policy for grant of special package for rehabilitation
of the bereaved families of the farmers who commit suicide under
distress. Further, a mechanism should be put in place to monitor
the relief to the bereaved families without any inordinate delay.
The Committee would like to be apprised of initiatives undertaken
by the Department in this regard. Ó
1.15 The Department in its Action Taken Reply has stated as under:Ñ
ÒThe observation of HonÕble Committee have been noted. However,
the Department is implementing few schemes where special
provisions were made to boost up the participation of women in
the animal husbandry and fisheries sector. Ó
1.16 While noting that the Department has discontinued special
packages to suicide-prone districts without any alternate package,
the Committee had recommended that the Government formulate
a policy for granting special package for rehabilitation of bereaved
families of farmers who commit suicide under distress. The
Department in its Action Taken Reply has submitted that it is
implementing a few schemes where special provisions have been
made to boost the participation of women in the animal husbandry
and fisheries sector. The Committee, however, are apprehensive of
the fact that the discontinuation of such packages to bereaved
families without any concrete assurance to bail them out of this
dire situation, needs to be relooked. The Committee, therefore,
reiterate their earlier recommendation that the Department should
take a holistic view of the entire situation and come up with alternate
packages to relieve the families of their loss due to unabated farmer
suicides in the country. The Committee would also like to be informed
of the steps taken by the Department in this direction.

11
CHAPTER II
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN
ACCEPTED BY THE GOVERNMENT
Share of the Department of Animal Husbandry, Dairying and Fisheries
in the Central Plan
Recommendation (Para No. 1)
Animal Husbandry, Dairying and Fisheries activities along with
agriculture continue to be an integral part of human life ever since the
process of civilization. These activities have contributed to the food
basket, draught animal power , helped in maintaining ecological balance
and have also played a significant role in generating gainful employment
in the rural sector, particularly among the landless, small and marginal
farmers and women, besides providing cheap and nutritious food to
millions of people. According to estimates of the Central Statistics
Office (CSO), the value of output from the livestock sector at current
prices was about Rs. 5,91,691 crore during 2015-16 which is about
28.5% of the value of output from agricultural and allied sector. At
constant prices the value of output from livestock is about 29% of the
value of the output from total agriculture and allied sector. Moreover,
India continues to be the largest producer of milk in the world. Milk
production during 2014-15 and 2015-16 is 146.3 million tonnes and
155.5 million tonnes respectively showing an annual growth of 6.27%.
The per capita availability of milk is around 337 grams per day in
2015-16. Furthermore, meat production in the beginning of Twelfth
Plan (2012-13) was 5.95 million tonnes which has been further increased
to 7.0 million tonnes in 2015-16. Besides being the second largest
producer of fish, India is also the second largest producer of fresh
water fish in the world. Fish production has increased from 41.57 lakh
tonnes (24.47 lakh tonnes for marine and 17.10 lakh tonnes for inland
fisheries) in 1991-92 to 107.90 lakh tonnes (35.8 lakh tonnes for marine
and 72.10 lakh tonnes for inland fisheries) in 2015-16 (provisional).
During the first two quarters of 2016-17 the fish production is estimated
at 5.03 million tonnes (P). With all this and much more coming as a
contribution to the National Gross Domestic Product from the Animal
Husbandry, Dairying and Fisheries division of the Agriculture sector , it
is agonizing to note that the Department is still struggling with the
issue of meagre allocations. This is evident from the fact that the
share of the Department in the Central Plan Outlay during 10th, 11th

12
and 12th plans was merely 0.28%, 0.38% and 0.33% respectively. Further,
the total allocation made to the Department in the BE stage of the
five fiscals of the Twelfth Plan is Rs. 9200.14 crore, which is a mere
64.88% of the approved 12th Plan Outlay of Rs. 14179 crore of the
Department. The Committee were apprised of the fact that prioritization
of different sectors and trend of expenditure during previous years
form the basis of allocation of funds. The Committee are unhappy to
note that despite consistent requests from the Department, the Ministry
of Finance has not provided higher allocation of resources. The
Committee are of the view that the Department of the Animal
Husbandry, Dairying and Fisheries should be allocated funds in the
Central Plan keeping in view the contributions made by this particular
sector to employment generation, the food basket and the National
GDP of the country. The Committee, therefore, urge the Ministry of
Finance to increase the share of the Department in the Central Plan
so that various programmes undertaken by them do not suffer for want
of funds. The Committee desire that the Department should pursue
the matter with the Ministry of Finance vigorously. The Committee
would like to be apprised of the initiatives undertaken by the
Department in this regard .
Reply of the Government
The observations of the Committee are noted for strict compliance.
Department has been continuously pursuing with Ministry of Finance
the matter for enhanced allocation of funds for the schemes. The
Department has also put stress on supplementing the efforts by States
for providing the additional means of sustenance in terms of wealth/
security and employment to the farming community mostly comprising
of small and marginal farmers residing in the rural areas. It is worth
mentionable that allocation for financial year 2017-18 for the schemes
of Department has been increased by 17.8% over the allocation for
financial year 2016-17.
[Ministry of Agriculture and Farmers Welfare (Department of Animal
Husbandry, Dairying and Fisheries) F .No. 25-5(2)/2017-AHD (Coord.)
dt. 21st July 2017]
Comments of the Committee
For comments of the Committee please refer to Para No. 1.7 of
Chapter-I of this Report.
Allocation of Funds During 12th Plan
Recommendation (Para No. 2)
The Committee note that during each of the years of the Twelfth
Plan i.e. 2012-13, 2013-14, 2014-15, 2015-16 and 2016-17, a huge
variation exists between funds demanded by the Department and the

13
funds allocated by erstwhile Planning Commission/Ministry of Finance.
For the year 2012-13, against the demand of Rs. 3497.50 crore, the
allocation was Rs. 1910.00 crore (54.61%). During the year 2013-14,
the Department was allocated Rs. 2025.00 crore against the proposal
of Rs. 3025.00 crore (66.94%). Again for the 2014-15, the proposal was
for Rs. 3535.00 crore but the allocation made was Rs. 2174.00 crore
(61.49%). During the year 2015-16, against a proposal of Rs. 4527.79
crore, the allocation was a meagre Rs. 1491.14 crore (32.93%). During
the year 2016-17, against a proposal of Rs. 3231.43 crore, the allocation
was again a meagre Rs. 1600.00 crore (49.51%). This mismatch between
the proposed allocation and the actual allocation is a cause of concern
to the Committee. As a result of lesser allocation of funds, the
Committee are apprehensive that the implementation of the various
schemes undertaken by the Department may have been adversely
affected, which in turn may have hindered the growth and development
of this vital sector of the economy. In view of the foregoing, the
Committee recommend that the Department should vigorously urge
the Ministry of Finance to allocate the funds as proposed by them at
the RE Stage, as otherwise the performance of the Department may be
adversely affected for want of funds. The Committee would like to be
apprised of the initiatives undertaken by them in this regard.
Reply of the Government
During the FY 2016-17, Department has utilized 99.72% fund out of
the increased allocation. i.e. Rs. 1748.00 crore at the RE stage. Further ,
it also stated that Department has utilized 97.05% fund out of the
allocated fund during the 12th FYP . Department is doing its best to
ensure optimum utilization of allocated funds. State/Implementing
agencies are continuously reminded through bi-Monthly Review Meetings,
Regional Review Meetings, Field Visit and Video Conferences to liquidate
the pending Utilization Certificates and submit proposal for release of
fund during the current financial year.
[Ministry of Agriculture and Farmers Welfare (Department of Animal
Husbandry, Dairying and Fisheries) F .No. 25-5(2)/2017-AHD (Coord.)
dt. 21st July 2017]
Output Outcome Framework for Schemes 2017-18
Recommendation (Para No. 4)
The Output Outcome Framework for schemes (2017-18) has laid
down Output/Deliverables against the outlay 2017-18 for the Centrally
Sponsored Schemes and for other key Deliverables of the Department.

14
While the outlay for the scheme on Blue Revolution for 2017-18 is
Rs. 400.73 crore against the proposed BE of Rs. 447.04 crore, the
projected medium term outcome is 6.1% growth in fish content and
increase in fish production by 7.04 lakh tonnes. As admitted by the
Department, the allocation is not sufficient and they will propose
higher allocation at the RE stage. The Committee hope that the required
allocation will be made for the scheme so that the Department is able
to achieve the set targets.
It has also been informed to the Committee that the Department
has prepared a National Action Plan for fisheries sector to achieve
overall target of 15MT fish production by 2020. The funds will also be
utilized for various activities related to fish production and welfare of
fishermen. The Department is exploring the possibilities for funding
through external agencies like Asian Development Board (ADB) and
World Bank. Further , the Department is also planning to get the funding
from NABARD and NCDC to achieve the overall target in fisheries
sector. The Committee would like to know the details of the Action
Plan for fisheries sector and the initiative undertaken to raise the
funds for the purpose and the progress made therein.
Similarly, for White Revolution the medium term outcome is
projected to th increase milk production by 20% by 2020. The Committee
note that the Dairy Entrepreneurship Development Scheme (DEDS) has
been formulated with an objective to promote setting up of modern
dairy farms for production of clean milk, encourage heifer calf rearing,
bring structural changes in the unorganized sector and generate self
employment. The Committee appreciate this initiative and hope that
this will go a long way in increasing milk production in the country,
both qualitatively and quantitatively.
Reply of the Government
For Seeing the immense scope for development of fisheries and
aquaculture various initiatives have been taken by the Department of
Animal Husbandry, Dairying & Fisheries, Ministry of Agriculture and
Farmers Welfare for the development of fisheries. Consequent to the
approval of the Central Plan Scheme, the Department has prepared a
detailed draft Integrated National Action Plan (INAP) on Development
of Fisheries.
INAP focuses mainly on optimal and sustainable utilisation of various
fisheries/water resources such as ponds & tanks, wetlands, brackish-
water , cold water, lakes & reservoirs, rivers & canals in inland fisheries.
Besides, sustainable harnessing of marine fisheries resources and

15
promotion of mariculture has also been focussed under the INPA. Other
critical inputs and fisheries infrastructure facilities such as fish seed,
hatcheries, brooders, brood-banks, rearing and farming areas required,
feed mills, cages & pens etc have also been worked out under the
INAP .
INAP aims to achieve the fish production of about 150 lakh metric
tonne by 2020 from the current production of 107.62 lakh metric
tonnes (2015-16). Out of this, the major production is proposed to be
contributed from inland fisheries from its present production of 71.62
lakh tonne (2015-16) to 110.32 lakh tonne by 2019-20. It is expected
that the marine sector will increase production from its present level
of 36.00 lakh tonne to 39.68 lakh tonne by 2019-20.
The potential areas to contribute such targeted fish production in
inland fisheries are identified as (i) Re-circulatory aquaculture system
(RAS), (ii) Wetlands including High altitude wetlands, Waterlogged
(manmade), (iii) Brackish Water (including land locked Saline states),
(iv) Cold chain, (v) Mariculture, (vi) Brackish water development,
(vii) focus on enhancement of fingerling production. The marginal
increase in fish production in marine sector is expected mainly from
the capture fisheries (7.16 lakh tonne) and some part from culture
activities (0.091 lakh tonne). INAP recognises the high potentiality of
the inland sector in enhancing fish production and doubling of fish
farmerÕs income.
The Department has approached multilateral funding agencies like
World Bank, NABARD, Asian Developmental Bank (ADB) for funding the
activities related to fisheries sector. Besides, the Department is also
in the process of creating a Fisheries and Aquaculture Infrastructure
Development Funds (FIDF) to provide for the infrastructural needs in
the sector.
[Ministry of Agriculture and Farmers Welfare (Department of Animal
Husbandry, Dairying and Fisheries) F .No. 25-5(2)/2017-AHD (Coord.)
dt. 21st July 2017]
Directorate of Animal Health
Recommendation (Para No. 7)
Directorate of Animal Health is a Central Sector Scheme. Under
the scheme there are six AQCS Stations established at New Delhi,
Mumbai, Chennai, Kolkata and Hyderabad and 5 RDDLs located at
Bengaluru, Pune, Jalandhar, Kolkata and Guwahati and one institute
(National Institute of Animal Health) located at Baghpat, Uttar Pradesh.

16
The Committee note with concern that there has been gross under
utilization of funds to the extent of 23.37% of RE during the Twelfth
Plan. The Committee are not convinced with the reason advanced by
the Department for such under utilization due to restriction and
expenditure in the month of March. The Committee therefore desire
the Department to be more prudent in their planning so as to ensure
that the allocated funds are spent for the purpose in a given timeframe.
Reply of the Government
The suggestion of the Committee has been noted for compliance .
[Ministry of Agriculture and Farmers Welfare (Department of Animal
Husbandry, Dairying and Fisheries) F .No. 25-5(2)/2017-AHD (Coord)
dt. 21st July 2017.]
Pig Development in the North-Eastern Region
Recommendation (Para No. 8)
The Sub Mission on Pig Development in the North-Eastern Region
has been formulated with the aim of supporting all round development
of piggery in the North-Eastern region wherein the Government of
India would back State Piggery Farms and importation of germplasm so
as to benefit the masses who are dependent on this for livelihood and
also because this would help provide protein-rich food in the 8 States
of the North-Eastern Region.
The Committee are however concerned to note that the population
of pigs has shown a negative growth rate of 7.54% from the 17th
Livestock in 2003 to the 19th Livestock Census in 2012 wherein pig
population of 13.5 million in 2003 has dwindled to 10.3 million in
2012. This is a disturbing trend, more so, when pork forms a rich
source of protein. The Department must also work towards meeting
challenges of early detection of disease, quality control, breed
improvement as well as quarantine of affected pigs in swine flu infested
regions and States. There is also the need to incentivize pig breeders
to adopt best practices and scientific pig rearing techniques and to
devise methods to increase the number of viable breeder farms, to
control diseases in animals in the vicinity of breeding areas and to
have healthy abattoirs for culling of pigs. The Committee desire that
the Department take concrete measures in this direction and apprise
the Committee of the same.

17
Reply of the Government
Department is implementing Classical Swine Fever Control Program
(CSF-CP) as a component of Livestock Health and Disease Control scheme
in all the North Eastern States wherein assistance is provided to States
for vaccines and vaccination cost. Surveillance is going on in the North
Eastern States for Porcine Reproductive and Respiratory Syndrome (PRRS)
disease. Beside these, assistance is also provided to States under the
schemesÑÒAssistance to States for Control of Animal Diseases Ó and
ÒEstablishment & Strengthening of Veterinary Hospitals and Dispensaries
(ESVHD)Ó for development of veterinary infrastructure.
For taking prevention of disease outbreaks, this Department has
issued Bio-security guidelines for piggery during the year 2016-17.
Further, the National Guidelines for formulation of State Pig Breeding
Policy focusing on outline of pig-breeding needs of the country, leaving
flexibility to States to work upon as per their requirement within the
frame-work has been issued during the year 2016-17 for breed
improvement.
A programme of Rural Slaughter Houses (establishment/
modernization/expansion) through Panchayati Raj Institutions has been
kept as a component under the National Livestock Mission which supports
slaughter houses in rural areas for production of hygienic meat.
Further , Innovative Pig Development Project for North East (IPDPNE)
is also envisaged increase the income of the Pig rearing farmer/
entrepreneur/NGO Cooperative Society, etc. in the North Eastern States
including Sikkim. Superior germplasm of high genetic merit through
import and then crossing them with the low productive indigenous
breeds to eventually result in crossbreds which would perform and
yield better harvest to the pig rearers.
[Ministry of Agriculture and Farmers Welfare (Department of Animal
Husbandry, Dairying and Fisheries) F .No. 25-5(2)/2017-AHD (Coord.)
dt. 21st July 2017]
Dairy Development Scheme
Recommendation (Para No. 09)
The Committee note that Dairy Entrepreneurship Development
Scheme (DEDS) is a Central Sector Scheme being implemented by
the Department since September, 2010, with an approved outlay of

18
Rs. 1400 crore for the period 2012-13 to 2016-17. DEDS is a credit
linked scheme and implemented by NABARD through financial
institutions. The scheme is beneficiary oriented and aims at generating
self employment opportunities in the dairy sector through enhancement
of milk production, procurement, preservation, transportation,
processing and marketing of milk; by providing back-ended subsidy @
25% of the project cost to the General Category and @33.33% of the
project cost to SC/ST category farmers and beneficiaries for bankable
projects through NABARD. The Committee express satisfaction over
the positive outcome and impact of the scheme as observed from the
findings of the report on Mid course ÔEvaluation and Impact Study Õ
conducted recently in thirteen States by National Productivity Council.
As per the findings of the report, a significant increase of around 123%
in milk production per beneficiary was noted. Further, direct
employment was given to 1.86 lakh persons and has improved the
livelihood of the farmers, besides improving the nutrition of under
nourished children of the poor farmers assisted under the scheme.
Considering the avowed objectives of the Scheme, the Committee
recommend that the Government should continue with the Scheme to
boost the dairy sector in the country. However , the Committee would
like the Government to generate awareness amongst prospective
individuals/entrepreneurs/farmers etc. about the objectives of the
Scheme through sustained campaign in print and electronic media. The
Committee would like to be apprised of the action taken by the
Department in this regard.
Reply of the Government
In order to ensure adequate publicity of scheme, 1% of subsidy
disbursed in a year is allowed to be spent by NABARD for publicity of
scheme across the country with special attention to NE states to
sensitize potential beneficiaries. NABARD is also arranging workshop,
seminars etc. in order to promote the scheme.
[Ministry of Agriculture and Farmers Welfare (Department of Animal
Husbandry, Dairying and Fisheries) F .No. 25-5(2)/2017-AHD (Coord.)
dt. 21st July 2017]

19
CHAPTER III
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO NOT
DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE GOVERNMENT ÕS REPLIES
-NIL-

20
CHAPTER IV
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF
THE GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE
Utilization of Funds
Recommendation (Para No. 03)
During the course of examination of the Demands for Grants
(2017-18), the Committee have observed that even the meagre
allocations from the Ministry of Finance at the RE stage, the Department
has failed to utilize the funds fully. During the year 2012-13, the
actual expenditure was just Rs. 1736.37 crore against an allocation of
Rs. 1910.00 crore, which is only 90.9% of the fund allocated during the
same year. For the year 2013-14, against an allocation of Rs. 2025.00
crore, the expenditure incurred by the Department was Rs. 1748.80
crore, which is just 86.36% of the allocated amount. In the year
2014-15, the actual expenditure was Rs. 1738.0 crore, which is 79.94%
of the allocated amount of Rs. 2174 crore. For 2015-16, the Department
was allocated Rs. 1491.14 crore out of which expenditure was
Rs. 1418.20 crore which amounts to 95%. In 2016-17, the Department
spent Rs. 1388.86 crore which is 86.80% of the allocated amount of
Rs. 1600 crore. The Committee are, therefore, dismayed to note that
despite repeated recommendations of the Committee, the Department
has failed to take corrective steps to optimally utilize funds allocated
to them. The Committee deprecate the under-utilization of funds by
the Department and that too uniformly throughout the year. This only
goes to show that there is some lacunae in the management and
regulation of the finance of the Department. The Committee, therefore,
recommend that the Department should take corrective steps and
make earnest efforts for optimum utilization of funds. The Committee
would like to be apprised of corrective action taken in this regard.
Reply of the Government
During the FY 2016-17, Department has utilized 99.72% fund out of
the increased allocation. i.e. Rs. 1748.00 crore at the RE stage. Further ,
it also stated that Department has utilized 97.05% fund out of the
allocated fund during the 12th FYP . Department is doing its best to
ensure optimum utilization of allocated funds. State/Implementing
agencies are continuously reminded through bi-Monthly Review Meetings,

21
Regional Review Meetings, Field Visit and Video Conferences to liquidate
the pending Utilization Certificates and submit proposal for release of
fund during the current financial year.
[Ministry of Agriculture and Farmers Welfare (Department of Animal
Husbandry, Dairying and Fisheries) F .No. 25-5(2)/2017-AHD (Coord.)
dt. 21st July 2017]
Shortage of Veterinary Doctors and Medicines
Recommendation (Para No. 05)
The Committee note with concern that there is an acute shortage
of veterinary doctors and medicine for treatment of sick livestock/
poultry particularly in the rural areas of the country. As a result, a
large number of sick animals die without treatment or medicine and
the farmers, particularly poor small and marginal farmers have to
suffer huge loss in terms of their livelihood. This issue has also been
raised by the Committee in the past but no corrective efforts have
been made by the Department to address the issue. The Committee
feel that the present animal healthcare infrastructure is grossly
inadequate to take care of the vast population of the livestock/poultry
in the country. Veterinary doctors or medicines are not available in the
nearby animal healthcare centres to treat the sick animals and
therefore, farmers are compelled to travel long distances for treatment
of their animals.
During the course of evidence, the Secretary of the Department
was candid enough to accept the fact that there is shortage of veterinary
doctors and medicines. This is particularly due to shortage of funds for
the purpose. However , the Secretary informed the Committee that a
plan has been conceptualised wherein AI-Technicians would be given
six months course on treatment of animals.
The Committee are of the opinion that the Department must work
towards integrating traditional medicinal knowledge/practice with
modern training. The Committee were also informed, during the course
of evidence, about the constitution of a Cell namely ÔAyurvedic Medicine
in Veterinary Medicine Õ by the Department which is still in its initial
stages. The Committee commend this effort of the Department and
desire that this work be taken further to allow proliferation of traditional
medicinal practice values into modern day veterinary sciences and
that the AI-technicians undergoing short term training courses also be
made aware in this regard so as to allow this practice to reach the
interiors of all rural areas. The Committee, therefore, recommend

22
that immediate action plan may be formulated to address the shortage
of veterinary doctors and medicines for treatment of sick animals.
Ministry of Finance may also be urged to provide adequate funds for
the purpose. The Committee would like to be apprised of the action
taken by the Department in this direction.
Reply of the Government
Veterinary Services are being provided by respective State
Government including deployment of veterinary manpower. To meet
the shortage of trained veterinary manpower , the Veterinary Council of
India has initiated various actions and the following achievements have
been made by Veterinary Council of India during the last two years:
(a) Number of recognized colleges increased to 45 from 36 from
September 2014 onward.
(b) Total number of annual veterinary graduates increased to
3398 from 2160.
(c) Increased to seats in 17 veterinary colleges to 1334 from 914
on the basis of infrastructure and facilities available in the
colleges.
(d) Online application facility for All India Pre-Veterinary Test
(AIPVT) for 15% seats at All India level in veterinary colleges
has been started for students of rural & remote areas.
(e) Reservation for SC/ST student against 15% seat for AIPVT
2015 has been started for students for rural and remote
areas.
(f) AIPVT has been conducted in Hindi and English both from
2015 onward.
(g) Admissions to B.V .Sc & A.H. courses have been allowed in
six more Veterinary Colleges in addition to 46 colleges which
will add more trained veterinary manpower.
Further , the Minimum Standards of Veterinary Education has been
amended to increase the seats to 80 admissions instead of earlier 60
admissions. The Central Government has framed Veterinary Council of
India (Procedure for recognition and de-recognition of Veterinary
Qualification and Veterinary Colleges) Rules, 2017 for streamlining the
recognition of new colleges. States have also been requested to fill up
the vacancies.

23
Under Rashtriya Gokul Mission National Programme for Bovine
Breeding 4,600 multipurpose All technicians in Rural India (MAITRIs)
have been established upto March 2017.
[Ministry of Agriculture and Farmers Welfare (Department of Animal
Husbandry, Dairying and Fisheries) F .No. 25-5(2)/2017-AHD (Coord.)
dt. 21st July 2017]
Comments of the Committee
For comments of the Committee please refer to Para No. 1.10 of
Chapter-I of this Report.
National Programme for Dairy Development Ñ A Component of NPBB
& DD
Recommendation (Para No. 10)
The Committee are happy to note that as a result of several
measures initiated by the Government, milk production has increased
significantly from the level of 102.6 MT at the end of 10th plan
(2006-07) to 155.5 MT in 2015-16. The Committee also note that the
National Programme for Dairy Development (NPDD)Ña component of
National Programme for Bovine Breeding and Dairy development
(NPBB&DD), launched in February, 2014 has been designed to develop
infrastructure from the grass root level to the point of consumption by
providing financial and technical assistance for dairy development.
NPDD focuses on creating infrastructure related to production,
procurement, processing and marketing by Milk Unions/Federations
and also extension activities including training of farmers. The
Committee express satisfaction over the fact that the transfer of the
scheme to the Central Sector has led to funds being directly released
to implementing agencies which has further accelerated the
implementation, utilization of funds and achievement of physical
targets.
Since inception, in February, 2014, 32 new projects have been
approved in 18 States covering 103 Districts with total approved cost
of Rs. 353.49 crore with central share of Rs. 149.06 crore. These
projects have benefited 36607 farmers forming 1175 Village level district
cooperative society in 18 States, procuring milk about 683.8 TLPD and
marketing milk of about 236.3 TLPD. However , the Committee note
that against an approved outlay of Rs. 600 crore, an amount of Rs. 600
crore for 12th plan, actual expenditure was only Rs. 419.72 crore
which works out only 69.95% of the approved outlay for NPDD. Thus,
31.05% of the funds allocated remained unutilized during 12th plan

24
period which is highly unsatisfactory. For 2017-18, Rs. 170 crore has
been allocated for NPDD. While appreciating the Department for its
efforts, the Committee trust that the Department will continue to
strive for sustained growth and development of dairy sector to meet
the demand of increasing population of the Country and take appropriate
remedial measures to ensure optimal utilization of allotted funds so
that the physical and financial performance do not suffer.
Reply of the Government
The Committee observed that against an approved outlay of
Rs. 600 crore actual expenditure was only Rs. 419.72 crore which
works out only 69.95% of the approved outlay for NPDD. Thus, 31.05%
of the funds allocated remained unutilized during 1 th plan period
which is highly unsatisfactory. In this context it may be stated that
against the allocation of Rs. 600.00 crore, an amount of Rs. 453.00
crore was provided as BE under NPDD during 12th plan. Against the BE
of Rs. 453.0 crore, an expenditure of Rs. 447.49 crore (98.85%) has
been made till 31.03.2017. It works out to 98.85% of BE allocated
under NPDD during 12 Five Year Plan.
[Ministry of Agriculture and Farmers Welfare (Department of Animal
Husbandry, Dairying and Fisheries) F .No. 25-5(2)/2017-AHD (Coord)
dt. 21st July 2017]
Development of Inland Fisheries and Aquaculture
Recommendation (Para No. 11)
The Committee note that the Development of Inland Fisheries and
Aquaculture scheme being implemented under different components
through the State Governments/UTs covers all the inland fishery
resources available in the country in the form of fresh water , brackish
water , cold water, water logged areas, saline/alkaline soils for
aquaculture and capture fisheries including reservoirs. Within inland
fisheries there is a shift from capture fisheries to aquaculture during
the last two and a half decade. Freshwater aquaculture with a share
of 34 percent in inland fisheries in mid-1980s has increased to about
80 percent in recent years. Fish Farmers Development Agencies (FFDA)
were set up in various districts for delivering a package of technologies,
practices, training and extension and for providing financial assistance
to the beneficiaries. So far, about 0.65 million ha of water area have
been brought under fish farming covering 1.1 million beneficiaries.
The Committee are appreciative of the initiatives taken by the
Government which have helped inland fisheries emerge as a major fish

25
producing system in India. However , the full potential of inland fishery
resources in the country largely remains untapped. In order to boost
the fish production in the country, it is but imperative that the area
of aquaculture in the country be expanded. The Committee strongly
feel that fisheries in India is a very important economic activity. A
large section of the people in the country are dependent on fishery
related activities for their livelihood. It not only meets the domestic
needs of the people but also earns precious foreign exchange for the
country from fish and fisheries products. The Committee, therefore,
recommend that all inland derelict water bodies, reservoirs, canals,
drains, ponds, tanks etc may be brought within the ambit of fishery
related activities for sustained growth and development of the inland
fisheries sector in the country without affecting the biodiversity of the
area. The Committee note that during each of the year of the
12th plan, the target of bringing area under aquaculture hovers around
0.24 lakh ha. However , during the years 2014-15 and 2015-16, against
the target of 0.24 lakh ha., only 0.1 lakh ha. and 0.13 lakh ha.
respectively could be brought under aquaculture under the scheme.
According to the Department, the reasons for non-achievement of
physical targets of bringing more area under aquaculture, are stated
to be the non-receipt of proposals from the State Governments and
also due to budgetary cut at the RE stage. Keeping in view the
importance of fisheries sector, it is imperative that States may be
impressed upon to send proposals to expand their area of aquaculture
for the benefit of fishing community of the States. The Committee are
also unhappy to note that the Fisheries Sector is not getting adequate
encouragement from the government in terms of funding. The
Committee, therefore, urge the Ministry of Finance to allocate funds
at the RE stage as demanded by the Department so that the
development of inland fisheries and aquaculture does not suffer for
want of funds. The Committee are also concerned to note that there
are huge losses of indigenous breeds of fishes due to reasons such as
drying up of local or inland water bodies, percolation of harmful
chemicals in the water bodies by ways of using chemical fertilizers and
pesticides in farming etc. The Committee therefore desire that
corrective measures may be undertaken in coordination with all
concerned to check such losses on priority basis. The Committee would
like to be apprised of initiatives undertaken by the Department in this
regard.
Reply of the Government
Foreseeing its high potential, the Hon Õble Prime Minister has called
for Òa revolution Ó in the fisheries sector and has named it as ÒBlue
RevolutionÓ. The Blue Revolution, with its multi-dimensional activities,
focuses mainly on increasing fisheries production and productivity from
aquaculture and fisheries resources in the country. Under the
restructured Scheme on Blue Revolution: Integrated Development and

26
Management of Fisheries, Development of Inland Fisheries and
Aquaculture is included as a major component for increase inland fish
production by exploring the unutilized inland water resources (such as
inland derelict water bodies, reservoir , ponds, tanks etc.) with stocking
of quality seed. The major activities covered under this component
are:
(I) Ponds AquacultureÑconstruction of new ponds and renovation
of existing pools,
(II) Establishment of hatcheries for Indian major carps and
prawns/shrimp,
(III) Development of fisheries in cold-water ,
(IV) WetlandÑProductive utilization of wetland waterlogged areas
and inland saline/alkaline waters for aquaculture,
(V) Reservoir FisheriesÑIntegrated development of reservoirs,
(VI) Establishment of small scale and medium size feed mills/
plants
(VII) Encouragement of low cost Re-circulatory Aquaculture System,
(VIII) Rejuvenation of urban/semi-urban/rural lakes/tanks for fish
culture,
(IX) Renovation of MNREGA ponds for fish culture etc.
Besides the above focused activity under Development of Inland
Fisheries and Aquaculture, State-wise priority areas were identified
for development of inland fisheries in the concerned State based on
the water resources available in the State. All States/UTs were requested
to include all these identified priority activities in the Detailed Project
Report (DPR) of Blue Revolution Scheme and in the proposals under
RKVY . Further, States are being requested for stocking of fingerlings
under the Mission Fingerlings Programme in the identified water bodied
such as wetland, reservoir, running water, ponds, tanks including ponds
created under MNREGA etc. under Blue Revolution Guideline, for
conservation and awareness of fisheries resources, financial support is
extended for preservation of indigenous breeds of fishes in riverine
water bodies.
[Ministry of Agriculture and Farmers Welfare (Department of Animal
Husbandry, Dairying and Fisheries) F .No. 25-5(2)/2017-AHD (Coord.)
dt. 21st July 2017]
Comments of the Committee
For comments of the Committee please refer to Para No. 1.13 of
Chapter-I of this Report.

27
National Institute of Fisheries Post Harvest Technology and Training
(NIFPHATT)
Recommendation (Para No. 12)
The Committee note that realizing the need for extending the
activities of developing post harvest technologies along the upper east
coast, the Govt. of India decided to set up a unit of Integrated Fisheries
Project in Visakhapatnam. The Integrated Fisheries Project was renamed
by the Government of India in 2008 as National Institute of Fisheries
Post Harvest Technology & Training (NIFPHATT). The Committee also
observe that the current mission of NIFPHATT is to take up the new
challenges and opportunities in the fisheries sector such as post harvest
technology upgradation and dissemination, human resource
development, gender development, relief and rehabilitation programmes
for the fishermen communities and consultancy in fisheries infrastructure
and post harvest technology. However, the Committee are concerned
to note that during each year of the 12th plan, the funds allocated at
the RE stage could not be fully utilised by the Department under
NIFPHATT . The under-utilisation of funds during the plan is to the
extent of 41.34% of the funds allocated to the Institute. The Committee
are not convinced with the explanation given by the Institute/
Department for under-utilisation of funds during 12th plan period and
are unhappy with this sordid state of affairs. The Committee, therefore,
desire that the Department/Institute should take corrective measures
ensuring that such instances are not repeated in future and scarce
funds made available to them are fully utilised.
The Committee further note that despite having the component of
gender development in fishermen communities as part of the NIFPHATT
scheme, the Department are yet to show any tangible results on that
front. The Department is providing mere lip service in the name of
gender development and has taken no initiative to ensure that the
fisherwomen find any place or special assistance within the NIFPHATT
scheme, in general and in the fisheries sector , in particular. According
to the Department, Gender Development programmes are usually carried
out in association with State Government fisheries department/agencies
which may vary as per their schemes. There are no provisions with this
Institute to provide livelihood compensation for the fisherwomen during
training days and hence, it may not be practically possible to bypass
the State Government agencies as to carry out such programmes directly.
In view of the foregoing, the Committee recommend that the
Department should come out with a plan in coordination and
consultation with the State Governments for implementing gender
development programmes in the fisheries sector. The Committee may
be apprised of the steps taken by the Department in this direction.

28
Reply of the Government
A major portion of the funds left unutilized were meant for
renovation and refurbishment of ice cum freezing plant of Vizag unit
of the Institute. This un-utilization of fund was mainly due to
non-finalization of tenders in the respective financial years and approval
from the Ministry During the year 2014-15, the tender (2 Nos.) received
were not approved by the Ministry and again it was re-tendered twice
and there was no response from the concerned parties. During the
year 2015-16, sanction for the work was received at the tail end of the
financial year and hence there was no sufficient time for processing
the e-tender formalities. However, earnest efforts will be taken to
utilize the funds allotted during the coming year.
NIFPHATT has always put forth its whole hearted effort for extending
the reach of its training programmes to intended beneficiaries. However,
it is a fact that the Institute does not have a specifically allotted fund
for conduction training programmes and is presently depending on
various sponsoring agencies like State Government. SHGs and other
User Agencies. It is a fact that fishermen/fisherwomen are reluctant
to forgo their livelihood and attend such training programmes. For the
entire training programmes conducted, the sponsoring agencies had to
compensate for the livelihood losses and most of our proposed training
programmes are intended at gender development in fishermen
communities are sometimes delayed due to the constraints.
[Ministry of Agriculture and Farmers Welfare (Department of Animal
Husbandry, Dairying and Fisheries) F .No. 25-5(2)/2017-AHD (Coord.)
dt. 21st July 2017]
Special Package for Rehabilitation of Bereaved Families of the Farmers
Committing Suicides
Recommendation (Para No. 13)
The Committee note that a special package for livestock and
fisheries sector for 31 suicide-prone districts of A.P ., Maharashtra,
Karnataka and Kerala, was to be implemented over a period of 3 years
from 2006-07. However , the Government of India approved a
rehabilitation package on 20.11.2008. As per Cabinet approval, the
total outlay of Idukki Package is Rs. 91.15 crore and the implementation
period was up to 30.11.2013. The above package was being implemented
along with Special Livestock Sector and Fisheries Package for the suicide-
prone districts of the aforesaid States which already ended on
30.09.2011. However, the Committee are anguished to note that the

29
special package to suicide-prone districts of the States was discontinued
without any alternate package as spate of farmer suicides continues
unabated in many parts of the country which brings out the state of
distress amongst the farmers.
The Committee, therefore, recommend that the Government should
formulate a policy for grant of special package for rehabilitation of
the bereaved families of the farmers who commit suicide under distress.
Further , a mechanism should be put in place to monitor the relief to
the bereaved families without any inordinate delay. The Committee
would like to be apprised of initiatives undertaken by the Department
in this regard.
Reply of the Government
The observation of Hon Õble Committee have been noted. However,
the Department is implementing few schemes where special provisions
were made to boost up the participation of women in the animal
husbandry and fisheries sector.
[Ministry of Agriculture and Farmers Welfare (Department of Animal
Husbandry, Dairying and Fisheries) F .No. 25-5(2)/2017-AHD (Coord.)
dt. 21st July 2017]
Comments of the Committee
For comments of the Committee please refer to Para No. 1.16 of
Chapter-I of this Report.

30
CHAPTER V
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH FINAL
REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT ARE STILL AWAITED
Foot and Mouth Disease Control Programme (FMD-CP)
Recommendation (Para No. 06)
The Committee note that the Foot and Mouth Disease Control
Programme (FMD-CP) has been formulated with to prevent economic
losses due to Foot and Mouth Disease and to develop herd immunity
in cloven-footed animals and that this programme is location specific
and is being implemented in 351 specified districts covering 13 States
and 6 Union Territories. Funds are provided for cost of vaccine,
maintenance of cold chain and other logistic support to undertake
vaccination. The State Governments are providing other infrastructure
and manpower. Till 2014-15, programme was under implementation
with 100% Central share. However , since 2015-16, funding pattern has
changed to 60:40 between Centre and States. The Committee are
happy to note that intensive implementation of FMD-CP has shown the
desired results in terms of reduction of FMD outbreaks in the States
covered under FMD-CP . Also that based on the effective implementation
of the FMD control programme, India has established three zones
(Zone 1-Telengana and AP; Zone 2-Maharashtra and Zone 3-Punjab) as
ÔFMD free Zones where vaccination is practiced Õ, as per World
Organization for Animal Health (OIE) guidelines and dossier has been
submitted to OIE for their recognition in 2016.
The Committee note with concern that against the proposed
allocation of Rs. 1708 crore, only Rs. 1046.78 crore were allocated to
the Department at the BE stage, which was further reduced to
Rs. 947.83 crore during the Twelfth Plan. During 2017-18, against
proposed allocation of Rs. 297.77 crore, only Rs. 201.71 crore has been
allocated under FMD-CP . In the opinion of the Committee, such a
drastic cut in the Plan allocation will adversely affect the
implementation of FMD-CP and achievements of the physical targets of
the scheme. The Committee, therefore, stress upon the Department to
impress upon the Ministry of Finance for allocation of adequate funds
at the RE stage so as to achieve the planned targets for 2017-18
without any hindrance.

31
Reply of the Government
During 2017-18, the Department has already allocated that Rs. 267
crores for the Foot and Mouth Disease Control Programme (FMD-CP)
out of budgetary allocation of Rs. 298.77 crores for entire LH & DC
Scheme. Further, the financial assistance is being provided under
Rastriya Krishi Vikas Yojna (RKVY) from the FMD-CP as sub-scheme.
The Department is also pursuing with the Department of Expenditure
to allocate remaining amount of Rs. 260 crores out of total amount of
Rs. 560 crores required as 60% central share for FMD-CP for entire
country covering all eligible population of Cattle and buffaloes.
[Ministry of Agriculture and Farmers Welfare (Department of Animal
Husbandry, Dairying and Fisheries) F .No. 25-5(2)/2017-AHD (Coord.)
dt. 21st July 2017]
   N
EW D ELHI; HUKM DEO NARAYAN YADAV,
28 August, 2017 Chairperson,
06 Bhadrapada, 1939 (Saka) Standing Committee on Agriculture.

32
ANNEXURE
STANDING COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE (2016-17)
MINUTES OF THE TWENTY SEVENTH SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE
The Committee sat on Monday, the 28th August, 2017 from 1500 hrs.
to 1530 hrs. in the Room No. 53, Parliament House, New Delhi.
PRESENT
Shri Hukm Deo Narayan YadavÑ Chairperson
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Md. Badaruddoza Khan
3. Dr. Tapas Mandal
4. Shri Janardan Mishra
5. Shri Nityanand Rai
6. Shri Mukesh Rajput
7. Shri C.L. Ruala
8. Shri Satyapal Singh (Sambhal)
9. Shri Jai Prakash Narayan Yadav
Rajya Sabha
10. Shri Sambhaji Chhatrapati
11. Sardar Sukhdev Singh Dhindsa
12. Shri Janardan Dwivedi
13. Shri Vinay Katiyar
14. Shri Mohd. Ali Khan
15. Shri Ram Nath Thakur
SECRETARIAT
1. Shri D.S. Malha Ñ Joint Secretary
2. Shri Arun K. Kaushik Ñ Director
3. Smt. Juby Amar Ñ Additional Director
4. Shri C. Vanlalruata Ñ Deputy Secretary
5. Shri Sumesh Kumar Ñ Under Secretary

33
2. At the outset, Hon Õble Chairperson welcomed the Members to
the Valedictory Sitting of the Committee. Thereafter, the Committee
took up the following draft Reports for consideration:
*(i) ***** ***** ***** *****
(ii) Draft Report on Action Taken by the Government on the
Observations/Recommendations Contained in the Thirty
Seventh Report of the Standing Committee on Agriculture on
ÔDemands for Grants (2017-18) Õ pertaining to the Ministry of
Agriculture and Farmers Welfare (Department of Animal
Husbandry, Dairying and Fisheries).
*(iii) ***** ***** ***** *****
3. After some deliberations, the Committee adopted the draft
Reports without any modifications and authorized the Chairperson to
finalize these reports. Since the House is not in Session, the Committee
decided to present the Reports to Hon Õble Speaker under Direction 71A
of the Direction by the Speaker , Lok Sabha.
*4. ***** ***** ***** *****
The Committee then adjourned.
*Matter not related to this Report.

34
APPENDIX
ANALYSIS OF ACTION TAKEN BY GOVERNMENT ON THE THIRTY
SEVENTH REPORT (16th LOK SABHA) OF STANDING
COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE (2016-17)
(Vide Para 4 of Introduction of the Report)
(i) Total number of Recommendations 13
(ii) Observations/Recommendations which have been
Accepted by the Government
Para Nos. 1, 2, 4, 7, 8 and 9
Total 06
Percentage 46.15%
(iii) Observations/Recommendations which the Committee
Do not desire to pursue in view of the Government Õs
replies
Para No. NIL
Total 00
Percentage 0.00%
(iv) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which
replies of the Government have not been accepted
by the Committee
Para Nos. 3, 5, 10, 11, 12 and 13
Total 06
Percentage 46.15%
(v) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which
Final replies of the Government are still awaited
Para No. 6
Total 01
Percentage 7.69%