40
STANDING COMMITTEE ON
AGRICULTURE
(2016-2017)
SIXTEENTH LOK SABHA
MINISTRY OF AGRICULTURE AND FARMERS WELFARE
(DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE, COOPERATION AND FARMERS WELFARE)
ÔAUGMENTING RURAL STORAGE INFRASTRUCTURE
THROUGH THE SCHEME OF RURAL GODOWNS Õ
[Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations
contained  in the Twenty Eighth  Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha)
of the Standing Committee on Agriculture (2015-2016)]
FORTIETH REPORT
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
August, 2017/Shravana, 1939 ( Saka)


FORTIETH REPORT
STANDING COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE
(2016-2017)
(SIXTEENTH LOK SABHA)
MINISTRY OF AGRICULTURE AND FARMERS WELFARE
(DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE, COOPERATION AND FARMERS WELFARE)
ÔAUGMENTING RURAL STORAGE INFRASTRUCTURE
THROUGH THE SCHEME OF RURAL GODOWNS Õ
[Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations
contained  in the Twenty Eighth  Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha)
of the Standing Committee on Agriculture (2015-2016)]
Presented to Lok Sabha on 09.08.2017
Laid on the Table of Rajya Sabha on 09.08.2017
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
August, 2017/Shravana, 1939 ( Saka)


COA No. 330
Price : R 50.00
' 2017 B Y L OK SABHA S ECRETARIAT
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct
of Business in Lok Sabha (Fifteenth Edition) and printed by
Aegean Offset Printers, New Delhi.

CONTENTS
PAGE
COMPOSITION OF THE C OMMITTEE ............................................. (iii)
INTRODUCTION ................................................................. (v)
CHAPTER I Report......................................................... 1
CHAPTER II Observations/Recommendations which have been
accepted by the Government............................ 13
CHAPTER III Observations/Recommendations which the Committee
do not desire to pursue in view of the GovernmentÕs
replies ........................................................ 21
C
HAPTER IV Observations/Recommendations in respect of which
replies of the Government have not been accepted
by the Committee .......................................... 22
C
HAPTER V Observations/Recommendations in respect of which
final replies of the Government are still awaited ..... 28
ANNEXURE
Minutes of the 25th Sitting of the Committee held on
03.08.2017 ............................................................ 30
APPENDIX
Analysis of Action Taken by the Government on the
Recommendations contained in the Twenty Eighth Report
(Sixteenth Lok Sabha) of the Standing Committee on
Agriculture (2015-2016) ............................................ 33
(i)

COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE
(2016-2017)
Shri Hukm Deo Narayan Yadav — Chairperson
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Prof. Ravindra Vishwanath Gaikwad
3. Shri Sanganna Karadi
4. Shri Nalin Kumar Kateel
5. Smt. Raksha Khadse
6. Md. Badaruddoza Khan
7. Shri C. Mahendran
8. Dr. Tapas Mandal
9. Shri Janardan Mishra
10. Shri Devji Patel
11. Shri Nityanand Rai
12. Shri Mukesh Rajput
13. Shri Neiphiu Rio
14. Shri Konakalla Narayana Rao
15. Shri C.L. Ruala
16. Shri Arjun Charan Sethi
17. Shri Satyapal Singh (Sambhal)
18. Shri Virendra Singh
19. Shri Dharmendra Yadav
20. Shri Jai Prakash Narayan Yadav
21. Shri B.S. Yeddyurappa
Rajya Sabha
22. Shri Sambhaji Chhatrapati
23. Sardar Sukhdev Singh Dhindsa
24. Shri Janardan Dwivedi
25. Shri Meghraj Jain
(iii)

26. Shri Vinay Katiyar
27. Shri Mohd. Ali Khan
28. Shri Ram Nath Thakur
29. Shri R. Vaithilingam
30. Shri Shankarbhai N. Vegad
31. Shri Darshan Singh Yadav
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Shri D.S. Malha Ñ Joint Secretary
2. Shri Arun K. Kaushik Ñ Director
3. Shri C. Vanlalruata Ñ Deputy Secretary
(iv)

(v)
INTRODUCTION
I, the Chairperson, Standing Committee on Agriculture (2016-17),
having been authorized by the Committee to submit the Report on
their behalf, present this Fortieth Report on action taken by the
Government on the Observations/Recommendations contained in the
Twenty Eighth Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) of the Standing Committee
on Agriculture (2015-16) on the Subject ÒAugmenting Rural Storage
Infrastructure through the Scheme of Rural Godowns Ó pertaining to the
Ministry of Agriculture and Farmers Welfare (Department of Agriculture,
Cooperation and Farmers Welfare).
2. The Twenty Eighth Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) of the Standing
Committee on Agriculture (2015-16) on the Subject ÒAugmenting Rural
Storage Infrastructure through the Scheme of Rural GodownsÓ pertaining
to the Ministry of Agriculture and Farmers Welfare (Department of
Agriculture, Cooperation and Farmers Welfare) was presented to
Lok Sabha and laid on the Table of Rajya Sabha on 11 August, 2016.
The Action Taken Notes on the Report were received on 11 November,
2016.
3. The Report was considered and adopted by the Committee at
their Sitting held on 03.08.2017.
4. An analysis of the action taken by the Government on the
Observations/Recommendations contained in the Twenty Eighth Report
(Sixteenth Lok Sabha) of the Committee is given in Appendix.
   N
EW D ELHI; HUKM DEO NARAYAN YADAV,
07 August, 2017 Chairperson,
16 Shravana, 1939 (Saka) Standing Committee on Agriculture.

1
CHAPTER I
REPORT
This Report of the Standing Committee on Agriculture deals with
the action taken by the Government on the recommendations contained
in the Twenty Eighth Report of the Standing Committee on Agriculture
(2015-16) on the Subject ÒAugmenting Rural Storage Infrastructure
through the Scheme of Rural Godowns Ó of the Ministry of Agriculture
and Farmers Welfare (Department of Agriculture, Cooperation and
Farmers Welfare) which was presented to Lok Sabha and laid on the
Table of Rajya Sabha on 11 August, 2016.
1.2 The Ministry of Agriculture and Farmers Welfare (Department
of Agriculture, Cooperation and Farmers Welfare) have furnished Action
Taken Replies in respect of all the 09 Observations/Recommendations
contained in the Report. These replies have been categorized as under:Ñ
(i) Observations/Recommendations that have been accepted by
the Government:
Recommendation Para Nos. 3, 4, 5, 6, 8 & 9
(Chapter II - Total 06)
(ii) Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not
desire to pursue in view of the Government Õs reply:
Recommendation Para No. NIL
(Chapter III - NIL)
(iii) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which action
taken replies of the Government have not been accepted by
the Committee:
Recommendation Para Nos. 1 & 7
(Chapter IV - Total 02)
(iv) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which final
replies of the Government are still awaited:
Recommendation Para No. 2
(Chapter V - Total 01)
1.3 The Committee trust that utmost importance would be given
to implementation of the Observations/Recommendations accepted
by the Government. In cases, where it is not possible for the

2
Department to implement the Recommendations in letter and spirit
for any reason, the matter should be reported to the Committee
with reasons for nonimplementation. The Committee desire that
further Action Taken Note on the Observations/Recommendations
contained in Chapter-I and Final Action Taken Replies to the
Observations/Recommendations contained in Chapter-V of this Report
be furnished to them at an early date.
1.4 The Committee will now deal with the action taken by the
Government on some of the Recommendations in the succeeding
paragraphs.
Need for Augmenting Rural Store Infrastructure
Recommendation (Para No. 1)
1.5 The Committee had observed/recommended as under:Ñ
ÒThe Committee note that establishment of rural godowns enables
the small and marginal farmers to increase their holding capacity
and avoid wastage and deterioration of their produce which in turn
help them to avoid distress sale and get them remunerative prices
for their produce. However, the Committee is distressed to note
that most of the farmers in the country do not have adequate
storage infrastructure to retain their produce and they tend to
dispose of the same without waiting for favorable market prices.
On 01.04.2001, Rural Godown Scheme (RGS) was launched by the
Government to promote creation of storage capacity across the
country. According to the Department, 55 million MT storage
capacities under the scheme have been created since its inception
in the year 2001. The scheme has contributed in reducing storage
gap of 35 million MT as estimated by the Planning Commission for
12th Five Year Plan. This is based on the assumption that the total
marketable surplus of all major crops will grow from 130 million
MT to 150 million MT by the end of the 12th Plan. As per estimates
of National Centre for Agricultural Economics and Policy Research
(NCAP), the total demand for foodgrains of the country is projected
to touch 281 million MT by 2020-21 which will require storage
capacity of around 196 million MT . During the course of evidence,
the Secretary of the Department also informed the Committee
that as per the assessment of the Government, about 600 lakh
tonnes of foodgrains are required under the Food Security Act and
therefore, the country needs storage capacity of 600 lakh tonnes.
Needless to say, warehousing is one of the critical infrastructural
facilities needed to support marketing of agriculture produce in

3
the country. It is also essential that the existing scheme for creation
of scientific storage capacity with allied facilities in rural areas to
meet the requirement of the farmers community may be
implemented effectively so that network of godowns is created as
per the requirement of the country. The Committee, therefore,
recommends that keeping in view the current and future food
grains production and procurement scenario, an action plan may
be prepared by the Department in coordination with State
Governments and other stakeholders for creation of sufficient
storage capacity. The Committee would like to be apprised of the
initiatives undertaken by the Department in this regard. Ó
1.6 In its Action Taken reply, the Department has stated as under:Ñ
ÒThe committee has mentioned that as per estimates of the National
Centre for Agricultural Economics and Policy Research (NCAP),
projected the total demand for foodgrains of the country shall
touch 281 million MT by 2020-21 which will require storage capacity
of around 196 million MT . The total storage capacity with Food
Corporation of India (FCI), Central Warehousing Corporation (CWC)
and State Warehousing Corporation (SWC) as on September 2016 is
about 80 Million tonnes (Source: Department of Food & Public
distribution). The Storage capacity sanctioned so far under the
Agricultural Marketing Infrastructure (erstwhile Rural Godown
Scheme) sub scheme of Integrated Scheme for Agricultural marketing
(ISAM) is about 62.2 million tonnes. Of this, 48 Million Tonnes
capacity has already been created. The storage capacity available
under Cooperative Sector is in the range of 16.68 million tonnes
(Source: Department of Food & Public distribution) . Thus total
available storage capacity is estimated to be around 144.68 million
tonnes. Thus a shortage of 51.32 (196-144.68) million tonnes storage
capacity is expected to be there by year 2020-21. It is expected
that 14.2 million tonnes of storage capacity under construction  via
Agricultural Marketing Infrastructure (erstwhile Rural Godown
Scheme) shall be available shortly. So the balance storage
requirement which will need to be provided by year 2020- 21 is
37.12 million tonnes. In view of above scenario, it would be
appropriate that Agricultural Marketing Infrastructure (erstwhile
Rural Godown Scheme) sub scheme of integrated scheme for
Agricultural marketing (ISAM) is continued beyond 12th plan
(2012-17) to suitably address the storage capacity gap by 2020-21.
However , considering the fact that the scheme needs to reach the
small and marginal farmers, an action plan, depending on the
availability of funds, will be prepared to meet the storage gap as

4
suggested by the committee. The Department will take into account
the feedback received from the State Governments and other stake
holders while framing the guidelines if the scheme is continued
beyond 2017. Ó
1.7 Taking into account that warehousing is one of the critical
infrastructural facilities that support marketing of agricultural
produce in the country and the existing scheme for creation of
scientific storage capacity with allied facilities in rural areas was of
paramount importance, the Committee had recommended that an
action plan be prepared by the Department in coordination with
State Government and other stakeholders for creation of sufficient
storage capacity. In their action taken reply, the Department have
candidly admitted that there is a balance storage requirement of
37.12 million tonnes which needs to be provided by the year 2020-
21. However, they have also stated that they would be taking into
account the feedback received from the State Governments and
other stakeholders while framing the guidelines if the scheme is
continued beyond 2017. Deeply concerned at the contrasting reply
of the Government, the Committee desire that finality be accorded
to the continuance of the Agricultural Marketing Scheme at the
earliest or the Government come up with an alternative to the
same, so as to address this pressing issue of augmenting the balance
storage requirement of 37.12 million tonnes by the year 2020-21.
The Committee would like to be apprised of the concrete action
taken by the Department in this regard.
Allocation of Funds
Recommendation (Para No. 2)
1.8 The Committee had observed/recommended as under:Ñ
ÒThe Committee is distressed to note that the scheme has been
temporarily stopped since 05.08.2014 for promoters of General
Category due to exhaustion of funds and only committed liabilities
are being met as on date. The Committee also regrets to note that
for want of funds, disbursement of subsidy amounting to Rs. 1000
crore to the beneficiaries is pending where construction of godowns
is complete. This has caused undue hardship to the beneficiaries
for no apparent fault of theirs. Further , godowns worth Rs. 800
crore have been sanctioned by the banks and these are to be
completed. According to the Secretary of the Department, additional
funds are required for creational of additional storage facility. The
Committee, therefore, recommends that the Department should

5
take up matter with the Ministry of Finance and impress upon them
to provide requisite funds so that creational of additional storage
facility across the country under the scheme is not hampered for
want of funds and pending subsidy to the beneficiaries is released
without further delay. The Committee would like to be apprised of
the action by the Department in this regard. Ó
1.9 In its Action Taken reply, the Department has stated as under:Ñ
ÒThe scheme is going to end on 31st March 2017 as per presently
available sanction. The department is assessing the clear committed
liabilities so that same can be fulfilled. Subsequent to stoppage of
the scheme on 05.08.14 for promoters of General Category, the
funds to the tune of Rs. 1320 crore has already been released to
the NABARD and NCDC for disbursement of subsidy to the
beneficiaries. The matter has been taken up by this Department
with the Ministry of Finance to provide additional estimated funds
in the range of Rs. 830 crores, in addition to BE provisions of
Rs. 682.80 for year 2016-17 to clear the committed liabilities and
creation of additional storage facility across the country. The Finance
Ministry is yet to release additional fund for this Scheme. However,
a sum of Rs. 200 crore has been recently made available from Kisan
Kalyan Cess for the scheme. Furthermore, the Department is making
efforts with the Ministry of Finance for providing additional funds
and they have agreed to consider the request of department in the
supplementary grant. Ó
1.10 The Committee were distressed to note that lack of funds
was holding up disbursement of subsidy amounting to Rs. 1000
crore to the beneficiaries who had completed the construction of
Godowns, which was causing them undue hardship. Also, Godowns
worth Rs. 800 crore have been sanctioned by banks and the same
are to be completed. Accordingly, the Committee had recommended
that the Department take up this matter with Ministry of Finance
for providing requisite funds so that the implementation of the
scheme for creation of additional storage facility is not hampered
and subsidy to beneficiaries is released at the earliest. In response,
the Department in their action taken replies have stated that initially
Ministry of Finance had not released the additional fund for this
scheme, but due to Department of Agriculture, Cooperation and
Farmers Welfare efforts, Ministry of Finance have agreed to consider
their request in the supplementary grant. In the interregnum, a
sum of Rs. 200 crore has been made available from Krishi Kalyan
Cess (KKC). Concerned to note that the Ministry of Finance has not

6
yet released funds as sought by the Department i.e. Rs. 830 crores
+ Rs. 682.80 crore, which works out to Rs. 1512.80 crore, the
Committee exhort upon the Department to take up this issue with
the Ministry of Finance at the highest level to ensure that adequate
funding is released at the earliest to clear the committed liabilities
under this scheme. The Committee would also like to be apprised
about the details of steps taken and the progress achieved.
Conversion of Land Use
Recommendation (Para No. 4)
1.11 The Committee had observed/recommended as under:Ñ
ÒThe Committee notes that certain States like Punjab, Uttar Pradesh,
Andhra Pradesh, Haryana, West Bengal, Telangana, and Madhya
Pradesh have taken advantage of the scheme and created a large
number of godowns in their States. In the State of Punjab, storage
capacity of 63 lakh tonnes has been created. Similarly, in States
like Uttar Pradesh, Andhra Pradesh, Haryana, West Bengal, Telangana,
and Madhya Pradesh, storage capacity of 50, 34, 69, 14, 50 and 86
lakh tonnes respectively has been created till August, 2015. On the
other hand, in States like Bihar , Jharkhand and in North Eastern
States, creation of storage capacity is comparatively unsatisfactory.
The reasons attributed for sub-par performance of some of the
States are lack of demand and communal ownership of the land/
land holdings in North-Eastern States. It was also brought to the
notice of the Committee that conversion of land is not mandatory
under the scheme. Many banks sanction the loan without land
conversion certificate and the subsidy under the scheme is released.
In certain States, godowns constructed in an area of 500 square
meters are treated as an agriculture activity and conversion of land
usage for commercial purposes is not required. In some States like
in Rajasthan initially for about four to five years, there was no
demand for land conversion for construction of godowns but later
on, the same was insisted upon. Thus, the Committee notes that
there is no clarity and uniformity on the issue of conversion of land
usage for the purpose of construction of godowns. This has created
confusion amongst the intended beneficiaries and is proving
detrimental to their interest as the guidelines on the issue are
silent. The Committee is of the view that construction of rural
godown is an important agricultural activity and therefore, conversion
of land usage need not be made essential for the purpose. The
Committee, therefore, recommend that the Department may take

7
up the matter with all the States and the stakeholders impressing
upon them to treat construction of storage infrastructure as part of
the agricultural activity and the conversion of land use may not be
required and suitable amendments be made in the guidelines on
the issue. The Committee also desire that the Department may also
take up the matter with those States where physical progress in
construction of storage capacity is dismal and direct them to make
concerted and coordinated efforts to create sufficient storage
capacity in their States. The Committee would like to be apprised
of the initiatives undertaken by the Department in this regard. Ó
1.12 In its Action Taken reply, the Department has stated as under:Ñ
ÒThis is submitted that Entry 18 and 45 of the Seventh Schedule
(List-II, i.e. State List) of the Constitution clearly confers legislative
power and administrative competence to the States on issues Land
and Land Revenue including assessment and collection of revenue,
maintenance of land records, land management and alienation of
land revenue, etc. Exercising the powers available in the
Constitution, some of the States have legislated Land Resource Act
or Land Revenue Act and framed rules there under to, inter alia,
regulate the conversion of usage of land from agriculture to
residential, industrial or commercial, and they have identified the
activity to cover there under. While some other States have not
passed any regulation on this issue. Grameen Bhandaran Yojana
(GBY) operational guidelines are legally correct in being silent on
the issue because the issue of land conversion is to be governed
under the concerned States land regulation provisions. The
department will refer the matter of treating godowns as an
agricultural activity and therefore waive the need for land conversion
to enable construction, to the Department of Land Resources. Based
on their operation, the State will be appropriately advised. The
only remedy available is for the States to amend their respective
laws to provide that construction of godowns upto certain capacity
can be treated as agricultural activity. Department has already
started collecting State-wise regulatory provision. The department
will take up the matter with the States through Department of
Land Resources, being it the nodal department. Ó
1.13 The Committee had noted that there was no clarity or
uniformity on the issue of conversion of land usage for the purpose
of construction of godowns and this was creating confusion amongst
the intended beneficiaries and was proving detrimental to their
interest. Accordingly, the Committee recommended that the

8
Department take up this matter with all the States and Stakeholders
to treat construction of storage infrastructure as part of agricultural
activity so that conversion of land use may not be required. They
further desired that suitable amendments may be made in the
guidelines on the issue. The Department in their action taken replies
submitted that as per the Constitutional Provisions, the States have
been conferred legislative power and administrative competence on
issue of land, land revenue, land records, land management and
alienation of land revenue. As land conversion is under the State
domain, Grameen Bhandaran Yojana (GBY) operational guidelines
are legally correct in being silent on the issue. However, the
Department will refer the matter of treating godowns as agricultural
activity with the Department implore upon Department of Land
Resources. The Department have also started collecting state-wise
regulatory provision. Being appreciative of the proactive approach
taken by the Department on this vital issue, the Committee desire
that the Department of Land Resources be impressed upon to take
up this matter with all states and impress upon them to amend
their laws so as to treat construction of rural godowns upto certain
capacity as agricultural activity and thus negate the need for land
conversion. The details of progress achieved herein may be
communicated to the Committee at the earliest.
Negotiable Warehouse Receipt System
Recommendation (Para No. 7)
1.14 The Committee had observed/recommended as under:Ñ
ÒThe Committee notes that Warehousing Development and Regulatory
Authority (WDRA) is mandated with the task of regulation of
warehouses in the entire country. Although, warehousing is a State
subject, the Government introduced negotiable warehouse receipt
system under Warehouse (Development and Regulation) Act, 2007.
These receipt books are issued by the Authority to registered godowns
and the same cannot be duplicated. Negotiable warehouse receipts
allow transfer of ownership of that commodity stored in a warehouse
without having to deliver the physical commodity. However, under
the Act, registration of warehouses is optional. Due to the credibility
of these warehousing receipts, the people who store their products
in these registered warehouses can avail easy loans from banks/
financial institutions. So far 952 godowns having capacity of about
38 lakh tonnes have been registered with the Authority. The value
of the produce stored in the godowns against receipts issued amounts

9
to Rs. 3806 crore against which banks have issued loans amounting
to Rs. 1277 crore. The Committee also notes that under the crop
loan scheme of the Department of Financial Services, crop loan for
a period of one year at 7% rate of interest can be availed. If the
loan is repaid timely by the farmers, then there is a subvention of
3% on the crop loan availed by them and the interest paid by them
is only 4%. If the post-harvest produce is stored in warehouse
registered by WDRA, then the period of crop loan is extended by
another six months. However , the scheme is not popular amongst
small and marginal farmers as they do not have surplus produce
that can be stored in godowns. Further, this scheme is applicable
for godowns registered with WDRA where produce can be stored
against negotiable warehouse receipt. As per the terms and
conditions, only small and marginal farmers possessing Kisan Credit
Card can avail loan extended by the Department of Financial Services
and as a result many farmers could not take the advantage of the
credit facility against stored produce. In view of the foregoing, the
Committee are of the view that introduction of negotiable warehouse
receipt system in the country not only helps the farmers to avail
better credit facilities and avoid distress sale but the same also
safeguard the financial institutions by mitigating risks inherent in
credit extension to the farmers. The Committee also feel that crop
loan at 7% rate of interest is high particularly for those small and
marginal farmers whose level of income is very low. The Committee,
therefore, recommends that the Department should take up this
issue with the Ministry of Finance and impress upon them to simplify
the post-harvest crop loan facility which may not cause undue
hardship particularly to those small and marginal farmers. They
should be provided post-harvest crop loan at an affordable and
concessional rate of 4 per cent which the Committee feel incentivize
farmers to store their produce in warehouses and help them to get
remunerative prices for their produce. The Committee also
recommends that the Government should make efforts to popularize
the scheme of registration of godowns with WDRA where produce
can be stored against negotiable warehouse receipt. This will help
the farmers to avail concessional crop loan facility extended by the
Department of Financial Services. The Committee would like to be
apprised of the initiatives undertaken by the Department in this
regard.Ó
1.15 In its Action Taken reply, the Department has stated as under:Ñ
ÒThe Warehousing Development & Regulatory Authority (WDRA), a
Statutory Authority under the Department of Food and Public

10
Distribution, Government of India is involved with the task of
developing and regulating warehouses, registration of warehouses
to enable them to issue Negotiable Warehouse Receipts (NWRs),
building fiduciary trust of Banks in NWRs and promotion of orderly
growth of the warehousing business in the country. The WDRA has
approved 11 accreditation agencies and notified 123 agricultural
commodities for issuing NWRs. So far , WDRA has registered
1321 warehouses including 260 warehouses belonging to the Primary
Agricultural Cooperative societies. Out of the 11 accreditation
agencies, 3 belong to the Ministry of Agriculture, namely, the
Directorate of Marketing & Inspection, Faridabad (attached office
of Ministry of Agriculture & FW), Chaudhary Charan Singh National
Institute of Agricultural Marketing, Jaipur (an autonomous
organization under the Ministry of Agriculture & FW) and the National
Co-operative Development Corporation, New Delhi, which are
actively associated with WDRA in the field of accreditation process.
However , there is a need to expedite the pace of accreditation.
The WDRA is facing certain challenges in registering the warehouses
and promoting the NWRs. These include, (a) The warehousing sector
is un-organized and fragmented, (b) Registration of warehouses is
voluntary and hence limited, (c) There is inadequate regulatory
framework, (d) The registration system and issuance of NWRs are
manual, and (e) The monitoring system of registered warehouses is
inadequate. In order to address these above issues, WDRA has
undertaken a transformation plan to invigorate the warehousing
sector and significantly improve post-harvest lending to farmers
against NWRs. Under Interest Intervention scheme of the
Government, the crop loan is available to the farmer at 7 percent
of interest rate. Further, there is provision for a concession of
3 percent of interest rate on prompt repayment. Thus a farmer can
get short term crop loan at 4 percent of interest rate. As regards
post harvest loan, the benefit of crop loan scheme has been made
available to small and marginal farmers having Kisan Credit Card
(KCC) for a further period of up to six months post harvest on the
same rate as available to crop loan against negotiable warehouse
receipt for keeping their produce in warehouse. Loan shall not
exceed 75% of actual value of produce pledged. However, the benefit
of interest subvention is available only up to Rs. 3 lakh. The actual
value of produce may be determined on the basis of the prevailing
market rate or the Minimum Support Price (MSP) announced by the
Government, whichever is less. In case MSP has not been announced
in respect of a particular crop, banks may ascertain market price
from the nearest Agricultural Produce Marketing Committee (APMC).
Loan under the scheme would be available for a period of up to six

11
months. Government of India will provide interest subvention @2%
p.a. to Cooperative Banks and Regional Rural Banks on their own
funds involved, in respect of individual loans against NWR up to
Rs. 3 lakh provided by them to farmers at interest rate of 7% p.a.
However, subvention (incentive) for prompt repayment will not be
available to the farmers for loans extended against negotiable
receipts. However , there are impediments in the implementation of
this scheme and most of the farmers are not able to get loan under
this scheme against NWRs. The impediments are as follows:
1. Only those farmers who have obtained crop loan are entitled
for post harvest loan on NWRs for a period of another six
months. The farmers who do not avail crop loan due to some
or other reasons are not entitled for post-harvest loan with
interest subvention against NWRs.
2. One of the conditions for availing pledge finance against
NWRs is that first crop loan should be repaid.
3. The above loan is available to only small and marginal
farmers having Kisan Credit Card (KCC). Since, most of small
and marginal farmers have little surplus agricultural produce
to store in scientific warehouses, there is limited benefit of
this scheme and the main objective of increasing liquidity
in rural areas through loan against negotiable warehouse
receipts cannot be achieved.
A Committee under the chairmanship of Chairman, WDRA has been
constituted for strengthening Negotiable Warehouse Receipts (NWRs)
in the country in October 2014 and the committee has submitted
its report in February, 2015. In its report, the above committee has
recommended that the pledge financing scheme should be provided
to all farmers holding KCC against NWRs issued by all the registered
warehouses including cold storages. The loan should be for a period
of six months and the maximum loan amount should be enhanced
to Rs. 5 lakhs. It is learnt that the Dept of Financial Services is
against such a proposal. Ó
1.16 The Committee were of the considered view that
introduction of negotiable warehouse receipt systems not only helps
the farmers to avail better credit facilities and avoid distress sale,
but also safeguards the financial institutions by mitigating risks
inherent in credit extension to farmers. However, the Committee
felt that crop loan at 7% rate of interest is high, particularly for
small and marginal farmers whose level of income is very low, and

12
therefore recommended that the Ministry of Finance be impressed
upon to simplify the post harvest crop loan facility to small and
marginal farmer and to provide them loan at a concessional rate of
4% which would incentivize farmers to store their produce in
warehouses and help them to get remunerative prices for their
produce. Further, Government should make efforts to popularize
the scheme of registration of godowns with WDRA. The Department
in it action taken reply informed about the various problems being
faced by WDRA in registering the warehouses and promoting NWRs.
It was further informed that the report of a Committee under the
Chairmanship of Chairman, WDRA had submitted its report in
February, 2015 recommending that pledge financing schemes should
be provided to all farmers holding KCC against NRWs issued by all
registered warehouses including cold storage. The loan period was
to be for 6 months and the maximum loan amount be enhanced to
Rs.5 lakhs. However, the Department of Financial Services (DFS)
was against such proposal. Concerned at this negative stand of DFS
on this vital issue, the Committee desire that the Department request
the Department of Food and Public Distribution to take this issue
with the Department of Financial Services so as to change their
stand on the recommendations contained in the report of the
Committee under the Chairmanship of Chairman WDRA. Deeply
concerned the silence of the Department on the issue of providing
post-harvest crop loan to small and marginal farmers at a concessional
rate of 4% to incentivize farmer to store their products in
warehouses, the Committee desire that this matter be given a serious
thought and be debated in the Government. The details of action
initiated and the progress achieved in this regard be communicated
to the Committee.

13
CHAPTER II
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN
ACCEPTED BY THE GOVERNMENT
Single Window System
Recommendation (Para No. 3)
The Committee note that with a view to provide a single window
for creation of Agriculture Marketing Infrastructure including Storage
Infrastructure, with effect from 01.04.2014, RGS was merged with the
Scheme for Development/Strengthening of Agricultural Marketing
Infrastructure Grading and Standardization (AMIGS) and renamed as
ÒAgricultural Marketing Infrastructure (AMI) Ó sub-scheme of Integrated
Scheme of Agricultural Marketing (ISAM). Under the Scheme, subsidy is
provided for creation of storage @ 25% and 33.33% to General category
and Special category/region respectively and is channelized through
National Bank for Agriculture and Rural Development (NABARD) (for
Private Promoters)/National Cooperative Development Corporation
(NCDC) (for Cooperative) Department of Agriculture, Cooperation &
Farmers Welfare (DAC &FW) (for State Agency). In this context, the
Secretary of the Department clarified during the course of evidence
that all the schemes of the Ministry has been brought under one
umbrella but that does not mean that the farmers would get all the
approvals at the field level for construction of godowns. According to
the Department, in certain States the concept of single window is
operational and is running successfully. The Committee feels that the
concept of single window concept may expedite creation of storage
infrastructure and other related activity. The Committee, therefore,
desire that the Department may study the single window concept
operational in those States where it is running successfully and impress
upon the other States to explore the possibility to develop the system
to expedite the additional storage capacity in their States.
Reply of the Government
The Sub scheme AMI under the ISAM is at the fag end of its
sanctioned duration (XII five year plan i.e. 2012-17) and the possibility
to introduce single window concept in the revised operational guidelines
shall be adopted if the scheme is continued beyond March 2017.
[Ministry of Agriculture & Farmers Welfare (Department of
Agriculture, Cooperation and Farmers Welfare) No. H-11016/1/2016-
M-II, dated: 10.11.2016]

14
Conversion of Land Use
Recommendation (Para No. 4)
The Committee notes that certain States like Punjab, Uttar Pradesh,
Andhra Pradesh, Haryana, West Bengal, Telangana, and Madhya Pradesh
have taken advantage of the scheme and created a large number of
godowns in their States. In the State of Punjab, storage capacity of 63
lakh tonnes has been created. Similarly, in States like Uttar Pradesh,
Andhra Pradesh, Haryana, West Bengal, Telangana, and Madhya Pradesh,
storage capacity of 50, 34, 69, 14, 50 and 86 lakh tonnes respectively
has been created till August, 2015. On the other hand, in States like
Bihar, Jharkhand and in North Eastern States, creation of storage
capacity is comparatively unsatisfactory. The reasons attributed for
subpar performance of some of the States are lack of demand and
communal ownership of the land/land holdings in North-Eastern States.
It was also brought to the notice of the Committee that conversion of
land is not mandatory under the scheme. Many banks sanction the loan
without land conversion certificate and the subsidy under the scheme
is released. In certain States, godowns constructed in an area of 500
square meters are treated as an agriculture activity and conversion of
land usage for commercial purposes is not required. In some States
like in Rajasthan initially for about four to five years, there was no
demand for land conversion for construction of godowns but later on,
the same was insisted upon. Thus, the Committee notes that there is
no clarity and uniformity on the issue of conversion of land usage for
the purpose of construction of godowns. This has created confusion
amongst the intended beneficiaries and is proving detrimental to their
interest as the guidelines on the issue are silent. The Committee is of
the view that construction of rural godown is an important agricultural
activity and therefore, conversion of land usage need not be made
essential for the purpose. The Committee, therefore, recommend that
the Department may take up the matter with all the States and the
stakeholders impressing upon them to treat construction of storage
infrastructure as part of the agricultural activity and the conversion of
land use may not be required and suitable amendments be made in
the guidelines on the issue. The Committee also desire that the
Department may also take up the matter with those States where
physical progress in construction of storage capacity is dismal and
direct them to make concerted and coordinated efforts to create
sufficient storage capacity in their States. The Committee would like
to be apprised of the initiatives undertaken by the Department in this
regard.

15
Reply of the Government
This is submitted that Entry 18 and 45 of the Seventh Schedule
(List-II, i.e. State List) of the Constitution clearly confers legislative
power and administrative competence to the States on issues of Land
and Land Revenue including assessment and collection of revenue,
maintenance of land records, land management and alienation of land
revenue, etc. Exercising the powers available in the Constitution, some
of the States have legislated Land Resource Act or Land Revenue Act
and framed rules thereunder to, inter alia, regulate the conversion of
usage of land from agriculture to residential, industrial or commercial,
and they have identified the activity to cover thereunder. While some
other States have not passed any regulation on this issue, Grameen
Bhandaran Yojana (GBY) operational guidelines are legally correct in
being silent on the issue because the issue of land conversion is to be
governed under the concerned States land regulation provisions. The
department will refer the matter of treating godowns as an agricultural
activity and therefore waive the need for land conversion to enable
construction to the Department of Land Resources. Based on their
operation, the State will be appropriately advised.
The only remedy available is for the States to amend their respective
laws to provide that construction of godowns upto certain capacity can
be treated as agricultural activity. Department has already started
collecting State-wise regulatory provision. The department will take
up the matter with the States through Department of Land Resources,
being the nodal department.
[Ministry of Agriculture & Farmers Welfare (Department of
Agriculture, Cooperation and Farmers Welfare) No. H-11016/1/2016-
M-II, dated: 10.11.2016]
Comments of the Committee
For comments of the Committee please refer to Para No. 1.10 of
Chapter I of this Report.
Safeguarding the Interests of Small and Marginal Farmers
Recommendation (Para No. 5)
The Committee notes that about 82.42% of the number of projects
created under the storage component of AMI sub-scheme, were by
private promoters and in terms of capacity, it is almost 91%. This
demonstrates that the scheme has helped to catalyze private investment
and strengthen the agriculture market places at local level. However,

16
the Committee are distressed to note that majority of the godowns
constructed under the scheme belong to the affluent people as informed
by the Secretary of the Department during the course of evidence.
Needless to say farming community in the country is dominated by
small and marginal farmers with very low income level and therefore,
they are not in a position to invest sufficient funds for creation of
infrastructure facility for storage of their produce. It would, therefore,
be imperative for the Department to safeguard the interests of small
and marginal farmers including those belonging to SC/ST category and
women and their problems should be addressed promptly without undue
delay. Needless to say, creation of storage infrastructure gives fillip to
post-harvest activities and helps the farmer Õs community to reduce
postharvest wastage and handling losses of their produce and enable
them to get the favorable market prices for their produce. It also
creates employment opportunity for them for operating the project
which, in turn, may raise their income level. The Committee, therefore,
recommends that the Department should make concerted and
coordinated efforts with all concerned to assist the farming community
particularly those small and marginal farmers in establishing storage
infrastructure for their produce. The Committee would like to be
apprised of the initiatives undertaken by them in this regard.
Reply of the Government
With the objective that more number of small and marginal farmers
get the direct benefit of construction of godowns and availing the
subsidy thereon, department by revising the guidelines reduced the
eligible capacity for subsidy from 100 MT to 50 MT , while for hilly areas
farmers, it was further reduced to 25 MT . Certainly, this endeavor of
the Department has benefitted such category farmers, including SCs/
STs. Further, such category of farmers get more benefit indirectly by
putting their meagre surpluses in the constructed warehouses under
the scheme or otherwise available warehouse, which doubly benefits
them by reducing storage losses and preventing distress sale.
The suggestion of the Committee to re-draft the scheme guidelines
so as to benefit small and marginal farmers shall be taken up, in case
of continuation of scheme beyond March, 2017.
[Ministry of Agriculture & Farmers Welfare (Department of
Agriculture, Cooperation and Farmers Welfare) No. H-11016/1/2016-
M-II, dated: 10.11.2016]
Eco-Friendly Godowns
Recommendation (Para No. 6)
The Committee are of the view that usage of godown for storage
of food grains and other post-harvest activities should be eco-friendly.

17
Such godowns should not emit any hazardous chemicals adversely
affecting the surrounding environment. In this regard, the Committee
regret to note that the Government has not conducted any study to
assess the impact of the scheme on environment. Being well aware of
the adverse consequences of neglecting environmental issues, the
Committee desire that a study may be undertaken at the earliest to
assess the impact of usage of godowns for storage of food grains and
other activities on the surrounding environment and action may be
taken on the basis of the outcome of such study.
Reply of the Government
The godowns under GBY are constructed on scientific basis as
meant for storage of agricultural commodities. The guidelines provide
that the warehouses are to be constructed as per standards of CWC
and FCI as prescribed by WDRA for Negotiable Warehouse Receipt
System (NWRS). In addition to this, other technical specifications
required under the guidelines have inbuilt provision to protect the
stored commodities from rodents and birds and proper ventilation so
that use of insecticide and fumigants is reduced to the minimum. As
regards the Committee Õs recommendation for conducting the study on
impact of usage of godowns for storage of food grains and other
activities on the surrounding environment shall be taken up.
[Ministry of Agriculture & Farmers Welfare (Department of
Agriculture, Cooperation and Farmers Welfare) No. H-11016/1/2016-
M-II, dated: 10.11.2016]
General Awareness and Training Programmes
Recommendation (Para No. 8)
The Committee is happy to note that general awareness,
advertisement, publicity and training programmes are taken up with a
special focus on promoters from SC/ST category and North-Eastern
Region and in the States/UTs where the storage component of the sub
scheme has not picked up in the past. The general awareness and
training programmes etc. are taken up through National Institute of
Agricultural Marketing (NIAM), Jaipur; National Institute of Agricultural
Extension Management (MANAGE), Hyderabad; Training of Personnel in
Cooperative Institute (TOPIC), Gurgaon, NABARD and other national
and State level institutions/universities. It was also brought to the
notice of the Committee that the Integrated Scheme for Agricultural
Marketing (ISAM) also supports NIAM which provides for capacity building
of stakeholders in the agri-marketing sector. NIAM conducts more than

18
150 training programmes every year for stakeholders like wholesale
market staff, various market functionaries, extension machinery staff
and farmers at the grassroot level. In addition, NIAM has now planned
to introduce concept like Farmers Business School which will focus on
all the aspects or limitation faced by the farming community at every
level of the value chain. The Committee is of the view that people are
not aware as to how to preserve and maintain the quality of their
produce and its long term preservation. It is imperative for the godown
owners to adopt scientific storage of their produce to reduce the
wastage and losses due to infestation. Being well aware of the
importance of general awareness and training programmes to the
beneficiaries of the scheme, the Committee recommends that an
intensive training for a period of ten days may be imparted to all the
beneficiaries under the scheme at the time of sanction of godown.
Further , concerted efforts may be made to develop infrastructure for
imparting training for the purpose. The Committee would also like to
be apprised of the number of people imparted training per godown
since the inception of the scheme.
Reply of the Government
The NIAM has organized 72 training programmes from the inception
of the scheme in the year 2001 and around 1400 persons have been
imparted training. These include mostly godown promoters themselves.
As per the evaluation report of Global Agri Systems, 85.5% of godowns
are operated by owners and the rest are operated by the employed
workers. There is a need to train these workers numbering about 4500.
Recently the Department has prepared an action plan under the Prime
MinisterÕs Kaushal Vikas Yojana (PMKVY) to train the workers. The
training is scheduled from 2016-17 to 2021-22. Training will be imparted
on standard packages of practices for scientific management of stocks;
costing methods, basic accounting & book keeping etc. and
communication and basic IT practices. The training programs will start
once the proposed plans are approved. The training institutes like
National Institute of Agricultural Marketing (NIAM), Jaipur and other
national and State level institutions/universities will be roped in to
conduct these training programmes and the existing infrastructure of
the partner institutes will be utilized for the same. The Committee
will be apprised of further development accordingly.
[Ministry of Agriculture & Farmers Welfare (Department of
Agriculture, Cooperation and Farmers Welfare) No. H-11016/1/2016-
M-II, dated: 10.11.2016]
Evaluation of RGS
Recommendation (Para No. 9)
The Committee notes that Rural Godown Scheme (RGS) was
evaluated and assessed by M/s Global Agri System Pvt. Limited which

19
submitted its report on 27.05.2013. The study revealed that the
programme has achieved success in achieving reduction in wastage
through its programme. It was also quite evident from the study that
quality control measures such as frequent spraying of insecticides,
fumigation and stacking is being adopted and practiced in most of the
godowns which were surveyed. However, the Committee regrets to
note that only 10.55% farmers reported to have availed the credit
against the store produce whereas 89.45% farmers did not avail any
credit facility against store produce. Pledge loan against stored produce
is not yet a popular practice among farmers and 37.2% were not even
willing to avail the credit. Out of the remaining, 26.71% were not
aware about the credit facility and 24.06% did not get support from
the godown owners. Only 10.55% farmers availed pledge loan. Majority
of farmers had reported that they are realizing better price since
storage. The said report also contains several recommendations
regarding continuation of the scheme during 12th Plan, capacity
building, pattern of assistance, conversion of land use, networking and
National Data Bank of Capacity and Availability etc. The Committee
would like to know the action taken by the Department on the findings
of the study and the recommendations contained in the said report
and the achievements made as a result thereof.
Reply of the Government
The Committee mentioned that the M/s. Global Agri System Pvt.
Ltd. contains several recommendations regarding continuation of the
scheme during 12th Plan, capacity building, pattern of assistance,
conversion of land use, networking and National Data Bank of Capacity
and Availability etc. The agency emphasized for target of creation of
20 million MT storage capacity during XII plan period. In this regard,
it is apprised that the scheme was continued during XII Plan and target
of 23 million MT storage capacity during XII plan Period has been fixed
under the scheme and against this target 30.92 million MT storage
capacity has been created under the scheme during XII plan (till
Sept., 2016) under the revised schemes Agricultural Marketing
Infrastructure (AMI) continued after subsuming of earlier schemesÑ
GBY and AMIGS. The proposal for training of godown owners/operators
for scientific management of the godowns is under process.
The agency has recommended a revision in the normative cost
@ Rs. 4000/MT of the godown. As per the guidelines of the scheme the
normative cost is Rs. 3500/MT for construction of godowns upto
1000 MT and Rs. 3000/MT for godowns above 1000 MT capacity whereas
Rs. 4000/MT in case of projects constructed in NER. A system for

20
collection, uploading of data and networking of data of the godowns
has been developed and being further strengthened to increase its
coverage and outreach.
A total of 37,574 storage infrastructure projects since inception
w.e.f. 01.04.2001 till 30.09.2016, with storage capacity of 62.64 million
MT were sanctioned under the scheme. In addition to above, a total
of 18,205 other than storage infrastructure projects since inception
w.e.f. 20.10.2004 till 30.09.2016 were sanctioned under the scheme.
In order to promote NWRS based credit among the farmers, the
department will undertake the following:Ñ
¥ Discuss with WDRA for simplification of accreditation process.
¥ Promote accreditation of RGS godowns.
¥ Hold orientation programmes for the godown owners &
operators regarding credit facility.
¥ Create awareness among the farmers to store & avail of
NWR based credit facility.
¥ Orient Banks & cooperatives about pledge loan scheme.
[Ministry of Agriculture & Farmers Welfare (Department of
Agriculture, Cooperation and Farmers Welfare) No. H-11016/1/2016-
M-II, dated: 10.11.2016]

21
CHAPTER III
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO NOT
DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE GOVERNMENT ÕS REPLIES
-NIL-

22
CHAPTER IV
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF
THE GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE
Need for Augmenting Rural Storage Infrastructure
Recommendation (Para No. 1)
The Committee note that establishment of rural godowns enables
the small and marginal farmers to increase their holding capacity and
avoid wastage and deterioration of their produce which in turn help
them to avoid distress sale and get them remunerative prices for their
produce. However, the Committee is distressed to note that most of
the farmers in the country do not have adequate storage infrastructure
to retain their produce and they tend to dispose of the same without
waiting for favorable market prices. On 01.04.2001, Rural Godown
Scheme (RGS) was launched by the Government to promote creation
of storage capacity across the country. According to the Department,
55 million MT storage capacities under the scheme have been created
since its inception in the year 2001. The scheme has contributed in
reducing storage gap of 35 million MT as estimated by the Planning
Commission for 12th Five Year Plan. This is based on the assumption
that the total marketable surplus of all major crops will grow from 130
million MT to 150 million MT by the end of the 12th Plan. As per
estimates of National Centre for Agricultural Economics and Policy
Research (NCAP), the total demand for foodgrains of the country is
projected to touch 281 million MT by 2020-21 which will require storage
capacity of around 196 million MT . During the course of evidence, the
Secretary of the Department also informed the Committee that as per
the assessment of the Government, about 600 lakh tonnes of foodgrains
are required under the Food Security Act and therefore, the country
needs storage capacity of 600 lakh tonnes. Needless to say, warehousing
is one of the critical infrastructural facilities needed to support
marketing of agriculture produce in the country. It is also essential
that the existing scheme for creation of scientific storage capacity
with allied facilities in rural areas to meet the requirement of the
farmers community may be implemented effectively so that network
of godowns is created as per the requirement of the country. The
Committee, therefore, recommends that keeping in view the current
and future foodgrains production and procurement scenario, an action
plan may be prepared by the Department in coordination with State

23
Governments and other stakeholders for creation of sufficient storage
capacity. The Committee would like to be apprised of the initiatives
undertaken by the Department in this regard.
Reply of the Government
The Committee has mentioned that as per estimates of the National
Centre for Agricultural Economics and Policy Research (NCAP), projected
the total demand for foodgrains of the country shall touch 281 million
MT by 2020-21 which will require storage capacity of around 196 million
MT .
The total storage capacity with Food Corporation of India (FCI),
Central Warehousing Corporation (CWC) and State Warehousing
Corporation (SWC) as on September 2016 is about 80 Million tonnes
(Source: Department of Food & Public Distribution). The Storage
capacity sanctioned so far under the Agricultural Marketing
Infrastructure (erstwhile Rural Godown Scheme) sub scheme of
Integrated Scheme for Agricultural Marketing (ISAM) is about 62.2 million
tonnes. Of this, 48 Million tonnes capacity has already been created.
The storage capacity available under Cooperative Sector is in the range
of 16.68 million tonnes (Source: Department of Food & Public
Distribution). Thus total available storage capacity is estimated to be
around 144.68 million tonnes.
Thus a shortage of 51.32 (196-144.68) million tonnes storage
capacity is expected to be there by year 2020-21. It is expected that
14.2 million tonnes of storage capacity under construction via
Agricultural Marketing Infrastructure (erstwhile Rural Godown Scheme)
shall be available shortly. So the balance storage requirement which
will need to be provided by year 2020-21 is 37.12 million tonnes.
In view of above scenario, it would be appropriate that Agricultural
Marketing Infrastructure (erstwhile Rural Godown Scheme) sub scheme
of integrated scheme for Agricultural marketing (ISAM) is continued
beyond 12th plan (2012-17) to suitably address the storage capacity
gap by 2020-21. However, considering the fact that the scheme needs
to reach the small and marginal farmers, an action plan, depending on
the availability of funds, will be prepared to meet the storage gap as
suggested by the committee. The Department will take into account
the feedback received from the State Governments and other
stakeholders while framing the guidelines if the scheme is continued
beyond 2017.
[Ministry of Agriculture & Farmers Welfare (Department of
Agriculture, Cooperation and Farmers Welfare) No. H-11016/1/2016-
M-II, dated: 10.11.2016]

24
Comments of the Committee
For comments of the Committee please refer to Para No. 1.7 of
Chapter I of this Report.
Negotiable Warehouse Receipt System
Recommendation (Para No. 7)
The Committee notes that Warehousing Development and Regulatory
Authority (WDRA) is mandated with the task of regulation of warehouses
in the entire country. Although, warehousing is a State subject, the
Government introduced negotiable warehouse receipt system under
Warehouse (Development and Regulation) Act, 2007. These receipt
books are issued by the Authority to registered godowns and the same
cannot be duplicated. Negotiable warehouse receipts allow transfer of
ownership of that commodity stored in a warehouse without having to
deliver the physical commodity. However, under the Act, registration
of warehouses is optional. Due to the credibility of these warehousing
receipts, the people who store their products in these registered
warehouses can avail easy loans from banks/financial institutions. So
far 952 godowns having capacity of about 38 lakh tonnes have been
registered with the Authority. The value of the produce stored in the
godowns against receipts issued amounts to Rs. 3806 crore against
which banks have issued loans amounting to Rs. 1277 crore. The
Committee also notes that under the crop loan scheme of the
Department of Financial Services, crop loan for a period of one year
at 7% rate of interest can be availed. If the loan is repaid timely by
the farmers, then there is a subvention of 3% on the crop loan availed
by them and the interest paid by them is only 4%. If the post-harvest
produce is stored in warehouse registered by WDRA, then the period
of crop loan is extended by another six months. However, the scheme
is not popular amongst small and marginal farmers as they do not have
surplus produce that can be stored in godowns. Further , this scheme
is applicable for godowns registered with WDRA where produce can be
stored against negotiable warehouse receipt. As per the terms and
conditions, only small and marginal farmers possessing Kisan Credit
Card can avail loan extended by the Department of Financial Services
and as a result many farmers could not take the advantage of the
credit facility against stored produce. In view of the foregoing, the
Committee are of the view that introduction of negotiable warehouse
receipt system in the country not only helps the farmers to avail
better credit facilities and avoid distress sale but the same also
safeguard the financial institutions by mitigating risks inherent in credit

25
extension to the farmers. The Committee also feel that crop loan at
7% rate of interest is high particularly for those small and marginal
farmers whose level of income is very low. The Committee, therefore,
recommends that the Department should take up this issue with the
Ministry of Finance and impress upon them to simplify the post-harvest
crop loan facility which may not cause undue hardship particularly to
those small and marginal farmers. They should be provided post-harvest
crop loan at an affordable and concessional rate of 4 per cent which
the Committee feel incentivize farmers to store their produce in
warehouses and help them to get remunerative prices for their produce.
The Committee also recommends that the Government should make
efforts to popularize the scheme of registration of godowns with WDRA
where produce can be stored against negotiable warehouse receipt.
This will help the farmers to avail concessional crop loan facility
extended by the Department of Financial Services. The Committee
would like to be apprised of the initiatives undertaken by the
Department in this regard.
Reply of the Government
The Warehousing Development & Regulatory Authority (WDRA), a
Statutory Authority under the Department of Food and Public
Distribution, Government of India is involved with the task of developing
and regulating warehouses, registration of warehouses to enable them
to issue Negotiable Warehouse Receipts (NWRs), building fiduciary trust
of Banks in NWRs and promotion of orderly growth of the warehousing
business in the country. The WDRA has approved 11 accreditation
agencies and notified 123 agricultural commodities for issuing NWRs.
So far, WDRA has registered 1321 warehouses including 260 warehouses
belonging to the Primary Agricultural Cooperative Societies. Out of the
11 accreditation agencies, 3 belong to the Ministry of Agriculture,
namely, the Directorate of Marketing & Inspection, Faridabad (attached
office of Ministry of Agriculture & FW), Chaudhary Charan Singh National
Institute of Agricultural Marketing, Jaipur (an autonomous organization
under the Ministry of Agriculture & FW) and the National Co-operative
Development Corporation, New Delhi, which are actively associated
with WDRA in the field of accreditation process.
However , there is a need to expedite the pace of accreditation.
The WDRA is facing certain challenges in registering the warehouses
and promoting the NWRs. These include, (a) The warehousing sector
is un-organized and fragmented, (b) Registration of warehouses is
voluntary and hence limited, (c) There is inadequate regulatory
framework, (d) The registration system and issuance of NWRs are

26
manual, and (e) The monitoring system of registered warehouses is
inadequate. In order to address these above issues, WDRA has 39
undertaken a transformation plan to invigorate the warehousing sector
and significantly improve post-harvest lending to farmers against NWRs.
Under Interest Intervention scheme of the Government, the crop
loan is available to the farmer at 7 percent of interest rate. Further,
there is provision for a concession of 3 percent of interest rate on
prompt repayment. Thus a farmer can get short term crop loan at 4
percent of interest rate.
As regards post-harvest loan, the benefit of crop loan scheme has
been made available to small and marginal farmers having Kisan Credit
Card (KCC) for a further period of up to six months post-harvest on the
same rate as available to crop loan against negotiable warehouse receipt
for keeping their produce in warehouse. Loan shall not exceed 75% of
actual value of produce pledged. However, the benefit of interest
subvention is available only up to Rs. 3 lakh. The actual value of
produce may be determined on the basis of the prevailing market rate
or the Minimum Support Price (MSP) announced by the Government,
whichever is less. In case MSP has not been announced in respect of
a particular crop, banks may ascertain market price from the nearest
Agricultural Produce Marketing Committee (APMC). Loan under the
scheme would be available for a period of up to six months. Government
of India will provide interest subvention @2% p.a. to Cooperative Banks
and Regional Rural Banks on their own funds involved, in respect of
individual loans against NWR up to Rs. 3 lakh provided by them to
farmers at interest rate of 7% p.a. However, subvention (incentive) for
prompt repayment will not be available to the farmers for loans
extended against negotiable receipts.
However , there are impediments in the implementation of this
scheme and most of the farmers are not able to get loan under this
scheme against NWRs. The impediments are as follows:
1. Only those farmers who have obtained crop loan are entitled
for post-harvest loan on NWRs for a period of another six
months. The farmers who do not avail crop loan due to some
or other reasons are not entitled for post-harvest loan with
interest subvention against NWRs.
2. One of the conditions for availing pledge finance against
NWRs is that first crop loan should be repaid.
3. The above loan is available to only small and marginal
farmers having Kisan Credit Card (KCC). Since, most of small

27
and marginal farmers have little surplus agricultural produce
to store in scientific warehouses, there is limited benefit of
this scheme and the main objective of increasing liquidity
in rural areas through loan against negotiable warehouse
receipts cannot be achieved.
A Committee under the chairmanship of Chairman, WDRA has been
constituted for strengthening Negotiable Warehouse Receipts (NWRs)
in the country in October, 2014 and the Committee has submitted its
report in February, 2015. In its report, the above Committee has
recommended that the pledge financing scheme should be provided to
all farmers holding KCC against NWRs issued by all the registered
warehouses including cold storages. The loan should be for a period of
six months and the maximum loan amount should be enhanced to
Rs. 5 lakhs. It is learnt that the Dept. of Financial Services is against
such a proposal.
[Ministry of Agriculture & Farmers Welfare (Department of
Agriculture, Cooperation and Farmers Welfare) No. H-11016/1/2016-
M-II, dated: 10.11.2016]
Comments of the Committee
For comments of the Committee please refer to Para No. 1.16 of
Chapter I of this Report.

28
CHAPTER V
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH FINAL
REPLIES OF GOVERNMENT ARE STILL AWAITED
Allocation of Funds
Recommendation (Para No. 2)
The Committee is distressed to note that the scheme has been
temporarily stopped since 05.08.2014 for promoters of General Category
due to exhaustion of funds and only committed liabilities are being
met as on date. The Committee also regrets to note that for want of
funds, disbursement of subsidy amounting Rs. 1000 crore to the
beneficiaries is pending where construction of godowns is complete.
This has caused undue hardship to the beneficiaries for no apparent
fault of theirs. Further , godowns worth Rs. 800 crore have been
sanctioned by the banks and these are to be completed. According to
the Secretary of the Department, additional funds are required for
creation of additional storage facility. The Committee, therefore,
recommends that the Department should take up matter with the
Ministry of Finance and impress upon them to provide requisite funds
so that creation of additional storage facility across the country under
the scheme is not hampered for want of funds and pending subsidy to
the beneficiaries is released without further delay. The Committee
would like to be apprised of the action by the Department in this
regard.
Reply of the Government
The scheme is going to end on 31st March 2017 as per presently
available sanction. The department is assessing the clear committed
liabilities so that same can be fulfilled. Subsequent to stoppage of the
scheme on 05.08.14 for promoters of General Category, the funds to
the tune of Rs. 1320 crore has already been released to the NABARD
and NCDC for disbursement of subsidy to the beneficiaries. The matter
has been taken up by this Department with the Ministry of Finance to
provide additional estimated funds in the range of Rs. 830 crores, in
addition to BE provisions of Rs. 682.80 crore for year 2016-17 to clear
the committed liabilities and creation of additional storage facility
across the country. The Finance Ministry is yet to release additional
fund for this Scheme. However , a sum of Rs. 200 crore has been

29
recently made available from Kisan Kalyan Cess for the scheme.
Furthermore, the Department is making efforts with the Ministry of
Finance for providing additional funds and they have agreed to consider
the request of department in the supplementary grant.
[Ministry of Agriculture & Farmers Welfare (Department of
Agriculture, Cooperation and Farmers Welfare) No. H-11016/1/2016-
M-II, dated: 10.11.2016]
Comments of the Committee
For comments of the Committee please refer to Para No. 1.10 of
Chapter I of this Report.
   N EW D ELHI; HUKM DEO NARAYAN YADAV,
07 August, 2017 Chairperson,
16 Shravana, 1939 (Saka) Standing Committee on Agriculture.

30
ANNEXURE
STANDING COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE
(2016-17)
MINUTES OF THE TWENTY FIFTH SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE
The Committee sat on Thursday, the 03rd August, 2017 from
1500 hrs. to 1700 hrs. in Committee Room No. 1 (Block-A), Extension
to Parliament House Annexe Building, New Delhi.
PRESENT
Shri Hukm Deo Narayan Yadav Ñ  Chairperson
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Prof. Ravindra Vishwanath Gaikwad
3. Shri Nalin Kumar Kateel
4. Smt. Raksha Khadse
5. Md. Badaruddoza Khan
6. Shri Janardan Mishra
7. Shri Neiphiu Rio
8. Shri B.S. Yeddyurappa
Rajya Sabha
9. Shri Sambhaji Chhatrapati
10. Shri Janardan Dwivedi
11. Shri Mohd. Ali Khan
12. Shri Ram Nath Thakur
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Shri D.S. Malha Ñ Joint Secretary
2. Shri Arun K. Kaushik Ñ Director
3. Smt. Juby Amar Ñ Additional Director
4. Shri C. Vanlalruata Ñ Deputy Secretary
5. Shri Sumesh Kumar Ñ Under Secretary

31
LIST OF W ITNESSES
MINISTRY OF AGRICULTURE AND FARMERS WELFARE
(DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURAL RESEARCH AND EDUCATION)
1. Dr. Trilochan Mohapatra Secretary (DARE) &DG (ICAR)
2. Dr. K. Alagusundaram Deputy Director General (NRM),
ICAR
3. Dr. S.K. Chaudhari Assistant Director General (SWM),
ICAR
4. Dr. P .K. Chakrabarty Assistant Director General (PP&B),
ICAR
5. Dr. P .P . Biswas Principal Scientist (Soils), ICAR
6. Dr. Krishan K. Sharma Principal Scientist, IAR, New Delhi
7. Shri B.S. Phogat Additional Plant Protection
Advisor
8. Shri D.D.K. Sharma Secretary, Central Board of
Insecticides & Registration
Committee
MINISTRY OF AGRICULTURE AND FARMERS WELFARE
(DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE, COOPERATION AND FARMERS WELFARE)
1. Shri Shobhana Pattanayak Secretary
2. Shri Ashwani Kumar Joint Secretary
MINISTRY OF CHEMICALS & FERTILIZERS
(DEPARTMENT OF CHEMICALS & PETROCHEMICALS)
1. Shri Rajeev Kapoor Secretary (Department of
Chemicals & Petrochemicals)
2. Shri Samir Kumar Biswas Joint Secretary (Chemicals)
3. Dr. Jitendra Kumar Director (IPFT)
4. Shri S.P . Mohanty Chairman & Managing Director
(HIL)
MINISTRY OF CHEMICALS & FERTILIZERS
(DEPARTMENT OF FERTILIZERS)
1. Shri Dharam Pal Addl. Secretary

32
2. At the outset, the Chairperson welcomed the Members to the
Sitting of the Standing Committee. Then, the Committee took up the
following draft Reports for consideration and adoption:
*(i) XXXX XXXX XXXX XXXX
(ii) Draft Report on the Action Taken by the Government on the
Observations/Recommendations contained in the Twenty-
eighth Report of the Standing Committee on Agriculture on
the Subject ÒAugmenting Rural Storage Infrastructure through
Scheme of Rural Godowns Ó pertaining to the Ministry of
Agriculture and Farmers Welfare (Department of Agriculture,
Cooperation and Farmers Welfare) (English Version);
*(iii) XXXX XXXX XXXX XXXX
*(iv) XXXX XXXX XXXX XXXX
3. After some deliberations, the Committee adopted the draft
Reports without any amendments and authorized the Chairperson to
finalise the Reports and present the same to Parliament.
[Witnesses were ushered in]
*4. XXXX XXXX XXXX XXXX
*5. XXXX XXXX XXXX XXXX
*6. XXXX XXXX XXXX XXXX
A verbatim record of the proceedings has been kept separately.
The Committee, then, adjourned.
*Matter not related to this Report.

33
APPENDIX
(Vide Para 4 of Introduction of the Report)
ANALYSIS OF ACTION TAKEN BY GOVERNMENT ON THE TWENTY
EIGHTH REPORT OF STANDING COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE
(2015-16) ON THE SUBJECT ÔAUGMENTING RURAL STORAGE
INFRASTRUCTURE THROUGH THE SCHEME OF RURAL
GODOWNSÕ OF THE MINISTRY OF AGRICULTURE AND
FARMERS WELFARE (DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE,
COOPERATION AND FARMERS WELFARE)
(i) Total number of Recommendations 09
(ii) Recommendations/Observations which have been
Accepted by the Government
Para Nos. 3, 4, 5, 6, 8 and 9
Total 06
Percentage 66.67%
(iii) Recommendations/Observations which the Committee
Do not desire to pursue in view of the Government Õs
replies
Para No. Nil
Total NIL
Percentage 0%
(iv) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which
replies of the Government have not been accepted
by the Committee
Para Nos. 1 and 7
Total 02
Percentage 22.22%
(v) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which
Final replies of the Government are still awaited
Para No. 2
Total 01
Percentage 11.11%