SIXTY FIRST REPORT
STANDING COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE
(2017-2018)
( SIXTEENTH LOK SABHA )
MINISTRY OF AGRICULTURE AND
FARMERS WELFARE
(DEPARTMENT OF ANIMAL HUSBANDRY,
DAIRYING AND FISHERIES)
‘DEMANDS FOR GRANTS
(2018-2019)’
[Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations
contained in the Forty-Ninth Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) of the
Standing Committee on Agriculture (2017-2018)]
Presented to Lok Sabha on 09.08.2018
Laid on the Table of Rajya Sabha on 09.08.2018
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
August, 2018/Shravana, 1940  (Saka)

C.O.A. No. 383
Price : Rs. 49.00
© 2018 BY L OK SABHA SECRETARIAT
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of
Business in Lok Sabha (Fifteenth Edition) and Printed by National Printers,
New Delhi-110 028.

(i)
CONTENTS
PAGE
C OMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE (2017-18).............................................(iii)
INTRODUCTION.............................................................................................. (v)
C HAPTER I Report................................................................................. 1
C HAPTER II Observations/Recommendations that have been
accepted by the Government......................................... 11
C HAPTER III Observations/Recommendations which the
Committee do not desire to pursue in view of the
Government’s replies....................................................... 21
C
HAPTER IV Observations/Recommendations in respect of which
replies of the Government have not been accepted
by the Committee............................................................. 22
C
HAPTER V Observations/Recommendations in respect of which
final replies of the Government are still awaited ...... 29
A NNEXURE
Extracts of the Minutes of the Twenty-Eight Sitting
of the Committee held on 07.08.2018........................... 30
A PPENDIX
Analysis of the action taken by the Government on
the recommendations contained in the Forty-Ninth
report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) of the Standing Committee
on Agriculture (2017-18)................................................. 32

(iii)
COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON
AGRICULTURE (2017-18)
Shri Hukmdev Narayan Yadav — Chairperson
M EMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Sanjay Dhotre
3. Prof. Ravindra Vishwanath Gaikwad
4. Shri Sanganna Amarappa Karadi
5. Shri Nalin Kumar Kateel
6. Smt. Raksha Tai Khadase
7. Md. Badaruddoza Khan
8. Shri C. Mahendran
9. Dr. Tapas Mandal
10. Shri Janardan Mishra
11. Shri Praveen Kumar Nishad
@
12. Shri Devji M. Patel
13. Shri Nityanand Rai
14. Shri Mukesh Rajput
15. Shri Konakalla Narayana Rao
16. Shri C.L. Ruala
17. Shri Arjun Charan Sethi
18. Shri Virendra Singh
19. Shri Dharmendra Yadav
@ Shri Praveen Kumar Nishad, MP Lok Sabha nominated vice Shri Nephiu Rio, MP
Lok Sabha w.e.f. 27.04.2018 vide Bulletin Part II No. 6866 dated 27.04.2018

(iv)
20. Shri Jai Prakash Narayan Yadav
21. Vacant#
Rajya Sabha
22. Sardar Sukhdev Singh Dhindsa
23. Shri Rajmani Patel*
24. Shri Narayan Rane
25. Shri Kailash Soni*
26. Shri Mohd. Ali Khan
27. Shri K.K. Ragesh
28. Shri Ram Nath Thakur
29. Shri R. Vaithilingam
30. Shri Harnath Singh Yadav*
31. Dr. Chandrapal Singh Yadav
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Shri D.S. Malha —Joint Secretary
2. Shri Arun K. Kaushik —Director
3. Smt. Juby Amar —Additional Director
4. Ms. Divya Rai — Executive Assistant
# Vacant due to resignation of Shri B.S. Yeddyurappa from the Membership of Lok Sabha
w.e.f. 18.05.2018 vide Bulletin Part-II Table Office (B) No. 6885 dated 19.05.2018.
* vice Shri Janardan Dwivedi, Shri Meghraj Jain, Shri Vinay Katiyar and Shri Shankarbhai
N. Vegad, who ceased to be the Member of the Committee on their retirement from
Rajya Sabha on 27.01.2018, 02.04.2018, 02.04.2018 and 02.04.2018 respectively.

(v)
INTRODUCTION
I, the Chairperson, Standing Committee on Agriculture (2017-18),
having been authorized by the Committee to submit the Report on their
behalf, present this Sixty-First Report on action taken by the Government
on the Observations/Recommendations contained in the Forty-Ninth
Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) of the Standing Committee on Agriculture
(2017-18) on ‘Demands for Grants (2018-19)’ pertaining to the Ministry
of Agriculture and Farmers Welfare (Department of Animal Husbandry,
Dairying and Fisheries).
2. The Forty-Ninth Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) of the Standing
Committee on Agriculture (2017-18) on ‘Demands for Grants (2018-19)’
pertaining to the Ministry of Agriculture and Farmers Welfare (Department
of Animal Husbandry, Dairying and Fisheries) was presented to Lok Sabha
and laid on the Table of Rajya Sabha on 06.03.2018. The Action Taken
Notes on the Report were received on 09.07.2018.
3. The Report was considered and adopted by the Committee at
their Sitting held on 07.08.2018.
4. An analysis of the action taken by the Government on the
Observations/Recommendations contained in the Forty-Ninth Report
(Sixteenth Lok Sabha) of the Committee is given in Appendix.
N
EW DELHI; HUKMDEV NARAYAN YADAV,
06 August, 2018 Chairperson,
15 Shravana, 1940 (Saka) Standing Committee on Agriculture.

CHAPTER I
REPORT
This Report of the Standing Committee on Agriculture deals with
the action taken by the Government on the Observations/
Recommendations contained in the Forty-Ninth Report (Sixteenth
Lok Sabha) of the Standing Committee on Agriculture (2017-2018) on
‘Demands for Grants (2018-19)’ of the Ministry of Agriculture (Department
of Animal Husbandry, Dairying and Fisheries) which was presented to
Lok Sabha and laid on the Table of Rajya Sabha on 6th March, 2018.
1.2 The Ministry of Agriculture and Farmers Welfare (Department
of Animal Husbandry, Dairying and Fisheries) have furnished Action
Taken Replies in respect of all 12 Observations/Recommendations
contained in the Report. These replies have been categorized as under:—
(i) Observations/Recommendations that have been accepted by
the Government:
Recommendation Para Nos. : 1, 2, 4, 5, 6, 8, 9 and 10
Total 08
Chapter - II
(ii)Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not
desire to pursue in view of the Government’s reply:
Recommendation Para No. : NIL
Total 00
Chapter - III
(iii)Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies
of the Government have not been accepted by the
Committee:
Recommendation Para Nos. : 3, 7, 11, and 12
Total 04
Chapter - IV

2
(iv) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which final
replies of the Government are still awaited :
Recommendation Para Nos. : NIL
Total 00
Chapter - V
1.3 The Committee trust that utmost importance would be given
to implementation of the Observations/Recommendations accepted by
the Government. In cases where it is not possible for the Department
to implement the Recommendations in letter and spirit for any reason,
the matter should be reported to the Committee with reasons for
non-implementation. The Committee desire that further Action Taken
Notes on the Observations/Recommendations contained in Chapter-I
of this Report be furnished to them at an early date.
1.4 The Committee will now deal with the action taken by the
Government on some of the Recommendations in the succeeding
paragraphs.
A. Share of Department of Animal Husbandry, Dairying and
Fisheries in the Central Plan
Recommendation (Para No. 3)
1.5 The Committee had observed/recommended as under:—
“The Committee note that during each of the years of the Twelfth
Plan i.e. 2012-13, 2013-14, 2014-15, 2015-16 and 2016-17, a huge
variation exists between funds demanded by the Department and
the funds allocated by erstwhile Planning Commission/Ministry of
Finance. This mismatch between the proposed allocation and the
actual allocation is a cause of concern to the Committee. As a result
of lesser allocation of funds, the Committee are apprehensive that
the implementation of the various schemes undertaken by the
Department may have been adversely affected, which in turn may
have hindered the growth and development of this vital sector of
the economy. The Committee feel that this issue of a huge gap
between proposed allocation and actual allocation is indicative of
the poor financial planning by the Department. The Committee
recommend that the Department should make a realistic assessment
of its requirement before sending a proposal to Ministry of Finance
for allocation of funds.”

3
1.6 In its Action Taken Reply, the Department has stated as under:—
“Ministry of Finance allocated Rs.1491.14 crore to Department at
RE stage for the FY-2015-16. It is mentioned that fund allocation
to the Department for financial year 2016-17 was Rs.1748.00 crore.
Department agreed on the fact that prioritization of different sectors
and trend of expenditure during previous years form basis of
allocation. It is mentioned that Department utilizes approximately
full fund allocated by Ministry of Finance. The table showing the
details of allocation and expenditure from 2012-13 is given below:—
S.No. Year BE RE Exp. % w.r.t.
to RE
1. 2012-13 1910.00 1800.00 1736.37 96.47
2. 2013-14 2025.00 1800.00 1748.80 97.16
3. 2014-15 2174.00 1800.00 1738.07 96.56
4. 2015-16 1491.14 1491.14 1418.20 95.11
5. 2016-17 1600.00 1748.02 1743.12 99.71
However, Ministry of Finance allocates the funds to the Different
Department/Ministries keeping in view the overall resources
position and the inter-se priorities for allocation among competing
demands from different sectors.”
1.7 The Committee had observed that there was an evident
mismatch between funds demanded by the Department and those
allocated by the erstwhile Planning Commission/Ministry of Finance
during each of the years of the Twelfth Plan i.e. 2012-13, 2013-14,
2014-15 and 2016-17 and also that lesser allocation of funds would cause
the performance of the Department to be adversely affected for want
of funds. Accordingly, the Committee, having expressed concern over
this huge variation, had recommended that the Department make a
realistic assessment of its requirements before sending a proposal for
allocation of funds. From the Action Taken Reply, the Committee note
that the Department has provided facts regarding utilization of funds
but has failed to provide the rationale behind demanding such huge
amounts from the Ministry of Finance or the effects of downsizing of
funds at the RE stage over the implementation of schemes undertaken
by the Department. The Committee further note that there exists a
huge gap between the figures under funds demanded and those under
the BE and RE sub-heads of funds allocated. It is also evident that such
drastic cuts at the RE stage lead to a shortfall of much required funds

4
for the ongoing schemes of the Department. The Committee, therefore,
reiterate their earlier recommendation that the Department, before
sending a proposal to the Ministry of Finance for allocation of funds,
should analyse its past expenditure and its future requirements for the
upcoming financial year and thus make a realistic demand based on
a practical evaluation of its needs, so as to avoid such huge discrepancies
between proposed and actual allocation and also to prevent its schemes
from suffering for want of funds. The Committee hope that the
Department will take this up with the Ministry of Finance with all the
seriousness it deserves and advocate its demands for allocation of
adequate funds to run their schemes effectively and efficiently. The
Committee would like to be apprised of the latest position in this
regard.
B. Establishment and Strengthening of Existing Veterinary Hospitals
and Dispensaries (ESVHD)
Recommendation (Para No. 7)
1.8 The Committee had observed/recommended as under:—
“In order to assist the States to set up infrastructure for new
veterinary hospitals and dispensaries and to strengthen/equip the
existing ones, the Department is providing funds on 60:40 (Centre:
State) sharing basis except NE and Himalayan States, where the
grants are provided on 90:10 basis. Mobile Veterinary Clinics (MVCs)
is also an activity of the component of ESVHD. The MVCs are
provided with Rs. 5 lakh grant per annum as upper limit. The
funds are provided to the States/UTs for contractual services for
technical persons, hiring vehicles, procurement of necessary
equipment required for treatment and disease diagnosis (including
sample collection and transportation of these samples to the
designated laboratory place) and maintaining cold chain or
preservation as necessary. The vehicle should accommodate the
necessary staff, the equipments, reagents/medicines for treatment
and diagnosis, facility for Artificial Insemination (AI) and also
suitable freezer or related equipments for sample transportation in
cold chain.
The Committee are, however, concerned to note that despite such
provisions under the ESVHD component, the status of availability
of mobile veterinary clinics in the country, especially in the rural
areas, is still dismal. The rural farmers and livestock owners hardly

5
have access to veterinary services, as a result of which they face
huge difficulties in accessing healthcare facilities for their livestock.
This is particularly due to shortage of funds and manpower for
the purpose. The Committee, therefore, recommend that immediate
action plan may be formulated to address the shortage of veterinary
doctors and medicines for treatment of sick animals. Ministry of
Finance may also be urged to provide adequate funds for the
purpose. The Committee would like to be apprised of the action
taken by the Department to ensure doorstep delivery, easy access
of veterinary services and availability of veterinary ambulance
services, especially in the rural areas of the country.”
1.9 In its Action Taken Reply, the Department has stated as under:—
“Veterinary service and Veterinary care is a state subject. Veterinary
Hospitals/Dispensaries are set up by respective State Governments
depending on livestock population in the particular area and
availability of resources. The deployment of manpower in the States
is also done by the State Governments. As per the review of
Performance of Veterinary Services in different States, total sanction
strength of total number of veterinarians in the Government Sector
is approximately 35000 out of which there is a vacancy of 20% to
30% across the States.
In order to assist the State the Governments for establishing and
strengthening of veterinary infrastructure, the Central Government
is implementing a programme namely Establishment and
Strengthening of Veterinary Hospitals and Dispensaries (ESVHD)
under which financial assistance are provided to the State
Governments for establishment and strengthening of existing
veterinary hospital and dispensaries. However, under this Scheme
money is only provided for infrastructure development and not for
the establishment cost of Veterinary Doctors which is borne by the
State Government. Under the Scheme, there is also a provision for
assistance for Mobile Veterinary Clinics for doorstep delivery of
veterinary services. The Department has requested all States and
UTs to explore the possibility to undertake strengthening of
veterinary infrastructure by availing more funds under other Scheme
such as RKVY, RIDF including dovetailing with MPLAD funds etc.
so as to cater adequate veterinary health in States/UTs including
Mobile Veterinary Clinics for improved veterinary infrastructure
and door step delivery of veterinary services.

6
The Veterinary Council of India (VCI) is mandated to maintain the
Indian Veterinary Practitioners’ Register (IVPR) containing the
names of the persons who possess recognized Veterinary
qualification (Degree in Veterinary Science and Animal Husbandry).
There are a total approximately 67800 veterinary graduates have
been registered in Indian Veterinary Practitioner Register up to
31.03.2015.
To meet up the shortage of veterinary manpower in the country,
the numbers of recognized veterinary institutions have been
increased to 45 as against 36. Further, during the year 2017-18,
nine veterinary colleges was permitted to admit students in
the First Year B.V.Sc and A.H. courses. Therefore, total number
of veterinarians passing out will be approximately
4100 per year.”
1.10 While taking note of dismal situation of veterinary care in
the country, particularly in the rural areas, the Committee had stressed
on the prospects of Mobile Veterinary Clinics (MVCs) and
recommended that the Department ensure doorstep delivery and easy
access of veterinary services in the rural areas, besides also urging the
Ministry of Finance to provide adequate funds for the purpose. The
Department in its Action Taken Reply furnished that veterinary service
and veterinary care is a state subject and that it is providing financial
assistance to States under the ESVHD component. The Department
also furnished that the Veterinary Council of India (VCI) has taken
a series of measures to meet the shortage of trained veterinary
manpower and for recognition of new veterinary colleges. The
Committee, however, are of the considered opinion that the Department
needs to take up seriously the idea of having mobile veterinary clinics
cater to the doorsteps of livestock owners looking to get medical care
for their livestock, besides also guiding State Governments to open up
more veterinary clinics in the rural areas as that is where they are
needed the most. The Committee feel that the steps taken so far have
not proved adequate and more is required to be done for animal
healthcare and veterinary infrastructure in the country. They, therefore,
reiterate their earlier recommendation that concerted efforts may be
made to ensure doorstep delivery, easy access of veterinary services
and availability of veterinary ambulance services, especially in the
rural areas of the country and an immediate action plan may be
formulated to address the shortage of veterinary doctors and medicines
for treatment of sick animals.

7
C. Gender Perspective in Animal Husbandry, Dairying and Fisheries
Recommendation (Para No. 11)
1.11 The Committee had observed/recommended as under:—
“The Committee note that the National Agriculture Policy
formulated in 2000 accorded high priority to recognition and
mainstreaming of women’s role in agriculture and highlighting
incorporation of ‘Gender Issues’ in the agriculture development
agenda. The Committee also note that as stated by the Department
within the overall mandate, goals and objectives, the DAHDF places
special emphasis on women participation and contribution in the
Animal Husbandry, Dairying and Fisheries Sector. However, the
ground realities are different as highlighted in the Economic Survey
2017-18, the structural changes that are being witnessed by the
agriculture sector in India necessitate re-orientation of policies
towards this sector in terms of strengthening the agricultural value
chain by focusing on allied activities like dairying and livestock
development along with gender specific interventions. The
Committee recommend that to this end the Department can do a
lot by creating more opportunities for women in the Sector and
involving more number of women in the workforce by way of
dairy cooperatives, livestock rearing and fishing enterprises and
also by earmarking at least 30 per cent of the budget allocation for
women beneficiaries in all ongoing schemes and programmes of
the Department. The Committee also advocate the idea of enabling
women entrepreneurs in the animal husbandry, dairying and
fisheries sector by easing loan facilities, providing requisite training
to women entrepreneurs and supporting women Self Help Groups
(SHGs) etc. The Department may also encourage women to take
up entrepreneurial activities in the field of cattle rearing, fodder
storage, milk cooperatives etc. as this will not only have a positive
impact on the animal husbandry, dairying and fisheries sectors but
also foster development of these sectors in the long run. The
Committee, therefore, recommend that the Department may work
out plans drawing more and more women folk into the Animal
Husbandry, Dairying and Fisheries sector and set an example of
opening up gainful and profitable employment opportunities and
mainstreaming women in the agriculture sector, particularly in the
sector of Animal Husbandry, Dairying and Fisheries. The Committee
would like to apprised of the initiatives taken by the Government
in this regard.”

8
1.12 In its Action Taken Reply, the Department has stated as
under:—
“The Recommendation of the Committee is noted for compliance.
It is mentioned that the existing Centrally Sponsored Scheme on
Blue Revolution: Integrated Development and Management of
Fisheries provides benefit of women fisher folk and weaker sections
of the society with comparatively higher subsidy assistance so as
to involve women participation specially in the marketing and post
harvest activity in fisheries.
Department is implementing the National Livestock Mission (NLM)
under which there is a component of ‘Entrepreneurship
Development and Employment Generation (EDEG)’, which
supports the credit linked activities related to poultry, small
ruminants, pigs and salvaging male buffalo calves. Similarly,
Department is implementing Dairy Entrepreneurship Development
Scheme (DEDS) under which priority is given to women farmers/
women in Self Help Group.”
1.13 While taking note of the efforts of the Department in
including women into animal husbandry, dairying and fisheries
activities, the Committee are concerned to note that the Department,
in its Action Taken Reply, is silent over the issue of incorporating
‘gender issues’ in the agriculture development agenda and also over
earmarking a fixed percentage of funds from budget allocation towards
training and induction of women folk into the animal husbandry,
dairying and fisheries sector and for women beneficiaries in all the
ongoing schemes and programmes of the Department. The Committee
are of the view that such benefits need to be provided to all women
across sections and caste barriers and States must be mandated to put
in place a mechanism to ensure this. The Committee, therefore, reiterate
their earlier recommendation that the Department may formulate
concrete plans to provide requisite training and loan facilities to women
entrepreneurs and women Self Help Groups (SHGs) and encourage
women to take up entrepreneurial activities in the animal husbandry,
dairying and fisheries sector and thus set an example of opening up
gainful and profitable employment opportunities and mainstreaming
women in the agriculture sector, particularly in the sector of Animal
Husbandry, Dairying and Fisheries. The Committee would also like
to be informed of the steps taken by the Department in this
direction.

9
D. Farmer Loans and Suicides in India
Recommendation (Para No. 12)
1.14 The Committee had observed/recommended as under :—
“The Committee note that a special package for livestock and
fisheries sector for 31 suicide prone districts of A.P., Maharashtra,
Karnataka and Kerala, was to be implemented over a period of
3 years from 2006-07. However, the Government of India approved
a rehabilitation package on 20.11.2008. As per Cabinet approval,
the total outlay of Idukki Package is Rs. 91.15 crore and the
implementation period was up to 30.11.2013. The above package
was being implemented along with Special Livestock Sector and
Fisheries Package for the suicide prone districts of the aforesaid
States which already ended on 30.09.2011. However, the Committee
are anguished to note that the special package to suicide prone
districts of the States was discontinued without any alternate
package as spate of farmer suicides continues unabated in many
parts of the country which brings out the State of distress amongst
the farmers. The Committee are also perturbed to note the DADF
does not operate any rehabilitation package to support families of
deceased farmers. The Committee are also aggrieved to note that
the Department has no provisions for any beneficiary oriented
scheme in the fisheries sector where loans are given to fishers
through the banks.
The Committee, therefore, recommend that the Government
formulate a policy for grant of special package for rehabilitation
of the bereaved families of the farmers who commit suicide under
distress. Further, a mechanism should be put in place to monitor
the relief to bereaved families without any inordinate delay and
appropriate measures should be adopted to bring in beneficiary
oriented scheme in the fisheries sector so as allow fish farmers and
entrepreneurs in the fisheries sector to avail loans from banks. The
Committee would like to be apprised of initiatives undertaken by
the Department in this regard.
1.15 In its Action Taken Reply, the Department has stated as
under:—
“In the sector of fisheries, there are no suicidal cases reported in
the country. The Division has implemented the central sector scheme
that is Blue Revolution: Integrated Developmental and Management
of Fisheries in India aiming Doubling the Farmers Income by 2022.

10
Fish Farmers/Fishers/Entrepreneurs are getting financial assistance
through the scheme including bereaved families of the farmers under
distress. Welfare of Fishermen is one of the components directly
helping the fishermen who dies in Natural Calamities by which
claim of Insurance can be done. So, the Division has no policy plan
to formulate any special package as on day.”
1.16 While noting that the Department has discontinued special
packages to suicide prone districts without any alternate package, the
Committee had recommended that the Government formulate a policy
for granting special package for rehabilitation of bereaved families of
farmers who commit suicide under distress. The Department in its
Action Taken Reply has submitted that financial assistance is being
provided to fish farmers or entrepreneurs, including bereaved families
of farmers under distress. The Committee, however, are dissatisfied to
note that no such provisions have been made for livestock owners and
their families and also that no programme or scheme has been
formulated till date for providing insurance cover to livestock owners
or their families. The Department is also silent over the issue of
providing fish farmers and entrepreneurs an easy access to institutional
credit and bank loans. Moreover, the non-inclusion of dairying
entrepreneurs and livestock owners and their families in such
rehabilitation packages and policies needs to be relooked and pondered
upon. The Committee, therefore, reiterate their earlier recommendation
that the Department should take a holistic view of the entire situation
and come up with a concrete plan to provide special assistance and
rehabilitation packages for livestock and fisheries sector and also
provide alternate packages to relieve the families of such farmers from
losses incurred due to unabated farmer suicides in the country. Further,
a mechanism should be put in place to monitor the relief to bereaved
families without any inordinate delay and appropriate measures should
be adopted to bring in beneficiary oriented scheme in the fisheries
sector so as allow fish farmers and entrepreneurs in the fisheries sector
to avail loans from banks. The Committee would also like to be
informed of the steps taken by the Department in this direction.

11
CHAPTER II
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS THAT HAVE BEEN
ACCEPTED BY THE GOVERNMENT
Share of Department of Animal Husbandry, Dairying and Fisheries in
the Central Plan
Recommendation (Para No. 1)
Agriculture forms the backbone of the economy and livestock,
poultry, dairying and fisheries form an important sub-sector of agriculture
allowing livelihood opportunities to farmers during seasonal
unemployment; contributing to the health and nutrition of the household
and providing critical inputs for agriculture besides supplementing the
income of farmers. According to NSS 68th Round Survey (July 2011-June
2012) on Employment and Unemployment, 16.44 million workers as per
usual status (Principal plus Subsidiaries) were engaged in the activities
of farming of animals, mixed farming, fishing and aquaculture. Also, as
per the CSO, value of output from livestock is about 28% of the value
of output from the total agriculture and allied sector. Milk production
during 2016-17 has increased to 165.4 million tonnes from 155.5 million
tonnes in 2015-16, showing an annual growth rate of 6.27% with per
capita milk availability at 355 grams per day in 2016-17. Poultry
production, as per 19th Livestock Census has reached 729.21 million
whereas egg production has been around 88.14 billion during 2016-17,
with the per capita availability of eggs being 69 per annum. Meat
production has gone up to 7.4 million tonnes in 2016-17, with the fisheries
production increasing from 41.57 lakh tonnes in 1991-92 to 114.10 lakh
tonnes in 2016-17 (provisional) and currently being estimated at
5.80 million tonnes (provisional) during the first two quarters of
2017-18. Despite such contributions from the Animal Husbandry, Dairying
and Fisheries sector towards the GDP, the Department is still struggling
with the issue of meagre allocations.
Reply of the Government
The observations of the committee are noted. Department has been
continuously pursuing the matter with Ministry of Finance for enhanced
allocation of funds for the schemes. It is worthwhile to mention here that

12
allocation for financial year 2018-19 for the schemes of Department has
been increased by 43.07% over the allocation for financial year 2017-18
excluding DMS receipts. Further, In the Cabinet Note on White Revolution-
Rashtriya Pashudhan Vikas Yojana (WR-RPVY) for the period from
2017-18 to 2019-20, the Department has proposed an enhanced allocation
of Rs. 5781.00 crore against the EFC recommendation of Rs. 5148.00 crore
for sustaining the achievements made so far under various schemes/
programmes of Umbrella scheme “WR-RPVY”.
[Ministry of Agriculture and Farmers Welfare
(Department of Animal Husbandry, Dairying and Fisheries)
F.No. 25-5(3)/2018-AHD (Coord.) dt. 09th July, 2018]
Share of Department of Animal Husbandry, Dairying and Fisheries in
the Central Plan
Recommendation (Para No. 2)
The Committee further note that against a demand of Rs.
4527.79 crore in 2015-16, the Department was allocated only Rs. 1491.14 crore
by the Ministry of Finance as also was the case for the financial years
2016-17, 2017-18 and 2018-19 where the Department proposed Rs.
3231.43 crore, Rs. 4922.00 crores and Rs. 6422.07 crores respectively, but
was instead allocated only Rs. 1600.00 crores, Rs. 2371.00 crores and Rs.
3100.00 crore respectively against each proposal year-wise. During the
course of evidence, the Committee were apprised of the fact that
prioritization of different sectors and trend of expenditure during previous
years form the basis of allocation. The Committee are, however, distressed
to note that despite repeated requests for a higher allocation, the Ministry
of Finance has allocated very meagre funds to the Department.
Notwithstanding the rise in the comparative share of the Department of
Animal Husbandry, Dairying and Fisheries to 0.11% in the year 2017-18,
the Committee feel that this too is less when viewed in the light of the
contribution made by this particular sector to employment generation,
the food basket and the National GDP of the country. The Committee,
therefore, urge the Department to take up the matter with the Ministry
of Finance to increase the share of the Department in the Central Plan
so that various programmes undertaken by them do not suffer for want
of funds. The Committee would like to be apprised of the initiatives
undertaken by the Department in this regard.
Reply of the Government
The Department had proposed an allocation of Rs. 5472.00 crore
as BE for 2017-18. However, Ministry of Finance keeping in view the

13
overall resources position and the inter-se priorities for allocation among
competing demands from different sectors had allocated a BE of Rs. 2921.00
crore for 2017-18. Finally, Ministry of Finance allocated Rs. 2606.74 crore
at RE stage for the year 2017-18. Further, after making continuous efforts
by Department for more funds, Ministry of Finance allocated
Rs. 3580.00 crore to Department at BE stage for the year 2018-19.
[Ministry of Agriculture and Farmers Welfare
(Department of Animal Husbandry, Dairying and Fisheries)
F.No. 25-5(3)/2018-AHD (Coord.) dt. 09th July, 2018]
Utilization of Funds by the Department
Recommendation (Para No. 4)
During the course of examination of the Demands for Grants
(2018-19), the Committee have observed that even the meagre allocations
at the RE stage have not been fully utilized by the Department. During
2015-16, the Department was allocated Rs. 1491.14 crore out of which
expenditure was Rs. 1418.20 crore which amounts to 95%. Barring the
exception of the year 2016-17 where the Department spent Rs. 1743.12
crore which is 99.72% of the allocated amount of Rs. 1748.00 crore, the
status of expenditure for the year 2017-18, up to 30.01.2018, has been only
Rs. 2055.86 crore while Rs. 315.14 crore remains to be expended in the
last two months of this quarter. This, however, is not in keeping with
the idea of balanced expenditure spread out evenly throughout the quarter.
Further, this also shows the laxity of the Department in financial planning
leading to sub-optimal fund utilization. The Committee are dismayed to
note that despite repeated recommendations of the Committee, the
Department has failed to take corrective steps to optimally utilize funds
allocated to them. This only reflects that there is some lacunae in the
management and regulation of the finance of the Department. The
Committee, therefore, reiterate their earlier recommendation that the
Department should take corrective steps and make earnest efforts for
optimum utilization of funds. The Committee would like to be apprised
of corrective action taken in this regard.
Reply of the Government
Department is doing its best to ensure optimum utilization of
allocated funds. However, sometimes Department is not in a position to
release the fund to the States due to huge unspent balance available with
them and non-receipt project proposals. Physical and Financial Progress

14
of the programmes/schemes implementation is continuously reminded
through bi-Monthly Review Meetings, Regional Review Meetings, Field
Visits and Video Conferences to liquidate the pending Utilization
Certificates and submit proposal for release of fund.
[Ministry of Agriculture and Farmers Welfare
(Department of Animal Husbandry, Dairying and Fisheries)
F.No. 25-5(3)/2018-AHD (Coord.) dt. 09th July, 2018]
Foot and Mouth Disease Control Programme (FMD-CP)
Recommendation (Para No. 5)
The Committee note that the Foot and Mouth Disease Control
Programme (FMD-CP) has been formulated with the aim of preventing
economic losses due to Foot and Mouth Disease and to develop herd
immunity in cloven-footed animals and that this programme is location
specific and is now being implemented all districts covering 29 States and
7 Union Territories. Funds are provided for cost of vaccine, maintenance
of cold chain and other logistic support to undertake vaccination while
State Governments provide other infrastructure and manpower. The
Committee are happy to note that intensive implementation of FMD-CP
is taking place in the country and that second round of vaccinations in
States and UTs not covered earlier, is being attempted through releasing
funds under Rashtriya Krishi Vikas Yojana (RKVY) for the FMD-CP
scheme. The Committee also note that out of the allocated amount of
Rs. 262.12 crore under this component during 2017-18, 94.7% has been released
till 31st December, 2017 besides 73.96% of the vaccination target being
achieved up to December, 2017 with funds for the same being raised
from Rs. 300 crore to Rs. 508 crore for FMD and other components. The
Committee are also happy to note that Zone 1 (of the three FMD-CP
zones established in India) comprising Telengana and AP, has not seen
a single case of FMD in the last three years. The Committee hope
that the Department will be able to achieve the target under this
programme.
Reply of the Government
During the year 2018-19, the budgetary allocation for Livestock
Health and Disease Control (LH&DC) has been enhanced by 70.29% by
allocating Rs 508.77 crore and the FMD-CP has been extended to cover
all the States/UTs. Out of Rs. 508.77 crore for LH&DC Scheme,

15
Rs. 401.75 crores has been allocated for FMD vaccination covering all
eligible cattle and buffaloes twice in a year. Rs. 117.88 crores has already
been released to States/UTs till June’ 2018 under FMD-CP. The Department
is taking necessary steps for effective implementation of the Scheme and
to achieve the target of vaccination of all eligible animals twice in a year.
[Ministry of Agriculture and Farmers Welfare
(Department of Animal Husbandry, Dairying and Fisheries)
F.No. 25-5(3)/2018-AHD (Coord.) dt. 09th July, 2018]
Foot and Mouth Disease Control Programme (FMD-CP)
Recommendation (Para No. 6)
The Committee, however, note with concern that out of the proposed
amount of Rs. 746.63 crore under the Livestock Health and Disease Control
(LH&DC) Scheme during 2018-19, only Rs. 508.77 crore is being provided
by the Ministry of Finance at the BE stage. In the opinion of the Committee,
such a drastic cut in the Plan allocation will adversely affect the
implementation of FMD-CP and achievements of the physical targets of
the component. Emphasizing the need to have adequate funds to allow
timely achievement of targets and to make the country Foot and Mouth
disease free, the Committee therefore, stress upon the Department to
impress upon the Ministry of Finance for allocation of adequate funds
at the RE stage so as to achieve the planned targets for 2018-19 without
any hindrance.
Reply of the Government
During 2018-19, the Department had been allocated Rs. 508.77 crore
for Livestock Health and Disease Control (LH&DC) Scheme. An amount
of Rs. 140.22 crore is already released to the States/UTs for implementation
of the LH&DC Scheme. Further, the financial assistance of Rs. 60.00 crore
would also be provided under Rashtriya Krishi Vikas Yojana (RKVY) for
two components of LH&DC Scheme i.e Brucellosis-Control programme
(B-CP) for vaccination covering all eligible female calves and Establishment
and Strengthening of Veterinary Hospitals and Dispensaries (ESVHD) as
sub-scheme.
[Ministry of Agriculture and Farmers Welfare
(Department of Animal Husbandry, Dairying and Fisheries)
F.No. 25-5(3)/2018-AHD (Coord.) dt. 09th July, 2018]

16
Rashtriya Gokul Mission
Recommendation (Para No. 8)
Rashtriya Gokul Mission has been initiated by the Department of
Animal Husbandry, Dairying and Fisheries for Development and
conservation of indigenous breeds since December 2014. This scheme is
crucial for upliftment of rural poor as more than 80% low producing
indigenous animals are with small and marginal farmers and landless
labours. The Scheme is important for enhancing milk production and
productivity of bovines to meet growing demand of milk and making
dairying more remunerative to the poor farmers of the country. The Scheme
is expected to lead to multiplication of elite animals of indigenous breeds
in an exponential manner. One of the components of Rashtriya Gokul
Mission is setting up of Gokul Grams for under taking development and
conservation of indigenous breeds in a scientific and organized manner.
Rs.173 crores have been sanctioned for 18 Gokul gram related to the
proposals received from 12 States. The Gokul Grams are being established
and constructed by states through the State Livestock Development Board.
The Committee note that while initiatives such as the e-Pashu Haat
Portal are aimed at eliminating middlemen from the process of buying
and selling of livestock, there still are infrastructural roadblocks in the
implementation of such ideas. Moreover, the problem of disproportionate
land holdings has led to the issue of non-availability of fodder to small
and marginal farmers owning livestock. The Committee further note that
the productivity of indigenous breeds of cattle has been reducing over
the years and this is a cause of serious concern as their milch ability has
also been declining due to this. The Committee are of the considered
opinion that the Department must take this issue up with all seriousness
and work towards ways to revive the productivity of native breeds besides
also working on increasing their longevity. The Committee, therefore,
recommend that the Department devise a plan to resolve these issues and
revive native breeds in a sustainable manner. The Committee would like
to be apprised of the steps taken by the Department in this regard.
Reply of the Government
The Department agreed with the comments of the Committee
regarding low productivity of indigenous and non descript cattle.
Following efforts have been made by the Department to enhance milk
production and productivity of bovines:—
• For increasing semen production of indigenous breeds 1752
bulls have been inducted at semen stations. Similarly,

17
26 semen stations have been strengthened and their capacity
increased to produce 15 crore semen doses annually. One
new semen station with the capacity of 50 lakh doses is being
established at Purnea Bihar.
• For delivery of artificial insemination at farmers doorstep
5046 AI technicians have been established and 39000 existing
AI technicians given refresher training.
• Along with other components and activities Rashtriya Gokul
Mission also envisages establishment of integrated cattle
development centres ‘Gokul Grams’ to develop indigenous
breeds. So far 20 Gokul Grams have been sanctioned in
13 States and till date, 3 Gokul Grams have been established
and 17 Gokul Grams are under the progress.
• Two National Kamdhenu breeding centres one in Chintaldevi,
Andhra Pradesh has already been completed and work for
establishment of second in Itarsi, Madhya Pradesh is under
rapid progress.
• 9 crore animals in milk are being identified by UID and issuing
Nakul Swasthya Patra in order to control animal diseases
and enhance milk productivity. So, far 10 million animals
have been identified till date.
• 20 Embryo Transfer Technology Labs are being established.
Indus Chip has been developed to increase the production
and productivity of indigenous breeds. As on date, 6000
animals have been selected through genomic selection.
• In order to encourage farmers for undertaking development
of indigenous breeds awards have been instituted under RGM
22 awards were given during 2017-18 and 62 awards in 2018.
• In 2016, first ever e-Pashudhan Haat Portal had been launched
in order to facilitate the sale and purchase of high-quality
breed/native livestock and availability of good quality semen
doses. Till June, 2018, information about 80,081 live animals,
7.69 crore semen doses and 371 embryos has been uploaded
on this portal. Information is now available with the farmers
on availability of indigenous bovine germplasm.
[Ministry of Agriculture and Farmers Welfare
(Department of Animal Husbandry, Dairying and Fisheries)
F.No. 25-5(3)/2018-AHD (Coord.) dt. 09th July, 2018]

18
Delhi Milk Scheme
Recommendation (Para No. 9)
The Committee note that Delhi Milk Scheme (DMS) was set up
with the primary objective of supplying wholesome milk to the citizens
of Delhi at reasonable prices as well as for providing remunerative prices
to milk producers. However, the Committee are extremely dissatisfied
with the current state of affairs of DMS. The milk procurement by DMS
has declined sharply over the years from 766.13 lakh kgs. in 2016-17 to
617.83 lakh kgs. in 2017-18. Its capacity utilization has also declined with
reference to its installed capacity of 5 lakh litres per day. The procurement
price of raw milk at RE stage in the year 2017-18, which was projected
@ Rs. 42/- per liter has also declined to Rs. 34/- per liter which is the
actual average price of milk. The Committee are further dissatisfied to
note that no major proposals are being taken up for upgrading plant and
machinery, civil and electrical works of the DMS plant as this has resulted
in a large amount of unspent balance.
The Committee note that the daily sale of milk of DMS has declined
over the last year and the Department has attributed this to the inability
of the DMS to withstand competition from Mother Dairy and Amul. The
Committee are of the view that the activities of DMS are commercial in
nature and therefore, it has to run as a commercial entity to make it
financially viable. DMS, therefore, needs to be given functional autonomy
on the lines of other commercial dairies, in order to enable it to undertake
strategic decisions on commercial lines. The Committee, therefore,
recommend the Government to consider granting functional autonomy
to DMS by taking a holistic view over the issue while also taking
immediate remedial measures to check its losses and make it commercially
viable. Upgradation and renovation of the DMS plant and machinery is
also the need of the hour so as to help the plant function in its optimal
capacity. The Committee feel that these efforts will help in increasing the
sale of milk and milk products which may in turn lead to reduction in
losses. The Committee would like to be apprised of the action plan of
the Department on the issue.
Reply of the Government
In line with the idea to give DMS more autonomy, the Union Cabinet
in its decision dated 22.04.2015 decided to lease out Operation and
Management of DMS for a period of 30 years.
In pursuance of Cabinet decision dated 22.4.2015, Department has
floated an e-tender on 26.05.2017 for selection of O&M agency for DMS.

19
The tender opening date has been extended thrice, from 18.08.2017 to
11.09.2017, 16.10.2017 and finally up to 08.11.2017 to get the bids. Three
technical bids received were opened on 08.11.2017. These technical
proposals were examined and rejected by the Bid Evaluation Committee
on 3.1.2018 due to non-submission of technical qualifications.
Further to this, certain tender conditions were revisited and have
now got the concurrence of Department of Expenditure. The Department
of Expenditure has agreed to re-tender with the revised tender conditions
based on interaction of this Department with the industry. Accordingly,
this Department has floated the tender on 27.06.2018. The process is
likely to be completed within a period of 3 months.
[Ministry of Agriculture and Farmers Welfare
(Department of Animal Husbandry, Dairying and Fisheries)
F.No. 25-5(3)/2018-AHD (Coord.) dt. 09th July, 2018]
National Fisheries Development Board (NFDB)
Recommendation (Para No. 10)
The Committee note that the National Fisheries Development Board
(NFDB) was set up in September, 2006, with its headquarters at Hyderabad
to realize the untapped potential of fisheries sector in inland and marine
fish capture, culture, processing and marketing of fish, and overall growth
of fisheries sector with the application of modern tools of research and
development including biotechnology for optimizing production and
productivity from fisheries. The activities of the Board are focused towards
increasing the fish production and productivity in the country, to enhance
the exports of fish and fishery products and to provide employment to
more than 3.5 million persons by extending assistance to various agencies
for implementation of activities. It also acts as a platform for public-
private partnership for fisheries.
The Committee are however, perturbed to note that the proposed/
demanded amount of Rs. 160.50 crore (BE) for NFDB in 2018-19 has been
drastically reduced to Rs. 5.00 crore by the Ministry of Finance and this
is sure to affect the functioning of the NFDB and also its production
oriented activities in the fisheries sector. Besides, the Committee feel that
the fisheries sector holds immense potential to contribute towards the
vision of doubling the income of farmers by 2022. The Committee,
therefore, strongly recommend that the Department take up the issue of
such drastic reduction of funds at the RE stage by the Ministry of Finance
and pursue with them vigorously to allocate deserving funds towards
the NFDB. The Committee also recommend that the Department utilize

20
allocated funds optimally and also come up with a foolproof action plan
to utilize the additional amount of Rs. 750 crore as announced for
infrastructure development and other facilities, as apprised by the
Secretary DADF during the course of the evidence. The Committee would
also like to be apprised of the action taken by the Department in this
direction.
Reply of the Government
The Division agreed with the recommendation mentioned by the
committee as contained in the report. While submitting RE 2017-18, the
Division proposed Rs. 125.87 crore but got only 9.00 crore. While for BE
2018-19 Division proposed 160.50 crore but allocated only Rs. 5.00 crore
by which the organization affected to implement many Fisheries
Developmental Activities in India. The recommendation by the Committee
has been noted by the Division and the issue will be taken care of at
the RE stage by demanding the required funds to carry out the existing
and upcoming developmental activities. The division has proposed
Rs. 125.00 crores to NFDB as first phase of supplementary demands for
grants.
[Ministry of Agriculture and Farmers Welfare
(Department of Animal Husbandry, Dairying and Fisheries)
F.No. 25-5(3)/2018-AHD (Coord.) dt. 09th July, 2018]

21
CHAPTER III
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE
DO NOT DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE
GOVERNMENT’S REPLIES
- Nil -

22
CHAPTER IV
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH
REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN
ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE
Share of Department of Animal Husbandry, Dairying and Fisheries in
the Central Plan
Recommendation (Para No. 3)
The Committee note that during each of the years of the Twelfth
Plan i.e. 2012-13, 2013-14, 2014-15, 2015-16 and 2016-17, a huge variation
exists between funds demanded by the Department and the funds allocated
by erstwhile Planning Commission/Ministry of Finance. This mismatch
between the proposed allocation and the actual allocation is a cause of
concern to the Committee. As a result of lesser allocation of funds, the
Committee are apprehensive that the implementation of the various
schemes undertaken by the Department may have been adversely affected,
which in turn may have hindered the growth and development of this
vital sector of the economy. The Committee feel that this issue of a huge
gap between proposed allocation and actual allocation is indicative of
the poor financial planning by the Department. The Committee
recommend that the Department should make a realistic assessment of
its requirement before sending a proposal to Ministry of Finance for
allocation of funds.
Reply of the Government
Ministry of Finance allocated Rs. 1491.14 crore to Department at
RE stage for the FY-2015-16. It is mentioned that fund allocation to the
Department for financial year 2016-17 was Rs. 1748.00 crore. Department
agreed on the fact that prioritization of different sectors and trend of
expenditure during previous years form basis of allocation. It is mentioned

23
that Department utilizes approximately full fund allocated by Ministry
of Finance. The table showing the details of allocation and expenditure
from 2012-13 is given below:—
S.No. Year BE RE Exp. % w.r.t.
to RE
1. 2012-13 1910.00 1800.00 1736.37 96.47
2. 2013-14 2025.00 1800.00 1748.80 97.16
3. 2014-15 2174.00 1800.00 1738.07 96.56
4. 2015-16 1491.14 1491.14 1418.20 95.11
5. 2016-17 1600.00 1748.02 1743.12 99.71
However, Ministry of Finance allocates the funds to the Different
Department/Ministries keeping in view the overall resources position
and the inter-se priorities for allocation among competing demands from
different sectors.
[Ministry of Agriculture and Farmers Welfare
(Department of Animal Husbandry, Dairying and Fisheries)
F.No. 25-5(3)/2018-AHD (Coord.) dt. 09th July, 2018]
Comments of the Committee
For comments of the Committee please refer to Para No. 1.7 of
Chapter-I of this Report.
Establishment and Strengthening of Existing Veterinary Hospitals and
Dispensaries (ESVHD)
Recommendation (Para No. 7)
In order to assist the States to set up infrastructure for new
veterinary hospitals and dispensaries and to strengthen/equip the existing
ones, the Department is providing funds on 60:40 (Centre: State) sharing
basis except NE and Himalayan States, where the grants are provided
on 90:10 basis. Mobile Veterinary Clinics (MVCs) is also an activity of
the component of ESVHD. The MVCs are provided with Rs. 5 lakh grant
per annum as upper limit. The funds are provided to the States/UTs for
contractual services for technical persons, hiring vehicles, procurement
of necessary equipment required for treatment and disease diagnosis
(including sample collection and transportation of these samples to the
designated laboratory place) and maintaining cold chain or preservation

24
as necessary. The vehicle should accommodate the necessary staff, the
equipments, reagents/medicines for treatment and diagnosis, facility for
Artificial Insemination (AI) and also suitable freezer or related equipments
for sample transportation in cold chain.
The Committee are, however, concerned to note that despite such
provisions under the ESVHD component, the status of availability of
mobile veterinary clinics in the country, especially in the rural areas, is
still dismal. The rural farmers and livestock owners hardly have access
to veterinary services, as a result of which they face huge difficulties in
accessing healthcare facilities for their livestock. This is particularly due
to shortage of funds and manpower for the purpose. The Committee,
therefore, recommend that immediate action plan may be formulated to
address the shortage of veterinary doctors and medicines for treatment
of sick animals. Ministry of Finance may also be urged to provide adequate
funds for the purpose. The Committee would like to be apprised of the
action taken by the Department to ensure doorstep delivery, easy access
of veterinary services and availability of veterinary ambulance services,
especially in the rural areas of the country.
Reply of the Government
Veterinary service and Veterinary care is a State subject. Veterinary
Hospitals/Dispensaries are set up by respective State Governments
depending on livestock population in the particular area and availability
of resources. The deployment of manpower in the States is also done by
the State Governments. As per the review of Performance of Veterinary
Services in different States, total sanction strength of total number of
veterinarians in the Government Sector is approximately 35000 out of
which there is a vacancy of 20% to 30% across the States.
In order to assist the State the Governments for establishing and
strengthening of veterinary infrastructure, the Central Government is
implementing a programme namely Establishment and Strengthening of
Veterinary Hospitals and Dispensaries (ESVHD) under which financial
assistance are provided to the State Governments for establishment and
strengthening of existing veterinary hospital and dispensaries. However,
under this Scheme money is only provided for infrastructure development
and not for the establishment cost of Veterinary Doctors which is borne
by the State Government. Under the Scheme, there is also a provision
for assistance for Mobile Veterinary Clinics for doorstep delivery of
veterinary services. The Department has requested all States and UTs to
explore the possibility to undertake strengthening of veterinary
infrastructure by availing more funds under other Scheme such as RKVY,

25
RIDF including dovetailing with MPLAD funds etc. so as to cater adequate
veterinary health in States/UTs including Mobile Veterinary Clinics for
improved veterinary infrastructure and door step delivery of veterinary
services.
The Veterinary Council of India (VCI) is mandated to maintain the
Indian Veterinary Practitioners’ Register (IVPR) containing the names of
the persons who possess recognized Veterinary qualification (Degree in
Veterinary Science and Animal Husbandry). There are a total
approximately 67800 veterinary graduates have been registered in Indian
Veterinary Practitioner Register upto 31.03.2015.
To meet up the shortage of veterinary manpower in the country,
the numbers of recognized veterinary institutions have been increased
to 45 as against 36. Further, during the year 2017-18, nine veterinary
colleges was permitted to admit students in the First Year B.V.Sc and
A.H. courses.. Therefore, total number of veterinarians passing out will
be approximately 4100 per year.
[Ministry of Agriculture and Farmers Welfare
(Department of Animal Husbandry, Dairying and Fisheries)
F.No. 25-5(3)/2018-AHD (Coord.) dt. 09th July, 2018]
Comments of the Committee
For comments of the Committee please refer to Para No. 1.10 of
Chapter-I of this Report.
Gender Perspective in Animal Husbandry, Dairying and Fisheries
Recommendation (Para No. 11)
The Committee note that the National Agriculture Policy formulated
in 2000 accorded high priority to recognition and mainstreaming of
women’s role in agriculture and highlighting incorporation of ‘Gender
Issues’ in the agriculture development agenda. The Committee also note
that as stated by the Department within the overall mandate, goals and
objectives, the DAHDF places special emphasis on women participation
and contribution in the Animal Husbandry, Dairying and Fisheries Sector.
However, the ground realities are different as highlighted in the Economic
Survey 2017-18, the structural changes that are being witnessed by the
agriculture sector in India necessitate re-orientation of policies towards
this sector in terms of strengthening the agricultural value chain by
focusing on allied activities like dairying and livestock development along

26
with gender specific interventions. The Committee recommend that to
this end the Department can do a lot by creating more opportunities for
women in the Sector and involving more number of women in the
workforce by way of dairy cooperatives, livestock rearing and fishing
enterprises and also by earmarking at least 30 per cent of the budget
allocation for women beneficiaries in all ongoing schemes and programmes
of the Department. The Committee also advocate the idea of enabling
women entrepreneurs in the animal husbandry, dairying and fisheries
sector by easing loan facilities, providing requisite training to women
entrepreneurs and supporting women Self Help Groups (SHGs) etc. The
Department may also encourage women to take up entrepreneurial
activities in the field of cattle rearing, fodder storage, milk cooperatives
etc. as this will not only have a positive impact on the animal husbandry,
dairying and fisheries sectors but also foster development of these sectors
in the long run. The Committee, therefore, recommend that the
Department may work out plans drawing more and more women folk
into the Animal Husbandry, Dairying and Fisheries sector and set an
example of opening up gainful and profitable employment opportunities
and mainstreaming women in the agriculture sector, particularly in the
sector of Animal Husbandry, Dairying and Fisheries. The Committee
would like to apprised of the initiatives taken by the Government in this
regard.
Reply of the Government
The Recommendation of the Committee is noted for compliance.
It is mentioned that the existing Centrally Sponsored Scheme on Blue
Revolution: Integrated Development and Management of Fisheries
provides benefit of women fisher folk and weaker sections of the society
with comparatively higher subsidy assistance so as to involve women
participation specially in the marketing and post harvest activity in
fisheries.
Department is implementing the National Livestock Mission (NLM)
under which there is a component of “Entrepreneurship Development
and Employment Generation (EDEG)”, which supports the credit linked
activities related to poultry, small ruminants, pigs and salvaging male
buffalo calves. Similarly, Department is implementing Dairy
Entrepreneurship Development Scheme (DEDS) under which priority is
given to women farmers/women in Self Help Group.
[Ministry of Agriculture and Farmers Welfare
(Department of Animal Husbandry, Dairying and Fisheries)
F.No. 25-5(3)/2018-AHD (Coord.) dt. 09th July, 2018]

27
Comments of the Committee
For comments of the Committee please refer to Para No. 1.13 of
Chapter-I of this Report.
Farmer Loans and Suicides in India
Recommendation (Para No. 12)
The Committee note that a special package for livestock and fisheries
sector for 31 suicide prone districts of A.P., Maharashtra, Karnataka and
Kerala, was to be implemented over a period of 3 years from 2006-07.
However, the Government of India approved a rehabilitation package on
20.11.2008. As per Cabinet approval, the total outlay of Idukki Package
is Rs. 91.15 crore and the implementation period was upto 30.11.2013.
The above package was being implemented along with Special Livestock
Sector and Fisheries Package for the suicide prone districts of the aforesaid
States which already ended on 30.09.2011. However, the Committee are
anguished to note that the special package to suicide prone districts of
the States was discontinued without any alternate package as spate of
farmer suicides continues unabated in many parts of the country which
brings out the state of distress amongst the farmers. The Committee are
also perturbed to note the DADF does not operate any rehabilitation
package to support families of deceased farmers. The Committee are also
aggrieved to note that the Department has no provisions for any
beneficiary oriented scheme in the fisheries sector where loans are given
to fishers through the banks.
The Committee, therefore, recommend that the Government
formulate a policy for grant of special package for rehabilitation of the
bereaved families of the farmers who commit suicide under distress.
Further, a mechanism should be put in place to monitor the relief to
bereaved families without any inordinate delay and appropriate measures
should be adopted to bring in beneficiary oriented scheme in the fisheries
sector so as allow fish farmers and entrepreneurs in the fisheries sector
to avail loans from banks. The Committee would like to be apprised of
initiatives undertaken by the Department in this regard.
Reply of the Government
In the sector of fisheries, there are no suicidal cases reported in
the country. The Division has implemented the central sector scheme that
is Blue Revolution: Integrated Developmental and Management of
Fisheries in India aiming Doubling the Farmers Income by 2022. Fish
Farmers/Fishers/Entrepreneurs are getting financial assistance through

28
the scheme including bereaved families of the farmers under distress.
Welfare of Fishermen is one of the components directly helping the
fishermen who dies in Natural Calamities by which claim of Insurance
can be done. So, the Division has no policy plan to formulate any special
package as on day.
[Ministry of Agriculture and Farmers Welfare
(Department of Animal Husbandry, Dairying and Fisheries)
F.No. 25-5(3)/2018-AHD (Coord.) dt. 09th July, 2018]
Comments of the Committee
For comments of the Committee please refer to Para No. 1.16 of
Chapter-I of this Report.

29
CHAPTER V
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH
FINAL REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT ARE STILL AWAITED
- Nil -
NEW DELHI; SHRI HUKMDEV NARAYAN YADAV,
06 August, 2018 Chairperson,
15 Shravana, 1940 (Saka) Standing Committee on Agriculture.

30
ANNEXURE
STANDING COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE
(2017-18)
MINUTES OF THE TWENTY-EIGHTH SITTING
OF THE COMMITTEE
The Committee sat on Tuesday, the 07th August, 2018 from
1000 hrs. to 1050 hrs. in the Chamber of the Chairperson, Room No. 138,
Third Floor, Parliament House, New Delhi.
PRESENT
Shri Hukmdev Narayan Yadav — Chairperson
M
EMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Prof. Ravindra Vishwanath Gaikwad
3. Shri Nalin Kumar Kateel
4. Smt. Raksha Nikhil Khadse
5. Md. Badaruddoza Khan
6. Shri Janardan Mishra
7. Shri Devji M. Patel
8. Shri Mukesh Rajput
9. Shri C.L. Ruala
Rajya Sabha
10. Shri Kailash Soni
11. Shri Ram Nath Thakur
12. Dr. Chandrapal Singh Yadav

31
*Matter not related to this Report.
SECRETARIAT
1. Shri Arun K. Kaushik —Director
2. Shri Sumesh Kumar —Under Secretary
2. At the outset, Hon’ble Chairperson welcomed the Members to
the Sitting of the Committee. Thereafter, the Committee took up the
following Draft Reports for consideration:
*(i)  *** *** *** *** ***
(ii)Draft Report on the Action Taken by the Government on the
Observations/Recommendations contained in the 49th Report
(16th Lok Sabha) of the Standing Committee on Agriculture
(2017-18) on ‘Demands for Grants (2018-19)’ of the Ministry
of Agriculture and Farmers Welfare (Department of Animal
Husbandry, Dairying and Fisheries).
3. After some deliberations, the Committee adopted the Draft
Reports without any modifications and authorized the Chairperson to
finalize and present these Reports to Parliament after getting them factually
verified from the concerned Departments/Ministries.
The Committee then adjourned.

32
APPENDIX
(Vide Para 4 of introduction of the report)
ANALYSIS OF ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE
RECOMMENDATIONS CONTAINED IN THE FORTY-NINTH REPORT
(16TH LOK SABHA) OF STANDING COMMITTEE
ON AGRICULTURE (2017-18)
(i) Total number of Recommendations: 12
(ii)Observations/Recommendations that have been Accepted by the
Government:
Para Nos. : 1, 2, 4, 5, 6, 8, 9 and 10
Total : 08
Percentage : 66.66%
(iii)Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not desire
to pursue in view of the Government’s replies:
Para No. : NIL
Total : 00
Percentage : 0.00%
(iv) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies of the
Government have not been accepted by the Committee:
Para Nos. : 3, 7, 11 and 12
Total : 04
Percentage : 33.33%
(v) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which final replies of
the Government are still awaited:
Para No. : NIL
Total : 00
Percentage : 0.00%