STANDING COMMITTEE ON
AGRICULTURE
(2016-2017)
SIXTEENTH LOK SABHA
MINISTRY OF FOOD PROCESSING
INDUSTRIES
'DEMANDS FOR GRANTS (2016-2017)'
[Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations
contained in the Twenty Third Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) of the
Standing Committee on Agriculture (2015-16)]
31
THIRTY FIRST REPORT
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
December, 2016/Agrahayana, 1938 (Saka)


THIRTY FIRST REPORT
STANDING COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE
(2016-2017)
(SIXTEENTH LOK SABHA)
MINISTRY OF FOOD PROCESSING
INDUSTRIES
'DEMANDS FOR GRANTS (2016-2017)'
[Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations
contained in the Twenty third Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) of the
Standing Committee on Agriculture (2015-16)]
Presented to Lok Sabha on  14.12.2016
Laid on the table of Rajya Sabha on  14.12.2016
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
December, 2016/Agrahayana, 1938 (Saka)


COA No. 351
Price : Rs. 73.00
© 2017 B Y LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of
Business in Lok Sabha (Fifteenth Edition) and printed by M/s. India Offset,
New Delhi-110 064.

CONTENTS
PAGE (S)
(i)
COMPOSITION  OF THE  C OMMITTEE ..................................................... (iii)
INTRODUCTION .............................................................................. (v)
CHAPTER I Report .................................................................... 1
CHAPTER II Observations/Recommendations that have been
accepted by the Government..................................... 15
CHAPTER III Observations/Recommendations which the Committee
do not desire to pursue in view of the Government's
replies ..................................................................... 45
CHAPTER IV Observations/Recommendations in respect of which
action taken replies of the Government have not been
accepted by the Committee ........................................ 46
C
HAPTER V Observations/Recommendations in respect of which
final replies of the Government are still awaited............ 47
APPENDIX
I. Minutes of the 7th Sitting of the Committee held on
09.12.2016 .............................................................. 49
II. Analysis of Action Taken by the Government on the
Recommendations contained  in  the  Twenty third
Report   (Sixteenth   Lok  Sabha)  of  the  Standing
Committee on Agriculture (2015-16).......................... 51

COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE
ON AGRICULTURE
(2016-2017)
Shri Hukm Deo Narayan Yadav —  Chairperson
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Prof. Ravindra Vishwanath Gaikwad
3. Shri Sanganna Karadi
4. Shri Nalin Kumar Kateel
5. Smt. Raksha Khadse
6. Md. Badaruddoza Khan
7. Shri C. Mahendran
8. Dr. Tapas Mandal
9. Shri Janardan Mishra
10. Shri Devji Patel
11. Shri Nityanand Rai
12. Shri Mukesh Rajput
13. Shri Neiphiu Rio
14. Shri Konakalla Narayana Rao
15. Shri C.L. Ruala
16. Shri Arjun Charan Sethi
17. Shri Satyapal Singh (Sambhal)
18. Shri Virendra Singh
19. Shri Dharmendra Yadav
20. Shri Jai Prakash Narayan Yadav
21. Shri B. S. Yeddyurappa
(iii)

(iv)
Rajya Sabha
22. Shri Sambhaji Shahu Chhatrapati
23. Sardar Sukhdev Singh Dhindsa
24. Shri Janardan Dwivedi
25. Shri Meghraj Jain
26. Shri Vinay Katiyar
27. Shri Mohd. Ali Khan
28. Shri Ram Nath Thakur
29. Shri R. Vaithilingam
30. Shri Shankarbhai N. Vegad
31. Shri Darshan Singh Yadav
S
ECRETARIA T
1. Shri U.B.S. Negi — Joint Secretary
2. Shri Arun K. Kaushik — Director
3. Smt. Juby Amar — Additional Director
4. Shri Nirantar Kumar Singh — Sr. Executive Assistant

(v)
INTRODUCTION
I, the Chairperson, Standing Committee on Agriculture (2016-17),
having been authorized by the Committee to submit the Report on their
behalf, present this Thirty First Report on action taken by the Government
on the Observations/Recommendations contained in the Twenty Third
Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) of the Standing Committee on Agriculture
(2015-16) on 'Demands for Grants (2016-17)' pertaining to the Ministry of
Food Processing Industries.
2. The Twenty Third Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) of the Standing
Committee on Agriculture (2015-16) on 'Demands for Grants (2016-17)' of
the Ministry of Food Processing Industries was presented to Lok Sabha and
laid on the Table of Rajya Sabha on 02 May, 2016. The Action Taken Notes
on the Report were received on 21 November, 2016.
3. The Report was considered and adopted by the Committee at their
sitting held on 09.12.2016.
4. An analysis of the action taken by the Government on the
Observations/Recommendations contained in the Twenty Third Report
(Sixteenth Lok Sabha) of the Committee is given in Appendix.
 N
EW D ELHI; HUKM DEO NARAY AN YADA V ,
09 December , 2016 Chairperson,
18 Agrahayana, 1938  (Saka) Standing Committee on Agriculture.

CHAPTER  I
REPORT
This Report of the Committee on Agriculture deals with the action taken
by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations contained in the
Twenty Third Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) of the Committee on Agriculture
(2015-16) on "Demands for Grants (2016-17)" pertaining to the Ministry
of Food Processing Industries which was presented to Lok Sabha and laid
on the Table of Rajya Sabha on 02.05.2016.
1.2 The Ministry of Food Processing Industries have furnished Action
Taken Replies in respect of all the 11 Observations/Recommendations
contained in the Report. These replies have been categorized as under:
(i) Observations/Recommendations that have been accepted by the
Government:
Recommendation Para Nos. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 10 and 11
Chapter-II
Total-10
(ii) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which the Committee
do not desire to pursue in view of the Government's reply:
Recommendation Para Nos. Nil
Chapter-III
Total- Nil
(iii) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which Action Taken
Replies of the Government have not been accepted by the
Committee:
Recommendation Para No. Nil
Chapter-IV
Total-Nil

2
(iv) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which final replies
of the Government are still awaited:
Recommendation Para No. 9
Chapter-V
Total-1
1.3 The Committee trust that utmost importance would be given
to implementation of the Observations/Recommendations accepted by
the Government. In cases, where it is not possible for the Department
to implement the Recommendations in letter and spirit for any reason,
the matter should be reported to the Committee with reasons for
non-implementation. The Committee desire that further Action Taken
Notes on the Observations/ Recommendations contained in
Chapter-I of this Report be furnished to them at an early date.
1.4 The Committee will now deal with the action taken by the
Government on some of the Recommendations in the succeeding
paragraphs.
A. Budgetary Allocation
Recommendation (Para No. 2)
1.5 The Committee had observed/ recommended as under:
"The Committee note that a well developed food processing sector with
higher level of processing helps in the reduction of wastage, improves
value addition, promotes crop diversification, ensures better return to
the farmers, promotes employment as well as increases export
earnings. This sector is also capable of addressing critical issues of
food security, food inflation and providing wholesome, nutritious food
to the masses. Food Processing sector has also emerged an important
segment of the Indian economy in terms of its contribution to GDP,
employment and investment. However, the Committee are distressed
to note that against the proposal of the Ministry for the 12th Five Year
Plan outlay of Rs. 14604.00 crore, only Rs. 5990 crore was made to
them by the Planning Commission. However, the actual budget
allocation made to the Ministry in the first four years of the 12th Plan
was only Rs. 2625 crore which was further reduced to Rs.2297 crore
at RE stage. Out of this allocation, the Ministry has been able to utilize

3
Rs. 2204.55 crore which is 95.96 % of the budget provided at
RE Stage. The budgetary allocations for the year 2016-17 is just
Rs. 636.02 crore. According to the Ministry, the resource constraint
of the Central Government has been the main reason for not providing
budget allocation as per the requirements of the Ministry. The
allocations of the different sectors are finalized by the Ministry of
Finance on the basis of resource availability and expenditure priorities
of the Government as on date. The Committee are deeply concerned
to note that the budgetary allocation during the first four years of 12th
Plan has been grossly inadequate. As a result of the reduced allocation,
the implementation of various schemes of the Ministry has been
adversely affected. The committed liabilities of the 11th Plan were
spilled over to the 12th Plan due to resource constraints. The reduced
allocation forced delay in discharging the committed liabilities under
the Scheme of Technology Upgradation/Establishment/Modernization
of Food Processing Industries and the Scheme of Human Resource
Development. Further, delinking of Central Government Support for
the implementation of Centrally Sponsored Scheme of National Mission
on Food Processing w.e.f. 01.04.2015, has resulted in accumulating
committed liabilities with the State Governments. NMFP was launched
during 12th Five Year Plan for decentralized implementation through
State/UT Governments wherein State/ UT Governments were empowered
to receive applications, sanction projects and release grant as per the
area specific needs of the States. A number of projects under Mega
Food Park Scheme, Integrated Cold Chain Scheme and Modernization/
Setting up of Abattoir Scheme are under implementation in various
stages. According to the Ministry, due to non-availability of adequate
funds to release the grant due to these projects, the progress of their
completion is likely to be affected adversely. The Committee, therefore,
express their concern over the lesser allocation of funds by the Planning
Commission/Ministry of Finance than demanded by the Ministry of
Food Processing Industries for implementation of its various schemes.
The Committee are of the view that Food Processing Sector (FPI) is
an important segment of Indian economy in terms of its contribution
to GDP, employment and investment. A well developed food processing
sector not only helps in reduction of wastage, improves value addition,
promotes crop diversification, ensures better return to the farmers,
promotes employment as well as increases export earnings but it is
also capable of addressing critical issues of food security, food inflation

4
and providing wholesome, nutritious food to the masses. The
Contribution of FPI Sector to the GDP of the country was 1.67% in
2012-13, 1.63% in 2013-14 and also in 2014-15 whereas the Plan
allocation of Rs. 600 crore for the year 2016-17 is just 0.086% of the
total Central Plan Outlay of Rs. 706248 crore. The Committee,
therefore, strongly recommend that the Ministry should raise the matter
with Ministry of Finance to allocate funds as per their requirement and
urge them to take into account the contribution of the FPI sector to
the GDP while allocating funds to the Ministry. However, as informed
to the Committee, the Ministry is making efforts to get more allocation
for the food processing sector in view of its importance in reduction
of the wastage of agriculture produce and increasing the income of
the farmers. The Committee hope that the Ministry of Finance will
allocate adequate funds to the Ministry of FPI at the stage of RE. The
Committee would like to be apprised of the initiative undertaken by the
Ministry of FPI in this regard.''
1.6 In its reply, the Ministry has stated as under:
"The Ministry has been making efforts to get additional allocation at
RE stage from the Ministry of Finance every year. The issue was taken
up at all the levels but the Plan allocation of the Ministry was not
enhanced due to financial constraints. However, during the current year
2016-17, the allocation of Rs. 636 crore at BE stage has been enhanced
to Rs. 729 crore at RE stage, an increase of Rs. 93.00 crore. While
considering the proposal of the Ministry for a new Central Sector
Scheme for Agro-Marine Produce Processing and Development of
Agro Clusters (SAMP ADA), Expenditure Finance Committee (EFC)
recommended re-structuring of the schemes of the Ministry under a
Central Sector Scheme NMFP (SAMPADA) with following verticals:
(i) Mega Food Park;
(ii) Integrated Cold Chain and Value Addition Infrastructure;
(iii) Modernization/Setting up of Abattoirs;
(iv) Food Safety and Quality Assurance Infrastructure;
(v) Infrastructure for Agro-processing Clusters;
(vi) Creation of Backward and Forward Linkages;

5
(vii) Creation/Expansion of Food Processing & Preservation
Capacities; and
(viii) Human Resources and Institutions.
An allocation of Rs. 6,000 crore has been recommended by EFC for
the National Mission on Food Processing (SAMPADA) including the
liabilities of the ongoing schemes for the period coterminous with the
Fourteenth Finance Commission i.e. upto 2019-20. All the ongoing Central
Sector Schemes of the Ministry have been brought under Central Sector
Scheme named as National Mission on Food Processing (SAMPADA) as its
verticals from the financial year 2016-17. The ongoing projects under
various schemes of the Ministry will continue to be implemented as per the
existing norms of the concerned scheme. Since these schemes form part of
the umbrella Scheme of NMFP (SAMP ADA), a consolidated proposal will
be submitted for approval of the cabinet with an allocation of Rs. 6000.00
crore for the period co-terminus to the period of 14th Finance Commission
as recommended by the Expenditure Finance Committee (EFC)."
1.7 While expressing their concern over the less allocation of
funds than demanded by the Ministry for implementation of the
various schemes, the Committee had recommended that the Ministry
should raise the matter with Ministry of Finance to allocate funds as
per their requirement taking into account the contribution of FPI
sector to the GDP. The Committee regret to note from Action Taken
Reply of the Ministry that the issue was taken up at all levels but the
Plan allocation of the Ministry was not enhanced due to financial
constraints. However, the Committee are happy to note that during
the current financial year the Ministry have been able to get an
enhanced allocation of Rs. 729 crore at RE stage against BE of
Rs. 636 crore. The Committee also note that the allocation of Rs. 6,000
crore has been recommended by EFC for the National Mission on Food
Processing (SAMPADA) including the liabilities of the ongoing
schemes for the period coterminous with the Fourteenth Finance
Commission i.e. upto 2019-20. The Committee expect the Ministry to
expedite the consolidated proposal for approval of the Cabinet with an
allocation of Rs. 6000 crore without further delay so that the wastage
of agri-produce could be reduced significantly. The Committee also
hope that the Ministry will continue to make sustained efforts and
impress upon the Ministry of Finance to allocate adequate funds from

6
the next financial years for effective implementation of ongoing/new
schemes of the Ministry.
B. National Policy on Food Processing Sector
Recommendation (Para No. 5)
1.8 The Committee had observed/recommended as under:—
"The Committee note that Expenditure Finance Committee (EFC) has
recommended re-structuring of the schemes of the Ministry under a
Central Sector Scheme NMFP (SAMPADA) with the following
verticals:
(i) Mega Food Park;
(ii) Integrated Cold Chain and Value Addition Infrastructure;
(iii) Modernization/Setting up of Abattoirs;
(iv) Food Safety and Quality Assurance Infrastructure;
(v) Infrastructure for Agro-processing Clusters;
(vi) Creation of Backward and Forward Linkages;
(vii) Creation/Expansion of Food Processing & Preservation Capacities;
and
(viii) Human Resources and Institutions.
An allocation of Rs. 6,000 crore has been recommended by EFC for
the National Mission on Food Processing (SAMPADA) including the liabilities
of the ongoing schemes for the period coterminous with the Fourteenth
Finance commission i.e. upto 2019-20. If the States decide to continue
NMFP with their own resources and design, the scheme may be implemented
as State scheme. However, no funds will be provided to States by Central
Government for implementation of their scheme. Therefore, the NMFP
scheme for development of food processing may continue both at State level
in State sector as well as at the Central level in Central Sector. According
to the Ministry, the creation of umbrella Scheme of NMFP (SAMPADA) will
provide flexibility to the Ministry in better utilization of the outlays to achieve
intended outcomes of the various programmes. The Committee also note
that all the ongoing as well as the proposed new schemes of the Ministry
will be subsumed in the umbrella scheme for better convergence and
flexibility in implementation. However, the Committee are not convinced with
the explanation of the Ministry on the issue and feel that before restructuring
of the Central Sector schemes, a comprehensive policy should have been

7
formulated after consulting all States and other stakeholders taking into
consideration their genuine concerns and the modalities worked out for their
effective implementation.
In its earlier report, the Committee had recommended for a consolidated
policy on food processing sector. In this context, the Ministry has informed
the Committee that the process of preparing the policy document is being
initiated. Since it will be an important guiding document for the food
processing sector, it will require consultation with all stakeholders at various
levels and policy planners and concerted efforts will be made in this direction
to bring out a pragmatic, consolidated national policy on food processing
with clearly defined objectives, goals and methodology for implementation.
The Committee would like the Ministry to expedite the process of
consultation with all concerned including stakeholders so that a national
policy on food processing sector is drafted and implemented without further
loss of time. The Committee would like to be apprised of the progress made
in the matter."
1.9 The Ministry in its Action Taken Reply has stated as under:—
"The Ministry welcomes the suggestion of the Hon'ble Committee for
a comprehensive National Policy on Food Processing. The Ministry
has initiated the process for formulation of this important document
with Vision: 2025.
Being an important guiding document for the Food Processing sector,
it requires consultation with all stakeholders at various levels and policy
planners to bring out a pragmatic, consolidated National policy on Food
Processing with clearly defined objectives, goals and methodology for
implementation.
An Expert Group is proposed to be constituted to prepare a Draft
National Policy on Food Processing with clearly defining objectives,
goals, methodology and modalities for implementation of the Policy.
The national policy document will be finalized after intensive interaction
with all the stakeholders."
1.10 In response to the recommendation of the Committee in its
original report for a comprehensive policy on food processing sector,
the Ministry in its Action Taken Reply has stated that they have
initiated the process for formulation of this important document with

8
Vision: 2025, which requires consultation with all stakeholders at
various levels and policy planners to bring out a pragmatic,
consolidated National Policy on Food Processing with clearly defined
objectives, goals and methodology for implementation. An Expert
Group is proposed to be constituted to prepare a Draft National Policy
on Food Processing with clearly defining objectives, goals, methodology
and modalities for implementation of the Policy. However the Ministry
is silent on the time-frame fixed for devising the proposed Policy. The
Committee are of the view that absence of a National policy on Food
Processing results in lack of proper coordination between the States
and Centre in effective implementation of the schemes. The
Committee, therefore, reiterates that the Ministry should expedite the
process of formulation of consolidated National policy on Food
Processing within stipulated timeframe. The Committee would like to
be informed of the progress made by the Ministry in this regard.
C. Cold Chain, Value-addition and Preservation Infrastructure
Recommendation (Para No. 07)
1.11 The Committee had recommended as under:—
" The Committee note that there exist a substantial gap in the cold chain
infrastructure capacity in the country. As per Dr. Saumitra Chaudhuri
Committee report, the cold storage requirement of the country is
61 million tonnes against which the existing capacity of cold storage
is estimated at around 32 million tones. Thus, the present gap in the
cold storage infrastructure is estimated around 29 million tonnes. As
per the All India Cold Chain Infrastructure Capacity conducted by the
NCCD, there is requirement of approximately 69750 numbers of
Integrated Pack Houses, 52,000 Reefer Trucks, 8000 numbers of
Ripening Chambers and 3 million tonnes of Cold Storage capacity. This
Cold Chain Infrastructure requirement excludes the requirement for
milk, meat, marine and easily perishable processed products. Presently,
the Ministry is implementing 135 cold chain projects which were
sanctioned in five phases, out of which 75 projects have achieved
completion and started commercial operations as on 23.03.2015. The
Committee note that in many cases the projects under the Scheme
could not achieve completion within prescribed timelines. According
to the Ministry, some of the reasons attributed for delay in

9
implementation of projects are due to change in location by the
promoter to ensure viability of the project, delay in obtaining various
statutory approvals integral to the commissioning of the project for
example permission for change of land use, exemption from land ceiling
laws, permission to establish and operate units from State Pollution
Control Board, NoC from Town & Country Planning Department etc.,
delay in construction work due to natural calamities, remote locations
especially in the hilly and North-East Region and inability and lack of
interest on the part of the promoters to implement the project. The
Committee also note that delay in disbursement of grant due to
non-availability of funds is also one of the reasons for time overruns
in implementation of cold chain projects. During 2014-15, 100% funds
earmarked for general areas were utilized by October 2014 and
approximately 15 proposals with committed liabilities of Rs. 47 crore
could not be released grant due to resource crunch. These projects
were released grant during April-May, 2015 after approximately
7 months of delay. During 2015-16, the Budget allocation for General
area was utilized by December, 2015 and approximately 12 proposals
with committed liabilities of Rs. 30 crore. could not be released grant
due to non-availability of funds. The Committee note that lack of funds
is a major reason for delay in implementation of Cold Chain Scheme.
The Ministry are not able to provide financial assistance to the
promoters in time. The Committee are of the view that the Integrated
Cold Chain Scheme is ambitious project and in the absence of cold
chain infrastructure, the farmers are compelled to sell their produce
without waiting for a better price. The Committee, therefore, strongly
recommend that the cold chain infrastructure should be expended
expeditiously to enable the farmers to store their produce as far as
possible close to farm, which would in turn help the farmers to market
their produce at better price and in the process to augment their income.
The Committee also recommend that the Ministry of Finance may be
impressed upon to allocate funds as per their requirement so that the
projects being assisted by them by way of grant of financial assistance
are not held up for want of adequate funds. The Committee would like
to be apprised of the initiatives undertaken by them in this regard.
The Committee also note that the Ministry had conducted an evaluation
study for assessing inter alia the socio-economic impact of the scheme
of Cold Chain, Value Addition and Preservation Infrastructure. This

10
study has been undertaken by M/s NABCONS on behalf of the
Ministry. The study has inter alia observed that operationalisation of
all cold chain projects will generate direct employment for 14082
persons and indirect employment of 78752. There has been increase
in farm gate price between 5 to 10% in fruits and vegetables sector
and 2.4 to 10% in dairy sector in the catchment area. Farmers'
interviews have reported benefit of assured procurement, timely
payment and convenience. Based on analysis of data and field
observations, the impact evaluation study has made certain suggestions
for improvement in the scheme. The suggestions are under consideration
of the Ministry. The Committee would like that the suggestions made
by the impact study may be examined/analysed and if felt necessary
the scheme should be modified and implemented to enable the farmers
to get maximum benefits under the scheme."
1.12 The Ministry in its Action Taken Reply has stated as under:—
"The Ministry of Food Processing Industries is implementing the
component of Cold Chain, Value Addition and Preservation Infrastructure
of Infrastructure Development Scheme under the Central Sector
National Mission on Food Processing. The objective of the scheme is
to arrest post-harvest losses of horticulture & non-horticulture produce
by providing financial assistance to individuals, groups of entrepreneurs,
cooperative societies, Self Help Groups (SHGs), Farmer Producer
Organizations (FPOs), NGOs, Central/State PSUs, etc. in setting up
integrated cold chain and preservation infrastructure facilities without
any break from the farm gate to the consumer. In order to achieve
seamless backward and forward integration, the scheme envisages
setting up of (i) Minimal Processing Centre at farm level,
(ii) Distribution Hub at consumption centres, and (iii) Reefer vans. In
order to setup integrated cold chain the entrepreneur has to set up any
two components out of the three components. Irradiation facility as
standalone component is also supported under the scheme.
To accelerate the availability of cold storage and to improve the
efficiency of cold chain management, a Task Force set up by the PMO
under the Chairmanship of Secretary, FPI in October 2014, has
inter alia, recommended that Government should aim at creating
additional capacity of 7.5 million tonnes over the next five years. Out
of this, Department of Agriculture and Cooperation can take up to

11
5 million tonnes under the Mission for Integrated Development for
Horticulture (MIDH) (2.5 million tonnes each by NHM and NHB) and
MoFPI can take up 2.5 million tonnes. In order to achieve
aforementioned objectives, the Ministry has proposed for upscaling the
cold chain scheme for taking up additional cold chain projects to create
capacity of 2.5 million tonnes in next five years with an additional
allocation of Rs. 4000 crore.
The original guidelines of the scheme were notified on 18.03.2010.
Based on feedback and consultations with stakeholders, the scheme
guidelines were modified on 20.11.2013 and subsequently on
08.08.2014 for the purpose of smooth implementation and to achieve
the objective of the scheme. Based on the experience gained during
the implementation of the scheme and taking into consideration the
observations of the evaluation study by NABCONS, the guidelines have
been further revised on 29.08.2016. The revised guidelines are available
on the website of the Ministry i.e. www.mofpi.nic.in. These revised
guidelines will be applicable to Expression of Interest (EoI) issued by
the Ministry for taking up new Integrated Cold Chain Projects
prospectively."
1.13 The Committee had recommended that the cold chain
infrastructure should be expanded expeditiously to enable the farmers
to store their produce as far as possible close to farm, which would
in turn help the farmers to market their produce at better price and
in the process to augment their income. In its Action taken Reply,
the Ministry has submitted that to accelerate the availability of cold
storage and to improve the efficiency of cold chain management, a
Task Force set up by the PMO under the Chairmanship of Secretary,
FPI in October 2014, has inter alia, recommended that Government
should aim at creating additional capacity of 7.5 million tonnes over
the next five years. Out of this, Department of Agriculture &
Cooperation can take up to 5 million tonnes under the Mission for
Integrated Development for Horticulture (MIDH) (2.5 million tonnes
each by NHM and NHB) and MoFPI can take up 2.5 million tonnes.
In order to achieve aforementioned objectives, the Ministry has
proposed for upscaling the cold chain scheme for taking up additional
cold chain projects to create capacity of 2.5 million tonnes in next five
years with an additional allocation of Rs. 4000 crore. While expressing
their satisfaction over the initiatives undertaken by the Government

12
on the issue, the Committee hope that concerted and coordinated
efforts will be made by the Ministry to create proposed additional
capacity over the stipulated next five years. The Committee desire to
be kept apprised of the progress made in this regard.
D. Spill-over Liabilities
Recommendation (Para No. 10)
1.14 The Committee had observed/ recommended as under:
"The Committee note that the Ministry was implementing the scheme
of Technology Up-gradation/ Establishment/ Modernization of Food
Processing Industries (TUS) and Human Resources Development
(HRD) scheme during the 11th Plan. Both the schemes were subsumed
in CSS-NMFP scheme w.e.f 01.04.2012 and were being implemented
through State /UT Governments. During the 12th Plan, the TUS and
HRD were subsumed in Centrally sponsored scheme—National
Mission on Food Processing. Although the scheme in the central sector
was discontinued w.e.f. 01.04.2012, it was decided to clear all the
pending liabilities as on 01.04.2012 during 12th Plan by the Ministry.
On 01.04.2012 as many as 3168 applications were pending with the
fund requirement of Rs. 740.00 crore as spill-over liabilities. Approval
of cabinet was obtained to clear the proposals of 11th Plan during 12th
Plan period. As on date, the actual expenditure incurred during 12th
Plan period as committed liabilities is Rs. 588.88 crore The left over
committed liabilities for the last year of 12th Plan period ( i.e.
2016-17) are about Rs. 151.12 crore  At the beginning of 12th Plan
the spill-over liabilities of HRD scheme was Rs. 35.61 crore. However,
the pending proposals of Entrepreneurship Development Programmes
(EDP), Food Processing & Training Centre (FPTC) wherein no
installments were released were transferred to the states subsequently.
The remaining spill over liabilities will be liquidated out of BE
2016-17 of Rs. 2.50 crore.
The Committee are constrained to note that the spill-over liabilities of
11th Plan are still continuing and the Ministry has not been able to clear
the liabilities even during the last four years of the 12th Plan period.

13
Although the Committee understand that the actual allocation during
this plan period was lower than that proposed by the Ministry, the
Ministry should have given priority to liquidate the spill-over liabilities
and should have spread the allocated funds accordingly. The Committee
recommend that the liabilities should be cleared on priority basis during
this fiscal year."
1.15 The Ministry in its Action Taken Reply has stated as under:
"A. Scheme For Technology Upgradation, Establishment And
Modernization of FPI
Under the committed liabilities of 11th Plan of the TUS scheme, the
details of cases assisted along with BE, RE and AE during 12th Plan
(2012-13, 2013-14, 2014-15, 2015-16 and 2016-17) are given below:
(Rs. in crore)
Sl. Y ear B E RE A E Cases assisted
No. (1st and 2nd
Instalment)
1 2012-13 100.00 186.46 186.19 1224
2 2013-14 160.00 163.98 162.08 998
3 2014-15 160.00 157.03 144.72 889
4 2015-16 100 102.11 99.12 562
5 2016-17 112.16 51.44 294
To liquidate the left over pending liabilities, Rs. 112.16 crore have been
allocated as BE during the current Financial Year (2016-17). Out of total
approved amount of Rs. 740 crore for meeting committed liabilities of
11th Plan under TUS Scheme, an expenditure of Rs. 643.55 crore has been
incurred during the 12th Plan by 8th November, 2016. The balance
committed liabilities are likely to be liquidated in the current financial year
itself.

14
B. Scheme of Human Resource Development
Under the Scheme of Human Resource Development, total committed
liabilities were amounting to Rs. 35.61 crore at the end of 11th Plan. Year-
wise expenditure for HRD scheme is during 12th plan is as below:
(Rs. in crore)
Sl. Year Creation of Infra for *FPTC **EDP Total
No. Degree/ Dip
1. 2012-13 1.07 0.55 2.36 3.98
2. 2013-14 1.35 0.32 2.11 3.78
3. 2014-15 2.72 0.15 0.78 3.65
4. 1015-16 1.30 0.14 0.30 1.74
2016-17 0.0 0.0 0.07 0.07
* Food Processing Training Centre
** Entrepreneurship Development Programme
1.16 The Committee were constrained to note that the Ministry
is yet to liquidate the spillover liabilities of the 11th Plan. In its Action
Taken Reply, the Ministry has stated that to liquidate the left over
pending liabilities, Rs. 112.16 crore have been allocated as BE during
the current Financial Year (2016-17). Out of total approved amount
of Rs. 740 crore for meeting committed liabilities of 11th Plan under
TUS Scheme, an expenditure of Rs. 643.55 crore has been incurred
during the 12th Plan by 8th November, 2016. The balance Committed
liabilities are likely to be liquidated in the current financial year itself.
Under the Scheme of Human Resources Development, total committed
liabilities were amounting to Rs. 35.61 crore at the end of 11th Plan.
Whereas, under the Scheme of Human Resource Development, total
committed liabilities were amounting to Rs. 35.61 crore at the end of
11th Plan. The Ministry has expended only Rs. 13.22 crore under this
scheme. The pendency of liabilities of 11th Plan even at the verge of
end of 12th plan is a cause of concern for the Committee. The
Committee, therefore, reiterate that the adequate steps should be
taken by the Ministry to liquidate the Spill-over liabilities of 11th Plan
during the current financial year on priority basis and ensure that
these are not carried forward over to the subsequent years.

15
CHAPTER II
OBSERV ATIONS/ RECOMMENDATIONS THAT HAVE BEEN
ACCEPTED BY THE GOVERNMENT
Implementation of the Committee's Recommendations
Recommendation (Para No. 1)
1. The Committee note that the Action Taken Replies regarding the
action taken by the Government on the Observations / Recommendations
contained in the Eighth Report of the Committee were furnished by the
Government within the stipulated three months. The Committee further note
that in pursuance of Direction 73-A of Directions by the Speaker, Lok Sabha,
the Minister concerned is required to make a Statement on the status of
implementation of Observations/ Recommendations contained in the Original
Reports of the Committee within six months of their presentation to the
Parliament. Accordingly, the Statement was made by the Minister in Rajya
Sabha and Lok Sabha on 07.08.2015 and 11.08.2015 respectively. The
analysis of the Action taken by the Government reveals that 82.35%
recommendation have been accepted, 5.88% have not been accepted. The
Committee desire the Government to take conclusive action in respect of
the nine recommendations commented upon in their 18th Action Taken
Report and furnish further action taken notes to the Committee expeditiously.
Reply of the Government
The Ministry has sent further action taken note in respect of the
observations/recommendations contained in the 18th Report of the
Committee on Agriculture on Demands for Grants (2015-16) to Lok Sabha
Secretariat vide its communication dated 17.11.2016.
[Ministry of Food Processing Industries (F. No. 6-03/2016-Parl.
Dated 21.11.2016)]
Budgetary Allocation
Recommendation (Para No. 2)
2. The Committee note that a well developed food processing sector
with higher level of processing helps in the reduction of wastage, improves

16
value addition, promotes crop diversification, ensures better return to the
farmers, promotes employment as well as increases export earnings. This
sector is also capable of addressing critical issues of food security, food
inflation and providing wholesome, nutritious food to the masses. Food
Processing sector has also emerged an important segment of the Indian
economy in terms of its contribution to GDP, employment and investment.
However, the Committee are distressed to note that against the proposal of
the Ministry for the 12th Five Year Plan outlay of Rs. 14604.00 crore, only
Rs. 5990 crore was made to them by the Planning Commission. However,
the actual budget allocation made to the Ministry in the first four years of
the 12th Plan was only Rs. 2625 crore which was further reduced to
Rs. 2297 crore at RE stage. Out of this allocation, the Ministry has been
able to utilize Rs. 2204.55 crore which is 95.96 % of the budget provided
at RE Stage. The budgetary allocations for the year 2016-17 is just Rs.
636.02 crore. According to the Ministry, the resource constraint of the
Central Government has been the main reason for not providing budget
allocation as per the requirements of the Ministry. The allocations of the
different sectors are finalized by the Ministry of Finance on the basis of
resource availability and expenditure priorities of the Government as on date.
The Committee are deeply concerned to note that the budgetary
allocation during the first four years of 12th Plan has been grossly
inadequate. As a result of the reduced allocation, the implementation of
various schemes of the Ministry has been adversely affected. The committed
liabilities of the 11th Plan were spilled over to the 12th Plan due to resource
constraints. The reduced allocation forced delay in discharging the
committed liabilities under the Scheme of Technology Upgradation/
Establishment/Modernization of Food Processing Industries and the Scheme
of Human Resource Development. Further, delinking of Central Government
Support for the implementation of Centrally Sponsored Scheme of National
Mission on Food Processing w.e.f. 01.04.2015, has resulted in accumulating
committed liabilities with the State Governments. NMFP was launched
during 12th Five Year Plan for decentralized implementation through
State/UT Governments wherein State/ UT Governments were empowered
to receive applications, sanction projects and release grant as per the area
specific needs of the States. A number of projects under Mega Food Park
Scheme, Integrated Cold Chain Scheme and Modernization/Setting up of
Abattoir Scheme are under implementation in various stages. According to
the Ministry, due to non-availability of adequate funds to release the grant

17
due to these projects, the progress of their completion is likely to be affected
adversely. The Committee, therefore, express their concern over the lesser
allocation of funds by the Planning Commission/Ministry of Finance than
demanded by the Ministry of Food Processing Industries for implementation
of its various schemes.
The Committee are of the view that Food Processing Sector (FPI) is
an important segment of Indian economy in terms of its contribution to GDP,
employment and investment. A well developed food processing sector not
only helps in reduction of wastage, improves value addition, promotes crop
diversification, ensures better return to the farmers, promotes employment
as well as increases export earnings but it is also capable of addressing
critical issues of food security, food inflation and providing wholesome,
nutritious food to the masses. The contribution of FPI Sector to the GDP
of the country was 1.67% in 2012-13, 1.63% in 2013-14 and also in
2014-15 whereas the plan allocation of Rs. 600 crore for the year 2016-
17 is just 0.086% of the total Central Plan Outlay of Rs. 706248 crore. The
Committee, therefore, strongly recommend that the Ministry should raise
the matter with Ministry of Finance to allocate funds as per their requirement
and urge them to take into account the contribution of the FPI sector to
the GDP while allocating funds to the Ministry. However, as informed to
the Committee, the Ministry is making efforts to get more allocation for the
food processing sector in view of its importance in reduction of the wastage
of agriculture produce and increasing the income of the farmers. The
Committee hope that the Ministry of Finance will allocate adequate funds
to the Ministry of FPI at the stage of RE. The Committee would like to
be apprised of the initiative undertaken by the Ministry of FPI in this regard.
Reply of the Government
The Ministry has been making efforts to get additional allocation at RE
stage from the Ministry of Finance every year. The issue was taken up at
all the levels but the Plan allocation of the Ministry was not enhanced due
to financial constraints. However, during the current year 2016-17, the
allocation of Rs. 636 crore at BE stage has been enhanced to Rs. 729 crore
at RE stage, an increase of Rs. 93.00 crore. While considering the proposal
of the Ministry for a new Central Sector Scheme for Agro-Marine Produce
Processing and Development of Agro Clusters (SAMPADA), Expenditure
Finance Committee (EFC) recommended re-structuring of the schemes of

18
the Ministry under a Central Sector Scheme NMFP (SAMPADA) with
following verticals:
(i) Mega Food Park;
(ii) Integrated Cold Chain and Value Addition Infrastructure;
(iii) Modernization / Setting up of Abattoirs;
(iv) Food Safety and Quality Assurance Infrastructure;
(v) Infrastructure for Agro-processing Clusters;
(vi) Creation of Backward and Forward Linkages;
(vii) Creation/Expansion of Food Processing & Preservation
Capacities; and
(viii) Human Resources and Institutions.
An allocation of Rs. 6,000 crore has been recommended by EFC for
the National Mission on Food Processing (SAMPADA) including the liabilities
of the ongoing schemes for the period coterminous with the Fourteenth
Finance Commission i.e. upto 2019-20. All the ongoing Central Sector
Schemes of the Ministry have been brought under Central Sector Scheme
named as National Mission on Food Processing (SAMPADA) as its verticals
from the financial year 2016-17. The on-going projects under various
schemes of the Ministry will continue to be implemented as per the existing
norms of the concerned scheme. Since these schemes form part of the
umbrella Scheme of NMFP (SAMPADA), a consolidated proposal will be
submitted for approval of the cabinet with an allocation of Rs. 6000.00 crore
for the period co-terminus to the period of 14th Finance Commission as
recommended by the Expenditure Finance Committee (EFC).
[Ministry of Food Processing Industries, (F. No. 6-03/2016-Parl.
Dated 21.11.2016)]
Comments of the Committee
For comments of the Committee please refer to Para No. 1.7 of
Chapter I of this Report.
Harvest and Post-harvest Losses
Recommendation (Para No. 3)
3. The Committee note that food processing sector has been
impacted as a result of abundant supply of raw materials, increase in demand

19
for food products and incentives offered by the Government. The food
processing sector has been on average growing at a faster rate than
agriculture sector from 2011-12 to 2014-15. During the last 3 years ending
2014-15, Food Processing Industries sector has been growing at an Average
Annual Growth Rate (AAGR) of around 2.26% as compared to around
1.69% in Agriculture and 6.23% in Manufacturing at 2011-12 prices.
However, the Committee are deeply distressed to note that despite the large
production of food products in India, food inflation and food security issues
are major concerns for policy makers in the country as they affect the basic
need of citizens to have sufficient, healthy and affordable food. A study
conducted by the Central Institute of Post Harvest Engineering and
Technology (CIPHET), Ludhiana reveals that a large quantity of the produce
suffers losses during different stages of harvesting, collection, thrashing,
grading/sorting, winnowing/cleaning, drying, packing, transportation and
storage depending upon the commodity. According to the report of the study
released in 2010, the annual value of harvest and post harvest losses of major
agricultural produces at national level was of the order of Rs. 44,143 crore
at 2009 wholesale prices. The report of the repeat study submitted in 2015
estimated that the annual value of harvest and post-harvest losses of major
agricultural produces at national level was of the order of Rs. 92,651 crore
calculated using production data of 2012-13 at 2014 wholesale prices. The
Committee also note that the percentage of losses estimated for cereals was
4.65-5.99 as per the report of 2015, for pulses the estimated loss was 6.36-
8.41%. While for Oil seeds, the percentage loss was 3.08 - 9.96, the same
for Fruits and Vegetables was 4.58- 15.88% and for Fisheries (Marine), the
losses + reported was 10.52% in 2015. The horticulture and cereal crops
have been reported to suffer high losses. In case of cereals, majority of
losses occur at farm level during harvesting, collection and threshing. In
case of fruits and vegetables also, there are high losses in farm level
operations. Much of these wastages can be reduced with adequate
processing facilities, thus providing remunerative price to the producer as
well as ensuring greater supply to the consumer. The significant percentage
of losses during harvest and post-harvest clearly shows that the various
schemes being implemented by the Government have not been able to
address the issues and challenges being faced by the food processing sector
over the years. The Committee are of the view that it is but imperative that
sustainable supply chains are developed to link the farmers to the processing
and marketing centers seamlessly. However, this cannot be done unless

20
adequate rural infrastructure and components of supply chain by way of
grading and packing centers, storage facilities, reefer vans, testing
laboratories etc. are developed which would require considerable investment
for the purpose. The Committee, therefore, recommend that public
investment may be significantly increased to fund the various components
of rural infrastructure and supply chain to contain the losses during harvest
and post-harvest, for which the Ministry of Finance may be urged to allocate
the requisite funds for the purpose. Simultaneously, it is also essential for
the Ministry to accelerate the execution of their various programmes/
schemes as per the budgetary allocation demanded by them. The Committee
would like to be apprised of the initiatives undertaken by the Ministry in this
regard.
Reply of the Government
To encourage private investment in the supply chain and expansion of
food processing and preservation capacity in the country, the Ministry had
submitted following two proposals to the Expenditure Finance Committee
(EFC):
(i) Upscaling the Central Sector Scheme for Infrastructure
Development for Food processing: Sub-Scheme/Component of
Cold Chain, Value Addition and Preservation Infrastructure
(11.01.2016).
(ii) Introduction of a new Scheme for Agro-Marine Produce
Processing and Development of Agro Clusters for promotion and
development of food processing sector (20.01.2016).
It was proposed to up-scale cold chain scheme with revised pattern
of assistance @35% of the total cost of the project in general areas and
@50% of the project cost in NE Region, Hilly States and ITDP Areas and
making the scheme open ended with an allocation of Rs. 4,000 crore for
taking up of 500 new projects in the next five years. The cost norms of
Mission for Integrated Development of Horticulture (MIDH) was proposed
to be followed, wherever available.
Further, it was also proposed to introduce a new Scheme for Agro-
Marine Produce Processing and Development of Agro Clusters (SAMPADA)
for promotion and development of food processing sector by providing
enabling infrastructure, expanding processing and preservation capacities
through induction of technologies, controlled temperature logistics and

21
backward & forward linkages. The maximum admissible grant for each
project was proposed to be 35% of eligible project cost in general areas and
50% of eligible project cost in NE and difficult areas / ITDP areas subject
to a maximum of Rs. 5.00 crore. However, the maximum level of grant for
creation of infrastructure for development of agro processing cluster will
be Rs. 10 crore per project. An allocation of Rs. 9500 crore was sought
for implementation of the proposed new scheme in the next five years.
Expenditure Finance Committee (EFC) in its meeting held on
09.02.2016 has recommended for the allocation of Rs. 6,000 crore to the
proposed Central Sector Scheme–National Mission on Food Processing
(SAMPADA) with the following verticals, for period of coterminous to
14th Finance Commission:
Sl. No. Name of the scheme
1. Mega Food Park
2. Integrated Cold Chain & Value Addition Infrastructure
3. Modernization / Setting up of Abattoirs
4. Infrastructure for Agro Processing Clusters
5. Food Safety & Quality Assurance Infrastructure
6. Creation of Backward & Forward Linkages
7. Creation/Expansion of Food Processing & Preservation Capacities
8. Human Resource & Institutes
While the schemes at serial nos. 1, 2, 3, 5 and 8 above are ongoing
schemes of the Ministry, schemes at serial nos. 4, 6 and 7 have been
proposed as new schemes by the Ministry. The Ministry is in the process
of obtaining Cabinet approval on the restructured Central Sector Scheme
of National Mission on Food Processing (SAMPADA). With an allocation
of Rs. 6000 crore. Implementation of these schemes will help in creating
Modern Infrastructure for food processing and enhancing food processing
and preservation capacities significantly which will help in reducing wastage
of agri-produce.

22
To accelerate the execution of Mega Food Park Scheme and utilization
of the budget allocated for the scheme, Ministry has taken the following
initiatives:
(i) The Ministry constantly monitors the progress of implementation
of Mega Food Park (MFP) projects with Implementing Agencies/
SPVs and also concerned State Governments through review
meetings, video conferences, inspections/visits etc. Hon'ble
Minister & Secretary, FPI are reviewing the progress of
implementation and operationalization of Mega Food Parks
regularly and periodically with concerned State Governments and
Promoters of the Mega Food Parks.
(ii) Based on the experience of implementation, the Scheme
Guidelines have been modified from time to time to ensure speedy
implementation of the projects. These modifications are also
based on stakeholders feedbacks received through various
consultations/interactions. The structure of the SPV has been
further simplified and states entities have also been allowed to
implement Mega Food Park projects. The provisions for levy of
penalty on the SPV in case of delay in the implementation of
project beyond stipulated timelines have been incorporated.
Recently, the guidelines have been amended on 21.07.2016 to
make it more streamlined and meaningful. Provisions regarding
sanction of only one Mega Food Park in a district, non-
consideration of the proposal of the promoter of an existing Mega
Food park within two years of completion of the existing Park
have been incorporated and Time line for completion of MFP has
been modified reducing from 30 months from the date of release
of 1st Instalment to 30 months from the issue of final
approval.The criteria for evaluation of Expression of Interest
(EoI) has also been modified.
(iii) State Governments have been involved in selection and monitoring
of the projects. Issues are taken up with various concerned
Departments/Agencies of the State Governments to expedite
statutory clearances and to remove the bottlenecks in implementation
of projects.
(iv) State Governments and Ministry of Finance have been requested
to provide fiscal incentives to the Mega Food Park projects.

23
(v) Issues were taken up with the Banks/ FIs to expedite sanction
of term loan to the projects.
(vi) Government of India has created a fund of Rs. 2000 crore with
NABARD to provide affordable credit to Mega Food Parks and
entrepreneurs setting up units in these Parks.
(vii) Implementing Agencies/ SPVs have been directed to submit
monthly progress reports on the progress of implementation of
MFP projects.
(viii) Constitution of District Level Coordination Committees by the
State Governments under the chairmanship of the concerned DM
to sort out the project related issues at local level.
(ix) Infrastructure status accorded to Mega Food Parks.
(x) Priority Sector Lending (PSL) status has been got accorded to
Food processing projects upto Rs.100 crore per borrower.
[Ministry of Food Processing Industries (F. No. 6-03/2016-Parl.
Dated 21.11.2016)]
'Make in India' Campaign
Recommendation (Para No. 4)
4. The Committee note that the food processing sector has been
identified as one of the priority sector under "Make in India" campaign. With
a view to attract investment to this sector, the Ministry of Food Processing
Industry has been investing in infrastructure for promoting food processing
industries. Mega Food Parks with common utility like road, electricity, water
supply, sewage facility and common processing facility like pulping,
packaging, cold storage, dry storage and logistics are being promoted in
areas with strong agricultural resource base. These parks provide fully
developed plots and factory sheds to entrepreneurs on long term lease basis
where they can set up food processing units in "plug & play model". Under
"MAKE IN INDIA" campaign, the Ministry has been disseminating
information to potential investors to attract investment to the sector through
a dedicated "Investors Portal" in which a range of information like resource
base, availability of land, state specific policies, fiscal incentives are shared
with the potential investors. The Ministry is also collaborating with Invest
India to help the investors in terms of locating joint venture partners,

24
extending hand holding services, expedite regulatory approvals and provide
investors after care services. The investor can also put their query in the
Investors portal which is promptly attended to by the Ministry for guiding
the investors. The Committee feel that 'Make in India' campaign is a
promotional campaign that encourages domestic and foreign investors alike
to manufacture in India. For foreign investors, this implies bringing in funds
into the country for financing their manufacturing activities. Funds are
essentially required for investment in infrastructure particularly the cold
storage /cold chain infrastructure and various components of supply chain
which is highly deficient in the country to facilitate the farmers to market
their produce seamlessly, which will in turn boost the growth and
development of the food processing sector. By identifying food processing
sector as a priority sector under "Make in India" initiative, potential
entrepreneurs would be encouraged to invest more in the sector. The
Committee would like the Ministry to make vigorous campaign under "Make
in India" initiative to attract potential investor in the sector and to promote
and popularize processed food products and to showcase the various
schemes being implemented by the Ministry. The Committee would like to
be apprised of the progress made in this regard.
Reply of the Government
During the year 2016-17 Ministry will be organizing 46 Events/
Seminars/ Meets/Conferences in the Country for showcasing the policies
and programmes /achievements of the Ministry for investment in view of
100% FDI being permitted in trading including e-commerce, in respect of
food products manufactured and / or produced in India under "MAKE IN
INDIA" Campaign.
[Ministry of Food Processing Industries (F. No. 6-03/2016-Parl.
Dated 21.11.2016)]
National Policy on Food Processing Sector
Recommendation (Para No. 5)
5. The Committee note that Expenditure Finance Committee (EFC)
has recommended re-structuring of the schemes of the Ministry under a
Central Sector Scheme NMFP (SAMPADA) with the following verticals:
(i) Mega Food Park;
(ii) Integrated Cold Chain and Value Addition Infrastructure;

25
(iii) Modernization/Setting up of Abattoirs;
(iv) Food Safety and Quality Assurance Infrastructure;
(v) Infrastructure for Agro-processing Clusters;
(vi) Creation of Backward and Forward Linkages;
(vii) Creation/Expansion of Food Processing & Preservation Capacities;
and
(viii) Human Resources and Institutions.
An allocation of Rs. 6,000 crore has been recommended by EFC for
the National Mission on Food Processing (SAMPADA) including the liabilities
of the ongoing schemes for the period coterminous with the Fourteenth
Finance commission i.e. upto 2019-20. If the States decide to continue
NMFP with their own resources and design, the scheme may be implemented
as State scheme. However, no funds will be provided to States by Central
Government for implementation of their scheme. Therefore, the NMFP
scheme for development of food processing may continue both at State level
in State sector as well as at the Central level in Central Sector. According
to the Ministry, the creation of umbrella Scheme of NMFP (SAMPDA) will
provide flexibility to the Ministry in better utilization of the outlays to achieve
intended outcomes of the various programmes. The Committee also note
that all the ongoing as well as the proposed new schemes of the Ministry
will be subsumed in the umbrella scheme for better convergence and
flexibility in implementation. However, the Committee are not convinced with
the explanation of the Ministry on the issue and feel that before restructuring
of the Central Sector schemes, a comprehensive policy should have been
formulated after consulting all States and other stakeholders taking into
consideration their genuine concerns and the modalities worked out for their
effective implementation.
In its earlier report, the Committee had recommended for a
consolidated policy on food processing sector. In this context, the Ministry
has informed the Committee that the process of preparing the policy
document is being initiated. Since it will be an important guiding document
for the food processing sector, it will require consultation with all
stakeholders at various levels and policy planners and concerted efforts will
be made in this direction to bring out a pragmatic, consolidated national
policy on food processing with clearly defined objectives, goals and
methodology for implementation. The Committee would like the Ministry to

26
expedite the process of consultation with all concerned including
stakeholders so that a national policy on food processing sector is drafted
and implemented without further loss of time. The Committee would like
to be apprised of the progress made in the matter.
Reply of the Government
The Ministry welcomes the suggestion of the Hon'ble Committee for
a comprehensive National Policy on Food Processing. The Ministry has
initiated the process for formulation of this important document with
Vision: 2025.
Being an important guiding document for the Food Processing sector,
it requires consultation with all stakeholders at various levels and policy
planners to bring out a pragmatic, consolidated National policy on Food
Processing with clearly defined objectives, goals and methodology for
implementation.
An Expert Group is proposed to be constituted to prepare a Draft
National Policy on Food Processing with clearly defining objectives, goals,
methodology and modalities for implementation of the Policy. The national
policy document will be finalized after intensive interaction with all the
stakeholders.
[Ministry of Food Processing Industries (F. No. 6-03/2016-Parl.
Dated 21.11.2016)]
Comments of the Committee
For comments of the Committee please refer to Para No. 1.10 of
Chapter I of this Report.
Mega Food Park Scheme
Recommendation (Para No. 6)
6. The Committee note that the Mega Food Park scheme provides
state-of-the-art infrastructure facility to enable setting up of food processing
units. During 11th and 12th Plan, the Government has approved to set up
42 Mega Food Park (MFP) projects in the country in 5 phases against which
Final Approval has been accorded to 35 projects and In-principle approval
has been granted to another 2 MFPs. Out of 35 projects accorded final
approval, only 7 projects are operational. The Committee were also informed

27
that one more project at Murshidabad district, West Bengal is becoming
operational in March 2016. On being fully functional, each Mega Food Park
is expected to generate 5 thousand direct employment and 25 to 30 thousand
indirect employments. The Committee were informed that all possible
support is being provided by the Ministry to these projects including
interaction with various concerned Departments/Agencies of the State
Governments at all levels to remove the bottlenecks in implementation of
projects, making suitable amendments in the scheme and its guidelines and
pursuing with concerned State Governments and other Central Government
Ministries to extend special fiscal and other benefits to these projects to
attract investment. According to the Ministry, the implementation of each
MFP project is being closely monitored individually and prompt and proper
assessment at every stage of implementation is also being made. However,
the Committee are not convinced with the explanation of the Ministry as
the fact remains that 11 projects of 1st and 2nd phases are running behind
the time schedule of their completion and the pace of progress in the
implementation of the scheme is significantly slow. This only goes to show
that the efforts being made by the Ministry are not adequate enough so as
to ensure that these projects are able to adhere to the prescribed timelines.
The Committee are of the view that every factor should be taken into
consideration before giving even inprinciple approval for MFP projects so
as to avoid time taken to grant final approval and their implementation within
the timeline. The Ministry should also assess the viability of the project and
capacity of the promoter/entrepreneurs in order to avoid cancellation at later
stage. An institutional mechanism also needs to be established in coordination
with all concerned to ensure effective implementation and strict monitoring
of the progress of the projects to avoid time and cost overrun. The
Committee, therefore, would like the Ministry to act accordingly.
The Committee regret to note that out of the allocation of Rs. 1714
crore to the Scheme of Mega Food Parks for the 12th Plan, funds of
Rs. 442 Crore only have been allocated to the Scheme in BE which was
further reduced to Rs. 386.89 crore at RE stage during the first four years
of the plan period. It was claimed by the Ministry that they were in a position
to utilize more funds under the scheme, if additional allocation would have
been made. The Committee strongly feel that in the absence of funds
demanded by the Ministry for MFP projects, the implementation of the
projects are being badly affected and as a result thereof, the avowed
objectives of the scheme could not be achieved. The Committee, therefore,

28
recommend that the Ministry should strongly urge the Ministry of Finance
to allocate the funds as demanded by them for effective implementation of
MFP scheme. According to the Ministry, State Governments are being
impressed upon to implement the single window clearance system for MFP
projects, to expedite the implementation of the projects. The Committee
would like the Ministry to make concerted and coordinated efforts to set
up the proposed single window clearance system for MFP projects at the
earliest. In this regard, the Committee would like to know the progress made
so far on the issue.
The Committee also note that the Ministry has also created a Special
Fund of Rs. 2,000 crore with NABARD to provide loan at a concessional
rate to Mega Food Parks and Food Processing Industries which will come
up in these Parks as well as other designated Food Parks notified by the
Ministry. The sanction of the loan to Mega Food Park Projects by NABARD
from this fund is being closely monitored by the Ministry to expedite the
process. The Committee hope that the said Fund would address adequately
the credit requirement of the Mega Food Parks and the food processing units
being set up. However, the Committee would like to know the details of
the individual entrepreneurs, cooperative farmer producers' organization,
corporations, joint venture SPVs and other entities which have availed the
credit facility for setting up food processing units including the progress
made therein.
The Committee also note that the Ministry awarded evaluation of the
Impact of the Scheme for Mega Food Park to M/s Indian Council for
Research on International Economic Relations (ICRIER). The report
submitted by ICRIER has been accepted by the Ministry. The Ministry has
claimed that the recommendations of the ICRIER will help both investors
and farmers. Based on the recommendations, the Ministry is in the process
of amending the guidelines of Mega Food Park Scheme to make it more
effective and investor friendly. The Committee would like that the proposed
amendment in the guidelines for MFP scheme may be expedited at the
earliest.
The Committee further note that the Ministry has proposed a new
Scheme for Agro-Marine Produce Processing and Development of Agro-
Clusters (SAMPADA) as a Sub-Scheme of the Central Sector Scheme of
National Mission on Food Processing (NMFP). One of the components of

29
the Scheme is creation of enabling infrastructure for development of agro
processing clusters in the areas of surplus agricultural production. The
scheme does not prescribe minimum size of the land. The cluster of
minimum five units with minimum investment of Rs. 25 crore has been
envisaged under the component. This will takecare of the special need of
Hilly and NE States and will help in creation of mini-Mega Food Parks in
the surplus agriculture production areas. This scheme has been recommended
by EFC in its meeting held on 09.02.2016 for incorporating in the umbrella
scheme of NMFP (SAMPADA) in the Central Sector to be introduced during
the period coterminous to 14th Finance Commission. The scheme will be
implemented after obtaining approval of the Competent Authority. The
Committee hope that the proposed scheme would help to set up Mini Food
Parks for the benefits of small investors and cater the needs of small States
and disadvantageous regions of other States. The Committee would like that
the proposed scheme may be implemented at the earliest. The Committee
would like to know the progress made in this regard.
Reply of the Government
Presently 34 Mega Food Park Projects, out of total 42 sanctioned by
the Government, are under implementation in various states. Present Status
of Implementation is as under:
• No. of MFP projects approved : 34
• No. of Parks operationalized : 8
• No. of MFP projects accorded Final Approval : 26
Eight Mega Food Parks at Chittoor (Andhra Pradesh), Haridwar
(Uttarakhand), Tumkur (Karnataka), Fazilka (Punjab), Nalbari (Assam),
Khargone (Madhya Pradesh), Ranchi (Jharkhand) and Murshidabad (West
Bengal) are operational. Four more Mega Food Parks are nearing completion
and likely to become operational by the end of March, 2017. The remaining
Mega Food Parks are at various stages of implementation.
Ministry has been requesting Ministry of Finance, time to time, for
allocation of sufficient funds for effective implementation of MFP scheme.
However, out of 12th Plan allocation of Rs. 1714 crore, only Rs. 376.34

30
crore i.e. just around 21.96% have been allocated during the first four years
of the 12th Plan period. Year wise expenditure is as under:
(Rs. in crore)
Year B E RE Expenditure
2012-13 86.00 93.20 93.12
2013-14 116.00 110.25 94.08
2014-15 120.00 63.94 63.94
2015-16 120.00 120.00 125.20
Total 376.34
In the current year, funds of Rs. 222.30 crore have been earmarked
for the Scheme of Mega Food Parks. The Ministry will continue to request
the Ministry of Finance for allocation of sufficient funds for effective
implementation of MFP scheme.
The Ministry takes every factor into consideration, including viability
of the project and capacity of the promoter/entrepreneurs, before giving in-
principle approval to MFP projects so as to ensure the selection of the most
suitable proposal to avoid delay in implementation. For selection of suitable
proposals, the Ministry has instituted a mechanism of three-tier scrutiny of
proposals, based on merit, by Programme Management Agency (PMA),
Technical Committee (TC) and Inter-Ministerial Approval Committee
(IMAC). The projects are selected from the proposals received in response
to a widely circulated Expression of Interest invited by the Ministry and
evaluated through a rigorous procedure based on fixed criteria prescribed
in the Scheme Guidelines.
Recently, the Mega Food Parks scheme guidelines have been amended
on 21.07.2016 to further streamline the implementation process. Modifications
in the criteria for evaluation of Expression of Interest (EoI) is one of the
important amendments besides incorporation of the provisions regarding
sanction of only one Mega Food Park in a district, not sanctioning another
project to the existing promoters without assessing the performance of
existing projects after two years of completion. The IMAC has been broad
based by including representation from other relevant Ministries, State
Governments and commercial Banks. The penal provision for delay in
implementation has also been incorporated.
Against the vacant slots, the Ministry has invited Expression of Interest
(EoI) for setting up Mega Food Park Projects in the country, on 31.07.2016

31
with the last date of 15.09.2016 which was further extended up-to
07.10.2016. In response to this, total 54 proposals were received and found
eligible to be appraised by the Program Management Agency (PMA).
Appraisal of these proposals on the basis of the modified guidelines is in
process.
Ministry has also been impressing upon the State Governments to
institute an effective single window clearance system for Mega Food Parks.
State Governments are being pursued in this regard through various modes
like, progress review meetings through Video Conferencing, meetings during
visit of the States by senior officials of the Ministry, IMAC and TC meeting
etc apart from writing letters. Some of the State Governments like Punjab,
Andhra Pradesh, Odisha, Jharkhand, Madhya Pradesh, Chhattisgarh,
Rajasthan, Bihar and Uttarakhand etc. have taken initiative in this regard but
Single Window Systems lack effectiveness in single point delivery in real
sense. Ministry has again taken up the matter recently with the State
Governments for establishing an effective Single Window System and will
continue to pursue this matter with the State Governments. Representative
of the concerned State Government has been included as a member in the
Inter-Ministerial as well as Technical Committee for facilitation of the
necessary clearances. Ministry has also requested the State Governments
to constitute a Co-ordination Committee under the chairmanship of District
Collector at the District level, where Mega Food Parks are situated, for
speedy settlement of the issues which may arise during the project
implementation. A similar Coordination Committee has also been requested
to be set up at the State level.
Status of Sanction and Disbursement of term loan by NABARD out
of Food Processing Fund (FPF) as on 25.10.2016 is as under:
(Rs. in crore)
Sl. Name of the Loc ation T erm Loan Disburse-
No. Project sanctioned ment
12 3 4 5
A Mega Food Park Projects
1. M/s Gujarat Agro Distt. Surat, Gujarat 37.91 18.90
Infrastructure Mega
Food Park Pvt. Ltd.

32
12 3 4 5
2. M/s Pristine Mega Distt. Khagaria, Bihar 46.54 16.29
Food Park Pvt. Ltd.
3. M/s Cremica Food Distt. Una, Himachal 32.94 8.24
Park Pvt. Ltd Pradesh
4. Punjab Mega Food Distt. Ludhiana, Punjab 27.12 12.00
Park by PAIC
5. Mega Food Park by Distt. Palakkad, Kerala 28.34 5.67
KINFRA
6. Haryana Mega Food Distt. Sonepat, Haryana 81.65 0.00
Park by HSIIDC
7. M/s Avantee Mega Distt. Dewas, MP 56.52 2.00
Food Park Pvt. Ltd.
8. M/s Raagamayuri Distt. Mahabubnagar, 46.89 10.00
Agro Vet Pvt. Ltd. T elangana
9. MFP by TSIIC Distt. Khammam, 29.44 0.00
Telangana
10. M/s Indus Best Distt. Raipur, 40.34 0.00
Mega Food Park Chhattisgarh
Pvt. Ltd.
11. M/s Smart Agro Distt. Nizamabad, 27.00 0.00
Food Park Pvt. Ltd. T elangana
Sub-Total 454.69 73.10
B Individual processing units in DFPs
1. M/s Patanjali Ayurved Distt. Haridwar, 19.21 0.00
Limited - Honey Plant Uttarakhand
2. M/s Patanjali Ayurved Distt. Haridwar, 17.59 0.00
Limited-Chyawanprash Uttarakhand
Unit
Sub-Total 36.80 0.00
T
OTAL 491.49 73.10

33
However, for the benefit of small investors and to cater to the needs
for small States and disadvantageous regions of other States, EFC in its
meeting held on 09.02.2016 has recommended the proposal of the Ministry
for a new scheme for creation of modern infrastructure for development
of agro clusters under the Central Sector Scheme of Nation Mission on Food
Processing (SAMPADA). The cluster of minimum five units with minimum
investment of Rs. 25 crore has been envisaged in a cluster under the scheme.
This will take care of the special need of Hilly and NE States. The proposed
scheme will be implemented during the period co-terminus with the 14th
Finance Commission cycle. The draft Cabinet note on re-structuring of the
schemes of the Ministry under one umbrella scheme namely National Mission
on Food Processing (SAMPADA) is being prepared for seeking approval of
Cabinet Committee on Economic Affairs (CCEA). After the approval of
CCEA, the scheme will be implemented at the earliest.
[Ministry of Food Processing Industries (F. No. 6-03/2016-Parl.
Dated 21.11.2016)]
Cold chain, Value-addition and Preservation Infrastructure
Recommendation (Para No. 7)
7. The Committee note that there exist a substantial gap in the cold
chain infrastructure capacity in the country. As per Dr. Saumitra Chaudhuri
Committee report, the cold storage requirement of the country is 61 million
tonnes against which the existing capacity of cold storage is estimated at
around 32 million tones. Thus, the present gap in the cold storage
infrastructure is estimated around 29 million tonnes. As per the All India Cold
Chain Infrastructure Capacity conducted by the NCCD, there is requirement
of approximately 69750 numbers of Integrated Pack Houses, 52,000 Reefer
Trucks, 8000 numbers of Ripening Chambers and 3 million tonnes of Cold
Storage capacity. This Cold Chain Infrastructure requirement excludes the
requirement for milk, meat, marine and easily perishable processed products.
Presently, the Ministry is implementing 135 cold chain projects which were
sanctioned in V phases, out of which 75 projects have achieved completion
and started commercial operations as on 23.03.2015. The Committee note
that in many cases the projects under the Scheme could not achieve
completion within prescribed timelines. According to the Ministry, some of
the reasons attributed for delay in implementation of projects are due to
change in location by the promoter to ensure viability of the project, delay
in obtaining various statutory approvals integral to the commissioning of the

34
project for example permission for change of land use, exemption from land
ceiling laws, permission to establish and operate units from State Pollution
Control Board, NoC from Town & Country Planning Department etc., delay
in construction work due to natural calamities, remote locations especially
in the hilly and North East Region and inability and lack of interest on the
part of the promoters to implement the project. The Committee also note
that delay in disbursement of grant due to non-availability of funds is also
one of the reasons for time overruns in implementation of cold chain
projects. During 2014-15, 100% funds earmarked for general areas were
utilized by October 2014 and approximately 15 proposals with committed
liabilities of Rs. 47 crore could not be released grant due to resource crunch.
These projects were released grant during April-May 2015 after approximately
7 months of delay. During 2015-16, the Budget allocation for General area
was utilized by December, 2015 and approximately 12 proposals with
committed liabilities of Rs. 30 crore could not be released grant due to
non-availability of funds. The Committee note that lack of funds is a major
reason for delay in implementation of Cold Chain Scheme. The Ministry are
not able to provide financial assistance to the promoters in time. The
Committee are of the view that the Integrated Cold Chain Scheme is
ambitious project and in the absence of old chain infrastructure, the farmers
are compelled to sell their produce without waiting for a better price. The
Committee, therefore, strongly recommend that the cold chain infrastructure
should be expended expeditiously to enable the farmers to store their produce
as far as possible close to farm, which would in turn help the farmers to
market their produce at better price and in the process to augment their
income. The Committee also recommend that the Ministry of Finance may
be impressed upon to allocate funds as per their requirement so that the
projects being assisted by them by way of grant of financial assistance are
not held up for want of adequate funds. The Committee would like to be
apprised of the initiatives undertaken by them in this regard.
The Committee also note that the Ministry had conducted an evaluation
study for assessing inter-alia the socio-economic impact of the scheme of
Cold Chain, Value Addition and Preservation Infrastructure. This study has
been undertaken by M/s NABCONS on behalf of the Ministry. The study
has inter-alia observed that operationalisation of all cold chain projects will
generate direct employment for 14082 persons and indirect employment of
78752. There has been increase in farm gate price between 5 to 10% in
fruits and vegetables sector and 2.4 to 10% in dairy sector in the catchment

35
area. Farmers' interviews have reported benefit of assured procurement,
timely payment and convenience. Based on analysis of data and field
observations, the impact evaluation study has made certain suggestions for
improvement in the scheme. The suggestions are under consideration of the
Ministry. The Committee would like that the suggestions made by the impact
study may be examined/analysed and if felt necessary the scheme should
be modified and implemented to enable the farmers to get maximum benefits
under the scheme.
Reply of the Government
The Ministry of Food Processing Industries is implementing the
component of Cold Chain, Value Addition and Preservation Infrastructure
of Infrastructure Development Scheme under the Central Sector National
Mission on Food Processing. The objective of the scheme is to arrest
post-harvest losses of horticulture & non-horticulture produce by providing
financial assistance to individuals, groups of entrepreneurs, cooperative
societies, Self Help Groups (SHGs), Farmer Producer Organizations (FPOs),
NGOs, Central/State PSUs, etc. in setting up integrated cold chain and
preservation infrastructure facilities without any break from the farm gate
to the consumer.
In order to achieve seamless backward and forward integration, the
scheme envisages setting up of (i) Minimal Processing Centre at farm level,
(ii) Distribution Hub at consumption centres and (iii) Reefer vans. In order
to setup integrated cold chain the entrepreneur has to setup any two
components out of the three components. Irradiation facility as standalone
component is also supported under the scheme.
To accelerate the availability of cold storage and to improve the
efficiency of cold chain management, a Task Force set up by the PMO under
the Chairmanship of Secretary, FPI in October 2014, has inter alia,
recommended that Government should aim at creating additional capacity
of 7.5 million tonnes over the next five years. Out of this, Department of
Agriculture & Cooperation can take up to 5 million tonnes under the Mission
for Integrated Development for Horticulture (MIDH) (2.5 million tonnes each
by NHM and NHB) and MoFPI can take up 2.5 million tonnes.
In order to achieve aforementioned objectives, the Ministry has
proposed for upscaling the cold chain scheme for taking up additional cold
chain projects to create capacity of 2.5 million tonnes in next five years with
an additional allocation of Rs. 4000 crore.

36
The original guidelines of the scheme were notified on 18.03.2010.
Based on feedback and consultations with stakeholders, the scheme
guidelines were modified on 20.11.2013 and subsequently on 08.08.2014 for
the purpose of smooth implementation and to achieve the objective of the
scheme. Based on the experience gained during the implementation of the
scheme and taking into consideration the observations of the evaluation study
by NABCONS, the guidelines have been further revised on 29.08.2016. The
revised guidelines are available on the website of the Ministry i.e.
mofpi.nic.in. These revised guidelines will be applicable to Expression of
Interest (EoI) issued by the Ministry for taking up new Integrated Cold Chain
Projects prospectively.
[Ministry of Food Processing Industries (F. No. 6-03/2016-Parl.
Dated 21.11.2016)]
Comments of the Committee
For comments of the Committee please refer to Para No. 1.13 of
Chapter I of this Report.
Setting up/ Modernisation of Abattoirs
Recommendation (Para No. 8)
8. The Committee note that it is imperative that Municipal Abattoirs
are modernized to ensure supply of safe and hygienic meat and meat
products to the Consumers. The Hon'ble Supreme Court has also expressed
concern about the poor sanitation and hygiene condition of abattoirs and in
Writ Petition (Civil) No. 309 of 2003 filed by Laxmi Narain Modi Versus
Union of India and others. The Scheme for modernization of abattoirs was
implemented in the Central Sector for the first two years of the 12th Plan
and thereafter, the Scheme was to be implemented by State Governments
through NMFP for the rest of the 12th Plan w.e.f. 01.04.2014 since most
of the proposals are from the Municipal Bodies which are closely connected
to the State Governments. The proposal received up to 31st March 2014
are being considered by the Ministry based on up-scaling of the scheme
approved for the first two years of 12th Plan. In the 12th Plan proposal
for up-scaling of the scheme has been approved for setting up of 25 new
abattoirs and modernization of 25 existing abattoirs at total cost of Rs. 330.84
crore inclusive of committed liabilities in respect of on-going projects of
11th Plan. The Committee also note that the implementation schedule as per

37
the scheme guidelines for 11th Plan was about 18 months and as per the
12th Plan guidelines the period is about 24 months. However, all the projects
are not progressing as per schedule in spite of intervention of the Ministry
in the form of advice, suggestions etc. However, the liability of the Ministry
is limited to the financial assistance in the form of grant-in-aid approved for
each project subject to a maximum of Rs. 15 crore per project. In case
there is any increase in the cost of the project because of delay or any other
reason, the balance has to be met by the Municipal Corporation/State
Government concerned. The scheme has been proposed to be brought under
Central sector as sub-scheme of NMFP (SAMPADA) and will be
implemented for taking up new projects after obtaining approval of the
competent authority. Since municipal abattoirs generally lack modern
equipment, proper sanitation/hygiene, facilities for scientific slaughtering,
waste management and pollution control, the Committee, therefore, feel that
abattoirs need to be modernized for production of clean and hygiene meat
for consumption and to check cruelty to animals, pollution of adjoining areas,
water bodies and rivers. Since the Ministry is providing financial assistance
in the form of grant-in-aid, they cannot ignore their responsibility as a nodal
agency. The Committee, therefore, recommend that concerted and vigorous
efforts may be made by the Ministry in coordination with State
Governments/Municipal Bodies concerned to expedite the pace of progress
of modernisation of all abattoirs in the country and the proposed scheme
brought under Central sector as sub-scheme of NMFP (SAMPADA) be
implemented without further delay.
In this regard, the Committee would like to point out that the population
of livestock has been declining in the country over the years which is
generally in proportion to the number of livestock being slaughtered every
day. The Committee are, therefore, deeply concerned to the rapid decline
in the population of livestock in the country and appropriate corrective
measures need to undertaken to address the issue in coordination with all
concerned. The Committee would like to be apprised of the initiatives
undertaken by the Ministry to address the issue.
Reply of the Government
The Ministry has utmost regard for the Hon'ble Committee and its
observations. It is submitted that Ministry has been conducting regular
review meetings with representatives of State Governments/ Municipal
Bodies etc. urging them to implement the abattoir projects within the period

38
as prescribed in the scheme guidelines. Video Conferencing is also resorted
to from time to time to impress upon the State Governments/ Municipal
Bodies the need to implement the abattoir projects expeditiously. In addition
the matter is also taken up with the Chief Secretaries of the States/ Principal
Secretary of the concerned Department in the States as also the Municipal
Bodies at the level of Secretary, FPI by writing DO letters and talking to
them over phone etc. All the Chief Secretaries have been requested for their
intervention in these projects so that these projects can be completed at the
earliest. Further they have also been requested to direct the concerned
Municipal Commissioners to take action on a war footing and conduct
weekly review of implementation of the project and send the minutes of
meetings to this Ministry. It was also suggested that they may setup a
process of regular monitoring of these projects at their level so that the
livestock farmers and the consumers will get benefit of the project by
utilization of their animals for meat purpose and availability of hygienic,
wholesome & safe meat products respectively.
The Ministry is in the process of obtaining Cabinet approval on the
restructured Central Sector Scheme of National Mission on Food Processing
(SAMPADA) with an allocation of Rs. 6000 crore. The Scheme for
modernization/setting up of Abattoirs is one of the SAMPADA Schemes.
The issue of livestock and its population across the country is dealt
by Department of Animal Husbandry, Dairying and Fisheries (DAHD&F),
Ministry of Agriculture and Farmers Welfare, Government of India.
It is submitted that as per 19th livestock Census-2012, All India Report,
the total livestock population in the country has declined by above 3.3% over
the previous Census (2007). Further the Census-2012 indicated that number
of milch animals (in-milk and dry) in Cow and Buffaloes has increased to
6.75%. The number of animals in milk in Cow and Buffaloes has also
increased to 4.5%.
As regards the corrective measures needed to address the issue,
Department of Animal Husbandry, Dairying and Fisheries (DAHD&F),
Ministry of Agriculture and Farmers Welfare, Government of India has
communicated the following details:
A. The Government has formulated National Livestock Policy, 2013
so as to increase livestock productivity in a sustainable manner.
The salient features of the policy are improvement in animal

39
productivity, infusion of appropriate technologies for quality
assurance to meet international standards, extension services, and
restructuring of institutions and support in terms of enhanced
investment and installation of an effective mechanism to sustain
the same.
B. The Government is implementing the following schemes for the
development and protection of the livestock, the details of which
are mentioned below each:
• National Programme for Bovine Breeding and Dairy
Development: The National Programme for Bovine Breeding
and Dairy Development (NPBBDD) is implemented with an
integrated, holistic and scientific approach: to improve and
upgrade the genetic makeup of bovines with the aim of
enhancing their production and productivity; and development
of dairy infrastructure for improved procurement, processing
and marketing. The Scheme has two components
(a) National Programme for Bovine Breeding (NPBB) and
(b) National Programme for Dairy Development (NPDD).
• Rashtriya Gokul Mission: A project under the National
Program for Bovine Breeding and Dairy Development, the
RashtriyaGokul Mission was launched with the objective of
conserving and developing indigenous Breeds in a focused
and scientific manner by setting aside Rs. 500 crores out
of Rs. 1800 crores allocated for NPBBDD.
• National Dairy Plan-I: The National Dairy Plan Phase-I
(NDP-I) is being implemented with an outlay of Rs. 2,242
crore as a Central Sector Scheme in 18 major milk producing
States. The Scheme is implemented through National Dairy
Development Board and aims at enhancing milk production
and productivity in order to meet the rapidly growing
demand of milk. The scheme has focused on development
and conservation of indigenous breeds.
• National Livestock Mission (NLM): National Livestock
Mission (NLM) is implemented throughout the country with
the objective of sustainable development of livestock sector.
With respect to Small Ruminants, Piggery and Poultry, there

40
are programs for strengthening the State farms in terms of
modernization, automation and bio-security to enable
production of improved breeds of Goats, Sheep, Pigs and
stocks of low-input technology chicken and conservation of
livestock breeds. Further, the Productivity Enhancement
component provides for supporting BPL families to encourage
rearing of backyard poultry and community led breed
improvement programmes. Similarly, under the
Entrepreneurship Development & Employment Generation
component there is provision for a number of small
ruminants, piggery and poultry farming and allied activities
wherein back-ended capital subsidy is provided to the
farmers.
• Livestock Health & Disease Control (LH&DC) schemes:
The Government is supplementing the efforts of State/UT
Governments for prevention, control and containment of
animal diseases by way of providing financial assistance
under the schemes of Livestock Health & Disease Control,
which is having the following nine components:
(a) Assistance to States for Control of Animal Diseases
(ASCAD)
(b) National Project on Rinderpest Surveillance and
Monitoring (NPRSM)
(c) Professional Efficiency Development (PED)
(d) Foot and Mouth Disease Control Programme
(FMD-CP)
(e) National Animal Disease Reporting System (NADRS)
(f) Peste des Petits Ruminants Control Programme (PPR-
CP)
(g) Establishment and Strengthening of existing Veterinary
Hospitals and Dispensaries (ESVHD)
(h) Brucellosis Control Programme (Brucellosis-CP)
(i) Classical Swine Fever Control Programme (CSF-CP).
[Ministry of Food Processing Industries (F. No. 6-03/2016-Parl.
Dated 21.11.2016]

Spill-over Liabilities
Recommendation (Para No. 10)
10. The Committee note that the Ministry was implementing the
scheme of Technology Up-gradation/Establishment/Modernization of Food
Processing Industries (TUS) and Human Resource Development (HRD)
scheme during the 11th Plan. Both the schemes were subsumed in CSS-
NMFP scheme w.e.f. 01.04.2012 and were being implemented through State
/UT Governments. During the 12th Plan, the TUS and HRD were subsumed
in Centrally Sponsored Scheme – National Mission on Food Processing.
Although the scheme in the central sector was discontinued w.e.f.
01.04.2012, it was decided to clear all the pending liabilities as on 01.04.2012
during 12th Plan by the Ministry. On 01.04.2012 as many as 3168
applications were pending with the fund requirement of Rs. 740.00 crore
as spill-over liabilities. Approval of cabinet was obtained to clear the
proposals of 11th Plan during 12th Plan period. As on date, the actual
expenditure incurred during 12th Plan period as committed liabilities is
Rs. 588.88 crore The left over committed liabilities for the last year of 12th
Plan period ( i.e. 2016-17) are about Rs. 151.12 crore. At the beginning of
12th Plan the spill-over liabilities of HRD scheme was Rs. 35.61 crore.
However, the pending proposals of Entrepreneurship Development
Programmes (EDP), Food Processing & Training Centre (FPTC) wherein
no instalments were released were transferred to the States subsequently.
The remaining spill over liabilities will be liquidated out of BE 2016-17 of
Rs. 2.50 crore.
The Committee are constrained to note that the spill-over liabilities of
11th Plan are still continuing and the Ministry has not been able to clear the
liabilities even during the last four years of the 12th Plan period. Although
the Committee understand that the actual allocation during this plan period
was lower than that proposed by the Ministry, the Ministry should have given
priority to liquidate the spill-over liabilities and should have spread the
allocated funds accordingly. The Committee recommend that the liabilities
should be cleared on priority basis during this fiscal year.
Reply of the Government
A. Scheme for Technology Upgradation, Establishment and
Modernization of FPI.
Under the committed liabilities of 11th Plan of the TUS scheme, the
41

details of cases assisted along with BE, RE and AE during 12th Plan
(2012-13, 2013-14, 2014-15, 2015-16 and 2016-17) are given below:
(Rs. in crore)
Sl. Y ear B E RE A E Cases assisted
No. (1st and 2nd
Instalment)
1. 2012-13 100.00 186.46 186.19 1224
2. 2013-14 160.00 163.98 162.08 998
3. 2014-15 160.00 157.03 144.72 889
4. 2015-16 100 102.11 99.12 562
5. 2016-17 112.16 51.44 294
To liquidate the left over pending liabilities, Rs. 112.16 crore have been
allocated as BE during the current Financial Year (2016-17). Out of total
approved amount of Rs. 740 crores for meeting committed liabilities of
11th Plan under TUS Scheme, an expenditure of Rs. 643.55 crore has been
incurred during the 12th Plan by 8th November, 2016. The balance
committed liabilities are likely to be liquidated in the current financial year
itself.
B. Scheme of Human Resource Development
Under the Scheme of Human Resource Development, total committed
liabilities were amounting to Rs. 35.61 crore at the end of 11th Plan. Year-
wise expenditure for HRD scheme is during 12th Plan is as below–
(Rs. in crore)
Sl. Year Creation of Infra for *FPTC **EDP Total
No. Degree/Dip.
1. 2012-13 1.07 0.55 2.36 3.98
2. 2013-14 1.35 0.32 2.11 3.78
3. 2014-15 2.72 0.15 0.78 3.65
4. 1015-16 1.30 0.14 0.30 1.74
5. 2016-17 0.0 0.0 0.07 0.07
*Food Processing Training Centre
**Entrepreneurship Development Programme
[Ministry of Food Processing Industries (F. No. 6-03/2016-Parl.
Dated 21.11.2016)]
42

Comments of the Committee
For comments of the Committee please refer to Para No. 1.16 of
Chapter I of this Report.
Development of North-Eastern States
Recommendation (Para No. 11)
11. The Committee note that as per Government policy, a minimum
of 10% of the Plan outlay is to be utilized for the projects in the North-
Eastern States including Sikkim. Accordingly, the Ministry has been utilizing
its plan funds for the projects in North Eastern States. During 2015-16, out
of total plan allocation of Rs. 487.00 crore, an amount of Rs. 48.00 crore
was allocated for North East. However, the actual utilisation against
allocation has been only Rs. 30.91crore. During the financial year 2016-17,
a provision of Rs. 60.00 crore being 10% of Central Plan Outlay of
Rs. 600.00 crore is earmarked for utilization on projects in the North-Eastern
States including Sikkim. As informed by the Ministry, the main reason for
low utilization of the allocation for North-East is non-availability of quality
proposals under various schemes of the Ministry. The Ministry is making
concerted efforts to increase utilization of the allocation for North-East.
A number of awareness events like seminars/workshops have been organized
in the current year in every State of the North East region. The efforts made
by the Ministry are expected to result in receiving more fresh proposals from
North East region under various Schemes of the Ministry. The Committee
are of the view that North Eastern States (including Sikkim) have immense
potential for development of Food Processing sector which may give
impetus for overall economic growth and development of the region. The
Committee, therefore, desire that concerted and coordinated efforts need to
be undertaken by the Ministry including creation of awareness amongst the
people in the region about the various schemes of the Ministry and the
benefits likely to accrue to the them and the region as a result thereof. The
Committee would like to be apprised of the initiatives undertaken by the
Ministry in this regard.
Reply of the Government
During 2015-16 Ministry organized 18 awareness events like
workshops and seminars in North East Region (including Sikkim) for
43

development of food processing sector. During this Fiscal Year Ministry is
organizing/supporting different events like exhibitions/seminars/workshops
in North East Region and clearing the liabilities of the last year. Ministry has
earmarked 13 events for promotion of food processing sector in NE region
during the year 2016-17.
[Ministry of Food Processing Industries (F. No. 6-03/2016-Parl.
Dated 21.11.2016)]
44

CHAPTER III
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE
DO NOT DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE
GOVERNMENT'S REPLIES
—Nil—
45

CHAPTER IV
OBSERV ATIONS/RECOMMENDA TIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH
ACTION TAKEN REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT
BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE
—Nil—
46

CHAPTER V
OBSERV ATIONS/RECOMMENDA TIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH
FINAL REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT ARE STILL AWAITED
Village Adoption Programme (VAP) by NIFTEM
Recommendation (Para No. 9)
The Committee note that Village adoption is a unique program
conceptualized and being implemented by NIFTEM for its students since
2012, with a view to sensitize and educate them of the problems and
practices of the farmers at the grass root level. The aim is to help the Indian
Food Processing sector accomplish its objective of all-inclusive growth and
facilitate the process of integrating the underprivileged sections of our
population with the main stream economy. Under this programme, B. Tech
(Food Technology & Management) and M. Tech students are divided into
groups of 10 to 12 students at the time of joining NIFTEM. Each group
is lead by a Faculty member (Mentor) and adopts a village anywhere in India
and nurses it during the entire programme of study. The groups go and stay
in the village twice a year: 10 to 12 days each time in every semester. It
is a symbiotic process leading to exchange of Knowledge. While villagers
gain scientific and technical knowledge through students who promote
future possibilities of food processing among them, students obtain first hand
experience of Indian rural scenario and understand traditional processing
technologies adopted by the villagers. Students gain general awareness of
the village life and facilitate the process of integrating the underprivileged
sections of our population with the main stream. Students learn to contribute
towards "Nation Building". As informed by the Ministry, NIFTEM is in the
process of organizing a V AP conclave to invite the lead farmers/
entrepreneurs of adopted villages to visit NIFTEM for interactive stay and
exposure visits. During the village adoption programmes, each VAP team
prepares a booklet of the traditional dishes of that adopted village and the
area around it. As a result, 494 traditional dishes of the 39 adopted villages
have been documented. While appreciating the efforts being made by
NIFTEM in popularizing the Programme, the Committee recommend that
more and more villages across the country should be adopted under this
47

programme so that villagers and the students are mutually benefited and in
the process more traditional dishes of the adopted villages are documented
for scientific intervention under Make in India initiative by NIFTEM. Since
V AP teams are lead by a faculty mention, the Committee, therefore, urge
that new recruitment of faculty may be expedited so that more and more
villages across the country are involved in the programme.
The Committee feel that in the absence of adequate support from the
Government in terms of adequate budget allocation, it would be difficult for
NIFTEM to run the noble programmes like the one Village Adoption
Programme. The Committee, therefore, agree with the Ministry that
NIFTEM should be given continuous Government support to fill the gap
between the expenditure requirements and the revenue generation till they
achieve self-sufficiency.
Reply of the Government
Village Adoption Programme (VAP) is a part of the academic
curriculum, and is a mandatory credit course in Under Graduate and Post
Graduate programmes. V AP activities are carried out by faculty of the
institute. V AP conclave is likely to be organized shortly by NIFTEM in which
lead farmers / Entrepreneurs of the adopted villages will be invited to visit
the institution for exposure. NIFTEM has proposed sanction of additional
faculty posts which are under process. Further there are some vacant posts
under reserved category, for which sincere efforts are being made to fill
up these posts by giving specific advertisements. Ministry has been providing
funds to NIFTEM in the form of grant-in-aid to fill the gap between the
expenditure requirement and the revenue generation. NIFTEM has submitted
financial proposal for the next four years also, which is under active
consideration of the Ministry. Simultaneously, NIFTEM has been asked to
prepare a plan and take necessary actions to achieve self-sufficiency.
[Ministry of Food Processing Industries (F. No. 6-03/2016-Parl.
Dated 21.11.2016)]
 N
EW D ELHI; HUKM DEO NARAYAN Y ADA V
05 December , 2016 Chairperson,
14 Agrahayana, 1938  (Saka) Standing Committee on Agriculture.
48

APPENDIX I
STANDING COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE
(2016-17)
MINUTES OF THE SEVENTH SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE
The Committee sat on Friday, the 09th December, 2016 from
1000 hrs. to 1050 hrs. in the Chamber of the Chairperson, Standing
Committee on Agriculture, Room No. 138 (Third Floor), Parliament House,
New Delhi.
PRESENT
Shri Hukm Deo Narayan Yadav — Chairperson
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Prof. Ravindra Vishwanath Gaikwad
3. Shri Sanganna Karadi
4. Shri Nalin Kumar Kateel
5. Md. Badaruddoza Khan
6. Shri Janardan Mishra
7. Shri Devji Patel
8. Shri C.L. Ruala
9. Shri Satyapal Singh (Sambhal)
Rajya Sabha
10. Shri Sambhaji Shahu Chhatrapati
11. Shri Meghraj Jain
12. Shri Mohd. Ali Khan
13. Shri Ram Nath Thakur
S
ECRETARIA T
1. Shri U.B.S. Negi — Joint Secretary
2. Shri Arun K. Kaushik — Director
49

3. Smt. Juby Amar — Additional Director
4. Shri C. Vanlalruata — Deputy Secretary
5. Shri Sumesh Kumar — Under Secretary
2. At the outset, Chairperson welcomed the Members to the Sitting
of the Committee. Thereafter, the Committee took up for consideration the
following draft Reports:
(i) Draft Report on the Action Taken by the Government on the
Observations/Recommendations contained in the 23rd Report
(16th Lok Sabha) of the Standing Committee on Agriculture
(2015-16) on 'Demands for Grants (2016-17)' of the Ministry of
Food Processing Industries.
*(ii) ***    *** ***
*(iii) ***    *** ***
*(iv) ***    *** ***
3. After some deliberations, the Committee adopted the draft Reports
without any modifications and authorized the Chairperson to finalize and
present these Reports to Parliament after getting them factually verified from
the concerned Departments/Ministries.
The Committee then adjourned.
*Matter not related to this Report.
50

APPENDIX II
(Vide Para 4 of Introduction of the Report)
ANALYSIS OF ACTION TAKEN BY GOVERNMENT ON THE
TWENTY THIRD REPORT OF COMMITTEE ON
AGRICULTURE (16TH LOK SABHA)
(i) Total number of Recommendations 11
(ii) Recommendations/Observations which have been
Accepted by the Government
Recommendation Para Nos. 1, 2, 3, 4 5, 6, 7, 8, 10 and 11
Total 10
Percentage 91.00%
(iii) Recommendations/Observations which the Committee
do not desire to pursue in view of the Government's
replies
Recommendation Para Nos. Nil
Total 0
Percentage 00.00%
(iv) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies of
the Government have not been accepted by the Committee
Recommendation Para No. Nil
Total 0
Percentage 00.00%
(v) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which
Final replies of the Government are still awaited
Recommendation Para No. 9
Total 1
Percentage 09.00%
51

BLANK

“All Parliamentary Publications including DRSC Reports are available on
sale at the Sales Counter, Reception, Parliament House (Tel. Nos. 23034726,
23034495, 23034496), Agents appointed by Lok Sabha Secretariat and
Publications Division, Ministry of Information and Broadcasting,
CGO Complex, Lodhi Road, New Delhi (Tel. Nos. 24367260, 24365610)
and their outlets. The said information is available on website
‘www.parliamentofindia.nic.in’.
The Souvenir items with logo of Parliament are also available at Sales
Counter, Reception, Parliament House, New Delhi. The Souvenir items
with Parliament Museum logo are available for sale at Souvenir Shop
(Tel. No. 23035323), Parliament Museum, Parliament Library Building, New
Delhi. List of these items are available on the website mentioned above.”