STANDING COMMITTEE ON
AGRICULTURE
(2016-2017)
SIXTEENTH LOK SABHA
MINISTRY OF AGRICULTURE AND
FARMERS WELFARE
(DEPARTMENT OF ANIMAL HUSBANDRY,
DAIRYING AND FISHERIES)
DEMANDS FOR GRANTS (2016-17)
[Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/
Recommendations contained in the Twenty Fourth Report of the
Standing Committee on Agriculture (2015-2016)]
32
lR;eso t;rs
THIRTY SECOND REPORT
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
December, 2016/Agrahayana, 1938 (Saka)

THIRTY SECOND REPORT
STANDING COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE
(2016-2017)
(SIXTEENTH LOK SABHA)
MINISTRY OF AGRICULTURE AND
FARMERS WELFARE
(DEPARTMENT OF ANIMAL HUSBANDRY ,
DAIRYING AND FISHERIES)
DEMANDS FOR GRANTS (2016-17)
[Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/
Recommendations contained in the Twenty Fourth Report of the
Standing Committee on Agriculture (2015-2016)]
Presented to Lok Sabha on  14.12.2016
Laid on the table of Rajya Sabha on  14.12.2016
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
December, 2016/Agrahayana, 1938 (Saka)
lR;eso t;rs

COA No. 352
Price : Rs. 68.00
© 2016 B Y LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of Business
in Lok Sabha (Fifteenth Edition) and Printed by M/s. Akashdeep Printers,
20-Ansari Road, Daryaganj, New Delhi-110 002.

CONTENTS
COMPOSITION  OF THE C OMMITTEE ................................................... (iii)
INTRODUCTION ............................................................................. ( V)
CHAPTER I Report..................................................................... 1
CHAPTER II Observations/Recommendations which have been
accepted by the Government..................................... 15
CHAPTER III Observations/Recommendations which the Committee
do not desire to pursue in view of the Government's
replies...................................................................... 39
CHAPTER IV Observations/Recommendations in respect of which
replies of the Government have not been accepted
by the Committee..................................................... 40
CHAPTER V Observations/Recommendations in respect of which
final replies of the Government are still awaited......... 43
ANNEXURE
I. Minutes of the 7th Sitting of the Committee held on
09.12.2016............................................................... 45
APPENDIX
I. Analysis of Action Taken by the Government on the
Recommendations contained in the  Twenty  Fourth
Report  (Sixteenth  Lok  Sabha)  of  the  Standing
Committee on Agriculture (2015-2016)...................... 47
PAGE (S)
(i)

COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE
ON AGRICULTURE
(2016-17)
Shri Hukm Deo Narayan Yadav — Chairperson
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Prof. Ravindra Vishwanath Gaikwad
3. Shri Sanganna Karadi
4. Shri Nalin Kumar Kateel
5. Smt. Raksha Khadse
6. Md. Badaruddoza Khan
7. Shri C. Mahendran
8. Dr. Tapas Mandal
9. Shri Janardan Mishra
10. Shri Devji Patel
11. Shri Nityanand Rai
12. Shri Mukesh Rajput
13. Shri Neiphiu Rio
14. Shri Konakalla Narayana Rao
15. Shri C.L. Ruala
16. Shri Arjun Charan Sethi
17. Shri Satyapal Singh (Sambhal)
18. Shri Virendra Singh
19. Shri Dharmendra Yadav
20. Shri Jai Prakash Narayan Yadav
21. Shri B. S. Yeddyurappa
(iii)

(iv)
Rajya Sabha
22. Shri Sambhaji Shahu Chhatrapati
23. Sardar Sukhdev Singh Dhindsa
24. Shri Janardan Dwivedi
25. Shri Meghraj Jain
26. Shri Vinay Katiyar
27. Shri Mohd. Ali Khan
28. Shri Ram Nath Thakur
29. Shri R. Vaithilingam
30. Shri Shankarbhai N. V egad
31. Shri Darshan Singh Yadav
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Shri U.B.S. Negi — Joint Secretary
2. Shri Arun K. Kaushik — Director
3. Shri C. Vanlalruata — Deputy Secretary
4. Miss Divya Rai — Executive Assistant

(v)
INTRODUCTION
I, the Chairperson, Standing Committee on Agriculture (2015-16),
(2016-17) having been authorized by the Committee to submit the Report
on their behalf, present this Thirty Second Report on action taken by the
Government on the Observations / Recommendations contained in the
Twenty Fourth Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) of the Standing Committee
on Agriculture (2015-16) on 'Demands for Grants (2016-17)' pertaining to
the Ministry of Agriculture and Farmers Welfare (Department of Animal
Husbandry, Dairying and Fisheries).
2. The Twenty Fourth Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) of the Standing
Committee on Agriculture (2015-16) on 'Demands for Grants (2016-17)' of
the Ministry of Agriculture and Farmers Welfare (Department of Animal
Husbandry, Dairying and Fisheries) was presented to the Lok Sabha and laid
on the Table of Rajya Sabha on 02 May, 2016. The Action Taken Notes
on the Report were received on 08 August, 2016.
3. The Report was considered and adopted by the Committee at their
Sitting held on 09.12.2016.
4. An analysis of the action taken by the Government on the
Observations / Recommendations contained in the Twenty Fourth Report
(Sixteenth Lok Sabha) of the Committee is given in Appendix.
 N
EW D ELHI; HUKM DEO NARAYAN YADA V
09 December, 2016 Chairperson,
18 Agrahayana, 1938  (Saka) Standing Committee on Agriculture.

REPORT
CHAPTER  I
1.1 This Report of the Standing Committee on Agriculture deals with
the action taken by the Government on the recommendations contained in
the Twenty Fourth Report of the Standing Committee on Agriculture (2015-
16) on 'Demands for Grants (2016-17)' of the Ministry of Agriculture and
Farmers Welfare (Department of Animal Husbandry, Dairying and Fisheries)
which was presented to the Lok Sabha and laid on the table of the Rajya
Sabha on 2nd May 2016.
1.2 The Ministry of Agriculture and Farmers Welfare (Department of
Animal Husbandry, Dairying and Fisheries) have furnished Action Taken
Replies in respect of all 17 Observations / Recommendations contained in
the Report. The replies have been categorized as under:
(i) Observations / Recommendations that have been accepted by the
Government:
Recommendation Para Nos. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 12, 13,
14, 16 and 17
(Chapter II - Total 15)
(ii) Observations / Recommendations which the Committee do not
desire to pursue in view of the Government's reply :
Recommendation Para No. Nil
(Chapter III - Nil)
(iii) Observations / Recommendations in respect of which action taken
replies of the Government have not been accepted by the Committee :
Recommendation Para No. 15
(Chapter IV - Total 01)
(iv) Observations / Recommendations in respect of which final replies
of the Government are still awaited :
Recommendation Para No. 11
(Chapter V - Total 01)

2
1.3 The Committee trust that utmost importance would be given
to implementation of the Observations / Recommendations accepted
by the Government. In cases, where it is not possible for the
Department to implement the Recommendations in letter and spirit
for any reason, the matter should be reported to the Committee with
the reasons for non-implementation. The Committee desire that
further Action Taken Note on the Observations / Recommendations
contained in Chapter - I and Final Action Taken Replies to the
Observations / Recommendations contained in Chapter V of this
Report be furnished to them at an early date.
1.4 The Committee will now deal with the action taken by the
Government on some of the Recommendations in the succeeding
paragraphs.
A. Share of the Department of Animal Husbandry, Dairying and
Fisheries in Central Plan
Recommendation (Para No. 2)
1.5 The Committee had observed/recommended as under:
"Animal Husbandry, Dairying and Fisheries activities along with
agriculture continue to be an integral part of human life since the
process of civilization started. These activities have contributed to the
food basket, draught animal power and also helped in maintaining
ecological balance. These activities also play a significant role in
generating gainful employment in the rural sector, particularly among
the landless, small and marginal farmers and women besides providing
cheap and nutritional food to millions of people. According to estimates
of the Central Statistics Office (CSO), the Value of output from the
livestock sector at current prices was about Rs. 7,33,054 crore during
2014-15 which is about 28.7% of the Value of output from agricultural
and allied sector. At constant prices the value of output from livestock
is about 27.8% of the output from total agriculture and allied sector.
Fisheries is a sunrise sector with varied resources and potential,
engaging over 14.50 million people at the primary level and many more
along the value chain transformation of the fisheries sector from
tradition to commercial scale has led to an increase in fish production
from 7.5 lakh tonne in 1950-51 to 101.64 lakh tonne (Provisional)
during 2014-15, while the export earnings from the sector registered

3
at Rs.33,441.61 crore in 2014-15 (US $ 5.51 billion). The sector
contributed about 0.9% to the National Gross Domestic Product (GDP)
and 5.17% to the agricultural GDP (2014-15). However, the Committee
note with concern that when the issue of distribution of financial
resources crops up, the Animal Husbandry, Dairying and Fisheries
sector gets neglected. This is evident from the fact that the percentage
share of the Department of Animal Husbandry, Dairying and Fisheries
stands at just 0.33% in the Twelfth Plan vis-a-vis 0.38% in the Eleventh
Plan, although in monetary terms, the allocation stands at Rs 8174.00
crore in the Eleventh Plan, which increased to Rs.14,179.00 crore in
the Twelfth Plan. However, the Committee are of the firm opinion that
this too is grossly inadequate as a result the various schemes
undertaken by the Department have been adversely affected as
accepted by the Department . Keeping in view the importance of Animal
Husbandry, Dairying and Fisheries Sector in supplementing the income
of our farmers and its role in national economy and in the socio-
economic development of the Country, the Committee , therefore
strongly advocate that the share of the Department in the Central Plan
should be increased at par with its contribution in the national economy
in terms of GDP and the Department should accordingly impress upon
the Ministry of Finance to provide the requisite allocation to them at
the RE stage for effective implementation of its various schemes. The
Committee would like to be apprised of the initiatives undertaken by
the Department in this regard."
1.6 In its Action Taken reply, the Department has stated as under:
"The observations of the Committee are noted. Department had
requested Ministry of Finance for enhancing the share of Department
in the Plan allocation for supplementing the efforts of States for
providing the additional means of sustenance in terms of wealth/
security and employment to the farming community mostly comprising
of small and marginal farmers residing in the rural areas. The allocation
for the financial year 2016-17 has been increased by 7.3% over the
allocation for financial year 2015-16."
1.7 Though the Animal Husbandry, Dairying and Fisheries
Sector (AHDF) plays a pivotal role in supplementing the income of our
farmers and also contributes well to our GDP, the Committee had
observed that allocation of funds was grossly inadequate. Accordingly,

4
the Committee had therefore advocated that the Share of the
Department in the Central Plan should be increased at par with its
contribution in the national economy in terms of GDP and recommended
that the Department should impress upon the Ministry of Finance to
provide the requisite allocation to them at the RE stage for effective
implementation of its various schemes. From the Action Taken Reply
of the Department, the Committee note that the Department has
received an increased allocation for the financial year 2016-17 as
compared to 2015-16. However, the Committee are unhappy to note
that the increase in allocation is only 7.3% which does not seem to
be adequate for effective implementation of various schemes of the
Department. The Committee, therefore, reiterate their earlier
recommendation that the Department should pursue vigorously with
the Ministry of Finance for allocation of adequate funds so that the
various schemes of the Department do not suffer for the want of funds.
B. Allocation of Funds
Recommendation (Para No. 3)
1.8 The Committee had observed / recommended as under:
"During the course of the examination of Demands for Grants (2016-
17) of the Department of Animal Husbandry, Dairying and Fisheries,
the Committee have observed that during the first five year of the
Twelfth Plan i.e. 2012-13, 2013-14, 2014-15, 2015-16 and 2016-17,
a huge variation exists between amount proposed by the Department
and the amount allocated by erstwhile Ministry of Finance. For the year
2012-13, against the proposal of Rs.3497.50 crore, the allocation was
Rs.1910.00 crore (54.61%). During the year 2013-14, the Department
was allocated Rs.2025.00 crore against the proposal of Rs. 3025.00
crore (66.94%). Again for the 2014-15, the proposal was for
Rs. 3535.00 crore but the allocation made was Rs. 2174.00 crore
(61.49%). During the year 2015-16, against a proposal of Rs. 4527.79
crore, the allocation was a meagre Rs. 1491.14 crore (32.93%). During
the current fiscal year 2016-17, against a proposal of Rs 3231.43 crore,
the allocation was again a meagre Rs. 1600.00 crore (49.51%). This
mismatch between the proposed allocation and the actual allocation is
a cause of concern to the Committee. During the course of evidence,
it was informed to the Committee that Foot and Mouth Disease is very

5
dangerous for the cattle which can affect the production of milk and
the productivity of the cattle but they have received Rs.200 crore less
for the National Disease Control Programme. Further, the next
Livestock Census is scheduled to be held in the year 2017 and the
Department have already undertaken a few activities in this direction.
For this, the Department demanded a total of Rs. 387 crore against
which they have received a very meagre sum of Rs.22 crore.
Preliminary activities for the impending Livestock Census will have to
be undertaken this year and for this the Department requires an
additional amount of Rs. 54 crore. As a result of lesser allocation of
funds, the Committee are apprehensive that the implementation of the
various schemes undertaken by the Department may be adversely
affected which in turn may hinder the growth and development of the
animal husbandry, dairying and fisheries sector of the economy. In
view of the foregoing, the Committee therefore, strongly advocate that
the Department should be allocated requisite funds as demanded by
them and recommend that the Department should vigorously urge the
Ministry of Finance to allocate the funds as proposed by them as
otherwise the performance of the Department may be adversely
affected for want of funds. The Committee would like to be apprised
of the initiatives undertaken by them in this regard."
1.9 In its Action Taken Reply, the Department has stated as under:—
"The Department had proposed an allocation of Rs.3231.43 crore as
BE for 2016-17; however Ministry of Finance keeping in view the
overall resource position and the inter-se priorities for allocation among
competing demands from different sectors had allocated a BE of
Rs.1600.00 crore for 2016-17. The Ministry of Finance would be
requested for a higher allocation at RE stage during 2016-17."
1.10 While noting with concern that there is a mismatch between
the amount proposed by the Department and the amount actually
allocated to them by the Ministry of Finance, the Committee
recommended that the Department should vigorously urge the
Ministry of Finance to allocate funds as proposed by them as otherwise
the performance of the Department may be adversely affected for want
of funds. In its Action Taken Reply, the Department has stated that
the Ministry of Finance would be requested for a higher allocation at
the RE stage during 2016-17. The Committee are unhappy to note that

6
the Department has time and again failed to fully utilize the funds
allocated to it. The Committee hope that the Department might have
taken up the issue with the Ministry of Finance with all the seriousness
it deserves and advocated their demands for allocation of adequate
funds to run their schemes effectively and efficiently. The Committee
would like to be apprised of the latest position in this regard.
C. Allocation and Utilization of Funds
Recommendation (Para No. 4)
1.11 The Committee has observed/recommended as under:
"The Committee note with concern that consequent to the award of
the 14th Finance Commission, higher devolution of funds have been
made to the States with corresponding reduction in the Central Budget,
which has resulted in reduction of BE for 2016-17 of the Department
of Animal Husbandry, Dairying and Fisheries. The BE for 2016-17 for
the Department is to the tune of Rs. 1600.00 crore as compared to
Rs.1910.00 crore, Rs. 2025.00 crore, Rs. 2174.00 crore and
Rs. 1491.14 crore for the fiscals 2012-13, 2013-14, 2014-15 and
2015-16 respectively. Furthermore the allocated amount is as less as
49.51% of the funds sought by the Department after making
considered assessment of their projects and priorities. According to the
Department, the present allocation is grossly inadequate to achieve the
targets set under its various schemes. However, the Committee are
constrained to note that even the funds allocated to the Department
has not been fully utilised. Out of the RE figures of Rs. 6891.14 crore
for the first four fiscals, the actual expenditure as on 18.02.2016
amounts to Rs.6428.70 crore only, which in percentage terms is
93.28% of the RE. This highlights the unsatisfactory financial
performance of the Department. The Committee, therefore, feel that
the Department needs to revisit their plan of action drafted for optimum
utilization of funds allocated to them and take corrective measures to
achieve the laid down financial and physical targets. The Committee
would like to be apprised of the initiatives undertaken by the
Department in this regard."
1.12 In its Action Taken Reply, the Department has stated as under:-
"Department has utilized 96.38% fund out of the allocated fund during
last four Financial Years of the 12th Five Year Plan. The Department

7
is trying to utilize the funds allocated to it fully. States/Implementing
agencies are continuously reminded through monthly meetings and
video conferences to liquidate the pending Utilization certificates and
submit proposal for fund release for the current financial year."
1.13 While noting unsatisfactory financial performance of the
Department, the Committee recommended that the Department needs
to revisit their plan of action for optimum utilization of funds allocated
to them and take corrective measures to achieve the laid down
financial and physical targets. However, the Committee are not
satisfied with the generic reply of the Department that it is trying to
utilize the funds allocated to it fully and State Governments and
Implementing Agencies are reminded continuously for timely
submission and liquidation of pending utilization certificates and
submit proposal for fund release. The Department has not elaborated
on the corrective measures / initiatives undertaken by them to address
the issue comprehensively and effectively. The Committee are of the
considered opinion that the Department needs to adopt a proactive
approach ensuring optimum utilization of funds and timely submission
of Utilization Certificates by the State Governments / Implementing
Agencies. The Department also needs to find out various constraints
which are affecting the timely and optimum utilization of funds by the
State Governments / Implementing Agencies. The Committee would
like to be apprised of the initiatives undertaken by the Department
in this regard.
D. Results Framework Document (RFD)
Recommendation (Para No. 5)
1.14 The Committee had observed / recommended as under:
"The Committee note with concern that the Department drops in
composite score from a high of 95.48 % in 2012-13 to 91.97 % in
2013-14. The provisional composite score of 67.41 % for the year
2014-15 is also highly unsatisfactory although the composite score for
the same has not been uploaded/communicated by the Cabinet
Secretariat. The Committee are well aware that Animal Husbandry,
Dairying and Fisheries being a State subject, the role of Department
gets restricted to a broad policy formulation and the implementation
of Schemes lies with the implementing agencies i.e. the States and

8
Union Territories, who are independent constitutional entities. In their
explanation, the Department has attributed reduction in budgetary
allocation at RE stage to achieve targets over and above the set targets
to excellent score of 100% in RFD. However, the Committee are not
satisfied with this explanation of the Department and are of the strong
view that the Department simply cannot just ignore their responsibility
being the nodal authority, for drop in composite score from a high of
95.48% in 2012-13 to 91.97% in 2013-14. If the funds get reduced
at RE stage then none but themselves need to be blamed for their failure
to impress upon the Planning Commission/Ministry of Finance for
allocation of funds as per their demand. Being the nodal authority, it
is but imperative for them to make sound plan of action for effective
and speedy implementation of the schemes undertaken by them for
timely and optimum utilization of funds. The Committee, therefore,
recommend that corrective measures may be undertaken by the
Department to improve their performance to get excellent score in
RFD. The Committee also urge the Department to impress upon the
Cabinet Secretariat to forward the composite score for the Fiscal 2014-
15, so that requisite remedial action could be undertaken by them for
effective implementation of its schemes and thereby improving their
performance to score high in RFD."
1.15 In its Action Taken Reply, the Department has stated as under:
"As per performance evaluation report for the year 2014-15, obtained
from the website of RFMS Cabinet Secretariat, the total composite
score of this department is 67.41%. The reason for shortfall in
achievement to get excellent score of 100% in RFD is reduction in
budgetary allocation at RF stage from Rs. 2174 crore to Rs.1800 crore
during 2014-15.
This Department is regularly monitoring the progress of implementing
the Schemes with State Governments/Implementing Agencies to
improve the performance through monthly meetings with Principal
Secretaries (Animal Husbandry) of State Governments, Video
Conference, field visits of Senior Officers etc."
1.16 While noting with concern the drop in composite RFD scores
of the Department from 2012-13 to 2013-14, the Committee
recommended for taking corrective measures to improve the

9
performance of the Department and get excellent score in RFD. The
Committee had also urged the Department to impress upon the
Cabinet Secretariat to forward the composite score for the Fiscal
2014-15. In its Action Taken Reply, the Department has informed that
the composite Result Framework Document (RFD) score of the
Department is 67.41% for the year 2014-15. However, the Committee
are not convinced with the reply of the Department that the reason
for shortfall in achievement of the excellent score of 100% in RFD,
is reduction in budgetary allocation at RE stage for the year 2014-15
as the Committee are constrained to note that even the funds allocated
at RE stage are not being fully utilized by the Department. The poor
financial performance leads to lower allocation in subsequent years.
The Committee, therefore reiterate their earlier recommendation that
the Department should tackle this issue in its entirety and strive for
excellent RFD scores in future financial years. The Committee would
like to be apprised of the actions taken by the Department in this
regard.
E. Mid-Term Appraisal
Recommendation (Para No. 6)
1.17 The Committee had observed/recommended as under:
"The Committee note with concern that the mid-term appraisal of the
performance of the 12th Plan in respect of the Department has not
been undertaken as a result , the Committee feel that the Department
has lost the opportunity to evaluate the performance of it various
schemes and to undertake the corrective measures to address the
shortcomings noticed in the implementation of its schemes. However,
the Committee were informed that the exercise has now been
undertaken by NITI Aayog. The Committee hope that the mid-term
appraisal of the Department would be conducted by NITI Aayog
without further delay and the requisite inputs of the appraisal would
be available to the Department to undertake corrective interventions as
and where necessary to reorient its policies and programmes for the
remaining period of the 12th Plan."
1.18 In its Action Taken Reply, the Department has stated as under:—
" The recommendation of the Committee has been noted."

10
1.19 The concept of Mid-Term Appraisal is to assess the
performance of the Five Year Plan period in respect of schemes of the
Departments, performed by the NITI Aayog in order to enable the
Ministries/Departments to take stock of the situation and address
shortcomings noticed in the implementation of their schemes.
However, the Committee had noted with concern that the mid-term
appraisal of the Department for the 12th Plan has not been
undertaken. In its Action Taken Reply, the Department has given a
casual reply stating that the recommendation has been noted. The
Department has not elaborated about the initiatives undertaken by
them in this regard and the progress made therein. Presuming that
NITI Aayog has completed its mid-term appraisal of the Department
then what corrective measures have been undertaken by the
Department to reorient its policies and programmes accordingly. The
Committee would like to be apprised of the actions taken by the
Department in this regard.
F. Outstanding Utilization Certificates
Recommendation (Para No. 7)
1.20 The Committee had observed/recommended as under:
"The Committee are anguished to note that 190 outstanding Utilization
Certificates (UCs) amounting to Rs. 207.54 crore as on 31.12.2015
are pending and not even a single UC has been liquidated during the
period from 01.04.2015 to 31.12.2015. The Committee express their
strong displeasure on the issue which clearly reflects that the follow-
up mechanism currently in place is ineffective and unsatisfactory to
address the issue. Needless to say, under utilization of funds leads to
vicious cycle of lower allocations in subsequent years and concomitantly
leads to downsizing of targets. The Committee, therefore, feel that the
extant mechanism in place need to be re-looked into and necessary
corrective measures need to be undertaken for liquidation of
outstanding UCs in a time bound manner ensuring release of Central
funds unhindered for effective implementation of its schemes. The
Committee, therefore, recommend that the corrective measures may
be undertaken to address the issue and apprise them of the action
initiated in this regard."

11
1.21 In its Action Taken Reply, the Department has stated as under:
"As per General Financial Rules, UCs become due only after completion
of one year for the grants released during the year. The addition of
UCs for a particular year and liquidation of the old UCs are regular
process of UCs monitoring and status of UCs are reported as on net
accounting basis. The Department has taken various steps to liquidate
the outstanding Utilization Certificates. This includes repeated follow-
up with the State Governments and implementing agencies for sending
the pending UCs, including holding monthly review meetings with the
senior officers of the States where the issue of pending UCs is one
of the priority agenda items. The Principal Accounts Office is also in
the process of creating a web-based portal for monitoring and
settlement of UCs. Payments are not being made without submission
of the UCs. As on 30.09.2016, 146 UCs are pending for only for an
amount of Rs.158.72 crores in respect of Grants released up to
31.03.2015."
1.22 The issue of non-submission of Utilization Certificates by
Implementing Agencies has been a cause of continuous and serious
concern to the Committee. This lack of financial discipline on the part
of the Implementing Agencies adversely affects the rapid growth and
development of the Animal Husbandry, Dairying and Fisheries Sector,
as a result of which the benefits of the various schemes, implemented
by the Department do not percolate down to the intended beneficiaries.
The data provided by the Department in its Action Taken Reply is for
the pending UCs as on 28.07.2016 for an amount of Rs. 158.72 crores
in respect of Grants released up to 31st March 2015. The Committee
feel that the outstanding amount for pending Utilization Certificates
clearly indicates the lackadaisical approach and inaction on the part
of the Implementing Agencies as well as absence of any institutional
mechanism at the apex level to rigorously monitor timely utilization
of funds. The Committee, therefore, reiterate their earlier
recommendation that the Department needs to take corrective
measures at the earliest so that outstanding UCs are liquidated without
further delay. The Committee would like to be apprised of the concrete
action taken by the Department in this regard and also about the latest
update about pending UCs.

12
G . Development of Inland Fisheries and Aquaculture
Recommendation (Para No. 15)
1.23 The Committee had observed/recommended as under:
"The Committee note that the Development of Inland Fisheries and
Aquaculture scheme being implemented under different components
through the State Governments/UTs covers all the inland fishery
resources available in the country in the form of fresh water, brackish
water, cold water, water logged areas, saline/alkaline soils for
aquaculture and capture fisheries including reservoirs. Since the
inception of the scheme, 8,90,403 hectares of freshwater bodies and
45,952 hectares of brackish water bodies have been developed
benefitting 15,60,863 and 39,896 fishers, respectively, till 31.12.2015.
During 2015-16, 5,414 hectares of freshwater bodies and 218 hectares
of brackish water bodies have been developed benefitting 8,000 fishers
and 400 fishers respectively. However, the full potential of inland
fishery resources in the country largely remains untapped. In order to
boost the fish production in the country, it is but imperative that the
area of aquaculture in the country be expanded. The Committee
strongly feel that Fisheries in India is a very important economic
activity. A large section of the people in the country are dependent on
fisheries activities for their livelihood. It not only meet the domestic
needs of the people but also earn precious foreign exchange for the
country from fish and fisheries products. The Committee, therefore,
recommend that all inland derelict water bodies, reservoirs, canals,
drains , ponds, tanks etc. may be brought within the ambit of fisheries
activities for sustained growth and development of the fisheries sector
in the country without affecting the biodiversity of the area. The
Committee also note that the Government recognizes the need of
availability of quality seed and feed for the development of inland
fisheries and aquaculture. However, presently there is a gap of about
4610 million fry. The Committee, therefore, desire that the Department
may set up brood banks and hatcheries on priority basis. During the
course of evidence, the Secretary of the Department informed the
Committee that various fisheries schemes are being restructured under
Blue Revolution and norms and guidelines are being formulated. The
Committee expect the Department to formulate these norms and
guidelines without further loss of time. The Committee hope that norms

13
and guidelines being formulated under restructured schemes of Blue
Revolution will address the issues which hinders the rapid growth and
development of inland fisheries sector.
The Committee express concern over the fact that there are
humongous losses of indigenous breeds of fishes due to reasons such
as drying up of local or inland water bodies, percolation of harmful
chemicals in the water bodies by ways of using chemical fertilizers
and pesticides in farming etc. The Committee therefore desire that
corrective measures may be undertaken in coordination with all
concerned to check such losses on priority basis. The Committee
would like to be apprised of the initiatives undertaken by the
Department in this regard."
1.24 In its Action Taken Reply, the Department has stated as under:
"During the year 2015-16, under the scheme 'Development of Inland
Fisheries and Aquaculture', 12.107 ha. of freshwater bodies and 1325
ha. of Brackish water bodies have been developed, benefitting 25,781
farmers and 520 farmers respectively. The Cabinet Committee on
Economic Affairs (CCEA) has considered and approved the restructured
Scheme on "Blue Revolution: Integrated Development and Management
of Fisheries" during December, 2015. In order to implement the scheme
the Department has issued an administrative approval of the scheme
on 20-05-2016. The revised guidelines and Unit cost/norms of the
restructured Central Sector Scheme have also been issued in
consultation with State Governments/UTs on 30.06.2016.
All inland derelict water bodies, reservoirs, canals, drains, ponds, tanks
etc. are covered under the new scheme within the ambit of fisheries
for sustained growth and development of the fisheries sector in the
country with bio-security measures. In order to fulfill the gap of fish
seed requirement, assistance for setting up of brood banks, hatcheries
have been provisioned under the new restructured scheme. Additionally,
feed mills both small and large sized have also been provisioned.
The Department sensitizes the State Governments and Union Territories
through notification of Schemes, State Minister's/Secretary level
conferences, Zonal level meetings besides regular monitoring, field
visits and bio-security checks on priority basis. The Guidelines for
Developing Fish Seed Certification & Accreditation System in India and

14
Guidelines for the States for framing a bill on Inland Fisheries and
Aquaculture have been issued to all the State Governments/UTs in order
to have uniformity in the measures taken by States/UTs for
development of fisheries in a sustainable manner. Besides, the
Department has also issued Guidelines for fisheries Management in
small, medium and large reservoirs including the associated tanks and
ponds in the command areas in the country for conservation and
optimum utilization of the productivity of reservoirs for sustained
production of valuable fish protein."
1.25 While taking note of the efforts of the Department for
attaining sustained growth and development of the fisheries sector, the
Committee are concerned to note that the Department in its Action
Taken Reply, is silent over the issue concerning the humongous loss
of indigenous breeds of fishes due to reasons such as drying up of local
or inland water bodies and percolation of harmful chemicals in water
bodies etc. The Committee therefore reiterate earlier recommendation
that corrective measures may be undertaken by the Department to
prevent the losses of indigenous breeds of fishes. The Committee
would like to be apprised of the actions initiated by the Department
in this direction.

15
CHAPTER II
OBSERV ATIONS/ RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH HA VE BEEN
ACCEPTED BY THE GOVERNMENT
Implementation of the Committee's Recommendations
Recommendation (Para No. 1)
1. The Committee note that the Action Taken Replies regarding the
action taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations
contained in the Eleventh Report of the Committee were furnished by the
Government within the stipulated three months. The Committee further note
that in pursuance of Direction 73-A of Directions by the Speaker, Lok Sabha,
the Minister concerned is required to make a Statement on the status of
implementation of Observations / Recommendations contained in the Original
Reports of the Committee within six months of their presentation to the
Parliament. However, the Committee note that the Minister concerned did
not make the Statement under Direction 73-A in the context of Eleventh
Report of the Committee within the stipulated time. The Committee take
strong exception to the failure of the Ministry to adhere to stipulations laid
down under Direction 73-A. The Committee expect the Ministry to strictly
follow the stipulations under Direction 73-A and hope that such lapses will
not be repeated in future. The analysis of the action taken by the Government
reveals that 65.40% Recommendations of the Committee have been
implemented. 11.53% Recommendations have not been implemented and
23.07% of Recommendations are in various stages of implementation. The
Committee desire the Government to take conclusive action in respect of
the nine Recommendations commented upon in their Twenty-first Action
Taken Report and furnish further action taken notes to the Committee
expeditiously.
Reply of the Government
Recommendations of the Hon'ble Committee have been noted for strict
compliance in future. Complying to the recommendations of the Hon'ble
Committee, the Department has made all efforts to submit the Action Taken
Report within stipulated time.

16
The Minister's Statement under the Direction 73-A of Directions by
Speaker, Lok Sabha in the context of Eleventh Report had been made in
Lok Sabha and Rajya Sabha on 03.05.2016 and 06.05.2016 respectively.
Department had already furnished further action taken note in respect
of recommendations on which Committee has commented in Twenty-first
Report on 24.02.2016.
[Ministry of Agriculture and Farmers Welfare (Department of Animal
Husbandry, Dairying and Fisheries) F.No. 25-5(2)/2016-AHD
(Coord.) dated 01.08.2016]
Share of the Department of Animal Husbandry,
Dairying and Fisheries in Central Plan
Recommendation (Para No. 2)
2. Animal Husbandry, Dairying and Fisheries activities along with
agriculture continue to be an integral part of human life since the process
of civilization started. These activities have contributed to the food basket,
draught animal power and also helped in maintaining ecological balance.
These activities also play a significant role in generating gainful employment
in the rural sector, particularly among the landless, small and marginal
farmers and women besides providing cheap and nutrition food to millions
of peoples. According to estimates of the Central Statistics Office (CSO),
the Value of output from the livestock sector at current prices was about
Rs. 7,33,054 crore during 2014-15 which is about 28.7% of the Value of
output from agricultural and allied sector. At constant prices the value of
output from livestock is about 27.8% of the output from total agriculture
and allied sector. Fisheries is a sunrise sector with varied resources and
potential, engaging over 14.50 million people at the primary level and many
more along the value chain transformation of the fisheries sector from
tradition to commercial scale has led to an increase in fish production from
7.5 lakh tonne in 1950-51 to 101.64 lakh tonne (Provisional) during 2014-
15, while the export earnings from the sector registered at Rs. 33,441.61
crore in 2014-15 (US $ 5.51 billion). The sector contributed about 0.9%
to the National Gross Domestic Product (GDP) and 5.17% to the agricultural
GDP (2014-15). However, the Committee note with concern that when the
issue of distribution of financial resources crops up, the Animal Husbandry,
Dairying and Fisheries sector gets neglected. This is evident from the fact
that the percentage share of the Department of Animal Husbandry, Dairying

17
and Fisheries stands at just 0.33% in the Twelfth Plan vis-a-vis 0.38% in
the Eleventh Plan, although in monetary terms, the allocation stands at
Rs. 8174.00 crore in the Eleventh Plan, which increased to Rs.14,179.00
crore in the Twelfth Plan. However, the Committee are of the firm opinion
that this too is grossly inadequate as a result the various schemes undertaken
by the Department have been adversely affected as accepted by the
Department. Keeping in view the importance of Animal Husbandry, Dairying
and Fisheries Sector in supplementing the income of our farmers and its
role in national economy and in the socio-economic development of the
Country, the Committee, therefore strongly advocate that the share of the
Department in the Central Plan should be increased at par with its
contribution in the national economy in terms of GDP and the Department
should accordingly impress upon the Ministry of Finance to provide the
requisite allocation to them at the RE stage for effective implementation of
its various schemes. The Committee would like to be apprised of the
initiatives undertaken by the Department in this regard.
Reply of the Government
The observations of the Committee are noted. Department had
requested Ministry of Finance for enhancing the share of Department in the
Plan allocation for supplementing the efforts of States for providing the
additional means of sustenance in terms of wealth/security and employment
to the farming community mostly comprising of small and marginal farmers
residing in the rural areas. The allocation for the financial year 2016-17 has
been increased by 7.3% over the allocation for financial year 2015-16.
[Ministry of Agriculture and Farmers Welfare (Department of Animal
Husbandry, Dairying and Fisheries) F.No. 25-5(2)/2016-AHD
(Coord.) dated 01.08.2016]
Comments of the Committee
For comments of the Committee please refer to Para No. 1.7 of Chapter
I of this Report.
Allocation of Funds
Recommendation (Para No. 3)
3. During the course of the examination of Demands for Grants
(2016-17) of the Department of Animal Husbandry, Dairying and Fisheries,
the Committee have observed that during the first five year of the Twelfth

18
Plan i.e. 2012-13, 2013-14, 2014-15, 2015-16 and 2016-17, a huge variation
exists between amount proposed by the Department and the amount allocated
by erstwhile Ministry of Finance. For the year 2012-13, against the proposal
of Rs.3497.50 crore, the allocation was Rs. 1910.00 crore (54.61%). During
the year 2013-14, the Department was allocated Rs. 2025.00 crore against
the proposal of Rs. 3025.00 crore (66.94%). Again for the 2014-15, the
proposal was for Rs. 3535.00 crore but the allocation made was Rs. 2174.00
crore (61.49%). During the year 2015-16, against a proposal of Rs. 4527.79
crore, the allocation was a meagre Rs. 1491.14 crore (32.93%). During the
current fiscal year 2016-17, against a proposal of Rs. 3231.43 crore, the
allocation was again a meagre Rs. 1600.00 crore (49.51%). This mismatch
between the proposed allocation and the actual allocation is a cause of
concern to the Committee. During the course of evidence, it was informed
to the Committee that Foot and Mouth Disease is very dangerous for the
cattle which can affect the production of milk and the productivity of the
cattle but they have received Rs. 200 crore less for the National Disease
Control Programme. Further, the next Livestock Census is scheduled to be
held in the year 2017 and the Department have already undertaken a few
activities in this direction. For this, the Department demanded a total of
Rs. 387 crore against which they have been received a very meagre sum
of Rs. 22 crore. Preliminary activities for the impending Livestock Census
will have to be undertaken this year and for this the Department requires
an additional amount of Rs. 54 crore. As a result of lesser allocation of funds,
the Committee are apprehensive that the implementation of the various
schemes undertaken by the Department may be adversely affected which
in turn may hinder the growth and development of the animal husbandry,
dairying and fisheries sector of the economy. In view of the foregoing, the
Committee therefore, strongly advocate that the Department should be
allocated requisite funds as demanded by them and recommend that the
Department should vigorously urge the Ministry of Finance to allocate the
funds as proposed by them as otherwise the performance of the Department
may be adversely affected for want of funds. The Committee would like
to be apprised of the initiatives undertaken by them in this regard.
Reply of the Government
The Department had proposed an allocation of Rs.3231.43 crore as
BE for 2016-17; however Ministry of Finance keeping in view the overall
resource position and the inter-se priorities for allocation among competing

19
demands from different sectors had allocated a BE of Rs.1600.00 crore for
2016-17. The Ministry of Finance would be requested for a higher allocation
at RE stage during 2016-17.
[Ministry of Agriculture and Farmers Welfare (Department of Animal
Husbandry, Dairying and Fisheries) F.No. 25-5(2)/2016-AHD
(Coord.) dated 01.08.2016]
Comments of the Committee
For comments of the Committee please refer to Para No. 1.10 of
Chapter I of this Report.
Allocation and Utilization of Funds
Recommendation (Para No. 4)
4. The Committee note with concern that consequent to the award
of the 14th Finance Commission, higher devolution of funds have been made
to the States with corresponding reduction in the Central Budget, which has
resulted in reduction of BE for 2016-17 of the Department of Animal
Husbandry, Dairying and Fisheries. The BE for 2016-17 for the Department
is to the tune of Rs. 1600.00 crore as compared to Rs.1910.00 crore,
Rs. 2025.00 crore, Rs. 2174.00 crore and Rs. 1491.14 crore for the fiscals
2012-13, 2013-14, 2014-15 and 2015-16 respectively. Furthermore the
allocated amount is as less as 49.51% of the funds sought by the Department
after making considered assessment of their projects and priorities.
According to the Department, the present allocation is grossly inadequate
to achieve the targets set under its various schemes. However, the Committee
are constrained to note that even the funds allocated to the Department has
not been fully utilised. Out of the RE figures of Rs. 6891.14 crore for the
first four fiscals, the actual expenditure as on 18.02.2016 amounts to
Rs. 6428.70 crore only, which in percentage terms is 93.28% of the RE.
This highlights the unsatisfactory financial performance of the Department.
The Committee, therefore, feel that the Department needs to revisit their plan
of action drafted for optimum utilization of funds allocated to them and take
corrective measures to achieve the laid down financial and physical targets.
The Committee would like to be apprised of the initiatives undertaken by
the Department in this regard.
Reply of the Government
Department has utilized 96.26% fund out of the allocated fund during
last four Financial Years of the 12th Five Year Plan. The Department is trying

20
to utilize the funds allocated to it fully. States/Implementing agencies are
continuously reminded through monthly meetings and video conferences to
liquidate the pending Utilization certificates and submit proposal for fund
release for the current financial year.
[Ministry of Agriculture and Farmers Welfare (Department of Animal
Husbandry, Dairying and Fisheries) F.No. 25-5(2)/2016-AHD
(Coord.) dated 01.08.2016]
Comments of the Committee
For comments of the Committee please refer to Para No. 1.13 of
Chapter I of this Report.
Results Framework Document (RFD)
Recommendation (Para No. 5)
5. The Committee note with concern that the Department drops in
composite score from a high of 95.48% in 2012-13 to 91.97% in 2013-
14. The provisional composite score of 67.41% for the year 2014-15 is also
highly unsatisfactory although the composite score for the same has not been
uploaded/communicated by the Cabinet Secretariat. The Committee are well
aware that Animal Husbandry, Dairying and Fisheries being a State subject,
the role of Department gets restricted to a broad policy formulation and the
implementation of Schemes lies with the implementing agencies i.e. the
States and Union Territories, who are independent constitutional entities. In
their explanation, the Department has attributed reduction in budgetary
allocation at RE stage to achieve targets over and above the set targets to
excellent score of 100% in RFD. However, the Committee are not satisfied
with this explanation of the Department and are of the strong view that the
Department simply cannot just ignore their responsibility being the nodal
authority, for drop in composite score from a high of 95.48% in 2012-13
to 91.97% in 2013-14. If the funds get reduced at RE stage then none but
themselves need to be blamed for their failure to impress upon the Planning
Commission/Ministry of Finance for allocation of funds as per their demand.
Being the nodal authority, it is but imperative for them to make sound plan
of action for effective and speedy implementation of the schemes undertaken
by them for timely and optimum utilization of funds. The Committee,
therefore, recommend that corrective measures may be undertaken by the
Department to improve their performance to get excellent score in RFD.

21
The Committee also urge the Department to impress upon the Cabinet
Secretariat to forward the composite score for the Fiscal 2014-15, so that
requisite remedial action could be undertaken by them for effective
implementation of its schemes and thereby improving their performance to
score high in RFD.
Reply of the Government
As per performance evaluation report for the year 2014-15, obtained
from the website of RFMS Cabinet Secretariat, the total composite score
of this department is 67.41%. The reason for shortfall in achievement to
get excellent score of 100% in RFD is reduction in budgetary allocation at
RF stage from Rs. 2174 crore to Rs.1800 crore during 2014-15.
This Department is regularly monitoring the progress of implementing
the Schemes with State Governments/Implementing Agencies to improve the
performance through monthly meetings with Principal Secretaries (Animal
Husbandry) of State Governments, Video Conference, field visits of Senior
Officers etc.
[Ministry of Agriculture and Farmers Welfare (Department of Animal
Husbandry, Dairying and Fisheries) F.No. 25-5(2)/2016-AHD
(Coord.) dated 01.08.2016]
Comments of the Committee
For comments of the Committee please refer to Para No. 1.16 of
Chapter I of this Report.
Mid-term Appraisal
Recommendation (Para No. 6)
6. The Committee note with concern that the mid-term appraisal of
the performance of the 12th Plan in respect of the Department has not been
undertaken as a result, the Committee feel that the Department has lost the
opportunity to evaluate the performance of it various schemes and to
undertake the corrective measures to address the shortcomings noticed in
the implementation of its schemes. However, the Committee were informed
that the exercise has now been undertaken by NITI Aayog. The Committee
hope that the mid-term appraisal of the Department would be conducted by
NITI Aayog without further delay and the requisite inputs of the appraisal
would be available to the Department to undertake corrective interventions

22
as and where necessary to reorient its policies and programmes for the
remaining period of the 12th Plan.
Reply of the Government
The recommendation of the Committee has been noted.
[Ministry of Agriculture and Farmers Welfare (Department of Animal
Husbandry, Dairying and Fisheries) F.No. 25-5(2)/2016-AHD
(Coord.) dated 01.08.2016]
Comments of the Committee
For comments of the Committee please refer to Para No. 1.19 of
Chapter I of this Report.
Outstanding Utilization Certificates
Recommendation (Para No. 7)
7. The Committee are anguished to note that 190 outstanding
Utilization Certificates (UCs) amounting to Rs. 207.54 crore as on
31.12.2015 are pending and not even a single UC has been liquidated during
the period from 01.04.2015 to 31.12.2015. The Committee express their
strong displeasure on the issue which clearly reflects that the follow-up
mechanism currently in place is ineffective and unsatisfactory to address
the issue. Needless to say, under utilization of funds leads to vicious cycle
of lower allocations in subsequent years and concomitantly leads to
downsizing of targets. The Committee, therefore, feel that the extant
mechanism in place need to be re-looked in to and necessary corrective
measures need to be undertaken for liquidation of outstanding UCs in a time
bound manner ensuring release of Central funds unhindered for effective
implementation of its schemes. The Committee, therefore, recommend that
the corrective measures may be undertaken to address the issue and apprise
them of the action initiated in this regard.
Reply of the Government
As per General Financial Rules, UCs become due only after completion
of one year for the grants released during the year. The addition of UCs
for a particular year and liquidation of the old UCs are regular process of
UCs monitoring and status of UCs are reported as on net accounting basis.
The Department has taken various steps to liquidate the outstanding

23
Utilization Certificates. This includes repeated follow-up with the State
Governments and implementing agencies for sending the pending UCs,
including holding monthly review meetings with the senior officers of the
States where the issue of pending UCs is one of the priority agenda items.
The Principal Accounts Office is also in the process of creating a web-based
portal for monitoring and settlement of UCs. Payments are not being made
without submission of the UCs.
As on 28.07.2016, UCs are pending for only for an amount of
Rs.158.72 crore in respect of Grants released upto 31.03.2015.
[Ministry of Agriculture and Farmers Welfare (Department of Animal
Husbandry, Dairying and Fisheries) F.No. 25-5(2)/2016-AHD
(Coord.) dated 01.08.2016]
Comments of the Committee
For comments of the Committee please refer to Para No. 1.22 of
Chapter I of this Report.
Establishment and Strengthening of Existing Veterinary
Hospitals and Dispensaries
Recommendation (Para No. 8)
8. The Committee note with deep concern that there is acute
shortage of infrastructure and professionally qualified veterinary doctors in
the country to take care of the vast resource of livestock and poultry in
the country. Presently, the number of registered veterinary doctors in the
county is only 67800 as against the requirement of around 1.15 lakh
veterinary doctors in the country. Huge scarcity of veterinary doctors has
arisen but for the failure of the Government to take corrective measures
over the years. Further, in spite of 11,367 veterinary hospitals/polyclinics,
26,034 veterinary dispensaries and 23,722 veterinary aid centers, the
Committee feel that the present animal healthcare infrastructure is not grossly
adequate to take care of the sheer size of the animal population of the country.
Healthcare facilities available in the veterinary hospitals/poly clinics/
dispensaries are also too inadequate with no option for hospitalization of the
sick animal, in case of any emergent need. Necessary equipment/machines
and medicines are also not adequately available in the veterinary hospitals/
polyclinics/colleges to treat the sick animal. Farmers are compelled to travel
long distances along with their animals in order to gain access to primary

24
animals health centres. This situation has arisen as the issue concerning
animal healthcare services failed to get the kind of attention from the
Government that it deserves and no corrective measures taken by the
Government to address the issue over the years.
During the course of evidence, it was brought to the notice of the
Committee that the Government has taken a slew of steps to overcome the
shortfall of veterinary doctors by increasing the number of veterinary
colleges by 10 from 36 to 46 and the admission intake in 17 colleges. 10
colleges have also been granted permission to recognize degree students.
In addition, 5 new colleges will also receive recognition. As a result of this
exercise, the number of doctors in hospital will increase and the problem
of shortage of veterinary doctors will be resolved. However, it may take
10 to 15 years before these shortages of veterinary doctors are filled up.
However, these steps are not adequate enough to meet the demand of animal
healthcare sector.
Owing to acute shortage of veterinary doctors and infrastructure in
the country, the delivery of animal health services has always remained a
great concern specially in rural and remote areas. The livelihood of the
farmers is adversely affected by the deficiency in the delivery of the animal
healthcare service which in turn affect the overall performance of the sector.
Given that livelihood of small and marginal farmers often depends on
livestock, the issue concerning animal healthcare needs to be addressed
objectively and comprehensively. The rearing of livestock helps in time of
economic distress and reduces the vulnerability of rural households. It
supports agriculture in the form of critical inputs, contributes to the health
and nutrition of the household and supplement its income and offers
employment opportunities. The Committee, therefore, recommend that the
entire issue concerning animal healthcare may be revisited and considered
in a holistic manner. Further, immediate steps may be undertaken to augment
expansion of animals healthcare paraphernalia covering the entire country.
Guidelines may also be formulated for recognition of more number of
colleges providing education in animal healthcare sector. Veterinary practices
may be incentivized and upgraded in coordination with the Veterinary Council
of India (VCI) and the State V eterinary Councils across the country. The
Committee would like to be apprised of the action taken by the Department
on the issues stated above.

25
The Committee were also informed that the Government has trained
about 10500 persons as MAITRI (Multi-Purpose AI Technician in Rural
India) and they also propose to train about thirty thousand persons in the
next two years. They will also train fishermen taken from villages, for high
seas. The Committee desire that the short duration course of MAITRI should
be popularised amongst the youth particularly rural youth and they should
be attracted and enrolled for training and appointment as MAITRI to augment
the veterinary staff at the primary level.
Reply of the Government
Veterinary hospitals, dispensaries, polyclinics etc. are set up by the
States/Union Territory (UT) Governments depending upon the livestock
population in a particular area and availability of resources. However, in order
to address the need to set up new veterinary hospitals/dispensaries by the
States/UTs and to strengthen/equip the existing ones, so as to improve
veterinary infrastructure in the States/UTs the Department of Animal
Husbandry, Dairying and Fisheries is providing financial assistance to States/
UTs under 'Establishment and Strengthening of existing Veterinary Hospitals
& Dispensaries (ESVHD)', a component of Centrally Sponsored Scheme
'Livestock Health & Disease Control (LH&DC)' since August, 2010. The
scheme is continued during 12th Plan Period with inclusion of new activity
for setting up of Mobile Veterinary Clinics by the States/UTs for improving
the quality of veterinary healthcare by providing the doorstep delivery of
veterinary services.
A sum of Rs. 13.00 crore and Rs.9.88 crore was provided as BE &
RE, respectively for the year 2015-16 against which a sum of Rs. 11.40
crore was released to States/UTs under the scheme.
During the year 2016-17 an amount of Rs. 4.00 crore has been
earmarked under the scheme. The Department has requested all States/UTs
to explore the possibility to undertake strengthening of Veterinary
infrastructure by availing more funds under other Scheme such as RKVY ,
RIDF including dovetailing with MPLAD funds etc. so as to cater adequate
veterinary health in States/UTs.
Veterinary Council of India has already enhanced the annual admissions
in 17 existing Colleges and ten new Veterinary Colleges have been included
in the First Schedule and has also allowed admission to six new colleges
under establishment. Further, the Council has framed Minimum Standards

26
of Veterinary Education (MSVE) Regulations, 2016 which provides for 80
annual admissions instead of 60 annual admissions as against previous MSVE
2008. All these measures have increased the total annual admission to
approximately 4100 graduates from the earlier 2311 (about 1800).
As regards, steps taken to augment expansion of animal healthcare,
the Veterinary Council of India has framed VCI Practice Regulation and has
sought comments from all State Animal Husbandry departments in the
context of current status of veterinary practice and technologies involved
in such practice. The Council has already received comments from 20 States
which have been conveyed after a meeting conducted by the respective State
Veterinary Councils. The comments thus, received are being processed
towards finalizing the draft regulations.
The Council is now envisaging framing rules under the provisions of
Section 64 read with Section 15(2) of the Indian Veterinary Council Act,
1984. As regarding upgrading of veterinary practice, once the VCI practice
regulation is implemented, the same shall help in upgrading the veterinary
practice delivery system in the country. The above mentioned actions will
encourage and streamline the establishment of many more new veterinary
colleges.
The recommendation of the Committee has been noted.
[Ministry of Agriculture and Farmers Welfare (Department of Animal
Husbandry, Dairying and Fisheries) F.No. 25-5(2)/2016-AHD
(Coord.) dated 01.08.2016]
Development of Poultry
Recommendation (Para No. 9)
9. The Committee express their satisfaction on noting that the
poultry production in the country has taken a quantum leap in the last four
decades, emerging from an unscientific farming practice to commercial
production system with state-of-the-art technological interventions. The
Poultry sector is growing nearly at 5%. It has become economically viable
sector. The Committee also express satisfaction over the efforts of the
Department in spreading awareness on the nutritive value of eggs and
highlight its importance in human nutrition, by organising events.
Considering the nutritional benefits of the eggs, the Department is also
advising the State/UT Governments to include eggs in Mid-Day Meal/

27
Integrated Child Development Scheme. However, the Committee would like
to urge the Department to take this initiative a step forward and hold vigorous
awareness programmes amongst the people about the nutritional value of
egg specially in the rural, backward and tribal areas of the country suffering
from malnutrition and diseases. Since poultry play a vital role in improving
the socio-economic conditions of the rural people, it is but imperative that
they are given extensive training to upgrade their skills in the field of poultry
farming which would in turn help them to augment their productivity and
may earn them a sustainable income.
The Committee note presently Central Poultry Development Organisations
(CPDOs) are located at four regions viz. Chandigarh, Bhubaneswar, Mumbai
and Hessarghatta and one Central Poultry Performance Testing Centre
located at Gurgaon have been playing a pivotal role in the implementation
of the policies of the Government with respect to poultry. However, the
Committee would like the Department to find out the feasibility for
establishment of one CPDO in North Eastern region specially to focus the
indigenous people of the region to help them to improve their socio-economic
condition through poultry farming.
The Committee note that Government is implementing a scheme which
would insulate the poultry population of the region against the deadly Avian
Influenza (AI), which is a highly devastating disease of the birds. However,
in spite of the various measures undertaken by the Government to control
and containment of Avian Influenza outbreak as well as prevent its ingress
into the country, a number of States in the country are being affected as
a result of outbreak of the disease now and then every year and as a result,
a large number of birds are culled in the affected zone of 0-1 Km in order
to check its spread and transmission to human beings. The Committee,
therefore, would like that strict surveillance and vigilance be kept about the
outbreak of the disease and State Governments as well as general public
be sensitized through extensive and intensive campaigns/alerts in this regard.
The Committee also desire that check points be established at the border
areas at the earliest to screen birds affecting from Avian Flu before they
are allowed to cross the border to enter into the country. The Committee
would like to be apprised of the action taken by the Department in this regard.
Reply of the Government
The Department would continue to spread the awareness about
nutritive quality of eggs amongst the masses. The Central Poultry

28
Development Organisations (CPDOs) are conducting training for the
backyards poultry farmers and entrepreneurs. Besides, a Skill Development
Centre for poultry activities has been established at Central Poultry
Development Organisation & Training Institute, Hessarghatta. In addition to
this 4 Qualification Packs for skill development for identified trades of
poultry are framed so far.
Currently CPDO (Eastern Region), Bhubaneswar is coordinating and
catering for Eastern & North Eastern Region States. However, as directed,
feasibility for establishment of one CPDO in NER will be assessed.
Avian Influenza is caused by a deadly virus. The ducks and migratory
birds usually harbor the virus without showing any signs of the disease. The
disease is reported time and again across the world, including the most
industrious countries due to movement of migratory birds. However, in order
to prevent the ingress of the disease in the country and for its control and
containment, all necessary precautions are being taken. The Department has
issued a robust surveillance plan for the effective control & containment
of Avian Influenza in the country. The Department has evolved an Action
Plan for Prevention, Control & Containment of Avian Influenza (AI). The
advisories are issued to States from time to time to strengthen the
preparedness, upgrade the laboratories, train the manpower, stockpile the
materials and sensitize the general public on Avian Influenza through
Information, Education and Communication (IEC) campaigns.
All the State Governments are alerted from time to time to be vigilant
about the outbreak of the disease, if any. Imports of poultry and poultry
products have been banned completely from AI positive countries. All poultry
or poultry products are allowed in the country only through the six quarantine
stations. Border check posts with neighbouring countries have been alerted
to be vigilant on illegal movement of poultry and poultry products. From
time to time on various aspects of disease control, surveillance and
importance of bio-security, advisories are issued to the States for further
guidance of poultry farmers. The States sharing international boundaries are
alerted when outbreak is reported in the neighbouring countries.
[Ministry of Agriculture and Farmers Welfare (Department of Animal
Husbandry, Dairying and Fisheries) F.No. 25-5(2)/2016-AHD
(Coord.) dated 01.08.2016]

29
Development of Dairy Sector
Recommendation (Para No. 10)
10. The Committee note with satisfaction that Dairy Sector has
experienced a substantial growth over the years owing to prudent policy
intervention by the Government. India ranks first among the world's milk
producing nations achieving an annual output of 146.31 million tonnes during
the year 2014-15 as compared to 137.68 million tonnes during 2013-14
recording a growth of 6.26 %. Dairying has become an important secondary
source of income for women and marginal farmers. The per capita
availability of milk has reached a level of 332 grams per day during the year
2014-15 which is more than the world average of 294 grams per day in
2013. Appreciating the efforts of the Government over the years, the
Committee urge the Government to augment its efforts for sustained growth
and development of the dairy sector to increase the availability of milk and
milk products to meet the demand of the growing population in the country.
The Committee would like to be apprised of the initiatives undertaken by
the Department in this regard.
Reply of the Government
As regards the issue of per capita availability of milk, it may be noted
that the correct figure of per capita availability of milk may be read as 322gm
per day instead of 332 gm per day. In order to meet the growing demand
of milk &milk products this department is implementing following three dairy
development schemes as central sector schemes during 12th Plan:
1. National Programme for Bovine Breeding & Dairy Development
(NPBBDD)
2. Dairy Entrepreneurship Development Scheme (DEDS)
3. National Dairy Plan - Phase I
In addition to above, a new scheme "Supporting State Cooperative
Dairy Federations" during severely adverse market conditions, natural
calamities or unforeseen exigencies has been approved by the Standing
Finance Committee during 2015-16. The scheme will be implemented by
National Dairy Development Board. The budget provision of Rs.40.0 crore
has been allocated for the year 2016-17. Further, The Department is in
process of envisaging dairy development under JICA (Japan International

30
Cooperation Agency) fund. NDDB has submitted a proposal in this regard.
This department has given in principle approval on the proposal. Department
of Economic Affairs has also informed that NDDB has been given sovereign
guarantee to implement JICA project in the country. DADF is presently
examining the Detailed Project Report (DPR) submitted by NDDB and also
guarantee on allocation for 2016-17 from Department of Economic Affairs.
This department is also considering a proposal of dairy development
in Eastern India comprising of 100 districts in 7 States of Eastern India.
[Ministry of Agriculture and Farmers Welfare (Department of Animal
Husbandry, Dairying and Fisheries) F.No. 25-5(2)/2016-AHD
(Coord.) dated 01.08.2016]
Dairy Entrepreneurship Development Scheme (DEDS)
Recommendation (Para No. 12)
12. The Committee note that Dairy Entrepreneurship Development
Scheme (DEDS) is a Central Sector Scheme being implemented through
NABARD since September, 2010 with an objective to promote setting up
of modern dairy farms for production of clean milk, encourage heifer calf
rearing, bring structural changes in the unorganized sector and generate self-
employment. The Scheme provides back-ended subsidy @ 25% of the
project cost to the General Category and @33.33% of the project cost to
SC/ST category farmers and beneficiaries for bankable projects through
NABARD. Since inception, NABARD has disbursed Rs.889.35 crore as back
ended capital subsidy to the beneficiaries for setting up of 238822 dairy units
upto 30th November, 2015. Considering the avowed objectives of the
Scheme, the Committee recommend that the Government should continue
with the Scheme to boost the dairy sector in the country. However, the
Committee would like that the Government should create awareness amongst
the prospective individuals/entrepreneurs/farmers etc. about the objectives
of the Scheme through sustained campaign in print and media. The
Committee would like to be apprised of the action taken by the Department
in this regard.
Reply of the Government
The scheme has received overwhelming response from dairy
entrepreneurs across the country. The number of beneficiary unit has
increased from 1,978 in the year 2010-11 to 1,22,330 in the year 2013-14.

31
NABARD has disbursed Rs. 936.72 crore as back ended capital subsidy to
the beneficiaries for setting up of 247597 dairy units upto 31th May, 2016.
The availability of funds under the Scheme has been inadequate to meet
the demand from the year 2014-15. Department, has temporarily suspended
receipt of fresh applications across the country under General Category from
01.01.2015, due to overall budgetary cut during 2014-15. During 2015-16,
against a demand of Rs.400 Crore, there was a budgetary provision of
Rs.117 Crore (at RE Stage). Of this, Rs.99 Crore was allocated for General
Category. The entire fund allocated for General category during 2015-16 was
utilized to meet out the committed pending claims, which rolled over from
2014-15. At that time, Hon'ble Agriculture Minister, vide DO letter dated
01.01.2016, had requested the Hon'ble Finance Minister for additional fund
allocation of Rs. 200 crore for 2015-16. However, no additional fund was
received by the Department. Then, it was also requested that a budgetary
support of Rs.450 Crore may be made for DEDS for financial year
2016-17.
During the current financial year 2016-17, an amount of Rs. 140 crore
has been allocated at BE stage against request of Rs. 450 Crore. Based on
the availability of fund after clearance of pending claims, Department has
withdrawn suspension of receipt of fresh application under General Category
for a period of three months i.e. 01.05.2016 to 31.07.2016. Further
extension of the same may be provided subject to availability of fund under
the General component and request received from NABARD.
In order to ensure adequate publicity of the scheme, 1% of subsidy
disbursed in year is allowed to be spent by NABARD for publicity of scheme
across the country with special attention to North Eastern States to sensitize
potential beneficiaries.
Ministry of Agriculture and Farmers Welfare (Department of Animal
Husbandry, Dairying and Fisheries) F.No. 25-5(2)/2016-AHD (Coord.) dated
01.08.2016
Budgetary Allocations for Fisheries Sector
Recommendation (Para No. 13)
13. The Committee note that presently India is the second largest fish
producing and second aquaculture nation in the world. India is also a major
producer of fish through aquaculture and ranks second in the world after

32
China. The total fish production in 2014-15 (provisional) is at 10.16 million
tonnes (MT) with contribution of 6.51 MT from inland sector and 3.65 MT
from marine sector. The fish production during the first two quarters of
2014-15 is estimated at 7.54 MT (provisional). However, the Committee feel
that much remains to be done for sustained growth and development of
fishery sector to meet the ever growing demands of the country. According
to the Department, presently, fishery today is dominated mainly by the
freshwater fishery and in order to enhance production, there is a need for
diversification of fish production in other areas like integrated fish farming,
cold water fisheries, riverine fisheries, capture fisheries, brackish water
fisheries etc. For this, the Government needs to increase the allocation to
the fisheries sector. Bringing derelict water bodies into the ambit of fisheries
will boost fish production tremendously and therefore, expansion of the
fisheries in these water bodies is one of focus areas of the Department for
increasing fish production. However, the Committee feel that in the absence
of requisite allocation of funds, it would be difficult for the Department to
implement the various schemes restructured and merged under an umbrella
of Blue Revolution. The Committee note that out of the 12th Plan Outlay
of Rs. 2483.00 crore, the BE allocation for the first four fiscals amounts
to Rs. 1670.11 crore, which was reduced at RE stage to Rs. 996.05 crore
for the first three fiscals. The variation between the Plan Outlay and actual
allocation in the first three fiscals is Rs. 1486.95 crore. In spite of the fact
that the sector contributed about 0.9% to the National Gross Domestic
Product (GDP) and 5.17% to the agricultural GDP (2014-15) and earned
Rs. 33,441.61 crore in 2014-15, the same is not getting its due
encouragement from the Government, in terms of funding. The Committee,
therefore, recommend that keeping in view the contribution of fisheries
sector to the exchequer and GDP, the Government should go for a quantum
enhancement of allocation funds at RE level for this year and higher allocation
in future as per the demand of the Department for the fisheries sector to
enable them to boost fish production in the country. The Committee expect
that the Department should make concerted efforts to impress upon the
Ministry of Finance for allocation of funds as per their demand.
Simultaneously, the Committee desire that State Government and Implementing
Agencies be asked to come forward with their proposals under various
schemes being implemented by the Department and for timely submission
of utilization certificates of past allocations for unhindered release of funds.
The Committee would like to be apprised of the initiatives undertaken by
the Department in this regard.

33
Reply of the Government
As suggested by the Committee, a higher allocation of Rs. 548.30 crore
was proposed at the RE stage during the year 2015-16. However, the
Ministry received reduced allocation of Rs. 455.86 crore at RE stage. Also,
the Department has proposed Rs.539.39 crore for 2016-17 but the BE
2016-17 allocation of the Department is only Rs. 450.00 crore.
The allocation in future will be proposed as per the requirement of the
Department for the fisheries sector to boost fish production in the country.
The Cabinet Committee on Economic Affairs (CCEA) in its meeting
held on 22nd December, 2015, considered and approved the Central Sector
Scheme on "Blue Revolution: Integrated Development and Management of
Fisheries" at a total central outlay of Rs.3000 crore. In order to implement
the scheme the Department has issued the Administrative Approval of the
Scheme on 20-05-2016. The revised guidelines and cost norms of the
restructured Scheme have also been issued on 30.06.2016.
For development of fisheries sector, the Department sensitizes the State
Governments and Union Territories through notification of Schemes, State
Minister's /Secretary level conferences, Zonal level meetings besides regular
monitoring and field visits etc. for speedy implementation of the schemes,
projects and utilization of funds by the State/UT Governments. The
Department also supports the proposals of State Governments under
Rashtriya Krishi Vikas Yojana (RKVY) implemented by Department of
Agriculture, Cooperation and Farmers Welfare.
[Ministry of Agriculture and Farmers Welfare (Department of Animal
Husbandry, Dairying and Fisheries) F.No. 25-5(2)/2016-AHD
(Coord.) dated 01.08.2016]
National Scheme of Welfare of Fishermen
Recommendation (Para No. 14)
14. The Committee note that basic amenities such as housing,
drinking water facilities, community halls are provided for fishermen in their
fishing village under "National Scheme of Welfare of Fishermen". Insurance
coverage is also provided for fishermen engaged actively in fishing and
financial assistance to fishers during lean fishing season. During 2015-16
(up to 31/12/2015), 48,19,423 fishers provided insurance cover under Group

34
Accident Insurance component and 3,13,005 fishers provided relief under
Saving-cum-Relief component. An expenditure of Rs.33.47 crore was
incurred under the scheme during 2015-16 as against RE of Rs.43.49 crore
(up to 31.12.2015). However, the Committee are highly displeased to note
that as against the target of 6500 houses during 2015-16, only 789 fishermen
houses have been approved for construction till 31.12.2015. A paltry sum
of Rs. 70,000 is given by the Government to support housing for the
fishermen. This clearly reflects the lackadaisical approach of the
Government on the issue. Needless to say, fishermen come across as
miserable and neglected lot and fishing is the only vocation of their livelihood
for which they undertake traditional fishing practices without being equipped
with any modern technology/equipment. However, the Committee are happy
to note that the Government propose to enhance the subsidy being granted
to them for housing from Rs. 70000 to Rs.120000 in plain areas and
Rs.130000 for housing in hilly areas. Further, the Department is also
formulating a new scheme to train them in deep/high sea fishing for which
they will also be provided with vessel along with training for the purpose.
Under the proposed scheme, they will also be given subsidy for the purpose.
However, the Committee are of the strong view that these poor fishermen
should be granted subsidy to the extent of 50% and out of 50% they may
invest 25% of their money and the rest they may take loan from the Banks
as otherwise it would be difficult for them to survive. The Committee,
therefore, recommend that the proposed schemes/provisions may accordingly
be formulated in the interest of fishermen community without further loss
of time. The Committee would like to be apprised of the progress made in
this regard. The Committee would also like to be apprised of the status of
the number of houses already constructed and those approved and under
construction for the fishermen along with measures undertaken to train and
equip them with modern fishing practices/equipment for deep/high sea
fishing.
Reply of the Government
During 2015-16 (upto 31.03.2016), 50,56,924 fishers were provided
with insurance cover 4,43,493 fishers were provided relief assistance under
the Saving-cum-Relief component and construction of 4809 fishermen
houses were approved under the Central Sector Scheme on 'National Scheme
of Welfare of Fishermen'. An amount of Rs. 59.51 crore was incurred under
the scheme during 2015-16 as against the RE of Rs. 60.00 crore.

35
The Expenditure Finance Committee in its meeting held on 3rd August,
2015 had recommended for transfer of the housing component to Indira
Awaas Yojana (IAY). In view of this, the Department could not process the
new housing proposals for few months. However, subsequently after
obtaining the approval of CCEA on 22nd December, 2015 for implementation
of the Central Sector Scheme 'Blue Revolution: Integrated Development and
Management of Fisheries' including continuation of the housing component,
the Department had expedited approval of proposals and approved 4020
houses in the last quarter of the financial year totaling to 4809 houses during
2015-16. It may be further submitted that the unit cost of fishermen houses
under the restructured scheme has been enhanced to Rs. 1.20 lakh/house
in General States and Rs. 1.30 lakh/house in North Eastern & Himalayan
States as specified under PMAY . The Department during the last four years
of the 12th Plan had approved a total of 21,809 fishermen houses in various
States/UTs.
The draft of the scheme for promotion of traditional fishers for Deep-
sea Fishing has been prepared. The basic concept of the scheme was shared
with the Committee and has been maintained while drafting the scheme. The
recommendations of the Committee regarding training and pattern of
financial assistance to fishers has been noted for consideration in the
proposed scheme.
[Ministry of Agriculture and Farmers Welfare (Department of Animal
Husbandry, Dairying and Fisheries) F.No. 25-5(2)/2016-AHD
(Coord.) dated 01.08.2016]
Strengthening of Database & Geographical Information
System of the Fisheries Sector
Recommendation (Para No. 16)
16. The Committee are deeply concerned about the under utilization
of allocated funds under the scheme of Strengthening of Database and
Geographical Information System (GIS) of the fisheries sector. Out of the
total of Rs. 27.51 crores allocated at RE stage, only Rs. 22.53 crore (as
on 18.02.2016) could be utilised by the Department under the scheme.
Under-utilisation of funds clearly reflects that the Department did not have
plan of action for their activities for optimum utilisation of funds allocated
to them. Under utilisation of funds may lead to lower allocations of funds
in subsequent years and thus adversely affecting the activities taken under

36
the scheme. The Committee, therefore, recommend that the Department
should take all necessary steps for optimum utilisation of funds allocated
to them under the scheme and to achieve the targets fixed thereunder.
Though the Department have presented a range of information on the
components of the scheme, the Committee note with apprehension that there
are rampant instances of indiscriminate dredging from trawlers used in deep
sea fishing. It would be significant to observe that such harmful practices
not only ruin the biodiversity but also become the reason for huge losses
to the traditional fishermen in terms of catch. The Committee, therefore
recommend the Department to furnish detailed reports of catch assessment
survey of inland and marine fisheries, census of marine fisheries and
mapping of water bodies across the country. The Committee would also
like to be apprised of the steps taken to check practices of indiscriminate
fishing and illegal fish trade across the borders and the details regarding
development of GIS based fishery management system.
Reply of the Government
Total fund allocation during FY 2015-16 under the scheme Strengthening
of Database and GIS of fisheries sector was Rs. 4.95 crore (BE) which
was increased to Rs. 8.25 crore at RE stage and Rs. 7.59 crore was released
to the beneficiary States, UTs and subordinate Institutes during FY
2015-16. The utilization of funds was 92.03% of RE and 167% of BE.
Catch Assessment Survey of Inland and Marine fisheries was
successfully conducted in all the States and UTs during FY 2015-16 by
following the methodology of the Central Inland Fisheries Research Institute
(CIFRI). As per data supplied by the States and UTs, the total Fish
Production during 2015-16 was estimated at 107,95,485 MT (Provisional).
CIFRI has been developing the Geographical Information System (GIS)
mapping including digitization of water bodies having area more than 0.5
hectare and preparation of an e-Atlas. So far CIFRI has prepared e-Atlas
of 19 States. The GIS Mapping of smaller water bodies of size 0.2 - 0.5
hectare is going on in West Bengal on a pilot basis and about 70% work
has been completed as reported by the State Government. The work of
mapping of smaller water bodies was also taken up in Chhattisgarh.
The Field work of Marine Fisheries Census, 2016 was successfully
completed by CIFRI and FSI in all the Maritime States and UTs during FY
2015-16. The data collected during the Census is being compiled and

37
analysed by CIFRI and the Reports of Marine Fisheries Census, 2016 are
expected soon.
The Catch Assessment Survey in Indian Exclusive Economic Zone
(EEZ) is carried out periodically by the Fishery Survey of India (FSI).
Fishing within 12 Nautical mile is regulated by the Marine Fisheries
Regulation Acts (MFRA) of Coastal States/UTs.
The import of livestock products including fish & fishery products in
to the country is regulated through the Livestock Importation Act, 1898 as
amended in 2001. There are specific "guidelines" for import of ornamental
fishes, tilapia, seed of sea-bass, etc, separately besides the "Quarantine
Guidelines" for import of SPF L.vannamei broodstock. Also, the
international trade in fish & fishery products is governed by the EXIM Policy
of the Directorate General of Foreign Trade, Ministry of Commerce.
[Ministry of Agriculture and Farmers Welfare (Department of Animal
Husbandry, Dairying and Fisheries) F.No. 25-5(2)/2016-AHD
(Coord.) dated 01.08.2016]
Development of Marine Fisheries, Infrastructure
and Post Harvest Operations
Recommendation (Para No. 17)
17. The Committee note with distress that some of targets set under
the scheme could not be achieved during 2013, 2014-15 and 2015-16. As
for illustration, during 2014-15, no achievements were made against the
targets set for construction of Minor Fishing Harbours, Construction of
Fishing Land Centres, Repair and renovation of existing Fishing Harbours
and FLCs and Infrastructure and marketing facilities. During 2013-14 as
against the target of 1000 units of safety kits for fishermen at sea, only 500
kits were distributed. It was explained by the Department that restricting
the central funding to 40% of the capital cost of infrastructure projects in
general areas and 55% in hilly and scheduled areas, has prevented many
States and UTs from submitting new proposals for financial assistance under
the scheme. Besides, the delay in the acquisition of land and environmental
clearances were also other factors that were attributed to the slack in
achieving the set targets under the scheme. However, the Committee were
informed that user friendly guidelines are being formulated under the
restructured schemes of Blue Revolution along with the allocation of

38
adequate budget for its implementation. The Committee, therefore, hope that
the Department would be able to address the issue under new guidelines
and desire that the Department should take up the issue with the State
Governments to get fresh proposals for financial assistance under the
scheme ensuring achievements of the targets set thereunder. The Committee
would like to be apprised of the progress made in this regard.
Reply of the Government
The Government has on 22nd December, 2015 approved the Scheme
on "Blue Revolution: Integrated Development and Management of Fisheries"
as a Central Sector Scheme with funding patterns of (a) 50% of the project/
unit cost for general States, leaving the rest to State agencies/organisations,
corporations, federations, boards, Fishers cooperatives, private entrepreneurs,
individual beneficiaries, (b) 80% of the project/unit cost for North-Eastern/
Hilly States leaving the rest to State agencies/Organizations, Cooperatives,
individual beneficiaries etc. and (c) 100% for projects directly implemented
by the Government of India through its institutes/organisations and Union
Territories.
According to the provisions in the restructured scheme, a committee
was constituted to revamp and revise the unit cost and cost norms for the
entire gamut of activities in the fisheries sector for increasing the fund flow
to States/UTs and beneficiaries. The cost norms in respect of each
component and sub-component of the scheme have been reworked and
reoriented, keeping in view the requirements for realizing the goals set under
the scheme. The revised guidelines alongwith the revised cost norms have
been issued on 30.06.2016. It is expected that with greater flexibility
provided and the broad scope now available in the scheme, achieving the
set targets of the scheme would be facilitated.
[Ministry of Agriculture and Farmers Welfare (Department of Animal
Husbandry, Dairying and Fisheries) F.No. 25-5(2)/2016-AHD
(Coord.) dated 01.08.2016]

39
CHAPTER III
OBSERV ATIONS/ RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE
DO NOT DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE
GOVERNMENT'S REPLIES
-Nil-

40
CHAPTER IV
OBSERV ATIONS/ RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH
REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN
ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE
Development of Inland Fisheries and Aquaculture
Recommendation (Para No. 15)
15. The Committee note that the Development of Inland Fisheries and
Aquaculture scheme being implemented under different components through
the State Governments/UTs covers all the inland fishery resources available
in the country in the form of fresh water, brackish water, cold water, water
logged areas, saline/alkaline soils for aquaculture and capture fisheries
including reservoirs. Since the inception of the scheme, 8,90,403 hectares
of freshwater bodies and 45,952 hectares of brackish water bodies have
been developed benefitting 15,60,863 and 39,896 fishers, respectively, till
31.12.2015. During 2015-16, 5,414 hectares of freshwater bodies and 218
hectares of brackish water bodies have been developed benefitting 8,000
fishers and 400 fishers respectively. However, the full potential of inland
fishery resources in the country largely remains untapped. In order to boost
the fish production in the country, it is but imperative that the area of
aquaculture in the country be expanded. The Committee strongly feel that
Fisheries in India is a very important economic activity. A large section of
the people in the country are dependent on fisheries activities for their
livelihood. It not only meet the domestic needs of the people but also earn
precious foreign exchange for the country from fish and fisheries products.
The Committee, therefore, recommend that all inland derelict water bodies,
reservoirs, canals, drains, ponds, tanks etc. may be brought within the ambit
of fisheries activities for sustained growth and development of the fisheries
sector in the country without affecting the biodiversity of the area. The
Committee also note that the Government recognizes the need of availability
of quality seed and feed for the development of inland fisheries and
aquaculture. However, presently there is a gap of about 4610 million fry.
The Committee, therefore, desire that the Department may set up brood
banks and hatcheries on priority basis. During the course of evidence, the

Secretary of the Department informed the Committee that various fisheries
schemes are being restructured under Blue Revolution and norms and
guidelines are being formulated. The Committee expect the Department to
formulate these norms and guidelines without further loss of time. The
Committee hope that norms and guidelines being formulated under
restructured schemes of Blue Revolution will address the issues which
hinders the rapid growth and development of inland fisheries sector.
The Committee express concern over the fact that there are
humongous losses of indigenous breeds of fishes due to reasons such as
drying up of local or inland water bodies, percolation of harmful chemicals
in the water bodies by ways of using chemical fertilizers and pesticides in
farming etc. The Committee therefore desire that corrective measures may
be undertaken in coordination with all concerned to check such losses on
priority basis. The Committee would like to be apprised of the initiatives
undertaken by the Department in this regard.
Reply of the Government
During the year 2015-16, under the scheme 'Development of Inland
Fisheries and Aquaculture', 12.107 ha. of freshwater bodies and 1325 ha.
of Brackishwater bodies have been developed, benefiting 25,781 farmers and
520 farmers respectively. The Cabinet Committee on Economic Affairs
(CCEA) has considered and approved the restructured Scheme on "Blue
Revolution: Integrated Development and Management of Fisheries" during
December, 2015. In order to implement the scheme the Department has
issued an administrative approval of the scheme on 20.05.2016. The revised
guidelines and Unit cost/norms of the restructured Central Sector Scheme
have also been issued in consultation with State Governments/UTs on
30.06.2016.
All inland derelict water bodies, reservoirs, canals, drains, ponds, tanks
etc. are covered under the new scheme within the ambit of fisheries for
sustained growth and development of the fisheries sector in the country with
biosecurity measures. In order to fulfill the gap of 4610 million fry assistance
for setting up of broodbanks, hatcheries have been provisioned under the
new restructured scheme. Additionally, feed mills both small and large sized
have also been provisioned.
The Department sensitizes the State Governments and Union Territories
through notification of Schemes, State Minister's /Secretary level conferences,
41

Zonal level meetings besides regular monitoring, field visits and bio-security
checks on priority basis. The Guidelines for Developing Fish Seed
Certification & Accreditation System in India and Guidelines for the States
for framing a bill on Inland Fisheries and Aquaculture have been issued to
all the State Governments/UTs in order to have uniformity in the measures
taken by States/ UTs for development of fisheries in a sustainable manner.
Besides, the Department has also issued Guidelines for fisheries Management
in small, medium and large reservoirs including the associated tanks and
ponds in the command areas in the country for conservation and optimum
utilization of the productivity of reservoirs for sustained production of
valuable fish protein.
[Ministry of Agriculture and Farmers Welfare (Department of Animal
Husbandry, Dairying and Fisheries) F.No. 25-5(2)/2016-AHD
(Coord.) dated 01.08.2016]
Comments of the Committee
For comments of the Committee please refer to Para No. 1.25 of
Chapter I of this Report.
42

CHAPTER V
OBSERV ATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH
FINAL REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT ARE STILL AWAITED
Delhi Milk Scheme
Recommendation (Para No. 11)
11. The Committee note that Delhi Milk Scheme (DMS) was set up
with the primary objective of supplying wholesome milk to the citizens of
Delhi at reasonable prices as well as for providing remunerative prices to
milk producers. However, the Committee are extremely dissatisfied with the
current state of affairs of DMS. The milk procurement by DMS has declined
sharply over the years from 1077.60 lakh kgs. in 2012-13 to 887.95 lakh
kgs. in 2014-15. Its capacity utilization has also declined with reference to
its installed capacity of 5 lakh litres per day. DMS has also failed to utilize
fully the funds allocated to them at RE stage. During the last four years,
DMS was allocated Rs 33.43 crore at BE stage which was reduced to merely
Rs.7.75 crore at RE stage, out of which only Rs.6.13 crore could be utilized
by them till 18.02.2016. All this reflects the current state of affairs of the
functioning of DMS. While explaining the reasons for declining capacity
utilization, the Department has stated that DMS does not have autonomy
to fix incentive/discount to retailer/concessionaire and as a result thereof,
DMS is not in a position to compete with other milk suppliers and therefore,
the sale of milk is low as well as its capacity utilization is also less in
proportional to the sale of milk. Unlike the Mother Diary which is a private
company, DMS is controlled by the Central Government and by its rules
and regulations. Mother Diary have not to approach the Central Government
for its day to day functioning. The Committee are of the view that the
activities of DMS are commercial in nature and therefore, it has to run as
a commercial entity to make it financially viable. DMS, therefore, needs to
be given functional autonomy on the lines of Mother Diary to undertake
strategic decisions on commercial lines. The Committee, therefore,
recommend that the Government may consider to grant functional autonomy
to DMS by taking a holistic view over the issue. Meanwhile, immediate
remedial measures may be taken to bring out all round efficiency to check
43

its losses and operational cost and to make it commercially viable. The
network of outlets of DMS may also be expanded on professional lines for
distribution of milk and milk products to the consumers. The efficiency of
DMS plant may also be augmented by its renovation/upgradation/
modernisation. Efforts may also be made to utilize its optimum capacity by
increasing the sale of milk and milk products which may in turn lead to
reduction in losses. The Committee hope that as a result of slew of remedial
measures feel it would not be difficult to turn around the fortune of DMS
in the near future. The Committee would like to be apprised of the action
plan of the Department on the issue.
Reply of the Government
It is stated that CCEA in its meeting held on 22.04.2015 has decided
to lease out operation and managment of DMS to an outsite O&M agnecy.
The Department has appointed M/s Darashaw and Company Pvt. Ltd. as
consultant on 14.09.2015 and is in process of finalization of e-procurment
compliant of RFP and Concession Agreement in consultation with NIC, IFD
and Department of Legal Affairs. This Department is also in the process
of adoption of intergrity pact and empanelment of Independent External
Monitors as per CVC guidelines. The entire bidding, selection of a suitable
O&M Agency and handing over of operations of DMS is expected to
complete by December, 2016.
[Ministry of Agriculture and Farmers Welfare (Department of Animal
Husbandry, Dairying and Fisheries) F.No. 25-5(2)/2016-AHD
(Coord.) dated 01.08.2016]
 N
EW D ELHI; HUKM DEO NARAYAN YADA V
09 December, 2015 Chairperson,
18 Agrahayana, 1937  (Saka) Standing Committee on Agriculture.
44

ANNEXURE
STANDING COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE
(2016-17)
MINUTES OF THE SEVENTH SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE
The Committee sat on Friday, the 09th December, 2016 from
1000 hrs. to 1050 hrs. in the Chamber of the Hon'ble Chairperson, Standing
Committee on Agriculture, Room No. 138 (Third Floor), Parliament House,
New Delhi.
PRESENT
Shri Hukm Deo Narayan Yadav — Chairperson
M
EMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Prof. Ravindra Vishwanath Gaikward
3. Shri Sanganna Karadi
4. Shri Nalin Kumar Kateel
5. Md. Badaruddoza Khan
6. Shri Janardan Mishra
7. Shri Devji Patel
8. Shri C.L. Ruala
9. Shri Satyapal Singh (Sambhal)
Rajya Sabha
10. Shri Sambhaji Shahu Chhatrapati
11. Shri Meghraj Jain
12. Shri Mohd. Ali Khan
13. Shri Ram Nath Thakur
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Shri U.B.S. Negi — Joint Secretary
45

2. Shri Arun K. Kaushik — Director
3. Smt. Juby Amar — Additional Director
4. Shri C. Vanlalruata — Deputy Secretary
5. Shri Sumesh Kumar — Under Secretary
2. At the outset, Chairperson welcomed the Members to the Sitting
of the Committee. Thereafter, the Committee took up for consideration the
following draft Reports:
*(i) XXXX XXXX XXXX XXXX XXXX
(ii) Draft Report on the Action Taken by the Government on the
Observations/Recommendations contained in the 24th Report
(16th Lok Sabha) of the Standing Committee on Agriculture (2015-16) on
'Demands for Grants (2016-17)' of the Ministry of Agriculture and Farmers
Welfare (Department of Animal Husbandry, Dairying and Fisheries).
*(iii) XXXX XXXX XXXX XXXX XXXX
*(iv) XXXX XXXX XXXX XXXX XXXX
3. After some deliberations, the Committee adopted the draft Reports
without any modifications and authorized the Chairperson to finalize and
present these Reports to Parliament after getting them factually verified from
the concerned Departments/Ministries.
The Committee, then, adjourned.
*Matter not related to this Report
46

APPENDIX
(Vide Para 4 of Introduction of the Report)
ANALYSIS OF ACTION TAKEN BY GOVERNMENT ON THE
TWENTY FOURTH REPORT OF STANDING COMMITTEE
ON AGRICULTURE (2015-16) ON 'DEMANDS FOR
GRANTS (2016-17)' OF THE MINISTRY OF
AGRICULTURE  (DEPARTMENT  OF
ANIMAL  HUSBANDRY , DAIRYING
AND FISHERIES)
(i) Total number of Recommendations: 17
(ii) Recommendations/Observations which have been
Accepted by the Government:
Para Nos.: 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 12, 13, 14,
16 and 17
Total 15
Percentage 88.23%
(iii) Rec ommendations/Observations which the Committee
do not desire to pursue in view of the Government's
replies:
Para No.: NIL
Total Nil
Percentage 0%
(iv) Recom mendations/Observations in respect of which
replies of the Government have not been accepted
by the Committee:
Para No.: 15
Total 01
Percentage 05.88%
(v) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which
final replies of the Government are still awaited:
Para No.: 11
Total 01
Percentage 05.88%
47

"All Parliamentary Publications including DRSC Reports are
available on sale at the Sales Counter, Reception, Parliament House
(T el. Nos. 23034726, 23034495, 23034496), Agents appointed
by Lok Sabha Secretariat and Publications Division, Ministry
of Information and Broadcasting, CGO Complex, Lodhi Road,
New Delhi (Tel. Nos. 24367260, 24365610) and their outlets. The
said information is available on website
‘www.parliamentofindia.nic.in’.
The Souvenir items with logo of Parliament are also available
at Sales Counter, Reception, Parliament House, New Delhi.
The Souvenir items with Parliament Museum logo are available
for sale at Souvenir Shop (T el. No. 23035323), Parliament
Museum, Parliament Library Building, New Delhi. List of these
items are available on the website mentioned above."