1 
 
 
 
 STANDING COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE 
 (2020-2021) 
                  
         
SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA 
          
 
MINISTRY OF FISHERIES, ANIMAL HUSBANDRY AND DAIRYING 
(DEPARTMENT OF FISHERIES)  
 
              
 
'DEMANDS FOR GRANTS (2020-21)' 
 
Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations contained 
in the Twelfth Report (Seventeenth Lok Sabha) of the Standing Committee on 
Agriculture (2019-20) 
 
         
TWENTY-SECOND REPORT 
 
 
         
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
......FEBRUARY 2021/......MAGHA,1942 (SAKA) 
 
22 

 
 
2 
 
TWENTY-SECOND REPORT 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE 
(2020-2021) 
          
         
MINISTRY OF FISHERIES, ANIMAL HUSBANDRY AND DAIRYING 
(DEPARTMENT OF FISHERIES)  
              
 
 
'DEMANDS FOR GRANTS (2020-21)' 
 
Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations contained 
in the Twelfth Report (Seventeenth Lok Sabha) of the Standing Committee on 
Agriculture (2019-20) 
 
                
           Presented to Lok Sabha on                                   11.02.2021 
           Laid on the Table of Rajya Sabha on                                 11.02.2021 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
......FEBRUARY 2021/......MAGHA,1942 (SAKA) 
 


 
 
3 
 
 
COA No. 421 
 
 
 
 
 
       
         
        
Price:  Rs.  
         
         
 
 
 
 
 
© 2021 By Lok Sabha Secretariat 
 
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of Business in Lok 
Sabha (Sixteenth Edition) and Printed by  
 

 
 
4 
 
<CONTENTS> 
 
                   PAGE 
  
*COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE (2019-20)……………………………  (iii) 
*COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE (2020-21)……………………………  (iv) 
*INTRODUCTION……………………………………………………………    (v) 
         
 
CHAPTER I   Report …………………………………………   1-13 
CHAPTER II  Observations/Recommendations which have    14-25 
   been accepted by the Government ……………     
CHAPTER III  Observations/Recommendations which the   26 
   Committee do not desire to pursue in view 
   of the Government’s replies …………………..     
CHAPTER IV  Observations/Recommendations in respect   27-31 
   of  which replies of the Government have  
   not been accepted by the Committee ………….    
CHAPTER V  Observations/Recommendations in respect of    32 
   which final replies of the Government are  
   still awaited …………………………………….    
5 
 
ANNEXURE 
 
Minutes of the 5th Sitting of the Committee held on 09.02.2021            33-34 
 
 APPENDIX 
 
I.  Analysis of Action Taken by the Government on the  
 Recommendations contained in the Twelfth Report  
 (Seventeenth Lok Sabha) of the Standing Committee  
 on Agriculture (2019-20).      35 
       
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
5 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE (2019-20) 
 
Shri Parvatagouda Chandanagouda Gaddigoudar-   Chairperson  
 
MEMBERS 
 
LOK SABHA 
 
 2. Shri Afzal Ansari 
  3. Shri Horen Sing Bey 
 4. Shri Devendra Singh 'Bhole' 
 5. Shri A. Ganeshamurthi 
 6. Shri Kanakmal Katara 
 7. Shri Abu Taher Khan 
8. Shri Bhagwanth Khuba 
9. Dr. Amol Ramsing Kolhe 
10. Shri Mohan Mandavi 
11. Shri Devji Mansingram Patel 
12. Smt. Shardaben Anilbhai Patel 
13. Shri Bheemrao Baswanthrao Patil 
14. Smt. Navneet Ravi Rana 
15. Shri Vinayak Bhaurao Raut 
16. Shri Pocha Brahmananda Reddy 
17. Shri Mohammad Sadique 
18. Shri Virendra Singh 
19. Shri V.K. Sreekandan 
20.  Shri Mulayam Singh Yadav 
21. Shri Ram Kripal Yadav 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
22. Shri Partap Singh Bajwa 
23. Sardar Sukhdev Singh Dhindsa  
#24. Shri Harivansh 
25. Shri Narayan Rane  
26. Shri Kailash Soni 
27. Shri Vaiko 
28. Shri R. Vaithilingam 
29 Smt. Chhaya Verma 
30. Dr. Chandrapal Singh Yadav  
31. Shri Harnath Singh Yadav  
 
______________________________________________________________________ 
# Nominated to this Committee w.e.f. 22.07.2020 vide CB-1 Note dated 24.07.2020. 
 
  

 
 
6 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE (2020-21) 
 
Shri Parvatagouda Chandanagouda Gaddigoudar-   Chairperson 
 
MEMBERS 
 
LOK SABHA 
 
 2. Shri Afzal Ansari 
  3. Shri Horen Sing Bey  
 4. Shri Devendra Singh 'Bhole' 
 5. Shri A. Ganeshamurthi 
 6. Shri Kanakmal Katara 
 7. Shri Abu Taher Khan 
8. Shri Bhagwanth Khuba 
9. Shri Mohan Mandavi 
10. Shri Devji Mansingram Patel 
11. Smt. Shardaben Anilbhai Patel 
12. Shri Bheemrao Baswanthrao Patil 
13. Shri Shriniwaas Dadasaheb Patil 
14. Shri Kinjarapu Ram Mohan Naidu 
15. Shri Vinayak Bhaurao Raut 
16. Shri Pocha Brahmananda Reddy 
17. Shri Mohammad Sadique 
18. Shri Virendra Singh 
19. Shri V.K. Sreekandan 
20.  Shri Mulayam Singh Yadav 
21. Shri Ram Kripal Yadav 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
22. Shri Partap Singh Bajwa 
23. Sardar Sukhdev Singh Dhindsa  
24. Shri Narayan Rane  
25. Shri Kailash Soni 
26. Shri Vaiko 
27. Shri R. Vaithilingam 
28 Smt. Chhaya Verma 
@29. Shri B.L. Verma 
30. Shri Harnath Singh Yadav  
*31. VACANT 
 
_______________________________________________________________ 
* vice Dr. Chandrapal Singh Yadav ceased to be a Member of the Committee on his 
retirement from Rajya Sabha w.e.f 25.11.2020 vide CB-I Note dated 06.10.2020. 
@ Shri B.L. Verma, MP Rajya Sabha has been nominated to the Committee as Member 
w.e.f 23.12.2020 vide Bulletin Part-II No. 1835 dated 24.12.2020 

 
 
7 
 
 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
 
1. Shri Shiv Kumar   - Joint Secretary 
2. Dr. Vatsala J. Pande   - Director 
3. Shri Nagender Singh   - Executive Officer 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(iv)  

 
 
8 
 
  INTRODUCTION 
         
I, the Chairperson, Standing Committee on Agriculture  (2020-21), having been 
authorized by the Committee to submit the R eport on their behalf, present this  
Twenty Second  Report on action taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in the  Twelfth Report (Seventeenth 
Lok Sabha) of the Standing Committee on Agriculture (2019-20) on 'Demands for 
Grants (2020-21)' pertaining to the  Ministry of Fisheries, Animal Husbandry And 
Dairying (Department of Fisheries). 
 
2. The Twelfth Report (Seventeen th Lok Sabha) of the Standing Committee on 
Agriculture ( 2019-20) on 'Demands for Grants (2020 -21)' pertaining to the 
Ministry of Fisheries, Animal Husbandry And Dairying  (Department of Fisheries)  
was presented to Lok Sabha and laid on the Table of Rajya Sabha on 13 March, 
2020. The Action Taken Notes on the Report were received on 30.06.2020. 
 
3. The Report was considered and adopted by the Committee at their Sitting 
held on 09.02.2021. 
 
4. An A nalysis of the action t aken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in the Twelfth Report (Seventeenth 
Lok Sabha) of the Committee is given in Appendix.  
  
    
 
NEW DELHI;                    P.C. GADDIGOUDAR 
09 February, 2021                                    Chairperson, 
20 Magha, 1942(Saka)                          Standing Committee on Agriculture  
 
 
(v) 

 
 
9 
 
CHAPTER-I 
DRAFT R E P O R T 
This Report of the Standing Committee on Agriculture deals with the Action 
Taken by the Government on the  Observations/Recommendations contained in the 
Twelfth Report (Seventeenth Lok Sabha ) of th e Standing Committee on Agriculture 
(2019-2020) on “Demands for Grants (2020 -21) pertaining to Ministry of Fisheries, 
Animal Husbandry and Dairying (Department of Fisheries) which was presented to 
Lok Sabha and laid on the Table of Rajya Sabha on 13.03.2020.   
 
1.2  The Ministry of Fisheries, Animal Husbandry and Dairying (Department of 
Fisheries) has furnished Action Taken Replies in respect of all the 10 
Observations/Recommendations contained in the Report. These replies given by the 
Ministry after scrutiny have been categorized as follows:  
 
(i)  Observations/Recommendations that have been accepted by the 
Government:  
 
Recommendation Nos. 1, 3, 4, 6, 7, 8, 10         
 
      Chapter- II 
      Total- 07                     
 
(ii)  Observations/Recommendations in respect of which the Committee do not 
desire to pursue in view of the Government’s reply:  
 
Recommendation  No.   NIL       
      Chapter- III 
      Total- 00                       
(iii)  Observations/Recommendations in respect of which Action Taken Replies of 
 the Government have not been accepted by the Committee:  
 
 Recommendation No.    2, 5, 9                
      Chapter- IV 
      Total- 03                     
 
(iv)  Observations/Recommendations in respect of which final replies of the 
Government are still awaited:  
Recommendation No.        NIL 
      Chapter- V 
      Total- 00                     

 
 
10 
 
1.3  The Committee trust that utmost importance would be given to 
implementation of the Observations / Recommendations accepted by the 
Government. In cases where it is not possible for the Department to implement 
the Recommendations in letter and spirit for any reason, the matter should be 
reported to the Committee with reasons for non -implementation. The 
Committee desire that further Action Taken Notes on the Observations / 
Recommendations contained in Chapter -I of this Report be furnished to them 
at an early date. 
   
1.4  The Committee will now deal with the action take n by the Government on 
some of the Recommendations in the succeeding paragraphs.  
 
 
 
A. ANALYSIS OF DEMANDS 
RECOMMENDATION (PARA NO.1) 
 
1.5 The Committee had observed/ recommended:- 
 
 The Committee note that the Department of Fisheries has been 
allocated Rs 825.00 crore for the financial year 2020-21 including allocation to 
Scheme and Non -Scheme Heads. The overall allocation to the Department 
for the financial year 2020 -21 has increased  by 2.51% in comparison to the 
allocation made during the year 2019 -20. The Committee further note that 
during the years 2015 -2020, Rs 2505.07 crore were allocated to Fisheries 
Sector. So approximately Rs 500 crore on an average per year were 
allocated to Fisheries Sector during the last five years. The Committee 
observe that there was huge reduction in the funds allocated to the 
Department at BE stage during the years 2017 -18 to 2020-21, as against the 
funds proposed by the Department and this has adversel y affected the 
various activities and targets of the Sector, as admitted by the Department.  
Despite these meager investments, it is quite noteworthy that the average 

 
 
11 
 
annual growth rate for Fisheries Sector has been more than 7% during these 
years. The Com mittee also note that Fisheries Sector contributes 1% to the 
GDP (Gross Domestic Product) of the Country and 5% to the Agriculture 
GDP. The foreign earnings from Fisheries Sector stood at Rs 46,589 crore in 
2018-19 and Fishery products continue to be leadi ng commodity in Agri -
Exports having 19.23% share in Agri -Exports Basket. The Committee were 
also informed that the Department is cherishing a very ambitious targets of 
raising fish production to 20 MMT by 2022 -23 and Fishery Export to one lakh 
crores by 20 24-25. The Committee are of the considered opinion that these 
targets cannot be achieved with the current Budgetary Allocations which is 
very low. The Committee, therefore, recommend the Government to suitably 
enhance Budgetary Allocation to the Department  of Fisheries in order to 
achieve the ambitious target set for Fishery Sector. 
1.6  In its Action Taken Reply, the Department has stated:- 
 
 The Department agree s with the recommendation made by the 
Committee as contained in the report  regarding reduction in the funds 
allocated to the Department at BE stage against the funds proposed by the 
Department. While submitting the BE proposal for the year 2020 -21, the 
Department had proposed Rs. 3050.25 crore (including PMMSY) towards the 
scheme components and Non scheme components of the Department, but 
was allocated Rs. 825 crore The recommendation by the Committee w.r.t 
need for enhanced budgetary allocation has been noted by the Department 
and the issue will be taken up with the Ministry of Finance. 
1.7 Keeping in mind the huge growth potential of Fisheries Sector and its 
contribution of 1% to GDP of the Country and 5% to the Agriculture GDP 
as also the sustained annual growth rate of more than 7%, the 
Committee had recommended the Department to pursue with the 
Ministry of Finance to suitably enhance its Budgetary Allocation to 
realize pull potential of Fisheries Sector. The Department, in its reply, 
has submitted that it agrees with the recommendation made by the 

 
 
12 
 
Committee regarding reduction in funds allocated to the Department at 
BE stage against the f unds proposed by the Department.  Further, the 
Department submits that it has taken Note of the Recommendation of 
the Committee with respect to enhanced Budgetary Allocation and it will 
take up the issue with the Ministry of Finance. The Committee, 
therefore, reiterate their earlier Recommendation that the Department 
should analyze its requirement of funds seriously and accordingly make 
proposal of funds before Finance Ministry so that its Schemes do not 
suffer for want of funds. The Committee hope that the Department will 
make earnest efforts to get the increased Budgetary Allocation from the 
Ministry of Finance so that it can implement its Schemes effectively and 
meaningfully. The Committee would like to be apprised of the concrete 
efforts being made in this direction. 
 
B. GROWTH OF FISHERIES SECTOR 
 
RECOMMENDATION (PARA NO. 2) 
 
1.8  The Committee had observed/ recommended:- 
  The Committee note that the total fish production during the year 2017-
18 was 12.59 million tonnes (MT) with a contribution of 8.90 MT from Inland 
Sector and 3.69 million tonnes from Marine Sector. The Committee further 
note that Fisheries Sector of the Co untry provides livelihood support to 
approximately 16 million people at the primary level and almost double the 
number along the value chain. The Committee note that the Fish production 
is envisaged to be increased by the expansion of area under cultivatio n, 
increase in productivity and diversification of aquaculture species. The 
Committee further note that the Department is working on upgradation 
/creation of infrastructure facilities for maintaining cold chain, insulated or 
refrigerated logistic connectiv ity, up -gradation of fishing harbours which 
could reduce post -harvest losses, enhance the production through 
expansion of area under shrimp farming, by increasing the unit shrimp 
productivity through adoption of Better Management Practices (BMPs) and 

 
 
13 
 
advanced technologies, and through diversification in commercial 
aquaculture techniques by introducing more exportable varieties with 
targeted programmes to achieve the targeted Export earnings of 1 lakh crore 
by 2024 -25. The Committee were further informed tha t the Department 
needs funds to the tune of Rs 27000 crore in coming years to be able to fully 
exploit the Fishery potential of the Country. The Committee, therefore, 
recommend the Government to Allocate sufficient funds to the Department 
so that the aforesaid Programmes/Schemes can be fully implemented which 
will enhance the Fish Production for achieving the targets. 
  
1.9  In its Action Taken Reply, the Department has stated:- 
 
 The Department of Fisheries, Ministry of Fisheries, Animal Husbandry 
and Dairying is giving precedence to boost fish production in the country. For 
increasing production and productivity of fisheries sector, the Department  had 
implemented the Centrally Sponsored Scheme (CSS) on Blue Revolution: 
Integrated Development and Management of Fisheries with focused approach 
on effective utilization of fisheries resources in a sustainable and responsible 
manner, technology infusion, creation of infrastructure, diversification of fish 
species and fishing practices, supply of quality input s, expansion and 
intensification of fish culture, disease management, adoption of best 
aquaculture practices . The Blue Revolution scheme has ended on 
31.03.2020. To supplement the efforts of the State Governments and Union 
Territories, the Department has p rovided an assistance of Rs. 2541 crore 
during the last five years, under the CSS for development of fisheries sector 
with view to enhance of fish productivity and production in the country.  
The sector has been recognized as a powerful income and employme nt 
generator as it stimulates growth of a number of subsidiary industries . The 
sector has immense potential to double the fishers and fish farmers’ incomes 
as envisioned by the government. To utilise the dormant and untapped 
potential, there is need for enhanced investment in the sector and there is 
need for increased allocation for the sector which would provided the much 

 
 
14 
 
needed thrust in the areas of enhancing Production and Productivity, 
Aquaculture Development, Post -Harvest and marketing infrastructure and 
other priority Interventions.  
  
1.10 The Committee had noted that the Department ha d set an ambitious 
target to enhance the Fishery Export to Rs. 1 Lakh Crore by 2024 -25; 
which stood at Rs. 46,589 Crore in 2018 -19. For this, the Department 
needs funds to the tune of Rs. 27,000 Crore in the coming years to be 
able to fully ex ploit the Fishery potential of the Country. In view of this 
ambitious target of the Department, the Committee had recommended 
the Government to allocate sufficient funds to the Department so that 
this target can be achieved. The Department, in its reply, h as submitted 
that for increasing production and productivity of Fisheries Sector, the 
Department had implemented the Centrally Sponsored Scheme (CSS) 
on Blue Revolution: Integrated Development and Management of 
Fisheries with focused approach on effective utilization of fisheries 
resources in a sustainable and responsible manner, technology 
infusion, creation of infrastructure, diversification of fish species and 
fishing practices, supply of quality inputs, expansion and 
intensification of fish culture, dis ease management, adoption of best 
aquaculture practices. The Blue Revolution Scheme has ended on 
31.03.2020. To supplement the efforts of the State Governments and 
Union Territories, the Department has provided an assistance of Rs. 
2541 crore during the last five years, under the CSS for development of 
Fisheries Sector  with view to enhanc e productivity and production in 
the country. The Committee are dissatisfied with the reply of the 
Department. The Department has not furnished the Actual Steps taken 
with respect to enhancement of funds to achieve target of increasing 
Fishery Exports. The Committee, therefore, recommend the Department 
to formulate Annual Plan and allocate funds accordingly to achieve the 
above said target. The Committee would like to be apprised of steps 
taken in this regard. 

 
 
15 
 
 
C. COASTAL AQUACULTURE AUTHORITY (CAA) 
 
RECOMMENDATION (PARA NO. 5) 
 
1.11 The Committee had observed/ recommended:- 
 
  The Committee note that the Coastal Aquaculture Authority was 
formed in 2005 to regulate the activities connected with Aquaculture in 
Coastal Areas.  The Committee further note that Department was able to 
utilize only Rs. 2.24 crore out of allocation of Rs 4.5 crore in the year 2019 -
20. The Committee were informed that this less expenditure was due to many 
of the sanctioned posts being vacant including that of Chairperson and 
Member Secretary in the Authority as the Budgetary allocation to CAA is 
provided mainly to meet the salaries, other administrative and establishments 
expenses. The Committee note that CAA is entrusted with very important 
mandate of ascertaining environmental impact of Coastal Aquaculture farms 
and to order demolition or removal of any polluting Coastal Aquaculture. The 
Committee believe that Coastal ecosystem is very fragile and utmost attention 
should be paid for its preservation and conservation so that the means of 
livelihood for lakhs of poor and vulnerable fishermen stay intact in the long 
run However, the Committee are dismayed to note that the CAA, which has 
been entrusted with this responsibility, is working without a Chairperson and 
Member Secretary an d many other posts also being vacant. The Committee 
believe that CAA cannot discharge its mandate diligently without sufficient 
manpower. Therefore, the Committee recommend the Department to make 
utmost efforts to fill the vacant posts in CAA at the earliest so as to ensure the 
smooth functioning of the Authority. The Committee would like to be apprised 
of steps taken in this direction.  
1.12 In its Action Taken Reply, the Department has stated:- 
 
 The recommendation made by the Committee has been noted by the 
Department and the status/  steps taken to fill up the vacant posts in CAA are 
as follows:  

 
 
16 
 
 
• Chairperson: The post of Chairperson is a 3 year tenure post and the tenure 
of Hon'ble Justice Shri Ravi Raja Pandian had ended on 19.5.2016 on 
completion of 3 years tenure. The recommendation of the Search cum 
Selection Committee has been forwarded to Ministry of Personnel and 
Training for obtaining the approval of the ACC on 17 th March, 2020 and the 
approval is awaited. The Department of Fisheries, Min istry of Fisheries, 
Animal Husbandry and Dairying, Govt. of India is actively pursuing the matter 
of filling up of the post of Chairperson, CAA. 
• Member Secretary: The post of Member Secretary is also a tenure post for 
a period of three years. The post was held as additional charge by Smt. I. 
Rani Kumudini, Chief Executive, NFDB, Hyderabad from 22.05.2019 to 
02.03.2020. The post has now been filled up on a regular basis by appointing 
Dr. (Mrs) V. Kripa as regular Member Secretary of CAA w.e.f. 22.05.2020. 
 
• Director (Tech): Shri A.Antony Xavier has been posted as Director (Tech), 
CAA from 16.4.2019 on deputation basis. 
 
• Assistant Director (Technical): The post is lying vacant since June 2016 on 
repatriation of its incumbent. The post is to be filled up on promotion after the 
appointment of Chairperson, CAA who chairs the DPC for the post. 
 
• Senior Administrative Officer: The post is lying vacant since July 2019 on 
completion of deputation period of the incumbent. The selection of next 
incumbent to the post has been completed, who is yet to join the post due to 
the present lockdown scenario. 
 
• Accountant: The post is lying vacant since April 2019. Attempts to fillup the 
post failed due to poor response since there was an error in the recruitment 
rules of this post on the RR for Accountant on 06.08.2019.  
 
• Stenographer Grade 'C': Two posts (deputation posts) are lying vacant 
since April, 2016. Adver tisement to fill up the post have been issued on 29th 
June, 2019. 
 
• Senior Clerk: Two posts are lying vacant and advertisement have been 
issued for filling up the posts on 29th June, 2019. 
 
1.13 While noting the less utilization of funds (approximately 50% only of the 
sanctioned amount) which was mainly due to many sanctioned posts 

 
 
17 
 
being vacant including that of Chairperson and Member Secretary in the 
Coastal Aquaculture Authority, the Committee had recommended the 
Department to make utmost efforts to fill the vacant posts in CAA at the 
earliest so as to ensure smooth functioning of the Authority. The 
Department, in its Reply has submitted that the post  of Chairperson is 
lying vacant from 19.05.2016. The recommendation of the Search cum 
Selection Committee has been forwarded to Ministry of Personnel and 
Training for obtaining the approval of the ACC on 17th March, 2020 and 
the approval is awaited. The po st of member Secretary has been filled 
w.e.f. 22.05.2020. Likewise, the post of Director (Tech) has also been 
filled. But the posts of Assistant Director (Technical), Senior 
Administrative Officer, Accountant, Stenographer Grade 'C' and Senior 
Clerk are still lying vacant. The Committee, therefore, reiterate its earlier 
recommendation and urge the Department to expedite the process of 
filling all the sanctioned post in a time bound manner  so that the 
functioning of CAA does not suffer due to lack of sufficient manpower. 
 
D.  HOUSING FACILITY TO FISHERMEN 
RECOMMENDATION (PARA NO. 7) 
 
1.14 The Committee had observed/ recommended:- 
 
 The Department provides Housing facility to fishermen under its 
flagship Centrally Sponsored Scheme - Blue Revolution Scheme. The 
Department provides assistance of Rs One Lakh Twenty thousand to 
fishermen for Housing unit in convergence with Pradhan Mantri  Awas Yojana 
(PMAY). However, the Committee note that no provision for providing 
Housing units to fishermen was made for big states like Gujarat, Karnataka, 
Madhya Pradesh, Maharashtra, etc. during the years 2018 -19 and 2019 -20. 
The Committee were informed  that the names of Beneficiaries for Housing 
Scheme are supplied by the respective State Government to the Department. 
The Department does not maintain any independent list of Fishermen who 

 
 
18 
 
are in need of House. The Committee believe that there are chances  of 
exclusion of Beneficiaries under the Scheme if the Department is solely 
dependent on States for providing list of Beneficiaries. The Committee, 
therefore, recommend the Department to develop a mechanism  in 
coordination with the State Governments for i dentification of Beneficiaries for 
the Housing Scheme and to allocate sufficient funds for the same so that this 
poor vulnerable section of our society gets maximum benefits. The 
Committee also desire the Department to explore the possibility of entrusting  
the task of identification of Beneficiaries to the Newly announced 'Sagar 
Mitras' as they will work at the Grass root level. The Committee would like to 
be apprised of steps taken in this regard. 
 
1.15 In its Action Taken Reply, the Department has stated:- 
 
 The Department under the National Scheme of Welfare of Fishermen 
under the CSS-Blue Revolution: Integrated Development and Management of 
Fisheries has released a sum of Rs. 134.38 crores towards cen tral share for 
construction of 18686 nos of fishermen houses from 2015-16 to 2019-20. The 
funds to the states namely Gujarat, Karnat aka, Madhya Pradesh, 
Maharashtra etc. could not be released due to no n submission of the 
proposals by these states and further compliances of the observations made  
by the  Department. Furth er, the scheme is demand driven  and the 
beneficiaries are generally selected by State Governments/UTs after the 
release of quantum of fund based on the availability of Budget and the earlier 
progress and utilization of the fund made by th e States. Since Fishery is a 
state subject, selection of beneficiaries is under the domain of State 
Governments. Ho wever, formation of Sagar Mitra  at the Ground level as 
approved recently in Pradhan Mantri Matsya Sampada Yojana will also be 
actively involv ed in convergence with State Government implementing 
agency for selection of beneficiaries in fair manner. 
 

 
 
19 
 
1.16 While noting that no Fishermen Beneficiary was selected for providing 
the Housing Units from big States like Gujarat, Karnataka, Madhya 
Pradesh, Maharashtra etc. , the Committee had recommended the 
Department to devise strategy so that potential beneficiaries are not 
excluded from the Housing Scheme of the Department. The Commi ttee 
had further recommended to  utilize the services of Newly an nounced 
'Sagar Mitras' under Pradhan Mantri Matsya Sampada Yojana (PMMSY) 
for identifying beneficiaries under Housing Scheme. The Department, in 
its reply, has submitted that Housing Scheme is demand driven and the 
Beneficiaries are generally selected by the State Government/UTs as the 
Fishery is a State Subject, so selection of the beneficiaries is under the 
domain of state Governments. The Department has further submitted 
that 'Sagar Mitras' under 'PMMSY will be actively involved in 
convergence with State  Governments implementing agency for 
selection of Beneficiaries in fair manner. The Committee appreciate this 
step of the Government. The Committee, however, strongly recommend 
the Department to actively pursue the States/UTs to avail maximum 
benefit under  Housing Scheme. Earnest efforts should be made to 
provide Housing Units to maximum fishermen for all the States/UTs.   
The Committee would like to be apprised of the specific steps taken by 
the Department in this direction to make sure the same. 
 
E. BLUE REVOLUTION  
 
RECOMMENDATION (PARA NO. 9) 
 
1.17 The Committee had observed/ recommended:- 
 
  The Committee note that the Department is implementing Centrally 
Sponsored Scheme 'Blue Revolution' for a period of Five years from 2015 -16 
to 2019-20 at an total Central Outlay of Rs 3000 crore. The Committee further 
note that the Department has been able  to utilize Rs 2085.82 crore out of 
allocated fund of Rs 2511.63 crore since 2016 -17. The Committee were 

 
 
20 
 
informed that ''CSS - Blue Revolution' is a demand driven Scheme and the 
fund releases are made on the merit of the proposals received from the 
States/UTs and their requirements. Because of this, the Department has not 
been able to spend the allocated funds completely as sufficient numbers of 
proposals were not received from State/UTs. The Committee also note that 
the Department is struggling with increa sing unspent balance for various 
States/UTs like Andamand & Nicobar, Bihar, Daman & Diu, Goa, etc. due to 
which these States were not allocated any funds during the year 2019 -20. 
The Committee deprecate the fact that the entire allocated amount could not 
be utilized due to lack of proposals from State Governments. The Committee 
recommend the Department to take up this issue with the State 
Governments/UTs seriously and workout an objective Action Plan to the 
problem of unspent balances. 
 
1.18 In its Action Taken Reply, the Department has stated:- 
 
  The Department has been actively pursuing with the concerned 
States/UT Governments, to liquidate the pending UCs. 
 
1.19. While noting less utilization of funds as against the Allocated funds 
under CSS Blue Revolution Scheme since 2016 -17 which is mainly due 
to lack of proposals from States/UTs as this Scheme is mainly demand 
driven, the Committee had recommended the Department to take up this 
issue seriously with the States/UTs to increase their participation in this 
Scheme. The Committee had further recommended the Department to 
work out an objective Action Plan to the problem of unspent balances 
as various States/UTs were not able to furnish the Utilization 
Certificates. The Department, in its reply, has submitted that it has been 
actively pursuing with the concerned States/UT Governments to 
liquidate the pending UCs. The Committee feel totally dissatisfied with 
the reply of the Department , because no concrete Action Plan has been 
furnished by the Department to the Committee for the purpose . Also the 

 
 
21 
 
Steps taken to liquidate the pending UCs have not been communicated 
to the Committee. The Committee are of the view that mere issuing of 
advisories is not going to solve the problem  of unspent balances by the 
States/UTs. The Committee, therefore, reiterate their earlier 
recommendation and urge the Department to formulate and implement 
concrete Action Plan to solve the issue of unspent balances. The 
Committee would like to be apprised of steps taken in this regard. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
22 
 
CHAPTER - II 
 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS THAT HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED BY 
THE GOVERNMENT 
 
RECOMMENDATION NO. 1 
ANALYSIS OF DEMANDS  
The Committee note that the Department of Fisheries has been allocated 
Rs 825.00 crore for the financial year 2020 -21 including allocation to Scheme 
and Non -Scheme Heads. The overall allocation to the Department for the 
financial year 2020-21 has increased by 2.51% in comparison to the allocation 
made during the year 2019 -20. The Committee further note that during the 
years 2015 -2020, Rs 2505.07 crore were allocated to Fisheries Sector. So 
approximately Rs 500 crore on an average per year were allocated to Fisheries 
Sector during the last five years. The Committee observe that there was huge 
reduction in the funds allocated to the Department at BE stage during the 
years 2017 -18 to 2020 -21, as against the funds proposed by the Department  
and this has adversely affected the various activities and targets of the Sector, 
as admitted by the Department.  Despite these meager investments, it is quite 
noteworthy that the average annual growth rate for Fisheries Sector has been 
more than 7% during these years. The Com mittee also note that Fisheries 
Sector contributes 1% to the GDP (Gross Domestic Product) of the Country 
and 5% to the Agriculture GDP. The foreign earnings from Fisheries Sector 
stood at Rs 46,589 crore in 2018 -19 and Fishery products continue to be 
leading commodity in Agri -Exports having 19.23% share in Agri -Exports 
Basket. The Committee were also informed that the Department is cherishing a 
very ambitious targets of raising fish production to 20 MMT by 2022 -23 and 
Fishery Export to one lakh crores by 20 24-25. The Committee are of the 
considered opinion  that these targets cannot be achieved with the current 
Budgetary Allocations which is very low. The Committee, therefore, 
recommend the Government to suitably enhance Budgetary Allocation to the 

 
 
23 
 
Department of Fisheries in order to achieve the ambitious target set for 
Fishery Sector. 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
The Department agrees with the recommendation made by the Committee as 
contained in the report  regarding reduction in the funds allocated to the Department 
at BE stage against the funds proposed by the Department . While submitting the BE 
proposal for the year 2020 -21, the Department had proposed Rs. 3050.25 crore 
(including PMMSY) towards the scheme components and Non scheme components 
of the Depar tment, but was allocated Rs. 825 crore The recommendation by the 
Committee w.r.t need for enhanced budgetary allocation has been noted by the 
Department and the issue will be taken up with the Ministry of Finance. 
 
Comments of the Committee 
For comments of the Commit tee please refer to Para No.1.7 of Chapter - I of this 
Report. 
 
RECOMMENDATION NO. 3 
MINIMIZING POST- HARVEST LOSSES  
 
The Committee observe that the Fisheries Sector suffers from very high 
amount of Post-harvest losses. The Annual Post -harvest losses for the Marine 
Fisheries stand at Rs 15,000 crore whereas combined losses for both Marine 
and Inland Fisheries stand at Rs 61,000 crore. The Committee believe that the 
possible causes for Post -harvest losses are faulty handling practices, 
inordinate delay in packing and transportation, lack of proper cold storage 
facilities, and lack of technological know -how for harvesting fi shes. The 
Committee feel that the Post -harvest losses result in loss of income for 
fishermen community and other stakeholders, traders and processors in 
fishing related Ancillary Operations because the spoiled and physically 
damaged fish stock fetches low market price compared to best quality catch. 

 
 
24 
 
Considering all these factors, the Committee recommend the Government to 
modernize the existing harbours and establish more cold storage facilities and 
ensure availability of more refrigerated trucks/vans for tr ansportation of 
fishes. The Committee would urge the Government to allocate sufficient funds 
to the Department so that the Post -harvest losses can be minimized thereby 
safe guarding the interest of various stakeholders in the Fisheries Sector. 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
The post harvest losses are being proposed to be minimized from 25% to 
10% under PMMSY by modernizing the existing harbors and by e stablishing fish 
landing Center along river coast. The cold storage, ice-plant and transport facility by 
way of refrigerated/insulated van are also enhanced to minimize post harvest losses. 
Further the scheme implemented by  the Department is demand drive and funds to 
the State Government/UTs are released based on the viable proposal s received 
from the State Government as per the guideline of Scheme. 
RECOMMENDATION NO. 4 
SCHEDULED CASTES SUB PLAN (SCSP) 
 
 Scheduled Castes Sub Plan (SCSP) is intended to channelize the flow of 
resources from the General sectors in the Central Ministries/ Departments 
towards the development of Scheduled Castes, at least in proportion to their 
numbers in the population, both in  physical and financial terms. The 
Committee note that the Department was able to utilize Rs 52.66, Rs. 80.95 
crore and Rs 36.29 crore as against allocations of Rs 64.92 crore, Rs 100.16 
crore and Rs 88.25 crore during the years 2017 -18, 2018 -19 and 2019 -20 (till 
14.02.2020), respectively. It is evident that the Department was not able to fully 
utilize the funds earmarked under SCSP. The Committee further note that no 
funds were released for States like Jammu & Kashmir, Jharkhand, Kerala, 
Punjab, Rajasthan,  Tamil Nadu, Telangana, West Bengal etc.  under SCSP 
which have significant Schedule Caste Population. The Committee were 
informed that lack of proposals from State Governments/UTs is one of the 

 
 
25 
 
reasons for less expenditure under SCSP and Zero Allocation for some States. 
The Committee therefore, recommend the Department to take up this issue 
with the concerned State Governments/UTs so that the intended benefits 
under SCSP reach the weaker sections of the Society.  To increase awareness 
the Committee also desi re the Department to undertake a publicity campaign 
about various Schemes being implemented  by the Department among SC 
population. The Committee would like to be apprised of the action taken in this 
regard. 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
The CSS Blue Revolution was a demand driven scheme and implemented in 
the country based on the proposals received from all the State s and Union 
Territories Governments. The Department of Fisheries released Rs. 330 lakh to 
Govt. of Jammu & Kashmir, Rs. 281.34 lakh relea sed to Govt. of Punjab, Rs. 19.98 
lakh to Govt. of Rajasthan, and Rs. 27 lakh to Govt. of Telangana for SCSP under 
the CSS Blue Revolution during the FY 2019 -20. Proposal from remaining states 
mentioned in the report has not received from the respective St ate Fisheries 
Departments under the SCSP component for the FY 2019 -20. Department of 
Fisheries has been undertaking  publicity campaign(s) about various Schemes being 
implemented by this Department through different Kisan Mela, exhibitions, capacity 
building training by the subordinate institutes, National Fish farmer’s day and World 
Fisheries Day, etc. The recommendation made by the Committee has been noted by 
the Department and the issue will be taken care of to carry out the existing and 
upcoming activities for the development of the sector through SCSP. 
 
RECOMMENDATION NO. 6 
FISHERY SURVEY OF INDIA (FSI) 
 
  The Committee note that Fishery Survey of India (FSI) is the nodal 
agency for carrying out the survey, assessment and monitoring of marine 
fishery resources in the Indian EEZ within the framework of a well defined 
mandate. The FSI also imparts training to the students, onboard survey 

 
 
26 
 
vessels on tenure basis, sponsored by the CIFNET, Kochi. The Committee 
note that FSI conducted stock Assessment of Marine Fishery Resources and 
Potential Yield Estimates were drawn based on time series data collected by 
the Sur vey vessels of FSI including the land based data. The Committee 
further note that presently  FSI has a fleet of 11 deep sea survey vessels with 
the State of Art Technology of which 2 are multifilament tuna longliners, 2 are 
monofilament tuna longliners and 7 Stern Trawlers which are being deployed 
from six operational Bases; Mumbai, Mormugao, Cochin, Chennai, 
Vishkhapatnam and Port Blair in order to accomplish the mandate of the 
Institute. The Committee observe that some of the Vessels like Matsya 
Nireekshani, Matsya Varshini , Matsya Shikari and Matsya Darshini are more 
than 40 years old and hence are subjected to frequent repairing besides the 
mandatory dry docking repairs. The Committee note that the total Expenditure 
incurred on Maintenance of fleet of FSI in 2019 -20 (Upto January 2020) alone 
stand at Rs. 36.15 crore. Further, as informed by the Department, four vessels 
were kept in dry-docking last year due to want of funds. The Committee are of 
view that FSI has been entrusted with essential responsibi lity of assessing 
Marine Fishery and towards this end the availability of a modern fleet of 
research and reconnaissance vessels is utmost necessity to survey fishing 
resources in long coastline and varied exclusive Economic Zone of Country. 
The Committee, therefore, recommend the Government to allocate sufficient 
funds for Maintenance of fleet under Fishery Survey of India so that proper 
assessment and survey of our Marine Resources do not suffer due to want of 
funds. The Committee also desire the Departmen t to explore possibility for 
replacement of ageing vessels under FSI fleet so that the burgeoning 
Maintenance Expenditure can be brought down. The Committee would like to 
be apprised of action taken in this regard. 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
•  Allocation of Su fficient funds for Maintenance of fleet:  In order to strengthen 
the fisheries institutes especially (i) Fishery survey of India (FSI) and (ii) Central 
Institute of Fisheries Nautical and Engineering Training, (CIFNET) and 

 
 
27 
 
considering the age of the survey  and training vessels and the need for 
continuous survey of marine fishery resources, need -based funding support are 
allocated for maintenance and dry docking of these survey / training vessels and 
acquisition of new modern resource specific survey / train ing vessels and such 
necessary components are appropriately included under the recently approved 
Pradhan Mantri Matsya Sampada Yojana (PMMSY) of this Department of 
Fisheries. 
• Explore the possibility of replacement of aging vessels: Regarding the 
replacement of old vessels, necessary funding provision has been kept in PMMSY 
and the DoF is in contact with the Shipyards of Ministry of Shipping for 
construction of “Make in India” resources specific survey / Training vessels.  The 
Heads of both the organizations  have been directed to have discussion with the 
Shipyards of M/o Shipping, Govt of India on the design and various aspects of the 
proposed survey vessels and to take up the matter immediately. 
 
RECOMMENDATION NO. 7 
HOUSING FACILITY TO FISHERMEN 
 The Department provides Housing facility to fishermen under its 
flagship Centrally Sponsored Scheme - Blue Revolution Scheme. The 
Department provides assistance of Rs One Lakh Twenty thousand to 
fishermen for Housing unit in convergence with Pradhan Mantri  Awas Yojana 
(PMAY). However, the Committee note that no provision for providing Housing 
units to fishermen was made for big states like Gujarat, Karnataka, Madhya 
Pradesh, Maharashtra, etc. during the years 2018 -19 and 2019 -20. The 
Committee were informed that the names of Beneficiaries for Housing Scheme 
are supplied by the respective State Government to the Department. The 
Department does not maintain any independent list of Fishermen who are in 
need of House. The Committee believe that there are chances  of exclusion of 
Beneficiaries under the Scheme if the Department is solely dependent on 
States for providing list of Beneficiaries. The Committee, therefore, 
recommend the Department to develop a mechanism  in coordination with the 

 
 
28 
 
State Governments for i dentification of Beneficiaries for the Housing Scheme 
and to allocate sufficient funds for the same so that this poor vulnerable 
section of our society gets maximum benefits. The Committee also desire the 
Department to explore the possibility of entrusting  the task of identification of 
Beneficiaries to the Newly announced 'Sagar Mitras' as they will work at the 
Grass root level. The Committee would like to be apprised of steps taken in 
this regard.  
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
The Department under the National Scheme of Welfare of Fishermen under 
the CSS -Blue Revolution: Integrated Development and Management of Fisheries 
has released a sum of Rs. 134.38 crores towards central share for construction of  
18686 nos of fishermen houses from 2015 -16 to 2019 -20. The f unds to the states 
namely Gujarat, Karnatka, Madhya Pradesh, Maharashtra etc. could not be released 
due to no n submission of the proposals by these states and further compliances of 
the observations made  by the Department. Further, the scheme is demand driven  
and the beneficiaries are generally selected by State Governments/UTs after the 
release of quantum of fund based on  the availability of Budget and the earlier 
progress and utilization of the fund made by the States. Since Fishery is a state 
subject, selection of beneficiaries is under the domain of State Governments. 
However, formation of Sagar Mitra  at the Ground leve l as approved recently in 
Pradhan Mantri Matsya Sampada Yojana will also be actively involved in 
convergence with State Government implementing agency for selection of 
beneficiaries in fair manner. 
Comments of the Committee 
For comments of the Commit tee please refer to Para No.1.16 of Chapter - I of this 
Report. 
 
 
 
 

 
 
29 
 
RECOMMENDATION NO. 8 
INSURANCE SCHEME FOR FISHERMEN 
  The Committee note that the Department is implementing a Scheme on 
‘Group Accident Insurance for Active Fishermen’ to provide life insurance 
cover to active fishers. The National Scheme on Welfare of Fishermen has 
been subsumed with the CSS on Blue Revolution: Integrated Development and 
Management of Fisheries and Group Accident Insurance for Active Fishermen 
is being  implemented in alignment with the Pradhan Mantri Suraksha 
BimaYojana (PMSBY) with effect from 1st June,2017, to continue to provide 
insurance coverage to active fishermen registered with the State Governments 
and Union Territories. The insurance coverage to fishermen und er the Group 
Accident Insurance for Active Fishermen was enhanced with effect from May, 
2014 (i) from Rs. 1.00 lakh to Rs.2.00 lakh against death or permanent total 
disability and (ii) from Rs. 50,000/ - to Rs.1.00 lakh for partial permanent 
disability. Active fishers from both Inland and Marine Sectors in the age group 
of 18 to 70 years are eligible under this scheme. The Committee note that only 
29,25,081 fishermen out of approximately 16 million active fishermen in the 
country are covered under Insurance Scheme. The Committee recommend the 
Department to make earnest efforts to provide Insurance coverage to all 
fishermen. The Committee further believe that the fishermen have to counter 
vagaries of nature in order to catch fishes and put their lives at risk for earning 
livelihood. The Committee feel that the provision of Insurance of Rs 2 lakh 
against death or permanent total disability and Rs One lakh for partial 
permanent disability is highly disproportionate to the risks being faced by the 
fishermen everyday. Therefore, the Committee recommend the Government to 
consider enhancing the amount of Insurance Cover provided to the fishermen 
under the Insurance Coverage Scheme, in proportionate to the extremely high 
level of risks faced by them. 
 
 

 
 
30 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
Under the recently approved Pradhan Mantri Matsya Sampada Yojana  
(PMMSY), group accident coverage fishers has been enhanced to Rs. 5.00 lakh 
insurance cover in case of death and permanent disability and Rs. 2.5 lakh in case 
of partial disability in light of the fact that many states are providing higher (that of 
the insurance cover of Rs.2 lakh in case of death/permanent disability and Rs. 1.00 
lakh in case of partial disability provided under BR) insurance coverage to 
Fishermen.    
 
RECOMMENDATION NO. 10 
PRADHAN MANTRI MATSYA SAMPADA YOJANA (PMMSY) 
 The Committee note that the Department has formulated Pradhan Mantri 
Matsya Sampada Yojana ( PMMSY) to bring about Blue Revolution through 
sustainable and responsible development of Fisheries Sector in India. The 
Committee were apprised that Expenditure Finance Committee (EFC) chaired 
by the Secretary (Expenditure), Ministry of Finance in its meet ing held on 21st 
January, 2020 approved the PMMSY at total cost of Rs. 20,050.00 crore 
comprising of (a) Central share of Rs. 9,407 crore, (ii) State share of Rs 
4,880.00 crore and (c) beneficiary share of Rs. 5,763 crore for its 
implementation for a perio d of 5 years with effect from 2020 -21 to 2024 -25 in 
all States/UTs. The Committee are aware that the existing Blue Revolution 
Scheme will be closed by 31st March, 2020. However, the Committee are 
distressed to note that no Budgetary Allocation has been mad e for PMMSY for 
the year 2020 -21 which will replace the existing Blue Revolution Scheme. In 
view of the Submission made by the Department, the Committee recommend 
the Department to expeditiously finalize the proposal and seek necessary 
approval for the Sch eme PMMSY at the earliest. The Committee would further 
like the Department to finalize the Operationalisation Guidelines for this 
Scheme at the earliest. The Committee would like to be apprised of steps 
taken in this regard.  

 
 
31 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
The Cabinet on 20.5.2020 approved the Pradhan Mantri Matsya Sampada 
Yojana (PMMSY) at a total investment of Rs. 20,050 crore comprising of (a) Central 
share of Rs. 9407 crore, (b) State share of Rs 4880 crore and (c) Beneficiaries 
contribution of Rs. 5763 crore for its implementation during a period of 5 years  from 
FY 2020-21 to FY 2024-25 in all States/Union Territories. 
 
 Since the  CSS-Blue Revolution : Integrated Development and Management 
of Fisheries  ended on 31 st March 2020, the Pradhan Man tri Matsya Sampada 
Yojana (PMMSY) envisages to utilize the allocated budget of Rs  637.50 crores 
during 2020 -21 ( which includes Rs. 77.5 crore allocated to NFDB)  for 
implementation of PMMSY as well as  for meeting the committed liabilities under 
CSS-Blue Revolution-Integrated Development and Management of Fisheries both by 
DoF as well as  NFDB, pending allocation of regular budgetary support for PMMSY 
during the FY 2020 -21. The file in this regard is already being submitted to Ministry 
of Finance. 
 
 Secretary, Department of Fisheries (DoF) vide his DO letter dated 20.05.2020 
addressed to Chief Secretaries of all the State Governments and Union Territories 
(UTs) conveyed the decision of the Government on PMMSY along with framework of 
the PMMSY and list of its a ctivities. The States/UTs were requested to take 
necessary steps for immediate roll out of the PMMSY. 
 
 Hon’ble Minister of Fisheries, Animal Husbandry and Dairying along with both 
the Hon’ble Ministers of State for Fisheries, Animal Husbandry and Dairying  on 
26.05.2020 launched the PMMSY and addressed the press conference, which was 
widely published in print and electronic media.  
 
 The Department of Fisheries, has prepared a Booklet on details of the 
Scheme required for advance planning and formulation of  proposals and sent to the 
Department of Fisheries of all the States/UTs vide DO letter dated 26.05.2020. The 

 
 
32 
 
States/UTs were requested to earmark requisite budgetary allocations for PMMSY 
state share and preparation of the detailed proposals for the PMMSY.  
 
 An inter -ministerial Committee under the chairmanship of Secretary, DoF 
namely Central Apex Committee (CAC) is responsible for steering the overall 
implementation of PMMSY including approval of the Operational Guidelines.  CAC 
with members drawn from various line ministries has been constituted on 8 th June, 
2020. Similarly, State/UT and District level Committees as mentioned below have 
also been requested to be constituted by the States/UTs vide letter dated  8 th June, 
2020. 
i. State Level Approval and Monitoring Committee (SLAMC)  
ii. Union Territory Level Approval and Monitoring Committee (UTLAMC)  
iii. District Level Committee (DLC)  
 
 The Administrative Approval for the PMMSY has been issued on 12/6/2020 
giving the framework/relevant details of the scheme.  PMMSY is an umbrella scheme 
with several standalone as well as inter -related activities (92) requiring preparation 
of detailed operational guidelines in consultation with States and Fisheries 
Institutions. The Department has fast tracked the preparation o f operational 
guidelines and completed the same in consultation with representative of states and 
fisheries institutes after a final round of meeting on 15/6/2020.   
 
 First meeting of the Central Apex Committee (CAC) under the chairmanship 
of Secretary, D oF was held on 22 nd June, 2020 through a Video Conference (VC). 
The CAC approved the Operational Guidelines including the unit costs of all the 
components/sub-components/activities of the PMMSY and has been shared with the 
States. In the meantime, these Operational guidelines of the PMMSY have also 
been shared with States/UTs for fast tracking the preparation of the project 
proposals. 
 

 
 
33 
 
 The Department of Fisheries has taken up with Integrated Finance Division  
(IFD) for creation of n ew Head of Account for the PMMSY  which is to be done in 
consultation with the Department of Expenditure, Ministry of Finance.  
  

 
 
34 
 
CHAPTER III 
 
OBSERVATION/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO NOT 
DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE GOVERNMENT’S ACTION TAKEN 
REPLY 
 
 
 
 
 
 
NIL  

 
 
35 
 
CHAPTER IV 
 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH ACTION 
TAKEN REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY 
THE COMMITTEE 
 
RECOMMENDATION NO. 2 
GROWTH OF FISHERIES SECTOR 
  The Committee note that the total fish production during the year 2017 -
18 was 12.59 million tonnes (MT) with a contribution of 8.90 MT from Inland 
Sector and 3.69 million tonnes from Marine Sector. The Committee further 
note that Fisheries Sector of the Country provides livelihood support to 
approximately 16 million people at the primary level and almost double the 
number along the value chain. The Committee note that the Fish production is 
envisaged to be increased by the expansion of area under cultivation, increase 
in productivity and diversi fication of aquaculture species. The Committee 
further note that the Department is working on upgradation /creation of 
infrastructure facilities for maintaining cold chain, insulated or refrigerated 
logistic connectivity, up -gradation of fishing harbours w hich could reduce 
post-harvest losses, enhance the production through expansion of area under 
shrimp farming, by increasing the unit shrimp productivity through adoption 
of Better Management Practices (BMPs) and advanced technologies, and 
through diversifi cation in commercial aquaculture techniques by introducing 
more exportable varieties with targeted programmes to achieve the targeted 
Export earnings of 1 lakh crore by 2024 -25. The Committee were further 
informed that the Department needs funds to the tun e of Rs 27000 crore in 
coming years to be able to fully exploit the Fishery potential of the Country. 
The Committee, therefore, recommend the Government to Allocate sufficient 
funds to the Department so that the aforesaid Programmes/Schemes can be 
fully im plemented which will enhance the Fish Production for achieving the 
targets. 
 

 
 
36 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
The Department of Fisheries, Ministry of Fisheries, Animal Husbandry and 
Dairying is giving precedence to boost fish production in the country. For increas ing 
production and productivity of fisheries sector, the Department  had implemented the 
Centrally Sponsored Scheme (CSS) on Blue Revolution: Integrated Development 
and Management of Fisheries with focused approach  on effective utilization of 
fisheries reso urces in a sustainable and responsible manner, technology infusion, 
creation of infrastructure, diversification of fish species and fishing practices, supply 
of quality inputs, expansion and intensification of fish culture, disease management, 
adoption of best aquaculture practices . The Blue Revolution scheme has ended on 
31.03.2020. To supplement the efforts of the State Governments and Union 
Territories, the Department has provided an assistance of Rs. 2541 crore during the 
last five years, under the CSS for development of fisheries sector with view to 
enhance of fish productivity and production in the country.  
The sector has been recognized as a powerful income and employment 
generator as it stimulates growth of a number of subsidiary industries . The sector 
has immense potential to double the fishers and fish farmers’ incomes as envisioned 
by the government. To utilise the dormant and untapped potential, there is need for 
enhanced investment in the sector and there is need for increased allocation for the 
sector which would provided the much needed thrust in the areas of enhancing 
Production and Productivity, Aquaculture Development, Post -Harvest and marketing 
infrastructure and other priority Interventions.  
Comments of the Committee 
For comments of the Commit tee please refer to Para No.1.10 of Chapter - I of this 
Report. 
 
RECOMMENDATION NO. 5 
COASTAL AQUACULTURE AUTHORITY (CAA) 
 
  The Committee note that the Coastal Aquaculture Authority was formed 
in 2005 to regulate the activities connected with Aquaculture in Coastal Areas.  

 
 
37 
 
The Committee further note that Department was able to utilize only Rs. 2.24 
crore out of allocation of Rs 4.5 crore in the year 2019-20. The Committee were 
informed that this less expenditure was due to many of the sanctioned posts 
being vacant including that of Chairperson and Member Secretary in the 
Authority as the Budgetary allocation to CAA is provided m ainly to meet the 
salaries, other administrative and establishments expenses. The Committee 
note that CAA is entrusted with very important mandate of ascertaining 
environmental impact of Coastal Aquaculture farms and to order demolition or 
removal of any p olluting Coastal Aquaculture. The Committee believe that 
Coastal ecosystem is very fragile and utmost attention should be paid for its 
preservation and conservation so that the means of livelihood for lakhs of 
poor and vulnerable fishermen stay intact in t he long run However, the 
Committee are dismayed to note that the CAA, which has been entrusted with 
this responsibility, is working without a Chairperson and Member Secretary 
and many other posts also being vacant. The Committee believe that CAA 
cannot dis charge its mandate diligently without sufficient manpower. 
Therefore, the Committee recommend the Department to make utmost efforts 
to fill the vacant posts in CAA at the earliest so as to ensure the smooth 
functioning of the Authority. The Committee would like to be apprised of steps 
taken in this direction. 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 The recommendation made by the Committee has been noted by the 
Department and the status/  steps taken to fill up the vacant posts in CAA are as 
follows:  
 
• Chairperson: The post of Chairperson is a 3 year tenure post and the tenure 
of Hon'ble Justice Shri Ravi Raja Pandian had ended on 19.5.2016 on 
completion of 3 years tenure. The recommendation of the Search cum 
Selection Committee has been forwarded to Min istry of Personnel and 
Training for obtaining the approval of the ACC on 17 th March, 2020 and the 
approval is awaited. The Department of Fisheries, Ministry of Fisheries, 

 
 
38 
 
Animal Husbandry and Dairying, Govt. of India is actively pursuing the matter 
of filling up of the post of Chairperson, CAA. 
• Member Secretary: The post of Member Secretary is also a tenure post for 
a period of three years. The post was held as additional charge by Smt. I. 
Rani Kumudini, Chief Executive, NFDB, Hyderabad from 22.05.2019 to 
02.03.2020. The post has now been filled up on a regular basis by appointing 
Dr. (Mrs) V. Kripa as regular Member Secretary of CAA w.e.f. 22.05.2020. 
 
• Director (Tech): Shri A.Antony Xavier has been posted as Director (Tech), 
CAA from 16.4.2019 on deputation basis. 
 
• Assistant Director (Technical): The post is lying vacant since June 2016 on 
repatriation of its incumbent. The post is to be filled up on promotion after the 
appointment of Chairperson, CAA who chairs the DPC for the post. 
 
• Senior Administrative Officer: The post is lying vacant since July 2019 on 
completion of deputation period of the incumbent. The selection of next 
incumbent to the post has been completed, who is yet to join the post due to 
the present lockdown scenario. 
 
• Accountant: The post is lying vacant since April 2019. Attempts to fillup the 
post failed due to poor response since there was an error in the recruitment 
rules of this post on the RR for Accountant on 06.08.2019.  
 
• Stenographer Grade 'C': Two posts (deput ation posts) are lying vacant 
since April, 2016. Adver tisement to fill up the post have  been issued on 29th 
June, 2019. 
 
• Senior Clerk: Two posts are lying vacant and advertisement have been 
issued for filling up the posts on 29th June, 2019. 
 
 

 
 
39 
 
Comments of the Committee 
For comments of the Commit tee please refer to Para No.1.13 of Chapter - I of this 
Report. 
RECOMMENDATION NO. 9 
BLUE REVOLUTION - INTEGRATED DEVELOPMENT AND MANAGEMENT OF 
FISHERIES  
 The Committee note that the Department is implementing Centrally 
Sponsored Scheme 'Blue Revolution' for a period of Five years from 2015 -16 
to 2019-20 at an total Central Outlay of Rs 3000 crore. The Committee further 
note that the Department has been able  to utilize Rs 2085.82 crore out of 
allocated fund of Rs 2511.63 crore since 2016 -17. The Committee were 
informed that ''CSS - Blue Revolution' is a demand driven Scheme and the 
fund releases are made on the merit of the proposals received from the 
States/UTs and their requirements. Because of this, the Department has not 
been able to spend the allocated funds completely as sufficient numbers of 
proposals were not received from State/UTs. The Committee also note that the 
Department is struggling with increa sing unspent balance for various 
States/UTs like Andamand & Nicobar, Bihar, Daman & Diu, Goa, etc. due to 
which these States were not allocated any funds during the year 2019 -20. The 
Committee deprecate the fact that the entire allocated amount could not b e 
utilized due to lack of proposals from State Governments. The Committee 
recommend the Department to take up this issue with the State 
Governments/UTs seriously and workout an objective Action Plan to the 
problem of unspent balances.   
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 The Department has been actively pursuing with the concerned States/UT  
Governments, to liquidate the pending UCs. 
Comments of the Committee 
For comments of the Commit tee please refer to Para No.1.16 of Chapter - I of this 
Report. 

 
 
40 
 
CHAPTER V 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH FINAL 
REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT ARE STILL AWAITED 
 
 
 
 
 
 
NIL 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                                                     
NEW DELHI;                              SHRI P. C. GADDIGOUDAR 
09 FEBRUARY, 2021                                                         Chairperson, 
20 MAGHA, 1942 (Saka)                               Standing Committee on Agriculture.
   
  

 
 
41 
 
ANNEXURE 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE 
(2020-21) 
 
MINUTES OF THE FIFTH SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE 
***** 
 The Committee sat on Tuesday, the 09 th February, 2021 from 1430 hrs. to  
1510 hrs. in the Committee Room '3', Block-A, Extn to PHA Building New Delhi.  
 
PRESENT 
Shri Parvatagouda Chandanagouda Gaddigoudar–  Chairperson 
 
MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA 
 
  2. Shri Afzal Ansari 
  3. Shri Horen Sing Bey 
  4. Shri Devendra Singh 'Bhole' 
  5. Shri A. Ganeshamurthi 
  6. Shri Kanakmal Katara 
  7. Shri Bhagwanth Khuba 
  8. Shri Mohan Mandavi 
  9. Shri Devji Mansingram Patel 
  10. Smt. Shardaben Anilbhai Patel 
  11. Shri Shriniwas Dadasaheb Patil 
  12. Shri Pocha Brahmananda Reddy 
  13. Shri Virendra Singh 
  14. Shri Ram Kripal Yadav 
 
      RAJYA SABHA 
  15. Shri Partap Singh Bajwa  
  16. Shri Narayan Rane 
  17. Shri Kailash Soni 
  18. Shri B.L. Verma 
  19. Smt. Chhaya Verma 
   
SECRETARIAT 
1. Shri Shiv Kumar   – Joint Secretary 
2. Dr. Vatsala J. Pande    –  Director  
3. Smt. Juby Amar   – Director  
4. Shri Prem Ranjan   – Deputy Secretary 
  
 
 
 

 
 
42 
 
2. At the outset, Chairperson welcomed the Members to the Sitting of the 
Committee. Thereafter, the Committee took up for consideration the followings 
Reports: 
 
*(i)  XXXX  XXXX  XXXX  XXXX 
*(ii)  XXXX  XXXX  XXXX  XXXX 
*(iii)  XXXX  XXXX  XXXX  XXXX 
*(iv)  XXXX  XXXX  XXXX  XXXX 
*(v)  XXXX  XXXX  XXXX  XXXX 
*(vi)  XXXX  XXXX  XXXX  XXXX 
*(vii)  XXXX  XXXX  XXXX  XXXX 
*(viii)  XXXX  XXXX  XXXX  XXXX 
 
(ix) Draft Report on Action Taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations on Twelfth Report of the Standing 
Committee on Agriculture (2019 -20) on 'Demands for Grants (2020 -
21)' of the Ministry of Fisheries, Animal Hu sbandry and Dairying 
(Department of Fisheries); 
 
*(x)  XXXX  XXXX  XXXX  XXXX 
 
3. After some deliberations, the Committee adopted the Draft Reports without 
any modifications and the Committee then authorized the Chairperson to finalize and 
present these Reports to Parliament. 
 
The Committee then adjourned. 
___________________________________________________________________
_______ 
*Matter not related to this Report 
 
 
  

 
 
43 
 
Appendix 
(Vide Para 4 of Introduction of the Report) 
ANALYSIS OF ACTION TAKEN BY GOVERNMENT ON THE TWELFTH REPORT 
OF STANDING COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE (17th LOK SABHA) 
  
i. Total number of Recommendations:     10 
Recommendations/Observations which have been 
Accepted by the Government: 
Recommendation Nos.  1, 3, 4, 6, 7, 8, 10 
Total                                                                                                    07 
Percentage                                                                                          70.00% 
  
ii. Recommendations/Observations which the Committee 
Do not desire to pursue in view of the Government’s replies  
Recommendation No.   NIL  
Total          00 
Percentage                                                                                          00.00% 
  
iii. Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies 
of the Government have not been accepted by the Committee 
Recommendation No.   2, 5, 9    
Total           03 
Percentage         30.00% 
  
iv. Recommendations/Observations in respect of which  
Final replies of the Government are still awaited 
Recommendation No.  NIL 
Total           00  
Percentage                                                                                          00.00% 
  
 
 
 