 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE, ANIMAL HUSBANDRY  
AND FOOD PROCESSING 
 
(2022-2023) 
                  
         
SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA 
          
         
                                 
 
MINISTRY OF FOOD PROCESSING INDUSTRIES 
              
 
 
'DEMANDS FOR GRANTS (2023-24)' 
 
 
 
 
{Action-taken by the Government on the Observations / Recommendations 
contained in the Fifty-Fifth Report (Seventeenth Lok Sabha) of the Standing 
Committee on Agriculture, Animal Husbandry and Food Processing (2022-23)} 
 
         
 
 
        
SIXTY- FOURTH REPORT 
 
  
 
         
               
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
AUGUST,2023/SRAVANA,1945 (SAKA) 
 
 
 
 
64 

 
SIXTY- FOURTH REPORT 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE, ANIMAL HUSBANDRY  
AND FOOD PROCESSING 
 
(2022-2023) 
          
 
SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA 
         
         
         
MINISTRY OF FOOD PROCESSING INDUSTRIES 
              
 
 
'DEMANDS FOR GRANTS (2023-24)' 
 
 
 
 
{Action-taken by the Government on the Observations / Recommendations 
contained in the Fifty-Fifth Report (Seventeenth Lok Sabha) of the Standing 
Committee on Agriculture, Animal Husbandry and Food Processing (2022-23)} 
 
         
        
            Presented to Lok Sabha on   10.08.2023 
            Laid on the Table of Rajya Sabha on 10.08.2023 
 
 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
AUGUST, 2023/SRAVANA,1945 (SAKA) 
 
 
 

 
 
 
COA No. _____  
 
 
         
         
         
         
         
         
 
         
         
        
 
 
 
         
                 
         
         
 
 
 
         
     
                     
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
© 2023 By Lok Sabha Secretariat 
 
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of Business in Lok 
Sabha (Sixteenth Edition) and Printed by Lok Sabha Secretariat 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
<CONTENTS> 
  Page No. 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE (2022-23) (iii) 
INTRODUCTION      (v) 
   
CHAPTER I  Report …………………………………………   
CHAPTER II Observations/Recommendations that have been accepted by 
the Government 
  
CHAPTER III Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not 
desire to pursue in view of the Government’s replies  
  
CHAPTER IV Observations/Recommendations in respect of  which replies of 
the Government have not been accepted by the Committee  
  
CHAPTER V Observations/Recommendations in respect of which final replies 
of the Government are still awaited  
  
  
ANNEXURE 
 
 
Minutes of the 19th Sitting of the Committee held on 08.08.2023   
    APPENDIX  
Analysis of Action Taken by the Government on the Observations / 
Recommendations contained in the Fifty -Fifth Report (Seventeenth Lok Sabha) 
of the Standing Committee on A griculture, Animal Husbandry and Food 
Processing (2022-23). 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 

 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE, ANIMAL 
HUSBANDRY AND FOOD PROCESSING (2022-23) 
 
SHRI P.C. GADDIGOUDAR -   CHAIRPERSON 
 
MEMBERS 
 
LOK SABHA 
 
 2. Shri Horen Sing Bey 
  3.  Shri A. Ganeshamurthi 
 4. Shri Kanakmal Katara 
 5. Shri Abu Taher Khan 
 6. Shri Ram Mohan Naidu Kinjarapu 
 7. Shri Mohan Mandavi 
 8. Shri Devji Mansingram Patel 
9. Smt. Sharda Anilkumar Patel 
10. Shri Bheemrao Baswanthrao Patil 
11. Shri Shriniwas Dadasaheb Patil 
12. Shri Vinayak Bhaurao Raut 
13. Shri Pocha Brahmananda Reddy 
14. Shri Rajiv Pratap Rudy 
15. Mohammad Sadique 
16. Shri Devendra Singh alias Bhole Singh 
17. Shri Virendra Singh 
18. Shri V.K. Sreekandan 
19. Shri Ram Kripal Yadav 
20.  VACANT# 
21. VACANT* 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
 
22. Smt. Ramilaben Becharbhai Bara 
23. Shri Masthan Rao Beeda 
24. Dr. Anil Sukhdeorao Bonde 
25. Shri S. Kalyanasundaram 
26. Shri Surendra Singh Nagar 
27. Shri Kailash Soni  
28. Shri Randeep Singh Surjewala 
29. Shri Ram Nath Thakur 
30. Shri Vaiko 
31. Shri Harnath Singh Yadav  
 
 
 
# Vacant w.e.f. 10.10.2022 due to demise of Shri Mu layam Singh Yadav on 10.10.2022. 
[Bulletin- Part II, Para No. 5316 dated 14.10.2022]. 
 *Vacant w.e.f.29.04.2023 due to disqualif ication of Shri Afzal Ansari from Lok Sabha 
Membership from the date of his conviction in terms of the provision of Article 102(1)(e) of the 
Constitution of India read with Section 8 of the Representation of the People Act, 
1951[Notification No. 21/4(6)/2023/TO(B) Dated - 01.05.2023]. 
 
(iii) 

 
 
 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
 
1. Shri Shiv Kumar    - Additional Secretary 
2. Shri Uttam Chand Bharadwaj  - Director 
3. Shri N. Amarathiangan   - Under Secretary 
4. Shri S. Vijayaraghavan   - Executive Officer 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(iv) 

 
  INTRODUCTION 
         
I, the Chairperson , Standing Committee on Agriculture, Animal Husbandry and 
Food Processing (2022-23), having been authorized by the Committee to submit the 
Report on their behalf, present this Sixty-Fourth Report on Action taken by the 
Government on the Observations/Recommendations contained in the Fifty-Fifth 
Report (Seventeenth Lok Sabha ) of the Standing Committee on Agriculture, Animal 
Husbandry and Food Processing (2022 -23) on 'Demands for Grants ( 2023-24)' 
pertaining to the Ministry Food Processing Industries . 
 
2. The Fifty-Fifth Report (Seventeenth Lok Sabha) of the Standing Committee on 
Agriculture, Animal Hus bandry and Food Processing (2022 -23) on 'Demands for 
Grants ( 2023-24)' pertaining to the Ministry of Food Processing Industries  was 
presented to Lok Sabha on 13 March, 2023 and laid on the Table of Rajya Sabha on  
14 March, 2023. The Action Taken Notes on the Report were received on 01.06.2023. 
 
3. The Report was considered and adopted by the Comm ittee at their Sitting held 
on   08.08.2023. 
 
4. An Analysis of the action t aken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in the Fifty-Fifth Report (Seventeenth Lok 
Sabha) of the Committee is given in Appendix.  
  
            
   
 
 
     
 
NEW DELHI;        P.C. GADDIGOUDAR 
08 August, 2023                                       Chairperson, 
17 Shravana, 1945(Saka)                       Standing Committee on Agriculture,  
      Animal Husbandry and Food Processing  
 
 
 
 
 
(v) 

1 
 
CHAPTER I 
REPORT 
  
This Report of the Standing Committee on Agriculture , Animal Husbandry and 
Food Processing  deals with the Action Taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in the Fifty-Fifth Report (Seventeenth Lok 
Sabha) of the Standing Committee on Agriculture , Animal Husbandry and Food 
Processing (2022-23) on ' Demands for Grants (202 3-24)' pertaining to the Ministry of 
Food Processing I ndustries which was presented on 13.03.2023 to the Lok Sabha and 
Laid on the Table of Rajya Sabha on 14.03.2023. 
  
1.2 The Ministry of Food Processing Industries has furnished Action Taken  Replies in 
respect of all the 8 Observations/Recommendations contained in the Report. These 
have been categorized as under: 
 
 Observations/Recommendations that have been accepted by the Government: 
     Recommendation Nos. 2, 3, 7 and 8 
Chapter - II 
Total - 04 
 
 Observations/Recommendations in respect of which the Committee do not desire 
to pursue in view of the Government's Reply: 
 Recommendation No. 1, 4, 5 and 6 
Chapter - III 
Total - 04 
 
 Observations/Recommendations in respect of which Action Taken Replies of the 
Government have not been accepted by the Committee: 
 Recommendation No. NIL 
Chapter - IV 
Total - NIL  
 Observations/Recommendations in respect of which final replies of the 
Government are still awaited: 
 Recommendation No. NIL 
Chapter - V 
Total - NIL 

2 
 
  
1.3  The Committee desire that utmost importance would be given by the 
Ministry to implement the observations/recommendations accepted by the 
Government. In cases, where it is not possible for the Ministry to implement the 
Recommendations in letter and spi rit for any reason, the matter may be reported 
to the Committee with the reasons for non-implementation. The Committee desire 
that further Action -Taken Note s on the Observations/Recommendations 
contained in Chapter - I and final replies in respect of Recommendations 
contained in Chapter - V of this Report be furnished to them at an early date. 
 
1.4  The Committee will now deal with the action taken by the Government on some 
of the Recommendations in the succeeding paragraphs. 
  
A.   Pradhan Mantri Kisan Sampada Yojana (PMKSY)    
 Recommendation No. 2 
 1.5    The Committee had observed/recommended as follows:— 
"The Committee note that the Ministry has been implementing the Pradhan 
Mantri Kisan Sampada Yojana Scheme launched in May, 2017, which is a Central 
Sector Scheme. The Scheme has eight components: - (i) Mega Food Parks (ii) 
Integrated Cold Chain and Value Addition Infrastructure (iii) Creation / Expansion of 
Food Processing and Preservation Capacities (Unit Schemes) (iv) Infrastructure for 
Agro Processing Clusters (v) Creation of Backward and Forward Linkages (vi) Food 
Safety and Quality Assurance Infrastructure (vii) Human Resources and Infrastructure 
and (viii) Operation Greens. The Committee note that an amount of Rs. 923.94 Crore 
has been pro visioned for BE 2023 -24 for PMKSY. The Committee also note that with 
regard to achievement of targets for the Scheme, there has been shortfall in nearly all 
the Components of the Scheme. The Committee feel that unless all the Components of 
the PMKSY Scheme are implemented as per the target set by the Ministry, the avowed 
objective of the Scheme including better return to farmer and creating huge employment 
opportunities especially in the rural areas cannot be achieved. 
The Committee, therefore, recommend that the Ministry should strive hard to 
implement the Scheme as per the targets set by them in a properly planned manner." 
 
 

3 
 
 1.6 In its Action taken reply, the Ministry has stated:- 
"Under the component schemes of Pradhan Mantri Kisan Sampada Yojana 
(PMKSY), most of the projects approved have gestation period ranging from 2 -3 years 
with staggered fund releases against milestones. The fund utilization has been relatively 
reduced in the financial years 2020 -21 and 2021 -22 due to the COVID pandemic 
restrictions, Governmental as well as non -Governmental implementing agencies had 
not been able to carry out the field activities, which led to sluggish implementation of 
schemes. Non -receipt of sufficient number of eligible proposals under various 
component schemes also contributed for less utilisation of allocated funds. 
The Ministry is making incessant efforts in pursuing the Project Implementing 
Agencies (PIAs) of the approved projects under PMKSY through monitoring, review 
meetings and physical site inspection of  the projects thereby mitigating the problems 
likely to cause delay in implementation of the project. Further, the Programme 
Management Agencies (PMAs) engaged under various component schemes of PMKSY 
are regularly interacting with the PIAs and are assisti ng them in proper implementation 
of the project. The Ministry and PMAs are putting their efforts in helping PIAs in 
completing their projects within the prescribed timelines as per the guidelines of the 
component schemes of PMKSY and to submit the requisit e documents in required form 
for considering the timely release of grants-in-aid by the Ministry. 
In view of the above, Ministry would be able to utilize effectively the BE allocation 
of Rs. 923.24 crore vis -à-vis physical targets under various component s chemes of 
PMKSY." 
 
1.7  The Committee had expressed opinion that unless all the components of 
Pradhan Mantri Kisan Sampada Yojana (PMKSY) Scheme were implemented as 
per the target set by the Ministry, the objective of the Scheme including creation 
of huge employment opportunities could not be achieved. The Committee, 
therefore, had recommended that the Ministry should strive hard to implement 
the Scheme as per the targets set by them in a planned manner. 

4 
 
The Ministry, in its Action Taken Reply has stated inter-alia that 
implementation of PMKSY and funds utilization was relatively sluggish during 
2020-21 & 2021 -22 due to COVID P andemic and non -receipt of sufficient number 
of eligible proposals under various components of PMKSY.  The Ministry is 
making incessa nt efforts in pursuing the Project Implementing Agencies (PIAs) 
and helping PIAs to complete their projects within the prescribed timelines for 
facilitating the timely release of grants -in-aid.   The Committee while appreciating 
the efforts made the Minist ry to improve the pace of implementation of   PMKSY, 
desire that the Committee be apprised about the specific steps taken by the 
Ministry towards resolving the factors that affect effective implementation of 
PMKSY. 
 
B.    Infrastructure for Agro Processing Clusters Scheme 
       Recommendation No.3 
 
1.8     The Committee had observed/recommended as follows:— 
"The Committee note that the objective of the Scheme is to create modern 
infrastructure for food processing closer to production areas, to provide integrated and 
complete preservation infrastructure facilities from the farm gate to the consumers and 
to create effective backward and forward linkages by linking groups of 
producers/farmers to the processors and market through well equipped supply chain.  
The Committee further note that for the year 2020-21 an amount of Rs. 56.69 Crore had 
been allocated at RE Stage and the Actual Expenditure was Rs. 48.47 Crore, for the 
year 2021 -22 an amount of Rs. 53.90 Crore had been allocated and the Actual 
Expenditure was Rs. 49.08 Crore and for the year 2022 -23 against Rs. 56.55 Crore 
allocation, and the Actual Expenditure has been Rs. 28 Crore. For BE 2023 -24, an 
amount of Rs. 81.30 Crore has been allocated against Rs. 81 Crore proposed. 
The Committee also note that  the target set for the year 2023 -24 is 12 Projects 
but the target set for the years 2020 -21, 2021-22 and 2022-23 have not been achieved. 

5 
 
The Committee also note that out of 79 Projects approved, core processing and basic 
enabling infrastructure have been completed in 16 Projects and 41,775 numbers of 
farmers have benefitted from these 16 completed Projects. The Committee also note 
that this Scheme is demand driven and as such no Projects have been approved in the 
States of Goa, Jharkhand, West Bengal, Arun achal Pradesh, Manipur, Mizoram, 
Nagaland, Tripura, Sikkim, Andman and Nicobar Islands, Chandigarh, Dadar and Nagar 
Haveli of Daman and Diu, Delhi, Lakshadweep, Pondicherry and Ladakh. 
The Committee, therefore, recommend that the Ministry should make earne st efforts to 
complete 79 Approved Projects in a time bound manner and also try to identify the 
reasons for the proposals not being received for a Single Project from the above 
mentioned States. The Committee would like to be informed of the action taken i n this 
regard." 
 
1.9   In its Action Taken Reply, the Ministry has stated:- 
"Ministry of Food Processing Industries (MoFPI) has been implementing the 
Scheme for Creation of Infrastructure for Agro Processing Clusters (APC) since 2017 
under the Pradhan Mantri Kisan Sampada Yojana (PMKSY) which aims at development 
of modern infrastructure to encourage entrepreneurs to set up food processing units 
based on cluster approach. 
During the implementation of APC projects, it has been observed that various 
compliances before setting up APC viz. Change of Land Use, approval of building 
layout plan, possession of land and removal of encumbrance thereon, Consent to 
Establish from pollution control board, sanction of term loan by lending bank/ financial 
institutions a re time -consuming processes which on an average take around 10 -12 
months or even more depending on rules/ regulations of various States/ UTs and 
concerned Departments. Therefore, the developers of projects under the Scheme used 
to get only 10 -14 months to actually implement and complete the projects (stipulated 
timeline was 20 months in General Areas and 24 months in Difficult Areas). Hence, 
there were delays in the implementation of projects. In order to mitigate the problems 
being faced by the developers of the projects, the Ministry vide the revised APC scheme 
guidelines dated 04.12.2020 has increased the time period for completion of new 
projects from earlier 20 months to 24 months for General Areas and from 24 months to 
30 months for Difficult Areas. 

6 
 
APC scheme is a demand -driven scheme and financial assistance is provided to 
only the interested investors/ entrepreneurs who submit their proposals to the Ministry 
on the basis of their assessment of viability of the project viz. (cost of project, location of 
project, financial strength of investors, availability of raw materials, market conditions 
and demand from consumers etc. Till date, very few of the promoters from 
aforementioned States/ UTs (viz. Goa, Jharkhand, West Bengal, Arunachal Pradesh, 
Manipur, Mizoram, Nagaland, Tripura, Sikkim, Andman and Nicobar Islands, 
Chandigarh, Dadar and Nagar Haveli of Daman and Diu, Delhi, Lakshadweep, 
Pondicherry and Ladakh) have shown interest in submitting proposals under APC 
scheme. 
However, Ministry is making cont inuous efforts to attract more investors/ 
entrepreneurs to avail benefits of the scheme for setting up APCs all over the country. 
In this regard, Ministry has simplified various provisions of the Scheme while issuing 
new guidelines on 08.06.2022. Ministry has also simplified the conditions for release of 
various instalments of grants-in-aid in the Scheme guidelines.  
Further, Programme Management Agencies (PMAs) engaged by this Ministry 
under APC scheme are regularly interacting with the Project Implementin g Agencies 
(PIAs) of approved projects and assisting them in proper implementation of the projects 
so as to ensure timely utilization of funds and implementation of APC projects. Ministry 
is also making incessant efforts for achieving the physical and fina ncial targets through 
review meetings, virtual verifications and physical site inspections on regular basis." 
 
1.10  The Committee  had expressed concern that the targets set for the 
implementation the Scheme of Infrastructure for Agro Processing Clusters ( APC) 
were not fully achieved during the years 2020-21, 2021-22 and 2022-23.  Out of the 
79 approved Projects, only 16 P rojects were completed.  Further, no Project was 
approved in 16 States / UTs, due to demand driven mode of implementation of the 
Scheme.  The Committee had therefore, recommended that the Ministry should 
make efforts to complete the 79 approved P rojects in a time bound manner and 
find out the reasons for non-receipt of proposals from many States / UTs. 

7 
 
In the Action taken reply, the Ministry has stated inter-alia that the d elays in the 
implementation of P rojects were due to various compliances / approvals like 
Change of land Use, Building Layout Plan, Consent of Pollution Control Bo ard, 
Obtaining of Term -loan, etc. which need to be undergone by project develo pers 
under the APC Scheme. To mitigate the aforesaid problems/ is sues, the Ministry 
revised APC Scheme G uidelines on 04.12.2020 and increased the tim e period for 
completion of ne w P rojects from earlier 20 months to 24 months for General 
Areas and from 24 to 30 months for Difficult Areas. The Committee have also 
been informed that the APC scheme is a demand -driven scheme and financial 
assistance is provided on the basis of assessme nt of viability of the Project 
proposals submitted by the interest ed investors / entrepreneurs. Till date, very 
few of the promoters fro m aforementioned 16 States/UTs have shown interest in 
submitting proposals under this Scheme. However, the Ministry is m aking 
continuous efforts to attract more investors for setting up of APCs all over the 
country and simplified various provisions of the Scheme while issuing t he new 
guidelines 08.06.2022. The Ministry is also making incessant efforts for achieving 
the phys ical and financi al targets on regular basis. The Committee, while 
appreciating the efforts of the Ministry , also reiterate that all the approved 
Projects should strive  to be completed in a time bound manner and remedi al 
action be taken for getting Project proposals from the aforesaid 16 States /UTs. 
**** 
  

8 
 
CHAPTER - II 
  
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS THAT HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE 
GOVERNMENT 
 
Pradhan Mantri Kisan Sampada Yojana (PMKSY)    
Recommendation No. 2 
 The Committee note that the Ministry has been implementing the Pradhan 
Mantri Kisan Sampada Yojana Scheme launched in May, 2017, which is a Central 
Sector Scheme. The Scheme has eight components: - (i) Mega Food Parks (ii) 
Integrated Cold Chain and Value Addition Infrastructure (iii) Creation / Expansi on of 
Food Processing and Preservation Capacities (Unit Schemes) (iv) Infrastructure for 
Agro Processing Clusters (v) Creation of Backward and Forward Linkages (vi) Food 
Safety and Quality Assurance Infrastructure (vii) Human Resources and Infrastructure 
and (viii) Operation Greens. The Committee note that an amount of Rs. 923.94 Crore 
has been provisioned for BE 2023 -24 for PMKSY. The Committee also note that with 
regard to achievement of targets for the Scheme, there has been shortfall in nearly all 
the Components of the Scheme. The Committee feel that unless all the Components of 
the PMKSY Scheme are implemented as per the target set by the Ministry, the avowed 
objective of the Scheme including better return to farmer and creating huge employment 
opportunities especially in the rural areas cannot be achieved. 
The Committee, therefore, recommend that the Ministry should strive hard to 
implement the Scheme as per the targets set by them in a properly planned manner. 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
Under the compone nt schemes of Pradhan Mantri Kisan Sampada Yojana 
(PMKSY), most of the projects approved have gestation period ranging from 2 -3 years 
with staggered fund releases against milestones. The fund utilization has been relatively 
reduced in the financial years 2 020-21 and 2021 -22 due to the COVID pandemic 
restrictions, Governmental as well as non -Governmental implementing agencies had 
not been able to carry out the field activities, which led to sluggish implementation of 
schemes. Non -receipt of sufficient number  of eligible proposals under various 
component schemes also contributed for less utilisation of allocated funds. 

9 
 
The Ministry is making incessant efforts in pursuing the Project Implementing 
Agencies (PIAs) of the approved projects under PMKSY through moni toring, review 
meetings and physical site inspection of the projects thereby mitigating the problems 
likely to cause delay in implementation of the project. Further, the Programme 
Management Agencies (PMAs) engaged under various component schemes of PMKSY 
are regularly interacting with the PIAs and are assisting them in proper implementation 
of the project. The Ministry and PMAs are putting their efforts in helping PIAs in 
completing their projects within the prescribed timelines as per the guidelines of th e 
component schemes of PMKSY and to submit the requisite documents in required form 
for considering the timely release of grants-in-aid by the Ministry. 
In view of the above, Ministry would be able to utilize effectively the BE allocation 
of Rs. 923.24 cro re vis -à-vis physical targets under various component schemes of 
PMKSY." 
Comments of the Committee 
 
For Comments of the Committee please see para 1.7 of the Report 
 
 
Infrastructure for Agro Processing Clusters Scheme 
Recommendation No.3 
The Committee note that the objective of the Scheme is to create modern 
infrastructure for food processing closer to production areas, to provide integrated and 
complete preservation infrastructure facilities from the farm gate to the consumers and 
to create effective backwa rd and forward linkages by linking groups of 
producers/farmers to the processors and market through well equipped supply chain. 
The Committee further note that for the year 2020-21 an amount of Rs. 56.69 Crore had 
been allocated at RE Stage and the Actual Expenditure was Rs. 48.47 Crore, for the 
year 2021 -22 an amount of Rs. 53.90 Crore had been allocated and the Actual 
Expenditure was Rs. 49.08 Crore and for the year 2022 -23 against Rs. 56.55 Crore 
allocation, and the Actual Expenditure has been Rs. 28 Cro re. For BE 2023 -24, an 
amount of Rs. 81.30 Crore has been allocated against Rs. 81 Crore proposed. 
The Committee also note that the target set for the year 2023 -24 is 12 Projects 
but the target set for the years 2020 -21, 2021-22 and 2022-23 have not been achieved. 
The Committee also note that out of 79 Projects approved, core processing and basic 

10 
 
enabling infrastructure have been completed in 16 Projects and 41,775 numbers of 
farmers have benefitted from these 16 completed Projects. The Committee also note 
that this Scheme is demand driven and as such no Projects have been approved in the 
States of Goa, Jharkhand, West Bengal, Arunachal Pradesh, Manipur, Mizoram, 
Nagaland, Tripura, Sikkim, Andman and Nicobar Islands, Chandigarh, Dadar and Nagar 
Haveli of Daman and Diu, Delhi, Lakshadweep, Pondicherry and Ladakh. 
The Committee, therefore, recommend that the Ministry should make earnest 
efforts to complete 79 Approved Projects in a time bound manner and also try to identify 
the reasons for the proposals not bei ng received for a Single Project from the above 
mentioned States. The Committee would like to be informed of the action taken in this 
regard." 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
Ministry of Food Processing Industries (MoFPI) has been implementing the 
Scheme for Crea tion of Infrastructure for Agro Processing Clusters (APC) since 2017 
under the Pradhan Mantri Kisan Sampada Yojana (PMKSY) which aims at development 
of modern infrastructure to encourage entrepreneurs to set up food processing units 
based on cluster approach. 
During the implementation of APC projects, it has been observed that various 
compliances before setting up APC viz. Change of Land Use, approval of building 
layout plan, possession of land and removal of encumbrance thereon, Consent to 
Establish from p ollution control board, sanction of term loan by lending bank/ financial 
institutions are time -consuming processes which on an average take around 10 -12 
months or even more depending on rules/ regulations of various States/ UTs and 
concerned Departments. Therefore, the developers of projects under the Scheme used 
to get only 10 -14 months to actually implement and complete the projects (stipulated 
timeline was 20 months in General Areas and 24 months in Difficult Areas). Hence, 
there were delays in the imple mentation of projects. In order to mitigate the problems 
being faced by the developers of the projects, the Ministry vide the revised APC scheme 
guidelines dated 04.12.2020 has increased the time period for completion of new 
projects from earlier 20 months  to 24 months for General Areas and from 24 months to 
30 months for Difficult Areas. 

11 
 
APC scheme is a demand -driven scheme and financial assistance is provided to 
only the interested investors/ entrepreneurs who submit their proposals to the Ministry 
on the basis of their assessment of viability of the project viz. (cost of project, location of 
project, financial strength of investors, availability of raw materials, market conditions 
and demand from consumers etc. Till date, very few of the promoters from 
aforementioned States/ UTs (viz. Goa, Jharkhand, West Bengal, Arunachal Pradesh, 
Manipur, Mizoram, Nagaland, Tripura, Sikkim, Andman and Nicobar Islands, 
Chandigarh, Dadar and Nagar Haveli of Daman and Diu, Delhi, Lakshadweep, 
Pondicherry and Ladakh) have sh own interest in submitting proposals under APC 
scheme. 
However, Ministry is making continuous efforts to attract more investors/ 
entrepreneurs to avail benefits of the scheme for setting up APCs all over the country. 
In this regard, Ministry has simplified  various provisions of the Scheme while issuing 
new guidelines on 08.06.2022. Ministry has also simplified the conditions for release of 
various instalments of grants-in-aid in the Scheme guidelines.  
Further, Programme Management Agencies (PMAs) engaged b y this Ministry 
under APC scheme are regularly interacting with the Project Implementing Agencies 
(PIAs) of approved projects and assisting them in proper implementation of the projects 
so as to ensure timely utilization of funds and implementation of APC projects. Ministry 
is also making incessant efforts for achieving the physical and financial targets through 
review meetings, virtual verifications and physical site inspections on regular basis. 
Comments of the Committee 
 
For Comments of the Committee please see para 1.10 of the Report 
 
 
Prime Minister Formalization of Micro Food Processing Enterprises (PMFME) 
Recommendation No. 7 
 
The Committee note that as part of Aatma Nirbhar Bharat Abhiyan, Ministry has 
launched an All India Centrally Sponsored Scheme 'PM Formalization of Micro Food 
Processing Enterprises (PMFME) Scheme' for providing financial, technical and 
business support fo r upgradation of existing Micro Food Processing Enterprises. The 
Scheme was approved by Union Cabinet on 20 May, 2020 and guidelines were issued 
on 19 June, 2020. It is to be implemented for a period of five years from 2020 -21 with 

12 
 
an outlay of Rs. 10,000 Crore. Two lakh Micro Processing Units will be directly assisted 
with Credit Linked Subsidy. The objective of the Scheme is to increase access to credit 
by the existing Micro Food Processing Entrepreneurs, Farmer Producer Organizations 
(FPOs), Self -Help Groups and Co -operatives, Integration with organized supply chain 
by strengthening branding and marketing, support for transition of existing 2,00,000 
Enterprises into formal framework, increase access to common service like common 
processing facility labora tories, storage, packaging, marketing and incubation services, 
strengthening of institutions, research and training in the Food Processing Sector and to 
increase access to professional, technical support and enterprises. 
There is One District One Product ( ODOP) approach to reap the benefits of scale 
in terms of procurement of inputs, availing common services and marketing of products. 
ODOP for the Scheme will provide the framework for value chain development and 
alignment of support infrastructure. The ODOP  product selected is either a perishable 
agri-produce, cereal based product or a food product widely produced. The Committee 
are happy to note that under ODOP, the Ministry have removed the restriction imposed 
on a District regarding opting for a particula r product. Now the District can opt for more 
than one Product and the Entrepreneurs can invest in any of these Products. 
The Committee note that an amount of Rs. 290 Crore was proposed for this 
Scheme in 2022 -23 and the Actual Expenditure is Rs. 180.95 Cro re and for the year 
2023-24 an amount of Rs. 750 Crore was proposed and finally Rs. 639.05 Crore has 
been allocated. The Committee also note that till 10th February, 2023, 11,285 Micro 
Food Processing Enterprises have been formalized.  
The Committee are of the opinion that at the present pace of formalization, all the 
Micro Processing Enterprises cannot be covered within the stipulated time frame and 
therefore recommend that the Ministry should try to implement this Scheme as per the 
set time schedules. The y are of the opinion that wide publicity should be given in 
electronic and print media including in all regional languages so that awareness about 
the Scheme may reach upto the Micro Level Entrepreneurs. They further urge that 
optimum level of utilization of funds be achieved. The Committee would like to be 
informed of the action taken in this regard. 
 
 
 

13 
 
 REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT  
The Prime Minister Formalisation of Micro food processing Enterprises (PMFME) 
was launched on 29th June 2020.  The major reasons for less expenditure under the 
Scheme was due to delay in establishment of institutional units at State & District level, 
restrictions of COVID 19 pandemic causing restricted awareness as well as other 
preparatory activities to be conducted for implementat ion of various components. The 
other reasons for low expenditure by the States/ UTs during the initial two years was 
opening up of Budget Heads and making Budget provision by States / UTs, delay in 
withdrawal of fund from State Treasury, contribution of matching State/ UTs share etc.  
In the year 2020 -21, no loans were sanctioned; in the 2nd Financial year (FY 
2021-22), 2895 loans were sanctioned while in FY 2022 -23, 28,828 loans have been 
sanctioned. The scheme is picking up the speed exponentially towards  achieving its 
target of formalizing 2 lakh micro food processing enterprises in the remaining years. 
The details of outcome / achievements made under the PMFME Scheme till date, since 
its inception are at Annexure I.   
Further, to increase the pace of exp enditure, Ministry is holding meetings 
regularly with various stakeholders such as State Governments/State Nodal Agencies 
(SNAs), District Nodal Officers (DNOs), State Level Banking Committees (SLBCs)/ 
lending banks etc.  Ministry has also taken up the iss ues relating to lending banks with 
Department of Financial Services (DFS) for directing the banks to sanction loan on 
faster mode.  
Ministry is conducting various promotional activities and wide scale publicity 
through advertisements, print ads, radio jingles etc. to increase the outreach of the 
scheme. The details of the promotional activities are at Annexure II.  
 
 
Less Utilization of Allocated Funds for 2023 -24 in Integrated Cold Chain and 
Value Addition Infrastructure 
Recommendation No. 8 
 
The Committee observe that 29 eligible proposals received in response to EOI 
dated 21.06.2022 for this Scheme could not be approved for want of funds. The 
Committee observe that as per Budget Allocation 2022 -23 an amount of Rs. 230.50 
Crore was allocated at BE Stage and Rs. 222.34 Crore has been allocated at RE Stage, 
whereas the Actual Expenditure as on 31.01.2023 is Rs. 158.09 Crore. 

14 
 
The Committee are constrained to note that inspite of having sufficient funds at 
their end, 29 eligible proposals received for this Scheme have not been approved for 
want of funds. The Committee desire to know the reason for this and also recommend 
the Ministry to lo ok into this aspect seriously. The Committee would like to be informed 
of the action taken in this regard. 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT  
It is stated that total 31 Projects have been approved under the Scheme for 
Integrated Cold Chain & Value Addition Infrastr ucture with total approved grant -inaid of 
Rs. 227.25 crore and with total capacity of 30.06 Lakh MT per annum against the EOI 
dated 21.06.2022. 
However, as per the Budget Allocation 2022 -23 an amount of Rs. 230.50 crore 
and Rs. 222.34 crore were allocated under BE and RE stage respectively, whereas the 
Actual Expenditure is Rs. 203.07 crore as on 31.03.2023. 
  

15 
 
CHAPTER - III 
  
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO NOT 
DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE GOVERNMENT’S REPLIES 
 
Analysis of Demands  
Recommendation No. 1 
The Committee note that against the proposed allocation of Rs. 3,473.97 Crore 
for BE 2023 -24 by the Ministry, an amount of Rs. 3,287.65 Crore in BE 2023 -24 has 
been allocated. Though it is less than the proposed amount, it is higher th an the amount 
of Rs. 2,941.99 Crore allocated for BE 2022-23. 
The Committee feel that less allocation of funds to the Ministry may be due to 
less utilization of allocated funds, which is clear from the Statement given by the 
Ministry regarding Scheme -wise outlays and Expenditure for the years 2020 -21, 2021-
22 and 2022 -23. The Committee feel that the under -utilization of allocated funds 
consistently by the Ministry is acting as a stumbling block in achieving the objectives of 
various Schemes of the Ministry aimed at addressing critical issues of food security, 
food inflation and providing wholesome nutritious foods to the masses, ensuring better 
returns for the farmers, generating employment and earning foreign exchange through 
the exports.  
The Committee, th erefore, desire that the Ministry should strive hard for optimal 
utilization of allocated funds for effective implementation of the Schemes.  
 
 REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
The recommendation of the Hon’ble committee has been noted for making efforts 
for optimum utilization of funds during 2023-24.   
The Ministry is closely monitoring implementation and expenditure for improving 
level of utilization of allocated budget under various schemes of the Ministry viz.  
Pradhan Mantri Kisan Sampada Yojana (PMKSY), Prime  Minister formalization of Micro 
Food Processing Enterprises (PMFME) and Production -Linked Incentive Scheme for 
Food Processing Industry (PLIS).  
Under Prime Minister formalization of Micro Food Processing Enterprises 
(PMFME) Scheme the Ministry has revise d the fund flow arrangement providing for 
release of 100 % Central Share through the State Treasury w.e.f. 01/04/2023.  

16 
 
The Ministry launched a new Central Sector Scheme viz. Production -Linked 
Incentive Scheme for Food Processing Industry (PLIS) in April, 2021.  Production -
Linked Incentive Scheme for Food Processing Industry (PLIS) has started disbursing 
incentives in the Financial Year 2022 -23 and is likely to pick -up further for utilization of 
allocated funds of  Rs. 1530 Crore during FY 2023-24. 
A Statem ent showing funds allocated and utilization thereof under PMKSY, 
PMFME, PLIS and Non -Scheme during the year 2022 -23 and allocation for 2023 -24 is 
given below : 
                                                                                                ₹ in Crore 
Scheme BE 2022 -
23 
RE2022-
23 
Actual Expenditure 
as on 31.03.2023 
% with 
reference to RE 
 BE  
2023-24 
PMKSY 900.00 673.00  561.92  83.49 923.24  
PMFME 900.00 290.00  274.76  94.74 639.05  
 PLIS 1022.00 801.00  489.83  61.15 1530.00  
Non- 
Scheme 
119.99 137.59  128.62  93.48 195.36  
Total 2941.99 1901.59  1455.13  76.52 3287.65  
 
 
Scheme for Integrated Cold Chain and Value Addition Infrastructure 
Recommendation No. 4 
The Committee note that under this Scheme for setting up of Integrated Cold 
Chain, Preservation and Value Addition Infrastructure Facilities without any break from 
the farm gate to the consumer, the Ministry provides financial assistance in the form of 
grant-in-aid @50% of eligible Project cost for areas for North -eastern States, Scheduled 
Caste, Scheduled Tribe, FPOs, SHGs and @35% for other regions, subject to a 
maximum grants-in-aid of Rs. 10 Crore Per Project. 
The Committee were further informed that as on 31.12.2022, 376 Integrated Cold 
Chain Projects have been taken up f or implementation. Out of these, 269 Projects have 
been completed and 107 are at various stage of implementation. The Committee note 
that a study conducted by NABARD Consultancy Services (NABCONS) revealed that 

17 
 
35 Million Metric Tonnes (MMT) cold storage c apacity was required against the existing 
capacity of 32 Million Metric Tonnes (MMT). 
The Committee are of the opinion that one of the main reasons for high losses in 
the supply chain of perishables is the absence of adequate and efficient Cold Chain 
Infrastructure right from the farm gate to the consumers. The Committee, therefore, 
recommend the Ministry to strive hard to make sure that all the approved Projects are 
completed in time so that they can start commercial operations at the earliest. The 
Committee also desire the Ministry to establish Cold Storage Plants as per the need 
and requirement in remote parts of the country so that the objective of curtailing the 
Post Harvest Losses of Agriculture and Horticulture produce can be achieved. The 
Committee would like to be informed of the action taken in this regard. 
 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT  
In furtherance to the mandate in the Allocation of Business Rules 1961, the 
Ministry of Food Processing Industries (MoFPI) has been making concerted efforts to 
augment the level of food processing in the country and thereby helping in reducing the 
wastage of agri-horti produce. Establishment of standalone cold storage is not within the 
mandate of MoFPI and is rather within the ambit of subjects allotted to the Ministry o f 
Agriculture & Farmers Welfare. MoFPI is supplementing MoA&FW in its efforts to 
minimize post-harvest losses. 
MoFPI is implementing an umbrella scheme, namely Pradhan Mantri Kisan 
Sampada Yojna (PMKSY), for extending financial support by way of grants -in-aid to the 
individuals/ entities who come forward with project proposals for setting up of 
processing facilities for different crops/ produce. The Scheme for Integrated Cold Chain 
and Value Addition Infrastructure is demand driven in nature under PMKSY Scheme. Its 
main aim is to provide integrated cold chain and preservation infrastructure facilities, 
without any b reak, from the farm gate to the consumer.  It covers creation of 
infrastructure facilities along the entire supply chain viz. precooling, weighing, sorting, 
grading, waxing at farm level, multi product/multi temperature cold storage, CA storage, 
packing fa cility, IQF, blast freezing in the distribution hub and reefer vans, mobile 
cooling units for facilitating distribution of non -horticulture, horticulture, fish/marine 
(except shrimp), dairy, meat and poultry. The scheme allows flexibility in project 
planning with special emphasis on creation of cold chain infrastructure at farm level. 

18 
 
The Ministry and the Project Management Agencies regularly monitors the projects for 
timely completion. 
Under this scheme, MoFPI invites project proposals from interested indi viduals/ 
entities through Expression of Interest (EoI) issued from time to time under the 
guidelines of respective sub -schemes. Approvals to the proposals received are 
accorded on merit basis amongst proposals found eligible as per eligibility and 
assessment criteria stipulated in the guidelines. The last EoI was issued on 21st June 
2022 based on guidelines dated 8th June 2022. 
 
 
Operation Greens  
Recommendation No. 5 
The Committee note that in pursuance of the budget announcement for the year 
2018-19, the Ministry of Food Processing Industry had launched a new Central Sector 
Scheme "Operation Greens" for Integrated Development of Tomato, Onion and Potato 
(TOP) Value Chain with a budgetary allocation of Rs. 500 Crore. The Scheme 
envisages to promote Farmer P roducers Organizations, Agri -logistics, Processing 
Facilities and Professional Management. Grants-in-aid @35% of eligible Project cost for 
Projects in General Areas and @50% of eligible Project cost of Projects in Difficult 
Areas as well as for Projects of  SC/ST, FPOs and SHGs with maximum of Rs. 50 Crore 
is provided under this Scheme. Organizations such as State Agriculture Federations, 
State Marketing Federations, Farmer Producer Organizations, Cooperative SHGs, 
Companies, Food Processors, Logistics Compa nies, Supply Chain Operators, Retail 
Chains, Wholesale Chains, State/Central entities/organizations etc. are eligible for 
financial assistance under this Scheme. The Scheme has two pronged strategies of 
Long term interventions and Short term interventions. 
The Committee also note that revised Scheme Guidelines were issued on 
08.06.2022 for effective implementation of this Scheme. 6 Projects were approved till 
31.03.2021 but only 2 Projects are at completion stage. Further, the Committee were 
told that 52 Approved Projects will be made operational by March, 2026, which is due to 
the huge response from the Stakeholders, after the guidelines were revised. 
The Committee are dismayed to note that even after 4 years of introduction of 
this Scheme, only 2 Projects are at completion stage. The Committee feel that with such 
a slow progress, the very objective of the Scheme gets diluted as till date growers of 

19 
 
fruits and vegetables are forced to make distress sale, when there is surplus production 
or not able to store their perishable produce due to lack of cold storage. 
The Committee, therefore, recommend that the Ministry should chalk out a 
strategy without any further loss of time to organize marketing of Tomato, Onion and 
Potatoes and other fruits and vegetables not ified in the TOP to TOTAL Scheme by 
connecting farmers with consumers by inviting the respective State Agriculture and 
other Marketing Federations, FPOs, Cooperative Companies and Self Help Groups 
(SHGs). The Committee feel this will not only help to preve nt the loss of perishable 
produce but also increase the income of the farmers and contribute to the objective of 
Doubling of Farmers Income. 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT  
This Scheme is demand -driven in nature, and project proposals from across 
India are invit ed from interested individuals/entities through Expressions of Interest 
(EOI) for setting up of food processing facilities. Proposals received are evaluated 
based on eligibility and assessment criteria. Approvals are given based on merit 
amongst eligible proposals. 
Grant-in-aid is offered @35% to 50%, up to a total of Rs.15 crores under the 
"Operation Greens Scheme - Long Term Interventions" which is one of the sub -
schemes of the Pradhan Mantri Kisan Sampada Yojana (PMKSY).  
The Scheme's objectives include increasing the food processing capacities and 
value addition by creating linkages with identified production clusters, and thereby 
enhancing the value that farmers realize through the development of farm gate 
infrastructure, strengthening of production clu sters/FPOs, reduction in post -harvest 
losses, appropriate agri -logistics, creation of adequate storage capacity, linking 
consumption centers, etc. The Scheme has two components, namely, (i) Integrated 
Value Chain Development Projects, and (ii) Standalone P ost-Harvest Infrastructure 
Projects. 
22 perishable commodities, including 10 fruits, 11 vegetables, and shrimp, are 
included for value chain development of designated clusters.  
The subjects allocated to the Ministry under Government of India (Allocation o f 
Business) Rules, 1961 are inter alia, “Fruit and vegetable processing industry (including 

20 
 
freezing and dehydration)” and, accordingly, it is not within mandate of this Ministry to 
engage in any activity relating to the marketing of fresh crops.   
The Min istry makes efforts to publicize/ popularize the OG Scheme through 
mass/ print media advertisements in regional languages. The Ministry recently gave a 
presentation on the guidelines for the short-term interventions of the OG Scheme for the 
benefit of stak eholders at the weekly meeting of the Department of Agriculture & 
Farmers Welfare with the major States producing potatoes and onions.  
 Further, in order to effectively reach the stakeholders and fulfil the objectives of 
the Scheme, the Ministry is committed to participate and engage with State Government 
officials on a regular basis in such meetings in the future. 
 
 
Production Linked Incentive Scheme (PLIS) 
Recommendation No. 6 
The Committee note that the Union Cabinet in its meeting held on 31.3.2021 
approved another ambitious Central Sector Scheme, Production Linked Incentive 
Scheme (PLIS) for Food Processing Industry to support Indian Brands of food products 
in the International market with an outlay of Rs. 10,900 Crore. The Scheme has been 
formulated based on the Production Linked Incentive Scheme (PLIS) of NITI Aayog 
under 'Aatma Nirbhar Bharat Abhiyan' for enhancing India's manufacturing capabilities 
and exchanging exports. The Scheme will be implemented over a six year period from 
2021-22 to 2026-27. 
The Committee further note that the first Component of the Scheme is related to 
incentivizing manufacturing of four major food product segment viz Ready to Cook, 
Ready to Eat (RTC/RTE) foods including Millets based products, Processed fruits and 
vegetables, marine products and mozzarella cheese. The second component relates to 
Production of Innovative / Organic products of SMEs including Free Range - eggs, 
poultry meat, egg products in these four segments. The third component relates to 
support fo r branding and marketing abroad to incentivize emergence of strong Indian 
Brands for in -store Branding, Shelf -space renting and marketing. It was informed that 
the Scheme has been well received by the Food Processing Industry and a total of 274 
applications have been received. 
The Committee observe that an amount of Rs. 1,530 Crore has been allocated 
for the year 2023 -24. The Committee also note that 150 Proposals have been finalized 

21 
 
in 3 Categories after evaluation and investment of about Rs. 5,000 Crore h as been 
made so far by the beneficiaries against total committed investment of Rs. 7,722 Crore. 
However, the Committee are dismayed to note that an amount of Rs. 108.27 Crore has 
been spent against allocated Rs. 801 Crore till 31.01.2023. 
The Committee, th erefore, recommend to the Ministry that to bring Indian 
companies at par with their global counterparts, the Ministry should endeavor to 
properly utilize allocated funds in an effective way so as to reap maximum benefits from 
this ambitious Scheme. 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT  
 
It is submitted that against the allocation ₹801 Crore for FY 2022 -23, an amount 
of ₹489.83 Crore was spent as on 31.03.2023. The lesser amount of spending as 
against the allocated budget was due to the reasons pertaining to some PLI Sc heme 
applicants failing to achieve the targeted committed investment, while in some other 
cases where the production was made using imported raw materials, sales were not 
incentivized. Some applicants could not achieve the desired growth in sales for which  
did not qualified for getting incentive. In few cases applicants did not submit the 
application for incentive claims. Since this was the first year for disbursal of incentives 
under the Scheme, some lessons have been learnt and it shall be the endeavor of  the 
Ministry to properly utilize allocated funds in an effective way in the coming years to 
bring Indian companies at par with their global counterparts. Moreover, the applicants 
have been sensitized to submit the desired documents in timely manner so as to enable 
the Ministry to process the incentive claims in time. 
  

22 
 
CHAPTER - IV 
  
OBSERVATIONS/ RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF 
THE GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
NIL 
  

23 
 
 
 
 
CHAPTER - V 
  
OBSERVATIONS/ RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH FINAL REPLIES 
OF GOVERNMENT ARE STILL AWAITED  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
NIL 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI;                                                                    P.C. GADDIGOUDAR 
08 August, 2023                                                                  Chairperson                            
17 Sravana, 1945 (Saka)                             Standing Committee on Agriculture,  
            Animal Husbandry and Food Processing 
  

24 
 
ANNEXURE  
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE, ANIMAL HUSBANDRY AND FOOD 
PROCESSING BRANCH 
(2022-23) 
 
MINUTES OF THE NINETEENTH SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE 
  
***** 
 
The Committee sat on Tuesday, the 08 August, 2023 from 1500 hrs.                              
to 1530 hrs. in Hon'ble Chairperson's Chamber, Room No. 103, 1st Floor, Block - 
B, PHA Extn., New Delhi.        
PRESENT 
 
Shri P.C. Gaddigoudar, Chairperson 
 
MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA 
 
 2.  Shri A. Ganeshamurthi 
3. Shri Mohan Mandavi 
4. Shri Devji Mansingram Patel 
5.  Smt. Sharda Anilkumar Patel 
6. Shri Bheemrao Baswanthrao Patil 
7. Shri Shriniwas Dadasaheb Patil 
8. Mohammad Sadique 
9. Shri Devendra Singh alias Bhole Singh 
10. Shri Virendra Singh 
11. Shri V.K. Sreekandan 
   
 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
 12. Smt. Ramilaben Becharbhai Bara 
 13. Shri Masthan Rao Beeda 
 14. Dr. Anil Sukhdeorao Bonde 
 15. Shri Kailash Soni 
 16. Shri Ram Nath Thakur 
 17. Shri Vaiko 
 
 
 
 

25 
 
 
SECRETARIAT 
  
 1. Shri Shiv Kumar   - Additional Secretary 
 2. Shri Uttam Chand Bharadwaj  - Director 
 3. Shri Prem Ranjan   - Deputy Secretary 
 4. Shri N. Amarathiagan   - Under Secretary 
 
2. At the outset, Chairperson welcomed the Members to the Sitting of the Committee. 
Thereafter, the Committee took up for consideration the following Draft Action Taken Reports:  
 
*(i)  XXXX   XXXX   XXXX   XXXX; 
 
*(ii)  XXXX   XXXX   XXXX   XXXX;  
 
*(iii) XXXX   XXXX   XXXX   XXXX; 
 
*(iv) XXXX   XXXX   XXXX   XXXX; 
 
(v) Draft Action Taken Report on Action -taken by the Government on the Observations / 
Recommendations contained in the Fifty-Fifth Report of the Committee on ‘Demands for 
Grants (2023-24)’, pertaining to the Ministry of Food Processing Industries; 
 
*(vi) XXXX   XXXX   XXXX   XXXX; 
 
3. After some deliberations, the Committee adopted the Draft Action Taken Reports without 
any modifications and the Committee authorized the Chairperson to finalize and present these 
Reports to Parliament.  
 
 
The Committee then adjourned.  
 
* Matter not related to this Report. 
 
 
 
 

26 
 
 
APPENDIX - I 
 
(Vide Para 4 of Introduction of the Report) 
 
ANALYSIS OF ACTION TAKEN BY GOVERNMENT ON THE OBSERVATIONS / 
RECOMMENDATIONS CONTAINED IN THE FIFTY FIFTH REPORT (17TH LOK 
SABHA) OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE , ANIMAL 
HUSBANDRY AND FOOD PROCESSING (2022-23) 
  
(i)  Total number of Recommendations              08 
(ii) Observations/ Recommendations that have been 
Accepted by the Government  
 Para Nos. 2,3,7 and 8    
Total          04    
Percentage                   50.00% 
(iii) Observations/ Recommendations which the Committee 
do not desire to pursue in view of the Government’s replies  
Para Nos.     1,4, 5 and 6         
Total                     04 
Percentage                     50.00% 
(iv) Observations/ Recommendations in respect of which replies 
 of the Government have not been accepted by the Committee 
Para No.  NIL 
Total            00 
Percentage                                      00.00% 
(v) Observations/ Recommendations in respect of which  
 Final replies of the Government are still awaited 
Para Nos.                NIL      
Total                     00  
Percentage                     00.00%  
 