 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE
                
 
        
 
        
 
 
        
 
                                
 
 
MINISTRY OF AGRICULTURE AND FARMERS WELFARE 
(DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE, COOPERATION AND FARMERS
         
    
 
 
”
AGRICULTURE MARKETING AND ROLE OF WEEKLY GRAMIN HAATS”
{Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/
Recommendations contained in the Sixty Second Report 
Sabha)
 
of the Standing Committee on Agriculture 
        
 
       
 
 
 
 
        
 
     
      
 
 
 
December, 2019/Agrahayaha, 1941(Saka)
 
 
 
8
 
1
 
 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE
 
(2019
-
2020)
 
 
 
SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA
 
MINISTRY OF AGRICULTURE AND FARMERS WELFARE 
(DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE, COOPERATION AND FARMERS
 
WELFARE)
AGRICULTURE MARKETING AND ROLE OF WEEKLY GRAMIN HAATS”
 
 
{Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/
Recommendations contained in the Sixty Second Report 
(Sixteenth Lok 
of the Standing Committee on Agriculture 
(2018
 
EIGHTH REPORT
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
 
NEW DELHI
 
 
December, 2019/Agrahayaha, 1941(Saka)
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE
 
MINISTRY OF AGRICULTURE AND FARMERS WELFARE 
 
WELFARE)
 
AGRICULTURE MARKETING AND ROLE OF WEEKLY GRAMIN HAATS”
 
{Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/
 
(Sixteenth Lok 
(2018
-
2019)}
 

 
 
 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE
         
 
 
        
 
        
 
        
 
MINISTRY OF AGRICULTURE AND FARMERS WELFARE 
(DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE, COOPERATION AND FARMERS WELFARE)
             
 
 
”
AGRICULTURE MARKETING AND ROLE OF WEEKLY GRAMIN HAATS”
 
 
        
 
{Action Taken by the Government on the 
Recommendations contained in the Sixty Second Report 
Sabha)
 
of the Standing Committee on Agriculture (2018
        
 
       
 
           
Presented to Lok Sabha on 
           
Laid on the Table of Rajya Sabha on
                
 
December 2019/Agrahayana,1941 (Saka)
 
2
 
 
EIGHTH REPORT
 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE
(2019
-
2020)
 
(SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA)
 
MINISTRY OF AGRICULTURE AND FARMERS WELFARE 
(DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE, COOPERATION AND FARMERS WELFARE)
AGRICULTURE MARKETING AND ROLE OF WEEKLY GRAMIN HAATS”
 
 
{Action Taken by the Government on the 
Observations/
Recommendations contained in the Sixty Second Report 
(Sixteenth Lok 
of the Standing Committee on Agriculture (2018
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on 
 
 
                                     
Laid on the Table of Rajya Sabha on
 
                                     
 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
 
NEW DELHI
 
December 2019/Agrahayana,1941 (Saka)
 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE
 
MINISTRY OF AGRICULTURE AND FARMERS WELFARE 
 
(DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE, COOPERATION AND FARMERS WELFARE)
 
AGRICULTURE MARKETING AND ROLE OF WEEKLY GRAMIN HAATS”
 
Observations/
 
(Sixteenth Lok 
of the Standing Committee on Agriculture (2018
-
2019)}
 
                                     
12
.12.2019
 
                                     
12
.12.2019
 

 
 
3
 
 
 
 
 
COA No. 405
 
 
 
        
 
        
 
        
 
        
 
        
 
        
 
 
        
 
        
 
       
 
Price:  Rs. 
 
        
 
        
 
        
 
        
 
        
 
 
 
 
        
 
    
 
                    
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
© 2019 By Lok Sabha Secretariat
 
 
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of Business in 
Lok Sabha (Fourteenth Edition) and Printed by 
 
 

 
 
4
 
 
<CONTENTS>
 
 
        
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
PAGE
 
 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE…………………………………. 
 
 
(iii)
 
        
 
INTRODUCTION
…………………………………………………………… 
 
 
(v)
 
 
CHAPTER I 
 
 
Report …………………………………………
 
 
 
 
 
CHAPTER II
 
 
Observations/Recommendations which have 
 
 
 
 
 
been accepted by the Government ……………
 
 
 
 
 
 
CHAPTER III
 
 
Observations/Recommendations which the
 
 
 
 
Committee do not desire to pur
sue in view
 
 
 
 
of the Government’s replies …………………..
 
 
 
 
 
CHAPTER IV
 
 
Observations/Recommendations in respect
 
 
 
 
of  which replies of the Government have 
 
 
 
 
not been accepted by the Committee ………….
 
 
 
 
 
CHAPTER V
 
 
Observations/Recommendations in respect of 
 
 
 
 
which final replies of the Government are 
 
 
 
 
still awaited …………………………………….
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                   
ANNEXURE
 
.
 
 
 
I.
 
Minutes of the 13
th 
Sitting of the Committee held on  09.12.2019
 
 
 
 
APPENDIX
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Analysis of Action Taken by the 
Government on the
 
 
 
 
Recommendations contained in the Sixty Second Report            
 
 
(Sixteenth Lok Sabha) of the Standing Committee on Agriculture
 
 
(2018
-
2019).
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
(i)
 
 

 
 
5
 
 
 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE 
(2019
-
20)
 
 
Shri Parvatagouda Chandanagouda Gaddigoudar
-
   
Chairperson 
 
 
MEMBERS
 
 
LOK SABHA
 
 
 
2.
 
Shri Afzal Ansari
 
 
 
3.
 
Shri Horen Sing Bey
 
 
4.
 
Shri Devendra Singh 'Bhole'
 
 
5.
 
Shri A. Ganeshamurthi
 
 
6.
 
Shri Kanakmal Katara
 
 
7.
 
Shri Abu Taher Khan
 
8.
 
Shri
 
Bhagwanth Khuba
 
9.
 
Dr. Amol Ramsing Kolhe
 
10.
 
Shri Mohan Mandavi
 
11.
 
Shri Devji Mansingram Patel
 
12.
 
Smt. Shardaben Anilbhai Patel
 
13.
 
Shri Bheemrao Baswanthrao Patil
 
14.
 
Smt. Navneet Ravi Rana
 
15.
 
Shri Vinayak Bhaurao Raut
 
16.
 
Shri Pocha Brahmananda 
Reddy
 
17.
 
Shri Mohammad Sadique
 
18.
 
Shri Virendra Singh
 
19.
 
Shri Vellalath Kochukrishnan Nair Sreekandan
 
20. 
 
Shri Mulayam Singh Yadav
 
21.
 
Shri Ram Kripal Yadav
 
 
RAJYA SABHA
 
 
22.
 
Shri Partap Singh Bajwa
 
23.
 
Sardar Sukhdev Singh Dhindsa 
 
24.
 
Shri Narayan Ra
ne 
 
25.
 
Shri Kailash Soni
 
26.
 
Shri Ram Nath Thakur
 
27.
 
Shri Vaiko
 
28.
 
Shri R. Vaithilingam
 
29
 
Smt. Chhaya Verma
 
30.
 
Dr. Chandrapal Singh Yadav
 
 
31.
 
Shri Harnath Singh Yadav 
 
 
 
 

 
 
6
 
 
SECRETARIAT
 
 
 
1.
 
Shri Shiv Kumar
 
 
 
-
 
Joint Secretary
 
2.
 
Shri Arun K. Kaushik
 
 
-
 
Director
 
3.
 
Shri Sumesh Kumar
 
 
 
-
 
 
Deputy Secretary
 
4.
 
Shri S. Vijayaraghavan
 
 
-
 
Asst. Executive Officer 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(iv)
 
 
 

 
 
7
 
 
 
 
INTRODUCTION
 
        
 
 
I, the Chairperson, Standing Committee on Agriculture (2019
-
20), having 
been authorized by the Committee to submit the Report on their behalf, present this 
Eighth Report on action taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in the
 
Sixty Second Report (Sixteenth 
Lok Sabha) of the Standing Committee on Agriculture (2018
-
19) on the Subject 
”
Agriculture Marketing and Role of Weekly Gramin Haats" pertaining to the Ministry 
of Agriculture and Farmers Welfare (Department of Agriculture, C
ooperation and 
Farmers Welfare).
 
 
2.
 
The Sixty Second Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) of the Standing Committee 
on Agriculture (2018
-
19) on the Subject 
”
Agriculture Marketing and Role of Weekly 
Gramin Haats"  pertaining to the Ministry of Agriculture and Farm
ers Welfare 
(Department of Agriculture, Cooperation and Farmers Welfare) was presented to 
Lok Sabha and laid on the Table of Rajya Sabha on 03 January, 2019. The Action 
Taken Notes on the Report were received on 08.05.2019.
 
 
3.
 
The Report was considered an
d adopted by the Committee at their Sitting 
held on 09.12.2019.
 
 
4.
 
An analysis of the action taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in the Sixty Second Report (Sixteenth 
Lok Sabha) of the Committee is given in 
Appendix.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI; 
 
          
 
 
 
 
 
       
   
P.C. GADDIGOUDAR
 
10 
December, 2019       
            
 
 
 
      
 
 
Chairperson,
 
19 
Agrahayana, 1941(Saka)
 
 
                    
Standing Committee on Agriculture
 
 
 
 
 
(v)
 
 
 

 
 
8
 
 
CHAPTER
-
I
 
 
REPOR
T
 
 
This Report of the 
Standing 
Committee on Agriculture deals with the action 
taken by the Government on the
 
Observations/
Recommendations contained in the 
Sixty Se
cond
 
Report (
Seventeenth 
Lok Sabha) of th
e 
Standing 
Committee on 
Agriculture 
(2018
-
2019
) on 
Agri
culture Marketing and Role of Weekly Gramin Haat
s
''
 
pertaining to 
the Ministry of 
Agriculture and Farmers Welfare (Department of 
Agriculture Cooperation and Farmers Welfare) 
which was presented to Lok Sabha 
and laid on the Table of Rajya Sabha on
 
03.01.201
9
  
 
 
1.2 
 
The 
Ministry of 
Agriculture and Farmers Welfare (Department of Agriculture 
Cooperation and Farmers Welfare)
 
have furnished Action Taken Replies in respect 
of all the 
12
 
Observations/Recommendations contained in the Report. These
 
replies
 
have been categorized as under: 
 
 
 
(i) 
 
Observations/Recommendations that have been accepted by the 
Government: 
 
 
Recommendation No
.
 
 
1,2,3,
7,8,9,10,11 and 12
 
   
 
        
Chapter
-
 
II
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
     
   
Total
-
 
9
 
 
 
                  
(ii) 
 
Observations/Recommendations in respect of which the Committee do not 
desire to pursue in view of the Government’s reply: 
 
 
Recommendation No
. 
 
NIL
 
 
 
 
 
        
Chapter
-
 
III
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
    
    
Total
-
 
0
 
 
 
                  
(iii) 
 
Observations/Recommendations in respect of which action taken replies of 
 
the Government have not been accepted by the Committee: 
 
 
Recommendation No. 
 
 
5,6
     
 
 
 
   
 
   
    
Ch
apter
-
 
IV
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
    
Total
-
 
2
 
 
                   
(iv) 
 
Observations/Recomme
ndations in respect of which final replies of the 
Government are still awaited: 
 
 
Recommendation No
. 
 
   
4
 
 
 
 
 
        
Chapter
-
 
V
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
    
   
Total
-
 
0
1
 
 

 
 
9
 
 
                   
1.3 
 
The Committee trust that utmost importance would be given to 
implementation of the Observations/Recommendations accepted by the 
Government. In cases, where it is not possible for the 
Ministry
 
to implement 
the Recommendations in letter and spirit for any reason, the matter should be 
reported to the Committee with 
the 
reasons for 
their 
non
-
implementation. The 
Committee desire that further Action 
Taken Notes on the Observations
/ 
Recommendations c
ontained in Chapter
s
 
-
 
I
 
and V of
 
this Report be furnished 
to them at an early date. 
 
  
 
1.4
 
 
The Committee will now deal with the action taken by the Government on 
some of the Recommendations in the succeeding paragraphs. 
 
 
 
 
 
A
.
 
Reform In Agriculture 
Produce Marketing Committee
s 
 
(APMCs) 
 
Act
  
2003
 
 
RECOMMENDATION (PARA NO. 4)
 
 
1.
5
 
The Committee had
 
observed/
 
recommended as under:
-
 
 
 
The Committee note that Agriculture Produce Market
ing Committees 
Act
 
(APMC Act) which 
was 
enacted in various State Governments with the 
objectives to ensure an environment to for fair play for supply and demand 
forces thereby resulting in an effective price discovery for farm produce, 
regulate market practices and attain transparency in transac
tions has become 
hotbed of politics, corruption and monopoly of traders and middleman. The 
Committee observe that APMC market across the country are not working in 
the interest of farmers due to various reasons such as  limited numbers of 
traders in APMCs 
markets thereby reducing competition, cartelization of 
traders, undue deduction in the name of market fee, commission charges etc. 
The Committee were also informed that provisions of the APMC Acts are not 
implemented in their true sense.  Market fee and co
mmission charges are 

 
 
10
 
 
legally to be levied on traders, however, the same is collected from farmers 
by deducting the amount from farmers’ net proceed. 
 
 
 
 
The Committee also note that provisions in APMC Act in some of 
States are so restrictive to the 
interest of farmers that market fee is levied 
even when sale of agriculture produce takes place outside the market yard.  
The Committee were informed that Market fee is collected in some States 
even without actual trade
-
transaction has taken place and simp
ly on landing 
the commodity at processing units and some States treat
-
transaction outside 
the market yard as illegal. Multiple licenses are required for trading in multiple 
APMC markets and multiple time market fee on same commodity even within 
the State i
s collected
. 
 
The Committee further note that APMC Acts are highly 
restrictive in promotion of multiple channels of marketing and competition in 
the system.
 
 
 
 
 
The Committee note that the Central Government is continuously 
pursuing the State Governments f
or reform in APMC acts. The Government 
has formulated and circulated Model Act (The
-------
State Agricultural Produce 
Marketing (Development &Regulation) Act, 2003 and Model Rules in 2007.   
The Committee were informed that Department has since been engagin
g with 
the States for more than fourteen years to implement reforms in the sector 
based on Model Act/ Rules and various State Governments has brought 
changes in their State APMC Act. However, despite these changes, a need 
was felt for further reform in APM
C Act and recognizing this, the  Ministry of 
Agriculture & Farmers’ Welfare formulated a model 'Agricultural Produce and 
Livestock Market Committee' Act (APLM Act) in 2017. Further the Ministry 
has also formulated a Model  'Agricultural Produce  & Livestoc
k  Contract 
Farming and Services (Promotion & Facilitation) Act, 2018'  in order to 
integrate fruits and vegetable growers with agro
-
 
processing units for better 
price realization and reduction of post
-
harvest losses and to create job 
opportunities in the 
rural areas. The Committee note that model APLM Act 
intend to create a single market in State/UTs level, provisions for single point 

 
 
11
 
 
levy of market fee across the State and  unified single trading license to 
realize cost
-
effective transactions,  full democ
ratization of Market Committee 
and State/UT  Marketing Board, promotion to private wholesale market yards  
and farmer consumer market yards in order to enhance competition  among 
different markets and market players for the farmer’s produce, promotion of 
d
irect interface between farmers and processors/ exporters/ bulk
-
buyers/ end 
users so as to reduce the price spread bringing advantage to both the 
producers & the consumers, freedom to the agriculturalists to sell their 
produce to the buyers and at the plac
e & time of their choice etc. The 
Committee were informed that only two States namely Uttar Pradesh and 
Punjab have so far adopted Model APLM Act, 2017 till now. 
 
 
 
 
The Committee observe that there is urgent need for radical reform in 
APMC Act in the coun
try, if we intend to provide justice to the farmers. 
Remunerative pricing for the farmers cannot be ensured unless number of 
marketing platforms for farm produce are enhanced and functioning of APMC 
markets is made democratic and transparent. The Committee
 
appreciate 
efforts of the Government for reforms in APMC market. However, the 
Committee are surprised to note the lukewarm response of the State 
Governments towards reforms in APMC market. The Committee are of view 
that there is need to involve all the st
akeholders especially the State 
Governments in the process of reforms in the APMC Act. The Committee, 
therefore, recommend the Government to constitute a Committee of 
Agriculture Ministers of all States in order to arrive at a consensus and chalk 
out legal
 
framework for marketing of agriculture Produce in the Country. The 
Committee are also of the opinion that provisions regarding entry fee and 
other Cess levied on transaction of agriculture produce should be done away 
with as it will help to reduce corrupt
ion and malpractices prevalent in APMC 
Markets. The Committee would like the Government to hold discussion with 
the State Governments to abolish entry fee and other cess in APMC Markets. 
The Committee would like to be apprized about steps taken in this dir
ection 
within three months of presentation of Report.
 

 
 
12
 
 
 
1.
6
 
The 
Ministry in its
 
Action Taken Reply has 
stated:
-
 
 
 
 
"An E
mpowered Committee of 10 State Agricultural Marketing 
Ministers to promote reforms and related issues was constituted on 2
nd
 
March, 2010, which submitted an exhaustive report to Ministry in 2013 for 
consideration. The Government constituted Committee to formulate Model 
Marketing Law considered almost all suggestions made in the report of 2013 
and formulated in wide consultation
 
with States and other stakeholders and 
released a Model APLM Act, 2017. Since, agricultural marketing is a State 
subject, Ministry of Agriculture & Farmers, Welfare, Government of India, is 
actively engaged with States/UTs for adoption of Model APLM Act, 
2017 by 
them. The provisions suggested in the report by Standing Committee on 
Agriculture to
 
do away with
 
entry fee and other Cess levied on transaction of 
agriculture produce have already been incorporated in Model APLM Act, 
2017. The Government at all 
level persuading rest of States to adopt the 
Model APLM Act, 2017. Due to constant and continuous persuasion and 
efforts made by Government of India with States, Arunachal Pradesh, Uttar 
Pradesh and Chhattisgarh have adopted the model APLM Act, 2017 while 
Punjab has adopted partially. Other States are at varied stages in the process 
of adoption.
"
 
No. H 
-
11017/03/2018
-
M
-
II (pt.)
 
       
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Dated: 02.05.2019
 
 
 
1.
7
 
While observing the u
rgent need of  reforms in APMC A
ct across the country 
and lukewarm 
response of the State
s
 
in adoption of 
the Model APLM Act, 2017
, the 
Committee had 
recommended the Government to constitute a Committee of 
Agriculture Ministers of all 
the 
States in order to arrive at a consensus and 
chalk out le
gal framework for marketing 
of the A
griculture Produce in Country. 
The Committee 
had 
also expressed the need t
o abolish provisions regarding 
Entry F
ee and other
 
Cess levied on transaction of Agriculture P
roduce in 

 
 
13
 
 
APMC Markets. The Department in 
its
 
ATR
, apart
 
from submitting 
the 
inf
ormation 
already known 
to the Committee
, has stated about
 
constant and 
continuous persuasion and efforts being made by Government of India with 
States. The Department has also submitted that Arunachal Pradesh, Uttar 
Pradesh and
 
Chhattisgarh have adopted th
e M
odel APLM Act, 2017 while 
Punjab has adopted 
it 
partially. Other States are at varied stages in the 
process of adoption. The Committee are anguished to note that despite the
ir
 
specific recommendation
 
in the matter
, the Department has not taken any step 
for constitution of Committee of Agriculture Ministers of all States in order to 
arrive at a consensus and chalk out le
gal framework for marketing of 
A
griculture Produce in the Country. The Committee are of view that unless 
urgent steps are no
t taken to re
form platform for Agriculture M
arketing and 
specifically APMC, farmers of our country will not able to get remunerative 
pricing for their produce. The Committee, therefore, once again reiterate their 
earlier recommendation and urge the Department to
 
take i
nitiative in this 
regard without any further delay.
 
 
 
B
.
 
Implementation of GrAMs Scheme
 
RECOMMENDATION (PARA NO. 5)
 
 
1.
8
 
The Committee had 
observed/
recommended:
-
 
 
 
 
The Committee note that existing marketing platforms available to the 
majority of small and marginal farmers are inadequate to sell surplus 
agriculture produce and ensuring remunerative prices for their investment. 
Various factors such as distance to the n
earest APMC market, dominance of 
middleman in APMCs, lack of  transportation facilities etc. are major factors 
which propel majority of small and marginal farmers to use the services of 

 
 
14
 
 
local middleman or shops to dispose of their surplus agriculture produ
ce 
much below the Minimum Support Prices(MSP) announced by the 
Government. In this scenario, Gramin Haat or Rural Periodical Markets may 
emerge as viable alternative for agriculture marketing if these are provided 
with adequate infrastructure facilities. T
he Committee are happy to note that 
the Government in their endeavor to double the income of farmers of the 
country has decided to launch ' GrAM Scheme' to improve the infrastructure 
and civic facilities in Gramin Haats being operated across the country. T
he 
Committee were informed that the Government will develop and upgrade 
4600 out of existing 22,000 Gramin Haats. In these GrAMs, physical 
infrastructure will be strengthened using MGNREGA and other government 
schemes. These GrAMs, electronically linked to
 
e
-
NAM and exempted from 
regulations of APMCs, will provide farmers facility of direct sale to consumers 
and bulk purchasers. The Committee are of view that Gramin Haats, being 
ingrained in the cultural ethos of rural India and their proximity to the farme
rs, 
may emerge as alternative agriculture marketing platform and can help in 
ensuring remunerative prices for agriculture produces due to direct access to 
the Consumers and  less transportation cost. The Committee are of opinion 
that up gradation/creation 
of infrastructure in existing Gramin Haats such as 
sheds, storage facilities for agriculture produce, connectivity through roads, 
civic facilities such as toilet, drinking water etc. will help in making these as 
viable and vibrant marketing platforms for a
griculture produce and help in 
doubling the income of farmers. The Committee, therefore, recommend the 
Government to finalize the procedural formalities such as preparation of 
Operational Guidelines, consultation with State Governments, allocation of 
finan
cial resources etc. for early implementation of the 'GrAM Scheme'. The 
Committee are also of the view that target of modernization of 4600 Gramin 
Haats is too low a number in a country of more than 6 lakh villages. The 
Committee, therefore, desire the Depa
rtment to enhance the numbers of 
Gramin Haats being targetted for modernization under the GrAM scheme and 
ensure presence of one Gramin Haat in each Panchayat of the Country. The 

 
 
15
 
 
Committee would like to be apprised about the steps taken in this direction 
w
ithin three months of presentation of the Report.
 
1.
9
 
The Ministry in its Action Taken Reply has stated:
-
 
 
 
The Government in Union Budget 2018
-
19, has announced 
development and upgradation of existing 22000 Village Haats to GrAMs. As 
per initial report, 
1
1,811 Village Haats are under Rural Local 
Bodies/Panchayats, approximately 1274 Village haats are under 
Agriculture 
Produce Market Committees
 
(APMCs) & other Government agencies while 
rest of Village haats (approximately 9856) are under private  trusts etc
.
 
 
DAC&FW through its attached office Directorate of Marketing & Inspection  
(DMI) is undertaking questionnaire based survey of these haats and so far 
survey of more than 11,000 rural haats have already been completed. The 
survey result shared with Ministr
y of Rural Development, Government of 
India, as requested by them for development of basic and supportive 
infrastructure through MGNREGS by States. 
 
 
The Government has circulated Guidelines on ‘Operation and Management of 
GrAMs’ to all States/UTs to facil
itate and promote better management in 
GrAMs. Further, the Government has requested States to exempt the GrAMs 
from State APMC regulations. The Government has also circulated Scheme 
guidelines for AMIF to be set up with NABARD to all States/UTs to guide 
th
em to avail loan at concessional rate of interest. Apart from above, in order 
to identify the location, type and nature of haats, their periodicity, arrivals of 
produce etc.,
 
 
The issue of development of rural haat has already been taken up with the 
States
 
during Rabi and Kharif campaign 2018 as well as Zaid Conference, 
2019.  
 
 
As far as allocation of financial resources is concerned, physical infrastructure 
is being strengthening through MGNREGA as coordinated by Ministry of 
Rural Development by States. T
he Government has approved an Agri
-
Market 
Infrastructure Fund (AMIF) with a corpus of Rs. 2000 crore with NABARD for 

 
 
16
 
 
developing and upgrading agricultural marketing infrastructure in the 10,000 
Gramin Haats and 585 Agriculture Produce Market Committee (APM
C) 
Markets. The Scheme guidelines have been circulated to States for availing 
fund. Fund can also be availed from the existing schemes of Government like 
AMI sub
-
scheme of ISAM. States have been requested to exempt GrAMs 
from their State APMC regulations. 
 
 
In addition to above, Agricultural Marketing Infrastructure (AMI) scheme 
provides for assistance of infrastructure in Gramin Haats including those 
Haats owned and managed by private entities. The AMI Scheme is demand 
driven.
 
 
No. H 
-
11017/03/2018
-
M
-
II (p
t.)
 
          
 
 
 
Dated: 02.05.2019
 
 
 
1.1
0
 
The Committee 
while lauding the Government for launching the ‘GrAM’ 
scheme 
with the purpose of
 
modernization and strengthening the 
infrastructure in Rural Periodical 
Market had
 
recommended the 
Government to finalize the procedural formalities such as preparation of 
Operational Guidelines, consultation with State Governments, allocation 
of financial resources
,
 
etc. for early implementation of the 'GrAM 
Scheme'. The Committee 
had 
also desired the Department to enhance 
the numbers of Gramin Haats being targeted fo
r modernization under 
the GrAM S
cheme and ensure presence of one Gramin Haat in each 
Panchayat of the Country.
 
The 
Department in 
its Action Taken R
eply has 
informed that th
ey have prepared and circulated Operational Guidelines, 
approved an Agri
-
Market Infrastructure Fund (AMIF) with a corpus of Rs. 
2000 crore with NABARD  for availing funds, physical infrastructure is 
being 
strengthened
 
through MGNREGA as coordinated by Mini
stry of 
Rural Development 
with the
 
States. The Department has also requested 
State Governments to exem
pt GrAMs from their State APMC 
R
egulations. However, the 
Department is silent on
 
the
 
need t
o enhance 
the number of Gramin H
aat
s
 
for modernization. The Committee are also 

 
 
17
 
 
astonished to know that none of revamped and modernized Gramin 
Haat
s
 
has been inaugurated so far. The Committee
 
are of view that 
Gramin Haat (
Rural Periodical Markets)
 
has potential to c
hange the face 
of marketing
 
of Agriculture P
roduce in the country and can significantly 
enhance the income of farmers. The Committee, therefore, desire the 
Department to take 
all the 
necessary steps to enhance the pace of 
modernization of Gramin Haats across the country and set a de
adlines 
in each State so that
 
the
 
farmers 
are
 
be be
nefitted as a result thereof.
 
 
C. 
 
AGRICULTURE MARKET INFRASTRUCTURE FUND (AMIF)
 
 
 
RECOMMENDATION (PARA NO. 6)
 
 
1.1
1
 
The Committee had observed/ recommended as under:
-
 
 
 
The Committee note that Government propose to set up Agriculture 
Market Infrastructure Fund (AMIF) of Rs. 2000 crore. This fund will be utilized 
for development of GrAMs (Rs. 1000 crore) and strengthening/promotion of e
-
NAM (Rs. 1000 crore). The Committee 
were informed that NABARD has 
been authorized to set up AMIF from market borrowings and 
Department is
 
in 
the process of formulation of EFC for interest subvention for the fund to be 
utilized under AMIF. The Committee are of view that creation of platforms 
for 
marketing of agriculture produce is one of the sectors that has long been 
ignored by the various Governments resulting in preventing the Gramin Haats 
to emerge as viable platform for agriculture marketing thereby, depriving the 
farmers the opportunity 
to direct access to the end consumers. There is an 
urgent need for fund infusion in this sector for creation and up gradation of 
infrastructure and civic facilities in Gramin Haats for their modernization and 
enhancing the reach of farmers to the end consu
mers. However, the 
Committee note that framework proposed for funding of 'GrAM Scheme' does 
not take into account the need of huge investment required for modernization 
of traditional 'Gramin Haats' existing in the Country. The Committee are of 
opinion tha
t availability of funds as a loan to the States for implementation of 

 
 
18
 
 
'GrAM Scheme' may not help to expedite the implementation of the Scheme. 
The Committee, therefore, while appreciating the praiseworthy initiative for 
modernization of 'Gramin Haat' would
 
like the Central Government to make 
this scheme as fully funded Central Scheme. They, therefore, recommend the 
Government to make 'GrAMs scheme' as fully funded Central Scheme. 
 
 
1.1
2
 
The Ministry in its Action Taken Reply has stated as under:
-
 
 
 
"
The Government has already approved an Agri
-
Market Infrastructure 
Fund (AMIF) with a corpus of Rs. 2000 crore for developing and upgrading 
agricultural marketing infrastructure in the 22000 Gramin Haats and 585 
Agriculture Produce Market Committee (APMC) M
arkets. States can 
avail 
loan at concessional rate of interest for development of marketing 
infrastructure in Gramin Haats and modernizing infrastructure in 585 APMCs. 
Fund can also be availed from the existing central sector schemes of 
Government like AMI
 
sub
-
scheme of ISAM and central sponsored scheme 
such as RKVY
-
 
RAFTAAR and MIDH. 
 
 
As per guidelines of AMI sub scheme of ISAM, circulated to States/UT, 
subsidy is provided @ 33.33% and 25% for infrastructure projects including 
development and upgradation 
of Rural Haats into GrAMs. 
 
 
In addition to this, States have option to additionally use the fund to finance 
development of Gramin haats from Rashtriya Krishi Vikas Yojana
-
 
Remunerative Approaches for Agriculture and Allied sector Rejuvenation 
(RKVY
-
RAFTAA
R) which is a Centrally Sponsored Scheme in the ratio of 60: 
40 (Government of India and State Share respectively) except in case of 
north eastern and hilly states where the sharing pattern is 90:10).
"
 
 
No. H 
-
11017/03/2018
-
M
-
II (pt.)
 
                             
Dated: 02.05.2019
 
 
1.1
3
   
 
While 
noting that the
 
facility of  
Agriculture Market Infrastructure Fund 
(AMIF) 
has been proposed by the Department as Interest Free C
redit facility 
for implementation of GrAM Scheme, the  Committee had recommended the 

 
 
19
 
 
Government to make 'GrAMs S
cheme' as fully funded Central Scheme. The 
Department in 
its
 
Action Taken Replies, apart from submitting 
the
 
information 
to the Committee 
about 
Agriculture Market Infrastructure Fund, has informed 
that 
funds can also be ava
iled from the exi
sting C
entral Sector S
chemes of 
Government like AMI 
sub
-
scheme of ISAM and C
entral Sponsored Scheme 
S
uch as RKVY
-
 
RAFTAAR and MIDH. The Committee are of conside
red view 
that availability of Central Government funds is necessary for expeditious 
completion of works under GrAM S
cheme as indecisiveness of State 
Governments regarding finan
cing of works for Gramin Haat will delay the 
ambitious project of modernization 
of Gramin Haats. The Committee, 
therefore, once again reiterate their earlier recommendation to make 
'GrAMs 
S
cheme' as 
the 
fully funded Central Scheme. The Committee would like to be 
apprized about steps taken by the Department 
in this regard 
at the earlie
st.
 
 
 

 
 
20
 
 
CHAPTER 
-
 
II
 
 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS THAT HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED BY 
THE GOVERNMENT
 
 
 
 
RECOMMENDATION SERIAL NO. 1
 
 
 
Availability of a transparent, easily accessible and efficient marketing platform 
is pre
-
requisite for sale of surplus agriculture produce and to ensure farmers 
remunerative prices for their hard work and investment in agriculture operation. Post 
Independe
nce, our country was dependent upon other countries to feed the teeming 
millions. The country was able to overcome this difficult period and achieved self 
sufficiency in the production of food grains, through the dedicated and planned 
intervention in agric
ulture sector known as "Green Revolution.  It has enabled our 
country to not only achieve self sufficiency in production of food grain to meet food 
requirement of the country but also to export it and contribute towards foreign 
earning. However, despite th
is success, barring a small section, majority of Indian 
Farmers are not able to get benefits of bumper production due to limited marketing 
platforms and hegemony of middleman in Grain mandis that led to realization of low 
prices for their produce. Our Coun
try is yet to solve the 'Riddle of Agriculture 
Marketing' to ensure remunerative prices to the farmers for their agriculture produce. 
Today, when the Government is committed to double the income of farmers in the 
Country, there is need to focus on bring qu
alitative and quantitative transformation in 
creating platform for agriculture marketing. The Committee, in succeeding 
paragraphs, has analyzed the issues regarding agriculture marketing and given their 
recommendations which if given attention, would help 
to ameliorate the economic 
condition of farmers of the country to a great extent. 
 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
 
The Government is focusing to bring qualitative and quantitative 
transformation in creating platform for agriculture marketing. The Government is 
advocating progressive reforms in the field of Agricultural Marketing. Department of 
Agriculture, Cooperation 
& Farmers’ Welfare has formulated a new Model 

 
 
21
 
 
Agricultural produce and Livestock Marketing (Promotion & Facilitation) Act, 2017 
{Model APLM Act, 2017} and released to States/UTs in April, 2017 for adoption. The 
new model Act provides the farmers options fo
r markets beyond the existing APMC 
regulated market yards. The provisions include inter alia for alternate marketing 
channels such as setting up of private markets, direct marketing, farmer
-
consumer 
markets, special commodity markets, declaring warehouses/
silos/cold storages or 
such structures as market sub yards to facilitate farmers in marketing their produce 
at competitive and remunerative prices.
 
 
In order to optimize the use of scarce resources and mitigate the uncertainty in price 
and marketing, the G
overnment has formulated and released a progressive and 
facilitative Model Act “The 
----
State/ UT Agricultural Produce & Livestock Contract 
Farming and Services (Promotion & Facilitation) Act, 2018” in May, 2018 for its 
adoption by the states/Union Territo
ries (UTs). The aforesaid Model Contract 
Farming Act covers the entire value and supply chain from pre
-
production to post 
harvest marketing including services contract for the agricultural produce and 
livestock.
 
 
Government is implementing National Agricul
ture Market (e
-
NAM) scheme wherein 
online trading of agriculture commodities including horticulture commodities is 
carried out in transparent and competitive manner helping the farmers with better 
price discovery for their produce, while at the same time l
owering transaction costs 
thereby stabilizing prices.
 
 
 
As per Union Budget Announcement, 2018
-
19, Government has announced to 
develop and upgrade existing 22,000 Gramin haats into Gramin Agricultural Markets 
(GrAMs) to work as centers of aggregation and for direct purchase of agricultural 
commodities from the
 
farmers.  In these GrAMs, physical infrastructure is being 
strengthening using MGNREGA and other Government Schemes. The Government 
has approved an Agri
-
Market Infrastructure Fund (AMIF) with a corpus of Rs. 2000 
crore for developing and upgrading agricul
tural marketing infrastructure in the 22000 
Gramin Haats and 585 Agriculture Produce Market Committee (APMC) Markets. 
 
Model APLM Act, 2017 will provide farmers alternate marketing channels for his 
produce and Model Contract Farming Act, 2018 will integrat
e farmers including fruits 
and vegetable growers with agro
-
industries with the objectives to mitigate market 
and price uncertainties. e
-
NAM will provide transparency in APMC transactions and 
upgradation of Gramin Haats into GrAMs will provide farmers easy 
access to 
markets for selling their produce.  These initiatives of the Government will enhance 
the economic conditions of the farmers. 
 
No. H 
-
11017/03/2018
-
M
-
II (pt.)
 
                                                                 
Dated: 02.05.2019
 
 

 
 
22
 
 
RECO
MMENDATION SERIAL NO. 2
 
REFORM IN AGRICULTURE MARKETING FOR CREATION OF ALTERNATIVE 
MARKETING PLATFORMS OF AGRICULTURE PRODUCE
 
 
 
 
The Committee note that farmers of the country, through their hard work and 
ingenuity, has achieved tremendous success, enhancing food grain production from 
83 million tonnes in 1960
-
61 to about 275.68 million tonnes in 2017
-
18.  However, 
despite the succe
ss of the farmers in ensuring food security of the country, they 
were not able to get remunerative pricing for their produce. The Committee further 
note that the procurement of rice and wheat by the Government agencies (FCI and 
State Government agencies) a
re one of the main platforms available to the farmers 
for sale of agriculture produce. However, the Committee note that the Government 
were able to procure only 358.82 million tonnes of wheat as against production of 
1340.02 miilion tonnes ( 26.77 %)  and 
487.60 million tonnes of rice as against 
production of 1557.75 million tonnes (31.30%) during the period of 2002
-
03 to 2017
-
18. Further, the Committee observe that small and marginal farmers, which, 
constitute the majority of farming community in the count
ry, lack access to 
Government Procurement facilities for agriculture produce due to various reasons 
such as small agriculture surplus, distance to the procurement centre, delay in 
payment, cumbersome bureaucratic procedure etc. These factors and lack of 
al
ternative marketing platform lead to a situation where farmers do not have any 
option but to sell their produce to middlemen with a very little and no profit at all. The 
Committee are of opinion that failure of the Central and State Governments to 
ensure a
 
transparent and easily accessible marketing platforms for agriculture 
produce is one of the reasons for poor financial condition of the majority of farmers 
of the country. There is need to create platforms for marketing of agriculture produce 
so that acce
ss of farmers to the end consumers may be enhanced. This will help to 
ensure remunerative pricing for agriculture produce and therefore increase the 
income of farmers. The Committee are of view that there is need for creation of 
alternative marketing platf
orms which could be easily accessible to the majority of 
farmers of the Country. The Committee, therefore, recommend the Government to 
take this issue on priority and initiate consultation among all stakeholders such as 

 
 
23
 
 
farmers and State Governments for re
form in this sector. The Committee also desire 
the Government to enhance allocation for this sector so that requisite investment 
may be made to create requisite marketing platforms in the country.
 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
 
The Government is actively engag
ed and consulting with the States/Union 
Territories (UTs) to reform their marketing laws and policies to create conducive 
ecosystem for emergence of multiple alternative marketing channels like direct 
marketing, establishment of private wholesale & farmer
-
consumer markets and 
contract farming. Based on Model Agricultural Produce Market Committee Act, 2003 
(APMC Act, 2003), twenty two States/ UTs have amended their APMC Acts. In 
states like Maharashtra, Karnataka, Gujarat, Rajasthan and Madhya Pradesh, such 
alternative marketing channels such as private markets, direct marketing and 
farmer
-
consumer markets have already come up. The State wise number of such 
alternative channels is at 
Annexure
-
I
. To make the reforms more farmers’ friendly, 
the Government has r
eleased 
Model Agricultural produce and Livestock Marketing 
(Promotion & Facilitation) Act, 2017 (APLM Act, 2017). 
 
The essence of the Model 
APLM Act, 2017 is to provide complete freedom to the cultivators and livestock 
rearers to sell their produce, livestock and its product to the buyers and through the 
marketing channel of their choice offering the better bid. Apart
 
from above, the 
Model Act, 2017 would attract the investment from private sector in developing post
-
harvest and marketing infrastructure. The model Act, 
inter
-
alia, 
provides for
 
declaration of whole State as one unified market, warehouses/silos/
 
cold stor
ages 
as 
market sub
-
yards, rationalization of market fee and commission charges. Arunachal 
Pradesh, Uttar Pradesh and Chhattisgarh have adopted the model APLM Act, 2017 
while Punjab has adopted partially. Other States are at varied stages in the process 
of 
adoption.
 
 
The Government is implementing National Agriculture Market (e
-
NAM) scheme 
wherein the Government is providing an online trading platform to farmers for 
trading of agriculture commodities including horticulture commodities 
in transparent 
and comp
etitive manner with better price discovery for their produce. This virtual 
trading e
-
NAM platform enhances the access of farmers to the market. Already 
585 mandis are integrated to this platform in 16 States and 02 Union Territories 
towards forming a Natio
nal Market. 
 
Developing new regulated wholesale markets in large number may neither be 
feasible nor economically viable, therefore, existing periodical markets need to be 
adequately developed. The Government’s proposal to develop and upgrade existing 

 
 
24
 
 
22,00
0 Rural haats in to Gramin Agricultural Markets (GrAMs) would not only create 
the additional market facilities nearer to the farm gate but would ingrate farmers and 
end buyers with incidental benefit in reduction of losses
.  
 
 
Further, as far as promotion 
of investment in market infrastructure is concerned, the 
Government has been promoting such infrastructure through schemes of Rashtriya 
Krishi Vikas Yojana
-
Remunerative Approaches for Agriculture and Allied Sector 
Rejuvenation (RKVY
-
RAFTAAR), Agricultural 
Marketing Infrastructure (AMI) sub
-
scheme of Integrated Scheme for Agricultural Marketing (ISAM), Mission for 
Integrated Development of Horticulture (MIDH), Pradhan Mantri Kisan SAMPADA 
Yojana (Scheme for Agro
-
Marine Processing and Development of Agro
-
Proc
essing 
Clusters) etc. 
 
No. H 
-
11017/03/2018
-
M
-
II (pt.)
 
                                                              
 
 
 
      
Dated: 02.05.2019
 
 
RECOMMENDATION SERIAL NO. 3
 
MODERNIZATION OF APMC MARKETS IN THE COUNTRY
 
 
 
 
Principal Market Yards (PMYs) and 
Sub Market Yards (SMYs) set up by 
Agriculture Produce Marketing Committee (APMCs) in various States are main 
marketing infrastructure for agricultural produce in the country. The Committee note 
that there are 6630 APMC Markets in 23 States and 5 Union Terr
itories. The 
Committee were informed that there is no APMC Market in the States of Bihar, 
Kerala, Manipur, Mizoram and Sikkim.   Further, there is no APMC market in UTs of 
Andaman & Nicobar Islands, Lakshadweep, Damn& Diu and D&N Haveli. The 
Committee also
 
note that there is a huge variation in the density of regulated 
markets in different parts of the country varying from 116 sq km. in Punjab to 11215 
sq km. in Meghalaya.  The all
-
India average area served by a regulated market is 
496 sq. km. as against re
commendation of National Commission on Farmers (2006) 
that a regulated market should be available to farmers within a radius of 5 Km 
(corresponding market area of about 80 sq. kms). The Committee were informed 
that there will be need of 41000 markets in th
e country to meet the norm as 
suggested by National Commission on Farmers.
 
 
 
The Committee further note that status of infrastructure and other civic facilities in 
APMC Markets varies widely across the country and only 65 % market have facility 

 
 
25
 
 
of Toilets 
whereas only 38% markets have Farmers Rest House. The Committee 
further note that only 15% APMC Market has cold storage facility whereas weighing 
facility is available in only 49% Markets. These APMC market also fare poorly in 
banking, internet connectivit
y and drying facility. The Committee have also been 
informed that civic infrastructure at most of the APMC Markets are in very bad shape 
causing inconvenience to the farmers. The Committee, therefore, recommend the 
Government to initiate consultation with 
the State Government concerned to 
enhance the number of agriculture markets in the country and for improvement of 
civic infrastructure, banking facility, digital connectivity and other facilities in APMC 
markets. The Committee desire the Government to devi
se a Centrally sponsored 
scheme for modernization of APMC Markets in the Country. The Committee also 
desire the Government to create marketing infrastructure in States like Bihar, Kerala, 
Manipur, Mizoram and Sikkim where APMC Markets do not exist. The Com
mittee 
would like to be apprised about the steps taken in this regard within three months of 
presentation of the report.
 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
 
In order to enhance the number of agriculture markets in the country, the 
Government is actively engaged and
 
consulting with the States/Union Territories 
(UTs) to reform their marketing laws and policies to create conducive ecosystem for 
emergence of multiple alternative marketing channels like direct marketing, 
establishment of private wholesale & farmer
-
consum
er markets and contract 
farming.
 
 
As per Union Budget Announcement, 2018
-
19, Government has announced to 
develop and upgrade existing 22,000 Gramin haats into Gramin Agricultural Markets 
(GrAMs) to work as centers of aggregation and for direct purchase of 
agricultural 
commodities from the farmers.
 
This initiative of the Government will enhance the 
number of agriculture markets in the country. 
 
 
The Government has approved an Agri
-
Market Infrastructure Fund (AMIF) with a 
corpus of Rs. 2000 crore for developi
ng and upgrading agricultural marketing 
infrastructure in the 22000 Gramin Haats and 585 Agriculture Produce Market 
Committee (APMC) Markets.
 
 
The 
basic and support Infrastructure/facilities such as open raised, covered platform, 
toilets (Separate for wome
n and Men), drinking water facility, drains, brick/stone 

 
 
26
 
 
soling in the moving space, garbage pits at corner, office block, storage (small size), 
boundary wall/fencing with two gates(incoming and outgoing), parking space, 
drinking water facility for cattle 
are eligible in rural haats under MGNREGS.  
 
 
Marketing infrastructure in GrAMs such as cleaning, sorting grading, washing, 
waxing, processing, packaging, pack house, low energy cool chamber / deep freezer 
/ storage facility/mini reefer, vans/solar powered
 
cold storage, freezer, IT 
infrastructure for integrating with e
-
NAM and for market information including 
electronic ticker board/ market information announcement system, electronic 
weighing scales/normal weighing scales, other Infrastructure such as value
 
additions 
machines such as Mini Dal Mill / Mini Rice Huller / Mini Millet processing unit/ Mini 
Oil Expeller/Deshelling/Decorticator Machines including solar powered ones, 
bagging and stitching machines and facilities are eligible under AMIF. 
 
Further, ma
rketing and other supporting Infrastructure in APMC markets such as 
common auction system and drying platform/drying equipment, scientific 
warehouses including material handling and testing equipment, ripening chamber 
cold storages/ pack houses/ refrigerat
ion deep freezer/reefer vans etc including solar 
powered and zero energy and with other technological innovations ones, cleaning, 
grading, washing, waxing, packaging and primary processing, electronic and normal 
weighing scale/ weigh bridge, computer & IT 
equipments and connectivity/POS 
devices for e
-
trading and market information system, assaying equipment and 
assaying laboratory, price display board (electronic/ non
-
electronic) and / or public 
announcement system, Mini dal mil/oil mil/ Mini Rice Huller/fl
our mill/deshelling/ 
decorticator machine/mini oil expeller and refining facility/Cotton ginning / Mini millet 
processing unit and allied facilities/spice making and other value addition machines 
such as drying machines & required platform etc., bagging an
d stitching machines 
and facilities for packaging are eligible under AMIF. 
 
 
The Government is already implementing a centrally sponsored Scheme namely    
Rashtriya Krishi Vikas Yojana
-
Remunerative Approaches for Agriculture and Allied 
Sector Rejuvenation 
(RKVY
-
RAFTAAR) to provide pre and post harvest required     
agri
-
infrastructure to States/UTs. Under the scheme, autonomy, flexibility is provided 
to States/UTs to plan and execute schemes as per local/ farmers
‟ needs.
 
 
The Government has re
-
launched the A
gricultural Marketing Infrastructure (AMI), 
sub scheme of Integrated Scheme for Agricultural Marketing (ISAM) recently with 
the objective to develop marketing infrastructure, promote Integrated Value Chains 
through minimal processing /value addition to mak
e the produce more marketable, 
promote innovative and latest technologies in post
-
harvest and agricultural 
marketing infrastructure in APMCs along with other eligible beneficiaries. 
 
 

 
 
27
 
 
APMCs may avail assistance for creation of infrastructure under other schemes of 
the Government such as MIDH.  In addition to this, assistance up to Rs. 75.00 lakh 
per mandi is also provided to States/UTs under e
-
NAM scheme for IT and quality 
assaying rela
ted infrastructure, cleaning, grading and packing facilities in e
-
NAM 
APMCs.  States like Bihar, Kerala, Manipur, Mizoram and Sikkim where APMC 
Markets do not exist can also avail assistance under RKVY
-
 
RAFTAAR. 
 
 
No. H 
-
11017/03/2018
-
M
-
II (pt.)
 
          
                                                             
   
Dated: 02.05.2019
 
 
RECOMMENDATION SERIAL NO.7
 
 
The Committee note that Gramin Haats play an important role in providing 
avenue for agriculture marketing for small and marginal farmers of the country. 
However, despite their significant contribution in sustaining agriculture based rural 
economy, Gramin H
aats were ignored in development dynamics of the Country. The 
Committee are surprised to note that none of the Government agencies at Central 
and State level maintains relevant information regarding Gramin Haats such as their 
numbers in State/UTs,  control
ling administrative agencies, facilities available at 
Gramin Haats etc. The Committee were informed that State Governments have 
forwarded them information about 22941 Agriculture Markets under the 
administrative control of APMC, Panchayati Raj Institutions
 
and other agencies. 
However, survey being undertaken by the Directorate of Marketing Inspection (DMI), 
an administrative agency under the control of Department of Agriculture, 
Cooperation and Farmers welfare, reveal inconsistency in data furnished by the 
various State Government Agencies. The Committee were informed that DMI has 
surveyed 9477 Gramin Haats till now and it aims to compile relevant details of all 
Gramin Haats in the Country after ground verification by the field Offices of DMI. The 
Committee 
appreciate the Department to take steps for undertaking the survey 
about the Gramin Haats across the country. The Committee are of view that the 
details obtained from this survey will be very useful for proper implementation of the 
scheme. The Committee, d
esire the Government to provide adequate funds and 
manpower to the DMI in order to complete the survey in minimum possible time.  
Further, the Committee also desire the Government to hold discussion with the State 
Governments to keep Gramin Haats out of th
e ambit of APMC Act. 
 

 
 
28
 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT
 
 
 
To have precise and accurate figures of Gramin haats along with the 
available marketing infrastructure and amenities therein, DAC&FW through its 
attached office of Directorate of Marketing & Inspection is con
ducting a survey 
across the States. So far, survey of more than 11,000 rural haats has been 
completed. The result of the survey has already been shared with Ministry of Rural 
Development to help development of basic infrastructure of Gramin Haats through 
M
GNREGS. The survey result has been shared with Ministry of Rural Development 
for planning for development through MGNREGS and the survey analysis has been 
used to develop the scheme of Agri
-
Market Infrastructure Fund (AMIF) which has 
been circulated after 
due approval. 
 
In order to implement recommendation of the Standing Committee, the Government 
has already provided fund of Rs. one crore to DMI under Domestic Travelling 
Expenses (DTE) to complete the survey as early as possible. The survey is in 
progress 
through with officers of DMI sometimes with assistance of respective State 
agencies. If required, further fund and manpower will also be provided to DMI. 
Further, the Government has already requested States/UTs to exempt the GrAMs 
from State APMC regulatio
ns.
 
 
No. H 
-
11017/03/2018
-
M
-
II (pt.)
 
                      
Dated: 02.05.2019
 
 
RECOMMENDATION SERIAL NO.8
 
 
The Committee note that since, implementation of 'GrAMs Scheme' envisage 
use of funds available under MGNREGA and other Government schemes, there will
 
be need of inter
-
ministerial coordination between various Ministries at the Central 
and State level. In this regard, the Committee were assured by the Secretary, 
DAC&FW that a Monitoring Committee involving various agencies will formed at the 
Central leve
l for implementation of the scheme. The Committee desire the 
Government to form such Monitoring Committee without any further delay as not 
only implementation but formulation of contour of the Scheme will also require 
effective coordination between various
 
agencies for time bound implementation of 
the scheme.
 
 

 
 
29
 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
 
As desired by the Standing Committee, an Inter
-
Ministerial Coordination 
Committee under the chairmanship of Additional Secretary, In
-
charge of Agricultural 
Marketing, Department of Agriculture, Cooperation & Farmers Welfare, has been 
constituted. The Commi
ttee comprises Joint Secretaries dealing with the subject in 
M/o. Rural Development, M/o. Panchyati Raj, M/o. Tribal Affairs and D/o. Animal 
Husbandry, Dairying and Fisheries.  The Inter
-
Ministerial Coordination Committee 
will facilitate the development of
 
GrAMs in strategic and coordinated manner by 
pooling the existing financial and technical resources and also various Government 
schemes. 
 
 
In addition to above, a coordination meeting was held on 23.05.2018 under the 
chairmanship of Secretary (AC&FW) whic
h was attended by Secretary, M/o Rural 
Development, Secretary, M/o. Tribal Affairs, Joint Secretaries from PMO and 
Managing Director, Small Farmers Agri
-
business Consortium (SFAC). In the 
meeting, the activities for development and upgradation of Gramin ha
ats were 
discussed. 
 
 
Based on the outcome of the coordination meeting, Guidelines on ‘Operation and 
Management of GrAMs’ have been formulated, got approved and circulated to 
States/UTs. Further, Scheme Guidelines of Agri
-
market Infrastructure Fund (AMIF) 
for development and upgradation of agricultural marketing infrastructure in Gramin 
haats and APMC markets have also been formulated in consultation with M/o. Rural 
Development and circulated to States/UTs to guide them to avail loan at 
concessional
 
rate of
 
interest.
 
DAC&FW has requested States to exempt the GrAMs 
from State APMC regulations. 
 
 
Subsequently, Ministry of Rural Development had conducted coordination meeting 
with States for preparation of state
-
wise plan for development of Gramin haats 
through 
MGNREGS. In the meeting, officers from DAC&FW had participated. 
 
 
DAC&FW along with M/o. Rural Development is persuading States to expedite the 
development and upgradation of basic infrastructure in Gramin haats through 
MGNREGS and agricultural marketing i
nfrastructure through AMIF. Ministry of Rural 
Development and States are regularly been consulted for proper coordination in 
development and upgradation of Gramin haats. Further, DAC&FW has requested 
States to designate Nodal Department as well as Nodal Of
ficer for the purpose of 
development and upgradation of Gramin haats. 
 
 
No. H 
-
11017/03/2018
-
M
-
II (pt.)
 
                     
Dated: 02.05.2019
 

 
 
30
 
 
RECOMMENDATION SERIAL NO. 9
 
 
 
The Committee note that the Department is in the process of formulation of 
Operational Guidelines for the implementation of 'GrAMs Scheme'. The Committee 
were also informed that the Department of Rural Development has prepared two 
designs for Creation/up gradation of infrastructure to be created under 'GrAMs 
Scheme' which envisag
e facilities such as Office, Godown, toilets, platform, 
connecting roads etc. and are in the process for further improvement of design in 
consultation with a professional agency. The Committee are of the view that any 
steps for improvement of facilities in
 
Gramin Haats should be according to the 
specific geographic, climatic and economic requirements of rural economy of the 
respective States and Government should encourage local design rather than 'one 
size fit all' design pattern. The Committee, therefore,
 
desire the Government to 
encourage area specific pattern reflecting local cultural ethos of rural economy.  
Further, the Committee are also of the view that there is need to encourage organic 
development of existing Gramin Haats rather than construction o
f new Gramin haats 
cut off from the mainstream of village life. The Committee, therefore, recommend the 
Government to take up up gradation and creation of infrastructure and other civic 
facilities in existing Gramin Haats spread across the Country. The Com
mittee also 
desire the Department to ensure electric supply based on solar energy in all Gramin 
Haats being upgraded under the GrAM Scheme. The Committee are also of the view 
that proper infrastructure and civic amenities should be available in Gramin Haat
s 
being operated by the private person. The Committee, therefore, desire the 
Department to incorporate such provisions in operational guidelines for 
implementation of GrAM scheme.
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
 
In the Scheme Guidelines of Agri
-
market Infrastruc
ture Fund (AMIF) for 
development and upgradation of agricultural marketing infrastructure in existing 
Gramin haats and APMC markets, full 
flexibility has already been provided to State 
Governments to come up with the proposals of development of Gramin haat
s based 
of local need and requirements and local practices and cultural ethos. In the survey 
of existing Gramin Haats conducted by DAC&FW, Gramin haats under private sector 
have also been included. The result of the survey has already been shared with M/o.
 

 
 
31
 
 
Rural Development with a request to develop and upgrade the physical 
infrastructure in this Gramin haats under MGNREGS as locally necessitated.   
 
 
The Government is ensuring to develop and upgrade only existing rural haats. The 
basic and support Infrastr
ucture/facilities including civic amenities such as open 
raised, covered platform, toilets (Separate for women and Men), drinking water 
facility, drains, brick/stone soling in the moving space, garbage pits at corner, office 
block, storage (small size), bo
undary wall/fencing with two gates(incoming and 
outgoing), parking space, drinking water facility for cattle are eligible in rural haats 
under MGNREGS.  
 
 
Marketing infrastructure in GrAMs such as cleaning, sorting grading, washing, 
waxing, processing, pac
kaging, pack house, low energy cool chamber / deep freezer 
/ storage facility/mini reefer, vans/solar powered cold storage, freezer, IT 
infrastructure for integrating with e
-
NAM and for market information including 
electronic ticker board/ market informati
on announcement system, electronic 
weighing scales/normal weighing scales, other Infrastructure such as value additions 
machines such as Mini Dal Mill / Mini Rice Huller / Mini Millet processing unit/ Mini 
Oil Expeller/Deshelling/Decorticator Machines, bag
ging and stitching machines and 
facilities are eligible under AMIF. Solar energy based system can also be provided in 
village haats. 
 
 
Further, marketing and other supporting Infrastructure in APMC markets such as 
common auction system and drying platform/drying equipment, scientific 
warehouses including material handling and testing equipment, ripening chamber 
cold storages/ pack houses/
 
refrigeration deep freezer/reefer vans etc including solar 
powered and zero energy and with other technological innovations ones, cleaning, 
grading, washing, waxing, packaging and primary processing, electronic and normal 
weighing scale/ weigh bridge, com
puter & IT equipments and connectivity/POS 
devices for e
-
trading and market information system, assaying equipment and 
assaying laboratory, price display board (electronic/ non
-
electronic) and / or public 
announcement system, Mini dal mil/oil mil/ Mini Ric
e Huller/flour mill/deshelling/ 
decorticator machine/mini oil expeller and refining facility/Cotton ginning / Mini millet 
processing unit and allied facilities/spice making and other value addition machines 
such as drying machines & required platform etc.,
 
bagging and stitching machines 
and facilities for packaging are eligible under AMIF. 
 
 
The provision has been made in AMI sub
-
scheme of ISAM started from 22
nd
 
October, 2018, to provide the assistance to private owned & operated Gramin Haats 
for developing
 
the infrastructure.  
 
Ministry of Rural Development, Government of India, has directed all States/UTs to 
visit at least 10 existing Rural Haats constructed on GP/Community land & managed 

 
 
32
 
 
by local bodies. Ministry of Rural Development conducted a workshop 
on 
“Upgradation of existing Rural Haats under MGNREGS”. 26 States/UTs participated 
in the workshop and presented the procedure to be adopted for upgradation of 
existing Rural Haats under MGNREGS. During the discussion in Labour Budget 
2019
-
20, meetings hel
d from 15
th
 
February to 28
th
 
February, 2019, the States/UTs 
have informed Ministry of Rural Development that 2720 existing Rural Haats have 
been identified which may be taken for upgradation in Financial Year 2019
-
20 
following the procedure under MGNREGS.  
 
 
Further, Ministry of Panc
hyati Raj, Government of India has also issued advisories to 
all States requesting them to provide basic amenities/infrastructure like proper 
sanitation, hygienic conditions, all weather roads etc. in Grameen Haats. 
 
 
No. H 
-
11017/03/2018
-
M
-
II (pt.)
 
      
               
Dated: 02.05.2019
 
 
RECOMMENDATION SERIAL NO.10
 
 
The Committee are of opinion that Gramin Haats spread across the country 
not only function as market place but also a medium where bulk of small and 
marginal farmers finds a platform to sell th
eir surplus agriculture produce. These 
Gramin Haats are also a medium of women empowerment as most of the 
participants are women farmers, who apart from selling their agriculture produce 
also purchase groceries and other materials of their daily needs. The
se Gramin 
Haats also function as a cultural space providing rural folks avenue for 
entertainment. These characteristics of Gramin Haats, if properly being taken into 
account during planning procedure for implementation of GrAM scheme, could be 
effectively 
utilized for providing agriculture extension services to the farmers and 
implementation of other schemes related to agriculture. The Committee, therefore, 
desire the Government to use Gramin Haats as a primary platform for dissemination 
of information and 
implementation of schemes related to agriculture sector. The 
Committee would like the Department to integrate agriculture sector schemes in 
GrAM scheme. 
 
 
 

 
 
33
 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
The suggestion of the committee regarding 
using Gramin Haats as a primary 
platform for dissemination of information and implementation of schemes related to 
agriculture sector is welcomed. Already schemes such as AMIF and AMI scheme, 
provisions exist for computer, IT equipments, information boards
 
and electronic 
ticker boards for village haats development keeping in view need for dissemination 
of market information in village haats as basic unit for market extension services.  
 
 
No. H 
-
11017/03/2018
-
M
-
II (pt.)
 
                     
Dated: 02.05.2019
 
 
RECOMMENDATION SERIAL NO.11
 
IMPLEMENTATION OF e
-
NAM SCHEME
 
The Committee note that Electronic 
-
National Agriculture Market (e
-
NAM) is a pan
-
India electronic trading portal which networks the existing APMC mandis to create a 
unified national market for agricultural commodities. The Committee note that NAM 
Portal in
tends to provide a single window service for all APMC related information 
and services. The Committee were informed that 585 regulated wholesale markets 
in 18 States/UTs have been connected through a web based portal under e
-
NAM 
scheme till 31 March, 2018.
 
The Committee were further informed that 1.05 crore 
farmers have been registered on the e
-
NAM portal till 17th June, 2018 out of which 
45.25 lakh farmers have been benefited by trading on e
-
NAM. The Committee 
appreciate the Government for taking the initi
ative for implementation of e
-
NAM 
schemes for promotion of transparency in agriculture trading in organized Wholesale 
Market under APMCs in the Country. The Committee hope that this will be able to 
help the farmers in realizing more remunerative prices for
 
their produce. However, 
the Committee desire the Government to enhance the coverage of the e
-
NAM facility 
to the States where APMCs wholesale market are not in existence. Further, there is 
need to enhance digital literacy among farmers in order to enhance
 
their 
participation. The Committee, therefore, recommend the Government to start  
training program for farmers on e
-
NAM portal. The Committee also desire the 

 
 
34
 
 
Government to sponsor a project to study impact of e
-
NAM platform on agriculture 
trading and bene
fits accrued to farmers as a result thereof. 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT
 
 
 
e
-
NAM is a reformed linked scheme. 
States/Union Territories are required to 
carry out following reforms in their APMC Act for integrating their mandis with e
-
NAM 
platform:  
 
i
)
 
Single point levy of market fee in State 
 
ii
)
 
Provision of Unified trade license valid across all e
-
NAM mandis
 
iii
)
 
Provision of Electronic Trading as a mode of Price discovery 
 
As per operational guidelines of e
-
NAM Scheme, States/ UTs which either do not 
have mar
keting regulation or have one which is not in force, in order to integrate 
with e
-
NAM portal and avail grants under the scheme, must identify some 
institution/ organisation and frame appropriate legally enforceable guidelines. The 
entity so identified may 
develop the appropriate physical infrastructure required for 
e
-
trading on e
-
NAM at back end and provide required for e
-
trading on e
-
NAM at 
back end and provide required logistic support.
 
 
The Government is continuously pursuing States, where APMC wholesale
 
markets 
are not in existence, to identify some institution/organisation and frame appropriate 
legally enforceable guidelines in order to integrate with e
-
NAM platform and avail 
grants under the scheme. Recently 06 mandis of Kerala, where there is no APMC 
Act, have been approved for integration with e
-
NAM platform. 
 
 
The Government is already conducting intensive training programmes to the farmers 
on e
-
NAM Portal. A self e
-
learning module has been provided for farmers and other 
stakeholders on e
-
NAM portal.
  
Under e
-
NAM, 828 training programmes to educate 
farmers about e
-
NAM have been completed.  In addition to this, training 
programmes of farmers in 3481 Gram Sabha for spreading awareness about e
-
NAM 
have been conducted. 
 
Small Farmers Agri
-
business Consort
ium (SFAC), lead implementing agency for e
-
NAM scheme, has engaged M/s Ernst & Young as a transaction advisor to give 
specialist advice on the roadmap of development of e
-
NAM. 
 
 
No. H 
-
11017/03/2018
-
M
-
II (pt.)
 
                      
Dated: 02.05.2019
 
 
 

 
 
35
 
 
RECOMMENDATION SERIAL NO.12
 
PARTICIPATION OF PRIVATE SECTOR AND PROMOTION OF AGRI
-
 
STARTUP 
IN MARKETING OF AGRICULTURE PRODUCE
 
 
The Committee feel that scarcity of marketing platforms for agriculture 
produce and mismanagement and corruption in APMC markets
 
have created a 
situation where farmers are being deprived of fruits of their hard earned labour 
leading to low price realization for farm produce. The Committee further observe that 
barring few exceptions, there is lack of participation of private sector 
in organized 
marketing of agriculture Produce. The Committee note that some private sector 
companies such as ITC Ltd. achieved success in establishing a successful platform 
for procurement and marketing of agriculture produce. The Committee were 
informed t
hat ITC Ltd. has established e
-
chaupal near the production center to 
undertake direct purchase from farmers.  The system involves the participation of 
the local people and provides prices around 10% over and above the modal price of 
previous day in the nea
rest mandi. The Committee are of view that there is need to 
create alternative platform for marketing of agriculture produce near the production 
centre so that farmers can get remunerative prices for their produce. These 
Marketing platforms may also provid
e them agriculture extension services to the 
farmers which will further help them to lower the input cost for farming. Such an 
experiment can be a win
-
win situation for the farmers as well as entrepreneurs. The 
Committee, therefore, recommend the Governmen
t to devise a specific policy for 
promotion of experiments/ enterprise in agriculture marketing sector which aims to 
integrate the Agriculture Extension Services and procurement of agriculture produce. 
The Committee desire the Government to allocate adequa
te funds for Agri
-
 
Startups 
in this sector. The Government should also provide preference to farmers and 
agriculture students in allocation of funds for Agri
-
 
Startups.
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
 
The Government is implementing 
Rashtriya Krishi Vikas Yojana
-
Remunerative Approaches for Agriculture and Allied Sector Rejuvenation (RKVY
-
RAFTAAR)
 
to incentivize States to increase expenditure on agriculture and allied 
sectors to achieve and sustain desired growth in agriculture and allied sectors. The 
extant guidel
ines of the Scheme provides complete flexibility and authority to States 

 
 
36
 
 
for selection, planning, approval and execution of projects under the scheme as per 
their needs, priorities and agro
-
climatic requirements and empower the states to 
approve their annu
al action plan accordingly for the development of agriculture and 
allied sectors.  RKVY
-
RAFTAAR  provides for development Public Private 
Partnership for Integrated Agriculture Development (PPPIAD) projects under which 
private sector encouraged PPP mode to 
collectively promote farmers in handholding 
including provided extension services to them for development PPPIAD projects.  
 
 
RKVY Scheme has provision for earmarking 8% of the scheme funds for innovation 
and agri
-
entrepreneur development to promote innova
tive startups to convert 
innovative idea into a marketable product. The suggested focus areas includes Agri
-
Biotech; Agriculture/Horticulture/Natural Resource Management; Sustainable 
Agriculture/Organic farming; Animal Husbandry, Dairying, Fishery; Agri
-
In
put tools 
and technologies, Micro Irrigation, Farm Mechanization and Agri Engineering, 
Precision Farming; Harvesting and Post
-
Harvest Processing; Food Processing; 
Supply Chain Management, Farm Retailing; Agri Extension Education; Internet of 
Things (IoT), 
ICT and Artificial Intelligence in Agriculture; Waste to Wealth, 
Secondary Agriculture; Agri Clinics & Farm Health Services etc. The benefits can be 
availed by farmers and agricultural students also. 
 
 
 
No. H 
-
11017/03/2018
-
M
-
II (pt.)
 
                     
       
 
 
 
 
         
Dated: 02.05.2019
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
37
 
 
CHAPTER III
 
OBSERVATION/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO NOT 
DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE GOVERNMENT’S ACTION TAKEN 
REPLY
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
NIL
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
38
 
 
CHAPTER IV
 
 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF 
WHICH ACTION 
TAKEN REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY 
THE COMMITTEE
 
 
RECOMMENDATION SERIAL NO.5
 
 
IMPLEMENTATION OF GrAMS SCHEME
 
The Committee note that existing marketing platforms available to the majority of 
small and marginal farmers ar
e inadequate to sell surplus agriculture produce and 
ensuring remunerative prices for their investment. Various factors such as distance 
to the nearest APMC market, dominance of middleman in APMCs, lack of  
transportation facilities etc. are the major fact
ors which propel majority of small and 
marginal farmers to use the services of local middleman or shops to dispose of their 
surplus agriculture produce much below the Minimum Support Prices(MSP) 
announced by the Government. In this scenario, Gramin Haat or
 
Rural Periodical 
Markets may emerge as viable alternative for agriculture marketing if these are 
provided with adequate infrastructure facilities. The Committee are happy to note 
that the Government in their endeavor to double the income of farmers of the
 
country has decided to launch ' GrAM Scheme' to improve the infrastructure and 
civic facilities in Gramin Haats being operated across the country. The Committee 
were informed that the Government will develop and upgrade 4600 out of existing 
22,000 Gramin 
Haats. In these GrAMs, physical infrastructure will be strengthened 
using MGNREGA and other government schemes. These GrAMs, electronically 
linked to e
-
NAM and exempted from regulations of APMCs, will provide farmers 
facility of direct sale to consumers an
d bulk purchasers. The Committee are of view 
that Gramin Haats, being ingrained in the cultural ethos of rural India and their 
proximity to the farmers, may emerge as alternative agriculture marketing platform 
and can help in ensuring remunerative prices f
or agriculture produces due to direct 
access to the Consumers and  less transportation cost. The Committee are of 
opinion that up gradation/creation of infrastructure in existing Gramin Haats such as 
sheds, storage facilities for agriculture produce, conne
ctivity through roads, civic 

 
 
39
 
 
facilities such as toilet, drinking water etc. will help in making these as viable and 
vibrant marketing platforms for agriculture produce and help in doubling the income 
of farmers. The Committee, therefore, recommend the Gove
rnment to finalize the 
procedural formalities such as preparation of Operational Guidelines, consultation 
with State Governments, allocation of financial resources etc. for early 
implementation of the 'GrAM Scheme'. The Committee are also of the view that 
target of modernization of 4600 Gramin Haats is too low a number in a country of 
more than 6 lakh villages. The Committee, therefore, desire the Department to 
enhance the numbers of Gramin Haats being targetted for modernization under the 
GrAM scheme and e
nsure presence of one Gramin Haat in each Panchayat of the 
Country. The Committee would like to be apprised about the steps taken in this 
direction within three months of presentation of the Report.
 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT
 
 
 
The Government in Union Budget
 
2018
-
19, has announced development and 
upgradation of existing 22000 Village Haats to GrAMs. As per initial report, 
11,811 
Village Haats are under Rural Local Bodies/Panchayats, approximately 1274 Village 
haats are under 
Agriculture Produce Market Committ
ees
 
(APMCs) & other 
Government agencies while rest of Village haats (approximately 9856) are under 
private  trusts etc.
 
DAC&FW through its attached office Directorate of Marketing & Inspection  (DMI) is 
undertaking questionnaire based survey of these haats
 
and so far survey of more 
than 11,000 rural haats have already been completed. The survey result shared with 
Ministry of Rural Development, Government of India, as requested by them for 
development of basic and supportive infrastructure through MGNREGS by
 
States. 
 
 
The Government has circulated Guidelines on ‘Operation and Management of 
GrAMs’ to all States/UTs to facilitate and promote better management in GrAMs. 
Further, the Government has requested States to exempt the GrAMs from State 
APMC regulations.
 
The Government has also circulated Scheme guidelines for 
AMIF to be set up with NABARD to all States/UTs to guide them to avail loan at 
concessional rate of interest. Apart from above, in order to identify the location, type 
and nature of haats, their per
iodicity, arrivals of produce etc.,
 
 
The issue of development of rural haat has already been taken up with the States 
during Rabi and Kharif campaign 2018 as well as Zaid Conference, 2019.  
 

 
 
40
 
 
As far as allocation of financial resources is concerned, physica
l infrastructure is 
being strengthening through MGNREGA as coordinated by Ministry of Rural 
Development by States. The Government has approved an Agri
-
Market 
Infrastructure Fund (AMIF) with a corpus of Rs. 2000 crore with NABARD for 
developing and upgradin
g agricultural marketing infrastructure in the 10,000 Gramin 
Haats and 585 Agriculture Produce Market Committee (APMC) Markets. The 
Scheme guidelines have been circulated to States for availing fund. Fund can also 
be availed from the existing schemes of Go
vernment like AMI sub
-
scheme of ISAM. 
States have been requested to exempt GrAMs from their State APMC regulations. 
 
In addition to above, Agricultural Marketing Infrastructure (AMI) scheme provides for 
assistance of infrastructure in Gramin Haats includin
g those Haats owned and 
managed by private entities. The AMI Scheme is demand driven.
 
 
No. H 
-
11017/03/2018
-
M
-
II (pt.)
 
          
 
 
 
Dated: 02.05.2019
 
 
Comments of the Committee
 
For comments of the Committee please refer to Para No.1.1
0
 
of 
Chapter 
-
 
I 
 
of this 
Report.
 
 
RECOMMENDATION SERIAL NO. 6
 
 
The Committee note that Government propose to set up Agriculture Market 
Infrastructure Fund (AMIF) of Rs. 2000 crore. This fund will be utilized for 
development of GrAMs (Rs. 1000 crore) and strengthening/prom
otion of e
-
NAM (Rs. 
1000 crore). The Committee were informed that NABARD has been authorized to 
set up AMIF from market borrowings and Department  is in the process of 
formulation of EFC for interest subvention for the fund to be utilized under AMIF. The 
C
ommittee are of view that creation of platforms for marketing of agriculture produce 
is one of the sectors that has long been ignored by the various Governments 
resulting in preventing the Gramin Haats to emerge as viable platform for agriculture 
marketing
 
thereby, depriving the farmers the opportunity to direct access to the end 
consumers. There is an urgent need for fund infusion in this sector for creation and 
up gradation of infrastructure and civic facilities in Gramin Haats for their 
modernization and
 
enhancing the reach of farmers to the end consumers. However, 
the Committee note that framework proposed for funding of 'GrAM Scheme' does 

 
 
41
 
 
not take into account the need of huge investment required for modernization of 
traditional 'Gramin Haats' existing 
in the Country. The Committee are of opinion that 
availability of funds as a loan to the States for implementation of 'GrAM Scheme' 
may not help to expedite the implementation of the Scheme. The Committee, 
therefore, while appreciating the praiseworthy ini
tiative for modernization of 'Gramin 
Haat' would like the Central Government to make this scheme as fully funded 
Central Scheme. They, therefore, recommend the Government to make 'GrAMs 
scheme' as fully funded Central Scheme. 
 
 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
 
T
he Government has already approved an Agri
-
Market Infrastructure Fund 
(AMIF) with a corpus of Rs. 2000 crore for developing and upgrading agricultural 
marketing infrastructure in the 22000 Gramin Haats and 585 Agriculture Produce 
Market Committee (APMC) Ma
rkets. States can 
avail loan at concessional rate of 
interest for development of marketing infrastructure in Gramin Haats and 
modernizing infrastructure in 585 APMCs. 
Fund can also be availed from the 
existing central sector schemes of Government like AMI 
sub
-
scheme of ISAM and 
central sponsored scheme such as RKVY
-
 
RAFTAAR and MIDH. 
 
As per guidelines of AMI sub scheme of ISAM, circulated to States/UT, subsidy is 
provided @ 33.33% and 25% for infrastructure projects including development and 
upgradation of
 
Rural Haats into GrAMs. 
 
 
In addition to this, States have option to additionally use the fund to finance 
development of Gramin haats from Rashtriya Krishi Vikas Yojana
-
 
Remunerative 
Approaches for Agriculture and Allied sector Rejuvenation (RKVY
-
RAFTAAR) which 
is a Centrally Spons
ored Scheme in the ratio of 60: 40 (Government of India and 
State Share respectively) except in case of north eastern and hilly states where the 
sharing pattern is 90:10). 
 
No. H 
-
11017/03/2018
-
M
-
II (pt.)
 
                            
 
 
 
 
 
         
Dated: 02
.05.2019
 
 
Comments of the Committee
 
For comments of the Committee please refer to Para No.1.1
3
 
of 
Chapter 
-
 
I 
 
of this 
Report.
 
 
 

 
 
42
 
 
CHAPTER V
 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH FINAL 
REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT ARE STILL AWAITED
 
 
RECOMMENDATION SERIAL NO.4 
 
REFORM IN AGRICULTURE PRODUCE MARKETING COMMITTEE (APMCs) 
ACTS
 
 
The Committee note that Agriculture Produce Market Acts (APMC Act) which 
were enacted in various State Governments with the objectives to ensure an 
environment to f
or fair play for supply and demand forces thereby resulting in an 
effective price discovery for farm produce, regulate market practices and attain 
transparency in transactions has become hotbed of politics, corruption and 
monopoly of traders and middleman.
 
The Committee observe that APMC market 
across the country are not working in the interest of farmers due to various reasons 
such as  limited numbers of traders in APMCs markets thereby reducing 
competition, cartelization of traders, undue deduction in the
 
name of market fee, 
commission charges etc. The Committee were also informed that provisions of the 
APMC Acts are not implemented in their true sense.  Market fee and commission 
charges are legally to be levied on traders, however, the same is collected f
rom 
farmers by deducting the amount from farmers’ net proceed. 
 
 
The Committee also note that provisions in APMC Act in some of States are so 
restrictive to the interest of farmers that market fee is levied even when sale of 
agriculture produce takes place
 
outside the market yard.  The Committee were 
informed that Market fee is collected in some States even without actual trade
-
transaction has taken place and simply on landing the commodity at processing 
units and some States treat
-
transaction outside the m
arket yard as illegal. Multiple 
licenses are required for trading in multiple APMC markets and also multiple time 
market fee on same commodity even within the State is collected The Committee 
further note that APMC Acts are highly restrictive in promotion 
of multiple channels 
of marketing and competition in the system.
 

 
 
43
 
 
 
The Committee note that the Central Government is continuously pursuing the State 
Governments for reform in APMC acts. The Government has formulated and 
circulated Model Act (The
-------
State
 
Agricultural Produce Marketing (Development 
&Regulation) Act, 2003 and Model Rules in 2007.   The Committee were informed 
that Department has since been engaging with the States for more than fourteen 
years to implement reforms in the sector based on Mode
l Act/ Rules and various 
State Governments has brought changes in their State APMC Act. However, despite 
these changes, a need was felt for further reform in APMC Act and recognizing this, 
the  Ministry of Agriculture & Farmers’ Welfare formulated a model 
'Agricultural 
Produce and Livestock Market Committee' Act (APLM Act) in 2017. Further the 
Ministry has also formulated a Model  'Agricultural Produce  & Livestock  Contract 
Farming and Services (Promotion & Facilitation) Act, 2018'  in order to integrate 
f
ruits and vegetable growers with agro
-
 
processing units for better price realization 
and reduction of post
-
harvest losses and to create job opportunities in the rural 
areas. The Committee note that model APLM Act intend to create a single market in 
State/U
Ts level, provisions for single point levy of market fee across the State and  
unified single trading license to realize cost
-
effective transactions,  full 
democratization of Market Committee and State/UT  Marketing Board, promotion to 
private wholesale ma
rket yards  and farmer consumer market yards in order to 
enhance competition  among different markets and market players for the farmer’s 
produce, promotion of direct interface between farmers and processors/ exporters/ 
bulk
-
buyers/ end users so as to redu
ce the price spread bringing advantage to both 
the producers & the consumers, freedom to the agriculturalists to sell their produce 
to the buyers and at the place & time of their choice etc. The Committee were 
informed that only two States namely Uttar Pra
desh and Punjab have so far adopted 
Model APLM Act, 2017 till now. 
 
The Committee observe that there is urgent need for radical reform in APMC Act in 
the country, if we intend to provide justice to the farmers. Remunerative pricing for 
the farmers can not 
be ensured unless number of marketing platforms for farm 
produce are enhanced and functioning of APMC markets is made democratic and 
transparent. The Committee appreciate efforts of the Government for reforms in 
APMC market. However, the Committee are surp
rised to note the lukewarm 

 
 
44
 
 
response of the State Governments towards reforms in APMC market. The 
Committee are of view that there is need to involve all the stakeholders especially 
the State Governments in the process of reforms in the APMC Act. The Commit
tee, 
therefore, recommend the Government to constitute a Committee of Agriculture 
Ministers of all States in order to arrive at a consensus and chalk out legal 
framework for marketing of agriculture Produce in the Country. The Committee are 
also of the opi
nion that provisions regarding entry fee and other Cess levied on 
transaction of agriculture produce should be done away with as it will help to reduce 
corruption and malpractices prevalent in APMC Markets. The Committee would like 
the Government to hold d
iscussion with the State Governments to abolish entry fee 
and other cess in APMC Markets. The Committee would like to be apprized about 
steps taken in this direction within three months of presentation of Report.
 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
 
An empowered 
Committee of 10 State Agricultural Marketing Ministers to 
promote reforms and related issues was constituted on 2
nd
 
March, 2010, which 
submitted an exhaustive report to Ministry in 2013 for consideration. The 
Government constituted Committee to formulate Model Marketing Law considered 
almost all suggestions made in the report of 2013 and formulated in wide 
consultation
 
with States and other stakeholders and released a Model APLM Act, 
2017. Since, agricultural marketing is a State subject, Ministry of Agriculture & 
Farmers, Welfare, Government of India, is actively engaged with States/UTs for 
adoption of Model APLM Act, 
2017 by them. The provisions suggested in the report 
by Standing Committee on Agriculture to
 
do away with
 
entry fee and other Cess 
levied on transaction of agriculture produce have already been incorporated in 
Model APLM Act, 2017. The Government at all le
vel persuading rest of States to 
adopt the Model APLM Act, 2017. Due to constant and continuous persuasion and 
efforts made by Government of India with States, Arunachal Pradesh, Uttar Pradesh 
and Chhattisgarh have adopted the model APLM Act, 2017 while Pu
njab has 
adopted partially. Other States are at varied stages in the process of adoption.
 
          
 
No. H 
-
11017/03/2018
-
M
-
II (pt.)
 
       
 
 
 
Dated: 02.05.2019
 
 
 
 

 
 
45
 
 
Comments of the Committee
 
For comments of the Committee please refer to Para No.
1.
7
 
of 
Chapter 
-
 
I
 
 
of this 
Report.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI;                                                         SHRI P.C. 
GADDIGOUDAR 
 
 
10 
December, 2019
                                                         
Chairperson
, 
 
19 
Agrahayana , 1941 (Saka)                       
Standing Committee on Agriculture
 
 
 

 
 
46
 
 
ANNEXURE
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE
 
(2019
-
20)
 
 
MINUTES OF THE THIRTEENTH SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE
 
*****
 
 
The Committee sat on Monday, the 09
th
 
December, 2019 from 1500 hrs. to
 
1530 hrs. in the Committee Room 'C', Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, 
New Delhi. 
 
PRESENT
 
Shri Parvatagouda Chandanagouda Gaddigoudar
–
  
Chairperson
 
 
MEMBERS
 
LOK SABHA
 
 
 
 
2.
 
Shri Afzal Ansari
 
 
 
3.
 
Shri Horen Sing Bey
 
 
 
4.
 
Shri Devendra Singh 'Bhole'
 
 
 
5.
 
Shri Abu Taher Khan
 
 
 
6.
 
Shri Bhagwanth Khuba
 
 
 
7.
 
Dr. Amol Ramsing Kolhe
 
 
 
8.
 
Shri Devji Mansingram Patel
 
 
 
9.
 
Smt. Shardaben Anilbhai Patel
 
 
 
10.
 
Shri Bheemrao Baswanthrao Patil
 
 
 
11.
 
Smt. Navneet Ravi Rana
 
 
 
 
 
 
RAJY
A SABHA
 
 
 
 
12.
 
Shri Partap Singh Bajwa
 
 
 
 
13.
 
Shri Kailash Soni
 
 
 
14.
 
Shri Ram Nath Thakur
 
 
 
15.
 
Smt. Chhaya Verma
 
 
 
16.
 
Dr. Chandrapal Singh Yadav

 
 
47
 
 
 
 
 
SECRETARIAT
 
 
1.
 
Shri Shiv Kumar
 
 
 
–
 
Joint Secretary
 
2.
 
Shri Arun K. Kaushik
 
  
 
–
 
 
Director 
 
3.
 
Smt. Juby 
Amar
 
 
 
–
 
Additional Director
 
 
4.
 
Shri Sumesh Kumar
 
 
 
–
 
Deputy Secretary
 
 
 
 
 
2.
 
At the outset, Chairperson welcomed the Members to the Sitting of the Committee. 
Thereafter, the Committee took up for consideration the followings Reports:
 
*(i)
 
 
XXXX
 
 
XXXX
 
 
XX
XX
 
 
XXXX 
 
*(ii)
 
 
XXXX
 
 
XXXX
 
 
XXXX
 
 
XXXX
 
*(iii)
 
 
XXXX
 
 
XXXX
 
 
XXXX
 
 
XXXX
 
(iv)
 
Draft Report on the Action Taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in the 62
th
 
Report (16
th
 
Lok Sabha) of the 
Standing Committee on Agriculture (2018
-
19) on the Subject "Agriculture Marketing 
and Role of Weekly Gramin Haats" of the Ministry of Agriculture and Farmers 
Welfare (Department of Agriculture, Cooperation and Farmers Welfare);
 
 
3.
 
After some deliberations, the Committee adopted the Draft Report
s without any 
modifications and the Committee authorized the Chairperson to finalize and present these 
Reports to Parliament.
 
*4.
 
 
XXXX
 
 
 
XXXX
 
 
 
XXXX
 
 
 
XXXX
 
The Committee then adjourned.
 
___________________________________________________________________
 
*Matter not related to this Report
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
48
 
 
APPENDIX 
 
(Vide Para 4 of Introduction of the Report)
 
ANALYSIS OF ACTION TAKEN BY GOVERNMENT ON THE 
SIXTY SECOND
 
REPORT OF 
STANDING 
COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE (1
7
TH
 
LOK SABHA)
 
 
 
(i) 
 
Total number of Recommendations
 
 
 
 
          
07
 
(
ii
)
 
Recommendations/Observations which have been
 
Accepted by the Government 
 
Recommendation Nos.
 
1,2,3,7,8,9,10,11 and 12
 
 
 
 
 
Total
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
09
 
  
 
Percentage
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
            
75
.0
%
 
(
iii
)
 
Recommendations/Observations which the Committee
 
Do not desire 
to pursue in view of the Government’s replies
 
 
Recommendation Nos.
 
NIL
 
 
Total
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
            
0
0
 
Percentage 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
            
00.00
%
 
(
iv
)
 
Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies
 
 
of the Government have not been accepted by the Committee
 
R
ecommendation No.
 
5 and 6
 
 
Total
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
2
 
Percentage
 
 
 
 
          
 
 
 
                  
 
  
16.66
%
 
(
v
)
 
Recommendations/Observations in respect of which 
 
 
Final replies of the Government are still awaited
 
Recommendation No.
 
  
4
          
 
Total
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
       
  
 
   
1
 
 
Percentage
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
       
 
    
 
8
.
33
%
 
 
 