   STANDING COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE,  
ANIMAL HUSBANDRY AND FOOD PROCESSING (2022-2023) 
                 
         
 
SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA 
          
         
 
                              
MINISTRY OF COOPERATION  
              
 
 
'DEMANDS FOR GRANTS (2023-24)' 
 
 
Action-taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations contained in 
the Fifty-Sixth Report (Seventeenth Lok Sabha) of the Standing Committee on 
Agriculture, Animal Husbandry and Food Processing (2022-23) 
         
        
 
SIXTY - FIFTH REPORT 
  
 
 
 
         
               
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
AUGUST 2023/SHRAVANA, 1945 (Saka) 
   
65 

 
 
 
SIXTY- FIFTH REPORT 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE ANIMAL HUSBANDRY AND FOOD 
PROCESSING (2022-2023) 
 
          
 
SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA 
          
         
 
                              
MINISTRY OF COOPERATION  
              
 
 
'DEMANDS FOR GRANTS (2023-24)' 
 
 
Action-taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations contained in 
the Fifty-Sixth Report (Seventeenth Lok Sabha) of the Standing Committee on 
Agriculture, Animal Husbandry and Food Processing (2022-23) 
              
 
SIXTY- FIFTH REPORT 
            
           Presented to Lok Sabha on                                  10.08.2023 
           Laid on the Table of Rajya Sabha on                                10.08.2023 
 
 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
AUGUST 2023/SHRAVANA, 1945 (Saka) 
 


 
 
 
 
COA No. ____ 
 
 
         
         
         
         
         
         
 
         
         
        
         
         
         
         
         
 
 
 
         
     
                     
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
© 2023 By Lok Sabha Secretariat 
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of Business in Lok 
Sabha (Sixteenth Edition) and Printed by Lok Sabha Secretariat 
 
  

 
 
 
 
<CONTENTS> 
  Page No. 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE (2022-23) (iii) 
INTRODUCTION      (v) 
   
CHAPTER I  Report …………………………………………   
CHAPTER II Observations/Recommendations that have been accepted by 
the Government 
  
CHAPTER III Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not 
desire to pursue in view of the Government’s replies  
  
CHAPTER IV Observations/Recommendations in respect of  which replies of 
the Government have not been accepted by the Committee  
  
CHAPTER V Observations/Recommendations in respect of which final replies 
of the Government are still awaited  
  
 
 
ANNEXURE 
 
 
Minutes of the 19th Sitting of the Committee held on 08.08.2023   
    APPENDIX  
Analysis of Action Taken by the Government on the Observations  / 
Recommendations contained in the Fifty -Sixth Report (Seventeenth Lok Sabha) 
of the Standing Committee on Agriculture, Animal Husbandry and Food 
Processing (2022-23). 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 

 
 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE, ANIMAL HUSBANDRY 
AND FOOD PROCESSING (2022-23) 
 
SHRI P.C. GADDIGOUDAR-   CHAIRPERSON 
 
MEMBERS 
 
LOK SABHA 
 
 2. Shri Horen Sing Bey 
  3.  Shri A. Ganeshamurthi 
 4. Shri Kanakmal Katara 
 5. Shri Abu Taher Khan 
 6. Shri Ram Mohan Naidu Kinjarapu 
 7. Shri Mohan Mandavi 
 8. Shri Devji Mansingram Patel 
9. Smt. Sharda Anilkumar Patel 
10. Shri Bheemrao Baswanthrao Patil 
11. Shri Shriniwas Dadasaheb Patil 
12. Shri Vinayak Bhaurao Raut 
13. Shri Pocha Brahmananda Reddy 
14. Shri Rajiv Pratap Rudy 
15. Mohammad Sadique 
16. Shri Devendra Singh alias Bhole Singh 
17. Shri Virendra Singh 
18. Shri V.K. Sreekandan 
19. Shri Ram Kripal Yadav 
20.  VACANT# 
21. VACANT* 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
 
22. Smt. Ramilaben Becharbhai Bara 
23. Shri Masthan Rao Beeda 
24. Dr. Anil Sukhdeorao Bonde 
25. Shri S. Kalyanasundaram 
26. Shri Surendra Singh Nagar 
27. Shri Kailash Soni  
28. Shri Randeep Singh Surjewala 
29. Shri Ram Nath Thakur 
30. Shri Vaiko 
31. Shri Harnath Singh Yadav  
 
 
 
# Vacant w.e.f. 10.10.2022 due to demise of Shri Mulayam Singh Yadav on 10.10.2022 .[Bulletin- 
Part II, Para No. 5316 dated 14.10.2022]. 
* Vacant w.e.f.29.04.2023 due to disqualification of Shri Afzal Ansari from Lok Sabha Membership 
from the date of his conviction in terms of the provision of Article 102(1)(e) of the Constitution of India 
read with Section 8 of the Representation of the People Act, 1951  [Notification No. 
21/4(6)/2023/TO(B) Dated - 01.05.2023]. 
 
 
(iii) 

 
 
 
 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
 
1. Shri Shiv Kumar   -  Additional Secretary 
2. Shri Uttam Chand Bharadwaj  -  Director 
3. Shri N. Amarathiagan   -  Under Secretary 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(iv)  

 
 
 
 
  
INTRODUCTION 
         
 
 I, the Chairperson, Standing Committee on Agriculture , Animal Husbandry and 
Food Processing (2022 -23), having been authorized by the Committee to submit the 
Report on their behalf, present this Sixty-Fifth Report on Action t aken by the Government 
on the Observations/Recommendations contained in the Fifty-Sixth Report (Seventeenth 
Lok Sabha) of the Standing Committee on Agriculture , Animal Husbandry and Food 
Processing (2022-23) on 'Demands for Gr ants (202 3-24)' pertaining to the Ministry of 
Cooperation. 
 
2. The Fifty-Sixth Report (Seventeenth Lok Sabha) of the Standing Committee on 
Agriculture, Animal Husbandry and Food Processing  (2022-23) on 'Demands for Grants 
(2023-24)' pertaining to the Ministry of Cooperation  was presented to Lok Sabha on                    
13th March,.2023 and laid on the Table of Rajya Sabha on 14th March, 2023. The Action 
Taken Notes on the Report were received on 15.06.2023. 
 
3. The Report was considered and adopted by the Committee at their Sitting held on 
08.08.2023. 
 
4. An analysis of the action taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in the Fifty-Sixth Report (Seventeenth Lok 
Sabha) of the Committee is given in Appendix-I  
  
      
 
 
 
NEW DELHI;             P.C. GADDIGOUDAR 
 08 August, 2023                                        Chairperson, 
 17 Shravana, 1945(Saka)                               Standing Committee on Agriculture,  
       Animal Husbandry and Food Processing  
 
 
 
 
(v) 

1 
 
   
CHAPTER-I 
 
REPORT 
 
This Report of the Standing Committee on Agriculture , Animal Husbandry and Food 
Processing deals with the action taken by the Government on the  
Observations/Recommendations contained in the Fifty Sixth  Report ( Seventeenth Lok 
Sabha) of the Standing Committee on Agriculture (2022-23) on 'Demands for Grants (2023-
24) pertaining to the Ministry of Cooperation which was presented to Lok Sabha on 
13.03.2023 and laid on the Table of Rajya Sabha on 14.03.2023.   
 
1.2  The Ministry of Cooperation has furnished Action Taken Replies  in respect of all the 
11 Observations/Recommendations contained in the Report. These  replies have been 
categorized as follows:  
(i)  Observations/Recommendations that have been accepted by the 
Government : 
Chapter- II 
 (Total- 09) 
Recommendation Nos. 1, 2, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, & 11 
(ii) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which the Committee do 
not desire to pursue in view of the Government’s reply: 
Chapter-III  
 (Total- Nil) 
Recommendation Nos. Nil. 
(iii) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which Action Taken 
Replies of the Government have not been accepted by the Committee: 
Chapter-IV  
 (Total- Nil) 
Recommendation Nos. Nil 
(iv) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which Final Replies of 
the Government are still awaited 
Chapter-V  
 (Total- 02) 
Recommendation Nos. 3 & 10. 
 
1.3  The Committee desire that utmost importance be given to implementation of 
the Observations/Recommendations accepted by the Government. In cases, where it 
is not possible for the Ministry to implement the Recommendations in letter and spirit 
for any reason, the matter should be  reported to the Committee with the reasons for 
non-implementation. The Committee desire that further Action Taken Notes on the 
Observations/ Recommendations contained in Chapter  - I and V of this Report be 
furnished to them at an early date.  
   

 
 
 
 
 
2 
 
1.4  The Committee will now deal with the action taken by the Government on some of 
the Recommendations in the succeeding paragraphs.  
 
 
Need for Expediting the Process of Formulation of New Schemes of the Ministry 
(Recommendation No.-3) 
1.5 The Committee in their 56th Report (17th Lok Sanha) had observed / recommended 
as under :- 
 
"The Committee note that the Ministry of Cooperation undertook an exercise to 
revamp and replace the Central Sector Integrated Scheme on Agricultural 
Cooperation (CSISAC) with the proposed new Schemes of (i) Digitalization of 
Primary Agricultural Cooperative Societies (PACS) ; (ii) Education & Training ; (iii) 
Credit Guarantee Fund for Cooperatives and (iv) 'Sahkar se Samriddhi Yojana' during 
2022-23. Government of India approved th e new Centrally Sponsored  Scheme of 
Digitalization of PACS Project on 29.06.2022 and its implementation has already 
been started. The new Scheme of Cooperative Training is under advanced stage of 
formulation and appraisal of the Project of establishment of  National Cooperative 
University is under progress. However, the Ministry could not get the approval of 
Expenditure Finance Committee (EFC) in respect of the proposed Credit Guarantee 
Fund for Cooperatives and the 'Sahkarse Samriddhi Yojana'. The Ministry has now 
proposed to formulate a consolidated Scheme afresh for  'Sahkarse Samriddhi' and a 
new Central Sector Scheme of strengthening of Cooperative Sugar Mills (CSMs). The 
Committee, therefore, urge the Ministry of Cooperation to accord the highest priorit y 
for processing of the proposals relating to formulation of these two Schemes of the 
Ministry to obtain the necessary approval for implementation to achieve the desired 
results. The Committee would like to be apprised of the action taken in this regard." 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
1.6 The Ministry in its Action Taken Reply has stated as under:- 
"Against the proposal of this Ministry to formulate Credit Guarantee Fund for 
Cooperative scheme, Department of Expenditure had stated that there are multiple 
schemes for providing Credit Guarantee which includes cooperatives too , and 
advised this Ministry to  take up the matter with the Ministries having such schemes 
for suitable amendments in scheme guidelines for making them easily accessible for 
cooperatives. In view of the above, Ministry withdrew the proposal of a separate 
Credit Guarantee Scheme for Cooperatives and did not seek any fund for this in BE 
2023-24. 
Subsequent to the same, on behalf of this Mini stry, Credit Guarantee Fund Trust for 
Micro and Small Enterprises (CGTMSE) has included Scheduled Urban Co -operative 
Banks, Non -Scheduled Urban Cooperative Banks, State Cooperative Banks and 

 
 
 
 
 
3 
 
District Cooperative Banks as Member Lending Institutions vide Ci rcular No. 165 
dated 18.02.2019 and Circular No. 194 dated 03.02.2022. 
 
The Ministry has after necessary stakeholders’ consultation, launched a new scheme 
named 'Grants-in-aid to NCDC for Strengthening of Cooperative Sugar Mills (CSMs)' 
which is being implemented during 2022 -23 and 2023 -24. Under the scheme, the 
Government of India is giving a grant of Rs 1000 crore to NCDC,  in 2instalments of  
Rs 500 crore each during 2022-23 and 2023-24. NCDC will use this grant to provide 
loans up to Rs 10,000 crore to cooperative sugar mills. Under this scheme, loan will 
be made available to cooperative sugar mills by NCDC for the following purposes: 
 
a. to set up an ethanol plant, or 
b. for setting up a cogeneration plant, or 
c. for working capital, or 
d. for all three 
 
Rs 500 crore has already been sanctioned to NCDC in the financial year 2022-23." 
 
 
1.7    The Committee , had taken note of the progress ach ieved by the Ministry of 
Cooperation in its efforts to formulate four new Schemes in place of the erstwhile 
Central Sector Integrated Scheme on Agricultural Cooperation (CSISAC) , which was 
to be discontinued w.e.f 2022 -23.  The Committee were informed inter-alia by the 
Ministry that it could not get the approval of Expenditure Finance Committee (EFC) 
for the pro posed Credit Guarantee Fund for Cooperatives and the 'Sahkarse 
Samriddhi Yojana' .  The Committee were further informed that the Ministry would 
formulate a consolidated Scheme afresh for 'Sahkarse Samriddhi' and a new Central 
Sector Scheme of strengthening of Cooperative Sugar Mills (CSMs).   The Committee, 
therefore, urge d the Ministry to accord highest priority for processing of the 
proposals relating to formulation of the  said two Schemes and expressed desire that 
the Committee be apprised about the action taken in the matter.   
  
    In the Action taken Reply, the Ministry of Cooperation has furnished details 
regarding the position of Scheme of 'Credit Guarantee Fund for Cooperatives' and the 
Scheme of 'Grants -in-aid to NCDC for Strengthening of Cooperative Sugar Mills 
(CSMs)'.  However, no detail s have  been furnished with regard to a consolidated 
Scheme of 'Sahkarse Samriddhi' that was proposed to be formulated afresh by the 

 
 
 
 
 
4 
 
Ministry. The Committee, may, therefore,  be apprised about the action t aken in the 
matter. 
 
  Liquidation of Committed Liabilities of National Cooperative Development 
Corporation (NCDC) (Recommendation No.-10) 
 
1.8 The Committee in their original Report (56th Report /17th Lok Sanha) had observed / 
recommended as under :-   
"The Committee note that implementation of the Central Sector Integrated Scheme 
on Agriculture Cooperation (CSISAC) has been discontinued. However, as per the 
approval of Department of Expenditure dated 23.12.2022, the Scheme is under 
implementation till 3 1.03.2023 to liquidate the committed liabilities of National 
Cooperative Development Corporation (NCDC). The Ministry has also intimated that 
a cumulative amount of ₹664.96 Crore has been provided at RE Stage against BE of 
Rs.50 Crore on specific request o f Ministry to liquidate the committed liabilities.In the 
year, 2022 -23, Rs.232.09 Crore has already been released to NCDC as on 
10.02.2023 for settling interest subvention against already sanctioned 
eligible/completed projects. The rest of budgetary provis ion will be utilized after 
receipt of funds under cash supplementary within the financial year 2022 -23. In this 
regard, the Committee recommend that the process of liquidation of committed 
liabilities of NCDC under the CSISAC Scheme including the unspent b alances with 
the NCDC be settled at the earliest." 
 
 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
1.9 The Ministry in its Action Taken Reply has stated as under:- 
"During 2022 -23, ₹662.87 Cr. had been released to NCDC for liquidating its 
committed liabilities under erstwhile  CSISAC Scheme. However, due to non 
disbursement of subsidy to Telangana Sheep and Goat Development Cooperative 
Federation Limited (TSSGDCFL), funds to the tune of ₹285.93 Cr. remained 
unutilized. A token of ₹1.00 Lakh has been allocated under CSISAC in BE  2023-24. 
Ministry is  further taking up the matter  with competent authority  for liquidating the 
committed liabilities under CSISAC." 
 
1.10    The Committee had taken note that implementation of the Central Sector 
Integrated Scheme on Agriculture Cooperation (CSISAC) was discontinued w.e.f. 
2022-23 but the already committed liabilities of National Cooperative Development 
Corporation (NCDC)  under the Scheme would be allowed .  A cumulative amount of 
₹664.96 Crore was provided at RE Stage on specific request of Ministry to liquidate 

 
 
 
 
 
5 
 
the committed liabilities.   The Committee therefore, had recommended that the 
process of liquidation of committed liabilities of NCDC under the CSISAC Sc heme 
including the unspent balances with the NCDC be settled at the earliest. 
 
 In regard to the above recommendation of the Committee, the Ministry of 
Cooperation has furnished Action Taken Reply that d uring 2022 -23, ₹662.87 Cr ore. 
was released to NCDC for liquidating its committed liabilities under erstwhile CSISAC 
Scheme.  However, due to non disbursement of subsidy to Telangana Sheep and 
Goat Development Cooperative Federation Limited (TSSGDCFL), funds to the tune of 
₹285.93 Crore. remained unutilized. A token of ₹1.00 Lakh has been allocated under 
CSISAC in BE 2023-24 and the Ministry is further taking up the matter with competent 
authority for liquidating the committed liabilities under CSISAC.   The Committee, 
taking into account th e foregoing, would like to be apprised of the details of all 
outstanding liabilities to NCDC under the CSISAC, Unutilized balanced with NCDC 
under CSISAC and progress achieved during 2023 -24 towards settlement of 
liquidation of committed liabilities of NCDC. 
New Schemes / Programmes of the Ministry 
(Recommendation No.-11) 
1.11 The Committee in their 56th Report (17th Lok Sanha) had observed / recommended 
as under :- 
 
The Committee note that a number of Schemes and Programmes aimed at 
development and growth of Cooperative Societies, are implemented by other 
Ministries of the Government, i.e. mainly by (i) Ministry of Agriculture & Farmers 
Welfare. (ii) Ministry of Food Processing Industries and the (iii) Ministry of Fisheries, 
Animal Husbandry & Dairying. The Committee have been informed that during the 
year 2023 -24, the Government intends to introduce the new Schemes towards 
creation of World’s Largest Food Grain Storag e Plan in Cooperative Sector; 
strengthening Cooperative Movement in the Country and deepening its Reach up to 
the Grassroots level and computerization of Agriculture and Rural Development 
Banks (ARDB). The Ministry of Cooperation envisages to play the role  of coordinator 
with all concerned Ministries in the implementation of these new Schemes particularly 
the Scheme of Computerization of ARDBs to be implemented by NABARD. The 
Committee in this regard express their earnest hope that the Ministry of Cooperati on 
would strive to establish a robust mechanism for the effective coordination among 
different Ministries in the implementation of various welfare Schemes for the 

 
 
 
 
 
6 
 
promotion of Cooperative Societies in the country.The Committee would like to be 
informed of the action taken in the matter." 
 
Reply of the Government 
1.12 The Ministry in its Action Taken Reply has stated as under:- 
A. World's largest Grain Storage Plan in Cooperative Sector  
 
(i) The ‘World’s Largest Grain Storage Plan in the Cooperative Sector’ was approved by 
the Cabinet on 31.05.2023. The plan entails creation of various agri -infrastructure 
including warehouse, custom hiring center, processing units, FPS, etc. at the level of 
PACS through convergence of various existing schemes of Government of India. The 
Pilot Project of the above-mentioned scheme will be implemented in selected districts 
of different States/UTs.  
 
(ii) The implementation of the scheme would not only address the grai n storage deficit in 
the country, but would also lead to huge reduction in post -harvest losses and 
transportation costs of food grains. By transforming PACS into multi -service centers 
having well established forward and backward linkages, it would also ena ble them to 
earn higher returns, thus improving the economic condition of millions of farmers in 
the country. 
 
B. Strengthening Cooperative Movement in the Country and deepening its reach 
up to the Grassroots  
 
(i) In order to strengthen cooperative movement in the country and deepen its reach up 
to the grassroots, Ministry of Cooperation’s Plan for establishing new Multipurpose 
PACS or Primary Dairy/Fishery Cooperative Societies covering all the Panchayats/ 
villages in the country as the case may be, has been ap proved by the Cabinet on 
15.02.2023. 
 
(ii) The Plan will be implemented with the support of NABARAD, NDDB and NFDB 
through convergence of various existing schemes of Government of India.  It would 
provide the farmer members with requisite forward and backward li nkages to market 
their produce, enhance their income. 
 
(iii) In order to ensure smooth implementation of the plan, an Inter -Ministerial Committee 
(IMC) under the chairmanship of Hon’ble Cooperation Minister has been constituted. 
A National Level Coordination Com mittee (NLCC) has also been constituted under 
the chairmanship of Secretary, Ministry of Cooperation. Further, all the States/UTs 
have been requested to constitute State Cooperative Development Committee 
(SCDC) and District Cooperative Development Committe e (DCDC) vide this Ministry 
letter dated 17.03.2023. Further, the Guidelines for the Project have been circulated 
to the States/UTs.  

 
 
 
 
 
7 
 
 
C. Computerization of Agriculture and Rural Development Banks (ARDBs)  
 
(i) The Long -Term Cooperative Credit Structure (LTCCS) consists of Cooperative 
Agriculture and Rural Development Banks at State and primary levels, and are 
primarily engaged in providing long term finance to farmers.  
 
(ii) In order to improve their operational eff iciency, bring uniformity in accounting 
practices and core aspects of the systems followed in lending, recovery and raising 
resources, and to aid in their business expansion, a project for ‘Computerization of 
ARDBs’ to be implemented by NABARD, under formu lation and appraisalby Ministry 
of Cooperation. 
 
1.22 The Committee had taken note that different Ministries / Departments 
implemented a number of Schemes and Programmes through Cooperative Sector.    
During the year 2023 -24, the Government intended to introduce the new Schemes 
towards (i) Creation of World’s Largest Food Grain Storage Plan in Cooperative 
Sector ; (ii) Strengthening Cooperative Movement in the Country and deepening its 
Reach up to the Grassroots l evel and (ii) Computerization of Agriculture and Rural 
Development Banks (ARDB). The Ministry of Cooperation envisaged to play the role 
of coordinator with all concerned Ministries in the implementation of new Schemes.   
The Committee, therefore, had expre ssed hope that the Ministry of Cooperation 
would strive to establish a robust mechanism for the effective coordination among 
different Ministries in the implementation of various welfare Schemes for the 
promotion of Cooperative Societies in the country.  
 In its Action Taken Reply, the Ministry of Cooperation has stated inter -alia 
about the salient features of the aforesaid three new Schemes for Cooperative Sector.    
However, no specific reply has been given with regard to action taken by the Ministry 
towards establishment of a robust mechanism for the convergence / effective 
coordination among different Ministries in the implementation of various welfare 
Schemes for the promotion of Cooperative Societies in the country.  The Committee, 
therefore, would lik e to be apprised of the specific action taken by the Ministry with 
regard to establishment of a mechanism for the convergence and coordination of 
Schemes implemented by different Agencies for Cooperative Societies.   Accordingly, 
the Committee reiterate their earlier stand in this regard.   

 
 
 
 
 
8 
 
CHAPTER - II 
 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS THAT HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE 
GOVERNMENT 
 
Budgetary Allocation for 2023-24 
(Recommendation No.1 ):- 
 
"The Committee are happy to note that the Ministry of Cooperation has been allocated 
Rs.1150.38 Crore as Budget Estimates for 2023 -24 against their projected demand of 
Rs.1945.60 Crore. At present, the Ministry is implementing only one Centrally Sponsored 
Scheme of Digitalization of Primary Agricultural Cooperative Societies (PAC S). The 
budgetary provision of Rs.968.24 Crore allocated for the implementation of the Scheme for 
2023-24 constitutes about 84.16 percent of the BE of the Ministry. The Committee also note 
that funds utilization of the Ministry during the current financial year remained low till fag end 
of 2022 -23, mainly due to delay in formulation of new Schemes and Programmes of the 
Ministry. The Committee do hope that the Ministry which is yet to complete the process of its 
creation, would fully utilize its BE during 20 23-24 and also urge the Ministry to take all 
necessary action for early formulation of Schemes and Programmes planned for 2023 -24 
including the requisite approval of the Government for effective implementation of Schemes 
for Cooperatives during 2023-24." 
 
Reply of the Government 
"Ministry of Cooperation has utilized 185.71 % (Rs. 1671.36 crore) of Budget Estimate 
2022-23 (Rs. 900.00 cr.) and 102.87% of Revised Estimate 2022 -23 (Rs. 1624.74 Crore) 
upto 31 st March, 2023. Ministry of Cooperation has been allocated Rs. 1150.38 Crore as 
Budget Estimate for 2023 -24 and Ministry is taking all necessary steps for expeditious 
formulation and roll out of schemes and programmes planned for 2023-24." 
 
Ministry of Cooperation  
[F.No. 4-7-2023 Budget  dated  15th June, 2023] 
 
Utilization of Funds During 2022-23 
(Recommendation No.2 ):- 
 
"The Committee note that during 2022 -23, the Ministry of Cooperation was allocated BE of 
Rs.900 Crore and the budgetary support was upwardly revised to Rs.1624.74 Crore at RE 
Stage. Again, the total budgetary allocation to the Ministry for 2022 -23 was further 
increased to Rs.2056.13 Crore as per the Supplementary Demands for Grants of the 
Ministry. However, till 31.01.2023, the expenditure incurred was on ly Rs.136.34 Crore, 
which is about 6.7 percent. According to the  Ministry, the progress of expenditure was low 
till January 2023, as it was a newly  created Ministry with an Independent Budget from the 
FY 2022-23 and all Schemes & Programmes of the Ministry  were under formulation during 
the current year 2022-23. However, the Ministry's expenditure as on 24.02.2023 was stated 

 
 
 
 
 
9 
 
to be Rs.513.50 Crore that is 57% of BE of Rs. 900 Crore. The Ministry during its deposition 
before the Committee exuded confidence tha t it would be able to make requisite 
expenditure after receipt of mandatory approvals in respect of the funds to be received by it 
through supplementary grants at later stages. Against this backdrop, the Committee desire 
that the Ministry completes all nec essary procedural formalities for incurring of expenditure 
for the total Schemes and Programmes of the Ministry in 2022-23." 
 
 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
"In pursuance of the recommendation of the Hon’ble Committee,  Ministry of Cooperation 
was able to utilize185.71 % (Rs. 1671.36 crore)of Budget Estimate 2022 -23 (Rs.900.00 cr.) 
and 102.87% of Revised Estimate 2022-23 (Rs. 1624.74 Crore) upto 31st March, 2023." 
Ministry of Cooperation  
[F.No. 4-7-2023 Budget  dated  15th June, 2023] 
 
New Cooperation Policy 
(Recommendation No.- 4):- 
 
"The Committee note that the Ministry of Cooperation is in the process of formulating a New 
National Cooperation Policy to realize the vision of 'Sahakar se Samriddhi', promoting the 
cooperative based economic development model, strengthening the cooperative movement 
in the country and deepening its reach up to the grassroots. The Committee have been 
apprised that a National level Committee has been constituted on 02.09.2022 under the 
Chairmanship of Shri Suresh Prabhakar Prabhu to formulate this proposed National 
Cooperation Policy. They were further informed that the Report of the Committee would be 
expected by the end of February, 2023. The Committee in this regard, recommend that th e 
New National Cooperation Policy, which is a cherished vision of the Ministry, be finalized 
and adopted at the earliest. The Committee would like to be enlightened about the progress 
achieved in the matter." 
Reply of the Government 
 
"In order to fulfil th e mandate of the new ministry of Cooperation, which inter alia, includes 
realizing the vision of ‘Sahakar se Samridhi, strengthening the Cooperative movement in the 
country, deepening its reach up to the grassroots and promoting cooperative based 
economic development model, the formulation of New National Cooperation Policy has 
been envisaged to replace the 2002 Policy. 
 A National Level committee has been constituted on 2 nd September 2022 under the 
chairmanship of Shri Suresh Prabhakar Prabhu, consisting o f experts of the Cooperative 
sector, representatives from National /State/District Primary level cooperative societies, 
Secretaries (Cooperation) and RCSs from States/UTs, officers from Central 
Ministries/Departments to formulate the New National Cooperati on Policy. The formulation 

 
 
 
 
 
10 
 
of New National Cooperation Policy will help in realizing the vision of ‘Sahakar se Samridhi 
promoting the cooperative based economic development model, strengthening the 
cooperative movement in the country and deepening its reac h up to the grassroots. In this 
regard, consultations were earlier held with stakeholders and suggestions for formulating 
the new Policy were invited from the Central Ministries/Departments, States/UTs, National 
Cooperative Federations, Institutions and al so from the general public. The National Level 
committee will analyze the collated feedback, policy suggestions & recommendations to 
formulate the draft of the new Policy. The drafting committee headed by Shri Suresh Prabhu 
made presentation to Hon’ble Hom e & Cooperation Minister on 05.06.2023. Based on his 
guidance and further consultation with experts, the Committee would finalize draft policy 
document and the same would be circulated to all the stakeholders including Central 
Ministries, State Governments  and placed before the Cabinet. The New National 
Cooperation Policy is targeted to be launched in July, 2023."     
 
Ministry of Cooperation 
[F.No. 4-7-2023 Budget  dated  15th June, 2023] 
Development of National Level Data Repository of Cooperative Societies 
(Recommendation No.- 5):- 
 
"The Committee note that different types of Cooperative Societies in the country can be 
grouped into two broad categories based on their functional jurisdiction i.e., (i) Cooperative 
Societies under the administrative control of Registrar  of Cooperative Societies of States / 
UTs and (ii)Multi-State Cooperative Societies under the administrative control of Central 
Registrar of Cooperative Societies.  At present, the Ministry of Cooperation does not have 
the authentic data about the number and categories of Cooperative Societies in the country, 
State / Union territory -wise and District -wise and also about Financial Institutions that 
provide credit facilities for the developmental needs of Cooperative Societies. Asper the 
vision of the Ministry of Cooperation, the process has been initiated for developing an 
exhaustive digital database of Cooperative Societies in the Country namely National 
Cooperative Database of Cooperatives working in different sectors across the country t o 
bring more synergy with the available various database maintained by Central Line 
Ministries and State Governments. The Committee also note  that NABARD being the 
implementing agency for Computerization of PACS, is developing the National Level 
Software, for which, it has finalized the National Level  PACS Software Vendor(NLPSV) and 
Project Consulting Agency (PCA) for the  implementation of the Project. In phase-I of the 
process, data collection of three cooperative sectors i.e. Primary Agricultural Credit 
Societies (PACS), Dairy and Fisheries has been started from 01.12.2022. Out of about 2.61 
Lakhs Cooperative Societies in these sectors, a database of about 2.58 Lakh Cooperatives 
have been collected so far. The Committee, therefore, recommend the Ministry t o pursue 
the matter pertaining to National Cooperative Database with all sincerity  and vigor. They 
desire that the progress made in this regard be apprised to the Committee." 
 

 
 
 
 
 
11 
 
Reply of the Government 
"Ministry of Cooperation has initiated the process of developing National Cooperative 
Database for about 8.5 lakh cooperative societies working in various sectors across the 
country.  Under Phase -I, the mapping of about 2.64 lakh cooperative societies operating in 
three sectors – PACS, Dairy and Fisheries has  been completed. The mapping of remaining 
5.8 lakh cooperatives working in various sectors is in progress." 
 
 Ministry of Cooperation 
[F.No. 4-7-2023 Budget  dated  15th June, 2023] 
 
Management of Multi-State Cooperative Societies (MSCS) 
(Recommendation No.6):- 
 
"The Committee note that as on date  there are about1481 registered Multi State Co -
operative Societies (MSCS) in the country and 83 of them including five Cooperative Banks 
are under liquidation. The liquidation proceedings are time consuming due to legal 
proceedings in various courts of laws and other tribunals / forums, involvement of multiple 
Law Enforcement Agencies, multitude of stake holders like depositors, employees, 
members, etc. The Committee also notice that no liquidation case of defunct M SCSs has 
been settled during the last 10 years. The Committee, taking this fact in view, urge the 
Ministry of Cooperation to take all necessary corrective measures to protect the interests of 
all the Members of these MSCSs at the earliest. The Committee al so recommend that the 
Ministry of Cooperation  may consider to introduce  a suitable Capital  / Credit Insurance 
Scheme for Cooperative Societies especially for the MSCS to protect financial interests  of 
all stakeholders of Cooperative Societies specifically for depositors Members of MSCSs at 
the earliest. The Committee would like to be apprised of the action taken in the matter." 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
"The Cooperative Societies registered under the provisions of the Multi -State Cooperative 
Societies (MSCS) Act, 2002 function as autonomous cooperative organizations accountable 
to their members. The multi -State cooperative societies are required to function as per the 
provisions of Multi -State Cooperative Societies Act, 2002 and rules made thereunder, r ead 
with approved bye-laws of the society which includes the roles and powers of the members, 
Board, General Body of the society and Central Registrar of Cooperative Societies (CRCS). 
As per the provisions of Section 49 of the MSCS Act, 2002, the business matters such as to 
admit members, to accept the deposits and investing the same and staff matters including 
payment of salary to them, etc. fall under the powers and functions of the Board of the 
society and the day to day management of the society falls u nder the powers and functions 
of the Chief Executive of the society as per the provisions of Section 52 of the MSCS Act, 
2002. To protect the financial interests of all Stakeholders of Cooperative Societies 
especially for depositors/ members of Multi -State Cooperative Societies and to strengthen 
governance, enhance transparency, increase accountability, reform electoral process etc. in 

 
 
 
 
 
12 
 
Multi-State Cooperative Societies and to incorporate provision of the 97 th Constitutional 
Amendment, the amendment by suppl ementing existing legislation in the Multi -State 
Cooperative Societies Act, 2002 has already been introduced in the Lok Sabha. The Bill is 
likely to be taken up for passing in the upcoming monsoon session of the Parliament. The 
Bill, when enacted along with appropriate Rules would help Society in protecting interests of 
members of MSCS by introducing prudential norms, stronger audit and monitoring 
mechanism." 
 
Ministry of Cooperation 
[F.No. 4-7-2023 Budget  dated  15th June, 2023] 
 
Functional  Status of Cooperative Societies 
(Recommendation No.7) :- 
 
"The Committee note that the Central Registrar of Cooperative Societies and Registrars of 
Cooperative Societies in the States and Union territories are responsible for administration 
and regulation of Cooperative Societies in the country. There are more than 8.54 Lakh 
Registered Cooperative Societies including 95,000 Primary Agricultural Cooperative 
Societies. The Committee observe that the element of fairness and transparency is 
reportedly lacking in t he functioning of Cooperative Societies under the Central/State/UTs 
due to various factors including vested interests of certain Members. With a view to bring 
transparency in the functioning of Cooperative Societies under the administrative control of 
the States/UTs, the Committee recommend the Ministry to examine whether the 
Cooperative Societies in States/UTs can be brought under the ambit of RTI Act, as in the 
case of Multi -state Cooperative Societies. The Committee also urge the Ministry to take 
adequate remedial measures to address the issues plaguing State Cooperative Societies. 
The Committee would like to be informed of the action taken in this regard." 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
"As per the Constitution, the Cooperative societies with objectives confined to one State 
only are governed by the laws of the respective State Governments and the cooperative 
societies with objectives extending to more than one State are governed by the central law, 
namely, ‘the Multi -State Co-operative Societies Act 2002  (Act 39 of 2002). Out of 8.5 lakh 
co-operative societies all over the country, only 1541 are multi-State cooperative societies.  
In so far as the multi-State co-operative societies are concerned, the Ministry of Cooperation 
has introduced the Multi -State Cooperative Societies (Amendment) Bill, 2022 which has a 
provision for appointment of ‘Cooperative Information Officer’ by Multi State Cooperative 
Societies for providing information to its members as per article 243ZO of the Constitution. 
The Multi -State Cooperative Societies (Amendment) Bill also aims to incorporate the 
provisions of Ninety -seventh Constitutional Amendment and strengthen governance, 
enhance transparency, increase accountability and reform electoral process, etc. in the Multi 
State Cooperative Societies." 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
13 
 
Multipurpose Cooperative Societies 
(Recommendation No.8):- 
 
"The Committee have been informed by the Ministry that the Ministry has circulated Model 
bye-laws to all States/UTs for their adoption by the Primary Agricultural Cooperative 
Societies (PACS) as per the respective State Cooperative Acts. This will enable the PACS 
to undertake more than 25 business activities  which, inter -alia, include Dairy, Fishery, 
Setting up of Godowns, Procurement of Foodgrains,  Fertilizers, Seeds, Distributorship of 
LPG/CNG/Petrol/Diesel, Short -term & Long -term Credit, Custom Hiring Centers, Common 
Service Centers, Fair Price Shops, Community Irrigation, Business Correspondent Activities, 
etc. It has been informed that the States and UTs have initia ted the process for facilitating 
PACS to adopt the model bye -laws. The Ministry has also intimated that  a Plan has also 
been prepared to converge various existing Schemes of Government of India to encourage/ 
incentivize PACS to become viable business entit ies. Keeping in view the foregoing, the 
Committee recommend that matter of adoption of bye -laws by the PACS  be taken up with 
States / UTs on priority basis so as to facilitate early adoption of the Model bye -laws by 
PACS. The Committee would like to be informed of the action taken in the matter." 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
"Model bye -laws for Primary Agricultural Credit Societies (PACS) / Large Area Multi -
Purpose Societies (LAMPS) have been prepared by Ministry of Cooperation in consultation 
with all stakeholders concerned, including the State Governments. The model bye-laws will 
enable PACS to undertake more than 25 business activities, including dairy, fisheries, 
godowns, LPG/ Petrol/ Diesel Distributorship, Common Service Centers (CSC), banking 
correspondents, etc. They will also improve the operational efficiency, transparency and 
accountability of PACS. Further, provisions have also been made to ensure a wider and 
more diversified membership in PACS. The model bye-laws were circulated to all the States/ 
UTs on 05.01.2023 for adoption as per respective State Co-operative Acts. Presently, model 
bye- laws have been adopted by 20 States/UTs & existing Bye - laws of 3 States/UTs are 
already in line with model bye - laws prepared by Ministry. Adoption of model bye - laws is in 
under process in the remaining States/UTs."  
 
Ministry of Cooperation 
[F.No. 4-7-2023 Budget  dated  15th June, 2023] 
 
Progress in Digitization of Primary  Agricultural Credit Societies (PACS) 
(Recommendation No.9):- 
 
The Committee note that a project for digitalization of about 63000 PACS was approved by 
the Government last year to which Budgetary allocation of Rs. 350 Crore for FY 2022 -23 
was made. For the financial year 2023 -24, Budget Allocation of Rs. 968.24 Crore has been 
made. The Committee have been told that the Ministry has chalked out a plan to digit alize 
63,000 PACS with a Budget Outlay of Rs. 2516 Crore. NABARD  is the main Implementing 

 
 
 
 
 
14 
 
Agency for implementation of the Project. This Project entails bringing all the functional 
PACS onto an ERP (Enterprise Resource Planning) based common software, link ing them 
with NABARD through State Cooperative Banks (STCBs) and District Central  Cooperative 
Banks (DCCBs).The digitalization of PACS would facilitate Common Accounting System 
(CAS) and Management Information System (MIS), which would enable PACS to carry  out 
their operations online and obtain refinance/ loans for  their various activities from NABARD 
through District Central Cooperative Banks and State Cooperative Banks. 
 
The Committee have been apprised that proposals for computerization of 54,749 PACS 
from 24 States & 4 UTs have been received and the Ministry aims to cover 13,000 and 
20,000 PACS during the years 2022 -23 & 2023 -24 respectively. The Committee also take 
note that the Ministry which received a budgetary support of Rs.350 Crore for the purpose  
during 2022-23, have utilized Rs.151.92 Crore till 16.02.2023.During the year 2023 -24, BE 
of Rs.968.24 Crore has been allocated for the project. The Committee while expressing their 
satisfaction over the new initiatives of the Government for computerizati on of PACS, 
recommend the Ministry  to take all necessary steps to ensure speedy digitization of all the 
PCAS in a time- bound manner with optimal utilization of funds allocated for the project. The 
Committee would like to be apprised of the progress made in this regard. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
"The centrally sponsored project for Computerization of 63,000 functional PACS with a total 
financial outlay of Rs. 2,516 crore is under implementation across country. The project 
entails bringing all the functional PACS onto an ERP (Enterprise Resource Planning) based 
common national software, linking them with NABARD through State Cooperative Banks 
(StCBs) and District Central Cooperative Banks (DCCBs). This w ill improve transparency, 
operational efficiency and governance in PACS through implementation of Common 
Accounting System (CAS) and Management Information System (MIS).  
 
So far, proposals for 58,383 PACS from 28 States/ UTs have been received for 
computerization. GoI share amounting to Rs. 437.17 crore has been released to States/ UTs 
for hardware procurement, digitization & support system. Further, Rs. 100 crore has been 
released to the NABARD for development of the common national software." 
Ministry of Cooperation 
[F.No. 4-7-2023 Budget  dated  15th June, 2023] 
 
New Schemes / Programmes of the Ministry 
(Recommendation No.11) :- 
 
"The Committee note that a number of Schemes and Programmes aimed at development 
and growth of Cooperative Societies, are implemented by other Ministries of the 
Government, i.e. mainly by (i) Ministry of Agriculture & Farmers Welfare. (ii)  Ministry of Food 
Processing Industries and the (iii) Ministry of Fisheries, Animal Husbandry & Dairying. The 
Committee have been informed that during the year 2023 -24, the Government intends to 

 
 
 
 
 
15 
 
introduce the new Schemes towards creation of World’s Largest Food Grain Storage Plan in 
Cooperative Sector; strengthening Cooperative Movement in the Country and deepening its 
Reach up to the Grassroots level and computerization of Agriculture and Rural Development 
Banks (ARDB). The Ministry of Cooperation envisages to play the role ofcoordinator with all 
concerned Ministries in the implementation of these new Schemes particularly the Scheme 
of Computerization of ARDBs to be implemented by NABARD. The Committee in this regard 
express their earnest hope that the Ministry of Cooperation would strive to establish a robust 
mechanism for the effective coordination among different Ministries in the implementation of 
various welfare Schemes for the promotion of Cooperative Societies in the country.  The 
Committee would like to be informed of the action taken in the matter." 
 
Reply of the Government 
A. World's largest Grain Storage Plan in Cooperative Sector  
 
(i) The ‘World’s Largest Grain Storage Plan in the Cooperative Sector’ was approved by 
the Cabinet on 31.05.2023. The plan entails creation of various agri -infrastructure 
including warehouse, custom hiring center, processing units, FPS, etc. at the level of 
PACS through convergence of various existing schemes of Government of India. The 
Pilot Project of the above-mentioned scheme will be implemented in selected districts 
of different States/UTs.  
 
(ii) The implementation of the scheme would not only address the grai n storage deficit in 
the country, but would also lead to huge reduction in post -harvest losses and 
transportation costs of food grains. By transforming PACS into multi -service centers 
having well established forward and backward linkages, it would also ena ble them to 
earn higher returns, thus improving the economic condition of millions of farmers in 
the country. 
 
B. Strengthening Cooperative Movement in the Country and deepening its reach 
up to the Grassroots  
(i) In order to strengthen cooperative movement in th e country and deepen its reach up 
to the grassroots, Ministry of Cooperation’s Plan for establishing new Multipurpose 
PACS or Primary Dairy/Fishery Cooperative Societies covering all the Panchayats/ 
villages in the country as the case may be, has been appr oved by the Cabinet on 
15.02.2023. 
 
(ii) The Plan will be implemented with the support of NABARAD, NDDB and NFDB 
through convergence of various existing schemes of Government of India.  It would 
provide the farmer members with requisite forward and backward link ages to market 
their produce, enhance their income. 
 
(iii) In order to ensure smooth implementation of the plan, an Inter -Ministerial Committee 
(IMC) under the chairmanship of Hon’ble Cooperation Minister has been constituted. 
A National Level Coordination Committee (NLCC) has also been constituted under 

 
 
 
 
 
16 
 
the chair manship of Secretary, Ministry of Cooperation. Further, all the States/UTs 
have been requested to constitute State Cooperative Development Committee 
(SCDC) and District Cooperative Development Committee (DCDC) vide this Ministry 
letter dated 17.03.2023. Fu rther, the Guidelines for the Project have been circulated 
to the States/UTs.  
  
C. Computerization of Agriculture and Rural Development Banks (ARDBs)  
 
(i) The Long -Term Cooperative Credit Structure (LTCCS) consists of Cooperative 
Agriculture and Rural Developme nt Banks at State and primary levels, and are 
primarily engaged in providing long term finance to farmers.  
 
(ii) In order to improve their operational efficiency, bring uniformity in accounting 
practices and core aspects of the systems followed in lending, rec overy and raising 
resources, and to aid in their business expansion, a project for ‘Computerization of 
ARDBs’ to be implemented by NABARD, under formulation and appraisalby Ministry 
of Cooperation. 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 Please refer to Para-1.22 in Chapter-I of this Report for comments of the Committee. 
 
Ministry of Cooperation 
[F.No. 4-7-2023 Budget  dated  15th June, 2023] 
*** 
 
 
  

 
 
 
 
 
17 
 
CHAPTER III 
 
OBSERVATION/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO NOT DESIRE TO 
PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE GOVERNMENT’S ACTION TAKEN REPLY 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Nil. 
 
 
 
  

 
 
 
 
 
18 
 
CHAPTER IV 
 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH ACTION TAKEN 
REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Nil. 
 
  

 
 
 
 
 
19 
 
CHAPTER V 
 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH FINAL REPLIES OF 
THE GOVERNMENT ARE STILL AWAITED 
 
Need for Expediting the Process of Formulation of New Schemes of Ministry 
(Recommendation No.- 3):- 
 
"The Committee note that the Ministry of Cooperation undertook an exerciseto revamp and 
replace the Central Sector Integrated Scheme on Agricultural Cooperation (CSISAC) with 
the proposed new Schemes of (i) Digitalization of Primary Agricultural Cooperative Societies 
(PACS) ; (ii) Education & Training ; (iii) Credit Guarantee Fund for Cooperatives an d (iv) 
'Sahkar se Samriddhi Yojana' during 2022 -23. Government of India approved the new 
Centrally Sponsored Scheme of Digitalization of PACS Project on 29.06.2022 and its 
implementation has already been started. The new Scheme of Cooperative Training is 
under advanced stage of formulation and appraisal of the Project of establishment of 
National Cooperative University is under progress. However, the Ministry could not get the 
approval of Expenditure Finance Committee (EFC) in respect of the proposed Credit  
Guarantee Fund for Cooperatives and the 'Sahkarse Samriddhi Yojana'. The Ministry has 
now proposed to formulate a consolidated Scheme afresh for 'Sahkarse Samriddhi' and a 
new Central Sector Scheme of strengthening of Cooperative Sugar Mills (CSMs). The 
Committee, therefore, urge the Ministry of Cooperation to accord the highest priority for 
processing of the proposals relating to formulation of these two Schemes of the Ministry to 
obtain the necessary approval for implementation to achieve the desired res ults. The 
Committee would like to be apprised of the action taken in this regard." 
Reply of the Government 
 
"Against the proposal of this Ministry to formulate Credit Guarantee Fund for Cooperative 
scheme, Department of Expenditure had stated that there are multiple schemes for 
providing Credit Guarantee which includes cooperatives too , and advised this Ministry to 
take up the matter with the Ministries having such schemes for suitable amendments in 
scheme guidelines for making them easily accessible for cooperatives. In view of the above, 
Ministry withdrew the proposal of a separate Credit Guarantee Scheme for Cooperatives 
and did not seek any fund for this in BE 2023-24.  
Subsequent to the same, on behalf of this Min istry, Credit Guarantee Fund Trust for Micro 
and Small Enterprises (CGTMSE) has included Scheduled Urban Co -operative Banks, Non-
Scheduled Urban Cooperative Banks, State Cooperative Banks and District Cooperative 
Banks as Member Lending Institutions vide C ircular No. 165 dated 18.02.2019 and Circular 
No. 194 dated 03.02.2022. 
The Ministry has after necessary stakeholders’ consultation, launched a new scheme 
named 'Grants-in-aid to NCDC for Strengthening of Cooperative Sugar Mills (CSMs)' which 
is being impl emented during 2022 -23 and 2023 -24. Under the scheme, the Government of 
India is giving a grant of Rs 1000 crore to NCDC,  in 2instalments of Rs 500 crore each 

 
 
 
 
 
20 
 
during 2022 -23 and 2023 -24. NCDC will use this grant to provide loans up to Rs 10,000 
crore to co operative sugar mills. Under this scheme, loan will be made available to 
cooperative sugar mills by NCDC for the following purposes: 
 
a. to set up an ethanol plant, or 
b. for setting up a cogeneration plant, or 
c. for working capital, or 
d. for all three 
Rs 500 crore has already been sanctioned to NCDC in the financial year 2022-23" 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 Please refer to Para-1.7 in Chapter-I of this Report for comments of the Committee. 
 
Ministry of Cooperation 
[F.No. 4-7-2023 Budget  dated  15th June, 2023] 
 
Liquidation of Committed Liabilities of National Cooperative Development 
Corporation (NCDC) (Recommendation No.10 ):-  
 
"The Committee note that implementation of the Central Sector Integrated Scheme on 
Agriculture Cooperation (CSISAC) has been discontinued. However, as per the approval of 
Department of Expenditure dated 23.12.2022, the Scheme is under implementation till 
31.03.2023 to liquidate the committed liabilities of National Cooperative Development 
Corporation (NCDC). The Ministry ha s also intimated that a cumulative amount of ₹664.96 
Crore has been provided at RE Stage against BE of Rs.50 Crore on specific request of 
Ministry to liquidate the committed liabilities.  In the year, 2022 -23, Rs.232.09 Crore has 
already been released to NC DC as on 10.02.2023 for settling interest subvention against 
already sanctioned eligible/completed projects. The rest of budgetary provision will be 
utilized after receipt of funds under cash supplementary within the financial year 2022 -23. In 
this regard, the Committee recommend that the process of liquidation of committed liabilities 
of NCDC under the CSISAC Scheme including the unspent balances with the NCDC be 
settled at the earliest." 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
"During 2022 -23, ₹662.87 Cr. had been released to NCDC for liquidating its committed 
liabilities under erstwhile CSISAC Scheme. However, due to non disbursement of subsidy to 
Telangana Sheep and Goat Development Cooperative Federation Limited (TSSGDCFL), 
funds to the tune of ₹285.93 Cr. remain ed unutilized. A token of ₹1.00 Lakh has been 
allocated under CSISAC in BE 2023 -24. Ministry is  further taking up the matter  with 
competent authority for liquidating the committed liabilities under CSISAC." 
 

 
 
 
 
 
21 
 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 Please refer to Para-1.10 in Chapter-I of this Report for comments of the Committee. 
 
Ministry of Cooperation 
[F.No. 4-7-2023 Budget  dated  15th June, 2023] 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                                                      
NEW DELHI;                                  P.C. GADDIGOUDAR  
08 August,  2023                                                                 Chairperson, 
17 Sharavan  ,1944 (Saka)         Standing Committee on Agriculture. 
              Animal Husbandry and Food Processing
  

 
 
 
 
 
22 
 
ANNEXURE  
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE, ANIMAL HUSBANDRY AND FOOD 
PROCESSING BRANCH 
(2022-23) 
 
MINUTES OF THE NINETEENTH SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE   
***** 
 
The Committee sat on Tuesday, the 08 August, 2023 from 1500 hrs.                              
to 1530 hrs. in Hon'ble Chairperson's Chamber, Room No. 103, 1st Floor, Block - B, 
PHA Extn., New Delhi.        
                                                                 
PRESENT 
 
Shri P.C. Gaddigoudar, Chairperson 
 
MEMBERS 
 
LOK SABHA 
 
 2.  Shri A. Ganeshamurthi 
3. Shri Mohan Mandavi 
4. Shri Devji Mansingram Patel 
5.  Smt. Sharda Anilkumar Patel 
6. Shri Bheemrao Baswanthrao Patil 
7. Shri Shriniwas Dadasaheb Patil 
8. Mohammad Sadique 
9. Shri Devendra Singh alias Bhole Singh 
10. Shri Virendra Singh 
11. Shri V.K. Sreekandan 
   
 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
 12. Smt. Ramilaben Becharbhai Bara 
 13. Shri Masthan Rao Beeda 
 14. Dr. Anil Sukhdeorao Bonde 
 15. Shri Kailash Soni 
 16. Shri Ram Nath Thakur 
 17. Shri Vaiko 
 
SECRETARIAT 
  
 1. Shri Shiv Kumar   - Additional Secretary 
 2. Shri Uttam Chand Bharadwaj - Director 
 3. Shri Prem Ranjan   - Deputy Secretary 
 4. Shri N. Amarathiagan  - Under Secretary 

 
 
 
 
 
23 
 
 
 
2. At the outset, Chairperson welcomed the Members to the Sitting of the Committee. 
Thereafter, the Committee took up for consideration the following Draft Action Taken 
Reports:  
 
*(i)  XXXX   XXXX   XXXX   XXXX; 
 
*(ii)  XXXX   XXXX   XXXX   XXXX;  
 
*(iii) XXXX   XXXX   XXXX   XXXX; 
 
*(iv) XXXX   XXXX   XXXX   XXXX; 
 
*(v) XXXX   XXXX   XXXX   XXXX; and 
 
(vi) Draft Action Taken Report on Action -taken by the Government on the Observations / 
Recommendations contained in the Fifty-Sixth Report of the Committee on ‘Demands 
for Grants (2023-24)’, pertaining to the Ministry of Cooperation; 
 
3. After some deliberations, the Committee adopted the Draft Action Taken Reports 
without any modifications and the Committee authorized the Chairperson to finalize and 
present these Reports to Parliament.  
 
 
The Committee then adjourned.  
 
* Matter not related to this Report. 
 
 
  

 
 
 
 
 
24 
 
APPENDIX - I 
 
(Vide Para 4 of Introduction of the Report)  
 
ANALYSIS OF AC TION TAKEN BY GOVERNMENT ON THE FIFTY SIXTH REPORT OF 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE, ANIMAL HUSBANDRY AND FOOD 
PROCESSING (17TH LOK SABHA) 
*** 
  
(i)  Total number of Recommendations               11 
 
(ii) Recommendations/Observations which have been 
Accepted by the Government  
Recommendation Nos. 1, 2, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9 & 11       
Total             09    
Percentage                      81.8% 
 
(iii) Recommendations/Observations which the Committee 
do not desire to pursue in view of the Government’s replies  
Recommendation Nos. Nil  
Total                       Nil 
Percentage                        
 
(iv) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies 
 of the Government have not been accepted by the Committee 
Recommendation Nos. Nil 
Total               Nil 
Percentage                                        
 
(v) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which  
 Final replies of the Government are still awaited 
Recommendation Nos. 3 & 10              
Total                       02  
Percentage                     18.2%  
 