 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE, ANIMAL HUSBANDRY AND 
FOOD PROCESSING 
  
(2022-2023) 
                  
         
SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA 
          
         
                                 
 
MINISTRY OF FISHERIES, ANIMAL HUSBANDRY AND DAIRYING  
(DEPARTMENT OF ANIMAL HUSBANDRY AND DAIRYING) 
 
              
 
'DEMANDS FOR GRANTS (2023-24)' 
 
{Action Taken by the Government on the Observations  / Recommendations 
contained in the  Fifty-Fourth Report (Seventeenth Lok Sabha ) of the  Standing 
Committee on Agriculture, Animal Husbandry and Food Processing (2022-23)} 
 
         
        
 
SIXTY - THIRD REPORT 
  
 
         
               
 
 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
AUGUST 2023 / SRAVANA,1945 (SAKA) 
 
 
 
 
63 
 

 
 
SIXTY - THIRD REPORT 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE, ANIMAL HUSBANDRY AND 
FOOD PROCESSING 
  
(2022-2023) 
 
          
SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA 
                 
 
         
MINISTRY OF FISHERIES, ANIMAL HUSBANDRY AND DAIRYING  
(DEPARTMENT OF ANIMAL HUSBANDRY AND DAIRYING) 
 
              
 
'DEMANDS FOR GRANTS (2023-24)' 
 
 
 
{Action Taken by the Government on the Observations  / Recommendations 
contained in the  Fifty-Fourth Report (Seventeenth Lok Sabha ) of the Standing 
Committee on Agriculture, Animal Husbandry and Food Processing (2022-23)} 
 
        
        
           Presented to Lok Sabha on                                      10.08.2023 
           Laid on the Table of Rajya Sabha on                                    10.08.2023 
 
 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
AUGUST 2023 / SRAVANA,1945 (SAKA) 
 

 
 
 
COA No. …. 
 
 
         
         
         
         
         
         
 
         
         
        
Price:  Rs.  
         
         
         
         
         
 
 
 
         
     
                     
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
© 2023 By Lok Sabha Secretariat 
 
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of  Procedure and Conduct of Business in Lok 
Sabha (Sixteenth Edition) and Printed by Lok Sabha Secretariat 
 

<CONTENTS> 
 
                             PAGE 
  
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE (2022-23)…………………………...   (iii) 
         
INTRODUCTION………………………………………………………………….   (v) 
 
CHAPTER I   Report …………………………………………………            
    
     
CHAPTER II  Observations / Recommendations that have   
   been accepted by the Government …………….…   
     
CHAPTER III  Observations / Recommendations which the 
   Committee do not desire to pursue in view 
   of the Government’s replies ………………….…..                  
 
CHAPTER IV  Observations / Recommendations in respect 
   of which replies of the Government have  
   not been accepted by the Committee ………..….                 
 
CHAPTER V  Observations / Recommendations in respect of  
   which final replies of the Government are  
   still awaited ………………………………………….   
  
5 
 
         ANNEXURE 
 
Minutes of the 19th Sitting of the Committee held on 08.08.2023…………… 
 
 
APPENDIX 
 
Analysis of Action Taken by the Government on the Observations / Recommendations  
contained in the Fifty Fourth Report (Seventeenth Lok Sabha) of the Standing Committee  
on Agriculture, Animal Husbandry and Food Processing (2022-23)…………….   
      
         
 
 
 
 
 
            
    
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(ii)

COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE, ANIMAL 
HUSBANDRY AND FOOD PROCESSING (2022-23) 
 
Shri P.C. Gaddigoudar-   Chairperson 
MEMBERS 
 
LOK SABHA 
 
 2. Shri Horen Sing Bey  
 3. Shri A. Ganeshamurthi 
 4. Shri Kanakmal Katara 
 5. Shri Abu Taher Khan 
 6. Shri Ram Mohan Naidu Kinjarapu 
 7. Shri Mohan Mandavi 
8. Shri Devji Mansingram Patel 
9. Smt. Sharda Anilkumar Patel 
10. Shri Bheemrao Baswanthrao Patil 
11. Shri Shriniwas Dadasaheb Patil 
12. Shri Vinayak Bhaurao Raut 
13. Shri Pocha Brahmananda Reddy 
14. Shri Rajiv Pratap Rudy 
15. Mohammad Sadique 
16. Shri Devendra Singh alias Bhole Singh 
17. Shri Virendra Singh 
18. Shri V.K. Sreekandan 
19.  Shri Ram Kripal Yadav 
20. VACANT# 
21. VACANT* 
 
 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
 
22. Smt. Ramilaben Becharbhai Bara 
23. Shri Masthan Rao Beeda 
24. Dr. Anil Sukhdeorao Bonde 
25. Shri S. Kalyanasundaram 
26. Shri Surendra Singh Nagar 
27. Shri Kailash Soni  
28. Shri Randeep Singh Surjewala 
29. Shri Ram Nath Thakur 
30. Shri Vaiko 
31. Shri Harnath Singh Yadav  
 
# Vacant w.e.f. 10.10.2022 due to demise of Shri Mulayam Singh Yadav on 10.10.2022  
[Bulletin- Part II, Para No. 5316 dated 14.10.2022]. 
 
* Vacant w.e.f. 29.04.2023 due to disqualification of SHri Afzal Ansari from Lok Sabha 
Membership from the date of his convictio n in terms of provision of Article 102(1)(e) of the 
Constitution of India read with the Section 8 of the Representation of the People Act, 1951 
[Notification No. 21/4(6)/2023 TO(B) dated 01.05.2023]. 
 
 
(iii)

 
SECRETARIAT 
 
 
1. Shri Shiv Kumar   - Additional Secretary 
2. Shri Uttam Chand Bharadwaj  - Director 
3. Shri Prem Ranjan   - Deputy Secretary  
4. Ms. Divya Rai    - Assistant Executive Officer 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(iv) 

 
  INTRODUCTION 
         
I, the Chairperson , Standing Committee on Agriculture, Animal Husbandry and 
Food Processing (2022-23), having been authorized by the Committee to submit the 
Report on their behalf, present this Sixty Third Report on Action-taken by the 
Government on the Observations  / Recommendations contained in  the Fifty Fourth 
Report (Seventeenth Lok Sabha) of the Standing Committee on Agriculture, Animal 
Husbandry and Food Processing (2022 -23) on 'Demands for Grants (20 23-24)' 
pertaining to the Ministry of Fisheries, Animal Husbandry and Dairying (Department of 
Animal Husbandry and Dairying). 
 
2. The Fifty Fourth Report (Seventeenth Lok Sabha) of the Standing Committee 
on Agriculture, Animal Husbandry and Food Processing (2022 -23) on 'Demands for 
Grants (2023 -24)' pertaining to the Ministry of Fisheries, Animal  Husbandry and 
Dairying (Department of Animal Husbandry and Dairying) was presented to Lok Sabha 
on 13.03.2023 and laid on the Table of Rajya Sabha on 14.03.2023. The Action Taken 
Notes on the Report were received on 12.06.2023. 
 
3. The Report was consider ed and adopted by the Comm ittee at their Sitting held 
on 08.08.2023. 
 
4. An analysis of the action t aken by the Government on the Observations  / 
Recommendations contained in the Fifty Fourth Report (Seventeenth Lok Sabha) of 
the Committee is given in Appendix. 
  
            
       
 
NEW DELHI;        P.C. GADDIGOUDAR 
08 August, 2023                              Chairperson, 
17 Sravana, 1945 (Saka)  Standing Committee on Agricultur e, 
Animal Husbandry and Food Processing 
 
 
 
 
 
(v) 

1 
 
CHAPTER - I 
REPORT 
This Report of the Standing Committee on Agriculture , Animal Husbandry and 
Food Processing deals with the Action -taken by the Government on the Observations / 
Recommendations contained in the Fifty Forth Report (Seventeenth Lok Sabha) of the 
Standing Committee on Agriculture , Animal Husbandry and Food Processing  (2022-23) 
on ‘Demands for Grants (202 3-24)’ pertaining to  the Ministry of Fisheries, Animal 
Husbandry and Dairying (Department of Animal Husbandry and Dairying) , which was 
presented to Lok Sabha on 13th March, 2023 and laid on the Table of Rajya Sabha on 
14th March, 2023. 
1.2 The Ministry of Fisheries, Animal Husbandry and Dairying (Department of Animal 
Husbandry and Dairying) has furnished Action -taken Replies in respect of all the 13 
Observations / Recommendations contained in the Report. These R eplies have been 
scrutinized and thereafter categorized as under :- 
(i) Observations / Recommendations  that have been accepted by the Government: 
Recommendation Nos.  1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 8 and 10 
Total 08  
Chapter - II  
(ii) Observations / Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to pursue 
in view of the Government’s reply: 
Recommendation No.                   NIL 
Total 00 
Chapter – III 
(iii) Observations / Recommendations in respect of which replies of the Government 
have not been accepted by the Committee: 
Recommendation Nos.  7 and 12 
Total 02 
Chapter – IV 
(iv) Observations / Recommendations in respect of which final replies of the 
Government are still awaited : 
Recommendation Nos.  9, 11 and 13 
Total 03  
Chapter - V  
 

2 
 
1.3 The Committee desire that utmost importance be given by the Ministry of 
Fisheries, Animal Husbandry and Dairying (Department of Animal Husbandry and 
Dairying) to implement the Observations / Recommendations accepted by the 
Government. In cases where it is not possible for the Department to implement 
the Recommendations in letter and spirit, for any reason, the matter should be 
intimated, in writing, to the Committee with reasons for non -implementation. The 
Committee also desire that further Action -taken Not es on the Observations / 
Recommendations contained in Chapter -I and the F inal Action -taken Replies to 
the Observations / Recommendations contained in Chapter -V of this Report be 
furnished to them at an early date. 
1.4 The Committee will now deal with the A ction-taken by the Government on some 
of the Observations / Recommendations in the succeeding paragraphs. 
 
A.   National Livestock Mission (NLM) 
      (Recommendation No. 7) 
1.5 The Committee had observed / recommended as under :- 
 "The Committee note that the Physical Targets set under the National Livestock 
Mission had to be revised as the Department could utilize only 34.14% funds of RE 
stage allocation during the year 2022 -23.  The Committee have also noticed less 
utilization of funds  by the States released to them under this scheme during the years 
2019-20 to 2021-22.  The Committee further note that Utilization Certificates amounting 
to Rs. 482.57 Crore under NLM from the year 2014 -15 up to 2022 -23 have been found 
pending with the States / UTs.    
The Committee, therefore, recommend the Department to develop a mechanism 
so that the pendency of Utilization Certificates with the States could be reduced and 
delay in releases of funds to States/UTs in future is avoided. The Committee woul d like 
to be apprised of the steps in this regard.   
  The Committee further note that National Livestock Mission has six Sub -
Components and under the Livestock Insurance component, not even a single livestock 

3 
 
has been insured during the year 2022 -23, whereas during the previous year i.e. 2021 -
22, a total of 1,74,061 animals were insured.  The Committee were informed of the 
hardships faced by the livestock owners in getting their livestock insured and also about 
the measures being taken to ease the process of livestock insurance. Expressing 
concern over the NIL Insurance during the year 2022 -23, the Committee recommend 
the Department to take effective steps so that the process of insurance of livestock is 
made easy for the beneficiaries. The Committee would also like the Department to 
explore the possibility of developing an App -based Livestock Insurance facility for 
livestock owners. The Committee would like to be apprised of the total progress made 
by the Department in this regard." 
  
1.6 In its Action taken reply, the Department has stated as under :- 
 "Under National Livestock Mission, 71.26% of RE has been utilized during the FY 
2022-23. States/UTs are continuously being reminded through National Review 
Meetings, Regional Review Meetings , Field Visits and Video Conferences to liquidate 
the pending Utilization Certificates.  
        Under Livestock Insurance of National Livestock Mission, an amount of Rs. 
1011.80 lakh  has been released to 3 States/UTs with a physical target of 3,44,602 
animals. The releases were made in the last 2 quarters of financial year 2022 -23.The 
States are facing difficulties in implementing Livestock insurance scheme because of no 
participation by the Insurance Companies. As a result, there is huge amount of unspent 
balances with the States resulting no release of fund to the States/UTs under livestock 
Insurance scheme. In this regard, the Department conducted a meeting on Livestock 
Insurance on  05.04.2023under the chairmanship of Hon’ble Minister (FAHD) with the 
concerned Stakeholders. As per the suggestions given by the Stakeholders, necessary 
steps are being taken for effective implementation of the Scheme." 
 
1.7 Taking note of the huge penden cy of the Utilization Certificates with the 
States / UTs under the National Livestock Mission (NLM), the Committee had 
recommended the Department to develop a mechanism so that the pendency of 
Utilization Certificates with the States could be reduced and d elay in future 
releases of funds to States/UTs could be avoided. Further, taking note of the fact 

4 
 
that not even a single livestock was insured during the year 2022 -23 under the 
Livestock Insurance component of NLM, the Committee had also recommended 
the Department to take effective steps for making the process of insurance of 
livestock easier for the beneficiaries and also to explore the possibility of 
developing an App-based Livestock Insurance facility for livestock owners. 
 In its Action-taken reply, the Department has informed about the measures 
being taken to liquidate pending Utilization Certificates. Further, the Department 
has stated that States are facing difficulties in implementing Livestock Insurance 
Scheme because o f non-participation of the Insurance Companies  and this has 
resulted in unspent balances with States and UTs and stalled further release of 
funds to them under the Livestock Insurance S cheme. The Department has 
further informed that a meeting on Livestock Insurance was conducted with 
concerned stakeholders in this regard and as per their suggestions, necessary 
steps are being taken for effective implementation of the Scheme. 
  The Committee, however, note that the reply of the Department is 
silent about the  progress achieved in the liquidation of pending Utilization 
Certificates with States and UTs under the National Livestock Mission as a result 
of its efforts. Further, the Committee feel that regardless of the reasons behind 
non-participation of Insurance companies in the Livestock Insurance Scheme, it 
is the livestock owners who end up as the ultimate sufferers. The Committee also 
note that the Department has stayed silent over the idea of developing an App -
based Livestock Insurance facility for livestock owners. 
The Committee, therefore, reiterate their earlier recommendation to develop 
an effective mechanism for liquidation of Utilization Certificates pending with 
States and UTs under the National Livestock Mission; to address the issue of NIL 

5 
 
insurance b y ascertaining the causes behind non -participation of Insurance 
Companies under the Livestock Insurance Scheme; and to take necessary steps 
to explore the possibility of developing an App-based Livestock Insurance facility 
for livestock owners in the count ry. The Committee would like to be apprised of 
the progress made in each of these areas. 
B.   Establishment of an Institution like AIIMS in Veterinary Services 
      (Recommendation No. 9) 
1.8 The Committee had observed / recommended as under :- 
 "The Committee note that there is shortage of specialized and trained manpower 
in Veterinary Services in the country. The Committee have been apprised that in 
addition to already existing 55 Veterinary Colleges recognized to impart Bachelor of 
Veterinary Science and Animal Husbandry (B.V.Sc. & A.H.) Degree,  13 more Colleges 
have been provisionally recognized and the number of seats in each recognized college 
have been increased from 60 to 80. The Committee have also been apprised that in 
pursuance of the recomme ndation contained in their 30th Report on the subject 'Status 
of Veterinary Services and Availability of Animal Vaccines in the country', a high level 
meeting with Specialists, Experts, VC, Directors, HoDs of Institutes, etc. was held under 
the Chairmanshi p of Secretary AHD on 18th January, 2023, for establishment of a 
Veterinary College on the lines of AIIMS (AIIMS - VET) and subsequently the Veterinary 
Council of India (VCI) was directed to allocate the subject matter to an Expert 
Committee constituted fo r the purpose of establishment of an Institute like AIIMS in 
Veterinary Sciences. The Committee, while appreciating the efforts of the Department 
regarding establishment of AIIMS like Institute in Veterinary Sciences, desire that 
necessary formalities in t his regard may be completed at the earliest and a model 
Veterinary Research and Education Institute be established to cater to the vast majority 
of livestock in the country on a priority basis. The Committee would like to apprised of 
the progress made in this direction." 
 
1.9 In its Action taken reply, the Department has stated as under :- 
 "At present, there are 56 recognized veterinary colleges to impart B.V.Sc. & A.H. 
degree and there are 14 provisionally recognized veterinary colleges. As regards the 

6 
 
progress regarding creation of national level institute in lines of AIIMS  (AIIMS - VET), a 
preliminary meeting was held under the Chairmanship of Shri R.K. Singh, the then 
Secretary (AHD) on 18.1.2023 wherein specialist Experts, Vice -Chancellors, Directors 
were called to deliberate on the aforesaid issue.   After detailed deliberation, it was 
decided that the aforesaid subject matter would be given to the Veterinary Council of 
India (VCI) and VCI shall constitute an Expert Committee for the purpose of 
Establishment of Institutions like AIIMS in Veterinary Services. Accordingly, this 
Department vide letter dated 23 rd February, 2023, directed the Secretary, VCI for taking 
necessary steps in the matter. 
 The matter was considered by the Executive Committee of th e Council in its 
meeting held on 02.3.2023 and the Executive Committee after detailed deliberation 
decided to constitute a Committee which shall examine the scope, the requirement of 
staff and offices, specialist, the role that the institutions could event ually play, the 
regulations linkage to other agencies like IVRI, ICAR, DAHD, VCI etc. The proposed 
expenditure for establishment of such education and nature of education and research 
to be conducted by the proposed institutions shall also be examined by this Committee. 
Hence, Executive Committee constituted the Committee consisting of following persons: 
1. Dr. Umesh Chandra Sharma, President, VCI – Chairman 
2. Dr. Abhijit Mitra, Animal Husbandry Commissioner, DAHD, GOI – Member 
3. Dr. N.H. Kelawala, Vice-Chancellor, Kamdhenu University, Gujarat – Member 
4. Dr. Ashwani Raut – Member 
5. Dr.Vinod Bhat, Secretary, VCI – Member 
Secretary.                                                  
  This decision was approved by the Council in its meeting held on 
14.3.2023. Necessary steps are being taken for holding a meeting of the experts in this 
regard." 
 
1.10 The Committee, w hile appreciating the efforts of the Department regarding 
establishment of AIIMS like Institute in Veterinary Sciences, had desired that 
necessary formalities in this regard be completed at the earliest and a model 
Veterinary Research and Education Institute be established  to cater to the vast 
majority of livestock in the country on a priority basis. 

7 
 
 In its Action -taken reply, the Department has informed that the subject 
matter on setting -up of an Institute like AIIMS in Veterinary Sciences has been 
allocated to the Veteri nary Council of India (VCI) with the direction to set up an 
Expert Committee. The Department has further informed that, as directed, the VCI 
has constituted a Committee, the mandate and composition of which have been 
furnished in the reply. The Committee, however, note that the Department has not 
provided any information about the timeline by which the Expert Committee 
constituted by VCI would submit their Report and by when the subsequent action 
for establishment of AIIMS -like Institute in Veterinary Scien ces would be taken 
up. Sensing the urgency to cater to the vast majority of livestock and the rising 
need for trained veterinary manpower in the country, the Committee feel that 
setting up a model Veterinary Education and Research Institute needs to be 
accorded topmost priority. The Committee, therefore, reiterate that necessary 
formalities for setting up of AIIMS-like Institute in Veterinary Sciences  be 
completed at the earliest and that a timeline be fixed in this regard . The 
Committee would like to be ap prised of the action taken and progress made in 
this regard. 
C.   Inclusivity in Animal Husbandry and Dairying Sector 
      (Recommendation No. 11) 
1.11 The Committee had observed / recommended as under :- 
"While appreciating the efforts of the Department regarding earmarking of funds 
under the Scheduled Castes Sub -Plan (SCSP) and Tribal Sub -plan (TSP), the 
Committee, however, note that the utilization of RE Stage allocations for the year 2022 -
23 under Scheduled Castes Sub-Plan (SCSP) and Tribal Sub-Plan (TSP) has been only 
20.95% and 24.87%, respectively. Further, the Committee are constrained to note that 
in States like Rajasthan where there is a considerable population of both, SC and ST 
communities, there have been chronic issues of non -receipt of proposals from the State 

8 
 
Government under the SCSP and TSP components. The Committee, therefore, 
recommend the Department to take active steps to ensure optimal utilization of funds 
allocated under these Component s and to take necessary steps to encourage State 
Governments to submit proposals under these plans so that benefits of the Schemes 
being run by the Department can reach intended beneficiaries and contribute to their 
economic upliftment effectively." 
 1.12 In its Action-taken reply, the Department has stated as under  :- 
"As all the schemes of the Department are demand-driven, 16.6% and 8.60 % of 
funds have been fixed under Scheduled Castes and Tribal Sub-Plan category 
respectively. Accordingly, the Department earmarked Rs. 616.62 crore and Rs. 327.20 
crore at BE Stage under SCSP & TSP category respectively which was Rs. 453.51 
crore and Rs. 244.40 crore at RE Stage. The actual expenditure was Rs. 312.05 crore 
(69% over RE Stage ) and Rs. 166.48 crore (68% over RE Stage) under SCSP & TSP 
Category respectively.  
The Department continuously follows up with States/UTs through National 
Review Meetings, Regional Review Meetings, Field Visits and Video Conferences to 
utilize the fund released under SCSP and TSP heads under schemes of the Department 
and submit fresh proposal for further release of fund so as to achieve the desired 
targets under various Schemes being implemented by the Department and to avoid the 
issues of under-utilization of funds under the SCSP & TSP head." 
 
1.13  Taking note of the low utilization of RE Stage allocations under the 
Scheduled Castes Sub -Plan (SCSP) and Tribal Sub -Plan (TSP), the Committee 
had recommended the Department to take active steps to ensure optimal 
utilization of funds allocated under these Components and also to encourage 
State Governments to submit proposals under these Plans so that benefits of the 
Schemes being run by the Department could reach intended beneficiaries and 
contribute to their economic upliftment effectively. 
 In its Action -taken reply, the Department has stated that 69% and 68% of 
the RE Stage allocations under the SCSP and TSP Components have been 

9 
 
utilized respectively. Besides, the Department has also apprised about the follow -
up actions being taken up with t he States and UTs to avoid the issue of under -
utilization of funds released under these Components. 
 The Committee, however, feel that the utilization of funds earmarked under 
the Scheduled Castes Sub-Plan (SCSP) and Tribal Sub -Plan (TSP) is still low and 
not upto the mark desired. The Committee, therefore, reiterate their earlier 
recommendation that the Department take active steps to ensure optimal 
utilization of funds allocated under these Components and that the State 
Governments be  encouraged to submit  proposals under these Components so 
that benefits of the Schemes being run by the Department are able to percolate to 
the intended beneficiaries and contribute to their economic upliftment effectively. 
D.   Inclusivity in Animal Husbandry and Dairying Sector 
      (Recommendation No. 12) 
1.14 The Committee had observed / recommended as under :- 
"The Committee are concerned to note that despite being asked to submit details 
regarding expenditure incurred under the Gender Budget from the year 2021 -21 to 
2022-23, the Department failed to submit any details in this regard. The Committee are 
further dissatisfied with the denial of the Representative, during evidence, of there being 
a Gender Budget Cell, when the same has been explicitly mentioned in the Annua l 
Report (2021 -22) of the Department. The Committee also note that no direct replies 
were submitted by the Department on being questioned about its initiatives regarding 
the constituents of ‘Gender Inclusiveness’ and ‘Gender Budgeting & Gender 
disaggregated Data’ for specific Schemes, as pointed out by the Development 
Monitoring & Evaluation Office  (DMEO) of NITI Aayog in its Thematic Report on 
‘Gender Mainstreaming in Governance’. 
While expressing appreciation with the assurance of the Department regarding  
enrolment of up to 50% Women Milk Producers in the Dairy Business  under the 
Scheme on Dairy Processing Infrastructure Development Fund (DIDF), the Committee, 
however, are concerned that no timeline was specified for achievement of this target of 

10 
 
50% women  milk producers in the Dairy business. The Committee, therefore, 
recommend the Department to implement in letter and spirit, the policy of earmarking 
30% of allocated funds towards women under the Schemes being implemented by the 
Department and also to spe cify the timeline by when the Department aims to achieve 
the target specified under the Scheme on Dairy Processing Infrastructure De velopment 
Fund (DIDF)." 
 
1.15 In its Action taken reply, the Department has stated as under  :- 
"Dairy Processing and Infrastructure Development Fund (DIDF) is not beneficiary 
oriented scheme. It is a credit linked demand driven scheme with the objective to 
create/ modernize the milk processing, chilling, and value -addition infrastructure. 
Further, as per CCEA approval dated 19.02.2020, 2022-23 was the last year for funding 
under DIDF. However, based on the recommendation of Ministry of Finance and NITI 
Ayog, DIDF is proposed to be merged with AHIDF. The objective and targets of the 
scheme are to be continued under AHIDF. The process of merging the scheme is under 
process. 
There is no separate budget allocation for Gender Budgeting. However, the 
Department is requesting the States to allocate 30% of the total fund release for the 
women beneficiaries." 
 
1.16 The Committee had recommended the Department to implement in letter 
and spirit the policy of earmarking 30% of the allocated funds towards women 
beneficiaries under the Schemes being implemented by the Department and also 
to specify the timeline by wh en the Department aims to achieve the target of 
enrolment of up to 50% Women Milk Producers in the Dairy Business under the 
Scheme on Dairy Processing Infrastructure Development Fund (DIDF). 
 In its Action -taken reply, the Department has informed that DIDF  is not a 
beneficiary oriented Scheme but a credit linked demand driven Scheme and it is 
proposed to be merged with the Animal Husbandry Infrastructure Development 
Fund (AHIDF) with the same objectives and targets. Further, the Department while 

11 
 
stating tha t there is no separate budget allocation for Gender Budgeting, has 
informed the Committee about requesting States to allocate 30% of the released 
funds for the women beneficiaries. 
 The Committee, however, note that the Department has not furnished any 
information with respect to the timeline for achieving the target of enrolment of 
up to 50% Women Milk Producers in the Dairy Business under the Dairy 
Processing Infrastructure Development Fund (DIDF). Further, the reply of the 
Department is also silent on  the recommendation of the Committee for 
earmarking 30% of allocated funds towards women under the Schemes of the 
Department. 
 The Committee, therefore, reiterate their earlier recommendation that the 
timeline for achievement of the specified target of enrolment of up to 50% Women 
Milk Producers in the Dairy Business  under the Scheme on Dairy Processing 
Infrastructure Development Fund (DIDF)  be specified and also that the policy for 
earmarking at least 30% of the allocated funds towards women beneficiaries be 
implemented in letter and spirit in the Schemes of the Department. The 
Committee would like to be apprised of the progress made in achievement of the 
respective targets. 
E.   Credit flow in Animal Husbandry and Dairying Sector 
      (Recommendation No. 13) 
1.17 The Committee had observed / recommended as under :- 
"While appreciating the achievement of disbursement of credit of Rs. 1,72,115 
Crore against the target of Rs. 1,04,580 Crore  towards Allied activities, the Committee 
note with concern the regional disparity in disbursement of credit in Animal Husbandry 
Sector. The Committee are of the view that the growing importance of Allied Sectors in 
the national economy calls for increased  access of credit to Livestock Farmers. The 

12 
 
Committee, therefore, recommend the Department to work towards removing this 
disparity in credit availability, especially with respect to the North Eastern and Eastern 
Regions and to ensure that awareness is crea ted in this regard through various 
awareness programmes including through print and electronic media." 
 
1.18 In its Action-taken reply, the Department has stated as under :- 
"Regional variation in the Ground Level Credit (GLC) is the product of disparity i n 
the credit flow across the States. Region -wise GLC with details like share of Gross 
Cropped Area (GCA), Gross Irrigated Area (GIA) and branch network in rural/ semi 
urban areas with GLC achievement during 2021 -22 and 2022-23 are given in the Table 
below. 
Regions Share 
in GCA 
(%) 
Share 
in GIA 
(%) 
Share in rural 
/ semi-urban 
outlets (%) 
Region-
wise GLC 
Disb. (%) to 
total during 
2021-22 
Region-
wise GLC 
Disb. (%) 
during 
2022-23 (p) 
( up to 31 
Mar 2023)* 
Region-wise 
Animal 
Husbandry 
Disb. (%) 
during 2022-
23 (p) (up to 
31 Mar 2023)* 
%age 
livestock 
(as per 20th 
Livestock 
Census) 
Northern 20.55 25.38 14.80 16.27 17.90 12.19 15.65 
N E R 3.21 0.91 3.66 0.76 0.61 0.78 4.54 
Eastern 12.16 13.14 18.47 10.83 8.91 8.30 21.60 
Central 28.63 34.83 18.69 12.84 13.65 9.17 24.02 
Western 18.37 10.72 23.09 12.18 12.79 10.17 11.21 
Southern 17.09 15.02 21.30 47.13 46.15 59.39 22.98 
*Source ; NABARD       The data for 2022-23 is provisional 
Similar trend is also observed in the case of Animal husbandry sector, as seen in 
the Table, higher credit absorption capacity of Southern region may be because of the 
availability of better infrastructure facilities, better banking network and credit avai lability 
leading to improvement in its share. Normally, low density of credit delivery outlets and 
weak financial health of Rural Financial Institutions could be the constraints for 
increasing credit flow in credit starved regions. Central and Eastern regi ons account for 
around 21% and 19% share in rural and semi urban bank branches, respectively, 
pointing towards demand side bottlenecks in the regions. Therefore, one way to 
stimulate the demand for agriculture credit including credit for animal husbandry a nd 
allied activities is to develop the credit absorption capacity in credit deficient region viz. 
Central, Eastern and North Eastern.  Accordingly, share of credit starved regions in 

13 
 
agriculture credit target has been increased to alleviate the growing reg ional imbalance 
in agriculture credit without dissuading the Southern and Northern states.  
The Department has prepared brochures, videos for AHDF -KCC and 
disseminated through all the social media platforms of the Department. These have 
been also distribut ed and disseminated in the major events of the Department across 
the country. Farmers have been given information on how to avail KCC and its benefits 
through Awareness camps organized by this Department through Common Service 
Centers (CSC) across the country." 
 
1.19 Having noted the regional disparity in disbursement of cr edit in Animal 
Husbandry Sector, the Committee recommended the Department to work towards 
removing this disparity, especially with respect to the North E astern and Eastern 
Regions and also to raise awareness in this regard . In its Action-taken reply, the 
Department has attributed higher credit absorption of the Southern region to 
availability of better infrastructure facilities, better banking networks and credit 
availability. The Department has further informed that credit starvation of the 
Central and Eastern Regions  could be due to low densi ty of credit delivery 
outlets, weak financial health of Rural Financial Institutions and regional demand-
side bottlenecks and that demand for credit in Agriculture, Animal Husbandry and 
Allied sectors in the Central, Eastern and North Eastern regions could be 
stimulated through development of credit absorption capacity. Accordingly, the 
Department has stated that share of credit starved regions in the A griculture 
credit target has been i ncreased to alleviate the growing regional imbalance in 
Agriculture credit without dissuading the Southern and Northern States. 
While noting the instant position of the Department, the Committee, 
however, feel that unless the credit absorption capacity of the Central, Eastern 
and North Eastern Regions is enhanced, increasing the credit share will have 

14 
 
little impact as the problem of demand -side bottlenecks will remain largely 
unaddressed. The Committee, therefore, reiterate that the Department recalibrate 
its approach and work towards addressing necessary factors at the micro -level in 
these Regions. The Committee would like to be apprised of the steps taken and 
progress made in this regard. 
  

15 
 
CHAPTER - II   
OBSERVATIONS / RECOMMENDATIONS THAT HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE 
GOVERNMENT 
 
Financial Planning & Expenditure 
Recommendation No. 1 
The Committee note that against the BE Stage allocations proposed by the 
Department from the year 2020 -21 to 2023-24, the actual allocations at BE Stage have 
always been on l ower side as compared to the amount proposed by the Department. 
The Committee also note that the RE Stage allocations for the said years have been 
further revised downwards. Further, the Department has repeatedly stated that for each 
of the years from 2020 -21 to 2022 -23, Physical Targets under various Schemes and 
Non-Schemes have been revised owing to reduction of allocation at the RE Stage. Even 
during the revision and realignment of various Components of existing Schemes of the 
Department for a duration o f 5years, against a proposed allocation of Rs. 26222.85 
crore from 2020-21 to 2024-25, Cabinet approval was given for only Rs. 9800 crore for 
5 years starting from2021 -22. Further, with the constant rise in contribution of the 
Animal Husbandry and Dairying  Sector in the national economy, the Committee are 
constrained to note that with such drastic cut in allocations towards the Department at 
both, the BE and RE Stages, the momentum of contribution of this Sector will be 
severely affected. The Committee, therefore, recommend the Government to make sure 
that adequate funds are allocated at the RE Stage for the year 2023 -24 so that the 
proposed physical targets under the Schemes and Non -Schemes do not have to be 
revised and their implementation does not suffer for want of funds.   
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNEMNT  
 The recommendation of the Committee is noted for compliance. The Department 
has been continuously pursuing with Ministry of Finance on the matter of increasing the 
budget allocation for the Department so as to be able to achieve the desired targets and 
also for more effective implem entation of the various Schemes / Programmes of the 
Department. Further, the Department will again follow up the matter with Ministry of 
Finance not to cut allocation of the Department at RE stage for the FY 2023-24.  
[Letter No. 25-5(1)/2023-AHD (Coord) dated 12.06.2023]

16 
 
Share of the Department in the Total Central Outlay 
Recommendation No.2  
The Committee note that the percentage share of BE Stage allocations of the 
Department of Animal Husbandry and Dairying vis -a-vis Total Central Outlay has 
declined from 0.12% in the year 2020 -21 to 0.10% in 2023 -24 and from 0.09% in 2020 -
21 to 0.08% in 202 2-23 at the RE Stage. During evidence, the Representative of the 
Department informed the Committee that the CAGR (Compound Annual Growth Rate) 
of the Animal Husbandry and Dairying Sector is 8%. The Committee further note that as 
per the Economic Survey, 20 22-23, Allied Sectors, i.e. the Animal Husbandry, Dairying 
and Fisheries Sectors have registered a higher growth compared to the Crop Sector 
and are also being recognised as emerging Sectors based on their performance and 
growth. 
Furthermore, the Committee  note that constant reduction in the RE Stage 
percentage share of the Department in the total Central Outlay, directly impacts the 
performance of Schemes. The Committee have been informed that despite repeated 
requests for enhancing the Budgetary Allocatio n at the higher level, no positive 
response has so far been received from the Ministry of Finance. Having taken a 
comprehensive view of the situation in entirety, the Committee recommend the Ministry 
of Finance to re -introspect its allocation strategy for the Department of Animal 
Husbandry and Dairying and to ensure that future allocations towards this Department 
are commensurate with the contributions of this Sector to the national economy. 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT  
The recommendation of the C ommittee is noted for compliance. Keeping in view 
the importance of the animal husbandry and dairying sector in the socio -economic 
development of the country, the Department has been seriously and continuously 
pursuing the matter at the level of Hon’ble Mi nister for Fisheries, Animal Husbandry and 
Dairying, and Secretary, AHD with Ministry of Finance for enhanced budgetary 
allocation for the Department. However, Ministry of Finance allocates the funds to 
Departments/Ministries keeping in view the overall re sources position and priorities for 
allocation among competing demands from different sectors inter se. 
[Letter No. 25-5(1)/2023-AHD (Coord) dated 12.06.2023] 
 

17 
 
Financial Performance of the Department 
Recommendation No.3      
The Committee note that during the years 2020-21 and 2021-22, the expenditure 
pattern of the Department was 98.7% and 98.5% of the RE Stage allocations, 
respectively. However, during the ongoing financial year 2022 -23, after imposition of 
financial discipline by the Ministr y of Finance regarding releasing of funds, the 
Department (DAHD) could spend only 56.07% of the RE Stage funds (up to 
20.02.2022). The Committee were apprised that the pace of expenditure was hampered 
due to opening of Single Nodal Agency (SNA) and Central  Nodal Agency (CNA) 
Accounts as per the allocation strategy of the Ministry of Finance, strictly limiting the 
Quarterly Expenditure Plan to 25% for each Quarter (3 months). The Committee also 
note that despite RE Stage allocation being revised downwards to  Rs. 3440.97 crore 
during the 2022 -23, the Department could utilize only 26.73% of the funds under 
Schemes and 74.03% under Non-Schemes components till January 2023.  
The Committee further note that despite extensive consultations with 
stakeholders before working out financial requirements, the Department has substantial 
under-utilization of funds allocated at RE Stage during the year 2022 - 23. Moreover, the 
Committee find that Rs.877.99 Crore unspent balance with the States from previous 
releases up to the  year 2020 -21 indicates towards lacunae within the strategy of the 
Department regarding financial planning and execution. Taking note of the expenditure 
pattern of the Department, the Committee recommend the Department to recalibrate its 
strategy and plann ing regarding proposal, utilization and monitoring of funds under 
various Schemes of the Department. 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT  
The recommendation of the Committee is noted for strict compliance. States  / 
UTs and Implementing Agencies are continuously being  reminded through National 
Review Meetings, Regional Review Meetings, Field Visits and Video Conferences to 
liquidate the pending Utilization Certificates and submit proposal for release of fund so 
as to achieve the desired targets under various Schemes be ing implemented by the 
Department. 

18 
 
The Department also regularly follows up with States/UTs to expedite the project 
implementation under the schemes of the Department.  
[Letter No. 25-5(1)/2023-AHD (Coord) dated 12.06.2023] 
 
Surrender of Funds 
Recommendation No.4 
The Committee are concerned to note that during the course of three years from 
2019-20 to 2021-22, the Department has surrendered an amount of Rs. 1545.78 Crore. 
As regards the reasons for surrender of funds, the Department has vaguely stated 
“reduction of RE”, as the reason for surrender, without furnishing any proper explanation 
thereto. The Committee further observe that despite having surrendered such huge 
quantum of funds each year during the last three years, the Department has bee n 
requesting for an increase in budgetary allocation.  
Having taken a holistic view of the situation, the Committee are of the considered 
opinion that surrender of allocated funds restrains the Department from making a 
compelling case before the Ministry o f Finance for enhancing Budgetary Allocation. The 
Committee, therefore, recommend the Department to undertake regular monitoring of 
the flow of funds and the pace of expenditure so as to avoid surrender of funds and also 
to identify and address appropriate ly the factors leading to heavy under -utilization of 
funds. The Committee would like to be apprised of the strategy devised by the 
Department to tackle this particular issue.  
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT  
The recommendation of the Committee is noted for strict compliance. Keeping in 
view the importance of the animal husbandry and dairy sector & the need to strengthen 
efforts in increasing the coverage of vaccination for animal disease and to strengthen 
socio - economic significance  of the sector, the dep artment has been seriously and 
continuously pursuing the matter with Ministry of Finance for increasing the budget 
allocation for the department as to achieve the desired targets and also more effective 
implementation of the various schemes/Programmes of the Department.  

19 
 
With effect from the financial year 2019-20 to 2021-22 programme divisions have 
taken necessary steps to achieve the target, but due to covid -19 in schemes such as 
NADCP/LHDCP, sum of Rs. 770.19 crore during 2019 -20 to 2021 -22 had to be 
surrendered. This is because the Vaccination programme could not   be fast tracked 
due to quality issues of vaccine & due to longer time required for procurement & 
fabrication of Mobile Vaccination Units. Further, due to unspent balances with 
implementing age ncies, funds could not be released during 1st and 2nd quarter of  
2019-20  & 2020 -21 period. Therefore, the Ministry of Finance reduced the budget 
allocation at RE stage. However, these issues have now been sorted   out. Now, the 
Department is undertaking regular monitoring of the flow of funds and the pace of 
expenditure both at the Secretary Levels. The Department is also keeping a close watch 
on unspent balances & on the physical/financial outcomes of the schemes, so as to 
avoid surrender of funds in future. 
[Letter No. 25-5(1)/2023-AHD (Coord) dated 12.06.2023] 
 
Rashtriya Gokul Mission (RGM)  
Recommendation No. 5  
The Committee note that Rs. 942.40 Crore were released to the States out of the 
sanctioned amount of Rs.1348.03 Crore from the year 2019-20 to 2022-23. Accordingly, 
Physical Targets were also revised and the same were achieved.  
The Committee were apprised that States of Assam, Maharashtra, Mizoram, 
Nagaland, Odisha, Punjab, Sikkim and Tripura did not receive any fund re lease for the 
years 2019 -20 and 2020 -21 under this RGM Scheme because they could not spend 
their unspent balances available with them released previously. The Committee further 
note that no Union Territory except Puducherry received any fund under RGM for the 
year 2019-20, 2020-21 and 2021-22. The Committee do acknowledge the importance of 
this innovative Scheme, where breeds of livestock are improved through state -of-the-art 
technology.  
The Committee, having analyzed the cause of unspent balances with Sta tes 
under the RGM Schemes for the last three years, recommend the Department to 
vigorously pursue with these States to liquidate the unspent balances so that further 

20 
 
funds be released seamlessly under this Scheme to these States. The Committee 
would like to appreciate the efforts made by the Department to persuade these States to 
utilize the unspent balance, however, simultaneously, they urge the Department to put 
in some extra efforts to get these unspent balances lying with the States liquidated at 
the earliest. 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT  
All schemes including Rashtriya Gokul Mission was reviewed for all States/UTs 
by the Department during the regional review meetings held on 18 th November 2022 at 
Krishi Bhawan, New Delhi for Northern Region States, on 24 th November 2022 in Goa 
for Western and Southern States and on 28 thNovember 2022 in Kolkata for Eastern and 
North Eastern states. Further, the Department also organizes State review meetings 
and video conferencing sessions at regular intervals. The issue of unspent balance is 
also being addressed during visit of senior level officers to the States. For handholding 
the States in successful implementation of the scheme, detailed component -wise 
guideline with model proposals were shared with the States and remin ders related to 
submission of Utilization Certificates with Physical Progress report are issued to the 
States. 
[Letter No. 25-5(1)/2023-AHD (Coord) dated 12.06.2023] 
 
National Programme for Dairy Development 
Recommendation No. 6 
The Committee observed that the utilization of RE Stage allocation under the 
scheme on National Programme for Dairy Development (NPDD) for the year 2022 -23 is 
52.67% only. However, the Committee have been assured by the Department that this 
RE Stage alloca tion of Rs. 340.01 crore under the NPDD Scheme will be utilized 
completely.  
The Committee are, however, concerned to note that the allocation towards this 
Scheme was revised downwards at the RE Stage during 2022 -23 owing to unspent 
balances with the States from previous releases which has adversely impacted the 
achievement of physical targets set under this Scheme.  

21 
 
The Committee further note that since the year 2020 -21, the Department has 
accorded priority to strengthening of village level milk chilling and testing infrastructure 
under the scheme and has planned to utilize a part of the increased BE stage allocation 
for 2023-24 to expedite the strengthening of village level milk infrastructure. However, 
the less utilization of funds released to States under the Scheme during the years 2021 
to 2023 raises concerns with the Committee.  
The Committee, therefore, recommend the Department to pursue with the States 
to ensure full utilization of unspent balances pending with them so that Physical Targets 
set under the Scheme are fully achieved. 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT  
BE, RE and Actual E xpenditure details (as on 31.03.20 23) under the NPDD are 
as under : 
(Rs. in Crore) 
Year BE allocated RE allocated Actual 
Expenditure 
% utilization of 
RE allocation 
2020-21 300.00 286.00 285.98 99.99 
2021-22 255.00 403.00 402.91 99.97 
2022-23 340.01 220.01 219.40 99.72 
2023-24 345.93 -- 0.00 -- 
 
Under National Programme  for Dairy Development (NPDD) scheme, 99.72 % of 
funds allocated at RE stage have been released to State Implementing Agencies during 
2022-23. Projects under NPDD scheme are capital intensive and envisage creation of 
dairy infrastructure. Generally, these projects are approved with 2 -4 years of 
implementation period. Therefore, utilization of funds takes time. However, Department 
regularly follows up with States to expedite the project implementation & to ensure 
submission pending fund utilization certifica tes under the scheme through Regional 
review meetings / Video Conferences / field visit etc. 
[Letter No. 25-5(1)/2023-AHD (Coord) dated 12.06.2023] 
 
 
 

22 
 
National Animal Disease Control Programme  
Recommendation No.8  
The Committee note  that in the year 2021 -22, two Schemes, namely, the 
Livestock Health & Disease Control (LH&DC) and National Animal Disease Control 
Programme (NADCP) allocations were merged and renamed as Livestock Health & 
Disease Control Programme (LHDCP). Prior to the merger, the National Animal Disease 
Control Programme (NADCP) was being implemented as a separate Scheme for control 
of Foot & Mouth Disease (FMD) and Brucellosis. The Committee also note the under -
utilization of funds allocated under NADCP from the year 20 19-20 to 2021 -22 and the 
drastic reduction of the BE Stage allocation of Rs. 1300 Crore to Rs. 858.00 Crore at 
the RE Stage during the year 2020 -21. The Committee were apprised that this was due 
to under -implementation of various Programmes owing to COVID -19 Lockdown 
situation and also due to the inability of manufactured vaccines to meet the quality 
control criteria.  
The Committee are further worried to note that despite the Foot and Mouth 
Disease (FMD) being categorized as an important economic disease, the States of 
Bihar and West Bengal recorded nil vaccinations in round I of FMD vaccination and 
regarding Brucella v accination programme the States of Bihar, Rajasthan and Tamil 
Nadu along with the Union Territories of Andaman & Nicobar Islands, Lakshadweep and 
Puducherry have recorded nil vaccinations till date. The Committee note that this 
shortfall in administration of Brucella vaccination was attributed to shortage of human 
resources available with the States for the purpose of carrying out vaccination activities. 
The Committee also note with constraint that there is a pendency of Rs. 393.46 Crore 
with the States und er NADCP. Regarding the issue of shortage of manpower, the 
Committee are of the considered view that adequate manpower and training of available 
manpower is a necessary pre -requisite for successful completion of vaccination 
activities against livestock disease in the country. Therefore, taking a holistic view of the 
entire situation, the Committee recommend the Department to ensure optimum 
utilization of allocated funds for the intended purpose, to have a strict monitoring 
mechanism for manufacturing of qua lity vaccine, to follow up with States and UTs 
regarding meeting physical targets set for vaccination under FMD and Brucellosis and 
also to take necessary steps to recruit and train manpower required for vaccination 

23 
 
activities across the country. The Commi ttee would like to be apprised of the steps 
taken and progress made by the Department in this direction. 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT  
To ensure optimum utilization of allocated funds, regular follow -up are being 
undertaken with State Implementing Agencies and  State Animal Husbandry 
Departments by the Department through Video conferencing and review meetings. In 
addition to the meetings, reminders regarding important topics are communicated 
through DO letters and frequent follow -ups are done through phone calls . In case, the 
States/UTs have utilized the funds, the States/UTs are advised to share Utilization 
Certificate at the earliest. 
For FMD vaccine quality control, regular meetings are held with scientists and 
experts from various ICAR research institutions w ith the Department. The committee 
meet on regular basis and evaluate the process of quality control of FMD vaccine and 
suggest necessary changes that need to be done. 
To ensure the quality of the vaccines, a well documented mechanism is in place 
to carry out vaccine testing before the vaccine is supplied to State for use in vaccination 
campaigns. The project Logistic Agency of NADCP (i.e. NSC) collects vaccine samples 
as per sample plan and send it to any of the three laboratories  designated by DAHD for 
testing the standard and quality of FMD vaccine. These designated laboratories are 
ICAR-Indian Veterinary Research Institute (IVRI), Bengaluru (Karnataka), National 
Institute of FMD (NIFMD), Bhubaneswar (Odisha) and Chaudhary Charan Singh 
National Institute of Animal Health National Institute of Animal Health (CCSNIAH, 
DAHD), Baghpat (UP). The vaccines are tested for safety, sterility, potency and purity 
as per the extant protocol. Once the vaccine samples passed the qu ality control tests in 
aforementioned ICAR or CCSNIAH laboratories, and then only the vaccines are 
supplied to the States.  
After the vaccination, the sero -conversion level in animal is also studied through 
well designed sero -montoring plans developed by I CAR-Directorate of FMD, 
Bhubaneswar (Odisha). 

24 
 
In order to achieve physical targets, set for FMD and Brucellosis, regular follow 
ups are done with States/UTs through Video Conferencing. All States/UTs are advised 
to share daily/weekly progress report in ord er to keep the reporting updated. As the 
vaccination are being done on campaign mode hence the States/UTs have been 
advised to submit the weekly target of vaccination and close monitoring of the program 
is done by the Department. So far, 35 States have com pleted round -II of FMD 
vaccination program. Round -III of FMD vaccination program has been initiated by 7 
States, out of which 2 States have already completed the round III FMD vaccination 
program. 
Vaccination against Brucellosis is going on in 26 states an d so far 62% 
vaccination coverage has been achieved in entire nation. 
Recruitment and training of manpower for vaccination are being done by the 
States/UTs. Detail guidelines have been issued by the Department to all States/UTs in 
this regard and the Depar tment also provides funds to all the States/UTs towards 
remuneration to the vaccinators. 
[Letter No. 25-5(1)/2023-AHD (Coord) dated 12.06.2023] 
 
Inclusivity in Animal Husbandry and Dairying Sector  
Recommendations No.10  
The Committee note with concern that utilization pattern of the Department 
regarding allocations towards the North Eastern Areas (NER) is 39.97% of the RE 
Stage allocation during the year 2022 -23. The Committee are also concerned to note 
that a total amount of funds amounting to Rs. 1447.61 Crore have been re -appropriated 
by the Department during the last three years and major re -appropriations have been 
under the North Eastern Region Head. Perplexed with such contradicting trends of 
utilization and re -appropriation, the Committee recommend the Department to ensure 
that the issue of under-utilization of funds under the NER Head during the financial year 
2022-23 is addressed and that funds allocated for this region are used optimally. The 
Committee also recom mend the Department to revisit their priorities while allocating 
funds under various Heads so to avoid such vast re -appropriations as it renders the 
planning, prioritizing and strategizing exercise of the Department futile.  

25 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT  
The re commendation of the C ommittee is noted for strict compliance. The 
Department continuously follows up with NER region through National Review 
Meetings, Regional Review Meetings, Field Visits and Video Conferences to utilize the 
fund released under various schemes of the Department and submit fresh proposals for 
further release of fund so as to achieve the desired targets under various Schemes 
being implemented by the Department and to avoid the issues of under-utilization of 
funds under the NER Head. 
[Letter No. 25-5(1)/2023-AHD (Coord) dated 12.06.2023] 
 
  

26 
 
CHAPTER - III 
  
OBSERVATIONS / RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO NOT DESIRE 
TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE GOVERNMENT’S REPLIES 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
NIL 
  

27 
 
CHAPTER - IV 
  
OBSERVATIONS / RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF THE 
GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE 
 
National Livestock Mission (NLM) 
Recommendation No. 7 
The Committee note that the Physical Targets set under the National Livestock 
Mission had to be revised as the Department could utilize only 34.14% funds of RE stage 
allocation during the year 2022-23.  The Committee have also noticed less utilization of funds 
by the States released to them under this scheme during the years 2019 -20 to 2021-22.  The 
Committee further note that Utilization Certificates amounting to Rs. 482.57 Crore under NLM 
from the year 2014-15 up to 2022-23 have been found pending with the States / UTs.    
The Committee, therefore, recommend the Department to develop a mechanism so 
that the pendency of Utilization Certificates with the States could be reduced and delay in 
releases of funds to States/UTs in future is avoided. The Committee would like to be 
apprised of the steps in this regard.   
The Committee further note that National Livestock Mission has six Sub -Components 
and under the Livestock Insurance component, not even a single livestock has been insured 
during the year 2022 -23, whereas during the previous year i.e. 2021 -22, a total of 1,74,061 
animals were insured.  The Committee were informed of the hardships faced by the livestock 
owners in getting their livestock insured and also about the measures being taken to ease 
the proces s of livestock insurance. Expressing concern over the NIL Insurance during the 
year 2022-23, the Committee recommend the Department to take effective steps so that the 
process of insurance of livestock is made easy for the beneficiaries. The Committee woul d 
also like the Department to explore the possibility of developing an App -based Livestock 
Insurance facility for livestock owners. The Committee would like to be apprised of the total 
progress made by the Department in this regard. 
  
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT  
Under National Livestock Mission, 71.26% of RE has been utilized during the FY 
2022-23. States/UTs are continuously being reminded through National Review Meetings, 
Regional Review Meetings, Field Visits and Video Conferences to liquidate the pending 
Utilization Certificates.  

28 
 
Under Livestock Insurance of National Livestock Mission, an amount of Rs. 1011.80 
lakh has been released to 3 States/UTs with a physical target of 3,44,602 animals. The 
releases were made in the last 2 quarters of financial year 2022 -23.The States are facing 
difficulties in implementing Livestock insurance scheme because of no participation by the 
Insurance Companies. As a result, there is huge amount of unspent balances with the States 
resulting no release of fund to the States/UTs un der livestock Insurance scheme. In this 
regard, the Department conducted a meeting on Livestock Insurance on 05.04.2023under 
the chairmanship of Hon’ble Minister (FAHD) with the concerned Stakeholders. As per the 
suggestions given by the Stakeholders, nece ssary steps are being taken for effective 
implementation of the Scheme. 
[Letter No. 25-5(1)/2023-AHD (Coord) dated 12.06.2023] 
 
Comments of the Committee 
For comments of the Committee please refer to Para No.1.7  of Chapter I of this 
Report. 
 
Inclusivity in Animal Husbandry and Dairying Sector 
Recommendation No. 12 
The Committee are concerned to note that despite being asked to submit details 
regarding expenditure incurred under the Gender Budget from the year 2021 -21 to 2022-23, 
the Department failed to sub mit any details in this regard. The Committee are further 
dissatisfied with the denial of the Representative, during evidence, of there being a Gender 
Budget Cell, when the same has been explicitly mentioned in the Annual Report (2021 -22) of 
the Department . The Committee also note that no direct replies were submitted by the 
Department on being questioned about its initiatives regarding the constituents of ‘Gender 
Inclusiveness’ and ‘Gender Budgeting & Gender disaggregated Data’ for specific Schemes, 
as pointed out by the Development Monitoring & Evaluation Office  (DMEO) of NITI Aayog in 
its Thematic Report on ‘Gender Mainstreaming in Governance’. 
While expressing appreciation with the assurance of the Department regarding 
enrolment of up to 50% Women Milk Producers in the Dairy Business  under the Scheme on 
Dairy Processing Infrastructure Development Fund (DIDF), the Committee, however, are 
concerned that no timeline was specified for achievement of this target of 50% women milk 
producers in the Dairy busine ss. The Committee, therefore, recommend the Department to 

29 
 
implement in letter and spirit, the policy of earmarking 30% of allocated funds towards 
women under the Schemes being implemented by the Department and also to specify the 
timeline by when the Depar tment aims to achieve the target specified under the Scheme on 
Dairy Processing Infrastructure Development Fund (DIDF). 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT  
Dairy Processing and Infrastructure Development Fund (DIDF) is not beneficiary 
oriented scheme. It is a credit linked demand driven scheme with the objective to create/ 
modernize the milk processing, chilling, and value -addition infrastructure. Further, as  per 
CCEA approval dated 19.02.2020, 2022 -23 was the last year for funding under DIDF. 
However, based on the recommendation of Ministry of Finance and NITI Ayog, DIDF is 
proposed to be merged with AHIDF. The objective and targets of the scheme are to be 
continued under AHIDF. The process of merging the scheme is under process. 
There is no separate budget allocation for Gender Budgeting. However, the 
Department is requesting the States to allocate 30% of the total fund release for the women 
beneficiaries.  
[Letter No. 25-5(1)/2023-AHD (Coord) dated 12.06.2023] 
Comments of the Committee 
For comments of the Committee please refer to Para N o.1.16 of Chapter I of this 
Report. 
  

30 
 
CHAPTER - V 
  
OBSERVATIONS / RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH FINAL REPLIES OF 
GOVERNMENT ARE STILL AWAITED  
 
Establishment of an Institution like AIIMS in Veterinary Services 
Recommendation No. 9 
The Committee note that there is shortage of specialized and trained manpower in 
Veterinary Services in the country. The Committee have been apprised that in addition to 
already existing 55 Veterinary Colleges recognized to impart Bachelor of Veterinary Science 
and Animal Husbandry (B.V.Sc. & A.H.) Degree, 13 more Colleges have been pr ovisionally 
recognized and the number of seats in each recognized college have been increased from 
60 to 80. The Committee have also been apprised that in pursuance of the recommendation 
contained in their 30th Report on the subject 'Status of Veterinary S ervices and Availability of 
Animal Vaccines in the country', a high level meeting with Specialists, Experts, VC, Directors, 
HoDs of Institutes, etc. was held under the Chairmanship of Secretary AHD on 18th January, 
2023, for establishment of a Veterinary C ollege on the lines of AIIMS (AIIMS - VET) and 
subsequently the Veterinary Council of India (VCI) was directed to allocate the subject matter 
to an Expert Committee constituted for the purpose of establishment of an Institute like 
AIIMS in Veterinary Scien ces. The Committee, while appreciating the efforts of the 
Department regarding establishment of AIIMS like Institute in Veterinary Sciences, desire 
that necessary formalities in this regard may be completed at the earliest and a model 
Veterinary Research a nd Education Institute be established to cater to the vast majority of 
livestock in the country on a priority basis. The Committee would like to apprised of the 
progress made in this direction. 
  
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT  
At present, there are 56 recognized veterinary colleges to impart B.V.Sc. & A.H. 
degree and there are 14 provisionally recognized veterinary colleges. As regards the 
progress regarding  creation of national level institute in lines of AIIMS  (AIIMS - VET), a  
preliminary meeting was held under the Chairmanship of Shri R.K. Singh, the then Secretary 
(AHD) on 18.1.2023 wherein specialist Experts, Vice -Chancellors, Directors were called to 
deliberate on the aforesaid issue.   After detailed deliberation, it was de cided that the 
aforesaid subject matter would be given to the Veterinary Council of India (VCI) and VCI shall 

31 
 
constitute an Expert Committee for the purpose of Establishment of Institutions like AIIMS in 
Veterinary Services. Accordingly, this Department vi de letter dated 23 rd February, 2023, 
directed the Secretary, VCI for taking necessary steps in the matter. 
 The matter was considered by the Executive Committee of the Council in its meeting 
held on 02.3.2023 and the Executive Committee after detailed deli beration decided to 
constitute a Committee which shall examine the scope, the requirement of staff and offices, 
specialist, the role that the institutions could eventually play, the regulations linkage to other 
agencies like IVRI, ICAR, DAHD, VCI etc. The proposed expenditure for establishment of 
such education and nature of education and research to be conducted by the proposed 
institutions shall also be examined by this Committee. 
Hence, Executive Committee constituted the Committee consisting of following persons: 
1. Dr. Umesh Chandra Sharma, President, VCI – Chairman 
2. Dr. Abhijit Mitra, Animal Husbandry Commissioner, DAHD, GOI – Member 
3. Dr. N.H. Kelawala, Vice-Chancellor, Kamdhenu University, Gujarat – Member 
4. Dr. Ashwani Raut – Member 
5. Dr.Vinod Bhat, Secretary, VCI – Member Secretary.                                                  
 This decision was approved by the Council in its meeting held on 14.3.2023.  Necessary 
steps are being taken for holding a meeting of the experts in this regard. 
 
[Letter No. 25-5(1)/2023-AHD (Coord) dated 12.06.2023] 
Comments of the Committee 
For comments of the Committee please refer to Para No.1.10  of Chapter I of this 
Report. 
 
Inclusivity in Animal Husbandry and Dairying Sector 
Recommendation No. 11 
While appreciating the efforts of the Department regarding earmarking of funds under 
the Scheduled Castes Sub -Plan (SCSP) and Tribal Sub -plan (TSP), the Committee, 
however, note that the utilization of RE Stage allocations for the year 2022 -23 under 
Scheduled Castes Sub -Plan (SCSP) and Tribal Sub -Plan (TSP) has been only 20.95% and 
24.87%, respectively. Further, the Committee are constrained to note that in States like 
Rajasthan where there is a considerable population of both, SC and ST communities, there 
have been chronic issues of non -receipt of proposals from the State Government under the 

32 
 
SCSP and TSP components. The Committee, therefore, recommend the Department to take 
active steps to ensure optimal utilization of funds allocated under these Component s and to 
take necessary steps to encourage State Governments to submit proposals under these 
plans so that benefits of the Schemes being run by the Department can reach intended 
beneficiaries and contribute to their economic upliftment effectively. 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT  
As all the schemes of the Department are demand-driven, 16.6% and 8.60 % of funds 
have been fixed under Scheduled Castes and Tribal Sub-Plan category respectively. 
Accordingly, the Department earmarked Rs. 616.62 crore and Rs. 327.20 crore at BE Stage 
under SCSP & TSP category respectively which was Rs. 453.51 crore and Rs. 244.40 crore 
at RE Stage. The actual expenditure was Rs. 312.05 crore (69% over RE Stage ) and Rs. 
166.48 crore (68% over RE Stage) under SCSP & TSP Category respectively.  
The Department continuously follows up with States/UTs through National Review Meetings, 
Regional Review Meetings, Field Visits and Video Conferences to utilize the fund released 
under SCSP and TSP heads under schemes of the Department and submit fre sh proposal 
for further release of fund so as to achieve the desired targets under various Schemes being 
implemented by the Department and to avoid the issues of under -utilization of funds under 
the SCSP & TSP head. 
[Letter No. 25-5(1)/2023-AHD (Coord) dated 12.06.2023] 
Comments of the Committee 
For comments of the Committee please refer to Para No.1.13 of Chapter I of this 
Report. 
 
Credit flow in Animal Husbandry and Dairying Sector 
 Recommendation No. 13 
While appreciating the achievement of disbursement of credit of Rs. 1,72,115 Crore 
against the target of Rs. 1,04,580 Crore towards Allied activities, the Committee note with 
concern the regional disparity in disbursement of credit in Animal Husbandry Sector. The 
Committee are of the view that  the growing importance of Allied Sectors in the national 
economy calls for increased access of credit to Livestock Farmers. The Committee, 
therefore, recommend the Department to work towards removing this disparity in credit 
availability, especially with respect to the North Eastern and Eastern Regions and to ensure 

33 
 
that awareness is created in this regard through various awareness programmes including 
through print and electronic media. 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT  
Regional variation in the Ground Level Cred it (GLC) is the product of disparity in the 
credit flow across the States. Region-wise GLC with details like share of Gross Cropped Area 
(GCA), Gross Irrigated Area (GIA) and branch network in rural/ semi urban areas with GLC 
achievement during 2021-22 and 2022-23 are given in the Table below. 
Regions Share 
in GCA 
(%) 
Share 
in GIA 
(%) 
Share in rural / 
semi-urban 
outlets (%) 
Region-wise 
GLC Disb. 
(%) to total 
during 2021-
22 
Region-wise 
GLC Disb. 
(%) during 
2022-23 (p) ( 
up to 31 Mar 
2023)* 
Region-wise 
Animal 
Husbandry 
Disb. (%) 
during 2022-23 
(p) (up to 31 
Mar 2023)* 
%age 
livestock (as 
per 20th 
Livestock 
Census) 
Northern 20.55 25.38 14.80 16.27 17.90 12.19 15.65 
N E R 3.21 0.91 3.66 0.76 0.61 0.78 4.54 
Eastern 12.16 13.14 18.47 10.83 8.91 8.30 21.60 
Central 28.63 34.83 18.69 12.84 13.65 9.17 24.02 
Western 18.37 10.72 23.09 12.18 12.79 10.17 11.21 
Southern 17.09 15.02 21.30 47.13 46.15 59.39 22.98 
*Source ; NABARD       The data for 2022-23 is provisional 
Similar trend is also observed in the case of Animal husbandry sector, as seen in the 
Table, higher credit absorption capacity of Southern region may be because of the availability 
of better infrastructure facilities, better banking network and credit avai lability leading to 
improvement in its share. Normally, low density of credit delivery outlets and weak financial 
health of Rural Financial Institutions could be the constraints for increasing credit flow in 
credit starved regions. Central and Eastern regi ons account for around 21% and 19% share 
in rural and semi urban bank branches, respectively, pointing towards demand side 
bottlenecks in the regions. Therefore, one way to stimulate the demand for agriculture credit 
including credit for animal husbandry a nd allied activities is to develop the credit absorption 
capacity in credit deficient region viz. Central, Eastern and North Eastern.  Accordingly, share 
of credit starved regions in agriculture credit target has been increased to alleviate the 
growing reg ional imbalance in agriculture credit without dissuading the Southern and 
Northern states.  
The Department has prepared brochures, videos for AHDF -KCC and disseminated 
through all the social media platforms of the Department. These have been also distribut ed 

34 
 
and disseminated in the major events of the Department across the country. Farmers have 
been given information on how to avail KCC and its benefits through Awareness camps 
organized by this Department through Common Service Centers (CSC) across the country. 
[Letter No. 25-5(1)/2023-AHD (Coord) dated 12.06.2023] 
Comments of the Committee 
For comments of the Committee please refer to Para No.1.19  of Chapter I of this 
Report. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI;                                                                    P.C. GADDIGOUDAR 
08 August, 2023                                                                  Chairperson                            
17 Sravana, 1945 (Saka)                             Standing Committee on Agriculture,  
            Animal Husbandry and Food Processing 
  

35 
 
ANNEXURE  
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE, ANIMAL HUSBANDRY AND FOOD 
PROCESSING BRANCH 
(2022-23) 
 
MINUTES OF THE NINETEENTH SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE 
  
***** 
 
The Committee sat on Tuesday, the 08 August, 2023 from 1500 hrs.                              
to 1530 hrs. in Hon'ble Chairperson's Chamber, Room No. 103, 1st Floor, Block -B, PHA 
Extn., New Delhi - 110001.        
                                                                 
PRESENT 
 
Shri P.C. Gaddigoudar, Chairperson 
 
MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA 
 
 2.  Shri A. Ganeshamurthi 
3. Shri Mohan Mandavi 
4. Shri Devji Mansingram Patel 
5. Smt. Sharda Anilkumar Patel 
6. Shri Bheemrao Baswanthrao Patil 
7. Shri Shriniwas Dadasaheb Patil 
8. Mohammad Sadique 
9. Shri Devendra Singh alias Bhole Singh 
10. Shri Virendra Singh 
11. Shri V.K. Sreekandan 
   
 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
 12. Smt. Ramilaben Becharbhai Bara 
13. Shri Masthan Rao Beeda 
14. Dr. Anil Sukhdeorao Bonde 
15. Shri Kailash Soni  
 16. Shri Ram Nath Thakur 
17. Shri Vaiko 
 
 
 
 
 

36 
 
SECRETARIAT 
  
1. Shri Shiv Kumar   - Additional Secretary 
2. Shri Uttam Chand Bharadwaj - Director 
3. Shri Prem Ranjan   - Deputy Secretary 
4. Shri N. Amarathiyagan  - Under Secretary 
 
 
 
2. At the outset, the Chairperson welcomed the Members to the Sitting of the Committee. 
Thereafter, the Committee took up for consideration the following Draft Action Taken Reports 
:  
 
*(i)  XXXX   XXXX   XXXX   XXXX; 
 
*(ii)  XXXX   XXXX   XXXX   XXXX;  
 
*(iii) XXXX   XXXX   XXXX   XXXX; 
 
*(iv) Draft Action Taken Report on Action -taken by the Government on the Observations / 
Recommendations contained in the Fifty -Fourth Report of the Committee on 
‘Demands for Grants (2023 -24)’, pertaining to the Ministry o f Fisheries, Animal 
Husbandry and Dairying (Department of Animal Husbandry and Dairying); 
 
*(v) XXXX   XXXX   XXXX   XXXX; 
 
*(vi) XXXX   XXXX   XXXX   XXXX; 
 
3. After some deliberations, the Committee adopted the Draft Action Taken Reports 
without any modi fications and the Committee authorized the Chairperson to finalize and 
present these Action-taken Reports to Parliament.  
 
 
The Sitting of the Committee then adjourned.  
 
* Matter not related to this Report. 
 
 
  

37 
 
APPENDIX 
 
(Vide Para 4 of Introduction of the Report) 
 
ANALYSIS OF ACTION TAKEN BY GOVERNMENT ON THE OBSERVATIONS / 
RECOMMENDATIONS CONTAINED IN THE FIFTY FOURTH REPORT (17th LOK SABHA) 
OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE, ANIMAL HUSBANDRY AND FOOD 
PROCESSING (2022-23)  
  
(i)  Total number of Recommendations              13 
(ii) Observations / Recommendations that have been 
Accepted by the Government  
 Recommendation  Nos.  1,2,3,4,5,6,8 and 10    
Total          08    
Percentage                    61.54% 
(iii) Observations / Recommendations which the Committee 
do not desire to pursue in view of the Government’s replies  
Recommendation No.     NIL         
Total                     00 
Percentage                     00.00% 
(iv) Observations / Recommendations in respect of which replies 
 of the Government have not been accepted by the Committee 
Recommendation Nos.  7 and 12  
Total            02 
Percentage                                      15.38% 
(v) Observations / Recommendations in respect of which  
 final replies of the Government are still awaited 
Recommendation Nos.        9, 11 and 13     
Total                     03  
Percentage                     23.07%  
 