    
STANDING COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE,  
ANIMAL HUSBANDRY AND FOOD PROCESSING (2022-2023) 
                 
         
 
 
SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA 
          
         
 
 
 
                              
MINISTRY OF FISHERIES, ANIMAL HUSBANDRY AND DAIRYING 
(DEPARTMENT OF FISHERIES) 
              
 
 
 
  
'THE COASTAL AQUACULTURE AUTHORITY (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2023'   
         
        
FIFTY- SEVENTH REPORT 
  
 
 
         
               
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
JULY, 2023 / ASHADHA,1945 (SAKA) 
 
   
57 

 
 
 
FIFTY- SEVENTH REPORT 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE ANIMAL HUSBANDRY AND FOOD 
PROCESSING (2022-2023) 
 
          
 
(SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
         
         
         
MINISTRY OF FISHERIES, ANIMAL HUSBANDRY AND DAIRYING 
(DEPARTMENT OF FISHERIES) 
              
 
 
 
'THE COASTAL AQUACULTURE AUTHORITY (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2023'   
         
        
FIFTY- SEVENTH REPORT 
              
            
           Presented to Lok Sabha on                                   21.07.2023 
           Laid on the Table of Rajya Sabha on                                 21.07.2023 
 
 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
JULY, 2023 / ASHADHA,1945 (SAKA) 
 


 
 
 
 
COA No. 473 
 
 
         
         
         
         
         
         
 
         
 
 
 
 
 
         
        
Price:  Rs.  
         
         
         
         
         
 
 
 
         
     
                     
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
© 2023 By Lok Sabha Secretariat  
 
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of Business in Lok 
Sabha (Sixteenth Edition) and Printed by Lok Sabha Secretariat 
  

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
<CONTENT> 
 
 
 
   COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE (2022-23)……………………………   (iii) 
INTRODUCTION……………………………………………………………........   (v) 
    
REPORT 
   CHAPTER - I      Genesis of Coastal Aquaculture Authority Act, 2005 and Features 
of Coastal Aquaculture Authority (Amendment) Bill, 2023 
1-21 
 
   CHAPTER - II      Clause by Clause Examination of The Coastal Aquaculture 
Authority (Amendment) Bill, 2023 
22-88 
 
   CHAPTER - III      Miscellaneous/Ancillary Issues 89-96 
   
APPENDICES 
 
(i)   Minutes of the 13th Sitting of the Committee (2022-23) held on 12th May, 2023 
(ii)  Minutes of the 14th Sitting of the Committee (2022-23) held on 02nd June, 2023 
 97-100 
101-104 
(iii) Minutes of the 15th Sitting of the Committee (2022-23) held on 02nd June, 2023 
(iv) Minutes of the 16th Sitting of the Committee (2022-23) held on 16th June, 2023 
105-109 
110-113 
(v)  Minutes of the 17th Sitting of the Committee (2022-23) held on 14th July, 2023 114-115 
   ANNEXURES 
 
ANNEXURE-I Operational part of the Supreme Court Judgment dated 11th 
December, 1996 in Writ Petition (Civil) No. 561 of 1994 
116-120 
 
   ANNEXURE-II The Coastal Aquaculture Authority Act, 2005 121-135 
   ANNEXURE-III The Coastal Aquaculture Authority (Amendment) Bill, 2023  136-155 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  

 
 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE, ANIMAL 
HUSBANDRY AND FOOD PROCESSING (2022-23) 
Shri P.C. Gaddigoudar-   Chairperson 
MEMBERS 
 
LOK SABHA 
 
 2. Shri Horen Sing Bey 
  3.  Shri A. Ganeshamurthi 
 4. Shri Kanakmal Katara 
 5. Shri Abu Taher Khan 
 6. Shri Ram Mohan Naidu Kinjarapu 
 7. Shri Mohan Mandavi 
 8. Shri Devji Mansingram Patel 
9. Smt. Sharda Anilkumar Patel 
10. Shri Bheemrao Baswanthrao Patil 
11. Shri Shriniwas Dadasaheb Patil 
12. Shri Vinayak Bhaurao Raut 
13. Shri Pocha Brahmananda Reddy 
14. Shri Rajiv Pratap Rudy 
15. Mohammad Sadique 
16. Shri Devendra Singh alias Bhole Singh 
17. Shri Virendra Singh 
18. Shri V.K. Sreekandan 
19. Shri Ram Kripal Yadav 
20.  VACANT# 
21. VACANT* 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
 
22. Smt. Ramilaben Becharbhai Bara 
23. Shri Masthan Rao Beeda 
24. Dr. Anil Sukhdeorao Bonde 
25. Shri S. Kalyanasundaram 
26. Shri Surendra Singh Nagar 
27. Shri Kailash Soni  
28. Shri Randeep Singh Surjewala 
29. Shri Ram Nath Thakur 
30. Shri Vaiko 
31. Shri Harnath Singh Yadav  
 
* Vacant w.e.f. 10.10.2022 due to demise of Shri Mulayam Singh Yadav on 10.10.2022 vide Bulletin - 
Part II, Para No. 5316 dated 14.10.2022. 
# Vacant w.e.f.29.04.2023 due to disqualification of Shri Afzal Ansari from Lok Sabha Membership 
from the date of his conviction in terms of the provision of Article 102(1)(e) of the Constitution of India 
read with Section 8 of the Representation of the People Act, 1951. 
 
(iii) 

 
 
 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
 
1. Shri Shiv Kumar    -  Additional Secretary 
2. Shri Uttam Chand Bharadwaj   -  Director 
3. Shri Prem Ranjan    -  Deputy Secretary 
4. Shri Ashwaghosh Bhaurao Lokhande -  Executive Officer 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(iv) 
  

 
 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
I, the Chairperson, Standing Committee on Agriculture, Animal Husbandry and Food  
Processing (2022-23), having been authorized by the Co mmittee to submit the Report on 
their behalf,  present this Fifty-Seventh Report on 'The  Coastal Aquaculture Authority 
(Amendment) Bill ' 2023 of the Ministry  of Fisheries, Animal Husbandry and Dairying 
(Department of  Fisheries). 
 
2. One of the functions of the Committee as laid down in Rule 331 E(1)(b) of ‘The Rules of  
Procedure and Conduct in Business in Lok Sabha' is to examine such Bills pertaining to 
the concerned Ministries/Departments as are referred to the Committee by the Chairman, 
Rajya Sabha or the Speaker, Lok Sabha as the case may be, and make Report thereon. In 
pursuance of this Rule, Hon'ble S peaker, Lok Sabha has referred ‘T he Coastal 
Aquaculture Authority (Amendment) Bill, 2023’, introduced in Lok Sabha on 05.04.2023, to 
the Standing Committee on 21.04.2023 for examination and report by the last day of the 
first week of the next session. 
 
3. The Committee held five sittings for detaile d examination of this Bill. During first sitting  
held on 12.05.2023, a briefing on the Bill was done by the representatives of the Ministry of 
Fisheries, Animal Husbandry and Dairying  (Department of  Fisheries) and the Ministry of 
Law and J ustice (Legislative Department) . During this Sitting,  the Committee decided to 
consult/hear the various Associations/Organisations, Stakeholders, Domain Experts and 
State Fisheries Department of Coastal States to gather holistic opinion /feedback on the 
aforesaid Bill. Accordingly, Memoranda from  the Stakeholders including Domain experts  
were invited. 
 
4. During the second  sitting of the Committee held on 02.06.2023 , the  
representatives of the Associations/Organizations – All India Shrimp Hatcheries 
Association, An dhra Pradesh; Society of Aquaculture Professionals (SAP), Andhra 
Pradesh; MPEDA-Rajiv Gandhi Centre for Aquaculture, Tamil Nadu; Stakeholders -  M/S 
Ananda Group, Andhra Pradesh; M/S Geekay Hatcheries, Tamil Nadu; and Domain Expert 
deposed before the Commi ttee. In the  third Sitting held in the second half on the same 
date, the representatives of the Department of Fisheries and Fishermen Welfare, Tamil 
Nadu; Department of Fisheries, Andhra Pradesh; Directorate of Fisheries, Odisha; 

 
 
 
Directorate of Fisheries, Maharashtra; Directorate of Fisheries, Karnataka; and Directorate 
of Fisheries, Kerala appeared before the Committee to  present thei r views on the Bill. 
Further, during the fourth sitting held on 16.06.2023 , oral evidence of the representatives 
of the Ministry of Fisheries, Animal Husbandry and Dairying  (Department of Fisheries) and 
the Ministry of Law and Justice (Legislative Department) was taken. 
 
5. The Committee considered and adopted this Report during their fifth Sitting held  
on 14.07.2023. 
 
6. The Committee expresses their thanks to the Associations/Organisations,  
Stakeholders, Domain Expert and the State Fisheries Departments  of Coastal States who 
gave their valuable  suggestions/views on the Bill to enable the Committee to understand 
the various Clauses of the Bill, in depth. 
 
7. The Committee wish to express their thanks to the Official s of the Ministry of Fisheries, 
Animal Husbandry and Dairying (Department of Fisheries ) and the Ministry of Law and 
Justice (Legislative Department)  for appe aring before the  Committee and furnishing the 
information that they desired in connection with the examination of the Bill. 
 
8. The Committee would also like to place on record their deep sense of appreciation for  
the invaluable assistance rendered to them  by the officials of Lok Sabha Secretariat 
attached to the Committee. 
 
 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI;                     P.C. GADDIGOUDAR 
14th July, 2023          Chairperson, 
23 Ashadha 1945 (Saka)          Standing Committee on Agriculture, 
Animal Husbandry and Food Processing 
 

1 
 
REPORT 
CHAPTER I 
 GENESIS OF COASTAL AQUACULTURE AUTHORITY ACT, 2005 AND FEATURES 
OF COASTAL AQUACULTURE AUTHORITY (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2023 
 
1.1. Coastal Aquaculture, mostly in form of Brackish Water Shrimp Culture 
witnessed rapid growth in 1980s and 90s. This  growth, mostly unregulated, 
drew widespread concern from e nvironmentalists and matter went  to Supreme 
Court. The Supreme Court in its judgement dated 11 thDecember 1996 in  Writ 
Petition (Civil) No. 561 of 1994  (S. Jagannath v/s Union of India) held that 
Shrimp Aquaculture is an industry  and hence covered by the prohibitions  
imposed in paragraph 2(1)  of the CRZ Notification, 1991 . Accordingly, it 
ordered among other things that n o Shrimp Culture Pond  can be set up within 
the Coastal Regulation Zone, that all Shrimp Culture Industries/Ponds operating 
in CRZ are to be demolished before 31.03.1997, that Central Government shall 
constitute an Authority under Environment (Protection) Act, 1986  to deal 
with the situation created by the Shrimp Culture Industry and to regulate it as 
per ‘Precautionary Principle’ and the “ Polluter Pays Principle ”. The 
Operational part of the Judgement is given at Annexure-I. 
 
1.2. Accordingly, an Authority named Aquaculture Authority was created under 
the Environment (Protection) Act 1986 on 6th February, 1997. However, as most 
Shrimp Farms  were within CRZ Area and they were declared as a prohibited 
activity under CRZ Notification 1991, it was realized that mere establishment of 
the Authority under Environment (Protection) Act cannot save the se Farms from 
closing down resulting in loss of lakhs of employment unless protection is given 
through an Act. Keeping this in view, Government initiated the process of 
formulating a new Act in 1997.  
 

2 
 
1.3. A Bill was introduced in Rajya Sabha on 20 th March, 1997 and passed 
with minor amendments. However, this Bill could not be taken up in Lok Sabha 
and lapsed when Lok Sabha was dissolved. On 21.12.1999, the Cabinet 
approved reintroduction of new Bill on the lines of the Aquaculture Authority Bill, 
1997 as passed in the Rajya Sabha. Finally, the Aquaculture Authority Bill, 2000 
was introduced in the Rajya Sabha on 28.02.2000 .  
 
1.4 Eventually, this Coastal Aquaculture Act was enacted in 2005, where among 
other things it was specifically laid down that the prohibition under CRZ Notification 1991 
issued under Environment (Protection) Act 1986 will not apply to Coastal Aquaculture. 
 
1.5 Since then the Provisions of the Act ensured continued operation of coastal 
aquaculture within CRZ Area subject to restrictions imposed by the Authority. As a 
result, the Coastal Aquaculture Shrimp Production has increased from about 75000 tons 
in 2008-09 to 10.17 Lakh Tons in 2021-22; seafood exports have grown at an average 
annual growth rate of 15% an d income and employment in the S ector have also 
increased manifold from 2005 level. With improvements in technology and culture 
practices, polluting potent ial of Shrimp Culture has also declined substantially. The 
Sector is now poised to take the next big leap in the form of diversification  of species 
and area expansion. 
 
1.6 However, the recent orders of National Green Tribunal (NGT) dated 26 thMay, 
2022 and 29th September, 2022 have interpreted that (a) Section 27 of CAA Act 2005 
offers exemption to coastal aquaculture from paragraph 2 of the CRZ Notification 1991 
only and not from the entire Notification; (b) Section 27 overrides CRZ Notification 1991 
and n ot the subsequent CRZ Notifications issued in 2011 and 2019; (c) Hatcheries 
cannot be permitted within 200 meters from High Tide Line (HTL) as CAA Act provisions 
do not allow it. This has meant that coastal aquaculture units need to obtain CRZ 
clearances i n addition to registration under CAA Act and that protection hitherto 
available under Section 27 is no more there. This development has unsettled a settled 
position vis-à-vis CRZ Notifications and has created considerable uncertainty for the 

3 
 
days ahead.  T hese apprehensions need to be addressed by providing necessary 
provisions in the Act to ensure that the protection granted to coastal aquaculture under 
the Act from the provisions of CRZ Notification 1991 are made available on a permanent 
basis.  
 
1.7 While replying to a query of the Committee as to why a standalone legislation to 
protect Coastal Aquaculture vis-à-vis Coastal Regulatory Zone Notification 1991, 2011 
and 2019 was required whereas the same could have been done by issuing another 
CRZ Notifi cation under the Principal Act - Environment (Prohibition) Act, 1986 or 
bringing suitable amendment in the Environment (Protection) Act 1986 itself allowing 
eco/nature friendly aquaculture in Coastal Areas, the Department submitted as under: 
 
 
'The Supreme Court has held that aquaculture is  an industry and ordered 
that “ the shrimp culture industry/the shrimp ponds are covered by the prohibition 
contained in para 2(1) of the CRZ Notification. No shrimp culture pond can be 
constructed or set up within the coa stal regulation zone as defined in the CRZ 
notification. This shall be applicable to all seas, bays, estuaries, creeks, rivers and 
backwaters”. Consequent to the devastation caused to the Coastal Aquaculture 
Sector, the Ministry of Environment and Forest s ubmitted a note on 1.3.1997 to 
Cabinet seeking approval for amending the CRZ Notification 1991 to permit 
aquaculture activities after a minimum distance of 200m from the HTL after 
obtaining the approval of Aquaculture Authority. The Cabinet directed Ministry of 
Law to prepare a standalone legislation instead of bringing it under the  ambit of 
CRZ Regulation. The Ministry of Law submitted a note dated 14.3.1997 to Cabinet 
seeking regarding legislation for aquaculture and Shrimp Farms/Ponds . While 
approving the proposal on 15.3.1997, the Cabinet directed that the proposed bill 
would be piloted by Ministry of Agriculture. It is submitted that the intention of the 
Government is to regulate the Coastal Aquaculture Sector through exhaustive 
standalone legislation rather than amending or reissuing of another CRZ 
Notification under the Princip al Act - Environment (Prohibition) Act, 1986. The 
mandate of CAA Act is beyond CRZ Regulation and is to promote orderly growth 
and development of Coastal Aquaculture in the country while protecting the coastal 

4 
 
environment. Accordingly, Section 27 of Coastal  Aquaculture Authority Act has 
introduced the sub -paragraph (xiv) in the CRZ Notification 1991 issued under the 
Environment (Protection) Act, to clarify that prohibitions imposed on the Industries 
under the CRZ notification 1991 is not applicable to coasta l and will be regulated 
by the Coastal Aquaculture Authority Act 2005.  CRZ Notification 1991 has been 
superseded by the subsequent CRZ Notifications of 2011 and 2019 making the 
Section 27 infructuous. Therefore, a suitable amendment by way of proviso to 
paragraph dealing with the prohibited activities in CRZ Notification is proposed in 
Section 27 of the Principal Act to remove the ambiguity and to unequivocally 
declare that coastal aquaculture is exempted from the prohibited activities of CRZ 
Notifications issued from time to time and to validate all actions so far taken under 
the CAA Act 2005 coming within the purview of CRZ Notification 1991.' 
 
1.8 After the enactment of the CAA Act, 2005, the Coastal Aquaculture in the 
country has witnessed rapid expansion and deepening with infusion of modern 
technologies and innovations. Technology of production and management of 
environment have also evolved over time. New activities like cage culture and 
seaweed cultivation unknown in 2005 are gaining prominenc e. It is thus 
imperative that the CAA Act is suitably equipped to serve the changing needs of 
the sector. 
 
1.9  Currently coastal aquaculture is not permitted within 200 meters of HTL 
in CRZ area. But Hatcheries, BMCs and NBCs need to be established in these 
areas only to get steady supply of saline water. This is the practice in other 
countries too. Without Hatcheries seed supply for coastal aquaculture cannot be 
ensured. Therefore, necessary relaxation  has been proposed. Similarly, costal 
aquaculture is not permitted in the creeks, rivers and backwaters within the 
CRZ. But activities like cage culture and seaweed can only be taken up 
profitably by small scale farmers in these areas and this is the pract ice in other 
countries. Moreover, these activities cause little damage to environment. 
Accordingly, it has been proposed to relax the prohibitions to ensure orderly 

5 
 
development of these activities and creation of additional sources of income and 
employment to the fishers.  
 
1.10 Since the jurisdiction of the CRZ Notifications 2011 and 2019 extends up 
to 12 Nautical Miles on the seaward side, the amendment to the CAA Act will 
ensure that the mariculture activities like seaweed cultivation, cage fishing , etc. 
which are mostly undertaken within 12 NM  on the seaward side are protected 
from the prohibitions of CRZ Notification and will benefit the small -scale fishers 
and aqua farmers. 
 
1.11  Though the CAA Act has specifically excluded Coastal Aquaculture from 
the purview o f CRZ Notification, recent NGT J udgement has given a different 
interpretation and has opened the door for more litigations. Unless this is 
addressed quickly and suitably, it will be difficult to attract new investment.  
 
1.12  Many of the provisions with respect to registration are too rigid and need 
to be reviewed. Similarly, a number of administrative procedures laid down in 
the Act need revision. For example, there is a need to clearly define the powers 
of Member Secretary under the Act for administrative efficiency and 
accountability. In the CAA Act, there is this provision of imprisonment for a 
period up to 3 years for carrying out coastal aquaculture without registration. 
This appears to be a very harsh punishment for an offence of pur ely civil nature. 
Hence it has been proposed to replace the same with suitable civil instruments 
such as penalty in line with the principle of decriminalizing civil transgressions.  
 
1.13 A recent order of NGT dated 29 th September, 2022 has ruled  that hatcheries 
cannot exist within 200 meter from the HTL citing the provisions of CAA Act. Further, 
they need to be situated mostly within 200 meters from HTL to ensure steady supply of 
saline water, which is now a ‘No Development Area’. Accordingly, relevant  provisions in 
CAA Act , 2005  need to be suitably amended to permit establishment/continuance of 
hatcheries. 

6 
 
1.14 Newer forms of coastal aquaculture have evolved since 2005 given the right 
environment and they have great potential to grow. Activities such as cage culture and 
seaweed culture can be taken up mostly in the estuaries  and creeks and the coastal 
seas within 12 Nautical Miles (NM). These activities do not find place in CAA Act: 
estuaries and creeks are prohibited areas under the Act in its present  form. To promote 
these new forms of coastal aquaculture, CAA Act provisions need to be amended to 
include them under the ambit of the Act and to permit these activities in estuaries and 
creeks, and in coastal waters upto 12 NM on the seaward side. 
 
1.15 To address these concerns, the Department of Fisheries, Ministry of 
Fisheries and Animal Husbandry and Dairying constituted an Expert Committee 
on 6thDecember, 2021 to suggest suitable amendments to the CAA Act, 2005 as 
per sectoral needs and also to draft  the Coastal Aquaculture Authority  
(Amendment) Bill. The present proposal is based on the Recommendations of 
the said Committee.  
 
1.16 Detailing the reasons as to why the Ministry thought of moving this 
proposed Coastal Aquaculture Authority (Amendment) Bill, 2023, the Secretary, 
Department of Fisheries submitted before the Committee as under:-  
 
'... the Act was enacted in 2005 in response to a Judgment given by 
the Supreme Court in 1996. The primary reason for this enactment was 
that the Supreme Court gave a judgment in 1996 saying that ‘shrimp 
culture is an industry and not an agricultural activity.  Since it is an industry, 
it ca nnot be allowed in the CRZ Area because as per CRZ Notification, 
1991, any industry is banned.’ The effect of this was that thousands of 
aquaculture farms had to be shut down. There was also a judgment of the 
Supreme Court that an authority should be forme d and coastal aquaculture should 
be regulated. Earlier this authority was formed, but no one could solve the threat to 
the Shrimp culture that it cannot run in the CRZ area. That is why, the Ministry of 
Agriculture proposed one Bill, and in depth study was  done for about six years. It 

7 
 
had gone to the Standing Committee.  Finally, after a lot of deliberations, this Act 
was enacted in 2005.   As per the Act, one Authority was made. The constitution of 
the authority was described. What will the authority do, h ow to regulate coastal 
aquaculture, so that it should be environment -friendly,  it was also described.  
Specifically, in one clause a provision was made that ‘nothing in the concerned 
paragraph of CRZ Notification 1991, will apply to Coastal Aquaculture. T he reason 
was that it was found very difficult, as the Supreme Court said that it was an 
Industry, to term it otherwise and to keep Coastal Aquaculture out of the industry. 
Hence, this specific Provision was done in Section 27.  After the Authority was 
formed in 2005, Rules were made.  Since then, Shrimp Aquaculture has 
progressed well in the country. Approximately, from 50-60 thousand tons it has 
reached one million tons today. It is a major export earner for the country. There is 
an export of nearly about  Rs. 45,000 C rore.  Lakhs of farmers and workers are 
depending on it directly in the production, and also in the processing, export, 
handling and other related activities. 
 
 But over the time, definition of Coastal Aquaculture has broadened 
beyond Shrimp Aquaculture. Newer activities started growing over time.  There are 
many things which can be included in coastal aquaculture including seaweeds, 
mussel culture, marine cage culture etc.  So, it is the thinking of the Department 
that we should include them in the definition of ‘coastal aquaculture’ because there 
are no rules or regulations for these cultures.  If anybody wants to start them, 
whom to apply, nobody knows. So, this is one of the reasons as to why the 
Ministry has thought of moving this proposed Bill.  
 
 Secondly, the Act of Coastal Aquaculture, 2005, was addressing the 
issues arising out of 1991 CRZ Notifications.  Subsequently, CRZ Notifications 
had been amended in 2011 and then in 2019. So, there is a legal ambiguity 
whether this Act still over rides the subsequent CRZ Notifications. To remove this 
ambiguity, we have proposed certain Sections and Amendments. 
 
 Thirdly, there are some administrative issues like how the Coastal 
Aquaculture Authority will move forward in certain situations.  It was not fully 

8 
 
described.  So, we have tried to create or amend some provisions to bring some 
definitiveness into the Act so that Authority runs smoothly.  For example, to make 
its Member-Secretary function, like CEO, we have tried to insert some provisions.  
 
Fourthly, when this Coastal Aquaculture Act was made, we were thinking it 
only of Shrimp Farms. But later on, we found that there are ancillary activities such 
as Hatchery where  shrimp seed get  produced without which, coastal aquaculture 
is not possible. W hether hatchery is included in the coastal aquaculture or not, 
there are certain ambiguities. Through the amendment, we want to bring it into the 
ambit of Coastal Aquaculture Authority so that there is a holistic development'. 
 
1.17 The main objectives of the Coastal Aquaculture Authority (Amendment) 
Bill are: (a)  to harmonize the CAA Act with the CRZ Notifications issued from 
time to time and to treat the registration granted under CAA Act as a valid 
permission under CRZ Regulations; (b) to keep Coastal Aquaculture outside the 
prohibitions imposed by CRZ Notifications ; (c) to reduce the regulatory 
compliance burden without diluting the core principles of environment protection 
in coastal areas; (d) to remove difficulties and ambiguities in the Act  for effective 
implementation, and for promoting ease of doing business;(e) to decriminalize 
the offence(s) under the Act ; and (f) to expand the scope of the Act to bring all 
coastal aquaculture activities under its ambit.  
 
1.18 The key amendments proposed under the Bill are stated to be as under: 
 
(a) to continue the protection granted  to coastal aquaculture from the prohibited 
activities of CRZ Notifications[Section 27(1)];  
(b) to declare coastal aquaculture and activities connect ed therewith as 
permitted activities rather than exempted  activities under CRZ Notifications while 
ensuring that the CAA alone continues to regulate coastal aquaculture [Section 
28 (1)];  
(c) to treat the registrations granted under CAA Act as valid permissions under  
applicable CRZ Notifications [Section 28 (2)];  

9 
 
(d) to cover all verticals and activities of coastal aquaculture including  hatcheries 
and aquaculture inputs(Section 2); 
(e) to permit Hatcheries, Brood Stock Multiplication Centres (BMC s) and 
Nucleus Breeding Centre s (NBC) within the No Development Zone in sync with 
the CRZ Notifications [Section 13 (8)]; 
(f) to permit activities like cage culture and seaweed cultivation in the creeks, 
rivers and backwaters within the CRZ [Section 13 (8)];  
(g) to replace  imprisonment provisions under Section 14 of the Act with a 
combination of suitable monetary and other p enalties(Section 14);  
(h) to make provisions for authorization of officers(Section 13A); 
(i) to impose penalties against use of banned antimicrobial agents or 
pharmacologically active components in coastal aquaculture(Section 12A); 
(j) to provide for reco very of unpaid cost and penalty as arrears of land revenue 
[Section 22A] etc.  
 The proposed changes are expected to help in harnessing  full potential of 
coastal aquaculture in harmony with the environment . 
 
1.19 Responding to the concern of the Committee, as to whether the 
Department of Fisheries ever consulted Apex Organizations, State Fisheries 
Departments, Stakeholders, Domain Experts, etc., while framing The Coastal 
Aquaculture Authority (Amendment) Bill, 2023 , the Department submitted as 
under:- 
'The Department of Fisheries (Ministry of Fisheries and Animal Husbandry 
and Dairying ) constituted an Expert Committee on 6 thDecember 2021 under the 
Chairmanship of Joint Secretary (Marine Fisheries) to suggest suitable 
amendments to the Coastal Aquaculture Authority Act, 2005 as per sectoral needs 
and also to draft the Coastal Aquaculture Authority (Amendment) Bill, 2022. 
Consultations were held with stakeholders including coastal States/UTs, 
aquaculture farmers, aqua entrepreneurs, seafood exporters and hatchery 
associations and suggestions have been suitably incorporated while drafting the 
Coastal Aquaculture Authority Amendme nt Bill. The draft Amendment Bill in Hindi 

10 
 
and English was placed in public domain and a public notice inviting comments on 
the draft amendment Bill was also published in the leading newspapers in all 
coastal States/UTs. Further, the details of the propose d amendments along with 
explanations in Hindi, English and vernacular languages of the coastal States/UTs 
were posted in public domain. 
 
 The comments/suggestions received from coastal States/UTs and 
stakeholders have been examined and suitably incorporate d in the Bill. The draft 
Coastal Aquaculture Authority Amendment Bill along with the draft Note for the 
Cabinet were circulated to the concerned Ministries/Departments including NITI 
Aayog and the Ministry of Law and Justice for their comments.  Since the t hrust of 
the Coastal Aquaculture Authority Act 2005 is on coastal environment protection, 
this Ministry also had detailed and focused deliberations with Ministry of 
Environment, Forest and Climate Change(MoEFCC), Government of India while 
drafting amendments to the Principal Act in connection with undertaking Coastal 
Aquaculture and Activities connected therewith in the Coastal Regulation Zone 
areas under the erstwhile Coastal Regulation Zone (CRZ) Notification 1991 and the 
prevailing CRZ Notifications 2011  and 2019 issued under the Environment 
(Protection) Act 1986.' 
 
1.20 Explaining as to whether the proposed Bill, in any way, infringes on the Rights of 
the Coastal States to manage the Coastal Areas, the Department submitted as under:-  
 
'The Principal Act i.e. Coastal Aquaculture Authority Act, 2005 was enacted 
by the Parliament in 2005 as a Union legislation inter alia  to protect coastal 
environment, while promoting orderly growth of coastal aquaculture in coastal 
areas and to establish a Coastal Aquaculture Authority for regulating the activities 
connected with coastal aquaculture in the coastal areas. The thrust of the 
legislation has always been to regulate coastal aquaculture with an aim to protect 
coastal environment. The subject "en vironment" has not been expressly listed in 
Union or State or Concurrent Lists of the 7 th Schedule of the Constitution. 
'Environment' being a residual subject, the Parliament has exclusive power to 

11 
 
legislate on residual subjects under Article 248(1) read with Entry 97 List l - Union 
List of Constitution and accordingly Coastal Aquaculture Authority Act, 2005 was 
enacted by Parliament as a Union Legislation. The Bill for enactment of the 
Principal Act i.e. Coastal Aquaculture Authority Act 2005 was piloted by the 
Ministry of Agriculture, Government of India. The Bill seeking to amend the Coastal 
Aquaculture Authority Act, 2005 is being proposed in the same manner. 
 
The Coastal Aquaculture Authority Rules 2005 have been formulated in 
such a way to implement t he Principal Act through the State Government 
institutional mechanisms such as Sub Divisional Committees and District Level 
Committee (DLC) which are headed by Revenue Divisional Officers and District 
Collectors respectively. The roles of the State governm ent machinery in the 
implementation of the legislation have been further enhanced and proposed to be 
codified in the proposed Amendment Bill. Accordingly, it is submitted that the 
Coastal Aquaculture Authority (Amendment) Bill does not in any way, infringe  on 
the Rights of the Coastal States to manage the Coastal Areas. It is also pertinent to 
mention that all the coastal states/UTs have extended their support for the 
amendments proposed in the Coastal Aquaculture Authority (Amendment) Bill 
2023.' 
 
1.21 A Writ Petition W.P.C 492 of 2007  filed by a Private Petitioner is pending in 
the Supreme Court with regard to the constitutional validity of certain provisions 
of the CAA Act, 2005 as well as legislative competence to enact the Act. 
However, as the Court is  yet to deliver its verdict, the competence to legislate is 
still available.  
 
1.22 While replying to what would be the fate of the proposed CAA Bill, 2023, if the 
Supreme Court decides in favour of the Private Petitioner with regard to Constitutional 
Validity of the ‘Certain Provisions’ of the Bill  with particular reference to W.P.C 492 of 
2007, the Department have submitted as under:-  
 

12 
 
'It is submitted that the petitioner in Writ Petition W.P.C 492 of 2007 in the 
Supreme Court, prayed that Section 27 of the CAA Act 2005 along with other 
provisions which take away or render ineffective the directions given by the Hon’ble 
Supreme Court in  S.Jagannath case are null and void. He further asserted that the 
said provisions under challenge are unconstitut ional, violative of Articles 14 and 21 
of the Constitution among others. It is submitted that the Hon’ble Supreme  Court 
has not listed the case W.P.C 492 of 2007 for Hearing after 29th January 2020. The 
matter has been consulted with the Department of Lega l Affairs and it was felt that 
the matter is being sub-judice does not preclude legislation. 
 
It is submitted that the CAA Act, 2005 is an outcome of the 1996 
judgement of Honourable Supreme Court in the Writ Petition (Civil) No. 561 of 
1994. The Hon’ble Supreme Court of India delivered its judgement and the orders 
of the Hon’ble Supreme Court of India on S Jaganathan Vs Union of India and Ors 
(W.P.(c) 561 of 1994) (1997)2 SCC87:AIR1997SC8II on 11 th December 1996. It is 
submitted that the Hon’ble Supreme Court had dismissed number of Review 
Petitions which were pending before the Hon’ble Court on this matter after the 
enactment of the CAA Act 2005.  Accordingly, it is interpreted in a way that the 
legislation has the judicial acceptance. It is submitted that considering CAA Act 
2005 is operational for more than 18 years and is considered as a settled law. 
Hence, it is unlikely that the Supreme Court will take a view in the matter in the 
near future and there is also no certainty about whether the Writ Petition ultimately 
succeeds.' 
 
 
1.23 The Major amendments proposed in the Bill, 2023 are as under: - 
A. Decriminalization of the CAA Act, 2005 
a) Removal of the provision of Imprisonment: - Section 14 of the CAA Act, 
2005 provides for punishment for carrying on coastal aquaculture without 
registration under CAA Act, 2005.  The punishment being imprisonment for a 
term which may extend to three years under the Act or a fine which may 
extend to one lakh rupees, or both. The farmers and other stakeholders are 

13 
 
of the view that since this provision is a draconian punishment and the same 
needs to be replaced with alternative penal provisions  as aquaculture is 
primarily a farming activity undertak en by farmers . Keeping in view, the 
efforts being made by the Government of India to decriminalize minor 
offences under various laws  and that non -registration is minor offence , it is 
now proposed to remove the imprisonment provision  by amending Section 
14 of CAA Act, 2005. 
b) Substitution of Imprisonment punishment with Monetary penalties : -  
Coastal Aquaculture Authority Act being a law mandated to safeguard the 
coastal environment, certain punitive actions are required in the Act to deter 
the violators. Acco rdingly, a combination of suitable monetary and other 
penalties has been proposed in lieu of imprisonment under the Act applying 
the ‘polluter pays principle’. Accordingly, the non -registration of coastal 
aquaculture unit and noncompliance of the provision s of the statute is 
proposed to be dealt with by suspension or stoppage of the coastal 
aquaculture activity, imposition of penalty, removal of any structure or 
standing crops, suspension or cancellation of registration under the 
amended section -14. The pro posed penalties for non -registration and 
noncompliance of the provisions of the Act would be adjudicated and 
imposed by the officers authorized for the purpose,  following “principles of 
natural justice”. Due care has been taken to ensure that the penalties are not 
excessive. Further, efforts have been made to remove discretionary powers 
of adjudicating and appellate authorities.  
c) Provision for Authorization of officers and Appeal:  - Under section -13 
(A) provisions have been made for Authorized officers and Adjudicating 
authorities. In section 14 (A), provisions for appeal against orders passed 
under section -14 have been proposed. This has become necessary as the 
cases will no longer go to courts which have an existing system of appeals 
and revisions.  
 
 

14 
 
B. ENABLING EASE OF DOING BUSINESS   
a) Condonation of delay in submitting the renewal application: -The 
principal Act did not have any provision for delayed application for renewal.  
Now provision has been made in Section 13(10) for condoning the delay in 
submitting the application for renewal of the registration with a compounded 
fee. This will ensure that the farmers are not put into undue difficulty because 
of minor slips. 
b) Provision for providing new certificate in case of mutilation, damage or 
loss, and for effecting changes etc.:  -Under the current Act, re-registration 
in case of changes in ownership or size of the activity causes huge delay in 
effecting the registration. The present amendment provides for effecting 
changes to the certificate of registr ation in case of changes in ownership or 
size of the activity vide Section 13(12) and for providing new certificate in 
case of mutilation, damage or loss of certificate, etc. vide Section 13(13). 
c) Validation of the Meetings of the Authority during the absenc e of the 
regular Chairperson of the Authority:  - As per the principal Act, the 
registration certificates are issued after the approval of the Authority in its 
meeting: this is often delayed when there is no regular Chairperson or, the 
Chairperson is absent . There is ambiguity with regard to how to conduct the 
meetings of the Authority in the event of absence of Chairperson. To remove 
such ambiguity and to ensure continued functioning of the Authority it has 
been proposed vide Section 7(2) to make express pr ovisions in the Act in 
order to enable Chairperson to nominate any other member of the Authority 
to chair the meeting of the Authority in his absence and to enable the 
members present to choose one of the members as a Chairperson.  
d) Minor revisions in Composition of the Authority : - The Composition of 
the Authority has been revised vide Section 4 (3) in tandem with 
nomenclature of various Ministries in the Central Government. A member 
from the administrative Ministry Viz. Ministry of Fisheries, Animal Husband ry 
and Dairying has been proposed. 

15 
 
e) Provision empowering the Authority to appoint Committees for efficient 
discharge of duties: -At present, the Authority implements the Act through 
District Level Committees headed by District Collector and Sub -Divisional 
Level Committees headed by Sub -Divisional Magistrate created under CAA 
Rules. But there are no enabling provisions for the same in the Principal Act. 
To remove this gap, suitable provision  has been proposed to be inserted in 
the Act vide Section 7A (1) to e xpressly empower the Authority to appoint 
Committees for the efficient discharge of its duties and performance of its 
functions under Act. This will enable speedy processing of applications for 
registrations/renewal and also better  monitoring and supervisi on at the field 
level. Further, vide Section 7A(2), the Authority is enabled to induct experts 
into these Committees.   
f) Member Secretary to be the Chief Executive officer of the Authority:  - 
The roles and responsibilities of the Member Secretary of the CAA under the 
current Act have not been elaborated  and this is resulting in administrative 
problems. Therefore, it has been proposed to suitably amend the Act to 
elaborate the roles and respo nsibilities of the Member Secretary by inserting 
a new Section 9A so that she/he can discharge the role more effectively. 
Further it has been proposed to make  the Member Secretary function as the 
Chief Executive Officer of the Authority for better control,  coordination and 
efficient delivery of the mandates under the Act.  
 
C. REDUCING REGULATORY AND COMPLIANCE BURDEN 
a) After the judgement of Hon’ble Supreme Court in 1996, the Ministry of 
Environment and Forest constituted one Aquaculture Authority of India 
during 1997, which became quite regulatory. At that time, it was felt that this 
may hinder growth of coastal aquaculture and even threaten the existing 
aquaculture where considerable investment had already been made. To 
protect such investment and to save emplo yment and livelihood already 
created and to provide for hassle-free growth of the sector, Ministry of 
Agriculture brought out the CAA Act 2005 to provide for conduct of coastal 

16 
 
aquaculture with adequate environment safeguards. T he intention of the 
Government of India all throughout while enacting the Coastal Aquaculture 
Authority Act, 2005 was a) to regulate the coastal aquaculture in the country 
through Coastal Aquaculture Authority Act, 2005 and b) not to treat coastal 
aquaculture as a prohibited activity  within the meaning of the CRZ 
Notification, 1991 issued under the Environment (Protection) Act, 1986.  
b) In order to achieve the above objectives and to clear all doubts, among other 
provisions, express declaration was made vide Section-27 in the Coastal 
Aquaculture Authority Act, 2005 to keep the Coastal Aquaculture out of the 
ambit of CRZ Notification1991.Since the n, the Coastal Aquaculture has been 
regulated under the CAA Act and the Coastal Zone Management Authorities 
constituted under CRZ Notifications have never asked the  coastal 
aquaculture units to obtain CRZ clearances. Further, the CRZ Notifications, 
1991 and 2011 did not even list coastal aquaculture activities in the  list of 
permitted activities/regulated activities. Even the CRZ Notification 2019,  has 
not listed Coastal Aquaculture  in the above lists  except Hatcheries which is 
added to the list of  a regulated activity for the first time. This shows that 
coastal aquaculture was meant to be regulated under CAA Act with the 
environment safeguards prescribed under CAA Act.  
c) However, of late, Section-27 of CAA Act, 2005 has been subjected to varying 
interpretations by Courts, most recent being ,the National Green Tribunal 
(NGT). NGT has viewed that Section 27 of CAA Act 2005 does not offer 
complete exempt ion to coastal aquaculture from the purview of CRZ 
Notification 1991 that rather coastal aquaculture is a regulated activity under 
CRZ Notification, 1991  and therefore clearances need to be taken from 
concerned environment regulators. Though this has been ordered with 
reference to Hatcheries and that too for Tamil Nadu only, this has the 
potential to open the entire sector to the scrutiny by such regulators. 
Therefore, a suitable amendment is proposed in the text of Section 27 of the 
Principal Act to remove the ambiguity and to unequivocally declare that 
coastal aquaculture is exempt from prohibited activities of CRZ Notification 

17 
 
issued from time to time  and to  validate all actions so far  taken under the 
CAA Act 2005 coming within the purview of CRZ Notification 1991.  
d) It is felt that Section 27 of the Principal Act even with the proposed 
amendment may not serve its purpose in respect of Coastal Aquaculture 
Units as it still has the gap to the effect that coastal aquaculture still requires 
permission under CR Z notification. Accordingly, it was proposed to insert a 
new Section 28 to make it clear that the CRZ notifications are not applicable 
on Coastal Aquaculture covered under CAA Act . However, in pursuance of 
further discussions held on this matter at various  levels, especially with 
Ministry of Environment , Forest and Climate Change (MoEFCC),  it was felt 
that it would be appropriate to declare Coastal Aquaculture and activities 
connected therewith as permitted activities under CRZ Notifications issued 
from time to time rather than being seen as an omnibus exemption from CRZ 
Notifications, while ensuring that the CAA alone continues to regulate coastal 
aquaculture.  Hence,  Section 28 has been suitably revised with an alternate 
formulation to the effect that coas tal aquaculture and activities connected 
therewith is a permitted activity in CRZ under the CRZ notifications and the 
registration granted under CAA Act shall be treated as valid permission 
under CRZ regulations and same has been agreed to by MoEFCC. This will 
help to a) remove the prevailing ambiguities and once for all put to rest any 
misinterpretations of courts including NGT; b) reduce the multi -agency 
regulatory and compliance burden on coastal aquaculture and c) reiterate 
the protection granted under the validation Section i.e. Section-27 in the 
Principal Act albeit in the revised form as stated above.  Furthermore, in order 
to validate the costal aquaculture activities undertaken subsequent to 
supersession of CRZ Notification 1991, suitable amendments to Sub-section 
8 of Section 13 of the Principal Act including insertion of a new  Sub-section 
(3) in Section-28have been proposed in the Amendment Bill.  
e) Section 13(8) of the CAA Act 2005 prohibits Coastal Aquaculture within the 
“No Development Zone” which is 200 meter from the High Tide Line (HTL) 
towards the landward side and in the creeks, rivers and backwaters within 

18 
 
the Coastal Regulation Zone (CRZ). At the time of promulgation of the Act, 
only coastal aquaculture activity was shrimp farms. Since farms can occupy 
Lakhs of Acres it was considered to ban them within this sensitive 200 -Meter 
Zone. However, this provision has been construed to be applicable for the 
Hatcheries by the NGT  in its recent Judgement. Hatcheries were always an 
exempted activity in the above No Development Zone as per  CRZ 
Notifications 1991 and 2011  and now permitted and regulated activity under 
CRZ Notification, 2019 and  are allowed to be established even in CRZ IB 
area i.e. intertidal zone  (from HTL towards  seaward side ) which  is much 
more sensitive than the No Development Zone of 200 meters). Further 
hatcheries and similar units of Brood Stock Multiplication Centres (BMCs) 
and Nucleus Breeding Centres (NBCs) need to be established on the coast 
to get adequa te supply and access to quality seawater. Without considering  
this position, NGT has viewed that hatcheries cannot exist in No 
Development Zone as they are not permitted as per Section 13(8) (a) of CAA 
Act, 2005. To address this issue once for all,  it is proposed to amend Section 
13(8) of CAA Act, 2005 to provide for permitting  hatcheries and similar 
activities like Brood Stock Multiplication Centres and Nucleus Breeding 
Centres within the No Development Zone of the CRZ in the case of sea and 
in the Buffer Zone in the case of creeks, rivers and backwaters under the Act 
with retrospective effect from the commencement of the Principal Act.  
f) Further, Section 13(8) (b) of the CAA Act 2005 prohibits Coastal Aquaculture 
in the creeks, rivers and backwaters within the CRZ. This was done because 
in 2005 only form of Aquaculture was shrimp farms, and they were being set 
up in these water  bodies by putting up bunds and altering the character of 
the water  bodies. Now newer forms of coastal aquaculture such as cage 
culture, seaweed culture, bi -value culture, etc. have come up which can only 
be done in these areas, and which do not cause any damage to such water  
bodies. These activities are very remunerative and also have the potential for 
creating large scale employment o pportunities for coastal fisher communities 
especially fisherwomen. Therefore, it is intended to make these activities 

19 
 
permissible in creeks, rivers and backwaters within the Coastal Regulation 
Zone (CRZ) by suitably amending the Section 13(8) of the CAA A ct with 
retrospective effect from the commencement of the Principal Act.  
 
D. Sustainable development of Coastal Aquaculture: 
(a) In 2005, coastal aquaculture activity was essentially shrimp farming. 
Therefore, aquaculture and farm have been interchangeably used. Now it is 
proposed to broad base “coastal aquaculture” to cover all activities of coastal 
aquaculture and necessary inclus ions in the list of definitions in Section 2 
have been made. The term “Farm or Farms” has been substituted with the 
term “coastal aquaculture unit or units” to expand the scope of the Coastal 
Aquaculture as understood in the Act and to provide for coordina ted, 
inclusive regulatory regime.    
(b) Disease prevention is key to success of coastal aquaculture.  Accordingly, 
specific provisions for Aqua Zonation, Specific Pathogen Free (SPF) 
Certification, establishment of NBCs and BMCs which are key to the 
production of disease -free stocks have been made in the Act vide section 
24(bc). Though these aspects have already been looked after through the 
Guidelines, it is felt that express mention of the same in the Act will help in 
better administration of such Guidelines.  
 
E. Ensuring the protection of Coastal Environment and its sustainability:- 
a) At present, the CAA Guidelines  in sync with CRZ Notification do not permit 
Coastal Aquaculture Activities in the Ecologically  Sensitive Areas (ESA s) 
and Geo -morphological areas for environmental sustainability . While this 
provision already exists through CAA Guidelines, there is no enabling 
provision in the Principal CAA Act for its legal validity and effective 
implementation. Therefore, it is proposed to make an express provision in  
the Principal Act 13(8)(a) in harmony with CRZ Notification.  
b) Rise of anti-microbial resistance because of indiscriminate use of anti -biotics 
in aquaculture is a major concern. To tackle this, the aquaculture inputs and 
pharmacologically active substance or anti -microbial agents have been 

20 
 
suitably defined. Further, prohibition of the use of pharmacologically active 
substances or anti -microbial agents  or any other material which may cause 
harm to human health including use of aquaculture inputs containing s uch 
substance, agent or material has been proposed under Section12A of the 
amendment Bill for protection of coastal environment and public health.  
 
Jurisdiction:-  
1.24 Detailing Jurisdiction of the Central Government pertaining to Fisheries which is 
State subject in the 7 th Schedule of the Constitution of India, the Department stated as 
under:-  
'Fisheries are included in the State list in the 7 th Schedule of Constitution 
of India . Coastal aquaculture is regulated by Government of India through CAA 
Act. Coastal aquaculture is the aquaculture carried on in CRZ areas. As CRZ 
areas have been extended up to territorial waters, power to regulate coastal 
aquaculture in such territorial waters will vest with Government of India.  
Whereas, the Coastal Aquaculture Authority Act , 2005  is a legislation 
enacted by the Parliament for regulating coastal aquaculture on the e nvironment 
side i.e. to protect coastal environment while promoting orderly growth of coastal 
aquaculture in coastal areas and to establish a Coastal Aquaculture Authority for 
regulating the activities connected with coastal aquaculture in the coastal areas. 
The thrust of the legislation has always been to  regulate coastal aquaculture with 
an aim to protect coastal environment. 'Environment' being a residual subject, the 
Parliament has exclusive power to legislate on residual subjects under Article 
248(1) read with Entry 97 List l - Union List of Constitution. 
It is relevant to add that one of the key purposes of enacting the Coastal 
Aquaculture Authority Act 2005 was to permit coastal aquaculture in Coastal 
Regulation Zone area in the Coastal Regulation Zone (CRZ) Notification 1991 
issued under Environment (Protection) Act, 1986 by  the Ministry of Environment, 
Forest and Climate Change ( MoEFCC). While the CRZ area under CRZ 

21 
 
Notification 1991 is 500 meter from High tide Line (H TL) one the landward side, 
the CRZ areas in the CRZ Notifications 2011 and 2019 extend up to the territorial 
waters on the seaward side in addition to 500 meter on the landward side. 
Therefore, it is essential to synchronise the jurisdictional areas of Coastal 
Aquaculture Authority Act 2005 and the CRZ Notifications 2011 and 2019 with  the 
express intention of enabling lakhs of small marginal aquaculture farmers to 
undertake coastal aquaculture on seaward side with registration under Coastal 
Aquaculture Authority Act and avoid the possible need for obtaining CRZ 
clearances from multiple  agencies especially State Coastal Zone Management 
Authorities (SCZMAs). It is also essential to ensure that the activities like seaweed 
cultivation, mussel cultivation, cage fishing etc. which are undertaken on seaward 
side are protected from the prohibit ions of CRZ Notifications for the benefit of the 
small-scale fishers and aqua farmers. 
It is also relevant to add that the Coastal Aquaculture Authority Rules 
2005 have been formulated in such a way to implement the Principal Act through 
the State Governme nt institutional mechanisms such as Sub Divisional 
Committees and District Level Committee (DLC) which are headed by Revenue 
Divisional Officers and District Collectors respectively. The roles of the State 
government machinery in the implementation of the legislation have been further 
enhanced and proposed to be codified in the proposed Amendment Bill. It is 
pertinent to mention that all the coastal states/UTs have extended their support for 
the amendments proposed in the Coastal Aquaculture Authority (Amen dment) Bill 
2023.  
Thus, it may be seen that the regulation of coastal aquaculture in territorial 
waters under the Coastal Aquaculture Authority Act 2005 is from the stand point of 
coastal environment protection. Neither the Coastal Aquaculture Authority Act 
2005 nor the pro posed Coastal Aquaculture Authority (Amendment) Bill in any 
way, infringe on the Rights of the Coastal States to develop and promote coastal 
aquaculture in territorial waters. The state governments will continue to govern and 
manage their fisheries in territorial waters as usual. 

22 
 
CHAPTER II 
CLAUSE BY CLAUSE EXAMINATION OF THE COASTAL AQUACULTURE 
AUTHORITY (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2023  
 
Clause No. 1 
Provision in the Principal Act, Section 1 (1) & (2) 
2.1. Short title and Commencement  
 (1) This Act may be called the Coastal Aquaculture Authority Act, 2005. 
(2) Provisions of Section 27 shall come into force at once and the remaining provisions 
of this Act shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by 
notification in the Official Gazette, appoint. 
Amendment Proposed in the Bill 
2.2 (1) This Act may be called the Coastal Aquaculture Authority (Amendment) Act, 
2023. 
(2) Save as otherwise provided, it shall come into force on such date as the Central 
Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint; and different dates 
may be appointed for different provisions of this Act. 
Justification  
2.3 Amendment of Section 1 is Editorial Change 
Comments/Observation/Recommendation of the Committee 
2.4 The Committee noted that there is no substantive change  except for an 
editorial change in this clause. The Committee decided to  accept the proposed 
amendment.  
Clause No. 2 
Provision in the Principal Act,  
Definitions, Section 2 (1) 
2.5 (1) In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,  
 
Amendment Proposed in the Bill 
2.6 In Coastal Aquaculture Authority Act, 2005, (hereinafter referred to as the 
Principal Act), unless the context otherwise requires, — 
 

23 
 
Justification  
2.7 Amendment of Section 2 
In 2005, coastal aquaculture activity was essentially shrimp farming. Therefore, 
aquaculture and farm have been interchangeably used. Now it is proposed to broad 
base “coastal aquaculture” to cover all activities of coastal aquaculture and nec essary 
inclusions in the list of definitions in Section 2 have been made. The term “Farm or 
Farms” has been substituted with the term “coastal aquaculture unit or units” to expand 
the scope of the Coastal Aquaculture as understood in the Act and to provide  for 
coordinated, inclusive regulatory regime.    
 
Amendment Proposed in the Bill (Definition) 
2.8 (a) “aquaculture input” means any material used as an input in coastal aquaculture 
for the maintenance of quality of water and soil and for the growth and better health of 
organisms reared, or other aquatic life available, therein and includes seed, fertilizer, 
feed, growth supplement, probiotic, environment remediator and disinfectant; 
Justification New Insertion 
2.9 To bring clarity and to cover the aquaculture inputs under this Act. 
 
Comments of Stakeholders 
2.10 The representative of the Directorate of Fisheries, Kerala  during their oral 
evidence and also through their written memorandum forwarded to the Committee 
Secretariat made a suggestion  for inclusion in the Definition Section 2 (i) for clause (a). 
Along with  the word  'fertilizer', the word  'organic manure’ should also be included 
because 'organic manure’ is used traditionally in aqua-culture. 
 
Examination by the Committee  
2.11 The Committee, duri ng the examination of the Bill, sought clarification on the 
word 'Fertilizer' to know whether this includes organic/green manure, etc. The 
Department responded in a written reply as under: 
 
'The word "fertilizer” includes both organic fertilizer and inorganic fertilizers 
and hence an express mention of the word “Organic Manure in Section 2(i) (a) has 
not been considered. The definition of Fertiliser including organic manure will be 
considered while framing the Rules.' 
 
 

24 
 
Comments/Observation/Recommendation of the Committee 
2.12 After perusing the reply of the Department, the Committee noted that the 
concerns of the Directorate of Fisheries  could be  addressed adequately  at the 
time of framing the Rules and the Committee decided to accept  the amendment 
proposed. 
Amendment Proposed in the Bill (Definition) 
 
2.13 (aa) “aqua mapping” means geospatial coastal area distribution maps depicting 
areas potential and suitable for coastal aquaculture; 
Justification New Insertion 
2.14 To provide for geo spatial planning to promote sustainable coastal aquaculture. 
 
Amendment Proposed in the Bill (Definition) 
2.15 (ab) “aqua zonation” means the zones of spatial planning for different species or 
methods of coastal aquaculture notified by a State Government or the Authority for 
sustainable coastal aquaculture; 
 
Justification  New Insertion 
2.16 To provide for geo spatial planning to promote sustainable coastal aquaculture. 
 
Comments of Stakeholders 
2.17 Department of Fisheries and Fishermen Welfare , Government of Ta mil Nadu in 
its written Memorandum submitted to the Committee made a suggestion that instead of 
'State Government or the Authority'  'State Government and the Authority ' may be 
substituted.  
Examination by the Committee  
2.18 While responding to the suggestion whether words "notified by a State 
Government or the Authority" be substituted with words "notified by a State 
Government/UT and the Authority", the Department in a written reply stated as under:-  
 
"In order to enable those  States which have already made the Aqua 
zonation to operationalise the same and also to avoid any possible delay in 

25 
 
formulating a national level aqua zonation by the Authority, it has been proposed 
as ‘State Government or the Authority’. Hence, the same may be retained." 
 
Comments/Observation/Recommendation of the Committee 
2.19 The Committee deliberated upon the proposal made in the clause including 
the justification given by the Department and decided to accept the amendment 
proposed under the clause.  
Amendment Proposed in the Bill (Definition) 
2.20 (ad) “biosecured facility” means a coastal  aquaculture unit carrying on coastal 
aquaculture activity  adopting such biosecurity measures for ensuring  freedom from 
disease causing pathogens as may be specified in  the guidelines issued for  such 
activity; 
 
Justification:- New Insertion 
2.21 Disease prevention is key to success of coastal aquaculture. Accordingly, specific 
provisions for Specific Pathogen Free (SPF) certification, establishment of NBCs and 
BMCs which are key to the production of disease-free stocks have been made in the Act. 
This will enable the establishment of disease free systems and production of genetically 
improvised SPF stocks to promote sustainable coastal aquaculture. 
 
Comments/Observation/recommendation of the Committee 
 
2.22 The Committee deliberated upon the proposal made in the clause including 
the justification given by the Department and decided to accept the amendment 
proposed under the clause.  
 
Amendment Proposed in the Bill (Definition) 
 
2.23 (ae) “biosecurity” means any measure or strategy or integrated approach 
adopted to analyse, manage and prevent  the risk of introduction or spread of harmful 
organisms, including viruses and bacteria, within the coastal aquaculture unit and to 
minimize the risk of transmission of infectious diseases; 
 
Justification  New Insertion 
2.24 To provide for disease free and genetically improvised stocks and systems to 
promote sustainable coastal aquaculture. 
 
 
 

26 
 
Comments/Observation/Recommendation of the Committee: 
 
2.25 The Committee deliberated upon the proposal made in the clause including 
the justification given by the Department and decided to accept the amendment 
proposed under the clause.  
Amendment Proposed in the Bill (Definition) 
2.26 (af) “Brood Stock Multiplication Centre” means a coastal aquaculture unit 
carrying on such coastal aquaculture activity which receives such post larvae or juvenile 
which are specific pathogen free or specific pathogen tolerant or specific pathogen 
resistant or such other post larvae or juvenile from a Nucleus Breeding Centre and rears 
it under strict biosecurity and close disease surveillance to ensure freedom from 
disease; 
Justification  New Insertion 
2.27 Disease prevention is key to success of coastal aquaculture. Accordingly, 
specific provisions for Specific Pathogen Free (SPF) certification, establishment of 
NBCs and BMCs which are key to the production of disease -free stocks have been 
made in the Act. This will enable the establishment of disease fre e systems and 
production of genetically improvised SPF stocks to promote sustainable coastal 
aquaculture. 
 
Comments/Observation/Recommendation of the Committee 
2.28 The Committee deliberated upon the proposal made in the clause including 
the justification given by the Department and decided to accept the amendment 
proposed under the clause.  
Provision in the Principal Act 
2.29 (c) “coastal aquaculture” means  culturing, under controlled  conditions in ponds, 
pens, enclosures or otherwise, in coastal  areas,  of shrimp, prawn, fish or any  other 
aquatic life in saline or  brackish water; but does not include  fresh water aquaculture; 
Amendment proposed in the Bill 
2.30 (c) “coastal aquaculture” or “coastal aquaculture activity” means rearing and 
cultivation of any life stages of fish, including crustacean, mollusc, finfish, seaweed or 
any other aquatic life under controlled conditions, either indoor or outdoor, in cement 
cisterns, ponds, pens, cages, rafts, enclosures or otherwise insaline or brackish water in 
coastal areas, including activities such as production of brood stock, seed, grow out, but 
does not include fresh water aquaculture; 
 
Justification  Amendment of Clause (c)  

27 
 
2.31 To broad base “coastal aquaculture” to comprehensively cover all activities of 
coastal aquaculture under the purview of this Act and to remove the ambiguity exist ing 
in the Principal Act between the farm and other verticals of coastal aquaculture. 
 
Comments/Observation/Recommendation of the Committee 
2.32 The Committee deliberated upon the proposal made in the clause including 
the justification given by the Department and decided to accept the amendment 
proposed under the clause.  
Amendment Proposed in the Bill (Definition) 
2.33 (ca) “coastal aquaculture unit” means any facility that is engaged in coastal 
aquaculture or any allied activity connected therewith and includes  Nucleus Breeding 
Centre, Brood Stock Multiplication Centre, hatchery and farm; 
 
Justification New insertion 
2.34 To broad base “coastal aquaculture” to cover all activities of coastal aquaculture 
and necessary inclusions in the list of definitions in Section 2 have been made. The term 
“Farm or Farms” has been substituted with the term “coastal aquaculture unit or units” to 
expand the scope of the Coastal Aquaculture as understood in the Act and to provide for 
coordinated, inclusive regulatory regime. 
 
Comments/Observation/Recommendation of the Committee 
2.35 The Committee deliberated upon the proposal made in the clause including 
the justification given by  the Department and decided to accept the amendment 
proposed under the clause.  
Provision in the Principal Act 
2.36 (d)  “coastal area” means the area declared as the Coastal Regulation Zone, for 
the time being, in the notification of the Government of India in the Ministry of 
Environment and Forests (Department of Environment, Forests and Wildlife) No. S.O. 
114(E), dated the 19th February, 1991 and includes such other area as the Central 
Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, specify; 
 
Amendment Proposed in the Bill 
2.37 (d)     “coastal area” means the area declared as the Coastal Regulation Zone in 
the Coastal Regulation Zone notification issued by the Central Government under the 
Environment (Protection) Act, 1986 and includes such o ther area as the Central 
Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, specify; 
 
Justification  Amendment of Clause (d) 

28 
 
2.38 The definition of coastal area has been amended to seamlessly cover the CRZ 
notifications issued from time to time. 
 
Comments/Observation/Recommendation of the Committee 
2.39 The Committee deliberated upon the proposal made in the clause including 
the justification given by the Department and decided to accept the amendment 
proposed under the clause.  
 
Amendment Proposed in the Bill (Definition) 
2.40 (da) “coastal environment” means the area of land  and water in the coastal area, 
including complete system of living organisms and physical surroundings therein; 
 
Justification New insertion 
2.41 To comprehensively cover the coastal environment under the purview of this Act. 
 
Comments/Observation/Recommendation of the Committee 
2.42 The Committee deliberated upon the proposal made in the clause including 
the justification given by the Department and decided to accept the amend ment 
proposed under the clause.  
Amendment Proposed in the Bill (Definition) 
2.43 (db) “ farm” means  a coastal aquaculture unit where culturing of fish, including 
crustacean, mollusc, finfish, seaweed or any other aquatic life is done under controlled 
conditions in ponds, pens, cages, rafts, enclosures or otherwise, in saline or brackish 
water in coastal areas and includes nursery rearing, but does not include fresh water 
aquaculture; 
 
Justification New insertion 
2.44 To alleviate the ambiguity that exists in the Principal Act between the farm and 
other verticals of coastal aquaculture. 
 
Comments/Observation/Recommendation of the Committee 
2.45 The Committee deliberated upon the proposal made in the clause including 
the justification given by the Depa rtment and decided to accept the amendment 
proposed under the clause.  
Amendment Proposed in the Bill (Definition) 
2.46 (dc) “hatchery” means a coastal aquaculture unit carrying on coastal aquaculture 
activity of breeding and seed production of fish, including crustacean, mollusc, finfish, 

29 
 
seaweed or any other aquatic life, in saline or brackish water and includes rearing of 
nauplii and live feed, but does not include fresh water aquaculture; 
 
Justification New insertion 
2.47 To alleviate the ambiguity that exists in the Principal Act between the farm and 
Hatchery as well to bring the Naup lii Rearing Hatcheries and live feed rearing facilities 
under the ambit of the Act. 
 
Comments of Stakeholders 
2.48 While deposing before the Committee, the representatives of the Department of 
Fisheries, Government of Andhra Pradesh advocated that the activities of live feed 
culture, ornamental fish breeding and propagation units should be exempted along with 
NBC, BMC and seaweed culture within  the CRZ notified zone, since these units also 
need coastal marine ecosystem to support the livelihood of the traditional coastal 
fishermen.  
 
Examination by the Committee 
2.49 On being asked about the view of the Department on the suggestion to exempt 
the activities of Live Feed Culture units and Ornamental fish breeding and propagation 
units also along with NBC, BMC and seaweed culture within CRZ notified area, as these 
units also need coastal marine ecosystem to support the livelihood of traditional coastal 
fishers, the Department in a written reply stated as under:  
“The 2(dc) of the Amendment Bill provides for the definition o f hatchery . 
“Hatchery” means a coastal aquaculture  unit carrying on coastal aquaculture 
activity of breeding and seed production of fish, including crustacean, mollusc, 
finfish, seaweed or any other aquatic life, in saline or brackish water and includes 
rearing of nauplii and live feed, but does not inclu de fresh water aquaculture”. 
Hence Hatchery includes any breeding activity including ornamental fish and live 
feed. Further Hatchery has also been exempted along with NBC’s and BMC’s in 
the “ No Development Zone”  in the case of sea, and in the “ buffer zo ne” in the 
case of creeks, rivers and backwaters as provided under Section 13(8)(b)”.  

30 
 
Comments/Observation/Recommendation of the Committee 
2.50 On examination, the Committee find that the concerns raised by the State 
Fisheries Department of Andhra Pradesh on the subject have already been 
adequately addressed to and incorporated and thus  accept the amendment  
proposed. 
 
Amendment Proposed in the Bill (Definition) 
2.51 (ea) “Nucleus Breeding Centre” means a coastal aquaculture unit carrying on 
bio-secured coastal aquaculture activity which has an established freedom from disease 
causing pathogens for the purpose of producing domesticated specific p athogen free, 
specific pathogen tolerant and specific pathogen resistant stocks; 
 
Justification New Insertion  
2.52 Disease prevention is key to success of coastal aquaculture. Accordingly, 
specific provisions for Specific Pathogen Free (SPF) certification, establishment of 
NBCs and BMCs which are key to the production of disease -free stocks have been 
made in the Act. This will enable the establishment of disease free systems and 
production of genetically improvised SPF stocks to promote sustai nable coastal 
aquaculture. 
 
Comments/Observation/Recommendation of the Committee 
2.53 The Committee deliberated upon the proposal made in the clause including 
the justification given by the Department and decided to accept the amendment 
proposed under the clause.  
Amendment Proposed in the Bill (Definition) 
2.54  (eb) “operator” means any person or firm that is engaged in the operation of the 
coastal aquaculture activity; 
 
Justification New Insertion 
2.55 To define and cover the owner or operator to fix responsibility on the owner and 
operator under this Act. 
 
Comments/Observation/Recommendation of the Committee 
 
2.56 The Committee deliberated upon the proposal made in the clause including 
the justification given by the Department and decided to accept the amendment 
proposed under the clause.  
 

31 
 
Amendment Proposed in the Bill (Definition) 
2.57  (ec) “owner”, in relation to any coastal aquaculture unit, includes— 
(i) his legal heirs or agent; and 
(ii) an operator, a mortgagee, lessee, including sub -lessee or  any other person in 
actual possession of such coastal aquaculture unit; 
Justification New Insertion 
2.58 To define and cover the owner or operator to fix responsibility on the owner and 
operator under this Act. 
Comments/Observation/Recommendation of the Committee: 
2.59 The Committee deliberated upon the proposal made in the clause including 
the justification given by the Department and decid ed to accept the amendment 
proposed under the clause.  
Amendment Proposed in the Bill (Definition)  
2.60 (ed) “ pharmacologically active substance or antimicrobial agent” means a 
naturally occurring, semi -synthetic or synthetic substance that, at in vivo concentration, 
exhibits antimicrobial activity of killing or inhibiting the growth of microorganisms; 
 
Justification New Insertion  
2.61 Rise of anti -microbial resistance because of indiscriminate use of anti -biotics in 
aquaculture is a major concern. Hence, to deter and prevent the usage of Antibiotics and 
the pharmacologically active substance or antimicrobial agent in the coastal 
aquaculture systems to promote sustainable coastal aquaculture and to protect the 
environment and public health. 
 
Comments/Observation/Recommendation of the Committee 
2.62 The Committee deliberated upon the proposal made in the clause including 
the justification given by the Department and decided to accept the amendment 
proposed under the clause.  
 
Amendment Proposed in the Bill (Definition)  
 
2.63 (h) “specific pathogen free” or “specific pathogen resistant” or “specific pathogen 
tolerant” means free of, resistant to, or tolerant to, such pathogens  as may be listed by 
the World Organization for Animal Health or any other pathogen notified by the Cen tral 
Government, which is specific for candidate species used in the coastal aquaculture; 

32 
 
Justification  New Insertion  
2.64    Disease prevention is key to success of coastal aquaculture. Accordingly, 
specific provisions for Specific Pathogen Free (SPF) certification, establishment of 
NBCs and BMCs which are key to the production of disease -free stocks have been 
made in the Act. This will enable the establishment of disease free systems and 
production of genetically improvised SPF stocks to promote sustai nable coastal 
aquaculture. 
 
Comments/Observation/Recommendation of the Committee: 
2.65 The Committee deliberated upon the proposal made in the clause including 
the justification given by the Department and decided to accept the amendment 
proposed under the clause.  
Amendment Proposed in the Bill (Definition) 
2.66 (i) “State” includes Union Territory; 
 
Justification  New Insertion 
 
Comments/Observation/Recommendation of the Committee 
2.67 The Committee deliberated upon the proposal made in the clause including 
the justification given by the Department and decided to accept the amendment 
proposed under the clause.  
Clause No. 3 
 
Provision in the Principal Act; Establishment of Authority and appointment of  
Chairperson and Members, 
 
2.68      Section 4 (3) 
(c)  one member who is an expert in the field of coastal ecology nominated by the 
Department of Ocean Development of the Central Government; 
(d) one member who is expert in the field of environment protection or pollution 
control nominated by the Ministry of Environment and Forests of the Central 
Government; 
(e) one member to represent the Ministry of Agriculture of the Central Government; 
(f)      one member to represent the Ministry of Commerce of the Central Government; 
 
Amendment Proposed in the Bill 
 
2.69 (c) For the words "Department of Ocean Development", the words "Ministry of 
Earth Sciences" shall be substituted. 

33 
 
(d) For the words "Ministry of Environment and Forests", the words "Ministry of 
Environment, Forest and Climate Change" shall be substituted; 
(e)  For the words  "Ministry of Agriculture ", the words "Ministry of Agriculture  and 
Farmers Welfare" shall be substituted; 
(f)  For the word, " Ministry of Commerce ", the words "Ministry of Commerce and 
Industries" shall be substituted; 
 
Justification Editorial Changes in tandem with the present day nomenclature of the 
Ministries 
 
Comments/Observation/Recommendation of the Committee 
 
2.70 The Committee deliberated upon the proposal made in the clause including 
the justification given by the Department and decided to accept the amendment 
proposed under the clause.  
Amendment Proposed in the Bill (Definition) 
 
2.71     (fa) one member to represent the Ministry of Fisheries, Animal Husbandry 
and Dairying of the Central Government; 
 
Justification New Insertion 
2.72 To include the newly created administrative Ministry. 
 
Comments of the Stakeholders 
 
2.73 While appearing before  the Committee, one of the experts in the field of 
Aquaculture submitted as under:-  
 
“In the Coastal Aquaculture Authority, Members are from different 
government departments with no representation from the stakeholders. Such a 
large community has not been  represented in the Authority. Our humble 
submission is that for a better understanding of the issues in the sector and for 
implementation of the rules and regulations of CAA, representation of stakeholders 
should be there in the Authority. The following r epresentatives should be 
considered to be made members of the authority: A representative from the coastal 
aquaculture farmers; a representative of the hatchers; a representative of the 
seafood exports; and a representative of the society of aquaculture profession”.  
 

34 
 
2.74 While appearing before  the Committee, another domain expert submitted as 
under:- 
 
“Originally, when Aquaculture Authority was established, we had farmers’ 
representatives as four representatives. Later, those fours were converted into 
Government people. There, you can put a word ‘stakeholders’ -- four members 
representing coastal States”. 
 
Examination by the Committee 
 
2.75 The Committee while examining the Bill noted that as per section 4(3) (g) of the 
Principal Act four members of the Coastal States will be represented in the Coastal 
Aquaculture Authority on rotation basis. While responding to the query of the Committee 
as to why all the Coastal/States/UTs cannot be included in the CAA composition, the 
Department of Fisheries in a written reply submitted as under:-  
 
'Section 4 of the Principal Act provides for inclusion of four members to 
represent the coastal States on rotation basis and the same may be considered for 
representation from the stakeholders.   In addition, a new provision Section 7 (A) 
has been included in the Amendment Bill to constitute Committees as may be 
necessary for efficient discharge of the function s of the Coastal Aquaculture 
Authority. P ublic representatives/members of coastal fish farmers as sociations/ 
local body members/Farmer Producer Organizations may also be included in such 
Committee to aid and advise the Authority." 
        
2.76  The Department further submitted in writing: 
 
"Section 4 of the Principal Act provides for four members to represent the 
coastal States’ on rotation basis for a period of 3 years.  This arrangement is 
working well since last 18 years and almost all major coastal stat es having coastal 
aquaculture have been represented over the years.  In addition, a new provision 
Section 7 (A) has been included in the Amendment Bill to constitute Committees 
as may be necessary for efficient discharge of the functions of the Coastal 
Aquaculture Authority. The Authority may include additional stakeholders including 
coastal states/UTs , public representatives, farmers and experts  in such 

35 
 
Committees to take benefit of their experiences and also have a close ear to the 
ground level situations concerning coastal aquaculture."    
 
2.77 During the course of deliberations held with the representatives of the State 
Fisheries Departments, Organisations, Stakeholders and Domain Expert, the 
Committee deduced that the general understanding and request of all the agencies 
concerned was that the representation in the Coastal Aquaculture Authority should be 
broadened representing various section s/interest groups on whom this Amendment Bill 
would have a bearing. Duri ng the discussions it was also ponder ed over that the 
representatives of the all the Coastal States, Coastal Aquaculture Farmers, 
Stakeholders, Hatcheries and Society of Aquaculture Professionals and public 
representatives should also be represented in the Coastal Aquaculture Authority so as 
to make it more inclusive. 
Observation/Recommendation of the Committee: 
2.78 The Committee note that Section 4 of the Principal Act deals with 
establishment of Coastal Aquaculture Authority and appointment of Chairperson 
and Members.  
Due to some consequentia l changes in the nomenclature of 
Ministries/Departments, certain provisions in Section 4 (3) (c) (d) (e) and (f) have 
been proposed to be amended. Simultaneously, a new Insertion (fa) sub -clause 
has been added to represent the nodal Ministry i.e. Ministry of Fisheries, Animal 
Husbandry and Dairying of the Central Government.   
As per Section 4 (3) (g) there is a provision that four Members from the Coastal 
States will be represented in  the CAA as Members on rotation basis. However, 
during deliberations of the Committee on the subject under reference, the 
Committee w ere in unanimity that the representation base of the Coastal 
Aquaculture Authority be broadened inclusively giving represen tation to all 
Coastal States including stakeholders. This matter was further discussed with the 
representatives of the Department wh o stated that apart from the existing 
representation of Coastal States as per sub -clause (g), a New Section 7A in the 
Bill h as been in serted to constitute Committees for efficient discharge of 

36 
 
functions of the CAA wherein the public representatives/ Members of Coastal Fish 
Farmers Association/Local Body Members/Farmer Producer Organization s may 
also be included in such Committees to aid and advise the Authority. 
The Committee note that there is no express provision to this effect under the 
proposed Section 7A and it is implied that it would be at the discretion and 
wisdom of the Department to give representation to such persons i n these 
Committees. The Committee, therefore, recommend that all the Coastal States , 
Stakeholders and Public Representatives should be given representation either in 
the Coastal Aquaculture Authority itself or in the Committees to be constituted 
under the proposed Section 7A.  
 
Clause No. 4 
 
Provision in the Principal Act, Meetings of Authority,  
 
2.79  Section 7 
 
(2)  If for any reason the Chairperson is unable to attend any meeting of the Authority 
any other member chosen by the members present at the meeting shall preside at the 
meeting. 
 
Amendment Proposed in the Bill 
 
2.80  (2) If the Chairperson is unable to attend a meeting of the Authority, any other 
member of the Authority nominated by the Chairperson in this behalf, and in the 
absence of both Chairperson and nominated member, any other member chosen by the 
members present from amongst themselves, shall preside over the meeting. 
 
Justification Substitution of Sub Section (2) 
2.81 As per the Principal Act, the registration certificates are issued  after the approval 
of the Authority in its meeting: this is often delayed when there is no regular 
Chairperson or, the Chairperson is absent. There is ambiguity with regard to how to 
conduct the meetings of the Authority in the event of absence of Chairpe rson. To 
remove such ambiguity and to ensure continued functioning of the Authority it has been 
proposed to make express provisions in the Act in order to enable Chairperson to 

37 
 
nominate any other member to chair the meeting of the Authority in his absence and to 
enable the members present to choose one of the members as a Chairperson. 
 
Examination by the Committee 
2.82 As justified by the Department that the issuance of registration certificates gets 
delayed when there is no regular Chairperson or the Chairperson is absent. They 
further stated that there is an ambiguity with regard to how to conduct the meetings of 
the Authority in the event of absence of Chairperson. To remove such ambiguity to 
ensure continued functioning of the Authority this provision has been made to enable 
the Chairperson to nominate any other Member to Chair the meeting of the Authority in 
his absence.  
 While examining this clause 4, the Committee endorsed the proposed provision 
of authorisation/nomination of a Member either by the Chairman or enabling the 
Members present to choose one of the Members as Chairperson to preside over the 
Meeting.  However, the Co mmittee note that there is no express provision how to 
conduct Meetings of CAA when there is no regular Chairperson.  
 
2.83 Responding to the above concern of the Committee during Oral Evidence, the 
Joint Secretary (Marine Fisheries), Department of Fisheri es submitted before the 
Committee as under:-  
 
'Sir, I would like to submit that under Clause 4(2) if the Chairperson is 
unable to attend a meeting of the Authority – that is a casual absence – any other 
member of the Authority nominated by the Chairperson  in this behalf, and in the 
absence of both Chairperson and nominated member, any other member chosen 
by the members present from amongst themselves, shall preside over the 
meeting.'  
 
2.84 In this regard, the Joint Secretary and Legislative Counsel (Legislative 
Department, Ministry of Law & Justice) submitted to the Committee as under: 
 
'Sir, actually this provision is for temporary absence of Chairperson only. It 
cannot be in the absence of appointed person. The Chairperson is a Judge of a 

38 
 
High Cour t in this case. Therefore, the Central Government has power under 
Section 4 to appoint the Chairperson and he has to be appointed.' 
 
2.85 Elaborating further the Member Secretary, CAA stated as under:-  
 
'Sir, for two to three years, as the hon. Member has  said, we did not have 
a Chairman. But after that even in the absence of Chairman, we had several 
meetings. What we did was that we selected among the members whoever is 
senior like Maharashtra Secretary or Andhra Secretary. Whoever is senior among 
the mem bers, that person served as a Chairperson for that particular Authority 
meeting. Every third month, we used to keep the Authority meeting and the 
Chairman used to be one person from those available members. So, like that, from 
2020 to 2021 December, for tw o years we conducted nearly eight Authority 
meetings on a rotation basis.' 
 
2.86 The Committee had exhaustive discussion on the issue of appointment of 
Chairperson and also had a pprehensions with respect to a situation when the post of 
Chairperson itself remains unfilled / vacant  and also acknowledged that in the 
amendment Bill there is no express provision to address such a situation. The members 
also expressed their concern as to who would call upon the meeting of the Authority if 
the post of Chairperson is vacant.  
Observation/Recommendation of the Committee 
2.87 The Committee examined this Clause and appreciate and endorse the 
provision made in the Clause for nomination of a Member by the Chairperson in 
his absence and enabling the Members to choose one of the Members to preside 
over the meeting of the CAA , in case the Chairperson is absent. However, at the 
same time, the Committee express their concern over the fact that this Clause of 
the Bill is silent with respect to a situation where the post of Chai rman of the 
Authority is vacant. However, the Committee are apprehensive as to who will call 
and preside over the Meeting when  the post of Chairperson of the Authority is 
vacant. Having taken a note of this , the Co mmittee recommend that a  provision 

39 
 
be expressly made in this Clause to address such a situation , where the post of 
Chairperson itself is vacant.  
 
Clause No. 5 
Amendment Proposed in the Bill, Committees of Authority, 
 
2.88 Insertion of new Section 7A 
7A. (1)  Subject to any rules made in this behalf, the Authority may from time to time 
constitute such committees as may be necessary for the efficient discharge of its 
functions.   
(2)  Every committee shall consist of such number of persons and perform such 
functions and be subject to such terms and conditions as may be prescribed. 
Justification Insertion of new Section 7A. 
2.89 At present, the Authority implements the Act through District Level Committees 
headed by District Collector and Sub -Divisional Level Committees headed by Sub -
Divisional Magistrate created under CAA Rules. But there are no enabling provisions for 
the same in the Principal Act. To remove this gap, suitable provision has been proposed 
to expressly empower the Authority to appoint Committees for the efficient discharge of 
its duties and performance of its functions under Act. This will enable speedy 
processing of applications for registrations/renewal and also better monitoring and 
supervision at the field level. Further, vide Section 7A (2), the Authority is enabled to 
induct experts into these Committees. 
Examination by the Committee 
 
2.90 The Department of Fi sheries submitting their stand on the subject stated in a 
written reply as under:- 
 
'It is also relevant to add that the Coastal Aquaculture Authority Rules 
2005 have been formulated in such a way to implement the Principal Act through 
the State Government institutional mechanisms such as Sub Divisional 
Committees and District Level Commit tee (DLC) which are headed by Revenue 
Divisional Officers and District Collectors respectively. The roles of the State 
government machinery in the implementation of the legislation have been further 

40 
 
enhanced and proposed to be codified in the proposed Amen dment Bill. It is 
pertinent to mention that all the coastal states/UTs have extended their support for 
the amendments proposed in the Coastal Aquaculture Authority (Amendment) Bill 
2023.  
 
Thus, it may be seen that the regulation of coastal aquaculture in territorial 
waters under the Coastal Aquaculture Authority Act 2005 is from the stand point of 
coastal environment protection. Neither the Coastal Aquaculture Authority Act 
2005 nor the pro posed Coastal Aquaculture Authority (Amendment) Bill do not in 
any way, infringe on the Rights of the Coastal States to develop and promote 
coastal aquaculture in territorial waters. The state governments will continue to 
govern and manage their fisheries in territorial waters as usual. ' 
 
2.91 Responding to a query as to how the power of the Authority to constitute 
Committees under principal legislation be subject ed to R ules to be formulated by the 
Government, which may lead to absolute delegation of power  by CAA , the Ministry 
stated as under:- 
'At present, the Authority implements the Coastal Aquaculture Authority 
Act 2005 through District Level Committees headed by District Collector and Sub -
Divisional Level Committees headed by Sub -Divisional Magistrate/ Revenue 
Divisional Officer created under Coastal Aquaculture Authority Rules. But there are 
no enabling provisions for the same in the Principal Act. To remove this gap, 
suitable provision has been proposed to expressly empower the Authority to 
appoint Committees for the efficient discharge of its duties and performance of its 
functions under Act. This will enable speedy processing of applications for 
registrations/renewal and also better monitoring and supervision at the field level. 
Further, vide Section 7A (2), the Authority is enabled to induct experts into these 
Committees. Similar provisions exist in the Marine Products Export Development 
Authority Act 1972 (MPEDA Act 1972), a union legislation of more than 50 years 
old, wherein the Authority has power  to appoint Committees under Section 8(1) 
and 8(2) of MPEDA Act 1972. However, even under the MPEDA Act 1972, the 
power of the Authority to constitute Committees is subject to rules and regulations 

41 
 
formulated by the Central Government i.e. under Section 33 and Section 34 of 
MPEDA Act 1972. The composition, roles and responsibilities of the Committees 
constituted under MPEDA Act 1972 are only spelt out under the Rules and 
Regulations notified under Act. This Ministry resorted to similar appr oach while 
drafting the Coastal Aquaculture Authority Amendment Bill 2023 with regard to 
constitution of Committees.  
 
The Committees are envisaged to perform only such delegated functions 
as may be entrusted by the Authority within the framework of the Ac t and detailing 
the functions of the committees in the Act itself is not desirable in the interest of 
maintaining the supremacy of the Coastal Aquaculture Authority in furtherance of the 
objectives of the Act. It is further submitted that the rules formula ted by central 
government under the amended Coastal Aquaculture Authority Act will prescribe the 
guiding principles on the nature of the committees to be constituted, their 
composition, functions, terms and conditions for transaction of business and such 
other matters thereof, to enable the Authority to constitute various committees for 
the efficient discharge of its duties and performance of its functions.' 
 
Observation/Recommendation of the Committee 
2.92 The Committee examined the proposed provision of constitution of 
Committees for efficient discharge of the functions of the  CAA. The Committee 
decided to accept the provisions proposed under this Clause. However, the 
Committee are equally concerned that the process and procedure for constituting 
these Committees be made transparent enough to make sure that the persons to 
be nominated to these Committees should have immaculate past record and 
relevant expertise in the subject.  
 
 
 

42 
 
Clause No. 6 
 
Amendment Proposed in the Bill, Member Secretary of Authority, 
2.93 Insertion of new Section 9A 
 
9A.(1) The Central Government may appoint an officer of such rank, as it considers fit, 
to be a Member -Secretary of the Authority, in such manner and subject to such terms 
and conditions as may be prescribed.  
(2) The Member-Secretary shall function as the Chief Executive Officer of the Authority 
who shall be responsible for–– 
(a) the day-to-day administration of the Authority; 
(b) drawing up of proposal for the Authority’s work programmes in consultation with 
the Authority; 
(c) implementing the work programmes and the decisions adopted by the Authority; 
(d) ensuring that the tasks of the Authority are carried out in accordance with the 
requirements of users, in particular with regard to the adequacy of the services 
provided and the time taken; 
(e) the preparation of the statement of revenue and expenditure and the execution 
of the budget of the Authority;  
(f) coordinating with the Central Government and with the committees of the 
Authority; and 
      (g) legally representing the Authority in all matters. 
 
 (3) Every year, the Member- Secretary shall submit to the Authority for approval: – 
(a) a general report covering all the activities of the Authority in the previous 
  year; 
(b) the programmes of work; 
(c) the annual accounts for the previous year; and 
        (d) the budget for the coming year. 
 
(4) The Member-Secretary shall, after the approval of the Authority, forward the general 
report and the programmes to the Central Government and shall have the general 
report published. 
(5) The Member-Secretary shall have administrative control over the officers and other 
employees of the Authority. 
 

43 
 
(6) The Member -Secretary shall approve all financial expenditure of the Authority and  
send a report on the Authority’s activities to the Central Government. 
 
Justification Insertion of new Section 9A 
2.94 The roles and responsibilities of the Member Secretary of the CAA under the 
current Act have not been elaborated and this is resulting in administrative problems. 
Therefore, it has been proposed to  suitably amend the Act to elaborate the roles and 
responsibilities of the Member Secretary so that she/he can discharge the role more 
effectively. Further it has been proposed to make the Member Secretary function as the 
Chief Executive Officer of the Aut hority for better control, coordination and efficient 
delivery of the mandates under the Act.   
 
 
Observation/Recommendation of the Committee 
2.95 The Committee deliberated upon the proposal made in the clause including 
the justification given by the Department and decided to accept the amendment 
proposed under the clause.  
Clause No. 7 
Provision in the Principal Act, Functions of Authority  
2.96 Section 11 (1) 
 
(a) to make regulations for the construction and operation of aquaculture farms within 
the coastal areas; 
(b) to inspect coastal aquaculture farms with a view to ascertaining their environmental 
impact caused by coastal aquaculture; 
(c) to register coastal aquaculture farms; 
(d) to order removal or demolition of any coastal aquaculture farms which is causing 
pollution after hearing the occupier of the farm; and 
 
Amendment Proposed in the Bill 
 
2.97 (i) In clause (a), for the words "aquaculture farms", the words "coastal 
aquaculture units" shall be substituted;  
 (ii) in clauses (b) and (c), for the word "farms", the word "units" shall be substituted; 
 (iii) for clause (d), the following clause shall be substituted, namely; 
 (d) to order removal or demolitio n of any coastal aquaculture unit which is causing 
pollution after hearing the occupier of the unit; 
 
 

44 
 
 
Justification Amendment of Sub Section 1 
 
2.98 Editorial change to substitute the word 'farm' with 'unit' to cover all the verticals of 
coastal aquaculture under the ambit of this Act. 
 
Comments/Observation/Recommendation of the Committee 
2.99 The Committee deliberated upon the proposal made in the clause including 
the justification given by the Department and decided to accept the amendment 
proposed under the clause.  
Amendment Proposed in the Bill, (New Insertion) 
 
2.100 (da)   to regulate or prohibit the number, species and method of any coastal 
aquaculture in such area, as may be prescribed, through planning and execution of 
such programmes, including aqua  zonation and aqua mapping for environmentally 
sustainable coastal aquaculture, as may be notified by the Central Government; 
 
Justification New Insertion 
2.101 The provisions for Aqua Zonation, will enable disease free coastal aquaculture 
farming with varying technological innovations through mapping of potential areas and 
aqua zonation for the sustainable development of all coastal aquaculture verticals. 
 
Examination by the Committee 
 
2.102 Replying to a suggestion proposed by one of the stakeholders that the proposed 
words "as may be notified by the Central Government"  be replaced with the word s "as 
may be  notified by the Central Government in consultation with respective Coastal 
States/UTs" the Department replied as under:-  
 
'Clause (da) of Subsection (1) of Section 11 provides for the powers of the 
Authority to regulate or prohibit the number, species and method of any coastal 
aquaculture in such area, as may be prescribed, through planning and execution of 
such programmes, including aqua zonation and aqua mapping for environmentally 
sustainable coastal aquaculture. Considering that the Authority in its composition 
has the representation of the State Government, an express mention in the said 
subclause has not been considered.' 

45 
 
Comments/Observation/Recommendation of the Committee 
2.103 The Committee deliberated upon the proposal made in t he clause in the 
light of the concerns raised by stakeholders and the justification given by  the 
Department and decided to accept the amendment proposed.  
Amendment Proposed in the Bill 
 
2.104 (db) to fix or adopt standards, certify, monitor, regulate or prohibit coastal 
aquaculture inputs, including probiotics, therapeutants and such other inputs used in 
coastal aquaculture, as may be prescribed, for the prevention, control and abatement of 
detriment to the coastal aquaculture or coastal environment; 
Justification - New Insertion 
 
2.105 Rise of anti -microbial resistance because of indiscriminate use of anti -biotics in 
aquaculture is a major concern. To tackle this, the aquaculture inputs and 
pharmacologically active substance or anti-microbial agents have been suitably defined. 
Further, prohibition of the use of pharmacologically active substances or anti -microbial 
agents or any other material which may cause harm to human health including use of 
aquaculture inputs containing such substance, agent or material has been proposed 
under Sectio n 12A of the amendment Bill for protection of coastal environment and 
public health. At present, the certification of inputs is being undertaken by CAA through 
Guidelines as a voluntary programme. 
 
Examination by the Committee 
2.106 The Committee noted that aqua -culturists use drugs /pro-biotics and production 
boosters sold by companies , which have no valid and verified content labeling . The 
Committee find that sometimes the export shipments are rejected on ground of residues 
of these banned drugs, pro -biotics, production boosters and anti -biotics. In this 
backdrop, the Committee enquired whether there is any accredited Authority/A gency in 
the country, which can test or certify these drugs/production boosters  etc available in 
the market to be free of banne d antibiotics and chemicals so that the Shrimp /fish and 
their product  do not get antibiotic residual level  beyond the acceptable limit or zero 
level. Responding to this concern of the Committee, the Ministry stated as under:  

46 
 
'The use of Antibiotics and Ph armacologically active substances are not 
permitted in Coastal Aquaculture as provided in the Coastal Aquaculture  Authority 
Guidelines. In order to enforce the same, Coastal Aquaculture Authority is 
implementing a voluntary certification programme and is i ssuing Certificate of 
Compliance for Antibiotic Free Aquaculture Inputs. Coastal Aquaculture Authority 
has issued necessary advisory encompassing labelling requirements and use of ‘ 
Antibiotic Free’ logo on the label based on the certification from  the Au thority. 
Further, in the present Amendment Bill, under clause (iv)(db) of sub -section (1) of 
Section 11 under the Functions of the Authority, provision has been made “to fix or 
adopt standards, certify, monitor, regulate or prohibit coastal aquaculture inp uts, 
including probiotics, therapeutants and such other inputs used in coastal 
aquaculture, as may be prescribed, for the prevention, control and abatement of 
detriment to the coastal aquaculture or coastal environment. Necessary detailing 
will be done while framing the Rules and Guidelines.' 
Comments/Observation/Recommendation of the Committee 
2.107 The Committee w ere informed that Shrimp farmers use certain 
drugs/production boosters so as to improve the quality and productivity of their 
Shrimp produce. However, at times these drugs/production boosters contain ing 
banned antibiotic/ chemical contents and their residues are found in the final 
product during the testing by the Export Inspection Authority (EIA). The 
Committee further came to know that the e xport shipments having residues  of 
such banned chemicals/drugs/anti -biotics are out rightly rejecte d by the 
importing countries.  
After having deliberated on the issue and the replies of the Department, the 
Committee are of the opinion that lack of content labeling on these 
drugs/production boosters is the major cause of concern and thus the voluntary 
certification programme being implemented by the Coastal Aquaculture Authority 
issuing certificates for antibiotic -free Aquaculture Inputs should be made 
mandatory. The Committee also desire that t he aquaculture unit holders should 

47 
 
know the contents of the aquaculture inputs t hey are using so that their produc e 
is not rejected at later stage. 
Amendment Proposed in the Bill 
2.108 (dc) to fix or adopt standards, certify, monitor and regulate the coastal 
aquaculture units, including coastal aquaculture activities carried out in such units with 
bio-security and close disease surveillance to ensure freedom from disease, in such 
manner as may be prescribed; 
Justification -  New Insertion  
2.109 Disease prevention is key to success of coastal aquaculture. Accordingly, specific 
provisions for Aqua Zonation, Specific Pathogen Free (SPF) certification, establishment 
of NBCs and BMCs which are key to the production of disease -free stocks. Though 
these aspects have already been looked after through the guidelines, it is felt that 
express mention of the same in the Act will help in better administration of such 
guidelines. 
Observation/Recommendation of the Committee 
2.110 The Committee deliberated upon the proposal made in the clause including 
the justification given by the Department and decided to accept the amendment 
proposed under the clause.  
Amendment Proposed in the Bill 
 
2.111 (dd) to fix or adopt the standards for emission or di scharge of effluents from 
coastal aquaculture unit: 
     Provided that different standards for emission or discharge may be fixed for different 
coastal aquaculture unit having regard to the quality or composition of the emission or 
discharge of effluents from such sources; 
 
Justification  New Insertion 
2.112 The waste water discharge from the aquaculture units are to be monitored for 
their standards as they are being discharged into the natural systems. The authority is 
empowered to fix or adopt standards for the waste water being discharged or any other 
emission being made from the facility to promote the environmental sustainability. 
 
 
 

48 
 
Comments/Observation/Recommendation of the Committee 
2.113 The Committee deliberated upon the proposal made in the clause including 
the justification given by the Department and decided to accept the amendment 
proposed under the clause.  
Amendment Proposed in the Bill 
2.114 (de) to collect and disseminate information in respect  of matters relating to 
coastal aquaculture; 
 
Justification New insertion 
2.115 To authorize the authority to publish information on coastal aquaculture. 
 
Comments/Observation/Recommendation of the Committee 
2.116 After due deliberations, the Committee feel that dissemination of relevant 
information regarding coastal aquaculture is a welcome step and thus , the 
Committee accept the amendment proposed. 
 
Provision in the Principal Act 
2.117   11 (2) Where the Authority orders removal or demolition of any co astal 
aquaculture farm under clause (d) of sub -section (1), the workers of the said farm shall 
be paid such compensation as may be settled between the workers and the 
management through an authority consisting of one person only to be appointed by the 
Authority and such authority may exercise such powers of a District Magistrate for such 
purpose, as may be prescribed. 
 
Amendment Proposed in the Bill 
2.118  (2) For the word "farm" at both places where it occurs, the word "unit" shall be 
substituted. 
 
Justification  Amendment of Sub Section 2 
2.119 Editorial change to substitute the word "farm" with "unit" to cover all the verticals 
of coastal aquaculture under the ambit of this Act. 
 
Comments/Observation/Recommendation of the Committee: 
2.120 The Committee deliberated upon the proposal made in the clause including 
the justification given by the Department and decided to accept the amendment 
proposed under the clause.  
 

49 
 
Clause No. 8 
 
Provision in the Principal Act, Power to enter  
 
2.121 Section 12 
 
#Subject to any rule made in this behalf, any person generally or specially authorised by 
the Authority in this behalf, may, where ever it is necessary to do so for any purposes of 
this Act, at all reasonable times, enter on any coastal aquaculture la nd, pond, pen or 
enclosure and ---- 
(a) make any inspection, survey, measurement, valuation or inquiry; 
(b) remove or demolish any structure therein, and 
(c) do such other acts or things as may be prescribed. 
 
*Provided that no such person shall enter on any coastal aquaculture land, pond, pen or 
enclosure without giving the occupier of such aquaculture land, pond, pen or enclosure 
at least twenty-four hours’ notice in writing of his intention to do so. 
 
Amendment Proposed in the Bill 
 
2.122 (a) For the words, "land, pond, pen or enclosure", wherever they occur, the word 
"unit" shall be substituted. 
(b) after the proviso, the following provisos shall be inserted, namely:-  
**Provided further that the requirement of notice  under the first proviso may be waived 
by the Authority, in such cases and for such reasons to be recorded in writing, as it 
deems fit: 
**Provided also that the owner shall be liable to pay the cost of demolition and cost of 
damage to the environment, if any, assessed in such manner as may be prescribed. 
 
Justification  Amendment of Section 12 
 
2.123 #Editorial change to substitute the word "farm" with "unit" to cover all the verticals 
of coastal aquaculture under the ambit of this Act. 
*Editorial changes in this proviso. 

50 
 
**Insertion of new provisos. To empower the authority to waive the requirement of notice 
on case to case basis to enter into any facility and to carry out its functions efficiently 
under the mandate of the Act.  Further Coastal Aquaculture Authority Act being a law 
mandated to safeguard the coastal environment, certain punitive actions are required in 
the Act to deter the violators. Accordingly, a combination of suitable monetary and other 
penalties has been proposed in lieu of imprisonment under the Act applying the ‘polluter 
pays principle’. 
 
Examination by the Committee 
2.124 Responding to the need to define ‘such cases’ and ‘such reasons’ which sound 
very vague, occurring in the above proposed proviso, the Department submitted in 
writing as under:-  
'The proviso to Section 12 has been proposed to empower the authority to 
waive the requirement of notice on case to case basis to enter into any facility and 
to carry out its functions efficiently under the mandate of the Act. It is submitted 
that as matte r of abundant caution, power to waive the requirement of notice has 
been vested with the Authority and not with the field officers to ensure that there is 
sufficient justifiable cause to enter the facilities without the notice to maintain the 
element of surprise.  
The Authority being the apex body to decide on the matter, it is proposed 
to leave it to the wisdom of the Authority on the field level requirements arising 
from time to time for which the waiver is to be granted instead of prescribing the 
same either under the Act or under the rule. Further Coastal Aquaculture Authority 
Act being a law mandated to safeguard the coastal environment, certain element of 
surprise is required to deter the violators. Further, the issues which necessitates 
entry and inspection without notice are quite dynamic and evolving, and hence, it is 
neither desirable nor feasible to list such cases in the Act itself and the objectives 
of the legislation are best served if such matters are left to the prudence of the 
Authority.'  

51 
 
2.125 Responding to the concern of the Committee regarding the ambiguity and  
vagueness of these words i.e. ‘such cases’ and ‘such reasons’ , the Joint Secretary 
(Department of Fisheries) during the Oral Evidence submitted as under:  
 
Yes, Sir.  In Section 12 of the Principal Act, at present, power of the 
authority to enter into coastal aquaculture, ponds without giving 24 hours notice we 
cannot enter into any aquaculture establishment. Right now we are bringing a 
small amendment to it.It is because it was the suggestion which actually emanated 
from the MPEDA. Someone is using antibiotics and we are not able to go to check 
it.Hon. Committee suggested whether it is too much power given to just enter into 
the premises and taking action. Therefore, it is not kept at the field level. Where the 
committee considers in exceptional cases, the authority can give a direction and 
not the field inspectors. Assistant Fishery Officer cannot directly enter into any 
premises. In exceptional cases Where there is some illegality, we have to see 
something completely, authority will be having the power to enter into it. Basically, 
this is to protect the vibrations. No one will be able to prove that someone is using 
antibiotics in 24 hours notice. The Committee will use its wisdom. In those cases of 
habitual offenders, they may invoke this as an exception. But we did not give full 
powers to the field level organizations in the amending Bill. This is only an 
exception power only with the approval of the authority. Authorization approval can 
be done. 
2.126 During deliberations on the issue and after  having heard  the views of all the 
agencies involved, the Committee expressed their concern with respect to the blanket 
powers of the proviso being added to Section 12 of the Principal Act which empowers 
the Authority to waive the requirement of Notice on case to case basis to enter into any 
facility and to carry out its functions efficiently under the mandate of the Act.  
The Committee expressed their apprehension that this proviso may take 
the form of a raid an d become a mechanism to harass the marginal Aquaculture 
Farmers. Allaying the apprehension of the Committee, the representatives of the 
Department during the oral evidence categorically made it clear that the said 

52 
 
proviso would not empower any local office r to conduct the said inspection on its 
own whims and fancies but with the express and exclusive  approval of the 
Authority on case to case basis. 
Comments/Observation/Recommendation of the Committee 
2.127 After elaborate discussion and assurance given by the Department to use 
this power- to waive the requirement of notice on case to case basis to enter into 
any facility - with the mandatory permission of the Authority,  the Committee 
accept the said amendment. However, the Committee desire  that the Department 
should take necessary measures and put in place adequate safeguards so as to 
prevent the misuse of the provisions of the amendment proposed. 
Clause No. 9 
Amendment Proposed in the Bill,12A. Prohibition of certain materials 
2.128 Insertion of New Section 12A 
 
12A. The Authority may, by an order, prohibit the use, in any coastal aquaculture 
activity, of– 
(a) such pharmacologically active substance, antimicrobial agent or other material 
which may cause harm to human health as may be prescribed; or  
(b) aquaculture inputs containing such substance, agent or material as may be 
specified under clause (a). 
Justification  Insertion of new Section 12A 
2.129 Rise of anti -microbial resistance because of indiscriminate use of anti -biotics in 
aquaculture is a majo r concern. To tackle this, the aquaculture inputs and 
pharmacologically active substance or anti-microbial agents have been suitably defined. 
Further, prohibition of the use of pharmacologically active substances or anti -microbial 
agents or any other mater ial which may cause harm to human health including use of 
aquaculture inputs containing such substance, agent or material has been proposed for 
protection of coastal environment and public health. 
 
Examination by the Committee 
2.130 Responding to a specific query as to why not the words 'harmful to human health’ 
be substituted with words 'harmful to coastal ecosystem including human health', the 
Department replied in writing as under:-  

53 
 
 
'The rise of anti -microbial resistance because of use of antibiotics in 
primary livestock production systems is a major concern. To tackle this issue in 
coastal aquaculture, the aquaculture inputs and pharmacologically active 
substance or anti-microbial agents have been suitably defined. Further, prohi bition 
of the use of pharmacologically active substances or anti -microbial agents or any 
other material which may cause harm to human health including use of 
aquaculture inputs containing such substance, agent or material has been 
proposed for protection o f public health. Coastal ecosystem being complex and 
vast, determination of harm to the ecosystem is subjective and hence not 
proposed. However, necessary and substantial provisions have been made 
available under the Act for safeguarding the coastal environment.'  
 
Comments/Observation/Recommendation of the Committee 
2.131 The Committee found the arguments forwarded by the Depar tment 
convincing. The Committee, therefore, accept the amendment proposed. 
 
Clause No. 10 
Provision in the Principal Act, Registration for Coastal Aquaculture 
2.132 Section 13 
 
(1) Save as otherwise provided in this section, no person shall carry on, or cause to be 
carried on, coastal aquaculture in coastal area or traditional coastal aquaculture in the 
traditional coastal aquaculture farm which lies within the Coastal Regulation  Zone 
referred to in sub -section (9) and is not used for coastal aquaculture purposes on the 
appointed day unless he has registered his farm with the Authority under sub -section (5) 
or in pursuance of subsection (9), as the case may be. 
Amendment Proposed in the Bill 
2.133  For the word "farm", the word "unit" shall be substituted. 
 
Justification  
2.134  Amendment of Section 13 
 

54 
 
Editorial change to substitute the word "farm" with "unit" to cover all the verticals of 
coastal aquaculture such as Hatchery, Nucleus Breeding Centers (NBC), Brood Stock 
Multiplication Centers (BMC) and Aquaculture inputs under the mandate of the Act. 
 
Comments/Observation/Recommendation of the Committee 
2.135 The Committee deliberated upon the proposal made in the clause including 
the justification given by the Department and decided to accept the amendment 
proposed under the clause.  
Provision in the Principal Act 
 
2.136 (3) The registration made under sub -section (5) or in pursuance of sub -section 
(9)— 
(a) shall be valid for a period of five years; 
(b) may be renewed from time to time for a like period; and 
(c) shall be in such form and shall be subject to such conditions as may be 
specified by the regulations. 
 
Amendment Proposed in the Bill 
 
2.137 In sub-section (3), the following proviso shall be inserted, namely:-  
 
“Provided that the Authority may issue a certificate of registration for carrying out 
coastal aquaculture on the land allotted or as signed by the Government subject to such 
procedure and for such period, as may be prescribed, but not exceeding the period 
specified under clause (a) or clause (b), as the case may be ." 
 
Justification  
2.138 Amendment of Sub Section (3) 
 
No change in these clauses (a), (b) and (c) 
A ‘proviso’ has been added as demanded by some state government in view of the 
state government policies relating to lease tenure. 
 
Examination by the Committee 
 
2.139 The Department in their written replies  pertaining to the tenure of Registration 
submitted as under:-  
 

55 
 
'The thrust of the Coastal Aquaculture Authority Act  2005 is to regulate 
coastal aquaculture with an aim to protect coastal environment.  Therefore, it is not 
desirable to allow long tenure of registration from the stand point of environmental 
sustainability. Hence, no revision has been proposed in the existing period of 
validity of five years  as contained in the Principle Act. It is relevan t to mention that 
registration of Coastal Aquaculture undertaken on leased lands is also permitted.        
Definition in the Section 2 (ec) of the Amendment Bill, clarifies ‘owner’ to mean to 
include lessee and sub -lessee. It is pertinent to mention that t he registration is 
against an activity i.e. here coastal aquaculture activity and hence independent of 
land lease. It is also relevant to mention that the Sub -section (3) of Section -13 of 
the Principal Act reads as follows: 
 
“ (3) The registration made under sub-section (5) or in pursuance of sub -section 9 
– 
(a) shall be valid for a period of five years; 
(b) may be renewed from time to time for a like period; and  
(c) shall be in such form and shall be subject to such conditions as may be 
specified by the regulations”  
 
While the language of Sub-section 3(a) and (c) with word “shall” makes it absolute, 
Sub-section 3(b) with word “may” offers flexibility. Therefore, this provision can be 
invoked while renewing the registration for period lesser than 5 years. Hence, there 
may not be any difficulty in availing financial assistance under Pradhan Mantri  
Matsya Sampada Yojana (PMMSY) on land taken on lease for 7 years.' 
 
 
Comments/Observation/Recommendation of the Committee 
2.140 The Committee accept the justification given by the Department for not 
allowing registration of Units for longer tenure i.e. beyond five years as has been 
prescribed in the Principal Act from the standpoint of environmental 
sustainability. However, t he Com mittee note that as there is no substantive 
amendment proposed under this section 13 (3) (a), (b) and (c) and only a proviso 
limiting the registration period specified under clause (a) or clause (b) as the case 

56 
 
may be, has been proposed to be inserted. The  Committee, therefore, accept th e 
amendment proposed.  
 
Provision in the Principal Act 
 
2.141   (4) A person who intends to carry on coastal aquaculture shall make an 
application for registration of his farm before the Authority in such form accompanied 
with such fees as may be prescribed for the purpose of registration under sub -section 
(5). 
 
(5) On  receipt of an application for registration of a farm under subsection (4), the 
Authority shall consider the application in the prescribed manner and after considering 
the application either register the farm or reject the application: 
Provided that the Au thority shall not reject the application without recording the reason 
for such rejection. 
 
(6) The Authority shall, after registering a farm under sub -section (5), issue a certificate 
or registration in the prescribed form to the person who has made the ap plication for 
such registration. 
 
 
Amendment Proposed in the Bill 
 
2.142 In sub-sections (4), (5) and (6), for the word "farm", wherever it occurs, the words 
"coastal aquaculture unit" shall be substituted. 
 
Justification  
2.143 Amendment of sub-section (4), (5) & (6) 
 
Editorial change to substitute the word "farm" with "unit" to cover all the verticals of 
coastal aquaculture such as Hatchery, Nucleus Breeding Centers (NBC), Brood stock 
Multiplication centers (BMC) and aquaculture inputs under the mandate of the Act. 
 
Examination by the Committee 
2.144 Responding to justification regarding uniform registration fee for both small and 
big aquaculture/hatchery etc Units, the Department stated as under:-  

57 
 
'Section 13 (4) of the Principal Act provides that “ A person who intends to 
carry on coastal aquaculture shall make an application for registration of his farm 
before the Authority in such form accompanied with such fees as may be 
prescribed for the purpos e of registration under sub -section(5).  Currently, the 
registration fee has been prescribed on per hectare water spread area basis in 
three slabs viz. a) upto 5 h ectares b) above 5 hectares and up to  10 hectares and 
c) above 10 hectare in the CAA Rule. Hence, the small farmers pay lesser amount 
compared to big unit holders. The prevailing registration fee up to 5 hectares water 
spread area is at the rate of Rs 200 per hectare (or a fraction there of) subject to a 
minimum of Rs 500. This shows that the regi stration fee is already on the lower 
side for farmers up to 5 hectares water spread area (or a fraction there of). So 
there is no plan to waive off or reduce the cost of registration.' 
 
Comments /Observation/Recommendation of the Committee 
2.145 The Committee find the justification put forth by the Department regarding 
the amount of registration fee for small and big farmers  just and rational . After 
having deliberated upon the amendments proposed in sub-section (4), (5) & (6) of 
Section 13 of the Principal Act, the Committee find nothing objectionable  therein 
and therefore, accept the amendment proposed. 
 
Provision in the Principal Act 
 
2.146 (7) In the case of a farm comprising more than two hectares of water spread 
area, no application for registration to commence any activity connected with coastal 
aquaculture shall be considered under sub-section (5) unless the Authority, after making 
such inquiry as it thinks fit, is satisfied that registration or such farm shall not be 
detrimental to the coastal environment. 
 
Amendment Proposed in the Bill 
 
2.147 (7) In the case of a farm comprising more than two hectares of water spread area 
and any other coastal aquaculture unit, no application for registration to commence any 
activity connected with coastal aquaculture shall be considered under sub -section (5) 

58 
 
unless the Authority, after making such inquiry as it thinks fit, is satisfied that registration 
of such coastal aquaculture unit shall not be detrimental to the coastal environment. 
 
Justification:- Substitution of Sub Section (7) 
 
2.148 Registration is the first step to establish traceability which is demanded by the 
importing countries and therefore it is essential that all the compliant units are registered, 
and no one is kept pending because of procedural issues. Hence, to provide for the 
prohibition on operation without the registration for all the verticals of coastal aquaculture 
such as Hatchery, Nucleus Breeding Centers (NBC), Brood Stock Multiplication Centers 
(BMC) and coastal aquaculture farm comprising more than two hectares of water 
spread area under the mandate of the Act. 
 
Comments of Stakeholders 
2.149 One of the Stakeholders  suggested that the  percentage of water spread area of 
total farm area be increased from 60% to 75% as some farmers have smaller area and 
can use maximum land for Shrimp farming. Responding to this, the Ministry stated that: 
'This will be considered and detailed while framin g the Rules and Guidelines 
based on the factual positions.' 
 
Observation/Recommendation of the Committee 
2.150 The Committee held elaborate discussions with the Stakeholders and 
examined the repl ies put forth by the Department.  The Committee are of the 
considered opinion  that the percentage of water spread area of total farm area 
may be increased from 60% to 75% atleast for the small farmers. The Committee 
impress upon the Department to consider  it while framing the Rules , Regulation 
and Guidelines in th is regard.  Apart from this, the Committee accept the 
amendment proposed by substituting sub-section (7) of Section 13. 
 
Provision in the Principal Act 
 
 2.151 13 (8) Notwithstanding anything contained in this Section, --- 

59 
 
(a) no coastal aquaculture shall be carried on within two hundred meters from High 
 Tide Lines; and 
 
(b) no coastal aquaculture shall be carried on in creeks, rivers and backwaters within 
 the Coastal Regulation Zone declared for the time being under the Environment 
 (Protection) Act, 1986: 
 
     Provided that nothing in this sub -section shall apply in the case of a coastal 
aquaculture farm which is in existence on the appointed day and to t he non-commercial 
and experimental coastal aquaculture farms operated or proposed to be operated by 
any research institute of the Government or funded by the Government; 
     Provided further that the Authority may, for the purposes of providing exemption 
under the first proviso, review from time to time the existence and activities of the 
coastal aquaculture farms and the provisions of this section shall apply on coastal 
aquaculture farms in view of such review. 
Explanation - For the purposes of this sub -section, “High Tide Line” means the line on 
the land up to which the highest water line reaches during the spring tide. 
Amendment Proposed in the Bill 
 
2.152 In sub-section (8) with effect from the 16th December, 2005:- 
(A) For clauses (a) and (b), the following clauses shall be substituted, namely:- 
(a) no coastal aquaculture shall be carried on in the ecologically sensitive areas or the 
geo-morphological features; 
(b) no coastal aquaculture, except hatchery, Nucleus Breeding Centre and Brood Stock 
Multiplication Centre shall be carried on in the No Development Zone in the case of 
sea, and in the buffer zone in the case of creeks, rivers and backwaters; 
(c) no coastal aquaculture, except sea weed culture, pen culture, raft culture and ca ge 
culture activities shall be carried on in creek, rivers and backwaters within the 
Coastal Regulation Zone; 
 
Explanation — For the purposes of this sub-section,  

60 
 
(i) “High Tide Line” means the line on the land up to which the highest water line 
reaches during the spring tide; 
  (ii) the expressions “ecologically sensitive areas”, “geo -morphological features”, “No 
Development Zone”, “buffer Zone” and “Coastal Regulation Zone” shall have the same 
meaning as defined in the Coastal Regulation Zone notificati on issued under the 
Environment (Protection) Act, 1986; 
Justification Amendment of Sub Section (8) 
2.153 At present, the CAA Guidelines in sync with CRZ notification do not permit 
coastal aquaculture activities in the Ecologically Sensitive Areas (ESAs) an d Geo -
morphological areas for environmental sustainability. While this provision already exists 
through CAA Guidelines, there is no enabling provision in the Principal CAA Act for its 
legal validity and effective implementation. Therefore, it is proposed t o make an express 
provision in the Principal Act 13(8a) in harmony with CRZ Notification.  
Section 13(8) of the Principal Act prohibits coastal aquaculture within the 
“No Development Zone” which is 200 meter from the High Tide Line (HTL) 
towards the landwa rd side and in the creeks, rivers and backwaters within the 
Coastal Regulation Zone (CRZ). At the time of promulgation of the Act, only 
coastal aquaculture activity was shrimp farms. Since farms can occupy lakhs of 
acres it was considered to ban them withi n this sensitive 200 m zone. However, 
this provision has been construed to be applicable for the hatcheries by the 
National Green Tribunal in its recent judgement. Hatcheries were always an 
exempted activity in the above No Development Zone as per CRZ Noti fications 
1991 and 2011 and now permitted and regulated activity under CRZ 
Notification, 2019 and are allowed to be established even in CRZ IB area i.e. 
intertidal zone (from HTL towards seaward side) which is much more sensitive 
than the No Development Zo ne of 200 meters). Further hatcheries and similar 
units of Brood Stock Multiplication Centres (BMCs) and Nucleus Breeding 
Centres (NBCs) need to be established on the coast to get adequate supply 
and access to quality seawater. Without considering this pos ition, NGT has 
viewed that hatcheries cannot exist in No Development Zone as they are not 

61 
 
permitted as per Section 13(8) (a) of Principal Act. To address this issue once 
for all, it is proposed to amend Section 13(8) of CAA Act, 2005 to provide for 
permitting hatcheries and similar activities like Brood Stock Multiplication 
Centres and Nucleus Breeding Centres within the No Development Zone under 
the Act.   
Further, Section 13(8) (b) of the Principal Act prohibits coastal 
aquaculture in the creeks, rivers a nd backwaters within the Coastal Regulation 
Zone (CRZ). This was done because in 2005 only form of aquaculture was 
shrimp farms, and they were being set up in these water bodies by putting up 
bunds and altering the character of the water bodies. Now newer forms of 
coastal aquaculture such as cage culture, seaweed culture, bi -value culture etc. 
have come up which can only be done in these areas, and which do not cause 
any damage to such waterbodies. These activities are very remunerative and 
also have the po tential for creating large scale employment opportunities for 
coastal fisher communities especially fisherwomen. Therefore, it is intended to 
make these activities permissible in creeks, rivers and backwaters within the 
Coastal Regulation Zone (CRZ) by sui tably amending the Section 13(8) of the 
CAA Act. 
Editorial change to substitute the word farm with unit to cover all the 
verticals of coastal aquaculture such as Hatchery, Nucleus Breeding Centers 
(NBC), Brood stock Multiplication centers (BMC) and Aquacul ture inputs under 
the mandate of the Act. 
Substitution of “Explanation” 
To synchronize the provisions under Section 13(8) with the provisions of 
CRZ Notification issued under Environment (protection) Act. 
 
Examination by the Committee 
2.154 Responding to the concern of the Committee regarding legal implications of the 
new provisions proposed in the Clause (a)  and (b) of sub-section 8 of Section 13 of the 
Act, 2005, w.e.f. 16th December, 2005, the Department stated as under:-  

62 
 
'At present, the CAA Guidelines in sync with CRZ notification do not permit 
coastal aquaculture activities in the Ecologically Sensitive Areas (ESAs) and Geo -
morphological areas for environmental sustainability. While this provision already 
exists through CAA Guidelines, there is no enabling provision in the Principal CAA 
Act for its legal validity and effective implementation. Therefore, it is proposed to 
make an express provision in the Principal Act 13(8a) in harmony with CRZ 
Notification. 
Section 13(8) of the Principal Act prohibits coastal aquaculture within the 
“No Development Zone” which is 200 meter from the High Tide Line (HTL) towards 
the landward side and in the creeks, rivers and backwaters within the Coastal 
Regulation Zone (CRZ). At the time of promulgation of the Act, only coastal 
aquaculture activity was shrimp farms. Since farms can occupy lakhs of acres it 
was considered to ban them within this sensitive 200 m zone. However, this 
provision has been construed to be applicable for the hatcheries by the Nationa l 
Green Tribunal in its recent judgement. Hatcheries were always an exempted 
activity in the above No Development Zone as per CRZ Notifications 1991 and 
2011 and now permitted and regulated activity under CRZ Notification, 2019 and 
are allowed to be establ ished even in CRZ IB area i.e. intertidal zone (from HTL 
towards seaward side) which is much more sensitive than the No Development 
Zone of 200 meters). Further hatcheries and similar units of Brood Stock 
Multiplication Centres (BMCs) and Nucleus Breeding Centres (NBCs) need to be 
established on the coast to get adequate supply and access to quality seawater. 
Without considering this position, National Green Tribunal (NGT) has viewed that 
hatcheries cannot exist in No Development Zone as they are not permit ted as per 
Section 13(8) (a) of Principal Act. To address this issue once for all, it is proposed 
to amend Section 13(8) of CAA Act, 2005 to provide for permitting hatcheries and 
similar activities like Brood Stock Multiplication Centres and Nucleus Breedi ng 
Centres within the No Development Zone under the Act. 
Further, Section 13(8) (b) of the Principal Act prohibits coastal aquaculture 
in the creeks, rivers and backwaters within the Coastal Regulation Zone (CRZ). 

63 
 
This was done because in 2005 coastal aqua culture was essentially shrimp farms, 
and they were being set up in these water  bodies by putting up bunds and altering 
the character of the water  bodies. Now newer forms of coastal aquaculture such 
as cage culture, seaweed culture, bi -value culture etc. h ave come up which can 
only be done in these areas, and which do not cause any damage to such water 
bodies. These activities are very remunerative and also have the potential for 
creating large scale employment opportunities for coastal fisher communities 
especially fisherwomen. Therefore, it is intended to make these activities 
permissible in creeks, rivers and backwaters within the Coastal Regulation Zone 
(CRZ) by suitably amending the Section 13(8) of the CAA Act. 
This will protect a large number primary production infrastructure such as 
Hatcheries and brood Stock Multiplication centers which had already been 
established within the No Development Zone as per the exemption granted under 
CRZ Notifications of 1991 and 2011. The regulations and environmental s afe 
guard required under the Coastal Aquaculture Authority Act is much stringent than 
CRZ notifications. Accordingly, it is submitted that these provisions are in sync with 
the provisions of CRZ notification and hence there is no adverse legal implications. 
Further, in order to validate the costal aquaculture activities undertaken 
subsequent to supersession of CRZ Notification 1991, suitable amendments to 
Sub-section 8 of Section 13 of the Principal Act including insertion of a new Sub -
section (3) in Section-28 have been proposed in the Amendment Bill.' 
2.155 The Department further stated:-  
'Ecologically Sensitive Zones and Geomorphological features are highly 
fragile ecosystems and any anthropogenic activities will have a major impact on 
their eco system. At present, the CAA Guidelines in sync with CRZ notification do 
not permit coastal aquaculture activities in the Ecologically Sensitive Areas (ESAs) 
and Geo-morphological areas for environmental sustainability. While this provision 
already exists through CAA Guidelines, there is no enabling provision in the 
Principal CAA Act for its legal val idity and effective implementation. Therefore, it is 

64 
 
proposed to make an express provision in the Principal Act 13(8a) in harmony with 
CRZ Notification.' 
2.156 The Department also added-  
'Section 13(8) of the Principal Act prohibits coastal aquaculture within the 
“No Development Zone” which is 200 meter from the High Tide Line (HTL) towards 
the landward side and in the creeks, rivers and backwaters within the Coastal 
Regulation Zone (CRZ).  While in contrary, CRZ notification 2019, prescribes 50m 
from the HTL is applicable to Rivers creeks and back waters and is being changed 
from time to time, Section 13(8 ) (a) of the principal Act imposed a blanket ban on 
coastal aquaculture upto 200m from HTL both in the case of Sea and creeks, 
rivers and backwaters.  
Hence, the proposed amendment in 13( 8)(b) clarified with the term ‘ No 
Development Zone” instead of “ 200m from HTL” in the case of Sea and “Buffer 
Zones” instead of “ 50m from the HTL”  in the case of Rivers, creeks and back 
waters. Hence any change in the  landward side area as no development zone or 
buffer zone will be accommodated under the provisions of the Act without seeking 
any amendment in the Act.'  
Comments/Observation/Recommendation of the Committee 
2.157 The Committee deliberated upon the proposal made in the clause including 
the justification given by the Department and decided to accept the amendment 
proposed under the clause.  
Provision in the Principal Act 
 
2.158  13 (9) Notwithstanding anything contained in this section, any traditional 
coastal aquaculture farm which lies within the Coastal Regulation Zone declared by the 
notification of the Government of India in the Ministry of Environment and Forests 
(Department of  Environment, Forests and Wildlife) No. S.O. 114 (E), dated the 19th 
February, 1991 and is not used for coastal aquaculture purposes on the appointed day 
shall be registered under sub -section (5) by producing before the Authority, by the 
person who is the owner of such farm, the documentary proof of such ownership failing 

65 
 
which such farm shall not be registered under sub -section (5) and if such person after 
such registration does not utilize such farm, within one year, for coastal aquaculture 
purposes, the registration shall be cancelled by the Authority. 
 
Amendment Proposed in the Bill 
 
2.159 For the word "farm", wherever it occurs, the words "unit" shall be substituted; 
Justification Amendment of Sub Section (9) 
2.160 In tandem with the changed scope and application of the Act to register the other 
verticals of the coastal aquaculture such as Hatchery, Nucleus Breeding Centers (NBC), 
Brood Stock Multiplication Centers (BMC) and Aquaculture inputs under the mandate of 
the Act. 
 
Comments/Observation/Recommendation of the Committee 
2.161 The Committee examined and deliberated upon the proposed amendment 
which is editorial in nature and the Committee , therefore, accept the amendment 
proposed. 
 
Provision in the Principal Act 
 
2.162 13 (10) A person, who intends to renew the registration of a farm made under 
sub-section (5) or in pursuance of sub -section (9), may make an application within two 
months before the expiry of such registration to the Authority in the prescribed form 
accompanied with the prescribed fees and the Authority shall, after receiving such 
application, renew the registration and for such purpose make an entry with its seal on 
the registration certificate relating to such form issued under sub-section (6).  
Amendment Proposed in the Bill 
 
2.163 (a) For the word "farm", the words "coastal aquaculture unit" shall be substituted; 
(b) the following proviso shall be inserted, namely:-  
"Provided that the Authority may condone the delay in making application for renewal, 
subject to payment of such fee for renewal of registration, as may be prescribed." 
Justification Amendment of Sub Section (10) 
2.164 Editorial change to substitute the word "farm" with "unit" to cover all the verticals 
of coastal aquaculture such as Hatchery, Nucleus Breeding Centers (NBC), Brood 

66 
 
Stock Multiplication Centers (BMC) and Aquaculture inputs under the mandate of the 
Act. 
The Principal Act did not have any provision for delayed appl ication for renewal.  Now 
provision has been made for condoning the delay in submitting the application for 
renewal of the registration with a compounded fee. This will ensure that the farmers are 
not put into undue difficulty because of minor slips. 
 
Comments/Observation/Recommendation of the Committee 
2.165 The Committee appreciate the provision added by the Department with 
respect to condoning the delay in submission of the application for renewal of the 
registration in the Amendment Bill. The Committee decided to accept the 
amendment proposed. 
 
Provision in the Principal Act 
 
2.166 13 (11) The Authority may refuse to renew the registration of a farm under sub -
section (10) if the Authority is satisfied that the person to whom such registration is 
made has  failed to utilize such farm for coastal aquaculture purposes or without any 
reasonable cause has violated any provision of this Act or the rules or regulations made 
thereunder or any direction or order made by the Authority in pursuance of section 11: 
Provided that such refusal to renew the registration shall not be made without providing 
such person an opportunity of being heard. 
Explanation 1. --- For the purpose of this section, “appointed day” means the date of 
establishment of the Authority. 
 
Explanation 2. --- For the removal of doubts, it is hereby declared that the expression “to 
renew the registration” used in sub -sections (10) and (11) shall be construed to include 
further renewal of the registration. 
 
Amendment Proposed in the Bill 
2.167 In sub-section (11), for the word "farm", at both the places where it occurs, the 
words "coastal aquaculture unit" shall be substituted: 
 

67 
 
Justification Amendment of Sub Section (11) 
2.168 Editorial change to substitute the word "farm" with "unit" to cover all the verticals 
of coastal aquaculture such as Hatchery, Nucleus Breeding Centers (NBC), Brood 
Stock Multiplication Centers (BMC) and Aquaculture inputs under the mandate of the 
Act. 
 
Comments/Observation/Recommendation of the Committee 
 
2.169 The Committee deliberated upon the proposal made in the clause including 
the justification given by the Department and decided to accept the amendment 
proposed under the clause.  
 
Amendment Proposed in the Bill 
New Insertion 
2.170 13 (12) The Authority may  vary, amend or modify the certificate of registration 
issued under this section, in such manner as may be prescribed. 
(13) In the event of the certificate of registration issued under this Act being defaced or 
mutilated or lost, the authority may grant a duplicate certificate, on payment of such fee 
and in such manner, as may be prescribed. 
 
Justification Insertion of new Sub Section (12) and (13) 
2.171 Under the current Act, re -registration in case of changes in ownership or size of 
the activity causes hu ge delay in effecting the registration. The present amendment 
provides for effecting changes to the certificate of registration in case of changes in 
ownership or size of the activity vide Section 13(12) and for providing new certificate in 
case of mutilation, damage or loss of certificate, etc. vide Section 13 (13). 
Examination by the Committee 
2.172 In response to a concern of the Committee regarding online registration and 
renewal of registration, the Department of Fisheries j ustifying further the need to insert 
two new sub -sections 12 and 13 under Section 13 of the Act, 2005, regarding the 
registration process and issuing of certificate, submitted as under:-  
 
'It is submitted that the Coastal Aquaculture Authority has already 
launched the electronic de livery of digital certificates on Friday, 23 rd March, 2023 
as a part of transparency and promoting ease of doing business. Further, a larger 

68 
 
frame work of Online Registration portal for end to end digitization of the 
registration process is being developed  under the National Single Window Portal 
initiative of Government of India. However, considering a large number of small 
scale farmers involved in coastal aquaculture and their limited access to digital 
systems, an enabling provision has been proposed in t he amendment bill to 
empower the authority to grant a duplicate certificate in the event of the certificate 
of registration issued under this Act being defaced or mutilated or lost.' 
 
2.173 Responding to the query of the Committee whether the registration and renewal 
of registration can be done online, the Joint Secretary (Department of Fisheries) during 
oral evidence submitted before the Committee as under:-  
To start with, one-and-a-half months ago, already on the mobile phone just 
like we can download medical reports, we can get online registration digital 
certificates. We have already started so that there is no human interface. We have 
already brought that reform. For the first six months, one year , his original copy 
was not available. Now, they can immediately download it. There is no need to go 
to the Coastal Aquaculture Authority for that. We are also doing the entire back -
end process online. Application online, process online, no meeting the peo ple, 
report from documentation field and complete step by step final print out is also 
online. 
 
Observation/Recommendation of the Committee 
2.174 The Committee appreciate  the initiative undertaken by the Department for 
providing Digital Registration Certificates as part of transparency and promoting 
ease of doing business. However, the Committee feel that a large number of 
farmers are poor and small farmers, who might not have electronic gadgets to 
access digital systems or internet and hence desire that alternate measures 
should be put in place to address such hardships and handicaps to make sure 
that small farmers do not have to face any inconvenience in this regard.  However, 
having taken entire perspective of the proposed Insertion of New Sub -Sections 
(12) and (13), the Committee decided to accept the amendments proposed. 

69 
 
Clause No. 11 
Authorization of officers 
 
2.175    Insertion of New Section 13A 
 
13A. (1) The Authority may, by an order, authorise any officer of the Authority or the 
State Government or the Central Government, not below the rank of Assistant Director 
of Fisheries in a District, to function as authorised officer to exercise such powers, to 
discharge such duties and perform such functions, as may be specified in that order. 
(2) The Central Government may, by notification, authorize any officer of the Authority 
or the State Government or the Central Government, not below the rank of Under 
Secretary t o the Government of India, to function as an adjudicating officer, to 
adjudicate the penalties imposed under this Act. 
(3) The Central Government may, by notification, authorize any officer of the Authority 
or the State Government or the Central Government , not below the rank of Deputy 
Secretary to the Government of India, to function as the Appellate Authority, who may 
affirm, vary or set aside the order passed by the adjudicating officer. 
 (4) The adjudicating officer or the Appellate Authority, shall, fo r the purposes of 
discharging functions under this Act, have the same powers as are vested in a civil 
court under the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 while trying a suit, in respect of the 
following matters, namely: — 
a) summoning and enforcing the attendance of witnesses; 
b) requiring the discovery and production of documents; 
c) requisitioning any public record or document or copy of such record or 
 document from any office; 
d) receiving evidence on affidavits; 
e) issuing commissions for the examination of witnesses or documents. 
 
(5) The adjudicating officer or the Appellate Authority shall be deemed to be a civil court 
for the purposes of sections 345 and 346 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973. 
 
 

70 
 
Justification: Insertion of new Section13A 
2.176 In tandem with the amendment of Punishment, the consequential provisions 
have been made for Authorized officers and Adjudicating authorities. In section 14 (A), 
provisions for appeal against orders passed under section-14 have been proposed. This 
has become necessary as the cases will no longer go to courts which have an existing 
system of appeals and revisions. 
 
Comments of Stakeholders 
 
2.177 The Department of Fisheries and Fishermen Welfare, Government of Tamil Nadu 
suggested that  
 
 'The Assistant Director of Fisheries belonging to the State Fisheries Department 
 shall be the Authorized Officer'.  
 
The Joint Director, Department of Fisheries, Kerala also suggested as under:-  
 
'As regards the Authorization Officers, our suggestion is that instead of Assistant 
Directors, the Deputy Directors of Fisheries should be the Authorization Officers.'  
 
 
Observation/Recommendation of the Committee 
2.178 The Committee deliberated upon the proposal made in the clause including 
the justification given by the Department and decided to accept the amendment 
proposed under the clause.  
Clause No. 12 
 
Provision in the Principal Act , Punishment for carrying on coastal aquaculture 
without registration 
 
2.179 Section 14  
14- If any person carries on coastal aquaculture or traditional coastal aquaculture or 
causes the coastal aquaculture or traditional coastal aquaculture to be carried on in 
contravention of sub-section (1) of section 13, he shall be punishable with imprisonment 
for a term which may extend to three years or with fine which may extend to one lakh 
rupees, or with both. 
 

71 
 
Amendment Proposed in the Bill 
2.180 Penalty for carrying on coastal aquaculture in contravention of provisions of Act;-- 
14. Where any person carries on coastal aquaculture or traditional coastal 
aquaculture or causes the coastal aquaculture or traditional coastal aquaculture to be 
carried on in contravention of any of the provisions of this Act or any rules or regulations 
made thereunder or any guidelines or notifications issued thereunder, an officer 
authorised under section 13A shall take all or any of the following actions, namely: ––  
 
(a) suspension or stoppage of any activity in a coastal aquaculture unit for such period 
and in such manner as may be prescribed;  
(b) imposition of penalty as specified in the Table below;  
(c) removal or demolition of any structure; 
(d) destruction of the standing crop therein; 
(e) suspension or cancellation of registration for such period and in such manner as 
may be prescribed. 
 
Table 
Sl 
No 
Coastal 
Aquaculture/ use of 
prohibited materials 
Offences Penalty 
First time 
offence 
Second time 
offence 
Third time and subsequent 
offences 
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) 
1. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Farm Non-
registration 
Rupees ten 
thousand per 
hectare (or 
fraction of a 
hectare) of 
water spread 
area. 
Rupees fifteen 
thousand per  
hectare (or 
fraction of a 
hectare) of water  
spread area. 
Rupees twenty -five 
thousand per hectare (or 
fraction of a  hectare) of 
water spread area. 
Non-
compliance 
with the  
provisions 
of the Act, 
rules, 
regulations, 
guidelines 
and 
notifications
Rupees five 
thousand per 
hectare (or 
fraction of a 
hectare) of 
water spread 
area. 
Rupees ten 
thousand per  
hectare (or 
fraction of a 
hectare) of 
water spread 
area. 
Rupees fifteen thousand 
per hectare (or fraction of a  
hectare) of water spread 
area. 

72 
 
, other than 
non-
registration 
2. Hatchery, Brood 
Stock Multiplication 
Centre, Nucleus 
Breeding Centre or 
such other coastal  
aquaculture unit 
Non-
registrati
on 
Rupees fifty 
thousand  
Rupees 
seventy-five 
thousand 
Rupees one lakh 
Non-
compliance 
with the 
provisions 
of the Act, 
rules, 
regulations, 
guidelines 
and 
notifications
, other than 
non-
registration 
Rupees 
twenty-five 
thousand 
Rupees fifty 
thousand 
Rupees one lakh 
3 Use of materials 
prohibited under 
section 12A 
Contraven
tion of the 
provisions 
clause (a) 
or clause 
(b) of 
section 
12A 
Rupees fifty 
thousand 
Rupees 
seventy-five 
thousand 
Rupees one 
lakh 
 
 
Justification Substitution of Section 14 
 
2.181 Section 14 of the CAA Act, 2005 provides for punishment for carrying on coastal 
aquaculture without registration under CAA Act, 2005. The punishment being 
imprisonment for a term which may extend to three years under the Act or a fine which 
may extend to o ne lakh rupees, or both. The farmers and other stakeholders are of the 
view that since this provision is a draconian punishment and the same needs to be 
replaced with alternative penal provisions as aquaculture is primarily a farming activity 
undertaken by farmers. Keeping in view, the efforts being made by the Government of 
India to decriminalize minor offences under various laws and that non -registration is 

73 
 
minor offence, it is now proposed to remove the imprisonment provision by amending 
Section 14 of CAA Act, 2005. 
 
Coastal Aquaculture Authority Act being a law mandated to safeguard the coastal 
environment, certain punitive actions are required in the Act to deter the violators. 
Accordingly, a combination of suitable monetary and other penalties has been  proposed 
in lieu of imprisonment under the Act applying the ‘polluter pays principle’. Accordingly, 
the non-registration of coastal aquaculture unit and noncompliance of the provisions of 
the statute is proposed to be dealt with by suspension or stoppage of the coastal 
aquaculture activity, imposition of penalty, removal of any structure or standing crops, 
suspension or cancellation of registration under the amended section -14. The proposed 
penalties for non -registration and noncompliance of the provisions  of the Act would be 
adjudicated and imposed by the officers authorized for the purpose, following “principles 
of natural justice”. Due care has been taken to ensure that the penalties are not 
excessive and the upper limit does not exceed the amount alread y prescribed in the 
Principal Act. Further, efforts have been made to remove discretionary powers of 
adjudicating and appellate authorities.   
Examination by the Committee 
2.182 Responding to whether it would not be appropriate if in place of 'as may be 
specified in that order ' should be replaced with 'as specified under section 14’, the 
Department stated as under:- 
'Section 14 of the Coastal Aquaculture Authority Act, 2005 provides for 
punishment for carrying on coastal aquaculture without registration u nder Coastal 
Aquaculture Authority Act, 2005.  The proposed penalties for non -registration and 
noncompliance of the provisions of the Act would be adjudicated and imposed by 
the officers authorized for the purpose, following “principles of natural justice” . In 
tandem with the amendment of punishment in Section 14, the consequential 
provisions have been made by the insertion of new section 13 (A), for Authorized 
officers, Adjudicating and Appellate authorities.  

74 
 
As per Section 13A, the Authority may, by an o rder, authorize an officer of 
the authority/state government/central government not below the rank of an 
Assistant Director Fisheries in the District to function as Authorized Officer to 
exercise such powers and to discharge such duties and perform such fu nctions as 
may be prescribed in that order. The Authorized Officer is the key official under the 
Act who plays vital role in furtherance of the objectives of the Act. At the same 
time, it is important to clearly prescribe through an order, the duties, role s and 
responsibilities of the Authorized officer to avoid ambiguity, discretion and abuse of 
power. Hence the words 'as may be specified in that order’ have been 
appropriately mentioned in section 13 A (1). At the same time, language 'as may 
be specified in that order’ would also leave a window to the Authority to entrust, if 
necessary, such other non -punitive functions to the Authorized Officer in addition 
to his core mandates under Section -14 of the Act. Therefore, replacing 'as may be 
specified in that o rder' with 'as specified under Section -14’ would confine/limit the 
roles of the Authorized officer to the mandates under Section -14 of the Act which 
may not be desirable.' 
 
2.183 Responding to the concern of the Committee as to whether decriminalization 
may lead to more violation the provisions of the Act, the Department submitted as 
under:-  
'In its 17 years of operation, the Coastal Aquaculture Authority has brought 
in several regulations and procedures to enable orderly development of the coastal 
aquaculture sector. Further, it is also pertinent to mention that since the time of 
promulgation of the Act in 2005, the coastal aquaculture has come a long way with 
improvements in technology and culture practices and the polluting potential of 
coastal aquacult ure especially shrimp culture has declined substantially. 
Notwithstanding this, Coastal Aquaculture Authority Act 2005 being a law 
mandated to safeguard the coastal environment, certain punitive actions are 
required in the Act to deter the violators. Secti on -14 of the Principal Act provides 
for punishment for carrying on coastal aquaculture without registration with 
imprisonment for a term which may extend up to 3 -years or with fine which may 

75 
 
extend to one lakh rupees, or with both. However, in practice, no criminal case has 
been registered by invoking Section 14 of the Act till date and no one has ever 
been punished with imprisonment .This shows that the objectives of the legislation 
have be achieved without the need for invoking the punishment of imprison ment. 
In recent times, farmers and other stakeholders are of the view that the provision 
of punishment with imprisonment needs to be replaced with alternative penal 
provisions as coastal aquaculture is primarily a farming activity undertaken by 
farmers.  
Keeping in view, the efforts being made by the Government of India to 
decriminalize minor offences under various laws and that non -registration is minor 
offence, it is now proposed to remove the imprisonment provision by amending 
Section 14 of Coastal Aquac ulture Authority Act, 2005.However, a combination of 
suitable monetary and other penalties has been proposed in lieu of imprisonment 
under the Act. Accordingly, the non -registration of coastal aquaculture units and 
noncompliance of the provisions of the st atute is proposed to be dealt with by 
suspension or stoppage of the coastal aquaculture activity, imposition of penalty, 
removal of any structure or standing crops, suspension or cancellation of 
registration under the amended Section -14. The proposed penal ties for non -
registration and noncompliance of the provisions of the Act would be adjudicated 
and imposed by the officers authorized for the purpose, following “principles of 
natural justice”. Also suitable provision has been proposed to impose and recover  
the damages to environment by invoking the “polluter pays principle” and any 
unpaid dues will be recovered as arrears on land revenue. These revisions are 
likely to enable the operationalization and implementation of the provisions of the 
Act in an effici ent manner and decimalization of the Act may not lead to more 
violations of the provisions of the Act.' 
 
2.184 Submitting further, the Department stated:-  
 
'The Principal Act mandates registration for all coastal aquaculture 
operations including traditional coastal aquaculture. Further, the Act under Section 

76 
 
14 also provides for imprisonment for a term which may extend to 3 years or with 
fine which may extend to Rs 1 lakh or with both for carrying coastal aquaculture 
without registration. The Section -14 of the principal Act does not provide for any 
relaxation to traditional fish farmers. When provision has been made under the 
Amendment Bill to decriminalise the  Principal Act by doing away with 
imprisonment and replacing with a set of monetary and other penalties, the same 
spirit has been maintained and no distinction has been proposed between 
traditional and non -traditional aquaculture. Care has been taken to ke ep the 
monetary penalties to bare minimum. Further, the Amendment to Section 14 of 
Principal Act provides for a basket of options as non -monetary penalties. The 
Department while making Rules may prescribe lower level of non -monetary 
penalties to protect the interests of traditional fish farmers.' 
 
Comments/Observation/Recommendation of the Committee: 
2.185 The Committee  are quite appreciative of the exercise done by the 
Department in drafting the provisions of proposed amendment. The Committee 
deliberated at length upon all the proposed provisions of the Amendment. The 
Committee, therefore, decided to accept the amendment proposed in Section 14 
of the Principal Act by replacing it with New Section 14 (a), (b), (c), (d) and (e).  
Amendment Proposed in the Bill, Appeal  
 
2.186 Insertion of New Section 14A 
 
14A. (1) Any person aggrieved by an order of the adjudicating officer may within thirty 
days from the date on which the order is made, prefer an appeal to the Appellate 
Authority: 
Provided that the Appellate Authority may entertain any appeal preferred after the expiry 
of the said period of thirty days, but before th e expiry of ninety days from the date 
aforesaid, if it satisfied that the appellant was prevented by sufficient cause from filing 
the appeal in time. 
 

77 
 
(2) No appeal under this section shall be entertained by the Appellate Authority unless 
the appellant has  at the time of filing the appeal deposited the amount of penalty 
payable under the order appealed against: 
Provided that on an application made by the appellant in this behalf, the Appellate 
Authority may, if it is of the opinion that the deposit to be ma de under this sub -section 
shall cause undue hardship to the appellant, by order in writing, dispense with such 
deposit, either unconditionally or subject to such condition, as it may deem fit to impose. 
(3) On the receipt of an appeal under sub -section (1), the Appellate Authority may, after 
holding such enquiry as it deems fit, and after giving the parties concerned reasonable 
opportunity of being heard, confirm, modify or set aside the order appealed against, 
and— 
(a) if the sum deposited by way of penalt y under sub -section ( 2) exceeds the 
penalty directed to be paid by the Appellate Authority, such excess amount shall be 
refunded to the appellant; or 
(b) if the Appellate Authority sets aside the order imposing penalty, the whole of the 
sum deposited by the way of penalty shall be refunded to the appellant. 
(4) The decision of the Appellate Authority under this section shall be final." 
 
Justification  Insertion of new Section14A 
 
2.187 In tandem with the amendment of Punishment, the consequential provisions  
have been made for Authorized officers and Adjudicating authorities. In section 14(A), 
provisions for appeal against orders passed under section-14 have been proposed. This 
has become necessary as the cases will no longer go to courts which have an existi ng 
system of appeals and revisions. 
 
Comments/Observation/Recommendation of the Committee 
2.188 The Committee note that insertion of New Section 14A consequent upon 
the proposed provisions in Section 14 of the Bill is logical and rational to deal 
with appeals to the Appellate Authority. The Committee feel that this N ew Section 
14A would deal in tande m with the amendment of punishment. The Committee 
were apprised that this became necessary as the cases will no longer go to 

78 
 
Courts which have an existing system of appeals and revisions. The Committee, 
having examined and deliberated upon the proposed provisions under New 
Section 14A, decided to accept the amendment proposed. 
 
Clause No. 13 
 
Amendment Proposed in the Bill, Arrears of cost and penalty recoverable as 
arrears of land revenue,  
 
2.189  Insertion of New Section 22A 
 
22A Any cost which is due and not paid as provided for by or under this Act and any 
sum directed to be recovered by way of penalty under section 14 shall be recoverable in 
the same manner as an arrear of land revenue. 
 
Justification 
2.190 Insertion of New Section 22A for recovery of the unpaid dues of penalty under 
section 14, which would be recoverable in the same manner as an arrear of land 
revenue.   
 
Comments/Observation/Recommendation of the Committee 
2.191 The Committee deliberated upon the proposal made in the clause including 
the justification given by the Department and decided to accept the amendment 
proposed under the clause.  
Clause No. 14 
Provision in the Principal Act, Power to Central Government to make rules  
2.192 Section 24  
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing powers, such 
rules may provide for all or any of the following matters, namely:- 
(a) the guidelines under section 3; 
(b) the salaries and allowances payable to, and the other terms and conditions of 
service of, the members under sub-section (5) of section 4; 
 
Amendment Proposed in the Bill 
2.193 Insertion of new clauses 
After Clause (b), the following Clauses shall be inserted, namely 
 

79 
 
“(ba) the manner of constitution of committees under sub-section (1) of section 7A; 
(bb) the number of persons  in the committees , the ir functions, and the terms and 
conditions of the committees under sub-section (2) of section 7A; 
(bc) the manner of appointment and the terms and conditions for appointment of 
Member-Secretary under sub-section (1) of section 9A; 
(bd) the area in which the Authority may regulate or prohibit the number, species and 
method of any coastal aquaculture under clause (da) of sub-section (1) of section 11; 
(be) the other inputs used in coastal aquaculture under clause (db) of sub -section (1) of 
section 11; 
(bf) the manner of certification, monitoring and regulation of the coastal aquaculture 
units and the manner of  carrying out coastal aquaculture activities with bio security and 
close disease surveillance to ensure freedom from disease in coastal aquaculture units 
under clause (dc) of sub-section (1) of section 11; 
Justification 
2.194  Consequential Changes due to the amendment of Section 11. 
Comments/Observation/Recommendation of the Committee 
2.195 The Committee note that consequential changes have been proposed by 
amending Section 24(2) of the Principal Act by proposing amendment in Sub -
Section 2. The Committee t hink that the changes are administrative in nature  
only. The Committee, therefore, decided to accept the consequential changes. 
 
Provision in the Principal Act 
2.196 (e) the rules subject to which any person referred to in section 12 may enter upon 
any coastal aquaculture land, pond, pen or enclosure under that section; 
 
Amendment Proposed in the Bill 
2.197 In clause (e) for the words "land, pond, pen or enclosure under that section", the 
word "unit" shall be substituted; 
 
Justification 2.197 Editorial Change to replace farm with units Consequential Changes 
due to a new insertion of proviso in Section 12 
 

80 
 
Comments/Observation/Recommendation of the Committee 
2.198 The Committee accept the  amendment proposed as there is only an 
editorial change to replace  'farm' with 'units' due to consequential changes 
proposed by way of New Insertion of proviso to Section 12. 
 
Amendment Proposed in the Bill, New Insertion 
 
2.199 (fa) the manner of assessing the cost of damage to the environment under the 
third proviso to section 12; 
 (fb) prohibition of such other material which may cause harm to human health under 
clause (a) of section 12A; 
(fc) the procedure and period under the proviso to sub-section (3) of section 13; 
 
Justification:  
 
2.200  Consequential Changes due  to the insertion of Section 12A and amendment of 
Section 13. 
 
Comments/Observation/Recommendation of the Committee 
2.201 The Committee find that due to consequential changes proposed under 
Section 12A and amendment of Section 13, three sub clauses (fa), (fb) and (fc) 
have been inserted  under Section 24  (2) of the Principal Act. The Committee 
accept the amendment proposed. 
 
Provision in the Principal Act 
 2.202 (j) the form of application and the fees to be accompanied therewith under sub -
section (10) of section13; 
Amendment Proposed in the Bill 
2.203 In clause (j), after the word and figures "section 13", the words "and the fee for 
renewal of registration under the proviso thereof" shall be inserted:  
After clause (j), the following clauses shall be inserted namely:-  
(ja) the manner of varying, amending and modifying the certificate of registration under 
sub-section (12) of section 13; 
(jb) the fee for grant of duplicate certificate and the manner of g ranting it under sub -
section (13) of section 13; 

81 
 
(jc) the period and the manner of suspension or stoppage of activity in a coastal 
aquaculture unit under clause (a) of section 14;  
(jd) the period and the manner for suspension or cancellation of registrati on under 
clause (e) of section 14; 
 
Justification  
 
2.204 Consequential Changes due to the amendment of Section 13 and 14. 
 
Comments/Observation/Recommendation of the Committee 
 
2.205 As the sub clause (J) of Section 24  (2) has been amended due to 
consequential cha nges proposed by amending Section 13 and 14 of the 
Principal Act, the Committee decided to accept the amendment proposed. 
 
Clause No. 15 
Provision in the Principal Act, Power of Authority to make regulations,  
2.206 Section 25 
2. (d) for the construction and operation of coastal aquaculture farms within the coastal 
areas under clause (a) of sub-section (1) of section 11; 
 
Amendment Proposed in the Bill 
2.207 In sub -section (2), in clause (d), for the  word "farms" the word "units" shall be 
substituted; 
 
Justification 2.208 Editorial change to substitute the word "farm" with "unit" to cover all 
the verticals of coastal aquaculture such as Hatchery, Nucleus Breeding Centers (NBC), 
Brood Stock Multiplication Centers (BMC) and aquaculture inputs under the mandate of 
the Act. 
 
Comments/Observation/Recommendation of the Committee 
2.209 The Committee note that in the present proposed amendment there is only 
an editorial change to substitute the word 'farm' with 'unit' to cover all verticals of 
coastal aquaculture such as Hatchery, Nucleus Breeding Centers (NBC), Brood 

82 
 
Stock Multiplication Centers (BMC) and aquaculture inputs. The Committee 
decided to accept the amendment proposed. 
 
Clause No. 16 
Provision in the Principal Act, Validation 
 
2.210 Section 27 
 
 27(1) Notwithstanding anything contained in clause (v) of sub-section (2) of section 3 of 
the Environment (Protection) Act, 1986 or clause (d) of sub -rule (3) of rule 5 of the 
Environment (Protection) Rules, 1986, in the notification of the Government of India in 
the Ministry of Environment and Forests (Department of Environment, Forests and 
Wildlife) No. S.O. 114 (E), dated the 19 th February, 1991 (hereafter referred to in this 
section as the said notification), in paragraph 2, after sub -paragraph (xiii), the following 
sub-paragraph shall be inserted and shall always be deemed to have been inserted with 
effect from the 19th day of February, 1991, namely:— 
“(xiv) nothing contained in this paragraph shall apply to coastal aquaculture.” 
27 (2) The said notification shall have and shall be deemed always to have effect for all 
purposes as if the foregoing provisions of this section had bee n in force at all material 
times and accordingly notwithstanding anything contained in any judgment, decree or 
order of any court, tribunal or other authority, no coastal aquaculture carried on or 
undertaken or purporting to have been carried on or underta ken shall be deemed to be 
in contravention of the said notification and shall be deemed to be and to have always 
been for all purposes in accordance with law, as if the foregoing provisions of this 
section had been in force at all material times and notwit hstanding anything as 
aforesaid and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing provisions, no suit or 
other proceeding shall be maintained or continued in any court for the enforcement of 
any direction given by any court of any decree or order di recting the removal or closure 
of any coastal aquaculture farm’s activity or demolition of any structure connected 
thereunder which would not have been so required to be removed, closed or 
demolished if the foregoing provisions of this section had been in force at all material 
times. 

83 
 
Amendment Proposed in the Bill 
2.211  27(1) Notwithstanding anything contained in clause (v) of sub -section (2) 
of section 3 of the Environment (Protection) Act, 1986 or clause (d) of sub -rule (3) of 
rule 5 of the Environment ( Protection) Rules, 1986, in the Coastal Regulation Zone 
Notification or the Island Coastal Regulation Zone Notification issued by the 
Government of India in the Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate Change, in 
exercise of the powers conferred under t he said Environment (Protection) Act, in the 
paragraph dealing with prohibited activities, after the last sub -paragraph, the following 
proviso shall be inserted and shall always be deemed to have been inserted with effect 
from the 19th day of February, 1991, namely:—  
“Provided that nothing contained in this paragraph shall apply to coastal aquaculture.”; 
 
In sub-section (2), the word "farm's" shall be omitted.  
 
Justification  Amendment of Section 27 
2.212 After the judgement of Hon’ble Supreme Court in 1996, the Ministry of 
Environment and Forest constituted one Aquaculture Authority of India during 1997, 
which became quite regulatory. At that time, it was felt that this may hinder growth of 
coastal aquacul ture and even threaten the existing aquaculture where considerable 
investment had already been made. To protect such investment and to save 
employment and livelihood already created and to provide for hassle -free growth of the 
sector, Ministry of Agricultu re brought out the CAA Act 2005 to provide for conduct of 
coastal aquaculture with adequate environment safeguards. The intention of the 
Government of India all throughout while enacting the Coastal Aquaculture Authority 
Act, 2005 was a) to regulate the co astal aquaculture in the country through Coastal 
Aquaculture Authority Act, 2005 and b) not to treat coastal aquaculture as a prohibited 
activity within the meaning of the CRZ Notification, 1991 issued under the Environment 
(Protection) Act, 1986.  
In order to achieve the above objectives and to clear all doubts, among other provisions, 
express declaration was made vide Section-27 in the Coastal Aquaculture Authority Act, 
2005 to keep the coastal aquaculture out of the ambit of CRZ Notification 1991. Since 
then, the coastal aquaculture has been regulated under the CAA Act and the Coastal 

84 
 
Zone Management Authorities constituted under CRZ Notifications have never asked 
the coastal aquaculture units to obtain CRZ clearances. Further, the CRZ Notifications, 
1991 and 2011 did not even list coastal aquaculture activities in the list of permitted 
activities/regulated activities. Even the CRZ Notification 2019, has not listed coastal 
aquaculture in the above lists except hatcheries which is added to the list of a reg ulated 
activity for the first time. This shows that coastal aquaculture was meant to be regulated 
under CAA Act with the environment safeguards prescribed under CAA Act.   
However, of late, Section -27 of CAA Act, 2005 has been subjected to varying 
interpretations by courts, most recent being, the National Green Tribunal (NGT). NGT 
has viewed that Section 27 of CAA Act 2005 does not offer complete exemption to 
coastal aquaculture from the purview of CRZ Notification 1991 that rather coastal 
aquaculture is a regulated activity under CRZ Notification, 1991 and therefore 
clearances need to be taken from concerned environment regulators. Though this has 
been ordered with reference to hatcheries and that too for Tamil Nadu only, this has the 
potential to open the entire sector to the scrutiny by such regulators. Therefore, a 
suitable amendment is proposed in the text of Section 27 of the Principal Act to remove 
the ambiguity and to equivocally declare that coastal aquaculture is exempt from the 
purview of the entire CRZ Notification 1991 and to validate all actions so far taken under 
the CAA Act 2005 coming within the purview of CRZ Notification 1991. 
 
Observation/Recommendation of the Committee 
2.213 The Committee note that Section 27 of CCA 2005 has been subjected to 
different interpretations by Courts. The National Green Tribunal (NGT) did not 
uphold the complete exemption to Coastal Aquaculture from the purview of the 
CRZ notification 1991 and rathe r termed the coastal aquaculture as a regulated 
activity under CRZ notification 1991. The Committee have been apprised by the 
Department of Fish eries that this order refers to the H atcheries and that to o for 
Tamil Nadu only. However, as per the Department , this order of NGT has the 
potential to open the entire sector to the scrutiny. Therefore, the Department has 
proposed a suitable amendment in the text of Section 27 of the Principal Act to 

85 
 
remove the ambiguity not only from the CRZ Notification 1991 but f rom the CRZ 
Notifications issued thereafter.  
 
The Committee, after having examined the existing provisions in the Principal Act 
2005 and the proposed provisions  under Section 27, are of the considered view 
that the proposed provisions to counteract the CR Z Notifications issued in 1991 
and afterwards to protect the aquaculture is a necessary requireme nt. The 
Committee, therefore, decided to accept the amendment proposed. 
 
Clause No. 17 
 
Amendment Proposed in the Bill, Validation of certain provisions and 
amendments retrospectively, 
2.214 Insertion of New Section 28 
 
 “28. (1) Where a coastal aquaculture and activities connected therewith has been 
granted registration under this Act, then, notwithstanding anything contained in clause 
(v) of sub -section (2) of section 3 of the Environment (Protection) Act, 1986, or clau se 
(d) of sub-rule (3) of rule 5 of the Environment (Protection) Rules, 1986 or in any other 
law for the time being in force, –– 
(i) such registration granted under this Act shall prevail and remain valid;  
(ii) such coastal aquaculture and activities conn ected therewith shall be a permitted 
activity under the Coastal Regulation Zone Notification or the Island Coastal Regulation 
Zone Notification issued under the Environment (Protection) Act, 1986; 
(iii) all registrations granted for coastal aquaculture and  activities connected therewith 
under this Act shall be valid permissions under the applicable rules, regulations and 
notifications notified under the Environment (Protection) Act, 1986 from time to time.  
(2) The provisions of sub-section (1), and the provisions of sub-section (8) of section 
13 as amended retrospectively with effect from the 16th December, 2005 by the Coastal 
Aquaculture Authority (Amendment) Act, 2023, shall have and shall be deemed always 

86 
 
to have effect for all purposes as if they had be en in force at all material times, and 
accordingly, –– 
(i) notwithstanding anything contained in any judgment, decree or order of any court, 
tribunal or other authority, any action taken or anything done or purported to have been 
taken or done in accordance with the said provisions shall be deemed to be, and always 
to have been, for all purposes, as validly and effectively taken or done as if the said 
provisions had been in force at all material times;  
(ii) no suit or other proceeding shall be instituted, maintained or continued in any court 
for any action taken or anything done or omitted to be done in accordance with the said 
provisions; and 
(iii)  no enforcement shall be made by any court of any decree or order or direction 
relating to removal or closure  of any coastal aquaculture activity or demolition of any 
structure connected therewith or relating to any action taken or done or omitted to be 
done accordance with the said provisions as if the provisions of sub -section (1), and the 
amendments made in su b-section (8) of section 13 had been in force at all material 
times. 
Justification  
2.215 It is felt that Section 27 of the Principal Act even with the proposed amendment 
may not serve its purpose in respect of coastal aquaculture units as the CRZ 
Notification 1991 has been superseded by the subsequent CRZ Notifications 2011 and 
2019. Accordingly, it was proposed to insert a new Section 28 to make it clear that the 
CRZ notifications are not applicable on coastal aquaculture covered under CAA Act. 
However, in pursuance of further discussions held on this matter at various levels, 
especially with Ministry of Environment Forest and Climate Change (MoEFCC), it was 
felt that it would be appropriate to declare coastal aquaculture and activities connected 
therewith as permitted activities under CRZ notifications issued from time to time rather 
than being seen as an omnibus exemption from CRZ notifications, while ensuring that 
the CAA alone continues to regulate coastal aquaculture. 

87 
 
Hence, Section 28 has been  suitably revised with an alternate formulation to the effect 
that coastal aquaculture and activities connected therewith is a permitted activity in CRZ 
under the CRZ notifications and the registration granted under CAA Act shall be treated 
as valid permission under CRZ regulations and same has been agreed to by MoEFCC. 
This will help to a) remove the prevailing ambiguities and once for all put to rest any 
misinterpretations of courts including NGT; b) reduce the multi -agency regulatory and 
compliance burden on coastal aquaculture and; c) reiterate the protection granted under 
the validation section i.e. Section-27 in the Principal Act albeit in the revised form as 
stated above. Furthermore, in order to validate the costal aquaculture activities 
undertaken subsequent to supersession of CRZ Notification 1991, suitable amendments 
to Sub -section 8 of Section 13 of the Principal Act including insertion of a new Sub -
section (3) in Section-28 have been proposed in the Amendment Bill. 
Comments/Observation/Recommendation of the Committee 
2.216 The Committee ha ve been apprised by the Department of Fisheries that 
New Section 28 has been inserted in the proposed Bill to safeguard the interest of 
coastal aquaculturists by validating certain provisions a nd amendments 
retrospectively. The Department further briefed the Committee that CRZ 
Notification 1991 has been superseded by the subsequent CRZ Notifications 2011 
and 2019 and accordingly it is proposed to insert a new Section 28 to clear once 
for all tha t CRZ Notifications are not applicable on Coastal Aquaculture covered 
under CAA Act. The Department further added that Section 28 will ensure that 
Coastal Aquaculture and activities connected therewith are permitted activities in 
CRZ and shall be treated a s valid permission under CRZ Regulations and the 
same has been agreed upon by the Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate 
Change.  
 
The Committee were further apprised that in order to validate the coastal 
aquaculture activities undertaken subsequent t o supersession of CRZ 
Notifications 1991, suitable amendments to Sub -section 8 of Section 13 of the 
Principal Act including insertion of a new Sub -section 3 in Section 28 have been 
proposed in the Amendment Bill. The Committee, having examined all the pros  

88 
 
and cons of the proposed insertion of New Section 28, are of the view that this 
will validate the aquaculture and aquaculture infrastructure set -up after CRZ 
Notifications 1991, 2011 and 2019 retrospectively. The Committee, therefore, 
decided to accept the proposed provisions under the New Section 28.  
  

89 
 
CHAPTER III 
MISCELLANEOUS/ANCILLARY ISSUES 
 
Nucleus Breeding Centres (NBCs). 
The Committee desired to know about the number of Nucleus Breeding Centres 
(NBCs) being established in the Country and whether it is true that Indian Hatcheries 
depend on Nucleus Breeding Centers (NBCs) overseas for the supply of Specific 
Pathogen Free (SPF) -White Shrimp PL (post larvae) production, the Department 
submitted as under:- 
The Nucleus Breeding Centres (NBCs) are highly  bio secured primary 
incubation facilities where genetic improvement and diseases exclusion is 
ensured in the stocks. There is no such NBC’s established for Litopenaeus 
vannamei (Pacific While leg shrimp) in India. However, the real multiplication of 
brood stock is carried out in the Brood -stock Multiplication Centres (BMCs) 
where the Parent Post Larvae produced at the NBCs are grown to adult stage in 
a bio secured way. There are  four BMCs established in India , three for L. 
vannamei and one for Black Tiger shrimp Penaeus monodon. One more BMC for 
L. vannamei  is under construction.  Considering L.vannamei being a Pacific 
Ocean shrimp and the availability of sufficient NBCs outside I ndia, the BMCs 
have been promoted in India. In addition, for want of diverse genetics, the Indian 
hatcheries depend on empanelled Overseas Suppliers to bring additional brood 
stock for better performance. With regard to establishment of NBC is concerned, 
Rajiv Gandhi Centre for Aquaculture -Marine Products Export Development 
Authority (RGCA-MPEDA) under the Department of Commerce has established 
Domestication of Tiger Shrimp ( P. monodon) Program in Andaman and Nicobar 
Islands, which is otherwise a genetic im provement program and an NBC. This 
project is in  its final stages of completion, and recently the Department of 
Fisheries has also extended financial support to RGCA-MPEDA for completion of 
some of the last mile works of this project. Further , a national p roject has been 
launched in 2022 for genetic improvement of Indian White Shrimp ( Penaeus 

90 
 
indicus) and financial assistance has been extended to Indian Council of 
Agricultural Research - Central Institute of Brackish water Aquaculture ( ICAR-
CIBA) as a part o f  Atma Nirbhar Bharat. The Department of Fisheries recently 
brought out the guidelines for SPF certification as a policy initiative for the 
production of certified SPF stocks in India. The Department of Fisheries is also 
exploring the feasibility of establishing NBCs in private space.  
3.2 The Committee also observed that the Rajiv Gandhi Centre for Aquaculture -
Marine Products Export Development Authority ( RGCA-MPEDA) under the Department 
of Commerce has established Domestication of Tiger Shrimp ( P. monodon) Program in 
Andaman and Nicobar Islands , however, the progress of the said NBC has been rather 
slow and the brood stock available in the establishment i.e. 11th generation and                
14th generation are not very useful for breeding. Further  coordination between Ministry 
of Commerce and Industry which runs RGCA and Ministry of Fisheries should be 
established for expediting the proper functioning of RGCA and therefore asked the 
Department about the steps taken to address these issues. The Depa rtment submitted 
that: 
In the last two years efforts have been made in this regard and the Hon’ble 
Minster of Fisheries Shri Rupala Ji visited the facility to sort out the impending 
issues. The project will be completed soon and very shortly the programme 
would be launched and we will have Nucleus Breeding Center for Monodon. 
The Department further stated that the Government is exploring the possibility 
of allowing private sector companies to establish NBCs in the country and 
shortly a policy decision in this regard would be taken.  
Observation/Recommendation 
3.3 The Committee acknowledge  that India being the second largest Shrimp 
exporter, a completely  unabated functional Nucleus Breeding Center (NBCs) is 
the need of the hour so as to make the Ind ian Hatcheries self reliant so that they 
do not  have to depend on NBCs overseas for the supply of Specific Pathogen -
Free (SPF)  White Shrimp PL (post larvae) pro duction. Further, noting that P 

91 
 
Monodon (Black Tiger Shrimp) being our native species of Shrimp, the Committee 
feel that the Department should take effective measures so that the facility at 
Andaman and Nicobar Islands for Do mestication of Tiger Shrimp (P. M onodon) 
run by Rajiv Gandhi Centre for Aquaculture -Marine Products Export Development 
Authority (RGCA -MPEDA) becomes fully functional at the earliest thereby 
supporting the initiative of Atma Nirbhar Bharat. The Committee would also like 
the Department to involve the private sector in setting up of NBCs in the country  
on priority basis to achieve the desired results. 
Pipelines through Forest Areas 
3.4 The Committee desired to know whether pipelines are allowed to pass through 
the forest occupied lands along the coastal belts so as to draw sea water for the 
Hatcheries, Brood Stock Multiplication Centers (BMCs) and Nucleus Breeding Centers 
(NBCs) established in such areas adjacent to forest lands and if not whether any 
provision has been made in the Amendment Bill to allow such pipelines. The 
Department it their reply submitted the following: 
The Hatcheries, Brood Stock Multiplication Centres (BMCs) and Nucleus 
Breeding Centres (NBCs) require access to high quality clean oceanic / sea 
water. If the land where these structures are to be established is located 
adjacent to the forest lands and sea, nece ssary permission is required from the 
Forest Department for laying the pipelines if the pipelines pass through the 
forest land s. However, entrepreneurs are discouraged to establish hatcheries, 
BMC and NBCs on lands near to forest lands and requiring l aying of pipelines 
through forest lands. No express provision made in the present CAA 
Amendment Bill to allow laying of such pipelines/ devices through forest lands . 
However, in case of absolute necessity, the issue of laying pipeline for the drawl 
and disch arge of sea water by coastal aquaculture units through forest lands 
will be addressed  in consultation with the Ministry of Environment, Forest and 
Climate Change while framing the Rules under the Amended Act.  In addition, 
under the Subsection (ii) of new S ection -28 (1) of the Coastal Aquaculture 
Authority (Amendment) Bill 2023  it is inter alia  mentioned that the coastal 

92 
 
aquaculture and activities connected therewith are permitted activities in the 
CRZ area. The words “activities connected therewith” have b een expressly 
included to address the very issue of laying pipelines in the CRZ area, which at 
present is highly cumbersome to the stakeholders in the absence of this 
enabling provision.  
The Department further stated that in exceptional cases of Reserve 
Forests, they would take up the issues with the Ministry of Environment, Forest 
and Climate Change on case to case basis. 
Observation/Recommendation 
3.5 The Committee  acknowledge the importance of Forests/Reserve Forests 
and accordingly feel the need to preserve and protect them from the occupational 
activities and human interventions which would affect the flora and fauna. The 
Committee appreciate the submission of th e Department, wherein they have 
stated that they would consult the Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate 
Change before framing the Rules in the amended Act to address those 
exceptional cases, where laying of pipelines through Forests becomes absolute ly 
necessary. The Committee further feel that the Rules so framed should be in 
tandem with the larger goal of preserving the environment and its sustainability 
in sync with achieving the goals of development of Hatcheries, Nucleus Breeding 
Centers and Brood Stock Multiplication Centres.  
Protecting Interests of Traditional Fish Farmers 
3.6 To protect the interest of Traditional Fish Farmers of the Coastal Areas, the 
Committee desired to know  if the rights of Traditional Fish Farmers have been 
safeguarded in the Amended Bill and also wanted to know the views of the Department  
on further reduction of penalty below the minimum as prescribed in the Bill for 
Traditional Fish Farmers in cases such as non-registration and non-compliance with the 
provision of the Act. 
3.7 The Committee further wanted the know if the provision of demolition of the 
structures of the farm and destruction of the standing crops as has been proposed 

93 
 
under Section 14 (c) & ( d) of the Amendment Bill can be relaxed in the case of 
Traditional Coastal Aquaculture undertaken by the Coastal Communities. The 
Department in their replies submitted as under: 
The thrust of the Coastal Aquaculture Authority Act  2005 has always 
been to re gulate coastal aquaculture with an aim to protect coastal 
environment. At present, the coastal a quaculture done in traditional way s and 
fish/shrimp farming activity carried out in a primitive manner using traditional 
knowledge is also registered by the Coastal Aquaculture Authority in order to 
ensure there is proper record and no misuse. It is pertinent to add that the 
Coastal Aquaculture Authority Act 2005 provides for exemption from 
inspection for farms up to 2 hectares of water spread area in support of 
traditional and small scale farmers who are engaged in coastal 
aquaculture. However, procedures would be further simplified for enabling 
registration of traditional aquaculture activities including integrated farming while 
framing the Rules.  
The Principal Act mandates registration for all coastal aquaculture 
operations including traditional coastal aquaculture . Further, the Act under 
Section 14 also provides for imprisonment for a term which may extend to 3 
years or with fine which may extend to Rs 1 lakh or with both for carrying coastal 
aquaculture without registration. The Section -14 of the principal Act does not 
provide for any relaxation to traditional fish farmers. When provision has been 
made under the Amendment Bill to decriminalize the  Principal Act by doing away 
with imprisonment and replacing with a set of monetary and other penalties, the 
same spirit has been maintained and no distinction has been proposed between 
traditional and non -traditional aquaculture. Care has been taken to ke ep the 
monetary penalties to bare minimum. Further, the Amendment to Section 14 of 
Principal Act provides for a basket of options as non -monetary penalties. The 
Department while making Rules may prescribe lower level of non -monetary 
penalties to protect the interests of traditional fish farmers.  
 

94 
 
The Department further submitted: 
The Amendment Bill aims to decriminalise the Act by doing away with 
imprisonment and replacing with a combination of monetary and non -monetary 
penalties as indicated in Section 14  (a) to (e) of the Amendment Bill.  Since, 
harsh penalty of imprisonment is being replaced, it is essential that the penalties 
proposed are deterrent enough to serve the purpose of the Act given its thrust 
on protection of coastal environment.  D estruction of the standing crop is one of 
the penal actions having a deterrent value. Providing an option to allow 
harvesting of the crop that was raised illegally may dilute the deterrence and it 
may not be desirable for State to receive such monies out of illegal activities.   
 
Observation/Recommendation    
3.8 The Committee note that a large chunk of Fish Farmers are poor and 
financially weak who undertake Aquaculture and Allied activities which are meant 
only for their survival. The Committee therefore recommend that lower level of 
non-monetary penalties should be prescribed at the time of framing the Rules so 
as to protect the interest s of  Traditional Fish Farmers  keeping in view their 
sustenance/livelihood needs . The Committee also desire that  adequate 
safeguards should be put in place for promoting and protecting Traditional 
Coastal Fish Farming and Aquaculture including activities connected therewith. 
Growth and Investment in Aquaculture and Related Activities 
3.9 The Committee desired to know the growth and investment in Aquaculture and 
its related activities in the recent past. The Department in their written reply stated as 
under:  
Coastal aquaculture is one of the major success stories crafted by diverse 
and har dworking small farmers and youth around the fulcrum of vibrant policy 
support of government. The shrimp production has increased from about 75000 
tons in 2008 -09 to around 10 lakh tons in 2021 -22. The seafood exports have 
grown at an average annual growth rate of 15% and stood at a record USD 7.76 
billion in 2021 -22 with Brackish water shrimp constituting the lion’s share of 

95 
 
exports. Shrimp Exports in last 10 years increased from Rs 8175 Crore in 2011 
to Rs. 42706 crore in 2022. Shrimp exported during 2021 -22 is 7,28,123 MT 
worth USD 5.83 Billion or Rs. 42706 crore in 2022. Most of the shrimp exported 
around 90% is from one single species called Litopenaeus vannamei (also called 
Pacific White legged shrimp). 
About 1.75 Lakh Ha has been brought under the Shri mp Aquaculture 
Production so far to produce 10.20 lakh tonnes of shrimp. Presently a total of 305 
hatcheries and 163 Nauplii Rearing Hatcheries (NRH) spread all over the coastal 
states with a production capacity of 125 Billion seeds per annum (including NR H) 
have been established. A total of 5 Brood stock Multiplication Centers have been 
established. India has the installed feed production capacity of 2.8 million tons 
per annum as against the requirement for around 1.2 million Metric tons of 
shrimp feed per  annum. Indian seafood processing industry has 613 registered 
seafood processing facilities with the processing capacity of 33,653 metric tons 
per day. Out of which 338 EU approved processing facilities has the processing 
capacity of 18,830 metric tons per  day and 275 non -EU processing facilities has 
the processing capacity of 14,822 metric tons per day.Coastal Aquaculture sector 
has been providing several lakhs of direct and indirect  employment in the rural 
and economically backward areas.  
Observation/Recommendation 
3.10 The Committee note that continued growth of population and priority of 
quality food enriched in protein and minerals and vitamin warrant food security in 
the country. The Committee also think that seafood is the only alterna tive food 
which may ensure supplement food security and provide quality food contents 
like protein, minerals and requisite vitamins. Apart from this, the Committee think 
that a sizeable foreign exchange can be earned by exporting surplus seafood 
including fish, prawns, shrimps, crabs, etc.  
The Committee are quite appreciative of the efforts/measures taken by the 
Government for promotion and development of seafood in the country. However, 

96 
 
the Committee  feel that the requisite growth rate has not been achieved at par 
with other developing countries like Indonesia, South Korea, Thailand etc. The  
Committee are of the firm view that still much is needed to promote and facilitate 
the growth of seafood in our  country. The Committee, therefore, urge the 
Government to put in more and more efforts to strengthen the infrastructure and 
market so that se afood growers can be assured of better rate of r eturns in 
respect of their hard work and investment. The Committee  further desire that this 
can be achieved by ensuring better and stronger backward and forward linkage 
through infallible supply chain.  
 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI;                     P.C. GADDIGOUDAR 
14th July, 2023          Chairperson, 
23 Ashadha 1945 (Saka)      Standing Committee on Agriculture, 
      Animal Husbandry and Food Processing   

97 
 
APPENDIX - I 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE, ANIMAL HUSBANDRY AND FOOD 
PROCESSING 
(2022-23) 
 
MINUTES OF THE THIRTEENTH SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE 
  
***** 
 
The Committee sat on Friday, the 12th May, 202 3 from 1 100 hrs to 1 300 hrs in 
Committee Room No. ' 3', First Floor, Block -A, Extn to  Parliament House Annexe  
Building, New Delhi. 
Present 
Shri P. C. Gaddigoudar – Chairperson 
 
Members 
 
Lok Sabha 
 
  2.  Shri Horen Sing Bey 
 3. Shri A. Ganeshamurthi 
 4. Shri Kanakmal Katara  
 5. Shri Devji Mansingram Patel 
 6. Smt. Sharda Anilkumar Patel 
 7. Shri Bheemrao Baswanthrao Patil 
 8. Shri Rajiv Pratap Rudy 
  
Rajya Sabha 
 
 9. Smt. Ramilaben Becharbhai Bara 
 10. Dr. Anil Sukhdeorao Bonde 
 11. Shri S. Kalyanasundaram 
 12. Shri Kailash Soni 
 13. Shri Ram Nath Thakur  
  
 
 
 

98 
 
Secretariat 
 
1.    Shri Shiv Kumar            –   Additional Secretary 
2.    Shri Naval K. Verma  – Director  
3.    Shri Uttam Chand Bharadwaj     –   Additional Director 
4.    Shri Prem Ranjan   – Deputy Secretary 
 
 
Representatives of Ministry of Fisheries, Animal Husbandry and Dairying  
(Department of Fisheries) 
 
Sl.No. Name  Designation 
1. Shri Jatindra Nath Swain Secretary (Fisheries) 
2. Dr. Abhilaksh Likhi  Officer on Special Duty  
3. Dr. Jujjavarapu Balaji Joint Secretary (Marine Fisheries) 
4. Dr. V. Kripa Member Secretary - CAA 
5. Shri A. Antony Xavier Fisheries Development Commissioner 
 
 
Ministry of Law and Justice (Legislative Department) 
 
1. Ms. Veena Kothavale Joint Secretary and Legislative Counsel 
2. Shri Prashant Singh  Deptuy Legislative Counsel 
 
2. At the outset, the Chairperson welcomed the Members and the Representatives of the 
Ministry of Fisheries, Animal Husbandry and Dairying (Department of Fisheries) and the Ministry of 
Law and Justice (Legislative Department) to the Sitting of the Committee convened for having a 
Briefing by the Representatives on 'The Coastal Aquaculture Authority (Amendment) Bill, 2023' 
and apprised them of the provisions of the Direction 5 5 of the 'Directions by the Speaker , Lok 
Sabha' regarding confidentiality of the proceedings. 
 
3. After the witnesses introduced themselves, the Representatives of the Ministry of Fisheries, 
Animal Husbandry and Dairying (Department of Fisheries) apprised the Committee of the Bill in 
brief. Thereafter, a power -point presentation was made briefing the Committee about the key 
indicators of India's Fisheries and Aquaculture Sector, Fisheries production trend, Inland Fisheries 
and aquaculture production trend, India's Marine Products Exports, Coastal Aquaculture, 
chronology of enactment of Coastal Aquaculture Authority Act, 2005, Objects and Reaso ns for 
enactment of Coastal Aquaculture Authority Act, 2005, Functions and Organizational structure of 
Coastal Aquaculture Authority , need for amendments in Coastal Aquaculture Authority  Act, 2005, 

99 
 
Objects and Reasons for amending of  CAA Act, 2005, key am endments proposed and reasons 
therefor, consultative process involved in drafting the CAA Amendment Bill, 2023, etc.  
 
4. The Chairperson and the Members of the Committee raised several issues/points as briefly 
mentioned below and sought clarifications/information thereon from the Department:  
 
i) State-wise/Union Territory wise details of the number of violation registered sinc e 
enactment of Coastal Aquaculture Authority (CAA) Act, 2005; 
ii) State-wise/Union Territory wise details of the number of people/offenders punished 
with maximum punishment of three years jail term for violating the provisions of the 
Coastal Aquaculture Authority (CAA) Act, 2005 since its enactment; 
iii) Possible environmental threats to seaweeds, fish, marine fish and other living 
creatures by artificial feed, anti -biotic, growth promoters, excreta, transportation, 
electricity or any radiation process used in the H atcheries and other Aquaculture 
Activities; 
iv) Protection/safeguards provided to Hatcheries and other Aquaculture Activities from 
natural disaster like tsunami, high tide, cyclone, etc.; 
v) Number of Projects getting benefitted by this Bill which were affected b y the decision 
of the Court/NGT and the cost of these Projects; 
vi) Total Coastal Area of the country and the Coastal area expected to be acquired for 
aquaculture activities; 
vii) Number of Farmers got benefitted from this Bill and the amount of rise in their 
income; 
viii)  Preferential treatment in allotment of the Coastal area to farmers, Farmer Producer 
Organisations, original fisherman community vis-a-vis big players; 
ix) Need to broadbase the composition of Coastal Aquaculture Authority and other 
Committees by including elected public representatives such as MPs, MLAs, etc, 
representatives of all the Coastal States and Union Territories and farmers; 
x) Provisions of differential penalty commensurate  with/proportionate to the size and 
scale of Aquaculture Units; 
xi) Waiving the r equirement of atleast twenty -four hours Notice in writing to enter into 
any Coastal Aquaculture Unit and its misuse; 
xii) Consultation process undertaken by the Department while framing the Coastal 
Aquaculture Authority (Amendment) Bill, 2023; 

100 
 
xiii) Composition of th e Expert Committee on whose recommendation the Bill has been 
drafted; 
xiv) Details of the provisions of CAA Act, 2005 , where the Constitutional Validity has 
been challenged by the writ petition in the Supreme Court; 
xv)  Possibility of increase in violation of the provisions of CAA Act due to proposed 
decriminalization of the offences under the Act;  
xvi) Reasons for not substituting the word 'farm' by 'unit' in sub -sections 7 and 8 of 
Section 13 of the Act;  
xvii) Reasons for using  words 'harmful to human health' instead of words 'harmful to 
Coastal eco-system including human health' in proposed new Section 12A; 
xviii) Regulation of Aquaculture activities in other countries; and 
xix) Total export of Marine Products, etc.  
 
5. The Representatives of the Department responded to most of the queries raised by the 
Members. The Chairperson, thereafter, thanked the witnesses for sharing valuable information with 
the Committee on the Subject and directed them to furnish the replies to the queries raised by the 
Members which remain unanswered and in respect of information, which was not readily available 
with them to the Committee Secretariat. The Committee decided to consult/hear various 
Associations/Organizations, Stakeholders, Domain Experts and State Fisheries Department of 
Coastal States to gather holistic opinion on the Bill. The Committee also decided to undertake an 
on-the-spot Study Visit in mid -June, 2023 - in connection with the subjects selected by the 
Committee.  
 
The Meeting then adjourned. 
(A copy of the Verbatim Proceedings of the Sitting has been kept) 
  

101 
 
APPENDIX - II 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE, ANIMAL HUSBANDRY AND FOOD 
PROCESSING 
(2022-23) 
 
 
MINUTES OF THE FOURTEENTH SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE 
  
***** 
 
The Committee sat on Friday, the 2 th June, 2023 from 1100hrs to 1230hrs in 
Committee Room No. '3', First Floor, Block -A, Extension to Parliament House 
Annexe Building, New Delhi.        
Present 
 
Shri P. C. Gaddigoudar – Chairperson 
 
Members 
 
Lok Sabha 
 
  2.  Shri A. Ganeshamurthi 
 3. Shri Kanakmal Katara 
 4. Shri Devji Mansingram Patel  
 5. Shri Vinayak Bhaurao Raut 
 6. Shri Pocha Brahmananda Reddy 
 7. Shri Rajiv Pratap Rudy 
 8. Mohammad Sadique 
 9. Shri Ram Kripal Yadav 
  
Rajya Sabha 
 
 10. Smt. Ramilaben Becharbhai Bara 
 11. Shri Masthan Rao Beeda 
 12. Dr. Anil Sukhdeorao Bonde 
 13. Shri S. Kalyanasundaram 
 14. Shri Ram Nath Thakur 
 15. Shri Harnath Singh Yadav 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 

102 
 
Secretariat 
1.    Shri Shiv Kumar            –   Additional Secretary 
2.    Shri Uttam Chand Bharadwaj     –   Director 
3.    Shri Prem Ranjan   – Deputy Secretary 
 
 
List of Representatives 
 
ASSOCIATIONS/ORGANISATIONS 
ALL INDIA SHRIMP HATCHERIES ASSOCIATION, ANDHRA PRADESH 
 
S.No.    Name    Designation 
   1.  Shri Ravi Kumar Yellanki   President 
   2.  Shri Muthukaruppan   Vice President 
   3.  Mr. Calraj     Tamil Nadu Region 
       President 
 
 
SOCIETY OF AQUACULTURE PROFESSIONALS (SAP), ANDHRA PRADESH 
 
S.No Name Designation 
1.  Shri S. Santana Krishnan Founder President of Society of 
Aquaculture Professionals 
2.  Shri K. Madhusudhan Reddy President 
3.  Shri D. Ramraj  Former President SAP & AISHA 
 
MPEDA - RAJIV GANDHI CENTRE FOR AQUACULTURE, TAMIL NADU 
 
S.No. Name Designation 
1.  Shri.K.S.Pradeep (IFS) Secretary 
2.  Shri.P.Jayagopal Deputy Director 
 
STAKEHOLDERS 
M/S. ANANDA GROUP, ANDHRA PRADESH 
 
S.No. Name Designation 
1.  Shri Uddaraju Kasi Viswanadha  Raju Chairman 
2.  Dr. Mohana Kumaran Nair Technical Director 
 
M/S. GEEKAY HATCHERIES, TAMIL NADU 
 
     S.No. Name Designation 
1.   Shri Y Krishna Reddy Managing Director 
2.  Shri Y.S.M Siddhartha Reddy Director 
3.  Smt. Y Kavitha Reddy Director 
 
 
 
 
 

103 
 
DOMAIN EXPERTS 
 
S.No. Name Designation 
1.  Dr. P. Ravichandran Former Member Secretary, 
Coastal Aquaculture 
Authority  
 
2. At the outset, the Chairperson welcomed the Members and the Representatives (Non -
Official) of the Organizations/ Associations/ Stakeholders and Domain Expert  to the Sitting of the 
Committee convened to hear their views in connection with the examination of  'The Coastal 
Aquaculture Authority (Amendment) Bill, 2023 ' and also apprised them of the provisions of             
Direction 5 5 of the 'Directions by the Speaker , Lok Sabha ' regarding confidentiality of the 
proceedings. 
 
3. After the witnesses introduced themselves, the Representatives (Non-Official) of the 
Organizations/ Associations/ Stakeholders and Domain Expert  presented their views before the 
Committee in respect of the Clauses of the Bill, in brief. The Committee were apprised about the 
urgency to amend the Bill so that Hatcheries are allowed to function which would benefit the 
production and export of Shrimp in the country including livelihood to lakhs of families which depend 
on Aquaculture. The non polluting aspect o f Aquaculture was also emphasized along with the 
mandatory requirement of having an affluent treatment plant for all aquaculture units. Further, , 
removal of 24 hours Notice Period for inspection, contamination by use of antibiotics, content 
labeling, redu cing of penalty for non -compliance with CAA provisions for small/poor farmers, 
Composition of Coastal Aquaculture Authority and representation of public representatives and 
stakeholders was discussed in detail.  
4. The Chairperson and the Members of the Co mmittee raised several issues/points as briefly 
mentioned below and sought clarifications/information thereon from the Department:  
i.  Decriminalisation of de faulters for non compliance with the provisions of Coastal 
Aquaculture Authority Act; 
ii. To examine the penal provisions prescribed in the Amendment Bill which may lead to  
arbitrary raids and thereby causing  harassment of the Coastal Aquaculture Unit holders 
by the Authority or its officials; 

104 
 
iii. Issue of contamination by the use  of antibioti cs and their control in the Coastal 
Aquaculture Unit; 
iv. To find ways to control the use of antibiotics in the facility as well as antibiotics residue in 
the final product; 
v. To examine the provision of doing away with the notice period of 24 hours for i nspection 
of Coastal Aquaculture Unit  by the authority. As it should not end up in harassment of 
the unit holders just to comply with European Union Standards; 
vi. To focus on developing farming of other species also such as fin fish, molluscs and sea 
weed; 
vii. To focus on Content Labelling of the drugs/production boosters/chemicals used by unit 
holders so as to avoid misuse and improper use; 
viii. To ensure that every Hatchery should have an Effluent Treatment Plant in accordance to 
the size of the Aquaculture Unit; 
ix. To ensure that sufficient numbers of Lab Testing facilities for antibiotic and disease 
testing is available to the Aquaculture Unit Holders; 
x. Need to broadbase the composition of Coastal Aquaculture Authority and ensure that it 
is represented by all Stakeholders as well as Coastal States/Union Territories; 
xi. Ensuring availability of seeds from Hatcheries to the farmers so that it does not affect 
production and thus exports and employment generation; etc. 
5. The Representatives of the  Organizations/ Associations/ Stakeholders and Domain Expert  
responded to most of the queries raised by the Members. The Chairperson, thereafter, thanked the 
witnesses for sharing valuable information with the Committee on the Subject and directed them to 
furnish the replies to the queries raised by the Members which remain unanswered and in respect 
of information, which was not readily available with them to the Committee Secretariat.  
 
The Meeting then adjourned. 
(A copy of the Verbatim Proceedings of the Sitting has been kept) 
  

105 
 
APPENDIX - III 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE, ANIMAL HUSBANDRY AND FOOD 
PROCESSING 
(2022-23) 
 
 
MINUTES OF THE FIFTEENTH SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE 
  
***** 
 
The Committee sat on Friday, the 2 th June, 2023 from 1400hrs to 1515hrs in 
Committee Room No. '3', First Floor, Block -A, Extension to Parliament House 
Annexe Building, New Delhi.        
Present 
 
Shri P. C. Gaddigoudar – Chairperson 
 
Members 
 
Lok Sabha 
 
  2.  Shri A. Ganeshamurthi 
 3. Shri Kanakmal Katara 
 4. Shri Devji Mansingram Patel  
 5. Shri Vinayak Bhaurao Raut 
 6. Shri Pocha Brahmananda Reddy 
 7. Shri Rajiv Pratap Rudy 
 8. Mohammad Sadique 
 9. Shri Ram Kripal Yadav 
  
Rajya Sabha 
 
 10. Smt. Ramilaben Becharbhai Bara 
 11. Shri Masthan Rao Beeda 
 12. Dr. Anil Sukhdeorao Bonde 
 13. Shri S. Kalyanasundaram 
 14. Shri Ram Nath Thakur 
 15. Shri Harnath Singh Yadav 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 

106 
 
Secretariat 
 
1.    Shri Shiv Kumar            –   Additional Secretary 
2.    Shri Uttam Chand Bharadwaj     –   Director 
3.    Shri Prem Ranjan   – Deputy Secretary 
 
 
 
LIST OF REPRESENTATIVES 
DEPARTMENT OF FISHERIES AND FISHERMEN WELFARE, TAMIL NADU 
 
S.No Name Designation 
1.  Dr. K.S. Palanisamy (IAS) Commissioner of Fisheries and Fishermen 
Welfare 
2.  Shri G. Arumugam Additional Director of Fisheries and Fishermen 
Welfare (Inland) 
3.  Shri V. Lamek Jayakumar Deputy Director of Fisheries and Fishermen 
Welfare (Mariculture) 
4.  Thiru G. Janarthanan Assistant Director (TN:AMP) 
Fisheries & Fishermen Welfare 
 
DEPARTMENT OF FISHERIES, ANDHRA PRADESH 
 
S.No. Name Designation 
4.  Dr. P Sankara Rao Joint Director of Fisheries, Office of 
Commissioner of Fisheries,Vijaywada 
5.  Shri Shaik Lal Mohemmed Joint Director of Fisheries, Konaseema 
District 
6.  Dr. P. Suresh Joint Director of Fisheries, Bapatla 
District 
 
DIRECTORATE OF FISHERIES, ODISHA 
 
S.No. Name Designation 
3.  Shri Suresh Kumar Vashishth 
(IAS) 
Principal Secretary to Government, Fisheries & 
ARD Department, Odisha 
4.  Shri Basanta Kumar Deputy Director of Fisheries (Brackish Water), 
Directorate of Fisheries, Odisha, Cuttack  
5.  Smt. Mamta Mohapatra Deputy Director of Fisheries, PMU, F & ARD 
Department 
6.  Shri Bibhuti Ranjan Rout District Fisheries Officer, Puri 
7.  Smt. Ratnamanjari Sahoo Assistant Fisheries Officer, Directorate of 
Fisheries, Odisha, Cuttack 
 
DIRECTORATE OF FISHERIES, MAHARASHTRA 
 
S.No. Name Designation 
1.  Dr.Atul Patne (IAS) Commissioner of Fisheries, Maharashtra 
2.  Shri. Yuvraj A. Chougule Joint Commissioner, (Brackish Water) 
3.  Shri. Mahesh H. Deore Joint Commissioner, Marine 

107 
 
DIRECTORATE OF FISHERIES, KARNATAKA 
 
S.No. Name Designation 
1.  Shri Dinesh Kumar Kaller Director of Fisheries 
2.  Shri Mahesh Kumar U. Deputy Director of Fisheries 
 
DIRECTORATE OF FISHERIES, KERALA 
 
S.No. Name Designation 
1.  Shri Mahesh S. Joint Director of Fisheries (Aqua) 
 
2. At the outset, the C hairperson welcomed the Representatives of State Fisheries 
Departments to the Sitting of the Committee, convened for taking oral evidence on 'The Coastal 
Aquaculture Authority (Amendment) Bill, 2023 ' and apprised them of the provisions of Direction 
55 of the 'Directions by the Speaker, Lok Sabha' regarding confidentiality of the proceedings. 
 
3. After the witnesses introduced themselves, the Representatives of the State Fisheries 
Departments presented their views one by one before the Committee on various issues which were 
general as well as State specific, which needs to be addressed. The Committ ee were apprised 
about the issues such as Traceability with regard to Shrimp export, allowing aquaculture activity in 
Eco-sensitive Zones of Tamil Nadu and Odisha, exempting activities of Live Feed Culture, 
Ornamental Fish breeding and propagation unit in the No Development Zone, inclusion of organic 
manure in the definitions along with Fertilizer, safeguarding the rights of traditional coastal 
aquaculture farmers, adequate representation of Coastal Farmers and Coastal States in the 
Composition of the Autho rity, notification of aqua culture areas, reduction in penalty for non -
registration, to do away with demolition of farms, setting up time limit for clearing Applications for 
Registration and controlling the sale of banned antibiotics.   
4. The Chairperson and the Members of the Committee raised several issues/points as briefly 
mentioned below and sought clarifications/information thereon from the Department:  
i. Issue of traceability which is an important issue in export of Shri mp to various foreign 
countries; 
ii. To find ways to allow Coastal Aquaculture Activity in the Eco-Sensitive and Buffer Zones 
specifically for the States such as Tamil Nadu, Maharashtra and Odisha where Eco -
Sensitive Zones are adjacent to the coast or the distance between the sea fron t and the 
mountains (sahyadri) is less than 500 metres as is the case in Maharashtra; 

108 
 
iii. Need for  exempting Aquaculture Activities such as Live Feed culture, ornamental fish 
breeding and propagation unit along with Nucleus Breeding Centres, Broodstock 
Multiplication Centres and Sea Weed Culture; 
iv. To focus on Aqua -mapping in Maharashtra and ensure that it is completed at the 
earliest; 
v. Issue of inclusion of Organic Manure along with Fertiliser since Organic Manure is used 
traditionally in aquaculture; 
vi. Traditional Coastal Aquaculture mentioned in Section 14 should be defined properly so 
that rights of the Traditional Farming Community can be protected; 
vii. To ensure that the Coastal Farmers are represented in the Coastal Aquaculture 
Authority; 
viii. To ensure that the Aquaculture areas are notified, since in many States large areas such 
as wetlands and paddy fields are kept fallow for more than 20 years. Such areas can be 
used for aquaculture and hence should be notified as aquaculture areas; 
ix. To focus on reducing penalty for non -registration and non-compliance of the Act in case 
of Traditional Aquaculture Activity; 
x. To do away with demolition of farm structures and standing crops as suggested in the 
amended Act in case of Traditional Coastal Aquaculture.  
xi. Every Coastal State should be given representation in the Authority; 
xii. Definition of different types of culture like intensive, semi -intensive, extensive, and 
traditional may be clarified in the Act; 
xiii.  Clarity should be sought from the Department on the issue of reducing the No 
Development Zone from 200 metres to 50 metres in the State of Odisha; 
xiv. It should be ensured that the States are represented in various committees formed 
under the Coastal Aquaculture Authority; 
xv. To focus on setting up of time limit for clearing of applications received for Registration 
of Coastal Aquaculture Units {Section 7(2)}; 

109 
 
xvi. To examine the issue , wherein, due to change in boundaries of Wildlife Sanctuaries 
some of the registered Aquaculture Units which were previously outside such 
boundaries have fallen within such redrawn boundaries of Wildlife Sanctuaries 
(particularly in the case of Odisha State); 
xvii.  To focus on issues relating to restricting/controlling the sale of banned 
antibiotics/chemicals to Aquaculture Unit Holders, etc.  
5. The Representatives of the State Fisheries Departments responded to most of the queries 
raised by the Members. The Chairperson, thereafter, thanked the witnesses for sharing valuabl e 
information with the Committee on the Subject and directed them to furnish the replies to the 
queries raised by the Members which remain unanswered and in respect of information, which was 
not readily available with them to the Committee Secretariat.  
 
The Meeting then adjourned. 
(A copy of the Verbatim Proceedings of the Sitting has been kept) 
  

110 
 
APPIENDIX – IV 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE, ANIMAL HUSBANDRY AND FOOD 
PROCESSING 
(2022-23) 
 
MINUTES OF THE SIXTEENTH SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE 
  
***** 
 
The Committee sat on Friday, the 16 th June, 2023 from 1100 hrs to 1240 hrs in 
Committee Room No.'3', First Floor, Block -A, Extension to Parliament House Annexe 
Building, New Delhi.        
Present 
 
Shri P. C. Gaddigoudar – Chairperson 
 
Members 
 
Lok Sabha 
 
  2.  Shri A. Ganeshamurthi 
 3. Shri Bheemrao Baswanthrao Patil 
 4. Shri Vinayak Bhaurao Raut  
 5. Shri Pocha Brahmananda Reddy 
 6. Mohammad Sadique 
 
  
Rajya Sabha 
 
 7. Smt. Ramilaben Becharbhai Bara 
 8. Shri Masthan Rao Beeda 
 9. Dr. Anil Sukhdeorao Bonde 
                    10. Shri Kailash Soni 
         11. Shri Ram Nath Thakur 
 
 
Secretariat 
1.    Shri Shiv Kumar            –   Additional Secretary 
2.    Shri Uttam Chand Bharadwaj     –   Director 
3.    Shri Prem Ranjan   – Deputy Secretary 
 
 
 
 
 

111 
 
Witnesses  
Ministry of Fisheries, Animal Husbandry and Dairying 
[Department of Fisheries] 
 
 Name     Designation 
1. Dr. Jujjavarapu Balaji  Joint Secretary (Marine Fisheries) 
2. Shri Sagar Mehra   Joint Secretary (Inland Fisheries) 
3. Dr. Vasant Kripa                Member Secretary (Coastal Aquaculture  
Authority) 
 
 Ministry of Law and Justice 
[Legislative Department] 
 
 Name     Designation 
1. Ms. Veena Kothawale  Joint Secretary and Legislative Council  
2. Shri Prashant Singh  Deputy Legislative Council 
 
2. At the outset, the Chairperson welcomed the Members and the Representatives of the 
Ministry of Fisheries, Animal Husbandry and Dairying (Department of Fisheries) and the Ministry of 
Law and Justice (Legislative Department) to  the Sitting of the Committee, convened for taking oral 
evidence on 'The Coastal Aquaculture Authority (Amendment) Bill, 2023' and apprised the 
Representatives of the provisions of Direction 55 of the 'Directions by the Speaker, Lok Sabha' 
regarding confidentiality of the proceedings. 
3. After the witnesses introduced themselves, the Representatives of the Department of the 
Fisheries and Legislative Department presented their views and clarified on various important 
issues raised by the Members.  
4. The Chairperson and the Members of the Committee raised several issues/points as briefly 
mentioned below and sought clarifications/information thereon from the Department:  
i) To ensure that only th e Authority can give permission to enter any C oastal Aquaculture 
Unit for inspection; 
ii) To focus on development of fisherme n villages/ colonies and to provide assistance in 
their relocation; 

112 
 
iii) To explore the possibility of laying of pipe lines for providing sea water for Aquaculture 
Units through forest areas; 
iv) To examine the possibility of introducing a time limit under which the appellate authority 
disposes off any appeal; 
v) To ban, or contain, LED fishing in the sea; 
vi) To examine the possibility of reduction in penalty with regard to Traditional Fishers; 
vii) To encourage Ornamental F isheries and explore the possibilities for providing subsidy 
for such Units; 
viii) To explore and develop markets for Shrimps and Ornamental Fisheries; 
ix) To request State Government s to check/restrict the movement of vessels en gaged in 
LED fishing within their State territorial waters itself; 
x) To promote Seaweed cultivation and encourage Coastal Fisherman to take up seaweed 
cultivation; 
xi To strengthen domestic marketing channels for Shrimps/Fish; 
xii) To impart training to the traditional fishermen in Aquaculture Farming; 
xiii)  To achieve self reliance in the genetically improved variety of Monodon Shrimp; 
xiv) Dissemination of information with respect to Central Schemes to the Members of 
Parliament from Coastal areas through local fishery officers; 
xv) To strengthen content labeling and  take measures to  contain diseases in Aquaculture 
Units; 
xvi) To explore the possibility of giving representation to all the Coastal States in the Coastal 
Aquaculture Authority; 
xvii) To expedite the process of establishing N ucleus Breeding Centers for L. Vannam ei 
Shrimp; 
xviii) To explore the possibility of  bringing all the Fisheries Research Institutes functioning in 
the country under the Department of Fisheries; 

113 
 
xix) To explore the possibilities of including the format for appointment to important position s 
in the Committees in the Legislation itself; 
xx) To ensure that the power of the Authority to enter any coast al aquaculture unit, pond, 
pen and enclosure for inspection is not misused; 
xxi) To ensure that ecologically harmful substances and inputs are identified and the 
authority which would certify such inputs/substances should be recognised as well; 
xxii) To ensure that Local R epresentatives/Stakeholders are represented in the Distri ct level 
Committees; 
xxiii) The issue of absence of the provision in the Bill about who will chair the meeting of the 
Coastal Aquaculture Authority in case post of the Chairperson of the Authority is vacant; 
and to make explicit provision in the Bill itself in this regard; etc. 
5. The Representatives of the Department of Fisheries and Legislative Department responded 
to most of the queries raised by the Members. The Chairperson, thereafter, thanked the witnesses 
for sharing valuable information with the Committee on the Subject and directed them to furnish the 
replies to the queries raised by the Members which remain unanswered and in respect of 
information, which was not readily available with them to the Committee Secretariat.  
 
The Meeting then adjourned. 
(A copy of the Verbatim Proceedings of the Sitting has been kept) 
  

114 
 
APPENDIX - V 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE, ANIMAL HUSBANDRY AND FOOD 
PROCESSING BRANCH 
(2022-23) 
 
MINUTES OF THE SEVENTEENTH SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE 
  
***** 
 
The Committee sat on Friday, the 14 July, 2023 from 1100 hrs.                              
to 1140 hrs. in Committee Room '3', Block -A, First Floor, Extension to Parliament 
House Annexe, New Delhi.        
                                                                 
PRESENT 
 
Shri P.C. Gaddigoudar, Chairperson 
 
MEMBERS 
 
LOK SABHA 
 
 2.  Shri A. Ganeshamurthi 
3. Shri Mohan Mandavi 
4. Shri Devji Mansingram Patel 
5.  Smt. Sharda Anilkumar Patel 
6. Shri Rajiv Pratap Rudy 
   
 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
 7. Smt. Ramilaben Becharbhai Bara 
 8. Dr. Anil Sukhdeorao Bonde 
 9. Shri Surendra Singh Nagar 
 10. Shri Kailash Soni 
 
SECRETARIAT 
  
1. Shri Shiv Kumar   - Additional Secretary 
2. Shri Uttam Chand Bharadwaj  - Director 
3. Shri Prem Ranjan   - Deputy Secretary 
 
 
 
 

115 
 
2. At the outset, Chairperson welcomed the Members to the Sitting of the Committee. 
Thereafter, the Committee took up for consideration the following Draft Reports:  
 
(i)  Draft Report on ‘The Coastal Aquaculture Authority (Amendment) Bill, 2023 ’ pertaining 
to the Ministry of Fisheries , Animal Husbandry and Dairying (Department of Fisheries) ; 
and 
 (ii)*  XXXX  XXXX  XXXX  XXXX  XXXX 
 
3. After some deliberations, the Committee adopted the Draft Reports without any 
modifications and the Committee authorized the Chairperson to finalize and present these 
Reports to Parliament.  
 
The Committee then adjourned.  
________________________________________________________________ 
*Matter not related to this Report 
 
 
 

97 
 
ANNEXURE-I 
OPERATIONAL PART OF THE SUPREME COURT J UDGMENT DATED 11TH 
DECEMBER, 1996 IN WRIT PETITION (CIVIL) NO. 561 OF 1994  
The judgement and the orders of the Supreme Court of India on S Jaganath Vs Union of 
India and ors in WPC (561/1994) is reproduced as follows:  
 “We, therefore, order and direct as under  
1. The Central Government shall constitute an authority under Section 8(3) 
of the Environment (Protection) Act, 1986 and shall confer on the said 
authority all the powers necessary to protect the ecologically fragile 
coastal areas, seashore, waterfront and other coastal  areas and specially 
to deal with the situation created by the shrimp culture industry in the 
coastal States/Union Territories. The authority shall be headed by a 
retired Judge of a High Court. Other members preferably with expertise in 
the field of aquacu lture, pollution control and environment protection shall 
be appointed by the Central Government. The Central Government shall 
confer on the said authority the powers to issue directions under Section 
5 of the Act and for taking measures with respect to th e matters referred 
to in clauses (v), (vi), (vii), (viii), (ix), (x) and (xii) of sub -section (2) of 
Section 3. The Central Government shall constitute the authority before 
15-1-1997. 
2. The authority so constituted by the Central Government shall implement 
"the Precautionary Principle" and "the Polluter Pays Principle".  
3. The shrimp culture industry/the shrimp ponds are covered by the 
prohibition contained in para 2(i) of the CRZ Notification. No shrimp 
culture pond can be constructed or set up within the coast al regulation 
zone as defined in the CRZ notification. This shall be applicable to all 
seas, bays, estuaries, creeks, rivers and backwaters. This direction shall 
not apply to traditional and improved traditional types of technologies (as 

98 
 
defined in Alagars wami Report) which are practised in the coastal low -
lying areas. 
4. All aquaculture industries/shrimp culture industries/shrimp culture ponds 
operating/set up in the coastal regulation zone as defined under the CRZ 
Notification shall be demolished and removed  from the said area before 
31-3-1997. We direct the Superintendent of Police/Deputy Commissioner 
of Police and the District Magistrate/Collector of the area to enforce this 
direction and close/demolish all aquaculture industries/shrimp culture 
industries, shrimp culture ponds on or before 31 -3-1997. A compliance 
report in this respect shall be filed in this Court by these authorities before 
15-4-1997. 
5. The farmers who are operating traditional and improved traditional 
systems of aquaculture may adopt improve d technology for increased 
production, productivity and return with prior approval of the "authority" 
constituted by this order. 
6. The agricultural lands, salt pan lands, mangroves, wetlands, forest lands, 
land for village common purpose and the land meant f or public purposes 
shall not be used/converted for construction of shrimp culture ponds.  
7. No aquaculture industry/shrimp culture industry/shrimp culture ponds 
shall be constructed/set up within 1000 mts of Chilka Lake and Pulicat 
Lake (including Bird Sanctuaries namely Yedurapattu and Nelapattu).  
8. Aquaculture industry/shrimp culture industry/shrimp culture ponds already 
operating and functioning in the said area of 1000 mts shall be closed and 
demolished before 31 -3-1997. We direct the Superintendent of 
Police/Deputy Commissioner of Police and the District 
Magistrate/Collector of the area to enforce this direction and 
close/demolish all aquaculture industries/shrimp culture industries, shrimp 

99 
 
culture ponds on or before 31 -3-1997. A compliance report in this re spect 
shall be filed in this Court by these authorities before 15 -4-1997. 
9. Aquaculture industry/shrimp culture industry/shrimp culture ponds other 
than traditional and improved traditional may be set up/constructed 
outside the coastal regulation zone as def ined by the CRZ Notification 
and outside 1000 mts of Chilka and Pulicat Lakes with the prior approval 
of the "Authority" as constituted by this Court. Such industries which are 
already operating in the said areas shall obtain authorisation from the 
"Authority" before 30 -4-1997 failing which the industry concerned shall 
stop functioning with effect from the said date. We further direct that any 
aquaculture activity including intensive and semi -intensive which has the 
effect of causing salinity of soil, or th e drinking water or wells and/or by 
the use of chemical feeds increases shrimp or prawn production with 
consequent increase in sedimentation which, on putrefaction is a potential 
health hazard, apart from causing siltation, turbidity of water courses and 
estuaries with detrimental implication on local fauna and flora shall not be 
allowed by the aforesaid Authority. 
10. Aquaculture industry/shrimp culture industry/shrimp culture ponds which 
have been functioning/operating within the coastal regulation zone as 
defined by the CRZ Notification and within 1000 mts from Chilka and 
Pulicat Lakes shall be liable to compensate the affected persons on the 
basis of the "Polluter Pays" principle. 
11. The Authority shall, with the help of expert opinion and after giving 
opportunity to the polluters concerned assess the loss to the 
ecology/environment in the affected areas and shall also identify the 
individuals/families who have suffered because of the pollution and shall 
assess the compensation to be paid to the said individuals /families. The 
Authority shall further determine the compensation to be recovered from 

100 
 
the polluters as cost of reversing the damaged environment. The authority 
shall lay down just and fair procedure for completing the exercise.  
12. The Authority shall compute  the compensation under two heads namely, 
for reversing the ecology and for payment to individuals. A statement 
showing the total amount to be recovered, the names of the polluters from 
whom the amount is to be recovered, the amount to be recovered from 
each polluter, the persons to whom the compensation is to be paid and 
the amount payable to each of them shall be forwarded to the 
Collector/District Magistrate of the area concerned. The Collector/District 
Magistrate shall recover the amount from the pollut ers, if necessary, as 
arrears of land revenue. He shall disburse the compensation awarded by 
the authority to the affected persons/families.  
13. We further direct that any violation or non -compliance of the directions of 
this Court shall attract the provisions  of the Contempt of Courts Act in 
addition. 
14. The compensation amount recovered from the polluters shall be 
deposited under a separate head called "Environment Protection Fund" 
and shall be utilised for compensating the affected persons as identified 
by the Authority and also for restoring the damaged environment.  
15. The authority, in consultation with expert bodies like NEERI, Central 
Pollution Control Board, respective State Pollution Control Boards shall 
frame scheme/schemes for reversing the damage caused to  the ecology 
and environment by pollution in the coastal States/Union Territories. The 
scheme/schemes so framed shall be executed by the respective State 
Governments/Union Territory Governments under the supervision of the 
Central Government. The expenditu re shall be met from the "Environment 
Protection Fund" and from other sources provided by the respective State 
Governments/Union Territory Governments and the Central Government.  

101 
 
16. The workmen employed in the shrimp culture industries which are to be 
closed in terms of this order, shall be deemed to have been retrenched 
with effect from 30-4-1997 provided they have been in continuous service 
(as defined in Section 25 -B of the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947) for not 
less than one year in the industry concerned before the said date. They 
shall be paid compensation in terms of Section 25 -F(b) of the Industrial 
Disputes Act, 1947. These workmen shall also be paid, in addition, six 
years' wages as additional compensation. The compensation shall be 
paid to the workme n before 31 -5-1997. The gratuity amount payable to 
the workmen shall be paid in addition.”  
 
 
 

22
The Coastal Aquaculture Authority Act, 2005

23
AgmYmaU
 EXTRAORDINARY
^mJ II - IÊS> 1
PART II - Section 1
àm{YH$ma go àH$m{eV
PUBLISHED BY AUTHORITY
ZB© {Xëbr,  ~¥hñn{Vdma, OyZ 23,2005/ Amfm>‹T> 2, 1927
NEW DELHI, THURSDAY, JUNE 23, 2005/ASADHA 2,  1927
g§.  27]
No. 27]
MINISTRY OF LAW AND JUSTICE
(Legislative Department)
New Delhi, the 23rd June, 2005/Asadha 2, 1927 (Saka)
The following Act of Parliament received the assent of the President
on the 23rd June, 2005, and is hereby published for general information:-
THE COASTAL AQUACULTURE AUTHORITY ACT, 2005
No. 24 of 2005
[23rd June, 2005]
An Act to provide for the establishment of a Coastal Aquaculture Authority
for regulating the activities connected with coastal aquaculture in the coastal
areas and for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.
B
E it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty-sixth Year of the Republic of India as
follows:-
£ÉÉ®iÉ ®ÉVÉ{ÉjÉ
The Gazette of India
BÉEÉ

24
CHAPTER 1
PRELIMINARY
1. (1) This Act may be called the Coastal Aquaculture Authority
Act, 2005.
(2) Provisions of section 27 shall come into force at once and the
remaining provisions of this Act shall come into force on such date as the
Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. (1) In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires, —
(a) “Authority” means the Coastal Aquaculture Authority established
under sub-section (1) of section 4;
(b) “Chairperson” means the Chairperson of the Authority;
(c) “coastal aquaculture” means culturing, under controlled
conditions in ponds, pens, enclosures or otherwise, in coastal areas, of
shrimp, prawn, fish or any other aquatic life in saline or brackish water;
but does not include fresh water aquaculture;
(d) “coastal area” means the area declared as the Coastal Regulation
Zone, for  the time being, in the notification of the Government of India
in the Ministry of Environment and Forests (Department of Environment,
Forests and Wildlife) No. S.O. 114(E), dated the 19th February, 1991 and
includes such other area as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, specify;
(e) “member” means the member of the Authority appointed under
sub-section (3) of section 4 and includes the Chairperson and the member-
secretary;
(f)  “prescribed” means prescribed by rules made under this Act;
(g)  “regulations” means the regulations made by the Authority under
this Act.
     (2) Words and expressions used herein and not defined but defined in the
Environment (Protection) Act, 1986 shall have the meanings respectively
assigned to them in that Act.
29 of 1986.
Short title and
Commencement.
Definitions.

25
CHAPTER II
GENERAL POWERS OF CENTRAL GOVERNMENT
     3. The central government shall take all such measures as it deems necessary
or expedient for regulation of coastal aquaculture by prescribing guidelines,
to ensure that coastal aquaculture does not cause any detriment to the coastal
environment and the concept of responsible coastal aquaculture contained in
such guidelines shall be followed in regulating the coastal aquaculture activities
to protect the livelihood of various sections of the people living in the coastal
areas.
CHAPTER III
THE COASTAL AQUACULTURE AUTHORITY
4. (1) With effect from such date as the Central Government may, by
notification in the Official Gazette, appoint in this behalf, there shall be
established for the purpose of this Act an Authority to be called the Coastal
Aquaculture Authority.
(2) The head office of the Authority shall be at such place as the
Central Government may decide.
(3) The Authority shall consist of the following members who shall
be appointed by the Central Government, namely:-
(a) the Chairperson who is, or has been, a Judge of a High Court;
(b) one member who is an expert in the field of coastal aquaculture;
(c)  one member who is an expert in the field of coastal ecology
nominated by the Department of Ocean Development of the Central
Government;
(d) one member who is expert in the field of environment protection
or pollution control nominated by the Ministry of Environment and Forests
of the Central Government;
(e) one member to represent the Ministry of Agriculture of the
Central Government;
(f) one member to represent the Ministry of Commerce of the
Central Government;
(g) four members to represent the coastal States on rotation basis;
Powers of
Central
Government to
take measures
to protect
environment.
Establishment
of Authority and
appointment of
Chairperson
and members.

26
(h) one member-secretary.
(4) The term of office of the Chairperson and every other member
shall be three  years
(5) The salaries and allowances payable to, and the other terms and
conditions of service of, the members shall be such as may be prescribed.
5.  A person shall be disqualified for being appointed as a member if he–
(a) has been convicted and sentenced to imprisonment for
an offence which, in the opinion of the Central Government, involves
moral turpitude; or
(b) is an undischarged insolvent; or
(c) is of unsound mind and stand so declared by a competent
court; or
(d) has been removed or dismissed from the service of the
Government or a Corporation owned or controlled by the
Government; or
(e) has, in the opinion of the Central Government, such
financial or other interest in the Authority as is likely to affect
prejudicially the discharge by him of his functions as a member.
6. Subject to sub-section (5) of section 4, any person ceasing to be a
member shall be eligible for reappointment as such member for not more
than two consecutive terms.
      7. (1) The Authority shall meet at such times and places and shall observe
such rules or procedure in regard to the transaction of business at its meetings
(including the quorum thereat) as may be specified by regulations.
       (2) If for any reason the Chairperson is unable to attend any meeting of
the Authority any other member chosen by the members present at the meeting
shall preside at the meeting.
(3) All questions which come up before any meeting of the Authority
shall be decided by a majority of votes of the members present and voting
and in the event of an equality of votes, the Chairperson or in his absence the
person presiding, shall have and exercise a second or casting vote.
Disqualifica-
tion(s) for
appointment
as member.
Eligibility of
member for
reappointment.
Meetings of
Authority.

27
8. No act or proceeding of the Authority shall be invalidated merely by
reason of —
(a) Any vacancy in, or any defect in the constitution of, the Authority;
or
(b) any defect in the appointment of a person acting as member of the
Authority; or
(c) any irregularity in the procedure adopted by the Authority not
affecting the merits of the case.
     9. (1) For the purposes of discharging its functions, the Authority shall
appoint such number of officers and other employees as it may consider
necessary on such terms and conditions as may be specified by the regulations.
(2) The Authority may appoint, from time to time, any person as adviser
or consultant as it may consider necessary on such terms and conditions as
may be specified by the regulations.
10.  All orders, decision and other instruments of the Authority shall be
authenticated under the Signature of the Chairperson or any other member or
any officer of the Authority authorised by the Chairperson in this behalf.
CHAPTER IV
POWERS AND FUNCTIONS OF AUTHORITY
11. (1) Subject to any guidelines issued by the Central Government under
section 3, the Authority shall exercise the following powers and perform the
following functions, namely :-
(a) to make regulations for the construction and operation of
aquaculture farms within the coastal areas;
(b) to inspect coastal aquaculture farms with a view to ascertaining
their environmental impact caused by coastal aquaculture;
(c) to register coastal aquaculture farms;
(d) to order removal or demolition of any coastal aquaculture farms
which is causing pollution after hearing the occupier of the farm; and
(e) to perform such other functions as may be prescribed.
(2) Where the Authority orders removal or demolition of any coastal
aquaculture farm under clause (d) of sub-section (1), the workers of the said
farm shall be paid such compensation as may be settled between the workers
and the management through an authority consisting of one person only to be
Vacancy in
Authority not to
invalidate
proceeding.
Appointment of
officers,
consultants and
other employees
of Authority.
Authentication of
orders and other
instruments of
Authority.
Functions of
Authority.

28
appointed by the Authority and such authority may exercise such powers of
a District Magistrate for such purpose, as may be prescribed.
12. Subject to any rule made in this behalf, any person generally or
specially authorised by the Authority in this behalf, may, whereever it is
necessary to do so for any purposes of this Act, at all reasonable times, enter
on any coastal aquaculture land, pond, pen or enclosure and ----
(a) make any inspection, survey, measurement, valuation or inquiry;
(b) remove or demolish any structure therein, and
(c) do such other acts or things as may be prescribed
      Provided that no such person shall enter on any coastal aquaculture land,
pond, pen or enclosure without giving the occupier of such aquaculture land,
pond, pen or enclosure at least twenty-four hours’ notice in writing of his
intention to do so.
13. (1) Save as otherwise provided in this section, no person shall carry
on, or cause to be carried on, coastal aquaculture in coastal area or traditional
coastal aquaculture in the traditional coastal aquaculture farm which lies within
the Coastal Regulation Zone referred to in sub-section (9) and is not used for
coastal aquaculture purposes on the appointed day unless he has registered
his farm with the Authority under sub-section (5) or in pursuance of sub-
section (9), as the case may be.
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1), a person
engaged in coastal aquaculture, immediately before the appointed day, may
continue to carry on such activity without such registration for a period of
three months from that day and if he makes an application for such registration
under sub-section (4) within the said period of three months till the
communication to him of the disposing of such application by the Authority.
(3) The registration made under sub-section (5) or in pursuance of
sub-section (9)--
    (a) shall be valid for a period of five years;
     (b) may be renewed from time to time for a like period; and
     (c) shall be in such form and shall be subject to such conditions
as may be specified by the regulations.
Power to
enter.
Registration
for coastal
aquaculture.

29
(4) A person who intends to carry on coastal aquaculture shall make an
application for registration of his farm before the Authority in such form
accompanied with such fees as may be prescribed for the purpose of
registration under sub-section(5).
(5) On receipt of an application for registration of a farm under sub-
section (4), the Authority shall consider the application in the prescribed
manner and after considering the application either register the farm or reject
the application:
Provided that the Authority shall not reject the application without
recording the reason for such rejection.
(6) The  Authority shall, after registering a farm under sub-section (5),
issue a certificate or registration in the prescribed form to the person who has
made the application for such registration.
(7) In the case of a farm comprising more than two hectares of water
spread area, no  application for registration to commence any activity
connected with coastal aquaculture shall be considered under sub-section (5)
unless the Authority, after making such inquiry as it thinks fit, is satisfied that
registration or such farm shall not be detrimental to the coastal environment.
(8) Notwithstanding anything contained in this section, ---
(a) no coastal aquaculture shall be carried on within two hundred
metres from High Tide Lines; and
(b) no coastal aquaculture shall be carried on in creeks, rivers and
backwaters within the Coastal Regulation Zone declared for the time
being under the Environment (Protection) Act, 1986:
Provided that nothing in this sub-section shall apply in the case of a
coastal aquaculture farm which is in existence on the appointed day and to
the non-commercial and experimental coastal aquaculture farms operated or
proposed to be operated by any research institute of the Government or funded
by the Government;
Provided further that the Authority may, for the purposes of providing
exemption under the first proviso, review from time to time the existence and
activities of the coastal aquaculture farms and the provisions of this section
shall apply on coastal aquaculture farms in view of such review.
29 of 1986.

30
Explanation - For the purposes of this sub-section, “High Tide Line”
means the line on the land up to which the highest water line reaches during
the spring tide.
(9) Notwithstanding anything contained in this section, any traditional coastal
aquaculture farm which lies within the Coastal Regulation Zone declared by the
notification of the Government of India in the Ministry of Environment and Forests
(Department of Environment, Forests and Wildlife) No. S.O. 114 (E), dated the 19th
February, 1991 and is not used for coastal aquaculture purposes on the appointed day
shall be registered under sub-section (5) by producing before the Authority, by the
person who is the owner of such farm, the documentary proof of such ownership
failing which such farm shall not be registered under sub-section (5) and if such person
after such registration does not utilise such farm, within one year, for coastal aquaculture
purposes, the registration shall be cancelled by the Authority.
(10) A person, who intends to renew the registration of a farm made
under sub-section (5) or in pursuance of sub-section (9), may make an
application within two months before the expiry of such registration to the
Authority in the prescribed form accompanied with the prescribed fees and
the Authority shall, after receiving such application, renew the registration
and for such purpose make an entry with its seal on the registration certificate
relating to such form issued under sub-section (6).
(11) The Authority may refuse to renew the registration of a farm under
sub-section (10) if the Authority is satisfied that the person to whom such
registration is made has failed to utilise such farm for coastal aquaculture
purposes or without any reasonable cause has violated any provision of this
Act or the rules or regulations made thereunder or any direction or order
made by the Authority in pursuance of section 11:
Provided that such refusal to renew the registration shall not be made
without providing such person an opportunity of being heard.
Explanation 1. --- For the purpose of this section, “appointed day” means
the date of establishment of the Authority.
Explanation 2. --- For the removal of doubts, it is hereby declared that
the expression “to renew the registration” used in sub-sections (10) and (11)
shall be construed to include further renewal of the registration.

31
14.  If any person carries on coastal aquaculture or traditional coastal
aquaculture or causes the coastal aquaculture or traditional coastal aquaculture
to be carried on in contravention of sub-section (1) of section 13, he shall be
punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to three years or
with fine which may extend to one lakh rupees, or with both.
15.  No court shall take congnizance of an offence under section 14
without a written complaint filed by an officer of the Authority authorised in
this behalf by it.
CHAPTER V
FINANCE, ACCOUNTS AND AUDIT
16.  The Central Government may, after due appropriation made by
Parliament, by law, in this behalf, pay to the Authority in each financial year
such sums as may be considered necessary for the performance of functions
of the Authority under this Act.
17.  (1) The Authority shall have its own fund and all sums which may,
from time to time, be paid to it by the Central Government and all the receipts
of the Authority (including any sum which any State Government or any
other authority or person may hand over to the Authority) shall be credited to
the fund and all payments by the Authority shall be made therefrom.
(2) All moneys belonging to the fund shall be deposited in such banks
or invested in such manner as may, subject to the approval of the Central
Government, be decided by the Authority.
(3) The Authority may spend such sums as it thinks fit for performing
its functions under this Act, and such sums shall be treated as expenditure
payable out of the fund of the Authority.
18.  The Authority shall prepare, in such form and at such time each
year as may be prescribed, a budget, in respect of the financial year next
ensuing, showing the estimated receipts and expenditure and copies thereof
shall be forwareded to the Central Government.
19.  The Authority shall prepare once in every calendar year, in such
form and at such time as may be prescribed an annual report giving a true and
full account of its activities during the previous year and copies thereof  shall
be forwarded to the Central Government and that Government shall cause
the same to be laid before both Houses of Parliament.
20. (1) The Authority shall cause to be maintained such books of account
and other books in relation to its accounts in such form and in such manner as
may, in consultation with the Comptroller and Auditor-General of India, be
prescribed.
Punishment
for carrying on
coastal
aquaculture
without
registration.
Cognizance
of offence.
Payment to
Authority.
Fund of
Authority.
Budget.
Annaul report.
Accounts
and audit.

32
(2) The Authority shall, as soon as may be, after closing its annual
accounts, prepare a statement of accounts in such form, and forward the same
to the Comptroller and Auditor-General of India by such date, as the Central
Government may, in consultation with the Comptroller and Auditor-General
of India, determine.
(3) The accounts of the Authority shall be audited by the Comptroller
and Auditor General of India at such times and in such manner as he thinks fit.
(4) The accounts of the Authority as certified by the Comptroller and
Auditor-General of India or any other person appointed by him in this behalf
together with the audit report thereon shall be forwarded annually to the Central
Government and that Government shall cause the same to be laid before both
Houses of Parliament.
CHAPTER VI
MISCELLANEOUS
21. The Chairperson and other members and the officers and other
employees of the Authority and the authority appointed by the Authority shall
be deemed to be public servants within the meaning of section 21 of the
Indian Penal Code.
22. No suit, prosecution of other legal proceeding shall lie against the
Central Government or the Authority or the Chairperson and other members
of the Authority or the authority appointed by the Authority or any person
authorised by the Authority or any  officer authorised by the Chairperson for
anything which is in good faith done or intended to be done in pursuance of
this Act or any rule or regulation or order made thereunder.
23.  (1) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this
Act, the Central Government may, by order published in the Official Gazette,
make such provisions, not inconsistent with the provisions of this Act, as
appear to it to be necessary or expedient for removing the difficulty:
Provided that no such order shall be made after the expiry of the period
of two years from the date of  the commencement of this Act.
(2) Every order made under this section shall, as soon as may be after it
is made, be laid before each House of Parliament.
45 of 1860.
Chairperson and
other members,
officiers and other
employees of
Authority, etc. to
be public servants.
Protection of
action taken
in good faith.
Power to
remove
difficulties.

33
24.  (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official
Gazette, make rules to carry out the provisions of this Act.
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing
powers, such rules may provide for all or any of the following matters,
namely:-
(a) the guidelines under section 3;
(b) the salaries and allowances payable to, and the other terms and
conditions of service of, the members under sub-section (5) of section 4;
(c) the other functions of the Authority under clause (e) of sub-section
(1) of section 11;
(d) the powers of a District Magistrate to be exercised by the authority
under sub-section (2) of section 11;
(e) the rules subject to which any person referred to in section 12
may enter upon any coastal aquaculture land, pond, pen or enclosure
under that section;
(f) the other acts or things under clause (c) of section 12;
(g) the form of application and the fees to be accompanied therewith
under sub-section (4) of section 13;
(h) the manner of considering application under sub-section (5) of
section 13;
(i) the form of certificate of registration under sub-section (6) of
section 13;
(j) the form of application and the fees to be accompanied therewith
under sub-section (10) of section13;
(k) the form and time of preparing budget under section 18;
(l) the form and time of preparing annual report under section 19;
(m) the books of account and other books to be maintained in relation
to the accounts of the Authority and the form and manner of maintaining
such books of account and other books under sub-section (1) of section 20;
(n) any other matter which is required to be, or may be, prescribed.
Power to
Central
Government to
make rules.

34
25. (1) The Authority may, by notification in the Official Gazatte, make
regulations not inconsistent with the provisions of this Act and the rules made
thereunder to carry out the purposes of this Act.
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing
powers, such regulations may provide for all or any of the following matters,
namely:-
(a) the times and places of the meetings of the Authority and the
rules of procedure to be observed in regard to the transaction of business
at its meetings  (including quorum thereat) under sub-section (1) of
section 7;
(b)  the terms and conditions of appointment of the officers and
other employees under sub-section (1) of section 9;
(c) the terms and conditions of appointment of adviser or
consultant under sub-section (2) of section 9;
(d) for the construction and operation of coastal aquaculture farms
within the coastal areas under clause (a) of sub-section (1) of section 11;
(e) the form and conditions of registration under clause (c) of
sub-section (3)  of section 13;
(f) generally for better regulation of the coastal aquaculture.
26. Every rule and every regulation made under this Act shall be laid, as
soon as may be after it is made, before each House of Parliament, while it is
in session, for a total period of thirty days which may be comprised in one
session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the
session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid,
both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or regulation or
both houses agree that the rule or regulation should not be made, the rule or
regulation shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be of no
effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or
annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously
done under that rule or regulation.
27. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in clause (v) of sub-section
(2) of section 3 of the Environment (Protection) Act, 1986 or clause (d) of
sub-rule (3) of rule 5 of the Environment (Protection) Rules, 1986, in the
notification of the Government of India in the Ministry of Environment and
Power of
Authority to
make
regulations.
Rules and
regulations to
be laid before
Parliament.
Validation.
29 of 1986.

35
Forests (Department of Environment, Forests and Wildlife) No. S.O. 114
(E), dated the 19th February, 1991 (hereafter referred to in this section as the
said notification), in paragraph 2, after sub-paragaraph (xiii), the following
sub-paragraph shall be inserted and shall always be deemed to have been
inserted with effect from the 19th day of February, 1991, namely:—
“(xiv) nothing contained in this paragraph shall apply to coastal
aquaculture.”
(2) The said notification shall have and shall be deemed always to have
effect for all purposes as if the foregoing provisions of this section had been
in force at all material times and accordingly notwithstanding anything
contained in any judgment, decree or order of any court, tribunal or other
authority, no coastal aquaculture carried on or undertaken or purporting to
have been carried on or undertaken shall be deemed to be in contravention of
the said notification and shall be deemed to be and to have always been for
all purposes in accordance with law, as if the foregoing provisions of this
section had been in force at all material times and notwithstanding anything
as aforesaid and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing provisions,
no suit or other proceeding shall be maintained or continued in any court for
the enforcement of any direction given by any court of any decree or order
directing the removal or closure of any coastal aquaculture farm’s activity or
demolition of any structure connected thereunder which would not have been
so required to be removed, closed or demolished if the foregoing provisions
of this section had been in force at all material times.
__________
T. K. VISW ANATHAN,
Secy. to the Govt. of India

1
THE COASTAL AQUACULTURE AUTHORITY
(AMENDMENT) BILL, 2023
A
BILL
to amend the Coastal Aquaculture Authority Act, 2005.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-fourth Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Coastal Aquaculture Authority (Amendment)
Act, 2023.
(2) Save as otherwise provided, it shall come into force on such date as the
Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint; and different
dates may be appointed for different provisions of this Act.
Short title and
commencement.
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
Bill No. 81 of 2023
5

2
2. In section 2 of the Coastal Aquaculture Authority Act, 2005, (hereinafter referred
to as the principal Act), in sub-section ( 1),—
(i) for clause ( a), the following clauses shall be substituted, namely:—
'(a) "aquaculture input" means any material used as an input in coastal
aquaculture for the maintenance of quality of water and soil and for the
growth and better health of organisms reared, or other aquatic life available,
therein and includes seed, fertilizer, feed, growth supplement, probiotic,
environment remediator and disinfectant;
(aa) "aqua mapping" means geospatial coastal area distribution
maps depicting areas potential and suitable for coastal aquaculture;
(ab) "aqua zonation" means the zones of spatial planning for different
species or methods of coastal aquaculture notified by a State Government
or the Authority for sustainable coastal aquaculture;
(ac) "Authority" means the Coastal Aquaculture Authority established
under sub-section ( 1) of section 4;
(ad) "biosecured facility" means a coastal aquaculture unit carrying
on coastal aquaculture activity adopting such biosecurity measures for
ensuring freedom from disease causing pathogens as may be specified in
the guidelines issued for such activity;
(ae) "biosecurity" means any measure or strategy or integrated
approach adopted to analyse, manage and prevent the risk of introduction
or spread of harmful organisms, including viruses and bacteria, within the
coastal aquaculture unit and to minimise the risk of transmission of infectious
diseases;
(af) "Brood Stock Multiplication Centre" means a coastal aquaculture
unit carrying on such coastal aquaculture activity which receives such post
larvae or juvenile which are specific pathogen free or specific pathogen
tolerant or specific pathogen resistant or such other post larvae or juvenile
from a Nucleus Breeding Centre and rears it under strict biosecurity and
close disease surveillance to ensure freedom from disease;';
(ii) for clause ( c), the following clauses shall be substituted, namely:—
'(c) "coastal aquaculture" or "coastal aquaculture activity" means
rearing and cultivation of any life stages of fish, including crustacean,
mollusc, finfish, seaweed or any other aquatic life under controlled
conditions, either indoor or outdoor, in cement cisterns, ponds, pens, cages,
rafts, enclosures or otherwise in saline or brackish water in coastal areas,
including activities such as production of brood stock, seed, grow out, but
does not include fresh water aquaculture;
(ca) "coastal aquaculture unit" means any facility that is engaged in
coastal aquaculture or any allied activity connected therewith and includes
Nucleus Breeding Centre, Brood Stock Multiplication Centre, hatchery and
farm;';
(iii) for clause ( d), the following clauses shall be substituted, namely:—
'(d) "coastal area" means the area declared as the Coastal Regulation
Zone in the Coastal Regulation Zone notification issued by the Central
Government under the Environment (Protection) Act, 1986 and includes
such other area as the Central Government may, by notification in the Official
Gazette, specify;
Amendment
of section 2.
24 of 2005.
29 of 1986.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

3
(da) "coastal environment" means the area of land and water in the
coastal area, including complete system of living organisms and physical
surroundings therein;
(db) "farm" means a coastal aquaculture unit where culturing of fish,
including crustacean, mollusc, finfish, seaweed or any other aquatic life is
done under controlled conditions in ponds, pens, cages, rafts, enclosures
or otherwise, in saline or brackish water in coastal areas and includes nursery
rearing, but does not include fresh water aquaculture;
(dc) "hatchery" means a coastal aquaculture unit carrying on coastal
aquaculture activity of breeding and seed production of fish, including
crustacean, mollusc, finfish, seaweed or any other aquatic life, in saline or
brackish water and includes rearing of nauplii and live feed, but does not
include fresh water aquaculture;';
(iv) after clause ( e), the following clauses shall be inserted, namely:—
'(ea) "Nucleus Breeding Centre" means a coastal aquaculture unit
carrying on biosecured coastal aquaculture activity which has an established
freedom from disease causing pathogens for the purpose of producing
domesticated specific pathogen free, specific pathogen tolerant and specific
pathogen resistant stocks;
(eb) "operator" means any person or firm that is engaged in the
operation of the coastal aquaculture activity;
(ec) "owner", in relation to any coastal aquaculture unit, includes—
(i) his legal heirs or agent; and
(ii) an operator, a mortgagee, lessee, including sub-lessee or
any other person in actual possession of such coastal aquaculture
unit;
(ed) "pharmacologically active substance or antimicrobial agent"
means a naturally occurring, semi-synthetic or synthetic substance that, at
in vivo concentration, exhibits antimicrobial activity of killing or inhibiting
the growth of microorganisms;';
(v) after clause ( g), the following clauses shall be inserted, namely:—
'(h) "specific pathogen free" or "specific pathogen resistant" or
"specific pathogen tolerant" means free of, resistant to, or tolerant to, such
pathogens as may be listed by the World Organisation for Animal Health or
any other pathogen notified by the Central Government, which is specific
for candidate species used in the coastal aquaculture;
(i) "State" includes Union territory.'.
3. In section 4 of the principal Act, in sub-section (3),—
(i) in clause ( c), for the words "Department of Ocean Development", the
words "Ministry of Earth Sciences" shall be substituted;
(ii) in clause ( d), for the words "Ministry of Environment and Forests", the
words "Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate Change" shall be substituted;
(iii ) in clause ( e), for the words "Ministry of Agriculture", the words
"Ministry of Agriculture and Farmers Welfare" shall be substituted;
(iv) in clause (f), for the words "Ministry of Commerce", the words "Ministry
of Commerce and Industry" shall be substituted;
(
v) after clause ( f), the following clause shall be inserted, namely:—
Amendment
of section 4.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

4
"(fa) one member to represent the Ministry of Fisheries, Animal
Husbandry and Dairying of the Central Government;".
4. In section 7 of the principal Act, for sub-section (2), the following sub-section shall
be substituted, namely:—
"(2) If the Chairperson is unable to attend a meeting of the Authority, any
other member of the Authority nominated by the Chairperson in this behalf, and
in the absence of both Chairperson and nominated member, any other member
chosen by the members present from amongst themselves, shall preside over the
meeting.".
5. After section 7 of the principal Act, the following section shall be inserted, namely:—
"7A. ( 1) Subject to any rules made in this behalf, the Authority may from
time to time constitute such committees as may be necessary for the efficient
discharge of its functions.
(2) Every committee shall consist of such number of persons and perform such
functions and be subject to such terms and conditions as may be prescribed.".
6. After section 9 of the principal Act, the following section shall be inserted,
namely:—
"9A. (1) The Central Government may appoint an officer of such rank, as it
considers fit, to be a Member-Secretary of the Authority, in such manner and
subject to such terms and conditions as may be prescribed.
(2) The Member-Secretary shall function as the Chief Executive Officer of
the Authority who shall be responsible for—
(a) the day-to-day administration of the Authority;
(b) drawing up of proposal for the Authority's work programmes in
consultation with the Authority;
(c) implementing the work programmes and the decisions adopted by
the Authority;
(d) ensuring that the tasks of the Authority are carried out in accordance
with the requirements of users, in particular with regard to the adequacy of
the services provided and the time taken;
(e) the preparation of the statement of revenue and expenditure and
the execution of the budget of the Authority;
(f) coordinating with the Central Government and with the committees
of the Authority; and
(g) legally representing the Authority in all matters.
(3) Every year, the Member-Secretary shall submit to the Authority for
approval,—
(a) a general report covering all the activities of the Authority in the
previous year;
(b) the programmes of work;
(c) the annual accounts for the previous year; and
(d) the budget for the coming year.
Amendment
of section 7.
Insertion of
new section
7A.
Insertion of
new section
9A.
Member-
Secretary of
Authority.
Committees
of Authority.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

5
(4) The Member-Secretary shall, after the approval of the Authority, forward
the general report and the programmes to the Central Government and shall have
the general report published.
(5) The Member-Secretary shall have administrative control over the officers
and other employees of the Authority.
(6) The Member-Secretary shall approve all financial expenditure of the
Authority and send a report on the Authority's activities to the Central Government.".
7. In section 11 of the principal Act,—
(A) in sub-section ( 1),—
(i) in clause (a), for the words "aquaculture farms", the words "coastal
aquaculture units" shall be substituted;
(ii) in clauses ( b) and (c), for the word "farms", the word "units" shall
be substituted;
(iii) for clause (d), the following clause shall be substituted, namely:—
"(d) to order removal or demolition of any coastal aquaculture
unit which is causing pollution after hearing the occupier of such
unit;";
(iv) after clause ( d), the following clauses shall be inserted, namely:—
"(da) to regulate or prohibit the number, species and method of
any coastal aquaculture in such area, as may be prescribed, through
planning and execution of such programmes, including aqua zonation
and aqua mapping for environmentally sustainable coastal aquaculture,
as may be notified by the Central Government;
(db) to fix or adopt standards, certify, monitor, regulate or prohibit
coastal aquaculture inputs, including probiotics, therapeutants and
such other inputs used in coastal aquaculture, as may be prescribed,
for the prevention, control and abatement of detriment to the coastal
aquaculture or coastal environment;
(dc) to fix or adopt standards, certify, monitor and regulate the
coastal aquaculture units, including coastal aquaculture activities
carried out in such units with biosecurity and close disease surveillance
to ensure freedom from disease, in such manner as may be prescribed;
(dd) to fix or adopt the standards for emission or discharge of
effluents from coastal aquaculture unit:
Provided that different standards for emission or discharge may
be fixed for different coastal aquaculture unit having regard to the
quality or composition of the emission or discharge of effluents from
such sources;
(de) to collect and disseminate information in respect of matters
relating to coastal aquaculture;";
(B) in sub-section (2), for the word "farm", at both the places where it occurs,
the word "unit" shall be substituted.
8. In section 12 of the principal Act,—
 (
a) for the words "land, pond, pen or enclosure", wherever they occur, the
word "unit" shall be substituted;
Amendment
of section 11.
Amendment
of section 12.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

6
(b) after the proviso, the following provisos shall be inserted, namely:—
"Provided further that the requirement of notice under the first proviso
may be waived by the Authority, in such cases and for such reasons to be
recorded in writing, as it deems fit:
Provided also that the owner shall be liable to pay the cost of demolition
and cost of damage to the environment, if any, assessed in such manner as
may be prescribed.".
9. After section 12 of the principal Act, the following section shall be inserted,
namely:—
"12A. The Authority may, by an order, prohibit the use, in any coastal
aquaculture activity of—
 ( a) such pharmacologically active substance, antimicrobial agent
or other material which may cause harm to human health as may be
prescribed; or
 (b) aquaculture inputs containing such substance, agent or material
as may be specified under clause ( a).".
10. In section 13 of the principal Act,—
(i) in sub-section ( 1), for the word "farm", the word "unit" shall be
substituted;
(ii) in sub-section ( 3), the following proviso shall be inserted, namely:—
"Provided that the Authority may issue a certificate of registration for
carrying out coastal aquaculture on the land allotted or assigned by the
Government subject to such procedure and for such period, as may be
prescribed, but not exceeding the period specified under clause ( a) or clause
(b), as the case may be.";
(iii) in sub-sections ( 4), (5) and (6), for the word "farm", wherever it occurs,
the words "coastal aquaculture unit" shall be substituted;
(iv) for sub-section ( 7), the following sub-section shall be substituted,
namely:—
"(7) In the case of a farm comprising more than two hectares of water
spread area and any other coastal aquaculture unit, no application for
registration to commence any activity connected with coastal aquaculture
shall be considered under sub-section ( 5) unless the Authority, after making
such inquiry as it thinks fit, is satisfied that registration of such coastal
aquaculture unit shall not be detrimental to the coastal environment.";
(v) in sub-section ( 8), with effect from the 16th December, 2005,—
(A) for clauses ( a) and (b), the following clauses shall be substituted,
namely:—
"(a) no coastal aquaculture shall be carried on in the ecologically
sensitive areas or the geo-morphological features;
Insetion of
new section
12A.
Amendment
of section 13.
Prohibition of
certain
materials.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

7
(b) no coastal aquaculture, except hatchery, Nucleus Breeding
Centre and Brood Stock Multiplication Centre shall be carried on in
the No Development Zone in the case of sea, and in the buffer zone in
the case of creeks, rivers and backwaters;
(c) no coastal aquaculture, except sea weed culture, pen culture,
raft culture and cage culture activities shall be carried on in creek,
rivers and backwaters within the Coastal Regulation Zone:";
 ( B) for the Explanation , the following Explanation  shall be
substituted, namely:—
'Explanation. —For the purposes of this sub-section,—
 ( i) "High Tide Line" means the line on the land up to
which the highest water line reaches during the spring tide;
(ii) the expressions "ecologically sensitive areas", "geo-
morphological features", "No Development Zone", "buffer zone"
and "Coastal Regulation Zone" shall have the same meanings
as defined in the Coastal Regulation Zone notification issued
under the Environment (Protection) Act, 1986.';
(vi) in sub-section ( 9), for the word "farm", wherever it occurs, the word
"unit" shall be substituted;
(vii) in sub-section ( 10),—
(a) for the word "farm", the words "coastal aquaculture unit" shall be
substituted;
(b) the following proviso shall be inserted, namely:—
 "Provided that the Authority may condone the delay in making
application for renewal, subject to payment of such fee for renewal of
registration, as may be prescribed.";
(viii) in sub-section ( 11), for the word "farm", at both the places where it
occurs, the words "coastal aquaculture unit" shall be substituted;
(ix) after sub-section ( 11), the following sub-sections shall be inserted,
namely:—
"(12) The Authority may vary, amend or modify the certificate of
registration issued under this section, in such manner as may be prescribed.
(13) In the event of the certificate of registration issued under this
Act being defaced or mutilated or lost, the Authority may grant a duplicate
certificate, on payment of such fee and in such manner, as may be
prescribed.".
11. After section 13 of the principal Act, the following section shall be inserted,
namely:—
"13A. (1
) The Authority may, by order, authorise any officer of the Authority
or the State Government or the Central Government, not below the rank of Assistant
Director of Fisheries in a District to function as authorised officer to exercise
such powers, to discharge such duties and perform such functions, as may be
specified in that order.
29 of 1986.
Insetion of
new section
13A.
Authorisation
of officers.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

8
(2) The Central Government may, by notification, authorise any officer of
the Authority or the State Government or the Central Government, not below the
rank of Under Secretary to the Government of India, to function as an adjudicating
officer, to adjudicate the penalties imposed under this Act.
(3) The Central Government may, by notification, authorise any officer of
the Authority or the State Government or the Central Government, not below the
rank of Deputy Secretary to the Government of India, to function as the Appellate
Authority, who may affirm, vary or set aside the order passed by the adjudicating
officer.
(4) The adjudicating officer or the Appellate Authority, shall, for the purposes
of discharging functions under this Act, have the same powers as are vested in a
civil court under the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 while trying a suit, in respect
of the following matters, namely:—
(a) summoning and enforcing the attendance of witnesses;
(b) requiring the discovery and production of documents;
(c) requisitioning any public record or document or copy of such record
or document from any office;
(d) receiving evidence on affidavits;
(e) issuing commissions for the examination of witnesses or documents.
(5) The adjudicating officer or the Appellate Authority shall be deemed to
be a civil court for the purposes of sections 345 and 346 of the Code of Criminal
Procedure, 1973.".
12. For section 14 of the principal Act, the following sections shall be substituted,
namely:—
"14. Where any person carries on coastal aquaculture or traditional coastal
aquaculture or causes the coastal aquaculture or traditional coastal aquaculture
to be carried on in contravention of any of the provisions of this Act or any rules
or regulations made thereunder or any guidelines or notifications issued thereunder,
an officer authorised under section 13A shall take all or any of the following
actions, namely:—
(a) suspension or stoppage of any activity in a coastal aquaculture
unit for such period and in such manner as may be prescribed;
(b) imposition of penalty as specified in the Table below;
(c) removal or demolition of any structure;
(d) destruction of the standing crop therein;
(e) suspension or cancellation of registration for such period and in
such manner as may be prescribed.
5 of 1908.
2 of 1974.
Substitution of
new sections
14 and 14A
for section 14.
Penalty for
carrying on
coastal
aquaculture in
contravention
of provisions
of Act.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35

9
Sl
No.
(1)
1.
2.
Coastal
Aquaculture/use
of prohibited
materials
(2)
Farm
Hatchery, Brood
Stock
Multiplication
Centre, Nucleus
Breeding Centre
or such other
coastal
aquaculture unit
Offences
(3)
Non-
registration.
Non-
compliance
with the
provisions of
the Act,
rules,
regulations,
guidelines
and
notifications,
other than
non-
registration.
Non-
registration.
Non-
compliance
with the
provisions
of the Act,
rules,
regulations,
guidelines
and
notifications,
other than
non-
registration.
First time
offence
(4)
Rupees
ten
thousand
per
hectare (or
fraction of
a hectare)
of water
spread
area.
Rupees
five
thousand
per
hectare (or
fraction of
a hectare)
of water
spread
area.
Rupees
fifty
thousand.
Rupees
twenty-
five
thousand.
Second
time
offence
(5)
Rupees
fiteen
thousand
per
hectare (or
fraction of
a hectare)
of water
spread
area.
Rupees
ten
thousand
per
hectare (or
fraction of
a hectare)
of water
spread
area.
Rupees
seventy-
five
thousand.
Rupees
fifty
thousand.
Third time
and
subsequent
offences
(6)
Rupees
twenty-
five
thousand
per
hectare (or
fraction of
a hectare)
of water
spread
area.
Rupees
fiteen
thousand
per
hectare (or
fraction of
a hectare)
of water
spread
area.
Rupees
one lakh.
Rupees
one lakh.
Penalty
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

10
3. Use of materials
prohibited under
section 12A
Contravention
of the
provisions of
clause (a) or
clause (b) of
section 12A.
Rupees
fifty
thousand.
Rupees
seventy-
five
thousand.
Rupees
one lakh.
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6)
14A. (1) Any person aggrieved by an order of the adjudicating officer may
within thirty days from the date on which the order is made, prefer an appeal to
the Appellate Authority:
Provided that the Appellate Authority may entertain any appeal preferred
after the expiry of the said period of thirty days, but before the expiry of ninety
days from the date aforesaid, if it satisfied that the appellant was prevented by
sufficient cause from filing the appeal in time.
(2) No appeal under this section shall be entertained by the Appellate
Authority unless the appellant has at the time of filing the appeal deposited the
amount of penalty payable under the order appealed against:
Provided that on an application made by the appellant in this behalf, the
Appellate Authority may, if it is of the opinion that the deposit to be made under
this sub-section shall cause undue hardship to the appellant, by order in writing,
dispense with such deposit, either unconditionally or subject to such condition,
as it may deem fit to impose.
(3) On the receipt of an appeal under sub-section ( 1), the Appellate Authority
may, after holding such enquiry as it deems fit, and after giving the parties
concerned reasonable opportunity of being heard, confirm, modify or set aside
the order appealed against, and—
(a) if the sum deposited by way of penalty under sub-section ( 2)
exceeds the penalty directed to be paid by the Appellate Authority, such
excess amount shall be refunded to the appellant; or
(b) if the Appellate Authority sets aside the order imposing penalty,
the whole of the sum deposited by the way of penalty shall be refunded to
the appellant.
(4) The decision of the Appellate Authority under this section shall be
final.".
13. After section 22 of the principal Act, the following section shall be inserted,
namely:—
"22A. Any cost which is due and not paid as provided for by or under this Act
and any sum directed to be recovered by way of penalty under section 14 shall be
recoverable in the same manner as an arrear of land revenue.".
14. In section 24 of the principal Act, in sub-section (2),—
(i) after clause ( b), the following clauses shall be inserted, namely:—
"(ba) the manner of constitution of committees under sub-section ( 1) of
section 7A;
(bb) the number of persons in the committees, their functions, and the
terms and conditions of the committees under sub-section (2) of section 7A;
Amendment
of section 24.
Appeal.
Insertion of
new section
22A.
Arrears of cost
and penalty
recoverable as
arrears of land
revenue.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

11
(bc) the manner of appointment and the terms and conditions for
appointment of Member-Secretary under sub-section (1) of section 9A;
(bd) the area in which the Authority may regulate or prohibit the
number, species and method of any coastal aquaculture under clause ( da)
of sub-section ( 1) of section 11;
(be) the other inputs used in coastal aquaculture under clause ( db) of
sub-section ( 1) of section 11;
(bf) the manner of certification, monitoring and regulation of the coastal
aquaculture units and the manner of carrying out coastal aquaculture
activities with biosecurity and close disease surveillance to ensure freedom
from disease in coastal aquaculture units under clause ( dc) of sub-section (1)
of section 11;";
(ii) in clause ( e), for the words "land, pond, pen or enclosure under that
section", the word "unit" shall be substituted;
(iii) after clause ( f), the following clauses shall be inserted, namely:—
"(fa) the manner of assessing the cost of damage to the environment
under the third proviso to section 12;
(fb) prohibition of such other material which may cause harm to human
health under clause ( a) of section 12A;
(fc) the procedure and period under the proviso to sub-section ( 3) of
section 13;";
(iv) in clause (j), after the word and figures "section 13", the words "and the
fee for renewal of registration under the proviso thereof" shall be inserted;
(v) after clause ( j), the following clauses shall be inserted, namely:—
"(ja) the manner of varying, amending and modifying the certificate of
registration under sub-section ( 12) of section 13;
(jb) the fee for grant of duplicate certificate and the manner of granting
it under sub-section ( 13) of section 13;
(jc) the period and manner of suspension or stoppage of activity in a
coastal aquaculture unit under clause (
a) of section 14;
(jd ) the period and manner for suspension or cancellation of
registration under clause ( e) of section 14;".
15. In section 25 of the principal Act, in sub-section ( 2), in clause (d), for the word
"farms", the word "units" shall be substituted.
16. In section 27 of the principal Act,—
(a) for sub-section (1), the following sub-section shall be substituted, namely:—
(1) Notwithstanding anything contained in clause (v) of sub-section (2) of
section 3 of the Environment (Protection) Act, 1986 or clause ( d) of
sub-rule (3) of rule 5 of the Environment (Protection) Rules, 1986, in the Coastal
Regulation Zone Notification or the Island Coastal Regulation Zone Notification
issued by the Government of India in the Ministry of Environment, Forest and
Climate Change, in exercise of the powers conferred under the said Environment
(Protection) Act, in the paragraph dealing with prohibited activities, after the last
sub-paragraph, the following proviso shall be inserted and shall always be deemed
to have been inserted with effect from the 19th day of February, 1991, namely:—
"Provided that nothing contained in this paragraph shall apply to
coastal aquaculture.".';
Amendment
of section 25.
Amendment
of section 27.
29 of 1986.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

12
(b) in sub-section ( 2), the word "farm's" shall be omitted.
17. After section 27 of the principal Act, the following section shall be inserted,
namely:—
"28. (1) Where a coastal aquaculture and activities connected therewith has
been granted registration under this Act, then, notwithstanding anything contained in
clause (v) of sub-section (2) of section 3 of the Environment (Protection) Act, 1986, or
clause (d) of sub-rule (3) of rule 5 of the Environment (Protection) Rules, 1986 or in any
other law for the time being in force:—
(i) such registration granted under this Act shall prevail and remain valid;
(ii) such coastal aquaculture and activities connected therewith shall be a
permitted activity under the Coastal Regulation Zone Notification or the Island
Coastal Regulation Zone Notification issued under the Environment (Protection)
Act, 1986;
(iii) all registrations granted for coastal aquaculture and activities
connected therewith under this Act shall be valid permissions under the
applicable rules, regulations and notifications notified under the Environment
(Protection) Act, 1986 from time to time.
(2) The provisions of sub-section ( 1), and the provisions of sub-section ( 8) of
section 13 as amended retrospectively with effect from the 16th December, 2005 by the
Coastal Aquaculture Authority (Amendment)  Act, 2023, shall have and shall be deemed
always to have effect for all purposes as if they had been in force at all material times,
and accordingly,—
(i) notwithstanding anything contained in any judgment, decree or order
of any court, tribunal or other authority, any action taken or anything done or
purported to have been taken or done in accordance with the said provisions
shall be deemed to be, and always to have been, for all purposes, as validly and
effectively taken or done as if the said provisions had been in force at all material
times;
(ii) no suit or other proceeding shall be instituted, maintained or continued
in any court for any action taken or anything done or omitted to be done in
accordance with the said provisions; and
(iii) no enforcement shall be made by any court of any decree or order or
direction relating to removal or closure of any coastal aquaculture activitiy or
demolition of any structure connected therewith or relating to any action taken
or done or omitted to be done in accordance with the said provisions as if the
provisions of sub-section (1), and the amendments made in sub-section ( 8) of
section 13 had been in force at all material times.".
Validation of
certain
provisions and
amendments
retrospectively.
Insertion of
new section
28.
29 of 1986.
29 of 1986.
29 of 1986.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35

STATEMENT  OF  OBJECTS  AND  REASONS
The Coastal Aquaculture Authority Act, 2005 was enacted to provide for the
establishment of a Coastal Aquaculture Authority for regulating the activities connected
with coastal aquaculture in the coastal areas.
2. The mandate of the Act is to protect coastal environment, while promoting orderly
growth of coastal aquaculture farming in coastal areas. It also facilitates the continued
operation of coastal aquaculture within Coastal Regulatory Zone area and beyond, subject
to restrictions imposed by the Authority. Today, the coastal aquaculture is one of the major
success stories of lakhs of hardworking small farmers and educated youth working on
average land size of 2 to 4 hectares with the policy support of the Government. The shrimp
production has increased from about 75000 tons in 2008-09 to around 10 lakh tons in
2021-22. The seafood exports have grown at an average annual growth rate of 15% and
stood at a record Rs. 57,586 crore in 2021-22 with brackish water shrimp constituting the
lion's share thereof, amounting to Rs.42,706 crore.
3. The Coastal Aquaculture Authority (Amendment) Bill, 2023, inter alia, seeks to—
(a) reiterate and clarify that while coastal aquaculture and activities connected
therewith are permitted activities within the Coastal Regulatory Zone under the Coastal
Regulatory Zone notifications, it shall continue to be regulated by the Coastal
Aquaculture Authority Act and no other Acts;
(b) decriminalise the offences under the Act for promoting ease of doing business
and to finetune the operational procedures of Coastal Aquaculture Authority to make
it more responsive to the needs of the stakeholders;
(c) promote newer forms of environment friendly coastal aquaculture such as
cage culture, seaweed culture, bi-valve culture, marine ornamental fish culture and
pearl oyster culture which has the potential for creating additional employment
opportunities on a large scale for coastal fisher communities especially fisherwomen;
(d) usher in global best practices in this sector, including mapping and zonation
of aquaculture areas, quality assurance and safe aquaculture products;
(e) encourage establishment of facilities in areas having direct access to seawater
to produce genetically improved and disease free broodstocks and seed for use in
coastal aquaculture;
(f) prevent the use of antibiotics and pharmacologically active substances which
are harmful for human health in coastal aquaculture;
(g) promote production, productivity and exports, traceability and increased
competitiveness and entrepreneurship leading to sustained increase in incomes,
employment and economic activity in rural areas along the coast in an environmentally
sustainable manner.
4. The Bill seeks to achieve the above objectives.
N
EW DELHI; PARSHOTTAM  RUPALA.
The 29th March, 2023.
13

FINANCIAL  MEMORANDUM
The provisions of the Bill do not involve any expenditure of recurring or non-recurring
nature from the Consolidated Fund of India.
14

MEMORANDUM  REGARDING  DELEGATED  LEGISLATION
Clause 14 of the Bill seeks to amend sub-section (2) of section 24 of the principal Act.
The said clause seeks to empower the Central Government to make rules inter alia on
matters relating to the manner of constitution of committees; the number of  persons in the
committees  their  functions and the terms and conditions of the committees; the manner of
appointment and the terms and conditions for appointment of Member-Secretary; the area
in which the Authority may regulate or prohibit the number, species and method of any
coastal aquaculture; the other inputs used in coastal aquaculture; the manner of certification,
monitoring and regulation of the coastal aquaculture units and the manner of carrying out
coastal aquaculture activities with biosecurity and close disease surveillance to ensure
freedom from disease in coastal aquaculture units; the manner of assessing the cost of
damage to the environment; the prohibition of such other material which may cause harm to
human health; the procedure and period for issuing registration to carry out coastal
aquaculture on the land allotted or assigned by the Government;  the fee for renewal of
registration; the manner of varying, amending and modifying the certificate of registration;
the fee for grant of duplicate certificate and the manner of granting it; the period and
manner of suspension or stoppage of activity in a coastal aquaculture unit; and the period
and manner for suspension or cancellation of registration.
2. The matters in respect of which the rules may be made are generally matters of
procedure and administrative detail and it is not practicable to provide for them in the Bill.
The delegation of legislative power is, therefore, of a normal character.
15

ANNEXURE
EXTRACTS FROM THE COASTAL AQUACULTURE AUTHORITY ACT, 2005
(24 OF 2005)
* * * * *
2. (1) In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) “Authority” means the Coastal Aquaculture Authority established under
sub-section ( 1) of section 4;
*                   *                       *                        *                   *
(c) “coastal aquaculture” means culturing, under controlled conditions in
ponds, pens, enclosures or otherwise, in coastal areas, of shrimp, prawn, fish or
any other aquatic life in saline or brackish water; but does not include fresh water
aquaculture;
(d) “coastal area” means the area declared as the Coastal Regulation Zone,
for the time being, in the notification of the Government of India in the Ministry of
Environment and Forests (Department of Environment, Forests and Wildlife)
No. S.O. 114(E), dated the 19th February, 1991 and includes such other area as the
Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, specify;
(e) “member” means the member of the Authority appointed under
sub-section ( 3) of section 4 and includes the Chairperson and the member-
secretary;
*                   *                       *                        *                   *
(g) “regulations” means the regulations made by the Authority under this
Act.
*                   *                       *                        *                   *
CHAPTER III
T
HE COASTAL AQUACULTURE  AUTHORITY
4. (1) *                   *                       *                        *                   *
(3) The Authority shall consist of the following members who shall be appointed
by the Central Government, namely:—
*                   *                       *                        *                   *
(c) one member who is an expert in the field of coastal ecology nominated by
the Department of Ocean Development of the Central Government;
(d) one member who is an expert in the field of environment protection or
pollution control nominated by the Ministry of Environment and Forests of the
Central Government;
(e) one member to represent the Ministry of Agriculture of the Central
Government;
(f) one member to represent the Ministry of Commerce of the Central
Government;
*                   *                       *                        *                   *
Definitions.
Establishment
of Authority
and
appointment
of
Chairperson
and members.
16

17
7. (1) *                   *                       *                        *                   *
(2) If for any reason the Chairperson is unable to attend any meeting of the
Authority any other member chosen by the members present at the meeting shall preside
at the meeting.
*                   *                       *                        *                   *
CHAPTER IV
P
OWERS AND FUNCTIONS  OF AUTHORITY
11. (1) Subject to any guidelines issued by the Central Government under section 3,
the Authority shall exercise the following powers and perform the following functions,
namely:—
(a) to make regulations for the construction and operation of aquaculture
farms within the coastal areas;
(b) to inspect coastal aquaculture farms with a view to ascertaining their
environmental impact caused by coastal aquaculture;
(c) to register coastal aquaculture farms;
(d) to order removal or demolition of any coastal aquaculture farms which is
causing pollution after hearing the occupier of the farm; and
*                    *                        *                         *                    *
(2) Where the Authority orders removal or demolition of any coastal aquaculture
farm under clause ( d) of sub-section ( 1), the workers of the said farm shall be paid such
compensation as may be settled between the workers and the management through an
authority consisting of one person only to be appointed by the Authority and such
authority may exercise such powers of a District Magistrate for such purpose, as may
be prescribed.
12. Subject to any rule made in this behalf, any person generally or specially
authorised by the Authority in this behalf, may, wherever it is necessary to do so for
any purposes of this Act, at all reasonable times, enter on any coastal aquaculture land,
pond, pen or enclosure and—
(a) make any inspection, survey, measurement, valuation or inquiry;
(b) remove or demolish any structure therein; and
(c) do such other acts or things as may be prescribed:
Provided that no such person shall enter on any coastal aquaculture land, pond,
pen or enclosure without giving the occupier of such aquaculture land, pond, pen or
enclosure at least twenty-four hours’ notice in writing of his intention to do so.
*                   *                       *                        *                   *
13. (1) Save as otherwise provided in this section, no person shall carry on, or
cause to be carried on, coastal aquaculture in coastal area or traditional coastal
aquaculture in the traditional coastal aquaculture farm which lies within the Coastal
Regulation Zone referred to in sub-section ( 9) and is not used for coastal aquaculture
purposes on the appointed day unless he has registered his farm with the Authority
under sub-section ( 5) or in pursuance of sub-section ( 9), as the case may be.
*                   *                       *                        *                   *
(3) The registration made under sub-section (5) or in pursuance of sub-section (9)—
 Meetings of
Authority.
Functions of
Authority.
Power to
enter.
Registration
for coastal
aquaculture.

18
(a) shall be valid for a period of five years;
(b) may be renewed from time to time for a like period; and
*                   *                       *                        *                   *
(4) A person who intends to carry on coastal aquaculture shall make an application for
registration of his farm before the Authority in such form accompanied with such fees as may
be prescribed for the purpose of registration under sub-section ( 5).
(5) On receipt of an application for registration of a farm under sub-section ( 4), the
Authority shall consider the application in the prescribed manner and after considering the
application either register the farm or reject the application:
Provided that the Authority shall not reject the application without recording the
reason for such rejection.
(6) The Authority shall, after registering a farm under sub-section (5), issue a certificate
of registration in the prescribed form to the person who has made the application for such
registration.
(7) In the case of a farm comprising more than two hectares of water spread area,
no application for registration to commence any activity connected with coastal
aquaculture shall be considered under sub-section ( 5) unless the Authority, after making
such inquiry as it thinks fit, is satisfied that registration of such farm shall not be
detrimental to the coastal environment.
(8) Notwithstanding anything contained in this section,—
 (a) no coastal aquaculture shall be carried on within two hundred metres
from High Tide Lines; and
(b) no coastal aquaculture shall be carried on in creeks, rivers and backwaters
within the Coastal Regulation Zone declared for the time being under the
Environment (Protection) Act, 1986:
Provided that nothing in this sub-section shall apply in the case of a coastal
aquaculture farm which is in existence on the appointed day and to the non-commercial
and experimental coastal aquaculture farms operated or proposed to be operated by
any research institute of the Government or funded by the Government:
Provided further that the Authority may, for the purposes of providing exemption
under the first proviso, review from time to time the existence and activities of the
coastal aquaculture farms and the provisions of this section shall apply on coastal
aquaculture farms in view of such review.
Explanation .—For the purposes of this sub-section, "High Tide Line" means the
line on the land up to which the highest water line reaches during the spring tide.
(9) Notwithstanding anything contained in this section, any traditional coastal
aquaculture farm which lies within the Coastal Regulation Zone declared by the
notification of the Government of India in the Ministry of Environment and Forest
(Department of Environment, Forests and Wildlife) No. S.O.114( E), dated the
19th February, 1991 and is not used for coastal aquaculture purposes on the appointed
day shall be registered under sub-section ( 5) by producing before the Authority, by the
person who is the owner of such farm, the documentary proof of such ownership failing
which such farm shall not be registered under sub-section ( 5) and if such person after
such registration does not utilise such farm, within one year, for coastal aquaculture
purposes, the registration shall be cancelled by the Authority.
(10) A person, who intends to renew the registration of a farm made under
sub-section ( 5) or in pursuance of sub-section ( 9), may make an application within
two months before the expiry of such registration to the Authority in the prescribed
29 of 1986.

form accompanied with the prescribed fees and the Authority shall, after receiving such
application, renew the registration and for such purpose make an entry with its seal on
the registration certificate relating to such form issued under sub-section ( 6).
(11) The Authority may refuse to renew the registration of a farm under
sub-section ( 10) if the Authority is satisfied that the person to whom such registration
is made has failed to utilise such farm for coastal aquaculture purposes or without any
reasonable cause has violated any provision of this Act or the rules or regulations
made thereunder or any direction or order made by the Authority in pursuance of
section 11:
Provided that such refusal to renew the registration shall not be made without
providing such person an opportunity of being heard.
Explanation 1.—For the purposes of this section, "appointed day" means the
date of establishment of the Authority.
Explanation 2.—For the removal of doubts, it is hereby declared that the
expression "to renew the registration" used in sub-sections ( 10) and ( 11) shall be
construed to include further renewal of the registration.
14. If any person carries on coastal aquaculture or traditional coastal aquaculture
or causes the coastal aquaculture or traditional coastal aquaculture to be carried on in
contravention of sub-section ( 1) of section 13, he shall be punishable with imprisonment
for a term which may extend to three years or with fine which may extend to one lakh
rupees, or with both.
*                   *                       *                        *                   *
24. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make
rules to carry out the provisions of this act.
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing powers,
such rules may provide for all or any of the following matters, namely:—
*                   *                       *                        *                   *
(e) the rules subject to which any person referred to in section 12 may enter
upon any coastal aquaculture land, pond, pen or enclosure under that section;
25. (1) *                   *                       *                        *                   *
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing powers,
such regulations may provide for all or any of the following matters, namely:—
*                   *                       *                        *                   *
(d) for the construction and operation of coastal aquaculture farms within
the coastal areas under clause ( a) of sub-section ( 1) of section 11;
*                   *                       *                        *                   *
27. ( 1) Notwithstanding anything contained in clause ( v) of sub-section ( 2) of
section 3 of the Environment (Protection) Act, 1986 or clause ( d) of sub-rule ( 3) of rule
5 of the Environment (Protection) Rules, 1986, in the notification of the Government of
India in the Ministry of Environment and Forests (Department of Environment, Forests
and Wildlife) No. S.O.114(E), dated the 19th February, 1991 (hereafter referred to in this
section as the said notification), in paragraph 2, after sub-paragraph ( xiii), the following
sub-paragraph shall be inserted and shall always be deemed to have been inserted with
effect from the 19th day of February, 1991, namely:—
“(xiv) nothing contained in this paragraph shall apply to coastal aquaculture.”.
Punishment
for carrying
on coastal
aquaculture
without
registration.
Power of
Central
Government
to make
rules.
Power of
Authority to
make
regulations.
Validation.
29 of 1986.
19

20
(2) The said notification shall have and shall be deemed always to have effect for
all purposes as if the foregoing provisions of this section had been in force at all
material times and accordingly notwithstanding anything contained in any judgment,
decree or order of any court, tribunal or other authority, no coastal aquaculture carried
on or undertaken or purporting to have been carried on or undertaken shall deemed to
be in contravention of the said notification and shall be deemed to be and to have
always been for all purposes in accordance with law, as if the foregoing provisions of
this section had been in force at all material times and notwithstanding anything as
aforesaid and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing provisions, no suit or
other proceeding shall be maintained or continued in any court for the enforcement of
any direction given by any court of any decree or order directing the removal or closure
of any coastal aquaculture farm’s activity or demolition of any structure connected
thereunder which would not have been so required to be removed, closed or demolished
if the foregoing provisions of this section had been in force at all material times.

LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
to amend the Coastal Aquaculture Authority Act, 2005.
————
(Shri Parshottam Rupala, Minister of Fisheries, Animal Husbandry and Dairying )
MGIPMRND—2885LS—31.03.2023.