 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE, ANIMAL HUSBANDRY  
AND FOOD PROCESSING 
 
(2022-2023) 
                  
         
SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA 
          
         
                                 
 
MINISTRY OF FISHERIES, ANIMAL HUSBANDRY AND DAIRYING 
(DEPARTMENT OF FISHERIES) 
              
 
'DEMANDS FOR GRANTS (2023-24)' 
 
{Action-taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations 
contained in the Fifty-Third Report (Seventeenth Lok Sabha) of the Standing 
Committee on Agriculture, Animal Husbandry and Food Processing  
(2022-23)} 
        
 
SIXTY-SECOND REPORT 
  
 
         
               
 
 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
AUGUST 2023/SHRAVANA,1945 (SAKA) 
 
 
 
 
 
62 

 
SIXTY-SECOND REPORT 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE, ANIMAL HUSBANDRY  
AND FOOD PROCESSING 
 
(2022-2023) 
          
 
SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA 
         
         
         
MINISTRY OF FISHERIES, ANIMAL HUSBANDRY AND DAIRYING 
(DEPARTMENT OF FISHERIES) 
 
 
              
'DEMANDS FOR GRANTS (2023-24)' 
 
{Action-taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations 
contained in the Fifty-Third Report (Seventeenth Lok Sabha) of the Standing 
Committee on Agriculture, Animal Husbandry and Food Processing  
(2022-23)} 
        
 
     
                     Presented to Lok Sabha on   10.08.2023 
            Laid on the Table of Rajya Sabha on 10.08.2023 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
AUGUST 2023/SHRAVANA,1945 (SAKA) 
 
 

 
 
 
 
COA No.  
 
 
         
         
         
         
         
         
 
         
         
        
         
         
         
         
 
 
 
         
     
                     
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
© 2023 By Lok Sabha Secretariat 
 
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of Business in Lok 
Sabha (Sixteenth Edition) and Printed by Lok Sabha Secretariat 
 

 
<CONTENTS> 
  Page No. 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE (2022-23) (iii) 
INTRODUCTION      (v) 
   
CHAPTER I  Report …………………………………………   
CHAPTER II Observations/Recommendations that have been accepted by 
the Government 
  
CHAPTER III Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not 
desire to pursue in view of the Government’s replies  
  
CHAPTER IV Observations/Recommendations in respect of  which replies of 
the Government have not been accepted by the Committee  
  
CHAPTER V Observations/Recommendations in respect of which final replies 
of the Government are still awaited  
  
 
 
ANNEXURE  
 
 
Minutes of the 19th Sitting of the Committee held on 08.08.2023   
    APPENDIX  
Analysis of Action Taken by the Government on the Observations / 
Recommendations contained in the Fifty -Third Report (Seventeenth Lok Sabha) 
of the Standing Committee on Agriculture, Animal Husbandry and Food 
Processing (2022-23). 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 

 
COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE, ANIMAL 
HUSBANDRY AND FOOD PROCESSING (2022-23) 
 
SHRI P.C. GADDIGOUDAR-   CHAIRPERSON 
 
MEMBERS 
 
LOK SABHA 
 
 2. Shri Horen Sing Bey 
  3.  Shri A. Ganeshamurthi 
 4. Shri Kanakmal Katara 
 5. Shri Abu Taher Khan 
 6. Shri Ram Mohan Naidu Kinjarapu 
 7. Shri Mohan Mandavi 
 8. Shri Devji Mansingram Patel 
9. Smt. Sharda Anilkumar Patel 
10. Shri Bheemrao Baswanthrao Patil 
11. Shri Shriniwas Dadasaheb Patil 
12. Shri Vinayak Bhaurao Raut 
13. Shri Pocha Brahmananda Reddy 
14. Shri Rajiv Pratap Rudy 
15. Mohammad Sadique 
16. Shri Devendra Singh alias Bhole Singh 
17. Shri Virendra Singh 
18. Shri V.K. Sreekandan 
19. Shri Ram Kripal Yadav 
20.  VACANT# 
21. VACANT* 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
 
22. Smt. Ramilaben Becharbhai Bara 
23. Shri Masthan Rao Beeda 
24. Dr. Anil Sukhdeorao Bonde 
25. Shri S. Kalyanasundaram 
26. Shri Surendra Singh Nagar 
27. Shri Kailash Soni  
28. Shri Randeep Singh Surjewala 
29. Shri Ram Nath Thakur 
30. Shri Vaiko 
31. Shri Harnath Singh Yadav  
 
# Vacant w.e.f. 10.10.2022 due to demise of Shri Mulayam Singh Yadav on 10.10.2022 . [Bulletin- 
Part II, Para No. 5316 dated 14.10.2022]. 
 
* Vacant w.e.f.29.04.2023 due to disqualification of Shri Afzal Ansari from Lok Sabha Membership 
from the date of his conviction in terms of the provision of Article 102(1)(e) of the Constitution of 
India read with Section 8 of the Representation of the People Act, 1951 [Notification No. 
21/4(6)/2023/TO(B) Dated - 01.05.2023]. 
 
(iii) 
 
 

 
 
 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
 
1. Shri Shiv Kumar    -  Additional Secretary 
2. Shri Uttam Chand Bharadwaj  -  Director 
3. Shri Ashwaghosh B. Lokhande  -  Executive Officer 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
INTRODUCTION 
          
I, the Chairperson , Standing Committee on Agriculture , Animal Husbandry and 
Food Processing  (2022-23), having been authorised by the Committee to submit the 
Report on their behalf, present this Sixty-Second Report on Action-taken by the 
Government on the Observations/Recommendations contained in the Fifty-Third Report 
(Seventeenth Lok Sabha) of the Standing Committee on Agriculture, Animal Husbandry 
and Food Processing  (2022-23) on 'Demands for Gr ants (2023 -24)' pertaining to the  
Ministry of Fisheries, Animal Husbandry and Dairying (Department of Fisheries). 
 
2. The Fifty-Third Report (Seventeenth Lok Sabha ) of the Standing Committee on 
Agriculture, Animal Husbandry and Food Processing  (2022-23) on 'Demands for Grants 
(2023-24)' pertaining to the Ministry of Fisheries, Animal Husbandry a nd Dairying 
(Department of Fisheries) was presented to Lok Sabha  on 13 March, 2023 and laid on 
the Table of Rajya Sabha on  14 March, 2023 . The Action Taken Notes on the Report 
were received on 22.06.2023. 
 
3. The Report was considered and adopted by the Committee at their Sitting held on 
08 August, 2023. 
 
4. An Analysis of the Action-taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in the Fifty-Third Report (Seventeenth Lok 
Sabha) of the Committee is given in Appendix.  
  
              
 
 
      
 
NEW DELHI;         P.C. GADDIGOUDAR 
08 August, 2023                                  Chairperson, 
17 Shravana, 1945(Saka)                       Standing Committee on Agriculture,   
      Animal Husbandry and Food Processing  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

1 
 
CHAPTER-I 
REPORT 
This Report of the Standing Committee on Agriculture, Animal Husbandry and 
Food Processing deals with the Action Taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in the Fifty -Third Report (Seventeenth Lok 
Sabha) of the Standing Committee on Agriculture, Animal Husbandry and Food 
Processing (2022 -23) on Demands for Grants (2023 -24) of the Ministry of Fisheries, 
Animal Husbandry and Dairying (Department of Fisheries) which was presented to Lok 
Sabha and laid on the Table of Rajya Sabha on 13th March 2023. 
1.2 The Ministry of Fisheries, Animal Husbandry and Dairying (Department of 
Fisheries) have furnished Action Taken Replies in respect of all the                                        
11 Observations/Recommendations co ntained in the Report. These Replies have been 
scrutinised and categorised as under:- 
(i) Observations/Recommendations that have been accepted by the Government: 
 Recommendation Para Nos.1, 3, 4, 7, 8, 10, 11  
                   Total 07 
            Chapter-II 
(ii) Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to pursue in 
view of the Government’s replies:  
Recommendation Para No. 2, 5, 9 
                           Total 03 
               Chapter-III 
(iii) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which Replies of the Government 
have not been accepted by the Committee: 
Recommendation Para Nos. 6 
                   Total 01 
               Chapter-IV 
(iv) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which final replies of the 
Government are still awaited: 
Recommendation Para No. Nil 
                     Total 0 
             Chapter-V 

2 
 
1.3 The Committee trust that utmost importance would be given to 
implementation of the Observations/ Recommendations accepted by the 
Government. In case where it is not possible for the Department to implement the 
Recommendations in letter and spirit for any reason, the matter should be 
reported to the Committee with reasons for non -implementation. The Committee 
desire that future Action Taken Notes on the Obs ervations/Recommendations 
contained in Chapter -I and Chapter -V of this Report be furnished to them at an 
early date. 
1.4 The Committee will now deal with the action taken by the Government on some 
of the Observations/Recommendations in the succeeding paragraphs. 
ALLOCATION AT REVISED ESTIMATES STAGE. 
(RECOMMENDATION PARA NO.1) 
 
1.5 The Committee had observed/recommended:- 
The Committee have been informed that the Department has an outstanding 
carry forward liability of Rs. 2647.53 Crore as on 31 st January, 2023 on account 
of projects already approved during the financial years 2020 -21, 2021 -22 and 
2022-23. The Committee note that even with such a substantial carry forward 
liability, during the financial year 2022 -23, the Revised Estimates (RE) of t he 
Department has been reduced to Rs. 1624.18 Crore from Rs 2118.47 Crore at 
BE stage. Apart from this the RE under the Pradhan Mantri Matsya Sampada 
Yojana (PMMSY) has also been reduced to Rs. 1410 Crore from Rs. 1879 Crore. 
The Committee are of the view that reduction in the funds allocated at RE stage 
needs to be addressed keeping in view the carry forward liability of the 
Department on account of Projects already approved.  
 
2. The Committee have been apprised that due to change in financial system 
with regard to release of funds for central schemes and due to the creation of 
Single Nodal Agency (SNA), there has been some delay in acquiring utilisation 
certificates from States an d as a result there has been less expenditure during 
the years 2021-23. The Committee are of the opinion that the Department should 

3 
 
take up the issue with States/UTs and devise a mechanism to remove the 
difficulties/hurdles that States/UTs might have been facing while adhering to the 
guidelines of the new Financial System/SNA. The Committee are also of the 
opinion that the Department should facilitate the liquidation of pending Utilisation 
Certificates so that next instalment could be released seamlessly to  optimise 
funds utilisation. The Committee also desire that once this SNA system is 
streamlined and becomes synchronised with the financial system, adequate 
additional funds be sanctioned and released to clear all the outstanding carry 
forward liability on account of the already sanctioned projects. 
 
1.6 In its Action Taken Reply, the Department has submitted:- 
The recommendation of the committee is noted for strict compliance. Training on 
SNA relates procedures have been imparted to States/UTs and Implemen ting 
Agencies. The progress of expenditures out of SNA account are being 
continuously and closely monitored and necessary guidance is being given from 
time to time to increase pace of utilization of funds. Specific targets on monthly 
basis have been fixed with respect to expenditures which will enable the 
Department to release further installments in time. Plan has been prepared to 
utilize entire budgeted amount of Rs. 2000 Crore during this FY and also to ask 
for additional funds during RE. 
1.7 The Committee had raised concerns  with respect to Single Nodal Agency  
Account, Liquidation of pending Utilization Certificates and  release of adequate 
additional funds to clear all the outstanding carry forward liability , once the SNA 
system is streamlined . In addition, the Committee had also expressed their 
concern regarding the reduction in the funds all ocated to the Department at RE 
Stage even when the Department has a carry forward liability  of Rs 2647.53 Crore 
on account of projects already sanctioned dur ing the financial years 2020 -21, 
2021-22 and 2022-23. The Department in its reply is however silent on the same. 
The Committee , therefore, reiterates that the reduction in the funds all ocated to 
the Department at RE S tage should be addressed  to keeping in view the carry 
forward liability of the Department. 

4 
 
EXPENDITURE BY THE DEPARTMENT. 
(RECOMMENDATION PARA NO.2) 
1.8 The Committee had observed/recommended:- 
The Committee observe that the expenditure made by the Department during the 
financial year 2022 -23 is Rs. 322.97 Crore as against the allocated amount of 
Rs. 1624.18 Crore at BE Stage. The Committee have been informed that the 
pace of expenditure has been slow because of slow utilization by States/UTs due 
to their limited capacity to absorb the funds an d the change in financial system 
w.r.t release of funds for Central Schemes. 
The Committee have been informed by the Department that the State/UTs 
Fisheries Departments generally start compiling proposals from the districts in 
1stquarter and after scrutiny  during the 2 nd quarter, same are submitted to 
Department of Fisheries. Further, the Department processes the proposals for 
approval during the 3 rd quarter and thus the States have only the last quarter to 
implement the projects. In addition, the implement ation of Projects in the Fishery 
Sector is a seasonal activity, which starts post monsoon only. 
Considering the above constraints, the Committee recommend that the 
Department should coordinate with the Ministry of Finance for the relaxation of 
the fund rel ease guidelines specifically for the Fishery Sector since most of the 
activities are undertaken after the monsoon only. The Committee also suggest 
that if need be, the earlier system of release of funds on basis of 50:50 in two 
instalments may be considere d, so that optimum level of utilisation of funds may 
take place. The Committee would like to be apprised of steps taken by the 
Department in this regard. 
1.9 In its Action Taken Reply, the Department has stated:-  
The observation and recommendation of the committee has been forwarded to 
Department of Expenditure Ministry of Finance vide letter of even number dated 
23rd May, 2023, for their consideration and Department of Fisheries also pursuing 
the matter with Department of Expenditure for positive consider ation in this 
regard. 

5 
 
1.10 The Committee had recommended that the Department should coordinate 
with the Ministry of Finance for the relaxation of the fund release guidelines 
specifically for the Fishery Sector since most of its  activities are undertaken after 
the monsoon only and also suggested that if need be, the earlier system of 
release of funds on basis of 50:50 in two instalments may be con sidered. The 
Department in its reply has stated that it has  forwarded the observation of the 
Committee to  the Department of Expenditure , Ministry of Finance vide letter of 
even number dated 23 rd May, 2023, for its  consideration. Though the Committee 
appreciate the effort made  by the Department in writing to the Department of 
Expenditure conveying the observation of the Committee , however, at the same 
time, the Committee would further like to be apprised of  the matter as and when 
the comments/reply of the Ministry of Finance is received. 
BUDGETARY PLANNING 
(RECOMMENDATION PARA NO 3) 
1.11 The Committee had observed/recommended:- 
The Committee note that the proportion of Budgetary Allocation made in favour 
of the Department of Fisheries out of the total Budget of Government of India at 
Revised Estimates Stage for the financial years 2021 -22 and 2022 -23 has been 
0.04 percent. In the current financial year also the percentage outlay of Fisheries 
Sector is 0.04 percent on an average basis at BE Stage. The Committee have 
been informed that Fisheries Sector contributes around 6.7 percent to the total 
Agriculture Gross Value Added (GVA) a nd around 1.24 percent to the National 
GVA of the country. Further, the contribution of the exports of Fish and Fisheries 
Products in overall exports of the country is nearly 2%.The Committee, therefore, 
recommend that the Department should vigorously purs ue with the Ministry of 
Finance so as to increase the Budgetary Outlay of the Department in accordance 
with the fishery sector’s contribution to the National GVA. The Committee think 
that this could bring a huge change in the production in Fisheries Sector , both 
Marine and Inland and will, in turn, help to boost the exports and employment.  
 

6 
 
1.12 In its Action Taken Reply, the Department has submitted:- 
The recommendation of the committee is noted for strict compliance. Department 
of Fisheries is continuous ly pursuing with Ministry of Finance and will seek 
additional funds in the Revised Estimate for the year 2023-24. 
 
1.13 Acknowledging the contribution of Fisheries Sector , which is around 6.7 
percent to the total Agriculture Gross Value Added (GVA) and around 1.24 
percent to the National GVA of the country along with its contribution of 2% to 
overall exports of the country, the Committee had recommended that the 
Department should vigorously pursue with the Ministry of Finance so as to 
increase the Budgetary Outlay of the Dep artment in accordance with the Fishery 
Sector’s contribution. However, the Department in its reply has  stated that they 
are pursuing with the Ministry of  Finance and will seek additional  funds in the 
Revised Estimates and are silent on the issue of enhancing the Budgetary Outlay 
commensurate with its contribution to the National GVA . T he Committee , 
therefore, reiterates their earlier concern  and urge the D epartment that they 
should strive  hard to get increased the Budgetary Outlay of the De partment in 
consonance with the Fishing Sector’s contribution to National GVA.  
EXPENDITURE UNDER SCHEDULED CASTE SUB PLAN (SCSP). 
(RECOMMENDATION PARA NO 6) 
1.14 The Committee had observed/recommended:- 
The Committee note that the Government has made provision of funds for 
implementation of Scheduled Caste Sub Plan (SCSP) under various 
Schemes/Programmes.The Committee notice that during the financial year 2021-
22, out of the total funds allocated to States/UTs under SCSP component of 
PMMSY, funds to the tune of Rs 20.35 Crore have been surrendered by the 
Department due to less or no proposals being received from the States/UTs. 
Further, during the FY 2022 -23 only Rs. 12 .30 Crore have been utilised by the 
Department till 10.02.2023, which is only 5.19 percent of the allocated amount. 

7 
 
The Committee observe that the funds allocated to SCSP have remained under 
utilised by the Department during the current financial year 2022 -23. The 
Committee acknowledge that the proposals under the SCSP are being forwarded 
by the States/UTs and urge the Department to take measures in coordination 
and cooperation with the concerned States/UT to raise awareness level 
regarding the benefits of the Programme/Scheme meant for Scheduled Caste 
and strive hard toward ensuring that all the funds allocated under the SCSP 
component are being utilised seamlessly and completely. Further, the States/UTs 
should be encouraged/pursued or incentivised to send proposals under the 
SCSP so that the vision/mission of the plan/scheme is achieved and the benefits 
reach the Scheduled Caste Population of the Country. The Committee would 
also like to know about the overall progress achieved by the Department w.r.t 
Cage Fishing in rivers and canals of Punjab, and especially by the Scheduled 
Caste fishermen. 
1.15 In its Action Taken Reply, the Department has submitted:- 
During 2022-23, an amount of Rs. 313 crore was allocated to Scheduled Caste 
Sub Plan beneficiaries  being 16.6% of total allocation under PMMSY 2022 -23. 
This figure got reduced to Rs. 216.43 Crore because overall fund availability got 
reduced to Rs. 1290 Crore during final RE. Out of the earmarked amount of Rs. 
216.43 crore, a sum of Rs. 189.83 crore ha ve been released to all the state/UTs 
and other implementing agencies, representing 87% of the final allocated 
amount. Further, at present there is no project operational in Punjab in respect of 
Cage Fishing in rivers and Canals. State Government of Punjab  has been asked 
to send the proposals for cage fishing by SC fishers under PMMSY.  
 
1.16 The Committee  noted that complete utilization of funds allocated for 
various Schemes/P rogrammes under the Schedules Castes Sub Plan (SCSP) 
component of Pradhan Mantri Matsya Sampada Yojana (PMMSY) was  pivotal in 
achieving the well being of the Scheduled Castes population and alleviating their 
socio-economic and educational status. However, t he reply of the Department 
that during the FY 2022 -23, out of the earmarked amou nt of Rs. 216.43 C rore, a 

8 
 
sum of Rs. 189.83 C rore has  been released to all the state/UTs and other 
implementing agencies, representing 87% of the finally allocated amount  does 
not seem very  encouraging. The Committee , therefore, reiterate their  earlier 
recommendation and urges the Department to take effective measures and 
oversee that the funds allocated under the SCSP  at Budgetary Estimates  do not 
remain underutilized or are surrendered.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  

9 
 
CHAPTER - II 
 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS THAT HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE 
GOVERNMENT 
 
A.  Overall Analysis of Demands for Grants 2023-24. 
 
1. ALLOCATION AT REVISED ESTIMATES STAGE. 
 
The Committee have been informed that the Department has an 
outstanding carry forward liability of Rs. 2647.53 Crore as on 31 st January, 2023 
on account of projects already approved during the financial years 2020 -21, 2021-
22 and 2 022-23. The Committee note that  even with such a substantial carry 
forward liability, during the financial year 2022 -23, the Revised Estimates (RE) of 
the Department has been reduced to Rs. 1624.18 Crore from Rs 2118.47 Crore at 
BE stage. Apart from this the RE under the Pradhan Mantri Matsya Sampada 
Yojana (PMMSY) has also been reduced to Rs. 1410 Crore from Rs. 1879 Crore. 
 The Committee are of the view  that reduction in the funds allocated at RE 
stage needs to be addressed keeping in view the carry forward liability of the 
Department on account of Projects already approved.  
The Committee have been apprised that due to change in financial system  
with re gard to release of funds for central s chemes and due to  the creation of 
Single Nodal Agency (SNA) , there has been some delay in acquiring utilisation 
certificates from States  and as a result there h as been less expenditure during 
the years 2021 -23. The Committee are of the opinion that the Department should 
take up the issue with States/UTs and devise a mechanism to remove the 
difficulties/hurdles that States/UTs might have been facing while adhering to the 
guidelines of the ne w Financial System/SNA . The Committee are also of the 
opinion that the Department should facilitate the liquidation of pending Utilisation 
Certificates so that next instalment could be released seamlessly to optimise 
funds utilisation . The Committee also d esire that once this SNA system is 
streamlined and becomes synchronised with the financial system, adequate 
additional funds be san ctioned and released to clear  all the outstanding carry 
forward liability on account of the already sanctioned projects. 

10 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT  
The recommendation of the committee is noted for strict compliance.  Training on SNA 
relates procedures have been imparted to States/UTs and Implementing Agencies . The 
progress of expenditures out of SNA account are being continuously a nd closely monitored and 
necessary guidance is being given from time to time to increase pace of utilization of funds. 
Specific targets on monthly basis have been fixed with respect to expenditures which will enable 
the Department to release  further installments in time. Plan has been prepared to utilize entire 
budgeted amount of Rs. 2000 Crore during this FY and also to ask for additional funds during 
RE. 
Ministry of Fisheries, Animal Husbandry and Dairying 
(Department of Fisheries) 
OM No. J-23011/1/2023-Fy (E-21738) dated 22nd June, 2023 
 
Comments of the Committee 
For comments of the Committee please refer to Para No.1. 7 of Chapter I of this 
Report. 
 
3. BUDGETARY PLANNING 
The Committee note that the proportion of Budgetary Allocation made in favour 
of the Department of Fisheries out of the total Budget of Government of India at 
Revised Estimates Stage for the financial years 2021 -22 and 2022 -23 has been 
0.04 percent. In the current financial year also the percentage outlay of Fisheries 
Sector is 0.04 percent on an average basis at BE Stage. The Committee have been 
informed that Fisheries Sector contributes around 6.7 percent to the total 
Agriculture Gross Value Added (GVA) and around 1.24 percent to the National 
GVA of the country. Further, the  contribution of the exports of Fish and Fisheries 
Products in overall exports of the country is nearly 2%.The Committee, therefore, 
recommend that the Department should vigorously pursue with the Ministry of 
Finance so as to increase the Budgetary O utlay of the Department in accordance 
with the fishery sector’s contribution to the National GVA. The Committee think 

11 
 
that this could bring a huge change in the  production in F isheries Sector, both 
Marine and Inland and will, in turn, help to boost the exports and employment.  
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT  
 
 The recommendation of the committee is noted for strict compliance.  Department of 
Fisheries is continuously pursuing with Ministry of Finance and will seek additional funds in the 
Revised Estimate for the year 2023-24. 
 
Ministry of Fisheries, Animal Husbandry and Dairying 
(Department of Fisheries) 
OM No. J-23011/1/2023-Fy (E-21738) dated 22nd June, 2023 
 
Comments of the Committee 
For comments of the Committee please refer to Para No.1. 13 of Chapter I of this 
Report. 
 
4. BUDGET AND CASH MANAGEMENT SCHEME 
 The Committee note that during the FY 2022 -23, the Actual Expenditure of 
the Department as on 13.02.2023 was Rs 322.97 Crore as against the RE of Rs 
1624.18 for the same financial year. In percentage terms, the Actual Expenditure 
incurred by the Department for all the four quarters comes to 3.47%,3.64%, 7.89% 
and 4.87% respectively. 
The Committee have been informed that the Quarterly Expenditure Plan/Monthly 
Expenditure Plan (QEP/MEP) stipulated in the Detailed Demands for Grants 
directs expenditure of 25% of total expenditure in each quarter. Further, para IV of 
the Guidelines for expenditure control laid down by the Department of Economic 
Affairs (DEA) vide OM No. F.No 12(13) -B (W&M)/2020 dated 25 th May, 2022 States 
that “no more than 33% and 15% of expenditure of the Budget estimates during 
the financial year shall be permissible in the last quarter and last month of the 
financial year, respectively”. 

12 
 
The Committee, therefore, observe that the expenditure of allocated funds at 
present by the Department is not in accordance with the guidelines enumerated 
under the Quarterly Expenditure/Monthly Expenditure Plan and the expenditure 
control guidelines of the Department of Economic Affairs. The Committee, 
therefore, recommend that the Depar tment should first accord attention to 
optimum fund utilization with utmost coordination with all the stake holders to 
clear the already carry forward liability of Projects sanctioned in preceding years 
and at the same time strive to adhere gradually  to the guidelines of QEP/MEP so 
that the expenditure is evenly spread over the duration of the financial year and 
the implementation of various Schemes/projects of the Fishery Sector are not 
hampered.  
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
  
The recommendation of the committee is noted for strict compliance. Department is making 
sincere efforts in adhering to the quarterly and monthly expenditure progress targets as 
stipulated in the Detailed Demands for Grants -2023-24. 
 For 2022-23 the total expenditure incurred was Rs. 1365.24 Crore as against RE of Rs. 
1624.18 Crore: expenditure in March, 2023 alone was Rs. 1040.44 crore. This bunching of 
expenditure happened because the States/UTs could clear their earlier balance during this 
month only making them eligible for further release. However, Department is already taking 
efforts to rectify this problem: quarterly and monthly expenditure targets has been fixed for each 
state/UT. Annual action plan (AAP) for 2023 -24 has been prepa red and intimated to states. 24 
States/UTs out of a total of 36 have already given their Annual Action Plans and the AAPs have 
been appraised. Action is being taken to approve all AAPs by before 15 th July. Respective 
divisions have been given targets and have been asked to monitor its achievements. 
Department has also started the practice of appraising new Action plan/projects without waiting 
for utilization of funds already released. Concerned divisions have been tasked with 
coordinating with respective st ates for smooth implementation of sanctioned projects and with 
review of progress on monthly basis. The Department expects that with these steps, the 
expenditure will be evenly spread and sufficient funds will be made available to clear the carry 
over liability and also to meet the need for funds for  2023-24 Action Plan.  

13 
 
Ministry of Fisheries, Animal Husbandry and Dairying 
(Department of Fisheries) 
OM No. J-23011/1/2023-Fy (E-21738) dated 22nd June, 2023 
 
7.  EXPORTS 
 The Committee note that Fisheries Sector plays an important role in the 
National economy with a contribution of 6.7 % in Agricultural Gross Value Added 
(GVA),1.24 % in total national GVA and nearly 2 % in overall exports of the 
country. The Committee have been informed that frozen shrimp c onstitutes a 
major item of export in terms of quantity and value accounting to almost 53.18 % 
of the Fishery Exports. To further enhance the export volume and 
competitiveness of shrimps, import duty is being reduced on key inputs required 
for domestic manufacture of shrimp feed such as fish meal (15% to 5%), Krill Meal 
(15% to 5%) and Alga Prime (Flour) (30% to 15%). The Committee have further 
been informed that a variety of plant and animal feedstuffs are used in shrimp 
feed and the major component of prot ein shrimp diet are wheat  flour (35%), 
soybean meal (20%) and fishmeal (25 %) which constitutes almost 80% of shrimp 
feed. The Committee observe that soybean meal comprises 20% of the shrimp 
feed and presently the duty levied on it is 30%. The Committee, th erefore, 
recommend that the Department should explore the possibility  of reducing 
GST/import duty on soybean meal to bring down the price of shrimp feed, thereby 
enhancing export volume and competitiveness of shrimps and achieving the 
target of 1 lakh Crore of exports by the year 2024 -25 ssunder the Pradhan Mantri 
Matsya Sampada Yojana (PMMSY) . The Committee would like to be apprised of 
the steps taken by the Department in this regard.  
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT  
 
 The recommendation of the committee is noted for strict compliance . Considering the 
importance of soybean seed/s oybean meal in the manufacturing of shrimp/fish seed in India, 
Department of Fisheries during May 2021 had taken up the matter with Department of 
Commerce and had already recommended for allowing duty free import of Soyabean 
seed/Soyabean meal and for taking other necessary measures to address the issue regarding 

14 
 
price hike and availability of the Soaybean seed/Soyabean meal . Department will take up the 
matter with Department of Commerce again based on advisory of the committee.  
 
In addition, it is submitted that the Government has permitted i mport of Soya de oiled cake 
(Non-Food) obtained from Genetically Modified (GM) Soya Seed based on request of  DAHD as 
animal feed is also dependent on availability and price of soya flour,  under chapter 23 of IT C 
(HS) code 2304.0020-oil cake of Soyabean, solvent ex-tracted (defatted) variety and 23040030-
Meal of Soyabean, solvent extracted(defatted) variety subject to payment of existing duty tariff 
and other applicable taxes. Department will take up the matter for further reduction in duty.  
 
Ministry of Fisheries, Animal Husbandry and Dairying 
(Department of Fisheries) 
OM No. J-23011/1/2023-Fy (E-21738) dated 22nd June, 2023 
 
 
8.  KISAN CREDIT CARDS (KCC) 
 
 The Committee note that a total number of 1,27,445 Kisan Credit Cards  
have been sanctioned to Fish Farmers. The Committee have been informed that  
individuals involved exclusively in allied activities such as Fish Vending, Fish 
Drying, and Marketing, etc. are not being considered for is suance of KCC. The 
Committee have also been informed that the new sub scheme announced in the 
current year’s budget viz the Pradhan Mantri  Matsya Kisan Samridhi Sah-Yojana 
(PM-MKSSY) with a corpus fund of Rs. 6000 Crore intends to facilitate access to 
institutional credit so that people who are in the allied sector such as fish drying 
and fish vending, who are fishermen but not covered under the Kisan Credit Card 
are also extended the benefits of KCC.  This Committee had earlier in their 39 th 
DFG Report (2022 -23)recommended that Allied activities in fishery sector should 
be included for the issuance of Kisan Credit Cards and therefore appreciates  this 
endeavor of the Government.  The Committee also observe that a substantial 
number of KCC applications have been rejected from Sta tes/UTs for various 
reasons and therefore recommend that the Department take concrete steps in 
coordination with States/UTs in addressing these issues effectively so that the 
benefits of KCC are availed by the poor needy Fishermen. 

15 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
  
 It is submitted that as per RBI guidelines issued on 04/02/2019 and modified on 
18/05/2022, only fishers and fish farmers are eligible for KCC. Therefore , the 
department will facilitate access to institutional credit of persons engaged in occupations 
allied to fisheries sector such as fish drying and fish vending under PM MKSSY. The 
department has taken note of KCC applications being rejected by banks and 
accordingly, in association with DAHD & Department of Financi al S ervice has been 
organizing ‘ Nationwide FAHD -KCC Campaign ’ throughout the country. The campaign 
ran from 15/ 11/21 to 31/ 03/22 and again from 15/ 09/22 to 31/ 03/23. During this 
Campaign, District level KCC Camps were organized on weekly basis by KCC 
Coordination Committee coordinated by Lead District Manager (LDM) for on -the-spot 
scrutiny of applications and for quick sanction. The said campaign has been                
re-launched from 1 st May, 2023 to 31 st March, 2024. In addition, the department has 
been creating awareness about the KCC scheme among the fishers/fish farmers in its 
awareness programs. Further, the fisheries departments/directorates of all the 
States/UTs, have been asked to translate all the important guidelines and eligibility 
criteria related to the KCC into regional languages and to circulate among all the fishers 
and fish farmers through pamphlets, banners etc.  
 
Ministry of Fisheries, Animal Husbandry and Dairying 
(Department of Fisheries) 
OM No. J-23011/1/2023-Fy (E-21738) dated 22nd June, 2023 
 
 
B. SCHEME-WISE ANALYSIS 
 
10.  PRADHAN MANTRI MATSYA SAMPADA YOJANA (PMMSY) 
 
The Committee note that Pradhan Mantri Matsya Sampada Yojana is the Flagship 
Scheme of the Department and almost 85 percent of the total Budgetary 
Allocation of the D epartment is being shared by PMMSY. The Committee notice 
that during the financial year 2022 -23, the Department has utilized Rs. 118.49 
Crore under the PMMSY against the sanctioned allocation of Rs. 1410 Crore. The 
Committee also note that out of the many interventions that PMMSY aims to 
undertake, improving Post -Harvest Infrastructure like establishment of Fishing 

16 
 
Harbours/Fish Landing Centres and enhancing contribution to Agriculture Gross 
Value Added (GVA) and Exports are significant so as to achieve the  target of Fish 
Production to 22 MMT and Rs1 Lakh Crore exports of Fishery Products by the 
year 2024 -25. The Committee have been informed that to achieve these targets 
various activities are being promoted under PMMSY. However, the Committee  
observe that t he performance in  achieving these targets  needs to be relooked 
afresh as only 52 Ha. of land has been under brackish water aquaculture against 
the target of 1300 Ha  during the FY 2022 -23. Further, the number of new fishing 
harbours/fish landing centres developed during the FY 2020 -21 and 2021 -22 has 
been nil with only 03 having  been developed during the current financial year 
2022-23. The Committee, therefore, recommend that the Department must take 
concrete measures to achieve these targets in a time bound manner. 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
  
During 2022-23 department utilized Rs. 1172 Crore out of Rs. 1290 Crore sanctioned 
under final RE (during 2020 -21 to 2022 -23) under PMMSY representing 91% of the 
sanctioned funds. The department has sanctioned 43 no. of projects for 
development/expansion/modernization of Fishing Harbour/Fish Landing Centres with 
central assistance of Rs. 973.326 crore. These projects are at various stages and once 
completed will result in reduction of post -harvest losses, in improvement of price 
realization to fishers and in improving export competitiveness as the importing countries 
take note of such infrastructure. Regarding expansion of fisheries output fish production 
increased from 14.7 Million ton in 2020 -21 to 16.2 Million ton in 2021 -22 and is 
expected to reach 17.54 million ton in 2022-23 as per preliminary estimates, showing in 
CAGR of 8%. Various initiatives in PMMSY ar e aiding this growth and if the same  
CAGR is maintained for next two years, it is possible to achieve 22 million ton by end of 
2024-25. Regarding expansion of Brackish water aquaculture which is crucial growth of 
exports (as 40.98 % of exports constitute farmed shrimp), the Department has set a 
target of bringing additional (2.02 lakh HA) of area under Brackish water aquaculture 
and set individual tar gets for each coastal state/UT. States have also been advised to 
take funding from PMMSY if necessary for expansion of Brackish water aquaculture. In 

17 
 
addition, department in coordination with Department of Commerce  is trying to expand 
export markets, to get the non-tariff barriers removed and to increase the percentage of 
value addition so as to achieve export target of 1 lakh crore. To increase share of value 
addition, processing sector is being encouraged to expand through PMMSY and 
scheme of MoFPI & MPEDA.  
 
Ministry of Fisheries, Animal Husbandry and Dairying 
(Department of Fisheries) 
OM No. J-23011/1/2023-Fy (E-21738) dated 22nd June, 2023 
 
11. RESERVING OF DAMS/WATER BODIES FOR FISHERMEN COOPERATIVES. 
The Committee note that harnessing of fisheries potential in a sustainable, 
responsible inclusive and equitable manner and emphasis on Social, Physical 
and Economic Security for Fishers and Fish Farmers are some of the important 
aims of Pradhan Mantri Matsya Sampada Yojana (PMMSY). The Committee have 
been informed that the Department of Fisheries is laying a lot emphasis on the 
development of Fishery Cooperatives and have also issued an advisory to State 
Governments to ensure that water bodies are given to Cooperative Societies on 
lease. The Committee ha ve also been informed that dam is a State Subject and 
many States have a policy that bigger dams may be given to the cooperatives as 
their first choice and if no cooperatives are available then they are given to 
private persons. The Committee, therefore, r ecommend that to ensure the well 
being and economic security of all those fishermen communities (SC/ST, Koli, 
Bhoi etc.), who have been residing alongside rivers on which big or small dams 
have been constructed and who have been fishing in those rivers tra ditionally for 
generations should be encouraged and assisted to form Fishermen Cooperatives 
so that they can lease big/small dams and water bodies to undertake fishing/fish 
farming activities and thereby earn meaningful livelihood. The Department may 
take necessary measures in this regard and the Committee may also be apprised 
of the progress achieved by the Department on this count. 
 
 

18 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
  
The Department has noted the observation of the Standing Committee and has advised 
all concerned state/UT Governments to take necessary measures to ensure the well 
being and economic security of all those fishermen communities (SC/ST , Koli , Bhoi 
etc.) who have been residing alongside rivers on which big or small dams have been 
constructed and who have been fishing in those rivers traditionally for generations by 
encouraging them and assisting them to form Fishermen Cooperatives so that they can 
take on le ase big/small  dams and water bodies to undertake fishing/fish farming 
activities in a profitable manner. Department has also taken up the tasks of developing  
2000 existing fishermen cooperatives into FFPOs at a total outlay of Rs. 451 crores 
under PMMSY.  In addition, department is taking up river ranching and stocking of 
reservoirs under PMMSY to improve yield for  these fishermen. Under the scheme of 
Ministry of Cooperation to form fishermen cooperatives in areas having large water 
bodies,the department has planned to form 12000 new cooperatives which will help 
improving the livelihood of fishers living along the rivers/water bodies.  
Ministry of Fisheries, Animal Husbandry and Dairying 
(Department of Fisheries) 
OM No. J-23011/1/2023-Fy (E-21738) dated 22nd June, 2023 
 
  

19 
 
CHAPTER - III 
 OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO NOT 
DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE GOVERNMENT’S REPLIES 
 
2. EXPENDITURE BY THE DEPARTMENT 
 
The Committee observe that the expenditure made by the Department 
during the financial year 2022 -23 is Rs. 322.97 Crore as against the allocated 
amount of Rs. 1624.18 Crore at BE Stage. The Committee have been informed that 
the pace of expenditure has been slow because of slow utilization by States/UTs 
due to their limited capacity to absorb  the funds and the change in financial 
system w.r.t release of funds for Central Schemes. 
The Committee have been inf ormed by the Department  that the State/UTs 
Fisheries Departments generally start compiling proposals from the districts in 
1stquarter and after scrutiny during the 2 nd quarter, same are submitted to 
Department of Fisheries. Further, the Department processe s the proposals for 
approval during the 3 rd quarter and thus the States have only the last quarter to 
implement the projects. In addition, the implementation of Projects in the Fishery 
Sector is a seasonal activity, which starts post monsoon only. 
Considering the above constraints , the Committee recommend that the 
Department should coordinate with the Ministry of Finance for the relaxation  of 
the fund release guidelines  specifically for the Fishery Sector since most of the 
activities are undertaken after th e monsoon only. The Committee also suggest 
that if need be,  the earlier system of release of funds on basis of 50:50 in two 
instalments may be considered , so that optimum level of utilisation of funds may 
take place. The Committee would like to be apprised  of steps taken by the 
Department in this regard. 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT  
 The observation and recommendation of the committee has been forwarded to 
Department of Expenditure Ministry of Finance vide letter of even number dated 23rd May, 2023, 

20 
 
for their consideration and Department of Fisheries also pursuing the matter with Department of 
Expenditure for positive consideration in this regard. 
Ministry of Fisheries, Animal Husbandry and Dairying 
(Department of Fisheries) 
OM No. J-23011/1/2023-Fy (E-21738) dated 22nd June, 2023 
 
Comments of the Committee 
For comments of the Committee please refer to Para No.1. 10 of Chapter I of this 
Report. 
 
5. STATUS OF UTILIZATION CERTIFICATES 
The Committee note that during the FY 2021 -22, the pending Utilization 
Certificates from all the States/UTs increased to Rs. 570.79 Crore as compared to 
Rs. 136.17 Crore in FY 2020 -21. The Committee have been informed that the 
Pradhan Mantri Matsya Sampada Yojana scheme was introduced in 2020 -21, 
however, actual release of fu nds started in last quarter and again funds allocated 
during the year 2021 -22 were released to respective states/UTs, which are also 
included in the figures of unspent balances indicated in the year 2021 -22. It is 
also informed that most of the activities under PMMSY are infrastructure based 
seasonal activities which take time for grounding and the release of State’s share 
of funds in time is one of the major limitation for grounding of the 
Schemes/Projects. 
The Committee observe that the Department has a t otal carry forward pending 
liability of Rs. 2647.53 Crore on account of Projects already approved during the 
previous financial years, which will be released based on the submission of 
Utilisation Certificates by the concerned States/UTs. The Committee, th erefore, 
recommend the Department to take concrete steps and liaise with the States/UTs 
and pursue them to liquidate the Utilisation Certificates at the earliest so that the 
pending liability on account of already approved Projects also get s reduced and 
the Schemes/Projects are completed well in time. 

21 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT  
 
Department of Fisheries is continuously and closely monitor ing utilization of  the funds already 
released so as to ensure their utilization within  the stipulated time frame  and to ensure that the 
schemes/projects are completed in time. To this effect, department has tasked the respective 
division to liaise closely with State/UTs, to sort out issues if any, to train them on SNA 
procedures and to monitor progress of expenditures on weekly basis. 
 
Ministry of Fisheries, Animal Husbandry and Dairying 
(Department of Fisheries) 
OM No. J-23011/1/2023-Fy (E-21738) dated 22nd June, 2023 
 
9. CENTRAL INSTITUTE OF FISHERIES NAUTICAL AND ENGINEERING 
TRAINING (CIFNET) 
 
 The Committee note that with the Introduction of sophisticated Deep Sea 
Fishing Vessels in Indian Fishery Sector, there is a great demand for qualified 
and certificated personnel for manning them. Central Institute of Fisheries 
Nautical and Engineering Training (CIFNET) is t he only national institute in the 
country to meet the training requirements of such technical and certificated 
personnel. The Institute also focuses on skill development and training of 
fishermen in deep sea fishing. The committee have been informed that t he 
country has an estimated harvestable potential of 5.31 Million Metric Tonnes 
(MMT) in its Exclusive Economic Zones (EEZ) which includes deep sea resources 
of 3.30 MMT and Government of India is responsible for the development and 
regulation of fisheries  in the EEZ waters between 12 and 200 Nautical Miles. The 
Committee find that almost 50% of the Administrative/Technical/Scientific posts 
in CIFNET are lying vacant and many posts have been abolished because they 
were not filled up for a long time, though the Department is pursuing with the 
Department of Expenditure for revival of such abolished posts. Keeping in view 
the huge harvestable deep sea potential o f the EEZ, the Committee observe  that 
the vacant posts in an important institute such as CIFNET best owed with the 
responsibility of providing training for deep sea fishing is antithetical to its 

22 
 
purpose and therefore recommend that the Department should take measures to 
fill up the vacant posts of CIFNET at the earliest. 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT  
 
Out of 279 sanctioned posts of CIFNET, 143 are currently filled up, 30have been sent to 
UPSC & SSC for filling up, 61 sent to DoE for revival and action is being taken to revi ve 
the remaining further posts. 
In last two years, 39 no. of posts of CIFNET have been f illed up through UPSC & SSC. 
Department will take steps to get all necessary posts filled up in consultation with 
UPSC, SSC, DoPT& DoE. 
 
Ministry of Fisheries, Animal Husbandry and Dairying 
(Department of Fisheries) 
OM No. J-23011/1/2023-Fy (E-21738) dated 22nd June, 2023 
 
 
  

23 
 
CHAPTER - IV 
  
OBSERVATIONS/ RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF 
THE GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE 
 
6. EXPENDITURE UNDER SCHEDULED CASTE SUB PLAN (SCSP) 
 The Committee note that the Government has made provision of funds for 
implementation of Scheduled Caste  Sub Plan (SCSP) under various 
Schemes/Programmes.The Committee notice that during the financial year 2021 -
22, out of the total funds allocated to States/UTs under SCSP component of 
PMMSY, funds to the tune of Rs 20.35 Crore have been surrendered by the 
Department due to less or no proposals being received from the States/UTs.  
Further, during the FY 2022 -23 only Rs. 12.30 Crore have been utilised by the 
Department till 10.02.2023, which is only 5.19 percent of the allocated amount. 
 
 The Committee observe that the funds allocated to SCSP have remained 
under utilised by the Department during the current financial year 202 2-23. The 
Committee acknowledge that the proposals under the SCSP are being for warded 
by the States/UTs and urge the Department to take measures in coordination and 
cooperation with the concerned States/UT to raise awareness level regarding the 
benefits of the Programme/Scheme meant for Scheduled Caste and strive hard 
toward ensuring that all the funds allocated under the SCSP component are being 
utilised seamlessly and completely. Further, the States/UTs should be 
encouraged/pursued or incentivised to send proposals under the SCSP so that 
the vision/mission of the plan/scheme is achi eved and the benefits reach the 
Scheduled Caste Population of the Country. The Committee would also like to 
know about the overall progress achieved by the Depar tment w.r.t Cage F ishing 
in rivers and canals of Punjab, and especially by the Scheduled Caste fishermen. 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
  
During 2022-23, an amount of Rs. 313 crore was allocated toScheduled Caste Sub Plan 
beneficiaries being 16.6% of total allocation under PMMSY 2022 -23. This figure got 

24 
 
reduced to Rs. 216.43 Crore because overall fund availability got reduced to Rs. 1290 
Crore during final RE. Out of the earmarked amount of Rs. 2 16.43 Crore, a sum of           
Rs. 189.83 crore  have been released to all the S tate/UTs and other implementing  
agencies, representing 87% of the final allocated amount. Further, at present there is no 
project operational in Punjab in respect of Cage Fishing in rivers and Canals. State 
Government of Punjab has been asked to send the proposals for cage fishing by SC  
fishers under PMMSY.  
Ministry of Fisheries, Animal Husbandry and Dairying 
(Department of Fisheries) 
OM No. J-23011/1/2023-Fy (E-21738) dated 22nd June, 2023 
 
Comments of the Committee 
For comments of the Committee please refer to Para No.1. 16 of Chapter I of this 
Report. 
 
  

25 
 
CHAPTER - V 
 
 
  
OBSERVATIONS/ RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH FINAL REPLIES 
OF GOVERNMENT ARE STILL AWAITED  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
NIL 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI;                                                                    P.C. GADDIGOUDAR 
08  August, 2023                                                                  Chairperson                            
17 Sravana, 1945 (Saka)                             Standing Committee on Agriculture,  
            Animal Husbandry and Food Processing 
  

26 
 
ANNEXURE  
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE, ANIMAL HUSBANDRY AND FOOD 
PROCESSING BRANCH 
(2022-23) 
 
MINUTES OF THE NINETEENTH SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE 
  
***** 
 
The Committee sat on Tuesday, the 08 August, 2023 from 1500 hrs.                              
to 1530 hrs. in Hon'ble Chairperson's Chamber, Room No. 103, 1st Floor, Block - 
B, PHA Extn., New Delhi.        
PRESENT 
 
Shri P.C. Gaddigoudar, Chairperson 
 
MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA 
 
 2.  Shri A. Ganeshamurthi 
3. Shri Mohan Mandavi 
4. Shri Devji Mansingram Patel 
5.  Smt. Sharda Anilkumar Patel 
6. Shri Bheemrao Baswanthrao Patil 
7. Shri Shriniwas Dadasaheb Patil 
8. Mohammad Sadique 
9. Shri Devendra Singh alias Bhole Singh 
10. Shri Virendra Singh 
11. Shri V.K. Sreekandan 
   
 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
 12. Smt. Ramilaben Becharbhai Bara 
 13. Shri Masthan Rao Beeda 
 14. Dr. Anil Sukhdeorao Bonde 
 15. Shri Kailash Soni 
 16. Shri Ram Nath Thakur 
 17. Shri Vaiko 
 
 
 
 

27 
 
SECRETARIAT   
 1. Shri Shiv Kumar   - Additional Secretary 
 2. Shri Uttam Chand Bharadwaj - Director 
 3. Shri Prem Ranjan   - Deputy Secretary 
 4. Shri N. Amarathiagan  - Under Secretary 
 
2. At the outset, Chairperson welcomed the Members to the Sitting of the 
Committee. Thereafter, the Committee took up for consideration the following Draft 
Action Taken Reports:  
*(i)  XXXX   XXXX   XXXX   XXXX; 
*(ii)  XXXX   XXXX   XXXX   XXXX;  
(iii) Draft Action Taken Report on Action -taken by the Government on the 
Observations / Recommendations contained in the Fifty -Third Report of the 
Committee on ‘Demands for Grants (2023 -24)’, pertaining to the Ministry of 
Fisheries, Animal Husbandry and Dairying (Department of Fisheries); 
*(iv) XXXX   XXXX   XXXX   XXXX; 
*(v) XXXX   XXXX   XXXX   XXXX; 
*(vi) XXXX   XXXX   XXXX   XXXX; 
3. After some deliberations, the Committee adopted the Draft Action Taken Reports 
without any modifications and the Committee authorized  the Chairperson to finalize and 
present these Reports to Parliament.  
 
 
 
The Committee then adjourned.  
* Matter not related to this Report. 
 
 
 

28 
 
APPENDIX - I 
 
(Vide Para 4 of Introduction of the Report) 
 
ANALYSIS OF ACTION TAKEN BY GOVERNMENT ON THE FIFTY-THIRD REPORT 
OF STANDING COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE, ANIMAL HUSBANDRY AND FOOD 
PROCESSING (2022-23) (17TH LOK SABHA) 
  
(i)  Total number of Recommendations              11 
(ii) Observations/ Recommendations that have been 
Accepted by the Government  
 Para Nos. 1,3,4,7,8,10 and 11    
Total          07    
Percentage                   63.63% 
(iii) Observations/ Recommendations which the Committee 
do not desire to pursue in view of the Government’s replies  
Para Nos.     2, 5 and 9         
Total                     03 
Percentage                     27.27% 
(iv) Observations/ Recommendations in respect of which replies 
 of the Government have not been accepted by the Committee 
Para No. 6  
Total            01 
Percentage                                      09.09% 
(v) Observations/ Recommendations in respect of which  
 Final replies of the Government are still awaited 
Para No.       NIL      
Total                     00  
Percentage                     00.00%  
 
 
 
 