1 
 
 
 
 STANDING COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE 
 (2020-2021) 
                  
         
SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA 
          
                                         
MINISTRY OF FISHERIES, ANIMAL HUSBANDRY AND DAIRYING 
(DEPARTMENT OF FISHERIES)  
               
 
'DEMANDS FOR GRANTS (2019-20)' 
 
Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations contained 
in the Fifth Report (Seventeenth Lok Sabha) of the Standing Committee on 
Agriculture (2019-20) 
 
         
        
SIXTEENTH REPORT 
 
 
 
         
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
......FEBRUARY 2021/......MAGHA,1942 (SAKA) 
16 
 

 
 
2 
 
SIXTEENTH REPORT 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE 
(2020-2021) 
          
 
(SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
         
         
        MINISTRY OF FISHERIES, ANIMAL HUSBANDRY AND DAIRYING 
(DEPARTMENT OF FISHERIES)  
              
 
 
'DEMANDS FOR GRANTS (2019-20)' 
 
 
 
Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations contained 
in the Fifth Report (Seventeenth Lok Sabha) of the Standing Committee on 
Agriculture (2019-20) 
 
         
        
           Presented to Lok Sabha on                                   11.02.2021 
           Laid on the Table of Rajya Sabha on                                 11.02.2021 
 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
......FEBRUARY 2021/......MAGHA,1942 (SAKA) 
 


 
 
3 
 
 
COA No. 415 
 
 
         
         
         
         
         
         
         
        
Price:  Rs.  
         
         
     
                     
 
 
 
 
© 2021 By Lok Sabha Secretariat 
 
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of Business in Lok 
Sabha (Sixteenth Edition) and Printed by  
 

 
 
4 
 
CONTENTS 
 
                     PAGE 
  
*COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE (2019-20)……………………………    (iii) 
*COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE (2020-21)……………………………    (iv) 
         
 
*INTRODUCTION……………………………………………………………      (v) 
       
CHAPTER I   Report …………………………………………     1-9  
CHAPTER II  Observations/Recommendations which have      10-19 
   been accepted by the Government ……………     
CHAPTER III  Observations/Recommendations which the     20 
   Committee do not desire to pursue in view 
   of the Government’s replies …………………..     
CHAPTER IV  Observations/Recommendations in respect     21-25 
   of  which replies of the Government have  
   not been accepted by the Committee ………….    
CHAPTER V  Observations/Recommendations in respect of       26 
   which final replies of the Government are  
   still awaited …………………………………….    
5 
. 
                                                     ANNEXURE 
           Minutes of the 5th Sitting of the Committee held on 09.02.2021     27-28 
  
 APPENDIX 
 I. Analysis of Action Taken by the Government on the Recommendations....  29 
  contained in the Fifth Report (Seventeenth Lok Sabha) of the Standing   
  Committee on Agriculture (2019-20).  
 
 
        
  

 
 
5 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE (2019-20) 
Shri Parvatagouda Chandanagouda Gaddigoudar-   Chairperson  
 
MEMBERS 
 
LOK SABHA 
 
 2. Shri Afzal Ansari 
  3. Shri Horen Sing Bey 
 4. Shri Devendra Singh 'Bhole' 
 5. Shri A. Ganeshamurthi 
 6. Shri Kanakmal Katara 
 7. Shri Abu Taher Khan 
8. Shri Bhagwanth Khuba 
9. Dr. Amol Ramsing Kolhe 
10. Shri Mohan Mandavi 
11. Shri Devji Mansingram Patel 
12. Smt. Shardaben Anilbhai Patel 
13. Shri Bheemrao Baswanthrao Patil 
14. Smt. Navneet Ravi Rana 
15. Shri Vinayak Bhaurao Raut 
16. Shri Pocha Brahmananda Reddy 
17. Shri Mohammad Sadique 
18. Shri Virendra Singh 
19. Shri V.K. Sreekandan 
20.  Shri Mulayam Singh Yadav 
21. Shri Ram Kripal Yadav 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
22. Shri Partap Singh Bajwa 
23. Sardar Sukhdev Singh Dhindsa  
#24. Shri Harivansh 
25. Shri Narayan Rane  
26. Shri Kailash Soni 
27. Shri Vaiko 
28. Shri R. Vaithilingam 
29 Smt. Chhaya Verma 
30. Dr. Chandrapal Singh Yadav  
31. Shri Harnath Singh Yadav  
 
______________________________________________________________________ 
# Nominated to this Committee w.e.f. 22.07.2020 vide CB-1 Note dated 24.07.2020. 
 
  

 
 
6 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE (2020-21) 
 
Shri Parvatagouda Chandanagouda Gaddigoudar-   Chairperson 
 
MEMBERS 
 
LOK SABHA 
 
 2. Shri Afzal Ansari 
  3. Shri Horen Sing Bey  
 4. Shri Devendra Singh 'Bhole' 
 5. Shri A. Ganeshamurthi 
 6. Shri Kanakmal Katara 
 7. Shri Abu Taher Khan 
8. Shri Bhagwanth Khuba 
9. Shri Mohan Mandavi 
10. Shri Devji Mansingram Patel 
11. Smt. Shardaben Anilbhai Patel 
12. Shri Bheemrao Baswanthrao Patil 
13. Shri Shriniwaas Dadasaheb Patil 
14. Shri Kinjarapu Ram Mohan Naidu 
15. Shri Vinayak Bhaurao Raut 
16. Shri Pocha Brahmananda Reddy 
17. Shri Mohammad Sadique 
18. Shri Virendra Singh 
19. Shri V.K. Sreekandan 
20.  Shri Mulayam Singh Yadav 
21. Shri Ram Kripal Yadav 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
22. Shri Partap Singh Bajwa 
23. Sardar Sukhdev Singh Dhindsa  
24. Shri Narayan Rane  
25. Shri Kailash Soni 
26. Shri Vaiko 
27. Shri R. Vaithilingam 
28 Smt. Chhaya Verma 
@29. Shri B.L. Verma 
30. Shri Harnath Singh Yadav  
*31. VACANT 
 
_______________________________________________________________ 
* vice Dr. Chandrapal Singh Yadav ceased to be a Member of the Committee on his 
retirement from Rajya Sabha w.e.f 25.11.2020 vide CB-I Note dated 06.10.2020. 
@ Shri B.L. Verma, MP Rajya Sabha has been nominated to the Committee as Member 
w.e.f 23.12.2020 vide Bulletin Part-II No. 1835 dated 24.12.2020 

 
 
7 
 
 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
 
1. Shri Shiv Kumar   - Joint Secretary 
2. Dr. Vatsala J. Pande   - Director 
3. Shri Nagender Singh   - Executive Officer 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(iv) 
  

 
 
8 
 
  INTRODUCTION 
         
I, the Chairperson , Standing Committee on Agriculture  (2020-21), having been 
authorized by the Committee to submit the R eport on their behalf, present this 
Sixteenth Report on action taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in the Fifth Report (Seventeenth Lok 
Sabha) of the Standing Committee on Agriculture ( 2019-20) on  'Demands for 
Grants (2019-20)' pertaining to the  Ministry of Fisheries, Animal Husbandry And 
Dairying (Department of Fisheries). 
 
2. The Fifth Report (Seventeenth Lok Sabha) of the Standing Committee on 
Agriculture ( 2019-20) on 'Demands for Grants (2019 -20)' pertaining to the 
Ministry of Fisheries, Animal Husbandry And Dairying  (Department of Fisheries)  
was presented to Lok Sabha  and laid on the Table of Rajya Sabha on  12 
December, 2019 . The Action Taken Notes on the Report were received on 
22.04.2020 
 
3. The Report was considered and adopted by the Committee at their Sitting 
held on 09.02.2021. 
 
4. An A nalysis of the action t aken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in the Fifth Report (Seventeenth Lok 
Sabha) of the Committee is given in Appendix.  
  
            
    
NEW DELHI;                    P.C. GADDIGOUDAR 
09 February, 2021                                    Chairperson, 
20 Magha, 1942(Saka)                          Standing Committee on Agriculture  
 
 
(v) 

 
 
9 
 
CHAPTER-I 
DRAFT REPORT 
This Report of the Standing Committee on Agriculture deals with the Action 
Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations contained in the 
Fifth Report (Seventeenth Lok Sabha) of the Standing Committee on Agriculture 
(2019-2020) on “Demands fo r Grants (2019 -20) pertaining to Ministry of Fisheries, 
Animal Husbandry and Dairying (Department of Fisheries) which was presented to 
Lok Sabha and laid on the Table of Rajya Sabha on 12.12.2019.   
 
1.2  The Ministry of Fisheries, Animal Husbandry and Dai rying (Department of 
Fisheries) has furnished Action Taken Replies in respect of all the 1 0 
Observations/Recommendations contained in the Report. These replies have been 
categorized as under:  
 
 
(i)  Observations/Recommendations that have been accepted by the 
Government:  
 
Recommendation Nos. 2, 3, 5, 6, 7, 8, 10   Chapter- II 
      Total- 07  
 
(ii)  Observations/Recommendations in respect of which the Committee do not 
desire to pursue in view of the Government’s reply:  
 
Recommendation  No.   NIL      Chapter- III 
      Total- 00  
 
(iii)  Observations/Recommendations in respect of which Action Taken Replies of 
 the Government have not been accepted by the Committee:  
  
 Recommendation No.  1, 4, 9        Chapter- IV 
      Total- 03  
 
(iv)  Observations/Recommendations in respect of which final replies of the 
Government are still awaited:  
 
Recommendation No.     NIL     Chapter- V 
      Total- 00 
 
  
 

 
 
10 
 
1.3  The Committee trust that utmost importance would be given to 
implementation of the Obse rvations / Recommendations accepted by the 
Government. In cases where it is not possible for the Department to implement 
the Recommendations in letter and spirit for any reason, the matter should be 
reported to the Committee with reasons for non -implementation. The 
Committee desire that further Action Taken Notes on the Observations / 
Recommendations contained in Chapter -I of this Report be furnished to them 
at an early date. 
 
1.4  The Committee will now deal with the action taken by the Government on 
some of the Recommendations in the succeeding paragraphs.  
 
 
 
A. CREATION OF A NEW DEPARTMENT OF FISHERIES 
 RECOMMENDATION (PARA NO.1) 
 
1.5 The Committee had observed/ recommended:- 
 
 The Committee note t hat the Government of India has  created a separate 
Ministry of Fisheries, Animal Husbandry and Dairying in year 2019 and Department 
of Fisheries under Ministry of Fisheries, Animal Husbandry and Dairying came into 
existence on 17.06.2019. The Committee appreciate this initiative of the Central 
Government. The Committee are of view that fisheries is an under -exploited Sector 
having huge potential for job creation in fishing as well as Food Processing 
Industries based on Fisheries. The Committee hope that newly created Department 
of Fisheries to shift their focus for drafting a policy for fully exploiting the potential of 
Marine, Inland and Aquaculture Fisheries. The Committee also recommend the 
Government to identify the gap in legislation which hinders optimum utilization of 
potential of Fisheries Sector in the Country and to introduce the requisite Bills to 
Parliament for this purpose. 

 
 
11 
 
1.6  In its Action Taken Reply, the Department has stated:- 
 
 The Department of Fisheries has formulated ‘The National Fisheries Policy, 
2020 by integrating the following policies viz., (i) National Policy on Marine Fisheries, 
2017 (ii) Draft National Inland Fisheries and Aquaculture Policy (iii) Draft National 
Mariculture Policy and (iv) Elements of policy on post -harvest processing and 
marketing of fish and fisheries products. The draft National Fisheries Policy 
document along with Draft Note for Cabinet has been circulated for comments and 
the Draft N ational Fisher ies Policy has also been uploaded in the website of the 
Department, for wider consultation . The Draft Note for Cabinet will be finalized 
subsequent to consultation process. 
The Blue Revolution targets to harness the full productivity potential and focuses on 
supply of quality fish seeds through setting up of brood banks and hatcheries, quality 
feed at affordable rates to fish farmers, species diversifications, induced breedin g, 
adoption of technologies, management of aquatic diseases, marketing support, 
accreditation of fish seed hatcheries, skill up -gradation of fish farmers and fisheries 
entrepreneurs. Cage culture in reservoirs, reservoir -stocking and adopting 
conservation measures, promotion of capture fisheries, skill up -gradation etc. are 
also some of the focused activities being taken up under the Blue Revolution  
Scheme. The Blue Revolution Scheme further focuses on effective utilization of 
other resources such as inland water bodies, floodplain lakes and wetlands, 
irrigation canals, saline and waterlogged areas to mainstream their contribution in 
fish production. 
 
1.7 The Committee acknowledge that keeping in mind the huge growth 
potential of Fisheries Sector and its rol e in improving lives of millions of poor 
and vulnerable fishermen of the country, the Government have decided to 
create to new dedicated Department to harness full potential of this Sector. 
The Committee had desired that  this newly created Department of Fisheries to 
shift their focus for drafting a policy for fully exploiting the potential of Marine, 
Inland and Aquaculture Fisheries. The Department, in its Reply, has, however, 

 
 
12 
 
informed that it  has formulated ‘The National Fisheries Policy, 2020 by 
integrating the following policies viz., (i) National Policy on Marine Fisheries, 
2017 (ii) Draft National Inland Fisheries and Aquaculture Policy (iii) Draft 
National Mariculture Policy and (iv) Eleme nts of policy on post -harvest 
processing and marketing of fish and fisheries Products. Further, t he draft 
National Fisheries Policy document along with Draft Note for Cabinet has been 
circulated for comments and the Draft National Fisheries Policy has also  been 
uploaded on the website of the Department, for wider consultation. The 
Committee desire the Department to expedite the process of formulation of 
National Fisheries Policy, 2020 and introduce the proposed “National Marine 
Fisheries (Regulation and Man agement) Bill, 2019” for holistic resource 
utilization in EEZ  (Exclusive Economic Zone) in the upcoming Session of the 
Parliament. The Committee would like to be apprised of steps taken in this 
regard. 
 
B. GENDER BUDGETING 
 
 RECOMMENDATION (PARA NO. 4) 
 
 
1.8  The Committee had observed/ recommended:- 
 
 The Committee note that  Gender Budgeting is a powerful tool for achieving 
gender mainstreaming so as to ensure that benefits of development reach women 
as much as men. Women constitute 48% of India’s population, but they lag behind 
men on many social indicators like health, education, economic opportunities, etc. 
Hence they warrant special attention due to their vulnerability and lack of access to 
resources. The Committee note that the Department of Fi sheries has constituted a 
Gender Budget Cell headed by Joint Secretary with six Members for correcting 
gender imbalances, promoting gender equality and development of women under 
the Schemes implemented by the Department.  The Committee were informed that 
the Department has not received any specific funds for women component, 
however, it has been advising States/Implementing Agencies for earmarking around 
30% of allocated funds towards women beneficiaries under the existing Centrally 
Sponsored Scheme - Blue Revolution, being implemented by the Department. The 

 
 
13 
 
Committee express their displeasure that the Department has failed to furnish State -
wise details of women beneficiaries under each Scheme of Fisheries Sector since 
2017-18. The Committee feel that the be nefits of Gender Budgeting cannot be fully 
delivered to the concerned quarters if records of Women beneficiaries under various 
schemes being implemented by them are not maintained. The Committee desire the 
Department to make Gender Budgeting Cell functiona l and more rigorous. The 
Committee further desire the Department to take up the issue of Gender Budgeting 
in letter and spirit and ear mark specific allocation for the same. The Committee also 
recommend the Department to set up specific physical targets St ate-wise and try to 
achieve those targets as women are an equal partner in overall development and 
upliftment of the society. 
  
1.9  In its Action Taken Reply, the Department has stated:- 
 
 After thorough examination and considering the women engaged, the Blue 
Revolution: Integrated Development and Management of Fisheries was identified  as 
one of the scheme for exp ending 30% provision of allocated funds towards women 
beneficiaries. The Depart ment has been issuing advisories to the State and UT 
Governments for allocating and utilising 30% provision of allocated funds towards 
women beneficiaries. 
 The recommendation by the Committee has been noted by the Department 
and the issue will be taken care of, for the development of women beneficiaries.  
  
1.10 Acknowledging the ro le of Gender Budgeting in uplif tment of women 
and subsequently achieving Women Empowerment, the Committee had 
recommended the Department  to take up the issue of Gender Budgeting  in 
letter and spirit and ear mark specific allocation for the same. The Committee 
had recommended the Department to set up specific physical targets State -
wise and try to achieve those targets as women are  equal par tners in the 
overall development and upliftment of the society.  The Committee  also felt 
that the benefits of  Gender Budget ing cannot be fully delivered to the 
concerned quarters if records of Women beneficiaries under various Schemes 

 
 
14 
 
being implemented by t hem are not maintained . In its reply, the Department 
has submitted that 30 percent fund is earmarked for women beneficiaries 
under Blue Revolution: Integrated Development and Management of Fisheries . 
Further, t he Department has been issuing advisories to t he State and UT 
Governments for allocating and utilising 30% provision of allocated funds 
towards women beneficiaries.  The Committee are dissatisfied with the 
response of the Department to their recommendation. The Committee feel that 
mere issuing of advis ories and letters to the State and UT Governments will 
not serve the purpose of Women Empowerment through Gender Budgeting. 
Therefore, the Committee reiterate their earlier recommendation and desire the 
Department to make earnest efforts for Gender Budgeti ng and in addition to 
issuing advisories, monitor the utilization of funds through the Gender 
Budgeting  Cell in the Department so that Women fisher folk who are often the 
most vulnerable and deprived section can reap the benefits of this Component 
of Budgetary outlay.  
 
C. BLUE REVOLUTION : INTEGRATED DEVELOPMENT AND 
 MANAGEMENT OF FISHERIES 
 
 RECOMMENDATION (PARA NO. 9) 
 
1.11 The Committee had observed/ recommended:- 
 
 The Committee note that Blue Revolution: Integrated Development and 
Management of Fisheries has been started as a Central Plan Schemes for 
development of fisheries during a period of five years 2015 -16 to 2019 -20 with a 
central outlay of Rs. 3000 crore. This Scheme provides focused development and 
management of fisheries, covering inland fisheries, aquaculture, marine fisheries 
including deep sea fishing, mariculture and all activities undertaken by the National 
Fisheries Development Board (NFDB). The Committee note that an allocation of Rs. 
2767.49 Crore has been made for implementation of scheme out of which the 
Department was able to utilize Rs2158.13 crore.  The Committeee observe that 
Department failed to achieve target under some componenets of scheme such as 
Development of Brackishwater Aquaculture, Motorization of Tr aditional Vessels, 

 
 
15 
 
Establishment of New Fishing Harbours/ Fish Landing Centre etc. The Committee 
have been informed that lower taget achievement is due to less proposals received 
from States/UTs. The Committee also observe that  the Department has fixed  low 
target under various Schemes such as development of Freshwater Aquaculture, 
Installation of Cages/Pens in reservoir and other open water bodies, safety of 
fishermen etc. despite significantly higher achievements in each financial year since 
2016-17. The Committee are of view that lower awareness among potential 
beneficiaries may be reason for lower demand for some components of the scheme. 
The Committee are of view that Department should make efforts to enhance 
awareness among potential beneficiaries so t hat they can get benefits and target of 
enhancing production of fish may be achieved in future. The Committee expect the 
Department to identify shortcomings of Blue Revolution Scheme and make 
corrective measures in next ambitious scheme Pradhan Mantri Mats aya Sampada 
scheme.  
 
1.12 In its Action Taken Reply, the Department has stated:- 
 
 The Department of Fisheries has been implementing the Centrally Sponsored 
Scheme on Blue Revolution: Integrated Development and Management of Fisheries 
with a total Central outlay of Rs.3000 crore for five years  (2015-16 onwards). The 
Department has utilized Rs. 2541.76 crore against the central allocation of Rs. 
2667.49 crore for different developmental activities in the country.  The less than 
below achievements of some of the components of the scheme, viz., development of 
brackish water aquaculture, as observed by the Committee  was primarily, due to 
lesser number of proposals received from the States/UTs. However, development of 
freshwater aquaculture and installations of cages/pens in reservoirs, and other open 
water bodies, the sector had witnessed very high demand from the States/UTs, for 
these components leading to apparent over achievements. The Department, would 
also like to inform that in addition to the period ical review by the Department of 
Fisheries, the NITI Aayog, has taken up the evaluation of the CSS on Blue 
Revolution- Integrated Management and Development of Fisheries. The 
recommendations of the Committee have been noted by the Department, and the 
Department of Fisheries would address the issues and shortcomings of the Blue 

 
 
16 
 
Revolution Scheme, while formulating the detailed operational guidelines of the 
PMMSY. 
 
1.13 Considering that Blue Revolution: Integrated Development and 
Management of Fisheries is the flagship Scheme of the Department which 
provides focused development and management of fisheries, covering inland 
fisheries, aquaculture, marine fisheries including deep sea fishing, mariculture 
and all activities undertaken by the National Fisheries Development Board 
(NFDB), the Committee had recommended the Department to make efforts to 
enhance awareness of this Scheme among potential beneficiaries so that they 
can get benefits as some of the Components of the Scheme such as 
Development of Brackishwater Aquaculture, Motorization of Traditional 
Vessels, Establishment of New Fishing Harbours/ Fish Landing Centre , etc. 
have under performed.  The Committee had further recommended the 
Department to identify shortcomings of Blue Revolution Scheme and make 
corrective measures in next ambitious Scheme  i.e., the Pradhan Mantri 
Matsaya Sampada Yojana. The Department, in its reply has submitted that less 
than below achievements of some of the Co mponents of the Scheme, viz., 
development of brackish water aquaculture, as observed by the Committee 
was primarily, due to lesser number of proposals received from the 
States/UTs. However, development of freshwater aquaculture and installations 
of cages/pens in reservoirs, and other open water bodies, the Sector had 
witnessed very high demand from the States/UTs, for these Components 
leading to apparent over achievements. Further, Department maintained that it 
has taken note of the recommendation of the Committee and will try to rectify 
the shortcomings in the upcoming Pradhan Mantri Matsya Sampada Yojana. 
The Committee believe that the performance of Blue Revolution or any other 
Centrally Sponsored Scheme depends upon the participation of States and the 
number of proposals received from them. So the Committee feel that it of the 
utmost importance that States are rigorously pursued to initiate new 
proposals under the Scheme so that intended benefits of the Scheme reach 
the maximum per sons. The Committee, hope that the issue of less proposals 

 
 
17 
 
from States and UT Governments, less awareness about the Scheme and 
other such issues affecting the proper implementation of the Scheme on Blue 
Revolution will be adequately addressed in the recent ly approved Pradhan 
Mantri Matsya Sampada Yojana as assured by the Department. 
  

 
 
18 
 
CHAPTER - II 
 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS THAT HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED BY 
THE GOVERNMENT 
 
RECOMMENDATION NO. 2 
ANALYSIS OF DEMAND 
  The Committee note that the Fisheries Sector is a sunrise sector in 
Indian Economy in terms of potential and providing livelihood to millions of 
poor and vulnerable fishermen. Presently India is the second largest fish 
producing and second largest aquaculture nation in the World after China. The 
Committee are informed that transformation of the Fisheries Sector from 
traditional to commercial scale has led to an increase in fish production from 
0.75 Million Metric tonnes (MT) in 1950 -51 to 12.61 Million Metr ic tonnes 
(Provisional) during 2017 -18. It has further been targeted to enhance fish 
production to 20 million metric tonnes (MMT) by 2023-24 (up from 13.34 million 
metric tonnes [provisional] in 2018 -19) at an Average Annual Growth of about 
9% (up from 7%)  in fish production.  The Committee also note that export 
earnings from the Sector registered at Rs. 45,106.89 crore (US $ 7.08 billion) in 
2017-18 with the Quantity of 1377244 tonnes. The sector contributed about 
0.96% to the National Gross Value Added (G VA) and 5.37% to the Agricultural 
GVA (2016 -17). Fisheries Sector engages over 14.50 million people at the 
primary level and many more along the value chain. Against this background, 
the Committee note  that in Budget Estimates 2019 -20, the Department has 
been allocated total Budgetary Support of Rs. 804.75 crore  including 
allocations for Scheme and Non- Schemes Components. The overall allocation 
for the financial year 2019 -20 has increased by 7.67 % in comparison to the 
allocation of Rs. 747.45 crore made  during the last year 2018 -19. The 
Committee also observe that allocations to Department of Fisheries are only 
0.3 percentage of total Central Budgetary Outlay of Government of India.  The 
Committee note that keeping in mind the potential of Fisheries Sector in 
employment generation and foreign earnings, this Budgetary Allocation is 

 
 
19 
 
meagre. The Committee , therefore,  urge the Ministry of Fisheries, Animal 
Husbandry and Dairying to take u p the matter with the Ministry of Finance to 
increase the share of the Department in Central Plan so that full potential of 
the Fisheries Sector can be realized and its Scheme s do not suffer for want of 
funds. 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
In Budget Estimates 20 20-21, the Department has been allocated total 
budgetary support of Rs. 825.00 crore including allocations for scheme and non - 
scheme components.  The overall allocation for the financial year 20 20-21 has 
increased by 2.51 % in comparison to the allocation of Rs. 804.75 crore made during 
the last year 2019 -20 (BE). However, the allocation in respect of Blue Revolution 
Scheme during the year 2020 -21 (BE) has been increased by only 1.81 % in 
comparison to the allocation during the year 2019-20 (BE).  
 
RECOMMENDATION NO. 3 
STATUS OF UTILIZATION CERTIFICATE 
The Committee note that the Department is grappling with huge 
pendency of Utilization Certificate s of funds that are yet to be received from 
various State Government s. The Committee have been informed that there is 
pendency of Utilization Certificate to the tune of Rs. 599.40 crore as on date 29 
October, 2019. The Committee also observe that there is huge pendency of 
UCs from States like Tamil Nadu, Kerala, Maharashtra and Bihar. In this 
regard, the Com mittee have been informed that change in funding pattern 
between Centre: State from 75:25 to 60:40 for implementation of Scheme is the 
main reason for huge pendency of Unutilized Funds as many States are not 
able to contribute their share. Many States have  not released their share of 
funds as a result of which the implementing agency could not utilize even the 
Centre's share of funds leading to jump in unutilized Fund.  The Committee are 
of view that Fishery is one of Sectors which can help in increasing the income 
of farmers of the Country and any hindrance such as failure of State to 

 
 
20 
 
contribute their share will lead to failure of schemes of Central Government. 
The Committee, therefore, recommend the Government to look into this issue 
and explore possibility of changing funding pattern of various Schemes in the 
ratio of 75:25 or 80:20 between Centre and State respectively. The Committee 
believe that it will lead to proper and effective implementation of Schemes 
being implemented by the Department thereby hel ping the poor and 
vulnerable fishermen across Country. 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
The recommendation by the Committee has been noted by the Department 
and the issue will be taken up with the Ministry of Finance, to explore the possibility 
of changing the funding pattern , so as to lessen the burden of avoid contribution of 
state share fo r the implementation of the CSS in the country , for the focused 
development of the sector. 
 
RECOMMENDATION NO. 5 
TRIBAL SUB PLAN (TSP) 
 
The Committee note that Tribal Sub-Plan (TSP) is a strategy for the rapid 
Socio-economic development of tribal people. It forms a part of Annual Plan of 
a State/UT . The Committee are informed that the erstwhile Department of 
Animal Husbandry, dairying and Fisheries had been exempted for earmarking 
of funds under Tribal Sub Plan (TSP) upto 2017 -18. The Department is making 
allocations to the tune of 8.6 percentage for TSP since 2018 -19.  The 
Committee note that  the Department has earmarked Rs. 261.60 crore at RE 
stage in 2018 -19 for TSP component under different schemes/ programmes, 
out of which Rs. 250.98 crore has been incurred during 2018 -19. Whereas, the 
Department has made Actual Expenditure of Rs. 8.18 Cror e during current 
year as against allocations of Rs. 53.83 crore for implementation of Schemes 
under Tribal Sub plan during current year.  The Committee are dismayed to 
note that the Department is not keeping with the idea of balanced expenditure 
spread out evenly throughout the quarter s. The Committee are clueless about 

 
 
21 
 
the ways the Department will spen d remaining amount i.e. Rs 4564.29 lakh in 
remaining five months of the current financial year. The Committee further 
note that there is nil alloca tion under TSP during current financial year in 
many States such as Arunachal Pradesh, Assam, Jharkhand, Chhattisgarh, 
Karnataka, Rajasthan , etc. which have significant Tribal Population. The 
Committee are of view that Fisheries Sector is one of important sector whi ch 
has potential to enhance the income of significant tribal population in our 
Country. The Committee, therefore, recommend the Department to take 
corrective steps and make earnest efforts for optimum utilization of funds in 
order to ameliorate the economi c condition of tribal in the Country. The 
Committee would like to be apprised of corrective action taken in this regard. 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
The CSS Blue Revolution is a demand driven scheme and implemented in 
the country based on the proposals receiv ed from all the State and Union Territories 
Governments. The Department of Fisheries has already released the central 
assistance of Rs. 46.28 crores out of the allocated amount of Rs. 53.83 crore under 
the CSS Blue Revolution during the current financial y ear (2019-2020). The 
recommendation made by the Committee has been noted by the Department and 
the issue will be taken care of to carry out the existing and upcoming activities for 
the development of the sector through TSP. 
 
RECOMMENDATION NO. 6 
GROWTH RATE OF FISHERIES SECTOR 
 
  The Committee note that India is second largest fish producing and 
second largest aquaculture nation after China and Government intend to attain 
the first place in the world in fish production.  The Committee further note that 
current fish production of country from capture as well as aquaculture during 
2018-19 (provisional) is 133 Lakh Tonne s, whereas, China has produced 668 
lakh tonnes fish during 2016. The Committee were informed that Departme nt 
has targeted to enhance fish production to 20 million metric tonnes (MMT) by 

 
 
22 
 
2023-24 at an Average Annual Growth of about 9% (up from 7%) in fish 
production. The Committee further note that our Country has harnessed 57 
per cent of our potential in the i nland Fishery 70 percent in the Marine Sector. 
The Committee were further informed that the Department intend to various 
steps such as Re-circulatory aquaculture system (RAS),  Cage culture,  
Brackish Water (including land locked Saline states), Cold chain  development,  
mariculture, development of Ornamental Fisheries, focus on enhancement of 
fingerling production, development of Cold water Fisheries and  creation of 
Fisheries Infrastructure Facilities both in Marine and Inland Fisheries Sectors 
for enhancing the production in fishery sector. The Committee have also been 
informed that there is plan to enhance investment to the level of Rs. 25000 
Crore to ramp up existing infrastructure and other inputs for Fisher ies Sector. 
The Committee also observe that De partment is planning to implement 
Pradhan Mantri Matsya Sampada Yojana with allocation of Rs.10,000 crore in 
next five years. However, the Committee are dismayed to note that current 
projection of Fish production and initiatives being taken by the Departme nt to 
enhance fish production are not sufficient enough to make India number one 
in fish production in the Country. The Committee are of view that there is need 
of fresh survey to assess the fish production potential in Country and identify 
the areas which  can help to enhance fish production in minimum possible 
time and investment. There is also need to optimally utilize Deep Sea Fishing 
in Exclusive Economic Zone and Open Sea. The Committee, therefore, 
recommend the Government to prepare a blueprint to enh ance fish production 
in Country. The Committee further desire the Government to allocate sufficient 
funds to the Department for implementation of the aforesaid Schemes so that 
the untapped potential of the Fisheries Sector in providing livelihood 
opportunities and employment generation can be fully harnessed and 
exploited.   
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
The Department of Fisheries, Ministry of Fisheries, Animal Husbandry and 
Dairying is giving priority to increase fish production in the country. For increasing 

 
 
23 
 
production and productivity of fisheries sector, the Department is implementing the 
Centrally Sp onsored Scheme (CSS) on Blue Revolution: Integrated Development 
and Management of Fisheries with focused approach  on effective utilization of 
fisheries resources in a sustainable and responsible manner, technology infusion, 
creation of infrastructure, dive rsification of fish species and fishing practices, supply 
of quality inputs, expansion and intensification of fish culture, disease management, 
adoption of best aquaculture practices. To supplement the efforts of the State 
Governments and Union Territories , the Department has provided an assistance of 
Rs. 2541 crore during the last five years, under the CSS for development of fisheries 
sector with view to enhance of fish productivity and production in the country. The 
harvestable potential of marine fishery  resources in the EEZ has been estimated at 
about 5.31 million metric tonnes (MMT)  and there is an untapped potential of about 
1.59 MMT of marine resources, especially the high valued resources like Tuna and 
allied species in the deep -sea. Considering the scope in deep -sea sector, the Blue 
Revolution scheme provides assistance and empowers the traditional fishers in 
Deep Sea Fishing. 
The sector has been recognized as a powerful income and employment 
generator as it stimulates growth of a number of subsidiar y industries. The sector 
provides livelihood support to about 160 lakh people at the primary level and almost 
twice the number along the value chain. 
The sector has immense potential to double the fishers and fish farmers’ 
incomes as envisioned by the gove rnment. To utilise the dormant and untapped 
potential, there is need for enhanced investment in the sector and there is need for 
increased allocation for the sector which would provided the much needed thrust in 
the areas of enhancing Production and Produc tivity, Aquaculture Development, 
Post-Harvest and marketing infrastructure and other priority Interventions. 
 
 
 
 

 
 
24 
 
RECOMMENDATION NO. 7 
KISAN CREDIT CARD FACILITIES TO FISHERIES SECTOR 
 The Committee note that Government of India has extended Kisan 
Credit Card (KCC) facilities to fisheries and animal husbandry farmers with a 
purpose to help them meet their working capital requirements since 2018 -19. 
The KCC facility will help fisheries and animal husbandry farmers to meet their 
Short-Term Credit requirements. Fishers, Fish Farmers (Individual & 
groups/partners/share croppers/tenant farmers), Self Help Groups, Joint 
Liability Groups and Women groups are eligible for availing the KCC facilit ies. 
The Committee further note that Reserve Bank of India (RBI) has issued 
detailed guidelines for extension of KCC facility to Fisheries and Animal 
Husbandry farmers also extended Interest Subvention for Kisan Credit 
Card(KCC) to Fishery sector during th e years 2018 -19 and 2019 -20. The 
Committee have been informed that Department has not fixed any physical 
target under this Scheme during 2019 -20. The Committee are also surprised to 
note that Department is not maintaining details of loan facility extended to 
Fishermen. The Committee are of view that Kisan Credit Card can emerge as 
cheapest and easily available loan to meet urgent need of Economically 
Weaker Fisherman. The Committee, therefore, recommend the Department to 
take steps to enhance awareness abou t the facility among fisherman. The 
Committee also desire the Department to fix target for disbursal of loan under 
Kisan credit Card scheme. The Committee would like to be apprised of the 
steps taken in this regard.  
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
The Kisan Credi t Cards (KCC) are being issued by the banks and this is 
being monitored by the State Level Bankers Committee (SLBC) in their respective 
States. The Department of Fisheries has taken up the matter with State Level/UT 
Level Bankers Committee (SLBC) and the S LBCs have been requested to include 
an agenda on issuance of KCC to fishers and fish farmers in their regular review 
meetings and fix annual target for issuance of KCC in consultation with their 

 
 
25 
 
respective State Fisheries Departments. The SLBCs have been a lso requested to 
nominate a nodal officer who will coordinate with the State and Central 
agencies/Departments and furnish the progress reports regularly on monthly basis to 
this Department. Further all the States/UTs have been requested to sensitize the 
extension of KCC facility to fishers and fish farmers and also furnish the progress 
made in this regard to this Department. States/UTs have been requested to consult 
their SLBCs to organize special ca mps in different locations in the States to cover 
maximum number of fishers and fish farmers. As per the progress reported by the 
States/UTs a total of 8260 cards have been issued to fishers and fish farmers and 
another 1,18,455 cards is under process.  
 
RECOMMENDATION NO. 8 
NATIONAL FISHERIES DEVELOPMENT BOARD (NFDB) 
  The Committee note that National Fisheries Board (NFDB) was 
established with aim to enhance fish production and productivity in the 
country and to coordinate fishery development in an integr ated and holistic 
manner. NFDB aims for holistic development of the fisheries sector through 
enhancement of fish production and productivity; to supplement nutritious 
protein for the growing population; to accelerate the overall economy of the 
country, bes ides improving health, economy, exports, employment and 
tourism in the country. The Committee, however, are distressed to note that 
allocations to NFDB are not being made according to their actual need. The 
Committee observe that NFDB received Rs. 9 crore and Rs. 100 crore as 
against proposed allocations of Rs  172.96 crore and Rs. 561.58 crore during 
financial year 2017 -18 and 2018 -19 respectively.  The Committee further note  
that NFDB got allocations of Rs 80.75 crore as against proposed allocations of 
Rs 200.00 crore for year 2019-20. The Committee are of view that allocations to 
any organization should be according to their needs and prop osed plan and 
deviation to this maxi m can bring financial mis -management. The Committee, 
therefore, recommend the Government to allocate sufficient funds for 
implementation of schemes by NFDB and effort should be made to bring 

 
 
26 
 
uniformity in allocations to NFDB at BE and RE stage.  The Committee desire 
the Department take up the issue of financial allocation with the Ministry of 
Finance so that various Schemes/Programmes of NFDB do not suffer for want 
of funds. 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
The Department agree s with the recommendation mentioned by the 
Committee as contained in the report. While submitting the RE proposal for the year 
2019-20, the Department had proposed Rs. 193.83 crore towards NFDB, but was 
allocated only Rs. 80.75 crore and similarly for the y ear 2020-21(BE) an amount of 
Rs. 77.50 crore was allocated as against the proposed amount of Rs. 232.30 crore. 
The recommendation by the Committee has been noted by the Department and the 
issue will be taken up with the Ministry of Finance. 
 
RECOMMENDATION NO. 10 
PRADHAN MANTRI MATSAYA SAMPADA YOJANA (PMMSY) 
 The Committee note that a New focused Scheme  - the Pradhan Mantri 
Matsya Sampada Yojana (PMMSY) has been announced in the Budget 2019-20. 
Through this Scheme the Department of Fisheries will establish a robust 
Fisheries Management Framework. The Committee have been informed that 
Fisheries Management & Regulatory Framework including Welfare of 
Fishermen, Enhancement of Production and Productivity, Infrastructure & 
Post Harvest Management and Technology Infusion are some of the 
component scheme. The Scheme intends to address critical gaps in the value 
chain, including infrastructure, modernization, traceability, production, 
productivity, post -harvest management and quality control. The Committee 
hope that the proposed scheme will be able to enhance the target of 
production of fish to 20 Million Metric To nnes and establish necessary 
infrastructure for providing momentum to modernization of fisheries in the 
country. The Committee note that this Scheme has Central Outlay of Rs 10,000 

 
 
27 
 
crore and the Scheme is to be implemented in 5 years (FY 2019-20 to 2023-24). 
However, the Committee note that the operationalization guidelines for 
implementation of the Scheme are yet to be finalized.  They desire that these 
guidelines should be finalised at the earliest.  The Committee would like to be 
apprised about steps taken in this regard within two months of presentation of 
this Report. 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
The Department of Fisheries (DoF), Ministry of Fisheries, Animal Husbandry 
and Dairying, Government of India (GoI) has formulated the Pradhan Mantri Matsya 
Sampada Yojana (PMMSY ) - a scheme to bring about Blue Revolution through 
sustainable and responsible development of fisheries sector in India. The 
Expenditure Finance Committee (EFC) chaired by Secretary (Expenditure), Ministry 
of Finance in its meeting he ld on 21 st January, 2020 approved the scheme. The 
PMMSY is to be implemented as an umbrella scheme having components of both 
Central Sector(CS) and Centrally Sponsored Scheme (CSS) with total outlay of Rs. 
20,050 crore with central liability of Rs.9407 cro re for a period of next five years for 
the development of fisheries sector in the country. 
In the mean time, a Central Standing Committee (CSC) headed by Joint 
Secretary (Fisheries) has been constituted for formulation of unit cost norms, unit 
costs and gu idelines in respect of all components and sub -components of PMMSY 
with representation from Indian Council of Agricultural Research (ICAR), ICAR 
fisheries institutes, States/UTs, National Fisheries Development Board (NFDB) and 
other fisheries institutes under this Department. Two meetings of the CSC were held 
and the formulation of operational guidelines is under process. 
  

 
 
28 
 
CHAPTER III 
 
OBSERVATION/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO NOT 
DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE GOVERNMENT’S ACTION TAKEN 
REPLY 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
NIL  

 
 
29 
 
CHAPTER IV 
 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH ACTION 
TAKEN REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY 
THE COMMITTEE 
 
RECOMMENDATION NO. 1 
CREATION OF A NEW DEPARTMENT OF FISHERIES 
The Committee note that the Government of India  have created a 
separate Ministry of Fisheries, Animal Husbandry and Dairying in year 2019 
and Department of Fisheries under Ministry of Fisheries, Animal Husbandry 
and Dairying came into existence on 17.06.2019. The Committee appreciate  
this initiative of the Central Government. The Committee are of view that 
fisheries is an under-exploited Sector having huge potential for job creation in 
fishing as well as Food Processing Industries based on Fisheries. However, 
there is need to concerte d efforts to fully utilize the potential of this Sector.  
The Committee note that despite  contributing 10% of the total E xports and 
nearly 20% of the Agricultural Exports, 0.91% of the GDP and 5.23% to the 
Agricultural GVA (2016 -17), there is lack of Compre hensive Policy for 
Fisheries Sector in the Country . The Committee hope that newly created 
Department of Fisheries to shift their focus for drafting  a policy for  fully 
exploiting the potential of M arine, Inland and Aquaculture Fisheries. The 
Committee also recommend the Government to identify the gap in legislation 
which hinders optimum utilization of potential of Fisheries Sector in the 
Country and to introduce the requisite Bills to Parliament for this purpose. 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
The Department of Fisheries has formulated ‘The National Fisheries Policy, 
2020 by integrating the following policies viz., (i) National Policy on Marine Fisheries, 
2017 (ii) Draft National Inland Fisheries and Aquaculture Policy (iii) Draft National 
Mariculture Policy and (iv) Elements of policy on post -harvest processing and 
marketing of fish and fisheries products. The draft National Fisheries Policy 

 
 
30 
 
document along with Draft Note for Cabinet has been circulated for comments and 
the Draft N ational Fisher ies Policy has also been uploaded in the website of the 
Department, for wider consultation . The Draft Note for Cabinet will be finalized 
subsequent to consultation process. 
The Blue Revolution targets to harness the full productivity potential and 
focuses on supply of quality fish seeds through setting up of brood banks and 
hatcheries, quality feed at affordable rates to fish farmers, species diversifications, 
induced breeding, adoption of technologies, management of aquatic diseases, 
marketing support, acc reditation of fish seed hatcheries, skill up -gradation of fish 
farmers and fisheries entrepreneurs. Cage culture in reservoirs, reservoir -stocking 
and adopting conservation measures, promotion of capture fisheries, skill up -
gradation etc. are also some of the focused activities being taken up under the Blue 
Revolution Scheme. The Blue Revolution Scheme further focuses on effective 
utilization of other resources such as inland water bodies, floodplain lakes and 
wetlands, irrigation canals, saline and waterlo gged areas to mainstream their 
contribution in fish production. 
 
Comments of the Committee 
For comments of the Commit tee please refer to Para No.1.7 of Chapter - I of this 
Report. 
 
RECOMMENDATION NO. 4 
GENDER BUDGETING 
 
  The Committee note that  Gender Budgeting is a powerful tool for 
achieving gender mainstreaming so as to ensure that benefits of development 
reach women as much as men. Women constitute 48% of India’s population, 
but they lag behind men on many social indicators like health, educ ation, 
economic opportunities, etc. Hence  they warrant special attention due to their 
vulnerability and lack of access to resources. The Committee note that the 
Department of Fisheries has constituted a Gender Budget Cell headed by Joint 
Secretary with six  Members for correcting gender imbalances, promoting 

 
 
31 
 
gender equality and development of women under the Schemes implemented 
by the Department.  The Committee were informed that t he Department has 
not received any specific funds for women component, however , it has been 
advising States/Implementing Agencies for earmarking around 30% of 
allocated funds towards women beneficiaries under the existing Centrally 
Sponsored Scheme- Blue Revolution, being implemented by the Department. 
The Committee express their di spleasure that the Department has failed to 
furnish State -wise details of women beneficiaries under each Scheme of 
Fisheries Sector since 2017-18. The Committee feel that the benefits of Gender 
Budgeting cannot be fully delivered to the concerned quarters if records of 
Women beneficiaries under various schemes being implemented by them  are 
not maintained . The Committee desire the Department to make Gender 
Budgeting Cell functional and  more rigorous. The Committee further desire 
the Department to take up the  issue of Gender Budgeting in letter and spirit 
and ear mark specific allocation for the same. The Committee also recommend 
the Department to set up specific physical targets State -wise and try to 
achieve those targets as women are  an equal partner  in overall development 
and upliftment of the society. 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
After thorough examination and considering the women engaged, the Blue 
Revolution: Integrated Development and Management of Fisheries was identified  as 
one of the scheme for exp ending 30% provision of allocated funds towards women 
beneficiaries. The Department has been issuing advisories to the State and UT 
Governments for allocating and utilising 30% provision of allocated funds towards 
women beneficiaries. 
The recommendation by the Committee has been noted by the Department 
and the issue will be taken care of, for the development of women beneficiaries.  
Comments of the Committee 
For comments of the Commit tee please refer to Para No.1.10 of Chapter - I of this 
Report. 

 
 
32 
 
 
RECOMMENDATION NO. 9 
BLUE REVOLUTION: INTEGRATED DEVELOPMENT AND MANAGEMENT OF 
FISHERIES  
 The Committee note that Blue Revolution: Integrated Development and 
Management of Fisheries has been started as a Central Plan Schemes for 
development of fisheries d uring a period of five years 2015 -16 to 2019-20 with 
a central outlay of Rs. 3000 crore. This Scheme provides focused development 
and management of fisheries, covering inland fisheries, aquaculture, marine 
fisheries including deep sea fishing, mariculture and all activities undertaken 
by the National Fisheries Development Board (NFDB). The Committee note 
that an allocation of Rs. 2 767.49 Crore has been made for implementation of 
scheme out of which the Department was able to utilize Rs  2158.13 crore.  The 
Committeee observe that Department failed to achieve target under some 
componenets of scheme such as Development of Brackishwater Aquaculture, 
Motorization of Traditional Vessel s, Establishment of New Fishing Harbours/ 
Fish Landing Centre etc. The Committee  have been informed that lower taget 
achievement is due to less proposal s received from States/UTs. The 
Committee also observe that  the Department has fixed  low target under 
various Schemes such as development of Freshwater Aquaculture, Installation 
of Cages/Pens in reservoir and other open water bodies, safety of fishermen 
etc. despite significantly higher achievements in each financial year since 
2016-17. The Committee are of view that lower awareness among potential 
beneficiaries may be reason for lower  demand for some component s of the 
scheme. The Committee are of view that Department should make efforts to 
enhance awareness among potential beneficiaries so that they can get 
benefits and target of enhancing production of fish may be achieved in future. 
The Committee expect the Department  to identify shortcomings of Blue 
Revolution Scheme and make corrective measures in next ambitious scheme 
Pradhan Mantri Matsaya Sampada scheme.  
 

 
 
33 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
The Department of Fisheries has been implementing the Centrally Sponsored 
Scheme on Blue Revolution: Integrated Development and Management of Fisheries 
with a total Central outlay of Rs.3000 crore for five years  (2015-16 onwards). The 
Department has utilized Rs. 2541.76 crore against the central allocation of Rs. 
2667.49 crore for differen t developmental activities in the country.  The less than 
below achievements of some of the components of the scheme, viz., development of 
brackish water aquaculture, as observed by the Committee  was primarily, due to 
lesser number of proposals received from the States/UTs. However, development of 
freshwater aquaculture and installations of cages/pens in reservoirs, and other open 
water bodies, the sector had witnessed very high demand from the States/UTs, for 
these components leading to apparent over achiev ements. The Department, would 
also like to inform that in addition to the periodical review by the Department of 
Fisheries, the NITI Aayog, has taken up the evaluation of the CSS on Blue 
Revolution- Integrated Management and Development of Fisheries. The 
recommendations of the Committee have been noted by the Department, and the 
Department of Fisheries would address the issues and shortcomings of the Blue 
Revolution Scheme, while formulating the detailed operational guidelines of the 
PMMSY. 
Comments of the Committee 
For comments of the Commit tee please refer to Para No.1.13 of Chapter - I of this 
Report. 
  

 
 
34 
 
CHAPTER V 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH FINAL 
REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT ARE STILL AWAITED 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
NIL 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                                                     
NEW DELHI;                              SHRI P. C. GADDIGOUDAR 
09 FEBRUARY, 2021                                                 Chairperson, 
20 MAGHA, 1942 (Saka)                             Standing Committee on Agriculture
   

 
 
35 
 
ANNEXURE 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE 
(2020-21) 
 
MINUTES OF THE FIFTH SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE 
***** 
 The Committee sat on Tuesday, the 09 th February, 2021 from 1430 hrs. to  
1510 hrs. in the Committee Room '3', Block-A, Extn to PHA Building New Delhi.  
PRESENT 
Shri Parvatagouda Chandanagouda Gaddigoudar–  Chairperson 
 
MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA 
 
  2. Shri Afzal Ansari 
  3. Shri Horen Sing Bey 
  4. Shri Devendra Singh 'Bhole' 
  5. Shri A. Ganeshamurthi 
  6. Shri Kanakmal Katara 
  7. Shri Bhagwanth Khuba 
  8. Shri Mohan Mandavi 
  9. Shri Devji Mansingram Patel 
  10. Smt. Shardaben Anilbhai Patel 
  11. Shri Shriniwas Dadasaheb Patil 
  12. Shri Pocha Brahmananda Reddy 
  13. Shri Virendra Singh 
  14. Shri Ram Kripal Yadav 
 
      RAJYA SABHA 
  15. Shri Partap Singh Bajwa  
  16. Shri Narayan Rane 
  17. Shri Kailash Soni 
  18. Shri B.L. Verma 
  19. Smt. Chhaya Verma 

 
 
36 
 
   
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Shri Shiv Kumar   – Joint Secretary 
2. Dr. Vatsala J. Pande    –  Director  
3. Smt. Juby Amar   – Director  
4. Shri Prem Ranjan   – Deputy Secretary 
  
 
 
2. At the outset, Chairperson welcomed the Members to the Sitting of the 
Committee. Thereafter, the Committee took up for c onsideration the followings 
Reports: 
*(i)  XXXX  XXXX  XXXX  XXXX 
*(ii)  XXXX  XXXX  XXXX  XXXX 
(iii) Draft Report on Action Taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations on Fifth Report of the Standing 
Committee on Agriculture (2019 -20) on ' Demands for Grants (2019 -
20)' of the Ministry of Fisheries, Animal Husbandry and Dairying 
(Department of Fisheries); 
*(iv)  XXXX  XXXX  XXXX  XXXX 
*(v)  XXXX  XXXX  XXXX  XXXX 
*(vi)  XXXX  XXXX  XXXX  XXXX 
*(vii)  XXXX  XXXX  XXXX  XXXX 
*(viii)  XXXX  XXXX  XXXX  XXXX 
*(ix)  XXXX  XXXX  XXXX  XXXX 
*(x)  XXXX  XXXX  XXXX  XXXX 
3. After some deliberations, the Committee adopted the Draft Reports without 
any modifications and the Committee then authorized the Chairperson to finalize and 
present these Reports to Parliament. 
The Committee then adjourned. 
___________________________________________________________________ 
*Matter not related to this Report 
 
 

 
 
37 
 
Appendix 
(Vide Para 4 of Introduction of the Report) 
ANALYSIS OF ACTION TAKEN BY GOVERNMENT ON THE FIFTH REPORT OF 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE (17th LOK SABHA) 
  
i. Total number of Recommendations:     10 
Recommendations/Observations which have been 
Accepted by the Government: 
Recommendation Nos.  2, 3, 5, 6, 7, 8, 10 
Total                                                                                                    07 
Percentage                                                                                          70.00% 
  
ii. Recommendations/Observations which the Committee 
Do not desire to pursue in view of the Government’s replies  
Recommendation No.   NIL  
Total          00 
Percentage                                                                                          00.00% 
  
iii. Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies 
of the Government have not been accepted by the Committee 
Recommendation No.   1, 4, 9 
Total           03 
Percentage         30.00% 
  
iv. Recommendations/Observations in respect of which  
Final replies of the Government are still awaited 
Recommendation No.  NIL 
Total           00  
Percentage                                                                                          00.00% 
  
 
 