 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE,  
ANIMAL HUSBANDRY AND FOOD PROCESSING  
 
(2022-23) 
                  
         
 
 
SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA 
          
         
                                 
 
 
MINISTRY OF AGRICULTURE AND FARMERS WELFARE  
(DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE AND FARMERS WELFARE) 
              
 
'DEMANDS FOR GRANTS (2023-24)' 
 
{Action-taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations 
contained in the Fifty-First Report (Seventeenth Lok Sabha) of the Standing 
Committee on Agriculture, Animal Husbandry and Food Processing  
(2022-23)} 
 
         
        
 
SIXTIETH REPORT 
  
 
 
 
 
         
               
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
AUGUST 2023/SHRAVANA,1945 (SAKA) 
 
 
60 

 
 
SIXTIETH REPORT 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE, ANIMAL HUSBANDRY  
AND FOOD PROCESSING 
 
(2022-2023) 
          
 
SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA 
          
         
                                 
 
 
MINISTRY OF AGRICULTURE AND FARMERS WELFARE  
(DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE AND FARMERS WELFARE) 
              
 
'DEMANDS FOR GRANTS (2023-24)' 
 
{Action-taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations 
contained in the Fifty-First Report (Seventeenth Lok Sabha) of the Standing 
Committee on Agriculture, Animal Husbandry and Food Processing  
(2022-23)} 
 
         
         
           Presented to Lok Sabha on   10.08.2023 
            Laid on the Table of Rajya Sabha on 10.08.2023 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
AUGUST,2023/SRAVANA,1945 (SAKA) 
 

 
 
 
COA No.  
 
 
         
         
         
         
         
         
 
         
         
        
         
         
         
         
         
 
 
 
         
     
                     
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
© 2023 By Lok Sabha Secretariat 
 
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of Business in Lok 
Sabha (Sixteenth Edition) and Printed by Lok Sabha Secretariat 

 
 
<CONTENTS> 
  Page No. 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE (2022-23) (iii) 
INTRODUCTION      (v) 
   
CHAPTER I  Report …………………………………………   
CHAPTER II Observations/Recommendations that have been accepted by 
the Government 
  
CHAPTER III Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not 
desire to pursue in view of the Government’s replies  
  
CHAPTER IV Observations/Recommendations in respect of  which replies of 
the Government have not been accepted by the Committee  
  
CHAPTER V Observations/Recommendations in respect of which final replies 
of the Government are still awaited  
  
 
 
ANNEXURE  
 
 
Minutes of the 19th Sitting of the Committee held on 08.08.2023   
    APPENDIX  
Analysis of Action Taken by the Government on the Observations /  
Recommendations contained in the Fifty -First Report (Seventeenth Lok Sabha) 
of the Standing Committee on Agriculture, Animal Husbandry and Food 
Processing (2022-23). 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE, ANIMAL 
HUSBANDRY AND FOOD PROCESSING (2022-23) 
 
SHRI P.C. GADDIGOUDAR-   CHAIRPERSON 
 
MEMBERS 
 
LOK SABHA 
 
 2. Shri Horen Sing Bey 
  3.  Shri A. Ganeshamurthi 
 4. Shri Kanakmal Katara 
 5. Shri Abu Taher Khan 
 6. Shri Ram Mohan Naidu Kinjarapu 
 7. Shri Mohan Mandavi 
 8. Shri Devji Mansingram Patel 
9. Smt. Sharda Anilkumar Patel 
10. Shri Bheemrao Baswanthrao Patil 
11. Shri Shriniwas Dadasaheb Patil 
12. Shri Vinayak Bhaurao Raut 
13. Shri Pocha Brahmananda Reddy 
14. Shri Rajiv Pratap Rudy 
15. Mohammad Sadique 
16. Shri Devendra Singh alias Bhole Singh 
17. Shri Virendra Singh 
18. Shri V.K. Sreekandan 
19. Shri Ram Kripal Yadav 
20.  VACANT# 
21. VACANT* 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
 
22. Smt. Ramilaben Becharbhai Bara 
23. Shri Masthan Rao Beeda 
24. Dr. Anil Sukhdeorao Bonde 
25. Shri S. Kalyanasundaram 
26. Shri Surendra Singh Nagar 
27. Shri Kailash Soni  
28. Shri Randeep Singh Surjewala 
29. Shri Ram Nath Thakur 
30. Shri Vaiko 
31. Shri Harnath Singh Yadav  
 
 
 
# Vacant w.e.f. 10.10.2022 due to demise of Shri Mulayam Singh Yadav on 1 0.10.2022. 
(Bulletin- Part II, Para No. 5316 dated 14.10.2022). 
* Vacant w.e.f.29.04.2023 due to disqualification of Shri Afzal Ansari from Lok Sabha 
Membership from the date of his conviction in terms of the provision of Article 102(1)(e) of the 
Constitution of India read with Section 8 of the Representation of the People Act, 1951  
[Notification No. 21/4(6)/2023/TO(B) Dated - 01.05.2023]. 
 
(iii) 
 

 
 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
 
1. Shri Shiv Kumar    - Additional Secretary 
2. Shri Uttam Chand Bharadwaj  - Director 
3. Shri Sanjeev Kumar    - Executive Officer 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(v) 

 
 
INTRODUCTION 
         
I, the Chairperson , Standing Committee on Agriculture, Animal Husbandry and 
Food Processing (2022 -23), having been authorized by the Committee to submi t the 
Report on their behalf, present this Sixtieth Report on Action taken by the Government 
on the Observations/Recommendations contained in the Fifty-First Report 
(Seventeenth Lok Sabha ) of the Standing Committee on Agriculture, Animal 
Husbandry and Food  Processing (2022 -23) on 'Demands for Grants (2023 -24)' 
pertaining to the Ministry of Agriculture and Farmers Welfare (Department of 
Agriculture and Farmers Welfare). 
 
2. The Fifty-First Report (Seventeenth Lok Sabha) of the Standing Committee on 
Agriculture, Animal Husbandry and Food Processing (2022 -23) on 'Demands for 
Grants (2023 -24)' pertaining to the Ministry of Agriculture and Farmers Welfare 
(Department of Agriculture and Farmers Welfare ) was presented to Lok Sabha  on                
13 March, 2023 a nd laid on the Table of Rajya Sabha on  14 March, 2023. The Action 
Taken Notes on the Report were received on 04.07.2023. 
 
3. The Report was considered and adopted by the Committee at their Sitting held 
on   08.08.2023. 
 
4. An Analysis of the action t aken b y the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in the Fifty-First Report (Seventeenth Lok 
Sabha) of the Committee is given in Appendix.  
  
            
   
 
     
 
NEW DELHI;         P.C. GADDIGOUDAR 
08 August, 2023                                  Chairperson, 
17 Shravana, 1945(Saka)                       Standing Committee on Agriculture,  
      Animal Husbandry and Food Processing  
 
 
 
 
 

1 
 
CHAPTER - I 
REPORT 
  
This Report of the Standing Committee on Agriculture, Animal Husbandry and 
Food Processing deals with the Action Taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in the Fifty First Report (Seventeenth Lok 
Sabha) of the Standing Committee on Agriculture (2022 -2023) on 'Demands for 
Grants(2023-24)' pertaining to the Ministry of Agriculture and Farmers Welfare 
(Department of Agriculture and Farmers Welfare) which was presented to Lok Sabha on 
13.03.2023 and Laid on the Table of Rajya Sabha on 14.03.2023, respectively. 
  
1.2       The Ministry of Agriculture and Farmers Welfare (Department of Agriculture and 
Farmers Welfare) has furnished Action Taken Replies in respect of all the 12 
Observations/Recommendations contai ned in the Report. These Replies have been 
categorized as under:     
  
(i)         Observations/Recommendations that have been accepted by the Government: 
           Recommendation Nos. 1,3,6,7,8,11 and 12                  Total- 07 
           Chapter- II                           
                                                                                                                              
(ii)        Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to pursue 
in view of the Government’s replies: 
  Recommendation Nos.    9 and 10                 Total - 02 
                                                            Chapter- III 
 
(iii)       Observations/Recommendations in respect of which Replies of the Government 
have not been accepted by the Committee: 
           Recommendation Nos.   2 and 5                                                 Total- 02 
                                                                Chapter- IV 
 
(iv)       Observations/Recommendations in respect of which final replies of the 
Government are still awaited:   
           Recommendation Nos.  4                                                             Total- 01 
                                                               Chapter- V 
                                  

2 
 
1.3       The Committee trust that utmost importance would be given to 
implementation of the Observations / Recommendations accepted by the 
Government. In cases where it is not possible for the Department to implement 
the Recommendations in  letter and spirit for any reason, the matter should be 
reported to the Committee with reasons for non -implementation. The Committee 
desire that further Action -taken Notes on the Observations / Recommendations 
contained in Chapter - I and Final Action -taken Replies to the Recommendations 
contained in Chapter-V of this Report be furnished to them at an early date. 
  
1.4       The Committee will now deal with the Action-Taken by the Government on some 
of the Recommendations in the succeeding paragraphs. 
  
A.       Analysis of Demands for Grants(2023-24)  
 Recommendation No.1 
  
1.5      The Committee had observed/ recommended:- 
"The Committee note that the Department of Agriculture and Farmers Welfare 
has been allocated Rs.110531.79 Crore for 2023 -24 at BE Stage, which is 
4.56% more than RE of Rs.110254.53 Crore for 2022 -23. The actual utilization 
of funds for 2022 -23 (as on 27.01.2023), w.r.t. RE stands at 58.78%, which 
suggests that the Department needs to strive hard to fully utilize the funds in 
remaining period of one month or more of 2022 -23 which seem to be an 
arduous task.  The Committee feel that the Budget Estimate is a better source 
to compare with the Actual Expenditure rather than the Revised Estimate. 
Moreover, the Department has not been able t o stick to its Monthly Expenditure 
Plan during 2022 -23 so far. The Committee are of the considered opinion that 
the Department should strive hard to ensure optimum utilization of the allocated 
RE funds by sticking to the Monthly/Quarterly Expenditure Plan in consonance 
with the guidelines issued by the Department of Expenditure, Ministry of 
Finance from time to time. They feel any rush of expenditure in the last quarter 
of the year should invariably be avoided at all costs." 
   
 
 
 

3 
 
1.6      In its Action-Taken Reply, the Department has stated:- 
"The expenditure for 2022 -23 was Rs. 102343.94 Crore which is 92.83% of 
RE (2022 -23). The slow pace of expenditure during the initial months of the 
Financial Year was mainly on account of unspent balance with Implementing 
Agencies and State Governments from funds released last year.  
Department has chalked out the Monthly Expenditure Plan  in the beginning of the 
year and indicated the same in Detailed Demand for Grants (DDG). All efforts are 
made to ensure the e xpenditure on the schemes in as per Monthly Expenditure 
Plan. However, following are the reasons, which resulted in deviation from 
Monthly Expenditure Plan in FY 2022-23. 
(i) The uneven pace of the expenditure is on account of processes related to 
ensuring com pliance with modified procedure for release of funds under 
Centrally Sponsored Schemes(CSS) and Central Sector Schemes(CS).  
(ii) Further, under the PM -KISAN scheme which has the largest budget in 
Department’s allocation (55% of BE 2022 -23), three installments a re released 
every year to the farmers generally in April, August & December which tend to 
impact the Monthly/Quarterly Expenditure Plan. 
 
Notwithstanding, special exemption was obtained from Ministry of Finance to 
incur expenditure in last quarter from sav ings of previous quarters’ 
expenditure plan. ''  
            
1.7      The Committee in their Report had desired that the Department should 
strive hard to ensure optimum utilization of funds by sticking to the 
Monthly/Quarterly Expenditure Plan in consonance with the guidelines issued by 
the Department of Expenditure, Ministry of Finance from time to time. The 
Committee had also noted that as per the details provided by the Department 
regarding actual utilization of funds for 2022-23 (till 27.01.2023) w.r.t.  RE stood at 
58.78%, the full utilization of funds in the remaining period of one month or m ore 
seemed to be an a rduous task. The Department in its Action -taken Replies has  

4 
 
submitted that the expenditure for 2022 -23 was Rs.102343.94 Crore which is 
92.83% of RE(2022-23). The Department has further submitted that the slow place 
of expenditure durin g the initial months of the Financial Year was mainly on 
account of unspent balance with Implementing Agencies and State Governments 
from funds released last year and the Department had chalked out the Monthly 
Expenditure Plan in the beginning of the year and made all efforts to ensure that 
the expenditure on the schemes are  made as per the Monthly Expenditure Plan & 
special exemption was obtained from the Ministry of Finance to incur expenditure 
in last quarter from savings of previous quarters expenditure plan. 
 The Committee have noted the efforts made by the Department  regarding 
utilization of funds but simultaneously notice that despite all the efforts of the 
Department like obtaining nod from the Ministry of Finance to incur expenditure 
from savings of previous quarters, the Department could only spent 92.83% 
which is 7 % less of RE.  The Committee are of the considered  view that the 
Department could have devised a more meticulous and target oriented strategy 
with time bound appraisals to keep track o f progress and simultaneously release 
funds under Centra lly Sponsored Schemes  (CSS) and Central Sector Schemes. 
They further feel that the Department must spruce up  their financial management 
and ensure that funds allocated to various schemes at BE Stage are fully utilized 
and hence reiterate their earlier stance in the matter. 
  
B. Budgetary Allocation   
 Recommendation No. 2      
  
1.8     The Committee had observed/ recommended:- 
" The Committee note that the Department has admitted in its replies that the 
proportion of Budgetary Allocations made in favour of the Department in terms of 

5 
 
the percentage out of the total budget of the Government of India during the years 
2020-21, 2021 -22, 2022 -23 and 2023 -24 stood at 4.41%, 3.53%, 3.14 %  and 
2.57% respectively. The total Budget outlay of the Central Government in 2020 -21 
was Rs. 30,42,230.09 Crore, which increased to Rs. 45,03,097.45 Crore in 2023 -
24. Taking into account the prominent role played by Agriculture in rural livelihood, 
employment generation and food security of the country , the Committee 
recommend the Department to take up the issue of budgetary allocation in 
percentage terms out of Central Pool with the Ministry of Finance and ensure that 
trend is reversed from the next Budget onwards.." 
 
1.9    In its Action-taken Reply, the Department has stated:- 
"The reduction in budgetary allocation in BE 2023 -24 as compared to BE 2022 -23 
is on account of reduced requirement of Rs. 8000  crores in PM-KISAN in next FY. 
The reduction in requirement is primarily due to exercise undertaken by 
Department for updating the PM -KISAN database through use of technology 
including integration with UIDAI, Income Tax, Land Records Database. This 
resulted in reduction in number of beneficiaries getting benefits under the Scheme 
while ensuring that no eligible beneficiary is left out. The exercise has led to 
significant savings for Government of India. Further, Budget allocation in other 
schemes is made k eeping in view the priorities accorded by the Union 
Government to agriculture sector in the country and the action plan of 
Department." 
  
1.10    The Committee in their original Report had noted that the proportion of 
Budgetary Allocations made in favour of the Department in terms of the 
percentage out of the total Budget of the Government of India during the years 
2020-21, 2021 -22, 2022 -23 and 2023 -24 stood at 4.41%, 3.53%, 3.14% and 2.57% 
respectively. The Committee had recommended the Department to take up the 
issue of budgetary allocation in percentage terms out of Central Pool with the 
Ministry of Finance and to ensure that the trend is reversed from next Budget 
onwards.  

6 
 
The Department in its Action Taken Replies has submitted that the reduction 
in budgetary allocation in BE 2023-24 as compared to BE 2022-23 is on account of 
reduced requirement of Rs.8000 Crore in PM -KISAN in the next FY 2023 -24. The 
Committee have noted that the Department has not  taken a holistic overview in 
regard to the said recommendation. They think that the issue is not only about 
reduced requirement of funds in one or two Schemes but about the Budgetary 
allocation for Agriculture, its role as the largest livelihood provider in the country 
and its impact on the  economy and growth in other Sectors through its backward 
and forward linkages. Having taken this into account, the Committee reiterate 
their earlier recommendation to take up the issue of enhancement of budgetary 
allocation in percentage terms out of Central Pool with the Ministry of Finance to 
ensure that the role of Agriculture in rural livelihood, employment generation and 
food security of the country gets prime importance and due weightage. 
   
C. Supplementary Demands for Grants of the Department 
 Recommendation No.5 
 
1.11 The Committee had observed/ recommended:- 
 "The Committee have been informed that the Department, on the one hand, has 
made provisions for the Supplementary Demands of Rs.  22,245.51Crore during 
2022-23 (tentative) and on the other, is surrendering funds not utilized by it 
amounting to Rs. 19762.05  Crore. The Committee are constrained to note that 
raising supplementary demands on one hand and surrender of funds on the other 
are incompatible and reflects on the expenditure planning done by the 
Department. The Committee, therefore, desire the Departme nt to undertake the 
planning of utilization of allocated funds seriously and ensure expenditure of the 
funds in the planned and stipulated manner. The Committee are of the 
considered opinion that sticking to implementing Monthly Expenditure 
Plan/Quarterly Expenditure Plan (MEP/QEP) in respect of Central Sector 

7 
 
Schemes will go a long way in solving the problem of surrender of funds as well 
as raising Supplementary Demands." 
 
1.12 In its Action-taken Reply, the Department has stated:-   
"The final surrender intimated by the Department to Ministry of Finance was 
Rs.21,005.13 crore out of which Rs.13,745.47 crore was mandatory surrender(BE-
RE) i.e. to account for reduction of Budget at RE stage. The actual surrender was 
Rs.7259.66 crore with reference to RE. To ken Supplementary Demand was 
sought for re -appropriation of savings within the grant primarily to meet additional 
committed expenditure in Agriculture Marketing component of Krishonnati Yojana 
(Rs.660 crore), Market Intervention Scheme (Rs.3000 crore), Distribution of Pulses 
to State/Union Territories for Welfare Schemes(Rs.151 crore) & Modified Interest 
Subvention Scheme (Rs.2000 crore). Details are at Annexure-B." 
 
1.13 The Committee had noted that Monthly Expenditure Plan (MED) or 
Quarterly Expenditure P lan be strictly adhered to ensure expenditure of the 
allocated funds in planned and stipulated manner avoiding incompatibility of 
surrendering of allocated funds at one hand and seeking additional funds 
through supplementary grants. The logic of the Depart ment given in the Action 
Taken Reply seems to be technical but not convincing; therefore, the Committee 
reiterate their earlier considered opinion and expect a convincing and holistic 
reply from the Department. 
*** 
  

8 
 
CHAPTER - II 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS THAT HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE 
GOVERNMENT 
 
Analysis of Demands for Grants(2023-24)  
Recommendation No.1 
 
The Committee note that the Department of Agriculture and Farmers Welfare has 
been allocated Rs.110531.79 Crore for 2023-24 at BE Stage, which is 4.56% more than 
RE of Rs.110254.53 Crore for 2022 -23. The actual utilization of funds for 2022 -23 (as 
on 27.01.2023), w.r.t. RE stands at 58.78%, which suggests that the Department needs 
to strive hard to fully utilize the funds in remaining period of one month or more of 2022-
23 which seem to be an arduous task.  The Committee feel that the Budget Estimate is 
a better source to compare with the Actual Expenditure rather than the Revised 
Estimate. Moreover, the Department has not bee n able to stick to its Monthly 
Expenditure Plan during 2022 -23 so far. The Committee are of the considered opinion 
that the Department should strive hard to ensure optimum utilization of the allocated RE 
funds by sticking to the Monthly/Quarterly Expenditu re Plan in consonance with the 
guidelines issued by the Department of Expenditure, Ministry of Finance from time to 
time. They feel any rush of expenditure in the last quarter of the year should invariably 
be avoided at all costs. 
    
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT  
The expenditure for 2022 -23 was Rs. 102343.94 Crore which is 92.83% of 
RE (2022 -23). The slow pace of expenditure during the initial months of the 
Financial Year was mainly on account of unspent balance with Implementing 
Agencies and State Governments from funds released last year.  
Department has chalked out the Monthly Expenditure Plan in the beginning of the 
year and indicated the same in Detailed Demand for Grants (DDG). All efforts are made 
to ensure the expenditure on the schemes in as per Monthly Expenditure Plan . 
However, following are the reasons, which resulted in deviation from Monthly 
Expenditure Plan in FY 2022-23. 

9 
 
(i) The uneven pace of the expenditure is on account of processes related to 
ensuring compliance with modified procedure for release of funds under 
Centrally Sponsored Schemes(CSS) and Central Sector Schemes(CS).  
(ii) Further, under the PM -KISAN scheme which has the largest budget in 
Department’s allocation (55% of BE 2022 -23), three installments are released 
every year to the fa rmers generally in April, August & December which tend to 
impact the Monthly/Quarterly Expenditure Plan. 
 
Notwithstanding, special exemption was obtained from Ministry of Finance to 
incur expenditure in last quarter from savings of previous quarters’ expen diture plan.  
[Ministry of Agriculture & Farmers Welfare 
(Department of Agriculture & Farmers Welfare) 
OM. No. 6-14/2022-B+A Dated 04.07.2023] 
 
Comments of the Committee 
For comments of the Committee please refer to Para No.1. 7 of Chapter I of this 
Report. 
 
 
Utilization of Funds (2023-24)  
Recommendation No.3 
The Committee note that while replying to its concern about utilization of funds 
during 2022-23, the Department has submitted that taking into account the proposals in 
the pipeline, the Department is likely to utilise the entire Budget during the current FY 
2022-23, except the quota allocated under mandatory provision for NE States where the 
utilisation is restricted on account of low cultivable area, non -release of matching share 
by those States and community landholding. This, in turn, clearly indicates that the 
Department has admitted that it will not be able to fully utilize the funds allocated to it 
even before the close of Financial Year 2022 -23. The Committee ar e of the considered 
view that since the Department is aware of the reasons/factors, which hamper cent 
percent utilization of funds available, it should suitably modify its Schemes including the 
funding pattern as well as method of implementation, so that e ffective and optimal 
utilization of funds earmarked for Agriculture Sector can be ensured. The Committee 
feel that there are two major Crop seasons - Kharif and Rabi. The Department should 

10 
 
consider the release of funds for Centrally Sponsored Schemes in tw o instalments of 50 
percent each as was being done in the past instead of the present scheme of four equal 
instalments of 25% each, would reduce the time lag in implementation of the Schemes, 
reduce documentation time and will enable expeditious payments. The Committee feel 
that the Department may take up the matter with the Department of Expenditure for 
suitable modification of the existing guidelines in view of the fact that Agriculture is a 
State subject. The Committee would like to be apprised of the steps taken in this regard. 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
Pursuant to recommendation of the Committee, Department has taken necessary 
steps to maximize utilization of funds allocated during 2022 -23, as a result of which only 
Rs. 7908.75 crore remained unutilized w.r.t. RE 2022 -23. Such funds remained 
unutilized in FY 2022 -23, mainly on account of issues related to compliance of 
guidelines promulgated by Ministry of Finance with effect from 1 st July 2021 for all 
Centrally Sponsored Scheme (CSS) and w.e.f. 01.04.2022 for Central Sector (CS) 
schemes. Further, utilization of funds mandatorily allocated for NE Region is 
constrained due to low gross cropped area, community land holding and capacity 
constraints in NER. The Department has taken proactive steps in ensuring compliance 
of DoE guidelines and also optimal  utilization of funds allocated to NER, to the extent 
feasible. 
2. States have already been provided flexibility and autonomy for selection , 
approval and implementation of the projects under schemes like RKVY, as per their 
needs, to enable efficient utilization of resources as per local requirements. 
3. Further, in line with the recommendation of the Committee, Department has 
requested Ministry of Finance for allowing release of 50% in each installment for NE 
States and release of 50% in each installment for schemes of the Department  which are 
crop based and seasonal in nature, vide DO letter dated 17/03/2023. DoE vide OM 
dated 13/04/202 3 has provided flexibility for obtaining financial concurrence and 
administrative approval for release of 50% of funds earmarked in a CSS and release the 
funds in terms of DoE guidelines dated 23/03/21. 
[Ministry of Agriculture & Farmers Welfare 
(Department of Agriculture & Farmers Welfare) 
OM. No. 6-14/2022-B+A Dated 04.07.2023] 

11 
 
Status of Utilization Certificates (UCs) 
Recommendation No.6 
 
The Committee note that the amount of Utilization Certificate (UCs) pending with 
States and Union territories has shown an increase over the years between 2016 -17 
and 2021 -22. The Committee have noted that Rs 5926.72 Crore is pending as on 
30.12.2022 for the releases upto 2020-21, which depicts that the monitoring mechanism 
needs to be revamped and strengthened. The C ommittee feel that the increasing 
pendency of UCs is acting as a bottleneck in smooth implementation of the Centrally 
Sponsored Programmes/Schemes run by the Department as pending UCs deprive 
Nodal Agencies/States/Union Territories in getting further funds . The Committee, 
therefore, recommend the Department to seriously look into the matter of increasing 
pendency of Utilization Certificates and take up the same with States / Union territories / 
Implementing Nodal Agencies by way of exploring innovative meth ods like Information 
Technology tools or Artificial Intelligence enabled software to utilize the allocated funds 
within stipulated time and furnish the UCs in time so that the farmers living in these 
States and Union territories  are able to derive the rea l benefits of the Schemes at the 
ground level. 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
The amount of Utilization Certificate pending with States and UTs have 
reduced from Rs. 5926.72 Crores (as on 30.12.2022) to Rs. 5109.77 Crore (as on 
31.03.2023). The monitoring mecha nism has been revamped in recent years by the 
introduction of the concept of "Just in Time" release through PFMS by the 
Department of Expenditure, Ministry of Finance. The revised procedure for release of 
funds under Centrally sponsored Scheme (CSS) and Ce ntral Sector Schemes (CS) 
has been introduced w.e.f. 01 -07-2021 and 01 -04-2022 through SNA model and 
CNA model respectively. As per this revised procedure, releases to State 
Governments are made on the basis of utilization of 75% expenditure of the previou s 
releases. The data pertaining to these releases, its expenditure and unspent balance 
available with State Governments/ Implementing Agencies on real -time basis is 
tracked through various reports of PFMS. This has helped in reducing the float of 

12 
 
idle mone y in recent years and brought a lot of transparency and efficiency in the 
Public Financial Management.  
[Ministry of Agriculture & Farmers Welfare 
(Department of Agriculture & Farmers Welfare) 
OM. No. 6-14/2022-B+A Dated 04.07.2023] 
 
 
Increase in Farmers’ Income 
Recommendation No.7 
The Committee have been informed that increase in income of farmers is 
assessed on the basis of results of successful implementation of all the schemes and 
programmes of the Department. It has also been informed that apart from e nhancement 
in budget allocation for agriculture sector, a number of schemes are being implemented 
which include Pradhan Mantri Fasal  Bima Yojana, PM (KISAN) Yojana, Promotion of 
Farmers Producer Organizations, Institutional Credit for Agriculture Sector, e tc. The 
Committee have further been informed that despite significant stress on government 
finance on account of recovery of pandemic induced shock, global economic scenario, 
etc., the allocation of funds for the Department is on the higher side as compare d to 
many other Departments. 
The Committee, while appreciating all the Schemes run by the Government to 
increase farmers' income, recommend the Department to ensure effective 
implementation of all the Schemes intended for the welfare of farmers so that the  
Schemes have a tangible effect on the ground level and the farmer's condition is 
improved in a significant way. 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
The Department of Agriculture & Farmers Welfare agrees with the 
recommendation of the Hon'ble Committee and conveys its commitment to continue 
with efficient implementation of its various schemes and programmes for continuous 
improvement in overall agricultural situation in the country and in the economic 
condition of the farmers. 
[Ministry of Agriculture & Farmers Welfare 
(Department of Agriculture & Farmers Welfare) 
OM. No. 6-14/2022-B+A Dated 04.07.2023] 
   

13 
 
Pradhan Mantri Fasal Bima Yojna (PMFBY) 
Recommendation No.8 
A Budgetary Allocation of Rs.13625 Crore has been made for the implementation 
of the Pradhan Mantri Fas al Bima Yojna (PMFBY) for 2023 -24 against the RE of 
Rs.12375.76 Crore for 2022 -23.  As regards the lower allocation for the Scheme in 
2023-24, as compared to BE 2022-23 of Rs.15500 Crore, the Department of Agriculture 
and Farmers Welfare has stated that th e Scheme is demand driven and that based on 
the coverage and demand situation under the Scheme, additional funds, if required, 
may be sought at Revised Estimates 2023 -24 Stage. The Committee recommend that 
the Department of Agriculture and Farmers Welfare should review the implementation of 
the Scheme at regular intervals to assess the demand situation and fund s requirement 
for the Scheme. 
The Committee desire that the Department look into the reasons for delay in 
settlement of claims by Insurance Companies  and take necessary measures and make 
concerted efforts to address them in the best possible manner so that they are counted 
in best practices to be adopted globally and enhance the credibility of PMFBY among 
the Farmers manifold.  
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
Implementation of the scheme including financial/budget requirements is 
reviewed / monitored constantly through weekly video conferences, one to one 
meetings with the stakeholders on regular basis.    Requirement of additional funds, if 
any, is proposed at Revised Estimate Stage. 
The major work relating to the assessment of crop yield/crop loss for calculation 
of admissible claims are being performed by the concerned State Government or Joint 
Committee of State Government officials and concerned insurance co mpany.  Delay in 
furnishing of requisite yield data for calculation of claims, release of State Government 
share in premium subsidy and yield data disputes between insurance companies and 
States have been identified as major reasons for delay settlement of  claims.   Over the 
period Government had taken various steps like capturing of    yield data/Crop Cutting 
Experiments (CCEs) data through CCE -Agri App & uploaded it on the National Crop 
Insurance Portal (NCIP), allowing insurance companies to witness the conduct of CCEs, 

14 
 
provision of penalty etc. to improve timely settlement of the claims to farmers.    But the 
issue remained in existence in one way or the other. 
Taking cognizance of farmers’ welfare and to expedite the claim disbursal 
process of admissible crop loss claims, Ministry has come up with the DigiClaim Module 
through integration of National Crop Insurance Portal (NCIP) and Public Finance 
Management System (PFMS) w.e.f. Kharif 2022 season claims.   With this, all the 
Threshold Yield (TY) data and Ac tual Yield (AY) required for calculation of claims is 
being uploaded on NCIP by the States/insurance companies and claims are worked 
out/processed accurately in a time bound manner and paid directly to the respective 
bank accounts of insured farmers in a t ransparent and accountable manner.   Another 
noteworthy feature of this digital advancement is that farmers would be able to track the 
claim settlement process on their mobile phones in real -time and avail the scheme’s 
benefits.  Delay in settlement of cla ims would automatically be captured by the module 
and penalties would be imposed as per the provisions of the Operational Guidelines of 
the scheme.    Central Government and State Governments can also monitor the 
disbursement of claims/pending claims through this module. 
In last few years, various innovative technologies have been piloted and 
integrated with the scheme to make the process of yield estimation and crop loss 
assessment more accurate.     Following steps have also been taken by the Ministry for 
transparency and infusion of improved technology for better implementation of the 
scheme including timely settlement of claims: 
1. Yield Estimation through Technology (YESTECH)   - It is a technology based yield 
estimations mechanism which has been developed  after 2 years of rigorous testing and 
pilot runs across 100 districts of the country. Five finalized models for wheat and paddy 
crops, have been made available to states & UTs to adopt and implement. These 
models use various parameters such as Remote Sensing indices, Weather indices, crop 
phenological information, soil types etc.  Maharashtra and Madhya Pradesh are the first 
states to implement YESTECH from Kharif 2022, rest of the states are required to adopt 
from Kharif 2023 onwards with minimum 30% thre shold. The pilot studies are going on 
for development of models for other crops and as and when the models are finalized, 
the same shall be rolled -out for the states to adopt and implement from Kharif 2023 
onwards. 

15 
 
2.  Weather Information Network Data Syst em (WINDS)  – WINDS is a network of 
Automatic Weather Stations & Rain Gauges at Taluk/Block and Gram Panchayat level 
respectively to create a strong database of hyper -local weather data for the different 
Govt. and other entities to use for all farmer and fa rming oriented services. The data so 
collected will be used for claim assessment under Parametric Crop insurance, Yield 
estimation through Technology, Crop -Region specific Agriculture Advisories to the 
Farmers, Disaster Risk Resilience & Mitigation needs. The weather data so collected 
can help the Govt. immensely in decision support system and building resilience in the 
Indian Agriculture eco-system and help strengthen the rural-agrarian economy.  
3.  Collection of Real-time Photos and Observation of Crops (CROPIC) - CROPIC 
is a technique of taking photographs of crops from time to time over a cropping cycle 
using mobile based apps. These photographs will be used for validation of sown and 
insured crops, crop damage assessment at the time of any localized an d wide-spread 
calamity or climatic condition affecting the crops and also act as an input for 
Technology based yield estimation models.  
 Further technological advancements towards modernization of Schemes. 
 To resolve the issue of flow of funds from the Sta tes, creation of separate 
escrow account by the States/UTs has been started from Kharif 2023 season.   
 The Government has de -linked the  release of Central Government share in 
premium subsidy from release by the concerned State Govt.   This move shall 
help in early settlement of claims. 
 A digital Farmer Grievance Helpline & Redressal Portal has been developed by 
the Department and the beta version of the same was launched on pilot basis 
from the State of Chhattisgarh.   The Government is in the process of deve loping 
the portal on all India basis. 
 Land record integration of states like Maharashtra, Karnataka, Odisha, 
Rajasthan, Madhya Pradesh, Chhattisgarh, Andhra Pradesh and Tamil Nadu has 
been completed and accounts for more than 90% Insured Area pre -validated 
through e -land records.   This will help in reducing the disputes between State, 
Insurers and farmers. 
[Ministry of Agriculture & Farmers Welfare 
(Department of Agriculture & Farmers Welfare) 
OM. No. 6-14/2022-B+A Dated 04.07.2023] 

16 
 
National Agriculture Market (e-NAM) Scheme 
Recommendation No.11 
The Committee have been informed that e -NAM, the virtual market platform 
since its launch in April, 2016, is being regularly upgraded in terms of new technology, 
innovation, improving transparency in transactions,  digital payments  and user friendly 
features. In July, 2022, e-NAM platform through  launch of Platform of Platforms (PoPs) 
as holistic unified structure, has been providing single roof  for all value chain actors like 
farmers, FPOs, e -platform service pr oviders,  transport service providers, quality 
assaying service providers, value addition, processors, exporters, Fintech, storage, etc. 
and service platforms have been empanelled under the following 10 service categories 
on PoP module i.e. Quality Assayin g, Transportation, Warehousing, Fin -tech, Trading 
platforms, Agri advisory, Market information, Institutional buyers, Sorting and grading 
and Agri input aggregators. The Committee desire that integration of all Mandis pan 
India with e-NAM platform must be done at the earliest so that online transaction of agri-
commodities be done by the farmers even located at remote corners of the country to 
fetch good prices for their produce. Overall, this would result in a win -win situation for 
both the farmers and buyers. 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
During FY 2022-23, 361 additional mandis were integrated on e-NAM across 15 
States & 2 UTs. New States/UT who have integrated their respective mandis on e-NAM 
are Andaman &Nicobar Islands (1), Assam (3), Bihar (20), Goa (7), Nagaland (19) & 
Tripura (7). As on March 2023, total of 1361 mandis have been integrated with e-NAM 
across 23 States and 4 UTs. State-wise List may be seen at Annexure A. 
Efforts are being made to bring in additional proposals with DPR from 
States/UTs to integrate respective mandis with e-NAM. 
e-NAM Platforms of Platforms (PoP) module was launched during July 2022 to 
facilitate access of various Agri -tech Service Provider Platforms (pre -harvest & post -
harvest) like Quality Assaying, Transportation, Warehousing, Fintech, Trading, Market 
Information, Sorting, Grading and packaging, Agri Input aggregators, Agri advisory 
Services etc, through a single platform. So far, 80 service platforms have been 
empanelled. 

17 
 
To expand and onboard more service platforms on POP, webinars are being 
conducted periodically to explain concept, benefits, on  boarding process and salient 
features of Request for Quote (RFQ). In this regard, webinars have been conducted on 
30th Sep 2022, 31st Oct 2022, 14th Dec 2022 and 6th April, 2023. 
[Ministry of Agriculture & Farmers Welfare 
(Department of Agriculture & Farmers Welfare) 
OM. No. 6-14/2022-B+A Dated 04.07.2023] 
 
Smart Farming Practices 
Recommendation No.12 
The Committee have been informed that the Department has been promoting 
adoption of Kisan Drones by the farmers for application of pesticides and crop nutrient 
and Standard Operating Procedures(SOPs) containing concise instructions for effective 
and safe operations of drones for pesticide and nutrient application have been released. 
The Committee desire that Small and Marginalised Farmers including from SC/ST 
communities be provided adequate training in the latest technologies to enable them to 
harness the tangible benefits of thi s Scheme. The Committee also desire that the 
technological advancements in the field of Agriculture may be made available to farmers 
at affordable rates. 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
The four Farm Machinery Training and Testing Institutes (FMTTIs) located at 
Budni, Hisar, Garladinne and Biswanath  Chariali are imparting training to different 
categories of beneficiaries like farmers, technicians, under graduate engineers 
entrepreneurs on selection, operation, maintenance, energy conservation, and 
management of a gricultural machinery and equipment including Kisan Drones. The 
Farmers are reimbursed a stipend of Rs. 500 per week & to and fro travel expenses by 
normal mode of transport.    
(2) In order to promote new technology machines in agriculture financial 
assistance is provided to farmers for purchase of machines @ 50% of the cot of 
machine. In order to make available machines and equipments on rental basis 
establishment of Custom Hiring Centers  is promoted and financial assistance under 

18 
 
Sub-Mission on Agricultu ral Mechanization  is being provided to Farmers and Rural 
Youths as an entrepreneurs, FPOs, Cooperative Societies SHGs and Panchayats.  
 (3) In line with the Budget Announcement for 2022-23, the Ministry of Agriculture 
and Farmers Welfare is promoting the u se of  Kisan Drone s, for modernizing  the 
agriculture sector. The major steps taken by the Ministry to promote the Kisan Drones 
for their application in different agricultural activities are as follows: 
i. Kisan Drones are included in the Submission on Agric ultural Mechanization 
(SMAM) component of RKVY Scheme of the Ministry for providing financial assistance 
on the Procurement of Drones & organizing drone demonstrations. 
ii. During 2022-23, total funds of Rs 13198.50 Lakhs have already been released 
to 13 States Governments and ICAR. Out of the funds released, Rs 5250.00 lakhs has 
been released to ICAR to procure 300 nos of Kisan Drones and to organize  drone 
demonstrations in 75,000  ha of farmer's fields for spraying  pesticides and crop/soil 
nutrients.  
 iii. 201 Kisan Drones were purchased by ICAR Institutes/KVKs for 
demonstrations and conducted field demonstrations in a 10,037 ha area in the farmer's 
field.  
 iv. A Generic SOPs for Use of Drones with Pesticides and Soil/Crop nutrients 
and another  Crop S pecific SOPs for spraying in respect of 10 crops, have 
been released by Honourable Minister for Agriculture and Farmers W elfare and SOP is 
available in public domain.   
v. All 4 Farm Machinery Training and Testing Institutes (FMTTIs) of DA&FW, at 
Budni, Hi sar, Garladinne, and Biswanth  Chariali are being developed as DGCA 
approved Remote Pilot Training Organizations (RPTOs) for imparting Training to the 
farmers and users on application of Kisan Drones for spraying pesticides & crop 
nutrients and other activi ties in Agriculture.  All 4 FMTTIs at Budni, Hisar, Anantapur, 
and Biswanth  Chariali, together have organized 81 drone demonstrations till 31 st of 
March 2023 with a total participation of 14030 farmers, rural youth, and other 
Stakeholders. 
[Ministry of Agriculture & Farmers Welfare 
(Department of Agriculture & Farmers Welfare) 
OM. No. 6-14/2022-B+A Dated 04.07.2023] 
 

19 
 
CHAPTER - III 
  
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO NOT 
DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE GOVERNMENT’S REPLIES 
 
Modified Interest Subvention Scheme 
Recommendation No.9 
A budgetary provision of Rs.23000 Crore for 2023 -24 has been made for the 
implementation of Modified Interest Subvention Scheme, a Central Sector Scheme, fully 
funded by the Government of India to provide concessional  crop loans to farmers 
through Kisan Credit Cards (KCCs). The RE 2022 -23 for the Scheme is Rs.22000 
Crore. The Committee desire that Farmers who belong to Small or Marginalised 
sections including SC and Tribal Categories be provided adequate support to ena ble 
them to avail maximum benefits under the Scheme. Moreover, all Financial Institutions, 
be it Scheduled Commercial Banks, Small Finance Banks, etc., be advised regularly to 
disseminate the details of the Scheme, especially in remote / backward areas of the 
country so that the Farmers residing in these areas are able to avail the benefits of the 
Scheme. Moreover, third party audit of the Scheme needs to be done on a regular basis 
to know the shortcomings and also keep improving the Operational Guidelines on 
continued basis. 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
The recommendation of the Committee has been noted. In this regard it is 
informed that Modified Interest Subvention Scheme was launched in the year 2006 -07 
with a view to provide short term Agri -loans availed by  farmers through KCC for their 
working capital requirements at concessional rate of interest. This Department provides 
administrative approval along with guidelines of the scheme for particular scheme year 
to RBI/NABARD. RBI/NABARD further disseminates the same to all Scheduled 
Commercial Banks (SCBs)/ Small Finance Banks / RRBs/ Cooperatives/ Computerized 
PACS ceded with SCBs. 
To bring the maximum number of farmers under KCC so that they can get loan at 
a cheaper rate through the ISS scheme, the Government has been running a campaign 
for saturation of KCC to farmers since, February, 2020 to cover all left over farmers with 

20 
 
special focus on PM -KISAN beneficiaries.  Government has also taken the following 
steps to make the credit system easy for the farmers inc luding SC and Tribal 
Categories:   
 All the charges including processing fee, inspection, ledger folio charges, 
service charges for loans upto Rs.3.00 lakh were waived off.  
 Collateral free loan limit for short term agri -credit has been raised from Rs.1.00 
lakh to Rs.1.60 lakh by RBI.  
 State Governments have been advised  to hold bank -wise and village wise 
camps to  collect KCC application forms from eligible farmers and the 
applications collected therein to be submitted to the Bank’s branch.  
 KCC is to be issued within 14 days from the receipt of completed application.  
 The progress is to be monitored by State Level Bankers Committee (SLBC).  
 The KCC has been extended to the farmers doing allied activities including 
Animal Husbandry, dairying and fisheries. 
 
These enabled farmers  to gain access to institutional credit at concessional 
interest rate. Under the ATMA NIRBHAR BHARAT campaign, the Government of India 
committed to providing 2.5 crore new KCCs to farmers. This was to ensure availability 
of concessional loans to farmers in times of crisis and to bolster the flow of about 2 lakh 
crores in rural economy. Target to cover 2.5 crore farmers was achieved on 15.10.2021 
and as on 21.04.2023, 409.29 lakh new KCC applications have been sanctioned with a 
sanctioned credit limit of Rs. 4,83,815crore as part of the drive. 
Further it is informed that in order to assess the effectiveness of the Interest 
Subvention scheme, especially for small and marginal farmers, third party evaluation of 
ISS was conducted during 2020.  
[Ministry of Agriculture & Farmers Welfare 
(Department of Agriculture & Farmers Welfare) 
OM. No. 6-14/2022-B+A Dated 04.07.2023] 
 
Formation And Promotion Of Farmers Producer Organization (FPOs) 
Recommendation No.10 
The Committee have been informed that FPOs would be working on the value 
addition, processing and marketing of the agri -produce which in turn would ensure 

21 
 
remunerative prices of the value -added products and consequently would improve the 
income of the memb ers. The Committee feel that these FPOs would require 
professionals for their smooth functioning and hence capacity building programmes for 
the Office bearers of FPO may be conducted. Similarly, the members may be trained in 
adequate skills related to valu e addition, storage of agri - products and latest tools 
related to Information Technology. Appropriate linkages between Financial Institutions 
and FPOs be made for actual realisation of the benefits of the Scheme. The Committee 
recommend that timely inputs , skilled manpower & expertise be shared with FPOs so 
that these are successful in achieving their objective. 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
Following provisions were made in Central sector scheme for Formation and 
Promotion of 10,000 FPOs scheme to encourage an d assist FPOs in marketing and 
value addition: 
a) Implementing Agencies to set up Cluster- Based Business Organizations (CBBOs) at the 
State/Cluster level to form and promote FPOs as per their requirements. The 
Implementing Agencies will apply due diligence to ensure that professionally competent 
CBBOs are transparently engaged & have experience in promotion and professional 
supports to FPOs. 
b) The CBBOs to be supported with five categories of specialists from the domain of (i) 
Crop husbandry; (ii) Agri. marketing / Value addition and processing; (iii) Social 
mobilization; (iv) Law & Accounts; and (v) IT/MIS in agriculture & agriculture marketing. 
The CBBOs with requisite number of other technical and supporting staff to be 
housed/operated from their own offices in respective States or from offices of respective 
Implementing Agencies, which have selected them. 
c) The CBBOs should be selected by considering professional experience and 
exposure in formation of FPOs in agriculture and allied sector and providing 
handholding support to them. 
d) FPOs to be encouraged for promoting processing, branding, marketing, and export of 
the product for better value realization. There may be more than one cluste r for one 
product in one district and a cluster also may extend beyond a district. However, to 
be an FPO economically sustainable and diversify risk & enhance returns, the FPO will 

22 
 
also have additional product and service mix; so that there are enough activities and 
engagements with the members throughout the year and FPOs is ensured with 
appropriate processing & assured marketing linkages on sustainable basis 
for remunerative prices for improving the income of the members as well as to 
developing processing and value addition within the country. 
e) Ongoing schemes of Government to be used in convergence to enhance the cost 
effectiveness of FPOs in production and raising productivity and to meet the cost of 
infrastructure requirement of the FPOs. Convergence of FPOs into other schemes for 
creation of infrastructure like Custom Hiring Centre/Common Facilitation Centre with 
machinery/equipment relating to production and post -production, value addition and 
farm level processing, storage and other activities to make FPOs sustainable and 
economically viable. 
[Ministry of Agriculture & Farmers Welfare 
(Department of Agriculture & Farmers Welfare) 
OM. No. 6-14/2022-B+A Dated 04.07.2023] 
 
  

23 
 
CHAPTER - IV 
  
OBSERVATIONS/ RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF 
THE GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE 
 
Budgetary Allocation   
Recommendation No. 2      
  
The Committee note that the Department has admitted in its replies that the 
proportion of Budgetary Allocations made in favour of the Department in terms of the 
percentage out of the total budget of the Government of India during the years 2020 -21, 
2021-22, 2022-23 and 2023-24 stood at 4.41%, 3.53%, 3.14 %  and 2.57% respectively. 
The total Budget outlay of the Central Government in 2020 -21 was Rs. 30,42,230.09 
Crore, which increased to Rs. 45,03,097.45 Crore in 2023 -24. Taking into account the 
prominent role played by Agriculture in rural livelihood, employment generation and food 
security of the country, the Committee recommend the Department to take up the issue 
of budgetary allocation in percentage terms out of Central Pool with the Ministry of 
Finance and ensure that trend is reversed from the next Budget onwards. 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
The reduction in budgetary allocation in BE 2023 -24 as compared to BE 2022-23 
is on account of reduced requirement of Rs. 8000 crores in PM -KISAN in next FY. The 
reduction in requirement is primarily due to exercise undertaken by Department for 
updating the PM -KISAN database through use of technology including integration with 
UIDAI, Income Tax, Land Records Database. This resulted in reduction in number of 
beneficiaries getting benefits under the Scheme while ensuring that no eligible 
beneficiary is left out. The exercise has led to significant savings for Government of 
India. Further, Budget allocation in other schemes is made keeping in view the priorities 
accorded by the Union Government to agriculture sector in the country and  the action 
plan of Department. 
[Ministry of Agriculture & Farmers Welfare 
(Department of Agriculture & Farmers Welfare) 
OM. No. 6-14/2022-B+A Dated 04.07.2023] 
 
 
 

24 
 
Comments of the Committee 
For comments of the Committee please refer to Para No.1. 10 of Chapter I of this 
Report. 
 
Supplementary Demands for Grants of the Department 
Recommendation No.5 
The Committee have been informed that the Department, on the one hand, has 
made provisions for the Supplementary Demands of Rs.  22,245.51Crore during 2022 -
23 (tentative) and on the other, is surrendering funds not utilized by it amounting to Rs. 
19762.05 Crore. The Committee are constrained to note that raising supplementary 
demands on one hand and surrender of funds on the other are incompatible and reflects 
on the expenditure planning done by the Department. The Committee, therefore, desire 
the Department to undertake the planning of utilization of allocated funds seriously and 
ensure expenditure of t he funds in the planned and stipulated manner. The Committee 
are of the considered opinion that sticking to implementing Monthly Expenditure 
Plan/Quarterly Expenditure Plan (MEP/QEP) in respect of Central Sector Schemes will 
go a long way in solving the pr oblem of surrender of funds as well as  raising 
Supplementary Demands. 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
The final surrender intimated by the Department to Ministry of Finance was 
Rs.21,005.13 crore out of which Rs.13,745.47 crore was mandatory surrender(BE -RE) 
i.e. to account for reduction of Budget at RE stage. The actual surrender was 
Rs.7259.66 crore with reference to RE. Token Supplementary Demand was sought for 
re-appropriation of savings within the grant primarily to meet additional committed 
expenditure in Ag riculture Marketing component of Krishonnati Yojana (Rs.660 crore), 
Market Intervention Scheme (Rs.3000 crore), Distribution of Pulses to State/Union 
Territories for Welfare Schemes(Rs.151 crore) & Modified Interest Subvention Scheme 
(Rs.2000 crore). Details are at Annexure-B. 
[Ministry of Agriculture & Farmers Welfare 
(Department of Agriculture & Farmers Welfare) 
OM. No. 6-14/2022-B+A Dated 04.07.2023] 
 
 

25 
 
Comments of the Committee 
For comments of the Committee please refer to Para No.1. 13 of Chapter I of this 
Report. 
  

26 
 
CHAPTER - V 
  
OBSERVATIONS/ RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH FINAL REPLIES 
OF GOVERNMENT ARE STILL AWAITED  
 
Funds Surrendered by the Department 
Recommendation No.5 
The Committee note from the reply of the Department that funds have been 
surrendered amounting to Rs. 23,824.54 Crore, Rs. 429.22 Crore and Rs.19,762.05 
Crore during 2020 -21, 2021 -22 and 2022 -23(Tentative) respectively. That means Rs. 
44,015.81 Crore in total have been surrendere d by the Department in these years. The 
Committee have been informed that the surrender of funds is mainly on account of less 
requirement under NES (North Eastern States), SCSP (Schedule Caste Sub -Plan) and 
Tribal Area Sub -Plan (TASP) Components. The Commi ttee feel that the practice of 
surrender of funds must be avoided by all means henceforth so that the tangible 
benefits accrued from the Schemes are allowed to percolate to the ground level in an 
optimum manner. The Committee, therefore, recommend the Depa rtment to identify 
avoidable reasons leading to surrender of funds and take corrective measures to ensure 
that the funds are utilized fully and efficiently.  
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
Surrender by the Department in the years mentioned above is primarily on account of 
following: 
(i) Due to unspent balance with States/Implementing Agencies from releases 
made in earlier years. 
(ii) Due to teething issues in ensuring adoption and compliance of Department of 
Expenditure’s guidelines for new procedure of fund release, Stat es could not 
furnish requisite documents and also there were unspent balance with 
implementing agencies. SNA mapping on PFMS portal for many States also 
took time whereby funds could not be released to many States/UTs. 
(iii) Utilization of mandatory 10% Gross Bu dgetary Support allocation for North 
Eastern States is constrained on account of low capacity, saturation in 
entitlement based scheme, less Gross Cropped Area as compared to the 
national average and community land holding in NE States. 

27 
 
2.  The Department h as done comprehensive brainstorming with the NE State 
Governments, Ministry of Development of North East Region (DoNER) as well as with 
the Department of Expenditure over the reasons for under -utilization of funds allocated 
for NE Region in various schemes  and possible corrective measures for improving the 
same in respect of North East States.  
3.  The Department proposes the following areas of interventions, which have 
already been highlighted to the NE State Governments and the Ministry of DONER in 
various interactions, to enable optimum utilization of allocated budget in NE States: 
(i) In case of Central Sector Schemes like PM KISAN, PMFBY, etc, NE States 
should ensure saturation in terms of coverage of all eligible farmers, which may 
result in increased expenditure under these entitlement -based schemes. In case 
there are specific issues  relating to land records maintenance, etc hindering 
implementation of these schemes, these should be brought to the notice of 
DA&FW for necessary action, if any. 
(ii) Flexibility has been provided under RKVY where, due to one size fit all or 
uniformity of the scheme guidelines, the states are finding it difficult to spend 
funds, thereby allowing NE States to choose schemes suitable to them on DPR 
basis. 
 
[Ministry of Agriculture & Farmers Welfare 
(Department of Agriculture & Farmers Welfare) 
OM. No. 6-14/2022-B+A Dated 04.07.2023] 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI;                                                                    P.C. GADDIGOUDAR 
08 August, 2023                                                                  Chairperson                            
17 Sravana, 1945 (Saka)                             Standing Committee on Agriculture,  
            Animal Husbandry and Food Processing 
  

28 
 
Annexure A 
No. of Mandis integrated on e-NAM  
(as on March 2023) 
 STATE Mandis Integrated 
 
 1 Andhra Pradesh 33 
2 Assam 3 
3 Bihar 20 
4 Chhattisgarh 20 
5 Gujarat 144 
6 Goa 7 
7 Haryana 108 
8 Himachal Pradesh 38 
9 Jharkhand 19 
10 Karnataka 5 
11 Kerala 6 
12 Madhya Pradesh 136 
13 Maharashtra 118 
14 Nagaland 19 
15 Odisha 66 
16 Punjab 79 
17 Rajasthan 145 
18 Tamil Nadu 157 
19 Telangana 57 
20 Tripura 7 
21 Uttar Pradesh 125 
22 Uttarakhand 16 
23 West Bengal 18 
UNION TERRITORY 
24 Andaman and Nicobar Islands 1 
25 Chandigarh 1 
26 Jammu & Kashmir 11 
27 Puducherry 2 
 TOTAL 1361 
 
 

29 
 
Annexure-B 
Grant No. 1-Department of Agriculture & Farmers Welfare 
Scheme wise Surrender 2022-23 
Rs. In Crore 
Name of Mission/Scheme Surrender 
2022-23 
(A)-1.01Secretariat  19.27 
(B)-1.02International Co-operation 2.30 
(C)-1.03Other Attached and Subordinate Offices 48.20 
(D)-2.01Pradhan Mantri FasalBimaYojna (PMFBY) 2688.57 
(E)-4Modified Interest Subvention Scheme (MISS)   22.08 
(F)-5Implementation of MIS/PSS 486.29 
(G)-6Pradhan Mantri AnnadataAaySanrakshan Abhiyan (PM-AASHA) 0.97 
(H)-7Distribution of Pulses  to State/ Union territories for Welfare Schemes 0.00 
(I)-9Pradhan Mantri Kisan Samman Nidhi (PM-KISAN) 9745.82 
(J)-10Pradhan Mantri Kisan MandhanYojna (PM-KMY) 49.95 
(K)-11Formation and Promotion of Farmers Producers Organizations 373.89 
(L)-12Agriculture Infrastructure Fund 286.14 
(M)-13National Beekeeping Honey Mission (NBHM) 54.99 
(N)-14Protection of Plant Varieties and Farmer's Rights 1.29 
(O)-15National Institute of Plant Health Management 7.34 
(P)-16National Institute of Agricultural Extension Management (MANAGE) 0.69 
(R)-18Choudhary Charan Singh National Institute of Agricultural Marketing 1.74 
(S)-44Rashtriya Krishi Vikas Yojna 3837.33 
(T)-46.01Food and Nutrition Security  574.29 
(U)-46.02Edible Oil - Oil Palm   746.74 
(V)-46.03Edible Oil - Oil Seeds   321.27 
(W)-46.04Organic Value Chain Development for NE Region 89.55 
(X)-46.05Integrated Development of Horticulture 956.76 
(Y)-46.06Seeds & Planting Material 155.87 
(Z)-46.07Agriculture Extension 249.36 
(ZA)-46.08Digital Agriculture  38.51 
(ZB)-46.09Agriculture Census and Statistics 55.16 
(ZC)-46.1Agricultural Marketing 190.78 
Grand Total 21005.13 
 
  

30 
 
ANNEXURE  
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE, ANIMAL HUSBANDRY AND FOOD 
PROCESSING BRANCH 
(2022-23) 
 
MINUTES OF THE NINETEENTH SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE 
  
***** 
 
The Committee sat on Tuesday, the 08 August, 2023 from 1500 hrs.                              
to 1530 hrs. in Hon'ble Chairperson's Chamber, Room No. 103, 1st Floor, Block - B, 
PHA Extn., New Delhi.        
                                                                 
PRESENT 
 
Shri P.C. Gaddigoudar, Chairperson 
 
MEMBERS 
 
LOK SABHA 
 
 2.  Shri A. Ganeshamurthi 
3. Shri Mohan Mandavi 
4. Shri Devji Mansingram Patel 
5.  Smt. Sharda Anilkumar Patel 
6. Shri Bheemrao Baswanthrao Patil 
7. Shri Shriniwas Dadasaheb Patil 
8. Mohammad Sadique 
9. Shri Devendra Singh alias Bhole Singh 
10. Shri Virendra Singh 
11. Shri V.K. Sreekandan 
   
 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
 12. Smt. Ramilaben Becharbhai Bara 
 13. Shri Masthan Rao Beeda 
 14. Dr. Anil Sukhdeorao Bonde 
 15. Shri Kailash Soni 

31 
 
 16. Shri Ram Nath Thakur 
 17. Shri Vaiko 
 
 
SECRETARIAT 
  
 1. Shri Shiv Kumar   - Additional Secretary 
 2. Shri Uttam Chand Bharadwaj - Director 
 3. Shri Prem Ranjan   - Deputy Secretary 
 4. Shri N. Amarathiagan  - Under Secretary 
 
2. At the outset, Chairperson  welcomed the Members to the Sitting of the 
Committee. Thereafter, the Committee took up for consideration the following Draft 
Action Taken Reports:  
 
(i)  Draft Action Taken Report on Action -taken by the Government on the 
Observations / Recommendations co ntained in the Fifty -First Report of the 
Committee on ‘Demands for Grants (2023 -24)’, pertaining to the Ministry of 
Agriculture and Farmers Welfare (Department of Agriculture and Farmers 
Welfare); 
 
*(ii)  XXXX   XXXX   XXXX   XXXX;  
 
*(iii) XXXX   XXXX   XXXX   XXXX; 
 
*(iv) XXXX   XXXX   XXXX   XXXX; 
 
*(v) XXXX   XXXX   XXXX   XXXX; and 
 
*(vi) XXXX   XXXX   XXXX   XXXX; 
 
3. After some deliberations, the Committee adopted the Draft Action Taken Reports 
without any modifications and the Committee authorized the Chairperson to finalize and 
present these Reports to Parliament.  
 
 
The Committee then adjourned.  
 
* Matter not related to this Report. 
 
  

32 
 
 
APPENDIX - I 
 
(Vide Para 4 of Introduction of the Report) 
 
ANALYSIS OF ACTION TAKEN BY GOVERNMENT ON THE OBSERVATIONS / 
RECOMMENDATIONS CONTAINED IN THE FIFTY FIRST REPORT (17 TH LOK 
SABHA) OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE, ANIMAL 
HUSBANDRY AND FOOD PROCESSING (2022-23) 
  
(i)  Total number of Recommendations              12 
(ii) Observations/ Recommendations that have been 
Accepted by the Government  
 Para Nos. 1,3,6,7,8,11 and 12    
Total          07    
Percentage                    58.33% 
(iii) Observations/ Recommendations which the Committee 
do not desire to pursue in view of the Government’s replies  
Para Nos.     9 and 10         
Total                     02 
Percentage                     16.67% 
(iv) Observations/ Recommendations in respect of which replies 
 of the Government have not been accepted by the Committee 
Para No. 2 and 5  
Total            02 
Percentage                                      16.67% 
(v) Observations/ Recommendations in respect of which  
 Final replies of the Government are still awaited 
Para Nos.       4  
Total                     01  
Percentage                     08.33%  
 