 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE, ANIMAL HUSBANDRY  
AND FOOD PROCESSING 
 
(2022-2023) 
                  
         
SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA 
          
         
                                 
 
MINISTRY OF AGRICULTURE AND FARMERS WELFARE  
(DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURAL RESEARCH AND EDUCATION) 
              
 
 
'DEMANDS FOR GRANTS (2023-24)' 
 
 
 
 
{Action-taken by the Government on the Observations / Recommendations 
contained in the Fifty-Second Report (Seventeenth Lok Sabha) of the Standing 
Committee on Agriculture, Animal Husbandry and Food Processing (2022-23)} 
 
         
 
 
        
SIXTY- FIRST REPORT 
 
  
 
         
               
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
AUGUST,2023/SRAVANA,1945 (SAKA) 
 
 
 
61 

 
 
SIXTY- FIRST REPORT 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE, ANIMAL HUSBANDRY  
AND FOOD PROCESSING 
 
(2022-2023) 
          
 
SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA 
         
         
         
MINISTRY OF AGRICULTURE AND FARMERS WELFARE  
(DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURAL RESEARCH AND EDUCATION) 
              
 
 
'DEMANDS FOR GRANTS (2023-24)' 
 
 
 
 
{Action-taken by the Government on the Observations / Recommendations 
contained in the Fifty-Second Report (Seventeenth Lok Sabha) of the Standing 
Committee on Agriculture, Animal Husbandry and Food Processing (2022-23)} 
 
         
        
            Presented to Lok Sabha on   10.08.2023 
            Laid on the Table of Rajya Sabha on 10.08.2023 
 
 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
AUGUST,2023/SRAVANA,1945 (SAKA) 
 

 
 
COA No.  
 
 
         
         
         
         
         
         
 
         
         
        
         
         
         
         
         
 
 
 
         
     
                     
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
© 2023 By Lok Sabha Secretariat 
 
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of Business in Lok 
Sabha (Sixteenth Edition) and Printed by Lok Sabha Secretariat 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
<CONTENTS> 
  Page No. 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE (2022-23) (iii) 
INTRODUCTION      (v) 
   
CHAPTER I  Report …………………………………………   
CHAPTER II Observations/Recommendations that have been accepted by 
the Government 
  
CHAPTER III Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not 
desire to pursue in view of the Government’s replies  
  
CHAPTER IV Observations/Recommendations in respect of  which replies of 
the Government have not been accepted by the Committee  
  
CHAPTER V Observations/Recommendations in respect of which final replies 
of the Government are still awaited  
  
  
ANNEXURE 
 
 
Minutes of the 19th Sitting of the Committee held on 08.08.2023   
    APPENDIX  
Analysis of Action Taken by the Government on the Observations / 
Recommendations contained in the Fifty -Second Report (Seventeenth Lok 
Sabha) of the Standing Committee on Agriculture, Animal Husbandry and Food 
Processing (2022-23). 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 

 
COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE, ANIMAL 
HUSBANDRY AND FOOD PROCESSING (2022-23) 
 
Shri P.C. Gaddigoudar-   Chairperson 
MEMBERS 
 
LOK SABHA 
 
 2. Shri Horen Sing Bey 
  3.  Shri A. Ganeshamurthi 
 4. Shri Kanakmal Katara 
 5. Shri Abu Taher Khan 
 6. Shri Ram Mohan Naidu Kinjarapu 
 7. Shri Mohan Mandavi 
 8. Shri Devji Mansingram Patel 
9. Smt. Sharda Anilkumar Patel 
10. Shri Bheemrao Baswanthrao Patil 
11. Shri Shriniwas Dadasaheb Patil 
12. Shri Vinayak Bhaurao Raut 
13. Shri Pocha Brahmananda Reddy 
14. Shri Rajiv Pratap Rudy 
15. Mohammad Sadique 
16. Shri Devendra Singh alias Bhole Singh 
17. Shri Virendra Singh 
18. Shri V.K. Sreekandan 
19. Shri Ram Kripal Yadav 
20.  VACANT# 
21. VACANT* 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
 
22. Smt. Ramilaben Becharbhai Bara 
23. Shri Masthan Rao Beeda 
24. Dr. Anil Sukhdeorao Bonde 
25. Shri S. Kalyanasundaram 
26. Shri Surendra Singh Nagar 
27. Shri Kailash Soni  
28. Shri Randeep Singh Surjewala 
29. Shri Ram Nath Thakur 
30. Shri Vaiko 
31. Shri Harnath Singh Yadav  
 
 
 
# Vacant w.e.f. 10.10.2022 due to demise of Shri Mulayam Singh Yadav on 10.1 0.2022. 
[Bulletin- Part II, Para No. 5316 dated 14.10.2022]. 
*Vacant w.e.f.29.04.2023 due to disqualification of Shri Afzal Ansari from Lok Sabha 
Membership from the date of his conviction in terms of the provision of Article 102(1)(e) of the 
Constitution of India read with Section 8 of the Representation of the People Act, 
1951[Notification No. 21/4(6)/2023/TO(B) Dated - 01.05.2023]. 
 
(iii) 
 
 

 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
 
1. Shri Shiv Kumar    - Additional Secretary 
2. Shri Uttam Chand Bharadwaj  - Director 
3. Shri Prem Ranjan    - Deputy Secretary 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(iv) 

 
  INTRODUCTION 
         
I, the Chairperson , Standing Committee on Agriculture, Animal Husbandry and 
Food Processing (2022-23), having been authorized by the Committee to submit the 
Report on their behalf, present this Sixty-First Report on Action taken by the 
Government on the Observations/Recommendations contained in the Fifty-Second 
Report (Seventeenth Lok Sabha ) of the Standing Committee on Agriculture, Animal 
Husbandry and Food Pro cessing (2022 -23) on 'Demands for Grants ( 2023-24)' 
pertaining to the Ministry of Agriculture and Farmers Welfare (Department of 
Agricultural Research and Education). 
 
2. The Fifty-Second Report (Seventeenth Lok Sabha) of the Standing Committee 
on Agricult ure, Animal Hus bandry and Food Processing (2022 -23) on 'Demands for 
Grants ( 2023-24)' pertaining to the Ministry of Agriculture and Farmers Welfare 
(Department of Agricultural Research and Education ) was presented to Lok Sabha on 
13 March, 2023 and laid on the Table of Rajya Sabha on  14 March, 2023. The Action 
Taken Notes on the Report were received on 17.05.2023. 
 
3. The Report was considered and adopted by the Comm ittee at their Sitting held 
on   08.08.2023. 
 
4. An Analysis of the action t aken by the Gove rnment on the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in the Fifty-Second Report (Seventeenth 
Lok Sabha) of the Committee is given in Appendix.  
  
            
   
 
 
     
 
NEW DELHI;        P.C. GADDIGOUDAR 
08 August, 2023                                       Chairperson, 
17 Shravana, 1945(Saka)                        Standing Committee on Agriculture,  
      Animal Husbandry and Food Processing  
 
 
 
 
 
(v) 

1 
 
CHAPTER I 
REPORT 
 
This Report of the Standing Committee on Agriculture , Animal Husbandry and 
Food Processing  deals with the Action -taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in the Fifty-Second Report (Seventeenth 
Lok Sabha) of the Standing Committee on Agriculture , Animal Husbandry and Food 
Processing (2022-23) on ' Demands for Grants (202 3-24)' pertaining to the Ministry of 
Agriculture and Farmers Welfare (Department of Agricultural Research and Education) 
which was presented to the  Lok Sabha on 13.03.2023 and Laid on the Table of Rajya 
Sabha on 14.03.2023. 
  
1.2 The Ministry of Agriculture and Farmers Welfare (Department of Agricultural 
Research and Education) has furnished Action -taken Replies in respect of all the 13 
Observations/Recommendations contained in the Report. These have been categorized 
as under: 
 
(i) Observations/Recommendations that have been accepted by the Government: 
     Recommendation Nos. 1,2,3,4,5,6,7, 11 and 12 
Total - 09 
Chapter - II 
 
(ii) Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to pursue in  
 view of the Government's Replies: 
 Recommendation No. NIL 
Total - 00 
Chapter - III 
 
(iii) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which Replies of the  Government 
 have not been accepted by the Committee: 
 Recommendation No. 13 
Total - 01 
Chapter - IV 
 
  

2 
 
(iv) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which final replies of the 
 Government are still awaited: 
 Recommendation No. 8,9 and 10 
Total - 03 
Chapter - V 
  
1.3  The Committee desire that utmost importance would be given by the 
Ministry of Agriculture and Farmers Welfare (Department of Agricultural Research 
and Education) to implement the Observations/Recommendations accepted by 
the Government. In cases, where it is not possible for the Ministry /Department to 
implement the Recommendations in letter and spirit for any reason, the matter 
may be intimated in writing  to the Committee with the reasons for non -
implementation. The Commi ttee desire that further Action -taken Note s on the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in Chapter - I and F inal Action-taken 
Replies in respect of Recommendations contained in Chapter - V of this Report 
be furnished to them at an early date. 
 
1.4  The Committee will now  deal with the Action-taken by the Government on some 
of the Recommendations in the succeeding paragraphs. 
  
A.   Preparedness to tackle spread of Disease in Animals    
 Recommendation (Serial No. 8) 
 
 1.5    The Committee had observed/recommended as under:— 
"The Committee note that some of the focused research areas in Animal Science 
are preventive health care, vaccine production, handling emerging diseases, 
surveillance and forecasting of diseases among livestock and poultry. The Committee 
have been appri sed that the research on veterinary biologicals in the  ICAR has led to 
successful eradication of  important diseases viz,. rinderpest and contagious bovine 
pleuropneumonia from the country. ICAR has developed vaccines for economically 
important diseases for  cattle in the country viz.,  Foot and Mouth Disease, Anthrax 
Spore, Black Quarter (BQ), HaemorrhagicSepticaemia (HS), Brucella Abortus (S -19 
Strain), Buffalo pox, Infectious Bovine Rhinotracheitis   and Lumpy Skin Disease. The 
Committee are also aware about  death of cattle on large scale in various regions of the 

3 
 
country last year due to spread of Lumpy Skin Disease resulting in economic loss and 
hardships to animal farmers. The Committee, therefore, recommend the Department to 
prepare itself to prevent spre ad of diseases among livestock and poultry in the country 
and if spread of disease occurs, prompt steps be taken to prevent its further spread on 
large scale so as to minimize the losses." 
 
 1.6 In its Action taken reply, the Department has stated as under:- 
"Prompt steps have been taken by ICAR for prevention of diseases in animals as 
various vaccines and diagnostics have been developed to tackle economically important 
diseases of animals. Recently, Lumpy Skin Disease (LSD) affected cattle on large scale 
basis in various states of the country. Many studies were carried on LSD through 
surveillance, sero -monitoring and identification of the etiological agent. The LSD 
vaccine production technology has been transferred to the four firms.  Regulatory 
approvals have been provided by DCGI and DAHD also.  The Biovet has submitted 
formal application cum dossier to DCGI Office, Delhi to issue manufacturing license, 
NOC (No Objection Certificate). Quality control testing of LSD vaccine has been carried 
out by IVRI, Izatnag ar and the Biovet conducted complete animal trials in -house on 
safety, reversion to virulence, efficacy etc. on LSD vaccine, so that it is available in the 
market. " 
 
1.7  The Committee note d that some of the focused research areas in Animal 
Science are preventive health care, vaccine production, handling emerging 
diseases, surveillance and forecasting of dise ase among livestock and poultry, 
however, various regions of the country witnessed death of cattle on large scale 
last year due to spread of Lumpy S kin Disease resulting in economic loss and 
hardships to animal farmers.  The Committee had, therefore, recommended the 
Department to prepare itself to prevent spread of diseases among livestock and 
poultry in the country and if spread of disease occurs, pro mpt steps be taken to 
prevent its further spread on large scale so as to minimize the losses.  

4 
 
The Department in its Action -taken reply has submitted that prompt steps 
have been taken by ICAR for prevention of disease s in animals as various 
vaccines and di agnostics have been developed to tackle economically important 
diseases of animals. The Department further submitted  about studies carried on 
Lumpy Skin Disease ( LSD) through surveillance, sero-monitoring and 
identification of the etiological agent; transf er of the LSD vaccine production 
technology to firms, Regulatory approvals, Quality Control Testing of LSD 
vaccine etc so that it is available in the market. The Committee, however, note 
that the reply of the Department is silent on its preparedness to pre vent spread of 
diseases like LSD in future among livestock and poultry in the country. 
The Committee, therefore, reiterate their earlier recommendation to the 
Department to prepare itself to prevent spread of diseases among livestock and 
poultry in the cou ntry and if spread of disease occurs, prompt steps be taken to 
prevent its further spread on large scale so as to minimize the losses. 
 
B.    Characterization, Cataloguing and Registration of Animal Genetic 
 Resources of the Country 
 Recommendation (Serial No.9) 
 
1.8     The Committee had observed/recommended as under:— 
"The Committee note that one of the focused research areas in animal science is 
characterization and registration of new populations of indigenous livestock, poultry and 
dogs. The Committee have been apprised that the ICAR has established a standard 
process of characterization, cataloguing and registration   of animal genetic resources of 
the Country, which has been appreciated by UN recently. Department has launched 
“Mission toward  non-descript Animal Genetic Resources (AnGR) in India” to 
characterize livestock, poultry and dog breeds. Under the Mission, registration of a total 
number of 212 breeds of livestock, poultry and dogs has been completed. 

5 
 
The Committee, therefore, recommen d the Department to make best efforts to 
achieve the targets set under "Mission toward non -descript AnGR in India" so that all 
the indigenous livestock, poultry and dog breeds of the country would get registered." 
 
1.9   In its Action Taken Reply, the Department has stated as under:- 
"Department registered 10 native livestock breeds of 5 states during 2022 -23. 
The breeds include 3 cattle breeds, 1 buffalo, 3 goats and 3 pig breeds. The 
characterization of 8 new native populations of 6 states/UTs has bee n carried out. The 
Animal Genetic Resources (AnGR) survey was conducted in 9 states (Arunachal 
Pradesh, Nagaland, Tripura, Tamil Nadu, Odisha, HP, UP, Bihar, Rajasthan), Ladakh 
(UT) and Organized in four State Interface meets (Madhya Pradesh, West Bengal, 
Himachal Pradesh, Bihar). Department has initiated 3 Network Units for characterization 
of native populations (Maharashtra, Bihar and Arunachal Pradesh)." 
  
1.10  Recognizing the importance and utility of the " Mission toward non-descript 
Animal Genetic Resources  (AnGR) in India" launched by the Department to 
characterize livestock, poultry and dog breeds, the Committee had recommended 
the Department to make best efforts to achieve the targets set under the Mission 
so that all the indigenous livestock, poultry and dog breeds of the country would 
get registered. 
The Department in its Action -taken reply has furnished information about 
the number of native livestock breeds registered and characterized; and name of 
the state s where Animal Genetic Resources (AnGR) survey was conducted and 
State Interface meets were organized. The Department has also stated that it has 
initiated 3 Network Units for characterization of native populations . The 
Committee, however, note that the De partment has not furnished any target date 
by which characterization, cataloguing and registration of the indigenous 
livestock, poultry and dog breeds of the country would be completed. The 

6 
 
Committee also note that achievement made under the Mission so far  is not 
substantial considering the fact that the country has large population and breeds 
of livestock, poultry and dog. 
The Committee, therefore, reiterate their earlier recommendation to the 
Department to make best efforts to achieve the targets set unde r "Mission toward 
non-descript AnGR in India" so that all the indigenous livestock, poultry and dog 
breeds of the country would get registered. 
 
 
C.    Krishi Vigyan Kendras (KVKs) 
       Recommendation (Serial No. 10) 
 
1.11 The Committee had observed/recommended as under:— 
"The Committee note that Agricultural Extension Division is carrying out on -farm 
testing to identify the location specificity of agricultural technologies and frontline 
demonstration to demonstrate the production potential of different crops. The Division 
also provides training to farmers and extension personnel about knowledge and skill 
improvement and creating awareness. This is done through a network of 731 Krishi 
Vigyan Kendras spread all over the country. The Committee also note from the reply of 
the Department that at present there are 766 districts in the country, 93 districts have 
two KVKs, 638 districts have single KVK and 128 districts do not have KVK. The 
Committee further note that the KVKs across the country have 3499 vacancies (Senior 
Scientist -187, Subject matter specialist - 1090, Technical Officer T4 - 688, Assistant- 
279, Stenographer- 280, Driver 432 and Skilled supporting staff - 543).  
 As the KVKs play an important role in extension services, the Committee 
recommend the Department to ope n a KVK in those 128 Districts which do not have 
even a single KVK. The Committee also recommend the Department to fill up the 
vacancies in KVKs on priority basis.  
 The Committee also recommend the Department to strengthen the existing 
mechanism and also develop online mechanism to ensure demonstration and 
dissemination of information about new varieties and technologies among farmers. The 

7 
 
emphasis should also be laid on providing training to farmers and Farmer Producer 
Organisations (FPOs) so that benefit s of the research and innovations in the field of 
agriculture are availed by them." 
 
1.12 In its Action Taken Reply, the Department has stated as under:- 
"Krishi Vigyan Kendras (KVKs) have been proposed for establishment in 82 new 
rural districts (notified  after approval of EFC 2017 -20) in the EFC proposal 2021 -26, 
which is submitt ed for appraisal and approval. The post of the KVKs are to be filled by 
respective Host Organizations. In this regard, the Heads of Host Organizations are time 
to time requested b y Directors of respective ATARIs (to vice chancellors of Agricultural 
Universities); by Secretary (DARE) & DG (ICAR) (to Chief Secretaries of the States) 
and Hon’ble Minister of Agriculture & Farmers Welfare and President of ICAR (to the 
Hon’ble Chief Mini sters of the States). Recently, such requests were sent on 
22.03.2023. The ICAR has created an online Platform KisanSarathi for two -way 
communication with farmers for solving their field problems through latest technologies 
including varieties. Farmers reg istered on this platform are able to ask questions and 
get answers in their own language." 
 
1.13 Recognizing the role played by the Krishi Vigyan Kendras (KVKs) in 
extension services, the Committee had recommended the Department to open a 
KVK in those 128 Districts which do not have even a single KVK and also to fill up 
the vacancies in KVKs on priority basis.  The Committee had also recommended 
the Department to strengthen the existing mechanism and also develop online 
mechanism to ensure demonstration and dissemination of information about new 
varieties and technologies among farmers and to lay emphasis on providing 
training to farmers and Farmer Producer Organisations (FPOs) so that benefits of 
the research and innovations in the field of agriculture are availed by them. 
The Department in its Action -taken reply has submitted that Krishi Vigyan 
Kendras (KVKs) have been proposed for establishment in 82 new rural districts 

8 
 
(notified after approval of EFC 2017 -20) in the EFC proposal 2021 -26, which is 
submitted for appraisal and approval. As regard filling of vacant posts in KVKs, 
the Department has submitted that these are to be filled by respective Host 
Organizations and they have been requested time to time by the Department to fill 
up the vacant posts. Further, the Department has stated that ICAR has created an 
Online Platform KisanSarathi for two-way communication with farmers for solving 
their field problems through latest technologies including varieties. 
The Committee, while appreciating the efforts made by the Department, are 
of the view that KVKs would not be able to discharge their responsibilities fully if 
there exist vacancies in them. The Committee, therefore, recommen d the 
Department to impress upon the Host Organization s to fill up the vacant posts  in 
KVKs on priority basis so th at farmers of the country take  maximum benefits 
through KVKs. 
 
D.    Manpower in ICAR Institutes        
 Recommendation (Serial No. 13) 
 
1.14 The Committee had observed/recommended as under:— 
"The Committee note that a large number of posts including those in scientific, 
administrative and technical categories are lying vacant at various Institutes of the 
ICAR. The Department has apprised the Committee that the Department makes all out 
efforts f or filling up of vacant positions of different cadre as and when the vacancies 
arise. The recruitment process for filling up of vacant position is a regular process 
through an established procedure of the Recruitment, subject to availability of 
appropriately qualified candidates in the required areas of specialization. Further, due to 
restructuring of Agricultural Scientist Recruitment Board and outbreak of Covid -19, the 
conduct of direct recruitment examination during last three years was adversely 
affected. However, the recruitment of Scientists, Administrative and technical staff in 

9 
 
ICAR has been vigorously pursued. The Committee recommend the Department to fill 
up the vacant scientific, administrative and technical posts at Institutes of ICAR at the 
earliest for the smooth and more meaningful functioning of the Institutes. The 
Committee also recommend the Department to initiate recruitment process well in 
advance so that posts do not remain vacant for a long period." 
 
1.15 In its Action Taken Reply, the Department has stated as under:- 
"The recruitment process for filling up of vacant positions in ICAR Institutes is a 
regular process and ICAR make out all efforts for filling up of vacant posts, as and when 
arise. The recruitment process of 102 Research Ma nagement Positions has been 
completed. A total of 208 entry level scientists have been recruited and scientists are 
under three months training. The requisitions for the recruitment of DR -Principal 
Scientists and DR -Senior Scientists (total 340) have been sent for advertisement. In 
order to maintain the rationalization and for the purpose of providing opportunity for the 
future eligible aspirants every year, approximately 1/3 rd of the total vacancies are filled 
in recruitment cycle at entry level Scientists . The mains examination for the recruitment 
of Administrative Officers and Finance and Account Officers have been completed. The 
result of Preliminary Examination for Assistant Grade has been declared; process is 
finalized for posting at the Institutes considering the requirement." 
 
1.16 Taking note of large number of posts including those in scientific, 
administrative and technical categories lying vacant at various Institutes of Indian 
Council of Agricultural Research (ICAR), the Committee had recommended  the 
Department to fill up the vacant scientific, administrative and technical posts at 
Institutes of ICAR at the earliest for the smooth and more meaningful functioning 
of the Institutes. The Committee had also recommended the Department to 
initiate recruitment process well in advance so that posts do not remain vacant 
for a long period. 

10 
 
The Department in its Action-taken reply has submitted that the recruitment 
process for filling up of vacant positions in ICAR Institutes is a regular process 
and ICAR make out all efforts for filling up of vacant posts, as and when arise. 
The recruitment process of 102 Research Management Positions has been 
completed. A total of 208 entry level scientists have been recruited and scientists 
are under three months trainin g. The requisitions for the recruitment of DR -
Principal Scientists and DR -Senior Scientists (total 340) have been sent for 
advertisement. In order to maintain the rationalization and for the purpose of 
providing opportunity for the future eligible aspirant s every year, approximately 
1/3rd of the total vacancies are filled in recruitment cycle at entry level Scientists. 
The mains examination for the recruitment of Administrative Officers and Finance 
and Account Officers have been completed. The result of Pre liminary 
Examination for Assistant Grade has been declared; process is finalized for 
posting at the Institutes considering the requirement. 
The Committee , while appreciating the Department for taking steps for 
filling of the vacant posts, note that even af ter the completion of the recruitment 
processes of the various posts, substantial number of posts will remain lying 
vacant at the Institutes of ICAR. The Committee also note that the Department is 
silent on the recommendation to initiate recruitment proces s well in advance so 
that posts do not remain vacant for a long period of the Committee. 
The Committee, therefore, reiterate their earlier recommendation to fill up 
the vacant scientific, administrative and technical posts at Institutes of ICAR at 
the earliest for the smooth and more meaningful functioning of the Institutes and 

11 
 
also to initiate recruitment process well in advance so that posts do not remain 
vacant for a long period. 
  

12 
 
CHAPTER - II 
  
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS THAT HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE 
GOVERNMENT 
 
Budgetary Allocation 
Recommendation Serial No. 1 
 
The Committee note that allocations (BE) of Rs. 9504.00 Crore has been 
made to the Department of Agricultural Research and Education which is 0.21% 
of total budget of Rs. 4503097.00 Crore of Central Government for the year 2023 -
24, though the Department ha d proposed Rs. 10390.53 Crore for BE 2023 -24. The 
allocation of Rs. 9504.00 Crore made in BE 2023 -24 for the DARE is higher than 
the allocations of Rs. 8513.62 Crore made in BE 2022 -23 and Rs. 8658.89 Crore 
made in RE 2022 -23, the proportion (in % terms) o f Budgetary Allocation (BE) in 
favour of the Department out of the total Budget of the Government of India has 
been reduced from 0.22% in the year 2022 -23 to 0.21% in 2023 -24. The Committee 
further note that at the Revised Estimate Stage, the Budgetary All ocation out of 
the total Budget of the Government of India was reduced from 0.23% in the year 
2021-22 to 0.20% in 2022-23.  
The Committee feel that progressive reduction in proportion of Budgetary 
Allocation with respect to the total Budget of the Governme nt of India is not a 
healthy trend particularly in view of the fact that the Department of Agricultural 
Research and Education/Indian Council of Agricultural Research is the largest 
Agri-Research Organization not only in India but also in the world. This R esearch 
Organization has contributed immensely in making the nation food and nutrition 
secure. The Committee are of the considered view that the present level of 
budgetary support/grant to DARE/ICAR is inadequate, which may impact its 
functioning and hampe r the Department in achieving its cherished vision and 
mandate. The Committee, having taken the view of challenges before DARE/ ICAR 
and inadequate funds allocated to it, recommend the Government to enhance the 
allocation for the Department of Agricultural  Research and Education at the 
Revised Estimates 2023 -24 Stage. The Committee also desire the Department to 
pursue for enhancement of allocation with the Ministry of Finance through 
Supplementary Grants. 

13 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
The Department is continuous ly seeking increased budget allocation for the 
Department of Agricultural Research and Education from the Ministry of Finance. The 
Department takes all steps to get the Budgetary allocation enhanced from Ministry of 
Finance through the supplementary demand  for grants and also at the RE 2023 -24 
stage, as suggested by the Committee. Further, the Secretary DARE and Financial 
Advisor DARE have  been raising this issue for increasing the allocation of DARE at 
appropriate forums on regular basis.  
[Ministry of Agriculture & Farmer’s Welfare 
(Department of Agricultural Research and Education) 
F. No. 7(2)/2023-PIM Dated 11.5.2023] 
 
Allocation Under Scheme Head 
Recommendation Serial No. 2 
 
The Committee note that out of the total allocation (BE) of Rs. 9504.00 
Crore for the Department (DARE) for the year 2023-24, Rs. 2423.41 Crore has been 
allocated under Scheme Head which constitutes around 25.49% of the total 
allocation. The Allocation und er Scheme Head in BE 2023 -24 (Rs. 2423.41 Crore) 
is 427.58 Crore more than the allocation of Rs. 1995.83 Crore in BE 2022 -23, 
however, it is Rs. 262.59 Crore less than BE 2021 -22 allocation of Rs. 2686.00 
Crore. The Committee also note that BE 2023 -24 allo cation is Rs. 490.89 Crore 
less than the Department's proposed amount of Rs. 2914.30 Crore for the Scheme 
Head for the year 2023-24.  
The Committee are of considered view that inadequate allocation in BE 
2023-24 particularly under Scheme Head would adverse ly impact the Schemes 
and Programmes planned by various Subject Matter Divisions (SMDs) and may 
impact the overall working of Research Institutes under the ICAR. The Committee, 
therefore, recommend the Department to take up the matter of enhancing the 
allocation under Central Sector Schemes with the Ministry of Finance at RE 
Stage. 
 
 
 

14 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
The Department is continuously making all the efforts to get the allocation under 
Schemes enhanced. It  continuously tries to utilize all the channels available in 
Government setup for seeking additional scheme allocation and makes all efforts for the 
enhancement of scheme budget at the RE stage with the Ministry of Finance. 
[Ministry of Agriculture & Farmer’s Welfare 
(Department of Agricultural Research and Education) 
F. No. 7(2)/2023-PIM Dated 11.5.2023] 
 
Internal Revenue Generation and its Utilization 
Recommendation Serial No. 3 
 
The Committee note that the Institutes of ICAR/DARE generate revenue 
internally through consultancy, training, services, etc. The Committee also note 
that an amount of around Rs. 1500.00 Crore is available at ICAR Headquarter upto 
31.03.2022 as bank balances in the books of accounts of the ICAR.  
The Committee have been apprised that due to the Recommendations/ 
Observations of the previous Committee contained in the 2 nd Report (16 th Lok 
Sabha) on Demands for Grants (2014 -15) and subsequent 15 th Report (16 th Lok 
Sabha) on the Action Taken by the Government on the Recommendations/ 
Observations contained in the 2 nd Report, the Department/ ICAR suspended 
utilization of funds from its available revenue resources since 2016 -17 which has 
resulted in financial hards hips to the Department/ICAR to carry out its mandated 
research activities in the absence of grant-in-aid received by the Department from 
the Ministry of Finance. The Budgetary support to DARE has seen a decline over 
the past few successive years. The Commi ttee have also been apprised of the 
relevant provisions of the General Financial Rules, 2017 with regard to generation 
of the internal resources and their utilization by autonomous bodies receiving 
grant-in-aid from the Government of India.  
The Secretary (DARE) and Director General (ICAR) also requested the 
Chairperson to review the concerned Recommendations of the Committee so that 
the ICAR was able to utilize the funds generated through internal resources.  
Having considered all aspects of the issue in to tality, the Committee accede to 

15 
 
the request of the Department to use its internal resources including already 
accumulated funds since 2014-15 for its own requirements, provided that existing 
rules including General Financial Rules 2017, regulations, provis ions, 
instructions, etc issued by the Ministry of Finance, Government of India from time 
to time in this regard are scrupulously adhered to. 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
The Department is obliged to the Hon'ble Committee for accepting the request of 
the Department to use its internal resources including already accumulated funds since 
2014-15 for its own requirement. The Department is making sincere efforts to maximize 
fund generation through internal resources and ensures its utilization as per the existing 
Government rules including General Financial Rules 2017, regulations, provisions, 
instructions, etc issued by the Ministry of Finance. 
[Ministry of Agriculture & Farmer’s Welfare 
(Department of Agricultural Research and Education) 
F. No. 7(2)/2023-PIM Dated 11.5.2023] 
 
Surrender of Funds 
Recommendation Serial No. 4 
 
The Committee note that the Department has surrendered unspent 
balances of Rs. 68.63 Crore and Rs. 66.86 Crore for the Financial Years 2020 -21 
and 2021 -22 respectively. The break -up of the surre ndered amount is Rs. 68.13 
Crore under Scheme and Rs. 0.50 Crore under Non -Scheme in the Financial Year 
2020-21 and Rs. 64.3 Crore under Scheme and Rs. 2.56 Crore under Non -Scheme 
in the Financial Year 2021 -22. However, an amount of Rs. 35.37 Crore pertain ing 
to National Agricultural Higher Education Project (NAHEP) was revalidated for 
utilization during 2021 -22. However, the Committee also note the percentage 
utilization of RE -allocations for the Financial Years 2020 -21 and 2021 -22 are 
98.48% and 99.13% re spectively, which in the opinion of the Committee is highly 
appreciable. Further, during the Financial Year 2022 -23, 96.71% of RE allocation 
has been utilized upto January, 2023. 

16 
 
The Committee having taken a holistic view, are of the considered opinion 
that surrender of allocated funds is not at all a healthy practice as it adversely 
affects implementation of the Schemes especially in view of the Department's 
request for enhancing Budgetary Allocations. The Committee, therefore, 
recommend that the pace of expenditure and flow of funds under various 
Schemes should be monitored regularly so as to avoid surrender of funds. The 
Committee also recommend the Department to identify the fac tors/reasons which 
hinder or restrict the utilization of funds and take appropriate action accordingly.  
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
The Department is making all efforts to minimize the surrender of funds for the 
financial year 2022-23. The pace of expenditure is regularly monitored by the respective 
SMDs. Further, the Senior Most Officers of the Department monitor the pace of 
expenditure regularly through the SOC (Senior Officers Committee) meetings held 
every month. 
[Ministry of Agriculture & Farmer’s Welfare 
(Department of Agricultural Research and Education) 
F. No. 7(2)/2023-PIM Dated 11.5.2023] 
 
Promotion of Climate Resilient Farming 
Recommendation Serial No. 5 
The Committee note that the Natural Resources Management Division 
covers the area of sustainable management of natural resources and is 
conducting research in farmers' participatory mode addressing issues at ground 
level to develop location specific, cost effective, eco -friendly, climate resilient 
technologies keeping in view the resource availability with the farmers, 
traditional/ indigenous technological knowhow and grass -roots farm innovations 
to enhance agricultural production, productivity and profitab ility in the country. 
The Committee further note that 64 Climate Resilient Integrated Farming System 
models for 26 States/UTs, 68 Organic Cropping System packages for 16 states 
have been developed, evaluated, and demonstrated. Moreover, 65 Climate 
Resilient Technologies such as crop varieties, intercropping systems, 
conservation agriculture, crop diversification, agro forestry systems, zero till drill 
sowing of wheat to escape terminal heat stress, alternate methods of rice 

17 
 
cultivation (system of rice inten sification, aerobic rice and direct seeded rice), in-
situ moisture conservation, etc. have also been developed and disseminated in 
151 vulnerable Districts across the country.  
The Committee also note that Capacity Building Programmes on various 
Climate Resilient Technologies are being organized for benefit of the farmers. The 
Committee, while appreciating the efforts of the DARE/ICAR, are of the view that 
more appropriate steps are required to be taken to promote Climate Resilient 
Farming by giving priority to Research for development of location -specific, cost-
effective, eco -friendly Climate Resilient Practices and Technologies and their 
dissemination and demonstration on large scale in the country so that adverse 
impact of climate change on Indian Agricul ture is minimized and food and 
nutritional security of the nation is maintained. The Committee recommend the 
Department to develop a mechanism to ensure income safety to the farmers, so 
that they are inclined to adopt new cropping pattern/crops having Clim ate 
Resilient and water efficient qualities/traits.  
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
Department has continued the development of climate resilient technologies and 
their dissemination to the stakeholders to address the climate change impact on 
agriculture. ICAR has already developed 446 climate resilient villages. Likewise, 151 
districts have been mapped for vulnerability assessment. Multi -stake capacity building 
programmes on various aspects of climate resilient agriculture have been conducted. 
To achieve food a nd nutritional security at household level, Integrated Farming System 
(IFS) research and extension was another priority across the ecologies. States like 
Tamilnadu, Kerala, Odisha and Telangana, and the UT J&K have supported the viable 
IFS models in their respective states. During the year  2023-24, 92.0 crores have been 
earmarked for promotion of IFS models by Tamilnadu, Kerala and Odisha 
Governments. To support the research and extension of climate resilient agriculture, an 
amount of Rs. 366.40 crores have  been earmarked by ICAR for the period of 2021 -
2026. 
[Ministry of Agriculture & Farmer’s Welfare 
(Department of Agricultural Research and Education) 
F. No. 7(2)/2023-PIM Dated 11.5.2023] 

18 
 
Availability of Quality Seeds to Farmers 
Recommendation Serial No. 6 
 
The Committee note that Crop Science Division undertakes research 
programs in the areas of management of genetic resources, crop improvement 
and crop management (production and protection). The focus of crop science 
program is on genetic enhancement of fi eld crops using modern tools of genome 
editing, genomics and phonemics for yield, quality and tolerance to biotic and 
abiotic stresses. The Committee also note that many Biofortified and Hybrid 
Varieties of several Field Crops have been developed, released  and notified for 
commercial cultivation by the farmers. The Committee are of the view that 
awareness among farmers about newly developed Biofortified and Hybrid 
Varieties of various Field Crops and their productivity and nutritional quality is 
limited. Al so quality seeds of Field Crops are not easily available to them. The 
Committee, therefore, recommend the Department to take proactive steps for 
popularizing and disseminating the information about newly released varieties of 
Field Crops. The Committee als o recommend the Department to give emphasis 
not only on increasing production and productivity of various crops but also on 
making available quality seeds to farmers. The Department should also lay 
emphasis on increasing the nutritional value of such modified crops. 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
Indian Council of Agricultural Research (ICAR) is mandated to production and 
delivery of breeder seed to various public and private sector agencies for their 
downstream multiplication to foundation and certified seeds. I CAR-All India Coordinated 
Research Project on Seed (Crops) coordinates quality seed production including 
breeder seed and development of region -specific technologies to address seed 
technological issues of various stakeholders through network of 65 centres  across 27 
state/Union Territories in the country. Crop and variety -wise breeder seed indents are 
submitted by the states for developing their seed rolling plan. Before finalization of 
indents list of all the varieties less than 10 years old including the latest one is shared 
with the states along with their yield and quality traits, area of recommendation and 
source of seed. Once the indents of breeder seed from States and Central seed 

19 
 
production agencies, Public Sector Undertakings and Private sector are received, a 
meeting is coordinated by DAFW under co-chairmanship of Joint Secretary (Seeds) and 
Assistant Director general (Seed), ICAR invites all these stakeholder and all Directors/ 
Project Coordinators of ICAR Institutes for inclusion/ enhancing the qu antity of breeder 
seed  of newly released climate resilient and biofortified varieties in the seed rolling 
plan. This helps in enhancing both seed and varietal replacement rates. ICAR is fulfilling 
the requirement of all the seed production agencies and d uring last three years (2019 -
20 to 2021 -22), 333707.5 quintals of breeder seed of more than 1400 varieties has 
been produced against the indent of 243951.4 quintals in field crops.  
Department made all efforts for popularization of newly developed varieties 
through front line demonstration, publication of pamphlets/ bulletins, programmes on DD 
Kisan, Doordarshan, KisanMelas, KisanGosthis, Field Days and through print and social 
media. Further focused efforts made to ensure the popularization of newly released 
varieties among the farmers ensuring their seed availability.  
A special Consortium research Project on Biofortification was initiated during 
2014-15 which focused on enhancing th e nutritional value in crop varieties and as a 
result a total 114 biofortified varieties of 16 field and horticultural crops have been 
released during past nine years. 
[Ministry of Agriculture & Farmer’s Welfare 
(Department of Agricultural Research and Education) 
F. No. 7(2)/2023-PIM Dated 11.5.2023] 
 
Availability of Quality Planting Material for Horticulture Crops 
Recommendation Serial No. 7 
 
The Committee have been apprised that several Biofortified and Hybrid 
varieties with increased nutritional value and productivity of various Horticulture 
Crops have been developed, released and notified for commercial cultivation by 
the farmers. However, t he Committee feel that availability of quality planting 
material of various Horticulture Crops particularly orange, mango, apples, etc are 
limited and as a result farmers are not able to procure quality planting material in 
sufficient quantity. The Committ ee, therefore, recommend the Department to 
produce quality planting material of various Horticulture Crops particularly 

20 
 
orange, mango, apples, etc and make available to the farmers in the sufficient 
quantity at cheaper rate.  
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
The Department has already  produced 44.403 lakh(nos.) quality planting 
materials of different traditional/improved varieties/hybrids  of various Horticulture Crops 
including orange, mango, apples, etc. during the year 2022 -23 and out of that 36.9187 
lakh(nos.) of quality planting materials were provided to farmers of different regions at 
cheaper rate according to their requirement.  
[Ministry of Agriculture & Farmer’s Welfare 
(Department of Agricultural Research and Education) 
F. No. 7(2)/2023-PIM Dated 11.5.2023] 
 
Research and Development (R&D) in Agriculture 
Recommendation Serial No. 11 
 
The Committee note that Research and Development and its application in 
Agriculture and Allied sector play a major role in realisation of sustainable 
agriculture practice that efficiently meets the objectives of food and nutritional 
security and improvemen t in farm income. The Committee also note that every 
rupee spent on agricultural research and development yields much better returns 
as Benefit: Cost of Investment in Agri-Research is 10.7:1.0.  
The Committee further note that in 2020 -21, only 0.49 percent  of Agri-GDP 
was spent on agricultural research and education in the country. However, to 
ensure long term food and nutrition security atleast 1% of the Agri-GDP is needed 
in R&D services in Agriculture. 
The Committee, therefore, recommend the Department t o take pro -active 
steps for raising the expenditure on agricultural research, education and 
innovation to atleast 1% of the Agri -GDP so as to ensure food and nutritional 
security for the largest population of this planet.  
 
 
 

21 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
The Department is taking necessary steps to get the allocation enhanced from 
the Ministry of Finance  for the RE 2023 -24 as per the recommendations of the 
committee (to at least 1% of Agri GDP) to ensure food and nutritional security for India.   
The department also pursue this recommendation with the Ministry of Finance at the 
Supplementary Demand of Grants 2023-24 for additional allocation of funds. 
[Ministry of Agriculture & Farmer’s Welfare 
(Department of Agricultural Research and Education) 
F. No. 7(2)/2023-PIM Dated 11.5.2023] 
 
Global Hub for Millets: "Shree Anna" 
Recommendation Serial No. 12 
 
The Committee note that Millets are Smart Food with high nutritional value and 
are also climate resilient. These are also important by virtue of their mammoth 
potential to generate livelihood, increase farmers' income and ensure food and 
nutritional security all over the world. The Committee also note that several types 
of Millets are grown in the country and India is the largest producer and second 
largest exporter of Millets in the world. The Committee have been apprised that to 
make India a global hub fo r Millets, the Indian Institute of Millet Research, 
Hyderabad would be supported as the Centre of Excellence for sharing best 
practices, research and technologies at the international level. The Committee, 
therefore, recommend the Department to make resear ch to know the specialties 
and health benefits of Millet crops and disseminate this knowledge among people 
on large scale. The Committee also recommend the Department to do research 
for improving the production, productivity and nutritional values of Mille ts. The 
Committee further recommend the Department to take all efforts for making the 
Indian Institute of Millet Research, Hyderabad as the Centre of Excellence so as 
to make India a global hub for Millets and reap the maximum benefits for the 
country.  
 
 
 

22 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
Realizing the importance of Shree Anna and lot of efforts made by the 
Government, the Hon’ble Finance Minster made the following budget announcement 
during the budget session 2023: 
“We are the largest producer and second largest exporter of ‘Shree Anna’ in the 
world. We grow several types of 'Shree Anna' such as jowar, ragi, bajra, kuttu, 
ramdana, kangni, kutki, kodo, cheena, and sama. These have a number of health 
benefits, and have been an integral part of our food for centuries . I acknowledge 
with pride the huge service done by small farmers in contributing to the health of 
fellow citizens by growing these ‘Shree Anna’.” 
A total Rs. 250 crores have been allotted for making Indian Institute of Millet 
Research as a Centre of Excel lence for making India a Global Hub under ‘Shree 
Anna’for sharing best practices, research and technologies at the international level. A 
special programme has been developed by ICAR -Indian Institute of Millets Research 
and following components have been identified for accomplishing this important national 
responsibility during next three years i.e. 2023-24 to 2025-26:    
Sr. No Component 
1 Establishing Long -term Germplasm Storage Facility to Strengthen Millets 
GeneBank for Conservation, Trait-specific Characterization and Utilization of 
Millet Biodiversity for Crop Improvement. 
2 Technology Innovation Centre for Trait, Seed and Crop Improvement of 
Millets for enhancing Yield and Productivity. 
3 Nutricereal Analytical, Food Safety and Quality Assurance  National Referral 
Laboratory for Millets. 
4 Centre of Excellence for Millet Value Chain and Business Facilitation for 
Entrepreneurship, Incubation and Startup Nurturing. 
5 Establishment of International Knowledge, Skill Development and Capacity 
Enablement Centre with International Millet Museum & Halls of Residence. 
6 Global Facility for Millet Pilots on Feed, Fodder, Biofuels, Malting, Brewing 
and Promotion of Industrial utilization of Millets. 
7 Regional Millet Technology Innovation and Outreach Hubs. 
 
[Ministry of Agriculture & Farmer’s Welfare 
(Department of Agricultural Research and Education) 
F. No. 7(2)/2023-PIM Dated 11.5.2023]  

23 
 
CHAPTER - III 
  
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO NOT 
DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE GOVERNMENT’S REPLIES 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
NIL  

24 
 
CHAPTER - IV 
  
OBSERVATIONS/ RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF 
THE GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE 
 
 
Manpower in ICAR Institutes        
Recommendation Serial No. 13 
The Committee note that a large number of posts including those in scientific, 
administrative and technical categories are lying vacant at various Institutes of the 
ICAR. The Department has apprised the Committee that the Department makes all out 
efforts f or filling up of vacant positions of different cadre as and when the vacancies 
arise. The recruitment process for filling up of vacant position is a regular process 
through an established procedure of the Recruitment, subject to availability of 
appropriately qualified candidates in the required areas of specialization. Further, due to 
restructuring of Agricultural Scientist Recruitment Board and outbreak of Covid -19, the 
conduct of direct recruitment examination during last three years was adversely 
affected. However, the recruitment of Scientists, Administrative and technical staff in 
ICAR has been vigorously pursued. The Committee recommend the Department to fill 
up the vacant scientific, administrative and technical posts at Institutes of ICAR at the 
earliest for the smooth and more meaningful functioning of the Institutes. The 
Committee also recommend the Department to initiate recruitment process well in 
advance so that posts do not remain vacant for a long period. 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
The recruitment process for filling up of vacant positions in ICAR Institutes is a 
regular process and ICAR make out all efforts for filling up of vacant posts, as and when 
arise. The recruitment process of 102 Research Management Positions has been 
completed. A total of 208 entry level scientists have been recruited and scientists are 
under three months training. The requisitions for the recruitment of DR -Principal 
Scientists and DR -Senior Scientists (total 340) have been sent for advertisement. In 
order to maintain the rationalization and for the purpose of providing opportunity for the 
future eligible aspirants every year, approximately 1/3 rd of the total vacancies are filled 
in recruitment cycle at entry level Scientists. The mains examination for the recrui tment 

25 
 
of Administrative Officers and Finance and Account Officers have been completed. The 
result of Preliminary Examination for Assistant Grade has been declared; process is 
finalized for posting at the Institutes considering the requirement. 
 
[Ministry of Agriculture & Farmer’s Welfare 
(Department of Agricultural Research and Education) 
F. No. 7(2)/2023-PIM Dated 11.5.2023] 
 
Comments of the Committee 
For comments of the Committee please refer to Para No.1. 16 of Chapter I of this 
Report. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  

26 
 
CHAPTER - V 
  
OBSERVATIONS/ RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH FINAL REPLIES 
OF GOVERNMENT ARE STILL AWAITED  
 
 
Preparedness to tackle spread of Disease in Animals    
Recommendation Serial No. 8 
 
The Committee note that some of the focused research areas in Animal Science 
are preventive health care, vaccine production, handling emerging diseases, 
surveillance and forecasting of diseases among livestock and poultry. The Committee 
have been apprised tha t the research on veterinary biologicals in the  ICAR has led to 
successful eradication of  important diseases viz,. rinderpest and contagious bovine 
pleuropneumonia from the country. ICAR has developed vaccines for economically 
important diseases for cattle  in the country viz.,  Foot and Mouth Disease, Anthrax 
Spore, Black Quarter (BQ), HaemorrhagicSepticaemia (HS), Brucella Abortus (S -19 
Strain), Buffalo pox, Infectious Bovine Rhinotracheitis   and Lumpy Skin Disease. The 
Committee are also aware about death of cattle on large scale in various regions of the 
country last year due to spread of Lumpy Skin Disease resulting in economic loss and 
hardships to animal farmers. The Committee, therefore, recommend the Department to 
prepare itself to prevent spread of d iseases among livestock and poultry in the country 
and if spread of disease occurs, prompt steps be taken to prevent its further spread on 
large scale so as to minimize the losses. 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
Prompt steps have been taken by ICAR for preventio n of diseases in animals as 
various vaccines and diagnostics have been developed to tackle economically important 
diseases of animals. Recently, Lumpy Skin Disease (LSD) affected cattle on large scale 
basis in various states of the country. Many studies we re carried on LSD through 
surveillance, sero -monitoring and identification of the etiological agent. The LSD 
vaccine production technology has been transferred to the four firms.  Regulatory 
approvals have been provided by DCGI and DAHD also.  The Biovet h as submitted 
formal application cum dossier to DCGI Office, Delhi to issue manufacturing license, 

27 
 
NOC (No Objection Certificate). Quality control testing of LSD vaccine has been carried 
out by IVRI, Izatnagar and the Biovet conducted complete animal trials  in-house on 
safety, reversion to virulence, efficacy etc. on LSD vaccine, so that  it is available in the 
market. 
[Ministry of Agriculture & Farmer’s Welfare 
(Department of Agricultural Research and Education) 
F. No. 7(2)/2023-PIM Dated 11.5.2023] 
 
Comments of the Committee 
For comments of the Committee please refer to Para No.1. 7 of Chapter I of this 
Report. 
 
Characterization, Cataloguing and Registration of Animal Genetic Resources of 
the Country 
Recommendation Serial No.9  
The Committee note that one of the focused research areas in animal science is 
characterization and registration of new populations of indigenous livestock, poultry and 
dogs. The Committee have been apprised that the ICAR has established a standard 
process of characterization, cataloguing and registration   of animal genetic resources of 
the Country, which has been appreciated by UN recently. Department has launched 
“Mission toward non -descript Animal Genetic Resources (AnGR) in India” to 
characterize livestock, poultry and dog br eeds. Under the Mission, registration of a total 
number of 212 breeds of livestock, poultry and dogs has been completed. 
The Committee, therefore, recommend the Department to make best efforts to 
achieve the targets set under "Mission toward non -descript AnGR in India" so that all 
the indigenous livestock, poultry and dog breeds of the country would get registered. 
 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
Department registered 10 native livestock breeds of 5 states during 2022-23. The 
breeds include 3 cattle breeds, 1 buffalo, 3 goats and 3 pig breeds. The characterization 
of 8 new native populations of 6 states/UTs has been carried out. The Animal Genetic 
Resources (AnGR) survey was conducted in 9 states (Arunachal Pradesh, Nagaland, 
Tripura, Tamil Nadu, Odisha, HP, UP, Bihar, Rajasthan), Ladakh (UT) and Organized in 

28 
 
four State Interface meets (Madhya Pradesh, West Bengal, Himachal Pradesh, Bihar). 
Department has initiated 3 Network Units for characterization of native populations 
(Maharashtra, Bihar and Arunachal Pradesh). 
 
[Ministry of Agriculture & Farmer’s Welfare 
(Department of Agricultural Research and Education) 
F. No. 7(2)/2023-PIM Dated 11.5.2023] 
 
Comments of the Committee 
For comments of the Committee please refer to Para No.1. 10 of Chapter I of this 
Report. 
 
 
Krishi Vigyan Kendras (KVKs) 
 Recommendation Serial No. 10 
 
The Committee note that Agricultural Extension Division is carrying out on -farm 
testing to identify the location specificity of agricultural technologies and frontline 
demonstration to demonstrate  the production potential of different crops. The Division 
also provides training to farmers and extension personnel about knowledge and skill 
improvement and creating awareness. This is done through a network of 731 Krishi 
Vigyan Kendras spread all over t he country. The Committee also note from the reply of 
the Department that at present there are 766 districts in the country, 93 districts have 
two KVKs, 638 districts have single KVK and 128 districts do not have KVK. The 
Committee further note that the KV Ks across the country have 3499 vacancies (Senior 
Scientist -187, Subject matter specialist - 1090, Technical Officer T4 - 688, Assistant- 
279, Stenographer- 280, Driver 432 and Skilled supporting staff - 543).  
 As the KVKs play an important role in exten sion services, the Committee 
recommend the Department to open a KVK in those 128 Districts which do not have 
even a single KVK. The Committee also recommend the Department to fill up the 
vacancies in KVKs on priority basis.  
The Committee also recommend th e Department to strengthen the existing 
mechanism and also develop online mechanism to ensure demonstration and 
dissemination of information about new varieties and technologies among farmers. The 
emphasis should also be laid on providing training to farme rs and Farmer Producer 

29 
 
Organisations (FPOs) so that benefits of the research and innovations in the field of 
agriculture are availed by them. 
 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
Krishi Vigyan Kendras (KVKs) have been proposed for establishment in 82 new 
rural districts (notified after approval of EFC 2017 -20) in the EFC proposal 2021 -26, 
which is submitt ed for appraisal and approval. The post of the KVKs are to be filled by 
respective Host Organizations. In this regard, the Heads of Host Organizations are time 
to time requested by Directors of respective ATARIs (to vice chancellors of Agricultural 
Universities); by Secretary (DARE) & DG (ICAR) (to Chief Secretaries of the States) 
and Hon’ble Minister of Agriculture & Farmers Welfare and President of ICAR (to the  
Hon’ble Chief Ministers of the States). Recently, such requests were sent on 
22.03.2023. The ICAR has created an online Platform KisanSarathi for two -way 
communication with farmers for solving their field problems through latest technologies 
including varieties. Farmers registered on this platform are able to ask questions and 
get answers in their own language. 
 
[Ministry of Agriculture & Farmer’s Welfare 
(Department of Agricultural Research and Education) 
F. No. 7(2)/2023-PIM Dated 11.5.2023] 
 
Comments of the Committee 
For comments of the Committee please refer to Para No.1. 13 of Chapter I of this 
Report. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI;                                                                    P.C. GADDIGOUDAR 
08  August, 2023                                                                  Chairperson                            
17  Sravana, 1945 (Saka)                             Standing Committee on Agriculture,  
            Animal Husbandry and Food Processing 
  

30 
 
ANNEXURE  
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE, ANIMAL HUSBANDRY AND FOOD 
PROCESSING BRANCH 
(2022-23) 
 
MINUTES OF THE NINETEENTH SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE 
  
***** 
The Committee sat on Tuesday, the 08 August, 2023 from 1500 hrs.                              
to 1530 hrs. in Hon'ble Chairperson's Chamber, Room No. 103, 1st Floor, Block - 
B, PHA Extn., New Delhi.        
PRESENT 
 
Shri P.C. Gaddigoudar, Chairperson 
 
MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA 
 
 2.  Shri A. Ganeshamurthi 
3. Shri Mohan Mandavi 
4. Shri Devji Mansingram Patel 
5.  Smt. Sharda Anilkumar Patel 
6. Shri Bheemrao Baswanthrao Patil 
7. Shri Shriniwas Dadasaheb Patil 
8. Mohammad Sadique 
9. Shri Devendra Singh alias Bhole Singh 
10. Shri Virendra Singh 
11. Shri V.K. Sreekandan    
 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
 12. Smt. Ramilaben Becharbhai Bara 
 13. Shri Masthan Rao Beeda 
 14. Dr. Anil Sukhdeorao Bonde 
 15. Shri Kailash Soni 
 16. Shri Ram Nath Thakur 
 17. Shri Vaiko 
 
 
SECRETARIAT 
  
 1. Shri Shiv Kumar    - Additional Secretary 
 2. Shri Uttam Chand Bharadwaj  - Director 
 3. Shri Prem Ranjan    - Deputy Secretary 
 4. Shri N. Amarathiagan   - Under Secretary 

31 
 
 
 
2. At the outset, Chairperson welcomed the Members to the Sitting of the 
Committee. Thereafter, the Committee took up for consideration the following Draft 
Action Taken Reports:  
 
*(i)  XXXX   XXXX   XXXX   XXXX; 
(ii)  Draft Action Taken Report on Action -taken by the Government on the 
Observations / Recommendations contained in the Fifty -Second Report of the 
Committee on ‘Demands for Grants (2023 -24)’, pertaining to the Ministry of 
Agriculture and Farmers Welfare (Department of Agricultural Research and 
Education);  
*(iii) XXXX   XXXX   XXXX   XXXX; 
*(iv) XXXX   XXXX   XXXX   XXXX; 
*(v) XXXX   XXXX   XXXX   XXXX; 
*(vi) XXXX   XXXX   XXXX   XXXX; 
 
3. After some deliberations, the Committee adopted the Draft Action Taken Reports 
without any modifications and the Committee authorized the Chairperson to finalize and 
present these Reports to Parliament.  
 
 
The Committee then adjourned.  
 
* Matter not related to this Report. 
 
 
 
  

32 
 
 
APPENDIX - I 
 
(Vide Para 4 of Introduction of the Report) 
 
ANALYSIS OF ACTION TAKEN BY GOVERNMENT ON THE OBSERVATIONS / 
RECOMMENDATIONS CONTAINED IN THE FIFTY-SECOND REPORT (17TH LOK 
SABHA) OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE , ANIMAL 
HUSBANDRY AND FOOD PROCESSING (2022-23) 
  
(i)  Total number of Recommendations              13 
(ii) Observations/ Recommendations that have been 
Accepted by the Government  
 Para Nos. 1,2,3,4,5,6,7, 11 and 12    
Total          09    
Percentage                    69.23% 
(iii) Observations/ Recommendations which the Committee 
do not desire to pursue in view of the Government’s replies  
Para Nos.     NIL         
Total                     00 
Percentage                     00.00% 
(iv) Observations/ Recommendations in respect of which replies 
 of the Government have not been accepted by the Committee 
Para No. 13  
Total            01 
Percentage                                      07.70% 
(v) Observations/ Recommendations in respect of which  
 Final replies of the Government are still awaited 
Para Nos.       8,9 and 10      
Total                     03  
Percentage                     23.07%  
 
 
 
 