  
STANDING COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE, ANIMAL HUSBANDRY 
AND FOOD PROCESSING 
 
(2025-2026) 
 
 
EIGHTEENTH LOKSABHA 
 
 
 
MINISTRY OF FISHERIES, ANIMAL HUSBANDRY AND DAIRYING  
(DEPARTMENT OF FISHERIES) 
 
 
‘DEVELOPMENT AND MODERNIZATION OF FISHING HARBOURS’ 
 
 
[Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations contained in the 
Twentieth Report (Eighteenth Lok Sabha) of the Standing Committee on Agriculture, Animal 
Husbandry and Food Processing (2024-25)] 
 
 
 
 
FORTIETH REPORT 
 
 
 
 
 
LOKSABHASECRETARIAT  
NEW DELHI 
 
AUGUST, 2026/SHRAVANA, 1948(SAKA) 
 
 
40 

 
  
FORTIETH REPORT 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE, 
ANIMAL HUSBANDRY AND FOOD PROCESSING 
 
(2025-2026) 
 
 
EIGHTEENTH LOKSABHA 
 
 
 
MINISTRY OF FISHERIES, ANIMAL HUSBANDRY AND DAIRYING  
(DEPARTMENT OF FISHERIES) 
 
 
‘DEVELOPMENT AND MODERNIZATION OF FISHING HARBOURS’ 
 
 
 
[Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations contained 
in the Twentieth Report (Eighteenth Lok Sabha) of the Standing Committee on 
Agriculture, Animal Husbandry and Food Processing (2024-25)] 
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on 12.08.2026 
Laid on the Table of Rajya Sabha on 12.08.2026 
 
 
 
 
LOKSABHASECRETARIAT  
NEW DELHI 
AUGUST, 2026/SHRAVANA, 1948(SAKA)  


 
  
COA No. 539 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
© 2026 By Lok Sabha Secretariat 
 
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of Business in Lok Sabha 
(Seventeenth Edition) and Printed by Lok Sabha Secretariat 

 
  
 
CONTENTS 
 
 PAGE 
Composition of the Committee (2024-25)  iii 
Composition of the Committee (2025-26)  iv 
Introduction  vi 
Chapter I Report 1 
Chapter II     Observations/Recommendations that have been accepted by the 
Government 
9 
Chapter III Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not desire 
to pursue in view of the Government’s replies 
29 
Chapter IV Observations/Recommendations in respect of which Replies of the 
Government have not been accepted by the Committee 
32 
Chapter V Observations/Recommendations in respect of which final replies of 
the Government are still awaited 
33 
 ANNEXURE 
Minutes of the 24th sitting of the Committee held on 11.08.2026  
 
34 
 APPENDIX 
Analysis of Action Taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in the Twentieth Report 
(18th Lok Sabha) of the Standing Committee on Agriculture, Animal 
Husbandry and Food Processing (2024-25) 
 
 
36 
 
 

 
(iii)  
COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE, ANIMAL 
HUSBANDRY AND FOOD PROCESSING  
 (2024-25) 
 
 
SHRI CHARANJIT SINGH CHANNI – CHAIRPERSON 
 
MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA 
 
2.  Shri Umeshbhai Babubhai Patel 
3.  Smt. Harsimrat Kaur Badal 
4.  Shri Rajkumar Chahar 
5.  Smt. Anita Nagarsingh Chouhan 
6.  Shri Kuldeep Indora 
7.  Shri Rajpalsinh Mahendrasinh Jadav 
8.  Md. Abu Taher Khan 
9.  Shri Rahul Singh Lodhi 
10.  Shri Sukanta Kumar Panigrahi 
11.  Smt. Krishna Devi Shivshankar Patel 
12.  Shri Naresh Chandra Uttam Patel 
13.  Shri Narayan Tatu Rane 
14.  Shri Murasoli S. 
15.  Shri Dharambir Singh 
16.  Shri Dushyant Singh 
17.  Shri Sudhakar Singh 
18.  Shri Kodikunnil Suresh 
19.  Shri Tejasvi Surya 
20.  Smt. Geniben Nagaji Thakor 
21.  Shri Bhausaheb Rajaram Wakchaure 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
22.  Smt. Ramilaben Becharbhai Bara 
23.  Shri Masthan Rao Yadav Beedha* 
24.  Dr. Anil Sukhdeorao Bonde 
25.  Shri Banshilal Gurjar 
26.  Shri S. Kalyanasundaram 
27.  Shri Nitin Laxmanrao Jadhav Patil 
28.  Shri Madan Rathore 
29.  Shri Ramji Lal Suman 
30.  Shri P. P. Suneer 
31.  Shri Randeep Singh Surjewala 
 
Shri Krishan Lal Panwar, Member resigned from Rajya Sabha on 14.10.2024. 
*Shri Masthan Rao Yadav Beedha, Member, Rajya Sabha has been nominated to the Standing Committee on Agriculture, Animal 
Husbandry and Food Processing w.e.f on 8th August 2025, vide Lok Sabha Bulletin Part-II, Para No. 3117 dated 13.08.2025.  
  

 
(iv)  
COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE, ANIMAL 
HUSBANDRY AND FOOD PROCESSING  
18th Lok Sabha (2025-26) 
 
SHRI CHARANJIT SINGH CHANNI – CHAIRPERSON 
 
MEMBERS 
   LOK SABHA 
 
2.  Shri Umeshbhai Babubhai Patel 
3.  Smt. Harsimrat Kaur Badal 
4.  Shri Rajkumar Chahar 
5.  Smt. Anita Nagarsingh Chouhan 
6.  Shri Kuldeep Indora 
7.  Shri Rajpalsinh Mahendrasinh Jadav 
8.  Md. Abu Taher Khan 
9.  Shri Rahul Singh Lodhi 
10.  Shri Sukanta Kumar Panigrahi 
11.  Smt. Krishna Devi Shivshankar Patel 
12.  Shri Naresh Chandra Uttam Patel 
13.  Shri Narayan Tatu Rane 
14.  Shri Murasoli S. 
15.  Shri Dharambir Singh 
16.  Shri Dushyant Singh 
17.  Shri Sudhakar Singh 
18.  Shri Kodikunnil Suresh 
19.  Shri Tejasvi Surya 
20.  Smt. Geniben Nagaji Thakor 
21.  Shri Bhausaheb Rajaram Wakchaure 
 
   RAJYA SABHA 
 
22.  Dr. Anil Sukhdeorao Bonde 
23.  Shri Banshilal Gurjar 
24.  Shri Nitin Laxmanrao Jadhav-Patil 
25.  Shri Madan Rathore 
26.  Shri S.R. Sivalingam 
27.  Shri Ramji Lal Suman 
28.  Shri P. P. Suneer 
29.  Shri Randeep Singh Surjewala 
30 Shri Mahesh Kewat* 
31 Shri James Pangsang Kongkal Sangma** 
 
 
Note:   Smt. Ramilaben Becharbhai Bara ceased to be a Member of the Committee after her retirement from Rajya 
Sabha w.e.f. on 21.06.2026 (Rajya Sabha Bulletin Part-II(TO), Para No. 66058 dated 09.01.2026). 
 Shri H.D. Devegowda, ceased to be a Member of the Committee after his retirement from Rajya Sabha w.e.f . on 
25.06.2026 (Rajya Sabha Bulletin Part-II(TO), Para No. 66058 dated 09.01.2026). 
 * Shri Mahesh Kewat, MP, Rajya Sabha have been nominated to the Standing Committee w.e.f. 23.07.2026 vide Lok 
Sabha Bulletin Part-II, No. 5724, dated 24.07.2026. 
 **Shri James Pangsang Kongkal Sangma, MP, Rajya Sabha have been nominated to the Standing Committee w.e.f. 
23.07.2026 vide Lok Sabha Bulletin Part-II, No. 5724, dated 24.07.2026. 
 

 
(v)  
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
 1. Shri Dhiraj Kumar   - Joint Secretary 
 2. Shri Maheshwar    - Director 
 3. Shri Ashwaghosh B. Lokhande - Under Secretary 
  
 
  

 
(vi)  
INTRODUCTION 
 
 
I, the Chairperson, Standing Committee on Agriculture, Animal Husbandry and 
Food Processing (2025-26), having been authorized by the Committee to submit the 
Report on their behalf, present this Fortieth Report on Action taken by the Government 
on the Observations/Recommendations contained in the Twentieth Report (Eighteenth 
Lok Sabha) of the Standing Committee on Agriculture, Animal Husbandry and Food 
Processing (202 4-25) on  the Subject  ‘Development and Modernization of Fishing 
Harbours' pertaining to the Ministry of Fisheries, Animal Husbandry and Dairying 
(Department of Fisheries).  
 
2. The Twentieth Report (Eighteenth Lok Sabha) of the Standing Committee on 
Agriculture, Animal Husbandry and Food Processing (202 4-25) on  the Subject  
‘Development and Modernization of Fishing Harbours’  pertaining to the Ministry of 
Fisheries, Animal Husbandry and Dairying (Department of Fisheries) was presented 
to Lok Sabha and laid on the Table of Rajya Sabha on 20th August, 2025. The Action 
Taken Notes on the Report were received on 24.11.2025. 
 
3. The Report was considered and adopted by the Committee at their Sitting held 
on 11.08.2026. 
 
4. An Analysis of the action taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in the Twentieth Report (Eighteenth Lok 
Sabha) of the Committee is given in Appendix. 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI; 
11 August, 2026                 
20 Shravana, 1948 (Saka) 
CHARANJIT SINGH CHANNI 
Chairperson, 
Standing Committee on Agriculture 
Animal Husbandry and Food Processing 
 

1 
 
CHAPTER – I 
 
REPORT 
 
This Report of the Standing Committee on Agriculture, Animal Husbandry and 
Food Processing deals with the Action Taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in the Twentieth Report (Eighteenth Lok 
Sabha) of the Standing Committee on Agriculture, Animal Husbandry and Food 
Processing (2024 -25) on the subject ‘Development and Modernization of Fishing 
Harbours’ of the Ministry of Fisheries, Animal Husbandry and Dairying (Department of 
Fisheries) which was presented to Lok Sabha and lai d on the Table of Rajya Sabha 
on 20th August, 2025. 
 
1.2 The Ministry of Fisheries, Animal Husbandry and Dairying (Department of 
Fisheries) have furnished Action Taken Replies in respect of all the 13 Observations/ 
Recommendations contained in the Report. These Replies have been scrutinised and 
categorised as under: - 
 
(i) Observations/Recommendations that have been accepted by the Government: 
 Recommendation Para Nos.1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 11, 12,13  
              Total 12 
       Chapter-II 
 
(ii) Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to pursue 
in view of the Government’s replies:  
Recommendation Para No. 10  
                      Total 01 
                    Chapter-III 
 
(iii) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which Replies of the 
Government have not been accepted by the Committee: 
Recommendation Para Nos. Nil 
              Total 00 
                   Chapter-IV 
 
(iv) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which final replies of the 
Government are still awaited: 
Recommendation Para Nos. Nil 
              Total 00 
                           Chapter-V 

2 
 
1.3 The Committee trust that utmost importance would be given to implementation 
of the Observations/ Recommendations accepted by the Government. In case where 
it is not possible for the Department to implement the Recommendations in letter and 
spirit for any reason, the matter should be reported to the Committee with reasons for 
non-implementation. The Co mmittee desire that further Action Taken Notes on the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in Chapter-I of this Report be furnished to 
them at an early date. 
 
1.4 The Committee will now deal with the action taken by the Government on some 
of the Observations/Recommendations in the succeeding paragraphs. 
 
DEVELOPMENT AND MODERNISATION OF FISHING HARBOURS (FHs) AND 
FISH LANDING CENTRES (FLCs) – ACCELERATING THE PACE 
(RECOMMENDATION PARA NO.1) 
 
1.5 The Committee had observed/recommended: - 
 The Committee has been informed that there are a total of 1547 notified 
Fish Landing Centres (FLCs) in the Country where fish is landed, and, 
Government of India since 1964 has selected 379 of these notified centres for 
development as Fishing Harbours and  Fish Landing Centres under various 
Schemes. Further, selection is done based on strategic considerations such as 
number of fishing boats operating from the landing centre, number of fishermen 
involved, volume of fish landings and proximity to major fish m arkets and fish 
processing centres. 
The Committee, note that, since 1964, Government of India (GoI) has been 
implementing, both, Central Sector and Centrally Sponsored Schemes for the 
development of Fishing Harbours (FHs) and Fish Landing Centres (FLCs) for 
safe landing and berthing faciliti es of fishing vessels. From the period 2014 
onwards, GoI has implemented Schemes such as Blue Revolution (BR), 
Fisheries and Aquaculture Infrastructure Development Fund (FIDF) and 
Pradhan Mantri Matsya Sampada Yojana (PMMSY) for development and 
modernization of FHs and FLCs. However, the Committee, observe that during 
the period i.e. from 1964 to June 2025, i.e. in a span of six decades, a total of 
only 287 landing centres out of 379 selected centres have been 

3 
 
constructed/commissioned which include 07 major Fishing Harbours, 69 minor 
Fishing Harbours and 211 Fish Landing Centres. 
The Committee are concerned that in a span of six decades only 379 landing 
centres out of 1547 notified landing centres have been selected for 
development into FHs and FLCs, which is a meagre 24%. Further, only 75% 
(287) of the selected landing centres have been completed till June 2025. The 
Department has also stated that the landing and berthing facilities available in 
these 379 FHs and FLCs is for 1.48 lakh fishing vessels which is inadequate to 
accommodate the 2.38 lakh active fishing vessels currently operating in the 
country.   
Taking into account the huge potential of Fisheries Sector in the country and 
the deficit in the modern landing and berthing facilities, the Committee 
recommend that the Department should take concrete efforts and select more 
notified landing centres for m odernization and development into Fishing 
Harbours and Fish Landing Centres and the Department may also consider to 
relax some of the strategic considerations while selecting these notified centres 
for development. The Committee understand that increased p ublic funding in 
modernization of FHs and FLCs would create assets and infrastructure which 
would in turn effectuate the overall growth of Fisheries Sector and provide 
modern and hygienic amenities for the fishermen working in these harbours and 
landing centres. The Committee also recommend that the Department may take 
necessary measures and establish a Central Monitoring Committee to oversee 
and ensure that these projects are completed well within time to bridge the gap 
between the current fishing fleet of  the country and the existing capacity of 
landing and berthing available at Fishing Harbours and Fish Landing Centres. 
The Committee would like to be apprised about the steps taken by the 
Department in this regard. 
 
1.6 In its Action Taken Reply, the Department has submitted: - 
 The Government of India has so far taken up 379 notified Fish Landing 
Centres for development as Fishing Harbours and Fish Landing Centres under 
various schemes since 1964. The formulation of projects are done by State/UTs 
keeping in view prioritization of Project(s) in concerned State/UTs and that the 

4 
 
Government of India complement and supplement the efforts of State/UTs. The 
pace of development is likely to accelerated as the Department has prepared  
Standard Operating Procedure (SOP) for development of basic infrastructure 
facilities in the balance no tified Fish Landing Centres. This SOP will facilitate 
as a guiding framework, with uniformity and flexibility as per site conditions, in 
all Coastal States/UTs in management, planning, design, development and 
maintenance of notified Fish Landing Centres (F LCs) as well as guidance to 
States/UTs for preparing techno-financially viable proposals. These initiative is 
aimed at encouraging States/UTs to take up the development of more notified 
centres by easing financial constraints and enhancing project viability. 
       The projects are formulated keeping in view the gaps in fishing fleet and 
facilities available for landing/ berthing at site in respective States/UTs as per 
priority in respective States/UTs and efforts are made  for extending financial 
assistance to more number of project subject to technical, financial viability and 
availability of budget. The monitoring of ongoing pr ojects are undertaken by 
various authorities in implementing State/UTs and reports submitted. The 
review of projects are also performe d at Central Level from time to time by 
different Officers including review by Hon’ble Union Minister to avoid time and 
cost overrun. 
 
1.7 The Committee appreciate that the Department of Fisheries has prepared 
Standard Operating Procedure (SOP) for development of basic infrastructure 
facilities in the remaining notified Fish Landing Centres which will act as a 
guiding framework for all Coastal States/UTs in management, planning, design, 
development and maintenance of notified Fish Landing Centres (FLCs) and also 
in preparing techno -financially viable proposals. The Committee, however, 
understand that the notified landing centres are chosen for  modernisation by 
States/UTs and that the Government of India complement and supplement such 
projects, keeping in view the strategic considerations such as number of fishing 
boats operating from the landing centre, number of fishermen involved, volume 
of f ish landings and proximity to major fish markets and fish processing 
centres. The Committee, however, feel that  increased public funding by 
States/UTs and Government of India in modernization of notified landing centres 

5 
 
would create assets and infrastructure and availability of such ready modern 
infrastructure and facilities around such notified landing centres would in turn 
encourage fishing activities, development of fish markets and processing 
centres in such areas which would add to the overall growth of Fisheries Sector. 
The Department may therefore examine this aspect and explore the possibility 
of developing some notified landing centres keeping in view the future 
expansion/possibilities of fisheries sector around s uch centres due to ready 
availability of modern facilities and infrastructure.   
SOCIAL SECURITY MEASURES, HOUSING AND EDUCATION FACILITIES FOR 
FISHERMEN WORKING IN FISHING HARBOURS/FISH LANDING CENTRES 
(RECOMMENDATION PARA NO.7) 
 
1.8 The Committee had observed/recommended: - 
 The Committee have been informed that under Pradhan Mantri Matsya 
Sampada Yojana (PMMSY) fishermen are provided safety kits to ensure their 
safety at sea, livelihood and nutritional support during fish ban period, 
accidental insurance cover in a cost shar ing mechanism with the States/UTs 
and insurance premium subvention for insurance of fishing vessels. The 
Committee has also been informed that fishermen can avail facilities offered by 
other ministries under several ongoing welfare schemes, such as, Ayushm an 
Bharat for medical insurance cover, Pradhan Mantri Jeevan Jyoti Bima Yojana 
(PMJJBY) and Pradhan Mantri Suraksha Bima Yojana (PMSBY) for life and 
accident insurance including hospitalization cover of Rs. 25000. 
The Committee, however, note that to address the specific housing, and 
education needs of the fishermen, there are no targeted schemes of the 
Department at present. Previously, the Department implemented the ‘Blue 
Revolution: Integrated Development and Man agement of Fisheries’ scheme, 
which included the ‘National Scheme of Welfare of Fishermen a centrally 
sponsored initiative which was designed to provide financial assistance and 
support to fishermen in India. One of the aims of the scheme was to empower 
fishermen by facilitating the construction of houses.  

6 
 
The Committee, recommend that the Department may take measures to assess 
the housing and educational requirements of fishermen in coastal areas and 
examine if in the current scheme i.e. PMMSY, specific components for housing 
and educational needs such as e ducational loans and scholarships for 
fishermen/fishermen families can be included. The Department may also 
explore the possibility if, in Pradhan Mantri Awaas Yojana (Gramin), some 
percentage in housing allotment selection can be reserved specifically for  
fishermen communities. The Committee would like to be apprised further in the 
matter. 
1.9 In its Action Taken Reply, the Department has stated:-  
 At present, components pertaining to housing and educational needs, 
such as educational loans and scholarships, are not covered under the scheme 
guidelines of the Department, as the Pradhan Mantri Matsya Sampada Yojana 
(PMMSY) is primarily focused on the d evelopment of the fisheries sector. The 
matters relating to housing and education are being dealt by the respective 
concerned Ministries. 
Further, the Department has requested the Ministry of Rural Development in 
accordance with the suggestion of Committee to explore the possibility of 
earmarking a certain percentage of housing allotments under the Pradhan 
Mantri Awaas Yojana (Gramin) specifically for fishermen communities.  
 
1.10 The Committee appreciate that the Department has requested the Ministry 
of Rural Development in accordance with the suggestion of Committee to 
explore the possibility of earmarking a certain percentage of housing 
allotments under the Pradhan Mantri Awaas Yojana (Gramin) specifically for 
fishermen communities.  The Committee, however, feel that the Department 
may also explore the possibility of incorporating the specific components of 
providing housing and educational needs such as educational loans and 
scholarships for fishermen/fishermen families in the proposed extended 
version of Pradhan Mantri Matsya Sampada Yojana (PMMSY). 
 
 
 
 

7 
 
COMPENSATION DURING LEAN FISHING SEASON TO BE SUBSTANTIAL 
(RECOMMENDATION PARA NO 8) 
 
1.11 The Committee had observed/recommended:- 
The Committee have been informed that under Pradhan Mantri Matsya 
Sampada Yojana (PMMSY), Government of India provides livelihood and 
nutritional support for socio-economically backward active traditional fishermen 
families during the fishing ban/lean period for three months. Under the scheme 
financial assistance of Rs.3000 per annum is provided to each enrolled 
beneficiary and the enrolled beneficiary’s contribution is Rs 1500 annually. 
Thus, an amount of Rs 4500 is disbursed to each enrolled beneficiary b y the 
respective State/UT annually. The Committee note that during the last five 
years i.e. from 2020 -21 to 2024 -25, only 5.95 lakh fishers were provided 
livelihood and nutritional support per annum with a project outlay of Rs. 1384.80 
cores. 
According to the data of the Department of Fisheries, there are about 2.8 crore 
fishermen in all the Coastal States and Union Territories of the country. The 
Committee are concerned that in the last five years i.e. 2020 onwards the 
Department has disbursed  livelihood and nutritional support to only 5.95 lakh 
fishermen annually which is a meager 2.1% of the fishermen population. The 
Department was unable to distribute financial assistance to all the fishermen 
even in a span of five years is very disheartening and a matter of concern. The 
Committee also do not accept the argument that most of the fishermen are not 
registered and hence unable to take benefit of the said scheme of the 
Department. 
The Committee strongly recommend that the Department should take 
immediate measures to address the dismally low performance of the scheme 
meant to provide livelihood and nutritional support to fishermen during the fish 
ban period. The Committee also recomm end that considering the current 
economic parameters and inflation, the Department should make efforts to 
increase the financial assistance provided during the fish ban period to at least 
ten thousand rupees per fishermen annually without any annual contri bution 
from the fishermen. 

8 
 
1.12 In its Action Taken Reply, the Department has submitted: - 
 The proposal for enhanced financial assistance for Livelihood and 
Nutritional support mooted for operationalization from FY 2025 -26 subject to 
the availability of fiscal space and approval of the competent authority/Cabinet 
 
1.13 The Committee had recommended that the Department should take 
immediate measures to address the low performance of the scheme meant to 
provide livelihood and nutritional support to fishermen during the fish ban 
period as during the last five years i.e. 202 0 onwards the Department has 
disbursed livelihood and nutritional support to only 5.95 lakh fishermen 
annually which is a meager 2.1% of the total 2.8 crore fishermen population. 
The Committee appreciate that the Department has accepted the proposal of 
the Committee to enhance the financial assistance provided to fishermen 
during the fish ban period subject to the availability of fiscal space and 
approval of the competent authority/Cabinet, however, the Committee feel that 
the Department may also take necessary measures and ensure maximum reach 
of the scheme meant to provide livelihood and nutritional support for fishermen 
during fish ban period.  
 
 
 
  

9 
 
CHAPTER – II 
 
 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS THAT HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE 
GOVERNMENT 
 
 
1. DEVELOPMENT AND MODERNISATION OF FISHING HARBOURS (FHS) 
AND FISH LANDING CENTRES (FLCS) – ACCELERATING THE PACE. 
 
The Committee has been informed that there are a total of 1547 notified Fish 
Landing Centres (FLCs) in the Country where fish is landed, and, Government of India 
since 1964 has selected 379 of these notified centres for development as Fishing 
Harbours and Fish Landing Centres under various Schemes. Further, selection is 
done based on strategic considerations such as number of fishin g boats operating 
from the landing centre, number of fishermen involved, volume of fish landings and 
proximity to major fish markets and fish processing centres. 
The Committee, note that, since 1964, Government of India (GoI) has been 
implementing, both, Central Sector and Centrally Sponsored Schemes for the 
development of Fishing Harbours (FHs) and Fish Landing Centres (FLCs) for safe 
landing and berthing facilities of fishing vessels. From the period 2014 onwards, GoI 
has implemented Schemes such as Blue Revolution (BR), Fisheries and Aquaculture 
Infrastructure Development Fund (FIDF) and Pradhan Mantri Matsya Sampada 
Yojana (PMMSY) for development and modernization of FHs and FLCs. However, the 
Committee, observe that during the period i.e. from 1964 to June 2025, i.e. in a span 
of six decades, a total of only 287 landing centres out of 379 selected centres have 
been constructed/commissioned which include 07 major  Fishing Harbours, 69 minor 
Fishing Harbours and 211 Fish Landing Centres. 
The Committee are concerned that in a span of six decades only 379 landing 
centres out of 1547 notified landing centres have been selected for development into 
FHs and FLCs, which is a meagre 24%. Further, only 75% (287) of the selected 
landing centres have been completed till June 2025. The Department has also stated 
that the landing and berthing facilities available in these 379 FHs and FLCs is for 1.48 
lakh fishing vessels which is inadequate to accommodate the 2.38 lakh active fishing 
vessels currently operating in the country.   
Taking into account the huge potential of Fisheries Sector in the country and 
the deficit in the modern landing and berthing facilities, the Committee recommend 

10 
 
that the Department should take concrete efforts and select more notified landing 
centres for modernization and development into Fishing Harbours and Fish Landing 
Centres and the Department may also consider to relax some of the strategic 
considerations while selecting these notified centres for development. The Committee 
understand that increased public funding in modernization of FHs and FLCs would 
create assets and infrastructure which would in turn effectuate the overall growth of 
Fisheries Sector and provide modern and hygienic amenities for the fishermen working 
in these harbours and landing centres. The Committee also recommend that the 
Department may take necessary measures and establish a Central Monitoring 
Committee to oversee and ensure that these  projects are completed well within time 
to bridge the gap between the current fishing fleet of the country and the existing 
capacity of landing and berthing available at Fishing Harbours and Fish Landing 
Centres. The Committee would like to be apprised ab out the steps taken by the 
Department in this regard. 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
The Government of India has so far taken up 379 notified Fish Landing Centres 
for development as Fishing Harbours and Fish Landing Centres under various 
schemes since 1964. The formulation of projects are done by State/UTs keeping in 
view  prioritization of Pr oject(s) in concerned State/UTs and that the Government of 
India complement and supplement the efforts of State/UTs. The pace of development 
is likely to accelerated as the Department has prepared  Standard Operating 
Procedure (SOP) for development of basi c infrastructure facilities in the balance 
notified Fish Landing Centres. This SOP will facilitate as a guiding framework, with 
uniformity and flexibility as per site conditions, in all Coastal States/UTs in 
management, planning, design, development and ma intenance of notified Fish 
Landing Centres (FLCs) as well as guidance to States/UTs for preparing techno -
financially viable proposals. These initiative is aimed at encouraging States/UTs to 
take up the development of more notified centres by easing financi al constraints and 
enhancing project viability. 
The projects are formulated keeping in view the gaps in fishing fleet and 
facilities available for landing/bearthing at site in respective States/UTs as per priority 
in respective States/UTs and efforts are made  for extending financial assistance to 

11 
 
more number of project subject to technical, financial viability and availability of 
budget. The monitoring of ongoing projects are undertaken by various authorities in 
implementing State/UTs and reports submitted. The review of projects are also 
performed at Central Level from time to time by different Officers including review by 
Hon’ble Union Minister to avoid time and cost overrun. 
 
Ministry of Fisheries, Animal Husbandry and Dairying 
(Department of Fisheries) 
F. No. J-23011/1/2025-Fy dated 24th November, 2025 
Comments of the Committee 
For comments of the Committee please refer to Para No. 1.7 of Chapter I of this Report 
 
2. DEVELOPMENT OF SMART AND INTEGRATED FISHING HARBOURS. 
The Committee, note that, the development of Smart and Integrated Fishing 
Harbours is an innovative approach to plan, design and develop modern infrastructure 
in line with Blue Port Initiative of Food and Agriculture Organisation which involves 
economic, social and environmental develo pment of the Fishing Harbour Area. The 
Department during the FY 2024-25 has sanctioned three Smart and Integrated Fishing 
Harbours namely Jakhau in Gujarat, Vanakbara in Diu and Karaikal in Puducherry with 
a total estimated cost of Rs. 369.8 crore. Further, the projects are being implemented 
by the respective States/UTs with a stipulated time period of completion in 18 months. 
The Committee, understand that rising awareness amongst the domestic consumers, 
and export requirements on food and safety, the Fishing Harbours in India need to be 
modernized so as to meet the parameters of hygiene, sanitation, bio -safety and 
cleanliness as accepted in International Markets. Thus, development of Smart and 
Integrated Fishing Harbours across the coastal regions becomes imperative, which in 
turn would improve operations, safety measures, environmental sustainability and 
socio-economic well-being of the fishermen working there. However, the Committee, 
is concerned, that the three Smart and Integrated Fishing Harbours which were 
sanctioned during the FY 2024 -25, namely, in Jakhau, Vanakbara and Karaikal 
respectively are still in pre -tendering st age and their work has not started. The 
Committee, therefore, recommend that the Department should proactively investigate 
the issues which are causing delay in the work starting at Jakhau, Vanakbara and 
Karaikal and take concrete measures to address them.  The Committee, further, 

12 
 
recommend that the Department should conduct a feasibility study, to assess, if Smart 
and Integrated Fishing Harbours can be established in all the coastal States/UTs 
which have substantial fishermen population and fishery resources. At least one Smart 
and Integrated Fishing Harbour in each Coastal State/UT may be developed by the 
Department, Government of India for speedy development of the Fishery Sector in 
India. 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
The concerned State/UTs have been requested to expedite the progress of 
smart and integrated fishing harbour projects sanctioned under PMMSY. The present 
status of the work is as follows:-  i) The tendering process for the Smart and Integrated 
Fishing Harbour at Karaikal has been completed (ii) The tendering process for the 
Smart and Integrated Fishing Harbour at Jakhau has also been completed and the 
works have been awarded iii) The tendering of works is under process for Smart and 
Integrated Fishing Harbour at Vanakbara. 
The Department has decided that henceforth Smart and Integrated Fishing 
Harbours to be developed in Coastal States/UTs subject to receipt of technically and 
financially viable proposal and that advisory to that affect has been already issued. 
The Department has prepared Standard Operating Procedure (SOP) for development 
of Smart and Integrated Fishing Harbours. This SOP will facilitate as a guiding 
framework, with uniformity and flexibility as per site conditions, in all Coastal 
States/UTs in management, pl anning, design, development and maintenance of 
Smart and Integrated Fishing Harbours as well as guidance to States/UTs for 
preparing techno-financially viable proposals.  
 
Ministry of Fisheries, Animal Husbandry and Dairying 
(Department of Fisheries) 
F. No. J-23011/1/2025-Fy dated 24th November, 2025 
 
3. STRENGTHENING OF CENTRAL INSTITUTE OF COASTAL ENGINEERING 
FOR FISHERY (CICEF). 
 
The Committee note that Central Institute of Coastal Engineering for Fishery 
(CICEF) is entrusted with extending necessary technical assistance to the needy 
States/UTs in conducting necessary economic and technical studies to identify priority 

13 
 
sites for development of Fishing Harbours (FH) and Fish Landing Centres (FLC). 
Further, CICEF becomes even more important, given the country’s plan to develop 
Smart and Integrated Fishery Harbours.  
The Committee has been informed that, the Techno -Economic Feasibility 
Report (TEFR) prepared by CICEF are incomplete for want of physical/mathematical 
model studies, Environmental Impact Assessment (EIA) and Environmental 
Management Plan (EMP) studies whic h are pre -requisites for project funding. 
However, at present Environmental and Mathematical Model Studies aspects are not 
part of CICEF mandate and the institute needs to outsource these studies for which 
the Department is envisioning to provide necessary funds from its annual budget. 
Given the importance of physical/mathematical model studies and EIA/EMP 
studies, the Committee recommend that CICEF should recruit experts who can deal 
with environmental and mathematical model studies to enable complete project 
reports. Further, the staff strength of CICEF shoul d be reviewed and adequate 
measures should be taken to fill the vacancies in the institute. The Committee also 
recommend that CICEF staff should be given adequate international exposure through 
study tours and overseas learning programmes to enhance their skills and output. 
Accordingly, the budget of the Institute may be increased to meet such requirements 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
The Physical/mathematical model studies and EIA/EMP studies are critical 
components of feasibility studies for a fishery infrastructure project. These studies are 
to be outsourced to accredited institutions as they are not part of the in-house mandate 
of CICEF . However, CICEF under deposit work mechanism approved by the 
Department of Fisheries, undertakes feasibility studies including hydraulic model 
studies and environmental studies by the QCI/NABET accredited institutions to the 
clients. These ensures that all TEFRs prepared are complete and fully compliant with 
project funding requirements of major infrastructure schemes and external funding 
agencies. 
Further, Mathematical/physical modelling require specialised national -level 
facilities, such as development of extensive physical models in widespread areas, 
wave flumes, specialized software, calibration mechanisms etc. which are available 

14 
 
with prestigious institutes under the Government of India like Central Water & Power 
Research Station (CWPRS), NIOT, IITs and certain Universities. It is economical to 
utilise the services of such institutes rather to build/develop in -house. CICEF is 
efficiently utilising the services of such professional institutions by analysing the 
outcomes and incorporating the results in the TEFRs. 
The Government norms prescribe that EIA/EMP reports must be prepared only 
by agencies accredited with QCI/NABET. While these studies will continue to be 
undertaken through specialised external institutions as per statutory requirements, 
CICEF is strengthening its internal capacity to coordinate and supervise such studies 
effectively and to integrate the results into TEFRs. The Department has already taken 
steps to augment technical manpower in CICEF, ensuring that adequate qualified 
officers are in position  to manage and oversee these outsourced studies. The 
Department of Fisheries is taking necessary timely action to fill up vacant Group ‘A’ 
posts as per extant rules. The Director, CICEF, has initiated action and is submitting 
proposals to the Union Public Service Commission (UPSC) and Staff Selection 
Commission (SSC) for filling up vacant Group ‘B’ and Group ‘C’ posts as per the 
Government rules. Filling -up of vacancies is a phased and continuous process to 
strengthen the Institute as recommended by the Com mittee. This will significantly 
enhance the Institute’s capacity to undertake pre -investment studies and preparation 
of TEFRs/DPRs. The Department recognised the need for capacity building in 
emerging areas such as smart and integrated harbour design, coas tal modelling, 
environmental engineering and global best practices. The Department of Fisheries is 
nominating CICEF staff for international exposure in the international collaborations 
for capacity building to enhance their skill set. The suggestion of the  Committee will 
be factored in future budgeting for CICEF in provisions for international training, 
exposure visits and skill enhancement programmes. 
 
Ministry of Fisheries, Animal Husbandry and Dairying 
(Department of Fisheries) 
F. No. J-23011/1/2025-Fy dated 24th November, 2025 
 
4. EXPORT INSPECTION COUNCIL OF INDIA (EIC). 
The Committee has been informed that approval of Export Inspection Council 
of India (EIC) is mandatory for only those Fishing Harbours (FH) and Fish Landing 
Centres (FLC), which handle fish and fishery products, intended for export in 

15 
 
accordance with the Government of India Notification S.O.730(E) dated 21 st August, 
1995 and its subsequent amendments. Harbours which handle exports must maintain 
certain standards and guidelines as mandated by EIC, such as compliance with 
Hazard Analysis Critical Control Point (HACCP) principles, European Union (EU) 
hygiene reg ulations and traceability norms. Furthermore, all such facilities have to 
adhere to the standards laid down in Appendix D and E of the Executive Instructions 
for Primary Production of Fish and Fishery Products – January 2016, which outline the 
structural and operational hygiene requirements for harbour and landing centres. 
Thus, the quality and hygiene requirements of importing countries are kept in mind to 
ensure that the country’s seafood exports remain compliant and competitive. 
The Department has also stated that proposals for upgradation, modernisaton or 
establishment of new Fishing Harbours (FH) and Fish Landing Centres (FLC) are 
formulated keeping in mind, the standards and guidelines laid down by the EIC as well 
as the requirements of major importing countries. 
The Committee note that facilities that solely cater to domestic or local 
consumption do not require any mandatory approval from EIC, and therefore, not 
bound by their quality and hygiene standards to operate. The Committee, strongly feel 
that it is high t ime, that we as a country, should treat our domestic consumers at par 
with international consumers, when it comes to providing quality and hygienic fish and 
fishery products and maintain the highest structural and operational hygiene in 
conformity with int ernational standards. The Committee, therefore, recommend that 
the guidelines and quality standards of Export Inspection Council of India (EIC) should 
be applied to Fishing Harbours and Fish Landing Centres catering to domestic 
consumers as well and necess ary infrastructure modernization and development of 
FH and FLC should be done on priority basis. This would ensure food safety, public 
health, contain contamination, traceability and sanitary hygiene throughout the supply 
chain and maintain uniformity in q uality standards both in domestic as well as 
international markets. The Committee would like to be further apprised on the matter. 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
The guidelines of the Export Inspection Council (EIC) have been circulated to 
all Coastal States/UTs with a request to examine the matter and take appropriate 

16 
 
action to explore the possibility of adhering to the prescribed EIC standards in all 
Fishing Harbours and Fish Landing Centres in their respective States/UTs, thereby 
ensuring food safety, public health, traceability, sanitary hygiene, and uniform quality 
standards across both domestic and international markets. 
Further, the Standard Operating Procedure (SOP) prepared by the Department for the 
“Development and Management of Smart and Integrated Fishing Harbours” and 
“Development of basic infrastructure facilities in the notified Fish Landing Centres” also 
incorporates and aligns with the guidelines and quality standards prescribed by the 
Export Inspection Council (EIC) of India for domestic consumers too.  
Ministry of Fisheries, Animal Husbandry and Dairying 
(Department of Fisheries) 
F. No. J-23011/1/2025-Fy dated 24th November, 2025 
 
5. CO-OPERATIVE MANAGEMENT STRUCTURE FOR FISHING HARBOURS/ 
FISH LANDING CENTRES IN THE COUNTRY. 
The Committee observe that effective management of Fishing Harbours is an 
important aspect in addition to development and modernization of harbours. However, 
many Fishing Harbours and Fish Landing Centres operating in the country do not have 
proper managem ent structures and are run with meager resources lacking basic 
health, hygiene and sanitary amenities. The Committee has been informed that the 
management of Fishing Harbour and Fish Landing Centres is generally done by 
respective State/UTs as per their gu idelines, however, Department of Fisheries, 
Government of India while approving the projects stipulates that concerned State/UT 
Government will be responsible for management, maintenance and operation of the 
Fishing Harbour in a professional and financially self-sustainable manner.  
The Committee has also been informed that Marine Product Development 
Authority (MPEDA) under Government of India along with Department of Fisheries of 
States/UTs is working towards improving harbour management practices through its 
society MPEDA - NETFISH. MPEDA has been promoting the Munambam (Kerala) 
Model of Fishing Harbour Management Society (MFHMS) as an effective model for 
management of fishing harbours to ensure efficient and participatory governance 
which includes representation form key stakeholders such as fishers, harbour workers, 
officials from the State Fisheries and Port Departments, MPEDA and the District 
Collector serving as its Chairman. The model ensures participatory decision making 

17 
 
and efficient day to day management of harbours thereby promoting good handling 
practices for fish and ice, hygiene and sanitation, and enforce a code of conduct within 
the harbour. 
The Committee, therefore, recommend that co-operative management societies 
with active participation from the government agencies and stakeholders such as 
fishers, harbour workers, boat owners and women/public representatives should be 
ideal for running Fishing Harbors and Fish Landing Centres and thus the Department 
should make efforts and pursue State/UT Governments to either implement the 
“Munamban Model” in all their Fishing Harbours/Fish Landing Centres, ‘or’ the 
Department may themselves develop a mod el co -operative management system, 
which may function as a guiding force to be implemented by all Coastal States/UTs 
voluntarily. The Department may also explore the possibility of linking the release of 
central funds to State/UTs (for development and mode rnization of Fishing 
Harbours/Fish Landing Centers) to the establishment of a co -operative harbour 
management system, so as to ensure and pursue States/UTs to set up Co -operative 
Management Systems with participatory decision making in their respective Fis hing 
Harbours and Fish Landing Centres.  
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
  The copy of of Munambam Cooperative Model followed in Munambam Fishing 
Harbour in State of Kerala have been circulated to all Coastal States/UTs with a 
request to take appropriate action to explore the possibility of establishing cooperative 
harbour management system in Fishing Harbours and Fish Landing Centres in their 
respective State/UTs by adopting the Munambam Cooperative Model for promoting 
participatory and sustainable management systems, 
Further, the Standard Operating Procedures (SOPs) prepared by the 
Department for “Development and Management of Smart and Integrated Fishing 
Harbours” and “Development of Basic Infrastructure Facilities in the Notified Fish 
Landing Centres” inter alia includes provisions related to management, maintenance, 
and operation frameworks, incorporating good practices from the Munamban 
Cooperative Model. These provisions are aimed at promoting participatory and 
sustainable management systems in Fishing Harbours and Fish Landing Centres. This 
SoP will serve as a guiding framework to all coastal states/UTs for establishment of a 

18 
 
cooperative management structure in Fishing Harbour and Fish Landing Centre in 
their respective State/UTs.  
 
Ministry of Fisheries, Animal Husbandry and Dairying 
(Department of Fisheries) 
F. No. J-23011/1/2025-Fy dated 24th November, 2025 
 
 
6. RELEASE OF CENTRAL FUNDS FOR DEVELOPMENT AND 
MODERNISATION OF FISHING HARBOURS/FISH LANDING CENTRES. 
The Committee have been informed that since inception of the Central 
Schemes, Government of India has provided funds to the tune of Rs 1860.62 crore for 
development of Fishing Harbours (FH), Fish Landing Centres (FLC) including 
modernization and up -gradation of the existing ones. Further, appr oval have been 
accorded for 117 FH, FLC proposals of various States/UTs to the tune of Rs. 9735 
crore under Blue Revolution, Pradhan Mantri Matsya Sampada Yojana (PMMSY) and 
Fisheries and Aquaculture Infrastructure Development Fund (FIDF).  However, funds 
have been released to the tune of Rs 1069 crore for development/ modernization of 
Fishing Harbours and Fish Landing Centres under Blue Revolution and Pradhan 
Mantri Matsya Sampada Yojana (PMMSY) and a loan to the tune of Rs1220 crore has 
been disbursed for development of Fishing Harbours and Fish Landing Centres by 
NABARD under Fisheries and Aquaculture Infrastructure Development Fund (FIDF) 
Scheme along with release of Rs. 60 crores towards interest subvention under FIDF. 
 The Committee are concern about the slow pace of release of Central Funds 
to infrastructure projects such as Modernization and Development of fishing harbours 
and were informed that funds are released based on the submission of utilization 
certificate (UC) of the previously released central share and submission of physical 
and financial progress reports by the State/UT. The Department also submitted that 
the main reasons for slow pace  of release of central funds are due to delay in 
completion of pre -tendering activities, slow progress of the projects, litigations and 
fund absorbing capacity of the project implementing agencies.  
The Committee observe that timely release of Central Funds meant for 
Development and Modernisation of Fishing Harbours and Fish Landing Centres is very 
crucial if these projects are to see the light of the day. The Committee, therefore, 

19 
 
recommend that the Department may coordinate with States/UTs and streamline the 
issues such as submission of Utilsation Certificates and completion of pre -tendering 
activities and if possible, set up a Central Monitoring Committee to even out any such 
obstacles in the release of Central Funds and ensure that the projects are completed 
well within the time frame. 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
Since the States/UTs are the project implementation agencies for the work, the 
Department has requested concerned States/UTs to take necessary action for 
expediting the progress of Fishing Harbour (FH) and Fish Landing Centre (FLC) 
projects sanctioned unde r the Centrally Sponsored Component(CSS) of Pradhan 
Mantri Matsya SampadaYojana (PMMSY), ensure timely submission of Utilisation 
Certificates for the funds released, complete all pre-tendering activities at the earliest 
and submit updated Monthly Progress Reports (MPRs) on a regular basis.  
The monitoring of ongoing projects are undertaken by various authorities in 
implementing State/UTs and reports submitted. The review of projects is also 
performed at Central Level from time to time by different Officers including review by 
Hon’ble Union Minister to avoid time and cost overrun. 
The efforts are made in review meetings to address and resolve issues with 
States/UTs—such as delays in submission of Utilisation Certificates, completion of 
pre-tendering activities, and other bottlenecks affecting the release of Central funds 
 
Ministry of Fisheries, Animal Husbandry and Dairying 
(Department of Fisheries) 
F. No. J-23011/1/2025-Fy dated 24th November, 2025 
 
7. SOCIAL SECURITY MEASURES, HOUSING AND EDUCATION FACILITIES 
FOR FISHERMEN WORKING IN FISHING HARBOURS/FISH LANDING 
CENTRES. 
The Committee have been informed that under Pradhan Mantri Matsya 
Sampada Yojana (PMMSY) fishermen are provided safety kits to ensure their safety 
at sea, livelihood and nutritional support during fish ban period, accidental insurance 
cover in a cost shari ng mechanism with the States/UTs and insurance premium 
subvention for insurance of fishing vessels. The Committee has also been informed 

20 
 
that fishermen can avail facilities offered by other ministries under several ongoing 
welfare schemes, such as, Ayushman Bharat for medical insurance cover, Pradhan 
Mantri Jeevan Jyoti Bima Yojana (PMJJBY) and Pradhan Mantri Suraksha Bima 
Yojana (PMSBY) for life and accident insurance including hospitalization cover of Rs. 
25000. 
The Committee, however, note that to address the specific housing, and 
education needs of the fishermen, there are no targeted schemes of the Department 
at present. Previously, the Department implemented the ‘Blue Revolution: Integrated 
Development and Man agement of Fisheries’ scheme, which included the ‘National 
Scheme of Welfare of Fishermen a centrally sponsored initiative which was designed 
to provide financial assistance and support to fishermen in India. One of the aims of 
the scheme was to empower fishermen by facilitating the construction of houses. 
The Committee, recommend that the Department may take measures to assess 
the housing and educational requirements of fishermen in coastal areas and examine 
if in the current scheme i.e. PMMSY, specific components for housing and educational 
needs such as educational loans and scholarships for fishermen/fishermen families 
can be included. The Department may also explore the possibility if, in Pradhan Mantri 
AwaasYojana (Gramin), some percentage in housing allotment selection can be  
reserved specifically for fishermen communities. The Committee would like to be 
apprised further in the matter. 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
At present, components pertaining to housing and educational needs, such as 
educational loans and scholarships, are not covered under the scheme guidelines of 
the Department, as the Pradhan Mantri Matsya Sampada Yojana (PMMSY) is 
primarily focused on the d evelopment of the fisheries sector. The matters relating to 
housing and education are being dealt by the respective concerned Ministries. 
Further, the Department has requested the Ministry of Rural Development in 
accordance with the suggestion of Committee to explore the possibility of earmarking 
a certain percentage of housing allotments under the Pradhan Mantri Awaas Yojana  
 

21 
 
(Gramin) specifically for fishermen communities.  
Ministry of Fisheries, Animal Husbandry and Dairying 
(Department of Fisheries) 
F. No. J-23011/1/2025-Fy dated 24th November, 2025 
Comments of the Committee 
For comments of the Committee please refer to Para No. 1.10 of Chapter I of this 
Report  
 
8. COMPENSATION DURING LEAN FISHING SEASON TO BE 
SUBSTANTIAL. 
 
The Committee have been informed that under Pradhan Mantri Matsya 
Sampada Yojana (PMMSY), Government of India provides livelihood and nutritional 
support for socio -economically backward active traditional fishermen families during 
the fishing ban/lean period for three months. Under the scheme financial assistance 
of Rs.3000 per annum is provided to each enrolled beneficiary and the enrol led 
beneficiary’s contribution is Rs 1500 annually. Thus, an amount of Rs 4500 is 
disbursed to each enrolled beneficiary by the respective State/UT annually. The 
Committee note that during the last five years i.e. from 2020-21 to 2024-25, only 5.95 
lakh fishers were provided livelihood and nutritional support per annum with a project 
outlay of Rs. 1384.80 crores. 
According to the data of the Department of Fisheries, there are about 2.8 crore 
fishermen in all the Coastal States and Union Territories of the country. The 
Committee are concerned that in the last five years i.e. 2020 onwards the Department 
has disbursed livelihood and nutritional support to only 5.95 lakh fishermen annually 
which is a meager 2.1% of the fishermen population. The Department was unable to 
distribute financial assistance to all the fishermen even in a span of five years is very 
disheartening and a matter of concern. The Committee also do not accept the 
argument that most of the fishermen are not registered and hence unable to take 
benefit of the said scheme of the Department. 
The Committee strongly recommend that the Department should take 
immediate measures to address the dismally low performance of the scheme meant 
to provide livelihood and nutritional support to fishermen during the fish ban period. 
The Committee also recomm end that considering the current economic parameters 

22 
 
and inflation, the Department should make efforts to increase the financial assistance 
provided during the fish ban period to at least ten thousand rupees per fishermen 
annually without any annual contribution from the fishermen. 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
The proposal for enhanced financial assistance for Livelihood and Nutritional 
support mooted for operationalization from FY 2025 -26 subject to the availability of 
fiscal space and approval of the competent authority/Cabinet.  
 
Ministry of Fisheries, Animal Husbandry and Dairying 
(Department of Fisheries) 
F. No. J-23011/1/2025-Fy dated 24th November, 2025 
 
Comments of the Committee 
For comments of the Committee please refer to Para No. 1.13 of Chapter I of this 
Report.  
 
9. SAFEGUARDING THE INTERESTS OF SMALL AND TRADITIONAL 
FISHERMEN AGAINST HIGH INTEREST LOANS FROM PRIVATE 
LENDERS. 
The Committee are concern about the plight of small and traditional fishermen 
who bear the brunt of paying exorbitant interest rates on the loans taken by them from 
private lenders to carry out fishing activities. The Department has informed the 
Committee that Kisan Credit Card (KCC) facility, that has been extended to 4.78 lakh 
fishers/fish farmers provides them with working capital and short -term loans at low 
interest rates. Further Fisheries and Aquaculture Infrastructure Development Fund 
(FIDF) scheme offers long -term low interest loans to individuals, coope ratives and 
Self-Help Groups. The Committee has also been informed that the sub scheme under 
PMMSY, viz Pradhan Mantri Matsya Kisan Samridhi Sah -Yojana (PM -MKSSY) 
promotes formalization of fisheries sector and also aims at registration on 40 lakh 
stakeholders on National Fisheries Digital Platform (NFDP) which will give them 
access to Institutional credit support. 
 The Committee, observe that there are about 2.8 crore fishers and fish farmers 
engaged in fisheries sector in the country, however only 4.64 lakh fishers/fish farmers 

23 
 
have been provided with KCC which is a meagre 1.6%. Further, under PM -MKSSY, 
25.48 lakh stakeholders are being registered on NFDP. 
The Committee are concerned about the low performance of the KCC scheme 
and understand that formalization of Fisheries Sector is very important to ensure 
targeted implementation of the Schemes of the Department so that the intended 
benefits of the Schemes are reaped by the Fishermen well within time. The 
Committee, therefore, recommend that the Department may take concrete measures 
to expand the reach of KCC to fishermen and ensure that more and more fishers/fish 
farmers are registered to promote formalizat ion of fisheries sector, so that they have 
ready access to the institutional credit provided under various schemes and thus get 
protected against private lenders and dependence on informal borrowing methods 
having exorbitant interest rates. 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
The Department has been actively mobilizing Kisan Credit Cards (KCC) for 
fishers and fish farmers through various nationwide initiatives since the scheme's 
extension to the fisheries sector. To saturate the targets of KCC fisheries, States/UTs 
have designa ted field officers, officials, and local resource persons from various 
departments and agencies, viz. State Fisheries Departments, Fisheries co-operatives 
and to provide handholding support for identification of eligible fishers, fish farmers 
and documentation works required in each districts and also to extend every possible 
help to the beneficiary to get loan. States/ UTs have been advised to regularly monitor 
the progress of saturation of eligible fishers and fish farmers under  KCC and also to 
take up follow up action with the concerned banks for resolving the issues if any and 
to ensure early sanction of  KCC to the eligible fishers and fish farmers. Regular 
Review meetings were conducted with all the stakeholders to assess the progress of 
KCC saturation drives. The Department has been making concerted efforts to increase 
the coverage of large number of fishers and fish farmers for proving KCC facilities 
including organising Special Drives from time -to-time, organising sensitization 
programmes, mass and in dividual extension activities such as distribution of 
pamphlets, conducting of awareness campaign in vernacular languages, Newspaper 
articles, advertisement etc. In order to provide Kisan Credit Card facility to all eligible 
Fishery Farmers and Animal Husb andry Farmers, Ministry of Fisheries, Animal 

24 
 
Husbandry and Dairying in association with Department of Financial Services 
organized several ‘Nationwide AHDF KCC Campaign’ from time to time for on -the-
spot scrutiny of applications sourced in both modes (offline and online). In order to 
extend the actua l benefit of the KCC to all the eligible fishers and fish farmers, the 
Department of Fisheries (DoF) has been pursuing with the Department of Financial 
Services (DFS), Ministry of Finance the necessary inclusion of the Fisheries Sector in 
the ‘Jan Samarth’ portal (www.jansamarth.in), which was successfully on-boarded on 
15th March 2024. As on 10.10.2025, a total of 6,92,639 Kisan Credit Card (KCC) 
applications has been mobilized from fishers and fish farmers across the country, out 
of which 4,89,116 KCCs ha ve been issued, with a total disbursement of ₹3569.60 
crore.  
Further, Pradhan Mantri Matsya Kisan Samridhi Sah-yojana (PM-MKSSY) provides 
‘one-time incentive’ to the willing farmers with farm size of 4 hectares of water spread area 
(WSA) and less. Aquaculture farms against purchase of aquaculture insurance will be 
eligible for ‘one-time incentive’ which, inter alia, will address and resolve the operational 
constraints currently impeding the effective disbursal of collateral -free KCC loans. 
Currently 03 insurance companies have been onboarded (AICL, OICL and New India  
Insurance Company (NIC)) on the National Fisheries Digital Platform (NFDP)from which 
insurance can be purchased by beneficiary, additionally beneficiary can also purchase 
offline insurance from these companies and can claim benefit for it on NFDP. Going ahead 
provision of taking e -KCC is also being incorporated on NFDP which will be powered by 
NABARD and applications will go directly to RRBs & Cooperative banks. 
 
Ministry of Fisheries, Animal Husbandry and Dairying 
(Department of Fisheries) 
F. No. J-23011/1/2025-Fy dated 24th November, 2025 
 
 
11. EXTENDING BENEFITS GIVEN TO AGRICULTURISTS TO FISHERS/ 
FISHERMEN. 
The Committee feel that the benefits given to Agriculturists under the Pradhan 
Mantri Kisaan Samman Nidhi (PM -KISAN) and the facility of Free of cost Electricity, 
may also be extended to the fishers and fish farmers of the country, given that, 
fisheries is an allied activity of agriculture and such benefits would no doubt help them 

25 
 
swim over the tide of economic hardships and thereby development of the Fisheries 
Sector in general. 
The Department has informed the Committee, that under Pradhan Mantri 
Matsya Sampada Yojana (PMMSY) component of income support, namely, Livelihood 
and Nutritional support for socio -economically backward active traditional fisher’s 
families, during fish ban period, an amount of Rs. 4500 is provided annually. 
The Committee understand that electricity forms a major input for a fish farm 
and is necessary for running water pumps, aeration units etc. in addition to filtration 
drums and ionizers in case of Recirculatory Aquaculture Systems (RAS). The 
Department has also informed the Committee, that providing electricity free of cost for 
fisheries activities will help in reducing the cost of production and enhance the income 
of the fish farmers improving their socio -economic condition. The Committee, 
therefore, recommend that the Department may explore the possibility of providing 
free electricity to fishers/fish farmers and pursue with States/UTs to extend such a 
benefit to fishers either by making a provision in their Central Scheme components or 
incentivizing States/UTs to provide the same. The Committee would like to be apprised 
further on the matter. 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
The provision of free electricity to fishers/fish farmers is a policy matter under the 
purview of the respective State/UT Governments. Further, the Department has requested 
all States/UTs to explore the possibility of extending free electricity to fishers and fish 
farmers. The Department has also requested concerned Ministry i.e, Ministry of Power to 
explore the possibility of extending electricity free to fishers and fish farmers and taking 
appropriate action. 
Ministry of Fisheries, Animal Husbandry and Dairying 
(Department of Fisheries) 
F. No. J-23011/1/2025-Fy dated 24th November, 2025 
 
12. FISHERY EXPERT IN KRISHI VIGYAN KENDRAS (KVKS). 
The Committee have been informed that PMMSY lays inter -alia special focus 
on training, skill development, skill upgradation and capacity building through 
trainings, awareness programmes and exposure visits to various stakeholders in the 

26 
 
fishery sector value chain for various fishing technology, aquaculture and post -
harvest related activities. Further, the training, awareness, exposure and capacity 
building programmes are carried out through the National Fisheries Development 
Board (NFDB), ICAR institutes, Krishi Vigyan Kendras (KVKs), other organizations 
and State/UT Fisheries Departments.   
The Committee observe that the scope and range of Krishi Vigyan Kendras 
covers a wider area and a total of 736 KVSs have been established by Indian Council 
of Agricultural Research (ICAR) in the country which act as a bridge between research 
institutions and farmers, disseminating improved technologies and providing training 
to enhance agricultural practices. However, with regard to fisheries, the Department 
has stated that some of the KVKs provide expert advice on fisheries while the rest do 
not have fishery expert. 
The Committee, feel that, Kisan Vigyan Kendras can play an important role for 
the disseminating of information with respect to various fishing technology, 
aquaculture, post-harvest related activities and the research done by fishery institutes 
and universities. The Committee, therefore, recommend that the Department may take 
necessary measures and pursue with ICAR, so as to ensure that fishery experts are 
appointed/deputed in the KVKs, especially in the coastal areas or areas where fishing 
activities are substantial. 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
The Department has taken up the matter with ICAR and requested them to ensure 
the appointment/deputation of fishery experts in Krishi Vigyan Kendras (KVKs), 
particularly in coastal areas and regions with substantial fishing activities, to strengthen 
fisheries extension and capacity-building support at the grassroots level. 
 
Ministry of Fisheries, Animal Husbandry and Dairying 
(Department of Fisheries) 
F. No. J-23011/1/2025-Fy dated 24th November, 2025 
 
 
 
 
 

27 
 
13. DEEP SEA FISHING- ACQUISITION OF DEEP-SEA FISHING VESSELS TO 
HARNESS THE POTENTIAL OF THE COUNTRY’S EXCLUSIVE ECONOMIC 
ZONE (EEZ) 
The Committee note that India has an expansive Exclusive Economic Zone 
(EEZ) covering an area of 22 lakh square kilometres, rich in marine living resources, 
which remain largely unexplored and underutilized for fishing activities. The 
Committee have been i nformed that the potential yield of Fisheries within EEZ (tons 
per annum) is 5.31 million tons including Deep -Sea and Oceanic resources of 2.31 
lakh tons. However, the current fleet of Deep -Sea Fishing Vessels available in the 
country are not sufficient to harness the Deep-Sea Resources of the Country.  
The Committee have been informed that  under the Centrally Sponsored 
Scheme (CSS) on Blue Revolution, acquisition of 918 Deep-Sea fishing vessels at unit 
cost of Rs.80 lakhs was approved with a total cost of Rs. 734.40 crore. Further, under 
the Pradhan Mantri Matsya Sampada Yojana (PMMSY) the unit cost was increased 
to Rs.120 lakh with subsidy amount of Rs.48 lakh for general and Rs.72 lakh for 
SC/ST/Women, and, so far, 470 Deep Sea fishing vessels had been approved under 
the PMMSY at a total cost of Rs. 56.40 crore. The Committee, however, note that the 
current fleet of Deep-Sea Fishing Vessels in the country is only 129 vessels.  
In the Union Budget 2025 -26 of the Government of India has announced that 
the Government will bring in an enabling framework for sustainable harnessing of 
fisheries from Indian Exclusive Economic Zone and High Seas with special focus on 
the Andaman & Nicobar and Lakshadweep Islands.  
The Committee observe that under the Blue Revolution Scheme and PMMSY, 
a total of 1338 Deep -Sea fishing vessels have been approved, however, the Deep -
Sea fishing fleet of the country is only 129 vessels which is inadequate to harness the 
potential of India’s EEZ. The Committee, therefore, recommend that the Department 
may take pro-active steps to acquire/increase the fleet of Deep Sea Vessels so that 
the true potential of Deep-Sea resources in India’s EEZ can be harnessed and the gap 
between the existing and required fleet of Deep- Sea fishing vessels can be bridged. 
Further, the Fishing Harbours may also be modernised to accommodate such fishing 
vessels. 
 

28 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
The Sustainable Harnessing of Fisheries in the Exclusive Economic Zone of 
India Rules, 2025 (EEZ Fisheries Rules, 2025) have been notified under The Territorial 
Waters, Continental Shelf, Exclusive Economic Zone and Other Maritime Zones Act, 
1976, which will serve as an important step towards harnessing the true potential of 
deep-sea resources within India’s Exclusive Economic Zone (EEZ). Besides, the 
Department of Fisheries, Government of India, is also supporting the acquisition of 
Deep-Sea Fishing Vessel s by traditional fishers under PMMSY as well as through 
FIDF, to bridge the gap between the existing and the required fleet of deep-sea fishing 
vessels.  
 The Department has prepared Standard Operating Procedure (SOP) for the 
development and management of Smart and Integrated Fishing Harbours. This SOP 
will serve as a guiding framework for all coastal States/UTs for the planning, design, 
development, management, and governance of Smart and Integrated Fishing 
Harbours, as well as provide guidance for preparing techno -financially viable 
proposals. The SOP also inter alia includes provisions for designing and upgrading 
harbours to accommodate and facilitate deep -sea fishing vessels, wherever such 
vessels are intended to be catered to. 
 
Ministry of Fisheries, Animal Husbandry and Dairying 
(Department of Fisheries) 
F. No. J-23011/1/2025-Fy dated 24th November, 2025 

29 
 
CHAPTER – III 
 
 OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO NOT 
DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE GOVERNMENT’S REPLIES 
 
10. PROTECTING THE TRADITIONAL FISHING SYSTEMS AND SECURING 
THE LIVELIHOODS OF TRADITIONAL/ARTISANAL FISHERMEN. 
The Committee note that the Traditional Fishing Systems which include 
traditional Fish Landing sites and small -scale fish vending zones exists in various 
coastal villages across coastal regions of the country and are being used by 
Traditional/Artisanal Fishermen since decades for their livelihood needs. The 
Committee observe that these systems are facing existential threats, and the coastal 
land earmarked for them to carry out fishing activities is being reduced due to various 
issues such as climate change, coastal erosion, mechanized fishing activities, 
pollution and construction of coastal resorts etc. 
 The Committee were concern about the plight of these Traditional Fishing 
System across coastal regions and the well -being of the fishermen working in them. 
The Committee have been informed by the Department that all these issues come 
under the ambit of either the Marine Fishing Regulation Acts (MFRA) of the concerned 
States/UTs and their State Policies or the Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate 
Change (MoEF&CC). 
 The Committee, understand that, even though these issues come under the 
ambit of State/UTs or other Ministries, the Department of Fisheries, Government of 
India cannot ignore their role in protecting and securing the rights of Traditional/ 
Artisanal Fishermen working in these Traditional Fishing Systems. Climate change 
and its affects directly affect the fishermen population of the country and corrective 
measures need to be taken to mitigate the effects of climate change and coastal 
erosion. The Committee, therefore, recommend that the Department may undertake 
a study, and assess, the effects of climate change and coastal erosion on the reduction 
in land meant for Traditional Fishing Systems where traditional fishing activities are 
carried out since decades  by traditional/artisanal fishermen for their livelihood and 
survival needs. 
 

30 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
As per latest studies on fish stocks conducted by ICAR -CMFRI has revealed 
that the fish stocks in the Indian EEZ are in good health and 91.1% of the 135 fish 
stocks evaluated in different regions during 2022 were found sustainable. The studies 
also indicat ed that there are inter annual fluctuations in landing of marine fishery 
resources due to changes in the climate and environmental variables. The Department 
has duly noted the Committee’s recommendation.  
The Department of Fisheries, Government of India (DoF, GoI) has included a 
component “ Development of 100 Coastal Fishermen Villages as Climate Resilient 
Coastal Fishermen Villages (CRCFV) ” under the PMMSY, which is aimed at 
developing the existing 100 fishermen villages situated close to the coastline in various 
States and Union Territories (UTs), and to transform them to economically vibrant 
fishermen villages. The guidelines of PMMSY for the component of CRCFV has listed 
a basket of activities that includes infrastructure components and economic activities 
that aid enhancing the resilience of the villages to climate change impacts.  
Infrastructure components under this include Multipurpose Halls & Training 
Centres for Capacity building, emergency coordination and community events, Net 
Mending Sheds for Sheltered space for gear maintenance and ensuring continuity 
post-disaster, Fish Dr ying Platforms & Storage for Solar -based drying & weather -
resistant storage to preserve product quality, Auction hall & Market Facilities for 
efficient and climate-safe fish marketing and trade operations, Artificial Reefs & Marine 
Ecosystem Support for bo osting biodiversity and improve fish stock resilience, Fish 
Pre-processing hall & Infrastructure for Maintenance of freshness, reducing post -
harvest loss, Cooperative credit society for providing credit and support to their 
members (mostly small -scale fish ers/farmers). The economic activities under the 
component of developing climate-resilient fisheries infrastructure include, Green Fuel 
& Energy Efficient Engines for reducing diesel use and carbon emissions, Marine 
Aquaculture & Livelihood Diversification for promoting alternative, climate -resilient 
incomes, Fish value added products development units for increasing income 
resilience during lean fishing seasons caused by ocean warming or cyclones, Safety 
& Risk Reduction Equipment - Life buoy and life jacket s for enhancing fisher safety 
during cyclones and sea hazards, Value addition by integrated projects for fish 

31 
 
processing for improving quality, shelf -life, and marketability of fish products, Bio -
fertilization production units for converting waste into income, reducing environmental 
impact, Mobile fish food restaurants for promoting retail sales and value -added fish 
product access, Marine spare parts shop for ensuring operational continuity and 
reliability. 
The stand-alone subjects pertaining to coastal erosion and coastal protection works 
does not fall under the ambit of the fisheries development scheme of the department.  
Ministry of Fisheries, Animal Husbandry and Dairying 
(Department of Fisheries) 
F. No. J-23011/1/2025-Fy dated 24th November, 2025 
 

32 
 
CHAPTER – IV 
 
  
OBSERVATIONS/ RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF 
THE GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE 
 
 
 
 
-NIL- 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

33 
 
CHAPTER - V  
 
OBSERVATIONS/ RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH FINAL 
REPLIES OF GOVERNMENT ARE STILL AWAITED  
 
 
 
 
 
-NIL- 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 New Delhi       Charanjit Singh Channi 
11 August, 2026                Chairperson 
20 Shravana, 1948 (saka)              Standing Committee on Agriculture,  
                     Animal Husbandry and Food Processing 
 
 
  

34 
 
ANNEXURE 
MINUTES OF THE TWENTY-FOURTH SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE 
ON AGRICULTURE, ANIMAL HUSBANDRY AND FOOD PROCESSING  
(2025-26) 
 
The Committee sat on Tuesday, the 11th August, 2026 from 1500 hrs. to 1510 
hrs. in Committee Room-‘D’, Parliament House Annexe (PHA), New Delhi.   
Present 
Shri Charanjit Singh Channi  -  Chairperson 
Members 
Lok Sabha 
 
2.  Shri Patel Umeshbhai Babubhai 
3.  Shri Rajkumar Chahar 
4.  Smt. Anita Nagarsingh Chouhan 
5.  Shri Kuldeep Indora 
6.  Shri Rajpalsinh Mahendrasinh Jadav 
7.  Md. Abu Taher Khan 
8.  Shri Rahul Singh Lodhi 
9.  Shri Sukanta Kumar Panigrahi 
10.  Smt. Krishna Devi Shivshankar Patel 
11.  Shri Naresh Chandra Uttam Patel 
12.  Shri Murasoli S. 
13.  Shri Dharambir Singh 
14.  Shri Dushyant Singh 
15.  Shri Sudhakar Singh 
16.  Shri Kodikunnil Suresh 
17.  Smt. Geniben Nagaji Thakor 
18.  Shri Bhausaheb Rajaram Wakchaure 
 
Rajya Sabha 
 
19.  Dr. Anil Sukhdeorao Bonde 
20.  Shri Banshilal Gurjar 
21.  Shri Nitin Laxmanrao Jadhav-Patil 
22.  Shri Madan Rathore 
23.  Shri S.R. Sivalingam 
24.  Shri P. P. Suneer 

35 
 
25. Shri Mahesh Kewat 
26. Shri James Pangsang Kongkal Sangma 
 
Secretariat 
 
1. Shri Dhiraj Kumar  – Joint Secretary     
2. Shri Maheshwar  – Director 
3. Shri Prem Ranjan  - Deputy Secretary 
     4. Shri Fauzi Badruddin - Deputy Secretary 
 
2. At the outset, the Chairperson welcomed the Members to the Sitting of the 
Committee. Thereafter, the Committee took up for consideration and adoption of the 
following Draft Action Taken Reports: 
(i) xxxx  xxxx  xxxx  xxxx*; 
 
(ii) Action Taken Report  on 20 th Report (18 th Lok Sabha) on the subject 
‘Development and Modernization of Fishing Harbours’  pertaining to the 
Department of Fisheries; 
 
(iii) xxxx  xxxx  xxxx  xxxx*; 
 
(iv) xxxx  xxxx  xxxx  xxxx*; 
 
(v) xxxx  xxxx  xxxx  xxxx*; 
 
(vi) xxxx  xxxx  xxxx  xxxx*; 
 
(vii) xxxx  xxxx  xxxx  xxxx*; and 
 
(viii) xxxx  xxxx  xxxx  xxxx*. 
 
3. The Committee, thereafter, adopted the draft Action Taken Reports without any 
modifications/amendments. 
 
4. The Committee also authorized the Chairperson to finalize and present the 
Reports to Parliament.  
The Committee then adjourned. 
 
* Matter not related to this Report. 

36 
 
APPENDIX 
 
(Vide Para 4 of Introduction of the Report) 
 
ANALYSIS OF ACTION TAKEN BY GOVERNMENT ON THE TWENTIETH REPORT OF STANDING 
COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE, ANIMAL HUSBANDRY AND FOOD PROCESSING (202 4-25)  
(18TH LOK SABHA) 
  
(i)  Total number of Recommendations              13 
(ii) Observations/ Recommendations that have been 
Accepted by the Government  
 Para Nos.  1,2,3,4,5,6,7,8,9,11,12,13   
Total          12    
Percentage                   92.30% 
(iii) Observations/ Recommendations which the Committee 
do not desire to pursue in view of the Government’s replies  
Para No. 10         
Total                     01 
Percentage                     7.70% 
(iv) Observations/ Recommendations in respect of which replies 
 of the Government have not been accepted by the Committee 
 Para No.  0  
 Total            00 
 Percentage                                      00.00% 
(v) Observations/ Recommendations in respect of which  
 final replies of the Government are still awaited 
 Para Nos.   0    
 Total                     00  
 Percentage                     00.00%
  
 
 
 