  
STANDING COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE, ANIMAL HUSBANDRY 
AND FOOD PROCESSING 
 
(2025-2026) 
 
 
EIGHTEENTH LOKSABHA 
 
 
 
MINISTRY OF AGRICULTURE AND FARMERS WELFARE  
(DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURAL RESEARCH AND EDUCATION) 
 
 
'RESEARCH FOR DEVELOPING WATER EFFICIENT VARIETY 
OF SEEDS TO SAVE GROUND WATER' 
 
 
[Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations contained in the 
Thirty Fourth Report (Eighteenth Lok Sabha) of the Standing Committee on Agriculture, Animal 
Husbandry and Food Processing (2025-26)] 
 
 
 
 
FORTY SIXTH REPORT 
 
 
 
 
 
LOKSABHASECRETARIAT  
NEW DELHI 
 
AUGUST, 2026/SHRAVANA, 1948(SAKA) 
 
 
46 

 
  
FORTY SIXTH REPORT 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE, 
ANIMAL HUSBANDRY AND FOOD PROCESSING 
 
(2025-2026) 
 
 
EIGHTEENTH LOKSABHA 
 
 
 
MINISTRY OF AGRICULTURE AND FARMERS WELFARE 
(DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURAL RESEARCH AND EDUCATION) 
 
 
'RESEARCH FOR DEVELOPING WATER EFFICIENT 
VARIETY OF SEEDS TO SAVE GROUND WATER' 
 
 
 
[Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations contained 
in the Thirty Fourth Report (Eighteenth Lok Sabha) of the Standing Committee on 
Agriculture, Animal Husbandry and Food Processing (2025-26)] 
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on 12.08.2026 
Laid on the Table of Rajya Sabha on 12.08.2026 
 
 
 
 
LOKSABHASECRETARIAT  
NEW DELHI 
AUGUST, 2026/SHRAVANA, 1948(SAKA)  


 
  
COA No. 545 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
© 2026 By Lok Sabha Secretariat 
 
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of Business in Lok Sabha 
(Seventeenth Edition) and Printed by Lok Sabha Secretariat 

 
  
 
CONTENTS 
 
 PAGE 
Composition of the Committee (2025-26)  (iii) 
Introduction  (v) 
Chapter I Report 1 
Chapter II     Observations/Recommendations that have been accepted by the 
Government 
10 
Chapter III Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not desire 
to pursue in view of the Government’s replies 
29 
Chapter IV Observations/Recommendations in respect of which Replies of the 
Government have not been accepted by the Committee 
30 
Chapter V Observations/Recommendations in respect of which final replies of 
the Government are still awaited 
31 
 ANNEXURE 
Minutes of the 24th sitting of the Committee held on 11.08.2026  
 
39 
 APPENDIX 
Analysis of Action Taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in the Thirty Fourth  
Report (18 th Lok Sabha) of the Standing Committee on Agriculture, 
Animal Husbandry and Food Processing (2025-26)  
 
 
41 
 
 
 

 
(iii)  
COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE, ANIMAL 
HUSBANDRY AND FOOD PROCESSING  
18th Lok Sabha (2025-26) 
 
SHRI CHARANJIT SINGH CHANNI – CHAIRPERSON 
 
MEMBERS 
   LOK SABHA 
 
2.  Shri Patel Umeshbhai Babubhai 
3.  Smt. Harsimrat Kaur Badal 
4.  Shri Rajkumar Chahar 
5.  Smt. Anita Nagarsingh Chouhan 
6.  Shri Kuldeep Indora 
7.  Shri Rajpalsinh Mahendrasinh Jadav 
8.  Md. Abu Taher Khan 
9.  Shri Rahul Singh Lodhi 
10.  Shri Sukanta Kumar Panigrahi 
11.  Smt. Krishna Devi Shivshankar Patel 
12.  Shri Naresh Chandra Uttam Patel 
13.  Shri Narayan Tatu Rane 
14.  Shri Murasoli S. 
15.  Shri Dharambir Singh 
16.  Shri Dushyant Singh 
17.  Shri Sudhakar Singh 
18.  Shri Kodikunnil Suresh 
19.  Shri Tejasvi Surya 
20.  Smt. Geniben Nagaji Thakor 
21.  Shri Bhausaheb Rajaram Wakchaure 
 
   RAJYA SABHA 
 
22.  Dr. Anil Sukhdeorao Bonde 
23.  Shri Banshilal Gurjar 
24.  Shri Nitin Laxmanrao Jadhav-Patil 
25.  Shri Madan Rathore 
26.  Shri S.R. Sivalingam 
27.  Shri Ramji Lal Suman 
28.  Shri P. P. Suneer 
29.  Shri Randeep Singh Surjewala 
30 Shri Mahesh Kewat* 
31 Shri James Pangsang Kongkal Sangma** 
 
Note:        Smt. Ramilaben Becharbhai Bara ceased to be a Member of the Committee on her retirement from Rajya Sabha w.e.f 
21.06.2026 (Rajya Sabha Bulletin Part-II(TO), Para No. 66058 dated 09.01.2026). 
 Shri H.D. Devegowda, ceased to be a Member of the Committee on his retirement from Rajya Sabha w.e.f 25.06.2026 
(Rajya Sabha Bulletin Part-II(TO), Para No. 66058 dated 09.01.2026). 
 
 *Shri Mahesh Kewat, MP, Rajya Sabha have been nominated to the Standing Committee w.e.f. 23.07.2026 vide Lok 
Sabha Bulletin Part-II, No. 5724, dated 24.07.2026. 
 **Shri James Pangsang Kongkal Sangma, MP, Rajya Sabha have been nominated to the Standing Committee w.e.f. 
23.07.2026 vide Lok Sabha Bulletin Part-II, No. 5724, dated 24.07.2026. 

 
(iv)  
SECRETARIAT 
 
 1. Shri Dhiraj Kumar   - Joint Secretary 
 2. Shri Maheshwar    - Director 
 3. Shri Prem Ranjan   - Deputy Secretary 
  
 
  

 
(v)  
INTRODUCTION 
 
 
I, the Chairperson, Standing Committee on Agriculture, Animal Husbandry and 
Food Processing (2025-26), having been authorized by the Committee to submit the 
Report on their behalf, present this Forty Sixth  Report on Action taken by the 
Government on the Observations/Recommendations contained in the Thirty Fourth 
Report (Eighteenth Lok Sabha) of the Standing Committee on Agriculture, Animal 
Husbandry and Food Processing (2025-26) on the Subject 'Research for Developing 
Water Efficient Variety of Seeds to Save Ground Water ' pertaining to the Ministry of 
Agriculture and Farmers Welfare (Department of Agricultural Research and 
Education).  
 
2. The Thirty Fourth Report (Eighteenth Lok Sabha) of the Standing Committee 
on Agriculture, Animal Husbandry and Food Processing (202 5-26) on the subject 
‘Research for developing Water Efficient Variety of Seeds to save Ground Water’  
pertaining to Ministry of Agriculture and Farmers Welfare (Department of Agricultural 
Research and Education) was presented to Lok Sabha and laid on the Table of Rajya 
Sabha on 27th March, 2026. The Action Taken Notes on the Report were received on 
02.07.2026. 
 
3. The Report was considered and adopted by the Committee at their Sitting held 
on 11.08.2026. 
 
4. An Analysis of the action taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in the Thirty Fourth  Report (Eighteenth 
Lok Sabha) of the Committee is given in Appendix. 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI;                                 CHARANJIT SINGH CHANNI  
11 August, 2026                                                             Chairperson, 
20 Shravana, 1948 (Saka)            Standing Committee on Agriculture
       Animal Husbandry and Food Processing 

1 
 
CHAPTER-I 
REPORT 
 
This Report of the Standing Committee on Agriculture, Animal Husbandry and 
Food Processing deals with the Action Taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in the Thirty Fourth Report ( Eighteenth 
Lok Sabha) of the Standing Committee on Agriculture, Animal Hus bandry and Food 
Processing (2025-26) on the subject “Research for Developing Water Efficient Variety 
of Seeds to Save Ground Water” pertaining to the Ministry of Agriculture and Farmers 
Welfare (Department of Agricultural Research and Education) which was presented to 
Lok Sabha and laid on the Table of Rajya Sabha on 27th March 2026. 
 
1.2 The Ministry of Agriculture and Farmers Welfare (Department of Agricultural 
Research and Education) have furnished Action Taken Replies in respect of all the 09 
Observations/Recommendations contained in the Report. These Replies have been 
scrutinised and categorised as under:- 
 
(i) Observations/Recommendations that have been accepted 
by the Government: 
Total - 05 
Chapter II 
 Recommendation Para Nos. 1, 2, 3, 6 and 8  
(ii) Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do 
not desire to pursue in view of the Government’s replies:  
Total - NIL 
Chapter III 
 Recommendation Para No. NIL 
(iii) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which 
Replies of the Government have not been accepted by the 
Committee: 
Total- NIL 
Chapter IV 
 
Recommendation Para No.  NIL 
(iv) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which final 
replies of the Government are still awaited. 
Total - 04 
Chapter V 
 Recommendation Para Nos. 4, 5, 7 and 9 
   

2 
 
1.3 The Committee desire that utmost importance would be given by the 
Ministry of Agriculture and Farmers Welfare (Department of Agricultural 
Research and Education) to implement the Observations/ Recommendations 
accepted by the Government. In cases where it is not possible for the 
Ministry/Department to implement the Recommendations in letter and spirit for 
any reason, the matter be intimated in writing to the Committee with reasons for 
non-implementation. The Committee desire that further Action Taken Notes on 
the Observations/ Recommendations contained in Chapter -I and Chapter -V of 
this Report be furnished to them at an early date. 
 
1.4 The Committee will now deal with the Action Taken  by the Government on 
some of the Observations/Recommendations in the succeeding paragraphs. 
 
A. SEED SYSTEMS AND ACCESSIBILITY  
 
RECOMMENDATION (PARA NO.4) 
 
1.5 The Committee had observed/recommended:- 
 
“The Committee have been informed that after release of variety and its notification in 
Gazette of India, the Seed Division of Department of Agriculture and Farmers Welfare 
receives indents for breeder seed of the variety from the Department of Agriculture of 
States, National Seeds Corporation Limited (NSCL), Public Sector Undertakings 
(PSUs), Non-Governmental Organizations (NGOs), Farmer Producer Organizations 
(FPOs) and Private Seed Companies (through Seed Associations) and subsequently 
in a meeting with all indenting agencies, the indent is finalized. ICAR produces breeder 
seed as per the indent, which in turn are converted into Foundation, Certified and 
Truthfully Labelled (TL) seeds in the next generations respectively by seed producing 
agencies and fin ally distributed among the farmers. The Committee have also been 
informed that the Department has not faced any shortage of breeder seed. Over the 
past 10 years, a total of 1,45,266.2 quintals of breeder seed of water-efficient varieties 
was produced against an indent of 93,147.8 quintals.  The breeder seed production is 
aligned with the annual demand (indents) placed by various state governments as per 
their Seed Rolling Plan and also by other public and private seed producing agencies. 

3 
 
The quantity produced has remained adequate to support the production of the 
required quantum of quality seed, as envisaged under the Seed Rolling Plans 
(Indents) of the respective states. However, due to declining indents from the states, 
the share of public sector National and State Level Corporation is declining and private 
sector is supplying the seeds to the states under various schemes.   
The Committee are of considered view that seeds are crucial and vital inputs for 
Agriculture.  Ensuring the timely availability of quality seeds at affordable price at the 
right time and place remains a significant challenge especially for small and margin al 
farmers, who face affordability and access barriers, and in arid and resource -poor 
regions, with many farmers relying heavily on the informal seed sector to meet their 
seed requirements.  The Committee, therefore, recommend the Department to take 
steps, in coordination with the Department of Agriculture and Farmers Welfare, for 
strengthening and equipping the existing seed production and distribution system 
networks to meet the increased and rapid demand, avoiding seed shortage, ensuring 
quality and affo rdability and easy availability. Also, State Governments should be 
impressed upon to take proactive steps to promote adoption of Climate -resilient and 
water-efficient varieties by ensuring timely availability and affordability of quality seeds 
to the farmers”.  
 
1.6 The Department, in its Action Taken Reply, has submitted:- 
 
“The Department of Agriculture & Farmers Welfare (DA&FW) is implementing 
several measures to strengthen and modernize seed production and distribution 
networks, ensuring they can meet rising demand while preventing shortages, 
maintaining quality, keeping prices affordable, and improving accessibility. The details 
are as under: 
1. DA&FW request State Governments to prepare a Seed Rolling Plan three 
years in advance to estimate the requirement of seed in their state and 
distribute seed production targets accordingly to different seed production 
agencies. This system ensures timely availability of required quantity of seed 
to the farmers in different states. 
2. DA&FW also ensure that the State Governments place their breeder seed 
indent of agriculture and horticulture crops one year in advance for 

4 
 
systematic breeder seed production of indented quantities. After production, 
the breeder seed is allotted to State Governments and other agencies for 
further multiplication into foundation and then certified seed and its 
distribution to the farmers. 
3. After taking the updated information from ICAR, Seeds Division, DA&FW 
circulates the list of newly released and notified high -yielding varieties, 
including climate-resilient and biofortified types, to all stakeholders, prior to 
the submission of breeder se ed demand. This measure is intended to 
ensure the incorporation of such varieties into the seed production chain, 
thereby enabling their timely availability to farmers while safeguarding 
quality, affordability, and accessibility. 
4. Uniform breeder seed price is fixed by DAFW in consultation with ICAR for 
optimization of the seed production cost in case of foundation and certified 
seed. 
5. The Department of Agriculture & Farmers Welfare (DA&FW) through its 
various schemes, extends financial assistance to States and Government 
Seed Producing Agencies for seed production, distribution, and other seed 
sector interventions. These measures are ai med at ensuring the timely 
availability of quality seeds to farmers at affordable prices. The ongoing crop 
development programmes/schemes include the National Food Security and 
Nutrition Mission (NFSNM), the National Mission on Edible Oil –Oilseeds 
(NMEO-OS), Mission for Aatmanirbharta in Pulses, National Mission for 
High Yielding Seeds, Mission for Cotton Productivity etc.”  
 
1.7 The Committee had recommended the Department to take steps, in 
coordination with the Department of Agriculture and Farmers Welfare, for 
strengthening and equipping the existing seed production and distribution 
system networks to meet the increased and rapid demand, avoiding  seed 
shortage, ensuring quality , affordability and easy availability. The Committee 
had also recommended the Department to impress upon the State Governments 
to take proactive steps to promote adoption of Climate -resilient and water -
efficient varieties by  ensuring timely availability and affordability of quality 
seeds to the farmers.  

5 
 
 The Department, in its Action Taken Reply, has stated that several 
measures have been taken  to strengthen and organize seed production and 
distribution networks to meet the rising demand while preventing shortages, 
maintaining quality, keeping prices affordable and improving accessibility . 
These include requesting State Governments to prepare a Seed Rolling Plan 
three years in advance to estimate the requirement of seed in their State; 
ensuring the State Governments to place their breeder seed indent s of crops 
one year in advance for systematic breeder seed production; circulating the list 
of newly released and notified high yielding varieties after taking the updated 
information from ICAR; fixing a uniform breeder seed price in consultation with 
ICAR for optimization of the seed production cost ; extending financial 
assistance to States and Government Seed Producing Agencies for seed 
production, distribution and other seed sector interventions; and ongoing crop 
development programmes. 
 The Committee note that the measures taken by the Department to 
strengthen and organize seed production and distribution networks  are quite 
appreciable, yet there are instances of shortage of quality/certified seeds, sale 
of seeds at exorbitant prices, sale of substandard/spurious seeds to farmers  
continue to be  reported from various parts of the country. The Committee, 
therefore, reiterate their earlier recommendation to the Department to take 
steps, in coordination with the Department of Agriculture and Farmers Welfare, 
for strengthening and equipping the existing seed production and distribution 
system networks to meet the increased and rapid demand, avoiding seed 
shortage, ensuring quality , affordability and easy availability, and also to 
impress upon the State Governments to take proactive steps to promote 
adoption of Climate -resilient and water -efficient varieties by ensuring timely 
availability and affordability of quality seeds to the farmers.  
 
B.  SEED AUTHENTICITY AND TRACEABILITY 
 
RECOMMENDATION (PARA NO. 5) 
 
1.8 The Committee had observed/recommended:- 

6 
 
“The Committee note that the Seed Authenticity Traceability & Holistic Inventory 
(SATHI) is a national platform implemented by the collaborative efforts of the Ministry 
of Agriculture and Farmers’ Welfare, Government of India with the Technical support 
of ICAR, and the National Informatics Centre (NIC) which proposes to provide a digital 
platform t hat streamlines the holistic management of seed production, quality 
certification, distribution and traceability at pan-India level.  This endeavor establishes 
a National Seed Grid (NSG), integrating all seed stakeholders within a unified national 
digital platform. 
The development of the platform has been taken up in 2 phases. Phase I of the 
project has been launched which covers onboarding the stakeholders involved in 
Nucleus to Breeder Seed Production, Breeder to Foundation and Foundation to 
Certified Seed Production processes to SATHI platform and capture their transactions 
at the granular level.  Phase II of the project will cover seed Supply chain and Inventory 
management. The movement of seed bag in supply chain will be recorded in real time 
to provide end to en d traceability and Seed Inventory from Micro to Macro level 
(Retailer to state and National Level). The Committee feel that full 
operationalization/implementation of SATHI platform would solve seed related issues 
particularly the menace of spurious and sub -standard seeds for the farmers.  The 
Committee, therefore, while appreciating the launching of the ambitious SATHI project, 
desire that the process of onboarding of all the stakeholders including Private Seed 
Companies on SATHI platform should be expedite d in a time bound manner so that 
the system becomes fully functional and effective at the earliest”.  
 
1.9 The Department, in its Action Taken Reply, has stated:-  
 
“SATHI Portal is structured into multiple functional phases aligned with the 
operational requirements of different seed systems. Phases I and II relate primarily to 
the notified and certified seed system, while Phases III and IV are designed for the 
Labelled (Truthfully Labelled) seed system. 
Phase I covers seed production and certification activities, including the progression 
from nucleus to breeder seed, production of foundation and certified seeds, and 
associated inspection and certification processes. 

7 
 
Phase II focuses on inventory and distribution, including inventory management, lot -
based based tracking, and distribution through Seed Producing Agencies, dealers, 
and government channels, culminating in sale to farmers. 
Phase III  provides a simplified “Rapid Flow” module for labelled seeds, enabling 
streamlined onboarding of producers, basic inventory management, and transaction 
recording. 
Phase IV  offers a more comprehensive “Holistic Flow” module for labelled seeds, 
covering grower registration, production tracking, inspection and testing (where 
applicable), and digital tagging with traceability”. 
 
1.10 The Committee had  noted that the SATHI’s (Seed Authenticity, 
Traceability and Holistic Inventory) platform is being implemented through the 
collaborative efforts of the Ministry of Agriculture and Farmers’ Welfare, 
Government of India with the technical support of ICAR and the National 
Informatics Centre (NIC) to provide a digital platform for streamlining the holistic 
management of seed production, quality certification, distribution and 
traceability at Pan -India level .  The Committee had desired that process of 
onboarding all stakeholders including Private Seed Companies, on to this 
platform should be expedited in a time bound manner so that the system 
becomes fully functional and effective at the earliest.  
 The Department, in its Action Taken Reply, has stated that SATHI Portal 
is structured into multiple functional phases aligned with the operational 
requirements of different seed systems. Phases I and II relate primarily to the 
notified and certified seed system, while Phases III and IV are designed for the 
Labelled (Truthfully Labelled) seed system. 
 The Committee note that the Department in its replies to the 
recommendation with respect to Seed Authenticity and Traceability has given 
details about the SATHI portal but has not shared details about the timeline  by 
which SATHI platform/portal would become fully functional. The Committee feel 
that full operationalization/implementation of SATHI platform would solve some 
of the seed related issues particularly the menace of spurious and sub-standard 
seeds for the farmers. The Committee, therefore, reiterat e their earlier desire 

8 
 
that the process of onboarding of all stakeholders including Private Seed 
Companies on to the SATHI platform should be expedited in a time bound 
manner so that the system becomes fully functional and effective at the earliest. 
 
C.  APEX BODY/COMMITTEE FOR COORDINATION 
RECOMMENDATION (PARA NO. 9) 
 
1.11 The Committee had observed/recommended:- 
 “The Committee note that during 1980s, almost all Agriculture and Allied Sector 
related Department were under a single Ministry and in course of time several new 
Ministries have been created, though they are directly or indirectly related to 
Agriculture. Th e Committee have been apprised that the discussions and 
collaborations are held among these Ministries at appropriate level but a permanent 
coordination Committee or an Apex body for coordination among these Ministries does 
not exist at present. The Comm ittee, therefore, desire that an Apex Body or a 
Committee for coordination among various concerned Ministries, Departments and 
Agencies on Agriculture and Allied Sector-related issues be constituted for institutional 
convergence, policy coherence and integ rated implementation of agricultural 
strategies especially in the context of complex and cross-cutting interventions”.  
 
1.12 The Department, in its Action Taken Reply, has stated:-  
 
“The establishment of such a permanent institutional mechanism is essential 
for achieving policy coherence, institutional convergence, and integrated 
implementation of agricultural strategies, particularly in the context of complex, cross-
cutting interventions such as water-efficient crop development, seed systems, climate 
resilience, and sustainable natural resource management”. 
1.13  The Committee had desired that an Apex Body or a Committee for 
coordination among various concerned Ministries, Departments and Agencies 
on Agriculture and Allied Sector -related issues be constituted for institutional 
convergence, policy coherence and integrated implementation of a gricultural 
strategies especially in the context of complex and cross-cutting interventions. 

9 
 
 The Department, in its Action Taken Reply, has stated that the 
establishment of such a permanent institutional mechanism is essential 
particularly in the context of complex, cross -cutting interventions such as 
water-efficient crop development, seed system , climate resilience, and 
sustainable natural resource management. 
 The Committee note that though the Department concurs with 
recommendation of the Committee, it has said nothing about the action it has 
initiated/taken to implement the recommendation. The Committee, therefore, 
desire that the Department needs to take initiatives for the constitution of an 
Apex Body or a Committee in a time bound manner for coordination among 
various concerned Ministries, Departments and Agencies on Agriculture and 
Allied Sector-related issues for institutional convergence, policy coherence and 
integrated implementation of agricultural strategies especially in the context of 
complex and cross-cutting interventions. 

10 
 
CHAPTER II 
 
Observations/Recommendations that have been accepted by the Government 
 
Strengthening of R&D Ecosystem for Development of Water Use Efficient 
Varieties 
Recommendation (Para No. 1) 
Agricultural sector is the backbone of the Indian economy, playing a vital role 
in the generation of national income and employment.  In India, while the volatility in 
agricultural growth has notably diminished over time due to targeted interventions, the 
sector is not without its challenges. Availability of water for agriculture is one of the 
serious challenges as maximum instability in yield is generally due to less or  non-
availability of water.  So, to maintain the sustainability of crop production and attain 
the target of ensuring food, nutrition, environment and livelihood security, development 
of water efficient varieties of crops and production of their seeds are quite essential. 
 
The Committee have been informed that Crop Science Division of the ICAR is 
working on 85 field crops under an Umbrella Scheme entitled ‘Crop Science for Food 
and Nutritional Security’ through its six sub-schemes. The six sub-schemes have total 
63 components including 28 Institutes, 20 All India Coordinated Research Projects 
(AICRPs), six All India Network Projects (AINPs) and four Consortium Research 
Projects (CRPs).  All the scheme components have one or more activities related to 
development of varieties for less water requirement or technologies which can help in 
mitigating the effect of less water. In addition, Institutes and Programmes under 
Natural Resource management Division are also contributing towards development of 
varieties and management technologies for higher productivity under water deficit/less 
water availability condition and help in saving the ground water. Besides, ICAR under 
its flagship network project ‘National Innovations in Climate Resilient Agriculture 
(NICRA) is also focused on cli mate resilient technological innovations. Apart from 
these planned projects, a good number of externally funded projects and the 
international organizations are also working on the objective of breeding for low water 
requiring varieties in different field crops. A few private companies also have their 
independent Research and Development programmes for development of water 

11 
 
efficient varieties.  The Committee have also been informed that out of total 3053 
varieties of 85 crops released by ICAR since 2014, 2813 varieties (92%) are climate 
resilient, 1064 varieties (35%) are drought tolerant and 328 varieties (10.7%) are 
extremely drought tolerant. Despite these developments the Committee are of firm 
opinion that R&D ecosystem of the ICAR needs to be further strengthened and 
breeding of location specific drought tolerance and high water -use efficient traits 
catering to the requirement of all agro-climatic regions of the country to be prioritized. 
The Committee also desire implementation of a long term ‘Water Efficient Seeds 
Mission’ for development of water efficient varieties of seeds of various crops to 
promote the conservation  of groundwater resources and to ensure sustainable crop 
production even under water-deficit conditions. 
 
Reply of the Government 
Multiple ICAR institutes are actively engaged in breeding programmes, 
germplasm development, and technology innovation aimed at reducing crop water 
requirements and enhancing productivity under water -deficit conditions. During 2014 
onwards, 341 drought tolerant varieties have been bred using advanced phenotyping 
and genotyping tools and these varieties perform well even under extreme drought 
conditions.  These 341 Drought tolerant varieties include 200 of Cereals comprising 
108 of Rice, 30 of Wheat, 22 of M aize, 9 of Sorghum, 13 of Pearl Millet, 3 of Little 
Millet, 5 of Kodo Millet, 1 each of Barnyard Millet and Foxtail Millet, 8 of Finger Millet; 
25 of Oilseeds comprising 5 of Soybean, 6 of Groundnut, 2 each of Sesame and Toria, 
1 each of Niger, Taramira an d Linseed and 7 of Indian Mustard; 43 of Pulses 
comprising 4 of Urd bean, 2 each of Moong bean, Horse gram, Moth bean and Lentil, 
3 of Cowpea, 14 of Pigeon pea, 9 of Chickpea, 1 each of Cluster bean, Faba bean, 
Rajmash, Lathyrus and Winged bean; 18 of Fibre Crops comprising 11 of Cotton, 4 of 
Bt Cotton; 1 of Jute and 2 of Mesta Roselle; 16 of Forage crops comprising 3 of Forage 
Pearl Millet, 2 each of Forage Sorghum and Rice bean, 1 each of Forage Maize, 
Forage Cowpea, Napier Bajra Hybrid, Fescue grass, Mar vel grass, Anjan grass, 
Forage Sewan grass, Guinea grass and Seteria grass; 36 of Sugarcane; 3 of Other 
crops comprising 1 each of Kalingda, Grain Amarantus and Tobacco.  

12 
 
Further, breeder and quality seed production of these varieties is being 
undertaken to ensure timely availability of quality seed to farmers, thereby facilitating 
wider adoption of water -efficient and climate -resilient cultivars. These efforts 
contribute towards sustainable agricultural production, improved water-use efficiency, 
groundwater conservation and enhanced livelihood security of farming communities.  
[Ministry of Agriculture & Farmers’ Welfare, Dept. of Agricultural Research and Education’s  
F. No. 20/1/2026-Seed (E-441746) Dated 2nd July, 2026] 
Genetic Improvement by Integrating Modern Tools 
Recommendation (Para No. 2) 
The Committee note that the project or sub-scheme entitled ‘Enhancing climate 
resilience and ensuring food security with genome editing tools’ (with a total budget of 
Rs. 310 crores during 2023-24 to 2025-26), under an Umbrella Scheme entitled ‘Crop 
Science for Food and Nutritional Security’ is based on the cutting edge latest 
biotechnological tools where 24 crops, which include 7 cereals, 6 pulses, 6 oilseeds, 
3 fibre crops, sugarcane and tobacco, have been included for improvement. The 
Committee have been apprised by the Department that Genome editing is a precision 
mutagenesis tool or method which uses biological mutagenic agents (gRNA and Cas 
enzyme) to create targeted mutation in a gene. Further, Genome edited crops are not 
considered as Genetically Mod ified (GM) Crops and bypass of GM Crops as GM 
Crops essentially carry a gene from foreign source, while Genome edited crops do not 
have any such foreign gene. Genome edited crops are similar to conventional bred 
varieties as genome editing creates mutation  in the native gene similar to that of 
spontaneous or induced mutagenic agent. Hence, there is no biosafety, environmental 
and ecological risk associated with varieties developed by genome editing. Several 
countries such as USA, Japan, UK, Philippines, Aus tralia, Brazil, Argentina, Kenya, 
Nigeria, Indonesia, Canada, Columbia, etc. have already exempted gene edited plants 
developed by SDN1 and SDN2, and they are considered as plant varieties developed 
by any other breeding tools. Already, genome edited soybe an crop in USA (from 
2019), tomato in Japan (from 2021) are commercially cultivated and consumed.  The 
Committee have also been apprised by the Department that development of seeds 
through ‘genome editing’ is permissible in India. The bio -safety and enviro nmental 
safety of Genetically Modified Organisms (GMOs)/Non -Living Modified Organisms 
(LMOs) are regulated under Rules 1989 of Environment (Protection) Act of 1986 of 

13 
 
Government of India.  The Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate Change, 
Government of India published OM on 30th March 2022 exempting SDN-1 and SDN-
2 categories of genome edited crop free from exogenous introduced DNA from the 
provision of Rules 7 to  11 (both inclusive) of the Rules 1989 (GM Regulation Rules).  
Further, Review Committee on Genetic, Manipulation (RCGM), DBT, Government of 
India published ‘Guidelines for safety assessment of genome edited plants 2022’ and 
‘SoPs for regulatory review of genome edited plants 2022’ following the International 
standard practice followed in other countries. 
 
The Committee recommend that while undertaking the genetic improvement by 
integrating modern tools like genome editing, speed breeding, marker -assisted and 
genomic selection etc., bio-safety measures must be scrupulously followed to secure 
human health, biodiversity and environment of the country. 
 
Reply of the Government 
ICAR acknowledges the recommendation of the Parliamentary Standing 
Committee regarding the scrupulous adherence to biosafety measures while 
integrating modern genetic improvement tools. The Council affirms that all ICAR 
institutes engaged in research involving modern technologies such as genome editing, 
speed breeding, marker -assisted selection (MAS), and genomic selection strictly 
comply with the biosafety and regulatory framework established by the Government 
of India. MAS and genomic selections are biote chnological tools which ensures the 
presence of genes responsible for the different targeted traits like yield, quality, 
disease and insect resistance and tolerance to abiotic stresses like drought, floods, 
heat, cold, salinity etc. Speed breeding is a fac ility which reduces life cycle of plants 
by adjusting light and temperature enabling 3 -5 generations per year which shortens 
the time of development of a new variety significantly.  
Genome editing technology (CRISPR-Cas) is a precision mutagenesis tool. In 
case of Site Directed Nuclease 1 (SDN1) and Site Directed Nuclease 2 (SDN2) 
mutants, once the mutations are created, transgenes (sgRNA, Cas, Repair template, 
selection marker gene, etc) are segregated out, and the target gene mutant free of 
exogenous introduced DNA is obtained in case of SDN1 and SDN2 type mutants. 

14 
 
Thus, a native gene is mutated in its native location to alter the expression of the gene 
and function of the protein (loss of function/altered function/activity and sensitivity of 
the protein). Ministry of Environment, Forests and Climate Change (MoEF&CC), Govt. 
of India exempted the SDN1 and SDN2 genome edited crop free of exogenous 
introduced DNA from GM regulation rules (Rules 7-11 of Rules 1989) vide OM F.NO. 
C-12013/3/2020-CS-III dated 30 March, 2022. Further, the Biosafety issues have been 
addressed following the ‘Guidelines for the Safety Assessment of Genome Edited 
Plants, 2022’ of Department of Biotechnology (DBT), Ministry of Science and 
Technology, Govt. of India issued vide OM No. File No. PID -15011/1/2022-PPB-DBT 
dated 17.05.2022 and “Standard Operating Procedures for Regulatory Review of 
Genome Edited Plants under SDN -1 and SDN -2 Categories” vide OM No. File No. 
PID-15011/1/2022-PPB-DBT dated 04.10.2022. Information as per regulatory 
disclosure norms is placed in the public domain through officially recorded minutes of 
Review Committee on Genetic Manipulation (RCGM) meetings 
(https://ibkp.dbtindia.gov.in/Content/DecisionDocs). ICAR reiterates that the 
development and deployment of varieties through modern tools shall continue to be 
undertaken wi th scientific rigor, regulatory compliance, and a commitment to 
safeguarding human health, biodiversity, and the environment, consistent with the 
highest national and international biosafety standards.  
[Ministry of Agriculture & Farmers’ Welfare, Dept. of Agricultural Research and Education’s  
F. No. 20/1/2026-Seed (E-441746) Dated 2nd July, 2026] 
 
Review Mechanism for Assessment 
Recommendation (Para No. 3) 
As per the information furnished by the Department, the ICAR has a robust 
system of review mechanism of newly developed varieties. The present review 
mechanism for the assessment of newly developed seed varieties, as implemented 
through ICAR’s coordinated network trials and institutional protocols, has been broadly 
effective in evaluating key parameters such as yield potential, disease and pest 
resistance, grain quality and adaptability across agro-climatic zones.  The Committee 
are of view that with the evolving priorities of agriculture – such as nutritional security, 
consumer preferences, climate resilience and sustainability, certain dimensions like 
nutritional profiling, sensory evaluation, shelf life and water -use efficiency (in case of 

15 
 
drought tolerant varieties) may be supplemented for further strengthening within the 
existing framework. The Committee, therefore, recommend that the Review 
Mechanism for assessment of newly developed varieties of various crops should be 
continuously refin ed and strengthened to keep pace with future challenges and 
expectations. 
Reply of the Government 
ICAR institutes have already initiated or are actively expanding the scope of 
varietal evaluation beyond conventional parameters such as yield, pest and disease 
resistance, to encompass nutritional security, consumer preferences, climate 
resilience, water-use efficiency, and post -harvest quality attributes. In case of wheat 
(iron, zinc, protein), rice (zinc, protein, GI), maize (tryptophan, lysine, pro -vit A, low 
phytic acid), millets (iron, zinc, protein, calcium), pulses (protein), oilseeds (enhanced 
oleic acid, reduction of glucosinolates in defatted cake, erucic acid, kunitz trypsin 
inhibitor, lox 2) quality traits are being addressed in routine breeding programmes and 
as a result total 187 biofortified varieties have been released and notified during pa st 
12 years which are in cultivation and occupy around 18 million ha area. For other 
abiotic traits too, crop-wise specific breeding programmes are in place and as a result 
total 587 varieties have been bred which possess extreme tolerance to the various 
traits like drought (341), flood/ submergence (89), salinity alkalinity (80), heat (59), 
cold/ frost (18).  
Review of mechanism of assessment of newly developed varieties of various 
crops is a dynamic process and is refined and strengthened regularly keeping the 
changing climate, emerging biotic/ abiotic stresses and consumer requirement. 
Benchmark for diseases have been introduced in major crops for ensuring that the 
released varieties are resistant to major pests so that performance of a variety is least 
effected. For screening of various diseases and insect pests hot spot locations have 
been identified and the  advance material is screened under these hot spots; 
accordingly, only promising material is promoted for further release as variety. Quality 
evaluation according to the consumer preference, shelf life, industrial value etc. is now 
the integral part of bre eding programmes and state of art laboratories have been 
established for quality evaluation in case of rice, wheat, millets, oilseeds, pulses, fibre 
and sugar crops. Further, ICAR is committed to ensuring that its varietal review 
mechanisms evolve in align ment with the changing priorities of Indian agriculture, 

16 
 
including nutritional security, consumer preferences, climate resilience, and 
sustainable water management, while maintaining scientific rigor and traceability in all 
assessment processes.  
[Ministry of Agriculture & Farmers’ Welfare, Dept. of Agricultural Research and Education’s  
F. No. 20/1/2026-Seed (E-441746) Dated 2nd July, 2026] 
Capacity Building and Awareness Creation 
Recommendation (Para No. 6) 
The Committee note that Water Use Efficient (WUE) varieties of various crops 
and water use efficient technologies have bene developed by the Institutes of the 
ICAR. Impact assessment and adoption studies of WUE varieties have shown positive 
results in enhancing productivity under limited water conditions. These varieties have 
improved yield stability, reduced irrigation needs and promoted sustainable water 
management. However, varietal adoption is shaped by diverse agro -climatic 
conditions, cropping patterns, market preferences and socio -economic factors.   The 
Committee also note that poor awareness about the water use efficient varieties, 
lesser demonstrations, poor breeder seed indents leading to seed availability, yield 
gaps between water efficient varie ty and normal bred variety during normal season, 
etc. are the major reasons for low adoption of water efficient variety of seeds by the 
farmers.  The Committee are of the view that there is a critical need to create 
awareness among farmers about the import ance of adopting water-efficient varieties 
and technologies as a strategy for climate adaptation and water conservation which 
needs to be supported by robust evidence of agronomic and economic benefits 
derived from such varieties and technologies.  The Committee, therefore, recommend 
the Department to take prompt and suitable action including awareness creation for 
addressing the reasons for the low adoption of water use efficient varieties and 
technologies by the farmers.  The Committee also recommend the Department to 
frequently provide training to breeders, scientists and farmers in water -use-efficient 
technologies to strengthen their scientific competencies and make them aligned with 
cutting-edge technologies for water-use efficiency. 
 
 

17 
 
Reply of the Government 
There is an inbuilt mechanism for demonstrating the water -use-efficient 
technologies at the farmers’ fields through Frontline Demonstrations, Cluster Front 
Line Demonstrations funded by Department of Agriculture and Farmers Welfare and 
implemented by ICAR through its institutes, and KVKs. Training on these areas is 
integral part of human resource development. Trainings are imparted to the scientists 
by ICAR through the Education Division programmes like Summer/ Winter Schools 
and Short Courses on these areas.  
[Ministry of Agriculture & Farmers’ Welfare, Dept. of Agricultural Research and Education’s  
F. No. 20/1/2026-Seed (E-441746) Dated 2nd July, 2026] 
Climate-Smart Agronomy 
Recommendation (Para No. 8) 
The Committee note that water scarcity and climate change present significant 
obstacles and challenges for Indian Agriculture.  Promoting agricultural production, 
patterns and practices that align with the specific agro-climatic conditions and natural 
resource availabilities of different regions across the country is vital. The Committee 
also note that the Indian Council of Agricultural Research (ICAR) has been actively 
promoting climate smart agronomy through its flagship initiative ‘National Innovations 
in Climate Resilient Agriculture (NICRA) and the All India Coordinated Research 
Project for Dryland Agriculture (AICRPDA) by focusing on developing and 
disseminating location-specific, climate-resilient agronomic practices. The Committee 
further note that the ICAR has developed and standardized different water smart, cost 
effective, location specific scientific technologies and practices viz. rainwater 
harvesting and recycling, bio-engineering water conservation measures for facilitating 
infiltration and in -situ moisture conservation and ex -situ storage of run -off water to 
provide supplementary irrigation to improve ground water recharge and minimize 
depletion of ground water, multiple use of water, conjunctive use of rain, surface and 
groundwater resources, smart and precision technologies for irrigation and farming 
practices, optimum irrigation scheduling including micro-irrigation, fertigation schedule 
through drip irrigation, sensor-based drop irrigation system and Internet of Things (IoT) 
-enabled capacit ance-based soil moisture sensing system for irrigation scheduling, 
automated alternate wetting and drying (AWD) irrigation schedule for transplanted 

18 
 
rice, development of land drainage and reclamation of saline soils to enhance irrigation 
water efficiency and water productivity in Indian Agriculture.  Besides, technologies 
and practices such as zero tillage, crop diversification, alternate rice establis hment 
methods, integrated farming system, climate -resilient crop varieties, smart nutrient 
and water management, weather -based advisories, sustainable intensification etc. 
strengthen resilience against climate variability across diverse agro-ecological zones. 
The Committee, while acknowledging the contributions made by the Department and 
ICAR in promotion of Climate Smart Agronomy, desire that Climate Smart Agronomy 
should be promoted and encouraged to cover all the agro -climatic regions of the 
country so as to not only mitigate the adverse impacts of climate change on the Indian 
Agriculture but also to reap the sustainable long-term benefits. 
 
Reply of the Government 
It is necessary to undertake region-wise assessment of the impact of climate change 
on water availability, particularly for agriculture sector. Assess climate change 
adaptation co-benefits of various climate smart agronomic practices in terms of carbon 
credits to harness the potential of voluntary carbon markets. As desired, climate smart 
agronomy practices were developed for various agro -climatic regions of the country 
suitable to rainfed crops and to mitigate the adverse impacts of climate change on 
rainfed crops and also to reap the  sustainable long-term benefits. The climate smart 
agronomy practices developed for various rainfed regions is as follows: 
 
Climate smart agronomy for various agro-climatic regions of the country 
 
S. No. Agro-
climatic 
region and 
AICRPDA 
centre 
Technology 
developed 
Technology Details Outcome 
1.  Western 
Vidarbha 
Zone in 
Maharashtra - 
Akola 
Integrated 
nutrient 
management 
in cotton + 
greengram 
(1:1) 
intercropping 
for Western 
Vidarbha Zone 
in Maharashtra 
Application of 50% N through 
gliricidia green leaf manure/FYM 
along with 50% recommended N 
and full P & K through fertilizers in 
cotton + greengram intercropping 
under long-term INM. 
Yield increased 
to 1407.8 kg/ha 
compared to 
773.4 kg/ha in 
FP with 82.02% 
increase, 
higher SOC, 
improved soil 
quality  

19 
 
2.  Ber-Based 
Agro-
Horticulture 
System with 
cotton + 
soybean 
Intercropping 
for Western 
Vidarbha Zone 
in Maharashtra 
Intercropping of cotton (AKH -081) 
and soybean (JS -335) in 1:1 ratio 
under ber (var. Mehrun) plantation 
(6 × 6 m spacing); intercrops 
spaced at 45 × 5 cm 
Ber equivalent 
yield: 970 
kg/ha; 19.75% 
increase over 
control 
3.  Foliar Nutrient 
Spray for Dry 
Spell Mitigation 
in soybean for 
Western 
Vidarbha Zone 
in Maharashtra 
Foliar spray of 19:19:19 mix water 
soluble fertilizer + ZnSO4 @0.5% 
in soybean 
Higher seed 
yield (2262 
kg/h), B:C ratio 
(2.53) as 
compared to no 
spray 1826 
kg/ha 
4.  Scarce rainfall 
zone in 
Andhra 
Pradesh – 
Anantapur 
 
Catchment–
Storage–
Command 
System for 
Water 
Productivity in 
Micro-
Watersheds for 
Scarce rainfall 
zone in Andhra 
Pradesh 
Farm pond (700 m³; 18×18×3 m) 
with soil cement lining (6:1), 
catchment 1.5 ha and command 
area 0.4 ha; sprinkler irrigation (20 
mm) at flowering and pod 
formation in groundnut 
Yield: 1522 
kg/ha; 20% 
increase over 
control;  
5.  
 
Millet-Based 
Pigeonpea 
Intercropping 
System for 
Scarce rainfall 
zone in Andhra 
Intercropping pigeonpea  (PRG-
176) with foxtail millet (SIA 3085) 
and pearl millet (ABV -04) under 
rainfed conditions 
Foxtail 
equivalent 
yield: 2215 
kg/ha; 9.5% 
increase;  
 Pradesh 
6.  Agroforestry-
Based Fodder 
Production 
System under 
Rainfed 
Conditions for 
Scarce rainfall 
zone in Andhra 
Pradesh 
Intercropping fodder crops 
(cowpea EC -4216, sorghum MP 
Chari) in alleys of tree species 
(Amla, Subabul, Simarouba, 
Custard apple, Jamun) at 6×6 m 
spacing 
Fodder yield 
up to 12.51 
t/ha; ~15% 
higher yield 
7.  Foliar Nutrient 
Spray for Dry 
Spell Mitigation 
in Groundnut for 
Scarce rainfall 
zone in Andhra 
Pradesh 
Foliar spray of water -soluble 
fertilizer (19:19:19 @0.5%) + Zn at 
critical stages 
Yield: 1156 
kg/ha; 25.8% 
increase  

20 
 
8.  Southern 
zone in 
Rajasthan - 
Arjia 
Deep Tillage 
with Vibro Chisel 
Plough in 
Rainfed Maize 
for Southern 
zone in 
Rajasthan 
Deep chiseling (45 –70 cm) using 
vibro chisel plough in maize (PM -
3) at 60×20 cm spacing for in -situ 
moisture conservation 
Yield: 3182 
kg/ha; 27.53% 
increase  
9.  Maize + 
Soybean 
Intercropping 
System for 
Southern zone in 
Rajasthan 
Intercropping maize (PM -3) + 
soybean (RKS-24) in 2:2 row ratio 
under rainfed conditions 
MEY: 4054 
kg/ha; 19.7% 
increase;  
10.  Maize + 
blackgram strip 
cropping system 
for Southern 
zone in 
Rajasthan 
Strip cropping (2/3 maize + 1/3 
blackgram) in 8:4 row ratio at 45 
cm spacing 
Yield: 3790 
kg/ha; 22.81% 
increase  
11.  Microbial 
Consortium-
Based INM in 
Chickpea for 
Southern zone in 
Rajasthan 
75% RDF + seed & soil application 
of microbial consortium 
(Rhizobium, Azotobacter, PSB, 
ZMB) 
Yield: 2402 
kg/ha; 14.11% 
increase 
12.  Foliar Nutrient 
Spray for Dry 
Spell 
Management in 
Maize for 
Southern zone in 
Rajasthan 
Foliar spray of ZnSO ₄ @0.5% + 
NPK (19:19:19) @2% at knee-high 
and tasseling stages in maize 
(PHM-3) 
Yield: 2910 
kg/ha; 26.24% 
increase 
13.  Kandi region 
in Punjab - 
Ballowal 
Saunkhri 
Groundnut–
chickpea 
cropping system 
under reduced 
tillage for Kandi 
region in Punjab  
Cultivation of groundnut (J 87) 
followed by chickpea (PBG 10) 
under reduced tillage as an 
alternative to maize–wheat system 
in rainfed kandi region. 
Yield: 6834 
kg/ha (WEY) 
vs 4456 kg/ha; 
Yield increase: 
53.3% 
14.  Strip 
intercropping of 
maize and 
blackgram under 
dryland 
conditions for 
Kandi region in 
Punjab 
Strip intercropping (3–6 m maize + 
2.4–4.8 m blackgram) to improve 
mechanization, resource use 
efficiency, and reduce erosion. 
Yield: 3808 
kg/ha vs 3191 
kg/ha; Yield 
increase: 
16.2%  
15.  Integrated 
Nutrient 
Management 
(INM) in maize –
wheat system for 
Kandi region in 
Punjab 
Combined use of NPK fertilizers, 
FYM (10 t/ha), ZnSO ₄, and 
balanced fertilization with split 
nitrogen application. 
Yield increase: 
171% (maize), 
128% (wheat)  

21 
 
16.  Southern 
dry zone in  
Karnataka-  
Bengaluru 
 
In-situ moisture 
conservation 
through 
compartment 
bunding and 
tillage practices 
in Pre -monsoon 
season under 
rainfed condition 
for Central, 
eastern and 
southern dry 
zone in 
Karnataka 
Compartment bunding and 
modified tillage practices for 
conserving soil moisture in field 
bean cultivation. 
Yield 
increased to 
1085 kg/ha 
with 13.88% 
increase over 
FP 
17.  Drone-Based 
Foliar Spray for 
Finger Millet for 
Central, eastern 
and southern dry 
zone in 
Karnataka 
Drone spraying of KNO₃ @1% and 
19:19:19 @1% in finger millet (ML-
365); spacing 30×10 cm; 
compared with conventional 
spraying 
Yield up to 
2796 kg/ha; 
~4–4.5% 
increase over 
conventional  
18.  Foliar Nutrient 
Spray for Dry 
Spell 
Management in 
fingermillet for 
Central, eastern 
and southern dry 
zone in 
Karnataka 
Foliar application of 1% KCl in 
fingermillet 
Highest grain 
yield (2487 
kg/ha) 
compared to 
normal water 
spray (2160 
kg/ha). 
19.  IFS module 
(Crop + 
horticulture + 
livestock) for 
marginal farm 
holdings (1 ha) 
in partially 
irrigated 
conditions for 
Central, eastern 
and southern dry 
zone in 
Karnataka 
Integrated system combining 
crops, horticulture, fodder and 
livestock under partially irrigated 
conditions. 
System 
productivity 
improved to 
10959 kg/ha 
with 23.43% 
increase 
20.  North Bank 
plain zone in 
Assam - 
Biswanath 
Chariali 
 
Maize-Based 
Cropping 
Sequences 
under Rainfed 
Upland 
Conditions for 
North Bank plain 
zone in Assam 
Best sequences: Maize–Cabbage 
(Hill zone), Maize –Tomato (Upper 
Brahmaputra Valley), Maize –
Rajmah (North Bank Plains); 
recommended varieties and 
spacing for each crop 
System yield 
up to 234.8 
q/ha; yield 
increase: 30 –
78% 
21.  Rajmah + 
Linseed 
Intercropping 
Intercropping of rajmah and 
linseed in 2:1 ratio under rainfed 
uplands; spacing: 30×10 cm 
Yield: 12.83 
q/ha; 66% 
increase  

22 
 
System (2:1) for 
North Bank plain 
zone in Assam 
22.  INM in Maize –
Greengram–
Rajmah 
Cropping 
System for North 
Bank plain zone 
in Assam 
Application of 75% RDF + 
vermicompost @1 t/ha; 
recommended varieties and 
spacing for all crops 
System yield: 
12.5 t/ha; 
51.41% 
increase 
23.  INM in Ahu 
Rice–
Greengram–
Toria Cropping 
System for North 
Bank plain zone 
in Assam 
Application of 75% RDF + 
vermicompost @1 t/ha in Ahu rice-
based system; recommended 
spacing for all crops 
System yield: 
7.68 t/ha; 
15.33% 
increase 
24.  Foliar Nutrient 
Spray for Dry 
Spell 
Management in 
maize for North 
Bank plain zone 
in Assam 
Foliar spray of water -soluble 
complex fertilizer (19:19:19) @ 
0.5% + ZnSO4 @ 0.5% + borax @ 
0.5% 
Higher yield of 
maize (3804 
kg/ha), system 
productivity 
(6563 kg/ha) 
compared no 
spray 2975 
kg/ha. 
25.  Western 
plateau 
zone of 
Jharkhand - 
Chianki 
Transplanting 
Method of Finger 
Millet for 
Western plateau 
zone of 
Jharkhand 
IP: Transplanted finger millet. FP: 
Direct seeded method. Crop: 
Finger millet. Variety: Birsa Madua 
2. Spacing: 25 cm.  
Yield 
increased by 
13.97%,  1790 
vs 1540 kg/ha.  
26.  Intercropping of 
Pigeonpea + 
Okra (1:1) for 
Rainfed Uplands 
for Western 
plateau zone of 
Jharkhand 
IP: Intercropping of pigeonpea + 
okra (1:1) for higher productivity in 
rainfed uplands. FP: Sole 
pigeonpea. Crops: Pigeonpea + 
Okra. Varieties: IPA -203 + Hybrid 
Okra. Spacing: 60 cm.  
Yield 
increased by 
46.64%  
27.  Aonla-based 
intercropping 
system for 
marginal lands 
for Western 
plateau zone of 
Jharkhand 
Intercropping of aonla  (NA-7) with 
aerobic rice (PAC -807) or urd 
(Birsa Urd -1) under rainfed 
conditions with proper spacing. 
Compared to sole upland rice or 
urd cultivation. 
Yield increase: 
~72.8%;  
28.  Malwa 
plateau in 
Madhya 
Pradesh - 
Indore 
Soybean + 
Cowpea (4:2) – 
Onion Cropping 
System for 
Rainfed Farming 
for Malwa 
plateau in 
Madhya 
Pradesh 
Intercropping of soybean (RVS 24) 
+ cowpea (local) in 4:2 ratio 
followed by onion (AFLR); 
recommended spacing for each 
crop 
Soybean 
equivalent 
yield: 8571 
kg/ha; 14.4% 
increase;  

23 
 
29.  Foliar Spray for 
Mitigation of 
Mid-Season 
Drought in 
Soybean for 
Malwa plateau in 
Madhya 
Pradesh 
Foliar application of KNO ₃ @ 1% 
during mid -season dry spell in 
soybean (var. JS 9560); spacing: 
30×10 cm 
Mean yield: 
1866 kg/ha; 
28.2% 
increase over 
control;  
30.  Southern 
zone of 
Tamil Nadu - 
Kovilpatti 
In-situ green 
manuring in 
cotton for 
Southern zone 
of Tamil Nadu 
Intercropping of cotton (KC 3) with 
green manure crops 
(sunnhemp/dhaincha) for 
improving soil fertility under rainfed 
conditions. Compared to sole 
cotton cultivation. 
Yield: 1403 
kg/ha vs 867 
kg/ha; Yield 
increase: 
15.8%;  
31.  Compartmental 
Bunding for 
Moisture 
Conservation in 
Blackgram for 
Southern zone 
of Tamil Nadu 
Land configuration with 
compartmental bunding (8×5 m) 
for rainfed blackgram (VBN 11) 
15% higher 
yield;  
32.  
 
Foxtail Millet + 
Pigeonpea 
Intercropping 
System for 
Southern zone 
of Tamil Nadu 
Intercropping of pigeonpea (CoRg  
7) with foxtail millet (CO 7) in 2:6 
row ratio 
28% higher 
pigeonpea 
equivalent 
yield (1340 
kg/ha)  
33.  Groundnut + 
Pigeonpea 
Intercropping 
System for 
Southern zone 
of Tamil Nadu 
Intercropping of pigeonpea  with 
groundnut (2:6 ratio) under rainfed 
conditions 
26% higher 
yield (2031 
kg/ha) 
34.   Alternate land 
use system with 
custard apple -
based 
intercropping for 
Custard apple (APK 1) 
intercropped with greengram, 
sorghum, and pearl millet under 
rainfed conditions. Compared to 
sole custard apple. 
Yield: Custard 
apple 3180 
kg/ha + 
greengram 630 
kg/ha; Yield 
increase: 25% 
(equivalent);  
 Rainfed Cotton 
for Southern 
zone of Tamil 
Nadu 
35.  Aonla-Based 
Alternate Land 
Use System with 
Intercropping for 
Southern zone 
of Tamil Nadu 
Aonla (NA -7) at 5×5 m spacing 
with intercrops (greengram, 
sorghum, pearl millet) for better 
resource utilization 
25% higher 
sorghum 
equivalent 
yield  
36.  Maharastra 
Plateau 
Zone in 
Maharashtra 
- Parbhani 
 
Farm Pond 
Technology 
(Assured 
Rainfall Zone) 
for Central 
Maharastra 
Farm pond (837 m³; 21×21×3 m); 
catchment: 1 ha; command: 1.30 
ha; sprinkler irrigation for soybean 
and chickpea 
Yield: 1357 –
1255 kg/ha; 
46.17–55.36% 
increase;  

24 
 
Plateau Zone in 
Maharashtra 
37.  Suitable Crops 
and Varieties 
under Delayed 
Monsoon for 
Central 
Maharastra 
Plateau Zone in 
Maharashtra 
Identification of crops (cotton, 
soybean, maize, sorghum, pearl 
millet, pigeonpea, greengram) and 
varieties for delayed sowing 
conditions 
Yield reduction 
limited to 15 –
17% (15 -day 
delay) and 28–
40% (1 -month 
delay); 
supports 
contingency 
planning 
38.  Subsoiling for 
Enhancing 
Soybean 
Productivity in 
Vertisols for 
Central 
Maharastra 
Plateau Zone in 
Maharashtra 
Subsoiling once in three years at 
1.5 m spacing for soybean (MAUS 
612); spacing: 45×5 cm 
Yield: 1551 
kg/ha; 22% 
increase;  
39.  Soybean + 
Pigeonpea Strip 
Cropping 
System for 
Central 
Maharastra 
Plateau Zone in 
Maharashtra 
Strip cropping in 18:12 row ratio 
with soybean (MAUS 612) and 
pigeonpea (BDN 711) 
~25% higher 
yield over 
control;  
40.  Rainfed 
Integrated 
Farming System 
(IFS) Model for 
Central 
Maharastra 
Plateau Zone in 
Maharashtra 
1.0 ha IFS model including 
cropping systems, fodder, fruit 
crops, livestock (goat, poultry) and 
farm pond 
Net monetary 
return: 
₹1,16,447/ha; 
diversified 
income 
sources; 
improved 
livelihood 
security 
41.  Eastern 
Ghat Zone 
in Odisha - 
Phulbani 
Ridge furrow 
system with 
organic 
mulching in 
tomato–radish 
sequence for 
Eastern Ghat 
Zone in Odisha 
Use of ridge -furrow system with 
Sal/Cassia leaf mulching for 
moisture conservation and 
drainage management. 
12.5% higher 
water 
conservation; 
20% higher 
yield;  
42.  Maize + 
vegetables 
intercropping 
system for 
Eastern Ghat 
Zone in Odisha 
Intercropping of maize with 
cowpea (2:2), runner bean (2:2), 
and bitter gourd (2:1) for improved 
productivity, soil health, and 
nutritional security. 
Yield increase: 
32% 
43.  Finger millet + 
vegetable 
intercropping in 
Finger millet (Arjun) intercropped 
with okra and bean (5:2) using 
raised-sunken bed system with 
Equivalent 
yield increase: 
up to 54.7%;  

25 
 
raised & sunken 
beds for Eastern 
Ghat Zone in 
Odisha 
mulching for moisture 
conservation. 
44.  Organic nutrient 
management in 
turmeric for 
Eastern Ghat 
Zone in Odisha 
Application of FYM (5 t/ha) + Sal 
leaf mulch (6 t/ha) or FYM (10 t/ha) 
for sustainable turmeric 
production. 
Yield: up to 
10091 kg/ha; 
Net return: 
₹1,94,679; 
Highest RWUE 
(7.33); B:C 
ratio: 2.23; 
Improved soil 
health 
45.  Rainfed 
Integrated 
Farming System 
(RIFS) for 
Eastern Ghat 
Zone in Odisha 
Integration of crop, livestock, and 
fishery systems for small and 
marginal farmers under rainfed 
and partially irrigated conditions. 
Net return 
increase: 56 –
98%; 
Employment 
generation: up 
to 184 person -
days/year 
46.  North 
Saurashtra 
zones in 
Gujarat - 
Rajkot 
 
In-situ moisture 
conservation 
through tillage 
practices in 
rainfed cotton for 
North 
Saurashtra 
zones in Gujarat 
Rotavator and cultivator use along 
with cotton residue incorporation 
for improving soil moisture and 
infiltration. 
Cotton yield 
increased to 
1488 kg/ha 
with 33.45% 
increase,  
47.  High Density 
Planting and 
Nutrient 
Management in 
Bt Cotton under 
Rainfed 
Conditions for 
North 
Saurashtra 
zones in Gujarat 
High density planting of Bt cotton 
(G. Cotton Hy -8, BG -II) at 60×45 
cm spacing (37,037 plants/ha) with 
application of 120 kg N, 10 t FYM 
and 500 kg castor cake/ha under 
rainfed conditions 
Seed cotton 
yield: 2137 
kg/ha; 13.7% 
increase  
48.  Nutrient 
management in 
gram under 
conserved soil 
moisture 
condition for 
North 
Saurashtra 
zones in Gujarat 
Application of 20:40:20:20 kg 
N:P₂O₅:K₂O:S/ha in gram (GJG-3) 
under conserved soil moisture, 
compared to farmer practice of 
applying only 20 kg N and 40 kg 
P₂O₅/ha at 45×10 cm spacing. 
Yield: 2030 
kg/ha (IP) vs 
1858 kg/ha 
(FP); Yield 
increase: 
9.25%;  
49.  Guava-based 
Agri-horti 
system under 
rainfed condition 
for North 
Saurashtra 
zones in Gujarat 
Intercropping groundnut in guava 
plantation under rainfed 
conditions. 
System yield 
increased to 
8123 kg/ha 
with 174.7% 
increase,  

26 
 
50.  Low altitude 
subtropical 
zone in 
Jammu and 
Kashmir - 
Rakh 
Dhiansar 
Maize + Cowpea 
Intercropping in 
Paired Row 
System for Low 
altitude 
subtropical zone 
in Jammu and 
Kashmir 
 
    
Intercropping of cowpea (C -475) 
with maize (Double Dekalb) in 
paired row system; maize at 60 cm 
and cowpea at 20 cm spacing in 
additive series 
Yield: 26.34 
q/ha; 25 –30% 
increase over 
sole crop;  
51.  Integrated 
Nutrient 
Management in 
Rainfed Maize 
for Low altitude 
subtropical zone 
in Jammu and 
Kashmir 
Application of FYM @ 4 t/acre + 16 
kg N/acre (urea) along with 
recommended P and K in maize 
(Kanchan-517) at 60×20 cm 
spacing 
Yield: 28.10 
q/ha; 20 –25% 
increase;  
52.  Foliar Nutrient 
Application in 
Wheat under 
Rainfed 
Conditions for 
Low altitude 
subtropical zone 
in Jammu and 
Kashmir 
Foliar spray of 0.5% N (urea) + 
0.5% K (KCl) along with 
recommended fertilizers in wheat 
(PBW-175) 
Yield: 21.98 
q/ha; 12 –15% 
increase;  
53.  Keymore 
plateau and 
Satpura Hill 
zone in 
Madhya 
Pradesh - 
Rewa 
 
Farm Pond -
Based Water 
Harvesting for 
Double 
Cropping for 
Keymore 
plateau and 
Satpura Hill 
zone in Madhya 
Pradesh 
 
  
Farm pond (905 m³) for water 
harvesting and recycling; crops: 
soybean/rice (Kharif) and 
wheat/chickpea/mustard/coriander 
(Rabi) 
23% yield 
increase;  
54.  Ridge and 
Furrow for In-situ 
Moisture 
Conservation in 
Soybean for 
Keymore 
plateau and 
Satpura Hill 
zone in Madhya 
Pradesh 
Ridge and furrow planting (45 cm 
spacing) in soybean (JS 93-05) for 
moisture conservation 
40–45% higher 
yield; 45% 
more moisture 
conservation;  
55.  Soybean + 
Pigeonpea 
Intercropping 
System (1:2) for 
Keymore 
Intercropping of soybean (JS 95 -
60) + pigeonpea (Rajivlochan) in 
1:2 ratio under rainfed conditions 
21% higher 
yield over sole 
cropping; 
higher LER 
(>1); 

27 
 
plateau and 
Satpura Hill 
zone in Madhya 
Pradesh 
56.  Chickpea + 
Linseed 
Intercropping 
System (4:2) for 
Keymore 
plateau and 
Satpura Hill 
zone in Madhya 
Pradesh 
Intercropping of chickpea (JG -63) 
+ linseed (JLS-27) at 4:2 ratio with 
spacing 20×30 cm 
22–25% higher 
yield;  
57.  Foliar Spray for 
Drought 
Mitigation in 
Soybean for 
Keymore 
plateau and 
Satpura Hill 
zone in Madhya 
Pradesh 
Foliar spray of 1% KNO ₃ + 
Trizophos @ 600 ml/ha during 
drought conditions in soybean (JS 
30-20) 
Yield: 16.5 
q/ha; 20 –25% 
increase;  
58.  
 
Tillage and 
Nutrient 
Management in 
Soybean for 
Keymore 
plateau and 
Satpura Hill 
zone in Madhya 
Pradesh 
Low tillage + herbicide + 
interculture + 50% RDF + 50% N 
through FYM in soybean (JS 93 -
05) 
Yield: 1270 
kg/ha; ~22 –
48% increase;  
59.  Northern 
Gujarat - SK 
Nagar 
Catchment–
Storage–
Command 
Relationship for 
Enhancing 
Productivity for 
Northern Gujarat 
Farm pond (310 –615 m³; 3 m 
depth; cement concrete lining) for 
loamy sand soils; catchment: 8 ha; 
sprinkler irrigation for cumin (GC 
4), mustard (GM 4), dillseed (GD 
2) 
Yield: Cumin 
377 kg/ha, 
Mustard 1202 
kg/ha, Dillseed 
1265 kg/ha; 
Net returns up 
to ₹40,299/ha; 
B:C ratio up to 
2.03; improved 
water 
harvesting and 
productivity 
60.  Integrated 
Nitrogen 
Management in 
Castor–
Clusterbean 
Rotation for 
Northern Gujarat 
Application of 50% N through 
fertilizer + 50% N through 
vermicompost along with P₂O₅ and 
biofertilizers (Azotobacter + PSB) 
in castor (GCH 7) and clusterbean 
(GG 2) 
Castor 
equivalent 
yield: 1558 
kg/ha; Net 
returns: 
₹51,634/ha; 
B:C ratio: 2.90; 
20% yield 
increase; 
improved soil 

28 
 
fertility and 
profitability 
61.  Drumstick-
Based Agri -
Horticultural 
System for 
Northern Gujarat 
Drumstick (PKM 2) based system 
with greengram intercrop (GM 4) 
along with other crops; spacing: 
3.6×6.0 m for drumstick 
Drumstick 
equivalent 
yield: 8067 
kg/ha; 44.23% 
yield increase; 
LER: 1.80;  
62.  Northern dry 
zone in 
Karnataka - 
Vijayapura 
Compartment 
bunding for 
rainwater 
harvesting in 
chickpea & rabi 
sorghum for 
Northern dry 
zone in 
Karnataka  
Compartment bunding practiced 
with chickpea (JG -11) and 
sorghum (M35 -1) under 
recommended spacing for in -situ 
rainwater conservation. 
Yield: 650 
kg/ha 
(sorghum), 622 
kg/ha 
(chickpea); 
Yield increase: 
37% & 48.2%;  
63.  Broad bed and 
furrow planting 
in pigeonpea for 
Northern dry 
zone in 
Karnataka 
Pigeonpea (TS-3R, GRG -152) 
grown on 120 cm raised beds 
using BBF planter. 
Yield up to 
1691 kg/ha; 
Yield increase: 
up to 23.5%;  
64.  Foxtail millet + 
niger 
intercropping 
system for 
Northern dry 
zone in 
Karnataka 
Intercropping of foxtail millet 
(DHFT-109-3) and niger (DNS -4) 
under dryland conditions. 
Yield: 1342 
kg/ha 
(equivalent); 
Yield increase: 
18.43%;  
65.  Integrated 
nutrient 
management in 
moth bean for 
Northern dry 
zone in 
Karnataka 
Application of FYM (2.5 t/ha) + 
12.5:25:0 NPK in moth bean 
(KBMB-1). 
Yield: 2340 
kg/ha; Yield 
increase: 
25.13%;  
66.  Ber-based agri -
horti system for 
Northern dry 
zone in 
Karnataka 
Integration of ber with pigeonpea 
and millets in 12×3 m spacing. 
Yield: 1201 
kg/ha 
(equivalent); 
Yield increase: 
111.07%;  
67.  Crop + 
horticulture + 
livestock IFS 
(small farms) for 
Northern dry 
zone in 
Karnataka 
Diversified system including onion, 
chickpea, grape, custard apple 
with livestock. 
Yield: 26276 
kg/ha; Yield 
increase: 
40.6%;  
  
[Ministry of Agriculture & Farmers’ Welfare, Dept. of Agricultural Research and Education’s  
F. No. 20/1/2026-Seed (E-441746) Dated 2nd July, 2026]  

29 
 
CHAPTER – III 
 
Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to pursue 
in view of the Government’s replies 
 
 
 
 
-NIL- 
 
  

30 
 
CHAPTER-IV 
 
Observations/Recommendations in respect of which Replies of the 
Government have not been accepted by the Committee 
 
 
 
 
-NIL- 
 
 
  

31 
 
CHAPTER-V 
Observations/Recommendations in respect of which final replies of the 
Government are still awaited 
 
Seed Systems and Accessibility 
Recommendation (Para No. 4) 
The Committee have been informed that after release of variety and its 
notification in Gazette of India, the Seed Division of Department of Agriculture and 
Farmers Welfare receives indents for breeder seed of the variety from the Department 
of Agriculture of States, National Seeds Corporation Limited (NSCL), Public Sector 
Undertakings (PSUs), Non -Governmental Organizations (NGOs), Farmer Producer 
Organizations (FPOs) and Private Seed Companies (through Seed Associations) and 
subsequently in a meeting with a ll indenting agencies, the indent is finalized. ICAR 
produces breeder seed as per the indent, which in turn are converted into Foundation, 
Certified and Truthfully Labelled (TL) seeds in the next generations respectively by 
seed producing agencies and fina lly distributed among the farmers. The Committee 
have also been informed that the Department has not faced any shortage of breeder 
seed. Over the past 10 years, a total of 1,45,266.2 quintals of breeder seed of water -
efficient varieties was produced agains t an indent of 93,147.8 quintals.  The breeder 
seed production is aligned with the annual demand (indents) placed by various state 
governments as per their Seed Rolling Plan and also by other public and private seed 
producing agencies. The quantity produce d has remained adequate to support the 
production of the required quantum of quality seed, as envisaged under the Seed 
Rolling Plans (Indents) of the respective states. However, due to declining indents 
from the states, the share of public sector National and State Level Corporation is 
declining and private sector is supplying the seeds to the states under various 
schemes.   
 
The Committee are of considered view that seeds are crucial and vital inputs 
for Agriculture.  Ensuring the timely availability of quality seeds at affordable price at 
the right time and place remains a significant challenge especially for small and 
marginal farmers, who face affordability and access barriers, and in arid and resource-
poor regions, with many farmers relying heavily on the informal seed sector to meet 

32 
 
their seed requirements.  The Committee, therefore, recommend the Department to 
take steps, in coordination with the Department of Agriculture and Farmers Welfare, 
for strengthening and equipping the existing seed production and distribution system 
networks to meet the increased and rapid demand, avoiding seed shortage, ensuring 
quality and affordability and easy availability. Also, State Governments should be 
impressed upon to take proactive steps to promote adoption of Climate -resilient and 
water-efficient varieties by ensuring timely availability and affordability of quality seeds to the 
farmers. 
 
Reply of the Government 
The Department of Agriculture & Farmers Welfare (DA&FW) is implementing 
several measures to strengthen and modernize seed production and distribution 
networks, ensuring they can meet rising demand while preventing shortages, 
maintaining quality, keeping prices affordable, and improving accessibility. The details 
are as under: 
1. DA&FW request State Governments to prepare a Seed Rolling Plan three years 
in advance to estimate the requirement of seed in their state and distribute seed 
production targets accordingly to different seed production agencies. This 
system ensures timely availability of required quantity of seed to the farmers in 
different states. 
2. DA&FW also ensure that the State Governments place their breeder seed 
indent of agriculture and horticulture crops one year in advance for systematic 
breeder seed production of indented quantities. After production, the breeder 
seed is allotted to State  Governments and other agencies for further 
multiplication into foundation and then certified seed and its distribution to the 
farmers. 
3. After taking the updated information from ICAR, Seeds Division, DA&FW 
circulates the list of newly released and notified high-yielding varieties, including 
climate-resilient and biofortified types, to all stakeholders, prior to the 
submission of breeder seed demand. This measure is intended to ensure the 
incorporation of such varieties into the seed production chain, thereby enabling 

33 
 
their timely availability to farmers while safeguarding quality, affordability, and 
accessibility. 
4. Uniform breeder seed price is fixed by DAFW in consultation with ICAR for 
optimization of the seed production cost in case of foundation and certified 
seed. 
5. The Department of Agriculture & Farmers Welfare (DA&FW) through its various 
schemes, extends financial assistance to States and Government Seed 
Producing Agencies for seed production, distribution, and other seed sector 
interventions. These measures are aimed at ensuring the timely availability of 
quality seeds to farmers at affordable prices. The ongoing crop development 
programmes/schemes include the National Food Security and Nutrition Mission 
(NFSNM), the National Mission on Edible Oil –Oilseeds (NMEO-OS), Mission 
for Aatmanirbharta in Pulses, National Mission for High Yielding Seeds, Mission 
for Cotton Productivity etc.   
[Ministry of Agriculture & Farmers’ Welfare, Dept. of Agricultural Research and Education’s  
F. No. 20/1/2026-Seed (E-441746) Dated 2nd July, 2026] 
Comments of the Committee 
For comments of the Committee please refer to Para No. 1.7 of Chapter I of this Report  
 
Seed Authenticity and Traceability 
Recommendation (Para No. 5) 
The Committee note that the Seed Authenticity Traceability & Holistic Inventory 
(SATHI) is a national platform implemented by the collaborative efforts of the Ministry 
of Agriculture and Farmers’ Welfare, Government of India with the Technical support 
of ICAR, and the National Informatics Centre (NIC) which proposes to provide a digital 
platform that streamlines the holistic management of seed production, quality 
certification, distribution and traceability at pan-India level.  This endeavor establishes 
a National Seed Grid (NSG), integrating all seed stakeholders within a unified national 
digital platform. 
 

34 
 
The development of the platform has been taken up in 2 phases. Phase I of the 
project has been launched which covers onboarding the stakeholders involved in 
Nucleus to Breeder Seed Production, Breeder to Foundation and Foundation to 
Certified Seed Production processes to SATHI platform and capture their transactions 
at the granular level.  Phase II of the project will cover seed Supply chain and Inventory 
management. The movement of seed bag in supply chain will be recorded in real time 
to provide end to en d traceability and Seed Inventory from Micro to Macro level 
(Retailer to state and National Level).  The Committee feel that full 
operationalization/implementation of SATHI platform would solve seed related issues 
particularly the menace of spurious and su b-standard seeds for the farmers.  The 
Committee, therefore, while appreciating the launching of the ambitious SATHI project, 
desire that the process of onboarding of all the stakeholders including Private Seed 
Companies on SATHI platform should be expedit ed in a time bound manner so that 
the system becomes fully functional and effective at the earliest. 
 
Reply of the Government 
SATHI Portal is structured into multiple functional phases aligned with the 
operational requirements of different seed systems. Phases I and II relate primarily to 
the notified and certified seed system, while Phases III and IV are designed for the 
Labelled (Truthfully Labelled) seed system. 
Phase I covers seed production and certification activities, including the 
progression from nucleus to breeder seed, production of foundation and certified 
seeds, and associated inspection and certification processes. 
Phase II focuses on inventory and distribution, including inventory 
management, lot -based based tracking, and distribution through Seed Producing 
Agencies, dealers, and government channels, culminating in sale to farmers. 
Phase III provides a simplified “Rapid Flow” module for labelled seeds, enabling 
streamlined onboarding of producers, basic inventory management, and transaction 
recording. 

35 
 
Phase IV offers a more comprehensive “Holistic Flow” module for labelled 
seeds, covering grower registration, production tracking, inspection and testing (where 
applicable), and digital tagging with traceability.  
[Ministry of Agriculture & Farmers’ Welfare, Dept. of Agricultural Research and Education’s  
F. No. 20/1/2026-Seed (E-441746) Dated 2nd July, 2026] 
Comments of the Committee 
For comments of the Committee please refer to Para No. 1.1 0 of Chapter I of this 
Report  
 
Water Budget Based Cropping System 
Recommendation (Para No. 7) 
The Committee note that the water is a critical input for crop production. Water 
scarcity and declining groundwater levels have become major constraints, particularly 
in arid and semi-arid regions.  The Committee also note that the total water resources 
of the country, as per an assessment, is 4000 billion cubic meters (BCM) based on 
annual rainfall and other forms of precipitation and utilizable water resources is 1123 
BCM compared to the projected total water demand of 1498 BCM.  There are also 
competing demands in domestic, industrial and ene rgy sectors which will need 
additional 222 BCM water by 2050.  There are also regional, seasonal and temporal 
variations in availability of water in the country and the existing cropping patterns often 
do not align with local water availability, causing ov er-extraction and environmental 
stress.    In this backdrop, the Committee are of the view that the implementation of 
Water Budget-Based Cropping Pattern/System i.e. designing and managing cropping 
systems based on the availability of water resources in a particular region, with the 
aim of optimizing water use for sustainable agriculture, is a pragmatic and sustainable 
approach especially vital in drought prone and water -deficit areas as it promotes 
ecological balance, sustainable water management, enhanced  resource-use 
efficiency and climate-resilient agriculture. 
 
The Committee, therefore, recommend the Department to make sincere efforts, 
in coordination with the Department of Agriculture and Farmers Welfare and other 
concerned agencies/organizations, for successful implementation of the Water 

36 
 
Budget-Based Cropping System in the Country. The Committee also recommend for 
establishing a legal or regulatory mechanism, particularly for critical and over-exploited 
water zones, to guide farmers on suitable crop choices and farming practices taking 
into consideration local agro -ecological conditions, water availability and socio -
economic factors when water resources are severely depleted. 
 
Reply of the Government 
Necessary efforts will be initiated on the recommendations of the committee on 
the subject. However, multiple ICAR institutes have developed relevant technologies, 
crop alternatives, and cropping system recommendations that can directly contribute 
to the effective implementation of such a system. ICAR has developed region-specific 
water-efficient cropping system modules aimed at enhancing farmers' income while 
conserving natural resources, particularly water and soil across the different aro -
ecologies of the country. The Institutes have identified and validated location-specific, 
short-duration, drought -tolerant, and moisture -efficient crops and varieties, coupled 
with suitable conservation agriculture and resource -management practices, to 
improve water prod uctivity, input -use efficiency, climate resilience, and system 
sustainability. These technologies provide viable alternatives to resource -intensive 
production systems and support sustainable agricultural intensification under 
changing climatic conditions.  
 
Assessing the water resources availability (ground and surface water) at block 
level is necessary. Identify water use efficient crops and cropping systems matching 
with available water resources in different blocks. Improved water management 
practices to be identified and promoted for increasing water use efficiency of different 
crops/cropping systems. 
 
In rainfed regions, efforts are made to harvest the rain water in farm ponds and 
efficiently utilize the harvested rainwater. As the amount of rainfall received and the 
soils vary in different parts of the country, the optimum quantity of runoff obtained i n 
different zones is assessed and accordingly the optimum sizes of farm ponds were 
designed. The harvested water is utilized during the dry spells as lifesaving irrigation 

37 
 
during the kharif season. During the rabi, crops were identified based on the availability 
of water in the farm pond. The All India Coordinated Research Project on Dryland 
Agriculture centers have identified optimum sizes of the farm pond for various rainfed 
regions and also the crops based on the availability of water in the farm pond. For 
example: For the Western Vidarbha region of Maharashtra, the optimum farm pond 
size was found to be 457 m³, with dimensions of 18 m × 18 m × 3 m, designed to serve 
a 1.0  ha catchment area and a 0.91 ha command area. The stored water can be 
utilized through sprinkler irrigation to provide one or two protective irrigations of 5 cm 
depth to chickpea during critical growth stages in one ha area. The results showed 
that chickpea yield increased to 2,005 kg/ha with two protective irrigations and 1,680 
kg/ha with one irrigation, compared to 1,335 kg/ha under rainfed conditions. Providing 
two protective irrigations resulted in a yield increase of 50.19% over the control, 
demonstrating the effectiveness of farm pond -based supplemental irrigation in 
enhancing chickpea productivity in the region. 
 
[Ministry of Agriculture & Farmers’ Welfare, Dept. of Agricultural Research and Education’s  
F. No. 20/1/2026-Seed (E-441746) Dated 2nd July, 2026] 
 
Apex Body/Committee for Coordination 
Recommendation (Para No. 9) 
The Committee note that during 1980s, almost all Agriculture and Allied Sector 
related Department were under a single Ministry and in course of time several new 
Ministries have been created, though they are directly or indirectly related to 
Agriculture. The Committee have been apprised that the discussions and 
collaborations are held among these Ministries at appropriate level but a permanent 
coordination Committee or an Apex body for coordination among these Ministries does 
not exist at present. The Committee, therefore, desire that an Apex Body or a 
Committee for coordination among various concerned Ministries, Departments and 
Agencies on Agriculture and Allied Sector-related issues be constituted for institutional 
convergence, policy coherence and integrated implementation of agricultu ral 
strategies especially in the context of complex and cross-cutting interventions. 
 
 

38 
 
Reply of the Government 
The establishment of such a permanent institutional mechanism is essential for 
achieving policy coherence, institutional convergence, and integrated implementation 
of agricultural strategies, particularly in the context of complex, cross -cutting 
interventions such as water -efficient crop development, seed systems, climate 
resilience, and sustainable natural resource management.  
[Ministry of Agriculture & Farmers’ Welfare, Dept. of Agricultural Research and Education’s  
F. No. 20/1/2026-Seed (E-441746) Dated 2nd July, 2026]  
Comments of the Committee 
For comments of the Committee please refer to Para No. 1.13 of Chapter I of this 
Report 
 
 
 
  
NEW DELHI; 
11 August, 2026                 
20 Shravana, 1948 (Saka) 
CHARANJIT SINGH CHANNI 
Chairperson, 
Standing Committee on Agriculture 
Animal Husbandry and Food Processing 

39 
 
ANNEXURE 
MINUTES OF THE TWENTY-FOURTH SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE 
ON AGRICULTURE, ANIMAL HUSBANDRY AND FOOD PROCESSING (2025-26) 
 
The Committee sat on Tuesday, the 11 th August, 2026 from 1500 hrs. to 1510 
hrs. in Committee Room-‘D’, Parliament House Annexe (PHA), New Delhi.   
Present 
Shri Charanjit Singh Channi  -  Chairperson 
Members 
Lok Sabha 
2.  Shri Patel Umeshbhai Babubhai 
3.  Shri Rajkumar Chahar 
4.  Smt. Anita Nagarsingh Chouhan 
5.  Shri Kuldeep Indora 
6.  Shri Rajpalsinh Mahendrasinh Jadav 
7.  Md. Abu Taher Khan 
8.  Shri Rahul Singh Lodhi 
9.  Shri Sukanta Kumar Panigrahi 
10.  Smt. Krishna Devi Shivshankar Patel 
11.  Shri Naresh Chandra Uttam Patel 
12.  Shri Murasoli S. 
13.  Shri Dharambir Singh 
14.  Shri Dushyant Singh 
15.  Shri Sudhakar Singh 
16.  Shri Kodikunnil Suresh 
17.  Smt. Geniben Nagaji Thakor 
18.  Shri Bhausaheb Rajaram Wakchaure 
 
Rajya Sabha 
 
19.  Dr. Anil Sukhdeorao Bonde 
20.  Shri Banshilal Gurjar 
21.  Shri Nitin Laxmanrao Jadhav-Patil 
22.  Shri Madan Rathore 
23.  Shri S.R. Sivalingam 
24.  Shri P. P. Suneer 
25. Shri Mahesh Kewat 
26. Shri James Pangsang Kongkal Sangma 
 
 
 

40 
 
Secretariat 
 
1. Shri Dhiraj Kumar  – Joint Secretary     
2. Shri Maheshwar  – Director 
3. Shri Prem Ranjan  - Deputy Secretary 
     4. Shri Fauzi Badruddin - Deputy Secretary 
 
2. At the outset, the Chairperson welcomed the Members to the Sitting of the 
Committee. Thereafter, the Committee took up for consideration and adoption of the 
following Draft Action Taken Reports: 
 
(i) xxxx  xxxx  xxxx  xxxx*; 
(ii) xxxx  xxxx  xxxx  xxxx*; 
(iii) xxxx  xxxx  xxxx  xxxx*; 
(iv) xxxx  xxxx  xxxx  xxxx*; 
(v) xxxx  xxxx  xxxx  xxxx*; 
(vi) xxxx  xxxx  xxxx  xxxx*; 
(vii) xxxx  xxxx  xxxx  xxxx*; and 
(viii) Action Taken Report  on 34 th Report (18 th Lok Sabha) on the subject 
‘Research for Developing Water Efficient Variety of Seeds to Save 
Ground Water’ pertaining to the Department of Agricultural Research 
and Education. 
 
3. The Committee, thereafter, adopted the draft Action Taken Reports without any 
modifications/amendments. 
 
4. The Committee also authorized the Chairperson to finalize and present the 
Reports to Parliament.  
 
The Committee then adjourned. 
  
 
* Matter not related to this Report. 

41 
 
 
APPENDIX 
 
ANALYSIS OF ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS CONTAINED IN THE THIRTY FOURTH 
REPORT (18TH LOK SABHA) OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
AGRICULTURE, ANIMAL HUSBANDRY AND FOOD PROCESSING (2025-26) 
 
(Vide Para 4 of Introduction of the Report) 
 
(i) Total Number of Recommendations  09 
(ii) Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted By the Government  
Para Nos. 1,2,3,6 and 8 Total   05 
      Percentage     55.56% 
(iii) Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to pursue in view  
of the Government’s replies  
Para No. NIL Total 00 
 Percentage      0.00% 
(iv) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which Replies of the Government have  
not been accepted by the Committee 
Para No. NIL Total 00 
   Percentage     0.00% 
(v) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which final replies of the Government  
are still awaited 
Para Nos. 4,5,7 and 9 Total 04 
 Percentage    44.44% 
 
 
 