 STANDING COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE, ANIMAL 
HUSBANDRY AND FOOD PROCESSING 
 
(2025-2026) 
 
 
EIGHTEENTH LOK SABHA 
 
 
 
          MINISTRY OF COOPERATION 
                       DEMANDS FOR GRANTS (2025-26) 
 
 
[Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations contained in the 
Ninth Report (Eighteenth Lok Sabha) of the Standing Committee on Agriculture, Animal 
Husbandry and Food Processing (2024-25) on Demands for Grants (2025-26)] 
 
 
 
 
THIRTY-SIXTH REPORT 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT  
NEW DELHI 
MARCH, 2026 / CHAITRA, 1948(SAKA) 
  
36 

 
THIRTY-SIXTH REPORT 
 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE, ANIMAL 
HUSBANDRY AND FOOD PROCESSING 
(2025-2026) 
 
 
EIGHTEENTH LOK SABHA 
 
 
 
 
MINISTRY OF COOPERATION 
 
DEMANDS FOR GRANTS (2025-26) 
 
 
[Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations contained in the 
Ninth Report (Eighteenth Lok Sabha) of the Standing Committee on Agriculture, Animal 
Husbandry and Food Processing (2024-25) on Demands for Grants (2025-26)] 
 
 
 Presented to Lok Sabha on      27.03.2026 
 
 Laid on the Table of Rajya Sabha on      27.03.2026 
 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT  
NEW DELHI 
MARCH, 2026 / CHAITRA, 1948(SAKA) 
 


 
i  
COA No. 535 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
© 2026 By Lok Sabha Secretariat 
 
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of Business in Lok Sabha 
(Seventeenth Edition) and Printed by Lok Sabha Secretariat 
 
 
  

 
ii  
CONTENTS 
Page No. 
Composition of the Committee (2024-25)  iii 
Composition of the Committee (2025-26)  iv 
Introduction  vi 
Chapter I Report 
 
1 
Chapter II     Observations/Recommendations that have been 
accepted by the Government 
 
8 
Chapter III Observations/Recommendations which the 
Committee do not desire to pursue in view of the 
Government’s replies 
 
15 
Chapter IV Observations/Recommendations in respect of which 
Replies of the Government have not been accepted by 
the Committee 
 
18 
Chapter V Observations/Recommendations in respect of which 
final replies of the Government are still awaited 
22 
ANNEXURE 
Minutes of the 12th sitting of the Committee held on 23.03.2026 23 
APPENDIX 
Analysis of Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/ 
Recommendations contained in the Ninth Report (18th Lok Sabha) of 
the Standing Committee on Agriculture, Animal Husbandry and Food 
Processing (2024-25) on Demands for Grants (2025-26) 
25 
 
  

 
iii  
COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE, ANIMAL 
HUSBANDRY AND FOOD PROCESSING  
 (2024-25) 
 
SHRI CHARANJIT SINGH CHANNI – CHAIRPERSON 
 
MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA 
 
2.  Shri Patel Umeshbhai Babubhai 
3.  Smt. Harsimrat Kaur Badal 
4.  Shri Rajkumar Chahar 
5.  Smt. Anita Nagarsingh Chouhan 
6.  Shri Kuldeep Indora 
7.  Shri Rajpalsinh Mahendrasinh Jadav 
8.  Md. Abu Taher Khan 
9.  Shri Rahul Singh Lodhi 
10.  Shri Sukanta Kumar Panigrahi 
11.  Smt. Krishna Devi Shivshankar Patel 
12.  Shri Naresh Chandra Uttam Patel 
13.  Shri Narayan Tatu Rane 
14.  Shri Murasoli S. 
15.  Shri Dharambir Singh 
16.  Shri Dushyant Singh 
17.  Shri Sudhakar Singh 
18.  Shri Kodikunnil Suresh 
19.  Shri Tejasvi Surya 
20.  Smt. Geniben Nagaji Thakor 
21.  Shri Bhausaheb Rajaram Wakchaure 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
22.  Smt. Ramilaben Becharbhai Bara 
23.  Shri Masthan Rao Yadav Beedha* 
24.  Dr. Anil Sukhdeorao Bonde 
25.  Shri Banshilal Gurjar 
26.  Shri S. Kalyanasundaram 
27.  Shri Nitin Laxmanrao Jadhav Patil 
28.  Shri Madan Rathore 
29.  Shri Ramji Lal Suman 
30.  Shri P. P. Suneer 
31.  Shri Randeep Singh Surjewala 
 
Shri Krishan Lal Panwar, Member resigned from Rajya Sabha on 14.10.2024. 
*Shri Masthan Rao Yadav Beedha, Member, Rajya Sabha has been nominated to the Standing Committee on Agriculture, 
Animal Husbandry and Food Processing w.e.f on 8th August 2025, vide Lok Sabha Bulletin Part-II, Para No. 3117 dated 
13.08.2025.   

 
iv  
COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE, ANIMAL 
HUSBANDRY AND FOOD PROCESSING  
 (2025-26) 
 
SHRI CHARANJIT SINGH CHANNI – CHAIRPERSON 
 
MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA 
 
2.  Shri Patel Umeshbhai Babubhai 
3.  Smt. Harsimrat Kaur Badal 
4.  Shri Rajkumar Chahar 
5.  Smt. Anita Nagarsingh Chouhan 
6.  Shri Kuldeep Indora 
7.  Shri Rajpalsinh Mahendrasinh Jadav 
8.  Md. Abu Taher Khan 
9.  Shri Rahul Singh Lodhi 
10.  Shri Sukanta Kumar Panigrahi 
11.  Smt. Krishna Devi Shivshankar Patel 
12.  Shri Naresh Chandra Uttam Patel 
13.  Shri Narayan Tatu Rane 
14.  Shri Murasoli S. 
15.  Shri Dharambir Singh 
16.  Shri Dushyant Singh 
17.  Shri Sudhakar Singh 
18.  Shri Kodikunnil Suresh 
19.  Shri Tejasvi Surya 
20.  Smt. Geniben Nagaji Thakor 
21.  Shri Bhausaheb Rajaram Wakchaure 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
22.  Smt. Ramilaben Becharbhai Bara 
23.  Dr. Anil Sukhdeorao Bonde 
24.  Shri H. D. Devegowda 
25.  Shri Banshilal Gurjar 
26.  Shri Nitin Laxmanrao Jadhav Patil 
27.  Shri Madan Rathore 
28.  Shri S. R. Sivalingam 
29.  Shri Ramji Lal Suman 
30.  Shri P. P. Suneer 
31.  Shri Randeep Singh Surjewala   

 
v  
SECRETARIAT 
 
 1. Shri Dhiraj Kumar   - Joint Secretary 
 2. Shri Maheshwar    - Director 
 3. Shri Sanjeev Kumar   - Under Secretary 
 4. Shri Ujjwal Yadav   - Assistant Security Officer 
 
 
  

 
vi  
INTRODUCTION 
 
 
I, the Chairperson, Standing Committee on Agriculture, Animal Husbandry and 
Food Processing (2025-26), having been authorized by the Committee to submit the 
Report on their behalf, present this Thirty-sixth Report on Action taken by the 
Government on the Observations/Recommendations contained in the Ninth Report 
(Eighteenth Lok Sabha) of the Standing Committee on Agriculture, Animal Husbandry 
and Food Processing (2024-25) on 'Demands for Grants (2025-26)' pertaining to the 
Ministry of Cooperation.  
 
2. The Ninth Report (Eighteenth Lok Sabha) of the Standing Committee on 
Agriculture, Animal Husbandry and Food Processing (2024-25) on Demands for 
Grants (2025-26) pertaining to the Ministry of Cooperation was presented to Lok Sabha 
and laid on the Table of Rajya Sabha on 12.03.2025. The Action Taken Notes on the 
Report were received on 05.06.2025. 
 
3. The Report was considered and adopted by the Committee at their Sitting held 
on 23.03.2026. 
 
4. An Analysis of the action taken by the Government on the Observations/ 
Recommendations contained in the Ninth Report (Eighteenth Lok Sabha) of the 
Committee on Demands for Grants (2025-26) is given in Appendix. 
 
 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI;                                 CHARANJIT SINGH CHANNI  
23rd MARCH, 2026                                             Chairperson, 
02 CHAITRA, 1948 (Saka)        Standing Committee on Agriculture 
                Animal Husbandry and Food Processing 
 
 
 

 
1 
 
REPORT 
 
CHAPTER - I 
 
This Report of the Standing Committee on Agriculture, Animal Husbandry and Food 
Processing deals with the Action Taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in the Ninth Report (Eighteenth Lok Sabha) of 
the Standing Committee on Agriculture, Animal Husbandry and Food Processing (2024-25) 
on “Demands for Grants (2025-26)” pertaining to the Ministry of Cooperation which was 
presented to Lok Sabha and laid on the Table of Rajya Sabha on 12th March, 2025. 
 
1.2 The Ministry of Cooperation have furnished Action Taken Replies in respect of all the 
09 Observations/Recommendations contained in the Report. These Replies have been 
scrutinised and categorised as under: - 
 
(i) Observations/Recommendations that have been accepted 
by the Government: 
Chapter-II 
(Total - 05) 
Recommendation Para Nos. 2,6,7,8 & 9 
(ii) Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do 
not desire to pursue in view of the Government’s replies:  
Chapter-III 
(Total - 02) 
Recommendation Para Nos. 3,5 
(iii) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which 
Replies of the Government have not been accepted by the 
Committee: 
Chapter-IV 
(Total- 02) 
Recommendation Para Nos. 1 & 4 
(iv) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which final 
replies of the Government are still awaited. 
Chapter-V 
(Total - 00) 
Recommendation Para No. NIL 
 
1.3 The Committee desire that utmost importance be given to implementation of 
the Observations/Recommendations accepted by the Government. In cases, where it 
is not possible for the Ministry to implement the Recommendations in letter and spirit 

 
2 
 
for any reason, the matter should be reported to the Committee with the reasons for 
non-implementation. The Committee desire that further Action Taken Notes on the 
Observations/ Recommendations contained in Chapter - I and V of this Report be 
furnished to them at an early date. 
 
1.4 The Committee will now deal with the action taken by the Government on some of 
the Recommendations in the succeeding paragraphs. 
 
A. Budgetary Allocation for 2025-26 
Recommendation No-1 
 
1.5 The Committee had observed/recommended: - 
 
The Committee note that the Ministry of Cooperation was allocated Rs.1150 Crore at 
Budget Estimate (BE) stage for the year 2023-24. The amount was reduced to Rs.747 
Crore at the Revised Estimate (RE) stage. The actual amount spent stood at Rs. 689 
Crore resulting in under-utilization of about Rs.59 Crore in the year 2023-24. 
Underutilisation and surrendering of the funds amounted to 7.7% of the RE allocation 
for the year. Similarly, Rs.1183 Crore was allocated at the (BE) for the year 2024-25 
but it was brought down to Rs.750 Crore at the Revised Estimate (RE) stage. Out of 
this amount, the Ministry, however, could spend Rs.573 Crore (approx.) as on 
14.02.2025 representing 76% of allocations at RE stage. Further, the Ministry has 
also informed that they will be able to spend the remaining 24% before the end of 
financial year. The Committee while appreciating the utilisation of the funds more or 
less as per the stipulations of the Dept of Expenditure, observe that the 
underutilisation during 2023-24 is primarily due to non-receipt of proposals for 
releasing funds, underutilisation of the funds disbursed due to non-readiness of the 
states/UTs such as non-opening/ mapping of SNA accounts, etc. The Committee 
while acknowledging the teething issues that may arise in the initial phases of shifting 
to new accounting system feel that these are transient and hope the Ministry will be 
able to utilise fully once the accounting systems are stabilised. The Committee, 

 
3 
 
however, suggest that state Govts may be persuaded to send the funding proposals 
for digitisation / computerisation of PACs and strengthening of Cooperatives through 
IT interventions. 
 
The Committee note that the Ministry of Finance considering the immense potential 
of the cooperative sector have allocated Rs.1186 Crore to the Ministry of Cooperation 
at the Budget Estimates for 2025-26.  The Committee further note that the higher 
allocation compared to the previous year in BE 2025-26 as compared to BE 2024-25 
is due to opening of two newly created Offices of Cooperative Election Authority and 
Cooperative Ombudsman. Further the higher allocations are also meant for 
computerization of higher number of PACS. Also, a new Central Sector Scheme is 
being introduced whereby the Grant-in-aid of Rs.500 Crore to the NCDC to enable it 
to provide loans to the Cooperatives. The Committee while hoping that the Ministry 
would be able to entirely use the budgetary allocation during the present financial 
year, also advise the Ministry to start implementing the Schemes and Programmes 
planned for 2025-26 at the earliest to achieve the intended objectives. 
 
1.6 The Ministry in its Action Taken Reply has stated as under: - 
 
It is humbly apprised that all the concerned States have been repeatedly pursued to 
spend their funds available in SNA Accounts and various meeting have been held 
with the participating States/UTs with the specific directions to them to spend their 
SNA Balance immediately. DO letters from Secretary, Cooperation and Joint 
Secretary, M/o Cooperation have also been sent to States raising this issue. Recently, 
on 24th April, 2025, a review meeting was also taken up with the lagging states in 
which the issue was raised regarding slow progress of fund utilization and pending 
SNA balances in their accounts.  NABARD has also been requested to reframe the 
payment guidelines to System Integrators (SIs) in the project so that the funds may 
be utilized in the better and faster manner.  
 

 
4 
 
After Budget Announcement and in accordance with the guidelines of DOE vide their 
OM dated 05/08/2016 a draft EFC memo for the new scheme “Grant-in-aid to NCDC” 
under Ministry of Cooperation with an outlay of ₹2000 crore to NCDC for 4 years (Rs. 
500 Crore for each year 2025-26 to 2028-29) has been prepared. After having 
requisite Stakeholders' consultation and making suggested modification in the draft 
EFC memo, it was circulated to various line ministries/departments and NITI Aayog 
on 25.03.2025 for their comments/inputs. The comments/inputs have since been 
received, the EFC memo has been finalized in consultation with IFD and the same is 
being submitted to DOE for approval. 
Further, Monthly review meeting on the progress of various undergoing schemes/ 
projects/initiatives in States/ UTs is being taken by Secretary (Cooperation) on 
monthly basis which also includes the update status of the project “strengthening of 
Cooperatives through IT interventions”. Moreover, regular communications and 
meetings through VC are also undertaken by Joint Secretary (Policy) with the stake 
holders in the States/ UTs for its effective implementation and to resolve the issues if 
any, regarding funds and technical part. Recently, DO letters have been issued by 
Secretary (Cooperation) to all Chief Secretary/ Administrators of the States/ UTs 
requesting them to complete the project by 30.09.2025. 
 
1.7 The Committee in their Report had recommended the Ministry to entirely 
use the budgetary allocation during the present financial year and to also start 
implementing the Schemes and Programmes planned for 2025-26 at the earliest 
to achieve the intended objectives. The Committee suggested that State Govts 
may be persuaded to send the funding proposals for digitisation / 
computerisation of PACs and strengthening of Cooperatives through IT 
interventions. The Committee further noted that the higher allocation in BE 
2025-26 as compared to BE 2024-25 is due to opening of two newly created 
Offices of Cooperative Election Authority and Cooperative Ombudsman and a 
new Central Sector Scheme has been introduced to provide Grant-in-aid of 
Rs.500 Crore to the NCDC to enable it to provide loans to the Cooperatives. The 
Ministry in its Action Taken Reply has stated that the concerned States have 

 
5 
 
been repeatedly pursued to spend their funds available in SNA Accounts and 
various meeting have been held with the participating States/UTs with the 
specific directions to them to spend their SNA Balance immediately and 
NABARD has also been requested to reframe the payment guidelines to 
System Integrators (SIs) in the project so that the funds may be utilized in the 
better and faster manner. A draft EFC memo for the new scheme “Grant-in-aid 
to NCDC” under Ministry of Cooperation with an outlay of ₹2000 crore to NCDC 
for 4 years (Rs. 500 Crore for each year 2025-26 to 2028-29) has been finalized 
with IFD after having requisite Stakeholders' consultation including comments 
received various line Ministries/Departments and NITI Aayog, the same is being 
submitted to DOE for approval. The Ministry has further stated that review 
meeting on the progress of various undergoing schemes/ projects/initiatives 
in States/ UTs is being taken by Secretary (Cooperation) on monthly basis 
which also include the updated status of the project “strengthening of 
Cooperatives through IT interventions”. Moreover, regular communications 
and meetings through VC are also undertaken by Joint Secretary (Policy) with 
the stake holders in the States/ UTs for its effective implementation and to 
resolve the issues if any, regarding funds and technical part. Recently, DO 
letters have been issued by Secretary (Cooperation) to all Chief Secretary/ 
Administrators of the States/ UTs requesting them to complete the project by 
30.09.2025. The Committee are of the considered opinion that the Ministry 
needs to put in place the required processes and mechanisms to monitor fund 
usage at regular intervals and to address issues that hamper the entire 
spending of the allocated budgetary amount as surrendering of the funds may 
have adverse bearing on the outcome and output targets given in various 
programmes, schemes, projects and Missions, particularly if rollover 
mechanisms for unused funds are not in place. 
 
B. Progress in operations of PACs under PM Bharatiya Janaushadi Kendra 
(PMBAK)  
Recommendation No - 4 

 
6 
 
 
1.8 The Committee had observed/recommended: - 
 
The Committee note that PACS have been allowed to open Pradhan Mantri Bharatiya 
Janaushadhi Kendra (PMBJK) which provide generic medicines at affordable prices, 
which are 50%-90% less than that of branded medicines in the open market, to rural 
citizens. The Jan Aushadhi Kendras provide around 2047 drugs and 300 medical 
devices at reasonable prices. They further note that so far, 4,692 PACS from 34 
States/UTs have applied for the scheme, out of which 2,648 PACS have been given 
initial approval by Pharmaceuticals & Medical Devices Bureau of India (PMBI). Drug 
licenses have been granted to 584 PACS from 24 States/UTs, and store codes have 
been issued to 465 PACS by PMBI. The afore mentioned data shows that 50 % 
(approx.) only of the PACs which have applied under the scheme were granted initial 
approval PMBI and 584 PACs only have been have been granted drug licenses. The 
Committee while appreciating the Govt for this move, are of the view that given the 
huge number of PACS there exists enough scope to bring more PACS under the 
Scheme. The Committee accordingly suggest to take appropriate steps to bring more 
PACS under the scheme in a phased manner.  
 
1.9 The Ministry in its Action Taken Reply has stated as under: - 
 
The Ministry of Cooperation is actively supporting PACS to function as Pradhan 
Mantri Bhartiya Janaushadhi Kendras (PMBJKs) to enhance rural access to 
affordable quantity generic medicines. 
Ministry of Cooperation has requested State Cooperation Departments to facilitate 
initially approved PACS for obtaining drug licenses. The Ministry has also taken up 
the matter with PMBI to simplify the application process for PACS. 
In this regard, a meeting was co-chaired by Secretary (Cooperation) and Secretary 
(Pharmaceuticals), Ministry of Chemicals and Fertilizers on 30.04.2025 to identify the 
way forward and to review the progress of this initiative, where representatives from 
Ministry of Health, O/o Drug Controller General of India (DCGI) and Pharmacy 
Council of India (PCI) were also present.   

 
7 
 
Through business diversification, this initiative aims to transform PACS into vibrant 
economic entities and also benefit the small and marginal farmers associated with 
them. 
 
1.10 The Committee in their Report had recommended that given the huge number 
of PACS, there exists enough scope to bring more PACS under the Scheme and 
accordingly suggested the Ministry to take appropriate steps to bring more PACS 
under the scheme in a phased manner. The Ministry in its Action Taken Reply has 
stated that it is actively supporting PACS to function as Pradhan Mantri Bhartiya 
Janaushadhi Kendras (PMBJKs) to enhance rural access to affordable quantity 
generic medicines, already requested State Cooperation Departments to facilitate 
initially approved PACS for obtaining drug licenses & taken up the matter with 
Pharmaceuticals & Medical Devices Bureau of India (PMBI) to simplify the application 
process for PACS. The Ministry has further stated that a meeting was co-chaired by 
Secretary (Cooperation) and Secretary (Pharmaceuticals), Ministry of Chemicals and 
Fertilizers on 30.04.2025 to identify the way forward and to review the progress of this 
initiative, where representatives from Ministry of Health, O/o Drug Controller General 
of India (DCGI) and Pharmacy Council of India (PCI) were also present. The Committee 
are of the considered opinion that given the enormous reach and potential of PACS 
to even the remotest corners of the country, the Ministry of Cooperation should not 
only expedite approvals for PACS but also issue guidelines to State 
Governments/PMBI to simplify guidelines for obtaining drug licenses by PACS.  The 
Ministry may also consider setting up a Dashboard on an online portal having 
Artificial Intelligence features to monitor progress of approvals of PACs on real time 
basis and subsequent features in collaboration with State Governments. These steps 
will go a long way in not only enhancing Ease of Doing business for PACS but would 
also provide quality generic medicines at affordable prices to the rural population 
thereby improving basic health facilities available to them.  

 
8 
 
CHAPTER - II 
 
 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS THAT HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE 
GOVERNMENT 
 
Computerization of Primary Agricultural Credit Societies (PACS) 
 
Recommendation No. 2 
 
The Committee acknowledge that the computerization of Primary Agricultural Credit 
Societies is a landmark project which aims to revolutionize the rural short term Loan 
Cooperative sector in India. This project helps in bringing transparency, lowering transaction 
costs, ensuring speedy disbursal of loans there by revolutionising the entire function of 
PACs. The Committee note that overall, 70 % of the PACs are covered so far and the 
remaining PACS are expected to be covered by the end of the financial year 2024-25. The 
Committee suggest that proactive steps may be taken to persuade the states to send the 
proposals for computerisation of PACs to ensure that projects is completed as per schedule 
and the sector experiences the benefits of such a massive project.  
 
Reply of the Government 
In this regard, it is submitted that computerization of PACS is a growing project.  
Recently, 11,700 PACS have been further sanctioned with the approval of the competent 
authority, under the Computerization of PACS project over and above 67,930 PACS 
sanctioned earlier. A Committee has also been formed with Registrar of Cooperative 
Societies (RCS) of the participating states like Uttarakhand, Jharkhand and Tamil Nadu 
along with CGM, NABARD HO for recommendation of additional PACS to brought under 
this Project. Further, hardware has been delivered in 62,937 PACS (93%) and 58,902 PACS 
(87%) have been onboarded on ERP software and 50,447 PACS have been made Go-Live 
(74%) and 46,416 PACS (68%) are doing Day-end activities on ERP software till 20.05.2025 
and concerted efforts are being made to computerize all sanctioned PACS within the 
stipulated timelines given in the scheme guidelines.  
MINISTRY OF COOPERATION 
File No. H-12/2/2025-MoC dated 03.06.2025 

 
9 
 
National Level University in the Cooperative Sector 
 
Recommendation No. 6 
 
The Committee feel that a very limited number of good educational institutions and 
training are presently operating in the field of cooperatives to meet the requirements, need 
and tapping the potentials of the cooperatives sector in India despite the fact that 
cooperative movement is very vibrant and has deep roots in the society. The Committee, 
thus, appreciate that the Government have decided to establish a national-level University, 
i.e., “Tribhuvan Sahkari University (TSU)” exclusively for the cooperative sector and a Bill 
has already been introduced in Lok Sabha for the legislative approval of the Parliament. The 
University will follow a multi-disciplinary course curriculum with flexible entry and exit system 
in line with the National Education Policy 2020 and would also offer courses in different 
sector-specific courses relating to cooperative business management, skill-development 
courses, and specialized engineering and technological courses as per demand of the 
cooperative sector. The Committee are hopeful that setting up of this University would 
definitely ensure a stable and continuous availability of qualified human resources to the 
cooperative sector and the capacity of employees and board members of cooperatives 
would also be enhanced immensely. The Committee, therefore, recommend the Ministry to 
pursue the matter for early setting up of the University and also desire that the Committee 
be apprised of the progress made in this regard. 
 The Committee, however, are of the considered opinion that Institute of Rural 
Management, Anand (IRMA), a pioneering institute which played a pivotal role in successful 
implementation of while Revolution in India, may be kept as an autonomous institution to 
allow it to continue to play key role in rural management sector.  
 
Reply of the Government 
It is humbly apprised that Cabinet approval for the introduction of the bill in Parliament 
for the establishment of a national level cooperative university was obtained on 12.12.2024 
by the Ministry. Further, the “Tribhuvan” Sahkari University Bill, 2025 was passed by the Lok 
Sabha and Rajya Sabha on 26th March,   2025and 1st April 2025 respectively. Thereafter, 
assent was also obtained from the Hon’ble President on the bill on 3rd April 2025. Further, 

 
10 
 
the Gazette notification for commencement of the Act and for establishment of the university 
have also been issued on 4th April, 2025. 
“Tribhuvan” Sahkari University (TSU) has been established by the Ministry of Cooperation 
through an Act of Parliament, by converting the Institute of Rural Management Anand 
(IRMA), located in the Anand district of Gujarat Constitution of the Governing Board of the 
University is in process. 
Identification of additional land in Gujarat for the University campus has been completed. 
Accordingly, the Chief Secretary of the Gujrat State has been requested to transfer the 
identified land to the University. 
To ensure the identity & autonomy of IRMA is preserved within the institutional framework 
of the University. Necessary provisions have been made in the “Tribhuvan” Sahkari 
University Act, 2025 itself. 
Section 5(1)(e) states that the identity and autonomy of the IRMA and its rights and privileges 
shall be continued. 
Section 5(4) states that the identity and autonomy of any ongoing academic programme and 
course of the Institute of Rural Management Anand School shall be preserved by the 
University and any modification, if needed, shall be with the concurrence of the Executive 
Board of such School. 
Section 5(5) states that the Institute of Rural Management Anand School shall have 
administrative and academic autonomy as may be provided by the Statutes. 
 
MINISTRY OF COOPERATION 
File No. H-12/2/2025-MoC dated 03.06.2025 
 
Ushering in the White Revolution 2.0 
 
Recommendation No. 7 
 
The Committee are happy to note that the Ministry of Cooperation has launched an 
initiative to usher Cooperative-led "White Revolution 2.0” aimed at expanding cooperative 

 
11 
 
coverage, employment generation and women's empowerment with an objective to increase 
milk procurement of dairy cooperatives by 50% from the present level over next five years 
by providing market access to dairy farmers in uncovered areas and increasing the share of 
dairy cooperatives in organised sector. The initiative would help in creating the milk 
procurement activities as an additional income generating activity in Primary Agricultural 
Cooperative Societies / Multipurpose Primary Agricultural Credit Cooperative Societies 
(MPACS). It is heartening that 1000 MPACS will be provided a grant of Rs.40,000 each for 
procuring basic milk procurement and testing equipment under the Scheme. The Committee 
recommend that the 1000 MPACS to who the financial grant are to be given must be 
identified as soon as possible and it may be ensure that these 1000 MPACS should be in 
different districts in different States to make the dairy cooperatives a successful enterprise 
in whole of India. The Committee would also like to be apprised, from time to time, about 
the progress and achievement made under the Scheme.  
 
Reply of the Government 
To promote dairying as an additional source of income for members of viable 
Multipurpose Primary Agricultural Credit Societies (MPACS), the National Dairy 
Development Board (NDDB) launched a scheme offering one-time financial assistance of 
up to ₹ 40,000 per MPACS to help initiate milk procurement activities by providing basic milk 
procurement and testing equipment. This scheme has since been extended to include 
formation of new Multipurpose Dairy Cooperative Societies (MDCS) also. The financial 
assistance is routed through the Milk Federation/Milk Union/Milk Producer Organization 
operating in the region. 
NDDB has already approved 15 projects across 13 Milk Unions and one Milk 
Producer Organization, covering 8 different states (Assam, West Bengal, Mizoram, Odisha, 
Maharashtra, Madhya Pradesh, Uttar Pradesh, Punjab). Of the targeted 1,000 
MPACS/MDCS, 893 have been approved for support, with a total sanctioned amount of Rs. 
3.59 Crore. The remaining 107 MPACS/MDCS will also be shortly approved. 
To date, 388 MPACS/MDCS have already begun milk procurement operations with 
total milk collection of around 46,000 litres per day from 8,653 pourer members. 

 
12 
 
Project wise details are tabulated below for perusal: - 
Sr. 
No. 
State Milk Union/MPO MPACS/ 
MDCS 
to be 
support
ed 
MPACS/ 
MDCS 
initiated 
milk 
procurem
ent (nos.) 
Milk 
Collection 
(LPD) 
Pourer 
Member 
(nos.) 
1 Assam West Assam Milk Union Ltd. 201 195 24,000 3,780 
2 Assam East Assam Milk Union Ltd. 100 25 1,448 782 
3 West Bengal Bardhaman Milk Union 10 8 122 24 
4 Mizoram Mizoram Milk Union 10 - - - 
5 Odisha Cuttack Milk Union 20 16 2,270 417 
6 Odisha Samaleshwari Milk Union 20 - - - 
7 Maharashtra Bhandara Milk Union 30 19 1,157 186 
8 Maharashtra Marathavarhad MPO 
(Vidarbha) 
200 - - -  
9 Madhya 
Pradesh 
Bhopal Milk Union 8 3 59 10  
10 Madhya 
Pradesh 
Bundelkhand Milk Union (2 
projects) 
50 50 2175 1197  
11 Uttar Pradesh Varanasi Milk Union 200 58 10,018 1,770 
12 Punjab Gurdaspur DCMPU Ltd. 20 10 2,120 307 
13 Punjab Ludhiana Milk Union 4 4 2,680 180 
14 West Bengal Sundarban Milk Union 20 - - -  Total 893 388 46,049 8,653  
 
MINISTRY OF COOPERATION 
File No. H-12/2/2025-MoC dated 03.06.2025 
 
Setting up of office of Cooperative Ombudsman  
 
Recommendation No. 8 
 
The Committee note that a Grievances Redressal mechanism relating to the 
functioning of the cooperatives societies was required to be to put in place for a very long 
time. The Committee appreciate the measure taken by the Government in creating the office 
of Cooperative Ombudsman who will consider the complaints or Appeals from the members 
of the Multi-State Cooperative Societies. The Cooperative Ombudsman would follow the 
principles of natural justice in dealing with the complaints so received by his office and he 

 
13 
 
shall exercise the same powers as are vested in the Civil Court under the Code of Civil 
Procedure, 1908 for summoning the person and documents. The Committee recommend 
that the Office of Cooperative Ombudsman be established as expeditiously as possible so 
that the complaints by or against the members of the Multi-State Cooperative Societies are 
dealt with promptly and in just and equitable manner. The Committee also recommend that 
a Standard Operating Procedure (SOP) for filing the complaints, procedure to dispose of the 
complaints in time-bound manner and imposition of penalty for filing false or baseless or 
frivolous complaints, should be framed for the guidance of the Cooperative Ombudsman. 
Since there would only be one Cooperative Ombudsman who is likely to have office only at 
one place, the Committee recommend that procedure to file online complaints to the 
Cooperative Ombudsman may be also prescribed in the SOP so that members of the Multi-
State Cooperative Societies residing in far-flung area may not be left behind from using the 
services and benefits of the office of Cooperative Ombudsman. 
 
Reply of the Government 
It is apprised that O/o Cooperative Ombudsman has been established and made 
functional in the year 2024 itself.  Also, the complaints are made before the Cooperative 
Ombudsman in a specific format i.e. Form 6 as prescribed in the MSCS Rules 2002 (as 
amended). Cooperative Ombudsman shall endeavour to follow the Principle of Natural 
Justice and give an opportunity to the multi state cooperative society of being heard. The 
complaints are to be disposed off within a time frame of 3 months. In addition, procedure to 
process and dispose of the complaints received by the Ombudsman is also prescribed in 
the Act/Rules. Presently there is no provision of imposing penalty on frivolous complaints 
under the MSCS Act. Regarding filing of complaints through online mechanism, a portal is 
under development for the same. 
MINISTRY OF COOPERATION 
File No. H-12/2/2025-MoC dated 03.06.2025 
 
Bringing transparency through office of Cooperative Election Authority 
Recommendation No. 9 

 
14 
 
With a view to conduct elections to Cooperatives in a transparent manner, a need 
was felt long ago for having an authority which would oversee and supervise the elections 
of cooperative societies. The Committee are glad that an independent authority in the form 
of Cooperative Election Authority has been created under the Multi-State Cooperative 
Societies Act, 2002 to conduct the elections of the Multi-State Cooperative Societies and 
also to supervise, direct and control the matters relating to preparation of electoral rolls. The 
Cooperative Election Authority is empowered to issue Election Programme and may appoint 
District Magistrate/District Collectors as the Returning Officer to ensure conducting of free 
and fair elections in the Multi-State Co-operative Societies. The Committee recommend that 
the State Government may also be persuaded to have such Cooperative Election Authority 
at the State-level for conducing of elections of the Primary Agricultural Credit Societies and 
other Cooperative Societies operating in the States. 
 
Reply of the Government 
The recommendation of the Committee is noted. The office of CRCS is taking up the 
issue of setting up of such Cooperative Election Authorities (CEAs) at State level with the 
respective State Governments. 
 
MINISTRY OF COOPERATION 
File No. H-12/2/2025-MoC dated 03.06.2025 
 
  

 
15 
 
CHAPTER-III 
 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO NOT DESIRE TO 
PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE GONERNMENT’S ACTION TAKEN REPLY 
 
Pradhan Mantri Kisan Samriddhi Kendras (PMKSK)  
Recommendation No. 3 
 
The Committee note that with a view to make available agri-products and services at 
a single location in rural areas and also increase & diversify the sources of income to the 
farmers , the Govt has taken the initiative to transform PACS as ‘Village Supermarkets’ and 
‘One Stop Shops’ known as PM Kisan Samriddhi kendras (PMKSKs).The PMKSKS cater to 
the requirements of farmers in their very neighborhood for selling  (i) products such as agri-
inputs-fertilizers, seeds, pesticides; making available farm equipment, and for  offering (ii) 
agri-services  namely (a) hiring of farm labourers, (b) soil & seed testing facilities, (c) 
Operation and Maintenance (O&M) of Rural Piped Water Supply Scheme  (PWSS); and (iv) 
operations of PM Bharatiya Janaushadi Kendra (PMBJK). Further these PMKSKs are also 
allowed to distribute fertilizers. 
  The Committee have no doubt that these initiatives will bring in transformative 
changes in the rural economy and help the farmers to prosper. The Committee feel that the 
farmers need not go too far-away place to buy agri-inputs and agri-related services as these 
are made available in their neighborhood itself. This, the Committee believe will result in 
reducing the cost of agriculture for the farmers, diversify the sources of income and offer 
more or less stable income through offering maintenance services.  The Committee have 
no doubt that these PACS will become strong in future on the lines of organized private 
supermarkets giving stiff competition to the local unorganized players. 
 
  

 
16 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
The Ministry of Cooperation has been actively facilitating the transformation of PACS 
into Pradhan Mantri Kisan Samriddhi Kendras (PMKSKs) to ensure the availability of various 
agricultural inputs & services under one roof at the village level. 
As per information received from States/ UTs, as on 6.5.2025, a total of 36,592 PACS 
have been upgraded into PMKSKs. States/ UTs have further been requested by the Ministry 
to facilitate PACS to obtain fertilizer licenses so that they can initiate operations as fertilizer 
distributors and subsequently be upgraded into PMKSKs. 
Further, the Ministry is also coordinating with D/o Fertilizers (GoI), IFFCO and KRIBHCO to 
initiate soil testing through PMKSK PACS in a campaign mode. 
In addition to the above, in order to diversify the businesses of PACS, Ministry of 
Cooperation is also implementing various other initiatives, including the following: 
 'PACS as Common Service Centers (CSCs)' to deliver various e-services to rural 
citizens, such as mobile recharge, electricity bill payment, insurance, digipay, etc. 
45,704 PACS are presently functioning as CSCs. 
 Pradhan Mantri Bhartiya Janaushadi Kendra (PMBJK)' to ensure availability of 
generic medicines to rural citizens at affordable prices. So far, 4,555 PACS have 
got initial approval from Pharmaceuticals and Medical Devices Bureau of India 
(PMBI) and 805 PACS have received Drug License and are being readied to start 
function as PMBJK. 
 PACS as Paani Samitis' to carry out Operation and Maintenance (O&M) services 
under Rural Piped Water Supply Scheme. So far, 822 PACS have been identified 
by States/ UTs for participating in this initiative. 
 
These initiatives not only transform PACS into vibrant economic entities but also 
benefit small and marginal farmers associated with them. 
 
MINISTRY OF COOPERATION 
File No. H-12/2/2025-MoC dated 03.06.2025 

 
17 
 
New Scheme 'Grant-in-Aid to NCDC”  
Recommendation No. 5 
 
The Committee appreciate that the Ministry of Cooperation are coming up with a new 
Scheme 'Grant-in-Aid to NCDC’ with the outlay of Rs. 500 Crore for promoting the 
cooperative based economic development model, strengthening the cooperative movement 
in the country and deepening its reach up to the grassroots. The National Cooperative 
Development Corporation will be able to mobilize funds and borrow additional funds from 
the open market for providing loans to the cooperative sector. The availability of loans will 
help cooperatives in their revival, capacity augmentation, diversification of activities, 
increasing their profitability and enabling them to increase their productivity and generate 
more employment which will improve the economic conditions of the farmer members. Loan 
assistance from NCDC will be provided either through the State Governments / UT 
Administrations or directly to the cooperatives fulfilling NCDC direct funding guidelines and 
criteria of applicable scheme. The Committee would like to be apprised of the details about 
the progress of the Scheme, implementation status and action taken expeditiously in the 
matter. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
The Committee is humbly apprised that after Budget Announcement for FY 2025-26 
and in accordance with the guidelines of DOE OM dated 05/08/2016 a draft EFC memo for 
the new scheme “Grant-in-aid to NCDC” under Ministry of Cooperation with an outlay of 
₹2000 crore to NCDC for 4 years (Rs. 500 Crore for each year 2025-26 to 2028-29) has 
been prepared. After having requisite Stakeholders' consultation and making suggested 
modification in the draft EFC memo, it was circulated to various line ministries/departments 
and NITI Aayog on 25.03.2025 for their comments/inputs. The comments/inputs have since 
been received, the EFC memo has been finalized in consultation with IFD and the same is 
being submitted to DOE for approval. 
 
MINISTRY OF COOPERATION 
File No. H-12/2/2025-MoC dated 03.06.2025 

 
18 
 
CHAPTER - IV 
 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH ACTION TAKEN 
REPLIES OF THE GONERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE 
 
Budgetary Allocation for 2025-26 
Recommendation No. 1 
 
The Committee note that the Ministry of Cooperation was allocated Rs.1150 Crore at 
Budget Estimate (BE) stage for the year 2023-24. The amount was reduced to Rs.747 Crore 
at the Revised Estimate (RE) stage. The actual amount spent stood at Rs. 689 Crore 
resulting in under-utilization of about Rs.59 Crore in the year 2023-24. Underutilisation and 
surrendering of the funds amounted to 7.7% of the RE allocation for the year. Similarly, 
Rs.1183 Crore was allocated at the (BE) for the year 2024-25 but it was brought down to 
Rs.750 Crore at the Revised Estimate (RE) stage. Out of this amount, the Ministry, however, 
could spend Rs.573 Crore (approx.) as on 14.02.2025 representing 76% of allocations at 
Re stage. Further, the Ministry has also informed that they will be able to spend the 
remaining 24% before the end of financial year. The Committee while appreciating the 
utilisation of the funds more or less as per the stipulations of the Dept of Expenditure, 
observe that the underutilisation during 2023-24 is primarily due to non-receipt of proposals 
for releasing funds, underutilisation of the funds disbursed due to non-readiness of the 
states/UTs such as non-opening/ mapping of SNA accounts, etc. The Committee while 
acknowledging the teething issues that may arise in the initial phases of shifting to new 
accounting system feel that these are transient and hope the Ministry will be able to utilise 
fully once the accounting systems are stabilised. The Committee, however, suggest that 
state Govts may be persuaded to send the funding proposals for digitisation / 
computerisation of PACs and strengthening of Cooperatives through IT interventions. 
 
The Committee note that the Ministry of Finance considering the immense potential 
of the cooperative sector have allocated Rs.1186 Crore to the Ministry of Cooperation at the 
Budget Estimates for 2025-26.  The Committee further note that the higher allocation 

 
19 
 
compared to the previous year in BE 2025-26 as compared to BE 2024-25 is due to opening 
of two newly created Offices of Cooperative Election Authority and Cooperative 
Ombudsman. Further the higher allocations are also meant for computerization of higher 
number of PACS. Also, a new Central Sector Scheme is being introduced whereby the 
Grant-in-aid of Rs.500 Crore to the NCDC to enable it to provide loans to the Cooperatives. 
The Committee while hoping that the Ministry would be able to entirely use the budgetary 
allocation during the present financial year, also advise the Ministry to start implementing 
the Schemes and Programmes planned for 2025-26 at the earliest to achieve the intended 
objectives. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
It is humbly apprised that all the concerned States have been repeatedly pursued to 
spend their funds available in SNA Accounts and various meeting have been held with the 
participating States/UTs with the specific directions to them to spend their SNA Balance 
immediately. DO letters from Secretary, Cooperation and Joint Secretary, M/o Cooperation 
have also been sent to States raising this issue. Recently, on 24th April, 2025, a review 
meeting was also taken up with the lagging states in which the issue was raised regarding 
slow progress of fund utilization and pending SNA balances in their accounts.  NABARD has 
also been requested to reframe the payment guidelines to System Integrators (SIs) in the 
project so that the funds may be utilized in the better and faster manner.  
 
After Budget Announcement and in accordance with the guidelines of DOE vide their 
OM dated 05/08/2016 a draft EFC memo for the new scheme “Grant-in-aid to NCDC” under 
Ministry of Cooperation with an outlay of ₹2000 crore to NCDC for 4 years (Rs. 500 Crore 
for each year 2025-26 to 2028-29) has been prepared. After having requisite Stakeholders' 
consultation and making suggested modification in the draft EFC memo, it was circulated to 
various line ministries/departments and NITI Aayog on 25.03.2025 for their 
comments/inputs. The comments/inputs have since been received, the EFC memo has 
been finalized in consultation with IFD and the same is being submitted to DOE for approval. 
Further, Monthly review meeting on the progress of various undergoing schemes/ 
projects/initiatives in States/ UTs is being taken by Secretary (Cooperation) on monthly basis 

 
20 
 
which also includes the update status of the project “strengthening of Cooperatives through 
IT interventions”. Moreover, regular communications and meetings through VC are also 
undertaken by Joint Secretary (Policy) with the stake holders in the States/ UTs for its 
effective implementation and to resolve the issues if any, regarding funds and technical part. 
Recently, DO letters have been issued by Secretary (Cooperation) to all Chief Secretary/ 
Administrators of the States/ UTs requesting them to complete the project by 30.09.2025. 
 
MINISTRY OF COOPERATION 
File No. H-12/2/2025-MoC dated 03.06.2025 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
Please refer to Para No. 1.7 of this Report for comments of the Committee. 
 
 
Progress in operations of PACs under PM Bharatiya Janaushadi Kendra (PMBAK)  
Recommendation No. 4 
 
The Committee note that PACS have been allowed to open Pradhan Mantri Bharatiya 
Janaushadhi Kendra (PMBJK) which provide generic medicines at affordable prices, which 
are 50%-90% less than that of branded medicines in the open market, to rural citizens. The 
Jan Aushadhi Kendras provide around 2047 drugs and 300 medical devices at reasonable 
prices. They further note that so far, 4,692 PACS from 34 States/UTs have applied for the 
scheme, out of which 2,648 PACS have been given initial approval by Pharmaceuticals & 
Medical Devices Bureau of India (PMBI). Drug licenses have been granted to 584 PACS 
from 24 States/UTs, and store codes have been issued to 465 PACS by PMBI. The afore 
mentioned data shows that 50 % (approx.) only of the PACs which have applied under the 
scheme were granted initial approval PMBI and 584 PACs only have been granted drug 
licenses. The Committee while appreciating the Govt for this move, are of the view that given 
the huge number of PACS there exists enough scope to bring more PACS under the 
Scheme. The Committee accordingly suggest to take appropriate steps to bring more PACS 
under the scheme in a phased manner.  

 
21 
 
 
Reply of the Government 
The Ministry of Cooperation is actively supporting PACS to function as Pradhan 
Mantri Bhartiya Janaushadhi Kendras (PMBJKs) to enhance rural access to affordable 
quantity generic medicines. 
Ministry of Cooperation has requested State Cooperation Departments to facilitate 
initially approved PACS for obtaining drug licenses. The Ministry has also taken up the 
matter with PMBI to simplify the application process for PACS. 
In this regard, a meeting was co-chaired by Secretary (Cooperation) and Secretary 
(Pharmaceuticals), Ministry of Chemicals and Fertilizers on 30.04.2025 to identify the way 
forward and to review the progress of this initiative, where representatives from Ministry of 
Health, O/o Drug Controller General of India (DCGI) and Pharmacy Council of India (PCI) 
were also present.   
Through business diversification, this initiative aims to transform PACS into vibrant 
economic entities and also benefit the small and marginal farmers associated with them. 
 
MINISTRY OF COOPERATION 
File No. H-12/2/2025-MoC dated 03.06.2025 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
Please refer to Para No. 1.10 of this Report for comments of the Committee. 
 
  

 
22 
 
CHAPTER - V 
 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH FINAL REPLY OF 
THE GONERNMENT ARE STILL AWAITED 
 
 
 - NIL -  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI;                                 CHARANJIT SINGH CHANNI  
23rd MARCH, 2026                                             Chairperson, 
02 CHAITRA, 1948 (Saka)               Standing Committee on Agriculture  
                Animal Husbandry and Food Processing 
 
  

 
23 
 
Annexure 
 
MINUTES OF THE TWELFTH SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE, 
ANIMAL HUSBANDRY AND FOOD PROCESSING (2024-25) 
 
The Committee sat on Monday, the 23rd March, 2026 from 1035 hrs. to 1118 hrs. in 
Committee Room No. 2, First Floor, Block-A, Extension to Parliament House Annexe 
(EPHA), New Delhi.   
Present 
 
Shri Charanjit Singh Channi – Chairperson 
 
Members 
 
Lok Sabha 
 
2  Shri Rajkumar Chahar 
3  Shri Kuldeep Indora 
4  Shri Sukanta Kumar Panigrahi 
5  Shri Dushyant Singh 
6  Shri Sudhakar Singh 
 
Rajya Sabha 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
Secretariat 
 
1. Shri Dhiraj Kumar  – Joint Secretary     
2. Shri Maheshwar  – Director 
3. Shri Prem Ranjan  - Deputy Secretary 
  4. Shri Fauzi Badruddin - Deputy Secretary 
 
7    Smt. Ramilaben Becharbhai Bara 
8    Dr. Anil Sukhdeorao Bonde 
9    Shri H. D. Devegowda 
10    Shri Madan Rathore 
  

 
24 
 
2. At the outset, the Chairperson welcomed the Members to the Sitting of the 
Committee. Thereafter, the Committee took up for consideration and adoption of the 
following Draft Subject Reports and Draft Action Taken Reports: 
 
*(i)  xxxx   xxxx   xxxx   xxxx   xxxx  
 
*(ii)  xxxx   xxxx   xxxx   xxxx   xxxx 
 
*(iii)  xxxx   xxxx   xxxx   xxxx   xxxx 
 
(iv)  Action-taken Report on the Action taken by the Government on the 
Observations/ Recommendations contained in the 9th Report of the 
Committee on the Demands for Grants (2025-26) pertaining to the 
Ministry of Cooperation presented during 18th Lok Sabha; 
*(v) xxxx   xxxx   xxxx   xxxx   xxxx 
 
*(vi)  xxxx   xxxx   xxxx   xxxx   xxxx 
 
3*.  xxxx   xxxx   xxxx   xxxx   xxxx 
 
4. The Committee adopted the Draft Action-taken Reports mentioned at para 2 (iii) 
to (vi) without any modifications. 
 
5*.  xxxx   xxxx   xxxx   xxxx   xxxx. 
 
6. The Committee also authorized the Chairperson to finalize the Reports in the 
light of modifications suggested and present the Reports to Parliament.  
 
The Committee then adjourned. 
 
__________________________ 
*Matter not related to this report. 
 
 
  

 
25 
 
APPENDIX 
(Vide Para 4 of Introduction of the Report) 
ANALYSIS OF ACTION TAKEN BY GOVERNMENT ON THE 9TH REPORT OF 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE, ANIMAL HUSBANDRY AND FOOD 
PROCESSING (2024-25) (18TH LOK SABHA) 
 
(i) Total number of Recommendations  09 
 
(ii) Observations/Recommendations that have been accepted by 
the Government: 
 
 
Para Nos. 2, 6,7, 8 & 9 
 Total 05 
 Percentage 55.55% 
 
(iii) Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not 
desire to pursue in view of the Government’s replies:  
 
  
Recommendation Para Nos. 3, 5 
 Total 02 
 Percentage 22.22% 
 
(iv) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which Replies 
of the Government have not been accepted by the Committee: 
  
Recommendation Para Nos. 1 & 4 
 Total 02 
 Percentage 22.23% 
 
(v) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which final 
replies of the Government are still awaited. 
 
Recommendation Para No. Nil 
 Total Nil 
 Percentage Nil 
   
 
 