  
STANDING COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE,  
ANIMAL HUSBANDRY AND FOOD PROCESSING 
(2025-26) 
 
EIGHTEENTH LOK SABHA 
 
 
MINISTRY OF AGRICULTURE AND FARMERS WELFARE  
 
(DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE AND FARMERS WELFARE) 
  
 
‘DEMANDS FOR GRANTS (2026-27)’ 
 
 
[Action-taken by the Government on the Observations/ Recommendations 
contained in the Twenty Seventh Report (Eighteenth Lok Sabha) of the Standing 
Committee on Agriculture, Animal Husbandry and Food Processing (2025-26)] 
 
 
FORTY SECOND REPORT 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
AUGUST, 2026 / SHRAVANA, 1948 (SAKA) 
  
42 

 
FORTY SECOND REPORT 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE, ANIMAL  
HUSBANDRY AND FOOD PROCESSING 
(2025-26) 
 
EIGHTEENTH LOK SABHA 
 
 
MINISTRY OF AGRICULTURE AND FARMERS WELFARE  
 
(DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE AND FARMERS WELFARE) 
 
  
 
‘DEMANDS FOR GRANTS (2026-27)’ 
 
 
[Action-taken by the Government on the Observations/ Recommendations 
contained in the Twenty Seventh Report (Eighteenth Lok Sabha) of the Standing 
Committee on Agriculture, Animal Husbandry and Food Processing (2025-26)] 
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on             12.08.2026 
 
Laid on the Table of Rajya Sabha on         12.08.2026 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
AUGUST, 2026/SHRAVANA,1948 (Saka) 
  


 
COA No. 541 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
© 2026 By Lok Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi 
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of Business in Lok Sabha 
(Seventeenth Edition) and printed by Lok Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi. 
 
  

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
<CONTENTS> 
 
Page No.  
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE (2025-26) …………………………… 
 
iii 
 *INTRODUCTION………………………………………………………………… 
 
v 
CHAPTER – I REPORT……………………………………………….. 1 
CHAPTER - II Observations/Recommendations that have been 
accepted by the Government……………………… 
 
17 
 
CHAPTER - III Observations/Recommendations which the 
Committee do not desire to pursue in view of the 
Government’s replies………………………………… 
 
51 
CHAPTER - IV Observations/Recommendations in respect of which 
replies of the Government have not been accepted by 
the Committee…………………………. 
 
60 
CHAPTER - V Observations/Recommendations in respect of which 
final replies of the Government are still 
awaited………………………………………………….. 
 
71 
ANNEXURE 
*Minutes of the Sitting of the Committee held on 11.08.2026                                   72 
APPENDIX 
Analysis of Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/ 
Recommendations contained in the Twenty Seventh Report                    
(Eighteenth Lok Sabha) of the Standing Committee on Agriculture, Animal 
Husbandry and Food Processing (2025-26) 
     74 

iii 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE, ANIMAL 
HUSBANDRY AND FOOD PROCESSING 
18th Lok Sabha (2025-26) 
 
SHRI CHARANJIT SINGH CHANNI – CHAIRPERSON 
MEMBERS 
            LOK SABHA 
2 Shri Patel Umeshbhai Babubhai 
3 Smt. Harsimrat Kaur Badal 
4 Shri Rajkumar Chahar 
5 Smt. Anita Nagarsingh Chouhan 
6 Shri Kuldeep Indora 
7 Shri Rajpalsinh Mahendrasinh Jadav 
8 Md. Abu Taher Khan 
9 Shri Rahul Singh Lodhi 
10 Shri Sukanta Kumar Panigrahi 
11 Smt. Krishna Devi Shivshankar Patel 
12 Shri Naresh Chandra Uttam Patel 
13 Shri Narayan Tatu Rane 
14 Shri Murasoli S. 
15 Shri Dharambir Singh 
16 Shri Dushyant Singh 
17 Shri Sudhakar Singh 
18 Shri Kodikunnil Suresh 
19 Shri Tejasvi Surya 
20 Smt. Geniben Nagaji Thakor 
21 Shri Bhausaheb Rajaram Wakchaure 
 
    RAJYA SABHA 
22 Dr. Anil Sukhdeorao Bonde 
23 Shri Banshilal Gurjar 
24 Shri Nitin Laxmanrao Jadhav-Patil 
25 Shri Madan Rathore 
26 Shri S.R. Sivalingam 
27 Shri Ramji Lal Suman 
28 Shri P. P. Suneer 
29 Shri Randeep Singh Surjewala 
30 Shri Mahesh Kewat* 
31 Shri James Pangsang Kongkal Sangma** 
  
Note:  Smt. Ramilaben Becharbhai Bara ceased to be a Member of the Committee on her retirement from Rajya Sabha 
w.e.f on 21.06.2026 (Rajya Sabha Bulletin Part-II(TO), Para No. 66058 dated 09.01.2026). 
 Shri H.D. Devegowda, ceased to be a Member of the Committee on his retirement from Rajya Sabha w.e.f on 
25.06.2026 (Rajya Sabha Bulletin Part-II(TO), Para No. 66058 dated 09.01.2026). 
 *Shri Mahesh Kewat, MP , Rajya Sabha have been nominated to the Standing Committee w.e.f. 23.07.2026 vide Lok 
Sabha Bulletin Part-II, No. 5724, dated 24.07.2026. 
**Shri James Pangsang Kongkal Sangma, MP , Rajya Sabha have been nominated to the Standing Committee 
w.e.f. 23.07.2026 vide Lok Sabha Bulletin Part-II, No. 5724, dated 24.07.2026. 

iv 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
      1.         Shri Dhiraj Kumar  - Joint Secretary 
      2.         Shri Maheshwar  - Director 
                 3.         Shri Sanjeev Kumar  - Under Secretary 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  

v 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
I, the Chairperson, Standing Committee on Agriculture, Animal Husbandry and 
Food Processing, (2025-26) having been authorized by the Committee to submit the 
Report on their behalf, present this Forty Second Report on Action Taken by the 
Government on the Observations/Recommendations contained in the Twenty Seventh 
Report (Eighteenth Lok Sabha) of the Standing Committee on Agriculture, Animal 
Husbandry and Food Processing (2025-2026) on ‘Demands for Grants (2026-27)’ 
pertaining to the Ministry of Agriculture and Farmers Welfare (Department of Agriculture 
and Farmers Welfare).  
2.  The Twenty Seventh Report (Eighteenth Lok Sabha) of the Standing Committee 
on Agriculture, Animal Husbandry and Food Processing (2025-26) on ‘Demands for 
Grants (2026-27)’ pertaining to the Ministry of Agriculture and Farmers Welfare 
(Department of Agriculture and Farmers Welfare) was presented to Lok Sabha and laid 
on the Table of Rajya Sabha on 16th March, 2026.   The Action Taken Notes on the Report 
were received on 29 May, 2026. 
3.  The Report was considered and adopted by the Committee at their Sitting held on 
11.08.2026. 
4.  An Analysis of the action taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in the Twenty Seventh Report                       
(Eighteenth Lok Sabha) of the Committee is given in Appendix.  
 
 
 
  NEW DELHI;                          CHARANJIT SINGH CHANNI  
11 August, 2026                                                               Chairperson, 
20 Shravana, 1948 (Saka)                        Standing Committee on Agriculture
           Animal Husbandry and Food Processing 
 
 
 
  

1 
 
CHAPTER – I 
REPORT 
This Report of the Standing Committee on Agriculture, Animal Husbandry and 
Food Processing deals with the Action Taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in the Twenty Seventh Report (Eighteenth 
Lok Sabha) of the Standing Committee on Agriculture, Animal Husbandry and Food 
Processing (2025-26) on ‘Demands for Grants (2026-27)’ pertaining to the Ministry of 
Agriculture & Farmers Welfare (Department of Agriculture & Farmers Welfare) which 
was presented to Lok Sabha on 16.03.2026 and Laid on the Table of Rajya Sabha on 
16.03.2026, respectively. 
1.2 The Twenty Seventh Report (18th Lok Sabha) of the Standing Committee  
on Agriculture, Animal Husbandry and Food Processing on Demands for  
Grants (2026-27)- Demand No.1 pertaining to Ministry of Agriculture & Farmers 
Welfare (Department of Agriculture & Farmers Welfare) contained 19 Observations/ 
Recommendations on the following aspects: 
 
 Demands for Grants (2026-27) - (Demand No. 1) 
Ministry of Agriculture & Farmers Welfare  
(Department of Agriculture and Farmers Welfare) 
Recommendation 
No. 
Recommendation 
1. Allocation of Budgetary Resources and Their Utilization  
2. Need For Enhancement of Budgetary Allocation to Department 
3. Need to Enhance Rate of Growth in Capital Formation in 
Agriculture 
4. Importance of Farm Labourer and the Need for Their Inclusion 
in the Mandate of Department of Agriculture and Farmers 
Welfare 
5. Change of Nomenclature of The Department of Agriculture & 
Farmers Welfare to Department of Agriculture, Farmers & Farm 
Labourers Welfare 
6. Scheduled Castes Sub Plan (SCSP) 
7. Tribal Sub Plan 
8. Advertisement & Publicity Campaign Including use of Digital 
Platforms to Boost Awareness About Ongoing Agricultural 
Schemes 
9. Pradhan Mantri Fasal Bima Yojana (PMFBY) 
10. Farmer Producer Organizations 

2 
 
11. Krishi Vigyan Kendras (KVK) 
12. Strengthening of e-National Agriculture Markets (e-NAM) 
13. Emphasis of Soil Health 
14. National Seeds Corporation 
15. National Horticulture Board (NHB) 
16. Viksit Bharat-2047 
17. Educational Support for Children of Small and Semi-Medium 
Farmers 
18. Educational Support for Children of Small and Semi-Medium 
Farmers 
19. Subsidy on EV Tractors 
 
1.3  The Ministry of Agriculture and Farmers Welfare (Department of Agriculture and 
Farmers Welfare) has furnished Action Taken Replies in respect of all the 1919 
Observations/Recommendations contained in the Report. These Replies have been 
categorized as under: 
(i) Observations/Recommendations that have been accepted by the Government: 
 Recommendation Para Nos. 1, 5, 6, 7, 8, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14 & 16 
              Total 11 
Chapter-II 
(ii) Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to pursue 
in view of the Government’s replies:  
Recommendation Para No. 4, 9, 15, 17, 18 & 19 
                      Total 06 
                   Chapter-III  
(iii) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which Replies of the 
Government have not been accepted by the Committee: 
Recommendation Para Nos. 2 & 3 
              Total 02 
Chapter-IV 
(iv) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which final replies of the 
Government are still awaited: 
Recommendation Para No. NIL 
Total 00 
             Chapter-V 
  

3 
 
1.4 The Committee trust that utmost importance would be given to 
implementation of the Observations/ Recommendations accepted by the 
Government.  In cases where it is not possible for the Department to implement 
the Recommendations in letter and spirit for any reason, the matter should be 
reported to the Committee with reasons for non-implementation.  The 
Committee desire that further Action-taken Notes on the Observation/ 
Recommendations contained in Chapter - I of this Report be furnished to them 
at an early date. 
 
1.5 The Committee will now deal with the Action - Taken by the Government on 
some of Recommendations in the succeeding paragraphs. 
 
A. Need for Enhancement of Budgetary Allocation to Department 
Recommendation No. 2 
1.6. The Committee had observed/recommended :- 
“The Committee observe that the proportion of budgetary allocation made in 
favour of the Department in terms of the percentage of the total Central outlay 
for the years 2022-23, 2023-24, 2024-25, 2025-26 and 2026-27 stood at 3.14%, 
2.57%, 2.54%, 2.51% and 2.44% respectively. This shows continuous decline 
in the allocations to the Department as proportion of Central Plan outlay. 
The Committee note that Agriculture and allied activities account for 46.1 % of 
the country’s workforce but contribute only one-fifth of India’s national income 
at current prices. This disparity highlights the Agriculture sector's vulnerability 
and the urgent need for increased public investment. Agriculture remains the 
backbone of India’s growth trajectory given the fact that the sector employs a 
large share of workforce. The Committee feel that investment in agriculture has 
a higher multiplier effect on poverty reduction than investment in many other 
sectors. Strengthening agricultural performance is therefore important for 
inclusive growth, economic stability and ensuring food security. 
The Committee recommend that the budgetary allocation to the Department of 
Agriculture & Farmers Welfare(DA&FW) is a strategic investment in the nation's 
economic sovereignty& not just a welfare measure and more importantly, to 

4 
 
complement and supplement the overarching goal of the Union government in 
doubling farmers' income effectively. Enhanced budgetary allocation will enable 
the Department to potently counter the challenges of Climate Change, 
fragmented landholdings, increasing disruptions in global supply chains, market 
volatility and so on as these require a swift and robust financial response. 
Enhanced budgetary allocations to the Department will facilitate in its transition 
from subsistence farming to sustainable agri-business, thereby ensuring food 
security for the nation and prosperity for the Annadata (food provider).” 
1.7 In its Action Taken Reply, the Department has stated :- 
“The Department agrees that agriculture plays a vital role in ensuring food 
security, inclusive growth, livelihood generation, and economic stability of the 
country. Despite challenges such as climate change, fragmented landholdings, 
market volatility, and global supply chain disruptions, the Government remains 
committed to strengthening the agriculture sector through various flagship 
schemes, policy interventions, technological advancements, and farmer-centric 
initiatives. 
Efforts are continuously being made by the Department to ensure efficient 
utilization of available resources and to prioritize investments in productivity 
enhancement, agri-infrastructure, digital agriculture, natural farming, crop 
diversification, market access etc. 
Budget Estimates 2026-27 of the Department of Agriculture & Farmers Welfare 
have been enhanced to Rs. 1,30,561.38 crore as compared to the Budget 
Estimates 2025-26 of Rs. 1,27,290.16 crore, reflecting the continued 
commitment of the Government towards the agriculture and allied sectors. In 
case additional requirement of funds arises during the course of the financial 
year, the Department will take up the matter with the Ministry of Finance for 
enhancement of allocation at the Revised Estimates (RE) stage, as per 
requirement and after following due procedure.” 
 
1.8 The Committee had recommended that the proportion of budgetary 
allocations made in favour of the Department in terms of the percentage of the 

5 
 
total central outlay for the years 2022-23, 2023-24, 2024-25, 2025-26 and 2026-27 
stood at 3.14%, 2.57%, 2.54%, 2.51% and 2.44% respectively which showed 
continuous decline in allocations to the Department as proportion of Central 
Plan outlay. The Committee had also recommended that as Agriculture remains 
the backbone of India’s growth trajectory given the fact that Agriculture and 
allied activities account for 46.1% of country’s workforce but contribute only 
one-fifth of India’s national income at current prices, proportion of budgetary 
allocations made in favour of Department of Agriculture & Farmers Welfare in 
terms of percentage of the total central outlay be  enhanced to facilitate the 
Department in its transition from subsistence farming to sustainable agri-
business, thereby ensuring food security for the nation and prosperity for the 
Annadata (food provider). The Department in its Action Taken Reply has 
submitted that it agrees that agriculture plays a vital role in ensuring food 
security, inclusive growth, livelihood generation, and economic stability of the 
country. Despite challenges such as climate change, fragmented landholdings, 
market volatility, and global supply chain disruptions, the Government remains 
committed to strengthening the agriculture sector through various flagship 
schemes, policy interventions, technological advancements, and farmer-centric 
initiatives. The Department has also submitted that efforts are continuously 
being made by the Department to ensure efficient utilization of available 
resources and to prioritize investments in productivity enhancement, agri-
infrastructure, digital agriculture, natural farming, crop diversification, market 
access etc. The Department have further submitted in their Action Taken Reply 
that Budget Estimates 2026-27 of the Department of Agriculture & Farmers 
Welfare have been enhanced to Rs. 1,30,561.38 crore as compared to the Budget 
Estimates 2025-26 of Rs. 1,27,290.16 crore, reflecting the continued commitment 
of the Government towards the agriculture and allied sectors. The Committee 
are of the considered view that though the amount of budgetary allocation to 
agriculture has increased over a period of time, the percentage share of the 
Department w.r.t. the total Central Plan outlay needs to be enhanced as 
investment in Agriculture has a higher multiplier effect on poverty reduction 
than investment in many other sectors and strengthening agricultural 
performance is vital for inclusive growth, economic stability and ensuring food 
security. The Committee are also of the view that enhancement in proportion of 
budgetary allocations made in favour of the Department in terms of the 
percentage of the total central outlay is not only a strategic investment in the 
nation's economic sovereignty but will also complement and supplement the 
Department to potently counter the challenges of Climate Change, fragmented 
landholdings, increasing disruptions in global supply chains, market volatility 
etc. 
 
 

6 
 
B. Need to Enhance Rate of Growth in Capital Formation in Agriculture 
Recommendation No. 3 
 
1.9 The Committee had observed/recommended :- 
“The Committee note that Agriculture is the backbone of our economy & 
dependence on Nature enhances the risk quotient of our Agriculture and this is 
precisely where high growth rate of Capital formation in agriculture can 
effectively mitigate the risks arising due to natural calamities.  It is a proven fact 
that the growth of capital formation is a vital prerequisite for agricultural 
development. Capital Formation in Agriculture refers to investment in- 
(i) creating physical assets such as infrastructure (ii) upgradation and honing of 
skills of human resources; and (iii) institutional capacity to boost productivity.  
Sustained growth in agricultural output and farmer incomes depends mainly on 
higher capital formation in agriculture. The rate of growth in Capital Formation 
in Agriculture is essential to enhance productivity as the most significant impact 
of increase in capital formation is the increase in yield per hectare. Growth in 
agricultural capital creates demand for industrial goods such as fertilizers, 
pesticides and so on. Increased agricultural output supplies raw materials to 
industries such as textiles and food processing. Strong infrastructure enables 
farmers in getting higher price realization for their agricultural produce. Thus, 
capital formation in agriculture acts as an engine for overall industrial growth 
too. 
 
The growth rate in Capital Formation (at current prices) in Agriculture and Allied 
Sector during the year 2019-20 was 5.1% which rose to 22.8% during the period 
2020-21, then fell down to 15.5% in the year 2021-22, increased marginally 
during 2022-23 to 16.1% and then fell significantly to 9.6% during the period 
2023-24. 
 
The Committee also note that the budget outlay for Agriculture & Farmers 
Welfare was Rs. 1,24,000 Crore in 2022-23 whereas the total Budget outlay of 
the Union Government was Rs. 39,44,908.6 Crore for the same period. 
Similarly, the budgetary allocation to Agriculture in 2026-27 BE is Rs. 
130,561.38 Crore whereas the total budget outlay of the Union Government is 

7 
 
Rs. 53,47,315 Crore. Simply put, from 2022-23 to 2026-27, there is an increase 
of Rs.6561.38 Crore in Budgetary allocation for Agriculture and Farmers 
Welfare whereas the Total Budget outlay of the Union Government increased 
by Rs. 14,02,406.34 Crore during the same period which indicates that the 
budgetary allocation for Agriculture did not get an increase in the same 
proportion. The Actual Expenditure in total Scheme Budget (Central Sector+ 
Centrally Sponsored Schemes) of Agriculture in 2020-21 was Rs.1,08,090.13 
Crore, out of which the  Actual expenditure incurred on PM-KISAN and Pradhan 
Mantri Fasal Bima Yojana (PMFBY) was Rs. 75151.38 Crore, which translates 
into Actual Expenditure of Rs. 32938.75 Crore on other heads including creation 
of Capital Assets. This meant that around 69.53% of total Scheme Budget of 
Agriculture was spent on payment to farmers and Insurance companies during 
the period 2020-21. Similarly, the Actual Expenditure in Total Scheme Budget 
(Central Sector+ Centrally Sponsored Schemes) of Agriculture in 2024-25 was 
Rs. 128763.55 Crore, out of which the Actual expenditure incurred on PM-
KISAN and PMFBY was Rs. 80594.66 Crore, which results into Actual 
Expenditure of Rs. 48168.89 Crore on other heads including creation of Capital 
Assets. This meant that around 62.59% of total Scheme Budget of Agriculture 
was spent on payment to farmers and Insurance companies during the period 
2024-25. Simply put, majority of the expenditure of total Scheme Budget of 
Agriculture goes on payments being made to Farmers and Insurance 
companies, leaving less for investment in Capital Assets and modernization of 
Agriculture including creating resilience against Climate Change.  
The Committee recommend the Government to enhance investments 
significantly in Capital, human and institutional assets in agriculture to ensure 
that the rate of Capital Formation in Agriculture and Allied Sector does not come 
below 15% as the growth in rate of capital formation in agriculture is not merely 
an economic metric but a strategic imperative to ensure food security, economic 
stability and stimulate industrial growth. 
1.10 In its Action Taken Reply, the Department has stated:- 
“Agriculture is a State subject, Government of India supports the States through 
appropriate policy measures, budgetary allocation and various schemes.  The 
Government has substantially enhanced the budget allocation of Department 

8 
 
of Agriculture & Farmers Welfare (DA&FW) from Rs. 21,933.50 crore BE during 
2013-14 to Rs. 1,30561.39 crore BE during 2026-27. Government of India has 
identified following measures/strategies to increase the farmers' income and 
comprehensive growth of agriculture sector:- 
(i)  Increase crop production/productivity 
(ii)  Reduce cost of production 
(iii)  Remunerative returns of farmers' produce to enhance their incomes. 
(iv)  Agricultural diversification 
(v)  Developing post harvest value addition 
(vi)  Adaptation to climate change for sustainable agriculture and mitigate 
against crop losses 
To enhance investments significantly in Capital, human and institutional assets 
in Agriculture Sector, the following major schemes/programmes are being 
implemented by the Government; 
(1)  Agriculture Infrastructure Fund (AIF) The Agriculture Infrastructure 
Fund (AIF) is a Central Sector scheme aimed at strengthening post-harvest 
management and farm infrastructure through medium- to long-term debt 
financing. With a corpus of 1 lakh crore, the scheme provides loans through 
banks and financial institutions with an interest subvention of 3% per annum 
and credit guarantee coverage for loans up to 22 crore. It supports a wide range 
of beneficiaries including farmers, agri-entrepreneurs, FPOs, SHGs, PACS, and 
cooperatives. The scheme promotes the creation of infrastructure such as 
warehouses, cold storage, logistics facilities, processing units, and modern 
technology-based farming systems like precision agriculture, drones, and IoT, 
with the overall aim of reducing post-harvest losses and increasing farmers' 
income. The scheme provides Convergence facility with central / state 
schemes. As on 15.05.2026, under AIF, Rs. 89,190.91 crore are sanctioned for 
1,99,178 projects. These projects have mobilized an investment of Rs. 
141352.29 Cr crore in agriculture sector. 

9 
 
(2) Integrated Scheme for Agriculture Marketing (ISAM) - ISAM supports 
state governments in governing the agricultural produce marketing through 
creation and improvement of market structures, capacity building and 
generating access to market information. 
(A)  Agriculture Marketing Infrastructure Scheme: 
AMI plays an important role in strengthening the agricultural marketing 
ecosystem. It promotes modernization, reduces post-harvest losses, and 
increases market efficiency. 
Under Agricultural Marketing Infrastructure (AMI), the subsidy @ 33.33% for 
NER, hilly area, Women/SC/ST promoters, PACS & FPOs etc. and @25% for 
others is available for storage projects and agriculture marketing infrastructure 
projects. From the inception of the scheme up to 11 May 2026, a total of 49,796 
storage infrastructure projects in the country were supported, resulting in the 
creation of 98.294 million metric tons of storage capacity and a subsidy of 
₹4,832.70 crore was released. In addition, besides storage, 25,009 marketing 
infrastructure projects were supported with a subsidy of 22,193.17 crore. 
(B) National Agriculture Market (e-NAM): 
An all-India electronic trading (e-trading) portal aims to link existing 
physical agricultural marketing committees (APMCs) through a virtual platform 
to create a unified national market for agricultural commodities. The portal 
serves as a single window for all information and services related to APMCs, 
including arrivals of commodities, quality and price, provisions for responding 
to buy-sell proposals, trade proposals, and other services such as direct 
electronic payment settlement into farmers' accounts. A total of 1,656 mandis 
in 23 states and 4 union territories have been connected through the e-NAM 
platform so far. 
(3)  Mission for Integrated Development of Horticulture (MIDH) Mission 
for Integrated Development of Horticulture (MIDH), a Centrally Sponsored 
Scheme is being implemented w.e.f. 2014-15, for holistic growth of the 
horticulture sector covering fruits, vegetables, root and tuber crops, 
mushrooms, spices, flowers, aromatic & medicinal plants, coconut, cashew, 
cocoa and bamboo. 

10 
 
Under the Mission, an additional area of 16.24 lakh hectares under 
horticulture crops has been covered for area expansion. In the area of water 
resource management, 60,009 water harvesting structures have been created. 
Under horticulture mechanization, 2.97 lakh horticulture mechanization 
equipment have been distributed. Organic farming has been adopted in an area 
of 52,459 hectares for promotion of organic cultivation of horticultural crops. In 
addition, 16.45 lakh bee colonies with hives have been distributed under 
beekeeping activities. Under the Post Harvest Management component, 1.65 
lakh units, including pack houses, cold storage units, refrigerated vans, 
primary/mobile processing units, ripening chambers, pre-cooling units attached 
to cold storages, and mobile pre-cooling units, have been established. Further, 
22,226 market infrastructures have been set up. Under the Human Resource 
Development (HRD) component, 11.39 lakh farmers have been trained in 
various horticulture activities. Moreover, 58 crop-specific Centres of Excellence 
have been established under Indo-Israel Cooperation, Indo-Dutch Cooperation, 
and Research Institutes. In the cold storage sector, 1,634 cold storage 
infrastructures with a total capacity of 7.41 million tonnes have been created. 
(4)  Sub Mission on Agricultural Mechanization (SMAM) Under the Sub-
Mission on Agricultural Mechanization (SMAM) and Crop Residue Management 
(CRM) schemes, financial assistance is provided to farmers, Farmer Producer 
Organizations (FPOs), cooperatives, entrepreneurs and Custom Hiring Centres 
for procurement of advanced agricultural machinery and crop residue 
management equipment. These interventions promote creation of durable farm 
assets, enhance productivity, improve operational efficiency, reduce labour 
dependency and strengthen farm-level infrastructure. The establishment of 
Custom Hiring Centres has also improved access to mechanization for small 
and marginal farmers. 
(5)  National Mission on Edible Oils (NMEO)-Oil Palm Under NMEO-OP, 
comprehensive support is provided to farmers, including assistance for high-
quality planting material, inputs for intercropping, and maintenance during four-
year gestation period, as well as replanting of old and unproductive plantations. 
Additional inputs such as farm machinery and irrigation facilities are also 
supported. 

11 
 
Since the launch of NMEO-OP, a total area of 2.7 lakh hectares has been 
brought under oil palm cultivation, contributing to a cumulative area of 6.4 lakh 
hectares as on 31.03.2026. In terms of production, 114.66 lakh tonnes of Fresh 
Fruit Bunches (FFBs) have been harvested, resulting in the production of 20.10 
lakh tonnes of Crude Palm Oil (CPO) during 2021-22 to 2025-26 under the 
mission. At present, 27 operational oil palm processing mills with a total 
processing capacity of 918.5 MTH are functioning across the country. In 
addition, 153 seed nurseries with a combined annual capacity of 500.43 lakh 
planting materials have been established. Further, a total of seven seed 
gardens have become functional across the country, while seven more seed 
gardens are expected to commence production within the next 2 to 8 years. 
(6)  National Mission on Edible Oils (NMEO)-Oil Seeds Under NMEO-OS, 
free seeds are distributed to farmers up to one hectare per farmer and training 
conducted under the Value Chain Cluster (VCC). Demonstrations also being 
conducted for newly released varieties and technologies to improve 
productivity. Support is also provided for establishment of oil mills to ensure 
remunerative prices to oilseed farmers. 
Oilseeds production has increased from 405.40 lakh tonnes to 429.89 
lakh tonnes, while the area under cultivation has expanded from 291.00 lakh 
hectares to 304.40 lakh hectares. The average yield has also improved from 
1,393 kg per hectare to 1,412 kg per hectare. Further. domestic edible oil 
production has increased from 121.75 lakh tonnes to 126.63 lakh tonnes. 
The mission has shown significant progress during 2025-26. Against the 
target of establishing 600 Value Chain Clusters, a total of 1,076 clusters have 
been established. Similarly, against the target of covering 10.00 lakh hectares 
under area expansion, an achievement of 13.35 lakh hectares has been 
recorded. Under the Seed Hub component, 60 Seed Hubs have been 
established against the target of 65, while the target of establishing 50 Seed 
Storage units has been fully achieved. Further, under the Post-Harvest 
Infrastructure component, 400 infrastructures have been established against 
the target of 661. 

12 
 
(7)  Formation and Promotion of 10,000 FPOs It is aimed at collectivizing 
small and marginal farmers to empower them in an organized manner. Under 
this scheme, newly formed FPOs are provided with necessary guidance and 
assistance in various aspects including management, inputs, production, 
processing, value addition, market linkage, credit facilities, and technology 
usage for a period of 5 years after their formation. 
Under the scheme, 10,000 FPOs (Farmer Producer Organizations) have 
been registered, comprising 6.23 million farmer shareholders.6,732 FPOs have 
obtained seed licenses, 6,479 FPOs have obtained fertilizer licenses, and 4,84 
FPOs have obtained pesticide licenses. 
Out of the 10,000 registered FPOs, equity grants of 2577.68 crore have 
been released to 7,912 FPOs, and 1,532 FPOs have received the full equity 
assistance of ₹15 lakh. 5,953 FPOS have been registered on the e-NAM 
platform for the sale of integrated products, while 6,864 FPOs under the 
scheme have been on boarded on the Open Network for Digital Commerce 
(ONDC). 62.69 Lakh Shareholder in FPO. 781.02 Cr Management Cost has 
been released against 9803 FPOs. Since the launch of the FPO scheme, the 
total cumulative turnover of FPOS has reached ₹20,340.73 crore. 
(8) Per Drop More Crop (PDMC) - It focuses on enhancing water use 
efficiency at farm level through Micro Irrigation technologies namely Drip and 
Sprinkler irrigation systems. Micro Irrigation helps in water saving as well as 
reduced fertilizer usage, labour expenses, other input costs and overall income 
enhancement of farmers. 
Other Interventions (OI) activities also supported under the scheme to 
supplement source creation for micro irrigation. Ol activities must be linked with 
Micro Irrigation to make potential use of the available funds for higher water use 
efficiency. The amount for Ol activities is allowed up to 20% of the total 
allocation for States/UTs and up to 40% for North East States, Himalayan 
States & UTs of Jammu Kashmir and Ladakh. 
From 2015-16 to 2025-26, Central Assistance of Rs. 26368.67 crore 
provided to States under PDMC scheme. From 2015-16 to 2025-26, an area of 
110 lakh ha has been covered under Micro Irrigation in the Country which is 

13 
 
about 134% higher as compared to the Pre-PDMC period. About 100 lakh 
farmers have been benefitted in the country through the scheme. During 2026-
27, so far Central Assistance of Rs. 1282.12 crore provided to States under 
PDMC scheme. 
(9)  Agri SURE (Agri Fund for Startups and Rural Enterprises) It is a 
SEBI registered Category II Alternative Investment Fund (AIF) designed to 
support innovative, technology-driven, high-risk and high-impact startups 
working in agriculture and allied sectors. The Fund aims to strengthen the agri-
startup ecosystem by providing growth capital and enabling innovation-led 
transformation in rural India. The Fund has a total corpus of 750 crore and is 
managed by NABVENTURES Ltd., a wholly owned subsidiary of NABARD. 
Under the Direct Scheme, investment approvals amounting to 2145 
crore have been accorded to six startups, with around 295 crore already 
disbursed to four startups. Under the FoF Scheme, investment approvals 
amounting to ₹160 crore have been accorded to nine AlFs, with disbursement 
of 36.77 crore across six AIFs. 
Agri SURE represents a pioneering public-private investment platform 
for promoting innovation-led agricultural transformation in India. By blending 
government support, institutional capital, and private investment expertise, the 
Fund is nurturing high-impact startups capable of improving productivity, 
strengthening rural livelihoods, generating employment, enhancing farmer 
incomes, and building resilient agricultural value chains across the country. 
(10)  Sub-Mission on Agriculture Extension (SMAE) - It aims to strengthen 
the agricultural extension system by promoting the dissemination of modern 
technologies, capacity building, and timely advisory services to farmers across 
the country through initiatives such as ATMA, Kisan Call Centres (KCCs), and 
Mass Media Support to Agricultural Extension. ATMA is a Centrally Sponsored 
scheme being implemented in 734 districts of 28 States & 5 UTs. It aims to 
make available the latest agricultural technologies in different thematic areas to 
increase agricultural production through extension activities viz. Farmers 
Training, Demonstrations, Exposure Visits, Kisan Mela, Mobilization of Farmers 
Groups and Setting up of Farm Schools. 

14 
 
During the current Financial Year 2025-26 (Upto March, 2026) a total of 
50,91,811 farmers have been benefitted under the scheme. From 2014-15 to 
2025-26 (up to March, 2026) a total of 4,75,42,028 farmers have been 
benefitted under the scheme. 
Apart from the above, the Government of India has launched the Prime 
Minister Dhan Dhaanya Krishi Yojana (DDKY), which was announced in the 
Union Budget 2025-26 and formally launched on 11th October, 2025 to cover 
100 districts across the country. The scheme aims to promote integrated and 
sustainable agricultural development through effective planning. 
implementation, monitoring and convergence of various schemes and 
interventions at the district level. PMDDKY further seeks to enhance agricultural 
productivity, increase adoption of crop diversification and sustainable 
agricultural practices, augment post-harvest storage facilities at the panchayat 
and block levels, improve irrigation facilities and facilitate availability of both 
long-term and short-term credit. The scheme is being implemented through 
convergence of existing schemes and does not have a separate budget 
provision. 
(11)  Rashtriya Krishi Vikas Yojana - Under PM-RKVY, about 97.5% of the 
scheme allocation is earmarked for implementation of State projects focused 
on increasing agricultural production, improving quality inputs, value addition, 
infrastructure development and other location-specific interventions. States are 
also empowered to organize skill development and capacity-building 
programmes for farmers based on their priorities. Further, 2.5% of the scheme 
funds is available for administrative expenditure, including engagement of 
consultants, technical personnel and establishment of Project Management 
Units (PMUs) for effective monitoring and evaluation. 
 
1.11 The Committee had observed that the growth rate in Capital 
Formation (at current prices) in Agriculture and Allied Sector during the year 
2019-20 was 5.1% which rose to 22.8% during the period 2020-21, then fell down 
to 15.5% in the year 2021-22, increased marginally during 2022-23 to 16.1% and 
then fell significantly to 9.6% during the period 2023-24. The Committee also 

15 
 
observed that the budget outlay for Agriculture & Farmers Welfare was Rs. 
1,24,000 Crore in 2022-23 whereas the total Budget outlay of the Union 
Government was Rs. 39,44,908.6 Crore for the same period. Similarly, the 
budgetary allocation to Agriculture in 2026-27 BE is Rs. 130,561.38 Crore 
whereas the total budget outlay of the Union Government is Rs. 53,47,315 Crore. 
From 2022-23 to 2026-27, there is an increase of Rs.6561.38 Crore in Budgetary 
allocation for Agriculture and Farmers Welfare whereas the Total Budget outlay 
of the Union Government increased by Rs. 14,02,406.34 Crore during the same 
period which indicates that the budgetary allocation for Agriculture did not get 
an increase in the same proportion. The Actual Expenditure in total Scheme 
Budget (Central Sector+ Centrally Sponsored Schemes) of Agriculture in 2020-
21 was Rs.1,08,090.13 Crore, out of which the  Actual expenditure incurred on 
PM-KISAN and Pradhan Mantri Fasal Bima Yojana (PMFBY) was Rs. 75151.38 
Crore, which translates into Actual Expenditure of Rs. 32938.75 Crore on other 
heads including creation of Capital Assets which meant that around 69.53% of 
total Scheme Budget of Agriculture was spent on payment to farmers and 
Insurance companies during the period 2020-21. Similarly, the Actual 
Expenditure in Total Scheme Budget (Central Sector+ Centrally Sponsored 
Schemes) of Agriculture in 2024-25 was Rs. 128763.55 Crore, out of which the 
Actual expenditure incurred on PM-KISAN and PMFBY was Rs. 80594.66 Crore, 
which results into Actual Expenditure of Rs. 48168.89 Crore on other heads 
including creation of Capital Assets which meant that around 62.59% of total 
Scheme Budget of Agriculture was spent on payment to farmers and Insurance 
companies during the period 2024-25. The Committee observed that majority of 
the expenditure of total Scheme Budget of Agriculture goes on payments being 
made to Farmers and Insurance companies, leaving less for investment in 
Capital Assets and modernization of Agriculture including creating resilience 
against Climate Change. Accordingly, the Committee recommended the 
Government to enhance investments significantly in Capital, human and 
institutional assets in agriculture to ensure that the rate of Capital Formation in 
Agriculture and Allied Sector does not come below 15% as the growth in rate of 
capital formation in agriculture is not merely an economic metric but a strategic 
imperative to ensure food security, economic stability and stimulate industrial 
growth. In its Action Taken Reply, the Department has submitted that Agriculture 

16 
 
is a State subject, Government of India supports the States through appropriate 
policy measures, budgetary allocation and various schemes.  The Government 
has substantially enhanced the budget allocation of Department of Agriculture 
& Farmers Welfare (DA&FW) from Rs. 21,933.50 crore BE during 2013-14 to Rs. 
1,30,561.39 crore BE during 2026-27. Government of India has identified 
following measures/strategies to increase the farmers' income and 
comprehensive growth of agriculture sector: (i) Increase crop production/ 
productivity (ii) Reduce cost of production (iii) Remunerative returns of farmers' 
produce to enhance their incomes (iv) Agricultural diversification (v) Developing 
post harvest value addition (vi) Adaptation to climate change for sustainable 
agriculture and mitigate against crop losses. The Department has further 
submitted that to enhance investments significantly in Capital, human and 
institutional assets in Agriculture Sector, the following major 
schemes/programmes are being implemented by the Government such as 
Agriculture Infrastructure Fund(AIF), Integrated Scheme for Agriculture 
Marketing(ISAM), National Agriculture Market(e-NAM), Mission for Integrated 
Development of Horticulture(MIDH), Sub Mission on Agricultural 
Mechanization(SMAM), National Mission on Edible Oils- Oil Palm & Oilseeds, 
Formation of 10,000 FPOs, Per Drop More Crop(PDMC), AgriSURE(Agri Fund for 
Startups and Rural Enterprises), Sub-Mission on Agricultural Extension(SAME) 
and Rashtriya Krishi Vikas Yojana(RKVY). The Committee are of the considered 
view that the Department need to enhance investments in Capital, human and 
institutional assets in Agriculture  to increase the rate of Capital Formation  in 
Agriculture which will enable transformative changes in the sector, by shifting 
from the present standards of subsistence farming to more dynamic agri 
business models catapulting the economic status of the farmers(Annadatas) by 
improving their economic stability and creating a strong social security net. The 
Committee are also of the considered view that enhancement of rate of Capital 
formation in Indian agriculture is not merely an economic necessity but also  is 
a socio-economic imperative to lift millions out of poverty  and  a high rate of 
Capital Formation would create a  dynamic and robust ecosystem of risk-
mitigation, improved credit, & targeted public infrastructure which will propel a 
virtuous cycle of capital formation that makes Agriculture resilient, 
economically attractive and globally competitive. 

17 
 
CHAPTER – II 
 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS THAT HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE 
GOVERNMENT 
 
Allocation of Budgetary Resources and Their Utilization 
Recommendation No. 1 
 
The Committee note that the Department of Agriculture and Farmers Welfare has 
been allocated Rs. 130561.39 Crore for 2026-27 at BE stage whereas the Actual 
expenditure on Agriculture& Farmers Welfare in 2024-25 was Rs. 1,29,933.47 crore 
which means a hike of only around Rs. 627.91 crore or simply put a 0.5% nominal 
growth, over a period of two years and that too without factoring the rate of inflation. 
The actual utilization of funds for 2025-26 as on 31.01.2026 is Rs. 79,233.42 Crore 
w.r.t. RE stands at 64.37% which clearly indicates that the Department needs to strive 
hard to fully utilize the funds in the remaining period of two months (approx.) of the 
current FY 2025-26. The Committee also note that RE of the Department for FY 2025-
26 is Rs. 123,089.30 Crore which is Rs. 4200.86 Crore less than its BE of 
Rs.127,290.16 Crore.  
The Committee are of the view that in case the Department is not able to spend 
the remaining funds in the last two months of FY 2025-26, there are high chances of 
not getting the enhanced allocations as sought by the Department, as the Ministry of 
Finance might take a stand that as surrendering of funds was done in the past, demand 
for allocating the entire amount sought by the Department of Agriculture & Farmers 
Welfare may not be acceded to.  The Committee recommend that the Department may 
expend funds in an equitable, time-bound manner as prescribed by Department of 
Expenditure guidelines for achievement of outcome and output targets under various 
Schemes, programmes, Missions etc.  
The Committee recommend the Department to use real-time digital dashboards 
having Artificial Intelligence (AI) features and quarterly variance reviews on a regular 
basis  which would provide the Department with a real time digital oversight thereby 
ensuring fiscal discipline, transparency, and efficient delivery of public services. The 
Department must also look into issues which are pending for more than six months 
and address them which are hampering the entire spending of the allocated amounts.    
The Department also needs to spruce up their Financial Management system as year 

18 
 
after year the prescribed limits of Quarter wise spending laid down by Department of 
Expenditure are not being adhered to. The processes need to be streamlined & 
guidelines be amended accordingly, if required, to optimize utilization of funds. 
 
Reply of the Government 
The Department is committed to ensuring optimal and timely utilization of 
allocated funds under various schemes, programmes and missions in accordance with 
the guidelines issued by the Department of Expenditure. Continuous monitoring and 
review mechanisms are already in place, and efforts are made to accelerate 
expenditure of the Department. The actual utilization (provisional) of funds for 2025-
26 as on 31.03.2026 is Rs. 110699.64 Crore, which is 89.93% of RE 2025-26. 
Expenditure of the department is reviewed scheme wise on a weekly basis. 
Zonal Conferences of states in smaller batches have also been initiated to go into 
concerns of implementation of schemes, to ensure efficiency in expenditure. Mostly all 
schemes have own dash-boards that monitor key indicators, both physical & financial. 
Additionally Program Divisions review schemes with the states on a fortnightly/monthly 
basis. 
The Department remains committed to improving its financial management 
system and ensuring adherence to quarterly expenditure ceilings prescribed by the 
Department of Expenditure invariably.  
 
[Ministry of Agriculture & Farmers Welfare 
(Department of Agriculture & Farmers Welfare) 
F. No.6-1/2026-B&A dated 29th May, 2026] 
 
Scheduled Castes Sub-Plan (SCSP) 
Recommendation No. 5 
 
The Committee are of the considered view that Scheduled Castes Sub Plan 
(SCSP), is an important budgetary mechanism designed to uplift the Scheduled 
Castes (SC). The Committee feel that the Department should more proactively pursue 
the release of funds under the SCSP with State Governments and implementing 
agencies. Concerted efforts should be made in coordination with State Governments 
to chalk out strategies to deal with problems which hitherto exist, after taking into 
account, the ground realities which may relate to Terms & conditions, eligibility criteria 
etc. The Committee strongly feel that funds utilization under Scheduled Castes Sub 

19 
 
Plan needs to be enhanced and procedural difficulties, if any, existing in regard to the 
same, may be addressed at the earliest. The Committee accordingly recommend that:  
(i) Terms and conditions (T&C) of the scheme may be regularly revisited to 
check their alignment with existing ground realities and suitable 
amendments be made after consulting all stakeholders; 
(ii) Mandatory social audits of SCSP by third party be done to impart 
transparency and accountability in the existing system; 
(iii) ensure compliance that funds allocated under SCSP remain non- 
divertible and are used exclusively for SCSP initiatives only;  
(iv) Need to shift plan to output-outcome budgeting; and 
(v) wide publicity in local dialects may be given in digital platforms, radio, tv, 
mobiles (KVK farmer /extension Whatsapp groups /SMS) detailing 
benefits of the Scheme. 
Reply of the Government 
The Department wholeheartedly noted the Committee's recommendations and 
committed to implement the all schemes more effectively. 
The Terms & Conditions (T&C) of Schemes the Department are being reviewed 
periodically in consultation with State Governments and other stakeholders to ensure 
alignment with emerging field requirements and implementation challenges. 
Necessary modifications relating to eligibility criteria, subsidy norms, inclusion of 
agricultural machinery, and implementation procedures are incorporated from time to 
time for effective delivery of the scheme benefits. 
States/implementing agencies are advised to strengthen transparency and 
accountability mechanisms under the Scheduled Caste Sub Plan (SCSP) component. 
Monitoring and verification processes including inspections, beneficiary verification, 
and periodic reviews are being undertaken. Efforts are also being made to encourage 
independent assessment and social audit mechanisms for effective evaluation of 
SCSP implementation. 
Department ensures that funds earmarked under SCSP are utilized exclusively 
for intended beneficiaries and approved activities under the scheme. Separate 
accounting, reporting, and monitoring mechanisms are being followed to track 

20 
 
utilization of SCSP allocations and ensure compliance with Government guidelines 
regarding non-diversion of funds. 
To promote the scheme among stakeholders, the Department organizes 
seminars, conclaves, and regional conferences, while also leveraging social media 
platforms for wider outreach. Furthermore, awareness campaigns and capacity- 
building initiatives are conducted to promote the scheme among farmers and 
entrepreneurs about financing opportunities under the scheme. These efforts help 
enhance participation and ensure effective utilization of the fund for strengthening the 
agricultural ecosystem. 
Wide publicity of the schemes are undertaken through multiple communication 
channels including digital platforms, State agriculture department portals, radio, 
television, mobile SMS campaigns, KVKs, farmer fairs, demonstrations, extension 
activities, and WhatsApp groups. Information related to scheme benefits, subsidy 
provisions, eligibility criteria, and application procedures is disseminated in local 
languages/dialects to enhance awareness and outreach among farmers. 
The Department remains committed to improving implementation and effective 
utilization of funds under SCSP in coordination with States/UTs. 
[Ministry of Agriculture & Farmers Welfare 
(Department of Agriculture & Farmers Welfare) 
F. No.6-1/2026-B&A dated 29th May, 2026] 
 
Tribal Sub Plan 
Recommendation No. 6 
The Committee note that the Department of Agriculture & Farmers Welfare has 
been entrusted with improving the socio-economic condition of tribal communities by 
adopting saturation coverage for tribal families in tribal majority villages and 
aspirational districts. The Committee are of the considered view that Tribal Sub-Plan 
(TSP) is a significant policy intervention aimed to ensure equitable growth by bridging 
the developmental gap between Scheduled Tribes (STs) and the general population.  
The Committee note that execution of TSP projects would benefit from greater 
convergence with related initiatives. The same would, in turn, improve the timely 
achievement of the intended outcomes under the Project/Mission. 

21 
 
The Committee recommend that the Department should actively coordinate 
with Ministry of Tribal Affairs to provide updates and inputs which would go a long way 
in tribal empowerment. The Committee also recommend the Department to create a 
portal for funds allocated to it under TSP which would track funds from allocation to 
expenditure in real-time, also list physical targets and geo-tag the assets created 
under the fund to ensure institutional accountability and last mile delivery.  
The Committee accordingly recommend that : 
(i) Terms and conditions (T&C) of the scheme may be regularly revisited to check 
their alignment with existing ground realities and suitable amendments be made 
after consulting all stakeholders; 
(ii) Mandatory social audits of TSP by third party be done to impart transparency 
and accountability in the existing system; 
(iii) Ensure compliance that funds allocated under TSP remain non- divertible and 
are used exclusively for TSP initiatives only;  
(iv) Need to shift plan to output-outcome budgeting; and 
(v) wide publicity in local dialects may be given in digital platforms, radio, tv, 
mobiles (KVK farmer /extension Whatsapp groups /SMS) detailing benefits of 
the Scheme. 
Reply of the Government 
The Department wholeheartedly noted the Committee's recommendations and 
committed to implement the all schemes more effectively. 
The Terms & Conditions (T&C) of Schemes the Department are being reviewed 
periodically in consultation with State Governments and other stakeholders to ensure 
alignment with emerging field requirements and implementation challenges. 
Necessary modifications relating to eligibility criteria, subsidy norms, inclusion of 
agricultural machinery, and implementation procedures are incorporated from time to 
time for effective delivery of the scheme benefits. 
States/implementing agencies are advised to strengthen transparency and 
accountability mechanisms under the Scheduled Caste Sub Plan (SCSP) component. 
Monitoring and verification processes including inspections, beneficiary verification, 

22 
 
and periodic reviews are being undertaken. Efforts are also being made to encourage 
independent assessment and social audit mechanisms for effective evaluation of 
SCSP implementation. 
Department ensures that funds earmarked under SCSP are utilized exclusively 
for intended beneficiaries and approved activities under the scheme. Separate 
accounting, reporting, and monitoring mechanisms are being followed to track 
utilization of SCSP allocations and ensure compliance with Government guidelines 
regarding non-diversion of funds. 
To promote the scheme among stakeholders, the Department organizes 
seminars, conclaves, and regional conferences, while also leveraging social media 
platforms for wider outreach. Furthermore, awareness campaigns and capacity- 
building initiatives are conducted to promote the scheme among farmers and 
entrepreneurs about financing opportunities under the scheme. These efforts help 
enhance participation and ensure effective utilization of the fund for strengthening the 
agricultural ecosystem. 
Wide publicity of the schemes are undertaken through multiple communication 
channels including digital platforms, State agriculture department portals, radio, 
television, mobile SMS campaigns, KVKs, farmer fairs, demonstrations, extension 
activities, and WhatsApp groups. Information related to scheme benefits, subsidy 
provisions, eligibility criteria, and application procedures is disseminated in local 
languages/dialects to enhance awareness and outreach among farmers. 
The Department remains committed to improving implementation and effective 
utilization of funds under TSP in coordination with States/UTs. 
[Ministry of Agriculture & Farmers Welfare 
(Department of Agriculture & Farmers Welfare) 
F. No.6-1/2026-B&A dated 29th May, 2026] 
 
 
Advertisement & Publicity Campaign Including Use of Digital Platforms to Boost 
Awareness About Ongoing Agricultural Schemes 
Recommendation No. 7 
The Committee are of the considered view that advertisement is a strategic 
initiative in bridging the information asymmetry and in ensuring the success of ongoing 

23 
 
agricultural schemes. Advertisements are the medium through which the farmers know 
details of the ongoing agricultural schemes and their potential benefits. There is a 
significant “information gap” between the Department and the farmers. Many farmers, 
especially those residing in remote areas, are unaware of agricultural schemes due to 
limited access to information. Publicity campaigns bridge the gap by disseminating 
information through accessible channels. Advertisement enhance budgetary efficiency 
by driving up enrolment in the ongoing schemes and ensuring that the allocated funds 
reach the intended beneficiaries. Agricultural schemes which are newly launched with 
aim to modernize farming need persuasive advertising campaigns to reach out to 
farmers by highlighting success stories and benefits thereby reducing the 
psychological barrier in adopting new technologies. 
The Committee, therefore, recommend that : 
(i) customized awareness campaigns in the form a comprehensive information 
booklet/handbook in local dialects/Hindi & English containing all relevant 
information such as names & details of Schemes and its benefits, contact nos. 
& email ids of local and district/regional level officers belonging to Agriculture, 
Fertilizers, Irrigation & Storage Infrastructure, Insurance officers/Ombudsman  
as well as Standard Operating Procedures to be adopted in case of specific 
challenges, need to be circulated both through digital medium as well as in the 
form of physical copies to all farmers in the country within the shortest span of 
time; 
(ii) Provide SMS based services for giving real time updates regarding ongoing 
schemes in local dialects to align with the Agricultural calendar. Schemes 
related to seeds, credit, fertilizers may be advertised intensively during pre-
sowing season whereas campaigns regarding pest management and insurance 
schemes could be run during the mid-season. During post harvest, 
advertisement relating to MSP procurement, storage infrastructure facilities, 
insurance claims, loan waiver timelines can be run on both medium- online 
(digital platforms/radio/tv) as well as offline (KVK staff/extension workers); 

24 
 
(iii) effectively utilize the reach and impact of KVKs, Farmer groups and Farmer 
Producer Organizations in dissemination of information pertaining to various 
government schemes and important timelines; 
(iv) encourage State Governments & implementation agencies to use social media 
to share success stories, scheme updates and important timelines tailored to 
farmers’ needs; 
(v) organize and promote “KISAN MELA” in urban/semi-urban areas preferably two 
times in a year when the agricultural calendar is not hectic, to create and spread 
awareness about the farmers produce in these areas especially on weekends 
to garner more footfalls; and 
(vi) assess the impact of advertisement campaigns, be it online or offline, through 
surveys or feedback mechanisms to refine strategies over time by the 
Department. 
Reply of the Government 
The department recognizes the importance of advertisements and publicity 
in bridging the information gap between the Government and the farming 
community through Mass Media Support to Agriculture Extension Scheme 
(MMSAE). The scheme aims to create awareness and publicize schemes, missions, 
government initiatives, advisories, and modern technologies related to agriculture 
and allied sectors for the welfare of the farming community. Various steps taken by 
the Department are as under:- 
(i)  Krishi Darshan program is being telecast at 18 Regional Kendras of 
Doordarshan in regional languages. Besides, 03 programmes namely Krishi 
Darshan, Hello Kisan and Choupal Churcha is being telecast on DD Kisan. 
Further, 02 program namely Kisanvani and "Kisan Ki Baat" is being 
broadcast through 96 Rural AIR FM Radio Stations and AIR FM Gold 
Channel, Delhi (NCR) respectively in regional languages and local dialects 
for creating awareness related to agriculture & allied sector. 
(ii)  'Focused Publicity & Awareness Campaign' through Audio-Video Spots are 
also being broadcast/telecast through DD, AIR and Private TV-Radio 

25 
 
Channels operating at National & Regional Level in regional languages for 
the benefits of the farming community. 
(iii)  Publicity & awareness is also carried out through Outdoor Publicity as well 
as through print advertisements in newspapers across the country. 
(iv) In view of growth in spread of mobiles and internet usage even in the rural 
areas, social media platforms viz Facebook (www.facebook.com/agrigoi), 
(www.twitter.com/agrigoi), Instagram (Instagram/agrigoi), Twitter YouTube 
(www.youtube.com/agrigoi) and WhatsApp Channel (@AgriGol) etc are also 
being utilized for the publicity. 
(v)  Pamphlets/ Brochures are distributed during the National/ Regional/ State 
Level Events/ Fairs organized/ supported by Ministry of Agriculture & 
Farmers Welfare, Govt. of India and the digital material of the same is 
distributed through State Whatsapp group for wider circulation/ distribution/ 
dissemination. 
(vi)  Bharat-VISTAAR (Virtually Integrated System to Access Agricultural 
Resources) is the Al-powered Digital Public Infrastructure (DPI) for 
Agriculture. It provides scheme information, eligibility guidance, application 
and benefit status, information from ICAR's package of practice, weather 
information, mandi prices and grievance services-through text or voice, in 
farmers' own language. Currently, information on 13 Central Schemes; ICAR 
scientific package of practice; IMD weather data; Agmarknet mandi prices; 
Benefit status of onboarded central schemes; and PM KISAN grievance 
redressal is being provided through Bharat Vistaar. The platform is available 
in Hindi and English languages through multiple channels, including a 
dedicated telephone number (155261), a voice-based Al chatbot, a web 
portal of the Ministry of Agriculture & Farmers' Welfare and a downloadable 
mobile application. To ensure accessibility for small and marginal farmers, 
the platform provides voice-based and Interactive Voice Response System 
(IVRS) access for non-smartphone users. Since Phase 1 launch on 17 Feb 
2026, more than 4.8 lakh questions have been asked. 
(vii)  The Viksit Krishi Sankalp Abhiyan (VKSA) was organised by the Indian 
Council of Agricultural Research (ICAR) and the Department of Agriculture & 

26 
 
Farmers Welfare (DA&FW), Ministry of Agriculture and Farmers Welfare, 
Government of India, from May 29 to June 12, 2025. Under this campaign, 
farmers across various villages were provided farm information on Kharif 
season activities. This campaign was conducted across 728 districts of the 
country, where 2,170 teams of scientists directly interacted with more than 
1.35 crore farmers from more than 1.40 lakh villages through a total of 60,917 
programs. A large number of farmwomen and rural youth also actively 
participated in these programs. Through social media, the campaign 
successfully reached approximately 55 million people. More than 1,000 
articles related to the campaign were published in about 200 editions of 
leading national newspapers. Around 31 programs were broadcast on DD 
Kisan, and 850 programs aired on All India Radio. The campaign was also 
implemented in all tribal-dominated districts (reaching 2.625 million farmers), 
all aspirational districts (over 1.9 million farmers), and 216 vibrant villages 
(reaching more than 37,000 farmers). 
(viii)  Regional Agriculture Fairs (RAFs) are organized in six regions of the country 
covering all States/UTs mainly to create awareness about the regional 
agricultural innovations to the farmers by setting-up different 
exhibits/technologies/innovations. In addition, under ATMA Scheme, Melas 
are organized at District level to promote the technologies which are 
innovative and farmer friendly. Under ATMA, exposure visits are arranged to 
the farmers to visit to the neighbouring States/Districts to learn about the 
innovative practices adopted by progressive farmers. 
(ix)  Further, State-organised Kharif and Rabi Campaigns have played an 
important role in strengthening the agricultural extension system by 
spreading awareness about modern farming techniques, government 
schemes, improved seeds, and sustainable agricultural practices among 
farmers. These campaigns have acted as an effective bridge between 
agricultural scientists, government departments, and farmers, ensuring that 
modern technologies and policies reach the grassroots level. During these 
campaigns, extension workers, agricultural officers, scientists, and experts 
have directly interacted with farmers through meetings, demonstrations, 
training programmes, and field visits. Farmers have been educated about 

27 
 
crop selection, soil health management, pest and disease control, irrigation 
methods, climate-resilient farming, and post-harvest management. The 
campaigns have also helped farmers prepare in advance for sowing seasons 
by providing timely guidance and agricultural inputs. 
(x) All the Divisions of DA&FW are organizing awareness programmes through 
states under the respective schemes. 
 
[Ministry of Agriculture & Farmers Welfare 
(Department of Agriculture & Farmers Welfare) 
F. No.6-1/2026-B&A dated 29th May, 2026] 
 
 
National Mission on Natural Farming (NMNF)/Organic Farming 
Recommendation No. 8 
 
The Committee are of the view that shifting Indian agriculture, which is deeply 
entrenched in the "Green Revolution" mindset of chemical inputs, requires a delicate 
balance of disincentivizing chemicals and incentivizing natural alternatives. The 
Committee feel that by providing a direct cash incentive of around Rs.12000-15000/- 
per hectare, to farmers growing Natural& Organic produce, for the first three years to 
compensate for potential yield loss, may go a long way in promoting Natural/Organic 
Farming. This acts as "Payment for Ecosystem Services" for keeping the soil and 
water chemical-free. 
The Committee recommend that to make Natural & Organic Farming a success, 
the government must move from a "Supply-Push" model for making fertilizers available 
to a "Demand-Pull" model for natural produce. Farmers need to be given an option to 
get cash equivalent to the amount of subsidy spent on Chemical fertilizers in their 
respective farmlands through Direct Benefit Transfer(DBT).  Proper checks and 
balances including checking of samples of Soil Health need to be added to ensure 
transparency and accountability. Institutions such as Food Corporation of India(FCI), 
NAFED etc. needs to be directed to a mandatorily procure a certain percentage of 
Natural and Organic Products from Farmers/FPOs to give boost to Natural & Organic 
Farming. The Department in consultation with Department of Food & Consumer Affairs 
also launch a “Bharat Natural” brand with select cereals with distinct identity for Natural 
and Organic Products by offering a premium price to consumers initially. By giving 

28 
 
farmers an option of replacing subsidy on chemical fertilizers with transition grants and 
premium market access, the government can make Natural& Organic Farming not just 
an ecological choice, but an economically superior one for our farmers. The 
Committee also recommend the Department to prioritize promoting native seeds, 
which are of superior grade— climate resilient and nutrient-rich for sustainable 
farming. These should be made readily available to farmers nationwide through Seed 
banks, Farmer Cooperatives, National Seeds Corporation and relevant agencies of 
State Agriculture Departments. The Committee further recommend that a National 
Board for Jackfruit, Tamarind and Jamun may be formed to fully tap their export 
potential and generate prosperity to lakhs of farmers. 
Reply of the Government 
The recommendations of the Committee have been examined. Natural Farming 
is a chemical free farming, involving livestock (preferably local breed of cow) integrated 
natural farming methods and diversified crop systems rooted in the Indian traditional 
knowledge. It is aimed towards improving soil health and restoring ecosystems and 
reducing input cost to the farmer to achieve greater climate resilience. NF recognizes 
the interdependence of the natural ecosystem amongst soil, water, microbiome, 
plants, animals, climate and human requirements. The Department is committed to 
promoting Natural Farming as an environmentally sustainable and economically viable 
agricultural system through the National Mission on Natural Farming (NMNF). The 
National Mission on Natural Farming (NMNF) was approved by the Union Cabinet to 
promote Natural Farming across the country. The recommendation of the Committee 
regarding provision of direct cash incentive to farmers during the transition period to 
Natural and Organic Farming has been noted. In this regard, National Mission on 
Natural Farming (NMNF) provides output-based incentive to farmers @ 24,000 per 
acre per year per farmer to support adoption of Natural Farming practices. The Mission 
aims to reduce dependence on external chemical inputs, lower cultivation costs and 
improve long-term soil health and farm sustainability. 
 
The Department recognizes that promotion of Natural Farming requires both 
production-side and market-side support. Under NMNF, emphasis has been placed on 
scaling-up adoption through community-based extension systems and farmer 
mobilization, while maintaining flexibility for farmers to gradually adopt Natural 

29 
 
Farming practices according to local conditions and experience. NMNF recognizes 
market linkage as a critical component for ensuring sustainable economic returns to 
natural farmers. States are encouraged to improve access of natural produce to local 
and national markets and strengthen linkages with small enterprises, cooperatives and 
value chains. The Department is promoting market development through Natural 
Farming Certification System (NFCS) implemented as "PGS-INDIA NATURAL" 
through the National Centre for Organic and Natural Farming (NCONF). The 
certification system is simple, transparent and community-centric, enabling traceability 
and facilitating access to premium markets for natural produce. 
 
The Committee's recommendation regarding promotion and wider availability 
of native, climate-resilient and nutrient-rich seeds is well aligned with the principles of 
Natural Farming. 
 
The NMNF Mission creates a favourable support ecosystem for farmers in a 
contiguous landscape for progressive transition to Natural Farming. This include 
decentralized farmer-to-farmer extension system supported by; localized and context 
specific agri-infrastructure such as Bio-Input Resource Centers (BRCs), community 
managed traditional varieties seed systems, small scale farm implements, etc; and 
market systems such as local farmers' markets; value addition in food processing, etc. 
 
Government is promoting Organic Farming, though Paramparagat Krishi Vikas 
Yojana (PKVY) and Mission Organic Value Chain Development for Northeastern 
Region (MOVCDNER) from 2015-16. PKVY Scheme is being implemented in a cluster 
mode with min. 20 ha size and states have been asked to implement in cluster size of 
1000 ha in plain area and 500 ha in hilly area to facilitate marketing of organic produce. 
Total 18.84 lakh ha area has been covered involving 33.94 lakhs farmers. Participatory 
Guarantee System of Certification (PGS India programme) was launched by Ministry 
of Agriculture in the year 2015-16 which is promoted through PKVY. Presently, more 
than 500 brands in the market, both private and public (States) hold PGS-India organic 
certification. The prominent brands such as Pure & Sure (Bengaluru), Tripura Organic, 
Swadesham Organics (Uttar Pradesh), Organic Himachal, Organic Jharkhand, Kerala 
Organic, Sahaja Aharam (Hyderabad), Tamil Nadu Organic Products, Aadim Organic 

30 
 
(Dantewada), Organic Uttarakhand, Namami Gange Jaivik Kashi etc have been 
developed under PGS-India Organic Certification programme. 
 
MOVCDNER scheme is implementing with an aim to develop end to end 
organic value chains across all eight states of NER. The scheme provides financial 
support for institutional development (FPOs), organic certification, on-farm and off-
farm inputs, quality planting material, custom hiring centres, post-harvest and 
processing infrastructure as well as for marketing and branding of organic produce. 
Under MOVCDNER, total 2.36 lakh ha area have been covered involving 2.70 lakh 
farmers. All 8 states developed their own brands under MOVCDNER namely Organic 
Arunachal (Arunachal Pradesh), Organic Manipur (Manipur), Mission Organic 
Mizoram (Mizoram), Naga Organic (Nagaland), Sikkim Organic (Sikkim), Megha 
(Meghalaya) and Tripura Organic (Tripura), Asoma (Assam) which are used on its 
organic products for marketing 
 
Natural Farming (NF) is a chemical-free, sustainable agricultural system rooted 
in traditional Indian knowledge, integrating livestock (especially indigenous cows), on-
farm bio-inputs like Beejamrut and Jeevamrut, and diversified cropping practices to 
enhance soil health, biodiversity, and climate resilience while reducing input costs. The 
National Mission on Natural Farming (NMNF) launched by the Government of India on 
25th November 2024 to promote natural farming (NF) across the country. The mission 
aims to form 15,000 clusters, covering about 7.5 lakh hectares of land with the 
enrolment of around 18.75 lakh farmers. 
 
Till FY 2025-26, a total of 18,893 clusters have been formed with 20.93 lakh 
farmers registered and about 10.32 lakh hectares of land brought under natural 
farming practices. 7,601 Bio-Input Resource Centres (BRCs) have been established 
to support the availability of inputs at the local level. More than 20.20 lakhs farmers 
have been registered under the natural farming certification system with more than 
10.63 lakh farmers issued certificates. Against the budget provision of ₹725.00 crore 
for FY 2025-26, a total of 2705.34 crore has been released. 
 
The recommendation regarding establishment of dedicated boards for crops 
such as Jackfruit, Tamarind and Jamun to harness their export and livelihood potential 

31 
 
has been noted. Development of value chains and promotion of horticultural and 
indigenous crops are being supported under various existing schemes such as 
Paramparagat Krishi Vikas Yojna (PKVY) and MOVCDER. NMNF envisages scaling 
up Natural Farming to cover one crore farmers through a community-based, farmer-
to-farmer extension model anchored in Community-Based Organizations such as 
SHGs, FPOs and PACS. Two Community Resource Persons (CRPs) are deployed per 
cluster to mobilize and train farmers. The Mission follows a progressive adoption 
approach wherein farmers may initially adopt Natural Farming on a smaller area and 
gradually expand based on experience and confidence. Further expansion is 
envisaged through peer learning and awareness generation involving KVKs. ATMA, 
Agricultural Universities and other support institutions. The Mission also emphasizes 
convergence with other schemes of DA&FW and other Ministries to strengthen 
ecosystem support for Natural Farming. 
 
The Department appreciates the Committee's valuable recommendations 
aimed at making Natural and Organic Farming economically attractive and 
environmentally sustainable. Several recommendations are substantially aligned with 
the objectives and interventions under NMNF, particularly in relation to farmer 
incentives, certification, market linkage, community-based extension and scaling-up. 
 
[Ministry of Agriculture & Farmers Welfare 
(Department of Agriculture & Farmers Welfare) 
F. No.6-1/2026-B&A dated 29th May, 2026] 
 
 
Farmer Producer Organisations 
Recommendation No. 10 
 
The Committee are of the view that Farmer Producer Organizations (FPOs) 
have massive potential to transform the landscape of Indian Agriculture. FPOs are 
central to the government's strategy to enhance farmer income, as they aggregate 
small and marginal farmers to achieve economies of scale. The Committee feel that 
while the formation of FPOs has been rapid, their functionality and sustainability 
remain major challenges. 

32 
 
Most FPOs are new and hence, have less assets. Banks are hesitant to lend to 
them without collateral, and the available Credit Guarantee Fund (CGF) covers only a 
fraction of the working capital needs. The Central Sector Scheme promises equity 
grants up to ₹15 lakh to match farmer contributions, but delays in release severely 
cause issues  the FPO's initial working capital. FPOs are typically managed by farmer-
directors who possess agricultural knowledge but often lack business management 
skills. FPOs often lack access to aggregation centers, sorting/grading units, and cold 
storage. Without these, they are forced to sell raw produce immediately after harvest, 
missing the opportunity for price arbitrage. 
 
The Committee recommend that the focus of the Government should shift to 
handholding the FPOs during the first 5 years to ensure that they become engines of 
rural prosperity and the work done to provide the initial push through grants and other 
support, does not go unrewarded. 
 
Reply of the Government 
The government acknowledges the observations of the Committee underlining 
the significance of FPOs in enhancing the farmers income though economies of scale 
in production, marketing and also the entire agri value chain. To address the 
functionality and sustainability challenge, Department, under the Central Sector 
Scheme for Formation and Promotion of 10,000 FPOs, has been making continuous 
efforts through provisioning of management cost, equity grant, credit guarantee 
support, capacity building, training, and market linkage support.  
 
Department has developed a transparent MIS system for release of equity 
grants as well as other financial support to the FPOs, more importantly, the MIS is 
visible to FPOs also. Thus, Department has largely being successful in reducing the 
delays in release of equity grant. Further, to address the credit linkage and mandatory 
requirement of collaterals in the banks, department under the said scheme has been 
providing credit guarantee cover for project loan up to 2 crores. So far, 3009 FPOs 
have availed credit guarantee cover to the tune of Rs. 810.48 crores. Furthermore the 
recommendation of the Committee regarding handholding support to FPOs during the 
initial five years is already under the scope of existing operational guidelines of 

33 
 
formation and promotion of 10,000 FPO Scheme for further strengthening the FPO 
ecosystem and ensuring long-term sustainability of FPOs. 
 
[Ministry of Agriculture & Farmers Welfare 
(Department of Agriculture & Farmers Welfare) 
F. No.6-1/2026-B&A dated 29th May, 2026] 
 
 
Krishi Vigyan Kendras (KVKs) 
Recommendation No. 11 
The Committee are of the view that Krishi Vigyan Kendras (KVK) form the 
bedrock of India’s agricultural extension system and needs to be strengthened as act 
as frontline demonstration hubs, resource centres and one stop platform for 
sustainable agricultural development. 
 
The Committee recommend that each district of the country must be provided 
with at least one KVK for faster dissemination of agricultural knowledge and provide 
handholding support in latest technologies to farmers/farmer groups. The Committee 
also recommend that same farmers should not keep getting enrolled in the Training 
workshops conducted by KVKs but all farmers need to get at least one chance in a 
year to update themselves in the programmes being conducted by KVKs. The 
Committee also recommend that KVKs need to work in close tandem with the State 
Government/UTs and inform public representatives  
 
like MPs, MLAs, Corporators etc. regarding their upcoming programmes, 
events well in advance for wider outreach. The Committee further recommend that 
KVKs need to promote cultivation of native seeds among farmers especially in drought 
prone and ecologically sensitive areas. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 The Centrally Sponsored Scheme "Agriculture Extension" is being implemented 
through the Scheme Component, "Support to State Extension Programs for Extension 
Reforms". The ATMA Scheme provides for active involvement of research 
system/research agencies at different levels of implementation. State Agricultural 
Universities (SAUs) and Krishi Vigyan Kendra (KVKs) are fully involved not only in 

34 
 
preparation of Strategic Research Extension Plan(SREP) and State Extension Work 
Plans (SEWPs) but also in implementation of various programmes in the field. They 
are also represented in all the bodies namely ATMA Governing Board and ATMA 
Management Committee at District level, SLSC and IDWG at State level. BTT-BFAC 
meetings at Block level. In addition, each KVK scientist may be made in-charge of one 
or more Blocks within the District. The KVK scientist technically advises the BTT and 
involve actively in preparation of Block Action Plans, especially with regard to research 
related issue/gaps and strategies. 
 
Agricultural Technology refinement, validation and adoption segment of 
cafeteria of activities including Farmers- Scientist Interactions (FSIs), to designate 
expert from KVKs at District level and joint visits by scientist & Extension workers, 
organization of Kisan Goshties and R-E-F linkages are dealt by KVKs. Apart from this, 
a joint circular on convergence between ATMA and KVK was issued under the 
signature of DG, ICAR and the Secretary, AC&FW. As per the circular, one of the 
activities is joint visits of Programmes Coordinator, KVK and Project Director to at least 
05 villages in a district every month. 
    
[Ministry of Agriculture & Farmers Welfare 
(Department of Agriculture & Farmers Welfare) 
F. No.6-1/2026-B&A dated 29th May, 2026] 
 
 
Strengthening of e-National Agriculture Markets (e-NAM) 
Recommendation No. 12 
The Committee are of the considered view that e-NAM need to shift from price 
discovery to seamless trade execution. The Committee strongly feel that financial 
interests of farmers may be protected from buyers at all costs and the Department 
may ensure that farmers are provided all the requisite handholding and other 
assistance during developing digital literacy to enable them avail benefits under the 
scheme. 
The Committee recommend that a Single Unified Trading License valid across 
all e-NAM mandis be mandated to eliminate state barriers and broaden the buyer 
base. The Committee also recommend to deploy automated quality assaying 

35 
 
machines in mandis and give priority to issuance of standardized digital certificates for 
distant buyers to trust the produce without physical inspection. The Committee also 
recommend to enforce a strict escrow based settlement mechanism to guarantee 
timely payment to farmers and to link e-NAM with relevant platforms to ensure 
affordable, real-time transport solutions for inter-state movement of produce. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 In sync with the committee recommendation to execute seamless trading 
through eNAM portal, Government has developed and launched upgraded and 
improved version of eNAM portal as eNAM 2.0. Being it "state-rule" specific portal, the 
trading can be considerably scaled up in consonance of the rules and the practices of 
the states concerned. To provide the handholding facilities to the farmers, Directorate 
of Marketing and Inspection (DMI), an attached office Department of Agriculture and 
Farmers' Welfare, Gol, with presence across the states through its offices have been 
assigned the task of ground level training and support to the farmers and other 
stakeholders. 
 
In consonance with the recommendation of the committee, e-NAM is being 
promoted based on barrier free seamless trade across the state. In order to execute 
the recommendation, e -NAM is reform linked as mandis of only those states which 
have made enabling provision in their APMC Acts for unified trading license valid for 
trading in all the mandis across the state can only be integrated with e-NAM portal. 
Apart from this, Department is also making all endeavors for implementation of unified 
trading licenses in the states. Assistance is being provided for development of quality 
assaying facilities in the mandis to undertake the quality assessment of the farmers' 
produce and assaying result is being digitally uploaded on the portal to enable distant 
buyers to bid the produce based on its quality. Further, in order to ensure the c-
payment to farmers' in their bank account in shortest time with all safeguard 
mechanism, the payment is linked to National Payments Corporation of India (NPCI) 
verification/authentication. The mechanism of payment through escrow account has 
already been provided. To facilitate the trade through e-NAM with all transport and 
logistic facilities, in the name of value added services, it has already been provisioned 
in eNAM2.0 portal, as it is ONDC compliant. To work in tandem and coordination,            

36 
 
e-NAM portal is being integrated with Bharat-Vistaar, AGMARKNET and such other 
portals operational in the states and in Centre. 
[Ministry of Agriculture & Farmers Welfare 
(Department of Agriculture & Farmers Welfare) 
F. No.6-1/2026-B&A dated 29th May, 2026] 
 
 
 
Emphasis on Soil Health 
Recommendation No. 13 
 
The Committee feel that Soil health is the main edifice of agricultural 
productivity and food security.  The Committee feel that the time lag between sample 
collection of soil and delivery of Soil Health Card (Soil Health Card) needs to be 
reduced to less than a week. Presently, by the time the Soil health card is received, 
the cropping season may have already begun or passed, rendering the advice useless 
for that cycle. The grid size  issues also needs to be sorted  out as  a farm within a grid 
of 10 hectares (rainfed) or 2.5 hectares(irrigated) may have different nutrient profiles. 
There is a shortage of laboratories, leading to outsourcing to private players. The 
quality of analysis varies between labs due to a lack of standardized equipment and 
quality control protocols. On many occasions, the Soil Health Card issued miss details 
regarding secondary nutrients such as Sulphur and micronutrients such as Zinc, 
Boron, Iron which are the limiting factors in the soil today due to intensive farming. The 
technical jargon on the cards also needs to be simplified to the maximum extent 
possible so that small and marginal farmers can easily decipher the recommendations 
made.  The availability of micronutrients such as Zinc, Gypsum and so on also needs 
to be made  on regular basis across the Cooperative Stores.  
 
The Committee recommend that dynamic measures need to be taken to 
increase carbon content in the soil across the country and geo tagging of soil samples 
need to be done to create a geospatial database which will help in creating precise 
"Soil Fertility Maps" for districts, moving away from generic grid sampling to farm-
specific analysis. Testing for biological parameters (organic carbon, microbial 
biomass) and physical parameters (soil structure, water holding capacity) also needs 
to be included mandatorily in Soil Health Card. The Committee also recommend that 

37 
 
Near-Infrared Spectroscopy (NIRS) and satellite imagery to map soil properties need 
to be completed across the country at the earliest years as this would allow for larger 
area coverage with higher accuracy. The Soil Health Card needs to be simplified in 
common terms   and over a period of time replace it with a Digital App in areas where 
internet connectivity is good so that real time nutrient recommendations based on 
GPS-tagged soil samples.  Extension workers also need to be trained to interpret Soil 
Health Cards and counsel farmers while distributing them. Soil health data should be 
integrated with the PM Fasal Bima Yojana as healthy soils reduce crop risk and 
farmers with good soil health scores could be offered lower insurance premiums, 
turning soil conservation for farmers into an additional revenue stream. The Committee 
feel that the Department need to maintain subsidy on drip and sprinkler irrigation as 
this lowers farmers’ initial investment in micro irrigation systems and encourage faster 
adoption while allowing cultivation in water scarce areas as well as allowing precise 
and timely application of fertilizers thereby providing cost advantage especially to 
small and marginal farmers. 
 
The Committee further recommend the Department to explore ways and 
methods to implement subsurface drainage systems existing in Belgavi in Karnataka, 
in water logging areas& coastal areas across the country to effectively combat excess 
surplus subsoil water for disposal into surface drains which will transform 
underproductive lands, enhance soil health and  increase farmer prosperity. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 In order to timely deliver the Soil Health Card to the farmers, the department 
has issued a citizen charter to states. As per the Citizen Charter states have been 
advised to complete the entire activities, starting from sampling, testing, generation of 
Soil Health Card giving advisory to the farmers within 25 days before the sowing of the 
crops so that farmers can use fertilizers as per the recommendation of Soil Health 
Card in their props. The grid system of Soil Health Card generation has already been 
done away from 2020-21 onward from the Model Village Program. Nowadays, Soil 
Health Cards are generated individually farm holding wise. The samples are collected 
from farmers' field and Soil Health Card given to each farmer separately. Hence, one 

38 
 
soil sample generates only one Soil Health Card. Soil Health Card is a customized 
recommendation for individual farmers. 
Since 2023-24 the Soil Health Card portal has been revamped and mobile 
application for soil sample collection capturing geo coordinates accurately is being 
used. Soil Health Cards can be downloaded from the portal itself by the farmers 
through their mobile number. Soil Health Card has been simplified technically and 
emojis have been inserted in the card to easily understand the nutrient status by the 
farmers along with chemical recommendations, Farmers can get a Soil Health Card 
for organic farming and natural farming also. Spectroscopy for soil testing is being 
developed by ICAR. Focus has been given to extension services so that farmers can 
understand the recommendation of Soil Health Card and use it. 
The integration of Soil Health Card (SHC) with Bharat-VISTAAR have been 
completed to enable farmers to access personalized, Al-driven and multilingual soil-
based advisories through a single digital platform. Farmers will receive crop-specific 
recommendations on balanced fertilizer use, nutrient management, and soil 
amendments based on their Soil Health Card data, leading to more informed decision-
making at the farm level. The integration combines SHC recommendations with 
weather alerts, pest management advisories, mandi information and government 
schemes, thereby promoting scientific nutrient application, reducing excessive use of 
chemical fertilizers, improving soil fertility and enhancing crop productivity and farmers' 
income. This strengthens last-mile delivery of soil health recommendations and 
encourage wider adoption of sustainable agricultural practices. 
So far as, surface drainage system in Belagavi, Karnataka is concerned, the 
state can use funds under the component of reclamation of soil under the scheme. 
Centrally Sponsored Scheme (CSS) of Per Drop More Crop (PDMC) is being 
implemented in the Country from the year 2015-16. The PDMC Scheme focuses on 
enhancing water use efficiency at farm level through Micro Irrigation technologies 
namely Drip and Sprinkler irrigation systems. Micro Irrigation helps in water saving as 
well as reduced fertilizer usage, labour expenses, other input costs and overall income 
enhancement of farmers. 
The Committee’s recommendation to explore ways and methods to implement 
sub surface drainage systems existing in Belgavi in Karnataka is noted for sharing with 
other states and compliance. Solar pump based drainage of water logged soils has 

39 
 
been supported under RKVY -DPRs for transforming under productive lands, enhance 
soil health & increase farmer prosperity. 
[Ministry of Agriculture & Farmers Welfare 
(Department of Agriculture & Farmers Welfare) 
F. No.6-1/2026-B&A dated 29th May, 2026] 
 
National Seeds Corporation 
Recommendation No. 14 
 
The Committee note that National Seeds Corporation (NSC) is the apex body 
for seed production in India and has played a historic role in the Green Revolution. It 
now faces competition from a vibrant private sector and hence, it requires a strategic 
roadmap to transform itself to meet the existing and upcoming challenges. The 
Committee are of the considered view that Upper Price Ceiling of Seeds needs to be 
implemented by the Department to protect farmers and their legitimate interests. 
 
The Committee feel that NSC needs to invest in the state of the art machinery 
for seed production and packaging & establish climate-controlled warehouses to 
prevent seed deterioration, implement RFID (Radio Frequency Identification) and 
Block chain technology for real-time tracking of seed lots from production to the 
retailer, ensuring traceability and checking counterfeiting. NSC need to use satellite 
imagery and drones to monitor seed crops in real-time to ensure isolation distances 
and rouging (removal of off-type plants) are done effectively, addressing the issue of 
genetic impurity. NSC also needs to promote native seeds to farmers across the 
country to strengthen crop resilience, maintain ecological balance, secure and enrich 
crop diversity. NSC is heavily tilted towards cereals such as wheat, paddy whereas 
the market is shifting towards horticulture, millets, and hybrids. NSC also needs to 
shore up its last mile delivery to boost sales. 
 
The Committee recommend that National Seeds Corporation (NSC)needs to 
transform its identity from a "Government Supplier" to a "futuristic, global-grade seed 
entity " by combining public sector trust and reach with the efficiency and technology 
of private sector. The Committee also recommend that NSC should ensure that Indian 
farmers have access to affordable, high-quality, and climate-resilient seeds, even in 
areas with sub-optimal connectivity, in securing the nation's food future. 

40 
 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 Seed prices in the country are generally determined by market forces, taking 
into account factors such as crop, variety/hybrid, technology involved, production cost 
and market demand. However, the Government remains committed to ensuring 
availability of quality seeds to farmers at affordable prices through various 
interventions including promotion of certified seeds, financial assistance under 
schemes such as National Food Security and Nutrition Mission (NFSNM) and 
Rashtriya Krishi Vikas Yojana (RKVY), strengthening of public sector seed production 
and distribution systems, and regulation of seed quality under the Seeds Act, 1966 
and Seeds (Control) Order, 1983. 
Besides, seeds sold in packaged form are required to carry Maximum Retail 
Price (MRP) labeling under the applicable legal and packaging provisions, thereby 
ensuring transparency in pricing for farmers. In addition, the Competition Act, 2002 
acts as a safeguard against anticompetitive practices, cartelization and abuse of 
dominant position that may adversely affect seed prices and farmers' interests. 
Further, in specific cases where it is considered necessary in public interest, 
the Government has exercised price regulation measures. For example, the Maximum 
Sale Price (MSP) of Bt Cotton seeds is regulated under the Cotton Seeds Price 
(Control) Order, 2015 to protect farmers from excessive pricing. 
The Government is also strengthening transparency and accountability in the 
seed supply chain through digital initiatives such as the SATHI (Seed Traceability, 
Authentication and Holistic Inventory) portal for seed traceability and authentication, 
enhanced seed law enforcement, expansion of seed testing infrastructure and 
promotion of quality seed production and distribution. 
Accordingly, while no proposal for a uniform upper price ceiling on all seeds is 
presently under consideration, the Government continues to closely monitor the seed 
sector and take appropriate measures, wherever required, to balance farmer welfare, 
seed availability, quality assurance and long-term innovation in the seed ecosystem. 
NSC for improving the quality of seed processing plant machinery has 
implemented the QCBS method of procurement in which due weightage to technical 

41 
 
parameters has been given. NSC is already using state of art method for construction 
of seed storage godowns and following are adopted; 
i. For storing high volume low value crops truss-less godown with turbo 
ventilator for proper aeration and temp. control. 
ii  Transparent sheet of polycarbonate/Fibre glass for allowing natural 
sunlight to reduce electrical cost. 
iii.  For storing low volume high value crops, AC godowns with 
dehumidifiers are installed at various Vegetable Packing Centres for 
temperature and humidity control. 
For real time tracking of seed all the seed production units of NSC are 
registered as SPA on Saathi Portal of MoA&FW. 
The observation of the committee to use satellite imagery and drones to monitor 
seed crops in real-time is noted for compliance. 
NSC has Initiated tie up with FPOs for production of Native seeds. However, 
native seeds have less yield, limited demand and less lucrative to growers. But it is an 
important sector, hence the crop varieties have been included in production. 
NSC is producing seeds of crops like fodder seeds, oil seeds and pulse crops 
in production chain apart from millet crops. NSC is also producing vegetable 
(Horticulture) seeds and also flower seeds along with saplings of fruit and avenue 
plantation. 
Last mile seed delivery is being catered through online sales (Open Network 
for Digital Commerce) as well as through vast network of dealers including FPOs till 
block level. 
NSC is supplying seeds to the private trade channel, dealers, FPOs apart from 
meeting the demand of different states. NSC is participating in krishi melas, 
exhibitions, various agri events and selling seeds to the farmers. NSC has a number 
of sales outlets attached to its Area Offices/Regional Offices. 
Observation of committee regarding access of Indian farmers to affordable, 
high-quality, and climate-resilient seeds, even in areas with sub-optimal connectivity 
is noted. NSC is producing climate resilient varieties of different crops and bio fortified 
varieties very much in tune with the futuristic needs of Indian agriculture and nutritional 

42 
 
security of the country. NSC is also storing seeds especially for hilly areas and North 
East regions under National Seed Reserve. 
[Ministry of Agriculture & Farmers Welfare 
(Department of Agriculture & Farmers Welfare) 
F. No.6-1/2026-B&A dated 29th May, 2026] 
 
 
Viksit Bharat-2047 
Recommendation No. 16 
 
The Committee recommend that in order to visualize the dream of a developed India- 
Viksit Bharat by 2047, the roadmap requires shifting from a "production-centric" 
approach to an "income-centric" and "sustainability-centric" model. Artificial 
Intelligence needs to be integrated with precision farming to optimize input use such 
as water, fertilizers etc. thereby reducing costs & environmental damage and drones 
need to be utilized for crop monitoring purposes.  The Committee also recommend 
that a unified digital ecosystem connecting land records, soil health, weather forecasts, 
and market prices needs to be implemented. This data should be available to farmers 
on a single smartphone app to support real-time decision-making.Shift from "per acre" 
irrigation to "per drop" irrigation needs to be done and Micro-irrigation (drip/sprinkler) 
must become the norm, covering 100% of irrigated areas. For this purpose, inter-
departmental convergence may be strengthened between the Department of 
Agriculture & Farmers Welfare(DAFW) and the Department of Water Resources, River 
Development & Ganga Rejuvenation under the Ministry of Jal Shakti. Steps may also 
be taken to enhance participation at the grassroots level through the involvement of 
village-level Water Committees at the Gram Sabha Level. The Committee further 
recommend that Indian farmers  need to be positioned as providers of "Carbon 
Credits" thereby creating an additional revenue stream for them. The Department 
should also establish specialized training centres for modern techniques like 
hydroponics, aqua ponics, and drone piloting at block level in the country. A "Green 
Revolution 2.0" specifically for the Eastern and North-Eastern states, needs to be 
launched to bridge the regional productivity gap, focusing on horticulture and pulses. 
FPOs need to be transformed as centres of Global Trade completely transforming the 
profile of the Annadata into a prosperous individual. Most importantly, by 2047, 

43 
 
agriculture needs to be turned into a sustainable, profitable and resilient business 
thereby catapulting India to lead the Ivy league of nations. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 Over the past decade, the Ministry of Agriculture & Farmers Welfare has made 
various efforts for strengthening the hands of our farmers, modernizing our systems, 
and preparing the foundation for a truly "income-centric" and "sustainability-centric". 
These efforts are not merely administrative; it reflects the aspirations of millions of 
farmers, whose hard work feeds our nation and sustains our economy. The 
Government of India has identified the following measures and strategies to enhance 
farmers' income and ensure the comprehensive growth of the agriculture sector, 
thereby transforming agriculture into a sustainable, profitable, and resilient enterprise 
and positioning India among the leading nations of the world:- 
(i)  Increase crop production/ productivity 
(ii)  Reduce cost of production 
(iii)  Remunerative returns of farmers' produce to enhance their incomes. 
(iv)  Agricultural diversification 
(v)  Developing post harvest value addition 
(vi) Adaptation to climate change for sustainable agriculture and mitigate 
against crop losses 
To achieve these objectives, the following major schemes/programmes are 
being implemented by the Government; 
1.  Pradhan Mantri Kisan Samman Nidhi (PM-KISAN) 
2.  Pradhan Mantri Kisan Maan Dhan Yojana (PM-KMY) 
3.  Pradhan Mantri Annadata Aay SanraksHan Abhiyan (PM-AASHA) 
4.  Pradhan Mantri Fasal Bima Yojana (PMFBY)/ Restructured Weather 
Based Crop Insurance Scheme (RWBCIS) 
5.  Modified Interest Subvention Scheme (MISS) 
6.  Agriculture Infrastructure Fund (AIF) 

44 
 
7.  Formation and Promotion of 10,000 new Farmer Producers 
Organizations (FPOs) 
8. National Bee Keeping and Honey Mission (NBHM) 
9.  Namo Drone Didi 
10. Agri Fund for Start-Ups & Rural Enterprises' (AgriSURE) 
11.  National Mission on Natural Farming (NMNF) 
12.  Rastriya Krishi Vikas Yojana- Detailed Project Report (RKVY-DPR) 
13.  Per Drop More Crop (PDMC) 
14.  Sub-Mission on Agriculture Mechanization (SMAM) 
15. Paramparagat Krishi Vikas Yojana (PKVY) 
16.  Soil Health & Fertility (SH&F) 
17.  Rainfed Area Development (RAD) 
18.  Agroforestry 
19.  Crop Diversification Programme (CDP) 
20.  Sub-Mission on Agriculture Extension (SMAE) 
21.  National Food Security and Nutrition Mission (NFSNM) 
2.  Integrated Scheme for Agriculture Marketing (ISAM) 
23.  Mission for Integrated Development of Horticulture (MIDH) 
24.  National Mission on Edible Oils (NMEO)-Oil Palm 
25.  National Mission on Edible Oils (NMEO)-Oilseeds 
26.  Mission Organic Value Chain Development for North Eastern Region 
27.  Digital Agriculture Mission 
28.  National Bamboo Mission. 
29. Mission for Atmanirbharta in Pulses 
30.  PM Dhan-Dhaanya Krishi Yojana (PMDDKY) 
The following schemes/ programmes/ initiatives are being implemented to 
promote "income-centric" and "sustainability-centric" precision farming through 

45 
 
optimized input use, digital agriculture ecosystems, micro-irrigation, modern 
technology training like hydroponics, aquaponics, and drone piloting also focused on 
horticulture and pulses, and strengthening of Farmer Producer Organizations (FPOs) 
to enhance farmers' income, sustainability and India's global agricultural leadership: 
DIGITAL AGRICULTURE 
A major step in this transformation has already been initiated through the 
adoption of Digital Agriculture. Technologies such as Artificial Intelligence (Al), drones, 
sensors, satellite mapping, and data analyties are being integrated with precision 
farming practices. Al is helping farmers optimize the use of water, fertilizers, and 
pesticides, thereby reducing production costs and environmental damage. Drones are 
increasingly being utilized for crop monitoring. disease detection, spraying, and field 
surveys, making farming more efficient, scientific, and data-driven. 
The Government has also begun developing a unified digital ecosystem 
connecting land records, soil health cards, weather forecasts, irrigation data, crop 
insurance, and market prices. Efforts are being made to provide this information to 
farmers through a single smartphone platform for real-time decision-making. This 
initiative is empowering farmers with timely information and improving productivity as 
well as profitability. Various measures taken by the Department to leverage technology 
and promote data-driven agriculture are mentioned below: - 
(i)  Under the Digital Agriculture Mission, the Department, in 
collaboration with States/UTs, is developing AgriStack as a Digital 
Public Infrastructure (DPI) for Agriculture. Under AgriStack, Digital IDs 
of farmers (Farmer IDs) are being created, which link farmers' 
authenticated details with their Geo-referenced land parcels and 
agricultural assets including crop grown data (collected through the 
Digital Crop Survey), fisheries and livestock owned. Till date more than 
9.65 crore Farmer IDs have been generated in 19 States. Under Digital 
Crop Survey (DCS), more than 30 crore plots have been surveyed 
across 24 States for crops grown. AgriStack enables targeted and 
efficient delivery of agricultural schemes and services and supports 
informed crop planning, including promotion of oilseeds cultivation. 

46 
 
(ii)  Bharat Vistaar has been developed as an Al-enabled digital 
public infrastructure for agriculture to provide farmers with instant, 
conversational access to farming-related information and services in 
their own language. Through Bharat Vistaar, farmers receive guidance 
on crop planning, scientific farming practices, pest management, 
weather updates, market prices, and government schemes, including 
information related to eligibility, applications, and grievance redressal. 
The Bharat Vistaar platform has been designed to ensure accessibility for all 
farmers. Those with smartphones and internet access can use it as a chatbot, while 
farmers without smartphones or internet connectivity can access the same services 
through the voice-call number 155261. 
The first phase of Bharat Vistaar was launched on 17 February 2026 in Hindi 
and English. In Phase-1, twelve major schemes related to agriculture and farmer 
welfare have been integrated. Since its launch on 17 February and upto 15 May 2026, 
Bharat Vistaar has responded to 44.56 lakh queries, demonstrating the importance of 
voice-based and non-internet access available to farmers 24X7. 
In a phased manner, the platform will be integrated with all Central Government 
services and major regional languages. States are also being encouraged to integrate 
their schemes and services with Bharat Vistaar so that farmers can easily access 
information and benefits from multiple services on a single platform. This initiative is 
expected to reduce transaction costs for farmers, enhance transparency and 
accountability in scheme delivery, strengthen data driven governance and improve 
productivity through Al enabled advisory. 
PER DROP MORE CROP (PDMC) 
Water conservation has emerged as a national priority. India has started shifting 
from "per acre irrigation" to "per drop irrigation." Micro-irrigation systems such as drip 
and sprinkler irrigation under Per Drop More Crop (PDMC) are being promoted 
extensively to improve water-use efficiency. The scheme mainly focuses on enhancing 
water use efficiency at farm level through Micro Irrigation, namely, Drip and Sprinkler 
Irrigation systems. Besides promoting Micro Irrigation, the scheme also supports micro 
level water storage, water conservation/management activities etc. as Other 
Interventions to supplement source creation for Micro Irrigation. Micro Irrigation helps 

47 
 
in water saving as well as reduced fertilizer usage, labour expenses, other input costs 
and overall income enhancement of farmers. 
From 2015-16 to 2025-26, Central Assistance of Rs. 26368.67 crore provided 
to States under PDMC scheme. From 2015-16 to 2025-26, an area of 110 lakh ha has 
been covered under Micro Irrigation in the Country which is about 134% higher as 
compared to the Pre-PDMC period. About 100 lakh farmers have been benefitted in 
the country through the scheme. During 2026-27, so far Central Assistance of Rs. 
1282.12 crore provided to States under PDMC scheme. 
To promote micro irrigation in the country, Government is implementing 
Centrally Sponsored Scheme of Per Drop More Crop (PDMC) is implementing in the 
Country under the Pradhan Mantri Rashtriya Krishi Vikas Yojana (PM-RKVY) since 
2015-16. The Scheme mainly focuses on enhancing water use efficiency at farm level 
through Micro Irrigation technologies namely Drip and Sprinkler irrigation systems. 
Micro Irrigation helps in water saving as well as reduced fertilizer usage, labour 
expenses, other input costs and overall income enhancement of farmers. 
Since inception of the scheme in 2015-16, an area of 110 lakh ha has been 
covered under Micro Irrigation with release of Central Assistance of Rs. 26368 crore 
to States/UTs under the Scheme. 
ORGANIC FARMING 
The idea of positioning Indian farmers as providers of Carbon Credits is also 
gaining momentum. Organic farming and the concept of Carbon Credits are also being 
actively promoted as important pillars of sustainable agriculture. Farmers adopting 
eco-friendly agricultural practices such as organic farming, agroforestry, and reduced 
chemical usage are gradually being recognized for their contribution towards 
environmental sustainability. Under Agroforestry, financial support is being provided 
for R&D projects related on agroforestry models, voluntary carbon market, soil health 
Improvement and climate-resilient practices, local initiatives etc. 
Organic Farming through Paramparagat Krishi Vikas Yojana (PKVY) and Mission 
Organic Value Chain Development for Northeastern Region (MOVCDNER) 
Government is promoting Organic Farming, though Paramparagat Krishi Vikas 
Yojana (PKVY) and Mission Organic Value Chain Development for Northeastern 
Region (MOVCDNER) from 2015-16. PKVY Scheme is being implemented in a cluster 

48 
 
mode with min. 20 ha size and states have been asked to implement in cluster size of 
1000 ha in plain area and 500 ha in hilly area to facilitate marketing of organic produce. 
Total 18.84 lakh ha area has been covered involving 33.94 lakhs farmers. Participatory 
Guarantee System of Certification (PGS India programme) was launched by Ministry 
of Agriculture in the year 2015-16 which is promoted through PKVY. Presently, more 
than 500 brands in the market, both private and public (States) hold PGS-India organic 
certification. 
MOVCDNER scheme is implementing with an aim to develop end to end 
organic value chains across all eight states of NER. The scheme provides financial 
support for institutional development (FPOs), organic certification, on-farm and off-
farm inputs, quality planting material, custom hiring centres, post-harvest and 
processing infrastructure as well as for marketing and branding of organic produce. 
Under MOVCDNER, total 2.36 lakh ha area have been covered involving 2.70 lakh 
farmers. 
National Mission on Natural Farming 
Natural Farming (NF) is a chemical-free, sustainable agricultural system rooted 
in traditional Indian knowledge, integrating livestock (especially indigenous cows), on-
farm bio-inputs like Beejamrut and Jeevamrut, and diversified cropping practices to 
enhance soil health, biodiversity, and climate resilience while reducing input costs. The 
National Mission on Natural Farming (NMNF) launched by the Government of India on 
25th November 2024 to promote natural farming (NF) across the country. The mission 
aims to form 15,000 clusters, covering about 7.5 lakh hectares of land with the 
enrolment of around 18.75 lakh farmers. 
Till FY 2025-26, a total of 18,893 clusters have been formed with 20.93 lakh 
farmers registered and about 10.32 lakh hectares of land brought under natural 
farming practices. 7,601 Bio-Input Resource Centres (BRCs) have been established 
to support the availability of inputs at the local level. More than 20.20 lakhs farmers 
have been registered under the natural farming certification system with more than 
10.63 lakh farmers issued certificates. Against the budget provision of 725.00 crore for 
FY 2025-26, a total of ₹705.34 crore has been released. 
To prepare farmers for the future, specialized training programmes and centres 
for modern agricultural techniques such as hydroponics, aquaponics, precision 

49 
 
farming, and drone piloting are being introduced at various levels. These efforts are 
improving technical skills, generating employment opportunities, and attracting youth 
towards agriculture. Steps have also been initiated for the Eastern and North-Eastern 
regions of India to bridge regional productivity gaps. Greater emphasis is now being 
placed on horticulture, pulses, and sustainable farming practices suited to these 
regions. 
 
AGRICULTURE INFRASTRUCTURE FUND 
AIF supports development of agriculture from "production-centric approach" to 
"income-centric approach" by focussing on investment in agri infrastructure. 
As on 26th May 2026, Rs 89,715 crore have been sanctioned for 2,00,447 
projects under the Scheme. These sanctioned projects have mobilized an investment 
of Rs. 1,42,138 crores in agriculture sector. 
Under the Scheme, the following major projects sanctioned: 
 49,793 custom hiring centres, 
 29,847 Primary Processing Centre 
 32,377 Farm harvest automation, 
 18,585 warehouses, 
 4,483 sorting & grading units, 
 2,988 cold store projects, 
 30,318 PM-KUSUM Components B&C 
 32.056 other kinds of post-harvest management projects and community 
farming assets. 
As per the impact assessment conducted by Indian Institute of Management 
Ahmedabad, AlF-supported units have led to an average reduction of 5-15 percentage 
points in post-harvest losses through improved storage, processing, and 
mechanisation systems that enhance efficiency and reduce spoilage across 
commodities. Additionally, these units have generated approximately 6.2 lakh direct 
and 13.2 lakh indirect employment opportunities, and created 750 LMT of dry and cold 
storage capacity through the AIF scheme. 
 

50 
 
FARMER PRODUCER ORGANIZATIONS (FPOS) 
Farmer Producer Organizations (FPOs) across the country are showing steady 
growth in membership, business activities and service delivery to farmers. 
So far, 62.81 lakh shareholders have been mobilized under the FPO movement. 
FPOS are also expanding their role in agricultural input services. At present, 6,489 
FPOs hold fertilizer licences, 6,741 FPOs possess seed licences and 4,846 FPOs 
have pesticide licences. 
FPOs are increasingly focusing on processing, value addition and digital 
marketing of agricultural products. Around 6,934 FPOs have established their 
presence on the Open Network for Digital Commerce platform for online sale of 
products, while many FPOs are actively involved in processing and value addition 
activities to improve farmer income and market reach. 
The business performance of FPOs has improved significantly in recent years. 
During FY 2024-25, FPOs recorded a turnover of ₹9,022.26 crore. The cumulative 
turnover since the formation of these FPOs has crossed 20,340 crore. 
The growing turnover and expanding services indicate that FPOs are emerging 
as strong farmer-led enterprises, helping improve market access, value addition and 
rural livelihoods. 
 
[Ministry of Agriculture & Farmers Welfare 
(Department of Agriculture & Farmers Welfare) 
F. No.6-1/2026-B&A dated 29th May, 2026] 
  

51 
 
CHAPTER - III 
 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO NOT 
DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE GOVERNMENT’S REPLIES 
 
Importance of Farm Labourer  and the Need for Their Inclusion in the Mandate 
of Department of Agriculture and Farmers Welfare 
Recommendation No. 4 
 The Committee are of the view that Farm Labourers are an important 
component of the Agricultural ecosystem in the country. Farm Labourers face unique 
& diverse challenges which are totally different than faced by any other class of 
Labourers including industrial labourers. In the current welfare measures being 
implemented by the Ministry right focus is being accorded for farmer welfare, but the 
labour which provides the necessary workforce in the agriculture fields is unable to 
reap the benefit as they do not own the land which they till. The Committee feel that 
the Department of Agriculture & Farmers Welfare (DA&FW) should make concerted 
efforts for identifying the unique challenges being faced by the labourers working on 
the farms. The Committee further note that while the   Ministry of Labour is the nodal 
Ministry to implement the welfare schemes for the labour class in the country, however 
farm labour being a distinct category and are different from industrial labour. As such, 
the agriculture labour are not identified as workmen/industrial labour and they are 
unable to reap the benefits being accorded to industrial labourers viz. Medical Care, 
Insurance and social Security. In this backdrop the Committee recommend that the 
Ministry Agriculture & Farmers Welfare (DA&FW) should consider to widen the ambit 
of component of Farmer Welfare and should include the welfare of Farm Labourers 
within its scope. The Committee also recommend that the Ministry needs to identify 
programmes, schemes, missions etc for their inclusion in specific social security 
schemes such as pension funds, Pradhan Mantri Suraksha Bima Yojana, and 
maternity benefits tailored specifically for agricultural labourers. 
Reply of the Government 
The Ministry of Labour & Employment is the nodal Ministry for labour welfare. 
As per the provisions of the Unorganised Workers "Social Security Act (UWSS), 2008," 

52 
 
the Government is committed to provide Social Security to all the workers of the 
unorganised sector including farm labourers by formulating suitable welfare schemes 
on the matters relating to: 
(i) life and disability cover; (ii) health and maternity benefits; (iii) old age protection; 
and (iv) any other benefit as may be determined by the Central Government. 
 
 Life and Disability cover is provided through Pradhan Mantri Jeevan Jyoti Bima 
Yojana (PMJJBY) and Pradhan Mantri Suraksha Bima Yojana (PMSBY). The health 
and maternity benefits are insured through Ayushman Bharat Pradhan Mantri Jan 
Arogya Yojana (AB-PMJAY). Old age protection is provided through Pradhan Mantri 
Shram Yogi Maan-Dhan (PM-SYM) pension scheme which provides monthly pension 
of Rs. 3000/- after attaining the age of 60 years. Apart from these schemes, Atal 
Pension Yojana, Public Distribution System under National Food Security Act, Viksit 
Bharat Guarantee for Rozgar and Ajeevika Mission (Gramin) [VB-G RAM G] Act, 2025, 
Deen Dayal Upadhyay Gramin Kaushal Yojana, Pradhan Mantri Awas Yojana, 
National Social Assistance Programme, Gareeb Kalyan Rojgar Yojana, Deen Dayal 
Upadhyay Antyodaya Yojana, PMSVA Nidhi, Pradhan Mantri Kaushal Vikas Yojana are 
also available to the unorganised workers including labour in agriculture and allied 
sector, depending upon their eligibility criteria. 
 
[Ministry of Agriculture & Farmers Welfare 
(Department of Agriculture & Farmers Welfare) 
F. No.6-1/2026-B&A dated 29th May, 2026] 
 
Pradhan Mantri Fasal Bima Yojana (PMFBY) 
Recommendation No. 9 
 
The Committee note that Pradhan Mantri Fasal Bima Yojana (PMFBY) was 
launched in 2016 to provide financial support to farmers in the event of crop failure 
and since then, it has removed the capping on premiums and lowered farmer premium 
rates. The Committee feel that Post-Harvest Losses (PHL) component may require 
further attention under the scheme. 
The flaws in area approach in PMFBY needs to be rectified to protect farmers. 
The data regarding yield of crops is still largely collected through manual Crop Cutting 
Experiments (CCEs), which are slow, labour intensive and prone to human error or 
manipulation. Due to the delay in conducting CCEs and submitting data, claim 

53 
 
settlements often happen months after the damage, sometimes even in the next 
season. This delays in getting instant relief for the farmer. Post-harvest losses is 
currently restricted only to crops kept in "cut and spread" condition in the field, which 
is a very small and narrow window. The definition in PMFBY must be expanded to 
include losses occurring during pre and post harvest crops damaged due to lightning, 
fire, hailstorms, stray or wild animals, rodent & locust infestation irrespective of the 
percentage. Further, losses incurred during transportation, threshing, and temporary 
storage at the farm level, in gunny bags or open courtyards for up to four weeks after 
harvest may also be covered. A "Crop Losses Reporting App" needs to be mandated 
in the guidelines where farmers can upload geo-tagged photos of damaged harvested 
produce within 48 hours of the event subsequently followed by assessment of damage 
by drones which will expedite the claim process faster. 
The Committee recommend that Pradhan Mantri Fasal Bima Yojana need to 
become a truly comprehensive one to usher into a latest version of itself, by evolving 
from a "Crop Yield Scheme" to a "Farm Income Protection Scheme" and for this to 
materialize, a shift from “Yield insurance” to “Value Chain insurance” needs to be 
adopted. and include Post-Harvest Losses by using a blend of technology such as 
drones& digital apps for assessment and actuarial reforms to cover the extended 
storage period post harvest. A “Post Harvest Clause” may be inserted into PMFBY to 
include losses from fire, natural calamities, losses occurring during transportation, 
threshing, and temporary storage at the farm level, kept in gunny bags or open 
courtyards for up to four weeks after harvest to enlarge the existing safety net. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
PMFBY is mainly implemented on 'Area Approach basis and provides 
comprehensive risk coverage for notified crops of eligible farmers against all non-
preventable natural risks from pre-sowing to post-harvest stages of the crops at very 
minimum premium for the farmers. Under PMFBY, Gram Panchayat has been 
provided as unit of insurance and yield estimation is done at an aggregated level 
through Crop Cutting Experiments (CCEs) conducted in the unit of insurance. 
 
Implementation of scheme at farm level rather than area approach would 
require crop yield estimation at farm level itself through Crop Cutting Experiments 

54 
 
which would be cost intensive for State/UTs, considering the large number of farm 
parcels getting insured under the scheme, owing to administrative, technical, 
manpower and financial issues. Further, the current level of available technical 
solutions are also not sufficiently mature to estimate crop yield at farm level owing to 
highly diversified cropping practices and fragmented land parcels. 
 
Therefore, at present crop yield estimation is done at Insurance Unit level 
through CCES and based on which the yield loss and claim compensation is 
calculated. However, in order to address the crop losses at individual farm level, 
provision of localized losses has been made in the scheme to cater to such localized 
crop risks arising from localized calamities arising out of hailstorm, inundation, 
landslide, natural fire, cloud burst, cyclone, cyclonic rains etc. 
 
Coverage is also available under the scheme for post-harvest losses, up to a 
maximum period of two weeks from harvesting, for those crops which are required to 
be dried in cut and spread / small, bundled condition depending on requirement of the 
crops in that area and left in the field after harvesting, against specific perils of 
hailstorm, cyclone, cyclonic rains and unseasonal rains. 
 
Individual losses including that for post-harvest losses are done through joint 
loss assessment surveys carried out by the representatives of Insurance Company, 
District Administration/State Government's/UT Administration's Nodal Department and 
Farmers. To ensure transparency in such individual crop loss assessment, a Crop 
Loss Assessment App (CLAP) has been made mandatory from Kharif 2025 to digitally 
record the loss percentage recorded during physical survey. 
 
However, losses arising due to transportation, threshing, and temporary 
storage kept in gunny bags or open courtyards for up to four weeks after harvest etc. 
is not in the scope of PMFBY owing to technical and operational difficulties in dealing 
with moral hazard, validating the risks and corresponding quantum of losses in such 
cases. 
Further, based on the experience gained, improvisation in technology solutions, 
views of various stakeholders and to ensure better transparency, accountability, timely 
payment of claims to the farmers and to make the scheme more farmer friendly, Gol 

55 
 
has revised the Operational Guidelines of the scheme from time to time and shall 
continue to do the same in coming future. 
 
PMFBY envisages adoption of improved/innovative technology in 
implementation of the scheme. Accordingly, Government has introduced following 
technology to bring transparency and ensure timely settlement of claims: 
 
i.  YES-TECH (Yield Estimation System Based on Technology) for gradual 
migration to Remote-Sensing based yield estimation to help assess yields 
as well as fair and accurate Crop Yield Estimation. This initiative has been 
launched for paddy & wheat crops from Kharif 2023 wherein minimum 30% 
weightage to yield estimation have been mandatorily assigned to YES-TECH 
derived yield. Soybean crop has been added from Kharif 2024 season. 
Weightage to YESTECH based yield is envisaged to be gradually increased 
over the time. 
ii.  WINDS (Weather Information Network and Data System) for setting up of 
Network of Automatic Weather Stations (AWS) & Automatic Rain-Gauges 
(ARG) at Block level & Gram Panchayat respectively for collecting hyper-
local weather data. This will be fed into a National database with 
interoperability & sharing of data in coordination with India Meteorological 
Department (IMD). WINDS provides data not only for YES-TECH but also for 
effective drought & disaster management, accurate weather prediction and 
offering better parametric insurance products. 
[Ministry of Agriculture & Farmers Welfare 
(Department of Agriculture & Farmers Welfare) 
F. No.6-1/2026-B&A dated 29th May, 2026] 
 
 
National Horticulture Board (NHB) 
Recommendation No. 15 
 
The Committee note that National Horticulture Board (NHB) plays an important 
role in developing Post-Harvest infrastructure (PHI) and promoting high-tech 
Horticulture. The Committee feel that NHB needs to engage itself more proactively 
and act as a catalyst to transform the landscape of Post Harvest Infrastructure and 
high-tech Horticulture. 

56 
 
 
The Committee recommend that NHB needs to completely digitize its operations, 
focus on integrated value chains, and link horticulture directly to export markets. For 
the farmers who are not tech savvy, options to need to be given to them to submit their 
application in physical copies. The administrative processes in NHB schemes also 
needs to be streamlined to expedite approvals and 100% of subsidies need to be 
transferred directly to the beneficiary's bank account, removing intermediaries and 
state-level bottlenecks. NHB should mandate the creation of integrated "Pack Houses" 
linked to cold storages and transport. NHB schemes need to be aligned with 
Agriculture Infrastructure Fund (AIF) to provide interest subvention, making capital 
cheaper for entrepreneurs setting up processing units. The Committee also 
recommend that NHB should register Geographical Indication (GI) tags for horticultural 
produce and create an umbrella brand for Indian agro produce for international 
marketing and also promote bio fortified varieties. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
National Horticulture Board (NHB) is already functioning as a proactive catalyst 
in the transformation of post-harvest infrastructure and high-tech horticulture across 
the country.  Financial assistance in the form of back-ended subsidies is being 
provided for the establishment of a wide range of post-harvest infrastructure, including 
cold storages, ripening chambers, pack houses, reefer vans, on-farm cold rooms, pre-
cooling units, and primary processing facilities. Importantly, these components are 
being promoted both as standalone units and as integrated components of production 
systems, thereby strengthening the entire value chain. Further, the cost norms for such 
infrastructure have been revised periodically in line with prevailing market rates to 
ensure greater viability and enhanced participation by stakeholders. 
 
NHB has already achieved end-to-end digitization of its core operations. The 
processes of application submission, scrutiny, query resolution, sanction, and 
monitoring are fully online under all major schemes, including the Horticulture Cluster 
Development Programme and capital investment schemes. This digital transformation 
has significantly enhanced transparency. efficiency, and accountability. 
Simultaneously, NHB's interventions are inherently aligned with the development of 

57 
 
integrated value chains, with increasing emphasis on export-oriented horticulture 
clusters and infrastructure. 
While the concern is appreciated, it is submitted that permitting physical 
applications may dilute the objectives of transparency, efficiency, and traceability 
achieved through digitization. Instead, NHB has adopted a facilitative approach by 
extending on-ground support through its regional offices and field functionaries, who 
assist farmers and entrepreneurs in online application submission. Additionally, 
simplified procedures, reduction in documentation requirements, and availability of 
model project reports on the NHB website have substantially eased access for 
stakeholders. 
NHB has already undertaken significant reforms to streamline its administrative 
processes. Timelines for processing have been rationalized, and all eligible subsidies 
are being released directly to beneficiaries' bank accounts through DBT, thereby 
eliminating intermediaries and minimizing delays. These measures have enhanced 
efficiency, reduced transaction costs, and ensured transparency in fund disbursement. 
NHB schemes already promote the development of integrated pack houses 
linked with cold chain and logistics infrastructure as a core design principle. Further, 
NHB schemes are well aligned with the Agriculture Infrastructure Fund, enabling 
beneficiaries to avail interest subvention and credit support. In fact, a substantial 
proportion of projects currently being assisted by NHB are also leveraging benefits 
under AIF through institutional credit, thereby reducing the overall cost of capital and 
enhancing project viability. 
NHB has previously facilitated Gl registration for select horticultural products 
such as Malihabadi Mango and Dindori wine. Building upon this experience, NHB will 
proactively support the identification and registration of additional horticultural 
products with Gl potential. in coordination with relevant stakeholders. Further, efforts 
will be aligned towards contributing to the development of a unified branding strategy 
for 
In summary, NHB has already undertaken substantial reforms and initiatives 
aligned with the Committee's recommendations and remains committed to further 
strengthening its role as a catalyst in the holistic development of the horticulture sector. 
[Ministry of Agriculture & Farmers Welfare 
(Department of Agriculture & Farmers Welfare) 
F. No.6-1/2026-B&A dated 29th May, 2026] 

58 
 
 
Educational Support for Children of Small and Semi-Medium Farmers 
Recommendation No. 17 
 
The Committee observes that small and semi-medium farmers form the 
backbone of India’s agricultural economy. However, many farming households 
continue to face financial distress due to low and uncertain farm incomes, rising input 
costs and indebtedness.  
In view of this situation, the Committee is of the considered opinion that the State 
must extend stronger social and educational support to the families of farmers. The 
Committee, therefore, recommend that the Government of India, through the Ministry 
of Agriculture & Farmers Welfare in coordination with the Ministry of Education, 
introduce a National Scholarship Scheme for the Children of Small and Semi-Medium 
Farmers, with special provisions for the children of farmers affected by extreme 
financial distress. 
 
[Ministry of Agriculture & Farmers Welfare 
(Department of Agriculture & Farmers Welfare) 
F. No.6-1/2026-B&A dated 29th May, 2026] 
 
Educational Support for Children of Small and Semi-Medium Farmers 
Recommendation No. 18 
 The Committee recommend that before concluding any bilateral or 
multilateral agreements which affect the farming sector, appropriate consultations may 
be held with the relevant stakeholders. 
 
Reply of the Government 
As per Allocation of Government Business Rules, matters relating to children's 
education are assigned to the Ministry of Education, which is responsible for policy 
formulation, implementation, coordination, and regulation of school education across 
the country. Ministry of Education's schemes for scholarships for children at school & 
college levels also cover children of small & marginal farmers. 
With regard to bilateral and multilateral agreements, consultations are with 
different Ministries like commerce, Finance etc. These agreements are impacted by 

59 
 
geo political situations, national requirement and multiple other factors such as global 
trade market scenarios.  
[Ministry of Agriculture & Farmers Welfare 
(Department of Agriculture & Farmers Welfare) 
F. No.6-1/2026-B&A dated 29th May, 2026] 
 
Subsidy on EV Tractors 
Recommendation No. 19 
 
The Committee feel that EV (Electric Vehicle) tractors are vital for sustainable 
farming as they cut diesel emissions significantly thereby promoting a greener planet 
with lesser carbon emissions. They also promote energy independence via solar 
charging and align them with India's net-zero goals. 
The Committee recommend that proportionate subsidies may be given on EV 
Tractors to that of Diesel Tractors to make them economically feasible and boost their 
acceptance among the farmers especially Small and Marginal farmers. The 
Committee also recommend that infrastructure relating to EV charging facilities may 
also be scaled up in rural areas to make EV tractors popular among the farmers. 
Reply of the Government 
 
The Department of Agriculture & Farmers Welfare (DA&FW) is promoting 
adoption of advanced, energy-efficient, and environment-friendly agricultural 
machinery under the Sub-Mission on Agricultural Mechanization (SMAM). Electric and 
battery-operated agricultural equipment such as electric sprayers, power weeders, 
brush cutters etc. are eligible for financial assistance 
The Department encourages use of cleaner and energy-efficient technologies 
in agriculture to reduce dependence on fossil fuels, lower operational costs, and 
minimize environmental pollution. State Governments are encouraged to demonstrate 
and popularize electric-operated agricultural machinery suitable for local farming 
conditions. 
Agricultural machinery, including electric-powered equipment are tested and 
evaluated through designated testing centres to ensure safety, efficiency, and 
suitability for Indian agricultural conditions. 
[Ministry of Agriculture & Farmers Welfare 
(Department of Agriculture & Farmers Welfare) 
F. No.6-1/2026-B&A dated 29th May, 2026] 

60 
 
CHAPTER - IV 
 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF 
THE GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE 
 
Need for Enhancement of Budgetary Allocation to Department 
Recommendation No. 2 
The Committee observe that the proportion of budgetary allocation made in 
favour of the Department in terms of the percentage of the total Central outlay for the 
years 2022-23, 2023-24, 2024-25, 2025-26 and 2026-27 stood at 3.14%, 2.57%, 
2.54%, 2.51% and 2.44% respectively. This shows continuous decline in the 
allocations to the Department as proportion of Central Plan outlay. 
The Committee note that Agriculture and allied activities account for 46.1 % of 
the country’s workforce but contribute only one-fifth of India’s national income at 
current prices. This disparity highlights the Agriculture sector's vulnerability and the 
urgent need for increased public investment. Agriculture remains the backbone of 
India’s growth trajectory given the fact that the sector employs a large share of 
workforce. The Committee feel that investment in agriculture has a higher multiplier 
effect on poverty reduction than investment in many other sectors. Strengthening 
agricultural performance is therefore important for inclusive growth, economic stability 
and ensuring food security. 
The Committee recommend that the budgetary allocation to the Department of 
Agriculture & Farmers Welfare(DA&FW) is a strategic investment in the nation's 
economic sovereignty& not just a welfare measure and more importantly, to 
complement and supplement the overarching goal of the Union government in 
doubling farmers' income effectively. Enhanced budgetary allocation will enable the 
Department to potently counter the challenges of Climate Change, fragmented 
landholdings, increasing disruptions in global supply chains, market volatility and so 
on as these require a swift and robust financial response. Enhanced budgetary 
allocations to the Department will facilitate in its transition from subsistence farming to 
sustainable agri-business, thereby ensuring food security for the nation and prosperity 
for the Annadata (food provider). 
 

61 
 
Reply of the Government 
The Department agrees that agriculture plays a vital role in ensuring food 
security, inclusive growth, livelihood generation, and economic stability of the country. 
Despite challenges such as climate change, fragmented landholdings, market 
volatility, and global supply chain disruptions, the Government remains committed to 
strengthening the agriculture sector through various flagship schemes, policy 
interventions, technological advancements, and farmer-centric initiatives. 
Efforts are continuously being made by the Department to ensure efficient 
utilization of available resources and to prioritize investments in productivity 
enhancement, agri-infrastructure, digital agriculture, natural farming, crop 
diversification, market access etc. 
Budget Estimates 2026-27 of the Department of Agriculture & Farmers Welfare 
have been enhanced to Rs. 1,30,561.38 crore as compared to the Budget Estimates 
2025-26 of Rs. 1,27,290.16 crore, reflecting the continued commitment of the 
Government towards the agriculture and allied sectors. In case additional requirement 
of funds arises during the course of the financial year, the Department will take up the 
matter with the Ministry of Finance for enhancement of allocation at the Revised 
Estimates (RE) stage, as per requirement and after following due procedure. 
[Ministry of Agriculture & Farmers Welfare 
(Department of Agriculture & Farmers Welfare) 
F. No.6-1/2026-B&A dated 29th May, 2026] 
 
Comments of the Committee 
(For comments of the Committee, please refer to Para No. 1.8 of Chapter-I of this 
Report.)  
 
Need to Enhance Rate of Growth in Capital Formation in Agriculture 
Recommendation No. 3 
 
The Committee note that Agriculture is the backbone of our economy & 
dependence on Nature enhances the risk quotient of our Agriculture and this is 
precisely where high growth rate of Capital formation in agriculture can effectively 
mitigate the risks arising due to natural calamities.  It is a proven fact that the growth 

62 
 
of capital formation is a vital prerequisite for agricultural development. Capital 
Formation in Agriculture refers to investment in- 
(i)   creating physical assets such as infrastructure (ii) upgradation and honing of 
skills of human resources; and (iii) institutional capacity to boost productivity.  
Sustained growth in agricultural output and farmer incomes depends mainly on 
higher capital formation in agriculture. The rate of growth in Capital Formation in 
Agriculture is essential to enhance productivity as the most significant impact of 
increase in capital formation is the increase in yield per hectare. Growth in agricultural 
capital creates demand for industrial goods such as fertilizers, pesticides and so on. 
Increased agricultural output supplies raw materials to industries such as textiles and 
food processing. Strong infrastructure enables farmers in getting higher price 
realization for their agricultural produce. Thus, capital formation in agriculture acts as 
an engine for overall industrial growth too. 
The growth rate in Capital Formation (at current prices) in Agriculture and Allied 
Sector during the year 2019-20 was 5.1% which rose to 22.8% during the period 2020-
21, then fell down to 15.5% in the year 2021-22, increased marginally during 2022-23 
to 16.1% and then fell significantly to 9.6% during the period 2023-24. 
The Committee also note that the budget outlay for Agriculture & Farmers 
Welfare was Rs. 1,24,000 Crore in 2022-23 whereas the total Budget outlay of the 
Union Government was Rs. 39,44,908.6 Crore for the same period. Similarly, the 
budgetary allocation to Agriculture in 2026-27 BE is Rs. 130,561.38 Crore whereas 
the total budget outlay of the Union Government is Rs. 53,47,315 Crore. Simply put, 
from 2022-23 to 2026-27, there is an increase of Rs.6561.38 Crore in Budgetary 
allocation for Agriculture and Farmers Welfare whereas the Total Budget outlay of the 
Union Government increased by Rs. 14,02,406.34 Crore during the same period which 
indicates that the budgetary allocation for Agriculture did not get an increase in the 
same proportion. The Actual Expenditure in total Scheme Budget (Central Sector+ 
Centrally Sponsored Schemes) of Agriculture in 2020-21 was Rs.1,08,090.13 Crore, 
out of which the  Actual expenditure incurred on PM-KISAN and Pradhan Mantri Fasal 
Bima Yojana (PMFBY) was Rs. 75151.38 Crore, which translates into Actual 
Expenditure of Rs. 32938.75 Crore on other heads including creation of Capital 
Assets. This meant that around 69.53% of total Scheme Budget of Agriculture was 
spent on payment to farmers and Insurance companies during the period 2020-21. 
Similarly, the Actual Expenditure in Total Scheme Budget (Central Sector+ Centrally 

63 
 
Sponsored Schemes) of Agriculture in 2024-25 was Rs. 128763.55 Crore, out of which 
the Actual expenditure incurred on PM-KISAN and PMFBY was Rs. 80594.66 Crore, 
which results into Actual Expenditure of Rs. 48168.89 Crore on other heads including 
creation of Capital Assets. This meant that around 62.59% of total Scheme Budget of 
Agriculture was spent on payment to farmers and Insurance companies during the 
period 2024-25. Simply put, majority of the expenditure of total Scheme Budget of 
Agriculture goes on payments being made to Farmers and Insurance companies, 
leaving less for investment in Capital Assets and modernization of Agriculture including 
creating resilience against Climate Change.  
The Committee recommend the Government to enhance investments 
significantly in Capital, human and institutional assets in agriculture to ensure that the 
rate of Capital Formation in Agriculture and Allied Sector does not come below 15% 
as the growth in rate of capital formation in agriculture is not merely an economic 
metric but a strategic imperative to ensure food security, economic stability and 
stimulate industrial growth. 
Reply of the Government 
Agriculture is a State subject, Government of India supports the States through 
appropriate policy measures, budgetary allocation and various schemes.  The 
Government has substantially enhanced the budget allocation of Department of 
Agriculture & Farmers Welfare (DA&FW) from Rs. 21,933.50 crore BE during 2013-14 
to Rs. 1,30561.39 crore BE during 2026-27. Government of India has identified 
following measures/strategies to increase the farmers' income and comprehensive 
growth of agriculture sector:- 
(i)  Increase crop production/productivity 
(ii)  Reduce cost of production 
(iii)  Remunerative returns of farmers' produce to enhance their incomes. 
(iv)  Agricultural diversification 
(v)  Developing post harvest value addition 
(vi)  Adaptation to climate change for sustainable agriculture and mitigate against crop 
losses 

64 
 
To enhance investments significantly in Capital, human and institutional assets 
in Agriculture Sector, the following major schemes/programmes are being 
implemented by the Government; 
(1)  Agriculture Infrastructure Fund (AIF) The Agriculture Infrastructure Fund 
(AIF) is a Central Sector scheme aimed at strengthening post-harvest management 
and farm infrastructure through medium- to long-term debt financing. With a corpus of 
1 lakh crore, the scheme provides loans through banks and financial institutions with 
an interest subvention of 3% per annum and credit guarantee coverage for loans up 
to 22 crore. It supports a wide range of beneficiaries including farmers, agri-
entrepreneurs, FPOs, SHGs, PACS, and cooperatives. The scheme promotes the 
creation of infrastructure such as warehouses, cold storage, logistics facilities, 
processing units, and modern technology-based farming systems like precision 
agriculture, drones, and IoT, with the overall aim of reducing post-harvest losses and 
increasing farmers' income. The scheme provides Convergence facility with central / 
state schemes. As on 15.05.2026, under AIF, Rs. 89,190.91 crore are sanctioned for 
1,99,178 projects. These projects have mobilized an investment of Rs. 141352.29 Cr 
crore in agriculture sector. 
(2)  Integrated Scheme for Agriculture Marketing (ISAM) - ISAM supports state 
governments in governing the agricultural produce marketing through creation and 
improvement of market structures, capacity building and generating access to market 
information. 
(A)  Agriculture Marketing Infrastructure Scheme: 
AMI plays an important role in strengthening the agricultural marketing 
ecosystem. It promotes modernization, reduces post-harvest losses, and increases 
market efficiency. 
Under Agricultural Marketing Infrastructure (AMI), the subsidy @ 33.33% for 
NER, hilly area, Women/SC/ST promoters, PACS & FPOs etc. and @25% for others 
is available for storage projects and agriculture marketing infrastructure projects. From 
the inception of the scheme up to 11 May 2026, a total of 49,796 storage infrastructure 
projects in the country were supported, resulting in the creation of 98.294 million metric 
tons of storage capacity and a subsidy of ₹4,832.70 crore was released. In addition, 

65 
 
besides storage, 25,009 marketing infrastructure projects were supported with a 
subsidy of 22,193.17 crore. 
(B)  National Agriculture Market (e-NAM): 
An all-India electronic trading (e-trading) portal aims to link existing physical 
agricultural marketing committees (APMCs) through a virtual platform to create a 
unified national market for agricultural commodities. The portal serves as a single 
window for all information and services related to APMCs, including arrivals of 
commodities, quality and price, provisions for responding to buy-sell proposals, trade 
proposals, and other services such as direct electronic payment settlement into 
farmers' accounts. A total of 1,656 mandis in 23 states and 4 union territories have 
been connected through the e-NAM platform so far. 
(3)  Mission for Integrated Development of Horticulture (MIDH) Mission for 
Integrated Development of Horticulture (MIDH), a Centrally Sponsored Scheme is 
being implemented w.c.f. 2014-15, for holistic growth of the horticulture sector covering 
fruits, vegetables, root and tuber crops, mushrooms, spices, flowers, aromatic& 
medicinal plants, coconut, cashew, cocoa and bamboo. 
Under the Mission, an additional area of 16.24 lakh hectares under horticulture 
crops has been covered for area expansion. In the area of water resource 
management, 60,009 water harvesting structures have been created. Under 
horticulture mechanization, 2.97 lakh horticulture mechanization equipment have been 
distributed. Organic farming has been adopted in an area of 52,459 hectares for 
promotion of organic cultivation of horticultural crops. In addition, 16.45 lakh bee 
colonies with hives have been distributed under beekeeping activities. Under the Post 
Harvest Management component, 1.65 lakh units, including pack houses, cold storage 
units, refrigerated vans, primary/mobile processing units, ripening chambers, pre-
cooling units attached to cold storages, and mobile pre-cooling units, have been 
established. Further, 22,226 market infrastructures have been set up. Under the 
Human Resource Development (HRD) component, 11.39 lakh farmers have been 
trained in various horticulture activities. Moreover, 58 crop-specific Centres of 
Excellence have been established under Indo-Israel Cooperation, Indo-Dutch 
Cooperation, and Research Institutes. In the cold storage sector, 1,634 cold storage 
infrastructures with a total capacity of 7.41 million tonnes have been created. 

66 
 
(4) Sub Mission on Agricultural Mechanization (SMAM) Under the Sub-Mission 
on Agricultural Mechanization (SMAM) and Crop Residue Management (CRM) 
schemes, financial assistance is provided to farmers, Farmer Producer Organizations 
(FPOs), cooperatives, entrepreneurs and Custom Hiring Centres for procurement of 
advanced agricultural machinery and crop residue management equipment. These 
interventions promote creation of durable farm assets, enhance productivity, improve 
operational efficiency, reduce labour dependency and strengthen farm-level 
infrastructure. The establishment of Custom Hiring Centres has also improved access 
to mechanization for small and marginal farmers. 
(5)  National Mission on Edible Oils (NMEO)-Oil Palm Under NMEO-OP, 
comprehensive support is provided to farmers, including assistance for high-quality 
planting material, inputs for intercropping, and maintenance during four-year gestation 
period, as well as replanting of old and unproductive plantations. Additional inputs such 
as farm machinery and irrigation facilities are also supported. 
Since the launch of NMEO-OP, a total area of 2.7 lakh hectares has been 
brought under oil palm cultivation, contributing to a cumulative area of 6.4 lakh 
hectares as on 31.03.2026. In terms of production, 114.66 lakh tonnes of Fresh Fruit 
Bunches (FFBs) have been harvested, resulting in the production of 20.10 lakh tonnes 
of Crude Palm Oil (CPO) during 2021-22 to 2025-26 under the mission. At present, 27 
operational oil palm processing mills with a total processing capacity of 918.5 MTH 
are functioning across the country. In addition, 153 seed nurseries with a combined 
annual capacity of 500.43 lakh planting materials have been established. Further, a 
total of seven seed gardens have become functional across the country, while seven 
more seed gardens are expected to commence production within the next 2 to 8 years. 
(6)  National Mission on Edible Oils (NMEO)-Oil Seeds Under NMEO-OS, free 
seeds are distributed to farmers up to one hectare per farmer and training conducted 
under the Value Chain Cluster (VCC). Demonstrations also being conducted for newly 
released varieties and technologies to improve productivity. Support is also provided 
for establishment of oil mills to ensure remunerative prices to oilseed farmers. 
Oilseeds production has increased from 405.40 lakh tonnes to 429.89 lakh 
tonnes, while the area under cultivation has expanded from 291.00 lakh hectares to 
304.40 lakh hectares. The average yield has also improved from 1,393 kg per hectare 

67 
 
to 1,412 kg per hectare. Further. domestic edible oil production has increased from 
121.75 lakh tonnes to 126.63 lakh tonnes. 
The mission has shown significant progress during 2025-26. Against the target 
of establishing 600 Value Chain Clusters, a total of 1,076 clusters have been 
established. Similarly, against the target of covering 10.00 lakh hectares under area 
expansion, an achievement of 13.35 lakh hectares has been recorded. Under the 
Seed Hub component, 60 Seed Hubs have been established against the target of 65, 
while the target of establishing 50 Seed Storage units has been fully achieved. Further, 
under the Post-Harvest Infrastructure component, 400 infrastructures have been 
established against the target of 661. 
(7)  Formation and Promotion of 10,000 FPOs It is aimed at collectivizing small 
and marginal farmers to empower them in an organized manner. Under this scheme, 
newly formed FPOs are provided with necessary guidance and assistance in various 
aspects including management, inputs, production, processing, value addition, market 
linkage, credit facilities, and technology usage for a period of 5 years after their 
formation. 
Under the scheme, 10,000 FPOs (Farmer Producer Organizations) have been 
registered, comprising 6.23 million farmer shareholders.6,732 FPOs have obtained 
seed licenses, 6,479 FPOs have obtained fertilizer licenses, and 4,84 FPOs have 
obtained pesticide licenses. 
Out of the 10,000 registered FPOs, equity grants of 2577.68 crore have been 
released to 7,912 FPOs, and 1,532 FPOs have received the full equity assistance of 
₹15 lakh. 5,953 FPOS have been registered on the e-NAM platform for the sale of 
integrated products, while 6,864 FPOs under the scheme have been on boarded on 
the Open Network for Digital Commerce (ONDC). 62.69 Lakh Shareholder in FPO. 
781.02 Cr Management Cost has been released against 9803 FPOs. Since the launch 
of the FPO scheme, the total cumulative turnover of FPOS has reached ₹20,340.73 
crore. 
(8) Per Drop More Crop (PDMC) - It focuses on enhancing water use efficiency at 
farm level through Micro Irrigation technologies namely Drip and Sprinkler irrigation 
systems. Micro Irrigation helps in water saving as well as reduced fertilizer usage, 
labour expenses, other input costs and overall income enhancement of farmers. 

68 
 
Other Interventions (OI) activities also supported under the scheme to 
supplement source creation for micro irrigation. Ol activities must be linked with Micro 
Irrigation to make potential use of the available funds for higher water use efficiency. 
The amount for Ol activities is allowed up to 20% of the total allocation for States/UTs 
and up to 40% for North East States, Himalayan States & UTs of Jammu Kashmir and 
Ladakh. 
From 2015-16 to 2025-26, Central Assistance of Rs. 26368.67 crore provided 
to States under PDMC scheme. From 2015-16 to 2025-26, an area of 110 lakh ha has 
been covered under Micro Irrigation in the Country which is about 134% higher as 
compared to the Pre-PDMC period. About 100 lakh farmers have been benefitted in 
the country through the scheme. During 2026-27, so far Central Assistance of Rs. 
1282.12 crore provided to States under PDMC scheme. 
(9) Agri SURE (Agri Fund for Startups and Rural Enterprises) It is a SEBI 
registered Category II Alternative Investment Fund (AIF) designed to support 
innovative, technology-driven, high-risk and high-impact startups working in 
agriculture and allied sectors. The Fund aims to strengthen the agri-startup ecosystem 
by providing growth capital and enabling innovation-led transformation in rural India. 
The Fund has a total corpus of 750 crore and is managed by NABVENTURES Ltd., a 
wholly owned subsidiary of NABARD. 
Under the Direct Scheme, investment approvals amounting to 2145 crore have 
been accorded to six startups, with around 295 crore already disbursed to four 
startups. Under the FoF Scheme, investment approvals amounting to ₹160 crore have 
been accorded to nine AlFs, with disbursement of 36.77 crore across six AIFs. 
Agri SURE represents a pioneering public-private investment platform for 
promoting innovation-led agricultural transformation in India. By blending government 
support, institutional capital, and private investment expertise, the Fund is nurturing 
high-impact startups capable of improving productivity, strengthening rural livelihoods, 
generating employment, enhancing farmer incomes, and building resilient agricultural 
value chains across the country. 
(10)  Sub-Mission on Agriculture Extension (SMAE) - It aims to strengthen the 
agricultural extension system by promoting the dissemination of modern technologies, 
capacity building, and timely advisory services to farmers across the country through 

69 
 
initiatives such as ATMA, Kisan Call Centres (KCCs), and Mass Media Support to 
Agricultural Extension. ATMA is a Centrally Sponsored scheme being implemented in 
734 districts of 28 States & 5 UTs. It aims to make available the latest agricultural 
technologies in different thematic areas to increase agricultural production through 
extension activities viz. Farmers Training, Demonstrations, Exposure Visits, Kisan 
Mela, Mobilization of Farmers Groups and Setting up of Farm Schools. 
During the current Financial Year 2025-26 (Upto March, 2026) a total of 
50,91,811 farmers have been benefitted under the scheme. From 2014-15 to 2025-26 
(up to March, 2026) a total of 4,75,42,028 farmers have been benefitted under the 
scheme. 
Apart from the above, the Government of India has launched the Prime 
Minister Dhan Dhaanya Krishi Yojana (DDKY), which was announced in the Union 
Budget 2025-26 and formally launched on 11th October, 2025 to cover 100 districts 
across the country. The scheme aims to promote integrated and sustainable 
agricultural development through effective planning. implementation, monitoring and 
convergence of various schemes and interventions at the district level. PMDDKY 
further seeks to enhance agricultural productivity, increase adoption of crop 
diversification and sustainable agricultural practices, augment post-harvest storage 
facilities at the panchayat and block levels, improve irrigation facilities and facilitate 
availability of both long-term and short-term credit. The scheme is being implemented 
through convergence of existing schemes and does not have a separate budget 
provision. 
(11) Rashtriya Krishi Vikas Yojana - Under PM-RKVY, about 97.5% of the scheme 
allocation is earmarked for implementation of State projects focused on increasing 
agricultural production, improving quality inputs, value addition, infrastructure 
development and other location-specific interventions. States are also empowered to 
organize skill development and capacity-building programmes for farmers based on 
their priorities. Further, 2.5% of the scheme funds is available for administrative 
expenditure, including engagement of consultants, technical personnel and 
establishment of Project Management Units (PMUs) for effective monitoring and 
evaluation. 
 

70 
 
[Ministry of Agriculture & Farmers Welfare 
(Department of Agriculture & Farmers Welfare) 
F. No.6-1/2026-B&A dated 29th May, 2026] 
 
Comments of the Committee 
(For comments of the Committee, please refer to Para No. 1.11 of Chapter-I of this 
Report.)  
 
  

71 
 
CHAPTER - V 
 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH FINAL 
REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT ARE STILL AWAITED 
 
 
 
 
--NIL-- 
 
 
 
 
  NEW DELHI;                          CHARANJIT SINGH CHANNI  
11 August, 2026                                                               Chairperson, 
20 Shravana, 1948 (Saka)                        Standing Committee on Agriculture
       Animal Husbandry and Food Processing 
  

72 
 
MINUTES OF THE TWENTY-FOURTH SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE 
ON AGRICULTURE, ANIMAL HUSBANDRY AND FOOD PROCESSING  
(2025-26) 
 
The Committee sat on Tuesday, the 11th August, 2026 from 1500 hrs. to 1510 
hrs. in Committee Room-‘D’, Parliament House Annexe (PHA), New Delhi.   
Present 
Shri Charanjit Singh Channi - Chairperson 
Members 
      Lok Sabha 
2. Shri Patel Umeshbhai Babubhai 
3. Shri Rajkumar Chahar 
4. Smt. Anita Nagarsingh Chouhan 
5. Shri Kuldeep Indora 
6. Shri Rajpalsinh Mahendrasinh Jadav 
7. Md. Abu Taher Khan 
8. Shri Rahul Singh Lodhi 
9. Shri Sukanta Kumar Panigrahi 
10. Smt. Krishna Devi Shivshankar Patel 
11. Shri Naresh Chandra Uttam Patel 
12. Shri Murasoli S. 
13. Shri Dharambir Singh 
14. Shri Dushyant Singh 
15. Shri Sudhakar Singh 
16. Shri Kodikunnil Suresh 
17. Smt. Geniben Nagaji Thakor 
18. Shri Bhausaheb Rajaram Wakchaure 
 
    Rajya Sabha 
19. Dr. Anil Sukhdeorao Bonde 
20. Shri Banshilal Gurjar 
21. Shri Nitin Laxmanrao Jadhav-Patil 
22. Shri Madan Rathore 
23. Shri S.R. Sivalingam 
24. Shri P . P. Suneer 
25. Shri Mahesh Kewat 
26. Shri James Pangsang Kongkal Sangma 
 
 

73 
 
Secretariat 
 
1. Shri Dhiraj Kumar  – Joint Secretary     
2. Shri Maheshwar  – Director 
3. Shri Prem Ranjan  - Deputy Secretary 
     4. Shri Fauzi Badruddin - Deputy Secretary 
 
2. At the outset, the Chairperson welcomed the Members to the Sitting of the 
Committee. Thereafter, the Committee took up for consideration and adoption of the 
following Draft Action Taken Reports: 
 
 (i)* XXXX  XXXX  XXXX 
 (ii)* XXXX  XXXX  XXXX 
 (iii)* XXXX  XXXX  XXXX 
 (iv) Action Taken Report on 27th Report (18th Lok Sabha) on DFG (2026-27) 
pertaining to the Department of Agriculture and Farmers Welfare; 
 (v)* XXXX  XXXX  XXXX 
 (vi)* XXXX  XXXX  XXXX 
 (vii)* XXXX  XXXX  XXXX 
 (viii)* XXXX  XXXX  XXXX 
 
3. The Committee, thereafter, adopted the draft Action Taken Reports without any 
modifications/amendments. 
4. The Committee also authorized the Chairperson to finalize and present the 
Reports to Parliament.  
 
The Committee then adjourned. 
_____________________________ 
*Matter not related to this Report 
 

74 
 
APPENDIX 
 
ANALYSIS OF ACTION TAKEN BY GOVERNMENT ON THE 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS CONTAINED IN THE TWENTY SEVENTH 
REPORT (18TH LOK SABHA) OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
AGRICULTURE, ANIMAL HUSBANDRY AND FOOD PROCESSING (2024-25) ON 
DEMANDS FOR GRANTS (2025-26) 
 
(i) Total Number of Recommendations  19 
(ii) Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted By the Government  
 Para Nos. 1,5,6,7,8,10,11,12,13,14 & 16 Total    11 
  57.90% 
(iii) Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to pursue in 
view of the Government’s replies  
 Para Nos. 4,9,15,17,18 & 19 Total 06 
  31.57% 
(iv) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which Replies of the Government 
have not been accepted by the Committee 
 Para No. 2 and 3 Total 02 
  10.53% 
(v) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which final replies of the 
Government are still awaited 
 Para No. NIL Total Nil 
   
 
 