 
 
   STANDING COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE, ANIMAL 
 HUSBANDRY AND FOOD PROCESSING 
(2024-2025) 
 
EIGHTEENTH LOK SABHA 
 
 
MINISTRY OF FOOD PROCESSING INDUSTRIES 
 
 
SCHEME FOR CREATION/ EXPANSION OF FOOD PROCESSING AND 
PRESERVATION CAPACITIES – AN EVALUATION 
 
 
 
 
{Action-taken by the Government on the Observations / Recommendations contained in 
the Sixty Seventh Report (Seventeenth Lok Sabha) of the Standing Committee on 
Agriculture, Animal Husbandry and Food Processing (2023-24)} 
 
 
 
EIGHTEENTH REPORT 
  
 
         
               
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
August, 2025 / Shravana, 1947 (Saka) 
  
18 

 
 
EIGHTEENTH REPORT 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE, ANIMAL  
HUSBANDRY AND FOOD PROCESSING 
(2024-2025) 
 
 
(EIGHTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
MINISTRY OF FOOD PROCESSING INDUSTRIES 
 
 
 
SCHEME FOR CREATION/ EXPANSION OF FOOD PROCESSING AND 
PRESERVATION CAPACITIES – AN EVALUATION 
 
 
 
 
{Action-taken by the Government on the Observations / Recommendations contained in 
the Sixty Seventh Report (Seventeeenth Lok Sabha) of the Standing Committee on 
Agriculture, Animal Husbandry and Food Processing (2023-24)} 
 
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on                            20.08.2025 
 
Laid on the Table of Rajya Sabha on                          20.08.2025 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
August, 2025 / Shravana, 1947 (Saka) 

 
 
COA No. 517 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
© 2025 By Lok Sabha Secretariat 
 
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of Business in Lok Sabha ( Seventeenth 
Edition) and Printed by Lok Sabha Secretariat 

 
 
 
CONTENTS 
 Page No. 
Composition of the Committee (2021-22) (iii) 
Composition of the Committee (2023-24) (iv) 
Composition of the Committee (2024-25) (vi) 
Introduction (viii) 
Chapter I Report  1-12 
Chapter II Observations/Recommendations that have been 
accepted by the Government 13-23 
Chapter III 
Observations/Recommendations which the Committee 
do not desire to pursue in view of the Government’s 
replies 
24-31 
Chapter IV 
Observations/Recommendations in respect of which 
replies of the Government have not been accepted by 
the Committee 
32-37 
Chapter V Observations/Recommendations in respect of which 
final replies of the Government are still awaited 38 
ANNEXURE 
Minutes of the 35th Sitting of the Committee held on 18 August, 2025 39 
APPENDIX 
Analysis of Action Taken by the Government on the Observations / 
Recommendations contained in the Sixty -Seventh Report (17th Lok 
Sabha) of the Standing Committee on Agriculture, Animal Husbandry 
and Food Processing (2023-24) 
41 
 
 
  
 

iii 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE, ANIMAL 
HUSBANDRY AND FOOD PROCESSING*  
(2021-22) 
 
SHRI P.C. Gaddigoudar – Chairperson 
 
MEMBERS 
   LOK SABHA 
2. Shri Afzal Ansari 
3. Shri Horen Sing Bey 
4. Shri Devendra Singh ‘Bhole’ 
5. Shri A. Ganeshamurthi 
6. Shri Kanakmal Katara  
7. Shri Abu Taher Khan 
8. Shri Mohan Mandavi 
9. Shri Kinjarapu Ram Mohan Naidu 
10. Shri Devji Mansingram Patel 
11. Smt. Shardaben Anilbhai Patel 
12. Shri Bheemrao Baswanthrao Patil 
13. Shri Shriniwas Dadasaheb Patil 
14. Shri Vinayak Bhaurao Raut 
15. Shri Pocha Brahmananda Reddy 
16. Shri Rajiv Pratap Rudy 
17. Shri Mohammad Sadique 
18. Shri Virendra Singh 
19. Shri V.K. Sreekandan 
20. Shri Mulayam Singh Yadav 
21. Shri Ram Kripal Yadav 
 
    RAJYA SABHA 
22.  Shri Pratap Singh Bajwa  
23.  Smt. Ramilaben  Becharbhai Bara 
24.  Sardar Sukhdev Singh Dhindsa 
25.  Shri Surendra Singh Nagar 
26.  Shri Kailash Soni 
27.  Shri Ram Nath Thakur 
28.  Shri Vaiko 
29.  Shri Harnath Singh Yadav 
30.  Vacant 
31.  Vacant 
 
* Standing Committee on Agriculture renamed as Standing Committee on Agriculture, Animal Husbandry and 
Food Processing vide Para No. 3293, Bulletin Part-II dated 23.11.2021 

iv 
 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE, ANIMAL 
HUSBANDRY AND FOOD PROCESSING (2023-24) 
 
SHRI P.C. Gaddigoudar – Chairperson 
 
MEMBERS 
   LOK SABHA 
2. Shri Horen Sing Bey 
3. Shri A. Ganeshamurthi 
4. Shri Kanakmal Katara  
5. Shri Abu Taher Khan 
6. Shri Ram Mohan Naidu Kinjarapu 
7. Shri Mohan Mandavi 
8. Shri Devji Mansingram Patel 
9. Smt. Sharda Anilkumar Patel 
10. Shri Bheemrao Baswanthrao Patil 
11. Shri Shriniwas Dadasaheb Patil 
12. Shri Vinayak Bhaurao Raut 
13. Shri Pocha Brahmananda Reddy 
14. Shri Sushil Kumar Rinku 
15. Shri Rajiv Pratap Rudy 
16. Shri Mohammad Sadique 
17. Shri Devendra Singh alias Bhole Singh 
18. Shri Virendra Singh 
19. Shri V.K. Sreekandan 
20. Shri Ram Kripal Yadav 
21. VACANT 
 
    RAJYA SABHA 
22.  Smt. Ramilaben  Becharbhai Bara 
23.  Shri Mastan Rao Beedha Yadav 
24.  Dr. Anil Sukhdeorao Bonde 
25.  Shri S. Kalyanasundaram 
26.  Shri Kailash Soni 
27.  Shri Randeep Singh Surjewala 
28.  Shri Ram Nath Thakur 
29.  Shri Vijay Pal Singh Tomar* 
30.  Shri Vaiko 
31.  Shri Harnath Singh Yadav 
 
* Shri Vijay Pal Singh Tomar, MP, Rajya Sabha has been nominated to the Committee vide Bulletin Part-II, Para 
No. 7523 dated 29.09.2023 vice Shri Surendra Singh Nagar w.e.f. 26.09.2023

v 
 
 
SECRETARIAT  
 
1. Shri Shiv Kumar Wadhawan    -  Additional Secretary 
  2.  Shri Uttam Chand Bharadwaj   -  Director  
3.  Shri N. Amarathiagan    -  Under Secretary  
4.  Shri S. Vijayaraghavan    -  Executive Officer 
 

vi 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE, ANIMAL 
HUSBANDRY AND FOOD PROCESSING  
18th Lok Sabha (2024-25) 
 
SHRI CHARANJIT SINGH CHANNI – CHAIRPERSON 
 
MEMBERS 
   LOK SABHA 
 
2.  Shri Patel Umeshbhai Babubhai 
3.  Smt. Harsimrat Kaur Badal 
4.  Shri Rajkumar Chahar 
5.  Smt. Anita Nagarsingh Chouhan 
6.  Shri Kuldeep Indora 
7.  Shri Rajpalsinh Mahendrasinh Jadav 
8.  Md. Abu Taher Khan 
9.  Shri Rahul Singh Lodhi 
10.  Shri Sukanta Kumar Panigrahi 
11.  Smt. Krishna Devi Shivshankar Patel 
12.  Shri Naresh Chandra Uttam Patel 
13.  Shri Narayan Tatu Rane 
14.  Shri Murasoli S 
15.  Shri Dharambir Singh 
16.  Shri Dushyant Singh 
17.  Shri Sudhakar Singh 
18.  Shri Kodikunnil Suresh 
19.  Shri Tejasvi Surya 
20.  Smt. Geniben Nagaji Thakor 
21.  Shri Bhausaheb Rajaram Wakchaure 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
22.  Smt. Ramilaben Becharbhai Bara 
23.  Shri Masthan Rao Yadav Beedha* 
24.  Dr. Anil Sukhdeorao Bonde 
25.  Shri Banshilal Gurjar 
26.  Shri S. Kalyanasundaram 
27.  Shri Nitin Laxmanrao Jadhav Patil 
28.  Shri Madan Rathore 
29.  Shri Ramji Lal Suman 
30.  Shri P. P. Suneer 
31.  Shri Randeep Singh Surjewala 
 
 Shri Krishan Lal Panwar, Member resigned from Rajya Sabha on 14.10.2024.  
*Shri Masthan Rao Yadav Beedha, Member, Rajya Sabha has been nominated to the Standing Committee 
on Agriculture, Animal Husbandry and Food Processing w.e.f 8 th August 2025, vide Lok Sabha Bulletin 
Part-II, Para No. 3117 dated 13.08.2025.  

vii 
 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
 1. Shri Maheshwar    - Director 
 2. Shri Ashwaghosh Bhaurao Lokhande  -  Under Secretary 
 3. Smt. Paromita Kumar    - Assistant Executive Officer 

viii 
 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
I, the Chairperson, Standing Committee on Agriculture, Animal Husbandry and 
Food Processing (2024 -25), having been authorized by the Committee to submit the 
Report on their behalf, present this Eighteenth Report on Action taken by the 
Government on the Observations/Recommendations contained in the Sixty Seventh 
Report (Seventeenth Lok Sabha) of the Standing Committee on Agriculture, Animal 
Husbandry and Food Processing (2023 -24) on the subject 'Scheme for 
Creation/Expansion of Food Processing and Preservati on Capacities - An Evaluation' 
pertaining to the Ministry of Food Processing Industries. 
 
2. The Sixty Seventh Report (Seventeenth Lok Sabha) of the Standing Committee 
on Agriculture, Animal Husbandry and Food Processing (2023 -24) on ‘Scheme for 
Creation /Expansion of Food Processing and Preservation Capacities - An Evaluation’ 
pertaining to the Ministry of Food Processing Industries was presented to Lok Sabha and 
laid on the Table of Rajya Sabha on 7 th February, 2024. The Action Taken Notes on the 
Report were received on 2nd April, 2024. 
 
3. The Report was considered and adopted by the Committee at their Sitting held on     
18th August, 2025. 
 
4. An Analysis of the action taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in the Sixty Seventh Report (Seventeenth 
Lok Sabha) of the Committee is given in Appendix. 
 
 
 
New Delhi;                           CHARANJIT SINGH CHANNI  
18 August , 2025                                                      Chairperson, 
27 Shravana, 1947 (Saka)             Standing Committee on Agriculture, 
                 Animal Husbandry and Food Processing 

1 
 
REPORT 
CHAPTER - I 
This Report of the Standing Committee on Agriculture, Animal Husbandry and 
Food Processing deals with the Action Taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in the Sixty Seventh  Report ( Seventeenth 
Lok Sabha) of the Standing Committee on Agriculture, Animal Hus bandry and Food 
Processing (2023 -24) on ‘Scheme for Creation /Expansion of Food Processing and 
Preservation Capacities - An Evaluation pertaining to the Ministry of Food Processing 
Industries’ which was presented to the Lok Sa bha and Laid on the Table of Rajya Sabha 
on 7th February, 2024 respectively. 
1.2     The Ministry of Food Processing Industries has furnished Action Taken Replies 
in respect of all the 13 Observations/Recommendations contained in the Report. These 
have been categorized as under: 
 
•  Observations/Recommendations that have been accepted by 
the Government: 
Total - 06 
Chapter II 
 Recommendation Para Nos. 1, 2, 3, 4, 9, and 13 
•  Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do 
not desire to pursue in view of the Government’s replies:  
Total - 04  
Chapter III 
 Recommendation Para No. 5, 6, 11 and 12 
•  Observations/Recommendations in respect of which Replies 
of the Government have not been accepted by the 
Committee: 
Total- 03 
Chapter IV 
 
Recommendation Para No.  7, 8, 10 
•  Observations/Recommendations in respect of which final 
replies of the Government are still awaited. 
Total - NIL  
Chapter V 
 Recommendation Para No. NIL 
 
1.3 The Committee trust that utmost importance would be given by the Ministry to 
implement the observations/recommendations accepted by the Government. In cases, 
where it is not possible for the Ministry to implement the Recommendations in letter and  

2 
 
spirit for any reason, the matter may be reported to the Committee with the reasons for 
non-implementation. The Committee desire that fu ture Action Taken Notes on the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in Chapter - I of this Report be furnished to 
them at an early date.  
1.4  The Committee will now deal with the action taken by the Government on some of 
the Recommendations in the succeeding paragraphs. 
 
Progress in Reduction of Harvest & Post Harvest Losses 
(RECOMMENDATION SERIAL NO. 1) 
 
1.5 The Committee had observed/recommended: 
“The Committee note that Agricultural Production in India has consistently recorded 
higher output over the years. In 2019, India ranked first in pulses & milk, second in 
vegetable, fruit, wheat and rice and third in cereals, eggs in the World Agriculture. 
However, the demand for food in India is likely to increase in the coming years - in direct 
proportion to likely increase in population of the country. The Harvest and Post -harvest 
losses in Agricultural Produces is however a drain on the food security and  economic 
development of the country. An effective Harvest and Post -harvest Management is 
therefore, very important for planning and utilization of the Agricultural Produces both 
scientifically and economically. Studies have been conducted on Harvest and Post -
harvest losses by the Central Institute of Post -Harvest Engineering and Technology 
(CIPHET) in 2015 and by the NABARD Consultancy Services Pvt. Ltd. (NABCONS) in 
2022. The post-harvest losses in respect of cereals, pulses, Fruits, vegetables, Egg, etc.  
are stated to be in the range of 3.89% to above 5%. The Ministry of Food Processing 
Industries has informed the Committee that as per findings of these Study Reports Post -
harvest losses have marginally come down during the period from 2015 to 2022.” 
 
2. Food Processing could strengthen the link between Agriculture and Industry and 
help in generating farm income and employment as also in reducing wastage of 
agricultural products. The Ministry of Food Processing Industries with the view to 
achieving the broad objective of bringing down post-harvest losses, is implementing 

3 
 
various Schemes and Programmes including the Pradhan Mantri Kisan Sampada Yojana 
(PMKSY), for the promotion of Food Processing Industries. 
3. The Committee, while taking note of the fact that the post-harvest losses, which is 
more than 3% in the cases of cereals, pulses, Fruits, vegetables, Egg, etc., recommend 
that realistic targets be set for the reduction of post-harvest losses in respect of 
Agricultural Produces through target-oriented implementation of various Schemes of the 
Ministry including the Scheme for Creation/Expansion of Food Processing and 
Preservation Capacities (CEFPPC). The Committee would like to be apprised of the 
action taken in the matter. 
 
1.6 In its Action Taken Reply, the Ministry has submitted: - 
“The Ministry of Food Processing Industries (MoFPI) has been implementing a Central 
Sector umbrella scheme viz. Pradhan Mantri Kisan Sampada Yojana (PMKSY) since 
2017-18. Under PMKSY, one of the component schemes  viz. Creation/ Expansion of 
Food Processing and preservation capacities (CEFPPC Scheme) is being implemented 
with an objective to set up new food processing units and modernization/ expansion of 
existing units thereby creating processing and preservation capacities to increase the 
level of processing and value addition and to reduce wastage. 
 
2. As on 13.02.2024, 501 food processing units have been approved under various 
sectors viz. Fruit & Vegetable, Consumer products, Dairy, Grain milling, Oil milling and 
Meat & Poultry processing for  total grants -in-aid/subsidy of  Rs. 1931.64 crore under 
CEFPPC scheme. Out of 501 units, 227 have been completed and commenced 
commercial operations, thereby creating 104.77 lakh metric tonnes (LMT) processing / 
preservation capacities, which leads to considerable reduction in the post -harvest 
losses.”   
 
1.7 The Committee had recommended that the Ministry should set realistic 
targets for reducing post-harvest losses in agricultural produce through the target-
oriented implementation of various schemes, including the Scheme for 
Creation/Expansion of Food Processing and Preservation Capacities (CEFPPC), to 
ensure effective reduction of post -harvest losses . In its reply, the Ministry has 

4 
 
stated that under the CEFPPC Scheme, 501 food processing units had been 
approved and 227 units had commenced operations, resulting in the creation of 
substantial processing and preservation capacity. The Ministry further stated that 
these efforts have contributed to a reduction in post -harvest losses. However, the 
Committee observe that, while these developments are appreciable, the Ministry’s 
reply is not specific regarding the setting of realistic targets for post -harvest loss 
reduction. The Committee, th erefore, reiterate their recommendation that the 
Ministry must establish clear targets for reduction of post -harvest losses  during 
the implementation of its schemes. The Committee also desire to be apprised of 
the steps taken in  this regard, and the details of progress achieved  so far at the 
time of furnishing Action Taken Statement. 
Implementation of the Scheme for CEFPPC for SCSP. TSP & NE Region 
(RECOMMENDATION SERIAL NO. 7) 
 
1.8 The Committee had observed/recommended: 
 
The Committee note that the Ministry could not properly utilise the funds allocated 
under the Scheme for CEFPPC for Schedule Caste Sub Plan (SCSP), Tribal Sub Plan 
(TSP) and for the North Eastern Region since the launch of the Scheme. As regards the 
implementation of SCSP during 2018-19 to 2022-23, the Budget Estimates (BE), Revised 
Estimates (RE), Actual Expenditure (AE) are Rs. 368.93 Crore; Rs. 292.92 Crore; and 
Rs. 107.50 Crore respectively. In the implementation of TSP, the achievements in terms 
of BE,  RE and AE are Rs. 217.64 Crore, Rs. 170.83 Crore and Rs. 35.32 Crore. 
Similarly, the BE, RE and AE in respect of North Eastern Region are Rs. 509.54 Crore, 
Rs. 397.27 Crore and Rs. 199.28 Crore respectively. 
2. The Committee note that utilization of funds for SCSP and TSP has been less 
than 1/3rd of the amount allocated and utilization of funds for North Eastern Region (NER) 
is less than 50% which is not an encouraging trend. The Committee, therefore, 

5 
 
recommend that the Ministry should try to find out the reasons for Non -utilization of 
allocated funds for SCSP, TSP and also for NER so as to make sure that the funds are 
utilized to the optimum level by the Ministry in the implementation of the Scheme. 
 
1.9 In its Action Taken Reply, the Ministry has submitted: - 
 
Under CEFPPC scheme, the Ministry of Food Processing Industries (MoFPI) has 
been providing the following benefits to encourage SC/ ST and NER category applicants 
as per the extant scheme guidelines dated 08.06.2022:  
(i) Proposals received from entities where Scheduled Caste (SC)/ Scheduled Tribe 
(ST) holding at least 51% stake in the entity, will be treated as SC/ST proposals. 
(ii) The entities applying under a scheme for financial assistance are required to 
submit a non-refundable fee of Rs. 20,000/ - (Rupees twenty thousand) in favour of “Pay 
and Accounts Officer, Ministry of Food Processing Industries, New Delhi”. This non-
refundable fee is Rs. 15,000/- for applications from SC/ST. 
(iii) Term loan from the Bank for an amount not less than 20% of the total project cost 
is required in respect of proposals from General Areas. In case of proposals from Difficult 
Areas or proposals from SC/ST or Farmer Producer Organisations or Self -Help Groups, 
minimum term loan amount requirement has been made 10% of the total project cost  as 
against 20% in other cases. 
(iv) The minimum marks  for eligibility of proposal is  45 for an applicant belonging to 
SC/ ST as against 60% in other cases. 
(v) Grants-in-aid will be considered @35% for projects in General Areas and @50% 
for projects in Difficult Areas (including NER) as well as for projects of SC/ST subject to a 
maximum of ₹5 crore. 
2. MoFPI has been taking regular steps to boost the utilization of funds under SCSP, 
TSP and NER by (i) organizing periodical review meetings with the implementing 
agencies (IAs) of the projects approved under SCSP, TSP and N ER categories of 
CEFPPC scheme in order to understand the problems faced (including non -submission 
of requisite documents for claiming grants -in-aid) in implementing these projects and to 
facilitate IAs to complete the projects within time and (ii) undertaking inspection of these 
units through Project Management Agencies from time to time so as to guide the IAs in 

6 
 
implementing the projects and to facilitate them in submitting documents on Sampada 
portal for claiming the installments of grants-in-aid under the scheme.  
3. MoFPI had floated an EoI dated 27.07.2023 for inviting applications specifically 
from prospective applicants belonging to SC & ST category and NER. Under this EoI, 42 
projects (20 projects under SC, 1 project under ST and 21 projects under N ER) have 
been approved with total grants -in-aid of ₹159.90 crore. These approved projects will 
become eligible for claiming installments of grants-in-aid in due course of time.  
4. Subsequently, a fresh EoI was issued on 04.10.2023 for inviting application s from 
all categories under the CEFPPC scheme. Against it, 1007 proposals have been 
received. 
5. In view of above actions, this Ministry would be able to utilize the funds to the 
optimum level under the heads of SCSP, TSP and NER of the scheme.  
 
1.10 The Committee observe that while the Ministry have outlined certain 
measures in its reply to encourage participation of SC/ST and NER category 
applicants and steps taken to boost the utilization of funds under the SCSP, TSP 
and NER for implementation of CEFPPC Scheme, the reply does not satisfactorily 
address the main concern raised by the Committee in its earlier recommendation 
regarding the reasons for continued underutilization of funds durin g the years  
from  2018-19 to 2022-23. The Committee also find that the Ministry in its reply has 
not furnished the status of approved projects, number of pending projects and 
also the timelines for completion of projects  under the SCSP, TSP and NER  
components for the aforementioned period.  
 In view of these shortcomings, the Committee are of the view  that without 
identifying and addressing the reasons for underutilization of funds, the purpose 
of optimal utilization of funds for ‘Implementation of the Scheme for CEFPPC for 

7 
 
SCSP, TSP and NER head’ is defeat ed. The Committee, therefore, reiterate their 
earlier recommendation that the Ministry must undertake a detailed review to 
identify the causes behind the underutilization of funds under the SCSP, TSP and 
NER head s and further  desire to be apprised of the steps taken in this regard  
along with the outcomes achieved so far at the time of furnishing the Action Taken 
Statement. 
 
Non-Refundable Fee in respect of Non-Implemented Eligible Proposals 
(RECOMMENDATION SERIAL NO. 8) 
 
1.11  The Committee had observed/recommended: 
 
The Committee note that the probable beneficiaries under the Scheme for 
CEFPPC need to submit their Application / Project Proposal complete in all respects in 
accordance with the instructions laid down in the Operative Guidelines and as per the 
Notification of the Ministry. All the Applicants are also required to submit a Non -
refundable fee of Rs.20,000/ - (Rs.15,000/- for SC/ST Applicants) along with the Project 
Proposal. Moreover, the successful applicants, on being selected for financial assistance 
by the  Ministry, are also required to submit a Refundable Bank Guarantee of 5% of 
eligible Grants-in Aid within 30 days of approval of the Project for the period, till 60 days 
beyond the date of completion of the Project. According to the Ministry, the Non -
refundable Application fee is sought in order to ascertain the genuineness and interest of 
the Applicant for availing Grants -in-Aid and also to meet out the expense involved in 
processing the Applications / Proposals. This fee in respect of the Rejected/ Inelig ible 
proposals is not returned to the Applicants. 
2. Keeping in view the above factors, the Committee hold the view that prescription 
of Non-refundable fee for the submission of application for the Scheme is a discouraging 
factor for prospective applicants particularly, SC/ST applicants and weaker categories 
like farmers, SHGs, etc. The Committee, therefore, recommend that the condition of Non-
refundable Application Fee for submission of proposals needs a serious reconsideration. 

8 
 
However, the Ministry may consider other alternate measures to discourage Non -serious 
candidates instead of prescribing Non-refundable Application Fee. 
3. The Committee also specifically desire that the Ministry shall look into the matter 
of 107 Eligible Proposals, which still remain pending with it out of the 307 Eligible 
proposals received by it against its previous Notification dated 21.06.2022. The 
Committee would like to be apprised of the action taken in the matter. 
1.12 In its Action Taken Reply, the Ministry has submitted: - 
 
 The Ministry of Food Processing Industries (MoFPI) as per the extant CEFPPC 
guidelines dated 08.06.2022, stipulates that the applicant against Expression of Interest 
(EoI) is required to submit (a) non -refundable application fee at the time of submission of 
the proposal in the Sampada portal in order to ascertain the genuineness and the actual 
interest of the applicant for availing grants -in-aid and to discourage non -serious 
applicants irrespective of the category they belong; and (b) refundable Bank Guara ntee 
worth of 5% of the eligible grants -in-aid within 30 days of approval of the project. The 
non-refundable fee is lower @ ₹15000 in case of SC/ST applications.   
2. MoFPI received 307 eligible proposals under CEFPPC scheme against the EoI 
dated 21.06.2022. Out of 307 eligible proposals, 243 proposals ha ve been accorded 
approval and remaining eligible proposals could not be approved due to paucity of funds. 
Thereafter, Ministry vide its notice dated 18.07.2023 has conveyed that approval of any 
new projects under CEFPPC scheme will be on the basis of new Expression of Interest 
that may be published in due course of time. Any entity who had submitted its application 
against earlier EoI dated 21.06.2022 may apply afresh as and when new EOI is issued 
by the Ministry.  
 
1.13 The Committee note that the Ministry’s reply regarding the nonrefundable 
application fee under the CEFPPC Scheme merely reiterates existing guidelines, 
without adequately addressing the Committee s’ earlier recommendation to review 
the provisions of Non-refundable application  fee charged at the submission of 
application for the Scheme . The Committee believe that while it is important to 

9 
 
deter nonserious applicants, the current fee model may inadvertently 
disadvantage SC/ST applicants, small and marginal  farmers, and Self Help Groups 
(SHGs). 
The Committee further observe that no remedy has been proposed for the 
64 eligible project proposals, out of a total of 307 submitted under the Expression 
of Interest (EoI) dated 21.06.2022, which were left unapproved due to lack of funds. 
They are of the view that the Ministry’s approach of merely notifying these 
applicants that they may reapply when a new EoI is issued does not adequately 
address the financial and procedural disadvantages faced, particularly by 
applicants from marginalized groups. 
The Committee, therefore, reiterate their earlier recommendation that the 
Ministry should review the fee provision with a view to introducing inclusive 
alternatives which should aim to uphold the seriousness of applications while 
minimizing undue financial burden on SC/ST applicants and other vulnerable 
groups such as farmers and SHGs. They also desire to be apprised of the steps 
taken in this regard, along with the timeline and current status of the 2 43 projects 
approved under the Scheme, at the time of furnishing the Action Taken Statement. 
 
Participation of Different Categories in the Scheme for CEFPPC 
(RECOMMENDATION SERIAL NO. 10) 
 
1.14 The Committee had observed/recommended: 
“As per the CEFPPC Operative Guidelines any organization/individual engaged in 
creation/ expansion/ modernization of Food Processing and Preservation Capacities 
would be eligible for Grants -in Aid (GIA) under the Scheme. The scheme is Demand 
Driven and subject to availability of funds. Although no specific State -wise allocation of 

10 
 
funds is made under the Scheme, however, 10% of total BE is reserved for North - 
Eastern Region. Many concessions including the enhanced rate of Grants -in-Aid are 
permitted in respect of Project Proposals submitted by Persons belonging to SC/ST and 
Difficult Areas, Farmers Producers Organizations (FPOs), Self -Help Groups (SHGs) and 
Central / State Entities in order to encourage these sections to participate in the Scheme 
for CEFPPC. 
2. As regards Selection Criteria, the Ministry clarified to the Committee that when 
many applications have the same score in assessment, the Project with higher project 
cost will gain preference in order to attract more private investment. This provision has 
the effect of nullifying the concessions extended to proposals from SC/ST, Difficult Areas, 
FPOs, SHGs and Central / State Entities. The Committee also note that out of the 473 
approved Projects, the break -up of different categories is Private  sector-399; SC 
category-27; STcategories-21; FPO's-13; MNC's-10; Multipurpose-Societies-1; Public 
Sector-1 and SHGs -Nil. Against this backdrop, the Committee recommend that the 
Selection Criteria be reviewed to ensure that FPOs, SHGs, Entities from Difficult Areas 
and Public Entities-having participation of farmers and women also get benefits under the 
Scheme for CEFPPC. The Committee would like to be apprised of the action taken in the 
matter.” 
 
1.15 In its Action Taken Reply, the Ministry has submitted: - 
“Ministry vide extant CEFPPC scheme guidelines dated 08.06.2022 has given  the 
following benefits to encourage applicants from SC/ ST category and NER, SHGs 
&FPOs applicants to apply against Expression of Interests (EoIs) issued from time to 
time under the scheme:  
(i) Proposals received from entities where Scheduled Caste (SC)/ Scheduled Tribe 
(ST) holding at least 51% stake in the entity, will be treated as SC/ST proposals. 
(ii) The entities applying under the scheme for financial assistance are required to 
submit a non-refundable fee of Rs. 20,000/ - (Rupees twenty thousand) in favour of “Pay 
and Accounts Officer, Ministry of Food Processing Industries, New Delhi”. This non -
refundable fee is Rs. 15,000/- for applications from SC/ST. 

11 
 
(iii) Infusion of equity of at least 10% for proposals from Difficult areas or proposals 
from SC/ST or FPOs or SHGs against the requirement of at least 20% for the proposals 
from General areas.  
(iv) The proposal from Difficult areas, applicants of SC/ST category, FPOs and SHGs, 
the combined net worth are required to be less than the grants -in-aid sought against the 
requirement of at least 1.5 times of grants-in-aid sought for others.  
(v) Term loan from the Bank for an amount not less than 20% of the total project cost 
in respect of proposals from General Areas. In case of proposals from Difficult Areas or 
proposals from SC/ST or Farmer Producer Organisations or Self -Help Groups, term loan 
amount should not be less than 10% of the total project cost. 
(vi) The minimum marks for eligibility of proposal will be 45 for an applicant belonging 
to SC/ ST against the requirement of 60% marks for general category applicants. 
(vii) Grants-in-aid will be considered @35% for projects in General Areas and @50% 
for projects in Difficult Areas (including NER) as well as for projects of SC/ST, FPOs and 
SHGs subject to a maximum of ₹5 crore. 
Ministry is of the view that the aforementioned benefits to the applicants from SC/ ST 
category and NER, SHGs & FPOs applicants would help them to avail the benefits under 
the scheme without affecting the merit.”  
 
1.16 The Committee had recommended that the Selection Criteria be reviewed to 
ensure that FPOs, SHGs, Entities from Difficult Areas and Public Entities -having 
participation of farmers and women also get benefits under the Scheme for 
CEFPPC. The Ministry in its reply has enumerated various provisions for these 
groups under the Scheme guidelines dated 08.06.2022. They have further stated 
that aforementioned benefits to the applicants from SC/ ST category and NER, 
SHGs & FPOs applicants would help them t o avail the benefits under the S cheme 
without affecting the merit.  The Committee, however, find this reply routine in 
nature as the Ministry has not mentioned any new measure or corrective steps 
taken by them in light of the recommendation of the Committee. The Committee, 

12 
 
therefore, would like to reiterate their recommendation. The Committee desire the 
Ministry to examine this important issue expeditiously and diligently to explore 
avenues to ensure greater participation of these groups.  
 
 

13 
 
CHAPTER-II 
 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS THAT HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE 
GOVERNMENT 
 
 
1. Progress in Reduction of Harvest & Post Harvest Losses 
“The Committee note that Agricultural Production in India has consistently 
recorded higher output over the years. In 2019, India ranked first in pulses & milk, 
second in vegetable, fruit, wheat and rice and third in cereals, eggs in the World 
Agriculture. However, the demand for food in India is likely to increase in the coming 
years - in direct proportion to likely increase in population of the country. The Harvest 
and Post-harvest losses in Agricultural Produces is however a drain on the food security 
and economic development of the country. An effective Harvest and Post -harvest 
Management is therefore, very important for planning and utilization of the Agricultural 
Produces both scientifically and economically. Studies have been conducted on Harvest 
and Post -harvest losses by the Central Institute of Post -Harvest Engineering and 
Technology (CIPHET) in 2015 and by the NABARD Consultancy Services Pvt. Ltd. 
(NABCONS) in 2022. The post-harvest losses in respect of cereals, pulses, Fruits, 
vegetables, Egg, etc. are stated to be in the range of 3.89% to above 5%. The Ministry of 
Food Processing Industries has informed the Committee that as per findings of these 
Study Reports Post -harvest losses have marginally come down during the period from 
2015 to 2022. 
 
Food Processing could strengthen the link between Agriculture and Industry and 
help in generating farm income and employment as also in reducing wastage of 
agricultural products. The Ministry of Food Processing Industries with the view to 
achieving the broad objective of bringing down post-harvest losses, is implementing 
various Schemes and Programmes including the Pradhan Mantri Kisan Sampada Yojana 
(PMKSY), for the promotion of Food Processing Industries. 
 
The Committee, while taking note of the fact that the post-harvest losses, which is 
more than 3% in the cases of cereals, pulses, Fruits, vegetables, Egg, etc., recommend 
that realistic targets be set for the reduction of post-harvest losses in respect of 
Agricultural Produces through target-oriented implementation of various Schemes of the 

14 
 
Ministry including the Scheme for Creation/Expansion of Food Processing and 
Preservation Capacities (CEFPPC). The Committee would like to be apprised of the 
action taken in the matter.” 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
“The Ministry of Food Processing Industries (MoFPI) has been implementing a 
Central Sector umbrella scheme viz. Pradhan Mantri Kisan Sampada Yojana (PMKSY) 
since 2017-18. Under PMKSY, one of the component schemes viz. Creation/ Expansion 
of Food Processing and preservation capacities (CEFPPC scheme) is being 
implemented with an objective to set up new food processing units and modernization/ 
expansion of existing units thereby creating processing and preservation capacities to 
increase the level of processing and value addition and to reduce wastage. 
 
As on 13.02.2024, 501 food processing units have been approved under various 
sectors viz. Fruit & Vegetable, Consumer products, Dairy, Grain milling, Oil milling and 
Meat & Poultry processing for total grants -in-aid/subsidy of Rs. 1931.64 crore under 
CEFPPC scheme. Out of 501 units, 227 have been completed and commenced 
commercial operations, thereby creating 104.77 lakh metric tonnes (LMT) processing / 
preservation capacities, which leads to considerable reduction in the post -harvest 
losses.” 
 
MINISTRY OF FOOD PROCESSING INDUSTRIES 
(OM. No. H-11012/1/2024-Parl. dated 02.04.2024) 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
 For comments of the Committee please refer to Para No. 1.7 of Chapter-I of 
this Report. 
 
 
2. Schemes and Programmes for the Promotion of Food Processing Sector of 
India  
 
“The Committee note that Food Products Industry of the country figures among 
the top five Sectors with respect to Output and Gross Value Added (GVA). About 70 lakh 
persons are directly engaged both in formal and informal segments of Food Processing 
Sector and this volume is almost 14% of the total employment in the Manufacturing 

15 
 
Sector. The average annual growth rate in Food Processing Sector was around 8.38% 
during the five years ending in 2020 -21. However, this Sector faces many challenges 
including Supply -Chain infrastructural gaps in primary processing/storage/distribution & 
marketing facilities, Seasonality of operations leading to low-capacity utilization & 
increased cost of production, Lack of product development and innovation, Inadequate 
institutional credit, etc. 
The Committee appreciate that the Government of India have taken several 
measures for the growth and development of the Food Processing Sector. The Food 
Processing Sector has been included under Priority Sector Lending (PSL) Norms under 
the ‘Agriculture’ category by Reserve Bank of India (RBI). The Ministry of Micro, Small 
and Medium Enterprises is implementing Credit Guarantee Scheme for Micro & Small 
Enterprises through Credit Guarantee Fund Trust for Micro & Small Enterprises 
(CGTMSE). The Ministry of Fo od Processing Industry is implementing two Central 
Sector Schemes - Pradhan Mantri Kisan Sampada Yojana (PMKSY) and Production 
Linked Incentive Scheme for the Food Processing Industries (PLISFPI) and one Centrally 
Sponsored Scheme of 'Pradhan Mantri Formalisation of Micro Food Processing 
Industries (PMFME)' towards promotion of the Food Processing Sector. Implementation 
of the umbrella Scheme of PMKSY, which at present comprises six separate Scheme -
Components including the Scheme for Creation / Expansion of  Food Processing and 
Preservation Capacities (CEFPPC ) have resulted in significant addition to infrastructure 
and manufacturing/storage capacity in the Sector. 
While acknowledging the progress so far, achieved, the Committee even then hold 
the view that the full scope and growth potential of Food Processing Sector of the country 
has not been fully realized. The Committee, therefore, recommend the Ministry to take 
necessary action to address the challenges faced by the Sector, especially the issues 
relating to credit needs of Entrepreneurs, through its Schemes and Programmes. The 
Committee also recommend the Government to give wide publicity to the Schemes & 
Programmes available under the Food Processing Sector and periodically bring out a 
Compendium of Updated Information on Schemes and Programmes implemented by the 
Union Government for the information of the farmers and Agro-Processing Industries.” 
 
 

16 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
The Ministry of Food Processing Industries has been taking continuous steps to 
mitigate challenges faced  viz. (i) d elay in submissi on of the statutory clearances, 
certificates from the State Government regarding Consent to Establish (CTE), Consent to 
Operate (CTO), building plan approval, electricity connection etc. by the implementing 
agency in relation to th e project to the Ministry and (ii) i nadequate support from lending 
banks in disbursement of term loan to the approved projects  in implementation of 
PMKSY component scheme viz. Creation/ Expansion of Food Processing and 
preservation capacities (CEFPPC scheme). 
 Ministry has been issuing letters/ making calls to State Departments dealing with 
the subject and request them to expedite the issue of statutory approvals to the 
implementing agency. Further, based upon requests of promoters of approved projects, 
matter is taken up with the term loan lending banks for timely completion of the projects.  
 Information and benefits of various schemes being implemented by this Ministry 
are disseminated through awareness campaigns, food fairs/ exhibitions, being organized/ 
supported by the Ministry and the National Institute of Food Technology 
Entrepreneurship and Management (NIFTEM) across the country from time to time. 
Further, proposals are invited from eligible entities by publishing the Expression of 
Interests from time to time in the leading Regional and National newspapers and in the 
public domain of the Ministry.  
 
MINISTRY OF FOOD PROCESSING INDUSTRIES 
(OM. No. H-11012/1/2024-Parl. dated 02.04.2024) 
 
3. Implementation of Pradhan Mantri Kisan Sampada Yojana (PMKSY) 
 
The Government launched the Pradhan Mantri Kisan Sampada Yojana (PMKSY), 
an Umbrella Scheme comprising eight Scheme -Components including the Scheme for 
Creation / Expansion of Food Processing and Preservation Capacities  (CEFPPC) on 
03.05.2017 - with a view to give necessary boost to growth of Food Processing Sector of 
the country. PMKSY was envisaged as a comprehensive package towards creation of 
Modern infrastructure with efficient supply Chain Management from Farm Gate to Retail 

17 
 
Outlet. However, the Committee find that funds utilization for PMKSY has been found to 
be less than optimal level since its launch in 2017 -18. During the period of 2017 -18 to 
2020-21, the Revised Estimates and the Actual Expenditure was Rs.3143.60 Crore and 
Rs.2555.28 Crore, respectively against the Outlay of Rs. 6107.50 Crore. The Committee 
further note that the PMKSY has since been restructured and provided with a marginally 
reduced outlay of Rs.4600 Crore for the 15 th FCC Period of 2021 -22 to 2025 -26 against 
the proposed outlay of Rs.9824 Crore. The Cumulative Funds Utilization under the 
PMKSY till 31.05.2023 was Rs.3864.17 Crore against a Cumulative Budgetary Allocation 
of Revised Estimates of Rs.5530.94 Crore for 2017-18 to 2023-24. 
Notwithstanding the issue of under -utilization of funds, the Committee note that a 
total of 1360 Projects with potential to create 364.9 LMT/amount of processing capacity 
were approved till 31.05.2023 and 776 Projects of these Projects were made operative 
leading to creation of 208.09 LMT of processing capacity. Against this backdrop, the 
Committee while appreciating the positive impacts of PMKSY towards creation / 
expansion of Food Processing and preservation capacities in the country, hold the firm 
view that the issue of under-utilization funds under PMKSY needs to be addressed on the 
top most priority. 
In view of the foregoing the Committee recommend that appropriate remedial 
measures be taken to improve the process of implementation and its regular monitoring 
so as to ensure optimal utilization funds and target oriented implementation of PMKSY. 
The Committee also emphasize that the Ministry needs look into the all issues affecting 
smooth implementation of PMKSY, particularly, the aspect of receipt of ineligible 
proposals, which has been stated to be a major constraint in the implementation of 
PMKSY. The Committee would like to be apprised of the action taken in the matter. 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
The Ministry of Food Processing Industries has been implementing a Central 
Sector umbrella scheme viz. Prad han Mantri Kisan Sampada Yojana (PMKSY) since 
2017-18. Under various component schemes of PMKSY, from 2017 -18 to 2023 -24 (till 
25.01.2023), 1115 projects have been approved. Out of 1115 projects, 579 have been 
completed and have commenced commercial operations, thereby creating processing 
capacity of 256.32 LMT and preservation capacity of 37.61 LMT.  Further, against the RE 

18 
 
allocation of ₹5283.24 crore from 2017 -18 to 2023 -24, actual expenditure of 
₹4131.52crore has been done till 09.02.2024 in implementation of PMKSY.  
Under component scheme, Creation/ Expansion of Food Processing and 
preservation capacities (CEFPPC scheme) of PMKSY, from 2017 -18 to 2023 -24 (till 
13.02.2024), 501 projects have been approved.  Out of 501 projects, 227 have been 
completed and commenced commercial operations, thereby creating 104.77 lakh metric 
tonnes (LMT) processing/ preservation capacities. Further, against  RE allocation of 
₹1270.30 crore from 2017 -18 to 2023-24, actual expenditure of ₹998.20 crore has been 
done till 09.02.2024 in implementation of CEFPPC scheme. 
In order to reduce receipt of ineligible proposals against the Expression of 
Interests (EoIs), M inistry provides awareness/ guidance on the scheme to the 
prospective entrepreneurs/ applicants by publishing the operative scheme guidelines and 
arranging pre -bid meetings at the time of issue of Expression of Interests for inviting 
proposals from the prospective applicants/ entrepreneurs.  Further, the queries of 
prospective applicants are being answered by uploading Frequently Asked Questions 
(FAQs) and during the Food Fairs/ Exhibition organized by this Ministry across the 
country. 
MINISTRY OF FOOD PROCESSING INDUSTRIES 
(OM. No. H-11012/1/2024-Parl. dated 02.04.2024) 
 
4. Need for Engagement of Resource Persons/Experts in the Implementation of 
Scheme for Creation / Expansion of Food Processing and Preservation Capacities 
(CEFPPC) 
 
  The Ministry of Food Processing Industries is implementing the Scheme for 
Creation/Expansion of Food Processing and Preservation Capacities (CEFPPC) since 
2017-18 under the Central Sector Umbrella Scheme of “Pradhan Mantri Kisan Sampada 
Yojana”. The Main Objective of the Scheme is to increase the level of food processing 
and value addition to facilitate reduction of wastage and enhancement of farmers income 
through creation of incremental processing and preservation capacities and 
modernization/ expansion  of existing food processing units. The CEFPPC Scheme, 
which covers a wide range of processing activities, is implemented in accordance with 
the Operative Guidelines issued by the Ministry. These Operative Guidelines lay down 

19 
 
the detailed procedure for the implementation of the Scheme including eligibility 
conditions. 
The Committee note that the CEFPPC Scheme is demand driven and the Projects 
selected under the Scheme are eligible for Grants-in-aid @35% of eligible project cost for 
projects in General Areas and @50% in Difficult Areas as well as for projects of SC/ST, 
FPOs and SHGs subject to a maximum of Rs. 5 crore. As provided in the Guidelines, the 
Ministry invites proposals from the public through Notification of Expression of Interest 
from time to time. Submission of proposals under the Scheme involves voluminous w ork 
requiring preparation of Det ailed Project Report and fulfil ment of other eligibility 
conditions as laid down in the Operative Guidelines including obtaining of Term-loan from 
bank, etc., within a time period of 45 days or so, as specified in the Notification. An 
Applicant also needs to furnish Non -Refundable Fee of Rs. 20,000/ - along with his 
project proposal, and this fee is not returned to the Applicants, even if the application is 
found ineligible or rejected subsequently. Since the inception of the Scheme, the Ministry 
has invited proposals six times including the last Notification of 27.07.2023. 
The Committee further note that more than 50% of the Applications received by 
the Ministry during each of the previous five times were rejected as those were found to 
be ineligible. The Committee, feel that the main reason for receipt of Ineligible Proposals 
is lack of information and knowledge about the Scheme among the applicants and the 
accompanying Formalities/ Technicalities associated with it. 
The Committee, recommend that suitable Experts/Resource Persons be engaged 
by the Ministry for providing necessary guidance and assistance to probable applicants / 
entrepreneurs for the preparation and submission of project proposals to the Ministry 
under all the Schemes of PMKSY including the Scheme for CEFPPC. The Committee 
would like to be apprised of the action taken on the issue. 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
 The Ministry of Food Processing Industries (MoFPI) has been implementing the 
component scheme – Creation/ Expansion of Food Processing and Preservation 
Capacities of PMKSY since 2017 -18. The awareness on the benefits of the scheme are 
being made by the Ministry through organizing food fairs/ exhibitions across the country. 

20 
 
The operative guidelines of the scheme contain all the details regarding (i) eligibility 
criteria to be fulfilled to apply, and (ii) documents to be submitted along with the proposal. 
Further, pre -bid meeting is being arranged by the Ministry at the time of issue of 
Expression of Interest (EoI) to clarify the doubts of the prospective applicants/ 
entrepreneurs both by offline and online. The queries are received on email and they are 
answered either through return email or by uploading Frequently Asked Ques tions 
(FAQs) in the Ministry’s website.  
 
 Apart from the above, till the last date of EoI, the queries raised by the prospective 
applicants/ entrepreneurs through telephones/ emails are also addressed promptly by the 
Ministry and facilitate them to submit applications/ proposals within the closing date of 
EoI.    
MINISTRY OF FOOD PROCESSING INDUSTRIES 
(OM. No. H-11012/1/2024-Parl. dated 02.04.2024) 
 
 
9. Criterion of Eligibility of Location for Implementation of the Scheme for 
CEFPPC and the Issue(s) Associated with Eligible Proposals 
 
As per the Operative Guidelines of the CEFPPC Scheme, the proposals under the 
Scheme will be considered both inside Mega Food Parks (MFPs)/Agro -processing 
Clusters (APCs) and anywhere outside MFPs/ APCs. As far as practicable, 60% of funds 
will be for units inside MFPs/APCs and 40% to units outside MFPs/APCs. The 
Committee note that 41 MFPs and 76 APCs have been sanctioned under the PMKSY 
and out of this sanctioned numbers, as on 11 -06-2023, there are 24 Functional MFPs 
and 18 Functional APCs, only. 
Further, the Committee note that many States/UTs like, Jharkhand, Goa, 
Pondicherry, Ladakh, etc., have had neither any MFPs nor any APCs. The Committee, 
therefore, recommend that the existing criteria regarding Eligible Location for 
implementation of the Scheme for CEFPPC including the ratio of 60: 40 for Projects 
Inside and Outside the MFPs/APCs be reviewed suitably. Further, New Provisions be 
incorporated in the Operative Guidelines so as to ensure that implementation of the 
CEFPPC Scheme is encouraged in  the States/UTs and in the Regions, which do not 
have any MFPs or APCs. The Committee also recommend that until such time the New 
Provisions are made in this regard, due  preference be accorded to those  States/UTs 

21 
 
which do not have any MFPs or APCs, while selecting / approving new Projects against 
the present 40% Project-quota meant for the places located outside the MFPs/APCs. The 
Committee would however, like to be apprised of the action taken in this matter. 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
Ministry vide extant CEFPPC scheme guidelines dated 08.06.2022 has made 
provisions in the guidelines to consider the proposals received both inside Mega Food 
Parks (MFPs)/ Agro Processing Clusters (APCs) and anywhere outside MFPs/APCs by 
bifurcating the total fund allocation to 60% and 40% for setting up of units inside MFPs/ 
APCs and outside MFPs/ APCs respectively under CEFPCC scheme. This fund sharing 
pattern would assist in making MFPs/ APCs approved by this Ministry under the 
respective scheme, operational and functional and encourage prospective entrepreneurs/ 
applicants anywhere outside the MFPs/ APCs to apply and avail the benefits of the 
CEFPPC scheme.  
 Further, Expression of Interests (EoIs) are being issued from time to time under 
the CEFPPC scheme to invite proposals from the prospective entrepreneurs / applicants 
across the country irrespective of the State/UT. In order to encourage the applicants from 
the States/ UTs and Regions where no MFP/ APC is available, wide publicity on the EoI 
and benefits of the scheme are being made. 
MINISTRY OF FOOD PROCESSING INDUSTRIES 
(OM. No. H-11012/1/2024-Parl. dated 02.04.2024) 
 
 
13. Delay and Challenges in the Implementation of the Scheme for CEFPPC 
 
The Committee note that the time period specified for completion and 
operationalization of Approved Projects under the Scheme for CEFPPC, is 18 months 
from the date of issue of Approval Letter. However, the Sanctioned Projects have been 
observed to incur delay / time -overruns in their implementation and completion. The 
Ministry have stated before the Committee that it could not approve the targeted 305 
projects during 14 th Finance Commission Cycle (FCC) period due to paucity of funds for 
the Scheme. However , the Ministry subsequently intimated that during the 14 th FCC 
Period of 01.04.2017 to 31.03.2021 a total of 353 Projects were approved, out of which 
212 Projects were completed, 96 were cancelled/withdrawn and 45 Projects are still 

22 
 
ongoing. During the 15 th FCC period starting from 01.04.2021 onwards, out of the total 
243 Approved Projects, 7 -Projects were completed 26 -Projects were cancelled/ 
withdrawn and 210 -Projects were ongoing. As on 12.09.2023, the cumulative 
achievements since the launch of the Scheme for CEFPPC in 2017 -18, are stated to be 
Total Number of Approved Projects - 596, Projects Completed - 218, Projects cancelled/ 
withdrawn - 105 and Ongoing Projects - 273. 
The Committee note that delay in obtaining Statutory Clearances / Certificates 
from States/UTs and inadequate support from lending banks in disbursement of Term -
loans are stated to be main factors causing delay in the implementation of the Approved 
Projects. As regards cancellation or withdrawal of approved Projects is concerned, the 
Committee note that the reason for the same is that the applicants could not fulfil  the 
eligibility conditions or show required progress/documents in the implementation of the 
project for getting benefits under the Scheme. The Committee, therefore, recommend 
that the Ministry should take necessary action to address the problems/ challenges faced 
by the Project Implementing Agencies (PIAs)in States/UTs through creation of Monitoring 
Cells/Units in concerned State/UTs and through effective coordination with the 
Institutions/Resources that have been established in States/UTs for the implementation 
of the Centrally Sponsored Scheme of 'Pradhan Mantri Formalisation of Micro Food 
Processing Enterprises (PMFME)'. The Committee also recommend that the Technical 
Evaluation and Monitoring Process for the implementation of the Scheme for CEFPPC 
be suitably strengthened by way of improving its mechanism so as to avoid subsequent 
Cancellation/ Withdrawal in respect of large number of Approved Projects. The 
Committee would like to be apprised of action taken in the matter. 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
MoFPI has been taking regular steps to combat the delay and challenges faced in 
implementation of the CEFPPC scheme by (i) organizing periodical review meetings with 
the implementing agencies (IAs) of the projects approved under CEFPPC scheme in 
order to understand the problems faced (including non -submission of requisite 
documents for claiming grants -in-aid) in implementing these projects and to facilitate IAs 
to complete the projects within time; (ii) taking up issues of projects with concerned 
banks, Sta te Governments and other organisations; and (iii) undertaking inspection of 

23 
 
these units through Project Management Agencies from time to time to guide the IAs in 
implementing the projects and to facilitate them  to set up units as per scheme guidelines 
and  submitting documents on Sampada portal for claiming the installments of grants -in-
aid under the scheme. 
MINISTRY OF FOOD PROCESSING INDUSTRIES 
(OM. No. H-11012/1/2024-Parl. dated 02.04.20 

24 
 
CHAPTER III 
 
OBSERVATION/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH THE COMMITTEE 
DO NOT DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE GOVERNMENT’S REPLY 
 
 
5. Utilization of Funds and Progress in Implementation of the Scheme for 
CEFPPC 
 
The Scheme for CEFPPC, which was launched in 2017 -18, was allocated a 
Budgetary Outlay of Rs.1290 Crore for the 14 th Finance Commission Cycle (FCC) Period 
ending on 31.03.2021. The Budgetary Support was subsequently revised to Rs.1068.50 
Crore for approving 305 Projects, with an average Grants-in-Aid of Rs.3.5 Crore Per Unit. 
The Ministry, however, exhausted the amount in approving 297 Units up to 31.03.2021 
and accordingly the target of approving 305 Units could not be achieved. The Committee 
note with con cern that the Ministry could eventually utilize only Rs.456.70 Crore against 
Rs.1068.50 Crore. With regard to lower achievements, the Ministry attributed the factors 
responsible for the same like Inadequate number of eligible proposals at initial stages of 
implementation, Approval of large number of Projects at the end of 14th FCC period, Time 
period of 18/24 months required for completion of Projects and the delay in submission of 
Documents for claiming Grants-in-Aid. 
During the 15 th FCC Period of 2021 -22 to 2025 -26, the outlay for CEFPPC was 
Rs.1292 Crore, out of which Rs.642 Crore has been earmarked only towards meeting the 
liabilities of Previously Sanctioned Ongoing Projects. Hence, an amount of Rs.650 Crore, 
was only available for implementation of New Proposals against which, the Ministry 
envisaged to implement 162 New Proposals including a backlog of 43 Eligible Proposals. 
The Ministry also received 307 More Eligible Proposals as against its Notification of 
21.06.2022 and thus there were a total of 350 (43+307) Eligible Proposals for 
implementation. In regard to additional funds allocation for the Scheme, the Department 
of Expenditure has suggested to the Ministry that it may utilize additional Rs.950 Crore 
only (20% of outlay of Rs.4600 Crore for PMKSY) after obtaining requisite approvals. 
Under these circumstances, the Ministry has now informed that 107 pending 
eligible proposals will not be approved for implementation due to non-availability of funds. 
Surprisingly, even in this crisis situation of non -availability of funds for approving already 

25 
 
received 107 Eligible Proposals and inadequacy of funds for completion of 273 Ongoing 
Projects, the Ministry has again issued Notification inviting proposals under the Scheme. 
Keeping in view the above factors, the Committee feel that the Ministry has failed 
to visualize, plan and ensure proper implementation of the Scheme and the Ministry has 
under-utilized the funds during the 14 th FCC period and faces financial constraints during 
15th FCC period in the implementation of the Scheme. The Committee, therefore, 
recommend that the Ministry needs to improve its planning process and execution 
mechanism in implementation of the CEFPPC Scheme. The Committee further 
recommend to the Ministry that necessary approvals as suggested by the Department of 
Expenditure be obtained well in time for getting additional funds allocation for the 
Scheme for CEFPPC in order to ensure smooth implementation of this most important 
Scheme-Component of PMKSY. The Committee would like to be apprised of the precise 
action taken in the matter. 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
The Ministry of Food Processing Industries (MoFPI) has been implementing the 
component scheme – Creation/ Expansion of Food Processing and Preservation 
Capacities of PMKSY since 2017 -18. During the 14 th Finance Commission Cycle period 
(2015-16 to 2019 -20 extended up to 2020 -21), a budgetary outlay of ₹1290 crore was 
allocated, which was subsequently revised to ₹1068.50 crore for approving 297 units 
against the target of 305 projects. During the 14 th FCC period ending 31.03.2021, 
₹460.78 crore has been utilized against the Revised Estimate (RE) of ₹533.22 crore, 
which is 86.41% of the RE allocation.  
 During the 15 th FCC period (2021 -22 to 2025 -26), a budgetary outlay of ₹1292    
(₹ 650 crore for approving 162 new projects and remaining ₹ 642 crore for meeting out 
liabilities). During the 15 th FCC period, an EoI dated 21.06.2022 was issued against 
which 307 eligible proposals were received. During 2022 -23, a total of 200 proposals 
against EoI dated 21.06.2022 plus 43 proposals of earlier EoI of which 243 proposals 
were approved based upon availability of funds. Thereafter, Ministry vide its notice dated 
18.07.2023 has conveyed that approval of any new projects under CEFPPC scheme will 
be on the basis of new Expression of Interest that may be published in due course of  
time and that any entity which had submitted its application against earlier EoI dated 

26 
 
21.06.2022 may apply afresh as and when new EOI is issued by the Ministry. 
 Further, MoFPI has floated an EoI dated 27.07.2023 for inviting applications 
specifically fr om prospective applicants belonging to SC & ST category and North -
Eastern Region (NER). Under this EoI, 42 projects (20 projects under SC, 1 project 
under ST and 21 projects under NER) have been approved with total grants -in-aid of 
₹159.90 crore. These 42 projects have been approved against the cancellation/ 
withdrawal of the projects and allocation of additional funds by Ministry of Finance. 
Subsequently, a fresh EoI was issued on 04.10.2023 under the CEFPPC scheme. 
Against it, 1007 proposals have been received. 
During the 15 th FCC period, against RE of ₹737.30 crore allocated from 2021 -22 
to 2023-24, ₹537.42 crore has been utilized till 09.02.2024, which is 72.90% of the RE 
allocation.  
 This Ministry has taken necessary approvals from the Department of Expenditure 
regarding al location of funds under the scheme. Thereafter, based on availability of 
funds, EoIs are floated and accordingly approvals are accorded to the eligible projects.  
    
Ministry of Food Processing Industries 
(OM. No. H-11012/1/2024-Parl. dated 02.04.2024) 
 
6. Requirement of Additional Budgetary Allocation for the Scheme for CEFPPC 
 
The Committee note that since the launch of the Scheme for CEFPPC in 2017 -18, 
the cumulative achievements as on 17.09.2023 are that a total of 596 Projects have been 
approved, out of which 218 -Projects were completed, 105 -Projects cancelled/ withdrawn 
and 273-Projects are ongoing. According to the Ministry an amount of Rs.1034.74 Crore 
is required for these 273 ongoing Projects. In addition, the Ministry may need additional 
funds for the implementation of New Eligible Proposals that will be received in resp onse 
to its notification of 27.07.2023. The Committee also note that an outlay for the Scheme 
for CEFPPC for the duration of 15 th FCC period of 2021 -22 to 2025 -26 was Rs.1292 
Crore. As on 01.06.2023, the Ministry has already incurred an expenditure of Rs. 415.12 
Crore. The Ministry has taken up the matter of additional funds allocation for the Scheme 
for CEFPPC with the Ministry of Finance. According to the Ministry 107 Eligible 
Proposals already pending with it could not be approved for implementation due to Non-

27 
 
availability of funds. The Non-Availability of sufficient funds during the current year, as 
also for the remaining duration of 15th FCC period has also been one of the major 
reasons for the same. The Funds requirements for comp letion of Ongoing Projects and 
additional funds needed by the Ministry for the implementation of New Projects under the 
Scheme, have not been clearly indicated by the Ministry. 
 
The Committee, therefore, strongly recommend that funds requirements for the 
Scheme be worked out afresh taking into account the balance funds available out of the 
outlay for 15 th FCC period, Number of projects likely to be completed during 2023 -24, 
2024-25 & 2025 -26 and the likely Number of new eligible proposals to be implemented 
out of the eligible application to be received against notification issued on 27.07.2023. 
The Committee, further emphasize that the Ministry shall work out a realistic 
estimate of its funds requirements and convince the Government for providing the 
required additional funds for the Scheme at the earliest so that all the eligible proposals 
received by it are implemented towards attaining the obje ctive of reducing Post -harvest 
losses of Agricultural Produces in the country. The Committee also desire that the 
Government should provide more funds for efficient and smooth implementation of the 
Scheme for CEFPPC during the current financial year and for the period of 2024 -26 for 
effective implementation of  the important Scheme Component  of the Pradhan Mantri 
Kisan Sampada Yojana (PMKSY). The Committee  would like to be apprised of the 
achievements made by the Ministry in this regard. 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
As on 13.02.2024, 501 food processing units have been approved under various 
sectors viz. Fruit & Vegetable, Consumer products, Dairy, Grain milling, Oil milling and 
Meat & Poultry processing for total grants -in-aid/subsidy of Rs. 1931.64 crore under 
CEFPPC scheme. Out of 501 units, 227 have been completed and commenced 
commercial operations, thereby creating 104.77 lakh metric tonnes (LMT) processing / 
preservation capacities, which leads to considerable reduction in the post-harvest losses. 
The balance 274 units are under different stages of implementation.  
During the 14 th Finance Commission Cycle period (2015 -16 to 2019 -20 extended 
up to 2020 -21), a budgetary outlay of ₹ 1290 crore was allocated, which was 
subsequently revised to ₹ 1068.50 crore for approving 297 units against the target of 305 

28 
 
projects. During the 14th FCC period ending 31.03.2021, ₹460.78 crore has been utilized 
against the Revised Estimate (RE) of ₹ 533.22 crore, which is 86.41% of the RE 
allocation.  
 During the 15 th FCC period (2021-22 to 2025-26), a budgetary outlay of ₹1292 (₹ 
650 crore for approving 162 new projects and remaining ₹ 642 crore for meeting out 
liabilities) had been provided. During 2022 -23, a total of 200 proposals against EoI dated 
21.06.2022 plus 43 proposals of earlier EoI were approved based upon availability of 
funds. Thereafter, Ministry vide its notice dated 18.07.2023 has conveyed that approval 
of any new projects under CEFPPC scheme will be on the basis of new Expression of 
Interest that may be published in due course of time and that any entity which had 
submitted its application against earlier EoI dated 21.06.2022 may apply afresh as and 
when new EOI is issued by the Ministry. 
 Ministry of Food Processing Industries has been taking up with Ministry of Finance 
for allocation of additional funds under various comp onent schemes of PMKSY. With 
these efforts, an amount of ₹920 crore has been allowed by Ministry of Finance over and 
above ₹4600 crore allocated under PMKSY earlier. Of this amount, it has been decided 
that ₹580 crore will be utilized for approving project s under component scheme of 
CEFPPC.  
Ministry of Food Processing Industries 
(OM. No. H-11012/1/2024-Parl. dated 02.04.2024) 
 
11. Time Schedule for Invitation of Proposals under the Scheme for CEFPPC 
 
  The Committee note that the Ministry of Food Processing Industries invites Online 
proposals/Applications from the prospective Entrepreneurs by issuing Expression of 
Interest (EoI) from time to time under various Sub -schemes of PMKSY including the 
Scheme for CEFPPC based on availability of funds, number of Cancelled/ Withdrawn 
Projects and the number of vacant slots. During the past six years of implementation of 
the Scheme for CEFPPC since its inception, the Ministry has invited proposals six times 
on 31.07.2017, 29.12.2017, 16.07.2019, 01.06.2020, 21.06.2022 & 27.07.2023. The last 
date for submission of proposals as per the current Notification of 27.07.2023 is 
22.11.2023. 
 

29 
 
The Committee further note that the Ministry has not followed any Annual time 
Schedule in inviting proposals reportedly due to Covid -19 Pandemic and non -receipt of 
adequate number of eligible applications/proposals at initial stages of implementation of 
the Scheme. However, during the 15th Finance Commission Cycle period starting from 
01.04.2021, the Ministry is receiving good response for the Scheme and is getting 
sufficient number of eligible proposals for the Scheme. Against the backdrop the 
Committee re commend that the Ministry must chalk out an Annual Time Schedule for 
Invitation, Selection and Approval / Sanction of Projects under the Scheme for CEFPPC 
and the Notification for inviting proposals be issued at  least once in a year after 
budgetary allocation for the year. Action taken in this regard be intimated to the 
Committee. 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
Expression of Interests (EoIs) are being issued by this Ministry from time to time 
under the CEFPPC scheme based on the availability of funds and vacant slots to invite 
proposals from the prospective entrepreneurs/ applicants across the country irrespective 
of the State/UT based on the availability of funds and vacant slots. During 2022, one EoI 
was issued while during 2023, two EoI were issued based on availability of funds.  
 
Ministry of Food Processing Industries 
(OM. No. H-11012/1/2024-Parl. dated 02.04.2024) 
 
12. Promotion of Region Specific Products under the Schemes of the Ministry 
 
The main objective of the scheme for CEFPPC is to increase the level of Food 
Processing and Value Addition through creation of processing and preservation 
capacities and modernization / expansion of existing Food Processing Units. The 
Committee, note that the Scheme for CEFPPC plays a major role in establishment / 
expansion of Food Processing Units. The Committee further note that the Scheme is 
Demand Driven and as such no State/UT -wise Project implementation and funds 
allocation is done. Out of the already  Approved 473 Food Processing Units till June, 
2023, 210 Projects have been completed with creation of processing/ preservation 
capacity of 38.32 LMT/Annum. Further, 263 Ongoing Projects will result in creating 
processing / preservation capacity of 55.58 LMT/Annum. However, the State/UT -wise 

30 
 
data of 484 Projects furnished by the Ministry indicates that there is a vast disparity 
among States/UTs and in different Regions. 
 
The Committee are also of the view that the problem of periodic glut in production 
of some Agricultural Produces like Onion, Potato, Tomato, etc. in different Regions of the 
country has not been properly addressed to under the Scheme. Moreover, the Post -
harvest losses - in respect of fruits and vegetables in the country, are in the range of 
4.58% to above 11%, which remains a big cause of concern. Processing of Agricultural 
Produces into suitable value added products and facilitation of appropriate storage for 
excess production can help to reduce the Post -Harvest losses and also give protection 
against price fluctuation during the glut periods. The Committee therefore, recommend 
that Region Specific and Product Specific Programmes be promoted under the Scheme 
for CEFPPC to address the issue through suitable interventions by the way of necessary 
modifications in the Operative Guidelines of the Scheme. The Committee also 
recommend that more number of Common Facility Centers with Gamma Radiation 
Centres, etc. be  promoted under the Scheme to increase preservation capacities - in 
respect of perishable items of agricultural produces. The Committee desire to be 
apprised of the action taken in the matter. 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
The Ministry of Food Processing Industries (MoFPI) has been implementing a 
Central Sector umbrella scheme viz. Pradhan Mantri Kisan Sampada Yojana (PMKSY) 
since 2017-18. Under PMKSY, a component scheme viz. Creation/ Expansion of Food 
Processing and preservation capacities (CEFPPC scheme) with an objective to set up 
new food processing units and modernization/ expansion of existing units thereby 
creating processing and preservation capacities to increase the level of processing  and 
value addition and to reduce wastage. As on 13.02.2024, 501 food processing units have 
been approved under various sectors viz. Fruit & Vegetable, Consumer products, Dairy, 
Grain milling, Oil milling and Meat & Poultry processing for total grants -in-aid/subsidy of 
Rs. 1931.64 crore under CEFPPC scheme. Out of 501 units, 227 have been completed 
and commenced commercial operations, thereby creating 104.77 lakh metric tonnes 
(LMT) processing / preservation capacities, which leads to considerable reduction in the 
post-harvest losses.  

31 
 
 Further, this Ministry has been implementing a Centrally Sponsored scheme viz. 
PM Formalisation of Micro Food Processing Enterprises (PMFME) adopts the One 
District One Product (ODOP) approach to reap the benefit of scale in terms of 
procurement of inputs, availing common services and marketing of products. ODOP for 
the scheme will provide the framework for value chain development and alignment of 
support infrastructure. There may be more than one cluster of ODOP products in one 
district. There may be a cl uster of ODOP products consisting of more than one adjacent 
district in a State.  Hence, the recommendation of inclusion of Region specific and 
Product specific programme under the CEFPPC scheme may lead to duplication/ 
overlapping among the schemes.  
 
 Under PMKSY, there is a component scheme –viz. Integrated Cold Chain and 
Value Addition Infrastructure which provide integrated cold chain and preservation 
infrastructure facilities, without any break, from the farm gate to the consumer. It covers 
creation of infrastructure facility along the entire supply chain viz. pre -cooling, weighing, 
sorting, grading, waxing facilities at farm level, multi product/multi temperature cold 
storage, CA storage, packing facility, IQF, blast freezing in the distribution hu b and reefer 
vans, mobile cooling units for facilitating distribution of non -horticulture, horticulture, 
fish/marine (except shrimp), dairy, meat and poultry. The scheme allows flexibility in 
project planning with special emphasis on creation of cold chain infrastructure at farm 
level. Further, under the component scheme, there is a  provision to support setting up of 
standalone Irradiation facility. Under irradiation facility, financial assistance of ₹10.00 
crore in the form of grants -in-aid/ subsidy is provided for creating irradiation facility along 
with cold store, grading & sorti ng facilities, refer vans for storage and transport of raw 
material and finished products for efficient utilization of the facility. Hence, the 
recommendation for inclusion of irradiation facility under the CEFPPC scheme may lead 
to duplication/ overlapping within the component schemes of PMKSY. 
 
Ministry of Food Processing Industries 
(OM. No. H-11012/1/2024-Parl. dated 02.04.2024) 
 

32 
 
CHAPTER IV 
 
 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH ACTION TAKEN 
REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE 
COMMITTEE 
 
 
7. Implementation of the Scheme for CEFPPC for SCSP, TSP & NE Region 
 
The Committee note that the Ministry could not properly utilise the funds allocated 
under the Scheme for CEFPPC for Schedule Caste Sub Plan (SCSP), Tribal Sub Plan 
(TSP) and for the North Eastern Region since the launch of the Scheme. As regards the 
implementation of SCSP during 2018-19 to 2022-23, the Budget Estimates (BE), Revised 
Estimates (RE), Actual Expenditure (AE) are Rs. 368.93 Crore; Rs. 292.92 Crore; and 
Rs. 107.50 Crore respectively. In the implementation of TSP, the achievements in terms 
of BE,  RE and AE are Rs. 217.64 Crore, Rs. 170.83 Crore and Rs. 35.32 Crore. 
Similarly, the BE, RE and AE in respect of North Eastern Region are Rs. 509.54 Crore, 
Rs. 397.27 Crore and Rs. 199.28 Crore respectively. 
The Committee note that utilization of funds for SCSP and TSP has been less 
than 1/3rd of the amount allocated and utilization of funds for North Eastern Region (NER) 
is less than 50% which is not an encouraging trend. The Committee, therefore, 
recommend that the Ministry should try to find out the reasons for Non -utilization of 
allocated funds for SCSP, TSP and also for NER so as to make sure that the funds are 
utilized to the optimum level by the Ministry in the implementation of the Scheme. 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
Under CEFPPC scheme, the Ministry of Food Processing Industries (MoFPI) has 
been providing the following benefits to encourage SC/ ST and NER category applicants 
as per the extant scheme guidelines dated 08.06.2022:  
(i) Proposals received from entities where Scheduled Caste (SC)/ Scheduled Tribe 
(ST) holding at least 51% stake in the entity, will be treated as SC/ST proposals. 
(ii) The entities applying under a scheme for financial assistance are required to 
submit a non-refundable fee of Rs. 20,000/ - (Rupees twenty thousand) in favour of “Pay 

33 
 
and Accounts Officer, Ministry of Food Processing Industries, New Delhi”. This non-
refundable fee is Rs. 15,000/- for applications from SC/ST. 
(iii) Term loan from the Bank for an amount not less than 20% of the total project cost 
is required in respect of proposals from General Areas. In case of proposals from Difficult 
Areas or proposals from SC/ST or Farmer Producer Organizations or Self -Help Groups, 
minimum term loan amount requirement has been made 10% of the total project cost  as 
against 20% in other cases. 
(iv) The minimum marks  for eligibility of proposal is  45 for an applicant belonging to 
SC/ ST as against 60% in other cases. 
(v) Grants-in-aid will be consi dered @35% for projects in General Areas and @50% 
for projects in Difficult Areas (including NER) as well as for projects of SC/ST subject to a 
maximum of ₹5 crore. 
MoFPI has been taking regular steps to boost the utilization of funds under SCSP, 
TSP and N ER by (i) organizing periodical review meetings with the implementing 
agencies (IAs) of the projects approved under SCSP, TSP and NER categories of 
CEFPPC scheme in order to understand the problems faced (including non -submission 
of requisite documents for claiming grants -in-aid) in implementing these projects and to 
facilitate IAs to complete the projects within time and (ii) undertaking inspection of these 
units through Project Management Agencies from time to time so as to guide the IAs in 
implementing t he projects and to facilitate them in submitting documents on Sampada 
portal for claiming the installments of grants-in-aid under the scheme.  
MoFPI had floated an EoI dated 27.07.2023 for inviting applications specifically 
from prospective applicants belonging to SC & ST category and NER. Under this EoI, 42 
projects (20 projects under SC, 1 project under ST and 21 projects under NER) ha ve 
been approved with total grants -in-aid of ₹159.90 crore. These approved projects will 
become eligible for claiming installments of grants-in-aid in due course of time.  
Subsequently, a fresh EoI was issued on 04.10.2023 for inviting applications from 
all categories under the CEFPPC scheme. Against it, 1007 proposals have been 
received. 
 
 

34 
 
In view of above actions, this Ministry would be able to utilize the funds to the 
optimum level under the heads of SCSP, TSP and NER of the scheme.  
Ministry of Food Processing Industries 
(OM. No. H-11012/1/2024-Parl. dated 02.04.2024) 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
 For comments of the Committee please refer to Para No. 1.10 of Chapter-I of 
this Report. 
 
8. Non-Refundable Fee in respect of Non-Implemented Eligible Proposals 
 
The Committee note that the probable beneficiaries under the Scheme for 
CEFPPC need to submit their Application / Project Proposal complete in all respects in 
accordance with the instructions laid down in the Operative Guidelines and as per the 
Notification of the Ministry. All the Applicants are also required to submit a Non -
refundable fee of Rs.20,000/ - (Rs.15,000/- for SC/ST Applicants) along with the Project 
Proposal. Moreover, the successful applicants, on being selected for financial assistance 
by the  Ministry, are also required to submit a Refundable Bank Guarantee of 5% of 
eligible Grants-in Aid within 30 days of approval of the Project for the period, till 60 days 
beyond the date of completion of the Project. According to the Ministry, the Non -
refundable Application fee is sought in order to ascertain the genuineness and interest of 
the Applicant for availing Grants -in-Aid and also to meet out the expense involved in 
processing the Applications / Proposals. This fee in respect of the Rejected/ Inelig ible 
proposals is not returned to the Applicants. 
Keeping in view the above factors, the Committee hold the view that prescription 
of Non-refundable fee for the submission of application for the Scheme is a discouraging 
factor for prospective applicants particularly, SC/ST applicants and weaker categories 
like farmers, SHGs, etc. The Committee, therefore, recommend that the condition of Non-
refundable Application Fee for submission of proposals needs a serious reconsideration. 
However, the Ministry may consider other alternate measures to discourage Non -serious 
candidates instead of prescribing Non-refundable Application Fee. 
The Committee also specifically desire that the Ministry shall look into the matter 
of 107 Eligible Proposals, which still remain pending with it out of the 307 Eligible 

35 
 
proposals received by it against its previous Notification dated 21.06.2022. The 
Committee would like to be apprised of the action taken in the matter. 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
 The Ministry of Food Processing Industries (MoFPI) as per the extant CEFPPC 
guidelines dated 08.06.2022, stipulates that the applicant against Expression of Interest 
(EoI) is required to submit (a) non -refundable application fee at the time of submission of 
the proposal in the Sampada portal in order to ascertain the genuineness and the actual 
interest of the applicant for availing grants -in-aid and to discourage non -serious 
applicants irrespective of the category they belong; and (b) refundable Bank Guara ntee 
worth of 5% of the eligible grants -in-aid within 30 days of approval of the project. The 
non-refundable fee is lower @ ₹15000 in case of SC/ST applications.   
 MoFPI received 307 eligible proposals under CEFPPC scheme against the EoI 
dated 21.06.2022. Out of 307 eligible proposals, 243 propo sals have been accorded 
approval and remaining eligible proposals could not be approved due to paucity of funds. 
Thereafter, Ministry vide its notice dated 18.07.2023 has conveyed that approval of any 
new projects under CEFPPC scheme will be on the basis of new Expression of Interest 
that may be published in due course of time. Any entity who had submitted its application 
against earlier EoI dated 21.06.2022 may apply afresh as and when new EOI is issued 
by the Ministry.  
Ministry of Food Processing Industries 
(OM. No. H-11012/1/2024-Parl. dated 02.04.2024) 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
 For comments of the Committee please refer to Para No. 1.13 of Chapter-I of 
this Report. 
 
10. Participation of Different Categories in the Scheme for CEFPPC 
 
As per the CEFPPC Operative Guidelines any organization/individual engaged in 
creation/ expansion/ modernization of Food Processing and Preservation Capacities 
would be eligible for Grants -in Aid (GIA) under the Scheme. The scheme is Demand 
Driven and subject to availability of funds. Although no specific State -wise allocation of 

36 
 
funds is made under the Scheme, however, 10% of total BE is reserved for North - 
Eastern Region. Many concessions including the enhanced rate of Grants -in-Aid are 
permitted in respect of Project Proposals submitted by Persons belonging to SC/ST and 
Difficult Areas, Farmers Producers Organizations (FPOs), Self -Help Groups (SHGs) and 
Central / State Entities in order to encourage these sections to participate in the Scheme 
for CEFPPC. 
As regards Selection Criteria, the Ministry clarified to the Committee that when 
many applications have the same score in assessment, the Project with higher project 
cost will gain preference in order to attract more private investment. This provision has 
the effect of nullifying the concessions extended to proposals from SC/ST, Difficult Areas, 
FPOs, SHGs and Central / State Entities. The Committee also note that out of the 473 
approved Projects, the break -up of different categories is Private  sector-399; SC
 category-27; STcategories-21; FPO's-13; MNC's-10; Multipurpose-Societies-1; Public 
Sector-1 and SHGs -Nil. Against this backdrop, the Committee recommend that the 
Selection Criteria be reviewed to ensure that FPOs, SHGs, Entities from Difficult Areas 
and Public Entities-having participation of farmers and women also get benefits under the 
Scheme for CEFPPC. The Committee would like to be apprised of the action taken in the 
matter. 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
 Ministry vide extant CEFPPC scheme guidelines dated 08.06.2022 has given the 
following benefits to encourage applicants from SC/ ST category and NER, SHGs 
&FPOs applicants to apply against Expression of Interests (EoIs) issued from time to 
time under the scheme:  
(i) Proposals received from entities where Scheduled Caste (SC)/ Scheduled Tribe 
(ST) holding at least 51% stake in the entity, will be treated as SC/ST proposals. 
(ii) The entities applying under the scheme for financial assistance are required to 
submit a non-refundable fee of Rs. 20,000/ - (Rupees twenty thousand) in favour of “Pay 
and Accounts Officer, Ministry of Food Processing Industries, New Delhi”. This non-
refundable fee is Rs. 15,000/- for applications from SC/ST. 

37 
 
(iii) Infusion of equity of at least 10% for proposals from Difficult areas or proposals 
from SC/ST or FPOs or SHGs against the requirement of at least 20% for the proposals 
from General areas.  
(iv) The proposal from Difficult areas, applicants of SC/ST category, FPOs and SHGs, 
the combined net worth are required to be less than the grants -in-aid sought against the 
requirement of at least 1.5 times of grants-in-aid sought for others.  
(v) Term loan from the Bank for an amount not less than 20% of the total project cost 
in respect of proposals from General Areas. In case of proposals from Difficult Areas or 
proposals from SC/ST or Farmer Producer Organisations or Self -Help Groups, term loan 
amount should not be less than 10% of the total project cost. 
(vi) The minimum marks for eligibility of proposal will be 45 for a n applicant belonging 
to SC/ ST against the requirement of 60% marks for general category applicants. 
(vii) Grants-in-aid will be considered @35% for projects in General Areas and @50% 
for projects in Difficult Areas (including NER) as well as for projects of SC/ST , FPOs and 
SHGs subject to a maximum of ₹5 crore. 
Ministry is of the view that the aforementioned benefits to the applicants from SC/ 
ST category and NER, SHGs & FPOs applicants would help them to avail the benefits 
under the scheme without affecting the merit.  
 
Ministry of Food Processing Industries 
(OM. No. H-11012/1/2024-Parl. dated 02.04.2024) 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
 
 For comments of the Committee please refer to Para No. 1.16 of Chapter-I of 
this Report. 
 
 

38 
 
CHAPTER V 
 
 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH FINAL REPLIES 
OF THE GOVERNMENT ARE STILL AWAITED 
 
 
 
 
-NIL- 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
New Delhi;                           CHARANJIT SINGH CHANNI  
19 August , 2025                                                      Chairperson, 
28 Shravana, 1947 (Saka)             Standing Committee on Agriculture, 
                 Animal Husbandry and Food Processing 
 
 
 
 

39 
 
ANNEXURE 
 
MINUTES OF THE THIRTY FIFTH SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE ON 
AGRICULTURE, ANIMAL HUSBANDRY AND FOOD PROCESSING (2024-25) 
 
The Committee sat on Monday, 18 th August, 2025 from 1500 hours to 1530 
hours in Committee Room No. 3, Extension to Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
 
Present 
 
Shri Charanjit Singh Channi – Chairperson 
 
Members 
 
Lok Sabha 
  
   2. Shri Umeshbhai Babubhai Patel 
   3. Shri Rajkumar Chahar 
4. Smt. Anita Nagarsingh Chouhan 
   5. Shri Rajpalsinh Mahendrasinh Jadav 
   6. Md. Abu Taher Khan 
7. Shri Sukanta Kumar Panigrahi 
8. Smt. Krishna Devi Shivshankar Patel 
9. Shri Naresh Chandra Uttam Patel 
10. Shri Murasoli S. 
11. Shri Dharambir Singh 
   12. Shri Sudhakar Singh 
   13. Shri Kodikunnil Suresh 
   14. Smt. Geniben Nagaji Thakor 
   15. Shri Bhausaheb Rajaram Wakchaure 
    
Rajya Sabha 
 
   16. Smt. Ramilaben Becharbhai Bara 
   17. Shri Masthan Rao Yadav Beedha 
   18. Shri Banshilal Gurjar 
   19. Shri Nitin Laxmanrao Jadhav Patil 
   20. Shri Madan Rathore 
   21. Shri Ramji Lal Suman 
   22. Shri P.P. Suneer 
 
Secretariat 
 
 
1. Shri Dhiraj Kumar   - Joint Secretary 
2. Shri Maheshwar   -  Director  
3. Shri Prem Ranjan   - Deputy Secretary   

40 
 
 
2. At the outset, the Chairperson welcomed the Members to the Sitting of the Committee 
and *xxxxx. Thereafter, the Committee took up for consideration and adoption the following 
Reports: 
 
(i)  *xxxx   xxxx   xxxx   xxxx   xxxx;  
(ii) *xxxx   xxxx   xxxx   xxxx   xxxx;  
(iii) *xxxx   xxxx   xxxx   xxxx   xxxx;  
(iv) *xxxx   xxxx   xxxx   xxxx   xxxx;  
(v) Draft Action -taken Report on the Action taken by the Government on the 
Observations/ Recommendations contained in the 67 th Report of the Committee 
on the subject, “Scheme for Creation/Expansion of Food Processing and 
Preservation Capacities (CEFPPC) – An Evaluation”, pertaining to the Ministry of 
Food Processing Industries presented during 17th Lok Sabha; 
(vi) *xxxx   xxxx   xxxx   xxxx   xxxx;  
(vii) *xxxx   xxxx   xxxx   xxxx   xxxx; and 
(viii) *xxxx   xxxx   xxxx   xxxx   xxxx. 
 
3. After some deliberations, the Committee adopted the Draft Reports without any  
modifications and the Committee authorized the Chairperson to finalize and present the Report to 
Parliament. 
 
The Committee then adjourned. 
 
* Matter not related to this Report 

41 
 
APPENDIX 
 
ANALYSIS OF ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS CONTAINED IN THE SIXTY SEVENTH 
REPORT (17TH LOK SABHA) OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE, 
ANIMAL HUSBANDRY AND FOOD PROCESSING (2023-24) 
 
(Vide Para 4 of Introduction of the Report) 
 
(i) Total Number of Recommendations       13 
(ii) Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted By the Government  
       Para Nos.  1, 2, 3, 4, 9, and 13. Total      06 
 Percentage     46.15% 
(iii) Observations/Recommendations which the Committee d o not desire to pursue in 
view of the Government’s replies  
Para No.    5, 6, 11, and 12                                                                Total      04 
                                                                                                                                
Percentage    30.77% 
(iv) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which Replies of the Government 
have not been accepted by the Committee 
Para No.    7, 8, and 10                                                                 Total     03 
                                                                                                                                
Percentage   23.08% 
(v) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which f inal replies of the 
Government are still awaited 
Para No.    NIL                                                                            Total      00 
 Percentage 0.00% 
 
 
 
  
 