  
STANDING COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE, ANIMAL HUSBANDRY 
AND FOOD PROCESSING 
 
(2025-2026) 
 
 
EIGHTEENTH LOKSABHA 
 
 
 
MINISTRY OF FOOD PROCESSING INDUSTRIES 
 
 
‘INITIATIVES TAKEN IN FOOD PROCESSING SECTOR  
UNDER ‘MAKE IN INDIA’ PROGRAM’ 
 
 
[Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations contained in the 
Twenty First Report (Eighteenth Lok Sabha) of the Standing Committee on Agriculture, 
Animal Husbandry and Food Processing (2024-25)] 
 
 
 
 
FORTY FIRST REPORT 
 
 
 
 
 
LOKSABHASECRETARIAT  
NEW DELHI 
 
AUGUST, 2026/SHRAVANA, 1948(SAKA) 
 
 
41 

 
  
FORTY FIRST REPORT 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE, 
ANIMAL HUSBANDRY AND FOOD PROCESSING 
 
(2025-2026) 
 
 
EIGHTEENTH LOKSABHA 
 
 
 
MINISTRY OF FOOD PROCESSING INDUSTRIES 
 
 
‘INITIATIVES TAKEN IN FOOD PROCESSING SECTOR  
UNDER ‘MAKE IN INDIA’ PROGRAM’ 
 
 
[Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations 
contained in the Twenty First Report (Eighteenth Lok Sabha) of the Standing 
Committee on Agriculture, Animal Husbandry and Food Processing (2024-25)] 
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on 12.08.2026 
Laid on the Table of Rajya Sabha on 12.08.2026 
 
 
 
 
LOKSABHASECRETARIAT  
NEW DELHI 
AUGUST, 2026/SHRAVANA, 1948(SAKA)  

 
  
COA No.  540 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
© 2026 By Lok Sabha Secretariat 
 
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of Business in Lok Sabha 
(Seventeenth Edition) and Printed by Lok Sabha Secretariat 

 
  
 
CONTENTS 
 
 PAGE 
Composition of the Committee (2024-25)  iii 
Composition of the Committee (2025-26)  iv 
Introduction  vi 
Chapter I Report 1 
Chapter II     Observations/Recommendations that have been accepted by the 
Government 
13 
Chapter III Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not desire 
to pursue in view of the Government’s replies 
40 
Chapter IV Observations/Recommendations in respect of which Replies of the 
Government have not been accepted by the Committee 
42 
Chapter V Observations/Recommendations in respect of which final replies of 
the Government are still awaited 
44 
 ANNEXURE 
Minutes of the 24th Sitting of the Committee held on 11th August,2026  
 
45 
 APPENDIX 
Analysis of Action Taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in the Twenty First  
Report (18 th Lok Sabha) of the Standing Committee on Agriculture, 
Animal Husbandry and Food Processing (202 4-25) on the Subject 
‘Initiatives Taken in Food Processing Sector under ‘Make in India’ 
Program’ 
 
 
48 
 
 

 
iii  
COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE, ANIMAL 
HUSBANDRY AND FOOD PROCESSING  
 (2024-25) 
 
 
SHRI CHARANJIT SINGH CHANNI – CHAIRPERSON 
 
MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA 
 
2.  Shri Umeshbhai Babubhai Patel 
3.  Smt. Harsimrat Kaur Badal 
4.  Shri Rajkumar Chahar 
5.  Smt. Anita Nagarsingh Chouhan 
6.  Shri Kuldeep Indora 
7.  Shri Rajpalsinh Mahendrasinh Jadav 
8.  Md. Abu Taher Khan 
9.  Shri Rahul Singh Lodhi 
10.  Shri Sukanta Kumar Panigrahi 
11.  Smt. Krishna Devi Shivshankar Patel 
12.  Shri Naresh Chandra Uttam Patel 
13.  Shri Narayan Tatu Rane 
14.  Shri Murasoli S. 
15.  Shri Dharambir Singh 
16.  Shri Dushyant Singh 
17.  Shri Sudhakar Singh 
18.  Shri Kodikunnil Suresh 
19.  Shri Tejasvi Surya 
20.  Smt. Geniben Nagaji Thakor 
21.  Shri Bhausaheb Rajaram Wakchaure 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
22.  Smt. Ramilaben Becharbhai Bara 
23.  Shri Masthan Rao Yadav Beedha* 
24.  Dr. Anil Sukhdeorao Bonde 
25.  Shri Banshilal Gurjar 
26.  Shri S. Kalyanasundaram 
27.  Shri Nitin Laxmanrao Jadhav Patil 
28.  Shri Madan Rathore 
29.  Shri Ramji Lal Suman 
30.  Shri P. P. Suneer 
31.  Shri Randeep Singh Surjewala 
 
Shri Krishan Lal Panwar, Member resigned from Rajya Sabha on 14.10.2024. 
*Shri Masthan Rao Yadav Beedha, Member, Rajya Sabha  has been nominated to the Standing Committee on Agriculture, 
Animal Husbandry and Food Processing w.e.f on 8th August 2025, vide Lok Sabha Bulletin Part -II, Para No. 3117 dated 
13.08.2025.  

 
iv  
COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE, ANIMAL 
HUSBANDRY AND FOOD PROCESSING  
18th Lok Sabha (2025-26) 
 
SHRI CHARANJIT SINGH CHANNI – CHAIRPERSON 
 
MEMBERS 
   LOK SABHA 
 
2.  Shri Umeshbhai Babubhai Patel 
3.  Smt. Harsimrat Kaur Badal 
4.  Shri Rajkumar Chahar 
5.  Smt. Anita Nagarsingh Chouhan 
6.  Shri Kuldeep Indora 
7.  Shri Rajpalsinh Mahendrasinh Jadav 
8.  Md. Abu Taher Khan 
9.  Shri Rahul Singh Lodhi 
10.  Shri Sukanta Kumar Panigrahi 
11.  Smt. Krishna Devi Shivshankar Patel 
12.  Shri Naresh Chandra Uttam Patel 
13.  Shri Narayan Tatu Rane 
14.  Shri Murasoli S. 
15.  Shri Dharambir Singh 
16.  Shri Dushyant Singh 
17.  Shri Sudhakar Singh 
18.  Shri Kodikunnil Suresh 
19.  Shri Tejasvi Surya 
20.  Smt. Geniben Nagaji Thakor 
21.  Shri Bhausaheb Rajaram Wakchaure 
 
   RAJYA SABHA 
 
22.  Dr. Anil Sukhdeorao Bonde 
23.  Shri Banshilal Gurjar 
24.  Shri Nitin Laxmanrao Jadhav-Patil 
25.  Shri Madan Rathore 
26.  Shri S.R. Sivalingam 
27.  Shri Ramji Lal Suman 
28.  Shri P. P . Suneer 
29.  Shri Randeep Singh Surjewala 
30 Shri Mahesh Kewat* 
31 Shri James Pangsang Kongkal Sangma** 
 
 
Note:   Smt. Ramilaben Becharbhai Bara ceased to be a Member of the Committee after her retirement from Rajya 
Sabha w.e.f. on 21.06.2026 (Rajya Sabha Bulletin Part-II(TO), Para No. 66058 dated 09.01.2026). 
 Shri H.D. Devegowda, ceased to be a Member of the Committee after his retirement from Rajya Sabha w.e.f . on 
25.06.2026 (Rajya Sabha Bulletin Part-II(TO), Para No. 66058 dated 09.01.2026). 
 * Shri Mahesh Kewat, MP, Rajya Sabha have been nominated to the Standing Committee w.e.f. 23.07.2026 vide Lok 
Sabha Bulletin Part-II, No. 5724, dated 24.07.2026. 
 **Shri James Pangsang Kongkal Sangma, MP, Rajya Sabha have been nominated to the Standing Committee w.e.f. 
23.07.2026 vide Lok Sabha Bulletin Part-II, No. 5724, dated 24.07.2026. 
 

 
v  
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
 1. Shri Dhiraj Kumar   - Joint Secretary 
 2. Shri Maheshwar    - Director 
 3. Shri Ashwaghosh B. Lokhande - Under Secretary 
 4. Smt. Paromita Kumar  - Asstt. Executive Officer 
  
 
  

 
vi  
INTRODUCTION 
 
 
I, the Chairperson, Standing Committee on Agriculture, Animal Husbandry 
and Food Processing (2025-26), having been authorized by the Committee to submit 
the Report on their behalf, present this Forty First  Report on Action taken by the 
Government on the Observations/Recommendations contained in the Twenty First  
Report (Eighteenth Lok Sabha) of the Standing Committee on Agriculture, Animal 
Husbandry and Food Processing (202 4-25) on the subject ‘Initiatives Taken in Food 
Processing Sector Under ‘Make In India’ Program ' pertaining to the Ministry of Food 
Processing Industries.  
 
2. The Twenty First Report (Eighteenth Lok Sabha) of the Standing Committee 
on Agriculture, Animal Husbandry and Food Processing (202 4-25) on  the s ubject 
‘Initiatives Taken in Food Processing Sector Under ‘Make In India’ Program ’ 
pertaining to the Ministry of Food Processing Industries was presented to Lok Sabha 
and laid on the Table of Rajya Sabha on 20th August, 2025. The Action Taken Notes 
on the Report were received on 20.11.2025. 
 
3. The Report was considered and adopted by the Committee at their Sitting 
held on 11th August, 2026. 
 
4. An Analysis of the action taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in the Twenty First  Report (Eighteenth 
Lok Sabha) of the Committee on the Subject ‘Initiatives Taken in Food Processing 
Sector Under ‘Make In India’ Program’ is given in Appendix. 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI; 
11 August, 2026                 
20 Shravana, 1948 (Saka) 
CHARANJIT SINGH CHANNI 
Chairperson, 
Standing Committee on Agriculture 
Animal Husbandry and Food Processing 
 

1 
 
CHAPTER I 
REPORT 
 
This Report of the Standing Committee on Agriculture, Animal Husbandry and 
Food Processing deals with the Action Taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in the Twenty First Report (Eighteenth Lok 
Sabha) of the Standing Committee on Agriculture, Animal Husbandry and Food 
Processing (2024-25) on ‘Initiatives Taken in Food Processing Sector Under ‘Make In 
India’ Program ' pertaining to the Ministry of Food  Processing Industries which was 
presented to the Lok Sabha and Laid on the Table of Rajya Sabha on 20.08.2025. 
 
1.2    The Ministry of Food Processing Industries has furnished Action Taken Replies 
in respect of all the 23 Observations/Recommendations contained in the Report. These 
have been categorized as under: 
 
•  Observations/Recommendations that have been accepted by 
the Government:  
Recommendation Nos. 
1,2,3,4,7,8,9,10,11,12,13,14,15,16,17,18,19,20,21,22 
Total – 20 
Chapter II 
•  Observations/Recommendations in respect of which the 
Committee do not desire to pursue in view of the Government's 
Reply: 23 
Total – 01 
Chapter-III 
•  Observations/Recommendations in respect of which Action 
Taken Replies of the Government have not been accepted by 
the Committee: 
Recommendation Nos. 5 & 6  
Total – 02 
Chapter-
IV 
•  Observations/Recommendations in respect of which final replies 
of the  Government are still awaited: NIL 
Total- NIL 
Chapter-V 
 
  

2 
 
1.3  The Committee desire that utmost importance would be given by the 
Ministry to implement the observations/recommendations accepted by the 
Government. In cases, where it is not possible for the Ministry to implement the 
Recommendations in letter and spirit for any reason, the matter may be reported 
to the Committee with the reasons for non -implementation. The Committee desire 
that further Action -Taken Notes on the Observations/Recommendations 
contained in Chapter - I of this Report be furnished to them within three months 
of its presentation.  
 
1.4  The Committee will now deal with the action taken by the Government on 
some of the Recommendations in the succeeding paragraphs. 
 
A. Special Food Processing Fund – Need to improve utilisation 
(Recommendation No.5 & 6) 
 
1.5. The Committee had observed/recommended as follows:  
 “The Committee note that the Govt of India has set up a special fund of 
Rs. 2,000 Crore in NABARD in 2014 -15 to provide affordable credit to the food 
processing units to be set up mega Food Parks and also to the mega Food 
parks.  
 The data on term loans sanctioned and disbursed, as on 31.03.2025, out 
of the Special Food Processing (SFPF) shows that even after a decade of its 
existence, (i) Rs. 1180 crore only out of Rs. 2000 crore, representing 59 % of 
the funds available could be sanctioned as term loans to Mega Food Parks 
(MFPs), Agro Processing Clusters (APCs), Individual food processing units in 
designated food parks and Industrial Food Parks (IFPs), (ii) Out of the term 
loans of Rs.  1179.79 crore sanctioned, Rs. 830 crore only  was disbursed, 

3 
 
representing 70.30% of sanctions till 30 March, 2025. The Committee would like 
to be apprised of the specific reasons for- 
(i) far lower sanctions vis-a-vis available funds;  
(ii) lower disbursements vis-à-vis sanctions;  
(iii) whether all the (a) 14 lendee’s  under MFPs, (b) Nine APCs (c) 14 
Individual Processing Units (IPUs) and three Industrial food parks 
(IFPs), as given at annexure ----, which availed credit from the fund are 
repaying the loans as per the terms and conditions of the loans and also 
whether they are operational   to produce / process products as per the 
agreed quantities maintaining prescribed quality, etc; and  
(iv) the three IFPs not completing the projects even after two / three years 
of disbursing the funds?   
The Committee also would like to be apprised of whether any third party 
audit of the fund was done and the detailed  findings of such audit such  as 
diversion, misutilisation / appropriation, if any?, etc and also the measures 
taken / proposed to be taken to address the shortfalls in administering the funds 
and also whether fund has achieved its objectives for which it was set up within 
a time frame drawn.”  
 
1.6  In its Action taken reply, the Ministry has stated: - 
“The Ministry is actively working with Ministry of Agriculture and Farmers 
Welfare and NABARD for various issues related to fund utilization and 
implementation. Necessary corrective actions are also being taken.” 
 
1.7  The Committee expressed concern over the low usage of the Special Food 
Processing Fund (SFPF), observing that even after more than a decade, a 
substantial portion of the funds remains unsanctioned and undisbursed. In order 
to understand the challenges faced by projects funded under the SFPF, and to 
ensure that the remaining resources are effectively channeled to support the 
Food Processing Sector as originally intended, the Committee raised point -wise 
queries in their recommendations. 

4 
 
In response, the Ministry stated that corrective measures are being 
undertaken in collaboration with the Ministry of Agriculture and Farmers Welfare 
and NABA RD. However, the reply does not address the  specific information 
sought by the Committee  like detailed data regarding the operational status and 
loan repayment schedules of individual projects including the stalled Industrial 
Food Parks (IFPs) etc.  The absence of such details hinders understanding about 
the actual impact and achievements made through u tilization of the special Food 
Processing Fund. 
The Committee , therefore, reiterate their earlier recommendation and 
expect a more comprehensive  reply to the queries raised  in its original Report . 
The Committee also desire to be apprised of whether any third -party audit of the 
Fund has been conducted, so as to provide a clear assessment of whether the 
SFPF has achieved its objectives as envisaged originally. 
 
B. PMKSY- Scheme for ‘Setting Up/Upgradation of Food Testing Laboratories’ 
(Recommendation No.12) 
 
1.8 The Committee had observed/recommended as follows:  
“The Committee observe that out of 205 Food Testing Lab Projects sanctioned 
under the component Scheme for ‘Setting Up/Up gradation of Food Testing 
Laboratories’, only 169 have been completed so far, with 36 projects still 
pending due to reasons related to delays in National Accreditation Board for 
Testing and Calibration Laboratories (NABL), accreditation and administrative 
procedures. The Committee have been apprised that there are 617 NABL 
accredited food testing laboratories operational in the country, c omprising 122 
Government owned and 495 private owned labs. An impact assessment carried 
out   by YES Bank in February 2021, indicates that there remains a significant 
deficit of over 360 laboratories nationwide. The Committee note that this 
shortfall, along with delays in operationalizing sanctioned labs, poses a 
challenge to ensuring food safety, regulatory compliance, and supporting the 
growth of the Food Processing Industry.  In view of the above, the Committee – 
(i) would like to be apprised of the specific corrective measures taken on the 
afore mentioned findings of Yes bank assessment study.   

5 
 
(ii) recommend that priority be given for timely completion of all pending food 
testing lab projects by streamlining administrative and accreditation processes, 
especially for NABL certification 
(iii) suggest to ensure that these labs are set up in regions with the greatest 
need and highest food processing capacity.  
(iv) recommend the Ministry to take steps for upgrading existing labs and 
enhance testing capacity and reliability, promote the use of mobile food testing 
labs and digital platforms to improve accessibility and efficiency, particularly for 
small and medium food enterprises in remote areas to mitigate the current gap 
in food testing infrastructure in the Food Processing Sector. 
 
  The Committee are of the considered opinion that complying with the 
above suggestions / recommendations will instill confidence in the importers of 
Indian processed foods as far as safety and quality are concerned.  Stringent 
quality checks will enable the India’s Food Processing Industries to compete 
globally.”   
 
1.9  In its Action taken reply, the Ministry has stated: - 
“(i) To address the current laboratory ‐capacity deficit, an Expression of 
Interest (EOI) has been floated to provide support for the establishment of 100 
new NABL accredited food-testing laboratories (FTLs). Additional weightage will 
be given to proposals for labs in districts which do not currently have a NABL -
accredited food testing laboratory. 
(ii) To this end, we have already initiated active engagement by coordinating 
regularly with PMA and NABL to facilitate timely completion of all pending food 
testing lab projects. 
(iii) Since this is a demand-driven scheme, applications are invited online from 
eligible investors and entrepreneurs, subject to availability of funds. The 
catchment area for each project is defined in the Detailed Project Report (DPR). 
To encourage geographic equity, special relaxations are being provided for 
laboratory proposals from “difficult” areas. Further, weightage is given to 
projects that are proposed to be located within 100 km  of major airports or 

6 
 
ports.” 
 
1.10 The Committee note that the Ministry has floated an Expression of Interest 
(EOI) for setting up 100 new NABL -accredited food testing laboratories. However, 
the Committee observe that the YES Bank assessment study had indicated a 
deficit of about 360 food testing laboratories across the country, and further note 
that the Ministry has initiated coordination with implementing agencies for 
completion of pending sanctioned 36 projects. By considering these figures, the 
Committee find that despite the issue of fresh EOIs, there re mains a deficit of 260 
laboratories. They also find that the Ministry has not addressed the 
recommendation made with respect to upgrading of exising labs, enhancement of 
testing capacity and reliability and promotion of mobile food testing labs. The 
Committee opined that compliance of these recommendations will instill 
confidence among the importers of Indian processed foods and consequently 
enable the Sector to compete globally. The Committee, therefore, reiterate their 
recommendation and desire the Minist ry to apprise them of the steps taken with 
respect to upgradation of existing labs and to mitigate the current gap in food 
testing infrastructure and timeframe set for completion of the pending projects at 
the time of furnishing the Action Taken Statement. 
  

7 
 
C. PMKSY- status on completion of the projects 
(Recommendation No.13) 
 
1.11 The Committee had observed/recommended as follows: 
“The Committee note that out of a total of 1,672 projects sanctioned under the 
various component schemes of PMKSY, only 1,116 projects have been 
completed so far, reflecting a completion rate of about 67%. The Committee 
note significant variation in progress across the component schemes under 
PMKSY- Under the component (i) ‘Integrated Cold Chain and Value Addition 
Infrastructure’ 288 out of sanctioned 398 projects; (ii) Agro Processing Clusters 
(APC) 22 out of sanctioned 76 projects; (iii) ‘Operation Greens’  only 10 out of 
sanctioned 45 projects have been completed. The Committee further observe 
that the total cost of completed projects stands at Rs. 17,661.72 crore, with 
grants approved for Rs. 5,297.86 crore and only Rs. 5,052.35 crore actually 
released, indicating a gap in fund disbursement. Completed projects have 
created a processing and preservation capacity of 249.36 lakh metric tonnes, 
benefiting over 33.53 lakh farmers, and generating 4.27 lakh jobs. The 
Committee are concerned to note that delays in project completion and timely 
fund release may be limiting the intended benefits of the Scheme to farmers 
and scope for employment generation. In view of these observations, the 
Committee recommend that the Ministry should take steps to expedite the 
completion of pending projects, particularly under components where progress 
has been sluggish, and ensure the timely release of approved grants. The 
Committee further recommend the Ministry to conduct regular review meetings 
and strengthened coordination with S tate-level agencies to resolve 
implementation bottlenecks and enhance the overall impact of PMKSY.” 
 
1.12 In its Action taken reply, the Ministry has stated: - 
“The implementation schedule for the food processing projects under 
PMKSY is as prescribed in the scheme guidelines of the respective component 
schemes and it ranges from 18 months to 30 months.  
Delay in implementation of projects under some component schemes of 
PMKSY is due to various reasons like not receiving of various statutory 

8 
 
clearances/approvals by the state/other concerned Govt authorities such as 
Consent to Establish (CTE), Consent to Operate (CTO), building/lay out plans, 
change of land use (CLU), FSSAI license, meeting of pre -disbursement 
conditions of lending banks for term loan disbursements etc. leading to lower -
than-expected disbursements. Further, the Ministry releases the final tranche of 
grant only after the completion of the project. 
As on 31.07.2025, under the various component schemes of PMKSY, a 
total of 1,595 projects have been sanctioned out of which 1,148 projects have 
been completed/operationalised, with a completion rate of about 72% (Variation 
in sanctioned numbers are due to cancellation or withdrawal of approved 
projects). The completed projects have created a processing and preservation 
capacity of 259.53 lakh metric tonnes, benefitting over 34.81 lakh farmers, and 
generating 4.37 lakh jobs. 
The total cost of the completed/operationalised projects is Rs. 18,261.41 
crores with approved grant -in-aid of Rs. 5,395.19 crores and released grant -in-
aid of Rs. 5,186.73 crores. The gap between approved grant and actually 
released grant is due to the following reasons: 
(i) At the time of approval of the project, eligible Project cost is envisaged 
based on the facilities to be set up and plant and machinery to be installed. As 
the project implementation progresses, Project Implementation Agencies (PIAs) 
realise that some of the components are not required which are dropped 
resulting in reduction in the actual project cost, thereby reducing the release in 
approved Grant-in-aid. 
(ii) Release of 1st/2nd/3rd/4th instalments of Grant-in-aid approved (as the case 
maybe) is on reimbursement basis, though the project is operational, last 
instalment of the approved Grant -in-aid is released after conducting JIT and 
uploading the correct documents, which takes some time. Therefore, there will 
be significant gap in approved Grant -in-aid and released grant -in-aid even after 
the project is operationalised. 
(iii) Though, most of the projects under PMKSY are completed within 
stipulated time period, some of the projects are being completed after approved 
period resulting in imposition of penalty up to 5% of approved grant as per 

9 
 
extant scheme guidelines, which is deducted from 1 st /2nd / 3 rd installment, as 
the case may be, thereby reducing the grant released to PIA. 
    The Ministry is making incessant efforts to ensure timely completion of 
projects and timely release of approved grants, particularly under component 
schemes where progress is slow, as mentioned below: 
(i)  Ministry and the Project Management Agencies (PMAs) engaged under 
component schemes of PMKSY are interacting regularly with the Project 
Implementing Agencies (PIAs) of approved projects and are assisting them in 
timely implementation of the projects. 
(ii)  Regular review meetings, virtual verification and physical site inspection 
of projects are conducted by the Ministry and PMAs for smooth and timely 
completion of the projects. 
(iii)  Ministry on the request of PIAs, also takes up the matter with the 
concerned State/UT Government and their agencies for smooth and timely 
implementation. 
(iv)  Further, to ensure the seriousness of the PIAs for implementation of the 
approved projects, Ministry has incorporated the clause regarding submission of 
the bank guarantee (@5% of approved grants -in-aid/subsidy) as performance 
security. The same may be forfeited by the Ministry in case of non -
implementation of the project.” 
 
1.13 The Committee note with satisfaction the improvement in the completion 
rate of approved projects under the Scheme, which has risen from 67 per cent to 
72 per cent, and acknowledge  the increase in processing and preservation 
capacity created by the completed projects. However, they observe  that the 
numbers of farmers benefited are  marginally increased and employment 
generation has also shown a marginal rise. In view of the lower disbursement of 
approved grant-in-aid, the Ministry has furnished several reason s for the existing 
gap between the funds approved and those actually released, and has outlined 
steps taken to address the Committee s’ recommendations. The Committee, 
however, find  that despite the Ministry’s efforts, there remains a gap between 
completion and fund disbursement. 

10 
 
In light o f this, the Committee reiterate their recommendation that 
implementation bottlenecks may be resolved, for enhancing the overall impact of 
PMKSY. In continuation, the Committee would like to be apprised of the progress 
made in accomplishing the completion of projects at the time of furnishing the 
Action Taken Statement. 
 
D.  Export related issues Need for projections/targets 
(Recommendation No.19) 
 
1.14 The Committee had observed/recommended as follows:  
“The Committee note that MoFPI has neither projections nor set any targets for 
exports of processed foods. In absence of any future projections or targets, the 
Committee believe, evaluation of export potential and the effectiveness of 
export promoting policies cannot be fairly evaluated. The Committee, therefore 
recommend that the relevant authorities establish clear and realistic future 
projections and targets for processed food exports, taking into account current 
market trends and ground realities. Setti ng such benchmarks will not only 
enable a fair assessment of export potential and the effectiveness of export 
promotion policies but will also instill a sense of accountability among the 
concerned agencies. Furthermore, well -defined targets and projections will 
provide a definitive direction for the sector, guiding strategic planning and 
resource allocation to maximize growth and competitiveness in the global 
market. In addition to this, the Committee also desire the Ministry to take steps 
for increasing th e number of Quality Control Cells in agro -processing clusters 
and units to ensure regular quality checks and strict compliance with standards 
which will help build trust in Indian processed food products and enhance the 
Sector’s ability to sustain export growth.” 
 
1.15 In its Action taken reply, the Ministry has stated: - 
“Based on the observed Compound Annual Growth Rate (CAGR) of 4.20 
% over the last five years ending 2024 -25, processed food exports are 
projected to reach approximately US$ 12,404.31 million over the next five years 

11 
 
under normal market conditions. However, given the prevailing restrictions on 
the export of certain commodities such as sugar and maida, the actual 
realization of this projection may be tempered in the short to medium term. 
While these restrictions are aimed at safeguarding domestic supply and price 
stability, they also constrain India’s ability to fully capitalize on expanding global 
demand for processed foods. 
Ministry of Food Processing Industries (MoFPI) has been incentivizing 
setting up/expansion of related infrastructure through its Central Sector 
Umbrella Scheme Pradhan Mantri Kisan SAMPADA Yojana (PMKSY), 
Production Linked Incentive Scheme for Food Processing Industry (PLISFPI) 
and Centrally sponsored PM Formalization of Micro Food Processing 
Enterprises (PMFME) scheme across the country. 
PMKSY has a dedicated Food Testing Laboratories (FTL) component 
scheme under which assistance is provided to strengthen food quality control 
infrastructure and make it accessible to the food processing sector and other 
stakeholders. This support is aimed at ensuring compliance with domestic and 
international food safety standards. The food testing facilities created under this 
scheme are available to food processing units for testing their products, thereby 
improving quality assurance, boosting consumer con fidence and facilitating 
exports. 
Further, in alignment with the budget announcement 2024 -25, Ministry 
will approve 100 Food Testing Labs (FTLs) with NABL accreditation under the 
component scheme – Food Safety and Quality Assurance Infrastructure 
(FSQAI) of  PMKSY to ensure regular quality checks and strict compliance with 
standards which will help build trust in Indian processed food products.” 
 
1.16 The Committee note the Ministry’s reply regarding the projected targets for 
processed food exports for the next five years and expect that these targets will 
be realized within the stipulated timeframe. With a view to ensuring regular 
quality checks and strict compliance with prescribed standards, the Committee 
had desired the Ministry take steps to increase the number of Quality Control 
Cells (QC Cells/Centres) in agro -processing clusters and food processing units. 

12 
 
The Committee are of the view that such Quality Control Cells can function as in -
house quality assurance mechanisms for monitoring the production environment 
and ensuring that finished products conform to predefined quality and safety 
standards before reaching consumers, thereby enhancing the credibility and 
export competitiveness of Indian processed food products in international 
markets. 
However, the Committee observe that instead of furnishing a specific reply 
regarding the establishment and strengthening of Quality Control Cells, the 
Ministry has stated that there is a proposal to approve 100 new Food Testing 
Laboratories (FTLs) in future. The Committee would like to emphasize that Food 
Testing Laboratories and Quality Control Cells perform distinct functions and 
cannot be treated as interchangeable. While Food Testing Laboratories undertake 
scientific and technical analysis of food sampl es for certification and compliance 
purposes, Quality Control Cells are operational units responsible for continuous 
and routine monitoring of quality parameters during various stages of production 
and processing. 
The Committee, therefore, feel that the Ministry’s reply does not adequately 
address the recommendation made by the Committee. The Committee, hence 
reiterate that the Ministry should take steps for establishment of Quality Control 
Cells across agro processing clusters and food processing units, particularly. 
The Committee also desire to be apprised of the action taken in this regard in its 
further Action Taken Statement.  

13 
 
CHAPTER – II 
 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS THAT HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE 
GOVERNMENT 
1. Sectoral Overview 
 
Recognizing the  critical role of food processing sector in the economy in terms of 
development of agriculture and allied sectors, employment generation, usage of 
agriculture raw material for  producing value added products, etc, Govt of India during 
the last decade has taken many path breaking policy initiatives such as (a) allowing 
Foreign Direct Investment (FDI) in Food Processing sector (FPS); (b) including loans to 
FPS  under Priority Sector Lending (PSL); (c)  Creating special fund for  setting  up of 
Mega Food Parks (MFPs), Industrial Food Parks (IFPs), Agro Processing Clusters 
(APCs), individual food processing units, etc; (d) identifying FPS as strategic sector its 
potential for inclusive growth, rural employment generation, value addition, and export 
promotion; and, (d) formulation and implementation of   various schemes viz. Prime 
Minister Kisan Sampada Yojana (PMKSY), Prime Minister Formalisation of Micro 
Enterprises, and PLI Scheme, as part of Make in India initiative,   for FPS.  These 
initiatives have res ulted in (i) attracting Rs 53000 crores of FDI during the last decade, 
(ii) doubling of processed food products grom about US $ 5billion to more than US$ 10 
billion since 2014 -15 (iii) increase in employment in FPS from 17.73 lakh in 2014 -15 to 
22.96 lakh in 2022–23, (iv) rise in Gross Value Addition (GVA) from Rs. 1.90 lakh crore 
in 2021–22 to Rs. 2.24 lakh crore in 2023 –24, (v) maintaining a share of around 8% in 
the GVA of the overall manufacturing sector. In the light of the afore mentioned, the 
Govt Sector is projected to grow at an average annual rate of 6.5% over the next five to 
six years and reach a GVA of approximately Rs. 3.3 lakh crore by 2030.  
 
 In light of the above, the initiatives taken so far may be strengthened further, 
assess schemes and policies to see whether any course correction is required to 
achieve the specified targets by 2030. The Committee also recommend the Ministry to 
ensure effective Communication, coordination, consultations with all the stakeholders 
including State Governments which may help in identifying region specific challenges, 

14 
 
streamlining regulatory frameworks and facilitate timely interventions for boosting 
investment, employment, and innovation in the Food Processing Sector. The 
succeeding paras deal in detail with various aspects of the policies and schemes of the 
Government.   
Reply of the Governmen 
In order to ensure growth and overall development of the food processing sector, 
Ministry of Food Processing Industries (MoFPI) has been incentivizing setting 
up/expansion of related infrastructure through its Central Sector Umbrella Scheme 
Pradhan Mantri Kisan SAMPADA Yojana (PMKSY), Production Linked Incentive 
Scheme for Food Processing Industry (PLISFPI) and Centrally sponsored PM 
Formalization of Micro Food Processing Enterprises (PMFME) scheme across the 
country. MoFPI provides mostly credit linked financial assistance (capital subsidy) in the 
form of grants -in-aid to entrepreneurs selected on the basis of Expression of Interest 
(EoI) issued from time to time. These schemes are not any region or state specific but 
demand driven and is implemented across the country.  
The projected average annual growth rate of 6.5 percent over the next five to six 
years with an expected Gross Value Added of ₹3.3 lakh crore by 2030 is an ambitious 
but plausible scenario, which signals significant strengthening of the Food Processing 
Sector’s role in overall economic activity, provided current policy momentum is 
sustained. However, the accuracy of this estimate depends on continued expansion of 
public capital expenditure, particularly in infrastructure, logistics and social sector 
schemes, stable macroeconomic fundamentals, including manageable inflation and 
sustained revenue buoyancy, policy continuity etc. However, risks emanating from 
global financial volatility, energy price shocks, and geopolitical tensions may introduce 
downside pressures on this expected GVA. 
Further, the meetings are conducted on regular intervals with States/ UTs, 
lending banks / institutions and other stakeholders to resolve issues in order to support 
to Micro Food Processing Enterprises under PMFME Scheme. Also, credit related 
issues are taken up with Department of Financial Services (DFS) and State Level 
Bankers Committee (SLBC) meetings as and when required. To raise awareness about 
the PMFME Scheme at the grassroots level and effectively address regional diversity, 
MoFPI and State / UT Go vernments have undertaken various initiatives such as 

15 
 
nationwide radio campaigns in regional languages which was broadcasted across 
national, community and private radio stations to ensure widespread coverage. 
Additionally, national print advertisement campaigns in regional languages have been 
launched, targeting publications from small to large -scale. In addition, district -level 
awareness workshops are being organised to engage key stakeholders such as 
potential micro-food processing enterprises, bank representatives, district officials, and 
resource persons, for creating awareness about the PMFME Scheme. 
MoFPI has been taking regular steps to boost the implementation of the food 
processing units under PMKSY Scheme by (i) organizing periodical review meetings 
with the project implementing agencies (PIAs) of the projects approved under scheme in 
order to understand the problems faced in implementing these projects and to facilitate 
PIAs to complete the projects within time and (ii) undertaking inspection of these units 
through Project Management Agencies from time to time so as to guide the PIAs in 
implementing the projects and to facilitate them in submitting documents on Sampada 
portal for claiming the installments of grants -in-aid / subsidy under the scheme (iii) At 
the request of the PIAs, the Ministry also takes up matters with the concerned 
States/UTs and their agencies, concerned term loan lending banks etc. to ensure the 
smooth and timely implementation of the projects. 
MINISTRY OF FOOD PROCESSING INDUSTRIES 
(OM. No. H-11012/5/2024-Parl. dated 20.11.2025) 
 
2. Foreign Direct Investment in Food Processing  
 
With a view to give impetus to the growth of food processing sector in India, the 
Committee note that Govt has initially in 2016 -17 allowed Foreign Direct Investment 
(FDI) under ‘ automatic route’  and subsequently in 2027 -18 100% FDI was permitted 
through the ‘approval of the Government’  for trading, including e -commerce concerning 
food products manufactured or made in India.  Such an enabling policy to attract foreign 
investments resulted in foreign companies investing more than Rs. 53,000 crore in 
Indian food processing industry since 2014 -15.  Such huge investments, the Committee 
believe is the primary driver, apart from other initiatives of the Govt of India, in 
increasing employment opportunities and also growth witnessed in exports of food 
processing sector, which was discussed in detail else where in the report.  

16 
 
The committee note the Government’s FDI policy could attract marquee food 
processing and beverage companies namely Nestle, Pepsi, Mars and other long -term 
investors from US, Singapore, France, Japan, Italy, Switzerland, Australia, etc. It has 
given fillip to local produce of agri commodities. The Committee appreciate that these 
Companies are using locally produced agricultural crops for making Ready to Eat/ 
Ready to Cook Products providing much needed support to the farmers. Further, these 
companies brought in food processing technologies which were not in India earlier. The 
moderation / decline in FDI in the last two/ three years, the Committee note, is due to 
geopolitical situation and also the overall decline in foreign capital inflows all over the 
world and hence is temporary in nature and will stabilise in due course. They at the 
same time suggest the Govt quicken the approval processes for FDI proposals and 
specific time lines may be drawn to accord approvals for FDI proposals as this will cat 
as an inc entive for these companies. Further, provision of basic infrastructure may not 
be allowed to be an inhibiting factor for attracting FDI especially in the current geo 
political situation.    
Reply of the Government: 
The Ministry would like to submit that all FDI proposals in the food -processing 
sector are being processed in accordance with the Standard Operating Procedure 
(SOP) issued by the Department for Promotion of Industry and Internal Trade (DPIIT). 
The SOP clearly prescribes the timelines and stages for examination, inter -ministerial 
consultations, and final approval of proposals. The Ministry has been adhering to these 
timelines to ensure expeditious processing of FDI proposals and to maintain 
transparency and predictability in the approval process. 
MINISTRY OF FOOD PROCESSING INDUSTRIES 
(OM. No. H-11012/5/2024-Parl. dated 20.11.2025) 
 
 
3. Credit flow to FPS under Priority Sector Lending 
 
 The Committee are  glad to note that the Government of India’s initiative to 
include lending to agro processing industries under Priority Sector Lending (PSL) in 
2015 is a decisive step in the right direction that contributed enormously to the growth pf 
Food Processing Industry (FPI) in India. The data furnished by the Ministry on lending 

17 
 
by the three groups of the commercial banks – Public, Private and Small Finance banks 
since 2020 shows that the outstanding credit to the food processing sector has 
witnessed continuous increase from Rs. 82,209, Rs. 41,132 and Rs.378 crore to Rs 
1,13,814, Rs. 1,01,465,   and Rs. 2707 crore in 2024 respectively. The outstanding 
credit by foreign banks though witnessed continuous growth from 2020 to 2022, it saw 
decline in the rest two years 2023 and 2024.  The Committee while acknowledging and 
appreciating t he initiatives of the Govt for enabling flow of credit to food processing 
industry which led to a massive increase of more than 70 % in outstanding credit to the 
sector i.e. from about Rs. 1,30,508 crores at the end of March in 2020 to Rs. 2,23,915 
crores at the end of March, 2024.  The Committee have no doubt that enabling credit 
flow to the sector has resulted in increase in employment and exports of the sector.  
 The Committee note that separate data is not maintained by Financial Inclusion 
& Development Department (FIDD) of RBI is not maintaining data on credit to the food 
processing units in rural and Urban areas separately. The Committee, in view of the 
objectives of the Prime Minister Formalisation of Micro Enterprises (PMFME) scheme to 
bring the informal food processing units, which are predominantly in rural areas, into the 
formal sector, they believe maintenance of data on credit flows to food processing uni ts 
in Urban and Rural areas is imperative. The Committee are further of the view that 
segregated data for urban and rural areas enables the Govt for reviewing the progress 
of the PMFME scheme in rural areas and also to have course correction, if any required 
in rural areas.     
Reply of the Government: 
Under the PMFME Scheme, Ministry is working in convergence with Ministry of 
Rural Development (MoRD) and Ministry of Housing and Urban Affairs (MoHUA) to 
extend benefit of Seed Capital to Rural as well as Urban SHG members engaged in 
food processing. Till 31st October, 297283 rural SHG members and 68652 urban SHG 
members have been benefitted with Seed Capital. Ministry is continuously engaging 
with financial institutions, including through the State Level Banking Committee (SLBC) 
mechanism, to address opera tional challenges and enhance the credit flow to micro 
food processing units. 
 
 

18 
 
4.  In view of the huge impact that food processing industry on employment 
generation especially in rural areas and also exports, the access to the bank credit 
particularly in rural areas needs to be monitored. Further, as a decade has gone by 
since the inclusion of food processing sector under PSL, it may be desirable to have an 
impact assessment study on the flow of credit to food processing units especially in 
rural areas.      
Reply of the Government: 
Regular Monitoring & feedback about the scheme is being undertaken at both the 
State and Central levels through the PMFME portal, review meetings with lending 
banks/ SLBCs/ State Nodal Agencies (SNAs), and District Resource Persons (DRPs) to 
increase the access to bank credit for micro food processing enterprises. Further, A 
third-party Mid -Term Impact Evaluation Study has been conducted to evaluate the 
performance of the Scheme. Therefore, corrective measures are initiated on the basis 
of evaluation findin gs to address operational bottlenecks in a timely manner. Till 31st 
October 2025, the PMFME Scheme has enabled over 1.6 lakh micro enterprise loans, 
driving access to formal credit, production expansion, and local direct and indirect 
employment generation of more than 8.5 lakhs including 3 lakh rural SHG members. 
   MINISTRY OF FOOD PROCESSING INDUSTRIES 
(OM. No. H-11012/5/2024-Parl. dated 20.11.2025) 
 
7.  Ease of doing Business – FSSAI regulations  
 
 In addition to enabling the credit flow to and allowing 100% FDI in FPS, the Govt 
also took initiatives towards ease of doing business. For instance, Food Safety and 
Standards Authority of India (FSSAI), the food sector regulator, has replaced product - 
by-product approval with ingredient and additive based approvals in 2017. Further 
FSSAI has put in place rules and procedures for grant of prior approval of non -specified 
food and food ingredients. The aforesaid regulation has helped the Food Business 
Operators and spurted the process of Food approvals.  
Reply of the Government: 
FSSAI has notified final regulations on Food Safety and Standards (Approval of 
non-specified food and food ingredients) Regulations, 2017. This regulation lays down 
the rules and procedure for grant of prior approval of non -specified food and food 

19 
 
ingredients.   
There are several food products/ingredients which are not covered in any of the 
regulations made under Food Safety and Standards Act, 2006. In order to regulate such 
products including novel food and provide the opportunity to Food Business Operators 
to innovate food products, FSSAI came up with this regulation. The regulation covers 
the following articles of food or food ingredients:  
• Novel food or novel food Ingredients or processed with the use of novel 
technology 
• New additives  
• New processing aids including enzymes  
• Articles of food and food ingredients consisting of or isolated from 
microorganisms, bacteria, yeast, fungi or algae. 
The FSSAI has designed, developed and introduced e -PAAS (electronic Product 
& Claim Approval Application system), the Online Portal to facilitate FBOs and other 
applicants to apply for Product Approval to increase transparency in dealing with 
public/other stakeholders and efficient utilization of resources.  
In order to understand and address the industry concerns and issues vis -à-vis 
regulatory requirements, emerging issues, etc. of the FBOs and keep them well -
informed about the procedure and documents required for the smooth filing and 
examination of the applications for approval under the Food Safety and Standards 
(Approval for Non -Specific Food and Food Ingredients) Regulation, 2017, the FSSAI 
hold interaction with FBOs twice every month as per schedule provided on website. 
Additionally, applicants and Food  Business Operators (FBOs) have the option to raise 
their concerns either electronically via email or physically. These concerns are promptly 
addressed, and the relevant information is communicated to them accordingly. 
To expedite the approval process for Non -Specified Foods (NSF), FSSAI has 
also established six Expert Committees to review the applications. 
A Food Business Operator has been provided an option to file an appeal before 
the Chief Executive Officer (CEO) of the Food Authority against any decision of 
rejection of application. Further, a FBO, who is aggrieved by the decision of the CEO 
may file a review petition to be placed for consideration of the Chairperson of the Food 
Authority. 

20 
 
8. Ease of Doing Business- Exemption from licenses under IDR Act 1951  
 
 Another significant policy initiative to attract investments into the FPS is 
exempting manufacturing / making processed food items from the purview of licensing 
under the Industries (Development and Regulation) Act, 1951.  The Committee believe 
that this initiative aligns with the Objectives of Promoting Ease of Doing Business such 
as reducing regulatory requirements, particularly for micro, small, and medium 
enterprises (MSMEs) which form a substantial part of the unorganised food processing 
sector.  The Committee are of the views that this may lead to faster establishment and 
expansion of food processing businesses, allowing them to focus on production rather 
than compliance. The Committee also feel that such a step will result in faster transition 
from the unorganised to the organised sector with fewer compliance burdens.  
Reply of the Government: 
The MoFPI  acknowledges the considered observations and recommendations 
aimed at strengthening the food -processing sector. The Ministry along with DPIIT, 
Ministry of Commerce and industry is taking various initiatives for encouraging foreign 
investment and deregulation to foster growth, employment and formalization in the 
sector. 
MINISTRY OF FOOD PROCESSING INDUSTRIES 
(OM. No. H-11012/5/2024-Parl. dated 20.11.2025) 
 
9.  Ease of doing Business - Digital initiatives 
 
The Committee observe that MoFPI  has undertaken significant digital 
transformation by launching dedicated online portals for three major schemes - 
SAMPADA Portal for PMKSY, separate and exclusive portals for PMFME and PLISFPI. 
These portals facilitate end -to-end online management of scheme applications, from 
proposal submission to the release of grant -in-aid, and enable real -time monitoring of 
project progress and key performance indicators through integrated dashboards. The 
Committee have given to understand that that these digital system s have improved 
transparency and accountability. Despite these advancements, the Committee find that 
delays in project implementation which are largely due to challenges in securing 
statutory clearances and approvals from multiple authorities, which are outside the 

21 
 
direct purview of these scheme -specific portals. The Committee further note that the 
National Single Window System (NSWS), integrating 32 Central Ministries, is 
specifically designed to facilitate investor related clearances on a single portal, with 
transparency and accountability, enhancing ease of doing business exponentially. The 
Committee underscore that full and seamless integration of all relevant authorities with 
NSWS is essential to unlock the Sector’s true growth potential. By ensuring that every 
regulatory clearance required for food processing projects is available through NSWS, 
the Ministry can substantially reduce project lead times, minimize bureaucratic hurdles, 
and create a truly investor -friendly environment. The Committee, therefore, recommend 
that the Ministry should take appropriate measures to ensure full integration of all 
relevant authorities with NSWS, promote its widespread adoption among stakeholders, 
rural areas, and establish robust monitoring and escalation mechanisms to realize the 
System’s best and most profitable outcomes for the Food Processing Sector. 
Reply of the Government: 
The Ministry has successfully integrated with the National Single Window System 
(NSWS) portal to facilitate seamless and efficient processing of clearances and 
approvals of projects under various schemes of MoFPI. This integration is aimed at 
enhancing transparency, reducing processing time, and improving ease of doing 
business by providing a single digital platform for all necessary approvals. 
MINISTRY OF FOOD PROCESSING INDUSTRIES 
(OM. No. H-11012/5/2024-Parl. dated 20.11.2025) 
 
10. Ease of Doing Business- e commerce platforms  
 
The Committee observe  that e -commerce platforms are becoming increasingly 
important for the Food Processing Industry. They help businesses, especially Small and 
Micro Enterprises (SMEs), reach more customers across the country without the need 
for a physical store. By selling online, food processors can secure better prices for their 
products by cutting down on establishment costs, middlemen and can respond more 
quickly to consumer demands. Open Network for Digital Commerce (ONDC), the 
Committee note, is an initiative by the Department for Promotion of Industry and Internal 
Trade (DPIIT) is a digital platform designed to democratize e -commerce by enabling 
open networks for all aspects of the exchange of goods and services over digital or 

22 
 
electronic networks. It envisions creating a level playing field for sellers, buyers, and 
service providers across India, particularly Small and Medium Enterprises (MSMEs). 
The Committee, while appreciating this initiative, are of the opinion that such e -
commerce platforms could be a game changer for the Food Processing Industry. They 
accordingly recommend that MoFPI take focused steps to raise awareness and 
increase the participation of MSMEs in e -commerce platforms, especially in rural and 
semi-urban areas. Further, MoFPI may actively encourage these enterprises to register 
and engage with platforms like ONDC to expand their market access reduces  
dependence on large platforms and improve their competitiveness and revenue 
opportunities. 
Reply of the Government: 
The Ministry is organizing awareness programs, training sessions, and capacity -
building workshops under schemes such as the PM Formalisation of Micro Food 
Processing Enterprises (PMFME) to educate MSMEs about the benefits of e -commerce 
and digital marketing. Through its schemes and capacity -building efforts, the Ministry is 
encouraging food processing units to adopt digital tools related to inventory 
management, order processing, payment systems, and customer engagement to 
enhance their readiness for e-commerce participation. 
 
11. FPI- Food safety and quality standards   
 
The Committee observe that during the past five years, the number of food 
samples collected and tested by FSSAI has steadily increased, indicating a 
strengthening of enforcement and monitoring activities. The Committee, however also 
note with concern that the proportion of non -conforming samples, including those 
deemed unsafe, substandard, or with labelling and other violations, remains persistently 
high each year. While authorities have intensified actions against violators, with a rise in 
both civil and c riminal proceedings, convictions, and penalties, the Committee believe 
that the ongoing prevalence of non -conforming samples indicate a significant challenge 
in achieving full compliance with food safety standards. 
Adulteration of Food is a serious concern in the country and has overarching 
effects on the general health and well -being of the population at large. In view of this, 

23 
 
the Committee strongly recommend:   
(i) FSSAI to intensify its efforts to enhance food safety compliance nationwide. This 
should include launching comprehensive awareness campaigns targeting food 
processing units and consumers alike, emphasizing the importance of food safety 
regulations and the serious consequences of non-compliance.  
(ii) to ensure that there are an adequate number of personnel in this field and to 
support regular training and capacity -building initiatives for food safety, equipping them 
with the latest knowledge and tools is imperative for strict monitoring and effective 
enforcement.  
(iii) To explore the possibility of debarring/blacklisting individuals instead of 
units/factories who are engaged in adulteration and non -compliance with FSSAI 
rules/regulations.  
The Committee are of the firm opinion that ensuring highest standards of quality 
and safety of processed food items will certainly elevate the ‘Make in India’ brand, 
building trust among consumers worldwide.  
Reply of the Government: 
(i) FSSAI is carrying out a nation -wide campaign 'Eat Right India' movement with a 
focus on preventive and promotive healthcare through social and behavioural change. 
This initiative is built on three core pillars - Eat Safe, Eat Healthy and Eat Sustainable. 
Under this Eat Right India movement, number of initiatives and programmes are 
being conducted to educate people about food safety and hygiene. Eat Right 
Certificates like - Eat Right School, Eat Right Campus, Eat Right Station, Eat Right 
Place of Worship, Eat Right Street Food Hub, Eat Right Fruits & Vegetables Market are 
awarded to the places where food is cooked and served for the food safety compliance. 
Awareness Activities at Social Media platforms and Exhibitions and Events are 
conducted to inform and educate people about different aspect of Food Safety, like - 
#HarLabelKuchKehtaHai, #AajSeThodaKam, #NoToAdulteration, etc. 
(ii) To ensure an adequate number of qualified personnel in the field of food safety, 
the FSSAI initiated the Food Safety Training and Certification (FoSTaC) Program in July 
2017. This program provides training to food handlers on good hygiene and sanitary 
practices, in compliance with Schedule 4 of the Food Safety and Standards (Licensing 
and Registration of Food Businesses) Regulations, 2011. Since its inception, the 

24 
 
FoSTaC program has successfully trained over 28 lakh food handlers across India. 
(iii) To ensure compliance with prescribed standards, limits, and other statutory 
requirements under the Food Safety and Standards Act and Regulations (FSSR), 
FSSAI, through State/UT food safety authorities and its Regional Offices , conducts 
regular localized/ targeted enforcement and surveillance drives  including the National 
Annual Surveillance Plan (NASP), inspections, and sampling activities throughout the 
year. In cases where deviations from standards or violations of the FSSR are detected, 
appropriate regulatory action is initiated against the defaulting Food Business Operators 
(FBOs). Such action may include suspension or cancellation of licenses, along with 
other punitive measures as provided under the FSS Act, 2006 and its associated rules 
and regulations made thereunder. 
 
12. PMKSY- Scheme for ‘Setting Up/Upgradation of Food Testing Laboratories’ 
 
The Committee observe that out of 205 Food Testing Lab Projects sanctioned 
under the component Scheme for ‘Setting Up/Up gradation of Food Testing 
Laboratories’, only 169 have been completed so far, with 36 projects still pending due to 
reasons related to delays in National Accreditation Board for Testing and Calibration 
Laboratories (NABL), accreditation and administrative procedures. The Committee have 
been apprised that there are 617 NABL accredited food testing laboratories operational 
in the country, comprising 122 Government owned and 495 private owned labs. An 
impact assessment carried out   by YES Bank in February 2021, indicates that there 
remains a significant deficit of over 360 laboratories nationwide. The Committee note 
that this shortfall, along with delays in operationalizing sanctioned labs, poses a 
challenge to ensuring food safety, regulatory compliance, and supporting the growth of 
the Food Processing Industry.  In view of the above, the Committee – 
(i) would like to be apprised of the specific corrective measures taken on the afore 
mentioned findings of Yes bank assessment study.   
(ii) recommend that priority be given for timely completion of all pending food testing 
lab projects by streamlining administrative and accreditation processes, especially for 
NABL certification 

25 
 
(iii) suggest to ensure that these labs are set up in regions with the greatest need 
and highest food processing capacity.  
(iv) recommend the Ministry to take steps for upgrading existing labs and enhance 
testing capacity and reliability, promote the use of mobile food testing labs and digital 
platforms to improve accessibility and efficiency, particularly for small and medium food 
enterprises in remote areas to mitigate the current gap in food testing infrastructure in 
the Food Processing Sector. 
  The Committee are of the considered opinion that  complying with the above 
suggestions / recommendations will instill confidence in the importers of Indian 
processed foods as far as safety and quality are concerned.  Stringent quality checks 
will enable the India’s Food Processing Industries to compete globally.   
Reply of the Government:  
(i) To address the current laboratory‐capacity deficit, an Expression of Interest (EOI) 
has been floated to provide support for the establishment of 100 new NABL accredited 
food-testing laboratories (FTLs). Additional weightage will be given to proposals for labs 
in districts which do not currently have a NABL-accredited food testing laboratory. 
(ii) To this end, we have already initiated active engagement by coordinating 
regularly with PMA and NABL to facilitate timely completion of all pending food testing 
lab projects. 
(iii) Since this is a demand -driven scheme, applications are invited online from 
eligible investors and entrepreneurs, subject to availability of funds. The catchment area 
for each project is defined in the Detailed Project Report (DPR). To encourage 
geographic equity, special relaxations are being provided for laboratory proposals from 
“difficult” areas. Further, weightage is given to projects that are proposed to be located 
within 100 km of major airports or ports. 
MINISTRY OF FOOD PROCESSING INDUSTRIES 
(OM. No. H-11012/5/2024-Parl. dated 20.11.2025) 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
 For comments of the Committee please refer to Para No. 1.10 of Chapter-I 
of this Report. 
 
 

26 
 
13. PMKSY-  status on completion of the projects 
  
The Committee note that out of a total of 1,672 projects sanctioned under the 
various component schemes of PMKSY, only 1,116 projects have been completed so 
far, reflecting a completion rate of about 67%. The Committee note significant variation 
in progress across the component schemes under PMKSY - Under the component (i) 
‘Integrated Cold Chain and Value Addition Infrastructure’ 288 out of sanctioned 398 
projects; (ii) Agro Processing Clusters (APC) 22 out of sanctioned 76 projects; (iii) 
‘Operation Greens’ only 10 out of sanctioned 45 projects hav e been completed. The 
Committee further observe that the total cost of completed projects stands at Rs. 
17,661.72 crore, with grants approved for Rs. 5,297.86 crore and only Rs. 5,052.35 
crore actually released, indicating a gap in fund disbursement. Completed projects have 
created a processing and preservation capacity of 249.36 lakh metric tonnes, benefiting 
over 33.53 lakh farmers, and generating 4.27 lakh jobs. The Committee are concerned 
to note that delays in project completion and timely fund release  may be limiting the 
intended benefits of the Scheme to farmers and scope for employment generation. In 
view of these observations, the Committee recommend that the Ministry should take 
steps to expedite the completion of pending projects, particularly under components 
where progress has been sluggish, and ensure the timely release of approved grants. 
The Committee further recommend the Ministry to conduct regular review meetings and 
strengthened coordination with State -level agencies to resolve implementat ion 
bottlenecks and enhance the overall impact of PMKSY.  
Reply of the Government: 
The implementation schedule for the food processing projects under PMKSY is 
as prescribed in the scheme guidelines of the respective component schemes and it 
ranges from 18 months to 30 months.  
Delay in implementation of projects under some component schemes of PMKSY 
is due to various reasons like not receiving of various statutory clearances/approvals by 
the state/other concerned Govt authorities such as Consent to Establish (CTE), 
Consent to Operate (CTO), building/lay out plans, change of land use (CLU), FSSAI 
license, meeting of pre -disbursement conditions of lending banks for term loan 
disbursements etc. leading to lower -than-expected disbursements. Further, the Ministry 

27 
 
releases the final tranche of grant only after the completion of the project. 
As on 31.07.2025, under the various component schemes of PMKSY, a total of 
1,595 projects have been sanctioned out of which 1,148 projects have been 
completed/operationalised, with a completion rate of about 72% (Variation in sanctioned 
numbers are due to cancellation or withdrawal of approved projects). The completed 
projects have created a processing and preservation capacity of 259.53 lakh metric 
tonnes, benefitting over 34.81 lakh farmers, and generating 4.37 lakh jobs. 
The total cost of the completed/operationalised projects is Rs. 18,261.41 crores 
with approved grant -in-aid of Rs. 5,395.19 crores and released grant -in-aid of Rs. 
5,186.73 crores. The gap between approved grant and actually released grant is due to 
the following reasons: 
(i) At the time of approval of the project, eligible Project cost is envisaged based on 
the facilities to be set up and plant and machinery to be installed. As the project 
implementation progresses, Project Implementation Agencies (PIAs) realise that some 
of the components are not required which are dropped resulting in reduction in the 
actual project cost, thereby reducing the release in approved Grant-in-aid. 
(ii) Release of 1 st/2nd/3rd/4th instalments of Grant -in-aid approved (as the case 
maybe) is on reimbursement basis, though the project is operational, last instalment of 
the approved Grant -in-aid is released after conducting JIT and uploading the correct 
documents, which takes some time. Therefore, there will be significant gap in approved 
Grant-in-aid and released grant-in-aid even after the project is operationalised. 
(iii) Though, most of the projects under PMKSY are completed within stipulated time 
period, some of the projects are being completed after approved period resulting in 
imposition of penalty up to 5% of approved grant as per extant scheme guidelines, 
which is deducted from 1 st /2nd / 3rd installment, as the case may be, thereby reducing 
the grant released to PIA. 
    The Ministry is making incessant efforts to ensure timely completion of projects 
and timely release of approved grants, particularly under component schemes where 
progress is slow, as mentioned below: 
(i)  Ministry and the Project Management Agencies (PMAs) engaged under 
component schemes of PMKSY are interacting regularly with the Project Implementing 
Agencies (PIAs) of approved projects and are assisting them in timely implementation of 

28 
 
the projects. 
(ii)  Regular review meetings, virtual verification and physical site inspection of 
projects are conducted by the Ministry and PMAs for smooth and timely completion of 
the projects. 
(iii)  Ministry on the request of PIAs, also takes up the matter with the concerned 
State/UT Government and their agencies for smooth and timely implementation. 
(iv)  Further, to ensure the seriousness of the PIAs for implementation of the 
approved projects, Ministry has incorporated the clause regarding submission of the 
bank guarantee (@5% of approved grants -in-aid/subsidy) as performance security. The 
same may be forfeited by the Ministry in case of non-implementation of the project. 
MINISTRY OF FOOD PROCESSING INDUSTRIES 
(OM. No. H-11012/5/2024-Parl. dated 20.11.2025) 
Comments of the Committee 
 
 For comments of the Committee please refer to Para No. 1.13  of Chapter-I 
of this Report. 
 
14. Agro Processing Clusters 
 
The main objective of Agro Processing Clusters is to develop modern  infrastructure and 
common facilities to encourage group of entrepreneurs for setting up of food processing 
units based on cluster approach. The Committee note that under this Scheme, grants -
in-aid are provided at 35% of the eligible project cost in general areas and 50% in 
difficult areas, as well as for projects led by Scheduled Castes (SC), Scheduled Tribes 
(ST), Farmer Producer Organizations (FPOs), and Self Help Groups (SHGs), with a 
maximum grant of Rs. 10 crore per project.  As observed in the above para 13,  22 
projects only out of  76 sanctioned could be completed so far even after a period of 
eight years, since the implementation of the Scheme from the year 2017. The 
Committee are glad to note that the completed projects have created a processing and 
preservation capacity of only 6.72 lakh metric tonnes, benefiting 81,300 farmers, and 
generating 17,133 jobs which is again very low given the Scheme’s potential. 
Considering these, the Committee recommend that the Ministry should promote greater 
participation of Farmer Producer Organizations (FPOs) in Agro Processing Clusters to 

29 
 
ensure success of the component.   
Reply of the Government: 
Regarding the recommendation of the Committee that the Ministry should 
promote greater participation of Farmer Producer Organizations(FPOs) in the Agro 
Processing Clusters to ensure success of the components, it is to submit that the 
Ministry of Food Processing Industries (MoFPI) has been implementing the Scheme for 
Creation of Infrastructure for Agro Processing Clusters (APC) since 2017 -18 as a sub -
scheme of Pradhan Mantri Kisan Sampada Yojana (PMKSY) to provide support in form 
of grant-in-aid/subsidy to the investors for setting up of Agro Processing Clusters in the 
country. The scheme is a demand driven scheme. Applications under the scheme are 
invited online from the potential investors / entrepreneurs against Expression of Interest 
(Eol) issued by the Ministry from time to time.   
Farmer Producer Organizations (FPOs) are one of the eligible entities for applying 
under the APC scheme. Further, to encourage the FPOs participation in the scheme, 
following relaxations are provided in the eligibility criteria to the FPO applicants under 
the scheme guidelines:- 
(i) The requirement of the combined net worth in case of FPO applicants is 
equal to the grants -in-aid/subsidy sought under the scheme as compared to 
the other applicants wherein the requirement of the combined net worth is 1.5 
times of the grants-in-aid/subsidy sought.  
(ii) The requirement of the infusion of equity and term loan for the FPO 
applicants is 10% of the total project cost under the scheme as compared to 
other applicants wherein the requirement of infusion of equity and term loan is 
20% of the total project cost.  
In addition to the above relaxations in the eligibility criteria, the pattern of assistance 
as grants -in-aid/subsidy is @50% of the eligible project cost for projects of FPOs 
subject to maximum of Rs. 10 crore as compared to the other applicants wherein the 
pattern of assistance as grants -in-aid/subsidy is @35% of the eligible project cost 
subject to maximum of Rs. 10 crore. 
MINISTRY OF FOOD PROCESSING INDUSTRIES 
(OM. No. H-11012/5/2024-Parl. dated 20.11.2025) 
 
 

30 
 
15. Study on Post-Harvest Losses 
 
 The Committee note that the India’s Post -Harvest Losses are substantial and the 
percentage loss data on Post -Harvest Losses (PHL), based on Indian Council for 
Agricultural Research -Central Institute of Post -Harvest Engineering and Technology 
(ICAR-CIPHET), and NABARD Consultancy Service Pvt. Ltd (NABCONS), 2022 study, 
show very high levels of losses in livestock, fruits, vegetables and cereals, with total 
losses across all categories amounting to Rs. 1.52 lakh crore. The Committee note that 
the Evaluation S tudy conducted by NABCONS in 2020 was highlighted that due to 
interventions of the Integrated Cold Chain and Value Addition Infrastructure Scheme of 
Ministry of Food Processing Industries, while all sectors reported a slight decrease in 
the wastages, the fruit and vegetable sector has been most significantly impacted by the 
cold chain scheme. The dairy sector saw a decrease in wastage from 0.84 per cent to 
0.13 per cent whereas in the fisheries sector the wastage decreased from 1.25 per cent 
to 0.38 per cent. As the data is more than five years old and since many developments 
took place in the field, the Committee would like to have an updated data in this regard.  
The Committee also recommend  that the Ministry should explore the possibility 
of setting up of totally Government owned cold storages, value chain addition modern 
infrastructure and supply chain management in every district or such districts which 
have substantial potential for development of food processing units so as to address the 
issue of PHL in a concrete way. Government spending in this Sector will give a strong 
push in reducing PHL since most of the schemes of the Ministry are demand driven and 
require private initiative. 
Reply of the Government: 
The Ministry is currently in the process of undertaking a comprehensive study to 
assess post-harvest losses across various categories of agricultural produce. This study 
aims to generate updated data on the extent of losses occurring at different stages of 
the post-harvest value chain including harvesting, handling, storage, transportation, and 
processing. The objective is to identify key gaps and inefficiencies contributing to these 
losses and to provide an evidence -based foundation for policy formulation,  
infrastructure planning, and targeted interventions to reduce wastage and improve value 
realization for farmers and stakeholders in the agri-food ecosystem. 

31 
 
MoFPI does not set up food processing projects/ units on its own under any of its 
scheme. However, under the component schemes namely Integrated Cold Chain and 
Value Addition Infrastructure, Creation of Infrastructure for Agro Processing Clusters, 
Operation Greens and Creation/Expansion of Food Processing and Preservation 
Capacities of PMKSY, applicants along with Government assisted and supported 
agencies are eligible entities for availing financial assistance to set up food processing  
projects including cold chains as per the extant scheme guidelines of the respective 
component schemes. 
MINISTRY OF FOOD PROCESSING INDUSTRIES 
(OM. No. H-11012/5/2024-Parl. dated 20.11.2025) 
 
 
16. Pradhan Mantri Formalisation of Micro Food Processing Enterprises 
(PMFME) 
 
 The Committee note  that the presence of informal units in FPI in the country is 
one of the main challenges in ‘Make in India’ under Food Processing Sector.  To 
address this challenge, the Govt of India has launched PMFME on 29 June 2020 with 
an outlay of Rs. 10,000 crores with the aim to provide credit -linked subsidy to two lakh 
micro food processing units across the country, especially in the unorganized sector. 
The Scheme offers financial, technical, and business support to help these enterprises 
join the formal economy and access Schemes of Food Processing Industries.  
    The Midterm Impact Evaluation study for PMFME scheme conducted by M/S 
BDO India LLP revealed that a total of 66,966 projects have been established under the 
Scheme (86.6% by first -time entrepreneurs), with 31,805 enterprises formalized which 
is far below the target of formalizing 2,00,000 enterprises. Further, in 2024 -25, loans 
were sanctioned to 50,875 beneficiaries under the Credit Linked Subsidy component, 
reflecting a decline from the previous year, the reasons being delays in subsidy release 
by State Governments. The Committee have taken note that the Ministry is addressing 
this challenge through regular meetings with banks and State Governments, raising 
issues at Department of Financial Services (DFS) and State Level Bankers Committee 
(SLBC) meetings, and conducting awareness campaigns. In view of this, the Committee 
recommend the Ministry to - 

32 
 
(i) intensify engagement with lending institutions and State Governments to resolve 
subsidy and sanctioning issues, ensuring uninterrupted credit and support to Micro 
Food Processing Enterprises. 
(ii) set annual targets for formalisation of FPI units, strengthen District Resource 
Persons, simplify and digitize registration, and conduct targeted awareness campaigns.  
(iii) conduct regular monitoring and evaluation to maximize formalization of FPI units 
and expand access to credit and market opportunities. Addressing these bottlenecks 
will help achieve the ambitious targets of the PMFME Scheme and significantly further 
the ‘Make in India’ initiative. 
Reply of the Government:  
(i) The meetings are conducted on regular intervals with States/ UTs, lending banks 
/ institutions and other stakeholders to resolve subsidy , sanctioning and credit issues 
etc to support to Micro Food Processing Enterprises under PMFME Scheme. Further, 
credit related issues are taken up with Department of Financial Services (DFS) and 
State Level Bankers Committee (SLBC) meetings as and when required. 
 (ii) Annual targets are fixed under credit linked subsidy component of the  Scheme 
and are communicated to States / UTs as well as lending Banks/ Financial Institutions.  
The States/ UTs regularly strengthen the  District Resource Person (DRPs) by providing 
structured training encompassing scheme -related aspects so as to provide hand -
holding support to micro food processing enterprises in preparing Detailed Project 
Reports (DPRs), securing bank loans, providing training, obtaining necessary regulatory 
approvals etc. 
PMFME MIS Portal has been designed for easy process for submission of 
applications and transparency throughout the system. The portal is online for 
submission of all the applications and no physical documentation is required under the 
scheme. The Detailed Project Report is inbuilt in the system and is generated 
automatically upon filling and submission of all the details along with documents, by the 
applicants.  
To raise awareness about the PMFME Scheme at the grassroots level and 
effectively address regional diversity, MoFPI and State / UT Governments  have 
undertaken various initiatives such as nationwide radio campaigns in regional 
languages which was broadcasted across national, community and private radio 

33 
 
stations to ensure widespread coverage. Additionally, national print advertisement 
campaigns in regional languages have been launched, targeting publications from small 
to large -scale. In addition, district -level awareness workshops are being organised to 
engage key stakeholders such as potential micro -food processing enterprises, bank 
representatives, district officials, and resource persons, for creating awareness about 
the PMFME Scheme. 
 (iii) Regular Monitoring & feedback about the scheme is being undertaken at both the 
State and Central levels through the PMFME portal, review meetings with lending 
banks/SLBCs/ State Nodal Agencies (SNAs), and District Resource Persons (DRPs) for 
addressing the bottlenecks to achieve the targets of the PMFME Scheme. Further, a 
third-party Mid -Term Impact Evaluation Study has been conducted to evaluate the 
performance of the Scheme. Therefore, corrective measures are initiated on the basis 
of evaluation findings to address operational bottlenecks in a timely manner. 
MINISTRY OF FOOD PROCESSING INDUSTRIES 
(OM. No. H-11012/5/2024-Parl. dated 20.11.2025) 
 
 
17. Production Linked Incentive Scheme for FPIs (PLISFPI) 
 
 The Committee observe  that the Production Linked Incentive Scheme for Food 
Processing Industry (PLISFPI) is designed to ensure that manufacturers use 
domestically grown agricultural produce for eligible food products, which supports 
farmers’ incomes and reduces reliance on imports. The Committee note that this 
approach has already resulted in companies successfully replacing imported tomato 
products with locally sourced alternatives, demonstrating the scheme’s effectiveness in 
promoting domestic manufacturing. The Committee app reciate the Ministry’s efforts to 
make the application process more accessible through a user -friendly online portal and 
the provision of technical support by the Project Management Agency (IFCI). However, 
the Committee are concerned by the low selection rate in the innovative segment, which 
indicates possible barriers for new and creative initiatives within the sector. In view of 
this, Committee recommend that the Ministry should take specific steps to identify and 
address obstacles faced by innovative pro jects, ensuring that the benefits of the 
scheme reach a wider range of stakeholders.  

34 
 
Reply of the Government:  
There is one time selection process of the applicants under the PLISFPI 
Scheme. No further proposal for selection of the applicants under the Scheme is under 
consideration in the Ministry. 
MINISTRY OF FOOD PROCESSING INDUSTRIES 
(OM. No. H-11012/5/2024-Parl. dated 20.11.2025) 
 
Infrastructure Development and Value Chain Strengthening 
 
18. The Committee note that lack of adequate infrastructure in the form of cold chain 
and storage facilities is one of the main issues that are being faced under the ‘Make in 
India’ initiative in Food Processing Sector.  The Committee also observe that cold 
storage facilities play a pivotal role in minimizing post -harvest losses, extending the 
shelf life of agricultural produce, and ensuring food security in India. They are essential 
for supporting the country’s fast growing food processing sector, which is a k ey driver 
under the ‘Make in India’ initiative. The availability of robust cold chain infrastructure 
enables value addition, enhances market access for farmers, and facilitates the 
integration of Indian agriculture with global supply chains. 
The analysis of the data reveals that (i) out of 1,604 projects approved only 1,129 
projects have been completed nationally, creating 205.14 LMT of processing and 49.11 
LMT of preservation capacity, (ii) certain States and Union Territories (such as 
Chandigarh, Ladakh, Lakshadweep, and several North Eastern States) still lag behind 
in both the number and capacity of cold storage facilities.  The Committee believe that 
there is a pressing need for the speedy augmentation of cold storage infrastructure 
across all regions, particularly in the States with high potential for agriculture produce 
and underserved areas, to support the ambitious ‘Make in India’ goals in the Food 
Processing Sector. The Committee, therefore, recommend the Ministry to accelerate 
project implementation by prioritizing the allocation of resources to low -coverage 
regions, and incentivize the adoption of advanced storage technologies.  
Reply of the Government:  
Under PMKSY standalone cold storages are not supported, Cold storage as a 
part of food processing projects is established as per the requirement of processing 
capacity of that food processing unit for exclusive captive use. As on date, a total 

35 
 
preservation and processing capacity of 259.53 LMT has been created under PMKSY 
scheme. Under PMKSY Individuals including rural entrepreneurs as well as entity / 
organization such as Farmer producer Organisation (FPOs)/Farmer Producer Company 
(FPCs)/ Non -Government Organisations (NGOs)/Public Sector Undertaking (PSUs) 
/Firms/Companies, etc. are eligible to avail benefits under the scheme. 
PMKSY is demand -driven in nature, and applications are invited through 
Expression of Interest (EoI) from all over India, and projects are approved based on 
availability of funds. The projects are not allocated region-wise under any component 
scheme of PMKSY. However, to ensure equal opportunities across rural and urban 
areas Scheme awareness activities through National & State level awareness 
campaigns are conducted with the aim to enhance the awareness of general public and 
for their participation for availing benefits under the Schemes. 
As on 31.07.2025, under the various component schemes of PMKSY, a total of 
1,595 projects have been sanctioned out of which 1,148 projects have been 
completed/operationalised creating 210.32 LMT of processing and 49.21 LMT of 
preservation capacity.  
MoFPI through implementation of PMKSY,  helps in creation of modern 
infrastructure with efficient supply chain management from farm gate to retail outlet 
across the country. The scheme not only provides a boost to the growth of food 
processing sector in the country but also helps in, interalia, reducing wastage of 
agricultural produce, increasing the processing level and enhancing the export of the 
processed foods. With creation of Food Processing Infrastructure, the demand for farm 
produce which is raw material for Food Processing increases leading to better prices to  
farmers and increasing farm gate profitability. 
MINISTRY OF FOOD PROCESSING INDUSTRIES 
(OM. No. H-11012/5/2024-Parl. dated 20.11.2025) 
 
19. Export related issues Need for projections/targets   
 
 The Committee note that MoFPI  has neither projections nor set any targets for 
exports of processed foods. In absence of any future projections or targets, the 
Committee believe, evaluation of export potential and the effectiveness of export 
promoting policies cannot be fairly evaluated. The Committee, therefore recommend 

36 
 
that the relevant authorities establish clear and realistic future projections and targets 
for processed food exports, taking into account current market trends and ground 
realities. Setting such benchmarks will not only enable a fair assessment of export 
potential and the effectiveness of export promotion policies but will also instil a sense of 
accountability among the concerned agencies. Furthermore, well -defined targets and 
projections will provide a definitive direction for the sector, guiding strategi c planning 
and resource allocation to maximize growth and competitiveness in the global market. 
In addition to this, the Committee also desire the Ministry to take steps for increasing 
the number of Quality Control Cells in agro -processing clusters and units to ensure 
regular quality checks and strict compliance with standards which will help build trust in 
Indian processed food products and enhance the Sector’s ability to sustain export 
growth. 
Reply of the Government:  
Based on the observed Compound Annual Growth Rate (CAGR) of 4.20 % over 
the last five years ending 2024 -25, processed food exports are projected to reach 
approximately US$ 12,404.31 million over the next five years under normal market 
conditions. However, given the prevailing restrictions on the export of certain 
commodities such as sugar and maida, the actual realization of this projection may be 
tempered in the short to medium term. While these restrictions are aimed at 
safeguarding domestic supply and pr ice stability, they also constrain India’s ability to 
fully capitalize on expanding global demand for processed foods. 
Ministry of Food Processing Industries (MoFPI) has been incentivizing setting 
up/expansion of related infrastructure through its Central Sector Umbrella Scheme 
Pradhan Mantri Kisan SAMPADA Yojana (PMKSY), Production Linked Incentive 
Scheme for Food Processing Industry (PLISFPI) and Centrally sponsored PM 
Formalization of Micro Food Processing Enterprises (PMFME) scheme across the 
country. 
PMKSY has a dedicated Food Testing Laboratories (FTL) component scheme 
under which assistance is provided to strengthen food quality control infrastructure and 
make it accessible to the food processing sector and other stakeholders. This support is 
aimed at ensuring compliance with domestic and international food safety standards. 
The food testing facilities created under this scheme are available to food processing 

37 
 
units for testing their products, thereby improving quality assurance, boosting consumer 
confidence and facilitating exports. 
Further, in alignment with the budget announcement 2024 -25, Ministry will 
approve 100 Food Testing Labs (FTLs) with NABL accreditation under the component 
scheme – Food Safety and Quality Assurance Infrastructure (FSQAI) of   PMKSY to 
ensure regular quality checks and strict compliance with standards which will help build 
trust in Indian processed food products. 
MINISTRY OF FOOD PROCESSING INDUSTRIES 
(OM. No. H-11012/5/2024-Parl. dated 20.11.2025) 
Comments of the Committee 
 
 For comments of the Committee please refer to Para No. 1.28 of Chapter-I 
of this Report. 
 
20. Adoption of Global Best Practices 
 
 The Committee observe  that while India’s Food Processing Sector has made 
notable progress in recent years especially with a rising share of processed food 
exports and significant employment generation, there is still considerable scope for 
improvement when compared to countries like the USA, China, and Brazil.  India is 
lagging behind in value chain integration, and technology adoption Vis-a-Vis developed 
countries. The   Committee would like the Ministry to adopt / embrace advanced 
automation, sustainable packaging, stringent food safety standards, and robust supply 
chain management to improve efficiency of the sector.  
Reply of the Government:  
The Ministry is promoting the use of modern processing technologies, 
automation systems, and digital tools through various schemes including PMKSY and 
PMFME, with the aim of enhancing efficiency and productivity across the food 
processing value chain. Emphasis is being laid on encouraging environmentally friendly 
and sustainable packaging practices. The Ministry through its autonomous bodies viz. 
National Institute of Food Technology Entrepreneurship and Management (NIFTEM) at 
Kundli and Thanjavur are not o nly addressing contemporary challenges but also 
nurturing entrepreneurship and building a resilient, future -ready food ecosystem. The 

38 
 
initiatives further extend to waste valorisation, transforming food industry by -products 
and agricultural residues into value -added products. This not only helps reduce waste 
but also generates new revenue streams and reinforces sustainability in food 
processing. 
MINISTRY OF FOOD PROCESSING INDUSTRIES 
(OM. No. H-11012/5/2024-Parl. dated 20.11.2025) 
 
21.  The Committee also desire  that the Ministry should establish a dedicated 
platform to facilitate the sharing of success stories and best practices among States and 
Union Territories.  
Reply of the Government:  
As part of its promotional activities, the Ministry undertakes various initiatives to 
strengthen and promote the food processing sector across the country. These include 
organizing, co-sponsoring, and participating in national -level seminars, workshops, fairs 
and exhibitions aimed at encouraging investment in food processing and enhancing 
awareness about the schemes being implemented by the Ministry. Such initiatives also 
serve as platforms to showcase innovations, technological advancements and emerging 
opportunities in the sector.  In addition, the Ministry leverages its official social media 
platforms to disseminate information on its schemes and programmes, share success 
stories of beneficiaries under the MSME focused initiatives, and highlight best practices 
and achievements in the food processing industry. These efforts collectively contribute 
towards building a robust Pan India ecosystem including States and UTs that supports 
entrepreneurship, innovation and inclusive growth in the sector. 
MINISTRY OF FOOD PROCESSING INDUSTRIES 
(OM. No. H-11012/5/2024-Parl. dated 20.11.2025) 
 
 
22. Research & Development in Food Processing Sector 
 
 The Committee note that the Ministry has taken important  steps to promote 
research and development in the Food Processing Sector through the PMKSY R&D 
scheme, providing financial support to universities, research institutions, and even 
private sector laboratories. Since 2008 -09, 236 R&D projects have been approved, with 
most now completed. Further, under PMKSY (from 2016 –17), 80 projects have been 

39 
 
approved, of which 69 are finished and 3 are ongoing. The Committee also note that 
Government organizations, institutions, and universities are eligible for 100% grant -in-
aid, while private organizations, institutions, and universities can receive 50% grant -in-
aid for equipment costs in general areas and up to 70% in difficult areas, all on a 
reimbursement basis as per the scheme guidelines.  In this context, the Committee 
would like to be apprised of the details of (i) patents – product or process filed an d 
received; (ii) the commercialisation of the technologies developed; and (iii) royalty 
payments, if any received in the areas of packaging, storage, etc.  
Reply of the Government:  
(i) A total of 20 patents have been filed out of R&D projects sanctioned so far (The 
details are at Annexure A). 
(ii) Further 52 new technologies have been commercialized for products, processes 
& equipment/prototypes developed (details at Annexure B). 
(iii) There are no provisions in the R&D scheme guidelines regarding royalty 
payments for areas such as packaging, storage, or similar activities. 
MINISTRY OF FOOD PROCESSING INDUSTRIES 
(OM. No. H-11012/5/2024-Parl. dated 20.11.2025) 
 
  

40 
 
CHAPTER III 
 
 
OBSERVATION/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH THE COMMITTEE 
DO NOT DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE GOVERNMENT’S REPLY 
 
 
 
23. Processing of Damaged Potato Crops 
 
 The Committee note that  there are many instances specially in those regions 
where potato cropping is abundant, Potato farmers have to throw away their crop for 
want of right prices and or storage space at reasonable cost. The Committee observe 
that many a time due to plummeting price in the market, the farmers are forced offload 
their crop at a loss.  The Committee therefore suggest the Ministry to take appropriate 
steps to redress the grievance.   
 Presently, the Committee note that Potato crop is considered as a horticultural 
crop. They however, would like to know whether including potato into the category of 
food/cereals would have some bearing on the facilities and importance being given to 
the crop and, if so, the same may be apprised to the Committee at the earliest.   
Reply of the Government:  
Potato is classified as Horticulture crop (vegetable crop) in India. Government 
has given due importance to stabilize value chain development for potato crop in the 
country through various interventions like extending storage and transport assistance 
from production centre to consumption centers, creating processing & value addition 
infrastructure in the production clusters. Through these interventions, the Government 
has been able to manage the glut situations for potato in the recent past in the country. 
Under Operation Greens scheme, Ministry has created 2.40 lakh MT processing and 
preservation capacity in the country since inception of the Operation Greens scheme in 
2018-19. Through this scheme about 20950 farmers have been linked/ benefitted. 
Due to creation of processing and value addition infrastructure for potato, demand for 
raw material has increased for processing which has resulted in better price realization 
for potato farmers and avoided glut situation in production centers. Further, the 
processed and value added potato products are also being exported and country is 

41 
 
earning foreign exchange. 
Considering the importance of Potato crop in increasing farmers income, fighting 
malnutrition and potential for earning foreign exchange, the Government is already 
giving thrust on increasing production & productivity and focussing on value chain 
development of potato. Changing category from “Horticulture” to “Cereal” may not have 
much bearing on the development of the potato crop. 
MINISTRY OF FOOD PROCESSING INDUSTRIES 
(OM. No. H-11012/5/2024-Parl. dated 20.11.2025) 

42 
 
CHAPTER IV 
 
 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH ACTION TAKEN 
REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE 
COMMITTEE 
 
5. Special Food Processing Fund – Need to improve utilisation 
 
 The Committee note that the Govt of India has set up a special fund of Rs. 2,000 
Crore in NABARD in 2014 -15 to provide affordable credit to  the food processing units 
to be set up mega Food Parks and also to the mega Food parks.  
     The data on term loans sanctioned and disbursed, as on 31.03.2025, out of the 
Special Food Processing (SFPF) shows that  even  after a decade of its existence, (i) 
Rs. 1180 crore only out of Rs. 2000 crore, representing 59 % of the funds available 
could be sanctioned as term loans to Mega Food Parks (MFPs), Agro Processing 
Clusters (APCs), Individual food processing units in designated food parks and 
Industrial Food Parks (IFPs), (ii) Out of the term loans of Rs.  1179.79 crore sanctioned, 
Rs. 830 crore only was disbursed, representing 70.30% of sanctions till 30 March, 2025. 
The Committee would like to be apprised of the specific reasons for- 
(i) far lower sanctions vis-a-vis available funds;  
(ii) lower disbursements vis-à-vis sanctions;  
(iii)  whether all the (a) 14 lendee’s under MFPs, (b) Nine APCs (c) 14 Individual 
Processing Units (IPUs) and three Industrial food parks (IFPs), as given at 
annexure ----, which availed credit from the fund are repaying the loans as 
per the terms and conditions of the loans and also whether they are 
operational   to produce / process products as per the agreed quantities 
maintaining prescribed quality, etc; and  
(iv) the three IFPs not completing the projects even after two / three years of 
disbursing the funds?   
The Committee also would like to be apprised of whether any third party audit of the 
fund was done and the detailed findings of such audit such as diversion, misutilisation / 
appropriation, if any?, etc and also the measures taken / proposed to be taken to 
address the shortfalls in administering the funds and also whether fund has achieved its 

43 
 
objectives for which it was set up within a time frame drawn.”  
1.6  In its Action taken reply, the Ministry has stated: - 
“The Ministry is actively working with Ministry of Agriculture and Farmers 
Welfare and NABARD for various issues related to fund utilization and 
implementation. Necessary corrective actions are also being taken.” 
 
6.    The Committee also  would like to be apprised of  whether any third party audit of 
the fund was done and the  detailed findings of such audit  such as diversion, 
misutilisation / appropriation, if any?, etc and also the measures taken / proposed to be 
taken to address the shortfalls in administering the  funds and also whether fund has 
achieved its objectives for which it was set up  with in a time frame drawn.  
Reply of the Government (5 & 6): 
The Ministry is actively working with Ministry of Agriculture and Farmers Welfare and 
NABARD for various issues related to fund utilization and implementation. Necessary 
corrective actions are also being taken. 
MINISTRY OF FOOD PROCESSING INDUSTRIES 
(OM. No. H-11012/5/2024-Parl. dated 20.11.2025) 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
 For comments of the Committee please refer to Para No. 1.7 of Chapter-I of this 
Report. 
 
  

44 
 
CHAPTER V 
 
 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH FINAL REPLIES 
OF THE GOVERNMENT ARE STILL AWAITED 
 
 
-NIL- 
 
 
 
 
New Delhi            CHARANJIT SINGH CHANNI  
11 August, 2026               Chairperson, 
20 Shravan, 1948 (Saka)    Standing Committee on Agriculture, Animal  
       Husbandry and Food Processing 
  

45 
 
MINUTES OF THE TWENTY-FOURTH SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE 
ON AGRICULTURE, ANIMAL HUSBANDRY AND FOOD PROCESSING  
(2025-26) 
 
 
The Committee sat on Tuesday, the 11 th August, 2026 from 1500 hrs. to 1510 
hrs. in Committee Room-‘D’, Parliament House Annexe (PHA), New Delhi.  
  
Present 
 
Shri Charanjit Singh Channi  -  Chairperson 
 
Members 
 
Lok Sabha 
 
2.  Shri Umeshbhai Babubhai Patel 
3.  Shri Rajkumar Chahar 
4.  Smt. Anita Nagarsingh Chouhan 
5.  Shri Kuldeep Indora 
6.  Shri Rajpalsinh Mahendrasinh Jadav 
7.  Md. Abu Taher Khan 
8.  Shri Rahul Singh Lodhi 
9.  Shri Sukanta Kumar Panigrahi 
10.  Smt. Krishna Devi Shivshankar Patel 
11.  Shri Naresh Chandra Uttam Patel 
12.  Shri Murasoli S. 
13.  Shri Dharambir Singh 
14.  Shri Dushyant Singh 
15.  Shri Sudhakar Singh 
16.  Shri Kodikunnil Suresh 
17.  Smt. Geniben Nagaji Thakor 
18.  Shri Bhausaheb Rajaram Wakchaure 
 
Rajya Sabha 
 
19.  Dr. Anil Sukhdeorao Bonde 
20.  Shri Banshilal Gurjar 
21.  Shri Nitin Laxmanrao Jadhav-Patil 
22.  Shri Madan Rathore 
23.  Shri S.R. Sivalingam 
24.  Shri P. P. Suneer 
25. Shri Mahesh Kewat 

46 
 
26. Shri James Pangsang Kongkal Sangma 
 
Secretariat 
 
1. Shri Dhiraj Kumar  – Joint Secretary     
2. Shri Maheshwar  – Director 
3. Shri Prem Ranjan  - Deputy Secretary 
   4. Shri Fauzi Badruddin - Deputy Secretary 
 
2. At the outset, the Chairperson welcomed the Members to the Sitting of the 
Committee. Thereafter, the Committee took up for consideration and adoption of the 
following Draft Action Taken Reports: 
 
(i) xxxx  xxxx  xxxx  xxxx*; 
(ii) xxxx  xxxx  xxxx  xxxx*; 
 
(iii) Action Taken Report  on 21 st Report (18 th Lok Sabha) on the subject 
‘Initiatives taken in Food Processing Sector under ‘Make in India 
Program’ pertaining to the Ministry of Food Processing Industries; 
 
(iv) xxxx  xxxx  xxxx  xxxx*; 
(v) xxxx  xxxx  xxxx  xxxx*; 
(vi) xxxx  xxxx  xxxx  xxxx*; 
(vii) xxxx  xxxx  xxxx  xxxx*; and 
(viii) xxxx  xxxx  xxxx  xxxx*. 
 
3. The Committee, thereafter, adopted the draft Action Taken Reports without any 
modifications/amendments. 
 
4. The Committee also authorized the Chairperson to finalize and present the 
Reports to Parliament.  
 
The Committee then adjourned. 
 
  
 
* Matter not related to this Report. 

47 
 
APPENDIX 
 
ANALYSIS OF ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE OBSERVATIONS 
/ RECOMMENDATIONS CONTAINED IN THE TWENTY FIRST REPORT 
(EIGHTEENTH LOK SABHA) OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
AGRICULTURE, ANIMAL HUSBANDRY AND FOOD PROCESSING (2024-25). 
(Vide Para 4 of Introduction of the Report) 
 
(i) Total Number of Recommendations             23 
(ii) Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted By the 
Government  
           Para Nos.  1,2,3,4,7,8,9,10,11,12,13,14,15,16,17,18,19,20,21,22  Total      20 
 Percentage     86.96% 
(iii) Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to    
pursue in view of the Government’s replies  
      Para No.    .    23                                                             Total              01 
 Percentage 4.35% 
 
(iv) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which Replies of the   
Government have not been accepted by the Committee 
    Para No              5 & 6                                                                        Total     02 
                                                                                                                                
Percentage   8.69% 
(iv) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which final replies of the       
Government are still awaited 
      Para No.    NIL                                                                            Total     00 
 Percentage 0.00% 
 
 
 
 