  
STANDING COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE, ANIMAL HUSBANDRY 
AND FOOD PROCESSING 
 
(2025-2026) 
 
 
EIGHTEENTH LOKSABHA 
 
 
 
MINISTRY OF FISHERIES, ANIMAL HUSBANDRY AND DAIRYING  
(DEPARTMENT OF FISHERIES) 
 
 
'DEMANDS FOR GRANTS (2026-27)' 
 
 
[Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations contained in the 
Twenty Ninth Report (Eighteenth Lok Sabha) of the Standing Committee on Agriculture, 
Animal Husbandry and Food Processing (2025-26)] 
 
 
 
 
FORTY FOURTH REPORT 
 
 
 
 
 
LOKSABHASECRETARIAT  
NEW DELHI 
 
AUGUST, 2026/SHRAVANA, 1948(SAKA) 
 
 
44 

 
  
FORTY FOURTH REPORT 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE, 
ANIMAL HUSBANDRY AND FOOD PROCESSING 
 
(2025-2026) 
 
 
EIGHTEENTH LOKSABHA 
 
 
 
MINISTRY OF FISHERIES, ANIMAL HUSBANDRY AND DAIRYING  
(DEPARTMENT OF FISHERIES) 
 
 
'DEMANDS FOR GRANTS (2026-27)' 
 
 
 
[Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations contained 
in the Twenty Ninth Report (Eighteenth Lok Sabha) of the Standing Committee on 
Agriculture, Animal Husbandry and Food Processing (2025-26)] 
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on 12.08.2026 
Laid on the Table of Rajya Sabha on 12.08.2026 
 
 
 
 
LOKSABHASECRETARIAT  
NEW DELHI 
AUGUST, 2026/SHRAVANA, 1948(SAKA)  


 
  
COA No. 543 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
© 2026 By Lok Sabha Secretariat 
 
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of Business in Lok Sabha 
(Seventeenth Edition) and Printed by Lok Sabha Secretariat 

 
  
 
CONTENTS 
 
 PAGE 
Composition of the Committee (2025-26)  (iii) 
Introduction  (v) 
Chapter I Report 1 
Chapter II     Observations/Recommendations that have been accepted by the 
Government 
8 
Chapter III Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not desire 
to pursue in view of the Government’s replies 
28 
Chapter IV Observations/Recommendations in respect of which Replies of the 
Government have not been accepted by the Committee 
29 
Chapter V Observations/Recommendations in respect of which final replies of 
the Government are still awaited 
30 
 ANNEXURE 
Minutes of the 24th sitting of the Committee held on 11.08.2026  
 
31 
 APPENDIX 
Analysis of Action Taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in the Twenty Ninth  
Report (18 th Lok Sabha) of the Standing Committee on Agriculture, 
Animal Husbandry and Food Processing (2025-26)  
 
 
33 
 
 
 

 
(iii)  
COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE, ANIMAL 
HUSBANDRY AND FOOD PROCESSING  
18th Lok Sabha (2025-26) 
 
SHRI CHARANJIT SINGH CHANNI – CHAIRPERSON 
 
MEMBERS 
   LOK SABHA 
 
2.  Shri Patel Umeshbhai Babubhai 
3.  Smt. Harsimrat Kaur Badal 
4.  Shri Rajkumar Chahar 
5.  Smt. Anita Nagarsingh Chouhan 
6.  Shri Kuldeep Indora 
7.  Shri Rajpalsinh Mahendrasinh Jadav 
8.  Md. Abu Taher Khan 
9.  Shri Rahul Singh Lodhi 
10.  Shri Sukanta Kumar Panigrahi 
11.  Smt. Krishna Devi Shivshankar Patel 
12.  Shri Naresh Chandra Uttam Patel 
13.  Shri Narayan Tatu Rane 
14.  Shri Murasoli S. 
15.  Shri Dharambir Singh 
16.  Shri Dushyant Singh 
17.  Shri Sudhakar Singh 
18.  Shri Kodikunnil Suresh 
19.  Shri Tejasvi Surya 
20.  Smt. Geniben Nagaji Thakor 
21.  Shri Bhausaheb Rajaram Wakchaure 
 
   RAJYA SABHA 
 
22.  Dr. Anil Sukhdeorao Bonde 
23.  Shri Banshilal Gurjar 
24.  Shri Nitin Laxmanrao Jadhav-Patil 
25.  Shri Madan Rathore 
26.  Shri S.R. Sivalingam 
27.  Shri Ramji Lal Suman 
28.  Shri P. P. Suneer 
29.  Shri Randeep Singh Surjewala 
30 Shri Mahesh Kewat* 
31 Shri James Pangsang Kongkal Sangma** 
 
 
Note:      Smt. Ramilaben Becharbhai Bara ceased to be a Member of the Committee after her retirement from Rajya Sabha 
w.e.f. on 21.06.2026 (Rajya Sabha Bulletin Part-II(TO), Para No. 66058 dated 09.01.2026). 
 Shri H.D. Devegowda, ceased to be a Member of the Committee after his retirement from Rajya Sabha w.e.f . on 
25.06.2026 (Rajya Sabha Bulletin Part-II(TO), Para No. 66058 dated 09.01.2026). 
*Shri Mahesh Kewat, MP , Rajya Sabha has been nominated to the Standing Committee w.e.f. 23.07.2026 vide Lok 
Sabha Bulletin Part-II, No. 5724, dated 24.07.2026. 
 **Shri James Pangsang Kongkal Sangma, MP , Rajya Sabha has been nominated to the Standing Committee w.e.f. 
23.07.2026 vide Lok Sabha Bulletin Part-II, No. 5724, dated 24.07.2026. 
 

 
(iv)  
SECRETARIAT 
 
 1. Shri Dhiraj Kumar   - Joint Secretary 
 2. Shri Maheshwar    - Director 
 3. Shri Ashwaghosh B. Lokhande - Under Secretary 
  
 
  

 
(v)  
INTRODUCTION 
 
 
I, the Chairperson, Standing Committee on Agriculture, Animal Husbandry and 
Food Processing (2025-26), having been authorized by the Committee to submit the 
Report on their behalf, present this Forty Fourth  Report on Action taken by the 
Government on the Observations/Recommendations contained in the Twenty Ninth 
Report (Eighteenth Lok Sabha) of the Standing Committee on Agriculture, Animal 
Husbandry and Food Processing (202 5-26) on 'Demands for Grants (202 6-27)' 
pertaining to the Ministry of Fisheries, Animal Husbandry and Dairying (Department of 
Fisheries).  
 
2. The Twenty Ninth Report (Eighteenth Lok Sabha) of the Standing Committee 
on Agriculture, Animal Husbandry and Food Processing (202 5-26) on Demands for 
Grants (202 6-27) pertaining to the Ministry of Fisheries, Animal Husbandry and 
Dairying (Department of Fisheries) was presented to Lok Sabha and laid on the Table 
of Rajya Sabha on 16th March, 2026. The Action Taken Notes on the Report were 
received on 20.07.2026. 
 
3. The Report was considered and adopted by the Committee at their Sitting held 
on 11.08.2026. 
 
4. An Analysis of the action taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in the Twenty Ninth Report (Eighteenth 
Lok Sabha) of the Committee is given in Appendix. 
 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI;                                 CHARANJIT SINGH CHANNI  
11 August, 2026                                                             Chairperson, 
20 Shravana, 1948 (Saka)            Standing Committee on Agriculture
       Animal Husbandry and Food Processing 
 
 

1 
 
CHAPTER – I 
 
REPORT 
 
This Report of the Standing Committee on Agriculture, Animal Husbandry and 
Food Processing deals with the Action Taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in the Twenty Ninth Report (Eighteenth 
Lok Sabha) of the Standing Committee on Agriculture, Animal Husbandry and Food 
Processing (2025-26) on ‘Demands for Grants (2026-27)’ of the Ministry of Fisheries, 
Animal Husbandry and Dairying (Department of Fisheries) which was presented to 
Lok Sabha and laid on the Table of Rajya Sabha on 16th March, 2026. 
 
1.2 The Ministry of Fisheries, Animal Husbandry and Dairying (Department of 
Fisheries) have furnished Action Taken Replies in respect of all the 1 0 Observations/ 
Recommendations contained in the Report. These Replies have been scrutinised and 
categorised as under: - 
 
(i) Observations/Recommendations that have been accepted by the Government: 
 Recommendation Para Nos.1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9 & 10  
              Total 10 
       Chapter-II 
 
(ii) Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to pursue 
in view of the Government’s replies:  
Recommendation Para No. Nil 
                      Total 00 
                    Chapter-III 
 
(iii) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which Replies of the 
Government have not been accepted by the Committee: 
Recommendation Para Nos. Nil 
              Total 00 
                   Chapter-IV 
 
(iv) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which final replies of the 
Government are still awaited: 
Recommendation Para Nos. Nil 
              Total 00 
                           Chapter-V 

2 
 
1.3 The Committee trust that utmost importance would be given to implementation 
of the Observations/ Recommendations accepted by the Government. In case where 
it is not possible for the Department to implement the Recommendations in letter and 
spirit for any reason, the matter should be reported to the Committee with reasons for 
non-implementation. The Committee desire that further Action Taken Notes on the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in Chapter-I of this Report be furnished to 
them at an early date. 
 
1.4 The Committee will now deal with the action taken by the Government on some 
of the Observations/Recommendations in the succeeding paragraphs. 
 
FISHERIES INSTITUTES - UTILISATION OF FUNDS AND STAFF STRENGTH 
(RECOMMENDATION PARA NO.5) 
 
1.5 The Committee had observed/recommended: - 
 The Committee have been informed by the Department that the budget 
estimates and revised estimates of the Fishery Institutes have been reduced 
over the last five financial years due to less expenditure made by the Fisheries 
Institutes.  Further, out of the  total funds allocated to Assistance to Fisheries 
Institutes, more than 81% of the funds are earmarked to two institutes namely 
Fishery Survey of India (FSI) and Central Institute of Fisheries, Nautical & 
Engineering Training (CIFNET), who spend a major a mount on the operation 
and maintenance of its 14 -fishery survey and training vessels, however, since 
2024-25 only two vessels are in operation.  
The Committee understand that fishery institutes play a crucial role in providing 
the necessary technological, engineering, research and survey related backup 
which is an important aspect for the growth and development of fishery sector 
in the Country. How ever, the Committee note that the utilization of funds 
allocated to the Department has been lower than anticipated, which has, in turn, 
led to reductions in the budgetary allocations for Fishery Institutes at the Budget 
Estimates and Revised Estimates stag es. The Committee, also note that the 
overall sanctioned strength of the Department of Fisheries including 
Headquarters, four subordinate offices/institutes and two autonomous 

3 
 
body/regulatory authority is 1298 posts. However, 671 posts are vacant, which 
constitutes a substantial vacancy of 50%.  
The Committee have been concerned about the smooth functioning of all the 
fishery institutes and have earlier also recommended that the Department may 
take corrective measures in this regard. However, the Committee, feel that the 
issues regarding underutilisation of funds and staff vacancy still persist and the 
reasons given by the Department are also similar to as given earlier. The 
Committee, considering the importance of these Institutes in the Development 
of Fishery Sector in the Country, recommend that  the Department engage a 
result-oriented approach to address all the issues faced by fishery institutes and 
ensure that underutilisation of funds does not become the reason for its budget 
being cut down by the M/o Finance. Further, the Department may also take 
necessary steps to fill up the vacant posts in all the fishery institutes and ensure 
their effective and smooth functioning. 
 
1.6 In its Action Taken Reply, the Department has submitted: - 
 The recommendation of the Hon'ble Committee has been noted for 
appropriate consideration. Further, it is submitted that a substantial number of 
vacant posts in the Department of Fisheries and its affiliated institutes could not 
be filled owing to various reasons beyond the control of these institutions. 
Consequently, a large number of these posts remained vacant for extended 
periods and, in accordance with the prevailing instructions issued by the 
Department of Expenditure, were classified as “deemed abolished” after 
remaining vacant for more than five years. 
 Realising the adverse impact of such vacancies on the operational efficiency 
of the Department and its institute’s, concerted efforts have been undertaken 
to revive /create these posts. At present, proposals for the revival/creation of a 
total of 163 posts across different levels, pertaining to the Department of 
Fisheries as well as its subordinate and autonomous inst itutes, have been 
initiated and are currently at various stages of examination and approval by the 
Department of Expenditure. 
  

4 
 
Simultaneously, proactive measures have been taken to fill up the live 
vacancies. These include efforts to fill posts through promotion and deputation, 
in addition to initiating direct recruitment processes in accordance with 
applicable recruitment rules a nd procedures. These steps are aimed at 
ensuring that critical positions are occupied in a timely manner, thereby 
strengthening the human resource capabilities of the Department. 
 In view of the sustained and coordinated efforts undertaken both for the 
revival/creation of abolished posts and the filling up of vacancies, it is 
anticipated that the overall staffing position within the Department of Fisheries 
and its institutes will w itness significant improvement in the coming months. 
This augmentation in manpower is expected to enhance administrative 
efficiency, facilitate smoother functioning of operations, and enable the 
Department and its institutions to discharge their mandates more effectively. 
1.7 The Committee  in several of its recommendations have expressed 
concern about the vacant posts in the various fishery institutes/ autonomous 
and regulatory bodies functioning under the Department of Fisheries . It is a 
matter of concern for the Committee to note from the reply of the Department  
that a large number of these posts remained vacant for more than five years and 
thus, in accordance with the prevailing instructions issued by the Department 
of Expenditure, were classified as “deemed abolished”.  The Committee, 
appreciate that the Department have initiated efforts to revive/create these 
abolished posts again and have proposed the revival of 163 posts across 
different levels pertaining to the Department of Fisheries and its subordinate 
and autonomous institutes . The Committee, however, feel that these posts 
should not have been allowed to be abolished in the very first place and should 
have been filled up appropriately well within time. The Committee, strongly feel 
that inadequate staffing and vacancies of important a nd functional posts 
drastically effects the operational efficiency of the Department of Fisheries in 
particular and the also hinders the progress of fishery sector of the country in 
general. The Committee, therefore, expects that the measures as stated by the 
Department for revival/creation of abolished posts and filling of vacancies bear 
positive results and the Department may be careful in future and take necessary 

5 
 
efforts so that no posts remain vacant for extended periods and as such avoid 
them being abolished. The Committee, would like to be further informed by the 
Department about the progress with regard to revival/creation of posts. 
KISAN CREDIT CARDS (KCC) - MAXIMISING THE REACH AMONGST 
FISHERMEN 
(RECOMMENDATION PARA NO.8) 
 
1.8 The Committee had observed/recommended: - 
 The Department has stated that till date a little above 5 lac Kisan Credit 
Cards (KCC) have been sanctioned to fishers and fish farmers, but, no year 
wise targets have been fixed in this regard. However, an overall national target 
of covering 50 lac fishers and fish farmers have been envisaged under the KCC 
scheme. The Committee, note that the country has around three crore fishers 
and fish farmers who are engaged in various fishing related activities, and KCC 
plays a vital role providing these fishermen a ccess to short -term institutional 
credit for the expenses incurred on seed, feed, medicines, fuel, labour, 
maintenance of ponds, cages, Re -circulatory Aquatic Units (RAS) and other 
requirements. The Committee would also like to emphasize that the target of  
50 lakh KCCs set by the Department may need to be further increased in light 
of the large population of fishermen in the country.  
The Committee, therefore, recommend that KCC should be given to all the 
fishers/fishermen of the country and the target should be set accordingly. The 
Department may therefore take necessary steps in this regard and ensure that 
the reach of KCC is maximized and ensure that more and more fishers, fish 
farmers are provided with Kisan Credit Cards. 
1.9 In its Action Taken Reply, the Department has stated: -  
 The Hon’ble Committee’s recommendation to extend KCC benefits to all 
eligible fishers and fish farmers has been noted. However, KCC coverage 
depends on beneficiary eligibility, willingness to avail institutional credit, 
submission of requisite documents, and lending decisions of financial 
institutions as per extant guidelines. 

6 
 
The Department of Fisheries (DoF), in coordination with State Governments/UT 
Administrations, the Department of Financial Services (DFS), banks, and other 
stakeholders, has been undertaking sustained efforts to expand KCC coverage 
through awareness campaig ns, beneficiary identification, and facilitation 
measures. 
To achieve saturation of eligible beneficiaries, Nationwide AHDF KCC 
Campaigns were conducted during 2021 –22 and 2022–23, and subsequently 
resumed during 2024 –25 with Gram Panchayat -level KCC camps for on -the-
spot scrutiny of applications. In addition, the “GharGhar KCC Abhiyan” and the 
“Viksit Bharat SankalpYatra” were implemented to enhance outreach, 
awareness, and access to KCC benefits. 
The DoF has also facilitated the onboarding of the fisheries sector on the 
JanSamarth portal to streamline access to institutional credit. Further, under 
the Pradhan Mantri Matsya Kisan Samridhi Sah -Yojana (PM-MKSSY), credit 
facilitation, professional handholding, and aquaculture crop insurance support 
are being provided to improve financial inclusion and risk mitigation in the 
fisheries sector. 
The Department will continue to review progress periodically and take 
necessary measures, in coordination with stakeholders, to maximize KCC 
coverage among eligible fishers and fish farmers.  
Further, a nationwide “Khet Bachao Abhiyaan” is being organised from 1stJune 
2026 to 30thJune 2026 in coordination with the Ministry of Agriculture & 
Farmers Welfare and State Governments/UT Administrations to saturate Kisan 
Credit Card (KCC) coverage among eligible farmers and facilitate their access 
for timely and affordable institutional credit.  
 
1.10 The Committee, appreciate the efforts taken by the Department to 
increase the coverage of Kisan Credit Cards amongst the fishermen of the 
country by engaging various tools such awareness campaigns, camps, Ghar  
Ghar KCC Abhiyan, Viksit Bharat Sankalp Yatra and onboarding of fisheries 
sector on the Jan Samarth portal. Further, the Department have also stated that 
a Nation wide ‘Khet Bachao Abhiyaan’ has been organised from 1 st June 2026 

7 
 
to 30th June 2026 to saturate Kisan Credit Card (KCC) coverage. The Committee 
would further like to be apprised of the results of these initiatives taken by the 
Department and would again suggest that the Department should set up a 
yearly target for distribution of KCC amongst fishermen so as to achieve the 
desired results in a target-oriented manner. 
 
 
 
 
  

8 
 
CHAPTER – II 
 
 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS THAT HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE 
GOVERNMENT 
 
1. ALLOCATIONS AND EXPENDITURE 
 
The Committee, note that the budget allocation of the Department of Fisheries 
from FY 2022 -23 has been increasing over the years, however the capacity of the 
Department to utilise the allocated funds has been continuously decreasing which was 
only 67.84% in the FY 2024 -25.  The reasons, stated by the Department, which are 
responsible for the shortfall in utilization of the allocated budget since 2021-22 includes 
Notification of alternative funds flow mechanism by the Department of Expenditure, 
Notification of SNA and SPARSH which made the fund flow slower, delay in 
preparedness of the States/UTs for adoption of new system of fund flow, delay in 
submission of viable proposals by the States/UTs, Restriction on instalment of central 
share of 25% of the central share approved under Central Sector proposals, slow pace 
of project implementation by States/UTs, delay in contribution of state share. The 
Department has also stated that the fund utilization under PMMSY is directly related 
to the pace of funds utilizatio n and implementation by all the States/UTs and this 
dependency accumulates the central liability. 
The Committee, note that, the reasons cited by the Department for slow 
utilisation of allocated funds continue to be similar to those observed during the 
financial year in which these financial initiatives were introduced. While the 
Department has undertak en a number of measures to address these issues, the 
anticipated improvement in fund utilization appears to be gradual, as reflected in the 
continuing shortfall since FY 2022-23. 
The Committee, is of the opinion that for the development of fishery sector in 
the country, it is imperative that the allocated funds are completely utilised so that the 
policies and schemes of the Department are successfully implemented on the ground. 
As recommended by the Committee earlier also, the Committee, again recommend 
that the Department should revisit their policy/financial procedures with a result -
oriented mindset and look out for gaps and address the issues causing hindrances. 
The Department, may, if necessary, review their procedures and take necessary steps 
accordingly to ensure that the funds allocated for schemes are completely utilised. 

9 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
The Department acknowledges the observations and recommendations of the Hon'ble 
Committee regarding optimal utilization of allocated funds for the development of the 
fisheries sector. The Department remains committed to ensuring effective 
implementation of  its schemes and programmes, particularly the Pradhan Mantri  
Matsya Sampada Yojana (PMMSY) and other ongoing initiatives. 
The Department of Fisheries continuously reviews the physical and financial progress 
of schemes through regular meetings, consultations with State/UT Governments and 
periodic assessment of implementation bottlenecks. States/UTs are advised from 
time-to-time to expedite pre-project implementation process and clearances, project  
approvals at the State level , timely mobilisation of States, expediting of project 
implementation, submission of utilization certificates, and completion of procedural 
requirements to facilitate timely release and utilization of funds. 
The introduction of the revised procedure, just-in-time release of funds by the Ministry 
of Finance initially posed certain operational challenges for States/UTs in aligning with 
the new financial and procedural requirements, which affected the pace of fund 
utilization during the transition period. However , with continuous engagement, 
capacity building, handholding support s, and increased familiarity with the revised 
procedures, the understanding and compliance of States/UTs have improved 
considerably. Consequently, a significant improvement in the utilization of funds has 
been observed in the recent years. 
Further, the Department of Fisheries, Government of India continues to review 
its operational and financial procedures in a result -oriented manner and undertakes 
corrective measures, wherever required, to facilitate efficient fund flow and maximize 
utilization of allocated resources. The Department of Fisheries remains committed to 
ensuring that the funds earmarked for fisheries development are effectively utilized for 
achieving the intended outcomes and strengthening the fisheries sector across the 
country. 
 
[Ministry of Fisheries, Animal Husbandry and Dairying 
(Department of Fisheries) 
J-18001/02/2026-FY dated 20th July, 2026] 
 

10 
 
2. INCLUSION OF SOCIAL WELFARE COMPONENTS IN THE PROPOSED 
EXTENSION OF PRADHAN MANTRI MATSYA SAMPADA YOJANA-II 
 
The Committee have been informed that Department of Fisheries in 
consultation with various States/UTs and Stakeholders has formulated a proposal for 
continuation of Pradhan Mantri Matsya Sampada Yojana-II for the next five years i.e. 
2026-27 to 2030-31 co-terminus with the 16th Finance Commission. The Commi ttee 
acknowledge that PMMSY is a very important scheme implemented by the 
Department for the benefit and development of fishery sector in the country and 
therefore recommended extension of the scheme in their 3rd report on DFG (24 -25). 
The Committee, appre ciate this effort taken by the Department for extension of the 
scheme, however, the Committee feel that the extended PMMSY -II should also 
include components which can address the social and economic issues faced by the 
small scale and traditional fishermen and fishery labourers (khalasi) of the country.   
The Committee, therefore, recommend that for the social and economic 
wellbeing of all fishermen including fishery labourers (khalasi) who are engaged in 
various fishing activities and work on fishing boats, their housing, health and education 
(educational loans and scholarships) needs may be addressed and provided for in a 
more concrete manner. If required, the Department may also co -ordinate with the 
Ministry of Labour in regard to providing social security measures to fishery labourer’s 
engaged in different fishing related activities. The Committee further, recommend that, 
in the extended PMMSY -II, a robust and foolproof mechanism may be developed to 
ascertain that the funds allocated to States/UTs under the scheme, reach the intended 
beneficiaries. Necess ary steps may also be taken to ensure seamless transfer of 
funds/DBT to intended beneficiaries such as small/traditional fishermen, SC/ST and 
women fishermen so as to strengthen their socio-economic wellbeing. 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
The Department of Fisheries, at the outset , expresses sincere gratitude to the 
Committee for recognizing the role played by the PMMSY for holistic development of 
fisheries and aquaculture in the country and recommending for continuation of 
Pradhan Mantri Matsya Sampada Yojana as Phase-II for the next five years i.e. 2026-
27 to 2030-31. This recommendation will greatly help the Department of Fisheries to 
move forward effectively and strategically.  Under the Pradhan Mantri Matsya 
Sampada Yojana (PMMSY) encompasses several interventions to improve the socio-

11 
 
economic conditions of fishers and fish workers through livelihood support, capacity 
building, insurance coverage, infrastructure development, and creation of income -
generating livelihood opportunities. The Department  of Fisheries  also promotes 
convergence with relevant schemes of other Ministries and Departments for 
addressing housing, education, healthcare, social security and livelihood -related 
requirements of fisheries stakeholders. 
The Department will continue to explore opportunities for enhanced convergence and 
coordination with concerned Ministries/Departments, including the Ministry of Labour 
& Employment and other relevant agencies, for extending appropriate social security 
and welfare benefits to the labourers engaged in fisheries and allied activities. 
Further, under the proposed PMMSY  Phase-II, due emphasis is being given to 
strengthening beneficiary identification, transparency, accountability and monitoring 
mechanisms to ensure that scheme benefits reach to the intended beneficiaries in an 
efficient and timely manner. Robust digital platforms, beneficiary databases, Aadhaar-
enabled Direct Benefit Transfer (DBT) mechanisms, and regular monitoring systems 
are being envisaged to facilitate seamless transfer of benefits without any leakages. 
PMMSY with a higher financial assistance always promotes Scheduled Castes 
(SCs), Scheduled Tribes (STs) and women beneficiar ies through targeted 
interventions aimed at improving their livelihoods, income generation opportunities 
and overall socio -economic well -being. The Department of Fisheries, GoI remains 
committed to ensuring inclusive and equitable development of the fisheries  and 
aquaculture sector through effective implementation of its schemes and programmes.  
 
[Ministry of Fisheries, Animal Husbandry and Dairying 
(Department of Fisheries) 
J-18001/02/2026-FY dated 20th July, 2026] 
3. PRADHAN MANTRI MATSYA KISAN SAMRIDDHI SAH YOJANA (PMMKS-
SY)- REGISTRATION OF FISHERMEN AND AVAILING INSTITUTIONAL 
CREDIT AND INSURANCE 
 
The Committee have been informed that under PMMKS -SY, development of 
National Fisheries Digital Platform (NFDP) is an important initiative which aims at 
formalization of the fisheries and aquaculture sector through creation of work based 

12 
 
digital identities and database for all the stakeholders. It will also serve as a one stop 
solution for access to institutional credit, strengthening of fishery co -operatives, 
incentivizing aquaculture insurance, performance -based incentives, fisheries 
traceability systems and adoption and expansion of fish and fishery products safety 
and quality assurance system. The Committee, note that till date out of 3 crore 
fishermen of the country only 29 lakh fishers, fish farmers and other stakeholders have 
been registered on NFDP. Further, out of 20 thousand lead applications received only 
347 loans have been sanctioned by the banks and aquaculture insurance has been 
availed by 29 beneficiaries covering 98.56 hectares.  
The Committee have been concerned with the plight of the small and marginal 
fishermen of the Country who are dependent on fishing activities for their survival and 
sustenance needs. Therefore, the Committee have earlier recommended for 
aquaculture insurance and provision of institutional credit to fishermen in their earlier 
reports. The Committee appreciate that these components have been addressed in 
the sub -scheme PMMS -SY, however, the Committee understand that 
formalization/registration of all the fisher s and fishermen in the Country is crucial if 
these benefits are to reach the fishermen at large.  
The Committee, therefore recommend that the Department may expedite the 
registration of fishermen under NFDP and taken necessary steps to ensure that the 
registered fishermen are made aware of the Department’s aquaculture insurance and 
institutional credit provisions so that they can avail them and thus get protected against 
the private lenders who provide credit at exorbitant interest rates. 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
Pradhan Mantri Matsya Kisan SamriddhiSah Yojana (PMMKS-SY) the sub-scheme of 
PMMSY launched on 9 th September, 2024 inter -alia aims at formalization of the 
fisheries sector through digitalization. Being the first of its kind initiative, development 
of the National Fisheries Digital Platform (NFDP) and its related modules has taken 
longer time than originally envisaged. The Department has been organizing series of 
meetings, awareness campaigns, workshops, training programmes, stakeholder 
consultations, and outreach activities across the country. High -level review and 
awareness meetings have been conducted under the chairmanship of the Hon'ble 

13 
 
Union Minister of Fisheries, Animal Husbandry and Dairying, as well as under the 
leadership of the Secretary (Fisheries), Joint Secretaries, and senior officers of the 
Department and by Common Services Centres (CSC) to stren gthen grassroots-level 
outreach by involving all States/UTs, Fisheires Cooperatives, CSC network, Fisheries 
Start-ups etc.  
Further, region-wise review and awareness meetings have been organized regularly 
covering different geographical zones of the country to facilitate focused discussions 
with States and Union Territories based on regional requirements and implementation 
status. The Department has also been conducting dedicated one-to-one meetings and 
consultations with potential States/UTs to identify implementation bottlenecksunder 
the scheme. 
The Department is also using various communication and publicity measures, 
including awareness campaigns, promotional materials, digital platforms, social media 
outreach, and field-level interactions, to disseminate information about the scheme.  
As on date, more than 32.92 lakh fishers, fish farmers, and other stakeholders 
have been registered in the NFDP . Under Credit module, 506 loans have been 
sanctioned by the banks amounting to Rs. 19.84 crore and aquaculture insurance has 
been availed by 127 beneficiaries covering 321.74 hectares amounting to Rs. 40.03 
lakh as one time incentive. 
 
[Ministry of Fisheries, Animal Husbandry and Dairying 
(Department of Fisheries) 
J-18001/02/2026-FY dated 20th July, 2026] 
 
4. REGIONAL CENTRES OF NATIONAL FISHERIES DEVELOPMENT BOARD 
(NFDB) 
 
The Committee have been informed by the Department that setting up regional 
offices would enable closer interaction with State Fisheries Departments, Fish 
Farmers’ Producer Organizations (FFPOs), cooperatives, and other stakeholders 
which would also facilitate monitoring of schemes and programme implemented by the 
Government thereby ensuring more responsive and context -specific interventions. 
The Department further stated that, regional presence would facilitate regular training 

14 
 
programmes, demonstrations, and technology dissemination, which would enhance 
productivity and promote adoption of best management practices. 
The Committee, is of the opinion, that opening up of Regional Centres of NFDB 
in other States will help in development of Inland fisheries by localising technical 
support, development of infrastructure and post-harvest facilities, increase productivity 
and would also speed up the utilisation of funds under the Pradhan Mantri Matsya 
Sampada Yojana (PMMSY). Fishers and Fish Farmers of other States would have 
easy access to training and capacity building and such centres will also facilitate 
administrative convenience. The Committee, note that Inland aquaculture contributes 
about 80% of the total fish production and has immense potential for employment 
generation and development of fisheries in the country. 
The Committee, therefore, recommend that regional centres of NFDB may be 
opened in prominent cities of all the major fish producing States/UTs and particularly 
Patna and Nagpur to boost Inland fisheries. The Committee, further recommend that 
the Department of Fisheries may also write to States/UTs as seek their willingness for 
setting up such regional centres in their respective States/UTs. 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
The National Fisheries Development Board (NFDB)  plays a pivotal role in the 
development of the fisheries and aquaculture sector in India by providing technical, 
financial, and institutional support. It works in close coordination with State/UT 
Governments, fisheries departments, research institutions, universities, cooperatives, 
FPOs/FISHCOPFEDs, and private stakeholders to promote sustainable and inclusive 
growth of the fisheries sector. 
 
The regional center at Patna, Bihar would be inaugurated on 15th June, 2026. NFDB 
has already requested the Government of Maharashtra vide letter dated 4th May, 2026 
for providing a suitable land for establishment of regional center at Nagpur. NFDB 
currently functioning with its regional center at Bhubaneswar, Guwahati and 
Mulapolam.  In addition to the above, t hree more new regional center s proposed at 
Amravati in Maharashtra , Thiruvananthapuram in Keralam and Sultanpur  in Uttar 
Pradesh.   

15 
 
Based on the responses received and the outcome of the feasibility assessment, 
appropriate action would be taken to further strengthen the institutional presence of 
NFDB in major fisheries-producing regions of the country. 
The Department remains committed to promoting balanced and inclusive growth of 
both inland and marine fisheries through enhanced institutional support and effective 
implementation of fisheries development programmes.  
[Ministry of Fisheries, Animal Husbandry and Dairying 
(Department of Fisheries) 
J-18001/02/2026-FY dated 20th July, 2026] 
 
5. FISHERIES INSTITUTES - UTILISATION OF FUNDS AND STAFF 
STRENGTH 
The Committee have been informed by the Department that the budget estimates 
and revised estimates of the Fishery Institutes have been reduced over the last five 
financial years due to less expenditure made by the Fisheries Institutes.  Further, out 
of the total funds allocated to Assistance to Fisheries Institutes, more than 81% of the 
funds are earmarked to two institutes namely Fishery Survey of India (FSI) and Central 
Institute of Fisheries, Nautical & Engineering Training (CIFNET), who spend a major 
amount on the operation and maintenance of its 14 -fishery survey and training 
vessels, however, since 2024-25 only two vessels are in operation.  
The Committee understand that fishery institutes play a crucial role in providing 
the necessary technological, engineering, research and survey related backup which 
is an important aspect for the growth and development of fishery sector in the Country. 
However, the Committee note that the utilization of funds allocated to the Department 
has been lower than anticipated, which has, in turn, led to reductions in the budgetary 
allocations for Fishery Institutes at the Budget Estimates and Revised Estimates 
stages. The Committee, also note that the overall sanctioned strength of the 
Department of Fisheries including Headquarters, four subordinate offices/institutes 
and two autonomous body/regulatory authority is 1298 posts. However, 671 posts are 
vacant, which constitutes a substantial vacancy of 50%.  
The Committee have been concerned about the smooth functioning of all the 
fishery institutes and have earlier also recommended that the Department may take 
corrective measures in this regard. However, the Committee, feel that the issues 

16 
 
regarding under utilisation of funds and staff vacancy still persist and the reasons given 
by the Department are also similar to as given earlier. The Committee, considering the 
importance of these Institutes in the Development of Fishery Sector in the Cou ntry, 
recommend that the Department engage a result-oriented approach to address all the 
issues faced by fishery institutes and ensure that underutilisation of funds does not 
become the reason for its budget being cut down by the M/o Finance. Further, the 
Department may also take necessary steps to fill up the vacant posts in all the fishery 
institutes and ensure their effective and smooth functioning.  
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
The recommendation of the Hon'ble Committee has been noted for appropriate 
consideration. Further, it is submitted that a substantial number of vacant posts in the 
Department of Fisheries and its affiliated institutes could not be filled owing to various 
reasons beyond the control of these institutions. Consequently, a large number of 
these posts remained vacant for extended periods and, in accordance with the 
prevailing instructions issued by the Department of Expenditure, were classified as 
“deemed abolished” after remaining vacant for more than five years. 
  
Realising the adverse impact of such vacancies on the operational efficiency of the 
Department and its institutes, concerted efforts have been undertaken to revive /create 
these posts. At present, proposals for the revival/creation of a total of 163 posts across 
different levels, pertaining to the Department of Fisheries as well as its subordinate 
and autonomous institutes, have been initiated and are currently at various stages of 
examination and approval by the Department of Expenditure. 
  
Simultaneously, proactive measures have been taken to fill up the live vacancies. 
These include efforts to fill posts through promotion and deputation, in addition to 
initiating direct recruitment processes in accordance with applicable recruitment rules 
and procedures. These steps are aimed at ensuring that critical positions are occupied 
in a timely manner, thereby strengthening the human resource capabilities of the 
Department. 
  

17 
 
In view of the sustained and coordinated efforts undertaken both for the 
revival/creation of abolished posts and the filling up of vacancies, it is anticipated that 
the overall staffing position within the Department of Fisheries and its institutes will 
witness significant improvement in the coming months. This augmentation in 
manpower is expected to enhance administrative efficiency, facilitate smoother 
functioning of operations, and enable the Department and its institutions to discharge 
their mandates more effectively.  
 
[Ministry of Fisheries, Animal Husbandry and Dairying 
(Department of Fisheries) 
J-18001/02/2026-FY dated 20th July, 2026] 
Comments of the Committee 
For comments of the Committee please refer to Para No. 1.7 of Chapter I of this 
Report.  
 
 
6. SURRENDERING FUNDS UNDER SCHEDULED CASTES SUB PLAN 
(SCSP) AND TRIBAL SUB PLAN (TSP) 
The Committee have been consistently expressing their concern with respect 
to non -utilisation of total funds allocated to the Department of Fisheries under 
Scheduled Castes Sub Plan (SCSP) and Tribal Sub Plan (TSP) leading to 
surrendering of allocated funds. 
The Department have stated various reasons for such underutilization such as  
i) Non- utilization of funds by the States/UTs against the Mother Sanction 
issued. 
ii) PMMSY being a demand driven scheme, the surrender of funds under 
SCSP head of PMMSY is due to non-receipt of sufficient proposals form 
the States/UTs. 
iii) Due to lack of land availability and Margin Money, most of SC/ST 
population is not able to take benefits of the Schemes. 
iv) Limited extension of PMMSY for implementation during 2025 -26 with a 
central outlay of Rs. 700 crores, restricted to the execution of mandatory 
activities.   
 

18 
 
Similar reasons were cited by the Department during the examination of the 3rd   
(2024-25) and 10th DFG (2025 -26) of the Department by the Committee, and the 
Committee while appreciating the efforts had recommended that the Department may 
device some incentive mechanism so as to encourage States/UTs to utilize the 
allocated funds and submit proposals un der PMMSY. The Committee feel that, for 
betterment of the socio-economic conditions of the SC/ST population in the country, it 
becomes imperative that they are able to reap benefits of all the Schemes intended 
for their welfare. The Committee, therefor e, recommend that the Department may 
explore other measures and initiatives to ensure fund utilization by States/UTs under 
SCSP and TSP such as: 
i) Identification of Genuine SC/ST beneficiaries and beneficiary centric 
approach. 
ii) Non lapsable funds under SCSP and TSP without any diversions. 
iii) Tailor made schemes/projects exclusively benefitting the SC/ST 
population. 
iv) Simplification of application procedures for SC/ST. 
v) Formation of Fish Farmer Producer Organisation and Self -Help Group 
exclusively for SC/ST. 
vi) Co-ordinate with States/UTs and explore the possibility of making land 
available for SC/ST under the proposed extended PMMSY-II. 
vii) Relaxation may be given in the margin money required to avail loans for 
projects to SC/ST. 
viii) Development of Management Information System (MIS) exclusively to 
track utilization of SC/ST funds. 
ix) Reserving of land (panchayat) for SC/ST, for development of 
AmritSarovar’s and reserving some percentage of AmritSarovar’s for 
SC/STs. 
The Committee, feel that the Department may engage a result -oriented approach 
so that the benefits of the schemes of the Department for SC/ST welfare reach the 
intended beneficiaries and funds allocated for them are utilized in full, thereby adding 
to their socio-economic upliftment. 
 

19 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
The Department appreciates the recommendations of the Hon'ble Committee 
regarding enhancing the utilization of funds earmarked under the Scheduled Caste 
Sub Plan (SCSP) and Tribal Sub Plan (TSP) and ensuring that the benefits reach the 
intended SC/ST beneficiaries. 
The Department accords high priority to the socio -economic upliftment of SC/ST 
communities through targeted interventions under its schemes and programmes, 
including the Pradhan Mantri  Matsya Sampada Yojana (PMMSY). States/UTs are 
regularly advised to identify eligible beneficiaries in a transparent manner and ensure 
adequate coverage of SC/ST fishers, fish farmers, fish workers and entrepreneurs 
under various fisheries development interventions. 
The suggestions of the Hon'ble Committee relating to beneficiary -centric planning, 
development of tailor -made projects for SC/ST communities, simplification of 
application procedures, promotion of SC/ST Fish Farmer Producer Organizations 
(FFPOs) and Self-Help Groups (SHGs), strengthening of monitoring mechanisms, and 
development of a dedicated Management Information System (MIS) for tracking 
SCSP/TSP fund utilization have been noted for consideration in the formulation and 
implementation of future programmes, including PMMSY-II. 
The Department will continue to engage with States/UTs to improve 
identification of genuine beneficiaries, facilitate greater participation of SC/ST 
communities in fisheries and aquaculture activities, and enhance utilization of 
earmarked funds. The feasib ility of providing additional support measures, including 
convergence with relevant schemes for land access, infrastructure creation, credit 
facilitation and livelihood promotion, will also be explored in consultation with 
States/UTs and other concerned stakeholders. 
 
[Ministry of Fisheries, Animal Husbandry and Dairying 
(Department of Fisheries) 
J-18001/02/2026-FY dated 20th July, 2026] 
 
 

20 
 
7. FISHERY SURVEY OF INDIA (FSI) – ENHANCING THE BUDGET AND 
REPLACEMENT/MODERNISATION OF ITS VESSELS 
The Committee, note that Fishery Survey of India conducts systematic marine 
fishery resource surveys in the Indian Exclusive Economic Zone (EEZ) and adjoining 
waters to assess fishery resources and provide scientific inputs for sustainable 
exploitation. Th e survey’s conducted by FSI are demersal survey, oceanic tuna 
survey, deep-sea shrimp survey, deep-sea squid survey, marine plastic and mammal 
survey. However, the Committee have been informed by the Department that the 
current FSI vessels are between 21 t o 47 years old leading to frequent mechanical 
fatigue and unscheduled repairs and longer docking periods during repairs. Currently, 
FSI conducts all its survey operations without a dedicated buffer vessel, which again 
puts a lot of constrains on the succes sful operations of FSI. As stated by the 
Department, FSI survey data also act as India’s scientific proof in international forums 
such as the IOTC and WTO, which helps in protecting our fishing rights and negotiate 
better trade deals globally. Further, the se surveys will act as a health report of our 
oceans, indicating how much fish can be harvested sustainably to ensure we meet 
national production targets.  
The Committee, acknowledge the pivotal role of FSI and understand that the 
surveys conducted by FSI play a very important role in accumulating the required 
information and data which will facilitate sustainable harvesting of fishery resources of 
the Indian Exclusive Economic Zone which has immense deep-sea fisheries potential. 
The Committee, therefore recommend that the budget allocation of FSI should be 
enhanced sufficiently so that FSI is able to function properly and carry out its mandate 
effectively. The vessel fleet of FSI should be modernized and old vessels should be 
replaced with sufficient number of new vessels and a buffer fleet should be maintained 
to address periodical maintenance and emergency breakdowns. 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
The Department of Fisheries fully concurs with the Committee’s crucial 
assessment regarding the strategic importance of the Fishery Survey of India (FSI) 
and the severe operational constraints caused by its ageing fleet of 21 to 47 -year-old 
vessels. To urg ently address the mechanical fatigue and unscheduled repairs 
hindering deep-sea surveys, the Department is actively engaging with the Ministry of 

21 
 
Finance to sufficiently enhance FSI's budgetary allocation for the phased 
modernisation and replacement of obsolete vessels. Furthermore, the upcoming fleet 
procurement strategy will explicitly mandate the inclusion of a dedicated buffer vessel 
to guarante e uninterrupted oceanic data collection across the Indian Exclusive 
Economic Zone (EEZ) &  Highseas. This targeted overhaul will ensure FSI continues 
to produce the vital scientific data necessary for sustainable marine harvesting and for 
robustly protecting India's sovereign fishing rights at international forums such as the 
IOTC and WTO. 
 
[Ministry of Fisheries, Animal Husbandry and Dairying 
(Department of Fisheries) 
J-18001/02/2026-FY dated 20th July, 2026] 
 
8. KISAN CREDIT CARDS (KCC) - MAXIMISING THE REACH AMONGST 
FISHERMEN 
 
The Department has stated that till date a little above 5 lac Kisan Credit Cards 
(KCC) have been sanctioned to fishers and fish farmers, but, no year wise targets 
have been fixed in this regard. However, an overall national target of covering 50 lac 
fishers and fish farmers have been envisaged under the KCC scheme. The 
Committee, note that the country has around three crore fishers and fish farmers who 
are engaged in various fishing related activities, and KCC plays a vital role providing 
these fishermen access to short-term institutional credit for the expenses incurred on 
seed, feed, medicines, fuel, labour, maintenance of ponds, cages, Re -circulatory 
Aquatic Units (RAS) and other requirements. The Committee would also like to 
emphasize that the target of 50 lakh KCCs set by the Department may need to be 
further increased in light of the large population of fishermen in the country.  
The Committee, therefore, recommend that KCC should be given to all the 
fishers/fishermen of the country and the target should be set accordingly. The 
Department may therefore take necessary steps in this regard and ensure that the 
reach of KCC is maximize d and ensure that more and more fishers, fish farmers are 
provided with Kisan Credit Cards. 
 
 

22 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
The Hon’ble Committee’s recommendation to extend KCC benefits to all eligible 
fishers and fish farmers has been noted. However, KCC coverage depends on 
beneficiary eligibility, willingness to avail institutional credit, submission of requisite 
documents, and lending decisions of financial institutions as per extant guidelines. 
The Department of Fisheries (DoF), in coordination with State Governments/UT 
Administrations, the Department of Financial Services (DFS), banks, and other 
stakeholders, has been undertaking sustained efforts to expand KCC coverage 
through awareness campaigns, beneficiary identification, and facilitation measures. 
To achieve saturation of eligible beneficiaries, Nationwide AHDF KCC Campaigns 
were conducted during 2021 –22 and 2022 –23, and subsequently resumed during 
2024–25 with Gram Panchayat -level KCC camps for on -the-spot scrutiny of 
applications. In addition, the  “GharGhar KCC Abhiyan” and the “Viksit Bharat 
SankalpYatra” were implemented to enhance outreach, awareness, and access to 
KCC benefits. 
The DoF has also facilitated the onboarding of the fisheries sector on the JanSamarth 
portal to streamline access to institutional credit. Further, under the Pradhan Mantri  
Matsya Kisan Samridhi Sah-Yojana (PM -MKSSY), credit facilitation, professional 
handholding, and aquaculture crop insurance support are being provided to improve 
financial inclusion and risk mitigation in the fisheries sector. 
The Department will continue to review progress periodically and take necessary 
measures, in coordination with stakeholders, to maximize KCC coverage among 
eligible fishers and fish farmers.  
Further, a nationwide “Khet Bachao Abhiyaan” is being organised from 1 stJune 2026 
to 30 thJune 2026 in coordination with the Ministry of Agriculture & Farmers Welfare 
and State Governments/UT Administrations to saturate Kisan Credit Card (KCC) 
coverage among eligible farmers and facilitate t heir access for timely and affordable 
institutional credit. 
  
[Ministry of Fisheries, Animal Husbandry and Dairying 
(Department of Fisheries) 
J-18001/02/2026-FY dated 20th July, 2026] 

23 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
For comments of the Committee please refer to Para No. 1.1 0 of Chapter I of this 
Report.  
 
 
9. EXPORTS – STRENGTHENING TRACEABILITY AND ACHIEVING THE 
GOALS OF VIKSIT BHARAT 2047 FOR FISHERIES SECTOR 
The Committee has been informed that in terms of quantity, seafood exports 
have seen a growth of 61.6 percent in volume over the decade and India’s current 
share in global seafood exports stands at about 4%. Further, under the vision of Viksit 
Bharat 2047, the Department of Fisheries envisages enhancing India’s share in global 
seafood exports from 4 percent to 10 percent by 2047 and transforming India into a 
global maritime and seafood export leader with a resilient, sustainable and globally 
competitive fisheries sector. To achieve this vision the strategy of the Department is to 
focuses on strengthening the entire fisheries value chain through enhanced value 
addition, diversification into premium products, establishment of robust traceability 
systems, strategic branding and marketing, adoption of advanced technologies and 
improved sanitary and phytosanitary compliance. 
The Committee understand that Disease Management, Certification and 
Traceability are very important areas which requires intervention so as to increase the 
export competitiveness of the Indian fisheries sector. The Committee, therefore, in 
their 70 th report on “Employment Generation and Revenue Earning Potential of 
Fisheries Sector” and 20 th report on “Development &Modernisation of Fishing 
Harbours” have recommended that measures should be taken in this regard. The 
Committee, appreciate that the Department has recently released the National 
Framework on Traceability in Fisheries and Aquaculture 2025, which provides for 
establishment of a national digital traceability system for fisheries and aquaculture to 
ensure compliance with domestic and international re gulations, promote food safety, 
enhance sustainability, and improve market access.  The framework is a welcome 
initiative to modernize India’s fisheries and aquaculture sector, ensuring sustainability, 
food safety, and global competitiveness. 
The Committee, appreciate the efforts taken by the Department in releasing the 
National Framework on Traceability which would definitely enhance the export 

24 
 
competitiveness of the domestic fish production. The Committee, recommend that the 
implementation of the Traceability Framework should be expedited and awareness 
should be created regarding the same. 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
The Department has notified the National Framework on Traceability in Fisheries and 
Aquaculture, 2025 with the objective of establishing a robust, interoperable and 
technology-enabled traceability system across the fisheries and aquaculture value 
chain. Th e Framework aims to strengthen food safety, ensure compliance with 
domestic and international market requirements, improve transparency and 
sustainability, facilitate disease surveillance and certification, and enhance the global 
competitiveness of Indian fish and fishery products. 
The recommendations of the Hon'ble Committee regarding expeditious 
implementation of the Framework and creation of awareness among stakeholders 
have been noted. The Department is taking necessary steps for phased 
implementation of the Framework in consultation with State/UT Governments, Export 
Inspection Council (EIC), Marine Products Export Development Authority (MPEDA), 
fisheries institutions, industry stakeholders and other concerned agencies. 
Further, awareness generation, stakeholder consultations, capacity -building 
programmes, training workshops and dissemination of guidelines are being 
undertaken to facilitate adoption of the traceability framework by fishers, fish farmers, 
processors, exporters and other stakeholders across the fisheries value chain. Efforts 
are also being made to leverage digital technologies for strengthening traceability, 
certification and monitoring systems. 
The Department of Fisheries is working to strengthen traceability from hatcheries 
by developing a structured certification and accreditation framework for shrimp and fish 
hatcheries that evaluates infrastructure, seed quality, pathogen -free status, genetic  
integrity, and environmental compliance. For the traceability of Marine fisheries DoF is 
installing Vessel Monitoring Systems (VMS) in the fishing boats, ReALCRaft portal and 
Nabhmitra mobile application also developed for the fleet management and digital  
traceability. 

25 
 
[Ministry of Fisheries, Animal Husbandry and Dairying 
(Department of Fisheries) 
J-18001/02/2026-FY dated 20th July, 2026] 
 
10. DEVLOPMENT OF INLAND FISHERIES - SOCIO-ECONOMIC 
DEVELOPMENT OF TRADITIONAL FISHERMEN RESIDING BESIDES 
MAJOR RIVERS 
The Committee has been informed that Inland Aquaculture in India contributes 
around 80% of the total fish production in India. The Committee, understand that 
traditionally, fishing in inland water bodies has been a small -scale or subsistence 
activity for the fishermen communities residing alongside major rivers of the country 
and which also plays a major role in poverty alleviation, food security, women’s 
empowerment and protection of ecosystem and biodiversity. However, inland fisheries 
also face threats from natural calamities and floods, climate change, pollution and 
urbanization. The Committee, note that numerous traditional fishing communities  
residing alongside rivers and are solely dependent on fishing activities for their 
sustenance needs.  
The Committee, has been informed by the Department that for the benefits of 
such fishermen communities under PMMSY various measures such as provisions of 
boats, nets and gear, aquaculture inputs, cage culture, post -harvest infrastructure, 
accidental insurance etc. have been provided. The Committee, however feel that the 
Inland Aquaculture potential of the country is immense with its huge reservoirs, 
brackish waters, and major rivers and ponds. Inland fisheries is also the major 
contributor to the total fish  production of the country, thus, development of Inland 
Fisheries will in turn benefit the Traditional fishermen communities who are engaged 
in fishing activities since decades.   
The Committee, therefore recommend that the Department may in 
Coordination with States/UTs identify such communities and devise specific 
policies/schemes which target and concentrate specifically on the development of 
Inland fisheries keeping into mind the  development of all such traditional fishing 
communities residing in the vicinity of major rivers, dams, reservoirs and brackish 
waters.  Such a targeted intervention may help raise the socio -economic level of all 
such small scale and traditional fishermen  of the Country. The Committee, also note 
that Fishery in waterlogged areas also referred as floodplain fisheries, is an important 

26 
 
activity which provides for rural livelihood. These areas are characterized by prolonged 
seasonal inundation making them ideal for inland aquaculture. The Committee, 
therefore recommend that the Department may identify such water-logged areas in all 
the St ates/UTs particularly in the States of Punjab (Malwa region), Gujarat 
(panchmahal), Rajasthan, Madhya Pradesh, Haryana (Bhiwani, Dadri, Jhajjhar), and 
take necessary measures to promote inland aquaculture, if possible, form clusters of 
such water-logged areas so that targeted initiatives and schemes can be devised for 
the development of such areas.  The Committee further recommend that concrete 
measures should be taken by the Department for the promotion of Ornamental 
Fisheries and Pearl Farming and saline water fisheries (zhinga farming) amongst 
fishermen who are engaged in Inland Fisheries in all the States/UTs. 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
The detailed recommendations  of the Hon'ble Committee regarding the 
comprehensive development of inland fisheries and aquaculture across reservoirs, 
freshwater systems, cold  water regions, North Eastern Region, and climate -resilient 
fishing villages has been noted. 
The Department recognizes the significant contribution of inland fisheries to the 
country's fish production and livelihood security. Under the Pradhan Mantri  Matsya 
Sampada Yojana (PMMSY), various interventions are being implemented for the 
development of inland fisheries and aquaculture, including reservoir fisheries, cage 
culture, pen culture, freshwater aquaculture, brackish  water aquaculture, integrated 
aquaculture systems, fish seed production, fisheries infrastructure, ornamental 
fisheries and livelihood support activities for fishers and fish farmers. 
The recommendation of the Hon'ble Committee regarding identification of traditional 
fishing communities and formulation of targeted interventions for their socio-economic 
development has been noted. The Department shall continue to work in close 
coordination with States/UTs to promote sustainable utilization of inland fisheries 
resources and facilitate greater participation of traditional fishing communities in 
fisheries and aquaculture development programmes. 

27 
 
The Department also recognizes the potential of floodplain and waterlogged areas for 
fisheries and aquaculture development. States/UTs are encouraged under PMMSY to 
undertake fisheries development activities in suitable water bodies, including 
floodplain wetlands and waterlog ged areas, based on local resource availability and 
techno-economic feasibility. The feasibility of promoting cluster -based development 
approaches in such areas may be explored in consultation with the concerned 
States/UTs. 
Further, the Department is promoting diversification of livelihood opportunities through 
support for ornamental fisheries, pearl culture, reservoir fisheries, saline and brackish 
water aquaculture, including shrimp farming, and other income -generating activities 
under PMMSY. These interventions are aimed at enhancing productivity, generating 
employment and improving the income of fishers, fish farmers and other stakeholders 
across the fisheries value chain. 
The Department remains committed to strengthening inland fisheries and 
aquaculture through targeted interventions, stakeholder participation and 
convergence with State/UT initiatives to ensure sustainable development and 
improved livelihoods for traditional fishing communities across the country. 
 
[Ministry of Fisheries, Animal Husbandry and Dairying 
(Department of Fisheries) 
J-18001/02/2026-FY dated 20th July, 2026] 
 

28 
 
CHAPTER – III 
 
 OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO NOT 
DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE GOVERNMENT’S REPLIES 
 
 
 
 
-NIL- 
 
 
 
 

29 
 
CHAPTER – IV 
 
  
OBSERVATIONS/ RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF 
THE GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE 
 
 
 
 
 
-NIL- 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

30 
 
CHAPTER - V  
 
OBSERVATIONS/ RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH FINAL 
REPLIES OF GOVERNMENT ARE STILL AWAITED  
 
 
 
 
 
-NIL- 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 New Delhi        Charanjit Singh Channi 
11 August, 2026                Chairperson 
20 Shravana, 1948 (saka)              Standing Committee on Agriculture,  
                     Animal Husbandry and Food Processing 
 
 
  

31 
 
ANNEXURE 
MINUTES OF THE TWENTY-FOURTH SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE 
ON AGRICULTURE, ANIMAL HUSBANDRY AND FOOD PROCESSING  
(2025-26) 
 
The Committee sat on Tuesday, the 11th August, 2026 from 1500 hrs. to 1510 
hrs. in Committee Room-‘D’, Parliament House Annexe (PHA), New Delhi.   
Present 
Shri Charanjit Singh Channi  -  Chairperson 
Members 
Lok Sabha 
2.  Shri Umeshbhai Babubhai Patel 
3.  Shri Rajkumar Chahar 
4.  Smt. Anita Nagarsingh Chouhan 
5.  Shri Kuldeep Indora 
6.  Shri Rajpalsinh Mahendrasinh Jadav 
7.  Md. Abu Taher Khan 
8.  Shri Rahul Singh Lodhi 
9.  Shri Sukanta Kumar Panigrahi 
10.  Smt. Krishna Devi Shivshankar Patel 
11.  Shri Naresh Chandra Uttam Patel 
12.  Shri Murasoli S. 
13.  Shri Dharambir Singh 
14.  Shri Dushyant Singh 
15.  Shri Sudhakar Singh 
16.  Shri Kodikunnil Suresh 
17.  Smt. Geniben Nagaji Thakor 
18.  Shri Bhausaheb Rajaram Wakchaure 
 
Rajya Sabha 
19.  Dr. Anil Sukhdeorao Bonde 
20.  Shri Banshilal Gurjar 
21.  Shri Nitin Laxmanrao Jadhav-Patil 
22.  Shri Madan Rathore 
23.  Shri S.R. Sivalingam 
24.  Shri P. P. Suneer 

32 
 
25. Shri Mahesh Kewat 
26. Shri James Pangsang Kongkal Sangma 
 
Secretariat 
1. Shri Dhiraj Kumar  – Joint Secretary     
2. Shri Maheshwar  – Director 
3. Shri Prem Ranjan  - Deputy Secretary 
     4. Shri Fauzi Badruddin - Deputy Secretary 
 
2. At the outset, the Chairperson welcomed the Members to the Sitting of the 
Committee. Thereafter, the Committee took up for consideration and adoption of the 
following Draft Action Taken Reports: 
 
(i) xxxx  xxxx  xxxx  xxxx*; 
 
(ii) xxxx  xxxx  xxxx  xxxx*; 
 
(iii) xxxx  xxxx  xxxx  xxxx*; 
 
(iv) xxxx  xxxx  xxxx  xxxx*; 
 
(v) xxxx  xxxx  xxxx  xxxx*; 
 
(vi) Action Taken Report on 29 th Report (18th Lok Sabha) on DFG (2026 -
27) pertaining to the Department of Fisheries; 
 
(vii) xxxx  xxxx  xxxx  xxxx*; and 
 
(viii) xxxx  xxxx  xxxx  xxxx*. 
 
3. The Committee, thereafter, adopted the draft Action Taken Reports without any 
modifications/amendments. 
4. The Committee also authorized the Chairperson to finalize and present the 
Reports to Parliament.  
The Committee then adjourned. 
 
* Matter not related to this Report. 

33 
 
APPENDIX - I 
 
(Vide Para 4 of Introduction of the Report) 
 
ANALYSIS OF ACTION TAKEN BY GOVERNMENT ON THE 29TH REPORT OF STANDING 
COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE, ANIMAL HUSBANDRY AND FOOD PROCESSING (2025 -26)  
(18TH LOK SABHA) 
  
(i)  Total number of Recommendations              10 
(ii) Observations/ Recommendations that have been 
Accepted by the Government  
 Para Nos.  1,2,3,4,5,6,7,8,9,10  
Total          10    
Percentage                   100.00% 
(iii) Observations/ Recommendations which the Committee 
do not desire to pursue in view of the Government’s replies  
Para No. Nil         
Total                     00 
Percentage                     00.00% 
(iv) Observations/ Recommendations in respect of which replies 
 of the Government have not been accepted by the Committee 
 Para No.  Nil  
 Total            00 
 Percentage                                      00.00% 
(v) Observations/ Recommendations in respect of which  
 final replies of the Government are still awaited 
 Para Nos.   Nil   
 Total                     00  
 Percentage                     00.00%
  
 
 
 