  
STANDING COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE, ANIMAL HUSBANDRY 
AND FOOD PROCESSING 
 
(2025-2026) 
 
 
EIGHTEENTH LOKSABHA 
 
 
 
MINISTRY OF FISHERIES, ANIMAL HUSBANDRY AND DAIRYING  
(DEPARTMENT OF FISHERIES) 
 
 
'DEMANDS FOR GRANTS (2024-25)' 
 
 
[Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations contained in the 
Third Report (Eighteenth Lok Sabha) of the Standing Committee on Agriculture, Animal 
Husbandry and Food Processing (2024-25) on Demands for Grants (2024-25)] 
 
 
 
 
TWENTY THIRD REPORT 
 
 
 
 
 
LOKSABHASECRETARIAT  
NEW DELHI 
 
DECEMBER, 2025/AGRAHAYANA, 1947(SAKA) 
 
 
23 

 
  
TWENTY THIRD REPORT 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE, 
ANIMAL HUSBANDRY AND FOOD PROCESSING 
 
(2025-2026) 
 
 
EIGHTEENTH LOKSABHA 
 
 
 
MINISTRY OF FISHERIES, ANIMAL HUSBANDRY AND DAIRYING  
(DEPARTMENT OF FISHERIES) 
 
 
'DEMANDS FOR GRANTS (2024-25)' 
 
 
 
[Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations contained 
in the Third Report (Eighteenth Lok Sabha) of the Standing Committee on Agriculture, 
Animal Husbandry and Food Processing (2024-25) on Demands for Grants (2024-25)] 
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on 18.12.2025 
Laid on the Table of Rajya Sabha on 18.12.2025 
 
 
 
 
LOKSABHASECRETARIAT  
NEW DELHI 
DECEMBER, 2025/AGRAHAYANA, 1947(SAKA)  


 
  
COA No. 522 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
© 2025 By Lok Sabha Secretariat 
 
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of Business in Lok Sabha 
(Seventeenth Edition) and Printed by Lok Sabha Secretariat 

 
  
 
CONTENTS 
 
 PAGE 
Composition of the Committee (2024-25)  iii 
Composition of the Committee (2025-26)  iv 
Introduction  vi 
Chapter I Report 1 
Chapter II     Observations/Recommendations that have been accepted by the 
Government 
12 
Chapter III Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not desire 
to pursue in view of the Government’s replies 
29 
Chapter IV Observations/Recommendations in respect of which Replies of the 
Government have not been accepted by the Committee 
32 
Chapter V Observations/Recommendations in respect of which final replies of 
the Government are still awaited 
33 
 
 ANNEXURE 
Minutes of the 37th sitting of the Committee held on 19.09.2025  
 
36 
 APPENDIX 
Analysis of Action Taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in the Third Report (18 th 
Lok Sabha) of the Standing Committee on Agriculture, Animal 
Husbandry and Food Processing (2024 -25) on Demands for Grants 
(2024-25)  
 
 
 
38 
 
 

 
iii 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE, ANIMAL 
HUSBANDRY AND FOOD PROCESSING  
 (2024-25) 
 
 
SHRI CHARANJIT SINGH CHANNI – CHAIRPERSON 
 
MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA 
 
2.  Shri Patel Umeshbhai Babubhai 
3.  Smt. Harsimrat Kaur Badal 
4.  Shri Rajkumar Chahar 
5.  Smt. Anita Nagarsingh Chouhan 
6.  Shri Kuldeep Indora 
7.  Shri Rajpalsinh Mahendrasinh Jadav 
8.  Md. Abu Taher Khan 
9.  Shri Rahul Singh Lodhi 
10.  Shri Sukanta Kumar Panigrahi 
11.  Smt. Krishna Devi Shivshankar Patel 
12.  Shri Naresh Chandra Uttam Patel 
13.  Shri Narayan Tatu Rane 
14.  Shri Murasoli S. 
15.  Shri Dharambir Singh 
16.  Shri Dushyant Singh 
17.  Shri Sudhakar Singh 
18.  Shri Kodikunnil Suresh 
19.  Shri Tejasvi Surya 
20.  Smt. Geniben Nagaji Thakor 
21.  Shri Bhausaheb Rajaram Wakchaure 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
22.  Smt. Ramilaben Becharbhai Bara 
23.  Shri Masthan Rao Yadav Beedha* 
24.  Dr. Anil Sukhdeorao Bonde 
25.  Shri Banshilal Gurjar 
26.  Shri S. Kalyanasundaram 
27.  Shri Nitin Laxmanrao Jadhav Patil 
28.  Shri Madan Rathore 
29.  Shri Ramji Lal Suman 
30.  Shri P. P. Suneer 
31.  Shri Randeep Singh Surjewala 
 
Shri Krishan Lal Panwar, Member resigned from Rajya Sabha on 14.10.2024. 
*Shri Masthan Rao Yadav Beedha, Member, Rajya Sabha has been nominated to the Standing Committee on Agriculture, Animal 
Husbandry and Food Processing w.e.f on 8th August 2025, vide Lok Sabha Bulletin Part-II, Para No. 3117 dated 13.08.2025.  
  

 
iv 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE, ANIMAL 
HUSBANDRY AND FOOD PROCESSING  
 (2025-26) 
 
 
SHRI CHARANJIT SINGH CHANNI – CHAIRPERSON 
 
MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA 
 
2.  Shri Patel Umeshbhai Babubhai 
3.  Smt. Harsimrat Kaur Badal 
4.  Shri Rajkumar Chahar 
5.  Smt. Anita Nagarsingh Chouhan 
6.  Shri Kuldeep Indora 
7.  Shri Rajpalsinh Mahendrasinh Jadav 
8.  Md. Abu Taher Khan 
9.  Shri Rahul Singh Lodhi 
10.  Shri Sukanta Kumar Panigrahi 
11.  Smt. Krishna Devi Shivshankar Patel 
12.  Shri Naresh Chandra Uttam Patel 
13.  Shri Narayan Tatu Rane 
14.  Shri Murasoli S. 
15.  Shri Dharambir Singh 
16.  Shri Dushyant Singh 
17.  Shri Sudhakar Singh 
18.  Shri Kodikunnil Suresh 
19.  Shri Tejasvi Surya 
20.  Smt. Geniben Nagaji Thakor 
21.  Shri Bhausaheb Rajaram Wakchaure 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
22.  Smt. Ramilaben Becharbhai Bara 
23.  Dr. Anil Sukhdeorao Bonde 
24.  Shri H. D. Devegowda 
25.  Shri Banshilal Gurjar 
26.  Shri Nitin Laxmanrao Jadhav Patil 
27.  Shri Madan Rathore 
28.  Shri S. R. Sivalingam 
29.  Shri Ramji Lal Suman 
30.  Shri P. P. Suneer 
31.  Shri Randeep Singh Surjewala 
 

 
v 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
 1. Shri Dhiraj Kumar   - Joint Secretary 
 2. Shri Maheshwar    - Director 
 3. Shri Ashwaghosh B. Lokhande - Under Secretary 
  
 
  

 
vi 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
 
I, the Chairperson, Standing Committee on Agriculture, Animal Husbandry and 
Food Processing (2025-26), having been authorized by the Committee to submit the 
Report on their behalf, present this Twenty Third  Report on Action taken by the 
Government on the Observations/Recommendations contained in the Third Report 
(Eighteenth Lok Sabha) of the Standing Committee on Agriculture, Animal Husbandry 
and Food Processing (2024 -25) on 'Demands for Grants (2024 -25)' pertaining to the 
Ministry of Fisheries, Animal Husbandry and Dairying (Department of Fisheries).  
 
2. The Third Report (Eighteenth Lok Sabha) of the Standing Committee on 
Agriculture, Animal Husbandry and Food Processing (2024 -25) on Demands for 
Grants (2024 -25) pertaining to the Ministry of Fisheries, Animal Husbandry and 
Dairying (Department of Fisheries) was presented to Lok Sabha and laid on the Table 
of Rajya Sabha on 17.12.2024. The Action Taken Notes on the Report were received 
on 30.04.2025. 
 
3. The Report was considered and adopted by the Committee at their Sitting held 
on 19th September, 2025. 
 
4. An Analysis of the action taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in the Third Report  (Eighteenth Lok 
Sabha) of the Committee on Demands for Grants (2024-25) is given in Appendix. 
 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI;                                 CHARANJIT SINGH CHANNI  
15 December, 2025                                             Chairperson, 
24 Agrahayana, 1947 (Saka)            Standing Committee on Agriculture
       Animal Husbandry and Food Processing 
 

 
1 
 
CHAPTER I 
REPORT 
This Report of the Standing Committee on Agriculture, Animal Husbandry and 
Food Processing deals with the Action Taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in the Third Report  (Eighteenth Lok 
Sabha) of the Standing Committee on Agriculture, Animal Husbandry and Food 
Processing (2024-25) on Demands for Grants (2024 -25) of the Ministry of Fisheries, 
Animal Husbandry and Dairying (Department of Fisheries) which was presented to 
Lok Sabha and laid on the Table of Rajya Sabha on 17th December, 2024. 
1.2 The Ministry of Fisheries, Animal Husbandry and Dairying (Department of 
Fisheries) have furnished Action Taken Replies in respect of all the 1 1 
Observations/Recommendations contained in the Report. These Replies have been 
scrutinised and categorised as under: - 
(i) Observations/Recommendations that have been accepted by the Government: 
 Recommendation Para Nos.1, 2, 4, 5, 6,8,10,11  
              Total 8 
Chapter-II 
(ii) Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to pursue 
in view of the Government’s replies:  
Recommendation Para No. 3, 9 
                      Total 02 
                    Chapter-III 
(iii) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which Replies of the 
Government have not been accepted by the Committee: 
Recommendation Para Nos. Nil 
                 Total 0 
Chapter-IV 
(iv) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which final replies of the 
Government are still awaited: 
Recommendation Para No. 7 
Total 01 
             Chapter-V 

 
2 
 
1.3 The Committee trust that utmost importance would be given to implementation 
of the Observations/ Recommendations accepted by the Government. In case where 
it is not possible for the Department to implement the Recommendations in letter and 
spirit for any reason, the matter should be reported to the Committee with reasons for 
non-implementation. The Committee desire that future Action taken Notes on the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in Chapter I and Chapter V of this Report 
be furnished to them at an early date. 
1.4 The Committee will now deal with the Action taken by the Government on some 
of the Observations/Recommendations in the succeeding paragraphs. 
 
STATUS OF UTILISATION CERTIFICATES (UCs) 
(RECOMMENDATIO PARA NO.4) 
 
1.5 The Committee had observed/recommended: - 
As there are pending utilization certificates involving huge amount of 
funds disbursed, this Committee in their  Recommendation at Sl.no 5 
contained in the 53 rd Third Report on Demands for Grants (23 -24) had 
recommended the  Department to take concrete steps by pursuing  with the  
States/UTs at regular intervals to liquidate the Utilization Certificates (UCs)  so 
that the pending liability on account of already a pproved Projects also gets 
reduced and the Schemes/Projects are completed well in time. The Dept  
in their action take replies informed that they had taken up the matter at the 
highest levels of the state Govt inter alia for expediting the utilization of 
available funds. Further, the States are also being monitored on daily basis for 
timely release of central and state shares to SNA from treasury and immediate 
distribution of such funds to beneficiaries through child account to expedite the 
implementation of the scheme and to minimize the pendency of un -utilized 
funds. The Committee while appreciating the efforts taken by the Department, 
note that despite their best efforts, Utilisation certificates are pending involving 
huge amount of Rs 584 crore. The Committee, therefore, recommend the 
Department to explore the possibility of developing a rating system for states 
based on their performance in utilizing funds and furnishing UCs on time and 

 
3 
 
offer non-financial incentives to better performing states in this regard.  The 
Committee believe that such a rating and awarding non -financial incentives 
will spur competition among the states in utilising funds and in furnishing UCs 
on time. The concrete  action taken in this regard be intimated to the 
Committee.   
1.6 In its Action Taken Reply, the Department has submitted: - 
The pace of utilization of funds got slowed down because of changes in 
accounts procedure and fund release procedures, delay in transfer of funds 
from treasury to SNA account, non -release of state share on time and non -
compliances of SNA -SPARSH guidelines. The matter has been taken up at 
various levels including the Chief Ministers, Chief Secretaries of States/UTs for 
release of State share; for ensuring SNA compliance and for expediting the 
utilization of available funds. Further, States are also being monitored on daily 
basis for timely release of central and state shares to SNA from treasury and 
immediate distribution of such funds to beneficiaries through child account. 
Secretary (DoF) reviewing with all the States where the pace of 
implementation and fu nds utilization is slow physically to understand the 
difficulties and to expedite the implementation of the scheme and to minimize 
the pendency of un-utilized funds. 
Further, Department of Fisheries approved the State Annual Action Plan (AAP) 
and relaxation in this regard issued to all the States/UTs, so that states can 
utilize part of unspent balance against any of the approved projects under 
PMMSY. 
Such efforts taken by the Department of Fisheries helped in expediting the 
utilization of funds by the States and the unspent balance available with States 
has come down to Rs. 446.26 crore. The Department is continuing its efforts 
through periodic review meetings at different levels for speedy utilization of the 
central and state funds. The comments of the Committee have been noted for 
further necessary action. 
1.7 The Committee, while appreciating the efforts taken by the Department of 
Fisheries to liquidate the Utilisation Certificates pending with States and UTs , 
amounting to Rs 584 crore, had recommended that, the Department may  

 
4 
 
explore the possibility of developing a rating system for States/UTs based on 
their performance in utilising funds and furnishing UCs on time , and, offer  
non-financial incentives to better performing States/UTs. In their reply, t he 
Department of Fisheries have enumerated several measures initiated by them 
to address the issue of slow pace of funds utilisation and have stated that there 
has been a reduction in unspent balance available with States , which has now 
come down to Rs 446.26 crore. The Committee, observe that besides these 
routine measures taken by the Department  of Fisheries, some incentives may 
also be extended to States/UTs wh o have performed well in submitting 
Utilisation Certificates . The Committee, therefore, reiterate their earlier 
recommendation that the Department may explore the possibility of developing 
a rating system for States/UTs based on their performance in utilizing funds and 
furnishing U tilisation Certificates on time , and offer them non-financial 
incentives.  
 
SCHEDULED CASTES SUB PLAN (SCSP) 
(RECOMMENDATION PARA NO.5) 
1.8 The Committee had observed/recommended: - 
The Committee observe that during the financial years 2021 -22, 2022-
23 and 2023 -24, the Department has surrendered funds earmarked for 
Scheduled Castes Sub Plan (SCSP) to the tune of Rs 20.35, 46.98 and 66.15 
crore respectively. The funds surrendered during the financial year 2021 -22, 
2022-23 and 2023-24 in percentage terms amounts to 10.15%, 19.84% & 26.25 
% respectively of the funds earmarked at revised estimates stage for SCSP . 
The Committee has been informed that the reason for surrender of funds under 
the SCSP head of PMMSY was due to non -receipt of proposals from the 
States/UTs under SCSP. The Committee has also been informed that for fishery 
related projects, land and investment is required, however, due to weak 

 
5 
 
financial status of most of the Scheduled Castes population of the country, they 
are unable to provide bank collateral, and therefore, even sanctioned projects, 
are unable to take off in real, on the ground.  
 In this context, the Committee would like to draw the attention of the 
department to recommendation at Sl. no. 6 contained in the 53rd report on DFG 
(23-24) wherein they had urged the Department to encourage/pursue and 
incentivize States/UTs to send proposals under the SCSP so that the 
vision/mission of the scheme is achieved and the benefits reach the Scheduled 
Caste Population of the Country.  
 The Committee while expressing serious concern at the declining trend 
of   utilisation of funds under SCSP for the last three years, suggest suitable 
measures be taken to arrest this trend. They also recommend the Department 
to analyse the reasons for non -receipt of the proposals from the state Govts 
and initiate suitable action including review of features, terms & conditions, 
eligibility criteria, etc. and tweaking of these, if necessary, to ensure the receipt 
of proposals from the state/ UT Governments for optimal utilization of the funds 
be taken.  
1.9 In its Action Taken Reply, the Department has submitted: - 
The Department of Fisheries, Government of India has highlighted 
matter with the States/UTs having sizeable Schedule Caste beneficiaries in all 
the review meetings and have been advised to ensure that minimum 16.6% of 
the Schedule Caste beneficiaries are i ncluded for financial assistance in 
PMMSY projects proposals while preparing the state annual action plan. 
Further, the measure taken up by the Department of Fisheries, Government of 
India in this regard include:  
I.Mandatory earmarking of minimum 16.6% of the budget allocated under 
Schedule Cast Sub -Plan ( SCSP) for the benefits of scheduled caste 
beneficiaries and advising States/UTs to include SC/ST beneficiaries 
accordingly in their annual action plans. Specific mention of the Ministry of 
Finance instructions in the annual administrative approval of the Scheme that 
the fund earmarked Scheduled Caste beneficiaries are to be utilized exclusively 
for development of Schedule Castes.  

 
6 
 
II.Requesting the End Implementing Agencies i.e.  Central Government entities 
including the National Fisheries Development Board (NFDB) to include suitable 
interventions/activities for supporting SC population appropriately in their 
respective Annual Action Plan or Project Proposals. Similarly, State 
Governments/UTs are requested regularly to make specific allocation of funds 
for SCs in their Annual Action Plan/Self -contained proposals/DPRs based on 
the percentage of SC population in their jurisdiction. 
1.10 Expressing serious concern over the surrender of funds earmarked for 
Scheduled Castes Sub Plan (SCSP) during the financial years 2021 -22, 2022-23 
and 2023 -24, and the declining trend of utilisation of funds under SCSP, the 
Committee had recommended that, the Department may analyse the reasons for 
non-receipt of proposals from States/UTs and also initiate suitable action such 
as review of features, terms and con ditions, eligibility criteria and making 
changes in them , if necessary, to ensure receipt of proposals. However, the 
Department of Fisheries, in their reply have stated that they have highlighted the 
matter with States/UTs and have been advising them to ensure that minimum 
16.6% of the Scheduled Castes beneficiaries are included for financial 
assistance in Pradhan Mantri Matsya Sampada Yojana (PMMSY) project 
proposals, while preparing the State Annual Action Plan. Further, the End 
Implementing Agencies such as National Fisheries Development Board (NFDB) 
have also been requested to include suitable interventions for Scheduled 
Castes population in their respective Annual Action Plan or Project Proposals. 
The Committee, observe that, the reasons causing hindrances in the receipt of 
proposals from States/UTs should be examined and addressed adequately. The 
Committee, therefore, reiterate their earlier recommendation, that, in addition to 
the above measures , the Department may also analyse the reasons for non -
receipt of proposals from States/UTs and initiate suitable action such as review 

 
7 
 
of features, terms and conditions, eligibility criteria etc. and change them if 
necessary. 
KISAN CREDIT CARD (KCC) 
(RECOMMENDATION PARA NO.7) 
 
1.11 The Committee had observed/recommended: -  
The Committee acknowledges the measures taken by the Department 
such as Ghar Ghar  KCC Abhiyan” and nationwide rural awareness campaign 
namely “Viksit Bharat Sankalp Yatra” for disseminating information, raising 
awareness and extending services at each Gram Panchayat. The Committee 
note that KCC scheme for fish farmers is one of the 18 schemes chosen for the 
“Viksit Bharat Sankalp Yatra” to expand its coverage, provide on-spot services 
to the fishers, fish farmers and to disseminate information, and create 
awareness amongst the fishermen. Further, the Department of Fisheries (DoF) 
has be en pursuing with the Department of Financial Services (DFS),  M/o 
Finance for inclusion of the Fisheries Sector in the ‘Jan Samarth’ portal 
(www.jansamarth.in), which was on-boarded on 15th March 2024. 
  
The Committee while appreciating the measures taken by the 
Department in making KCC a success, suggest the department to address the 
challenges reflected in the vast gap between the receipt of applications for issue 
of KCC and sanctions as 4.33 lakhs KCCs only for fishermen were sanctioned 
as against 50 lakh applications received. They also suggest identifying the 
reasons for such a huge gap and take appropriate measures including 
undertaking a special drive to improve the sanctioning of KCCs to more 
Fishermen.  
1.12 In its Action Taken Reply, the Department has submitted: - 
 To saturate the eligible fishers and fish farmers with the KCC facility and 
facilitate access to institutional credit at a subvented interest rate, the 
Department of Fisheries has been actively coordinating with the Ministry of 

 
8 
 
Agriculture and Farmers Welfare, the Department of Financial Services, 
Ministry of Finance, and the Fisheries Department of all the States/UTs.  
 
The ‘Nationwide AHDF KCC Campaign for 2024 -25’ has also been launched 
from 15 th September 2024 to 31 st March 2025, for saturating all the eligible 
fishers and fish farmers. During this campaign, Gram Panchayat -level KCC 
Camps are being organised by the State/UT Fisheries Departments for on-the-
spot scrutiny of applications sourced in both modes (offline th rough Common 
Service Centres and online via the ‘JanSamarth’ portal (www.jansamarth.in).  
 
The District Fisheries Officers in States/UTs have designated as the Nodal 
Officers at the district level for the KCC campaign. They coordinate with the 
Lead District Managers (LDMs) to ensure the timely approval and sanctioning 
of KCC loans from the banks . The State Level Bankers Committee (SLBC) is 
organizing weekly KCC Loan Camps at the district level to facilitate the 
sanctioning of eligible KCC working capital loans for fishermen.  
Further, in the Union Budget 2025-26, the Government of India has enhanced 
the KCC lending limit for fishers and fish farmers from ₹3 lakh to ₹5 lakh. 
Additionally, the collateral-free loan limit for KCC fisheries has been raised from 
₹1.60 lakh to ₹2 lakh , effective from 1 st January, 2025. The status of pending 
proposals is regularly reviewed by the District Collector and by the State Level 
Bankers Committee (SLBC). A total number of 4,63,492 numbers of KCC cards 
has been Sanctioned with the Sanctioned Amount of Rs. 2982.58 crore. 
Few of the reasons for the gap between the receipt of applications for the issue 
of KCC and sanctions are as below: 
 
a. Reluctance in sanctioning KCC loans by most bank branches in districts. 
b. Lack of awareness amongst the majority of the bank staff about KCC 
guidelines/SOP for fisheries 
c. Lack of online facilities for uploading KCC applications through e -seva 
centre or bank website etc 
d. Applicants not able to arrange the required guarantor for availing KCC 
loan as per the requirement set by the bank and are claimed as invalid. 

 
9 
 
e. Land ownership Issues (Banks don’t consider family on land/multi-
owner land) 
f. Comparatively lower scale of finance approved for fisheries activities as 
KCC loans  
g. Rejection of applications based on: Low CIBIL scores of applicants, 
pending loan to be recovered by the bank and Default NPA 
h. Lack of sufficient manpower in the local fisheries’ offices to undertake 
KCC mandate. 
 
At present no insurance coverage available to cover fishery crop and due to that 
banks are very much reluctant to provide loan to the poor fishermen without any 
collateral. A robust effort is being initiated to start the insurance coverage for 
fisheries un der the new flagship sub -scheme namely, Pradhan Mantri Matsya 
Kisan Samridhi Sah-Yojana (PM-MKSSY), which is a Central Sector Sub-scheme 
of Pradhan Mantri Matsya Sampada Yojana (PMMSY).  
 
1.13 The Committee had Recommended that the Department of Fisheries may 
identify the reasons for the huge gap between the receipt of applications for 
issue of K isan Credit Card (KCC) and actual sanctions, as only 4.33 lakh KCC 
were sanctioned to fishermen as against 50 lakh applications received. The 
Department, in their reply, have enumerated various reasons for the said gap, 
however, they have also stated that, at present no insurance coverage is 
available to cover fishery crop , and due to that, banks are reluctant to provide 
loans to the poor fishermen without any collateral. The Department has further 
stated that robust efforts are initiated to start the insurance coverage for 
fisheries under the new flag ship scheme Pradhan Mantri Matsya Kisan Samridhi 
Sah-Yojana (PM-MKSSY) which is a sub -scheme under Pradhan Mantri Matsya 
Sampada Yojana (PMMSY). The Committee, appreciate the efforts taken by the 

 
10 
 
Department to formulate a scheme which would give insurance cover to fishery 
crop and would further like to be apprised on the matter. 
 
CONTINUATION OF PRADHAN MANTRI MATSYA SAMPADA YOJANA (PMMSY) 
AS PHASE-II 
 
(RECOMMENDATION PARA NO.10) 
 
1.14 The Committee had observed/recommended: -  
The Committee note that Pradhan Mantri Matsya Sampada Yojana 
(PMMSY), a flagship initiative of the Department launched in 2020 -21, has 
been instrumental in transforming India's fisheries and aquaculture sector and 
with a substantial investment of Rs  20,050 crore, PMMSY has focused on 
sustainable and responsible development, aiming to boost the sector's 
contribution to the national economy and food security. The Committee has 
been informed that till date 35 States and Union Territories have participate d 
in PMMSY and out of the Rs 20,864.29 crore proposals approved till date, the 
Central share amounts to Rs 8871.42 crore out of which an amount of  Rs 
4670.80 crore have been released to States/UTs and other Implementing 
agencies. Thus the remaining committed liability of the Department amounts 
to Rs. 4200 crore, which has to be spent till March 2025, i.e. when the tenure 
of the scheme concludes. 
 
The Committee observe that there is a need to extend the scheme for 
another five years to sustain the momentum of the initial phase and further 
accelerate and strengthen the development of India's blue economy. By 
continuing the scheme, the government can capitalize on the initial successes 
and ensure a sustainable and prosperous future for the fisheries sector. The 
Committee, therefore, strongly recommend that Pradhan Mantri Matsya 
Sampada Yojana may be continued as PMMSY Phase -II for a period of 
another five years i.e. from FY 2025-26 to FY 2029-30. PMMSY Phase-II will 
focus on strengthening of value addition infrastructure to enhance seafood 
exports, island fisheries development (Andaman & Nicobar and Lakshadweep 

 
11 
 
Islands) and infusion and adoption of cutting -edge technologies to further 
modernise fisheries sector. 
 
1.15 In its Action Taken Reply, the Department has submitted: - 
Co-terminus with the 15 th Finance Commission year cycle, no cost extension 
up to 2025 -26 has been approved in principle for Pradhan Mantri Matsya 
Sampada Yojana (PMMSY). Extension of PMMSY for another five years 
(2026-27 to FY2030-31) after detailed guidelines issued by DoE with approval 
of CA/Cabinet. 
1.16 Acknowledging the importance of Pradhan Mantri Matsya Sampada 
Yojana (PMMSY)  in transforming India's Fisheries/Aquaculture Sector and 
strengthening the development of India’s Blue Economy, the Committee, had 
recommended that PMMSY may be extended for a period of another five years 
i.e. from FY 2026-27 to FY 2030-31 as PMMSY Phase-II. Department of Fisheries 
in their reply have stated that extension of PMMSY for another five years (2026-
27 to FY2030 -31) would be done after detailed guidelines issued by DoE with 
approval of CA/Cabinet. The Committee, observe that, extension of PMMSY for 
another five years would strengthen seafood exports, Island fisheries 
development (Andaman & Nicobar and Lakshadweep Islands) and would also 
infuse cutting -edge technologies and modernise Fisheries Sector. The 
Committee, appreciate the efforts taken by the Department of Fisheries and 
would like to be apprised further on the developments regarding extension of 
the Scheme. 
  

 
12 
 
CHAPTER II 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS THAT HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE 
GOVERNMENT 
1. Decline in Actual Expenditure. 
As there have been cases of  underutilization of allocated resources for various 
schemes/ projects under Central Sector (CS) and Centrally Sponsored schemes 
(CCS), the Committee in their Recommendation at Sl . no. 1 contained in the 53 rd 
Report on DFG (2023 -24),  had recommended that the Department should devise a 
mechanism to remove the difficulties faced by States/UTs while adhering to the 
guidelines of the new financial system and Single Nodal Agency (SNA) Account to 
maximize the  Expenditure and also to  reduce the pendency of Utilization Certificates 
with States/UTs. The Committee notes that the revised procedure for release of funds 
to the States was issued on 23 rd March, 2021 and it’s been more than three years 
since this new procedure was introduced.  
 The Committee note that the reason for underutilization during the Financial 
Year 2023-24, again, was attributed to new financial system and the release of Central 
Funds to States/UTs, opening of SNA and Child Accounts by States/UTs. Delay in 
Contribution of State matching share is the other reason for decline in Actual 
Expenditure by the States/UTs during the Financial Year 2023-24. The Department in 
their Action Taken Reply to the above referred Recommendation had assured of strict 
compliance of the Recommendation of the Committee along with various measures to 
streamline the procedure of Single Nodal Agency (SNA).  
 The Committee observe that it has been more than three years since the new 
financial system is put in place by the Ministry of Finance. The desired results, 
however, have not been achieved as envisaged by the Department and the reasons 
for underutilization continue to remain the same. The Committee, therefore, 
recommend that, the Department should make serious efforts and proactively liaise 
with its counterparts in the States/UTs and State Fisheries Departments to address 
this issue for positive results. For the   Socio-Economic upliftment of the Fishermen in 
general and traditional fishermen in particular, targeted and effective implementation 
of the Schemes of the Department becomes imperative. It, therefore, becomes all the 
more necessary that the Budget allocation for various Schemes of the Department is 

 
13 
 
utilized in full. The Committee would like to be apprised of the steps taken by the 
Department and progress achieved in this regard. 
Reply of the Government:  
In order to bring more efficiency in cash management at both Centre and States 
levels, the Department of Expenditure, Ministry of Finance vide OM 
No.1(27)/PFMS/2020 dated 13 th July 2023 has notified an alternative fund flow 
mechanism for releasing central funds to the State Governments on “ Just-in-Time” 
basis under Centrally Sponsored Schemes (CSS). This new system has been named 
as SNA-SPARSH wherein 28 schemes including PMMSY have been on boarded with 
effect from 1st June, 2024. Under this new system, 26 States have been on -boarding 
on the SNA SPARSH platform. Lack of understanding by the states to adhere to the 
compliances of SNA -SPARSH, transition phase between SNA and SNA -SPARSH 
made the process slow for the States to adopt the new procedure and Non - 
compliance of the Guidelines in time by the States are few of the major point for slow 
expenditure. The Department has been working in close coordination with the States 
and these issues have been addressed from time to time. As such, better performance 
in the upcoming days is expected. 
Ministry of Fisheries, Animal Husbandry and Dairying, Dept. of Fisheries 
F. No. J-17001/91/2024-Fy(E-24961) Dated 30th April, 2025 
 
2. PMMSY- Advertising and Publicity. 
 The Committee note that Pradhan Mantri Matsya Sampada Yojana (PMMSY), 
with a view to create awareness about the features and benefits of scheme and its sub 
components, among the stake holders such as fish farmers, fishermen, entrepreneurs, 
fishermen cooperative societies, have been allocating funds since the launch of the 
scheme in 2020-21 for advertisement and Publicity of the scheme. The allocations of 
Rs. 1crore and 2.4 crore for the purpose at RE stage of 2020 -21 and 2021 -22 
respectively were fully spen t. The funds given in the years 2022 -23 & 2023 -24, 
however, could not be spent fully. For instance, the allocation of Rs. 8 crore for 2022-
23 at BE was reduced to Rs. 66 lakh and the actual spending amounted to Rs. 46.37 
lakh. Such downward revision of BE can be seen in 2023 -24 also, wherein BE of        

 
14 
 
Rs. 8.51 crore was reduced to Rs. 6 crore at RE and actual utilization stood at Rs. 50 
lakh only, which is a meager 8.3 % of the RE. 
 The Committee note that under PMMSY, National Fisheries Development 
Board (NFDB) is the nodal agency for implementing the activities such as training, 
awareness, exposure and capacity building programme for fishermen. NFDB is also 
active in organizing various State/National level fish festivals to create awareness on 
schemes, new technologies and also to increase domestic fish consumption using 
digital means, campaigns, audio-video publicity, print media and hoardings.  
 The Committee take a very serious note of the trend of downward revisions of 
BE at RE stage and large scale underutilization of these RE funds during the last two 
years. The Committee are of the view that without dissemination of features, benefits, 
eligibility criteria, etc., of the PMMSY, the achievement of the objectives of the scheme 
may have been compromised.  The Committee, therefore, while seeking the 
specific reasons for reduction in allocations at RE stage of 2022-23 and 2023-24 and 
also the difficulties faced, if any, in utilizing the funds, suggest that suitable steps be 
taken to utilize the allocated funds in future to have maximum impact on the targeted 
beneficiaries of PMMSY. The Committee also recommend that to achieve the target of 
attaining 12 kg per capita domestic consumption of fish under PMMSY, which is a 
cheap source of protein, proactive measures using Advertising and Publicity should 
be actively resorted to.   
 The Committee while appreciating (i)  ICAR- National Bureau of Fish Genetics 
and Resources (ICAR - NBFGR), Lucknow for implementing National Surveillance 
Programme on Aquatic Animal Diseases (NSPAAD) and NSPAAD-phase-II for control 
of diseases and dissemin ation of information to fish/shrimp farmers through mobile 
based applications such as “Report Fish Disease (RFD), a mobile based application 
for strengthening farmer based disease reporting; and, (ii) ICAR - Central Institute of 
Freshwater Aquaculture (ICAR-CIFA) for launching an interactive mobile app “Treat 
My Fish” for providing specific advisory services to the farmers for different fish 
diseases of freshwater aquaculture, they would like to be apprised of (i) the number of 
fishermen and other stakeholde rs who downloaded the app both in absolute and 
percentage of the total  no of stakeholders (approx.);   and,  (ii) whether the 

 
15 
 
assessment of impact of the app was carried out to ascertain the achievement or 
otherwise of intended objectives.   
Reply of the Government: 
Department of Fisheries in coordination with NFDB has organized various 
outreach activities to popularize schemes implemented and increasing Domestic fish 
consumption through various digital platforms such as short news apps/google/face 
book etc, campaign in railway stations, airports, audio -video publicity in the form of 
Jingles/video films and printing /publicity (Magazines and Newspapers), installing 
Hoardings etc. The said outreach campaigns are taken up to create awareness in rural 
and urban people thr ough print, audio -visual, outdoor, digital and electronic media 
through Central Bureau of Communication (CBC) which is the nodal agency to 
undertake multi -media advertising and publicity for various Ministries and 
Departments of Government of India. 
  The outreach activities are implemented directly by NFDB in coordination with 
State Department of Fisheries, KVKs, ICAR institutes and state universities. Various 
outreach activities such as outdoor campaigns, Digital Campaigns, mass media 
campaigns, Publicity through electronic media announcement in railways, digital 
display in airports on priority activities National level workshops on Seaweed, 
ornamental fisherie s, create awareness on insurance scheme benefits, PMMSY 
workshops, Anniversary program, door to door campaign on KCC seeking grievances. 
Presently regular outreach programs are organized on PMMSKY , National 
digital Platform, Cluster approach, climate resilience and Demonstration on drone 
technology & its usefulness have been conducted across the country for popularization 
of modern technologies.  
The National Surveillance Programme for Aquatic Animal Diseases (NSPAAD), 
which is a component of the Pradhan Mantri Matsya Sampada Yojana (PMMSY), is 
implemented by the Department of Fisheries and coordinated by ICAR -National 
Bureau of Fish Genetic Resour ces (NBFGR). NSPAAD aims to strengthen aquatic 
animal disease management in India through various initiatives, including disease 
surveillance, disease diagnostic centers, and the "Report Fish Disease" app. The RFD 
app will help the farmers in reporting inc idence of diseases in finfish, shrimps, and 
molluscs on their farms with the field level -officers and fish health experts. This shall 

 
16 
 
help farmers in getting the scientific advice for efficient management of disease. The 
data regarding the diseases will be stored on temporal & spatial scale and can be used 
for mapping the disease cases. 
The App would support farmers in improving farmer -based reporting, getting 
scientific advice, and reducing losses due to diseases, thereby increasing farmers’ 
income. Also, Fish Disease Reporting App shall have a massive impact on fish disease 
management, promoting early detection, rapid response, collaboration, and 
knowledge sharing. It will contribute to the sustainability and resilience of aquaculture 
systems by minimizing the negative impacts of fish diseases on fish population, 
industry, and ecosystems. As on date more than 18400 beneficiaries are using this 
app for disease reporting in the country. 
Ministry of Fisheries, Animal Husbandry and Dairying, Dept. of Fisheries 
F. No. J-17001/91/2024-Fy(E-24961) Dated 30th April, 2025 
 
4. Status of Utilisation Certificates (UCs)  
 As there are pending utilization certificates involving huge amount of funds 
disbursed, this Committee in their  Recommendation at Sl.no 5 contained in the 53 rd 
Third Report on Demands for Grants (23 -24) had recommended the  Department to 
take concrete steps by pursuing  with the  States/UTs at regular intervals to liquidate 
the Utilization Certificates (UCs)  so that the pending liability on account of already 
approved Projects also gets reduced and the Schemes/Projects are completed well in 
time.  The Dept in their action take replies informed that they had taken up the matter 
at the highest levels of the state Govt inter alia for expediting the utilization of available 
funds. Further, the States are also being monitored on daily basis for timely release of 
central and state shares to SNA from treasury and immediate distribution of such funds 
to beneficiaries through child accou nt to expedite the implementation of the scheme 
and to minimize the pendency of un-utilized funds. The Committee while appreciating 
the efforts taken by the Department, note that despite their best efforts, Utilisation 
certificates are pending involving huge amount of Rs 584 crore. The Committee, 
therefore, recommend the Department to explore the possibility of developing a rating 
system for states based on their performance in utilizing funds and furnishing UCs on 
time and offer non-financial incentives to better performing states in this regard.  The 

 
17 
 
Committee believe that such a rating and awarding non -financial incentives will spur 
competition among the states in utilising funds and in furnishing UCs on time. The 
concrete action taken in this regard be intimated to the Committee.   
Reply of the Government:  
The pace of utilization of funds got slowed down because of changes in 
accounts procedure and fund release procedures, delay in transfer of funds from 
treasury to SNA account, non-release of state share on time and non-compliances of 
SNA-SPARSH guidelines. The matter has been taken up at various levels including 
the Chief Ministers, Chief Secretaries of States/UTs for release of State share; for 
ensuring SNA compliance and for expediting the utilization of available funds. Further, 
States are also being mon itored on daily basis for timely release of central and state 
shares to SNA from treasury and immediate distribution of such funds to beneficiaries 
through child account. Secretary (DoF) reviewing with all the States where the pace 
of implementation and funds utilization is slow physically to understand the difficulties 
and to expedite the implementation of the scheme and to minimize the pendency of 
un-utilized funds. 
Further, Department of Fisheries approved the State Annual Action Plan (AAP) 
and relaxation in this regard issued to all the States/UTs, so that states can utilize part 
of unspent balance against any of the approved projects under PMMSY. 
Such efforts taken by the Department of Fisheries helped in expediting the 
utilization of funds by the States and the unspent balance available with States has 
come down to Rs. 446.26 crore. The Department is continuing its efforts through 
periodic review meetings at different levels for speedy utilization of the central and 
state funds. The comments of the Committee have been noted for further necessary 
action. 
Ministry of Fisheries, Animal Husbandry and Dairying, Dept. of Fisheries 
F. No. J-17001/91/2024-Fy(E-24961) Dated 30th April, 2025 
 
Comments of the Committee 
For Comments of the Committee please refer to Para No.1.7 of Chapter I of 
this Report. 

 
18 
 
5. Scheduled Castes Sub Plan (SCSP) 
 The Committee observe that during the financial years 2021 -22, 2022-23 and  
2023-24, the Department has surrendered funds earmarked for Scheduled Castes 
Sub Plan (SCSP) to the tune of Rs 20.35, 46.98  and 66.15 crore respectively. The 
funds surrendered dur ing the financial year 2021 -22, 2022 -23 and 2023 -24 in 
percentage terms amounts to 10.15%, 19.84% & 26.25 % respectively of the funds 
earmarked at revised estimates stage for SCSP. The Committee has been informed 
that the reason for surrender of funds unde r the SCSP head of PMMSY was due to 
non-receipt of proposals from the States/UTs under SCSP. The Committee has also 
been informed that for fishery related projects, land and investment is required, 
however, due to weak financial status of most of the Sched uled Castes population of 
the country, they are unable to provide bank collateral, and therefore, even sanctioned 
projects, are unable to take off in real, on the ground.  
 In this context, the Committee would like to draw the attention of the department 
to recommendation at Sl no. 6 contained in the 53 rd report on DFG (23 -24) where in 
they had urged the Department to encourage/pursue and incentivize States/UTs to 
send proposals under the SCSP so that the vision/mission of the scheme is achieved 
and the benefits reach the Scheduled Caste Population of the Country.  
 The Committee while expressing serious concern at the declining trend of   
utilisation of funds under SCSP for the last three years, suggest suitable measures be 
taken to arrest this trend. They also recommend the Department to analyze the 
reasons for non -receipt of the proposals from the state Govts and initiate suitable 
action including review of features, terms & conditions, eligibility criteria, etc. and 
tweaking of these, if necessary, to ensure the receipt of proposals from the state/ UT 
Governments for optimal utilization of the funds be taken.  
Reply of the Government:  
The Department of Fisheries, Government of India has highlighted matter with 
the States/UTs having sizeable Schedule Caste beneficiaries in all the review 
meetings and have been advised to ensure that minimum 16.6% of the Schedule 
Caste beneficiaries are included for financial assistance in PMMSY projects proposals 

 
19 
 
while preparing the state annual action plan. Further, the measure taken up by the 
Department of Fisheries, Government of India in this regard include:  
 
I. Mandatory earmarking of minimum 16.6% of the budget allocated under 
Schedule Cast Sub-Plan(SCSP) for the benefits of scheduled caste beneficiaries 
and advising States/UTs to include SC/ST beneficiaries accordingly in their 
annual action plans. Specific men tion of the Ministry of Finance instructions  in 
the annual administrative approval of the Scheme that the fund earmarked 
Scheduled Caste beneficiaries are to be utilized exclusively for development of 
Schedule Castes.  
II. Requesting the End Implementing Agencies i.e. Central Government entities 
including the National Fisheries Development Board (NFDB) to include suitable 
interventions/activities for supporting SC population appropriately in their 
respective Annual Action Pl an or Project Proposals. Similarly, State 
Governments/UTs are requested regularly to make specific allocation of funds 
for SCs in their Annual Action Plan/Self-contained proposals/DPRs based on the 
percentage of SC population in their jurisdiction. 
Ministry of Fisheries, Animal Husbandry and Dairying, Dept. of Fisheries 
F. No. J-17001/91/2024-Fy(E-24961) Dated 30th April, 2025 
 
Comments of the Committee 
For Comments of the Committee please refer to Para No.1.10 of Chapter I of 
this Report. 
 
6. Integrated Farming Systems 
The Committee note that Integrated fish farming is a system of producing fish 
in combination with other agricultural/livestock farming operations centered around the 
fish pond. They also note that promotion of integrated fish farming in the North-Eastern 
States is cornerstone of the Pradhan Mantri Matsya Sampada Yojana (PMMSY) 
strategy.  

 
20 
 
 The Committee observe that there are many wet lands and water bodies in the 
country which can be focused upon and developed into Integrated Fish Farms. In the 
North-East region, they note, around five thousand hectares of land are being 
developed for Inte grated Fish Farming. The Committee observe that states namely 
Bihar and West Bengal have vast area of wet lands which can also be developed 
under Integrated fish farming as is being done in the North East. The Committee, 
therefore, recommend that the Depar tment should devise a plan/policy to utilise wet 
lands and water bodies available in States/UTs other than North Eastern regions for 
the development of Integrated Farming Systems. This would in turn give a push to the 
economic well being of the fishers of the Country in general and also promote inland 
fisheries as part of Bio -Economy which would ascertain minimal scope for wastage 
and high reutilization on the farm along with increase in fish production and other 
livestock. 
 
Reply of the Government:  
The Pradhan Mantri Matsya Sampada Yojana (PMMSY)  scheme being 
implemented by the Department inter alia, supported fish seed stocking of reservoirs, 
wetlands like beels, ox-bow lakes etc., in situ hatcheries and fingerlings rearing units 
for open water bodies along with Integrated fish farming and need based aquaculture 
activities in freshwater, brackish water, saline/alkaline affected soil areas.  
The North-Eastern States, with their abundant water resources, including rivers, lakes, 
and ponds, are ideal for integrated fish farming. The integration of various farming 
practices such as fish culture, poultry, piggery, and agriculture can help diversif y 
income sources for farmers while promoting sustainable practices. The PMMSY aims 
to increase fish production and productivity, improve infrastructure, and promote eco-
friendly and community -based aquaculture practices, particularly in these resource -
rich regions. Under PMMSY during last five years (2020-21 to 2024-25) a total 5063.11 
ha area has been sanctioned. 
For holistic development of Fisheries in the Country, the PMMSY scheme is in the 
terminal year of implementation of 5 years and based on the findings of the evaluation 
of PMMSY, special focus will be given for development of Wetland Fishery in 
States/UTs other than North Eastern Region to push to the economic wellbeing of the 

 
21 
 
fishers of the Country in general and also promote inland fisheries as part of Bio -
Economy. 
Ministry of Fisheries, Animal Husbandry and Dairying, Dept. of Fisheries 
F. No. J-17001/91/2024-Fy(E-24961) Dated 30th April, 2025 
 
8. Welfare Schemes, Insurance, Health and Education to Fishers 
The Committee note that under PMMSY , Integrated Modern Coastal Fishing 
Villages (IMCV) are being developed with the aim to maximize economic and social 
benefits to coastal fishers while minimizing environmental degradation through 
sustainable fishing practices. Further, through IMCV, fishers of these villages are 
empowered for securing their livelihoods along with modern amenities, disaster 
resilient houses, cyclone and tsunami shelters, post -harvest amenities, etc. The 
Committee notes that under PMMSY 11 IMCV’s have been sanctioned at a total 
investment of Rs. 77.56 crore. 
The Committee has also been informed that Marine Fisheries Census which is 
being carried out by Department of Fisheries every five years was carried out the last 
time in the year 2016 covering all maritime states/UTs. The survey provides the 
information on village wise population, number of active fishermen and different types 
of fishing units, number of mechanized and indigenous fishing crafts and gears for 
each maritime states, marine fishing villages, marine fish landing centers, etc. They 
note more than five years have  elapsed since the last fish census, carried out in 2016, 
they would like to be informed of whether the next  marine Fisheries census has 
commenced  and if so the details thereof . In case, it is not commenced, they suggest 
the same may be  undertaken without any delay as the PMMSY initiated in 2020 -21, 
may have used the data of 2016 census. As eight years have passed since then, the 
Committee feel that it is imperative to have updated data on the fisheries sector to 
have maximum reach under PMMSY. 
 The Committee also recommend that the Department should take substantive 
measures to increase the number of IMCV’s in the country so that the welfare 
measures including health and education needs of the fishermen are taken care of 

 
22 
 
and would like to be apprised of the status of implementation of 11 sanctioned 
Integrated Model Coastal Fishing Villages (IMCVs) with a budget of Rs. 77.56 crore. 
Reply of the Government:  
Department of Fisheries, Government of India has approved the Marine 
Fisheries Census 2025-26 with an outlay of Rs.1458.08 lakh to ICAR -Central Marine 
Fisheries Research Institute, who will be the nodal institute to conduct the census 
operations in 9 Marin e States while Fishery Survey of India will conduct the census 
operations in four UTs (A&N Islands, Lakshadweep, Puducherry and D&N Haveli & 
Daman and Diu). The proposed timeline for the Marine Census, 2025 is one year from 
April, 2025 to March, 2026.  
The objectives of Marine Fisheries Census 2025-26 are as follows:  
a. To completely enumerate marine fisher households of the 13 states and UTs 
of India (UTs will be covered by FSI) 
b. To collate particulars that would give comprehensive idea about the fisher 
families, economic status, educational status, community/ cast, 
occupational profile of fisherfolk with family as unit  
c. To have a complete count of fishing craft, gear and other professional 
gadgets in possession of each family  
d. To have a complete account of fishing craft along with their gear(s) that are 
operational at the landing centres  
e. To have an exhaustive information repository of fishery related infrastructure 
at the avail of the fisherfolk - ice plants, peeling/ curing yards, processing 
plants etc.  
f. To have a focused listing of general amenities and facilities available at the 
villages where the fisherfolk reside permanently 
Moreover, the Department of Fisheries, Ministry of Fisheries, Animal Husbandry 
and Dairying during the last five years (2020 -21 to 2024-25) has accorded approvals 
to the proposals for development of 11 integrated Modern Costal Fishing Villages with 
total outlay of Rs.7756.46 lakh, which include (i) nine coastal villages at a cost of Rs. 
6106.61 lakh in Kerala, (ii) one costal village at a cost of Rs.899.85 lakh in 

 
23 
 
Lakshadweep and (iii) one coastal village at a cost of Rs. 750 lakh in West Bengal. 
The latest progress on State wise implementation of 11 Integrated Modern Coastal 
Fishing Village is as under: 
The latest progress State wise on implementation of the approved 11 Integrated 
Modern Coastal Fishing Villages is as under:   
(Rs.in lakhs) 
S.No Name of village District Date of 
approval  
Approved 
project 
cost  
Broad 
components  
Latest 
progress 
(physical) 
A. Kerala 
1 Integrated 
Modern  Coastal 
Fishing  Village- 
Arattupuzha 
Alappuzha 12.03.2024 619.50 Development 
of facilities for 
Fish Landing 
Centre, 
Training 
centre, OBM 
repair Centre, 
Cold storage 
Facility, 
Fishermen 
Community 
development 
center, Fish 
processing 
kiosk, sea food 
cafeteria / fish 
product outlet 
for 
fisherwoman,  
Portable Solar 
dryer, Cage 
culture, 
Aquarium cum 
rearing unit, 
artificial reef off   
the coast, 
Construction of  
Disaster 
resilient 
All activities 
approved are 
progressing 
well towards 
grounding. 
Land has been 
identified for 
most of infra 
projects and  
permissive 
sanction 
received from 
concerned 
authorities at 
district level, 
beneficiary 
selection 
completed, 
tendering 
under process 
for public 
toilets, 
coordinates 
fixed for 
artificial reefs. 
 
 
2 Integrated 
Modern  Coastal 
Fishing  Village-
Chaliyam 
Kozhikkode 12.03.2024 732.95 
3 Integrated 
Modern  Coastal 
Fishing village - 
Chellanam 
Ernakulam 12.03.2024 569.97 
4 Integrated 
Modern  Coastal 
Fishing village - 
Nayarambalam 
Ernakulam 12.03.2024 710.24 
5 Integrated 
Modern  Coastal 
Fishing village -
Tanur 
Malappuram 12.03.2024 717.47 
6 Integrated 
Modern  Coastal 
Fishing village -
Ponnani  
Malappuram 12.03.2024 724.10 
7 Integrated 
Modern  Coastal 
Kannur 12.03.2024 636.50 

 
24 
 
Fishing village - 
Chalilgopalpetta 
settlements for 
fishermen 
rehabilitation 
during 
environment 
disaster, 
Fisheries 
extension cum 
common utility 
centre,  
Emergency 
treatment and 
Rescue block 
for Fishermen, 
Installation of 
high mast light 
in fishing 
hamlets, fish 
feed mill, 
Rehabilitation 
and 
Reconstruction 
of fishermen 
dwelling, e -
scooters for 
fish vending, 
Ecotourism, 
additional area 
for parking in 
the fish landing 
centre 
premises, 
community 
Toilet block, ice 
Box to selected 
fishermen. 
For 
Rehabilitation 
Centre cum 
community 
centre and  
Model 
Disaster 
resilient 
Houses at  
Malappuram 
land issues 
(proposed 
land under 
court case) 
State has 
taken action 
taken to 
identify new 
land.  
 
 
 
8 Integrated 
Modern  Coastal 
Fishing village -
Shiriya 
Kasargod 12.03.2024 704.32 
9 Integrated 
Modern  Coastal 
Fishing village - 
Edakazhiyoor. 
Thrissur  12.03.2024 691.56 
B West Bengal 
10 Integrated 
Modern  Coastal 
Fishing  Village-  
Gangadharpur, 
Kakdweep, 
South 24 
parganas 
28.03.2023 750.00 Work for 14 no 
link road, Fish 
Market, 
Multipurpose 
Community 
Hall  
Work for 14 no 
link road has 
been 
completed 
with the 
project cost of 
an amount of 
Rs. 1.56 
crores. 

 
25 
 
Amount paid 
Rs.1.19 crores 
rest is in the 
process  for 
payment 
through SNA  -
SPARSH. 
Work for 
market and 
multipurpose 
community 
hall is in full 
swing. 
Expected by 
April 25. 
C Lakshadweep 
11 Integrated 
Modern  Coastal 
Fishing  Village 
Not selected   899.00 Not identified  
  Total 7756.46   
 
Ministry of Fisheries, Animal Husbandry and Dairying, Dept. of Fisheries 
F. No. J-17001/91/2024-Fy(E-24961) Dated 30th April, 2025 
 
10. Continuation of Pradhan Mantri Matsya Sampada  Yojana (PMMSY) as 
Phase-II 
The Committee note that Pradhan Mantri Matsya Sampada Yojana (PMMSY), 
a flagship initiative of the Department launched in 2020-21, has been instrumental in 
transforming India’s fisheries and aquaculture sector and with a substantial investment 
of Rs 20,050 crore, PMMSY has focused on sustainable and responsible 
development, aiming to boost the sector’s contribution to the nat ional economy and 
food security. The Committee has been informed that till date 35 States and Union 
Territories have participated in PMMSY and out of the Rs 20,864.29 crore proposals 
approved till date, the Central share amounts to Rs 8871.42 crore out of which an 
amount of Rs 4670.80 crore have been released to States/U Ts and other 
Implementing agencies. Thus , the remaining committed liability of the Department 

 
26 
 
amounts to Rs. 4200 crore, which has to be spent till March 2025, i.e. when the tenure 
of the scheme concludes. 
The committee observe that there is a need to extend the scheme for another 
five years to sustain the momentum of the initial phase and further accelerate and 
strengthen the development of India’s blue economy. By continuing the scheme, the 
government can capitalize on the initial successes and ensure a sustainable and 
prosperous future for the fisheries sector. The Committee, therefore, strongly 
recommend that Pradhan Mantri Matsya Sampada Yojana may be continued as 
PMMSY Phase-II for a period of another f ive years i.e. from FY 2025-26 to FY 2029-
30. PMMSY Phase -II will focus on strengthening of value addition infrastructure to 
enhance seafood exports, island fisheries development (Andaman & Nicobar and 
Lakshadweep Islands) and infusion and adoption of cutting-edge technologies to 
further modernize fisheries sector. 
Reply of the Government:  
Co-terminus with the 15 th Finance Commission year cycle, no cost extension 
up to 2025 -26 has been approved in principle for Pradhan Mantri Matsya Sampada 
Yojana (PMMSY). Extension of PMMSY for another five years (2026 -27 to FY2030 -
31) after detailed guidelines issued by DoE with approval of CA/Cabinet. 
Ministry of Fisheries, Animal Husbandry and Dairying, Dept. of Fisheries 
F. No. J-17001/91/2024-Fy(E-24961) Dated 30th April, 2025 
 
Comments of the Committee 
For Comments of the Committee please refer to Para No.1.16 of Chapter I of 
this Report. 
 
11. Registration of Fishers 
 The Committee has been informed that there are about 2.8 crore fisheres, fish 
farmers and other fish value chain stakeholders engaged in fisheries sector in 
States/UTs. The Committee appreciates the initiative taken by the Department in 
developing a dedicated National Fisheries Digital Platform (NFDP) under the Pradhan 

 
27 
 
Mantri Matsya Kisan Samridhi Sah-Yojana (PM-MKSSY) to register and provide work-
based identity to all the fishers and fish farmers and other value chain stakeholders. 
However, the Committee note that till date under NDFP a total of 8.60 lakh fisheries 
stakeholders including 8.56 lakh individuals and 3393 organisations have been 
registered. The Committee therefore recommend that the Department should 
undertake proactive measures and devise effective initiatives to reach out to the 
remaining un-registered fishermen and assure that all the fishermen in the country are 
registered so that the schemes/policies of the government are better oriented in a 
targeted manner and benefit the fishermen of the country. 
Reply of the Government:  
Under the Pradhan Mantri Matsya Kisan Samridhi Sah -yojana (PMMKSSY), a 
National Fisheries Digital Platform (NFDP) and Mobile App is created for fishers, fish 
farmers, fish workers etc. for self -registration or assisted registration, self -reporting 
and creation of work-based identities, with appropriate interfaces for digital payment 
and financial access including interfaces with public sector platforms for social safety 
net and Direct Benefit Transfer. On NFDP, the registrations can be done through two 
mode (i) individual (ii) CSC VLE assisted mode.  
Department of Fisheries, GoI has taken number of steps to create awareness 
and disseminate information and knowledge amongst the stakeholders as well as 
initiate mass mobilisation for registrations on NFDP through self -mode or Common 
Service Centre(CSC) assisted mode.  
More than 30 Consultation meetings have been undertaken as part of outreach 
and awareness campaigns for registration with States/UTs, Fisheries 
College/University, ICAR Institutes and DoF Institutes, Central Ministries/Departments 
and agencies, Cooperatives and so on. A pan India live meeting on facebook, youtube 
and twitter was conducted in coordination with CSC for boosting registrations on NFDP 
wherein beneficiaries and CSC VLEs participated. 
Apart from this, DoF has conducted Application mobilization camps from 14 th -
22nd February, 2025 in all States/UTs in coordination with CSC VLEs and State/UT 
fisheries Department. Further, at ground level CSC VLE s and Sagar mitras are 
reaching the local masses for registrations on NFDP.   

 
28 
 
  As a result of all these efforts, the registrations on NFDP have crossed mark of 
22.37 lakh as on date. 
Ministry of Fisheries, Animal Husbandry and Dairying, Dept. of Fisheries 
F. No. J-17001/91/2024-Fy(E-24961) Dated 30th April, 2025 
  

 
29 
 
CHAPTER – III 
 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO NOT 
DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE GOVERNMENT’S REPLIES 
 
3. Utilization of Funds under Centrally Sponsored Schemes (CSS)  
 The Committee observe that the Actual Expenditure under the Centrally 
Sponsored Scheme (CSS) component of the Department showed a declining trend 
from 2021-22 onwards vis-a-vis the Revised estimates. Rs. 1200, 1410 and Rs.1500 
crore were allocated at RE stage during 2021 -22, 2022-23 and 2023-24 respectively. 
The actuals, amounted to Rs. 1191.45, 1290 and 1196.50 crore respectively resulting 
in underutilization of Rs. 8.55, 120 and 303.5 crore during 2021-22, 2022-23 and 2023-
24 respectively. Further, the b udgetary allocations at BE stage were reduced by 
Rs.469 and Rs. 500 crore at RE stage during 2022 -23 and 2023-24 respectively. But 
the actual amounts spent fell far short of reduced revised estimates as mentioned 
above. This spending pattern of the department for the last four years appears to recur 
again in 2024-25 also as against BE of Rs. 2,352 crore, only Rs. 484 crore was spent 
till November, 2024. The Committee are concerned to note that repeated 
underutilization of the amounts allocated even at Revised Estimates (RE) stage, year 
after year, shows lack of proper planning, assessment of the fund requirement, failure 
to take into account ground realities while making proposals for fund requirements 
even at RE stage. The repeated surrendering of the funds , the Committee are of the 
view, might have impacted adversely affecting the outcomes output envisaged under 
PMMSY. The Committee, therefore, urge the Department to take proactive measures 
in this regard and ensure that the hurdles faced due to the implementation of the new 
financial system such as Single Nodal Agency (SNA) Account are overcome so as to 
ensure that the funds allocated for schemes are utilized in full.  
Reply of the Government:  
The Pradhan Mantri Matsya Sampada Yojana (PMMSY) has received 
overwhelming responses from states/UTs and projects worth of Rs. 20,9 30.33 Crores 
have been approved with the central share of Rs. 9179.78 crore during last five years 
since 2020-21. Out of the  Central share approved an amount of Rs. 5213.81 crore 

 
30 
 
have been released and an amount of Rs. 3965.97 crore being the central liability 
under PMMSY. Since, 2023 -24 the pace of fund flow and implementation of the 
scheme is not getting on the expected pace because of the modification of the fund 
flow procedure by the Ministry of Finance. Multiple criteria has been affected the 
implementation w.r.t. the said procedure. Now after various consultations and frequent 
monitoring with the State Governments, the pace of understanding to the procedure 
has been developed and it is expected that in the upcoming days the performance of 
funds utilization and implementation of the scheme shall be improved. 
Ministry of Fisheries, Animal Husbandry and Dairying, Dept. of Fisheries 
F. No. J-17001/91/2024-Fy(E-24961) Dated 30th April, 2025 
 
9. Safety and Security of Fishermen at Sea 
The Committee observe that PMMSY supports comprehensive Vessel 
Monitoring System (VMS) equipped with requisite communication and safety 
devices/appliances for traditional and motorized fishing vessels. Further, the 
Department of Fisheries, has sanctioned a  project for installation of ISRO developed 
satellite-based Vessel Communication and Support System (transponders) on one 
lakh fishing vessels with an investment of Rs 364 crore. These transponders will be 
installed ‘free of cost’ in fishing vessels ensuri ng safety and security of fishermen at 
sea, enabling them to stay connected with security agencies, their families, and can 
seek assistance during natural calamities, weather changes, etc’. 
 The Committee observe that during the last five financial years, from 2020 -21 
to 2024 -25 (up to 22.11.2024)   the dept released Rs 54 crore only, under the 
Component ‘Transponders’ as against the total project cost of 364 crore, which also 
includes the Ce ntral share or Rs 218.40 crore. Given the importance of safety and 
security of fishermen at sea, the Committee want the Department to apprise them of 
the specific reasons for releasing less than one seventh of the total project outlay even 
five years (approx.) under this component.  
Reply of the Government:  
The Department of Fisheries, under the Pradhan Mantri Matsya Sampada 
Yojana (PMMSY), has approved a project on National Rollout Plan for Vessel 

 
31 
 
Communication and Support System in about one lakh marine fishing vessels 
including mechanized and motorized vessels across 9 coastal states and 4 union 
territories with an outlay of Rs.364 Crores on 30th March,2023. This system will provide 
two-way communication system to fishermen and also enable real -time tracking of 
fishing vessels including onboard crew, and monitoring of fishing harbours and fish 
landing centres across the country through mobile based ‘National Fisheries App’.   
Department of Fisheries, released 25%  i.e 1/4 th  of the Central share of  Rs. 54.60 
crore on 31st March, 2023. Subsequently, on the further progress of the project in line 
with the project milestone, second installment amounting Rs. 23.00 crore was released 
on 28 th February, 2025 and third instalment for an amount of Rs. 53.44 crore was 
released on 29 th March, 2025. Till date, 24,622 transponders were installed in the 
States of Gujarat, Maharashtra, Goa, Karnataka, Kerala, Andhra Pradesh and Odisha 
and also in the UTs. of Daman and Diu and Puducherry.  
Ministry of Fisheries, Animal Husbandry and Dairying, Dept. of Fisheries 
F. No. J-17001/91/2024-Fy(E-24961) Dated 30th April, 2025 
  

 
32 
 
CHAPTER IV 
 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF 
THE GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE 
 
 
 
 
-NIL- 
 
 
  

 
33 
 
CHAPTER V 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH FINAL 
REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT ARE STILL AWAITED 
7. Kisan Credit Card (KCC) 
The Committee acknowledges the measures taken by the Department such as 
Ghar Ghar KCC Abhiyan” and nationwide rural awareness campaign namely “Viksit 
Bharat Sankalp Yatra” for disseminating information, raising awareness and extending 
services at each Gram Panchayat. The Committee note that KCC scheme for fish 
farmers is one of the 18 schemes chosen for the “Viksit Bharat Sankalp Yatra” to 
expand its coverage, provide on -spot services to the fishers, fish farmers and to 
disseminate information, and create awareness amongst the fishermen. Further, the 
Department of Fisheries (DoF) has be en pursuing with the Department of Financial 
Services (DFS), M/o Finance for inclusion of the Fisheries Sector in the ‘Jan Samarth’ 
portal (www.jansamarth.in), which was on-boarded on 15th March 2024. 
The Committee while appreciating the measures taken by the Department in 
making KCC a success, suggest the department to address the challenges reflected 
in the vast gap between the receipt of applications for issue of KCC and sanctions as 
4.33 lakhs KCCs only for fishermen were sanctioned as against 50 lakh applications 
received. They also suggest identifying the reasons for such a huge gap and take 
appropriate measures including undertaking a special drive to improve the sanctioning 
of KCCs to more Fishermen.  
 
Reply of the Government:  
 To saturate the eligible fishers and fish farmers with the KCC facility and 
facilitate access to institutional credit at a subvented interest rate, the Department of 
Fisheries has been actively coordinating with the Ministry of Agriculture and Farmers 
Welfare, the Department of Financial Services, Ministry of Finance, and the Fisheries 
Department of all the States/UTs.  
 
 The ‘Nationwide AHDF KCC Campaign for 2024 -25’ has also been launched 
from 15th September 2024 to 31st March 2025, for saturating all the eligible fishers and 
fish farmers. During this campaign, Gram Panchayat -level KCC Camps are being 

 
34 
 
organised by the State/UT Fisheries Departments for on -the-spot scrutiny of 
applications sourced in both modes (offline through Common Service Centres and 
online via the ‘JanSamarth’ portal (www.jansamarth.in).  
 
The District Fisheries Officers in States/UTs have designated as the Nodal 
Officers at the district level for the KCC campaign. They coordinate with the Lead 
District Managers (LDMs) to ensure the timely approval and sanctioning of KCC loans 
from the banks. The State Level Bankers Committee (SLBC) is organizing weekly KCC 
Loan Camps at the district level to facilitate the sanctioning of eligible KCC working 
capital loans for fishermen.  
Further, in the Union Budget 2025-26, the Government of India has enhanced 
the KCC lending limit for fishers and fish farmers from ₹3 lakh to ₹5 lakh. Additionally, 
the collateral-free loan limit for KCC fisheries has been raised from ₹1.60 lakh to ₹2 
lakh, effective from 1 st January, 2025. The status of pending proposals is regularly 
reviewed by the District Collector and by the State Level Bankers Committee (SLBC). 
A total number of 4,63,492 numbers of KCC cards has been Sanctioned with the 
Sanctioned Amount of Rs. 2982.58 crore. 
 
Few of the reasons for the gap between the receipt of applications for the issue 
of KCC and sanctions are as below: 
a. Reluctance in sanctioning KCC loans by most bank branches in districts. 
b. Lack of awareness amongst the majority of the bank staff about KCC 
guidelines/SOP for fisheries 
c. Lack of online facilities for uploading KCC applications through e-seva centre 
or bank website etc. 
d. Applicants not able to arrange the required guarantor for availing KCC loan 
as per the requirement set by the bank and are claimed as invalid. 
e. Land ownership Issues (Banks don’t consider family on land/multi-owner 
land) 
f. Comparatively lower scale of finance approved for fisheries activities as KCC 
loans  

 
35 
 
g. Rejection of applications based on: Low CIBIL scores of applicants, pending 
loan to be recovered by the bank and Default NPA 
h. Lack of sufficient manpower in the local fisheries’ offices to undertake KCC 
mandate. 
 
At present no insurance coverage available to cover fishery crop and due to that 
banks are very much reluctant to provide loan to the poor fishermen without any 
collateral. A robust effort is being initiated to start the insurance coverage for fisheries 
under the new flagship sub -scheme namely, Pradhan Mantri Matsya Kisan Samridhi 
Sah-Yojana (PM-MKSSY), which is a Central Sector Sub -scheme of Pradhan Mantri 
Matsya Sampada Yojana (PMMSY). 
[Ministry of Fisheries, Animal Husbandry and Dairying, Dept. of Fisheries 
F. No. J-17001/91/2024-Fy(E-24961) Dated 30th April, 2025] 
 
Comments of the Committee 
For Comments of the Committee please refer to Para No.1.13 of Chapter I of 
this Report. 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI; CHARANJIT SINGH CHANNI 
15 December, 2025  Chairperson 
24 Agrahayana, 1947 (Saka) Standing Committee on Agriculture,  
 Animal Husbandry and Food Processing 
 
 
 
  

 
36 
 
ANNEXURE 
MINUTES OF THE THIRTY SEVENTH SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE ON 
AGRICULTURE, ANIMAL HUSBANDRY AND FOOD PROCESSING (2024-25) 
 
The Committee sat on Friday, the 19th September, 2025 from 1103 hrs. to 1335 
hrs. in Committee Room No. 1, First Floor, Block -A, Extension to Parliament House 
Annexe (EPHA), New Delhi.   
Present 
 
Shri Charanjit Singh Channi – Chairperson 
 
Members 
 
Lok Sabha 
 
2.  Shri Patel Umeshbhai Babubhai 
3.  Smt. Anita Nagarsingh Chouhan 
4.  Shri Kuldeep Indora 
5.  Shri Sukanta Kumar Panigrahi 
6.  Smt. Krishna Devi Shivshankar Patel 
7.  Shri Naresh Chandra Uttam Patel 
8.  Shri Dharambir Singh 
9.  Shri Dushyant Singh 
 
Rajya Sabha 
 
10.  Smt. Ramilaben Becharbhai Bara 
11.  Dr. Anil Sukhdeorao Bonde 
12.  Shri Banshilal Gurjar 
13.  Shri S. Kalyanasundaram 
14.  Shri Madan Rathore 
15.  Shri Ramji Lal Suman 
16.  Shri P. P. Suneer 
 
  
Secretariat 
 
1. Shri Dhiraj Kumar  – Joint Secretary     
2. Shri Maheshwar  – Director 
3. Shri Prem Ranjan  - Deputy Secretary 
 

 
37 
 
2. At the outset, the Chairperson welcomed the Members to the Sitting of the 
Committee. Thereafter, the Committee took up for consideration and adoption of the 
following Draft Subject Reports and Draft Action Taken Reports: 
(i) xxxxx  xxxxx  xxxxx  xxxxx  xxxxx*; 
(ii) xxxxx  xxxxx  xxxxx  xxxxx  xxxxx*; 
(iii) xxxxx  xxxxx  xxxxx  xxxxx  xxxxx*;  
(iv) xxxxx  xxxxx  xxxxx  xxxxx  xxxxx*; 
(v) Action-taken Report on the Action taken by the Government on the 
Observations/ Recommendations contained in the 3 rd Report of the 
Committee on the Demands for Grants (2024 -25) of the Ministry of 
Fisheries, Animal Husbandry and Dairying (Department of Fisheries)  
presented during 18th Lok Sabha; 
(vi) xxxxx  xxxxx  xxxxx  xxxxx  xxxxx*; 
(vii) xxxxx  xxxxx  xxxxx  xxxxx  xxxxx*, and 
(viii) xxxxx  xxxxx  xxxxx  xxxxx  xxxxx*. 
 
3. After some deliberations, the Committee adopted the draft Action Taken Report 
on the 3rd Report of the Committee on DFG (2024-25) without any modification.   
 
4. xxxxx  xxxxx  xxxxx  xxxxx  xxxxx*  
5. xxxxx  xxxxx  xxxxx  xxxxx  xxxxx*.  
 
 
The Committee then adjourned. 
xxxxx  xxxxx  xxxxx  xxxxx  xxxxx  
  
 
* Matter not related to this report. 

 
38 
 
APPENDIX 
 
ANALYSIS OF ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS CONTAINED IN THE THIRD REPORT  
(18TH LOK SABHA) OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE, ANIMAL 
HUSBANDRY AND FOOD PROCESSING (2024-25) ON DEMANDS FOR GRANTS 
(2024-25)  
 
(Vide Para 4 of Introduction of the Report) 
 
(i) Total Number of Recommendations  11 
(ii) Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted 
By the Government  
Para Nos. 1,2,4,5,6,8,10 and 11 Total    08 
      72.72% 
(iii) Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not 
desire to pursue in view of the Government’s replies  
Para Nos. 3 and 9 Total 02 
    18.18% 
(iv) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which Replies of 
the Government have not been accepted by the Committee 
Para No. NIL Total 00 
 00. 00% 
(v) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which final 
replies of the Government are still awaited 
Para No. 7 Total 01 
  9.09% 
 