 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE, ANIMAL HUSBANDRY 
AND FOOD PROCESSING (2025-26) 
                 
         
EIGHTEENTH LOK SABHA 
          
         
                                 
MINISTRY OF AGRICULTURE AND FARMERS WELFARE  
(DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURAL RESEARCH AND EDUCATION) 
              
 
 
DEMANDS FOR GRANTS (2026-27) 
         
       [Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations contained in 
the Twenty Eighth Report (Eighteenth Lok Sabha) of the Standing Committee on 
Agriculture, Animal Husbandry and Food Processing (2025-26)] 
 
 
FORTY THIRD REPORT 
  
 
         
               
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
August, 2026 / Shravana, 1948 (Saka) 
  
43 

 
 
FORTY THIRD REPORT 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE,  
ANIMAL HUSBANDRY AND FOOD PROCESSING  
(2025-26) 
 
          
 
(EIGHTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
         
         
         
MINISTRY OF AGRICULTURE AND FARMERS WELFARE  
(DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURAL RESEARCH AND EDUCATION) 
              
 
 
DEMANDS FOR GRANTS (2026-27) 
 
       [Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations contained in 
the Twenty Eighth Report (Eighteenth Lok Sabha) of the Standing Committee on 
Agriculture, Animal Husbandry and Food Processing (2025-26)] 
 
 
            
           Presented to Lok Sabha on                                  12.08.2026 
           Laid on the Table of Rajya Sabha on                                12.08.2026 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
                 
August, 2026 / Shravana, 1948 (Saka) 
 


 
 
COA No. 542 
 
 
         
         
         
         
         
         
 
         
         
        
 
         
         
         
         
         
 
 
 
         
     
                     
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
© 2026 By Lok Sabha Secretariat 
 
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of Business in Lok Sabha (Seventeenth 
Edition) and Printed by Lok Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi-110001 
  

 
 
CONTENTS 
 
 PAGE 
 
Composition of the Committee (2025-26) …………………………………….. (iii) 
Introduction ……………………………………………………………………….. (v) 
Chapter I Report…………………………… 1 
Chapter II     Observations/Recommendations that have been accepted by the 
Government 
9 
Chapter III Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not desire 
to pursue in view of the Government’s replies 
21 
Chapter IV Observations/Recommendations in respect of which Replies of the 
Government have not been accepted by the Committee 
22 
Chapter V Observations/Recommendations in respect of which final replies of 
the Government are still awaited 
26 
   
 ANNEXURE 
Minutes of the 24th sitting of the Committee held on 11.08.2026 
 
 
30 
 APPENDIX 
Analysis of Action Taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in the Twenty Eighth 
Report (18th Lok Sabha) of the Standing Committee on Agriculture, 
Animal Husbandry and Food Processing (2025-26) 
 
 
 
32 
 

(iii) 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE, ANIMAL 
HUSBANDRY AND FOOD PROCESSING  
18th Lok Sabha (2025-26) 
 
SHRI CHARANJIT SINGH CHANNI – CHAIRPERSON 
 
MEMBERS 
   LOK SABHA 
 
2.  Shri Patel Umeshbhai Babubhai 
3.  Smt. Harsimrat Kaur Badal 
4.  Shri Rajkumar Chahar 
5.  Smt. Anita Nagarsingh Chouhan 
6.  Shri Kuldeep Indora 
7.  Shri Rajpalsinh Mahendrasinh Jadav 
8.  Md. Abu Taher Khan 
9.  Shri Rahul Singh Lodhi 
10.  Shri Sukanta Kumar Panigrahi 
11.  Smt. Krishna Devi Shivshankar Patel 
12.  Shri Naresh Chandra Uttam Patel 
13.  Shri Narayan Tatu Rane 
14.  Shri Murasoli S. 
15.  Shri Dharambir Singh 
16.  Shri Dushyant Singh 
17.  Shri Sudhakar Singh 
18.  Shri Kodikunnil Suresh 
19.  Shri Tejasvi Surya 
20.  Smt. Geniben Nagaji Thakor 
21.  Shri Bhausaheb Rajaram Wakchaure 
 
   RAJYA SABHA 
 
22.  Dr. Anil Sukhdeorao Bonde 
23.  Shri Banshilal Gurjar 
24.  Shri Nitin Laxmanrao Jadhav-Patil 
25.  Shri Madan Rathore 
26.  Shri S.R. Sivalingam 
27.  Shri Ramji Lal Suman 
28.  Shri P. P. Suneer 
29.  Shri Randeep Singh Surjewala 
30 Shri Mahesh Kewat* 
31 Shri James Pangsang Kongkal Sangma** 
 
 
Note:      Smt. Ramilaben Becharbhai Bara ceased to be a Member of the Committee after her retirement from Rajya Sabha 
w.e.f. on 21.06.2026 (Rajya Sabha Bulletin Part-II(TO), Para No. 66058 dated 09.01.2026). 
 Shri H.D. Devegowda, ceased to be a Member of the Committee after his retirement from Rajya Sabha w.e.f . on 
25.06.2026 (Rajya Sabha Bulletin Part-II(TO), Para No. 66058 dated 09.01.2026). 
*Shri Mahesh Kewat, MP, Rajya Sabha has been nominated to the Standing Committee w.e.f. 23.07.2026 vide Lok 
Sabha Bulletin Part-II, No. 5724, dated 24.07.2026. 
 **Shri James Pangsang Kongkal Sangma, MP, Rajya Sabha has been nominated to the Standing Committee w.e.f. 
23.07.2026 vide Lok Sabha Bulletin Part-II, No. 5724, dated 24.07.2026. 
 

(iv) 
 
 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
 
1. Shri Dhiraj Kumar   - Joint Secretary 
2. Shri Maheshwar   - Director 
3. Shri Prem Ranjan   - Deputy Secretary 
  

(v) 
 
INTRODUCTION 
         
 
 I, the Chairperson, Standing Committee on Agriculture, Animal Husbandry and 
Food Processing (2025-26), having been authorized by the Committee to submit this 
Report on their behalf, present this Forty Third  Report on action taken by the 
Government on the Observations/Recommendations contained in the Twenty Eighth 
Report (Eighteenth Lok Sabha) of the Standing Committee on Agriculture, Animal 
Husbandry and Food Processing (202 5-26) on ‘Demands for Grants (202 6-27)’ 
pertaining to the Ministry of Agriculture and Farmers Welfare (Department of 
Agricultural Research and Education).   
 
2. The Twenty Eighth Report (Eighteenth Lok Sabha) of the Standing Committee 
on Agriculture, Animal Husbandry and Food Processing (2025-26) on ‘Demands for 
Grants (202 6-27)’ pertaining to the Ministry of Agriculture and Farmers Welfare 
(Department of Agricultural Research and Education) was presented to Lok Sabha 
and laid on the Table of Rajya Sabha on 1 6 March, 2026. The Action Taken Notes 
on the Report were received on 11 May, 2026. 
 
3. The Report was considered and adopted by the Committee at their Sitting held 
on 11.08.2026 
 
4.  An Analysis of the action taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in the Twenty Eighth Report (Eighteenth 
Lok Sabha) of the Committee is given in Appendix. 
 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI; 
11 August, 2026                 
20 Shravana, 1948 (Saka) 
CHARANJIT SINGH CHANNI 
Chairperson, 
Standing Committee on Agriculture 
Animal Husbandry and Food Processing 

1 
 
CHAPTER-I 
REPORT 
 
This Report of the Standing Committee on Agriculture, Animal Husbandry and 
Food Processing deals with the Action Taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in the Twenty Eighth Report (Eighteenth 
Lok Sabha) of the Standing Committee on Agriculture, Animal Hus bandry and Food 
Processing (2025-26) on ‘Demands for Grants (2026-27)’ pertaining to the Ministry of 
Agriculture and Farmers Welfare (Department of Agricultural Research and Education) 
which was presented to Lok Sabha and laid on the Table of Rajya Sabha on 16th March 
2026. 
 
1.2 The Ministry of Agriculture and Farmers Welfare (Department of Agricultural 
Research and Education) have furnished Action Taken Replies in respect of all the 14 
Observations/Recommendations contained in the Report. These Replies have been 
scrutinised and categorised as under:- 
 
(i) Observations/Recommendations that have been accepted 
by the Government: 
Total - 08 
Chapter II 
 Recommendation Para Nos. 4, 5, 6, 7, 9, 11, 13 and 14 
(ii) Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do 
not desire to pursue in view of the Government’s replies:  
Total - NIL 
Chapter III 
 Recommendation Para No. NIL 
(iii) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which 
Replies of the Government have not been accepted by the 
Committee: 
Total- 03 
Chapter IV 
 
Recommendation Para Nos.  2, 10 and 12 
(iv) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which final 
replies of the Government are still awaited. 
Total - 03 
Chapter V 
 Recommendation Para Nos. 1, 3 and 8 
   
1.3 The Committee desire that utmost importance would be given by the  
Ministry of Agriculture and Farmers Welfare (Department of Agricultural 
Research and Education)  to implement the Observations/ Recommendations 
accepted by the Government. In case s where it is not possible for the 

2 
 
Ministry/Department to implement the Recommendations in letter and spirit for 
any reason, the matter be intimated in writing to the Committee with reasons for 
non-implementation. The Committee desire that further Action Taken Notes on 
the Observations/ Recommendations contained in Chapter-I and Chapter-V of 
this Report be furnished to them at an early date. 
 
1.4 The Committee will now deal with the Action Taken by the Government on some 
of the Observations/Recommendations in the succeeding paragraphs. 
 
A. UTILIZATION OF FUND UNDER CAPITAL SECTION (CAPITAL OUTLAY ON 
OTHER GENERAL ECONOMIC SERVICES) 
 
RECOMMENDATION (PARA NO.2) 
 
1.5 The Committee had observed/recommended:- 
 
“The Committee note that Rs. 10.41 crore and Rs. 6.50 crore were allocated in 
BE 2023-24 and BE 2024 -25 respectively under ‘Capital Section (Capital Outlay on 
other General Economic Services)’ of the Department which were reduced to Rs. 9.96 
crore and Rs. 3.82 crore in RE of the respective years. However, the Department was 
able to utilize only Rs. 3.39 cror e in the year 2023-24 and Rs. 3.15 crore in 2024 -25. 
The Committee also note that the allocation of Rs. 4.33 crore under this head in BE 
2025-26 was reduced to Rs. 2.49 crore in RE 2025 -26 and till January 2026, the 
Department has been able to utilize only Rs. 1.0346 crore i.e. 23.89% of BE allocation 
and 41.55% of RE allocation for the year. 
The Committee are of the considered view that the allocated amount under any 
head of the Department should be properly and optimally utilized for the intended 
purpose(s).  The Committee, therefore, recommend the Department to analyse the 
reasons for under -utilization of allocated fund under ‘Capital Section’ and 
consequently devise proper strategy and planning for optimum utilization of allocated 
fund in a time-bound manner.” 
 
1.6 The Department, in its Action Taken Reply, has submitted:- 
 
“Majority of the funds released under the CAPITAL SECTION (CAPITAL 
OUTLAY ON OTHER GENERAL ECONOMIC SERVICES) were to ASRB 
(AGRICULTURAL SCIENTISTS RECRUITMENT BOARD), which is responsible for 
recruitments and conduct of All India level competitive examinat ions like NET, ARS, 

3 
 
SMS (T-6), STO (T-6) and other technical services. The LOA’s were issued to CPWD 
under the object head “Building and Structure” for the newly constructed ASRB office 
building, however CPWD surrendered the amount at the fag end of the Financial 
Years. The e fforts were also made through the re -appropriation of funds for optimal 
utilization. The ASRB has made concerted efforts and planning for optimal utilization 
of allocated fund in a time bound manner.” 
 
1.7 The Committee , taking note of the under -utilization of allocated funds 
under ‘Capital Section (Capital Outlay on other General Economic Services)’ 
since the financial year 2023 -24, had recommended the Department to analyze 
the reasons for under -utilization of allocated funds under ‘Capital Section 
(Capital Outlay on other General Economic Services)’ and consequently devise 
proper strategy and planning for optimum utilization of allocated funds in a time-
bound manner.   
The Department, in its Action Taken Reply, has submitted that the 
majority of the funds released under the Capital Section were to the Agricultural 
Scientists Recruitment Board (ASRB) and CPWD, which had been issued LOA’s 
under the object head “Building and Structure” for the newly constructed ASRB 
office building, surrendered the amount at the fag end of the financial years.  
The efforts were also made through the re -appropriation of funds for optimal 
utilization. The Department has further submitted that the ASRB has made 
concerted efforts and planning for optimal utilization of allocated funds in a 
time-bound manner.  
The Committee, however, note that the problem of under -utilization of 
allocated funds under ‘Capital Section’ has been continuing since the financial 
year 2023-24 and almost same replies have been furnished by the Department 
on each occasion in this regard.  Also, the Department has not stated anything 
about the outcome/result achieved or improvement witnessed in utilization of 
allocated funds under ‘Capital Section ’ during the financial year 2025 -26 as a 
result of stated action taken by the Department.  
The Committee, therefore, reiterate their earlier recommendation to the 
Department to analyse the reasons for under-utilization of allocated funds under 

4 
 
‘Capital Section’ and accordingly devise a proper strategy and planning for 
optimum utilization of allocated funds in a time-bound manner.   
 
B.  AGRICULTURAL EXTENSION 
 
RECOMMENDATION (PARA NO. 10) 
 
1.8 The Committee had observed/recommended:- 
 
“The Committee note that Agricultural Extension Division has been allocated 
Rs. 210.00 crore in BE 2026-27 which is more than the allocations made in BE 2025-
26 (Rs. 204.23 crore) and RE 2025 -26 (Rs. 182.23 crore) but less than the Actual 
Expenditure (Rs. 234.69 crore) incurred during the financial year 2024-25. During the 
financial year 2025-26, the Division has utilized Rs. 144.2 crore (79% of RE allocation) 
as on 20.01.2026. 
The Committee are of the view that Agricultural Extension plays a vital role in 
transferring scientific knowledge, improved technologies and sustainable agriculture 
practices to farmers, thereby enhancing productivity and resilience.  However, the 
Committee note that agricultural extension services in the country continue to face 
certain challenges relating to outreach, availability of trained personnel, and 
coordination in service delivery.  Krishi Vigyan Kendras (KVKs), which play a crucial 
role in extension activities, are yet to be established in every district of the country.  At 
present, there are 731 KVKs.  While 93 districts have two KVKs each, 121 districts do 
not have a KVK.  The Committee further note that no new KVK has been opened 
during the las t 3 years.  In addition, some of the existing KVKs face infrastructural 
constraints, and around 29% of the sanctioned posts across KVKs remain vacant. 
The Committee, therefore, recommend the Department to establish/open at 
least one KVK with adequate infrastructure and sufficient manpower in each district of 
the country including the Union Territories which do not have such facilities. The 
Committee also recommend the Department to make extension services at KVK more 
broad-based and inclusive so that maximum number of farmers are able to avail the 
services.  Besides, the Committee recommend the Department to take steps /action 
for maintaining uniform standards of performance, transparency, service delivery and 
availability of financial resources across all KVKs to ensure effective and equitable 
outreach to the farming community.” 

5 
 
 
1.9 The Department, in its Action Taken Reply, has stated:-  
 
“The Krishi Vigyan Kendras (KVKs) are mandated to undertake a wide range of 
activities aimed at promoting and disseminating innovative technologies across 
agriculture and allied sectors. Their work spans multiple domains, including crop 
production, soil health and fertility management, plant protection, horticulture, fisheries 
and livestock production and management. In addition, KVKs support areas such as 
agricultural engineering and agroforestry, while also emphasizing community sciences 
and women’s empow erment. Collectively, these diverse activities enable KVKs to 
address the comprehensive needs of the farming community in the respective districts.  
To increase the coverage of KVKs, Indian Council of Agricultural Research 
(ICAR) is operating robust ICT based platform “KISAN SARATHI” to provide a 
seamless, multimedia, multi -ways connectivity to the farmers for knowledge 
dissemination. Till date, more t han 2.75 crore farmers are registered with KISAN 
SARATHI across the country. 
The KVKs are the “Single Window Agricultural Knowledge, Resource and 
Capacity Development Centres”. The KVKs are monitored based on “Key 
Performance Indicators” against the Annual Action Plans. Monitoring and review of 
KVKs are done regularly at National, Zonal, University and District level by Indian 
Council of Agricultural Research (ICAR); Agricultural Technology Application 
Research Institute; Agricultural Universities and Scientific Advisory Committee of each 
KVK, respectively. The performance and worki ng of KVKs are also reviewed 
periodically by Quinquennial Review Team (QRT) and Third-Party Evaluations. 
Opening of KVKs in newly created districts is a continuous process as per 
prescribed procedure and guideline. Each KVK is provided modest infrastructure like 
office building, farmers hostel, demonstration units, tractor, farm implements, office 
equipment, vehicles, etc. alongwith 16 manpower for carrying out the mandated 
activities.” 
 
1.10 The Committee had recommended the Department to establish/open 
atleast one Krishi Vigyan Kendra (KVK) , with adequate infrastructure and 
sufficient manpower , in each district of the country , including the Union 
Territories which do not have such facilities and to make extension services at 

6 
 
KVKs more broad-based and inclusive so that maximum number of farmers are 
able to avail the services.  The Committee had also recommended the 
Department to take steps/action for maintaining uniform standards of 
performance, transparency, service delivery and a vailability of financial 
resources across all KVKs to ensure effective and equitable outreach to the 
farming community.  
The Department, in its Action Taken Reply, has stated about the mandate 
of the KVKs, monitoring and review of the performance and working of KVKs 
and operation of ICT based platform ‘KISAN SARATHI’ by Indian Council of 
Agricultural Research (ICAR) to incre ase the coverage of KVKs. Besides, the 
Department has stated that the opening of KVKs in newly created districts is a 
continuous process as per prescribed procedure and guideline s. Each KVK is 
provided modest infrastructure like office building, farmers ’ hostel, 
demonstration units, tractor, farm implements, office equipment, vehicles, etc. 
alongwith 16 manpower for carrying out the mandated activities.   
The Committee note that at present, there are 121 districts which do not 
have a KVK and the Department has not stated anything about the timeline by 
which at least one KVK with adequate infrastructure and sufficient manpower 
would be established  in each district of the country .  On the issues of 
infrastructural constraints and vacancies against the  sanctioned posts in the 
existing KVKs and maintenance of uniform standard across all KVKs, the 
Department has merely stated about the provisions.  The replies of the 
Department are bereft of any indication of action taken or contemplate d to be 
taken to resolve/address these issues which is a matter of concern.  
The Committee, therefore, reiterate, their earlier recommendation  to 
establish/open at least one KVK with adequate infrastructure and sufficient 
manpower in each district of the country including the Union Territories which 
do not have such facilities. The Committee also recommend the Department to 
make extension service s at KVK more broad -based and inclusive so that 
maximum number of farmers are able to avail the services.  Besides, the 
Committee recommend the Department to take steps /action for maintaini ng 
uniform standards of performance, transparency, service delivery and 

7 
 
availability of financial resources across all KVKs to ensure effective and 
equitable outreach to the farming community. 
 
C.  AGRICULTURAL EDUCATION 
 
RECOMMENDATION (PARA NO. 12) 
 
1.11 The Committee had observed/recommended:- 
 
“The Committee note that Rs. 514.87 crore has been allocated for Agricultural 
Education in BE 2026 -27 which is less than the allocations made in BE 2025 -26  
(Rs. 708.94 crore) and RE 2025-26 (Rs. 645.00 crore).  The Committee also note that 
Rs. 484.00 crore (approx. 75%) has been utilized till January 2026 during the financial 
year 2025 -26.  The Committee feel that there is a need to strengthen Agricultural 
Education in the country and the reduction in allocation for Agricultural Education 
would adversely a ffect it. Further, the Committee desire that the basic Agricultural 
Education may be introduced at School level to familiarize young generation with 
agriculture activities and processes. The Committee also desire the Department to 
explore the possibility o f opening agricultural college(s)/institution(s) exclusively for 
girls to take care of the requirements and sensibilities/concerns of rural areas of the 
country.” 
 
1.12 The Department, in its Action Taken Reply, has stated:-  
 
“Agriculture and agricultural education being primarily a State subject, the 
establishment of new agricultural colleges/institutions, including those exclusively for 
girls, falls within the purview of the respective State Governments. However, the 
Department, through its Education Division, extends support to State Governments 
and Agricultural Universities by way of policy guidance, academic frameworks, and 
financial assistance under the Scheme.” 
 
 
1.13  The Committee  had desired for introduction of the basic agricultural 
education at School level to familiarize the young generation with agriculture 
activities and processes. The Committee had also desired the Department to 
explore the possibility of opening agricultural college(s)/institution(s) 

8 
 
exclusively for girls to take care of the requirements and sensibilities/concerns 
of rural areas of the country.  
The Department, in its Action Taken Reply, has stated that the 
establishment of new agricultural colleges/institutions, including those 
exclusively for girls, falls within the purview of the respective State 
Governments as Agriculture and agricultural education being primarily a State 
subject.  However, the Department, through its Education Division, extends 
support to State Governments and Agricultural Universities by way of policy 
guidance, academic frameworks, and financial assistance under the Scheme.   
The Committee are fully aware that four autonomous bodies viz. Indian 
Council of Agricultural Research (ICAR), New Delhi; Central Agricultural 
University (CAU), Imphal; Dr. Rajendra Prasad Central Agricultural University, 
Pusa, Bihar; and Rani Lakshmi Bai Central Agricultural University, Jhansi, Uttar 
Pradesh are under administrative control of the Department  yet the Committee 
feel as a nodal Department of the Government, DARE can play the role of a sheet 
anchor for popularizing Agriculture as a subject of education and popularize the 
same, including at school level so that Agriculture Education becomes a sought 
after subject at higher levels, therefore, the Committee reiterate their desire that 
the basic Agricultural Education may be introduced at School level to familiarize 
the young generation with agriculture activities and processes  and also to 
explore the possibility of opening agricultural college(s)/institution(s) 
exclusively for girls to take care of the requirements and sensibilities/concerns 
of rural areas of the country. 
  

9 
 
CHAPTER II 
 
Observations/Recommendations that have been accepted by the Government 
 
Natural Resource Management and National Innovations in Climate Resilient 
Agriculture (NICRA) 
Recommendation (Para No. 4) 
The Committee note that Natural Resource Management and National 
Innovations in Climate Resilient Agriculture (NICRA) Division has been allocated  
Rs. 232.05 crore in BE 2026 -27 which is marginally higher than the allocations of  
Rs. 229.09 crore made in BE 2025 -26 and Rs. 198.09 crore in RE 2025 -26.  The 
Committee also note that the Division has utilized 83.60% (till 31st January, 2026) of 
the allocation in RE 2025 -26. The Committee appreciate that the Division has 
developed and disseminated the climate resilient technologies including crop varieties, 
intercropping systems, conservation agriculture, crop diversification, agroforestry 
systems, zero till drill sowing of wheat to escape terminal heat stress, alternate 
methods of rice cultivation (System of rice intensification, aerobic rice and direct 
seeded rice), in-situ moisture conservation etc. among the farmers/stakeholders in 151 
vulnerable districts across the country.  It is also quite commendable that the 
deployment of climat e resilient varieties and other technologies led to enhanced 
production even during the abnormal years of 2020 -21, 2021-22, 2022-23 and 2023-
24 and the fluctuations in crop production have decreased over the years. The 
Committee, however, emphasise the imp ortance of continuing and further 
strengthening such efforts, particularly in view of the likely increase in the frequency 
and intensity of climate change, as well as emerging biotic (pests, diseases, weeds) 
and abiotic stresses (drought, high temperatures , salinity, acidity) in the future.  The 
Committee, therefore, recommend the Department to ensure sufficient allocation and 
optimal utilization of the allocated funds to the Division and give priority to Research 
for development of location -specific, cost -effective, eco -friendly Climate Resilient 
Practices and Technologies suitable for different agro -ecological regions and their 
dissemination and demonstration on large scale in the country so as to 
minimize/contain the adverse impact of climate changes and other constraints and 
promote sustainability in Agriculture. 
 

10 
 
Reply of the Government 
Department has focused emphasis on development, demonstration and large-
scale dissemination of location -specific, cost -effective and eco -friendly climate 
resilient practices and technologies. The Department has ensured adequate allocation 
and optimal utilization of funds for the NRM Division, with ₹232.05 crore allocated in 
BE 2026 -27, out of which ₹43 crore (about 18% of the NRM budget) has been 
earmarked for climate resilient agriculture, indicating the priority accorded to this area. 
These funds are being utilized for development, dissemination of technologies and 
providing support through Climate Resilient Villages, Krishi Vigyan Kendras (KVKs) 
and line departments. The Natural Resource Management Division has utilized 
99.89% of the Budget allocations du ring the financial year 2025 -26 till 31st March 
2026. The allocation has been made based on requirements of constituent units and 
reviewed at the RE stage to ensure optimal utilization. Location -specific climate 
resilient technologies have been developed a nd tested in vulnerable districts under 
NICRA and are disseminated through farmer participatory approaches. Further, 
Integrated Farming Systems (IFS), agroforestry models and stress -tolerant crop 
varieties are being promoted to enhance resilience. The divi sion has planned to 
upscale demonstrations and expand large -scale dissemination of these technologies 
across different agro -ecological regions to minimize adverse impacts of climate 
change and promote sustainability in agriculture.  
[Ministry of Agriculture & Farmers’ Welfare, Dept. of Agricultural Research and Education’s  
F. No. 7(7)/2026-PIM Dated 11th May, 2026]  
 
Agricultural Engineering 
Recommendation (Para No. 5) 
The Committee note that Rs. 96.50 crore has been allocated to the Agricultural 
Engineering Division in BE 2026 -27 which is marginally more than the allocations of 
Rs. 95.74 crore in BE 2025 -26 and Rs. 89.00 crore in RE 2025 -26. The Committee 
also note that the Division has utilized 73.66% (Rs. 65.66 crore) of allocation made in 
RE 2025 -26 till January 2026.  The Committee appreciate that the Division has 
contributed immensely in development, demonstration and commercialization of new 
machines/equipment/ tec hnologies for improving pre and post production 
mechanization of different crops/crop operations, development of process protocols 

11 
 
and value-added food, fibre and other agricultural allied products and reorientation of 
research projects for development of machine/technologies with fusion of 
sensors/artificial intelligence. The Committee are of the view that farm mechanization 
is necessary for enhancing efficiency in agricultural operations/activities and reducing 
drudgery on human beings, but economic viability of any machine/technology also 
needs to be assessed before recommending for its widespread adoption. The 
Committee note that in some instances, the purchase of tractors by small and marginal 
farmers has placed additional financial pressure on them.  The Committee, therefore, 
recommend the Department to take steps for promoting need -based mechanization 
and developing appropriate, affordable machinery/ equipment/ technologies, 
supported by R&D and considering the fact that majority of farmers in the country are 
small and marginal having small and fragmented landholdings. 
 
Reply of the Government 
The Agricultural Engineering Division is developing and promoting need-based, 
affordable, and appropriate mechanization solutions tailored for small and marginal 
farmers. A range of cost effective  technologies have been designed and 
commercialized such as inclined plate planter, peg type puddler, two -row sugarcane 
settling transplanter, millet planter, self -propelled power weeder, power operated 
multi-crop thresher, self-propelled walk behind reaper, tractor drawn groundnut digger, 
animal drawn seed drill and manual paddy drum seeder, manual paddy transplanter, 
manual cono weeder, manual twin wheel hoe, animal drawn solar powered sprayer, 
animal drawn blade harrow, power tiller drawn sweep cultivator, millet harvester, pedal 
operated paddy thresher, tubular maize sheller, power operated cleaner-cum-grader, 
small-scale dal mills, makhana processing machinery, simple hand -operated tools 
including banana comb cutters, pomegranate aril extractors, fish descaling tool which 
significantly reduce drudgery while ens uring economic viability. Emphasis is also 
placed on modular and multi -utility equipment to enhance utilization efficiency and 
minimize capital investment. The Division has also continued the promotion of 
establishment of Custom Hiring Centres and Agro pro cessing Centres in rural areas 
to reduce the financial burden on individual farmers. 
[Ministry of Agriculture & Farmers’ Welfare, Dept. of Agricultural Research and Education’s  
F. No. 7(7)/2026-PIM Dated 11th May, 2026]  

12 
 
Crop Science 
Recommendation (Para No. 6) 
The Committee note that Rs. 969.50 crore has been allocated to Crop Science 
Division which is marginally higher than the allocations made in BE & RE 2025-26 (Rs. 
965.46 crore).  The Committee also note that high yielding varieties of Field Crops 
developed by the ICAR have led to increase in productivity and production of these 
crops, yet there remains substantial potential t o enhance agricultural productivity. 
Yields across several crops including cereals, maize , soybeans and pulses, continue 
to trail global averages. Besides, progress remains uneven across States and crops 
in improved seed availability and varietal replacement rates. 
The Committee, therefore, recommend the Department to optimally and 
effectively utilize the allocation made to this Division and lay emphasis on preserving 
and developing indigenous crop varieties for better productivity and yield while 
retaining originali ty in taste, flavour, shelf life, nutrients, etc.  The Committee also 
recommend the Department to develop, disseminate and popularize agricultural 
practices for production of crops from natural/intrinsic strength of the soil avoiding use 
of chemical fertilizers, pesticides etc. 
 
Reply of the Government 
The Department has aligned its research programs and activities with national 
priorities to ensure enhanced productivity, sustainability, and nutritional security while 
preserving the intrinsic qualities of indigenous crop varieties. The Crop Science 
Division is engaged in developing and promoting sustainable and eco -friendly 
agricultural practices; research activities are undertaken on resource conservation 
technologies, integrated nutrient management, and organic/natural farming 
approaches aimed at reduci ng dependence on chemical fertilizers and pesticides. 
Location-specific package of practices are being refined and disseminated through 
frontline demonstrations, capacity building programmes and collaboration with State 
Agricultural Universities and extension agencies. During the last eleven years (2014 -
2025), total of 3236 field crop varieties have been released and notified out of which 
2996 varieties are Climate Resilient and among them 587 varieties are Extreme 
Climate Tolerant Varieties as well as 1098 are rainfed. 185 biofortified varieties in field 

13 
 
crops have been developed and deployed in the cropping system covering around 18 
million hectare area. These biofortified varieties have been improved for essential 
nutrients viz., iron, zinc, calcium, protein, lysine, tryptophan, pro -vitamin-A, 
anthocyanin, vitamin-C, oleic acid and linoleic acid. The concentration of several anti-
nutritional factors viz., erucic acid, glucosinolates and trypsin inhibitor has been 
significantly reduced in some of the cultivars. Off -flavour of soybean grains has also 
been reduced. These cultivars with balanced concentration of nutrients are also high 
yielding, thus ideal for meeting country’s ‘food and nutrition security’. 
Efforts are also made to reintroduce and promote suitable traditional varieties 
in niche areas through participatory approaches and farmer -led demonstrations. 
Division has programs for conservation of germplasm including local landraces and 
traditional var ieties in its National Gene bank, which currently holds 4.74 lakh 
accessions of 2,147 species including 85,633 landraces and 14,515 traditional 
cultivars. Traditional varieties are promoted and varieties with special traits are used 
in the crop improvement  programmes in different crops. The All India Coordinated 
Research Projects (AICRPs) on various crops utilize local varieties/ germplasm 
including traditional varieties as base material to develop new cultivars by 
introgression of superior agronomic traits. Till now, total 509 varieties in 26 crops viz. 
rice, maize, horse gram, linseed, Indian mustard, pigeon pea etc. have been 
developed using germplasm including traditional cultivars. 
Efforts are made to retain the organoleptic quality and roti making ability of the 
rabi sorghum cultivars with the existing varieties before they are approved for release. 
The millet value-addition technologies have been developed to provide the traditional 
taste, texture and nutritional value, also comparable to the equivalent products of other 
cereals, while retaining the nutritional value. The efforts are laid on biochemically 
targeted breeding programmes to enhance shelf life of pearl millet flour, Identification 
of biomarkers for rancidity, etc. The work on genome editing to knock out the function 
of Lipase genes that cause rancidity has been targeted. Processing and packaging 
technologies have been developed to retain the shelf-life of dehulled millet grains such 
as little millet up to 10 months. The shelf -life of proso millet semolina has been 
increased to 9 months through hydrothermal processing.  Kalanamak rice, a scented, 
premium rice from eastern Uttar Pradesh, was revitalized through the development of 

14 
 
dwarf, high-yielding varieties. Similarly, other local land races are also targeted for 
improvement. 
The research programmes are oriented towards conserving soil health. Several 
experiments and trials like “Long term Soil Fertility Management”, “Evaluation of 
organic fertilizers and natural farming practices for enhancing crop productivity and 
soil health ” have been undertaken. Nutritional efficient rice varieties that are low 
phosphorous tolerant and nitrogen efficient varieties have been developed to reduce 
dependence on chemical fertilizers. Division has develops technologies for crop 
production that promote "Integrated Nutrient Management" (INM) specifically tailored 
for farmers to combine minimal chemical fertilizers with organic manures, bio -
fertilizers, and crop residue recycling to maintain soil fertility without causing 
environmental harm. Under AICRP on Rabi Pulses experiments were laid to inclusive 
cropping system to organic cultivation of chickpea, lentil and field pea. The organic 
farming consistently improved soil health indicators and yield under organic cultivation 
having been comparable to inorganic practices across locations, with foliar application 
of Biophos and Biozinc showing consistent yield improvement. During 2025 -26, seed 
treatment of Lentil with RhizoNBAIM (L) and Bio Phos has been demonstrated in 450 
ha FLD. The microbial consortia  (Trichoderma asperellum and Bacillus spp.) are an 
effective way for control of soil borne disease and infestation by insect -pests like pod 
borer. During 2025-26, seed treatment of Lentil and Chickpea by microbial consortia 
(Trichoderma asperellum and Bacillus spp.) has been demonstrated in farmers field in 
Lentil-187 acres and chickpea-400 acres. 
Department has focus on promotion of natural, eco -friendly and soil -based 
agricultural practices to reduce dependency on chemical fertilizers and pesticides.  
Indian Council of Agricultural Research (ICAR) is promoting soil test-based Integrated 
Nutrient Management (INM) with the 4R approach (Right quantity, Right time, Right 
method and Right type of fertilizer), ensuring judicious and reduced use of chemical 
fertilizers through integration of organic and inorganic nutrient sources. Similarly, only 
need based integrated plant protection measures are promoted. Technologies have 
been developed for preparation and use of organic manures such as vermicompost, 
phospho-compost, enriched compost and biofertilizers, including liquid biofertilizers 
with higher shelf life. In addition, natural farming practices using inputs such as 
Jeevamrit and Beejamrit are validated and promoted.  Integrated Organic Farming 

15 
 
System (IOFS) models and state-specific organic packages have been developed and 
demonstrated to facilitate wider adoption. These practices help in improving soil 
health, enhancing microbial activity, reducing input costs and ensuring environmental 
sustainability. Organic and Natural Farming Demonstration Plot has been established 
to promote sustainable agriculture and conserve indigenous crop varieties by 
providing farmers with practical field exposure and encouraging the adoption of natural 
farming practi ces. Under Front -Line Demonstrations (FLDs) and other outreach 
programmes farmers are guided to use balanced and need -based fertilizers to 
enhance crop productivity while maintaining soil health. The natural farming practices 
are demonstrated at 400 locati ons and has initiated competitive research grants to 
further promote natural farming approaches aimed at minimizing the use of chemical 
fertilizers and pesticides. It is planned to strengthen through capacity building, training, 
frontline demonstrations an d awareness programmes to promote sustainable and 
natural farming across the country. 
[Ministry of Agriculture & Farmers’ Welfare, Dept. of Agricultural Research and Education’s  
F. No. 7(7)/2026-PIM Dated 11th May, 2026]  
 
Horticulture Science 
Recommendation (Para No. 7) 
The Committee note that Rs. 220.00 crore has been allocated to Horticulture 
Science Division in BE 2026 -27 which is lower than the allocations made in  
BE 2025-26 (Rs. 318.91 crore) and RE 2025 -26 (Rs. 262.91 crore).  The Committee 
also note that Horticulture sector has witnesse d tremendous progress and is playing 
an important role in promoting income diversification, nutritional security and more 
resilient agricultural growth. The Committee, therefore, recommend the Department to 
continue to lay emphasis o n growth of productivity and production of Horticultural 
Crops in the country. 
 
Reply of the Government 
The ICAR- Horticultural Science Division plans and coordinates research for 
over 200 crops pertaining to fruits, vegetables, spices, flowers, plantation, and tuber 
crops to improve yield, nutritional security, and climate resilience in India. The Division 
operates 11 institutes, 5 directorates, 6 national research centres, and 11 All India 

16 
 
Coordinated Research Projects (AICRPs) located in various ICAR Institutes, Central 
Agricultural Universities (CAUs) and State Agricultural Universities (SAUs). The focus 
areas include improvement and management of tropical/temperate fruits, root/tuber 
crops, bulbous/arid crops, vegetable crops, floriculture, and mushroom research. The 
major research initiatives are focused towards the development of bio -fortified 
varieties, germplasm conservation, underutilized fruits/vegetables, post -harvest 
technology, and value addition for the growth of Horticulture sector of the Country.  
The research efforts of the Division are aimed to enhance productivity of 
horticultural crops for ensuring nutritional security of large population and generate 
surplus production for export and further help in improvement of the income of 
stakeholders through science and technology driven support. The genome editing in 
16 economically most important horticultural crops and gene sequencing/ generation 
of genomic resources in three indigenous crops has been a new initiative of the 
Division. During 2025 -26, 97 improved varieties of different horticultural crops were 
identified for notification and release. In all, a total of 124 technologies/location-specific 
package of practices on production and processing including plant protection protocols 
were standardized. A total of 182 varieties were in the seed/plant production chain 
with production of 1421.557q breeder/truthful seeds, 3182.8 tons seed tubers, 
17,98,212 rooted cuttings, 24,28,265 perennial plants and 1623.21q mushroom spawn 
were produced/distributed t o farmers. A total of 382 licenses of technologies were 
issued to stakeholders for upscaling of technologies.  
[Ministry of Agriculture & Farmers’ Welfare, Dept. of Agricultural Research and Education’s  
F. No. 7(7)/2026-PIM Dated 11th May, 2026]  
 
Fisheries Science 
Recommendation (Para No. 9) 
During the Study Visit of the Committee in January 2026, the Committee undertook 
an on-the-spot visit to Germplasm Resource Centre for Marine Ornamental Organism 
of ICAR – National Bureau of Fish Genetic Resources (ICAR -NBFGR) located at 
Agatti Island of L akshadweep. The representative(s) of the Centre inter -alia raised 
issues/demands for expansion of the facility and increase in production in hatchery, 
development and making available specialized facility or packing materials for packing 
Ornamental fishes and other aquatic organisms etc. to cater the 

17 
 
requirements/demands of ever-increasing tourists to Lakshadweep islands who want 
to purchase and carry them home as memento. The Committee have been apprised 
by the Department that the activities at the Centre is restricted to certain outreach 
activities i ntended to demonstrate the technologies pertaining to ornamental fish 
breeding and rearing and the activities could be expanded depending on the resource 
availability.  The Committee, while sympathetic to the demand of the Centre, 
recommend to the Department to make available sufficient resources for its expansion 
and the requisite packing material to cater the requirement of interested tourists who 
want to purchase and carry them home as memento. 
Reply of the Government 
The Fisheries Science Division is committed to make available adequate 
resources for expansion of the facility, and necessary financial support to strengthen 
the existing germplasm resource facilities at Agatti, Lakshadweep Centre. 
[Ministry of Agriculture & Farmers’ Welfare, Dept. of Agricultural Research and Education’s  
F. No. 7(7)/2026-PIM Dated 11th May, 2026]  
 
Viksit Bharat Sankalp Abhiyan 
Recommendation (Para No. 11) 
The Committee have been apprised about the Viksit Krishi Sankalp Abhiyan 
which was organized in the country from May 29, 2025 to June 12, 2025.  The Abhiyan 
was organized in 725 districts by 2170 teams. 60,281 events were organized and 
140122 villages and 134.85 lakh farmers were covered.  As a result of the Abhiyan, 
more than 300 farmer-led innovations, approximately 500 researchable issues and 70 
policy inputs emerged. The Committee, while recognizing the benefits of the Abhiyan 
accrued to the farmers and Agriculture Sector recommend the Department to organize 
such Abhiyan on regular basis in the country. 
 
Reply of the Government 
Each State organizes various awareness programmes to disseminate 
information among farmers regarding improved agricultural technologies, modern 
farming practices, and various Government schemes and policies aimed at agricultural 
development. These programmes serve as an important medium to enhance farmers’ 

18 
 
knowledge, promote adoption of modern and sustainable farming techniques, and 
ensure that the benefits of Government initiatives effectively reach the grassroots 
level. Taking lesson from Viksit Krishi Sankalp Abhiyan (VKSA) 2025, 
scientists/experts of KVK s/ICAR Institutes have been instructed to join the teams of 
various awareness programmes of the concerned state and educate the farmers on 
improved agricultural technologies in convergence mode. 
[Ministry of Agriculture & Farmers’ Welfare, Dept. of Agricultural Research and Education’s  
F. No. 7(7)/2026-PIM Dated 11th May, 2026]  
 
Provisions for SC/ST Farmers 
Recommendation (Para No. 13) 
The Committee note that the Department do not have any specific scheme for 
Scheduled Caste/Scheduled Tribe sections of the society. However, the Department 
implemented Development action plan Scheduled Caste (DASC) and Development 
action plan Scheduled Tribe (DAPST) component within the scheme wherein SC/ST 
communities were supported with skill development, supply of inputs, transfer of 
agricultural technologies and knowledge to undertake agriculture and allied operations 
at agricultural farms and fields fo r enhancement of agricultural production and 
productivity. The Committee are of the view that Scheduled Caste (SC) and Scheduled 
Tribe (ST) farmers, constituting a substantial portion of the nation’s agricultural 
population, are primarily small or marginal  landholders having small and fragmented 
plots. They face significant barriers including limited access to institutional credit, 
quality inputs and advanced technology resulting in lower productivity and lower net 
returns. The Committee, therefore, recomme nd the Department to take steps/action 
to indicate specific requirements of the farmers belonging to these segments so that 
they can be provided with the necessary skill sets and technology application so that 
they too can benefit from the various innovati ons made by the Department in the 
agriculture sector so that they are not left out and the benefits of agricultural research, 
education and extensions schemes of the Department are fully availed by the SC/ST 
farmers for improving their livelihood and income. 
 
Reply of the Government 
The Department implemented Development action plan for Scheduled Caste 
(DASC) and Development action plan for Scheduled Tribe (DAPST) component as 

19 
 
per guidelines within the scheme wherein SC/ST communities were supported and 
aimed at improving their livelihood and income. The Departments took up activities 
covering crops and horticulture, natural resources management, animal and poultry, 
fisheries, a gricultural engineering etc. Capacity building through training and 
demonstration and supply of critical inputs to support agricultural production and 
processing. The need based critical inputs are distributed among the farmers which 
include seeds and planting material of newly released varieties of field and horticultural 
crops, bio -control agents, organic and fertilizer nutrients, pest and disease control 
agrochemicals, farm tools, fishing gear, artificial fish habitats, electric cabinet dryer, 
sealing machine, mini rotary tiller, power sprayer, brush cutter, coconut tree climbers, 
bypass fat, milking machines, chicks and piglets, breeding animals etc. During 2025 -
26, the KVKs trained 884533 SC/ST farmers including women on various facets of 
new technologies of agriculture and allied sectors. Further, in the Viksit Krishi Sankalp 
Abhiyan organized during May -June 2025 to create awareness about improved 
agricultural technologies, a total of 19,89,670 farmers of aspirational districts and 
25,52,116 farmers of  tribal districts participated. The animal production activities 
supports the livelihood and family income of larger numbers of SC/ST families, therein 
department supplied/ distributed  over 1.5 lakh poultry birds; about 2000 superior 
germplasm of livestoc k (Sheep, Goat, Pig) for breed improvements; 500 tonnes of 
feed; 15,000+ small/medium agricultural equipment; organised 200 animal health 
camps, over 20 tonnes of quality seed and essential materials such as angle iron, 
barbed wire, tarpaulin, solar lamps and night shelters to enhance income -generating 
opportunities and strengthen farm -based livelihoods. Department extended supports 
during 2024-25 to 1817987 beneficiaries and 1366807 beneficiaries (2025 -26, upto 
December 2026) of SC community, whereas 16413 78 and 2062169 beneficiaries of 
ST community were supported respectively during the periods. 
[Ministry of Agriculture & Farmers’ Welfare, Dept. of Agricultural Research and Education’s  
F. No. 7(7)/2026-PIM Dated 11th May, 2026]  
 
Viksit Bharat @ 2047 
Recommendation (Para No. 14) 
The Committee note that the Department has set ambitious targets for various 
parameters in Agriculture and Allied Sector’s research to be achieved by 2047 as part 
of Viksit Bharat and has been making sincere efforts to achieve them. The Committee 

20 
 
are quite hopeful that the Department would surmount the challenges of climate 
change, declining arable land and water resources, emerging biotic 
(pests/diseases/weeds) and abiotic stresses (drought, high temperatures, salinity, 
acidity), market and trade uncertainty and global conflicts and achieve the set targets. 
The Committee also agree with the concerns of the Department about stagnated 
allocations for last several years and subsequent reductions at RE stage and, 
therefore, recommend the Department to pursue with the Ministry of Finance for an 
allocation of one percent of Agricultural GDP for R&D in Agriculture so as not to allow 
funds constraints come in the way of achieving the targets. 
 
Reply of the Government 
The Department is continuously seeking increased budget allocation for the 
Department of Agricultural Research and Education from the Ministry of Finance. The 
Department will take necessary steps to get the Budgetary allocation enhanced from 
Ministry of Finance through the supplementary demand for grants and also at the RE 
2026-27 stage, as suggested by the Committee. Further, the Secretary DARE and 
Financial Advisor DARE have been raising this issue for increasing the allocation of 
DARE at appropriate forums on regular basis. 
[Ministry of Agriculture & Farmers’ Welfare, Dept. of Agricultural Research and Education’s  
F. No. 7(7)/2026-PIM Dated 11th May, 2026]  
 
  

21 
 
CHAPTER – III 
 
Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to pursue 
in view of the Government’s replies 
 
 
 
-NIL- 
 
  

22 
 
CHAPTER-IV 
 
Observations/Recommendations in respect of which Replies of the 
Government have not been accepted by the Committee 
 
Utilization of Funds Under Capital Section (Capital Outlay on Other General 
Economic Services) 
Recommendation (Para No. 2) 
The Committee note that Rs. 10.41 crore and Rs. 6.50 crore were allocated in 
BE 2023-24 and BE 2024 -25 respectively under ‘Capital Section (Capital Outlay on 
other General Economic Services)’ of the Department which were reduced to Rs. 9.96 
crore and Rs. 3.82 crore in RE of the respective years. However, the Department was 
able to utilize only Rs. 3.39 crore in the year 2023 -24 and Rs. 3.15 crore in 2024 -25. 
The Committee also note that the allocation of Rs. 4.33 crore und er this head in BE 
2025-26 was reduced to Rs. 2.49 crore in RE 2025 -26 and till January 2026, the 
Department has been able to utilize only Rs. 1.0346 crore i.e. 23.89% of BE allocation 
and 41.55% of RE allocation for the year. 
The Committee are of the considered view that the allocated amount under any 
head of the Department should be properly and optimally utilized for the intended 
purpose(s).  The Committee, therefore, recommend the Department to analyse the 
reasons for under -utilization of allocated funds under ‘Capital Section’ and 
consequently devise proper strategy and planning for optimum utilization of allocated 
funds in a time-bound manner. 
 
Reply of the Government 
Majority of the funds released under the CAPITAL SECTION (CAPITAL 
OUTLAY ON OTHER GENERAL ECONOMIC SERVICES) were to ASRB 
(AGRICULTURAL SCIENTISTS RECRUITMENT BOARD), which is responsible for 
recruitments and conduct of All India level competitive examinations like NET, ARS, 
SMS (T-6), STO (T-6) and other technical services. The LOA’s were issued to CPWD 
under the object head “Building and Structure” for the newly constructed ASRB office 
building, however CPWD surrendered the amount at the fag end of the Fi nancial 

23 
 
Years. The efforts were also made through the re -appropriation of funds for optimal 
utilization. The ASRB has made concerted efforts and planning for optimal utilization 
of allocated funds in a time bound manner.  
[Ministry of Agriculture & Farmers’ Welfare, Dept. of Agricultural Research and Education’s  
F. No. 7(7)/2026-PIM Dated 11th May, 2026]  
Comments of the Committee 
For comments of the Committee please refer to Para No. 1. 7 of Chapter I of this 
Report. 
 
Agricultural Extension 
Recommendation (Para No. 10) 
The Committee note that Agricultural Extension Division has been allocated Rs. 
210.00 crore in BE 2026 -27 which is more than the allocations made in BE 2025 -26 
(Rs. 204.23 crore) and RE 2025 -26 (Rs. 182.23 crore) but less than the Actual 
Expenditure (Rs. 234.69 crore) incurred during the financial year 2024-25. During the 
financial year 2025-26, the Division has utilized Rs. 144.2 crore (79% of RE allocation) 
as on 20.01.2026. 
The Committee are of the view that Agricultural Extension plays a vital role in 
transferring scientific knowledge, improved technologies and sustainable agriculture 
practices to farmers, thereby enhancing productivity and resilience.  However, the 
Committee note that agricultural extension services in the country continue to face 
certain challenges relating to outreach, availability of trained personnel, and 
coordination in service delivery.  Krishi Vigyan Kendras (KVKs), which play a crucial 
role in extension activities, are yet to be established in every district of the country.  At 
present, there are 731 KVKs.  While 93 districts have two KVKs each, 121 districts do 
not have a KVK.  The Committee further note that no new KVK has been opened 
during the las t 3 years.  In addition, some of the existing KVKs face infrastructural 
constraints, and around 29% of the sanctioned posts across KVKs remain vacant. 
The Committee, therefore, recommend the Department to establish/open at 
least one KVK with adequate infrastructure and sufficient manpower in each district of 
the country including the Union Territories which do not have such facilities. The 
Committee also recommend the Department to make extension services at KVK more 

24 
 
broad-based and inclusive so that maximum number of farmers are able to avail the 
services.  Besides, the Committee recommend the Department to take steps /action 
for maintaining uniform standards of performance, transparency, service delivery and 
availability of financial resources across all KVKs to ensure effective and equitable 
outreach to the farming community 
Reply of the Government 
The Krishi Vigyan Kendras (KVKs) are mandated to undertake a wide range of 
activities aimed at promoting and disseminating innovative technologies across 
agriculture and allied sectors. Their work spans multiple domains, including crop 
production, soil health and fertility management, plant protection, horticulture, fisheries 
and livestock production and management. In addition, KVKs support areas such as 
agricultural engineering and agroforestry, while also emphasizing community sciences 
and women’s empowe rment. Collectively, these diverse activities enable KVKs to 
address the comprehensive needs of the farming community in the respective districts.  
To increase the coverage of KVKs, Indian Council of Agricultural Research 
(ICAR) is operating robust ICT based platform “KISAN SARATHI” to provide a 
seamless, multimedia, multi -ways connectivity to the farmers for knowledge 
dissemination. Till date, more t han 2.75 crore farmers are registered with KISAN 
SARATHI across the country. 
The KVKs are the “Single Window Agricultural Knowledge, Resource and 
Capacity Development Centres”. The KVKs are monitored based on “Key 
Performance Indicators” against the Annual Action Plans. Monitoring and review of 
KVKs are done regularly at National, Zonal, University and District level by Indian 
Council of Agricultural Research (ICAR); Agricultural Technology Application 
Research Institute; Agricultural Universities and Scientific Advisory Committee of each 
KVK, respectively. The performance and worki ng of KVKs are also reviewed 
periodically by Quinquennial Review Team (QRT) and Third-Party Evaluations. 
Opening of KVKs in newly created districts is a continuous process as per 
prescribed procedure and guideline. Each KVK is provided modest infrastructure like 
office building, farmers hostel, demonstration units, tractor, farm implements, office 
equipment, vehicles, etc. alongwith 16 manpower for carrying out the mandated  
 

25 
 
activities.  
[Ministry of Agriculture & Farmers’ Welfare, Dept. of Agricultural Research and Education’s  
F. No. 7(7)/2026-PIM Dated 11th May, 2026]  
Comments of the Committee 
For comments of the Committee please refer to Para No. 1.1 0 of Chapter I of this 
Report 
Agricultural Education 
Recommendation (Para No. 12) 
The Committee note that Rs. 514.87 crore has been allocated for Agricultural 
Education in BE 2026-27 which is less than the allocations made in BE 2025 -26 (Rs. 
708.94 crore) and RE 2025-26 (Rs. 645.00 crore).  The Committee also note that Rs. 
484.00 crore (approx. 75%) has been utilized till January 2026 during the financial 
year 2025 -26.  The Committee f eel that there is a need to strengthen Agricultural 
Education in the country and the reduction in allocation for Agricultural Education 
would adversely affect it. Further, the Committee desire that the basic Agricultural 
Education may be introduced at Scho ol level to familiarize young generation with 
agriculture activities and processes. The Committee also desire the Department to 
explore the possibility of opening agricultural college(s)/institution(s) exclusively for 
girls to take care of the requirements  and sensibilities/concerns of rural areas of the 
country. 
 
Reply of the Government 
Agriculture and agricultural education being primarily a State subject, the 
establishment of new agricultural colleges/institutions, including those exclusively for 
girls, falls within the purview of the respective State Governments. However, the 
Department, through its Education Division, extends support to State Governments 
and Agricultural Universities by way of policy guidance, academic frameworks, and 
financial assistance under the Scheme. 
[Ministry of Agriculture & Farmers’ Welfare, Dept. of Agricultural Research and Education’s  
F. No. 7(7)/2026-PIM Dated 11th May, 2026]  
 
Comments of the Committee 
For comments of the Committee please refer to Para No. 1.13 of this Report.  

26 
 
CHAPTER-V 
Observations/Recommendations in respect of which final replies of the 
Government are still awaited 
 
Budgetary Allocation 
Recommendation (Para No. 1) 
The Committee note that the Department of Agricultural Research and 
Education (DARE) sought an allocation of Rs. 11427.51 crore in BE for the year 2026-
27, it got Rs. 9967.40 crore which is 0.19% of total Outlay (BE) of Rs. 5347315.00 
crore of Government of India for the year.  This allocation is, however, lower than the 
allocations of Rs. 10466.39 crore made in BE 2025-26 and Rs. 10280.83 crore made 
in RE 2025-26.  The Committee also note that the proportion (in percentage terms) of 
the Budgetary Allocation (BE) made in favour of the Department out of the total BE 
allocation of the Government of India has declined from 0.24% in the year 2021-22 to 
0.19% in 2026-27.  During the last three years, the allocation to the Department was 
0.21% of the total outlay (BE) of the Government of India. The Committee have been 
apprised by the Department that the present allocation in BE 2026-27 shall impact the 
schemes and programs planned by various subject matter divisions and over all 
working of the Institutes. The Committee have also been apprised that India’s public 
agricultural R&D spending is about 0.5-0.6% of Agri-GDP against the global average 
of ~0.93%. 
The Committee are of the firm opinion that further strengthening of Agriculture 
and Allied Sector is imperative for economic resilience, improving the livelihood of 
millions, promoting rural prosperity, ensuring food and nutrition security and driving 
inclusive growth in the country. The Department of Agricultural Research and 
Education (DARE) and the Indian Council of Agricultural Research (ICAR), being the 
premier research organization, play crucial role in strengthening Agriculture and Allied 
sector by addressing the priority and challenging issues through Research, Education 
and Extension. The Committee, therefore, recommend the Government to consider 
increasing the allocation for the Department for making Research, Education and 
Extension Ecosystem of A griculture and Allied Sector strong, robust and modern in 
the country. 
 

27 
 
Reply of the Government 
The Department will continue to make concerted efforts towards seeking 
enhanced budget allocations for addressing the priority and emerging challenging of 
Indian agriculture through modernising agricultural research, education and extension 
ecosystem in the country. 
[Ministry of Agriculture & Farmers’ Welfare, Dept. of Agricultural Research and Education’s  
F. No. 7(7)/2026-PIM Dated 11th May, 2026]  
 
Allocation under Scheme Head 
Recommendation (Para No. 3) 
The Committee note that out of the total allocation (BE) of Rs. 9967.40 crore to 
the Department (DARE) for the year 2026 -27, Rs. 2830.12 crore has been allocated 
under Scheme Head which constitutes around 28.39% of the total allocation. The 
allocation under Scheme Head in BE 2026-27 (Rs. 2830.12 crore) is 389.10 crore less 
than the allocation of Rs. 3219.22 crore in BE 2025 -26 and Rs. 97.42 crore less than 
the allocation of Rs. 2927.54 crore in RE 2025-26.  The Committee also note that the 
Department has sought/proposed Rs. 3015.17 crore only under Scheme Head for BE 
2026-27 which marks the first year of the 16th Finance Cycle. The Committee  have 
been apprised that as a result of reduced allocation under Scheme Head in RE 2025-
26, the Department had to prioritize its research and development activities and 
optimize administrative expenses to achieve the desired goals and objectives. Also, 
programs and activities of low emergent type were deferred for the coming financial 
years. Further, due to inadequate allocation in BE 2026 -27, similar strategies will be 
adopted during this year too. 
The Committee are of considered view that allocation of adequate financial 
resources is imperative for developing of robust R&D ecosystem for Agriculture and 
Allied Sector to achieve the desired result. The Committee, therefore, recommend the 
Department to take up the matter of enhancing the allocation under Scheme Head 
with the Ministry of Finance. 
 
Reply of the Government 
The Department is committed to make concerted efforts with the Ministry of 
Finance for enhancement of allocation under Scheme Head at RE 2026 -27 stage so 

28 
 
that adequate financial resources are available to Department for developing 
technologies for Agriculture and Allied Sector to achieve the desired results.   
[Ministry of Agriculture & Farmers’ Welfare, Dept. of Agricultural Research and Education’s  
F. No. 7(7)/2026-PIM Dated 11th May, 2026]  
 
Animal Science 
Recommendation (Para No. 8) 
The Committee note that Rs. 416.95 crore has been allocated to Animal 
Science Division in BE 2026-27 which is quite lower than the allocations of Rs. 504.04 
crore in BE 2025-26 and Rs. 417.04 crore in RE 2025 -26.  The Committee also note 
that the Division has utilized 78% of the allocated funds for the year 2025 -26 till 
January 2026.  The Committee have been apprised that the ICAR’s research on 
veterinary biologicals has led to successful eradication of important animal diseases 
and the Department is workin g on development of new generation vaccines, 
identification of indigenous livestocks, genome editing and animal genomics studies 
etc. for improved animal health and production in the country.  The Committee have 
also been apprised about demand -supply gaps in green fodder, dry fodder and 
concentrates leading to persistent shortages and quality constraints of feed and fodder 
affecting the livestock nutrition. Considering livestock sector as an important growth 
engine and key contributors to enhancing farm inc ome, the Committee recommend 
the Department to take steps for ensuring feed and fodder security for the animals. 
The Committee also recommend the Department for preservation and development of 
indigenous breeds of cow in view of its usefulness to the human beings and the society 
as a whole. 
 
Reply of the Government 
The Department is committed to preservation and scientific development of 
indigenous cattle breeds, recognizing their critical role in nutritional security, climate 
resilience and rural livelihoods. The Animal Science Division has implemented the 
Network P roject on Animal Genetic Resources (NWP -AnGR) through 37 Network 
centres across 26 states/Union Territories for systematic characterization, 
documentation and sustainable utilization of indigenous germplasm. During the year 
2025-26, 16 new breeds of livestock and poultry including 2 synthetic breeds of cattle 

29 
 
have been registered, taking the total to 246. A total of 55 indigenous breeds and 3 
Synthetic breeds of cattle has been registered in country till date. The All India 
Coordinated Research Project (AICRP) on Cattle have programmes that targeted 
genetic imp rovement for key indigenous and synthetic breeds (Sahiwal, Rathi, 
Tharparkar, Gir, Kankrej and Frieswal). The programmes have achieved 1.0 -1.5% 
annual genetic gain in milk yield in organized herds and strengthened AI services 
through production of approximately 3.0 lakh quality semen doses annually for wider 
dissemination of superior germplasm at field level. These coordinated interventions 
have contributed to genetic upgradation, enhanced productivity and long -term 
conservation of indigenous cattle resourc es directly benefiting farmers and the 
livestock sector.  
Sustainable efforts are made to improve feed and fodder availability through 
development of grazing resources, promotion of non -conventional feed options and 
adoption of conservation practices such as silage, haymaking and feed blocks, along 
with farmer training and extension for balanced feeding. The ICAR- Indian Grassland 
and Fodder Research Institute has developed state specific fodder plan for 28 states 
of India in consultation with stakeholders.  The document provided a blue print to 
address region specific fodder issues. The various technological options available for 
arable lands, non –arable lands, fodder conservation and utilization and adoption of 
new high yielding varieties for improving feed and fodder availability. These efforts are 
for enhancing productivity, conserving valuable indigenous germplasm and ensuring 
sustainable livestock development for the benefit of farmers and society.  
[Ministry of Agriculture & Farmers’ Welfare, Dept. of Agricultural Research and Education’s  
F. No. 7(7)/2026-PIM Dated 11th May, 2026]  
 
 
 
 
 
  
NEW DELHI; 
11 August, 2026                 
20 Shravana, 1948 (Saka) 
CHARANJIT SINGH CHANNI 
Chairperson, 
Standing Committee on Agriculture 
Animal Husbandry and Food Processing 

30 
 
ANNEXURE 
MINUTES OF THE TWENTY-FOURTH SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE 
ON AGRICULTURE, ANIMAL HUSBANDRY AND FOOD PROCESSING  
(2025-26) 
 
The Committee sat on Tuesday, the 11 th August, 2026 from 1500 hrs. to 1510 
hrs. in Committee Room-‘D’, Parliament House Annexe (PHA), New Delhi.   
 
Present 
 
Shri Charanjit Singh Channi  -  Chairperson 
 
Members 
 
Lok Sabha 
 
2.  Shri Patel Umeshbhai Babubhai 
3.  Shri Rajkumar Chahar 
4.  Smt. Anita Nagarsingh Chouhan 
5.  Shri Kuldeep Indora 
6.  Shri Rajpalsinh Mahendrasinh Jadav 
7.  Md. Abu Taher Khan 
8.  Shri Rahul Singh Lodhi 
9.  Shri Sukanta Kumar Panigrahi 
10.  Smt. Krishna Devi Shivshankar Patel 
11.  Shri Naresh Chandra Uttam Patel 
12.  Shri Murasoli S. 
13.  Shri Dharambir Singh 
14.  Shri Dushyant Singh 
15.  Shri Sudhakar Singh 
16.  Shri Kodikunnil Suresh 
17.  Smt. Geniben Nagaji Thakor 
18.  Shri Bhausaheb Rajaram Wakchaure 
 
Rajya Sabha 
 
19.  Dr. Anil Sukhdeorao Bonde 
20.  Shri Banshilal Gurjar 
21.  Shri Nitin Laxmanrao Jadhav-Patil 
22.  Shri Madan Rathore 
23.  Shri S.R. Sivalingam 
24.  Shri P. P. Suneer 
25. Shri Mahesh Kewat 
26. Shri James Pangsang Kongkal Sangma 
 
  

31 
 
Secretariat 
 
1. Shri Dhiraj Kumar  – Joint Secretary     
2. Shri Maheshwar  – Director 
3. Shri Prem Ranjan  - Deputy Secretary 
     4. Shri Fauzi Badruddin - Deputy Secretary 
 
2. At the outset, the Chairperson welcomed the Members to the Sitting of the 
Committee. Thereafter, the Committee took up for consideration and adoption of the 
following Draft Action Taken Reports: 
 
(i) xxxx  xxxx  xxxx  xxxx*; 
 
(ii) xxxx  xxxx  xxxx  xxxx; 
 
(iii) xxxx  xxxx  xxxx  xxxx; 
 
(iv) xxxx  xxxx  xxxx  xxxx; 
 
(v) Action Taken Report  on 28 th Report (18 th Lok Sabha) on DFG (2026 -27) 
pertaining to the Department of Agricultural Research and Education; 
 
(vi) xxxx  xxxx  xxxx  xxxx; 
 
(vii) xxxx  xxxx  xxxx  xxxx; and 
 
(viii) xxxx  xxxx  xxxx  xxxx. 
 
3. The Committee, thereafter, adopted the draft Action Taken Reports without any 
modifications/amendments. 
 
4. The Committee also authorized the Chairperson to finalize and present the 
Reports to Parliament.  
 
The Committee then adjourned. 
 
  
 
* Matter not related to this Report. 

32 
 
APPENDIX 
 
ANALYSIS OF ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS CONTAINED IN THE TWENTY EIGHTH 
REPORT (18TH LOK SABHA) OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE, 
ANIMAL HUSBANDRY AND FOOD PROCESSING (2025-26) 
 
(Vide Para 4 of Introduction of the Report) 
 
(i) Total Number of Recommendations  14 
(ii) Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted By the Government  
Para Nos. 4,5,6,7,9,11,13 and 14 Total   08 
 Percentage     57.14% 
(iii) Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to pursue in view  
of the Government’s replies  
Para No. NIL Total 00 
 Percentage    0.00% 
(iv) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which Replies of the Government have  
not been accepted by the Committee 
Para Nos. 2,10 and 12 Total 03 
 Percentage 21.43% 
(v) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which final replies of the Government  
are still awaited 
Para Nos. 1,3 and 8 Total 03 
 Percentage  21.43% 
 
 
 