 
 
 
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
COMMITTEE ON SUBORDINATE LEGISLATION 
 
                                                              
                                               Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi 
                                                 December/Pausha, 1933 (Saka) 
 
ONE HUNDRED AND NINETY SIXTH REPORT 
.     The Tea (Marketing) Control Order, 2003 
And 
The Prohibition on Sale of Cigarettes and other     Tobacco Products 
around Educational Institutions Rules, 2004 
(Presented to Rajya Sabha on 16 th  December, 2011) 
196  COSL  196 

C O N T E N T S 
      
                         PAGES 
1. COMPOSITION  OF  THE  COMMITTEE 
  
(i) 
2. INTRODUCTION 
 
(ii) 
3. 
 
 
 
 
 
REPORT 
 
I.     The Tea (Marketing) Control Order, 2003 
II.   The Prohibition on Sale of Cigarettes and other     
Tobacco Products around Educational Institutions 
Rules, 2004 
 
 
 
 
4. 
MINUTES  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  

COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE 
(CONSTITUTED ON THE   29 th  SEPTEMBER 2010) 
 
1. Shri Kalraj Mishra   Chairman 
2. Shri Jesudasu Seelam     
3. Ms. Sushila Tiriya 
4. Shri Vijay Jawaharlal Darda 
5. Shri P. Kannan 
6. Shrimati Maya Singh 
7. Shri Prakash Javadekar 
8. Shri Narendra Kashyap 
9. Shri Ali  Anwar Ansari 
10. Dr. K.P. Ramalingam 
11. Dr. Janardhan Waghmare 
12. Shri Syed Azeez Pasha 
13. Dr. Bharatkumar Raut 
14. Shri M.V. Mysura Reddy 
15. Shri Ahmad Saeed Malihabadi 
     
 
SECRETARIAT  
 
1.  Shri N.K.Singh , Joint Secretary 
2.  Shri Mahesh Tiwari, Joint Director 
3.         Shri Sameer Suryapani, Deputy Director 
4.      Shri  R.P. Shukla, Assistant Director  
5.        Smt. Monica Baa, Assistant Director 
 
 
 
 

 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
1. I, the Chairperson of the Committee on Subordina te Legislation, having been authorized 
by the Committee, do hereby present on its behalf, this One Hundred and Ninety Sixth Report of 
the Committee.  
 
2.  The Committee examined the matters that came up    while   scrutinizing (i) The Tea 
(Marketing) Control Order, 2003 and (ii) the Prohib ition on Sale of Cigarettes and other     
Tobacco Products around Educational Institutions Ru les, 2004 and issues relating to them along 
with the comments received from the concerned Governments. 
 
3.   The observations and recommendations of the Co mmittee are contained in the Report.  
 
4. The Committee considered and adopted the draft R eport in its meeting held on the 14 
th  
December, 2011  
             
                                          KALRAJ MISHRA  
     Chairman 
 
Committee on Subordinate Legislation,                                                                                        
Rajya Sabha  
 
N
EW DELHI  
14.12.2011 
 
 
(ii) 

Report 
I 
The Tea (Marketing) Control Order, 2003 
 The Tea (Marketing) Control Order, 2003 ( Annexure I ) framed under the Tea Act, 1953 
were taken up for examination by the Committee on S ubordinate Legislation, Rajya Sabha.  The 
Committee had earlier examined the Tea (Marketing) Control Order, 1984 and the matter was 
reported to the House vide the 127 th  Report of the Committee presented to the House on the 14 th  
March, 2000. The Tea (Marketing) Control Order, 200 3 has been framed by the Ministry of 
Commerce and Industry (Department of Commerce) in s upersession of the Order of 1984. The 
Order of 1984 had been examined in detail by the Co mmittee and all its suggestions relating to 
the provision of the Order have since been carried out by the Ministry of Commerce & Industry 
vide the Tea (Marketing) Control (Amendment) Order, 1999.  
 
2. However, a perusal of the Tea (Marketing) Order,  2003 revealed that it did not 
incorporate some of the amendments which had been c arried out through the Amendment Order 
of 1999 on the basis of the recommendations of the Committee. These included 
recommendations of the Committee on paragraphs 21 a nd 23 of the 1984 Order. Vide 
Amendment Order of 1999, in paragraphs 23 of the 19 84 Order, after the words “or any officer 
of the Board”, the words “not below the rank of ins pector” were inserted but in paragraph 27 of 
the Order of 2003, the words “not below the rank of  inspector” are missing. Similarly, while the 
Committee was considering the Order of 1984, the Go vernment had agreed to delete the 
provisions of paragraph 21 of the Order of 1984 reg arding Constitution of the Committee on Tea 
Marketing. But the provision finds place vide 
 paragraph 25 of the Order of 2003. Accordingly, a 
reference was made to the Ministry of Commerce & In dustry (Department of Commerce) on the 
16 th  July, 2004 seeking clarifications on these discrep ancies apart from some general questions 
on the Tea (Marketing) Control Order, 2003. The poi nts referred to the Ministry and the 
comments/clarifications received thereon are place at Annexure-II . 
 

3. The Committee also took up the matter for discus sion with the representatives of the Tea 
Board and the Ministry of Commerce and Industry at Kolkata on the 25 th  October, 2004. 
Relevant extracts from the study note ( Annexure III ) on the above discussion was forwarded to 
the Ministry for necessary action on the 31 st  March, 2005. The Ministry vide  their 
communication dated the 20 th  July, 2005 have since furnished Action Taken Note. A summary of 
the points referred to the Ministry and the action taken by them are given below: 
 
3.1  Regarding the need of supersession of the Order of 1984 by a new one, the Committee 
was informed that the depressed condition of the te a industry in the country since the end of 
1999 had given rise to the need for more accurate i nformation in order to facilitate effective 
decisions. Accordingly, a number of changes were re quired to be made in the Order of 1984 and 
a new Order of 2003 was brought into effect. The Co mmittee took note of the changes brought 
out in the new order.  
  
3.2 It was pointed out by the Committee that the Mi nistry had not been careful enough to 
take note of its earlier recommendations contained in its 127 
th  Report while formulating the 
Order of 2003. The Committee was informed that para graph 25 of Tea (Marketing) Control 
Order, 2003 has been deleted vide Notification S.O. 1170(E), dated the 20 th  October, 2004 
regarding the Tea (Marketing) Control (Second Amendment) Order, 2004 
 
3.3  The Committee found that the Ministry did not take note of its recommendations 
contained in its 127 
th  Report to include the words “not below the rank of  Inspector” in the 
corresponding paragraph 27 of the new Order. The Co mmittee, however, noted that the Ministry 
had since done the same through an amendment Notification  
 
3.4  The Committee noted that the Order of 2003 prescrib ed a stricter regulation for auctions, 
marketing activities and the calling for informatio n from the persons engaged in this industry. 

The committee wondered how such regulatory activiti es could be welcomed in the current era of 
autonomy and liberalization. The Committee felt tha t the objectives of the Order did not warrant 
prescription of such high levels of regulation. The  fact that the Tobacco Board was also 
monitoring the primary marketing of tobacco was not justified in the Committee’s opinion. 
 The Ministry informed the Committee that in order to bring greater transparency in the 
primary marketing of tea and for effective data col lection and collation, it was necessary to 
incorporate a provision in the Tea (Marketing) Cont rol Order enabling registration of one of the 
important stakeholders of tea industry viz. primary  buyers of tea. Further, in order to protect the 
consumers from supply of any adulterated tea, a pro vision was incorporated stipulating that the 
tea should conform to the specifications as laid do wn under the prevention of Food Adulteration 
Act, 1954 as amended from time to time or any other  rules for the time being in force. A 
provision has also been incorporated for fixation o f a price sharing formula so as to ensure that 
the small tea growers get a reasonable share of the  price obtained by the manufacturer of made 
tea. Tea (Marketing) Control Order, 2003 also has a n enabling provision empowering the Tea 
Board to issue directives to the Auction Organizers , Brokers etc. for improving the efficiency of 
the present auctioning system, so as to reduce the cost and time in selling tea through auction and 
also to enable the auction system to handle more volume of tea. 
 
3.5   The Committee felt that the scheme of the Order ves ted most of the powers with the 
Chairman of the Board. The Committee, accordingly, desired that the Ministry/ Tea Board re-
examine this point. The Ministry informed the Commi ttee that the matter has already been 
examined. Under the new Tea (Marketing) Control Ord er, 2003, powers have been vested with 
the Chairman of the Tea Board with a view to implem ent various provisions of the Order 
effectively. The implementation of the different pr ovisions of the Order is being made with the 
assistance of the Tea Board’s officials located in different parts of India. Moreover, any 
directives which are required to be issued by the C hairman, Tea Board, are based on the 
recommendations of experts and taking into account the views obtained from different 
stakeholders of the tea industry. Under the new Ord er, the Chairman is also required to consult 
the Department in all important policy matters. 

 
3.6  To a query raised by the Committee on the constitution of a Committee on Tea Marketing 
under paragraph 25 of the 2003 Order, the Ministry informed that so far no Committee had been 
constituted under paragraph 25 of the Order of 2003 .  Instead, paragraph 25 of Tea (Marketing) 
Control Order, 2003 had been deleted vide 
 Notification S.O. 1170(E) dated the 20 October, 
2004, publishing the Tea (Marketing) Control (Second Amendment) Order, 2004. 
 
3.7 The Members enquired about the status of tea in dustry in the North-Eastern region. They 
also showed concern regarding changing trend in the  tea industry and impressed upon the 
Ministry/ Tea Board to take necessary steps to inte rcept and prevent the closing of tea gardens. 
The Committee observed that the points raised by th e Members were noted by the 
representatives of the Tea Board for taking appropriate action. 
 The Committee was informed that the Indian tea ind ustry has been passing through a 
period of depressed prices during the last few year s. The continuous fall in prices of tea, high 
costs of production, fall in exports etc. have adve rsely affected the viability of tea gardens, 
particularly the medium sized and financially weak ones, resulting in closure/abandonment of 
some tea gardens in the country. The industry is al so faced with long term problems like old age 
of the plantations, worn-out machinery in the proce ssing factories and poor infrastructure 
facilities. 
During the last few years, 118 tea gardens were clo sed in different parts of the country. 
However, 86 tea gardens have been re-opened while t he number of tea gardens that remain 
closed at present is 27. Also, the Central Governme nt and the Tea Board have facilitated 
discussions on the matter between the managements of the closed tea gardens and their bankers.  
 
4. The Committee notes that the Ministry of Commerc e and Industry have since 
amended the Tea (Marketing) Control Order, 2003 as per its recommendations and 
notified the same as follows: 

(i) The Ministry vide  its Notification No. S.O. 270 (E) dated the 27 th  February, 2004 
(Annexure-IV) have published the Tea (Marketing) Co ntrol (Amendment) Order, 2004 
wherein necessary amendment has been made by way of  insertion of the words ‘not below 
the rank of Assistant Development Officer or Inspec tor’ after the words ‘any officer of the 
Board’ for the purpose of search and seizure; and 
 
(ii) The Ministry vide 
 its Notification No. S.O. 1170 (E) dated the 20 th  October, 2004 
(Annexure- V) have published the Tea (Marketing) Co ntrol (Second Amendment) Order, 
2004 where by Para 25 of the Order of 2003 which em powered Central Government to 
constitute a Committee on tea marketing has been deleted. 
5. The Committee notes that  the Tea (Marketing) Control Order, 1984 were replaced 
by the Tea (Marketing) Control Order, 2003, which prescribes for stricter regulation of the 
auctions, marketing activities and the calling for information from the persons engaged in 
this industry.  The Committee, however, feels that the objectives o f the Order did not 
warrant prescription of such high levels of regulat ion in the current era of autonomy and 
liberalization. The fact that the Tobacco Board is also monitoring the primary marketing 
of tobacco is no justification in the Committee’s o pinion.  The Committee, further, observes 
that certain provisions of the 2003 Order reportedl y caused some concern to the buyer 
community with regard to their implementation espec ially the provisions relating to 
definition of buyer/manufacturer, his registration, payment for registration fee, submission 
of returns etc.  The Committee notes that in  order to remove the genuine difficulties of the 
various sections of the tea industry for the purpos e of implementation and compliance of 
the new order, the Government has since brought ame ndments to the Tea (Marketing) 
Control Order 2003 by way of Tea (Marketing) Contro l (Amendment) Order, 2004 .  It is 
hoped that the amendments to Tea (Marketing) Contro l Order 2003 will help in removing 
the genuine difficulties faced by the buyers/sellers of tea. 
   
 

II 
The Prohibition on Sale of Cigarettes and other Tobacco Products around Educational 
Institutions Rules, 2004 
 
 The Prohibition on Sale of Cigarettes and other To bacco Products around Educational 
Institutions Rules, 2004 (Annexure I)  have been framed under the Cigarettes and other To bacco 
Products (Prohibition of Advertisement and Regulati on of Trade and Commerce, Production, 
Supply and Distribution) Act, 2003.  The Rules proh ibit sale of cigarettes and other tobacco 
products within a radius of one hundred yards of th e educational institutions and the offence is 
punishable with a fine which may extend to two hund red rupees.  Since the teenagers and young 
school/ college going students are most vulnerable group to the addiction of tobacco, this 
provision (to ban the sale of tobacco products 100 yards around educational institutions) was 
made. The Prohibition on Sale of Cigarettes and oth er Tobacco Products around Educational 
Institutions Rules, 2004 was notified in the Gazett e of India vide G.S.R. 561 (E) dated 1 st  
September, 2004.  The Rules were laid on the Table of the Rajya Sabha on the 30 th  August, 
2005.  
2. The Committee took up for examination the said r ules and a questionnaire on the subject 
matter was forwarded to the Ministry of Health & Fa mily Welfare (Department of Health) for 
their comments/ clarifications on the 10 
th  July, 2006.  The Ministry furnished their comments / 
clarifications on the 2 nd  November, 2006 (Annexure II).   A summary of the points raised by the 
Committee and the comments of the Ministry received  thereon have been summerized in the 
succeeding paragraphs:  
3. The Committee pointed to the delay of 11 months from the notification of the Prohibition 
on Sale of Cigarettes and other Tobacco Products ar ound Educational Institutions Rules, 2004 to 
its laying before Parliament.  The Ministry attribu ted this delay to the late receipt of the required 
number of copies of printed notification from the G overnment of India Press; hence it could not 
be laid on the Table of both Houses of Parliament in time.   
4. On the point relating to the boards to be displa yed by the manager/person in-charge of an 
educational institution, the Ministry stated that t he rules provide the board to be displayed at a 

conspicuous place outside the educational premises stating prominently that sale is prohibited 
within a radius of one hundred yards, and that ther e should not be any objection from the 
educational institutions in prominently displaying the board.   
5. On the Committee’s view that the fine of Rs. 200 /- for not displaying such a board was 
too  low and that the same should be increased so t hat it acts as a deterrent, the Ministry 
informed that they did not have any objection to en hancing the penalty and that the Ministry 
would consider the same as and when a comprehensive  amendment of the Tobacco Act, 2003 is 
taken up.   
6. On the use of imperial system of measurement of distance (of 11 yards from educational 
institutions) rather than the metric system which i s more prevalent, the Ministry stated that the 
distance of 100 yards has been specified in the Act .  The Ministry, however, submitted that they 
did not have any objection in replacing the ‘yards’  with ‘Meters, whenever amendment to the 
Act would be taken up.  
7. Thereafter, Committee heard the Secretary, Minis try of Health and Family Welfare 
(Department of Health) on the 8 th  January, 2010.  During the course of discussion, t he 
Committee raised the issues relating to increasing use of cigarettes and tobacco products 
amongst youngsters, process of monitoring of implem entation of the rules, periodic assessment 
of target fixed and achieved and sufficiency of qua ntum of fine/ penalty.  The Committee was 
informed that the growing use of tobacco products a mongst youngsters was basically due to peer 
pressure.  It was therefore, important to educate t he children from tender age about the damages 
caused-social, economical, physical, etc. by the us e of cigarettes and other tobacco products.   
The Ministry also informed the Committee that they had earmarked almost Rs. 50 crores for 
media campaigns to educate and create awareness in this regard .  While the reality of the huge 
agricultural labourers and farmers dependent on its  production was a fact that cannot be ignored, 
a conscious decision had been taken by the Ministry  to provide alternative cropping system to 
the farmers producing tobacco. The Committee was as sured that the punishment prescribed 
under the Act and the Rules are sufficient enough.   
8. The concerns expressed and queries raised by the  Members during the meeting was 
forwarded to the Ministry of Health & Family Welfar e vide  this Secretariat letter dated 3 rd  

February, 2010 as contained in the verbatim oral ev idence sent with a request to furnish 
information/replies to the  Committee.  Another letter was sent to the Ministry on the 30 th  March, 
2010, for expediting the replies.  But to the Commi ttee’s surprise, the Ministry did not furnish 
the replies.         
 
General Observations/ Recommendations of the Committee 
 
9. The Committee observes that tobacco product manu facturers increasingly focus on 
youth and children.  Our efforts, therefore, should  be to ensure that tobacco products are 
not easily available to children and that they are prevented from involuntary smoke as 
enshrined in the Preamble to the Act.   The Committ ee, accordingly, hopes that the 
Ministry of Health and Family Welfare would conscio usly and diligently work towards this 
end so that the  Rules serve the purpose of the law in true spirit a part from complying with 
our Treaty obligations under Framework Convention o n Tobacco Control (FCTC).  We 
ought to adopt all the  international best practice s in implementing the law in letter and 
spirit.   
10. The Committee expresses its concern that childr en between the age group of 13-15 
years are taking to smoking.  The Ministry’s attemp t for detoxification and to get the 
youngsters de-addicted from tobacco has not been ve ry successful.  The Committee notes 
that the Ministry is taking action for strict imple mentation of the rules under the Code of 
Criminal Procedure (Cr. P.C.).  The Committee, however, feels that much more needs to be 
done to bring about the required behavioural change  amongst youth and school going 
children by starting aggressive education and aware ness programmes through media 
campaigns.  The Committee noticed that after the me eting, a visible media campaign 
depicting dangerous effects of using tobacco products was started and warnings/pictures on 
cigarettes and chewing tobacco was made more promin ent.  It had no doubt had the 
desired impact.  The Committee compliments the agen cies-government and non-
government involved in this and calls upon them to continue this effort with renewed 
vigour. 

11. The Committee deprecates the laxity shown by th e Ministry in laying the 
notification on the Table of the House.  The Commit tee is not convinced by the reason 
advanced (non-availability of printed copies of the  notification) and feels that the time of 
one year in procuring the printed copies was not at  all acceptable. The Committee does not 
approve of such inordinate delay in laying the pape rs and directs that such delays should 
not recur in future. The Ministry must evolve suita ble arrangements with the Ministry of 
Urban Development to avoid delays in preparing prin ted copies from Government of India 
Press in future. 
12. The Committee notes that the Ministry have no o bjection in replacing the imperial 
system of measurement of distance of hundred yards as specified in the Act by the metric 
system which is more prevalent today and which woul d require amendment to the Act.  
The Committee hopes the Ministry would do that as a nd when amendment of the Tobacco 
Act, 2003 is considered. 
13. The rules provide that the display board should  be displayed at a conspicuous place 
outside the educational premises stating prominently that sale is prohibited within a radius 
of one hundred yards and that there should not be a ny objection from the educational 
institutions in prominently displaying the board.   The Committee, accordingly, 
recommends the Ministry to ensure that this rule is  strictly adhered to and the display 
boards are prominently displayed and directs the Mi nistry of Health & Family Welfare to 
furnish a status report on the number of educationa l institutions in Delhi and NCR 
(National Capital Region) which are not complying w ith this rule.  Regular inspections 
should be done in this regard. 
14. The Committee is aware that peer pressure was t he single factor for youngsters to 
take to smoking. The tobacco companies also, theref ore, consciously work on the young 
people for two reasons.  One, peer pressure is easier to build and two, it is fashionable.  The 
Committee is concerned over the serious health haza rds including high health costs of the 
treatment of cancer and cardiovascular diseases, of which 30% are cancer cases on account 
of tobacco.  The Committee is happy that the Minist ry has undertaken the “Global Adult 
Tobacco Survey and hopes that the Ministry would co nsciously and consistently work 

towards taking steps for effective monitoring and a ssessment at every stage of the 
implementation of the rules.   
15. The Committee found that the monitoring of impl ementation of Rules left much to 
be desired.  One can find shops and vendors selling  tobacco products within the prohibited 
area of 100 yards from school/ educational institut ional premises.  The Committee feels 
that strict vigilance around the educational instit utions was required. The Committee 
observes that punishment for violations or non obse rvance of Rule has to be quick and 
significant,  if it is to act as a deterrent. Then only, can the menace of tobacco be contained.  
The Committee notes that the Ministry of Health & F amily Welfare does not have any 
objection and has assured to enhance the penalty fo r selling tobacco products within 100 
yards from educational institutions from the existi ng Rs 200/- as and when a 
comprehensive amendment of the Tobacco Act, 2003 could be considered. 
16. The Committee is happy to note that an attempt has been made by the Ministry of 
Health and Family Welfare to provide alternative cr opping system and alternative 
livelihood to the tobacco growers/farmers and the p eople working in tobacco industries 
who will be displaced.  The Committee appreciates t he Ministry’s efforts to select some 
vocations which can be beneficial for the small sho pkeepers who are dependent for their 
livelihood on the sale of tobacco products.  The Co mmittee hopes that the Ministries of 
Health and Family Welfare, Labour, Rural Developmen t, Industry and Commerce would 
coordinate with each other to find a workable solut ion in this regard to everyone’s 
satisfaction 
 
17. The Committee takes a serious view of the Minis try not furnishing information/ 
replies on the concerns and queries raised by the M embers of the Committee during it’s 
meeting despite two letters sent by the Committee S ecretariat in this regard.  The 
Committee, therefore, takes this opportunity to giv e specific directions in the matter so as 
to ensure prompt disposal of its references made to  the 
Ministries/Departments/Organizations etc.  The repl ies should be furnished positively 
within a month and in case it is not possible to do  so within one month of the receipt of the 

reference in the Ministry, the Committee may be inf ormed of the reasons of delay in 
writing and specific request be made to the Committee for the extension of time.    
 
  

MINUTES OF THE MEETING OF THE COMMITTEE ON SUBORDINATE LEGISLATION, RAJYA SABHA 
 
XV 
Fifteenth  Meeting 
 
The Committee met at 3.00 p.m. on the 14 th  December,2011 in Room No. 126-C (Chairman’s 
Room), Third Floor, Parliament House, New Delhi. 
Present 
1. Shri Kalraj Mishra    Chairman 
Members 
2.   Shri Jesudasu Seelam  
3 Ms.Sushila Tiriya 
4.  Shri Vijay Jawaharlal Darda 
5.  Shri Prakash Javadekar   
6.  Shri Ali Anwar Ansari 
7.  Dr. Janardhan Waghmare 
8. 
 Shri Syeed Azeez Pasha 
 
9. 
 Dr.Bharat Kumar Raut 
 
10.  Shri M.V.Mysura Reddy 
 
11.  Shri Ahmad Saeed Malihabadi 
 
 
Secretariat 
 
1. 
 Shri N.K. Singh, Joint Secretary 
2.  Shri Mahesh Tiwari, Joint Director 
3.  Shri Sameer Suryapani, Deputy Director 
4.  Shri R.P.Shukla, Assistant Director 

 
2. At the outset the Chairman welcomed the Members.  The following items were taken up for 
consideration by the Committee: 
●    The DraCg--, 195 
nd  Report on Statutory Orders Laid on the Table of the Rajya  Sabha during its 
222 nd  Session 
●      The DraCg--, 196 rd  Report on the  Tea (Marketing) Control Order, 2003 and the Prohibition of 
Sale of Cigarettes and Other Tobacco Products around Educational Institutions Rules, 
2004- Implementation of the 127 th   Report of the Committee 
3. The Committee considered the draft 195 th  Report  on Statutory Orders Laid on the Table of the 
Rajya Sabha during its 222 nd  Session and noticed inordinate delays in the framing as well as laying of 
rules, regulations, etc. by the different Ministries/ Departments.  The Committee found that the 
Ministries/ Departments were not following strictly the Committee’s recommendations contained in its 
127 th  Report in this regard and that the time limits were also not being adhered to by them for 
framing/laying of various subordinate legislations. Apart from delay in laying/framing these instruments, 
the mandatory Delay Statements giving reason for delay were also not being submitted in large number 
of the cases. The Committee expressed concern over the Ministries/Departments not following its 
recommendation/observation made in such matters in its reports submitted after every session. The 
manner in which such an important matter is being handled by the Ministries/Departments is, no doubt, 
causal and it appears that no senior officers were supervising this activity. This attitude has been noticed 
not only in one or two but with most of the Ministries/Departments.  
4. The Committee felt that delaying paper to be laid on Table of the House or not doing so in 
required form was tantamount to showing disregard to its recommendation and well laid out 
procedures. The Committee  strongly feels that the Ministries/Departments need to be sensitized about 
this and calls upon the Cabinet Secretary  and the Secretary,  Department of Parliamentary Affairs to 
play a proactive  role for ensuring that Subordinate Legislation were not only framed in time but also 
brought before the House strictly as per the laid out procedure and time frame. 
5.   The Committee, thereafter, adopted the 195 th  Report. 
6. The Committee considered the draft 196 th  Report  on the Tea (Marketing) Control Order 2003 
and the The Prohibition of Sale of Cigarettes and Other Tobacco Products around Educational 
Institutions Rules, 2004-Implementation of the 127 th  Report of the Committee. It expressed its 

unhappiness about the Ministry of Health not replying to the Secretariat’s communication and also not 
acting  upon the Committee’s  recommendations regarding the Prohibition of Sale of Cigarette and 
Other Tobacco Products around Educational Rules, 2004  After some discussions, the Committee 
adopted its 196 th  Report. 
7. The Committee decided to present these two Reports  to the House on the 16 th  December, 2011.  
Accordingly,  it authorized its Chairman and in his absence Shri Vijay Jawaharlal Darda and Shri M.V. 
Mysura Reddy, Member of the Committee, to present the Reports to the House. 
8.          *    *    *  
9.           *    *    * 
 
10. 
      The meeting adjourned at 4.00 p.m. 
 
______________________________ 
*** Relate to other matters. 
 
 