REPORT  NO.  
255 
 
 
 
                 PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
           RAJYA SABHA 
 
 
COMMITTEE ON SUBORDINATE LEGISLATION 
 
 
 
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi  
July, 2025/Sravana, 1947 (Saka)
 
TWO HUNDRED FIFTY FIFTH REPORT 
 
ON 
 
The Telecommunications (Critical Telecommunication 
Infrastructure) Rules, 2024 and Telecommunications 
(Telecom Cyber Security) Rules, 2024 
 
 (Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 24th July, 2025) 
 
( 
 
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on …….February, 2025)  
 
 
(Presented on …February,2025) 

C O N T E N T S 
  PAGES 
1 COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE (i) 
2 INTRODUCTION (ii) 
3 ABBREVIATIONS (iii)-(iv) 
4 REPORT ON THE TELECOMMUNICATION (CRITICAL 
TELECOMMUNICATION INFRASTRUCTURE) RULES, 2024 AND 
TELECOMMUNICATION (TELECOM CYBER SECURITY) RULES, 
2024 
1-14 
5 EXAMINATION OF RULES, OBSERVATIONS AND 
RECOMMENDATIONS 
15-24 
6 SUMMARY OF THE OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS OF 
THE COMMITTEE 
25-28 
7 MINUTES 29-43 
8 ANNEXURES 44-66 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE 
(CONSTITUTED ON THE 22ND OCTOBER, 2024) 
1. Shri Milind Murli Deora                                       Chairman 
2. Shri Golla Baburao  
3. Ms. Sushmita Dev  
4. Shri Kesridevsinh Jhala 
5. Shri Jose K. Mani  
6. Shri Manan Kumar Mishra  
7. Smt. Ranjeet Ranjan  
8. Shri C. Ve Shanmugam 
9. Dr. Dinesh Sharma  
10. Shri Kartikeya Sharma 
11. Shri Neeraj Shekhar 
12. Shri Tiruchi Siva 
13. Shri Sadanand Mhalu Shet Tanavade  
14. Shri G. K. Vasan  
15. Smt. Sangeeta Yadav  
SECRETARIAT 
1. Shri Sanjay Kumar Khursija, Joint Secretary 
2. Shri Har Prateek Arya, Director 
3. Shri Thangzalun Khuptong, Deputy Secretary  
4. Smt. Mamta Banga, Under Secretary 
5. Shri Pardeep Kumar, Committee Officer 
 
 
 
 
(i) 

 
 
                  INTRODUCTION 
 
I, the Chairman of the Committee on Subordinate Legislation, having been 
authorized by the Committee, do hereby present on its behalf, this Two Hundred and 
Fifty Fifth Report of the Committee. 
2. The Committee examined the  matters that came up while scrutinizing the 
Telecommunications (Critical Telecommunication Infrastructure) Rules, 2024 and 
Telecommunications (Telecom Cyber Security) Rules, 2024 and issues relating to them 
along with the comments received from the Minist ry of Telecommunications 
(Department of Telecommunications) and besides the Secretary and other senior 
Officials of the Department also heard the submissions of representatives from National 
Centre for Communication Security (NCCS), Telecommunication Engin eering Centre 
(TEC), Bharat Sanchar Nigam Limited (BSN L/ MTNL ), Cellular Operators 
Association of India (COAI) and Telecom Equipment Manufacture Association of 
India (TEMA).  
3. The observations and recommendations, which in the opinion of the Committee 
should be brought to the notice of the House, are contained in the succeeding 
paragraphs of the Report. 
4. The Committee considered and adopted the draft Report in its meeting held on 
the 21st July, 2025. 
 
 
New Delhi               Milind Murli Deora 
21st July, 2025              Chairman, 
    Committee on Subordinate Legislation, Rajya Sabha 
 
 
 
 
 
(ii) 

ABBREVIATIONS 
1. 3GPP - 3rd Generation Partnership Project 
2. ACTO - Association of Competitive Telecom Operators 
3. ANSI - American National Standards Institute 
4. BIF - Broadband India Forum 
5. BIS - Bureau of Indian Standards 
6. BSNL - Bharat Sanchar Nigam Limited 
7. CERT-In - Indian Computer Emergency Response Team 
8. CII - Critical Information Infrastructure 
9. CISO - Chief Information Security Officer 
10. COAI - Cellular Operators Association of India 
11. ComSec - Communication Security Scheme 
12. CRO - Compulsory Registration Order 
13. CTI - Critical Telecommunication Infrastructure 
14. CTSO - Chief Telecommunication Security Officer 
15. DCC - Digital Communications Commission 
16. DEA - Department of Economic Affairs 
17. DoT - Department of Telecommunications 
18. DPDP - Digital Personal Data Protection Act, 2023 
19. DPIIT - Department for Promotion of Industry and Internal Trade 
20. DSCI - Data Security Council of India 
21. ETSI - European Telecommunications Standards Institute 
22. GCS - General Certification Scheme 
23. GSMA - Global System for Mobile Communications Association 
24. I4C - Indian Cybercrime Coordination Centre 
25. IAC - Interface Approval Certificate 
26. ICDR - International Mobile Equipment Identity, Calling Line Identification, and 
Device Registration 
27. IMEI - International Mobile Equipment Identity 
28. IITs - Indian Institutes of Technology 
29. ISPs - Internet Service Providers 
30. ITI - Indian Telephone Industries 
31. ITSARs - Indian Telecom Security Assurance Requirements 
32. ITU-T - International Telecommunication Union - Telecommunication 
Standardization Sector 
33. MeitY - Ministry of Electronics and Information Technology 
(iii) 

34. MHA - Ministry of Home Affairs 
35. MPLS - Multiprotocol Label Switching 
36. MSC - Mandatory Security Certification 
37. MSME - Ministry of Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises 
38. MTCTE - Mandatory Testing and Certification of Telecommunication Equipment 
39. MTNL - Mahanagar Telephone Nigam Limited 
40. NCCS - National Centre for Communication Security 
41. NCIIPC - National Critical Information Infrastructure Protection Center 
42. NSDTS - National Security Directive on Telecommunication Sector 
43. NSCS - National Security Council Secretariat 
44. OEMs - Original Equipment Manufacturers 
45. PQC - Post-Quantum Cryptography 
46. RJIL - Reliance Jio Infocomm Limited 
47. SCS - Simplified Certification Scheme 
48. SFLC - Software Freedom Law Center 
49. SLAs - Service Level Agreements 
50. SOC - Security Operations Centre 
51. SOR - Statement of Objects and Reasons 
52. STL - Sterlite Technologies Pvt Ltd 
53. TAC - Type Approval Certificate 
54. TCL - Tata Communications Limited 
55. TEC - Telecommunication Engineering Centre 
56. TEMA - Telecom Equipment Manufacturers Association of India 
57. TRAI - Telecom Regulatory Authority of India 
58. TSPs - Telecom Service Providers 
59. TSTLs - Telecom Security Testing Labs 
60. UPI - Unified Payments Interface 
61. VIL - Vodafone Idea Limited 
62. VPN - Virtual Private Network 
63. VSC - Voluntary Security Certification 
64. VTNPs - Virtual Telecom Network Providers 
65. ZTA - Zero Trust Architecture 
 
 
 
(iv) 

1. Background 
1.1 The Telecommunications Bill, 2023, aim ed to modernize and consolidate the legal 
framework governing India's telecom sector, recognizing its vital role in economic 
development, digital inclusion, and national security. Its Statement of Objects and Reasons 
(SOR) mentioned that the then current reg ulatory system, based on outdated laws, was no 
longer adequate due to rapid technological advancements.  This Bill propose d a 
comprehensive framework covering authorization of telecom services and networks, spectrum 
assignment etc. and also addresse d national security, public safety, dispute resolution, and 
regulatory compliance. Additionally, it repeal ed the outdated laws, owing to huge technical 
advancements in the telecom sector and technologies, made requisite amendments  to the 
TRAI Act, and retained certain provisions related to power transmission lines. The legislation 
aimed to ensure secure, inclusive, and forward -looking growth of the telecommunications 
sector. 
1.2 The said Bill was introduced in the Lok Sabha on 18 th December, 2023 and was 
passed by Lok Sabha and Rajya Sabha on 20 th and 21 st December, 2023. The 
Telecommunications Act, 2023, received the assent of President  of India on December  24, 
2023 and was published in the Official Gazette on the same day  i.e. December 24, 2023. The 
Telecommunication Act 2023 aim ed to amend and consolidate the law relating to 
development, expansion and operation of telecommunication services and telecommunication 
networks, assignment of spectrum, and matters connected therewith. The Telecommunication 
Act 2023 also sought to repeal older legislative framework like Indian Telegraph Act 1885 
and Indian Wireless Telegraph Act 1933 .Guided by the principles of Samavesh (Inclusion), 
Suraksha (Security), Vriddhi (Growth), and Tvarit (Responsiveness), the Act a ims to achieve 
the vision of Viksit Bharat (Developed India). 
1.3 Telecommunications (Telecom Cyber Security) Rules, 2024: One of the objects of 
Statement of Reasons of the Telecommunications Act, 2023 mentions "Provisions for national 
security, public emergency and public safety". In line with this objective, section 22 (1) of the 
Telecommunications Act states that: 
"The Central Government may by rules provide for the measures 
to protect and ensure  cyber security of Telecommunication 
networks and telecommunication services." 
 
1 
 
 
 

Further, section 22(2) Telecommunications Act states that: 
The measures may include collection, analysis and dissemination 
of traffic data that is generated, transmitted, received or stored in 
telecommunication networks. 
Explanation. -For the purposes of this sub -section, the expression 
"traffic data" means any data generated, transmitted, received or 
stored in telecommunication networks including data relating to 
the type, routing, duration or time of a telecommunication. 
 
Accordingly, the  Telecommunications (Telecom Cyber Security) Rules, 2024have been 
notified on 2 1.11.2024. These rules cover the subjects mentioned under the Act.  As ·per the 
allocation of business rules dated 27.09.2024, matters relating to security of telecom networks 
has been allotted to Department of Telecommunications (DoT). 
1.3.1 It goes without saying that Telecommunications play a vital role in delivery of  digital 
services by providing the infrastructure that allows people to connect, communicate, and 
participate in the digital economy. Telecommunications Network and telecommunications 
services are integral to digital inclusion and  for promoting ease of living to the citizens. Thus, 
maintaining integrity and continuity of operation of Telecommunications Network and 
telecommunications services are of paramount importance. For this, it is imperative to adopt 
high standard of  security so that  seamless services of telecommunications may be ensured. 
Safeguarding the citizens by identification of misuse of telecommunications resources is 
highly required. Also, Telecommunications generate hug e-volume of traffic data. Adoption 
of policies and nece ssary data analytics capabilities is required to adopt the measures to 
protect and ensure telecom cyber security. Thus, the objective of these rules  
(Telecommunications (Telecom CyberSecurity) Rules, 2024) is to have an approach for cyber 
security of telecommunication networks and telecommunication services which includes 
tools, policies, security concepts, security safeguards, guidelines, risk management 
approaches, actions, assurance and technologies that can be used to safeguard 
telecommunication networks and telecommunication services against relevant security risks in 
the cyber environment. 
 
1.3.2 The rules are applicable on the telecommunication entities providing 
telecommunication services, or establishing, operating, maintaining, or expanding 
telecommunication network or a  person exempted from the requirement  of authorisation.  
These rules are also applicable to the users involved in misuse of telecommunications 
resources for fraud, cheating, personation and transmitting any message which is fraudulent. 
 
2 

1.3.3 The Department of Telecom has submitted that  the rules have undergone public 
consultation and inputs from several telecom industry bodies like Cellular Operators 
association of India (COA I), ACTO (Association of Competitive Telecom Operators), BIF  
(Broadband India  Forum), Access Now, Airtel, Cyril Amarchand Mangaldas, Reliance Jio 
lnfocomm Limted (RJIL), Vodafone Idea Limited (VIL), Data Security Council of India 
(DSCI), Tata Communications Limited (TCL) and Indian Telephone Industri es (ITI) have 
been duly considered before notification of the rules. It has further been submitted that no 
impediment for  implementation of the rules is noticed and envisaged other than the 
preparatory work which DoT has to undertake for digital implementation of the rules. 
 
1.3.4 Department of Telecom , submits that t he enforcement of the said rules shall  ensure 
building robust  telecommunications network and telecommunications services as well as 
preventing misuse of telecommunication resources for cybercrime and financial frauds  and 
these rules shall help in ensuring telecom cyber security by: 
i. Adoption of telecom cybersecurity policy including security safeguards, 
risk management approaches, actions, training, network  testing 
including hardening, vulnerability  assessment and penetration testing 
and risk assessment. 
ii. Periodic telecom cyber security audits of  its network through its own 
mechanisms and through the certified agency. 
iii. Establishing     Security    Operations   Centre     (SOC), 
maintain command logs of operation and maintenance. 
iv. Collection, analysis and sharing analysis related to telecom 
cybersecurity to agency of the Central Government  engaged in law 
enforcement and security 
v. Developing digital means to identify and reporting of act that may 
endanger telecom cyber security and action. 
vi. Identification and removal of telecommunication equipment with 
tampered International Mobile Equipment Identity (IMEI) number 
1.3.5 The Department also submits that  the rules for Telecom Cyber Security have been 
notified recently and they are being operationalized. The rules have been framed keeping in 
view of the n eed to ensure the telecom cyber security considering the significance of 
telecommunications in the implement ation of digital service delivery and  protecting the  
citizens from  cybercrime and financial frauds through misuse of telecommunications 
resources. The modification in these rules is not envisaged at present and can be taken care of 
once the situation demands under the provisions of the Telecommunication Act, 2023. 
3 
 

1.4 Telecommunications (Critical Telecommunication Infrastructure) Rules, 
2024: One of the objects of Statement of Reasons of the Telecommunications Act, 2023 
mentions "Provisions for national security, public  emergency and public  safety". In line  
with this  objective, section 22 (3) of the Act facilitates identification of Critical 
Telecommunication Infrastructure (CTI), disruption o f which shall have debilitating 
impact on national security, economy, public health or safety.  Section 22(4)of the 
Telecommunications Act 2023 says that: 
"The Central Government may by rules provide for the standards, 
security practices, upgradation requirements and procedures to be 
implemented for such Critical Telecommunication Infrastructure." 
Accordingly, the Telecommunications (Critical Telecommunication Infrastructure) Rules, 
2024 have been notified on 22.11.2024. These rules cover the  subjects mentioned under 
the Act. 
 
1.4.1 At present, National Critical Information Infrastructure Protection Center (NCIIPC) is 
an agency notified vide Information Technology (National Critical Information 
I n f r a s t r u c t u r e Protection Center and Manner of Performing Functions and Duties) 
Rules, 2013 on 16.01.2014 under  Section 70A of the Information Technology Act 2000. 
Section 70A of IT Act mentions "The national nodal agency designated under sub-section (]) 
shall be responsible for  all measures including Research and   Development  relating to 
protection of Critical Information Infrastructure." 
 
The key functions  of NCIIPC include identification  and designation of  critical 
information infrastructures (CII) and protect them from specific threats and 
vulnerabilities. Telecom sector has been  declared as critical sector by NCIIPC which has 
declared certain telecom network elements as "protected systems". 
 
1.4.2 The objective of these rules is  to have  a focused monitoring  of standards and 
practices being followed for the Critical equipment in Telecom Sector by various Service 
providers. Service Providers through these rules are obligated to put special focus on their 
"Critical Telecom Equipment" regarding threats, vulnerabilities, risks and cyber 
incidents. The rules are applicable on the telecommunication ent ities whose 
telecommunication network  or part thereof is  declared as  Critical Telecommunication 
Infrastructure (CTI) by Department of Telecom. All licensees - fixed line  and mobile 
operators, internet service providers and other telecom  service providers fall under the 
purview of these CTI rules. 
 
4 

1.4.3 The Department of Telecom has submitted that t he rules have undergone public 
consultation and inputs from several telecom industry  bodies like  STL (Sterlite 
Technologies Pvt. Ltd), ACTO (Association of  Competitive Telecom Operators), BIF  
(Broadband India Forum),  Access Now,  Airtel, Cyril  Amarchand Mangaldas, RJIL  
(Reliance Jio Infocomm Limted), DSCI (Data Security Council of India), TCL (Tata 
Communications Limited), SFLC  (Software Freedom Law  Center) and ITI (Indian 
Telephone Industries) which have been duly considered  before notification of the rules.  
Hence no impediment for implementation of the rules are noticed  and envisaged other 
than the preparatory work which DOT has to undertake for declaration of Critical 
Telecommunication Infrastructure. 
 
1.4.4 It has further been stated that the rules have been framed keeping in view of the 
recent increased requirements of protecting the critical infrastructure in telecom sector 
from increasing cyber threats and to have better monitoring and threat incident response. 
The modification in these rules is not envisaged at present and can be taken care of once 
the situation demands under the provisions of the Telecommunication Act, 2023. 
1.4.5 Thus, the Department of Telcom has informed that the enforcement of these rules will 
strengthen cybersecurity for Critical Telecommunication Infrastructure (CTI) and support the 
broader objective of safeguarding this vital sector against targeted and widespread cyber -
attacks. These rules will play a crucial role in protecting sensitive data from theft and damage.  
With increasing digitalization, data such as personal information, financial rec ords, and 
intellectual property has become immensely valuable. The enforcement of these rules will 
help protect such sensitive data from unauthorized access and theft, while a lso upholding 
personal privacy. In an era where personal information is routinely collected, stored, and 
shared in digital formats, cybersecurity is essential to preserve privacy rights. Safeguarding 
personal data from unauthorized access, surveillance, an d misuse, fosters trust in digital 
services. Furthermore, these measures will help prevent financial losses, assist service 
providers in meeting compliance and legal obligations, and ensure business continuity. Cyber-
attacks on CTI can cause severe disrupt ions, including revenue loss, reputational damage, and 
in some cases, the complete shutdown of operations. Enforcing cybersecurity rules will help 
prevent or mitigate such impacts, thereby supporting uninterrupted business operations. 
 2. The Committee on Subordinate Legislation decided to examine the 
Telecommunications (Critical Telecommunication Infrastructure) Rules, 2024  and the 
Telecommunications (Telecom Cyber Security) Rules, 2024  due to their far -reaching 
implications for national security, privacy,  and the functioning of India’s digital 
infrastructure.  
5 

The Committee deemed it essential to ensure that the delegated legislation remains within the 
permissible limits of the parent Act, adheres to principles of transparency and accountability, 
and does not confer excessive or unchecked powers on the executive. While examining these 
Rules, the Committee has aimed at assessing the potential impact on stakeholders and 
ensuring consistency with constitutional and legal safeguards. During its examination of these 
two Rules, the Committee held three meetings on 4 th February, 2025, 11 th and 25 th March, 
2025.  In these meetings the Committee held detailed deliberations and heard the views and 
submissions of the Secretary and concerned Officers of the Department of Telecom, Ministry 
of Communications, Representatives of the Telecommunication Engineering Centre (TEC) 
and National Centre for Communication Security (NCCS), representatives of Cellular 
Operators Association of India (COAI), T elecom Equipment Manufacturers Association of 
India (TEMA), Bharat Sanchar Nigam Limited (BSNL) and Mahanagar Telephone Nigam 
Limited (MTNL). The Committee also sought information through Questionnaires from the 
Ministry and other organizations. The following paras summarize the views, submissions and 
the deliberations in these meetings and the information shared with the Committee.  
 
2.1 In their submissions before the Committee, Secretary, Department of 
Telecommunications and other Officers mentioned that  these Rules form the backbone of 
cyber telecom security and the world over, telecom has become the basic platform for 
providing any service, innovation, economic development, security or defence and   it is 
incumbent upon the Government and the private sector to ensure  that both the players play 
their respective roles to ensure that adversaries do not gain control of these networks. It was 
submitted that recently, the Government, reco gnizing the importance of cyber security, 
modified the Allocation of Business Rules into  three parts where the original cyber security 
remained with the Ministry of Electronics and Infor mation Technology and the cyber security 
of telecom networks was specifically allocated to Department of Telecom and prosecution 
and punishment on cybercrimes to the Ministry of Home Affairs. With the aid of power point 
presentation, various aspects of the CTI Rules, 2024 were explained and it was also informed 
that that there were no telecom sector specific rules for critical infrastructure that were in 
existence earlier and rules under the IT Act of 2000 were governing them.   The difference 
from the existing rules is that they are more specific to telecom sector and more 
comprehensive and cover the security standards and upgradation processes of telecom 
infrastructure which is declared as critical. This ensures better monitoring of cyber security 
incidents that take place in telecom infrastructure and mitigation measures taken timely.   
Further Rules have been framed under Section 22(4) of the Telecommunications Act which 
provides for standards, security practices, upgradation requirements and procedures to be 
implemented for the critical telecom infrastructure and two organisations in the DoT will  
6 

 
specify the standards, namely, the Telecommunication Engineering Centre (TEC) and the 
National Centre for Communication Security (NCCS), Bangalore.  
2.2 On the Telecom Cyber Security Rules, 2024, it was stated that there are two important 
stakeholders on which these Rules are applicable, viz  the telecommunication entities which 
provide telecommunication services or networks, and the users, who are involved in misuse of 
telecommunication resources for fraud, cheating, etc.   It was submitted that before these rules 
were published, the Ministry went through an extensive round of public consultation and 
submissions from most of the associations of telecom service providers, several law firms and 
some public sector entiti es were received and all of them were considered and the rules were 
framed accordingly. While making submissions on the rule -wise features , it was submitted 
that t hese Rules establish a robust legal and operational framework for telecom security, 
ensuring compliance, accountability, and resilience against emerging cyber threats. 
2.3 In the submissions, t he interconnected nature of both rules was pointed out and the 
need for proactive measures to address the rapid advancements in technology and 
cybersecurity was emphasized. Issues relating to inter -ministerial coordination, particularly 
between the Department of Telecommunications (DoT), Ministry of Electronics and 
Information Technology (MeitY), Ministry of Home Affairs (MHA), and other relevant 
departments, to ensure effective collaboration in enforcing these rules were also mentioned. 
Points regarding the security of smart  phones and apps, particularly those manufactured in 
other countries and also about the testing and enforcement mechanism to ensure that devices 
entering the Indian market are free from malware or spyware  were also deliberated upon. 
Members of the Committee, raised concerns about cybercrime awareness, particularly in rural 
areas, and suggested leveraging government platforms like UPI, Aadhaar, and banking portals 
to disseminate cybersecurity awareness messages.  Queries also touched upon the need for 
better coordination with state governments and cyber police, particularly in addressing 
financial frauds targeting vulnerable groups like senior citizens.   
2.4 In summary, Secretary of the Department of Telecommunications (DoT), on the 
Telecom Cyber Security Rules  pointed out that they s erve as an overarch ing framework for 
telecom cyber security, covering telecom service providers and users misus ing telecom 
resources (e.g., for digital arrests or fraud)  and the Critical Telecommunication Infrastructure 
(CTI) Rules  enable the government to designate specific telecom infrastructure as critical, 
based on its impact on national security, economy, publ ic health, and safety.  In the Global 
context, this a ligns with international practices for protecting critical assets.  Also, it was 
emphasized that unlike the IT Act’s broader framework, CTI Rules are telecom-specific,  
7 

covering security standards, upgrades, and inspections  and facilitate a shift from the IT Act’  
critical information infrastructure framework to a telecom-focused one. 
2.5 While clarifying some queries by Members, Secretary outlined robust inter -ministerial 
coordination through the Digital Communications Commission (DCC), involving MeitY, 
NITI Aayog, Department of Economic Affairs(DEA) , Department for Promotion of Industry 
and Internal Trade ( DPIIT) , and collaboration with MHA’s Indian Cybercrime Coordination 
Centre (I4C),  the Ministry of Consumer Affairs, and Ministry of Micro, Small and Medium 
Enterprises( MSME) for cybercrime, unsolicited calls, and Industry 4.0. He stated that DoT 
coordinates with State Governments via Digital Intelligence Units and manages sp ectrum for 
law enforcement. The I4C portal facilitates cybercrime reporting with state police integration. 
On the Data Protection (DPDP) Rules, it was submitted that DoT is aligning telecom 
cybersecurity with industry input to avoid dual regulation.  He also highlighted t he ‘Sanchar 
Saathi’ app which empowers users to report fraudulent calls, block numbers, and reduce 
fraudulent international calls by 75% through biometric verification. It was informed that DoT 
plans a centralized campaign using platforms like banks and UPI, leveraging ‘Sanchar Saathi’ 
and dial tones.  
2.6 During the meeting of the Committee on 11 th March, the Committee heard the 
submissions of the Telecommunication Engineering Centre (TEC) and National Centre for 
Communication Security (NCCS) on the matter.  
2.7 In their submissions, Secretary and Senior Officials of the Telecommunication 
Engineering Centre (TEC) stated that TEC serves as the technical arm of the Department of 
Telecommunications (DoT), acting as a knowledge hub and advis ory body for the telecom 
and ICT sectors. Its key functions include standardization, testing, and certification of 
telecommunication equipment, along with administration of the Mandatory Testing and 
Certification of Telecommunication Equipment (MTCTE) unde r the Indian Telegraph 
(Amendment) Rules, 2017and  Telecommunications (Standards, Conformity Assessment and 
Certification) Rules, 2025. It was mentioned that  TEC plays a crucial role in formulating 
technical standards, conducting field trials, and ensuring conformity assessment through 
various certification schemes like Type Approval Certificate (TAC), Interface Approval 
Certificate (IAC), Simplified Certification Scheme (SCS), and General Certification Scheme 
(GCS). Also, the MTCTE framework mandates equipm ent testing at TEC -designated labs, 
with an end -to-end online certification process. Additionally, TEC collaborates with global 
standardization bodies like ITU -T, ETSI, 3GPP, and ANSI , ensuring alignment with 
international best practices.  
8 

It was conveye d that the Government has also exempted specific telecom products such as 
mobile user equipment, servers, and smart cameras  from MTCTE, with ongoing discussions 
to align essential requirements with the BIS Act, 2016. 
 
2.8. In their submissions, representatives of National Centre for Communication Security  
 (NCCS) mentioned that NCCS  oversees telecom network security through a structured 
approach covering network establishment, operation, and surveillance . The Communication 
Security Scheme (ComSec) ensures in -country, evidence -based security certification, with 
objectives such as developing security standards, creating a testing ecosystem, and ensuring 
regulatory compliance. It was further stated that NCCS has published 47 India n Telecom 
Security Assurance Requirements (ITSARs), with 5 more in progress, and designated 6 
Telecom Security Testing Labs (TSTLs), with 5 additional labs expected within a year. It was 
also informed that the Certification process includes Voluntary Secur ity Certification (VSC) 
for six months, followed by Mandatory Security Certification (MSC), with 5 telecom products 
already mandated for security certification . NCCS is responsible for certification issuance, 
renewal, non -conformity handling, dispute resol ution, and surveillance , ensuring robust 
supply chain security under the National Security Directive on Telecommunication Sector 
(NSDTS). The ProTem certification, valid for six months until December 2025, has already 
issued 35 certificates, with further inputs awaited from OEMs for compliance rectifications. 
 
2.9 In respect of queries about the level of standards fixed in the country with respect to 
the international standards it was informed that the standards are almost same as used by other 
developed countries otherwise, the synchronization and interface would not be possible from 
the technical point of view  and the basic safety, security, and the nodal agency for 
collaborating with the international standards is ensured, national and international 
stakeholder consultations are conducted and based on the inputs, the Indian standards are 
fixed. It was also submitted that five products were exempted from the MTCTE scheme as are 
being covered under the Compulsory Registration Order  (CRO) of  MeitY and BIS A ct; 
however, consultations with MeitY are going on for inclusion of these items also under the 
Scheme. 
2.10 In the meeting of the Committee held on 25 th March, 2025, views/ submissions of the 
representatives from the Cellular Operators Association of India  (COAI), the Telecom 
Equipment Manufacturers Association of India (TEMA) and Bharat Sanchar Nigam Limited 
(BSNL) and MTN were heard. 
 
 
9 

2.11 In his submissions, CMD, BSNL and MTNL highlighted the core areas of both the 
rules and stated that Governments worldwide are classifying telecom networks as critical 
infrastructure and actively taking steps to secure communications and safeguard national 
interest, their implications on cybersecurity and vulnerability to cyber -attacks. He mentioned 
that Telecommunications (Critical Telecommunication Infrastructure) Rules, 2024 pave the 
way for a secure and robust telecommunication infrastructure in India. H e stated that BSNL 
has already put in place industry standard measures to safeguard critical telecom 
infrastructure and maintain network security  and they have undertaken multiple initiatives to 
enhance physical security and also regularly issues guideline s to reinforce security measures. 
The CMD, BSNL also highlighted the key areas of the Telecommunications (Telecom Cyber 
Security) Rules, 2024 such as collection, sharing and analysis; obligations relating to telecom 
cyber security; measures to protect & en sure telecom cybersecurity; reporting of security 
incidents and appointing Chief Telecommunication Security Officer.   He also mentioned that 
BSNL is committed to ensuring telecom cybersecurity and is setting up a dedicated 
organization at both corporate and field levels, including Chief Information Security Officer 
and also have dedicated Information Security Cell, Security Operation Center and core 
cybersecurity expertise. 
 
2.12 In his submissions, the DG of COAI submitted that with regard to policy level issues 
there is a need to replace the requirement of sharing of TSPs traffic data analysis, disclosure 
of security incidents to public should be introduced and the CTI should be finalized in 
consultation with respective operators. Further he also highlight ed the operations issues viz. 
spares should be removed from the list of CTI, inspection should be carried out only in cases 
of major security incident, logs to be provided only in case of major security incident, supply 
chain records considered confidential by Original Equipment Manufacturers (OEMs) and not 
shared with TSPs, since details are already being submitted by OEMS to government, directly 
through the National Security Directive on Telecommunications sector (NSDTS) and MTCTE 
Program. He also submitted that current submissions to NSDTS and or TEC may be utilized 
by DoT to reduce compliance burden on TSPs, in view of impracticality of the time line  and 
there should be no separate provision for reporting of security incidents in respect of CTI, 
since all security incidents already need to be reported under the extant CERT-IN guidelines. 
  
2.13 COAI representative also submitted their views/suggestion s with regard to policy level 
issues and operational issues under the Telecommunications (Telecom Cyber Security) Rules, 
2024. In their submission, they highlighted the policy issues with regard to obligations 
relating to telecom cyber security and reimbursement of costs of compliance.  
10 

It was also stated that as regards the operations issues, under Rules 2(e) they have proposed 
that the security incident definition must be in line or in accordance with the requirements and 
definitions that have been in use currently; specific consultation should be held to decide the 
category/type of security incide nt and only major incidents should require to be reported. In 
Rule 3(2)(b) regarding sharing of traffic Data they have opined that there is no clarity on the 
scope of the data which may be shared, as well as the circumstances under which it may be 
shared a nd may be considered that the data collected may only be shared with the 
Government and authorized agencies and not with telecommunication entities or users. They 
have also submitted their suggestion for consideration of the Committee under Rules 4(4)(a),  
4(4)(f) and 4(4)(h)(vi), 5(5)(a), 5(12), 6, 7(1) and 7(2) regarding telecom cyber security 
policy, security audits and maintain logs, suspension of telecom identified, telecom identifier, 
appointment of CTSO, reporting security incidents and disclosure of security incident to 
public, respectively.  
  
2.14  Thereafter, the Chairman, TEMA in his submissions complimented the Government 
for coming out with both the rules as they represent a significant regulatory step in fortifying 
India’s Telecommunications Ne twork and securing its critical infrastructure against Cyber 
threats and taking care of national security issues. He also submitted certain issues before the 
Committee for its consideration viz. cyber Security and security issues arising out of Mobile 
phones; need to address the issue of getting approval on the basis of Non -Land Border 
Country Chip/Components/OS but supplying and deploying the products with 
chips/Components/OS from land Border Countries, by third party/random inspections, need to 
use and prescribe Indian Operating Software including Mobile SIM Operating System, need 
to incorporate/mandate of Zero Trust Architecture; need to enhance incident response and 
recovery plans; need to encourage threat intelligence sharing platform; need to strengthen 
Supply Chain Security; need for Cybersecurity awareness and training; and need to establish a 
Cybersecurity Certification Framework.  He also highlighted some specific issues with rules 
provisions under the Teleco m Cyber Security Rules, 2024 before the Committee and suggest 
to include Virtual Telecom Network providers also in the definition under the Rules 2(f) and 
Rules 4(2) (b) need to define fraudulent messages; Rule 6 need to prescribe 
qualification/criteria for the role of CTSO etc. 
2.15 TEMA’s submissions also highlighted the importance of regular capability maturity 
assessments for Security Operation Centres and continuous professional development for 
cybersecurity personnel. They proposed the implementation of a National Firewall and 
monitoring only metadata at gateways to strengthen security.  
11 

Additionally, TEMA resubmitted Annexure 1 with clarifications and additional information, 
while Annexure 2 remained unchanged. Further submissions covered critical areas such as 
"Rip and Replacement" of vulnerable infrastructure, addressing white -labelling issues, 
leveraging Indian opportunities arising from U.S. tariff policies, and strategies to promote 
Indian standards globally. These recommendations aim to fortify India’s telecom 
cybersecurity framework and enhance its global competitiveness. 
3. Besides the oral submissions during the meetings of the Committee, the Department of 
Telecom in its written submissions , while responding to the Questionnaires sent in respect of 
the examination of Rules has provided information which is summarized as under:  
3.1 Submissions in respect of Critical Telecom Infrastructure (CTI) Rules, 2024: The 
Telecommunication Act, 2023 (Chapter IV, Sections 19–23) provides the legal foundation for 
standards, public safety, national security, and telecom network protection. Sectio n 22 
outlines CTI identification and security implementation. The CTI Rules include features 
beyond NCIIPC’s CII rules under the IT Act, such as mandatory compliance with telecom -
specific standards, log preservation for two years, risk registers, remote ac cess protocols, 
supply chain upgrade procedures, and a digital compliance framework.  Rule 9 of the CTI 
Rules directs punishment under the Telecommunication Act. Section 42(1) prescribes up to 
three years imprisonment or a ₹2 crore fine, or both, for unauth orized services or damaging 
CTI. Additional penalties apply under Sections 32 and 34 for authorization breaches. The 
Rules require that Service providers must submit detailed information on CTI components. 
These are reviewed for compliance with applicable security standards by the Telecom 
Engineering Centre (TEC) and the National Centre for Communication Security (NCCS).  The 
submissions mention that t he National Security Directive on Telecommunication Sector 
(effective since June 2021) mandates sourcing tel ecom equipment from trusted sources. 
National Security Council Secretariat (NSCS) manages this through the Trusted Telecom 
Portal, evaluating and approving equipment before deployment. Field inspections by DoT 
verify compliance.  DoT conducts annual inspections using updated proformas. CTI 
inspections will be integrated into this routine. Security incidents must be reported within six 
hours via email and later through a digital portal, as per Rule 7(1)(j) of the CTI Rules and 
definitions from the Telecom Cyber Security Rules, 2024.  Also, each service provider must 
designate a CTSO to oversee network security and compliance  whose responsibilities include 
maintaining architecture, access authorizations, risk analysis, incident reports , audits, SLAs, 
and updates to a centralized portal.TEC and NCCS formulate security standards in 
consultation with academic institutions like IITs which are published after stakeholder review.  
 
12 

Service providers are obligated to comply, with field insp ections ensuring adherence.  Also, 
entities must apply to DoT for planned upgrades. In urgent cases post -security incidents, 
immediate upgrades are permitted with post -facto intimation to DoT within 24 hours. All 
requests and reports will eventually be routed through a dedicated portal. 
3.2 Further submissions outline the framework for identifying and regulating telecom 
infrastructure critical to national security, public safety, and economic stability. A designated 
Committee within the Department of Telecommunications (DoT), including NCIIPC 
representatives, evaluates telecom networks to classify Critical Telecom Infrastructure (CTI) 
based on impact assessments. The MTCTE (Mandatory Testing and Certification of 
Telecommunication Equipment) framework is used for testing and certifying imported 
telecom hardware and software, with standards and test labs already established for various 
equipment categories. The  CTI Rules provide mechanisms for inspection, compliance, 
penalties, and data access with checks to safeguard privacy and prevent misuse. Inspections 
require prior notice to telecom entities, and a Chief Telecom Security Officer (CTSO) must be 
appointed by each entity to ensure rule implementation. Data access is res tricted to 
cybersecurity-related information, not personal data. The rules mandate incident reporting 
within six hours, with further detailed reporting timelines to be reviewed later. While prior 
government permission is required for CTI upgradation, excep tions are made for urgent 
security responses, and a 14 -day deemed approval process is included to reduce compliance 
delays. 
3.3 Submissions in respect of Telecom Cyber Security Rules, 2024 : The submissions 
outline a comprehensive framework for enhancing cy bersecurity in India’s telecom sector. 
The rules emphasize a "digital by design" approach, with Rule 10 mandating a dedicated 
portal for compliance and data submissions is currently under development by the Department 
of Telecommunications (DoT). Until the  portal is operational, interim measures like email -
based incident reporting aligned with CERT -IN timelines and existing license conditions for 
security policies are in place. The Ministry submits that the broad definitions in the rules  take 
into account the evolving nature of cyber threats and referenc e the IT Act, 2000, IT Rules, 
2009, and ITU standards to ensure inclusivity. Data confidentiality is prioritized through 
secure MPLS networks or VPNs, role -based access, and metadata -only collection 
(approximately 1% of traffic), with secure data centers restricting unauthorized access. 
3.4 Key operational aspects include mandatory Security Operations Centres (SOCs) for all 
telecom entities, as per Rule 4(4)( h), tasked with threat monitoring, logging, and supporting 
investigations. The ICDR portal facilitates IMEI registration, with Rules 8(4) and 8(5)  
13 

enabling the identification and removal of tampered IMEI devices without user hearings, 
following GSMA st andards. The Ministry acknowledges implementation challenges, such as 
portal development timelines and stakeholder training, but ensures safeguards like password -
protected, role -based access and contemporary security standards. Punitive measures under 
Rule 9 and Section 42 of the Act impose strict penalties for offences like fraudulent SIM 
procurement or tampering, with up to three years imprisonment or a ₹50 lakh fine. The 
Ministry also notes that no stakeholder objections have been received, indicating in itial 
acceptance of the rules. 
3.5 The Ministry’s responses to specific concerns address stakeholder feedback on 
ambiguities and implementation. For instance, the broad language in phrases like  “adequate 
safeguards” and “as may be specified” is justified as necessary for flexibility in the fast -
evolving telecom and cyber threat landscape, allowing for future adjustments. Rule 5 balances 
urgent suspension powers with a seven -day notice and 30 -day appeal mechanism for non -
urgent cases, ensuring grievance redressal. Data collection is limited to traffic data for 
cybersecurity purposes, with safeguards to prevent unauthorized access, and the Central 
Government may impose additional measures. The Mini stry acknowledges AI -driven cyber 
threats, noting that the rules are designed to accommodate emerging technologies and can be 
updated as needed. 
3.6 Further submissions state that the Rules f ortify India’s telecom infrastructure through 
digital compliance, robust security measures, and proactive threat management.  Through the 
development of the compliance portal, ongoing stakeholder training, and alignment with 
international standards like GSMA and ITU , the rules’ forward -looking approach has been 
underscored.  
3.7 The Ministry emphasizes that telecom cyber security is a rapidly evolving field, and 
thus, broader definitions and flexible mechanisms were intentionally designed to 
accommodate emerging threats and technological changes. Safeguards like password 
protection, role -based access, and adherence to future government -issued measures are 
mentioned, stating that many specifics will figure in the digital portal currently under 
development is operational. 
 
 
14 

4. Observations and Recommendations on the Telecommunications (Telecom Cyber 
Security) Rules, 2024 and Telecommunications (Critical Telecommunication 
Infrastructure) Rules, 2024  
Telecommunications (Telecom Cyber Security) Rules, 2024 
4.1 The Committee notes that Rule 2(e) defines a "securi ty incident" as "an event having 
real or potential risk on telecom cyber security."  On concerns that this definition is overly 
broad and whether it aligns with existing definitions, such as those under CERT -In or global 
standards, the Department of Telecom (DoT) has informed, with examples of such definitions 
from the National Institute of Standards and Technology USA and the Ministry of Electronics 
and Information Technology (MeitY) Notification dated 29.04.2016, that the definition aligns 
with global best  practices and is necessitated by the DoT’s new responsibility for telecom 
network security under the Allocation of Business Rules. Taking note of the submissions, 
the Committee supports the broad definition of a "security incident" under Rule 2(e), as 
a n ecessary measure to safeguard critical telecom infrastructure; however, to address 
concerns about its scope and ensure practical implementation, the Committee observes 
that the DoT may consider refining the definition, and may evaluate it for introducing a 
tiered incident classification system to prioritize reporting of major incidents, ensuring a 
balanced approach to telecom cybersecurity. 
4.2 The Committee , in context of suggestions, to include Virtual Telecom Network 
providers also in the definition unde r the Rules 2(f)  notes that in its submissions ,  the 
Department has clarified that under Rule 2(f), which defines a "telecommunication entity" , 
the definition already encompasses Virtual Telecom Network Providers (VTNPs), as it 
includes any person providi ng telecommunication services or operating a telecommunication 
network, specifically covering authorized entities under the Telecommunications Act, 2023.  
Noting the clarification, the Committee observes that the Department may apprise the 
TSPs in this regard also.  
4.3 The Committee notes under Rule 2(1)(g), the definition of "telecommunication entity" 
has been given. The Committee is of the view that in order to enhance consistency and clarity 
in the said rules the term be suitably defined to explicitly distinguish it from 
"telecommunication service provider"  (TSP). The Committee observes that the current 
definition in Rule 2(1)(g) is broad, encompassing both service providers and network 
operators, which risks inconsistent application. The Committee recommends that 
suitable necessary action in this regard be taken by the Department of Telecom. 
15 

4.4 The Committee notes the provisions of Rule 3(1)(a) which allow for seeking, from  a 
telecommunication entity, traffic data and any other data, other than content of messages, in 
the form and manner as may be specif ied by the Central Government on the portal .  The 
Committee in this respect observes that the wording “any other data" under this Rule is quite 
broad in scope and can raises potential for privacy violations. In this regard the Committee 
recommends that the Department should explicitly define the categories of data 
permissible for collection, limiting it to what is strictly necessary for telecom 
cybersecurity.  
4.5 The Committee notes that Rule 3(2)(b) permit the Government  to analyse collected 
traffic data for enhancing telecom cybersecurity and share such analysis with 
telecommunication entities or users as deemed necessary. On the aspect of clarity regarding 
the scope of data to be shared and the circumstanc es for sharing, the Department has clarified 
that the rule pertains to sharing analysis derived from data, not the raw data itself, and that 
sharing with telecommunication entities or users is necessary to enable corrective actions to 
ensure cybersecurity,  such as notifying a user or entity about a targeted threat. The 
Committee observes that telecommunication entities, as network operators, and users, as 
end-points, play a vital role in implementing corrective measures, justifying their 
inclusion in the da ta-sharing framework. The Committee, however recommends that a 
mechanism of having a periodic review of the data -sharing framework to assess its 
effectiveness in enhancing telecom cybersecurity and address emerging privacy or 
security challenges  be set up. Besides efforts towards regular engagement with 
stakeholders regarding the sharing process and evolving cybersecurity standards shall 
also be beneficial. 
4.6 The Committee takes note of the provisions of Rule 3(3) wherein it is stated that the 
Central Government and any agency authorized by the Central Government to collect data 
under these rules, as well as persons with whom such data is shared under sub -rule (2), shall 
put in place adequate safeguards, including any specific safeguards as may be specified by the 
Central Government to ensure that such data is stored and maintained in strict confidentiality 
and prevent any unauthorized access thereto. In this regard, the Committee is of the view 
that the phrase "adequate safeguards" is vague and fails to elaborate upon what level of 
safeguards will be considered adequate. Thus, the Committee recommends that t o 
provide clarity on the term "adequate safeguards”, the Department should issue 
detailed guidelines specifying mandatory technical and proce dural measures for 
authorised agencies and telecom entities.  
16 

4.7 The Committee notes that Rule 4(2)  (b), prohibits telecommunication entities from 
transmitting any message that is fraudulent. The Committee observes that the term 
"fraudulent" is too broad, lacks a clear definition within the rule, and raises concerns about 
who determines whether a message is fraudulent, noting that innocent individuals may 
unknowingly forward such messages. In view of this, the Committee recommends that to 
address concerns about the broadness of the term "fraudulent" and risks to innocent 
senders, the DoT may take necessary ac tion to explicitly define the term, establish clear 
criteria and processes for determining fraudulence, and provide robust support for 
telecommunication entities and users in this regard.  
4.8 The Committee notes that Rule 4(4)(a) mandates that every telec ommunication entity 
should adopt a telecom cybersecurity policy. Upon noting that the Telecom Service Providers 
(TSPs) are already required under extant license conditions to maintain an "organizational 
policy on security and security management of their networks”, the Committee had queried as 
to whether this requirement imposes an unnecessary compliance burden and cost on TSPs. In 
their submission, the Department has stated that these Rules are applicable to a broader range 
of telecom entities, including t hose exempt from authorization, and that the rule does not 
create additional burdens for licensees already complying with similar license conditions. The 
Committee observes that a standardized cybersecurity policy is essential to address 
evolving threats a nd ensure that all entities, licensed or otherwise, maintain robust 
security practices. Thus, the Committee agrees with the laid requirement for all 
telecommunication entities to adopt a telecom cybersecurity policy, as it strengthens the 
security across a diverse ecosystem.  
4.9 The Committee in respect of Rule 4(4)(f) observes that it mandates telecommunication 
entities to conduct periodic cybersecurity  audits, both internally and through certified 
agencies, and share audit reports with the Government. The Department in this respect has 
submitted that Telecom Service Providers (TSPs) already comply with such requirements 
under the National Security Direc tive on Telecommunications Sector (NSDTS), Mandatory 
Testing and Certification of Telecom Equipment (MTCTE), and COMSEC, as well as internal 
audits and periodic audits by DoT’s Licensed Service Area (LSA) units. Further the 
Department has informed that it has taken steps to streamline audits by standardizing 
proformas and automating workflows, and has mentioned that this is an ongoing process. The 
Committee observes that framing clear guidelines on scope and frequency, by the DoT 
shall be helpful in ensurin g that the cybersecurity objectives are readily met by the 
TSPs.  
17 

4.10 The Committee notes that in its submissions on Rule 4(4)(h)(vi) which mandates 
telecommunication entities to maintain records or logs for a period specified by the Central 
Government and make them available to authorized agencies or persons, it has been informed 
that the maximum duration will be determined through consultations with stakeholders, 
including Telecom Service Providers (TSPs), Internet Service Providers (ISPs), the Chief 
Information Security Officer (CISO) of DoT, and the country’s security apparatus. The 
Committee, in this regard, recommends that inclusive stakeholder consultations be 
conducted so that a practical, secure, and effective log retention framework, which 
minimizes burden on telecommunication entities gets framed at the earliest.  
4.11 The Committee takes note of Rule 5(5)(a) which authorizes the Government to 
temporarily suspend the use of a telecommunication identifier for a duration specified in an 
“Order”. Upon the question to specify the duration of suspension and propose a maximum 
timeline of 30 days, the Department of Telecom (DoT) has submitted that users will receive 
notice and an opportunity to respond before suspension, and the duration will be determ ined 
on a case-by-case basis mentioning that fixing a uniform 30 -day limit may be impractical due 
to the variable time required for investigations by law enforcement agencies. The Committee 
while taking note of the submission observes that for cases requir ing longer suspensions 
(e.g., complex investigations by law enforcement), the DoT should allow extensions 
through a formal process, like clearly stating the reasons for such extension and also 
giving a tentative resolution timeline. 
4.12 Rule 6 regarding Chief Telecommunication Security Officer  (CTSO) states that 
“Every telecommunication entity shall appoint a Chief Telecommunication Security Officer, 
whose details shall be provided in writing to the Central Government in the form as may be 
specified on th e portal and any replacement or change of such officer shall be promptly 
intimated to the Central Government, in such form as may be specified on the portal by that 
Government”. The Committee notes  that as per the extant license conditions, TSPs are 
already required to appoint a ‘Chief Information Security Officer (CISO). On the question of 
if  there is an overlap in the responsibilities of the CISO and CTSO, the Department has 
mentioned that as per the license condition “39.23 (i) The Chief Officer in char ge of technical 
network operations and the Chief Security Officer/Chief Information Security Officer, and in -
charge of GMSC, MSC, Soft -Switch, Central Database, ILD Gateway, VSAT Hub, INSAT 
MSS-R Hub, PMRTS Central/Base Station, GMPCS Gateway, Switches and  System 
Administrators shall be resident Indian citizen.” and thus the Chief security officer has been  
18 
 

re-designated as Chief Telecommunication Security officer along with its responsibilities in 
the extant rules and thus no additional responsibility has been cast. The Committee notes the 
clarification given. 
4.13 The Committee notes that Rule 7(2) allows the Government  to disclose security 
incidents to the public or require affected telecommunication entities to do so when deemed in 
the public interest. The Committee agrees with the provision, for public disclosure of 
security incidents, as it supports cybersecurity awa reness and public safety besides 
educating the public about cybersecurity trends, enhance awareness, and prevent future 
incidents. However, the Committee observes that to address concerns about unnecessary 
panic and reputational loss of the telecommunicati on entity, the DoT should issue clear 
guidelines on disclosure circumstances, prioritize direct notifications to affected persons, 
and implement safeguards to protect privacy and manage public perception.  
4.14 The Committee notes that under Rule 10 , as a positive step towards Digital 
implementation of the Rules, establishment of a centralized portal has been stated for 
compliance and reporting streamlining obligations. The Committee observes that the 
success of the portal shall depend on accessibilit y, security, and effective 
implementation. The Committee recommends that the portal’s development be 
expedited and all steps be taken to ensure that it is secure, user -friendly, and supported 
by clear guidelines.  
4.15 The Committee observes that the absence of mandatory malware testing for devices 
such as mobile phones, servers, and smart watches poses a significant cybersecurity risk to 
India’s telecom ecosystem. These devices, integral to telecom networks, can harbour 
malware, spyware, or other vulnerabi lities that compromise data integrity, network security, 
and national security. The Committee further observes that addressing this gap is critical to 
prevent malicious software from infiltrating telecom networks and critical infrastructure. The 
Committee, therefore recommends that suitable steps be taken towards enforcing 
malware testing, strengthening supply chain security, and promoting indigenous 
solutions, so that the country’s telecom networks can be safeguarded from malicious 
threats.  
4.16 The Committee taking note of the newer emerging technologies is of the view , that 
integrating Post -Quantum Cryptography (PQC) into India’s telecom networks is critical to 
counter future quantum-based threats and provide a robust foundation for this transition.  
19 
 

In this regard, the Committee recommends that to secure telecom networks against 
quantum-based attacks, a strategic, phased adoption of Post-Quantum Cryptography  
(PQC) should be implemented as its integration is essential to ensure long-term security. 
Telecommunications (Critical Telecommunication Infrastructure) Rules, 2024  
4.17 The Committee notes that Rule 4 mandates that spares, hardware, and software used in 
CTI comply with specified standards.  The Committee also takes note that the Department of  
Telecom in its submission has emphasized the critical role of spares in maintaining telecom 
infrastructure and has justified their inclusion in the CTI framework as a security requirement, 
asserting that it does not increase the compliance burden on Telec om Service Providers 
(TSPs). It has also been submitted that spares are essential for the maintenance and 
operational continuity of CTI and as spares replace failed equipment, they must adhere to the 
same standards to ensure network reliability and securit y. The Committee observes that 
substandard spares could introduce vulnerabilities, compromising the integrity of 
critical infrastructure and thus mandating compliance for spares is a prudent measure 
to safeguard national security and public interest. Howev er, the Committee also 
observes that smaller TSPs, in particular, may face challenges in sourcing compliant 
spares, especially if supply chains are limited or if compliant spares are costlier. Thus, 
while supporting the inclusion of spares in the CTI  Rules, 2024, as a critical security 
measure, the Committee recommends that the Department of Telecom may adopt a 
balanced approach through clear guidelines, phased implementation, and targeted 
support for smaller operators as these measures will strengthen the telecom 
infrastructure's resilience while fostering a conducive environment for compliance. 
4.18 The Committee notes that Rule 5(1) authorizes the Government to inspect hardware, 
software, and data related to CTI and in this respect,  it has been informed that such 
inspections are an extension of existing field inspections conducted by DoT units to ensure 
compliance by telecom entities. The Committee also notes that it has been submitted that 
security incidents will follow standard pro cesses, including reporting and mitigation. The 
Committee is of the view that such inspections enable proactive identification of 
vulnerabilities or non -compliance, and thereby reduces the risk of disruptions or 
cyberattacks on critical telecom infrastruct ure. Thus, the Committee endorses the 
inspection provisions under the Rules, as a critical mechanism to ensure compliance and 
security of telecom infrastructure. However, the Committee recommends that to 
enhance effectiveness and address concerns about ope rational disruptions, the DoT 
should adopt a hybrid inspection framework combining routine and incident-triggered  
20 

inspections, supported by clear guidelines, standardized protocols, and stakeholder 
engagement. The Committee feels that these measures wi ll strengthen the security of 
CTI while fostering a collaborative and efficient compliance environment for telecom 
entities. 
4.19 The Committee notes that Rule 6(2)(h) mandates that all logs related to CTI be 
provided to assist in real -time anomaly detecti on and intelligence generation by the 
Government. The Committee notes that it has been informed that real -time log submission is 
essential for proactive security monitoring through a Security Operation Center (SOC). The 
Committee understands that logs are indispensable for post -incident analysis and that 
real-time access would be helpful in preventing or mitigating large-scale cyber incidents; 
however, the Committee also notes that continuous log submission may undermine the 
proactive monitoring capabilitie s leading to delays in the detection of emerging threats 
and a balanced approach needs to be developed. Taking note of the requirements of 
real-time log submission, the Committee recommends all steps be taken to ensure that 
the SOC infrastructure can handle large volumes of logs without compromising 
performance or security. Also, all steps to ensure that SOC infrastructure is fortified 
against cyberattacks through regular security assessments and compliance with global 
cybersecurity standards be taken. 
4.20 The Committee notes that Rule 7(b) places an obligation on the Telecommunication 
entity to maintain a complete list of Critical Telecommunication Infrastructure. The 
Committee further notes that it their submissions, the Department has clarified that the list of 
Critical Telecom Infrastructure (CTI) s hall be finalized in consultation with respective 
operators (authorized entities/licensees). The Committee appreciates the approach and the 
clarification given and observes that since Telecom operators possess detailed knowledge 
of their infrastructure, including its technical specifications, operational significance, 
and vulnerabilities , finalizing the CTI list in consultation with respective operators is 
both a practical and strategic necessity. 
4.21 The Committee takes note that the Rule 7(1)(e) mandates Telecom Service Providers 
(TSPs) to maintain and provide supply chain records for telecommunication equipment 
deployed in CTI. The Committee also notes that supply chain details are considered 
confidential by Original Equipment Manufacturers (OEMs) and are already submitted to the 
Government through the National Security Directive on Telecommunications Sector 
(NSDTS) and the Mandatory Testing and Certification of Telecom Equipment (MTCTE) 
program. On the query raised as to why these submissions cannot be utilized to reduce the  
21 

compliance burden on TSPs, the Department of Telecom (DoT) has informed that NSDTS 
captures supply chain details only for equipment deployed after 15.06.2021, and MTCTE 
lacks provisions for supply chain records, necessitating the rule to ensure comprehensive 
visibility at a single point. In view of the stated information, the Committee endorses the 
requirement under Rule 7(1)(e), to maintain supply chain records as a critical m easure 
to ensure the security of critical telecom infrastructure; however, to reduce the 
compliance burden on TSPs and enhance efficiency, the Committee recommends that 
DoT should make efforts to integrate NSDTS data and adopt a phased approach for 
legacy equipment, and also provide robust support to TSPs. in case they face any issue 
in providing the data sought.  
4.22 The Committee taking note of the Rule 7(1)(j) observes that it mandates Telecom 
Service Providers (TSPs) to report security incidents to the  Central Government within six 
hours of their occurrence. Also, the Committee observes that under Rule 7(1) of the Telecom 
Cyber Security Rules,  2024 regarding reporting of Security Incidents, it has been stated that 
“The telecommunication entity shall –) within six hours of becoming aware of a security 
incident affecting its telecommunication network or telecommunication service, report the 
same to the Central Government with relevant details of the affected system including the 
incident”. Detailed report will then be required within 24 hours.   The Committee also notes 
that the extant CERT -In guidelines require reporting within six hours of becoming aware of 
an incident. The Committee while observing that the CTI -specific incident reporting 
requirement is a  necessary measure to enhance the security of critical telecom infrastructure 
also notes that with the six -hour timeline triggered from the “occurrence” of an incident, as 
opposed to CERT -In’s “awareness” trigger, a practical challenge also emerges as TSPs  may 
not immediately detect incidents due to their complexity or latency in monitoring systems, 
rendering the “occurrence” timeline unrealistic. Taking it in view, the Committee 
recommends that to improve practicality and reduce the compliance burden, the DoT 
may consider aligning the reporting timeline with CERT - In’s “awareness” trigger, 
streamline reporting processes to avoid duplication, and provide robust support to 
TSPs. The Committee also notes that this shall bring similarity in provisions in both t he 
Rules.  
4.23 The Committee notes that Rule 8(8) exempts routine software updates aimed at 
incrementally improving the performance or security of CTI from certain regulatory 
requirements. In this respect, the Department has submitted that routine software updates, 
deployed by Original Equipment Manufacturers (OEMs), address shortcomings and  
22 
 

vulnerabilities to ensure stable operation and enhance CTI performance and security, and are 
therefore exempted under the rule. However, the Committee observes that without a 
precise definition, there is a risk of ambiguity, potentially allowing non -routine or 
significant updates to be misclassified as routine, bypassing necessary oversight, or 
causing confusion among Telecom Service Providers (TSPs) and OEMs about 
compliance requ irements. Thus, the Committee recommends that in order to address 
concerns about ambiguity, the DoT should clarify and clearly define "routine software 
update,” with defined criteria and guidelines so that TSPs and OEMs stand in 
compliance. 
4.24 The Commit tee notes that a significant portion of India’s telecom network 
infrastructure potentially relies on equipment from Chinese manufacturers, raising critical 
cybersecurity and national security concerns due to the risk of embedded vulnerabilities, 
backdoors, or unauthorized data access. These risks are particularly acute given the borderless 
nature of cyber threats and the strategic importance of telecom networks as critical 
infrastructure. The Committee observes that though the Critical Telecom Infrastructur e 
and Telecom Cyber Security Rules, 2024, provide a robust framework to address these 
concerns, but targeted actions are needed to mitigate the specific risks posed by foreign, 
particularly Chinese-made, equipment. In this regard, the Committee recommends that 
to address the security risks associated with such telecom equipment, a phased "Rip -
and-Replace" strategy should be implemented. Further this strategy could involve 
systematically identifying, removing, and replacing high -risk equipment with trusted, 
preferably indigenous, alternatives while strengthening supply chain security and 
enforcement mechanisms. This shall also allow India  to position itself as a global leader 
in secure telecom manufacturing.  
4.25 The Committee observes that the compliance provisions under the Critical Telecom 
Infrastructure Rules, 2024, may impose additional responsibilities on Telecom Service 
Providers (TSPs) to ensure national security and maintain critical telecom infrastructure . In 
respect of the query as to whether the costs of compliance should be reimbursed by the 
Government, the Department has submitted that these costs are inherent to the operational and 
business obligations of TSPs, as outlined in existing license conditio ns. It has further been 
submitted that compliance with security requirements is a fundamental aspect of operating in 
the telecom sector, and such costs should be factored into TSPs' business plans besides the 
security obligations vary by country due to dif fering security environments and regulatory 
frameworks. The Committee observes that there are instances where in some countries,  
23 
 

regulators provide financial compensation or cost -sharing mechanisms to TSPs for 
compliance with national security -related infrastructure mandates. In view of the 
foregoing, the Committee recommends that the Government may assess the actual cost 
implications of the se Rules and if required, may consider a hybrid approach in this 
regard or may consider offering incentives, such as tax breaks or subsidies, for 
compliance costs specifically tied to new mandates under the Rules. 
4.26 The Committee takes note of the submis sions by the Department of Telecom on the 
aspect of Cyber Security and National Security Issues arising from Mobile Phones that it 
cannot take action regarding mobile phones as they were denotified from the Mandatory 
Testing and Certification of Telecom Eq uipment (MTCTE) scheme via a Gazette notification 
dated 24.05.2022 , implying that mobile phones are no longer subject to mandatory testing for 
compliance with security standards under this framework. Also, the issue of White Labelling 
and import of telecom equipment from land border countries has been noted. The Committee 
observes that these gaps in the current regulatory framework need to be addressed and 
observes the Department may deliberate an d discuss these issues with concerned 
stakeholders to find a way for stricter enforcement mechanisms on these issues to ensure 
compliance with security standards and safeguard national interests. 
4.27 On the aspect of need to incorporate / mandate Zero Trust  Architecture (ZTA), the 
Department of Telecom has submitted the clarification that ZTA mandates strict identity 
verification and least -privilege access to prevent unauthorized access and lateral movement 
within networks, and is already incorporated as a r equirement under the Indian Telecom 
Security Assurance Requirements (ITSARs) framed by the National Centre for 
Communication Security (NCCS). Also, the ComSec Scheme's testing is based on these 
ITSARs, indicating that ZTA is effectively mandated and implem ented within the existing 
telecom security framework. The Committee notes the clarification given.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
24 

RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE – AT A GLANCE 
The Committee observes that the DoT may consider refining the definition  of "security 
incident" under Rule 2(e), and may evaluate it for introducing a tiered incident 
classification system to prioritize reporting of major incidents, ensuring a balanced 
approach to telecom cybersecurity. 
          Para 4 (4.1) 
             
The Comm ittee observes that the current definition in Rule 2(1)(g) is broad, 
encompassing both service providers and network operators, which risks inconsistent 
application. The Committee recommends that suitable necessary action in this regard be 
taken by the Department of Telecom. 
          Para 4 (4.3) 
 
The Committee recommends that the Department should explicitly define the categories 
of data permissible for collection, limiting it to what is strictly necessary for telecom 
cybersecurity.  
         Para 4 (4.4) 
 
The Committee observes that telecommunication entities, as network operators, and 
users, as end -points, play a vital role in implementing corrective measures, justifying 
their inclusion in the data -sharing framework. The Committee recommends that a 
mechanism of having a periodic review of the data -sharing framework to assess its 
effectiveness in enhancing telecom cybersecurity and address emerging privacy or 
security challenges be set up. Besides efforts towards regular engagement with 
stakeholders regarding the sharing process and evolving cybersecurity standards shall 
also be beneficial. 
          Para 4 (4.5) 
 
The Committee is of the view that the phrase "adequate safeguards" is vague and fails 
to elaborate upon what level of safeguards will be consider ed adequate. Thus, the 
Committee recommends that to provide clarity on the term "adequate safeguards”, the 
Department should issue detailed guidelines specifying mandatory technical and 
procedural measures for authorised agencies and telecom entities.  
          Para 4 (4.6) 
 
The Committee recommends that to address concerns about the broadness of the term 
"fraudulent" and risks to innocent senders, the DoT may take necessary action to 
explicitly define the term, establish clear criteria and processes for d etermining 
fraudulence, and provide robust support for telecommunication entities and users in this 
regard.  
           Para 4 (4.7) 
 
The Committee observes that a standardized cybersecurity  policy is essential to address 
evolving threats and ensure that all entities, licensed or otherwise, maintain robust 
security practices. Thus, the Committee agrees with the laid requirement for all 
telecommunication entities to adopt a telecom cybersecuri ty policy, as it strengthens the 
security across a diverse ecosystem.  
          Para 4 (4.8) 
 
The Committee observes that framing clear guidelines on scope and frequency, by the 
DoT shall be helpful in ensuring that the cybersecurity objectives are readil y met by the 
TSPs.  
          Para 4 (4.9) 
 
25 

The Committee  recommends that inclusive stakeholder consultations be conducted so 
that a practical, secure, and effective log retention framework, which minimizes burden 
on telecommunication entities gets framed at the earliest.  
          Para 4 (4.10) 
 
The Committee observes that for cases requiring longer suspensions (e.g., complex 
investigations by law enforcement),  the DoT should allow extensions through a formal 
process, like clearly stating the reasons for such extension and also giving a tentative 
resolution timeline. 
          Para 4 (4.11) 
 
The Committee observes that to address concerns about unnecessary panic  and 
reputational loss of the telecommunication entity, the DoT should issue clear guidelines 
on disclosure circumstances, prioritize direct notifications to affected persons, and 
implement safeguards to protect privacy and manage public perception.  
         Para 4 (4.13) 
 
The Committee observes that the success of the portal shall depend on accessibility, 
security, and effective implementation. The Committee recommends that the portal’s 
development be expedited and all steps be taken to ensure that it is secure, user-friendly, 
and supported by clear guidelines.  
          Para 4 (4.14) 
 
The Committee recommends that suitable steps be taken towards enforcing malware 
testing, strengthening supply chain security, and promoting indigenous solutions, so that 
the country’s telecom networks can be safeguarded from malicious threats.  
          Para 4 (4.15) 
  
The Committee recommends that to secure telecom networks against quantum -based 
attacks, a strategic, phased adoption of Post-Quantum Cryptography ( PQC) should be 
implemented as its integration is essential to ensure long-term security. 
          Para 4 (4.16) 
 
The Committee observes that substandard spares could introduce vulnerabilities, 
compromising the integrity of critical infrastructure and thus mandating compliance for 
spares is a prudent measure to safeguard national security and public interest. However, 
the Committee also observes that smaller TSPs, in particular, may face challenges in 
sourcing compliant spares, especially if supply chains are limited or if compliant spares 
are costlier. Thus, while supporting the inclusion of spares  in the CTI Rules, 2024, as a 
critical security measure, the Committee recommends that the Department of Telecom 
may adopt a balanced approach through clear guidelines, phased implementation, and 
targeted support for smaller operators as these measures wil l strengthen the telecom 
infrastructure's resilience while fostering a conducive environment for compliance. 
          
Para 4 (4.17) 
 
The Committee is of the view that inspections enable proactive identification of 
vulnerabilities or non -compliance, and thereby reduces the risk of disruptions or 
cyberattacks on critical telecom infrastructure. Thus, the Committee endorses the 
inspection provisions under the Rules, as a critical mechanism to ensure compliance and 
security of telecom infrastructure. However, the Committee recommends that to 
enhance effectiveness and address concerns about operational disruptions, the DoT 
should adopt a hybr id inspection framework combining routine and incident -triggered 
inspections, supported by clear guidelines, standardized protocols, and stakeholder 
engagement.  
26 

The Committee feels that these measures will strengthen the security of CTI while 
fostering a collaborative and efficient compliance environment for telecom entities. 
            
 Para 4 (4.18) 
 
The Committee understands that logs are indispensable for post -incident analysis and 
that real -time access would be helpful in preventing or mitigating large-scale cyber 
incidents; however, the Committee also notes that continuous log submission may 
undermine the proactive monitoring capabilities leading to delays in the detection of 
emerging threats and a balanced approach needs to be developed. Taking n ote of the 
requirements of real-time log submission, the Committee recommends all steps be taken 
to ensure that the SOC infrastructure can handle large volumes of logs without 
compromising performance or security. Also, all steps to ensure that SOC infrastructure 
is fortified against cyberattacks through regular security assessments and compliance 
with global cybersecurity standards be taken. 
          Para 4 (4.19) 
 
The Committee appreciates the approach and the clarification given and observes that 
since Telecom operators possess detailed knowledge of their infrastructure, including its 
technical specifications, operational significance, and vulnerabilities, finalizing the CTI 
list in consultation with respective operators is both a practical and strategic necessity. 
           
Para 4 (4.20) 
 
The Committee endorses the requirement under Rule 7(1)( e), to maintain supply chain 
records as a critical measure to ensure the security of critical telecom infrastructure; 
however, to reduce the compliance burden on TSPs and enhance efficiency, the 
Committee recommends that DoT should make efforts to integrat e NSDTS data and 
adopt a phased approach for legacy equipment, and also provide robust support to 
TSPs. in case they face any issue in providing the data sought.  
          Para 4 (4.21) 
 
The Committee recommends that to improve practicality and reduce the  compliance 
burden, the DoT may consider aligning the reporting timeline with CERT -In’s 
“awareness” trigger, streamline reporting processes to avoid duplication, and provide 
robust support to TSPs. The Committee also notes that this shall bring similarity in 
provisions in both the Rules.  
          Para 4 (4.22) 
 
The Committee observes that without a precise definition, there is a risk of ambiguity, 
potentially allowing non -routine or significant updates to be misclassified as routine, 
bypassing necessary oversight, or causing confusion among Telecom Service Providers 
(TSPs) and OEMs about compliance requirements. Thus, the Committee recommends 
that in order to address concerns about ambiguity, the DoT should clarify and clearly 
define "routine software upd ate,” with defined criteria and guidelines so that TSPs and 
OEMs stand in compliance. 
          Para 4 (4.23) 
 
The Committee observes that though the Critical Telecom Infrastructure and Telecom 
Cyber Security Rules, 2024, provide a robust framework to addr ess these concerns, but 
targeted actions are needed to mitigate the specific risks posed by foreign, particularly 
Chinese-made, equipment.  
27 

The Committee recommends that to address the security risks associated with such 
telecom equipment, a phased "Rip -and-Replace" strategy should be implemented. 
Further this strategy could involve systematically identifying, removing, and replacing 
high-risk equipment with trusted, preferably indigenous, alternatives while 
strengthening supply chain security and enforcement mechanisms. This shall also allow 
India to position itself as a global leader in secure telecom manufacturing.  
          Para 4 (4.24) 
 
The Committee observes that there are instances where in some countries, regulators 
provide financial compensation or cost -sharing mechanisms to TSPs for compliance 
with national security -related infrastructure mandates. In view of the foregoing, the 
Committee recommends that the Government may assess the actual cost implications of 
these Rules and if required, may consider a hybrid approach in this regard or may 
consider offering incentives, such as tax breaks or subsidies, for compliance costs 
specifically tied to new mandates under the Rules. 
          Para 4 (4.25) 
 
The Committee observes that these gaps in the current regulatory framework need to be 
addressed and observes that the Department may deliberate and discuss these issues 
with concerned stakeholders to find a way for stricter enforcement mechanisms on these 
issues to ensure compliance with security standards and safeguard national interests. 
           
Para 4 (4.26) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
28 
 

MINUTES OF THE MEETING OF THE COMMITTEE ON SUBORDINATE 
LEGISLATION, RAJYA SABHA 
III 
 THIRD MEETING 
 
 The Committee met at 03.00 PM on Tuesday, the 4th February, 2025 in Committee Room 
No.-3, A-Block, Parliament House Annexe Extension Building, New Delhi.  
 The following Members of the Committee were present in the meeting:- 
PRESENT: 
1. Shri Milind Murli Deora                      Chairman 
Members 
2. Ms. Sushmita Dev 
3. Shri Kesridevsinh Jhala 
4. Shri Jose K. Mani 
5. Shri Kartikeya Sharma 
6. Shri Tiruchi Siva 
7. Shri G.K. Vasan 
8. Smt. Sangeeta Yadav 
Secretariat 
1. Shri Sanjay Kumar Khursija, Joint Secretary 
2. Shri Har Prateek Arya, Director 
3. Shri ThangzalunKhuptong, Deputy Secretary 
4. Ms. Aditi Choudhary, OSD to Hon'ble Chairman, Rajya Sabha  
5. Shri P. P. Raumon, Under Secretary 
 WITNESS 
(A)      Ministry of Communications (Department of Telecommunications) 
1.   Shri Neeraj Mittal, Secretary 
2.   Shri Gulzar Natarajan, Additional Secretary 
3.   Shri Devendra Kumar Rai, Joint Secretary (T) 
4.   Shri Sanjeev Sharma, DDG (AI&DIU) 
5.   Shri Vishwa Mohan, DDG (SA) 
6.   Shri Jitendra Prakash, Director (Security) 
7.   Shri Arvind Sharma, Director (UDS) 
8.   Shri Sahil Garg, Director (UBB) 
9.   Shri Pranay Diwakar, ADG (AI&DIU) 
29 

2.  XX          XX          XX    XX 
 
XX          XX          XX    XX 
 
XX          XX          XX    XX 
 
3.  XX          XX          XX    XX 
 
 XX          XX          XX    XX 
 
 XX          XX          XX    XX 
 
4.  XX          XX          XX    XX 
 
 XX          XX          XX    XX 
 
 XX          XX          XX    XX 
5.   Thereafter, the Committee invited the Secretary and other Officials from the 
Department of Telecommunications to hear their submissions on the Telecommunications 
(Critical Telecommunication Infrastructure) Rules, 2024, and, the Telecommunications 
(Telecom Cyber Security) Rules, 2024 formulated under the Telecommunications Act, 2023. 
The Chairman welcomed the Secretary and other officers from the Ministry and asked them to 
explain the salient features of these Rules and point out the manner in which the rules aim to 
secure critical telecom infrastructure through stringent compliance measures, penalties, and 
security directives, and also strengthen cyber security frameworks via mandatory audits, 
compliance protocols, and enforcement mechanisms. It was also asked that, the Committee be 
also provided, insights into the objectives, key provisions, operational scope, benefits, 
challenges, and stakeholder responses to these rules. 
30 

6. Secretary, Department of Telecommunications and other Officers in their submissions 
mentioned that the  Rules, which are under examination by the Committee, form the backbone 
of cyber telecom security and the world over, telecom has become the basic platform for 
providing any service, innovation, economic development, security or defence and   it is 
incumbent upon the Government and the private sector to ensure that both the players play 
their respective roles to ensure that adversaries do not gain control of these networks. The 
Secretary further informed that recently, the Government, recognizing the impo rtance of 
cyber security, modified the Allocation of Business Rules into three parts where the original 
cyber security remained with the Ministry of Electronics and Information Technology and the 
cyber security of telecom networks was specifically allocate d to Department of Telecom and 
prosecution and punishment on cybercrimes to the Ministry of Home Affairs.  
7. With the aid of power point presentation, various aspects of the critical telecom 
infrastructure Rules, 2023 were explained to the Committee.   The Ministry Officials 
informed that there were no telecom sector specific rules for critical infrastructure were in 
existence earlier and rules under the IT Act of 2000 were governing them.   The difference 
from the existing rules is that they are more speci fic to telecom sector and more 
comprehensive and cover the security standards and upgradation processes of telecom 
infrastructure which is declared as critical. This will ensure better monitoring of cyber 
security incidents that take place in telecom infra structure and mitigation measures taken 
timely. Rules have been framed under Section 22(4) of the Telecommunications Act which 
provides for standards, security practices, upgradation requirements and procedures to be 
implemented for the critical telecom in frastructure.  Two organisations in the DoT will 
specify the standards, the Telecommunication Engineering Centre and the National Centre for 
Communication Security, Bangalore. The salient features of the Rules, details about the 
consultations made with stakeholders and the response of the Government on the points raised 
etc were explained to the Committee.  
8.  On the Telecom Cyber Security Rules, 2024, the Ministry explained that one of the 
objectives in the Statement of Objects and Reasons was, “Provision s for national security, 
public emergency and public safety” and rules were framed focusing on this.   Under section 
22 (2),  the measures may include collection, analysis and dissemination of traffic data that is 
generated, transmitted, received or stored in telecommunication networks.  These Rules were 
notified on 21 st November, 2024. The Ministry explained that there are two important 
stakeholders on which these Rules are applicable, viz    the telecommunication entities which 
provide telecommunication services or networks, and the users, who are involved in misuse of 
telecommunication resources for fraud, cheating, etc.  
31 

The Ministry further informed that before these rules were published, they went through an 
extensive round of public consultation and submissions from most of the associations of 
telecom service providers, several law firms and some public sector entities were received and 
all of them were considered and the rules were framed accordingly. Detailed submission on 
the rule-wise features was also done. It was submitted that t hese Rules establish a robust legal 
and operational framework for telecom security, ensuring compliance, accountability, and 
resilience against emerging cyber threats. 
9.  During the deliberations, several key points and queries were raised by Chairman and 
Members regarding the Telecom Cyber Security Rules and Critical Telecommunication 
Infrastructure Rules. The interconnected nature of both rules was pointed out and the need for 
proactive measures to address the rapid adv ancements in technology and cybersecurity was 
emphasized. Issues relating to inter -ministerial coordination, particularly between the 
Department of Telecommunications (DoT), Ministry of Electronics and Information 
Technology (MeitY), Ministry of Home Affai rs (MHA), and other relevant departments, to 
ensure effective collaboration in enforcing these rules was discussed. The Chairman also 
sought information regarding the security of smartphones and apps, particularly those 
manufactured in other countries and also about the testing and enforcement mechanism to 
ensure that devices entering the Indian market are free from malware or spyware. Members of 
the Committee, raised concerns about cybercrime awareness, particularly in rural areas, and 
suggested leveraging  government platforms like UPI, Aadhaar, and banking portals to 
disseminate cybersecurity awareness messages.  Queries also touched upon the need for better 
coordination with state governments and cyber police, particularly in addressing financial 
frauds targeting vulnerable groups like senior citizens.  The Chairman also asked the Ministry 
to furnish the replies to the queries raised by the Members, in writing, within a week. 
10. The meeting was adjourned at 4.40 pm. A verbatim record of the proceedings was kept. 
  
Har Prateek Arya 
Director                                                                                                                                                           
4.2.2025 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                32 
 
6364

MINUTES OF THE MEETING OF THE COMMITTEE ON SUBORDINATE 
LEGISLATION, RAJYA SABHA 
IV 
FOURTH MEETING 
The Committee met at 3.00 p.m. on Tuesday, the 11 th March, 2025 in Committee Room ‘A’, 
Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. The following Members of the 
Committee were present in the meeting: - 
   
PRESENT: 
  
1. Shri Milind Murli Deora - Chairman  
2.  Ms. Sushmita Dev 
3. Shri Kesridevsinh Jhala 
4. Shri Jose K. Mani 
5. Smt. Ranjeet Ranjan 
6. Shri Kartikeya Sharma 
7. Shri Neeraj Shekhar 
8.  Shri Sadanand Mhalu Shet Tanavade 
9. Shri G.K. Vasan 
10. Smt. Sangeeta Yadav  
 Secretariat 
1. Shri Sanjay Kumar Khursija, Joint Secretary 
2. Shri Har Prateek Arya, Director 
3. Shri ThangzalunKhuptong, Deputy Secretary 
4. Shri P.P. Raumon, Under Secretary  
 Ministry of Communication (Department of Telecommunication) 
1. Dr. Neeraj Mittal Secretary  
2. Shri Anand Khare, Member (S) 
3. Shri Gulzar Natarajan, Additional Secretary 
4. Shri Devendra Kumar Rai, Joint Secretary 
5. Shri Sanjeev Sharma, DDG (AI&DIU) 
6. Shri Vishwa Mohan, DDG (SA) 
33 

7. Shri Jitendra Prakash, Director (Security) 
8. Shri Arvind Sharma, Director (UDS) 
9. Shri Sahil Garg, Director (UBB) 
10. Shri Pranay Diwakar, ADG (AIDIU) 
 National Centre for Communication Security (NCCS) 
1. Shri S.N. Rama Gopal, Sr. DDG 
2. Shri R. Babu Srinivasa Kumar, DDG (SC&HQ) 
Telecommunication Engineering Centre (TEC) 
1. Ms. Tripti Saxena, Sr. DDG  
2. Shri Ajay Kumar Nema, DDG (TC) 
 
2.  At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members to the meeting stated that in the 
last meeting of the Committee held on 4th February, 2025, the Committee had taken up two 
Rules namely Telecommunications (Critical Telecommunication Infrastructure) Rules, 2 024 
and Telecommunications (Telecom Cyber Security) Rules, 2024 under the 
Telecommunications Act, 2023 for their examination and had heard, at length,  Secretary, 
Department of Telecommunications  and other Senior Officials on the above -mentioned 
Rules. He conveyed that in today’s meeting the Committee shall continue its deliberations on 
these two Rules and with two organizations under the Department of Telecommunications, 
namely Telecommunication Engineering Centre (TEC) and the National Centre for 
Communication Security (NCCS) along with Secretary and other Senior Officials of the 
Department have been invited.   
 
3.  Thereafter, while welcoming the Secretary and other Senior  officers of the Department, 
TEC and NCCS, the Chairman mentioned that the Committee understands that the 
Telecommunication Engineering Centre (TEC) and the National Centre for Communication 
Security (NCCS) play crucial roles under the Department of Teleco mmunications (DoT) in 
ensuring the quality, security, and standardization of telecom networks in India. TEC is 
responsible for formulating technical standards, testing, and certification of telecom 
equipment to ensure interoperability and reliability. Mean while, NCCS focuses on cyber 
security by evaluating and certifying network security measures to safeguard critical telecom 
infrastructure. Together, they contribute to the development of a secure and resilient telecom  
ecosystem in the country. In view of the specialized nature of the work of these organizations,  
 
34 

the Committee would like to hear from both TEC and NCCS their specific roles, how the 
monitoring mechanism is effectively functioning, the areas where difficulties are arising, the 
scope for further improvement, the bottlenecks and overlapping. 
 
4. In their submissions, Secretary and Senior Officials of the Telecommunication  
Engineering Centre (TEC) stated that TEC serves as the technical arm of the Department of 
Telecommunications (DoT), acting a s a knowledge hub and advisory body for the telecom 
and ICT sectors. Its key functions include standardization, testing, and certification  of 
telecommunication equipment, along with administration of the M andatory Testing and 
Certification of Telecommunica tion Equipment (MTCTE)  under the Indian Telegraph 
(Amendment) Rules, 2017 and Telecommunications (Standards, Conformity Assessment 
and Certification) Rules, 2025 . It was mentioned that TEC plays a crucial role in 
formulating technical standards, conducting  field trials, and ensuring conformity assessment 
through various certification schemes like Type Approval Certificate (TAC), Interface 
Approval Certificate (IAC), Simplified Certification Scheme (SCS), and General 
Certification Scheme (GCS). Also, the MTCTE framework mandates equipment testing at 
TEC-designated labs, with an end -to-end online certification process. Additionally, TEC 
collaborates with global standardization bodies like ITU-T, ETSI, 3GPP, and ANSI , 
ensuring alignment with international best practices. It was conveyed that the Government has 
also exempted specific telecom products such as mobile user equipment, servers, and 
smart cameras from MTCTE, with ongoing discussions to align essential requirements with 
the BIS Act, 2016. 
 
5. In their subm issions, representatives of National Centre for Communication 
Security (NCCS) mentioned that NCCS oversees telecom network security through a 
structured approach covering network establishment, operation, and surveillance . The 
Communication Security Scheme  (ComSec) ensures in -country, evidence -based security 
certification, with objectives such as developing security standards, creating a testing 
ecosystem, and ensuring regulatory compliance . It was further stated that NCCS has 
published 47 Indian Telecom Security Assurance Requirements (ITSARs), with 5 more in 
progress, and designated 6 Telecom Security Testing Labs (TSTLs) , with 5 additional labs 
expected within a year. It was also informed that the Certification process includes Voluntary 
Security Certif ication (VSC) for six months , followed by Mandatory Security 
Certification (MSC) , with 5 telecom products already mandated for security 
certification. NCCS is responsible for certification issuance, renewal, non-conformity  
 
35 
 

handling, dispute resolution, and surveillance , ensuring robust supply chain security  
under the National Security Directive on Telecommunication Sector (NSDTS) . The 
ProTem certification , valid for six months until December 2025, has already issued 35 
certificates, with further inputs awaited from OEMs for compliance rectifications. 
6. Members raised queries in respect of the level of standards fixed in the country with 
respect to the international standards and it was informed that the standards are almost same 
as used by other  developed countries otherwise, the synchronization and interface would not 
be possible from the technical point of view. The Committee was also apprised that the basic 
safety, security, and the nodal agency for collaborating with the international standar ds is 
ensured, national and international stakeholder consultations are conducted and based on the 
inputs, the Indian standards are fixed. The Committee was also told that five products were 
exempted from the MTCTE scheme as are being covered under the CRO  of MeitY and BIS 
Act. However, consultations with MeitY are going on for inclusion of these items also under 
the Scheme. 
7. Queries were also raised by Members regarding details of acceptability of Indian 
testing standards globally, matching standards with E uropean and other developed countries 
and whether the best practices in Indian standards are being followed. Members asked 
questions in respect of OEM countries from where India is installing equipment, measures for 
tackling the security threats, benchmark s on hardware and software used, issues of hacking 
using modern technology, the software updates and its frequency, how the risk of spyware etc 
is being met etc.  Secretary summed up his response to some of the queries and conveyed that 
they shall be To some of the queries, the concerned Officers responded and also stated that the 
Department shall be submitting its replies in respect of issues raised especially in context of 
SAR, Tower and Mobile radiation wise and the process followed. Chairman of the Comm ittee 
also directed that submissions and status notes in respect of how much part of Indian network 
could be vulnerable due to legacy equipment, viability of following a Rip and replace Scheme 
towards it, security issues that are arising out of post quantu m cryptography and the ongoing 
interactions between DoT and MeiTy be also submitted. The Chairman also stressed on the 
need of strict vigilance on the networks and platforms used in the country especially, the 
Network Servers being used for ensuring any security breaches. 
8. The meeting was adjourned at 4.05 P.M.  
 
Dated the 11th March, 2025                 Har Prateek Arya 
                          Director 
       
 
 
 
 
36 

 
MINUTES OF THE MEETING OF THE COMMITTEE ON SUBORDINATE 
LEGISLATION, RAJYA SABHA. 
             V  
FIFTH MEETING  
            The Committee met at 3.00 p.m. on Tuesday, the 25 th March, 2025 in Committee 
Room No.4, A -Block, Parliament House Annexe  Extension Building, New Delhi.  The 
following Members of the Committee were present in the meeting:  
PRESENT: 
1. Shri Milind Murli Deora           -           Chairman 
Members  
2. Shri Golla Baburao 
3. Shri Kesridevsinh Jhala 
4. Smt. Ranjeet Ranjan 
5. Dr. Dinesh Sharma 
6. Shri Tiruchi Siva 
7. Shri Sadanand Mhalu Shet Tanavade 
8. Shri G.K. Vasan 
9. Smt. Sangeeta Yadav 
Secretariat  
1. Shri Sanjay Kumar Khursija, Joint Secretary 
2. Shri Har Prateek Arya, Director 
3. Shri Thangzalun Khuptong, Deputy Secretary 
4. Shri Pardeep Kumar, Committee Officer 
 Witnesses 
Bharat Sanchar Nigam Limited (BSNL) 
1. Shri Robert J Ravi A, CMD, BSNL & MTNL 
2. Shri Sandeep Govil, Director (CM), BSNL Board 
3. Shri Mohan Lal Hirwal, GM (Regulation), BSNL  
4. Ms. Pallavi Tandon, PGM (CS&CSC-CFA), BSNL 
5. Shri Sudhakar Pathak, AGM (CS&CSC), BSNL 
6. Shri Lokendra Ganolia, DM (PHA) BSNL 
Cellular Operators Association of India (COAI) 
1. Lt. Gen. Dr. S.P. Kochhar, Director General 
2. Shri Savjit S. Soin, DDG 
37 

3. Shri Vikram Tiwathia, DDG 
Telecom Equipment Manufacturers Association of India (TEMA) 
1. Prof. NK Goyal, Chairman Emeritus, TEMA 
2. Shri Vijayant Gaur, CISM, CISA, Director General, CSAI 
3. Shri Binu George, Director CMAI 
4. Shri Prashant Jain, Director, Tejas Ltd. 
 
   At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members to the meeting and recalled that in the 
last two meetings of the Committee,  the Committee has taken up two Rules namely 
Telecommunications (Critical Telecommunication Infrastructure) Rules, 2024 and  
Telecommunications (Telecom Cyber Security) Rules, 2024 under the  Telecommunications 
Act, 2023 for their examination and had heard,  at length, Secretary, Department of 
Telecommunications and the two  organizations under the Department of 
Telecommunications, namely Telecommunication Engineering Centre (TEC) and the National 
Centre for Communication Security (NCCS) along with other Senior  Oﬃcials of the 
Department. He conveyed that in today’s meeting, the  Committee will continue its 
deliberations on these two Rules with the  representatives from the Cellular Operators 
Association of India (COAI), the Telecom Equipment Manufacturers Association of India 
 (TEMA) and Bharat Sanchar Nigam Limited (BSNL) and MTNL. 
2.   The Chairman of the Committee also suggested that from next  meeting onwards, the 
Committee can take up the “The Food Safety  and Standards (Labelling and Display) 
Regulations, 2020 which were framed under Food Safety and Standards Act, 2006 (Act 34 of 
2006). He stated that these regulations aim to enhance transparency and  consumer awareness 
regarding food products and key features of the regulations include mandatory declaration of 
nutritional information and also required clear labelling of allergens, ingredients, and the ‘best 
before’ and ‘use by’ dates to ensure safety. Thereafter, the Committee unanimously decided to 
consider th e Food Safety and  Standards (Rebelling and Display) Regulations, 2020 for 
detailed examination of the Committee. 
3.    Thereafter, while welcoming the representatives from the  Cellular Operators 
Association of India (COAI), the Telecom  Equipment Manufactur ers Association of India 
(TEMA) and Bharat  Sanchar Nigam Limited (BSNL), the Chairman mentioned that the  
Telecommunications section stands as the backbone of India’s digital  transformation, driving 
economic growth, innovation, and connectivity  across urban and rural landscapes. The rules 
under examination aims to address these twin pillars; the protection of critical  
38 

telecommunication infrastructure and the enhancement of cyber  security within the telecom 
ecosystem. He stated that the Committee  would like to hear the views directly from key 
stakeholder, i.e. the  operators, manufacturers, and service providers who are the forefront  of 
implementing these regulations. The insights, experiences, and  recommendations from them 
will be invaluable in assessing  the practicality, eﬃcacy, how the monitoring mechanism is 
eﬀectively functioning, the areas where diﬃculties are arising, the scope for  further 
improvement, and potential challenges of these rules. 
4.  In his submissions, CMD, BSNL and MTNL highlighted th e core  areas of both the 
rules and stated that Governments worldwide are  classifying telecom networks as critical 
infrastructure and actively  taking steps to secure communications and safeguard national  
interest, their implications on cybersecurity and vul nerability to cyberattacks.  He mentioned 
that Telecommunications (Critical  Telecommunication Infrastructure) Rules, 2024 pave the 
way for a  secure and robust telecommunication infrastructure in India. He  stated that BSNL 
has already put in place industry s tandard measures to safeguard critical telecom 
infrastructure and maintain  network security.  They have undertaken multiple initiatives to  
enhance physical security and also regularly issues guidelines to  reinforce security measures. 
The CMD, BSNL also hig hlighted the key areas of the Telecommunications (Telecom Cyber 
Security) Rules, 2024 such as collection, sharing & analysis; obligations  relating to telecom 
cyber security; measures to protect & ensure  telecom cybersecurity; reporting of security 
incidents and appointing  Chief Telecommunication Security Oﬃcer. He also mentioned that  
BSNL is committed to ensuring telecom cybersecurity and is setting  up a dedicated 
organization at both corporate & ﬁeld levels, including Chief Information Security Oﬃcer and 
also have dedicated  Information Security Cell, Security Operation Center and core  
cybersecurity expertise. 
5.  Thereafter, the DG of COAI submitted the views/suggestions of  COAI before the 
Committee with regard to policy level issues and  operational issues under the 
Telecommunications (Critical  Telecommunication Infrastructure) Rules, 2024.  COAI 
representative stated that they have stated the policy related issues that there is a  need to 
replace the requirement of sharing of TSPs traﬃc data  analysis, disclo sure of security 
incidents to public should be  introduced and the CTI should be ﬁnalized in consultation with  
respective operators. Further he also highlighted the operations  issues viz. spares should be 
removed from the list of CTI, inspection should be carried out only in cases of major security, 
logs to be  provided only in case of major security incident, supply chain records  considered 
conﬁdential by Original Equipment Manufacturers (OEMs)  and not shared with TSPs, since 
details are already being submit ted by OEMS to government, directly through the National 
Security Directive on Telecommunications sector (NSDTS) and MTCTE Program.  
39 

He has submitted that current submissions to NSDTS and  or TEC may be utilized by DoT to 
reduce compliance burden on TSPs, in view of impracticality of the time line and there should 
be no separate provision for reporting of security incidents in respect of CTI, since all security 
incidents already need to be reported under the extant CERT-IN guidelines. 
 6.    COAI representative also submitted their views/suggestions  with regard to policy 
level issues and operational issues under the  Telecommunications (Telecom Cyber Security) 
Rules, 2024. In their submission, they highlighted the policy issues with regard to  obligations 
relating to telecom cyber security and reimbursement of  costs of compliance. It was also 
stated that the operations issues under Rules 2(e) they have proposed that the security incident 
deﬁnition must be in line or in accordance with the requirements and  deﬁnitions that have 
been in use currently; speciﬁc consultation  should be held to decide the category/type of 
security incident and  only major incidents should require to be reported. In Rule 3(2)(b)  
regarding sharing of traﬃc Data they have opined that ther e is no  clarity on the scope of the 
data which may be shared, as well as the  circumstances under which it may be shared and 
may be considered  that the data collected may only be shared with the Government and  
authorized agencies and not with telecommunication entities or users.  They have also 
submitted their suggestion for consideration of the Committee under Rules 4(4)(a), 4(4)(f) and 
4(4)(h)(vi), 5(5)(a), 5(12),6, 7(1) and 7(2) regarding telecom cyber security policy, security  
audits and maintain logs, suspension of telecom identiﬁed, telecom  identiﬁer, appointment of 
CTSO, reporting security incidents and disclosure of security incident to public, respectively. 
7.    Thereafter, the Chairman, TEMA in his submissions  complimented the Governme nt 
for coming out with both the rules as  they represent a signiﬁcant regulatory steps in fortifying 
India’s Telecommunications Network and securing its critical infrastructure  against Cyber 
threats and taking care of national Security issues. He  also submitted certain issues before the 
Committee for kind consideration viz. Cyber Security and national Security issues arising  out 
of Mobile phones; need to address the issue of getting approval  on the basis of Non -Land 
Border Country Chip/Components/OS but  supplying and deploying the products with 
chips/Components/OS from land Border Countries, by third party/random inspections, need to 
use and prescribe Indian Operating Software including Mobile SIM  Operating System, need 
to incorporate/mandate Zero Trust  Architecture; need to Enhance Incident Response and 
Recovery Plans; Need to encourage Threat Intelligence Sharing Platform; need  to strengthen 
Supply Chain Security; Need to Cybersecurity Awareness and Training; and need to establish 
a Cybersecurity Certiﬁcation Framework.  He also highlighted some speciﬁc issues  with rules 
provisions under the Telecom Cyber Security Rules, 2024  before the Committee and suggest 
to include Virtual Telecom Network providers also in the deﬁnition under the Rules 2(f) and  
40 

Rules 4(2) (b) need to deﬁne fraudulent messages; Rule 6 need to  prescribe 
qualification/criteria for the role of CTSO etc. 
8.  Thereafter, Members raised the queries on the various issues  of manufacturing, 
comparative poor Service by MTNL/BSNL  compared to priva te service providers, Quantum 
Computing and Quantum Communications, allegation of tacit understanding of BSNL  with 
private companies/Starlink etc. Some of the queries were  answered by the representatives 
concerned. 
 9.       The Chairman asked the represen tatives from BSNL,TEMA and COAI to furnish the 
replies to the queries raised by the Members  and any other submissions on their part to the 
Committee,  in writing, within a week. 
 10.  The meeting was adjourned at 3.54 P.M. 
                                                               
                     Har Prateek Arya  
                             Director   
Dated: 25th March, 2025           
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
41 

MINUTES OF THE MEETING OF THE COMMITTEE ON 
SUBORDINATE LEGISLATION, RAJYA SABHA  
          VIII         
      Eighth Meeting 
  
The Committee met at 03.00 P.M. on Monday, the 21 st July, 2025 in 
Committee Room ‘A’, Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.   
The following Members of the Committee were present in the meeting:- 
  
Members Present: 
       1.  Shri Milind Murli Deora - Chairman  
2.  Shri Kesridevsinh Jhala 
3.  Smt. Ranjeet Ranjan 
4.  Dr. Dinesh Sharma 
5.  Shri Neeraj Shekhar 
6.  Shri Sadanand Mhalu ShetTanavade 
  
Secretariat  
1. Shri Sanjay Kumar Khursija, Joint Secretary 
2. Shri Har Prateek Arya, Director 
3. Shri Thangzalun Khuptong, Deputy Secretary 
4. Smt. Mamta Banga, Under Secretary 
2.         At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members of the Committee 
and mentioned that the Committee had examine d the  Telecommunications 
(Critical Telecommunication Infrastructure) Rules, 2024 and the 
Telecommunication (Telecom Cyber Security) Rules, 2024 under the 
Telecommunication Act, 2023 in its four meetings held on 4 th February, 11 th 
March, 25th March, 2025 and 21 st July, 2025  and the Committee had 
deliberated upon various issues under these Rules with the stakeholders.   
 
3.       He further informed that based on the deliberations and the inputs that 
were given, a Draft Report on these Rules has  been prepared and the  agenda for 
today’s meeting is to consider and adopt this Draft Report on these Rules so that 
it can be presented in the ongoing Monsoon Session.  
42 

4.  Thereafter the Committee considered the 255 th Report on the 
Telecommunications (Critical Telecommunication Infrastructure) Rules, 2024 
and the Telecommunications (Telecom Cybersecurity) Rules, 2024 for 
consideration and adoption.  The Committee, after some discussion, adopted the 
255th Report. Further , the Committee also authorized its Chairman and in his 
absence, Shri Sadanand  Mhalu Shet Tanavade, M.P. and   Shri Kesridevsinh 
Jhala, M.P. to present the Report to the House, tentatively,   on the 24 th July, 
2025. 
 
 5.      XX   XX   XX   XX  XX 
 XX   XX   XX   XX  XX 
  XX   XX. 
 
6.        The meeting was adjourned at 3.30 P.M.       
  
HAR PRATEEK ARYA 
DIRECTOR 
New Delhi 
21.07.2025 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
43 

7557  GI/2024 (1) 
रजिस्ट्री सं. डी.एल.- 33004/99 REGD. No. D. L.-33004/99 
 
 
 
xxxGIDHxxx 
xxxGIDExxx 
असाधारण  
EXTRAORDINARY 
भाग II—खण् ड 3—उप-खण् ड (i)   
PART II—Section 3—Sub-section (i) 
प्राजधकार से प्रकाजित 
PUBLISHED BY AUTHORITY 
 
संचार मंत्रालय 
(दूरसंचार जिभाग) 
अधिसूचना 
नई ददल् ली, 22 निम् बर, 4202  
 सा.का.जन. 723(अ).—क े न्द्रीय सरकार दूरसंचार (महत्िपूणण दूरसंचार अिसंरचना) जनयम, 2024 क े  प्रारूप को, 
जिसे दूरसंचार अजधजनयम, 2023 (2023 का 44) की धारा 56 की उप-धारा (2) क े  खंड (ब) क े  साथ पठित धारा 22 की 
उप-धारा (4) द्वारा प्रदत्त िजियों का प्रयोग करते हुए बनाने का प्रस्ट्ताि करती है, को उि अजधजनयम की धारा 56 की  
उप-धारा (1) की अपेक्षानुसार भारत सरकार क े  संचार मंत्रालय, दूरसंचार जिभाग की अजधसूचना संख्या सा.का.जन. 521 
(अ),  तारीख 28 अगस्ट्त, 2024  द्वारा भारत क े  रािपत्र, असाधारण , भाग II, खंड 3, उप-खंड (i), तारीख 28 अगस्ट्त, 
2024 में प्रकाजित दकया गया था, जिसमें इससे प्रभाजित होने िाले व्यजियों से उि अजधसूचना िाले रािपत्र की प्रजतयां 
िनसाधारण को उपलब्ध कराए िाने की तारीख से तीस ददन की अिजध समाप्त होने से पूिण आपजत्तयां और सुझाि आमंजत्रत 
दकए गए थे;  
 और उि रािपत्र की प्रजतयां तारीख 29 अगस्ट्त, 2024 को िनसाधारण को उपलब्ध करा दी गई थीं; 
 
सं.   664] नई ददल्ली, िुक्रिार, निम् बर 22, 2024/अग्रहायण 1, 1946  
No. 664] NEW DELHI, FRIDAY, NOVEMBER 22, 2024/AGRAHAYANA 1, 1946  
सी.जी.-डी.एल.-अ.-22112024-258842
CG-DL-E-22112024-258842
44

2  THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY    [PART II—SEC. 3(i)] 
 
 और क े न्द्रीय सरकार द्वारा उि प्रारूप जनयमों क े  संबंध में िनसाधारण से प्राप्त आपजत्तयों और सुझािों पर जिजधित 
रूप से जिचार दकया गया है; 
 अतः अब क े न्द्रीय सरकार दूरसंचार अजधजनयम, 2023 (2023 का 44) की धारा 56 की उप-धारा (2) क े  खंड (ब) 
क े  साथ पठित धारा 22 की उप-धारा (4) द्वारा प्रदत्त िजियों का प्रयोग करते हुए जनम्नजलजखत जनयम बनाती है, अथाणत:- 
1. संजक्षप्त नाम और प्रारंभ - (1) इन जनयमों का संजक्षप्त नाम दूरसंचार (महत्िपूणण दूरसंचार अिसंरचना) जनयम, 2024 है।  
  (2) ये रािपत्र में उनक े  प्रकािन की तारीख को प्रिृत्त होंगे। 
2. पठरभाषाएं - (1) इन जनयमों में, िब तक दक संदभण से अन्द्यथा अपेजक्षत न हो:  
(क)  “अजधजनयम” से दूरसंचार अजधजनयम, 2023 (2023 का 44) अजभप्रेत है; 
(ख)  “मुख्य दूरसंचार सुरक्षा अजधकारी” से दूरसंचार (दूरसंचार साइबर सुरक्षा) जनयम, 2024 क े  जनयम 6 क े  अधीन 
जनयुि मुख्य दूरसंचार सुरक्षा अजधकारी अजभप्रेत है; 
(ग)  “महत्िपूणण दूरसंचार अिसंरचना” से अजधजनयम की धारा 22 की उप-धारा (3) क े  अधीन अजधसूजचत कोई भी 
दूरसंचार नेटिक ण  अथिा उसका कोई भाग अजभप्रेत है; 
(घ)  “पोटणल” से जनयम 10 क े  उप-जनयम (1) क े  अधीन क े न्द्रीय सरकार द्वारा अजधसूजचत पोटणल अजभप्रेत है;  
(ङ)  “सुरक्षा घटना” का िही अथण होगा िो दूरसंचार (दूरसंचार साइबर सुरक्षा) जनयम , 2024  क े  जनयम 2 क े   
उप-जनयम (1) क े  खंड (च) में समनुदेजित है; और   
(च)  "दूरसंचार इकाई" का िही अथण होगा िो दूरसंचार (दूरसंचार साइबर सुरक्षा) जनयम, 2024 क े  जनयम 2 क े   
उप-जनयम (1) क े  खंड (छ) में समनुदेजित है। 
 (2) उन िब्दों और पदों क े, िो इसमें प्रयुि हैं और पठरभाजषत नहीं हैं दकन्द्तु अजधजनयम में पठरभाजषत हैं, क े  िही 
अथण होंगे िो उनक े  उस अजधजनयम में हैं। 
3. लागू होना - (1) ये जनयम दूरसंचार नेटिक ण  अथिा उसक े  दकसी भाग पर लागू होंगे, जिसे क े न्द्रीय सरकार द्वारा अजधजनयम 
की धारा 22 की उप-धारा (3) क े उपबंधों क े  अधीन महत्िपूणण दूरसंचार अिसंरचना क े  रूप में अजधसूजचत दकया गया है, 
िो इस आकलन पर आधाठरत है दक ऐसी अिसंरचना क े  जिघटन से राष्ट्रीय सुरक्षा, अथणव्यिस्ट्था, सािणिजनक स्ट्िास्ट््य अथिा 
राष्ट्र की सुरक्षा पर प्रजतक ू ल प्रभाि पडेगा। 
 (2) क े न्द्रीय सरकार पोटणल पर िह प्ररूप और तरीका जनर्दणष्ट करेगी जिसमें प्रत्येक दूरसंचार इकाई अपने दूरसंचार 
नेटिक ण, दूरसंचार सेिाओं तथा ऐसे नेटिक ण  और सेिाओं क े  घटकों का ब्यौरा उपलब्ध कराएगी। 
4. अनुपालन आिश्यकताएँ - (1) प्रत्येक दूरसंचार इकाई यह सुजनजित करेगी दक महत्िपूणण दूरसंचार अिसंरचना जिसमें 
ऐसी महत्िपूणण दूरसंचार अिसंरचना में उपयोग दकया िाने िाला कोई भी पुिाण , हाडणिेयर और सॉफ़्टिेयर िाजमल हैं, 
जनम्नजलजखत मानकों का अनुपालन कर रहे हैं, अथाणत:- 
(क) अजनिायण आिश्यकताएँ (ईआर), इंटरफ े स आिश्यकताएँ (आईआर), भारतीय दूरसंचार सुरक्षा आश्वासन 
आिश्यकताएँ (आईटीएसएआर) और दूरसंचार अजभयांजत्रकी क ें र, राष्ट्रीय संचार सुरक्षा क ें र अथिा दकसी अन्द्य 
व्यजि द्वारा िारी जिजनदेिों, परीक्षण आिश्यकताओं अथिा अनुरूपता मूल्यांकन जिसे इस उद्देश्य क े  जलए 
क े न्द्रीय सरकार द्वारा अजधसूजचत दकया िाएगा; 
 
45

[भाग II—खण् ड 3(i)] भारत का रािपत्र : असाधारण  3 
 
  परंतु ऐसे मानकों क े  अभाि में, कोई दूरसंचार इकाई क े िल ऐसे महत्िपूणण दूरसंचार अिसंरचना का 
उपयोग कर सक े गी, जिसमें ऐसे महत्िपूणण दूरसंचार अिसंरचना में प्रयुि कोई भी अजतठरि पुिे, हाडणिेयर और 
सॉफ्टिेयर िाजमल हैं, िो इस संबंध में क े न्द्रीय सरकार द्वारा अजधसूजचत सुसंगत मानकों को पूरा करते हों; 
(ख)  क े न्द्रीय सरकार द्वारा िारी दूरसंचार सेक्टर (एनएसडीटीएस) पर राष्ट्रीय सुरक्षा जनदेि;  
(ग)  क े न्द्रीय सरकार द्वारा िारी संचार सुरक्षा प्रमाणन पर जनदेि। 
(घ)  महत्िपूणण दूरसंचार अिसंरचना पर लागू ऐसे अन्द्य मानक जिन्द्हें क े न्द्रीय सरकार द्वारा समय-समय पर 
अजधसूजचत दकया िा सक े । 
5. महत्िपूणण दूरसंचार अिसंरचना का जनरीक्षण - (1) क े न्द्रीय सरकार, आदेि द्वारा, अपने कार्मणकों को दूरसंचार इकाइयों 
की महत्िपूणण दूरसंचार अिसंरचना से संबंजधत हाडणिेयर, सॉफ़्टिेयर और डेटा क े  पहुंच और उसका जनरीक्षण करने क े  जलए 
प्राजधक ृ त करेगी। 
 (2) प्रत्येक दूरसंचार इकाई महत्िपूणण दूरसंचार अिसंरचना क े  जनरीक्षण क े  जलए उप-जनयम (1) क े  अधीन क े न्द्रीय 
सरकार द्वारा प्राजधक ृ त दकसी भी कार्मणक की पहुंच सुजनजित करेगी। 
6. मुख्य दूरसंचार सुरक्षा अजधकारी – (1) मुख्य दूरसंचार सुरक्षा अजधकारी इन जनयमों क े  कायाणन्द्ियन क े  जलए उत्तरदायी 
होगा। 
 (2) क े न्द्रीय सरकार पोटणल पर िह प्ररूप और तरीका जनर्दणष्ट करेगी जिससे प्रत्येक दूरसंचार इकाई महत्िपूणण 
दूरसंचार अिसंरचना क े  संबंध में ब्यौरा उपलब्ध कराएगी, जिसमें जनम्नजलजखत ब्यौरा िाजमल होगा, अथाणत:- 
(क)  महत्िपूणण दूरसंचार अिसंरचना का दूरसंचार नेटिक ण  आर्क ण टेक्चर; 
(ख)  महत्िपूणण दूरसंचार अिसंरचना तक पहुंच रखने िाले प्राजधक ृ त कार्मणक; 
(ग)  महत्िपूणण दूरसंचार अिसंरचना से संबंजधत हाडणिेयर, सॉफ्टिेयर और पुिों की सूची; 
(घ)  महत्िपूणण दूरसंचार अिसंरचना की साइबर सुरक्षा आर्क ण टेक्चर क े  जलए भेद्यता/खतरा/िोजखम जिश्लेषण का 
ब्यौरा; 
(ङ)  महत्िपूणण दूरसंचार अिसंरचना क े  जलए साइबर संकट प्रबंधन योिना; 
(च)  महत्िपूणण दूरसंचार अिसंरचना की सुरक्षा लेखापरीक्षा ठरपोटण और लेखापरीक्षा की अनुपालन ठरपोटण;  
(छ)  महत्िपूणण दूरसंचार अिसंरचना से संबंजधत सेिाओं क े  सेिा स्ट्तर करार (एसएलए); 
(ि)  जिसंगजतयों का पता लगाने में सहायता करने और क े न्द्रीय सरकार को िास्ट्तजिक समय क े  आधार पर आसूचना 
की िानकारी उपलब्ध कराने में सक्षम बनाने क े  जलए महत्िपूणण दूरसंचार अिसंरचना से संबंजधत सभी लॉग; 
और 
(झ)  जनयम 7 क े  अधीन महत्िपूणण दूरसंचार अिसंरचना क े  जलए जिजनर्दणष्ट समय-सीमा में सुरक्षा घटनाओं की 
ठरपोर्टिंग करना। 
7. महत्िपूणण दूरसंचार अिसंरचना से संबंजधत दाजयत्ि- (1) प्रत्येक दूरसंचार इकाई जनम्नजलजखत दाजयत्िों का पालन करेगी, 
अथाणत्: - 
(क)  जनयम 4 क े  अधीन ददए गए मानकों क े  अनुपालन सजहत महत्िपूणण दूरसंचार अिसंरचना की सुरक्षा सुजनजित 
करना; 
46

4  THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY    [PART II—SEC. 3(i)] 
 
(ख)  सॉफ्टिेयर और हाडणिेयर जििरण क े  साथ-साथ ऐसे महत्िपूणण दूरसंचार अिसंरचना पर जनभणरता क े  साथ 
महत्िपूणण दूरसंचार अिसंरचना की सम्पूणण सूची का रखरखाि; 
(ग)  ऐसे दूरसंचार नेटिक ण  संरचना में पठरितणन सजहत महत्िपूणण दूरसंचार अिसंरचना क े  दूरसंचार नेटिक ण  संरचना 
क े  लॉग और प्रलेखन का कम से कम दो िषण की अिजध क े  जलए अथिा क े न्द्रीय सरकार द्वारा जनधाणठरत दकसी 
अन्द्य अिजध क े  जलए सुरजक्षत तरीक े  से संरजक्षत रखना; 
(घ)  महत्िपूणण दूरसंचार अिसंरचना तक पहुँच रखने िाले सभी अजधक ृ त कार्मणकों क े  जलए लागू होने िाली पयाणप्त 
सत्यापन प्रदक्रयाओं और प्रोटोकॉल क े  जलए योिना बनाने, जिकास करने तथा उनका रखरखाि बनाए रखने और 
क े न्द्रीय सरकार क े  जनदेिानुसार उनकी आिजधक पुनर्िणलोकन करना; 
(ङ)  महत्िपूणण दूरसंचार अिसंरचना क े  उपयोग में होने तक दूरसंचार उपकरणों और अन्द्य उपकरणों की आपूर्तण 
िृंखला क े  अजभलेखों का रखरखाि करना तथा क े न्द्रीय सरकार द्वारा िैसा और िब मांगे िाने पर ऐसी िानकारी 
उपलब्ध कराना; 
(च)  यह सुजनजित करना दक महत्िपूणण दूरसंचार अिसंरचना की दूरसंचार नेटिक ण  संरचना क े  जलए भेद्यता अथिा 
खतरा अथिा िोजखम का जिश्लेषण प्रजतिषण अथिा ऐसे अंतरालों पर दकया िाता है िैसा दक क े न्द्रीय सरकार 
द्वारा जनदेजित दकया गया है; 
(छ)  महत्िपूणण दूरसंचार अिसंरचना क े  संबंध में दूरसंचार इकाइयों द्वारा अपने िेंडर क े  साथ दकए गए सेिा स्ट्तर 
करारों (एसएलए) क े  जलए आिश्यक प्रदक्रयाओं की योिना बनाना, उनका जिकास करना, रखरखाि करना और 
पुनर्िणलोकन करना; 
(ि)  महत्िपूणण दूरसंचार अिसंरचना क े  कायण में सहायक नेटिर्क िं ग और संचार उपकरणों, सिणरों, प्रणाजलयों और 
सेिाओं क े  लॉग का जनयजमत बैकअप लेने की प्रदक्रयाओं की योिना बनाना, जिकजसत करना, रखरखाि करना 
और पुनर्िणलोकन करना; 
(झ)  जडिास्ट्टर ठरकिरी और व्यिसाय जनरंतरता सजहत सुरक्षा घटना प्रजतदक्रया प्रणाजलयों क े  जलए मानक प्रचालन 
प्रदक्रयाओं का कायाणन्द्ियन; 
(ञ)  सुरक्षा घटना(ओं) क े  बारे में क े न्द्रीय सरकार को ऐसी घटना क े  घठटत होने क े  छ: घंटे क े  भीतर पोटणल पर यथा 
जिजनर्दणष्ट जिजध और प्रदक्रया से सुजनजित करने क े  जलए तंत्र को कायाणजन्द्ित करना; और 
(ट)  अपने नेटिक ण  क े  भीतर महत्िपूणण दूरसंचार अिसंरचना क े  जिजभन्न एजलमेंट्स से िुडे ग्रेडेड ठरस्ट्क एसेस्ट्मेंट सजहत 
िोजखम रजिस्ट्टर का रखरखाि, महत्िपूणण दूरसंचार अिसंरचना क े  जलए उत्पन्न िोजखमों से नुकसान और 
गंभीरता की पहचान करना तथा उन्द्हें कम करने क े  उपाय और क े न्द्रीय सरकार द्वारा मांगे िाने पर ऐसी सूचना 
प्रस्ट्तुत करना। 
(2) िहां दकसी दूरसंचार इकाई को भारत क े  क्षेत्र क े  बाहर दकसी स्ट्थान से मरम्मत अथिा रखरखाि क े  उद्देश्य से अपने 
महत्िपूणण दूरसंचार अिसंरचना तक दूरस्ट्थ पहुंच की आिश्यकता होती है तो िह ऐसा क े िल ऐसे स्ट्थान से करेगी जिसक े  
जलए उसने क े न्द्रीय सरकार से पूिण जलजखत अनुमोदन प्राप्त दकया है और िह ऐसी दूरस्ट्थ पहुंच क े  प्रत्येक कायण क े  जलए –  
(क)  पोटणल पर जिजनर्दणष्ट जिजध और प्रदक्रया से क ें र सरकार को ऐसी दूरस्ट्थ पहुंच की उजचत सूचना प्रदान करेगी; 
और 
(ख)  यह सुजनजित करेगी दक ऐसी दूरस्ट्थ पहुंच क े  जलए लॉग को कम से कम एक िषण क े  जलए संरजक्षत दकए िाते हैं 
और क े न्द्रीय सरकार द्वारा मांगे िाने पर प्रदान दकए िाते हैं। 
 
47

[भाग II—खण् ड 3(i)] भारत का रािपत्र : असाधारण  5 
 
(3) प्रत्येक दूरसंचार इकाई उप-जनयम (1) क े  अधीन अपने द्वारा की गई कारणिाई से संबंजधत एक जिस्ट्तृत ठरपोटण को पोटणल 
पर जिजनर्दणष्ट जिजध और प्रदक्रया से प्रस्ट्तुत करेगी। 
(4) क े न्द्रीय सरकार उप-जनयम (3) क े  अधीन दकसी दूरसंचार इकाई से प्राप्त दकसी भी ठरपोटण अथिा अन्द्य िानकारी क े  
अनुसरण में , - 
(क)  ऐसी दूरसंचार इकाई से आगे स्ट्पष्टीकरण मांग सकती है; अथिा 
(ख)  महत्िपूणण दूरसंचार अिसंरचना की सुरक्षा या ऐसी अिसंरचना क े  जलए िोजखम को कम करने क े  जलए ऐसी 
दूरसंचार इकाई को कोई जिजनदेि, आदेि या अनुदेि िारी करना। 
8. महत्िपूणण दूरसंचार अिसंरचना क े  उन्नयन क े  जलए आिश्यकताएँ- (1) िहां महत्िपूणण दूरसंचार अिसंरचना का भाग 
बनने िाले उपकरणों का उन्नयन अपेजक्षत है िहां दूरसंचार इकाई ऐसे उन्नयन क े  जलए परीक्षण ठरपोटण क े  जििरण सजहत 
क े न्द्रीय सरकार को उस जिजध और प्रदक्रया से सूजचत करेगी िैसा क े न्द्रीय सरकार द्वारा इस प्रयोिन क े  जलए जिजनर्दणष्ट दकया 
िाए। 
(2)  क े न्द्रीय सरकार उप-जनयम (1) क े  अधीन आिेदन प्राप्त होने क े  चौदह ददनों क े  भीतर – 
 (क) यदद आिश्यक हो तो दूरसंचार इकाई से कोई और स्ट्पष्टीकरण मांगेगी; 
 (ख) उप-जनयम (3) क े  अधीन आगे परीक्षण करने क े  जलए ऐसी इकाई को जिजनदेि  िारी करेगी; अथिा 
 (ग) उन्नयन गजतजिजध क े  जलए आिेदन को स्ट्िीक ृ त या अस्ट्िीकार करेगी। 
(3)  क े न्द्रीय सरकार दकसी दूरसंचार इकाई को महत्िपूणण दूरसंचार अिसंरचना में दकसी उन्नयन का समुजचत जनयंजत्रत 
प्रदक्रया क े  अधीन परीक्षण करने तथा ऐसे परीक्षणों क े  पठरणामों को क े न्द्रीय सरकार द्वारा जिजनर्दणष्ट जिजध और प्रदक्रया से 
प्रस्ट्तुत करने का जिजनदेि भी दे सक े गी और दूरसंचार इकाई ऐसे जिजनदेिों का अनुपालन करेगी। 
(4) िहां क े न्द्रीय सरकार ऐसे आिेदन की प्राजप्त की तारीख से चौदह ददन की अिजध क े  भीतर उप-जनयम (2) क े  अधीन कोई 
स्ट्पष्टीकरण नहीं मांगती है अथिा जनदेि िारी नहीं करती है अथिा अपना अनुमोदन अथिा अस्ट्िीक ृ जत जनर्दणष्ट नहीं करती 
है, िहां दूरसंचार इकाई ऐसे उन्नयन कायणकलाप क े  साथ आगे बढ़ सकती है: 
 परंतु िहां क े न्द्रीय सरकार ने उप-जनयम (2) क े  अधीन स्ट्पष्टीकरण मांगा है, िहां चौदह ददनों की ऐसी अिजध ऐसी 
दूरसंचार इकाई द्वारा स्ट्पष्टीकरण प्रस्ट्तुत करने की तारीख से मानी िाएगी: 
 परंतु यह और दक िहां क े न्द्रीय सरकार ने उप-जनयम (3) क े  अधीन उन्नयन का परीक्षण करने का जनदेि ददया है, 
िहां चौदह ददनों की ऐसी अिजध ऐसे परीक्षणों क े  पठरणामों को प्रस्ट्तुत करने की तारीख से मानी िाएगी िैसा दक क े न्द्रीय 
सरकार द्वारा सुरजक्षत मोड क े  माध्यम से मामले दर मामले क े  आधार पर जिजनर्दणष्ट दकया िा सकता है। 
(5) िहां दकसी सुरक्षा घटना क े  प्रजतक ू ल प्रभािों का पता लगाने अथिा कम करने क े  जलए उन्नयन आिश्यक है, िहां दूरसंचार 
इकाई उप-जनयम (1) क े  अधीन आिेदन दकए जबना महत्िपूणण दूरसंचार अिसंरचना का जहस्ट्सा बनने िाले दकसी भी उपकरण 
क े  सॉफ्टिेयर या हाडणिेयर में तत्काल उन्नयन कर सकती है और ऐसे उन्नयन क े  चौबीस घंटे क े  भीतर क े न्द्रीय सरकार को उस 
जिजध और प्रदक्रया से ठरपोटण कर सकती है, िैसा दक क े न्द्रीय सरकार जनम्न सुसंगत जििरण क े  साथ जनधाणठरत कर सकती है-  
(क)  संबंजधत सुरक्षा घटना का जििरण; और  
(ख)  उन्नयन की आिश्यकता िाले उपकरण का प्रासंजगक सॉफ्टिेयर अथिा हाडणिेयर और ऐसे उपकरण क े  संबंध में 
दकए गए उन्नयन की प्रक ृ जत।  
(6) क े न्द्रीय सरकार उप-जनयम (5) क े  अधीन सूचना प्राप्त होने पर दूरसंचार इकाई से आगे की िानकारी या स्ट्पष्टीकरण मांग 
सकती है अथिा आगे क े  परीक्षण और ठरपोर्टिंग क े  जलए जनदेि िारी कर सकती है िैसा दक िह आिश्यक समझे।  
48

6  THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY    [PART II—SEC. 3(i)] 
 
(7) दूरसंचार इकाई दकसी भी उन्नयन से संबंजधत अजभलेखों और सूचनाओं का संरक्षण सुजनजित करेगी िब तक दक सुसंगत 
महत्िपूणण दूरसंचार अिसंरचना उपयोग में है और ऐसे अजभलेखों को क े न्द्रीय सरकार द्वारा मांगे िाने पर प्रस्ट्तुत दकया 
िाएगा। 
(8) इस जनयम में कोई भी बात ऐसे जनयजमत सॉफ्टिेयर अद्यतन पर लागू नहीं होगी जिसका उद्देश्य महत्िपूणण दूरसंचार 
अिसंरचना क े  कायणजनष्पादन अथिा सुरक्षा में क्रजमक सुधार करना हो। 
9. जनयमों का उल्लंघन. -- अन्द्यथा उपबंजधत क े  जसिाय इन जनयमों क े  उपबंधों क े  दकसी भी उल्लंघन से अजधजनयम क े  
प्रािधानों क े  अनुसार जनपटा िाएगा। 
10. जडजिटल कायाणन्द्ियन. - (1) क े न्द्रीय सरकार इन जनयमों क े  जडजिटल कायाणन्द्ियन क े  प्रयोिन क े  जलए एक पोटणल 
अजधसूजचत करेगी और कोई अन्द्य कायाणन्द्ियन प्रणाली भी जिजनर्दणष्ट कर सक े गी। 
(2) िहां क े न्द्रीय सरकार दूरसंचार इकाइयों को कोई आदेि, जनदेि अथिा अनुदेि िारी करने क े  जलए अथिा ऐसी दूरसंचार 
इकाइयों से कोई सूचना एकजत्रत करने क े  जलए पोटणल क े  अजतठरि संचार क े  दकसी अन्द्य सुरजक्षत तरीक े  का उपयोग करना 
आिश्यक समझती है िहां िह मामले दर मामले आधार पर संचार क े  ऐसे सुरजक्षत तरीक े  का उपयोग कर सकती है। 
(3) प्रत्येक दूरसंचार इकाई पोटणल का उपयोग करक े  अथिा क े न्द्रीय सरकार द्वारा जनधाणठरत संचार क े  सुरजक्षत तरीक े  क े  
माध्यम से इन जनयमों क े  अधीन क े न्द्रीय सरकार को सूचना देने अथिा प्रस्ट्तुत करने से संबंजधत दाजयत्िों का अनुपालन 
सुजनजित करेगी।  
[फा. सं. 24-08/2024-यूबीबी] 
देिेंर क ु मार राय, संयुक् त सजचि 
 
 
 
 
MINISTRY OF COMMUNICATIONS 
(Department of Telecommunications) 
NOTIFICATION 
New Delhi, the 22nd November, 2024 
 G.S.R. 723(E).—Whereas a draft of the Telecommunications (Critical Telecommunication Infrastructure) 
Rules, 2024, which the Central Government proposes to make in exercise of the powers conferred by sub-section (4) of 
section 22 read with clause (w) of sub-section (2) of section 56 of the Telecommunications Act, 2023 (44 of 2023), was 
published as required by sub -section (1) of  section 56 of the said Act vide notification of the Government of India in 
the Ministry of Communications, Department of Telecommunications numbe r G.S.R. 521(E), dated the 28th August, 
2024, in the Gazette of India, Extraordinary, Part II, section 3, sub -section (i), dated the 28th August, 2024, inviting 
objections and suggestions from the persons likely to be affected thereby, before the expiry of  the period of thirty days 
from the date on which the copies of the Official Gazette containing the said notification were made available to the 
public; 
 And whereas copies of the said Official Gazette were made available to the public on the 29 th August, 2024; 
 And whereas the objections and suggestions received from the public in respect of the said draft rules have 
been duly considered by the Central Government; 
 Now, therefore, in exercise of the powers conferred by sub-section (4) of section 22 read with clause (w) of 
sub-section (2) of section 56 of the Telecommunications Act, 2023 (44 of 2023), the Central Government hereby makes 
the following rules, namely:- 
1. Short title and commencement.  – (1) These rules may be called the Telecommunications (Critical 
Telecommunication Infrastructure) Rules, 2024. 
 (2) They shall come into force on the date of their publication in the Official Gazette.  
 
 
49

[भाग II—खण् ड 3(i)] भारत का रािपत्र : असाधारण  7 
 
2. Definitions. – (1) In these rules, unless the context otherwise requires,– 
(a) “Act” means the Telecommunications Act, 2023 (44 of 2023); 
(b) “Chief Telecommunication Security Officer” means the Chief Telecommunication Security Officer 
appointed under rule 6 of the Telecommunications (Telecom Cyber Security) Rules, 2024;  
(c) “Critical Telecommunication Infrastructure” means any telecommunication network, or part thereof, 
notified under sub-section (3) of section 22 of the Act; 
(d) “portal” means the portal notified by the Central Government under sub-rule(1) of rule 10;  
(e) “security incident” shall have the same meaning assigned to it in clause (f) of sub -rule (1) of rule 2 of the  
Telecommunications (Telecom Cyber Security) Rules, 2024; and 
(f) “telecommunication entity” shall have the same meaning assigned to it in clause (g) of sub -rule (1) of rule 
2 of the Telecommunications (Telecom Cyber Security) Rules, 2024.   
(2) Words and expressions used in these rules and not defined herein but defined in the Act, shall have the 
meanings respectively assigned to them in the Act. 
3. Application. – (1) These rules shall apply to telecommunication network, or any part thereof, which has been 
notified by the Central Government as Critical Telecommunication Infrastructure under sub -section (3) of section 
22 of the Act, based on an assessment that disruption of s uch infrastructure shall have a debilitating impact on 
national security, economy, public health or safety of the nation. 
(2) The Central Government shall specify on the portal the form and manner in which every telecommunication 
entity shall provide the details of its telecommunication network, telecommunication services, and elements of such 
network and services.  
4. Compliance requirements. - Every telecommunication entity shall ensure that Critical Telecommunication 
Infrastructure, including any spares, hardware and software used in such Critical Telecommunication Infrastructure, 
are in compliance with the following standards, namely:–   
(a) Essential Requirements (ERs), Interface Requirements (IRs), Indian Telecommunication Security Assurance 
Requirements (ITSARs) and specifications, testing requirements, or conformity assessment, as applicable, 
issued by Telecommunication Engineering Centre, National Centre for Communication Security, or any other 
person as may be notified by the Central Government for this purpose:  
 Provided that in the absence of such standards, a telecommunication entity may utilise only such Critical 
Telecommunication Infrastructure, including any spares, hardware and software used in such Critical 
Telecommunication Infrastructure, which meet the relevant standards as may be notified by the Central Government in 
this regard; 
(b) National Security Directive on Telecommunication Sector (NSDTS) as issued by the Central Government;  
(c) directives on communication security certification issued by the Central Government; and     
(d) such other standards applicable to Critical Telecommunication Infrastructure, as may be notified by the Central 
Government from time to time. 
5. Inspection of Critical Telecommunication Infrastructure.  – (1) The Central Government, may, by an order, 
authorise its personnel to access and inspect hardware, software and data pertaining to Critical Telecommunication 
Infrastructure of telecommunication entities. 
(2)  Every telecommunication entity shall ensure access to any personnel authorised by the Central Government 
under sub-rule (1) for inspection of Critical Telecommunication Infrastructure.  
6. Chief Telecommunication Security Officer.  – (1) The Chief Telecom Security Officer shall be responsible for 
the implementation of these rules.  
(2) The Central Government shall specify on the portal, the form and manner in which every telecommunication 
entity shall provide the details in respect of Critical Telecommunication Infrastructure, including the following details, 
namely:– 
(a) telecommunication network architecture of the Critical Telecommunication Infrastructure;  
(b) authorised personnel having access to Critical Telecommunication Infrastructure;  
(c) inventory of hardware, software and spares related to Critical Telecommunication Infrastructure;  
50

8  THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY    [PART II—SEC. 3(i)] 
 
(d) details of vulnerability, threat or risk analysis for the cyber security architecture of Critical 
Telecommunication Infrastructure; 
(e) Cyber Crisis Management Plan for Critical Telecommunication Infrastructure;  
(f) security audit reports and audit compliance reports of Critical Telecommunication Infrastructure; 
(g) Service Level Agreements (SLAs) of services pertaining to Critical Telecommunication 
Infrastructure; 
(h) all logs relating to Critical Telecommunication Infrastructure to assist in detection of anomalies and 
enable the Central Government to generate intelligence on real time basis; and  
(i) reporting of security incidents within the timelines specified for Critical Telecommunication 
Infrastructure under rule 7. 
7. Obligations related to Critical Telecommunication Infrastructure. – (1) Every telecommunication entity shall 
comply with the following obligations, namely:– 
(a) ensure security of Critical Telecommunication Infrastructure, including through compliance with the 
standards as provided under rule 4;  
(b) maintain a complete list of Critical Telecommunication Infrastructure along with the software and 
hardware details, as well as the dependencies on such Critical Telecommunication Infrastructure;  
(c) preserve in a secure manner, for a minimum period of two years or such other period as may be 
determined by the Central Government, logs and documentation of the telecommunication network 
architecture of Critical Telecommunication Infrastructure, including  changes in such 
telecommunication network architecture;   
(d) plan, develop and maintain adequate verification practices and protocols applicable for all personnel 
authorised to have access to Critical Telecommunication Infrastructure, and undertake periodic review 
of the same as directed by the Central Government;  
(e) maintain records of the supply chain of the telecommunication equipment and other equipment 
deployed in the Critical Telecommunication Infrastructure till such infrastructure is in use, and 
provide such records, as and when sought for by the Central Government; 
(f) ensure that vulnerability or threat or risk analysis for telecommunication network architecture of 
Critical Telecommunication Infrastructure is carried out annually  or in such intervals as may be  
directed by the Central Government ; 
(g) plan, develop, maintain and review processes required for Service Level Agreements (SLAs) entered 
into by the telecommunication entities with their vendors in relation to Critical Telecommunication 
Infrastructure;  
(h) plan, develop, maintain and review processes of taking regular backup of logs of networking and 
communication devices, servers, systems and services supporting the functioning of the Critical 
Telecommunication Infrastructure; 
(i) implement standard operating procedures for security incident response systems, including disaster 
recovery and business continuity; 
(j) implement mechanisms to ensure intimation of security incident(s) to the Central Government, no 
later than six hours of occurrence of such incident, in the form and manner as may be specified on the 
portal; and 
(k) maintain a risk register including a graded risk assessment associated with different elements of 
Critical Telecommunication Infrastructure within its network, identifying the potential and severity 
of risks posed to the Critical Telecommunication Infrastructure and solutions to mitigate the same and 
produce such information as and when sought for by the Central Government .  
(2) Where a telecommunication entity requires remote access to its Critical Telecommunication Infrastructure for 
the purpose of repair or maintenance from a location outside of the territory of India, it shall do so only from such 
location for which it has obtained prior written approval from the Central Government, and it shall, for each instance of 
such remote access – 
(a) provide due intimation of such remote access to the Central Government in the form and manner specified on 
the portal; and 
51

[भाग II—खण् ड 3(i)] भारत का रािपत्र : असाधारण  9 
 
(b) ensure that the logs for such remote access are preserved for at least one year and provided as and when sought 
for by the Central Government. 
 
(3) Every telecommunication entity shall furnish a detailed report relating to the action taken by it under sub-rule (1) in 
the form and manner as may be specified on the portal.  
(4) The Central Government may, pursuant to any report or other information received from a telecommunication entity 
under sub-rule (3),–– 
(a)  seek further clarifications from such telecommunication entity; or  
(b)  issue any directions, orders or instructions to such telecommunication entity for the protection of Critical 
Telecommunication Infrastructure or mitigating risks to such infrastructure.  
8. Requirements for upgradation of Critical Telecommunication Infrastructure.  – (1) Where upgradation of the 
software or hardware of equipment which form part of the Critical Telecommunication Infrastructure  is required, 
the telecommunication entity shall make an application to the Central Government, along with details of the test 
reports for such upgradation and other relevant information in the form and manner as may be specified on the 
portal by that Government.      
(2) The Central Government shall, within fourteen days of receipt of the application under sub -rule (1),–   
(a) seek any further clarifications if required from the telecommunication entity;  
(b) issue directions to such entity to conduct further testing under sub-rule (3); or 
(c) approve or reject the application for upgradation activity. 
(3) The Central Government may direct a telecommunication entity to test any upgradation in the Critical 
Telecommunication Infrastructure in an appropriate controlled environment and submit the results of such tests in the 
form and manner, as may be specified by the Central Government on case to case basis, and the telecommunication 
entity shall comply with such directions. 
(4) Where the Central Government does not seek any clarification or issue directions or specify its approval or 
rejection under sub -rule (2) within a period of fourteen days from the date of receipt of such application, the 
telecommunication entity may proceed with such upgradation activity: 
 Provided that where the Central Government has sought clarifications under sub -rule (2), such time period of 
fourteen days shall be considered from the date of submission of clarification by such telecommunication entity:  
 Provided further that where the Central Government has directed to  test the upgradation under sub -rule (3), 
such time period of fourteen days shall be considered from the date of submission of the results of such tests in the form 
and manner as may be specified by the Central Government on case to case basis through secure mode. 
(5) Where upgradation is necessary for addressing or mitigating the adverse effects of a security incident, a 
telecommunication entity may undertake immediate upgradation in the software or hardware of any equipment that 
forms part of Critical Telecommunic ation Infrastructure without making an application under sub rule (1) and  within 
twenty-four hours of such upgradation, report to the Central Government in the form and manner as may be determined 
by the Central Government, with relevant details of – 
(a) the description of the concerned security incident; and 
(b) the relevant software or hardware of an equipment requiring upgradation and the nature of upgradation 
undertaken in respect of such equipment. 
(6) The Central Government may, upon receipt of information under sub -rule (5), seek further information or 
clarifications from the telecommunication entity, or issue directions for further testing and reporting, as it may consider 
necessary. 
(7) The telecommunication entity shall ensure preservation of records and information in relation to any 
upgradation, till such time the relevant Critical Telecommunication Infrastructure is in use, and such records shall be 
produced as and when sought by the Central Government.  
(8) Nothing in this rule shall apply to a routine software update aimed to incrementally improve performance or 
security of Critical Telecom Infrastructure. 
9. Contravention of rules. — Save as otherwise provided, any contravention of the provisions of these rules shall be 
dealt with in accordance with the provisions of the Act.  
52

10  THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY    [PART II—SEC. 3(i)] 
 
10. Digital implementation.  – (1) The Central Government shall notify a portal for the purpose of digital 
implementation of these rules and may also specify any other implementing mechanism.  
(2) Where the Central Government considers  it necessary to use any secure mode of communication, other than 
through the portal, for the issuance of any orders, directions or instructions to telecommunication entities, or for 
collection of any information from such telecommunication entities, it may use such secure mode of communication on 
case to case basis. 
(3) Every telecommunication entity shall ensure compliance with the obligations relating to reporting or 
submission of information to the Central Government under these rules using the portal or through a secure mode of 
communication as determined by the Central Government. 
 
[F. No.  24-08/2024-UBB] 
DEVENDRA KUMAR RAI, Jt. Secy. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Uploaded by Dte. of Printing at Government of India Press, Ring Road, Mayapuri, New Delhi-110064 
and Published by the Controller of Publications, Delhi-110054.  
SARVESH KUMAR 
SRIVASTAVA
Digitally signed by SARVESH 
KUMAR SRIVASTAVA 
Date: 2024.11.22 21:31:21 +05'30'
53

7510 GI/2024 (1) 
रजिस्ट्री सं. डी.एल.- 33004/99 REGD. No. D. L.-33004/99 
 
 
 
xxxGIDHxxx 
xxxGIDExxx 
असाधारण  
EXTRAORDINARY 
भाग II—खण् ड 3—उप-खण् ड (i)   
PART II—Section 3—Sub-section (i) 
प्राजधकार से प्रकाजित 
PUBLISHED BY AUTHORITY 
संचार मंत्रालय 
(दूरसंचार  जिभाग) 
अजधसूचना 
नई ददल्ली, 21 निम् बर, 2024 
सा.का .जन. 720(अ).—दूरसंचार  (दूरसंचार  साइबर सुरक्षा) जनयम, 2024  का  प्रारूप जिसे क ें द्रीय सरकार , 
दूरसंचार  अजधजनयम, 2023 (2023  का  44) की  धारा 56 की  उपधारा (2) के  खंड (फ) के  साथ पठित धारा 22 की  
उपधारा (1) द्वारा  प्रदत्त िजियों का  प्रयोग करते  हुए बनाने का  प्रस्ट्ताि करती  है, उि अजधजनयम की  धारा 56 की  
उपधारा (1) की  अपेक्षा के  अनुसार भारत के  रािपत्र, असाधारण, भाग II खंड 3, उपखंड (i), तारीख 28 अगस्ट् त, 2024 
में, भारत सरकार  के  संचार मंत्रालय के  दूरसंचार  जिभाग की  अजधसूचना संख्या सा.का .जन. 520(अ), तारीख 28 अगस्ट्त, 
2024 द्वारा  उन सभी व् यज‍ तयों से जिनक े उससे प्रभाजित होने की  संभािना है, ऐसी तारीख से जिसको  उ‍ त अजधसूचना से 
यु‍ त रािपत्र की  प्रजतयां िनसाधारण को  उपलब्ध करिाई गई थीं, तीस ददिस की  अिजध की  समाज‍ त से पूिव आक्षेप और 
सुझाि आमंजत्रत करते  हुए प्रकाजित दकया  गया था; 
उि रािपत्र की  प्रजतयां िनसाधारण को  तारीख 29 अगस्ट्त, 2024 को  उपलब्ध करिाई गई थीं; 
सं.   661] नई ददल्ली, बृहस्ट् पजतिार, निम् बर 21, 2024/कार्तवक 30, 1946  
No. 661] NEW DELHI, THURSDAY, NOVEMBER 21, 2024/KARTIKA 30, 1946  
सी.जी.-डी.एल.-अ.-21112024-258808
CG-DL-E-21112024-258808
54

2  THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY    [PART II—SEC. 3(i)] 
 
उि प्रारूप जनयमों के  संबंध में िनसाधारण से प्राप्त आक्षेपों और सुझािों पर क ें द्रीय सरकार  द्वारा  सम् यक्  रूप  से 
जिचार दकया  गया है; 
अतः अब क े न्‍द द्रीय सरकार , दूरसंचार  अजधजनयम, 2023 (2023  का  44) की  धारा 56 की  उपधारा (2) के  खंड 
(फ) के  साथ पठित धारा 22 की  उपधारा (1) द्वारा  प्रदत्त िजियों का  प्रयोग करते  हुए और मोबाईल जडिाईस उपस्ट् कर 
पहचान संख्या से छेड़छाड़ की  रोकथाम  जनयम, 2017 को  उन बातों के  जसिाय अजधक्ांत  करते  हुए, जिन्‍द हें ऐसे अजधक्मण  
से पूिव दकया  गया है या करने  का  लोप दकया  गया है तथा इन जनयमों के  अधीन की  गई कारविाई के  जनबंधनों और ितों 
जिसक े अधीन इसक े अनुसरण में दकए  गए रजिस्ट् रीकरण  भी है, को  अध् यारोही दकए  जबना जनम् नजलजखत जनयम बनाती है, 
अथावत्: 
अध् याय 1 
प्रारंजभक 
1. संजक्ष‍ त नाम और प्रारंभ:- (1) इन जनयमों का  संजक्ष‍ त नाम दूरसंचार  (दूरसंचार  साइबर सुरक्षा) जनयम, 2024 है। 
 (2) ये इनक े रािपत्र में प्रकािन की  तारीख को  प्रिृत् त होंगे। 
2.  पठरभाषाएँ- (1) इन जनयमों में िब तक  दक  संदभव  से अन्‍दयथा अपेजक्षत न हो- 
(क )  "अजधजनयम" से दूरसंचार  अजधजनयम, 2023 (2023 का  44) अजभप्रेत है; 
(ख)  "प्रमाजणत अजभकरण " से सुरक्षा संपरीक्षा करने  के  जलए पोर्वल पर क ें द्रीय सरकार  द्वारा  जिजनर्दवष्ट 
अजभकरण  अजभप्रेत है। 
(ग)  "मुख्य दूरसंचार  सुरक्षा अजधकारी " से जनयम 6 के  अधीन  जनयुि दूरसंचार  इकाई  के  अजभजहत 
कमवचारी  अजभप्रेत है। 
(घ)  "पोर्वल" से जनयम 10 के  उप-जनयम (1) के  अधीन  क ें द्रीय सरकार  द्वारा  अजधसूजचत पोर्वल अजभप्रेत है; 
(ङ)  "सुरक्षा घर्ना" से ऐसी घर्ना अजभप्रेत है जिसका  दूरसंचार  साइबर सुरक्षा पर िास्ट्तजिक या 
संभाजित िोजखम हो; 
(च)  "दूरसंचार  साइबर सुरक्षा" से दूरसंचार  नेर्िक व और दूरसंचार  सेिाओं की  साइबर सुरक्षा अजभप्रेत है 
जिसमें उपकरण , नीजत, सुरक्षा, अिधारणा, सुरक्षा रक्षोपाय, मागवदिवक  जसद्ांत , िोजखम प्रबंधन 
दृजष्टकोण, कारविाई, आश्वासन और प्रौद्योजगकी सजम् मजलत हैं जिनका  उपयोग साइबर पयाविरण में 
सुसंगत सुरक्षा िोजखमों के  जलए दूरसंचार  नेर्िक व और दूरसंचार  सेिाओं की  सुरक्षा के  जलए दकया  िा 
सकता  है; 
(छ)  “दूरसंचार  इकाई ” से इस अजधजनयम की  धारा 3 की  उप-धारा (।) के  अधीन प्राजधकार प्रा‍ त प्राजधक ृ त 
इकाई  अथिा इस अजधजनयम की  धारा 3 की  उप-धारा (3) के  अधीन प्राजधकार की  अपेक्षा से छूर् 
प्रा‍ त व् यज‍ त सजहत दूरसंचार  सेिाएं उपलब् ध कराने  अथिा दूरसंचार  नेर्िक व स्ट् थाजपत करने , उसका  
प्रचालन, रखरखाि अथिा जिस्ट् तार करने  िाला कोई  व् यज‍ त अजभप्रेत है। 
(ि)  “दूरसंचार  उपस्ट् कर पहचान संख् या” से जनम् नजलजखत दूरसंचार  पहचान संख् या अजभप्रेत है: 
i) अंतरराष्‍ट रीय मोबाइल उपस्ट् कर पहचान संख् या (आईएमईआई); या 
ii) इले‍ रॉजनक  क्म  संख् या (ईएसएन); या 
iii) अन्‍द य कोई  संख् या या संक े त िो जिजिष्‍ट र् दूरसंचार  उपस्ट् कर की  पहचान करता  है। 
55
636

[भाग II—खण् ड 3(i)] भारत का रािपत्र : असाधारण  3 
 
(2)  उन िब् दों और पदों  के , िो इन जनयमों में प्रयु‍ त हैं और पठरभाजषत नहीं है कक ं तु अजधजनयम में पठरभाजषत 
हैं, िही अथव होंगे, िो उनक े इस अजधजनयम में है। 
3.  डेर्ा संग्रह, साझा करना  और जिश् लेषण 
(1)  क ें द्रीय सरकार  या क ें द्रीय सरकार  द्वारा  सुरक्षा और दूरसंचार  साइबर सुरक्षा सुजनजित करने  के  
प्रयोिनाथव प्राजधक ृ त कोई  अजभकरण  : 
(क )  क ेन्‍दद्रीय सरकार  द्वारा  पोर्वल पर यथा जिजनर्दवष्‍ट र् तरीक े से अथिा स्ट् िरूप  में दूरसंचार  संस्ट्था से 
रैदफक  डेर्ा और संदेिों के  क ं र्ेन्‍दर् के  अलािा दकसी  भी अन्‍दय डेर्ा की  मांग कर  सकती  है; और 
(ख)  दूरसंचार  संस्ट्था को  जिजनर्दवष्ट पॉइंर् से इस प्रकार के  डेर्ा के  प्रसंस्ट् करण और भंडारण के  जलए इसका  
संग्रह करने  और उसे उपलब्ध कराने  के  जलए आिश्यक अिसंरचना और उपस्ट् कर संस्ट्थाजपत करने  
का  जनदेि दे  सकती  है। 
(2)  उप-जनयम (1) के  अधीन  संग्रजहत डेर्ा का  जिश् लेषण दूरसंचार  साइबर सुरक्षा बढाने के  उपाय करने  के  
जलए दकया  िा सकता  है और दूरसंचार  साइबर सुरक्षा प्रयोिन से और दूरसंचार  साइबर सुरक्षा 
सुजनजित करने  के  जलए क ें द्रीय सरकार  ऐसे जिश् लेषण को  अिधाठरत सीमा तक - 
(क )  जिजध प्रितवन और सुरक्षा संबंधी दक्याकलापों  में सजम् मजलत क ें द्रीय सरकार  की  दकसी  भी अजभकरण   
को  उपलब् ध करा  सकती  है; और 
(ख)  दूरसंचार  इकाईयों  या उपयो‍ ताओं के  साथ िेयर कर  सकती  है; 
परंतु इस प्रकार प्रसाठरत या साझा दकए  गए दकसी  भी डेर्ा का  उपयोग दूरसंचार  साइबर सुरक्षा 
सुजनजित करने  के  अलािा दकसी  अन्‍दय प्रयोिन के  जलए नहीं दकया  िाएगा। 
(3) क ेंद्रीय सरकार  और इन जनयमों के  अधीन  डेर्ा संग्रह करने  के  जलए क ें द्रीय सरकार  द्वारा  प्राजधक ृ त कोई  
अजभकरण   और साथ ही ऐसे व्यजि  जिनक े साथ उप-जनयम (2) के  अधीन  इस प्रकार का  डेर्ा िेयर दकया  
िाता है पयावप्त सुरक्षा संबंधी उपाय करेंगे  जिसमें क ेन्‍दद्रीय सरकार  द्वारा  जिजनर्दवष्ट दकए  गए क ुछ सुरक्षा संबंधी 
उपाय िाजमल है तादक  यह सुजनजित दकया  िा सक े दक  ऐसे डेर्ा सख़्त गोपनीयता के  साथ भंडाठरत और 
अनुरजक्षत दकये  िाएँ और उस तक  दकसी  भी अप्राजधक ृ त पहुँच को  रोका  िा सक े । 
4. दूरसंचार  साइबर सुरक्षा संबंधी दाजयत्ि- (1) कोई  भी व्यजि  
(क ) दूरसंचार  साइबर सुरक्षा को  खतरे में नहीं डालेगा; अथिा 
(ख) ऐसा मैसेि नहीं भेिेगा िो दूरसंचार  साइबर सुरक्षा को  प्रजतक ू ल ढग से प्रभाजित करता  हो। 
(2) उप-जनयम (1) की  व्यापकता  पर प्रजतक ूल प्रभाि डाले जबना, कोई  भी व्यजि  दूरसंचार  उपस्ट् कर या दूरसंचार  
पहचान संख् या या दूरसंचार  नेर्िक व या दूरसंचार  सेिाओं के  दुरुपयोग  द्वारा  या जनम् नजलजखत के  द्वारा  दूरसंचार  साइबर 
सुरक्षा को  खतरे में नहीं डालेगा:   
(क ) कपर् , छल या प्रजतरूपण; 
(ख) दकसी  भी ऐसे संदेि को  प्रेजषत करना  िो कपर्  पर आधाठरत हो; 
(ग) दकसी  भी सुरक्षा घर्ना काठरत  करना  या सुरक्षा घर्ना काठरत  करने  का  आिय रखना, या 
(घ) ऐसे दकसी  अन्‍दय उपयोग में जल‍ त होना िो तत् समय प्रिृत् त दकसी  अन्‍द य जिजध के  दकसी  भी उपबंध के  
जिपरीत हो। 
(ड.) कोई  अन्‍दय रीजत जिससे दूरसंचार  साइबर सुरक्षा पर िोजखम हो सकता  हो। 
56

4  THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY    [PART II—SEC. 3(i)] 
 
(3) प्रत्येक दूरसंचार  इकाई  दूरसंचार  साइबर सुरक्षा सुजनजित करने  के  जलए दूरसंचार  पहचान संख् याओं या दूरसंचार  
उपस्ट् करों या दूरसंचार  नेर्िक व या दूरसंचार  सेिाओं के  दुरुपयोग  की  रोकथाम  के  जलए क ें द्रीय सरकार  द्वारा  िारी दकए  िा 
सकने  िाले जनदेिों और मानकों , जिनमें उनक े कायावन्‍दियन के  जलए समयसीमा भी िाजमल है, का  अनुपालन सुजनजित 
करेगी।  
(4)  प्रत्येक दूरसंचार  इकाई  दूरसंचार  साइबर सुरक्षा सुजनजित करने  के  जलए जनम्नजलजखत उपायों का  कायावन्‍द ियन 
सुजनजित करेगी , अथावत:- 
(क ) दूरसंचार  साइबर सुरक्षा नीजत अपनाएगी, जिसमें जनम्नजलजखत सजम् मजलत होंगे: 
(i) दूरसंचार  साइबर सुरक्षा को  बढाने के  जलए रक्षोपाय, िोजखम प्रबंधन दृजष्टकोण, कारविाई, प्रजिक्षण, 
सिोत्तम प्रणाली और प्रौद्योजगकी; 
(ii) दूरसंचार  नेर्िक व परीक्षण जिसमें किोरता, भेद्यता जनधावरण और भेदन  परीक्षण िाजमल हैं; 
(iii) िोजखम जनधावरण, पहचान और सुरक्षा घर्नाओं की  रोकथाम ; 
(iv) सुरक्षा घर्नाओं से जनपर्ने के  जलए त्िठरत कारविाई प्रणाली जिसमें ऐसी घर्नाओं के  प्रभाि को  
सीजमत करने  के  जलए िमन उपाय सजम् मजलत हैं; और 
(v) ऐसी घर्नाओं से सीख सुजनजित करने  और दूरसंचार  साइबर सुरक्षा को  और सुदृढ  करने  के  जलए 
सुरक्षा घर्नाओं का  फोरेंजसक  जिश्लेषण; 
(ख) उप-खंड (क ) के  अधीन  जनर्दवष्ट नीजत को  अपनाने पर क ें द्रीय सरकार  को  इस प्रकार सूजचत करेगी  िैसा 
क ें द्रीय सरकार  द्वारा  अिधाठरत दकया  िाए; 
(ग) सुरक्षा घर्नाओं के  िोजखमों की  पहचान करना  और उन्‍दहें कम  करना  और ऐसी घर्नाओं पर समय पर 
प्रजतदक्या सुजनजित करना ; 
(घ) सुरक्षा घर्नाओं के  समाधान  के  जलए उजचत कारविाई करना  और उनक े प्रभाि को  कम  करना ; 
(ङ) दूरसंचार  साइबर सुरक्षा पर क ेंद्रीय सरकार  द्वारा  िारी दकए  गए जनदेिों और मानकों  का  कायावन्‍दियन 
सुजनजित करना ; 
(च) दूरसंचार  साइबर सुरक्षा के  प्रजत खतरों के  प्रजत समुत् थान िज‍ त का  जनधावरण करने  के  जलए अपने स्ट्ियं के  
तंत्र के  माध्यम से और प्रमाजणत अजभकरण  के  माध्यम से अपने नेर्िक व की  ऐसे अंतरालों पर काजलक  
दूरसंचार  साइबर सुरक्षा संपरीक्षा करना  िैसा क ें द्रीय सरकार  द्वा रा पोर्वल पर जनर्दवष्ट दकया  िाए और 
संपरीक्षा ठरपोर्व को  क ें द्रीय सरकार  के  साथ साझा करना  िो आिश्यकता पड़ने पर आगे की  संपरीक्षा कर  
सकती  है; 
(छ) सुरक्षा घर्ना की  सूचना क ेंद्रीय सरकार  या क ें द्रीय सरकार  द्वारा  इस जनजमत् त प्राजधक ृ त दकसी  भी 
अजधकारी  को  देना  और जनयम 7 में जनर्दवष्ट तरीक े से ऐसी घर्नाओं से जनपर्ने के  जलए दकए  गए उपाय 
करना ; 
(ि) उप-जनयम (3) के  अधीन क ें द्रीय सरकार  द्वारा  जिजनर्दवष्ट समयािजध के  भीतर स्ट्ियं अथिा अन्‍दय दूरसंचार  
इकाईयों  के  सहयोग से सुरक्षा प्रचालन क ें द्र (एसओसी) िैसी सुजिधाएं स्ट्थाजपत करना  तादक  जनम्नजलजखत 
का  समाधान दकया  िा सक े अथावत्: 
(i) दूरसंचार  साइबर सुरक्षा और सुरक्षा घर्नाओं, घुसपैि और दूरसंचार  सेिाओं अथिा दूरसंचार  नेर्िक व 
के  भंग के  साथ-साथ ऐसी घर्नाओं, घुसपैि या भंग के  प्रयास के  कारण  की  जनगरानी करना ; 
57

[भाग II—खण् ड 3(i)] भारत का रािपत्र : असाधारण  5 
 
(ii) दूरसंचार  सेिा या दूरसंचार  नेर्िक व को  प्रभाजित करने  िाले खतरे के  कारकों  के  ब् यौरे बनाए रखना; 
(iii) प्रचालन और रखरखाि के  कमांड  लॉग बनाए रखना; 
(iv) सुरक्षा प्रचालन क ें द्र (एसओसी) (फायरिॉल, घुसपैि का  पता लगाने िाली प्रणाली (आईडीएस) या 
घुसपैि रोकथाम  प्रणाली (आईपीएस), या सुरक्षा सूचना और घर्ना प्रबंधन (एसआईईएम) या ऐसे 
अन्‍दय समाधान) के  लॉग बनाए रखना; 
(v) दूरसंचार  सेिा या दूरसंचार  नेर्िक व की  सुरक्षा के  जलए आिश्यक दूरसंचार  सेिाओं या दूरसंचार  
नेर्िक व के  घर्कों  या अन्‍दय घर्कों  के  लॉग बनाए रखना; 
(vi) क ें द्रीय सरकार  द्वारा  पोर्वल पर जिजनर्दवष्ट अिजध के  जलए इस उप-जनयम में जिजनर्दवष्‍ट र् सभी ठरकॉडव  या 
लॉग का  रख-रखाि करना  और क ें द्रीय सरकार  द्वारा  इस जनजमत् त प्राजधक ृ त व्यजि  को  उपलब्ध 
कराना ; और 
(vii) सुरक्षा घर्नाओं से संबंजधत िांच के  प्रयोिन के  जलए जिजध प्रितवन एिेंजसयों सजहत क ें द्रीय सरकार  
द्वारा  प्राजधक ृ त व्यजि  को  आिश्यक सहायता प्रदान करना।  
(5) प्रत्येक दूरसंचार  इकाई  उप-जनयम (4) के  अधीन अपने द्वारा  की  गई कारविाई से संबंजधत जिस्ट्तृत ठरपोर्व पोर्वल पर 
जिजनर्दवष्ट प्ररूप और रीजत में प्रस्ट्तुत करेगी।  
(6) क ेंद्रीय सरकार  उपजनयम (4) के  अधीन दकसी  दूरसंचार  इकाई  से प्राप्त दकसी  ठरपोर्व या अन्‍दय सूचना के  अनुसरण में - 
 (क )  ऐसी दूरसंचार  इकाई  से आगे ऐसे स्ट्पष्टीकरण मांग सकती  है; या 
 (ख)  दू रसंचार साइबर सुरक्षा के  संरक्षण के  जलए और दूरसंचार  साइबर सुरक्षा के  जलए िोजखम को  कम  करने  
के  जलए ऐसी दूरसंचार  इकाई  को  कोई  जनदेि, आदेि या अनुदेि िारी कर  सकती  है। 
5. दूरसंचार  साइबर सुरक्षा को  संरजक्षत करने  और सुजनजित करने  के  उपाय - (1) क ें द्रीय सरकार , िैसा िह आिश्यक 
समझे, जडजिर्ल और अन्‍दय तंत्र स्ट्थाजपत कर  सकती  है तादक  ऐसे कायों  की  पहचान की  िा सक े या दकसी  व्यजि  को  उनकी  
पहचान करने  और ठरपोर्व करने  में सक्षम बनाया िा सक े, िो दूरसंचार  साइबर सुरक्षा को  खतरा पहुंचा सकते  हैं। 
 (2) क ें द्रीय सरकार , उप-जनयम (1) के  अधीन प्राप्त सूचना की  िांच के  पिात्, उस दूरसंचार  पहचान संख् या 
की  पहचान करेगी  जिसक े उपयोग से दूरसंचार  साइबर सुरक्षा को  खतरा उत्पन्न होने का  आरोप है तथा उस व्यजि  की  भी 
पहचान करेगी  जिसे दूरसंचार  इकाई  द्वारा  ऐसी दूरसंचार  पहचान संख् या िारी की  गई है और ऐसे व्यजि  को  उसक े ब्यौरे 
सजहत नोठर्स िारी करेगी।  
 (3) िह व्यजि  जिसे उप-जनयम (2) के  अधीन नोठर्स िारी दकया  िाता है, ऐसे नोठर्स की  प्राजप्त के  सात ददन  के  
भीतर क ें द्रीय सरकार  को  जलजखत प्रत्युत्तर भेिेगा और यदद  ऐसी अिजध के  भीतर कोई  प्रत्युत्तर प्राप्त नहीं होता है तो क ें द्रीय 
सरकार  उप-जनयम (5) के  अधीन आदेि िारी करने  के  जलए कारविाई करेगी।  
 (4) यदद  उपजनयम (2) के  अधीन नोठर्स के  प्राप्तकताव से उपजनयम (3) में जिजनर्दवष्ट समय के  भीतर प्रत्युत्तर प्राप्त 
होता है,  तो क ें द्रीय सरकार  ऐसे व्यजि  को  सुनिाई का  उजचत अिसर देने  के  पिात् उपजनयम (5) के  अधीन िैसा िह िीक 
समझे उस पर आदेि पाठरत करेगी।  
 (5) क ें द्रीय सरकार  तथ्यों के  अपने जनधावरण और उस व्यजि  द्वारा  जिसे उप-जनयम (2) के  अधीन नोठर्स िारी 
दकया  गया है,  दकए  गए जनिेदन, यदद  कोई  हो, के  आधार पर कारणों  को  अजभजलजखत करते  हुए एक  आदेि पाठरत करेगी , 
जिसमें दूरसंचार  इकाई  को  प्रदत् त जनदेि िाजमल हो सकते  हैं दक — 
(क )  ऐसे आदेि में जिजनर्दवष्ट रीजत से और अिजध के  जलए संबंजधत दूरसंचार  पहचान संख् या के   उपयोग को  
अस्ट्थायी रूप  से जनलंजबत कर  सकती  है; या 
58

6  THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY    [PART II—SEC. 3(i)] 
 
 (ख)  संबंजधत दूरसंचार  पहचान संख् या के  उपयोग को  स्ट्थायी रूप  से समाप्त कर  सकती  है। 
 (6) िहां क ें द्रीय सरकार  समझती है दक  उपजनयम (5) के  अधीन तत्काल कारविाई लोकजहत  में आिश्यक या 
समीचीन है, िहां िह उपजनयम (2) के  अधीन नोठर्स िारी दकए  जबना, कारणों  को  अजभजलजखत करते  हुए एक  आदेि 
पाठरत करेगी , जिसमें दूरसंचार  इकाई  को  संबंजधत दूरसंचार  पहचानकताव  के  उपयोग को  अस्ट्थायी रूप  से जनलंजबत करने  के  
जलए उजचत जनदेि ददए  िाएंगे। 
 (7) यथाजस्ट् थजत उप-जनयम (5) या उप-जनयम (6) के  अधीन आदेि की  एक  प्रजत, उप-जनयम (2) में जिजनर्दवष्ट 
व्यजि  या उप-जनयम (6) में जिजनर्दवष्ट दूरसंचार  इकाई  या आदेि से प्रभाजित ऐसे व्यजि  को  प्रदान की  िाएगी और 
यथाजस्ट् थजत ऐसा व्यजि  या, दूरसंचार  इकाई , आदेि िारी करने  की  तारीख से तीस ददनों  की  अिजध के  भीतर जलजखत रूप  
में क ें द्रीय सरकार  को  कारणों  के  साथ प्रस्ट्तुत कर  सकती  है दक  ऐसी कारविाई ‍यों  नहीं की  िानी चाजहए। 
 (8) क ें द्रीय सरकार , उस व्यजि  को , जिसे उप-जनयम (7) के  अधीन आदेि की  प्रजत उपलब्ध कराई  गई है, सुनिाई 
का  उजचत अिसर देने  के  पिात् और कारणों  को  लेखबद्  करक े   उप-जनयम (5) या उप-जनयम (6) के  अधीन पाठरत आदेि 
को  या तो बनाए रखने या उपांतठरत करने  या िापस लेने का  आदेि पाठरत करेगी : 
 परन्‍द तु उप-जनयम (6) के  अधीन  आदेि के  दकसी  भी संिोधन में दूरसंचार  इकाई  को  उप-जनयम (5) के  खंड (ख) के  
अधीन  जनर्दवष्ट सुसंगत दूरसंचार  पहचान संख् या के  उपयोग को  स्ट्थायी रूप  से समा‍ त करने  का  जनदेि देने  िाला आदेि भी 
िाजमल हो सकता  है। 
 (9) उप-जनयम (5), उप-जनयम (6) या उप-जनयम (8) के  अधीन संबंजधत दूरसंचार  पहचान संख् या के  उपयोग के  
जनलंबन या स्ट्थायी रूप  से समा‍ त करने  का  कोई  आदेि उस व्यजि  से िुड़े अन्‍दय दूरसंचार  उपस्ट् कर या दूरसंचार  पहचान 
संख् या पर भी लागू दकया  िा सक े गा, जिसे दूरसंचार  पहचान संख् या उप-जनयम (2) के  अधीन पहचाना गया है या उप-
जनयम (2) के  अधीन पहचाने गए व्यजि  को  िारी की  गई अन्‍दय दूरसंचार  पहचान संख् याओं पर भी लागू दकया  िा सक ेगा। 
 (10) क ें द्रीय सरकार  ऐसे व्यजियों  और दूरसंचार  पहचान संख् याओं का  संग्रह रख सक े गी जिन पर उप-जनयम (5) 
या उप-जनयम (6) या उप-जनयम (8) या उप-जनयम (9) के  अधीन आदेिों के  अनुसरण में कारविाई की  गई है और दूरसंचार  
इकाईयों  को  ऐसे आदेि की  तारीख से अजधकतम  तीन िषव की  अिजध के  जलए ऐसे व्यजियों  के  जलए दूरसंचार  सेिा तक  
पहुंच को  प्रजतजषद् या सीजमत करने  का  जनदेि दे  सक े गी। 
 (11) क ें द्रीय सरकार  यदद  िह आिश्यक समझे या दूरसंचार  पहचान संख् याओं से िुड़ी सेिाएं प्रदान करने  िाले 
दकसी  व्यजि  द्वारा  दकए  गए दकसी  अनुरोध के  अनुसरण में उप-जनयम (5) या उप-जनयम (6) या उप-जनयम (8) या उप-
जनयम (9) के  अधीन आदेिों के  अनुसरण में ऐसी दूरसंचार  पहचान संख् याओं, जिन पर कारविाई की  गई है, की  सूची ऐसे 
व्यजियों  के  साथ साझा कर  सक े गी और आदेि द्वारा  ऐसे व्यजियों  को  जनदेि दे  सक े गी दक  िे अपने उपभो‍ ताओं की  पहचान 
के  जलए या सेिाओं के  जितरण के  जलए ऐसी दूरसंचार  पहचान संख् याओं के  उपयोग को  उस तरीक े से प्रजतजषद् या 
पठरसीजमत करें , िैसा दक  ऐसे आदेि में जिजनर्दवष्ट दकया  िाए। 
(12) ऐसी भी दूरसंचार  पहचान संख् या को , िो इस जनयम के  अनुसार दूरसंचार  सेिा के  जनलंबन या स्ट् थायी समाजप्त का  
जिषय है, ऐसे आदेि िारी होने अथिा स्ट् थायी समाज‍ त की  तारीख से एक  (1) िषव की  अिजध के  जलए जिसे जिजिष्ट मामलों 
में तीन (3) िषव तक  बढाया िा सकता  है, दकसी  अन्‍दय व्यजि  को  पुनः आिंठर्त नहीं दकया  िाएगा।   
6. मुख्य दूरसंचार  सुरक्षा अजधकारी  - (1) प्रत्येक दूरसंचार  इकाई  एक  मुख्य दूरसंचार  सुरक्षा अजधकारी  जनयुि करेगा  
जिसका  ब् यौरा ऐसे प्ररूप में क ेन्‍दद्रीय सरकार  को  जलजखत रूप  में उपलब्ध कराया  िाएगा िैसा पोर्वल पर जिजनर्दवष्‍ट र् दकया  
िाए। ऐसे अजधकारी  के  दकसी  प्रजतस्ट्थापन या पठरितवन की  सूचना तत्काल क े न्‍दद्रीय सरकार  को  ऐसे प्ररूप में दी  िाएगी, 
िैसा दक  सरकार  द्वारा  पोर्वल पर जिजनर्दवष्ट दकया  िाए। 
(2) मुख्य दूरसंचार  सुरक्षा अजधकारी  भारत का  नागठरक  और जनिासी होगा तथा दूरसंचार  इकाई  के  जनदेिक  मंडल या 
समान िासी जनकाय  के  प्रजत उत्तरदायी होगा। 
59

[भाग II—खण् ड 3(i)] भारत का रािपत्र : असाधारण  7 
 
(3)  मुख्य दूरसंचार  सुरक्षा अजधकारी  इन जनयमों के  कायावन्‍दियन के  जलए दूरसंचार  इकाई  की  ओर से क ें द्रीय सरकार  के  साथ 
समन्‍दिय करने  के  जलए उत्तरदायी होगा, जिसमें जनयम 7 के  अधीन  दकसी  भी ठरपोर्र्िंग अपेक्षाओं या सुरक्षा घर्नाओं की  
ठरपोर्र्िंग का  अनुपालन भी िाजमल है। 
7.  सुरक्षा घर्नाओं की  ठरपोर्र्िंग-(1) दूरसंचार  इकाई - 
(क )  अपने दूरसंचार  नेर्िक व या दूरसंचार  सेिा को  प्रभाजित करने  िाली दकसी  सुरक्षा घर्ना की  िानकारी  होने 
के  छह घंर्े के  भीतर प्रभाजित प्रणाली के  सुसंगत ब्यौरे सजहत ऐसी घर्ना के  जििरण सजहत इसकी  ठरपोर्व 
क े न्‍दद्रीय सरकार  को  देगी ; और 
(ख)  ऐसी घर्ना की  िानकारी  होने के  चौबीस घंर्े के  भीतर, जनम्नजलजखत िानकारी , िैसा लागू हो, प्रस्ट्तुत 
करेगी : 
(i)  सुरक्षा संबंधी घर्ना से प्रभाजित उपयोिाओं की  संख्या; 
(ii)  सुरक्षा संबंधी घर्ना की  अिजध; 
(iii)  सुरक्षा संबंधी घर्ना से प्रभाजित भौगोजलक  क्षेत्र; 
(iv)  दूरसंचार  नेर्िक व या दूरसंचार  सेिा के  कामकाि  पर दकस  हद  तक  प्रभाि पड़ा है; 
(v)  दकए  गए या दकए  िाने हेतु प्रस्ट्ताजित उपचारात् मक  उपाय और 
(vi)  कोई  अन्‍दय िानकारी  जिसे िह सुसंगत समझता हो। 
(2) क ेन्‍दद्रीय सरकार  िहां यह अिधाठरत करती  है दक  सुरक्षा घर्ना का  प्रकर्न लोकजहत  में है ऐसी सुरक्षा घर्ना के  बारे में 
िनता को  सूजचत कर  सकती  है या प्रभाजित दूरसंचार  इकाई  को  ऐसा करने  के  जलए आग्रह कर  सकती  है। 
(3) क े न्‍दद्रीय सरकार  प्रभाजित दूरसंचार  इकाई  से जनम्नजलजखत उपलब्ध कराने  की  मांग कर  सकती  है: 
(क )  साइबर सुरक्षा उपाय सजहत ऐसे दूरसंचार  नेर्िक व और दूरसंचार  सेिाओं की  सुरक्षा का  जनधावरण करने  के  
जलए आिश्यक सूचना; 
(ख)  क ें द्रीय सरकार  द्वारा  यथाअिधाठरत प्रमाजणत अजभकरण  द्वारा  सुरक्षा संपरीक्षा करना।  
(4) क े न्‍दद्रीय सरकार  दकसी  सुरक्षा संबंधी घर्ना के  उपचार के  जलए या दकसी  महत्िपूणव खतरे की  पहचान होने पर उसे 
घठर्त होने से रोकने  के  जलए अपेजक्षत उपचारों सजहत जनदेि िारी कर  सकती  है तथा प्रभाजित दूरसंचार  इकाई  के  जलए ऐसे 
जनदेिों के  कायावन्‍दियन के  जलए समय-सीमा जनर्दवष्ट कर  सकती  है। 
8. दूरसंचार  पहचानकताव  और दूरसंचार  उपस्ट् कर से संबंजधत बाध् यता- (1) उपस्ट् कर का  जिजनमावता जिसक े पास अंतरावष्‍ट रीय 
मोबाईल उपस्ट् कर पहचान (आईएमईआई) संख्या है, भारत में जनर्मवत ऐसे उपस्ट् कर की  आईएमईआई संख् या ऐसे उपस्ट् कर के  
पहले जिक्य से पहले पोर्वल पर ऐसे प्रयोिन के  जलए ऐसे प्ररूप में िो क े न्‍दद्रीय सरकार  द्वारा  जिजनर्दवष्‍ट र् दकया  िाए, क े न्‍द द्रीय 
सरकार  से पंिीक ृ त कराएगा।  
(2) रजिस्ट् रीक ृ त उपस्ट् कर का  आयातक  जिसक े पास अंतरावष्‍ट रीय मोबाईल उपस्ट् कर पहचान (आईएमईआई) संख्या है, 
भारत में जिक्य, परीक्षण, अनुसंधान या दकसी  अन्‍दय प्रयोिन के  जलए आयाजतत ऐसे उपस्ट् कर की  आईएमईआई संख् या ऐसे 
उपस्ट् कर के  भारत में आयात से पहले ऐसे प्ररूप में िो पोर्वल पर ऐसे प्रयोिन के  जलए जिजनर्दवष्ट दकया  िाए क ेन्‍दद्रीय सरकार  
के  पास रजिस्ट् रीक ृ त कराएगा।  
 
 
60

8  THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY    [PART II—SEC. 3(i)] 
 
(3)  कोई  भी व्यजि - 
(क )  िानबूझकर  जिजिष्ट दूरसंचार  उपस्ट् कर पहचान संख्या को  हर्ाएगा, जमर्ाएगा, बदलेगा  या पठरिर्तवत नहीं 
करेगा ; या 
(ख)  यह िानते हुए दक  इसे ऊपर जिजनर्दवष्ट अनुसार कॉजन्‍दफगर दकया  गया है, िानबूझकर  दूरसंचार  पहचानकताव  
या दूरसंचार  उपस्ट् कर से संबंजधत हाडविेयर या सॉफ्र्िेयर का  उपयोग, उत्पादन, यातायात, जनयंत्रण या 
अजभरक्षा अपने पास नहीं रखेगा। 
(4)  क ें द्रीय सरकार  छेड़छाड़ दकए  गए दूरसंचार  उपस्ट् कर या अंतरावष्‍ट रीय मोबाईल उपस्ट् कर पहचान (आईएमईआई) संख्या 
के  संबंध में यथाअपेजक्षत सहायता प्रदान करने  के  जलए आईएमईआई संख् या िाले दूरसंचार  उपस्ट् कर के  जनमावताओं को  जनदेि 
िारी कर  सकती  है। 
(5) क ें द्रीय सरकार  दूरसंचार  नेर्िकों में या दूरसंचार  सेिाएं प्रदान करते  समय छेड़छाड़ दकए  गए अंतरावष्‍ट रीय मोबाईल 
उपस्ट् कर पहचान (आईएमईआई) संख्या िाले दूरसंचार  उपस्ट्करों के  उपयोग को  रोकने  के  जलए दूरसंचार  इकाइयों  को  जनदेि 
िारी कर  सकती  है। 
9. जनयमों का  उल्लंघन - अन्‍दयथा उपबंजधत के  जसिाय, इन जनयमों के  उपबंधों के  दकसी  भी उल्लंघन से अजधजनयम के  
उपबंधों के  अनुसार जनपर्ा िाएगा। 
10. जडजिर्ल कायावन्‍दियन- (1) क ें द्रीय सरकार  इन जनयमों के  जडजिर्ल कायावन्‍दियन के  प्रयोिन के  जलए एक  पोर्वल 
अजधसूजचत करेगी  तथा कोई  अन्‍दय कायावन्‍दियन तंत्र भी जनर्दवष्ट कर  सकती  है। 
(2) िहां क ें द्रीय सरकार  दूरसंचार  इकाईयों  या दूरसंचार  उपकरणों  के  जनमावताओं या आयातकों  को  कोई  आदेि, जनदेि या 
अनुदेि िारी करने  के  जलए या ऐसी दूरसंचार  इकाईयों  से कोई  सूचना एकजत्रत करने  के  जलए पोर्वल के  अलािा संचार के  
दकसी  सुरजक्षत तरीक े का  उपयोग करना  आिश्यक समझती है, िहां िह संचार के  ऐसे सुरजक्षत तरीक े का  उपयोग कर  
सक े गी। 
(3) प्रत्येक दूरसंचार  इकाईयों  तथा दूरसंचार  उपस्ट् कर का  जिजनमावता या आयातक , पोर्वल का  उपयोग करक े  या क े न्‍दद्रीय 
सरकार  द्वारा  यथाअिधाठरत संचार के  सुरजक्षत रीजत से इन जनयमों के  अधीन क ेन्‍दद्रीय सरकार  को  सूचना देने  या प्रस्ट्तुत 
करने  से संबंजधत बाध् यताओं का  अनुपालन सुजनजित करेंगे।  
[फा. सं. 24-07/2024-यूबीबी] 
देिेंद्र क ु मार राय, संयु‍ त सजचि 
 
 
MINISTRY OF COMMUNICATIONS 
(Department of Telecommunications) 
NOTIFICATION 
New Delhi, the 21st November, 2024. 
G.S.R. 720(E).—Whereas a draft of the Telecommunications (Telecom Cyber Security) Rules, 2024, which 
the Central Government proposes to make in exercise of the powers conferred by sub-section (1) of section 22 read 
with clause (v) to sub -section (2) of section 56 of the Telecommunications Act, 2023 (44 of 2023) , was published as 
required by sub -section (1) of section 56 of the said Act vide notification of the Government of India in the Ministry 
of Communication, Department of Telecommunication number G.S.R. 520(E), dated the 28th August, 2024, in the 
Gazette of India, Extraordinary, Part II, section 3, sub -section (i), dated the 28th August, 2024, inviting objections and 
suggestions from the persons likely to be affected thereby, before the expiry of the period of thirty days from the date 
on which the copies of the Official Gazette containing the said notification were made available to the public;  
And whereas copies of the said Official Gazette were made available to the public on the 29 th August, 2024; 
61

[भाग II—खण् ड 3(i)] भारत का रािपत्र : असाधारण  9 
 
And whereas the objections and suggestions received from the public in respect of the said draft rules have 
been duly considered by the Central Government; 
Now, therefore, in exercise of the powers conferred by sub-section (1) of section 22 read with clause (v) to sub -
section (2) of section 56 of the Telecommunications Act, 2023 (44 of 2023) , and in supersession of the prevention of 
tampering of the Mobile Device Equipment Identification Number Rules, 2017, except as respects things done or 
omitted to be done before such supersession and without overriding the terms and conditions of actions taken under 
those rules, including registrations undertaken  in pursuance thereof, the Central Government hereby makes the 
following rules, namely:- 
1. Short title and commencement.  — (1) These rules may be called the Telecommunications (Telecom Cyber 
Security) Rules, 2024. 
(2) They shall come into force on the date of their publication in the Official Gazette.  
2. Definitions. — (1) In these rules, unless the context otherwise requires,–  
(a) “Act” means the Telecommunications Act, 2023 (44 of 2023); 
(b) “certified agency” means the agency  specified by the Central Government on the portal to carry out 
security audit; 
(c) “Chief Telecommunication Security Officer”  means the designated  employee of a  
telecommunication entity, appointed under rule 6; 
(d) “portal” means the portal as notified by the Central Government under sub -rule (1) of rule 10; 
(e) “security incident” means an event having real or potential risk  on telecom cyber security; 
(f) “telecom cyber security”  means cyber security of telecommunication networks and 
telecommunication services which includes  tools, policies, security concepts, security safeguards, 
guidelines, risk management approaches, actions, assurance and technologies that can be used to 
safeguard telecommunication networks and telecommunication services against relevant security 
risks in the cyber environment; 
(g) “telecommunication entity”  means any person providing telecommunication services, or 
establishing, operating, maintaining, or expanding telecommunication network, including an 
authorised entity holding an authorisation under sub -section (1) of section 3 of the Act, or a person 
exempted from the requirement of authorisation under sub-section (3) of section 3 of the Act; and 
(h)  “telecommunication equipment identification number” means a telecommunication identifier 
bearing—   
(i)  international mobile equipment identity (IMEI) number; or  
(ii)  electronic serial number (ESN); or  
(iii)  any other number or signal that identifies a unique telecommunication equipment.   
(2) Words and expressions used in these rules and not defined herein but defined in the Act, shall have the 
meanings respectively assigned to them in the Act. 
3. Collection, sharing and analysis of data.  — (1) The Central Government, or any agency authorised by the 
Central Government, may, for the purposes of protecting and ensuring telecom cyber security,  — 
(a) seek from a telecommunication entity, traffic data and any other data, other than content of 
messages, in the form and manner as may be specified by the Central Government on the portal; 
and  
(b) direct a telecommunication entity to establish necessary infrastructure and equipment for collection 
and provision of such data from designated points to enable its processing and storage.  
(2) The data collected under sub -rule (1) may be analysed for taking measures to enhance telecom cyber security, and 
such analysis may, to the extent determined by the Central Government as necessary for protecting and ensuring 
telecom cyber security, be— 
(a) disseminated to any agency of the Central Government engaged in law enforcement and security 
related activities; and 
(b) shared with telecommunication entities or users:  
 Provided that any data so disseminated or shared, shall not be used for any purpose, other than for ensuring 
telecom cyber security.  
62

10  THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY    [PART II—SEC. 3(i)] 
 
(3) The Central Government and any agency authorised by the Central Government to collect data under these rules, 
as well as persons with whom such data is shared under sub -rule (2), shall put in place adequate safeguards, including 
any specific safeguards as may be specified by the Central Government to ensure that such data is stored and 
maintained in strict confidentiality and prevent any unauthorised access thereto.  
4.  Obligations relating to telecom cyber security. — (1) No person shall –   
(a) endanger telecom cyber security; or 
(b) send any message which adversely affects telecom cyber security. 
(2) Without prejudice to the generality of sub -rule (1), no person shall endanger telecom cyber security by 
misuse of telecommunication equipment or telecommunication identifier or telecommunication network or 
telecommunication services or by – 
(a) fraud, cheating or personation;  
(b) transmitting any message which is fraudulent; 
(c) committing or intending to commit any security incident;  
(d) engaging in any other use which is contrary to the provision, of any other law for the time being in 
force; or 
(e) any other means which may have security risk on telecom cyber security.  
(3) Every telecommunication entity shall ensure compliance with the directions and standards, including 
timelines for their implementation, as may be issued by the Central Government for the prevention of misuse of 
telecommunication identifiers or telecommunication equipment or telecommunication network or telecommunication 
services for ensuring telecom cyber security. 
(4) Every telecommunication entity shall implement the following measures to ensure telecom cyber security, 
namely :— 
(a) adopt a telecom cyber security policy, which shall include — 
(i)  security safeguards, risk management approaches, actions, training, best practices and 
technologies, to enhance telecom cyber security; 
(ii) telecommunication network testing including hardening, vulnerability assessment and penetration 
testing;  
(iii) risk assessment, identification and prevention of security incidents;  
(iv) rapid action system to deal with security incidents including mitigation measures to limit the 
impact of such incidents; and 
(v)  forensic analysis of security incidents to ensure learnings from such incidents and further 
strengthening telecom cyber security; 
(b) inform the Central Government on adoption of the policy referred to in  sub -clause (a), in the manner 
as may be determined by the Central Government; 
(c) identify and reduce the risks of security incidents and ensure timely responses to such incidents;  
(d) take appropriate action for addressing security incidents, and mitigate their impact;  
(e) ensure implementation of directions and standards issued by the Central Government on telecom cyber 
security; 
(f) conduct periodic telecom cyber security audits of its network to assess resilience to threats on telecom 
cyber security through its own mechanisms and through the certified agency in such intervals as may 
be specified by the Central Government on the portal, and share the audit report with the Central 
Government, which may undertake further audits if so required; 
(g) report security incidents to the Central Government, or any officer authorised in this behalf by the 
Central Government, and measures taken to address such incidents in the manner specified in rule 7;  
(h) establish facilities such as Security Operations Centre (SOC), by itself or in collaboration with other 
telecommunication entities, within the time period as may be specified by the Central Government 
under sub-rule (3), to address the following, namely: 
(i) monitor telecom cyber security and security incidents, intrusions and breaches of 
telecommunication services or telecommunication network, as well as, attempts to cause such 
incidents, intrusions or breaches; 
63

[भाग II—खण् ड 3(i)] भारत का रािपत्र : असाधारण  11 
 
(ii) maintain details of threat actors impacting its telecommunication services, or 
telecommunication network;  
(iii) maintain command logs of operation and maintenance; 
(iv) maintain logs of Security Operations Centre (SOC) (firewall, Intrusion Detection System 
(IDS) or Intrusion Prevention System (IPS), or Security Information and Event Management 
(SIEM) or other such solution); 
(v) maintain logs of elements of telecommunication service, or telecommunication network or any 
other element required for security of telecommunication service or telecommunication 
network; 
(vi) maintain all records or logs specified in this sub -rule, for a period as specified on the portal by 
the Central Government, and make such records available to the person authorised by the 
Central Government in this behalf; and 
(vii) provide necessary support to the person authorised by the Central Government, including law 
enforcement agencies for the purpose of investigation related to security incidents.  
(5) Every telecommunication entity shall furnish a detailed report relating to the action taken by it under sub -rule (4) 
in the form and manner as may be specified on the portal.  
(6) The Central Government may, pursuant to any report or other information received from a telecommunication 
entity under sub-rule (4), may –– 
(a)  seek further clarifications from such telecommunication entity; or  
(b)  issue any directions, orders or instructions to such telecommunication entity for the protection of telecom 
cyber security and mitigate risks to telecom cyber security. 
5.  Measures to protect and ensure telecom  cyber security.— (1) The Central Government may put in place digital 
and other mechanisms as it may consider necessary to identify, or for enabling any person to identify and report, acts 
that may endanger telecom cyber security. 
(2) The Central Government shall, after examination of the information received under sub -rule (1), identify the 
telecommunication identifier, the use of which is alleged to have endangered telecom cyber security and the person to 
whom such telecommunication identifier has been issued, by the telecommunication entity, and issue a notice to such 
person, with details thereof. 
(3) The person to whom notice is issued under sub -rule (2), shall send a written response to the Central 
Government within seven days of receipt of such notice, and if no response is received within such period, the Central 
Government shall proceed to issue an order under sub-rule (5). 
(4) If a response is received from the recipient of the notice under sub -rule (2) within the time specified in sub -
rule (3), the Central Government shall, after giving such person a reasonable opportunity of being heard, make an 
order thereon as it thinks fit under sub-rule (5). 
(5) The Central Government shall, based on its assessment of facts and submissions, if any, made by the person 
to whom notice is issued under sub -rule (2), pass an order, with reasons to be recorded in writing, which may include 
directions to the telecommunication entity to — 
(a) temporarily suspend use of the relevant telecommunication identifier, in the manner and for a duration 
as may be specified in such order; or  
(b) permanently disconnect the use of the relevant telecommunication identifier.  
(6)  Where the Central Government considers that immediate action under sub -rule (5) is necessary or expedient 
in the public interest, it shall without issuing a notice under sub -rule (2), pass an order recording the reasons thereof, 
with appropriate directions to the telecommunication entity to temporarily suspend use of the relevant 
telecommunication identifier. 
(7) A copy of the order under sub -rule (5) or sub -rule (6), as the case may be, shall be provided to the person 
referred to in sub -rule (2) or the telecommunication entity referred to in sub -rule (6) or such person affected by the 
order, and such person or, as the case may be, the telecommunication entity, may, within a period of thirty days from 
the date of issuance of the order, represent to the Central Government in writing, with reasons why such action should 
not be taken.  
(8) The Central Government shall, after giving the person to whom copy of the order has been provided under 
sub-rule (7), a reasonable opportunity of being heard and for reasons to be recorded in writing, pass an order, either 
upholding, or modifying, or revoking the order passed under sub-rule (5) or sub-rule (6):  
64

12  THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY    [PART II—SEC. 3(i)] 
 
Provided that any modification of the order under sub -rule (6) may also include an order directing the 
telecommunication entity to permanently disconnect the use of the relevant telecommunication identifier as specified 
under clause (b) of sub-rule (5). 
(9) Any order of suspension or permanent disconnection of use of the relevant telecommunication identifier  
under sub -rule (5), sub -rule (6) or sub -rule (8) may also be extended to the other telecommunication equipment or 
telecommunication identifier linked to the person whose telecommunication identifier has been identified under sub-
rule (2) or other telecommunication identifier issued to the person identified under sub-rule (2). 
(10) The Central Government may maintain a repository of persons and telecommunication identifiers which have 
been acted upon pursuant to the orders under sub -rule (5), or sub -rule (6), or sub -rule (8), or sub -rule (9), and may 
direct telecommunication entities, to prohibit or limit the access to telecommunication service to such persons for a 
period not exceeding three years from the date of such order.   
(11) The Central Government may, if it considers necessary, or pursuant to any request made by any person 
providing services that are linked to telecommunication identifiers, share the list of telecommunication identifiers that 
have been acted upon pursuant to orders under sub -rule (5), or sub -rule (6), or sub -rule (8), or sub -rule (9), with such 
persons and, by order, direct such persons to also prohibit or circumscribe the use of such telecommunication 
identifiers  for identification of their customers or for delivery of services, in the manner as may be specified in such 
order.  
(12) Any telecommunication identifier, which is subject to suspension or permanent disconnection under this rule, 
shall not be reallocated to any other person for a period of one year from the date of issuance of the order of 
suspension or permanent disconnection which may be extended upto three years, for reasons to be recorded in writing, 
in specific cases. 
6.  Chief Telecommunication Security Officer.  — (1) Every telecommunication entity shall appoint a Chief 
Telecommunication Security Officer, whose details shall be provided in writing to the Central Government in the 
form as may be specified on the portal and any replacement or change of such officer shall be promptly intimated to 
the Central Government, in such form as may be specified on the portal by that Government.  
(2) The Chief Telecommunication Security Officer shall be a citizen and resident of India, and responsible to the 
Board of Directors or similar governing body of the telecommunication entity. 
(3) The Chief Telecommunication Security Officer shall be responsible for coordinating with the Central 
Government on behalf of the telecommunication entity for the implementation of these rules, including 
compliance with any reporting requirements or reporting of security incidents under rule 7.  
7.  Reporting of security incidents. — (1) The telecommunication entity shall–  
(a) within six hours of becoming aware of a security incident affecting its telecommunication network 
or telecommunication service,  report the same to the Central Government with relevant details of 
the affected system including the description of such incident; and 
(b) within twenty-four hours of becoming aware of such incident, furnish the following information, as 
applicable: 
(i) the number of users affected by the security incident; 
(ii) the duration of the security incident; 
(iii) the geographical area affected by the security incident; 
(iv) the extent to which the functioning of the telecommunication network or telecommunication 
service is affected;  
(v) the remedial measures taken or proposed to be taken; and  
(vi) any other information it considers relevant. 
(2) The Central Government may, where it determines that disclosure of the security incident is in the public 
interest, inform the public of such security incident, or require the affected telecommunication entity to do so. 
(3) The Central Government may require the affected telecommunication entity to — 
(a) provide information needed to assess the security of the telecommunication network and 
telecommunication service including telecom cyber security policy; 
(b) carry out a security audit by a certified agency as may be determined by the Central Government.  
 
65

[भाग II—खण् ड 3(i)] भारत का रािपत्र : असाधारण  13 
 
(4) The Central Government may issue directions including measures required to remedy a security incident 
or prevent one from occurring when a significant threat has been identified and may also specify the time 
limits for implementation of such directions to the affected telecommunication entity.  
8. Obligations relating to telecommunication identifier and telecommunication  equipment.— (1) A manufacturer 
of equipment that has International Mobile Equipment Identity (IMEI) number, shall register such IMEI number of 
such equipment manufactured in India with the Central Government, prior to the first sale of such equipment, in the 
form as may be specified for such purpose on the portal by that Government. 
(2) An importer of equipment that has an International Mobile Equipment Identity (IMEI) number, shall register 
such IMEI number of such equipment imported into India for sale or testing or research or for any other purpose, with 
the Central Government, prior to the import of such equipment into India, in the form as may be specified for such 
purpose on the portal. 
(3) No person shall — 
(a) intentionally remove, obliterate, change, or alter the unique telecommunication equipment identification 
number; or  
(b) intentionally use, produce, traffic in, have control or custody of, or possess hardware or software related 
to the telecommunication identifier or telecommunication equipment, knowing it has been configured as 
specified above. 
(4) The Central Government may issue directions to manufacturers of telecommunication equipment bearing 
International Mobile Equipment Identity (IMEI) number to provide assistance as required in relation to tampered 
telecommunication equipment or IMEI number. 
(5) The Central Government may issue directions to telecommunication entities to block the use of 
telecommunication equipment with tampered International Mobile Equipment Identity (IMEI) number in 
telecommunication networks or telecommunication services. 
9. Contravention of rules. — Save as otherwise provided, any contravention of the provisions of these rules 
shall be dealt with in accordance with the provisions of the Act.  
10. Digital Implementation.  — (1) The Central Government shall, notify a portal for the purpose of digital 
implementation of these rules and may also specify any other implementing mechanism.  
(2) Where the Central Government considers  it necessary to use any secure mode of communication, other than 
through the portal, for the issuance of any orders, directions or instructions to telecommunication entities or 
manufacturers or importers of telecommunication equipment, or for collection of any information from such 
telecommunication entities, it may use such secure mode of communication.  
(3) Every telecommunication entity and manufacturer or importer of telecommunication equipment shall ensure 
compliance with the obligations relating to reporting or submission of information to the Central Government under 
these rules using the portal or through a secure mode of communication as may be determined by the Central 
Government. 
                  [F. No. 24-07/2024-UBB] 
DEVENDRA KUMAR RAI, Jt. Secy.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Uploaded by Dte. of Printing at Government of India Press, Ring Road, Mayapuri, New Delhi-110064 
and Published by the Controller of Publications, Delhi-110054.  
SARVESH KUMAR 
SRIVASTAVA
Digitally signed by SARVESH 
KUMAR SRIVASTAVA 
Date: 2024.11.21 18:30:45 
+05'30'
66