         COSL 
  
 
 
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
COMMITTEE ON SUBORDINATE LEGISLATION 
 
HUNDRED AND NINETY ONE REPORT 
 
ON 
 
(i) The Railways (Punitive Charges for Overloading of Wagon) Rules, 2007;  
 
and 
 
(ii) The Delhi Advocate's Welfare Fund Rules, 2001-Implementation of 169th 
Report of the Committee on Subordinate Legislation 
 
 
                                  (Presented on 16TH March, 2011) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT 
                                              NEW DELHI 
 
             March, 2011/ Phalguna,1932  (Saka) 
191  

 
(I)  
The Railways (Punitive charges for overloading of wagon) Rules, 2007 
 
 
 The Railways (Punitive c harges for overloading of wagon ) Rules, 
2007 (Annexure-I) framed under the Railways Act, 1989 (Annexure-II) were 
notified on 15.06.2007. 
  
2. The main objective  to notify these rules was  to check overloading  of 
wagons and to ensure safe train operation as overloading of wagons 
endangers  the safety of the wagon and track.  As loading in railway wagons 
cannot b e precisely controlled, provision of loading tolerance have been 
made in the rules.  Besides, these rules also intend to check revenue leakage 
caused by understating of weight of consignment loaded in railway wagons. 
To overcome the menace of overloading rules of punitive charges have been 
made stringent for those rail users who have malafide intention. 
The operational benefit of these rules is that it ensure safe train operation 
and prevent leakage of revenue. 
 
3.  The Ministry has informed in th eir background note (Annerxure- III) 
that the incidence of overloading, in case of  West Central and East Central 
for a particular month of 2008 in comparison to corresponding mont h of 
2007 has decreased due to levy of punitive charges for overloading. The 
incidence of overloaded wagons in West Central Railway has reduced to 
10.6% from 22.08% whereas in East Central Railway it has reduced to 
4.76% from 11.28% 
 

4.  The Railway s (Punitive charges for overloading of wagon)  Rules, 
2007 framed under the Railway s  Act, 198 9 were examined and a 
questionnaire on the subject was forwarded to the Ministry of Railways for 
their comments/clarifications on 16 th May, 2008.  The Ministry furnished 
their comments/clarifications on 16th June, 2008 (Annexure IV). 
 
5.  On the query that  what changes took place at the ground level that 
necessitated the supersession of the Rules of 2005 and what are the salient 
features of the new set of rules’ and what loop -holes in the previsous rules 
have been plugged through the new rules?  The Ministry replied that: 
“After the issue of Railways (Punitive charges for overloading of wagon ) 
Rules, 2006 following changes took place: 
 The concept of charging of freight on the basis of CC commodities 
and Enhanced CC commodities was done way with w.e.f 01.03.0 7.  
The freight was chargeable on the basis of permissible carrying of the 
wagons. 
 Loading tolerance  of 1 tonne was provided for all covered wagons 
and BOY/ BOYN tolerance of wagons and loading tolerance of 2 
tonnes was provided for all other wagons (except  covered and 
BOY/BOYN wagons) 
 The above changes necessitated for the amendments in the Railways 
(Punitive charges for overloading of Wagons) Rules, 2006.  Therefore, in 
supersession of Rules of 2006, Railways (Punitive charges for overloading 
of Wagons) Rules, 2007 were notified on 15.6.2007. 
Salient features of Railways (Punitive charges for overloading of Wagons) 
Rules, 2007 are as under: 

 Punitive charges are levied wagon-wise for all commodities instead of 
‘CC’ & ‘Enchanced CC’ comm odities wise as was e arlier in Rules of 
2006. 
 Loading tolerance of 2 tonnes have been provided for all type of 
commodities.  BOY, BOYN, covered, Tank wagons and container 
trains are exceptions in which loading tolerance is one tonne. 
 Graded punitive charges, as prevalent earlier have been retained. 
 There was no loop -holes in the  previous Rules of 2006.  But as the 
system of charging of freight had undergone a change, the rules for punitive 
charges for overloading accordingly needed a corresponding change which 
has been done with the issue of Rules of 2007”. 
 
6.  The Committee wanted to know that the rationale behind levying 
punitive charges three times of the freight rate applicable to the highest class 
in case of overloading by more than five tonnes while provision already 
exists of levying two times of the freight rate in case of overloaded by more 
than two tones for eight wheeled wagons ( except BOX and BOST wagons) 
why the same rules are not applicable in case of BOX and BOST and all 
other types of wagons and for container tr ain where the weight of the 
commodity exceeds the permissible carrying capacity of the wagon; punitive 
charges leviable is two times of the freight rate in case of overloading by 
more than one tonne but not more than four tones and three times of the 
freight rate in case of overloading by more than four tones.  Whether rules 
should not uniformly be applicable in all cases.  On this the Ministry 
informed the Committee that: 
“In the rules of 2006, in case of BOX and BOST wagons, loading tolerance 
of one tonne  was provided.  But the concept of charging of freight on the 

basis of CC commodities and Enhanced CC commodities was done way with 
w.e.f. 01.03.07.  The freight was chargeable on the basis of permissible 
carrying of the wagons.  Loading tolerance of 1 tonne was providees for all 
covered wagons and Boy BOYN  wagons and loading tolerance of 2 tonnes 
was provided for all other wagons (except covered and BOY/BOYN 
wagons).  Accordingly, Railways (Punitive charges for overloading of 
wagons) Rules, 2007 were notified on 15.06.2007. 
 A need was felt to introduce graded punitive charges for varying 
quantity of overloading.  It was decided  to levy less punitive charges when 
overloading was less and to impose higher punitive charges when extent of 
overloading was much.   Therefore, in case of wagons other than covered, 
tank and BOY/BOYN wagons when the weight exceeds of PCC of the 
wagons by more than 2 tonnes but up to 5 tonnes (l oading tolerance, i.e., 2 
tonnes + 3 tonne), punitive charges  @ 2 times of freight rate appl icable to 
commodity is levied, whereas when the weight exceeds the PCC of the 
wagons by more than 5 tonne s, when punitive charges @ 3 times of the 
freight rate applicable to the highest class, is levied. 
 In ideal conditions, the rails user  is expected to load the wagons upto 
the prescribed Permissible  Carrying Capacity (PCC) of wagon.  However, 
overloading cannot be controlled up to the PCC because of certain practical 
situations.  In order to take  care of eventuality of overloading more than 
PCC, a loadi ng tolerance of 1 tonne/2 tonne has been prescribed.  For all 
other types of wagons like open wagons which are more prone to 
overloading, the loading tolerance of 2 tonne has been prescribed. 
 Due to difference in loading tolerance the slabs of rates for p unitive 
charges are different.  In case where loading tolerance has been  prescribed 
as 2 tonnes, the slabs are upto 2 tonnes, between 2 tonnes and 5 tonnes and 

more than 5 tonnes.  In case of loading tolerance has been prescribed as 1 
tonne, the slabs are  upto 1 tonne, between 1 tonne and 4 tonnes, and more 
than 4 tonnes.” 
 
7.  The Committee observed that there are rules/provision made for three 
types of overloading as mentioned under Par t I, II and III whereas in the 
Rules of 2006, these were covered unde r Part I and II only; what are the 
reasons for adding additional Part III under the new rules Regarding this  the 
Ministry clarified that a separate part has been added to specifically mention 
container trains to made the provisions more clear.  In the ear lier rules, it 
was covered under Part-II. 
8.  The Committee wanted to know to what extent, these rules would 
work as deterrent in so far as overloading of wagons is concerned . On this 
issue the Ministry informed that the rules for punitive charges for 
overloading have been made to act as a deterrent in overloading of wagons.  
Overloading of wagons not only endangers safety, but results in leakage of 
revenue.  It is expected that these rules will be effective in checking the 
overloading of wagons. 
9.  On the  querry whether any difference have been witnessed over 
revenue collection since introduction of the Railway ( Punitive charges for 
overloading of wagon) Rules, 2007,    the Ministry informed that the main  
rationale for levying the punitive charges for  overloading is to ensure saf e 
train operation and to check overloading by way of penalty.  These charges 
are not viewed as source of revenue.  These are treated as part of freight and 
are recoverable with the freight.  Railways do not maintain separate accounts 
for punitive charges.   

 The Ministry further stated that t hese rules were revised in 2007 due 
to circumstances necessitation these changes.  These rules were not modified 
as a measure of generation of revenue. 
 
10.  On the query that whether the Ministry  is contemplating punitive 
charges from all consumers/stakeholders involved  in overloading be it 
intentional; if not, how these rules will be applicable for both the parties.  
The Ministry stated that the p unitive charges for overloading are levied on 
all rail users if excess weight is found.  However, different rates are charged 
depending upon the extent of overloading, and actual payload in comparison 
with combined Permissible Carrying Capacity (PCC) of the rake. 
11. The Committee sought clarifications on the issue that punitive charges 
leviable on the the commodity  weighing  more than one tonne is two times 
the freight  rates applicable to that commodity,   whether these charges are  
high and stringent   On this the Ministry stated that the Railways are of th e 
view that current structure of rates of punitive charges is reasonable.  This 
structure is constantly reviewed on the basis of feed back received from the 
Zonal Railways and rail-users. 
12.  The Committee observed that the Rules do not mention the maximu m 
limit of overloading in a wagon beyond which detachments of overloaded 
wagons for off -loading should invariably be done.   The Ministry informed 
that the maximum permissible weight which is equal to PCC of the wagon  
plus loading tolerance, has been  prescribed in respect of all wagons.  A rail -
user is expected  to load within this limit only.  Any variation in the loaded 
weight6 on account of justifiable reasons has been taken care of by way of 
loading tolerance. 

 However, the wagons, which are found overloa ded on weighment, 
may be detached/adjusted or run with restricted speed based on the rail -
infrastructure which varies from Railway to Railway.  All Zonal Railways 
have made a procedure order for dealing with overloaded wagons, which 
includes provisions regarding detachment. 
 
13.  The Committee wanted to know  whether it would not be appropriate 
if Punitive Charges are borne by the sender and not by the consignee in 
order to fight the menace of overloading; otherwise, the burden gets 
transferred to the consignee and through him to the consumer Regarding this 
the Ministry commented that  as per extant rules, a rail -user that makes the 
payment of freight is required to pay the punitive charges also.  All 
consignments are required to be weighed at weighbridges bef ore issue of 
Railway Receipt and efforts are made to include punitive charges in Railway 
Receipts itself. 
However, if the punitive charges cannot be included in Railway Receipt 
itself due to any reason, the same is to be realized from the consignee. 
 
Recommendations 
14.  The Committee is of the opinion that the R ules should reflect the 
maximum limit of overloading in a wagon beyond  which  detatchment 
of overloaded wagons for off loading or detatchment should be done. 
15.  The Committee is of the view in cas e of overload on weighment 
what would be the restricted speed based on the rail -infrastructure on 
which the wagons  would run and the maximum overload  on 
weightment till which it would allow to run should be categorically 
mentioned in the Rules. 

16.  The Committee suggests that the Rules for punitive charges for 
overloading should aim at not only reducing the overloading but also at 
reducing at a successive rate every year reducing loading tolerance. 
17.  The Committee recommends that the punitive charges f or 
overloading wagons can be modi fied as a measure of generation of 
revenue as overloading of wagons not only endangers safety but results 
in leakage of revenue also. 
 
 
 

II 
Delhi Advocate’s Welfare Fund Rules, 2001-Implementation of the 169th Report of 
the Committee 
 
 
 The Delhi Advocate’s Welfare Fund Rules, 2001 framed under the Advocate’s 
Welfare Fund Act, 2001, were examined and the matter was reported in the 169 th Report 
of the Committee presented to the House on the 5 th September, 2007.  In the Report, the 
Committee had recommended/ observed as under: 
 
“2. The Committee notes with satisfaction that the Ministry of Law & Justice 
(Department of Legal Af fairs) have react ed favorably on the various points that 
were referred to them for comments/clarificat ions. The Committee notes that the 
Ministry have agreed to take action as follows in pursuance to its recommendations: 
 
 Point 1 (Rule 9 (8)):   To provide that the Chairperson presiding over the 
meeting, exercises his voting right only in cases where there  is a tie in the 
votes cast, for the purpose of resolution of the same. 
  
Point 3 (Rule 12(1)):  (i) To provide a specific time period of 4 months for 
issuing a certificate for recognition in Form- IV. 
 (ii) To provide for an authority for appeal/ review , if the application for 
recognition is rejected, which may be the State Bar Council of each State. 
  
Point 5 (Rule 14):  (i) To prescribe 6 months as the period for seeking re -
admission as a member of the fund and by fixing the interest on arrears at 
the time of re-admission at not exceeding 3%. 
 (ii) To prescribe a period of 15 days to ensure continuity of the membership 
of the fund and that the membership may be discontinued , if the member 
failed to respond. 
  
Point 6 (Rule 15 ):  To prescribe 6 months perio d for the issuance of 
certificate of membership to the fund. 
  
Point 7 (Rule 16):  To increase the period from 15 to 45 days for intimating 
the removal/ suspension of a member from the State roll to the Trustee 
Committee. 
  
Point 8 (Rule 19): To substitute the word 'thiery' with the word 'thirty', 
thereby rectifying a typographical error.  
 
On rest of the points the Committee accepts the explanation furnished by the 
Ministry. 
 

 The Committee, however recommends that the Ministry of Law and Justice 
should carry out modification in the Rules as agreed to by them, expeditiously.” 
 
 
 2. Relevant extracts from the 169th Report were forwarded to the Ministry of Law & 
Justice (Department of Legal Affairs) for necessary action on the 14th September, 2007.   
 
3. The M inistry of Law & Justice (Department of Legal Affairs) vide their 
communication dated the 11 th October, 2007 informed that  relevant extracts of the  
Report had been forwarded to the Department of Law, Justice & Legislative Affairs of 
the Government of Nati onal Capital Territory of Delhi for carrying out the amendments 
in the Rules in pursuance to the Committee’s recommendations.  The powers of the 
Central Government for framing rules under Section 35 of the Advocate’s Welfare Fund 
Act, 2001 has been delegat ed to the Administrators of the Union territories and the 
Government of NCT of Delhi in pursuance of which the Government of NCT of Delhi 
had framed the Delhi Advocates’ Welfare Fund Rules, 2001.    
  
4. The Department of Law, Justice & Legislative Affairs of the Government of NCT 
of Delhi vide their communication dated the 3 rd June, 2009 has furnished a copy of the 
notification No. F.219/litigation/01/Dysecylaw/1932 -51 dated the 8 th May, 2009 
publishing the Delhi Advocate’s Welfare Fund (Amendment) Rules, 2009 (Annexure).   
 
5. The Committee notes with satisfaction that the Government of NCT of Delhi  
has carried amendments in the Delhi Advocate’s Welfare Fund Rules, 2001 
incorporating its suggestions/ recommendations in: 
 
 (i) Rule 9 (8) by providing that the Chairperson presiding over the meeting, 
exercises his voting right only in case  there is a tie in the votes cast, for 
the purpose of resolution of the same; 
 
 (ii) Rule 12(1) by providing a specific time period of 4 months for issuing a 
certificate for  recognition in Form - IV and also  by providing for an 

authority for appeal/ review , if the application for recognition is rejected 
which may be the State Bar Council of each State; 
(iii) Rule 14 by prescribing  6 months as the period for seeking re -admission 
as a member of the fund and by fixing the interest on arrears at the time 
of re -admission at not exceeding 3% and  by prescribing  a period of 15 
days to ensure continuity of the membership of the fund and that the 
membership may be discontinued if the member failed to respond; 
 
(iv) Rule 15 by prescribing 6 months period for the issuance of certif icate of 
membership to the fund;  
 
(v) Rule 16 by increasing the period from 15 to 45 days for intimating the 
removal/ suspension of a member from the State  roll to the Trustee 
Committee; and, 
 
(vi) Rule 19 by substituting the word 'thiery' with the word 'thirty', thereby 
rectifying a typographical error.” 
 
  
. 
 
 
 
  