Com. I-54 wu •• 
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA 
COMMITTEE ON SUBORDINATE 
LEGISLATION 
FIFTY-SECOND REPORT 
(Presented on the 25th March, 1g83) 
RAJY A SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
March 1g8s/Chattra 1905 (Saka) 

REPORT 
I 
INTRODUCTION 
I, the Chairman of the Committee on Subordinate Legislatio~ 
having been authorised by the Committee to present the Report 
on its behalf, present this Fifty-second Report. The Committe~ 
considered and adopted the Report at its meeting held on the. 11th, 
March, . 1983. 
2. At some of its sittings, the Committee heard the represen~· 
tatives of various MinistriesjDepartments of the Government of 
India. 
3. Observations of the Committee on matters arising out of the 
examination of various 'Orders', which in the opinion of the Com .... 
mittee should be brought to the notice of the House, together with 
the recommendations of the Committee thereon are contained in the 
succeeding paragraphs. 
·n 
,~-.. CHARGE LEVIED BY D·ELHI ELECT'RIC g,·uPP'L~·y UNDER·""" 
1
rAKING_ ON CONSUMERS FOR REPA!RS ETC. Ob' ELECTRIC: 
' \. 
METERS 
.. ~; Section 49 of the Electricity (Supply) Ac~, 1948 reads as 
unppr:-, ·. · 
. PrOvision for the sale ·of electricity by the Board to persomr, 
· ' other tHan ]ieen~ees-
(1) Subject to the_ Pl'Ovisi<;>ns of this Act ~nd of regulations if' 
any, made in this behalf, the Board may supply electricity to anyr 
person not being a licensee upon such te~ms and conditions .am 
the Board thinks fit and maJ:' for the purposes of such suppf,r' 
frame uni!orm tariffs; 

2 
]n pursuance of the above provisions the Delhi Electric 
llndertaking framed conditions of s'Upply of electricity to 
::mers. Clau-ses 9 and 23 of these conditions provide as follows: 
~. Security: 
(a) The Undertaking may require every consumer to 
security as prescribed in the schedule annexed hereto as 
'G' (Annexure I) against payment of his monthly bills for 
supplied. The security deposits may be in the form of cash 
'Government bondl'.l. Simple interest at the rate of :~1 per 
·per annum or such other rate as the Undertaking on cash sec~urJl•; 
ties, deposited with the Undertaking by the permanent consu• 
mers for supply for Industrial and Commercial purposes. The 
'interc•st on the amount of security deposited in cash c 
for each completed period of 12 months shall be credited to 
account of the consumers. No interest shall be paid on security 
·deposited by residential and commercial lighting and domesti~/. 
power consumers. 
<(b) The consumer 'on demand shall from time to time· renew or 
.. replenish the sec'Urity depooit, in the event of the same becoming 
-exhausted or insufficient. The Undertaking shall be at liberty 
~at any time and from time to time to appropriate and supply the 
~amount of security so deposited as aforesaid in or towards pay. 
· ment or satisfaction of all or any money which shall become due . 
·or owing by the consumer to the Undertaking in re'i'lpect of the 
supply of energy or otherwise, but the provisions contained in 
this clause shall not prejudice any other remedy to which the 
;undertaking may. be entitled for the recovery of such amount.'' 
·:1<.23. Accuracy of meters: 
(a) Should the consumer di~pute the accuracy of any meter 
which is not his own property, he may upon giving notice and 
;: ~}laying the ·prescribed fee,, have the meter tested b.y the lJnder­
taking in accordance with section 26 of the Act and in the event . 
of the meter being found to be beyond the limits of the accuracy, 
·~s prescribed in the Indian Electricity Rules, in force from time 
to time the testing fee shall be refunded and the amount of the 
bill adjusted in accordance with the results of the test taken 
·with regpect of meter readings of the 3 months perior to the 
month in which the dispute has arisen, due regard being paid to 
;the conditions of occupancy ddring the months. Rent for the 

• 
I 
'. 
3 
~riod if it is found inaccurate will not be charged by the Under­
-taking. 
(b) Where the meter belongs to the conS'umer, he shall- be 
·responsible for keeping the meter correct, if at any t!me the 
'Undertaking doubts the accuracy of such meter, the same shal1 
be tested by the Undertaking testing fee therefor recovered from 
'~he cons1:1mer. If on testing the meter, it is found to be defective 
the consumer ahall be served with 7 clear days noti~ to get his 
meter set right. In default of his doing so the Undertaking shall 
·-cease to supply energy through the meter till such time the meter 
is set right or replaced by the consumer . 
_(c) The undertaking shall at any reasonable time and on in­
forming the consumer of its intention have accesa to and be at 
liberty to inspect and test and for that purpose, if it thinks fit, 
'take off and remove any meter to its meter testing laboratory." 
5. It was gathered that DESU provide electric meters to con­
·sumers against security deposit. It waa, however, not known 
·whether S'Uch deposit earned any interest to the consumers. 
Since DESU charge meter rent @. 50 paise per month which is 
.included in the electricity bills, it is expected of them to provide 
trouble-free meters. The electricity consumers are asked to make a 
deposit of Rs. lOf- by way of postal orders alongwith their request 
for repair fV~ri:fication of the Electric Meters as and when they 
lll,ake a complaint to DESU about excess billing or stoppage of 
-electric meters. 
6. Accordingly, the Ministry of Energy were addressed to give 
·.the foHowing information:- · 
. ' '
1 
(i) the rate of security deposit collected by DESU from 
·consumers 'fqr electric meters. 
(ii) whether any interest is allowed on the security deposit it 
·so collected. ' 
(iii) whether any charge is leyied by l)ESU for repairjchecking 
·etc. of electric meters on receipt of complaints of stoppage of 
metersJexcess billing, etc.". 
The Ministry of Energy informed aa follows:-
"1. No security deposit is collected from the cpnsumers for 
.electric meters. The security is charged from the r.onsumers to . . 

4 
safeguard electricity consumption bills. The schedule indicating 
the. rateG of security deposit it is enclosed. (Annexure I) 
2. Under the provision of clause 9 of the conditions of Supply. 
interest. @ 2! pe~ annum is paid on cash security deposited with 
the Undertaking, J:ty the permanent consumer for supply of energy· 
for industrial and commercial power purposes. 
3. No testing fee is charged for the replacement of stopped' 
matters. The suspected defective meters reported by the consumer· 
are checkedjreplaced after charging testing fee as per enclosed' . 
schedule." (Annexure~ I). 
7. To the specific enquiry whether position stated at SL Nos. 1 to·· 
3 above is backed by any rules, the Ministry of Energy, vide their 
O.M. dated the 7th September, 1980, informed as follows:-
"DESU have informed that the provisi<ms cited at Sl. Nos. 1 to 3:: 
of this Ministry's O.M. of even number dated the 16th January, 
1980, exist in the 'Conditions of .Supply' framed by DESU, under 
the powers vested with it ·under section 49 of Electricity (Supply}., 
Ad, 1!148,·as under:-,- •"" 
Sl. No. 1 
Sl No.2 
Sl. No.3 
Clause No. 9 
Clause No.9 
Clause No. 23'' 
8., Since the DESU charge meter rent @ SO paise per month they· 
are under obligation to provide trouble-fee meters. As such the· 
charging of a sum of Rs. 10/-, or any other sum for that matter, in1 
whatever form, appears to be arbitrary. 
9. At its sitting held on the 9th June, 1981 the Committee con-­
sidered the matter and decided to hear the Secretary in the Ministry 
of Energy with a view to seeking clarificationsjelucidation on matters; 
pertaining to the payment of interest on cash security deposited with 
DESU only to those permanent consumers who required power 
connection for industrial and commercial purposes, the low rate of" 
interest, upward revision of miscellaneous charges and security 
deposit, etc. 
10. At its sitting held on the 8th July, 1981 the Committee 
the representatives of the Department of Power. During the 
of their deposition the representatives of the Minlstry gave an 
ranee that the Ministry would get the following matters 
by an independent technical Committee:-
. 1. Periodical checks of meters installed at the premises of 
consumers; 

5 
2. Steps . to be taken to increase the efficiency of the DESU so· 
that there is some visible improvement in the service 
rendered by DESU to its consumers; and 
3. The question of payment of security deposit, especially by 
Members of Parliament. 
11. The Ministry of Energy (Department of Power) vide their 
O.M. dated the 17th Match, 1982, informed ·as follows:-
(i) At present, DESU have more than 10 lakh consumers, and 
their methodology is such that the meter reading Inspector, Area 
Inspector note down the cases of defective_meters during their visit 
and the meters are replaced with new tested meters by their Zonal 
Staff on receipt of complaints. There are cases where consumers 
approach the Undertakings and deposit the testing fee for testing 
of the meters. In such cases the meters are replaced and the same 
are sent to Laboratory for testing. The meters for H.T. consumers 
are periodically tested and replaced if required immediately. 
DESU is thus replacing about 60,000 meters every year against the 
defective meters. 
The testing of the meters within 5 years period cannot be 
adopted. It would be uneconomical to te·st the meters as it would 
require employment of lot or additional staff. 
(ii) All efforts are being made to maintain the voltage within the 
prescribed limits. Low voltage conditions are sometimes observed 
throughout the Northern Grid due to low generation and in such 
cases it is beyond the control of DESU to rectify the situation. · 
Damage to the equipment, if any, arising out of such fluctuations 
is a natural consequence of the prevailing system conditions. 
(iii) Electricity and water connections al'e given either on 
depositing cash security or on furnishing a guarantee by the 
concerned department, in case of Government servants. In case, 
the security is to be waived in· respect of Members ·of Parliament, 
they will be required to furnish guarantee from any of the Govern-· 
ment Departments which in this ca'Se probably could be Lok S:abha 
and Rajya Sabha Secretariats, as the case may he. There is no· 
obj!iction to the waiver of security deposit. by a Member of Par­
liament provided the Government is prep:ared to furnish guarante·e 
in respect of Members of Parliament. 
· 12. At its sitting held on the 26th August, 1982, the Committee 
considered the above and decided to hear again the Secretary in the 
Ministry of E'nergy with a view to 'Seeking certain clarifications in 
the matter. 

6 
13. The Ministry of Energy were, in the meantime, requested to 
:furnish the foUowing information::...... 
(i) the procedure prescribed for refund of testing fee in terms 
of clause 23 of the conditions of supply framed by DESU; and 
(ii) the number of cases in last three years (as also their per­
centage in terms of the number of cases where the accuracy of 
meters was disputed by consumers and/ or meters were not found 
accurate by DESU, where the amount of Rs. 10/- was refunded. 
The Ministry of Energy, vide their· O.M. dated the 30th August, 
1982 gave the following information:-
(i) whenever a meter is declared defective, revised supplemen­
tary Bill based on rest results, is prepared .and the credit of testing 
fee is given to the consumer. 
(ii) 21532: meters were tested against payment of testing fee of 
Rs. 10/- during the period 1-4-1979 to 31-3-1982 and approximately 
· 40 per cent of the met·ers tested were found defective beyond 
accuracy limit. DESU have informed that the date regarding 
number of cases where amount of Rs. 10j- as testing fee ha•s been 
refunded is being collected from the field offices. This information 
will be furnished immediat~ly on receipt or the same from DESU. 
14. The Secretary in the· Department of Power and General 
Manager, DESU appeared before the Committee on the 4th Septem­
ber, 1982. The repres~tatives told the Committee that model 
conditions of supply of electricity ~in Delhi were set out in the Indian 
Electricity Rules. The Rules provided that the interest would be 
payable only to large consumers since the amount involved was 
substantial. As for the domestic consumers where the monthly 
·consumption was small and little amouqt was involved, the calcula-
tion of interest and its payment would become extremely cumber­
some. The Rules provided for a security of Rs. 25. From domestic 
·consumers. On being asked in case a domestic consumer paid more 
than Rs. 25/- whether he would get interest as the amount of Rs. 2'5'/­
was •applicable to industrial users as well, the Secretary replied that 
amount was fixed in 1956 and in the model rules, there was no dis­
tinct ion between commercial and domestic consumers. In regard to 
the entitlement of domestic consumers to have interest -if he paid 
more than Rs. 25, the Secretary replied that in Delhi, they were 
·close to 10 lakhs of domestic consumers and so to calcul·ate the 
inte:~·e.st at regular intervals for that large number of consumers and 
to adjust the same against their consumption bills would pose an 
..administrative problem. The Chairman intervened that if bills could 

7 
be prepared and sent in the present age of computers, it was a little 
$Urpristng to be told that b€cause calculation was not possible, it 
won't be done. 
The Secretary told that there was sl~ght legal difference. As far 
as the State Boards were concerned, they were governed by section 
49 of the Electricity Supply Act, 1948, under which they had been 
given powers to frame rules and regulations. DESU did not ·stand 
exactly on the same footing as it was governed under the Indian 
Electricity Supply Act, 1910. 
15. The General Manager, DESU then told the Committee that 
the DESU Rules were based under the E.~ectricity Supply Act. The 
Municipal Corporation of Delhi, an elected body was also empowered 
to frame its own rules and that body framed those rules which were 
being followed. It was neither necessary nor expedient to follow 
exactly the same thing which has ooen laid down as model. Local 
conditions· would differ· and for. that reason, some minor variation was 
there in DESU Rules. In regard to non-payment of interest' to the 
domestic consumers, the General Manager stated that the philosophy 
behind charging •security deposit being that electricity was supplied 
one or two months oofore the payment was made by the consumers 
to the Undertaking. The security thus was a sort of advance pay­
ment against the electricity to be consumed. In the case of commer­
cial consumers or other non-domestic consumers, the corrsumption 
was of a very high order whereas in the case of about 80 per cent of 
domestic consumers, the consumption was very low and the bill was 
. for Rs. 10/- or Rs. 15/- or even below that and ·so the amount of· 
security deposit was also comparatively small. Security was charged 
@ Rs. 80 per sanctioned kw. In the case of domestic category, it 
was not more than ~kw. Generally, it did not go beyond sanctioned 
5 kw. except in a very few cases: The amount Wa'S very small and 
the computation of interest at 2·! per cent and its adjustment would 
be of a very high magnitude and would not commensurate with the 
results to be achieved. Even the billing problem was very difficult 
for DESU. The rationale for 21! per cent interest was that it was 
indirectly connect.ed With the cost of electricity that had already 
been supplied. For instance,· for the supply of electricity in the 
month of January, the payment would come in April and for thO'se 
three months on that bill, the interest was not charged though the 
electricity was consumed in January. Thus, energy was supplied 
on credit without any charge. The studies undertaken had shown 
that in respect of small consumers, the cost of billing wa·s propor­
tionally high. For that reason, the bill for the small consumers was 
done once in two months or three months. If the deposit sho·uld 
carry an interest With the commercial rate, the same rate of intere<st 

li 
r 
r 
v 
·Mal 
ber, 
cont 
'Ele< 
pay~ 
"SUbS 
cons 
· ti:on 
som< 
·const 
than 
was·~ 
amou 
tinc1i 
the e. 
more 
close 
inte;1·e 
to adj 
.adrn.in 
8 
should. be .charged on the energy supplied and consumed by the­
small consum€rs. 
16. In regard to the proper functioning of meters, the General 
Manager informed that as soon as DESU found the meter had gone· 
defective, it was replaced without any charg€. When the consumers 
complained that his meter wa·s defective, he was charged. In case 
the meter was found defective, the amount charged from the con­
sumer was refunded but if the meter was found correct ·after testing, 
the amount was not refunded. Such a procedure was followed to· 
curb infructuous testing and to avoid baseless complaints. To a 
query, the life of a meter was 25· years and the co·st of each meter 
was Rs. 150/-. Asked when Rs. 12/- per year was charged for 25 
years a sum of Rs. 300/~ was to be eharged against the cost of 
Rs. 150/-, the General Manager replied that the meter was to be 
maintained and if found defective, it was to be replaced. A reference 
was made to section 49 of the Electricity Supply Act under scrutiny. 
The Act provided for uniform tariff and the tariff was used 
for imports and exports, but in general way, tariff covered all 
charges which were payable in connection with the supply of elec­
tricity. He was asked whether ·security was not covered under that. 
The Secretary replied that under clauses (1) and (4) of section 49, 
the definition under 'terms and conditions', security deposit was also· 
covered. The terms authorised both tariff as well as security 
depo•sit. 
17. The representatives, thereafter, were asked to send a note on 
what was discuss·ed with them to give their comments in the matter. 
They promised to send a note to the Committee. 
18: Subsequently, the Chief Engineer, DESU, vide his letter dated 
the 8th September, 1982 informed as follows:-
"A question had ari·sen as to the quantum of meter rent being 
charged by the Undertaking. The G.M., D.E.S.U. had mentioned 
that Re. 1/- and R!'i. 2/- was being charged as met·er rent per month 
in respect of single phase and poly-phase meters respectively. 
The position hasbeen checked up from r-ecord and it is found that 
these rates were effective till 28-2-1981 and from 1-3-1981 the meter 
rent for single phase and poly-phase meters is Rs. 2J- and Rs. 5.2:l· 
per month, respectively. 
The present rates of meter rent of various types of meters includ.,.-­
ing those of single phase and poly-phase effective from 1st March,.. 
1981 are enclosed. · (Annexure-H). 

10 
l'he Committee recommends tberefo~ th111t there should be no 
distinction in the matter of payment of interest on security deposits 
made by various categories of consumerS. and that the domesti• 
consumers should be paid the amount of interest on th~ir deposits 
as is being done in the ease of the commercial and industrial con­
sumers. 
ANNEXURE I 
(Vide paras 3 and 5 of the Report) 
DELHI ELECTRIC SUPPLY UNDERTAKING 
(Municipal Corporation of Delhi) 
OFFICE ORDER 
No: ceo. 22(129) 75-76. Dated the 16th January, 1976. 
SUBJECT: -Revision of miscellaneous charges and security deposit. 
Annexure 'G' to the Conditions of Supply having been approved 
by the M.C.D. vide Commissioners' decision No. 739 dated 8•1-1976 
is hereby revised as per schedule attached. 
At present the Government employees are exempted from de­
positing the security charges and in lieu thereof they submit guaran­
tee letters from their departments. It has been decided th·at the 
Government employees would be treated on a par with other con­
sumers for the purpose of security deposit here-in-after. According· 
ly, Finance Department would inform the various Government 
departments about it and start insisting for security deposit and 
take necessary steps to replenish the security deposit from the 
existing consumers as well. 
The revised schedule of miscellaneous charges and security de­
posit shall be effective from 1st February, 1976. 
Sd/- (H. C. P .I\~ DE) 
Deputy General Manager. 

11 
PROPOSAL FOR REVISION OF M'NEXURE 'G' OF THE CONDITIONS 
bF str:PPLY 
Sl. 
No. 
1. 
ll. 
"Revision of Miscellaneous Charges. 
Description AS per exist­
il)g condi­
tions of 
supply 
Q 3 
Installation Testing Fee 
The first test and ins(cection will be canied out free of 
charge, but shou d any further test or inspection be 
necessitated due to defect disc!Qsed at the initial test or 
by non-compliance with conditions of supply, 
fee will be charged for each test as under: . 
testing 
(i) For leads upto 10 kw. Domestic/Industrial/Commer 
dal. . " . . .. . . .. . R~.s/- J 
(ii) For loads above 10 kw. and upto 100 kws. (on L.T.) Rs.s/-
(iii) For loads above 100 kw. and/or for H.T, supply. Rs.sof-
Reconnection F'je 
For an installation which is disconnected on zccount of non-
eaymen,t of dues, vacation of premises, defects in instal-
ation, failure to comply With the terms of the agree-
ment or With the provisions of the conditions of supply 
or with such provisions of the Indian Electricity Act, 
1910 as may be relevant. 
(i) :For low & medium voltage service line where meter 
esists. R''3/-
As 
proposed 
4 
Rs.wf-1 
R,s.2o/-
Rs.IOO/-
R~.5/·: 
(ii) Where it is necessary to instal a metar and test installa- R~·5/· Rs.s/-
tion. . plus installaticn 
testing fee as 
(iii) Where supply has been given on medium volt2ge erd 
installation of meters with CTs is involved.; 
(iV) Where supply has been given by high voltage <JVerhead 
or underground service line. • . • . 'Rs,50/-
in I above. 
R~.IOO/-
3· .Meter and demand indicator nmt 
(a) D.C. Metears 
(i) D.C. Meters 2 wire 
(ii) D . .C. Meters 3 wire 
(b) A.C. Meters 
(i) Single phase 
(ii) Polyphase meters 
• 
50 paise Re.l/-
permonth 
Rs.1/-P.M. Rs.2/· 
50 paise Re.1/-
per month 
Re.tf-P.M. Rs.rt/-
(c) Dem.a.rtd indicator and special type of meters of capa- R~.t/2,5P.M. The fame as; ' 
city mote th1m 50 amps. and involving me of current per n ree nd;t: r g 
and potential transformers; of cost of 
the metering 
equipment. 
. ' 

11 
PROPOSAL FOR REVISION OF AN1\TEXURE 'G' OF THE CONDITIONS 
bF stJi>ri.V 
Sl. 
No. 
Description 
"Revision of Misctillo.t~tous Charges. 
As per exist­
i~gcondi­
tions of 
supply 
3 
AS 
proposed 
1. lT~Stallation T1sting F1e 
The first test and inspection will be eanied out free of 
charge, but should any further test or in~pection be 
necessitated due to defect disclosed at the initial test or 
by non-compliance with condiHons of supply, testi!lg 
fee will be charged for each test as under; 
(i) For leads upto 10 kw. Domestic/lndustriai/Commer 
cial. . . • • . • . . . R5.5/-J 
(ii) For loads above 10 kw. and upto iOO kws. (en L.T.) Rs.sf-
Rs.!0/-1 Rs.z.o/-
(iii) For loads above 100 kw. and/or for H.T, supply. 
:2. Reconnection Fet 
Rs.wof-
For an installation which is disconnected on ~ccount of non~ 
paymen,t of dues, vacation of premises, defects in instal­
lation, failure to comply w1th the terms of the agrt:e· 
ment or with the provisions of the conditions of supply 
or with such provisions of the Indian Electricity Act, 
1910 as may be relevant. 
(i) For low & medium voltage service line where meter 
m~ ~~ R~.s/-' 
(ii) Where it is necessary to instal a metar and test installa- RF.5/- Rs.s/· 
tion. . plus installaticn 
testing fee as 
in I above. 
(iii) Where supply has been given on medi~:m voltzge ar d 
installation of meters with GTs is involved.; 
(iv) '\There supply has been given by high voltage overh.ead 
or underground service line. . . . . Rs,;,o/-
3· Meter and demand indicator rent 
(a) D.C. Meteors 
R~.IOO/-
50 paise Re.r I· 
(i) D.C. Meters ll wire 
(ii) D~C. Meters 3 wire 
(b) A.C. Meters 
(i) Single phase 
(ii) Polyphase meters 
per month 
Rs.rf-P.M. Rs.ll/· 
50 paise Re. I 1-
permonth 
Re.1f·l'.M. Rs.2/· 
(c) Dtun.and indicator and special type of meters of capa- R8.l/:25P.M. 
city morll.~h~tn 50 amps. and involving use of current Jler n pee 
and pot~nt1ahransformers; • . • • • of cost of 
the metering 
equipment. 
The fa.tne a;$ ; 
exh1;r g 

12 
3 4 
R.s. 5/· I .. T. polyphase meter with C.T. 
L.T.M.D.I.· R~.25/- R,S.25/-
L.T. meters/HT MDI meters . 
Trivector meters. : 
4· a) Replacing of glass of meter 
R.~.!OO/­
Rs. wof-
R,s.t. 25 per R.s.s/" 
·glass per glass 
b) Resealing of meters, cut-out R.s.3/- R.s.lO/· 
c) Resealing of max. demand fndicators, current trans­
formers. 
5. Testing qf meters 
RS.25/-
For a~certaining the accuracy as laid down under the In­
dian Electricity Rules, 1956. 
a) qrdinary me.ters (Single Phase) 
b) -do- (Polyphase) . 
c) M.V. meters with C.Ts. or MDI 
d) H.T. met.:,;rs with or without MDI 
e) H.T. trivector meter. 
6. Secw ity de{losit 
a) D.}ffiC>tic log. ftn and domestic power 
b) Commercial Lighting . 
Commercial Power 
c) Industrial J:>Ower 
., Rs. 50/·per 
k.w. subjecr 
to minimum 
ofRs. 25/·. 
R.s. 40/·pe:r 
k.w. 
R~. 25/-per 
k.w. 
RS.25/­
Ruoo/­
Rs.JOO/· 
Rs.IO/· 
RS.20/· 
Rs.so/­
Rs.fwo­
Rs.Iso/-
DL·Rs.s<>/· Rs.£of-per 
per Kw. KW with 
subject to m1mmum 
minimum of Rs.4Q/­
Rs.25/­
DP-Rs.4o/­
per Kw 
equal aver 
age con• in 
sumption 
four con­
secutive 
months, 
whichever 
is high. 
Rs. 100/-per k.w. with 
a minimum of Rs. 50/-for 
and amount equal to 
average consumption in 
three consecutive months 
whichever is higher in case 
of monthly billing and 
b) or an amGunt equal to 
average consumption in 
four consecutive months 
whichever is higher in 
case ofb1-monthly billing. 
R,. so/-per k.w. part thereo 
subject to : 
a) Minimum of R~. so/or 
an amotint equal to 
average consumption of 
3 consecutive months 
whichevtl: is higher in 
the case of monthly . 
billing and; 

I 
13 
(d) Temporary loads 
(i) upto one week or part thereof 
3 4 
(b) Minimum ofR.s. 50/· or 
an amQunt equal to aver• 
age comumption of 3 
, consecutive months, whi­
cheV'er is higher in the 
case of bi-monthly bil­
ling. 
Rs. t 5/· per Rs. 25/-per kw 
Kw 
(ii) above one week but less than r 5 days Rs. r 5/~p"'r Rs. 50/· per kw 
Kw 
(iii) Aboue 15 days but less than one 
month (i.e. 30 days) 
(iv) Over 30 days 
(v) StreetLight . 
7 Tran~former oil Testing 
NOTE 
R<. sof-per Rs. 6o/-pet Kw 
Kw 
Rs· so/- per Rs. IOO/- perkw biiling 
kw plus Rs. 15 should be done monthly. 
per week or 
part thereof 
subject to 
minimum 
desposit of 
Rs. so/-
Rs. 230/.per Rs. 450/-per Kw 
Kw 
Rs. 10/· Rs. 30/-per sample 
1. All charges for connection and installatictJl ave tc l:e paid in adva1ice, bfoc wmk 
is taken up. 
2. Reinstallation of service line etc. Flalll:e extra. 
3· Install~tion testing fee is reouired t\- l::e paid only in can· of C:o1 ment supply or supply 
is disconnected for defective wiring. 
4• The monthly billing shall be adoptrd in cafe d ttmpNa.ry correctkn ft•I a Jleri(d 
more than one month. In case of functions, Ex! ibitiom, circus etc. weekly billing 
s~ll be adopted. 
. ANNEXURE II 
{Vide para 18 of the Report) 
·Meter and tkma11d indicattw rent effective 11om Ist March, 81). 
Proposed 
charges 
--------------------------~--------
·A.C.Meurs 
' ,I Si~le phaSe . Rs. 2/·P.M. 
'~ .:: ' ' ~ ·' 
Poly-pliase meters Rs.5·.~t5P.M 

I 
14 
4 
Dentand indicator and special type of meters 
of cal!)acitymore than so Amps. and involving 
use of clirrent and potential transformers . R.s. I. soP.M. Per rupee of the cost of 
metering equipment. " 
L.T. Polyphase meter with G.T. 
L.T.M.D.I •• 
H.T. meters/HT MDI meters 1 
TrivectorfTwo vector meters ) 
R.s. IO. 00 
P.M. 
R.s.so.oo 
P.M. 
R.s. 120/·P.M. 
ANNEXURE III 
(Vide para 20 of the Report) 
DELHI ELECTRIC SUPPLY UNDERTAKING 
(Municipal Corporation of Delhi) .... 
Comments on the points raised at the . meeting of the Committee on 
Subordinate Legislation of Ra.jya Sabha held on the 4th September, 
1982 
Points raised and DESU's comments on the same are as given 
,below:-
(i) METER TESTING FEE: 
Hon'ble Members of the Committee felt that since energy meters 
installed at the premises of the consumers belonged to DESUt 
there was no justification for the Undertaking's charging Rs. 10/- as 
meter testing fee from the consumers. 
It was explained that whenever it is found that a meter has 
stopped functioning or is suspected to be defective, replacement is 
done by DESU at its own cost and po testing fee is charged from the 
consumer.. It is only when the consumer himself alleges that the 
meter is defective and wants it to be tested, that a fee has to be 
d.epositeQ. i,n advance. The meter is then tested and if the allegation 
is found to be false, the fee is forfeited. In case, however, the alle­
gation is correct. i.e,, if the meter is found to _be actuaHy defective 
beyond the prescribed limits of accuracy (presently + 3 per cent), 
testing. fee is refrindablejadjustable. ·-

15 
It would thus be seen that the provision of testing fee puts no 
bunlen Pn the qt')ftSUII'ler if :his ~oroplaint is genuine, it only serves to 
;keep fal'selfrlvolous complaints in check. 
{ii) WHETHER SECURITY DEPOSIT IS A PART OF TARIFF? 
It was explained that security deposit was not a part of tariff but 
was included in the 'cond.tions of supply' of power in accordance 
with the provisions of the Indian Electricity Act. Rates of see'Urity 
deposits are approved by the Delhi Administration. 
Securlty deposit, in fact, r:epresents the c6st of electricity already 
used by the consumer. Electricity is consumed every day by the 
eonsum~r, but meter reading is taken after specific intervals-monthLy, 
bi-monthly or so. It also takes time to prepar.e the bill, to despatch 
it and then time has to be g:ven to the consumer for making pay­
ments. There is thus invariably a longish interval between actual 
~nsumption of power by the consumer and receipt of paytnent for 
the same. Security deposit is thus essentially intended to cover and 
under write to some extent, the cost of power already actually con· 
sumed during this period. 
(iii) WHY NO INTEREST IS PAID ON SECURITY DEPOSIT TO 
DOMESTIC CONSUMERS: 
It was explained that under the existing policy/orders, simple in­
terest @ 2-lf2 per cent per annum is paid by the Undertaking on 
cash security deposited with the undertaking by the permanent 
conSumers of power for industrial and commercial purposes. No 
interest is paid· on security depesit made by residential and commer­
cial (non-domes!titr) 1\ghtmg and domestic:~ ldghtingJpower consu"' 
mers. 
Tat.'ift for d()1'l1&s.tie light/power is all'ee..dy k~pt very. low and ts 
· h,Svily subsfd~. t('lim'i.ber of ElotneSti~ consumers is very large 
and sec~~ deposit amounts at'e lbw and. hence infurest on them 
would be a petty figtire til an overwhelmingly targe number of cases. 
Besides, their calculation and adjustme-nt woulc;l pose serious prob ... 
lems in accounting· and E+~mstratiOh. . 
Municipal Coo:-po.ration of Delhi is an elected body duly authori. 
sed and eniPQW~red b.y an Act of. Parliament (DMC Act, 1957) to 
fix tariff~ and should be presumEXl to have· exercised this power after 
taking into account all relevant :factors .and considerations including 
the interest of the consumers. 

16 
III 
;L'HE DEPARTMENT OF FOOD, CENTRAL GOVERNMENT FRUIT 
JUICE PLANT (GROUP 'A', 'B' AND 'C' POSTS) RECRUITMENT 
(AME.NDMENT) RULES, 19·80 (G.S.R. 645 OF 1980). 
22. Paragraphs 32. to 35 of the 46;th Report of the Committe~ read 
as· follows:-
"32. The provision regarding the composition O·f the Departmental 
Promotion Committee in respect of Stenographer (Grade 'C'), Store­
keeper, Accotmts Clerk, Sales Clerk, Telephone Operator, Skilled 
Labour, Semi-skilled Labour, Unskilled Labour, Messenger, Secu­
rity Guard, Safaiwala and Mali, contained in column 12 of the sche­
dule to the above cited amending rules is inter alia, as follows:-
"One of the Head of the Division-Member." 
It 'was felt that the above provision was vague. Besides, the 
qualifications for the post of Sales Clerk wer.e prescribed as 
follows:-
"Essential: 
(i) Higher Secondary or equivalent. 
(ii) Typing speed 30 W. .P. M. 
Desirable: 
3 years' experience in marketing/sales organisation of repute.~' 
It was felt that keeping in view the nomenclature of the post of 
Sales Clerk, what ought to have been prescribed as an essential one 
had been prescribed as a desirable one and vice-versa. 
33;. Accordingly, the matter was takien up with the Ministry of 
.Agriculture (Department of Food) who were requested to intimate 
whether they had any objection to (i) making the entry regarding 
the composition of the D.P.C. precise and (ii) amending the entry 
regarding the- qualifications prescribed for Sales Clerk suitably. 
34. The Ministry of Agn:iculture (Department of Foocl) vide 
their O.M. dated the 26th December, 1980 informed as follows:-
, uthis .Department have no objection in (i) making the en+ry 
· .. regarding .the.composition of the DP:C precise and (ii) amending 
· . the entry regarding the qualifications prescribed for Sales Clerk. 
suitably:·' 

• 17 
35. The Committee notes that the Ministry of Agriculture 
(Department of Food) . has no objection (i) to recast in precise 
terms, the entry rega;rding the composition of ·the Departmental 
Promotion Conunittee; and (ii) to amend suitably the entry re­
garding the qualificSJtions. prescribed for the post of Sales . Clerk 
and di:rects that the Ministry be asked to furnish for its considera. 
:tion a copy of the draft amendment regarding the qualifications 
propose'!- to be prescribed for the post of ·Sales Clerk. 
A copy .of the e*acts from the 46th Report was sent to. the 
Ministry of Agriculture for their information and necessary action. 
23. _The Ministry Qf Agriculture (Department of Food) in their 
communication, dated the 16th April, 198:2 stated as under:--
. ., .. to state that action for amendment of Recruitment Rule,s as 
desired by the Rajya Sabha Committee on Subordinate Legisla­
tion was taken in consultation with the Department of Personnel 
and Administrative Reforms. The 'draft Notification for amending 
the Recruitment Rules is now ready. Meanwhile, the Fruit Juice 
Bottling Plant has been transferred to Modern Bakeries (Tndia) 
Limited w.e.f. 1st April, 1982. Since the Plant is· no longer with 
. the Government and the posts would now be filled up by Modern 
Bakeries (India) Limited, as per their own Rules and· RegUlations, 
the Recruitment Rules issued by the Department of Food for the 
Fruit Juice Bottling Plant would not be operated. In view of the 
above, it is considered that no useful purpose would be served 
by amending the Recruitment Rules which have become redundant. · 
However, if at any stage, the Fruit Juice Bottling Plant is re­
transferred to the Depa:rtment of Food and recruitments at'e made 
as per the existing Recruitment Rules, the necessary amendments 
as suggested by the Rajya Sabha Committee on Subordinate 
Legislation would be carried out. 
24. At its sitting held on the 1st July, 1982, the Committee consi­
dered the above comments of the Minis.try and subsequently heard 
the Secretary, Ministry of Agricultull'e on the 3rd September, 1982, 
with a view to seeking certain clarifications in the matter. 
25. During the course of his deposition before the Committee the 
representative of the Ministry was asked to gi~e a note about the 
present position and about the steps which came in between the 
acceptance of the Committee's recommendations by the Ministry and 
theitr final reply stating that it would not be of much use to make any 
amendments as the Plant had since been transferred. 

18 
26. The Ministry of Agriculture (Department of Food), vide 
their O:M. dated the 8th September, 1982, stated as under:-
" ••.••. a note indicating the position regarding time taken in 
processing the amendments suggested by the Committee together 
with a statement giving the sequence of dates connected with the 
processing of the amendments is enclosed (Annexure IV). It is 
:requested that this may please be placed before the Committee." 
27. The Committee notes the comments of the 1\:linistry of Agri· 
culture (Department of Food) and decides not to pursue the matter 
further. iJII' 

A:iNQ:'URB IV 
(Vide para 26 of the Report) 
SUBJECT : Fruit Jui,ce aottJ,ing J>lant (Group· 'A', 'B' and 'C' Posts) 
Recruitment (Amendment) Rules 1980 (G.S.R. 645 Qf 
1960). 
The Committee on Subordinate Legislation had desired Food 
S~retary to ap:pear befor~ the Gom:q~.ittee on the 3rd Septembe~:, 
1982 ~t 3.45 P.M. for certahl elarifioations required by the Committee. 
Food Secretary appeared before the CC>m.mittee on the 3rd September, 
1982. After <Uscll$Sions,. FOQ'd Secretary was desired to send a note 
indicating the reas9ns for delay in· consideri:ng the proposal for 
amendments to the Recruitment Rules. · 
2. The position regarding the time taken in processing the· amend:. 
ments suggested by the Committee is explained in the following 
paragraphs. A statement giving the sequence of dates connected 
with the processing of the amendments is also enclosed. · 
2.1. As would be seen from the enclosed sequence, the Depart­
ment received a communication from the Rajya Sabha Secretariat 
on 1~12-80 seeking to know whether it has any objection to the 
amendments mentioned in the said communication. It was . also 
indicated therein that the matter would be considered by the Com­
mittee on Subordinate Legislation. The Department sent its reply 
on 26-12-80 saying that it had no objection to incorporating suitably 
the proposed amendments. However, the Department 'did not know 
what view the Committee had taken finally in this regard until 
tt received the Forty-8ixth Report of the Committee which covered, 
inter alia, the Committee's recommendations on this subject, wit:ti 
Rajya Sabha Seeretariat communication No. RS. 4 (13) /81-Com. I 
of December 18, 1981. It was only after this communication dated 
18-12-61 was received that the Department could initiate the action 
required to process the Committee's recommendations. The matter 
w·as considered in the. DePartment and the case sent on to the Dew 
partment of Personnel mu:l Administrative Refo!l'lns on 22-1-82. The 
case was received baok from. that Department ort 9 .. 2-82. Thereafter, 

20 
the matter was further considered in this Department keeping in 
view the new development regarding the transfer of the management 
of the Plant to the Modern Bakeries (India) Ltd. and the final reply 
sent- to, the Rajya S:abha Secretariat on 16-4-82. 
2. 2. It would be seen from the position explained in para 2. 1 that 
there ha:d been no avoidable delay on the part o·f this Department. 
Statement giving seqw,ence of daltes in processing the amendments 
suggesrtled bry the Rajya Sabha Committee on Subo>rdinate I,egslation. 
Latter dated 15-111·198o from RaJya Sabha Secretriat received 
in the Department asking whether the Department would have 
any objection to the proposed· amendments, for consideration 
of the Committee. · 
Reply sent to Rajya Sabha Secretariat that the Department haa 
no 9bjection to the proposed amendments. · 
Letter issued by Rajya Sabha Secretariat forwarding a copy of the 
· 46th Report of the Committee .on Subordinate Legislation to 
this Department. 
· After comideration in this D.:plrtm,nt,. File sent to DOPAR 
File received back from DOPAR. 
Further consideration in this Department and reply sent to Rajya 
Sabha Secretariat. · 
IV 
RESERVE BANK OF INDIA ACT, 1924-RESERVE BANK OF 
INDIA (NOTE, REFUND) RULES, 1975. 
" · 28. In 1980, ·the Committee considered the Reserve Bank of India 
XNote Refund) Rules, 1975, on receipt of a representation from one 
Shrlmati Jwala Ditti who had submitted to the Reserve Bank of 
India, New 'Delhi, a claim for Rs. 21,402[- for the recovery of the 
value of currency notes belonging to her which were damaged in 
floods and thus became defective. The claim was substantially rejec~ 
teii and quite some curr.ency n.otes forfeited. . In that context the 
Committee haa in its 4Srd Report observed as follows:-
41The Committee, at its meeting held on the 21st October, 1980, 
considered the commen.ts of the Ministry. The Committee feels 

21 
that the special procedure of examining defective currency notes 
should form a part of the Rules. The Committee also suggests that 
the provision for appeal against the· 'decision of the authority com­
petent to examine the defective notes in terms of the Note Refund 
Rules should be inserted in the Rules." (P~ra 39) 
29. The Ministry of Finance were apprised of the observations of 
the Committee. They mde their O.M. dated the 7th AU<111<!t 1981 0 ...... ' • 
forwarded the comments received by them from the Reserve Bank 
of India, which ate reproduced below:~ 
"The tlajya Sabha Committee on Subordinate Legislation has, in 
its 43rd repOII't vide paragraph 39, raised the following. points, viz.-
(A) That the Special Procedure followed by the Bank in 
dealing with the claims in respect of charred, dilapidated or 
excessively soiled and brittle notes should form a part of the 
Reserve Bank of India (Note Refund) Rules, 1975; and 
(B) That the provision of appeal against the decision of the 
Prescribed Officer fBank may be introduced in the Reserve Bank 
of India (Note Refund) Rules, 1975. 
We set out below the Bank's comments on the aforementioned 
points. 
Regarding (A) 
Defective notes are disposed of in the following manner:-
(i) Those with slight mutilations· which are presented at tht' 
counters of the Bank are exchanged readily for good notes~ 
(ii) Those with mutilations which require closer scrutiny are 
. accepted by the Bank and the exchange value thereof paid if they 
are payable under the· Note Refund Rules. 
(iii) Notes which are charred, brittle or dilapidated are. sub. 
jected to scrutiny by several officials of the Reserve Bank . viz. 
first by those at the c<mnter, later at the junior level according to 
. the -powers delegated to them and subsequently, if necessary at 
the senior level viz. the Currency Officer who is t~e Prescribed 
Officer under the Bank's Note Refund Rules. These notes are, 

· therefGQ.'e, kept in the Sa.tne condition in wb,ich they are received 
an.d. . t4e tenderer is. advised to call at our office and witness the 
aqjudiaation of his/her notes if hejshe so desires and, if hejshe 
'does.not desire to be present the notes are adjudicated in hisfher 
absenae. In any case, the notes falling under this category are 
-also dealt with in the same m~nner in which the other notes are 
dealt with inasmuch as no special consideration is given and they 
are exchanged only if they are found payable under the Note 
Refund Rules. Therefore, no special treatment is given to the 
notes which are dealt with under Special Procedure but, in order 
to avoid . their .further dilapidation, they are dealt wi~ st,raight­
away by the Prescribed Officials in the presence of \1te other 
authorised officials of the Bank. 
Mutilated etc. notes for which value has been paid are subjected 
to a verification in the Bank's Verification Secti~n in view of what 
has been stated above, in re$pect of special procedure cases, those 
notes are not subjected to verification as the official concerned 
with the verification himself is present at the time of adjudication 
by the Currency Officer. 
Regarding (B) 
The other point raised by the Committee relates to the pro­
vision of appeal in the 1975 Rules against the decision of the 
Prescribed Officer/Bank. We presume the reference has been made 
to the provisions of rule 21 (2) of .the 1975 Rules. It may be point­
ed out in this connection that this rule is merely in the nature of a 
clarificatory provision and has been included to make It abundantly 
clear that the Prescribed Officer's or the Bank's decision in respect 
of a claim made under the 1975 Rules shall be final. It is necessary 
to retain this rule specially in the light of subsequent delegation, to· 
the public sector banks. It may be stated . that in terms of sub­
rule (2) of this Rule even though no appeal against the decision 
of the Prescribed Officer /Bank in regard to any claim therein shall 
lie the Prescribed Officer himself or the Bank itself is not precluded , . 
from reviewing its decision. The Bank has in this connection 
iSsued administrative instructions that if the Prescribed Officer (or 
the Central Office . of the Bank) is satisfied that a bonafide mistake 
has beeri made, it is open to him to correct the mistake either on 
his ·initiative or on his attention being drawn to the mistake by the 
claimant or any other person. 

23 
It may also be stated here that <.\ provision ol appttal cannot be 
sine qua-non of a good legislati-Qn, especially when by reason of 
section 28 of the Reserve Bank of India Act a claimant with a 
claim in respect of a mutilated or imperfect no~ has no right to­
recover the value of the note. It is :respectfully pointed out that 
the question whether the decision of ihe Prescribed Officer is objec­
tive or not, does not ¢1epend on a p·rovision for appeal against 
his decision. The Bank exercises sufficient · administrative control 
and supervision whenever requir~d. 
In this connection, we invite the attention of the. Committee to 
t~ followi~ passage in Helsbuty•s Laws of ltngland. 4th Edition. 
Vglum~ I paragraph 50 at page 54t ....... 
"50. Appe4Z l.f1'!1d review 
A right of appeal to a court or statutory tribunal is a cretiture 
of statute; there is no inherent right of appeal''. 
It will, therefore, be seen from the above that a right of appeai 
is not a natural right or an inherent right but is a creature of the 
rules. Therefore, the mere fact that rule 21 (2) provides that the 
claimant shall not have a right of tippeal against the decision of 
the Prescribed Officer or the Bank would not mean that ·there is 
any infringement of the. principles of natural justice. 
Attention is also invited to H.W.R. Wade's Administrative La~, 
4th Edition. page 566. The following pa~age is relevant:-
((Finality Claus.es: Many statutes provide that some decision 
,shall be ftnal. The courts have made it a rule that such provisions 
cannot hamper the operation of judicial control/' 
Therefore, the mere fact that rule 2·1 (2) provides that the 
decision of the Prescribed Officer /Bank shall be final . would not: 
mean that such decision will not be subject to judicial review. In 
fact, there have been several cases of parties going to Court and 
the Com:ts deciding the matter. 
Having regard to the facts that· there is no infringement of. the 
principles of natural justice and that the provision of rule 21 (2) 
cannot hamJ?.er the operation of judicial control, it is conside;red 
that provision of a right of appeal may not be quite nec~ssary." 

24 
30. In this connection it may be recalled that the present pro· 
visions contained in the R.B.I .. (Note Refund) Rules, 1975, flow 
from Section 28 of the R.B.I. Act, 19~4, which reads as under. 
"28. Recovery of notes lost, sto1ien, mutilated or imperfect. 
· Notwithstanding anything .contained in any enactment or rule 
of law to the contrary no person shall of right be entitled to 
recover from the Central Government or the Bank, the value of 
any lost, stolen, mutilated or imperfect currency note of the 
Government of India, or bank note . 
. Provided that the Bank m:ay, with the previous sanction of the 
Central Government prescribe the circumstances in and the 
conditions and limitations subject to which the value of such 
currency notes or bank notes may be refunded as o:f · grace and 
the, rules made under this proviso shall be laid on the Table of 
Parliament." 
The Reserve · Bank of India ·Act, 1934,, came in for review jn 
195(), 1951, 1956, 1957, 1959, 1963 and again in 1968 but the Govern .. 
ment decided not to .change the provision contained in Section 28, 
though it does not appear to be responsive to the needs of the time. 
The Bank in its comments has stated that th~ provision regard­
ing appeal contained in rule 21 (2) of the 1975 rules "is merely in 
the nature of a darificatory ptovision and has been included to 
make it abundently clear that the Prescribed Officer's or the Bank's 
decision in respect of a claim made under the 1975 rules shall be 
final.." Again the Bank has stated that "the Prescribed Officer him­
self or the Bank itself is not precluded from reviewing its decision." 
Furthermore, while reiterating the provision contained in Section 28 
of the Act the Bank has stated that it exercises "sufficient adminis­
t:rative control and supervision whenever required." 
31. The Committee notes the comments offered by the Reserve 
Bank of India on the subject and decides not to pursue the matter 
·further. 
v 
AYURVEDIC COLLEGE IN MUNDKA, DELHI-REGULATIONS 
REGARDING MIGRATION OF Sro.DENTS TO AND FR0-
32. The Ministr\Y of Health and Family Welfare were asked on the 
29th June, 1982, to supply a copy of the regulations regarding migra­
. tion of students to and fro the Ayurvedic College in Mundka, Delhi. 

25 
33. The Ministry V'ide their O.M. dated the 25th September, 1982 
forwarded a copy of notification No. F. 3,j71806-M&PH dated 24-7-1982. 
The notification has added the following sub-clause to J;~egulation 23:-
" (d) (i) Migration of students .will be allowed on genuine 
grounds, ori the receipt of request from_ the _stude~ts .provided no 
objection certificate from the parent insti.tution. and from the ins­
titution where the s~udents seek migration are obtained .. 
(ii) In case of disaffiliation of an institution, the students of dis:. 
affiliated college can be migrated without obtaining no objection 
·· · certificate from either of the college. The orders will then be issued 
by the Examining Body.'' 
34. The Committee notes that the Ministry of Health and Family 
·Welfare. have amended the regulations regarding migration of stu­
dents to and fro the Ayurvedic College in Mundka Delhi only after 
a reference was made to that Ministry, 
VI 
THE MINISTRY OF FOOD, AGRICUVI'URE COMMUNITY DEVE~ 
LOPMENT AND COOPERATION (DEPART1VIENT OF AGRICUL~ 
TURE) (CLASS IV POSTS) (AMENDMENT) RECRUITMENT 
RULE8, 1980 (G.S.R. 67 OF 1981) 
35. The above mentioned amending rules substituted rule •1A of 
the original rules of 1969' in the following manner:-
"4A Liability of persons appointed as Peons to undergo training 
as Home Guards. 
Notwithstanding anything contained in these rules, every person 
appointed as a Peon under these rules shall undergo training as a 
Home Guard for a period of three years. Prov~de·rl +hat the Com­
mandant General, Home Guards, may having regard to the perform­
ance of and standard of training achieved. by any person during the 
period of training reduce such period to two years for reasons to be 
recorded in writing.~' 
36. It was felt that the rules should also provide for exempting the 
physically- handicapped. persons from undergoing homeguard train­
ing. Attention of.the Ministry of Agriculture (Department of Agri­
eulture and C'ooperation) was invited to the general instructions in· 

26 
!regard to framing of recruitment Nles issued by the Department of 
:Personnel which is reproduced below:-
3.13.3. In the recruitment rules for the po$t of Peon, an additional 
provision may be made that after appointment, training in home­
guard will be obligatory, save those who are physically handicapped 
to undergo such training. 
The Mini'Stry were. asked to amend rule 4A of the aforewaid rules 
in accordance with the instructions. 
37. The Ministry vide O.M. dated the 2nd July, 1982 informed 
as follows:-
" ...... That .necessary amendment is being made in the Recruit-
ment Rules. The case has been sent to the Ministry of Law (Legis­
lative Department) for concurrence." 
38. The Ministry in their subsequent conununication dated the 
20th August, 1982 stated as follows:-
" ...... a reply to Rajya Sabha Secretariat O.M. dated the 21st 
June, 198.2 was sent to the Rajya Sabha Sect'etariat on 2nd July, 
1982. The Amendment proposed by Rajya Sabha Secretariat in 
their O.M. dated 17th December, 1981 is acceptable to this Depart­
ment and the Recruitment rules are being amended accordingly. 
The draft notification in this regard has been approved by the 
Ministry of Law (Legislative Department) and is being processed 
for issue. 
39. The Committee notes the above reply of the Ministry of Agri­
culture (Department of Agriculture and Cooperation) and decided 
not to persue the matter further since the Ministry have ag·reed to 
amend the Ret':ruitment Rules as suggested by the Committee. 
vu 
'THE MINISTRY OF FINANCE, DEPARTMENT OF ECONOMIC 
AFFAIRS (BANK NOTE PRESS DEWAS, CLASS III POSTS) 
RECRl,JITMENT (2ND/4TH AMENDMENT) RULES, 1930 
(G.S.R. NO. 569j611 OF 1980) 
. 40. In its 47 Report, the Committee on Subordinate Legislation 
recommended as follows:-
'116. The Committee agrees . to the proposal of the Ministry of 
Finance (De}:larttnent of Economi<; Affairs') . to raise the 'Status of 
its representative from 'Observers' to Member in the Departmental 

Promotion Committee fur Cl!ass III posts in the Bank Note Pres~, 
Dewas. The Committee, however, directs that the Ministry, while 
carrying out the amendment for the purpose, should make the 
prqvisJon speciti.c by indicating the designation of the officer who 
would represent them." · 
A copy of the extracts from the 47th Report was forwarded to the 
Ministry of Finance on the 16th September, 196i. In their reply, 
dated 25th September, 1981 the Ministry informed that that Depart­
ment were taking action to amend the rules in the light of the deci­
sion contained in the report and that a copy of the amendment would 
be forwarded to the Secretariat in due course for record. 
41. On being reminded on the 16th February, 1982, the Ministry 
of Finance (Department of Economic Affairs) vide their O.M:. dated 
the 8th March, 1982, informed as follows:- · 
" ..... the Draft Notification had been sent to the Ministry of 
Law for their vetting. While vetting the draft Notification, the Mi­
nis~ry of Daw have made certain observations for inclvsion in the 
proposed Notification. The information is being collected frorQ. the 
BNP Dewas and a copy of the amendment to the rules cited above 
will be sent to the Rajya Sabha Sectt. as soon as it is finalised, for 
being placed before the Committee on Subordinate Legislation." 
42. The Ministry were again requested on the 17th June, 1982, 
to expedite supply of a copy of the amendment to the rules in 
question. The Ministry vide their O.M. dated the 24th June, 1982 
informed that the notification was under issue and that a copy 
.thereof would be sent to the Rajya Sabha Secretariat soon. 
,43; The Ministry uide their O.M. dated the 3rd July, 1982, fur­
nished a· copy of their notification No. F\4(31) 180-BNP dated the 
·~th Jurte, l9fl2, publishing the Ministry of Finance, Department of 
Economic Affairs (Bank Note Press, Dewas, Class III Basts) Re~ 
,cruitmellt (Second Amendment) Rules, 1982, 
Para 2 of the N otific:ation reads as unde:r:--
In the Schedule to the Ministry of ·Finance, Department of 
Economic Affairs (Bank Note ··Press, Dewas,· Class III Posts) Re­
·cruitment Rules, 1975, aga5nst each of the poets specified in column 
2, for the entries under column 18, the :liollowing shall be sub­
·stituted, namely:-
"Group C Departmental Promotion Committee comprisi~g of­
(i) General Manager.:_cha.irma.n 

28 
(ii) Deputy General ~anager_:.Member 
(iii) Works ManagerfCbief Chemist-Member 
(iv) Chief Accounts and Administrative Officer-Member 
(v) An Officer of or above the rank of Under Secretary in. 
the Mints and Presses Division of the Ministry of Fin~ 
ance, Department of Economic Affairs-Member 
44. The Committee notes that tJhe Ministry of Finance have fOr• 
warded a copy of the Notification publishing the Ministry of Finance 
Department of EcOittomic Affairs (Bank Note Press, Dewas, Class 
lll Posts) Recruitment (Second Amendment) Rules, 1982, carrying 
out the amendment a-s suggested by the Committee in its 47th Re· 
port and decides not be pursue the matter further. 
VDI 
THE DIRECTORATE OF COORDINATION (POLICE WIRELESS) 
(CLASS IV POSTS RECRUITMENT (AMENDMENT) RULES, 
1980. (G.S.R. 380 OF 1980) 
45. The above-mentioned amending rules have inserted rule. 4A 
after rule 4 in the parent rules of 197~. The new provision reads 
as under:-
''4A. Liability of persons appointed as Peons to undergo train­
ing. as Home Guards-Notwithstanding anything contained in· 
these rules, •. every persons appointed as a Peon under these 
rules . shall undergo training as a Home Guard for a period 
of three year~. Provided that the Commandant General, Home 
Guards may for reasons to be recorded in writing with regard to 
the performance of. and the standard of training achieved by, any 
person during the period of training reduce such period to two­
years." 
It was felt that the rules should also provide for exempting the 
physically handicapped persons from undergoing homeguard train­
ing .. 
46. The point was taken up with the Ministry of Home Affairs. 
Attention of the Mini9try was also drawn to the following instruc­
tions datE!d the 22nd May, 1979 issued by the Department of per­
sonnel and .Administrative Reforms:-
.... · "3.13.3. Tn the recruitment rules for the 1JOst of PeO'll, an ~ddt­
tional pmvision may be made that after appointment, training in 

29 
homeguard Will be ~&igatocy, save those who. are physically 
handicapped to un<Iergo su~h training." 
• · ' ,._,,t.,,_, A",j.~-:,;-.i t , ·::. .. :' ,;';.'' , ... , ' ' • • ' 
47. The ·MinistrY,' ()f Hqme Affairs vide their O.M. dated the 3rd .f' .. ~ ;,•_;~~\fl.} ,:._f-:- .,.,-. __ .~, r;•o••l,'. 
April, 1982 iilfoh~u!d as follows:- .. 
"The matter • has ·peen ,examined . i:Q consult~tion with. the De-
. '' 's '-- __ , ' ,_ - -. ',.' ... _ ,. ' ., \ ···- ..... ' -· ' ' 
partment of Personnel and Administrative Reforms and it is now 
proposed to incorp~rat~ .~4~,follmyi~~ p~ol:1~o · ~ter ,~,Ue 4A in 
the Directorate of Coordination (Police Wireless) Class IV Posts 
Re\!ruitment Rules. · · · 
' . '; .... , ... ·-' :·· ,-.,- ~ l' ,\_. ' .- . ': ·-- ', -.'':'_-: '. j ' 
'Provided ft¢thet that the physicalLY handicapped persons shall 
be exempted fPom unqergoing training as a Home Guard." 
I..t is . f:eq}f~t,r~' t~f,' tjlle .. ~tter m,p.y be .. P~ii<l~4 before the.. Commit­
tee on Su}lq~:4fn-te , ;l..egf~latioq of; Itajya S.~bha and· their views 
communicated to this Ministry before the proposed amendment is 
made." 
48~ .. ~~~- QollllOi~t~ d~i'!es ~ot ~. pu:rS}le .·the . ~tter, further as 
the Ministry of Home Affairs have agreed to amend the rules as 
recommended by the Committee. , -, .• 
IX 
THE DIREC'l10aATlil . OF EXTE~SIQN . (VIST,i\R NIDESHA­
LAYA) SUPERINTENDENT (ACCOUNTS) R;gcRUITMENT 
(AMENDMENT) RULES, 1986 (G.S.R. 1029 OF 1980) 
49. Col: 12· of the schedule. to the 1;\Qtrve RU.lf::!$ provided for the 
composition of the Departmental Promotion Committe.e as follows~-
Group 'B' Departmental Promotion Committee comprising: 
1. Joint Se~r.etary (Extension) ;Joint Secretary (Administra· 
tion) -Chairman 
2. Director (Corps)fDeputy SecretarY. (Cro~s)-MenJber 
3. Director of Administration, Directorate : of Ext~n~ion-
M~~ . . . . . 
·ti was ieiLthat the,,comno~i~o,n qf_ ~~· nePa.rt~#~a! Promotion 
Com . 'i t~e !Via'S' D.o' ~t ··. d,K~ .. ,tfi1 ' Min~$h'Y .. ~f. !Lftrip~lture were, 
"'ci ntJ ;·•l;f' 'r'' 1 ,, "~''' ~' wh~···~r ' ).'I h'" an'. oqjection in making t~f:rc;!~ot:~.~ '$,~,~ ~ , s~~~ ••. , . ~,~ \' .~~ ••• g , . Y . . . . .· _, 
the compositiQ$\ J.)f ~!te. C~nmtit~~El .s~dlc. 

30 
50. The Ministry vide their O.M. dated"t~~· 17th July, l9S2 inti- · 
mated as follows:-
"The existing composition of the Group 'B' Departmental Pro­
. motion Committee indicated in cOlumn 12 pf the Schedule to the 
recruitment rules for the post of Superintendent (Accounts) and 
Process Officer in the Directorate of Extension is proposed to be 
. 
1 
substituted by the following compositiO'D:-
1. Director of Administration-Chairman 
Directorate of Extension. 
2. Joint Commissioner, (Extension)-Member 
3. Under Secretary (Crops)-Member 
4. Group 'A' Gazetted Officer, under whom the Group 'B' 
official concerned is to work/working-Member 
5 SchedUled CastejScheduled Tribe officer of the appropriate 
rank .·either belonging to the Directorate of Extension or 
such an officer working in another office situated locally­
Membe1· 
For this purpose the recruitment rules for the post of Superin­
tendent (Accounts) and Process Officer are being amended. A 
ct!opy1 of the notification issued in this regard will be endorsed to 
:tJi~ ,Rajya Sabha Secretariat." · 
51. The Committee notes the comments of the Directorate of 
Extension (VIstar Nideshaiaya) o;n the subject and decides not to 
pursue. the matter ful'ther. 
X 
THm TAPIOCA SAGO GRADING AND .MARKJNG RULES, 19RO 
(S.O. 2578 OF 1980) .. 
52. The above rules were examine<} ·anq following .points were 
. referred to the Ministry of Rural . Develop1llent on the 4th N ovem­
. ber, 1981 for' their oommentsfclarifications:'-
. "(i) whether the words. "Ptoduce 9f India" appearing in the 
. l risiRe: Sun 'can be substi:tuted by their vernacular equiva~ 
, ; , , ·· .. lents or alterna~iv~ly wh~ther tn.~ Ministry would. have 
any objection .tP shifting 't~e . vc.ror~s . "Prodt}ce of Ind_ia" 
to a place' above their vernacular eq\livalents; and' 

.. 
• 
31, 
(ii) whether t~e }fjp.istry would have any objection to spell­
ing ou~ in sp~it\C. terms the requirements. of law in the 
rules . ~tead of using expressions such as " .... in a man­
j]e,r apprpved by the Agricultural Marketing Adviser"­
. Rule ·~.(i). " .... in such a manner as may be specified by 
the Agricultural Marketing Adviser" - Rule ·6 (ii) and 
" .... in the ·manner approved by the said officer" - Rule 
6 (Hi)." . . 
53: 'l~he Ministry in their Office Memoranda dated the 5th March 
and 271;h January, 1002 respectively stated as under:-
;" (i) to say that in the present design of the grade designa-
tion mark, as published under Schedule II of the above 
rules, the map of India carries words "AGMARK". The 
words 'Produce of India' have been inserted under the 
rising sun for the purpose of similarity and prominence 
keeping in view the fact that the ·labels are mainly for 
the information of the buyers in foreign countries. As 
such substituting the words "Produce ·of India'' by their 
vernacular equivalents is not considered desirable. Fur­
ther, the present design of the grade designation mark is 
identical to the grade designation mark published in al1 
the 82 notifications so far published under the Agricul­
tural Produce (Grading and Marking) Rules, 1937, and 
it is not considered desirable to make a change in one 
such ·notification as the grade designation mark has to be. 
common in all the notifications.'' 
(ii) The expression "in a manner approved by the Agricul­
tural Marketing Adviser to the Government of India", 
as may be specified by the A.M.A. have been provided, 
mainly to accommodate different practical situations aris­
ing wbile implementing the Rules. Otherwise, even to 
· ac~ommQdate minor practical requirements, the rules 
have to' be. amencled, which being a time consuming pro-
. cess, will act- as a hinderance to the trade. It' is difficult 
t:o -vfsuaHse and pr~cribe in the rules all the· likely re­
quirementS of the t~;adejforei~n ~myers. The only alter­
native to maintain -tb.& flexibility within the framework 
of ' the. law· }s t~ place· suc9 . i~ues . 'within discretionary 
powers of the, Agri~ultural Marketing Adviser. All the 
relevant aspects o( the .gra~ilg are being covered in the 
exb;)ust.ive jp.structions issiteMt~t may, be issued by the 
April.· Mar.keting. A~er under Rule. ~(f) of the General 
· 'Grading 'an.d Marking lf,u,l~. If these ·instructions are in-

32 
corpor~ted in the Rttles, .. the R,u!.E?s would become very 
. volumillP\lS and. bulky. In. fact that Committee on Sub­
. ordinate Legislation have already' agreed in: anothef case 
that these instructions need not be incorpora~d in the 
rules. In this connection Rajya Sabha Sectt. O.M. No. 
RS. 713!73-Com. I dated 26-4-75 refers." 
54. lit view of the po~ition explained by the Ministry, the Com­
mittee decides not to pursue the matter further. 
XI , .. l . _, .. 
THE.··· MONOPOLIES AND RESTRICTIVE TRADE PRACTICES 
COMMISSION, OFFI(:Ei OF REGISTRAR, . RESTRIICTIVE . TRADE 
AGREEMENTS (OFFICERS A~D STAFF) RECRUITMENT 
AMENDMENT RULES, 1980 (G.S.R. 582 OF 1980) 
55, In its 46th Report, the Committe~ co.J?:sidere<;i the question of 
retrospective effect given to the above mentioned amending rules with 
efted from. the 5th July, 1978. The, amendin$ rules wer~ published 
in the Official Gazette dated the 31st May, 1980. The-Committee had 
then observed. as follows:- · . 
"'J;'h~ Qomm~ttee express~ its un.hl:\ppiness:in the .matter and 
~dv:is~s the Ministry. to ensure that such instances are avoided 
in future. (Para 87) 
56 .. In response to the Committee's observ:ati,ons the Ministry of 
Law, ·Justic~ and Comp~_ny Afl)tirs (Department of Company 
Affairs vide their O.M. dated the 14th January, 1982 informed as 
under:-
" ... immediately (\fter the sitting of th~ Committ.e~ on Subordi-
. · mite Legislation on 28th Aprib, 1981, p.t which . the Secre•­
tary of . this D~partment 'flas appe~red hefo:.:e the Com­
mitt~e to ex,pl~in some delay in ,th~ pub~i<:atipn of Mono­
poli~s al}4 1 R.~strictiv4!! 1.rade Pr;;.cti~~? .. CQ!pmi::t!)ion, Office 
of .. the ~gistrar, Restrictive :r'r11de _j\greernen~s · (Officers 
and S~aff) . J~ecru.itnie~t. Ame~dptept, .Jitul~.~., ~~80 a new 
proce<,lure has been pr~.scriP:ed tq enstife th~t e,ases of de-
lay of similar naiu,re do npt recur. ,A i CQI?Y .. of Jhis Depart­
ment' Circular of even ilttl11P~r ,dat~d 30th .J\pril, 198.1' is 
enclosed for information . <A.n.J.lexure . V)... In . this . Cir" 
cyl,~t~ Jt has _aisp b~n , i~i4. r;t~~~ . that. JL r:egister in. 
~~-. pr~s~~i~cl foriA .. shall_ pe m.~i~taii:J:ed. . PY,: .. each Sec-
. ~ipn. ~!As.r~,gi_~terfl»:~i,pe.rpvie:wJ'!d ~YJ~~S~~~ion Officer 
.c~~C~!le?- .on, the .. fir~.\ W.9r)ri.R~ .. ~Y lf.~ •. ~ve~::r ,w,eek for ex­
. pedlting publication of the notift<:atl.9,ns .~;;en,t to the Gov-

.. 
• 
33 
ernment of I;ndia Press and that the register. shall be put 
up by the Sect~on Qft\cer concerned once a month to the 
Branch ():fficer ~net . ~fice · a . quarter to the group Officer 
for perusal wHh a note indicating the action taken ln res~ 
pect of eaCh case. with the help of the revised procedure 
it is being ensured that the pul::Oication of notification. 
sent to the Government of India. Press is closely watched 
so as to avoid any delay in their publication." 
5:7. The Committee notes the prtJcedure adopted by the Depart­
ment of. Company Affairs with a view to avotcling deb\y in publica­
tion of notification~' ill· the Gazette of India ~lia··therefore. decides 
not to pursue the :inatter. further. 
~· ' '• 

ANNEXURE V 
(~ide para 56 of the Report) 
No. A 450~1j42/81-Admn. I 
GOVERNMENT OF INDIA 
MINISTRY OF LAW, JUSTI~E & COMPANY AFFAIRS 
(Deparment of Company. Affairs) 
Shastri Bhavan, 'A' Wing, 5th Floor 
New Delhi- 30th April, 1981 
CIRCULAR 
An instance has come to notice where two notifications were sent 
to the Government of India Press for publication in the Gazette of 
India under the cover of the sa:me letter. It so happened that one 
of these notifications only was published by the Press and no indi­
cation was given in regard to the other notification. After protracted 
correspondence it transpired, when the Press was personally con­
tacted at a very late stage, that the other notification was not 
published at all in the Gazette of India. On further enquiri·es, the 
Government of India Press denied the receipt of notification. 
Consequently, the notification had to be sent again for publication, 
but as in the meantime a considerable time was lost, the notification 
had to be given restl."lospective effect to regularise the actions taken 
in pursuance thereof. The Committee on Subordinate Legislation 
of the Rajya Sabha has taken strong exception to the delay that had 
occurred in the publication of the notification in the Gazette of 
Indja, 
2. In order to ensure that the instances of the type referred to 
above do not recur, it is necesS'ary that a close watch ~is kept on 
publication ·of notifications in the Gazette of India from the date 
it is sent to the Press till it is published. For this purpose a 
register should be maintained in the form annexed, in each Branch 
of this Department. The register should be reviewed by the 
Section Officer on the first working day of every week for ex-
34 

.. 
• 
pedit~ng publication of the · notitlcations sent to the Press. This 
register s})all be put up by. the Section Officer concerned once a month 
to the Branch Officer illld once a quarter to the Group Officer 
for~perusal with a note indicating the action taken in respect of each 
case. ~. ! • 
3. I~ addition, the following proced11re should also be followed:_,.,. 
.(i) not more than one notification should be sent under the 
cover ~f a letter to the Government of India Press for 
publication; . 
(ii) the notifications should be sent by Registered A.D. post 
or by hand. In the latter case an <acknowledgement should 
be obtained from the Press; 
(iii) for a notification sent to the Press for publication in the 
ordinary issue of Garette of India, the Press should be 
reminded demi-officially if no intimation is received from 
it within fifteen days about publication of the notification. 
If the Press· does not respond to thls, it should be con­
tacted personally within the next fortnight; In addition. 
demi-official reminders should continue to be issued till 
the notification is published. 
The notifications sent for publication in the_ extra-ordinary 
issUe of Gazette are required to be published on the same 
date. As such, the Press should be ·contacted personally 
if the printed copies of the s<ame are . not received latest 
within a week. 
4. All the Sections are requested to follow these instructions 
scrupulously. 
All Officers 
All Sections. 
S.No. Number 
and date 
oft he 
notification 
Sdj-
s. P. GANGUL"i· 
Director (Admn.) 
REGISTER OF NOTJF1CATIQNS, 
Particulars Date on 
of the . which 
notifi- ' sent to 
cation · the Govt. 
3 . 
of India 
Press ' 
4 
Reference 
No. and· 
date of 
the letter . 
under .which 
'. it was"seil:t. 
5 
the Gaz: 
et,te of · 
fndia 
GSR/SO Page No. 
No. • of the Gaz· 
·. ette at · f 
which pub· 
Hshed · 
7 

36 
~~~ 
;j, .I -i 
(i) DELAY IN MAKING OF RULES AND REGULATIONS, 
· · CENSUS ACT, l948. . . . . 
58. The recommendation of th~ Committee on Subordinate Legis­
lation on .the aspect of delay in making of rules and regulations 
contained hi pliril~r~ph 5tr af itS Tenth'··· Repcii«; 'Wa8 brouglit to the 
notice' of all tne'Miirl'stnes/Departments' of Government of India 
with the request to intimate' the SE!Cretar.iat _whether there were any 
Central Acts under which rules and regulations viere required to be 
made but were not made and if so; the names of such Acts and the 
reasons for w~ich rules and regulations had not been made. 
59. The Ministry of H01ne Affairs in th~ir communication dated 
the 16th June, · 1982 ex:PUHned ·the· position· in the fonQwing terms 
with' regard to making··o'f'ru1~s Uhder· the proVisions of 'the census 
Act, 1948':~ . . . . 
" .... the Office of the 11;e~istrar General. & Census Commis­
sioner of India· adrriit~isters two Central Aets, namely (i) 
. Census A:ct, i~~. and. (ii) Regis~r~t.ion of l,Jirths & Deaths 
Act', 19G9~ While rules under the. la.t-ter Act· are being 
framed and noti:&ed .~Y· the ~tate· Governments concerned 
uti~ tH~ geneni\!~~i~anc~ antl''shpervfs;on 6~ tills office, 
no ftlle'S Jiaw !~t be~ff~etflUntlWr lfie Census Act 1948. 
Itwtt'!ftelt 'that 1 tHl!''A~ r~Ul±e~· athehd,ments. I~ fact, 
fhe anierldinelits ettvi.S"ageti' \ \voiiid mean fairly com-
. plete revision of· the Act. The drliff of the' ~nVisaged Bill 
is under active'·eonsidetitiori. hi consultati6h with the M:in­
istry of Law. It was felt that the rules relating to the 
Census Act, should be formulated after the amendments 
of the Act have been finalised. It is hoped to introduce 
this Bill later this year and, therefore, it would stiJl seem 
appropriate not to initiate framing of rules till the final 
deCision is taken on introduction of the ;am for revision 
of the Census Act and await its enactment." 
60, At Us meeting held on the 17th November, 1982 the Commit~ 
tee oo.nsidered· the')reply' Or ~he' Mfurstcy of Home Atfairs and noted 
the assurance of· the· MinistrY'· tliat · the amenrunent of ·the· ·Census 
Aet, 19Uw:W·t.bbe &.naJiSed: andaD. wasam~diitg 'Bm for the·ptat-
pos.e waS w be introduc~ .SO()n. bt Parliament; · 
\ ,, :' . ,·, ·" . 
61. dn an ~nquiry De.ing made regarding the time likely to be 
taken by Gover.nment to introduce· the proposed amending Bill in 
Padiameni, the Ministry of Horne Afairs. (Office of the Registrar 

37 
General of India) vide their O.M. dated the 3~$t January, 1963 stated 
as follows : ... 
" .... ~ . and to say that tlits dftlc~ · requests · the f-avour of your 
dropping df. thilfa~ntfe' in vi~w of the fact t,hat the 
Aniertd1ftg. ~f~l, ftsitlf il und~tgOJJ!$' · tnajor': dtarigei ~nd it 
\\tin :e~e-YqUi~:ion'f~'tim~'.befor~·it '~Qn· be introduced. ill 
th~·:P~nanieh~." · .· · · . ' 
The Comihittee, hav-mg considered the . comments given by the 
Ministry, does not agree to drop the assurance. The Committee ex­
presses its elSft~rn tliat it was only on a reference made to·the Minis­
try of Home Affairs m regard to the delay ·in making of rules and 
regtilationa under the Central Acts, that that Ministry 'conveyed to 
thl\1' ·Cdtrtrnittee the reasons for the delay. in making rules and regula-· 
titfiis 'tirtder lhe ·census Act, 1948. · The Committee holds that the 
Ministry suo moto should have taken an action on the rule making 
process under the Act. The Committee observes that the Ministry 
do not seem to be aware of the recommendations made by the Com­
mittee in regard to the making of rules and regulations required to 
be made under an Act of Parliament. The Committee wishes to 
draw the att~ntion of the Ministry to the following reco~mendations 
Of the Committee in this beha:U:- · 
"In order that such long and inordinate delays do not take 
place in future, the C'ommittee recommend that rules and 
regulations required to be made under a statute should be 
made as soon as possible but in no case later than six 
months from the date on *hich · . the statute . comes into 
force." 
[Para 48of the .9th Report] 

39 
rules under the Air (Prev~ntion and.Contr~l of Pollution) Act.,\1981. 
Department's request is reproduced· .below:-
" ..... that the Rulesrequired to he notified under the provi-
. ~ions of the Air (Prevention & Control of Pollution) Act, 
l981 hav~ already been drafted and vetted by Ministry of 
Law,. Justice. arid Company Affairs. Since the provisi~ns 
reg~rding· the payment or allowances to the non-official 
members who may be participating in the meeting of the 
Central Board. for the Prevention & Control of Water 
Pollution require the concurrence of the Department of 
Personnel and Administrative Reforms and the draft 
Rules have been referred to that Department. In case the 
Department of Personnel proposes any amendments in 
the said rules the same· would be got vetted again·· frorn 
the Ministry of Law, Justice and Company Affairs and 
notified. 
2. Since the process explained above is likely to ta~e time, it 
is requested that extension of time for a further period 
upto 15-11-1982 may kindly. be granted for notifying the 
Rules. 
3. This has the approval of the Deputy Minister of Environ­
ment." 
66. Atits meeting held onthe 17th November, 1982, the Com-
• mittee considered the requests of the Department of Environment 
and decided .to hear the Secretary. in that Department in order to 
explahi the reasons for which the rules under the Air (Prevention 
and Control of Pollution) Act, 1981 had not yet been framed in spite 
of repeated ·reminders and despite the fact that the period of exten­
SIOn asked for bythe Dei>artmemt i.e. upto the 15th November, 1982 
was over. The Committee tlt''its' · meeting·held on the ·13th Decem­
·b~_r, 1982 heard the Secretary in the Department.' of Environment.' 
67. During the course of deposition before the Committee,· the 
Secretary informed that the rules had been sent to the Press on 
the 18th November, 1982. for publication andr>the same were expected 
to be published shortly. He apologised for inotdinat.e delay in mak­
ing rules. He·, however, added that: the Air Pollution: Board was 
transferred from the Department of·ScienC.e & Technology to the 
Depart~ent of Environment sometime in January; t982, After the 
tr~nsfer, it took some time ~or them to organise. themselves. The 

40 
dd~y in making'rules was Qn aceount of settlement of emoluments 
tfu! the consultancy. The Ministry l;iad a Httle id~a .·about charging 
the emoluments by the co~sult~nts: 'Ad:ordiri.g to Water Polhttion 
}lules the· amount of consultancy was wit)lin the range of Rs. 50·­
Rs. 75. .. W,ith that amount, it was not possil>l~. for 'tf!.e pepartment 
tti ~~t good. consultant~.· The Department qeciqed to raise the con­
cuttancy charges ®lis. 2QOj- but the Finance ¥hiistry dk.l not agree 
In '.July, the Department took a qedsion ~ith regarq to notifying 
tpe rtiles without prejudice to the cbailge. in emoluments subse· 
quently. For doing that,· the ~epartment was to take the concur­
ranee of the Ministry of Finance, :pepartinent of J:l.ernonnel & Ad­
ministrative Reforms and ·the Ministry of La.w. The Department 
of Personnel took about two months and the Law Ministry asked 
for clarifications three times. The Secretary was very sorry for the 
lapse on their part for delay. 
The. Secretary was told that besides owning the responsibility 
for the lapse the Committee was not given due respeet as it appeared 
from the communications received _by the Committee from the De­
partment in that behalf. The process of det!idmg the emol·uments 
had withheld the enforcement of the Acf Beeause the rules could 
not be framed in time. When the Secretary stated that "the moment 
we came to know it was a fight over trivial issue sometime in July, 
we decided ... ", the Chairman intervened that it was rat)ler strange 
that the Secretary r.ealised that the issue wa·s trivfa] after several 
months and even then the issue had not been settled. The Secretary 
admitted that that could not be settled. rhe Secretary was told that 
l:ly delay in framing rules an impression had' been created on the 
Committee that •the whole subject of environment was a frght. witl; 
th~ vested in~rests and that millions of cltizeris unfortunately got 
affected 'as a result of that. The Secretary accepted the fauit. 
. ~· fhe {Jommtttee ex,.Presses its anguJ,sh over inordinafie delay ) 
in irlakJng rides 'by· th,e D~r,tment of tuvironment lintler the Air 
(Jtmrention . and ~on trot . ot Ponuiion> Aet, tMt . whteh came· into 
tJi.ee on 'the l6th ~y 198i .. ·n~ rules shOU14 have be4'!tt.framed 
wifliiu' a .,enoci of ~ months after the enforcement of the Aet. The 
Conunittee strongly feels tha.t the DfipartDtent Slio111ci h:tve · been 
~ ' ' . ',' :- ' '- t- . "_ - -~ ·';. - •"-.. ' ' 
more prompt and vigilant In framing rill~ on a matter of such a 
vital public importance since tbe !Poilutibn atiects a.n 6ver-Whelnting· 
popula.ti,&n· of the 'countl'y~ The fl'amliig of ''rules ShoulW. ba.ve not 
beell d.eliyett ·on· a. potnt whtcli could hli'Ve Been· setilM Ia.ter on after 
enforcement· of the rules. Tlte t~mmitteY(Jit)p'es ttilltftie Depart-
1\lent o.t En\!irbnment lilll not ie.,eat s1feh la~ in blture. · · 
:New riiu:~1; · ' , BHAI MAnA VIR 
March 11, 1983 Chairman, 
Committee on Subordinate Legislation. 

. : ' ~ 
"·------·-"-_.;;;;=== 
MINUTES 

MINUTES OF THE MEETINGS OF THE COMMITTEE ON 
SUBORDINATE LEGISLATION 
II 
SECOND MEETING 
The Committee met at 11.00 A.M. on Friday, the 11th June, Hl82. 
MEMBERS PRESENT 
1. Dr. Bhai Mahavir-Chairman 
2. Shri T. Basheer 
3. Shri Nand Kishore Bhatt 
4. Shri G. C. Bhattacharya 
5. Shri Dipen Ghosh 
6. Shri B. D. Khobragade 
7. Shri Ram Niwas Mirdha 
8. Shri Sushil Chand Mohurtta 
9. Shri Ghanshyambhai Oza 
lO.·Shri Santosh Kumar Sahu 
11. Shri Ng. Tompok Singll 
12. Shri Shanti Tyagi. 
SECRET.!\RIAT 
Shri K.. Dayal, Chief Legislative Committee Officer. 
2. The Committee considered and took decisions on the following 
memoranda;..,.._ 
(i) to (v) ., * * * 
to matters not induded in .. ' 
Report. 
'• '43 

44 
(vi) MEMORANDUM NO. 6.-The Air (Preventiocn and Control of 
Pollution) Act, 1981 (No. 14 of 1981)-making of Rules under the 
The Committee considered the request of the Department of 
'Envircmment for extension of time upto the 15th August, 1982, for 
making rules .under the Air (Prevention and Control of• Pollution) 
Act, 1981 (No. 14 of 1981) and agreed to grant the time asked ior. 
3. 'The Committee then considered its future programme of sit­
'tings and decided to hold its next series of meetings on the :10th 
June, and 1st July, 1982. 
4. The Committee then adjourned at 12.40 P.lVI. 
IV 
FOURTH MEETING 
Tr'e Committee met at 11.00 A.M. on Thursday, the 1st J•uly, 1982 . 
.. 
MEMBERS PRESENT 
1. Dr. Bhai Mahavir-Chairman 
2. Shri T. Basheer 
3. Shri G. C. Bhattacharya 
4. Shri A:marprosad Chakraborty 
5. Shri B. D. Khopragade 
6. Shri Ram Niwas Mirdha 
7. Shri Sushil Chand Mohunta 
8. Shri Ghanshyambhai Oza 
9. Shri Ng. Tompok Singh 
10. Shri Shanti Tyagi. 
SECRETARIAT 
Shri K. Dayal, Chief Legislative Committ_ee Officer. 
Shl.'i B. R. Goel, Senior Legislative Committee Oftker. 
2. The Committee considered and took decisions on the follow­
ing memoranda. 
(i) MEMORANDUM NO. 8.-The Department of Food, Central 
Government Fruit Jui.ce Plant (GrO'lhp• 'A' (B' and ~'C' P~·sts)· 
Recruitment (Amendment) Rules, 1980 •(G.S.R. 645 of 1900) 
The Commi~te~ con~ider~d : ~fl,~. ~~~o~~Il:qm», .~P~; af.~er, some~. dis-
cussion decided to hear the Secretary· in the M'inistcy . ·of AgtlCUl· . ,) '• . 
ture with a view to seeking certain clarifications in the matter. 

. (ii) to (:vi) ,·. · ·. "' . 
' 3., The Committee then adjourned at 12.40 P~M .. 
VUJ 
EIGHTH ME!ETING 
.. 
The Committee met at 11.00 A.M. on Th'llrsday, the 26th August, 
1982; in . Committee Room 63, First F1oor, Parliament H-ouse, ·New 
Delhi. 
M~BERS PRESENT 
1. Shri Sushi! Chand Mohunta-in the Chair. 
2. Shri G. C. Bhattacharya 
3. Shri Dipen Ghosh 
4. Shri B. D. Khobragade · 
5. Shri G. Swamy Naik 
6. Shri Ghanshyambhai Oza 
7. Shri Santosh Kumar Sahu 
8. Shri N g. Tompok Singh. 
SECRETAR1A'l' 
Shrimati K. K. Chop~a, Additional Secretary. 
2. In the absence of the Chairman, Shri Sushil Ch!:md Mohunta 
:,) was voted · to the Chair. 
3. and 4. *' ·* 
5. SUPPLEMENT TO MEMORANDUM NO, 64 (tl980i81'1-
~ . ' . ' 
Charges levied ~y ,DESU. on ~umers- for repairs~ etc. oj electric 
· "' meters 
The Committee consi•ea the· trin!mdl'mdum ba~r:F :on the reply 
received from the Ministry of Energy. After some discussion the 
Committee deci(\edt9 }Jear Jh~ Secretary in. the Ministry of Energy 
on the su'!;lject af·fts J;ilE!ettng· ~o 'h~ h~d. on the 4th ~tember, ·1982. 
~·· •• '·, >: "'\' ' .• • '·-- • - ' ; ·- • -.--· .-~·- > ~··- ~-.,;,.~~. • ' 
~~-
****Relate to matters not included in· thm :Repert. 

-~ 
The Committee also directed the Secretariat to obtain the. following 
infor:rii:ation from the Ministry:- · · 
.. 
,. , (i) :the procedure prescribed for the refund of Meter testing 
fees as -referred to in clause 23 of the conditions of supply ·framed 
.by DESU; and 
(ii) the number of cases dllring last 3 years (as also the per­
centage of total cases Vv'here the accuracy of Meters was disputed. 
by consumer andfor by DESU) yv-here the testing fee was 
.~un~ . . 
, ':.:6'; ·The 'Committee then adjourned at l1.5U A.M.. to meet at 3.00 
P.M.. on Friday the 3rd September, 1982. 
IX 
NINTH MEE.TING 
The Committee met at 3.00 P.M.. on F.riday, the 3rd September. 
1982 in Committee Room 'A', Ground ·Floor, Pariiament ''Uouse 
Artnexe; New DeihL 
MEM.BE'RS PRESENT 
.b •.. Dr., Bb,ai Mahavir-..Chairman. 
2. Shri Nand Kishore Bhatt . · 
~. ShrL G, ~· Bhattacharya. ,· 
··4. Shri · Amarprosad Chakraborty 
5. Shri B. D. Khobragade 
:6; Shri Ram Niwas Mirdha 
· 7. Shri SushU Chand Mohunta 
8. ~hri G .. Swamy Naik 
9. Shri Ghanshyambhai Oza 
10. Shri Santosh Kumar Sahu 
11. Shri Ng. Tompok Singh 
12. Shri Shanti Tyagi 
13. Dr. Rafiq Zakaria 
WITNESS 
R.epresentatives of the Ministry orf Agriculture (Department of Food) 
Shri B. C. Gangopadhyay, Secretary. 
Shri H.. D, Bansal, Joint Secretary. 
SECRETARIAT 
... · .SP-r.imati .K.. K. Chopra, Additional Secretary. 
· · · ~- Shri B .. R: Goel, Senior Legislative Committee Officer. 
'"'-"_ ........... '!'~- ........... .... -·' -_-··-· ' ' 

... 
47 
2. The. Chairman made a ' reference to . the .. passing .a;w~y of 
Shri G. S. Pathak, former Chairman of the Rajya Sabha, and ex­
.'Pressed prefound. grief and sorrow; He eulogised the. services of 
Shri Pat}):ak to the;nation .. The Committee thereafter observed' two 
minutes silence, all members standing, as a mark' of respect' to the 
memory o~ the deceased. · 
* * * • 
'4. Sfi,PPLEMENT TO MEMORANDUM NO. 8 
The Department of Food, Central Government Fruit Juijce P,lant . 
· (Gro1..1p 'A', 'B' and 'C' Po·sts) Recruitment (Amendment) ,Rulest 
1980 (G.S.R. 645 of 1980) 
The Committee heard the representatives of the Ministry of 
Agriculture. 
A verbatim record ,of the evidence was kept. 
Tile Committee direct the representatives to submit . a note. on 
the chronhlogy of events between the acceptance of the suggestion 
of the Committee and the final reply of the Ministry in which it 
was stated that it would not be of much use to make any amend­
ments to the rules as the J:>lant had since been transferred to the 
Modern Bakeries. 
The Committee deferred its decision in · the matter till the note 
was received from the Ministry. 
5. The Committee then adjourned at 4.46. P.M.; to meet again at 
11.00 A.M. on Saturday, the 4th September, 1982 .. 
X: 
TENTH MEETING 
The Committee met at 11.00 A.M. on Saturd~:J.y; the 4th Septem­
ber, 1982, in Committee Room 63, First Floor, Parliament House,· 
New Delhi. : 
MEMBERS PRESJSNT - l. 
1. Dr. Bhai Mahavir--Chairman 
2. Shri G. C. Bhattacharya 
3. Shri Amarprosad Chakrabotty 

48 
4. Shri Dipen Ghosh 
5. Shri B. D. Khobragade 
6 .. Shri Ram Niwas Mirdha 
7. Shri Sushi! Chand Mohunta 
8. Shri G. Swamy Naik 
9. Shri Ghanshyambhai Oza 
.10 .. Shri Ng. Tompok Singh 
ll. Shri Shanti Tyagi 
12. Dr; Rafiq Zakaria 
WITNESS 
i. 
. I 
Representatives of the Ministry of Energy· (Department of Power) 
Shri T. R. Satish· Chandran, Secretary 
.. ~ ,~ , .. 
Shri P. P. Srivastava, General Manager, DESU 
SHRI T. C. Sanger, Chief Engineer, DESU .· 
Shri Ish Kumar, Director, CEA. 
SECRETARIAT 
Shrimati K K. Chopra, Additional Secretary. 
2. SECOND SUPPLEMENT TO MEMORANDUM NO. 64 
Charge levied by DESU on consumers for repairs, etc. of electric 
-meters. 
The ·Committee heard the representatives of the Ministry of 
Energy (Department of Power). The Committee directed the 
representatives to examine afresh the suggestions made by the 
Committee and to send a re·port within one month. 
A verbatim record of the evidence was kept. 
The Committee deferred further consideration of the memo­
randum till the requisite report was received from the Ministry. 
Th~ Cqrmrlitt~E? t,!l~n adjourn~d at ~~·~0 l?:~~ 

,, :" 
1'.DHiililTEENTH ··MEETING 
The Committee met at 3.00 P.M. on Wednesday, the 17th 
Novembe-r,· 1982 irr Committee Room No. 00, Parliament House, 
New Delhi. 
MEMEERS PRESENT 
l. Dr. Bhai Mahavir-Chairman 
2. Shri Nand Kishore Bhatt 
· .. 3. Shri Dipen Ghosh 
4. Shri . B. D. Khobragade 
5. Sliri Ram Niwas Mirdha 
6. Shri Sushil Chand Mohunta 
7. Shri G. Swamy Naik 
8. Shri Ghanshyambhai Oza 
.9. Shri Ng. Tompok Singh 
10. Shri Shanti Tyagi 
SECRETARIAT ·· 
Shri B. R. Goel, Senior Legislative Committee Officer. 
·-:~ 
2. The Chairman infopmed Members that the Committee· had 
received a letter from the Standing Joint Committee on Regulations 
and other Statutory Instruments of the Canadian Parliament in 
'' which the representatives of the Committee had been invited to 
dttend the Second Commonwealth Conference of Delegated Legis..; 
·lation to be held at Ottawa between the 11th and 15th April, 1983. 
The Committee accepted th~ · invitation. The Commit,tee then 
decided to approach the Hon'bl~ Chairman, · Rajya Sabha and 
authorised the Chairman to approach the Hon'ble Chairman for 
seeking his permission for attending the Conference .and also to 
decide the number of representatives who would be attending the 
. conferenCe. 
3. and 4. . '. • • 
5. The Cori:t:n'!:ittee con~i'der~d the question Of iiving extension of 
time to the Mfrli:rtriesjDepatt:men'ts for ~ldt1g rttles/regulations 
etc. under vario·us statutes, on their requests fr€lm various Ministries. 
'included in ·Report. 

50 
~ter s9me discussion, the Committee a1.1thorised the Chairman 
~ consider such requests and give e~ten,sion of time for such period" 
as he ·.may .consider necessaJ;y in each such case. 
6. The Committee, thereafter, considered and took decision on the 
following memoranda:-
MEMORANDUM NO. 19 
(i) p~lay in m.aking of Rules and RegulatiDns under ·the Census 
Act, 1948; 
The Committee considered the above memorandum and noted 
the assuran,c~ of rthe M~nistry of Home Affairs :that the amendment 
of the Census . .A,ct, 19•8 was to be f1nalised and .. an. Amendment 
Bill. for the purpose was to be introduced soon. 
(ii) * * * * 
. MEMORANDUM NO. 21 
(iii) The Mornopolies and. Restricti:v>e Trade Practkes Commis­
siQn, Office of Regi.strar, Rf?strictive Trade Agll"eements (Officers 
and .Staff) Recruitment Amendment R'ules, 1980 (G. S. R. 582 
of 1~·) 
Th~ Committee considered the above memorandum and noted the 
procedure adopted by the Ministry of Law with a view to avoiding 
'delay in publication of notifications in the Gazette. 
MEMORANDUM NO; 22 
(iv) ··The Tapioca. Sago Grading andi Marking Rules, 1980 (S.O. 2578 
. ·ot· '1980) .; : 
The Committee considered the above memoranf;lum and in view 
of the position explained in the. Office ¥emorandum dated the 27th 
January, 1982, received from the Ministry of Rural Development, 
decided not to punsue the matter. · · 
"' * "' 
MEMORANDUM NO. 24 
(vi) The Air (Preve'ntion and. Control of Potliution) Act, 1981 
(No. 14 of 1981)--=making of rules under-:. 
The. Committee considered the above memorandum and decided 
to hear the Secretary in the Department of Environment to expa.ain 
**""*Relates to matter not includ~d in this Report. 

.. 
·51 
the reasons for which the Air (Preyention and Control of Po~bition) 
Act, 1981 had not been .. framed so far in, ·spite of repeated reminders 
and despite the fact· .that the period of eX:teri.sion li'sked for ·l)y the 
Deptt. i.e. upto the 15th November, 1982,. w~s. oy~r. 
• ' - ,. ' - ~-· f ' • ' 
MEMORANDUM NO. 25 
(vii) DeLay in. mak:ing rules and re.gulat'iOtns under the provis·ion.~ of 
(i) The Prevention o:f Corruption Act, 1947; and (ii) The, Depart­
mental Inquiri,es (&j01rcement Of Attendance of Witne;;ses and 
P'fO!Wuct>i'on. of, P~um:ents). A~t, 1972 
The ·Committee, after some· discussion, decided to postpone con-· 
sideration.of the above memorandum to its next meeting tobe held 
on the 18th November, 1962 . 
. (viii) to (x) * * * * 
6. The Committee thereafter considered its future programme of 
sittings and decided to held its next series of meetings on thi:! 2nd 
and 3rd December, 1982. · 
7. The C'ommittee then adjourned at 4.35 ·P. M. to meet again at.· 
11.00 A. M. on the 18th November, 1982 
. XVII 
SEVENTEENTH ··lVIEtETlNG 
The Committee met at 3.00P .. M. on Monday, the 13th December, 
1900 ·in Committee Room 'A', Ground Floor,. Parliament trouse 
Annexe, New Delhi. 
· ·MEMBERS' •PREsENT 
1. 'Dr. B,li.aiMahavir...;.;Chairmoo 
2. 8Pri Nand Kishore Bhatt \ 
3. Shri G. C. · Bhattacharya 
4. Shri Amarprosad Chaki:aborty 
9~ Slu!i, Dlpen .. Ghosh ... · 
·6. Shri B~ .D. 'Khobragade 
7, S~i Sushil Cha.nd.Mohunta 
,8. Shli G. Slwamy Nalk 
****Relates to matters· not 1ncluded in this Report. 

52 
9', Shr~ O~an~hyClmbhai Oza 
10. Sh,fi S~nto~h Kumar Sahu 
11. Shri Ng. Tompok Singh 
12. SP,ri Sh9nti Tyagl 
13. Dr. Rafiq Zakaria 
WITNESSES 
R.eprest?ntatives of the Department of Environment 
(i) Dr. T. N. Khoshoo, Secretary 
(ii) Shri Brij Kishore, Director 
SECRETARIAT 
Shrimati K. K. Chopra, Add;tional Secr'etary 
Shri K. Dayal, Chief Legislative Committee Officer 
* * * 
3. SUPPLEMEN'l' TO MEMORANDUM NO. 24 
Making of Rules unde1· th(? Ai·r (Prevention and Control of Pollution) 
· · Act, 1981 
The Committee. thereafter took up the above memorandum for 
cons'deration and heard the representatives of the Department of 
Environment in the matter. 
A verbatim reco~d !Jlf the evidence was kept. 
4. The Committee then adjourned at 4.30 P. M. to meet again at 
11.00 A. M. on Tuesday, the 14th December, 19·82 
XVIII 
EIGHTEENTH MEETING 
The Committee met at 11.00 A. M. ori Tuesday, the 14th Decem­
ber, 1982, in Committee Room 'A', Ground Floor, Parliament House 
Annexe, New Delhi. 
MEMBERS PRESENT 
1. Dr. Bhai Mahavir-Chairman 
2. Shri Nand Kishore Bhatt 
-··----------- --~ -·------·-·----
****Relates· to matter not induded in this Report. 

3. Shri G. C. Bhattacharya 
4. Shri Amarprosad· Chakraborty 
5. Shri Dipen Ghosh 
6. Shri B. D. Khobragade 
7. Shri G. Swamy Naik 
8. Shri Ghanshyambhai Oza, 
9. Shri Santosh Kumar Sahu 
10. Shri ~. 'Ibmpok; Sjngh 
11. Shri Shanti Tyagi 
12. Dr. Rafiq Zakaria 
* * * 
SECRETARIAT 
.Shrimati K. K. Chopra, Additional Secretary 
2 to 4 * * 
5 .. SECOND SUPPLEMENT TO :M;EMORANDUM NO. 64 
Charges levied by DESU on consumers for repairs etd. of electric. 
meters 
The Committee took up the above memorandum for considera­
tion. 
The Committee noted. the comments of the DESU. 
6. * * * 0 
7. The Committee then considered its future programme of sit~ 
tings. and decided to meet on the l<lth and 11th January, 1003. 
8. The· COmmittee then adjourned at 1.30 P. M. 
XXI 
TWENTY ~FIRST MEETING 
The Committee met at 3.00 P.M .. on Monday, the loth January, 
1983, in Committee Room 'A', Ground Floor Parliament Hou•se An~ 
nexe, New Delhi. 
MEMBERS PBssmT 
1. Dr. Bhai Mahavir-Chairm~n 
2. Shri T. Basheer 
3. Shri Nand Kishore Bhatt 
**"'*Relates· to mat.~:~; n€lt ·ineluded in this Report. 

54 
4, Shri B. D. Khobragade 
5. Shri Ram Niwas Mirdha 
6. Shri Sushi! Chand Moh•unta 
7. Shri G. Swamy Naik 
3. Shri Ghanshyambhai Oza 
9~ Shri Santosh Kumar Sahu 
10. Shri Ng. Tompok Singh 
11. Dr. Rafiq Zakaria 
* 
SECRETARIAT . 
* 
Shri K. Dayal, Chief Legislative Committee Officer . 
. 2; The Chairman informed members that the Chairman, Rajya 
Sabha had decided that the Chairman of the Committee would re­
present the Committee at the proposed Second Conference of the 
Committees on Delegated Legislation to be held at Ottawa in 
April, 19&3. 
3. * * 
;4: The Coll}tnittee .tb.en ·adjourned at 4.30 P.M. to ·meet again at 
11.00 A.M. on Tuesday, the lith January, 1983. 
----'"""'' 
XXII 
TWENTY-SECOND MEETING 
The Committee met at 11.00 A.M. on Tuesday, the 11th January, "\ 
1983, in Committee Room 'A', Gro~nd Floor, Parliament House 
Annexe, New Delhi. . • 
MEMBERS PRESENT 
1. D·r. B-hai Mahavir-Chairman :" 
2. Shri Nand Kishore !_3hatt 
3. Shri B. D. Khobragade 
4. Shri Ram Niwas Mirdha ·' 
5. Shri G .. Swamy Naik 
6. Shri Ghanshyambhai Oza 
****Relates to matter not included in this Rep(,rt. 

55 
7. Shri Santosh Kumar Sahu 
8. Shri N g. Tompok Singh. 
"' ' 
SECRETARIAT. 
Shri B. R. Goel, Senior Legjs!ative Committee Officer. 
2'"and 3 * * 
4. MEMORANDUM NO. 31 
Reserve Bank :oJ India Act, 1934-Reserve Bank of India (Note Re­
fund) Iittles, 1975. 
The Committee considered the above memorandum .. The Com­
mittee noted the comments offered by the. Reserve Bank of -India 
on the subject and decided not to pursue the matter . 
. . 5. MEMORANDUM NO. 32 
The Directorate of Coordination (Pollice Wiretess) Class IV posts 
Rec;ruitment (Amendment) R:zL~e~ 1980 (G . .S.R. 380 of '!1980) 
The Committee considered thl\ above memorandum and. noted 
the reply Qf the Dmector~te of Coordination (Police Wirel~ss) on 
the m.1hj'ect. · · · 
6. MEMORANDUM NO. 33 
The Directorate of Extension (ViStar NW.eshalaya) Superinten,dent 
(Accounts} Recrwitment (Amendment) · Rule·s; 1980 (G.S.R. 1029 
of 1980 
The . Committe,e eonsidered the above memorandum; . ' 
The. Committee noted the comments of the Directorate of Ex­
tension (Vistar Nideshalaya) on the subject and decided not to fur­
ther pursue the matter. 
7 * • 
8. The Committee then considered its futl,lre programme of 
sittings and decided to meet on the 27th and 2'8th January, 1983, in 
the forenoon, on both the days. 
9. The Committee then adjot,irned at1 12.4l) P.M. · to meet again 
at 11.00 .1\.M. on Thursday, the 217th Jat\uary, 1983. · 
' ' 
****Relates tO matter nat inCluded in thi-s RePort. 

56 
XXV 
TWENTY-FIFTH MEETING 
Th~ Commit~ee met at 3.?0 P.M. on Monday, the 7th February, 
1983, m Committee Room; A', Ground Floor, Parliament House 
Annexe, New Delhi. 
MEMBEitS PRESENT 
1. Dr. Bhai Mahavir---'Chairman 
2. Shri T. Basheer 
3. Shri Nand Kishore Bhatt 
4. Shri G. C. Bhatta·charya 
5. Shri Dipen Ghosh 
6. Shri G. Swamy Naik 
7. Shri Ghanshyambhai Oza 
8. Shri Santosh Kumar Sahu 
9. Shri N g. Tompok Singh 
10. Shri Shanti Tyagi 
11. Dr. Rafiq Zakaria 
. SECRETARIAT 
Shri R. P. Mahajan, Senior Legislative Committee Officer. 
2. Chairman .and members ' of the Committee congratulated 
Shri Ram Niwas Mirdha,a member of the Committee on his appoint­
ment as a member of the Council of Ministers. 
The. Committee placed on record its appreciation of the services 
rendered by Shri K. Dayal, Chief Legislative Committee Officer to 
the Committee. The Committee congratulated Shri B. R. Goel on 
his promotion as Chief Examiner of Questions, who would continue 
to be associated with the Committee. The Chairman introduced to 
the Committee Shri R P. Mahajan, who had on his promotion as 
Senior Legislative Committee Officer, taken the place of Shri Goel. 
3. The Committee considered and took decisions on the following 
memoranda:-
(i) Memorandum No. 36 regarding the Ministry of Finance Depa:rrt­
ment of Economic Afja.irs (Bank Note Press Dewas, Class III Posts) 
Recruitment (2nd/4th Amendment) Rules, 1980 (G.S..R. No. 5691/ffl.l 
of 1980 
The Committee noted that the Ministry of Finance Depa•rtment 
of Economic Affairs (Bank Note Press, Dewas, Class III Posts) Rec-

58 
sEciiETllii'r 
Shri B. R.. Goel, Chief Examiner of questions 
. 2. The Committee conside~ed and took decisions on the following 
memoranda:- · · 
(i) 'II<. 
* * 
(ii) Memo'randum No. 43 regarding Ayurvedic College in Mundka, 
Delhi-Ru~s regarding Mi:gration of Students: :an_d teachers to and fro 
;Tl?-e Committee noted· that the Ministry of Health andFamily 
Welfare had, on a suggestion of the Committee, agreed· to add in the 
rezulations the provision regarding migration of students and 
teachers to and fro the Ayurvedic College in Mundka, Delhi. 
3. The Committee, after some disctlSsion authorised the Chair­
man to invite Secrefaries of various Ministries/Departments to 
appear before him as and. when he considered ·necessary to seek 
clarifications/elucidations, before the matter was placed before the 
Committee for its consideration. ' 
4. The Committee then adjourned at 12.05 P.M. 
xxvu 
TWENTY-SEVENTH MEETING 
The Committee met at 3.00! P.M. on Friday, the 11th March, 
1983, in Committee Room 'A', Ground Floor, Parliament House 
Annexe, New Delhi. 
MEMBIERS PRESENT 
1. Dr. Bhai Mahavir-Chairman 
2. Shri Nand Kishore Bhatt ... i 
3. Shri Dipen Ghosh . . ~ 
4. Shri Sushil Chand Mohunta 
5. Shri G. Swamy Naik 
6. Shri N g. Tompok Singh 
7. Shri Shanti Tyagi. 
--·--.·----------
****Relates to matter not included in thi:s Report. 

S~~IAT 
Shri B. R. Goel, Chief Examiner of Questions. 
Shri It. P. Mahajan, Senior Legislative Committee Officer . 
.. I 2 .. The Committee considered and adopted the draft Fifty-second 
Report with some changes. The Committee decided that the Report 
be . presented to the House sometime in the last week of the current 
session pf the Rajya Sabha. 
3. The Corhmittee authorised the Chairman and in his absence 
Shri Dipen Ghosh, Shri Sushil Chand Mohunta and Shri Shanti 
Tyagi to present the Report to the House. 
4. The Committee thereafter considered its future programme of 
sjttings and decided to hold its next series of meetings on the 6th 
and 7th April, 1983. 
5. The Committee adjourned at 3.55 P.M. 