<a] OF INDIA

RAJYA SABHA

COMMITTEE ON SUBORDINATE
LEGISLATION

FORTY-FOURTH REPORT

(Presented on the 17th December, 1980)

RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI

DECEMBER, 1980j/AGRAHAYANA, 1902 (SAKA)


Para Nos. Paces

‘Geers oF THs Connarrrez ee (iii)

= Esvoduction z मर = ६ 52 oe . ing ड़

जा. The Motor Vehicles (Protective Headgear) Rules,
398० [G.S.R. 261 (8) of 1980] 3 ee के S415

= Regiistion made under the Major Port Trusts Act,
हि | ae a

pees 1516 5-6
TY. Deputationists in the Ministry of Defence .. 17-22 6-10
अर. Irregularitics in Select Lists for Promotions in Armed
Forces Headquarters ‘ 23-25 10-12
VI. The Survey of India (Recruitment from sof
Ergincer Officers) Amendment Rules, 1 R
+486 of 1980) ou 5 26-27 19-14
VII. The Drugs and Cosmetics (First Amendment) Rules,
1980 (G.S.R. 430 of 1980) : Sey 28-30 14-16
VIII. Delay in maki.g Rules and Regulations under the
Central Act . है & कं 31-40. 16-22
(i) Rules/Regulations under the Water (Prevention
and Controlof Pollution) Amendment Act,1978 . 31-33 16-17
(ii) Rules/Regulations under the Delbj Development
4 Act, 1957 ea ee ee ee 34-30. 17-18
> (ii) Rules unger the Haryana and Uttar Pradesh
| (Alteratio > of Boundaries) Act, 1979 sess 37-39 18-19
4 (iv) Rules/Regulations under the Provisions of the
hi Police Act, 1978 = 40-43 19-20
(v) Rulesunder the Press Gouncil Act, 1978 F 44-46 20-22

IX. Implementation of the recommendations of the Com:
mittee . . 47557. 23°27

Grievances of Officers recruited under the DHANI

Civil Service Rules repealed by the Hima chal Pradesh
Adminestrative Service Rules J a * 475 #%-श्व

| Avcexure

(i) Statement regarding Deputationists in the Ministry
of Defence . . oe 29-41

(ii) Statement showing the particulars of deputationists

(who oversta: their normal deputation period)
in under Ministry of Defence. . ve 42-48


c.-. . ।

PARANos. Pacme ।

(iii) Statement showing list of Regulations already
finalised/under consideration under the provisions
of the Delhi Police Act, 1978 7 2 न : हे 49

(iv) 0०79 ग॑ the D.O. letter dated the 26th May, 1980
from the Minister of State in the Ministry of Horne
Affairs : eee ES eae se 5०5४

(९) Statement indicating the names of officers who figured
in Shri K.N. Dhulap’s letter and who could not
be appointed in the initial constitution of the Delhi
and Himachal Pradesh GivilSernce . «+ 3 53

(vi) Copy of Government of Himachal Pradesh Noti-
fication No. 8-176/71-DP (Apptt. I) dated the
Chay ee अब कारें Si 54

(vii) Copy of Government of Himachal Prad sh Noti-
fication No. Karmika (A-I)-8(7)-2/79, dated the

andJune,1980. .  - 55
4 APPENDIX
List of representatives who appeared be‘ore the
Committee दर = sae ; १६ 56

5. Minutes or THE MretINcS OF THE Commarrree . . +: 59°75



RANos. Pans

53

55

59°75

_. COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE
(1980-81)

CHAIRMAN
1. Shri Narasingha Prasad Nanda
MEMBERS
2. Shri B. N. Banerjee
3. Shri Murlidhar Chandrakant Bhandare
4. Shrimati Pratima Bose
5. Shri Ramakrishna Hegde
*6, Shri Khurshed Alam Khan
7. Shri Bhagatram Manhar
8 Shri Jagdish Prasad Mathur
9, Shri Narsingh Narain Pandey
10 Shri Ram Bhagat Paswan
11, Shri Rajendra Singh Ishwar Singh
12 Shrimati Rajinder Kaur
13 Shri Rameshwar Singh q
14 Shri Syed Shahedullah ql
15 Dr. Rafiq Zakaria. |

SECRETARIAT

Shri Sudarshan Agarwal, Additional Secretary,
Shri K. Dayal, Chief Legislative Committee Officer.
Shri B. R. Goel, Senior Legislative Committee Officer.

*Resigned tom. oe membership of the Committee with effect
from the 23rd October, 1980.

(४)


RANos. Pans

53

55

59°75

_. COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE
(1980-81)

CHAIRMAN
1. Shri Narasingha Prasad Nanda
MEMBERS
2. Shri B. N. Banerjee
3. Shri Murlidhar Chandrakant Bhandare
4. Shrimati Pratima Bose
5. Shri Ramakrishna Hegde
*6, Shri Khurshed Alam Khan
7. Shri Bhagatram Manhar
8 Shri Jagdish Prasad Mathur
9, Shri Narsingh Narain Pandey
10 Shri Ram Bhagat Paswan
11, Shri Rajendra Singh Ishwar Singh
12 Shrimati Rajinder Kaur
13 Shri Rameshwar Singh q
14 Shri Syed Shahedullah ql
15 Dr. Rafiq Zakaria. |

SECRETARIAT

Shri Sudarshan Agarwal, Additional Secretary,
Shri K. Dayal, Chief Legislative Committee Officer.
Shri B. R. Goel, Senior Legislative Committee Officer.

*Resigned tom. oe membership of the Committee with effect
from the 23rd October, 1980.

(४)


RANos. Pans

53

55

59°75

_. COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE
(1980-81)

CHAIRMAN
1. Shri Narasingha Prasad Nanda
MEMBERS
2. Shri B. N. Banerjee
3. Shri Murlidhar Chandrakant Bhandare
4. Shrimati Pratima Bose
5. Shri Ramakrishna Hegde
*6, Shri Khurshed Alam Khan
7. Shri Bhagatram Manhar
8 Shri Jagdish Prasad Mathur
9, Shri Narsingh Narain Pandey
10 Shri Ram Bhagat Paswan
11, Shri Rajendra Singh Ishwar Singh
12 Shrimati Rajinder Kaur
13 Shri Rameshwar Singh q
14 Shri Syed Shahedullah ql
15 Dr. Rafiq Zakaria. |

SECRETARIAT

Shri Sudarshan Agarwal, Additional Secretary,
Shri K. Dayal, Chief Legislative Committee Officer.
Shri B. R. Goel, Senior Legislative Committee Officer.

*Resigned tom. oe membership of the Committee with effect
from the 23rd October, 1980.

(४)


Ea
As far as this Ministry is aware, certain rules/directions
have been issued by the State Governments of U. P., Karnataka,
Maharashtra, Mizoram and the Union Territories of Delhi and
Chandigarh so as to require compulsory wearing of crash hel-
mets by the drivers and in certain cases by the pillion riders also.

As indicated above Parliament has passed the legislation to
require the drivers as well as the pillion riders to wear crash
helmets. The question of appointment of any Committee or
body for the purpose therefore does not arise. Further, in this
context the furnishing of justification for making such manda-
tory requirement by this Ministry does not arise. It is well
known that the measure is for protection against likely head in-
jury if any accident occurs. This is a road safety measure. The
number of accidents involving only the scooters and pillion
riders for the last three years are not readily available.

In this regard, it may further be stated that a Committee on
Road safety was appointed by the Government, which submitted
its report to Government in 1972. The Committee had recom-
mended that in a majority of cases, the drivers/riders of the two
wheeled vehicles die as a result of head injuries. The Com-
mittee had recommended eventually amendment of the Act to
make it compulsory for the drivers/riders to wear crash helmets

(Para 90 of Chapter 8 of the Report). After considering the re-
commendations, the Act was amended by Parliament.

Section 85A of the Motor Vehicles Act, 1939, as inserted in
1977 also enables the Central Government to provide for such
exceptions as it may think fit by the rules to be framed by it.
The provisions of the Act inserted in 1977 and the rules notified
vide GSR No. 261(E) of 1980, are to become effective w.e.f 1st
November, 1980.

Representations had been received from the Shiromini
Gurudwara Parbandhak Committee, Amritsar as well as its
Delhi Unit urging upon the Government to exempt Sikh ladies
also from wearing crash helmets as it was against their religious
feelings A deputation of Sikh leaders including Shri Tohra,
President SGPC and Shri Talwandi, President Akali Dal had
met the former Minister of State (Shri Chand Ram) on 17-5-
1973. It wes explained to them that it was a safety measure
@nd the Sikh ledies in their own interest could also wear crash
helmets. However, they imsisied upon the exemption on the
ground that such a course would be against their religious tenets.



&
As they continued to insist upon this, the then Minister for
Shipping and Transport decided that the Sikh ladies may be
given exemption under the rules io be framed by the Central
Government. Accordingly, the Sikh ladies have been given
exemption under the rules notified by the Government. These
rules, have, however, been finalised after getting it approved
from the present Minister for Shipping and Transport.
This issues with the appiuval of Joint Secretary (T).”
9. On a question being asked whether there was any proposal to
exempt all women and children below 12 from the operation of the
rules, the Ministry simply stated that they had no proposal under
consideration to exempt all pillion riders from the mandatory require-
ment of wearing a helmet.

10. At its sitting held on the 9th October, 1980, the Committee
again considered the rules in the light of the comments furnished by
the Ministry and desired to be informed about the provision under
which male Sikhs had been exempted from the requirement of
wearing crash helmets and the practice obtaining in the U.K. in
relation to such Sikhs. The Commttee also decided to hear the
representatives of the Ministries of Shipping and Transport and Law
on the point.

वा. The Ministry sent the following information in compliance
with the Committee’s above direction:—
(i) The provision under which male Sikhs stand exempted from
wearing crash helmets while driving scooters, etc.

First proviso to Section 85(A) inserted by Act No. 27 of
1977 provides for exemption of male Sikhs from wearing crash
helmets while driving or riding on ‘the motor-cycle, in a publie
place, wearing a turban. This is to be brought into force wie
effect from 1st November, 1980 vide Notification No. TGM-
78-I dated 14th May, 1980.

(ii) Practice obtaining in the U.K. in this regard

While the precise details as of today are not available, it had
earlier in 1977 been brought to our notice that Sikhs wearing
turbans are exempted from wearing of crash helmets while
riding two-wheeler motor vehicles. It would however be rele-
vant to mention that due to climatic conditions the two-wheelers
scooters are not much in vogue in the U.K.

12. The Committee at its sitting held on the 21st October, 1980,

heard the representatives of the Ministries of Shipping and Trans-
port (Transport Wing) and Law (Department of Legal Affairs).



=|

13. The Committee initially took objection to the provision made
in rules exempting Sikh women from the operation of section 85A
of the Motor Vehicles Act, 1939. The representatives of the Ministry
of Shipping and Transport explained that that provision was being
made on the analogy of the exemption granted under the Act to male
Sikhs. They also informed the Committee that the exemption from

putting on protective headgear was proposed to be extended to all
women and children below the age of 12 years.

14..The Committee is not in favour of exemption being given from
the requirement of section 85A so liberally, particularly, in view of
the fact that that requirement is inteneded as a safety measure. The
Committee, therefore, fels that Government should keep in view
that aspect before considering grant of any exemption and also care-
fully consider the validity of such exemptions in the light of the pro~
visions contained in articles 14, 15 and 16 of the Constitution,

प्रा

REGULATIONS MADE UNDER THE MAJOR PORT TRUSTS
ACT, 1963

15. Sections 28, 123, 124, 126 and 132 of the Major Port Trusts
Act, 1963, deal with making and publication of regulations under the

Act.

A reading of the above mentioned provisions makes it clear that
the initial regulations, relating to the service conditions and other
matters of the employees and for the efficient and proper adminis-
‘tration of a major port are required to be made by the Central Gov-
ernment and published in the Gazette of India. Subsequent amend-
ments to such regulations are made by the Board of Trustees of the
concerned port and published only in ‘the Official Gazette of the
State in which that port is situated. Consequently, amendments
made to regulations by ‘the Board of Trustees, though approved by

the Central Government, escape the scrutiny of the Committee on
Subordinate Legislation.

The regulations made under the authority of a Board could be
brought within the purview of the Committee if a provision was
incorporated in the Act making laying of every regulation made
under the Act before each House of Parliament, obligatory.

16. The Committee considered the matter at its meeting held on
the 11th November, 1980, with a view to bringing the regulations



6

i. the authority of a Board within its purview. The Com-
mittee directs that a provision should be incorporated in the Major

- Port Trusts Act, 1963, to the effect that every regulation made under
the Act, as Soon as may be afer it is made, be laid before each House

of Parliament while it is in session. Till such provision
is incorporated in the Act, Government should on its own take the

initiative to lay such regulations on the Table of each House of
Parliament. ie

Iv
DEPUTATIONISTS IN THE MINISTRY OF DEFENCE

17. The Committee, at a meeting held on the 25th July, 1979,
took note of the fact that 88 persons were employed on deputation
in the Ministry of Defence and desired to know from the Ministry

the reasons for retaining those deputationists beyond the normal
tenure of three years.

18. The information furnished in respect of 27 deputationists was
Placed before the Committee at its meeting held on the 22nd Decem-
ber, 1979. Subsequently, the Ministry furnished in two parts parti-
culars of 39 more officers (List of 66 deputationists as received from

. the Ministry are annexed as Annexure 1) and clarified the position

in the matter as under: —

“On receipt of Ministry of Home Affairs (Department of
Personnel and Administrative a 0.0. No. CSC-14017/1|
78-RR dated 6-2-1978, the concerned organisations/authorities in
the Ministry of Defence were requested to furnish the informa-
tion pertaining to deputationists—ex cartre posts (Group A & 8
Officers). On receipt, this information was forwarded to the
Department of Personnel and AR in original (Without retaining
office copy at this end) as it was required by that Department
on immediate basis. On this account, this Ministry is not
aware as to how the Department of Personnel and AR calculated
that there were 88 officers on deputation covering periods of
more than 3 years.

On receipt of Rajya Sabha Secretariat Office Memorandum
dated 3rd August, 1979, the concerned organisations/authorities
in this Ministry were asked to furnish the required information
called for by the Rajya Sabha Secretariat pertaining to reasons
for retaining a large number of deputationists beyond the meriod



el
lajor
der

se

E

the
of

7

of 3 years, as well as the information which was furnished by
them with reference to Department of Personnel and AR. Office
Memorandum of 6-2-1978, cited above. By calculating this in-
formation (sent to Department of Personnel & AR), it was ob-
served that this Ministry had forwarded information to the De-
partment of Personnel & AR in respect of 100 deputationists.
Out of this figure 64 deputationists seem to be covered for
period more than 3 years and the remaining 36 for periods less
than 3 years.

Information containing reasons for retaining officers on de-
putation beyond a period of 3 years in regard to 25 officers (com-
plete information was in respect of 25 officers instead of 27
officers) was furnished to the Rajya Sabha Secretariat under this
Ministry’s Office Memorandum dated 3-12-1979. The said informa-
tion in respect of 12 more officers was forwarded to the Rajya
Sabha Secretariat on 1-3-1980 vide Office Memorandum of even
number.

The required information in respect of remaining 27 officers
is forwarded here with for the consideration of the Committee
on Subordinate Legislation of Rajya Sabha. The information
which is being sent herewith vide Sl. Nos. 1 to 21 need the fol-
lowing clarification: —

The information furnished to Department of Personnel &
A.R. was based on incorrect interpretation by the lower forma-
‘tions, under the control of D (Appts) of this Ministry, of the
‘Department of Personnel & AR Office Memorandum No. CSC
14017|1|78-RR dated 6-2-1978. It is considered that the intention
behind eliciting the said information was to ascertain the number
of officers from lower formations including outside Departments|
Ministries on deputation to this Ministry proper and Public Sec-
tor Undertakings|autonomous or corporate bodies under its
administrative control. The information submitted by the lower
formations as would be evident from the attached statements
(Sl. Nos. 1 to 21), includes names of officers under Ministry of
Defence on deputation to outside Organisations|Ministries, which
perhaps, was not the intention. It is felt that this information
may not be entirely correct due to defective interpretation. The
correct. information can, however, be obtained afresh, if desired,
provided reasonable time is given for this purpose.”

19. At its meeting held on the 9th April, 1980 the Committee con-
sidered the reasons given by the Ministry of Defence for retention of
the deputationists beyond the normal terms of 3 years. As the Com-



3
f mittee was not convinced of the justification given :
for the retention of the officers it decided to hear दर
the Ministry to seek further clarification in the ter

20. The Committee, at its meeting held on the 4th Ja
heard the Tepresentatives of the Ministry of Defence =i
the reasons for retaining 66 deputationists beyond the nom:
Of three years. The Committee directed them to ्
months the information in respect of remaining deput:
to examine the aspect of absorbing the deputationists in &
or reverting them to their parent offices and also whet
Possible for them to have their own personnel in Place of *

tationists,

The Ministry furnished a statement containing inforn
Annexure II),

21, The comments of the Ministry on various points
the course of evidence were as under: —

“(i) Retention of a large number of deputationists

The officers have been taken on deputation keepi:

the exigensies of work/non-availability of suitable car

the post within the organisation, shortage of officers b

{ cialised qualification and technical background with
f experience/expertise, to avoid dislocation of work, in p

rest, with the approval of the competent authority, in 5
circumstances,

(ii) Policy with regard to deputation

The policy with regard to deputationists is to retain them for
a period permissible in accordance) with recruitment rules.
Wherever the retention of the incumbent in considered necessary
in public interest, extensions are granted with the approval of
the competent authority and in consultation with the parent
cadre authority. Further, the idea behind having officers on
deputation is that it provides the organisation an opportunity to
utilise the experiences/expertise in certain specialised fields. In
the lower formations of the Ministry, the ex-cadre posts like
Accounts Officers, are required to be filled by transfer on deputa-
tion of officers holding analogous posts in the Indian Audit and
Acounts Department, as per recruitment rules. The officers are
selected after calling nominations from the concerned Depart-
ments and observing all formalities.


S|
€&) Formation of own cadre to avoid dependence on deputation
In so far as the Ministry of Defence Sectt, is concerned, it
35 Rot possible always to have our own cadre for all the Posts.
For certain jobs, officers with special background and experience
are required. As for example, in case of Project Managers in
the Department of Defence Supplies, Officers with Service
background are required and they have to be necessarily taken
from the Army/Navy/Air Force,

In the lower formations of th
filled in by deputation whic
direct recruitment etc.
fore, it is not feasible ६

e Ministry, only those Posts are
h cannot be manned by romotion|
These posts are isolated ones, and there-
‘© evolve a cadre structure therefor.

In the Department of ‘Defence Production, to a certain extent
the Ordnance Factories/Heavy Vehicles Factory have built their
own cadres and their dependence on deputationists has been con-

siderably reduced and will further go down to an insignificant
level,

In the Research & Dev:

elopment Department, Accounts Cadre
has already been formed.

(iv) Retention of Accounts Officers on deputation for long periods

The deputation period in respect of Accounts Officers had to
be extended, only in few cases, beyond the normal permissible

period, in public interest, with the approval of the competent
authority,

{v) Recruitment procedure for selection on deputation

The normal procedure for recruitment on deputation is by
circulating the vacancy and calling for the service records from
the Departments from where the recruitment is done. Selection
is made out of the names made available by the concerned De-
artments, after taking into account qualification, performance,
experience, etc. with the approval of the competent authority.

* * * *

{vii) Necessity for retaining the deputationists

The cases of the deputationists have been reviewed and it is
considered that the deputation in all cases was necessary because
of the shortages/non-availability of suitable officers with the
cadre, The deputationists have been generally officers with spe-
cialised qualification and experience in various fields and their
retention on deputation was essential in public interest.



Io

In view of the above, it will be seen that the retention of the
officers in question on deputation beyond their normal deputa-
tion period was essential keeping in view the specialised quali-
fication and experience/expertise required for the post. However,
it will be ensured that in future as far as possible the officers
taken on deputation do not remain beyond their normal reputa-
tion period.

There has been a little delay in furnishing the requisite in-
formation for consideration by the Committee as promised, since
Ministry of Defence have been extremely busy with the Parlia-
mentary business during the current Budget session and the
meeting of the Consultative Committee for the Ministry of De-
fence held recently under the Chairmanship of the Prime Minis-
ter. Inconvenience caused is regretted.”

22, At its meeting held on the 23rd September, 1980, the Com-
mittee considered the comments of the Ministry in support of taking
deputationists and retaining some of them beyond the normal term.
The Committee accepts the explanation of the Ministry with the
hope that they will abide by he assurance given to the Committee
and also scrupulously follow the guidelines issued in this behalf so
as not to extend the term of deputationists as a rule,

v

IRREGULARITIES IN SELECT LISTS FOR PROMOTIONS IN
ARMED FORCES HEADQUARTERS

23, The Ministry of Defence were asked to explain the reasons for
delay in publishing the Select Lists for promotion to various grades
of the Armed Forces Headquarters Civil Service.

24. The Ministry explained the reasons for the delay as under: —

“AFHQ Civil Service has four grades, viz., Selection Grade
(Joint Director or Senior Civilian Staff Officer), Civilian Staff
Officer, Assistant Civilian Staff Officer and Assistant. Promotion
to the grades of Selection Grade, Civilian Staff Officer and Assis-
tant Civilian Staff Officer are made in accordance with provisions
made in this regard in the AFHQ Civil Service Rules, 1968 (Third
Schedule) and AFHQ Civil Service (Promotion to Selection
Grade) Regulations, 1975 and AFHQ Civil Service (Promotion to
CSO and ACSO) Regulations, 1968. The regulations ibid provide
that select lists of Assistants, Assistant Civilian Staff Officers
and Civilian Staff Officers for promotion to the grades of ACSO,

———

ini



IL

The select lists are prepared taking into account the vacancies
expected during the period Ist October of a year to 30th Sep-
tember of the following year, The Select list of UDCs
Promotion to the grade of Assistant is also prepared once a year
when the earlier select list is exhausted.

The position about preparation and announcement of select
lists for Promotion to various Srades of the service is explained
in the Succeeding para; there has been delay in the preparation
and issue of the select lists for promotion to the'grades of Civilian

Staff Officer and Assistant Civilian Staff Officer as indicated
thererin,

Select list for promotion to Selection Grade

The select list of Civilian Staff Officer for Promotion to Selec-
tion Grade against the vacancies expected during the period
1-10-1978 to 30-9-1979 was exhausted in August, 1979. A Proposal

during the period 1-10-1979 to 30-9-1980 was submitted to the
UPSC on 17-8-1979, A meeting of the Selection Board was held
in the UPSC jn November, 1979 and the select list was published
on 17-12-1979, This select list was exhausted on 1-3-1980. It fell
short of 6 officers due to the reasons that 3 officers included in
the select list retired before vacancies became available for their

retirnig in July/August, 1980, A proposal for preparation of a sup-
plementary select list of CSOs for promotion to 2 lection Grade
was submitted to UPCS on 14-2-1980. The UPCS has intimated
that a meeting of the Selection Board will be held on 147-1980

Select list for promotion to Civilian Staff Officer

The select list for Promotion to the grade of Civilian Staff
Officer to cater for vacancies expected during the period 1-10-1978
to 30-9-1979 was exhausted in October, 1979, Anticipating this, a
Proposal for preparation of a fresh select list was submitted to
UPSC on 14-9-1979, Meetings of the Selection Board were held
in UPSC during February, 1980 and candidates were interviewed
during March, 1980. The select list was published on 31-3-1980.



iE

There was delay in the Preparation ot this select list as
adequate number of eligible Assistant Civilian Staff Officers were
not available for consideration for promotion and the condition

of minimum service for eligibility had to be relaxed in con-
sultation with the UPSC.

Select list for promotion to the grade of Assistant Civilian Staff
Officers

The select list for promotion to the grade of Assistant Civi-
lian Staff Officer for the vacancies expected during the period
1-10-1978 to 30-9-1979 was exhausted in September, 1979. Meet-
ings of the Departmental Promotion Committee were held in

January-February, 1980 and the select list was published on
31-3-1980.

Delay in this case was due to representations from certain
categories of Assistants who were not eligible for consideration
for promotion under the rules as they stood, against the publi-
cation of the list without their being considered for inclusion
in it by appropriate amendments to the rules, Pending a deci-
sion, a provisional select list to cater for vacancies upto 30-6-1980
was published on 31-3-1980 but its operation has been stayed in
view of representations of AFHQ Civilian Associations that the
select list involves supersession in a large number of cases.

The matter is under consideration and a decision is expected
shortly.

Select list for promotion to the grade of Assistant

The select list for promotion to the grade of Assistant for
the period 1978-1979 was exhausted in August, 1979. Meetings
of the Departmental Promotion Committee to prepare a fresh
select list were held in October, 1979 and the select list was
published on 7-11-1979.

25. The Committee at its meeting held on the 23rd September,

1980, considered the comments of the Ministry. The Committee,

while accepting their explanation, observes that the Ministry should

make, as far as possible, a correct estimate of probable vacancies so

| that adequate number of eligible persons find their place in the
] Select List which are prepared periodically.



Et 3
VI

THE SURVEY OF INDIA (RECRUITMENT FROM CORPS OF
ENGINEER OFFICERS) AMENDMENT RULES, 1980 (G.S.R. 486
OF 1980)

26. The above mentioned amending rules had substituted the
Annexure to rule 7 of the Survey of India (Recruitment from Corps

seales prescribed under the Central Civil Services (Revised Pay)
Rules, 1973, which came into force on Ist January, 1973. These
amending rules had also been given retrospective effect from that
date. It was felt that there had been inordinate delay in substitut-
ing the Annexure to rule 5 of the Survey of India (Recruitment
trom Corps of Engineer Officers) Rules, 1950. The matter was,
accordingly, taken up with the Department of Science and Techno-
logy, who explained the position as under: —

“,..that the action to amend the Annexure to Rule 7 of the
Survey of India (Recruitment from Corps of Engineer Officers)
Rules, 1950 could appropriately be proceeded with after the
revised pay scales for the different grades in the cadre of the
Survey of India Group ‘A’ service had been notified. The final
decision regarding the revised pay scales in Tespect of the posts
of Director and ‘Director (Selection Grade) in the Survey of
India was communicated vide Ministry of Finance O.M. No. F.
42|1|74|10 dated 29-9-1976 In the meantime, the Andhra Pra-
desh High Court, while delivering judgment in Writ Petition
No. 1260/1974, struck down, inter alia rules 5(2), 5(3), 5(5), 7
and 11 of the Survey of India (Recruitment from Corps of Engi-
neer Officers) Rules, 1950. After consulting the Ministry of Law
and after obtaining necessary certificate from the Andhra Pra-
desh High Court, the Government of India filed an appeal
before the Supreme Court of India and also obtained stay in
the case. During the pendency of the appeal before the Sup-
reme Court, the question of revising the Annexure to Rule 7 was
Proceeded with in accordance with the advice of the Solicitor
General of India, The matter was first taken up with the
Ministry of Finance on 23-4-1976. As Suggested by that Minis-
try, the proposal was again referred to the Ministry of Finance



os

seconded to the Survey of India. The Ministry of Finance (De-
fence) consulted various formations and their concurrence was
signified to the Ministry of Finance in the third week of April,
1978. This Department was pursuing the matter constantly with
Finance Ministry and their clearance was finally received vide
u.o, 9291|E.111 dated 17-9-1979, The concurrence of the Depart-
ment of Personnel and Administrative Reforms Was obtained on
26-6-1979 in the meantime and a reference was thereafter made

to the U.P.S.C. and the Commission’s concurrence was received
on 31-12-1979,

The Writ Appeal came up for hearing before the Supreme
Court which upheld inter alia the validity of Rule 7 of the Sur-
vey of India (Recruitment from Corps of Engineer Officers)
Rules, 1950 vide its judgment delivered on 21-10-1979, After
getting the draft notification vetted by the Ministry of Law,
Justice and Company Affairs ( Legislative Department) and the
Official Languages Commission for Hindi version, the notification
was issued vide this Departments No. 18 (85) /75-Sur.I dated
22-3-1980 for publication in the Gazette of India.”

27. The Committee after due consideration of the matter finds the
explanation satisfactory and condones the delay,

vit

THE DRUGS AND COSMETICS (FIRST AMENDMENT) RULES,
1980 (G.S.R. 430 OF 1980)

28. The above mentioned amending rules were published in draft
and final forms in the Gazette of India dated the 23rd September,

1978 and the 19th April, 1980, respectively.

29. On being asked to explain the reasons for the inordinate

in the finalisation and publication of the aforesaid rules, the Minis-
try of Health and Family Welfare (Department of Health) stated
as follows: —

“...that the draft rules published in the Gazette of India
on 23-9-78 were made available to public on 7th October, 1978
for comments/suggestions within 90 days. After receipt of
comments/suggestions these were considered and examined, it
was found that the comments received regarding the scale of
sampling of condoms, the distribution of the samples for per-
forming various tests (like water leakage test, air inflation test,



e (De-
ce Was
April,
Hy with
d vide
lepart-
ed on
made
Pceived

ipreme
९ Sur-
cers) 1
After ©
Law,
id the
ation
dated |
1

is the

ES,

aft ह
er,

lay
n is-
ited

of
it
of

15 Bas

determination of tensile strength, elongation at break and ten-
sion set) and sampling plan of different batch sizes were diver-
gent and needed clarifications. Accordingly, it became neces-
sary to consider the comments received on the draft amendment
in a meeting with large scale manufacturers of condoms in the
country as the success of the Family Planning Programme de-
pends to a great extent on the quality of condoms manufactured
in the country.

A meeting could be convened by Drugs Controller (India)
with the representatives of large scale condom manufacturers
and the Director, C.LP.L. (Central Indian Pharmacopia Labo-
ratory) Ghaziabad on the 24th July, 1979 to reconsider the
comments received and necessary changes were made in the
relevant paras of the draft amendment io Schedule R.

After finalisation of the draft amendment, these were refer-
red to Ministry of Law for vetting on 17-8-79. The draft rules
as vetted by the Ministry of Law were received back from
Ministry of Law on 28-9-79 and then sent to the Official Langu-
ages Commission on 4-10-79 for Hindi translation.

As the proposed amendment was a lengthy document and
contained a number of technical words, the Hindi Version of
the draft notification was received from Official Languages
Commision on 6-12-79. The vetted/translated Hindi version of
the draft notification was sent to Drugs Controller (India) on
13-12-79 for verification. The paper after necessary checking was
returned to the Ministry on 22-1-1980.

The final amendment ‘to the Drugs and Cosmetics Rules was
approved by the Minister of State for Health on 15-2-80. As
the notification was lengthy running into 14 pages and as it also
contained technical words/phrases, the fair copies of both
English and Hindi version, it was again got checked by the
technical experts and was sent to the Govt. of India Press on
2-4-80 who published it in the Gazette of India on 19-4-80. Ii will
thus be seen that the delay in finalising the amendment was due
to unavoidable circumstances. The delay which occurred in
issuing final amendment of Drugs and Cosmetics Rules is very
much regretted.”

The Ministry also informed tha: they had since introduced the

following procedure in order to avoid delay in such cases:—

“(1) All finalised amendments are now being issued only
in the Gazette Extraordinary under the name of the Joint
Secretary, which ensures its publication immediately.



Ez

46

(2) Files relating to amendment of Rules will be put up with
a tag indicating that the contents are time bound in nature.

(3) Closer liaison will be maintained with the Official Langu-
ages Commission and reminders will be sent at higher
levels to avoid delay in geiting the Hindi translation,”

lined procedure in order to avoid delay in such cases,

शा

DELAY IN MAKING RULES AND REGULATIONS UNDER THE
CENTRAL ACTS

(i) Rules/Regulations under the Water (Prevention and Control of
Pollution) Amendment Act, 1978

31. The Committee had, at its meeting held on the 9th April,
1980, at the request of the Ministry of Works & Housing, agreed to
grant extension of time upto the 30th June, 1980, for making of
rules/regulations under the Water (Prevention and Control of Pollu-
tion) Act, 1974 as amended by the ‘amending Act of 1978, [Para 31
of the Forty-first Report].

32. The Ministry in a subsequent communication dated the 30th
June, 1980, requested for grant of further extension of time upto
the 30th September, 1980 for the said purpose. The request of the
Ministry is reproduced below:—

“that regulations regarding the service conditions of the
employees of the Central Board for the Prevention and Control
of Water Pollution (Except Medical Reimbursement Regulation)
have since been finalised. The Central Board for the Prevention
and Control of Water Pollution is taking necessary action for
its notification in the Gazette.

A new rule regarding the fee to be accompanied with the
application for consent of the State Board for the Prevention



2
8००७०
angu-
nigher
Dn,”
y the
) for
rugs
atis-
pam-

- ७6 ४; »9- 4७४७ em

HIE

of
il,
f

s

1

7

the Amendment Act, 1978 is being finalised in consultation with
the concerned Departments.

In view of the circumstances explained above, it is likely
to take some more time before regulations are published and
the quantum of ‘he fee is determined. It is requested that the
Committee on Subordinate Legislation may kindly grant further
extension of time upto 30th September, 1980 for finalising the
rules/regulations in question,”

At its sitting held on the 11th Sepiember, 1980, the Committee
acceded to the above request of the Ministry.

In yet another communication dated the 25th September, 1980
(worded exactly on lines similar to the earlier one) the Ministry
of Works and Housing requested for the third time for grant of
further extension of time upto the 30th December, 1980, for finalis-
ing the rules/regulations in question.

33. The Committee accedes to the request of the Ministry for
extension of time upio the 30th December, 1980, for finalising the
rules/regulations under the Water (Prevention and Control of Pol-
lution) Amendment Act, 1978. The Committee, however, desires
that the Ministry should finalise the rules/regulations within the
extended time as no further extension will be granted in this regard.

(ii) Rules/regulations under the Delhi Development Act, 1957

34. The Committee at its meeting held on the 22nd May, 1989,
noted the assurance given by the representatives of the Ministry
of Works and Housing during the course of their evidence that the
process of rule-making on some matters enumerated under the Delhi
Development Act would be finalised within the next three and a
half months’ time. [Para 30 of the Forty-first Report].

35. The Ministry of Works and Housing in their communication
daied the 3rd September, 1980, requested the Committee for grant
of extension of time upio the 5th November, 1980, for finalising the
tules. The request of the Ministry is reproduced below:—

“...that the Committee on Subordinate Legislation, in its
meeting held on 22-5-80, allowed three and a half months’ time
to ‘this Ministry to frame the remaining four sets of rules under
the Delhi Development Act, 1957. This Ministry has already
finalised the rules on the following two subjects which are being
sent for publication in the gazette: —

(i) Rules under section 56(2) (dd)—Stages of development of
a feature of a zone.



le

= Gi) Rules under section 56(2)(jjj)—Factors determining levy
of betterment charges outside development areas.

Draft rules under section 56(2) (mm) viz., ‘procedure for
borrowing money by way of loans’ are under discussion with
the Ministry of Law and we hope to finalise them soon.

It is, however, likely to take a couple of monihs more to
finalise the rules under section 56(2) (j) viz. ‘manner of dealing
with Nazul lands after development’ as, because of the scope
of these rules, detailed discussions had to be made wiih the
Delhi Administration and D.D.A. It is, therefore, requested that
extension of time may kindly be granted for two months ie.
upto 5-11-80 for finalising the rules on this subject.”

36. The Committee accedes to the request, of the Ministry of
Works and Housing for extension of time upto the 5th November,
1980, for finalising rules under the Delhi Development Act, 1957, with
the hope that the Ministry will complete the process of rule-making
within the extended time.

(iii) Rules under the Haryana and Uttar Pradesh (Alteration of
Boundaries) Act, 1979

37. At its meeting held on the 9th April, 1980, the Committee
had acceded to the request of he Ministry of Home Affairs for exten-
sion of time upto the 30th June, 1980, for making rules under the
Haryana and Uttar Pradesh (Alteration of Boundaries) : 1979.
[Para 33 of the Forty-first Report].

38, The Ministry, in their communication dated the 8th Septem-
ber, 1980, requested for further extension of time upto the end of

December, 1980, for the said purpose. The request of the Ministry
is as follows:—

“...The progress in regard to the completion of prelimi-
nary action as detailed in the said Office Memorandum was
reviewed from time to time. At a meeting held in this Ministry
in June, 1980 with revenue officers of both the State Govern-
ments, it was explained by the representatives of the Govern-
ment of Uttar Pradesh that they could not devote adequate
attention to this matter mainly because of their preoccupation
with elections to the State Assembly. It was emphasised on
the representatives of both the State Governments that the
survey work for the demarcation of the remaining stretch of the
inter-State boundary should be completed during the next field
season in September/October and that Survey of India should



eB
Complete preparation ang su
ermments. An indication
tion to bring the operative
3st December, 1980 Was al:
State Governments.

pply maps to the two State Gov-
of the Central Government’s inten-
provisions of the law into force from
so given to the representatives of the

In view of the fact that
only after the preliminary
is completed, it would be

the rules can be brought into force
action, as required under the law,

necessary to seek approval of the
Committee on Subordinate Legislation for further extension of

time for the framing of rules under the said Act upto the end
of December, 1980. It is accordingly requesied that the requi-
site approval may kindly be obtained 2nd communicated to this

} Ministry.
of
r, The request in Paragraph 3 for extension of time for fram-
h I ing of rules has been made with the approval of Minister of
तय |। State in the Ministry of Home Affairs.”

39. At its meeting held on the 2:

f | mittee considered the circumstances
3 making of rules unde rthe Haryana and Uttar Pradesh (Alteration
of Boundaries) Act, 1979. The Committee, while agreeing to the
| request of the Mintstry of Home Affairs for extension of time upto
the end of December, 1980, desires that the Ministry should not
_ delay the matter any further.

‘3rd September, 1980, the Com-
that led to further delay in the

(iv) Rules/Regulations under the provisions of the Delhi Police Act,
1978

40. At its meeting held on the 8th May, 1980,
while acceding to the request of the Ministry of H
grant of extension of time upto the 30th September, 1980, for making

Rules!Regulations under the provisions of the Delhi Police Act, 1978,
had observed as follows:—

the Committee,

a

“The Committee expressed its disa
making of rules and directed that
ensure that the rules are framed w

pproval over the delay in
the Ministry should be told to
ithin the extended time limit.”
[Para 43 of the Forty-first Report]

The above observation w

as conveyed to the Ministry on the 2ist
May, 1980.

Tt w:
such a ri
for

‘as for the second time that the Committee had acceded to
equest from the Ministry. Earlier, the Ministry had requested
and been granted extension of time upto the 31st March, 1980,



41. The Ministry of Home Affairs in their communication dated:
the 6th October, 1980, the relevant portion of which is reproduceé
below, requested for another extension of time upto the 3151 Decem-
ber, 1980:--. :

“that the Delhi Administration have stated that they have
been able to finalise 8 Regulations and the remaining 6 are under
process (list enclosed) (Annexure III) which they hope to
finalise very shortly. Besides, they have also to draft more rules
under the Delhi Police Act, 1978 and also the Delhi Police.
Manual, which is quite voluminous. The existing Punjab Police
Rules Manual which is to be replaced by the Delhi Police Manual,
in three volumes which run into several hundred pages. Since
this is likely to take Some more time, it is requested that the
approval of the Committee on Subordinate Legislation for
further extension of time-limit till the 31st December, 1980, may
kindly be obtained and communicated to this Ministry. The
Rules/Regulations already framed will be laid on the Table of
the House, during the next session of Parliament.

This issues with the approval of Minister of State (H).”

42. The Committee at its meeting held on the 22nd October, 1980,
considered the request of the Ministry of Home Affairs for further
extension of time upto the 395 December, 1980, for ihe making of
some of the rules/fégulations under the provisions of the Delhi Police
Act, 1978.

(43. The Committee is unhappy over the delay in the making of
these rules and reluctantly agrees to give extension upto that date
as the last extension. The Committee desires that the Ministry should
inform it of the position in this‘ regard early in January, 1981.

(v) Rules under the Press Council Act, 1978
44, Section 25 of the Press Council Act, 1978, empowers the Cen
tral Government to make rules to carry out the purposes of the Act.
Sub-section (2) of section 25 of the Act details the matters which
may be provided for in ‘the rules made by the Central Government.

45. The Ministry of Information and Broadcasting forwarded @
copy each of the following Rules and stated that finalisation of draft
rules governing Budget and Accounts as enumerated in clauses (h)
and (i) of sub-section (2) of section 25 of the Press Council Act.
1978, would take some more time and, therefore, requested the Com-
mittee for grant of extension of time upto the 31st December, 1989:—

(i) The Press Council (Procedure for Nomination of Mem-
bers) Rules, 1978; and



2r
(ii) The Press Council Rules, 1979.
The request -of the Ministry is reproduced below:—

“So far two Rules, namely the Press Council (Procedure for
Nomination of Members) Rules, 1978, Press Council Rules, 1979
and the Press Council (Amendment) Rules, 1980 have been
made. The Press Council (Procedure for Nomination of Mem-
bers) Rules, 1978 have been notified in the gazette on 11-11-
1978 and laid on the Table of Rajya Sabha on 23-11-1978. The
Press Council Rules, 1979 have been notified on 17-2-1979 and
laid on the Table of Rajya. Sabha on 28-2-1979. The Press
Council (Procedure for’ Nomination of Members) Rules, 1978
provide for matters mentioned in clauses (a), (b) and (c) of
Sub-section (2) of Section 25 of the Press Council Act, 1978
whereas the Press Council Rules, 1979 provide for matters men-
tioned in clauses (d) (e) (g) and part of (h) of sub-section 2
of Section 25 of ‘the Act, clause (f)° of sub-section (2) of Sec-
tion 25 provides for powers to make rules, on a matter other
than those mentioned in clauses (a) to (e) of sub-section (1)
of Section 15 of the Act i.e. 15(i) (£), which relates to general
powers of the Council for the purpose of Section 15 of the Act,
confers on the Council ‘the ‘same power throughout India as are
vested in a Civil Court while’ trying a suit under the code of
Civil Procedure 1908 in respect of summoning examining on
oath ete. The purpose of clause (f) of Sub-section (1) of Section
15 seems to be with the Council with further powers as may
be necessary to meet any unforeseen’ situation in the future.
Therefore any action to frame rules with regard to this clause
could be taken up only when Press Council approaches the
Government with any specific problem in the matter.

It may be mentioned here that Press Council had come up
with a proposal to amend the Press Council Rules, 1979 by
deleting the bracket and ‘the word India appearing in bracket
after the phrase “Contributory Provident Fund” in Rule 8 of the
Press Council Rules, 1979. The same has been done by the
Press Council (Amendment) Rules, 1980. The Press Council
(Amendment) Rules, 1980, will be laid on the (Table of) Rajya
Sabha during the ensuing winter session.

As regards part of clause (h) and clause (i) of sub-section
(2) of Section 25 regarding Budget & Accounts, it may be stated
that the draft rules have already been made in consultation with
the Press Council. The concurrence/comments of Comptroller
and Auditor General of India are awaited. As the finalisation



हु.

as well as eventual notification of the Press Council (Budget
and Accounts) Rules, may take some more time, the Committee
on Subordinate Legislation (Rajya Sabha) are requested to grant
time upto 31st December, 1980 by which time, it is expected that
the Press Council (Budget & Accounts) Rules, would be framed
and notified.”

46. The Committee accedes to the request of the Ministry for
extension of time upto the 35 December, 1980, for making and
notifying the Press Council (Budget and Accounts) Rules under
Section 25 of the Press Council Ac‘, 1978. The Committee, however,
draws the attention of the Ministry to the following observations
made by it earlier on the aspect of delay in the making of rules:—

“In order that such long and inordinate delays do not take
place in future, the Committee recommend that rules and regu-
lations required to be made under a statute should be made as
soon as possible but in no case later than six months from the
date on which the statute comes into force.”

(Para 48 of the Ninth Report)

“To avoid delays the Ministries could, to start with, frame
broad but clear rules; they need not wait to frame all the rules
on a particular subject in one instalment especially when various
authorities/bodies have to be consulted in the matter. Such
rules could be amended or new rules added subsequently on
the basis of experience. It is recognised that rules should be
as perfect as possible, but this - should not be at the
cost of expedition, The Ministries should also establish the
practice that if rules are not framed within the period of six
months the Secretary or the Head of the Department at the
Secretary‘s level should be informed accordingly who in turn
should by means of a comprehensive note inform the Minister
concerned and obtain his orders thereon. Such a note invariably
refer to the fact whether the particular matter had come within
the knowledge or comment of a Parliamentary Committee or
not. The Committee are persuaded to make this suggestion for
the simple reason that for any non-compliance or excessive
delay in compliance with the provision of a statute the Minister
is answerable to the House. The Committee trust that if such a
course is adopted, the cases of such abnormal delays will definite-
ly lessen.”

[Para 56 of the Tenth Report]



a
Ix
SMPLEMENTATION OF THE जा OF THE
COMMITTEE
GRIEVANCES OF OFFICERS RECRUITED UNDER THE DHANI
CIVIL SERVICE RULES REPEALED BY THE HIMACHAL
PRADESH ADMINISTRATIVE SERVICE RULES

47. The Committee had earlier considered the grievances of the
eficers recruited under the erstwhile Delhi, Himachal Pradesh
Andaman and Nicobar Islands Civil/Police Service Rules (DHANICS
8nd DHANIPS) and made the following observations:—

“The Committee expresses its surprise that the Ministry of
Home Affairs did not move in that direction and the officers
suffered on account of the apathy of the Ministry of Home
Affairs. The Ministry of Home Affairs should have taken initia-
tive by making a provision in the State of Himachal Pradesh
Act, 1970 or in asking Himachal Pradesh Government to put a
saving clause in the Himachal Pradesh Administrative Service
Rules to protect the interests of the Officers,

The Committee fails to understand how the state Govern-
ments of Punjab and Himacha] Pradesh moved in opposite
directions. As reported to the Committee, the Punjab Govern-
ment made its police officers with two or three years service
permanent immediately before their transfer to Himachal Pradesh
as some areas of Punjab were to be merged with Himachal
Pradesh under the Punjab Reorganisation Act, 1966. The
Himachal Pradesh Government on the other hand totally ignored
the interests of their own officers who were working in the
Himachal Pradesh Government fer a number of years and after
attainment og State-hood, the State Government resorted to
direct recruitment under the new rules, ignoring claims of ihe
officers who were already in service. The Himachal Pradesh
Government did make an exception in their notification dated
the 20th June, 1973 in favour of Assistant Engineers (Civil) under
which the Assistant Engineers on ad hoc appointments upto the
27th November, 1972 were appointed on a regular basis subject
to their being found suitable by the Himachal Pradesh Public
Service Commission. Thus, the Himachal Pradesh Government
applied two different yardsticks one favouring the Assistant
Engineers (Civil) and the other ignoring the Civil and Police
Officers governed under DHANI Civil and Police Service Rules,

1965. =
The Committee notes with surprise that although some sub-
stantive vacancies were lying, both in civil and police services



Ez

at the time of enfore
had been workin
were convenientl.

ement of new rules, yet the officers who
8 under the DHANI Civil and Police Services

The Committee is of the
dered advice of the Home Mii
Would have spared these unfo)

view that timely and well consi-
nistry to the State Administration
rtunate officers from their suffering.
The Committee. therefore,

vice Rules of 1961 against di
grade ang promotion to the
ready reached the age of 54
to the LAS. by relaxing thei

should be considered for promotion
ir age limit.”
[Paras 34—37 of the Thirty-Seventh Report]

48. The Minister of State in ‘the Ministry of Home Affairs con-

oth veyed the Ministry’s comments on the aforesaid observations of the

Committee vide hos D.O. letter of the 26th May, 1980 (Annexure IV)
The Committee at its meeting held on the 4th June, 1980, considered
these comments and difected that an enquiry be made from the
Ministry regarding the discrepancy between the number of officers
as stated by them in the Minister’s letter and as mentioned by Shri
K. N. Dhulap in his note dated 19-1-1979 (Annexure V). The Com-
| mittee also desired to fing out whether the Government of Himachal

Pradesh had taken any action on its recommendations made on the

subject concerning the State Government. The Ministry and the
| Himachal Pradesh Government were accordingly addressed in the

matter and their replies are as follows:—

“....that this Ministry is unable to appreciate the alleged

discrepancy referred to in your Office Memorandum. In _ this

Ministry’s letter dated the 26th May, 1980, it haq been stated

that 40 eligible EACs of Hima*hal Pradesh were considered for

j ; inclusion in the initial constitution of Delhi and Himachal Pra-
if desh Civil Service. Out of those 40 officers, 26 officers were
found suit*ble by the Selection Committee for initial appoint-

ment to the service and the remaining 14 officers were not found

Suitable for such appointment. In Shri K. N. Dhulap’s letter,



25

he mentioned about 17 officers, these 17 officers included only
6 of 14 officers who were considered by the Selection Committee
and not found suitable for initial appointment. The remaining
11 officers were not eligible for initial appointment and were
therefore not considered by the Selection Committee. A state-
ment indicating the position of these 17 officers was forwarded
with this Ministry’s letter wherein the position of these officers
was clearly explained.

In view of the circumstances mentioneg above, there is no
discrepancy involved. It is, therefore, requested that the Pposi-
tion may kindly be made clear to the Members of the Committee
on Subordinate Legislation,”

[O.M, dated 21-6-1980 from the Ministry of Home Affairs]

“...that the Himachal Pradesh Government is concerned
with the following two recommendations of Rajya Sabha Com-
mittee on Subordinate Legislation made in its 37th Report: —

(i) To regularise the Select-list Officers of defunct
DHANICS who are still working as such in HPAS; and

(ii) To count continuous service rendered by a member
of the HPAS prior to his appointment to the said service
under rule 15, as a Select List Officer of the defunct
DHANICS for the award of Selection Grade of HPAS.

So far as the first recommendation is concerned, necessary
amendment to this effect has already been made in the HPAS
Rules, 1973 vide this Government Not'fication No. PER (A-I)-B
(15)-2/79 dated the 29th December, 1979 as already intimated to
you in detail vide this Government letter of even number dated
the 8th January, 1980. The cases of all the Select-list Officers
of defunct DHANICS presently officiating in HPAS purely on
temporary basis have already been sent to the H:P. Public Ser-
vice Commission and the Commission has fixed a meeting of
D.P.C. for 18-8-1980 to consider the regularisation of these

* Officers,

As to the second recommendation the position is that the
HPAS/HPPS Rules have been amended to the following extent
as per recommendations of the Rajya Sabha Committee on Sub-
ordinate Legislation, vide this Department Notifications No.
8-176/71-DP (Apptt.) I.dated the 26th May, 1980 and Notification
No. Karmik (A+1)-B (7)-2/79 dated the 2nd June, 1980 (Annexure
VI & VI):— .



26

“Provided that the continuous service rendered by a
member of the HPAS/HPPS prior to his appointment to the
said service under rule 14-15 as a Select List Officer of the
defunct DHANICS/DHANIPS against duty posts of
DHANICS-DHANIPS/HPAS/HPPS/such _ex-cadre posts,

taken into account for determining the length of service
for the award of Selection Grade of the said Service.”

In so far as the release of Selection Grade according to these
amendments, is concerned, it is stated for information that some
direct recruit of HPAS have filed a Civil Suit in the Court of
Chief Judicial Magistrate, Simla challenging the above referred
amendment which is still pending for decision, Simultaneously
they have also put in representations claiming that if the junior
officers according to these amendments become eligible for the
award of selection grade then all the seniors to him shall also
be considered for the award of selection grade. This entire
matter is under examination of this Government.

Regarding other recommendations of the Committee i.e. to
count the service rendereg by these officers as Select List Officers
of defunct DHANICS/EAC etc. for promotion to IAS and to
consider them for promotion to the IAS by relaxing their age
limit, tae H.P. Government is not concerned with these recom-
mendations. These pertain to the Department of Personnel,
Government of India. In case the Government of India, Minis-
= of Home Affairs makes any amendment in the rules or issues
instructions to this Government, their cases can be taken up by
this Government, accordingly.”

[Government of Himachal Pradesh, Department of Personnel (A-I)

O.M. No. 8|171|76-DP (Apptt.) dated the 7th August, 1980].

- 49. The Committee notes that the discrepancy between the num-
ber of Extra Assistant Commissioners, who could not find place in
the initial constitution of the Himachal Pradesh Administrative _
Service, as given by the Minister of State in the Ministry of Home _
Affairs in his letter dated the 26th May, 1980, and as mentioned by
Shri K. N. Dhulap in his note dated the 19th January, 1979, has been
reconciled, हू

50. The Committee also notes that in accordance with its recom-
mendation for the removal of the grievences of the aggrieved officers,
the Himachal Pradesh Government have amended the Himachal
Pradesh Administrative Service/Himachal Pradesh Police Service



27

negligence on the part of the Ministry of Home Affairs. The Com-
mittee reiterates its earlier recommendation that in future the
Ministry of Home Affairs should always take adequate and necessary
measures to sefeguard the interests of the employees.

NARASINGHA PRASAD NANDA
New Det; Chairman,
December 4, 1989. Committee on Subordinate Legislation.



“Aressaoau st uonetoosse. एजाएप्रए05
- SIM PREM गण maoford #िएूए08-00 rofeye ore उप) धर
aay juoUdofosag pue प्फीफत WH “ACE Jo quour ‘WO ‘AG
~ullsse 1uviaoduy ox Buxproy में 94 asneoaq छाए aang
Puoxeq popuaixs u9eq sey uoneindsp Jo porrad aur, sep or 9५८8 aT ‘yBurg xnqiny ‘pop 5

1२४३ ou UT pourErgo ose sum sq Jo
Twaordde oyf, ‘soyvoroy posvojor sem of 'glor
Jo pus ITN sistuonvindsp TTe Jo porsad oy puarxa or
WoIspap [eaueH oyy YIM २०पछ7०००७ UL 84-61-15
हू. "वी 93009%9 sopany sem v&exypedownpy ays
Jo wonwindsp 297 “YONG WIM aAH Jo. Jofiour
pesodoud >प Jo mara uy {195 ICL प्यपक् sITHS93 pook
Bama बणु S919) o1Tqnd ut धर + ordn popuarxa sem
wonvindap Jo potiad ayy ‘azoyatay.t, “s1eak Moy उग्र ८
PowONDUes sem पजपृ५ [29 1ए26०[2५>८ एफ प्जेष्ज्त
Jo font Harpjoy se “oy osnevaq papuarxa sea (stpuour + sivas ५) Wo ka
vAvdypedoyynyy tayg jo uoneindap jo potsad ayy AIfeHtUT GLb §L-6-9 oa ‘edekypedownyy y एपड 7?
x uh £ = ue Be. mu
bid प्र + 5

a 1
4 हर (हार्ड yo saquinyy)

‘ o woay sp01yo “ON

© $96 8 puokoq UoNuDiar Foy HowoyNsf . — dopemndact Jo por ape s0110g 4S

oy) Jo UoNnvUmsaq pue suey

I .
aouafog fe onayy का हू sistuoomdep Supwier powers
Quodoy ay yo gt ydessesed @pta)
व 3YNXANNV

Sa,



30

‘paroprsuoo 8०.१ भू 6८61 ‘19q0190 19 uoHeindap JO
uowsuayxo 10y sed MY *6८-01-18 WO जगा ० InP
SoH, ‘popunxo seas wonerndap jo porrad sty stip 10
OM Up. aso wosrer so gol ay soy ayeudosdde
parapisuoa sem neg Hyg “eEnNa[eD एफ: Auquog
Ve paves 2०७ JAH JO भार) vomrT gf61 UL
Nammsqns ७. placid you pmoo Aoup yeUB pavers 190
ge panues8 sem wonmindsp 1०. पगाएथर wt LE

<popuarxa aq ० pey बस 'व “A BUS
jo uonemndap jo povad oy yons sy पर out
32०० ay. suoswor yeuosiod wpe OV जाए INE
रिध्य बे (A Hyg aveldor oy pawops sem FOUL
Jo T apeary 1204 “py “Ig: ‘weApuNg जे व HHS

spournqo ose
sea gat Jo ferosddy oousttodxo snorsaid sty
O} anp  suonaes yuatitomoord 9peay, २ oUEISTEEY
Spey. 0 aoueysIsse एज 10 ४४७ ay OSE UA}
01ष्पू७ “dS Hug Jo woerndsp Jo WorsUor,

‘swok § puosog
popuarxa sem wor eindap Jo poltod ayy woswas
sysod ays 7०1 प४प३ YIM 49040 aqey sem >>
yep 10. 1ण्णए ज 9 018 2081der ० 29m

ins go soures ayy 92ए7७४००७६ ० एग5११७२7 #eM 190

soupe) AAHL Uf paqiosqe ४७००
‘sajna quouNIndgar UL JOY PopLroy

gous set गत
urge 07 ४०:

se 3४७ TAL
oy Sayyeoroyt,
proud oy put sox0ig Jo otRNaUE 199150 TEUONES
Po TAHT ut paXo[duio sem au omB9q ए०0ए०४० su

पा गए 9 “D.Hugso wonantdap Jo, peed a1 Aen

ayep 07 1L-4-61

(squow 6 ४४४३५ £)
6L-H18 — ५८-फुछा

(syyuour £ sivak $)
6L-S-s1 — EL-01-08

(suour 6 s1v9X £)
glob Hei

‘ssa

(kav arpep 44408
yuoureunay 3० "जता

au

1d

soxpep Ayddng
quowmeuny.[VABN

aoseueyy “AC
“neg “ad 'ए EIS

so Seueyy
sovy ‘a “A BUS

soSwueyy
‘gofiameyn “d *$ BUS

aoCULyy
me MS BUS

aoivuryy
“आपाणु९ 99 HS

्

€



॥

‘sneak S—(Qq) 19947 अ्पृण्ण्णय (१)
S—sowang (०). (gl-o1-16

‘sre.

gl-o1-6¢

(9 Bd) “aa ty (n)
gl-orge #६-६-६1

snortes jo woneyndap Jo porsad op Aptxeuipso Fey) WOR
~euIpioop 7B Buruuejd yo awsoyoncy 24) Ur ysod T
S8¥[D FOF Solna yUoUNMADOA ay UE papraosd Ud0q sey If

1

|
—! स्कृप्णा ge aq त# sisod

| (way) 0159

“poisod sea
ainnsqns e [1p papurxa sem woneyndop so potiod ous,
“SINAHSqns ४ NOY प्यप्‌ ऊअश्युआ ० o[qIssod Jou SUM 17
pur ‘sjuourufisse jueytodun Baproy sem s01yo ayy, 8(-ढ-<

(sre ax +)
#८-ढ1-6

जणु एजग्ग्‌ Buroq
st ammsqns yy , *64-८-96 uo uoneindop jo ४४२६
819० poriod om payajduoo sey uvfereyen “Ay प््पछ

arep ० 9८-८-८८

ता पल]
ur 6८-8-1 10 posesjar 2q10u ए[0०० भूप॒'8८-61-18
ग्रका popuaixa sem mpeumatys, Hyg Jo UoReIndop Jo
porod ayE, “Key 08 posyeuly us9q you sey भप॑त,
AOD WIM AAH Jo sois0ut poodxa ayy aiata
ur Sufdooy gé-zi-18 तरफ Muoqunour SuNsixo uoy
2qp वा Jo uonemndap Jo amu ay) puarxo oF WAY Jo
Teaoidde ox tim pappop sem yt uoyeoroy.T, “ysouojUT
auqnd uy papttayxo ‘axojarayy sem uoNwndep jo
poled oyz, “euedeft 40g sorrquiosse sjusuadur09 Jo
Joquint Jo uoHestuosrpay ay) YIM SurTeop sem soto (siwaX 9)
ay) wonendep 1० anus jo uonoduoo 1० au oy IV 6८-४1. $#८-

9

“aTQUTIEAR sem aanyNsqns
aqqeimns ४ गए pepuarxe sem uoneindap Jo portod oy,

(syuour ०1 ४1४३६ 8)
“juowrusisse उपछाय०वंधाए. ue Burpjoy sem 3२०प्लञ० 2५.

ghage — $-4-61

"भाषप्श्याक & Ja[os ० PUY UT st HONDY ‘opquireAe

M JIMHSqns aqeiMs Ou pue yuUTUsIssE ३ए०)३०१७ा
Burpjoy श्‌ ay se suvaX oon puokaq popuorxo

७००१ १९५ SAPO EAYS 10 एज॥७१०१०० Jo portod ay.L,

ayep oy FL61-L-1
a

‘pataprstioo Suyaq st 6८61 ‘4.9010,
प्रणव Joy ऊ९४३ SIEE “6L-o1-
St OEE “papuayxa svar पं
AOIA uy

10 II uoneindap 18
16 WO amar ण आए
'प९)एव Jo portod 581
TOYO uostery 1० qol 39 104 ae
82... 2020 ०

ssa

tod

ज्फ््छ -urg

ssa

(O%d) ग्गश्ग्पत्‌
40M N's Hyg का

uvuraiog 'मछए
‘qeiddurey “yy yg ot

spBeuryy yy
‘ueferwen “AM एप 71

swoSwueyy “Vs8y
‘wreunays, "थे एप oF

aBeury assy
‘urerueureaqnsejeg “y Uys 6

sofeuvyy “<q
‘ssepoIsHyD "WHYS 9

eae टेक न के"



32

“potiad uonvindsp
poquosaid —oyy puooq paurvjor usoq AR
S1991Yo asarp Jo AoIou Wey ए०२ oq fouoyosanp ‘Avur ay

ssitak F~ 1200 Brig (P)
का $—~(Oda)—29O #णण्ण्णव्‌ Ando ()

aep 03 9८-छ1-$5

fgé-o1-1€ 4८-85

(<>0) Oa sv (७0

Gl--L-18 eh-rtr

६ (9a) oa “Aa sv (0

ssa

dW

“royutys

(aoa) w29WO 8

weld
बजा “DN Bus Ft



|

ssorqut ogqnd ur og6r ‘fount
०२१ seqy 422० at) Jo adsax ur poriod पए०

0g-9-08

suonenuue
(0 VIAINS '3409 UTOIy

pay २४१

jad uonemndap ay, 0g-e-6z
sysauoqur जूवाव 4 0} >प्पप WHOA popusIe

sem aaoyyo ay 10 wadsox uy porad uopeindap ayy, 8८79-07

-og61 ‘oun’ of

oda ३2०० amy yo yadsar ut 9०920. uonmnds|

ayy jo. UoIsIaXa ayy ० aax8u ० (QW [UPC

Souwurg jo AnsIuTAY oy 10% u20q seq yesodosd

Yo spuno® uvaeyueuny onaqedus wo um

है. cum woay popuarxa sem porod uopwindap ULI,

4 wos popuaxa

A uopemndap ayy, GL-S-6

1५ sy श्णण

saotgo 2tf} $B प००४ se posoyos oq IM जशणार BAS

SEE Hg Jo 1ए2ए०7शूवय ७ se paras ०9० op

jod oy parsanbos u20q eq Ajddng Jo 'र्वश्द जप,

docr ayy Aq ayqurreae

‘ou sw uonwindap 10

ar sem aa0qjo ay, 0६-1-05

sysorqqut oyqnd ut ou oF
sem 2010 at) Jo podsox पाए

saoufd sry ur Adding jo
apeur aq pinos ainansqns भूषण!
pouad peuniou जप puodaq pour

suoneindap uo se payean 21 3०0७०. >०पुपु० IP
yons se pire (omupuadeg jo ywounredag) ००पश्था Jo
Anstuyy ogy Jo food sunoooy 30D feNwD out UE
Pophput भू. J20yJO siuNoDay ४०० उणुप०६ 19 1४० ULL,

8८०८-०8 ५८-८-8
6/-(ना क८-(-हा
६६+-०६४ ¥L-S-01
gl-a1-6 SL-e1-01
9८-८६ SL-get
6l-0-gt gl-v-61
gi-g-t Shgtt

(eforg) aa
‘ang 'ह 1० VT 5०

BIO ध्रणा०००ए
‘mares “YU एपछ व
उ२०प0 s1uno90

‘uefa ‘A BS गढ़
‘OVS

‘nndseyQ १३ “SH BUS ०७
‘ow

coomenyqrned ‘AU BIS 6

‘ovo
SMe '9 'घ BUS 87

५0७0
uefeg ekyptn HIS. ८४

|: OVO “3S
&  ‘yseqeag WO BUS

9 s

+

>्ण्भ्म्त
go Ansrarpy पर

ध्यूण्व HY
‘up uy papraoad

ir poutejer sem se pound tone = a0u9jocT

उ००छु० जप yoryat
pouad uopeindap Jo एणषप्श*० 10) डए४०च ‘ondn मध्य

जात yewuou jo — jo Ansar
Andxg jo veg Suruof jo eC

uoneusisog “
pue उ००पु0 oy Jo ourN IS



=t19pIsuod J9PUN. sf उप S14 JO YONe~g -poysod sx
muisowpdos भाप @nUNUCD ©) pamo[e us2q sey
wonvindap ay ‘uondag sunosoy a4 UE 41]0011000,
HUE 03 MATA UII puke Yurs dyeuNpsoqns
afury> oy anq “soueunidpad Ari wyses
Apuanxa Sutopior st omy oy, ५८61 ‘ounp
16 -yam Ound ‘DIA UL उ०)धां0 slundaaV Jo sod SPOIAIDG [eOIPATY
wonwindap ४० प्जण ण०>०व sey एत99 woy, अग्ज्पाु० uy (a, “dp) 7 SOY ए707ए “R1susy sWOpoNG Se
गए anoy sp qsod oy uy omuay print squstuouy) pue
MHL “ge-si-1€ sous sowang/sq Jo wod Suppozy (७, dp ty) ८ Spurr] coujeq ‘feu awiopang fs

9 ह Fy e 1

‘sava 5 90०44 २०घ२०( Jo Eee
“Wy 9tp JopuN uONEY Jo "बाएं zapun uoNe
एक 00 ti2019O" a, “mney oo easy a ‘ube upg oN
# sive goat puosaq uonusiey soy suoseay, “dp /v, ‘dg Jo “ON "१9/,9, "dp Jo “ON” /uonenae8i9 eotiag उजण्य 10 ouuieyy



35

The following two officers were retained on deputation beyond
3 years due to the reasons indicated below: —

26. (a) Shri 7' N. Sitaraman, Accounts Offcer, Defence Electronics
Research Laboratory, Hyderabad.

Shri T. N. Sitaraman was posted to Research and Development
“Organisation on deputation initially for a period of 2 years with
effect from 2nd July, 1971. Subsequently this period was extended upto
4 years, Meanwhile a permanent cadre of Accounts Officer was crea~
ted in Defence Research and Development Organisation and this
officer was being considered for absorption in the cadre. However
‘due to his involvement in a Vigilance case he could not be absorbed
permanently in Defence Research and Development Organisation
and has been reverted back to his parent department w.e.f. 9 Aug. 79.

27. (b) Shri K. S. Narasinha Iyar, Accounts Officer, Gas Turbine
Research Establishment, Bangalore.

He was posted to Defence Research and Development Organisa-
tion on deputation for a period of 2 years w.e.f. 1-5-76. Later on his
deputation was extended for 1 year upto 30 Apr. 79. As the Officer
was due to retire on 30 June 79 his deputation was extended for
another 2 months to avoid an unnecessary expenditure and disloca-
tion of the officer.



‘ogbr-g-9 to pus op sear porad yeuriott
oy 0८617. 720५ Anemos J9Pu
se uopomosd —Bunyeoyyo soy प्याप AY ए०
Juanbosuod paviosar SEM उउ्णपु० 9yp ‘J9AOMOHL
दि xis sesaNy JUsUNyDIy od sue ysod

ysdqeay “ag {feduerey “W'S Hus. L |

290 !pUrH ‘Hedy "WA BYS “9 1 |

ayy toy पग्राष्यण्वंजए Jo poled poquosoxd 941, : 08-89. 1८484
. ssoSunduey
ferogo jo rdoch ayy Jo woREapHuo> Ce: 2 tho
Jopun quasar 3७ 2०००७ TENTID pe EMIS 1
eypeygiey Jo woneurog “vorindsp Jo
potiad’ paquosaad ०५... गर्ग ‘Sf 2xouL. \
Rnepy | owoH/IN  s9sensuvT — Tepgo oo : ated a20ugO IpUNFY “eULTEYS 0ए 5
jor Moot ayy. 44. postteay u99q 185 of 109 a ee feuzeys ‘N's Hus.“
‘aaey sod gsayy Foy ध्शूृण्त quaupmsey Oy. es 3 96००-11 s99tyO फ़्णाप “Ag “WEY ue एप कफ
>छ८-८6०
uo payor sem xa9yjo oy, अंडर
भू uoneindap Jo potied oy “isK{euy, zomg
10 ysod ayy रण sayny yuoUNII A Sy saodsy —- 8८668 £g-9-61 ६६-9-०० ६. ३छपष्ण्ए ज्णु०० “आप dA एप. 8
"6६-८-81 Wo हि
jojo yuored sy 07 एगम्शश seas 409M पा, - 6८-4-81 4८-६1 (ay) s20yo 8णुप्ण्णव्‌ “ey WIN 14७७ “dD 8
‘oun aend
sorddy op १४ pauyurexa oq [HM ‘Aue x ए०७
12० aang jo wonsand ay, (18-६1 ७०
1900. oq [0 WoRINdap Jo poured TeNIUE UT. ee 1g-4-18 bbe (Away) s20yjO 3णुण्ण्ण्‌व ष्य्ग्ग्ए "DH HYS 1
७) (0) (७) @ (1)
BS (ae) . sony we है
WOOT UE
papiroad
“pal ty se pod
pours — uoneaidap
sum Jo0ujo jeuuou pou 18
ar yorum), 10419... Buyujof
poriod uoneindap Jo worstioyxo roy suosvry avin EL 1० भष्द jo ova uuopeudisop yp svotyo oyp Jo atuely
nu


‘gl-F-bs woyy sopnp sty Jo porotar sem pte SL-6-F uroy yoayo प[४ uoHTindep uo UOpYsIULSIO 5142.01 parsod sem ekedypedA “g;quys 'टा

>94-प-1 uo yuounredocy yuored शुप्‌ण paaao’ sum pue SL-S-6 wosy29y9 HIM UOHeINdep UO UONSULTIO sty 07 pysod semjedsuN “| yuyg “11

<pournyqo sem yuourdofasoq pure yostasoy 20UJoq Areyaieag pu sosapy syNuaIIg 2५3०
feaoidde gl-g-18 0 Lé-zi-zr wo tonunar sty sog *Aquo 8८ “Buy 18 uo soup sty Jo padorfas ‘orojoioyy ‘sem भप्‌ 8८ “Bny Of orn oavoy
[eorpour uo paurewiox pue gh cidy 61 wo ज०छताश oy ouMUKOUE oy UE “gl “dy ZI Wo J9pi0 Bansod sty pansst VOD oy, “HEAA 90m JO
tonafdums uo oHEstUsIQ sip so 77० wIy sod ० YEDD. ap porsanbar pey am ‘svat sary Jo Arrdxa ays जग **LL61-Z1-z1 UO pasrdxs परम
$#(61-61-81 form savak goxip jo portad ७ उग्र UoNeIndop uO s120IJ धष्णा०००ए UL se UOHLSMLSIO sty) OF Parsod sem MUETeYDLILAUDA “Y

sgl-11-g 0} gf-zi-1 = wou fe
गुणा शपा 0} uoHendep प० sem 22०० ay. | हु Fons 390035 "Mg 10D V1 6

tog-[-2a tto omdxa [IM pure siead 9 st sony 2
‘naa oy} dod se uoHeIndop jo pojtod oy. ‘ askeuy af owwy a Leys "8

/



38

*Ld-1-o8 st arnt
apjoaep Andxo
अप, “Paya ayy
03 ‘salny aotArag
9 क% gs Se 4
उप ur Surpou

‘uoneindsp uo story, “sBurna
“TAHA Uwseuey Wy २ dd ey tod
“TAH Ut pxptosqe Apuow [euolday ay se ४४ आए ५ stasod (40) “2a
es 0} APY St agoyo —s एज्णुर्ण sey saoujo "अत Jo yey pue se ५/-01-1 एप
aye, ६(-1-05

puokeq uow ayy wry ssye घ्वए०& ४ श1800 51. (AO) ‘22g '*त॒ se

है “qa ‘oSeueyy
-U2}X9 PorUEsZ sem उ>पा० oT, Ll-z1-1€ ०07 Jo aimuay oyT, नाना 99 परत ष्ण्गश्मभ् heen “SL BUS
(1 05830 Aouvse, oy
ysupeBe ploy) या “ePD 39°WO.
09-908 6८94 ६८०६-०६ “od = शाप्तणश०३ “Ig ‘AMIN '5'अ एप5
“simak sony
povoxa गण Ajay! उ०प 918 pue *T 9p 1990
[paso 100 pip suoneyndap a4, 0-9-08 6L-gror blegeit od 0g “ag ‘ovy wreyseU ‘Ca ANS
“2091 2yNtAINg
18८-6-+5 6८-6-५6 ६८-6-9% जद. edioung #फण९७$ “NW UC
“AABN ON) 0F SBUOJaq JoBUOT
ou s20%J0 ay puw ३5३०७ (pp
siovy = ‘PI. —sueIpuy AupsQ) 3२०प्0 Ajddng usu
ow Ul paqiosqe  <puouwuntog, 8८-ह-85 (८-(-9ा $L-b-gt sod oynuaog -wuny [wAeN “MIPEPY 89 एप
(4) (9) (8) (0) (8) @)
‘(porrad poptiorx Re tery : es se
Buypnyour)

uoneiidep uo ureutor ‘say NIoy oy UT * (८

0} भ 32० uloywindsp —_ papraoid se pots.
uo pauteuior uoneindap [tui0u uoneindop

yr ordn aeq Jo Aatdeg Jo ayecy wo Surmoljo अध्द sapey २०५००६

20910
ayp Jo won eusisocy २ aureN

1)


39

‘od

ss1vad G st ysod [oAoy
JO ‘20 9011C ax Jo. aun,
youn Ssavok ©
#[ए० payoqdiuos sey 42ज8० o4,f,

“gd-o1-16 uo 10३ए्रप
Jo MaIA UP pue ysorqUT
! Suysnoyy 7% sAIOMIO

Joy paurmar ४७७ 4>>पु० NLT,

ऋज्म्जणा जाकण्व ण yyrEas

*y80d [259 410,994
AQ Suypjoy Mow

# a9] Jo ayy se
Z1-06 $f 9anitton
aired Andxa 1० aep oy,

“8-४

wonemdap ७० [[ए.. 4705० jo 20० oy],

9८-८-81
Wo [As] 79>ग्गत्‌
अप 9 parwag]a
स्थणु#०्व[>ग
इत ष्थाण्प्रण
“pamor sem OcpyTJo sod
ays, '8८-५-6० st
Aardxa yo भश्ए aut,

"81७३६ st पजुपृथ उठ

anus, ay) गण

~oattqtyoysod जप

Surpjoy — <paveur

caipep ayy =n seM sa0IyO

07 eq payiaasr «= ayy sv LL-z1-08
9080 ay पृजपृ st ampuay jo

Aq paurar sum ३००पु० oy, उजाए 6£-11-1 01dq,  Aatdxayo ayep oy,

ssrwak
sr उगज्गातु Jo isod ap ur

+1g-6-16 st at (5४०

*aotatag styp uy छाए

ayy wou pamor © st ysod Joao]
ISHYo ay YOY “AIC BJo anti Jo

suoneindop Jo uri [2urto oy, t9yRoge-1 iQ Amdeajo ap जप,

ssotigJoCL Jo “WIN
ur (ary) 'जत॒ se
gi-ri-t एफ ‘20g
Jorkq se gh-w 1-16

3७०1 9?

(40) 'गत se ६<-ढ-6

*RUISNOFY 7 S104
Jo "UN Ut 199,
juamdozan acy

ay per] sv 8८-५-०६

9८-9-91 uo Uy
Rac “HC se pue
UV RAC ण्‌ २४
shq se ४८-11

-aogaur0
jocuryy om Ur
roan 8९ gf-F-1

od * (ary) गत teeumy “Mad US

ORTa * (dO) ‘Iq ‘o19qO 'व “WEIS

ORICA * OCR TWD “NMS

“*pueuriop “yuap OR
ह पद “गत vepeunysey 'अ ys

DPT + s0ypang ‘uemyy "8 णप५

on

6



Es

(1)

f ‘od PIs “enonp “CW Hyg 16
“od, dM] ‘wsIyFDA “dD iq oF
H ‘oa MV] 'प्पशए 'ए Iq 61
tsysod-a1p¥o-xo Uy 20119] किक 778 ap.

Fp heen ero 100 xa mag EMBO A aC. at

Uo OU ३1०४ ple suOREsTHRRIO a 4 445

apisino pas 154 575 तप ossajord “eusxes 4३-२4 At

uioi0q — JopuN peosqe Kon ‘ ivan eee

28 HSI eh UN od sossjold “HUN '$'अ Hyg gt

“Wo smut iiv. ” * ‘od * s08sojorg “(eauesdy “Gq एप 91
HPAL CNTY *  ‘sossyoug 'गष्पत्र०9 “a's एपड के

a

apr uo uy *syodoqt

818०६... 9२ rf #2799 [LIPO

Aq pours sum s90tfo oy, 8८01 पएवए wot ¥L01 ‘AON paS 15८61 ‘Aon yb soouog pauy *(‘AID)OS “AL ए था ‘OH yg शा

‘s1wok 6. 4[ए० “०

porojdutoo avy os sey उग्०्पा० ~suvay, २ 3

Su "हा 5 sp ३४0४. [०५० शक ए० name 10 eae es

AOVINICL ४ 4OJ UIOY [ष्प्प्राण्प पा, lag jo Andxo oy, एप गत ४४ (नाना og WeYya ‘OOM एपूए or

न]

soy [8०१०0 soypuny ow

ony jwoeid — Vy ‘0g-f-8 Leones ttesi0 [०१००:)

© UoIstra}Xo avoK gO ‘ysod [३0 4929 yuown oy) ttt

payuvsS wveq sey solo ayy “4 on auppeambs sIjoxtor) 2एल्‍एा३:)

‘sawak # st yorya 10y oanut 2 StOOLJorwod oy -juiof se ६(-1-1

2०8 ‘Aq, 01 enbo st ३००पा० 5९ 09-6-g1 stomnt pure 3०0 1०७०) 4

ap Aq pry aod oy) ous — UorINd9p Uo [Tg ८ -9) Jo 47057 oy, Jory — sw, 9८-६-81 एशाव wou Sof जाए Pag iu

(4) (9) (9) 0) (5) (2)



a

1८-9०
PMO OH ‘ons 1एअष्त oy oF tt

fo wonwsteBi0 ytared sry 01 99173
Hood Sunyeuraid 301 todo शप्‌ ००७,

1 up0q svi
Ronbastior) LL-1-$

‘osodind ayy x05 poxmnbox sea
SD JO Souatiodxa pure sootaros om pire uodvam yawns yHersodu we |० 103
rea OEUUEPIOOD एव poBusus 4 ४४५, OHO a1 ३०

४ fs1e0k & pitokog

© 403 Popuorxa wo9q sey 300प० op Jo poriod us
“Pomlox souls sey Nsva dy एप “spoaryoodsou 09-F-0€ pu ०४-1-18 '>

APU) 10 soup ayy oydn popuajxa” sem घर yeindop jo porod ayy 1, Apa (न

pue 64-11: शत SMO जप, “siuNsedop

STD JO Yom oy itnturoyys ut Suryjnsor वर 995 IaSpng pure yoorne 4

Wye jyBnosg aaky Kop se Tyasn A390 w90q ० sowreuniopind ayy [ 9८-1

19124 वर्ड 300 Jo poriod उपाय

*toneasp
मम ottand ty (026 otto Jo poriod soyrmny 40} worusyor आप 105 Jesodoxy
Heindsp jo awox 9५6 sty porsydutoo  ofy (4० ण्ण्पु1, apIQOWONY घन
SOHO aqermejo Aroned 1ण|्कए ngs वसा NOL OAEY SOO OM Jo ४7५०७ OBL, oLeite

“He94 vanp jo पणछगृवाए०० aiopq gl-r1-9¢ wo Pads जय 9३८-०-61

जज

d00dvd ‘ous *

$V 1s

(syDH 4090)
ys

(S¥UH 40900

Ge

AOOVA seg aA एपड़ fe

PEAY

pieuepy “Xq ‘ony "yg uyg fs

peienyy

BEAN
Sow meqoyy "Nays

oe



“ASHI जप MY GL-zr-01 *]'०५४ siseq
Ae[NSar प०, poarosq? tq '1२४३७०प्‌ suY
OBO ILL '१$गणु o1yqud ur Wor Jopls:
*Hoo Ueteytoeniny pue onoyyedwAs ७०
गाल ग otATY पाठ p2pIOIXD ४४४५. 32००
> ayy Jo yodsar ut popiod uopendop ays,

“Ay oymmee juayadw09
Jo [waoudde ayy yr ysoray ONgnd ur
जया; 0} जप) WOJy popuarxa SLM —J09YJO
ayn yo yodsaa up potwd uonemdep oy,

6L61-21-6 8461-ढ1-6 4461-ढ1-ग

8८61-9561 £L61-¥-08 VL61-S-1 simoooy “uefa A Lys 1

उ्णरच्प२3०३५ २००२ुमत Jo 4उमष्णाए -y

s ¢ &

se9k 8 puokaq

WoRwD}21 Joy YoRWoyNsnl/suoseoy,

eindop uo pautreuos

ध्ज्ण्स्‌

(porsad popu) UNIO
>> Surpnyouy) voy ur Poptsoad sv polio
‘voryemdop pruuou woryeindap -bolfo oy) ONG
Jo vorwusisoq २ oweyy IS

पृणुपृश गा ayeqy

Jo kuidxa Jo oye wo SuntHof jo awe

souafice fo Casiuayg या apunjuy (popsnd wayopndrp [०७०२० potoys 42१७ ०0०) sys;uoyomdep fo suoyropuang 2] Surnays pwowepoys:

(soday ap 1० 0% ydeaSesed spi)
गा a¥AXaNNV



*Goyeouoyy pu 3७०६ Yano}
pitokoq souemoyye uoneindop ques 0)

छ- 88४. Rayner bo oqqem
४०11६ ayqnd oyy ur papuayx> 1201 धरणा०9०ए
atp Jo won eindop jo 19४०4 our, gl61-9-L ‘Auemseuvaeien «~, yg

+0961-9-08 uo
WWoWMaL sop जाए sem ay soms प्या प्‌ qam
“SIP 01 100 ¥e Os ‘uoHwDpIsUOD ULL)
=U Y pure onoyediNks to ‘syUONL
JIE & PUL U9 Jo [26 w Joy Papuan sm 2910 SunoD0y
A99YJ0 IY Jo UOHNNdep jo pouad auf, 0g61-9-06 6L61-g-11 94561-छ-11 ‘Aynmeuysiry 9 7 एप

+6८61-11-08 wo 3एणा
>भ्प्रख्य Joy जाए sem oy >०घ MY वृजपणए
OF Jou sv os ‘oN eIopisuoo WEL] MEM
pue onowptdmds uo ‘pum jpey ७ pue
doy) 10 [Jods w Joy popuayxa sem s204yO T-9pein “s01j9 simooay
at) Jo iadsor ur uoHeINdop Jo portod supp, GL61- L108, 6L61-g-91 96-89. * OUT. tH Hus

souszog yo Ansruyy oy sopun suopEurI0; 3०1 “g

प्रणृ1४००णु8 ७ Ploav ०1 ‘AyUOY NE us}adw109
Jo yesoadde ox yim ‘sum oy oun पाक

Papuanxa sem JooYso oy Jo woRNdsp ous, 0g61-9-08 8६61-६-७ SL61-L-6 ung eyoysy 1०७0 पा

‘ysouqur orjqnd uy
Su OF st ध्य०्णु Papuarxa seM\ ७०60) हे 490YJO, >#रष्पुण्मत॒|०ष०७०:७
tp Jo yadsax ur pousd uonendap >पा, 6L61-S-5 9461-८-1$ $L61-g-1 AEN OM NS



* sog6r SAE
Ur Potisst 919K FOYZO ay} Jo पडा
at Joy ४7४३० ayy, “ABojoupay, a1qour
-oyny TIM srs01o aIquams jo Ayoned
ysurede  [Nyosn Apourayxa paiapIsuod 2120५
sootasas sly souls ‘Ayuo stnuom ५ jo Tjods
Hoys we OY YsosoIUE onan Ul “papuorxa so8eueyy Ando,
sem WYO oy) 1० एप्प uonendop ayy, Ayuo syyuonr ५ 6८61-61-६5 9८61-ढ81-८6 4७००७ 'च “A एपड OF

prvog करण roaupi 0)

woHonporg ज्ण्युग्द्‌ jo wounsedeg ‘|

हे ल्ग्ह्टना
0) 6८61-6-95 घ्ाठज उ००पा० ay 3० [ALIS
-100० ayy astawynor oF PaUIIGS oq ण SF
+ Auoyne uojadwoo ay Jo [waoadde ०
~sod-xq ‘og6t-L-1 yo wWounardop 3
SI 0} PAL9AI J9dYJO >पा, "AIOM Jo
प्रणष०णुभए Proaw or (aoujd sty UI parsod
[parajas aq Pnoo yuoumoNjdas ayqeains ou 2
sv) asarowu! onqnd ur ‘povied uonwndop OO भाणा००ए
yewuou sty puodog pauyyjat ४४४ 49०प/० PULL, ogG1-L-1 6८61-6-६65 ‘Kuemsepury पर एप 6

+og-£-S1 ०३ oun moy

उ०्णपा० orp 10 [eAvysI9AO >पा osET] NO OF
ite Supoq styeaoidde —oyovf-as0d-xap
1-6-S1 Wo Wounsedop yword sty OF

suroyjqnd ut poliod uoneindap ywunow
sty puodoq—sypuoUt dary) yOGe Jo omy DIJO sunosoy
JO [lads Jotq ७ soy poureras ४४:७४ 17०७० OUT, 6L61-01-6 9८61-61-01 ‘my y 'घ Ss ७9पड 8

9 ¥ §



ou पा iw unoedax ~|qeyms Jo
Anigeyreve-uou 03 आए फम्म्भण जब्त

मो BUCH 6 40 eds ४ sop poptorxs
sm TOKIO aM) 10 Pored wonendop अप,

“2H0 91 pourep ‘ur

ait c0¢jdax” 03 09012भ% 10०धा0 omy ve
sous ongnd ut अप ur 6 40 popunxs
Sem Oyo MT Jo Potted uoneindop. sary,

“Osan jo
Yaordde om qm sysucm + puy eas
Aq’ Pebuax9 sein sooo ox 3० pousd
पटक 1 at ‘ureisods एप astya-dxo
Fre १1० पशाप॥ ०0 1ए०:०००॥०८
हुए १ पड़ 10 aBaeyo अपए[०प्‌ sem अप sy
hang © Od sem woamndop jo potiod
Ietwiou omy

ous 4 आपात था ose pue wort
“Bi9pIsuoo परश्‌य्। urMny owpedmAs ue
Atuo " styuout 5/1-6 jo powed 340 पृ छ उठ
Pepuaix2 sea 770० aya Jo घ०) १ lap sa,

iuaunsedap >प Jo yom sys Suuy
Dia inc! BepInsax wonsag ya8 png pul
OVd Moq uf yoopno ysoy ७ aq8no01q
पा ja oh IyaIN Asan 0७2५ sexy OME
wt 20 ut aHOFed amp ‘soysang “ogre
to quamaINax Joy आए sem अप 2our
IY qamsip ७1 you se os “don tiapisuoo
wee trem y, onewedmAs’uo ” popuayxs
SEM 20190 243 Jo porod Yoneindsp oyz

8८61-6-#1

6L61-6-1§ 8८61-9-11

6८ 'पणी <८61-6-५

७७७७८ ६ है)

0961-F-08 0961-1-Fz

GL6 1-11-84

¥L61-31-6

SL61-9-21

£L61-1-6z

9461-11-91

aoBeurpy
“WEN “Y's Lug

2०8००घा९ “Aq
‘Ord 'व | ung

seBeuepy [९०००७ “Aq
‘Aekapedowynyy “y tiqg

Te10099 39०२९ “ney “Aq
“40% नर 5 LYS

Tesu9g
wren 1४७ Andag
‘Nseg 'व -y 1yg



46

cHedxa_ue pasmbax ooo mau arp aoutg
“eyno[eD pue Aequiog ae pouado arom
AAH 3० भाग uosery oy ‘oumueour
oy प्यू १9८01 udy पाए ze0k sopoue
Aq papuaixa sopiny sem potod uon
ceindop sty ‘uosvax sures oysog “sreok
omy Aq papuayxe ४४५४ poried wonyindep
sty sod om ur Aymumuoo Joy post जप
एपए ४३7०४ Jo wondedsur oy ur z90q;0
अपर JO soustdxa oy, Mota wi Burdaoy

Og
Arooeg soueupsg wpm LuojoR,y sono
AavaH{ 10 JoBtout pasodosd ax pue quour
-soudes aiquims Jo Aqepreae-uow ‘ust
61 paisn.quo Sonn jo amyeu arp MOA
ur Surdeoy “soinur onqnd ur papuayxs
SEM 3००प ० ay Jo

mvindop yo potiad ay,

“HAH UY
Poguosge Apuouvuod sem oy pu gl-z-ge
oidn “papuaxo sem poued uonend
-2p SY ‘oseo ayy jo uonYsyeuy Surpuag
suiny Aq pastos9xd sem TY 9०७७० TAH
oy ur uondiosqe soy uondo ayy’ pry
उ००घू० ०प३ 9८, 1०0 ५३७४ 9940} ०१७] IUD
पृ? YM s9N4 1७०७7 MAO oy) sap) 'घ1७०६
€ sem uonwndap jo potiod jeuou ayy,

ssoustsadxa
snotaaid sty 01 जाए suos20g rwawoIN90Ad
opty pur souestsse apex) Wr syuourosmbar
got ay) pur try ० pormnus sonnp
Jo amen om Mot ur Sudooy ‘nga
Jo yeaordde ayy wim sory जावे ur
Popuarxa SEM 19910 om Jo UoKeINdsp ou,

6161-01-18

6L61-8-18

8८61-२० 6

क८6ा+-छा

9461-9-06

६६61-4-81

1८61-#-61

PLE1-L-1

¥L61-L-91

€L61-o1-0%

JoSereyy “hq
‘Med ‘a ‘V Hyg 61

soSeuryy “Aq.
“SSEPOISYD पर एप gt

soeuryy
“MMU *§ *8 Uys Lr

so8eueyy “Aqy
‘softoneyD “d's HYS 91



47

uonendep yeunou sty Jo uonsjduros
uo yo uy sod 9 paysonbas sem पाप
cemuesio juored आप (८६61-ढ1-ढ1) porod “420 UNOVy
uonemdap yeurrou sry ३० Autdxa ay भगत 8461-8-18 ६८61-ढ1-छ1 +#६601-61-81 Surepeyoureyua, “yy

we

UopwsyuLsQ 3एजप्फतें०[२५०८ puy Yyoawosey ३०ण्यग्द “q

taé-a-gv Wo so1ases wro4y amar ० onp sem
24 sous ‘uORLsepisuoo | पश्फ्रष्यापण्य्या प्‌
UO Ose pur “Y10M Jo UONLDOTSIP proar ०
Wornuy oygqnd ur papuajxs sem <904jQ
ap 3० woneyndop Jo powod ay >>
शप्पा०००७ se JAH tof oy Surin sem
VOD Woy 32०फु० ou pue Guouiuaisse ‘oSeurpy “59
yuxjsodur ue Seppoy sem उ>)छु० ayy sy 9846 0-8-86 1] #६61ल्‍-61 ‘ueAuvureaqnsyjeg “y

‘yuauaoetdos opqeyms
Jo ooussqe amp ur (6८-8-1 [Tn एकण्णथ aq
JOU P[No? wAamoy foxy “syuE, wyUEAeliA
JO} soWquiasse yUoUduIOD Jo saqumu
Jo wonssiuaiypur ym Surpeop sem sos4yo
ay) fuoneindap yo anus} Jo uoNszdu09
JO auth oy qe se “Grown qusjaduroo
Jo jeaowdde ap wim पश्जजण oygqnd ut
‘aun 01 अप्यूप WO popuox sem 3२००

saoSeueyy 1190
arp jo wadsor ur uonzndsp so potrad ax, 6:61-8-1 LLG1-£-£ #६61-6-9

*s19k
anog Jo Andxo z9ye pomojfe sem sour
>#णूए woneindap ou ५१०0५ “uon enue
-todns Jo ep sty PIM poreunm}-09 9q
0} 64-01-16 [1h popunxo sem wonvind
> Jo portad sty four uy afqutreae sem
‘ainyTsqns g[quims ou sy “gL61 pady wgr
fi St sneel 00 यम ‘Aq. papuarxe
JopIny sea uopeyndsp Jo poured sny
“meq Hyg Jo ‘punow¥yoxq pue ३०७३
spradxo op mora ut Sardoay म्म्जूप० 9२०७२

ems tg



‘g0RJo जप FO
uonEo[srp pue amytpuadse Aressooouun
ploae 0} #पुएए०पप 8 JOTOUE Joy Papua
sem wonemndap sty “6L61-g-0f ०० omer
गण ONP SEM APIO 947 Se ‘6L-b-08 oidn
seak. 1 oj popuarxe sem woneindap s4
uo उथष्य “gf-G-1 “yom sreak 6 JO POL

छ उणु uoTEINdap Uo pasod sem IDOHFO oyT.

6८-8-6 wo soryo yuared sry ०. 99Eq
povioaar sem एप “UBIO CRA sUeFoCT
Sy up wondiosqe उन toy a[quains
pospisucs aq jou pynod oy ‘seo suey
Eta ur yaowDaToaut sty 07 आए ‘19AIMOFT

‘oxpeo ay
uy wopdzosqs quoteusiod जगा palopysuo?
Butoq ४७७ 72०9० ayy pur “UBIO C BA
aougjog Ur payers sem Jooyjo syuNOD
coy 10 axpeD yuoueursod ४ आपुलप्शप्‌
sAyuoyne yuajaduro9 yo [ए५०उ१6ए oy WEN.
qsorajur oyqnd ut ‘sak # oydn papuayxo
sem pouiod siya ‘kpuonbasqng *1L61-L-5
syo'm sxvok 5. 10 poliod ४ Joy Atpenyur
uoneindsp wo poysod ४४७ x20970 Oy,

“Aoyne
jujaduro9 om Aq porosdde sem oxnuay
Teuow puoksq uoptindep uo ए०एएथ
ror SEL 8८-8-16 wo AO. woRwsTaUSIO
quored sty 07 parzoags ‘axoyoz9y) “SEM OEE
sgd-g-08 ordn oaway jeotpour wo pouywaror
एण्ड yors वाश 2२० पा० Ip ‘ouNUWoUE जप UE
‘oougo juored sty Aq (8401+-61 ७० wey
pansst (2907७०प ‘FAM J9YO SYP OF s19pso
Riessaoau >फा, "४7४०६ oom, Jo polad

9

IRoHIO ध्रण००२०ए

6L61-9-08 gl6i-F-08 9f61--1 Godt BUEN "gM BYS Fo
है ‘ soolyO syun099y
6L61-9-6 ६(61--ढ प(61-(-र sqomemaig "NAL एप 8%



ANNEXURE या

(vide Patagraph 41 of the Report)
List of Regulations already finaliseg

1. Delhi Control of Vehicular and oth
Streets Regulations, 1980.

2. Delhi Eating Houses Re;

er Traffic on Road and

gistration Regulations, 1980.
3. The Exposure and Movement of Corpse of Deceased Persons
in the Streets Regulations, 1978,

4. Union Territory of Delhi Swimming Pools (Licensing ang
Controlling) Regulations, 1980,

5. Union Territory of Delhi Loud-Speakers (Licensing ang
Controlling) Regulations, 1980,

6. The Delhi Prohibiting of Being Armed Regulations, 1980.

7. The Delhi Prohibiting of Burning or Discharging Firearms
in public places Regulations, 1980.

8. The Delhi Control] of Processiong and Assemblies in Public
Placeg Regulations, 1980,

List of Regulations under consideration

i: Regulations for keeping Places of Public Entertainment in
the U.T. of Delhi.

७ - आओ ७० 8,


ANNEXURE IV
(vide paragraph 48 of the Report)

Copy of the D.O. letter dated the 26th May, 1980, from the Minister
of State in the Ministry of Home Affairs

I have received a copy of 37th Report of the Committee on Sub-
ordinate Legislation, Rajya Sabha, regarding grievances of officers
recruited under the DHANI Civil Service Rules, 1965, repealed by
Himachal Pradesh Administrative Service Rules, 1973, which was
presented to the House on 12th March, 1980,

With reference to recommendations/observations of the Commit-
tee as contained in pages 31—36 of the Report, I find that Committee
is not satisfied with certain actions taken by this Ministry in the
past, firstly, in the case of Extra Assistant Commissioners of Hima-
chal Pradesh in regard to their non-inclusion in the initial constitu-
tion of Delhi, Himachal Pradesh Civil Service which was constituted
in 1961, and secondly in respect of officiating DHANI Civil/Police
Service officers when Himachal Pradesh attained statehood in 1971
and consequently DHANICS and DHANIPS Rules were repealed.
We had earlier received a letter in this regard from Shri K. N. Dhulap,
a Member of the Committee and examined the whole issue with
reference to the rules and Act which were in vogue at that time.
We found that action taken by us in the past was in accord with
DHANICS/DHANIPS rules and the State of Himachal Pradesh Act,
1970. I am explaining hereunder these cases from which, I hope,
you will kindly appreciate the position that the Home Ministry can
do little in this regard: —

(i) As regards the alleged grievances of Extra Assistant
Commissioners of the erstwhile Union Territory of Himachal
Pradesh, the Position is that under rule 17(1) (a), the officers
who held any of the posts included in Schedule-I to the Delhi,
Himachal Pradesh Civil Service Rules, 1961 on the 15th March,
1961 (i.e. the date when the rules were promulgated) were eligi-
ble for inclusion in the initial constitution of the service subject
to their being found suitable by the Selection Committee, The
posts of extra Assistant Commissioners having been included
in Schedule-I, those who held such posts on a regular basis on
the 15th March, 1961 were eligible for being included in the
initial constitution. There were 40 such eligible officers of the

50



st

erstwhile Union territory of Himachal Pradesh. Out of them,
26 were found suitable for induction in the service at the initial
stage. Of the remaining 14 officers, some retired before the final
selection while others Were not found fit by the Selection Com-
mittee. In Shri K. N. Dhulap’s letter, he gave the names of
Extra Assistant Commissioners who could not find place in the
initial constitution of the service. We scrutinized each name
with reference to our Past record and found that those who
could not find place in the initial constitution belonged to the
following categories: —

(a) the officers who were eligible for induction in the initial

Constitution but were not found fit;

(b) those who held the posts of E.A.C. on 15th March, 1961
but whose services in those posts were not regularised on
or before that crucial date and hence were not eligible
for consideration for inclusion in the initial constitution;
and

(c) those who held the posts of Extra Assistant Commis-
sioners after 15th March, 1961, and hence were not eligi-
ble for inclusion in the initial constitution,

A statement indicating the names of officers of three categories
is attached, (Annexure)

You will kindly observe that keeping in view the provisions
of rules, the cases could not be considered for induction in the
initial constitution of erstwhile Delhi, Himachal Pradesh Civil
Service nor can this be done now, nor we can give them any
benefit in the matter of seniority which will go counter to the
letter and the spirit of the Tules,

(ii) As regards the alleged grievances of the officiating
DHANI Civil/Police Service officers who went over to Himachal
Pradesh on attainment of its statehood in 1971, the position is
that on the 25th January, 1971, when Himachal Pradesh attained
statehood, erstwhile DHANI Civil/Police Service rules were re-
pealed and new DHANI Civil/Police Service Rules were pro-
mulgated. Some regular members of the erstwhile DHANI Civil/
Police Service were allocated to the Government of Himachal
Pradesh in pursuance of section 40(4) of State of Himachal
Pradesh Act, 1970. These officers were inducted in the initial
constitution of the Himachal Pradesh Administrative/Police
Service, Those officers who were officiating in DHANICS and
DHANIPS prior to 25-1-71, and who were not regular members
of these services, continued to remain members of feeder service/
posts to which they belonged. They also continued to officiate

——



In the report of the Committee, it has been mentioned that one
officer who was considered by the successive Selection Committees
from 1963 onwards was not found suitable for substantive appoint.
ment right upto 1970, and he, therefore, continued to officiate with-
out securing substantive appointment in service. You will kindly
appreciate that if the officer is not considered good enough by the
ef successive Selection Committees in a merit selection, it wil) not be
Proper for us to interfere in such a ८; 5
a ॥ I think you will appreciate that it is not because of apathy on
the part of this Ministry, but because of the operation of rules, as |
they are, some officers may have suffered, When we follow certain Fy
oo पा Statutory rules and well established conventions, it becomes difficult डर
| for us to make deviation lest they should create a host of compli-
4 cations, t

eam



ANNEXURE v
(vide paragraph 48 of the Report)
dicating the names of officers who figured in Shri KN.

ter and who could not be appointed in the
constitution Of the Dethi and Himachal Pradesh Civil Sery:

initial
ice
(0) Category (4):—The officer,

5 who were Considered by the
Selection Co;

mmittee but not recommended for initia] appointment:
@ Shri ०. ए. Mehta
(ii) Shri Jit Ram
(iii) Shri Surinder Pa)
(iv) Shri Sohan Lal
(v) Shri Chattar Singh
(vi) Shri Sher Singh
(II) Category (b):—Those w:

March, 1961 but whose appointm
that crucial date:

ho held the posts of E.A.C. on 15th
ent was not Tregularised on or before
(i) Shri 8. ९. Sharma
(ii) Shri Romesh Kumar (II)
(III) Category (c):—Those who held the posts of Extra Assistant
Commissioners after the 15th March, 1961;
(i) Shri Lakhanpal
(ii) Shri Karam Singh
(iii) Shri K, C. Chauhan
(iv) Shri Kashmir Singh
(v) Shri Jai Chand
(vi) Shri 8. L, Budhiraja
(vii) Shri Budh Ram
(viii) Shri Valdey Singh
(ix) Shri Jaswant Singh.

53


ANNEXURE VI

(vide paragraph 48 of the Report)

Government of Himachal Pradesh Department of Personnel (4-1) |

No. 8-176|71-DP (Apptt.-I)

न Dated Simla-171002, the 26th May, 1980
NOTIFICATION

In exercise of the powers conferred by the Proviso to Article 309
a | of the Constitution of India and all other powers enabling him in
this behalf, the Governor, Himachal Pradesh hereby makes the

following rules further to amend the Himachal Pradesh Administra-
1 tive Service Rules, 1973 namely:—

4 (1) These rules may be called the Himachal Pradesh Admin-
1 istrative Service (Second Amendment) Rules, 1980.
: 4 (2) These rules shall come into force from the date of issue

of this notification.

१? | (3) In sub-rule 4 of Rule 23 of the Himachal Pradesh Adminis-
trative Service Rules, 1973 the following Proviso is

bes added as Proviso (०) :--

Ae Proviso (c) to Rule 23 (4)

oa | “Provided that the continuous service rendered by a mem-
if ber of the HPAS prior to his appointment to the said service
under rule 15, as a Select List Officer of the defunct DHANICS
against duty posts of DHANICS/HPAS such ex-cadre posts,
which have now been included in HPAS, shall be taken into

account for determining the length of service for the award of
Selection Grade of the said Service.”

Government of Himachal Pradesh.
Government of Himachal Pradesh

54


el vil
(vide paragraph 48 of the Report)

Government of Himachal Pradesh ‘Department of Personnel .(A-I)’
No. Karmik (A-I)-8(7)-2|79 dated Simla-171002, the 2-6-80.
2a NOTIFICATION

In exercise of the powers conferred by the Proviso to Article 309
of the Constitution of India and all other powers enabling him in
this behalf, the Governor, Himachal Pradesh hereby makes the
following rules further to amend the Himachal Pradesh Police Ser-
vice Rules, 1973 namely: —

(1) These rules may be called the Himachal Pradesh Police
Service (first Amendment) Rules, 1980.

(2) These rules shall come into force from the twenty-sixth

May, 1980.
(3) In sub-rule 7 of Rule 19 of the Himachal Pradesh Police
Service Rules, 1973 the following provision is added: —

Proviso to Rule 19(7)

“Provided that the continuous service rendered by a mem-
ber of the HPPS prior to his appointment to the said service
under rule 14, as a Select List Officer of the defunct DHANIPS
against duty posts of DHANIPS|HPPS|such ex-cadre posts,
which have now been included in HPPS, shall be taken into
account for determining the length of service for the award of
Selection Grade of the said Service.”

Chief Secretary to the
Government of Himachal Pradesh.

434६० rime

oo



APPENDIX
(ide paragraph 2 of the Report)
be

List of representatioes whe appeared befere the Committee

Sl.No, Name of the Ministry/Department Bate of sitting

Ministry of Shipping & Transport .

2 eee 21-10-1980
Ministey of Law, Justice and Company Affairs Department of
Legal Afsie) ., , ३

* + @t-t0-1980



(1979-80)
XXXVIII

THIRTY-EIGHTH MEETING

The Committee met at 11.00 a.m. on Saturday, the 22nd December,
1979.

MEMBERS PRESENT
. Shri Narasingha Prasad Nanda—in the Chair,
. Shrimati Pratima Bose
. Shri Jagdish Joshi
Shri Dhaneshwar Majhi
. Shri Jagdish Prasad Mathur
. Shri Ahmad Hossain Mondal
- Shri V. C. Kesava Rao.

नमक कर के ६० ह७ +«

SECRETARIAT
Shri Sudarshan Agarwal, Additional Secretary
Shrimati K. K. Chopra, Chief Examiner of Questions
Shri B. R. Goel, Senior Legislative Committee Officer.
2. In the absence of the Chairman, Shri Narasingha Prasad Nanda
was voted to the Chair,
3. The Committee considered and took decisions on the following
memoranda: —
* * * *
T(vi) Memorandum No. 71 regarding deputationists in the Ministry
of Defence

The Committee considered the interim reply of the Ministry of
Defence giving reasons for retaining deputationists in that Ministry.
The Committee decided to await the information in respect of the

****Relates to matters not included in this Report.
?The Committee at its earlier meeting held on the 25th July, 1979 directed
that a reference be made to the Ministry of Deference asking them
the reasons for a large number of deputationists being retained by them
beyond 3 years.

59



60

remaining deputationists in that Ministry. The Committee, ther
‘ove, directed the Secretariat that the Ministry be asked to expediti
the information in respect of other deputationists,

* * * *

4. The Committee then considered the future programme of its)

sittings and decided to hold its meetings on the 9th and 10th January,
1980.

The Committee then adjourned at 12.10 p.m, to meet again at
3.00 p.m. on Wednesday, the 9th January, 1980.

L
FIFTIETH MEETING

The Committee met at 3.00 p.m, on Wednesday, the 9th April,
1980.

MEMBERS PRESENT
. Shri Narasingha Prasad Nanda—Chairman
. Shrimati Pratima Bose
. Shri Ibrahim Kalaniya
. Shri Jagdish Prasad Mathur
. Shri Ahmad Hossain Mondal
. Shrimati Rajinder Kaur
. Shri S. K. Vaishampayen
. Shri Alexander Warjri.

SNanrwnr

SECRETARIAT

Shrimati K. K. Chopra, Chief Examiner of Questions
Shri B. R. Goel, Senior Legislative Committee Officer.

* * * *

3. The Committee then considered and took decisions on the fol-
iowing Memoranda: —

* * * *

****Relates to matters not included in this Report.



62

2. The Committee heard the representatives of the Ministry
Defence to seek clarifications with regard to the need for retain-
ing a large number of deputationists beyond the normal term in
the Ministry of Defence. The members were of the view that
many of the officers, in the list furnished by the Ministry, who
were still continuing on deputation with the Ministry could easily
be spared and their positions could be taken by direct recruits.
The representatives conceded the guiding principle governing term
of deputation and assured the Committee to make an endeavour to
adhere to the normal period prescribed by the Department pf
Personnel for persons on deputation. As desired by the Com

they could be sent back to their parent Departments.

sured the Committee to furnish that information by the Ist wee’
of August, 1980. The Committee while underlining the need
eliminate the practice of appointment on deputation took exc

‘ion to the practice of retaining deputationists beyond a period
3 years.

A verbatim record of the evidence was kept.

3. The Committee then considered and took decisions on
following Memoranda:—

(i) Memorandum No. 108 regarding recommendation of the
Committee on DHANICS Rules

The Committee considered the D.O. letter from the Ministe
of State for Home Affairs on the subject. The Committee directe
to make an enquiry from the Home Ministry regarding a di
pancy about the number of officers stated by them in the com
munication under reference and the communications sent earli
The Committee also desired to find out whether the Governme:
of Himachal Pradesh had taken any action to implement the a
commendations made by the Committee in its 37th Report.

* * * *

4. The Committee decided to visit Tuticorin tentatively on
9th and 10th July, 1980.

The Committee then adjourned at 12.00 Noon.

****Relates ‘to matter not included in this Report.



=)
(1980-81)
bie
SECOND MEETING

The Committee met at 11.00 Am. on Thursday, the 11th Sep-
tember, 1980.

MEMBERS PRESENT

. Shri Narasingha Prasad Nanda—Chairman
. Shri 8. N. Banerjee

. Shri Murlidhar Chandrakant Bhandare
. Shrimati Pratima Bose

. Shri Ramakrishna Hegde

. Shri Bhagatram Manhar

. Shri Jagdish Prasad Mathur

. Shri Narsingh Narain Pandey

. Shri Ram Bhagat Paswan

. Shri Rajendra Singh Ishwar Singh

. Shri Rameshwar Singh

. Shri Syed Shahedullah

न
8४७ 9०:०२ 9१ एफ क ६० १० +

Be
Re

SECRETARIAT

Shrimati K. K. Chopra, Chief Examiner of Questions.
Shri 8. R. Goel, Senior Legislative Committee Officer.

2. The Committee considered and took decisions on the follow-
ing Memoranda:—

* * * *
Memorandum No. 6

Making of Rules/Regulations under the Water (Prevention and
Control of Pollution) Amendment Act, 1978

The Committee considered and agreed to the request of the
Ministry ¢f Works and Housing for further extension of time upto
30th September, 1980 for finalizing the rules and regulations
under the Water (Prevention and Control of Pollution) Amend-
ment Act, 1978.

The Committee then adjourned at 11.40 a.m. to meet again at
3.00 p.m. on Monday, the 22nd September, 1980.

****Relates to matter not included in this Report.



fal
IV
FOURTH MEETING

é Committee met at 11.00 a.m, on Tuesday, th

8 23rd September,
1980.

MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Shri Narasingha Prasad Nanda—Chairman
2. Shri 8. N. Banerjee
. Shrimati Pratima Bose

3
4. Shri Bhagatram Manhar

5. Shri Jagdish Prasad Mathur
6. Shri Narsingh Narain Pandey
. Shri Ram Bhagat Paswan

- Shrimati Rajinder Kaur |
9. Shri Rameshwar Singh
10. Shri Syed Shahedullah

SECRETARIAT

Memorandum No. 7

(i) Delay in making of rules fregulations unde

r the Delhi Develop-
ment Act, 1957

The Committee considered the request of tl
and Housing for extension of time for finalising rules under the Delhi
Development Act, 1957 The Committee agreed to the request for ex-
tension of time upto 5th November, 1980,
Ministry would complete the process of
extended time.

he Ministry of works

with the hope that the
rule-making within ‘the

Memorandum No. 8

(ii) Framing of rules under the Haryana and Uttar P
tion of Boundaries) Act, 1979

The Committee considered the circumstances that led to further
delay in fra

aming the rules under the Haryana and Uttar Pradesh

radesh (Altera-



65

(Alteration of Boundaries) Act, 1979. The Committee, while agree-
ing to the request for further extension of time upto the end of
December, 1980 for framing the rules under the Act, desired that the
Ministry should not delay the matter any further,

Memorandum No, 10
(iii) Deputationists in the Ministry of Defence.

The Committee considered the comments of Ministry of Defence
in support of taking deputationists and retaining some of them be-
yond the normal te: The Committee accepted the explanation of
the Ministry with the hope that they would abide by the assurance
given to the Committee and also scrupulously follow the guidelines
issued in this behalf so as not to extend the term of deputationists
as a rule.

Memorandum No. 11

{iv) Irregularities in Select Lists for promotions in Armed Forces
Headquarters,

The Committee
Defence explaining reasor
for promotion to the es 1 ed Forces Headquar-
ters. The Committee, while accepting their explanation, observed
that the Ministry should make, as far as possible, a correct estimate
of probable vacancies so that adequate number of eligible persons
find their place in the Select List prepared periodically.

of the Ministry of
ion of Select. Lists

160९८ then adjour

d at 11.45 a.m. to meet again on
the 8th October, 1980.

FIFTH MEETING
The Committee met at 3.00 p.m. on Wednesday, the 8th Octubver,
1980,
MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Shri Narasin Prasad Nanda—Chairman
2. Shri 8. N. Banerjee
3. Shri. Murlidhar Chandrakant Bhandare
4. Sh:

na Bose

5. Shri Ramakrishna Hegde



__ 6 Shri Bhagatram Manhar
"7. Shri Jagdish Prasad Mathur =
~ 8 Shri Narsingh Narain Pandey eal =
9. Shri Ram Bhagat Paswan = 2
10. Shrimati Rajinder Kaur : |
11. Shri Syed Shaheduilah
12. Dr. Rafiq Zakaria

* * * *
SECRETARIAT

Shri K. Dayal, Chief Legislative Committee Officer
Shri B. R. Goel, Senior Legislative Committee Officer

2. * » * * *

3. The Committee also considered and took decisions on the follo-
wing Memoranda:
* * * * *
,Gi) Supplement to _Memorandum No. 6

Making of Rules/Regulations under the Water (Prevention and Con- :
trol of Pollution) Amendment Act, 1978.

The Committee considered the request of the Ministry of Works
and Housing and granted them further extension of time upto 30-12-
1980 for-finalising the rules/regulations under the Water (Prevention
and Control of Pollution) Amendment Act, 1978. The Committee,
however, desired that the Ministry be informed that no further ex-
tension would be allowed in that regard.

4. The Chairman informed members that Chairman, Rajya Sabha
had accorded permission to the Committee to hold some meetings at
Bangalore and in Lakshadweep Islands. The Committee decided to
hold its meetings at Bangalore and in Lakshadweep Islands immedia-
tely after the winter (November, December, 1980) session of the
Rajya Sabha or during the first week of January, 1981.

5. The Chairman then gave a brief account of the deliberations
and conclusions arrived at the conference of Committees on delega-
ted legislation held at Canberra (Australia) at which he represented
the Rajya Sabha Committee on Subordinate Legislation.

****Relates to matter not included in this Report.



a 67
6. The Chairman read out a letter from Shi
Ishwar Singh, a member of the Com:
dates of next meetings.

ri Rajendra Singh
mittee regarding fixation of

The Committee then decided to hold its next series of meetings

on the 2180 and 22nd and thereafter on the 30th and 31st October,
4980.

The Committee then adjourned at 440 P.M. to meet again at
11.00. a. mM. on Thursday, the 9th October, 1980.

VI
SIXTH MEETING

The Committee met at 11.00 a. mt. on Thursday, the 9th October,
1980.
Members PRESENT
1. Shri Narasingha Prasad Nanda—Chairman
2. Shri B. N. Banerjee
3. Shrimati Pratima Bose
4. Shri Ramakrishna Hegde
5. Shri Bhagatram Manhar
6, Shri Jagdish Prasad Mathur
7. Shri Narsingh Narain Pandey
8. Shri Ram Bhagat Paswan
9. Shrimati Rajinder Kaur
10. Shri Syed Shahedullah
11. Dr. Rafiq Zakaria

* * *
SECRETARIAT
Shri K. Dayal, Chief Legislative Committee Officer
Shri B. R. Goel, Senior Legislative Committee Officer.
2. * * * *

3. The Committee also considered and took decisions on the
following Memoranda :

****Relates to matter not included in this Report.



6 Memorandum No. 12

The Motor Vehicles (Protective Headgears) Rules, 1980
[G.S.R. 261(E) of 1980]

The Committee considered the aforesaid rules in the light of the
comments furnished by the Ministry of Shipping and Transport.
The Committee desired to ascertain the provision whereunder male
Sikhs have been exempted from the requirement of wearing crash
helmets and the practice that obtains in U.K. in relation to such
Sikhs. The Committee also directed the Secretariat to go through
the Lok Sabha Debates of the 5th August, 1980, to find out if any
discussion had taken place on the subject in that House that day
and, if so, what appeared to be the consensus in this respect. The
Committee decided to hear the representatives of the Ministries of
Shipping and Transport and Law on this point at its next meeting
to be held on the 21st October, 1980.

* * * * *

The Committee then adjourned at 12.35 p.m. to meet at 3.00 p.m.
on Tuesday, the 21st October, 1980.

The
1980.

. Shri Narasingha Pra:
. Shri B. N. Banerjee
. Shri Murlidhar Che
. Shrimati Pratima Bose

Nanda—Chairman

ndare

won ४+

. Shri Ramakrishna Hegde
Shr
Shri Jagdish Prasad 1४
. Shri Na:
9. Shri Ram Bhagat Paswan.

i Bhagatram Mant

nog

~

ingh Narain Pandey

****Relates to matter not included in this Report.

ie



i

WITNESSES

REPRESENTATIVES OF THE MINISTRIES
Muyistry or SHIPPING AND TRANSPORT
Shri J. S. Marya, Director General Road Development &
Additional Secretary
Shri Y. Sinha, Joint Secretary
Shri B, R. Chavan, Deputy Secretary.

Ministry or LAw, Justice anp CoMPANY AFFAIRS
Shri 8, K. Bahadur, Joint Secretary and Legal Advisor.
SECRETARIAT

Shri K. Dayal, Chief Legislative Committee Officer
Shri B. R. Goel, Senior Legislative Committee Officer.

2. Memorandum No. 12
The Motor Vehicles (Protective Headgears) Rules, 1980
[G.S.R. 261(E) of 1980]

The Committee heard the representatives of the Min
Shipping and Transport (Transport Wing) and_Law (9
of Legal Affajrs) to seek clar on the points
the Motor Vehicles (Protective He s) Rules, 1980.

A verbatim:record of the evidence was kept
The Committee initially took objection to tl
rules exempting Sikh womer from the ope
the Motor Vehicles Act, 1939. The rep’
of Shipping and Transport who appeared b
plained that that provision was being made on
exemption granted under the Act to-male Sikhs. . Tr
ed the Committee that the exemption from putting on protective
headgear was 9 ysed to be extended to all women i children
below the age of 12 years.
as not in favour of exemption bein:
858 so liberally, particula:
intended 85 8 safety 7
ould keep in view

nistry

fore
y of the
o inform-

The Committee w:
the requirement of secti
the fact that that requirement v
The Committee, therefore, felt that Gover
that aspect before considering grant of any

exemption and also



g >

cerefully consider the validity of such exemptions in the light of
th ions contained in articles 14, 15 and 16 of the Constitution.

— के * * * *

The Committee then adjourned at 4.35 p.m. to meet again at 11.00
Am. on Wednesday, the 22nd October, 1980.

Vill
EIGHTH MEETING

The Committee met at 11.00 a.m. on Wednesday, the 22nd October,
1980.
MEMBERS PRESENT

1, Shri Narasingha Prasad Nanda—Chairman

2. Shri 8. N. Banerjee

3. Shrimati Pratima Bose

4. 8; hna Hegde

5. m Manhar

6. S ad Mathur
है है ain Pand

8. Shri Ram Bhagat Pas
* * * * *
SECRETARIAT
Shri K. Dayal, Chief Legislative Committee Officer
Shri B. R. Goel, Senior Legislative Committee Officer.

2. -
3. The Committee then took decision on the following Memo-
randa:
* * * * *

(iii) Memorandum No. 16
Framing of rules/regulations under the prov
Police Act, 1978

ns of Delhi

The Committee considered the request of the Ministry of Home
Affairs for further extension of time upto the 315 December, 1980

+54*Relates to matters not included in this Report.


7

br making of some of the rules/regulations under the provisions

the Delhi Police Act, 1978. The Committee was unhappy over
he delay in the making of those rules and reluctantly agreed to
ive extension upto that date as the last extension. The Committee
sired that the Ministry should let it know the position in this
gard early in January 1981 and also that the attention of the
[Ministry be drawn to its earlier observation on the aspect of delay.

(iv) Memorandum No. 17

* * * * *

The Committee then adjourned at 12.35 p.m. to meet on Thrusday,
the 30th October, 1980.

x
TENTH MEETING

Members PRESENT
1, Shri Narasingha Prasad Nanda—Chairman
2, Shrimati Pratima Bose
3. Shri Ramakrishna Hegde
4, Shri Bhagatram Manhar
5. Shri Jagdish Prasad Mathur
6. Shri Narsingh Narain Pandey
7. Shri Ram Bhagat Paswan
8. Shri Rameshwar Singh
9. Shri Syed Shahedullah
10, Dr. Rafiq Zakaria

* * * * *

SECRETARIAT
Shri B. R. Goel, Senior Legislative Committee Officer.
* * * * *

The Committee met at 11.00 A.M. on Friday, the 31st October, 1980.

“y##**Relates to matter not included in this Report.



* :

3. Memorandum No. 19
Regilations made under the Major Port Trusts Act, 1963
The Committee briefly considered the aforesaid regulations.
Further consideration was deferred till the next meeting.
4. Memorandum No. 20
The Drugs and Cosmetics (1st Amendment) Rules, 1980
(G.S.R. 430 of 1980)

The Committee was satisfied with the reasons furnished by the
Ministry of Health and Family Welfare for the inordinate delay
in the finalisation and publication of the aforesaid rules and noted
with satisfaction the fact that the Ministry had since introduced a
streamlined procedure in order to avoid delay in such cases,

The Committee then adjourned at 12.50 P.M. to meet again on
Monday, the 10th November, 1980.

XI
TWELFTH MEETING
The Committee met at 11.00 a.m. on Tuesday, the 11th November,
1980.
Memsers. PRESENT

Shri Narasingha Prasad Nanda—Chairman
, Shri Murlidhar Chandrakant Bhandare
. Shrimati Pratima Bose
Shri Bhagatram Manhar
Shri Jagdish Prasad Mathur
. Shri Narsingh Narain Pandey
- Shri Ram Bhagat Paswan
. Shri Rameshwar Singh

SIAN फ्ले ६०७ ७ '+

SECRETARIAT
Shri K. Dayal, Chief Legislative Committee Officer.
Shri B. R. Goel, Senior Legislative Committee Officer.

*****Relates to matter not included in this Report.



a

2, Memorandum No. 23
Recommendations of the Committee contained in its 37th Report
regarding Grievances Of Officers recruited under the Dhan
Civil Service Rules repealed by the Himachal Pradesh
Administrative Service Rules
The Committee note pancy between the number
+ of Extra Assistant Commissioners, who could not find place in the
initial constitution of the Himachal Pradesh Administrative Service,
irs in the Minister's letter

as given by the Ministry of Home Affai
entioned by Shri x. N. Dhulap

dated the 26th May, 1980, and as m
in his note dated the 19th January, 1979, had been reconciled.

4 that the discre)

The Committee also noted that jm accordance with its recom=
| the grievances of the aggrieved

mendation for the removal ०
officers, the Himachal Pradesh Government had amended the
Administrative Service/Himachal Pradesh

Himachal Pradesh

Police Service Rules and made a provision therein for taking into
account the continuous service rendered by 8 member of the HPAS/
PPS prior to his appointment to the said service as 9 Select List
Officer of the defunct DHANICS|DHANIPS for the award of Selec-

tion Grade in the said service.

After a brief discussion, the Committee decided to finally bring
the matter to 8 close by observing that DHANICS/DHANIPS in
Himachal Pradesh was an jnstance to show that when a Union
Territory is given Statehood or 3 new State is created otherwise,
problems regarding absorption of the former employees do arise
and it was evident that in the case of DHANICS) ‘DHANIPS, some
employees had to suffer a setback in their service career because
of the negligence on the part of the Ministry of Home Affairs. The
Committee reiterated its earlier recommendation that in future the
Ministry of Home Affairs should always take adequate and necessary
terests of the employees.

measures to safeguard the in’
3, Memofandum No. 19
Regulations made under the Major Port Trusts Act, 1963
consideration of the memo-
s of the Major Port
e condi-

The Committee then took up further
randum and noted that under the provisions
Trusts Act, 1963, the first regulations relating to. the ser
tions and other matters of the employees and for the efficient and
proper administration of a major Port were required to be made by
the Central Government and published in the Gazette of India while

endments thereto were to be made by the Board
published only in the Official

the subsequent am
of Trustees of the concerned Port and



74

Gazette of the State

in which that Port was situated. Cons

rporated in the Act, Government

tive to lay such regulations on the
Table of each House of Parliament.

4. Memorandum No, 21

The Survey of India (Recruitment from Corps of Engineer Officers)
Amendment Rules, 1980 (G.S.R, 486 of 1980)

The Committee considered
Science ang Technology with regar,
Annexure to rule 7 of the Survey
of Engineer Officers) Rules, 1950,

the reply of the Department of
'd to the delay in substituting the
of India (Recruitment from Corps
, Whereby the Pay scales of Engi-
tms of the pay scales prescribed

explanation of the Department
delay.
5. Memorandum No, 22

Making of Rules under the Press Council Act, 1978 (37 of 1978)
The Committee acceded to t

mation and Broadcasting for extension of time upto the 31st Decem-
ber, 1980, for making and notifying the Press Council (Budget and

making of rules,

6. The Committee. decided to hold its next meeting on the 4th
December, 1980,

7. Thereafter the Committee briefly discussed the programme of
holding its meetings in Lakshadweep and at Bangalore and decided
to hold the meetings on the 4th and 5th January, 1981 (in Laksha-
dweep) and 9th and 10th January, 1981 (at Bangalore).

8. The Committee then adjourned at 12.05 pw.



75
जा
THIRTEENTH MEETING

The Committee met at 3.00 P.M. on Thursday, the 4th December,
1980.

MEMBERS PRESENT
. Shri Narasingha Prasad Nanda—Chairman
. Shri 8. N. Banerjee
. Shri Murlidhar Chandrakant Bhandare
. Shrimati Pratima Bose
. Shri Bhagatram Manhar
. Shri Narsingh Narain Pandey
. Shrimati Rajinder Kaur
. Shri Syed Shahedullah
. Dr. Rafiq Zakaria
SECRETARIAT
Shri K. Dayal, Chief Legislative Committee Officer.
Shri B. R. Goel, Senior Legislative Committee Officer.

2. * * * * eae

3. The Committee then considered and adopted the draft Forty-
third and Forty-fourth Reports.

4, The Chairman informed the Committee that the Forty-third
and Forty-fourth Reports would be presented to the House on the
10th and 17th December, 1980, respectively.

5. The Committee authorised the Chairman and in his absence
Shri Narsingh Narain Pandey and Shrimati Rajinder Kaur to present
the Reports to the House.

6. The Committee, thereafter, finalised the programme regarding
its visits to Lakshadweep and Bangalore from 3rd to 10th January,
1981.

The Committee then adjourned at 3.50 P.M. to meet again at
Kavaratti (Lakshadweep) on the 4th January, 1981.

*****Relates to matter not included in this Report.
GMGIPMRND—RS I—1449 RS—4-2-81—450.



PRINTED BY THE GENERAL MANAGER, GOVERNMENT OF INDIA PRESS,
MINTO ROAD, NEW DELHI~110002.