COM-I

147

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA छः

RAJYA SABHA

COMMITTEE ON SUBORDINATE LEGISLATION

HUNDRED AND FORTY SEVENTH REPORT

(Presented on April 23, 2003)

RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI

April,2003/Vaisakh 3, 1925 (Saka)



CONTENTS

COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE
INTRODUCTION

REPORT

L Visakhapatnam Port Employees
(Grant of Advances for Purchase of

Conveyances) Regulations, 1993.

u. The Cochin Port Trust Employees
(Grant of Advances for Building of
House) Regulations, = 1971-
Implementation of 133 Report of
the Committee on Subordinate

Legislation, Rajya Sabha

m. The Coir Board _ Services
(Classification, Control & Appeal)
Bye Laws, 1969-Implementation of
125" Report of the Committee on
Subordinate Legislation, Rajya

Sabha. .

Iv. The Tobacco Board (General)

Regulations, 1984
v. Summary of recommendations

Minutes

PAGES

C)

10—16

17—22

471—49



su Penne

a

Con

eee
BOSS

15

COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE

(CONSTITUTED ON THE 30™ MAY, 2002)

Shri A. Vijayaraghavan — Chairman
Shri M.V. Rajashekaran .

Shri Kapil Sibal

Shri Khan Ghufran Zahidi

Dr. A. R. Kidwai

Shri Dilip Singh Judev

Shri Rajiv Ranjan Singh ‘Lalan’

Shri B.P. Singhal fe
Shri Ravula Chandra Sekar Reddy

Shri S. Sivasubramanian

Shri Janeshwar Mishra

Shri Drupad Borgohain

Shri V.Maitreyan

Shri Harendra Singh Malik

Shri N.K. Premachandran

SECRETARIAT

Shri N.C. Joshi, Joint Secretary ५
Shri Deepak Goyal, Deputy Secretary
Shri Ram Behari Gupta, Under Secretary
Shri Arun Sharma, Committee Officer

‘inducted into the Council of Ministers wef 29" January, 2003 2003



INTRODUCTION

I, the Chairman of the Committee on Subordinate Legislation,
having been authorized by the Committee to present the Report on its _
behalf, do hereby present this Hundred and Forty Seventh Report of
the Committee.

"1.2 The Committee considered and adopted the Report in its
meeting held on 31. 3.2003.

1.3 The matters examined by the Committee arise out of the
scrutiny of various Rules/Regulations and issues, related therewith,
along with Government’s comments received thereon. The
observations and recommendations which, in the opinion of the
Committee, should be brought to the notice of the House, are contained

in the succeeding paragraphs of the Report.
. NEW DELHI, A. VJAYARAGHAVAN
March 31, 2003 Chairman,

Committee on Subordinate Legislation,
Rajya Sabha.



REPORT

I
VISAKHAPATNAM Port EMPLOYEES (GRANT OF ADVANCES FOR
- PURCHASE OF CONVEYANCES) REGULATIONS, 1993

The Visakhapatnam Port Employees (Grant of Advances for

Purchase of Conveyance), Regulations, 1993 framed under the Major
~ Port Trusts Act, 1963 were examined and a questionnaire was

forwarded to the Ministry of Shipping on October 31, 2001. The
Ministry furnished their replies on the various points raised in the
Questionnaire and the matter was discussed with the representatives of
the Visakhapatnam Port Trust as well as the Ministry of Shipping at
Visakhapatnam-on the 9" November 2001. The points raised in the
Questionnaire, the Ministry's comments thereon together with the
observation of the Committee are as follows.:-
1. Point raised

Whether. the Visakhapatnam Port Employees (Grant of
» Advances for purchase of Conveyance) Regulations, 1993 and the
amendments thereto have been laid on the Table of both the Houses of
Parliament, if so; the details in this regard?.

Ministry’s reply ‘

The Visakhapatnam Port Employees (Grant of Advances for
Purchase of Conveyance) Regulations, 1993 were laid on the Table of
Lok Sabha on 2.8.94 and Rajya Sabha on 27.7.94. The subsequent
amendment vide GSR No. 280(E) dated 27.5.97 was also laid on the
Table of Lok Sabha on 8.5.2000 and Rajya Sabha on 2.5.2000.

1

/



2
Committee’s Observation
There had been a in laying the amendment regulations notified
on 27.5.1997 due to oversight. The Committee observed that such a
delay in laying should be avoided.

2. . Point raised

The Regulations under examination have been framed in the
year 1993 under the Major Port Trusts Act, 1963. What are the reasons
for delay in the enactment of the regulations and in what manner grant
of advance for purchase of conveyance was regulated in the absence of
these regulations?

Ministry’s reply

It is to submit that prior to enactment of the Major Port Trusts
Act, 1963, which came into force from the 29" February, 1964, the
Rules of the Central Government were made applicable to the
employees of the Port. After the enactment of the MPT Act, 1963, the
Central Government framed certain Regulations as first Regulations
under Section 126 of the MPT Act. However, in respect of grant of
.advances for purchase of motor cycle/motor car, no such first
Regulations have been framed and as such, the Port Trust adopted the
Government Rules viz., GFRs and the provisions relating to the grant of
advances for motor cycle/motor car, etc. as available in GFRs were
followed by the Port Trust. For the first time in the year 1989, a
Proposal framing Regulations entitled VPE (Grant of Advances for
purchase of conveyances) Regulations, 1989 was placed before the
VPT Board, vide Agenda item No. 43 in the meeting held on the 23"



3
January, 1989 and Board’s approval sent to Government for sanction,
wherein it was clearly mentioned that the VPT had no separate
Regulations for grant of advances for purchase of conveyances by the
port employees and hence the provisions in GFRs were followed.
Thereafter, certain clarifications were sought by the Ministry and again
the said Regulations were placed before the Board, vide Agenda item
No. 31 in the meeting held on 29" January, 1992 and again, on further
directions from the Ministry to redraft the Regulations in conformity
with the provisions of either the Rules prevailing in other Port Trusts or
adopting the provisions contained in GFRs, as applicable to the Central
Government servants, the Regulations were revised and were placed
before the Board, vide Agenda item No. 5-5 in its meeting held on 29"
March, 1993 and the said Regulations were approved, vide Resolution
No. 278/92-93 and sent to the Government vide letter dated the 28”
April, 1993, seeking approval of the Government. Finally, the
Regulations have been approved by the Government vide Notification
No. 1/PR/12015/14/91-PE-I dated 3" January, 1994 and published in
the Gazette of India as GSR No. 1-8 dated 3" January, 1994.

. Hence, immediately after formation of VPT Board, the
provisions of GFRs of the Central Government have been followed
and after framing the Regulations as mentioned above, the same are
being followed and the Government instructions/orders are also being
followed, vide Regulation 26 of the said Regulations.



Committee’s Observation

The Committee noted the Ministry’s reply regarding the
manner in which the grant of conveyance advance was being regulated
when the regulations were not in place.
3. Point raised

What is the justification for excluding persons appointed on
deputation from the Central or a State Government for the purpose of

rant of advance for purchase of conveyances? Whether it would be

possible to include such employees.also for the purpose. What are the
comments? ;

हे

Ministry’s reply

It is to submit that the reason for excluding the persons on
deputation from Central or State Government or any other source is that
the period of deputation is for a limited period and on completion of
deputation period, they will be repatriated to the parent department and
if advances are granted during the period of deputation, difficulty may
be experienced in recovering the said advance from the employee(s)
who are/were repatriated to various organizations.

हु Committee’s Observation

The Committee noted the Ministry’s reply.
4. Point raised

As per regulation 6(2), an employee holding class I post
whose basic pay is in the scale the maximum of which is Rs. 7500/- per
month or more, is entitled for advance of purchase of motor car. These
provisions of the regulations give an impression as if the scales of pay


5
have not been revised for long in pursuance of the recommendations of
the Central Pay Commission made from time to time. What is the
present status in this regard?

Ministry’s reply
It is to submit that initially the maximum scale of pay of
Class-I Post has been mentioned as Rs. 4230/- in the Regulations
approved by the Government and published in the Gazette and
thereafter the said scale of pay has been amended to Rs. 7,500/- vide
“GSR No. 280(E) dated 27" May,1997. Now, the said maximum scale
of pay of the said Class-I posts has been revised to Rs. 15,100/-, while
revising pay scales of Class- I & II officers, which came into force on
1.1.97 and in terms of the said revised scales of pay, the maximum
scale of pay of Class-I post has been taken into consideration for the
purpose of granting motor car advance, pending amendment to
Regulations, which is presently under consideration.
Committee’s Observation
The Committee noted the reply and desired that the Ministry
should amend the pay scales mentioned in the regulations since the
same had been revised.
5. Point raised Regulation 12
The last revision in the advances for purchase of conveyances
took place in the year 1997. However, the repayment schedules was
not revised. There appears to be a need for revision of the repayment
schedules keeping in view the cost of vehicles and advance. Whether

Ce a ee



6
any review has taken place in this regard. Whether the Ministry intend
to revise the repayment schedules?

Ministry’s reply

It is to submit that Regulation 12 of the said Regulations deals
with recovery of advance and the number of instalments for recovery
shall be not more than 150 instalments in respect of motor car and 100
instalments in respect of motor cycle. However, in Rule No. 201 of
GFRs (Swamy’s compilation 2000), a provision exists that the
maximum number of instalments where the motor car advance is
Tequired to be recovered was mentioned as 200. In respect of motor
cycles, a provision exists in Rule 211 second proviso indicating the
maximum number of instalments as 70 (Swamy’s compilation of GFR,
2000 edition). The recovery of advance will depend upon the length
of left over service of the concerned officer, who had been granted
motor car advance. Hence, it is felt that it is not necessary to modify
the number of instalments for recovery of advances as mentioned in the
Regulation.

Committee’s Observation

. The Committee desired that the Ministry should consider

revising the number of instalments for repaying of car loan from 150 to
200. —

6. Point raised
Regulation’ 19 mentioned in the sub-regulation (4) of

regulation 6 appears to be a printing mistake. Should it not be
regulation 18, whether the Ministry would correct it?



Ministry’s reply

It is to submit that Regulation 6 deals with condition of
eligibility and sub-regulation (4) deals with granting of advance for the
second time, unless the outstanding balance of the first advance is
repaid in full with interest. In this sub-regulation, a reference to
Regulation-19 has been mentioned as an exception. The present issue
for consideration is whether the said Regulation is 18 or 19. In this
connection, it is to submit that Regulation-18 deals with condition for
grant of a second or subsequent advance before the earlier advance with
interest has been repaid. Regulation-19 deals with restrictions in the
case of employee due to retire within maximum period prescribed for
payment. So, it is submitted that Regulation-18 is a case, where the
second and subsequent advance has been considered in the normal
course, whereas Regulation-19 imposes restrictions to regulate the
number of instalments for repayment of advance with interest, so that
the recovery wilt be completed before the date of retirement. Since this
is an exceptional provision, the same has been mentioned in Regulation
6 (4). It is, therefore, felt that there is no necessity to substitute the

figure 19 with the figure 18 in sub-regulation (4) of Regulation-6.



8
Committee’s Observation
The Committee noted the Ministry’s reply

2.0 The Ministry of Shipping vide their communication dated the
26" February, 2002 forwarded a Gazette Notification GSR No. 904 (E)
dated the 20" December 2001 carrying out amendment in regulation
6(2) revising the requirement of maximum of the basic pay to Rs.
15,100/- for the purpose of grant of Motor Car Advance. In their
subsequent communication dated the 17" January 2003, the Ministry
had forwarded a Gazette Notification G.S.R. 841 (8) dated 26 12.02
notifying amendment to Regulation’ 12 (1) by substituting figures ‘150°
and ‘100’ with ‘200’ and ‘70’.

3.0 The Committee notes with satisfaction that the Ministry of
Shipping have amended Regulation 6(2) by revising maximum of
the basic pay for the purpose of eligibility for grant of Motor Car
Advance from Rs. 7500/- to Rs. 15100/- consequent upon revision of
Pay scales of port employees in pursuance of the recommendations
of the Vth Central Pay Commission. The Committee further notes
that the Ministry have also carried out amendment to Regulation
12 (1) regarding recovery of advance by increasing the number of
instalments from 150 to 200 in case of purchase of Motor Car and

decreasing the number of instalments from 100 to 70 in case of



purchase of Motor Cycle, ete. thereby bringing the provisions in

line with those applicable to the Central Government Employees.


0

THE Cocuin Port TRUST EMPLOYEES (GRANT OF ADVANCES FOR
BUILDING OF Houses) REGULATIONS, 1971 — IMPLEMENTATION

OF 133" REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE ON SUBORDINATE
LEGISLATION, RAJYA SABHA

The Cochin Port Trust Employees (Grant of Advances for Building

~ of Houses) Regulations, 1971 framed under Section 28 of the Major
Port Trust Act, 1963 were examined and the matter was reported in the
133" Report of the Committee presented to the House on April 25,
2001, wherein the Committee had recommended as under :-

“@ in Regulation 26) the term
“permanent employee” and
“temporary employee” be
defined separately;

di) in Regulation 4(a) the revised
ceiling on the cost of flat/house
should be reflected in the
regulation and: the amended
regulation should be laid on the
Table of the Rajya Sabha during
the Budget Session (2001) of the
Rajya Sabha; and

(iii) in Regulation 6(b) the revised
ceiling of maximum advance
should be incorporated in the
regulation and the amended
regulation should be laid on the
Table of the Rajya Sabha during
the Budget Session (2001).

10



॥॥ 1
The Committee hopes that the Ministry of Surface

Transport would carry out the amendments as suggested above
expeditiously.”

2. ‘Relevant extracts from the Report were forwarded to the

Ministry of Shipping on May 4, 2001 for necessary action. The
Ministry vide their communication dated the 15" May, 2001 informed
that the matter had been taken up with the Cochin Port Trust.
Thereafter, the Ministry sought extension of time for two months vide
their communication dated the 5" August, 2002. The Ministry further
sought extension of time for another two months i.e., upto the 31"
December, 2002 vide their communication dated the 29" October,
2002.

3. The Ministry of Shipping vide their communication dated the
11% December, 2002 furnished a copy of the Gazette notification dated

the 4" December, 2002 publishing the “Cochin Port Trust Employees
(Grant of Advances for Building etc. of Houses) Amendment
Regulations, 2002. (Annexure)

4. The Committee notes with satisfaction that as
recommended by it, the Ministry have amended the Cochin Port

Trust Employees (Grant of Advances for Building of Houses)


12

Regulations, 1971 incorporating all the changes in the regulations
as proposed by it in its 133 Report.

eS



ANNEXURE
[Vide para 3 at page 11]

Relevant extracts from the Ministry of Shipping Notification
dated 4" December, 2002 publishing the Cochin Port Trust Employee
(Grant of Advances for. Building etc. of Houses) Amendment
Regulations, 2002.

MINISTRY OF SHIPPING
(PORTS WING)
NOTIFICATION

NEW DELHI, THE 4™ DECEMBER, 2002

G.S.R.796(E).- In exercise of the powers conferred by Sub-
section (1) of Section 124, read with Sub-section (1) of Section 132 of
the Major Port Trusts Act, 1963 (38 of 1963), the Central Government
hereby approves the Cochin Port Trust Employees (Grant of Advances
for Building of Houses) Amendment Regulations, 2002 made by the
Board of Trustees of Cochin Port Trust as set out in the Schedule
annexed to this Notification.

2. The said Regulations shall come into force from the date of
publication of this Notification in the Official Gazette.

THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY
SCHEDULE -

In exercise of the powers conferred by section 28 of the Major
Port Trusts Act,1963 (38 of 1963), the Cochin Port Trust hereby makes
the following amendments to the Cochin Port Trust Employees (Grant
of Advances for Building etc. of Houses) Regulations, 1971.

“Cochin Port Trust Employees (Grant of Advances for
Building etc. of Houses) Amendment Regulations, 2002”.

I 1. These Regulations may be called “The Cochin
Port Employees (Grant of Advance for Building etc.
of Houses) Amendment Regulations, 2002”.

13



Iv.

0)

14

2. They shall come into force on the date of their
publication in the Official Gazette:

Cochin Port Employees (Grant of advance for
building etc. of houses) Regulations, 1971,
hereinafter called the said, Regulations, shall be
amended as follows. .

In Regulation 2 clause (i) shall be substituted by the
following:

“Permanent employee”, is ari employee who has been
confirmed in the grade of his entry into service.

In Regulation 2 the following shall be inserted as (j)

“Temporary employee” isan — employee who is
not holding a regular post or who has not been
confirmed in the post to which _he is initially
recruited.

Clauses (a) (i),(ii), (iii) of Regulation 4 of the said
Regulations shall be substituted by the following
namely:-

a) 1 The cost of the house to be built /purchased
(excluding the cost of land as mentioned in the
‘sale deed in respect of the land/house) should not
exceed 200 times of the monthly basic
pay+NPA+stagnation increment of the
-employees subject to a minimum of Rs. 7.5 lakhs

and a maximum of Rs. 18 lakhs. Where the

Chairman is satisfied for proper reasons that

there is justification on the merits of the case

they may relax the ceiling limit, the same may be
relax up to a maximum of 25% of the ceiling
mentioned above in individual cases.



VI.

15

In the said. Regulations, in Regulation 4 sub
clause (0) 2 the words “100 times monthly pay or
Rs.1,25,000/- which ever is less” shall be
substituted as follows:-

“the cost ceiling limits prescribed in these
Regulations”

In the said Regulations, in Regulation 4 a (i) (ii)
(iii) shall be renumbered as a(1), a(i) shall be
renumbered as a(2), a and b(i) clauses shall be
renumbered as (i) (ii) and clause b(2) shall be
renumbered as (b). A

Sub-Regulation(b) of Regulation 6,. shall be
substituted as follows:-

“Class 1 & Il officers may be granted an
advance not exceeding an amount equal to 50 times
of Basic pay +Stagnation Increment+NPA subject to
a maximum of Rs.7,50,000/- or the actual cost of
construction whichever is less in cases Covered by
Regulation 5(a) above and Rs. 1,80,000/- in cases
falling under Regulation 5(b) above”.

Class III and IV employees may be granted
an advance not exceeding an amount equal to 50 times
of Basic pay+Stagnation Increment in cases covered by
Regulation 5(a) above and Rs. 1,80,000/- in cases
falling under Regulation 5(b) above.

In Sub-Regulation (c) of Regulation 6 after
the first sentence the following shall be inserted as
second sentence after the words “prescribed above”.

The true cost of land and construction of
house or cost of enlarging living accommodation
shall be restricted to 80% in rural areas. If the HOD



16
certifies that the concerned rural area falls within the
periphery of a town or city this can be sanctioned
upto 100% .
Sub-Regulation (e) of Regulation 6 shall be
substituted as follows:-
“The repaying capacity of the employee will be

calculated in the following manner:-

(@) In the case of officials 35% of basic pay +
Tetiring after 4 stagnation
20 years U increment + NPA

(0) In the case of 4 40% of basic pay +
Official retiring US.L.+NPA
after 10 years || after adjustment +
but not later 20 years} of 65% of DCRG.

(०) In the case of 1 50 % of basic pay+
Officials retiring ॥ S.1. + NPA adjust-
within 10 years Ument of 75% of

4 DCRG



m

THE COIR BOARD SERVICES (CLASSIFICATION, CONTROL &
APPEAL) BYE LAWS,1969 -IMPLEMENTATION OF 125™
REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE ON SUBORDINATE
LEGISLATION, RAJYA SABHA

The Coir Board Services (Classification, Control &Appeal)
Bye Laws, 1969 framed under the sub-section (3) of Section 4 of the
Coir Industry Act, 1953 were examined by the Committee and the
matter was reported to the House on December 22, 1999 in its 125"
Report. The observations/recommendations of the Committee as
contained in the said Report are as under:

“The Committee notes with satisfaction that the Ministry
of Industry have accepted the suggestions of the
Committee in respect of bye law 5 regarding classification
of posts and bye law 8 regarding penalties. The
Committee, however, notes the reply of the Ministry with
regard to bye law 3 The Committee hopes that the
Ministry of Industry would notify the amendments to bye

. laws 5 & 8 as agreed to by them expeditiously, under
intimation to it.”

2 The extracts from the above Report were forwarded to the
Ministry of Agro & Rural Industries on January 9, 2001 for necessary
action.

3. The Ministry, vide their communication dated January 12,
2001 furnished a copy of the Notification S.O. No. 599 dated July 27,
1999 publishing the Coir Board Services (Classification, Control &
Appeal) Amendment Bye- laws, 1999. (Annexure I) carrying out
amendment to Bye-law 5 as per the Committee’s recommendations,



18

5. On December 26, 2001, the Ministry informed that the
amendment to Bye-law 8 of the Coir Board (Classification, Control &
Appeal) Bye- laws, 1969 regarding penalties had since been vetted by
the Ministry of Law & Justice. The Ministry also forwarded a copy of

the draft notification for Committee’s information

6. The Ministry vide their communication dated January 3, 2003
furnished a copy of the Notification 5.0. No. 1260 (8) dated
24.12.2001 publishing the “Coir Board Service (Classification, Control
& Appeal) Amendment Bye-Laws, 2001 (Annexure-II) amending Bye-

Law 8 as per the Committee’s suggestion.

The Committee notes with satisfaction that the Ministry of
Agro & Rural Industries have notified the amendments in Bye-

laws 5 and 8 in pursuance to its recommendations.

4. Regarding amendment to Bye-law 8, the matter was pursued
with the Ministry of Agro & Rural Industries. After some reminders,
the Ministry, on July 4, 2001 stated that they had assigned the study to
the Administrative Staff College of India (ASCI), Hyderabad and
sought extension of time upto December 2001, which was granted to
them.



ANNEXURE I
[Vide para 3 at page 17]

The GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY
MINISTRY OF INDUSTRY
@epartment of Small Scale Industries and Agro
and Rural
Industries)

NOTIFICATION
New Delhi the 27" July, 1999

8.0. 599(E):- The following bye-laws further to amend the
Coir Board Services (Classification, Control and Appeal)
Byelaws,1969 made by the Coir Board in exercise of powers conferred
by Clause (d) of sub-section (1) of Section 27 of the Coir Industry Act,
1953 (45 of 1953) read with bye-laws 15 and 16 of the Coir Board
(Transaction of Business Conditions of Service of Employees and
Maintenance of Accounts) Bye-laws, 1955 and confirmed by the
Central Government, are hereby published as required by sub-
section(2) of section 27 of the said Act, namely:-

1. (1) These Bye-laws may be called the Coir Board
Services (Classification, Control and Appeal) Amendment
Bye- laws, 1999.

(2) They shall come into force on the date of their
publication in the Official Gazette.

2. In the Coir Board Service (Classification, Control and Appeal)
‘Laws, 1969 Bye-Law 5 shall be amended, namely:-

19



a —————————

20
Classification of Posts:-

All posts under the Board’s service shall be classified as
follows:-

$1 190. Pay of maximum of the scale of the Grouping posts

Group 7 प्जैजयाएा

1. Not less than Rs. 13,500 A
2. Not less than Rs.9,000 but less than Rs. 13,500 8
3. Over Rs. 4,000 but less than Rs 9,000 c
4. Rs. 4,000 or less D

Foot Note:- The principal Bye-Laws were published in the Gazette of
India vide S.O.No 200 dated the 18” January, 1969 and
subsequently amended vide:-

1. Notification $.0. 2279 dated the 12 July, 1975.

2. Notification 5.0. 4389 dated the 20 November, 1976

3. Notification $.0.4372 dated the 17" November, 1983

4. Notification $.0.1075 (0) dated the 227 November, 1988.

Notification 5.0.779 (8) dated the 23" October, 1992.


ANNEXURE II
[Vide para 6 at page 18]

MINISTRY OF AGRO AND RURAL INDUSTRIES
‘NOTIFICATION
New Delhi, Dated the 24" December,2001

$.0.1260 (E):- The following bye-laws further to amend the
Coir Board Services(Classification, Control and Appeal) Bye-laws,
1969 made by the Coir Board in exercise of the powers conferred by
sub-section (3) of section 4 of the Coir Industry Act, 1953 (45 of
1953), read with rules 4 and 5 of the Coir Industry Rules, 1954, and
confirmed by the Central Government are hereby published, as required
by sub-section(2) of section 27 of the said Act, namely:-

1. (1) These Bye-laws may be called the Coir Board Services
(Classification Control and Appeal) Amendment Bye-laws,
2001.

(2) They shall come into force on the date of their publieation in
Official Gazette.

2, (1) in the Coir Board Services (Classification, Control and
Appeal). Bye-laws, 1969, iti byé-law 8, —

(a) after Clause (iii), the following shall be inserted, namely:-

“Gii) (a) reduction to a lower stage in the time-scale of pay for a period
not exceeding three years, without cumulative effect and not adversely
affecting his pension”.

(0) Inclause V, the words, “save as provided for in clause iii (a)” shall
be inserted in the beginning and the following proviso shall be
inserted at the end, namely:



22

“Provided that, in every case in which the charge of
possession of assets disproportionate to known- sources of
income or the charge of acceptance from any person of any
gratification, other than legal remuneration as a motive or
reward for doing or forbearing to do any official act is
established, the penalty mentioned in clause(viii) or clause (ix)
shall be imposed.

Provided further that in any exceptional case and for special
reasons recorded in writing, any other penalty may be imposed”.

F.No.4(27)/98-Coir
Sd/-

Foot Note:- The notification for constitution of the Coir Board was
issued vide numbers 5.0. 784 (E) dated the 7" September, 1998 and
दर subsequently amended vide numbers (1) 5.0.38 (8) dated the 28%
January, 1999, (2) 5.0. 166 (E) dated the 11" March 1999, (3) $.0. 410
(8) dated the 26" April, 2000 and (4) S.0.70 (E) dated the 197 January,
2001.


Iv
THE TOBACCO BOARD (GENERAL) REGULATIONS, 1984
The Tobacco Board (General) Regulations, 1984 framed under
the Tobacco Board Act, 1975 were examined and a questionnaire on
the subject was forwarded to the Ministry of Commerce and Industry
on the 27" December, 2000 for their comments/clarifications. The
points referred to the Ministry and their comments/clarifications
received thereon are placed at Annexure I.
2. The subject matter was then taken up for discussion with the
representatives: of the Tobacco Board and the Ministry of Commerce
and Industry at Hyderabad on the 8" January, 2000. Relevant extracts
from the study note (Annexure II) on the above subject were forwarded
to the Ministry for necessary action on the 317 March, 2000 and the
* Action Taken Note thereon was furnished on the 23 June, 2000. The
Committee’s observations and the action taken by the Ministry thereon
are reproduced below:-

23



.

24

॥ L Laying of the Tobacco General Regulations. Committee’s
observation (8.1.2000)
The Committee expressed its dissatisfaction over the fact that
neither the Ministry nor the Board were aware of the exact position in
. this regard. The Chairman of the Tobacco Board and the Joint
Secretary of the Department of Commerce promised to have this
information ascertained.
Action taken by Ministry (23.6.2000)
It could not be confirmed beyond doubt whether the Tobacco
Board General Regulation, 1984 issued under notification dated the 317
December,.1984 and its subsequent amendment Regulations issued
under notification dated the 27 December, 1988 were laid on the Table
of both the Houses of Parliament within the stipulated time. As a
measure of abundant caution and on the assumption that notifications
” were not laid on the Table of the Houses, action has been. initiated to
lay the notifications during the ensuing monsoon session, 2000.

IL Regulation 7(1) proviso, regulation 15 proviso and
regulation 18 proviso


25 .

Committee’s observation (8.1.2000)

The Committee noted that the Ministry had found favour with
its suggestions in relation to regulation 7(1) proviso, regulation 15
proviso and regulation 10 proviso.

Action taken by Ministry (23.6.2000)

This Ministry is in the process of issuing notifications for
amendments in the Regulations 7(1), 15 and 18 as suggested by the
Committee.
nL Rules/Regulations to be framed under the Tobacco Board
Act, 1975

Committee’s observation (8.1.2000)

The Committee desired to know the extent to which
tules/regulations which are contemplated under the Tobacco Board Act,
1975 have been framed. The representatives of the Tobacco Board
‘mentioned some of the areas where rules/regulations were yet to be
acid The Committee desired to have a note indicating the position

clearly in this regard.



EEEE—————

26

Action taken by Ministry (23.6.2000)
| The areas where any fresh Rules and Regulations are to be
framed, are being examined and the position will be intimated shortly.
Tv. Appointment of the Chairman, Tobacco Board
. Committee’s observation (8.1.2000)

The Committee also raised the point that institutions like
Tobacco Board which owe a great responsibility should be adequately
manned and, in any case, it should be headed by a full time Chairman
so that it receives a proper supervision. The Committee’s point was
well taken.

Action taken by Ministry (23.6.2000)
Government is taking necessary action to select and appoint a
willing and suitable candidate for the post of Chairman, Tobacco

Board.

3. The Ministry of Commerce and Industry on the 50 January,
2001, furnished the latest position with reference to amendments to
Regulations 7(1), 15-and 18. The Ministry informed that amendments

to the Regulations were under active consideration. Certain other areas

had been identified to give more powers to the Tobacco Board. The



27

said Regulations and the issues being identified were being taken
together for processing amendments in the Act. |

4. Thereafter, the subject matter was again taken up for
discussion with the representatives of the Tobacco Board and the
Ministry of Commerce and Industry (Department of Commerce) at
Hyderabad on the 8" November, 2001. The Committee during the
course of discussion enquired about the implementation of its earlier
suggestion on regulations 7(1), 15 proviso and 18 proviso. Relevant
‘extracts from the study note on the above discussion are placed at
Annexure III.

5. The representative from the Ministry of Commerce and
Industry informed that the Ministry had notified the amendment as
suggested by the Committee and accepted by the Ministry through 8
“Gazette Notification 5.0. No 112 issued on the 7" August 2000. To
this the Committee pointed out that implementation of the action taken
should have been sent to the Committee. The representative of the
Ministry promised to look into the matter. The Committee, however,
asked the Ministry to expedite the note on the status of Subordinate

Legislation under the Tobacco Board Act, 1975. The Committee also



28

asked the Ministry to check and intimate the date of laying of the
Tobacco Board General Regulation. Regarding Committee’s
observation that a full-time Chairman be appointed to the Tobacco
Board in the interests of proper supervision, the Committee was
informed that a full-time Chairman had been appointed by the
Department of Personnel & Training in January 2001.
6. The Ministry of Commerce and Industry vide Notification No.
4/45/99-EP (Agri VI) dated the 8" August, 2000 have since notified the
Tobacco Board (General) Amendment Regulations, 2000 on the 6th
May, 2002 (Annexure IV) along with statement explaining the delay in
laying the Tobacco Board (General) Amendment Regulations, 2000.
The Ministry’s explanation for the delay is as under :-

“Tt has not been possible to confirm beyond doubt

whether these Regulations have been laid or not on the

Table of both Houses of Parliament within the stipulated

time, as the relevant records in this regard are not

traceable. Likewise, it is not possible to prove beyond

doubt that: the notifications issued under the Tobacco

Board Act over the years 2000 have been.tabled in the

Parliament. Therefore, as a measure of abundant

caution, action has been initiated to lay all the relevant

notifications on the Table of both the Houses of

Parliament during the on-going Winter Session. The

lapse, if any, in this regard, is very much regretted and
may be condoned.”



29
7. The Ministry vide their communication dated the August 29,
2002 furnished a status note on subordinate legislation under the
Tobacco Board Act, 1975 (Annexure V)

8. In relation to regulation 7(1) proviso, it was pointed out by
the Committee that the regulations did not specify any time period
within which the casual vacancy on any committee shall be filled
up. The Committee notes with satisfaction that regulation 7 has
been amended so as to provide that any casual vacancy on a
Committee shall be filled up by the Board at its immediate next
meeting, Further, in relation to regulation 15 proviso, the
Committee had pointed out that the upper ceilings of pay
mentioned therein did not account for the revision in pay-scales in
pursuance of the Vth Central Pay Commission’s recommendations.
The Committee also notes that the Ministry have substituted
regulation 15 whereby the pay-scales mentioned therein are based
upon the Vth Pay Commission’s recommendations. Lastly, the
Committee had pointed out that the mention of Rs. 10/- as
conveyance allowance per day in regulation 18 proviso seemed to
be quite disproportionate. The Committee is also happy to note
that the Government have substituted regulation 18 with a new one
by providing for payment of actual expenditure incurred on
conveyance to an associated or co-opted Member.



ANNEXURE I
[Vide para 1 at page 23]

Tobacco Board: Guntur
(Ministry Of Commerce, Government, Of India)

Points Observed By The Rajya
Sabha Secretariat
Vide Their Questionnaire On
Tobacco Board (General),
Regulations, 1984.

(1) Where the Tobacco Board
(General) Regulations,
1984 have been laid on
the Table of the Rajya
Sabha; if so the details in
this regard.

Regulation 5(2) proviso:

(2) What is the notice period
within which a special
meeting could be called?
Whether the Ministry
have any objection in
prescribing any period
for this special meeting?

Comments of The Tobacco
Board, Guntur.

The exact date of laying the
rules on the table of the Rajya
Sabha is being obtained from the

There is no proviso in Tobacco
Board (General) Regulations,
1984 under section 5(2) about
the notice period within which a
special meeting could be called.
However there is a provision to
call for a meeting of any of the
Committees at any time in the
case of urgency. As per the
Regulation 5(3) the time
required to call for a meeting of
the regular meeting it self is 10
clear days. This requirement
may apply to special meetings

ORRIN ae



Regulation 70) proviso:

(3).There is no time period
within which a casual
vacancy on any
Committee shall be filled
up. Whetlier the Ministry
have any objection in
prescribing a time period
for this purpose.

Regulation 15 proviso:

(4) Whether the upper ceilings
of pay = mentioned
account for the
recommendation of the
Vth Pay Commission or
whether a revision is
called for therein. What
action Government have
taken/are taking for the
updating the provision
of the these regulation.

‘Regulation17(4) proviso:

(5)What are those special
circumstances under which
Travelling Allowance to
any associated or co-opted
members may be granted
from the place other than
the place of residence. How
many time and for how

formally Casual vacancy on a
Committee is filled up by the
Board at its next meeting.
Prescribing a time period would
mean that the Board will have
to meet exclusively within the
prescribed time for this
purpose. Therefore, at best, it
may be prescribed that a
vacancy on a Committee shall
be filled up by the Board at its
immediate next meeting.

As per the Vth Pay
Commission recommendations,
the maximum scale of pay of Rs.
4500/: per mensem in the case of
non-technical staff has been
revised to Rs. 15,200/- per
mensem and that of Rs.4000/- in
the case of technical staff has
been revised to Rs.13,500/- per
mensem. Action for updating
these scales is being taken up.

The Associated or Co-opted
members are entitled for
travelling and daily allowances
as per Regulations, 17 of
Tobacco Board (General)
Regulations, 1984 from the
usual place of residence to the
meeting. However, in case of



many members this provision
have been invoked during the
last three years?

Regulation 18 proviso:

(6) A sum of mupees ten as
conveyance allowance
per day is too less an
amount When was this
amount fixed and why

32

special circumstances, if the
‘Associated or Co- opted
members are compelled to travel
from places other than their
usual place of residence due to
the exigencies is of their work
and their presence is required for
the meeting, the travelling,
allowances to the above two
categories of members may be
admitted for payment for travel
from places other than their
usual place of residence.

last three years.

The amount of Rs. 10/- as
conveyance allowance per day
was fixed in the year 1984 vide
Gazette Notification No. F8/880-
Ep (Agri-V1) dated 31.12.1984.
Since the Tobacco Board has
been providing transport to all
categories of members who are
residing at a place where the
meeting of the Board or any
Committee is convened, the
Board did not consider
enhancing the — conveyance
allowance suitably. However the
conveyance allowance can be
considered for revisiom as
suggested by the Rajya Sabha



(7) How many members have
been co-opted with the
various Committee
during last three years.
Whether the Ministry
would like to give their
details.

33

Committee on Subordinate
Legislation.

No member has been co-opted
with the vayious Committee
during last three years.



ANNEXURE II
[Vide para 2 at page 23]
STUDY NOTE ON THE VISIT OF THE COMMITTEE ON
SUBORDINATE LEGISLATION TO VISAKHAPATNAM AND
HYDERABAD FROM JANUARY 4 TO 8, 2000.
Vv
DISCUSSION WITH THE REPRESENTATIVES OF TOBACCO
BOARD TOGETHER WITH THE REPRESENTATIVES OF
THE CENTRAL MINISTRY OF COMMERCE ON THE
TOBACCO BOARD GENERAL REGULATIONS, 1984
FRAMED UNDER THE TOBACCO BOARD ACT, 1975.
The Committee met at 10.00 a.m. on Saturday, the 87 January
2000 at Hyderabad for discussions on the Tobacco Board General
” Regulations, 1984 framed under the Tobacco Board Act, 1975 with the
Tepresentatives of Tobacco Board and Central Ministry of Commerce.
The following were present:-
MEMBERS
Miss Saroj Khaparde  — Chairperson
Shri Radhakishan Malaviya
Shri Sukhdev Singh Libra

Shri S. Ramachandran Pillai
Shri A. Lakshmisagar

yPwnre

34



35
5. Shri N. Thalavai Sundaram
6. Shri Rumindla Ramachandraiah
=|
1. Shri Deepak Goyal, Deputy Secretary

REPRESENTATIVES OF THE MINISTRY OF COMMERCE AND
TOBACCO BoaRD

1. Shri S.M. Acharya, Joint Secretary & Chairman Tobacco

2. आग IB. V. Subrahamanyam, Executive Director

3. Shri C.R. Chikkamath, Director (Auctions)

4. Shri P. Gangadhara Prasad, Secretary

The discussion began with an opening remark by the
Chairperson of the Committee wherein she spelt out the scope and
functions of the Committee together with the objectives of its visit. The
Tepresentatives were asked to make a brief presentation on the subject
and come forward with suggestions, if any, | for
amendments/modifications of the Tobacco Board General Regulations,

1984 framed under the Tobacco Board Act, 1975, particularly, in the

light of their experience during the course of implementation. Shri S.M.
Acharya, Chairman Tobacco Board and Joint Secretary Ministry of
Commerce welcomed the Chairperson and Members of the



|

36
Committee. This was followed by a brief presentation on the subject by
him.

Coming to the Tobacco Board General Regulations, the Committee
sought some further clarifications on the basis of the answers furnished
by the Ministry of Commerce to the questionnaire. On the first question
which related to the details of laying of the Tobacco Board General
Regulations on the table of both Houses of Parliament, the Committee
expressed its dissatisfaction over the fact that neither the Ministry nor
the Board were aware of the exact position in this regard. The
Chairman of the Tobacco Board and the Joint Secretary of the
Department of Commerce promised to have this information
ascertained.

The Committee noted that the Ministry of Commerce have found
favour with the Committee’s suggestions in relation to regulation 7(1)
proviso, regulation 15 proviso and regulation 18 proviso. The
Committee, iowever, noted the position as stated by the Ministry in
relation to regulation 5(2) proviso and regulation 17(4) proviso.

Besides the specific provisions of the regulations, the Committee

also had discussion on certain general points. The Committee desired to



37

note the extent to which rules/regulations which are contemplated
under the Tobacco Board Act, 1975 have been framed. The
Tepresentatives of the Tobacco Board mentioned some of the areas
where rules/regulations were yet to be framed. The Committee desired
to have a note indicating the position clearly in this regard. The
Committee also asked the Chairman of the Tobacco Board to comment
on the appropriateness of the title of the regulation vis-a-vis its contents
because the regulation scemed to deal with the establishment of the
Board as well as the travelling and other allowances of the associate
and corporate members of the Board and, to that extent, the title of the
regulation was in misnomer.

The Committee also raised the point that institutions like Tobacco
Board which owe a great Tesponsibility should be adequately manned
and, in any case, it should be headed by a full time Chairman so that it
receives a Proper supervision. The Committee’s point was well taken.

The meeting adjourn with a mutual vote of thanks.



ANNEXURE III
[Vide page 4 at page 27]

STUDY-NOTE ON THE VISIT OF THE COMMITTEE ON
SUBORDINATE LEGISLATION TO HYDERABAD
VISAKHAPATNAM AND BHUBANESHWAR FROM
NOVEMBER 7 TO 12,2001.

I

‘The Tobacco Board General Regulations, 1984, and the Tobacco Board
(Recruitment) Regulations, 1989.

The Committee met at 3.00 p.m. on Thursday, the 8" November,
2001 at Hyderabad and held discussion with the representatives of the
Tobacco Board and the Department of Commerce on the Tobacco
Board General Regulations, 1984 and the Tobacco Board (Recruitment)
Regulations, 1981.

The following were present:-

MEMBERS

1. Shri Solipeta Ramachandra Reddy = Convenor

2. Shri Rajnath Singh ‘Surya’

3. Shri H.K. Javare Gowda

4... Shri 5. Sivasubramanian

5. Shri P.G. Narayanan
6. Shri Suresh A. Keshwani
SECRETARIAT
Shri Deepak Goyal, Deputy secretary
2... Shri Surendra K. Tripathi, Committee officer
38

=


|

REPRESENTATIVES OF TOBACCO BOARD
Dr. P. Dayachari, Chairman
Shri K.J.v. Subrahmanyam, Executive Director
Shri C.S.S. Patnaik, Secretary
Smt. Shefali, Director
At the outset, Convenor welcomed the Tepresentatives of the
Tobacco Board and the Department of Commerce and introduced the
members present in the meeting. Next, Chairman, Tobacco Board made
a brief presentation on the activities of the Board. He informed the
Committee that the production of Tobacco is increasing at a steady
Pace of 2% and its consumption is also increasing at the same rate. He
further informed that growing tobacco in the country has a high
economic significance as there are at least 5 million farmers in this
field and in all 26 million people are involved with tobacco which is
3% of the population. He further informed that a good sum of Rs. 8800
Crores is collected as Central Excise on tobacco which is aroun’ 12%
of the total exchequer’s collection in a year. The Flue Cured Virginia
Tobacco (FCV Tobacco) is the major exportable type cultivated
tobacco which is mainly grown in Andhra Pradesh followed by
Karnatka and a little in Maharashtra and Orissa. The Committee was
informed that India was the 271 largest producer and the 7” largest
exporter of tobacco in the world earning an annual foreign exchange of
about Rs.9000 crores. The Committee was however informed that jdue
to quota restrictions on India, tobacco was facing some problems. The
Committee was informed that the Board was financially self sufficient

की Yn =

6

1! |


40

and it did not require any grants. The Committee was also apprised
about the functions of Tobacco Board as enumerated below:

(0) Regulate the production and curing the Virginia Tobacco
to match demand in India and abroad.

(ii) Propagating information useful to the growers, dealers
and exporters of Virginia tobacco and manufacturers of
Vigrinia tobacco products. .

(9). Promoting grading of tobacco at the level of growers.

| (iv) Establishment of auction platforms for the sale of Virginia
| tobacco and function as auctioneer.

(v) Maintenance and improvement of existing markets and

| development of new markets outside India.

(vi) Keeping a constant watch on Virginia tobacco market,
both in India and abroad and ensuring fair and
remunerative price for the same.

(vii) Purchasing Virginia tobacco from the growers when the
same is considered necessary or expedient for protecting

. the interest of growers. Thereafter the Committee took up
the agenda.
Tobacco Board General Regulations 1984
The Committee enquired about the implementation of its
suggestion on the following regulations made during its visit to

Hyderabad on January 8, 2000.

@ Regulation 7(i) proviso: regarding filling of ‘casual

vacancy by the Board at its immediate next meeting;



5 |
(ii) Regulation 15 proviso: regarding up dating the Pay scales
of technical and non technical staff.
(iii) Regulation 18 proviso: regarding upward revision of
conveyance allowance per day.

The representative from the Department of Commerce
informed that the Ministry had notified the amendment as suggested by
the Committee and accepted by the Ministry through a Gazette
Notifications 5.0. No 112 issued on 7” August 2000. To this the
Committee pointed out that implementation of the action taken should
have been sent to the Committee. The representative of the Ministry
agreed to look into the matter. The Committee however asked the
Ministry to expedite the note on the status of Subordinate Legislation
under the Tobacco Board Act, 1975. The Committee also asked the
Ministry to check and intimate the date of laying of the Tobacco Board
General Regulation.



| os IV
[Vide para 6 at page 28]

MINISTRY OF COMMERCE AND INDUSTRY
(Department of Commerce)
NOTIFICATION
New Delhi, the 7" August, 2000

No. 4/45/99-EP (Agri. V¥).- In exercise of the powers
conferred by sub-section(1) read with sub-section (2) of section 33 of
the Tobacco Board Act, 1975 (4 of 1975), the Tobacco Board hereby
makes the following regulations, the same. having been approved by the
Central Government as required by sub-section (3) of section 33 of the
said Act, further to amend the Tobacco Board (General) Regulations,
1984, namely.

1. (1) These regulations may be called the Tobacco Board
(General) Amendment Regulations, 2000.

(2) They shall come into force on the date their publication in
the Official Gazette

2. In the Tobacco Board (General) Regulations, 1984(herein
after referred to as the principal regulation), in regulation 7, for sub-
regulation (1), the following shall be substituted, namely:-

(1) Any casual vacancy on a Committee shall be filled
up by the Board as its immediate next meeting”.

3. In the principal regulation for regulation 15, the following
shall be substituted namely:-

™]5, CREATION OF POSTS:- The Board may, subject to
availability of funds, either by inclusion of a specific budget
provision for the purpose or by savings under an appropriate head or
by valid re-appropriation, create such posts under intimation to
Government, subject to scrutiny at the budget stage and also subject
to observance of ban order for creation of posts issued by the
Government from time to time, if in its opinion creation of such posts
is considered necessary for the efficient performance of its function:-
42



43

Provided that no post, the maximum of scale of pay which
exceeds Rs. 13,500 per mensem in the case of non-technical and Rs.
13,125 per mensem in the case of technical, shall be created without the
previous sanction of the Central Government:

Provided further that in case of exigencies, temporary posts
which would need to be created in the interest of the Board and the
maximum of scale of pay which does not exceed Rs. 13,500 per
mensem in the case of non-technical and Rs. 13,125 per mensem in ihe
case of technical may be created by the Chairman subject to post facto
approval of the Board.”

4 -In the principal regulation, for regulation, 18 the following
regulation shall be substituted, namely:-

“18, Conveyance allowances to associated member and
coopted members: No conveyance allowance for attending
meetings of the Board or any of its Committees or for attending to
any other business of the Board or of the Committees, shall be paid
to the associated or co-opted members who draw travelling or
daily allowance:

Provided that an associated or a co-opted member who is residing
at a place where the meeting of the Board or any of the Committees is
held or where any other business of the Board or the Committee is
transacted may be paid the actual expenditure incurred on conveyance
on production of vouchers and subject to the same being approved by
the Chairman of the Board/Committee, provided that such a member
has not availed of any transport arranged by the Board”.

(No. Advt. -3/4/Exty/153/2000)



44

हा Note:- The principal regulation was published vide Department of
Commerce, Tobacco Board’s notification No. F8/8/80-EP(Agri.VI)
dated 31-12-1984 In Part-II, Section 4 on 12.1.1985 and subsequently
amended by:-

No.2/4/85-EP(Agri. VI) dated 21.12.1988.

To be on the table of Lok Sabha /Rajya Sabha
(Authenticated)

Government Of India
Ministry of Commerce & Industry
Department of Commerce

Statement explaining the delay in laying the Tobacco Board
(General) Amendment Regulations, 2000

It has not been possible to confirm beyond doubt whether
these Regulations have been laid or not on the Table of both the Houses
of Parliament within the stipulated time, as the relevant records in this
regard are not traceable. Likewise, it is not possible to prove beyond
doubt that the notifications issued under the Tobacco Board Act over
the year 2000 have been tabled in Parliament. Therefore, as a measure
of abundant caution, action has been initiated to lay all the relevant
notifications on the Table of both the Houses of Parliament during the
on-going Winter Session. The lapse, if any, in this regard, is very much
regretted any.may be condoned.

RE



x
[Vide para 7 at page 29]

STATUS NOTE ON SUBORDINATE LEGISLATION
UNDER THE TOBACCO BOARD ACT

The Tobacco Board has framed the following rules and
Tegulations as per the powers conferred by sections 32 and 33 of the
Tobacco Board Act for carrying out the Purposes of the Act and to
enable sufficient discharge of its functions:-

(a) Tobacco Board Rules 1976

(b) Tobacco Board (Auctions) Rules 1984

(० The Tobacco Board (General) Regulations 1984

(9) The Tobacco Board (Auction) Regulations 1984

(०) The Tobacco Board (Recruitment) Regulations 1989

In addition,’ the Board has also formulated the Tobacco Board
€ess Rules, 1984 under the Tobacco Cess Act, 1975.

In brief, the objective of each of these rules and regulations is
as follows: ह

Tobacco Board Rules: These rules cover aspects such as filling of
vacancies on the board, term of office, Procedure for meetings,
functions, budget and accounts and outline the powers of the Board, the
Chairman, the Executive Director and the Secretary. In addition, the
mules also cover aspects such as registration of growers, exporters, barn
operators and inspection of land or premises by the Board etc.



राणा, 46

Tobacco Board (Auction) Rules: These rules cover the procedure to
be adopted for conduct of auctions by the Tobacco Board. Specific
areas covered are delivery of tobacco by growers at auction platforms,
returns to be submitted, authorization of buyers and malpractices by
growers and buyers and relevant penal provisions.

The Tobacco Board (Auction) Regulations: These cover aspects
such as issue of passbooks to growers, allotment of quotas, mode of
packing and delivery of tobacco at the auction platforms, procedure for
receipt, weighment and arrangement of bales on the platforms,
procedure and conditions for authorization of buyers, classification of
tobacco, auction procedure, conduct of sale & mode of bidding, mode
of payment by the buyers and procedure for payment of sale proceeds
to growers as well as procedure for rejections and reputations.

Tobacco Board (General) Regulations: These rules cover matters
such as appointment and functions of various committees, rules of
procedure for: meetings of the committees, conditions of service of
officers and employees of the Board, establishment matters, including
rules on postings and transfers.

The Tobacco Board (Recruitment) Regulations: These cover all
aspects related to recruitment of officers and employees of the Board,
pay & allowances, qualifications, _ seniority, reservations and
relaxations, constitution of DPCs and other conditions of service.



Vv
SUMMARY OF RECOMMENDATION
I

Visakhapatnam Port Employees (Grant of Advances for Purchase
of Conveyances) Regulations, 1993.

The Committee notes with satisfaction that the Ministry of
Shipping have amended Regulation 6 (2) by revising maximum of the
basic pay for the purpose of eligibility for grant of Motor Car Advance
from Rs. 7500/- to Rs.15100/- consequent upon revision of Pay scales
of port employees in pursuance of the recommendation of the Vth Pay
Commission. The Committee further noted that the Ministry have
also carried out amendment to Regulation 12 (1) regarding recovery of
advance by increasing the number of installments from 150 to 200 in
case of purchase of Motor Car and decreasing. the number of
installments from 100 to 70 in case of purchase of Motor Cycle, etc.
thereby bringing the provision in line with those applicable to Central
Government Employees.

0

The Cochin Port Trust Employees (Grant of Advances for Building
of Hoses) Regulations 1971-Implementation of 133" Report of the
Committee on Subordinate Legislation, Rajya Sabha

The Committee notes with satisfaction that as recommended
by it, the Ministry have amended the Cochin Port Trust Employees
(Grant of Advances for Building of Houses) Regulations, 1971
incorporating all the changes in the regulations as proposed by it in its
133" Report.



m
The Coir Board Services (Classification, Control & Appeal) Bye

Laws, 1969 - Implementation of 125" Report of the Committee on
Subordinate Legislation, Rajya Sabha

The Committee notes with satisfaction that the Ministry of Agro &
Rural Industries have notified the amendments in Bye-laws 5 and 8 in

pursuance to its recommendations.

Iv
The Tobacco Board (General) Regulations, 1984

In relation to regulation 7(1) proviso, it was pointed out by the
Committee that the regulations did not specify any time period within
which the casual vacancy on any Committee shall be filled up. The
Committee notes with satisfaction that regulation 7 has been
amended so as to provide that any casual vacancy on a committee
shall be filled up by the Board at its immediate next meeting.
Further, in relation to regulation 15 proviso, the Committee had pointed
out that the upper ceilings of pay mentioned therein did not account for

the revision in pay-scales in pursuance of the Vth Central Pay

Commission’s



recommendations. The Committee also notes that the Ministry have
substituted regulation 15 whereby the pay-scales mentioned therein
are based upon the Vth Pay Commission’s recommendations.
Lastly, the Committee had pointed out that the mention of Rs. 10/- as
conveyance allowance per day in regulation 18 proviso seemed to be
quite disproportionate. The Committee is also happy to note that
the Government have substituted regulation 18 with a new one by

Providing for payment of actual expenditure incurred on

conveyance to an associated or co-opted member.

eee



MINUTES OF THE MEETING OF THE
COMMITTEE ON SUBORDINATE LEGISLATION,
RAJYA SABHA

K
NINTH MEETING

The Committee met at 3.00 p.m. on Monday the 31" March,
2003 in Room No. 126-C (Chairman’s Room) Third Floor, Parliament

House, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT

ShriA.Vijayaraghavan  — Chairman
Shri M.V. Rajasekharan

Shri Khan Ghufran Zahidi

Dr. AR. Kidwai

Shri Rajiv Ranjan Singh ‘Lalan’

Shri Ravula Chandra Sekar Reddy

Shri S. Sivasubramanian

raven

SECRETARIAT

1 Shri N.C. Joshi, Joint Secretary

2.  - Shri Deepak Goyal, Deputy Secretary

3. Shri Ram Behari Gupta, Under Secretary
4. Shri Arun Sharma, Committee Officer

in the fourth week of April 2003 for ion of these reports to the
House. The Committee further authorized its Chairman and in his
Foe Shri Ravula Chandra Sekar Reddy and Shri S
Sivasubramanian, Members, to present the Reports.

50



ee

4. The meeting then adjourned at 4.30 p.m.

oe

कक

Relates to matter not included in the Report