ES OF INDIA

RAJYA SABHA

COMMITTEE ON SUBORDINATE
LEGISLATION

{ SEVENTY-THIRD REPORT

) (Presented on the 27th August, 1987)

gana an’

RAJYA SABHA SECRF/IARIAT
NEW DELHI

August 1987/Bbhadra 2909 (Saka)

}

/


1५
2,

=

Paes
Composition of the Committee 6) to Gy)
The Report
I. Introduction . . . . . . . . . . 1
Tf. Delay in making rules under the Atomic Energy Act, 1962 . . 1-6
प्रा, Goa, Daman and Diu Childern Rules, 1972 : . . . * 6-17
IV. Central Secretariat Service (Second Amendment) Rules. 1984... + 18-22
V. Recruitment Rules of the Central Silk Board’s Secretariat and
Research and Seryice Stations + 23-29
VI. Rules Governing the service conditons of persons serving in the Indian
Audit and Acgounts Department. I 29-34
Annexures
I, Note onthe visitof the Committaeto Bhabha Atomic Research Centre,
Bombay, on 27-9-84 35 - 38

Il, List of Rule:

[Notifications/Orders issued under the Atomic Energy Act,

1962 (as on 23-9-85) . 39-41
“ment showing progress of action taken to frame rules yet to be noti-
‘der the Atomic Energy Act, 1962 (as on 13-8-86) 42—43
position (as on 19-3-84) regarding making of Recruitment Rules
@loyees of the Deptt. 44—45
3 on the visit of the Committee to Trivandrum and Bangelore from
to 16th April, 1985. . . . . . » 46-48
utes of the Meetings of the Committee - ° . . - S167

1409 RS—1.


COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE
(1987-88)
CHAIRMAN
1. Prof. N. M. Kamble
MEMBERS
2. Shri Lal K. Advani
3. Shri Tirath Ram Amla
4. Shri Chitta Basu
5. Shri Vithalrao Madhavrao Jadhav
8 6. Shrimati Kailashpati S
‘ 7. Shri Suresh Kalmadi im
8. Shri F. M. Khan a
9. Shri Mukhtiar Singh Malik
10. Shri G. Swamy Naik
11. Shri Yalla Sesi Bhushana Rao
12. Shri Ramsinghbhai Pataliyabhai Rathvakoli
13. Shri P. Babul Reddy
14. Shri Sukomal Sen g
15. Shri Keshavprasad Shukla ;
SECRETARIAT
Shrimati K. K. Chopra, Additional Secretary
Shri R. N. Bhardwaj, Chief Legislative Committee Officer
Shri R. B. Sharma, Senior Legislative Committee Officer.

3७.

rei eae

COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE
(1986-87)

CHAIRMAN

1. Prof. N. M. Kamble

‘MEMBERS
2. Shri Tirath Ram Amla
3. Shri Chitta Basu

4. Shri Vithalrao Madhavrao Jadhav

छा]



fii]
5. Shrimati Kailashpati
6. Shri Suresh Kalmadi
7. Shri Ram Naresh Kushawaha
8. Shri Mukhtiar Singh Malik
9. Shri Mahendra Mohan Mishra
10. Shri Yalla Sesi Bhushana Rao
11. Shrj Ramsinghbhai Pataliyabhaj Rathyakoli
12. Shri P. Babul Reddy
13. Shri Sukomal Sen
14. Shri Keshavprasad Shukla
15. Shri Thangabaalu

COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE
(1985-86)
CHAIRMAN
“1. Shri M. M. Jacob
Members

2. Shri Lal K. Advani

3. Shri Jagannath Sitaram Akarte
4. Shri Pawan Kumar Bansa}

5. Shri Kamalenduy Bhattacharjee
6. Shri S. w. Dhabe

7. Shri M. Kalyanasundaram

8. Shrimati Krishna Kaul

**9. Shrimati Usha Malhotra

10. Shri Dhuleshwar Meena

11. Shri Mahendra Mohan Mishra
12, Shri Sushil Chana Mohunta
13. Shrj Deba Prasad Ray

14. Shri P. Babul Reddy

15. Shri Thangabaalu

हे 2 ene teed
*Shri M. M. Jacob, Deputy Chairman, Rajya Sabha, resigned from
Chairmanship of the Committee on 13th March, 1986, ‘

**Shrimati Usha Malhotra, ceased to be member of the Com-
mittee consequent on her retirement from membership of the Rajya
Sabha on 2nd April, 1986.



E | OF THE COMMITTEE
(1984-85)

CHAIRMAN

- Shri M. M. Jacob

MEMBERS
Shri Lal K. Advani
Shri Syed Rahmat Ali
. Shri Pawan Kumar Bansal
' Shri Madan Bhatia

ढक | ४७ ७

Shri Kamalendu Bhattacharjee
. Shri 8. W. Dhabe

. Shri M. Kalyanasundaram

. Shrimati Krishna Kaul

fo 9० 4

10. Shri Ram Naresh Kushawaha
*11. Vacant
12. Shri Dhuleshwar Meena
13. Shri Rafique Alam
14. Shri Syed Sibtey Razi
15. Shri Deba Prasad Ray.
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE
(1983-84)

CHAIRMAN
1. Dr. Bhai Mahavir
MEMBERS
ri Banamali Babu
Madan Bhatia

Nand Kishore Bhatt
i G. C. Bhattacharya =

ir Prasad resigned his seat in Rajya Sabha w.e-f. 19-1-1985.



Livy

6. Shri Amarprosad Chakraborty
7. Shri Dipen Ghosh

8. Shri B. D. Khobragade

9. Shri Ram Naresh Kushawaha
10. Shri G. Swamy Naik

11. Shri Ghanshyambhai Oza

12. Shri Rafique Alam

13. Shri Santosh Kumar Sahu
14. Shri Shanti Tyagi

15, Dr. Rafiq Zakaria



=

INTRODUCTION

1, the Chairman, of the Committee on Subordinate Legislation,
having been authorised by the Committee to present the report on
its behalf, do hereby present this Seventy-third Report of the Cam-
mittee.

1.1 The Committee considered and adopted the Report at its meet-
ing held on 25th August, 1987.

1.2 The observations of the Committee on matters arising out of
the scrutiny of various Rules|Regulations and matters connected
therewith which, in the opinion of the Committee, should be brought
to the notice of the House, together with the recommendations of the
Committee thereon, are contained in the succeeding paragraphs of
the Report.

DELAY IN MAKING RULES UNDER THE ATOMIC ENERGY
ACT, 1962. ws

The Department of Atomic Energy—vide their O.M. dated 2nd
ecember, 1981—made a request to the Committee for grant of ex-
ion of time upto 31st May, 1982, for making rules under the Ato-
० Energy Act, 1962. {
Committee at its meeting held on 23rd March, 1982, con-
quest and granted the extension. Thereafter, the De-
roached the Committee thrice for grant of exten-
ing upto 28th February, 1984.

view to ascertaining the reasons for delay in making
Committee at its meeting, held on 11th October,
7 the Secretary of the Department of Atomic

1


5

2.3 The Additional Secretary of the Department and representa~
tives of the Bhabha Atomic Research Centre, Bombay, appeared be~
fore the Committee on 1st February, 1984, to explain the position.

2.4 The Committee at its meeting held on July 11, 1984 considered
the reasons for delay in framing the rules under the Atomic Energy
Act, 1962 as communicated by the Department from time to time
namely: —

my) that Atomic Energy being a new field, drafting rules and re-
lations involved study of international practice and conventions;

_ ii) that there was need to study various international organisa-

fioris such as, the Atomic Enetgy Agency, International Radiation
Protection etc.;

(iii) that: there were not enotigh guidelines in the matter of
preparation of rules and some of the guidélines were stil! imder

formulations by International Organisations like LE-R.A., $ oy a a
ete.; and

(iv) that a comparable legislation not being available in the’
country, legislations of other countries were to be studied and
adapted to suit the conditions prevalent in India.

2.5 In order, therefore, to have a first hand information about
the eéhnidalities involved in framing ‘the rules; the ‘functioning. of
important organisations in the ‘Bbsence of rules under the Atomic
Energy aft 1962 and the practical difficulties in the matter of fra-
ming the rules being faced by the, Dep: partment, the Committee deci-
ded. to visit some, of the ee x nts of the Department of Ato-
mic Energy located at Bombay. ie Committee . accordingly visi-
ted the Bhabha Atomic Research Centre, Bombay on September 27,
1984 for an on-the-spot study. The. Committee held discussions at
the:Centre with the Director of the Bhabha Atomic Research Centre,
jn-the absence of the Chairman; Atomic Energy Commission who was
at that time reported to have-gone abroad,

“A ‘note on the aforesaid Visit of the Committee is given at
Annecure-1.

2.6 Vide their OM. dated “23rd September, 1985, ihe Department
furnished a List showing the position then existing about rules made
and still to be made under the Atomic Energy Act, 1962 (Annexure-II).



2.7 The Department—vide their O.M. dated 13th August, 1986—
furhished a statement (Annexure III) showing the position then ob-

taining regarding finalisation of Rules yet to be made under the Act
and stated as follows:—

“.. As May please be seen from the Statement, notification of
Atomic Energy (Safe ‘Transport of Radioactive Materials) Rules
and Atomic Energy (Safety in Design, Installation, Use and opera-
tion of Teletherapy Units) Rules, 1984 are not necessary and in lieu
thereof notification of surveillance procedures under Rule 15 of the
Radiation Production Rules, 1971 would be sufficient. As such, only

three Rules are yet to be notified which are under various stages of
finalisation.”

2.8 The position regarding framing of rules etc. regulating the Ser-
vice Conditions of Employees of the Department was also explained
by the Department in their O.M. dated 19-3-84 (Annexure-IV).

2.9 The Committee at its meeting held on 18-11-1986, consideréd the
matter further in the light of the latest communication from the De-
partment. Not satisfied with the explantions: given by the Depart-
ment for the unreasonable delay in making rules under'the Atomic
Energy Act, 1962, the Committee decided to hear the Secretary of
the Atomic Energy and Chairman Atomic Energy Commission to seek
further clarifications and _ ascertain the up-to-date position of the
rule sunder the relevant Act.

2.10. At its meeting held on 15th July, 1987, the Committee heard

the Secretary, Department of Atomic Energy & Chairman, Atomic

Energy Commission on the subject. The attention of the Sectetaty
was pointedly drawn to the aspect of delay in making the rules under
the Atomic Energy Act and the often repeated requests from the
Department over the last 7 years for grant of extension of time on
grounds such as “guidelines are still under formulation by Inter-
national Organisation”, “legislation of other countries have to be

ied to suit our requirements”, “recommendationg of various other
I ational Organisations have to be taken note of, etc.”. The
Chairman asked the Secretary to explain the reasons for such in-

ordinate delay and the latest position in making of the requisite rules
under the Act.

2.11 Giving the latest position about the making of rules ‘under
section 30 of the Atomic Energy Act, 1962, the Secretary informed



E as on August 13, 1986 the following five rules were yet to be
made:—

1. Rules for the Safe Disposal of Radioactive Wastes.
2. Atomic Energy (Safe Transport of Radioactive Materials) Rules,

3. Atomic Energy (Safety in Design, Installation, Use and Opera-
tion of Teletherapy Units) Rules.

4. Atomic Energy (Restricted Information and Prohibited Areas)
Rules.

5. Hmenite (Control of Export) Order.

2.12 He added that the rules regulating Safe Disposal of Radioac-
tive Wastes had since been finalised and notified on 28-2-1987. He
further said that the Atomic Energy (Safe Transport of Radioactive
Materials) Rules and Atomic Energy (Safety in Design, Installation,
Use and Operation of Teletherapy Units) Rules as contemplated
earlier had however, not been considered necessary and instead noti-
fication of Radiation Protection Rules and Radiation Surveillance Pro-
cedures for Medical Applications of Radiation respectively under rule
15 of the Radiation Protection Rules were considered to be sufficient.
In this connection the Secretary further explained that the Deptt.
had issued a code under the Atomic Energy Regulatory Board. The
Department felt that in a technologically changing situation there
could be slightly better flexibility if in such cases, codes were issued,
since it was comparatively easier and convenient to up date these
codes from time to time as the need arises.

2.13 Regarding the Atomic Energy (Restricted Information and
Prohibited Areas) Rules, the Secretary informed that the Ministry of
Law had advised that an amendment vf Section 26 of the Act was
necessary in order to make offences cognizable under the Cr. P.C. and
that the Department and the Law Ministry were in correspondence
on the subject and the matter was expected to be resolved shortly.
Asked as to why the amendment of Section 26 was not initiated at the
time when the Act was last amended in 1986, the Secretary inform-
ed that the Ministry of Law were not clear in their mind as to whe.
ther an amendment was required*or not and therefore they were
still examining the matter.

2.14 As to the Imenite (Control of Export) Order, the Secretary
explained that since the matter had already been brought under the
purview of the Atomic Energy (Working of Mines, Minerals and



5

‘Handling of Prescribed Substances) Rules, no separate set of rules
was required to be made in that behalf. :

2.15 Explaining the reasons for the delay in making the rules, the
Director, BARC informed that one such reason was that the radio-
active material is required to be transported to various places and the
requirement of rules and regulations for safe transport of radioactive
material has changed its complexion. This required a constant upda-
- ting of the rules, he added.

2.16 Asked about the propriety of dual approach in the matter of
making Recruitment Rules that while for some categories Recruit-
ment Rules had been made under the proviso to Article 309 of the
Constitution, the regulation of recruitment and promotion of other
categories of personnel is being done through norms and executive
orders, the Secretary clarified that in respect of scientific and techni-
cal categories of employees the practice of the Department went back
to the days of Dr. Bhabha and over the last 30 years the Department
had evolved a very comprehensive system of selection and promotion
of scientific and technical personnel which had stood the test of time
in the sense that the Department had been able to have a really good
quality of scientific work-force with little or no complaints or discord,
This had been functioning extremely well over the years and many
a difficult and challenging task had been fulfilled since there is a
very good system of committees, leaving no scope for subjective deci-
sions, in the matter of appointments and promotions. Secretary
further stated that the question whether there should be
rules in the formal sense of the term or the present practice might be
allowed to continue had been discussed number of times and it was

felt that straight-jacketing of the personnel policies by way of issue

| of formal rules in regard to Scientific/Technical jobs requiring special
nowledge and expertise would, in a sense. rob the system of the
built-in flexibility that existed within the organisation.

ae 247 Regarding Recruitment Rules for the posts on the Adminis-
‘trative side, the Secretary explained that they had about ninety cate-
gories in the administrative areas out of which rules relating to six
categories had been notified and for twelve more categories had been
cleared by Ministry of Law but were awaiting clearance by the Ato-
mic Energy Commission. Another twenty categories which were
"being examined by the Law Ministry were expected to be cleared very
soon. Regarding remaining fifty-two categories which generally rela-
ted to C & D categories, the Secretary informed that they were under



6

discussion with the staff side and were expected to be sent to the Law
Ministry shortly. i

218 The Committee feels that notwithstanding the involvement of
technicalities and developments in the scientific, ‘especially nuclear,
field in framing of the rules, there has been an inordinate delay on the
part of the Government in this respect. The Committee reiterates its
earlier recommendations contained in para 48 of the 9th Report and
observes that such long and inordinate delay should not take placeiin
future. Rules/Regulations required to be-miade under a statute should
be made as soon as possible but in no case later than six months from
the date on which the statute comes into force.

2.19 Regarding the asstiratice given by the Secretary during ‘his
evidence before the Comtittee that ‘the question of amendment ‘of
Section 26 of the Act in order to make offences cognizable under the
Cr, P.C. is under active consideration of the Government, the Com-
inittee hopes that a desision in the matter and ‘steps to appropriately
amend the Act would be taken without further deliiy.

2.20 Regarding framing of Recruitment Rules for employees on
the Administrative Side of the Department, the Committee notes the
assurance given by the Secretary that the Recruitment Rules of the
remaining fifty-two categories pertaining to C&D group of employees
are likely to be completed shortly. The Committee hopes that this
would be done expeditiously, and the Committee informed of the posi-
tion, as soon as the rules are framed.

Or

THE GOA, DAMAN AND DIU CHILDREN RULES, 1972
3. ‘The Goa, ‘Dathan ‘and-Diu Children’ Rules, 1972, made! under
Section A9 of the Children Act, 1960, were examined and certain points

Were referred to the Ministry of Social Welfare on 5-9-84, for com-
ments

3.1 Comments of the Ministry, vide their O.M. dated 11-4-85, were
eonsidered by the Committee on 19-6-1985. As directed by the Com-
mittee, a reference was made to the Ministry on 5-8-1985, for further
clarification,

3.2' Clarificatioris ~futnished ‘by the Ministry, vide their O.M.
dated 16-12-1985 were considered by the Committee on 4-6-1986. As
directed by the’ Committee ancther reference was mate to the Ministry
‘on 26-9:1986 for ‘further clarification. Clarifications of the Ministry
“Wee Teceived on 3-6-1987.



7
3.3 The points referred and the comments/clarifications furnished

‘by the Ministry on different dates are as follows:—

(1) Point referred:

These rules have been made under the Children Act, 1960 after
a lapse of 12 years. The reasons for this inordinate delay in
framing the rules may be explained.

Ministry’s comments:

The Children Act, 1960, was enforced in this Territory in 1964.
However, a Regular Probation Officer was appointed only in
1970. The Rules were framed thereafter in 1972 based on the
Rules framed by Delhi Administration. This took time.

(2) Point referred:

‘he regular probation Officer was appointed in the year 1970
and rules were framed in the year 1972. What are the reasons for
delay in the appointment of regular Probation Officer and the
framing of the rules.

Ministry’s comments:

With regard to the delay in the appointment of Regular Proba-
tion Officer and framing of the Rules, it may be mentioned that
the post of Probation Officer was created by the Goa Administra-
tion, in 1968 and the Recruitment Rules framed in 1969. The
delay in this connection was due to the fact that information in
respect of similar recruitment rules in the neighbouring states
and Union Territories was to be collected as no such post was in
existence in Goa during that period. Further, after the framing
of the Recruitment Rules and their notification in the Govern-
ment Gazette, the post was advertised by the U.P.S.C. and filled
by a regular Probation Officer. This naturally took its own time.

(3) Point referred:

Section 59(2) spells out the various matters on which rules are
required to be made. But on a perusal of the Goa, Daman and Diu
Rules, 1972, it appears that rules on many vital aspects as indicat-
ed below, have not been made so far although 24 years have elap-
sed since the Act came into force.

(a) Rule 32 says that Rules governing the recruitment and
training of persons apvointed to carry out the purposes of the
Act and the terms and conditions of their service shall be such



8

as may be prescribed by the Administrator from time to time.
[vide Section 59(2) 6) 1;

(b) Rule 44 says that the rules governing the internal man-
agement of special schools, children’s homes and observation
homes shall be such as may be made by the Administrator from
time to time. [vide Section 59(2) (d)];

(c) Rule 45 says that the functions and responsibilities of spe-
cial schools, children’s home sand observation homes shall be
such as may be prescribed by the Administrator from time to.
time. [vide Section 59 (2) (e)]; and

(d) Rule 46 says that rules governing the establishmeat, re-
cognition, management and functions of After-Care Organisa-
tions shall be such as may be framed by the Administrator
from time to time. [vide Section 59(2) (g)]

(i) Whether the above mentioned rules have been made, if
not the reasons for non-making of rules may be intimated.

(ii) Secondly the rules relating to—

(A) the manner in which the competent authority may
hold its sittings; [vide Section 59 (2) (४) ];

(B) inspection of the After-Care Organisations. [vide
Section 59(2)(f)]; and

(C) the qualifications of the Probation Officers, [vide
Section 5$(2) (h)], do not seem, to have been included in the
Goa, Daman & Diu Children Rules, 1972, Whether the
above rules have been made, if not, the reasons for not
making the rules may be clarified].
Ministry’s comments:

(i) Rules covering (a), (b) and (c) have been made vide Goa
Daman and Diu Children (Management, Functions and Responsi-
bility of Special Schools, Children’s Homes and Observation
Home) Rule 1978. The Rules relating to After-Care Homes are

being made now as the establishment of After-Care Home is
now under consideration.

(ii) (A) It has not been included due to oversight. It shall be
done now.

(B) The same will be done after rules relating to After-Care
Homes are made.



ts

EAE RT TT

ca

(C) The qualification of the Probation Officer are laid down
in Rule 8 of the Goa, Daman and Diu Probation of Offenders
Rules, 1974. If it is considered necessary that they may be
included in the rules under the Act, the same shall be done
now after receiving instructions in this regard?

(4) Point referred:

What are the reasons for delay in setting up of the After-care
Homes and why rules have not been framed so far in that regard?

From the comments of the Ministry it is not clear what is
meant by saying that the rules relating to the manner, in which
the competent authorities may hold its sittings could not be in-
cluded due to oversight. Whether the rules already existed
separately but had not been included in the 1972 Rules, if so, a
copy thereof could have been sent to this Secretariat for scruti-
ny. In case the rules have not been framed the reasons for delay
may kindly be furnished.

Ministry’s comments:

The Children Act, 1960 provides for the establishment or re-
cognition of After-care organisations in order to link the care
services with rehabilitation of the discharged inmates. The Goa
Administration set up the Observation Home, Children’s Home
and Special Schools. for the first time and at that stage did not
feel the need to establish After-care Home. In an effort to deve-
lop the existing infrastructure, the Administration has now taken
up the setting up of After-care Homes and framing of necessary
rules.

(5) Point referred;

Whether After-care Homes have since been set up as contem-
plated under the rules; if so, the details of the same may be fur-
nished. Whether the Rules relating to After-care Homes have
since been made; if so a copy of the same also may be furnished.

Ministry’s comments:

In so far as setting up of After-care Homes is concerned, the
Administration of Goa, Daman and Diu have stated that no After-
care Homes have been set up and the rules relating to After-care
Homes have not been framed. The matter, is however, being:
pursued.


_ ©), Point referred; sdf 30 पल,

Rule 5 deals with withdrawal of certificate or recognition of
an institution and Rule 7 18: iow: be re-

hs

ceived into an institution he date of wa receipt by the
managers of the institution of a notice of withdrawal of the certi-
ficate or recognition or after the date of notice of resignation of
the certificate or recognition. The grounds on which a certi-
cate of recognition to an institution may be withdrawn
should be clearly: specified. in the rules itself. The underlined
words may also please be explained.

Ministry's comments:

The concerned words have been included to debar admission
ofa child after a notice from either side to see that continuity
of his education, training and treatment programme does not suf-

fer, The grounds for withdrawal of certificate of recognition shall
‘be specified now as desired.

(7) Point referred

Rule 6 provides for Resignation of Certificate or recognition by
managers of an ‘institution’, What is meant by the term. ‘resig-
nation’ in this context?

Ministry's comments:

If the institution concerned, which has been recognised as Ob-
‘servation Home, Children’s Home or Special School etc. does not
move to continue further it may do so in writing and such written
notice has been termed as “resignation”

(8) Point referred:

Rule 8 lays down the procedure of disposal of inmates on with-
drawal or resignation of certificate or recognition. When an insti-
tution ceases to be an institution certified or recognised the Child-
ren detained therein may be discharged absolt on such
conditions as the officer may impose. The conditions for absolute
discharge or conditional discharge of children should also be
clarified and specified in the Rules itself.

Ministry’s comments:
Noted.

(9) Point referred:

Rule 9 prescribes the contribution of the parent or other persons
towards the maintenance of the child and places it at a sum not

we sk ie



बांध आधा iit

7

j

(C) The qualification of the Probation Officer are laid down
in Rule 8 of the Goa, Daman and Diu Probation of Offenders
Rules, 1974. If it is considered necessary that they may be
included in the rules under the Act, the same shall be done
now after receiving instructions in this regard?

(4) Point referred:

What are the reasons for delay in setting up of the After-care
Homes and why rules have not been framed so far in that regard?

From the comments of the Ministry it is not clear what is
meant by saying that the rules relating to the manner, in which
the competent authorities may hold its sittings could not be in-
cluded due to oversight. Whether the rules already existed
separately but had not been included in the 1972 Rules, if so, a
copy thereof could have been sent to this Secretariat for scruti-
ny. In case the rujes have not been framed the reasons for delay
may kindly be furnished.

Ministry’s comments:

The Children Act, 1960 provides for the establishment or re-
cognition of After-care organisations in order to link the care
services with rehabilitation of the discharged inmates. The Goa
Administration set up the Observation Home, Children’s Home
and Special Schools for the first time and at that stage did not
feel the need to establish After-care Home. In an effort to deve-
lop the existing infrastructure, the Administration has now taken
up the setting up of After-care Homes and framing of necessary
rules,

(5) Point referred:

Whether After-care Homes have since been set up as contem-
plated under the rules; if so, the details of the same may be fur-
nished. Whether the Rules relating to After-care Homes have
since been made; if so a copy of the same also may be furnished.

Ministry’s comments:

In so far as setting up of After-care Homes is concerned, the
Administration of Goa, Daman and Diu have stated that no After-
care Homes have been set up and the rules relating to After-care
Homes have not been framed. The matter. is however, being:

pursued.



exceeding Rs. 50|-. It may be clarified whethey this ‘amount of
Rs. 50/- still holds good. What happens in case of failure of the
parent/other person to pay the contribution?

Ministry’s comments:

the same manner as an order under section 125 of the Code of
Criminal Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1974).

(10) Point referred:

In view of the depleting value of Tupee, what steps are being
taken so that the standard of maintenance does not suffer.

Ministry's comments:

The contribution money by the parents is fixed only as a
token to establish link between the committed child and parents
and not as an expenditure incurred on that particular child,
However in view of the observations made by the Committee

time to time.
(11) Point referred:

(i) In the ‘conditions’ appended to Form I, under Rule 10(1),
there is no stipulation regarding proper education of the child.
‘On the other hang it contemplates regular and punctual attend-
ance at employment of the child. It is a sorry state of affairs
that in a welfare state, as India is, instead of providing for
compulsory education -of “the children, the emphasis hag been
shifted to employment. The condition stipulating compulsory
education of the child may be appended to Form 1.

ii) Rule 20(3) provides “when a licence has been revoked
under sub-section (3) of section 48 of the Act and the child
refuses or fails to return to the special school or the children’s
home to which he was directed so to return, any police officer
“May, on the advice of the authority revoking the licence, arrest
‘the child without warrant and send him to the home or school,
as the case may be.” 2 ia
1409 RS—2. हे



12

The nature and form of the advice of the authority revoking.
the licence may be specified whether it will be written or oral or
in the form of an order for arrest or the like. The authority
to arrest without warrant and without assigning reasons in.
writing seems to be too much and is likely to be abused.

Ministry’s comments:
Noted.
(12) Point referred:

In para 2, Form II under Rule 11(A), condition (3) should
be so modified as to remove the clause relating to sending the:
child to daily work. Work/Employment of children for earn-
ing should be discouraged. The Directive Principles under the-
Constitution contemplate free and compulsory education of all
children upto the age of 14 years. As such emphasis should
be on education and not on employment of the children.

Ministry's. comments:
Noted.

(13) Point referred;

Rule 13 refers to obligation of the parent/guardian or other
fit person under whose care a child can be placed. It would
be in fitness of things if specific provisions against employment
of the children of tender age and sending them for begging are
made in the Rules. It may be mentioned in this context
that the atmosphere is rife with reports about employment of
children in hazardous and deplorable conditions and subjecting
them to slavery. Children in large numbers are found begging
on road crossings, on railway platforms and even around inter-
national airports. The conditions required to be fulfilled’
before a person or institution can be considered as a ‘fit person”
within the meanings of Sections 16 and 21 may be spelt out
in the Rules.

Ministry’s comments:

Noted.

__ (14) Point referred:

In Bond Form III (under Rule 17), the word ‘work’ may be~
deleted. Work/Employment of children need to be discouraged.



Ministry’s comments:
Noted.

(15) Point referred;

: ~ Rule 18(3) states that if the relative or the fit person fails
~~ to come to take charge of the child on the appointed date, the
child shall be taken to his ordinary place of residence by the
escort of the observation home. It may so happen that the
Telative or the fit person has shifted to some other place or
may have died, Keeping in view this contingency the institu-
tion authorities should, in the first instance, confirm the where-~
abouts of the relative or fit person.

Ministry’s comments; =
se _ Noted. “Actually the same is done in practice, . .- <>
(16) Point referred: |

Rule 19 relates to constitution of Child Welfare Boards. It
is neither clear from the rules nor from the Act as to how
many members will be there in the Board. It seems that there ,
is no fixed membership of the Board. Not only this, qualifica-
tions, background of the Members have also not been specified.
Secondly, the ratio of official and non-official members may also
be clarified,

Ministry’s comments:
Noted.

(17) Point referred;

Rule 19(3) states that the tenure of appointment of a mem-
ber may be terminated by the Administrator at any time with-
out assigning any reason. The reason for making such provision
vesting the Administrator with unfettered discretion may be
sought.

- Ministry’s comments:

There is no specific reason. If it is felt that it should be
changed the same will be changed on instructions received in
this behalf.



(18) Point referred:

Rule 26 relates to liabilities of the managers. Sub-rule (2)
states that the managers of the institution may, on receipt of
the information, intimate in writing objections if any, to the
committal of the child and these will be fully taken into con-
sideration before the child is committed to the institution. It

__ is not understood on what basis the managers can refuse the
- proposed committal of the child about which information in
_ advance has been sent by the competent authority.

\. न

- Ministry's comments:
_ There is no specific ground. This rule can be changed.
(19) Point referred

Para 2 of the Form VIII laid down under Rule 29(2) speaks
of certain conditions to be observed while the child is under
the supervision of a Probation Officer. Condition (6) stipulates
that ‘he will live honestly and peaceably and will go to school
regularly/endeavour to earn an honest livelihood’. a

The clause ‘endeavour to earn honest livelihood’ may be
deleted since it is not happy to bind a child to earn his own
livelihood. The emphasis should of course be on his education
-and training. Even if the child has, by force of circumstances, to

~ earn his livelihood, it should not be laid down in the ‘conditions’
to be observed while the child is under the supervision of
the Probation Officer.

Ministry’s comments:

Noted. तह |
(20) Point referred;

Rule 30 relates to the mode of dealing with children suffer-
ing from dangerous diseases or mental complaints. Under sub-
- rule (1) the child may be kept in an approved place within
the meaning of Rule 39 for the remainder of the term: for
which he has been kept in custody under the orders of the
competent authority or for such period as may be certified by

a Medica] Officer to be necessary for the proper treatment of
© child.



15 ets

Can the period of stay and treatment at the approved place
go beyond the term of custody, and if so, whether after the
expiry of the term of custody, his supervision would be restor-

to his parent, etc, or otherwise.

Sub-rule (2) of Rule 30 ‘states that “where it appears to the

authority that the child is cured of the disease, he may send ae

3 ‘him to the school or children’s home or fit person from which
er from whom he was removed.” It is presumed that the
authority before making the order would obtain 8 medica! 3
certificate of fitness of the, child. This may be confirmed anc 8८.
specified in the rule itself.

Ministry’s comments: a
Noted.
(21) Point referred: “a

Section 46(1) & (2) of the Children Act deal with powers 0°
the Administrator of 8 Union Territory to transfer a neglecte” ==
or delinquent child from children’s home or special school or f
institution within ‘the Union Territory to a similar institution
, in any other State (with the consent of the State Government)
‘and also to provide for reception in such an institution in the तु
Union Territory of a child from any other State. 4

Whether any rules/regulations have een made for such
transfer of children from and to such institution in the Union
Territory- z .

Ministry’s comments:

No.

Various proformas and bond forms appended to ithe Goe

ff Daman and Diu Children Rules, 1972 contemplate employmen

J or work for earning a livelihood by children. Article 24 of th
हि nsibili

_ ~ . other hazardous employment. It would be proper if the
~~ gelevant provisions/forms appended to Rules are suitably
: amended to prohibit such employment expressly:



Ministry’s comments:

~~ Noted. = हि
३. - > b=

(23) Point referred:
Article 47 of the Constitution provides for a duty of State i

to raise the level of nutrition and to improve public health. It

~ is not clear if any rules/regulations have been laid down to

"-““ensure nutrition for children lodged in children’s homes and
other such institutions contemplated under the Children Act.

Ministry’s comments:

No such rules have been made. The same is noted and
while amending the rules such provision shall be inserted. है

(24) Point referred:

The Committee found that in reply to the various points
referred to the Ministry the Ministry in their comments have
simply commented as noted. The Committee disapproved this
ray manner-of-furnishing the comments, es it is not-clear from
% this: whether the suggestions made have been accepted by the

Ss Ministry-or not. The Ministry may kindly intimate whether
the suggestions made in the above points have been accepted:
if so, the details of the steps taken in that behalf may kindly
be furnished.

Ministry’s comments:

~- In this connection it has been ascertained from the Goa
Administration that the term ‘noted’ may kindly be taken to

mean that necessary action on the subject matter is being taken.

The outcome of their efforts would be reported, as and when

received from their end

(25) Point. referred: Be

Whether action has been initiated to amend ‘the Rules under
examination on the lines suggested by the Committee and
assured by the Ministry vide para (24) above if so, what is the
latest ‘position thereof? emai = >
- Ministry’s comments: :



WW

the lines suggested by the Committee on Subordinate Legisla-
‘tion, Rajya Sabha”. ५, है = ek

3.4, Clarifications furnished by the Ministry in their O.M. dated
3-6-1987 are found still wanting and the matter was placed before
‘the Chairman. As directed by the Chairman, representatives of the
‘Ministry appeared before him on 3-7-1987 and apprised him of the
factual position as follows: —

“The suggestions made by the Committee were taken note of
and action was being initiated to amend the Goa, Daman and
Diu Children Rules, 1972 accordingly. Meanwhile, the Juvenile
Justice Act, 1986 has been enacted by Parliament to provide for -
the care, protection, treatment, development and rehabilitation of
neglected or delinquent juveniles and for the adjudication of
certain matters relating to, and disposition of, deliquent juveniles,
The Act is likely to be brought into force shortly. With the
coming into force of the Act and-the Rules made thereunder, the
Children Acts (Central and State) and the Rules made there-

--under would stand repealed. The Ministry of Welfare “have
- prepateda set. of model rules to carry out the purposes of the
Juvenile Justice Act, 1986 and-circulated them to all State/Union
. Territory Governments, to provide-some guidelines on’ the basis
.of which those-Government-would prepare their own rules. At the
time of preparation of the above-model rules, the suggestions of
the Committee were kept-in view. Goa having now become a
fulfledged State, Government thereof are also required to~make
their own rules «under the: Juvenile Justice Act, 1986.”

3.5. In view of the ahove explanation, the Committee decides
S not to pursue the matter further.

3.6. The Committee, however, hope that the recommendations

made by it and agreed to by the Ministry earlier, especially

~ ~“those made to discouraze ent of children and earning
०) livelihood by them, Tas emphasis on their education and
~ © training and ‘rade in the light of Articles 24 and. 47 of
~ the Constitution of India to prohibit employment of children in

~~ hazardous jobs and to provide for raising of their level of nutri-
"tion and improvement of their health, would be kept in. view
by the Government of Goa and also the Administration of
Daman and Diu while framing rules under the Juvenile Justice

Act, 1986. है



Iv
“THE CENTRAL SECRETARIAT SERVICE (SECOND AMEND-
MENT) RULES, 1984.

4, ‘The Central Secretariat Service (Second Amendment) Rules,
1984, were examined in pursuance of certain representations to the
Committee. The points that arose, were referred to the Ministry
‘of Personnel, Public Grievances and Pension on 9-5-1985 for their
comments, The points referred and the Ministry's comments,
thereon vide their 0.५, dated 30-5-1985, are as under: —

(i) Point referred: a tah ie :

Clause 2 of the Amendment Rules, substitutes the third
proviso to sub-rule (2) of rule 12 of the Central Secretariat
Service Rules, 1962 by a new proviso which by implication
imereases the pertod of qualifying regular service in the grade
of Section Officer from 6 years to 8 years in order to render
the officers eligible for consideration for promotion to Grade I
What is the justification for replacing the original proviso by
a new one? Whether this amendment is in consonance with
the principles of natural justice and equity insofar as this
amendment ‘hits hard on such of the direct recruit Section
Officers who join the service on the presumption that they
‘would ‘be eligible for consideration for promotion to grade I on
‘completion of 6 years of approved service in the grade of Section
Officer. Now, with the amendment of the Rules, those direct
recruits who have already put in over five years of approved
service, will have to complete 8 years of approved service
instead of 6 years, before being eligible for consideration for
promotion to grade 1.

Department's comments:

The third proviso below sub-rule (2) of rule 12 of the CSS
Rules, 1962 has been substituted with another proviso with a
view to meeting the ends of the principles of natural justice and

equity as it removes different lengths of approved service in.
the Section Officer’s grade for promotion to Grade 1 and incor-
porates uniform length of 8 years approved service for all
concerned excepting in the case of Section Officers belong-
ing to the Scheduled Castes or Scheduled Tribés who are re-
quired to have rendered not less then 4 years service in that



grade. The aforesaid amendment has been made on the demand
of the Staff side after discussions in the Departmental Council
(JCM) of the Department of Personnel & Training. Further the
amendment has been made with the concurrence of the Union
Public Service Commission and after hearing the view point of
the representatives of the promotees and the direct recruits. It is
the considered view of the Government that the rules afier

the amendment are more equitable to all concerned than they
were before.

(ii) Point referred: _

Clause 3 of the Amendment Rules substitutes the first
proviso to-sub-rule (2) of rule 13 of the Rules of 1962 which
impliedly increases the period of regular service in the grade
of Assistant from 6 years to 8 years in order to be
eligible. for consideration for promotion to the grade of
Section Officer. Whether this amendment is in consonance
with the principle of natural justice and equity keeping in view
the interest of direct recruit Assistants who joined the service
on the understanding that they would be eligible for considera-
tion for promotion to the grade of Section Officer on comple-
tion of 6 years of approved service in the grade of Assistant,
but now with the coming into force of the amendment rules
they are required to complete 8 years of approved service,

instead of 6 years before being eligible for consideration for
promotion. =

Department’s comments: ‘

What has been stated with reference to the amendment affect-
ing the direct recruit Section Officers is equally applicable in
the case of direct recruit Assistants. In accordance with the
principles of natural justice and equity the first proviso now
inserted below sub-rule (2) of rule 13 of the CSS Rules, 1962

prescribes uniform length of 8 years approved service for all
categories of Assistants. are x

(iii) Point referred:

~The amendment Rules are to come into force w.ef. Ist July,
1985, ‘Whether these amendment Rules have the effect of re-
- trospective SS 8 to the detriment of the interest of direct

recruit Section Officers and Assistants who have already put
in six vears of qualifying service in the grade.



Whether there is any objection in applying the said amend-
‘tment to those direct recruit Section Officers and Assistants who
would join service after the coming into force of the amend-
Ment rules and not to the existing incumbents. In this context
the general rule of administration, namely, that the conditions
of the service of the employees should not be amended to their
deteriment after they have entered into service may be kept in
“view. :

Depattment’s comments:

It is not correct to say that the amendment has been applied
-retrospectively since as already stated the said amendments
“were notified on 29th December, 1984 and were actually pub-
lished in the Gazette of India on 12-1-1985 and it (Notification)
clearly provides that the amendments come into force on 1-7-
1985. It would have been the case of retrospective operation
had the amendments been brought into force with effect from
the date earlier than the 29th December, 1984. j

Tt Wotild be indefensible, if the revised proviso under sub-rule
(2) of Rule 12 and revised proviso under sub-rule (2) of Rule
13 of CSS ‘Rules, 1962 are made applicable to future-entrants and
not to existing Section Officers and Assistants, particularly as

-_ there by the very objective behind these amendments would be

nullified. “It may be mentioned that when the existing proviso
was last inserted vide Notification No. 8|14|75-CS(1) dated
21-2-78 providing for 6 years service’ for promotion to. ‘Grade
I (for a senior when junior is considered for promotion) no
exception was made in respect. of_ existing Section Officers.

_ Further the notifications in respect of the examination on_ the

basis of which direct recruit Section Officers and Assistants are
Teeruited from time to time clearly stipulate that Section
“Officers/Assistants would be eligible for promotion to higher
grades in accordance with the rules in force from time to time
in this behalf.

(iv) Point referred:

A copy of the-representation addressed to the Chairman, Com-
mittee on_ Subordinate Legislation of Rajya Sabha from some

_ of the direct recruit Section Officers and Assistants governed

by the CSS Rules, 1962 is also enclosed: for the comments of
the Ministry_ on the points raised therein. ~



न

Department's comments:

Insofar as the representation of direct recruit Assistants
addressed to the Chairman of the Committee on Subordinate
Legislation of Rajya Sabha is concerned, it may be stated that
they have by and large raised the same points as mentioned in
the Office Memorandum under reference to which comments
have been furnished. [t may, however, be stated that the
amendments to the rules made vide Notification dated 29-12-84
“do not in any way affect the seniority of the Assistants. ‘The
contention of the Assistants that the whole seniority of the
direct recruit Assistants as already fixed has been changed
retrospectively is without any basis. It may be further stated
that the contention of the direct recruit Assistants as made out
in para 3 of their representation that the direct recruit Assist-
ants with 5 years service will have to wait for another 3 years
before they. can be included into the zone of promotion is also
not based on facts. As per instance presently the zone of
promotion. in the supplementary common seniority list of

” Assistants has-been fixed at 903 which covers those direct recruit

_ Assistants svho were recruited in 1973. Thus only those direct
recruit. Assistants. who have put in about 10 years service are

“jn the zone of regular promotion. The Statement of the re-
presentationists is, therefore, misleading...

Insofar as the para 4 of the representation is concerned, it
may be-stated that ad hoc-promotions are of short duration
and do not confer any right in the matter of seniority oF
approved service, they also do not*confer any right on the ad
hoc -promotee. है 3019 AES J

Tt is felt that uniform Jength of 8 years service for both direct
recruits and promotees js fair and equitable to vast majority
of Assistants. The amendments, therefore, does not defy any
rules of natural justice. ‘As regards para 5 of the representa-

* tion, it may be stated that the Supreme. Court Judgement in

_ the case of Karampal Vs. Union of India has no relevance to
the amendments. under reference -since these amendments do
not affect the seniority of direct recruits. es

4.1 The Committee at its meeting held on the 18th June, 1985,

_ »eonsidered the subject matter and after some discussion decided to

cheb कक 77 8



_ hear the Secretary, Department of Personnel and Training with a
view to seeking further clarifications/elucidations in the matter.

‘42, Accordingly, the Secretary, Department of Personnel &

Traini 8 appeared before the Committee on the 28th June, 1985.

43 As regards the point that the rule had been given retrospec-
tive effect, the Secretary clarified that any amendment would be
considered to have been given retrospective effect if the amend-
ment itself specified the date earlier to the date on which the
amendment was notified. In the instant case, the notification was
issued on 29th December, 1984, and the amendment became opera-
tive only from 1st July, 1985.

> 4 Regarding the point made cut in the representation about
the applicability of cardinal principle that nothing detrimental to
persons already in service should be done, the Secretary clarified
that the said ‘principle applied only in regard to certain posts creat-
ed by the Constitution, such as, judges in the High Courts and in
the Supreme Court. In the case of Assistants and Section Officers,
there was a stipulation that in so far as these services were cone
‘cerned, their further promotions etc. depended upon the rules to
be made from time to time. z

45 The Secretary informed the Committee ‘hat the interests of
promotee and direct yeeruits were not uniform and often clashed.
with each other. In a situation like this, effort had been made to
make the ‘best that was possible. ‘The amendment was brought
into being only after hearing both the promotees and direct recruits
and consulting the U.P.S.C. दे

“46 The Committee feels that though some people may still be
there who are not getting their due and who feel that with a little
more postponement of the amendment, they ०० would have been
absorbed. Yet in view of the assurance that all that was possible
was done to give justice to all concerned in a given set of circum-
stances, the Committee decides not to pursue the issue.

a
:
4



23
Vv

5 RECRUITMENT RULES OF THE CENTRAL SILK BOARD'S
SECRETARIAT AND RESEARCH AND SERVICE STATIONS

5. A few points pertaining to recruitment rules of the Central
Silk Board’s Secretariat and Research and Seryice Stations were
referred to the Ministry of Commerce (Department of Textiles), for
comments,

wr 5.1 The points referred and the comments of the Ministry are as
follows:—

I. The Central Silk Board (Recruitment) Amendment Rules,
1961 (as amended by Amendment Rules of 1964).

(1) Point referred: Rule 7 relates to procedure for recruitment
Sub-rule (3) states that the recommendations of the Selection
Committee and the Departmental Promotion Committee shall be
duly taken into consideration by the appointing authority at the

time of appointment or promotion, This provision seems super-
fluous. हे

Ministry’s comments: In this connection, it may ‘be mention-
ed that the Central Silk Board only framed the above said Re-
‘ctuitment Rules and after getting it approved by the Standing
Committee held on 19th February, 1960, the same was forward-
ed to the then Ministry of Commerce and Industry on 14th
March, 1960 for Setting approval of the Government of India and
issue of necessary notification in this regard. The Ministry. of
Commerce and Industry had prepared the notification and issu-
ed the same as per the procedure prevailing at that time, How-
ever, the same had been noted for guidance.

Presently, the Recruitment Rules of the Poard’s organisations
‘are under preparation and the instructions mentioned at ‘I’ above
will be complied with at the time of submission of the draft Te-
cruitment rules ६० Ministry for approval’ and notification. ~

(2) Point referred: The method of recruitment for the post of
Assistant Secretary (Admn.), Assistant Secretary (Tech.), Pub-
licity Officer, Export Promotion Officer, Deputy Secretary. (Tech.),
Sunerintendent, Senior Economie Investigator, Superintendent
(Silk Trading Section), Assistant, Depot Assistant and Junior
Gestetnor Operator is by departmental promotion 100 per cent.



Seer

re
ie

ee
x

; taken to indicate the percentage in the draft

Ministry’s comments: “In respect of the points raised as above
it may be Mentioned that when the Central Silk Board (Recruit
ment) Amendment Rules, 1961 (as amended vide Amendment
Rules of 1964) were frameg by the Central silk Board, it was
4 quite new work for them and in the absence of Proper procedure
for framing the recruitment Tules, the age and educational quali-
fications were also indicated under Columns. 4 and 5 in the re
cruitment rules ven for the posts to be filled up by 100 per cent
departmental Promotion, which are
However, the same will be omitted in Tespect of the posts to be

ver, a care is being

recruitment rules
wherever it 15 necessary as suggested above,”

(4) Point referred: The pay scales prescribed for the different
Posts do not seem to be the ones in force at present, Tt may be
clarified whether Pay scales given in the recruitment rules have

been revised, if 80, in what manner and the details of the
revised scales,



25

& Ministry's comments: “In this connection, it may be mention-
.. ed that the pay scales indicated in the recruitment rules are one
--which were in force when the recruitment rules were framed
and notified in April, 1964. The revised pay scales as prescribed
by the 3rd Pay Commission came into force with effect from
1-1-1973 only. The revised pay scales as per recommendations
of the 3rd Pay Commission has already been made applicable to
the Board’s employees after getting approved by the then Min-
> istry of Industrial Development. A copy of approved revised
scales of pay in respect of different categories of posts applicable
in the Board’s Secretariat is enclosed herewith for ready refe-
rence.

Il, The Central Silk Board (Research and Service Stations)
Consolidated Recruitment Rules, 1966.

(5) Point referred: These rules have been made in exercise
of the powers conferred by Section 18 of the Central Silk Board
Act, 1948, 1.6. after a lapse of 18 years. The reasons for this
delay may be specified.

Ministry's comments; “The Central Silk Board Act received
the assent of the then Governor General on the 20th September,
1948 where as the Central Silk Board was constituted in April,

- 1949. Till 1958, the Board’s organisation consisted only of its
Central Office as also three Liaison Offices at Bangalore, Calcutta
and New Delhi, respectively. In October, 1958 a decision was
taken by the Board to set up some service stations of a!l India
importance to meet the requirement of the development activi-
ties initiated under the plan. It was as such that in October,

- 1958 the Board had set up the then All India Sericultural Train-
ing Institute, Mysore (now Central Sericultural Research &
Training Institute, Mysore) and Central Silkworm Seed Station,
Srinagar (now Regional Sericultural Research Station at Pam-
pore, Kashmir). i

om Pursuant to a decision taken by the Government of India in
i 1958 that all activities connected with the Sericultural research
should be brought under the central control, the Board took

_. over the Central Sericultural Research Institute, established by

- the Government of Mysore at Channapatna in April, 1961. In

November, 1961, the then Government of Madras transferred the-

_ control of the Hill Rearing Station, (Coonoor) to the Central
Silk Board.



26

The Board took over the Tasar Research Station belonging to
the Government of Bihar at Chaibasa on 1800 March, 1964 and
shifted it to Kanchi for organising the same as Central Tasar
Research and Training Institute, Sumilarly, on 15th March, 1964,
the Tasar Seed Station at Lakha was taken Over by the Board
from the Government of Madhya Pradesh for running the same
as the Central Tasar Silkworm Seed Station.

It can be seen from the above that different stations have been
taken over by the Central Silk Board from different State Gov-
ernments at different dates. The last one was taken in March,
1964 and after taking over the same, the work of framing recruit-
ment rules was initiated and it took some time to complete the
task after taking various aspects into consideration and ascer-
taining the views and recruitment rules from other similar orga-
nisations such as Tea Board, Cotton Textiles, Fund Committee,
Office of the Textiles Commissioner, Council of Scientifie and
Industrial Research ete,, and a concrete proposal framing the
consolidated recruitment rules for the staff working in the
Board’s Research and Service Stations was sent to Ministry on
8rd August, 1965 which was approved and notified by the Minis-

try of Commerce, Government of India on 16th August, 1966.

Tt can be observed from the above, that there is no time gap
as indicated above for framing the Central Silk Board (Research
and Service Stations) Consolidated Recruitment Rules, 1966.

(6) Point referred: The method of recruitment for the posts
of Director, Central Sericultural Research and Training Insti-
tute, Mysore, Assistant Director (Seri.), Director Central Silk-
worm Seed Station, Srinagar is by deputation or direct recruit-

ment. But the period of deputation has not been specified
anywhere.

Ministry’s comments: “The above mentioned posts have been
filled-up by direct recruitment and not on deputation basis.
However, the instructions as indicated above for svecifying the
period of deputation has been noted for compliance in the draft
recruitment rules which are under preparation.”

(7) Point referred: The method of recruitment for the post
of Senior Research Officer (Plant Breeding & Genetics), Senior
Research Officer (Host Plant), Senior Research Officer (Che-
mistry), Senior Research Officer (Agronomy). Senior Research
Officer (Silkworm Physiology), Assistant Director (Central



os

27

Silkworm Seed Station), Special Officer, Central Tasar Silk-
worm Seed Station, Senior Research Assistant (Statistics),
Assistant Superintendent (Central Sericultural Research &
Training Institute), Reeling Expert, Accountant Manager-cum-
Accountant, Hostel Manager, Junior Gestetner Operator, is by
departmental promotion. When the appointment is by depart-
mental promotion, the reasons for prescribing the educational
and other qualifications for direct recruitment in the relevant
column of the schedule are not clear.

Ministry’s comments: “The recruitment rules in respect of the
above mentioned posts were framed by the Board and the same
were notified by the Ministry of Commerce on 16th August,
1966. However, the post meant for departmental promotion has
been filled-up according to the seniority in the concerned cate-
gory without any restriction regarding age, qualification, etc.

It may be mentioned that the instructions contained as above
have been noted and necessary care is being taken in the draft
recruitment rules which are presently under preparation regard-
ing omitting the age and qualification from the recruitment
rules of the posts to be filled-up by 100 per cent departmental
promotion.

5.2 The Committee at its metting held on the 31st May, 1984
noted that the Ministry of Commerce (Department of Textiles had
agreed to the suggestions made with regard to various provisions of
the Recruitment Rules of the Central Silk Board's Secretariat and
Research and Service Stations and that they would keep the same
in view while finalising their rules which were being redrafted by
them.

5.3 The Ministry on the 20th June, 1984 were requested to fur-
nish copies of the draft Recruitment Rules which were under con-
sideration of the task force constituted by the Board. The Minist-
ry were reminded in the matter on the 7th December, 1984.

5.4 In reply, the Ministry on the 5th January, 1985 informed as
under:

“_ , it has been reported by Central Silk Board that final discus-
sion for finalisation of draft recruitment rules to be held in the
meeting of the Task Force on personnel policies was due to take
place in the last week of December and thereafter the same are

1409 RS—3


required to be placed before the Standing Committee/General

pody of the Board for approval before. submitting them to the
Ministry.”

5.5 On the 17th January, 1985, the Ministry were requested te
intimate the decision taken by the task force in the matter of finali-
sation of the draft Recruitment Rules, an‘

d they were reminded in
this regard on the $3rd February, 1985.

5.6 In reply the Ministry, on the 5th March, 1985, informed 88
under:—

1. “the Central Silk Board. has informed that the draft recruit-
ment rules have not yet peen finalised by the rask Force. As soon
as the report is finalised the decision shall be conveyed to the
Rajya Sabha Secretariat by this Ministry.”

5.7 Meanwhile the Committee visited Trivandrum and Bangalore
from 9th April to 16th April, 1985. The subject was discussed by

py the Committee at Bangalore during its visit. Extract from the

study note is enclosed [Annexure-V]-

5.8 The Ministry were reminded on 9th August, 1985 to inform
the decision taken by the ‘Task Force in the matter of finalisation
of the draft recruitment rules to which the Ministry furnished an
interim reply on 9th September, 4985 as under:—

“The report su bmitted by the Task Force is peing placed pefore
the All India Sericultural Research Coordination Committee at its
next meeting likely to be held in September, 1985 for considera-
tion. Thereafter the same is required to be placed pefore the
General Body meeting of the Board for approval and then submit-
ted for consideration of this Ministry.

As soon as the report is received in the Ministry, the decision
would be conveyed to Rajya Sabha Secretariat.

5.9 The Ministry vide their OM. dated 13th November, 1985, in-
formed as under:—

«_. the report ‘submitted by the Task Force has already been
considered by All India Sericulture Research Coordination Com-
mittee. However, it is yet to be cons‘dered bv the General Body
Meeting of the Board which is likely to be hpeld within two

months.


On receipt of the approved report and consideration by this
department, the decision would be conveyed to the Rajya Sabha

Secretariat.”

5.10 The Ministry were again reminded on 15th January, 1986
and 14th July, 1986.

5.11 In reply the Ministry vide their O.M. dated 15th September,
1986, informed as follows:—

“...the proposed consolidated Recruitment Rules. of Central
Silk Board have been recently received by this Ministry; from
the Board. The Recruitment, Rules of Central Silk Board are
now under the consideration of this Ministry.”

5.12 The Committee at its meeting held on 5th March, 1987,
considered the comments furnished by the Ministry.

5.13 The Committee notes the Protracted delay in framing of
the rules and directs that such delays in framing recruitment rules
should be meticulously avoided in- future so. as to ensure justice
and fair play to all concerned and eliminate ad-hocism in such
matters affecting the service career of the employees.

vI

RULES GOVERNING THE SERVICE CONDITIONS OF PERSONS
SERVING IN THE INDIAN AUDIT AND ACCOUNTS
DEPARTMENT

6. A reference was made to the Ministry of Finance (Depart-
ment of Expenditure) on 14-7-1982, seeking certain clarifications.
The points referred and comments of the Ministry vide their O.M.
dated 11th August, 1982, ate as follows:—

(1) Point referred:

The Ministry are requested to supply copies of the rules gov-
erning the service conditions of persons serving in the Indian
Audit and Accounts Department and the Administrative powers
of the Comptroller and Auditor-General, made by the President,
in terms of Article 148(5) of the Constitution,


fa comments:

Government have not prescribed any specific rules exclusive-
ly governing the service conditions of persons serving in the
1A. & AD. and the Administrative powers of the C & 8.6.
made by the President, except in respect of Accounts|Audit|
Administrative Officers and Section Officers of that Department
in whose cases Separate recruitment rules have been framed by
the President. The employees of the LA. & AD., are treated
for all intents and purposes as Central Government employees
with the only difference that their service conditions, are pre-
scribed by the President after consulting the C & A.G. as con-
templated in Article 148(5) of the Constitution, The adminis-
trative powers of the C & AG. are also determined by the
President only after consulting him as envisaged in the Article
148(5) of the Constitution.

(2) Point referred:

The Ministry may inform whether Government have any
proposal or scheme to introduce any legislation in Parliament
in near future as contemplated in Article 148(5) of the Con-
stitution: —

Ministry’s comments:

Government have no proposal or scheme to introduce any
legislation in Parliament in near future as contemplated in
article 148(5) of the Constitution,

6.1 The Ministry of Finance (Department of Expenditure) there-
after were requested vide this Secretariat O.M. dated the 4th
January, 1983 to forward two copies of recruitment rules in respect
of Accounts|Audit|Administrative Officers and Section Officers of
that Department for scrutiny by the Committee,

6.2 After persistent reminders the Ministry vide their O.M. dated
the 9th December, 1983, furnished a set of the following Rules:—

(i) The Indian Audit and Accounts Department (Administra-
tive Officers, Assistant Accounts Officers and Assistant Audit Offi-
cers) Recruitment Rules. 1963: and

(ii) The Indian Audit and Accounts Department (Subordinate
Accounts Service and Subordinate Railway Audit Service) Service
Rules, 1974. 5



6.3 The aforesaid rules were examined and points that arose were
referred to the Ministry on 2nd April, 1984, for comments,

6.4 Again after repeated reminders the Ministry vide their OM.
dated the 6th February, 1986, furnished their comments.

The points referred are as follows:—

@) Composition of the Class Il DPC may be specified, if there
is no objection, in column 12 of the Schedule to the Indian Audit
and Accounts Department (Administrative officers, Assistant Ac-
counts Officers and Assistant Audit Officers Recruitment Rules,
1964, (not 1963)

Gi) Separate percentage of the posts to be manned through direct
recruitment and promotion may be specified in rule 5 of IAAD
(Subordinate Accounts Service and Subordinate Railway Audit
Service) Service Rules, 1974.

(iii) Reasons and rationale of putting of direct recruit senior to
those already working in the cadre vide Rules 7 of the Rules refer-
red to at (ii) above.

(iv) Order in which appointments to the Service is to be made
ie. whether through open or departmental examination has not
been specified in rules.

6.5 The reply of the Ministry is reproduced below seriatim:

(i) These rules were notified prior to issue of guide-lines in
DPAR O.M. No. 14017|24/76-Estt. (RR) dated 25-5-1979 and there-
fore, this omission has occurred. Class II (Gsoup ‘B’) DPC con-
sists of AG Level Officers and the senior among the Accountants
General in the DPC is the Chairman. There is no objection to
specify this in the rules. However, these rules are to be repealed
and fresh rules are to be issued, as they are no longer operative
due to change in designations and also because of recent reorganisa-
tion of Accountant General’s offices into Audit offices and Accounts
& Entitlement Offices. The rules for the feeder cadre are being
prepared and after its finalisation, the rules for Audit Officers|Ac-
counts Officers will be issued. When issuing the rules, guidelines
of DPC and also the observation of the SLC will be kept in view.

(ii) This has already been replied to vide this Ministry’s O.M. of
even number dated 25-6-1984. It is, however, clarified that the SAS
and SRAS Service Rules have been partially struck down by the


32

Supreme Court. ‘The C-& AG are finalising the rules for the

feeder cadies and: after issue of these rules, fresh rules for SAS

and SRAS will be issued. Because of Major reorganisation in

= "1984 considerable changes in the organisational set up and cadre

have occurred. ‘his Ministry has notified recentiy the rules for

3 Record Keeper and Senior Auditor. Director recruitment is re-

sorted to rarely only in offices where there is dearth of staff who

~ have qualified in the departmental examination for promotion to

5 SAS: (mow known as “Section Officer's Grade) like commercial

= Audit Wing. The intention is that where the method of promo-

tion fails, direct. recruitment’ will’ be resorted to. This will be
specified in the new rules.

(iii) Tt has been stated in Rule 7 of SAS rules that a direct recruit
shall on: appointment to the service rank senor to all officiating
persoris in the service passing in the same Departmental exami-

= nation or subsequent departmental examination. Under the “ad-
ministrative orders regulating seniority of a direct recruit vis-a-vis
departmental candidates passing the SAS examination a directly
recruited Section Officer ranks immediately below the last SAS
ba passed person officiating in the SAS on the date on which the
sa Girectly: recruited so takes over charge as S.O. Thus, they do not
ix overtake the departimentally qualified SO’s who are already in ser-
ce vice as SOs. The direct recruits are also selected through open en-
4 trance examinations and thereafter they have to pass the depart-
Be mental examination. The observations of the committee will be kept
in view while framing revised rules so that there is no ambiguity.

(iv) There has been some tie up in this case with the recruitment +

i for those posts; CAG has recently decided that the posts in hhead-
quarters may be filled in by deputation from field office. Action will
be taken to frame the rules for the posts in headquarters indicating

| eo rules for posts'in the C&LAG office, No rules have been notified ‘so far
the method of recruitment as deputation.

हर 6.6 The Committee at its meeting held on 22nd May, 1986, con-
हू sidered the above comments and directed the Secretariat to make
= further reference to the Ministry in the light of the discussion.

6.7 Accordingly, on ‘3rd October, 1986, the Ministry of Finance
were requested to furnish information in the following terms:—

: “that Committee on Subordinate Legislation at its meeting
| held on May 22, 1986,.considered the Ministry's comments and


33

directed the Secretariat to pursue the matter and obtain these Rules
when issued as indicated in the O.M. under reference. The Com-
mittee also took exception to the sloggish response and the shoddy
manner in which the Min.stry of Finance treated the communica-
tions sent on behalf of the Committee for obtaining copies of the

rules and their comments on the points referred to them in respect
of the rules under examination.”

6.8 The Ministry vide their O.M. dated 17th December, 1986, fur-
nished the following information:—

..that on the basis of the information received from the Office

of the Comptroller & Auditor General of India the position is as
below:—

2. With regard to the Indian Audit & Accounts Department
(Administrative Officers, Assistant Accounts Officers: and Asstt:
Audit Officers) Recruitment Rules, 1964, there has been major res-
tructuring in the Indian Audit & Accounts Department and some
new intermediary cadres have been created. For promotion to the
cadre of Audit Officers, the feeder cadre now is Assistant Audit
Officers (in the scale of Rs. 2000-3200-revised scale) which was creat-
ed after restructuring of cadres. In the case of Accounts Officers
till now the feeder cadre was Section Officers. But the Pay Com-
mission have recommended for creation of a ‘functional
intermediary cadre as in the case of Audit Office, in the
scale of Rs. 2000—3200. Therefore the rules framed in
1964 will have to be replaced and new rules to be
brought separately for the Audit Officers and for the Accounts Offi-
cers, as with the restructuring Audit Officers are separate from the
Accounts & Entitlement Officers. Further these rules were framed
in 1964 and are not in accordance with the standard pattern pre-
scribed in May, 1979 by DPAR. In order to repeal those rules and
bring revised rules, the rules for the feeder cadres are to be fram-
ed first as UPSC does not normally clear the rules without rules for
the feeder cadre. Due to the restructuring in the Devartment and
subsequent recommendation of the Pay Commission it has become
a major task to frame the rules for all feeder posts. The Pay
Commission have recommended certain higher grades in A&E Offi-
ces also. Office of the C&AG has stated that they are also keen to
get the rules for all posts finalised exned'tiously. Recruitment Rules
for posts of Senior Auditors, Sunervisors, Accountants ete. have been
framed and notified recently. The Recruitment Rules for Personal



_ Assistants have been sent to the press for notification on 5-12-86.
of the C&AG are making special efforts to frame the rules
for other posts also quickly.

~ 6.9 At its meeting held on 2nd April, 1987, the Committee consi- ]
3 dered the Ministry’s communication dated 17th December, 1986 and =u
Zz noted its contents. |

» 6.10 The Committee, however expresses its deep anguish over the
sluggish response and the shoddy manner in which the Ministry had
i treated the communications sent to them on behalf of the Commit-
tee. The Committee also directs that all the rules being framed and
those required to be framed, be framed and notified expeditiously
under intimation to the Committee.

New Delhi, Ss s N. M. KAMBLE,
August 25, 1987. Chairman,
Committee on Subordinate Legislation.



ANNEXURE-I

[Vide para 2.5 of the Report]

Note on the visit of the Committee to Bhabha Atomic Research
Centre, Bombay on 27th September, 1984

In pursuance of the decision taken at its meeting held on 11th June,
1984 and 11th July, 1984, the Committee on Subordinate Legislation
visited Bombay from 26th to 29th September, 1984.

2, A brief Note on the visit of the Committee is given in succed-
ing paragraphs.

* * * *

15. While explaining the reasons for delay in framing rules under
the Atomic Energy Act, 1962, the Department of Atomic Energy ‘had
earlier informed the Committee that Atomic Energy being a new
field, drafting of rules and regulations involved study of international
practices and conventions; that there was need to study various re-
commendations of International Organisations such as Atomic Energy
mendations of International Organisations such as Atomic Energy
Agency, International Commission for Radiation Protection ete. that
there were not enough guidelines in the preparation of rules and some
of the guidelines were still under formulation by international orga-
nisations like TERA, ICRP, etc. and that comparable legislation not
being available in the country, legislations of other countries were
to be studied and adapted to suit the conditions prevelent in India.

16. In order, therefore, to have first hand information about tech-
nicalities involved in framing of rules under the Atomic Energy Act,
1962, and the practical difficulties in that respect being faced by the
Department of Atomic Energy, the Committee inter alia decided to
visit some of the establishments of the Department of Atomic Energy
located at Bombay.

17. On Thursday, the 27th September, 1984, at about 1.30 P.M. the
Committee arrived at Bhabha Atomic Research Centre at Trombay:

ec R, 35


Eee

200 81 (1 oe a en

23200

+

iis

18. The following Members were present during the visit:—
Shri M. M. Jacob—Chairman
Shri Pawan Kamar Bansal
Shri Ram Naresh Kushwaha
Dr. Mahabir Prasad

Shri Dhuleshwar Meena
Shri Rafique Alam
Shri Syed Sibtey Razi

SECRETARIAT
Shrimati K. K. Chopra, Additional Secretary.
Shri C. R. Roy Choudhury, Legislative Committee Officer.

19. Dr. P.K. Iyengar, Director, on behalf of the Chairman, (Dr. R.
Ramanna) of BARC, who was reported to be away from India on offi-
cial business, welcomed the Committee and introduced his colleagues
who were present to assist him to conduct the visit.

20. At the outset, Dr. Iyengar briefly explained to yembers the
origin of the BARC, various development activities undertaken by it
towards building up of nuclear power programme of the country and
significant contributions made in fields of space, defence, industry,
agriculture and medicine.

21. During the course of discussion, Dr. Iyengar explained the
functioning of the BARC with its background. The discussion held
with him and other information given by the BARC is summarised as
follows:— =

India had foreseen the potential of atomic energy for power gene-

|. tation as far back as 1944, almost 40 years ago. At the end of the

Second World War, when most vf the nations viewed atomic energy

as a force of destruction, India was already thinking in terms of using
atomic energy solely for economic development.

Jt was late Dr. H. J. Bhabha who recognised, in those early days,
the important role that atomic energy could play in India’s develop-
ment, and initiated the nuclear programme in the country, :

Though the country had a long and rich tradition of research in
the sciences, organised studies in nuclear sciences may be said to have
begun with the Tata Institute of Fundamental Research (TIFR), Bom-
bay, which was founded in June, 1945, by Dr. Bhabha.

5
=
%
3



37°

In April, 1948, the Indian Legisiature passed the Atomic Energy
Act, 1948, for the developmeni and control of Atomic Energy and for
purposes connected therewith. To achieve the objectives, efforts were
initiated to build up a versatile infrastructure of research facilities,
trained scientifie and technical manpower, raw material processing
centres and the know-how and capability to manufacture nuclear
components and electronic equipment to support the atomic energy
Programme and make the couniry self-reliant.

With work in atomic energy growing, the TIFR group of nuclear
scientists and a major part of the work on atomic energy was moved
to Trombay, where a separate multi-disciplinary unit, named as the
Atomic Energy Establishment was set up in 1954. The Establish-
ment was formally inaugurated by the late Prime Minister Shri
Jawaharlal Nehru on January 20, 1954.

Thereafter in September, 1962, Parliament passed the Atomic
Energy Act, 1962 (in supersession of the 1948 Act), to provide for
the development, conduct and use of atomic energy for the welfare
of the people of India and for other peaceful purposes and for mat-
ters connected therewith.

In January 1967, the Atomic Energy Establishment was renamed
as Bhabha Atomic Research Centre (BARC) to perpetuate the me-
mory of Dr. Bhabha.

With a manpower strength of 11,000 including 3,000 scientists and
engineers, the Bhabha Atomic Research Centre is today one of the
largest and best equipped research Centres in the world. Over the
years, it has built strong research groups and a wide range of modern
facilities in a number of disciplines covering diverse fields of activi-
ties such as physics, chemistry, engineering, metallurgy, reprocess-
ing, fuel fabrication, waste management, radio isotopes, electronics,
instrumentation, biology, agriculture, food technology, radiation me-
dicine etc.

Thus, India has reached a stage where it has a sound infrastruc-
ture of industry and know-how io support and sustain all the re-
quired activities encompassing feasibility studies detailed project
design, construction, commissioning and operation of any plant in
the entire fuel cycle chain through a well planned network of Ato-
mic Energy Establishments spread over the length and breadth of
the country, namely, (1) Atomic Minerals Division at Hyderabad,
(2) Atomic Power Stations at Kakraper, Kalpakkam, Narora, Rana



3 tomic Research at

3 (4) Centre for Advanced Technology, Indore; (5) Elec-

tronies Corporation of India Ltd. at Hyderabad; (6) Heavy Water
Plants at Baroda, Kota, Manuguru, Nangal, Talcher, Thalvaishet, and
Tuticorin; (7) High Altitude Research Laboratory at Gulmarg; (8)
Mineral Sands at Chavara and Manavalakuruchi; (9) Nuclear Fuel
Complex at Hyderabad; (10) Nuclear Research Laboratory at Sri-
nagar; (11) Oscom Project at Chatrapur; (12) Power Reactor Fuel
Reprocessing Unit at Tarapur; (13) Rare Earths Plant at Alwaye;
(14) Reactor Research Centre at Kalpakkam; (15) Saha Institute of
Nuclear Physi¢s at Calcutta; (16) Soismic Station at Gauribidnur;
(17) Tata Institute of Fundamental Research at Bombay; (18) Tata
Memorial Centre at Bombay; (19) Uranium Corporation of India
Ltd. at Jaduguda; and (20) Variable Energy Cyclotron at Calcutta.

22. The Committee was then taken round some of the establish-
ments of the BARC including DHRUVA and ISOTOPES where the
Members had opportunity inter alia to see the scientists, engineers
and other workers engaged in various fields of activities of the
Centre. ;

23. The Chairman thanked Dr. Iyengar and his colleagues for the
nice arrangements made for the visit of the Committee to BARC.

24, The Committee thereafter left the BARC at about 4.30 p.m.

LENA ie aM, a |

ie



ANNEXURE.-IT
[Vide para 2.6 of the Report)
List of Rules/Notification/Orders issued under the Atomic Energy Act, 1962 (As on 23-9-85) *

S.No. Subject and date of Rule/Notification/Order Date of
issue

1, Atomic Energy Act, 1962 (Notification fixing 21-9-62 as the date of its
coming into force), ३ 18:

2... Disposal of Uranium - Prescribing proportion of Uranium contained in
its natural state, . T-ll

3. Prescribed substances - revised lists.

4. Prohibited areas - declaration of 5 5 के
@ Bhabha Atomic Research Centre © ५ ५... ५ ss 20-8-20 4
(ii) Electronics Corporation of India Ltd., Hyderabaé. =. =. --‘1110-74 a
Gil) Heavy Water Project, Baroda... ABT
@) —do- MOU! Soil eee aS Soins SAS
ते —do— Taloher:/s.c5- 50152 ०० ३५ पचठ के केक see कं
i) —do— Tuticorin’ 2. eee 1873 >
(Vii) Jaduguda Mines/Mill Project.’ 5. se ३3-07
(viii) Madras Atomic Power Project Reactor Research Centre & Centra-
lised Waste Management Facility, Kalpakkam, ‘& 4-4-78
(ix) Narora Atomic Power Project Fy ao a OTS
@) Nuclear Fuel Complex. =. 2 ssw ARID ;
(xi) Rajasthan Atomic Power Project. . . . . -  ~ 23-10-69
(xii) Saha Institute of Nuclear Physics, Calcutta. 9. =. =» + 16-12-71 थे
(xiii) Tarapur Atomic Power Station & other Plants Projects etc., at :
Tarapur. : 5 Z +e 19-9477
(xiv) Triveni Structurals Ltd., Workshop at NAPP. .  . «ss इ5इजय6 |
(xy) Uranium Corporation of India Ltd., Surda Uranium Recovery
Maes + 24-10-75
(avi) Variable Energy Cyclotron Project, Calcutta. ot £8 * + 16-12-71

Aare Soca


S.No. Subject and date of Rule/Notification/Order Date of
issue

5... Prohibition of entry into a prohibited area =

(i) Madras Atomic Power Project =... st 30-9-10

(0) Reactor Research Centre; > . है . « 30-9-70

6. Prohibition of entry into any areas of premises declared as prohi-

bited area. 4-2-5
7, Radiation Protection Rules 1971. . 13-9-71
8. Rvtiation Protection Rules 1971 Appointment of Head, DRP, as

competent authority. न 12-1-79

9. — Radiation Protection Rules—Operational Limits for level of Radiation

and Contamination, Order 1972. -

10. Radiation Protection Rules—Maximum Permissible Radiation
Levels for source Housing of Telegamma Units Order, 1972.

11, ८7: के Protection (Amendment) Rules, 1975 omission of Rules

12. Radiation Protection (Amendment) Rules, 1974 Substituting Rules
‘Sand insertion of Rules 9-4.

13. Rauiation Protection (Amendment) Rules 1976 Substitution Rules 5

14. Radiation substances or radioactive mat rial prescribing levels of
radiation. .

15. Restriction on disclosure of information. . . . «. y

16. Subordinate authorities—delegation of powers in respect of prohi-
bited areas— ५

@ Bhabha 5 01.1० १, न मम

(ii) Electronics Corporation of India Ltd., Hyderabad. . «|

(iii) Heavy Water Project, Baroda है ५ Byes ”
(iv) —do- ae 10 tee ery
(0 —do~ Talcher .

07) —do-— ‘Tuticorin
(wii) Jaduguda Mines/Mill Project. - . ». «. «© «©

(viii) Madras Atomic Power Project, Reactor Reasearch Centre & Centrali-
sied Waste Management Facility, Kalpakkam. 5

(ix) Narora Atomic Power Project हे 2 . . . रे

(x) Nutlear’Fuel Complex... . - ५. »०» ५४ ३४

9-2-72

4-10-75,

18-6-74
15-5-76,

13-9-71
42-75

20-8-70
7-12-76
13-12-71
15-12-71
21-5-14
18-473
19-10-70

44-18
क््श्या
18-12-71



41
Sl. No. Subject and date of Rules/Notification/Order Date of issue
(xi) Rajasthan Atomic Power Project. +» + + + + 28-70
(xii) Reactor Research Centre. . .. > ‘ रे कर « 23-2-73
(xiii) Sina Institute of Nuclear Physics, Calcutta. « ms . . + 16-12-71
(xiv) Tarapur Atomic Power Station & other Plants, Projects Etc. at
Tarapur. : . . . . . . . 7-3-17
(xv) Triveni Structurals Ltd, Workshop for NAPP = = 7 ete Ei)
(xvi) Variable Energy Cyclotron Project i: 2 A = 3 + 16-12-71
(xvii) Uranium Corporation of India Ltd., Surda Uranium. - : + 24-10-75
17. Subordinate authorities— delegation of powers in respect of grant of
permission for import raaioactive substances. . . : : 9-3-79
18. Radiation Protection Rules, 1971 Appointment of ‘Head, DRP, BARC, as
the comptent authority to excercise the powers conferred onthe compe-
tent aucnority by the said rules. . - . - ५ . + 12-1-79
19. “Prescribed equipment” - List of - . . : : . + 17-10-79
20. “Tie Industrial Radiography (Radiation Surveillance) Procedures” 30-1-80
21. Atomic Energy (Factories) Rules 1984 - हे : . न्पल 21-7-84
22. Atomic Energy (Working of Mines Minerals and Handling of 25-6-84
Prescribed Substances) Rules, 1984. * न . ० न्‍ डे 21-7-84
23,

Atomic Bazrgy (Arbitration) Procedure Rules, 1984. : + 25-6-84



ANNEXURE-IIT

[Vide para 2-7 of the Report]

‘Statement showing progress of action taken to frame rules yet to be notified under
the Atomic Energy Act, 1962 (As on 13-8-1986)

Sl. Particulars of Rules
No.

Present status

1. Rules for the Safe Disposal cf Radioactive Cleersnec scccived frem the

Wastes.

Ministry of Law and approval
of Prime Minister obtained.
After clearance from the
Atomic Energy Regulatory
Board, the Rules have since
been referred to Legislative
Department in the Ministry
of Law for Hindi translation.

2, Atomic Energy (Safe Trasport of Radioactive Atomic Energy Regulatory Board

Materials) Rules, 1984.

3. Atomic Energy, (Safety in Design, Installation,
Use and Operation of Teletheraphy Units)
Rules, 1984.

has since forwarded “Radia-
tion Surveillance Procedures
for the Safe Transport of
Radioactive Materials 1986,
under Rulel5 of the Radiation
Protection Rules, 1971. This
is being processed for Noti-
fication. “AERB has intimat-
ed that this procedure along-
with a Regulatory Code for
Safety in eee of Radio-
active Materials which will be
@ supplementary to this pro-
cedure would replace this Rule.

The Legal advice thatthe ae
ing procedure cannot be in-
troduced without the telether-
aphy units having been listedas
one of the prescribed equip-
ments and notified as such was
considered by the Safty Review
Committee of this Department.
Taking into account the in-
volvement of the safety as-
pects of the teletheraphy units,
the Rules were referred to the
Atomic Energy Regulatory
Board (AERB), AERB has
since framed a document entit-
led ‘Radiation Surveillance
Procedures‘ for Medical Appli-
cations of Radiation pole in
lieu of this Rule. jot ison
hand for _ notification of
these procedures.



43

Sl. Particulars of Rules
No.

Present status

4. Atomic Energy (Restricted Information

Prohibited Areas) Rules,

5, Imenite (Control of Export) Order.

and

Ministry of Law have advised
that an amendment of Section
26 of the Act is necessary in
order to make offences _cogni-
zable under theCr. P.C.H ence,
the promulgation of these
Rules can be taken up only
after amendment of Section
26 ofthe Act. Actionis being
taken separately on the pro-
posed amendment,

Ministry of Law intimated that
this order being oneunder Sec-
tion 14 of the Atomic Energy
Act, must follow issue of Rules
under the above Section. The
Department have issued the
Atomic Energy (Working of
Mines, Minerals and Hand-
ling of prescribed Substances)
Rules, 1984 under Section 140f
the Act. These Rules provide
for grant of licences for hand-
ling any of the prescribed sub-
stances which include ilmenite.
The draft Nemenite (Control of
Export) Order has been pre-
pared and is presently under
examination.



Zi.

(Vide para 2.8 of the Report]

Latest Position as on 19-3-1984 regarding making of Recruitment
Rules for Employees of the Department

en

As already submitted before the Committee on Subordinate
Legislation recruitment and promotion to various posts in the
Department of Atomic Energy are presently governed by the norms हि.
laid down by executive orders. The norms are observed on initial
appointment as well as on promotion to various grades, Copies of
the orders issued by this Department containing the norms in respect
of var-ous posts in the areas of Administration, Accounts, Purchase
& Stores are enclosed herewith. These orders have been circulated

to all concerned,

2. Apart from the above posts, this Department has a large
number of scientifie and technical personnel. The bulk of our re-
quirement of scientist and engineers in Physics, Chemistry and En-
gineering disciplines is met by recruitment made through the Bha-
bha Atomic Research Centre Training School. The norms and
conditions of eligibi ity for the recruitment are published in adver-
tisement issued for this purpose and on selection on the basis of
interview the trainees are appointed. On successful completion of
training and after absorption, they are promoted from time to time
to higher grades in accordance with the guidelines and norms laid
down for this purpose under various executive orders, Similar pro-
cedure of direct recruitment through open advertisement
in accordance with recruitment norms is adopted in respect of other
specialised areas like medical, biology, civil engineering, electrical
and ventilation system ete. with the difference that the initial
recruitment is not through the Training School.

3. In the technical category persons are recruited at the level
of Tradesman ‘B’ in some cases direct recruitment of technical staff
in higher grade is also made to meet some specific requirement of
work. Their recruitment and promotion js also governed by the
norms laid down by executive orders.

@

44


45

4. It may be mentioned here that promotion of scientific and tech-
nical personnel in this Department is governed by a merit promo-
tion scheme specified for the purpose, The philosophy underlying
this is to assess the intrinsic worth of the persons through inter-
views by the duly constituted Selection Committees and on the basis
of their recommendations, provide them opportunities for advance-
ment. Therefore, once the person fulfills the standards laid down
on the basis of merit, the required number of posts in higher grades
are created to accommodate the promotions, In view of this the
norms for promotion for various scientific and technical grades are
invariable linked with the grading in the confidential Reports and
are therefore kept strictly confidential and have, therefore, not been
notified. Two booklets contrining the norms for direct recruit-
ment as well as recruitment of scientific and technical personnel
followed in this Department along with the norms for promotion of
civil engineers are enclosed herewith for the information of the
Committee.

5. Action has also been initiated separately to frame recruitment
rules in respect of certain senior administrative posts under proviso
to Article 309 of the Constitution of India.



ANNEXURE-V
[Vide para 5.7 of the Report]

Extracts from note on the visit of the Committee on Subordinate

Legislation to Trivandrum and Bangalore from 9th to 16th April,
. 1985

-In pursuance of the decision taken at its meeting held on 2ist

March, 1985 the Committee on Subordinate Legislation visited Tri-

vandrum and Bangalore from 9th to 16th April, 1985. The Com-

_ mittee stayed at Trivandrum from 9th to 11th April, 1985. On 12th

April, it proceeded for Bangalore where it stayed from 13th to 16th
April, 1985,

2. A brief note on the visit of the Committee is given in succeed-
ing paragraphs.

* * * * *

April 15, 1985
(2.00 p.m.)

Discussion with the representatives of the Central Silk Board

At 2.00 p.m, on 15-4-85, the Committee assembled in the Con-
ference Room of the Head Office of the Central Silk Board at
Bangalore and had discussions with the representatives of the
Board on the (i) Central Silk Board Rules, 1955 and (ii) Recruit-
ment Rules of Central Silk Board’s Secretariat and Research and
Service Stations in the Light of Memorandum No. 21/84 and Memo-
randum No, 6/84 (Supplement) respectively.

The following were present:

MEMBERS
1. Shri M. M. Jacob—Chairman
3. Shri Lal K. Advani
3. Shri Dhuleshwar Meena
4. Shri Rafique Alam
5. Shri Pawan Kumar Bansal
6, Shri Ram Naresh Kushawaha

46

2


E Shri P. Babul Reddy
8, Shrimati Krishna Kaul

SECRETARIAT
Shri 8. R. Goel, Chief Examiner of Questions.
Shri C. R. Roy Choudhury, Legislative Committee Officer.
REPRESENTATIVES OF THE CENTRAL S1LK Boarp

1. Shri A. P. Bhatikar, Member-Secretary.
2. Shri M. V. Abhyankar, Dy. Secretary.
3. Shri P. Sampath, Deputy Director (Publicity).
4, Shri C. R. Dakshinamoorthy, Asstt. Secretary (Admn.).
5. Shri K. 5 Nagarejarao, Audit Officer.

Ministry or CoMMERCE
Shri O, 9, Gupta, Deputy Secretary.

Shri A. P. Bhatikar, Secretary of the Central Silk Board wel-
comed the Chairman and the Members of the Committee and intro-
duced the officers of the Board to the Committee.

Giving a brief introduction of the Board the Chairman told the
Committee that the Central Silk Board had been maintaining a
steady growth of about 7 per cent to 8 per cent per annum in the
production of silk during the past three years, India’s position in
the production of silk was third, the first and second being China
and Japan, respectively. The main reason why China and Japan
were above India in the production of silk was that the Cocoons
which they produced were of superior quality. Besides, they backed
by an experience of over 100 years. India was however trying to
improve the quality of Cocoons. Whereas India’s experience in
the line was practically 10 to 20 years.

Giving a brief introduction of the Board the Chairman told the
Committee that the Central Silk Board was set up in the year 1949
under the Central Silk Board Act, 1948. In the initial stages the
Board functioned primarily as an Advisory Body and also as an
Agency for distribution of grants and loans to the State Govern-
ments against approved schemes. It did not take up any direct
activity relating to development of sericulture industry. In the
year 1958, pursuant to a decision taken by the Govt. of India, the
Board was made responsible for organising sericultural research,
advanced training of personnel and basic seed production under its
direct control with the taking over of sericulture, Research and



‘Training institutions from State Governments, the activities of
the Board increased and consequently its Budget and Staff also
increased manifold. The Committee was told that the Seventh Five
Year Plan envisages an infrastructure of development plans. The
Board had realised its role in the field of marketing too and there
were plans to set up all India price stability Boards.

The Committee had discussions with the representatives of the
Board on the (1) The Central Silk Board Rules, 1955 (2) The Cen-
tral Silk Board Study Leave Rules (8) The Central Silk Board
Contributory Provident Fund Rules and (4) The Central Silk Board
(General Provident Fund) Rules, 1966, all framed under the Cen-
tral Silk Board Act, 1948. The Committee expressed its satisfac-
tion that the Ministry had acceded to many of the suggestions made
by it in respect of certain provisions of the above rules,

The representatives of the Board told that a Committee under
the Chairmanship of Dr. A, Kalanidhi was on the job of consolidating
the various Rules of the Board and that its report was expected
shortly,

As regard the Central Silk Board Recruitment Rules, the Sec-
retary of the Board said that a task force was on the job of con-
solidating the four sets of Recruitment Rules and its proceedings
were at the final stage.

The Chairman thanked the representatives of the Central Silk
Board for the valuable information/clarification given by them,

* * * * *

Visit to the Central Silk Technological Research Institute (Cen-
tral Silk Board), Bangalore

At 1.00 p.m, on 16-4-85 the Committee visited the Central Silk
Technological Research Institute at Bangalore.

On arrival at the Institute, the Committee was welcomed by
Shri T. N. Sonwalkar, Officer on Special Duty, of the Institute.

The Committee saw how silk yarn was obtained from the cocoons
and how the weaving, printing ete. of silk cloth was done and the
whole process was explained to the members by the officers of the
Institute.

The Committee thanked the officers of the Institute for the
demonstrations conducted by them.

The Committee thereafter dispersed.

eo


4]


MINUTES OF THE MEETINGS OF THE COMMITTEE ON
‘ SUBORDINATE LEGISLATION
XXVIII
TWENTY-EIGHTH MEETING
The Committee met at 3.00 p.m. on Tuesday, the 23rd March,
1982, in Committee Room No. 63, Parliament House, New Delhi,
MeEMbers PRESENT
1. Shri Narasingha Prasad Nanda—Chairman
2. Shri 8. N. Banerjee
3. Shri T. Basheer
4. Shri Sunder Singh Bhandari
5, Shri Nand Kishore Bhatt
6. Shri Ramakrishna Hegde
7. Shri Bhagatram Manhar.
SECRETARIAT
Shri हू, Dayal, Chief Legislative Committee Officer,
Shri B. R, Goel, Senior Legislative Committee Officer,

* * * * *
4. Memorandum No. 35

Making of rules under the Central Acts, (the Atomic Energy Act,
1962) and laying of such rules before both the Houses of Parlia-
ment $
The Committee considered the request of the Department of
Atomic Energy and granted it extension of time upto the 3ist May,
1982, for making rules under the Atomic Energy Act, 1962.

* * * * *

9. The Committee then adjourned at 4.00 p.m.

***Relates to the matter not included in this Report.

ai gapnd 51



52

XVII

EIGHTEENTH MEETING

The Committee met at 11.00 a.m. on Tuesday, the 11th October,
in Committee Room ‘A’, Ground Floor, Parliament House
Annexe, New Delhi,

Memeers Present

1. Dr. Bhai Mahavir — Chairman
2. Shri Madan Bhatia

3. Shri 6. ८. Bhattacharya

4. Shri Dipen Ghosh

# Shri 8. D. Khobragade

6. Shri 6. Swamy Naik

7. Shri Ghanshyambhai Oza

8. Shri Santosh Kumar Sahu

SECRETARIAT
Shri 8. R. Goel, Chief Examiner of Questions,
Shri R. N. Bhardwaj, Senior Legislative Committee Officer,
* * * * *
4. Memoranpum No. 33/83
Atomic Energy Act, 1962—Delay in making rules under the
of the information furnished by the Department of Atomic Energy,
vide their O.M. dated the 29th April, 1983,
After some diseussion, the Committee decided to hear the Sec-
retary, Department of Atomic Energy, for seeking further clarifica-
+ * * * *

7. The Committee then adjourned at 12.50 p.m. to meet again at
3.00 Px. on the 2st October, 1983,

***Relates to the matter not ‘included in this Report.

ee


FE

XXxXUl

THIRTY-THIRD MEETING
The Committee met at 3.00 p.m. on Wednesday, the Ist Feb-
ruary, 1984, in Committee Room ‘A’, Ground Floor, Parliament
House Annexe, New Delhi.

Members PRESENT
. Dr. Bhai Mahavir—Chairman
. Shri Madan Bhatia
Shri Nand Kishore Bhatt
. Shri G. C. Bhattacharya
. Shri Amarprosad Chakraborty
Shri G, Swamy Naik
. Shri Santosh Kumar Sahu
. Shri Shanti Tyagi

enreaurypnr

SECRETARIAT
Shri 8. R. Goel, Chief Examiner of Questions.
Shri R. N. Bhardwaj, Senior Legislative Committee Officer.

‘WITNESSES
DeparTMENT or Atomic ENERGY

Shri Y. S. Das, Additional Secretary
Shri K. G. Vohra, Director, BARC.
Shri V. N. Meckoni, Director, BARC.
Shri 8. Menon, Deputy Secretary.
Shri 8. Pandey, Deputy Secretary.

2. MemoranpuM No. 33/83 (SUPPLEMENT)
Delay in making rules under the Atomic Energy Act, 1962

The Committee considered the above Memorandum and heard
the representatives of the Department of Atomic Energy in the
matter. The representatives explained to the Committee the latest
position with regard to the framing of rules under the Atomic Energy
Act, 1962. |

A verbatim record of the evidence was kept.



नि Committee directed the Tepresentatives of the Department
to furnish tabulated statement about diff

Clauses of Section 30 of the Atomi
as to the date when they Were notified and Jai

uitment rules made under pro-
viso to Article 309 of the Constitution for various Posts in Depart-
ment of Atomic Energy and also to furnish a statement show-
ing posts in respect of which recruitment rules under the said
Provision had not been framed,

3. The Committee then adjourned at 4.50 Pm. to meet again at
11.00 am, on Thursday, the 2nd February, 1984,
—.
i.
SECOND MEETING

The Committee met at 11.00 a.m, on Thursday, the 31st May,
1984, in Committee Room ‘A’ Ground Floor, Parliament House
Annexe, New Delhi.

MEMpeERs Presenr
Shri M. M. Jacob—Chairman
Shri Lal K, Advani
. Shri Syed Rahmat Alj
bri Pawan Kumar Bansal
" Shri Kamalendy Bhattacharjee
. Shri S. W. Dhabe
. Shrimati Krishna Kaul
. Shri Ram Naresh Kushawaha
|, Dr, Mahabir Prasad
: Shri Dhuleshwar Meena
- Shri Rafique Alam
SECRETARIAT
Shrimati K. kK. Chopra, Additional Secretary,
Shri 8. R, Goel, Chief Examiner of Questions,
Shri R. N. Bhardwaj, Senior Legislative Committee Officer.
* * * * *

7 & ६७ 9० :उ 99 छ के ६७ [७ +५

a

***Relates to the matter nof included GRC the matter not included in this Report.



Fa
4, MeEmoranpum No. 6/84

Recruitment rules of the Central. Siti Board’s Secretariat and ।
Research and Service Stations

The Committee noted that the Ministry
ment of Textiles) ‘agreeg with the sugges;
various provisions of th
Board’s Secretariat and Research and Service Stations, and would
keep the same in view while finalising their Rules which were
being redrafted by them. The Committee directeq the Secretariat {
to obtain a copy of the Rules for scrutiny.

* * % *

| of Commerce (Depart-
tion made with regard to

*

7. The Committee then adjourned at 1

2.05 Pm, to meet again at
3.00 p.m. on Monday, the 11th June, 1984,

vit

EIGHTH MEETING

The Committee met at 11.00 a.m. on Wednesday, the 11th July,
1984, in Committee Room ‘A’, Ground Floor, Parliament House

Annexe, New Delhi.
Members Presenr

- Shri M. M. Jacob—Chairman

. Shri Lal K, Advani

. Shri Pawan Kumar Bansal

- Shri S. W. Dhabe

. Shri M. Kalyanasundaram
Smt. Krishna Kaul

५ Shri Ram Naresh Kushawaha

५ Dr, Mahavir Prasad है|
. Shri Dhuleshwar Meena

. Shri Rafique Alam

. Shri Syed Sibtey Razi

- Shri Deba Prasad Ray

Se Aare wre

ee
SES

***Relates to the matter not included in this Report.


56

SECRETARIAT

Shrimati K. K. Chopra, Additional Secretary,
Shri 8. R. Goel, Chief Examiner of Questions,
Shri R. N. Bhardwaj, Senior Legislative Committee Officer.

* * * * *
3. Memoranpum No, 3/84 (SuprLeMENT)
Atomic Energy Act, 1962—Delay in making Rules under the

The Committee considered the above Memorandum. After some
discussions, the Committee decided to hear the Secretary, Depart-
ment of Atomic Energy and also to visit Bombay in order to have
a first-hand knowledge of the progress made till date in finalising
the remaining rules to be framed under the Atomic Energy Act,
1962.

प्रा
THIRD MEETING
The Committee met at 3.00 P.M, on Tuesday, the 18th June, 1985,

in Committee Room ‘A’, Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe,
New Delhi.

MEMBERS PRESENT

1. Shri M. M. Jacob—Chairman

2. Shri Lal K, Advani

3. Shri Jagannath Sitaram Akarte
4. Shri Pawan Kumar Bansal

5. Shri S. W. Dhabe

6. Shri M. Kalyanasundaram

7. Shrimati Krishna Kaul

8. Shrimati Usha Malhotra

9. Shri Dhuleshwar Meena
10. Shri Mahendra Mohan Mishra

***Relates to the matter not included in this Report.



57

11. Shri Sushil Chand Mohunta
12. Shri P. Babul Reddy
13. Shri Thangabaalu
SECRETARIAT
Shrimati K. K. Chopra, Additional Secretary.
Shri B. R. Goel, Chief Examiner of Questions,
Shri R. N. Bhardwaj, Senior Legislative Committee Officer.
* * * * *

Memoranpum No. 5/85

The Central Secietariat Service (Second Amendment) Rules, 1984

The Committee considered the above Memorandum. After some
discussion the Committee decided, in the first instance, to hear the
Secretary in the Department of the Personnel and Training and
then the representationists who approached the Committee,

* * * * .

6. The Committee then adjourned at 4.15 p.m. to meet again at
11.00 a.m. on the 19th June, 1985.

IV
FOURTH MEETING

The Committee met at 11.00 a.m. on Wednesday, the 19th June,
1985, in Committee Room ‘A’, Ground Floor, Parliament House
Annexe, New Delhi.

MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Shri M. M. Jacob—Chairman
2. Shri Lal K. Advani
3. Shri Jagannath Sitaram Akarte
4. Shri Pawan Kumar Bansal
5. Shri S. W. Dhabe
6. Shri M. Kalyanasundaram
7. Shrimati Krishna Kaul
8. Shrimati Usha Malhotra
9. Shri Dhuleshwar Meena

***Relates to the matter not included in this Report.


= Ss
10. Shri Mahendra Mohan Mishra
11. Shri Sushil Chand Mohunta
12: Shri P. Babul Reddy

13. Shri Thangabaalu

SECRETARIAT
Shrimati K. Kk, Chopra, Additionay Secretary,

Shri 8. R, Goel, Chief Examiner Of Questions,
Shri R. N. Bhardwaj, Senior Legislative Committee Officer,
* *

*

*

*

3. Memoranpum No. 7/85

Daman and Diu Children Rules, 1972

and decided that, subject to the permission of the Chairman of the
Rajya Sabha, it would make an on-tl

ings and discussions with the cone

of India Act, 1955, the Bank-
nsfer of Undertakings) Acts,
‘as and Bangalore, in connection with exami-

ing Companies (Acquisition and Tra
1970 and 1980; at Madr.
nation of Rules frame,

d under the Cinematograph Act, 1952; and at
Panaji (Goa), in connection with examination of Rules framed
under the Children Act, 1960 and the Probation of Offenders Act,
1958, sometime in July, 1985,

* * * कं *

5. The Committee then adjourned at 11.45 au.

***Relates to the matter not included in this Report.



ie

59
v
FIFTH MEETING
The Commiitee met at 3.00 p.m. on Frid the 28th June, 1985,

in Committee Room ‘A’. Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe,
New Delhi.

MEMBERS PRESENT

1. Shri M. M. Jacob—in the Chair.
2. Shri Lal K. Advani

3. Shri Pawan Kumar Bansal

4. Shri S. W. Dhabe

5. Shri M. Kalyanasundaram

6. Shrimati Krishna Kaul

7. Shrimati Usha Malhotra

. Shri Dhuleshwar Meena

9. Shri Mahendra Mohan Mishra
10. Shri Sushil Chand Mohunta
11. Shri P. Babul Reddy

12. Shri Thangabaalu.

SECRETARIAT
Shri 8, R. Goel, Chief Examiner of Questions.
Shri R. N. Bhardwaj, Senior Legislative Committee. Officer.

WITNESSES
Representatives of Department of Personnel and Training
Shri K. Ramanujam, Secretary.
Shri Ashok Pradhan, Joint Secretary,
Shri 8, D, Chadha, Under Secretary.

2. MemoraANnpuM No. 5/85 (SuPPLEMENT)
The Central Secretariat Service (Second Amendment) Rules, 1984.

The Committee considered the above Memorandum and heard
the Secretary, Department of Personnel and Training in the matter.
A verbatim record of the evidence was kept.

* * * * * *

4. The Committee adjourned at 12.20 P.M.

***Relates to the matter not included in this Report.



60
XXIX
TWENTY-NINTH MEETING

The Committee met the 11.00 a.M. on Thursday, the 22nd |
1986.

Memsers PRESENT

Shri P. Babul Reddy—in the Chair.
Shri Lal K. Advani

Shri Jagannath Sitaram Akarte

Shri M. Kalyanasundaram

Shrimati Krishna Kaul

Shri Dhuleshwar Meena

Shri Mahendra Mohan Mishra

Shri Sushil Chand Mohunta

Shri Thangabaalu,

Ub wn

wana

SECRETARIAT
Shri R. N. Bhardwaj, Senior Legislative Committee Officer.

2, In the absence of Chairman, Shri P. Babul Reddy was voted
to the Chair.

3. MEMORANDA Nos. 14 To 16 oF 1986

* * * * के क

As ‘regards Memorandum No. 15/86 regarding the Rules govern-
ing the service conditions of persons serving in the Indian Audit Ac-
counts Department, the Committee took note of the pointwise position
as explained in the Ministry's comments dated 6-2-1986 and directed
the Secretraiat to pursue the matter and obtain the fresh Rules when
issued as indicated therein. It, however, took exception to the slug-
gish response and the shoddy manner in which the Ministry of
Finance treated the Communications sent on behalf of the Committee
for obtaining copies of the rules and their comments on the points
referred to them in respect of the rules under examination.

* * * * *. क्र

The Committee then adjourned at 11.30 a.m.

***Relates to the matter not included in this Report.



‘61
Xxx
THIRTIETH MEETING

The Committee met at 3.00 p.m. onWednesday, the 4th June,
1986.

Memsers PRESENT

Shri P. Babul Reddy—in the Chair.
Shri Lal K. Advani

Shri Jagannath Sitaram Akarte
Shri M. Kalyanasundaram
Shrimati Krishna Kaul

Shri Dhuleshwar Meena

Shri Mahendra Mohan Mishra
Shri Sushil Chand Mohunta

Shri Thangabaalu.

७ ०० +३ ०७ '> + ० ७ (४

SECRETARIAT

Shri R. N. Bhardwaj, Chief Legislative Committee Officer.
Shri R. B. Sharma, Senior Legislative Committee Officer.

2. In the absence of Chairman: Shri P. Babul Reddy was voted
to the Chair.

* * * * * *

4. MeMorANDUM No. 17/86
Goa, Daman and Diw Children Rules, 1972

The Committee considered the above Memorandum and noted
the comments of the Ministry of Social Welfare on the points referred
to them. As regards point No. 2 about the setting up of aftercare
homes and necessary rules for the same, the Committee wanted t
know the progress so far made in that behalf. On other point.
also, where the Ministry had only remarked, ‘noted’ recommendations

***Relates to the matter not included in this Report.



é

of the Committee, the Committee directed that and what was the
progress made in the action taken might be ascertained.

The Committee also directed that further clarifications be sought
from the Ministry in the light of the discussions.

* * * * * *
The Committee then adjourned at 3.40 P.M. to meet again on
Sth June, 1986,

॥ 1 ६
SECOND MEETING

The Committee met at 4.00 P.M, on Tuesday the 18th November,
1986.

MeMBERS PRESENT

. Prof. N. M. Kamble—Chairman
. Shri Chitta Basu
. Shrimati Kailashpati
Shri Mukhtiar Singh Malik
. Shri Mahendra Mohan Mishra
. Shri Yalla Sesi Bhushan Rao
Shri P. Babul Reddy
. Shri Keshavprasad Shukla
Shri Thangabaalu

७ 0० :३ 9७ ४७ + wn

SECRETARIAT

Shrimati K. K. Chopra, Additional Secretary.
Shri R. N, Bhardwaj, Chief Legislative Committee Officer.
Shri R. 8, Sharma, Senior Legislative Committee Officer.

* * * * *

***Relates to the matter not included in this Report.



2 No. 22/86
Delay in making Rules under the Atomic Energy Act, 1962.

_ The Committee considered the above Memorandum. The Com-
mittee took serious note of the fact that even after 24 years of enact-
ment of the Atomic Energy Act, 1962, Government failed to make
requisite Rules|Regulations under the Act, especially those relating to
safe disposal of radioactive wastes. The Department of Atomic Ener- |
gy seemed to have overlooked the importance of these regulations. Beal
The Committee felt that it was better to have imperfect rules than not |

to have any rules at all. i

‘The Committee was not convinced by the explanation of the De-
partment dated 13-8-1986, that notification of the Atomic Energy (Safe-
Transport of Radioactive Materials) Rules, 1984, and the Atomic i
Energy (Safety in Design, Installation, Use and Operation of Tele
therapy Units) Rules, 1984, were not necessary and, in lieu thereof,
notification of surveillance procedures under Rule 15 of the Radio-
active Protection Rules, 1971, would be sufficient.

The Committee directed that copies of the Rules|Regulations so far
made under various provisions of the Atomic Energy Act, 1962, be
obtained from the Department, for scrutiny.

The Committee further directed that the Department be asked to
expedite finalisation of Rules\Regulations which are yet to be made
under-the Act.

The Committee also did not approve of the contention of the De
partment in their note, dated 19-3-1984, that recruitment and pro-
motion to various posts in that Department were being governed by
executive orders, instead of rules. The Committee directed that the
Department be asked to frame requisite rules without delay, under
intimation to the Committee. रे

The Committee decided to hear both the Secretary of the Depart-
ment of Atomic Energy and the Chairman of the Bhabha Atomic Re-
search Centre, to seck further clarifications in the matter.

* * * * * *

5. The Committee then adjourned at 4.50 PM.

***Relates to the matter not included in. this Report.



FOURTEENTH MEETING
—" Committee met at 3.00 Pm. on Thursday, the 5th March,

5

Memerrs Preseyy

1. Prot. N. M., Kamble—Chairman

2. Shri Vithalrao Madhavrao Jadhay

3. Shri Mukhtiar Singh Malik

4. Shri Ramsinghbhaj Pataliyabhai Rathvakolj
5. Shri Keshavprasad Shukla

क्‍

Secrerarrar
Shri R. B, Sharma, Senior Legislative Committee Officer,
* * *

i
|

* * *

(1) Mrmoranpuy No. 40/86

Recruitment rules of the Central Silk Board's Secretariat and Research
and Service Stations.

The Committee noted the comments furnished by the: Ministry,

*

* * * * *

The Committee then adjourned at 3.40 Pm.

——

XV

FIFTEENTH MEETING

The Committee met at 3.00 P.M, on Thi
1987 at Committee Room ‘A’, Ground Fi.

ursday, the 2nd April,
Annexe, New Delhi.

oor, Parliament House
MEMBERS PRESENT

1. Prof. N. M. Kamble—Chairman

2. Shri Tirath Ram Amla

***Relates to the matter not included in this Report.



& Shri Chitta Basu
4. Shrimati Kailashpati
5. Shri Ram Naresh Kushawaha
6. Shri Mukhtiar Singh Malik
7. Shti Mahendra Mohan Mishra
8. Shri P. Babul Reddy
9. Shri Sukomai Sen
10. Shri Keshavprasad Shukla
11. Shri Thangabaalu.

SECRETARIAT

Shrimati K. k. Chopra, Additional Secretary

Shri R. N. Bhardwaj, Chief Legislative Committee Officer

Shri R. B, Sharma, Senior Legislative Committee Officer
2, MEMORANDUM No. 15/86 (SUPPLEMENT)

Rules governing the Service Conditions of persons serving in the
Indian Audit and Accounts Department

The Committee considered the above Memorandum and noted
the reply of the Ministry. The Committee, however, expressed its
deep anguish over the sluggish response and the shoddy manner in
which the Ministry of Finance had treated the communications sent
on behalf of the Committee.

* * * * * *

The Committee then adjourned at 3.45 P.M. to meet again at
11.00 A.M. on Friday, the 3rd’ April, 1987.

शा

EIGHTH MEETING

The Committee met at 3.00 P.M. on Wednesday, the 15th July,
1987.

MEMBERS PRESENT

1, Prof. N. M. Kamble—Chairman
2. Shri Lal K. Advani


| Shri Tirath Ram Amla
. Shri Vithairao Madhavrao Jadhav

. Shri Suresh Kalmadi

3.

4

5. Shrimati Kailashpati

6.

7. Shri Mukhtiar Singh Malik

8. Shri G. Swamy Naik

9, Shri Ramsinghbhai Pataliyabhai Rathvakoli
10. Shri Sukomal Sen

11. Shri Keshayprasad Shukla

SECRETARIAT

Shrimati K. K. Chopra, Additional Secretary
Shri R. N. Bhardwaj. Chief Legislative Committee Officer

Shri R. 8, Sharma, Senior Legislative Committee Officer
WITNESSES
REPRESENTATIVES OF THE-DEPARTMENT OF AToMIc ENERGY

! 1, Dr. M. R. Srinivasan, Secretary (DAE) and Chairman,
AEC.
2. Dr. A. K. Iyengar, Director, BARC
3. Shri $. Rajgopal, Additional Secretary
4. Shri N. A. 0. Sawian, Joint Secretary
5. Dr. S. D, Soman, Associate Director, BARC
6. Shri Shailendra Pandey, Director.

2. MEMoRANDUM No. 9|87

Delay in Making rules under the Atomic Energy Act, 1962

The Committee took up the above memorandum for considera-
tion and heard the Secretary, Department of Atomic Energy on the
subject. The Committee expressed concern over the continuing delay
in framing the requisite rules under the Atomic Energy Act, 1962.
The Secretary (DAE) assured the Committee on- behalf of his Depart-
ment that they had taken note of the feelings of the Committee and



a
A verbatim record of the proceedings was kept.
*

* *

3. The Committee then adjourned at 3.40 P.M.

डा
ELEVENTH MEETING
‘Yhe Committee at 3.00 P.M, on Tuesday, the 25th August, 1987.
MEMBERS PRESENT

1, Prof. N. M. Kamble—Chairman

2. Shri Lal K. Advani

3. Shri Chitta Basu

4. Shri Vithalrao Madhavrao Jadhay

5. Shrimati Kailashpati

6, Shri F. M. Khan

7. Shri G. Swamy Naik

8, Shri Yalla Sesi Bhushana Rao

9. Shri Ramsinghbhai Pataliyabhai Rathyakoli

10, Shri P. Babul Reddy

11. Shri Sukomal Sen

12, Shri Keshavprasad Shukla

SECRETARIAT
Shri R. N. Bhardwaj, Chief Legislative Committee Officer.
Shri R. B. Sharma, Senior Legislative Committee Officer.
2. The Committee considered 1७ draft 73rd and 74th Reports and

adopted the same with minor changes.

3. The Committee decided that the two Reports be presented to
the House on 27th August. 1987, and authorised the Chairman and,
in his absence, Shri Chitta Basu and Shri P. Babul Reddy to present

the Reports to the House.
क्र *
The Committee ‘then adjourned at 3.40 P.M.

* * * *

***Relates to the matter not included in this Report.
GMGIPMRND-—- 1409 RS—18-12-87