PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
file:///10.21.218.119/who%20am%20i/1%20rajesh%20sir/convert/english/Committee%20on%20Subordinate%20Legislation/172%20Report.htm[25-10-2016 16:42:19]
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA SABHA
 
COMMITTEE ON SUBORDINATE LEGISLATION
 
HUNDRED AND SEVENTY-SECOND REPORT
 
(Presented on November 27, 2007)
 
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
 
November, 2007/ Agarahayan,1929  (Saka)
C O N T E N T S
                                               
 
1.COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE
 
2.INTRODUCTION
 
3.REPORT
 
I. The Edible Oils Packaging (Regulation) Order, 1998.
 
II. Bombay Port (Licensing and Control of Pilots) Regulations, 1975
 
III. The Regional Rural Banks (Appointment and Promotion of Officers and other Employees)
Rules, 1998 – Implementation of the recommendations of the Committee as contained in its 157th
Report.
 
IV. The Export of Live Fish (Quality Control, Inspection and Monitoring) Rules, 2002 –
Implementation of 157th Report of the Committee.
 
4.SUMMARY OF RECOMMENDATIONS
 
5.MINUTES
 
RAJYA SABHA
 LIST OF MEMBERS OF THE COMMITTEE ON SUBORDINATE LEGISLATION
(CONSTITUTED ON THE   4th  SEPTEMBER, 2006)
 
 
1.       Dr. (Shrimati) Najma A. Heptulla                   Chairperson
2.       Prof. P. J. Kurien                               
3.       Dr. Radhakant Nayak                         
4.       Shri Praveen Rashtrapal                     
5.       Ms. Mabel Rebello
6.       Shri Vikram Verma                                      

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
file:///10.21.218.119/who%20am%20i/1%20rajesh%20sir/convert/english/Committee%20on%20Subordinate%20Legislation/172%20Report.htm[25-10-2016 16:42:19]
7.       Shri Surendra Lath                             
8.       Shri Mahendra Mohan    
9.       Shri Penumalli Madhu                        
10.     Shri N. Jothi                                      
11.     Shri M.V. Mysura Reddy
12      Shri Ali Anwar
13.     Shri Harendra Singh Malik                           
14.     Shri R. Shunmugasundaram               
15.     Shri Abani Roy                                 
 
 
SECRETARIAT
1.
     Smt. Vandana Garg, Joint Secretary
2.     Shri Deepak Goyal, Director
3.     Shri Mahesh Tiwari, Joint Director
4.     Smt. Subhashree Panigrahi  Deputy Director
5.     Shri Narmadeshwar Prasad, Assistant Director
6.     Shri  R.P. Shukla, Committee Officer
 
 
INTRODUCTION
 
 
1.       I, the Chairman of the Committee on Subordinate Legislation, having been authorized by the Committee to
present the Report on its behalf, do hereby present this Hundred and Seventy-Second Report of the Committee.
 
1.2
       The Committee considered and adopted the Report in its meeting held on the 22nd November, 2007.
 
1.3     The matters examined by the Committee arise out of the scrutiny of various Rules/Regulations and issues,
relating to them along with the comments received from the Government.   The observations and recommendations of
the Committee are contained in the succeeding paragraphs of the Report.
 
 
NEW DELHI
 November 27, 2007
 
 
DR. (SHRIMATI) NAJMA A. HEPTULLA 
 Chairperson,
 Committee on Subordinate Legislation,
                                             
                                                                Rajya Sabha
 
                                                         
I
 
The Edible Oils Packaging (Regulation) Order, 1998.
 
 
          The Edible Oils Packaging (Regulation) Order, 1998 framed under the Essential Commodities Act, 1955 was examined
and a questionnaire on the subject was forwarded to the Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food & Public Distribution,
(Directorate of Vanaspati, Vegetable Oils & Fats) on the 29
th September, 1999 for their comments/clarifications thereon.   The
Ministry vide their O.M. dated the 26 th May, 2000 furnished their comments/clarifications on each point raised in the
questionnaire. The points referred to the Ministry and their comments/clarifications thereon are reproduced below: -

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
file:///10.21.218.119/who%20am%20i/1%20rajesh%20sir/convert/english/Committee%20on%20Subordinate%20Legislation/172%20Report.htm[25-10-2016 16:42:19]
 
1.       Point raised
Whether the Edible Oils Packaging (Regulation) Order, 1998 has been laid on the Table of the Rajya Sabha, if so, the
details in this regard.
Ministry’s Comments
41 copies of the Edible Oils Packaging (Regulation) Order, 1998 issued vide Notification NO. GSR. 584 (E) dated 17-
09-1998 and Corrigendum No. GSR 702 (E) dated 30-11-1998 alongwith one copy of each in Hindi and in English
authenticated by the Minister (Consumer Affairs and Public Distribution) were sent to both Lok Sabha and Rajya  Sabha
Secretariats on 10-12-1998 vide this Directorate’s letter No. 17/1/98-EXP. dated 09-12-1998. While information from Lok
Sabha regarding laying of the papers on the Table on 15-12-1998 (vide Lok Sabha Bulletin Part –I No. 58) has been received,
the information from Rajya Sabha has not be received so far.
 
2.       Point raised- 
Clause 2(b)
          “Edible Oils” mean  vegetable oils and fats and include any i.e, margarine, vanaspati, bakery shorting and fat spread as
specified in the Prevention of Food Adulteration Act, 1954 (37 of 1954) and rules made there under, for human consumption;”
Whether the term “edible oils” include ghee and butter also and if not, the justification for non-inclusion of these items
within the meaning of the term.
Ministry’s Comments
The term “Edible Oils” does not include ghee and butter, as ghee and butter are of animal origin and not of vegetable
origin. The term “edible oils” means vegetable oil as per the definition of “edible oils”
 
3.       Point raised- Clause 2(c)
          “Edible Oils Commissioner” means the person appointed as Edible Oils Commissioner by the Central Government and
includes any other person empowered by the Central Government to exercise any or all of the functions of the Edible Oils
commissioner under this Order;”
Whether there are any qualifications or conditions precedent to empowering any person to exercise any or all the
functions of the Edible Oil Commissioner and if so, whether Government have any objection in prescribing them in the Order
itself.
Ministry’s Comments
No qualification has been explicitly stated. The implicit understanding is that the person empowered to exercise the
functions of the Edible Oils Commissioner would be a Senior Gazetted Officer of the Central/ State Government competent
enough to handle the responsibility of the job assigned and enjoying the confidence of the superiors.
 
Action Taken
Modified the provision of Clause 2 (c) of the Order vide notification dated 22 nd November, 2005 (Annexure VII-
Appendix ‘A’)
 
4.       Point raised- 
Clause 3(b)
          “which is not packed in a container, marked and labeled in the manner as specified in the Scheule-1:
                  Provided that the State Government may, in the public interest, for reasons to be recorded in writing, in specific
circumstances and for a specific period by a notification in the Official Gazette, exempt any edible oil from the provisions of
this Order.”
What is the justification for empowering the State Governments to exempt any edible oil from the provisions of this
Order? What are the specific circumstances in the mind of the Ministry behind prescribing for such exemption? Further, there

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
file:///10.21.218.119/who%20am%20i/1%20rajesh%20sir/convert/english/Committee%20on%20Subordinate%20Legislation/172%20Report.htm[25-10-2016 16:42:19]
is no provision in the clause under which the State Government is under any obligation to inform the Central Government or
the Edible Oils Commissioner regarding the exemption given to any edible oil. Whether such information is not desirable in the
opinion of Government; what is the reaction of the Ministry in this regard? Whether these provisions are being implemented in
a foolproof manner?
Ministry’s Comments
The Central Government is aware of the fact that the production of edible oils is highly decentralized. Substantial
quantity is produced in the small scale or unorganized sector. Further, a sizeable portion of the population is living below the
poverty line. It is in view of these situations that the State Governments have been empowered to exempt any edible oil from
the provisions of this Order in specific circumstances and for specific period only in the public interest for reasons to be
recorded in writing and for specific period only.
          Further vide 
Clause 15, the Edible Oil Commissioner has been authorized to issue appropriate directions including
seeking of information from the State Governments for the purpose of giving effect to the provisions of the Packaging Order.
 
5.       Point raised- Clause 4(1) read with Schedule-III
“Registration: No person shall carry on business as a packer except under a certificate of registration granted to him
under this Order and in accordance with the terms and conditions specified in the Schedule-III.”
One of the terms and conditions for grant of certificate of registration is that the registered packer shall not employ any
person who is suffering from infection/contagious disease which is likely to affect packing in hygienic conditions. Which is the
authority that would determine whether any particular disease is infectious or contagious; whether Government have any
objection in prescribing the competent authority in the Order itself? Further, it has been made obligatory for each registered
packer to maintain a register showing the quantity sold. Is it not possible that a registered packer may not be engaging himself
in selling, the product and that he might be doing only the packaging work, in that case such a registered packer would not be
able to comply with this condition and he would be unable to keep a record of the edible oil sold. Whether Government have
any objection in suitable modification of this condition? 
Ministry’s Comments
The power for implementation of the Packaging Order is delegated to the State Governments. It has been left to the State
Governments to decide as to how they will carry-out the various provisions of the order. We have already written to the State
Governments that in case there is any operational difficulty in the implementation of the Order, these may be brought to the
notice of the Central Government so as to resolve the issue in a manner which is not inconsistent with the provisions of this
Order.
 
6.       Point raised- 
Clause 4(2)
          “Every person who intends to carry on the business of a packer shall make an application to registering authority in the
Form specified in the Schedule-II together with the fee to be paid to the State Government, in such manner as may be specified
by the State Government.”
The provision does not specify the quantum of fee to be paid to the State Government along with the application form to
the registering authority. What is the justification for not prescribing the quantum of fees and the manner in which it could be
paid?
Ministry’s Comments
          As already indicated, the power for implementation of the Packaging Order has been delegated to the State Government.
It has been left to the State Government to specify the quantum of fee having regard to the local situations etc.
 
7.       Point raised- Clause 4(3)
“No person shall be eligible for grant of certificate of registration under this Order unless he has his own laboratory

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
file:///10.21.218.119/who%20am%20i/1%20rajesh%20sir/convert/english/Committee%20on%20Subordinate%20Legislation/172%20Report.htm[25-10-2016 16:42:19]
facilities and has appointed in that laboratory at least one chemist having Bachelor of Science Degree with Chemistry as one
of the subjects or has made any other arrangement of a common laboratory for such purpose to the satisfaction of the
registering authority for testing of samples of edible oils.”
The words “to the satisfaction of the registering authority” appearing in the above Order seem to be unwarranted as they
tend to give an unwanted discretion to the registering authority. Once a condition has been prescribed in the order, the same has
to be implemented by the registering authority and making the things subject to satisfaction of an authority seems to be
redundant. What is the opinion of the Ministry in this regard and whether they have any objection in suitable modification of
the provision?
Ministry’s Comments
          We would like the State Governments to start implementation of the Packaging Order. In case, there is any operational
difficulty in the course of implementation of the packaging Order, Central Government will definitely consider suitable
modifications of the provisions of the order.
 
8.       Point raised- Clause 4(4)
“After making necessary enquiries, the registering authority may, as he deems fit, issue certificate of registration
containing terms and conditions to the applicant as specified in Schedule-III or reject the application, for reasons to be
recorded in writing, within ninety days from the date of receipt of application:”
As per the provisions, the registering authority has been allowed 90 days time for the disposal of an application. This
period appears to be too long. Whether Government have any objection in reducing this period to 60 days?
Ministry’s Comments
As replied under question No. 7 above.
Action Taken
          The Ministry has reduced the number of days for the disposal of an application under the section from 90 days to 60 days
vide notification dated the 16th June, 2004.
 
9.       Point raised- Clause 4(5)
“Where a certificate of registration is not granted to a person under this clause, the fee paid by him shall be refunded to
him in the manner as specified by the State Government.”
The Order does not specify the amount of fee to be deposited along with the application and Clause 4(5) states that the
individual shall be refunded the fee paid by him where a certificate of registration is not granted. If the fee is charged only to
offset cost of administrative work involved in the processing of papers, there is no justification for prescribing for its refund in
case of non-issue of the certificate. But, in case, the quantum of fee being charged is on the higher side, with the objective of
keeping a check on the unnecessary and frivolous applications, the so called “fee” deserves to be split up in two parts; one
being the cost of the services involved and the other as security money and the refund of the security money is justified in case
of non-issue of certificate. In such a case, the quantum of security money can well be prescribed in the Order itself. What is the
reaction of the Ministry towards this?
Ministry’s Comments
Same as replied under Question No. 5.
 
10.     Point raised- Clause 5(4)
“Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-clauses (1) and (2), the Edible Oils Commissioner may by order published
in the Official Gazette, specify any other conditions to be complied with by a registered packer, and it shall be the duty of every
registered packer to comply with such conditions.”
As per the provisions, there has been a further delegation of powers upon the Edible Oils Commissioner with regard to

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
file:///10.21.218.119/who%20am%20i/1%20rajesh%20sir/convert/english/Committee%20on%20Subordinate%20Legislation/172%20Report.htm[25-10-2016 16:42:19]
prescribing other conditions to be complied with by a registered packer. What is the justification for delegating such powers on
the Edible Oils Commissioner when such conditions have been prescribed in the Order itself? Should the powers delegated not
be exercised by the Central Government only?
Ministry’s Comments
It is not possible to foresee all the situations during implementation of the Packaging Order. Delegation of such power to
the Edible Oils Commissioner has been considered necessary so as to take care of emergent situations. Edible Oils
Commissioner, it may be mentioned, is the representative of the Central Government and cannot exercise the powers in his
individual capacity.
 
11.     Point raised- Clause 7(1)
“Renewal of certificate of registration(1) Every registered packer shall make an application for renewal of registration
within the period of sixty days before the date of expiry of the certificate of registration to the registering authority in the form
specified in the Schedule-II together with the fee specified by the State Government to be paid to the registering authority in the
manner as may be specified by the State Government for such renewal.”
What is the justification for charging fee at the time of making an application for renewal of certificate for registration?
Here again, the Order does not specify the quantum of fees prescribed to be charged for the purpose.
Ministry’s Comments
Same as replied under Question No. 5
 
12.     Point raised- Clause 7(3)
“Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-clauses (1) and (2), the certificate of registration issued or renewed under
this Order shall be valid till a decision on the application for its renewal is taken by the registering authority.”
As per the provisions, certificate of registration issued or renewed remains valid till a decision on the application for its
renewal is final. Such provision leaves scope for misuse of powers and the registered packer might take undue advantage due
to prolonging of the decision on his application for renewal. Whether Government have any objection in prescribing a time
limit within which a decision must be taken on an application for renewal?
Ministry’s Comments
 The provision “the certificate or registration issued or renewed under this order shall be valid till a decision on the
application for its renewal is taken by the registering authority” is a conscious decision taken to ensure continuity of operation
by the registered packers. The Central Government would be prepared to issue appropriate guidelines if the situation so
demands.
 
13.     Point raised- 
Clause 8
“Appointment of Inspecting Officers-The Central Government or the State Government may, by notification in the
Official Gazette, appoint such persons as it thinks fit, having the qualifications determined by the Government for this purpose
to be Inspecting Officers for such local areas as may be assigned to them by the Central Government or the State Government
as the case may be:
 
       Provided that no person who has any financial interest in the packing of edible oils shall be appointed to be an
Inspecting Officer under this Order.”
What is the justification for not prescribing the qualifications for being appointed as an Inspecting Officer by the Central
Government or a State Government? The provision as it exists at present, permits prescribing of different qualifications by the
Central Government as well as the State Governments. Should there not be uniformity in the qualifications which can be
achieved by prescribing the same in the Order itself.

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
file:///10.21.218.119/who%20am%20i/1%20rajesh%20sir/convert/english/Committee%20on%20Subordinate%20Legislation/172%20Report.htm[25-10-2016 16:42:19]
Ministry’s Comments
          We have already written to the State Governments that the State Governments could prescribe the qualifications of the
Inspecting Officers in a manner so as to ensure smooth implementation of the Packaging Order without compromising with
quality as specified in the order.
 
14.     Point raised- Clause 9
“Power to carry out inspection, entry and sampling (1) The Edible Oils Commissioner and Inspecting Officers of the
Central Government as well as of the State Government may enter and inspect any premises or vehicle and seize stocks of
edible oils, in respect of which he has reason to believe that a contravention of any of the provisions of this Order has been or
is being or is likely to be committed.”
The provisions give wide powers to the Edible Oils Commissioner as well as the Inspecting Officers of the Central and
the State Government in the matter of inspection of the premises and seizure of the stocks of edible oils.
          Whether there are any safeguards in the Order to prevent misuse of these powers by the Inspecting Officers and avoid
unnecessary harassment to the packaging company. What is the procedure for conducting such inspections and whether the
same is done at random or in a regular manner or inspections are conducted on the basis of receipt of any complaint from any
quarter?
Ministry’s Comments
The provision, if considered necessary, could be put into operation only with the approval of the competent authority in
the Central or the State Government. There are enough safeguards in the Government system and procedure to take care of the
possibility of the misuse of such power.
 
15.     Point raised- 
Clause 10(2)
“The laboratory shall make a report to the Edible Oils Commissioner or any Officer or authority of the Central
Government of State Government authorized in this behalf by that Government as the case may be, of the results of analysis of
the sample sent to it for examination.”
The sub-clause prescribes that laboratory shall make a report about the result of the analysis of sample sent to it for
examination but is silent about the time by when it shall submit its report. Whether the Ministry has any objection in
prescribing a time limit for the purpose?
Ministry’s Comments
We have no objection to prescribing a time limit if such a situation arises.
Action Taken
          The Ministry has prescribed a time limit of 40 days from the date of receipt of the samples for analysis  vide notification
dated the 16th June, 2004.
 
16.     Point raised- Clause 12
“Suspension of certificates of registration.-The registering authority may, after giving the registered packer an
opportunity in writing to show cause and after giving him one month’s notice, suspend a certificate of registration issued to
him under this Order for any breach of terms and conditions of the certificate of registration or for contravention of the
provisions of this Order or for any failure to comply with any order, direction or requisition made under this Order.
    Provided that where the edible oil being found to contain harmful substances such as, argemone oil, mineral oil, or
any other substance injurious to human health, the certificate of registration of the registered packer shall be suspended
immediately by the registering authority without issuing a show-cause notice.”
The provision authorizing the registering  authority to suspend the registration certificate immediately without any show-
cause notice does not appear to be in consonance with principles of natural justice and more so such a thing cannot be

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
file:///10.21.218.119/who%20am%20i/1%20rajesh%20sir/convert/english/Committee%20on%20Subordinate%20Legislation/172%20Report.htm[25-10-2016 16:42:19]
prescribed by way of subordinate legislation. What are the comments of the Ministry in this regard? Further, should there not
be some safeguard to ensure that the powers enumerated in the proviso are not misused or exercised in a prejudicial manner.
Ministry’s Comments
This is for the first time that an Order of this type has made a distinction between substances which are substandard in
quality but not injurious, and substances which are injurious or harmful to health. In case, it is found that the edible oil contains
harmful substances injurious to health, Government can not have the luxury of going through the ritual of issuing show-case
notices and in the meantime, allowing the innocent people to continue to suffer because of the action of the erring units. It is
therefore, necessary for the Government to take immediate action.
 
17.     Point raised- Clause 13
“Appeal.-A registered packer aggrieved by any order passed by the registering authority under this Order may appeal
against such order to the State Government within a period of thirty days from the date on which such order has been
communicated to him and the State Government shall give opportunity of being heard to the registered packer and the
registering authority before making any decision in such appeal.”
The Clause does not prescribe any time limit within which an appeal shall be disposed of. Whether the Ministry have any
objection in prescribing a time limit for the purpose?
Ministry’s Comments
The Ministry has no objection to prescribing a time limit, as suggested by Hon’ble Member, if the situation arises.
Action Taken
          The Ministry has prescribed a time limit of 90 days from the disposal of an appeal by the State Government vide
notification dated the 16th June, 2004.
 
18.     Point raised- 
Clause 14
“Power to review.-A review petition may be filed to the Edible Oils Commissioner against the decision of the State
Government under clause 13 by any party aggrieved by such decision within thirty days from the date of such decision and the
Edible Oils Commissioner shall decide the review petition after giving the parties in such petition the opportunity of being
heard.”
The Clause does not prescribe any time within which a review petition shall be disposed off by the Commissioner.
Whether the Ministry have any objection in prescribing a time limit for the purpose?
Ministry’s Comments
The Ministry have no objection in prescribing a time limit if such a situation arises.
Action Taken
          The Ministry has prescribed a time limit of 60 days within which a review petition shall be disposed off by the
Commissioner vide notification dated the 16th June, 2004.
 
19.     Point raised-
Whether any order was in force before the coming into force of the Edible Oils packaging (Regulation) Order, 1998, if
so, the details in this regard and what is the justification for coming out with a new Order in the year 1998? In case, there was
no such Order, earlier (as it appears due to non-mention about it in the existing Order). What is the manner in which these areas
of activity were being regulated?
Ministry’s Comments
No such Order was in vogue earlier, these areas of activity used to be regulated by the general provisions of PFA Act.
          In the wake of the mustard oil adulteration leading to dropsy cases and dropsy deaths in 1998, Government promulgated

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
file:///10.21.218.119/who%20am%20i/1%20rajesh%20sir/convert/english/Committee%20on%20Subordinate%20Legislation/172%20Report.htm[25-10-2016 16:42:19]
the Edible Oil Packaging (Regulation) Order 1998, so as to ensure availability of safe and quality edible oils to the consumers
in packed form with proper label declaration so that the consumer is not cheated and identity of the packer/manufacturer is
clear.
 
20.     Point 
raised-
Whether the Ministry have received any complaints with regard to any of the provisions of this Order, if so, the details in
this regard and what corrective action Government have taken/ propose to take in the matter?
 
Ministry’s Comments
This Ministry received requests for clarifications on certain provisions of the Packaging Order from the State
Governments. Clarifications sought have already been provided. Relevant clarifications are enclosed (Annexure-I)
 
2.  The Committee considered the comments/clarifications of the Ministry in its meeting held on the 9th April, 2001 and being
not satisfied with the replies of the Ministry observed that the Ministry was relying excessively on inputs from the State
Governments.  The Committee decided to seek further clarifications from the Ministry in view of the fact that the Ministry
themselves were the implementing authority in respect of this Order in the Union Territories as well as the establishments in
the central sphere. The Committee took up the matter, in the light of these observations, with the State Governments of Kerala
and Tamil Nadu at Thiruvananthapuram and Chennai on the 9
th and 13 th July, 2001, respectively. Relevant extracts of the
above said visit (Annexure-II) were forwarded to the Ministry on the 1 st November, 2001 for action thereon.  Meanwhile, the
Ministry wrote to all the Secretaries/Commissioners (Food & Civil Supplies) of the State Governments & Union Territories
requesting them to intimate to it, on priority, the specific action/actions taken and operating difficulties, if any, faced by the
respective State Govts./UTs in implementation of the Packaging Order. 
 
3.       Subsequently, the Ministry vide
 their communication dated the 30th September, 2002 further informed the Committee
about the status of implementation of the Packaging Order by various State Governments (Annexure-III). The Ministry also
furnished the reply to the questionnaire as received from the Govt. of Kerala (Annexure-IV).
 
4.       While perusing the matter, the Committee vide its O.M. dated the 3rd March, 2003 requested the Ministry to furnish the
status of action taken on the points upon which the Committee’s suggestions of the Edible Oils Packaging (Regulation) Order,
1998 were accepted by them and also the views of the State Governments/Union Territories regarding the smooth
implementation of the said Order.  After a couple of reminders, the Ministry vide  their O.M. dated the 6th  July, 2004 informed
the Committee that they have carried out amendments in  clauses 4(4), 10 (2), 13 & 14 of the Edible Oils Packaging
(Regulation) Order, 1998 vide notification G.S.R. 363 (E) dated the 16th June, 2004 (Annexure-V).
 
5.       Deliberating upon the matter at its meeting held on 19th October, 2004 the Committee took a strong exception to the fact
that some of the State Governments/Union Territory Administrations had not furnished the status of implementation of the
Order in their State/Union Territory. Accordingly, the Committee decided to seek latest information from the Ministry
regarding the status of implementation of the Order by the State Governments/Union Territories, which the Ministry furnished
vide their OM dated the 15 th December, 2004 (Annexure-VI). The matter was again considered by the Committee in its
meeting held on the 7 th January, 2005 wherein the Committee felt that the response from several State Governments/Union
Territories with regard to the implementation status of the Edible Oils Packaging (Regulation) Order, 1998 was inadequate and
decided to hear the representatives of the Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food and Public Distribution to seek further

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
file:///10.21.218.119/who%20am%20i/1%20rajesh%20sir/convert/english/Committee%20on%20Subordinate%20Legislation/172%20Report.htm[25-10-2016 16:42:19]
clarifications/elucidations in the matter. Subsequently, the Committee took the oral evidence of the representatives of the
Ministry on the 19 th July, 2005.  In pursuance to the oral evidence that the Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food & Public
Distribution vide  their communication dated the 5 th January, 2006 furnished the information/ clarifications sought by the
Committee (Annexure-VII).
 
6.       The Committee notes with satisfaction that the Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food & Public Distribution, (Directorate
of Vanaspati, and Vegetable Oils & Fats) have taken necessary action on its suggestions as follows:
 
·  Clause 4(4):   By reducing the number of days for the disposal of an application from 90 days to 60 days.
·  Clause 10(2):  By prescribing a time limit of 40 days from the date of receipt of the samples for carrying out the
analysis.  
·  Clause 13:   By prescribing a time limit of 90 days for the disposal of an appeal by the State Government.
·  Clause 14:   By prescribing a time limit of 60 days within which a review petition shall be disposed off by the Edible
Oil Commissioner
 
The Committee is however, unhappy to note the slow progress with respect to the implementation of the Edible Oils
Packaging (Regulation) Order by the State Governments.  In September, 2002, the Committee was informed that only seven
States have commenced the implementation of the Order and were issuing Registration Certificate in respect of certain oils and
only give States had notified the Registering Authority,  Inspecting Officers and Registration Fees.    The position in the
remaining States as reported to the Committee was found not encouraging as most of them were found to be at the very initial
stage in the process of implementation of the Order.  Besides, there were some States like Haryana, Punjab, Utter Pradesh etc. 
who had kept the implementation of the Order in abeyance in their States.  The Committee, however, notes with satisfaction
the improvement in the implementation of the said Order in the States as reported to it on 15
th December, 2004 from which it
could be seen that the majority of the States were implementing the Order.  The Committee is happy to note the further
progress in this regard as reported to it on 5 th January, 2006 whereby as on 22 nd December, 2005, twenty States had
implemented the Order, in ten States, implementation of the Order was under consideration and in the remaining five States,
there were no oil manufacturing/ packaging Units
 
The Committee recommends  that the Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food & Public Distribution   (Directorate of Vanaspati
and Vegetable Oils & Fats) to take positive steps to ensure the implementation of the said Order in the ten States where the
implementation has been stated to be under consideration as on 22nd December, 2005.
II
 
Bombay Port (Licensing and Control of Pilots) Regulations, 1975
 
 
          The Bombay Port (Licensing and Control of Pilots) Regulations, 1975 framed under the Major Port Trusts Act,
1963 were examined and a     
                                                                                                                                                                           questionnaire
on the subject was forwarded to the Ministry of Shipping, Road Transport and Highways, (Department of Shipping) on
the 20th June, 2003 for their comments/clarifications thereon. 
 
2.       The subject matter was taken up for discussion by the Committee with the representatives of the Ministry and

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
file:///10.21.218.119/who%20am%20i/1%20rajesh%20sir/convert/english/Committee%20on%20Subordinate%20Legislation/172%20Report.htm[25-10-2016 16:42:19]
the Mumbai Port Trust during its visit to Mumbai on the 5 th July, 2003.  The relevant extracts from the study note
were forwarded to the Ministry on the 29 th April, 2004 for action taken note.  The point referred to the Ministry, their
comments/clarifications and the Committee’s observations thereon during its visit to Mumbai are reproduced below:-
 
(1)     Point referred
          Whether the Bombay Port (Licensing and Control of Pilots) Regulations, 1975 have since been laid on the Table
of both the Houses and if, so the date of laying thereof.
Ministry’s reply
          When these regulations were framed in 1975, there was no provision in the Major Port Trusts Act, 1963 for
placing of regulations before both Houses of Parliament.  This requirement was introduced by insertion of provision by
Act 17 of 1982 with effect from 31.5.1982.
Committee’s observation
          The Committee was appraised that the regulations were not laid on the table of both the Houses as there was no
laying provision in the Major Port Trusts Act, 1963 prior to 1982.  The Committee desired that the regulations should
be laid now alongwith the amendments suggested by it.
(2)     Point referred: Regulation 1 (2)
          “They shall come into force on the date of the publication of the Government’s sanction in the Official Gazette.”
          Generally the rules/regulations are brought into effect from the date of publication of the Official Gazette. What
is the significance of publication of “Government’s sanction” in case of the rules in hand?
Ministry’s reply
          Section 124 (1) of the Major Port Trusts Act, 1963 provides that no regulation made by the Board under the Act
(other than a regulation made under sub-section 2 of section 17) shall have effect until it has been approved by the
Central Government and until such approval has been published in the Official Gazette.   The provision in the
regulation is accordingly worded for the regulations to come into effect from date of publication of Government’s
sanction in the Gazette.   In effect, however, the regulations came into effect from the date of publication in the
Gazette.
Committee’s observation
          The management of the board had agreed to amend the commencement clause as suggested by the Committee.
(3)     Point referred: Regulation 3 - Definitions
          The term “pilot” is generally associated with the aeroplanes .  But here it has been used for handling of vessels. 
Whether Government have any objection in inserting the definition of word “Pilot” in the regulation itself?
Ministry’s reply
          The term ‘Pilot’ is defined in the Indian Ports Act, 1908, section 3 (3) as under:
          ‘Pilot’ means a person for the time being authorized by Government to pilot vessels.”
          It is a term in the standard international maritime vocabulary.  Hence, it is not included in the definition in the
regulations.
 
(4)     Point referred: Regulation 7-Conditions for joining the pilot service
          “A person shall not be licensed as a pilot unless and until he satisfies the Chairman that he fulfills the following
conditions, namely:-
(a)     The conditions of eligibility for direct recruitment to posts under the Board as may be laid down by
regulations in this behalf;
(b)     on the date of appointment as a probationary pilot he is of an age not below 25 years and not above 35
years, unless otherwise relaxed by the Chairman; and

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
file:///10.21.218.119/who%20am%20i/1%20rajesh%20sir/convert/english/Committee%20on%20Subordinate%20Legislation/172%20Report.htm[25-10-2016 16:42:19]
(c)     he possesses the qualifications specified in regulation 8.”
(a)      The regulation mentions about the eligibility for direct recruitment.   Whether there is any quota for the
departmental candidates for joining the pilot service?
(b)     Whether any specific regulations have been framed for direct recruitment in pilot service.   Whether such
regulations can be incorporated in these regulations itself?
(c)     Sub-regulation (c) appears to be superfluous in view of regulation 8.  Whether the Ministry have any
objection in deleting this sub-regulation?
Ministry’s reply
(a)      There is no quota prescribed for departmental candidates for appointment to the post of Pilot.  The reason
is that the qualifications required for the Pilot can be acquired only with service on foreign sea-going vessels and not in
the Port.
(b)     Yes, separate regulations covering appointment to all posts in the Port including that of Pilot have been
framed which are known as the Mumbai Port Trust Employees (Recruitment, Seniority and Promotion) Regulations,
1976.  The basic educational and other requirements are prescribed therein.   These are the same as prescribed in
regulation 8 (1) (a) in these regulations.
(c)     Clause (c) of regulation 7 interalia is one of the conditions for joining the Port’s pilotage service.  The said
clause provides that the candidates must fulfill the prescribed qualifications.  Regulation 8 specifies such qualifications
for joining Port’s pilotage service.
(5)     Point referred: Regulation 8 (1) (a) - Qualification of Candidates
“A candidate for a pilotage license shall:
(a) produce certificate of good character and sobriety and be in possession of a Certificate of Competency as
Master (Foreign-going) granted by the Government of India or its equivalent and should have, preferably experience
of at least six months as First Mate on a foreign-going ship.”
The words ‘its equivalent’ are vague.  Whether Government have any objection in making the provision of
Regulation 8 (1) (a) specific?
Ministry’s reply
As per Section 86 of the Merchant Shipping Act, 1958, the Central Government may, by notification in the
Official Gazette, declare any certificate of competency granted under the laws in force in any other country as
equivalent to the corresponding certificate of competency or service granted under this Act.  This is to facilitate Indian
nationals obtaining equivalent competency certificates in other countries to seek employment opportunities in India
and on Indian ships.  The countries so recognized may change from time to time.   Hence, the inclusion of the words
‘its equivalent’ in the regulation.
(6)     Point referred: Regulation 8 (2)
          “The fee for a pilot’s licence and for renewal thereof in case of loss shall be prescribed by the Board from time
to time.”
What is the existing rate of pilot fee prescribed by the Board, when this fee was last revised?
Ministry’s reply
The fee prescribed for issue or renewal of pilot’s licence is Rs.30.  This was fixed in July 1975.
Committee’s observation
The Committee desired that the fee for a pilot’s licence should be revised suitably and in case no fee is charged
from the pilots for a licence, the provision is irrelevant and it should be scrapped.
(7)     Point referred: Regulation 10 - Examination Committee
          “The examination shall be conducted by the Examination Committee composed as follows:
(i)               The Deputy Conservator (Chairman)

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
file:///10.21.218.119/who%20am%20i/1%20rajesh%20sir/convert/english/Committee%20on%20Subordinate%20Legislation/172%20Report.htm[25-10-2016 16:42:19]
(ii)             The Harbour Master
(iii)          A Dock Master
(iv)           A Master Pilot
(v)              A Master of a foreign going ship.”
What is the manner in which the examination is conducted, whether it is written or practical or both.  The
regulation seems to be silent on these aspects, are there separate set of rules/regulations for this?
Ministry’s reply
          The candidate is required to undergo practical training for a period of about 5 months during which time he
attends vessel being piloted by senior pilots and where he gets an opportunity to observe maneuvres  both during day
and night.  The Examination Committee takes into account the regularity and attendance of the candidate on the ships
and his performance with regard to the various aspects of ship’s manoeuvres  in different parts of harbour and the
docks, his interests and capabilities in understanding the technical aspects of navigation as also his ability to pilot a
ship considering the tidal, wind and weather conditions.   The Examination Committee consisting of the 5 persons
including an expert from outside conducts oral examination on all the above-mentioned aspects as well as the subjects
mentioned under regulation 9.  There are no separate set of rules/regulations for conduct of the examination.
(8)     Point referred: Regulation 11 - Failure to pass an examination
          “In the event of a probationary pilot failing to pass the specified examination within nine months of his
appointment, he will be liable to be discharged.”
          How many trials a probationer gets during the period of 9 months.?  To what extent, the provision of this
regulation has been invoked  in the past i.e. service of probationers terminated, are any options available to the
probationers after the invoking of Regulation 11, if so the details?
 
Ministry’s reply
          The period of nine months for passing the examination indicated in the copy of the regulations submitted earlier
is incorrect.  The mistake is regretted.   In fact, this period has since been revised to twelve months.  The prescribed
training period is six months.  Thereafter, the candidate can appear for the examination upto another six months. 
There is no limit on the number of attempts to appear for the examination during this period.
          Occasions of termination of service of probationers on failure to pass the examination are rare.  During the last
10 years, there has been no such incident.
          Though the persons are recruited as Probationary Pilot, their actual working starts after completion of training,
passing of the examination and issue of licence.   Thus, the examination is a part of the recruitment process.  Strict
training is given to the candidates followed by ample opportunity to clear the examination.   If the person still does not
clear the examination, he is not suitable for the post.  It is, therefore, not necessary to provide for any option for appeal
or review.
 (9)    Point referred: Regulation 25 - Master Pilots to give instructions to Junior Pilots and Probationary
Pilots
          “The Master Pilots shall assist in instructing the junior pilots and probationary pilots in all branches of a pilot’s
duty.
What is the meaning of the words “assist in instructing” ?; should it not be substituted by the words “assist and
instruct” so as to be more clear and specific?
Ministry’s reply
          Yes; ‘assist and instruct’ would be the more appropriate phrase.  Suitable change will be made in the regulations.
Committee’s observation
          The management of the Board had accepted the Committee’s suggestion to substitute the words “assist in

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
file:///10.21.218.119/who%20am%20i/1%20rajesh%20sir/convert/english/Committee%20on%20Subordinate%20Legislation/172%20Report.htm[25-10-2016 16:42:19]
instructing” by the words “assist and instruct”.
(10)    Point referred: Regulation 27 - Pilots to obey the orders of the authority
          “A Pilot shall obey and execute all orders and regulations given or issued by the Board, the Chairman, the
Deputy Chairman, the Deputy Conservator and/or the Harbour Master and the Master Pilot while at the Pilot Station. 
He shall also obey all orders given by the Dock Masters relating to the docking, undocking, towing, transportation or
removing of vessels under his charge.
Regulation 28-Pilot’s behaviour
“A pilot shall at all times exercise strict sobriety.  He shall, throughout the time he is in charge of vessel, use his
utmost care and diligence for her safety and the safety of other vessels and property.  He shall when necessary keep
the lead going while the vessel is underway.  He shall not lay by the vessel aground without a written order from the
owner or officer in command.”
(a)      Whether the Board has prescribed any code of conduct for the pilots, and if so, whether the same cannot
be made part of the regulations?
(b)     What action is taken for violation of code of conduct?
Ministry’s reply
(a)      The Board has not prescribed any code of conduct specifically for the Pilots apart from the above
provisions of regulations 27 and 28.  However, Mumbai Port Trust Employees (Conduct) Regulations, 1976, which
contain various regulations regarding discipline, integrity, devotion to duty, etc., are applicable to all employees of the
Port including the Pilots.  Since the Pilots perform certain specific tasks relating to navigation, docking, undocking,
towing, mooring, etc. of the ships, in addition, certain specific provisions have been made in these regulations, namely,
in regulations 27 and 28.
(b)     Violation of code of conduct under regulations 27 and 28 and the general code of conduct prescribed
under the Mumbai Port Trust Employees (Conduct) Regulations, 1976 invites action/penalty under the Mumbai Port
Trust Employees (Classification, Control & Appeal) Regulations, 1976.
(11)    Point referred: Regulation 33 - Pilot may leave vessel at anchor in the 
harbour if not provided with
proper food and sleeping accommodation
          “The Master of a vessel in pilotage  charge of a Pilot shall provide the Pilot with reasonable accommodation, if
necessary, and with breakfast between 7.00 a.m., with lunch between 8.00 p.m., if the vessel is at anchor in the
harbour during these hours.  In the event of failure on the part of the Master of the vessel, the pilot may leave the
vessel and come to shore after giving the officer in command at least one hour’s notice in writing of his intention to do
so and shall report the case in writing to the Deputy Conservator as soon as practicable.”
(a)      What is implied by the term – “reasonable accommodation”?
(b)     To what extent the provisions of regulation 33 are still being implemented, are these provisions which
require reporting in writing twice not obsolete in the present day scenario?
Ministry’s reply
(a)      Reasonable accommodation means an accommodation which would provide the pilot adequate comfort
and be suitable to his status under the attendant circumstances and conditions.  Usually, as a matter of international
practice, all sea-going vessels have specified accommodation for pilot known as Pilot’s cabin.
(b)     The provision is not so relevant in today’s scenario where berthing of vessel does not take such long time
as before nor does a vessel needs to stay for long period at anchorage awaiting docking.  However, if the rare occasion
of a pilot having to leave the vessel does arise, giving of notice to Master of the vessel is necessary.  Likewise, report
to the Dy. Conservator is essential to have full information and enable enquiry into the situation and taking of
corrective action as may be necessary.
Committee’s observation

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
file:///10.21.218.119/who%20am%20i/1%20rajesh%20sir/convert/english/Committee%20on%20Subordinate%20Legislation/172%20Report.htm[25-10-2016 16:42:19]
          The Committee was informed that the provision was not relevant in today’s scenario and under no circumstances
a pilot shall leave the vessel.  The Committee desired that the provision should be modified suitably.
 
 
3.       Meanwhile, the Ministry vide their O.M. dated the 4 th August, 2004 informed the Committee that the
amendment proposals incorporating the suggestions made by the Parliament Committee are being placed before the
Mumbai Port Trust before the Board of Trustees for approval. Thereafter, the same will be forwarded to the Ministry
for their approval. As and when the amendments in question are approved and notified in the Official Gazette, the
same will be intimated to the Committee in due course.
 
4.       The Ministry vide
 their communication dated the 4 th January, 2004 addressed to the Chairman, Mumbai Port
Trust, and a copy endorsed to this Secretariat have informed that draft notification containing amendments proposed
have since been received by the Ministry and are being examined by them.   Meanwhile, the Committee decided to
have discussion on the subject at Mumbai on the 8th February, 2005.
 
5.       During the visit, the Committee noted with satisfaction that the Board proposed nineteen amendments in the
Regulations. On the 29
th April, 2005 the Ministry vide their O.M. informed the Committee that the Ministry of Law
and Justice (Legislative Department) have suggested the supersession of the principal regulation as incorporation at
this stage would give these regulations retrospective effect , which is legally untenable. The Ministry further informed
that they have accepted the line of action as suggested by the Ministry of Law and Justice (Legislative Department)
and have accordingly requested the Mumbai Port Trust to take necessary action in the matter.
 
6.       Meanwhile, the Committee forwarded the relevant extracts of the study note from its visit to Mumbai on the 8
th
February, 2005 to the Ministry for action taken by them on amendment of the commencement clause of the regulation
as advised by the Legislative Department of the Ministry of Law and Justice. After repeated reminders, the Ministry
vide their O.M. dated the 22 nd March, 2007 furnished a copy of the Notification G.S.R 116 ( E), which is the new
revised set of regulations on the subject (Annexure- I).
 
7.       The Committee notes with satisfaction that the Ministry of Shipping, Road Transport and Highways,
(Department of Shipping) have taken necessary action on almost all of its recommendations as follows:
(i)      By deleting the words “of the Government’s sanction” in the commencement clause thereby making the
regulations to come into effect on the date of their publication in the Official Gazette which is the normal format
of legislation.
(ii)      By scrapping the provision regarding charging of fees for pilot’s licence as contained in the pre revised (1975
regulation 8 (2). The Committee had expressed its desire that the fee for a pilot’s licence should be revised
suitably and in case no fee is charged, the provision being irrelevant should be scrapped.
(iii)     By replacing the words “assist in instructing” with the words “assist and instruct” in the pre revised (1975)
regulations 25 thereby, making the provision more clear and specific.
(iv)     By deleting the provisions of regulation 33 of the pre-revised (1975) regulations which in Committee’s opinion
were not relevant to the current times and were obsolete. Regulation 33 of the 1975 regulations provided that
pilots may leave vessels at anchor in the harbour if not provided with proper food and sleeping accommodation.
 
8.       The Committee is happy to note that the Ministry has revised the whole set of regulations of 1975, made them

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
file:///10.21.218.119/who%20am%20i/1%20rajesh%20sir/convert/english/Committee%20on%20Subordinate%20Legislation/172%20Report.htm[25-10-2016 16:42:19]
more relevant to the current times and also complied with the requirement of laying the regulations before the
Parliament which could not be done in the case of 1975 regulations due to the absence of such a provision in the Major
Port Trusts Act, 1963.
 
III
The Regional Rural Banks (Appointment and Promotion of Officers and other Employees) Rules, 1998 –
Implementation of the recommendations of the Committee as contained in its 157th Report.
 
The Regional Rural Banks (Appointment and Promotion of Officers and other Employees) Rules, 1998 framed
under the Regional Rural Banks Act, 1976 were examined and the Committee in its 157th Report, which was
presented to the House on the 20th April, 2005 recommended as follows: -
 
“The Committee notes with satisfaction that the Ministry of Finance (Banking Division) have agreed to the
Committee’s suggestions and carried out the following amendments in the Regional Rural Banks (Appointment and
Promotion of Officers and other Employees) Rules 1998: -
(i)
                In Rule 4 by substituting the words “such number of posts” with words “such posts” thereby rectifying the
discrepancy as pointed out by the Committee as Rule 4 contained a reference to the First Schedule, which contained
only nomenclature of the posts and not their number.
(ii)
              In Rule 10(1) by substituting the existing provision of sub-rule (1) as follows so as to realign the provisions in
the light of the provisions in the Government of India brochure on reservation for SC/ST;
“The posts of messenger, messenger-cum-sweeper (full time or part time), driver, driver-cum-messenger and
security guard shall be filled in by the Committee of the Regional Rural Banks after making a reference to the
Employment Exchange, Sainik Boards and to the agencies, if any, catering to the welfare of physically handicapped
persons.  Further, the vacancies for Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes shall also be brought to the notice of
Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes Organisation listed in Appendix 11 referred to in para 7.1 (iii) of the Brochure
on Reservation for Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes in services (8 th Edition) as amended from time to time
catering to the Welfare of Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes as are recognized by the Central Government or the
State Government having jurisdiction over the Regional Rural Banks filling the posts.  When doing so, it should be
made clear to such organizations that their function is limited to advising the Scheduled Caste/Scheduled Tribe
candidates about the recruitment proposed and that it will not be for them to recommend or press the names of any
individuals.  The candidate should apply to the appointing authority either direct or through the Employment
Exchanges as the case may be.
(iii)            In rule 10(1) proviso by incorporation the words “Other Backward Classes” so as to include OBCs also along
with SCs/STs for the purpose of giving preference.
(iv)            In Schedule III in the provisions relating to the nomination of an additional member of the Board in case of
selections for SCs/STs by substituting the word “may” with the word “shall” so as to make the nomination of the
members from the reserved category mandatory.
The Committee further notes that the Ministry have issued instructions to the National Bank for Agriculture and
Rural Development to issue necessary instructions to the Regional Rural Banks and sponsor banks in pursuance of the
Committee’s recommendation that the qualifying service for the purpose of promotions should not be relaxed in a
routine manner and that it should be decided on a case-to-case basis and the reasons for doing so must be recorded.  
The Committee, however, recommends that the Ministry of Finance should consider incorporating these instructions
suitably in schedule III also so that the position is set right once for all.   As regards Rule 5 pertainig to vacancies, the
Committee is of the view that the RRB’s could be given some autonomy for recruitment of staff.  As regards Schedule

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
file:///10.21.218.119/who%20am%20i/1%20rajesh%20sir/convert/english/Committee%20on%20Subordinate%20Legislation/172%20Report.htm[25-10-2016 16:42:19]
III governing the method of promotion, the Committee reiterated the need for balance between seniority and merit to
keep the RRB’s competitive with other Commercial Banks”.
 
2.       The Committee forwarded the relevant extracts from the 157th Report to the Ministry of Finance, Department of
Economic Affairs, on the 6th May, 2005 for necessary action. The Ministry furnished their action taken note vide their
communication dated the 9 th January, 2006. The points raised by the Committee, the Ministry’s replies, the
Committee’s recommendations on the points as contained in the report  and the Ministry’s requisite action taken note
are reproduced below: -    
 
1.       Point raised
Rule 5: Vacancies
“The Board may, in consultation with its Sponsor Bank, determine the number of vacancies in each category of
posts to be filled keeping in view, the guidelines issued by Central Government from time to time.”
(i)                What are the present Guidelines of the Central Government in this regard?
(ii)              Whether Board of Rural Banks have ever reviewed the guidelines issued by the Central Government for
determining the number of vacancies in each category of the posts?
Ministry’s reply
The Central Government has issued the norms and guidelines for creation and filling of the vacancies in various
cadres and appointments and promotion to the newly created posts from time to time.   Recently, the Government of
India has constituted a Working Group to review the staffing norm in RRBs.  The Working Group is likely to submit
its report shortly.
Committee’s Observation
The Committee felt that RRBs should give some autonomy for recruitment of staff.  The Committee noted that
the recruitment was temporarily banned in order to re-adjust the surplus staff and that the surplus staff could be
redeployed from one bank to another.   The Committee further noted that RRBs could also hire people on contract
basis, if required.
 
 
Action taken 
In terms of Government of India letter No.7 (5)/2004-RRB dated 2.11.2004, (Annexure-I)  freedom has been
given to the sponsor banks to recuit/redeploy RRB staff as per their requirement keeping in view the financial health of
the concerned RRB, its existing management costs, besides the business potential of the RRB and suitability of the
staff to be redeployed/recruited for realizing that potential.   These instructions were reiterated vide letter No.7
(5)/2004-RRB dated 4.8.2005 (Annexure-II) .  Accordingly, the sponsor banks are required to re-assess the manpower
requirement and to fill up the posts.
 
2.       Point raised
Rule 10(1)  Recruitment to the posts of messenger, messenger-cum-sweeper, driver, driver-cum-messenger
and security guard-
“The posts of messenger, messenger-cum-sweeper, driver, driver-cum-messenger and security guard shall be
filled in by the Committee of the Regional Rural Banks after making a reference to the Employment Exchange, Sainik
Board or other agencies catering to the welfare of Schedule castes/Scheduled tribes, physically handicapped persons
or other categories of persons as are recognized by the Central Government or the State Government having

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
file:///10.21.218.119/who%20am%20i/1%20rajesh%20sir/convert/english/Committee%20on%20Subordinate%20Legislation/172%20Report.htm[25-10-2016 16:42:19]
jurisdiction over the Regional Rural Bank filling the posts.”
What are the other agencies to which reference is made for filling up of vacancies?   In what manner the
recommendations of Employment Exchange or other agencies are given effect to; whether the candidates
recommended by Employment Exchange and other agencies are given equal weight age?
Ministry’s reply
The reserved vacancies in the Group ‘C’ are required to be filled up in the RRBs as per the procedure indicated
in Chapter 7 of the Brochure on reservation for SC/ST – (8th edition) which are as under:
i)                   All the vacancies should be notified to the local/regional Employment Exchange.
ii)                 When a local Employment Exchange is unable to nominate any suitable candidate, it will refer vacancies to the
Central Employment Exchange.
iii)
               If sufficient numbers of SC/ST candidates are not available through Employment Exchange the vacancies
should be advertised in local newspapers.
iv)
               Simultaneously, with the advertisement, the vacancies should be brought to the notice of the SC/ST
organisations listed in Appendix 11 to be said Brochure.  While doing so, it should be made clear to such organisations
that their function is limited to advising the SC/ST candidates about the recruitment proposed and that it will not be for
them to recommend or press the names of any individuals.   The candidates should apply to the appointing authority
either direct or through the Employment Exchange as the case may be.
As against the above instructions, Rule 10 indicates that the reference is required to be made out to the Other
Agencies also in addition to the Employment Exchange and the Jila Sainik Board.  Further, the second proviso to the
said rule also states that no candidate other than those sponsored by the Employment Exchange, Sainik Board or Other
Agencies shall be called for interview.  However, it can be observed from the above that the other agencies are merely
informed, when the required numbers of candidates are not available through Employment Exchange/Sainik Board and
these agencies do not have powers to sponsor the name of the candidates.  In view of the above, Rule 10 is slightly at
variance with the above guidelines in the Brochure.  Accordingly, the Government will consider amending Rule 10 in
consultation with the Ministry of Law.
Committee’s Observation
The Committee desired that the procedure as laid down in Rule 10(1) needs to be realigned so as to resolve the
ambiguities as pointed out by it.  The Committee impressed upon the need to modify the provisions of Rule 10(1).
Action taken
The necessary amendments in Rule 10(1) were carried out vide  notification dated 16.10.2002 (Annexure-III) . 
The observations of the Committee therefore stand complied with.
 
3.       Point raised
Rule 10 (1) proviso
“Provided that preference shall be given to candidate belonging to Schedule Caste and Scheduled Tribe in
accordance with the instructions or guidelines issued by the Central Government.”
Whether under the proviso any preference is also given to the candidate of OBC category, if so, whether the
Ministry have any objection in incorporating the same in the rule itself?
Ministry’s reply
The Government have no objection to incorporate OBCs in the proviso to rule 10(1).
Committee’s Observation
The Committee noted that the Ministry had no objection in including the OBC candidate also, along with the
SC/ST candidates, for being given preference under proviso to Rule 10(1).
Action taken

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
file:///10.21.218.119/who%20am%20i/1%20rajesh%20sir/convert/english/Committee%20on%20Subordinate%20Legislation/172%20Report.htm[25-10-2016 16:42:19]
The notification has already been issued on the 16 th October, 2002 (Annexure-III) to incorporate the
observations of the Committee.
 
4.       Point raised
Schedule-III
Against the eligibility column for various posts covered in the schedule, a minimum period of service has been
prescribed which the officer should have rendered before he is eligible to be considered for promotion to the next
higher scale.  In the same breath, there is a proviso for relaxation in the qualifying service for a period up to 2 years,
in case eligible officers are not available.
Normally, the Rule lays down the eligibility criteria only and in case any relaxation is called for, the powers are
exercised under a general clause in the Rule providing the Competent Authority with the powers to relax in certain
cases.  The pattern followed in the Third Schedule i.e. providing for relaxation in the qualifying service in case of each
of the post separately is a deviation from the normal procedure more particularly because the power to relax in the
Rules is exercisable only in extreme cases of hardship and for removal of disability, is any.  On the other hand, in the
present case, the power to relax the condition of length of service has been made to form a part of the eligibility
criteria thereby giving an impression that the eligibility condition can be relaxed in a routine manner in case eligible
persons are not available.
What is the justification for adopting a changed pattern in the rules in hand and whether Government have any
objection in recasting the provisions in the changed pattern?
Ministry’s reply
The Rule specifically lays down a criterion, which stipulates that relaxation is to be made only if eligible officers
are not available.  This relaxation can be made only with the prior approval of the National Bank who will ensure that
this is not done in a routine manner.
Committee’s Observation
The Committee noted the clarification given by the Ministry during the course of discussions that relaxations are
not made in a routine manner.  The Committee, however, felt that the circumstances for allowing relaxation should
really deserve and that it should be on a case-to-case basis and that the reasons for the same should be required to be
recorded.  The Ministry agreed to the Committee’s suggestions.
Action taken
While allowing relaxations, NABARD ensures on a case by case basis that there are no other eligible officers
available and that all the criteria prescribed for allowing relaxation are satisfied.
 
5.       Point raised
Schedule –III
In the Rules pertaining to the post of scale III officer, scale II officer, scale I officer and clerk-cum-cashier, it
has been provided that if none of the members of the Committee belongs to SC or ST, the Board “may” nominate a
person belonging to these communities as an additional member.
It is felt that presence of a Member from these communities in the Committee is essential more particularly
when any official from these categories is to be considered by the Committee. Whether Government have any
objection in substituting the word “may” by the word “shall”?
Ministry’s reply
The word “may” used in the relevant rule has the connotation of “shall”.   The Committee constituted under this
rule invariably comprises of members belonging to SC/STs.
Committee’s Observation

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
file:///10.21.218.119/who%20am%20i/1%20rajesh%20sir/convert/english/Committee%20on%20Subordinate%20Legislation/172%20Report.htm[25-10-2016 16:42:19]
The Committee noted during the course of the deliberation that the representatives of the Ministry of Finance
were agreeable to replace the word “may” with the word “shall” in provisions relating to nomination of SC/ST as an
additional member of the Board.
Action taken
The Government of India vide notification dated 13.07.2004 (Annexure-IV) has substituted the word “may” with
the word “shall”.
6.       Point raised
Schedule-III
For appointment to the posts in the Schedule, the method of promotion has been stated to be on the basis of
seniority-cum-merit.
What are the main features of this procedure for promotion; Whether it is permissible to change the seniority of
officials as it exists in the feeder grade while recommending their names for promotion to the next higher grade which
is inherent in the “selection” as a method of promotion at least for the purpose of promotion in scale III, scale II and
scale I so as to promote merit in the organisation?
Ministry’s reply
“Seniority-cum-merit” shall mean seniority and found fit for promotion.   It is not possible to change the
seniority of officials, as it exists in the feeder grade.  Thus, seniority-cum-merit implies promotions based on seniority
subject to minimum necessary merit requisite for the promotion.  The Government feels that there should be a uniform
criterion for promotion to all scales and that the present system may continue.
Committee’s Observation
The Committee came across divergent views on the point of promotion on the basis of seniority-cum-merit.  The
Bank of Rajasthan was of the view that promotion should not be purely on the basis of seniority only and merit should
also be given at least 50% weight age.  The Dungarpur Banswara Gramin Bank was of the view that in lower scales,
weight age may be given to seniority but in higher scale merit should prevail.   The Gramin Bank was of the view that
promotion should be made on the basis of both seniority and merit.  The Committee reiterated the need for balance
between seniority and merit to keep the Regional Rural Banks competitive with the other commercial banks.
Action taken
The existing recruitment rules provide for filling up the posts by seniority-cum-merit.   It, therefore, gives due
weightage to the seniority as well as merit.    However, the position would be reviewed after the process for
amalgamation is completed.
 
3.       The Committee notes with satisfaction that the Ministry of Finance, Department of Economic Affairs have taken
necessary action on its recommendations on Rules 4, 10(1), 10(1) proviso and Schedule III and notified the necessary
amendments. On the remaining points, the Committee notes with satisfaction the explanation furnished by the
Ministry.
 
IV
 
The Export of Live Fish (Quality Control, Inspection and Monitoring)
Rules, 2002 – Implementation of 157th Report of the Committee.
 
The Export of Live Fish (Quality Control, Inspection and Monitoring) Rules, 2002 framed under the Export
(Quality Control and Inspection) Act, 1963 were examined and  the Committee in its 157 th Report, which was
presented to the House on the 20th April, 2005 recommended as follows:-

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
file:///10.21.218.119/who%20am%20i/1%20rajesh%20sir/convert/english/Committee%20on%20Subordinate%20Legislation/172%20Report.htm[25-10-2016 16:42:19]
 
“The Committee considered the matter in its meeting held on the 31 st December, 2003. The Committee noted
the Ministry’s comments on most of the points. The Committee is happy to note that the Ministry have agreed to its
suggestion on rule 16(i) for prescribing a maximum time period for disposal of an appeal and have notified the same
by adding sub rule (iii) in rule 16 to this effect.
The Committee, however, reiterates its earlier stand on point 2 (Rule 9) and point 4 (Rule 14)  that a time limit
may be prescribed in the rule itself for grant/ refusal of approval under rule 9 or for issue of certificate under rule 14.
The Committee hopes that the Ministry would carry out/ notify these amendments expeditiously.” 
 
2.       Relevant extracts from the Report were forwarded to the Ministry of Commerce and Industry (Department of
Commerce) on the 6th May, 2005 for Action Taken Note thereon.   The Ministry vide their O. M. dated the 20th June,
2005 furnished the Action Taken Note. The Committee’s recommendation and the Ministry’s Action Taken Note is as
under: -
 
1)      Committee’s recommendation (Rule 9)
The Committee reiterates its earlier stand that a time limit may be prescribed in the rule itself for grant/refusal of
approval under rule 9.
Ministry’s Action Taken Note
“The issue has been re-examined and it may be pointed out that the system of approval of fish and fishery
products establishments has been changed in line with the new EC Regulation No: 854/2004.  Accordingly, new
executive instructions for approval of the fish and fishery product establishments/freezer vessels are being issued.  As
per the new system of approval, which is applicable for both European Union (EU) and non-EU establishments, during
the initial approval the establishment would be assessed by the Inter-Departmental Panel (IDP) at two stages.  During
the first visit, the IDP would assess the infrastructural facilities of the establishment as well as the compliance to the
regulatory requirements specified in the Government of India notification.   If satisfied, the IDP would recommend for
the ‘conditional approval’ of the establishment.   The conditional approval would be granted by the Competent
Authority for a period of 3 months, which would be extended to a maximum period of 6 months.  During the
conditional approval, the IDP would visit the unit for the second time for conducting HACCP Audit and if satisfied,
would recommend for the ‘full approval’ of the establishment.
 
     Therefore, as the process of granting full approval to the establishment may take considerable time, which may vary
from less than one month to six months, it is not practical to fix any time limit for grant of approval in the Rules. 
However, in the operational instructions the detailed procedure for implementation of the scheme and a time limit of
15 days has been laid down for conducting assessment of the application complete in all respects.”
 
2)      Committee’s recommendation (rule 14)
The Committee reiterates its earlier stand on rule 14 that a time limit may be prescribed in the rule for issue of
certificate.
Ministry’s Action Taken Note
“As provided for in Rule 14 of the Gazette Notification, the Agency concerned shall issue health certificate(s),
upon receipt of the request from the exporter or processor, after satisfying itself that live fishes have been handled in
the approved establishment having valid approval number.  This is normally done immediately on receipt of request in
cases where the requirements of the importing country are in line with the requirements provided for in the
notification.  However, in such case, where the importing country requires additional parameters to be certified, it
becomes necessary to test for the specific requirements and the health certificate is issued on receipt of test results.  As
there is no uniformity in the importing country’s standards, the issuance of health certificate vary from case to case
depending on whether additional testing is required or not. 

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
file:///10.21.218.119/who%20am%20i/1%20rajesh%20sir/convert/english/Committee%20on%20Subordinate%20Legislation/172%20Report.htm[25-10-2016 16:42:19]
 
          In view of the above it is not practical to prescribe time limit for issue of health/veterinary certificates in the
Rules.”
 
 
3.       The Committee considered the response of the Ministry of Commerce and Industry (Department of Commerce)
on the recommendations of the Committee on rules 9 and 14 and going by the explanation furnished decided not to
pursue its recommendations on these two rules any more.
SUMMARY OF RECOMMENDATIONS
 
I
The Edible Oils Packaging (Regulation) Order, 1998.
 
          6.       The Committee notes with satisfaction that the Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food & Public Distribution,
(Directorate of Vanaspati, and Vegetable Oils & Fats) have taken necessary action on its suggestions as follows:
 
·  Clause 4(4):   By reducing the number of days for the disposal of an application from 90 days to 60 days.
·  Clause 10(2):  By prescribing a time limit of 40 days from the date of receipt of the samples for carrying out the
analysis.  
·  Clause 13:   By prescribing a time limit of 90 days for the disposal of an appeal by the State Government.
·  Clause 14:   By prescribing a time limit of 60 days within which a review petition shall be disposed off by the Edible
Oil Commissioner
 
The Committee is however, unhappy to note the slow progress with respect to the implementation of the Edible Oils
Packaging (Regulation) Order by the State Governments.  In September, 2002, the Committee was informed that only seven
States have commenced the implementation of the Order and were issuing Registration Certificate in respect of certain oils and
only give States had notified the Registering Authority,  Inspecting Officers and Registration Fees.    The position in the
remaining States as reported to the Committee was found not encouraging as most of them were found to be at the very initial
stage in the process of implementation of the Order.  Besides, there were some States like Haryana, Punjab, Utter Pradesh etc. 
who had kept the implementation of the Order in abeyance in their States.  The Committee, however, notes with satisfaction
the improvement in the implementation of the said Order in the States as reported to it on 15
th December, 2004 from which it
could be seen that the majority of the States were implementing the Order.  The Committee is happy to note the further
progress in this regard as reported to it on 5 th January, 2006 whereby as on 22 nd December, 2005, twenty States had
implemented the Order, in ten States, implementation of the Order was under consideration and in the remaining five States,
there were no oil manufacturing/ packaging Units
 
The Committee recommends  that the Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food & Public Distribution   (Directorate of Vanaspati
and Vegetable Oils & Fats) to take positive steps to ensure the implementation of the said Order in the ten States where the
implementation has been stated to be under consideration as on 22nd December, 2005.
 
 
II
 
Bombay Port (Licensing and Control of Pilots) Regulations, 1975
 

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
file:///10.21.218.119/who%20am%20i/1%20rajesh%20sir/convert/english/Committee%20on%20Subordinate%20Legislation/172%20Report.htm[25-10-2016 16:42:19]
          7.       The Committee notes with satisfaction that the Ministry of Shipping, Road Transport and Highways,
(Department of Shipping) have taken necessary action on almost all of its recommendations as follows:
(i)      By deleting the words “of the Government’s sanction” in the commencement clause thereby making the
regulations to come into effect on the date of their publication in the Official Gazette which is the normal format
of legislation.
(ii)      By scrapping the provision regarding charging of fees for pilot’s licence as contained in the pre revised (1975
regulation 8 (2). The Committee had expressed its desire that the fee for a pilot’s licence should be revised
suitably and in case no fee is charged, the provision being irrelevant should be scrapped.
(iii)     By replacing the words “assist in instructing” with the words “assist and instruct” in the pre revised (1975)
regulations 25 thereby, making the provision more clear and specific.
(iv)     By deleting the provisions of regulation 33 of the pre-revised (1975) regulations which in Committee’s opinion
were not relevant to the current times and were obsolete. Regulation 33 of the 1975 regulations provided that
pilots may leave vessels at anchor in the harbour if not provided with proper food and sleeping accommodation.
 
8.       The Committee is happy to note that the Ministry has revised the whole set of regulations of 1975, made them
more relevant to the current times and also complied with the requirement of laying the regulations before the
Parliament which could not be done in the case of 1975 regulations due to the absence of such a provision in the Major
Port Trusts Act, 1963.
 
 
 
III
 
The Regional Rural Banks (Appointment and Promotion of Officers and other Employees) Rules, 1998 –
Implementation of the recommendations of the Committee as contained in its 157
th Report.
 
The Committee noted with satisfaction that the Ministry of Finance, Department of Economic Affairs have taken
necessary action on its recommendations on Rules 4, 10(1), 10(1) proviso and Schedule III and notified the necessary
amendments. On the remaining points, the Committee notes with satisfaction the explanation furnished by the
Ministry.
 
IV
The Export of Live Fish (Quality Control, Inspection and Monitoring)
Rules, 2002 – Implementation of 157th Report of the Committee.
 
The Committee considered the response of the Ministry of Commerce and Industry (Department of Commerce)
on the recommendations of the Committee on rules 9 and 14 and going by the explanation furnished decided not to
pursue its recommendations on these two rules any more.
Confidential
MINUTES OF THE MEETING OF THE COMMITTEE ON   SUBORDINATE LEGISLATION, RAJYA
SABHA.
 
XII
 
Twelfth Meeting
 

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
file:///10.21.218.119/who%20am%20i/1%20rajesh%20sir/convert/english/Committee%20on%20Subordinate%20Legislation/172%20Report.htm[25-10-2016 16:42:19]
          The Committee met at 2.00 p.m. on Thursday, the 22 nd November, 2007 in Room  No. 126-C (Chairperson’s
Room) Third Floor , Parliament House, New Delhi.
 
MEMBERS PRESENT
 
1.       Dr. (Shrimati) Najma A. Heptulla                        Chairperson
2.       Ms. Mabel Rebello
3.       Shri Surendra Lath
4.
                 Shri Penumalli Madhu
5.                 Shri M.V. Mysura Reddy
6.                 Shri Ali Anwar
7.                 Shri Harendra Singh Malik
8.                 Shri R. Shunmugasundaram
 
SECRETARIAT
 
1.
                 Shri Deepak Goyal,  Director
2.       Shri Mahesh Tiwari, Joint Director
3.       Smt. Subhashree Panigrahi, Deputy Director
4.       Shri Narmadeshwar Prasad, Assistant Director
 
 
2.       X                             X                            X                            X                             X
 
3.       The Committee took up for consideration its draft 171st Report on notifications laid by Government before the
Rajya Sabha during the 211 th and the 172 nd report on certain rules/regulations examined by it respectively, and
adopted the same after some discussion.   The Committee decided to present both these reports to the House on the
27th November, 2007.
 
4.      X                             X                            X                            X                             X
 
 
5.      X                             X                            X                            X                             X
 
         
6.       The meeting then adjourned at 3.00 p.m.
New Delhi
 November 22, 2007
 
 
DEEPAK GOYAL,
DIRECTOR
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 