CO~I.-1-122 
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA 
COM!\IITTEE ON SUBORDINATE 
LEGISLATION 
HUNDRED AND SIXTEENTH REPORT 
( f'mtnrtd on April 1. 1998) 
RAJ\', \ S,\B HA SEC RET,\RIAT 
t\E W DELHI 
AJml 1"19K ('haunt, IY1tl tSnknJ 

CONTENTS 
PACES 
I. CoMro:.moN OF nrE COMMITTEE (i) 
2. ReroRT oN Ger<DER DascRaMa,.,-T ao .... IN LEolsLAnvE 
DRAFTING 1-10 
3. ANNE.'CiiRES 11-23 
4, MINUTES OF T>IE MEETINGS OF THE COMMITTEE 24-26 
5. SELECT BrouOORAMIY 27 
1039 RS F-I·A 

1039 RS F-1·8 

COMPOSITION OF 'fHE COMMllTEE 
(1997-98) 
I. Shri M.A . Baby-Chairman 
2. Shri Balbir Singh 
3. Shri John F. Fernandes 
4. Shri Salchidananda 
5 Shri G Pralhapa Reddy 
6. Shri Shiv Charan Singh 
7. Shri Narain Prasad Gupla 
8. Prof Ram Bakbsb Singh Varma 
9. Shrimati !Ia Panda 
10. Shri S. Mu1bu Maru 
II. Shri Tara Charan Majumdar 
12. Shri Adhik Sbirodkar 
13. Shri M.P. Abdussamad Samadani 
14. Shri R.N. Arya 
15. Shri Nabam Rebia 
SECRETARIAT 
I. Shri Tapan Chauerjec, Deputy Secretary 
2. Shri A.K. Gandhi, Committee Officer 
(i) 

REPORT 
L'IITRODUCTION 
I, the Chatrman of the Committee on Subordinate Legislation, 
having been authorised by tbe Committee to present the Report on its 
behalf, do hereby present tlus Hundred and Sixteenth Report of the 
Committee . 
1.2 The Committee considered and adopted tbe Report in itS 
meeting held on March 31, 1998. 
1.3 The mancrs examined by the Committee arising out or the 
scrutiny or various Orders, Rules, Regulations and Bye-laws issued 
under the Constitution or under any law made by Parliament and 
matters related therewith, along with the comments or the 
Government received tbereon, and the observations and 
recommendations which. in the opinion of the Committee, should be 
brought to the notice of the House. are contained in the succeeding 
pnragrnphs of the Report. 
GENDER DISCRIMINATION IN LEGISLATIVE DRAFTJNG 
2. The question of gender discrimination is a vexed one within 
sociological debate, in which it tends to be raised as a central concept 
in analyses concerned with 'inequalities' in comemporary societies. In 
terms or such 'conventionul' analyses tbe sp.:cific cla~s position of 
women can never be considered, for a social category defined in terms 
of the theoretical framework adopted. relegates women to 'second · 
hand' status. Bearing in mind that this is a 'legitimate' area of study, its 
impact must obviously be very great, panicularly when it is considered 
how much finding is received by sociological work on stratification 
1 

2 
2.1 Gender discrimination is so firmly embedded in the history of 
humanity that it is ofte n not perceived as discrinunation. Because 
women have always been burdened with unpaid household work and 
absent from public life, this is deemed to be Q natural state of 
affaiD-this is the way it has always been. To challenge such 
practices and the deeply rooted attitudes on which these are based is 
a tremendous task indeed. 
2.2 While challenge 10 itlequ.ahty is inherent in the very nouon of 
human rights, the maio postulate is that aU human beings have equal 
rights, which arc propenics inh~rent to them. Sex was included to the 
universally prohibited grounds for discrimination by the United 
Nations Chaner, and aU further human rights instruments reinforced 
and fwther extended this prohibition. The most imponant change 
was attained by the Convention on the Elimination of All forms of 
Discriminatio n Against Women (1979) which demands not only that 
women should be accorded rights equal to those of man, namely that 
there should be no de jure djseriminotion, but that they should be 
able to enjoy all thC5C formally accorded rights. This requires that 
other·than·legal obstacles be identified and eliminated. Eliminating 
de facto discrimination is much more complex and difficult than 
enacting laws which recogm~ equality for all. 
2.3 International Human Rights Law specifies prohibited grounds 
of discrimination (race, colo11r, sex, language. religion. political or 
other opinion, ethnic or national origin) and these have been 
extended funhcr. to cover origtn, property or economtc position, 
birth, age, disability, sexual orientation, state of henlth. medical 
history. moriral or family status. Funher, this law lists types of 
discrimination and areas where discrimonation is prohibttcd. 
2.4 The UN Human Rights Commillee declared th:ll equal and 
effective proteelion against discrimination is an autonomous right. 
This view emanates from Article 26 of the International Covenant on 
Civil and Political Rights. 1966 (rCCPR) which states thot all 
individuals are equal before tbe law and equ~lly entitled to protection 
by the law against any discrimination. The Human Rights Committee 
also extended protection against discrimination to include all human 
rights, civil. political, economic, social and cultural. In n series of 

3 
cases the Commiuee applied prohibition of discrimination to 
unemployment benefits. social security, and immigration law. thus 
broadening access to remedy beyond civil and political rigbts. That 
was an important improvement because economic and social rigbts 
were until ~cently considered to be unenforceable by court action . 
Non-discrimcnation should thus apply in all areas regulated by public 
authoritie.~ . 
2.S The chronology of international prohibitions of gender 
discrimination show~ how much improved is our knowledge of what 
constitutes discrimination . In the beginning it was considered 
sufficient to state simply and clearly that discrimination on the basis 
of s.cx was prohibited. The more women used mis prohibition to 
challenge gender discrimination the broader it became, because many 
practices which originally had not been recognized as discriminatory 
were proved to discriminate against women. Definitions of 
discrimination thus became increasingly detailed. A comparison of 
the wording of .the Universal Declaration and the Women's 
Conven11on demon.-rates this well: 
Universal Declaration of Human Rigbts (1948): 'Everyone 15 
entitled to all the rights and fteedoms ... without distinction of any 
kind, such as race, colour, sex .. .' 
Convention on the Elimination of All Fonns of Oisqimlnation 
Agaln~t Wornen (1979): 'The terrn ''discrimination against 
women" sha11 mc~tn any distinclion. exclusion or restriction made 
on the bnsis of sex which hns the effect or purpose or impairing 
or nullifying the recognition. enjoyment or exercise by women. 
irrespective of their marital status, on n basis of equality of men 
and women, of human rights. of fwldamental freedom in the 
fXlhtical, economic. social, cultural. civil or any other field ' 
2.6 Non·di~mination requires Governments to undertake direct 
action to ensure the observance of non-discrimination by all public 
authorities and in all the public service. that is, in all the areas which 
arc under direct control of the national authority. 
2.7 In the context of women in India, a significant mode of 
interpretation and projecllon can be perceived in the construction of 
'new' ' Indian' woman . She is ·new' in the sense both of having 

4 
evolved and arrived in response 10 1he times, as well as of being 
intnnsically 'modem' and 'libenucd'. 
2.8 Saoli Milra produced her one-woman pri2e-winning dance· 
drama NtJthtJbqn-Anatha/JQt, ('Having Husbands bu1 like a Widow'. 
i.e. 'the Married Woman Bereft of Prmection') in New Delhi in 
December, 1991. She bases her script on lbe story of Draupad1 in the 
MahabhtJTata, as interpreled by the historian !ravau Karvb, narratmg 
it lhrough song, dance arid dramatic forms that are adapted from a 
number of traditional and folk forms. The formal innovativcness and 
strenuousness of her product ion are remarkable. Draupndi is the 
princess of Vidchu w)lo is obliged to marry all the five Pandava 
princes !hough il Is Arjuna whom she has chosen. Insulted by lhe 
Ksursvas after her husbands' dcfeal at the gambling-lable, she is 
saved by Krishna's intervention; and the great battle of Kurukshetra 
berween the two clans is fought by the Pandavas at least panty to 
avenge the insult offered to her. Draupadi is read by Karve as a 
woman who suffers, endures, rebels and assens herself, a 'true 
daughter of the canh', unlike the Sira of the Ramayan• . 
It is this version of Draupadi that Mitra presents, using her as a 
voice and her story as a means to indict oppression, war and the 
structures of male power. · 
LAW REFORM 
3. Campaigns for law reform have played an importanl role in the 
women's movement, past and present. Social reformers 1n 19th 
century, women in the independence movement, and contemporary 
feminist activities have aU fought for law reform 10 eliminate 
diserimina1ion against women, and to ensure that women's rights are 
)>rotected. These campaigns for law refo.rm have mobilized women, 
rajsed public awareness of discrimination and oppression, and 
succeeded- in realizing many changes in the legal regulation or 
women. Yet, after years of law reform. it often seems that little has 
changed . Despile changes in law. women's lives continue to be 
• $talus. of Indian Wo-oo-Crisd and Coalll<t 10 ~ndcr !Jsucs. by Uma Sbanb1 
Jfla, A.vti Mehta, Lalita Mcnoa (Ed.), Ka!lilhka Publishcl$, Dinributcl$, New 
Delhi, 1998. Vol. 2. Poa• nr. 

5 
plagued by violence, inequality and oppression. This gap between the 
formal rights of women and the continuing substantive ineqltality of 
women's lives can easily lead to a questioning or the value or law reform. 
3.1 Legal rights Opetate within the context of the given politico­
economic system. Law reform may not remove the structural 
inequalnies of the system whieb make it difficUlt for individuals to 
realise those rights. Instead of unrealistically expecting that law can 
change the whole social system, and then being disappointed at its 
failure to do so, it is more productive ro realise that law can induce 
or assist social change only to a certain extent. 
3.2 The struggle for law reform must continue to be an important 
dimension of the women's movement's engagement with law. Formal 
equality ri&hts are important. The recognition and condemnation of 
the violations that women experience-the crimes and discrimination 
committed against women-continue to be important in discursive 
struggles. While tMse laws may not be enforceable or accessible to 
most or many Indian women, these laws may nevenheless have an. 
important symbolic value. It is in this symbolic. or discursive value, 
that law plays an ideological role in producing con.~ensus. As Stuart 
Hall, Carol Sman, and others have argued, law does not operote only 
as a coercive institution or power. Law also opc{atcs on the 
ideological level, in the 'production of consent' . It plays a positive 
and educative (unction which orchestrates public opin ion. It is in this 
respect that law reform continues to play an important wle in 
discursive struggles for ideological hegemony . Law reform can be 
rcconccptualiscd as a proecs.• of creating a social consensus· that 
ccrt(lln forms of behaviour arc unacceptable and not simply ·about the 
creation 'or individual rights. purponedly universally accessible to 
redress individual violations. By rcvisioning law reform e&lllpaigns .as 
discursive stn.gglcs, where competing normative visions of the world 
arc fought out, we can begin to understand feminist engagement as 
an effort tO destabilize and displace previously dominant meanings of gender.· 
·sub\'cf$1\'t SHes: Feminist Enaagcmtnu with Law i:n Jndia, by Rarna ~<;!pur, Bltntb 
Cossmao, s., •. New D<ilu, 1996, Pag< 315 to 3t6 . 
10.19 R~ F- Z·A 

ORIG IN OF DISCRIMINATION J:'i LEGISLATIVE DRAFTING 
4 The origin of gender discrimination in legislative drafting could 
be traced to the fact that women in most of the leading countries 
could participate in the process of governance only during the 
contemporary modern times. However, it is interesting to note that 
the first countnes to graRt Wl'men electoral equality with men were 
New Zealand (1893), Finland (1906), Norway (1913), and Denmark 
and Iceland (1915}. With the exception of a few individual states of 
the Australian Federation (1902) arul the United States (where 
Wyoming wa.~ the first to grant women the suffrage in 1869), equality 
of votes for women came in most leading countries at the end of or 
soon after World War I, the Netherlands and Soviet Union in 1917; 
Germany and Luxembourg in 1919: Austria, Czechoslovakia, Poland. 
and Sweden 1n 1918, the Udited States in 1920 and Great Britain '" 
1928 (though subject to a number of limitations. age and marital 
status among others, British women were first enfranchised by the 
Reprc~entation of the People Act of 1918). During the interwar 
period, electoral equality was extended to women in the Union of 
South Africa (1930), Spain (1931), Brazil and Siam (now Tha1land. 
19~2), Ceylon, Cuha. Turkey, and Uruguay (1934), Burma and 
Romania (1935), and the Philippines (1937); in the other states it 
came in the wake of World War If or else of the replacement of the 
old colonial empires with new sovereign state s. 
4.1 In France, women have always enjoyed high status not only in 
the family but also socially and cultura lly. The country has produced 
a number of eminent womcrn in literature and politics (incidentally, 
even two ministers of slate in the Popular Front Government of 1936, 
before French women had the vote) and includes among its national 
-+terocs a woman soldier (Joan of Arc). French women, nevertheless. 
were not enfranchised until 1944. 
4.2 Switzer land, one of rhe oldest democracies, did not give women 
the vote until 1971. This is all th~ more curious because not only 
have Swiss women played a considerable part in the economy of their 
country but Swit-zerland was among the first to ~~tend university 
education 10 women on a basis of complete equality with men . 
6 
t039 RS F-l·B 

CONSIDERATIO~ OF THE ISSUE BY THE COl\.!MITTEE 
5. In our country though women's participation in the Panchayati 
Raj Institution~ and the Ci,·ic bodic' h~vc been statutoril} ensured. 
we ha>·e not been able to pro, ide so CJr rcservllion tor women in the 
legiSlative bod1c• and the) hove b.:cn kept away from the process of 
fonnulation of legislations. This €ommiuee h<ti come across umpteen 
instance> of .cxism in pnncipal kgt>lations and the orders. rules 
regulations and bye-ta.-s which were examined by it While 
examining the various rule' and regulations drafted b} the cxccuti,c. 
the Commiuee fell offended that the gender discrimination !lCL> 
reflected in the rules and rcgula11ons masmuch as they are evident m 
the highest statute of the land t t the ConsUtution. and the pnnc1pal 
stcnutc~. The clas..\ic;: example tlf sCXI!'It hia!\ 1n \Ot.,al welfare measures 
which the Committee has occasion to cxammc arc the Employees' 
Pension Regulations of LIC. GIC and the llationah,ed banks. T"o 
instances may be cited to prove the po1nt. There is discrimination 
between n se>n and a daughter related tO the !)Criod upto which 
Family Pen~ion could be received. The boy of the deceased employee 
can receive pension upto the age of 25 years while a girl is 
disqualified for rece1p1 of family pension 1n case she is married before 
the age of 25. Secondly, both the disabled boy and the girl are 
entitled to enmity pension for life but 111 case of the girl there is a 
rider-she becomes disqua lified in case of her marriage. This is 
violative of principles of natu raVsocial ju~ticc, Fundamenta l Right5, 
discriminatory and is, therefore, Inhuman and uncivilised. 
5.1 The Constitution of India, the basic law of the land, is not free 
from instances of this sex bias. Section 13 of General Clauses Act, 
1897 provides that lll nil Centra l i\cts and Regulations. unless there is 
anything rcpugMnt 10 the subject or context. the words importing the 
masculine gender shall be taken to mclude females. However. the 
same section, while providing a rule of Interpretation in relation to 
numbers, provides that the words in the singular shall include the 
plural and vic~ versa Similar is the situatio n in the State General 
Oauscs Acts in India. 
5.2 As already stated many a time the Comminee had the unhappy 
experience of coming across 1 hos kind or discrimination and 
7 

8 
gender bias getting reflected in various social security measures !hat 
exist tn our society, which are being denied to women on vanous 
grounds. At the same time. the Committee has also come across 
gender bias in legislative drafting. Hence the Committee felt that 
besides the examination of various legislations, it should also make its 
contribution towards makin& certain amendmentS to do away wuh the 
gender bias and discrimination in the rules and regulation being 
made. 
5.3 The Chainnan of the Committee had an occasion to discuss the 
issue ·with the Additional Secretary, Ministry of Law & Justice 
(Legislative Department) in his Chamber on !5.7.97. The 
representative of the Law Ministry briefly apprised the Chairman of 
the historical background, refonn in the English Law and attempts 
made 10 the country on the question. 
5.4 As directed by the Cbainnan, the Ministry vide their UO note 
dated 17.9.97 had furnished a Status Note (Annexure·!) on the 
~ubject to facilitate the discussion in the Committee 
Relevant extracts from th~ 
(i) General Clauses Act, 1897; 
(ii) The Interpretation Act, 1889 and the Interpretation Act, 1978 
of England; and 
(iii) Sixtieth Report of Law Commission of India (May 1974) on 
the General Clauses Act, 1897; 
are placed at Annexures fl, Ill and IV respectively. 
5.S Tile Commiuec deliberated on the subject in its meeting held 
on October 28, 1997. and decided to bear the Secretary, Ministry of 
Law and Justice (Legislative Department). 
5.6 Accordingly, the Commiuee beard the Secretary, Ministry of 
bw and Justice (Legislative Department) on 25.3.98. 
5.7 The Secretary, Mimstry of Law and JUstice (Legislative 
Department), while summing up the deliberations inter alia made the 
following observations: 
(i) A clear mandate should go to the community of drafters, not 
only at the Central level but also at the State level for use of 

• 
9 
neuter, non-sexist expressions while drafting new legislations 
and subordinate legislations. 
(ii) The drafting departments in tbe_Statcs are interconnected with 
each other and all of them come for training to tbe Union Law 
Minister through specific training programmes. For drafters of 
the State Governments a message can go and percolate down 
to the QLher levels in the States and the whole scenario would 
change, the psychology of the drafters wiU change and they wall 
strive to bring in the usc of neuter genders and not usc sexist 
expressions or expressions that are discriminatory to either sex. 
(iii) A national level conference of the Chief Drafipersons ot all 
the States involved in the mauer could be held to discuss tbe 
various issues and debate the various intricacies so that as far 
as possible and practicable, tbe language that is used in legal 
wrilin& or statutory writing should be non-sexist. 
5.8 The Committee having considered all the inputs on the subject 
and having heard the Secretary and other representatives of the 
Ministry of Law and Justice (Legislative Department) recommends 
the following course of action to the Ministry of Law and Justicc:-
(a) All new le~:lslollons and subordinate legislations may be 
draCled using non-sexist language. 
(b) Whenever comprehensive review or existing legislations rul"" 
regulations orders are undert a ken, care should be taken to 
demaseullnl:te the language therein the Committee realises 
that II would be a stupendous task to make comprehensive 
amendmenLS In the Constitution to delete sexist words and 
expressions with non-sexist neuter ones but the Law Ministry 
should at the earliest opportunity undertake the exercise of 
proposinc amendments In those chapters or the Constitution 
deallna wllb Fundamental Rights, Civil Liberties, Directive 
Principles of State Polley, proviSions relating the President or 
India, Speaker Lok Sabha, Deputy Cbalrman Rajya Sabba 
ete. tic ... , to rid them of their masculine orientations. Section 
13 of the General Clauses Act also be amended Immediately in 
line with the Interpretations Act, 1978 of England. 
, 

10 
S 9 There would be many difficulties and technical problems 
e;pccinUy when trnnslating the laws and orders in Hmdi and other 
official languages meluded in the Eighth Schedule to the Conslltutton, 
bul those challenges would have to be accepted and all 1hc 
impcdimenl~ would have to be overcome. so that a good begmning 
could be made 10 demasculinize the legal corpora. 
5.10 In this con1cxt the Committee ts hopeful that the thirt)·lhr" 
per cent reservation for women in Parliament and State Lcg~slatures 
"ould :.oon materialise as a great leap forward towards empowerment 
of "'omen . 
>.II !nequilable $ociO·economic conditions play a significant role in 
perpetualing and accentuating gender inequalitie<. Signifieanlly 
however, a new thinking bas emerged to do away with gender 
disparity. It i> the intenlion of the Committee to further accentuate 
th•t feeling generale a national debate on the subject and wipe tho 
~ial psyche off tiS masculine bias. If thiS ISsue ts taken up tn the 
righl spiri1. it would be a befitung contribulion to the cause of 
women's emancipation during the golden jubilee cclcbrattons of our 
Independence. 
NEw Dca.Ht, 
A!lril I , 1998 
M.A. BABY 
Chairman~ 
Commllll!l! on Sul>ordinull 
LegiJ/ation. 

ANNEXURE-I 
(Vid~ Para 2.19) 
LEGISLATIVE DEPARTMEI\'T 
SuwECr: Gender Bias in Legislative Drafting-<onsidcration 
by the Committee on Subordinate Legislation, Rajya 
Sabha. 
Rajya Sabha S_ecretariat 
RS. 5(2~}97-Comm. l dated 
cited above. 
may refer to their fetter No. 
September 5, 1997 on the subject 
2. Status note on the subject in the light of the discussion held 
at 3.00 p.m. on 15.7.1997 with the Chairman is sent herewith The 
note hns the approval of the Minister of State for Law a11d 
Justice. 
Sdl· 
(DR. RAGHBIR SINGH) 
Add11ional· Secrctttr)• 
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, Parliament House Annexe (Ann Shn 
Tapan Chnucrjce, Deputy Secretary) 
U.O.No. 416-97-Leg. 1, dated 17.9.97. Ministry of Law and Jusuec 
(LD) 
11 

GENDER BIAS IN LEGISLATIVE DRAITING 
A SRORT NOTE 
Legislations in India, while referring to living beings, whether the 
human beings or other living species. are drafted in masculine form 
unless it is specifically intended to refer to such a living being as a 
femimne specie. The practice has irs roots in the slalute of 
interprelation in vogue in this coumry, namely, the General Clauses 
Act, 1897. 11 provides in Section 13 1hat m all Cen1ral Acts and 
Regulauons, unless there is anything repugnant in the subJect or 
eomext, 1he words importin!l the masculine gender shall be 1aken to 
onclude females. However, tire same section, while providing a rule of 
in($rpretation in relation to numbers, provides that the words in the 
singular shall include the plural and vice-versa. Similar is 1he situauon 
in the State General Clauses Acts in India. Tbe General Clauses Act, 
1897 ~races i1s history to tbe common law in England. The firsl 
enac1ment of the kind was Lord Brougham's Act. The provisions of 
1hat s1a1u1e were adapted to India and lbe s~e were amplified by 
the General Clauses Act (1 of 1868}. It was followed by series of 
amendmcniS in India culminating into the prese01 Ac.t, namely, 1he 
General Clauses Act, 1897. 
2. The lnlcrpretation Act, 1889 in England, like the (Indian) 
Genera l Clnuses Act, 1897, provided in Section 1 11lat, unle~s 1he 
contrary intention appears, words importing the masculine gender 
shall include female. Similarly, that section provided lhat the word 
singular shall include plura l and the word plural shaU include 
sangular. However, the Interpretation Act, 1978 10 England has 
changed the rule of interpretation in rela1ion to gender. Section 6 of 
that Act provides that, unless contrary intention appears, the words 
importing masculine gender include the feminine and ihe words 
importing feminine gender include the masculine. It is clear lhat the 
gender equalily at least in rule of interpretation in England has been 
12 
, 

13 
achieved. How far it has transcended to the actual legislative drafting 
practices is still a big question. In other words, how far draftspersons 
are using feminine expressions to connote both masculine and 
feminine genders and the British Parliament is cognizant of gender 
bias hitherto practised In drafts is a matter which shall conclude any 
observer to a definite conclusion that social stereotypes are still 
having their full sway over the whole matter . 
3. The Law Commission of India had the occasion to examone the 
matter in its Sixtieth Report (May, 1974) on the General Clauses 
Act, 1897. It observed that this rule of interest to grammarians is 
with a view to facilitate the shortening of the language of enactments, 
by enabling the draftsman to avoid the tortuous process of 
mentioning the female of the species whenever he frames a provision 
applicable to the living beings, or of mentioning the plural whenever 
he uses a word in lhe singular and viu-vusa. The Commission, at the 
same time, observed mat the resultant brevity is purchased at a price. 
Since the rule is subject to the context indicating a contrary intention, 
there. have been disputes about it. However, the same is unavoidable . 
Looking into the merits of the benefits, the little price has to be paid. 
The Commission did not suggest any change in so far as the extant 
rule about gender is concerned. Probably, the Commission did not 
have the benefit in 1974 of the similar change brought in 1978 in the 
English law referred to above. Similarly, the Commission happened 
to ~ working in a period which preceded the era of consciousncs$ 
created in this country and abroad about the gender equality related 
matters. The Committee on the Status of Women in India submitted 
its report on the 31st December, 1974. The year 1975 was observed 
as the International Women Year which was followed by celebration 
of a decade dedicated to the women at the global level. 
4. In the absence of a rule of interpretatton in the nature of 
expression of gender in a common form discussed in the preceding 
paragraphs, the draftsperson will have to mentton masculine and 
feminine gender repeatedly in his di-afu which shall vehemently lead 
to a verbose and cumbersome reading of the statutes . In so tar as 
drafting in English language is concerned, the problem is confined to 
references about nouns and pronouns. Since our Constitution grants 
to the Regional languages the status of Official Languages and Hindi 

14 
has been adopted as the National Language, attempu are being made 
to venture into original drafting in Hindi and other regional 
languages. However, the India Code in its entirety has been 
translated into Hindi and the same is being translated into other 
regional languages Various State Governments arc also 
simullaneously preparing the texts of their legislations in their 
respective regional languages. The Bills in English being introduced 
in Parliament have their nuthetuicated Hindi version also along with 
them. The grammars of all the languages of the sub-continent have 
their feminine gender in verb~ as well unlike the English gntmmar 
where distinctiveness of the gender is to be judged from the nouns 
and the pronouns only. 
S. In view of the above, any aucmpt with a view to express ltoth 
masculine and femtninc gender in the legislative drafting will have the 
following problems: 
(1) The drafts will become verbose and clumsy. Thus wall ause 
problem in reading. 
(2) All existing legislations will have to be accordingly modified 
with a view to provide the expressions relating to both 
masculine and feminine genders. This will be a stupendous job 
and in certain situations will lond to ambiguny as. while 
amending those legislations, it cannot be said with certainty 
that the expression in masculine according to its context relntes 
to masculine gender only and not the feminine gender This 
will lead to uncalled for difricultics. 
(3) Since we have a system of translating the texts into Hindi and 
other regional languages, the whole exercise will have to be 
done in rcla11on to those languages as well which shall not only 
be confined to the noun or pronoun used in a sentence but an 
major pan of it as the verb thereof also gets affected . 
. 6. Altemativi!ly, if it is decided to amend section 13 of the General 
Clauses Act, 1897 with a view to bring it m pari mat~rta with the 
similar rule in lhC English Interpretation Act, 1978 so as to provide 
chat masculine includes feminine and •icc·versa. the exercise will be 
more of a symbolic character since !he notions of male supcriont) nrc 
the product of centuries old lopsided societal development nnd hence 

15 
reversal in that direction can only bring in concrete and longlasting 
results. An inceresting instance of the prejudice of the legislative 
draftspcoon, and in ultimate analysis of the legislature. is the Indian 
Nursing Council Act, 1947. The objects of the legislation are men and 
women nurses alike. Draftsperson. of course. had the handicap of 
expressing nurses in feminine form in viev. of single direction rule 
under section 13 of the General Clauses Act, 1897 He could have 
taken the traditional route of puuing in masculine form so as to 
ancludc as well the female nurses. However, he chose to repeat male 
and female expressions conjunctively. The obvious reason therefor 
appears to be that he was dealing with professionals with substantially 
higher female population. Suc.b pieces of legislation in maner of their 
style of drafting are an exception. 

13 
achieved. How far it bas transcended to the actual legislative drafting 
practices is still a big question. In other words, how far draftspersons 
are using feminine expressions to connote both ma'ICulinc and 
feminine genders and the British Parliament is cognizant of gender 
bias hitherro practised in drafts is a mouer which shall conclude any 
observer to a definite conclusion that social stereotypes arc still 
having theiT full sway over the whole 11J&IIer. 
3. The Law Commission of lndia had the occasion to examine the 
matter in its Sixtieth Report (May, 1974) on the General Clauses 
Act, 1897. It observe<! that this rule of interest to grammarians is 
with a view to facilitate the shortemng of the language of enactments, 
by enabling tbe draftsman to avoid the tortuous process of 
mentioning the female of the species whenever he frames a provision 
applicable to the living beings, or of mentioning the plural whenever 
he uses a word in the singular and vlce·vtrsa. The Commission, at the 
same time, observed that the resullant brevity is purchased at a price. 
Since the rule is subject to the context indicating a contrary intention, 
there. have been disputes about it. However, the same is unavoodablc. 
Looking into the merits of the benefits, the little price has to be paid. 
The Commission did not suggest any change in so far as the extant 
rule about gender is conoemed. Probably, the Commission did not 
have the benefit in 1974 of the similar change brought in 1978 in the 
English law referred to above. Similarly. the Commission happened 
to pe working in a period which preceded the era of consciousness 
created in this country and abroad about the gender equality related 
matters. The Committee on the Slatus of Women in India submitted 
its report on the 31st December, l974. The year 1975 was observed 
as the International Women Year which was followed by celebration 
of a decade dedicated to the women at the global level. 
4. [n the absenoe of • rule or interpretation in the nature or 
expression of gender in a common form discussed in the preceding 
paragraphs, the draftsperson will have to mention masculine and 
feminine gendtr repeatedly in bis drafts which shall vehemently lead 
to a verbose and cumbersome reading of the statutes. In so far as 
drafilng in English language is concerned, the ·problem is confined to 
references about nouns and pronouns. Since our Constitution grants 
to the Regional languages the status of Official Languages and Hindi 

14 
has been adopted as the National Language, allempts are being made 
to venture into original drafting in Hindi and other regional 
languages . However, the India Code in ils entirety has been 
translated into Hindi and the same is being lran.<lated into mhcr 
regional languages. Various State Governments are also 
simultaneously preparing the texrs of their legislations in their 
respective regional languages. The Bills in English being introduced 
m Parliament have their authenticated Hindi version also along with 
them. The grammars or all the languages of the sub-continent have 
their feminine gender in verbs as well unlike the English grammar 
where distinctiveness of the gender is to be judged from the nouns 
and the pronouns only. 
S. In view of the above, any auempt with a view to express !loth 
masculine and feminine gender in the legislative drafting will have the 
following problems: 
(I) The drafts will become verbose and clumsy. Thus will cause 
problem in reading. 
(2) All existing leglslations will have to be accordingly modified 
with a view to provide the expressions relating to both 
masculine and feminine genden. This will be a stupendous job 
and in certain situations will lead to ambiguity as, while 
amending those legislations, it cannot be said with certuinty 
thnt the expression in maseulioe according to its context relates 
10 masculine gender only and not the feminine gender. This 
will lend to unca lied for difficulties. 
(3) Since we have a system or translatjng the texts into Hindi and 
other regoonnl languages, the whole exercise will have to be 
done on relation to those languages as well whkh shall not only 
be conrined 10 lhe noun or pronoun used in a sentence but in 
major part of it as the veri> thereof also gets affected. 
6. Alternntivt:ly. •f it is decided 10 amend section 13 of the General 
ciauses Act, 1897 wnh a view to bring it in pari mOferia with the 
similar rule in the English Interpretation ACI, 1978 so as 10 provide 
that masculine includes feminine and VIce-versa. the exercise will be 
more of a symbolic character since the notions of male superiority nrc 
the product of centuries old lopsided societal development and hence 

15 
reversal in that direction ea11 only bring in concrete and longlastmg 
resul!s. An interesting instance of the prejudice of the leg•slative 
draftspenon, and in ultimate analysis of the legislature. is the Indian 
Nursing Council Act, !947. The objects of the legislation are men and 
women nurses alike. Draftsperson, of course, bad the bandie11p of 
c~pressing nurses in feminine form in view of s•nglc dncction rule 
under section 13 of the General Clauses Act. 1897. He could have 
taken the traditional route of purring in masculine form so as to 
include as well the female nurses. However. he chose to repeat male 
and female expressions conjuncuvely. The obvious reason therefor 
appears to ~ that he was dealing with professionals with substantially 
higher female population. Suc:b pieces of legislation in mancr of their 
style of drafting arc an exception. 

Ot 1897) 
Compuurion 
or dmc. 
ANNEXUR&-n 
Wid< Paro 2. 19) 
SECTION 13 OF THE GENERAL CLAUSES ACT 1897 
CtMrol Clawa 
{1) Th11 ketlon applk. oho ro •II [Ccnltal 
Acu) mode ali<r rhe rhird day of Januaty, 1868, 
and co aU Rqulartons made on or aftu the 
fourtet.nth day of ltnu.ary, 18:87. 
10. (I) Wb<re, by any )Ccnr .. r Acr] or 
Rcauhuion n'bde after the commen«menr of this 
A a, any aa or pr«t'cding i1 directed or alloWed 
to be done or taken Jn any COur1 or office on a 
ccnoin d1y or wilhln • prtscribed period, then, if 
the Court or office. b closed Qn that doy or the 
fur day of the prefCribcd period, the: act or 
proc:t.edlng •hall be consjdcrcd as dont or raken 
ln due time If 11 i.l done or taken on the. next 
day afterwards on which the Court or office •.s 
open: 
Prov.ck:d that nothing 1n this section shall .apply JJ of 1871 
10 any tl<'l or procct.d1ng to which the fndian 
Umhatlon Act, 18n, apphcs. 
(1) ThiJ kcdon appliCJ also ro all )Ccnrrnl Acts) 
and Reaul.ations made on or alter tbe fowteemb 
day oC Jonuory, 1887. 
16 
II 

17 
11. ln the measurement or aoy distance:_§ for 
the purposes of. any (Ccntnl Actl or R~gulation 
made after the commc.n«me-o.t of thil Act. that 
dtstance ~oh.all, unlus a different intention appeo1n.. 
be me.asl.lre.d ln a ttrait,ht line on a horizootaf 
plane 
11. Where, b)' a.Dy enactment now 10 force: ot 
hcreaftcr to be: in fotce. a.ny duty of cw:toms or 
uriS<, or'" the nature thcreo(, i$ k"·ublt on ;,ny 
IJ\IC.D quanlll)'. by -..;c'lht, measure or "'31u-e of 
any coods or rncrchaodtsc, then a like duty 11 
k'ftlblc. eccor~ng to the same rate or any creatu 
or less quant1ty 
~ty to bt td.n 
pro-·rata •• 
~ 
U. In all (Cenutl Acts) and Rc.gulations, unlm Ge:adca •tid 
then IS enychin& rcpugrunt 1n ch.c subject or null'llbc-r 
contcXl.-
(I) words importing the masculine gender sb3ll 
be lalr.cn to 1ndude fcmaks; and 
(2) wordJ in tl\c .singular sb::lll mcludc the 
plural, and vi« vttrso. 
4t3A.. [Rc{ur:nc~t 10 rJJ~ So~rdgn.] Rrp. ''Y tht 
A.O. 19SO. 
14. (/) Where, by any (Centro ! Ac1] or 
Reaulation m11de after the cornmenctmcn( nf this 
Aca. 3AY power i$ conferred • • •. lhen junless a 
d1fCerent mtcnlJOI1 appears) 1ha1 power ma)' ~e 
e.xercued from tame to 11me. as occ.a51on requires. 
(2} This sediOn apploe• Oliso co aU (Cunral ACU] 
and Re&ul•llons made on or aftc.1 the fourt«nlh 
day ol Januory, 1887 
JlewJtf\• 
..-oa.h:rrcd to he 
cJteto:S.ilbk from 
umc to hnlt. 

ANNEXURE·lll 
(Vrde Par> 2.19) 
EXTRACTS FROM THE INTERPRETATION ACT. /889 AND THE 
INTERPRETATION ACT 1978 OF ENGLAND 
App II] The lnt<rptctahon A<l. 1889 867 
TilE ADAPTATION OF LAWS (No. 6) ORDER, 19S7 
I. (I) This Order m>y be called the Adapcalion of u""' (No. 5) Ord«, 1957 
(2) II Wll be: ckemcd to b.lvc come into roccc on tbc. IJt day of No .. cmbcr . 1956 
2 In chis Order.-
(•) ··appointed day" mnnt the lit doy of November, 1956: 
(b) "l3.w .. muns a law as defined In clause: (h) of Sccttoo 2 of the States 
Reorcaniurlon Act, 1956 (37 or 1956). 
3. The General cr.u.ses Act, l897, applies for the mtcrprctauon or ltu.S Order as It 
opphes for 1he lntcrprctallon of a Central Act. 
4. As (rom the appointed day . the Acts mc.ntloncd 1n the Schedule to lh1s Order 
shDII , un1il repealed or amended by a oompctcnl L.eg1shuurc: or other compctenl 
authority, have dfect subject to cb.c adapuulon.s :md modifications dtrccted by th.e 
Schedule 0 1, lr il 1$ directed, shall mnd repea led. 
5. Where 1h1s Order rc.qulres chat in any specified section or other pon.ion of an Act, 
(!efUin wordt s.hall be substituted Cor cercain ocher words, or that cemain words ihall be 
omitted that substitu1ion or omiuion, as the case may be. shall, except where it 1s 
Olherwise exprcu ly prov1dcd, be:. made wherever tbe wordJ refe rred to oocur In that 
ucuon or poni on 
6. Jn any law ln foru Immediately before 1he appo il:ued by iD the Part C S111c of 
Delhi, Hlmaclul Prad<lh, ManiJ>II' Of Tnpull'-
(a) re(ercn«t by whalever form of word$ to Del hi. Htmaeb.a1 ..Pra-desh, Man1pur 
or Trtpura as a Pan C State or co the Chief Commissioner or lieutenant 
Governor lhcrc:of shall u from the appo1nted d..1y, be conJC.nKd respectively as 
r<lertno<S co the Un1011 Terri<ory or Delhi. Himadlal Prode>h. Manipur or 
Tripura or to the Adminisuacor thereof: 
18 

19 
(b) references by whatever rorm or words lO th~ Gov~rnmc:nl nf ij PGrt c St:nc, 
uccpt where Jt IS otherwiSe e~pressly prov1ded 10 such lnw M m th1s Order. 
shall, u from 1he ;appointed day, boe c:onsliUcd as rderC'nteJ to the Ccnrrill 
Oovcrnme.nt, 
(c) references co lhc- Contolldatc-d Fund of the S~tc: .shall as from the llftp,oln!c-d 
day, be COrulNcd U• rdcrences to the Con.sohdarcd Fund of lnd1a 
THE INTERPRETATIOI' ACT, 1889 
Aa An tor COOiOhcbtiDJ c.ol<"lmcnts rellting 10 the oonstruc:lion o! Acu of 
Pa.rliamc.nl 1nd for funhcr 1hortc.DlDJ &he Unau:.gc used tD Aru of Par~nt 
RE·ENAC'I'MENT OF EXIsn!"G RULES 
I. Rae'" as to acndtr aod nwnber.~l) In lhi$ Act aod t.n e~e-ry Ad pa1SCd after the 
ytar Oftc lhOutand tlabt hundred and fift-y, whether bdon or aftu the C'On\MCOUment 
of thu Act, unlc• tbe contnry intention appun.-
(o) word• tmporuna tile lli&JCIIItne ccnckr sholl lll<luck females: and 
(b) words 1n the stn&W.r 1bolllnduck Ill< plwal and words in the plurnl •h•llln<ludc 
tlle sinplor. 
(2) The 11n-.e rules lhal1 be oblerved in the co-nttructiOn of every ~n:t<:1men1 r~Jtuing to 
an offetK'e punish.able on lndktment or on summary conv1ctt0n, when the enoctn.enr tS 
contained In an Act p•sxd ja or before the )'¢if one tholliand ca.&ht hundred 11nd filly 
' 

Word\ of 
C'rt.lCfMICftl 
AmcHdutocnl or 
rcpc.:tl 11t (~Rlc 
Sesttt'n . 
JuthCt:JI llOhCc:, 
Time or 
Cohlnu:ncemenr. 
INTERPRETATION ACf 1978 (c. 30) 
Ss. I· 7 
An Act.ro consohdatc the lnre:rprct3110n Art 1889 Olnd «rr~•n 
Clhe:r ttt3Ctmcnls rei~''"! tO rh~ oon..-~rucuon :and opcrat.Jon 
of Acu or Parhlmcnc and Olhtr Ul.\"ffUJUCIU$. Wllh 
.lrrtudmcnrt to &itrc cffca ro rttom~nd;1rion, of rbc- Uw 
Commiu.on and the ~Uith Uw Commission 
[2fllh July l<n&j 
E"cry stntnn of an AC1 tal.~ dftct os ~ substano'c 
tn)cttncnt wttbour •n•rt'duc:tory 'IIIOn:h 
2, Any ACI may bt ant tndcd or rcpe:.lcd in the Se~c:,nn of 
Pnrhi'ln,cnc 10 ,.luch 11 i:. f\<'1\"'cd 
J. f:'o'ef)' ACI is 3 pubhc Act IO he JUd!CIIlJly not~d OS '"udl. 
unleu rht cr>nr~ry i11 upJc~li1f pro\'tdt.J hy the Acr. 
4 An Ac:l nr provb;ion of :»n Act comes inro forte-
(11) where prov1sion Is mndc for 11 ro com~ mto force on o 
p:ulitu lllr dly, :u 1he beginning nf thai d3y; 
(b) where nu prnvit1on Is nuldt for us cnming inrn force, iU 
I he bC'gtnnmg of lb~ da)' on ...,.hich the Act receive'\ the R~y:~l A(!lenr 
lntuprf'fllliorr un(/ t:otnrruclinn 
S ln Jlnt Atl, unleJ~ 1hc C'ontrJry mrc-nlloo .:.pp~Jrs. "'t>rds 
Ond upre\~aon'l liSted 111 ~chedute I to I.Ju~ Ace: ;arc to hc:­
COflnruc:d occocthng to th.11 Schedule 
20 

21 
6, Jn any Act, unl~ss tbc contrary in tcnt1on appeaB,-
(•I words amporun& lhe matCUiine. &coder IDCIU-de the 
feminine: 
{b) .. Otd< ln\pOr11nJ the (emuune &eoder ancludc tbe 
maliQlhnt ;, 
(c) v.·ords •n tbe t.tn.&ular inclu.ck the pi\U'Il and words in the 
plural ~ncil.ldc: the smaul.ar. 
7, Where an A<1 authorl)C:I or rcqun« ~ny document to be 
Mf\'ed by pent ('wM:tbtr the nptc!StOn ·sc.rvc• or lhc 
d:Pfa:sion .. IJ\C .. or "'send'" or any ocher cxprc»ton is used) 
t.hu. anleu tbc t.Onlrary tntention appears. the service tS 
dee<Md to be effttted by proP<rly addreuin&. pre-p.>)in& and 
polt1.a1 • letter conttuHI'll the d«•.uncnt and. unless tb<C" 
conLruy t.s proved., to have btcn dfeacd ~~ the lime at 'wbtCh 
the lcncr •oukJ be dch .. crcd ~n the OlChnary counc of posl. 
Gender 
number . 
ond 
Rcfcrert>tt.. to 
"""ott b) .,.,.. 

ANNEXURE-IV 
(Vidr Pom 2.19) 
EXTRACTS FROM THE SIXTIETH REPORT OF LAW COMMISSION !IF INDIA 
(MAY 1974/ ON THE GENERAL CLAUSES ACT, /11'17 
Scaion 13-
Gcndcr aod 
numbtr 
Numbu and gurdtr 
8 23. Two naks or IRICT~t to p:anmw:ia~h sub)ccc .10 the 
cootut-arc incOfpOr.lled an sea10n 13. The fim s:ays that •onb 
unposho& t.bc ma.scuhne ~nder include (crn3le:s n,~ s~conJ 
provides thlt WOC'dl m the smgul;~r mdude the pfur.~l, and viet' 
tltru The abject of both ii to factlalllt.e shortening .of rh,· lilnguasc 
of cnaccmenLS. by enabling t.ht d'aftsmon to :1'-o•d th~· 1\)fhh,ds 
proet:ss of mcntionmg 1 he female: of the spcciC"S wh,·nc ... er h:C' 
(ramct ~ pro"ision ;pplk.uble to 1iv1ng beings. or of mcnr,on•ng the 
plura.l whtncnr he Uk~ 1.'1 word tn the singular and l'lrr Yt'na 
Melli nf the 8.24 lllc mcflt or thc.sc two pcOYlSJOn1 is ob'o'iOUS. or course, 
provi11ion the r()ullant brevity ts purchased .at .. pn«, tlecausc-, "'IS shown 
by the fairly lnrgc: number of rcpc:trted cases ..,n the \C\'IIt...\n, 11 ~ 
often not ca.sy to decide whedJel'. in o pnntcul:)r st:tl\llflfy 
provlt•on, the context 11hauld be tnktn as indic:lltn{!. :• c-oncmry 
intention Some of thc!te oues hn~c even gone H'J tht' Suprenu: 
Section 13 and 
rules 
Cour1.1 
And, lbcre have been .recent deru1ons 1 of the High C•u1 tl abo. 
But this canno1 be avoided for a.ht5 rt'D.SOo, no subsumti31 change 
b susscsted in the .s«tion 
8.25. In one of the easel befotc- chc Supteme Coun,-Rt'&innal 
.f/flltmtnf Ccmtuissiona v . Stmdt'rdu.l-cehurn.& ro n1lts mod~ 
under the OJSplaeed Pef""((n." (Compematton and Rch;,h,ht3Cion) 
Act (40 of 195-1). ~ction 13 (of the Gc.ncn1 001.Ul<S Act~ v.as held 
not to apply 10 lhc- p~rtleulat t\tJCJ.. in \1.CW or the «tftle •• But I he 
ccn.cral quc.shon "'itelher the Gcncr.~t Cllu~ Act :.rrhcd J~t itllto 
tut't'rdanllc kg•slaooo was not oon!ukrcJ. 
22 

23 
8 26. Certt1n \lcrbol chana:ct aro, however, propos<'d in scct100 
ll~ which aho1;1ld be revued as follows:-
Rttistd s«don 13 
V c:rbal ch.afl&C..S 
reconun<nckd in 
sectiocs \3. 
(1) In c ... cry Central AC'I or Rt&ulalion. aanlm the context Gender and 
othuwlk rcqu•m. wordJ importmg the milSCUhn.t gender number 
sltaU •ndude femaks 
(2) In C\'Cf'Y ~nttal Act or Replauon. uoltss the conte.XI 
Otherwise: ~quares. wotdt m the. .s.i..ntultt.r toh.all 1nduck the 
plunt. •nd 'II'Ords an tltt plurttl sluaU inclutlt tht sinplttr. 

MINUTES OF THE MEETINGS OF THE COMMITTEE 
ON SUBORDINATE LEGISLATION 
IX 
NL"iTB M£.ETJSC 
The Comminee mel ac 3.30 P.M. on Tuesday, the 281h Occober, 
1997 in Room No. 67, FJrsl Floor. Parliamenc House, Nc"' Dclh• 
ME. .... B£RS P~:-.7 
I. Shn M.A Baby-Chatrman 
2 Shri Balbir Singh 
3. Shri Sacchidananda 
4. Shri Sh1v Charan Singh 
5. Shri Narain Prasad Gupca 
6. Prof Ram Bakhsh Singh Varma 
7. Shri Tara Char an MaJumdar 
SECitETAR1AT 
1. Shri Tapan Chanerjee. Depwy s~cretory 
2. Shri A.K Gandhi. Committet Officer 
MEMORANDUM NO. 26/97-Gende .r Bias in legislative Drafting. 
2. The Committee considered the above Memorundum in the !igh1 
of the Noce daled 17.9.1997 received from che Ministry of La"! and 
Jusciee (Legislacivc Dcplt.) and decided to hear the SecretDry in thai 
Ministry in the matter. 
3. • 
4. 
s. 
6. 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• • • Relates co atem noc induded tn the Rc:porL 
24 
• 
• 
• 

XIX 
•NINETEENTH ME£TINC 
• 
The Commitree met at 3.30 P.M. on Wednesday. March 25. 1998 in 
Room No. 63, Firsc Floor, Parliament House. New Delhi. 
MEMBERS PRESENT 
I Shn M.A. Baby-Chairman 
2. Shri John F. Fernandes 
3. Shn Satchidananda 
4 Sbri Narain Prasad Gupta 
5. Prof. Ram Bakhsh Singh Varma 
6. Shrimato lla Panda 
7 Shri Muohu Moni 
8 Shri Tara Charan Majumdar 
9. Shri Adhik Shirodkar 
10 Shri M P. Abdussamad Samadani 
SrcRtTAIHAT 
I Shro Tapnn Chuttcrjec, Dopt<ll' Secre~arJ 
2 Shti A. K Gandhi. Commmn ()J[icer 
W~t:.S!-.t~ 
R,•prt.lrti/0/11'<'.< uf MIIIISir)' of La11 and Jusuce 
( l.tgMati••e Drpar/mCIII) 
I Or. Raghbn Singh. St•cwary 
2 ~lilt Sushnuo Juin, )Oint Srrr"wr.l' and l.egisluri<·c Cawrsel 
3. Shri N.K. Nnmbooohiry, Deputy LegL<ill(iv• Cuwr.<cl 
MEMORANDUM NO. 6198-Cctldcr discrimination in Lc~:islutiv< 
Dr3nlng. 
2. At the outset, the Chairman gave o brief background to the 
con~idcration of the ~ubjcct by lhe Comminee. Thereafter. lhc 
Ctlmnuttcc heard the Scerctary und other rcpres.;ntati"c' ot the 
Mino;try of La\\ ond Justice, LcgisiJtivc Department Member> 
sought clanficalions from the wltncs,cs whrch were replied tu. 
• M1nutes of lhc T~nlh I(' FIJhtcenth Mc:ctmg-s cd:ues to lRher mallei"'> 
• 
25 

26 
2.1 A verbatim record of lhe proteedings was kept. 
2.2 While summoog up the deliberations, the Chairman stated that 
the Committee would present a report on the subject in tbe light of 
lhe inputs received and on the basis of its own analysis and 
percepuons. 
• • • 
• • •Relates &o item no1 included In lhe Rcpoct_ 

27 
SELEcr BIBLIOGRAPHY 
1. Status or Indian Women-Crisis and ConfiiciS in Gender Issues 
by Umo ·Shankar Jha, Aar1i Mehta, Lalita Menon . (Ed .) 
Kanishka Publishers, Distributers, New Delhi. 1998. 
2. Subversive Silts-Feminist Engagements with Law in India by 
Ratna Kapur, Blenda Cossman, Sage, New Delhi, 1996. 
3. Encylopaedla Britannica, Volume 19, Fifteenth Edition. 1983. 