. 
                                                                                                                           
 
      
REPORT NO.  
212 
 
                                                        PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
                                                                RAJYA SABHA 
     COMMITTEE ON SUBORDINATE  LEGISLATION 
          
                                                             
  
                                                          Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi 
                                                          August, 2013/Shravana, 1935 (Saka) 
                             TWO HUNDRED AND TWELFTH REPORT 
Delay in the Framing of Subordinate Legislation under the Acts of Parliament 
And 
Delay in the Laying of Rules/ Regulations/ Orders on the Table of the House 
                                       ( Presented to the Rajya Sabha  on 3rd  September, 2013) 
 

 
C O N T E N T S 
      
                                               PAGES 
 
1. COMPOSITION 
 OF  THE  COMMITTEE                        (i) 
2. INTRODUCTION                   (ii) 
3. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
4. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
REPORT 
  
DELAY IN FRAMING OF SUBORDINATE LEGISLATION 
UNDER THE ACTS OF PARLIAMENT  AND DELAY IN 
LAYING OF RULES/ REGULATIONS ON THE TABLE OF 
THE HOUSE 
PART  I          DELAY IN FRAMING OF SUBORDINATE 
LEGISLATION UNDER THE ACTS OF 
PARLIAMENT 
PART  II        DELAY IN LAYING OF RULES/ 
REGULATIONS ON THE TABLE OF THE 
HOUSE 
PART III       EXCESSIVE  DELEGATION OF POWERS ETC. 
PART  IV     PROBLEMS IN DRAFTING OF  REGULATIONS 
OBSERVATIONS/ RECOMMENDATIONS OF THE 
COMMITTEE 
*MINUTES 
 
 
 
 
 
* To be appended later. 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE 
(CONSTITUTED ON THE   29 th  SEPTEMBER, 2010) 
1. Smt. Maya Singh   Chairperson 
2. Shri M. P. Achuthan 
3. Shri Ali Anwar Ansari 
4. Shri D. Bandyopadhyay 
5. Shri P. Bhattacharya 
6. Shri Balwinder Singh Bhunder 
7. Shri Prakash Javadekar 
8. Shri. Mangala Kisan 
9. Shri Lalhming Liana 
10. Shri Rasheed Masood  
11. Dr. Bhalchandra Mungekar 
12. Shri K. Parasaran 
13. *Shri Vijay Jawaharlal Darda 
14. Shrimati Vasanthi Stanley  
15. Shri Bhupender Yadav 
S
ECRETARIAT  
1. Shri N.K. Singh, Joint Secretary  
2. Shri Mahesh Tiwari, Director  
3. Shri R.S. Rawat, Joint Director  
4. Shri Rakesh Anand, Joint Director  
5. Shri R.P. Shukla, Assistant Director  
6. Smt. Monica Baa, Assistant Director 
 
* Nominated  w.e.f.  22 nd  June, 2013  
(i) 

INTRODUCTION 
 
1. I, the Chairperson of the Committee on Subordina te Legislation, having been authorized by the 
Committee, do hereby present on its behalf, this Two Hundred and Twelfth Report of the Committee.  
2.  The Committee on Subordinate Legislation, Rajya  Sabha is constituted under Rule 204 of the Rules 
of Procedure and Conduct of Business in the Council  of States.  Mandate of the Committee is to scrutin ize 
and report to the Council whether the powers to make rules, regulations, bye-laws, schemes or other statutory 
instruments conferred by the Constitution or delega ted by Parliament have been properly exercised with in 
such conferment or delegation as the case may be.  The Notifications containing Rules/Regulations, etc . 
which are laid on the Table of the Rajya Sabha are perused by the Committee in the light of the provisions of 
the Acts under which these were framed and also wit h a view to see whether these have been laid proper ly 
and within the prescribed form and time-frame.   
3. The Committee's concern is centered mainly aroun d the serious implications of delayed framing and 
laying of notification containing rules/regulations /orders, etc.  As part of this exercise, Committee has been 
calling the defaulting Ministries/ Departments to k now the reason for the delay, the problems faced by  them 
in laying the notifications and to find solutions to the problems.  
4. The Report has been dealt with in four parts.  T he first part deals with delay in the framing of ru les/ 
regulations under the various Acts of Parliament.  The second part deals with delay in the laying of 
Notifications on the Table of the House. The third part deals with excessive delegation of power, etc.  The 
fourth part deals with drafting of Regulations.  Th e Report on the whole contains general as well as s pecific 
observations/recommendations of the Committee on the issue. 
5. The   Committee   considered and adopted  the dr aft Report in its meeting held on the 27 
th   August, 
2013.                    
                                                                                                                                                     MAYA SINGH 
                                                                                                        
     Chairperson  
 Committee on Subordinate Legislation,                                                                                        
Rajya Sabha 
NEW DELHI  
September 3    , 2013 
 
 

REPORT 
ON 
DELAY IN FRAMING OF SUBORDINATE LEGISLATION UNDER THE ACTS OF 
PARLIAMENT 
AND 
DELAY IN LAYING OF RULES/ REGULATIONS ON THE TABLE OF THE HOUSE 
 
PART I 
DELAY IN FRAMING OF SUBORDINATE LEGISLATION UNDER THE ACTS OF 
PARLIAMENT 
 
PART II 
DELAY IN LAYING OF RULES/ REGULATIONS ON THE TABLE OF THE HOUSE 
 
PART III 
EXCESSIVE  DELEGATION OF POWERS ETC. 
 
PART IV       
PROBLEMS IN DRAFTING OF REGULATIONS 
 
AND 
OBSERVATIONS/ RECOMMENDATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE 
 

PART I 
 
DELAY IN FRAMING OF SUBORDINATE LEGISLATION UNDER THE ACTS OF 
PARLIAMENT 
 
        The primary function of the Parliament is t o pass the legislations which become Act 
to be implemented by the government. An Act of the Parliament, in fact, creates the broad 
framework of a particular law containing an outline  of the purpose of the Act. The Parliament 
delegates its legislative authority to the executiv e to make detailed Rules/Regulations, etc. for 
administering those Acts.  These are called subordi nate legislations required to be laid before both 
Houses of Parliament after notification.  Members o f Parliament have the right to move Statutory 
Motion in the House for their modification or their  annulment altogether, if it passed by both 
Houses.   
 
2. Keeping in view the rapid growth of subordinate legislation framed under different Acts, the 
Committee took up the issue of providing a model 'L aying Formula', to be incorporated in all the 
Acts containing provision for delegation of rule-ma king powers to the Central Government. Issues 
involved in framing the said Formula were discussed  in its Fifth Report (para 20 to 25) presented to 
the House on 19 
th  August, 1968. Earlier the Committee took serious n ote of the inordinate delays in 
the framing of Subordinate Legislation and recommended the following: 
 
“ In order that such long and inordinate delays do not take place in future, the Committee 
recommends that rules and regulations required to b e made under a statute should be 
made as soon as possible but in no case later than six months from the date on which the 
statute comes into force”. 
 
[Para 48 of 9 th  Report ] 
(Presented to the House on 24.03.1971)     
 

3. The Committee pursued the implementation of the above stated recommendation and 
reported the implementation status in its subsequen t Reports.  The Committee again took up the 
issue of delay in the framing of rules/regulations when it recommended the following: 
“To avoid delays the Ministries could, to start with, frame broad but clear rules; they need 
not wait to frame all the rules on a particular sub ject in one go especially when various 
authorities/bodies have to be consulted in the matt er.  Such rules could be amended or 
new rules added subsequently on the basis of experi ence.  It is recognized that rules 
should be as perfect as possible, but this perfection should not be at the cost of expedition.  
The Ministries should also establish the practice t hat if the rules are not framed within 
this period of six months, the Secretary or the Hea d of the Department at the Secretary’s 
level should be informed accordingly , who in turn should by means of a comprehensive 
note inform the Ministries concerned and obtain his  orders thereon.  Such a note should 
invariably refer to the fact whether the particular  matter had come within the knowledge 
or comment of a Parliamentary Committee or not.  Th e Committee are persuaded to make 
this suggestion for the simple reason that for any non-compliance or excessive delay in 
compliance with the provisions of a Statute the Min ister is answerable to the House.  The 
Committee trusts that  if such a course is adopted,  the cases of such abnormal delays will 
definitely lessen”. 
[Para 56 of 10 th  Report ] 
(Presented to the House on 24.05.1971)    
4. In continuation with its commitment to ensuring that subordinate legislation framed under 
different Acts by the Ministry/Departments concerne d is brought before the Parliament and thereby 
opening it to parliamentary scrutiny by way of annu lment/modification, the Committee, after 
extensive discussions with the Ministry of Law & Ju stice, recommended the following model 
'Laying Formula' to be incorporated in all new legislations and also in the existing Acts: 
  "Every rule made by the Central Government under this Act shall be laid, as soon as 
may be after it is made, before each House of Parli ament, while it is in session, for a total 
period of thirty days which may be comprised in one  session or in two or more successive 
sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session immediately following the session or the 
successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in  making any modification in the rule 
or both Houses agree that the rule should not be  m ade, the rule shall thereafter have 
effect only in such modified form or be of no effec t, as the case may be; so, however that 
any such modification or annulment shall be without  prejudice to the validity of anything 
previously done under that rule."        
[Paras 57 of the 10 th  Report] 
(Presented to the House on 24.5.1971)   
 

5. Coming to the issue under consideration the Comm ittee again took up the issue of delay in 
framing of rules/regulations and stressed the need for framing of requisite subordinate legislation 
within the given time frame and if it is not possible to do so then extension of time should be sought 
from the Committee along with the reasons for the s ame. The view of the Committee showed that 
despite the repeated attempts by the Committee the Ministries/Departments continued to delay the 
framing of rules/regulations contemplated under different Acts and also in laying them before the  
House, thereby avoiding the parliamentary scrutiny. The Committee recommended the following: 
 
‘The Committee feels that the rule making process co uld well have been completed within 
the time limit of six months which the Committee has laid down for making of rules under 
an Act after coming into force of the Act. Where ho wever, a Ministry does not find its 
possible to adhere to the time limit, they should i nform the Committee of the reasons why 
they cannot make rules within the time limit and seek extension of time for completing the 
rule making process.’ 
[Para 29 of 47 th  Report ] 
(Presented to the House on 14.09.1981)     
 
6. The Committee subsequently decided to make use o f the e-governance initiatives of the 
Government and in its 135 
th  Report took another initiative for bringing transp arency and in the 
framing of subordinate legislation under different Acts when it recommended the following: 
 
“The Committee would like to take this opportunity to recommend that Ministries, as part 
of their e-governance initiative, put all subordina te legislation on their website, preferably 
bilingually. The Committee further recommends that the Ministry of Information 
Technology immediately develop a standard applicati on software with an internet 
interface for use in all Ministries, which will provide a searchable database of subordinate 
legislation linked to principal Acts administered b y the respective Ministry. Seeing the 
relative simplicity of the software the Committee h opes that this will be complete within a 
period of 6 months, and all Ministries will submit Action Taken replies in this regard 
within this period.”    
[Para 10 of 135 th  Report ] 
(Presented to the House on 27.07.2001) 

 
7. The Committee reiterated its anguish over the de lay in framing of rules/regulations and 
made the following recommendation in its 192 
nd  Report : 
 
“In addition to the concern expressed by the Committee over delay in laying of Notifications 
on the Table of the House, the Committee also expre ss its deep concern over delay in 
framing of rules/regulations under different Acts. The Committee in its 47 th  report presented 
to the House on 14.9.1981 had recommended that the rule-making process should be 
completed within a period of six months of the comi ng into force on an Act. The committee 
has further recommended that in case a Ministry is not able to adhere to this time limit, it 
should seek extension of time for completing the ru le-making process. The recommendation 
of the committee reads as follows:- 
 
 “The Committee feels that the rule-making process c ould well have been 
completed within the time limit of six months which  the Committee has laid 
down for making of rules under an Act after coming into force of that Act. 
Where however, a Ministry does not find it possible  to adhere to the time limit, 
they should inform the Committee of the reasons why  they cannot make rules 
within the time limit and seek extension of time for completing the rule-making 
process.” 
 
The Committee is constrained to take note of the fact that the Ministries/Departments 
of Government of India are not complying with the C ommittee’s recommendation to 
complete the process of framing of subordinate legi slation contemplated under various Acts 
of Parliament within a period of six months. At the  same time, the Committee also does not  
receive requests for extension of time for completi ng the rule-making process in terms of its 
recommendations as above from most of the Ministrie s/Departments. The Committee takes 
a serious note of the prevailing situation in which  the Ministries/Departments are neither 
able to complete the task of framing rules/regulati ons under different Acts within the given 
six months’ period nor do they suo-motu  approach the Committee for seeking extension of 
time. The Committee further notes that in order to ensure timely framing of rules/regulations 
it has taken an initiative to monitor the progress of framing of subordinate legislation in 
respect of all legislations brought about by differ ent Ministries/Departments of Government 
of India from the year 2003 onwards with a view to ensure that the framing of subordinate 
legislation is not delayed. The Committee, however,  finds that the responses from the 
Ministries/Departments have not been prompt in this  monitoring exercise undertaken on 
behalf of the Committee.  
  

In view of the above position, the Committee once a gain reiterates its 
recommendation that the Ministries/Departments shou ld ensure putting in place subordinate 
legislation positively within a period of six month s of the Act coming into force of the Act. 
The Committee further recommends that in case the M inistry fails to meet with this 
deadline, they should invariably approach the Commi ttee for seeking extension of time. The 
Committee further recommends that in cases where th e time limit of six months is not 
adhered to, they should, while laying rules/regulations before the Parliament invariably lay a 
statement explaining the reasons why the framing of  rules/regulations was delayed beyond 
six months so as to keep the Parliament apprised of  the compliance of the Parliament’s 
mandate  conferred upon the Executive.” 
[Para 2 ( xiv) of 192 nd  Report ] 
(Presented to the House on 24.08.2011) 
 
8. In view of the facts presented above it becomes quite evident that the Committee had been 
from its very beginning, quite concerned, about the inordinate delays in framing of rules/regulations 
contemplated under different Acts. It had in its different Reports raised the said issues alongwith the 
delay in laying of these notifications before the H ouse. It also helped resolve doubts and queries by 
way of consultations with different Ministries/Depa rtments and also by way of its 
recommendations. 
 
9. Currently at the end of each year, the Acts in w hich framing of rules/regulations are 
contemplated are identified and  followed up with t he concerned Ministries/Departments as 
regarding the position of the rules/regulations to be framed. However, despite the fact that the issue  
has been for long in the knowledge of the Committee  it is quite difficult to provide an authentic and 
reliable data regarding the Acts under which rules are to be framed and have not been framed so far. 
 
10. As part of this exercise, the Committee has bee n summoning the Secretaries of the 
defaulting Ministries/ Departments to know the reas on for the delay in framing, the problems faced 
by them in laying the notifications and to find sol utions to the problems.  The 
observations/recommendations of the Committee on th e issue of non framing of subordinate 
legislation/ delay in the laying of gazette notific ations on the Table of the House in respect of some  
Ministries/Departments have been enumerated in the succeeding paragraphs. 

 
I. Delay in the framing of subordinate legislation under the Micro, Small and Medium 
Enterprises Act, 2006 by the Ministry of Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises . 
 
11. The Committee took up the issue of non framing of rules/ regulations under the Micro, 
Small and Medium Enterprises Act, 2006 with the rep resentatives of the Ministry of Micro, Small 
and Medium Enterprises on the 19 
th  October, 2012.  The Committee took serious note of  the fact 
that framing of rules had not been completed even a fter six years of the passage of the Act.   The 
Committee observed that though the Ministry of Micr o, Small and Medium Enterprises had 
constituted the National Board for the purpose of f raming of Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises 
Rules, 2006 in exercise of powers conferred to it b y Section 29 (2) (a) and (b) of the Act, it had not  
framed any rules for administration of the Fund und er Section 29(2)(c) (d) & (e) of the Act.  The 
Committee also enquired about the status of the rul es to be framed under sections 30(1) & (2) by 
State Governments.  The Ministry informed that the creation of Fund or Funds under Section 14(1) 
and (3) was an enabling provision and that Rules co uld be framed only when Government 
constituted the Fund.   However, after examination,  the Committee was of the view that 
empowering the Central Government to create a Fund was one of the aims of the Small and 
Medium Enterprises Development Bill, 2005 as mentioned in the Statement of Objects and Reasons 
of the Bill.  In response, the Secretary, Ministry of Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises informed 
that the creation of a fund has to be specific to the objective of the Fund.  The fund should be a fund 
for promoting equity investment.  He clarified that  the plan outlay for the Ministry in the current 
year, i.e. 2012-13 was Rs.2,800 crores and there we re roughly 57-58 Plan Schemes. Money was 
available for development of the MSME sector throug h various Plan Schemes such as through the 
Development Commissioner, Micro, Small and Medium E nterprises (DCMSME), the Khadi & 
Village Industry Commission, the Coir Board, the Na tional Small Industries Corporation (NSIC) 
etc.   
 
12. The Ministry further informed that as far as St ate Governments are concerned, they are 
required to frame rules relating to Micro and Small  Enterprise Facilitation Councils under Sections 
21 and 30 of the Act. The Central Government has ci rculated model rules in this regard and 31 out 
of the total 35 States/UTs have so far framed rules  for setting up of the said Facilitation Councils. 

The number of States/UTs that have notified the Cou ncils stands at 34 States.  On the issue of 
framing of rules under Section 29(2) (c), (d) and ( e) of the Act, the Committee was informed that 
rules under section 29(e) has already been framed a nd a provision of 100 crores rupees has been 
made for National Innovation Fund in the Budget for year 2012-13. After approval, the rules will be 
framed and notified.  The Committee hopes that the Ministry would expedi te the framing/ 
notification of the said rules/ regulations and tak e prompt action for their laying on the Table 
of the House  at the earliest. 
  
II. Framing of rules/ regulations under the Protect ion of Plant Varieties and Farmers 
Rights Act, 2001  by the Ministry of Agriculture (Department of Agric ulture & 
Cooperation).   
 
13.   The Committee observed that the process of framing of rules/ regulations under the said Act 
had not been completed even after passing of more t han a decade. The Ministry of Agriculture 
sought extension of time on seven instances which t he Committee had no option but to grant. The 
Committee, accordingly, heard the representatives o f the Ministry of Agriculture (Department of 
Agriculture & Cooperation on the issue on 19 
th  October, 2012.  Joint Secretary, Ministry of 
Agriculture informed that the total number of rules  needed to be framed under Section 95 and 96 of 
the said Act was 67, out of which 62 have been alre ady framed by them. They were yet to frame 
remaining 5 rules. He attributed the delay in framing the rules to this being a unique Act which talks 
about farmers’ rights, plant varieties etc.  He ass ured that his Ministry would complete the task of 
framing the remaining 5 rules without any further delay.  The Committee was informed that rule for 
the establishment of Plant Protection Varieties and  Farmers’ Rights Authority (PPV&FRA) was 
notified in 2003 and it started functioning in 2005. Since then, the authority have notified guidelines 
for registration of 57 crop varieties, established 97 Desk Test Centres throughout India and set up 
the National Gene Bank for conserving different pla nt varieties.   The Chairman, PPV&FRA, 
assured the Committee that they would frame the remaining rules within six months. 
 
14. The Committee appreciates the fact that this in itially being a new subject might 
require lots of consultation while drafting the specialized rules/regulations. But a decade is too 
long a time which reflects that there was some laxi ty in this regard and lack of necessary 

importance to framing of subordinate legislation as  contemplated under the Act. The 
Committee expresses concern about the fact that alt hough the Act was passed in 2001, the 
Authority was established as late as in 2004.  Also , India being an agriculture based country 
and with important issues like introduction of Gene tically Modified (GM) Crops for field 
trials, diversion of agricultural land for non-agri cultural use, etc. cropping up lately, the 
Ministry should have expedited the framing of the r ules at the earliest. The Committee, 
accordingly, recommends the Ministry to frame the r emaining rules and regulations under 
section 95 and 96 of the Act as early as possible.     
 
III  Delay in the framing of subordinate legislation by the Ministry of Environment & 
Forests.  
15.  The Committee observed that the Ministry of Environ ment & Forests were yet to finalize 
Rules on Classification, Labeling and Packaging of Hazardous Chemicals as recommended by it in 
its 99 th  Report on the Manufacture, Storage and Import of H azardous Chemicals Rules, 1989 
presented to the House on the 22 nd  March, 1993.  The Committee sought to know (i) the  reasons for 
taking so long to frame the said rules, (ii) the pr oblems/ difficulties being faced by them in the 
process; and (iii) the timeframe within which they would be able to finalize the Rules.  The 
Secretary, Ministry of Environment & Forests informed that the final Draft Rules on the subject had 
been circulated to all the Ministries and that only  final publication of the rules was pending.  The 
Ministry wanted to consult the various Ministries, i.e. Ministry of Chemicals & Fertilizers, Ministry 
of Commerce & Industry , Ministry of Agriculture, e tc., which have been vested with certain duties 
under the Rules and have specific input from them w ith respect to specific responsibilities proposed 
to be assigned to them.  Once response from the con cerned Ministries was received, the rules would 
be finalized.  The Secretary assured the Committee that entire process of finalization of the Rules 
would be completed in three months.  The Committee acknowledges the fact that lot of 
consultation goes into the drafting of specialized rules/regulations.  The Committee hopes the 
Ministry would fulfill its assurance given to it to  complete the process of finalization of the 
rules within the stipulated time-frame and their su bsequent laying before Parliament under 
intimation to it.    
 

IV Delay in the framing of subordinate legislation under the Warehousing (Development 
and Regulation) Act, 2007 by the Ministry of Consum er Affairs, Food & Public Distribution 
(Department of Food & Public Distribution)  
 
16. The Committee has been pursuing the framing of rules/ regulations under the Warehousing 
(Development and Regulation) Act, 2007 with the Min istry of Consumer Affairs, Food & Public 
Distribution (Department of Food & Public Distribution) since March 2008.  The Ministry vide their 
latest communication dated the 9 
th  July, 2013 provided a list of Rules/ Regulations framed under the 
said Act and informed that the corresponding rule t o be framed under Section 50(2) (h) was yet to 
be framed as the rule required to prescribe the min imum percentage of space to be kept reserved for 
storage of agricultural commodities in a registered  warehouse.  The number of registered 
warehouses at present was small.  After sizable num ber of warehouses were registered, thereafter 
these rules would be drafted based on experience an d difficulties faced.  Similarly, Section 51(2) 
(c), (d) & (j) provide for framing of regulations.  However, Section 9(1) to (9) provide for a brief 
procedure for disposal of goods stored in the warehouses.  Therefore, at present there appeared to be 
no need to frame regulations on this issue.  In War ehousing (Development and Regulation) 
(Registration of Warehouses Rules, 2010, provisions  had been made for the registration fee and 
security deposit for registration of warehouses.  S imilarly, in the Warehousing (Development and 
Regulation) Registration of Accreditation Agencies Rules, 2010, fee and security deposit to be 
charged from the accreditation agencies had been provided.  Therefore, there was at present no need 
to make regulations.   
 
17. The Committee observes that though the Ministry  of Consumer Affairs, Food & Public 
Distribution (Department of Food & Public Distribut ion) have framed the majority of rules/ 
regulations, a few are still in the pipeline for wa nt of time and future practical/ logistic 
requirements.  The Committee, acknowledges the fact that registration of warehouses is an on 
ongoing process, but at the same time, would like t o impresses upon the Ministry that it 
should strive to keep the delay to the minimum and take care to frame the remaining rules/ 
regulations at the first available opportunity and also ensure that the notifications are laid on 
the Table of the House without any further delay.  
 

V. Delay in the framing of the Civil Liability for Nuclear Damages Rules, 2011 and status 
of subordinate legislation contemplated to be frame d under the Civil Liability for 
Nuclear Damages Act, 2010 by the Department of Atomic Energy (DAE) . 
 
18. The Secretary, DAE in a meeting held on 19 th  October, 2012 informed the Committee that 
the delay in the framing/ finalization of the rules  was due to the fact that lots of legal consultatio ns 
took place leading to the inadvertent delay.  Also,  number of documents pertaining to development 
of safety codes and safety guides is an on-going pr ocess.  It involves taking inputs from 
stakeholders which include multi-tier reviews, prio ritizing which documents need to be developed 
first and so on.  This is an on-going process.  Thu s, documents that are needed to be developed 
under the Act are under processing and would be finalized soon.   
 
19.  The Committee acknowledges the whole process of leg al consultations, development of 
safety codes and safety guides and other aspects of the matter involved in the framing of rules.  
However, the Committee feels that while the rules s hould be as perfect as possible, this 
perfection should not be at the cost of expeditious ly framing the rules.   A minimum period of 
thirty clear days from the date of the Gazette in w hich draft rules are published should be 
given to the public to send their comments thereon,  to ensure that the legal requirement of 
previous publication of the draft order is fulfilled both in letter and spirit.  In view of the time-
limit prescribed for making rules, the Ministries s hould approach the Committee for grant of 
extension of time for framing rules and the Committ ee has granted/not granted the extension 
asked for after considering all aspects of the matt er.  The Committee directs  the Department 
of Atomic Energy to complete the whole process of f raming and laying of the rules/ 
regulations under the Civil Liability for Nuclear Damages Act, 2010 at the earliest. 
 
VI Delay in the framing of Rules/Regulations under the AIIMS Act, 1956 by the Ministry 
of Health & Family Welfare (Department of Health)/ AIIMS  
  
20. The Committee has had several meetings with the  Ministry of Health & Family Welfare 
(Department of Health) and AIIMS on the issue of fr aming of rules/regulations as prescribed under 
Sections 28 and 29 of the Act. The Committee is dis mayed to know that the framing of all 

rules/regulations contemplated under the Act have n ot been done nearly 60 years after the Act has 
been passed by Parliament.  
 
21. The  Committee, in its 178 
th  Report on AIIMS Regulations, 1999 presented to the  House on 
21 st  June, 2012 pointed out that there has been gross u nder regulation under Sections 28 and 29 of 
the Act. The Committee found that the Rules/Regulat ions framed under these Sections are generic 
and lack specific details.  The Committee also foun d that the Regulations are not self-explanatory 
and at so many places matters of details are missin g and the language of the parent Act is repeated 
instead of giving elaborations. This has led to dis crepancies in interpretation and application, 
thereby causing numerous and avoidable litigations.  The Committee feels that if there is more 
clarity in the Regulations, there will be less disc retion in the interpretation and application of 
the Regulations. The Committee also feels that resp ect for administration would increase if 
procedures are followed in spirit and that this wil l prevent the faculty and employees from 
going to courts on trivial issues. In this regard, the Committee’s recommendation in its 86 th  
Report presented to the House on 07.08.1991 regardi ng use of proper and precise language 
while framing rules/regulations is reproduced here: 
 
“….. The Committee, therefore, impresses upon all c oncerned that while making rules the 
executive Ministries as also the Law Ministry shoul d ensure the use of proper and precise 
language so that not many clarification have to be issued .  In the case of the subordinate 
legislation, the intention of the makers of the rul es should be clear from the language used 
as there is no other way for the courts and others to known about it, as against in the case of 
primary legislation where it may be possible to kno wn about the intention of the framers 
from the `Statement of Objects and Reasons’ appende d to the Bills at the introduction stage 
as also from the debates in the legislatures”. 
 
 (Para 2.21 of 86 th  Report)  
    (Presented to the House on 7 th  August, 1991)  
  
22. The Committee also finds that Regulation 16 of AIIMS Regulations, 1999 is grossly 
inadequate. Regulation 16 simply states, “The Insti tute may create and appoint persons to 
Professorships, Readerships and Lecturerships and o ther posts.”  Section 29(k) of the Act has more 
clarity.  The Regulations should have more details like recruitment, promotion, seniority, 

disciplinary action, leave, etc. On whether rules/r egulations to be framed under Section 29(k) of the 
Act have been framed, notified and laid before the Rajya Sabha, the Ministry stated that this has not 
been done so far as AIIMS is an autonomous institut ion. The Committee also queried whether 
recruitment rules have been framed for posts mentio ned in Regulation 16. The Ministry replied that 
recruitment rules in respect of different categorie s of Professorship at AIIMS like Professor, 
Additional Professor, Associate Professor, Assistan t Professor, Principal of College of Nursing and 
Lecturer in Nursing are available and the same has been approved by Academic Council and 
Governing Body of the Institute. However, the Ministry stated that the same has not been notified in 
the Official Gazette as AIIMS is an autonomous institution.   
 
23. The Committee finds the argument of the Ministr y that the Recruitment Rules and 
Regulations of AIIMS need not be notified as AIIMS is an autonomous institution is fallacious, 
erroneous and very funny.  Nowhere in the Act it has been stated that AIIMS having an autonomous 
institution should not frame rules / regulations an d lay same on the Table of the House.  If 
Recruitment Rules are published and laid on the Tab le, it would not hurt the autonomy of 
institution.  The delegation has been made by Parli ament to institution to frame subordinate 
legislation to have transparency and curb arbitrari ness and discretion.  It seems AIIMS feels more 
comfortable in enjoying discretion at the expense of transparency and even violating the mandate of 
Parliament.  The AIIMS is creation of Parliament an d can not be above Parliament just by posing 
‘autonomy’, a word which has hardly been used in th e Act.  There are many statutory organizations  
in the country which have been created through   st atutory instrument and have got proper rules and 
regulations at place. Section 28 (2) of the AIIMS A ct, 1956 provides for laying of rules and Section 
29(3) of the Act provides for laying of regulations before both Houses of Parliament.  
 
24. The Committee feels that framing, notifying and lay ing of the Recruitment Rules 
would enable the Committee as well as the Members o f Parliament to get an opportunity to 
express their opinion on the said Rules and to ensu re that the Rules have been framed in 
accordance with the Act. The Committee on Subordina te Legislation, Rajya Sabha has been 
reiterating in its reports that all subordinate leg islation framed in pursuance of an Act of 
Parliament has to be laid on the Table of the House s of Parliament.  Since such 
rules/regulations come into force even before they are laid before Parliament, any delay in 

laying before Parliament, in fact, prevents Members  to exercise their right to get them 
modified/annulled by moving a Motion. In this regar d, the Committee’s recommendation in 
its 75 th  Report regarding laying of all subordinate legisla tion/orders framed in pursuance of 
powers delegated by Parliament is reproduced here: 
 
“The Committee agrees with the view of the Committee  on Subordinate Legislation, Lok 
Sabha (Seventh Lok Sabha) expressed in its 20 
th  Report that laying on the Table of all 
‘Orders’ in pursuance of powers delegated by Parliament is very significant, as it affords an 
opportunity to Members of Parliament, if they so de sire to move any amendment or 
modification to such ‘Order’, including a motion for their annulment.” 
 (Para  2.5 of 75 th  Report ) 
(Presented to the House on 29 th  March, 1988) 
 
25. The Committee is also surprised that neither In stitute nor the Ministry had compiled 
decisions taken by the Institute Body from time to time.  These decisions are important source of 
law to govern the institute.  The Institute was als o not able to provide details about decisions taken  
by joint Institute Body at Srinagar and outcome the reof.  The Institute has also created some 
standing committees.  However, regulations pertaini ng to these standing committees have still not 
been framed.  The AIIMS also operates APS (Assessme nt Promotion Scheme).  This Scheme has 
generated lots of confusion.  The Committee directs AIIMS to complete framing of regulations 
on that issue also at the earliest. 
 
26. In this respect, with regard to the Committee’s  recommendations, Ministry of Home Affairs 
has adopted a procedure which is recommended to the  rest of the Ministries also which is as 
follows:- 
“Very often delay occurs in framing of the recruitm ent rules for service/posts.  At times the 
different service/posts continue to be regulated by  draft recruitment rules or executive orders 
for a long time.  The draft recruitment rules or ex ecutive instructions are no substitute for 
statutory recruitment rules framed under proviso to  article 309 of the Constitution as unlike 
statutory rules they are not published in the gazet te and do not come to the notice of public at 
large.  The Committee are also unable to examine dr aft recruitment rules or executive 
instructions with a view to see whether any provisions therein can be so used by the executive as 

to favour or discriminate against an individual.  T he absence of statutory rules may also lead to 
discontentment among  the persons who may be or are likely to be adversel y affected as a result 
of such absence”. 
 
VII Issue of delay in the framing of subordinate le gislation under the National Institute of 
Fashion Technology Act, 2006 by the Ministry of Textiles/NIFT.  
27.  The NIFT  Act was enacted by Parliament in 2006.   Section 25  of the Act empowers the 
Board of Governors of NIFT to frame Statutes on the  subjects mentioned in Section 24, whereas 
Section 27 empowers the Senate of the Institute to frame Ordinances on the matters enumerated 
under Section 26.  Further Section 34 of the Act ma ndates that every Statute or Ordinance made 
under the Act shall be published in the Official Ga zette and laid on the Table of Both Houses of 
Parliament.  The Committee took up the status of fr aming of Statutes/ Ordinances under the NIFT 
Act, 2006 with the Ministry of Textiles in 2007. Or dinarily, the framing of subordinate legislation  
contemplated under an Act of Parliament should be c ompleted within a period of six months from 
the commencement of the Act as recommended by the C ommittee vide its 9 th  Report presented in 
1971. However, framing of Statutes/ Ordinances coul d not be completed within the six months 
period and the Ministry of Textiles had been seekin g extension of time again and again vide their 
letters dated the 29 th  November, 2007, 4 th  July, 2008, 12 th  September, 2008, 8 th  April, 2009 and 15 th  
November, 2011 . Further, the Committee enquired about (i) the rea sons for not notifying the 
Statutes and Ordinances on the subjects mentioned i n Section 24 and 26 of the NIFT Act, 2006, 
respectively and not laying them on the Table of th e both Houses, (ii) the reasons for not laying the 
Ordinance of NIFT on the Table of the House when it  was notified on 13 th  April, 2007 and sent to 
the Ministry of Textiles on 25 th  September, 2007 for laying in Parliament, and (iii ) the difficulties 
faced by NIFT in this regard.    
 
28. Thereafter, Committee decided to summon Secreta ry and DG, NIFT to explain the delay in 
framing of subordinate legislation, the Secretary, Ministry of Textiles stated that the Ministry was 
working on finalization of the Statutes from April 2007 and pending its finalization, NIFT was 
trying to systematize its procedure and establishin g standard procedures, methods and order in its 
functioning.   In 2007, the first Board of Governors met under the new Act and passed an Ordinance 
to govern the academic framework and lay down the academic  parameters.     Unfortunately,      the  

Ordinance could not be laid on the Table of the Hou se. The Statute was sent to the Law Ministry 
which raised several objections on various matters included therein.  Perhaps NIFT at that stage was 
not equipped to understand and proceed as per the Government rules.  A core Committee was set up 
to look into the matter including various other iss ues.  This procedure took a long time.  The first 
version of the draft took a year and a half and the  second took another year and a half for approval 
of the Board.  Thereafter, the Law Ministry again r aised substantive points.  This exercise had been 
completed by then.  
 
29.  The Ministry have since notified (i) The First  Ordinance of NIFT i.e. The National Institute 
of Fashion Technology for the Post Graduate Degree,  Diploma and Certificate Programme 
Ordinances, 2007, (ii) The Second Ordinance of NIFT  i.e. The National Institute of Fashion 
Technology Academic Programmes Ordinances, 2012 and  (iii) The First Statute of National 
Institute of Fashion Technology, 2012.  The Ordinan ces were laid on the Table of Rajya Sabha on 
the 2 nd  May, 2012 and the Statute was laid on 7 th  May, 2012.  Thus, the Ministry took almost five 
years to frame the ordinance and statutes to run the Institute.  The Committee does not accept 
the contention of the Ministry for the undue delay in framing subordinate legislation.  The 
Committee expressed its anguish at the attitude of the Ministry and felt that in spite of 
passage of Act in 2006, it took six years to frame the Ordinance and Statutes which are 
sketchy and hardly any matters of details.  It is o nly after the Secretary was called before the 
Committee on 19 th  October, 2012, she promised to set a time line and  complete the process 
within the stipulated schedule.   
 
30. The Committee further observed that NIFT was ye t to frame the required Statutes/ 
Ordinances to cover all the issues/ subjects as pro vided for in Sections 7, 9, 10, 11, 13, 14, 15, 17,  
22 and 23 so that the obligations provided for in t hese Sections are adequately fulfilled.  The 
Committee, accordingly, desired NIFT/ Ministry to f inalize the Statutes/ Ordinances and also to lay 
the same before the House within a stipulated time frame. 
 
31. The Committee observes that the Statutes and Or dinances so framed do not provide 
for the necessary details as envisaged under the Ac t. In the Committee’ s view, Parliament 

had clearly intended that delegation should be to s pecified authorities and the Statutes and 
Ordinances would be framed providing all details to  curb discretion.  However, it appears as 
if the Statute and Ordinances framed have created a  new Act.  Details are necessary so that 
these can be placed before the Committee for furthe r examination.  The Subordinate 
legislation framed under Section 24 and 26 lack det ails and appear to be in conflict with the 
parent Act.  In most of the cases where Board was s upposed to frame Statutes/ Ordinances 
with full details, same has been converted into dis cretion and further delegation has been 
provided.  The point noted was that on a number of issues like admission to various 
programmes, fees, academic input, evaluation and co nduct of examination, discipline and 
conduct, faculty development and training, intellec tual property rights, etc.,  Ordinance 15 of 
the National Institute of Fashion Technology Academ ic Programmes Ordinances, 2012 
stipulates that they should be governed by the Regu lations framed and published in the 
Academic Manuals.  This, when the Act states that t hese should be provided in the 
Ordinances.  In the Committee’s opinion, this furth er delegation for framing of Regulations 
by the Ordinance is inappropriate and is against the spirit of the Act.    
 
32. The Committee is apprehensive that in the absen ce of rules and regulations the Board 
of Governors of NIFT might become a parallel body r unning the Institute in an ad hoc  
manner.   The Committee noted that under Section 17  of the Act, the powers and duties of the 
authorities and officers were to be determined.  Ho wever, in the absence of Statutes, the 
Committee wondered how these powers and duties were  being determined.  NIFT’s 
perception that Board has got powers to decide abou t everything is misplaced.  The 
Committee does not accept the contention of the NIF T.  The Board derives its power from the 
Act and has to discharge its duties as per the proc edure provided in the Act on the basis of 
subordinate legislation. 
 
33. In Committee’s view, the Board has to function on the basis of laid down procedures as 
given in the Act, Ordinances and Statutes.  Further  no authority which has been delegated 
powers by Parliament to frame subordinate legislati on can re-delegate these powers to any 
authority or convert them as discretionary powers. How can a Statute override or go beyond 
the parent Act? Section 7(g) clearly states that th e Board will frame Statutes and Ordinances 

but in a number of places in the Statute the terms “power as delegated by the Board”, “duties 
as assigned by the Board” have been used. Instead o f being vague, such details should have 
been provided in the Statutes/Ordinances. The Commi ttee questions the right of the Board to 
delegate powers to itself without an authorization under the Act. 
 
34. It is significant to note that the Statutes/ Or dinances framed by NIFT are in skeletal 
form while implementation of the Act depends upon p roper framing of Statutes and 
Ordinances.   The Ordinances framed lack specific details. For ex ample, Section 26 of the Act 
provides a detailed list on which subordinate legislation have to be framed. But in every clause 
of the Ordinances framed, it has been stated that “ details may be laid down in the regulations 
as framed under the Ordinance 15”. Nowhere in the A ct regulations have been provided for. 
However, in Ordinance 15 overriding powers have bee n given and stated that “subject 
matters may be governed by the regulations framed a nd published in the Academic Manual” 
which would be approved by the Board. It appears th at the Board has sought to delegate all 
powers to itself whereas Parliament had provided th at the powers given to the Board and 
Senate would be contained in detailed Statutes and Ordinances. The Manual is for internal 
use and not laid before the Parliament. It has also  not been provided for in Section 26 of the 
Act. In other words, subject matter which are to be  included in the Statutes and Ordinances 
and which will come under Parliamentary scrutiny will escape it due to their being included in 
the internal Manuals of the Institute. In the Commi ttee’s view Statutes and Ordinances 
should provide for the necessary details as envisaged under the Act. 
 
35.  The Committee  would also like that the Institute / Ministry shoul d put in place, at the 
earliest, the required Statutes/ Ordinances to cove r all the issues/ subjects as provided for in 
Sections 7, 9, 10, 11, 13, 14, 15, 17, 22 and 23 so  that the obligations provided for in these 
Sections are adequately fulfilled.  The Committee r ecommends that ordinances and statues 
should be reframed as per the spirit of the Act as early as possible and laid on the Table of the 
House. 
 

36. The Committee takes this opportunity to impress  upon the Ministries to pay attention 
to details such as proper format of the notificatio ns, publication of the notifications in 
appropriate part and section of the Gazette and bea ring separate S.R.O. numbers, etc. while 
drafting the subordinate legislations.  The Committ ee would also appreciate if the Ministry of 
Law & Justice while vetting notifications sent by t he Ministries would examine these in the 
light of the above points and other technicalities involved in rule-drafting and strive to remove 
any lacunae in this regard from the rules/ regulations.   
 
GENERAL OBSERVATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE  
37. The Committee, with regard to framing of subord inate legislation under various Acts 
of Parliament, in general, recommends as under:- 
 
(i) Like all other laws, the delegated legislation ought not only be certain but also 
ascertainable. Publication of such legislation is, therefore, a vitally important factor both for 
the protection of the public affected and for the p urpose of keeping the Government agencies 
in line with democratic principles Therefore, rules  framed by Government should be 
published in the Official Gazette even though the s tatutes under which these are framed do 
not specifically provide for such publication. 
 
(ii) In the opinion of the Committee, every notificatio n should be assigned a distinctive 
number in order to give it a separate identity and similarly, no notification should be 
published/laid which does not carry a notification number. The Committee expects all 
Ministries/Departments of Government of India to ex ercise caution in this regard. In case 
where there are more than one notification under a single file, the Ministries/Departments 
should ensure that the file number on each notifica tion should be suitably distinguished from 
one another. 
 

(iii)  The Committee also expresses its deep concern over  delay in framing of 
rules/regulations under different Acts. The Committ ee in its 47th report presented to the 
House on 14.9.1981 has recommended that the rule-ma king process should be completed 
within a period of six months of the coming into fo rce on an Act. The committee has further 
recommended that in case a Ministry is not able to adhere to this time limit, it should seek 
extension of time for completing the rule-making pr ocess. The recommendation of the 
committee reads as follows:- 
 
“The Committee feels that the rule-making process could well have been completed within 
the time limit of six months which the Committee has laid down for making of rules under 
an Act after coming into force of that Act. Where h owever, a Ministry does not find it 
possible to adhere to the time limit, they should i nform the Committee of the reasons why 
they cannot make rules within the time limit and seek extension of time for completing the 
rulemaking process.” 
 
(iv)  The Committee is constrained to take note of the f act that the Ministries/Departments 
of Government of India are not complying with the Committee’s recommendation to complete 
the process of framing of subordinate legislation c ontemplated under various Acts of 
Parliament within a period of six months. At the sa me time, the Committee hardly receives 
requests for extension of time for completing the r ule-making process by the 
Ministries/Departments. The Committee takes a serio us note of the prevailing situation in 
which the Ministries/Departments are neither able t o complete the task of framing 
rules/regulations under different Acts within the s ix months’ period nor do they suo-motu 
approach the Committee for seeking extension of tim e. The Committee, in order to ensure 
timely framing of rules/regulations, has taken an i nitiative to monitor the progress of framing 
of subordinate legislation in respect of all Acts t o be administered by different 
Ministries/Departments of Government of India from the year 2003 onwards with a view to 
ensure that the framing of subordinate legislation is not delayed. The Committee, however, is 
dismayed to find that the responses from the Minist ries/Departments have not been prompt 
and cooperative in this monitoring exercise undertaken on behalf of the Committee. 
  

(v) In view of the above position, the Committee once a gain reiterates its recommendation 
that the Ministries/Departments should ensure putti ng in place subordinate legislation 
positively within a period of six months of coming into force of the Act. The Committee 
further recommends that in case the Ministry fails to meet with this deadline, they should 
invariably approach the Committee for seeking exten sion of time. The Committee further 
recommends that in cases where the time limit of si x months is not adhered to, they should, 
while laying rules/regulations before the Parliamen t invariably lay a statement explaining the 
reasons why the framing of rules/regulations was de layed beyond six months so as to keep the 
Parliament apprised of the compliance of the Parlia ment’s mandate conferred upon the 
Executive. 
38. In pursuance to the Committee’s recommendations , the Ministry of Home affairs have 
adopted a procedure which is recommended to the res t of the Ministries also.  The 
procedure adopted by the Ministry of Home Affairs is as follows:-
 
(i)     The rules/regulations required to be made under a Status should be framed as soon as   
possible but in no case later than six months from the date from which the Statue 
comes into force.    
     (ii)   In case the rules/regulations have not been framed under a Statute within the time 
prescribed, the Committee on Subordinate Legislatio n (of both Houses of Parliament) 
should be approached for extension of time.  While seeking extension of time full facts 
should be given justifying the extension asked for. 
(iii) Very often delay occurs in framing of the rec ruitment rules for service/posts.  At times 
the different service/posts continue to be regulate d by draft recruitment rules or 
executive orders for a long time.  The draft recrui tment rules or executive instructions 
are no substitute for statutory recruitment rules f ramed under proviso to article 309 of 
the Constitution as unlike statutory rules they are  not published in the gazette and do 
not come to the notice of public at large.  The Com mittee are also unable to examine 
draft recruitment rules or executive instructions w ith a view to see whether any 
provisions therein can be so used by the executive as to favour or discriminate against 
an individual.  The absence of statutory rules may also lead to discontentment among  
the persons who may be or are likely to be adversel y affected as a result of such 
absence. 
(iv)  To avoid delay in framing of recruitment rule s the sections could, to start with, frame 
broad but clear rules; they need not wait to frame all the rules on a particular subject 
in one installment especially when various authorit ies/bodies have to be consulted in 
the matter.  Such rules should be amended early sub sequently on the basis of 
experience.  It is recognized that rules should be as perfect as possible, but this 

perfection should not be at the cost of expedition.   If the rules are not framed within a 
period of six months, the Home Secretary is to be i nformed accordingly by the 
Parliament Section who in turn is to inform the Min ister and obtain his orders 
thereon.  It may be mentioned that for any non-comp liance or excessive delay in 
compliance with the provisions of a Statute the Min ister is answerable to the House 
and if this course is adopted, the cases of abnormal delays will definitely lessen. 
      (v)   In order to enable the Parliament Secti on to keep a watch on framing of rules, a 
quarterly report as in proforma pertaining to the p eriod ending 31 st  March, 30 th  June, 
30 th  September and 31 st  December should be sent to the Parliament Section by the 5 th  
of the following month”. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

PART II 
 
DELAY IN LAYING OF RULES/ REGULATIONS (NOTIFICATIONS) ON THE TABLE 
OF THE HOUSE  
 
39. The Committee observes that Ministries are maki ng delay not only in framing of 
rules/regulations under different Acts of Parliamen t, Ministries are not laying Gazette Notifications 
on the Table of the House on time. Furthermore in m ost of the cases, delay statements are not being 
attached to Notifications where there is delay in l aying of notifications on the Table of the House. 
The Committee’s recommendations in this regard are given as under:  
 
 “Since ‘laying before parliament’ is one of the mos t effective ways of exercising control 
on delegated legislation, the Committee feels that there should not be any inordinate or 
unjustifiable delay in laying ‘orders’ before the H ouse.  The Committee, therefore, 
recommend that the rules and orders required to be laid before the House should be 
laid- 
 
(i) within a period of 15 days after publication in  the Gazette, if the House is in 
Session; and 
(ii)  if the House is not then in Session, within a perio d of 15 days after the 
commencement of the next ensuing Session”  
(1 
st  Report) 
(Presented to the House on 15 th  March, 1966) 
 
“The Committee, in this context, regrets to note that some Ministries that have delayed 
the laying of the Statutory Orders have failed to a ppend a delay statement while laying 
the notifications before the Parliament. The Commit tee, has time and again, 
emphasized that it is essential that in case there is a delay in the laying of Statutory 
Orders, the concerned Ministry/Department should in variably append a delay 
statement along with the notifications being laid s o as to apprise the Parliament of the 
causes of delay. The Committee desires all Ministri es /departments to take a note of 
this, since the intention is that through the proce ss of formulation of a delay statement 

the Ministry is able to introspect, identifying bot tlenecks and devising remedial 
measure.” 
135 th  Report 
    (Presented to the House on 27 th  July, 2001)  
40. The Committee further observes that even when d elay statements are attached, the 
Ministries have been giving unconvincing/ flimsy grounds such as delay in printing of notifications, 
some administrative or procedural reasons or amendm ents taking place subsequently or 
notifications being left unnoticed inadvertently et c.  These reasons are not at all convincing and the  
Committee feels that the work of laying of notifications are not being taken in the Ministry with that 
importance and seriousness which it deserved.  The Committee views it seriously and calls upon the 
Ministries/Departments to ensure that notifications are given for laying in time and in the prescribed 
format along with a delay statement, if any.  Delay ing it has serious implications in respect of 
ensuring executive accountability to Parliament.  
 
41. The following formula for laying of statutory r ules before both Houses of Parliament is 
incorporated in all legislations which provide for making of rules by the Central Government: 
 
“Every rule made by the Central Government under th is Act shall be laid, as soon as 
may be after it is made, before each House of Parli ament, while it is in session, for a 
total period of thirty days which may be comprised in one session or in two or more 
successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of t he session immediately following the 
session or the successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any 
modification in the rule or both Houses agree that the rule should not be made, the rule 
shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case 
may be; so, however that any such modification or a nnulment shall be without 
prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule.” 
 
42. The Notifications containing Rules/Regulations,  etc. which are laid on the Table of the 
Rajya Sabha are perused by the Committee in the lig ht of the provisions of the Acts under which 
these were framed and also with a view to see wheth er these have been laid properly and within the 
prescribed form and given time-frame.  The Committe e presents to the House a Report on Statutory 

Orders laid on the Table of the House during the pr evious session  analyzing the delays and other 
deficiencies  in laying of notifications by the Ministries.  It also gives its observations/ 
recommendations in respect of defaulting Ministries .  The Report contains an Annexure in the form 
of a statement (Ministry-wise) detailing Statutory Orders/Notifications relating to 
Rules/Regulations/Schemes/Bye-laws framed under the  Constitution/ Acts of Parliament were laid 
on the Table of the House by various Ministries/Dep artments of Government of India. Also, the 
details of the Gazette Notifications in which these  were published, the date of their laying on the 
Table of the Rajya Sabha are also indicated. 
 
I Delay in the laying of subordinate legislation by  the Department of Revenue and the 
Department of Financial Services  of the Ministry of Finance during the 220 th  to 223 rd  
sessions.   
  
43. Secretary, Department of Revenue on the issue s ubmitted that in most of the notifications of 
the Department of Revenue, CBEC and CBDT, the delay  in the laying of notifications of the 
Department of Revenue was mainly on account of the delay in getting the notifications printed 
which took at least 7-10 days, getting the Hindi tr anslation of the notifications, getting them 
authenticated from the Minister and then laying the m on the Table of the House. It took a minimum 
of 15 days to complete the whole process of getting  the notifications laid on the Table of the House 
and that there was a certain bare minimum which cou ld not be avoided however efficiently the 
Ministry/Department functioned.  While agreeing that a prolonged delay in the framing of rules was 
a serious issue as the intent of Parliament was mad e ineffective in the absence of the rules, 
Secretary, Department of Revenue along with the Sec retary, Financial Services expressed the 
common view that it would be far more reasonable if  the stipulation was within one month’s time 
for laying the papers instead of the current fiftee n days.  Both Departments assured the Committee 
that delay statement will be sent along with the delayed notifications in future.   
 
44. The Committee observes that the whole process o f enacting laws is defeated if rules are 
not framed and laid on the Table of the House in ti me.  A reasonable delay could be 
understood but unjustifiably long delays should be avoided and the Ministries should work 
towards improving this position.   The Committee hopes that Ministry would strive to k eep the 

delay to the minimum and take care that Notificatio ns are laid on the Table of the House at 
the first available opportunity after publication of Notifications.  
 
II. Delay in the laying of subordinate legislation by t he Ministry of Road Transport & 
Highways.     
 
45. A study of  statistical data of the Notifications laid by the M inistry of Road Transport & 
Highways, showed that out of the 180 notifications laid by the Ministry during the 223 
rd  Session, 
there was a delay in the laying of 149 notification s and out of that 133 notifications did not contain  
a delay statement.  During the 224 th  Session, the Ministry laid 56 notifications out of which 54 were 
delayed and moreover 53 notifications did not have delay statement appended with. From 223 rd  to 
226 th  session, the Ministry laid a total of 557 notifica tions, out of which 456 were delayed and 419 
notifications did not have any delay statement. The  Committee observed that in 80% cases of the 
delayed Notifications, the delay is between 12 to 22 months.   
 
46. Secretary, Ministry of Road Transport & Highway s informed that instructions had been 
issued to append a delay statement in cases where t here was a delay in the laying of notifications 
and assured the Committee that this kind of delay w ould not happen in future so that least delay 
statements have to be appended.  Regarding delay in  the laying of notifications, the Secretary 
attributed it to delay in the printing of notificat ions.  It took about 2 to 2 and 1/2 months to get t he 
notifications printed. He stated that he would disc uss the matter with the Ministry of Urban 
Development, who controlled the Government of India  Press. He admitted that there was scope for 
further improvement within their internal procedure  by cutting levels through which papers have to 
pass.  He elaborated that hundreds of notifications  are received from all over the country.  The 
entire Ministry has nine zones which process the va rious notifications. National Highways 
Authority of India (NHAI) had been instructed to se nd the notifications directly from the Chairman, 
NHAI to the Secretary who can put it to the Ministe r for approval instead of sending the 
notifications to the divisions, which prepare a fil e and put it up to three or four layers, thereby 
avoiding the otherwise delay of 15-30 days in the office.   
 

47. The Committee would like to impress upon the Mi nistry that it is their responsibility to 
ensure that copies of the Notifications are printed  timely and for this purpose, they need to 
evolve a suitable mechanism to ensure that notifica tions are laid in time.   The Committee is 
happy that the Ministry has evolved an internal mec hanism/ procedure for this purpose.  The 
Committee hopes that it would take action accordingly in order to comply with the prescribed 
schedule in the matter of laying of statutory Notifications 
 
48. The Ministry must take appropriate step to remo ve lacuna, if any, administrative or 
otherwise causing such long delay by being little p roactive and prompt.  Further, the 
Ministries should take it up with the Ministry of U rban Development for late receiving of 
printing copies of the Notification.  
 
49. The Committee has, time and again, emphasized t hat it is essential that in case there is 
a delay in the laying of Statutory Orders, the conc erned Ministry/Department should 
invariably append a delay statement along with the notifications being laid so as to apprise 
Parliament of the causes of delay. The Committee de sires all Ministries/Departments to follow 
this since the intention is that through the proces s of formulation of a delay statement this 
would enable the Ministries to introspect, identify bottlenecks and devise remedial measures. 
 

III 
EXCESSIVE  DELEGATION OF POWERS ETC. 
 
I.  Issue of giving retrospective effect to FEMA Regula tions framed under Section 48 of 
the FEMA Act, 1999 by the Department of Economic Affairs, Ministry of Finance .  
50.  The Committee heard the Secretary, Department of Economic Affairs of the Ministry of 
Finance on the 8 th  January, 2013 on the issue of giving retrospective  effect to FEMA Regulations 
framed under Section 48 of the FEMA Act, 1999 and w anted to know (i) the reasons for giving 
retrospective effect to the Regulations - Notificat ion Nos. G.S.R. 795(E), G.S.R. 796(E), G.S.R. 
797(E), G.S.R. 798(E) & G.S.R. 799(E) - framed unde r the Foreign Exchange Management Act, 
1999; (ii) the reasons for not appending an Explana tory Memorandum to these notifications citing 
the reasons for giving them retrospective effect; ( iii) whether the Parent Act provided for powers to 
give retrospective effect to subordinate legislatio n and if not, under what powers retrospective 
effective was being given to these regulations; and  (iv) the reasons for a week’s gap in laying of 
these notifications on the Table of the Lok Sabha w here it had been laid on 30 th  November, 2012  
and  Rajya Sabha where it was laid on 13 th  December, 2012. 
 
51. Secretary, Department of Economic Affairs infor med that issue of Notifications under the 
Foreign Exchange and Management Act is the responsi bility of the Reserve Bank of India. The 
Notifications are prepared and legally vetted by th e concerned department of the Reserve Bank of 
India and sent to the Department of Economic Affair s for publication in the Official Gazette.  As 
per Government of India Allocation of Business Rule s, formulation of Foreign Direct Investment 
Policy is the responsibility of the Department of I ndustrial Policy & Promotion (DIPP). However 
there are some provisions of the FEMA Act which are  concerned with the Department of Economic 
Affairs. When the foreign direct investment policy was decided, DIPP issued a Press Note to this 
effect and in consequence RBI issues notifications to give effect to the provisions contained in the 
Press Note. The process in this whole exercise was a bit long and it consequently led to delay in the 
framing of the notifications.  
 

52. Based on the above, the Committee sought clarif ications on the following points: (i) legal 
status of the Press Note; (ii) law under which Pres s Note has statutory status; (iii) given that polic y 
issues are declared by way of a Press Note, whether  this process of issuing Press Note bypasses 
Parliamentary Procedures. The Secretary informed th e Committee that retrospective effect to 
notifications has been given earlier also, though t his is not the best practice. Even the Supreme 
Court has stated that economic policy is ordinarily  not amenable to judicial review unless it can be 
demonstrated that it has transgressed its constitut ional limits and the only limitation imposed is tha t 
retrospective penal laws cannot be framed. The Law Ministry had advised the Finance Ministry that 
there was no provision of retrospective effect in t he said Act. However, in view of the Supreme 
Court opinion there is no bar to retrospective appl ication of subordinate legislation.  He informed 
the Committee that they were now making a new frame work by which, in most cases, the 
regulations would be issued before the press note i s issued except in exceptional cases where it 
might be delayed sometime.  He assured that this sh ould not become a norm as it seems to have 
become in the past few years.   The Committee notes the reply of the Ministry and h opes that 
the Ministry would comply with its assurances given to the Committee .    
 
 
II. Issue of non laying of Notification No.  S.O. 6 1(E), dated the 20 
th  January, 2006 issued 
by the Department of Atomic Energy under the Atomic Energy Act, 1962.   
 
53. The Department of Atomic Energy, in pursuance o f clause (f) and (g) of Section 2 and 3 of 
the Atomic Energy Act, 1962 issued a notification N o. S.O. 61(E) dated the 20th January, 2006 .   
The Committee held discussions with the Secretary, Department of Atomic Energy, Secretary, 
Ministry of Mines and Minerals and Secretary, Legislative Department, Ministry of Law and Justice 
on the 8 
th  January, 2013 on the said notification and inquire d the reason for non-laying of the said 
Gazette notification on the Table of the House and whether in this case the Department of Atomic 
Energy had taken the route of executive action whic h was against the spirit of legislation. The 
Committee took strong exception to the contention of the Department of Atomic Energy (DAE) that 
it had issued the notification under Section 2(1)(g ) of the Atomic Energy Act,1962. Section 2(1) (g) 
of the Act is only a Definition Clause and such a c lause does not give power to delist or enlist any 
substances in the First Schedule of the Mines and M inerals (Development and Regulation) Act.  It 
should be a part of a substantive clause of the Act. 

 
54. Secretary, Department of Atomic Energy informed  the Committee that since 1950s lists of 
prescribed substances were being periodically modif ied by the Department based on its authority 
coming from Section 2(1) (g) of the Atomic Energy A ct itself. The Atomic Energy Act, 1948, had 
been repealed with the 1962 Act. In 2006, DAE for t he seventh time issued a Gazette Notification 
bringing out a new list of prescribed substances wh ich was done entirely as per the same provision 
of the Atomic Energy Act, 1962.  To keep the list o f newly notified prescribed substances in 
consistent with the Beach and Mineral Policy of 199 8, DAE had mentioned in the Gazette 
Notification that the latter would come into force either when the Mines and Minerals 
(Development and Regulation) Act would get modified , or, on 01.01.2007, whichever came earlier. 
He further apprised the Committee that it was the observation of the Ministry that in Atomic Energy 
Act, 1962 there was no provision for laying the notified list of prescribed substances on the Table of 
the House.  However, the 2006 notification was subm itted to the Ministry of Law before its 
publication in the Gazette.    
               
55. Secretary, Ministry of Law and Justice in respo nse stated that in the Atomic Energy Act, 
1962, no provision has been made for laying of the Notifications issued by the Central Government 
on the Table of the House. It was, however, later m andated by the various recommendations of the 
Committees on Subordinate Legislation to place all the Notifications before the Parliament and 
these instructions of the Committees were then conv eyed to all the Ministries/Departments. He 
apprised the Committee that Atomic Energy Act was a lready being considered for certain 
amendments and any ambiguity in interpreting the Act could be removed by amending it. 
 
56. The Department of Atomic Energy informed the Co mmittee that ambiguity had occurred 
because of the way the Act had been drafted and this could be resolved by taking away the power to 
delist or enlist any substances, technology and equ ipment and inserting it in the rule-making power. 
In the Department’s opinion a more convenient metho d to modify the Act would be to insert a 
specific provision for mandatory laying of Notifications on the Table of the House in Section 30(4).  
The Committee directs the Department of Atomic Ener gy and the Ministry of Law and 
Justice to take prompt action and resolve the issue  mutually at the earliest so as to leave no 

scope for any kind of ambiguity in the Act with reg ard to the framing and laying of statutory 
orders on the Table of the House as recommended by the Committee from time to time in its 
various reports. 
 
57. In pursuance to the Committee’s directions, the Min istry of Law & Justice  furnished their 
views on the matter on the 1 
st  January, 2013 which states as under:- 
“…… The said Committee also in its various reports have recommended that the 
administrative Ministry concerned with publication of such instruments of subordinate 
legislation have to lay the same, as far as possibl e, immediately after the commencement of 
the successive Sessions of Parliament and in no cas e later than fifteen days from such 
commencement. 
 
6. The Committee on Subordinate Legislation (Rajya Sabha), in its Seventy Fifth Report 
has categorically recommended to the government to lay all orders made in pursuance of 
the powers delegated by Parliament so as to enable the Members of Parliament to move 
amendment or modification to such orders including a motion for their annulment.   
 
7. Since the instruments of subordinate legislation  are issued by the subordinate 
authorities while exercising delegated powers given by Parliament, it is implicit in that, that 
the delegate of such power should inform the Parliament about the exercise of that power so 
that Parliament can scrutinize such subordinate leg islation to examine whether it is in 
accordance with the intention of the legislation or not.  Otherwise, those instruments may be 
modified or annulled by the Parliament. 
 
8. In view of the above, even though there is no ex press requirement in the Act to lay 
down a notification, the propriety demands that the same should have been laid”. 
  
58. The Committee directs that all the notification s published under the Act passed by the 
Parliament must be laid on the Table of the House s o as to apprise the Members and the 
House about them.  This gives Members an opportunit y to examine and see whether  the 
notification has been made as per the letter and sp irit of the Bill passed by the House.  This 
would give Members an opportunity to move motions f or modification or annulment of the 

said notification.  The Ministry of Law has also ag reed to this perception of the Committee.  
The laying formula was prescribed precisely to curb  this tendency of not laying of 
notifications.   However, if certain provision mand ating issue of notifications or framing of 
rules/ regulations or prescribing matters of detail  are kept out of the purview of laying 
formula, this will go against the principle of exec utive accountability to Parliament as also 
against the recommendations of the Committee prescr ibing laying formula.  The Ministry 
cannot decide on its own whether it is to be laid o n the Table or not.  The Committee is also 
against the idea of issuing notifications or framin g rules under Definition Clause to expand 
the meaning of certain terms through administrative  order without legislative sanction as was 
being done by Department of Atomic Energy.   
 
59. The Committee would like to take this opportuni ty to impress upon the Ministries that, 
if in a particular case, the rules have to be given  retrospective effect due to any unavoidable 
circumstances, the Government should take immediate  action to clothe it with legal sanction 
for the purpose; and even when a statute empowers g iving of retrospective effect, the rule 
should be accompanied by an Explanatory Memorandum stating the reasons and 
circumstances necessitating the retrospective effec t.  Besides, due care should be taken to 
ensure that nobody is adversely affected or unduly benefited as a result thereof.  
 
60. The Committee also held discussion with the Ministry of Parliamentary Affairs  with 
regard to the mechanism available with the Ministry  for monitoring the procedure followed by the 
Ministries/ Departments in laying of subordinate legislation on the Table of the House. Based on the 
discussion, the Committee observes that Chapter 11 of the Manual of Parliamentary Procedure deals 
with the procedure to be followed by the Ministries  regarding laying of subordinate legislation on 
the Table of the House.  The Ministries and Departm ents deal directly with the Department of 
Legislative Affairs for framing the rules and that the Ministry of Parliamentary Affairs does not 
have any monitoring or supervisory role as far as f raming of rules within the timeframe is 
concerned.  The Secretary informed the Committee th at the Ministry of Parliamentary Affairs had a 
meeting with all the Ministries and Departments and  brought to their notice the importance of 
framing of subordinate legislation within the timef rame and that feedback was also received from 
them. However, his Ministry has neither the resourc es nor the infrastructure to monitor timely 

framing of rules by each Ministry.  He submitted th at the Ministry did not have the mandate or the 
resources to do that.  Regarding action being taken  on the recommendations of the Committee as 
contained in its various reports presented to the H ouse, Secretary, Ministry of Parliamentary Affairs 
replied that as far as recommendations of the Commi ttee which were of general nature and which 
related to more than one Department were concerned, the Ministry took follow-up action. 
 
61. The Committee notes that the Ministries/Departm ents are not taking their 
responsibilities towards the framing/laying of subo rdinate legislations seriously.  Also, a 
number of Statutory papers supposed to be laid on the Table of the House were not only being 
delayed, but were also being laid without following  required procedure despite the 
Committee’s repeated advisory/observation thorough its successive reports. The Committee 
feels that the situation needs immediate change of practice and mindset.  The Committee 
reiterates that in order to enable their Parliament  Sections to keep a watch on framing of 
rules, a quarterly report pertaining to the period ending 31st March, 30th June, 30th 
September and 31st December should be sent by the 5
th  of the following month.  This would 
go a long way in ensuring that rules/ regulations r equired to be framed under the Acts of 
Parliament are being framed / laid before Parliament within the stipulated time frame.   
 
62. The Committee's concern is centered mainly arou nd the serious implications of 
delayed framing and laying of notification containi ng rules/regulations/orders, etc.  The 
Committee is constrained to infer that Ministries/D epartments may be doing so deliberately 
with a view to evading Parliament's scrutiny of the rules/regulations that are delegated by it to 
be framed by the Government.  Since such rules/regu lations come into force even before they 
are laid before Parliament, any delay in laying bef ore Parliament, in fact, prevents Members 
to exercise their right to get them modified/annull ed by moving a Motion.  And this is what is 
exactly happening today.  Another disturbing proble m is delayed response to the Committee's 
communications from the Ministries, and not acknowl edging its letters, etc. in time.  So many 
cases of scrutiny of rules/regulations are pending before the Committee mainly due to pending 
responses from them for many years.  They go on see king extension on one pretext or the 
other.  This has become a norm than exception.  It highly restricts the normal flow of 
Committee's work and the parliamentary scrutiny.  I n such a situation, the Committee feels it 

cannot remain a mute spectator; but needs to protec t its right to be informed, scrutiny and 
surveillance.  Since it amounts actually bypassing Parliament and disobeying its authority, it 
is a serious breach of privileges not only of the C ommittee but also of the House and its 
Members, which can be invoked in this case.  
 
III Delays on account of late printing 
 
63. The Committee at its meeting held on 2 nd  May, 2013 while discussing the draft Two 
Hundred and Fourth Report on the Statutory Orders l aid on the Table of the Rajya Sabha during the 
227 th  Session had some reservations on its recommendatio ns having evoked the desired promptness 
in the Ministries/Departments for timely framing of  subordinate legislations.  It, however, noted 
some improvement in this regard. While 33.5% notifi cations were delayed during 226 th  Session, it 
came down to 26.25% during 227 th  Session. While discussing the reasons of delay in laying of 
notifications by Ministries/Departments, the Commit tee noticed that in most of the cases reasons 
citied/forwarded by the Ministry/Department has been ‘late receipt of printed copies of notifications 
from Government of India Press’.  The Committee, ac cordingly, decided to hear the Ministry of 
Urban Development, the administrative Ministry of Government of India Press, responsible for  
printing Government of India Notifications on the i ssue and to understand the problem and for its 
solution. 
 
64. Accordingly, the Committee at its meeting held on 30 July, 2013 heard the Secretary, 
Ministry of Urban Development  on the issue.  The Chairman of the Committee made it known to 
the Secretary that a number of Ministries attribute d the delay in issuing of Notifications to the long  
time taken in printing of those Notifications in th e Government of India Press. Some of the 
Ministries which have given this as a reason repeat edly are the Ministries of Power, Defence, Civil 
Aviation, Communication & Information Technology, E nvironment & Forests, Department of 
Revenue, Ministry of Corporate Affairs, Department of Financial Services, to name a few.  The 
Committee has never accepted this as a justifiable reason for a delay and had advised the Ministries 
to make sure that these were printed in time and in  case of any infrastructural and manpower 
problems, the matter be taken up with the administrative Ministry of the Government of India Press.  
The Committee, accordingly, asked the Secretary (i)  how many of such Ministries had taken up the 

issue with his Ministry and what he had to say in t his respect, (ii) measures/ initiatives taken by th e 
Government of India Press and/ or the Ministry of U rban Development to resolve the issue and (iii) 
measures proposed to be taken in future to resolve the issue.  The Committee wanted to know 
whether this could not be expedited so that there w as no delay due to printing as sometimes the 
delay ranged from one month to so many months.     
 
65. The Secretary, Ministry of Urban Development in formed that approximately 5,000 Gazette 
Notifications, both Extra Ordinary Gazette and Week ly Gazette, consisting of 1,20,000 A/4 size, 
were being printed every year by the four designate d Government of India Presses, i.e. Minto Road, 
Ring Road, Faridabad and Nashik.  All efforts were being made to supply the notifications by the 
Presses in time, but sometimes, due to heavy work l oad, the prescribed timeline overshot.  
Provisions had been made and circulated to all the Government Departments/ Ministries that in case 
of delay in printing of the Gazette, the Gazette Notifications could be cyclostyled/ photocopied after 
obtaining the Government Statutory Rules (GSR), Sta tutory Order (SO) Number from the 
respective Presses and 15 copies could be made available in Kitab Mahal .  Further, efforts had been 
put in by adding advanced computer and sharing the work with the sister presses to print the 
notifications on schedule time.  Attempts had also been undertaken to upload the Gazette 
Notifications simultaneously with the printing.  A system of having weekly report through SMS and 
in hard copy had also been introduced for streamlin ing the work and ensuring that the Gazette 
Notifications were published as per schedule.  
 
66.  The Secretary informed that delay in publicati on was mainly due to two reasons: First was 
the shortage of staff as there was a ban on recruit ment in printing press because of some vigilance 
matter in 2007.  This had now been resolved a few m onths ago and posts were being filled up.  
Secondly, they had started the mandate of softcopy coming along with the printed matter.  
However, some Ministries were not ready to bring in  softcopies.  Sometimes, the softcopies sent by 
the Ministries/ Departments were not compatible wit h the software application available with the 
Printing Press.  This led to delay.  Then, there wa s the managerial problem that Ministries brought 
incomplete documentation, which the Printing Press staff tentatively accepted.  This was also shown 
as delay on their account.  These problems had now been resolved.  As of now only approximately 
690-700 pages of material, which comprised 22 notif ications were pending, The Secretary, Urban 

Development assured the Committee that from 1 st  August, there would not be any backlog.   With 
regard to uploading of the notifications, the Minis try informed that they had uploaded all the 
notifications issued by the Government of India Pre ss since 1950, which ran into19 lakh pages. 
Notifications printed today were uploaded within 2- 3 days.  Technical issues were being sorted out 
with NIC and all efforts were to make it user-frien dly.  The Lok Sabha Committee under the 
chairmanship of Shri S.S. Ahluwalia, M.P. was also reviewing it every two months.  Accepting the 
views of the Ministry, the Committee expressed that  given the importance of notifications, the 
Ministry of Urban Development/ the Government of In dia Press must attend to any problems 
that may arise, then and there itself, and sort out  the problem.  The Committee feels that 
Ministries/Departments, in case of delay in printin g of notifications, may take GSR and SO 
numbers from Government of India Press and prepare required number of copies for laying 
in Parliament in cyclostyled form. 
 

 
PART IV 
PROBLEMS IN DRAFTING OF REGULATIONS 
 
I Regulations framed under the Dentist Act, 1958 by  Dental Council of India  
 
67. The Committee on Subordinate Legislation had ta ken up following regulations for detailed 
study:- 
 
(i)  The Dental Council of India (Establishment of New D ental Colleges, Opening of 
New or Higher Courses of Study or Training and Incr ease of Admission 
Capacity in Dental Colleges) Regulations, 2006. 
 
(ii)  Revised BDS Courses Regulation, 2007. 
 
(iii)  Revised MDS Course Regulation, 2007. 
 
(iv)  Dental Council of India Post Graduation Diploma Cou rse Regulations (Dental 
Materials), 2009. 
 
(v)  The Dental Council of India Dental Hygienists Course Regulations, 2008. 
 
(vi)  The Dental Council of India Post Graduation Diploma  Course Regulations, 
2008. 
 
68. The regulations have been framed under Section 20 of the Dentist Act, 1958. This Section 
provides for making any regulation with previous ap proval of the Central Government.  The 
Regulations were examined by the Committee and the questionnaire was also forwarded to Ministry 
of Health & Family Welfare their comments.  During the preliminary examination the Committee 
had raised some concern relating to drafting and format of the Regulations. 
   
69. In most of the places it was found that the num bering of Regulations has not been done in 
orderly manner and it is almost impossible to quote  any regulation with a definite number.  There 

are certain matters of details like details of book s, courses, material curriculum etc. have been 
provided in the main body which otherwise should ha ve been given either in Annexure or in 
schedule for example, in the case of Dental Hyginis ts Courses Regulation, 2008 after short title 
again heading and sub-heading has been given which conveys same meaning.  It does not have 
numbering in orderly manner.  In the case of amendm ent it would not be possible to quote the 
definite number of regulation targeted to be amende d.  Moreover, the Regulations contain the 
details about subjects, courses, eligibility criteria, syllabus etc. which creates confusion. 
 
70. It seems that these Regulations were not vetted  by the Ministry of Law and Justice 
(Legislative Department).  The Committee obtained t he opinion of Legislative Department, 
Ministry of Law & Justice in this regard.  The Mini stries furnished their comments on the 
Committee’s concerns as follows: 
 
(i)  The Committee is of the opinion that these Regulati ons are not in proper 
format. Numbering of Regulations has not been done in orderly manner and it is 
almost impossible to quote any regulation with a de finite number:  As a basic rule of 
legislative drafting, the provision of the rules of  regulations should be properly numbered.  
The regulation, sub-regulation, clause, sub-clause,  item, sub-item, paragraph and sub-
paragraph should be properly numbered (for example : 1(1) (a)(i)(A)(I), etc. ) so as to 
identify or locate the relevant provisions easily w ithout any confusion.  The proper 
numbering of the provisions contained in any rule o r regulation also facilitate the carrying 
out of future amendments when required. 
 
(ii) The details of books, courses, material curriculum,  etc have been provided in 
the main body which may have been given as Annexure  of Schedule:  Schedules or 
Annexures facilitate the listing of details which are normally not provided in the text of rules 
or regulations.  For example, the Annexures may ent ail details of the syllabus, course or 
curriculum which may be appropriately linked with t he specific regulations which deal with 
the prescription of the syllabus.  With a view to s implify the format of regulations, the 
subject matter covered under it is Schedules or Ann exures.  Broadly the regulations set out 

the details of supplementary rules/regulations nece ssary to give effect to the provisions of 
the principal Act.  The Committee feels that these details should be avoided. 
(iii) The Regulations also do not have definition clause:  It is well settled principal of 
law that if a term or expression stands defined in the principal Act, then , such term or 
expression is given the same meaning in the rules o r regulations, as the case may be.  As a 
general practice, only the words or expressions use d for the first time in the rules or 
regulations in consonance with the provisions conta ined in the principal Act can be defined 
in sync with the Act.  Otherwise, the words or expr essions defined in the principal Act will 
be taken as basis for such rules or regulations.  U sually the definition clause will contain a 
provision stating that the words and expression use d herein and not defined but defined in 
the principal Act shall have the meanings assigned to them under the said Act to avoid 
repetition or such words or expression used in the rules or regulations, as the case may be.  
However, in certain regulations dealing with certai n technical, scientific or procedural 
matters or the contents of any course, where the sp ecific reference of the provisions of the 
Act is not required but the regulations squarely fall under the ambit of the Act then, in such a 
case definition clause may not be required. However , in this case, the Committee feels that 
the words expressions used in the body of text of r egulations should be either defined giving 
a definition clause or it should be stated that unl ess, otherwise terms having different 
meaning would carry same meaning as given in the Principal Act. 
(iv) Assigning of File number to the Regulations instead  of G.S.R. number: To 
facilitate the smooth and symmetric publication of notifications, orders, rules or regulations, 
etc., Gazette of India has been divided into differ ent Parts and Sections.  Miscellaneous 
notifications including notifications, orders, adve rtisements and notices issued by the 
Statutory Bodies are published under Part III, Sect ion 4 of the Gazette of India.  Under this 
Part notification is published by giving reference to the File number in which the proposal 
was considered and approved by the Competent Author ity.  In respect of this Part of the 
Gazette, this practice is invariably followed. 
(v) The Committee accepts opinion given by Ministry of Law and Justice 
(Legislative Department) and recommends that these regulations require fresh 
drafting .  After re-drafting of regulations same m ay be vetted by Ministry of Law and 
Justice (Legislative Department) and laid on the ta ble superseding earlier regulations.  

The Committee has noted the tendency of certain sta tutory / autonomous organisation 
/ institution not sending their subordinate legislation for vetting to Ministry of Law and 
Justice (Legislative Department) on the pretext tha t they have got their own legal 
officers for the purpose or they are autonomous organisation.  The Committee does not 
accept this excuse for avoiding vetting by the Legi slative Department.  Their principal 
Acts are drafted by the Legislative Department and this Department has expert 
draftsmen who understand drafting techniques.  More over they also know under what 
circumstances the Principal Act was created and are  in the better position to see that 
subordinate  legislation is drafted as per the spirit of the Act and does not have element 
of excessive delegation.  The Committee recommends all the institutions created under 
the legal instrument of Parliament to follow this p ractice.  This would also save 
precious time of Committee while examining the subo rdinate Legislation.  The 
Committee also recommends that administrative Minis tries must ensure that the 
regulations being laid have been properly vetted by the Ministry of Law. 

 
 
OBSERVATIONS/ RECOMMENDATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE  
 
71. Like all other laws, the delegated legislation ought not only be certain but also 
ascertainable. Publication of such legislation in o fficial Gazette is, therefore, vitally important 
for many reasons.  Therefore, rules framed by Gover nment should be published in the 
Official Gazette and laid before the House even tho ugh the statutes under which these are 
framed do not specifically provide for this. 
 
72. If in a particular case, the rules have to be g iven retrospective effect due to any 
unavoidable circumstances, the Government should ta ke immediate action to clothe it with 
legal sanction for the purpose; and even when a sta tute empowers giving of retrospective 
effect, the rule should be accompanied by an Explan atory Memorandum setting out therein 
the reasons and circumstances necessitating retrosp ective effect.  Besides, due care should be 
taken to ensure that nobody is adversely affected or unduly benefited as a result thereof.  
 
73. The Committee feels that delaying paper to be l aid on Table of the House or not doing 
so in required form tantamounts to showing disregar d to its recommendation and well laid 
down procedures. The Committee  strongly feels that  the Ministries/Departments need to be 
sensitive about this and calls upon the Cabinet Sec retary  and the Secretary,  Department of 
Parliamentary Affairs to play a proactive  role for ensuring that Subordinate Legislation were 
not only framed in time but also brought before the  House strictly as per the laid out 
procedure and time frame. 
 
74. The Committee takes serious note of the fact th at delay was caused due to late receipt 
of printed copies of the Notifications. It has been  noticed that very often Ministries have been 
taking recourse to this very plea. The Committee do es not accept this as a valid reason as it is 
for the Ministries/Departments to see that adequate  arrangements are made to get them 

printed.  They may also try to get GSR and SO numbe rs from the Government of India Press 
and prepare cyclostyled copies for laying, if print ing is delayed.  The Committee has time and 
again impressed upon the Ministries that it is thei r responsibility to ensure that copies of the 
Notifications are printed timely.  For this purpose , they may evolve a suitable mechanism to 
see that such delays do not recur and the prescribe d schedule and procedure is followed for 
laying of statutory Notifications .  
 
75. Committee impresses upon all the Ministries/Dep artments to take immediate steps to 
ensure timely and proper laying of subordinate legi slation. The Committee, accordingly, 
wishes to bring again to the notice of all Ministri es/Departments of the Government of India, 
particularly, the defaulting ones, the following re commendations, as contained in its 131 
st  , 
135th, 152 nd  and 192nd Reports : 
 
“Orders required to be laid before the House should  be laid (i) if the House is not in Session, 
during the Session immediately following the date o f publication of the Order in the Official 
Gazette and (ii) if the House is in Session, on the  date of the publication of the Order, during 
its continuance and in case the time lag between th e date of publication and the date of the 
closing of the Session is less than 15 clear days, before the expiry of the Session immediately 
following the said Session. All the Ministries/Depa rtments of Government of India should 
henceforth comply with this schedule in the matter of laying of the Orders issued under 
various Acts of Parliament on the Table of the Rajya Sabha. 
 
(131st Report) 
(Presented on 15 December 2000) 
 
“The Committee has, time and again, emphasized that  it is essential that in case there is a 
delay in the laying of Statutory Orders, the concerned Ministry/Department should invariably 
append a delay statement along with the notifications being laid so as to apprise Parliament of 
the causes of delay. The Committee desires all Mini stries/Departments to take a note of this, 
since the intension is that through the process of formulation of a delay statement the Ministry 
is able to introspect, identify bottlenecks and devise remedial measures”. 
(135th Report) 

(Presented on 27 July 2001) 
“In the opinion of the Committee, every notificatio n should be assigned a distinctive number 
in order to give it a separate identity and similar ly, no notification should be published/laid 
which does not carry a notification number. The Com mittee expects all 
Ministries/Departments of Government of India to ex ercise caution in this regard. In case 
where there are more than one notification under a single file, the Ministries/Departments 
should ensure that the file number on each notifica tion should be suitably distinguished from 
one another.” 
(152 nd  Report) 
(Presented on 26 August 2004) 
 
 
“In addition to the concern expressed by the Commit tee over delay in laying of Notifications 
on the Table of the House, the Committee also expre ss their deep concern over delay in 
framing of rules/regulations under different Acts. The Committee in its 47th report presented  
 
to the House on 14.9.1981 has recommended that the rule-making process should be 
completed within a period of six months of the comi ng into force on an Act. The committee 
has further recommended that in case a Ministry is not able to adhere to this time limit, it 
should seek extension of time for completing the rule-making process. The recommendation of 
the committee reads as follows:- 
 
“The Committee feels that the rule-making process could well have been completed within 
the time limit of six months which the Committee has laid down for making of rules under 
an Act after coming into force of that Act. Where h owever, a Ministry does not find it 
possible to adhere to the time limit, they should i nform the Committee of the reasons why 
they cannot make rules within the time limit and seek extension of time for completing the 
rulemaking process.” 
 
The Committee is constrained to take note of the fa ct that the Ministries/Departments of 
Government of India are not complying with the Comm ittee’s recommendation to complete 
the process of framing of subordinate legislation c ontemplated under various Acts of 
Parliament within a period of six months. At the sa me time, the Committee also does not 
receive requests for extension of time for completi ng the rule-making process in terms of its 
recommendations as above from most of the Ministrie s/Departments. The committee takes a 

serious note of the prevailing situation in which t he Ministries/Departments are neither able 
to complete the task of framing rules/regulations u nder different Acts within the given six 
months’ period nor do they suo-motu approach the Committee for seeking extension of tim e. 
The Committee further notes that in order to ensure timely framing of rules/regulations it has 
taken an initiative to monitor the progress of fram ing of subordinate legislation in respect of 
all legislations brought about by different Ministr ies/Departments of Government of India 
from the year 2003 onwards with a view to ensure th at the framing of subordinate legislation 
is not delayed. The Committee, however, finds that the responses from the 
Ministries/Departments have not been prompt in this  monitoring exercise undertaken on 
behalf of the Committee. 
In view of the above position, the Committee once a gain reiterates its recommendation 
that the Ministries/Departments should ensure putti ng in place subordinate legislation 
positively within a period of six months of coming into force of the Act. The Committee 
further recommends that in case the Ministry fails to meet with this deadline, they should 
invariably approach the Committee for seeking exten sion of time. The Committee further 
recommends that in cases where the time limit of si x months is not adhered to, they should, 
while laying rules/regulations before the Parliamen t invariably lay a statement explaining the 
reasons why the framing of rules/regulations was de layed beyond six months so as to keep the 
Parliament apprised of the compliance of the Parlia ment’s mandate conferred upon the 
Executive.” 
(192 nd   Report) 
(Presented on 26 August 2011) 
 
“Rules/Regulations/Orders/bye-laws are laid by different Ministries on the Table of the House 
under various provisions of parent Acts passed by P arliament. These Rules/ 
Regulations/Orders/bye-laws are published in the of ficial Gazette before being laid on the 
Table of the House. Even after they are laid, it is  very difficult to get access to these 
notifications. The Committee recommends that such R ules/Regulations/Orders, etc. laid on 
the Table of the House should be invariably uploaded on the websites of respective Ministries  
immediately on the same day when they have been lai d on the Table of the House, for 
information of Members of Parliament and people at large for their easy access”. 
(201 st     Report) 
(Presented on 14th December, 2012)  