I 
t 
\ 
COM· I-55 
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA 
COMMITTEE ON SUBORDINATE 
LEGISLATION 
FIFTY-THIRD UWORT 
\ 
(Presented on the 10th May, 1983) 
ltAJYA SA»BA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI. 
JgBsiV AlSAKJi:A, 190! (SAJ~ A) 

\ 
\ 
i COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE 
. (19S2-83) 
QIAIRMAN 
L Dr: Bhai Mahavir 
MEl\:iBERS 
2. Shri T. Bashee.r 
3. Shri Nand Kishore Bhatt 
4. Shri G. C. BI1l\ttacharya 
5. Shri Amarprosad Chakraborty 
6. Sbri Dipen Ghosh. 
7. Shri B. D .. Khobragade 
* 8. Shri ·Ram Niwas Mirdha 
9. Shri Sushi! Chand Mohunta 
10. Shri G. Swamy Naik · 
11. Shri Ghanshyambhai Oza 
12. Shri Santosh Kumar Sahu 
13. Shri Ng. Tompok Singh 
14. Shri Shanti Tyagi 
15. Dr. Rafiq Zakaria 
SECRETARIAT 
Shrimati K. K. Chopra, Additional Secretary. 
Shri B. R. Goel, Chief Examiner of Questions. 
Shri R. P. Mahatan, Senior Legislative Committee Officer. 
* Shri Ram Ni.was Mirdha sworn in as a Minister of State on the 29th 
January, 1983. · . 
(i) 

, 
REPORT 
I 
INTRODUCTION 
I, the Chairman of the Committee on Subordinate Legislation having 
'been authorised ·by the Committee to present the Report on its behalf, 
;present this Fifty-third Report. The Committee considered and adopted 
the Report at its meeting held on the 6th May, 19S3. 
2. In its 46th and 49th Reports, the Committee had dealt with a 
representation from 'the Central P.W.D. Engineers' Association regarding 
the C.P.W.D. Assistant Engineers (Central Engineering Service and Cen~ 
tral Electrical Engineering Service) Group 'B' (Confirmation and Senio­
rity) Rules, 1979 which were subsequently amended in 198~. , 
3. The Committe·e received a first representation dated the 26th 
November1 1982 from the Central P.W.D. Engineers Association in regard! 
to the Central Public Works Department, Assistant Engineers (Central 
.Engineering Service and Centra} Electrical Engineering Service) Group 
'B'' (Confirmation and Seniority) Amendmement Rules, 1982. The Com­
mittee· heard the representatives of the C.P.W.D. Engineers' Association 
on the 25th August, 1982 and the Secretary in the Ministry of Works 
.and Housing 0 n the 2nd December, 1982 and the lOth January, 1983. 
4. The observations of the Committee in the matter which in the 
opinion of the Committee should be brought to the notice of ·the House, 
·together with· the recon::JVlendations of the Committee thereon, are con­
tained in the succeeding paragraphs of this ~port. 
·II 
'C,:P,W.ID. aSSISTANT ENGINEERS {cpNTRAL ENGINEERING 
SERVICE AND' CENTRAL ELECI':RreA!L ENGINEERING SER­
":VI~)'. oRiOUI> 'B' . (CONrrRMATION ANn SENIORITY) 
RiUL~k Ii979 AS Al\lliENDED ;,.y AMEND:MfENT RULES, 1982. 
_ 5 ... Relevant ~t;r~ots from the 46th and 49th Reports are. reproducoo 
·~below:..,- . · 
"46.. In, Ma~;· J.fh9, the. Committee. on Subordinate Legislation 
.rec~~ved a, rep:resen1ation .from .the Central P.W.D. Engineers• 
1 

Association ~egar~g the C.P.W.D. Assistant Engineers (Cen .. ~ 
tr~ :Bngmeenng Service and Centra} EleotticaL 
Engtneenng Service) ~roup '~' (Confirmation and Seniority}. 
R~les, 1979 · !he pmnts_ raised in the. representation; inter 
alza, were that (I) a large number of Senior Assistant Engineers 
had been, adve:7ely aff~cted due to the retrospective operation. 
of the rules; (11) the rules had been framed in violation of a 
Su~re~e <:ourt judgemenit in the matter; and (iii) the latest 
semonty hst prepared by the Department wa:s not in accord­
ance with the rules. 
4 7 · The matter was referred to the Ministry of Works and Housing , 
who explained the position as follows:- ' 
(i) The contention of the Association that .many officers are ad~ 
versely affected due to the retrospective. effect given to the 
Seniority-cum-Confirmation Rul~ is not correct. Prior to 
1971, there was a quota system for appointment to the grade 
of Assistant Engineer in the C.P.W.D. by direct recruitment 
and by promotion of junior Engineers. According to this, 
the direct recruit Assistant Engineers were placed higher than 
the promotee Assistant Engineers in the seniority list of 
Assistant Engineers. In 1971, the Delhi High 
Court ruled that the quota system had not been determined 
properly and hence was null and vcid. Accordingly, the 
seniority list based on the quotas became inoperative. Some 
direct recruit Assistant Engineers went in appeal to ·the 
Supreme Court against the judgement of the Delhi High Court. 
Since the earlier seniority list had become ·inoperative, it 
became necessary to draw up a fresh seniority list. However, . 
as the matter was sub-judice, a provisional seniority list was 
drawn up in 197~2 to enable the department to carry on the 
normal functions. This seniority list was prepared on the 
basis of the date of appointment of the officer as Assistant 
Engineer, and most of the promotee Assistant Engineers were 
placed in senior positions in the list, At that time, there were 
no seniority rules to govern the seniority of Assistant Engi- · 
neers as the pre\?ious mles had be'en declared void and no 
new rules had been framed. The seniority list drawn np in 
1972 was marked provisional and was not finalised at any 
stage thereafter. The contention of the Association is base~' 
on the seniopty positions given to the promotees in the provi­
sional seniority list of 1972. The present Seniority~um~on:. 
firmation Rules have been framed after the matter had been 
finally disposed of by the Supreme Court. As the 1:>enefits 
given to some ·of the Assistant Engineers wer~ not base_d on 
any mles and furthe·r as the promotee Assil.Sitant Engmws. 

3 
could not claim these benefits, as a matter of right, withdrawal 
of these benefits, consequent upon framing of appropriate 
rules, cannot be construed as having adversely affected them. 
(ii) The Explanatory Memorandum has been wo~dM to bring out 
the i~tention of the Supreme Court. It was neither necessary 
·nor mcumboot to quote the judgement of the Supreme Court. 
Besides, the Explanatory Memorandum does no} form part of 
the statutory rules and in no way affects the validity or other­
wise of the rules. It is also not correct to say that the rules 
framea are in violation of the Supreme Court judgement. 
The Supreme Court judgement permitted Government to 
frame appropriate rules even restrospectively. 
(iii) The interpretation given to the second ·proviso to rule 4 (c) 
(iii) by the Association is not correct. The intention of this 
proviso is to indicate as to when the left over promotees and 
direct recruit. Assistant Engineer (Temporary) should be con~ 
firmed and not the manner or order in which they should be 
confinned. This proviso is~4tl80 intended to protect the interest 
of the direct recruits against permanent posts. The promo-
. tees and the direct · recruits against temporary posts are re­
quired to be confirmed by interspersing of one direct rec£nit · 
a,.gainst temporary post and one promoted from the lower rank 
as provided in the main rule 4(c) (iii). This has been !fol­
lowed while preparing the seniority list. 
* 
An extract from the observations made by Supreme Court in this case 
iis also reproduced below:-
"Persons entering Government service have the right to know whe~ 
they stand with regard to their conditions of service and 
future promotion. Since there is no impediment in the way 
of the Government to make appropriate rules regarding con­
ditions of service, even restrospeetively, subject to constitu­
tionality, keeping in view justice and fair play to all concerned, 
· · it is a sorry sight to find that. offic~rs in the same Service fight 
over the ,years in Courts having failed to get redress from . 
the .Government. · When Officers are qualifi.ed to hold certain 
posts after recruitment, according to rules, ap.d they have put 
in a number of years, without break in the Servi'ce to the satis-
faction of the authprlties, it is i~permissible to invoke a 
_,eco~dite rule and call it in aid to deprive a: large se'Ction. of 
uffi~ers <>f the benefit · of their. otherwise satisfactory ~erv:tce~ 
The· matter may be different whi:m posts in the Service are 
abolished, appointments to service are · tranl!itory of· fortuitous· 

4 
or incumbents are found unsuitable fQr absorp,ti:Qn. The his-• 
tory of this service is that temporary posts are first created · 
and. then after some years they are converted into permanent 
posts. The Government therefore, cannot merely be an on­
looker where it could rightly claim to be a legit1tnate arbitetJ 
on its ·own authority aod having proper· regard to all just 
claims. We also cannot help feeling that thinking. in the 
M~nistry has not always been uniform, sympathy waning or 
waxing from time to time for reasons not always manifest:•· 
48. Later, in January 1980, the Committee also received a representa-· 
tion from. the ,other asSQCiation of Engineem-the pirect Recruits' 
Association. 
49. ·The (i:ommittee considered the matt.er. at several meetings and 
witP,., a: view to studying the problem in. d,t(pth :i.t hear4. the representatives 
ot b<,lth, the ASsociationS as well as the. Miirl~try of 'Works .and Housing 
a ~Ull}:ber of times. The Committee felt that by the retrospective opera­
tion of the rules, injustice had been• done to the promotee Assistant Engi­
neers. It, therefore, directed the Government to consider the whole 
matter .afresh so as to remove the grievances of these officers. As a result 
of this directive, Government started a process of consultaticm. with the 
concerned MinistrlesiU.P.S.C. in order to &4 the most equitable solution 
to the problem of seniority of Assistant Engineers by amending the con­
firmation and seniority rules of 1979. 
50. In a communication dated· the 29th April, 1980, the Ministry of 
Works and. Housing informed the Committee that 'there were about' 40 
va~ancies in the grade of Executive Engineers in the C.P.W.D. and it was 
absqlutely essential to fill up those vacancies in order to cope with the 
work relating to. the Asian Games, 1982, and the crash programme or 
constructing 21 ,000' houses in the general pool all over the country and 
reques1ted the Committee to permit them to make purely ad hoc promo­
tions based on the 1979 provisional seniority list of Assistant Engineers 
subject to the final decision of the Government on the question of seniority 
of Assistant Engineers. They assured that such promotions wquld be 
provisional and would not confer on the promotees any claim for re•gular 
promotion or seniority either in the grade of Assistant Engineer or Exe-
cutive Engineer. 
S 1. The Committee agreed to .the request of the Ministry f<f making 
prpmotions to the posts of Executive Engineer on the basis of the 1979 · 
seniority, list purely. as an ad hoc arrangement. 

• 
fn reply ... to a communication from the SecretStriat, the Ministry . ot 
Work~ and Housing vide their O.M. dated the 16th October, 1980, fitittedl 
as follows:-
"The proposed draft amendment to the CPWD Assistant Engineers 
(CES and. CEES) Group 'B' (Confirmation and Seniority) 
Rules, 1979,. has been soncurred in by the UPSC with a minoJ:! 
modification. The modification proposed by the UPSC is 
under consideration in consultation with the Department of 
Personnel and A.R. and the amendment . will be notified by 
Govermnent as expeditiously as possible. 
2. :It is .cohfirmed that the recent promotions of Assistant Engineers 
on ad hoc basis, have beenjate being made only to the extent 
abso1utely necessary to meet the pur~ose ex:plain~d earlier to 
the Committee." , , j 
52. Th~> MiniS>try were requested to furnish a copy. of the p~posed 
draft amendment to the rules before the same was notified in the Official 
Gazette. As the :M!inistry failed to comply with this· request and in view 
of a fresh fep~settta:l:f~ receive(l from. the €PWD Engineers' Association~ 
the Secretary in the Ministry of'Works al(f Uousing was asked to appea·r 
befor~ the Committee. 
* • 
The Committee heard the Secre:tary in the Ministry of Works ·and 
Housing on the 6th May, 1981. 
60. During the course of evidence the Secretary informed the Com­
mittee that the exercise in regard to the finalisation of the proposed amend­
ment to the Rules was being carried on by the Ministry. The Ministry had 
thought of certain possibilities for finding an equitable s:olution to the 
problem and ,they would require some more time to make up *their mind 
on the points raised by the Ministries !Departments, which had been con­
sulted in the matter. The ·Secretary also informep the Committee that 
very recently they had received a notice in respect 'of a Writ Petition, filed 
by MIS. :R.L. Bansal and others (representing the affected promotee 
EngJneers), which· was. comi:tt:g up for prelip1inary hearing before' the 
Supreme Court on the 8th Mfay, 1981. The Writ Petition contained a 
prayer ror the anritiiment of 'the 1979 rules. 
61. The Committee felt that the retrospective operation of the Rule! 
had ind~ed advel's~ly ltfilkted the promotee Assistant ·Engineers, and benc.e 
directed the Mirtlsky to proceed itt right earnest and with expedition for 
the nnalisi:ltit>n uf th~ amertdment to the Rules with a view to .finding an 
equitable solution to the problem and apprise t~e Committee of the action; 

6 
taJ.cen by them ~n th~ :U&tter. The Committee was of the view that mere 
filing ~f .the Wnt Petitio~ ,in the Supreme Court did not in any way prevent 
the MullStry from carrymg on their . work in this regard. The Ministry 
had akeady taken an unduly long time in finalising the matter on one 
pretext or the other." 
[46th Report] 
* * 
· . '?be observations of the Committee in the matter were sent to the 
Mnl1s~ry of Works and Housing who were asked to intimate whether the 
ame~dment to the C.P.W.D. Assistant Engineers (Central Engineering 
Service and Central Electrical Engineering Service) Group 'B' (Confirma­
tion and Seniority) Rules, 1979, had since been finalised by them and 
iJf s,'?, to send a copy of the draft amendment for scrutiny by the Com-
mittee. "' • 
, 92. The Ministry in th~ir reply dated the 15th December, 1981, in­
.fortned that the matter was under active consideration and a further com-
munication would be sent as soon ~s the matter was finalised. · 
The Committee heared the Secretary in the Ministry of. Works and 
Housing on the 5th Jantiary, 1982. · · 
When asked as to what further steps the Ministry had taken to reach 
the stage of finalisation of the amendment and whether there was any stay 
from the Supreme Court in the Writ Petition, the Secretary anSIWered that 
though the case had been admitted for hearing there was no stay order by 
the Court. As to finalisation of the amending rules, he stated that one 
round of interministerial consultations had already taken place and cer~ain 
additional points had been raised which involved · redrawing up of the 
seniority list, the drawing. up of the panels and so on. The matter being 
at the last leg. of consultations, the Government would take a final view 
in the matter in the very near future. 
94. After seeking clarifications from the Secretary, the Committee 
directed the . Ministry to. conclude the exercise and find a just solution to 
the problem by the first week of March, 1982. Pursuant to the directions 
of the Committee, the Ministry of Works and Housing vide their O.M. 
dated the 9th March, 1982, informed as follows:-
" .... amendment to the CPWD Assistant Engineers (CBS & CEES) 
Group 'B' (Confirmation and Seniority) Rules, 1979 has been 
finalised. A copy of the amendment being issued (English 
version) is sent herewith for the information of th~ Com­
mittee on Subordinate Legislation, Rajya Sabha. The Official 
Language Wing of the Ministry of Law, Justice and Company 

7 
Affairs have been requested to make available the Hindi 
version, which is yet to be received. A copy thereQf will be 
sent to the Rajya Sabha Secretariat as soon as received." 
(49th Report) 
At its meeting held on the 23rd March, 1982, the Committee 
after having considered the above reply of the Ministry directed 
the Ministry to implement the amended rules and prepare the sen­
iority list on the basis of those rules expediously." 
6. The Committee received a fresh representation dated the 30th 
April;· 1982 from the C .. P.W.D. Engineers Association (vide An­
nexure-I) which was referred to the Ministry of Works and Hous­
ing· for comments. 
7. The Ministry vide their O.M. dated the 13th AuguSJt, 1982 
'Stated that a seniority list of Assistant Engineers in the C.P.W.D. 
was being prepared and implementation report would be sent for 
the information of the Committee soon. 
8. At its meeting held on the 25th August, 1982, the Committee 
considered the reply of the Ministry and heard the representatives 
· 'Of the Central P.W.D. Engineers Association, New Delhi. ' 
9. During the course of their deposition, the repr.esenatives 
stated that the Central Public Works Department and the Minister 
of Works and Housing had taken almost two years to issue the 
amendments to the Confirmation and Seniority Rules, 1979. They 
felt that the Seniority list prepared according to the amended ' rnles 
would not give fair and just treatment to each and every promotee 
. Engineers. 
Taking advantage of the 1979 Seniority list, the Department had 
promoted all these direct recruits leaving aside the claims of the 
senior departmental officers. The practice of ad hoc promotion 
bad been going on for the last two years. Ac.cording to .1954 rules 
only four different methods were laid down for recruitment of 
Assistant Engineers: (i) Written competitive examination held by 
tbe UPSC; (ii) direct selection of graduate Assistant Engineers 
~mbiect to their at!e heinfo! below 45 and they bei'ng eligi­
ble to sit in the written examination; (iii) Promotion from per-
manent sectional officers and (iv) transfer. Government had been 
doing that all along. Suddenly in 1968 a seniority list was prepared 
which gave undue preferenc€ to direct recruits. As a result, the 
Tepresentationists approached the Delhi High Court and subsequent­
!v the Supreme Court. High Court was of the opinion that when 
there 'had been no valid determination of quota, people recruited! 

.... 
8 
·from different sources were. entitled to the same treatment, which 
was accepted and implemented by the Department and the Ministry 
<Jf Works and Housing by preparing a seniority list of 1979 which 
was also circulated. But the Direct Recruit Assistant Engineers 
went to the Supreme Court against the High Court judgement. 
During the hearing the Department filed an affidavit saying that the 
recruitment rules did n0t specify any preferential treatment. Sub­
sequently the High Court judgement was upheld by the Supreme 
Court. But they gave a rider saying that the Government could 
issue notifications even retrospectively subject to constitutionality, 
fair play and justice. · 
They added that as recommended by the Committee·s on Sub·· 
ordinate Legislation of Rajya Sabha and Lok Sabha and als0 Minis-
' try o~ Home Affairs, every orde;c being given ret~.ospectfve eff-ect has 
to <:arry a certificate that 110 one is adversely affected. But the 
Department had not given that certificate in 1979 rules and even 
1982 amendment rules were without such a certif1.cate. 
From 1972 onwards seniority list was prepared on the date of 
joining consequent on selection by the UPSC or the :Departmental 
Promotion Committee and was adopted. After the 1979 list, pre­
vious one was declared null and void. As a result all direct re­
cruits appointed upto 1971 had been promoted as Executive En­
gineers whereas promotee Assistant Engineers appointed as early 
as in t962 were still continuing on the same post. 
The departmental officers (Assistant Engineers since 1953) had 
-p.ot been confirmed and there was a ·condition that unconfirmed As­
sistant Engineers could not come in the seniority list of Executive 
Engineers. 
10. The Ministry of Works and Housing vide their O.M. dated 
the 13th September, 1982 forwarded their replies to the three basic 
aspects of the representation from the Central P.W.D. Engineers 
Association, New Delhi which are reproduced below:-
11(1) Confirmation and Seniority rules shall not be given 
retrospective effect. 
In this connection it may be stated that the Central Engineer­
ing Service Class II Recruitment Rules, and the Central 
EJectrical Engineet:ing Service Class II •.Recruitment 
Rules were enforced w,e.f. 21-5;.54. As these rules did 
not contain the prindples for determining the seniority 
of officers appointed to the grade of Assistant Engineer 
.. 

9 
thr.ough different methods except direct recruitment the 
CPWD Assistant Engineers (Central Engineering Servke 
and Central Electrical Engineering Service.) Group 'B' 
(confirmation and Seniority) Rules, 1979 were issued on 
31~1-1979. These were later on amended by the CPWD 
Assistant Engineers (CESS/CEES) Group 'B' (Confirma-. 
tion & Seniority) Amendment Rules. 1982 and notified 
on 19-3-82. Since the principles of seniority have to be 
applie9. to the officers appointed to the service in the past 
also, these have necessarily to be given retrosJJective ef- .. 
feet i.e. from the date of the constitution of the service, 
viz., 21-5-1954. 
. 
(2) The Ministry shall prepare the seniority list giving equal 
treatment to all categ~Jries of Assistant Engineers. The 
Assistant Eng1neers recruited. in subsequent year,s should . 
not be made seruot to the AES. already . working: 
'Vhe matter had been examined threadbare by the Committee 
on SubO'rdinate Legislation, in its 46th and 49th Reports 
.After examining the ·matfer, the Committee had directed 
the Ministry of Works and Housing to implement the 
amended rules referred to above and prepare the senior- · 
ity list on the basis of those rules expeditiously. The 
same is in hand .. 
It may be added that according to the general principles laid 
down by the Ministry of Home Affairs in their O.M. No. 
9/11/55-RPS dated 27-12-19'59 the seniority of Officer ap­
pointed on or after 22-12-1959 is to be determined in ac- . 
cordance with their confirmation and the persons who are 
not confirmed in. that grade are to be treated as· junior 
to those who have been confirmed. This principle has 
been. follow.ed in the amended rules. 
(3) Supernumerary post must be created for all categories. 
The case has been abnormally delayed. Perusal of the 
record will reveal that not a single promotee Assistant 
Engineer has been confirmed during the last 2s year or 
even more. 
In this connection, attention is invited to rules 5(2) (b) (ii) 
and 5 (2) (b) (iii) of the amended rules which inter-alia 
provide that in the case of officers who have been recrui­
ted against permanent posts in a particular year, if they 
are eligible for confirmation and no permanent post is 

10 
available then such Assistant Engineers are to be confir­
med against supernumerary posts. Obviously this can~ 
not be made applicable to the Assistant Engineers who 
have been recruited against temporary posts or who have 
been promoted from lower ranks on temporary basis. The 
Officers belonging to later categories can only be confir~ 
med when permanent posts are available. 
(2) Necessary action for the preparation of revised seniority 
list on the basis of the amended rules is in hand. 
(3) This issues with the approval of Secretary, Ministry of 
Works and Housing." 
11. In ~ subsequent communication dated the 25th October, 1982, 
the Ministry of W arks and Housing forwarded a copy of the revised 
·seniority list of Assistant Engineers in the C.P.W.D. prepared on the 
basis of amended provisions of the C.P.W.D. Assista,nt Engineers 
(CES/CEES) Group 'B' (Confirmation and Seniority) Rules, 1979, 
The Ministry also informed that the revised seniority list was being 
circulated to all concerned for inviting objections, if any, to the 
positions assigned to the Assistant Enginneers in the list, before 
making it final. 
12. At its meeting held on the 18 November, 1982 the Committee 
considered the reply of the Ministry and decided to hear the Secre­
tary in the Ministry of Works and Housing with a view to seeking 
further elucidation/ clarifications in the matter. 
13. A letter dated the 26th November, 1982 received from the 
C.P.W.D. Engineers Association is also annexed (Vide Annexure•-H). 
14. The Committee heard the Secretary, Ministry of Works and 
Housing. at its meeting held on Monday, the lOth January, 1983. 
During the course of the evidence, the Secretary explained that 
after the Committee directed the Ministry to examine the matter 
afresh keeping in view the grievances of the promotee Engineers, 
the Ministry re-examined the matter. After consultation with diffe­
rent departments and the UPSC they adopted the rules and princi­
ples that were prevalent till December, 1959 for the purpose of deter­
mining the seniority. After 195g, the principle was the date of con­
firmation. According to the Ministry after the operation of this 
principle the position vastly improved in favour of the promote~ 
engineers. 

11 
The Secretary did not clarify the reasons behind the non-inclu-· 
sion of a certificate, in the amending rules, to the effect that inter­
ests of non would adversely be affected. 
There was no categorical answer to the grievance of the promotee 
Engineers that they had not been confirmed since 1953. 
It was also revealed that the direct •recruits recruited against 
permanent vacancies had a prior claim over the vacancies, Assis­
tant Engineers recruited against permanent posts in a particular 
year, who had completed the period of probation, were to be confir­
med en bloc against permanent vaca~ncies because they had been 
Tecruited against permanent vacancies available in that year in the 
order of inter se seniority of such officers, and where the 'number 
of Assistant Engineers so appointed in a particular year exceeded 
the number Df permanent posts available in that year, such Assis­
tant Engineers were to be confirmed against the supernumerary 
posts which had to be created for that purpose. It reflected an 
improvement on the previous rules because in order to accommodate 
the_ direct recruits the provision of supernumerary posts had been 
mad<:: so that their claims did not get carried over to the subsequent 
year, thereby restricting the opportunity of the promo tee officers. 
\iVhen asked whether thP-re wer? cases where the promotee En­
gineers contained for 12-14 years in an officiating position, the Sec­
retary conceded that there might have been instances where some­
body was holding the post for 12, 13, 14 years, temporarily, and m 
an ad hoc manner. Th'lt was due to non-finais1ation of seniority 
rules as they were sub-judice for the last 12 years. 
The Secretary also conceded that all the Assistant Engineers· 
appointed against permanent posts had an ,overriding priority. Sec­
ondly' if at any time ad<,iitional persons were setected than the 
number of posts, more supernumerary posts were created for them 
so that their seniority was fixed that very_ year and it did not get­
carried forward. And if tpere were any posts left unfilled they 
were filled-in the ratio of 1:J. 
The Secreta1:-y categorically stated that so far as those rules 
were concerned, they had been fully gone into and . ruled out the 
possibility of the Government doing_ anything more in the mat-· 
ter. 
15. At its meeting held on the 8th February. 1983, the Committee· 
directed that the Ministry of Works and Housing be asked to in ... 

12 
1orm whether any case in the matter was pending before any Court, 
if so, the Ministry be asked to send a copy of Writ P€tition to the 
Secretariat. 
16. The Committee also directed the Secretariat at that meeting 
to enquire from th€ Ministry of Home Affairs (Department of Per­
sonnel and Administrative Reforms) whether they had laid down· 
any guidelines for the Ministries/Departments for an explanatory 
Memorandum being appended to an Order if so, to obtain a copy 
.·of the guidelines from the Ministry. 
17. The Ministry of Works and 'Housing jn th€ir O.M. dated the 
18th February, 1983 stated that-
"there is one case viz. Shri R.L. Bansal & others Vs. Union of 
India-Writ Petition No. 1438 of 1981-pending in the Sup~ 
reme Court of India. The above case was last heard in 
the Court on 7-9-81 and was admitted for regular hearing 
, but no effective heanng has been fixed so far." 
18. The Ministry of Home Affairs (Department of Personnel 
and ·Administrative Reforms) forwarded the recommendation made 
b:y the Committee on Subordinate Legislation (Lok Sabha) which 
is reproduced below:-
"The Committee are not satisfied with the explanations of 
the Ministries concerned and are of the view that nor­
mally all ·rules should be published before the date of 
their ·enforcement or they should be enforced from the 
date of their publication. The Ministries/Departments 
should take appropr,iate steps to ensure the publication 
of rules, before they came into force. However, if in 
any particular case, the rules have to be given retrospec­
tive effect in view of any un-avoidable circumstances, a 
clarification should be given, either by way .of an ex­
planation in the rules or in the form of a foot note to the 
relevant rules to the effect no one will be adversely aff­
ected as a result of retrospectiv€ effect being given to 
such rules." 
19. The Committee while making recommendations contained in 
its Forty-sixth· and Forty-ninth Reports took into view the Writ 
petition filed by M/S. R.L. Bansal and others '(representihg tpe aff­
ected p:romotee Engineers) in the Supreme Court. 'rhe Committee. 

13 
iu its Forty-sixth RepoTt gave the substance of the observations 
made by the Su.fll'eme Court in the matter which is again reproduc· 
ed below:- .. 
·' 
"Persons entering Government service have the right to know 
where they stand with regard to their conditions of ser­
vice and future promotion, Since there is no impedi­
ment in the way of the Government to make appropriate 
rules regarding conditions of service, even restrospective­
ly, subject to constitutionality, keeping in view justice 
and fair pla:y to all concerned, it is a sorry sight to find 
that officers in the same Se_rvice fight over the years in 
Courts having failed to get redress from the Government. 
When Officers are qualified to hold certain posts after 
recruitment, according to .rules, and they have put in a 
number of years, without break, in the Service to the 
satisfaction of the authorities, it is impermissible to in­
voke a recondite rule and call it in aid to deprive a large 
section of officers of the benefit of their otherwise satis­
factory service. The matter may be different when posts 
in the Service are abolished, appointments to the Service 
are transitory or fortuitous or incumbents are found unsui~ 
table for absorption. The history of this Service is that 
temporary posts are first created and then after some 
years they are converted into permanent posts. The 
Government, therefore, cannot merely be a on­
lobker where it could rightly claim to be a legitimate ar­
biter on its own authority and having p:roper regard to 
all just claims .. We also cannot help feeling that thinking 
in the Ministry has not always been uniform, sympathy 
waning or waxing from time to time for reasons not al­
ways manifest." 
·20. The Committee notes that the Ministry of Works and Hous-
Jag. H'•!\,~l~ o~ tke veoommendations made by the Committee did 
3m-.tQJt~,Jc11tt.,:Jmt ._., them etfeetiv~ froDli 195& and thereby did 
.~t1f4;_. • .__.*;al•*-·11ro•·thfl .. preblem atteotfig the prom.otee 
· llldi ... -~';,~}'\·~:t.y ·tlie cVetrospeeRve opera-
~-~--·~·~ is:M.;~ to note. D'cml th:e evi-
8c-.r~4~~-.~-~· GJWOllks ~d HO.Iinw when 
¥·~!
1
S.,~--- llDioi'lw•~Btl, they had been fully 
iJOBe "fR~ .... _.,.iteafk'ip~ 6t G-ove:riultent d&ing any 
thing nmredilifa~ll!\ :, '111ft:£~· eonchktlett · tMt · tie 
Mird$~y. hid ~ ._ ..... ;fir· t't~Jtiiel!' exa..mattott ot tll!e Issue. 
The Cbitiffti~·lJ~:~ to• s~. iha:t· t~~ 1Jro~ En&'lneer~ 
with· n& MWft ·v.rtJl~r ~~bed to · ~ in ·•,:ui' olletating r)ositloil 

14 
from 12 to 14 years temporarily and in an ad hoc manner ·and the 
Ministry could not do anythdng for all these years for their con. 
firmation against permanent posts with .the result that those pro~ 
motee Engineer~ ·were put in a disadvantageous position vis-a-vis 
the direct recruits. In the opinion of the Committee the promotee 
Engineers and the direct recruits belong to the same Ministry 
doing the same· type of job and that Ministry in a welfare stat& 
should' not have ignored the cl~im of their own promotee Engineers 
by keeping them in an officiating . position. While amending tbe 
rules of 1954, the Ministry should have looked into the spirit and 
the pith and substance of the Supreme ·court's observations when 
the highest court of the land says "persons entering the Govern-
. ment Service have the right to know where they stand with regard 
to their conditions of service and future promotion. Since thei·e is 
no impediment in the way of the Government to make appropriate 
rules regarding conditions of service, even 'retrospectively, subject 
to constitutionality, keeping in view justice and fair play to all 
concer:p.ed, it is a sorry sight to find that officers in the same service 
fight over the years in courts having failed to get redress from the 
Government: ....... ,. ......... " 
The promote engineers were recruited under the rules of 1954 
and while entering the Govermnent service tbey were not apprised 
of position where they stood with regard to their conditions of ser~ 
vice and future position as the rules then. in force did not provide 
for any direct recruitment quota. If the intention of the G:wern­
ment ·was to have such a quota. even subsequently. it was a ll:lpse 
on their part that they did not·make the promotee engineers a',vare 
·of it and introduced that provision in the 197g Rules. giving retros-
pectivE! effect to these rules, to the detriment of the promotee En­
gineers who had by then already served the Department for about 
25 years. 
21. The Committee finds from the deposition of the Secretary, 
Ministry of Works and Housing, that direct recruits recruited 
against permanent vacancies had a prior claim over the vacancies 
and such of them as had. completed a period of probation had 
confirmed against those permanent vacancies as" 
cruited against permanent vacancies available in that 
order of inter se seniority of such officers. And where · 
of Assistant Engineers so recruited in a particular year. 
the number of permanent posts avail;:tble in that y~a't;: 
Assistant Engineers were required to be confirmed against the 
merary posts which were to be created for that purpoGe. That 
in order . to accommodate the direct recruits and the provision 

1~ 
it~rlift ~ts' ha4 ~e~ti ·m.il~e .sP .thai their cl~~ ~· ~o~ ~fu,'.iv~,:~ 
the subsequ~rit year. thereby restricting the opportunity for other Engineers. 
. . ·ti.. The CofuDdttee Is of . tli~, 'View that .~~ • ~'- ,reasoning could 
tie. applioo to the · 1prQmOtee Engine.ers . also .. Tho~ ~· were 1• aim 
re~ruited under .the 1954 R.oleS t~ •. ~t tem~ or ad hoc 
vacancies b~ tl•e M:inisflry shOuld not have ][ept ,them ·~ .. t.Nt positien for 
·~ ....miJy ~ JNbrlod •. Ino~te t'hlays iB ,holdiDg .4¥8 ~tings of the 
ih~ntid PrOmOtion CotnnJittee \ve.re the .obvious. re&SQns for the non• 
. ct\tiii.fmation ~f ~ose Engineel's, a tPb~on for which tbey were in no 
WR.>' rCspOnsibte •. Jt WaS O~ey ,for the Miaistry ~ pel'DIQ,Bellf posts be 
~reated atter their promoti9n so that m0$t of. ~e ·E~ after putting 
lft i:e~uable .perlods pf' .officiating sem@ coJdd ha-,e ~n a~commoda~cl 
ilgahlst those penn~ent posts. The ~ns f~r wllidl ibis 'iW8S not done 
ill the case.~ the pro.OOtee Engbieers aJ,IJ ;be ~l)f:n ~nly to the Ministry. 
1.~ ~mn,t~~ :~es wi.tb ~ vieWS ,~xpres~ b)' tbeSe~tary in the 
Mi.~ o~ Wqtks . .-d ~ tUt ~,_-had •·commitment in 
t1ie case ot the Assistant Engineers recruited' against 'pt)~nt ,posts tbat 
they were to be confirmed against pern1!811ent posts againstl which., t'bey were 
r~ed ad if itt 'a~tibte ·~ f)etsOOs .were reefUitea ttiab 16e .. n1i1ltbtt 
of permanent posts avldl&bl&, silpehiutiieraty pOsts bad to be createa tor 
~~qt. wi$ a view Jo fixing fhqir se~oJ!i~ withiQ/~ v~cy y~r. JW ill 
~g so .they C®.lpl~ely Josfl sight of 4Je effect tb,at that I:Wltio~ ·WM ~ 
fo ~Ve in regarit t<) the 'seni.w#y jPosifioR 9f the pl'OIQOtee ~ ,.. 
proJD()~. ~rs .m,ght haft. ~ r.ec~ tJgainst ce~ ~' .. ~ 
they temporar.y tones, .but the,re .~ .~finite rules, .OJtlers ~. ·toVel\1lif41 (!011,. 
version of temporary posts into permanent ones after they have . ~II: in 
existeli~e ··for some· tinie. . Wherea8 in the case of direct :recniits, th~ 
MiDiSttY. had !g6~e a step f~t ~ &ettdfig supemnmerary posts b'e(:ailse 
~Ci1iltnient Wit~ ·~·iii eic:C:ess ·6t ihe ~.~f ot · ~PC~nhli pMts m-ift4 
able with them at that time, in. the ca8'ti' M 'W :P~t& Eri~~ die\ 
~of,~~ of.~JMi~,p~.-. pe~IJt·~ ~,tStdd down 
ro;~:~,.o~~ ,~~·~ ~.~ N~ • ~" ... e~ ~·rma~ o~ 
~•lMY~n,i!PWJ i!~tel~,,~J•·~~~ --~·i&P:~~ by oontinu,ing 
~ ,~'* W. ~·m ~·.~~ .. ~ Committee 
tbe-;~~· .• .-.:h\·.~·~~·~.~-·~~ also super-
~ ",.S".,e,:.~~~ ~ giy;e ·tit$! .. ~· dgh~ c9nf~ation retros· 
p~veiJ1 witlt .• t .o~ ~ ·~· ~w .out .of~.. . . .. · .. • . . . ... 
\. 
·.2. 3 .. · . '·The Committee observes that the certificate (usuali.Y. appended in 
•' ' . . : ,, .. . I'' ' 
s.uch ca!;es) to . the eff~t tl;l,at tp~ retrq>p~CtJve applica~ion of the rules 
wm.i.ld l),Ot. affect anyone's ip.tere3t adverseJ¥ was<;:onspicw:msly missing in 
the explanatory memorandum appended to the 1979 rules applying them 

16 
retrospectively from the date of the commencement of the 1954 r1,1les. 
The Mi'n·istry's explanatory memorandtiin reads as under:-
,., . 
,. 
'. 
' 
"Consequent upon the judgement of the Delhi High Court, which 
has· since. been. .:;onfirmea by the Supreme Court, in the Writ 
Petition filed by Shri M. Ramayya and others, the quotas fixed 
for appointment . to the posts of Assistant Engineeru in the 
Central Engineering· Service and the Central Electrical En-
gineerlng .. ·service, Group . 'B' were held .. as . not 
having been determined validly . The Supreme Court 
had observed that the Government should .make. appropriate 
· rules regardin~: conditions of service, . even retrospectively, 
keeping in view justice and fair play to all concerned. The 
·Delhi·. High Co~rt ·struck down the quota rule on technical 
grounds that it had not the approval of th6 then Ministry of 
Home Affairs (now Department of Personnel and Administra· 
· tive Reforms). ·Taking into consideration the interest of direct 
recruits and promotees the principles .of Seniority .and ~onfir::-. ' ' . ·:' . ' - . ' ' 
mation have been laid down and incorporated in· the a:bove 
notification." . 
,. 4 • 24 •. The circumstances force the Committee to the conclusion that this 
omission was not! inadvertent . or due ro 8:11i ovei.'Sight. . . . 
~ ; '25 •. The Committee is inclined to hold the •certificate to tie the · touch 
stone·' of the criteria.laid down by the highest_ court oil the . land in the 
matter:··'constitudonality, fair play and juStice. 'The Co~, therefore, 
Wishes to reiterate tlult the • order of seniority should accord to· norms given 
by 1llie Supl'eme ·Court . With OOI'I'e8p()ndlng changes in . the Us~ '. ,. . ' 
.. · 26 ... The Lok Sa:b'ha Committee on Subordinate Legislation as well as 
~is Committee bad earlier recommended the following formula tor operat· 
jng any rules with retroopective effect where the necessity for such retros­
pective operation . was unavoidable:-
• 1. 
"Tbe Committee are not satisfied with the explanations of the 
Ministries concerned and are ·of the view that normally all 
rules · '3hould be published before the date of their enforcement 
or they should be enforced from the ·date of their publicatimt. 
The Ministries /Departments should take appropriate steps to 
ensure the· publication. of rules, before they eame into force. 
However, if in any particular case, the rules have to be given 
retrospective effect in view of any unavoidable circumsiances, 
a clarification should be given, either "by way of an explana­
tion in the rules or ill the form of a foot note to the relevant 
rules to the effect that no one will be adversely affected as a 
result of retrospectiye effect being. given to such rules." 

.. 
• 
• 
17 
17. In instant case if the Ministry otl Works and Housing hadi hono~r­
._,d t1tt above fonnula in the matter· the Ministry wouldl have bJ tbemsel'fes 
~eliminated the lacunae in the draft of 1979 rules before issuing them. This. 
the Collllfiittee cannot be happy to observe does not appear to have beea . ' ·done in this case. 
28. The Committee has perused the seniority list of Assistant Engineers. 
issued by the Ministry of Works and Housing vide their O.M. Nq. 12015 
• .. (4)/76-EWI Vol. II dated the 25th October, 1982. The Committee finds 
'it amusing that many of the promotee Engineers who retired long ago and 
:some of whom had even died were included in that seniority list. The 
!Committee fails to understand the purpose or justification for inclusion of 
.:names of such E-ngineers in the list . 
"NEW DELID: 
~May 6,-1983.-
\)I 
4 ;r 
. : 
BHAI MAHA VIR, 
Chairman, 
Committee on Subordinate Legislation. 
/ 

.~N~,E~VM l 
(Vide para 6 of the Report) 
Repr.e.S(irtt.l·tion dated the 30th April, 1982 received Hom C.P.W.D. Engi-
To 
Sir, 
, ·. . neers Association, New Delhi. · 
The Chairman, 
< ,; ' • \ ' 
Committee on Subordinate Legislation, 
~ajya ~-~bha, .(>arliament House Annexe Building, 
New Delhi. 
Sus: (i) C;P.W.D. Ass.istarit Engineer (Central Engineering Service­
and Central Electrical !Engineering Service) Group 'B' (Cop.-:-
irmation and Seniority) Rules, 1979. ' 
(ii) Central Public Works Department, Assistant Engineers (Cen­
tral Engineering Service and Central Electrical Engineering 
Service) Group 'B' (Confirmation and Seniority) Amendment 
Rules, 1982. 
This associatiqn finds no wmds to expresG thanks to your august ,body 
for the consideration of our grievances in details. 
It is a e>:>tablished fact that the Ministry is adamant to give no relief to 
the Promotee Assistant Engineers. The case is lingering on since la•3t about 
15 years in the various courts. The Hon'ble Delhi High Court clearly 
pronounced during the year 1971 that all categories are to be treated at 
par. The Government aocepted the judgement and did prepare the seniority 
list on the basis of judgement of the Hon'ble Delhi High Court as early as 
in 1972. The Government did act on that list and continued to follow thal 
list upto 79. Some direct Class II went in appeal to the Supreme Court 
against· the judgement of the Hon'ble Delhi High Court. The Supreme 
Court uphe1d the judgement of the Hon'ble High Cou.rt. The Government 
remained silent for two years and instead of implementing the judgementS· 
pronounced by the courts of law, issued 1979 rules which adversely affect· 
ed all the promotee Assistant Engineers. This Association approached : 
your good office and after hearing all the concerned parties at length and: • 
t8 

• 
19 
mfter seeking clarifications from the Ministry of Work~ and Housing the 
~oriimittee obset'Ved fls under:....:..... 
"The Committee feels that the retroSp:eetive dperation of the Rules 
has indeed adversely affected tht ptdmotee ASsistant Engi­
neers, . and hence dir:ects th~ Ministry to proceed in right 
e'arnest and ~th · expedition for the finalisation of the amend­
n:l'erti to the ·Rules With a view to finding an equitable solution 
to the problem and appriGe the Committee of the action taken 
by them in the matter. 
The Committee is of the view that mere filing of the Writ Petition 
in the Supreme Court does ·not in any way prevent the Ministry 
from carrying on their work in this regard. The Ministry has 
already taken an unduly long time in finalising the matter on 
one pretext or the other." 
The Committee directed the Ministry of Works and Housing to amend 
·the rules giving equitable solution to the . problem. 
The Ministry took abnormally long time deliberately in finalisation of 
the amendment rules. The l\1inistry has promoted all the direct recruit 
Assistant Bngineen> in the name pf ad hoc promotion giving undue benefit 
to. the direct recruit Assistant Engineers .. 
On going through the 1982 amendments· made by the Ministry, it is 
submitted that. this does not provide any equitable fair and just solution 
to promotee A,ssistant Engineers. It is Gimply an Eye Wash. It is further 
submitted that with these amendments the Government bas strengthened 
its iron . hands in meeting more hardship to the promotee Assistant 
'Eqgineers. 
· ·The uWdet'. m'6n~iolied exp~an'aiion will clarify the· position:­
,t:}ri)'9fg1itie:.<JP:veni~~~f ma,d~ the said Rule gi~ing t~e retros· 
: ·t \.J~ ,l',' '' _,-.,\ '·' ,. •J l ' ... " 1.' ' !,<' ·• ' • 
,-' ~~Rtl~~J~t .~·~:fr 2~~t"Mar 1954 (i.e~, by taking the clock 
t?(~c~~~¥, ~~ xear~). , N?:v the 5Jovernment made amendment 
.t'q) 1 HleSf!:.~~~.)~,1?~2 ·f#ld· &ve~ retrospect~ve ·effect w.e.f. 
·,77,n!+~~~J:P.OO! ~~59, .. (i.e: hy taking the clock back by 2.3 
years). The benefit is mar&nal .,of• only two ~ars. This does· 
not give any relief ~o the promotee Assistant Engineers appoin· 
t~ }:ft~;, ~~st. J)ecembir 1959. The benefit· is just notional. 
·and not fJtql;ual. , , 

20 
2. Under the Ghelter of the amendment Rules the. Govemment has: 
provided supernumerary post to accommodate direct· recruits 
against permanent posts but no relief has been provided for 
the promotee class. 
3.' This amendment provides notional relief only to the Assistant 
Engineers appointed upto 21st December 1959 who fall in. 
the category: 
(i) Already dead. 
(ii) Already Retired. 
(iii) Already promo~ed as Executive \Engineer. 
4. The As•3istant Engineers appointed after 21st December 1959 and 
upto 4th November 1971 wherein the dispute in seniority arises, belong to 
the categories as under: 
(i) Promotee Assistant Engineers through regular 
1
DPC. 
Gi) Director recruit (Against Permanent Post), 
(iii) Direct Recruit (Against . Temporary Poot). 
(iv) Direct Recruit (Against ad hoc Post). ··· 
It may be pertinent to me.ntion here that a few of the direct recruits; 
approached t'he Hon'ble Supreme Cotllrt by invoking itG jurisdiction under 
Article 32 of the Constitution of India. The direct recruits relied up<tt' 
certain quota rule and elaimed preferential treatment to which the Depart­
ment denied specifically and took the stand ·in the Writ Petition No. 152T 
of 1973 that no preferential treatment can be accorded to the direct rec­
ruits. The Department categorically pleaded that all the persons in the 
cadre received from any of the sources are equal members of the cadre· 
and no preferential treatment can be accorded only for the reasons of the 
source of recruitment. The department further stated that the list of 1972 
had been framed on correct basis and had been adopted in consulation with 
the Department of Personnel and Administrative Reforms and the Ministry 
of Law, Justice and Company Nfairs of the Government of India as the· 
basis was found to be most rational for re-arranging the officers. The­
Department also categorically stated that the list prepared was in the light 
· . .of the judgeme-nt of the High Court. · 
The perusal of the provisional seniority list prepared by the Depart­
ment (on the basis of the judgement of the Delhi High Court which 

• 
" 
2 I . 
been up-held by the Supreme· Court) will indi~Je that total number of 
Assistant ·Engineers appointed through different methods are as under:-
(i) Total number of Assistant Engineers appoint f)d between 22-12-59 to 4-11-71 -722 Nos. t' • . . 
(ii) Assistant Engineers promoted 
(iii) Assistant Fngineers .recruited direct. against permanent post. 
(iv) Assistant Engineers recruited against temporary post 
(v) Assistant Engineers recruited on adhoc basis against temporary post .. 
. • -515 Nos. 
• c._Q67 Nos· 
.- 108 Nos 
- 32 Nos. 
722 Nos. 
On going through 1954 rule, read with proposed amendment (i.e., 
shifting the date of application of Rules from 1954 to 1959 will reveal as 
under:- · 
(i) All the permanentposts cropp~d up in the :Department after 
21st December 1959 will be distributed among the Assistant 
Engineem appointed. through various sources as below: 
(ii) All the Assistant Engineers appointed against permanent post 
will be assigned over-riding priority. More over supernu­
merary post will be created for them if required to accom~ 
modate them. 
(iii) After absorbing Assistant Engineers against permanent post the 
remaining posts if any wiUbe distributed in 1:1 ratio i.e., one 
will go to. the promotee and one to the direct recruit appointed 
against· temporary or. even ad hoc posts; ·· 
. 
·The height of adverse effect on the Department promotees will be to 
the extent as un'der:- ' 
In case 347 permanent '{\Osts crop \IP in the 'Department. The distri~ 
bution of vacancies Will be 67 which will go to direct recruit permanent, 
140 to Assistant ~gineers re.cruited against temporary and ad hoc basis 
and 140 to Assistant Engineers appointed on the basis of DPC. In this 
wav remaining large number of Departmental Assistant Engineers will be 
ve;y adversely affected.· -The ASsistant Engineers appointed through direct 
recruitment in the year 1971. will be made seniors to the Assistant Engineer& 
appointed during the year 1963. 
' -, > ' ' 

5. Equal treatment has not bee11 provided. to all the categories of 
Assistant Engineers thotigh they are workipg in the same scale of pay 
with siinilar responsibi1itiro and same duty and are from one integrated 
cadre. Instead of providing benefit to the promotee class (due to their 
long experience in· the department) they have been deprived and pushed 
back by ~any years. 
6. The quota at the stage of confirmation and seniority that too giving 
its retrospective effect is highly unreasonable irrational, malafide and 
arbitrary. ~ , · ~ ~ 
We submit your goodself to re-CO'Ilsider our case sympathetically. Our 
members look forward towards act of your kindness. We pray to seek 
justice. The Gvernment has taken undue time in finalisation of this case 
and is lingering it on one pretext or the other. 
In the circumstances, your ha.nour may graciously be pleaGed to direct: 
1: That confirmation and seniority Rules shall not be given retros­
pective effect. 
2. The Ministry shall prepare the seniority list giving equal treat-· 
ment to all categories of Assistant Engineers. The Assistant 
Engineers recruited in subsequently years should not be made 
senior to the Assistant Engineers already working. 
3. Supernumerary ~t must be created for all categories to avofd 
hardship to any one. The case has been abnormally delayed.· 
Perusal of t'he record will reveal that not a· single promotee 
Assistant Engineem has been confirmed since last 28 years or 
even more. 
It is, therefohJ, earnestly requested to give high priority to this case, so 
that at least some Assistant .Engineers (Not yet retired) may get some 
relief. We shall be grateful, if you kindly grant us pemonal hearing 
explain· om hardship. 
All early action in the matter is requested. 
With highest regards. 
' ' 
Yours faithfully, 
Sd/-
S. N. DHAR, 
Vice-President, 
Central P.W.D. Engineers, As~·tatl'/.?l 
Block lOA, Jam Nagar 
New Delhi-11 

&NNBXWBE·B· 
(Vide::Pa'fa 13 of th~ Rejx>rt) 
CENTRAD,. P.ff1:,D.: ~INEEIUNG AsSOCIATION 
''(Repre8en,ting oy~r 8(): per cent ~~ all Gazetted Engineering Establishment) 
Central Office: 
C-519, Indraprastha Bhavan, 
I. P. Estate, New Delhi-110002. 
Ref. No. EAjCPWDJ82-83J277 New Delhi !.26th Nov., 1982 •. 
'To 
The Chairman, 
Committee on Subordinate Legislation, 
Rajya Sabha, 
Parliament House Annexe Building, 
New Delhi. 
·sun:-C.P.W.D. Assistant Engineers. (Central Engineering Service and 
Central Ell'!ctrical Engineering Services) Group 'B' Confirmation and Se­
niority Rules of 1979 and · amended on 19th March, 1982. 
Sir, . .. ,,. 'I 
I 
This Association is extremely thankful to your August Body for coosi-:­
, deration of om grievances in details and for giving us a bearing on 25th' 
August, 1982. 
'The department has now come out with the Seniority Liat of Assistant 
E11gP1eers based on. 1982 Amendment Rums and has supplied a copy of 
tbe ·same to this Association on 29th October 1982. . 
The Association wishes to bring the following discrepencies and the 
injustices done to our members in this Seniority List. 
(i) The list includes the Assistant Bngineers promoted upto 1973.· 
The names of the Assistant Engineers promoted after 1973 
and upto 1982 have not been included. 
(ii) In this list, the department has not a<x:ounted for the permanent 
po8ts relea..:;ed year wise due to retirement, death, confirmation 

.· 
2} 
in the higher grade etc·., of the various Assistant Engineers 
though. it was so stated as per unstarred question No •, 
3654 tn the Lok $abha on 19th March, 1979. · 
(iii) All direct recruit Assista':lt Engineer:s have to be considered 
and. confirmed as Assistant Engineers after successful com ... 
pletton of thcir probationary period· of: 2 years. Wh · th s · · L' . ereas m 
~ emo~1ty ISt now prepared some of those Assistant Engi .... 
neers Senal Nos. 625, 626, 628, 630 and 632 have been con­
firmed from the date of their joining service as Assistant Engi­
neers whereas. the others shown against Serial Nos. 771, 773, to· 
777, ~80 and 7~1 have been confirmed after completion of 
p~obattonary penod of Q years. Thus the list now prepared 
is defective and not based on the relevant rules. All the 
direct recruit Assistance Engineers confirmed from date of 
joining o.r otherwise will thus have to be pushed down by . 2' 
years. 
(iv) Although part of the: list prepared upto Serial No. 624 (one 
page 35 of the list) covering Assistant Engineers propoted up­
to 21-12-59 is acceptable to us as it is based on fair play, 
equity and justice, yet the list prepared after Serial No. 624-
'0n the basis of defective rules which have been g\ven .affect to 
retrospectively is against the principl~ of fair play, equity and 
justice as this is very adversely affecting a very large number of 
departmentally promoted Assistant · Engineers and is also 
against the Supreme Court ruling in o,ur case. Kindly refer to 
para 5 of notes· recorded by the Department of Legal Affairs, 
Ministry of Law, Justice· and Company Affairs and placed. as. 
annexure lll on page 21 of our paper book filed on 25~8-82 
at the time of hearing. The. observations of Supreme Court 
are reproduced below for ready reference:-
«Since there is no impediment i'n the way of the Govern­
ment to make appro.priate rUles. regarding conditions of service · 
even retrospectively subject to constitutionality, keeping in 
view justice and fair play to all concerned, it is a sorry sight 
to :find that officers in the same service figllt over the years 
in courts having failed to get redress. from the Government." 
"When officers are qualified to hqld certain posts after 
recruitment according to rules, and they have put in a number 
of years without break in the service to the satisfaction of the 
authorities, it is. impermissible to invoke a recondite rule and 
call it in aid to deprive a· large section of officers of the benefit 
of their otherwise satisfactory service. The matter may be 
different when posts in a service are abolished, appointments 
to the service are transitory or fortuitous or irtcumbents are· 
found unsuitable for absorption .... ". 
.. 
• 
·~ 

25 
An ~xample Olf this may kindly be seen at Serial No.1042' 
of the list prepared by the Department. The person against this 
S. No.Jsa direct recruit who was r~cruited against a temporary 
post (date of appointment 25.,.8-70), He has been 'Placed be:­
fore S. No. 1043 who is a promotee Assistant Engineer with 
date of pr.omotion. as 8-8-62. Against the S. No. 1041 is also a 
promotee Assistant Engineer whose date of promotion is 12-3-62 
(wrongly shown in the list as 12-2-68). This shows that the 
directly recruited temporary Assistapt Engineer has got unjus-
tified seniority of 8 years and has superseded 291 Assistant 
Engineers. (from S. No. 1043 to 1333) who are otherwise 
senior to him (as per the date of promotion as departmentally 
promoted Assistant Engineers). 
(v) The seniority list prepared by the Department after 21-12-59 
has also very adversely affected the promotion of departmen­
~ally promoted Assistant Engineers to the post of Executive 
" Engineers . The last departmental Assistant Engineer promo-
ted as Executive Engineer is with his date of joining as As­
sista'nt Engineer on 22-1-63 as per S.-No. 1100 of the list 
whereas direct recruit (temporary) Assistant Engineer as per 
S. No. '1038 of the list and with date of joining as 7-8-70 
has been promoted as. Executive Engineer. There are 274 
nos. Assistant Engineers recruited upto 7-8-70 who have· been 
left over and not pr.omoted as Executive Engineers due to 
this defective amended rules and Seniority List. (List attached 
as Appendix-!). 
The applicability of the rules framed in 1979 and amended 
in 1982 retroSpectively from December, 1959 onwards is there­
fore, ·. totally unjustified. Even otherwise these rules are 
agains,t the fair play, equity ·and justice as: rule 5'(2}(b)(iii) 
is against the judgement of Delhi High Couq which said that 
· there is no valid determination of quota and therefore people 
irecriuted from different sources are entitled to sam,e treat­
ment. 
In this coonectii'oa please also fefer to the para B &. D of the affidavit 
of Shri'f. N. 'srivastava, Director of Administration, Central iP.W.D. filed 
as Annexure n with our paper :.book on 25-8-82 and reproduced below 
for ready reference:-
(B) The recruitment Rules: do not specify any preferential treat· 
men.t to Assistant Bngio~ recruited by), one method over 
l those recruited by otl_ler' methods. 
r"~ (D) I say that no mistake in law has been committed in preP,ara­
. tion of the provisional Seniority List as alleged by the Peti-
. · tioners right for ~ing eonfirmed against, the . post of 

26 
Assi~tant Engi11eers is <eo-existent · with that of officers 
recrutted by the other methOds' prescribed in· the· Recruitment 
~ules, and . the! cannot claim any preferential treatment in 
t~s ~atter m VIe;" .of the decision of the Delhi High Court.' 
~e m~er se stmwnty ·of the Petitioners has been determind 
stnctly m accordance with the· positions secured by them in 
. the competitive examination. 
. It is due to this very rule that the AssiSJtant Engineers recruited direc­
tly after several years . be:ome senior to ;the Assistant Engineers promoted 
departmentally much ear her. This is against the judgement of ·Supreme 
, Court as already quoted above. . . 
(vi) Perusal of page 16 S. No. 271 onward of the list will reveal 
PRAYER: 
that the promotee Engineers! with 29 years service as As­
sistant Engineers have not been confinned as Assistant Engi­
nee'fs so far, although some of them have already retired from 
service after officiating even as Executive Engineers for · 20 · 
years. 
(i) The department should include immediately the names of all the 
Assistant En~neers promoted 'between 1973 a:nd ,1982 in the list. 
J 
(H) The deparlmerit should'·account for the. petniaftettt: pbsts released 
years.:.wise due to retirement, deafu; ooofirnu1tion in. the l1igh6r grade etc. 
of the various Assistant Engineers in those particular· yeats fto'm 1960 on-' 
.ward. 
(iii) Tre department should be directed to prepare the seniority List 
· afresh, taking into account the effect of oonfirmatioo of direct recruit As.­
sis.tant Engineers after their completion of probationery period of 2 years. 
(iv) The rules framed in 1979 and amended in 1982 should not be 
made applicable retrOSipectively at ·all. These rules should be made1 ap-
. plicable only from 1979 onwards with due amendment to para 5(2) (b) 
(iii)etc. keeping in view fair play, equity and justice so that the depart­
mentally promoted Assistant Engineers who lform bulk of this category of 
engineers of the department are not denied timely confirmation an& 
· promotion. 
( v) The Ministry may kindly be directed to make oonfirmation of As­
sistant Engineers upto Serial No. 624 upto which there is no dispute with-
out dela;Y. 
(vi) B~tween 1959 and upto 19'10, adequate number of super'uume­
!fary pcists should· ~ created for all clasS?s to avoid hardship to any par-

.. 
27 
ticular class1. · This· will facilitate ·to adjust the departmentally promoted· 
Assistant Engineers in that particular year so as to give equal treatment 
to all categories of Assistant Eqgine~r;s. .and. thp Assistant Engineers already 
working are not made junior ro AsSistant' Engineers recruited much. later 
in subsequerJ;t yelJXfl. Th,is Qreation. .of supernumerary posts. during the 
different ·years will be. necessary and .\ln~~tvoidable as senior departmentally 
promotq'd Assist~nt Eng\ne~J;s as per list cannot -be confirmed later than 
their Junior Assistant ,Eng\n~ers. · 
•' .. '·' ) . 
.... ·Yours faithfully, 
Sdl-
s. P. AGARWAL. 
Encl: 1· General Secretary. 

APPENDIX-I 
.List shoWing the Serial Nos. oj Assistant Engineers who have been le/i 
over. 
Serial Nos. 908, 910, 912, 920, · 922, 926, 932, 
936, 938, 940, 947, 955~ 957, 959, 96·1, =31 Nos. 
965, 967, 975, '.!'79, 981, 987 989, 993, 995, 
1001, 1005, 1013, 1017, 1029, 1031, 1033. .~ 
.. Serial Nos. 1039, 1041, 1044, 1045, 1047 to 
1052, 1055, 1058, 1059, 1062 ItO 1066, 
1069 to 1072, 1074, 1076, 1078, 1Q80, =39 Nos. 
1082, 1084 to 1087, 1089, 1090, 1092, 
1093, 1095, 1097 to 1099. 
1101 onward upto 1333 leaving retired per-=204 Nos. 
sons. 
ToTAL=274 
Sdi-
S. P; AGARWAL, 
General Secretary. 

MINUTES 

MINUTES O.F THE MEETING OF THE COMMITTEE ON 
SUBORDlNATE LEGISLATION 
(1982-83) 
VII 
SEVENTH MEETING 
The Committee met at 3.00 P.M. on Wednesday, the 25th August, 
1982, in Committee Room 'A', Ground F1oor, Parliament House Annexe, 
New Delhi. 
MEMBERS PRESENT 
1. Dr. Bhai Mahavir-Chairman 
2. Shri G. C. Bhattacharya 
3 . Shri Dipen Ghosh 
4. Shri B . D. Khobragade 
5 . Shri Ram Niwas Mirdha 
6. Shri Sushil Chand Mohunta 
7. Shri G. Swamy Naik 
8. Shri Ghanshyambhai Oza 
9. Shri Santosh Kumar Sahu. 
10, Shri Ng. Tompok Singh 
SECRETARIAT 
Shri B. R. Goel, Senior Legislative Committee Officer. 
REPR~SENTATIVE OF C.P.W,D. ENGINEERS ASSOCIATION 
Shri B. s. Kha:twani, President 
· Shri S. P. Agarwal, General Secretary 
Shri K .. A. Nankani, Member 
Shri G. R.- Jain, Member '. 
Shri D .. K. fain, M*ber . 
2 .. and.13. * * * * 
--~··--------·---------··--·--······· ·---· 
• "'**Relates <tO matte.r not included in this Report 
31 

3~ 
4:. MEMORANDUM No. 15-C.f.W..D. Assistant Engineers (Central 
Engineering Service and Central 'Electrical Engineering Service) 
Group 'B' (Confirmation. aliU1 Seniority) Rules, 1979 as amended 
by Amendment Rules, 1982. 
The Committee considered the above memorandum and heard the 
representatives of the Central P.W.D. Engineers Association, New Delhi, 
on the subject and sought clarifications. 
A verbatim record of :the evidence was kept . 
5. * ':' * * 
6. 'Fhe Committee considered the future programme of its silting3 and 
d~cided to hold next series of its meetings on Friday, the 3rd September 
·and Saturday, the 4th Sep,:ember, 1982. 
7. The Committee then. adjourned at 4.40 P.M. to meet again at 11.00 
A.M. on Thursday, the 26th Augus;t, 1982. 
XIV 
FOURTEENTH MEETING 
. The Committee met at 11.00 A.M. on Thursday, the 18th November, 
1982, in Committee Room No. 63, First Floor, Parliament House, New 
Delhi. · 
MEMBERS PRESENT 
1. Dr. Bhai Mahavir-Chairma'n · 
2. Shri Nand Kishore Bhatt 
3. Shri Amarprosad Chakraborty 
4. S'hri Dipen Ghmh 
5 . Shri B. D. Khobragadi! · 
6. Shri G. Swamy Naik 
7. Shri Ghanshyambhai Oza 
8. Shri Ng. Tompok Singh 
9. Shrl Sha'Ilti Tyagi "' 
SECRETARIAT 
Shri K. Dayal, Chief Legislative Committee Officer 
Shri B. R. Goel, Senior Legislative Committee Officer 
* * '" 
2 & (i) * * * * 
"'***Relates to matter not included in this Report, 

• 
33 
(ii) Supplement to Memorandum No, 15.-C.P.W.D. Assistant 
Engineers (Central Engineering Service and Central Electrical 
Engi>neering Service) Group 'B' ( C041:{irmation and Senioritt.,• 
Rules, 1979 as amended by Amendment Rules, 1982. . 
The Committtee considered the memorandum in the light of the com­
munica:tion of the Ministry of Works and Houging dated the 25th October, 
]982. . 
After so~e discussion, the Committee decided to hear the Secretary in 
the Ministry of Works·and Housing on the subject. 
4. The Committee then reconsidered i::s future programme of· sittings· 
and decided to meet at Delhi on 1st and 2nd December, 1982 instead of 
2nd and 3rd December, 1982 as decided earlier. 
The Committee also decided that subject to :the permtssmn of the 
Hon'ble Chairman, Rajya Sabha, it would visit Trivandrum, Cochin and 
Lakshadweep sometime during the month of December, 1982, to hold 
meetings and to make on-i~he-spot study visits in connection with the 
Committee's work. 
The Committee authorised its Chairman to approach the Hon'ble 
Chairman, Rajya Sabha, for obtaining his permission for the proposed: 
visits. 
The Committee also authorised its Chairman to chalk out the detai1ed 
programme for the proposed visit~ preferably during the later half of 
December, 1982. 
5. The Committee then adjourned at 12.40 P.M. to mecl again at 3.00 
P.M. on Wednesday, the 1st December, 1982. 
XVI 
SIXTEENTH. MEETING . 
The Commi:;tee met at 11.30 A.M. on Thursday, the 2nd December, 
1982, in Committee Room 'N, Ground Floor, Parliament Hou%ey Annexe, 
New Delhi. ' 
MEMBERS PRESENT 
1. Dr. Bhai Mahavir-Chairman 
2. Shri T. Basheer 
3. Shri Nan.<.! Ktshqr~ Bhatt 

34 
4. Shri G.' C. Bhattacharya 
5. Shri Dlpen Ghosh 
6. Shri B. D. Kbobragade 
7. Shri Sushil Chand Mohunta 
8. Shri G. Swamy Naik 
9. Shri Ghanshyambhai Oza 
10. Shri Santosh Kumar Sahu 
11. Shri N g. Tompok Singh 
12. Shri Shanti Tyagi. 
SECRETARIAT 
Shrimati K. K. Chopra, Additional Secretary 
Shri B. R. Goel, Senior Legisla:~ive Committee Officer. 
WITNESSES 
Representatives of the Ministries 
(i) Ministry of Works and Housing 
(;.f) Shri N. K. Mt!kherji, Secretary 
(b) Shri M. Srinivasan, Joint Secretary 
(ii) * * * 
2. * * * 
3. Supplement to Memorandum No. 15.-C.P.W.D. Assistant 
Engineers (Central Engineering Service dnd Central Electrical 
Engineering Service) Group 'B' ( Confirmtl!ion and Seniority) 
Rules, 1979 as amended by Amendment Rules of 1982. 
The Committee postpaned consideration of the above memorandum 
and the hearing of the Secretary of the Ministry of Works and Housing 
in the matter to a later date. 
4. The Committee then considered its future programme of sittings and 
decided to meet on the 13th and 14th December, 1982. 
5. The Commi~tee then adjourned at 1:00 P.M. to meet again at· 3 ·OO 
' on 13th December,. 1982. 
··Relates to matter not included in this Report. 

35 
XXI 
TWENTY-FIRST MEETING 
The Committee met at 3.00 P.M. on Mon9ay, the lOth January, 1983, 
in Committee Room 'A', Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New 
Delhi. 
MEMBERS PRESENT 
1. Dr. Bhai Mahavir-Chairman 
· 2. Shri T. Basheer 
3. Shri Nand Ki•3hore Bhatt 
4. Shri B. D. Khobragade 
5. Shri Ram Niwas Mirdha 
6. Shri Sushil Chand Mohun::a 
7. Shri G. Swamy Naik 
8. Shri Chanshyambhai Oza 
9. Shri Santosh Kumar Sahu 
10. Shri Ng. Tom]Jok Singh 
11. Dr. Rafiq Zakaria 
SECRETARIAT 
Shri K. Dayal, Chief Legislative Committee Officer. 
WITNESSES 
Representtives of ·the Ministry of Works and Housing 
Shri N. K. Mukherjee, Secretary 
Shri G. S. Rao, Director General (Works) C.P.W.D. 
Shri H. R. Gael, Under Secretary (E.W.) 
2. * * * 
3. Second Supplement to Memorandum No. 15.-C.P.W.D. Assis­
tant 'EngineQrs (CESICEES) Oroup 'B' (Confirmation and 
Seniority) Rules, 1979 as amended by Amendment Rules, 1982. 
The Commktee took up the above Memoranc;lum. for consideration and 
I1eard the representatives of the Ministry of Works and HoU<si~g :on. the 
subject. 
A verbatim record of the evidence was ke!1'. 
The Committee, after some discussion, decided to consider the matter 
furthe.r later on. The Chairman directed the Secretariat to prepare a note 
on the subject for the consideration by t!').e Committ~. 
4. The Committee ·~hen adjourned at 4.30 P.M. to meet again as 11.00 
A.M. on Tuesday, the l1th January,, 1983. 
****Relates to matters not rricluded in the Report. 

36. 
XXVI. 
TWENTY -SIXTH MEETING 
The. Commit~ee met at 11.00 A.M. on Tuesday, the 8th Februar 
1983, m ?'mmittee Room 'A' Ground Floor, Parliament House Anne:1;; New Delht. ' 
M~~BERS PRESENT 
1. Dr. Bhai Mahavir-Chairman 
2. Shri Dipen Ghosh 
3. Shri B. D. Khobragade 
4. Shri Sushi! Chand Mohunta 
5. Shri G. Swamy Naik 
6. Shri G'hanshyambhai Oza 
7. Shri Santosh Kumar Sahu 
8. Shri Shanti Tyagi 
SECRETARIAT 
Shri B. R.. Goal, C'hief Examiner of Questions 
2. The Committee considered and took decisions on the following 
memoranda:-
(i) Third Supplement to Memorandum No. 15.-regarding the 
C.P.W.D. Assistant Engineers (CemraJ Engineerinf< Se.-v!ce 
and Central Electrical Engineerinf? Service) Group 'B' (Con­
finnation and Seniority) Rules, 1979 as amended by Amend­
mrmt Rules, 1982. 
After some discussion, the Committee directed that the Ministry of 
Works and Housing be asked to inform whether any casG in the matter 
was pending before· any court, if so, the Ministry be asked to send a ccpy 
of Writ Petition to the Secretariat. The Committee further directed that 
a copy of Recruitment Rules of 1954 regarding Assistant Engineers {Civil 
and Electrical) be obtained from the Ministry. 
The Committee also directed the Secretariat to enquire from the Minis­
try of Home Affairs (Department of Personnel and Administrative Re­
forms) whether they had laid down any guidelines for the Ministrics!De­
partments for an Explanatory Memorandum being appended to an Order, 
if so, a copy of the guidelines be obtained from the Ministry. 
(ii) * * * 
3. The Committee, after some discussion authorised the Chairm~n to 
invite Secretaries of various MinistriesiDepartments to app~ar before him· 
·-·---~----··---
****Relates to matter not included in this Report. 

37 
as and when he considered necessary to seek clariticationslelucidations
1 
before the f!Iatter was placed before the Committee for its consideration. 
4. The Committee then adjourned at 12.05 P.M. 
XXVIII 
'TWENTY-EIGHTII MEETING 
The'Committee met at 11.00 A.M. on Saturday, the 2nd April, 19g3 
in Committee Room 'A', Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New 
Delhi. 
MEMBERS PRESENT 
1. Dr. Bhai Mahavir-Chairman 
.2. Shri T. Basheer 
3. Shri G. C. Bhattacharya 
4. Shri Alllarprosad Chakraborty· 
5. Shri Dipen Ghosh 
6. Shri B. D. Khobaragade 
7. Shri Sushil Chand Mohunta 
8. Shri G. Swamy Naik 
9. Shri Ghanshyambhai Oza 
10. Shri Santosh Kumar Sahu 
11. Shri Ng. Tompok Singh 
12. Shri Shanti Tyagi 
SECRETARIAT 
· Shri B. R. Goel, Chief Examiner of Questions 
Shri R. P. Mahajan, Senior Eegislative Committee Officer 
2. The Committee considered and took decisions on the following 
memoranda:-
(i) · to (iv) **** 
('f) Fourth Supplement to memorandum No. 15 regarding the 
C.P.W.D. Assistanlt Engineers (Civil Engineering Service and 
Central Electrical Engineering Senlice) Group 'B', (Confirma­
tion and Seniority) Rules, 1979 as amendetd by Amendment 
Rules, 1982. 
--·-~------
**"*Rela~i;:S to 1Jiatters not included in :this Report. 

gB 
the Committee considered the above memorandum and decided to 
r~iterate lts earlier direction in the· matter to the Ministry of Works and 
Housing to implement the amended rules and prepare the seniority list 
on the basis of those rules and the guidelines)directions issued by the Delhi 
High Court and up held by the Supreme Court and Committee on Subordi­
. nate Legislation ·of the Lok Sabha relating· to the retrospective operation 
of the rules expeditiously. While doing so, the Ministry of Works and 
Housing should not violate the principles of fair play, constitutionality, 
natural justice and the matter be decided keeping in view these principles. 
The Committee then directed the Secretaria~ to prepare a draft report 
on these lines. 
3. The Committee decided to hold its next series of meetings on the 
18th and 19th April, 1983. · 
4. The Committee then adjourned at 12.15 P.M. to meet again at 3.00 
P.M. on Monday, the 18th April, 1983. 
XXXI 
THIRTY -FIRST MEETING 
The Committee met at 3.00 P.M; on Friday, the 6th May, 1983, in 
Comm~ttee Room No. 67, First Floor, Parliament House, New Delhi. 
MEMBERS J;lRESENT 
1. Dr. Bhai Mahavir-Chairman 
2. Shri T. Basheer 
3. Shri B.D. Khobragade 
4. Shri Sushil Chand Mohunta 
5. Shri G. Swamy Naik 
6. Shri Santosh Kumar Sahu 
7. Shri Ng. Tompok Singh 
8. Dr. Rafiq Zakaria 
SECRETARIAT 
Sh · B R Goal .Chief Examiner of Questions . . n . . . ' 
Shri R. P. Mahajan, Senior Legislative Committee Officer. 
2. **** 
---------~---~ --~--- ---- ~- ···---~-- --~ 
-------~-
* * Rehltes to matters not included in the Report. 

39 
3. The Committee cdnsidered and adopted the dr~t Fifty-Third Re­
port. The Committee decided ·that ithe Report be presented to the House on 
the lOb May, 1983. 
4. The Committee authorised <the Chairman and, in his absence, Shl'i 
Sushil Chand Mohunta, Shri Santosh Kumar Sahu and Shri B.D. Khobra­
gade to present the Report to the House. 
5. **** 
6. The Committee adjourned at 3.40 P.M., to meet again as 3.00 
P.M. on Friday, the 20th May, 1983. 
--- ..... --------------....,. 
••••Relates to matter not included in this Report. 