REPORT NO.
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA SABHA
COMMITTEE ON SUBORDINATE LEGISLATION
TWO HUNDRED AND NINTH REPORT
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi
September, 2013/Bhadrapada, 1935 (Saka)
The Hallmarking Scheme and Certain
Rules/Regulations framed under the
Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 1986
(Presented on 3rd September, 2013)
209


Webside : http://rajyasabha.nic.in
E-Mail : rsc1sub@sansad.nic.in

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA SABHA
COMMITTEE ON SUBORDINATE LEGISLATION
TWO HUNDRED AND NINTH REPORT
The Hallmarking Scheme and Certain Rules/
Regulations framed under the Bureau of
Indian Standards Act, 1986
(Presented on 3rd September, 2013)
RAJYA  SABHA  SECRETARIAT
NEW  DELHI
September, 2013/Bhadrapada, 1935 (Saka)
Hindi version of this publication is also available

CONTENTS
PAGES
1. C OMPOSITION  OF THE C OMMITTEE ............................................ (i)
2. I NTRODUCTION ..................................................................... (iii)
3. R EPORT ON THE HALLMARKING SCHEME AND CERTAIN
RULES/REGULATIONS FRAMED UNDER THE BUREAU OF
INDIAN S TANDARDS ACT, 1986 .............................................. 1-17
4. A NNEXURE  ......................................................................... 19-42
5. M INUTES ............................................................................ 43-45

COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE
(Constituted on the 8th May, 2013)
1. Shrimati Maya Singh        ------       Chairperson
2. Shri M.P. Achuthan
3. Shri Ali Anwar Ansari
4. Shri D. Bandyopadhyay
5. Shri P. Bhattacharya
6. Shri Balwinder Singh Bhunder
7. Shri Prakash Javadekar
8. Shri Mangala Kisan
9. Shri Lalhming Liana
10. Shri Rasheed Masood
11. Dr. Bhalchandra Mungekar
12. Shri K.Parasaran
*13. Shri Vijay Jawaharlal Darda
14. Shrimati V asanthi Stanley
15. Shri Bhupender Yadav
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Shri N.K.Singh, Joint Secretary
2. Shri Mahesh Tiwari, Director
3. Shri R.S. Rawat, Joint Director
4. Shri Rakesh Anand, Joint Director
4. Shri R.P. Shukla, Assistant Director
5. Shrimati Monica Baa, Assistant Director
(i)
*Nominated w.e.f. 22.07.2013

INTRODUCTION
1. I, the Chairperson of the Committee on Subordinate Legislation, having
been authorized by the Committee, do hereby present on its behalf, this Two
Hundred and Ninth Report of the Committee.
2. The Committee examined the matters that came up while scrutinizing
the Hallmarking Scheme and Certain Rules/Regulations framed u nder the
Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 1986 and issues relating to them along with
the comments received from the concerned Governments.
3. The observations and recommendations of the Committee are contained
in the Report.
4. The Committee considered and adopted the draft Report in its meeting
held on the 27th August, 2013.
MAY A SINGH
Chairperson,
Committee on Subordinate Legislation
Rajya Sabha.
NEW DELHI;
3rd September, 2013
(iii)

1
Report on The Hallmarking Scheme and
Certain Rules/ Regulations framed under the
Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 1986
The Bureau of Indian Standards (BIS), an autonomous statutory
organization, came into existence after repealing of erstwhile Indian Standards
Institution (Certification Marks) Act, 1952, through an Act of Parliament i.e.
the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 1986 dated 26th November 1986, on
1 April 1987. The new Act has, therefore, a broadened scope with more powers
taking over the staff, assets, liabilities and functions of erstwhile Indian
Standards Institution (ISI). Through this change over, Government envisaged
building a climate for quality culture and consciousness and greater participation
of consumers in formulation and implementation of national standards.
2. The Committee received a representation dated the 4th October, 2010
from the Forum for Good Governance, New Delhi regarding illegal operation
of Hallmarking Scheme for Gold Jewellery by the Bureau of Indian Standards
(BIS) and Department of Consumer Affairs in contravention of the BIS Act,
1986 as no regulations for governing the licences granted under the Scheme
have been laid down. A copy of the representation was forwarded to the Ministry
of Consumer Affairs, Food and Public Distribution (Department of Consumer
Affairs) for their comments/clarifications on the issues contained thereon on
the 31st December, 2010. The Ministry furnished their comments/clarifications
(Annexure-I) on the 14th January, 2011. The Committee thereafter held
discussions on the Hallmarking Scheme with the representatives of the Ministry
of Consumer Affairs, Food and Public Distribution (Department of Consumer
Affairs), Ministry of Commerce and Industry (Department of Industrial Policy
and Promotion), Bureau of Indian Standards (BIS) and Minerals and Metals
Trading Corporation (MMTC) on the 19th January, 2011 in New Delhi and
again with the representatives of the MMTC, BIS, along with Assaying Centres
and the Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food and Public Distribution (Department

2
of Consumer Affairs) at Kumarakom on 23rd June, 2011. Study Notes on the
above discussions are placed at Annexure II and III. The Ministry’s comments
on the representation and the issues taken up for discussion during the above
said meetings are enumerated in the succeeding paragraphs.
3. The main issue for consideration of the Committee was that Gold Jewellery
Hallmarking Certification Scheme of BIS contravened the BIS Act as no
regulations for governing the licences granted under the Scheme had been laid
down, as required under Section 15 of the BIS Act. Secondly, in the absence
of regulations how and under which provisions of the BIS Act, 1986 or rules/
regulations, BIS had been operating the Hallmarking Scheme. The comments
of the Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food and Public Distribution (Department
of Consumer Affairs) on the representation are given as under:-
“According to Section 2 (t) of the BIS Act, Standard Mark means the
Bureau of Indian Standards Certification Mark specified by BIS to
represent a particular Indian Standard. Rule 9 of the BIS Rules, 1987
provides that the Standard mark in relation to each Indian Standard shall
be published by the Bureau in the Official Gazette. Accordingly, the Bureau
notified the Standard Marks for IS 1417:1999 and ISI 2112-2003 in the
Gazette dated 27.04.2000 and 18.01.2006, respectively. Under the
Hallmarking Scheme for Gold and Silver Jewellery, licences are granted
to jewelers to enable them to get their jewellery certified for its fineness
in accordance with the requirements of ISI 1417:1999 ‘Gold and Gold
Alloys, Jewellery/ Artifacts-Fineness and Marking-Specification (Third
Revision)’ and ISI 2112:2003 ‘Silver and Silver Alloys, Jewellery/
Artifacts-Fineness and Marking-Specification’ and use the notified
standard mark on them. The provisions for grant of license to use the
Standard Mark in respect of any product against a particular standard
are contained in the Bureau of Indian Standards (Certification) Regulations,
1998. Gold and Silver jewellery are the products for which license can
be given”.

3
4. The Ministry further informed the Committee that the Scheme was
introduced in 2000 as a voluntary scheme. In order to make the Scheme
mandatory, Government has been considering an amendment to the BIS Act.
Further, the subject “BIS- Hallmarking of Jewellery” was selected by the
Parliamentary Standing Committee on Food, Consumer Affairs and Public
Distribution for examination in the year 2010. The Committee in its 9th Report
submitted to the Lok Sabha and the Rajya Sabha on 31st August, 2010 strongly
recommended the Department to finalize the modalities of the Bill (for
amendment of the BIS Act) for its early introduction in Parliament so as to
bring the hallmarking under Mandatory Certification. The Committee also felt
that a lot more needed to be done to make the Scheme popular and make
people aware about the benefits of the Scheme and desired that BIS should
organize more publicity campaigns to educate the people at large about the
benefits of the scheme. The aim is that the common consumer gets gold and
silver jewellery of the purity declared by the jeweler. The Ministry was of the
considered view that no separate regulations were required as the existing BIS
Certification Regulations were adequate to cover voluntary hallmarking license
and that no difficulty or legal problems had been encountered so far.
Implementation of the Scheme was already being done as per these regulations.
5. Based on the Ministry’s comments, the issues that came up for discussion
during the Committee’s meetings held on 19th January, 2011 and 23rd June,
2011, included: (i) whether Ministry’s position that ‘no separate regulations
are required for hallmarking license’ was in contradiction with Section 15(1)
of the BIS Act, 1986 which provided that the Bureau may grant, renew, suspend
or cancel a license in such a manner as may be determined by regulations; and
Section 15(2) which provides that the grant or renewal of the license shall be
subject to such conditions and on payment of such fees as may be determined
by regulations; (ii) action taken pursuant to the Parliamentary Standing
Committee on Food, Consumer Affairs and Public Distribution’s
recommendations for early introduction of amendment to the BIS Act so as to

4
bring hallmarking under mandatory certification; (iii) steps taken by Government
to make hallmarking Scheme more popular; (iv) the legal remedy available to
consumers who are cheated by the jewellers and whether BIS would be legally
empowered to take action against the delinquent jewellers; and (v) whether
BIS undertakes frequent inspection of assaying centres and steps taken by BIS
to prevent adulteration of gold.
6. The Committee was informed that Hallmarking Scheme for Gold Jewellery
was launched by BIS in April, 2000 to protect consumers against victimization
due to irregular gold quality, develop export competitiveness and make India as
a gold market centre in the world. The gold jewellery hallmarking licenses
were regulated by the Bureau of Indian Standards (Certifications) Regulations,
1988 and that most of the standards prescribed by the BIS were generally
voluntary and consensus based. Under the Scheme, a jeweller has to obtain
licence from BIS to get his jewellery hallmarked from a BIS recognized Assaying
and Hallmarking Centre. The Scheme thus does not grant self marking rights
to jewellers. The Hallmarking Centres are recognized by BIS based on laid
down criteria after ensuring that the Centre has required infrastructure for
assaying and hallmarking of gold jewellery, as well as adequate arrangement
for security and safety of articles.
7. Bureau of Indian Standards, under the administrative control of the
Department of Consumer Affairs has been operating the Gold Jewellery
Hallmarking Scheme. People purchased hallmarked jewellery under the belief
that hallmarking was legal and they would have legal remedies against the
dishonest jewellers. However, the Scheme did not have a legal backing and the
Hallmarking Scheme for Gold Jewellery was being allowed to run illegally in
total defiance to the provisions of section 15 of the BIS Act and without any
Regulations. The Ministry in their reply stated that the gold jewellery hallmarking
licenses were regulated by the Bureau of India Standards (Certifications)
Regulations, 1988 and that most of the standards prescribed by the BIS were

5
generally voluntary and consensus based. On the issue of quality maintenance
in ISI certified products, BIS informed that day-to-day checking was not done
given the spread and size of the country. However, inspection was done
periodically and the labs which gave ISI certifications had to fulfil the
requirements prescribed by the National Accreditation Board for Testing and
Calibration Laboratories (NABL). Adequate surveillance was being maintained
on operations of the assaying and hallmarking centres. Section 14 of the BIS
Act gave powers to the Central Government to make some of the standards
mandatory in public interest. These standards were mandatory keeping in view
public health and safety involved therein. Whenever any standard was made
mandatory then all the producers of that particular product had to compulsorily
take license from the BIS. As per the BIS Act, offences against use of ISI/
Hallmark without licence and nonconformity of gold with declared purity are
constituted under section 11 of the Act and punishment for the offences under
Section11 is prescribed under Section 33 of the BIS Act. The Committee,
however, observed that orders referring to mandatory standards are
issued by the concerned Ministry and not by the Bureau of Indian
Standards or Department of Consumer Affairs and that the Bureau of
Indian Standards Certification Regulations, 1988, in reality, only
regulated the licenses for use of ISI Mark. As the Hallmarking Scheme
was not governed by any Regulations, the Hallmarking licenses granted
by BIS had no legal force and their violations did not constitute offences
under Section 11 and, therefore, not punishable under Section 33 of the
Act.
8. The Committee is of the view that the Hallmarking Scheme of
Gold Jewellery should be made mandatory by making an amendment to
the BIS Act and Department of Consumer Affairs and BIS may be directed
to urgently make regulations under Section 15 and Section 38 of BIS
Act, 1986 for governing the Hallmark Licences. The Committee is
surprised and fails to understand why BIS/ Government is averse/ hostile

6
to framing of regulations for hallmarking licences and how in the absence
of any regulations, hallmarking licences are being granted under Section
15 of the BIS Act. The Committee observes that in view of Section 15(1)
and 15(2), existence of Regulations is mandatory for grant of licenses
under the Hallmarking Certification Scheme.
9. The Committee observed that although BIS had specified hall-
marking charges which licensed jewellers paid to the recognized Assaying
and Hall-Marking Centers, for getting gold jewellery articles tested and
hall-marked, yet, BIS had no role in deciding pricing of Hall-Marked
jewellery articles. The Committee was not satisfied with the work of BIS
in this regard and expressed concern regarding the higher cost involved
in hall-marking of goods/articles and pointed towards the difference in
market prices of goods with and without hall-marking. BIS Act requires
appropriate Regulations for operating Hallmarking Schemes in terms
of section 15 of the BIS Act, 1987. The Committee, accordingly, directs
the Ministry/BIS to take immediate/ necessary action in this regard.
10. The Committee recommends that assaying and hallmarking should
be made mandatory not only for the protection of the customer but also
for the viability of units established all over the country. Also, to provide
assurance of quality, hallmarking scheme may be made mandatory for
exporters of gold jewellery. Further, the licence to assaying and
hallmarking centres should be granted area-wise to avoid inter se
competition. In the Committee’s view, the Indian Hallmarking Council,
an independent body, under the BIS should be set up with Members of
Trade and Industry to monitor the operation of the scheme and enforce
regulations framed and notified by BIS/ Government.
11. The Committee observes that the registration scheme started by
Government in consultation with BIS is akin to granting/ distributing
licences to industries and sacrificing the interests of consumers as well

7
as the quality. In Committee’s view the registration scheme is killing
the existing revenue earning scheme i.e. the BIS Product Certification
Scheme popularly known as ISI Mark Scheme. This simplified procedure
for granting licences to the industry at the cost of the consumer will put
all checks and balances of normal procedure to a naught. Infact, this
simplified procedure violates the provisions of the BIS Act/ Rules/
Regulations. The Committee, accordingly, recommends that BIS take
immediate necessary action to correct the procedure so that it does not
put companies applying for licence under normal procedure to
disadvantage.
12. The Committee feels that more needs to be done to popularize the
scheme by creating awareness among the consumers and such awareness
campaigns should also highlight benefits which would accrue to the
jewellers through hallmarking. Further, in view of the capital intensive
nature of the project, BIS may explore the possibility of granting subsidy/
other incentive for all units established for promotion of the scheme.
13. The Committee also examined the BIS (Terms and Conditions of Service
of Employees) Regulations, 2007 and a questionnaire on the subject matter
was forwarded to the Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food and Public
Distribution (Department of Consumer Affairs) for their comments/clarifications
on the 14th January, 2011. The comments/clarifications of the Ministry on the
questionnaire are placed at Annexure-IV. The Committee also discussed the
subject matter with the Department of Consumer Affairs, Ministry of Consumer
Affairs, Food and Public Distribution and Bureau of Indian Standards (BIS) at
its meeting held on the 19th January, 2011.
14. The Ministry informed the Committee that implementation of the Central
Pay Commission Recommendations (CPC) necessitated the framing of the
BIS (Terms and Conditions of Service of Employees) Regulations, 2007. The
Ministry further informed the Committee on the following issues, (i) As per
Regulation 17, BIS employees were entitled for medical facilities under Central

8
Government Health Scheme (CGHS). The employees not covered under the
CGHS were entitled to benefits as admissible to the employees of Central
Government Employees under Central Civil Services (Medical Attendance)
Rules, 1944 (CSMA). The present amount of monetary ceiling per annum was
over and above the benefits under CSMA Rules for reimbursement of medical
expenses including OPD charges. This was to facilitate treatment from any
registered medical practitioner; (ii) Revised pay scales as per the 6th Pay
Commission had been implemented in the BIS with the approval of the
Government. However, the first Schedule of the Regulations was yet to be
amended as certain discrepancies were observed in a few categories of Group
‘B’ Posts for which the matter had been taken up with the Government; (iii)
Consequent upon the upgradation of the erstwhile employees of Group ‘D’ to
Group ‘C’, the insurance cover as well as the contribution payable by the BIS
employees had been enhanced w.e.f. February, 2010. However, Sl. No. 6 of
the Second Schedule appended to the Regulations was yet to be amended as
the matter was under consideration with the Ministry; (iv) Promotion prospects
of BIS Scientific Cadre Officers were made in accordance with Government
of India’s Flexible Complementing Scheme (FCS) and duly incorporated in the
BIS (Recruitment to Scientific Cadre) Regulations, 2002; (v) BIS was short of
staff. The main difficulties before BIS in this regard were (a) non availability
of suitable candidates to fill the posts through direct recruitment, and (b) non
availability of candidates with the prescribed qualifications and experience in
BIS Laboratory Cadre for filing up the scientific cadre posts through promotion;
(vi) The 2007 Regulations provided for filling up of posts through promotion/
transfer on deputation/Direct Recruitment. BIS had made efforts to address
this problem by (a) reviving some posts that had been abolished, (b) advertising
the posts to be filled and (c) taking steps as per the provisions of the said
Regulations for filling up posts that had not been filled up yet.
15. The Committee, thereafter, enquired about (i) the reasons for not holding
any meeting of BIS since 28th July, 2003 in violation of Rule 5(2) of BIS

9
Rules, 1987; (ii) the reasons for outsourcing part of BIS’s work and whether
the same was mandated under the BIS Act and Rules; (iii) prospects of promotion
for scientific cadre officers working in BIS as compared to scientists working
in other Government undertakings, training facilities provided to employees of
BIS and other related issues. The Committee observed that (i) Shortage of
manpower in BIS, especially non-scientific officers which led to certain
essential items of work relating to legal, Human Resource Department,
Administration, etc. being attended to by some scientific officers in
addition to their normal duties; (ii) BIS had not held any meetings since
28th July, 2003 in violation of Rule 5(2) of the BIS Rules, 1987, which
mandates that the Bureau shall meet twice in a year; and (iii) Section
10(1)(l) of BIS Act, 1986 empowered BIS to appoint agents in India or
abroad for inspection, testing and such other purposes as may be
prescribed. Based on this provision, BIS had outsourced its work relating
to routine surveillance visits after the grant of licence. The Committee
wondered to what extent this was justified.
16. Director General, BIS informed the Committee that there was shortage
of staff in BIS especially in the scientific cadre as the Interview Board could
not find suitable candidates. The problem was compounded by the standing
orders of the Department of Personnel and Training (DOPT) which stated that
if a post is lying vacant for more than one year, it stands abolished. Regarding
training of employees, DG , BIS stated that the National Institute of Training
for Standardization (NITS) Noida, a training Institute under the Bureau conducts
training on a wide range of subjects for staff and officers of BIS for capacity
building and also organizes international training programmes for developing
countries as well. The Committee could not fathom why BIS could not get
requisite number of suitable candidates for scientific cadre when other
organizations were getting the requisite number of such candidates.
17. Further, during the course of examination of the Electrical Wires, Cables,
Appliances and Protection Devices and Accessories (Quality Control) Order,

10
2003, on which the Committee presented a Report to the House on the 3rd
May, 2013, the Committee held meetings with the representatives of the Ministry
of Commerce and Industry (Department of Industrial Policy and Promotion),
Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food and Public Distribution (Department of
Consumer Affairs) and Bureau of Indian Standards. During the course of the
discussions, the Committee raised certain points regarding the administrative
setup and functioning of the Bureau of Indian Standards and functioning under
the administrative control of the Government through the Department of
Consumer Affairs, Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food and Public Distribution.
The points that came up for discussion with the Ministry of Consumer Affairs,
Food and Public Distribution (Department of Consumer Affairs) thereon are
given in the succeeding paragraphs.
18. Although BIS had specified hall-marking charges which licensed jewellers
paid to the recognized Assaying and Hallmarking Centres, for getting gold
jewellery articles tested and hallmarked yet BIS had no role in deciding pricing
of Hallmarked jewellery articles. The Committee was not satisfied with the
work of BIS in this regard and expressed concern regarding the higher
cost involved in hallmarking of goods/articles and pointed towards the
difference in market prices of goods with and without hallmarking.
19. As per the BIS Act, 1987, the Director General of BIS is to be appointed
by the Central Government as per the BIS (Appointment, Terms and Conditions
of Service of Director General) Rules, 1987. These rules lay down the norms,
qualifications and the procedure for appointment of Director General of BIS.
The Committee expressed serious concern on observing that generalist
officers, especially from All India Services, were being appointed as
Director General (DG) and Additional Director Generals (ADGs) of BIS
when the BIS Rules (Appointment, Terms and Conditions of Service of
Director General), 1987 had specifically prescribed technical qualifications
for the posts of DG and ADGs. However, BIS Rules had been totally by-
passed while appointing DG, BIS on deputation. Firstly, there was no provision

11
in BIS Rules for appointment of DG , BIS on deputation basis. The Committee
had shown its displeasure over the failure of BIS to find any suitable candidate
from technical background when the post of Director General lied vacant
repeatedly in 2004, 2006 and 2008. The Selection Committee was, therefore,
compelled to approach the Department of Personnel and Training so that they
nominate an officer empanelled as Additional Secretary with technical/scientific
degree for that post. The Committee observed that BIS being a specialized
agency and when the BIS (Appointment, Terms and Conditions of Service
of Director General) Rules, 1987 particularly provided for technical
qualification for the post of Director-General, appointment of generalist
officers was tantamount to violation of recruitment rules in BIS. The
Committee took note of the fact that later on the Cabinet Secretariat separately
advised the Department to review and revise the Recruitment Rules. The draft
Rules prescribing revised eligibility conditions for the post of Director General
were then submitted to Cabinet Secretariat and DOP&T for concurrence/
approval which had been received from DOPT. Moreover, it seems that BIS
did not heed to the advice of the Cabinet Committee on Appointments (CCA)
and without amending the Recruitment Rules, sought its approval for
appointment of DG, BIS on deputation again in July, 2008 when a vacancy of
DG arose due to promotion of erstwhile DG , BIS in May, 2008.
20. Bureau of India Standards is a scientific organization and has a Flexible
Complementing Scheme (FCS) for promotions of its scientific officers, which
leaves much scope for violating the provisions of FCS and DOPT Circular for
promoting officers without giving regard to eligibility criteria. It is alleged that
BIS is making mockery of Flexible Complimenting Scheme (FCS) for promotion
of BIS Scientific Cadre in violation of BIS Regulations and DOPT instructions.
The Committee, accordingly, recommends that specific/relevant rules
should be in place to ensure that the existing systems do not make
mockery of Flexible Complimenting Scheme (FCS) for promotion of BIS
Scientific Cadre Officers in violation of BIS Regulations and DOPT
instructions.

12
21. While BIS Act under Section 10(1)(l) has a provision for appointing
agents/outsourcing jobs for carrying out inspections under BIS Product
Certification Scheme, but in the process of appointing agents BIS has violated
many provisions of its Principal Act, Rules, Regulations and also its own
Certification Manual. Thus, procedure given in BIS rules has not been followed.
The Committee observed that BIS had been outsourcing part of its work
and expressed concern whether this was mandated under the BIS Acts
and Rules and how BIS ensured that these outsourced agencies appoint
qualified and technically competent staff.
22. On the issue of the working of BIS and ‘Certification Work’, the
Committee further wanted to know the reason for outsourcing the certification
work to private agencies which was earlier being done by BIS. The Committee
also inquired about the standards or qualifications prescribed for the private
agencies and whether BIS undertook quality audit of working of these agencies.
The Committee thus questioned about the violation of the rules in this regard.
The Ministry informed the Committee that due to increase in work load and
shortage of officers in the BIS, the work relating to routine surveillance visits
after the grant of license was outsourced. The work relating to preliminary
inspection for grant of license and other statutory functions including
certification were, however, discharged by BIS officers only. As per Section
10 (1) (l) of BIS Act, 1986, agents can be appointed in India or abroad, for
inspection testing and such other purposes as may be prescribed. The
laboratories of the agents are then counter-checked by the BIS personnel to
find out whether they have required facilities for testing and whether laboratories
are certified by National Accreditation Board for Laboratories (NABL). One of
the technical requirements at the time of tendering for engagement as authorized
agencies is that the people deployed for inspection work of BIS should have
Degree in Engineering/Post Graduate Degree in Science. The BIS Committee
which selects these agents ensures that these agents fulfil the technical
requirements as envisaged in the BIS Act. The inspection reports submitted by
outsourced agencies are then scrutinized by BIS officers and discrepancies, if

13
any found, are conveyed to the agencies for necessary actions at their end.
BIS officers also undertook quality audit of these units. The Committee
observed that agencies usually employed diploma holders or ITI trained
people for inspecting companies and their products while in the BIS Act
it was provided that only scientific cadre officers should inspect the
companies.
23. The Committee observes that though the BIS Act provided for
appointment of Advisory Committee, the Rules framed in this regard
did not provide for the qualifications, experience etc. of the Members to
be appointed to these Advisory Committees. In the view of the
Committee, the Rules of BIS should have been made more specific and,
accordingly, advises the Ministry to initiate immediate/necessary action
in this regard. The Ministry in its reply stated that Section 5 of the Bureau of
Indian Standard Act, 1986 provided for number of Advisory Committees each
consisting of a Chairman and such other members as may be determined by
Regulations. “Member” as per BIS Act meant any member of the Bureau and
could represent Government, Industry, Scientific and Research Institutions,
and other interests.
24. Further after studying the rules/regulations framed by BIS so far,
the Committee was of the view that there was an absence of proper
delegation of powers at different levels and therefore inquired about the
action that had been initiated by the Ministry/BIS to amend the BIS
Rules in this regard. The Ministry in turn informed the Committee that under
Regulation 3 of the BIS (Powers and Duties of Director General) Regulations,
1987 on account of administrative efficiency, Director General may delegate
any of his powers or duties as prescribed in the Regulations to any officers not
below the rank of Deputy Director of the Bureau. Accordingly, Director General
had appropriately delegated various powers to the subordinate officers of the
BIS. Further with the view to increase efficiency, Bureau itself had delegated
its powers for grant of license to the Heads of various Branch Offices of the
BIS.

14
25. The Committee also raised concern about the inadequate manpower
of BIS and took note of the fact that officers were holding multiple posts
for which different qualifications and experience were needed. The
Committee viewed it seriously as this kind of situation would certainly
hamper the functional efficacy of any organization. However, the
Committee was informed that BIS at that particular time had 411 scientific
officers and 34 non scientific officers against the strength of 579 and 57
respectively indicated in the relevant Regulations. Due to shortage of non
scientific officers, certain essential items of work relating to Legal, Human
Resource Department, Administration, etc. were being attended to by some of
the scientific officers in addition to their normal duties so that the functioning
of BIS was not hampered and this arrangement was done in the interest of the
organization. The Ministry further informed that the Consumer Affairs
Department of BIS was a part of technical support service to be handled by
scientific cadre officers as the activity required knowledge of standardization.
Officers of that Department also handled the functions of standards promotion,
educational utilization of standard programmes, standard formulation, etc, which
were of scientific nature. However, in the Committee’s opinion, the core
functions of BIS should not be outsourced to private agencies as they
have no accountability to the Parliament. Moreover, the Committee
observes that the BIS Act needs to be suitably amended to allow BIS to
impose stringent penalties and punishments to the defaulters of BIS
Standards.
26. The Committee also observed that BIS Rules regarding appeals
had been violated. There are instances of appeals being heard and decided by
the Executive Committee of the BIS ( the Appellate Authority in BIS) where
Director General was present as a member, who himself has passed orders
against which appeals are being heard. This is in violation of CCS (CCA)
Rules, 1965 and also against the Principle of Natural Justice.

15
GENERAL OBSERV ATIONS/ RECOMMENDATIONS OF THE
COMMITTEE
27. The Committee is of the view that the Hallmarking Scheme of
Gold Jewellery should be made mandatory by making an amendment to
the BIS Act and Department of Consumer Affairs and BIS may be directed
to urgently make regulations under Section 15 and Section 38 of BIS
Act, 1986 for governing the Hallmark Licences. The Committee observes
that in view of Section 15(1) and 15(2), existence of Regulations is
mandatory for grant of licenses under the Hallmarking Certification
Scheme.
28. The Committee observed that although BIS had specified hall-
marking charges which licensed jewellers paid to the recognized Assaying
and Hallmarking Centers, for getting gold jewellery articles tested and
hallmarked, yet, BIS had no role in deciding pricing of Hallmarked
jewellry articles. The Committee was not satisfied with the work of BIS
in this regard and expressed concern regarding the higher cost involved
in hallmarking of goods/articles and pointed towards the difference in
market prices of goods with and without hallmarking. BIS Act requires
appropriate Regulations for operating Hallmarking Schemes in terms
of section 15 of the BIS Act, 1987. The Committee, accordingly, directs
the Ministry/BIS to take immediate/necessary action in this regard.
29. The Committee expressed serious concern on observing that
generalist officers, especially from All India Services, are being appointed
as Director General (DG) and Additional Director Generals (ADGs) of
BIS when the BIS Rules (Appointment, Terms and Conditions of Service
of Director General), 1987 had specifically prescribed technical
qualifications for the posts of DG and ADGs. The Committee, therefore,
impresses upon the Department of Consumer Affairs not to violate the
BIS (Appointment, Terms and Conditions of Service of Director General)
Rules, 1987 while appointing DG or ADGs in the BIS.

16
30. The Committee is concerned about the acute shortage of manpower
in BIS and took note of the fact that officers were holding multiple posts
for which different qualifications and experience were needed. The
Committee viewed it seriously as this kind of situation would  certainly
hamper the functional efficacy of any organization. In the Committee’s
opinion, the core functions of BIS should not be outsourced to private
agencies as they have no accountability to the Parliament. Moreover,
the Committee observes that the BIS Act needs to be suitably amended
to allow BIS to impose stringent penalties and punishments to the
defaulters of BIS Standards.
31. The Committee observed that BIS had outsourced the work relating
to routine surveillance visits after the grant of licence due to shortage
of staff and officers. The Committee, therefore, reiterates the need to
strengthen the staff of BIS, to increase the number of BIS labs so as to
reduce imbalances in the country in respect of distribution of BIS
laboratories. Moreover, the Committee feels that the core functions of
BIS should not be outsourced as private agencies have no accountability
to the Parliament.
32. BIS is a scientific organization and has a Flexible Complementing
Scheme (FCS) for promotions of its scientific officers. The Committee,
accordingly, recommends that specific rules should be framed to ensure
that the existing Flexible Complimenting Scheme (FCS) for promotion
of BIS Scientific Cadre Officers does not work in violation of BIS
Regulations and DOPT Circulars. The Committee is also of the opinion
that there should be proper delegation of powers at different levels in
the organization so that BIS can perform its work without any hindrance.
33. The Committee observes that though the BIS Act provides for
appointment of Advisory Committee, the Rules framed in this regard
do not provide for the qualifications, experience etc. of the Members
to be appointed to these Advisory Committees. In the view of the

17
Committee, the Rules of BIS should have been made more specific
and, accordingly, advises the Ministry to initiate immediate/ necessary
action in this regard .
34. The Committee feels that Department of Consumer Affairs and
BIS need to do a lot more to arouse mass awareness about the benefits
of the Hallmarking Scheme through publicity campaigns in electronic
and print media.
35. In the Committee’s view, the Department of Consumer Affairs, as
the administrative Ministry for enforcement of the BIS Act and BIS,
has both authority and responsibility to regulate BIS and ensure that
the affairs of BIS are conducted in accordance with the BIS Act.

ANNEXURES

Annexure-I
No:-14/2/2010-BIS
Government of India
Ministry of Consumers Affairs Food & Public Distribution
Department of Consumer Affairs
Krishi Bhawan, New Delhi
Dated 14th January, 2011
OFFICE  MEMORANDUM
Subject :- Representation received from Forum for Good Governance on the
Gold Jewellery Hallmarking .
The undersigned is directed to refer to Rajya Sabha Secretariat O.M.
No. RS.19(10)/2010 : COSL dated 31st December, 2010 on the subject
mentioned above and to say that the issues raised by Shri Makhijani in his
representation dated 4th October, 2010 have been examined in consultation
with BIS. The comments/clarifications in the matter are as under:
(a) The relevant Indian Standards relating to the BIS Hallmarking Scheme
are as follows:
(1) IS 417 : 1999 'Gold and Gold Alloys, Jewellery/Artefacts -
Fineness and Marking - Specification (Third Revision)'.
(2) IS 2112: 2003 'Silver and Silver Alloys, Jewellery/Artefacts-
Fineness and Marking- Specification'.
(b) According to Section 2 (t) of the BIS Act, Standard Mark means
the Bureau of Indian Standards Certification Mark- specified by the
Bureau to represent a particular Indian Standard. Rule 9 of the BIS
Rules, 1987 provides that the Standard Mark in relation to each
Indian Standard shall be published by the Bureau in the Official
21

22
Gazette. Accordingly, the Bureau notified the Standard Marks for
IS 1417:1999 and IS 2112-2003 in the Gazette on 27-04-2000 and
18-01-2006 respectively. Under the Hallmarking Scheme for Gold
and Silver Jewellery, licenses are granted to jewellers to enable them
to get their jewellery certified for its fineness in accordance with
the requirements of IS 1417:1999 'Gold and Gold Alloys, Jewellery/
Artefacts - Fineness and Marking - Specification (Third Revision)'
and IS 2112: 2003 'Silver and Silver Alloys: Jewellery/ Artefacts-
Fineness and Marking-Specification' and use the notified standard
mark on them. The provisions for grant of license to use the Standard
mark in respect of any product against a particular standard are
contained in the Bureau of Indian Standards (Certification)
Regulations, 1988. Gold and Silver Jewellery are also the products,
for which, license can be given.
(c) The Scheme was introduced in the year 2000 as a voluntary
Scheme. In order to make the Scheme mandatory the Government
has been considering an amendment to the BIS Act. It is expected
that this Bill will be introduced in the Parliament this year.
(d) The subject “BIS Hallmarking of Jewellery" was selected by
Parliamentary Standing Committee on Food, Consumer Affairs and
Public Distribution for examination during the year 2010. The
Committee held discussions with the representatives of Consumer
Affairs and BIS during its various meetings held on 25 January,
2010, 22 May, 2010, 1st July, 2010 and 21st July, 2010. The
Committee in its 9th Report submitted to Lok Sabha and Rajya
Sabha on 31st August, 2010 strongly recommended to the
Department to take up the matter with utmost seriousness and finalize
the modalities of the Bill (for amendment of the BIS Act) for its
early introduction in the Parliament so as, to bring the hallmarking
under Mandatory Certification. The Committee also felt that a lot

23
more needs to be done to make the Scheme popular and make
people aware about the benefits of the Scheme and desired that BIS
should organize more publicity campaigns to educate the people at
large about the benefits of the Scheme. The aim is that common
consumer gets gold or silver jewellery of the fineness declared by
the jeweller.
(Kishan Pal)
Under Secretary (BIS)
Te1.No.23097042
Rajya Sabha Secretariat
(Kind Att: Shri Mahesh Tiwari, Joint Director)
Parliament House Annexe,
New Delhi-110001

Annexure - II
Study Note on the Electrical Wires, Cables, Appliances and
Protection Devices and Accessories (Quality Control)
Order, 2003, BIS (Terms and Conditions of Service of
Employees) Regulations, 2007 and Hallmarking Scheme
The Committee had discussions on the Electrical Wires, Cables and
Appliances and Protection Devices and Accessories (Quality Control) Order,
2003, BIS (Terms and Conditions of Service of Employees) Regulations, 2007
and hallmarking scheme with the representatives of the Ministry of Consumer
Affairs, Food & Public Distribution (Department of Consumer Affairs), Ministry
of Commerce and Industry (Department of Industrial Policy and Promotion),
BIS and Minerals and Metals Trading Corporation (MMTC) at 10.00 a.m. on
the 19th January, 2011 in Hotel Claridges, New Delhi.
PRESENT
1. Shri Kalraj Mishra ––       Chairman
MEMBERS
2. Shri Jesudasu Seelam
3. Ms. Sushila Tiriya
4. Shri Vijay Jawaharlal Darda
5. Shri Narendra Kashyap
6. Shri Syed Azeez Pasha
7. Dr. Bharatkumar Raut
8. Shri M.V. Mysura Reddy
24

25
SECRETARIAT
1. Shri N.K. Singh, Joint Secretary
2. Shri Mahesh Tiwari, Joint Director
3. Shri Sameer Suryapani, Deputy Director
4. Smt. Monica Baa, Assistant Director
Representatives of the Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food and Public
Distribution (Department of Consumer Affairs)
Shri Rakesh Kacker, Additional Secretary
Representatives of the Ministry of Commerce and Industry (Department
of Industrial Policy and Promotion)
Ms. Renu Sharma, Joint Secretary
Representatives of the Bureau of Indian Standards
1. Shri Sharad Gupta, DG
2. Shrimati Alka Panda, ADG
3. Shri Alinda Chandra, ADG
4. Shri P. K. Gambhir, Sc. G
5. Shri C.K. Maheshwari, Sc. G
6. Shri D.K. Nayyar, Sc. G
7. Smt. Parminder Bajaj, DDG (HEP)
Representatives of the Minerals and Metals Trading Corporation
1. Shri Sanjay Anand, DGM
2. Shri Arnab Chakma, DGM
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members of the Committee,
representatives of the Department of Consumer Affairs, Director General, Bureau
of Indian Standards (BIS), representatives of Department of Industrial Policy
and Promotion and representatives of MMTC. The Chairman, in his opening

26
remarks; enquired about the shortage of manpower in BIS and the steps taken
to address this problem. He also queried about the reasons for not holding any
meeting of BIS since 28th July, 2003 in violation of Rule 5(2) of BIS Rules,
1987; the reasons for outsourcing part of BIS's work and whether the same
was mandated under the BIS Act and Rules; prospects of promotion for scientific
cadre officers working in BIS as compared to scientists working in other
Government undertakings, training facilities provided to employees of BIS and
other related issues. On the hallmarking scheme, the Chairman questioned the
non framing of regulations for hallmarking licenses in violation of Section
15(2) of the BIS Act; and in the absence of any regulations whether and how
the hallmarking licenses granted by BIS were legal and the legal remedies available
to consumers who were cheated by jewellers.
3. DG, BIS informed the Committee that there is shortage of staff in BIS
especially in scientific cadre as the Interview Broad could not find suitable
candidates. The main difficulty was non availability of suitable candidates to
fill the posts through direct recruitment. Also there was non availability of
candidates with the prescribed qualifications and experience in BIS Laboratory
cadre for filling up the scientific cadre posts through promotion. The problem
was compounded by the standing orders of the Department of Personnel and
Training (DOPT) which stated that if a post is lying vacant for more than one
year, it stands abolished. However, keeping in view that the Regulations provide
for filling up of posts through promotion/transfer on deputation/Direct
Recruitment efforts had been taken in this regard. Some abolished posts had
been revived, and vacancies had been advertised. Also for those posts not
filled up yet; steps were being-taken as per the provisions of the Regulations.
Regarding training of employees, DG, BIS informed the Committee that BIS
has a training institute called the National Institute of Training for Standardization
(NITS) in Noida. NITS has been organizing various types of training
programmes. Training is conducted on a wide range of subjects "for staff and
officers of BIS from capacity building i.e. Lead Auditors Course on Laboratory
Quality Management System and Internal Audits Quality Management Systems,

27
Food Safety Management Audits to CCS Conduct Rules, Disciplinary
proceedings, Team Work, Leadership etc. Further, NITS has been organizing
international training programme for developing countries as well. The
Committee, however, could not fathom why BIS cannot get requisite number
of people when other organizations are getting the requisite number of people.
4. The Committee further enquired how quality was being maintained in
ISI certified products and whether random checking was being conducted by
BIS. BIS replied that day-to-day checking is not done given the spread and size
of the country. However, regular inspections were done periodically. Also, the
labs which give ISI certifications have to fulfil the requirements prescribed by
the National Accreditation Board for Testing and Calibration Laboratories
(NABL). The Committee was informed that jewellery is not included as
mandatory in the schedule to the Essential Commodities Act, 1955. To enable
hallmarking mandatory in  jewellery, BIS Act has to be amended accordingly.
The Committee was informed by MMTC that they have hallmarking units at
New Delhi, Jaipur, Ahmedabad and Kolkata and a fifth one is under process in
Madurai, These .units are used for testing the purity of gold and gold articles
and accredited with BIS.
5. The meeting adjourned at 12:30 
P.M.

Annexure - III
Study Note on BIS Hallmarking of Gold Jewellery Scheme
The Committee on Subordinate Legislation, Rajya Sabha had discussions
on the BIS Hallmarking of Gold Jewellery Scheme with the representatives of
MMTC, BIS, along with assaying centres and the Ministry of Consumer Affairs,
Food and Public Distribution (Department of Consumer Affairs) on the 23rd
June, 2011 in Kumarakom,
PRESENT
1. Shri Kalraj Mishra ––       Chairman
MEMBERS
2. Ms. Sushila Tiriya
3. Shri Ali Anwar Ansari
4. Dr. K.P. Ramalingam
5. Dr. Janardhan Waghmare
6. Shri Syed Azeez Pasha
7. Dr. Bharatkumar Raut
8. Shri M.V .Mysura Reddy
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Shri N.K. Singh, Joint Secretary
2. Shri Mahesh Tiwari, Joint Director
3. Shri R.P. Shukla, Assistant Director
Representatives of the Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food and Public
Distribution (Department of Consumer Affairs)
Shri A.K. Jain, Director
Representatives of MMTC
Shri H.S. Mann, CMD
28

29
Representatives of BIS
Ms. Alka Panda, Additional DG
Representatives of Indian Association of Hallmarking Centres
Shri Anand Merlecha, Secretary
2. The Chairman, in his opening remarks, whether the Ministry's position
that no separate Regulations are required for hallmarking license is not in
contradiction with Section 15(1) of the BIS Act, 1986 which provided that the
Bureau may grant, renew, suspend or cancel a license in such manner as may
be determined by regulations and Section 15(2) which provides that the grant
or renewal of the licence shall be subject to such conditions and on payment of
such fees as may be determined by regulations; the action taken pursuant to
the Parliamentary Standing Committee on Food, Consumer Affairs and Public
Distribution's recommendations for early introduction of amendment to the
BIS Act so as to bring the hallmarking. under mandatory certification; the
steps taken by the Ministry to make the hallmarking scheme more popular; the
legal remedy available to consumers who are cheated by the jewellers and
whether BIS would be legally empowered to take action against the delinquent
jewellers; whether BIS undertakes frequent inspection to assaying centres and
the steps taken by BIS to prevent adulteration of gold.
3. The Committee is informed that publicity of the scheme is given through
print and electronic media, hoarding at bus shelters, electronic display boards,
bus panels, kiosks, etc. Also, the rate of financial incentives have been increased
for setting up assaying and hallmarking centres. The Indian Association of
Hallmarking Centres (IAHC) submitted a memorandum to the Committee
mentioning their grievances and suggestions. The gist of the points raised by
IAHC are:
(i) urgent need for introducing hallmarking starting from metro
cities;
(ii) hallmarking to be made compulsory for jewellery export;

30
(iii) hallmarking to be made affordable for small jewellers; and
(iv) Increase awareness for the scheme.
4. The Committee directed that BIS and the Ministry should send a reply
on the points raised by IAHC and that Rules/Regulations should be framed
with regard to Hallmarking of Gold Jewellery, MMTC sent a note on Assaying
and Hallmarking on the 12th July, 2011 stating that:
(i) MMTC has been popularizing the concept of hallmarking in all its
jewellery exhibitions as well as through retail showroom sales.
(ii) Assaying and hallmarking should be made mandatory not only for
the protection of the customer but also for the viability of units
established all over the country.
(iii) The license to A&H Centres should be granted area-wise to avoid
inter se competition.
(iv) Indian Hallmarking Council, an independent body, under BIS should
be set up with Members of Trade and Industry to monitor the
operation of the scheme and enforce guidelines notified by BIS/
Government on the lines of the British Hallmarking Council in the
United Kingdom.
(v) To provide assurance of quality, hallmarking scheme may be made
mandatory for exporters of gold jewellery.
(vi) The scheme should be popularized by creating awareness to the
consumers and campaign should also highlight benefits which may
accrue to the jewellers through hallmarking.
(vii) Presently, BIS is giving subsidy only for the first unit established
in a particular area. In view of the capital intensive nature of the
project with a long gestation period, BIS should grant, subsidy for
all units established for promotion of the scheme.

Annexure - IV
Reply to Questionnaire on the BIS (Terms and Conditions of
Service of Employees) Regulations, 2007
Sl. No.              Questions                 Reply
1. What are the reasons that
necessitated the framing of the
BIS (Terms and Conditions of
Service of Employees)
Regulations, 2007 in super-
session of the BIS (Terms and
Conditions of Service of
Employees) Regulations, 1988?
2. What are the main points of
differences between the
regulations of 1988 and the
new regulations of 2007?
3. Regulation 17 provides that the
employees who are not covered
under the Central Government
Health Scheme (CGHS) shall be
entitled to medical
reimbursement up to a
monetary ceiling of two
thousand rupees per annum. Is
this amount not on the lower
side and what is the basis of
providing a ceiling of this
amount?
Implementation of Central Pay
Commission Recommendations
(CPC) necessitated framing of BIS
(Terms and Conditions of Service
of Employees) Regulations, 2007.
The Annexure is enclosed.
As per Regulation 17 of BIS (Terms
and Conditions of Service of
Employees) Regulations, 2007, BIS
employees are entitled for medical
facilities under Central Govt. Health
Scheme (CGHS). The employees
not covered under the CGHS are
entitled to benefits as admissible to
the employees of Central Govt.
employees under Central Civil
Services (Medical Attendance)
Rules, 1944 (CSMA).
31

32
The present monetary ceiling of
Rs. 2000 (Two thousand) per annum
is over and above the benefits under
CSMA Rules for reimbursement of
medical expenses including OPD
charges. This is to facilitate
treatment from any registered
medical practitioner.
Though the revised pay scales as
per 6th CPC have been implemented
in the BIS with the approval of the
Government, the first Schedule of
the Regulations is yet to be amended
as certain discrepancies were
observed in a few categories of
Group B Posts for which the matter
has been taken up with the
Government.
Govt. of India, Ministry of Finance
vide O.M. No. 7(1)/EV/2008 dt.
10 Sept. 2010 has enhanced the
monthly subscriptions towards
CGEGIS and insurance coverage
to the erstwhile Group D employees
from Rs. 15 to Rs. 30 w.e.f.
1st January of the next calendar year
Sl. No.              Questions                 Reply
4. The First Schedule in the
Regulation contains the
classifications of posts and
scales of pay of BIS employees.
Have the scales of pay been
revised pursuant to the
acceptance of the Sixth Pay
Commission Recommendations
by the Central Government and
if so, whether the First
Schedule has been amended
accordingly?
5. Whether the insurance cover
and the contributions payable
by the employees as provided
in the Second Schedule to the
Regulations have been revised
pursuant to the acceptance of
the Sixth Pay Commission
Recommendations by the

33
Central Government and if so,
whether the Second Schedule
has been amended accordingly?
6. Whether the Central
Government reservation policy
for SCs/STs and OBCs is being
followed in appointments and
promotion in BIS?
7. What are the prospects of
promotion for the Scientific
Cadre officers working in BIS
as compared to scientists
working in other Government
undertakings/organizations?
Are any special allowances paid
to the scientists working in BIS?
Sl. No.              Questions                 Reply
i.e. January, 2011. Consequent upon
the upgradation of the erstwhile
Group D employees to Group C, the
insurance cover as well as
contribution payable by the BIS
employees has already been
enhanced from Rs. 25,000 to
Rs. 50,000 and Rs. 25 to Rs. 50,
respectively w.e.f. February, 2010.
However, Sl. No. 6 of Second
Schedule appended to BIS (Terms
and Conditions of the Service of the
Employees) Regulations, 2007, is
yet to be amended in view of fact
given against item 4 above.
Yes.
The promotion of BIS Scientific
Cadre Officers are made in
accordance with Government of
India's Flexible Complementing
Scheme (FCS) duly incorporated in
BIS (Recruitment to Scientific
Cadre) Regulations, 2002. However,
no comparative study of the

34
Sl. No.              Questions                 Reply
promotion prospects with respect
to other undertakings/organizations
has been made by the Bureau.
No special allowance is being paid
to the scientists working in BIS.
A) Scientific cadre:
1. Total number of sanctioned
posts as per BIS (Recruitment
to Scientific Cadre) Regula-
tions, 2002 = 579.
(a) Out of 579, 93 posts got
deemed abolished since
2003.
(b)Reduced Number of
scientific cadre sanctioned
posts = 486
2. Out of 93 deemed abolished
scientific posts, 74 posts have
been revived in end Nov.,
2010. Due to revival of 74
posts, the total sanctioned
strength becomes 560.
3. The present strength of
Scientific Cadre officers =
436.
8. What is the total number of
sanctioned posts in BIS and the
present staff strength? What
steps are being taken with
regard to shortage of staff and
what are the difficulties in this
regard?

35
Sl. No.              Questions                 Reply
Steps taken to fill-up the
vacancies to overcome the
shortage of staff :
1. The process of recruitment
for scientific cadre officers
has been initiated.
2. A Committee has been
constituted for carrying
manpower study in BIS for
ascertaining the manpower
requirement.
Difficulties :
1. Non availability of suitable
candidates to fill the posts
through direct recruitment.
2. Non availability of candidate
with the prescribed
qualifications and experience
in BIS Laboratory Cadre for
filling up the scientific cadre
posts through promotion.
B ) Posts Other than Scientific
Cadre :
1. Total number of sanctioned
posts other than the posts
covered in the scientific cadre
referred above = 1698.

36
(a) Out of 1698, 172 posts got
deemed abolished since
2003.
(b)Reduced Number of
sanctioned posts = 1526
2. Out of 172 deemed abolished
posts, 50 posts have been
revived in end Nov. 2010.
Due to revival of 50 posts, the
total sanctioned strength
becomes 1576.
3. The present strength = 1214.
Steps taken to fill up the vacancies
to overcome the shortage of
staff :
1. Of late 51 vacancies have
been filled by direct
recruitment.
2. Further action is in hand to
fill up the remaining vacant
posts i.e. existing vacancies
as well as 50 posts revived by
the Govt. recently.
Present position of Group 'A' and
'B' Posts in Non Scientific Cadre is
Sl. No.              Questions                 Reply
9. What is present position with
regard to the shortage of

37
manpower is BIS especially
non-scientific officers which
lead to certain essential work
relating to Legal, Human
Resource and Administration
being handled by some
scientific officers? What steps
are being taken to address this
problem?
10. What types of training facilities/
opportunities are provided to
the staffs/employees of BIS?
Sl. No.              Questions                 Reply
as follows :-
Group Group
 'A' 'B'
Allocated Stength 57 498
(after revival)
Existing Strength 33 396
Vacant Posts 24 102
Regulation provides for filling up of
posts through promotion/transfer on
deputation/Direct Recruitment. The
following efforts have been made:
(i)Recently, some abolished
posts have been revived;
(ii) Posts have been advertised
for filling up; and
(iii) For those posts not filled
up yet, steps are being taken
as per the provisions in the
Regulation.
National Institute of Training for
Standardization (NITS) Noida,
which is a national training institute
under the Bureau, conducts
trainings on wide range of subjects
for staff and officers of BIS for

38
Sl. No.              Questions                 Reply
capacity building i.e. Lead Auditors
Course on Laboratory Quality
Management System and Internal
Audits, Food Safety Management
Systems, Quality Management
Systems, Stress Management,
Recommendations of 6th Pay
Commission (specifically for Group
D employees), CCS Conduct Rules
and Disciplinary proceedings, RTI
Act, Team Work and Leadership etc.

39
Annexure-V
Various Amendments made in BIS (Terms and Conditions of the
Services of the Employees) Regulations, 1988
Sl. Particular/ Subject Amendment Implications/Remarks
No. Clause of Matter made and
Regulation, notified in
1988 2007
1      2       3     4               5
1. Regulation 6 Appointing Deleted Regulation incorporated in
Authority BIS (Recruitment to Admi-
nistration, Finance and
other Posts) Regulations,
2007.
2. Regulation 7 Composition Deleted Regulation incorporated in
of Selection BIS (Recruitment to Admi-
Committees nistration, Finance and
other Posts) Regulations,
2007.
3. 1
st Proviso to Probation Deleted Period linked with training/
Regulation 9 age of entry in BIS services
dropped.
4. Regulation Probation Deleted The provision of
9 (2) "Termination without
assigning any reason" has
been done away with.
5. 2 nd Proviso to Conduct, Amended Amended to the extent that
Regulation 11 Control and the appointing authority, the
Appeal disciplinary authority, and

40
the appellate authority have
been prescribed in Third
Schedule.
6. Proviso to Retirement Deleted Proviso not required for
Regulation 13 Scientific Cadre as the
retirement age of all
categories was revised by
the Central Government.
7. Proviso 4 (b) Pay and Upward Amended to revise the
to Regulation Allowances revision of ceiling rates of lodging
14 lodging allowance. Two new slabs
allowance in the pay range were
introduced i.e. Rs. 16,400
and above but less that
Rs. 18,400 and Rs. 12,000
and above but less than
16,400. Further, note below
the table was also revised
to the extent that the lodging
rates were made excluding
taxes/Government levies
which shall be extra at actuals.
8. Proviso 4 (e) Pay and Amended To include the revised pay
to Regulation Allowances and also to include Scientists-
14 E level officers in the
category of Directors and
above.
9. Regulation 15 Leave Addition Amended by way of adding
"as amended from time to
1      2       3     4               5

41
time" included after Central
Civil Services (Leave)
Rules 1972 so that any
changes in the CCS (Leave)
Rules are taken care of.
10. Regulation 17 General Addition Amended by way of adding
Provident "as amended from time to
Fund time" included after  Rules
1960 so that any changes
in the General Provident
Fund (Civil Services) Rules
are taken care of.
11. Regulation 18 Gratuity on Addition Amended by way of adding
Resignation "as amended from time to
time" included after
Payment of Gratuity Act
1972 (390 of 1972) so that
any changes in the Gratuity
Act are taken care of.
12. Regulation Benevolent (a) BIS Employee's monthly
20 (a) Fund contribution to the
Scheme Benevolent Fund
enhanced from Rs. 6 to
Rs. 15 and BIS contri-
bution enhanced from
Rs. 4 to Rs. 30
Regulation Amended (b) On permanent incapaci-
20 (b) for upward tation of an employee,
1      2       3     4               5

42
revision of amount payable
rates enhanced from Rs. 50
thousand to Rs. One
Lac.
Regulation (c) In case of death of an
20 (c) employee during
service, amount
enhanced from Rs. 50
thousand to Rs. One
Lac.
13. First Pay Scales Amendment Nomenclature of Scientific
Schedule cadre posts changed. Pay
scales of the all the posts
revised in accordance with
recommendation of 5th pay
commission.
14. None Definition & Addition Appointing, Disciplinary
CCA Rules and Appellate Authorities
prescribed for Group A, B,
C and D level posts as
Schedule-III.
1      2       3     4               5

43
MINUTES OF THE MEETING OF THE COMMITTEE ON
SUBORDINATE LEGISLATION, RAJYA SABHA
IV
Fourth Meeting
The Committee met at 3.00 P.M. on the 27th August, 2013 in Room No.
126-C, Third Floor, Parliament House, New Delhi.
MEMBERS P RESENT
1. Shrimati Maya Singh ––    Chairperson
2. Shri M.P . Achuthan
3. Shri Balwinder Singh Bhunder
4. Shri Prakash Javadekar
5. Dr. Bhalchandra Mungekar
6. Shri K. Parasaran
7. Shri Vijay Jawaharlal Darda
8. Shrimati Vasanthi Stanley
9. Shri Bhupender Yadav
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Shri N.K. Singh, Joint Secretary
2. Shri Mahesh Tiwari, Director
3. Shri R.S. Rawat, Joint Director
4. Shri Rakesh Anand, Joint Director
5. Shri R.P. Shukla, Assistant Director
6. Smt. Monica Baa, Assistant Director
2. The Chairperson welcomed the Members of the Committee and thereafter

44
the Committee took up the following draft Reports for consideration one-by-
one :-
(i) Two Hundred and Eighth Report on the Statutory Orders laid on
the Table of the Rajya Sabha during the 228th Session;
(ii) Two Hundred and Ninth Report on the taking over of Distance
Education Council (DEC) of IGNOU by the University Grants
Commission (UGC) through an administrative order in violation of
IGNOU Act, 1985 and the Statutes framed thereunder;
(iii) Two Hundred and Tenth Report on the Hallmarking Scheme and
Certain Rules/Regulations framed under the Bureau of Indian
Standards Act, 1986;
(iv) Two Hundred and Eleventh Report on (i) the Cigarettes and Other
Tobacco Products (Prohibition of Advertisement and Regulation
of Trade and Commerce, Production, Supply and Distribution)
Rules, 2004 and (ii) Kandla Port Trust (Authorization of
Pilots) Regulations, 1964- Implementation of 163 rd Report of the
Committee;
(v) Two Hundred and Twelfth Report on the Border Roads Engineering
Services ‘A’ (Amendment) Rules, 1988; and
(vi) Two Hundred and Thirteenth Report regarding delay in the framing
of subordinate legislation under the Acts of Parliament and delay in
the laying of Rules/Regulations/Orders on the Table of the House.
3. The Chairperson informed the Members that the issue regarding shifting
the Distance Education Council (DEC) from IGNOU to the University Grants
Commission (UGC) through an administrative order instead of by amending
the IGNOU Act, 1985 needed further discussion as the Ministry wants to
submit more facts to the Committee on the issue which they could not do

45
so earlier. The Committee, therefore, decided not to report the subject to the
House until the final view is taken on the said new facts by the Committee.
4. The Committee thereafter took up for consideration the other reports
and after some discussion adopted the 208th, 210th, 211th, 212th  and 213th
Reports. The Committee authorized its Chairperson and in her absence
Dr. Bhalchandra Mungekar and in his absence Shri Vijay lawaharlal Darda to
present the Reports to the House on 3
rd September, 2013.
5. * * *
6. The Chairperson thanked the Members present and meeting was
concluded at 3.40 
P.M.
***relates to other matters