COSL 
  
 
 
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
COMMITTEE ON SUBORDINATE LEGISLATION 
 
HUNDRED AND NINETY THIRD REPORT 
 
                               (Presented on 26 
th  August, 2011) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                        RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
August, 2011/Bhadrapada, 1933   (Saka) 
 
193 


C O N T E N T S 
      
        PAGES 
 
1. COMPOSITION 
 OF  THE  COMMITTEE 
 
(i) 
2. INTRODUCTION 
 
(ii) 
3. REPORT 
 
 
I. The Building and Other Construction 
Workers (Regulation of Employment and 
Conditions of Service) Central Rules, 1998. 
 
  
II. State Emblem of India (Regulation of Use) 
Rules, 2007-Implementation of the 188 
th  
Report of the Committee. 
 
 
 
4. SUMMARY 
 OF  RECOMMENDATIONS 
 
 
 
5. MINUTES* 
 
 
* To be enclosed later 
 
 
 

RAJYA SABHA 
 LIST OF MEMBERS OF THE COMMITTEE ON SUBORDINATE LE GISLATION, RA JYA 
SABHA 
(CONSTITUTED ON THE   29 th  SEPTEMBER, 2010) 
 
 
 
1. Shri Kalraj Mishra   Chairman 
2. Shri Jesudasu Seelam     
3. Ms. Sushila Tiriya 
4. Shri Vijay Jawaharlal Darda 
5. Shri P. Kannan 
6. Shrimati Maya Singh 
7. Shri Prakash Javadekar 
8. Shri Narendra Kashyap 
9. Shri Ali  Anwar Ansari 
10. Dr. K.P. Ramalingam 
11. Dr. Janardhan Waghmare 
12. Shri Syed Azeez Pasha 
13. Dr. Bharatkumar Raut 
14. Shri M.V. Mysura Reddy 
15. Shri Ahmad Saeed Malihabadi    
 
    
 
S
ECRETARIAT  
 
1. Shri N.K.Singh , Joint Secretary  
2. Shri Mahesh Tiwari, Joint Director 
3.   Shri Sameer Suryapani, Deputy Director  
4. Shri  R.P. Shukla, Assistant Director  
5.   Smt. Monica Baa, Assistant Director  
 
     
 
 
 
 
 
 
 (i) 

INTRODUCTION 
 
 
1. I, the Chairman of the Committee on Subordinate Legislation, having been 
authorized by the Committee to present the Report o n its behalf, do hereby present this 
One Hundred and Ninety Third Report of the Committee. 
 
1.2       The Committee considered and adopted the Repo rt in its meeting held on the 
24
th  August, 2011. 
 
1.3 The matters examined by the Committee arise out  of the scrutiny of various 
Rules/Regulations and issues, relating to them alon g with the comments received from 
the Government.  The observations and recommendations of the Committee are contained 
in the succeeding paragraphs of the Report.  
 
 
 
KALRAJ MISHRA 
                                                                                                               Chairman 
 Committee on Subordinate Legislation, 
                                                                                                              Rajya Sabha 
 
NEW DELHI  
26 th  August, 2011  
 
 
 
 
(ii) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Report on the  
Building and Other Construction Workers (Regulation of Employment and 
Conditions of Service) Central Rules, 1998  
 
  
 The building and other construction workers are on e of the most vulnerable 
segments of the unorganized sector workers in India. Their work is of a temporary nature.  
Besides, relationship between employer and employee  is also temporary and the working 
hours very uncertain. Basic amenities and welfare f acilities provided to these workers are 
found to be generally inadequate. Nature of work in volved in building and construction 
activities is generally arduous and workmen engaged  therein are prone to frequent 
accidents sometimes leading to death due to absence  of adequate safety measures 
available.  
 
2. Down-sizing and outsourcing have also had a nega tive impact on management of 
health and safety of the workers in construction industry. Informal contractual conditions, 
fear of losing employment makes it further difficul t for construction workers to exercise 
their rights.  Often, time and financial constrains  compel employers to ignore the health 
and safety of workers even if that results in their death. 
 
3. Keeping in view the above circumstances the Buil ding and other Construction 
Workers (Regulation of Employment and Conditions of  Service) Act, 1996 was enacted 
by the Parliament to regulate the employment and co nditions of service of building and 
other construction workers and to provide for their  safety and welfare measures. The  
Building and other Construction Workers (Regulation  of Employment and Conditions of 
Service) Rules, 1998 ( Annexure I ) framed under the above Act were taken up for 
examination by the Committee keeping in view its importance in July, 1999. 
 
4. The Committee discussed the subject with the rep resentatives of the National 
Building Construction Corporation Ltd. (NBCC) and t he Ministries of Urban 
Development and Labour and Employment on 22 
nd  October, 1999 at New Delhi for 
eliciting requisite inputs on the subject matter. D uring the course of the discussion, the 
Committee was apprised of the fact that even though  the construction workers were 
covered to some extent by various labour laws, but being a special category of workers it 

was felt to have a separate legislation for them. D uring the discussion the Ministry of 
Labour accepted the fact that the implementation machinery with respect to the Act/Rules 
was inadequate and needed to be strengthened. Furth er the Committee was informed that 
“other Construction Workers” included workers in co nstruction areas like power 
generator, transmission, distribution, gas installa tions, communications, etc, and since 
they were exposed to same hazards risks and problem s which the building workers faced, 
therefore, these category of workers had also been included under the purview of the Act. 
A study note on the discussions held during the meeting was prepared. (Annexure -II) 
 
5. The Committee, thereafter considered the matter at its meeting held on 20 
th  June, 
2000 and desired to know the reasons for delay in the framing of rules under the Building 
and Other Construction Workers Employment Act, 1996  and continuing delay in 
implementation of the provisions of the Act and the  rules. Accordingly, a reference was 
made to the Ministry of Labour and Employment seeki ng their comments on the above 
points on 5 th  July, 2000. The Ministry furnished their comments on the 2 nd  August, 2000. 
The points referred to the Ministry and their comments/clarifications received thereon are 
reproduced below:- 
I. Point referred  
 Regarding delay in the framing of the rules under the Building and Other 
Construction Workers Employment Act, 1996.  
 
Ministry's comments (2.8.2000)  
 In conformity with Section 5(1) of the Act, the gov ernment constituted an Expert 
Committee on the 17 
th  May, 1996 under the Chairmanship of Joint Secretar y/director 
General (Labour Welfare). The other members of the Committee were Director General, 
Factory Advice Service and labour Institute, Labour  Secretary, Government of Kerala, 
Chief Labour Commissioner (C), Chief Engineer (Vigi lance), Central Public Works 
Department and Executive Director, Civil Engineerin g (General), Ministry of Railways. 
Its constitution was revised in November, 1996. The  Expert Committee met on the 20 th  
August, 1996 and constituted two sub-groups for the purpose of drafting the rules-one for 
the purpose of general rules and other for the purp ose of health and safety rules. The 
Committee met again on the 4 th  February, 1997. In the subsequent meeting held on the 

26 th  March, 1997 the draft rules prepared by the sub-gr oups were amalgamated and 
approved. Since offices of the members of the Committee were located at different places 
i.e. Delhi, Mumbai and Thiruvananthapuram and the rules were voluminous and technical 
in nature, it took long time for the Committee to subject the draft report. Further, the rules 
required extensive consultation and discussion between the Ministries of Law and Justice, 
and Labour and Employment before they were finally vetted by the Ministry of Law and 
Justice in October, 1998 and notified on the 19 th  November, 1998. 
 
II. Point referred  
 Regarding the continuing delay in implementation o f the provisions of the Act 
and the Rules. 
 
Ministry's comments (2.8.2000)  
 The implementation of the provisions of the Act (s ) is to be expedited by the 
States and Union Territories. The status report reg arding implementation of the Act by 
the State Governments has already been furnished to  the Rajya Sabha Secretariat vide 
O.M of even number dated the 31 
st  March, 2000. Minister of State for Labour and 
Employment has also written to the Labour Ministrie s of all States in this regard. The 
Government also propose to hold a Conference of the  Labour Ministers of the States so 
as to emphasize the need for speedy implementation of the Act and to have first hand 
information regarding difficulties, if any, in the implementation of the Act (s).  
 
6. Thereafter, the Committee discussed the subject matter with the representatives of 
the Oil and Natural Gas Corporation Limited (ONGC) and the Ministry of Petroleum and 
Natural Gas and Ministry of Labour & Employment on the 29 
th  September, 2000, at 
Mumbai. During the course of the discussion, supple mentary questionnaires were handed 
over to the Oil and Natural Gas Corporation, Minist ry of Petroleum & Natural Gas and 
Ministry of Labour and Employment for their comment s/ clarifications. Relevant extracts 
from the study note on the above meeting is enclose d (Annexure  III).  A brief review of 
the comments received is reproduced in the succeeding paragraphs. 
 

7. The Committee raised the issue as to why the reg istration of the workers had been 
made optional. The Ministry of Labour and Employmen t commented that the objectives 
of the Act are to take care of the health and safet y of the workers and provide certain 
social security and welfare measures. For this purp ose there is a provision of constitution 
of State Building and Other Construction Workers’ W elfare Board. To undertake the 
social security and welfare measures, a Building and other Construction Workers Welfare 
Fund is to be constituted. There is a provision of levy of a cess on the cost of construction 
and also contribution from the beneficiaries regist ered with the Board. The health and 
safety provisions are applicable to all the workers irrespective of the fact whether they are 
registered with the Board or not. Since there is a provision of contribution to the Fund 
from the workers with the objective to create a sen se of participation, the registration has 
been made optional and not mandatory or obligatory.  
 
8. The Committee also sought clarification arising out of the definition “employer” 
which means owner and includes contractor in relati on to a building or other construction 
work carried on through a contractor or by the empl oyment of building workers supplied 
by the contractor. The Committee wanted to know if work is done by a contractor who 
has to comply with the provisions of the Act/Rules,  whether the owner will also be liable 
in such case, and, if so, what are the reasons for making both the owner and contractor 
liable simultaneously. 
 
9. The Ministry of Labour explained that section 2( 1) of the Act defines “employer.” 
Section 2(1) (iii) further defines that: 
“In relation to a building or other construction wo rk carried on by 
or through a contractor, or by the employment of bu ilding workers 
supplied by a contractor, the contractor” 
 
In view of above provisions of the Act, where contr actor is the employer, the 
responsibility to comply with the provisions of the Act is that of the contractor. However, 
to safeguard the interest of the workers in so far as payment of wages and compensation 
is concerned, the employer has been made liable to ensure payment of full wages by the 
contractor in the matter as specified under section  45 of the Act and Rule 5 (10) of the 
Rules framed under the Act. 

 
10. The Committee expressed apprehension on the con tradiction between Rule 9 
in relation to its observation that the Act did not contemplate any kind of exemption 
from the provisions of the Act.  The Ministry of La bour and Employment informed 
that the Act and Rules made thereunder did not prov ide exemption to certain 
categories of establishments from the implementatio n of the Act.  Under Rule 9, the 
exemption is contemplated in respect of applicability of Rules and not the provisions 
of the Act and that too when this does not affect t he safety, health and welfare of the 
building workers.  However, the Ministry submitted that the matter could be 
examined in consultation with the Law Ministry.   
 
11. The Committee again discussed the matter with t he representatives of the 
State Government of Kerala and the Ministry of Labo ur and Employment at 
Cochin on the 19 
th  January, 2001.  Relevant extracts from the study n ote (Annexure-
IV)  on the above discussion were forwarded to the Mini stry of Labour and 
Employment for necessary action on the 15 th  February, 2001. 
 
12. The Ministry of Labour and Employment vide  their  communication dated 
the 30 
th  April, 2001 expressed their stand on all points ex cept on Rule 9 of the 
Central Rules.  The Ministry informed that the conc erned Ministries/Departments 
had been requested to register under the Building a nd Other Construction Workers 
(Regulation of Employment & Conditions of Service) Act, 1996 and pay cess to the 
Building and Other Construction Workers Welfare Boa rds constituted under the 
Act.  Further, the State Governments had also been requested to expedite 
implementation of the said Act and frame State Rule s, constitute the State Advisory 
Committee, the Welfare Fund and to notify the authorities under the Act.  A copy of 
the Rules framed by the Government of Kerala under the Act was also sent to the 
State Governments for necessary action at their end .  Regarding the matter of Rule 
9 of the Central Rules relating to power of the Gov ernment to exempt from 
applicability all or any requirements of the Rules,  the matter was being examined in 
consultation with the Legal Department. 
 

13. Thereafter, after a couple of interim replies, the Ministry on the 8 th  April, 
2003 clarified their position as follows:- 
 
 “It is stated that an interim reply has been sent t o the Rajya Sabha Secretariat 
vide this Ministry’s O.M. of even number dated the 30 
th  April, 2001 wherein it 
has been communicated that the matter of Rule 9 of the Central Rules relating 
to the powers to the Government to exempt from all or any requirements of the 
Rules, was being examined in consultation with the Ministry of Law and 
Justice, Legislative Department. 
Now the Legislative Department has stated that Rule  9 of the Building and 
Other Construction Workers (Regulation of Employment & Conditions of 
Service) Rules 1998 exempts any building or any appliance fr om all or any of 
the provisions of the said Rule and does not confer powers to the Government to 
exempt any of the provisions of the Main Act i.e., Building and Other 
Construction Workers (Regulation of Employment & Co nditions of Service) 
Act, 1996.  Clarifying the point further they opine d that similar exemption 
powers have been provided in Rule 16 of the Coir In dustries (Registration and 
Licensing) Rules, 1958 even though the principal Ac t namely the Coir 
Industries Act, 1958 does not contain any provision s for giving exemption.  
Hence, it is felt that technically there is no cont radiction of the provisions of 
Rule 9 of Building and Other Construction Workers ( RECS) Rules, 1998 in 
relation to provisions of the main Act”. 
     
14. The Committee took up the matter for further co nsideration on the 5 
th  September 
2005. It decided to seek updated information on the  subject by making a reference to the 
Ministry, which, accordingly, was made on the 28 th  December 2005. Thereafter, the 
Ministry vide  their communication dated the 17 th  January, 2006 furnished their position 
as follows:- 
“(i)  Number of construction Projects/Units of the Central Ministries/Departments 
which have been registered under the Building and O ther Construction 
Workers (RECS) Act, 1996 by the concerned Appropria te Governments 
through out the country are not maintained in the Ministry. 
 
(ii) Status of implementation of the above Act in the St ates/UTs as on 
31.12.2005 . 
 

(iii) Rule 9 of the Building and Other Construction Worke rs (RECS) Central 
Rules, 1998 have been formulated keeping in view th e arrangements 
existing/made by the employers/contractors at the c onstruction site.  
Further, the Government shall not grant exemption under this rule unless it 
is satisfied that such exemption would not adversel y affect the safety, 
health and wealth of the building workers”.  
 
  15. The Committee considered the matter in its me eting held on 7 
th  June, 2006.  The 
Committee observed that the Building and Other Cons truction Workers (Regulations of 
Employment and Condition of Service) Central Rules,  1998 was an important piece of 
legislation and covered a vast area.  But there was a continuing delay in implementing the 
provisions of the concerned Act and the Rules.  The  Committee, accordingly, decided to 
hear the Secretary, Ministry of Labour and Employme nt for seeking clarifications on 
some of the points that had come up during the course of examination of the Rules.  
 
 16 The Committee heard the views of the Secretary,  Ministry of Labour and 
Employment at New Delhi on the 17 th  August, 2009.  During the meeting, the 
Chairperson expressed the Committee’s concern over the continuing delay in the 
implementation of provisions of the Act and the Rul es, by the States and the Union 
Territories. The Committee also expressed its reser vation over the poor implementation 
and poor monitoring by the Central Government despi te elaborate provisions in the Act. 
The Committee also sought to know if the contract l abourers, who form a sizable 
segment of labourers in such projects, were covered  under these Rules. The Committee 
took note of the fact that in several States not a single labourer was registered, the 
collection of Welfare Cess was much below the estim ates and its utilisation by the 
appropriate Government for the welfare of the labou rers has been rather dismal. The 
Committee recognized that in a few States the cess was being collected without 
constituting the Boards. Concern was expressed over  the exploitation of contract 
labourers by the labour contractor, who did not pay  even the minimum wages. The 
Committee also found the figures of registered labo urers in Delhi unrealistically low. It 
was submitted by the Secretary, Department of Labou r, Government of National Capital 
Territory of Delhi, that as per a recent survey, th e estimated number of labourers in Delhi 
stood at 4.5 lakhs. The Chairperson sought to know if labourers were actually being paid 
the pension as provided in the Act.  
 
17. The Secretary, Ministry of Labour, informed the Committee that the provisions of the 
Rules were aimed to protect the service conditions of the unskilled migrant labourers 
engaged in the building and other construction acti vities. The Committee sought to know 
the implementation of these Rules in the Central Go vernment projects in Delhi like the 
Delhi Metro Rail and projects relating to Commonwea lth Games.  It was clarified that 
while the Central Government retained the power of enforcing the Rules, the welfare of 
labourers is to be implemented by the respective St ate Governments. The Secretary, 
Ministry of Labour and Employment, agreed with the Committee’s impression that the 
implementation of the Rules was far from being satisfactory. 
 

18. Thereafter, the Committee held discussions with  the representatives of Ministry of 
Labour and Employment and Department of Labour of t he Government of NCT of Delhi 
alongwith the representatives of National Building Construction Company Ltd. (NBCC), 
Central Public Works Department (CPWD), Delhi Metro  Rail Corporation (DMRC), 
IRCON, Delhi Development Authority (DDA), Housing a nd Urban Development 
Corporation Limited (HUDCO), National Projects Cons truction Corporation Limited 
(HUDCO) and Hindustan Prefab Limited on 28 th  August, 2009. During the course of the 
discussion the Committee noted the fact due to non- existence of Boards and 
programmes/schemes in the States the concerned agencies were not able to transfer funds 
that they collected as cess amount. A study note on  the discussions was also prepared. 
(Annexure-V) . 
 
19. The Committee also took up for discussion the s aid Rules with  Neyveli Lignite 
Corporation Limited, Bharat Heavy Electricals Limit ed, National Highways Authority of 
India along with the representatives of the State Government of Tamil Nadu and Ministry 
of Labour and Employment at Chennai on 22 
nd  December, 2010 . The Committee was 
informed that in Tamil Nadu welfare schemes framed under the Tamil Nadu Manual 
Workers (Regulation of Employment and Conditions of  Work) Act, 1982 were being 
implemented.  The reason for this was that Section 63 of the Building and Other 
Construction Workers (Regulation of Employment and Conditions of Service) Act, 1996 
provides that the said Act would not affect the ope ration of any corresponding law in a 
State if the welfare schemes under it are more bene ficial to the building and other 
construction workers than those provided under the Central Act. However the Committee 
noted that some of the organizations were not payin g the cess contemplated under the 
State Act. The Committee was of the opinion that th e concerned stake holders should 
resolve the issue of collection of cess under the S tate Act at the earliest so that the rights 
of the workers are not lost . A study note on the discussion was also prepared. 
(Annexure-VI) 
 
General observations and recommendations of the Committee  
 

20. The Committee during the course of its discussi ons with the concerned 
Ministries and other organisatons associated with t he implementation of the Rules 
observed the following facts: 
 
21. The Committee expressed its dismay over the fac t that even after the 
Building and other Construction Workers (Regulation  of Employment and 
Conditions of Service) Act, 1996  and the Building and other Construction Workers 
(Regulation of Employment and Conditions of Service ) Rules, 1998  have been in 
operation for a sufficiently long time, the States have shown a general reluctance to 
implement the welfare measures in its true spirit.  This is evident from the data 
submitted by the Ministry of Labour and Employment.   As per the statistics, States 
like Chattisgarh, Jharkhand, Rajasthan, Uttar Prade sh and others have not even 
registered a single worker under the Act. However, on the other hand, the 
Committee appreciates the efforts made by States li ke Kerela and Tamil Nadu in 
getting the registration of workers done. The Commi ttee therefore, recommends 
that a time frame should be decided and progress ma de by States be monitored 
regularly. The Committee hope that the Central Advi sory Committee would ensure 
all States take adequate steps to implement the Rul es. The Committee is also of the 
view that the Ministry of Labour has two models bef ore it, one operational in 
Kerala and other in Tamil Nadu. The Committee there fore recommends that the 
Ministry should examine both the models and see if any improvements in the 
existing provisions can be made at Central or State levels. 
 
22. The Committee observed that the registration pr ocess was lengthy and the 
paper work involved discouraged the workers, majori ty of whom were illiterate and 
migrant.  It felt that the duty attendance register  could be used to issue certificates 
and to register the workers.  The Committee, theref ore, recommends that the paper 
work involved should be reduced to the minimum and steps be taken to ensure 
adequate publicity to the Rules. The feasibility of  issuing identity cards with all 
India validity should also be studied and if possible be implemented. The Committee 
appreciates the proposal to extend Rashtriya Swasth ya Bima Yojana to Building 
and Other Construction Workers as it is a progressi ve step and hopes steps would 

be taken to ensure its success. The district labour  inspectors should also undertake 
field trips and register workers on the spot.  The concerned agencies should also be 
motivated to generate awareness about the rules amo ngst the workers as also to 
facilitate the registration so that they were covered under the rule for availing of the 
benefits. 
 
23. During the course of the discussions the fact c ame up time and again that a 
number of States have still to frame welfare scheme s for the workers as 
contemplated under the Act. This had on a number of  occasions led to situation 
where the concerned agencies had deposited the cess  collected by them but it was 
lying ideal in the absence of welfare schemes which  the concerned State 
Governments have to frame. The Committee expresses its concern over the issue 
and hopes that the Ministry would make efforts to p ersuade the States to take 
suitable time bound steps in this regard. The Commi ttee also suggests that the 
Ministry could frame Welfare Schemes which the Stat es can adopt with suitable 
modifications. 
 
24.  The Committee notes that now a days developmen t of infrastructure has led 
to lots of construction activity, both in the priva te and public sector. These projects 
involve large number of construction workers and th e well being of these workers is 
a cause of concern. The Committee, therefore, recom mends that special 
measures/mechanism be put in place to ensure adequa te implementation of the 
welfare measures contemplated for them under the Ru les. Measures like awareness 
programmes for the workers may be organized to help  them gain knowledge about 
their rights. 
 
25.   The Committee expresses its concern about the  occupational diseases 
effecting the health of the workers and the need fo r ensuring adequate provisions to 
be made to protect the workers from such occupation al diseases. The Committee, 
therefore, recommends that the Rules should also pr ovide for safety measures to 
prevent such occupational diseases and provision fo r their treatment in case the 
worker gets affected.   

 
26. The Committee has also noted that some of the o rganizations are not paying 
the cess contemplated under the State Act. The Comm ittee, therefore, recommends 
that the concerned stake holders should resolve the  issue of collection of cess under 
the State Act at the earliest so that the rights of the workers are not lost. 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 