       
 
 
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
 
COMMITTEE ON SUBORDINATE LEGISLATION 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi 
February, 2014/Magha, 1935 (Saka)  
 
  
 REPORT NO.  
214  
TWO HUNDRED AND FOURTEENTH REPORT 
 
Marble Development and Conservation Rules, 2002  
 
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 19th   February , 2014) 

C O N T E N T S 
      
        PAGES 
 
1. COMPOSITION 
 OF  THE  COMMITTEE 
 
(i) 
2. INTRODUCTION 
 
(ii) 
3. REPORT ON THE MARBLE DEVELOPMENT 
AND CONSERVATION RULES, 2002 
 
 
 
4. SUMMARY OF 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS  
 
 
5. ANNEXURE 
  
6. MINUTES 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE  
(CONSTITUTED ON THE   8th  MAY, 2013) 
 
 
 
 
1. *Dr. Najma A. Heptulla   Chairperson 
2. Shri M.P. Achuthan 
3. Shri Ali Anwar Ansari 
4. Shri D. Bandyopadhyay 
5. Shri P. Bhattacharya 
6. Shri Balwinder Singh Bhunder 
7. Shri Prakash Javadekar 
8. Shri Mangla Kisan 
9. Shri Lalhming Liana 
10. ***  
11. Dr. Bhalchandra Mungekar 
12. Shri K. Parasaran 
13. **Shri Vijay Jawaharlal Darda 
14. Shrimati Vasanthi Stanley 
15. Shri Bhupender Yadav 
 
   
 
S
ECRETARIAT  
 
1.  Shri N.K.Singh , Joint Secretary  
2.  Shri Mahesh Tiwari, Director 
3.   Shri R.S. Rawat, Joint Director 
4. Shri Rakesh Anand, Joint  Director 
5. Shri  R.P. Shukla, Assistant Director  
6.   Smt. Monica Baa, Assistant Director  
 
* Nominated w.e.f. December 20, 2013 
**Nominated w.e.f. July 22, 2013 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 (i) 

INTRODUCTION 
 
 
1. I, the Chairperson of the Committee on Subordina te Legislation, having been 
authorized by the Committee, do hereby present on i ts behalf, this Two Hundred and 
Fourteenth Report of the Committee.  
 
2.  The Committee examined the matters that came up  while scrutinizing the Marble 
Conservation and Development Rules, 2002 and issues  relating to them along with the 
comments received from the Government. 
 
3.   The observations and recommendations of the Co mmittee are contained in the 
Report.  
 
4.  The Committee considered and adopted the draft Re port in its meeting held on the       
18 
th  February, 2014 
 
 
 
 
Najma A. Heptulla 
                                                                                                               Chairperson 
 Committee on Subordinate Legislation, 
                                                                                                                         Rajya Sabha 
 
NEW DELHI  
February    19, 2014 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Report  
on the  
Marble Development and Conservation Rules, 2002  
 
I BACKGROUND 
 
 
 Marble a ‘minor mineral’ as defined in clause (e) of Section 3 of Mines and 
Minerals (Development & Regulation) Act, 1957 is used widely in buildings, monuments 
and sculptures. It is know for its pleasant colours , smooth and uniform texture, moderate 
hardness, amenability to be quarried into big block s, smooth & shiny polished surface 
and silky feel. Though the occurrence of Marble has  been reported from many States in 
the country, however, deposits of economic importan ce are localized in Rajasthan, 
Gujarat, Haryana, Andhra Pradesh and also in Madhya  Pradesh as per recent reports. 
Rajasthan has the distinction of having the best am ong Indian resources of good quality 
marble. As per available data on marble resources a bout 64% of total resources are in 
Rajasthan and 21% in Jammu & Kashmir. The remaining  resources are distributed 
mainly in Gujarat, Chhattisgarh, Maharashtra, Harya na, Uttarakhand and Sikkim in 
descending order. In terms of production Rajasthan alone accounts for 94% of the total 
output. Further, over the years the export of marble has also increased.  
 
2. The Marble Development & Conservation Rules (MDM R), 2002 were brought 
into effect for the purpose of conservation, system atic development and scientific mining 
of marble and to provide a uniform framework that w ould be applicable throughout the 
country. In the background to these Rules it was in formed that a Group on Marble 
Development (GMD) was constituted on 22.9.1999 unde r the overall guidance and 
supervision of Granite Development Council to addre ss the difficulties faced by the 
Marble industries.  The Group on Marble Development  (GMD) in its meeting held on 2 
nd  
February, 2000 decided to constitute a Sub-Group un der the Chairmanship of Controller 
General, Indian Bureau of Mines to examine the mech anization in marble quarries. The 
Sub-Committee recommended that Marble Development a nd Conservation Rules could 
be framed in line with the Granite Conservation and  Development Rule, 1999.   
Accordingly, in consultation with stakeholders, the  Marble Development and 
Conservation Rules ( Annexure-I) were notified vide G.S.R. 369 (E) dated 15.5.2002.  

 
II  SALIENT FEATURES OF THE MARBLE DEVELOPMENT AND 
CONSERVATION RULES,  2002  
 
3.  Salient Features of the Marble Development and Conservation Rules, 2002 are as 
follows: 
 
i)  The rules apply to prospecting and quarrying of mar ble and are framed 
under Section 18 of MMDR Act, 1957 read with Sectio ns 21 and 26 for 
conservation and systematic development, scientific  mining of marble in 
the country and to provide a uniform framework in this regard. 
ii)  The rules make it mandatory to carry out prospectin g operations before a 
mining lease can be granted. 
iii)  The period of prospecting license shall not exceed two 
years. 
iv)  The period of mining lease shall not be less than t wenty years and shall 
not exceed thirty years. 
v)        Minimum area to be granted under lease sh all not be less than four 
hectares and not    
           more than fifty hectares, with the restr iction that any side of the area shall 
not be less              .         than 200 metres 
vi)  Preparation of a scheme of prospecting and prospect ing operations to be 
carried out in accordance with the said scheme is mandatory. 
vii)     The prospecting license holder for marble has to  submit a scheme of 
prospecting indicating the manner in which he propo ses to carry out the 
prospecting to the State Government within 60 days from the date of 
execution of prospecting license. Every holder of a  prospecting license for 
marble shall submit an annual report to the State Government. 
viii)  The rules provide for priority claim over a mining lease to the holder of a 
prospecting license if licensee applies for the min ing lease at thirty days 
before expiry of prospecting license. 
ix)  The Mining Plan duly approved shall be valid for the duration of the lease. 
x)  The rules provide for optimum deployment of certain  mining machinery 
to ensure production with minimum waste generation. 

xi)  On receipt of the application for grant of mining lease, the State Govt. shall 
take decision to grant precise area for said purpose. 
xii)  On receipt of communication about precise area the applicant shall submit 
a mining plan prepared by a recognized person. The Mining Plan 
submitted shall be approved by State Govt. on recei pt of the approved 
mining plan. The State Govt. will take a decision to grant the lease. 
xiii)  With a view to systematic and scientific mining, th e rules provide for 
removal and utilization of top soil, storage of ove rburden, waste rock, 
reclamation and rehabilitation of lands, precaution against air, water, noise 
pollution, restoration of flora, etc. 
xiv)  Employment of a mining engineer for carrying out pr ospecting and 
mining operations has been made mandatory. 
xv)  Submission of half-yearly and annual production ret urns has been 
provided for in the rules. 
xvi)  The provisions of the rules are also applicable to the government or its 
agencies carrying out mining operations. 
xvii)  The provisions of the Minor Mineral Concession Rule s framed by the 
respective State Governments under Section 15 of th e MMDR Act are 
applicable to the marble quarry leases to the exten t they are not repugnant 
with or inconsistent with the rules. 
 
III EXAMINATION OF RULES, OBSERVATIONS AND 
RECOMMENDATIONS  
 
4. Taking into consideration the importance of thes e Rules, the Committee took up 
for examination the Marble Development & Conservati on Rules (MDMR), 2002 and a 
questionnaire on the subject was forwarded to the M inistry of Mines for their comments/ 
clarifications on the 24 
th  January, 2003.  The Ministry furnished their 
comments/clarifications on the 19 th  September, 2003 (Annexure II) . A brief summary of 
the points raised by the Committee and the comments  of the Ministry are elaborated in 
the succeeding paragraphs along with the observatio ns/ recommendations of the 
Committee. 
 

5. The Mines and Minerals (Development & Regulation ) Act, 1957 was enacted in 
1957, but the Marble Development and Conservation R ules, 2002 were framed and 
notified in the year 2002.   The Committee, accordi ngly, sought to know the manner in 
which the areas covered by these rule were being regulated in the absence of these rules.   
 
5.1 The Ministry informed the Committee that Marble  is a building stone which is a 
notified minor minerals under Section 3(e) of Mines  and Minerals (Development and 
Regulation) Act, 1957 (MMDRA Act). Section 15 of the MMDR Act empowers the State 
Governments to make rules in respect of minor minerals for regulating the grant of quarry 
lease, mining leases, or other concessions and for purposes connected therewith. 
Therefore, every State Government is competent to m ake rules in respect of marble 
resources in the State.     The grant of concession s in respect of minor minerals including 
building stones like marble, granite, etc. are gove rned by the Minor Mineral Concession 
Rules of the respective State Governments. While Se ction 15 of the  MMDR Act, 1957 
has denuded  the Central Government of powers to fr ame rules for regulating the grant of 
quarry lease, mining leases, or other concessions a nd for purposes connected therewith in 
respect of minor minerals, under section 18 of the MMDR Act, 1957, a duty has been 
cast upon the Central Government to take all steps to ensure systematic and scientific 
mining of all minerals, including minor minerals. 
5.2 The Ministry further informed that the Mineral Conservation and Development 
Rules, 1988, supplement the Mineral Concession Rule s, 1960 in ensuring systematic 
conservation and development of major minerals and are not applicable to minor 
minerals.  In view of the rising importance of marb le as an important mineral with 
sizeable export market, the Central Government felt  a need to notify Marble 
Development and Conservation Rules, 2002 separately , carefully delineating the areas 
delegated to the States under powers bestowed to th em under Section 15 of the MMDR 
Act, 1957, in the interest of uniform legislation a cross States for this important minor 
mineral.  Prior to enactment of the Marble Developm ent and Conservation Rules, 2002, 
there was no uniform statutory framework across the  States for systematic conservation 
and development of marble resources in the country.  The State Governments are 
responsible in all matters regarding minor minerals . Therefore, the State Governments, 

who, under their own State rules, had been regulati ng the areas now covered by the 
Marble Development and Conservation Rules, 2002, ha ve been made the administering 
authority for enforcing the Central rule as well. 
 
6. Rule 3(1)(o) Definition 
"Recognized person" means a qualified person grante d recognition by the 
competent authority under these rules to prepare mining plan.  
 
6.1 The Committee enquired as to who was the compet ent authority referred to in the 
Rules and whether there was any objection in defining the same in the Rule.   
 
6.2 The Ministry stated that the Competent Authorit y referred in rule 3(1) (o) is the 
State Government or any person authorized by the St ate Government. The competent 
authority would be different for different states d epending upon the State Government 
set up. In order to provide the flexibility to the State Government in deciding the 
competent authority in enforcing the various provis ions of the rules, the term has not 
been defined separately in the rules. The Mineral c oncession Rules, 1960, which is 
applicable for major minerals is also framed similarly.  
 
6.3  The Committee after considering the contentions of the Ministry is of the 
opinion that the Ministry should ensure that the ba sic qualifications of the 
Recognized person under Rule 3(1)(o) should be unif orm in all the States where 
substantial amount of Marble is found. This was ess ential to maintain a certain 
basic level of uniformity in the implementation of the Rules in different States and 
setting the standards’ of the basic qualifications for the Recognized person was one 
of them. 
 
7. Rule 5: Period for which prospecting license may be granted. 
 
 "The period for which a prospecting license may be granted shall not 'exceed two 
years". 

 
7.1 The Committee was apprehensive whether two year s period was sufficient for 
prospecting and whether the rules should not take c are for circumstances where more 
period is required for genuine reasons.   
 
7.2 Allaying the apprehensions of the Committee, th e Ministry informed that in all 
cases of exploring and prospecting for minerals, a finite period is prescribed in the 
interest of mineral development. Even in case of ma jor minerals, a reconnaissance 
permit, which interalia  involves aerial exploration, is granted only for a  fixed period of 
three years.   
7.3 As per the Marble Development & Conservation Ru les (MDMR), 2002, evidence 
of prospecting or establishing existence of marble has been made a prerequisite for the 
grant of mining/ quarry lease in a particular area.  The Government held extensive 
discussions with the marble mining industry and the  State Governments before deciding 
on the period for prospecting. It was the consensus  that a two-year period is sufficient to 
locate the marble deposits as these occur mostly as  surface deposits, and accordingly the 
rules have provided for the same. Granite Conservat ion and Development Rules, 1999 
(GCDR) also prescribe the same period for prospecti ng for granite, on similar 
considerations.   
 
7.4 The Committee noted the reply of the Ministry.    
 
8. Rule 7: Minimum and maximum area for grant of a mining lease . 
 
“Provided that the State Government, if it is satis fied on the basis of proposed 
production level, geological, topographical or othe r conditions, may for the 
reasons to be recorded in writing, grant a lease ov er an area more than the 
maximum area or less than the minimum area specified under this rule." 
 
8.1 The Committee felt that the rule seems to vest enormous discretion with the State 
Government in deciding the area of land for mining lease. Recording the reasons in 

writing is the only check envisaged in the rules to  prevent misuse of the discretion. Does 
government not contemplate any further safeguards i n this regard like prescribing a 
maximum limit that could not be crossed under any c ircumstances, or some other such 
conditions.   
 
8.2 The Ministry informed that the Marble Developme nt and Conservation Rules, 
2002, envisage that State Governments would be the administering authority for 
enforcing the same.  The State Governments are empo wered vide Section 15 of the 
MMDR Act, 1957 to make rules for grant of leases/co ncessions for minor minerals 
including for marble.  Though the Marble Developmen t and Conservation Rules, 2002, 
have prescribed minimum and maximum area that can b e granted under mining lease for 
marble, but under the administering authority of th is Central Rule, a duty has been cast 
upon the State Governments to use the discretion fo r deviation from the ceilings 
prescribed only in genuine circumstances while gran ting mining leases for this minor 
mineral, on the basis of production level, geological, topographic or other conditions.   
8.3 The Ministry further informed that a similar di scretion is available to the Central 
Government for relaxing the maximum area that can b e granted under a mining lease in 
the interest of mineral development for major miner als under Mineral Concession Rules, 
1960. Most of the important mineral based industria l concerns, including Central and 
State Public Sector Undertakings have been granted large mining leases in judicious 
exercise of the discretion. Therefore, prescribing a maximum limit that could not be 
crossed under any circumstances in case of granting  of mining lease for marble, a minor 
mineral, which is otherwise totally under jurisdict ion of the State Governments, perhaps 
cannot be justified in the federal structure. 
 
8.4 The Committee notes the comments/clarifications  offered by the Ministry is 
of the opinion that since the said Rules have been in effect for over a decade, the 
Government must have gained sufficient experience i n the working of these Rules. 
Therefore, the Ministry based on its experience sho uld come up with an advisory 
regarding the grounds on which relaxation may be gr anted under the Rules. Views 
of the concerned States may also be solicited in th is regard keeping in view the fact 

that the State Governments also have a major role i n deciding the area of land for 
granting of mining lease. Such an advisory would help expedite the process of taking 
decisions regarding relaxation of Rules concerning area requirements.  
 
9. Rule 9: Modification of Scheme of Prospecting  :- 
 
“(1)   A prospecting scheme prepared and submitted under rule 8 may be 
modified at any time on geological considerations b y the holder of a 
prospecting license during continuance of the prospecting license.   
 
(2) Any modification carried out under Sub-rule (1)  shall be intimated to the 
State Government or any person authorized in this b ehalf by that 
Government, by the holder of a prospecting licence within a period of 
fifteen days.” 
 
9.1 The Committee wanted a clarification as to the modification suggested by the 
holder of the prospecting licence need any formal a pproval by any body, what is the date 
from which the period of 15 days is to reckon, and what checks are there in the rule to 
ensure that the limitation of 15 days is not violated.   
 
9.2 The Ministry informed that the modification car ried out in the Prospecting 
Scheme submitted under rule 8(1) is only to be inti mated to the State Government or any 
person authorized in this behalf by that Government  within a period of 15 days from the 
date of such modification and no formal approval is  required. If a violation of this rule is 
detected, the holder of the Prospecting Licence is liable to punishment provided under 
Rule 41.  
 
9.3  The Committee while accepting the comments offered by the Ministry is of 
the opinion that some safeguards are needed to be p ut in place for the modifications 
in the prospecting scheme. Therefore, the intimatio n of modification submitted to 
the State Government or any other person authorized  in this behalf should be 
accompanied by a statement indicating the reasons f or making the modifications 
along with its financial and ecological implications. The Committee, therefore, urges 
the Ministry to amend the rules accordingly.   
 

10 Rule 12: Mining Plan as a pre-requisite to the grant of lease:  
  
2(a) For the renewal of any lease over an area exce eding one hectare the State 
Government shall require the lessee to submit a min ing plan duly 
approved by the State Government or any person auth orized in this behalf 
by that Government for the development of marble de posit in the area 
concerned. 
 
(b) For the purpose of renewal of a mining lease up to an area of one hectare, 
the State Government shall specify a simplified sch eme of mining to be 
submitted by the lessee for approval by the state G overnment or any other 
person authorized in this behalf. 
 
10.1 The Committee sought clarification as to wheth er the restriction of minimum area 
of four hectares provided in rule 7(1) for grant of  lease was also applicable in case of 
renewal of lease under the provisions of rule 12(2)  (a) & (b).  Also, how rule 12(2) is 
mentioning about one hectare of area.  
 
10.2  In response the Ministry stated that the Marb le Development and Conservation 
Rules 2002 have drawn a distinction between initial  grant of a mining lease and renewal 
of an existing mining lease.  Rule 7(1) and (2) pre scribe the minimum area and the 
maximum area that may be granted under a mining lea se.  Rule 12(1) states that no lease 
shall be granted unless there is an approved mining  plan.   This Rule complements Rule 
7(1) and (2) regarding grant of a mining lease.   W hile Rule 12(2)(a) provides that for 
renewal of any mining lease for an area of 1 hectar e and above, a mining plan should be 
submitted where as Rule 12(2)(b) provides that for smaller areas a simple scheme of 
mining should be submitted for approval of State Govement. 
10.3 Drawing a distinction between grant of a minin g lease and renewal of mining 
lease in so far as minimum size of the lease is con cerned and submission of mining plans 
in the Marble Development and Conservation Rules, 2 002 has a background.  Marble 
quarries have existed for last few centuries in are as like Makrana in Rajasthan, and with 
time, inheritance rights over small fragmented quar ries have come into existence, which 
cannot be suddenly reversed.  Before framing of Mar ble Development and Conservation 
Rules, 2002 the States had already granted smaller mining/quarry leases for marble and 
such areas are already broken.  The Central rules i ntend to provide for scientific and 

systematic mining for fresh mining leases for marbl e, in virgin areas. Hence the 
restriction of minimum area of 4 hectares provided under rule 7(1) for grant of lease is 
not applicable in case of renewal of such existing quarry leases of less then the minimum 
prescribed area. Rule 12(2), therefore, provides for scheme of mining for such areas up to 
one hectare in extent, as and when they come up for renewal.   
10.4 The Committee noted the reply of the Ministry  
 
11. Rule 15-Approval and submission of mining plan . 
 
 “On receipt of the application for grant of mining  lease for undertaking mining 
operations for marble, the State Government shall t ake decision to grant precise area for 
the said purpose and communicate such decision to t he applicant and on receipt of the 
communication from the State Government of the prec ise area to be granted, the 
applicant shall submit a mining plan within a perio d of three months from the date on 
which such communication is received or such other period as may be allowed by the 
State Government for approval and the said mining p lan shall incorporate :-
………………” 
 
 
11.1 The Committee was of the view that Rule 15 gav e discretionary powers to the 
State Governments for submitting by the applicant t he mining plan for approval. It 
therefore sought clarification as to whether the ru les should not be uniform for all and 
leave no scope for different application and whethe r Government had any objection in 
prescribing certain checks to ensure that submissio n of mining plans was not unduly 
delayed. 
 
11.2  In response the Ministry submitted that while  applying for a mining lease, the 
applicant cannot submit the mining plan, because he is not aware of how much and which 
part of the area may ultimately be granted to him.  Rule 15 therefore provides that he has 
to submit the mining plan only after the State Gove rnment has taken a decision to grant 
him a lease over a precise area.   Therefore, the a pplicant is given three months time or 
such other period as may be allowed to submit the m ining plan for the precise area 
incorporating nature and extent of the marble depos it,  details of geology and lithology, 
extent of manual mining, mining by the use of machi nery, etc.  over which the State 
Government has taken a decision to grant him the le ase.  Preparation of the mining plan 

is time consuming and the minimum period of 3 month s given by the State Government 
is reasonable.  An applicant, cannot be granted a n ew mining lease unless he submits the 
plan and the State Government approves it.  The sub mission of mining plans within time 
is always in the interest of applicant himself.  In case of undue delay not acceptable to the 
State Government, the Government has powers to revo ke the decision to grant the said 
lease under the State Minor Mineral Concession Rules. 
 
11.3  The Committee while acknowledging the content ions of the Ministry 
is of the opinion that  the Ministry should make ef forts to use the latest electronic 
networks for expediting the process of submission o f mining plans. The Ministry 
should make efforts to motivate the State Governments to move towards a paperless 
procedure by setting up websites for submission of applications and mining plans. 
This would also help the process of monitoring of s ubmission of documents in a time 
bound manner.  
 
12. Rule 16(4) -  Mining plan as a pre-requisite to the commencement of mining 
operations : 
 
“The State Government or any person authorized in t his behalf by that 
Government may approve the modifications under sub- rule(3) or approve with 
such alterations as it may consider expedient.” 
 
12.1 The Committee wanted to know whether the Gover nment had any objection in 
providing for recording in writing the reasons for making alterations or modifications in 
the mining plan in the name of expediency.   
 
12.2 The Ministry accepted the views of the Committ ee and stated that the State 
Governments were being directed to invariably recor d in writing the reasons for making 
alterations or modifications in the mining plan.   
 
12.3  The Committee expresses its satisfaction on the ste ps taken by the Ministry 
to give effect to its views/suggestions. It further  urges the Ministry to make suitable 

amendments in the Rules to give statutory backing t o the suggestions of the 
Committee. 
 
 
13. Rule 18(5): Review of mining plan . 
 
“ If approval or refusal of the scheme of mining is  not conveyed to the holder of 
the lease within the stipulated period, the scheme of mining shall be deemed to 
have been provisionally approved and such approval shall be subject to final 
decision whenever communicated”. 
 
13.1 The Committee felt that the words ‘whenever co mmunicated’ were vague and 
conferred wide discretion upon the authorities for granting approval which may be 
misused.  The Committee, therefore, desired that Go vernment should specify an outer 
time limit this regard.   
 
13.2 The Ministry clarified that as  per sub-rule(5 ) of Rule 17, approval of mining plan 
or scheme of mining of the modified mining plan is to be conveyed within 90 days and as 
per sub-rule(6) of Rule 17, if no decision is conve yed within the stipulated period, it is 
deemed to have been “provisionally” approved.  Sinc e a lot of scrutiny is involved in the 
approval of mining plans and considering the number  of applications, it may not be 
possible to provide a time frame for communication of final decision. 
 
13.3 The Committee notes the clarifications provided by the Ministry and 
reiterates its earlier recommendation that efforts should be made to make use of the 
electronic networks to expedite the process of comm unication of decisions and 
submission of applications and documents. Such a ne twork, if put in place, would 
ensure better monitoring and transparency. The Comm ittee, therefore, urges the 
Ministry to take up the issue with the concerned States for setting up such a system.  
 
14. Rule 25: Protection of environment . 
 
“Every holder of a prospecting licence or a lease s hall take all possible 
precautions for the protection of environment and c ontrol of pollution while 

conducting prospecting,  mining or processing of ma rble in the area for which 
such licence or lease is granted”. 
 
14.1 It was felt that the term ‘all possible’ as us ed in the rule was vague. The 
Committee was of the opinion that protection of env ironment and control of pollution are 
issues of vital importance. Therefore, whether any specific guidelines and standards of 
norm existing in this regard and, it not, how matte rs of details are being enforced in the 
area of environment protection.  
 
14.2 The Ministry informed that the Central Governm ent (through Ministry of 
Environment and Forests) was mainly responsible for  matters related to environment and 
control of pollution, Every State Government also h as counterpart Ministries/Department 
to look after these aspects.   Also, Rules 29, 30, 31 and 33 of the Marble Development 
and Regulations Rules 2002 address some of the spec ific environmental and pollution 
issues.   
 
14.3 The Committee is not inclined to agree with the com ments of the Ministry.  
The Committee is of the view that since the Ministr y of Mines being the 
administrative Ministry for the Mining operations had the necessary experience and 
knowledge in this field and merely stating that res ponsibility for matters relating to 
environment and pollution control rests with the Mi nistry of Environment & Forest 
was not in the proper spirit. The Committee is of t he opinion that the Ministry of 
Mines should take the initiative in coordination with the Ministry of Environment & 
Forest for getting the necessary subordinate legisl ation framed with particular 
reference to marble and related operations. It, the refore, urges the Ministry to take 
necessary steps in this regard. 
 
15 Rule 26:  Removal and Utilization of top soil . 
 
“(1) Where top soil exists and is to be excavated f or prospecting or mining 
operations for marble, its shall be removed separately. 
 

(2) The top soil so removed shall be utilized for r estoration and rehabilitation 
of the land which is no longer required for prospec ting or mining operations or 
for stabilizing or landscaping the external dumps. 
 
(3) Where top soil cannot be used concurrently, it shall be stores separately 
for future use.” 
 
15.1 The Committee sought clarification as to wheth er non-compliance would invite 
any penalty, and, if so, should it not be provided in the rules.  
 
15.2 The Ministry clarified that penalty is already  provided in the MDCR, 2002.  As 
per Rule 41 relating to Penalty, whosoever contrave nes any of the provisions of these 
Rules shall be punishable with imprisonment for a t erm of one year or with fine to the 
extent of Rs. 5000 or with both. 
 
15.3 The Committee noted the reply of the Ministry. 
  
16. Rule 28: Reclamation and rehabilitation of lands   
 
“Every leaseholder shall undertake in a phased mann er restoration, reclamation 
and rehabilitation of lands affected by prospecting or mining operations and shall 
complete this work before the conclusion of such operations and the abandonment 
of the marble quarry of mine”. 
 
16.1 The Committee wanted to know the parameters fo r reclamation and rehabilitation 
of land used by the leaseholder and whether non-compliance would attract any penalty. 
 
16.2 The Committee was informed that as per Rule 28 , the mine owner had to 
undertake restoration, reclamation and rehabilitati on of lands affected by prospecting or 
mining operations, in a phased manner.  With this t he land is expected to be restored to 
its original shape and use in stage.   This aspect is also looked into in the scheme of 
mining as per the individual cases.  As per Rule 41 - Penalty, whosoever contravenes any 
of the provisions of these Rules shall be punishabl e with imprisonment for a term of one 
year or with fine to the extent of Rs. 5000 or with both. 
 

16.3 The Committee after examining the clarificatio ns provided by the Ministry is 
of the considered opinion that the penalties provid ed in the rules is insufficient and 
needed to be made more stringent to increase its de terrent value. The Committee, 
therefore, recommends that the amount of the fine s hould be linked to the extent of 
area of the mine. Steps should also be taken to ens ure that   operations like 
restoration, reclamation and rehabilitation of land s affected by prospecting or 
mining operations are carried out in a time bound a nd effective manner. This is 
crucial for ecological and environmental considerations. 
 
 
IV EXAMINATION OF REPRESENTATIONS 
  
  
17. The Committee during the course of the examinat ion of the said Rules also 
received representations from Aravalli Minerals & C hemical Industries Private Limited 
and Udaipur Marble Producers Association. These wer e forwarded to the Ministry of 
Mines for their comments/clarifications on 29 
th  July, 2005.  The Ministry furnished their 
comments/ clarifications on the 30 th  August, 2006 ( Annexure III ).   
17.1 On a perusal of the comments/clarifications fu rnished, the Committee 
observes that most of the issues raised in the said  representations concerned with 
the State Governments since the implementation of t he said Rules rested with them. 
The Committee is therefore of the opinion that the Ministry should take up the 
issues raised by the  Associations with the concern ed State Government for 
resolving the obstacles faced by the Marble produce rs for the smooth 
implementation of the said Rules. 
 
18 The Committee, thereafter, heard the Ministry of  Mines on the subject matter on 
the 20 
th  July, 2011.  Relevant extracts of the Minutes of t he said meeting are placed at 
Annexure IV . During the course of the said meeting the Committ ee was informed that 
Marble being a minor mineral, its regulation was de legated to the State Governments. 
The role of the Central Government in fact, was to provide suitable policy environment 
for the growth of the marble mining in a sustained and scientific manner. Most of the 

powers under the rules were vested in the State Gov ernments and the rules also clearly 
lay down the details regarding preparation of the m ining plan and its components and the 
State Governments cannot deviate from the basic pri nciples laid down in the rules and 
have to work within a uniform national framework. I t was informed that the Ministry had 
been engaged with concerned stakeholders to resolve  the challenges faced by the marble 
sector. The Committee was also informed that a comp rehensive legislation proposed for 
the entire mining sector, including minor minerals was expected to be introduced in the 
Monsoon Session, 2011 which would help address a nu mber of concerns raised by the 
Committee.  
  
V ON THE SPOT APPRAISAL OF THE RULES 
  
 
19. The Committee, thereafter, took up the for disc ussion the said Rules with the 
representatives of Udaipur Marble Producers Associa tion, Aravalli Minerals & Chemical 
Industries Private Limited and other Marble produce rs along with the Ministry of Mines 
and the State Government of Rajasthan  at Udaipur, Rajasthan on the 8 
th  February, 2013.  
A Study Note on the said discussion was prepared (Annexure-V).   During the course of 
discussion, the Committee was informed that mineral  activity had increased 
tremendously in recent times. This was mainly due t o increase in demand.  For 
monitoring of the same, registration of mine owners  had become necessary. This has 
been directly monitored by the Central Ministry. A Committee comprising of the 
Ministries of Mines, Labour & Employment and Enviro nment & Forest had been set up 
to look after the mining activities in the States o f Rajasthan, Gujarat, Haryana, Andhra 
Pradesh and Madhya Pradesh. 
 
20. Based upon its discussions held with the Marble  Producers Association in 
Udaipur, the Committee is of the opinion that more publicity needed to be given to 
the said Rules. The Ministry should also hold more consultations with the Marble 
miners to understand the problems faced by them in different States in the 
implementation of the said Rules. This was crucial to the effective implementation of 

the Rules and development of the Marble sector in a  coordinated manner. The 
Committee therefore urges the Ministry to take suitable measures in this regard.         
 
SUMMARY OF COMMITTEE’S OBSERVATIONS AND 
RECOMMENDATIONS  
 
21. Rule 3(1)(o) Definition. 
  The Committee after considering the contentions o f the Ministry is of the 
opinion that the Ministry should ensure that the ba sic qualifications of the 
Recognized person under Rule 3(1)(o) should be unif orm in all the States where 
substantial amount of Marble is found. This was ess ential to maintain a certain 
basic level of uniformity in the implementation of the Rules in different States and 
setting the standards’ of the basic qualifications for the Recognized person was one 
of them. 
 
22. Rule 7: Minimum and maximum area for grant of a  mining lease. 
 The Committee notes the comments/clarifications of fered by the Ministry is 
of the opinion that since the said Rules have been in effect for over a decade, the 
Government, must have been gained sufficient experi ence in the working of these 
Rules. Therefore, the Ministry based on its experie nce should come up with an 
advisory regarding the grounds on which relaxation may be granted under the 
Rules. Views of the concerned States may also be so licited in this regard keeping in 
view the fact that the State Governments also have a major role in deciding the area 
of land for granting of mining lease. Such an advis ory would help  expedite the 
process of taking decisions regarding relaxation of  Rules concerning area 
requirements.  
 
23. Rule 9: Modification of Scheme of Prospecting. 
 The Committee while accepting the comments offered  by the Ministry is of 
the opinion that some safeguards are needed to be p ut in place for the modifications 
in the prospecting scheme. Therefore, the intimatio n of modification submitted to 

the State Government or any other person authorized  in this behalf should be 
accompanied by a statement indicating the reasons f or making the modifications 
along with its financial and ecological implications. The Committee, therefore, urges 
the Ministry to amend the rules accordingly.   
 
24. Rule 15: Approval and submission of mining plan . 
 The Committee while acknowledging the contentions of the Ministry is of the 
opinion that  the Ministry should make efforts to u se the latest electronic networks 
for expediting the process of submission of mining plans. The Ministry should make 
efforts to motivate the State Governments to move t owards a paperless procedure 
by setting up websites for submission of applicatio ns and mining plans. This would 
also help the process of monitoring of submission o f documents in a time bound 
manner.  
 
25. Rule 16(4)- Mining plan a pre-requisite to comm ence mining operations. 
The Committee expresses its satisfaction on the ste ps taken by the Ministry to give 
effect to its views/suggestions. It further urges t he Ministry to make suitable 
amendments in the Rules to give statutory backing t o the suggestions of the 
Committee. 
 
26. Rule 18: Review of mining plan 
 The Committee notes the clarifications provided by  the Ministry and 
reiterated its earlier recommendation that efforts should be made to make use of the 
electronic networks to expedite the process of comm unication of decisions and 
submission of applications and documents. Such a ne twork, if put if place, would 
ensure better monitoring and transparency. The Comm ittee, therefore, urges the 
Ministry to take up the issue with the concerned States for setting up such a system.  
 
27. Rule 25: Protection of Environment 
 The Committee is not inclined to agree with the co mments of the Ministry.  
The Committee is of the view that since the Ministr y of Mines being the 

administrative Ministry for the Mining operations had the necessary experience and 
knowledge in this field and merely stating that res ponsibility for matters relating to 
environment and pollution control rests with the Mi nistry of Environment & Forest 
was not in the proper spirit. The Committee is of t he opinion that the Ministry of 
Mines should take the initiative in coordination with the Ministry of Environment & 
Forest for getting the necessary subordinate legisl ation framed with particular 
reference to marble and related operations. It, the refore, urges the Ministry to take 
necessary steps in this regard. 
 
28. Rule 28: Reclamation and rehabilitation of land s. 
 The Committee after examining the clarifications p rovided by the Ministry is 
of the considered opinion that the penalties provid ed in the rules is insufficient and 
needed to be made more stringent to increase its de terrent value. The Committee, 
therefore, recommends that the amount of the fine s hould be linked to the extent of 
area of the mine. Steps should also be taken to ens ure that   operations like 
restoration, reclamation and rehabilitation of land s affected by prospecting or 
mining operations are carried out in a time bound a nd effective manner. This is 
crucial for ecological and environmental considerations. 
 
29.  On a perusal of the comments/clarifications fu rnished, the Committee 
observes that most of the issues raised in the said  representations concerned with 
the State Governments since the implementation of t he said Rules rested with them. 
The Committee is therefore of the opinion that the Ministry should take up the 
issues raised by the  Associations with the concern ed State Government for 
resolving the obstacles faced by the Marble produce rs for the smooth 
implementation of the said Rules. 
 
 
30. Based upon its discussions held with the Marble  Producers Association in 
Udaipur, the Committee is of the opinion that more publicity needed to be given to 
the said Rules. The Ministry should also hold more consultations with the Marble 

miners to understand the problems faced by them in different States in the 
implementation of the said Rules. This was crucial to the effective implementation of 
the Rules and development of the Marble sector in a  coordinated manner. The 
Committee therefore urges the Ministry to take suitable measures in this regard.         
 
31. The Committee is hopeful that the Ministry woul d carry out the 
recommendations  of the Committee expeditiously und er intimation to it. The 
Committee is also of the opinion that proper monito ring and inspections are 
essential for the proper implementation of the Rule s and stresses upon the Ministry 
to strengthen its enforcement mechanism to ensure t hat the objectives of the Rules 
are achieved.  
 

MINUTES OF THE MEETING OF THE COMMITTEE ON SUBORDINATE 
LEGISLATION, RAJYA SABHA 
 
IX 
 Ninth Meeting 
 
The Committee met at 3.30 pm on Tuesday, the 18 th  February, 2014 in Room 
No.126-C (Committee Chairperson’s Room), Parliament House, New Delhi.   
Present 
1. Dr. Najma A. Heptulla    Chairperson 
Members 
2. Shri M.P. Achuthan 
3. Shri Ali Anwar Ansari 
4. Shri P. Bhattacharya 
5. Shri Balwinder Singh Bhunder 
6. Shri Lalhming Liana 
7. Dr.Bhalchandra Mungekar 
8. Shri Vijay Jawaharlal Darda 
 
Secretariat 
1.  Shri N.K. Singh, Joint Secretary 
2.  Shri Mahesh Tiwari, Director 
3.  Shri R.S.Rawat, Joint Director 
4.  Shri Rakesh Anand, Joint Director 
5.  Shri R.P.Shukla, Assistant Director 
6.  Smt. Monica Baa, Assistant Director 
 
2. At the outset, the Chairperson welcomed the Memb ers of the Committee to the 
meeting.  The following draft reports were taken up for consideration and adoption by the 
Committee: 
• Draft 213 
th  Report on Statutory Orders Laid on the Table of th e Rajya  
Sabha during its 229th  Session 
• Draft 214 th  Report on the Marble Development and Conservation Rules, 
2005; and 
• Draft 215 th  Report on the Hours of Working of Loco Running Sta ff in the 
Indian Railways 
3. The Committee unanimously adopted its draft 213 th , 214 th  and 215 th  Reports and 
decided to present these Reports to the House on the 19th  February, 2014.  Accordingly, it 

authorized its Chairperson, and in her absence Shri  Vijay Jawaharlal Darda and Shri Ali 
Anwar Ansari, Members of the Committee, to present the Reports to the House. 
4.   *   *   * 
 
5.     The meeting adjourned at 4.00 p.m. 
 
________________________ 
*** Relate to other matters. 