PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA 
COMMITTEE 
ON 
SUBORDINATE LEGISLATION 
(Preseuted on the 14th March, 1g84) 
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
·,fc, '.· 
r 

COMPOSJ.TION OF 'IHE COMMITIEB 
(1983-84) 
CHAIRMAN 
1. Dr. Bhai Mahavir 
MEMBERS 
2. Shri Banaman Babu . 
3. Shri Madan Bhatia 
4. Shrl N aJnd Kis.hore BhaJtt ' 
5. Shri G. C. Bhattacharya 
6 .. Shri Amarprosad Chakraborty 
7. Shri Dipe..:t Ghosh 
8. Shri B. D. Khobragade 
9. Slnii Ram Naresh K:ushawaha 
10. Sbri G. SWamy Naik 
11. · Shri Ghans.hyambhai Oza 
12. Shri Rafique Alam 
13 .. Shri Santosh Kumar Sahu 
14. Shri Shanti Tyagi 
15. Dr. Rafiq Zakaria 
SECRETARIAT 
Sttimati K. K. Chopra, Additional Secretary. 
Shri B. R. Goel. Chief Examiner of Questions, 
I 
Shri R.. N. Bhardwaj, Senior Legislative Committee Officer. 
(1982-83) 
CHAIRMAN 
1. Dr. Bhai Mahavir 
MEMBERS 
. 2. Sh:r'i T. Basheet 
3. Shrl. Nand Kishore Bhatt 
4. Shri G. C. Bhatt~harya . 
(i) 

ii 
5. Shri Amarprosad Chakraborty 
6. Shri Dipen Ghosh 
7. Shri B. D. Khobragade 
· *·8. Sbri Ram Niwas Mirdha 
9. Shri S'ustm Chand Mohwta 
10. ~hri G. Swamy Naik 
11. Shti Ghanshyamrtlb.ai Oza 
12. Sbri SantOISib K:lliD1al' Sahu: 
: 13. Shri Ng. Tomp<>k Singh 
14. Sbri Shanti Tyagi 
15. Dr. Rafiq Zaikarla ·' 
(1979-80) 
CaAIR.MAN 
1. Shri Viswanathai Menon 
MEMBERS 
z. Shrimati Pratima Bose 
3. Shrl Jag4ish Joshi 
4, Prof. N. M. Kamble 
5. Shti l.Jabhmana Mahapatro 
4 · Shti Dhaneshwar Majhi 
t7. Shri Ibrahim Kalaniya 
8. Shri J agdish ~ad Malthu:r 
9, Shri S. A. Khaja: Mohideen 
10. Shri Ahmad Hossain Mondal 
111. Shri Narasi:lllgha Pr:asadi Nanda 
112 Shrimati Raljinder Kau:r 
13, Sbri V. C .. Kesava Rao 
14. Shrri S. K. VaimshampaYM 
15. Sbri Alexander Warjrl 
.. 
*Shri Ram Niwas Mirdhaswotn in as a Minister of State on the 29th january, t98S•· 
tNomlnated on the 5th FebrUary, 1980 11ke Shrl Yogendra Makwana, resigned. 

.. 
REPORT 
I, ilihe Chairman of the Committee on Subordinate Legislation, having. 
been authorised by the Comt:nli:ttee tp present the !Report on its behalf, 
present this Fifty·ninth Report. The Committee conSidered aftd adopted 
the Report at its meetin1g held. on the 9th March, 1984. 
2 The Committee at its mee~g held on the 9th November, 1979, 
decided tihat fh,e Dellhi Co.-operative Societies Rules, 19:73 mad~ under 
:the Delhi Coope1ative Societies. Act, 1972 should be scrutinised. As 
~eSe ruJes ~ their multifacet application affect practically every section 
of society in the Union Territory' of Delhi, the Committee also decided to 
eleicit views of institutions'/t)fganisations and individuals on the subject. 
A PresS Release was accordingly, issued on the 20th November, 1979 
(Annexure U In response, two m~oranda were recei'9ed from orie Shri 
S. Balnerjee of Tagore Park, Delhi, and the other from Dr. S. N. Jain of 
tlhe India'n Law Institute, New Delhi ( Arinexures. IT and m). 
3. The Delhi Co-operative Societies Rules, ·1973; were scrutinised arid 
the poin~ which emerged, were referred to the Ministry of Agriculture 
(Depaiitment of Agriculture and Cooperation), on tlhe 21st November,, 
1980, for their comments. The comments of the Ministry on the ·variom 
points referred! to them were received vide 1lheir O.M. dated the 9th June, 
1981 (Annexure tv). 
4. Subsequently, the MiJnistry, vide tlhclr O.Ms. dated the 9th Juilj, 
1981 and 181lh August, 19811, inter adia informed that the Slllggestions fOt 
ameDdmeln1l to the Rules as received from different quarters, w:ere being 
considered by a seven-man ad hoc Commi~fee OOlliSisting of officials of 
Delhi Admi:nistration and representatives of different co-operative societies, 
which was constituted! ·by the Delhi Adminilstration in November, 1977. 
Thereafter, on 2nd June, 1982, the Ministry informed tt1 at, based on the 
aforesaid suggestions, tlhe Delhi Administration carried out pertain amend­
tne'nts in the Rul~ and the same were notified in the Deffii Gazette, dated 
the 24th M~. 19·82. 
S. At its meeting held on 1lhe 24th NIOVemJber, 1983, the Committee 
considered tlbe Ruiles as amended, in the iJigbt of the comments Cif lbe 
Mfn,ist,ry. . 
6. At ~ts meeting .held on rthe lltlh Janua:ty, 1984, ~he Committee 
tieird the representatives of the Ministry of Agriculture (Department of 
'AgricultUre & Coop!etatidn) and the Delhi Adimin·istraitiion and sought 
ttir!!iher · dladfications in the matter. 

7. Observati(jl]s of the Committee on various rules arising out of their 
examination which in the opinion of the Committ.ee should be brought to 
the notice of the House, together with the recommeudadons Ot the 
Committee thereon, are contained in the. succeeding paragraphs: . 
8.1 Rule 2: Definitions: 
(xvi) "Model ibye...tlaws'' mean a set of. bye-"laws approved and 
proposed by the Registrar for general adoption b!y a class of 
co-operative society. 
Rule 14: Model By~-laws: 
The RegiStrar shall make model bye-laws of each· class ar sub­
cia~ of a cO-Operative society which may be adopted with or 
without changes, if anY. 
Poi'nt referred: 
There was a referetiiCe to model bye-laws in rule 14 also. It was 
nod clear. under which authority the Registrar sh.all ma:ke 
model bye-laws. Was it obligaJtory on the Coo!lerative 
Sodet:es to adopt model bye-laws in their functioning ..:.nd if 
so, to wlhat . extent? 1t was felt that as the m~el bye-ilaws 
had legal 1 ~alidity the model by-laws, so made by the Registrar 
sllould have been appended to the Rules. 
Ministry's comments: 
Rule 14 is framed itUl pursuance of the rule-making power given 
to the Lt. Governor of Delhi under Section 97(2){iv) of 
Delhi Co-operative Societies Act, 1972, which says that the 
rules to be :framed by the Lt. Governor may provide for all 
or any of the. matters in respect Of which the Society may QT' 
shall make lJye-"laws and for the procedure to be fQllowed 
in making, altering and a abrogating ibye-hmvs and the con­
ditions to; be satisfied prior to such making, alterations or 
abrogation. The model bye-laws as the name suggesits, is 
intended to provide guidance to promoters in the matter of 
adopt~on of bye-laws for · registration. The Registrar of Co­
opera'lli.ve Societies, as friend, ;philosopher and guide of co­
operatives ihave been fonn.ru1ati1ng model 'bye-laws for the 
guidance of promoters of co-operative societies. These model 
bye-laws can be adopted by societies with or withc:.'Jt changes, 
i})ut h:av:e to be finally approved by the Registrar before register­
ing. The model bye-laws attain legal validity only a£ter ~ 
are registered by the Registrar. As such, the model bye-laws, 
which are in the nature of guidelines are not· necessary to be 
appended to the Ru1es. 

3 
8.2. The representatives of the Ministry of Agriculture and the Delhi 
Administration, who appeared before the Committee on the 11th January_ 
1984, clarified and elabOrated their stand with regard tQ rule 2(xvi) and 
ruie 14. · .I 
.. l 
8.3. During ~he course o'f deposition, the r~resentatives of the 
Ministry told the Committee that the model bye-laws made by the Re-­
gistrar were not binding on the societies. They were made as a source of 
guidance to the societies who would like rto get them registered with the 
Registrar. The societies were free to adopt the model bye-laws in th: 
or'igi:n:al foom or in the modified form and they could submit those bye­
laws to the Registrar and after approval only they got the legal statu:>. 
There were about 15-16 types of societies and model bye-laws were made 
for them and those model bye~laws did not enjoy any legal status. On 
being told that though tlhose were the guildelines but 1they had created 
confusion since they had been incorporated in the rules. The societies 
were autonomous bodies and had necessary power under the la.w to make 
their own bye-laws, The administration could have giveu . those model 
1Yye-laiWS 'in .the form of iin~structions stating. that; those were the basic 
parameters within which the societies could make their bye-lam;. 
According to the General Clauses Act, the provisions in the Act super .. 
s00es' the rules and the bye-laws. The representatives were 1asked, in case 
some society framed its bye-law where the model bye-law was not followed, 
what was the provision in the law to deal with that case. The represen­
tative replied that the Act was the :IDJaJin thing and nothing in the . rules 
or the bye-laws could provide for anything which would be in contradic­
tion with the provisiQ!ls of the Act. He added that the rules were sulbser .. 
vient to the Act and so bye-law's to the rules. The purpose of providing 
model bye-laws in the rules simp1y provided guidelines. The SocietieS 
were free to adopt with or witHout changes'. The representative admit­
ted that there was no specific provision in the Act which gave that powi!f 
but in Rule 14 or in the definition of the model bye-llaws, there wa~ 
nothing repugnant to the parent Act. 
8.4. In the opinion of tthe Committee the. power given to the Regli. 
trar -..der Rule 14 to frame. model bye-laws isi not sup}Wrted by ai:J 
provision in the Deihl. Cooperative: Societies Act, 1972. Tbe powei tq 
make bye-laws is m:tually. vested in the Cooperative societies themselftS 
under the Act. It is only as a ''friend, philosopher and guide of Coopera­
tives'' that the Registrar is to frame the model bye-laws, for a dan 011 
sub~ of · Cooperati:ve Societies~ which ~y be adopted with or wfth. 
out changes, if any, by tlOO societies concerned. 11re bye-laws so framed 
by file societies are; 'however, subject to the approval or the Regisfrar 
under Section 9(1) (c) of the Act, who bas to examine the~ and satisfy 
himself belore approval that they are mot . contrarry to ·the provisions of 

4 
6e Act and the Iblles made ~. The fact, !however, remains that 
lhe power to make JDOdel bye•liaiws does not find a legal sanction in the 
Aet sud as· sueb should not be Given sta11u1tory sancfion b·y im:orporatiag 
It ooder the rules. Since ~ ~ bye-laws are to . be made by the 
Registrar in bis role only as a: tirlend, philosoPh« and guide of the eo­
eperati~s, it should not be coudled · wJb statutory sanction by W1aY .,. 
incorporatioo in the R:uks. Tile COmmi:ttee, therefore, recommends that 
the model bye-laws which ate framed only lor the guidance of the eo.. 
operative societies to enable· them to frame their ow.n bye-laws, shouka 
be laid down only as administrati~ btlstructions and clause (xvi) of 
Rule 2 and Rule 14 of the Delhi Cooperative Societies Rules, 1973 be 
deleted. . 
8..5 !The Committee also rqoo~ ~ tbe SOICiqtief!., which are 
autonomous bodies un.OOr the Ad and the rules made thereunder, should 
be free to make, ~ and foD:ow tlreit own bye-Jaws, if they are in 
eouformity with the provisions of the Act .aiDdl the rules. The Registrar 
under the provisions of the Act and the rules should not interfere in the 
adoption or ope.ratiion ot tllre bye.la:ws by a particohtr society if they 
fulfil the requhements of the Act and the ·rules made thereunder. 
9.1 RuJe 3::, Persons appointed to asSI'lst the Regi8trar and Position 
of Government Servants. 
* * • 
( 4) A Government servant may become a member of a Consumer's 
Co..operative SOcietY or a !Housing Co-operative Society. He may be­
come a member of any co--operative society organised ·exclusively for the 
employees Oif the department concerned and take part in its management,. 
deposit, invest. or lend money to it or borrow from it and stand surety for 
· a borrower. He may 'lisa. rovest or depQ!sit money m any Co-operative 
Socletiy or a Co-operative Bank. ~ 
Point refemil: 
A Governmenlll servant m.i:ght also in:veSit or deposit money in any Co­
operative Society or a Co-operative Bank whereas it had been stipulated lt1 
the ru!le 'lfbat he could become a member of cetltain specilfied tocieties. It 
was not clear under what circumstances a Government servant who was 
110t allOwed to 'becCIDle member o1. a co-operative society other than.~ 
fi.ed CO'Dld invest or depoSit money in that society. 
Mirr18try's comments: 
Rule 3(4) pl~ restrictions on Government servants ~. 
members Of 1ll1 types of ~eties meant for generaill{l'Ublic, except~·. 
co-operatives and hoosin1g '00-QPei'alti:ves. For depositing. money in a 
operative society, a person need not be a memlber of a oo-ope:.ra.Q:~ 
society. If .1Jbe concerned society can accept deposin; from nO'lt-me.mt•efSJ 
a ~t servant11 em ].nvest or deposit money in that society. 

5 ,~-! 
:rule ( 6) of rule 3 provides restrictiODS on Government servants for !becom­
ing members of other than speotiied sQCieties, unless peimitted by the Headj 
of lthe Depart:ment. Deletion Of this rule is being considered by ihe 
CQmmittee appointed ~ the DeJ:bi Administration to suggest ameac:J,.. 
ments to t!he Delhi: Co-operative Sociefies Ruiles, 1973. 
9.2 The Commtttee notes that the existing sub-rule (6) has since been 
deleted and sub-rule (7) has <been re-numered as sub-rule (6) vide 
I).Ot'ification issued on the 24th May, 1982. 
10.1 Rule 4: Olmsificdtion. of Co-opertJtive Societies. · 
( 1 ) (d) "H<ousing Society"' means a co-operative society fotme4 
with object of ;providing its members with dwelling houses 
subject to the provisions of these rttles and Qtl the conditions 
to be determined b\y the Lt. Governor from time to time and 
may be of any of the following types:-
(i) Tmant Ownership Housing Co-operative SOciety where land is 
he]d, either on lease.Ixl'ld or free-'hold basis by ~ co-operative 
societJy aud the houses are to ib.e owend!. by members. 
(ii) BlOUSing Fmance Co-operative Soci.~ whioh bas its principal 
object of · raising fulnds, provi.dmg fina'Dce to its members f01' 
cons'I!I'UCtion_ of hou.ses and or PQrChase of remdentia[ plots 
ae(.':Ordmg to sclleme 8iDdJ plan approved: by the prescribed 
authority after mortgage of immovable propert!y in favour ~ 
co-aperative soCiety. 
(iii) Tenant Co-partnership Housing Co-operative Society which 
holds both lands and buildings either on lease-hold or free-hold 
basis and allots them to the members. 
(iv) Plot-holders Housing Co-operative Society which acquires land 
either on lease-hold or free..holdl ~is, develops it into a 
residential area according to lay-out plan apprQIVed by the 
prescrilbed . au~ority and sells !residential plots to its members 
on the lease-hold or ffee...hold basis. · 
l'oint Relerr~d: · 
It was notited that! in case of Housing Society, certain conditions to bO 
determitled by 1lhe ·Lt. Governor were menti~ whereas sueh conditions 
were not stated in the foregoing societies mentioned in clauses (~) & (c). 
Ministry's comme-nts: 
In a !housing society where land is to be acquired. or allotted by the 
Delhi Administration or the D.D.A. and which is governed by .the. law 
relating to acquisition and disposal of Jand in the Union Territory of Delhi, 

/ 
6 
certain conditions are required to be fuLfilled by cooperative housing 
societies and hence a reference has ~n made to these conditions to be 
laid down by the Lt. Governor under this rule. No such conditions are 
necessary ,to be fu!lfiUed by the produ~r or consumer co-operatives· men­
tioned in sUJb-clause (b) or (c) Of rule 4. 
10.2 The Committee· agrees with the above view of the Mmistry. 
10.3 Point referred: 
There was no mention of Group Housing Co-operative Society in the 
classification of Housing' Societies as mentioned in clause (d) .• 
Ministry's comments: 
The types of housing societies haye been indicated in sub-clauses (i) 
to (iv) of clause (d) of role 4. Group hQusing societies could be covered 
either under clause (i) or clause (iii). 
10.4 The Committee motes the above reply of the Ministry. 
1 1.1 Rule 5: Procedure for cOnversion of a co-operative society into 
a different claas. 
(1) IUJ.y co..opetative society may, at a meeting of its general body 
·specially called for the purpose, of which at least seven clear days' notice 
;bas been given ~o its members, resolve to convert itself by an amendment 
of i~ bye-laws into a co-operative society of a class different from the one 
of which it belongs. The said resolution (hereinafter in this rule referred 
to "as the preUm~narly resolution") shaU include the amendmen;ts to the. 
bye-laws proposed for adoption by this co-operative society. 
Point referred: 
It was not clear how a co...operative society set up for different objedlive 
cou[d lbe converted into a c~erative society of a class different from tlhe 
one to which it orlg:ina:lly belonged. 
Ministn/'s comments: 
Sub-rule (3) of rule 5 lays down that the classmcation can be convert­
ed subiect to the provis'ions of section l1 and by registration of amendments 
Of bye-laws adopted by the co-operative society. The objoots of a co­
.operatlive. society are provided in the bye-laws and when the bye .. laJWs of a 
different class are adopted, the objeC'Ilsi ailso dha'nge and suoh amendment 
10f bye-laws have to be registered. under the provisions of section 11 of the 
Act and· with the registration of amendment of bye-laJWs adopted by the 
co-oper~ti.ve society, the objects of tlie co...operative scx:iety also change. 
Therefore, there is tno ambi1gultly in this rille. 
11.~ The COmmittee finds the 3'bove· reply of rtlhe Ministry !llatisfactory. 

7 i 
12.1 Rule 7: Di:sposal of application for registration 
( 1 ) On receipt of the applica'llion under rule 6 and before passing 
final order under sectioR 9' the Registrar may call for such further informa­
tion ,from the applicants or make such independent enquiries as he may 
. deem fit. 
Point referred: 
. It was n~ clear what wru. meant by independent enquiries when it was 
stated that the Registrar might call for such other informatian from the 
applicants. · 
Ministry's comments: 
From the perusru of the :provisions of clause (D of rule 7 it is clear 
that a choice has been given to the Registrar that he may either call for 
further informati~ from the applicants or may make independent enquiries. 
This provision is necessary as before the registration of a co-operative 
societly, it has to be ensured t)lat there are reasonable chances of success 
of the society .as provided in sub-clause (d) of section 9 of the Act. 
12.2 The Committee finds the reply of the Ministry satisfactory. 
13.1 Rule 7: Disposal of application for registration 
(2) The Registrar may give, wherever necessary, opportunity to thej 
promoters to modify the proposed bye-laws . before finally registering the! 
co-operative society or rejecting the application for registration of the 
co-operative society. 
Point referred; 
It 'was found that no period was mentioned for giving opp'ortunitieSl 
to the prQI11oters to modify the proposed bye-laws. 
Ministry's comments: 
Thls rule has been framed under section 9 of the Delhi Co-operative 
Socie,ties Act, 1972, which lays down the time-limit for the disposal oil 
the application for registration. Therefore, there is no necessity to repeat 
the same in the provisions of sub-role (2) or rule 7. 
13.2 Tile Committee finds the above reply of ~ Miinsitry rather 
S1U'])rising. As laid down in section 9 of the Act, tb.e Registrar gets th~ee 
monb' time to dispose of an application for registmltion. Obviously iti 
is the Registrar woo gets three nronths' time to dispose of an applica­
tion · for registr'alion ami not the proonoters of a cooperative society to 
·modify the proposed bye-laws. As· such the Committee recommeonds tltat 
the time to be given to the promoters to make modificafions should also 

8 
,IJe spl!Cified, say one mo~ on expiry Of wtJida tbel Registrar' ~boulcl 
J~e free to go ahead with eonsideratioo ol the ap~ independeldly. 
14.1 Rule 11: Rd/usal to register. 
( 1) No co-operaJtive society shall be registered by the name which 
iD the opinion of tJhe Registrar is undesirable. 
Point reje"ed: 
The expression 'undesirable' did not seem to fit in the context o:f the 
ruiles. It was felt that what W!as 'undesirable' should have been mentioned 
therein. 
Ministry's comments: 
Sulb-rule ( 1 ) of rule 1'1 has heen amended .in the following manner 
and thus there is no ambiguity left:-
(1) No co-operative society shall be registered by the name which 
is identical with or which nearly resembles the name by 
which . a C()<Opierative society is in eXlistence and has been: 
previously registered or the name is ,in contravention of any 
law for the t.inre being in foroo. 
14.2 The CoJIIIDittee notes that the Miniistry have agreed. with the 
Committee's suggestioo and amended' mile 11. 
15.1 Rule 15: Amendment of Bye-laws. 
(4) After the res.Olurtion is passed, a c<>py thereof shall, within a 
period of two month& from the date of the meetin,g at which the resolu,.. 
tion was passed, be furnished to the Registrar along with:-
(a) a copy of the relevant bye-laws in force with amendments 
proposed to be inade m pUil"SSI.Nlnce of the resolution, togethe11 
with reasons justifying such amendments; 
(b) four copies of the text d.f the bye-laws as tbey would stand 
after amendment, signed by the officers duly authodsed in 
this behalf by the committee of tbe society; 
(c) a copy of tire notice given to the members of tbe society of the 
proposal to amend the bye-laws.; 
(d) such other information as may be required by the Registrar. 
( 5) On recdpt Qf a copy of lthe resolution a'nd · other particulars re­
ferred to in sub-rule (4), the Registrar shall examine the amendment pro­
posed by the society and if he is satisfied that the amendment is not con­
trary to the Act or the roles, and is in the interest of co-operative society 
· and co-operative movement, he may register the 1amendment and issue to 
the co-opr~rative sa.ciety a· copy of the amendment certified by him. under 

9 
sub·sec~on (2) Qf ~tion 13. Where the Registrar is of the opinion that 
the proposed amendment may be accepted sublject to any modification~ 
· h~ may ind'kaf)Q. to the co-operative society such: modifiooti.on after ex­
plaining in writin~ his reasons therefor. 
,E'oint referred: 
· In sub--rule ( 4), a period of two mollltb!!> was mentioned but in sub­
rule (5) there was no such time limit. It was f~t tha,t the Registrar might 
take indefinite time. for examination of the amendment (s). And unless ~ 
amendment was cleared by the Registrar, the society wou:ldnot be in a 
position to function in pursuance of the amendmentp .. A time limit was, 
therefore, necessary. 
Ministry's comments: 
Sub-rule (5) has been amended ,an:d now a time-liwt of 6 months <M 
have been provided which can be extended for two months within wh1..cb 
the application for amendment of bye-laws is to be dispo!Sed of, failing 
which the bye-laws shall be deemed to be registered. 
15.2 The Committee notes that as suggested by it, the Ministry have 
amended sub-rule (5) or rule 15 of the rules. 
16.1 Rule 18: Change in Name of Society. 
(i)Tbe name of a co-operative society may be changed under sec-
tion 14 so however that it does not refer to any caste or religious Qeno1 
mination and is not inconsistent with the objects of the co-operative 
society. 
Pmm referred: 
It was ~elt that a society should also not be registered on a regional 
basis. Therefore, the expression 'regional' might be included therein. 
Ministry"s comments: 
. - This proposal was placed before the Committee appQinted fo consider 
the amendment of Rules. They were of the opinion that there are -Mrendy 
such societies registered on regional basis. Therefore, this amendment 
was not accepted by th'e Committee. · 
16.2 The COilllllittee having e~ the a1Hwe reply of flte MiDis­
try reco:tDmlends that in Rule 18, words 'or regional' be inserted after the 
wOrds 'or religiOUS" so as to preclmk soeieties: with regiO>nal denomina­
tiOns from ·being registered under tire rules, afl.east in future... . •. 
17.1 Rule 23: AppeqJ against the refuslll to registrl!J' amendment . to. 
. bye-l(IWs •. 
Where an application· for registration of an amendment in the bye-< 
laws of Ill! co-9perative society is rejected by the Registrar under sub-sec-

IO 
~p:.- .• ~ 
tioo (4) Of section 11, the appeal, if any, shall be made only after a meet.. 
ing of the general body has reconsidered the matter and has decided to 
prefer the appeal which shaH be signed by the officer of the society auth0.. 
rised in this behalf by the general meeting. A copy of the resolution of 
the general body shall be attached with the memorandum of appeal. 
· Point referred: 
As there was no time-limit for examining or de~iding the amendment, 
rule 23 read with sub-rule ,(5) of rule .15 seemed to be redundant. 
lt(inlstry' s comments: 
This rule is not redundant as sub-rule (5) of rule 15 has been amended, 
which now provides for a time-limit for the disposal of the application for 
amendment of the bye-laws. 
17.2 The ConuiUttee notes the above reply oil tlte Ministry. 
18.1 Rule 24(i) :Conditions t~ be complied with for admission to_ 
membership. 
No person shall be admitted as a member t>f a co-operative society un~ 
less (i) he has applied in writing in the form laid down by the c~pera­
tive societies or in the .form specified by the Registrar, if any, for mem· 
bership. · 
Point referred:' 
The application form as specified by the Registrar shoukt'have been 
appended to tbe rules. 
Ministry's comments:. '' 
This rule refers to the forms laid down by the Society or the form 
specified by the Registrar. So far the societies have been laying down 
their own ·forms depending on their class and conditions essential for 
membership as per their bye--laws. Therefore, no form has been specified 
by the Registrar. 
18.2 The Committee agrees with too above, stand of the Ministry. 
19.1 Rule 24(ii): Conditions to be complied with for admission to 
'1 membership. , 
( ii) No person shall be admitted as a member of a co-operative socie-­
ty unless his application is •approved by the committee of the co-operative 
society in pursuance of the powers conferred on it in that behalf and sub- . 
ject to such resolution, as the general body maY. in pursuance of the power9 
conferred on it in that behalf from time to time pass, and in the case of 
nominal •associate or sympathiser member, by an officer of the society 
authorised in that behalf by the· Comm~ttee. 

II 
referred: 
It was not clear as to ·what was meant by 'associate or. sympathiset 
and whether such a member had any rights and obligations. 
The Associate member has already been defined in Section 21 of the 
and the words "or Sympatbiser'' has been deleted vide notification 
dated 24-5~82. 
19.2 The Committee notes that the MiniStry have clarified the posi. 
tion of assO£iate member and deleted i!he words. "or Sympathiser''. 
20.1 Rule 25: Disqualification for Membership. 
(1) No person shall be eligible for admission as a member of a Co­
operative society, if he-(c) in the case of Membership of a housing so­
. ciety (i) he owns a residential house or a plot o'f land for the construo­
tion ~f a residential house in any of the approved or unapproved colonies 
in the Union Territory of Delhi, in,his own name or in the name of his 
spouse or any of his dependent children, on lease hOld or free hold basis; 
Point referred: 
It was felt that as the unapproved colonieis were liable to be demon .. 
shed unless approved or regularised, individuals owning houses in such 
colonies shouil.d be eligible for membership of relevant co-operative so­
cieties. · ' · ' · :':~~~ 
Ministry's comments: 
A proviso below this rule has been incorporated vide Notificatioll 
dated 24-5-82 that a person who is a co-tSharer of a joint ancestral pro­
perty in congested localities (slum areas) whose share is less than 66--77 
"'Sq. meters (80 sq. yards) of land &ball not be disqualified to become a 
member of a housing society. 
'20.2 The Committee i~ smprised to oote that the Ministry bas not 
touched the specific. proposal that the individuals owning houses in unap­
proved colonies should be made elligible' for membership in co-operative 
societies. The Committee recommends that such a pro'risioo Should be 
ID8de iD the Rules. 
21.1 Rule 25: Disqualifications for Membetship. 
(1) (c) (ii)--he deals in purchase Qt sale of immovable propert1y 
either as principal or as agent in the Unjon Territory of Delhi. 

Points reftrreQ;: 
This sub--clause seemed to be disor.imM:latory in :tefims of sub-clause 
(g) of clause {i) of Article 19 of the Constitu11ion. This sub-clause may be 
examined afresh in :terms of constitutional provision. 
Mihistry'<S comlnents: , :f~ 
This recommendation w:as considered by the Committee appointed for 
this purpose and it was decided that keeping in view the provisions of 
'Scheme of Large--scale Acquisition and Disposal o'f Land in Delhi', it 
would not be: proper to delete this clause. Moreover, it would be identical 
business to that of the Society. 
11.1 The Committee ~s witb the stand 1Jaken by. the "'nistry, br 
80 far 88 tJds restrictioD may be considered a teiSOilable iestrlction OB the 
exercise of the Fundamental Right urnder Article 19 01 the Consti.tGtioB.: 
22.1 Rule 25: Disqualifications of Membership 
( 1) (c) (ill )-he or his spouse or a'ny Of his dependent children is a 
member of any other housing society except otl:Jierwise permitted by the 
Registrar. ' · : l 
Point referred:· i ~ 
It WlalS felt that the child, boy or girl, who was unmarried and having 
an independent job or profession but living with his or her parents would be 
included in the category or dependent children. 
As regards sub-clause (ill), it .is felt that the children having indepen­
dent job or profession who may be living witb their parents, can in noi 
sense be treated as dependent children. 
12.1 The COimllittee n* ~above reply of the Ministry . 
. 23.1 Rule 25: Dlsquolifications of Membership. 
(3) A member who ceases, to be ~ member of a co-operative society 
ooder sub-rule (2), shall not 00, entitiled to exercise rights of membership 
or incur liability as meimiOO.r with effect from the date referred to in sub­
rule (2) but as from the: date he becomes a creditor of the co-operativq 
society in respect of the a.tllQl.l!tlt due to him on account of paid up sbar~ 
capital, deposit, cost of land deposited or 100y other amount paid by hiin 
to the co-operative society as its member. As from the date of his ceasing 
to be a member o'f the society lldlder sub--rule (2), the amount standing to· 
his credit shall be paid ;to him by the co-operative society forthwith am! 
when tl::Jie co-operative society is already under liquidation, the amount due 

13 
to him will be credited as a debt due to a third party from the cooperativ~: 
•ociety. 
Point referred: : I 
1 ~t was felt that it was not pc:)Sble tQ refund the money to a m.embell" 
of a Housing Society wh~ his money was deposited towards the cost of· 
land unless that portion of iliand was disposed of by the Societlft This ap­
peared impractical in view of the complication and time-consuming pro- . 
cess involved in disposing of the share in land or house etc. A time-limit! 
should be specified in the Rule by w:hen monic's due to him ~Should bel 
refunded or the. procedure for the re'fund sholllld be . spelt out. 
Mini$ry's comments: · !? 
This rule has been amended vide notification dated 24-5;..82 and now 
the word "forthwith'' has been substituted with the words "within 3 
months." 
l.Jo2 'Ihe Committee notes fbat as suggested by it, the Ministry have 
ameDded sob-J!ulei (3) ol rule 25. 
24.1 Rule 216: Terms and Conditions on which persons referre(L to in 
Section 20( 1) (d) may be· adm$tted as members. . \ 
(1) The number of such persons admitted to. the membership of a co­
operative society shalil not exceed 5 per cent of its tbtal membership at 
any time. 
Point referred: 
It Wl!S not clear as to whether a housing society would , be pemrlttedl 
to enrol new members, if a few plots remained vacant. 
Minim-y's comments: 
This rule has been framed under Section 20 (D (d) of the Act where 
the Lt. Governor has the authority to modify such class or classes of per ... 
sons or associations of persons who can become member of a cooperative* 
society. No such classification has so far been made and when this .clas~i­
fica.tion is made it shall be for the purpose of enro11ing new members. As 
regards its application in case of housing societies, care shall have to be 
taken about the possibtlity of its applicability to each class of societies 
b1cluding housing societies. r , 
~ •• 2.4~2 ''Ihe Committee motes the above reply of the MJnfstry. • 
· .25.1 Rule 29: At:lmfs9ion of riembers be/ore meeting of its generd·' 
~· 
No co-operative society shall admit members within one month prlot 
to the date of a meeting of its general body. 

I4 
It was not clear whether this rule would also apply to. enrolment of 
new members. Also, whether the approval of the genaral "body was re-. 
quired for enrolment of new mem1bers. 
Mini$ry's comments: 
The intention of this rule is that new members are not enrolled to a 
co-operative society to influence elections which are held in a geneml 
meeting. For admitting new members, the approval of. the Board o'f Diree-
. tors and not of the general body would be required. · 
~ • · 25.2. Tile Committee agrees with the above reply of the Ministry. 
26.1 Rule 36: Procedure for expulsiOn uf Members. 
<(3) When a resolution p1assed in accordance with sub-rule (1} or (2) 
is sent to the Registrar or otherwise brought to his notice, the Registrar 
may consider the resolution and after making such inquiries, as he may 
deem fit, give his approval and communicate the same to the society and 
the me¥tber concerned. The resolution shall be effective from the date of 
such approval 
Point refe"ed:· 
It was felt that there should be a time-limit within which the Registrar 
should bebound to give his approval to th~ resolution. 
Mil'listry's commems:' 
. 
Sub-rule (3) o'f rule 36 has been am~nded and a tim~-limit of 6 months 
has been laid down for approval of expulsion cases. 
26.2. The Committee notes the above reply of the Ministry. 
27.1 Rule 65: Meetings of the Committee. 
Notwithstanding anything contained in the bye-laws, the Committee of 
a co-operative society shall cause minutes of all proceedings Of its .meet­
ings to be entered in the book for the purpose in hand, written at the s~ 
in the presence of members present and voting. The minutes of each meet­
ing shall contain the names of 'the members present, names of the members, 
if anly, dissenting from or not concurring in any resolution. A.t the en~ of 
the minutes, each member present and voting shall sign them. If the mm~­
tes· are not made and recorded in this manner, they shall not be consi­
dered valid 'and it shall be deemed that no such meeting was duly called 
·and held. 

.Point referred: 
It was felt that in view of the time-consuming proceedings of such 
Committees and other practical difficulties in the course of the proceedings 
of the meeting, some nrembers left the meeting earlier and as such they 
·were not in a position to sign the minutes' books at the end of the meeting. 
' ' 
The Ministry in tqeir earlier communication stated as follows:-
The point raised by the Coll1ffiittee on Subordinate Legislation in 
regard to sub-rule (5) ot rule 65 appears particularly valid 
in respect of federal institutions and bigger cooperatives. 
The Delhi Administration has been advised to consider 
amending this sub-rule in the light of the comments of the 
Committee. 
In a written statement submitted by the representatives o'f the Minis­
try, when they <appeared before the Committee on the 11th January, 1984, 
the Ministry further informed as follows:-
This rule has not been amended. As in case the minutes of the 
previa.us meeting are to be ·oonfirrned at the next meeting. The 
· minutes of the meeting cannot be treated as legal till the same 
are not confirmed in the next meeting . 
. . . 27.2 . The Committee faills .. to undetstand the rationale behind this 
eban. as the Ministry bas not cc,nsi.dered it necessary to advance any 
convincing reason for their subsequent reply •.. 
28.1 Rule 8S: Audit Fee 
(1) A cooperative society shall pay on or before the 31st March o'f 
·each year, an audit fee at such rates as may be fixed by the Registrar with 
the prior approval of the Lt. Governor. 
(2) The Registrar shall have power to increase the prescribe! audit fee, 
in speCial cases, for reasons to he recorded in writing. 
The Registrar may, at his discretion, remit either wholly or in part the 
audit .fee payable by any society. 
:.Point referred: 
· It ·was felt that the rates of audit fee should be specified in the rulo 
itself. 
:' ~~Further, ·sub--~ ,(2l) gives discretionary· power to the Registrar in fi­
nancial matters which shoudd have been avoided. It was felt that the cir­
·C\lmstances under which the Registmr· might exercise· his discretion· for 
'the remission of audit fee should be spelt out. 

I6 
Ministry'a comments: 
The Committee appointed to amend· the rules considered thi's observa­
tion bu~ it' did not consjder it necessary that the schedule of rate of audit 
fee should be added a:s a part of this rule, as it was felt that the schedule 
could be changed by the Registrar with file prior awroval of the Lt. Gov­
ernor but it would not be possible to amend the ru~e every time. There­
fore, no schedtde of rate of audiit fee has been specified in this rule. 
The Committee appointed' to ·1amend ·the ru~es · considered the observa­
tion and found that the Registrar rarely exercised. thk power and .. the ci.r­
cumstances of each case differ amf it was not possible to incorporate it 
in the rules. Therefore, this rule has not been amended . 
. 28.2 Tbe Committee• takes note of & aibove obServations, of the Com­
mittee appointed to amend the• R'UIIes. 
29 .l Rule 91: Appointment of persons as arbitrator: 
(1) For purpose of clause (c) of suib-section ( 1) of section 61, the 
Registrar may appOint any person who ifu1fi1s such qualification as ~ay be· 
speeified by the Registrar to perform the duties of the arbitrator for dispute 
for a period to be specified in the order, which shflll not ordinarily exceed:· 
one year but may be e-xtended by the Registrar by further special order for 
further periods not exceeding mte year at a time. 
(2) For purpose of sub-rule (1) of rule 91 the Regist1 ar may appoint 
an arbitrator from: 
(a) Gazetted Officers of any department of Government; or 
(b) Officers, paid.:staff or member of any cooperative societies; 
(c) Members of Metropolitan Council and local bodies; 
(d) Certified Accountants. 
Point referred: 
The expression 'such qualification' in sub-rule (1) was not explicit and 
the interpretation of the expression was left to the Registrar. It was felt 
that the qualifications of persons for appointment as arbitrator sliould be 
laid daWn: itt the rules: 
Clause (b) of sub-rule (2) was inconsistent with the · objective for 
which an officer was appointed asati arbitrator: It \VIi !felt that the .. 
paid staff ·or ·members of any co-operative societies in such matters 
should' not be apPOinted to act as aibitdtt6ts. as they :rriight not act ill'dtpen ... · 
den tty. 

' I 7 
The term 'local bodies' in.l clause (C} sliouHi tie defined • to specify whe­
ther it lncluded. the Municipal Corporation of· Delhi, tho. N.D.M.C •• Delhi 
Cant~~nt :or SOJPe other local .. bGdiQS. Jiiurtlier •. clause '(d}· relatiq to 
•certified accountants required· elucidation. 
Jliniatr'!'s comments: 
Sub-rule (2) of rule 91 has been amended wherein the educational 
qualifications have been specified. 
'!'.he officers or members of' a Co-operative SocietY are appointed aa 
·~ Arbitrator, but the cases of the same society are not entrusted to them. 
• 
Therefore, no change has been made in this rule. 
Sub-rule (2) has been amended and the clause (c) of the earlier ru:le 
has been deleted and in clause (d) in place of "Certifl.ed Accountant"· the 
words "Chartered Accountant has been provided. 
29.2. The Committee note the above reply of the Ministry. 
30.1 Rule 93: Appearance by '[J1'0fes11onoz PI'~ sc. 
In the proceedings· under rules 89 to 92, any patty to the dispute may 
take the assistance of any other person to represent the case on his be.haif 
but may not engage a legal practitioner fur the purpose. If a legal 
practitioner is a member of a co-operative society and represents the 
society in these proceedings, the other party to the dispute shaD have a 
right to be represented by a legal practitioner. 
Point referred! 
This rule debars a legal practictionet to represent the case in the 
dispute before the arbitrator whereas in rule 144(2) the Presiding Officer of 
tlie Tn'bunal shall be a person who has been a judge of any High Court etc. 
This shows that the case before the arbitrator is likely to involve some 
legal issues because in case of appeal against the decision of the arbitra~ 
tor, the Presiding Officer of the Tribunal is required to have judicial or 
legal experience. It was, therefore, felt that the bar on the engagements 
of a .legal practitioner should be removed. 
Ministry's cOmmt!rua: 
This rule has alreadty been struck down by the Delhi High Court in 
a writ petition aud new legal practitioners can appear before an Arbi· 
trator. 
' . ' 
30.2 The Committee notes witb satisfacoo" that its sug~stion1 for re-
nmvat of tbe bar on the appearooce of a leJ!a) practUioner befo.-e tbe arbi­
trator has ·been uphreld . by tbe Delhi High Court and n•l~ 93 struck down. 

r8 
31.1 Rule lSS: Pawer to aemp1 from rtiltt6 
The ·Lt. Governor may, by general or special order, exempt any socie~ 
tj ·or any class. of societies. from any of the proViaioDa qf these rulei Ol 
may direct that such provisions shall apply to such society or clas6 of • 
:societies with such modifications and/or conditions as may be specified in 
the order. 
Point referred: 
The considerations underlying exemption to societies from provisions 
of these rules need clarification. 
Ministry's comments: 
This is a statutory provision hased on the provisions of Section 88 
of the Act. Therefore, there is no need to amend it. 
31.~ The Committee agt·ees with tbe stand taken by the Ministry. 
NEw Dm.m; 
MtJrch. 9, 1984. 
BHAT MAHA VIR, 
Chairman, 
C01t1mittee on Subordinate Leglslotion. 

f 
ANNEXURE I 
(Vide para 2 of the Report) 
RAJYA SABRA SECRETARiAT 
PRESS RELEASE 
Tho Committee on Subordinate Legislation of Rajya .Sabha has decid-
ed to undertake scrutiny of the Delhi Co-operative Societies Rules, 
1973 framed under the Delhi Co-operative Societies Act, 1972. 
The Rules published in the Delhi Gazette dated March 16, 1973 
comprise 158 rules, 30 fornis and 5 schedules and these together em­
brace a wide range of details regarding registration, management and 
privileges of co-opt;rative SQ.c:ieties, including group housing Societies, the 
rights and liabilities of members, settlement of disputes, recovery of dues 
and the mode of election of members of the societies etc. . As tb.~e. roles 
in their multiiacet application affect practiCally every section of societly 
in the Union Territory of Delhi, the Committee has decided to elicit 
views of institutions/organisations and individuals who are interested in 
the provisions of . the rules. Those desirous of placing their views for 
consideration of the Committee may send a copy thereof to the Senior 
Legislative Committee· Officer, Rajya Sabha Secretariat. Parliament House 
Annexe, New Delhi latest by the 22nd December, 1979. 
NRW DHLHI,' 
November 20. 1979. 

ANNEXURE 111 
(Vide para 2 of the Report) 
Suggestions from S. Benerjee, 232, Tagore Park, Delhi-110009 for 
consideration while scrutinising the Delhi Cooperative S<>cieties Act, '1972 
by the Committee on Subordinate Legislation of the Rajya Sa.bha. ~ ' 
Suggestions are on broad line and the Co-qperative Housing Society's 
Bye--Laws, the sections of the DelM Co-operative Societies Act, 1972 
and the Rules of the Delhi Co-operative Societies Rules, 1973, are to be 
consulted 1for the scrutinisation. The suggestions, although are equally 
applicable to the different kinds of Coop, Socie~ies, if is primarily men­
tioned here for a Coop. Housing SQCiety. 
1. The life of a Managing Committee should be· one year to 15 
months only. · 
2. All the Members of the Managing Committee, including office­
bearers, should not be elected after 2 terms. 
3. Accounts slrould be duly audited, warking report about the acti­
vities of the Socie!Y, to be considered in the 'General Meeting every year 
and the objections from the Inspector and Auditor of the Co-operative 
Department should be properly processed. 
4. The minutes of the meetings of the General Body and the Manag­
ing Committee, should be written then and there and the signatures of the 
President, Hony. Secretary should be obtained immediately after the 
General meeting is over and' the minutes are read out in the meeting. 
Similarly the signatures of all the members of the Managing Committee 
present in the meeting, should he obtained after the meeting i's over. 
Otherwise, invariably, a. wrong minute is made afterwards. 
5. Irrespective of number of membership, all the elections of all 
Coop. Societies should be held by Secret Ballot only. General Body 
should approve the membership, otherwise, no one will be considered a 
member of tbe society. 
6. Membership List and other Registers and documents should l?e 
made made uptodate, in accordance with the relevant provisions of Law. 
The application and affidavits should be chocked carefully. 
1. If the Registrar, Co-operative Society, Delhi, finds that sam~ C~. 
Hou:sing Society has persistently ma~e defaults and has been neghgent 111 
20 

21 
.the .~rformance of its duties imposed upon it by the Delhi Co-operative 
.Societies Act, 1972 and the Ru1es framed thereunder and the bye-Law& 
"of the Society, a show cause notice should be issued to the society within 
.. a fortnight of the inspection and a reply from the· society should conte 
within a fortnight from the date of issue of the show-cause notice. 1f 
.the rQply is not satisfactory, the Registrar will be held responsible for 
· not issuing a Removal order of the Managing Committee and suspend 
. the activities of the society; an Administrator should be appointed im­
mediately also and the office-bea,rers should not have entrance to see 
.the records from the time of issuing of the order. The office of the 
cllociety should bi') under the lock of the Registrar. 
8. The Registrar, Coop. SOcieties would be held responsible for all 
:the misdeeds of a society, as the stame is under the law to be executed 
.by the Registrar. Any grievance of a member against the Society or 
.:the Registrar, a member should be allowed to go direct to the Court with­
out going through the Registrar, for a proper justice. If, however, the Lt. 
·Governor of Delhi is approached through a letter that letter should be 
considered as a regular ajJpeal, as it is very difficult for an ordinary 
member to go to a Court of law against the Society and the Registrar. 
9. The Registrar should get a proper audit of financial transctions of a 
:society and the mistakes should be brought to the notice of the Registrar 
'immediately. 
10. The Managing Committee should not sanction an expe:nditure of 
more than Rs. 1 000 for a particular job and for higher amount, the 
<Jeneral Body should be approached for sanction. 
1 L The Registrar should control the activities of the societies, tho 
-4.efects shQuld be rectified and responsibility should be fixed. 
12. The ground rent from a member of a Coop. Society 3bould bo 
·allowed to pay directly to the Delhi Development Authority, 'for avoiding 
the obligation of the leasefsub'-lease agreentents, as the societies do not 
pay the sa~;ne for years .. 
13. The deputation of lAS officers for the pos't of the Registrar, Co-
operative Societies Delhi Administm,tion, shou~d be stopped!, as it has 
been seen that the .works done by a Registrar, are not followed up by the 
office and the successor cannot control the Work of the prodecessot 
for not putting up the files requiring further actions. Thus, the 
illegal works of the staff do not come up. An IAS officer comes o.n 
'tteputation for say, 3 years. By the time he picks up the work of · hts 
()ffice he is transferred and the work suffers. , 
·14. The Registrar, Co-operative Societies and the Delhi ·Development 
Authority will work together for a Co~operative Housing Society in Delhi 

22 
and both will be responsible, i:f the allotment of plot is made wrongfully~ 
. to a non-member. 
15. The Income-tax authorities should also be contacted, if the Regu>·· 
trar, Co-operative Societies, the DDA or any other institution or a person> 
reports about violation of lease agreements Wld a non-member is possesl!­
}ng a land plot irregularly. The seller member and the purshaseT non­
member should be penalised for this unlawful act, in a Cooperative· 
Housing Society, which if for a member's benefit only. There should be 
no compromise for an irregular transfer. 
16. If required, the Delhi Co-operative Societies Act, 1972, should\ 
be amended suitably for the above suggestions. 

ANNEXURE Ill 
(Vide para 2 of he Report) 
COMMENTS RECEIVED FRO,M: SHRI S. N. JAIN,' INDIAN LAW 
INSTITUTE, NEW DEILHI ON THE AMENDMENT TO RULE 
59(D) OF THE DELHI CO-OPERATIVE SOCIETIES RULES, 1973. 
The original Rule 59(d) of the Delhi Co-operative Societies Rules. 
1973 provided: 
"No person shall be eligible for election as a member of the 
Committee if he bias committed any offenoe involving dis 
honesty · or moral turpitUde during a period of five years 
prior to the date. of scrutiny of nomination papers." 
The new amendment deletes the underlined words. In other words, 
a person who may have committed an offence 20 or 30 years back can­
not become a member of a Committee of a co-operative society. Such 
an amendment is against co...operative spirit and also the social policy of 
integrating a person who may have committed a crime once in his lifer 
into the social stream. 
The amendment suffers from several flaws, both of the law and of 
policy. It conflicts witJJl current criminological trends, goes beyond the 
power delegated by fhe Parent Act, is unscientific and runs counter to 
the spirit .of equality. Thus, being uncalled for and not arising out of 
any felt necessity, it should be annulled. 
It may also be pointed out that the original amendment was on the 
lines of provisions in the other State enactments ou the subject. Further, 
under the Representation of the People Act, 1951, the maximum dis­
qU!a:lifi.cation for a criminal offence is five years for parliamentary elec~ 
tions. When it is so in case of the national legislature, or in the case of 
tbe highest functionary of the State, namely, the President of India 
it does not seem reasonable that in the case of another minidemocradc 
institution, namely, 13: co-operative society, a much more drastic disqua­
lication should be prescribed. 
( 1) The Criminological A speot 
First as, to criminologica1 trend in modem times, criminological 
tbirnldnig now recognises that while it may be neceJSsary to punish an 
offender, it i~ equally necessary that the stigma should be removed in 
course of time, unless it appears that the offender has not mended his 
ways. Based on this line of thinking, a number of. devices have been 
evolved in various countries to remove or mitigate the stigma as sum­
marised below:-
23 

24 
,(i) To facilitate rehabilitation of the offender and his ,assimilatioa 
in · society in due course, some countries provide 1for "ex­
punging" the criminal record Of conviction." 
(ii) Some countries provide by law that once a specified period 
of ·time has passed since the conviction was imposed or the 
sentence served, the conviction shall not be disclosed. For 
example, in England bly a recent Act of P:arliament2 evidence 
of 'old' convictions is rendered in admissible in court where 
certain conditions are satisfied. 
(iii) Some countries have an institution in the' law whereunder the 
civic riglhts of which a con,vict might hav'e been deprived 
by reason of conviction are restored after a specified period. 
For example, the French have an institution called la rehabi­
. litation, wheceunder rights can be restored in such cases by 
judicial decision (in some cases, the rights are restored by 
automatic operation of Law) . 
(iv) In a 'few countries, the piardonin.g power of the sovereign can 
be used for the purpose of achieving the rehabilitative ideal. 
Thus, Belgium recognises a power, inter alia, tQ remit an 
inc.atpacity wh~ch might judicially or by legislation attach to 
certain convictions.3 There is :llso a provision in Japanese 
Law for the restoration of offenders' rights . in certain 
cases.4 
The object of all these provlSlons is to remove the stigma of past 
convictioa after the sentence has been served and to give an opportunity 
to the offender to show that he has earned hrs re-instatement in society 
as a full citizen. 
In India also, it is now being: recognised that ·the element of rehabili­
tation canont be diSiregarded in the formulation of legislative policy con­
cerned with criminal Law, convictions, punishments and related matters. 
No doubt, an accused may need adequate measures to deter him and: 
others, but this does not mean that the law should ruthlessly action the 
false logma of once a criminal, always a criminal There must arrive 
. some point where deterrence ends and rehabilitation has· to begin. 
1. See Damaska, "Adverse legal consequence$ of conviction and their removal" ( lg6g) 
5gjournal of Cri:minal Law & Criminology 347(1968). 
'.'!.The Rehabilitation of offenders Act, 1974 (U.K.). 
3· Artlcle 87, Penal code of Belgium. 
4· Th~ offended Reh'lbilitation Law I949· 
• 

25 
The moder~ ~p:oaeh is to avoid inflicting on an accused sufferinl!l 
heyo~d a certam nurumum. That minimum must be undergone, but once! 
that IS done; the approach favoured is to avoid any appearance of vindic­
tiveness. Sutherland and Cressy" in their well known work on crimino~ 
logy go to the· hea:rJ,: of the matter when they state the position in these 
words: . 
"The deprivatipn of civil rights was originally devis<:.~d as a puni­
tive system for placing social distance between the offenders 
and :law abiding citizens. As the treatment reaction to crime has 
become more popular, however, it has become apparent that 
if the prisioner is to be released t0 the community at all, he 
should be made to fee!, as much as possible, that he is a mem­
ber of that community. For the protection of social and poli~ 
tical institutions, prisioners probably should not be permitted 
to vote, hold office, or exercise some· Of the other rights. But 
for the maximum degree of reformation, and hence, protection 
of society his rights probably should be automatically restored 
as soon as he is placed in the outside community, at the 
. beginning o1' the criminal period. Criminals are returned to 
the community so that the law-abiding group may assimilate 
them. Assimilation is not promoted by this d~vice for main­
taining social distance." 
(2) Transgression of the limits of elegated powers · 
By making the amendment which (i) goes ag~inst current criminological 
thinking in India and elsewhere, (ii) introduces a disqualifiction operating 
with undue harshness, and (iii) is not based on any actual~y experienced 
anomalies, the executive has crossed the limits of the legislative power dele­
gated to it. A power to make rules under an Act is intended to provide 
for carrying out the purposes of the Parent Act. The amendment does not 
"carry out'' the purpose of the Co-operative Societies Act. In fact, it goes 
contrary to the spirit of the cooperative movement which the A:ct is supposed 
to foster. The object of the co-operative movement is to involve more and 
more persons in constructive work. The very word "co-operative" highlights 
this aspect. But the amendment under discussion, instead of encouraging 
more people to evote themselves to a beneficial activity, duqualifies them 
and deprives them of an opportunity r;;f constructive work. In fact, the 
caxncndment may >be described not ,only as destructive of the foundations of 
the co..Operati.ve movement, but ilso as stdkiqg of fatal blow to the policy 
of the law to involv:e the citizens of the country (not excluding convicts 
meJ;ely on the basis of conviction) in constructive endeavours that will bring 
------'- ------ -----····------- --------
5· Suther and hnd Cressev, Principles of ·Criminology (1965) (Indian Rep1•intl 
(Times of fndia Press), page 5 77 (Footnotes omitted), 

. out the better parts of their character. Thus, the. amendment is doubly 
. baneful; it goes against the spirit of the co-operative movement and alS() 
against enlightened penology. No legislature could have contemplated that 
such a far-reaching amendment could be made by its delegate in exercise of 
a power whose object is to "carry out" and not to destroy the principal 
purposes of the Act. 
In fact, the Parent Act does not give any power to the executive to pres­
cribe any disqualifications for membership of a Committee of a Co-operative 
Society. It is such an important aspect of the administration and manage­
ment of a co-operative society that such .a power: should have been given to 
the executive in the Parent statute itself. The parent statute does not lay 
down any guidelines in the matter. In the absence of any guidelines in tbe 
parent statute, it puts additional burden on the executiv{( to see that in 
a democratic society governed by the rules of law values the power must not 
be exercised in an arbitrary manner. It is not at all dear what led the exe- . 
cutive to make the amendment in question. There does not seem to be any 
new development which may have called for the necessity of the amendment. 
(3) The Constitutional Astpect 
Under the Amendment, a person convicted, say 20 years ago, would 
now be disqualified for the office in question, even if he has led a decent life 
in all those 20 years. Prima facie therefore, the discrimination operates in 
an unreasonable manner against him. No doubt, convicts and non-convicts 
can be placed in separate categories and this broad principle not be disputed. 
But at some stage the discrimination, reasonable initially, would start losing 
its reasonableness. ReaSQD.ableness and unrea'sonableness in this con!ext are 
not absolutes. They have to be measured in terms of relevant cricumstance:s. 
In the present context, it is enough to point out that the longer the period 
that has passed afer conviction, the less strong becomes the case for conti­
nuing the discrimination. To put it in a differe'Iit form, a provision which 
discriminates against convicts by in'Corporating a rule of an extreme charac­
ter comes dangerously near to unreasonable discrimiation and thus denies 
the equal protection of law to an unjustifiable extent. In this context, it is 
proper to mention briefly a judgement of the SuyJreme Court of U.S.A.8 
in which n state law providing for the sterlisation of persons convicted of 
two of more "felonies involvinrr moral turpitude" was held violative of 
the equal protection clause of the Fourteenth Amendment. 
The amendment in question, by introducing a disqualification operating 
with extreme harshness, which has (at ieast in point of degree) no rational 
relation to the object sought to be achieved by the provision in question, 
violates article 1,4. It should be noted that we are not concerned here with 
habitual l()ffenders 01· recidivists, but with ordinary offenders. Legislative· 
6. Skinner V. Oklahoma (t942) 3 r6 'U.S. 535 . 
. 

27 . 
.classification need not be logically perfect, but. at .the same ti~e it must 
, t b rbi'trary In the present ca.se the discrimmation has been mtroducedl :no e a . ' . f . h 1 
,011 the false assumption that once a person is convicted h~ will, ~r his w o_e 
Jifetime be unfit to discharge the duties of the office m questiOn. This 
assumption is false, because it disregards the. fa.ct :hat every moment of 
good life would (where there is no proof of cnmmallty) weaken the hyp~- . 
thesis of dishonesty or other moral depravity represented by the . offence m 
question. 
The: amendment deprives a person of a personal liberty by :;m unreason ... 
able process of law and hence is also violative of article 21 (see Maneka 
•Gandhi V. Union of India, A.I.R. 1978 S.C. 597). 
( 4) Unscientific nature of the amendment 
,, The amendment is totally unscientific in its approach. It assumes that 
the earlier limited disqualification had failed, and created a situation not 
conducive to the growth of co-operative movement. While changing a rule 
of law, there should be some basic and valid premise on which it is based. 
A rule of Jaw may not be changed simply because the executive so feels it 
without some valid policy reasons and without some materials in its posses­
sion warranting a change in the law. No such thing appears to be here. 
The amended rules were promulgated on 24th May, 1982, under 
Section 97(3) of the .Act. The rules are to be ~aid, as soon as may be 
after they are made, before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, 
for a total period of 30 days, etc., and both Houses may agree to annul 
the rules. Accordingly, the amended rules were presumably laid before 
Parliament on 8th July, 1982 when the present Session began. In view 
of the unreasonableness of the amendment analysed above [Rule 59 (d)] 
it is requested that the amendment to the rule may be annulled. 
Sd/-
S. N. JAIN 
INDIAN LAW INSTITUTE BLDG., 
BHAGWANDAS ROAD, 
NEW DELHI-11 0001. 

ANNEXURE IV 
(Vide para 3 of the Report) 
No. L-11013j16J80:..L&M 
GoVERNMENT OF INDIA 
MINISTRY OF AGRICULTURE 
Deptt. of Agriculture & Cooperation 
Krishi Bhavan, New Delhi' 
June 9, 1981. 
OFFICE MEMORANDUM 
SUBJECT: Scrutiny of the Delhi Cooperative Societies Rules, 1973 by 
the Committee on· Subordinate Legislation. 
The undersigned is directed to r~fer to the Rajya Sabha Secretariat 
0. M. No. RS. 5(98)/79..Com. I dated the 21st Novemiber, 1980 on the 
subjeclt mentioned above. The Delhi CO-Opera1ive Societies Rules, 1973, 
were ·originally prepared by the Delhi Administration. The Comments. 
on the observations ·made by the· Committee on Subordinate Legislation: 
could, therefore, be finalised only after consultation with the Delhi Adminis­
tratioo. Accordjngly, immediately on receipt of the above mentioned' 
reference from the Rajya Sabha Secretariat, this Department wrote to the· 
De1hi Adrninis>tration for comments on the observations made by the· 
Committee on Subordina,te Legislation in relation to the Delhi Cooperative 
Societies Rules, 1973 and also to furnish the requisite nutnber of copies 
of the documents required by the Rajya Sabha Secretariat. After several 
reminders, the comments of the Delhi Administration have been received 
only on 6th June, 1981, and hence the delay, which is very much regretted. 
2~ The comments on the observations made by the Committee on Sub­
ordinate Legislation in relation to various 'Ruies ·of the Delhi Co-operative 
Societies Rules, 1973, are a:s under:~ 
1. Rule 2-Defiriitions: According to sub-rule (xvi) of Rule 2 of the 
Delhi Cooperative Societies Rules, 1973, "model byelaws means a set of 
bye-laws approved and proposed by the Registr~r for general adoption by 
a class of cooperative society." According to Rule 14 of the aforesaid 
Rules, "Th'e Registrarr shall make model bye-laws of each class or sub-. 
class of a cooperative society which may be adopted with or without 
changes, if any."' 

5. Sub~rule ( 1) o.f Rule 5: There are occasions when a society of 
,·one class is converted into a society of another class. For instance a Thirft 
. and Credit Society which is a 'Resource Society" could given up its credit 
business and convert itself into a consumer society by changing its ob· 
jectives through amendme·nt of bye-:la:ws. 
6. Sub-rule ( 1) of Rule 7: The Registrar may require the promoters 
to give additional information or he may ask any of his officers to up~ta.date 
the information by making independent inquiry ·from persons, other than 
promoters. Such inquiries would be of independent nature. 
7. S#b'-rule ( 2) of rule 7: This rule has been framed under section 9 
,of the Delhi Co-operative Societies Act, 1972, whdch lays down the time ... 
limit for th~ disposa1 o'l' the application for registration. Therefore, there 
is no necessity to repeat the same in the provisions of sub-rule (2) of 
rule 7. 
8. Sub-rule ( 1) & explanation of rule 11: The Delhi Administration 
has taken note of this observation and are placing the same before the 
Committee constituted to sugest amendments to the rules. 
9. Rule 15: It i's proposed that a time-limit of three months may be 
allowed for accepting or rejecting the proposal for amendment qf bye-
1aws and this proposal is being placed bly the Delhi Administration before 
the Committee appointed to consider the amendments to the Rules, 
10. Sub-rule (1) of rule 18: This propooal is being placed.before the 
·committee appointed to consider amendments o'f the rules. 
11. Rule 23: The proposal for amendment of sub-clause (b) of rule 
15 baing placed before the Committee appointed to consider amendment 
of the rules. The provisions of Rule 23 shaH no more remain redundant · 
once the amendments of Rule 15(5) providing for a time-limit of 3 months 
is approved. 
12, Sub-clause (l) of rule 24: This rule refers to 1he forms laid down 
by the· society or the form specified by the Registrar. So far. the so­
cieties have been laying down their own forms depending on their class 
and c<'Jl'lditions essential for membership as per their byelaws. Therefore, 
:no fonn has bean specified by the Registrar. 
12. Sub-clause (ii) of rule 24: Section 21 of the Delhi Co-operative 
'Societit:s Act, 1972 specifically refers to nominal and associate ' 
and their rights and obligations. The Delhi Administration is being advised 
:to drop the word 'sympathiser' occuring in this rule. 
14. Sub-clause (i) of clauJS<e (c) of sub-rule (1) of rule 25: As '"'1<.""""'' 
su~dause (1) of clause (c) of :sub-rule (1) o'f rule 25, it may be 

.. 
3i . 
. · .~. oqt ,,t~at.t~ Ministry ohWoi:k~ arld Housing baye ··al,ready ~~~/ri~~ed'~h~·,. 
.•. ~ersons inheriting residential propert'ies measuring 'ie~ )han .. 80 ;.s'q. 'i~~.·;·J 
IU .slum areas. Therefore, the proposal to. ame.rid this rdle is· l:>.eil}g phiceil ·~ 
hefqre the .,Committee appointed by the Delhi Admiriig:tratian JO. c8nsid~-:: 
the amendment of the rules~ .. ' · 
.:. ~.· : ,!i 
Sub-rule (ii): As· regards sub-clause (ii) this is being :placed befme the· 
C.emmittee ·appointed ·to considt:r the provision~ of 'ihc. Maiter. ):,Iari andL. 
the scheme of large scale acquisition and di!'posal of hm<l. il1. ,De.llii may ' 
have to be kept in mind. · · · 
Suh-clause ·· (iii}: ·As regards sub-clause {iii), it is'felt ;hat the .bhildren 
having independent job ·or profession who may be living with tne~'parents';:: 
can in <to sense be treated ·as dependent ch.ildren. · · 
~ 15, Sub-ru!le (3) of .rule 25: This is b,eing placed bef~Jre the· C"Qm-, 
mittee appointed .to consider ar11endment of the rule~,; 
:16 .. Sub~rule (l) of rule 26·: Section 20{1)(df'!:6f~rs ·io.:.corpohite 
membership, such as firms;' coinpani'es, etc,. whi'cb arecn~ot.n:ormally eligibti!(, 
to be enrolled to the membership of a cooperative ~ociety, JJ11d,er. tli:ar· 
secti,on such corporates persons are· en!lbled to become inem~rs .. of cO:: · 
operative societies in special cases, by notification by the ~Lt ... Govem6r, 
Even where they are permitted to ·be enrolled to the meml:)ershilt ~f' a co;.;:: 
operative. by the special notification to be issued by Lt. Gove.ritot:; sub-role~ 
( 1) of rule 26 -specifically provides that their members shall not exceed 
5 per cent of the total membership including new membership, 
A point has been·· raisel'J whether in the case of Housing Society, if 
t~ plots remain vacant, the society would be permitted to enrol new 
members'under this rule. Persons referred to in this rule will not be cor­
porate persons and such persons will not be eligible to be admitted as mem­
bers of cooperative Housing Societies. 
17. Rule 29: 'The i nten :ion of this rule is that new members are 
not enrolled to a. cooperative society to influence dections which are held 
in a general meeting. For admitting new members, the approval of the 
Board of Directors and not of the general body would be required. 
18. Sub-rule (3) of rutle 36: This proposal is being placed before the 
Committee appointed to consider amendment of the rules. 
1.9. Sub-rule ( 6) of rule 65: The point raised by the Committee on 
Subordinate Legislation in regard to suh-rule (5) of ru:te 65 appears parti­
cularly valid in respect of federa:l institutions and bigger cooperatives. The 
Delhi Administration has been advi'Sed to consider amending this sub-rule 
in the light of the comments of the Committee. 

32 
20. $uHule Al) .Uf rule 85 · relflrdiftg audit 'fee: AlthOugh a schedu:re 
of ·n.~ Of ·audit fee has l>ecn.Jaid down, it .has not :been ·incorporated'·in· 
the 111les.. .Far this .purpose, matter •is being placed by tbe Delhi Admn. 
l«Qr.e tlle Committee ·appointed-to consider amendment of the mles; 
Similatly, tlle observation made as regards sub-rule (2) is also being pllU!ed' -
Wore the Committee for consideration. 
l. Ru~ 91-Appointment of persons as A·tbitrators: This is bU!tg.· 
n!l:irred<by .~he Delhi. Administration to the Committee appointed to con"' 
Bider· amendment of the rules. 
22. Rule 93: Simple, inespensive and .expeditious procedure for re­
t!10l$g di~utes in cooperative:·societies is the "basic objective of the ·pro• 
Visioas made in the cooper~tive societies Act fcir•·al'bitratlon. lt is in ·thiS 
context that legal practitioners are not allowed to appear before the .arbi­
trato£ except. irt special circumstances. Such a provision. exists. i1:1 various 
State Cooperative Societies Acts such as M.P., Tamil Nadu and Kerala. 
2;3, Jit:ule 153: This is a common provision in "the State Cooperativ~ 
~. Am5 ·ll«<t'd.ing·to·which, cooperative ~E'ldeties are·excmpted ·in 
$pi!IOial··tdmurnstances omd·on account of unforeseen ·contingencies from cer­
taia .~s,·of the Act. Section ·88 of the Dt5lhi Cooperative Societia 
Mt, ·1972. incoql!Orates such ·a provision. A similar· provision·· has been 
'III:IOrpOtateci':in the Delhi ·Cooperative Societies 'RUles 10 exempt coopern­
li!QSrftclml.,the··provisions of the •said rules in special circumstances. 
St!t· 
K~ SUNDARARAJUI,.r1 
Chief Director (Cooperatioo) 

MINUTES 
c=============-;;:-:::::===~-=·===:t:lfii=ZII 

MINUTES OF THE MEETING OF THE COMMlTTEE ON 
SUBORDINATE LEGISLATION 
/ 
(1979-80) 
XXX 
THIRTIETH MEETING • 
''~The·Cbnnnittee met at 11.00 A.M. on Friday, the 9th November, 1979. 
MEMBER: PRES!ENT 
1. Shri Viswanahia, Menan-Chairman 
2. Shrimati Pratima Bose 
3. Shri Jagdish Joshi 
4. Shri Dhaneshwar Majhi 
5. Shri Yogendra Makwana 
6. Shri J agdish Prasad Mathur 
7. Shri Ahmad Hossain Mondal 
8. Shri Narasingha Prasad Nanda 
9. Shrimati Rajinder Kaur 
10. Shri V. C. Kesava Rao 
ll. Shri S. K. Vaishampayen 
SECRETARIAT 
Shri B. R. Goel, Senior L~gislative Committee Officer. 
2. * * 
Delhi Co-operative Socie'tes Rules, 1973. 
. .· · 3. The <;ommittee decided that the Delhi Co-operative Societies Rules, 
1973 s,hould be examined by the Secretariat and to facilitate a fuller exami 
nation of the provisions, the Committee decided to elicit views. of indivi ... 
duals and organisations on the subject through a press release. 
4.: The Cominhtee then adjourned at 12.15 P.M. to met again at 
3.00 P.M. on Monday, the 19th November, 1979. · 
* * * * Relates to matters not included in this report: 
"' I• 
35 
,',·. 

( 1982-83) 
XXV 
TWENTY -FIFTH MEETING 
. The c.ommittee met at 3.00 P.M. on Monday, the 7th February, 1983, 
tn Committee Room 'A', Ground Floor, Par:iamem House Annexe. New 
·~- . . 
MEMBERS PRESENT 
1. Dr. Bhai Mahavir·-Chairman 
2. Shri T. Basheer 
3. Shri Nand Kisbore Bhatt 
4. Shri G. C. Bhattacharya 
5. Shri Dipen Ghosh 
6. Shri G. Swamy Naik 
7. Shri Ghanshyambhai Oza 
8. Shri Santosh Kumar Sahu 
9. Shri Ng. Tompok Singh 
10. Sbri Sbanti Tyagi 
11. Dr. Rafiq Zak:aria 
SECRETARIAT 
Shri R. P. Mahajan, Senior Legisf.al.ive Committee Officer. 
2, Chairman and members of tbe Committee congratulated Sbri Ram 
Niwas Mirdha, a. member of the Committtee on his appointment as a mem­
ber .of the Council of Ministers. 
The Committee ptaced on record its appreciation of the s.etVices ren­
dered by Sbri K. Dayal, Chief Legislative Committee Officer to the Com· 
mittee. The Committee congratulated Shri B. R. Gael on his promotion 
as Chief Examiner of Questions, who would continue to be associated 
with the Committee. The Chairman introduced to the Committee Shri R. P. 
Mahajan, who had on his promotion as Senior Legislative Committee 
Oificer, taken the place of Shri ~1. 
(
( 
l 
< 

37 
3. The Committee considered and took decisions on the following 
memoranda:-
(i) to (vi) * * .. 
(vii) Memorandum No. 42 regirrding the Delhi Cooperative Societies 
Rules 1973. 
The Committee directed the Secre;ariat to circulate copie!"> of the Delhi 
Co-ape:rative Societies Rules, 1973 to its members be.forc the memoranda 
was placed at a "subsequent meeting, 
The 0\airman also directed the Secretariat to obtain a copy of the 
Super Bazar Bye-laws under the Delhi Cooperative Societies Rules, 1973 
for examination by the Committee. 
(viii) * * * 
4. The Committee then adjoumed at 4.45 J'.M. to meet again at 11.00 
A.M. on Tuesday, the 8th February, 1983. 
---·----***Relates .to matter not included in this Report 

' n 
a 
w 
}\.< 
0; 
(1983-8~) 
XXV 
TWENTY -FIFTH MEETING 
. ' The Committee met at 3.00 l'.M. on Thursday, the 24th Nov;mber, 
1983, in Committee Room No. 63, First Floor, Parliament House; New 
Delhi. 
1. Dr. Bhai Mahavir-Chairman 
2. Shri Madan Bhatia 
3. Shri G. C. Bhattacharya . . ' 
4. Shri B. D. Khobragade 
5. Shri Ram Naresb Kushawaha 
6. Shri Ghanshyambhai Oza 
7. Shri Sbanti Tyagi 
8. Dr. Rafiq Zakaria. 
SECRET ARIA 1 
Shri B. R. Goel, Chief Examiner of Questions. 
Shri R. N. Bhardwaj, Senior Legislative Commi1tee Officer. 
2. * .. 
3. MEMORANDUM NO. 37/83 
The De~hf Coapem#ve ${JCiety Rules, 1973 
The Committee cons·idered the Memorandum and aft,~r some discus­
sion, decided to hear the Secretary, Ministry of Agriculture (Department 
of Agriculture & Cooperation), and the Registrar, Cooperative Societies, 
, Deihi, for seeking certain clarifications I elucidations in the matter. 
4. The Committee then adjourned at 3.35 P.M. to meet again at 
A.M. on Friday, the 25th November, 1983. 
----------~· .. ~-·---------··> _______ ~ 
***P"lates to m~.tter not included in this Rcpwt 

. 
) 
XXX 
TH1RTIETH MEETING 
The Committee met at 11.00. Aj.;M. on Wednesday, the· llfP. January, 
1984, in Commit~ee 'Room No. 'A', Ground Floor Parliament House . . . · Annexe, New Delhi. 
MEMBERS PRESENT 
· 1. Dr. Bhai Mahavir-Ch~irman 
2. Shri Nand Kishore Bhatt 
3. Shri G. C. Bhattacharya 
4. Shri Dipen Ghosh 
5. Shri Ram Naresh Kushawaha 
6. Shri G. Swam~ Naik 
7. Shri Ghanshyambhai Oza 
8. Shri Santosh Kumar Sahu 
9. Dr. 'Rafiq Zakaria. 
SECRETARIAT 
Shri B. R. Goel, Chief Examiner of Questions. 
Shri R. N. Bhardwaj, Senior Legislative Committee Officer. 
WITNESSES 
(i) Ministry of Agriculture (Department of Agriculture and Cooperation~ 
1. Shri Vishnu Bhagwan-Joint Secretary. 
2. Shri R. N. Nagpal-Depu.ty Director. 
(ii) Delhi Administration 
1. Shri Sanat Kaul-Registrar of Cooperative Societies and Special 
Secretary (Cooperation) 
2. Shr'i R. C. Mehtra-Assiftant Registrar. 
39 

2. Memorandum No. 37/83 (Supplement) 
The Delhi Co-operative Societies Rules 1973. 
' < • ' 
The Committee considered the above memorandum and heard the re-.. presentative& of the Ministry of Agriculture and .the Department of Co-: 
·operation, Delhi Adrninistration in the matter. 
A verbatim record of the evidence was kept. 
3. 
4. * 
* 
5. The Committee then adjourned at 12.15 P.M. to meet again at 
3.00 P.M. on Friday the 20th January, 1984. 
----------------·------***Relates to matter not included in this Report 

XXXVIII 
THIRTY -EIGHTH MEETING 
The Committee met at 3.00 P.M. on Friday, the 9th March, 1984, 
in Committee Room No. 63, First Floor, Parliament House, New Delhi. 
MEMBERS PRESENT 
1. Dr. Bhai Mahavir-Chairman. 
2. Shri Banamali Babu 
3. Shri Madan Bhatia 
4. Shri Rafique Alam 
5. Dr. Rafiq Zakaria 
SECRETARJAT 
Shri B. R. Gael-Chief Examiner of Questions. 
Shri R. N. Bhardwaj-Senior Legislative Committee Officer. 
2. The Committee .considered its draft 59th and adopted tte same with 
some modifications. 
3. The Committee decided to present the Report to the House on the · 
14th March, 1984 and auth'orised the Chairman and in his absence, 
Dr. Rafiq Zakaria or Shri Madan Bhatia, to present the Report to the 
House. 
4. * • • • 
5. The Committee then adjourned at 4.10 P.M • 
.. 
------------------ -------- ----· • • * • Relates to matter~ not included in this Report. 
41 
GMGJPMRND-27-RS-RS I, 

25 
CHAPTER-III 
MISCELLANEOUS 
9. Power df AdministJratior to prohibit persons from visiting or 
residing in lthe Islands. 
(1) The Administrator may with the ,provision sanction of t \,p 
Central Government, making rules ,imposing r:easonable restril~­
tions in the interests of· the ~n1;ral public o.r for the protectiun 
, of the interest of any Schedule ibe, on the right of any person, 
who is not a native of the Isla s, to visit or resirle in the. I'slands. 
(2) The rules made under sub-s<;,ction (1) may provide that any 
contravention of any of the provisions of the rules shall be punish­
.able with imprisonment which may extend to one month, or with 
nne which may extend to one thousand Rupees, or with both. 
''.'( 

Annexure-- IV 
(Vide para 6.4 of the Report) 
Copy of the Rajya Sabha Secretariat O.M. No. RS 5(2) \83 Com .. 
I, dated the 15th January, 1983, addressed to the Ministry of Home 
Affairs. 
"The undersigned is directed to ~te that during the course of 
its recent visit to Lakshadweep t'T Committees on Subordinate 
Legislation of the Rajya Sabha learnt that no person who was not 
a native of the Islands, could . visit Lafshadweep Islands without 
an entry permit from the Ministry of Home Affairs. The Members 
of the Committee generally felt concerned about this restriction 
which barred entry of even a citizen of India to the Islands which 
territory was an integral part of the country. They, therefore, 
desired to be informed about the provisions of the ActjRules etc. 
authorising the Government to impose. such a restridion. The 
A•dministrator of the Lakshadweep Islands brought to the Com­
mittee's notice the provision of the Rules made unde:c sub-section 
(1) of Section 9 of the Laccadive, Minicoy and Amindivi Islands· 
(Laws) Regulations, 1965, made by the President in exercise of the 
powers conferred by Article 2.40 of the Constitution. 
The Committee has considered the Rules. While the Committee 
does not question the President's power to make the a:bove noted 
Regulations or the Administrator's power to make Rules there­
under, it feels that the Rules made in this case, instead of spelling 
·out precisely the restrictions which according to the Presidential 
Regulations, ought to have been reasonable, impose a blanket res­
triction, laying down only a few exceptions. 
The Committee, therefore, does not help feeling that while 
making rules, the Administrator has made excessive use of the 
delegated power than .contemplated in the Presidential Regulation. 
The Committee has accordingly desired that the Ministry of 
Home Affairs may be addressed to give their comments in this 
regard at an early date so as to enable the Committee to study the 
matter further. 
The Ministry of Home Affairs are requested to furnish their · 
comments immediately for being placed before the Committee." 
26 

Annexure--V 
(Vide para 6.6 of the Report) 
Note on sa<:io-economic development of Lakshadweep Islands. 
Lakshadweep, an archipelago of 27 islanl islets and r~ofs lies · 
about 200 to 400 kms. off Kerala Coast. Te of the islands are 
inhabited and densely populated. There ar · () ports and harbours 
in the islands. The total area of the Territory is 32 sq. kms. and 
its population is , 402'37. The headquarters of ifle Adlministration 
is at Kavaratti. 
There is an Inter State Police Wireless Station at Kavaratti for 
emergent communications with Delhi and Cochin. There are also 
12 wireless stations under Post and Telegraphs Department, one in 
·each of the ten inhabited islands and one each at the Calicut Office 
and Cochin office of the Administration. Since October, 1972;, 
radio-telephone facility has been. provided between Kavaratti and 
the mainland, via~Calicut. An earth Satellite Station was commis~ 
~ioned at Kavaratti in November, 1980 providing a speedy and 
reliable communication link with the mainland. 
The territory is backward. The local people are all Muslims 
and classified as Scheduled Tribe. The entire economy is based on 
the coconut tree and its produce. viz. nuts, copra, jaggery and vin~ 
gar and fishing. Fish especially tuna are abundant in the sea 
around the island. 
A.dministration 
The islands were constituted into a .separate Union Territory 
with effect from 1-11-1956 a.s a result of the reor.ganisat~on of States. 
The . territory is administered under article 239 of the . Constitution 
by . the President through an Administrator. An Advisory Council 
consisting of non-officials from various islands including the Mem-. 
her of. Parliament representing this Union Territory is associated 
with the Adminjstrator in matte~ relating to the territory. The 
Council is ~onstituted every year. Ano~her Advisory Committee 
with 8 non-official members besi'd,e8 the Administrator. . and the 
Member of Parliament . has also been constituted to advise the · 
'Ministry of Ht>me Affairs on the questio~ 'of policy. r~lating to ·the· 
27 

28 
Administration; its legislative proposals, Annual Financial State­
ments etc. The territory is divided into four Tehsils for revenue 
and administrative purposes. Each islands is considered as a 
village. 
The judi:ial and executive functions of the Magistl'acy were 
separated w1th efi'ect from 1-3-1970 when the Union T:erritories 
(Separation of Judicial and E:xecutive Func1iions) Act, 1969: was 
. enforced. t' 
Salient features of development f 
There has been substantial developments in all fields like 
Fisheries, Agriculture, Animal Husbandary~ Education etc. Laksha­
dweep A<lministration spent Rs. 6.06 crores on various develop­
mental schemes during 1982-83. 
Twenty four hour power supply has been provided in all the 
islands even before ~he time schedule set up for the purpose. A 
solar distilla-tion plant was commissioned at Bitra, the smallest 
island in order to discontinue practice of bringing potable water 
from neighbouring island about 30 miles away from Bitra. Com­
munication between mainland and islands which is at present 
maintained and island by two all wealth vessels will improve further 
with the arrival of a new ferry vessel for which orders have been 
placed. In the sphere of edu,cation, the notable achievements are 
enhancement: of scholarship, opening of a new junior college at 
Androth and upgradation of a senior basic school as High School 
at Chetlat island. ' 
It is proposed to go in for promoting domestic and international 
tourism in a big way this year and it is ·expected that this will give 
employment to a sizeable number of local educated youths. 
As regards Industry, the Administration made all efforts to im­
prove productivity in every possible sector during 1982 which was 
declared as productivity year. The Tuna Cannirig factory at Mini­
coy under the Fisheries Department was able to touch record pro­
duction. There is a proposal to set up a Fisheries Development: 
Corporation to exploit the vast fisheries potential around the islani:ls. 
STC is contemplating a deep sea Tuna Fisheing project wh~ch will 
cover, this area and when implemented will pr:ovide employment 
, and expertise in this sphere to the territory. Similarly productio~ 
of copra which is the main crop of, the isla~qs not only went ;tP. 
but the farmers are also getting the highest prices from the mam-
, hmd market. ' 

29 
The following table shows the Plan outlay of the Union Territory 
and expenditure since the inception of Planning. there:-
(lb. in lakhs) 
Outlay Expenditure Percentage of 
Expenditure 
to outay 
-F-ir: Fi~e-Y-e-ar-P-Ia_n _______ ·------ ----~,51---,56) t--=--------=-----~ 
Second Five y";ar Plan (56---6x)ll 73·85 40·29 54-·8 
Third Fiv~ Year Plan 
Annual Plan 1966-67 
Armual Plan 1967-68 
Annual Plan 1968-69 
Fourth Five Year Plan 
Fifth Five Year Plan 
Annual Plan 1978-79 
Annual Plan 1979-ffo 
Sixth Five Year Piau 
Annual Plan 198o-8t 
Annual Plan £981-82 
Annual Plan tg82-83 
Annual Plan 1983-ll4 
(61--66) 
(69-74) 
(74"779) 
(Bo--85) 
r8·38 
61· 76 
49'58 
44'56 
200•00 
622'73 
243'64 
30o·oo 
235'00 
3oo·oo ., 
986·6o 
6o6·71 
577'04 
1\)8· 51 I03•0 
44'56 72"2 
28•52 5s·1 
21'93 49'2 
189·41 94'7. 
380•95 61·2 
132'75 54'5 
'74'84 s8·3 
. r 92·Bs 64•3 
' 
828·80 88•44 
6o6·o6 99'89 
The physical targets and achievements during 1982-83 are reflect­
ed in Appendix-!, 
The 'details of approved outlay for Annual Plan 1983-84 are shown 
in f,.ppendix-II. The important development schemes for 1983-84 are 
·given below:-
(i) Pnocu.re~nt of a second hand aU weather ship: Y.rill 
recently out of the two ships plying between the main­
land ~d the Islands, oue of them, namely, m. v. Laccadive 
was a fair weather vessel. A second hand foreign vessel 
has been acquired to replace this vessel. After suitable 
modification the new vessel named m.v. Bharat Seema 
was c~mmissioned for service in July, 1982. For develop­
ment of ports, lighthouses and shipping a provision o.f 
Rs. 207.38 lakhs has been made. 
1426 FS---3 

30 
(ii) De~~I?pm~n{ of er:,op husbandry, mainly eoconu~ cultiv;a- ' 
ticin (Rs. 40.52lakhs), Animal Husbandry (Rs. 33.02 lakhs) 
and Fisheries (Rs. 35•.20 lakhs) . 
· (iii) Provision of Rs. 28.93 lakhs for augmentation of. power 
generating capacity and Rs. 14.50 lakhs for anti-sea 
erosion schemes. 
(iv) Providing better educational facilities with additional 
enrolment at various stages .of school education (Rs. 41.0D 
lakhs). 
(v) Housing and Urban Devel~ment (Rs. 30.00 lakhs). 
(vi) Water supply and Sew~rage (R~. 38.00 lakhs). 
(vii) Medical· Public Health and Sanitation (Rs. 21.33 lakhs). 
The post control and intensive Multiple cropping programme 
along with distribution of implements of 50 per cent subsidy will 
be continued under Agriculture. The production of eggs and Milk 
w:ill. also be boosted. The veterinary services will be made more 
effective. 
Boats will be <:ontinued to be distributed at subs!dised cost. The 
dist'ribution of essential commodities will be streamlined. Supply 
of electricity will be augmented. Cent per cent enrolment of child­
ren is aloso expected to be ensure'd during 1983-84. 

• 
• 
SectOr Item 
Agriculture: 
1. Area under rodent control pro­
gramme 
2. Control of rhinoceros heolk 
g. Locust <·.ontrol programme 
1· Control of disease of a.comnt. 
5· Control of pests nml cli~ease of 
intercrops 
6. Multiple demostra.tion plots 
7· Improved cultural manurial prac­
tices 
8. Trials on n<~v crops 
9· l\olulberry cultivation and scricultm·e 
programme 
10. Plantation crops and seed l:u·m 
1 I. Dist. Agrkultural ra.rm 
1 2' Horticultural flu-m 
13. Agriculture Farm . · 
14. Supply of fertilizers 
15. Seed~ . 
16. Supply of Agriculture impkm<~Ilts 
Do. Link nH·· I• . 
18. Intensive kitchen . 
garden programme 
19. Compostpits. 
2o. Sugarc;ane 
21. Sl!pply of Hybrids Seednut.s 
22. Fertiliser demonstration plots 
23 Plants . 
Unit 
l:lect .... 
:VlT 
KG 
Nos 
sq. Mt. 
Nos. 
Hect 
N~s. 
,, 
Target 
•' 1,000 
~ 3!)0 
400 
500 
5 
5 
4 
6 
50 
go 
goo 
s,ooo 
8oo 
750 
10 
Io,ooo 
8o 
2,000 
Appendis: I to 
Annexure.V 
Achievement upto 
:~1·12·82 
5 
459'00 
3 
4 
798 
3,965 
763 
IO• 18 
1,330 
93 
----- _____ _. . ., ____ , 
31 

32 
.., __________ . ----
2 3 
Animal Husbandary 
I. Animal& ~0 
2. Feed MT 
3· Distribution of cockerals ~OS 
4· Area under fodder Cultivation (Ha) Hect ., 
Fisheries ·' 
I. No. of boats No 
2. Out board engine. 
Communi!>' Development ; 
1. Agriculture implement Set 
Power Sector : 
r. Constructioa of LT Lint' KM 
2. Procurement of 25 KW DG sets No. 
3· Construction of FIT Line KM 
4· Service connection 
5· Street light . 
Ports, Light Hou.re and Shipping 
r. Second Ship. 
2. Motor Launch 
3· Ferry Vessel 
Education : 
{. Pre-Primary 
2. Primary 
3· Secondary 
4· University and Higher 
Medical and Public Health : 
1. Motor ambulance boat 
Education 
2. Construction work on Maternity & 
Paedeatrics ward in Hospital at 
Kavaratti . . . . 
Homing 
r .. Welfare of Backward Classes Hous­
ing 
2. Village housing (Praject) Scheme • 
No. 
~0. 
No. 
Nos. 
No 
4 5 
30 5't ]\' 05 
Nos 
40 35 (Subsidy) 
1000 72 
40 35 
30 7 
IO 9 
50 
!3'5 :1· 62H 
3 3 
6 l. 336 
so8 5°5 
220 3g 
720 6s(l 
36so 9293 
I3IO 1795 
250 352 
I (In [:)ro,grC5)) 
IO 

• 
Appeadi:l: II to Annexure V 
APPROVED OUTLAY FOR 1983-8.t--~LAKSHADWEEP 
Rs. in lakhs 
Head of Dt~vclopmenL Approved outlay 
---------·-·-· .. ·---··-·-· ~----- - .. ---------~--
I. Crop Fl usbandry 
2. Minor Irrigation 
3· Animal Husbandry 
~- Fisheries . 
5· Community Development 
I. Agriculture and Allied servi,,e( 
Co-operation 
II. Co-o,beration 
T. Power 
2. Anti-Sea Et·o~ion 
HI. Water and Power Dewlopmmt 
Village :and Small Jndustrie~ 
IV, Iwlustrits ~Xild Minerals 
1. l'orls, light Houses and Shipping 
2. Roads & Bridges 
3· Tnurisni 
4· Othet· Tt·ansport (Radio Telephone) 
v. Transport anrf Comrmmicatl'on 
r. General Education . 
2. Arts and Culture 
3· Scientific Scrviceq & Research (ENVIRON-
· MENTAL) 
ll3•98 
7•38 
7•38 
28•93 
43'43 
111'37 
2•00 

34 
4· 'M('dical and Publk Health 
(). 
7· 
Scwerag1' Water 
I rou,ing 
I nformatinn & 
Supply & 
l'ublicily 
8. Labour & Labour Welfare 
!l· Social Welfare 
JO, Nutrition 
VI. ,)'ocial awl Crllnmunil)• SNoicrs 
Senital,lq_n 
.. 
1. Secretariat Economic Sel'viccs • 
2. Wcigbts and Mca<ure-
V 11. i!Icommic Seroice1 
1. Sl~ tiouet'y and P••inting , 
V Ill. General Semi~t~ 
GRAND TOTAL 
•' 
<JB·o" 
:1o·oo 
(i. :;o 
1 ·oo 
(). '1· 
I. 75 

.. 
MINUTES 

MINUTES OF THE MEETING OF THE COMMITTEE ON SUB­
ORDINATE LEGISLATION 
XIV 
FOURTEENTH MEETING 
ri'he Committee met at 11.00 A.M. on Th'IU"sday, the 18th Novem­
ber, 1982, in Committee Room No. 63, FirstFloor, Parliament House, 
New Delhi. · . .. , 
ME:M.lu:Rs PR.'es:ENT 
1. Dr. Bhai Mahavir-ChG~. 
2. Shri Nand Kishore Bhatt 
3. Sh.ri Amarprosad Chakraborty 
4. Shri Dipen Ghosh 
5. S~ B. D. Khobragade 
· 6. Sh.ri G. Swamy Naik 
7. Sh.ri Ghanshyambhai Oza 
8. Shri N g. Tompok Singh 
9. Shri Shanti Tyagi 
WITNESSES 
Representatives of Ministry of Commerce 
Shri Abid Hussain, Sec,retary 
Shri C. Venkatraman, Additional Secretary 
Shri Joginder Singh, Director 
Shri Zaffar Saifulla, Managing Di,rector TF AI 
Shri N. L. Lakhan Pal, General Manager TF AI 
Shri S. C. Sharma, Manager Administration TFAI 
Shrl K. Hayder, Under Secretary MIO Commerce 
SECRETARIAT 
Sh!'i K. Dayal, Chief Legislative Committee Officer 
Shri B. R. Goel, Senior Legislative OfJ.lcer 
37 
,, 

36 
MEMORANDUM NO. 29 
Trade Fair· A'J:I:thority of India Service Regulations 
. 2. The Committee heard the representatives of the Mini'stry of 
Commerce on the above subject. The representatives informed the 
Committee that so far they did not feel any necessity to 'obtain 
legal advice from the . administrative. Ministry or for tha,t matter 
from the Ministry of Law for the reason that the Trade Fair Autho­
rity was a company incorporated unq.er the Companies Act, 1956 
::Jhd as· such the TF AI was competenr enough to make Rules , and 
\ J amend them without the advice#of the Ministries. The. repre­
sentatives assured the Committee th~t ~hey would now seek the 
advice of the Ministry of Law in. the mat\er and report back to the 
Committee in about a month's time. . 
A verbatim record of the proceedings was kept. 
* * * 
The Committee also decided that subject to the permission of the 
Hon'ble Chairman, Rajya Sabha, it would visit·Trivandrpm, Cochin 
and Lakshadweep sometime during the mon.th of December, 1982:, 
to hold meetings and to make on-the-spot study visits in connection 
with the Committee's work. · . · 
The Committee authorised its Chairman· to appro~ch the Hon'ble 
Chairman, Rajya Sabha, for obtaining his permission fo.r the pro-
pdsed visits. I 
The Committee also authorised·· its Chairman 'to· chalk out the 
detailed programme for the proposed visits preferably during the 
later half of December, 1982. ) 
5. The Committee then adjourned at 12..40 P.M. to meet again at 
:3.00 P.M. on Wednesday, the 1st December, ·198·2 . 
. ' ~: 
****Relatts to matter not included in this Report. 

ll 
• 
XX 
TWENTIETH MEETING 
The Committee met at 11, 0,0 A.M. on Monday, th~ 27th pecem­
ber, 1982 at Trivandrum. 
MF...MBERS P~ENT 
1. Dr. Bhai Mahavir-Chairman. 
2. Shri Amarprosad Chakraborty 
3. Sh.ri Dipen Ghosh 
4. Shri Sushil Chand Mohunta 
5. Slui Santosh. Kumar Sahu 
6. Shri Shanti Tyagi 
SECRETARIAT 
Shri K. Dayal, Chief Legislative Committee Officer. 
2. The Committ·ee reviewed the work done by it during its visits 
to Lakshadweep, Cochin and Trivandrum. The following decisions 
we.re taken by the· Committee:-
* * * 
(ii) Rules ma.de under the Lakshadweep, Minicoy and Amindivi 
Islands (Laws) Reg1J..lation, 1965, 
Members of the Committee recalled the discussions held at 
Kavarati, with the Administrator of the Lakshad:weep Island in 
. regard to the rules: made under the Laccadive, Minicoy and Ami:n­
divi Islands (Laws) Regulation, 1965, promulgamated by the Pre­
sident under Article 240 of the Constitution, placing a ban on the 
entry ·of persons other than the natives of the Islands to these 
Islands. After some discussion the Committee felt that the restric­
tions imposed was not reasonable and it appeared that excesstve 
****Relates to matter not included in this Report. 
~·9 i • 
' ' ' ,. ·, .. I~ '• ' • . 
·~ ·' ., ' 

40 
use had been made by the Administrator under the rule-making 
power delegated in the· Presidential Regulation. The Commirttee 
desired that the Ministry of Home Affairs be addressed for their 
comments in the matter . 
• • * 
4. The Committee then ·adjourned at 11.30 A.M. to meet again at 
3.00 P.M. on Monday, the lOth Janl.lary, 1983. •, 
·' 

XI 
ELEVENTH MEETING 
The Committee met at 3.00 P.M. on Wednesday, the 7th September, 
1983, in Committee Room 'A', Ground ~loor, Parliam~nt IL:»use 
Annexe, New Delhi. · · · ' 
1. Dr. Bhai Mahavir-C'hairman r 
2. Shri Madan Bhatia 
3. Shri Nand Kishore Bhatt 
4. Shri G. C. Bhattacharya 
5. Shri Amarprosad Chakraborty 
6. Shri Dipen Ghosh 
7. Shri B. D. Khobragade 
8. Shri Ram Naresh Kushawaha 
9. Shri G. Swamy Naik. 
10. Shri Ghanshyambhai (Jza 
11. Shri Saritosh Kumar Sahu 
12. Shri; Shanti Tyagi 
13. Dr. Rafiq Zakaria. 
SECRETARIAT 
Shri B. R. Goel, Chief Exa.mincr of Questions. 
Shri R. N. Bhardwaj, Senlm Legislative Committee Officer. 
2. The Committee considered and took decisions on the following 
Memoranda:-
. (i) Memora.ndum No. 18/83 regarding the Trade Fait· Authority o~ 
India .Service Regulations, 1977. 
The C(l-mmittee noted that, the Ministry of Commerce (TFAI) 
had agreed to place before the Standing Committee of. the Trade 
41 

42 
Fair AutLo.rity of India a proposal for the deletion of clauses (i), (ii) 
and (iii) of rule 19~A of the Trade Fair Authority of India Service 
Hegulations, 1977. The Committee however 'felt that the legal cell 
of th~ T.F.A.I. should have been more alert and hoped that it would 
be more active in the future. The Committee directed that · the 
Minist.ry be asked to expedite finalisation of the proposal and inform 
the Committee thereafter. 
* 
' 
4. The Committee then adjourned ·at 4.15 P.M. to meet again. at 
3.00 P.M. Oil Thursday, the 8th 8ep~ber, 1983. 
·' 

XII 
TWELFTH MEETING 
The Committee met at 3.00 P.M. on Thursday., the 8th September,~ 
1983, in Committee Room 'A', Ground Floor, Parliament H~~:e 
Ann~xe, New Delhi.' .: ., : 
1. Dr. Bhai Mahavir-Chai~a~: , 
2. Shri G. C. Bhattacharya '· 
3. Shri B. D. Khobragade 
4. Shri Ram Naresh Kushawaha 
5. Shri G. Swamy Naik 
6. Shri Ghanshyambhai Oza 
7. Shri Shanti Tyagi 
8. Dr. Rafiq Zakaria. 
SECrun'ARIAT 
Shri B. R. Goel, Chief Examine.r of Qu-estions. 
Shri R. N. Bhardwaj, Senior Legislative Committee Officer. 
2. The Committee considered and took decision on the following 
Memoranda:-
* 
(iii) Memorandum No. 21/83 regarding the Naval Headquarters: 
Directorate of Management Services (Statistical Assistant) 
Recruitment Rules, 1982 (SRO 163 of 1982) 
The Committee noted that the ·Ministry of Defence had agreed · 
to specify the composition of pepartmental Promotion Committee in · 
column 12 of the schedule appended to the . above rules. 
(i~) Memorandum No. 22:/Sa r~gardi~g the C~trai Ground Water 
Board (Senior Technical Assistant) (Survey) Recruitment 
Rules, 1980 (GSR 1032 of 1980) 
The Committee noted that the. Ministcy of Irrigation had agreed 
to ~pe¢fy a deputation period, namely 3 years, f~r the post of Senior 
Technical Assistant (Surirey) in the above rules. 
3. The Committee then adjourned at 3.50 P.M. to meet again at 
3.00 P.M •. on the 16th September, 1983. 
****Rektes to ~tter not included in this RepOrt. 

XIII 
THIRTEENTH MEETING 
The Committee met at 11.00 A.M. on Saturday, the 17th September, 
1983, in Committee Room 'A', Ground Floo.r, Parliament House 
.Annexe, New Delhi. \. 
M.EMBiERs PRESENT 
1. Dr. Bhai Mahavir-Chairman 
2. Shri Banamali Babu 
3. Shri Madan Bhatia 
4. Shri G. C. Bhattacharya 
5. Shti Amarprosad Chakraborty 
6. Shri Dipen Ghosh 
. 7. Shri Ram Na;resh Kushawaha 
8. Shri G. Swamy Naik 
9. Shri Ghanshyambhai Oza 
10. Shri Shanti Tyagi 
11. Dr. Rafiq Zakaria 
SECRETARIAT 
Shrimati K. K. Chopra, Additional Secretary 
Shri R. N. Bhardwaj, Senior Legislative Committee Officer. 
2. Memorandum No. 25/83, regarding the Laccadive Minicoy and 
Amindivi Islands (Restrictioms on Entry and Residence) Rules, 
1967 made under s'ection 9(1) oJ the L.M.A.I. (Laws) Regula­
tions:, 1965. 
The: Committee considered the above Memorandum. 
~fter some discussion, the Committee decided. that the Ministry 
··be asked to give clarifications on the following point, for consideration 
of the Committee:----
(i) whether any bonafide visitor who wanted to visit the 
Laccadive, Minicoy · and Amindivi Islands was ever re­
fused entry, and if so, the details thereof. 
44 

45 
(ii) Whether the Ministry have any objection in liberalising 
·the rule~ without injuring the whole fabric of permit 
system under the Rules. 
(iii) Whethey any appeal against the judgement of the Kerala 
High Court dated the 27th. November, 1973 upholding the 
provision Of the Rule~ has ever been made in the Supreme 
Court, if so, the details thereof. · 
The Com~ittee also decided that th~·S~cretary, Ministry of Home 
If Affairs be invited to appear before ~e Committee to give further 
clarifications on various provisions of tlie Rules with special reference 
to the aspect of reasonableness· of the restriction imposed on the 
entry into the Islands. · · V 
The Committee also considered the .representation. dated the 8th 
August, 1983 received from Shri H. S. Jayaprasad, on behalf of 
children of Main-land officials, Kavaratti Island, Union Te·rritory of 
Lakshadweep regarding 100 pe.r cent reservation of jobs in P & 'T 
Department in the Laccadive, Minicoy and Amindivi Islands for the 
original inhabitants thereof in respect of Class III and IV posts. 
After some discussion, the Committee decided to take up the matter 
seiparately and directed the Se·creta.riat to refer the. matter to the 
Ministry of Home Affairs., in the first instance for their comments. 
3. The Committee then adjourned at 1.15 P.M. to meet again at 
11.00 A.M. on Monday, the 19th September, 1983. 

IUAX 
EIGHTEENTH MEETING 
The Committee met at 11.00 A.M. on Tuesday, the 11th October, 
1963, in Committee Room 'A', Gro~q. Floo.r, Parliament House 
Annexe, New Delhi. -
l. Dr. Bhai Mahavir-Chairman f 
2. Shri Madan Bhatia 
3. Shri G. C. Bhattacharya 
4. Shri Dipen Ghoslh 
5. Shri B. D. Khobragade 
6. Shrl G. Swamy Naik 
7. Shri Ghanshyambhai Oza 
8. Shri Santosh Kumar Sahu 
Sl!lCRETARIAT 
Shrri B. R.. Goel, Chief Exa:mine;r of Question$. 
Shri R. N. Bhardwaj.; Senior Legislative Committee officer. 
2. Memorandum No. 31/83 regarding Kosangas. Company (Acqui­
sition of U!fl,dertaki'ng) (Administration O'f Funds) Sc~me, 
1980. 
The Committee considered the above memorandum in the light 
of the information furnished by the Min:l'Stry of Energy, vide their 
O.M., dated the 14th April, 1983; and: 20th: June, 1983. The Committee 
recommended that the effective parts of long term settlement signed 
on April 12,, 1983, with the non-management staff of the HPCLj 
erstwhile Kosangas employees be incorporated in the scheme in 
question or be notified separately so as to give a finality and legal 
sanction to the terms and conditions as contemplated therein. 
The Committee also directed: that the Ministry may be asked to 
furnish the details of the provisions of the rules and regulations ap­
plicable to or the law governing the provident fund, superannuation. 
welfare and other fund established by Gocu1 Gas Private Umited 
46 

47 
or Kosangas Company, whieh were in force before the :a,6f:h day of 
May, 1979, as :r.:efe.rred to in the Kosqas Company! (Acquisition of 
Undertaking) (Administration of Funds) Scheme, 1980, published 
as GSR No. 4:41 (E), dated the 14th July, 1980. 
* * • 
7. T~ Committee then adjourned at 12.50 P.M. t:o meet again at 
3.00 r>~. on the 21st October. 1983. · ', 
****Relates to matters not included in the Report. 

:xxm 
. TWENTY-THIRD MEETING 
The Committee met at 3.001P.M. on Thursday, the loth November, 
1983, in Committee Room 'A', Ground Flaor, Parliament. House 
Annexe, New Delhi. · ' 
\. 
f· 
'< li 
MEM:BE:Rs PRE$ENT 
1. Dr. Bhai Mahavir-Chairman y 
2. Shri Madan Bhatia 
3. Shri G. C. Bhattacharya 
4. Shri Ram Naresh Kushawaha 
5. Shri G. Swamy Naik 
6. Shri Ghanshyambhai Oza 
SECR!El'l'ARIAT 
Shri B. R. Goel, Chief Examine,r of Questions. 
Shri R. N. Bhardwaj., Senior Legislative Committee Officer. 
REl'REsENTA'l'IVE.s OF THF.l MlNISTRIEs 
Ministry of Home Affairs 
Sbri T. N. Chaturvedi, Secretary 
Shri R. V. Pillaii, Joint Secreta.ljll 
Smt. Uma Pillai, Director 
Shri Chandra Mohan, Collector, Lakshadweep. 
Minstry o1 Home Affaws 
(Depa:rtment of O[fi.clal Language) 
Shri K. K. Srivastava, Sec.retary 
Shri D.P. Bhalla, Under Secretary. 
48 

!.\. 
49 
2. MEMORANDUM NO, ~/83 (SECOND SUPPLEMENT) 
The Laccadi-ve, Minicoy a.nd Amindivi Iskmds (Restrictions on Ent1'Y 
and Residence) Ru~es, 1967 ma.de under Section 9(1) of 'too 
L.M.A.I. (La.ws) Reguwtions, 1965. 
The Committee took up the Memorandum for ·consideration and 
took oral evidence of the representatives of the Ministry of Home 
Affairs on the subject 
A verbatim record of the evidence wd.s. kept. 
' 
- . ~. • ' " 4. The Committee tlum f).djoumed.at 4.4& P.M. 1to meet a~n }at 
11.00 A.M. on the 11th November, 1983. rr 
••••RAtlates to matter not included in the Report. 
' ' 
OMGIPMR.ND 1426 R8-RS I-